DVD
al
Clinical
Pathology
fortheVeterinaryTeam
AndrewJ.Rosenfeld
and Sharon M.Dial
WILEY-BLACKWELL
Clinical Pathology for the
Veterinary Team
Clinical Pathology for the
Veterinary Team
Andrew J. Rosenfeld, DvM
Diplomate, American Board of Veterinary Practitioners
Canine and Feline
Sharon M. Dial, DvM
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Pathologists
Clinical and Anatomic Pathology
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Publicatior1
Edition first published 2010
@ 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell's publishing program has
been merged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Editorial office
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services, and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright rmaterial in this book, please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients,
is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center,
 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license
by CCC, a separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of the Transactional
Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1008-9/2010.
and product names used in this book are trade names, service rmarks, trademarks or registered trademarks of
publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered.
It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional
advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Catatoging-in-Publication Data
Rosenfeld, Andrew J.
Clinical pathology for the veterinary team / Andrew J. Rosenfeld, Sharon Dial.
p. ;cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-0-8138-1008-9 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Veterinary pathology-Laboratory manuals.
I. Dial, Sharon. II. Title.
Techniques-veterinary-Laboratory Manuals. 3. Pathology, Veterinary-methods-Laboratory Manuals.
SF 772.6 R813c 2010]
SF772.6.R67 2010
636.089'607-dc22
2010004690
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.s. Library of Congres.
Set in 10/12pt Sabon by Aptara Inc., New Delhi, India
Printed in Singapore
12010
Dedicated to Lisa, Lauren, and Jillian—who act as my center, my
practicality, my imagination, and my world, respectively.
AndrewJ.Rosenfeld
Dedicated to the hardworking technicians in veterinary medicine
       i 
SharonDial
Contents
About the Authors
ix
Foreword
!x
1.
 Sample Handling and Laboratory Standardization—-Developing Standard
Operating Procedures
1
 2. Components of the Complete Blood Count
19
3.
Hematology: The Erythrocytes, White Blood Cells, and Immune System
33
Abnormalities in the Red and White Blood Cell Populations
45
5.
Renal Physiology and Anatomy, Clinical Diagnostics, and Disease
75
Liver Physiology and Anatomy, Clinical Diagnostics, and Disease
93
7.
Pancreatic and Gastrointestinal Physiology and Anatomy, Clinical
Diagnostics, and Disease
105
 Electrolyte Physiology, Function, and Derangement
119
'6
Components of the Urinalysis
129
10.
Evaluating the Urinalysis with Disease Conditions
139
11. Adrenal Function and Testing
151
vi
vili
Contents
12. Blood Gas
167
13. Coagulation
175
14.
 Emergency Diagnostics—A Discussion of Shock and Clinical Diagnostics
183
15. Obtaining Samples from Different Body Systems and Evaluating Cytology
193
Appendix A: Tables
207
Appendix B: Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team DVD Instructions
237
247
AdditionalResources
257
Glossary
259
Index
271
Cases - See companion DVD
About the Authors
Andrew J. Rosenfeld, DVM, ABVP
Sharon M. Dial, DVM, PhD, Diplomate
 Dr. Rosenfeld has been practicing
ACVP (Clinical and Anatomic Pathology)
emergency medicine for the last 18 years.
 Dr. Dial received a bachelor's degree in
His medical interests are in
Microbiology from Montana State
emergency/critical care, ultrasound,
University. She then received a Doctor of
 internal medicine, and surgery.
Veterinary Medicine and a Doctorate in
 Dr. Rosenfeld has always had a strong
Pathology from Colorado State University.
interest in teaching and has been an
 Dr. Dial has been both a working
instructor at Arizona State University and
pathologist as well as an active instructor
Mesa Community College in Animal
at the University of Wisconsin and
Science and Technology. Dr. Rosenfeld is
Louisiana State University. She also has
cofounder and head instructor of VTEC,
 been a clinical pathologist for Animal
and he has written a training and
 Diagnostic Lab in Tucson, Arizona, and
interactive text for veterinary hospitals
 Antech Diagnostics. Dr. Dial is currently
called The Veterinary Medical Team
an Associate Research Scientist in the
Handbook, published by Wiley-Blackwell.
 Department of Veterinary Science and
Microbiology at the University of Arizona.
ix
Foreword
With new technology, in-hospital clinical
states that our hospital team members have
 diagnostic laboratories are becoming an ex-
 an understanding of each patient's disease
pected part of every veterinary hospital.
process, its symptoms, the clinical diagnos-
Veterinary teams now have the ability to ob-
tics that need to be obtained, and treatment
tain medical data in complete blood count,
protocols. They are not expected to be vet-
chemistry, blood gas, lactate, urine, and
erinarians, but no team member should be
clotting times in minutesinformation that
 given the responsibility of monitoring a pa-
would take 1-2 days to obtain from an out-
tient without understanding the disease pro-
side lab. This allows us to have an excellent
cess affecting the ill animal.
medical database quickly and effectively
to
The goal of this book is to help team
help evaluate and treat our patients.
 members understand each clinical diagnos-
However, with this technology comes an
 tic test of the small animal patient and thus
added responsibility for our medical team.
be a more thorough resource to the vet-
Team members now must begin to assume
 erinary team. Each member should be able
the role of the veterinary lab technician.
to monitor patients and communicate con-
Hospital teams must be able to run quality
cerns to the veterinarian, to discuss these
 control on lab equipment and calibrate it as
clinical diagnostics with the client, and to
needed. The technical team must be able to
understand what further tests and samples
handle blood samples and identify potential
may need to be taken when there is a change
artifacts. Further, the technical team mem-
 in clinical pathology.
bers must be able to evaluate blood films
The DVD at the end of this text is meant
to identify abnormal cellular pathology that
 to give technical team members the ability
the clinical diagnostics cannot interpret.
to practice the concepts discussed by this
 Our medical team must be able to train
book in virtual cases.
its members in pre-cage theory. This theory
xi
Sample Handling and Laboratory
Standardization-Developing
Standard Operating
 Procedures
Over the last decade, the availability of
The In-House Clinical Laboratory
hematology and clinical chemistry instru-
mentation for in-clinic use has increased ex-
 ponentially. There is a wide choice of instru-
ments being marketed for use in veterinary
chase in-clinic clinical pathology instrumen-
practices. While the convenience of rapid re-
tation, it is the veterinary technician who is
 given the responsibility to obtain accurate
sult turnaround is touted as a primary rea-
data from the diagnostic samples for clini-
son for purchase and use of in-clinic instru-
cal management of the patient. This chap-
mentation, the full impact of their use on
technical personnel time or training needs
ter is an introduction to laboratory man-
agement. The frst aspect of integrating an
and the full cost of appropriate manage-
in-clinic laboratory into the general prac-
ment of the in-clinic laboratory are usually
not well addressed during the decision pro-
tice is to identify a location for the labo-
ratory equipment with suficient workspace
cess. When a veterinary practice decides
to
that includes space for sample processing,
provide in-clinic clinical pathology service,
sample/reagent storage, and instrumenta-
it must make the commitment to ensure that
the data produced by its in-clinic labora-
tion. The area should be convenient to
the treatment/surgery areas and examina-
tory is of the same quality as that obtained
by reference laboratories. The management
tion rooms but out of congested traffc ar-
of the practice must understand the need
eas. In addition to hematology and clinical
chemistry instrumentation, a free-arm cen-
for trained personnel, standard operating
 trifuge for spinning down serum and urine
procedures, and appropriate quality control
and quality assurance programs.
 samples, a microhematocrit centrifuge, a
2 Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
the microscope should be the highest qual-
Ocular-
ity affordable. The standard lenses on most
light microscopes are 10x, 40x, and 100×
oil emersion. The addition of a 20x or
 a 50x oil emersion lens can facilitate the
rapid examination of cytology and hema-
tology samples. Each microscope manufac-
Ocular
focus ring
turer can provide options for magnification
 and optical correction and should be able
Objective
to assist in the choice of objectives for the
Lenses
type of clinical use in each practice. Objec-
Stage
tive lenses differ considerably in cost. It is
worth the additional cost for higher-quality
Condenser
lenses that provide a large, flat viewing
field. The higher-quality objective will sig-
Field
Diaphragm
nificantly reduce eyestrain experience by the
microscopist and improve diagnostic accu-
racy by providing the best quality image for
Condenser
viewing.
Focus Knob
Focus Knob
dry objective requires a coverslipped slide.
(a)
The optics of this objective are optimized
for viewing histopathology slides that are
always coverslipped. A simple way to use
the 40x objective to view hematology and
FocusKnob
cytology slides is to use a drop of immer-
sion cil as a coverslip mounting medium.
Place a drop of oil on the microscope slide
and place a coverslip in top of the oil. This
will allow sharp focus of the slide with
the 40x objective. It is imperative that the
high dry objective does not get immersed in
[b]
oil. If this inadvertently happens, immedi-
ate cleaning with a quality lens cleaner (not
Figure 1.1. Image of a high-quality microscope as
xylene) and lens paper is necessary. A good
part of the in-hospital medical lab equipment.
habit is to always rotate the microscope ob-
jectives in one direction, from lowest power
to highest power. This will keep the mi-
quality microscope, and a refrigerator with
croscopist from dragging the 40× objective
a non-frost-free freezer compartment are
through oil.
needed.
The microscope manufacturer and the
The need for a quality microscope can-
individual who is chosen to clean and
not be emphasized enough. The ability to
maintain the scope are great resources
critically examine hematology and cytol-
for choosing good immersion oil. Immer-
ogy specimens depends upon the clear op-
sion oils have been standardized over the
tics of the microscope. Figure 1.1 identi-
years and the most frequently asked ques-
fies the components of a compound bright
tion is concerning the viscosity of the oil.
feld microscope. The objective lenses of
High-viscosity oils are often preferred by
Chapter 1: Standard Operating Procedures3
a
[b
Figure 1.2.
(a) An out-of-focus field diaphragm with fuzzy edges. (b) An in-focus field diaphragm with sharp
edges.
microscopists because less oil is required to
3.
Carefully move the condenser up or
fill the gap between the slide and the objec-
 down to bring the edges of the field di-
tive lens (high-viscosity oil does not spread
aphragm into sharp focus (Figure 1.2).
out as much as low-viscosity oil) and, when
4.
 Open the field diaphragm to allow com-
viewing multiple slides, less oil is needed
plete illumination of the feld.
on subsequent slides because the oil clings
to the objective when the previous slide is
Most good-quality microscopes sold to-
removed. To prevent oil dropping on the
day have an adjustable condenser and are
next slide before it is needed, the micro-
parfocal. Parfocal means that if the image
scopist should develop a habit of switching
is in focus at 10x, there should be little
to the 10x objective before removing one
need to focus at the higher magnification
slide and placing a new slide on the stage.
objectives. One way to optimize the parfo-
As with all laboratory equipment, main-
cal lenses is to focus a microscope slide at
tenance is necessary to keep the microscope
the higher objective (preferably at 40×) and
working appropriately. A yearly mainte-
switch to the 10× objective. If the image is
nance and cleaning schedule will result in a
out of focus, use the focus rings of the eye-
long and useful life for a good microscope.
 pieces to bring the image back into focus.
Microscopy training is essential for all per-
Once this is done, only fine focus should be
 needed as the microscopist moves from one
sonnel using the microscope. Tasks that
should be understood by all microscopists
objective to the next.
 include adjusting the microscope condenser
 An excellent resource for microscopy tips
to provide the best illumination (Kohler illu-
is the individual that is contracted to main-
tain the microscope. In addition, there are
mination), correct lens cleaning techniques,
Excellent Internet resources for microscopy.
and bulb replacement. Kohler illumination
is the process of adjusting the condenser to
Optimizing microscopy skills will allow vet-
produce the best focus of the illumination
erinary technicians to fully utilize their mi-
 croscopes and increase the effciency
source. The process is as follows:
of
viewing hematology, urinalysis, and cytol-
ogy slides.
1.
 Place a microscope slide on the stage
 A working understanding of the avail-
and focus the image on the slide to 10x.
 able clinical instrumentation and the pro-
2.（
 Close the field diaphragm completely.
cedures necessary to provide accurate
4
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
clinical laboratory values is necessary—in
coat. In the erythrocyte population, imma-
fact, required—to best serve the interests of
ture erythrocytes (reticulocytes) will take up
the patient. Veterinarians will make better
the stain for RNA and, therefore, an es-
decisions based on their physical exam, his-
timate of reticulocyte number is possible.
tory, and diagnostic skills without any clin-
Once the sample is spun, white blood cell
ical pathology data than they will if they are
and platelet counts are estimated based on
given erroneous data. No clinical pathology
the height of each portion of the buffy coat
data is far better than trying to interpret er-
that corresponds to each cell type and the
roneous data. The following are the primary
average size of the cell type. The packed cell
responsibilities of the veterinary technician
volume (PCV) is determined by measuring
placed in charge of laboratory equipment:
the height of the red cell column as a per-
centage of the total blood column in the
1.
 Institute and monitor a quality control
tube.
system.
 Studies evaluating the accuracy of this
2.
 Maintain maintenance protocols.
methodology have shown good correla-
3.
Develop standard operating procedures
tion with standard impedance instruments
for all tests performed in the laboratory.
when samples from healthy animals are
4.
 Provide consistent training for all indi-
analyzed. When samples from ill animals
viduals who will be using the equipment
are compared, the expanded buffy coat has
in the laboratory.
poor correlation with other methods and
with blood film analysis. Many pathologi-
Currently, there are several hematology
 cal changes in blood interfere with an ac-
instruments available for the in-clinic labo-
 curate evaluation of blood parameters us-
ratory. It is often the responsibility of the
ing this methodology because alterations in
veterinary technician to review the instru-
cells result in abnormal layering during cen-
ments available prior to the investment of
trifugation.
 a large amount of money. An understand-
The impedance cell counters use the prin-
ing of the types of instruments available and
ciple that cells are poor conductors of an
the differences in methods used by each in-
electric current. In an impedance counter,
strument in obtaining data will greatly in-
individual cells are counted as they flow
 crease the potential for making an appro-
through an electric field. In addition, the
priate choice.
size of cells can be measured because the
magnitude of the change in current is pro-
portional to the cell size. This methodology
Hematology Instruments
has been the mainstay of automated hema-
tology for over 50 years. It is precise and ac-
curate in counting leukocytes, erythrocytes,
There are basically three types of instru-
and platelets and can produce a reliable but
ments available for the veterinary clinic:
limited automated differential.
centrifugal, impedance, and laser-based.
 Laser-based flow cytometry instruments
The centrifugal system uses a large-bore
depend on a cell's ability to scatter light
capillary tube with a special float that ex-
as it passes through a sheath of diluent.
 pands the buffy coat when the tube is spun.
 The degree and direction of light scatter
The tube is coated with an eosin stain that
from the laser indicates the size and “com-
will stain DNA and RNA. The differential
plexity" of the cell. Based on these at-
uptake of the stain by white blood cells and
tributes, the laser-based instrument can pro-
erythrocytes allows the instrument to sepa-
vide up to a 5-part automated differential.
rate the populations in the expanded buffy
The inherent variability in light stability of
Chapter 1: Standard Operating Procedures
individual lasers can affect the precision of
 the serum/plasma sample is placed. Once
the instrument.
 Regardless of the methodology, blood
the amount of a specific type of reflcted
film review is an essential part of the use of
light is measured.
hematology instrumentation. It is an excel-
lent internal control. When comparing what
is seen on the blood film to what the in-
strument measures, well-trained veterinary
Considerations in Purchasing
technicians can and should trust their eyes
an Instrument
over the instrument.
 In most cases, the purchase of a clinical
hematology or chemistry instrument is a
Clinical Chemistry Equipment
major decision. There are several aspects to
consider as this decision is made. One of
The currently available in-clinic chemistry
the most important questions is how many
samples will be run on the instrument each
instruments are primarily closed systems
day. In most cases, greater than 5 CBC or
 ,  ,   
 clinical chemistry panels a day are necessary
istry methods. The wet chemistry systems
to warrant in-house instrumentation. The
are based on traditional spectrophotomet-
ric methods with individual tests or test
more often the instrument is used the more
familiar the staff will be with the procedures
profles contained in a cartridge with sepa-
 needed to provide accurate data. Other con-
rate cells containing all the reagents needed
siderations include the following:
for the individual test reaction. The serum
(or, in some cases, plasma) is introduced
into the cartridge and parsed to each cell.
1.
Cost analysis for tests performed
There is little possibility for user error other
a.
Cost of reagents (include 10% ad-
 than storage of reagents, sample handling,
ditional reagent costs for rerunning
and instrument maintenance. There are in-
samples if needed)
clinic wet chemistry units that are smaller
b.
 Cost of consumables (pipette tips,
versions of the large clinical chemistry in-
cuvettes)
struments that require reconstitution of in-
C.
Cost of technician time
dividual reagents for each test. In these in-
'P
Cost of overhead (electricity, build-
struments, the reagents and serum/plasma
ing expenses)
sample
e are pipetted into a reaction cell.
e.
Cost of quality control product
These instruments require significant train-
Available workspace for the instru-
ing to maintain adequate performance be-
ment
cause there is more possibility for user (tech-
3.
Technical skill of the individuals per-
nician) error in managing the reagents, in-
forming the tests
strument, and sampling.
 Sample size required (the smaller the
Dry chemistry instruments use the prin-
better for many small animals)
ciple of reflected light rather than trans-
5.
 Test performance time
mitted light (as used for spectrophotomet-
6.
 Monitoring requirements for the instru-
ric methods). This method is less affected
ment
by both hemolysis and lipemia than spec-
a.
 Quality control needs
trophotometric methods. Dry chemistry in-
b.
Maintenance time and cost
struments use slides or reagent “sticks" that
7.
 Technical support and cost of service
contain a pad of dried reagent onto which
contracts
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Evaluation of Instrumentation
Step 3 Square each of the individual devi-
ations and add these squared dif-
ferences. The sum of the squared
Prior to purchase,the clinical staff should be
differences is 5.21
allowed to evaluate the precision and accu-
Step 4I
 Divide the number you got from
racy of an instrument. This is done by per-
adding the squared differences to-
forming a series of evaluations, usually by
gether by 19. In this case:
serial testing of a control product or prod-
ucts. In most cases, 20 consecutive sam-
5.21/19 = 0.274211
plings of the control product are run and
their standard deviation and coeffcient of
Step 5(
Calculate the square root of the re-
variance is determined.
sult of the previous step. The result
 To calculate a standard deviation and co-
of this calculation is the standard
efficient of variance:
deviation. In this case:
1. Run a selected control product on the
0.274211² = 0.075191
new instrument. Add all 20 sample val-
ues of the variable together and divide
Step 6(
Calculate the coefficient of variance
by 20. This gives you the average or
by dividing the standard deviation
mean of the data set.
by the mean. In this case:
Calculate the deviance of the data from
the mean. This is done by subtracting
0.075191/2.95 = 0.0255 or 2.55%
the total mean from each individual
number.
A low coeffcient of variance indicates
 3. Square each of the individual deviations
good instrument precision (<5%). In ad-
and add these squared differences.
dition, running 20 samples of the control
4.
Divide that sum by 19.
IM skep oz o Ol Jo Pouad e 1no onpod
5. Calculate the square root of the result
measure the long-term stability of the in-
of the previous step. The result of this
strument. Once the 20 samples are obtained
calculation is the standard deviation.
over 20 days, the coefficient of variance
6.
Calculate the coefficient of variation
should be evaluated again. This will allow
(CV) by dividing the standard deviation
 the hospital team to determine whether the
by the mean. It can be expressed either
coefficient varies over time, affecting overall
as a fraction or a percent.
precision.
 Once precision is determined, the results
 For Example: In Chart 1.1, your hospi-
of a specific set of tests on 20 patients can be
tal team measures the following 20 control
compared to a reference laboratory to de-
samples and notes the following values with
termine the instrument's correlation to stan-
a mean of 2.95.
dard methods. It is very important to make
sure that the reference laboratory to which
Step 1  Calculate the average of these num-
the comparison samples are sent uses the
bers or the mean.
same methodology as the in-clinic instru-
 Sum of all these numbers is 59
ment. If the methods differ, the values
b.
Average of these numbers is
may not be similar, especially the liver and
59/20 = 2.95
pancreatic enzyme values. Together these
Step 2 Calculate the deviance from each
two evaluation methods will help deter-
value by subtracting
2.95 from
 mine the accuracy of the instrument's read-
each value (see above).
 ings. The importance of determining both
Chapter 1: Standard Operating Procedures
Chart 1.1
Step 2 Calculate the
Step 3 Square
 deviance from the data
each of the
Sample #
Value
(sample value: 2.95).
differences.
1
3.2
0.25
0.0625
2
3.0
0.05
0.0025
3
2.8
-0.15
0.0225
4
2.4
-0.55
0.3025
5
2.6
-0.35
0.1225
6
2.4
-0.55
0.3025
7
2.9
-0.05
0.0025
8
3.6
0.65
0.4225
9
3.8
0.85
0.7225
10
2.5
-0.45
0.2025
11
3.1
0.15
0.0225
12
3.0
0.05
0.0025
13
3.7
0.75
0.5625
14
2.5
-0.45
0.2025
15
2.2
-0.75
0.5625
16
4.2
1.25
1.5625
17
2.8
-0.15
0.0225
18
2.7
-0.25
0.0625
19
2.8
-0.15
0.0225
20
2.8
-0.15
0.0225
Sum
59
5.1
 precision and correlation is illustrated in
is in their best interest to prove the utility of
Figure 1.3.
 their instruments in providing accurate and
An instrument's precision can be evalu-
reliable data.
ated as one of three types: precise but not
correlated with a target method, imprecise
Quality Control—Minimizing
but correlated with the target method, or
Analytic Error
 both precise and well correlated to the tar-
get method (the optimal scenario). When
purchasing an instrument, the instrument
Once an instrument has demonstrated good
company's technical staff should assist in
 precision and correlation, it is the ongoing
 performing these important evaluations. It
responsibility of the veterinary technician
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Precise/
Imprecise/
Precise/
inaccurate
accurate
accurate
Figure 1.3.
Target illustrations of test values (red) and target value (gray) relationships. Shown are an instrument
with good precision but poor correlation with the target test value, an instrument that shows correlation but poor
 precision, and an instrument that is both precise and has good correlation with the target value.
who supervises the laboratory to insure the
when the controls are not within the es-
continuance of accurate data. This is done
tablished control ranges
by close monitoring of a well-defined in-
5.
Guidelines for maintenance of the lab-
house quality control system. All reference
oratory environment
 laboratories must employ a quality control
system to monitor the overall performance
 of the instruments in the laboratory. A qual-
Standard Operating Procedures
ity control system is much more than sim-
ply running a control product through an
Standard operating procedures are often ne-
instrument at a standard interval to check
glected in clinical practices. An SOP can
the performance of the individual instru-
be an active document if written well. The
ment. Quality control systems include the
document should be written with the goal
following:
of providing anyone with the basic back-
ground in clinical pathology all the informa-
1.
 A set of standard operating procedures
tion needed to perform a specific test. The
(SOPs) for all tests performed by the
SOP is usually written in an outline form to
veterinary technician, for evaluation of
include the following:
daily quality control data and actions
to determine the cause of failed control
data, and for appropriate training of all
Title (specific procedure)
personnel that use the instruments
Scope (what is the goal of the proce-
2.
Maintenance records for all instru-
(amp
ments
 Definitions pertinent to understanding
3.
 Documentation of all samples run, in-
the procedure
cluding name of operator, date, patient
Training level required of person per-
identity, results, lot number of controls,
forming the test
and calibrators
 Necessary equipment and reagents (and
4.
 Quality control log to track daily qual-
location)
ity control values and all actions taken
Procedure (step-by-step instructions)
Chapter 1: Standard Operating Procedures
Quality control procedures specific to
Calibrators are products used to set the
the test
electronics of the instrument and "tell" it
 Any logs associated with procedure or
what signal coresponds to a given value.
instruments used in the procedure
In-clinic instruments are usually calibrated
by the manufacturer with periodic calibra-
Instrument procedure manuals can be
tions as needed if the instrument fails to
used to supplement procedures performed
perform correctly. Control products are
by each instrument rather than duplicating
sample equivalents with the same physical
the information.
 properties as the patient's sample. The man-
ufacturer of the clinical instrument should
be able to assist in identifying appropriate
Daily Quality Control
commercial quality control products for use
in their instrument. There are references
All clinical pathology results can be af-
in the literature that discuss the use of
fected by three types of errors: preanalyt-
"pooled" serum samples that have been
ical (sample handling), analytical (instru-
analyzed in the clinic as “control" prod-
ment errors), and postanalytical (reporting
ucts. Although this is a much less expensive
errors, interpretive errors). Sample handling
method compared to buying commercial
and results reporting will be discussed later
control products, the stability and validity
in this chapter.
of this type of quality control is question-
 All hematology instrumentation requires
able. The commitment of the practice to
daily quality control measurements. The
 providing quality clinical pathology data
 r   r 
should include the use of good commercial
control measurements vary between instru-
control  products  with  well-documented
ments. Some dry chemistry instrument man-
reference values and stability.
ufacturers suggest that their instruments
Large reference laboratories use quality
need only weekly, rather than daily, QC
control "rules" such as the Westgard rules
checks. However, if the instrument is in con-
that employ multiple control values for
trol limits on a given day but out of con-
each run, depending on the number of
trol limits 1 week later, there is no way
samples being run at any one time. In-
to determine when the instrument shifted.
house laboratories rely on quality control
Therefore, daily quality control is the best
usually run at the beginning of each day
insurance that the clinical instruments are
 to determine whether the instruments are
performing in a consistent manner.
working appropriately.(
Optimally, two
The quality control product used should
to three control products are measured,
be similar to the sample being tested. For
one with values within the reference range
hematology systems, commercial quality
for each parameter and the others with
control products consisting of stabilized
values above or below the reference range.
whole blood are used. For chemistry in-
The use of multiple control levels allows
struments, the control product is usually a
better use of rules in evaluation of quality
lyophilized serum-based product. In both
 control values. A simplified set of Westgard
cases, extensive analysis of each lot of con-
rules can be used when multiple control
trol product is performed by the manufac-
levels are evaluated with each run. When
turer to provide expected ranges for each
 evaluating control values, it is not enough
parameter with stability over a set time once
to just look at the individual value. Each
the product is opened for use. It is impor-
new control value should be inspected in
tant to remember that control products are
reference to the previous values. The fol-
different than calibrators.
lowing set of rules will assist in determining
10Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
whether the instrument measurement is not
1.
 Running a new set of controls from the
stable:
same lot as the original control.
2.
 Running a new set of controls from a
One control value is outside 2 SD
new lot.
1.
(warning rule). Repeat control mea-
3.
Performing
 any maintenance proce-
 dures as needed and rerunning controls
surement. If the second control value is
within control reference range and none
after the maintenance is performed.
of the following rules apply, the instru-
Most instruments
have a trouble-
 ment is stable. Instrument measurement
shooting guide that will assist in deter-
 is not stable if one value is outside 2 SD
mining the cause of instrument error.
(warning rule) and one of the following
Contacting the instrument's technical
also applies.
service if the 
procedures above do
Two consecutive values are outside
 not reestablish the appropriate perfor-
2.
2 SD on the same side of the mean.
mance of the instrument.
 The range between two consecutive val-
 ues is greater than 4 SD.
No patient sample can be run on the
 Four consecutive values exceed 1 SD on
instrument until it is performing appro-
4.
the same side of the mean.
priately and providing control data values
 Ten consecutive values are above or be-
within the expected range.
5.
low the mean.
 Documenting quality control can be done
 by daily recording the results of each qual-
 If, using the above rules, the instrument
ity control test performed in a quality con-
 trol log. Alternatively, a graphic represen-
measurement is determined to be unstable,
tation of the control data can be used. This
measures should be taken to determine the
 is usually done with a Levy-Jennings graph.
cause. In most cases, the steps involved in
 Figure 1.4 illustrates the use of this type
 determining the cause of erroneous control
 of graph to recognize two distinct changes
data include the following:
3
Quality Control - Trend
Quality Control - Shift
ion
Dev
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9101112131415161718192021
01 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415161718192021
(a)
Quality Control Event
(b)
Quality Control Event
Figure 1.4. (a) Levy-jennings plot showing a trend in control values. A trend suggests a gradual change in the
instruments reading for a parameter in a control product. A common cause of this change is deterioration of the
aui suug oi papaau ag Aew jol mau e guisn jo pol awes ayi u! pnpoid louo mau e gujuado npoid louo
dnge ue sisaans us  sanien lonuos u ylus e sums oid suuua-an (a) ueaw aui piem yeg sanin
po ssoi si aueun sun jo asne uowo y onpod louo e ui laaeed e ioy supean suannsu aui ui aueu
 Calibration for that parameter. Recalibrating the instrument would be warranted.
Chapter 1: Standard Operating Procedures
11
2SD
-ISD
Mean
+ISD
+2SD
Figure 1.5. A distribution curve from a normal population. Shown are the mean (heavy black line) and limits
for 1, 2, and 3 standard deviations from the mean of the population. Reference values for a control product are
values representing the limits that include all values falling between two standard deviations from the mean. For
example: If the mean for hemoglobin concentration for a control product 12.3 and the mean ±2 std is 12.9 and
a't oi /'ll uaaag ag pinoys onpd lo seu ui uigooay ioi ane paadxa aui aun iaasai '/'l
gm/dL.
in control data, shifts, and trends. The ad-
control product. This means that 5% of the
vantage of the Levy-Jennings graph is the
time, when measuring this control product,
ability to visualize change over time that
the results will be either above or below the
can warn the technician that intervention
expected range. As a result, measurements
may be needed soon. As such, the techni-
 outside the range should be expected peri-
cian will be able to take actions to keep
odically.
the instruments on track before the con-
trols indicate failure. Levy-Jennings graphs
can be made using standard graph paper
and the expected results and standard devi-
Reference Ranges
ations provided with the control products
used. A chart for each analyte or parameter
Large laboratories usually develop their
is needed.
own reference ranges for each specific
The expected range for a control prod-
test using a large number of samples
uct is determined by the manufacturer by
from healthy animals of each species for
repeated measurement of the control with
which they offer tests. This is a costly,
calculation of the mean and standard de-
time-consuming procedure that is essential
viation. The reference range is usually the
de
mean value plus or minus two standard de-
data. For most small in-clinic laboratories,
viations (Figure 1.5). Setting the range to
this process is not realistic. In most cases,
include all values within these limits will in-
the instruments in the clinic laboratory
clude 95% of the results obtained from that
use standardized reagents and come with
12
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
well-established reference ranges for all
The adage “garbage in, garbage out"
analytes tested.
 However, it is still appropriate for the
ogy laboratory. Samples for evaluation will
clinician and/or technician to review the
 provide useful information only when ob-
veterinary literature for published studies
tained and processed correctly. Blood sam-
that support the instrument manufacturer's
ples should be collected using the needle
claim of validation for its methods using
with the largest bore available to minimize
veterinary samples. This independent vali-
the possibility of hemolysis, especially in ill
 dation for an instrument may point out in-
animals that may have fragile erythrocytes
dividual parameters that are not as reliable
The age-old controversy over the use of
 as others measured by the instrument. For
syringes versus vacutainer systems is not ex-
example, most in-clinic hematology instru-
 pected to end any time soon. The best com-
ments provide reliable erythrocyte measure-
promise is to try both and use the method
ments but vary significantly in the reliabil-
that is most comfortable for each individual
ity of their leukocyte differential, especially
and provides the best sample. Figure 1.6 il-
when counting monocytes and eosinophils.
lustrates venipuncture using a syringe.
 A clinic can use wellness exams and presur-
Butterfly catheters with a connector for
gical blood work from patients undergoing
vacutainer tubes have nicely addressed the
elective surgeries, such as spays and neuters,
problem of vein collapse because of ex-
to collect data over time to compare to the
cess vacuum in patients with compromised
 reference ranges provided by the instrument
blood pressure (Figure 1.7) and of trauma to
manufacturer. Forty to sixty samples per
the vein if the animal struggles. The primary
species can be used to generate reference
advantage to using the vacutainer system is
ranges for the population of patients seen
the standard volume that is drawn into the
at a specific clinic.
collection tube. This is extremely important
when drawing blood for coagulation stud-
 ies that require a precise ratio of coagulant
Sample Handling—Minimizing
to blood.
Whole blood for a complete blood count
Preanalytic Error
(CBC) must be collected in an anticoagu-
lant. EDTA is the most common anticoagu-
The first step in collecting any sample for
lant used for this purpose. It is essential that
clinical evaluation is adequate labeling of
 the blood be promptly mixed to prevent the
all containers and slides with the patient's
formation of clots that will interfere with
name and the date. This is an extremely im-
 cell counting. Heparin can be used in cer-
 portant step in sample handling that is often
tain cases, but it interferes with staining of
 neglected in veterinary medicine. Close at-
the blood cells for blood film analysis. The
tention to sample labeling will ensure that
ratio of blood to anticoagulant is impor-
the correct results are reported for each
tant, as mentioned above. If too little blood
patient. Many clinic management software
is drawn into the collection tube, the anti-
d a a sd
coagulant, if in liquid form, will cause dilu-
for the in-house pharmacy that can eas-
tion of the blood resulting in artifactual low
a a 'es pe rg asn aq 
values.
of glass slides with a frosted end will al-
 In addition, erythrocytes will shrink due
low labeling with a pencil. Placing labels on
to the high osmolality (solute concentra-
glass slides prior to staining can result in
tion) of the anticoagulant fluid. This can
loss of the information during the staining
 result in artifactual changes in red cell shape
procedure.
when the blood flm is reviewed, in an
Chapter 1: Standard Operating Procedures
13
(b)
i-Mix
THERMOlyNE(C)
(d)
Figure 1.6. The steps for venipuncture using a syringe method. (a) The patient's forearm is held off and the
0 lasiel io ane zz iseal le ag pinous alpaau aul Xiaje seydan ayn woiy pooig smep agwaw wean lejuyoal
prevent hemolysis. (b) Once the blood is drawn, it is placed into the EDTA blood tube; care should be taken to
remove the top of the tube and expel the blood directly into the tube. This helps to reduce hemolysis. The EDTA
tube should be inverted 7-8 times so that the blood and EDTA can properly mix. (c) If possible, place the sample on
a sample rocker to allow the blood samples to continue to mix properly with the EDTA. (d) Finally, before making 
the blood smear, a small section of the sample should be examined with a pipette or wooden applicator sticks to
make sure there is no obvious clot formation. If clotting is observed, this sample should be disposed of and a new
sample obtained.
artifactual decrease in the packed cell vol-
instrument performs the necessary dilution
ume (PCV), and in discordance between the
 of the blood sample for counting.
PCV and the hematocrit (Hct) value in the
If too much blood is placed into the
automated CBC. In this case, the instrument 
collection tube, clots will form. The clots
Hct will be the more accurate value because
in this case may be too small to visualize
the erythrocytes will “rehydrate" when the
but can affect the results and may cause
14
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
techniques used to make good blood films.
There is no absolute correct method. Two
methods are illustrated in Figure 1.8. The
best method to use is the one that allows the
individual to produce the best blood flm.
Try as many methods as possible, and re-
view the blood films for even distribution
of leukocytes and the presence of an ad-
equate counting area. Adopt the one that
works best for each individual. The only
method that is discouraged is the used of
the “pull" preparation normally used for
 cytology preparation (see Chapter 15).
Figure 1.7.  The use of a butterfly catheter with a vacu-
tainer adapter often makes the collection of blood eas-
ier than using a needle and syringe. After the catheter
is placed it can be secured to the patient, diminish-
ing the chances of damaging the vessel if the patient
struggles. An additional advantage is that this method
allows the collection of a small amount of blood for a
 quick PCV, total protein, and blood film while clearing
the catheter and tubing of blood that may contain pro-
Coagulant factors that would promote clot formation in
the EDTA tube.
[a]
obstruction of the tubing within the instru-
 ment causing instrument failure. Gross in-
spection of the blood for clots is essential
 prior to introducing a sample into an instru-
ment. In addition to checking for clots, the
 presence of agglutination should be noted if
 present. Agglutination will artifactually al-
 ter most erythrocyte indices reported by the
instrument. Since a total protein and a PCV
 are important aspects of a complete blood
count and should be performed on all whole
blood samples, the appearance of the buffy
coat can be recorded as well. A thick buffy
(b)
coat supports the presence of a leukocyto-
sis or thrombocytosis; a thin buffy coat in-
Figure 1.8. Two methods for preparing a blood film.
(a) The push slide is rested on one finger rather than
dicates a leukopenia or thrombocytopenia;
being held between the thumb and index finger. The
and reddish discoloration suggests possible
method prevents excessive pressure on the push slide.
reticulocytosis. Young erythrocytes are less
Excessive pressure results in uneven distribution of the
dense than mature erythrocytes and can sed-
leukocytes to the feathered edge. (b) Both the push
iment out in the buffy coat when the blood
slide and blood film slide are in the hands. This tech-
nique allows some individuals better control of the
is spun.
slides. There are additional techniques for blood film 
Making a good blood film is essential
preparation. Try as many methods as possible and
to blood film analysis. There are several
 choose the one that produces the best blood film.
Chapter 1: Standard Operating Procedures
15
The methods of blood film evaluation and
estimates for leukocyte and platelet num-
bers were developed for the distribution
of these cells in the traditionally prepared
 blood film. One important note on prepar-
ing blood films is to note that the angle
of the “push" slide needed to provide a
  uo s   o
of the blood. Thin (anemic patient) blood
requires a steep angle or the blood film may
run off the end of the slide. Thick blood
(a)
(dehydrated patient) requires a shallow an-
gle or the blood film will be too short and
there will be an inadequate counting area
(Figure 1.9).
 Practice is the only way to develop good
blood flm—making skills. Figure 1.10 il-
lustrates common problems in blood flm
preparation.
The most common stain used in prac-
tice is a modified quick Romanowsky stain
(Diff-Quik). Romanowsky-type stains dif-
ferentially stain the cytoplasm of the leuko-
[b]
cytes. The azure or blue dye stains the acid
components of the cells (nuclei and pro-
teins), the eosin or red dye stains the ba-
sic components of the cell (carbohydrates,
some granules). The pH of the stains is crit-
ical. Therefore, keeping the stains fresh and
limiting evaporation are important in main-
taining the pH of the solutions.
Stains should be changed frequently (at
least every 2 weeks if used often). There
are a number of Romanowsky-type stains
available to the practice. The most com-
C
monly used stain in reference laboratories
Fgure 1.9. The angle of the push slide and the vis-
is the Wright-Giemsa or Modified Wright-
cosity of the blood determine the length of the blood
Giemsa stain. These have the advantage of
film. (a) For blood with a normal PCV, a 45? angle will 
produce a blood film with a good feathered edge and
providing a truer staining quality to reticu-
counting area. (b) For blood that is thick (dehydration),
locytes on a blood flm and are preferred for
a shallower angle is needed or the blood film will be
staining cytological preparation of lymph
too short. (c) For blood that is thin (anemia), a steeper
nodes and other lymphoid organs. Spend-
angle is needed or the blood film will be too long.
ing the time to evaluate different stains is
recommended.
 Samples collected for clinical chemistry
ting the sample is centrifuged and the serum
tests are usually collected in collection tubes
is pipetted off, or, if a serum separator
without anticoagulant and allowed to clot
tube is used, poured off and placed in a
for at least 15-20 minutes. Following clot-
clean tube and sealed tightly. Occasionally,
16
Clinical Pathologyfor theVeterinaryTeam
(b)
[C}
(d)
a1
(e)
(f)
(g)
Figure 1.10. Blood film examples. (a) An example of a well-made blood film. (b) Streaks in the blood film due to
platelet clumps or dust on the slide. (c) Too much blood dropped on the slide or the angle of the push slide is too
low. (d) Too little blood dropped on the slide or the angle of the push slide is too high. (e) Hesitation with abrupt
lifting of the push slide at the end. (f) Hesitation. (g) Drops of blood allowed to sit too long before making the slide.
Chapter 1: Standard Operating Procedures
17
 samples are collected in heparin and plasma
 For urine samples, the method of collec-
is collected. This is usually done when the
tion should always be recorded. Interpreta-
volume of the blood sample is expected to
tion of the result of the urinalysis will be
be small, such as with puppies, kittens, or
 greatly affected by the method used. Opti-
pocket pets and in severely dehydrated pa-
mally, cystocentesis and catheterization are
tients. The volume of plasma obtained from
the preferred methods of urine collection.
a blood sample is often greater than for
Collection and storage of the urine sam-
serum.
ple in a clean, sterile container will allow
 In addition, the sample can be centrifuged
culture of the sample if the urinalysis re-
immediately for testing rather than wait-
sults suggest a possible septic process. Urine
ing for clot formation. It is important to
samples can be stored in the refrigerated for
remember that not all chemistry tests can
24 hours if the sample cannot be processed
be performed on heparinized plasma and
within 1-4 hours. If the sample is refrig-
that the correct type of heparin must be
erated, it must be allowed to reach room
used (lithium heparin). It is essential that
temperature prior to analysis. The artifac-
the serum or plasma portion of the blood
tual effects of urine sample handling will be
is separated from the cellular portion as
further outlined in Chapter 9.
soon as possible. Delayed separation of the
The veterinary technician plays a pivotal
blood sample can cause significant artifac-
role in the provision of clinical laboratory
tual changes in several chemistry param-
data in the veterinary practice. To do this,
eters. The tests most consistently affected
an understanding of how laboratory data
by prolonged exposure of the serum or
is produced (instrumentation), an under-
plasma to cells are glucose and phospho-
standing of the basic physiology behind dis-
rus. Potassium concentration can also be
ease processes, and experience and training
significantly increased over time in patients
in blood film evaluation will allow the tech-
with increased platelet numbers and in cer-
 nician to provide excellent data, recognize
tain breeds such as the Akita due to active
incongruent laboratory values, and antici-
 transport of potassium out the cells into the
 pate further testing by the veterinarian.
serum.
Although the veterinarian is the indi-
As with whole blood samples for hema-
vidual responsible for interpretation of
tology, serum samples should be examined
data during the process of diagnosis and
and changes in color and clarity recorded.
treatment follow-up, the technician is the
The presence of lipemia, hemolysis, and
 individual that is responsible for overseeing
icterus should be noted in the record when
the provision of accurate data and trou-
present. Most clinical chemistry instru-
bleshooting the process when problems
ments will provide information concerning
arise. The following chapters focus on
what individual clinical chemistry tests are
providing an overview of hematology,
affected by lipemia, hemolysis, and icterus.
clinical chemistry, urinalysis, and cytology
It is important to note these effects when
that will enable the veterinary technician
reporting results for a sample with these
to be a proactive part in practical clinical
changes.
pathology.
Components of the Complete
Blood Count
The complete blood count (CBC) is a pro-
difficult to fully interpret the results of a
cess by which the cellular components of
CBC without a total protein, this measure-
the blood are evaluated. The components
ment should be included as an important
of the CBC provide data that is used to
component of the CBC. The total protein
determine whether there are abnormalities
 can be measured by refractometer or by an
in erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets.
in-house chemistry instrument.
The packed cell volume (PCV), hematocrit
(Hct), hemoglobin concentration, and in-
dices that describe the size of erythrocytes
The Hemogram
and the concentration of hemoglobin within
the erythrocytes are used to evaluate ery-
The hemogram is the collection of spe-
throcytes.
cific measurements that allow the veteri-
The white blood cell count (WBC) and
narian to evaluate a patient's erythrocytes,
differential leukocyte count are used to
leukocytes, and platelets. The portion of
evaluate leukocytes. The blood flm eval-
the hemogram that contains the parameters
uation is an essential part of the CBC and
that assess erythrocytes is the erythrogram
is used to confirm the numbers obtained
and the portion that relates to the leuko-
by the automated or manual CBC and to
cytes is the leukogram. Platelet parameters
fully evaluate cell morphology. The CBC
are often reported with the erythrogram.
 can be automated or performed manually.
 Most automated cell counters will provide
The automated CBC includes each of the
 the following measurements:
above components, while the majority of
manual CBCs do not include measurement
Red cell count measured in cells/μL
of hemoglobin or the erythrocyte indices.
 Hematocrit (Hct) measured in percent
The necessary items for a manual CBC
Mean cell volume (MCV) measured in
are shown in Figure 2.1. Because it can be
femtoliters (fl)
19
20Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
measured values, the calculated values will
be erroneous.
Each of these measurements can help
identify and characterize the anemic pa-
UNOPETTE
tient. The definition of anemia is decreased
circulating erythrocytes. Therefore, an ane-
mic patient will have decreased erythro-
cyte count, decreased Hct, and decreased
Hgb. There are occasions in which all three
of these measurements are not decreased.
When this happens, an investigation into
why this discordance is present should be
C
done. To understand how discordant val-
[b]
ues occur, the technician must understand
how these measurements are made.
（a]
 -   
instruments measure hemoglobin using a
spectrophotometric method. When this
method is used, a fixed amount of blood
is diluted in a lysing solution to release the
Figure 2.1.  (a) Hemocytometer. (b)  Refractometer.
hemoglobin from the erythrocytes. Then, a
(c) Microhematocrit tube sealant. (d) Unopette system
diluent reservoir and pipette. (e) Microscope slides.
light of a specific wavelength (540 nanome-
(f) Microhematocrit tubes. (g) Unopette WBC count-
ters) is passed through the fluid containing
ing system.
the released hemoglobin, and the amount
that is transmitted to the photocell on
Hemoglobin (Hgb) measured in g/dL
the other side of the fluid is measured
(Figure 2.2).
 Mean  cell hemoglobin concentration
The amount of hemoglobin present is in-
(MCHC) measured in g/dL
versely proportional to the amount of light
 Mean cell hemoglobin (MCH) measured
that is transmitted. The less light that passes
in pg
through the fluid, the more hemoglobin will
 Platelets numbers in cells/μL
be measured in the fluid. Therefore, any-
White blood cell count in cells/μL
thing that will decrease the amount of light
 Leukocyte differential cell counts in per-
that can pass through the fluid or scatters
cents and absolute numbers in cells/μL
light as it passes through the fluid will cause
(Table 2.1).
an artifactual increase in the hemoglobin
measurement. Artifactual changes in the
measurement of hemoglobin will directly
The Erythrogram
affect the calculation of MCHC and MCH.
The red cell count is a direct count of
The three erythrocyte parameters in the
individual cells as they pass through an
erythrogram that are directly measured
electrical feld (impedance) or a flow cell
by most in-clinic hematology instruments
(laser counters) (Figure 2.3). Erroneous red
are 
hemoglobin, red cell count, and
cell counts will affect the Hct and MCH.
red cell volume. The remaining red cell
The MCV is a direct measurement of cell
parameters—MCHC, Hct, and MCH—are
size that is related to the magnitude of
calculated from the measured values. As a
the disrupted electrical current as each cell
result, if there are artifactual changes in the
 passes through the instrument. Erroneous
Chapter 2: Components of the CBC 2
21
Table 2.1. Components of the hemogram.
Mea surement
Component Measured
Units 
Hematocrit/PCV
 Measures the RBC mass as a percentage
Percent 
of blood. The hematocrit is calculated 
 by an instrument and the PCV is
measured.
Hemoglobin concentration 
 Measures the amount of hemoglobin 
Grams/deciliter (g/d L)
 contained in the blood 
Red cell count
 Measures the number of red blood 
Million/microliter (1 06/u L)
 cells/unit volume
Mean cell volume (MCV)
 Measures the average volume of the
Femtoliter (fl) or cubic
 individual red blood cells
micrometer (um?)
 Mean cell hemoglobin 
 Measures the average hemoglobin 
 Percent
concentration (MCHC)
 concentration in ind ividual red blood 
cells
 Mean cell hemoglobin
 Measures the average amount of 
 Picogram (pg)
(MCH)
 hemoglobin in the ind ividual red blood 
cell
Total white blood cell count
 Measures the number of white blood 
 Thousands/microliter
 cells/unit volume
(103/uL)
Platelet count
 Measures the number of platelets/unit
 Thousands/microliter
volume
(103/uL)
Neutrophil count 
 Measures the absolute number of 
 Thousands/microliter 
 neutrophils/unit volume
(103/uL)
 Eosinophil count
Measures the absolute number of 
 Thousands/microliter
eosinophils/unit volume 
(103/uL)
Monocyte count
Measures the absolute number of 
 Thousands/microliter
 monocytes/unit volume
(103/uL)
Lymphocyte count 
Measures the absolute number of 
 Thousands/microliter 
lymphocytes/unit volume 
(103/uL)
 Basophil count
Measures the absolute number of 
 Thousands/microliter
basophils/unit volume
(103/uL)
 % neutrophils 
The percentage of neutrophils in the 
 Percent
total white count
% eosinophils
 The percentage of eosinophils in the
Percent 
total white count
 % monocytes
 The percentage of monocytes in the
 Percent
total white count
% lymphocytes
The percentage of lymphocytes in the
Percent
total white count
 % basophils
 The percentage of basophils in the total
 Percent
white count
22
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
540nm
540nm
filter
filter
Detector
Detector
Sample
Sample
Light
Light
Source
540nm
Source
540 nm
wavelength
wavelength
(a)
light
(b)
light
Figure 2.2.
The components of a simple spectrophotometer. The filter allows one wavelength from the light source 
to pass through, 540 nm in the case of hemoglobin measurement. The hemoglobin in the sample will absorb the 
light in proportion to the amount of hemoglobin. The more hemoglobin in the sample, the less light will pass
through to the detector. Anything that will interfere with light passing through a solution will erroneously increase 
the instruments measurement of hemoglobin. (a) The sample has a high concentration of hemoglobin, absorbs a
large amount of the 540 nm wavelength and, therefore, a small amount of the light passes through the sample for
detection. (b) This sample has a low concentration of hemoglobin and, therefore, a large amount of the light passes 
through the sample for detection.
sample
External
Electrode
Sheathfluid
cell
Laser
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3. Schematic of an impedance counter (a) and a laser counter (b). (a) In the impedance counter, an
electrical current is created across a small opening (the aperture) by the external and internal electrodes. As the
cells are aspirated through the aperture, they disrupt the current in proportion to the size of the cell. As a result,
 both the number and size of the cells are measured. (b) In the laser counter, cells flow through a channel in single
file and pass through a single beam of focused light. The light is scattered to a different degree by the different types 
of cells.
Chapter 2: Components of the CBC
23
measurement of the MCV will affect the Hct
 the two populations to produce an accurate
and MCHC.
platelet count.
The platelet count is usually reported
 In some cases, large platelets (macro-
with the erythrogram. Platelets are directly
platelets) may interfere with the count.
counted in most instruments. They are
 Large platelets are produced when platelets
counted in the same cycle as the erythro-
are being consumed. Cavalier King Charles
cytes. The two populations are separated
 spaniels can have large platelets as a breed
by their size. In those instruments that
characteristic. Figure 2.4 shows three his-
use impedance, a histogram (a distribution
tograms, one from a patient with normal-
curve) shows the size difference between the
sized platelets, one from a patient with
platelets and erythrocytes. The instrument
 small erythrocytes, and one from a patient
must be able to identify a valley between
with macroplatelets. Platelet clumps will
Cell Size in femtoliters
Cell Size in femtoliters
(a)
(b)
Cell Size in femtoliters
(c)
Figure 2.4.  Red blood cell and platelet histograms. (a) Normal histogram showing a well-defined "valley" between
the platelets and the red blood cells. (b) Histogram from an individual with small red blood cells that extend into 
the platelet size ranges, making it difficult for the instrument to accurately count the platelets. (c) Histogram from an
individual with large platelets. In this case, the larger platelets will be counted as red blood cells and an artifactually
low platelet count will be reported.
24
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
also interfere with the platelet count. Small
clusters of platelets are lost in the red cell
population and, therefore, not counted as
platelets. The larger clusters are not counted
DIFFC
at all. Evaluation of the blood flm is nec-
essary for identification of macroplatelets
and platelet clumps and interpretation of
the platelet count.
The Leukogram
The total white blood cell count, leukocyte
differential, absolute leukocyte counts, and
leukocyte morphology abnormalities are all
components of the leukogram. The total
white blood cell count and, in some instru-
ments, the absolute number of individual
cell types are direct counts. Although there
are in-clinic instruments that offer auto-
mated differential and absolute differential
cell counts, blood films should be reviewed
to confirm the number and distribution of
leukocytes.
This can be done quickly by examining
the slide at 10 for overall cellularity and
at 40x to confirm the differential. If on
review of the blood flm, there is concern
for the accuracy of the instrument differ-
ential cell count and absolute numbers, a
manual differential should be done. In most
Figure 2.5. Cell counters. Bottom, mechanical
cases, a 100 cell differential suffices. How-
counter; top, electronic counter; inset: individual cell
ever, if the total cell count is greater than
counter.
30,000/μL, a 200 cell differential should be
done. The more cells counted in the dif-
The digital counter has the advantage of
ferential cell count, the more accurate the
calculating the absolute numbers from the
count. An essential part of the leukogram is
 percentages obtained in the differential cell
the morphological evaluation of the leuko-
count. In addition, most digital counters
cytes. Comments on the presence of toxic
have a key to count nucleated erythrocytes
change and Dohle bodies, reactive lym-
(nRBC) without affecting the differential.
phocytes, and atypical or unidentified cells
If the technician is using the mechanical
should be noted where appropriate. These
counter, an additional single counter will be
changes will be discussed in Chapter 4.
needed to keep track of the nRBC. The sin-
The manual differential cell count is the
gle counter is also used to count cells on the
most time-consuming component of the
 hemocytometer when performing the man-
CBC. The process can be shortened con-
ual WBC.
siderably by the use of a differential cell
 Manual white blood cell counts may be
counter. Two types of differential cell coun-
needed in some cases, such as when the
ters are shown in Figure 2.5.
amount of blood obtained is insufficient for
Chapter 2: Components of the CBC1
25
Figure 2.6.   Hemocytometer and Unopette system for
manually counting white blood cells.
an automated count or the blood film does
Fgure 2.7. Neubauer grid for counting cells.
not verify the automated WBC. Manual
 cell counts are most commonly done using
be purchased to have on hand in case of
 the Unopette system and a hemocytometer
breakage.
(Figure 2.6).
The following is a short protocol for per-
 There are several types of Unopette sys-
forming a WBC using a hemocytometer and
tems available. Table 2.2 lists the systems
the Unopette system:
most commonly used for white blood cell
counts. If more than one system is used in
1. Place the blood sample on the sam-
the clinic, it is important to be sure that the
ple rocker to mix thoroughly (Figure
pipettes are used only with the correct dilu-
2.8a).
ent reservoir. The pipettes measure a spe-
Clean the grid surface of the hemo-
cific volume that is different for each di-
cytometer and the coverslip with wa-
lution reservoir. There are several types of
ter and a dust-free tissue (lens paper
hemocytometers. The hemocytometers with
works well). Wipe both dry. Be gentle
the improved Neubauer grid are the most
with the fragile coverslips. They are
commonly used type (Figure 2.7). The cov-
usually broken when being cleaned.
3.
 Place the coverslip over the counting
erslip that accompanies the hemocytome-
ter is specifically weighted for use with
area of the hemocytometer.
the hemocytometer. Extra coverslips should
4.
 Using the pipette cover, pierce the di-
aphragm of the reservoir to open it
(Figure 2.8b).
Table 2.2. Types of Unopette systems.
5.
Charge the Unopette pipette with
blood. Capillary action will draw the
Method
Contents 
blood up to the hub of the pipette.
Carefully wipe off the outside of the
pipette being sure not to touch the tip
Leukocyte
3% acetic acid (cannot be
of the pipette with the tissue (Figures
count
used to count cells in joint
2.8c,d).
fluid)
 Platelet/leukocyte 
6.
Squeeze the Unopette reservoir slightly
1 % ammonium oxalate
count
and carefully seat the pipette
tip
Reticulocyte
New methylene blue
firmly into the neck of the reservoir.
stain set
Release the reservoir to allow the
vacuum to pull the blood into the
26
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
(a)
[e]
C
(d)
(h)
Figure 2.8. Performing a manual WBC count.
Chapter 2: Components of the CBC 2
27
dilution fluid. Gently rinse the pipette
by slightly squeezing and releasing the
reservoir to force fluid into the pipette
without spilling fluid from the open
end of the pipette (Figures 2.8e,f).
7. Allow the charged reservoir to sit for 5
minutes on a rocker to allow complete
lysis of the erythrocytes and to mix
thoroughly. If a rocker is not avail-
able, be sure to mix the reservoir gen-
tly 10-15 times just before charging
the hemocytometer (Figure 2.8g).
8.
 Remove the pipette and seat the hub
Fgure 2.9. A petri dish, small absorbent paper, and
back into the reservoir.
two sections of an applicator stick are used to make
9.
 Just before placing the tip of the
a humidity chamber. A small amount of water is used
pipette into the charging channel on
to moisten the paper. The hemocytometer is placed in
the hemocytometer, expel a few drops
this chamber for about 5 minutes to allow the cells to
settle onto the surface. Once the cover of the petri dish
to clear any residue in the pipette that
is in place, the moisture from the moisten paper will
may not be well mixed.
prevent loss of fluid from under the cover slip due to
10.
Gently squeeze the reservoir to form a
evaporation.
small drop and set it in the charging
 channel of the hemocytometer (Figure
2.8h).
15.
 In order to keep track of the cells
 Allow the fluid to be pulled, by cap-
that fall on the lines of the grid, in-
11.
clude the cells on the top and left lines
illary action, under the coverslip just
of each square in the count for that
until the chamber is filled. Practice
may be needed to accurately charge
square. Figure 2.10 illustrates the grid
a hemocytometer. If the chamber is
and how cells are counted.
16.
Charge and count both sides of the
overfilled or underfilled, the count will
hemocytometer. The counts should be
not be accurate.
within 10% of each other. Average
12.
 Place the hemocytometer in a humidi-
the two counts before calculating the
fied chamber (Figure 2.9).
WBC using the formula provided by
13.
 Place the hemocytometer on the mi-
 the Unopette system used.
croscope stage and view using the
17.
Be sure to thoroughly clean the hemo-
10× objective. The stage will have to
be lowered significantly to bring the
cytometer and coverslip before storing
counting grid on the hemocytometer
them.
into view. By focusing on the tip of
the charging channel, it is easy to find
The Blood Film
 ay u as a uo aq pe au
rection of the point of the channel.
14. Count all the cells in the 9 large
The blood flm is an essential part of the
squares following a pattern that starts
complete blood count. It can be used as
in the upper-left square along the top
 an internal control for the white blood cell
row to the right, down to the middle
count, differential, and platelet count. As
row along to the left, and then down
discussed in Chapter 1, a good uniform
to the bottom row along to the right
blood film is essential to the process
again.
 of blood flm examination. There is an
28
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
10
11
12
C
[b]
(a)
14
Figure 2.10. When counting the cells in the grid, it is
standard practice to count the cells that are on the lines
in a standard pattern to keep from counting a cell twice.
The cells on the top and left of each small square are
counted with that square, while the cells on the bottom
 and right are not. In this field, the red cell on the lines
in squares 1, 4, 6, and 11 will be counted in each of
their respective squares because they are on the top or
left lines. The red cells on the line in squares 12 and 15
will be excluded from their respective squares because 
Figure 2.11. (a) The feathered edge. (b) The counting
 they are on the bottom line.
area. (c) The body of the film.
"anatomy" to the blood flm, and each
 In a well-made blood flm, the leukocyte
 part of the blood film is used for a specific
distribution will allow an estimation of the
purpose.
WBC count and an accurate differential cell
 Figure 2.11 illustrates the regions of the
count. The body of the film is in the thicker
blood film: feathered edge, counting area,
 portion of the blood film where the red cells
 and body. As the blood film is made, large
are just overlapping. Figure 2.11 illustrates
things such as platelet clumps, large atyp-
the cell density seen in each of the three
ical cells, and microflaria are carried to
areas of the blood film.
the feathered edge. However, in this area,
Evaluation of the blood flm is done at
the erythrocytes and leukocytes are flat-
 several levels. The initial step is scanning
tened and do not show a normal morphol-
the slide at low power (10x objective) for a
 ogy. As a result, erythrocyte and leuko-
quick estimate of the white blood cell count
cyte morphology cannot be evaluated in this
(>50 white blood cells/field indicates a high
area. Erythrocyte and leukocyte morphol-
count, <20 cells/field indicates a low cell
Ogy evaluation is done in the counting area
count) and review of the feathered edge for
where the blood cells form a monolayer.
large cells, platelet clumps, and parasites
 In the counting area, the red cells in those
(i.e., microflaria). On low power, the qual-
species with a good central pallor, such as
ity of the blood film can be determined (i.e.,
the dog, are easy to distinguish from atyp-
is the cell distribution even or are all the
ical cells such as spherocytes, and the cy-
cells at the feathered edge?). This quick as-
toplasm and nucleus of the leukocytes are
sessment of the WBC count can be used to
clearly seen.
support the manual or automated count. A
Chapter 2: Components of the CBC
29
 more accurate estimate of the WBC count
dard objective working field diameter of
can be done using the high dry objective
0.63 mm. If the working field diameter of
(40×). When using the 40x objective, it is
the clinic microscope is larger or smaller,
important to use a coverslip or the cells will
the estimates may need to be adjusted for
not be in focus. This estimate is done in the
that particular microscope.
"counting" area of the blood flm. The fol-
lowing steps can be used for this estimate:
1.
Count all leukocytes in 10 40x fields.
2.
Total leukocyte counted / # of fields
counted × 2000 = estimated leukocyte
count
3. If the patient is anemic a corrected
 count can be obtained by the following
formula:
Corrected count = (estimated count X
(actual PCV / normal PCV))
(For the “normal PCV,” use 45 for dogs
and 35 for cats)
Example:
100 cells counted / 10 felds
PO
10×2000
(approximately)
20,000/μL
PCV 22
20,000
(22/45)
(approxi-
mately) 9,800/μL
A similar formula can be used to estimate
the platelet count. For platelets, the estimate
is done using the oil immersion objective in
the body of the blood film. The following
steps can be used for platelet estimate:
1.
 Count all platelets in 10 oil immersion
felds.
2.
Total platelets counted / # of felds
counted x 20,000 = estimated platelet
count
Example:
100 platelets counted / 10 fields
10 × 20,000 = (approximately)
200,000/uL
(Note: if the number of platelets
 seen in each feld is 10 or greater,
the patient should have a normal
Fgure 2.12.  (a) Note the flattened and distorted ery-
 platelet mass).
throcytes and neutrophils at the feathered edge. (b)
 Note the central pallor in the erythrocytes and the crisp 
nucleus of both the neutrophil and monocyte in the
The above estimates of the white blood
counting area. (c) Note the increased density of the
cell and platelet counts are based on a stan-
erythrocytes in the body of the blood film.
otherchanges
↑
Elements of
Complete
Blood Count
 the 
The
Chapter 2: Components of the CBC3
31
 After the WBC and platelet counts are
(Figures 2.12, 2.13). There are several
verified, morphological evaluation of ery-
changes in the erythrocyte morphology that
throcytes, leukocytes and platelets can be
should be reported. Changes in size (aniso-
done. Platelet size, changes in leukocyte
cytosis), shape (poikilocytosis), color (poly-
morphology, and erythrocyte morphology
chromasia or hypochromasia) and the pres-
should be noted. Leukocyte atypia and cyto-
ence of inclusions can be seen because of
plasmic abnormalities such as reactive lym-
underlying disease processes. The specific
 phocytes and neutrophil toxicity are im-
abnormalities identified in the CBC will be
portant findings to be noted in the CBC
discussed in Chapter 4.
Hematology: The Erythrocytes
White Blood Cells, and
Immune System
Hematology is the study of the cellular com-
the stimulation of lymphocytes and is dis-
ponents of blood. Blood is composed of
 cussed as a separate section.
both cells and fluid. The cells are white
blood cell (leukocytes), erythrocytes (ery-
throcytes), and platelets. The fluid compo-
Hematology
nent consists of water, protein, electrolytes/
minerals, lipids, soluble carbohydrates,
amino acids, and other noncellular sub-
The enumeration and morphological evalu-
stances such as hormones. Each component
 ation of the peripheral blood cells are essen-
of blood has a specific function and can
tial parts of the complete blood count. An
change in response to disease states. This
understanding of the formation, function,
chapter discusses the cellular components
 and peripheral dynamics of white blood
of blood and includes normal physiology
cells will allow the veterinary technician to
 of each cell type.
accurately identify and report changes in the
 Immunology is the study of the immune
CBC associated with disease processes.
system. The immune system is a complex
cellular defense that recognizes foreign sub-
stances and infectious agents and mounts a
Hematopoiesis
reaction to destroy the foreign agent. There
are two primary divisions of the immune
system: innate immunity and acquired im-
Hematopoiesis is the production of blood
munity. The cells of the innate immune sys-
cells. All peripheral blood cells are formed
tem include the peripheral blood leukocytes
in the bone marrow from a single cell, a
(neutrophils, eosinophils, and monocytes)
stem cell. The stem cell produces cells that
and are discussed in the hematology section
commit to a specific cell type in response
of this chapter. Acquired immunity requires
to specific growth factors. Hematopoiesis
66
34Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Bone Cortex
MarrowSpace
Central Vascular
Sinus
Figure 3.1.  The hematopoietic tissue is present within the marrow spaces of the long bones. The mature leukocytes,
 erythrocytes, and platelets are released into the central sinusoids of the marrow and, eventually, into the peripheral
blood. Normal supportive structures of the bone marrow are as essential to normal blood cell production as the
hematopoietic cells.
is  separated  into granulopoiesis
{neu-
creased production of blood cells. In addi-
trophil, eosinophil, basophil production),
tion to the structural support, the microen-
erythropoiesis (erythrocyte
production),
vironment must provide access to certain
and  megakaryopoiesis (platelet produc-
circulating hormones, growth factors (sub-
tion).
 stances produced by supportive cells), and
 Bone marrow is found within the central
nutrients.
core of most bones throughout the body.
There are many factors that control
 Figure 3.1 illustrates the structure of bone
 hematopoiesis to maintain normal num-
marrow.
bers of erythrocytes, white blood cells, and
 The bone marrow consists of support-
 platelets and to increase production of each
ive cells, their supportive matrix (the mi-
of these cell types when needed. Figure 3.2
croenvironment), and hematopoietic cells.
illustrates the progression of hematopoiesis
The supportive cells that provide a produc-
from t
the uncommitted
1  (pleuripotential)
tive microenvironment are macrophages,
stem cell that gives rise to all blood cells and
fat cells, fibrocytes, and vascular endothe-
primary growth factors that act to promote
lial cells (cells that line the blood vessels).
 production of these cells.
The hematopoietic cells are uncommitted
The stimuli to increase production of
 stem cells, committed stem cells, and vari-
each cell type are varied. For example,
ous maturation stages of each cell type. The
erythrocyte production is increased in re-
microenvironment is extremely important.
 sponse to hypoxia perceived by the kidney.
Injury to the cells and supportive structures
The cells that surround the tubules of the
of the microenvironment will result in de-
kidney respond to changes in oxygenation
Chapter 3:Hematology
35
Stem Cell
SCF
SCF-Stem Cell Factor
GM-CSF - Granulocyte/Monocyte-
Colony StimulatingFactor
G-CSF - Granulocyte-Colony
StimulatingFactor
Myeloblast
M-CSF - Monocyte-Colony Stimulating
Factor
GM-CSF
GM-CSF
Erythropoeitin
Erythropoeitin
Thrombopoietin
G-CSF
M-CSF
Red Cell
Platelet
Basophil
Eosinophil
Neutrophil
Monocyte
Figure 3.2.
 The hematopoietic cellines and the primary growth factors that control production of each type of
blood cell.
of the sounding tissue. Erythropoietin, the
 pends on a balance between the factors that
primary hormone that stimulates erythro-
promote hematopoiesis and those that in-
poiesis, is produced at a constant rate to
hibit the process.
maintain the normal rate of erythropoiesis.
There are many factors that can stimu-
The circulating concentration of erythro-
late the production of neutrophils, several
poietin increases when the oxygenation of
 of which are produced as a result of inflam-
the renal tissue decreases.
mation.
There are also factors that  inhibit
In the normal animal, the bone mar-
 hematopoiesis. The maintenance of normal
row produces the majority of blood cells.
concentrations of peripheral blood cells de-
 The spleen is another site of hematopoiesis,
36
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
extramedullary hematopoiesis. The major-
the spleen and, to a lesser degree, liver and
ity of blood cells produced in the spleen
bone marrow. These cells are replaced by
are erythrocytes; however, both granulo-
 new red cells to maintain the normal red cell
cytes and platelets can also be formed in
count in the peripheral blood. Erythrocyte
the spleen. This organ can increase its pro-
maturation takes approximately 3-5 days.
duction of blood cells when needed but can-
As a result, if an animal has an episode of
not replace the bone marrow as the primary
significant blood loss, it may take up to 7
site of hematopoiesis. Several changes in
days to see any evidence of regeneration in
the peripheral blood occur when the spleen
the peripheral blood sample
has increased production of erythrocytes,
The erythrocytes only function is to carry
including increased circulating nucleated
Oxygen from the lung to the tissues and CO2
erythrocytes.
from the tissues to the lung. The shape of the
cell, hemoglobin, cytoplasmic enzymes, and
membrane-associated electrolyte pumps all
contribute to moving oxygen from the alve-
Erythropoiesis
oli of the lung to the tissues. The concentra-
tion of hemoglobin within the erythrocyte
Erythrocytes are formed in sinusoids of the
and the number of erythrocytes in circula-
bone marrow, surrounded by “nurse” cells
tion determine how well blood will trans-
(specialized macrophages that store iron
port oxygen.
and phagocytize the extruded nucleus) and
Hemoglobin consists of 4 molecules of
move though the walls of the sinusoids
 heme, each containing 1 atom of iron, and
into the bloodstream. Figure 3.3 illustrates
1 molecule of a protein, globulin. Approx-
the progression of the erythrocyte from the
imately 95% of the erythrocyte dry weight
committed stem cell to the mature erythro-
is hemoglobin. Each heme/iron unit can
cyte.
ransport 1 oxygen molecule. Therefore,
As the erythrocyte matures it becomes
each molecule of hemoglobin can carry 4
smaller, accumulates more hemoglobin, and
molecules of oxygen. There are over 200
eventually extrudes its nucleus. The num-
million molecules of hemoglobin in each
ber of mitotic divisions the cell undergoes
erythrocyte.
is closely regulated and determines the final
The ability of the heme molecule to carry
size of the red cell. During normal produc-
 Oxygen depends on several factors. The tem-
tion of erythrocytes, only mature erythro-
 perature and pH of the tissues have signif-
cytes are released into the circulation.
cant effects on the oxygen-carrying capacity
With increased demand, younger, larger,
 of hemoglobin. In the lungs, the tempera-
polychromatophilic
erythrocytes
(stress
ture is high (equal to core temperature) and
reticulocytes) are released. The blue hue
the pH is neutral. In addition, oxygen con-
 of the young polychromatophilic red cell
centration is high. All these factors promote
is due to RNA in the cytoplasm. Once
Oxygenation of the hemoglobin molecule.
released, the reticulocyte will continue to
 In the peripheral tissues, the temperature,
make hemoglobin and eventually lose the
pH, and oxygen concentration are lower. In
RNA. However, it does not become smaller.
this environment, hemoglobin will release
The normal life span of the erythrocyte
its oxygen into the tissues. The schematic in
varies between species. In the cat, normal
Figure 3.4 shows the mechanics of oxygen
red cells circulate for approximately
70
uptake and release from the erythrocyte as
days; in the dog, the red cells circulate for
it travels from the lung to the tissue.
approximately 110 days. As the red cells
The shape of the erythrocyte also assists
age, they are removed by macrophages in
in delivering oxygen. In many species, the
igure3.3
38Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Tissue
Lung Alveolus
Capillary
Capillary
O2
Erythrocyte
 Figure 3.4. Oxygen and COz transportation between the lung and the tissue. COz is released from the hemoglobin
in the erythrocytes in the capillary and diffuses into the lung alveolus. At the same time, oxygen diffuses from the
shn ssanoid asiaai au saoia au u ugooay au q dn payid s pue Aelden aui oui snjoaie
in the tissues with release of oxygen into the tissues while COz is picked up by the erythrocyte for transport to
the lung.
biconcave shape provides abundant surface
the network proteins in which the cells are
area to exchange oxygen in the lung and
 oval-shaped rather than the normal bicon-
tissues. The shape allows the cells to travel
cave disc.
efficiently through the small blood vessels
There are many factors that affect the
in the tissues (capillaries) and provides the
production of normal erythrocytes. Two
 greatest surface area possible for exchange
processes, hemoglobin synthesis and DNA
of oxygen in the lungs and peripheral
synthesis, are essential. The concentration
tissues.
of hemoglobin within the cytoplasm of the
The red cell membrane consists of pro-
erythrocyte affects the division of the red
tein (45%), lipid (45%), and carbohydrate
 cell as it matures. The maximum amount
(10%). Just within the membrane of the red
 of hemoglobin in the erythrocytes is very
cell is a protein “net" that maintains the
closely regulated. Although the erythro-
shape of the erythrocyte. Figure 3.5 illus-
cyte can have less hemoglobin than nor-
trates the membrane and protein structure
mal, it cannot contain a higher concentra-
of the erythrocyte.
tion than normal. Once the concentration
Alterations in the lipid content of the
of hemoglobin reaches a critical level, cell
cell's membrane or the protein net will re-
division will cease and the nucleus of the
sult in changes in the erythrocyte shape.
immature erythrocyte is extruded. Normal
There are genetic and metabolic diseases
DNA synthesis is required for cell division
that produce abnormal erythrocytes due to
to occur. Any process that inhibits DNA
alterations in the erythrocyte membrane.
synthesis will result in decreased erythro-
For example, hereditary elliptocytosis is a
 poiesis or production of abnormal erythro-
 genetic disease due to a defect in one of
cytes.
Chapter 3: Hematology
39
Red Cell Surface Antigens
LipidMembrane
MembraneProteins
Submembrane Proteins
Figure 3.5. The erythrocyte shape is maintained by the protein and lipid content of the membrane and a special-
ized network of proteins. Any change in these structural molecules will alter the shape, and, possibly, the flexibility
of the erythrocyte. Anchored in the membrane are many surface antigens that make up the blood group types.
Mammalian erythrocytes vary consider-
continue to use glucose resulting in an arti-
ably in size and shape from species to species
factual decrease in serum glucose.
(Figure 3.6).
There are several genetic disorders of ery-
Erythrocytes depend on glucose for their
 throcyte metabolism that result in anemia.
energy needs (glycolysis). As a result, if red
Although relatively rare, they have been
cells are left in contact with serum, they will
reported in several species. In most cases,
species
RBC count
Morphology
PCV
MCV
MCHC
DOG
5.5-8.5
37-55
60-77
32-36
CAT
5.0-10.0
24-45
39-55
30-36
cow
5.0-10.0
24-46
40-60
30-36
SHEEP
8.0-16.0
24-50
23-48
31-38
GOAT
8.0-18.0
®
19-38
15-30
35-42
HORSE
6.5-12.5
32-52
34-58
31-37
ever, is fairly similar between species.
40Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Stem Cell
Myeloblast
Promyelocyte
Promonocyte
Myelocyte
Monocyte
Metamyelocyte
Band
Neutrophil Eosinophil Basophil
Figure 3.7. Granulopoiesis.
the diseases are associated with hemolytic
present in their cytoplasm determines the
anemia.
identity of the granulocytic precursor cells.
Granulopoiesis
Neutrophils
As with erythrocytes, circulating leukocytes
The neutrophil is the most common granu-
are also formed in the sinusoids of the bone
locyte in the peripheral blood of dogs, cats,
marrow. The progression from committed
humans, and horses. The neutrophil's name
stem cells to mature leukocytes is illustrated
is derived from the fact that when stained
in Figure 3.7.
with the routine Romanowsky stains used
 Under the influence of specific growth
for peripheral blood films, the granules
factors, the multipotential myeloid stem
int
their cytoplasm are
“neutral"; they
cell will be committed to becoming gran-
don't stain red (eosinophilic) or purple (ba-
ulocytes (i.e., neutrophils, eosinophils, ba-
sophilic). The primary function of the neu-
sophils) or monocytes. Production of gran-
 trophil is defense against bacterial disease.
ulocytes to maintain normal numbers in
The neutrophil is very efficient at engulfing
the peripheral blood is a balance between
and destroying bacteria. The granules con-
stimulating growth factors and a negative
 tain enzymes and antibacterial substances
 feedback from the mature granulocytes in
to kill and degrade bacteria. One of the most
the peripheral blood. The type of granules
 active agents within the neutrophil granule
Chapter 3: Hematology
41
is elastase, an enzyme that breaks down tis-
production of neutrophils for the matu-
sue. Unfortunately, in the fulfillment of their
ration and storage pool. If the inflamma-
function, they often cause significant tissue
tory stimulus is strong enough, immature
 damage. A common example of this is the
 neutrophils (band neutrophils, metamyelo-
subcutaneous abscess.
cytes) will be released from the maturation
pool resulting in a "“left shift," defined as
the presence of immature neutrophils in the
Neutrophil Dynamics
circulation. Occasionally, the demand for
neutrophils can be so strong that it over-
Changes in the number of neutrophils, ei-
whelms the bone marrow, producing a
ther increased number (neutrophilia) or
"noncompensated" left shift. The types
decreased number (neutropenia), are the
 of neutrophil responses are discussed in
most common changes seen in the leuko-
Chapter 4.
gram. Understanding the dynamics that de-
In response to chronic stress with in-
termine the number of neutrophils that cir-
creased circulating corticosteroids, there are
culate will allow the veterinary technician
increased circulating neutrophils. The neu-
to access the blood film and relate the
trophilia of the stress leukogram is the re-
changes to the patient. The number of cir-
sult of increased release of neutrophils from
culating neutrophils depends on four sepa-
the storage pool and release of neutrophils
rate pools of cells: proliferation pool, mat-
from the marginated pool. The steps nec-
uration/storage pool, circulating pool, and
essary for a neutrophil to leave circulation
marginated pool. Each of these pools re-
and migrate into the marginated pool re-
sponds to circulating factors that can in-
 quire expression of adhesion molecules on
crease or decrease the number of cells in the
the cells that line the capillaries (endothelial
 pool population.
cells) and the membrane of the neutrophils.
The Proliferation pool contains all pre-
The neutrophil tumbles along the wall of the
cursors that are capable of division (stem
vessel until it finally adheres to the endothe-
cell, myeloblast, promyelocyte, myelocyte ).
lial cell, and then the cell can migrate be-
The maturation and storage pool contain
tween endothelial cells into the tissues when
the postdivision neutrophils (metamelocyte,
needed. Steroids decrease the expression of
band neutrophils, 1
mature neutrophil).
In
receptors on the surface of the neutrophil
the normal animal, neutrophils are retained
 that are responsible for adhesion of the neu-
in this pool until they are mature and stored
trophil to the vessel wall. As a result, fewer
for quick release under the stimulation of
neutrophils will be attached to the wall of
products of inflammation. The size of the
 the vessels decreasing the marginated pool
 and increasing the circulating pool.
and cats have a large storage pool; rumi-
Another common cause of neutrophilia
nants have a small storage pool and do not
is excitement. In this case, increased rate
have the same capacity to release large num-
of blood flow in response to secretion of
bers of mature neutrophils when needed.
epinephrine “ washes" neutrophils from the
The most common changes in the neu-
marginated pool into the circulating pool.
 trophil pools are in response to stress, ex-
In addition to the increase in neutrophils,
citement, and inflammation.
lymphocytes also increase in response to
In response to inflammation, there is im-
increased release of epinephrine. In many
mediate release of mature neutrophils from
cases, the number of lymphocytes will be
the storage pool into the circulation. In
greater than the neutrophils. Young dogs
addition, the demand for neutrophils will
 and cats have the most prominent excite-
stimulate the proliferation pool to increase
ment response.
42
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Eosinophils
 inflammatory responses and allergic con-
ditions. In normal animals, basophils are
extremely rare in peripheral blood. Their
The eosinophil has eosinophilic (red) gran-
number often increases in response to the
ules. Their function is not as well defined
 same disease processes as the eosinophil.
as the neutrophil's function. They are in-
volved in response to parasitic infections,
fungal disease, some protozoal diseases, al-
 lergies, and immune-complex disease. Their
Monocytes
 granules contain one of the most caustic
substances found in granulocytic cells, ma-
The peripheral blood monocyte's primary
 jor basic protein. This protein is thought to
function is to migrate to the tissues to be-
be responsible for the remarkable degree of
come a macrophage. Once in the tissues,
necrosis found in tissues with eosinophilic
these cells participate in tissue repair, reg-
inflammation. In the normal animal, very
ulation of the immune response, erythro-
few eosinophils are present in the periph-
cyte turnover, and iron recycling in the
eral blood.
spleen. They are very active cells. Mono-
cytes circulate in relatively low numbers in
the normal animal. Their numbers increase
in chronic inflammatory disease and with
Basophils
stress in the dog. The monocyte is often
confused with toxic bands and metamye-
The basophil has deep purple (basophilic)
 locytes. They are larger and usually have
 granules in most species and light laven-
discrete vacuoles. Their nucleus is more
der granules in the cat. Very little is known 
pleomorphic (many different shapes) un-
about the function of basophils. The con-
like the band neutrophil and metamyelo-
tents of the granules are similar to those
cyte, which have distinct shapes. Figure 3.8
found in the mast cell, a tissue mononuclear
illustrates a monocyte compared to a band
cell that is often associated with certain
 neutrophil and metamyelocyte.
(b)
Figure 3.8.  (a) Monocyte. (b) Band neutrophil. (c) Metamyelocytes.
Chapter3:Hematology
43
Megakaryocyte
Proplatelets
Platelets
Figure 3.9. Megakaryopoiesis. Platelets are small cytoplasmic fragments that are released from the ends of long
Cytoplasmic extensions (proplatelets) from the body of the megakaryocyte.
Megakaryopoiesis
ules: dense granules and alpha-granules.
 Dense granules contain calcium, an essen-
tial component for the activation of clot-
Megakaryopoiesis is the
production
of
ting factors. Alpha-granules contain clot-
platelets. Platelets are small fragments of
 ting factors and other components that pro-
megakaryocyte cytoplasm that break off
of the tips of long cytoplasmic exten-
mote coagulation.
sions called proplatelets. The production of
platelets is regulated by the growth factor,
thrombopoietin, in concert with other cy-
Lymphocytopoiesis
tokines, some of which are part of the in-
flammatory process. In addition, erythro-
poietin can potentiate the activity of throm-
The lymphocyte is the second most com-
bopoietin. As a result of this interaction of
 mon cell type in the peripheral blood of the
erythropoietin and inflammatory cytokines,
dog, cat, horse, and human. In the rumi-
increased numbers of circulating platelets
nant, however, the lymphocyte is the most
(thrombocytosis) are seen with anemia and
common peripheral blood leukocyte. The
inflammation.
primary function of the lymphocyte is to
Megakaryocytes are the largest cells in
participate in acquired immunity. There are
the bone marrow. They have large lobu-
lated nuclei and abundant lightly granular
cell, responsible for the production of an-
basophilic cytoplasm. Figure 3.9 illustrates
tibodies (immunoglobulins); and the T-cell,
the process of platelet production.
responsible for regulation of the immune
Platelets are essential for normal blood
response and a process called cell-mediated
clotting (coagulation). The process of coag-
immunity. The type of lymphocyte cannot
ulation will be discussed in Chapter 15. The
be determined by its morphology. Special
platelet's membrane and cytoplasmic gran-
stains are needed to differentiate the type of
ules both participate in formation of blood
lymphocyte. The morphology of the lym-
clots. There are two types of platelet gran-
phocyte can change when foreign antigens
44
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
stimulate the cells. Once the cells are stim-
while keeping lymphocytes that will not re-
ulated, they become larger and develop
act to self. This allows the body to iden-
 deeply basophilic cytoplasm. Their nuclei
tify nonself antigens from foreign bacte-
 often develop a prominent nucleolus.
ria and pathogens while not attacking the
 Lymphocytes, initially produced in the
body's own tissue. The thymus and the
bone marrow, migrate to several other lym-
bone marrow are the two lymphoid organs
phoid organs (the spleen, lymph nodes, thy-
that can produce lymphocytes without im-
mus, and specific areas in the lungs and
mune stimulation. Over time, the thymus
intestine) where they organize to form the
decreases in size and function by a process
lymphoid system. The lymphocytes present
called involution. The remaining lymphoid
in the peripheral blood circulate into and
organs produce lymphocytes when stimu-
out of these lymphoid organs as they survey
lated by a foreign antigen.
the body for foreign antigens or infectious
The spleen is a large vascular organ with
 agents. Lymphoid cells that leave the pe-
two primary functions. It is the largest sec-
ripheral blood are returned to circulation
ondary lymphoid organ and acts as a blood
through the lymphatic vessels that arise in
filter. The tissue of the spleen has two
the tissues and eventually are dumped into
distinct regions, the red and white pulp.
the vena cava through the thoracic duct in
The name for these regions comes from
the thoracic cavity. Figure 3.10 illustrates
the fact that on cut surface, small round
the organs involved in the lymphoid system.
white spots corresponding to the lymphoid
The thymus is the source of T-cells.
. The
tissue (white pulp) are scattered through-
environment of the thymus allows the body
out the highly vascular red pulp. The fil-
to identify lymphocytes that have the po-
tering function of the spleen allows it to
tential to react to the individual's
remove abnormal erythrocytes. As blood
own
tissue and remove them from the body
flows through the sinusoids of the spleen
through the red pulp, old, atypically shaped,
parasitized, immune-injured, and nucleated
erythrocytes are removed. In addition, the
onsils
spleen's lymphoid tissue, the white pulp,
Submandibular,
Thymus
continually surveys the blood as it passes
lymph nodes
Prescapular
 through its vessels and sinusoids for foreign
lymphnodes
antigens.
The lymph nodes are small, bean-shaped
organs that filter lymph and transport lym-
phocytes and other cells from the tissues
Axillary
Spleen
back to the blood. Lymph is fluid from
lymph nodes
sublumbar
the tissues that is collected in specialized
Inguinal
lymph nodes
thin-walled vessels, the lymphatics; filtered
lymph nodes
through the lymph nodes; and finally re-
Popliteal
turned to the blood through the thoracic
oneMarrow
lymphnodes
duct, which empties into the vena cava
within the thorax. Multiple lymphatic ves-
sels enter a lymph node through its cap-
sule and exit through a single vessel. The
lymph percolates through the cortex to the
medulla of the lymph node exposing the res-
Figure 3.10. An illustration of lymph nodes and
ident lymphocytes to all components in the
lymph flow through the canine body.
fluid.
Abnormalities in the Red and
White Blood Cell Populations
It is much easier to understand changes that
provide an insight into the underlying cause
occur in response to disease when one has
for anemia or prompt the close evaluation
a strong understanding of normal blood
of the functions of certain organs, such as
and blood cells. This chapter reviews com-
the liver, spleen, and kidney. Recognition of
mon changes in the hemogram associated
these morphological changes is an essential
with disease. Changes in erythrocyte and
skill for veterinary technicians who review
leukocyte morphology and their underly-
blood films.
ing causes are discussed, and the pathogen-
esis (steps involved in the development of
a disease) of anemia, polycythemia, leuko-
Poikilocytes
cytosis, leukopenia, thrombocytosis, and
thrombocytopenia are described along with
Erythrocyte morphology has its own lan-
the diseases that are associated with these
guage, as do many areas of medicine.
 abnormal hemogram findings.
Poikilocytosis simply indicates that the red
blood cells seen on review of a blood film
have abnormal shapes. There are several
Abnormalities in Erythrocyte
specific shape changes that warrant iden-
Morphology
tification to assist the clinician in inter-
preting changes in the hemogram. Poikilo-
cytes are abnormally shaped erythrocytes.
Changes in the morphology of erythrocytes
The most common types of poikilocytes are
include changes in shape and inclusions in
echinocytes (crenated erythrocytes), acan-
or on the erythrocyte. Each of these mor-
thocytes, schistocytes, spherocytes, kerato-
phological abnormalities provides informa-
cytes, burr cells, eccentrocytes, and tar-
tion about disease processes that may be
 get cells. Less common poikilocytes include
present. Several erythrocyte abnormalities
stomatocytes and ovalocytes. Figure 4.1
45
cell). (g) torocyte (target cell). (h) Ovalocyte.
Figure 4.1. (a) acanthocyte. (b) schistocyte. (c) Keratocyte (d) sphe
Chapter 4: Blood Cell Abnormalities
47
Table 4.1. Common poikilocytosis and associated diseases.
Type of Cell Noted
 Shape of Cell
Disease
Echinocytes (crenated 
Numerous uniformly distributed
Artifact of drying, snake bite.
cell}
tent-shaped spikes
dehydration, inherited erythrocyte
defects
Acanthocytes
Irregularly spaced thin spikes with
 Prominent numbers: liver disease,
 knoblike tips: no central pallor
renal disease, hemangiosarcoma 
 Small numbers: iron deficiency.
 microangiopathy
Eccentrocytes
 Dense eccentric displacement of
 Oxidative injury secondary to
 hemoglobin with a clear edge
 onion toxicity, drugs
Schistocytes
 Small iregular fragments of the 
Microangiopathy, iron deficiency.
 erythrocyte
hemangiosarcoma, valvular
stenosis
 Spherocytes
Small dense cells with no central
Large numbers: hemolytic anemia
pallor
Small numbers: microangiopathy.
iron deficiency
Keratocytes
Surface blisters that rupture to
Iron deficiency, microangiopathy.
 form small hornlike extensions.
liver disease
Burr cells
 Elongate cells with spikes similar
Feline liver disease, renal disease
(ovalo-echinocytes)
to a crenated cell 
illustrates each of the most common types
shape change is to view a wet-mount prepa-
of poikilocytes. Crenated cells, target cells,
ration of the blood. One drop of blood and
and stomatocytes can be seen as artifacts of
two drops of saline can be mixed on a glass
drying as well as in association with a dis-
slide, coverslipped, and viewed on the mi-
ease process. Table 4.1 lists the common
croscope. True crenation will still be present
poikilocytes and disease associated with
when viewed on the wet-mount prepara-
each shape.
tion.
 Echinocytes are erythrocytes with spiky
 Unlike crenated cells, acanthocytes are
 protrusions from their surface. They are the
 not associated with artifact but are con-
most common poikilocytes seen on blood
sidered true morphological changes when
films. There are se veral types of echinocytes;
 seen on the blood film. They differ from
crenated cells and acanthocytes are the most
 crenated cells in several ways. The projec-
commonly seen. Crenated erythrocytes can
 tions present on acanthocytes are irregu-
 be seen on blood films as an artifact when
larly placed, they have variable-sized knobs
the blood flm dries slowly. Crenation can
on the tips of the spiky projections, and
also be seen in dehydrated animals and
they generally do not retain an area of
secondary to snake bite. Crenated cells
 central pallor. Acanthocytes are associated
have regularly placed tent-shaped projec-
with several disease processes. Renal dis-
tions from their surface. They also retain a
ease, liver disease, iron deficiency, microan-
central area of light staining, central pallor,
 giopathy (formation of small fibrin clots in
characteristic of the normal discoid shape of
capillaries), and vascular neoplasia (heman-
the red blood cell. A useful test to determine
 giosarcoma) are the most common causes of
whether the crenation is an artifact or true
 acanthocytosis in veterinary patients. The
48Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
exact mechanism of acanthocyte formation
in veterinary patients is not fully under-
stood. It is thought to be due to changes in
membrane lipids that make the cells more
rigid and prone to deformation as they cir-
culate through capillaries. When acantho-
cytes are seen on the blood flm, it should
 prompt the clinician to further evaluate the
liver, spleen, and kidneys for possible dys-
function.
 Spherocytes are small erythrocytes with
[a]
no central pallor. Spherocytes are a
 hallmark of inmmune-mediated hemolytic
 anemia, but they can also be seen in small
numbers in association with other types
of erythrocyte damage. Spherocytes are
formed when a macrophage removes an ab-
normal portion of the erythrocyte mem
brane, causing the erythrocyte to form a
sphere instead of the normal biconcave disc
(partial phagocytosis) (Figure 4.2).
The biconcave disc shape of the normal
[b]
erythrocyte cannot be maintained if a por-
tion of the membrane is lost. Spherocytes
are easier to see in canine blood than in fe-
line blood because of the normal shape of
the erythrocyte in these two species. The
 dog has a more pronounced central pallor
compared to the smaller erythrocyte with
much less central pallor in the cat. Accu-
rate identification of spherocytes requires
the evaluation of erythrocytes in the count-
(C)
ing area only. Erythrocytes at the feathered
Figure 4.2. Formation of a spherocyte. (a) The
edge do not have an area of central pal-
macrophage recognizes a defect in the membrane of a
lor. There will usually be normal erythro-
red cell and begins the process of partial phagocytosis.
cytes to compare to the spherocyte in the
-lod (ewouge aun jo sauouid, saeydopew aul (q)
 counting area. The spherocyte will appear
tion of the red cell membrane. (c) The remaining red
 cell membrane cannot maintain the normal biconcave
small and dense. In addition to immune-
shape, and the red cell becomes a sphere that is smaller 
 mediated mechanisms, spherocytes can be
than the original red cell and has no central pallor.
seen with erythrocyte fragmentation (dis-
cussed below). In most cases, a high number
of spherocytes in an anemic patient with no
function. Spherocytes associated with ad-
other erythrocyte morphological changes is
ditional erythrocyte changes (schistocytes,
indicative of immune-mediated hemolysis.
acanthocytes, keratocytes) indicate nonim-
Spherocytes can also be seen with hy-
mune mechanisms of spherocyte formation.
persplenism, a splenic disease in which
The nonimmune causes of spherocyte for-
the spleen removes excessive numbers of
mation include toxins such as zinc and
erythrocytes due to abnormal macrophage
copper as well as hypophosphatemia (see
Chapter 4: Blood Cell Abnormalities4
49
Figure 4.3. Formation of a schistocyte. The red cell encounters a fibrin strand, and a small portion of the cell
membrane is cut from the cell forming a spherocyte and a small fragment (schistocyte).
Chapter 8). The mechanisms underlying
flow associated with abnormal blood ves-
spherocyte formation in these conditions
 sels, abnormal heart valves (valvular steno-
is not well understood, but it may relate
sis), vascular neoplasia, and obstructions to
to oxidative injury to the membrane with
 blood flow (severe heartworm disease) can
formation of hemoglobin crystals in the
 also cause formation of schistocytes. Intrin-
erythrocyte membrane (Heinz bodies) and
sic changes to the erythrocyte membrane
partial phagocytosis of the erythrocyte by
that increase cell fragility will also result
macrophages.
 in fragmentation (e.g., iron deficiency and
Schistocytes are small fragments of ery-
doxorubicin toxicity).
throcytes that are irregular in size and
Eccentrocytes are erythrocytes with fu-
shape. This erythrocyte change is a hall-
sion of a portion of the cell membrane that
mark of erythrocyte fragmentation.
The
causes the hemoglobin to be pushed to the
erythrocytes are fragmented as they circu-
side. Oxidative injury to the erythrocyte is
late through abnormal capillaries or tor-
the cause of the fusion. This morphologi-
tuous vascular channels present in some
 cal change is seen most commonly in the
forms of neoplasia. One of the most com-
 dog. The most common cause of eccentro-
mon causes of schistocyte formation  is
 cyte formation in the dog is onion toxic-
microangiopathy. Microangiopathy
isa
ity. Zinc toxicity can also result in eccen-
consequence of many diseases. Microan-
trocyte formation in the dog. Heinz bodies,
giopathy is essentially the formation of fib-
another erythrocyte abnormality associated
rin strands or small fibrin clots within cap-
with oxidative injury, are usually present
illaries and is associated with disseminated
along with eccentrocyte. Both eccentrocytes
intravascular coagulation. The syndrome
and erythrocytes with Heinz bodies will
of disseminated intravascular coagulation
have a shorter half-life and an increased
and its causes is fully discussed in Chapter
chance of being removed from circulation
13. Schistocytes are often seen concurrently
 by the macrophages of the spleen.
with small numbers of spherocytes, acan-
Keratocytes and burr cells are erythro-
thocytes, and keratocytes. Figure 4.3 illus-
cyte morphological changes associated with
trates the fragmentation of an erythrocyte
many different erythrocyte abnormalities.
as it passes through a capillary that contains
Keratocytes are erythrocytes that have small
fbrin strands with formation of a schis-
"blisters"
 on their surface that rupture.
tocyte and a spherocyte. Turbulent blood
Keratocytes can be seen with increased
50Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
fragility, microangiopathy, and oxidative
 are also associated with erythrocyte inclu-
injury. Burr cells (ovalo-echinocytes) are
 sions and are discussed later in this chapter.
oval-shaped cells with numerous 
small
Heinz bodies are formed by oxidative
spikes similar to those seen on crenated
injury to the hemoglobin in the erythro-
 cells, and they are seen in diseases associated
 cyte and are most common in the cat. The
with changes in the erythrocyte membrane
hemoglobin denatures and adheres to the
lipid. Feline hepatic lipidosis is commonly
cell membrane, forming a spherical light or
associated with increased numbers of burr
clear staining inclusion that may extend out
cells.
from the cell membrane. Feline hemoglobin
 Target cells (codocytes) are erythrocytes
is more susceptible to oxidation because of
with a central area of hemoglobin within the
its structure. Hemoglobin molecules from
 area of central pallor forming a target ap-
different species have variable numbers of
 pearance. Target cells are usually an artifact
sulfhydryl groups (composed of sulfur and
of drying. They can be seen with regenera-
hydrogen). These groups are very suscep-
tive anemia, liver disease, endocrine disease
tible to oxidation and the more sulfhydryl
(hypothyroidism), and iron deficiency. The
 groups a molecule of hemoglobin has, the
target appearance is thought to be due to
more likely Heinz bodies will form when
the fact that the cells have excessive mem-
the patient undergoes oxidative stress. Fe-
brane for their volume and are "floppy."
line hemoglobin has twice the number of
sulfhydryl groups per molecule than dog
hemoglobin.
 Heinz body formation is associated with
Erythrocyte Inclusions
 anemia because the spleen will remove ery-
throcytes with Heinz bodies. The most com-
 In addition to poikilocytosis, erythrocytes
mon causes for Heinz body formation in
 can contain a variety of abnormal structures
the cat are toxic (acetaminophen, propy-
(inclusions) that are associated with certain
lene glycol, propofol) and metabolic (dia-
disease processes. Heinz bodies, Howell-
betes mellitus, renal disease, lymphoma, hy-
 Jolly bodies, and basophilic stippling are
perthyroidism). The less common causes of
the most common inclusions. Figure 4.4 il-
Heinz body anemia include methylene blue,
lustrates the common noninfectious inclu-
vitamin K3, benzocaine products, phenols,
sions found in erythrocytes. Erythropara-
d-L methionine, phenazopyridine, naphtha-
sites (parasitic diseases of the erythrocyte)
lene, zinc, and copper.
(a}
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.4. Common inclusions in erythrocytes. (a) Heinz bodies. (b) Howell-jolly body. (c) Basophilic stippling.
Chapter 4: Blood Cell Abnormalities
51
A good drug history is essential in de-
erythrocytes. Basophilic stippling can also
termining the underlying cause of a Heinz
 be seen with lead poisoning.
body anemia. Heinz bodies can be large or
Siderocytes are erythrocytes with iron-
small and diffcult to identify. Large Heinz
containing basophilic inclusions. They are
bodies are more easily identified because
relatively uncommon but can be seen in pa-
they project out from the surface of the ery-
tients with erythrocyte destruction and in-
throcyte. Smaller Heinz bodies are more dif-
creased erythrocyte turnover rate.
ficult to find because they are seen as small
lightly staining areas within the erythro-
cyte. The smaller Heinz bodies are present
in small numbers in normal feline blood
Anemia
 si     i 
metabolic disease. The smaller Heinz body
may not be associated with anemia, and sig-
Anemia, a decreased number of red blood
nificant numbers of large Heinz bodies are
cells as measured by the PCV/Hct, is one of
usually associated with anemia.
the most common abnormalities seen in the
 Howell-Jolly bodies are small remnants
CBC of an ill patient. Clinical signs sugges-
of the erythrocyte nucleus that occasion-
tive of anemia include pale mucous mem-
ally remain after the nucleus undergoes di-
branes, increased respiratory rate, and, in
vision. These small fragments may not be
some cases, icterus (yellow coloration of
extruded with the nucleus as the erythro-
tissues). The initial step in evaluating an
cyte matures. In the normal state, erythro-
anemic patient is to determine whether the
cytes with Howell-Jolly bodies will be re-
patient's bone marrow can increase pro-
moved by the spleen. Splenectomy and any
duction of erythrocytes in response to the
condition that inhibits normal splenic func-
decrease in PCV. The presence of a bone
tion (increased circulating corticosteroids,
marrow response separates anemia into two
septicemia/endotoxemia, hypoxia) will re-
broad categories, regenerative and nonre-
sult in increased numbers of circulating ery-
 generative. A regenerative anemia is defined
throcytes with Howell-Jolly bodies. When
as an anemia with evidence that the bone
erythrocyte production is accelerated, more
marrow can respond by increased produc-
erythrocytes will have Howell-Jolly bod-
tion of erythrocyte. Erythropoietin, the hor-
ies when released into circulation.
. Cats
mone released by the kidneys in response to
normally tend to have a few erythro-
the decrease in oxygen-carrying capacity of
cytes with Howell-Jolly bodies because their
the blood, is the stimulus for the bone mar-
spleen is not as effcient at removing ab-
row to increase production of erythrocytes.
 normal erythrocytes. The unique filtering
A regenerative anemia indicates that the pa-
capability of the feline spleen also con-
 tient has a normal functioning bone marrow
tributes to the fact that cats often have
and normal production of erythropoietin by
more circulating Heinz bodies than the
the kidney interstitium. A nonregenerative
dog.
anemia is defined as an anemia with no ev-
 Basophilic stippling of erythrocytes is
idence that the bone marrow can respond.
characterized by fine basophilic reticulum
The lack of response by the bone marrow
that is seen on Wright-Giemsa stains. The
can be due to a disease that directly affects
reticulum is aggregated RNA (just as in
the bone marrow or decreased production
reticulocytes) and is occasionally seen
in
of erythropoietin by the kidney, usually due
regenerative anemia. When basophilic stip-
to chronic renal failure. Table 4.2 lists the
pling is seen in a regenerative anemia, it is
more common causes of regenerative and
usually found in young polychromatophilic
nonregenerative anemias.
52
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table 4.2. Causes of regenerative and nonregenerative anemia.
Regenerative Anemia
 Nonregenerative Anemia
Blood loss (trauma, coagulation defects)
Bone marrow neoplasia (leukemia, nonmarrow [metastatic])
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia 
 Bone marrow fibrosis
 Oxidative hemolytic anemia
Infectious disease (FeLV, chronic ehrlichiosis)
Erythroparasites
Toxicity
 Chronic renal disease (lack of erythropoietin)
Regenerative Anemia
increase and if there are a sufficient num-
ber of them, the MCV will be above
The classification of an anemia as regenera-
the reference range indicating macrocyto-
tive is based on identifying several changes
sis (large erythrocytes). The larger poly-
found in the hemogram and on the blood
 chromatophilic cells have a lower concen-
film that are indicative of release of young
 tration of hemoglobin compared to normal
erythrocytes because they usually contain
cells). Young erythrocytes produced in re-
the same amount of hemoglobin in a
 sponse to anemia are larger than normal
larger volume. As a result, the mean cell
 because they are produced more rapidly
hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) will be
and released sooner than normal. When
 decreased indicating hypochromasia (cells
significant numbers of these large poly-
with decreased staining of their cytoplasm).
 chromatophilic cells are present in circu-
Figure 4.5 shows a photomicrograph illus-
lation, the mean cell volume (MCV) will
 trating hypochromasia and macrocytosis.
a
(q)
Figure 4.5. (a) Hypochromasia. (b) Macrocytosis.
Chapter 4: Blood Cefl Abnormalities
53
A high MCV and low MCHC are ex-
Table 4.3.  Semiquantitation method for
cellent indicators of regeneration, but they
polychromasia.
cannot be used as the sole indication of re.
generation. There are few instances where
Number of 
the MCV may be misleading when evaluat-
Degree of 
Polychromatophilic
 ing an anemic patient. Small populations of
 Polychromasia
Cells/1000x
poodles and Akitas have MCV values that
are out of the reference range for most dogs.
few
Individual poodles may have a genetic trait
0-1
1+
1-2 (dog), 0-1 (cat)
(poodle macrocytosis) that results in a nor-
2+
2-3 (dog). 1-2 (cat)
 on s ra u a  p
3+
3-6 (dog), 2-4 (cat)
compared to 60-77 fl for most dogs). A
4+
6 (dog), >4 (cat)
subpopulation of Akitas, and perhaps other
Japanese breeds, has erythrocytes that are
significantly smaller than other dogs (45 fl
compared to 60-77 fl for most dogs). In the
chromasia should be used when evaluating
first case, a poodle with a nonregenerative
the blood flm for evidence of a regener-
anemia may be thought to have a regenera-
ative anemia. Table 4.3 shows a common
tive anemia because its MCV is high, even
 method for reporting degree of polychro-
 though it is normal for that individual dog.
masia based on number of polychromatic
In the second case, an Akita with a regen-
cells seen per 1000x field. Reporting poly-
erative anemia may be considered to have
chromasia is a subjective method and is
a nonregenerative anemia because its MCV
not as accurate as counting the number of
is within the reference range for other dogs,
reticulocytes/1000 cells using a reticulocyte
even though it is increased for that individ-
stain. Reticulocyte stains are stains that pre-
ual. In the cat, FeLV infection can cause a
cipitate residual RNA in the erythrocytes
nonregenerative macrocytic anemia with a
and stain the precipitate dark blue. Young
remarkably high MCV in the face of severe
erythrocytes have more residual RNA than
bone marrow dysfunction.
mature erythrocytes and will stain with a
As a result of these exceptions and
distinct blue “reticulum"—hence the name
because the degree of macrocytosis and
reticulocyte. There are two types of reticu-
hypochromasia is an insensitive indicator of
locytes, aggregate and punctate. Dogs have
regeneration, review of the blood flm and
 aggregate reticulocytes only. Cats have both
a reticulocyte count are necessary to con-
punctate and aggregate forms. Figure 4.6
firm a regenerative response. The presence
illustrates reticulocyte stain preparations
of polychromatophic cells on the blood film
from a dog and a cat.
 is required in order to confirm regeneration,
Reticulocyte counts are not difficult to
and an increased reticulocyte count is neces-
 perform; however, they do require patience.
sary to determine whether the regenerative
Unlike other blood film stains, reticulocyte
response is sufficient for the degree of ane-
stains are added to the blood before the
mia.
blood flm preparation is made. When us-
Polychromatophilic erythrocytes are usu-
ing new methylene blue, 5 drops of whole
ally larger than normal erythrocytes, and
blood and 5 drops of a 0.5% solution of
they have a larger central pallor and a blue
new methylene blue are mixed in a small
hue when stained with Wright-Giemsa stain
tube and allowed to sit for 5 to 10 minutes,
and a muddy blue hue when stained with
after which a blood film is prepared. A retic-
Diff-Quik Wright-GiemsaTM. A standard
ulocyte count is done by counting the num-
method of reporting the amount of poly-
 ber of reticulocytes found while examining
54
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
by 10 to obtain the percentage of reticulo-
cytes in the erythrocyte population. As with
all methods used to estimate a value from
the blood flm, a quick low-power scan of
the blood film is necessary to ensure that
there is an even distribution of reticulocytes
in the area to be counted. This method can
be validated in the clinic by comparing the
estimated count to that obtained at a refer-
ence laboratory on the same blood sample.
The number of reticulocytes can be re-
 ported as a percentage or an absolute num-
(a)
ber, just as is done with leukocyte numbers.
Multiplying the red blood cell count by the
 percentage of reticulocytes will provide an
absolute number of reticulocytes. Figure 4.7
illustrates the calculation of an estimated
reticulocyte count and an absolute reticu-
locyte count. The degree of regeneration,
measured by percent reticulocytes should be
greater as the degree of anemia increases if
the bone marrow is working to its high-
est capacity. The percent reticulocyte count
should be corrected for the degree of anemia
 by using a factor that takes into account the
(b)
patient's PCV and the normal PCV of the
 patient's species.
Figure 4.6. Reticulocyte stains. (a) Dog. (b) Cat. Note
the aggregate (*) and the punctate (<) reticulocytes in
Example: An anemic cat has a PCV of
the cat.
18% and a 3.0% reticulocyte count. The
percent reticulocyte count is corrected by
multiplying the 3.0% by the patient's PCV
1000 erythrocytes. This is time consuming
divided by 35 (for the cat):
and is usually done at a reference labora-
tory. In addition, newer large hematology
3.0% × 18/35 (35 for a cat, or 45
instruments used by reference laboratories
for a dog) = 1.5%
can accurately count reticulocytes as part of
the automated CBC.
A close estimate of the reticulocyte count,
The absolute number of reticulocytes does
which is fairly accurate, can be done in the
not need to be corrected because it is based
clinic. In the area of the blood film where
on the degree of anemia (the red blood cell
the erythrocytes are touching or just over-
count). There are accepted ranges for abso-
lapping, the number of erythrocytes in a
lute reticulocyte counts and percent reticu-
standard 1000× feld is approximately 200
 locytes that indicate the degree of response.
cells for the dog and slightly more for the
Table 4.4 lists reticulocyte percentages and
cat. Counting the number of reticulocytes
absolute numbers that correspond to the de-
in five of these fields will provide a good es-
gree of regeneration.
timate of the number of reticulocytes/1000
 In addition to polychromasia, increased
 erythrocytes. This number is then divided
numbers of metarubricytes (nucleated red
Chapter 4: Blood Cell Abnormalities
55
Calculating a % reticulocyte count:
1.Count the number of reticulocytes in5oil immersionfields in thebody
of reticulocyte-stained blood film.
2.Divide by 10.
Example:
30reticulocytescounted in5oil immersion fields.
30/10=3.0%
Figure 4.7. Estimation of the reticulocyte percent.
blood cells (nRBC) may be released by the
throcyte precursors. The most common
 marrow into the peripheral blood. The re-
causes for an inappropriate metarubricy-
lease of metarubricytes in a regenerative
tosis are splenic disease, extramedullary
anemia will always be accompanied by a
 hematopoiesis, and splenectomy. Other dis-
significant polychromatophilia and an in-
case processes
6 associated with inappro-
creased reticulocyte count. This is termed
 priate metarubricytosis are hypoxia, bone
an appropriate metarubricytosis. An in-
 marrow necrosis, sepsis/endotoxemia, and
appropriate metarubricytosis is defined as
neoplasia (splenic hemangiosarcoma). Any
an increased number of metarubricytes in
disease that inhibits splenic function can re-
the circulation without other evidence
of
sult in an inappropriate metarubricytosis.
regeneration. An inappropriate metarubri-
The macrophages of the spleen are respon-
cytosis is seen with bone marrow injury,
sible for removing abnormal erythrocytes
splenectomy, lead poisoning, and neoplas-
 in the peripheral blood, and metarubricytes
tic processes such as leukemia of the ery-
should not be in the peripheral circulation.
Table 4.4. Reticulocyte percentages and absolute numbers and corresponding degree of regeneration.
 Reticulocyte Percentage (Corrected)
Absolute Reticulocyte
 Degree of Regeneration 
<1% (dog), <0.4% (cat)
<60,000 (dog), <40,000 (cat)
No regeneration
1 -4% (dog), 0.5-2% (cat)
60-150,000 (dog),40-70,000 (cat)
 Mild regeneration 
5-20% (dog), 3-4% (cat)
150-300,000 (dog), 70-100,000(cat)
 Moderate regeneration 
<20% (dog), >4% (cat)
300,000 (dog), >100,000 (cat)
Marked regeneration 
56Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Corticosteroid administration will inhibit
ity while about half of the erythrocytes are
 the function of splenic macrophages as well.
 recovered by the lymphatic system; the re-
Regardless of the cause of the increase in
mainder of the erythrocytes either lyse or
metarubricytes in the peripheral blood,
if
are engulfed by macrophages. The regener-
they are present they will be counted by all
 ative response to blood loss is usually mod-
in-house hematology instruments and in the
erate. In most cases, there is no significant
manual WBC count as leukocytes. As a re-
red cell morphology abnormality associated
sult, the leukocyte count must be corrected
with acute blood loss other than increased
for the number of metarubricytes seen while
numbers of Howell-Jolly bodies and poly-
doing the differential. The calculation for
chromasia.
correcting the leukocyte count is (100/
Chronic external blood loss can be seen
(100 + number of nRBCs counted on dif-
with gastrointestinal ulcers, ulcerated gas-
ferential)) x WBC count.
trointestinal neoplasms, chronic hematuria,
Example: 10 nRBCs noted during the 100
 and internal and external parasitism. Over
cell differential count and the WBC count is
time, chronic blood loss shifts from a regen-
11,000/μl:
erative anemia to a nonregenerative anemia
 because of loss of the iron in hemoglobin. In
(100/(100 + 10))×11, 000/μl=10, 000/μl
the normal turnover of erythrocytes, iron is
 recycled. If chronic blood loss has resulted
 If the leukocyte count is high enough to re-
in sufficient loss of iron and overwhelmed
quire a 200 cell differential then the calcu-
the body's ability to absorb dietary iron in
lation would be: (200/(200 + the number
suffcient quantities, iron deficiency ane mia
of nRBCs counted during the differential))
will occur. Iron deficiency anemia is asso-
x WBC count.
ciated with microcytosis (decreased MCV)
and hypochromasia (decreased MCHC).
The erythrocytes will appear pale with
Anemia due to Blood Loss
a large area of central pallor and there
will be remarkable anisocytosis (variation
 Once an anemia is confirmed as regenera-
 in erythrocyte size) present on the blood
tive, the cause of the regenerative anemia
film.
must be determined. There are two general
 In addition, red cell morphology changes
causes for a regenerative anemia, blood loss
can be seen because of increased erythrocyte
or blood destruction. Anemia due to exter-
fragility associated with iron deficiency.
 nal blood loss is associated with low total
 Schistocytes, acanthocytes, and keratocytes
 protein because protein and blood cells are
are abnormal erythrocyte changes associ-
both lost with bleeding. The development of
ated with iron deficiency. Figure 4.8 il-
anemia following a significant bleed takes
 lustrates several erythrocyte changes that
    s  
are associated with iron deficiency. Iron
protein are eventually diluted by the influx
deficiency is more common and develops
of fluid into the vascular system in an at-
more rapidly in young animals, because
tempt to replace the blood lost. As a result
they have limited iron in their diets if they
of this, measuring a PCV and total protein
are still nursing and their bone marrow has
earlier than 4 hours after a potential bleed-
 a smaller pool of stored iron. Adult animals
ing will not reveal an anemia.
usually develop iron deficiency with pro-
Internal blood loss into body cavities such
longed bleeding that is difficult to identify
as the thorax and abdomen results in a de-
 on physical exam, such as a bleeding gas-
crease in PCV but not total protein. The
 trointestinal lesion that does not produce
protein is reabsorbed from the body cav-
overt melena.
Chapter 4: Blood Cell Abnormalities 57
(a)
Figure 4.8.
Common erythrocyte ch
ia. (b) Budding fragmentation
(c) Schistocyte. (d) Keratocyte.
Anemia due fo Blood Destruction
liver engulf and destroy damaged erythro-
(Hemolytic Anemia)
cytes and break down hemoglobin to re-
cover the iron and release bilirubin (a break-
Hemolytic anemia can occur by several
down product of heme) into the circulation
mechanisms including toxicity, erythropar-
resulting in an increase in circulating biliru-
asitism, and immune-mediated disease. In
bin (hyperbilirubinemia). Many hemolytic
contrast to blood loss anemia, the total pro-
diseases are associated with both intravas-
tein in hemolytic anemia is usually normal.
cular and extravascular mechanisms. Fac-
There are two broad types of hemolytic
tors that can influence the type of hemolysis
anemia, intravascular and extravascular.
 include the type of antibody causing the ly-
Table 4.5 lists diseases associated with ery-
sis in immune-mediated disease, the severity
throcyte destruction and their most com-
of infection with erythroparasitism, and the
mon mechanisms. Intravascular hemolysis
severity of oxidative injury with toxicity.
is the process by which erythrocytes lyse in
Intravascular hemolysis often causes a
the blood vessel, resulting in release of their
more severe disease because of the toxic
hemoglobin (hemoglobinemia).
effects of free hemoglobin on the kidneys
Extravascular hemolysis is the process
and the widespread inflammation associ-
by which macrophages in the spleen and
ated with release of hemoglobin into the
58
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table 4.5. Diseases associated with erythrocyte destruction and mechanisms.
Immune-mediated
Extravascular hemolysis:
Intravascular hemolysis: lysis of 
 hemolytic anemia 
macrophage removal of
erythrocytes by antibody on the cell
antibody-coated erythrocytes
surface
Heinz body
 Oxidative injury to hemoglobin
anemia/eccentrocyte-
(zinc, drugs); extravascular
a ssociated
hemolysis: macrophage removal of 
anemia
erythrocytes with Heinz bodies
Erythroparasites
Extravascular hemolysis:
Intravascular hemolysis: lysis of heavily
macrophage removal of infected 
infected erythrocytes (may be
erythrocytes (antibodies to the
antibody-mediated)
 organism contributes to the
phagocytosis)
Hypophosphatemia
Extravascular hemolysis: removal of 
Intravascular hemolysis, posibly due to 
 erythrocytes with oxidative injury
disruption of erythrocyte metabolism 
blood. Hemoglobinemia is seen as a red
the damaged erythrocytes are fragile but do
discoloration of the serum or plasma (Fig-
not lyse in the vessel; they are removed by
ure 4.9a). When evaluating a patient with
the macrophage system. However, during
hemoglobinemia, it is very important to be
the process of venipuncture, the fragile cells
sure that the hemoglobinemia is truly due to
will lyse as they are drawn into the syringe
lysis of the erythrocyte within the patient's
or vacutainer. One simple way to deter-
vessels. In some cases of hemolytic anemia,
mine whether the lysis is truly intravascular
is to evaluate the urine. Patients with true
hemoglobinemia  will have  hemoglobin-
uria (red urine due to the presence of
hemoglobin).
When hemolysis is present,
the MCHC
Cis usually
 increased.
. This
is an artifactual increase because erythro-
cytes cannot contain a higher concentration
of hemoglobin than normal. Occasionally,
an MCHC will be increased without con-
current hemoglobinemia. When this occurs,
it indicates that there is some component
other than hemoglobin in the blood that is
being measured as hemoglobin by the in-
strument. The most common causes of this
artifact are lipemia, Heinz bodies (dena-
tured hemoglobin), and abnormal proteins.
Extravascular hemolysis is more com-
mon than intravascular hemolysis. When
the hemolysis is severe, it is associated
with hyperbilirubinemia and jaundice (yel-
(a)
(b)
low discoloration of the tissues). Hyper-
bilirubinemia, if severe enough, causes a yel-
Figure 4.9. (a) Hemoglobinemia. (b) Hyperbiliru-
low discoloration of the serum or plasma
binemia (icterus).
Chapter 4: Blood Cell Abnormalities
59
(Figure 4.9b). The patient with extravascu-
lar hemolysis will become jaundiced when
the amount of bilirubin produced over-
whelms the liver's ability to excrete the
bilirubin through the bile. Most forms of
immune-mediated anemia are due to ex-
travascular hemolysis. In all forms of ex-
travascular hemolysis, there is a struc-
tural alteration in the erythrocyte that
triggers phagocytosis by macrophages in
the spleen and liver. Antibodies, parasites,
hemoglobin crystals, and fused membranes
are the most common erythrocyte structural
changes associated with increased erythro-
cyte removal by macrophages.
 There are several changes in the periph-
eral blood that can assist in the diagnosis
(a)
(b)
of hemolytic anemia and help identify the
underlying cause of the hemolysis. One of
the most striking examples is visible agglu-
Fgure 4.10. (a) EDTA tube showing gross agglutina-
apa ayea asaai, e umys w poig (a) u
tination of erythrocytes seen with immune-
due to marked erythrocyte agglutination.
mediated hemolytic anemia. Marked ag-
glutination (clumping of erythrocytes due
to immune mechanisms) is seen as large
 Centrifuge a second time.
red "flakes" in the sample as it is rotated
5.1
 Pour off supernatant and resuspend the
(Figure 4.10a). On the blood film, the clus-
 erythrocyte pellet in 2 ml of saline.
ters of agglutinated erythrocytes are seen
6.
 Prepare a wet-mount of the cell suspen-
throughout the blood film, most promi-
sion by placing 2 drops of the suspen-
nently at the feathered edge. In some cases,
sion on a glass slide and cover with a
the agglutination is so severe that it is im-
coverslip; evaluate on low power.
possible to make a good blood flm (Fig-
ure 4.10b). When agglutination is seen, it
Figure 4.11 shows the results of a positive
-e an st i ieu ams aq ot juod s
 and a negative saline agglutination test. One
glutination caused by antibodies linking the
of the most common abnormalities associ-
 erythrocytes together and not a nonspecific
ated with immune-mediated hemolytic ane-
"stickiness" caused by inflammatory pro-
mia is the presence of significant numbers
teins in the plasma. The saline agglutination
of spherocytes. Other forms of hemolytic
test is very useful in differentiating these two
anemia are associated with toxicities re-
causes of erythrocyte clumping.
sulting in oxidative injury with formation
Use the following steps for the saline ag-
of Heinz bodies and eccentrocytes (e.g.,
glutination test method:
acetaminophen, zinc toxicity, copper tox-
icity, hypophosphatemia) and erythropar-
1.
 Add 5 drops of blood to 2 ml of saline
asitism. There are hereditary hemolytic
and mix gently.
 anemias associated with both erythrocyte
2.
Centrifuge the sample on the same set-
structural abnormalities and enzyme def-
ting as a urine sample.
ciencies. Table 4.6 provides a list of hered-
3.1
 Pour off supernatant, add an additional
 itary diseases of the erythrocyte that result
2 ml of saline and mix gently.
in hemolytic anemia.
60
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Nonregenerative Anemia
 Nonregenerative anemia occurs when the
bone marrow cannot continue to replace
erythrocytes that are removed due to ag-
ing.
This includes diseases that directly
affect the bone marrow and non-bone mar-
row diseases that can inhibit the bone mar-
row. In nonregenerative anemia, the bone
marrow cannot produce new erythrocytes
in sufficient numbers to maintain a nor-
mal PCV/Hct. Primary bone marrow fail-
ure is seen with toxins, neoplasia, and,
a]
rarely, with nutritional causes. In addi-
tion, there are poorly understood primary
bone marrow diseases such as aplastic ane-
mia and pure red cell aplasia. Primary dis-
eases of the bone marrow usually affect all
hematopoietic cellines. Anemia is a chronic
change when the marrow is injured, be-
cause erythrocytes have a much longer half-
life (120 days in the dog) than other blood
cells. In most cases of nonregenerative ane-
mia, the MCV and MCHC are within nor-
mal limits because there are few reticulo-
cytes present. Therefore, the anemia can be
(b)
described as a normocytic/normochromic
anemia. The exceptions to this rule are
Figure 4.11.Saline agglutination test. (a) Negative for
FeLV-associated macrocytic nonregener-
 true agglutination. (b) Positive for true agglutination.
ative anemia  (macrocytic/normochromic)
and chronic nonregenerative iron deficiency
(microcytic and hypochromic).
Table 4.6. Hereditary diseases associated with
Nonregenerative anemia due
hemolytic anemia.
tosec-
ondary bone marrow disease is associated
with renal disease (lack of erythropoietin),
 inflammatory disease (marrow suppressive
Disease
Common Breed
 inflammatory substances), and endocrine
disease (lack of hormones that augment ery-
Hereditary
Miniature schnauzers,
thropoietin).
spherocytosis
 Alaskan malamutes 
Pyruvate kinase
Basenji, beagles, West 
deficiency
Highland white
terriers, cairn terriers,
Polycythemia
 miniature poodles
 Phosphofructokinase
 English springer
deficiency
 spaniels, American 
Polycythemia is the counterpoint to anemia
 cocker spaniel 
and is defined as an increase in red blood
cell count, Hct/PCV, and hemoglobin. The
Chapter 4: Blood Cell Abnormalities
61
most common cause of polycythemia is
membranes and distended blood vessels in
dehydration. Dehydration-associated poly-
the eye.
cythemia is termed "relative" because the
increase in red cell numbers is not due to
increased production by the bone marrow.
Instead, it is due to loss of the fluid portion
Leukocyte Changes Associated with
of the blood due to dehydration. A high to-
Disease
tal protein will be present, in addition to
the increased red cell parameters. All values
will return to within their normal reference
Leukocyte changes in disease can affect each
ranges with appropriate fluid therapy.
type of peripheral blood cell. Disease pro-
In contrast, absolute polycythemia is a
cesses can decrease or increase the num-
real increase in red cell production. Abso-
ber of circulating leukocytes. The pattern of
lute polycythemia can be a primary disease
change in the absolute leukocyte numbers of
 of the bone marrow, polycythemia vera,
each cell type is used to identify underlying
-ana jo uouonpond aeidoiddeu oi anp no
diseases that are inflammatory (infectious
thropoietin. Polycythemia vera is a neoplas-
and noninfectious), metabolic, and neoplas-
tic process that results in production of
tic, and to identify physiologic responses to
high numbers of red blood cells. Secondary,
excitement and stress. Understanding the
non-bone marrow causes of polycythemia
mechanisms that cause changes in leuko-
are usually associated with diseases
that
cyte number in response to both phys-
cause general hypoxia (chronic pneumonia,
iological stimuli and disease enables the
large pulmonary or intrathoracic masses),
veterinary technician to provide the most
renal hypoxia (masses that impinge
on
complete information to the clinician based
blood flow to the kidney), or neoplastic
 on examination of the hemogram and pe-
masses that produce excessive amounts of
ripheral blood film.
erythropoietin or erythropoietin-like sub-
The total WBC count provides informa-
stances (paraneoplastic syndromes). Table
 tion on the total number of leukocytes and
4.7 lists causes of polycythemia. Clinical
identifies a leukocytosis or a leukopenia.
signs seen with increased numbers of red
The differential cell count provides the ab-
blood cells include injected (red) mucous
solute number of each leukocyte and allows
a full characterization of the leukocytosis or
leukopenia (i.e., a leukogram pattern). Each
Table 4.7. Types of polycythemia.
leukogram pattern can be used to develop a
list of possible disease processes (a differen-
tial diagnosis). In addition to determining
Relative
 Dehydration, splenic
the absolute number of each type of leuko-
 contraction 
cyte, examination of the leukocytes during
the differential cell count identifies changes
Absolute primary
Polycythemia vera
in leukocyte morphology that will provide
valuable insight into possible disease pro-
Absolute
Hypoxia (general)
secondary
cesses. This section describes the mecha-
 Renal hypoxia (renal
nisms that affect the number of each leuko-
ma sses)
cyte type and the morphological changes
Erythropoietin-like
substance produced by
seen in specific leukocytes in response to ei-
 nonrenal neoplasia 
ther physiological changes or disease. Sev-
 eral atypical cell types are discussed.
62
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Changes in Neutrophil Numbers
 trophils are in the circulating subgroup and
and Morphology
are flowing within a central core of blood
that is surrounded by cell-poor plasma. It
is the circulating neutrophils in this core
Neutrophils
that are sampled when blood is drawn
(Figure 4.12).
A thorough understanding of neutrophil
dynamics, as discussed in Chapter 3, is
essential to understanding alterations in
neutrophil numbers due to physiological
Neutrophilia
processes or disease. Inflammation, stress,
There are three primary mechanisms that
and excitement each have a distinct ef-
can
result in neutrophilia: inflamma-
fect on the neutrophil pools. As a short
tion, stress (increased circulating corticos-
review, there are three neutrophil
1 com-
teroids), and excitement (increased circu-
partments: the proliferating pool, the mat-
lating epinephrine). Differentiating among
uration/storage pool, and the circulat-
these three causes can be difficult.
ing/marginated pool. The proliferating and
Inflammatory neutrophilia develops be-
maturation/storage pools are in the bone
cause of a demand for neutrophils in the
marrow, and the circulating/marginated
tissues, in response to either tissue death
pool is in the blood vessels. Shifts of neu-
(necrosis) or an infectious agent such as bac-
trophils among these pools are responsible
teria or fungi (sepsis). In most cases, a small
for both increases in circulating neutrophils
focus of tissue inflammation will not cause a
(neutrophilia) and decreases in circulating
significant increase in circulating neutrophil
neutrophils (neutropenia).
numbers. However, a large lesion or an in-
 Neutrophils in different stages of mat-
flammatory process that affects multiple tis-
uration are found in the different neu-
sues (systemic inflammation) will result in
trophil pools. The proliferation pool con-
 an increase in the number of circulating
tains neutrophil precursors that are still
neutrophils. If the inflammatory disease is
able to divide, (myeloblasts, promyelocytes,
severe or widespread enough, the demand
and myelocytes). The maturation/storage
for neutrophils will exhaust the matura-
pool contains the remainder of the neu-
tion/storage pool of mature neutrophils and
trophils in the bone marrow (metamyelo-
immature neutrophils will be released into
cytes, band neutrophils, and mature seg-
the circulation.
mented neutrophils). The storage subgroup
The release of immature neutrophils is
in this pool consists of approximately a 5-7
called a left-shift. The presence of a left-shift
day supply of mature neutrophils. When
is diagnostic for an inflammatory leuko-
this storage pool of mature neutrophils is
gram. An inflammatory leukogram can be
exhausted by an inflammatory demand for
characterized by neutrophilia, normal neu-
neutrophils, band neutrophils and, if de-
trophil count, or neutropenia. The severity
mand is severe enough, metamyelocytes are
of the inflammatory process can be inferred
released. When there is an overwhelming
by the severity of the left-shift. A left-shift
demand for neutrophils, myelocytes may
 is classified as regenerative or nonregener-
be released from the proliferation pool.
ative. Another way to refer to it is com-
The circulating/marginated pool consists of
 pensated or noncompensated. If the bone
mature neutrophils in the normal animal.
 marrow can compensate fairly well for an
The subgroup of neutrophils in this pool
inflammatory demand for neutrophils, the
is marginated cells, neutrophils that line
compensated inflammatory leukogram will
the blood vessel wall. The remaining neu-
show neutrophilia with a left-shift and the
Chapter 4: Blood Cell Abnormalities
63
Blood
Pool
Tissues
Vessel
Marginate
Pool
Circulating
Pool
Maturation/
Storage
Pool
1
Myeloblast
Metamyelocyte
Promyelocyte
O Band Neutrophils
4
Myelocyte
6Neutrophil
Bone Marrow
Figure 4.12. The normal neutrophil pools.
number of immature neutrophils will be less
Band neutrophils are considered the hall-
than the number of mature neutrophils.
mark of an inflammatory leukogram. When
If the bone marrow cannot adequately
 band neutrophils are present in increased
respond to the demand for neutrophils,
 numbers, the clinician should be prompted
three types of noncompensated inflamma-
to search for the focus of inflammation. It
tory leukogram can be seen: one with
is very important that all technicians in the
neutrophilia in which the number of im-
clinic who review blood films have a stan-
mature neutrophils outnumber the mature
dard by which they identify a band neu-
 neutrophils, one in which there is a normal
 trophil. The definition of a band neutrophil
neutrophil count and there are increased
is a neutrophil whose nucleus is not seg-
numbers of immature neutrophils, and one
mented. Neutrophils in dogs and cats have
in which there is a neutropenia and an
less distinct segmentation than other species
increase in the number of immature neu-
(i.e., humans and horses). In the dog and
trophils. It is important to remember that
cat, a good rule of thumb is this: if the nu-
for the last two types of noncompensated in-
cleus of the neutrophil does not have a nar-
flammatory leukogram, the number of im-
row region that is less than 1/2 the greatest
 mature neutrophils does not have to exceed
width of the remaining nucleus, it is a band
the number of mature neutrophils. Figure
neutrophil (Figure 4.14).
4.13 illustrates three types of inflammatory
Once an inflammatory leukogram is iden-
leukogram and their classification.
tified, there are morphological changes in
64
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
 Compensated left shift 
42,000 neutrophils /μl
neMarrowcankeepup
3,800bandneutrophils/μl
withdemandfor
500metarubricytes/μl
neutrophils
Noncompensated left shift
4,800neutrophils/μl
BoneMarrowcan'tkeep
1,100 band neutrophils/μl
up with demand for
Severe noncompensated left shift
neutrophils
1,300neutrophils/ul
600 band neutrophils /μl
 Figure 4.13.  Types of left-shifts associated with inflammation.
the neutrophil that can assist in differentiat-
cytoplasmic inclusions—also indicate toxic
ing inflammation secondary to sepsis from
change (Figure 4.15). Cat neutrophils of-
inflammation secondary to nonseptic pro-
 ten have Dohle bodies without any change
cesses. Toxic neutrophils are most often
in cytoplasmic basophilia or vacuolation;
 seen with septic inflammatory processes. A
therefore, these inclusions are not signifi-
toxic neutrophil has increased cytoplasmic
cant in the cat.
basophilia and a “moth-eaten" or foamy
A compensated left-shift is seen with
change to its cytoplasm. In dogs, the pres-
chronic or focal inflammation because nei-
ence of Dohle bodies—angular, basophilic
ther process overwhelms the bone marrow
 Band comparing the widest part of the
nucleus (A) to the thinnest part of
the nucleus (B): Line B is longer
then I/2 of line A
Neutrophil comparing the widest part of
the nucleus (A) to the thinnest part of
the nucleus (B): Line B is shorter
then I/2 of line A
Figure 4.14. A method for defining the band neutrophil.
Chapter 4: Blood Cell Abnormalities
65
A decompensated left-shift occurs when
inflammation has overwhelmed the bone
marrow's ability to produce neutrophils in
adequate number to meet the demands of
the inflamed tissues. Overwhelming infec-
tions of whole organs such as pneumonia,
pyelonephritis, open pyometra, generalized
exudative dermatitis, and severe enteritis
are often associated with a decompensated
left-shift. Figure 4.17 illustrates the changes
 in the neutrophil pools with a decompen-
sated left-shift.
 Not all inflammatory leukograms have
Figure 4.15. Dohlé body in a dog band neutrophil.
a left-shift or toxic change. Many animals
with a mild or moderate inflammatory pro-
storage pool. The bone marrow can increase
cess will have a simple neutrophilia. As
the rate of neutrophil production and keep
a result, it is often difficult to differenti-
up with the demand for the neutrophils in
ate neutrophilia due to inflammation from
the inflamed tissue. Figure 4.16 illustrates
neutrophilia due to stress (steroid-induced
the changes in the neutrophil pools in a
neutrophilia) or excitement (epinephrine-
compensated left-shift.
induced neutrophilia). There are hints in the
Pool
Blood
Tissues
Vessel
Marginate
Pool
4
Pool
1
Pool
Myeloblast
Metamyelocyte
Promyelocyte
OBand Neutrophils
Myelocyte
6 Neutrophil
Bone Marrow
Figure 4.16. Changes in the neutrophil pools in an inflammatory process with a compensated left-shift.
66
ClinicalPathology for theVeterinary Team
Blood
Tissues
Vessel
Marginate
Pool
Pool
?
Storage
Pool
Myeloblast
Metamyelocyte
Promyelocyte
Band Neutrophils
Myelocyte
Neutrophil
Bone Marrow
Figure 4.17. Changes in the neutrophil pools with a noncompensated left-shift. Note that the storage pool contains
no mature neutrophils.
remainder of the leukogram that can help.
lating steroids. The effect of steroids on neu-
A steroid or stress response is also associ-
 trophils is one of the reasons patients that
ated with decreased numbers of lympho-
are receiving steroids are more susceptible
cytes, and in the dog, an increased number
to infections; their neutrophils cannot exit
 of monocytes. An excitement response is of-
into the tissues to destroy bacteria during
ten associated with a concurrent increase in
an infection. An excellent example of this
lymphocytes.
is the development of bacterial cystitis in
 Neutrophilia
associated with stress is
patients with increased circulating corticos-
caused by the effects of corticosteroids on
teroids due to either a disease or administra-
the movement of neutrophils between the
tion of large doses of steroid medication. In
neutrophil pools. Steroids increase the re-
these individuals, the urine does not always
lease of neutrophils from the storage pool
have a significant number of neutrophils in
 and increase retention of neutrophils in the
response to the bacteria present.
circulation by making them less “sticky"
 Increased circulating epinephrine in the
(decreasing the number of neutrophils in
excited patient will cause an increase in
the marginated pool and less flexible. These
blood pressure that “washes" marginated
changes prevent neutrophils from easily ex-
neutrophils off of the vessel wall into the
iting the circulating into the tissues. Figure
 circulating pool resulting in apparent neu-
4.18 illustrates the changes in the neutrophil
 rophilia. A lymphocytosis is also seen in
 pools due to the effects of increased circu-
 conjunction with neutrophilia and can at
Chapter 4: Blood Cell Abnormalities
67
Pool
Blood
Tissues
Vessel
Marginate
Pool
Circulating
Pool
Storage
p
Pool
?
Myeloblast
Metamyelocyte
Promyelocyte
Band Neutrophils
Myelocyte
Neutrophil
Bone Marrow
Figure 4.18. Changes in the neutrophil pools due to increased circulating steroids (stress neutrophilia). Note that
u slydonau jo shagunu paseaoap pue lood aseois aui wo sllydonnau ainew jo aseaai paseaou! s! aaul
the marginated pool causing a neutrophilia. Because the neutrophils cannot attach to the wall of the vessel they
Cannot migrate into the tissues.
times exceed the number of neutrophils.
creased production of neutrophils, often in
 This response is more prominent in the cat
association with a nonregenerative anemia
because cats have a larger marginated pool
and thrombocytopenia. Infectious agents
compared to the dog. Figure 4.19 illustrates
(panleukopenia virus, chronic ehrlichiosis)
the changes in the circulating neutrophil
and drugs (chemotherapeutic drugs, estro-
 pool in response to excitement.
gen, certain antibiotics) can cause reversible
damage to the bone marrow. In these cases,
treatment of the infection or withdrawal of
the drug will allow the remnant hematopoi-
Neutropenia
etic stem cells to repopulate the marrow.
Inflammatory leukograms can also be seen
Irreversible damage to the marrow is of-
with decreased neutrophil numbers (neu-
ten seen with prolonged exposure to cer-
tropenia). Severe inflammation can so
tain drugs, replacement of the marrow
 greatly overwhelm the bone marrow that
hematopoietic tissue by a neoplastic pro-
it cannot maintain neutrophil numbers at
cess, or as an idiopathic process. In these
the normal level. In this case, a left-shift
cases, aggressive treatment to stimulate the
 and toxic change are usually present. Neu-
bone marrow fails because there are no
 tropenia does not always indicate inflam-
hematopoietic stem cells left to repopulate
mation. Bone marrow injury can cause de-
the bone marrow.
68
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Blood
Tissues
Vessel
Marginate
Pool
Circulating
Pool
Maturation/
Storage
Pool
C
Myeloblast
Metamyelocyte
Promyelocyte
O Band Neutrophils
Myelocyte
Neutrophil
Bone Marrow
Figure 4.19. Changes in the neutrophil pools due to increased circulating epinephrine (excitement). The
marginated pool is the only pool affected by excitement.
One special case of neutropenia is due
be seen within 15 minutes of exposure to
to gram-negative bacterial
sepsis. Gram-
the toxin. Just as rapidly as the neutrophil
negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli
count can drop, the neutrophil count can
and Klebsiella spp. have a component
rebound with remarkable neutrophilia with
of their cell wall called endotoxin
or
a left-shift when the animal is successfully
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Endotoxin has
treated.
 many potent effects that contribute to the
serious clinical signs seen in patients with
 gram-negative bacterial infections. One of
these effects is to increase the “stickiness"
Changes in Lymphocyte Numbers
 of neutrophils, prompting neutrophils in
in Disease
the circulating core to enter the marginated
 pool. Endotoxin also inhibits the release
 of neutrophils from the maturation/storage
Lymphocytosis
 pool and decreases the rate of prolifera-
tion and maturation of neutrophils. Each of
Lymphocytosis is an increase in the num-
these effects contributes to the development
ber of circulating lymphocytes. As discussed
of neutropenia. Figure 4.20 illustrates the
 previously, excitement can cause a signif-
 changes in the neutrophil pools in response
cant lymphocytosis and is likely the most
to endotoxin. The effects of endotoxin can
 common cause of this leukogram change.
Chapter 4: Blood Cell Abnormalities
69
Blood
Pool
Tissues
Vessel
囍
Marginate
Pool
Circulating
O
Pool
Maturation/
Storage
Pool
Myeloblast
Metamyelocyte
Promyelocyte
BandNeutrophils
Myelocyte
6Neutrophil
Bone Marrow
Figure 4.20. Changes in the neutrophil pools in sepsis (endotoxin). Note that there is a decrease in the number
of neutrophils released by the storage pool and an increase in the number of neutrophils in the marginated pool.
This results in a decreased number of neutrophils in the circulating pool (neutropenia).
Vaccination in young dogs and cats is also
 chronic or lymphocytic. The lymphocytes
associated with a significant increase in cir-
 seen in lymphoblastic leukemia are large
culating lymphocytes as a result of strong
 and have prominent nucleoli and variably
antigenic stimulation of the immune sys-
tem. The increase in lymphocytes is seen 1
to 2 weeks after vaccination. The lympho-
cytes seen in this case, as with excitement,
are small and normal in appearance. Occa-
sionally, large lymphocytes with deeply ba-
sophilic cytoplasm and prominent nucleoli
(immunoblasts) can be seen as a component
of the lymphocytosis (Figure 4.21).
 Both excitement-induced lymphocytosis
and lymphocytosis secondary  to vacci-
 nation are considered physiological lym-
phocytosis. A less common, but impor-
tant, cause of lymphocytosis is lymphoid
leukemia. There are two types of lym-
Figure 4.21.A large reactive lymphocyte in a puppy
phoid leukemia, acute or lymphoblastic and
postvaccination.
70
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
neutrophils, monocytes, and platelets. The
noo
monocytic parasite (Ehrlichia canis) can
cause a marked lymphocytosis where the
lymphocytes are slightly larger than normal
and have small numbers of eosinophilic to
slightly basophilic granules, often nestled in
a small niche in the nucleus. The distinc-
tive morphology of these granulated lym-
phocytes should prompt testing for ehrli-
chiosis.
8
Figure 4.22. Acute lymphoid leukemia. Note the size
Lymphopenia
of the lymphoid cells compared to the one neutrophil
in the field.
Decreased numbers of circulating lympho-
cytes, lymphopenia, is seen with several
basophilic cytoplasm (Figure 4.22). This
processes. Stress, as discussed previously,
neoplastic process is easily distinguished
results in decreased lymphocytes because
from a physiological lymphocytosis.
steroids inhibit the return of lymphocytes to
On the other hand, chronic or lympho-
the circulation and can cause lysis of lym-
cytic leukemia can be difficult to differ-
phocytes (lympholysis). Lymphopenia can
be due to loss of lymphocytes into the tissues
entiate from physiological lymphocytosis
because, in both cases, the circulating lym-
and body cavities. Chylothorax is an accu-
phocytes are small and have normal mor-
mulation of lymphocyte-rich fluid (lymph)
phology (Figure 4.23). The clinician will
in the thoracic cavity. Lymphocytes can also
 be lost or compartmentalized (sequestered)
have to use other factors to decide whether a
 dog or cat with a lymphocytic lymphocyto-
in dilated lymphatic vessels of the gastroin-
 sis has a neoplastic or physiological process.
testinal tract (lymphangiectasia). Heredi-
There is one special case of lymphocy-
tary immune-deficiency diseases can result
tosis that is associated with an infectious
 in the decreased production of lymphocytes,
disease: ehrlichiosis. Rickettsial organisms,
and viral disease can result in the necrosis
the cause of ehrlichiosis, are parasites of
of lymphoid tissues and destruction of lym-
phocytes.
Monocytes
Monocytosis, increased circulating mono-
cytes, is a feature of the stress leukogram
in the dog. Tissue necrosis and some forms
of chronic inflammation, such as fungal dis-
ease, are also associated with monocytosis
 as a component of the inflammatory leuko-
 gram. Occasionally, monocytosis is seen in
 neutropenia patients, perhaps as a compen-
sation for the lack of neutrophils. A de-
Figure 4.23. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Note
 creased number of monocytes is not asso-
the normal morphology of the small lymphocytes.
ciated with disease.
Chapter 4: Blood Cell Abnormalities7
71
Eosinophils
with Pelger-Huet anomaly is the fact that
the eosinophils are affected as well as the
Eosinophilia, increased numbers of circu-
neutrophils and that the neutrophils have
lating eosinophils, is most commonly as-
dense clumped nuclear chromatin and no
sociated with diseases of hypersensitiv-
evidence of toxic change
ity or allergy (allergic dermatitis, asthma),
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, mucopoly-
parasitism (heartworm disease and some
saccharidosis Vl, and gangliosidosis are all
external
 parasites), eosinophilic enteritis,
rare inherited diseases that have abnormal
leukocytes. The neutrophils from individu-
tis-
als with Chediak-Higashi have a small num-
sues of animals with fungal disease and
ber of lightly eosinophilic, moderately sized
mast cell tumor, these diseases are not com-
 granules. The neutrophils from individuals
monly associated with an eosinophilia. In-
with mucopolysaccharidosis VI have nu-
creased numbers of basophils,
, basophilia,
merous small basophilic granules, and oc-
can be seen in concert with eosinophilia.
casionally their lymphocytes have vacuoles.
Basophilia is rarely seen by itself.
Individuals with gangliosidosis have vacuo-
lated lymphocytes. Figure 4.25 illustrates
the leukocyte morphology of these inher-
ited diseases.
Atypical Circulating Leukocytes
Atypical circulating leukocytes are often in-
Infectious Disease Agents of
dications of neoplasia or leukemia. If rou-
Erythrocytes and Leukocytes
tine evaluation of a peripheral blood film
reveals atypical cells in addition to the nor-
mal peripheral blood leukocytes, it is best
There are several infectious diseases that
to have the blood film and a fresh blood
can directly affect the hemogram findings.
sample sent into a reference laboratory for
Most erythroparasites are associated with
a pathology review. Determining the origin
anemia. The severity of the anemia depends
of neoplastic cells in peripheral blood may
on the individual infectious agent and, in
require specialized testing in addition to re-
some cases, the age of the patient.
view of the Wright-Giemsa stained slide.
Mycoplasma bemofelis and Mycoplasma
Figure 4.24 illustrates several examples of
bemominutum are two erythroparasites
neoplastic leukocytes.
that attach to the surface of the erythro-
There
are hereditary disorders 
that
cyte. They are small and can be difficult to
are characterized by circulating abnormal
identify unless the blood film is well stained
leukocytes. Pelger-Huet anomaly is a ge-
and free of stain precipitate. Mycoplasma
netic disease found in many breeds of dog
hemominutum is the smaller of the two or-
and occasional cats. In individuals affected
ganisms and is usually seen as a small, rod-
with Pelger-Huet anomaly, all circulating
shaped, dark-staining body on the edge of
neutrophils and eosinophils are hyposeg-
the erythrocyte. Mycoplasma hemofelis is
mented and resemble band forms of these
larger and may form distinct signet ring
granulocytes. There is no disease process
forms that can be seen overlying the ery-
associated with this anomaly. It can cause
throcyte on the blood film. In many cases,
significant confusion when a perfectly
only one of these organisms will be seen on
healthy-appearing dog has what would be a
the blood film. Some cats can be infected
noncompensated left-shift in any other pa-
by both. Mycoplasma hemofelis is the or-
tient. One of the keys to identifying a patient
 ganism that is most often associated with
72
Clinical Pathology for the VeterinaryTeam
a
(b]
[C]
Figure 4.24. (a) Acute lymphoid leukemia. (b) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia. (c) Myelomonocytic leukemia.
(d) Erythremic myelosis (erythroleukemia).
a
[d]
Figure 4.25. (a) Neutrophils with two eosinophilic granules from a cat with Chediak-Higashi syndrome.
(b) Neutrophils with numerous basophilic granules from a cat with mucopolysaccharidosis. (c) Lymphocyte with
anomaly.
hemofelis.
(e) Mycoplasma
dist
canis.
(a) Babesia gibsoni. (b) Babesia
Figure 4.26.
74
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
anemia (extravascular hemolytic anemia).
Mycoplasma hemominutum can be seen in
nonanemic cats. The feline mycoplasma or-
 ganisms are spread by bites and blood suck-
ing external parasites such as fleas. My.
coplasma hemocanis is seen in dogs that are
splenectomized or have poor splenic func-
tion. It is rarely, if ever, seen in dogs with a
functional spleen.
Babesia canis and Babesia gibsoni are in-
ternal erythroparasites that are within the
erythrocyte cytoplasm. Though rare in the
United State, babesiosis is still seen on occa-
Figure 4.27. Microfiliaria in a blood film from a dog
 sion. Babesia organisms are protozoa rather
positive for Dirofilaria immitis antigen.
than bacteria. The disease is spread by ticks
and bites. Babesia canis is the larger of the
devastating viral disease of young dogs. In
two organisms. It is usually shaped like a
acute infections, viral inclusion can be seen
teardrop and may be found as a pair within
in neutrophils and erythrocytes. The inclu-
one erythrocyte. Babesia gibsoni is signifi-
sions are best seen using Diff-Quik stain and
cantly smaller than Babesia canis and has
appear as deep magenta homogeneous in-
a signet ring shape with a small dark nu-
clusions. They are easily missed on Wright-
cleus at the periphery of a clear vacuole-like
Giemsa stain because they stain light laven-
space. The American bulldog and the pit
der and fade into the background staining of
bull appear to have an increased suscepti-
the neutrophil and erythrocyte cytoplasm.
bility to Babesia gibsoni.
Figure 4.26 illustrates the morphology of
Cytauxzoon felis is a protozoan ery-
 several infectious agents that can be seen on
throparasite of cats similar in appearance to
 a peripheral blood film.
Babesia gibsoni. They are small signet ring
Dirofilaria immitis (the canine heart-
structures with a small dark nucleus and a
worm) is a flarial worm seen primarily
clear vacuolar space within the cytoplasm
in dogs (occasionally in cats). The adults
 of the erythrocyte. When first reported, cy-
live in the anterior vena cava, right atrium,
tauxzoonosis was an invariably fatal disease
and occasionally the right ventricle of the
in cats. In most cases, by the time the owner
heart. The larvae (microfilaria) produced by
noted that the cat was ill and presented their
the adult female worms can be seen in the
pet to the hospital, the patient was mori-
 peripheral blood in infected animals. The
bund and died shortly after arrival. Over
larvae are elongate and contain numerous
time, the parasite appears to have developed
small nuclei throughout their length. When
a better relationship with its new host, the
microflaria are identified on a blood film, it
domestic cat. More cats are surviving treat-
 is important to perform a heartworm anti-
ment in recent years. This parasite is most
gen test to confrm that the microflaria are
commonly seen in the central and southern
Diroflaria immitis. There are other less-
states.
pathogenic flarial worms that can release
Canine(
distemper virus, though rarely
microfilaria into the blood (Dipetalonema
identified on routine blood flm examina-
reconditum). The larvae of these two species
tion, can be seen in dogs with very acute
of filarial worms cannot be distinguished
disease. Fortunately, as a result of excel-
from each other on a blood flm. Figure 4.27
lent vaccination programs, most practices
illustrates a circulating microflaria from a
in the United State see only rare cases of this
 dog with confirmed heartworm disease.
Renal Physiology and Anatomy
Clinical Diagnostics, and Disease
Introduction
should not be strong enough to produce
hemolysis.
Before discussing renal function and its clin-
ical diagnostics, sample handling technique
Step 2
must be reviewed. In handling blood in a
serum separator or clot tube (red top tube),
Allow the blood tube to clot. In general,
team members must evaluate the tube for
10-15 minutes should produce suffcient
changes suggestive of artifact or pathology.
time to allow for the blood to clot in the red
Just as the purple top tube can help detect
changes in the blood that can suggest arti-
top tube. If a clot does not occur, it may sug-
 gest two possibilities: artifact or pathology.
fact (i.e., clotting) or disease (i.e., agglutina-
tion), changes in the red top tube can also
suggest disease or artifact that can affect the
outcome of the clinical diagnostics.
Artifact
The blood has been contaminated with
Step 1
some EDTA while placing the blood in
another tube (purple, blue, or green top).
After blood is drawn from the patient, it
This can occur when using either a syringe
should be placed in the red top tube by re-
 or vacutainer system; a small amount of
moving the red stopper and gently dripped
EDTA can contaminate the vacutainer de-
into the tube itself. This prevents trauma
livery needle as blood is being transferred
to the red cells and helps to reduce artifi-
into the tube. This EDTA then can affect
cial hemolysis. If the medical team member
the blood entering the red or serum top
is using a vacutainer, the normal flow of
 tubes stopping the clotting process. To help
 blood into the tube by the vacuum pressure
 prevent this artifact from occurring, team
75
76Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
 members using a vacutainer system should
Evaluate the Platelet Count
place blood into red top tube initially and
Although it takes both clotting factors and
then fill the other nonclotting tubes.
platelets to produce a final clot formation,
often patients that have increased clotting
times will also have decreased platelet num-
Pathology
bers. The platelets are consumed as the body
tries to initiate the clotting cascade and stop
 If the patient is suffering from a disease that
internal bleeding. As with clotting factors,
decreases platelets or clotting factors (see
a patient with decreased platelet counts
Chapter 13), the patient's ability to clot may
(<60,000) can represent a life-threatening
be compromised. Although it is important
concern for the patient, which, when iden-
to note that with clotting or lack of clotting
tifed, should be discussed with the veteri-
within the red top tube, the lack of a clot
 narian immediately.
does not always reflect the patient's ability
to clot in its body. A lack of clot in the red
top tube should always be discussed with
the veterinarian. If a clot does not occur,
Step 3
the following samples could be collected to
Evaluate the serum for abnormality. Once a
determine the patient's ability to clot blood:
clot is observed, the sample should be spun
down in the centrifuge for 15 minutes. Once
the blood tube is removed from the cen-
Redraw a Venous Sample
trifuge, the serum should be evaluated for
Drawing another blood sample and placing
 abnormality. Normal serum is a clear straw
the blood into another fresh red top tube
color. Changes to the serum can occur due
will rule out the possibility that the previ-
to artifact or disease; these changes not only
 ous sample was contaminated with EDTA.
can suggest disease but can also artifactu-
When drawing a fresh blood sample in this
ally affect other components of the blood
situation, a jugular blood draw should not
chemistry. Any changes in the blood serum
be attempted. If the patient does have a clot-
should be documented in the chart imme-
ting problem, a jugular draw can produce
 diately and discussed with the veterinarian.
a very large collection of blood under the
The following abnormalities can be noted
skin (hematoma) that can decrease the pa-
in the serum.
tient's red blood cell count to the level that
a transfusion may be necessary.
White Serum (Lipemia)
Obtain a Clotting Time
Lipemia suggests an increased white pre-
 Obtaining a clotting time from a periph-
cipitate of fat or lipid in the serum. This
eral vein can help the medical team evalu-
can occur artifactually if the animal has
ate the levels of chemical in the blood to
eaten a fatty meal before the blood draw.
help initiate the clotting process (clotting
This also this seems to be a common arti-
factors; (see Chapter 13)). Increased clot-
fact noted when drawing blood from minia-
ting times represent a life-threatening con-
ture schnauzers. Any disease that alters
cern for the patient, which, when identified,
the body's ability to digest and metabolize
should be discussed with the veterinarian
fat can also cause a true lipemia. Diseases
immediately.
that produce a true lipemia are diabetes
Chapter 5: Renal Clinical Diagnostics and Disease7
77
 mellitus, hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocor-
ticism, hyperlipidemia (rare), and hyper-
urine to prevent dehydration, controlling
cholesterolemia (rare). Dependent on the
blood electrolyte levels, controlling blood
chemistry unit used, lipemia can also ar-
pH (blood gas), and maintaining blood
tifactually alter liver and other blood
pressure.
chemistries.
 Renal disease is one of the most common
forms of geriatric disease in both the cat
and dog. Team members must understand
Red Serum (Hemolysis)
renal function, obtain a thorough database
to help identify renal disease, understand
Hemolysis occurs when red blood cells are
 blood chemistry changes that identify renal
destroyed releasing hemoglobin into the
disease, and be able to discuss these con-
serum. This can occur artifactually due to a
cerns with the client.
traumatic blood draw or improper transfer
The urinary system's main function is to
of blood into the red top tube. In disease
control the elimination of waste and tox-
conditions, hemolysis can be noted in the
ins from the body. Severe disease occurs
early stages of immune-mediated hemolytic
when the kidneys are unable to flter out
anemia (IMHA), where the red blood cells
toxins and waste through specialized struc-
are being attacked by white blood cells like
tures called glomeruli (Bowman's capsules)
foreign bacteria. Dependent on the chem-
(renal cortex) and concentrate the urine by
istry unit used, hemolysis can also artifactu-
reabsorbing water in the loops of Henle (re-
ally alter liver (especially bilirubin), kidney,
 nal medulla) to prevent the fluid loss that
blood calcium, and other blood chemistries.
produces dehydration. Further, the kidneys
also function to help produce red blood cells
from the bone marrow, control blood pres-
Yellow Serum Jaundice)
sure through a cellular mechanism called
the renin-angiotensin system, control the
There is no artifact that can produce jaun-
excretion of acidifying compounds that help
dice. Jaundice occurs when bilirubin, a
to
 control blood pH, and balance of the
waste product from red blood cell pro-
electrolytes (sodium and potassium) within
duction, builds up in the tissue. Bilirubin
the body. Normal kidney function is neces-
normally is produced by the body as red
sary for life.
blood cells are destroyed in the spleen and
Each animal has two kidneys, the right
 then converted into a nontoxic form in the
and the left (Figure 5.1). The kidneys are lo-
liver. It is then excreted by the liver through
cated close to the spine in the middle of the
the gallbladder. Animals develop jaundice
abdomen. The left kidney is slightly further
with liver disease, gallbladder obstruction,
behind the right kidney, which is located
or massive destruction of red blood cells in
just behind the last rib. The right kidney is
the blood vessels (secondary to IMHA).
positioned within the rib cage. The right and
left adrenal glands sit just in front of both
kidneys. The internal anatomy of the kid-
neys is split into several sections, each sec-
Urogenital System
tion having its own anatomy and function.
The kidney's internal anatomy has two
The urogenital system consists of the kid-
 major anatomical regions, each of which
neys, ureters, bladder, urethra, and repro-
has its own architecture and function. The
ductive organs of the animal. The kidneys
renal cortex is responsible for the filtra-
are a complicated organ responsible for fil-
tion of toxins out of the blood, balancing 
78Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
space. These smaller molecules are sugar,
amino acids, waste products, and elec-
trolytes (e.g., sodium, potassium, chloride,
Adrenal
gland
etc.). Larger blood molecules such as pro-
teins (e.g., albumin, globulin, etc.) cannot
pass through the small fenestrations of the
healthy glomerular capsule.
Once the molecules and fluid have been
passed into the urinary space, the urine
Right kidney
flows on into the proximal convoluted
tubules. The function of these tubules is to
Venacava
aggressively reabsorb all of the necessary
nutrients back into the bloodstream. This
Ureter
is an active process accomplished by cellu-
Leftkidney
lar pumps within the walls of the proximal
Abdominal
 and distal tubules. Once the necessary nu-
aorta
trients are reabsorbed, the fluid then passes
into the loops of Henle within the renal
medulla.
 The loops of Henle function to reabsorb
a large percentage of the fluid component 
of the urine (Figure 5.3).
To do this the cells of the nephrotic loops
actively extract sodium ions (Na+) and
move them into the medullary tissue around
the nephrotic loops. The tissue in this re-
gion is more concentrated than the fluid
moving through the loops of Henle, caus-
ing water to passively move into the sur-
Figure 5.1. Illustration of renal position and local
rounding tissue. This process reabsorbs 2/3
anatomy within the abdomen.
of the fluid within the nephrotic loops. Ini-
tially, patients unable to actively reabsorb
of blood electrolytes, and control of blood
fluid from the urine first develop increased
 pressure. The renal medulla is responsible
thirst (polydipsia) and urination (polyuria)
for the concentration of urine to prevent
as they try to compensate for increased
dehydration.
fluid losses. As the disease progresses, an-
The renal cortex is the outermost re-
imals experience life-threatening dehydra-
gion of kidney tissue. This region houses
 tion and are unable to make up their fluid
hundreds of thousands of glomeruli (Figure
losses.
5.2).
Once the urine leaves the loops of Henle,
The glomeruli are closely associated with
it enters the collecting ducts and enters the
small arteriole beds. The glomerular fil-
renal pelvis. The renal pelvis collects all
ters have very fine openings (called fen-
the urine produced before moving into the
estrations) that allow small molecules to
ureters. The ureters enter the bladder at the
flter into the tubules from the blood-
 bladder's neck in the area called the trigone.
stream. As blood passes through the small
Once urine collects in the bladder, it is ex-
arteriole beds, all blood molecules small
 creted through urethra and leaves the body
enough flow passively into the urinary
through the urethral opening.
Chapter 5: Renal Clinical Diagnostics and Disease7
79
Glomerularcapsule
Urinary
Proximal
space
convoluted
Parietallayer
Proximal
tubule
Visceral layer-
Arteriole
convoluted
tubule
Efferent
arteriole
Interlobular
artery
Sugar
BUN/
ammonia
Affer
arteriole
Sodium
Distal
convoluted
tubule
Potassium
Creatinine
Collecting
Amino
duct
acids
Nephric
loop
Figure 5.2. llustration of a glomerular capsule, urinary space, proximal and distal convoluted tubules, nephrotic
loops, and collecting ducts.
The kidneys must filter the blood at a
fltration (glomerular fltration; Table 5.1)
constant rate in order to maintain a low
 and urinary concentration is occurring.
level of blood toxins. To do this, 20% of
 Diseases, which effect the renal glomeru-
the body's blood volume must be filtered
lar filtration, inhibit the kidney's ability
through the kidneys every minute (Figure
to flter out toxins from the bloodstream.
5.4). Any disease or pathology that de-
The inability of glomerular fltration is di-
creases glomerular filtration increases the
rectly proportional to the amount of tox-
amount of toxin in the form of ammonia
ins within the bloodstream. In general, it
in the bloodstream. This is called azotemia.
takes 65-70% of all glomeruli to be affected
The increase in toxins makes the patient
before there is a rise in the renal toxins
weak, anorexic, and nauseous; causes di-
(azotemia) of blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
arrhea and vomiting; and can produce
and creatinine. The following sections de-
 life-threatening dehydration and potential
scribe blood chemistry parameters that can
shock.
suggest decreased ability of glomerular fl-
tration.
Evaluating Renal Function
Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN)
Key elements in the chemistry allow the
 Blood urea nitrogen is an amalgamation
medical team to evaluate if normal renal
of two ammonia molecules. Ammonia is
80Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Renal
Convoluted
tubule
Bowman's
capsule
Renal
H20
medulla
H20
Na
Na
OH0
Na
OH
Na
H20
Loopof
Henle
Collection
tubule
the patient.
a toxin produced during normal protein
(e.g., parvoviral infection) can secondarily
metabolism. BUN is produced in the liver
 increase BUN levels in the blood. Further,
and then placed into the bloodstream so
high protein meals can also produce a tran-
that it can be excreted during normal
sient increase in serum BUN as the protein
glomerular filtration. General increases in
is metabolized. Although blood levels of
BUN concentration can be associated with
 BUN can vary from lab to lab, normal BUN
decreased glomerular filtration. However,
 levels are generally as shown in Chart 5.1.
intestinal bleeding can also increase BUN.
 Blood contains a large amount of protein,
Chart 5.1
which, when bled into the intestinal system,
 Canine
10-26 mg/dL
is digested like any other food source.
 Diseases that produce intestinal bleeding
Feline
15-34 mg/dL
Chapter 5: Renal Clinical Diagnostics and Disease
81
creatinine. Although blood levels of crea-
tinine can vary from lab to lab, normal
 creatinine levels are generally as shown in
Toxin
Chart 5.2.
Chart 5.2
Canine
0.5-1.3 mg/dL
Feline
1.0-2.2 mg/dL
Left kidney
Phosphorus
 Ureter
Phosphorus is a mineral that is a key
element in many cell functions, includ-
ing bone formation, energy metabolism,
muscle contraction, and acid-base balance.
 Phosphorus is largely excreted by the kid-
 neys. There are many causes for increased
blood phosphorus
 levels (hyperphospho-
temia, see Chapter 8); however, the pres-
ence of hyperphosphotemia in association
with elevations of BUN and creatinine
can support changes in glomerular filtra-
tion. Although blood levels of phosphorus
can vary from lab to lab, normal phos-
Bladder
phorus levels are generally as shown in
Chart 5.3.
Toxin
Chart 5.3
Canine
2.3-5.5 mg/dL
Figure 5.4. Image of normal filtration of blood. It re-
Feline
3.0-7.0 mg/dL
quires 20% of blood volume going through the kid-
neys/minute to allow adequate removal of toxins from
the blood into the urine.
Albumin
Creatinine
Albumin is protein produced in the liver
Creatinine is an amino acid that is a metabo-
 and released in the bloodstream to carry
lite of muscle, which is produced in the
molecules throughout the body. If glomeru-
body during normal muscle metabolism.
 lar flters are damaged, albumin can pass
Increases in creatinine concentration
is
from the blood into the urine during nor-
directly associated with a decrease in
mal glomerular filtration (Figure 5.5).
glomerular fltration. Unlike BUN, there
Protein loss into the urine can occur
are no secondary causes for elevations in
early in renal disease before a true azotemia
82
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table 5.1. Clinical diagnostics that help to monitor kidney function.
 Other Factors That Elevate
Chemistry Elements That
 Enzyme or Element Level 
Suggest Decreased 
Besides Decrease in 
Factors Indicating That
 Element
Glomerular Filtration 
Glomerular Filtration
True Renal Azotemia
BUN
Azotemia
 Gl bleeding 
USG <1.015
BUN >26 mg/dL (Canine)
High protein meal
 BUN >34 mg/dL (Feline)
 Creatinine
Azotemia
None
USG <1.015
Crea >1.3 mg/dL (Canine)
Crea >2.2 mg/dL (Feline)
Phosphorus
P >5.5 mg/dL (Canine)
Disease that affects 
Increased phosphorus 
P >7.0 mg/dL (Feline)
 calcium and phosphorus
 must be in association 
 balance.
with elevated 
BUN/creatinine and low 
USG.
Potassi um 
K <4.0 mEq/L (Canine)
Any disease that can
 Decreased potassium 
K <3.7 mEg/L (Feline)
cause fluid losses (i.e..
 must be in association 
vomiting, anorexia, or 
with elevated
diarrhea may lower body
BUN/creatinine and low
potassium)
USG.
Pota ssium
K >5.4 mEg/L (Canine)
 Hypoadrenocorticism
 Increased potassium must 
K >5.2 mEq/L (Feline)
(Addison's Dz)
be in association with 
 elevated BUN/creatinine
 and urinary obstruction.
CAN BE ACUTELY LIFE 
THREATENING
Albumin 
Alb <3.1 g/dL (Canine)
Liver Disease
 Possible early warning of
Alb <2.4 g/dL (Feline)
 Bleeding
 impending renal disease.
 Gastrointestinal Dz
Low albumin must be
associated with a true
renal proteinuria
(See Chapter 11}
is noted. A combination of low body al-
Potassium
bumin (hypoalbuminemia) and high uri-
nary protein levels (proteinuria) can suggest
 Potassium is an intracellular ion that helps
glomerular damage and be an early indica-
produce electrical energy allowing skeletal
tor of renal disease. Although blood levels
and cardiac contraction muscle, depolariza-
of albumin can vary from lab to lab, nor-
 tion of nerves, and other metabolic func-
 mal albumin levels are generally as shown
tions (see Chapter 8). Potassium is normally
in Chart 5.4.
absorbed through the digestive system,
stored inside cells, and excreted through
Chart 5.4
the kidneys. Although many diseases can
Canine
3.1-4.5 g/dL
alter blood potassium levels, chronic re-
nal disease can produce a profoundly low
 Feline
2.4-4.1 g/dL
 body potassium level (hypokalemia). This 
Chapter 5: Renal Clinical Diagnostics and Disease
83
Urinary
 creased thirst and urination as a first symp-
Glomerularcapsule
Parietal layer
space
tom to these diseases.
Viscerallayer-
 The kidney's ability to concentrate urine
is measured by an instrument called a re-
Efferent,
fractometer (see Chapter 9). This instru-
arteriole
ment measures the concentration of a fluid.
Interlobular
The specific gravity of fluids is measured
artery
from 1.001 to above 1.045. The higher the
number, the more concentrated the fluid.
A urine specific gravity is the best assess-
ment of concentrating ability of the re-
nal medulla and a key indicator of renal
Afferent
disease.
arteriole
To diagnose true renal disease the medi-
Distal
cal team must prove that the patient has lost
convoluted
the ability to both flter toxins (azotemia)
tubule
and concentrate urine. If both elements are
not observable, the patient may be affected
 by a secondary disease that affects either
Figure 5.5.
Illustration of kidneys with damage to the
glomerular filtration or medullary concen-
filters causing blood protein (albumin) to pass into the
urinary space.
tration. It then becomes the medical team's
responsibility to differentiate primary kid-
ney disease vs. another disease affecting re-
occurs as the patient loses its ability to con-
nal function (Algorithm 5.1).
centrate urine, and more and more potas-
Prerenal azotemia is caused by decreased
sium is excreted from the body with larger
 blood perfusion of the kidneys, producing
quantities of urine. Although blood levels of
 decreased glomerular filtration. This syn-
 potassium can vary from lab to lab, normal
drome is not caused by kidney disease but
potassium levels are generally as shown in
is caused by dehydration. Elevated percent-
Chart 5.5.
age of dehydration decreases the body's
ability to perfuse its organs normally, and
Chart 5.5
glomerular filtration decreases. However,
Canine
4.0-5.4 mEq/L
the kidneys still maintain the ability to con-
3.7-5.2 mEq/L
centrate urine (Figure 5.6).
Feline
Diseases that alter renal medullary tis-
Text Box 5.1
sue affect the animal's ability to concentrate
Key Points to Help Distinguish Prerenal
urine. These animals have lost the ability
of reabsorbing sodium into the medullary
Azotemia
tissue and are unable to create a high
The pet has evidence of decreased 
sodium gradient. This stops the flow of wa-
 glomerular filtration with an increased
ter out of the urine and into the tissue, in-
azotemia.
Urine specific gravity is high because the
creasing fluid loss. Patients with decreased
 kidneys have not lost their ability to
medullary function cannot maintain normal
concentrate urine.
hydration. To help compensate for the loss,
 The azotemia reverts to normal levels
patients begin to drink large amounts of wa-
after hydration is restored.
ter. Often these pets will begin to show in-
Notify DVM immediately.
 Potential A ddison's
s
er
Notify DVM
Further diagnostics (i.e., urine protein
may be required
to be assessed to evaluate for renal
No obvious renal dysfunction.
 creatinine ratio,
damage or dysfunction.
Further clinical diagnc
 Is urine specific gravity
E valuate patient for other
 Obtain urine sample.
causes of azotemiz
No
low?
No
小
Physical: thin, weak, dehydrated
Algorithm 5.1. Overview of diagnosis of renal disease
hosphorus) elevated?
urine
(osn
]ow
P
change
nically]
(hypo
Chapter 5: Renal Clinical Diagnostics and Disease
85
Toxin
Toxin
Left kidney
Left kidney
Ureter
Ureter
Bladder
Bladder
Toxin
Toxin
Figure 5.6. Illustration of prerenal azotemia. Dehy-
Fgure 5.7. Due to the loss of 2/3-3/4 of kidney mass,
dration decreases blood flow through the kidneys slow-
the kidneys cannot adequately filter or concentrate
ing glomerular fitration and reduces the amount of tox-
urine. This produces patients with severe azotemia
ins in the urine. This causes increasing levels of toxins 
(high levels of toxins in the blood/low levels of toxins 
in the bloodstream.
 in the urine) and patients that produce large amounts
of urine because the kidneys have lost the ability to
concentrate urine.
 In renal azotemia, a disease that primarily
affects the kidneys causes azotemia and de-
therefore, the urine specific gravity can be
creased medullary concentration. In order
much lower than normal (<1.015). With
for the azotemia to occur, 65-75% damage
severe chronic renal disease, the azotemia
to both kidneys must occur. The kidneys
 may not revert to normal with fluid therapy
have lost the ability to concentrate urine;
(Figure 5.7).
86
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Text Box 5.2
Key Points with Renal Azotemia
Toxin
·  The pet has evidence of decreased
Toxin
 glomerular filtration with an increased
azotemia.
Toxin
 Urine specific gravity is low because the
 kidneys have lost their ability to
 concentrate urine.
 The azotemia does not generally revert to
 normal levels after hydration is restored.
Left kidney
In postrenal azotemia, there is a rise
Ureter
in kidney nonprotein nitrogenous com-
 pounds due to an obstruction of the blad-
der, which produces a retrograde backflow
 of urine to the kidneys and ammonia into
the bloodstream (Figure 5.8). A severe
azotemia is present; however, urine spe-
cific gravity tends to be high initially be-
 cause the kidneys still maintain the abil-
ity to concentrate urine. Due to lack of
 potassium excretion, a life-threatening high
blood potassium level (hyperkalemia, see
Chapter 8) can occur. Generally, once the
urinary tract is unobstructed and the animal
Toxin
is rehydrated on fluids, the kidney values
Bladder
can return to normal. However, if the pa-
Toxin
tient is obstructed for a long period (e.g.,
Toxin
hours), the increased retrograde urinary
pressure can produce permanent kidney dis-
ease. These patients come in obstructed and
have life-threatening azotemia and dilute
Figure 5.8.  Due to obstruction of the bladder and uri-
urine.
nary outflow tract, toxins that are pushed into the urine
retrograde back into the kidneys, slowing glomerular 
filtration and producing severe azotemia. If obstructed 
long enough, permanent kidney disease can occur.
Text Box 5.3
Key Points with Postrenal Azotemia:
 The pet has evidence of decreased
continues long enough, permanent 
glomerular filtration with an increased 
damage can occur and USG can lower
azotemia.
(poor prognosis).
Patients can be severely hyperkalemic.
[f caught in the early phase, azotemia can
 revert to normal levels after urinary
because the kidneys have lost their ability
obstruction is removed and hydration is 
to concentrate urine. If obstruction 
restored.
Chapter 5: Renal Clinical Diagnostics and Disease
87
Secondary Concerns of Renal
can produce moderate to severe anemia
Disease
(Figure 5.9).
When treating the chronic kidney failure
patient, the animal may present both ane-
There are a number of secondary con-
mic and dehydrated. As discussed in Chap-
cerns that can occur when glomerular fil-
ter 2, this can produce a packed cell vol-
tration is affected. Most concerns occur
ume that may appear within low normal
with chronic disease (i.e., chronic renal dis-
limits. As the medical team treats the renal
case), as glomerular fltration and the abil-
patient with large amounts of intravenous
ity to concentrate decrease over time. All
fluids, blood fluid levels can return to nor-
secondary disease concerns should be eval-
 mal or even produce a dilution effect on the
uated when monitoring and treating a re-
red blood cell. This can produce patients
 nal patient. Many secondary problems can
with a life-threatening anemia within a few
make the patient worse if the medical team
 hours after the beginning of intravenous flu-
does not evaluate each component and treat
ids (Figure 5.10).
accordingly. The following sections discuss
these concerns.
Electrofyte Abnormafities
Chronic Nonregenerative Anemia
Sodium and potassium levels are responsi-
 Normal renal tissue produces a hormone
ble for producing electrical activity in the
called erythropoietin, which stimulates red
body. Sodium is a charged particle that is
blood cell formation from the bone mar-
largely extracellular in the body. Potassium
row. With chronic kidney disease,
ery-
is a charged particle that is largely intra-
thropoietin levels decrease. This decreases
 cellular in the body. Sodium and potassium
red blood cell formation chronically and
change places in order to create electrical
erythropoieten
erythropoieten
Figure 5.9. Illustration of how erthypoiten stimulates red blood cell production from the bone marrow (let). With
( eaue punooid  aeaoe e anoid ue siaal uaodoua suiseaap 'aseas aup iuor
88Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
·Pretreatment
 Chronic Renal Disease
Posttreatment
PCV
Patient
PCV
Serum
Serum
Total
Buffy coat
'volume
L
Total
Bufy coat
PCV25%
volume
PCV 11%
Figure 5.10.
Illustration of how packed cell volume is affected by renal patients that are both dehydrated and 
anemic. The PCV on the left represents a cat with chronic renal failure prior to treatment. The PCV on the right
represents the same patient after 6 hours of heavy fluid therapy.
current to produce muscular contractions,
Hypertension
heartbeats, firing of neurons,
.and other
body functions (Figure 5.11).
 The kidneys must preserve normal blood
As discussed previously, chronic renal
pressure to ensure that 20% of the blood
failure can produce chronic hypokalemia.
is filtered by the kidney. As blood pres-
 Mild changes in hypokalemia can produce
sure decreases glomerular filtration also de-
weakness, anorexia, and lethargy. In severe
creases, and over time the kidneys can
cases, a patient can become so weak that
deteriorate. To help prevent a decrease
it cannot lift its head (ventroflexion of the
in blood volume, the kidneys use the
neck; Figure 5.12).
renin-angiotensin system to increases blood
Sodium (Na)
个
Sodium (Na)
个
Potassium (K+)
Potassium (K+)
Cell
Cell
Electrical potential
 Figure 5.11. llustration of how the exchange of sodium and potassium into and out of the cell body produces
electrical energy for the body.
Chapter 5: Renal Clinical Diagnostics and Disease
89
 sure. As blood pressure decreases, the jux-
taglomerular cells shrink, which stimulates
the release of a chemical called renin.
Renin activates another hormone called an-
giotensin → angiotensin I, which is pro-
duced by the liver. Then angiotensin I
is changed into angiotensin II within the
lungs. Angiotensin II is a potent constric-
tor of blood vessels, producing a whole
body arteriole constriction. With increased
constriction of the blood vessels, blood
 pressure rises, increasing blood through
the kidneys and increasing glomerular
fltration.
With patients suffering from chronic re-
nal disease, the diseased tissue can still se-
 crete renin even though 66-75% of both
Figure 5.12.Ventroflexion of the neck: The body's
kidney tissues have been damaged or de-
potassium is so low that the patient cannot lift its neck.
stroyed. As glomeruli begin to fail and their
pressure (Figure 5.13). There are special-
ability to filter blood is compromised, renin
ized cells present within the arterioles of
 secretion increases. This continued process
the glomeruli called juxtaglomerular cells,
 over time can produce constant hyperten-
which stretch depending on blood pres-
sion.
Juxtoglomerularcells
Rapid blood flow
Noreninsecretion
Juxtoglomerularcells
Benin
Angiotensinl
Angiotensinll
Vasoconstriction
Figure 5.13. llustration of the juxtaglomerular cells releasing renin in response to decreasing blood pressure.
Renin activates angiotensin, a potent vasoconstrictor, increasing blood pressure.
90 Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Protein-Losing Nephropathy
Urogenital Diagnostic Tests
As discussed previously, some forms of
Because renal disease can develop as a
glomerular disease can produce damage
subtle process and because kidney enzyme
to the glomerular flters, allowing larger
molecules such as albumin to pass into
elevation can be seen with other disease con-
ditions (e.g., dehydration, urinary obstruc-
the urinary space (see Figure 5.5). Over
tion), a full diagnostic workup can be in-
time, chronic blood protein levels decrease,
dicated. The following sections present an
producing hypoalbuminemia. Without nor-
overview of suggested clinical diagnostics.
mal blood albumin levels the body can-
not heal properly and the patient can
become weakened and anorexic. Further,
albumin exerts a pressure on the fluid
Complete Blood Count
component of the blood (oncotic pressure)
pulling fluid from the tissue into the blood
The complete blood count allows the veteri-
so that the large protein molecule can be
narian to determine changes in the red and
moved through the vascular supply. The hy-
white blood cell populations that can be af-
poalbuminemic patient loses oncotic pres-
fected by renal disease. Some changes that
sure and begins to push fluid from the blood
 can be noted are reviewed in the following
supply back to the tissue, increasing
the
sections.
chances of fluid buildup in the tissues and
lungs. Chronic renal patients that are hy-
poalbuminemic have an increased chance of
Changes in the Red Blood Cell Count
fluid overload because fluid is more likely
to move from the blood supply into the
Chronic dehydration can cause an increased
lungs.
packed cell volume secondary to an acute
or chronic disease. Pets that cannot concen-
trate their urine produce large amounts of
dilute urine that can result in dehydration. A
Metabolic Acidosis
 decreased red blood cell population/anemia
also can occur secondarily to chronic de-
There are millions of chemical reactions
crease in erythropoietin levels.
that the body uses every day to pro-
duce energy, manufacture proteins, main-
tain normal homeostasis, and meet other
Changes in the White Blood Cell Count
daily needs (see Chapter 7). All these re-
There can be bacterial, fungal, or protozoal
 actions require a specific blood pH be-
causes of infectious renal disease, which can
tween 7.35-7.45. If the blood pH alters
produce significant elevations of the white
from this range, these reactions are slowed
blood cell populations.
or
do not occur. With patients suffer-
ing from renal disease, loss of glomeru-
lar filtration, buildup of body toxins, and
yomiting and diarrhea can occur.
. These
Blood Chemistry
factors can produce a blood pH <7.35,
causing a metabolic acidosis; this can fur-
As described previously, elevations in crea-
ther produce weakness, anorexia, vomiting,
tinine, BUN, and phosphorus and changes
and diarrhea, and the patient can develop
in electrolytes can all support the diagnosis
shock.
of potential azotemia.
Chapter 5: Renal Clinical Diagnostics and Disease
91
Urinalysis
Blood Pressure Monitoring
Urinalysis is one of the most important clin-
Because high blood pressure (hypertension)
ical tests in defining renal disease and iden-
is a common secondary sequelae to re-
tifying early changes in kidney function.
nal disease, monitoring blood pressure with
Evaluation of urine specific gravity in the
Doppler or oscillation equipment is strongly
azotemic patient confirms renal azotemia in
recommended. Screening ill patients before
 most cases (see Chapter 9). The presence of
beginning large amounts of fluid therapy
protein in the urine may be an early indi-
will decrease the risk of a worsening hyper-
cation of glomerular disease before the pa-
tension and development of retinal hemor
tient develops significant azotemia. Evaluat-
rhage, cardiac enlargement, fluid overload,
ing the urinary sediment for abnormality in
and death.
cellular cytology can suggest the evidence of
renal casts, white blood cells, urinary crys-
tals, or abnormal cells, indicating disease
of the bladder, kidneys, or reproductive or-
Blood Gas
gans (e.g., prostate).
Because loss of renal function can decrease
renal perfusion, increase blood toxin, and
produce diarrhea and vomiting, which can
Urine Cufture and Sensitivity
cause the loss of bicarbonate rich fluids,
 metabolic acidosis is a common secondary
If a heavy bacterial presence is noted in
concern to renal patients. In evaluating
the urine in conjunction with increased uri-
 blood gas (see chapter 12), the veterinar-
nary white blood cell count and renal casts
 ian can get a prognostic indicator of how
(especially white blood cell casts), a urine
severely affected the patient is and, with
culture and sensitivity should be considered
(see chapter 9).
successive evaluation, monitor response to
treatment.
Urine Protein/Creatinine Ratio
Ethylene Glycol Test
If true renal proteinuria is detected (see
Chapter 9) in a patient without obvi-
If within the previous 8 hours antifreeze in-
ous azotemia, an evaluation of urine pro-
toxication is suspected, an ethylene glycol
tein/creatinine should be made. In most
test can help confirm whether ethylene gly-
healthy patients, there should be a very
col is evident in the body.
small amount of protein in the urine com-
pared to a large level or renal excreted
creatinine; therefore, this ratio should be
< 1. As glomerular disease progresses, larger
Abdominal Radiography
amounts of blood albumin will seep into the
urine, increasing this ratio close to and be-
Radiographs of the abdomen can help
 yond 1. Increasing ratio levels suggest more
the medical team evaluate kidney size and
severe glomerular disease and help the med-
shape, determine whether there is evidence
ical team recognize affected kidneys and be-
of renal or bladder stones, or note other
gin treatment before azotemia and severe
abdominal organ changes that may suggest
weight loss occur.
disease.
92Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Abdominaf Ultrasound
nal disease can be detected early, its disease
 progression slowed, and secondary disease
Abdominal ultrasound can help the medi-
concerns can be monitored for and con-
cal team image the internal architecture of
trolled. All members of the medical team
the abdominal organs to see changes in soft
must be able to understand the clinical di-
tissue suggestive of glomerular or medullary
 agnostics of renal disease, how to monitor
 disease and determine the presence of stones
for secondary concerns, and how to ex-
or soft tissue calcification or the evidence of
plain the disease and its concerns to the
masses or tumors.
client.
 Through proper monitoring and evalua-
tion of middle age to senior patients, re-
Liver Physiology and Anatomy
Clinical Diagnostics, and Disease
As opposed to clinical diagnostic evalua-
 Right lateral lobe
tion of renal disease and kidney function,
 Right medial lobe
the ability to evaluate liver damage vs. hep-
Quadrate lobe
atic function is much more complex. This
 Caudate lobes
chapter reviews the changes in liver en-
zymes that are present in patients with liver
The liver also contains the gallbladder,
trauma. However, note that changes in en-
which is the collecting site for deactivated
zymes do not always mean that the liver is
 toxins. The gallbladder is stimulated to con-
nonfunctional. The other concern is that a
tract, emptying its content through the com-
 patient can have severe debilitating liver dis-
mon bile where it also shares ducts from
ease with poor function and can still have
the pancreas (see Chapter 7) before it emp-
blood work parameters within normal lim-
ties into the duodenum. The ingestion of
its. Team members must be able to under-
food and water stimulate the release of the
stand the importance and the limitation of
pancreatic enzymes and constriction of the
hepatic clinical diagnostics when approach-
gallbladder through the common bile duct.
ing a patient with potential liver disease
Many of the toxins deactivated by the liver
The liver sits in the cranial section of the
are color pigments (see the section “Biliru-
abdomen on the right side of the body be-
bin" below), which give the feces most of its
hind the diaphragm and caudal to the stom-
color. Loss of liver function or obstruction
ach and spleen (Figure 6.1).
of the gallbladder can produce retrograde
The liver is divided into multiple lobes
flow of these bile pigments into the serum
separated by fissures within the organ. In
and tissue producing a yellow coloration
the canine and feline liver, the lobes are di-
(icterus or jaundice). Because bilirubin is a
vided into the following:
toxin, increased levels can make the patient
● Left lateral lobe
weak, lethargic, and anorexic and produce
●Left medial lobe
vomiting and diarrhea.
93
94
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Venacava
Liver
Portal
vein
Stomach
Pancreas
Spleen
Jejunum
 Figure 6.1. Cranial abdomen architecture.
The liver has many functions in the body;
For the liver to be able to detoxify blood,
the most important is detoxification of tox-
the internal architecture of the liver must
ins. The small intestine absorbs all food
 be adapted to filter blood, harvesting nec-
stuff, microbes, and toxins into a large ve-
essary nutrients and removing toxins. To
 nous system called the portal venous sys-
do this, the liver architecture is divided
tem. The large portal vein carries all of these
 into sinusoids where layers one cell thick
substances into the liver where intracellular
of hepatocytes filter blood flowing from
 chemicals (enzymes) detoxify toxins into in-
the portal vein to the hepatic central vein 
ert waste products.
(Figure 6.2).
Chapter 6: Liver Clinical Diagnostics and Disease
95
Sinusoids
ecanalicul
Bile duct
Central
vein
Branch portal
vein
Branch hepatic
artery
 pushing blood into the central vein. Blood toxins, nutrients, and microbes are absorbed by the liver cells lining
this sinus (hepatocytes). The toxins and microbes are deactivated and then pushed into a duct system called bile
canaliculi, which then move the toxins into the gallbladder
The function of these cells is to absorb all
loss, vomiting, and diarrhea. Further spe-
toxins, bacteria, and nutrients that are in
cific toxins
can
penetrate the central
the portal blood supply. The nutrients are
nervous system producing neurologic symp-
absorbed, altered into other proteins, en-
toms such as seizures, acute blindness,
ergy, and fats needed by the body and then
circling, head pressing, and abnormal be-
released back into the blood venous flow
havior. Neurologic symptoms produced
for general circulation. The toxins and bac-
secondary to decreased hepatic function are
teria are deactivated and then released into
 called hepatic encephalopathy. Because this
channels, called canaliculi, running between 
 process is stimulated by the absorption of
layers of hepatocytes. These canaliculi lead
nutrients and improper detoxification of
to the bile ductules, which then move all
toxins, neurologic signs can be closely as-
deactivated sludge and debris into the gall-
sociated with feeding.
bladder.
The liver also stores a small amount of
If the body is unable to detoxify these
a carbohydrate molecule called glycogen.
compounds, the active toxins can build
Glycogen is broken down into sugar when
up into the bloodstream and tissues. This
the blood sugar stores rapidly decrease and
can produce anorexia, weakness, weight
fat has not yet been mobilized.
96
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table 6.1.  Risks of patients with reduced hepatic function.
Liver Function
Concern of Dysfunction
Detoxification
Hepatic encephalopathy: Neurologic symptoms develop secondary to improper
detoxification of microbes and toxins, which remain in the body affecting the 
 central nervous system.
 Physicat symptoms due to buid of toxins and bilirubin: Increased toxins can
 produce nausea, anorexia, depression, vomiting. diarrhea, weakness, and weight
loss
 Formation of building 
 Anemia: Lack of red blood cell precursors
blocks 
Increased clotting time: The liver produces clotting factors that finalize clot
formation.
Hypoalbuminemia: Due to lack of blood albumin, the body can shift fluid from 
the vascular supply to the tissue, increasing fluid accumulation in the body.
 producing ascites, edema, and pulmonary edema (with patients on IV fluids).
Glucose storage
Hypoglycemia (rare)
Finally, the liver produces many of the
within the abdomen (ascites). Medical team
body's building blocks necessary for normal
members must be extremely cautious with
maintenance, growth, and production. It is
hospitalized patients with low albumin
important to note that the liver produces
levels on intravenous fluids because these
many of the necessary components needed
patients have increased risk of pushing
 for red blood cell production and clotting
larger amounts of fluids into the tissue.
factors (see Chapter 13). Therefore, animals
This increases risks of moving fluid into
with chronic hepatic disease may develop
lung tissue producing pulmonary edema
chronic anemia and may have decreased
and developing fluid overload (Table 6.1).
 ability to clot blood. With this concern, no
 jugular blood collection should ever be at-
Diseases of the Liver
tempted with patients suffering from poten-
tial hepatic disease or dysfunction.
The liver:
also
produces
a
protein
Liver disease can take many forms, and un-
molecule called albumin. Albumin's func-
 like renal disease, where general treatment
tion is to carry other
molecules
sand
options include fluid therapy, medications,
hormones around the bloodstream 
ina
and hospitalization, medical and surgical
deactivated form until the body
requires
therapy can be extremely variable depen-
the chemical. In order to move
albumin
dent on the type of liver disease present. In
through the bloodstream, large amounts 
many cases, final diagnosis of liver disease
 of fluid must be pulled from the tissue.
must be based on liver biopsy.
 This physiological draw of fluid that albu-
min exerts on the tissue is called oncotic
Infectious Liver Disease
pressure.
Loss of：
 albumin production
secondary to liver dysfunction can decrease
Viral, bacterial,
fungal,
and parasitic
 oncotic pressure, increasing the amount of
pathogens can infect and invade normal
fluid returning to the tissue. If severe, large
liver tissue, producing acute or chronic dis-
amounts of fluid accumulation can occur
ease and debilitation.
Chapter 6: Liver Clinical Diagnostics and Disease
97
Inflammatory Disease
Hepatitis is the activation of the immune
system by some foreign antigen within the
liver. This antigenic stimulation produces
an influx of white blood cells through a
healthy liver, causing damage and irritation.
Inflammatory disease can be acute, chronic,
or end-stage (cirrhosis).
Cancer (Neoplasia)
The liver is both the site of primary cancer
Fgure 6.4. Image of a liver) infiltrated by large
and a common site of secondary metastatic
amounts of fat (hepatic lipidosis).
disease (Figure 6.3). Some common cancers
that primarily affect the liver are hepatic
mals have a disease entity that produces a
adenocarcinoma,
hepatic cholangioade-
profound anorexia. The animals shunt large
nocarcinoma, lymphoma, and mast cell
amounts of fat into the liver to transform it
tumor.
into sugar. The movement of fat into the
liver is so severe that normal liver archi-
Metabolic Disease
tecture and liver function can be affected
(Figure 6.4).
This form of liver disease occurs as inert
compounds buildup within the liver, de-
stroying the normal architecture and liver
Amyloidosis (Protein)
function. Common metabolic diseases of
Amyloidosis is an accumulation of an inert
the liver include hepatic lipidosis and amy-
protein in the liver, which can chronically
loidosis (protein).
destroy normal liver tissue. The buildup of
this abnormal protein is most commonly
Hepatic Lipidosis
seen in the shar-pei breed, in which amy-
loidosis can be associated with kidney and
This disease syndrome occurs commonly in
 liver disease and inflammatory changes in
the cat and horse (pony) when these ani-
 the joint capsule.
Toxin Disease
 Because the liver is the major detoxifying
organ in the body, toxins can damage nor-
mal liver tissue, which affects function.
Portacaval Shunts
 In some patients, a small blood vessel,
called a shunt, can occur from the portal
vein to the caudal vena cava, producing
Figure 6.3.
 Image of a liver with primary cancer or
metastasis.
a bypass of blood flow around the liver.
98 Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Vena cava
Vena cava
Shun
Figure 6.5. Illustration of an extrahepatic shunt. In the figure on the left, the portal vein courses normally into the
liver. In the illustration on the right, there is a small vessel that bypasses the liver (shunt) allowing the movement of
toxins into normal circulation prior to liver metabolism.
 In these patients, blood toxins bypass the
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
liver and enter the general bloodstream and
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
produce severe neurological and systemic
Gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT)
signs. Shunts can occur as a congenital de-
Alkaline phosphatase (Alk Phos)
fect or as an acquired disease and can occur
within the liver (intrahepatic) or outside of
Unlike evaluating kidney disease by mon-
the liver (extrahepatic) (Figure 6.5).
itoring azotemia (see Chapter 5), these clini-
cal diagnostics do not represent a buildup of
toxin but rather normal enzymes produced
Identifying Liver Damage vs.
within the hepatocytes. Normally, a specific
level of each enzyme leaks from the hepato-
Hepatic Dysfunction
cyte into the bloodstream. Acute trauma to
hepatocytes can produce sharp elevations of
Within the liver cells are enzymes that func-
liver enzymes by leakage of enzymes out of
tion to change or produce specific body-
the damaged hepatocyte into the blood or
building blocks or detoxify toxic chemicals
 by increased production of enzymes from
in the body. Clinically, we evaluate the fol-
chronic stimulation or irritation. Increases
lowing intracellular enzymes:
in these liver enzymes support liver trauma,
Chapter 6: Liver Clinical Diagnostics and Disease
99
but they do not always suggest liver dys-
secondary to injury, inflammations,
or
function. However, with chronic to end-
infection within the liver. The increased
Stage disease, there may enough hepatic en-
 blood levels do not indicate the severity of 
zymes within the bloodstream to produce
the damage to the hepatocytes or degree
normal blood levels in clinical testing, but 
 of reversibility of the disease process.
 the liver may not be functional.
Further ALT activity can also be increased
Hepatocytes also produce （
chemicals
secondary to the following:
called bile acids that help to emulsify fat
within the small intestine. Bile acids are
Chronic use of anticonvulsants, steroids,
stimulated when the patient eats. Bile acids
then empty through the gallbladder and into
 Physical trauma
the common bile duct. After fat is emulsi-
Cardiac disease
fed, bile acids are then rapidly reabsorbed
by the small intestine.
Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST
or SGOT)
Clinical Diagnostics That Identify
Acute Liver Damage
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) is an in-
tracellular enzyme in all cells, but it has
higher levels of activity in muscle and liver
Alanine Aminotransferase (AIT)
cell damage. Although blood levels of as-
partate aminotransferase can vary from lab
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) is respon-
to lab, normal AST levels generally are as
sible for the conversion of 2-oxoglutarate
shown in Chart 6.2.
to pyruvate and glutamate in the liver cells
Chart 6.2
(hepatocytes). Although blood levels of ala-
nine aminotransferase can vary from lab
Canine
5-55 IU/L
to lab, normal ALT levels are generally as
Feline
5-55 IU/L
shown in Chart 6.1.
Chart 6.1
 The following sections review patterns in
Canine
50-60 IU/L
the AST level.
Feline
28-76 IU/L
Decreased AST Activity
 The following sections review patterns in
Low ALT activity is not generally associated
the ALT level.
with disease conditions.
Low ALT Activity
Increased AST Activity
Low ALT activity is not generally associated
As with ALT, AST blood levels in the blood
with disease conditions.
Occur when there are alterations in the lipid
 membrane of the hepatocytes, secondary to
Increased Activity of the Enzyme
injury, inflammations, or infection within
the liver. The increased blood levels do not
Increased activity of the enzyme in the
indicate the severity of the damage to the
blood occurs when there are alterations
hepatocytes or degree of reversibility of
 in the lipid membrane of the hepatocytes,
the disease process. Further AST activity
100Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
can also be increased secondary to the
cytes; its activity is increased due to in-
following:
creased production (induction) of the en-
zyme in response to disease.
 Disease that affects the muscular skeletal
system (e.g., trauma or seizure)
Alkaline Phosphatase (SAIP or
Disease
that produces
blood
cell destruction (e.g., immune-mediated
ALP)
hemolytic anemia) because there are sig-
nificant levels of AST in red blood cells.
Alkaline phosphatase is present within the
liver, intestine, bone, kidneys, and placenta.
On most chemistry panels, alkaline phos-
Gamma-glutamyftransferase (GGT)
phatase activity represents the combined ac-
tivity of all combined tissue alkaline phos-
Gamma-glutamyltransferase is more an in-
phatase levels. Although blood levels of al-
dicator of gallbladder obstruction or lack
kaline phosphatase can vary from lab to lab,
of bile flow. GGT is an intracellular en-
 normal ALP levels are generally as shown in
zyme responsible for cleaving C-terminal
Chart 6.4.
glutamyl groups from one
substrate
or
molecule to another, and it is thought to be
Chart 6.4
involved in pathways used to protect cells
Canine
10-150 IU/L
from oxidative injury. GGT is present in
Feline
0-62 IU/L
 all cells except that it has higher concentra-
tion in renal epithelial, bile duct, and hep-
atic cells. Although blood levels of gamma-
 The following sections review patterns of
glutamyltransferase can vary from lab to
ALP.
lab, normal GGT levels are generally
as
shown in Chart 6.3:
Decreased ALP Activity
Chart 6.3
Low ALP activity is not generally associated
Canine
with disease conditions.
0-10 IU/L
 Feline
1-7 IU/L
 Increased ALP Activity
 The following sections review patterns of
High ALP can originate from diseases and
nondiseased conditions. Similar to GGT,
GGT levels.
ALP's activity increases because of in-
creased production of the enzyme (induc-
Decreased GGT Activity
tion) in response to disease. The follow-
 ing are some conditions that increase ALP
Low GGT activity is not generally associ-
ated with disease conditions.
activity:
Hyperadrenocorticism. Although not a spe-
cific test for hyperadrenocorticism (Cush-
Elevations in GGT
ing's disease, see Chapter 11), chronic
Increased GGT activity can be associated
 production of adrenal cortisol (steroid)
with decreased bile flow (cholestasis). Fur-
 increases production of alkaline phos-
ther, GGT can increase with liver damage
phatase. Further, the administration of
that produces cholestasis. Unlike AST and
oral corticosteroids can cause increased
ALT, GGT does not “leak" from hepato-
ALP activity.
Chapter 6: Liver Clinical Diagnostics and Disease
101
Liver and Gallbladder Disease.
With
The buildup of bilirubin in the serum 
chronic hepatic or gallbladder disease,
and body in association with liver dis-
increases in ALP production can be ob-
ease indicates liver dysfunction. However,
served.
it should be noted that although patients
Long-term medication. Patients on specific
that are icteric secondary to liver disease
long-term medication (e.g., phenobarbi-
have liver dysfunction, not all patients
tal, prednisone) can increase production
with liver dysfunction are icteric. Further-
of ALP.
more, increased levels of bilirubin also can
Bone growth. Rapid changes in bone (e.g.)
be associated with increased intravascular
growth, bone cancer) can increase blood
red blood cell destruction (e.g, immune-
levels of alkaline phosphatase from pro-
mediated hemolytic anemias) or gallbladder
duction within the bone.
obstruction.
Clinical Diagnostics That Identify
Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN)
Liver Dysfunction
A low BUN level can be associated with the
liver's inability to take ammonia molecules
Liver dysfunction is due to acute or chronic
and produce BUN. When observed on clin-
damage to liver tissue affecting normal
production of liver compounds and hep-
function. A low BUN by itself does not
atic detoxification. Determining whether
always indicate liver dysfunction. Low-
the disease is acute or chronic is not as im-
 protein diets can also result in a low BUN.
 portant as determining whether there is hep-
Although blood levels of BUN can vary
atic trauma or, more importantly, hepatic
from lab to lab, normal BUN levels are gen-
dysfunction. The following sections identify
erally as shown in Chart 6.6.
 chemistry parameters that suggest liver dys-
function.
Chart 6.6
Biirubin
Canine
10-26 mg/dL
Feline
15-34 mg/dL
Bilirubin is a toxic metabolite produced
from the red blood cell destruction in the
spleen and the breakdown of hemoglobin.
As red blood cells age, they are re-
Albumin
moved from circulation in the spleen, lysed,
and the iron molecule removed from the
As discussed previously, albumin is a small
hemoglobin molecule to be used again. The
carrier protein that binds to hormones
remaining chemical is bilirubin, which is
and other components in the bloodstream
moved to the liver to be detoxified and ex-
to maintain and move necessary elements
creted through the gallbladder. Although
throughout the body. Decreases in blood
blood levels of bilirubin can vary from lab
albumin concentration can occur generally
 to lab, normal levels are generally as shown
with a number of disease syndromes that
in Chart 6.5
affect production or loss of the
protein
molecule. A decrease in functioning hepato-
Chart 6.5
cytes will compromise the liver's ability to
Canine
0.0-0.6 mg/dL
produce albumin. As a general rule, at least
0.0-0.4 mg/dL
75% of normal liver function must be lost
Feline
before albumin concentration is decreased.
102
2Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
When attributable to liver disease, hypoal-
 also evaluate the history, physical exam-
buminemia can be an indicator of altered
 ination, and other diagnostic aids. There
liver function. However, low body albumin
are many potential forms of liver disease;
can also be associated with kidney disease
blood work can appear normal and there
(see Chapter 5), bleeding (see Chapter 14),
can still be significant liver dysfunction. Fur-
and intestinal disease (see Chapter 7). Al-
ther, clinical diagnostics and imaging alone
though blood levels of albumin can vary
are often not sufficient to diagnose the cause
from lab to lab, normal albumin levels are
of the liver disease present. If the medi-
generally as shown in Chart 6.7.
cal team determines that hepatic dysfunc-
tion is occurring, a liver biopsy (fine nee-
Chart 6.7
de, tissue biopsy, or core biopsy) may be
Canine
3.1-4.5 g/dL
recommended to obtain a final diagnosis
and help outline treatment protocols (Al-
 Feline
2.4-4.1 g/dL
gorithm 6.1). Overall, a clinical diagnostic
evaluation for a hepatic patient may include
the tests described in the following sections.
Bile Acids
As discussed previously, bile acids are ex
Compfete Blood Count
creted in response to eating to help emulsify
fat. In liver disease, bile acids are not prop-
Components of the complete blood count
erly reabsorbed and represent a true liver
can vary depending on the form of liver
dysfunction. To evaluate bile acids, the pa-
disease; however, general trends should be
tient is fasted for 12 hours and a baseline
monitored for red blood cells, white blood
level of bile acids are drawn. Then the ani-
cells, and platelets.
mal is fed a high-energy food, and 2 hours
later another bile acid level is collected. In
Red Blood Cells
 an animal with liver dysfunction, prefeeding
(preprandial) bile acids are high and post-
With chronic waning disease, chronic ane-
feeding (postprandial) bile acids are even
mia may be present secondary to the
higher. Although bile acid levels can vary
lack of precursors for cellular components.
 Chronic liver disease also can affect the pa-
from lab to lab, normal levels are as shown
in Chart 6.8.
tient's ability to clot blood. With significant
anemia, platelet number, clotting times, and
Chart 6.8
a blood flm should be evaluated to deter-
 Preprandial: 0-5 μmol/L
 mine whether the patient has a nonregener-
Canine
 Postprandial: <25 μmol/L
 ative anemia vs. chronic bleeding concerns.
 Preprandial: 0-5 μmol/L
 Feline
 Postprandial: <15 μmol/L
White Blood Cells
With concerns ofinfectious disease, changes
in white blood cells should be evaluated.
With certain forms of cancer (e.g., hepatic
Hepatic Clinical Diagnostics
 lymphoma), white blood cell elevations can
be severe, with extremely abnormal cytol-
 Because liver disease, trauma, and dysfunc-
ogy and high white blood cell. A blood
tion can be difficult to evaluate based on
smear is always suggested with sick ani-
blood work alone, the medical team must
mals to better assess cell morphology (red
Chapter 6: Liver Clinical Diagnostics and Disease 103
Algorithm 6.1. Hepatic clinical diagnosis
Is there evidence of liver disease?
History: inappetance, weight
 Liver disease may still be present. Further
loss, vomiting, diarrhea
No
clinical diagnostics may need to be assessed
 Physical signs: icterus, ascites,
to evaluate for liver damage or dysfunction.
neurologic signs, spontaneous
bruising
Evidence of liver
 ls bilirubin elevated
dysfunction:
Yes
to liver disease (no
Diagnosis may
Are liver damage enzymes (ALT,
Yes
evidence of IMHA
Yes
need to be made
AST, GGT, Alk Phos) elevated?
or gallbladder
through cytology
obstruction)?
and/ or biopsy.
No
Yes
No
Are bile acids abnormal?
Is BUN or albumin low?
Concerns of
Jiver damage
No
and liver
No
No obvious liver dysfunction.
dysfunction:
 Possible liver damage, recommend
Do paired
monitoring blood work and
Liver disease may still be present.
bile acids.
reevaluating patient if there are any
Further advanced clinical
changes.
diagnostics may be needed to
 assessliver damage or dysfunction.
blood cells and white blood cells) as well as
imals with liver damage or chronic disease
platelet numbers.
and try to assess hepatic function.
Platelets
Coagufafion Screen
With concerns of decreased clotting factors
 and an inability to finalize the clotting pro-
Evaluating clotting times—activated clot-
cess (coagulopathy), platelets counts should
ting time (ACT), partial thromboplastin
also be closely monitored. Animals should
time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin
be carefully assessed for bruising, and jugu-
time (APTT)—can help detect early trends
lar sticks should not be attempted if there is
of the patient's ability to clot blood (see
concern of a coagulopathy.
Chapter 14).
Chemistry
Abdominal Radiography
As discussed previously, blood work on a
Abdominal radiographs can help assess for
routine chemistry can be extremely variable
changes in hepatic size and shape, evidence
with acute or chronic liver disease, porta-
 of gallbladder for stones (cholelithe), and
caval shunts, and neoplasia. The medical
 any other changes in the abdomen that can
team's responsibility is to try to identify an-
104Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Abdominaf Ultrasound
cal team confirm diagnosis. Cellular or tis-
sue biopsy is possible through ultrasound-
Abdominal ultrasound can assess the inter-
 guided biopsy techniques.
 nal architecture of the abdominal organs
for changes suggestive of focal or diffuse
 hepatic disease, changes in the gallbladder
Exploratory Surgery
wall suggestive of infection or obstruction,
and identification of abnormal blood ves-
 In some cases, when ultrasonic biopsy
 sels that could suggest a portacaval shunt.
or fine needle aspirate is nondiagnostic,
It is important to note that changes in hep-
exploratory or laparoscopic surgery and
atic architecture can only suggest focal or
wedge or core biopsy of the liver may be
 diffuse disease and rarely helps the medi-
needed.
Pancreatic and Gastrointestinal
Diagnostics, and Disease
The gastrointestinal system is a tubular sys-
 sonography). However, there are specific di-
tem running from the animal's mouth to its
agnostics indicated once intestinal disease
rectum (Figure 7.1). Several regions within
has been identified.
this system have been specialized to help
break down and absorb nutrients, reabsorb
 Maldigestion/Malabsorption
water, and excrete toxins produced by the
Syndrome
kidneys and liver. The mouth, stomach, and
early small intestine (e.g., duodenum and
jejunum) function to break down the food-
Patients that have decreased ability to di-
stuff and absorb nutrients. The lower in-
 gest and absorb nutrients often present with
testine (ileum and large colon) is respon-
vomiting, weight loss, increased appetite,
sible for reabsorbing water, forming fecal
and soft cow-patty stools with or with-
material, and producing a source of water-
out the presence of thick, tarry, digested
soluble vitamins through fermentation in
blood (melena). These patients can develop
most domestic animals.
the following changes in their clinical diag-
The clinical diagnostic testing of the gas-
nostics.
trointestinal system is utilized when pa-
tients are having problems in digesting
Albumin
food (maldigestion) and absorbing nutri-
ents (malabsorption) and with concerns of
As discussed previously, low body albumin
intestinal bleeding. As discussed previously,
(hypoalbuminemia) can occur secondary to
patients with concerns of chronic intestinal
bleeding, renal disease, and liver disease.
disease must be evaluated based on their
 Patients with malabsorption/maldigestion
history, physical exam, complete blood and
disease (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease,
urine diagnostics, fecal examinations, and
lymphangectasia, intestinal neoplasia) can
advanced imaging (e.g., radiology or ultra-
have depletions in essential amino acids
105
106Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Venacava
Liver
Portal
vein、
Stomach
Pancreas
Spleen
Jejunum
Figure 7.1.  Illustration of the gastrointestinal system.
and proteins, producing hypoalbuminemia
Chart 7.1
(protein-losing enteropathy). Patients with
Canine
3.1-4.5 g/dL
a persistently low albumin levels should be
evaluated for chronic bleeding, renal loss,
Feline
2.4-4.1 g/dL
liver dysfunction, or chronic gastrointesti-
nal disease. Although blood levels of al-
Blood Folate Levels
bumin can vary from lab to lab, normal
albumin levels are generally as shown in 
Diseases that can affect chronic digestion
Chart 7.1.
can alter normal gastrointestinal bacterial
Chapter 7: Pancreatic and Cl Clinical Diagnostics, and Disease
populations and decrease normal bacte-
Complete Blood Count and Blood
rial fermentation. This change in bacte-
Film
rial populations can lead to overgrowth
of other pathogenic bacteria, which can
Patients with chronic intestinal bleeding
make gastrointestinal signs worse. Further,
 present mildly anemic with evidence of re-
with chronic decreased bacterial fermenta-
 generation in their blood film. Team mem-
tion and pathogenic bacteria overgrowth,
bers should evaluate blood films for nucle-
the production of the B vitamin folate de-
ated red blood cells, reticulocytes, Howell-
creases. Low blood folate levels can help
 Jolly bodies, and polychromasia, which
support the diagnosis of chronic intestinal
help to indicate that a regenerative ane-
disease. Although blood levels of folic acid
mia is occurring (Figure 7.2). It is impor-
can vary from lab to lab, normal levels are
tant to note that the only true hallmark
generally as shown in Chart 7.2.
of regeneration is a reticulocyte count; the
 other changes noted above help to support
Chart 7.2
evidence that a regenerative anemia is oc-
Canine
6.5-11.5 ng/ml
curring. With chronic bleeding, a decreased
platelet (thrombocytopenia) count may also
Feline
9.7-21.6 ng/ml
be observed.
Intestinal Bleeding
BUN and the BUN/Creatinine Ratio
Blood that accumulates in the intestine sec-
 In patients that present with chronic tarry
ondary to ulceration is digested and ab-
stool or blood vomiting (hematemesis),
sorbed like any other nutrient. Digestion
concerns of chronic intestinal ulceration
of red blood cells increases the amount of
and bleeding should be explored. Gastroin-
body ammonia, which then produces an in-
testinal ulceration can occur secondary to
creased BUN level (see Chapter 5). By com-
drug interactions (e.g., Nonsteroidal
an-
paring the amount of BUN to creatinine,
tinflammatory drugs, steroids), ulcer for-
this ratio can suggest an increased produc-
mation, tumors, or diseases that produce
tion of BUN that is not associated with
chronic bleeding problems. To help deter-
glomerular filtration. An elevation in this
mine whether the patient has chronic in-
ratio is not an absolute indication of in-
testinal bleeding, the medical team should
testinal bleeding because other factors may
evaluate the diagnostics in the following
 also increase BUN (e.g., high-protein meals)
sections.
without affecting creatinine levels.
[b
Figure 7.2. Evidence of a regenerative anemia: (a) nucleated red blood cells, (b) reticulocytes, (c) polychromasia.
108Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Albumin
Pancreas
As discussed previously, hypoalbuminemia
Pancreatitis
 can also be observed with chronic bleeding.
Pancreatitis is an inflammation or infec-
The pancreas sits in the cranial abdomen.
tion of the pancreas, producing a leak-
The right lobe lays lateral to the duode-
 age of lipase and amylase onto the organ
num extending from the middle part of the
surface. The release of these enzymes be-
right kidney to the pyloric region of the
gins an autodigestion of the pancreas re-
stomach.
The left lobe lays caudal to
sulting in worsening inflammation, severe
the stomach and perpendicular to the duo-
whole body illness, and the potential for sec-
 denum (see Figure 7.1). The pancreas func-
ondary organ disease (e.g., kidney and liver)
tions both as an exocrine and endocrine
and infection (sepsis). Classically, patients
organ. Exocrine glands, which play an
present with extremely painful abdomens,
important part in normal body functions
experiencing vomiting and diarrhea, and
(i.e., salivary gland, sweat gland, mammary
severely dehydrated. Further, if the swelling
gland), secrete chemicals through a duct
is severe,the gallbladder ducts that empty
network. The pancreas secretes two en-
through the pancreas and into the small in-
zymes, lipase and amylase, that aid in the
testine can become obstructed, producing
breakdown of foodstuff. Amylase cleaves
jaundice and secondary hepatic disease.
large sugar molecules into smaller single
sugars. Lipase breaks down fat into smaller
molecules so that they can be absorbed by
Pancreatic Exocrine Insufficiency (PEl)
the intestine. Lipase and amylase are pro-
PEI is a rare congenital or acquired dis-
duced in response to ingestion of food and
ease of the acinar cells resulting in a lack of
water and production of hydrochloric acid
production of exocrine pancreatic enzymes.
by the stomach. Both enzymes are critical
These animals suffer from a severe mal-
to the digestive process.
absorption/maldigestion syndrome because
Endocrine glands secrete hormones di-
they are not able to digest normal nutri-
rectly into the bloodstream that affect other
 ents. Patients usually appear very happy and
organs in the body (ie., pituitary, thyroid,
energetic, but are very thin with decreased
sex organs). The endocrine pancreas pro-
muscle mass, are always hungry, and have
duces insulin and glucagon, which help
severe
 cow-patty diarrhea. The congeni-
maintain normal blood sugar levels. Insulin
tal disease is seen most commonly in the
is released in times of increasing blood sugar
German shepherd breed. The acquired dis-
to stimulate the conversion of sugar into
 ease can often occur after severe chronic de-
glycogen (liver) and fat. Glucagon is pro-
structive pancreatitis.
duced in response to lower blood sugar
levels to stimulate the conversion of glyco-
Pancreatic Tumors
 gen and fat back into glucose. Insulin and
glucagon are produced by specialized re-
 Pancreatic tumors are rarely seen in the fe-
gions of cells called the islets of Langerhans
line and canine, closely mimicking pancre-
(Figure 7.3).
atitis. Patients present with chronic vom-
 Pancreatic disease can affect both the
iting and diarrhea, abdominal tenderness,
 exocrine or endocrine components of the
dehydration, and depression.
 pancreas. Common pancreatic
As with liver disease, clinical diagnos-
exocrine
diseases are reviewed in the following
tic blood work is a large part of the di-
sections.
 agnostic protocol; however, in the case of
intestinal loss; determine that it
function
Evaluate for Gl blood
nine ratio
bile acidosis
loss: urinalysis
blood
40
creatil
yrmes.
BUN/
Fecal
Renal 
Do clinical diagnostic evaluation:
evaluation
smea
o
flotat
Fecal
dA
u
。
testi
gastro
ofthe
Clinical diagnostics 
suBs
appetite
gas
lgorithm7.1.
110ClinicalPathology for the Veterinary Team
Pancreatic acini
Alpha
Redblood
cells
Betacell
Islets of Langerhans
 Figure 7.3. Small section of the pancreas showing the pancreatic acinar cells, which produce lipase and amylase
(exocrine) and the islet of Langerhans (endocrine), which produces insulin and glucagon.
pancreatitis, baseline blood work may not
smears for increased numbers of imma-
indicate the severity of the syndrome and
ture neutrophils (bands). These patients can
often blood work is nonconclusive. Clinical
have a normal white blood cell count ini-
 diagnostics for the exocrine pancreas can
tially, but the increase in bands can reflect
include those reviewed in the following sec-
acute inflammatory or infectious changes
tions.
(Figure 7.4). With chronic exocrine pancre-
atic disease, the complete blood count can
be normal.
Complete Blood Count
Dependent on the disease and its acuteness
Pancreatic Exocrine Insufficiency
 or chronicity, changes in the complete blood
 count can be variable. The following sec-
Generally, the complete blood count can be
tions review changes that can be noticed.
normal with patients who have PEI.
Pancreatitis
Pancreatic Tumor
With acute disease, dehydration can pro-
duce elevation in the red blood cell count.
Animals with pancreatic tumors may pro-
Further, secondary to inflammation or in-
duce chronic (nonregenerative) anemia due
fection, elevations in the white blood cell
to the progressive disease consuming pre-
count can be observed. As discussed previ-
cursors necessary to produce normal red
 ously, team members should evaluate blood
blood cells (anemia of chronic disease).
Chapter 7: Pancreatic and Cl Clinical Diagnostics, and Disease  111
Pink Cytoplasm
Granules
Unsegmented
 Nucleus
Figure 7.4. Image of an immature neutrophil (band). Band neutrophils can be identified by their unsegmented
nucleus, pink cytoplasm, and evident vacuoles. Increasing levels of band neutrophils can suggest massive whole
body infection even before increases in the total white blood cell count.
Clinical Chemistry
of feline pancreatitis. Although blood levels
of Lipase can vary from lab to lab, normal
 levels are generally as shown in Chart 7.4.
With pancreatic exocrine disease, patients
may
have severe disease evident, and
Chart 7.4
changes in the blood chemistry can be
Canine
normal.
10-500 IU/L
Feline
10-195 IU/L
Pancreatitis
Canine
Feline
 Evaluate the serum. Team members should
begin by evaluating for the presence of
Blood chemistry and serum can be com-
lipemia, which can suggest altered fat
pletely normal even with severe disease.
metabolism.
Amylase. Increased serum amylase can be
a suggestive indicator of acute pancreatitis
Pancreatic Insufficiency
is the canine. It is not helpful in evaluation
of feline pancreatitis. Although blood levels
Chemistry results are generally within nor-
of amylase can vary from lab to lab, normal
mal listed parameters.
levels are generally as shown in Chart 7.3.
Chart 7.3
Pancreatic Tumor
Canine
500-1500 IU/L
With the concern of pancreatic cancer, li-
Feline
500-1500 IU/L
pase and amylase may show significant el-
evations in the routine chemistry. It is im-
 Lipase. Increased serum lipase can be a
portant to note that a normal lipase and
suggestive indicator of acute pancreatitis is
 amylase level do not rule out the possibility
the canine. It is not helpful in evaluation
of pancreatic cancer.
112Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Trypsinlike Immunoassay (TLI)
Ultrasound
TLI is a blood test that allows the medical
 Ultrasound studies of the pancreatic region
team to assess the levels of trypsin, a prote-
 are an important diagnostic indicated in
olytic enzyme in the body that is activated
evaluating changes in the pancreas that sug-
by normal pancreatic activity. In the canine,
gest disease, abscess, or cancer. Further,
increased TLI levels can be suggestive of
ultrasound-guided fine needle aspirates can
chronic pancreatitis or pancreatic cancer. In
 be helpful in identifying pancreatic disease.
the canine, decreased TLI levels suggest lack
 of lipase and amylase production strongly
Secondary disease concerns due to
 indicating PEI.
diseases of the exocrine pancreas occur
largely as a result of severe chronic or acute
pancreatitis. With pancreatitis, the severe
whole body inflammation and possible
Canine Pancreatic Lipase Inhibition
secondary infection can produce conditions
Test (cPLI)
reviewed in the following sections (see
Algorithm 7.2).
The cPLI is used as a screening test for pan-
creatitis. Pancreatic lipase inhibitor levels
Renal Failure
increase dramatically, suggesting that pan-
creatic inflammation and irritation are oc-
 curring. There are no noted changes in cPLI
 Renal damage occurs as dehydration from
 levels with PEI or pancreatic tumor.
pancreatitis produces decreased blood flow
through the kidneys, producing hypoten-
sion and decreased glomerular filtration.
Decreased glomerular filtration (see Chap-
Blood Folate Levels
ter 5) causes a worsening azotemia and
worsens dehydration, which can develop
As discussed previously, decreasing levels of
into an acute renal failure.
folate can suggest alteration in normal bac-
terial synthesis in the gastrointestinal sys-
Gallbladder Obstruction
tem, which can support a chronic inflam-
mation of the pancreas and gastrointesti-
nal system. This test is often used with
With severe swelling or infection of the pan-
other clinical diagnostic test to help confirm
creas, the bile ducts, which empty into the
 chronic pancreatitis.
intestine through the pancreas, can be oc-
cluded. The patient will start to become
icteric and weak as toxins from the gall-
Radiology
bladder cannot empty into the small intes-
tine. This change signifes a worsening in
the condition and prognosis.
Although difficult to interpret with abdom-
inal radiographs, appearance of the pan-
Hepatic Failure
creatic region and position of the duo-
denum may suggest enlargement of the
pancreas due to inflammation or secondary
Continued dehydration, decreased blood
infections.
flow, and potential secondary ascending
Chapter 7: Pancreatic and CI Clinical Diagnostics, and Disease  113
Algorithm 7.2. Acute exocrine pancreatic patient (pancreatitis)—-canine.
The patient shows signs of
Check clinical diagnostics:
acute pancreatitis:
Serum: lipemia (?)
Vomiting
CBC: increased RBC (dehydration)
Diarrhea
Increased WBC (inflammation or infection)
Anorexia
 Blood film: increased bands
Painful abdomen
Chemistry
0 Increased lipase and increased amylase
0 Increased albumin (dehydration)
CPLI: increase
Evaluate advanced modalities:
Radiographs appearance of pancreas, position of
duodenum
 Utrasound: changes in pancreatic tissue
Metabolic acidosis:
Acute renal failure:
 Decreasing blood pH
 If severe disease is evident, monitor for
Azotemia
Decreased sodium bicarbonate
secondary concerns.
 Dehydration
Increased anion gap
Gallbladder obstruction:
lcterus
Ascending hepatic disease:
 Increasing abdominal pain
Increased liver damage enzymes
and weakness
Decreased liver function
Increase in enzymes suggesting cholestasis
(increased bilirubin, GGT, and Alk Phos)
Decreased clotting factors
infection from the pancreas can produce
Chapter 12). Clinically, team members will
a secondary hepatitis. Acute hepatic dys-
identify metabolic acidosis by observing a
function can lead to decreased clotting fac-
change in blood pH (pH < 7.25), a nor-
tors, an inability to detoxify toxins, and
 mal or decreased partial pressure of carbon
decreased bacterial clearance.
dioxide (pCOz), decreasing levels of blood
bicarbonate levels, and a decreasing base
excess.
Metabolic Acidosis
With chronic pancreatic disease, chronic
destruction of the pancreas can produce de-
The loss of normal glomerular filtration, in-
struction of either exocrine or endocrine tis-
creased body toxins, and vomiting and di-
sue. The following sections review diseases
arrhea that can occur with pancreatitis can
that can occur secondary to chronic pancre-
develop a serious metabolic acidosis (see
atic disease (see Algorithms 7.3 & 7.4).
114Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Algorithm 7.3. Chronic exocrine pancreatic patient (pancreatitis)—-canine.
The patient shows signs of
 Check clinical diagnostics:
acute pancreatitis:
Chronic vomiting
Serum: lipemia (?)
CBC: usually WNL
Weight loss
 Blood film: usually WNL
 Episodic weak ness
Chemistry: can be WNL
 CPLl: possible increase
TLl: possible increase
Blood folate levels: 1ow
Evaluate advanced modalities:
 Ultrasound: changes in pancreatic tissue
 If severe disease is evident, monitor for
secondary concerns.
Diabetes mellitus:
Pancreatic exocrine
insufficiency:
Hyperglycemia
Lipemia
Urine glucose
 Altered liver enzymes
Decreased TL]
 Altered cholesterol
Diabetes Mellitus-Endocrine
tries to remove the excess sugar by excret-
Disease of the Pancreas
ing it in the urine and transforming it into
fat metabolically. The increased demand for
fat production overwhelms the chemical in-
Disease of the endocrine pancreas results
 termediaries necessary, and the body can
from loss of production of or lack of
produce only a chemical toxin called ace-
tissue response to insulin-producing dia-
 tone, which is a ketone. Type I Diabetes is
betes mellitus. There are three potential
due to exhaustion of the islet cells and is
causes of diabetes mellitus in the canine and
seen more commonly in canines and obese
feline.
animals.
Type I Diabetes
Type II Diabetes
Type I diabetes results from a lack of in-
Type II Diabetes is produced by an in-
sulin production causing increased glucose
sulin resistance by peripheral tissue, slowed
levels and, in some cases, ketone produc-
production of insulin, or decreased pro-
 tion. As insulin levels decrease, the patient
duction of insulin. Insulin has decreased
Chapter 7: Pancreatic and Cl Clinical Diagnostics, and Disease  115
 The patient shows signs of acute
 Check clinical diagnostics:
pancreatitis:
CBC: usually WNL
Chronic vomiting
+
 Blood film: can be WNL
Weight loss
Chemistry: changes in amylase and
Chronic diarrhea
lipase—-not reliable
Possibly no symptoms
CPLI: (?)
Possibly no changes in clinical diagnostics
Evaluate advanced modalities:
 Ultrasound: changes in pancreatic tissue
±biopsy
If severe disease is evident, monitor
 for secondary con cerns.
Diabetes mellitus (?):
Hyperglycemia
Urine glucose
Altered liver enzymes
Altered cholesterol
effect on peripheral tissue producing hy-
focused on blood and urine samples. Clin-
perglycemia, but typically this form is not
ical diagnostic changes in the diabetic pa-
severe enough to produce ketones. This syn-
 tient are reviewed in the following sections
 drome is much more common in felines and
(see Algorithm 7.5).
if continued chronically enough, these pa-
tients can become Type I diabetics.
Compfete Blood Count
Type Ill Diabetes
Typically in diabetic animals, there are no
overall changes in complete blood count.
This type of diabetes is secondary to a
primary underlying disease. Common dis-
eases that can produce diabetes mellitus are
Chemistry
chronic pancreatitis, hyperadrenocorticism
(Cushing's disease), hyperthyroidism, and
Serum
animals on specific prolonged drug therapy
(e.g., estrogens, steroids).
 Due to decreased ability to move sugar into
Clinical diagnostics to determine whether
fat, many patients will have chronic lipemic
diabetes is evident in the patient are largely
serum.
 Recheck blood glucose
 ketoacidotic patients.
 once patient relax es.
 Fructosamine levels
ldentify diabetic
samples
idism)
chemistry
only
level
(hyp
whether
ood folate]
2
diagnosticss
glur
luate for
mellite
Hyperglycemia
firm
roid
1n
Endocrine pancreatic patient (Diabetes
clinical
2
Weight loss
mellitus
Polyuria
Algorithm 7.5.
Chapter 7: Pancreatic and CI Clinical Diagnostics, and Disease
117
Blood Sugar
Repeat Blood Sugar
A persistent hyperglycemia (high blood
 Repeat the blood sugar testing later during
sugar) is the most notable change observed.
the visit once the pet has seemed to calm
Stress can also cause elevations in blood glu-
down.
cose as well. Although blood levels of Glu-
cose can vary from lab to lab, normal levels
are generally as shown in Chart 7.5.
Perform a Fructosamine Level Test
See section on fructosamine levels below.
Chart 7.5
Canine
60-125 mg/dL
Liver Enzymes
 Feline
70-150 mg/dL
Mild to moderate elevations in liver en-
zymes (i.e., alanine transferase, aspartate
transferase) can be observed with chronic
In general, the medical team should be
diabetes.
Also secondary to altered fat
more concerned if the patient is a dia-
metabolism, blood cholesterol level eleva-
betic whose glucose levels are the follo-
tions can be observed.
wing:
Canines: Glucose > 200 mg/dL tend to be
Urinalysis
a true hyperglycemia.
Felines: Glucose < 300 mg/dL tend to be a
The evidence of a persistent glucosuria can
true hyperglycemia.
support the finding of hyperglycemia to
confirm the diagnosis of diabetes. With
concerns of Type I diabetes, the pres-
If a severely stressed patient presents with
ence of urine ketones (acetone) confirm-
questionable elevation in blood sugar, the
ing the diagnosis of ketoacidotic diabetes.
medical team should recommend the fol-
 Diabetic patients also can develop sec-
lowing tests.
 ondary bacterial bladder infections due to
the glucosuria increasing bacterial growth
proteinuria, hematuria, and elevations of
Check the Patient's Urine
white blood cells, urinary crystals, and
Evidence of urine glucose can help deter-
bacteria evident in the urine sediment. In
mine whether the patient is diabetic. How-
many cases these urinary tract infections
ever, it is important to note that stressed
must also be eliminated to help chronic
patients (especially felines) with blood glu-
control of insulin need in the diabetic
cose above 240 mg/dL can spill some sugar
patient.
into the urine, producing both a hyper-
glycemia and low-level glucose in the urine
(glucosuria). The owner should bring in 
Fructosamine Levels
serial samples of urine collected at home
to determine whether the patient has glu-
Fructosamine is a slowly metabolized blood
cosuria evident in a nonstressed environ-
sugar that allows the veterinarian to deter-
ment.
mine how the patient is metabolizing body
118Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
sugar stores over the previous 7 to 10 days.
that the patient may be given too much in-
Animals with significantly elevated fruc-
sulin, producing periods of hypoglycemia.
tosamine levels can suggest decreased con-
Blood levels of fructosamine can vary from
 trol of insulin production and utilization.
lab to lab, and reference ranges depend on 
 Decreased fructosamine levels can suggest
the method and instrument used.
Electrolyte Physiology, Function,
and Derangement
This chapter focuses on the common elec-
els between 140-155 mEq/ml and main-
trolytes monitored in an in-hospital clinical
tain 27 times more sodium then potas-
diagnostic evaluation, their function, and
sium in the extracellular fluid. The adrenal-
the conditions noted when their concentra-
mineralocorticoid axis (see Chapter 11)
tion is deranged.
maintains the balance of sodium to potas-
sium by producing a mineralocorticoid
 called aldosterone. This hormone is respon-
Sodium
sible for the reabsorption of sodium and
expulsion of potassium in the distal convo-
luted tubules in the kidney (Figure 8.2). This
Sodium is the most abundant positively
hormone above all other adrenal hormones
charged ion in the extracellular fluid that
helps to regulate electrical potential in
is needed for normal handling of stress and
body maintenance. Without sufficient lev-
the body. The movement of extracellular
 els of this hormone, an animal can develop
 sodium into the cell and intracellular potas-
 a life-threatening crisis.
sium out of the cell stimulates an electrical
rhythm. When the body needs to produce
Although blood levels of sodium can vary
from lab to lab, levels generally are as
an electrical rhythm for muscular contrac-
tion, nerve depolarization, heart contrac-
shown in Chart 8.1.
tion, and millions of other muscular and
Chart 8.1
neurological activities, sodium and potas-
sium switch places to produce the electrical
Canine
142-150 mEq/L
pulse necessary for the action (Figure 8.1).
Feline
147-162 mEq/L
 The balance of sodium to potassium is
critical to maintaining normal electrical
potential and physiological balance.
The
Derangements in sodium are typically
body must maintain sodium serum lev-
related to conditions that affect fluid
119
120Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Sodium (Na)
Sodium (Na)
Potassium(K+)
Potassium(K+)
Cell
Cell
Electrical potential
 Figure 8.1. Illustration of sodium and potassium role within the cell to produce an electrical rhythm. These
 electrical waves maintain normal function in neurological, cardiovascular, and muscular actions.
concentration in the body. Low blood
moderate to severe vomiting and diarrhea.
sodium levels, hyponatremia, is related
Hyponatremia can also be observed in
to factors that increase solute loss in the
association with patients with increased
body, most commonly seen in patients with
blood potassium, hyperkalemia, and in
Urinary
Distal
Bowman'scapsule
space
convoluted
Parietallayer-
Viscerallayer-
tubule
Arteriole
Distal ConvolutedTubule
Efferent.
arteriole
Interlobular
artery-
Glomerular
BUN/
Capillary Tuft
ammonia
Afferent
arteriole
Sodium
Proximal-
Aldoster
convoluted
tubule
Potassium
Creatinine
duct
Loop of Henle
Figure 8.2. Illustration of distal tubule of a nephron of the kidney. Here the hormone aldosterone controls the 
reabsorbtion of sodium and expulsion of potassium from the body.
Chapter 8: Electrolyte Function and Derangement
121
patients  with decreased production of
 hypokalemia are reviewed in the following
aldosterone,
hypoadrenocorticism.
Hy-
sections.
and weak; however, with hyponatremia,
 seizures and comas have been reported.
Gastrointestinal Disease
Increased serum  sodium 
concentra-
tion, hypernatremia, is observed rarely
Diseases such as colitis, parvoviral infec-
in patients that ingest too
much
salt,
tion, panleukopenia, and gastric foreign
 body severe can produce a profound hy-
fluids, or have conditions where patients
pokalemia (<2.5 mEq/dL) due to significant
have increased fluid loss but maintain
fluid losses from vomiting and diarrhea.
Xpoq aenbape
sodium(
concentrations.
Hypernatremia is extremely rare; however,
hypernatremic patients
have increased
Renaf Disease
thirst (polydipsia), become disoriented, and
have seizures and comas
Animals with chronic kidney disease lose
the ability to concentrate urine in the re-
nal medulla (see Chapter 5). To compen-
Potassium
sate, patients increase their fluid consump-
tion and urine output, which increases the
amount of potassium excreted.
As discussed above, sodium and potas-
sium are responsible for production of
electrical energy in the body. However,
Hospitafized Animals on IV Fluids
unlike sodium, derangements in potas-
sium are more common and can produce
Hospitalized patients on intravenous fluid
serious physical symptoms and potential
support that are not able to eat can develop
life-threatening concerns. Although blood
hypokalemia due to the increased IV fluid
levels of potassium can vary from lab to
and urinary output.
lab, normal levels generally are as shown
in Chart 8.2.
Diabetic Ketoacidotic (DKA)
Chart 8.2
Canine
4.0-5.4 mEq/L
DKA patients must receive regular injec-
tions (every 1-3 hours) or constant rate
Feline
3.7-5.2 mEq/L
infusions of short-acting insulin (Humilin-
N?) in order to lower blood glucose and
ketone levels in the blood. As insulin in-
Hypokalemia
creases absorption of glucose, potassium
also is carried into the cell. This rapid inter-
nalization can make the patient profoundly
Hypokalemia, potassium <2.5 mEq/L, is
hypokalemic.
associated with diseases that increase fluid
loss (i.e., vomiting or diarrhea, chronic re-
Hypokalemia is generally not life threat-
nal disease, animals on intravenous fluids)
ening, but patients are generally weak, de-
or patients that are being treated for dia-
pressed, anorexic, and with severe condi-
 betes ketoacidosis in the hospital (see Chap-
tions such as have ventroflexion of the neck
ter 7). Common diseases associated with
(Figure 8.3).
122 Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
the kidneys while reabsorbing sodium (see
Chapter 11).
Overadministration of
Potassium-Supplemented Fluids
 Patients on intravenous fluids that are
supplemented with potassium chloride or
other potassium-containing additives can
develop severe hyperkalemia when patients
are given more than 0.5 mEq/kg/hr. To
avoid this condition, patients should never
receive boluses that also contain potassium
additive.
Figure 8.3. Image of a cat unable to lift its neck due
Although rare, there are nonpatho-
to severe hypokalemia (ventroflexion of the neclk).
logic conditions that produce a non-life-
threatening or artifactual hyperkalemia.
Hyperkalemia
The medical team should consider all poten-
tial causes, true and artifactual, to assure the
identification of the truly hyperkalemic pa-
High blood potassium level, hyperkalemia,
tient. Some causes of non-life-threatening
is a life-threatening derangement of the
body's electrolyte balance when potassium
or artifactual hyperkalemia are discussed in
the following sections.
levels exceed 5.7 mEq/mL. Hyperkalemia
can occur when patients are unable to
remove  potassium normally
from the
Breed Specificity
blood into the urine, are given too much
intravenous potassium supplementation,
The Akita and other Japanese breeds have
 or cannot remove urine from their body.
red blood cells with a unique Na/K pump.
The most common diseases that produce
This pump continues to move potassium
 hyperkalemia are reviewed in the following
out of the cell after blood samples have been
sections.
collected. These patients will have increases
in their serum potassium as long as the
 serum and clot are in contact. Prompt sep-
Feline Lower Urinary Tract Disease
aration of the serum and red cells is needed
(FLUTD) or Urinary Obstruction
to obtain a true serum potassium concen-
tration in these breeds.
Observed mostly in male felines, urinary-
obstructed patients are unable to eliminate
potassium from the body and can develop
Gastroinfestinaf Disease
severe hyperkalemia.
 Patients suffering from chronic gastroin-
testinal disease or parasitism can have
Hypoadrenocorticism
significant
hyponatremia
and hyper-
kalemia. The artifactual hyperkalemia is
As discussed previously, patients with de-
caused by the translocation of potassium
creased aldosterone production are unable
in exchange for hydrogen ions by severe
to produce the excretion of potassium in
 metabolic acidosis. The clinical chemistry
Chapter 8: Electrolyte Function and Derangement 123
s ai re A sd as jo
Clinical Chemistry
to the hypoadrenocortical patient (Ad-
disonian). The only way to differentiate
The following changes in clinical chemistry
between these two diseases is an ACTH
should be evaluated if hyperkalemia is ob-
stimulation test (see Chapter 11).
served.
Potassium Supplementation
Hypoglycemia
As discussed previously, patients that re-
 Patients suffering from an acute hypoad-
ceive a bolus of potassium-rich fluids or are
renocorticism (Addisonian) syndrome can
on high levels of oral potassium supplemen-
become significantly hypoglycemic. Many
tation can become hyperkalemic.
patients with significant hypoglycemia
(<60 mg/dL) may many need emergency
supplementation.
Changes in Peripheral White Blood
Cell and Platelet Concentrations
Azofemia
 In rare conditions, patients with severe el-
Hypoadrenocorticism
evation in their white blood cell (white
blood cell count >200,000) or platelet
Addisonian patients lose the ability to con-
counts (>1,000,000) can have significantly
centrate urine due to the inability of the
renal medulla to produce a high sodium
increased serum potassium due to loss of
potassium from these cells after the sample
gradient. These patients develop dehydra-
tion, decreasing glomerular filtration and
is obtained.
producing a prerenal azotemia (see Chapter
Hyperkalemia can be a life-threatening
5). Unlike normal renal azotemia, the Ad-
 condition affecting primarily nerves and
disonian patient will have an azotemia and
skeletal and cardiac muscle. The following
dilute urine that will correct with treatment.
are signs associated with hyperkalemia:
FLUTD or Urinary-Obstructed Patients
Muscle fasiculations
These patients develop postrenal azotemia
Pulse deficits
due to the inability to remove urine from the
 Decreased mentation
body. These patients have severe azotemia,
Bradycardia
have concentrated urine (initially), and are
Cardiac arrhythmia
hyperkalemic.
 Flaccid paralysis
Death
Sodium/Potassium Ratio (Na/K)
Because hyperkalemia can produce seri-
ous life-threatening syndromes, the medical
In the Addisonian patient, due to the
team must be quick and effective at evaluat-
 inability of the kidneys to reabsorb sodium
ing blood work for the cause of the hyper-
and expel potassium, the patient becomes
kalemia as well as secondary complications
hyponatremic
and hyperkalemic.
The
that can occur. Key clinical diagnostic tests
electrolyte balance is described by the
for affected patients are reviewed in the fol-
sodium/potassium ratio. The normal ratio
lowing sections.
of sodium to potassium should always be
124Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
No P
No P
QRS
QRS
Figure 8.4. A sample of an EKG strip with no apparent P waves. Loss of the P wave can support the diagnosis of
hyperkalemia.
>25:1. When the ratio of Na/K is <23:1,
changes in the chloride population. Al-
Addison's 
 disease should be
 suspected.
though blood levels of chloride can vary
There are conditions that (
produce
from lab to lab, normal levels generally are
can
significant hyperkalemia without hypona-
as shown in Chart 8.3.
tremia. If the Na/K ratio is low but the
patient is not hyponatremic, Addison's
Chart 8.3
disease is unlikely.
Canine
105-117 mEq/L
 Feline
114-126 mEq/L
Electrocardiogram
Similarly, physical symptoms of high chlo-
Another concern that supports severe serum
ride (hyperchloremia) and low chloride
hyperkalemia is the loss of the P wave (Fig-
blood levels (hypochloremia) are the same
ure 8.4) in a normal EKG strip. Hyper-
as seen with changes in the sodium blood
kalemia can produce a small and wider P
level.
wave until it disappears entirely. If team
members are concerned about severe hyper-
kalemia and rapid measurement of potas-
sium concentration is not available, evalua-
Calcium
tion of the EKG strip can be used to support
a diagnosis of hyperkalemia.
Calcium is needed by almost every cell in
the body to control cellular activity, aid in
Chloride
muscular contraction, help heart function,
and aid nerve conduction as well as other
body functions. Changes in calcium con-
Chloride is an abundant anion in the ex-
centration in the body can be observed in
tracellular fluid.It is closely associated
hormonal disease, specific types of cancer,
with sodium, and changes that produce
nutritional disease, renal disease, and repro-
hypo-/hypernatremia also produce similar
ductive disease. Blood calcium exists in an
Chapter 8: Electrolyte Function and Derangement
inactivated protein-bound form (bound to
albumin), an active ionized form, and also
bound in complex with other substances.
Change in blood calcium concentration can
produce serious life-threatening disease. Al-
though blood levels of Calcium can vary
from lab to lab, normal levels generally are
as shown in Chart 8.4.
Chart 8.4
Canine
9.2-11.2 mg/dL
 Feline
7.2-11.4 mg/dL
Hypocalcemia
Fgure 8.5. Image of a female dog with eclampsia.
Low blood calcium, hypocalcemia, is rarely
Hypocalcemia prevents normal muscle contraction,
seen in disease conditions of the dog and cat.
so the patients often appear rigid with a sawhorselike
Most commonly, patients that are hypoal-
stance and muscle fasiculations.
buminemic from other causes (e.g., chronic
bleeding and liver, renal or intestinal dis-
Restlessness
ease), will have an artifactual hypocalcemia.
Nervousness
This is due to the fact that a large percent-
Whining
age of blood calcium is complexed with al-
 Muscular tremors
bumin; therefore, a decreased albumin level
Slow heart rate (bradycardia)
can produce a hypocalcemia state. Patho-
Walking stiffly (Figure 8.5)
logic hypocalcemia is most commonly asso-
Seizurelike activity
ciated with those conditions reviewed in the
 Rapid respiratory rates
following sections.
Convulsions
 High body temperature (secondary to
muscular spasms)
Eclampsia, Postparturient Hypocalcemia
 Eclampsia is a serious condition of the preg-
Acute/Chronic Renal Failure
nant dog shortly after pregnancy due
to
increased demands of blood calcium sec-
Patients with acute/chronic renal failure can
ondary to lactation. Once lactation begins,
 develop hypocalcemia.
calcium levels fall rapidly and the patient
cannot compensate, and the muscular, car-
Ethylene Glycol Intoxication
diac, and neurologic systems are severely af-
fected. The disease is more common in small
Antifreeze intoxication can also produce
breed dogs, more predominantly during the
hypocalcemia.
frst litter, and lactating females are usu-
ally affected within the first 2 weeks after
birth. It is important to note that eclamptic
Hypercalcemia
patients can also be severely hypoglycemic.
Signs occur acutely and the owners will usu-
High blood levels of calcium, hypercal-
ally report the following clinical signs:
cemia, is a more serious disease concern
126
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
potentially affecting renal, gastrointesti-
secondary to disease conditions. However,
nal, cardiac, and other soft tissues of the
similar to potassium, significant hypophos-
body. Prolonged hypercalcemia can pro-
photemia can result from acid/base imbal-
duce abnormal calcification of the body,
ance and aggressive insulin therapy when
leading to kidney failure, bladder stone
treating a diabetic ketoacidotic animal. Pa-
formation (calcium oxalate), altered gas-
tients on prolonged short-acting insulin
trointestinal function, abnormal contrac-
therapy (>24 hours) can develop a signifi-
 tility, and hypertension. Hypercalcemia is
cant hypophosphotemia, and serum phos-
produced from specific types of cancer
phorus levels <1.0 mg/dL can result in a
(hypercalcemia of malignancy—-e.g., lym-
hemolytic crisis. Signs associated with de-
phoma, leukemia, anal gland adenocar-
creased phosphorus concentration include
cinoma), overproduction of a calcium-
the following:
releasing hormone—parathyroid hormone
(PTH), acute renal failure, types of rat
poison ingestion, hypoadrenocorticism, and
specific infectious diseases (e.g., blastomy-
Pale MM
cosis). Typically, physical signs observed
Rapid respiratory and cardiac rates
+
 Red urine and serum
are based the underlying disease producing
the hypercalcemia. Although not an emer-
Spherocyte formation (Figure 8.6)
 gency finding, team members identifying a
+
Weakness
Depression
hypercalcemic patient should discuss their
concerns with the veterinarian.
Phosphorus
Similar to calcium, phosphorus is a mineral
integral to many cell functions including
bone formation, energy metabolism, muscle
Spherocytes
 contraction, and acid/base balance. Phos-
phorus is absorbed in the diet and stored
with calcium in a complex architecture that
gives bone its strength. Phosphorus is also
a key element needed for energy production
in the cell. Although blood levels of phos-
phorus can vary from lab to lab, normal
 levels generally are as shown in Chart 8.5.
Chart 8.5
Canine
2.3-5.5 mg/dL
 Feline
3.0-7.0 mg/dL
Hypophosphotemia
Figure 8.6. Concerns of a hemolytic anemia pro-
Decreased phosphorus concentration hy-
 duced by hypophosphotemia produces spherocytes in
 pophosphotemia is not generally produced
the blood film.
Chapter 8: Electrolyte Function and Derangement 127
Table 8.1. Electrolyte abnormalities, their causes, and their secondary concerns.
Element 
 Normal Finding
 Presence of Abnormality Suggests
Sodium
 Canine: 142-1 50 mEq/L
Hyponatremia: Associated with loss of solute from vomiting and
 Feline: 147-162 mEq/L 
diarrhea and hypoadrenocorticism. Evaluate potassium levels.
 Hypernatremia: Associated with increased intake and loss of
large quantities of fluids.
Potassium
Canine: 4.0-5.4 mEq/L
Hypokalemia: Associated with chronic gastrointestinal loss
 Feline: 3.7-5.2 mEq/L
(vomiting/diarrhea), chronic renal disease, and long-term IV
fluid therapy. Severe hypokalemia can be associated with 
treatment of the DKA patient.
Hyperkalemia:
● Artifactual hyperkalemia can be associated with specific
 breeds (Japanese canine breeds), chronic intestinal/parasitic
 disease, and severe abnormalities in white blood cell count 
and platelet count.
● Disease: Associated with hypoadrenocorticism and urinary
 obstruction. Evaluate sodium level.
Chloride 
Canine: 105-117 mEq/L 
Hypochloremia: Closely associated with causes of
 Feline: 114-126 mEgq/L
hyponatremia and loss of solute.
Hyperchloremia: Closely associated with hypernatremia and 
 increased intake and loss of large quantities of fluids.
Calcium
Canine: 9.2-11.2 mg/dL
 Hypocalcemia: Associated with eclampsia, acute/chronic renal
 Feline: 7.2-11.4 mg/dL
failure, and ethylene glycol intoxication.
Hypercalcemia: Associated with specific types of cancers, acute
 renal failure, overproduction of parathyroid hormone.
hypoadrenocorticism, specific rodenticides, and specific types 
of infection.
Phosphorus
Canine: 2.3-5.5 mg/dL
Hypophosphotemia: Associated with the treatment of the DKA
 Feline: 3.0-7.0 mg/dL 
patient. If levels are <1.0 mg/dL, hypophosphotemia can
produce a hemolytic anemia.
Hyperphosphotemia: Associated with decreased excretion of
 phosphorus from the kidneys secondary to renal disease and 
failure. Can be also associated with diseases that produce
severe prerenal and postrenal azotemia (see Chapter 5).
Hyperphosphotemia
hyperphosphotemia can also be
associ-
ated with diseases
that
produce
severe
Increased levels of serum phosphorus
prerenal and postrenal
_azotemia
(see
(hyperphosphotemia) are most commonly
Chapter S). Physical symptoms of
hy-
associated with decreased
excretion
of
 perphosphotemia are dependent on the
phosphorus from the kidneys secondary
underlying disease causing the aberration
to renal disease and failure. F
However,
(Table 8.1).
Components of the Urinalysis
The urinalysis is one of the most impor-
if a urine culture is anticipated. The pre-
tant tests available for evaluating an ill
ferred collection methods are cystocente-
patient, as well as for monitoring well pa-
sis and catheterization. Less useful methods
tients. The test is inexpensive, but it re-
are free-catch and bladder expression. Se-
quires a skilled technician. It is highly rec-
cretions from the lower urinary tract affect
ommended that this test is done in-house
both free catch and bladder expression. If
because fresh urine that is evaluated within
the only way to obtain a sample is with a
2-4 hours of collection will provide the
free catch, a midstream urine catch is pre-
most valid findings. There are many param-
ferred to decrease contamination. Regard-
eters on the chemistry profle that cannot be
less, if the examination of the urine reveals
interpreted without a urinalysis. The evalu-
abnormal findings such as bacteria or in-
ation of renal function values, protein con-
creased protein, a cystocentesis or catheter-
centration, and metabolic function requires
ized sample must be obtained to confirm
information that is provided in the urinal-
that the abnormalities are related to disease
ysis. The complete urinalysis is the evalua-
in the kidneys or urinary bladder. An ad-
tion of the physical (color, clarity, and spe-
ditional problem with bladder expression is
cific gravity), chemical, and formed element
the small but real possibility of a ruptured
characteristics of urine.
bladder if excessive pressure is used or the
 bladder wall is compromised.
The timing of a urinalysis can be im-
Obtaining the Sample
 portant in obtaining the most information
from a urine collection. A first morning
Sampling technique has a significant effect
sample (obtained just after the patient is
on the results of the urinalysis and their
taken out of its cage in the morning) will
interpretation. A sterile container should
 provide the best evaluation of concentrat-
be used when obtaining a urine sample
 ing ability. It is also the best sample to
129
130Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
evaluate for formed elements such as casts.
common preanalytical error is contamina-
The urinalysis should be done as soon as
tion of the urine during sample collection.
possible after obtaining the sample. Cellular
The temptation to analyze urine that has
element and crystals can deteriorate, mak-
 been collected from any surface (however
 ing it diffcult to recognize these structures
clean it is thought to be) should be avoided
correctly. In addition, crystals may dissolve
if at all possible. Unfortunately, it is dif-
or form over time. Chemical parameters can
ficult to prevent a patient from evacuat-
also change as urine sits, especially at room
ing its bladder before a cystocentesis or
temperature. If the urinalysis must be post-
catheterization procedure. If the only sam-
poned, the urine can be refrigerated for no
ple that can be obtained is from the sur-
longer than 6 hours. If the sample is re-
face of the examination table, the results
frigerated, it must be allowed to return to
must be provided with major disclaimers on
room temperature before the chemical anal-
the interpretation of certain elements of the
 ysis is done. Several of the indicator pads
urinalysis. Cleaning solvents can alter the
on the reagent strip are enzyme-based re-
chemical reactions on the reagent pads;
actions. The speed of enzymatic reactions
 therefore, a chemical evaluation should not
decreases as temperature decreases; there-
be reported. The presence of bacteria can-
fore, the timing for reading the reaction
not be interpreted, because bacteria from
will not be valid unless the urine is at room
the surface will contaminate the sample.
temperature.
The specific gravity will usually not be al-
A standard operating procedure (SOP),
tered and crystals or formed elements such
as discussed in Chapter 1, is important to
as erythrocytes, leukocytes, and casts can
ensure that the urinalysis results are ob-
still be reported.
tained and reported in a uniform man-
 The following are the most common an-
 ner. For quality assurance, the following
alytical errors:
information should be recorded on a uri-
 nalysis record for each sample: when the
1.
 Delay in performing urinalysis without
sample was obtained, how the sample was
refrigeration
obtained, any medication given prior to the
2.
 Failure to mix the sample prior to
urinalysis, and when the urinalysis was per-
aliquoting
formed. A legible label containing the pa-
3.
Failure to
 adequately resuspend the
tient's name, owner and hospital ID num-
sample
ber should be placed on the container (not
4.
 Failure to follow the standard operat-
the lid) at the time of collection.
ing procedure with specific adherence
There are controls available for urinaly-
to the volume of aliquot evaluated, cen-
sis. These are expensive and are not rou-
 trifuge speed and time, and number of
tinely used. For most cases, if the reagent
high power fields evaluated.
strips are handled and stored properly and
not used passed their expiration date, con-
trols do not need to be performed. There are
reagents that can be used to test the labora-
Performing the Analysis
tory technician's sediment evaluation skills
These controls are helpful for in-house qual-
A routine urinalysis includes the following
ity assurance programs and for technician
steps:
training.
 The common sources of error in urinal-
 ysis are primarily preanalytical (inappro-
1.
 Collect urine in a sterile container or
 priate collection) and analytical. The most
syringe.
Chapter 9: Components of the Urinafysis 131
2.1
 Mix the urine gently and place a stan-
supernatant and no erythrocyte pellet will
dard volume (5 or 10 mL) of the urine
form. Although there are diagnostic tests
in a conical centrifuge tube.
that can be performed on urine to differenti-
3.
 Record color and clarity and perform
ate myoglobin from hemoglobin, the easiest
the chemical analysis.
way is to evaluate a concurrent blood serum
4.
Centrifuge for 3-5 min at 1000-2000
sample. Hemoglobinuric patients will also
rpm (~100 G).
be
hemoglobinemic. Myoglobinuric pa-
5.
 Record volume of sediment using the
tients will have clear serum. Myoglobin is
 graduations on the conical tube.
cleared from the serum by the kidney very
Pour off the supernatant (leave a stan-
rapidly, but it takes much longer to clear
dard volume of supernatant to resus-
hemoglobin.
pend the sediment, 0.3-0.5 ml).
7.
 Place a drop of the resuspended sedi-
ment pellet on a glass slide and place a
Urine Specific Gravity
coverslip over the drop.
The specific gravity of urine depends on the
number and type of solutes (soluble par-
ticles) in the urine. The specific gravity is
measured using a refractometer, often the
Gross Evaluation
same one that is used to measure total pro-
tein in body cavity fluids and plasma. The
Normal urine is clear and light to dark
specific gravity of distilled water is 1.000.
yellow in color. Urine can have a rain-
Distilled water can be used to check the cali-
bow of colors, however; diet, disease, and
bration of the refractometer. Large amounts
drugs can alter the color of urine. The most
 of protein and glucose can increase the spe-
common abnormal colors seen in urine are
cific gravity of a urine sample. There are
red/orange, black/brown, and green. When
refractometers made specifically for veteri-
methylene blue was being used as a urine
nary samples. These instruments have one
acidifier, it caused the urine to be bluish.
scale for dogs and large animal species that
Black or brown discoloration of the urine
goes to up to 1.045 and another scale for
is seen with methemoglobin and nitrites.
cats that goes up to 1.060. Any urine sam-
Green discoloration is seen when bilirubin
ple with specific gravity that goes beyond
is present and allowed to break down over
the scale should be recorded as greater
time. The most common color changes seen
than the highest reading on the appropri-
in veterinary samples are red, red-brown,
ate scale (>1.045 or >1.060). There is no
red-orange, and orange. These colors all re-
reference range for urine specific gravity
late to the presence of erythrocytes or heme
in the normal patient. The specific grav-
pigments in the urine (hemoglobin, myo-
ity will vary depending on the hydration
globin, porphyrin).
status. In general, the expected USG in
Hematuria is indicated when the urine
a patient that is dehydrated but has nor-
is red and turbid (cloudy). When a hema-
 mal renal function should be as shown in
turic urine sample is spun, the erythrocytes
Chart 9.1.
will pellet at the bottom of the tube, and
the supernatant will be clear or translucent.
Hemoglobinuria and myoglobinuria is indi-
Chart 9.1
cated when the urine is red and translucent.
Canine
USG >1.030
When hemoglobinuric or myoglobinuric
Feline
USG >1.035
urine is spun down, the color remains in the
132Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Chemical Evaluation
The package insert should list confounding
factors for each individual test. Some of the
Chemical analysis of the urine can be per-
most common artifacts are seen with the
formed on the supernatant of the cen-
 tests reviewed in the following sections.
trifuged sample or on uncentrifuged urine.
The primary reason for performing the
Glucose
analysis on uncentrifuged urine is the fact
that centrifugation will clear the blood cells
The glucose reagent pad is enzyme de-
from the urine and may cause a false nega-
pendent; therefore, it is sensitive to tem-
tive reading on the blood reagent pad. How-
 perature. Ascorbic acid will cause a false
ever, erythrocytes will be seen on the micro-
 negative. Some glucose reagent pads will
 scopic evaluation if present in numbers too
have decreased activity in urine with a low
small to see grossly. The advantage of per-
(<1.005} specific gravity. Contamination of
forming the analysis on centrifuged samples
the urine sample with cleaning agents can
is to clear the urine of particulates that may
cause a false positive. Strict adherence to
interfere with interpretation of the reagent
 the expiration date is necessary, and the en-
 pad changes. Chemical analysis of the urine
 zyme activity will decrease rapidly after the
must be done when the urine is at room tem-
expiration date.
 perature. When done on cold urine from the
refrigerator, many of the reagent pads will
be falsely negative or less positive.
Ketones
The package insert for the reagent strip
The ketone reaction on the reagent pad will
usually has a recommended procedure to
detect only one of the ketoacids that may be
follow. It will also have a list of substances
 in the urine. Therefore, a negative reaction
that may interfere with the reagent reactions
does not entirely rule out ketonuria. The re-
 if they are present in the urine. It is impor-
action is highly sensitive to moisture, heat,
tant to ensure that the cross-contamination
and light, so it is important to tightly replace
 of the individual reagent pads does not oc-
the lid on the reagent strip bottle. False pos-
cur. The urine should be aliquoted into the
itive ketone reactions can be seen with ad-
 conical centrifuge tube before the chemical
 ministration of captopril, D-penicillamine,
analysis is done. It is best to tilt the tube
tiopronin, and cystine.
toward the horizontal plane, immerse the
reagent test strip, and quickly remove it,
Conjugated Bilirubin
drawing the strip across the edge of the tube
into a horizontal position. Do not allow
Conjugated bilirubin, the form of bilirubin
urine to run from one pad to the next. Al-
excreted in the urine, can be quickly de-
ternatively, urine can be drawn into a small
graded to biliverdin or unconjugated biliru-
 syringe and aliquots placed directly on each
bin, both of which do not react with the
test pad.
 reagent pad. Dark-colored urine will make
 Each pad has a specific incubation time
 interpretation of the bilirubin reaction dif-
that must be followed before the color of
ficult. Ascorbic acid in the urine can result
the pad can be interpreted. It is very help-
in a false negative result in some test strips.
ful to review the times for each test in the
package insert before performing the test to
Blood
know what order and time they should be
read. As indicated previously, there are ar-
The test pad for blood will react with
tifacts that can interfere with interpretation
erythrocytes, hemoglobin, and myoglobin.
of the color change on the reagent pads.
Mol aea un sds isan a
Chapter 9: Components of the Urinatysis 133
numbers (
of intact erythrocytes
from
 procedure and is considered a “crutch" by
hemoglobin and myoglobin because intact
many laboratory microscopists. The sedi-
red cells will cause a stippled appearance
 ment (stained or unstained) is dropped onto
rather than a solid color change. However,
a glass slide and a uniform coverslip is
a large number of intact erythrocytes will
placed over the urine drop. The size of the
result in a solid color change, the same as
coverslip is not significant, other than the
hemoglobin or myoglobin.
fact that the large coverslip allows more
area for evaluation. The slide is placed on
the microscope stage and the light is ad-
Protein
justed by closing the iris diaphragm or low-
For most reagent strips, the protein pad
ering the stage just as one would do when
detects albumin. Highly alkaline urine can
counting white blood cells in a hemocy-
result in a false positive reaction in some
tome ter.
test strips. The reaction of the protein pad
The sediment examination is performed
should be interpreted in concert with the
by scanning the urine on low power (10×
urine specific gravity. A 1+ urine protein in
objective) to identify large formed elements
a urine sample with 1.010 specific gravity
such as epithelial cells and casts of re-
is more significant than a 1+ finding in a
 nal tubules. The entire coverslip is scanned
sample with a 1.040 specific gravity.
at low power and the average number
of formed elements per low power field
is recorded (i.e., 1-2 squamous cells/low
Nonuseful Reagent Pads
power field [pf]. Following the low power
There are reagent strips that include specific
scan, a consistent predetermined number
gravity, nitrate, and leukocyte reactions.
of high power fields (40x objectives) are
None of these reactions are useful in the vet-
 evaluated. At this power, the type of cells
erinary patient. Urobilinogen is sometime
in the urine can be better identified and
present on reagent strips as well. This re-
recorded as cells/high power field (hpf).
action, for the most part, is not useful. It
The cellular elements that can be seen in
is very insensitive because urobilinogen is
urine include squamous cells, transitional
very unstable. Some sulfa-based antibiotics
cells, white blood cells, and erythrocytes.
will cause false positive reactions. The pH
Other formed elements, bacteria, fungi, and
of the urine can have a great effect on the
 crystals are identified and reported at few,
reaction. Highly alkaline urine will increase
moderate, or many. The type of crystal is
the reaction, and acid urine can decrease the
identified and the morphology of any mi-
reaction. When choosing a reagent test strip
croorganism is recorded.
for use in the clinic, consider ones that do
The most difficult part of the urinalysis
not have these tests. It is not worth paying
for most technicians is evaluation of the
for tests that are of little use.
sediment. Confidence and competence re-
quires practice. Making urinalysis a rou-
tine test for all sick patients and part of
a wellness examination will allow constant
Sediment Examination
honing of microscopy skills by the techni-
cian. The formed elements in the urine sedi-
Examination of urine sediment can be done
ment that should be easily identified by any
with or without sediment stain. Unstained
technician doing a urinalysis include ery-
specimens have fewer artifacts, but they are
throcytes, white blood cells, epithelial cells
more difficult for some individuals to eval-
(squamous and transitional), casts, crystals,
uate. Using stain adds to the cost of the
and bacteria.
134Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Erythrocytes
be quite reactive when there is an inflam-
 matory process present in the urinary blad-
Erythrocytes are the smallest of the cellu
der. If there is suspicion of transitional cell
lar elements. They can be found in small
neoplasia, a urine sample can be sent in for
numbers in normal samples (0-3/HPF), es-
further evaluation by a cytopathologist.
pecially in cystocentesis samples. They are
small round biconcave disks with slight red-
dish to greenish tinge. If the urine has a high
Microorganisms
specific gravity, the red cells may be cre-
nated. In urine with a low specific gravity,
Bacteria and artifacts that can imitate bac-
the erythrocytes may lyse and faint ghost
teria cause the greatest confusion on a uri-
 membranes may be seen.
nalysis. Both rods and coccoid bacteria can
Erythrocytes are most easily
confused
 be seen in the urine of patients with a sep-
with white blood cells and fat droplets. Cat
tic process of the urinary tract. The most
urine tends to have a significant number of
common type of bacteria seen in urinary in-
fat droplets. White blood cells are larger and
fections is rod-shaped and motile. As a re-
have a granular pattern. They will appear
sult, on examination of the sediment when
lighter than the erythrocyte. Fat droplets
these bacteria are present, the microscopist
vary in size and usually collect just under
should see small rod-shaped organisms with
the coverslip in a plane above the erythro-
progressive movement.
cytes. Focusing up and down will show the
When coccoid bacteria are seen, it is im-
different planes for these two elements.
portant to see them in chains or organized
clusters. Most coccoid bacteria are non-
motile, so forward motion will not be seen.
White Blood Cefls
 Brownian motion is random motion by par-
 ticles suspended in a liquid. Many urine
White blood cells can also be found in
 samples have small particulate matter such
normal urine in low numbers (0-2/HPF),
as very small crystals or amorphous debris
 Leukocytes are larger than erythrocytes and
that is round and about the size of coccoid
bacteria. When suspended in the urine, they
glitter as you focus up and down). In some
will vacillate in place, but they will not show
cases, you will see the segmented nucleus of
 progressive forward motion. In most cases,
the neutrophil.
when bacteria are present, leukocytes will
be present as well. If you identify bacteria
 and there isn't an inflammatory response
Epithelial Cells
indicated by the presence of pyuria (neu-
 trophils in the urine), the bacteria are likely
Epithelial cells are larger than erythrocytes
contaminants. The exception to this rule
and leukocytes. Squamous epithelial cells
is when an animal is immunosuppressed,
are found in higher numbers in free catch
receiving corticosteroids, or has Cushing's
samples. They are the largest cells found
disease.
in urine sediment. They have abundant cy-
 Fungi are less common in urine samples
toplasm, small round nuclei, and angular
than bacteria. Yeast is the most common
edges.
fungal elements seen; however, fungi that
Transitional cells (urothelial cells) vary
form hyphie or mycelia can be found in
considerably in size, have rounded edges,
some cases. Yeast are larger than bacte-
 and have variable amounts of cytoplasm.
ria and are occasionally confused with ery-
 Their nucleus is round. This cell type can
throcytes. With close examination, budding
Chapter 9: Components of the Urinalysis  135
 yeast can usually be found. The budding
Fatty casts are most common in the cat.
yeast body can have a thin or broad base,
The cat has higher lipid content in its re-
and this characteristic can be helpful
in
nal tubular epithelial cells. Fatty casts have
identification of possible species of yeast.
large numbers of distinct round refractile
Yeast can be contaminates from the lower
 bodies embedded in a protein background.
urinary tract when a free-catch sample is
They are often accompanied by a large num-
evaluated.
ber of lipid droplets in the background.
There are very few parasites that are
Additional formed elements that can be
found in the urinary tract. Though rare,
 seen in the urine include spermatozoa, par-
ova of the bladder worm, Capillaria pica, or
 asites, and plant spores.
Capillaria felis can be found in urine from
dogs and cats.
Urinary Crystals
Urinary Casts
There are numerous crystals that can be
Casts are formed elements that are liter-
seen in urine samples. The type and num-
ally “casts" of the tubules in which they
ber of each crystal should be reported.
form. Casts can be cellular (erythrocytes,
Triple phosphate or struvite crystals are
leukocytes, or renal tubular cells), granular
 the most common crystal seen in compan-
(coarse, fine), hyaline (protein), or waxy.
ion animal urine. These crystals are de-
Hyaline casts are clear, colorless, and re-
 scribed as “coffin lids." They are elongate
fractile. They have parallel sides and consist
with sharp edges and are usually found in
of protein.
slightly acidic urine. They are commonly
Granular casts are the most common
found in urine from animals with no evi-
casts seen in the urine. They consist of de-
dence of urinary tract disease.
generate cellular debris. Granular casts of-
Ammonium biurate crystals are a com-
ten have a yellow/brown hue.
mon finding in urine samples. They are
Cellular casts consist of recognizable
brown, round, and have irregularly spaced
cells. They can be composed of leukocytes,
spikes on their surface. Their presence in
renal tubular epithelial cells, and erythro-
urine is indicative of high serum ammonia
cytes. Red cell casts will have the same red to
levels and is commonly associated with
 greenish hue seen in the free erythrocytes in
dogs that have a portosystemic venous
urine. Cellular casts are not common. Their
shunt. However, they can be seen with
presence in urine is highly significant. White
severe primary hepatic disease and in the
blood cell casts are seen in pyonephritis and
dalmatian dog.
indicate significant inflammation within the
Calcium oxalate crystals have become
renal tubules. Red cell casts confirm hemor-
more common in companion animal species
rhage into the renal tubules. Epithelial cell
due to dietary changes. In an attempt to
casts indicate acute sloughing of the renal
limit the formation of struvite uroliths
tubular epithelial cells.
(triple phosphate stones in the urinary sys-
Waxy casts indicate chronic renal dis-
tem), diets have been modified to alter the
ease with low glomerular filtration rate (low
acidity of the urine to make it less com-
flow of urine through the renal tubular sys-
 patible with formation of triple phosphate
tem). They are the largest casts found in
stones. As a result, calcium oxalate stones
urine. They are clear, colorless, and refrac-
have become more common. There are two
tile with “cracks" at the edge. They are
forms of calcium oxalate crystals: dihy-
formed from the lipid present in degener-
drate calcium oxalate and monohydrate cal-
ate cell membranes.
cium oxalate. It is very important to report
■
136(
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table 9.1. Elements of urine and their meanings.
Urinary Element 
Normal Finding
 Presence of Abnormality Suggests
Urine specific gravity
Canine >1.030
 Decreased urine specific gravity can suggest the
Feline >1.035
kidneys' inability to concentrate urine. This can 
occur simply due to increased fluid intake (oral, IV
fluids) or be secondary to renal or hormonal
diseases.
Urine glucose
Negative
Artifact: Decreased UsG <1.005 can hide
(glucosuria)
 glucosuria on the reagent strip (false negative).
Contamination of the urine may produce a false
positive.
 Disease: True glucosuria suggests diabetes mellitus
 or stress-associated hyperglycemia and glucosuria
(see Chapter 7).
 Urine ketones
Negative
 Artifact: Test checks for only one kind of ketone, so
(ketonuria)
 a negative does not always rule out ketonuria. False
 positive ketone reactions can be seen with
 administration of captopril, D-penicillamine.
Tiopronin, and cystine.
 Disease: A true ketonuria with glucosuria suggests
that the patient is suffering from diabetic
ketoacidosis (see Chapter 7).
Conjugated bilirubin 
Negative 
 Artifact: Can show false negatives due to the
(bilirubinuria)
 presence of ascorbic acid.
 Disease: Can support evidence of liver disease,
IMHA, or gallbladder obstruction in the patient.
Blood (hematuria)
Negative
Artifact: Test can show positive for blood,
hemoglobin, or myoglobin. Diseases that cause
 erythrocyte destruction (e.g., IMHA) or muscle
degeneration or necrosis can cause increased 
release of hemoglobin or myoglobin and make this
test falsely positive. To help confirm the diagnosis of
hematuria, the urine supernatant should be
 evaluated after the urine is spun. Patients with true 
 hematuria will have a clear supernatant because the 
 cells have been condensed into the pellet.
 Disease: Hematuria suggests that disease causes
 bleeding into the urinary bladder--e.g., urinary tract 
 infections, coagulopathies, urinary stones 
(urolithiasis), or bladder/renal tumors.
Protein (proteinuria)
Canine: negative 
 Artifact: Artifactual proteinuria can occur if urine 
to trace
pH is alkaline (>7.5).
 Feline: negative 
 Disease: The presence of urine protein (especially in
dilute urine) can suggest evidence of urinary tract
 disease or renal disease with glomerular damage.
Sediment—white blood 
(<0-2 WBC hpf)
 Evidence of increased white blood cells supports the
cells
 presence of infection or inflammation within the 
 urinary tract. Increased white blood cells are most
commonly observed with urinary tract infections.
Chapter 9: Components of the Urinalysis 137
Table 9.1. (Continued)
 Urinary Element 
 Normal Finding 
 Presence of Abnormality Suggests
Sediment-—-erythrocytes
(<0-3 WBC hpf)
Evidence of increased erythrocytes supports the
 presence of bleeding within the kidney or bladder,
suggesting urinary tract infections, urinary stones,
 or bladder or renal tumors.
Sediment—epithelial 
(<1-2/lpf)
Increased evidence of epithelial cells can suggest 
cells
the presence of some types of bladder cancer.
 When noted, the urinary sample should be sent to.
the lab for cytological evaluation.
 Sediment—-bacteria or 
None
True bacterial or fungal elements in the urine 
 snBuny
 supports renal or urinary tract infection. If these 
 elements are noted, the type of microorganism
should be documented. The presence of white 
 blood cells helps to further confirm that an 
infection is evident.
 Casts-hyaline
 Negative
Increased loss of protein in the urine.
Casts-granular
Negative
 Sloughing of the renal tubular epithelial cells.
Casts—cellular
Negative
Uncommon. Their presence suggests serious renal
disease, and its cause is dependent on the type of
cell found. Erythrocyte casts suggest renal 
hemorrhage, whereas white blood cell casts 
suggest renal inflammation.
Casts-waxy
Negative
 If evident, they can suggest chronic renal tubular 
damage secondary to chronic kidney disease.
Casts-fatty
Negative
 Not significant
Crystals—triple
Negative 
 Artifact: Can precipitate out in samples that sit for
 phosphate
 too long at room temperature.
 Disease: Suggestive of crystallization of 
 magnesium, phosphorus, and ammonia out of
 dietary elements in urine with an alkaline pH;
usually not significant.
 Crystals—-calcium
 Negative
 Artifact: Can precipitate out in samples that sit for
oxalate
 too long at room temperature.
 Disease: Suggestive of crystallization of calcium
 and oxalate out of dietary elements in urine with 
an acidic pH; usually not significant 
 Crystals—monohydrate 
 Negative
These crystals are evident with ethylene glycol
calcium oxalate
intoxication (antifreeze) within the first 8 hours of
 ingestion.
 Crystals--bilirubin 
Negative
 Normal findings in concentrated urine in dogs: 
 can suggest diseases that produce
hyperbilirubinemia (e.g., liver disease, gallbladder 
obstruction, or IMHA).
 Crystals-—ammonium 
 Negative
Evident in patients with liver dysfunction and in 
 biurate crystals
 dalmatians.
138Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
each specific type. Dihydrate calcium ox-
test can be used in detecting early
re-
alate crystals are common in the urine of
 nal disease and monitoring response to
 dogs and cats with no evidence of renal or
treatment.
urinary tract disease. The dihydrate crystal
is square with a refractile cross in the cen-
ter. The monohydrate form is elongate with
Profein/Creatinine Ratio
a blunt point on each end that causes it to
resemble a picket fence post. The monohy-
 This ratio is a better quantitation of pro-
drate form is highly associated with ethy-
tein loss than the semiquantitative measure-
lene glycol (antifreeze) poisoning.
ment of the reagent pad. It closely corre-
Bilirubin crystals are more common in
lates with the urine protein measurement
the dog than the cat. They are elongate thin
that requires collection of urine over a full
yellow/brown needles that are often gath-
24 hours.
ered into a cluster that resembles a wheat
bundle. When found in the cat, they are
highly associated with hyperbilirubinemia.
Endocrine Tests
They are considered normal findings in con-
centrated urine in the dog.
The urine cortisol/creatinine ratio, per-
 Cystine crystals are rarely seen. They are
formed in a reference laboratory, is used
indicative of a hereditary metabolic defect
as a screening test for hyperadrenocorti-
and cystinuria. They are perfect six-sided
cism (Cushing's disease; see Chapter 11).
flat plates (hexagons).
Cortisol is a hormone that is produced
by the adrenal glands to help maintain
blood glucose in times of stress. In nor-
mal patients, very small amounts of cor-
Tests for Evaluating Changes in
tisol are released in the urine. In patients
Glomerular Filtration
with increased release of cortisol secondary
to Cushing's disease or other chronic dis-
As discussed in Chapter 5, detection of pro-
eases, large amounts of cortisol may be
teinuria can be a key diagnostic test in de-
excreted in the urine. If the ratio of cor-
termining early renal disease prior to the
tisol to creatinine is low, Cushing's dis-
patient developing azotemia and physical
ease is highly unlikely, lowering the clinical
symptoms. If renal disease is detected early,
concern. If the ratio is elevated, additional
these patients can be treated to slow the pro-
confirmatory testing for Cushing's disease
 gression of the disease. The following sec-
(low-dose dexamethazone test or ACTH
tions review clinical diagnostics that help
stimulation test) must be done. In general,
evaluate these changes
patients with chronic diseases are stressed
and will have a high cortisol/creatinine ratio
(Table 9.1).
Microlevels of Albumin in the
Urine
An in-clinic test for very small amounts of
albumin (microprotein) is available. This
Evaluating the Urinalysis with
Disease Conditions
 Urinalysis is an essential component of the
formation together to provide an overview
initial evaluation of an ill patient and the
of urinalysis findings in disease.
wellness exam of healthy animals (see Algo-
rithm 10.1). Findings in the urinalysis can
assist in evaluation of liver function, renal
Urine Specific Gravity
function, endocrine function, and acid-base
status. Understanding how disease affects
the composition of urine enables the veteri-
The specific gravity of urine is one of the
nary technician to anticipate the request of
most important values obtained in a uri-
additional testing by the veterinarian.
nalysis. The volume necessary to obtain a
Each component of the urinalysis pro-
 specifc gravity is very small (~100 μL). It
vides valuable information. Both abnormal
is an essential value for determination of
and normal urinalysis findings are impor-
the underlying cause of azotemia in an ill
tant in interpretation of additional diag-
patient. As discussed in Chapter 5, there
nostic tests. Examination of the chemical
are three types of azotemia: prerenal (dehy-
 composition of the urine and the sediment
dration), renal, and postrenal (obstruction).
are required to realize the full benefit of a
Urine specific gravity is essential for dif-
urinalysis. Although it is tempting to omit
ferentiating prerenal from renal azotemia.
the sediment examination in samples with
 The dehydrated azotemic patient will have
a normal chemical composition evaluated
a high urine specific gravity (>1.035 in the
by the reagent pads, the sediment from all
dog, >1.045 in the cat). If the urine specific
samples should be examined. Information
gravity is less than expected for dehydra-
concerning the urinalysis findings in se veral
tion, there is an underlying defect in urine
organ systems is found in several chapters
concentration that may be due to primary
within this text. This chapter pulls that in-
renal disease (loss of renal tubular function)
139
Algorithm10.1.Evaluating urine color turbidity, and specifc gravit
AZ
veterinaria
ON
Continue to Algorithm 10.2.
No
ON
Js urine color
Chapter 10: Evaluating Urinalysis141
Table 10.1. Common causes of decreased
tient with a history of fluid therapy or ad-
urine-concentrating ability.
ministration of a diuretic, the urine specific
gravity cannot be used to differentiate pre-
Glucocorticoids
renal from renal azotemia. In these cases,
Loss of response
 Hypercalcemia 
to antidiuretic
hormone
Hypokalemia
 mine whether the patient has adequate renal
Osmotic diuresis
 Hyperglycemia
function.
 Loss of sodium into urine
Primary renal 
 Loss of renal tubule
disease
function
Chemical Evaluation
The chemical evaluation of urine can pro-
vide information essential to disease diag-
or secondary disease that is causing inhibi-
nosis and interpretation of the CBC and
tion of renal tubular function. Table 10.1
chemistry profle (Algorithm 10.2). The
lists diseases that inhibit the kidney's ability
 chemical reagent pads on urine reagent
to concentrate urine and their underlying
strips provide a semiquantitative value for
pathogenic mechanism.
each substance being tested. It is important
Normal renal tubular function is neces-
to remember that there is a degree of sub-
sary to both concentrate and dilute urine.
jective analysis when reading the reagents
Therefore, an azotemic animal that has a
pad reactions. In some cases, a more accu-
very low specific gravity (<1.005) has nor-
rate evaluation may be necessary, as is often
mal renal tubular function with an under-
needed when determining the significance of
lying disease that is not allowing normal
proteinuria.
response to antidiuretic hormone (ADH),
the hormone that allows the renal collect-
ing ducts to reabsorb water from the urine
Glucosuria
as it flows through the medulla.
 Primary (central) diabetes insipidus, a rel-
atively rare disease, is a genetic disease that
Glucose is filtered out of the blood as it
has been found in several breeds of dog
passes through the glomerulus and must
(Great Dane, Portuguese Water Dog, Rott-
be reabsorbed by the proximal convoluted
weiler, Standard Poodle, West Highland
tubules. In the normal dog and cat, all of
White Terrier, Soft-coated Wheaten Ter-
the glucose filtered can be reabsorbed as
rier, Bearded Collie, Leonberger, and Nova
 long as the renal tubular epithelial cells are
Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever). Primary di-
 healthy and the amount of glucose filtered
abetes insipidus is the lack of antidiuretic
 out does not exceed the ability of the epithe-
hormone. Secondary Diabetes insipidus oc-
lial cells to reabsorb glucose. The proximal
curs when the renal collecting ducts do not
 convoluted tubular epithelial cells have spe-
respond to ADH. In both cases, the urine
cific membrane transport pumps that are
specific gravity is less than 1.005. Figure
responsible for moving glucose from the
10.1 illustrates the effects of ADH and how
urine back into the serum. The renal glucose
it increases water reabsorption in the col-
threshold is the serum glucose concentra-
lecting ducts.
tion over which the renal tubules transport
 In addition to disease processes, it is im-
pumps cannot reabsorb all of the glucose
 portant to remember that intravenous fluid
that is filtered into the urine. The renal glu-
and diuretic therapy will also inhibit renal
cose threshold is 180 mg/dL for the dog
concentrating ability. In an azotemic pa-
and 240 mg/dL for the cat. If the patient is
142Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
CollectingDuct
Collecting Duct
CollectingDuct
Epithelial Cells
lumen
(a)
Epithelial Cells
HO
H2O
H2O
HC
Dilute urine
(b)
Collecting Duct
CollectingDuct
Collecting Duct
Epithelial Cells
lumen
Epithelial Cells
H2O
H2O
H2C
H2O
HO
H2O
H2O
Concentrated urine
Figure 10.1. (a) The water channels are closed if there is no ADH present on the ADH receptors at the basal
membrane of the renal tubule cell. Water is not reabsorbed and dilute urine is formed. (b) When ADH attaches to
the ADH receptor, it changes conformation and signals the cell to open the water channels to allow water to enter
the epithelial cell at the luminal surface of the cells and flow into the interstitial tisue, forming concentrated urine.
hyperglycemic with serum glucose greater
reabsorb glucose or if there was transient
than 180 mg/dL in the dog and 240 mg/dL
hyperglycemia. There are genetic diseases
in the cat, the patient will have glucosuria.
that result in abnormal glucose transport
Glucosuria can occur when a patient's
pumps that cannot reabsorb glucose ade-
serum glucose is less than the renal glu-
quately: Fanconi Syndrome, seen most com-
cose threshold if there is a defect in the
monly in the basenji is one example. These
ability of the renal tubule epithelial cells to
patients will have normal blood glucose
Chapter 10: Evafuating Urinalysis 143
 Algorithm 10.2.  Evaluating urine chemistry—-key factors.
Blood in urine usually suggests lower urinary tract disease (urolithiasis, urinary
Is there blood in
Yes
tract infection, mass, or inflammatory disease); however, renal infection or
tumor or other systemic disease that affects the body's ability to clot is also
the urine?
possible.
No
Bilirubin can suggest liver disease or increased red blood cell breakdown by an
Yes
immune-mediated disease (im mune-mediated hemolytic anemia).
Is there bilirubin
in the urine?
Evaluate liver enzymes, packed cell volume, blood film (spherocytes,
agglutination).
No
Protein in the urine can suggest urinary tract infection, renal disease,chronic
Is there protein
Yes
inflammatory disease, neoplasia, and other causes.
in the urine?
 Protein in the urine can also be artifactual secondary to alkaline urine.
Evaluate urine pH, blood, sediment, renal enzy mes.
No
Glucose in the urine can be strongly suggestive of diabetes mellitus. However,
Is there glucose
Yes
some patients will begin leaking glucose in the urine with stress.
jn the urine?
Evaluate urine ketones, blood sugar, chemistry.
No
Ketones in the urine can be strongly suggestive of a severe diabetes mellitus in
Are there
Yes
which ketones are also being produced. This toxin can make the pet very ill and
ketones in the
can be a serious emergency.
Evaluate urine glucose, blood sugar, chemistry. NOTIFY VE TERINA RIAN.
No
Continue to Algorithm 10.3.
concentrations and glucosuria. Additional
Ketonuria
testing for other components of the urine
that are normally reabsorbed by the proxi-
Ketones are produced by animals that are
mal convoluted tubule, such as amino acids,
metabolizing fat as their primary source of
is used to confirm these inherited defects in
 energy. This usually happens in diabetic an-
 proximal tubular function.
Cats commonly have transient hyper-
imals because glucose is not available for
tissue utilization due 
 to lack of insulin.
glycemia when excited or stressed. If the
 The ketone reagent pad detects two of the
hyperglycemia is high enough and persists
three ketones produced with increased fat
for long enough there will be spillover of
metabolism: acetoacetate and acetone. The
glucose into the urine. This occurrence can
make it difficult to differentiate diabetes
reagent pad reacts most strongly to ace-
toacetate. The reagent pad does not de-
mellitus from stress in the cat. Serum fruc-
tect betahydroxybutyrate, the third ketone
tosamine concentration, a test often used to
produced with fat metabolism. Unfortu-
assist in diagnosing diabetes mellitus, will
nately, betahydroxybutyrate is the primary
be increased in diabetic cats and be within
the reference range in cats with stress hy-
ketone produced in diabetic ketoacidosis.
 Therefore, the ketone reagent pad can show
perglycemia.
144
4Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
a false negative reaction in some cases.
and myoglobinuria. Differentiating which
 Rarely, ketones are produced in sufficient
is present in the urine relies on gross
 concentration to cause ketonuria when an-
and microscopic examination as well as
imals are starved. After insulin therapy,
understanding how the body deals with
urine ketones can increase significantly be-
hemoglobin and myoglobin. Urine samples
cause of a shift in the production of ketones
with a small amount of whole blood (often
from betahydroxybutyrate to acetoacetate.
not detectable grossly) will show a speckled
turia will cause the urine to be red and
Bilirubinuria
cloudy. Pigmenturia is the presence of pig-
ments such as hemoglobin and myoglobin.
There are two major types of bilirubin
The pigments are soluble; therefore, the
found in the serum: conjugated bilirubin
urine will be transparent rather than cloudy.
 Figure 10.2 illustrates the gross appearance
 and unconjugated bilirubin. The only type
 of bilirubin found in the urine is conjugated
of hemoglobinuria and hematuria.
It is ‘difficult to differentiate
 because the kidney does not filter unconju-
myo-
 globinuria from hemoglobinuria by gross
gated bilirubin. Just as with glucose, there
is a renal threshold for bilirubin. As with
the glucose threshold, the dog has a lower
threshold for bilirubin than the cat. In ad-
(a)
(b)
 dition, canine renal tubular epithelial cells
can conjugate unconjugated bilirubin and
excrete it into the urine. Because of the dif-
ference in the renal threshold for bilirubin
between the dog and cat, the significance of
bilirubin in their urine differs. Dog urine can
have trace to 1 + bilirubin with no under-
lying disease. Although bilirubinuria can be
found in normal dog urine, it should not
be completely discounted. Bilirubinuria will
be seen before hyperbilirubinemia in dogs
with early hepatic disease.
In cats, the renal threshold is high enough
that hyperbilirubinemia develops before
bilirubinuria. Therefore, the presence
of
bilirubin in feline urine is always signif-
cant. The diseases that cause bilirubinuria
are the same as those that result in hyper-
bilirubinemia: liver disease, hemolysis, bile
duct obstruction, and sepsis.
Figure 10.2. Two samples of urine that tested pos-
Hematuria, Hemoglobinuria,
itive for blood on the reagent pad and have been
centrifuged. (a) Hemoglobinuria is present. The super-
Myoglobinuria
natant remained red after centrifugation and there isn't
a red blood cell pellet at the bottom of the tube. (b)
Hematuria is present. The supernatant is clear and yel-
The reagent pad for blood will detect whole
low, and the red cells have been separated into a red
 blood, lysed blood cells, hemoglobinuria,
pellet at the bottom of the tube.
Chapter 10: Evafuating Urinalysis145
evaluation of the urine. To differentiate
(Algorithm 10.3). Pyuria, the presence of
these two, evaluation of the serum is nec-
increased numbers of white blood cells,
essary. Hemoglobin is bound to albumin
indicates inflammation, which is usually ac-
when it is in the plasma; myoglobin is free in
companied by protein as part of the in-
the plasma. As a result, myoglobin is rabidly
flammatory process. Quantification of the
cleared from the blood, and hemoglobin is
amount of protein is not helpful when
slowly cleared because the albumin helps
inflammation is present. The proteinuria
keep hemoglobin from being filtered by
 present with inflammation should resolve
the kidneys. Patients with hemoglobinuria
once the cause of the inflammation has been
will have hemoglobinemia. Patients with
treated. However, if there is no evidence of
myoglobinuria will have normal serum or
inflammation, proteinuria is a very signif-
plasma color.
cant finding in the urinalysis.
When urine is concentrated as it flows
through the medulla of the kidney, all of
the substances in the urine will increase in
concentration as well. Because of this, the
Protein
protein reaction will be stronger in concen-
trated urine. A 1 + reaction in a urine sam-
The reagent pad for protein is most sensitive
ple with a specific gravity of 1.010 is more
to albumin. Urine from a patient with nor-
significant than a 2 + reaction in a urine
mal kidneys usually has no protein present.
sample with a specific gravity of 1.035. In
Very little protein can filter through the
many cases, the veterinarian will want to
glomerulus into the urine. The proximal re-
better quantify the degree of proteinuria
nal tubular epithelial cells reabsorbed the
with further testing. The decision to further
small amount of protein that does leak into
quantify the loss of protein in the urine may
the urine. However, a small amount of pro-
be prompted by the presence of hypoalbu-
tein can be present without any other ev-
minemia.
idence of renal disease. This can happen
The protein-creatinine ratio provides a
with stress, excitement, or strenuous exer-
quantification of the protein by compar-
cise. Pathological proteinuria can be due to
ing it to the concentration of creatinine
glomerular or tubular disease. Injury to the
in the urine. The creatinine acts as an
proximal tubule epithelium will prevent the
internal standard that correlates to the de-
reabsorption of the small amount of pro-
 gree of urine concentration. Normal ani-
tein that normally filters into the urine. The
mals will have a very low protein creati-
degree of proteinuria seen with tubular dis-
nine ratio, <0.5. Significant proteinuria is
ease is usually mild. In contrast, injury to
present when the ratio is > 1.0. Table 10.2
 the glomerulus can result in mild to marked
lists the most common diseases that can
proteinuria. The degree of proteinuria is
cause significant proteinuria.
proportional to the severity of the glomeru-
 Repeatable detection of small amounts
lar damage.
of albumin, microalbuminuria, can assist in
Protein can be present in the urine as
identifying early renal disease. It is best to
a result of inflammation in the kidney or
test for microalbuminuria as a screen for
bladder, glomerular disease, or renal tubu-
early renal disease in patients that are at
lar damage. If the sample is a free-catch col-
risk. Table 10.3 lists risk factors for devel-
lection, the protein can also be from the ure-
opment of chronic renal disease. Patients
thra and prepuce or vagina. Interpretation
with these risk factors may benefit from
of the protein reaction depends on the spe-
screening for persistent early protein loss
cific gravity and the sediment examination
with a microalbuminuria test.
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Algorithm 10.3.
. Evaluating urine sediment.
Blood in urine usually suggests lower urinarytract disease (urolithiasis, urinary
Yes
tract infection, mass, or inflammatory disease); however, renal infection or
Are there red
blood cells in
tumor or other systemic disease that affeets the body's ability to clot is also
the urine?
possible.
No
White blood cells in urine usually suggest lower urinary tract disease
 Are there
white blood
Yes
(urinary tract infection, mass, or inflammatory disease), renal disease
cells in the
(pyelonephritis), tumor, or other systemic disease.
urine?
Evaluate urine protein, urine blood, urine pH, complete blood count,
No
Single abnormal celltypes (more than 1 per low power field) can suggest
 Are there
possible tumor or mass within the bladder.
abnormal cell
Yes
types in the
Evaluate complete blood count, chemistry. NOTIFY VETERINARIAN.
urine?
No
Crystaluria can suggest that dietary componernts are crystallizing out of the urine.
 Are there
Yes
If the process occurs over a long term, bladder stone formation is possible. It is
 crystals noted
important to determine the type of crystal; see above.
 in the urine?
Evaluate urine pH, urine blood, urine protein. Notify veterinarian.
No
Casts are aggregates of protein or cells that form inside the kidney
 Are there
tubules. They can suggest acute or chronic renal disease, infection, or
Yes
casts noted in
neoplasia.
the urine?
Evaluate white and red blood cell counts; examine sediment for infectious
No
Finish w/a: discuss abnormal fin dings with veterinarian.
Sediment Examination
of the chemical reactions for protein and
blood require sediment evaluation. Identi-
fication of cells, casts, and crystals can as-
Evaluation of the urine sediment is an essen-
sist the veterinarian in developing a differ-
tial part of the urinalysis. Full interpretation
ential diagnosis for underlying disease and
Table 10.2. Causes of proteinuria.
Disease
 Mechanism
Degree of Proteinuria
 Glomerular disease
 Glomerulonephritis
Immune-complex deposition in glomerular capillaries 
Mild to moderate
Amyloidosis
Abnormal protein deposition in the glomerulus
Marked
 Glomerulopathy
Hereditary defects in the glomerular capillaries
 Mild to moderate
Tubular disease
 Fanconi syndrome
 Defect in the proximal tubular transports
Mild 
 Interstitial nephritis
 Inhibiting proximal tubular function 
 Mild to moderate
 Drug toxicity
Proximal tubular necrosis 
Mild 
Chapter 10: Evafuating Urinalysis 147
Table 10.3.Risk factors for development of renal disease.
 Chronic inflammatory disease
 Dermatitis
Dental disease
Immune-mediated disea se
Infectious disease
 Feline leukemia virus 
 Ehrlichiosis
 Heartworm disea se
Metabolic disease
 Hypertension
Diabetes mellitus 
Hyperthyroidism
Chronic urinary tract disease
Neoplasia
a treatment plan. Urine sediment exami-
casts are formed when renal tubular ep-
nation should be both qualitative (identi-
ithelial cells slough into the lumen of the
fying specific cast, crystal, and cell types)
tubule. Initially, the casts will be coarsely
and quantitative (determining the number
 granular as the epithelial cells lose their in-
of each element per high or low power field).
 tegrity and break up. If the flow of urine
is slow, the coarse granular casts will be-
come finely granular as the cell debris con-
Urinary Casts
tinues to degrade while the cast slowly pro-
gresses through the tubular system. Waxy
Casts are formed elements that arise in the
casts develop over a long period of time
renal tubules. The appearance of the cast
as the lipid component of the cellular de-
depends on where it forms, how long the
 bris breaks down forming a large hyaline
cast was present in the tubule, and the
cast with no recognizable cellular debris.
contents of the cast. Coarse and granular
Figure 10.3 illustrates how casts form.
(a)
®
®
®
3
Figure 10.3. Casts are formed by sloughing of cells into the tubule. Initially, the casts are cellular (a) As they travel
through the tubules they continue to break down into coarsely granular casts (b) and then finely granular casts (c)
and, if they remain in the tubules for long enough, waxy casts (d).
148Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table 10.4. Urinary cast types.
is reestablished. This increase in casts does
 not mean that there is additional damage to
the renal tubules or increased protein loss;
Cast Type
Cause
it is the result of the increased urine flow
"washing" the casts that were present be-
Hyaline cast
Proteinuria
fore fluid therapy was initiated out of the
 Granular casts 
Renal tubular necrosis
tubules.
Waxy cast
 Chronic renal disease 
White cell cast
 Inflammation into the renal
 a/ngni
Red cell cast
 Hemorrhage into the renal
Urinary Crystals
 alngni
Urine crystals form when minerals or other
constituents precipitate or crystallize in the
urine. Crystals can form in the tubules or
Red blood cell and white blood cell casts
in the urine. The formation of crystals de-
form if there is significant inflammation or
 pends on the concentration of the substance
hemorrhage in the renal tubules. When they
 or substances in the urine and the urine pH.
are present in the urine, they identify the re-
Traditionally, crystals can be categorized by
nal tubule as the site for the inflammation
the pH of the urine that promotes formation
or hemorrhage. They will not be present
of the crystal. However, although there is
with cystitis unless there is ascending dis-
 an optimum pH for different crystal forma-
ease with extension of the inflammatory
tion, each crystal type can be seen in acid
 process from the bladder up through the
or alkaline urine, especially if the pH of the
urethra to the kidney.
urine is near neutral.
Hyaline casts are an indication of in-
 Dietary and metabolic factors are the pri-
creased protein in the urine.
. Because of
mary elements that promote crystal forma-
their appearance, they are diffcult
to see
tion. In addition, bacteria can act as a nidus
on sediment examination unless the con-
or center onto which a crystal will grow.
 denser is lowered to accentuate contrast in
Table 10.5 lists the most common crystals,
the wet preparation. Table
 10.4 lists the
the urine pH they in which they are usu-
individual casts and their causes. In dehy-
ally found, and the diseases with which they
 drated animals and animals with renal dis-
 are associated. The presence of crystals in
ease, fluid therapy can result in a transient
the urine does not predict the formation of
shower of casts into the urine as urine flow
uroliths (urine stones).
Table 10.5.(
 Common urine crystals and associated diseases.
Urine pH
Disease
Neutral to high
Urinary tract infection
 Neutral to high
Liver disease, portacaval shunts, normal in dalmatians
Low to neutral
 Hyperparathyroidism, hereditary predisposition in miniature schnauzers 
Low to neutral
Ethylene glycol intoxication 
Not pH-associated
Liver disease, immune-mediated hemolytic anemia 
Low to neutral
Hereditary cystinuria
Chapter 10: Evafuating Urinalysis 149
Table 10.6. Cellular elements and associated diseases.
Cell type
 Disease
Squamous cells
No clinical significance
Transitional cells
Increased numbers in cystitis, atypical cells associated with neoplasia
Erythrocytes
Cystitis, neoplasia, coagulopathies
Leukocytes 
 Cystitis, neoplasia, pyelonephritis 
Cells
rhage. A catheterized or cystocentesis sam-
ple should be obtained. A large number of
The cells present in urine are leuko-
these cells in a cystocentesis or catheter sam-
 ple indicate inflammation or hemorhage
cells, transitional cells and, rarely, renal
within the bladder or kidneys. Cystocente-
tubular epithelial cells. All of these cells can
sis can result in small amounts of blood in
be found in small numbers in urine from
 the urine sample.
clinically normal animals. The method of
 Transitional cells increase in number
urine collection has a direct effect on the
when inflammation of the 
bladder is
significance of the cellular elements found
present.
When inflammation is present,
in urine. Squamous and transitional epithe-
 transitional cells can become very atypical
lial cells usually have little significance, re-
 and difficult to differentiate from neoplastic
 gardless of collection method.
cells. If the number or appearance of transi-
Free-catch urine samples often have low
tional cells in urine is a concern, the sample
numbers of leukocytes and erythrocytes. If
should be reviewed by a clinical pathologist.
these cells are present in large numbers in a
Table 10.6 illustrates the cellular elements
free-catch sample, it is difficult to determine
found in urine and their association with
the source of the inflammation or hemor-
disease processes.
Adrenal Function and Testing
The adrenal glands are complex organs with
 producing a steroid hormone called al-
multiple functions. They play a central role
dosterone, also called a mineralocorti-
in the body's response to chronic and acute
coid
stress by regulating blood pressure, heart
Zona
fasciculata and zona reticu-
rate, bronchodilatation, electrolyte bal-
laris, which are the inner regions of
ance, and blood glucose levels. The adrenal
the adrenal cortex that produce a
glands are small peanut-shaped glands that
 prednisone-like steroid called cortisol
sit cranial to both kidneys (Figure 11.1).
 and small amounts of androgens (sex
The glands are composed of two distinctive
hormones)
and separate tissues-
the adrenal cortex
and the adrenal medulla—and each part
has a different function.
Adrenal Medulla
The adrenal medulla is the tissue in the
Adrenal Cortex
middle of the gland that is responsible for
producing epinephrine and norepinephrine
The adrenal cortex is the outer tissue layer
to assist the central nervous system in
responsible for producing different types of
times of crisis ("fight or flight response").
steroids for maintenance of blood glucose,
Epinephrine has the following effects on the
electrolytes, and sex hormone production.
body:
The cortex has three distinct levels and com-
 promises 75% of the entire gland:
 Increased heart rate
Blood vessel constriction → increased
 Zona granulosa, which is the outermost
blood pressure
area of the cortex and is responsible for
 Bronchial airways dilation
151
152 Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
 2. ACTH is released into the bloodstream
Adrenal
where it encounters specific protein re-
gland
ceptors in the adrenal cortex that stim-
ulate the release of cortisol into the
blood. The circulating cortisol stimu-
lates the conversion of protein and fat
into glucose, primarily in the liver.
As cortisol levels increase in the blood,
the pituitary decreases the amount of
ACTH released. This is called a nega-
tive feedback loop (Figure 11.2).
 Figure 11.1. The normal position of the adrenal gland
Adrenal Cortex: Mineralocorticoid
in the body.
Production
Decreased  intestinal secretion and
 The adrenal cortex also produces a miner-
movement
alocorticoid called aldosterone that is re-
Pupil dilation
sponsible for the reabsorption of sodium
and excretion of potassium in the distal con-
voluted tubules in the kidney (Figure 11.3).
Adrenal Function
Without this hormone, the renal medulla is
unable to maintain the high sodium gradi-
ent and thus cannot concentrate urine. This
In general, the adrenal gland has three pri-
hormone above all other adrenal hormones
mary functions that regulate the body's re-
is needed for normal handling of stress and
sponse to stress:
 electrolyte maintenance. Without sufficient
levels of this hormone, an animal can de-
 Cortisol production
velop a life-threatening Addisonian crisis:
 Mineralocorticoid production
Epinephrine production
Aldosterone is necessary for the main-
tenance of the sodium/potassium bal-
ance within the body. Sodium is the elec-
Adrenal-Pituitary Axis: Cortisol
trolyte found in highest concentrations
Production
in the serum and the extracellular fluid
in the body. Potassium is found in the
Cortisol is produced by the adrenal cortex
highest concentrations inside the cell.
to take protein and fat and turn them into
 All muscle contraction and nerve depo-
glucose in times of low blood glucose. The
larization require sodium and potassium
three-step process is controlled by a small
to switch places to produce the elec-
gland in the brain called the pituitary gland,
trical impulse necessary for the action
also called the "master gland":
(Figure 11.4).
When the normal sodium and potas-
1.
When the brain senses low blood
sium concentrations in the cells and
glucose, the 
pituitary gland
re-
blood
are altered, the
body has
a
leases  adrenocorticotrophic  hormone
harder time producing normal electrical
(ACTH) to stimulate the adrenal gland
activity, and the patient becomes weak-
to produce cortisol.
ened, with muscle fasiculations and
Chapter 11: Adrenal Function and Testing153
ACTH
stimulates
Adrenal
gland
1)Stimulatesfat and protein
Inhibits
CORTISOL
breakdown
2) Increases blood sugar
production
Figure 11.2.
ACTH stimulates the release of cortisol. Cortisol then stimulates production of blood glucose from
fats and muscle, while also decreasing the production of ACTH. This type of model is called a negative feedback
'doo]
abnormally  slow  heart 
rhythms.
response. It is closely linked to the sym-
Severely affected animals can develop
 pathetic nervous system, a division of the
 a life threatening condition, called an
autonomic nervous system of the body.
Addisonian crisis.
Epinephrine is secreted  when an animal
 is threatened and produces the following
 changes in the body:
Adrenaf Cortex: Epinephrine
Production
 Increased heart rate
 Increased Blood pressure 
As mentioned earlier, epinephrine is the
 Bronchodilatation to increase airflow
hormone associated with the fight or flight
into the body
154
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Urinary
Distal
Bowman'scapsule
space
convoluted
Parietallayer
Viscerallayer
tubule
Arteriole
Distal Convoluted Tubule
Efferent.
arteriole
Interlobular
artery
Glomerular
BUN/
Capilary Tuft
ammonia
Afferent
arteriole
Sodium
Proximal-
Aldosterone
convoluted
tubule
Potassium
Creatinine
Collecting
np
Loop of Henle
Figure 11.3.
 Sodium is reabsorbed and potassium excreted in the distal convoluted tubules due to the action of
aldosterone.
Sodium (Na)
Sodium (Na)
Potassium (K+)
Potassium (K+)
Cell
Cell
Electricalpotential
 Figure 11.4. Sodium/potassium exchange occurs within the cell to produce an electrical wave. These electrical
waves are key to normal neurological, cardiovascular, and muscular actions. Without proper concentrations of
Chapter 11: Adrenal Function and Testing155
Stopping intestinal movement and sali-
 pigmentation, hair loss (alopecia), rash,
vation
or plaques on the skin
 Pupil dilation 
 Polydipsia, polyuria, and polyphagia:
+
 Increased thirst, urination, and appetite.
 Chronic skin disease: Due to long-term
Evaluating the Patient with Adrenal
exposure to chronic steroidal medica-
Disease
tion, patients can have symmetrical hair
loss on both sides of the abdomen, thin-
ning of the skin or fragile skin, and in-
Three types of adrenal disease are com-
creased deposition of pigment.
monly seen in general practice; hyper-
 Abdominal
distention:
Due
toi
in-
adrenocorticism (Cushing's disease), hy-
 creased protein catabolism from long-
 poadrenocorticism (Addison's disease), and
term steroidal effects, the abdominal
pheochromocytoma.
 musculature begins to thin and the pa-
tient appears pot-bellied (Figure 11.5).
Panting: Panting is often reported as a
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's
side effect to increased steroidal medi-
Disease)
cation or production.
 Lethargy: Generally, clinical hypera-
Hyperadrenocorticism is an overproduction
drenocortical patients have decreased
of cortisol caused by primary adrenal or pi-
 energy and are more depressed.
tuitary disease.
Forms of Hyperadrenocorticism
Clinical Signs of Adrenal Disease
The following are clinical signs of adrenal
There are three forms of hyperadrenocorti-
disease:
cism:
 Chronic infection/skin disease: Thin-
Pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorti-
 ning of the skin, generalized increased
cism (PDH)
Figure 11.5. Image of a patient with distended or pot-bellied abdomen due to long-term affects of steroids
decreasing abdominal musculature.
156ClinicalPathology for the Veterinary Team
ACTH
stimulates
No
inhibition
Bothadrenals
enlargeas
theyproduce
more cortisol
1)Increased muscle and protein
Increased cortisol
breakdown
production
2) High levels of blood sugar
evident
Figure 11.6. Pituitary-dependent form of hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease). In this case, microscopic
tumors of the pituitary overproduce ACTH, producing bilaterally enlarged adrenal glands, which then overproduce
cortisol, producing Cushing's disease.
 Adrenal neoplasia
mors do not respond to the negative feed-
· Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism
back of increased circulating cortisol. If the
pituitary tumor becomes large enough, neu-
rologic disease can be seen (i.e., seizures)
Pituitary-Dependent
(Figure 11.6).
Hyperadrenocorticism (PDH)
This form of the disease is caused by a
Adrenal Neoplasia
pituitary tumor, which produces excessive
amounts of ACTH and causes overstimula-
A less common cause of hyperadrenocorti-
tion of both adrenal glands; this results in
cism is a tumor of the adrenal cortex that
 constant production of cortisol. These tu-
produces excessive amounts of cortisol. In
Chapter 11: Adrenal Function and Testing157
ACTH
stimulates
Negative
feedbackdue
Tumor
toexcessive
levelsof
Atrophy
1) Stimulates fat and protein
breakdown
CORTISOL
2) Increases blood sugar
production
Figure 11.7. With a tumor of the adrenal cortex, the affected gland overproduces cortisol irrespective of the ACTH
in the blood. The increasing blood cortical concentration decreases ACTH production, causing secondary atrophy
of the unaffected adrenal gland.
this case, one adrenal gland is usually en-
 ing suppression of ACTH section by the
larged and the other is small (atrophied).
 pituitary gland. The decreased circulating
The high concentration of cortisol and sec-
ACTH causes atrophy of both adrenal
ondary increase of glucose in the blood
glands.
. The exogenous steroids produce
cause a decrease in secretion of ACTH by
clinical signs similar to the other forms of
the pituitary through the negative feedback
hyperadrenocorticism. However, if the ex-
loop. Because there is decreased circulating
 ogenous steroids are discontinued abruptly,
ACTH, the other adrenal gland is small and
the patient develops signs of decreased
atrophied (Figure 11.7).
 adrenal function and may produce a life-
threatening Addisonian crisis. This conse-
quence of iatrogenic hyperadrenocortism
latrogenic Hyperadrenocorticism
can be avoided with a slow withdrawal of
the exogenous steroids.
Long-term administration of exogenous
 It is very difficult to diagnose most forms
steroids (i.e., prednisone) can disrupt the
 of hyperadrenocorticism with routine blood
normal negative feedback loop by caus-
work. Changes in the CBC and chemistry
158Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
profile can support a diagnosis of hypera-
drenocorticism but should not be consid-
ered diagnostic for the disease. Advanced
diagnostic tests are needed to confirm the
diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism and dif-
ferentiate primary pituitary disease from
adrenal disease (see Figure 11.10, later in
this chapter). The choice of a diagnostic
protocol to evaluate for hyperadrenocorti-
cism depends on the preference of the clini-
cian and the history and clinical findings of
the patient.
Routine Diagnostics for
Figure 11.8. Is this lipemia artifactual or suggestive
Hyperadrenocorticism
of a disease state? Endocrine diseases that affect fat
metabolism (i.e., hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mel-
litus, and hypothyroidism) may result in lipemic serum.
Serum Color
It is important for the technical team to record changes
in the gross appearance of serum samples. In addition,
As discussed previously, it is important for
suggesting underlying disease, this change will affect
the technical team to always evaluate and
in-house clinical chemistry values.
record serum color as part of routine diag-
nostic testing.
An increased neutrophil count
Patients with many forms of endocrine
 A decreased lymphocyte count
 disease, including hyperadrenocorticism,
An increased monocyte count in the dog
can have lipemic serum (see Figure 11.8).
 It is important to note that Lipemia can
also be seen as an artifact when a blood
Chemistry
sample is collected from a pet that has
just recently eaten. In general, a fast of 12
Changes in a routine chemistry profle can
hours is recommended to eliminate post-
be extremely variable. There is no abso-
 prandial lipemia. If lipemia persists greater
lute test for adrenal disease on a routine
than 12 hours, the patient should be evalu-
chemistry profle; however, the following
ated for diseases that may produce altered
sections review some commonly observed
fat metabolism.
changes.
Complete Blood Count
Alkaline Phosphatase
Alkaline phosphatase refers to a large num-
The complete blood count can be normal;
 ber of intracellular enzymes that are present
however, a stress leukogram is commonly
within the liver, intestine, bone, kidneys,
seen. A stress leukogram is characterized by
and placenta (see Chapter 6). Serum alka-
the following:
line phosphatase concentration is one of the
most common changes seen in the chem-
●A slight increase in white blood cells
 istry profle of patients with hyperadreno-
count
 corticism. Increased circulating steroids
Chapter 11: Adrenal Function and Testing 159
increase the production and release of alka-
Advanced Diagnostics for
line phosphatase by hepatocytes. This pro-
Hyperadrenocorticism
 cess is called induction.
It is important to note that patients with
hyperadrenocorticism can have normal lev-
The diagnosis of adrenal dysfunction re-
els of alkaline phosphatase and still have
quires special diagnostic tests that evaluate
significant disease.
the responsiveness of the adrenal-pituitary
axis. There are several diagnostic tests avail-
able; each has its own value in evaluating a
patient for abnormal adrenal function (see
ALT and AST
Figure 11.10, later in this chapter). The fol-
Chronic stimulation of hepatocytes by cir-
lowing sections review diagnostic tests com-
culating corticosteroids causes excessive ac-
 monly used to support a diagnosis of hyper-
cumulation of glycogen and can result in
 adrenocorticism.
hepatocellular damage with release of ALT
and AST.
Urine Cortisol/Creatinine
Ratio Test
Cholesterol
 Increased cholesterol can be seen with hy-
In animals with hyperadrenocorticism or
 peradrenocorticism due to increased fat mo-
 chronic stress, excess cortisol is excreted by
bilization.
the kidneys increasing the concentration of
cortisol in comparison to creatinine in the
urine. A single urine sample is obtained and
Blood Glucose
submitted to a reference laboratory. Results
 can include the following:
Animals with chronically high levels of
cortisol can be hyperglycemic. Blood glu-
 Increased levels of cortisol raise the cor-
cose in nondiabetic animals can range from
tisol/creatinine ratio > 1.
200-300 mg/dL. In 20% of hyperadreno-
A normal urine cortisol/creatinine ratio
corticism patients, diabetes can occur due
rules out Cushing's disease.
to corticosteroid-induced insulin resistance .
An elevated cortisol/creatinine ratio sup-
 ports, but is not diagnostic for, hypera-
drenocorticism. Any disease associated
Urinalysis
with chronic stress will increase the cor-
The ability of the kidneys to concentrate
tisol/creatinine ratio.
urine can be affected by increased circu-
lating corticosteroids. Animals are usually
Therefore, this test is a good screening
hyposthenuric with urine specific gravities
test to rule out hyperadrenocorticism.
of 1.008-1.012. Corticosteroids inhibit the
actions of the pituitary hormone ADH (an-
tidiuretic hormone), the hormone that reg-
ACTH Stimufation Test
ulates reabsorption of water in the kidneys.
In addition, if the disease is chronic enough,
The following procedure is used for this test:
loss of sodium in the medullary region of
the kidneys will decrease the osmotic gradi-
 The patient is fasted for 12 hours and a
ent necessary for reabsorption of water (see
 blood sample is taken for a prestimula-
Chapter 5).
 tion cortisol level.
160Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
2. ACTH is given, either intramuscularly
when faced with increasing cortisol or
or intravenously, depending
onthe
cortisol-like drug concentrations in the
form of ACTH administered.
blood. The abnormal pituitary tissue does
 3. 1 or 2 hours later (depending on the
 not respond to negative feedback.
form of ACTH administered), a blood
 Adrenal tumors do not depend on ACTH
sample is taken for a poststimulation
from the pituitary for production of corti-
cortisol level.
sol. Therefore, they do not decrease corti-
sol production when faced with decreasing
Patients with hyperadrenocorticism show
blood ACTH concentration.
 an exaggerated increase (far above the nor-
This test is an excellent screening for
Cushing's disease; however, this test does
mal response to ACTH) in blood corti-
sol concentration after stimulation of the
not distinguish between pituitary dependent
 adrenal gland; this response is due to their
 disease and an adrenal tumor.
enlarged hypertrophic adrenal glands. Al-
though this test is helpful in diagnosing hy.
 peradrenocorticism, it does not distinguish
High-Dose Dexamethasone
between pituitary-dependent disease and an
Suppression Test
adrenal tumor.
This test is done to differentiate between
adrenal or pituitary forms of the disease
Low-Dose Dexamethasone
after the low-dose dexamethasone suppres-
Suppression Test
sion test or the ACTH stimulation test have
confirmed the diagnosis of hyperadrenocor-
The following procedure is used for this test:
ticism.
 The following procedure is used for this
1. The patient is fasted for 12 hours and
test:
a blood sample is taken for a pretest
cortisol level.
1.
 The patient is fasted for 12 hours and
2.
A low dose of dexamethasone is in-
a blood sample is taken for a pretest
jected intravenously.
 6 and 8 hours after injection, blood
cortisol level.
3.
2.
 A high dosage of dexamethasone is in-
 samples are taken for additional corti-
jected intravenously.
sol concentration determinations.
3. 6 and 8 hours after injection, blood
samples are taken for additional corti-
 In the normal animal, cortisol concentra-
sol concentration determinations.
tion should be suppressed through the nega-
tive feedback system, decreasing ACTH se-
cretion and lowering cortisol production by
In the patient with pituitary-dependent
the adrenal glands. A normal animal will
 disease, the pituitary tumor will decrease
suppress its blood cortisol concentration by
ACTH production in the face of a higher
50% 6 to 8 hours after the initial dexam-
dexamethasone dose. The decreased ACTH
ethasone injection.
secretion in turn causes decreased cortisol
 In the patient with hyperadrenocorticism,
 release from the adrenal glands and blood
 there is no suppression of the cortisol after
 cortical goes down (is suppressed).
8 hours.
 In the patient with an adrenal tumor,
With pituitary disease, the pituitary tu-
blood cortical concentration will not sup-
mors will not decrease ACTH secretion
press in response to a higher dexamethasone
Chapter 11: Adrenal Function and Testing
161
Ultrasound
When hyperadrenocorticism is considered
as the likely diagnosis by review of rou-
tine clinical diagnostic tests, advanced diag-
nostic screening tests (i.e., ACTH response
test, low-dose dexamethasone suppression
test), abdominal ultrasound imaging can
help confrm bilaterally enlarged adrenal
glands or an adrenal mass. Ultrasound can
help detect the following:
Figure 11.9. An x-ray image of an enlarged liver sec-
Pituitary-dependent disease: With this
ondary to possible chronic steroid exposure. Neopla-
sia, infectious disease, or other forms of liver disease
form of the disease, abdominal ul-
Can also cause liver enlargement.
trasound can help indicate moderate
(1-2 × normal size) enlargement of both
adrenal glands due to increased ACTH
dose because it is not a responsive change
production from the pituitary gland.
 in blood ACTH concentration.
Adrenal tumor: With this form of the
disease, abdominal ultrasound can help
 indicate moderate enlargement of one
Additional Diagnostic Tests for
adrenal gland and atrophy of the other
gland secondary to negative feedback
Hyperadrenocorticism
of increased Cortisol concentrations and
decreased ACTH levels.
Radiology
Abdominal radiographs are used to assess
Text Box 11.1
 organ enlargement (i.e., hepatomegaly) or
Discussing Clinical Diagnostic Tests for
potential adrenal masses in patients with
 Hyperadrenocorticism with the Client 
clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism. Al-
though many diseases can produce organ
The veterinarian is recommending initial
enlargement, chronic increased blood cor-
baseline blood and urinalysis diagnostics
ticosteroid concentrations can produce an
to help evaluate your pet for Cushing's
increased liver mass (Figure 11.9).
disease, also known as
hyperadrenocorticism. This disease is 
 caused by an overproduction of steroids
by the adrenal Gland.
Blood Pressure
 Although routine blood work and
urinalysis will not absolutely confirm
One of the most common causes of ca-
Cushing, these diagnostic tests will help
 nine hypertension is hyperadrenocorticism.
indicate whether further testing is needed 
It is recommended that patients being eval-
to confirm or rule out the disease. Further,
uated for hyperadrenocorticism have sys-
the routine diagnostic tests will allow the
tolic blood pressure evaluated. Dogs with
veterinarian to assess for other organ
blood pressure persistently >150-160 mm
dysfunction that could occur secondary
Hg should be followed and may require
to Cushing's disease (i.e., diabetes
mellitus, liver disease).
tre atment.
162
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Cushing's disease is suspected
based on
。
Signalment
History
 Physical exam
Initial blood work
Option 1
 Option l1
Option Ill
Urine cortisol
Low-dlose Dex
creatinine ratio
ACTH STIM
1o1ssaddns
Abrormal
Abrorrmal
Abrorrmal
Low-dose Dex 0r
Ultrasound
ACTH STIM
Highi-dose Dex
uoiss.ddns
Abrormal
Abrormal
Bilateral enlarged
Unilateral enlarged
Cortisol suppresses
No suppression
Ultrasound
adrenals →→
adrenal ard smaller
secoridary adrenal 
Pituitary-dependent
Adrenal turmor
Pituitary-dependent
seasip s guusng
Cushing's disease
Cushing's disease
Adrenal tumor
Cushing's disease
Bilateral erlarged
Unilateral en larged
Adrenals →
adenal and smaller
Pituitary-dependent
secor dary adrenal →
Cushing's disease
 Adrenal turmor
Cushing's disease
 Figure 11.10. The decision tree gives team members an overview of the clinical diagnostic protocols that may be
but to understand the compfexity of testing to heip discuss diagnostic options with the cfient.
 produce steroid hormones. Controlling the
[f Cushing's disease is suspected,
disease requires a lifelong commitment by
advanced diagnostic tests and abdominal
 imaging may be needed.
owners to monitor their pets for recurrence
The type of the disease (pituitary vs.
of physical symptoms and routine reevalu-
 adrenal) must be diagnosed in order for
ation of blood work.
 an appropriate treatment protocol to be
 Over time, patients with hyperadrenocor-
recommended.
ticism can develop diabetes mellitus, hy-
pertension, secondary liver disease (steroid
hepatopathy), decreased ability to fight in-
fection (immunosuppression), muscle loss,
Long-Term Monitoring of the
and skin changes from chronic steroidal
 Patient with Hyperadrenocorticism
exposure. In addition, patients may de-
velop hypoadrenocorticism, because med-
ical treatment of the disease destroys the
Treatment protocols largely focus on de-
adrenal cells that produce both cortisol and
stroying the adrenal cell layer that produces
 aldosterone (see the section “Hypoadreno-
cortisol or decreasing the body's ability to
corticism," later in this chapter).
Chapter 11: Adrenal Function and Testing163
Chronic Infection/Skin Pathology
 Diabetes Melitus (20% of allCushing's Patients)
Client-Thinning of the skin, increased pigmentation, generalized
ClientInereased thirst & urination
hair loss (alopecia), rash or plaques in the skin 
 With Concern Diagnostics Can Include
With Concern Diagnostics Can Include
 Serial U/a
 ACTH or adrenal function testing
Serial blood sugar
Thyroid level
Fructosamine
 Complete blood count and chemistry 
Hypoadrenocortical Patients (From Treatment)
Client-
Weakness
Vomiting, diarrhea
Collapsing
Bradycardia
With Concern Diagnostics Can Include
Electrolytes
·
ACTH Response test
Fructosamine
Liver Disease (Steroid Hepatopathy)
Hypertension
Client-Vomiting, diarrhea, weight loss, jaundice, weakeness
 Client-We akness, -..patient aeting old or not right, .' blindness,.
With Concern Diagnostics Can Inclue
exercise intolerance
 With Concern Diagnostics Can Include
 Chemistry-lever profile
Bile acids
·Blood pressure
 Ultrasound
Figure 11.11. Ilustration of secondary disease, physical symptoms, and clinical diagnostic tests that are evaluated 
when treating and monitoring the Patient with hyperadrenocorticism.
Hospital teams should consider and dis-
 jury, changes in electrolytes to monitor for
cuss these concerns with clients and make
any changes that could suggest hypoad-
sure that the owners are aware of physi-
renocorticism, and changes in blood glucose
cal signs that could suggest changes in the
 concentration that could suggest early signs
patient's disease status and of routine clin-
 of diabetes mellitus.
ical monitoring of patients (Figure 11.11).
Suggested clinical pathology testing for the
long-term management of the patient with
hyperadrenocorticism includes the tests re-
ACTH Stimulation Test
viewed in the following sections.
This clinical diagnostic test is used at reg-
ular intervals to evaluate the patient's re-
Complete Blood Count and
sponse to medication and to make sure the
Chemistry Profile
-dns Aq ua o uuoda st uad
 pressing the production of cortisol but has
The medical team s
should evaluate for
not developed clinical hypoadrenocorticism
changes in the CBC that suggest inflam-
(Addison's disease). Based the results of the
matory or infectious disease. Further, the
test, the veterinarian can change medication
chemistry should be evaluated for changes
or level of medication to maximize control
in liver enzymes that may suggest liver in-
of the disease.
164Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Blood Pressure Evafuation
unknown. The most likely disease process is
thought to be immune-mediated destruction
If the patient continues to remain poorly
 of the cortical tissue.
controlled by medication, routine evalua-
tion of blood pressure should be monitored.
latrogenic
 If a patient becomes hypertensive, medica-
tions to control the hypertension (see Chap-
As discussed in the previous section on hy-
ter 5) may be added.
peradrenocorticism, chronic administration
of steroids can result in loss of adrenal
cortical tissue due to atrophy. When the
Bile Acids/Abdominal Ultrasound
Exogenous steroids are abruptly discontin-
s i s  nd a 
If the patient begins to show physical symp-
of hypoadrenocorticism. In addition, the
toms of liver disease or if there are changes
drugs used to treat hyperadrenocorticism
in the blood work to suggest liver damage,
can cause necrosis of the cortical tissue. If
bile acid assays are often recommended to
the necrosis is extensive, hypoadrenocorti-
assess liver function (see chapter 6). If liver
cism will develop and the patient will then
function is affected, often abdominal ultra-
need to be treated for Addison's disease.
sound and ultrasound-guided biopsy may
be elected to help identify the type of liver
Granulomatous Disease
injury.
Several infectious diseases, primarily fun-
 gal, can affect the adrenal cortical tissue. In
Hypoadrenocorticism
these cases, the cortical tissue is replaced by
inflammatory cells that form multiple gran-
ulomas.
The second form of adrenal disease is hy-
poadrenocorticism (Addison's disease), a
Neoplasia
decreased production of aldosterone and/or
cortisol by the adrenal gland. The lack of
Cancer can spread from other organs
aldosterone inhibits the kidney's ability to
(metastasize) to the adrenal gland or invade
retain sodium and excrete potassium. The
from the adrenal medulla and destroy the
lack of cortisol inhibits normal release of
normal adrenal cortical tissue.
blood glucose in times of crisis or response
to stress. Addison's disease is caused by de-
struction of the adrenal cortex.
Forms of Hypoadrenocorticism
Disease Processes
There are two forms of hypoadrenocorti-
cism. The most common type is called pri-
The following sections review several dis-
mary Addison's disease. This disease results
ease processes that can result in destruction
from a decrease production of aldosterone
 or loss of the cortical tissue.
and cortisol due to lack of adrenal cor-
tical tissue. These patients lose the abil-
ity to retain sodium and excrete potas-
Idiopathic
sium, produce glucose when the patient is
In most cases of hypoadrenocorticism, the
hypoglycemic, and respond to stress. Pa-
exact cause of the loss of cortical tissue is
tients suffering from the primary form of
Chapter 11: Adrenal Function and Testing
165
hypoadrenocorticism can develop a life-
 blood glucose concentration. Blood glucose
threatening crisis (Addisonian crisis) from
<60 mg/dL should be treated as a life-
 their inability to balance sodium and potas-
 threatening emergency (see Chapter 15).
sium concentrations in blood and tissues.
The second form of Addison's disease
(atypical Addison's disease) occurs when
Azotemia
the patient lose the ability to produce corti-
When patients are admitted in an Addis-
sol only. These patients have a decreased
ability to produce glucose when hypo-
onian crisis, they are weak, dehydrated,
 and often hypotensive. These factors slow
glycemic and respond to stress, but they do
 glomerular filtration of the blood (see Chap-
not typically present with life-threatening
ter 5) and increased BUN and creatinine
electrolyte imbalance.
concentrations. Usually, the elevation in
BUN and creatinine concentration is mild
to moderate.
Diagnostic Tests for
Hypoadrenocorticism
Urinalysis
Routine blood and urine diagnostic tests
The ability of the kidneys to concentrate
are often more helpful in evaluating the
urine is affected by the decreased sodium
patient's hypoadrenocorticism compared
 in the renal medulla (see Chapter 5). Ani-
to hyperadrenocorticism.
Thef
following
 mals are usually hyposthenuric with a urine
changes in routine blood work are often
specific gravity of 1.008 to 1.012. It is im-
seen in the patient with hypoadrenocorti-
 portant to understand the exception to the
cism.
rule for differentiating prerenal from renal
 azotemia: Addisonian patients are azotemic
Chemistry
with dilute urine but do not have primary
renal disease. Once controlled with proper
medication, these patients will be able to
Electrolyte Imbalance
concentrate their urine and filter their blood
With hypoadrenocorticism:
properly.
 The body is not able to reabsorb sodium
and excrete potassium.
ACTH Stimulation Test
sodium and increased concentration of
evaluate the adrenal glands’ response to
potassium.
 ACTH and confirm the diagnosis of hypoa-
The  sodium/potassium
ratio
 is de-
drenocorticism:
creased.
+
The normal
sodium/potassium
ratio
 is >25:1 (Na:K); a ratio of <23:1 is sug-
 The normal response produces a mea-
 gestive of Addison's disease.
surable moderate rise in blood cor-
tisol 2 hours after administration of
ACTH.
Hypoglycemia
 In the patient with hypoadrenocorti-
Occasionally, patients in an Addisonian
cism, there is no response to cortisol lev-
crisis will have a significantly decreased
els after administration of ACTH.
166
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
 of the disease have mild signs of chronic
Text Box 11.2
 Discussing Clinical Diagnostic Tests for
anorexia, vomiting, weakness, and other
general clinical signs. Oten, veterinarians
Hypoadrenocorticism with the Client
 include ACTH stimulation testing in the di-
The veterinarian is recommending initial
agnostic process for patients suffering from
 routine blood and urinalysis tests to help
symptoms of chronic vomiting, diarrhea,
'aseasip suos!ppy ioy lad ino aenieaa 
and anorexia. Patients suffering from atypi-
which is the lack of production of steroids 
 cal Addison's disease will show no response
from the adrenal gland.
to ACTH.
 The veterinarian will evaluate changes in 
the urine and the blood electrolytes (i.e..
 sodium and potassium) that suggest an 
Pheochromocytoma
 imbalance in the normal reabsorption of
sodium and excretion of potassium from
the body.
The third and final adrenal gland dis-
· [f Addison's disease is suspected,
ease is pheochromocytoma, cancer of the
 advanced diagnostic testing may be
 adrenal medulla, the epinephrine-producing
recommended.
tissue of the adrenal gland. This rare type
 of cancer can cause severe hypertension,
Evaluating a patient for atypical Addi-
rapid heart rate, weakness, and eventually
son's disease is more difficult; these pa-
death. Except for having potential severe
 tients produce enough aldosterone to main-
life-threatening hypertension, these patients
tain normal electrolyte concentrations. In
show little change in their clinical diagnos-
addition, patients suffering from this form
tic database.
Blood Gas
Every animal requires chemical reactions to
acidotic state.
produce energy, fght offinfection, or han-
dle electrolyte abnormalities. A simple ex-
CH12O6 (Sugar) + no O2
ample of a common metabolic reaction is
the conversion of sugar (glucose) into en-
ergy. The following is the basic formula for
+ Lactic Acid + CO2
this reaction:
People affected by lactic acidosis become
weak, anorexic, nauseous, and potentially
CH12O6 (Sugar) + H2O + O2
shocky.
H73s-7.4s> Energy + CO2
When factors produce a change in blood
pH, the normal body's reaction can be
In order for this reaction to occur prop-
slowed and the patient can become ill. Aci-
erly, the body must have adequate levels of
dosis is defined as a decrease in plasma
blood sugar, oxygen, and a proper blood
bicarbonate concentration (HCOs) or an
pH. If one of these factors is limited, the
increase in carbon dioxide (COz) in a
production of energy is affected. An excel-
patient. Bicarbonate is a natural buffer
lent example is when people begin to ex-
that helps to maintain neutral pH when
ercise; they may limit the amount of oxy-
blood pH becomes acidic; loss of blood
gen needed to produce essential energy. In
 bicarbonate levels is generally associated
this situation, the patient begins to anaero-
with conditions producing metabolic dis-
bically (without oxygen) convert sugar into
ease (metabolic acidosis).
energy and lactic acid. Not only is this not
Carbon dioxide is an acid that is pro-
as effcient a way to produce energy, lactic
duced as the body metabolizes sugar to form
acid lowers the body's pH and produces an
energy; increase in blood carbon dioxide
167
168Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
levels are generally associated with disease
Acid added to body: diabetic ketoacido-
that affects gas exchange in the lungs (res-
sis, lactic acidosis, antifreeze intoxica-
 piratory acidosis). These changes in chemi-
tion (ethylene glycol), snail bait poison-
cal population move the normal blood pH
ing (paraldehyde)
away from its neutral pH 7.35-7.45 into an
Decreased acid secretion: renal disease
acidic pH. With acidic pH, the body's chem-
(renal tubular disease)
ical reactions cannot function normally and
the patient becomes weakened, sick, and de-
Metabolic acidosis can affect any species,
bilitated.
breed, sex, or age of animal. The patient
with metabolic acidosis may have a his-
tory of a chronic disease that can reduce
Etiology
the body's ability to excrete toxin (i.e., di-
abetes, renal disease, and hypoadrenocorti-
cism), a history of exposure to toxins (an-
Metabolic acidosis occurs as pH is lowered
tifreeze, snail bait, aspirin overdose), or
in the bloodstream. This occurs from a com-
a disease that produces excessive vomit-
 bination of factors, which include a loss of
 ing/diarrhea (i.e., parvo, pancreatitis, HE,
bicarbonate due to a loss of body fluids, an
etc.). Metabolic acidosis can be subtle, pro-
addition of an abnormal acid to the fluid
ducing a large variety of signs but, in gen-
 pool, or decreased renal secretion of acid
eral, the patient will show the following:
(Figure 12.1). The following are common
examples of metabolic acidosis:
Nausea
Weakness
 Loss of HCOs-rich fluids: diarrhea (ex-
V/D
cessive), hypoadrenocorticism
Dehydration
Acidic Compounds
To counter:
H+ - From Metabolic
Renal Excretion of toxins
Reactions
Blood Buffers torestore
Toxins
pH (7.35-7.45)
normalpH
Metabolic Reaction
Sodium Bicarbonate
 Ingested Toxins
Disease
OtherBuffers
Acidic pH (<7.35)
Homeostasis
MetabolicAcidosis
MetabolicorIngestedToxin
Lossof RenalExcretion
LOSSOF BUFFER RICH FLUIDS
that overwhelmsthenormal
(Acute Severe Disease)
DIARRHEA,VOMITING
buffers
Figure 12.1. An illustration of causative factors that produce acidosis. In the healthy patient, acidic compounds,
such as hydrogen ions from metabolic reactions and toxins, lower blood pH. However renal excretion of toxins
and normal blood buffers counter this pH drop and maintain normal levels. In the metabolically ill patient,
overwhelming toxin load, the loss of renal excretion (i.e. dehydration, renal tubular acidosis), and loss of buffer-
rich fluids (i.e., diarrhea and vomiting), overwhelm the patient and produce a severe metabolic acidosis.
Chapter 12: Blood Gas 169
Cardiac arrhythmias
The following are common physical
+
Shock
symptoms:
Hyperventilation (body's response to
acidosis → decreasing COz levels)
 Decreased metabolic reactions
Cardiac arrhythmia
Altered breathing patterns or hyperventi-
 Decreased ability to oxygenate tissue
lation can occur as decreases in pH stimu-
Shock
late the body to remove other acid sources.
The body then increases respiration to re-
move carbon dioxide, producing a hyper-
If either form of acidosis is not aggres-
ventilation respiratory pattern. This pattern
sively treated, the patient can become weak,
ill, nauseous, or prone to cardiac arrhyth-
of abnormal breathing and decreased CO2
in the face of acidosis is called a compen-
mia or shock, and may die.
sating metabolic acidosis. It is important
Blood gas is generally included as part
of a clinical diagnostic baseline dependent
to note that even with a patient's ability
to lower COz, this may not be sufficient to
upon the patient, its medical history, and
control the acidosis (see below).
the physical symptoms. With metabolic aci-
 dosis, blood gases are generally evaluated
Respiratory acidosis is a buildup of
as a part of clinical diagnostic baseline
 carbon dioxide due to improper oxygen
(i.e., complete blood count, chemistry, elec-
Exchange in the body or decreased oxygena-
trolytes, blood gases, and urinalysis). Fur-
tion of the patient (Figure 12.2). The follow-
ther, it can also be utilized as a diagnostic or
prognostic indicator to determine whether
ing are the most common causes:
the patient is responding to treatment, to
 Inadequate oxygenation from anesthe-
 obtain a differential disease list, and to out-
sia (i.e., decreased ventilation or poor
line treatment options.With metabolic aci-
ventilation)
dosis, the clinical diagnostic parameters are
Anesthesia
of
metabolically
ill
blood pH, partial pressure of CO2 (pCO2),
a
patient—i.e., gastrodilatation volvulus
 anion gap, and base excess. This can be ob-
(GDV)
tained through a venous sample by normal
+
 A patient with severe pneumonia
collection methods.
RBC
Dgin
CO
Oxygen
AIR
Alveolus
Figure 12.2. Ilustration of gas exchange at the alveolar level. In this image, oxygen is breathed in through the
trachea, the bronchi, into the alveolus. The enlarged drawing of the alveolus shows that oxygen is exchanged for
carbon dioxide in the blood. With respiratory acidosis, this process does not occur and COz levels increase in the
blood.
170Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Figure 12.3. With signs of metabolic acidosis, a venous blood sample should be obtained and the sample included
 as part of a diagnostic baseline. With signs of respiratory acidosis, an arterial sample is indicated. For anesthesia
patients, the sublingual artery is often a good choice.
With respiratory acidosis, blood gases
 patients, except those receiving sodium bi-
are generally evaluated with anesthetic pa-
carbonate therapies, will not require treat-
tients under long-term surgical procedures,
ment or monitoring.
animals on mechanical ventilators, and
animals during emergency surgery with
possible underlying metabolic issues (i.e.,
Step 2: Determine the Type
GDV—endotoxic shock). To evaluate the
of Acidosis
patient for respiratory acidosis, the clinical
diagnostic parameters are blood pH, pCO2,
To determine the cause of the acidosis, the
pO2, HCOs, and % saturated oxygen level.
medical team must evaluate the partial pres.
 In anesthetized patients, an arterial blood
sure of carbon dioxide (pCOz). With an aci-
stick of a sublingual vessel offers easy expo-
dotic patient:
sure to a small arterial (Figure 12.3).
 Once blood samples are obtained there is
Decreased pCO2 (<35 mm HG) or nor-
a simple four-step algorithm to evaluate a
mal pCO2 (34-40 mm HG) indicates
patient for acidosis (Algorithm 12.1).
a primary metabolic acidosis. Because
 This process helps to determine whether
CO2 levels are low to normal, the pa-
the patient is acidotic, the cause of the aci-
tient is becoming acidotic due to in-
dosis, the prognosis, possible differential
creased blood toxins, decreased filtra-
diseases that can cause the acidosis, and the
tion, or loss of bicarbonate-rich fluids.
outline treatment options.
Low pCO2 (<35 mm HG) indicates a
primary metabolic acidosis with respira-
Step 1: Identify Acidosis
tory compensation. The patient is trying
to expel carbon dioxide at an increased
An acidotic patient has a pH <7.35. This
rate to help
） counter the metabolic
factor alone designates whether the patient
acidification. This usually presents with
is acidotic and may require treatment. A pa-
a patient with altered or abnormal res-
tient with pH >7.45 is alkalotic. In general,
piratory cycle (i.e., hyperventilating).
acidotic patients require evaluation, treat-
However, this process is not always
ing, and monitoring. In general, alkalotic
enough to reverse the acidosis.
acidosis
UNDERLYING
[0
aul
as
rhea
Diarrl
Renal
ea
12
2 3
Treat underlying disease and
 continue diagnostic pathways.
I metabolic acidosi
 Is the anion gap elevated?
oacidosis
Treat underlying disease 2
Lactic acidosis
Yes
Renal disease
Diabetic 
Jdentified
pa
al
2iM
N
Algorithm 12.1. Causes of acidosis
Is the patient acidotic?
f patient has pulmonary disease:
Is the patient still acidotic?
Identified respiratory acidosis
(blood pH <7.35)
s
en therapy
oxygen levels
172Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
 Normal pCO2 (34-40 mm HG) indi-
Ketoacidosis (diabetes mellitus)
cates a primary metabolic acidosis with-
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's dis-
out respiratory compensation.
ease)
Increased pCO2 (>40 mm HG) indicates
Lactic acidosis
a primary respiratory acidosis. The pa-
Uremia (retention of anion metabolites)
tient has decreased ability to exchange
Toxins
(ethylene
glycol,
methanol,
gases at the alveolar level and carbon
ethanol,
paraldehyde
{snail
bait),
dioxide is building up in the blood-
aspirin)
stream. Carbon dioxide is an acid and
+
Renal disease
leads to a lowering of the blood pH.
A
patient
with
normal
anion
gap
metabolic acidosis is less common  in
Step 3: Develop a Differential List
veterinary medicine and usually associated
for Metabolic Acidosis
with increased chloride (hyperchloremia).
This is generally caused by diseases that
If dealing with a metabolic acidotic patient,
produce severe diarrhea and electrolyte
the next step is to develop a potential dif-
abnormalities.
ferential list for the cause of the acidosis.
 In many situations, general blood work can
 be ambiguous and, by evaluating all compo-
Step 4: Formufafe a Treatment Plan
 nents of blood gas, the medical team may be
 able to isolate a cause of the disease process.
With a patient suffering from respiratory
To do this, the medical team must eval-
acidosis, when the respiratory acidosis is
uate the anion gap (AG). Patients have
confirmed by increasing levels of pCOz and
positively and negatively charged ions that
 decreasing pH below normal, the goal to
help to regulate electrical impulses, moder-
 treatment is increasing oxygenation levels.
ate chemical reactions, and aid in multiple
Acute elevations in COz that are due to the
metabolic functions. The typical measured
anesthetic process require an adjustment of
ions are cations (positively charged ions),
ventilator settings, or manually ventilating
such as sodium and potassium, and anions
the patient. With chronic pulmonary pa-
(negatively charged ions), chloride and bi-
tients, the goal is to increase oxygen levels
carbonate The AG is the unmeasured an-
in the tissue. The overall goals of treatment
are the following:
ions in a serum sample. The following are
examples of these anions:
On a ventilator: As with any anes-
Sulfate
thetic concern, the first step in treat-
 Phosphate
ing a patient is to increase oxygen
Lactate
concentration and decrease anesthetic
levels. Then the goal is to increase oxy-
Pyruvate
Ketoacids
gen exchange at the alveolar level by
 Some plasma proteins/amino acids
decreasing the expiratory time on the
 Some toxins or toxin metabolites
ventilator. This produces a deep holding
breath that forces gas exchange into the
The normal AG is generally measured at
tissue.
 8-25 mmol/L. An elevated high anion gap
Without a ventilator: As stated pre-
(>35) in the metabolic acidosis patient sug-
viously, oxygen concentration should
gests an adition of an unmeasured charged
be increased and anesthetic levels de-
ion producing the acidosis. The following
creased. Then the animal should be
are examples of some of these unmeasured
manually ventilated taking deep breaths
ions:
until the patient's increased shallow
Chapter 12: Blood Gas 173
ventilation slows or blood gases im-
The medical team must carefully monitor
 prove. With manual ventilation, the goal
the patient while bicarbonate is given. Gen-
is to increase ventilation rate to 15-20
erally it is recommended to give half the
breaths per minute at a pressure of
calculated amount over 30 minutes and re-
18-20 cm Hg. In between each breath,
assess acid/base status. Bicarbonate admin-
the stop-off valve should be opened to
istration should be used cautiously by an
allow the patient to continue breathing
experienced medical team.
 on its own and to allow waste gases can
Last, it is important that the client under-
be expelled.
stands the importance of monitoring blood
With pneumonia patients: Aggressive
gas and importance of controlling the aci-
therapy is recommended with patients
dotic patient. When discussing monitoring
suffering from an infectious disease ob-
blood gas, the medical team should empha-
structing alveoli and bronchi and de-
size the following concerns:
creasing the body's ability to oxygenate
its tissues. Some therapeutic options
may be hospitalization, intravenous flu-
 The body requires millions of metabolic
ids and antibiotics, oxygen therapy, and
reactions to maintain normal function,
nebulization.
fight off infection, and deal with disease.
 In order to produce these necessary body
With a patient suffering from metabolic
reactions, the body must have a blood pH
acidosis, the key is to treat the primary un-
between 7.35-7.45.
derlying disease. Through serial blood gas,
[f the blood pH falls below 7.35, the
response to treatment can be evaluated and
patient becomes acidotic, slowing the
body's ability to maintain its normal 
can be a strong prognostic indicator for the
 chemical reactions and adding to the
patient's health status. However, in patients
patient's potential for illness and 
that do not respond to standard treatment,
disease.
bicarbonate therapy may be considered.
 One cause of acidosis is respiratory
To evaluate whether bicarbonate therapy
acidosis caused by an inability of the
is indicated, base excess (BE) should be eval-
body to exchange gases in the lungs. This 
uated. Base excess indicates the amount of
is typically seen with patients undergoing
blood buffer available to return blood pH
long anesthetic procedures, ill patients 
back from acidic level. If BE is normal in
requiring surgery, and patients with
an acidotic patient, there is no need to cor-
pneumonia.
rect for a metabolic problem. Base excess is
 The second form of acidosis is metabolic
acidosis, which occurs in sick animals
reported in positive or negative numbers.
that have increased blood or infectious
When
faced
1 with 
1anonresponsive
toxin loads, decreased ability to remove
metabolic acidosis with a pH of <7.25, the
toxins from the body (for example,
 patient may require intervention other than
kidney disease, severe dehydration, and
bolusing a pH balanced fluid. Bicarbonate is
 other causes), or loss of buffers (from
dosed according to the following equation:
vomiting and diarrhea) that help maintain
normal blood pH.
Sodium bicarbonate (mEq) needed to bring
 By evaluating blood gas, the medical 
BE to zero = ABS [(weight in kg × 0.3)
team can identify acidotic patients and 
the type of the acidosis, help icentify
× BE]
causes of the acidosis, and identify
Absolute value (ABS) is needed in this
 treatment options that can help stabilize
equation or else the value comes back to
the patient and improve its ability to
handle anesthesia or combat severe
negative. There is no way to administer a
disease.
negative amount of bicarbonate.
Coagulation
The bleeding patient can present with
hand, excessive blood coagulation will re-
acute disease such a hemorrhagic shock or
sult in the formation of blood clots, caus-
chronic disease causing iron deficiency ane-
 ing an obstruction of vessels and resulting
mia. In addition, an inability to control the
in hypoxic injury to the tissues. Fibrinolysis
formation of a clot can result in the inappro-
(breakdown of blood clots) is the opposing
priate formation of clots (thrombi) without
mechanism that reestablishes blood flow af-
injury to a blood vessel. An understanding
ter the vessel is repaired by dissolving the
of the events involved in maintaining ade-
clot that is obstructing the vessel. Fibrinoly-
quate blood flow without blood loss is very
sis also limits the process of coagulation to
important when both monitoring a patient's
the site of injury. There are several principle
status and relating the results of clinical test-
 events that are involved in coagulation:
ing to the condition of the patient. The clin-
ical manifestations of abnormalities in co-
Constriction of the injured vessel
agulation can assist in determining which of
Formation of the “primary platelet
the events in coagulation are dysfunctional.
plug"
The process of coagulation and the events 
 Stabilization of the primary platelet plug
that control coagulation are complex. This
by deposits of fibrin
chapter discusses the process of coagulation
and the essential steps as they relate to the
patient and to laboratory testing.
Each of these steps is discussed along with
Blood coagulation
1(hemostasis) is the
the concurrent activation of fibrinolysis as a
process of turning free-flowing blood into
 control of clot formation. Clinical findings
a stationary clot. This process is essential
and diagnostic testing for disorders of co-
to life. It prevents fatal blood loss when a
agulation are reviewed as they relate to the
vessel or vessels are injured. On the other
process of hemostasis.
175
176Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Hemostasis
 process of coagulation to the site of vessel
injury. Without this control, the clot would
continue to grow and, potentially, block the
The three primary elements of hemostasis
vessel far beyond what is needed to keep
are the endothelial cells that line the wall
normal blood flow through the vessel.
 of the blood vessels, platelets, and clotting
The injured endothelial cell is procoag-
factors. Each of these elements must func-
ulant. The initial action of the endothelial
tion appropriately for normal hemostasis.
Defects in any of these three participants in
cell is to contract and constrict the vessel.
This immediate action decreases the flow of
the process can result in abnormal bleeding
 blood. The injured endothelial cells expose
 or inappropriate clot formation. Although
subendothelial tissues that activate platelets
the processes of hemostasis occur simulta-
and promote their aggregation. In addition,
neously in the animal, when a patient is
the injured endothelial cells bind clotting
being evaluated for a defect in hemostasis,
factors on their surface, which increases
these processes are considered and tested
their concentration at the site of injury. At
separately. The most difficult element of
the same time, injured endothelial cells re-
hemostasis to evaluate is the endothelial
lease proteins that oppose fibrinolysis. The
cells.
focal inhibition of fibrinolysis allows the de-
veloping clot to be strong.
There is no laboratory testing that can
Endothelial Cells
evaluate the function of endothelial cells.
There are diseases that can interfere with
Endothelial cells line all blood
1 vessels.
the function of the endothelial cells. In most
When injured, the endothelial cell retracts
cases, abnormal endothelial cells result in
to expose proteins present in the tissue in
abnormal clot formation because they do
the vessel wall or interstitium that interact
not maintain their anticoagulant nature.
with platelets to promote their adhesion.
 Sepsis and metabolic diseases such as dia-
Further, these sites release molecules that
betes can result in procoagulant changes in
promote activation of the clotting factors.
endothelial cells throughout the body.
The blood vessel wall plays a major role in
both coagulation and fibrinolysis. Interest-
ingly, intact endothelial cells suppress acti-
Platelets
vation of clotting factors and inhibit adhe-
sion of platelets. The dual nature of the en-
 Platelets are essential for primary hemosta-
dothelial cell assists in keeping the process
sis, t
the 
formation of the initial clot
 of coagulation limited to the site of vessel
(primary platelet plug). The injured en-
injury.
dothelial cells promote the adhesion, aggre-
The intact healthy endothelium has anti-
gation, swelling, and secretion by platelets
coagulant activity. The endothelial cells se-
(activation). Activated platelets also pro-
mote 
the activation of other platelets.
"(apixo snonu pue I upuelseisoid) uoes
Platelets are very sensitive to endothelial cell
promote vasodilation to keep blood flowing
 injury, which is why it is important to per-
quickly through the lumen, activate antico-
form atraumatic venipuncture. Any trauma
agulant proteins (protein C), and promote
to the vessel or surrounding tissue during
inactivation of all clotting factors. This an-
venipuncture will activate platelets and re-
ticoagulant activity keeps inappropriate co-
sult in platelet clumping in the blood sam-
agulation from occurring in the uninjured
ple. When platelets are activated, they re-
vessel. It is extremely important to limit the
lease factors that promote activation of the
Chapter 13: Coagulation  177
coagulation cascade. In addition to the se-
zymes or enzyme complexes that form the
creted factors, platelets provide a surface for
coagulation cascade. The coagulation cas-
the clotting process and the cellular mass
cade depends on many cofactors, such as
that will form the clot.
calcium and multiple feedback loops that
Defects in primary hemostasis can oc-
accelerate and inhibit the process. If there is
cur due to decreased numbers of circulat-
 a deficiency in the coagulation cascade, the
ing platelets (thrombocytopenia) or platelet
primary plug will degrade prematurely and
dysfunction. Thrombocytopenia is the most
bleeding will resume.
common defect in primary hemostasis.
For the purpose of discussion, the coagu-
Thrombocytopenia can be due to several
lation cascade (the sequential steps involved
mechanisms, as discussed in Chapter 4. De-
in clotting) are artificially separated into
fects in platelet function, most often hered-
two pathways that converge into a com-
itary, include the following:
mon pathway that ends in the formation
 of fbrin. Fibrinogen is the protein precur-
 Deficiencies in factors that allow the
sor to fibrin that circulates in the plasma.
platelet to adhere to the subendothelial
In the coagulation cascade, the two path-
tissue, as seen in von Willebrand's dis-
ways are the intrinsic pathway, where all
ease (e.g., Doberman Pinscher)
the factors are found in the blood, and the
 Factors that allow platelets to adhere
extrinsic pathway, which requires a tissue
to each other, as seen in Glanzmann's
factor. Figure 13.1 illustrates the two con-
thrombasthenia (e.g., Great Pyrenees)
verging pathways and the final pathway. It
 Factors that allow the platelet to adhere
 is very important to remember that this sep-
to von Willebrand's factor as seen in
aration of pathways is artificial. In the an-
Bernard-Soulier syndrome
imal, it is easier to think of the intrinsic
pathway as an acceleration pathway that
In addition, there are inherited diseases
amplifies the extrinsic pathway. The cen-
that affect the contents of the granules in
tral theme for the coagulation cascade is
the platelet that inhibit release of procoag-
to form fibrin, and the major factor in-
ulant factors. There are acquired defects in
volved in formation of fibrin is the enzyme
platelet function; the most common is drug
thrombin. One could say that the forma-
related. Aspirin and certain antinflamma-
tion of thrombin and control of its activity
tory drugs inhibit platelet function.
is the primary purpose of the coagulation
Thrombocytopenia or platelet dysfunc-
cascade.
tion produce an overt "primary” hemor-
 Thrombin is a powerful enzyme that cir-
rhage, petechia and hemorrhage from mu-
culates in the blood in an inactive form
cosal surfaces (melena, epistaxis).
called prothrombin. Thrombin converts the
circulating protein fbrinogen into fibrin,
the glue that holds the platelet plug together
Coagufation Factors
(Figure 13.2). However, transforming fib-
rinogen into fbrin is not the only process
Secondary hemostasis is the process of sta-
in which thrombin plays a role. Throm-
bilizing the platelet plug by formation of
bin promotes platelet aggregation, activates
fibrin, the mortar that holds the platelets to-
several clotting factors, and inhibits the
gether. Again, in the patient, the processes
breakdown of fbrin. In addition, throm-
of primary and secondary hemostasis oc-
bin also plays a role in inhibiting coagu-
cur simultaneously. The formation of stable
lation. Thrombin activates a molecule that
fbrin is the result of activation of numer-
inhibits its own actions. Where it is in high
ous circulating clotting factors that are en-
concentration (in the area where the clot is
178(
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Hemophilia A (deficiency of factor VIII)
+
Hemophilia B (deficiency of factor IX)
Xlla
Deficiency of factor X
Acquired disorders of coagulation are
Prothrombin
diseases that result in decreased produc-
Thrombin
tion of clotting factors from liver failure
?
Fibrinogen
(see Chapter 6), increased consumption of
Xa
Ylla
clotting factors (disseminated intravascular
Fibrin
coagulation), or ingestion of toxins that in-
hibit the function of clotting factors (war-
VII
farin toxicity).
Vllla
 Factors that evaluate liver damage and
dysfunction have been discussed in Chap-
ter 6. Patients with increased liver dysfunc-
tion can have decreased production of clot-
Figure 13.1. The intrinsic pathway is green, the ex-
trinsic pathway is blue, and the common pathway is in
ting factors, which can make them more
black. The figure illustrates the interaction of the three
 prone to bleed. Medical teams evaluating
pathways with feedback loops to amplify the produc-
patients for suspected liver disease and fail-
tion of thrombin. The thrombin produced then ampli-
ure should not draw blood from large veins
fies the intrinsic and common pathway.
(e.g.,thejugular vein) because this may pro-
duce serious bleeding into the tissue.
forming), thrombin will degrade activated
Warfarin toxicity is one of the more com-
clotting factors.
mon acquired coagulation disorders. War-
Defects in secondary hemostasis can be
farin is a toxin that acts as a vitamin K an-
acquired or inherited. Inherited disorders of
 tagonist. Vitamin K is extremely important
coagulation occur when the patient cannot
in the production of functional coagulation 
produce a specific clotting factor or pro-
factors. Vitamin K is a cofactor that is nec-
duces an abnormal, inactive clotting factor.
-onpoid ul pasn auazua oyads e ro Aressa
The most common clotting factor deficien-
ing clotting factors II, VII, IX, X and the
cies are
anticoagulant factors protein C and S.
OD.
coagula
 Figure 13.2. Damage to the endothelial cells exposes receptors (von Willebrand factor) and platelets adhere to
the wall of the vessel covering the defect. The platelets become activated, undergo a shape change, and begin to
aggregate to form a clot at the injury. The platelets secrete substances and provide tissue factor for activation of
converts fibrinogen to fibrin, and the fibrin "glues" the platelets together into a stable clot sealing off the injury.
Chapter 13: Coagulation  179
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation
 a clot. Both of these processes are complex
(DIC) is a syndrome that is seen in associa-
and closely intertwined. They occur almost
tion with many disease processes. Any dis-
simultaneously with coagulation limited to
ease that results in a procoagulation state
the site of vessel injury and fibrinolysis at the
can initiate DIC. Systemic activation of
edge of the developing clot to localize the
platelets and the coagulation cascade causes
 process of coagulation to the injury. Even-
the formation of small clots (microthrombi)
tually, once the vessel is repaired, fbrinoly-
throughout the capillaries of the vascular
sis removes the clot and blood flow through
system and consumption of both platelets
the injured vessel is reestablished. There are
and clotting factors. Simultaneously,
.the
rare inherited disorders of fbrinolysis that
fbrinolytic system is activated. Early in the
can result in an increased tendency to form
 process, the individual will be hypercoag-
clots (thrombosis).
ulable, and as the process progresses and
platelets and coagulation factors are de-
pleted, uncontrolled bleeding occurs. The
Diagnostic Tests for Coagulation
condition is best treated by addressing the
Abnormalities
 underlying disease. Common diseases asso-
ciated with DIC include heat stroke, endo-
toxemia (sepsis), severe trauma, shock, neo-
The tests used to identify the cause of
plasia, venomous bites, and vasculitis. The
bleeding are separated into those that ad-
results of DIC can be seen on the blood film
dress primary hemostasis (platelet num-
in the form of red cell fragments (schisto-
bers and function) and those used to eval-
cytes, see Chapter 3) and decreased platelet
uate secondary hemostasis (clotting fac-
numbers. The microthrombi can result in
tors). The most important aspect of testing
multiple organ failure.
 for abnormalities in hemostasis is sample
Disseminated intravascular coagulation,
collection.
widespread activation of the coagulation
factors, results in formation of small mi-
croclots that obstruction flow through cap-
Primary Hemostasis
illary beds. This in turn leads to consump-
tion of platelets in the microthrombi result-
The platelet count is the most common test
ing in thrombocytopenia. Coagulation tests
for defects in primary hemostasis. In gen-
become prolonged when 75% of the coagu-
eral, an animal will not begin to sponta-
lation factors are absent. Decreased produc-
neously bleed until the platelet number is
tion of clotting factors by the liver occurs
<40,000/μL. An EDTA tube is used for de-
when 75% of functional liver mass is lost.
termination of platelet numbers. It is essen-
The prothrombin time (PT) and activated
 tial that the venipuncture is as atraumatic
 partial thromboplastin time (APTT) are the
as possible to decrease the activation of
most common coagulation tests done
in
platelets. In addition, for optimum evalu-
practice. These tests are performed most of-
ation of the platelet count, the count should
ten at a reference laboratory.
 be performed within 4 hours of collection.
As discussed in Chapter 2, platelet num-
bers can be estimated from the blood film as
Fibrinolysis
well.
 Platelet function tests should be per-
formed in the bleeding patient with nor-
Hemostasis is the process of clotting, and
mal platelet numbers and coagulation
fibrinolysis is the process of dissolution of
times. There are sensitive tests for platelet
180(
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Step I:
Step2:
Step 3:
Fold theupperlipup and secure
Make areproducible 1/8 to 1/4 stab
Genty removethe blood dropswith
must be looseto allownormal blood
flow
determined by marking the blade tip.
to stop bleeding.
 Figure 13.3.  A method for determining the buccal mucosal bleeding time
function that require submission of a sam-
Secondary Hemostasis
ple to a specialty laboratory. However,
there are in-house tests that can be done
The common tests for defects in secondary
to identify patients with possible defects in
hemostasis are the prothrombin time (PT)
platelet function: buccal mucosal bleeding
and the activated partial thromboplastin
time, cuticle bleeding time, and clot retrac-
time (aPTT). The PT assay evaluates the
tion. The cuticle bleeding time and clot re-
extrinsic pathway and the aPTT assay eval-
traction tests are very insensitive and are not
uates the intrinsic pathway.
recommended. The cuticle bleeding time
When drawing blood for coagulation
will be prolonged with defects in coagula-
time testing, the quality of the sample plays 
tion as well as decreased platelet function.
a major part in providing accurate results.
 The clot retraction test (measuring the time
The volume collected in the vacutainer is
from collection to complete retraction of the
critical. Using the vacutainer sleeve is the
 clot and separation of serum) requires nor-
 best way to insure proper filling of the va-
 mal platelet numbers and normal function.
cutainer with minimum hemolysis and acti-
The maximum time for normal retraction
vation of platelets. To obtain the best pos-
of the clot is 1-2 hours.
sible sample, place a catheter for collection.
The buccal mucosal bleeding time is com-
Before drawing the sample into the citrate
monly done to screen dogs for von Wille-
tube (blue top), clear the catheter needle and
brand's disease. A small shallow cut is made
tubing by drawing a small amount of blood
 in the mucosal surface of the upper lip, and
into a serum tube (red top); then allow the
the time from the initial cut to cessation of
 citrate tube to fill completely.
 bleeding is recorded. It is very important to
When using a syringe and needle, it is es-
perform this test in a standard and consis-
sential to perform an atraumatic venipunc-
tent manner. A standard procedure for this
ture. If possible, change syringes after draw-
test is outlined in Figure 13.3. If there is
ing 0.5 mL of blood to clear the needle of
a prolonged buccal mucosal bleeding time,
any tissue or activated platelets. Immedi-
further laboratory tests are required to de-
ately transfer the correct amount of blood
termine the cause of the platelet dysfunc-
to the collection tube. You can transfer the
tion.
blood using the vacuum of the collection
Chapter 13: Coagulation
181
tube. If the collection tube is over- or un-
transfer the plasma to a clean plastic tube.
derflled, the results of the coagulation tests
Keep the sample cold until picked up by
will be affected.
the laboratory courier. If using a reference
It is optimum to perform coagulation
laboratory by overnight delivery, freeze at
tests within 4 hours of collection. If using
-20°C or lower if testing will be delayed
a reference laboratory with a local courier,
for more than 24 hours. Ship the sample
centrifuge and separate the plasma from the
overnight with cold packs or dry ice. Mul-
cells immediately using a plastic pipette to
tiple freezing and thawing can artifactually
Table 13.1. Causes of prolonged clotting times.
Primary hemostasis
Test
Outcome 
Platelet count 
 Decreased platelet number will
affect the body's ability to produce
the initial clot (<40,000/μL).
Platelet function tests 
Sent out to lab when presented
with a bleeding animal with 
normal platelet number and 
 normal clotting times.
 Buccal mucosal bleeding
 Done as an in-house test for lack
of von Willebrand's factor (von 
Willebrand's disease)
Secondary hemostasis
Test
Cascade Affected 
 Possible Causes
Prolonged PT:
 Extrinsic cascade
 Factor Vll deficiency
Normal a PTT
Normal PT
Intrinsic cascade
Factor Vlll or IX deficiency
Prolonged aPT'T
 Prolonged PT 
 Both cascades
Multiple factor deficiencies
Prolonged aPTT
● Vitamin K antagonism (rat poison)
● Liver disease
·DIC
Inherited Dz:
· Factor X
●Thrombin 
182
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
prolong coagulation tests. Plasma from a
 ease, DIC) or an inherited defect in factor
healthy dog can be sent with the patient's
X or thrombin).
 sample as a control.
Another test is the whole blood clot-
 Although clotting times can vary from lab
ting time, which is a measure of the time
 to lab, normal levels are generally as seen in
it takes for blood drawn into a serum
Charts 13.1 and 13.2.
tube to clot. In the normal dog, the blood
should clot within 3-15 min, in the cat,
Chart 13.1  Prothrombin Times (PT)—Measurement 
6-8 min. This is a crude measure of sec-
of the Extrinsic Pathway
ondary hemostasis. If prolonged it indi-
Canine
12-17 sec
cates severe multiple factor deficiency such
as warfarin toxicity, severe liver disease,
 Feline
15-23 sec
or DIC.
 Finally, there are tests that are used pri-
Chart 13.2  Partial Prothrombin Times (aPTT)-
marily for evaluation of the patient sus-
Measurement of the lntrinsic Pathway
 pected of having DIC. In addition to clotting
Canine
times and platelet counts, tests that iden-
71-102 sec
tify increased degradation of fbrin can be
 Feline
70-120 sec
performed. Fibrinogen degradation prod-
uct (FDP) and D-dimer assays both identify
 Both tests are performed for a full eval-
fragments of fbrin that occur with exces-
uation of the coagulation cascade. A pro-
sive fibrinolysis. Both of these tests are best
longed PT and normal aPTT indicate de-
performed at a reference laboratory. How-
fect in the extrinsic pathway (usually a def-
ever, since DIC is a life-threatening con-
ciency in factor VIl); a prolonged aPTT with
dition that must be treated quickly, med-
a normal PT indicate a defect in the extrinsic
ical teams do not usually have the time to
pathway (usually a defect in either factor IX
wait for outside lab analysis to be completed
or VIl). If both tests are prolonged, there
(Table 13.1). Therefore, both the FDP and
may be multiple factor deficiencies (vitamin
 D-dimer assays are more often confirmatory
K antagonism or warfarin toxicity, liver dis-
tests rather than diagnostic tests.
Emergency Diagnostics-
Discussion of Shock and
Clinical Diagnostics
Obtaining a clinical diagnostics baseline in
the medical teams quickly create an effective
the emergency patient can vary dependent
problem list (Table 14.1).
on how the patient presents, the chief com-
plaint, and the needs of the medical team.
However, when faced with an emergency
patient a minimal clinical database can be
Obtaining Blood Samples
obtained. There are different levels of clin-
ical diagnostics that can be obtained. The
The most effective way of obtaining diag-
following levels of clinical diagnostics can
 nostic samples from the emergency patient
suggest a testing hierarchy.
is to fill the blood tubes through a nonhep-
arinized/nonflushed peripheral catheter that
is being set prior to the administration of
fluids. In some cases, where patients are very
Code I Database
hypotensive, obtaining adequate samples is
not possible. If blood has to be drawn from
A code I database is obtained as an initial
 another source, it is recommended to ob-
diagnostic baseline for the emergency pa-
tain a sample from a small peripheral vein
tient. The information is obtained quickly
until clotting times can be evaluated. On ini-
from a very small sample of blood (i.e.,
tial blood collection, the blood tubes should
with a catheter stilette) and a quick eval-
 always be checked for abnormalities that
uation of monitoring modalities. Although
can suggest serious disease or pathology (see
not a full clinical diagnostic, careful atten-
Chapters 1 and 2). The following sections
tion to changes in a code I database can help
 review recommended clinical diagnostics.
183
184(
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table 14.1. An overview of code I diagnostics.
Clinical Test 
Outcome
 Other Diagnostics
Cause/Action 
Packed cell
Canine >55%
Should be a marked 
Dehydration
volume
 Feline >45 % 
 increase in albumin/total
1.
 Notify veterinarian.
protein.
 Prepare patient for
 aggressive fluid therapy.
Canine <35 %
Check purple top for clot or
 Notify veterinarian.
Feline <25 %
agglutination.
Causes:
Check albumin/total
● Blood loss
protein for decrease.
● Chronic anemia of disease 
Check a blood film for 
·ImHA
abnormal cellularity (i.e.
●Artifact 
spherocytes).
 Serum
Straw-colored
If hemolyzed, check PCV
 Document all changes to
for anemia; check purple 
serum and notify veterinarian.
top for agglutination.
If icteric, check PCV for
anemia and purple top for
 agglutination. Check
patient for physical
jaundice.
If lipemic, check medical
history for the last time
patient ate.
 Buffy coat
 Buffy coat should be
Check white blood cell
Decreased buffy coat: viral
<1% but visible 
 count and blood film.
infection/immunosuppression
Increased buffy coat: infection/
inflammation/cancer
Total
Canine: 5-7.2 g/dL
Low total protein: Evaluate
Low total protein can suggest 
 protein
Feline: 5.8-8.5 g/dL
PCV/TP, albumin.
bleeding, renal disease, liver 
High total protein: Evaluate
disease, chronic intestinal
 PCV/TP, albumin and 
disease, or possibly disease
 globulin.
that produces a decreased 
immune response (low 
immunoglobuliny.
High total protein: dehydration
 or disease that produces an 
increased immune response
(high immunoglobulin)
Albumin 
Canine: 3.1-4.5 g/dL
Low albumin: Evaluate 
Low total protein can suggest 
Feline: 2.4-4.1 g/dL
 PCV/TP, clotting times,
bleeding, renal disease, liver 
 urinalysis, renal enzymes,
disease, chronic intestinal
liver enzymes.
disease.
High albumin: Evaluate 
 High total protein: dehydration 
PCV/TP.
Blood 
Canine: 60-115 mg/dL
Low blood glucose: Check
 Low blood sugar: sepsis 
glucose 
 Feline: 60-130 mg/dL
white blood cell 
 Notify veterinarian
count/blood film.
immediately.
Increased blood glucose:
Increased blood glucose: 
 urinalysis, fructosamine,
diabetes mellitus, stress 
chemistry
Chapter 14: Emergency Diagnostics
185
Table 14.1.
(Continued)
Clinical Test 
awono
 Other Diagnostics
Cause/Action
 Electrolytes
Sodium (Na):
Chemistry
 Decrease in electrolytes is
Canine: 142-1 50 mEq/L
 Urinalysis
caused by vomiting, diarrhea,
Feline: 147-162 mEq/L
fluid therapy.
Chloride (Cl):
Increase in potassium: FLUTD,
Canine: 105-117 mEq/L
hypoadrenocorticism
Feline: 114-126 mEq/L
 Notify veterinarian
Potassium (K):
immediately.
Canine: 4.5-5.4 mEq/L
 Feline: 3.7-5.2 mEq/L
Lactate
Lactate >3
se8 p0018 
Increased lactate supports
(Although normal can
decreased ability to oxygenate
vary from machine to
tissue (perfusion). This makes
machine.)
the tissue burn energy through
fermentation and lactate builds
up. Serial lactates serve as a
monitor of how the body is 
responding to treatment to
increase oxygenation of blood 
and body perfusion.
 Clotting
PT:
Increased clotting times: 
Increased clotting times 
times
Canine: 71-102 sec
 Evaluate PCV/ TP, AIbumin,
 support the patient's ability to
 Feline 70-120 sec 
CBC (platelet count)
Clot blood (see Chapter ).
a PTT:
 Notify veterinarian
Canine: 12-17 sec
immediately.
 Feline: 15-23 sec
Blood 
Systolic >100-140 mm
If there are any abnormalities.
pressure
Hg
 notify veterinarian
immediately.
Packed Cell Volume (PCV)/Total
disease or artifact. Changes in serum color
Protein (TP)
should be documented in the chart and dis-
cussed with the veterinarian, because serum
changes can affect chemistry results in hos-
A PCV/TP is one of the first tests that should
 pital machinery. The following sections re-
be completed on an emergency patient (Fig-
view serum abnormalities.
ure 14.1). The PCV/TP should be evaluated
for serum color, red blood cell concentra-
tion, buffy coat, and total protein levels.
Red
Red coloration of the serum can artifactu-
ally elevate kidney, liver, and electrolyte lev-
Step 1: Evaluate and Record Serum
 els on some in house chemistry equipment.
Cofor
The red coloration can occur with artifact
or disease.
Normal serum should be straw-colored or
Artifact: Traumatic blood stick or collec-
clear. Changes in serum color can indicate
tion
186Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Packed CellVolume
Disease: Increased lipemia can occur with
orHematocrit
diseases that alter fat digestion. The follow-
ing are some examples of these diseases:
Hypothyroidism
 Diabetes mellitus
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's dis-
ease)
Hyperlipidemia
Serum
Yellow
 A yellow pigmentation (jaundice) suggests
Total
a buildup of toxin from the inability of the
Buffy coat
volume
liver to detoxify, a massive destruction of
red blood cells in the vessels, or a gallblad-
der obstruction. Jaundice always suggests
one of the following diseases:
Red blood cell
Liver disease
volume
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
Gallbladder disease
Step 2: Evaluate the Packed Cell
Volume (PCV) Percentage
Figure 14.1. Illustration of a PCV tube with the sepa-
The next step is to evaluate the red blood
ration of red blood cells, buffy coat (white blood cells),
cell column as compared to the entire col-
and serum.
umn of blood and fluid. This is called the
 packed cell volume percentage.
Disease: Hemolysis of red blood cells oc-
curs within the vessels because white blood
Normal PCV
cells are destroying red blood cells as if they
 Chart 14.1 lists normal PCV percentages.
were foreign bacteria. This change is sec-
 ondary to an immune-mediated hemolytic
Chart 14.1
anemia (IMHA).
Canine
35-55%
Feline
25-45%
White
White coloration suggests an accumulation
Decreased PCV
of fat within the serum or fluid portion of
the blood. It can have effect on several pa-
Decreased PCV can indicate dilution, blood
rameters in the chemistry and also can occur
 clot, or anemia:
with artifact or disease.
Artifact: Pets that have eaten within a few
Dilution: If too little blood is placed in
 hours of blood draw may have a postpran-
a purple top tube, the blood will be di-
 dial increased fat level.
luted by the EDTA in the tube, lowering
Chapter 14: Emergency Diagnostics
187
the packed cell volume. If there is only
count secondary to infection, inflammation,
a small sample available, micro blood
or-
-rarely—neoplasia. If the white blood
tubes are available from your lab. These
 cell count elevates, discuss running a CBC
tubes require only 250-500 μL of blood.
 to the lab to help quantitate the total white
 Blood clot: If the blood is not adequately
blood cell count and the types of white
mixed with the EDTA, the blood may
 blood cells elevating.
clot, artifactually lowering the packed
cell volume.
Anemia: Anemia or a decreased
red
Step 4: Evaluate Total
blood cell count can be caused by
Protein/Aibumin
 Blood loss/internal bleeding: Acute
blood loss or internal bleeding can
Total protein is the sum of two body pro-
lower PCV. When the patient acutely
teins: globulin produced by the lympho-
bleeds, both PCV and TP decrease as
cytes to fight offinfection, and albumin pro-
protein follows blood out of the vas-
duced by the liver to carry other chemicals
cular supply. Team members should
throughout the bloodstream. Dehydration,
check total protein/albumin to help
 blood loss, and organ disease can effect al-
determine whether the anemia
is
bumin and thus affect total protein levels.
caused by blood loss.
 Normal total protein and normal albumin
Chronic anemia of disease: Chronic
levels are listed in Charts 14.2 and 14.3,
disease that decreases the body's
respectively.
ability to regenerate red blood cells
can produce a severe anemia. Dis-
Chart 14.2
 Total Protein
eases that can produce chronic ane-
mia are kidney disease, liver disease,
Canine
5.0-7.2 g/dL
or cancer.
Feline
5.8-8.5 g/dL
 Immune-mediated  hemolytic
ane-
mia: As discussed previously,
de-
struction of the red blood cells by
Chart 14.3
Albumin
white blood cells, as if they were for-
eign bacteria, can also cause severe
Canine
3.1-4.5 g/dL
anemia. Team members should eval-
Feline
2.4-4.1 g/dL
 uate the purple top tube and blood
film for agglutination or the presence
of spherocytes on the blood film.
Decreased Total Protein/Albumin Levels
Increased PCV
Decreased levels of albumin can occur with
 severe blood loss or organ disease.
 Increased PCV generally suggests dehydra-
With bleeding, albumin follows blood
tion. With a dehydrated patient, the fluid
out through the vessels lowering body al-
component of the blood decreases, increas-
bumin levels. However, diseases that affect
ing the overall percentage of red cells com-
the excretion (loss), production, or absorp-
 pared to the column of blood.
tion of protein can also cause a low body
albumin level. Further, albumin maintains a
Step 3: Check the Buffy Coat
 positive pressure (oncotic pressure) on fluid
components within blood. When albumin
Dramatic changes in the buffy coat can
levels decrease, this pressure is lost and fluid
suggest increases in the white blood cell
more readily flows into surrounding tissue.
188Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
 Low albumin levels can make a patient
cial in evaluating the patient's overall con-
 more at risk for fuid overload and pul-
dition. Although discussed previously, the
monary edema.
blood film should be evaluated for the fol-
lowing parameters (Figures 14.2, 14.3).
Increased Total Protein/Albumin Levels
 Similar to the packed cell volume, as an ani-
Low-Power Review of Blood Film
mal dehydrates, albumin concentrates in the
(10×)
decreased blood fluid, increasing their mea-
surable levels.
 A precursory qualitative evaluation should
be done to determine the number of white
blood cells and if microflaria or giant cells
Blood Film
 are present (see Chapter 4).
As discussed in Chapter 3, a thorough blood
High-Power Review of Blood Film
film should be completed with a full com-
(100×, Oil Immersion)
plete blood count, and blood film review
is part of a code II database. However a
The following parameters should be evalu-
brief review of blood films while obtaining
ated and documented for n a brief review of
a code I database can be extremely benefi-
the blood film.
 Step I: Blood film: Evaluate purple top for 
visible agglutination or clots.
Low or high white blood cell count
I noted, notfy veterlnarlan.
(ess or more than 8-10 wBC/lpf)
Microfilaria or large celtype seen
 Step Il: Blood film: Evaluate slide under low
O High: Infection,infammation or
Notfy DVM
power. Identify abnormalies.
Neoplasia
Note In Chart
I aglutination is correct - check PCV. 
purple top tube, spherocytes.
 Agglutinatlon concern-perlorm wet
prep blood film.
Notfy DVM
StepIll: Evaluate red blood cell wall
morphology under high oil(100x).
Ifcellchanges presenton wet prep.
Echlnocytes/acanthocytes noted -
concerns are blood based tumor ralle
perform wet prep blood film.
snake envenomatin or altered fat 
metabolism.
Spherocytes -check wet prep blood 
Notfy DVM
film, purple top tube, concern of IMHA 
Notlfy DV M
Eccentrocytes - concern of 
hemoglobin injury (i e., onions)
Notlfy DVM
Regeneratlve response - note
nucleated RBC, polychromasia.
reticulocytes - Record In Chart 
Figure 14.2. Algorithm for evaluating blood film on emergency patients.
Chapter 14: Emergency Diagnostics
189
Heinz Bodies - Oxidative injury to hemoglobin:
 Concerns are acetaminophen toxicity onions,
Step l Evaluate red blood cellintermal
garlic.
morphology under high oil (100x).
Notfy DVM
Howell-lowell bodies - Nuclear remanants from
immature red blood cels, supports a regenerative
response. Check for polychromasia, Nucleated
RBC, reticulocytes.
Record In Chart
Other intracellular inclusions - possibly infectious
agents. Notfy DVM, posslbly send Into lab.
Increased band neutrophils - Can suggest early
massive infection/ sepsis.
 Step IV: Check fo abnormal populations of 
white blood cells.
Notify DVM
Increased eosinophils - Can suggest fungal.
 parasitic or allergic disease.
Record In chart / notfy DVM
 Step V: Calculate platelet count under 100x 
Increased mast cel - Can suggest serious mast
objective:
cell disease / mast cell leukemia.
Estimated platelet number =the average
Notlfy DVM
number of platelets x 15000
If decreased, notlfy DVM
(Count Is not vald If platelet clumps are
seen I the feathered edge)
Posslbke evaluate ckottlng tlmes
Figure 14.3. Algorithm for evaluating blood film on emergency patients.
Red Blood Cell Morphology
White Blood Cells
Red blood cells should be evaluated for
White blood cells should be evaluated for
 the following changes suggestive of disease
the following changes:
pathology:
 Increased band neutrophils
Changes in the lipid membrane:
 Increased eosinophils
Agglutination
Mast cell present
Spherocytes
Acanthocytes/echinocytes
Platelet Estimate
Schistocytes
Nucleated
red
blood
 cells/poly-
The platelet estimate should be evaluated.
chromasia
 Changes in the red blood cell internal
morphology:
Blood Sugar
 Heinz bodies
Howell-Jolly Body
Other intracellular changes (i.e., In-
Blood sugar levels should be monitored reg-
fectious agents)
ularly and should always be obtained from
190Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
 all critical care animals on presentation.
chloride, and potassium levels are listed in
 Normal glucose levels are listed in Chart
Charts 14.5, 14.6, and 14.7, respectively.
14.4.
Chart 14.5 Sodium (Na)
Chart 14.4
Canine
142-150 mEq/L
Canine
60-125 mg/dL
Feline
147-162 mEq/L
 Feline
70-150 mg/dL
An animal can show severe weakness or
Chart 14.6  Chloride (CI)
neurologic signs and it may simply be at-
Canine
105-117 mEq/L
tributable to a low blood sugar.
Low blood sugar levels (<50 mg/dL) can
Feline
114-126 mEq/L
 produce the following:
Chart 14.7
Potassium (K)
Seizures
Weakness
Canine
4.0-5.4 mEq/L
Collapse
+
Feline
3.7-5.2 mEq/L
Anorexia
Ataxia
 Abnormal vocalization
Animals with severe derangement of elec-
Coma
 rolytes can show serious to life-threatening
Death
signs:
Slow heart rate
Using a Human Glucometer
Pulse deficits
Muscle fasciculations (muscle tremors/
This is extremely helpful in obtaining a
shaking)
Weakness
quick glucose level with very little blood.
Howe ver, human glucometers are adjusted
Anorexia
low (40-50 mg/dL glucose) to encourage
human diabetics to eat before glucose drops
Animals that are on long-term fluids (>24
too low. Remember 60-80 mg/dL glucose
hours) and not eating and drinking can also
on a glucometer may be 100-110 mg/dL to
have severe aberrations of electrolytes in
the animal.
the body. Most animals that have vomit-
 ing or diarrhea can have severe electrolyte
changes. These electrolytes can be added
or balanced dependent on blood electrolyte
Electrolytes
levels.
Electrolytes refer to sodium, potassium, and
chloride (see Chapter 8). These minerals are
Clotting Times
responsible for normal fluid balance in the
body, conduction of nerve impulses, muscu-
lar contraction, and concentration of urine.
If there are concerns of increased chances
As discussed previously normal sodium,
of bleeding, routine clotting times may be
Chapter 14: Emergency Diagnostics
191
needed (see Chapter 13). Normal values are
Lactate should be evaluated in animals
listed in Chart 14.8.
 that are unable to perfuse and oxygenate
their tissues (e.g., cardiac disease, pul-
Chart 14.8
monary disease [pneumonia]] to assess how
Test
Canine
severe decreased oxygenation is affecting
Feline
the tissue. Higher levels of lactate suggest
APTT
71-102 sec
70-120 sec
 more severe concern to oxygenate and per-
12-17 sec
15-23 sec
fuse the body. As the animal is treated,
PT
 decreasing lactate levels can suggest a re-
Any animals with severe
 metabolic de-
sponse to treatment. Further, patients that
 rangements and disease can begin to have
 may have vascular compromise to their tis-
problems with their ability to clot. The fol-
sues (e.g, gastro-distention volvulus), lac-
lowing are some types of diseases that cause
tate levels can suggest how much tissue
clotting problems:
damage due to lack of oxygenation (is-
chemia) may be occurring. In these cases,
patients with increasing lactate levels may
GDV/bloat
have more tissue damage and death.
Splenectomy
Liver disease (severe)
Heat stroke
+
Pancreatitis (severe)
Blood Pressure
Types of cancer
Massive infection (sepsis)
Systolic blood pressure is a measure of
the body's ability to perfuse tissue and or-
gans. In an emergency situation, the hospi-
Lactate
tal team's ability to restore normal perfu-
sion is the key to stabilization and a normal
As a patient has decreased ability to per-
return for organ function (e.g., glomerular
fltration, hepatic detoxification). Normal
fuse tissue, conversion of glucose into car-
 bon dioxide and energy in the cellular level
systolic nlood pressure levels are listed in
is also decreased. Decreased oxygen tension
Chart 14.10.
at the cellular level makes the body use fer-
mentation to produce energy. This less ef-
Chart 14.10
ficient pathway builds up lactate as a by-
product; increased presence of this acid can
Test
Canine
Feline
cause the patient to have metabolic acidosis.
Systolic
100-140 mm
100-160 mm
 Increased body lactate represents a medical
blood
HG
HG
concern and supports a patient's inability
 pressure
to perfuse tissue. A patient under treatment
with lactate levels that return to normal sug-
gests that perfusion is improving. Normal
Values are listed in Chart 14.9.
Hypotension
Chart 14.9
 Systolic blood pressures <100 mm Hg sug-
Test
Canine
Feline
 gest that the patient in unable to adequately
perfuse their tissues and organs. This in-
 Lactate
<3 sec
<3 sec
dicates that the body is unable to filter
192
2Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
toxins, produce and transport needed pro-
Code Il Database
tein and energy sources, and produce an ad-
equate immune response. Until blood sys-
tolic blood pressure is >100 mg Hg, the pa-
A code II database is obtained when the
tient is still unstable.
patient is stable and undergoing treatment.
Sample collection and diagnostic testing
may need to be performed based on the
 patient's comfort and stability level. Code
Trauma Patients
II diagnostics come into play as the ani-
mal is stabilized and moved into a critical
Trauma patients (e.g., those hit by a car)
 care nursing phase. Code II databases can
may initially come in hypotensive, and nor-
include the following:
mal perfusion can be restored with aggres-
sive fluid therapy. However, it is impor-
Complete blood count
tant for team members to monitor blood
Thorough blood flm analysis
pressure as patients stabilize so that pres-
Chemistry
sures do not rise to >130-140 mm HG. In-
Urinalysis
creased pressures above this level may over-
 Full electrolyte profle
come clots that have already formed sec-
Blood gas
ondary to internal trauma and may restart
Radiography
internal bleeding. Once normal blood pres-
Ultrasound
sure is restored, trauma patients
should
have PCV/TP and clotting times reeval-
uated to determine the risk of internal
Code Ill Database
bleeding.
A code III database may contain elements
of all previous databases, but it is generally
Hypertension
obtained on completely stable patients that
may be treated in hospital or as outpatients.
Hypertension may occur secondary to many
These databases can include the following:
chronic disease conditions of middle-aged
to older patients. Aggressive fluid therapy
1
Infectious screens
 can make patients more hypertensive, lead-
Thyroid profles
ing to fluid overload, heart failure, reti-
Adrenal axis testing
+
nal lesions, shock, and death. Diseases that
Endoscopy
can cause hypertension are renal disease,
Laparoscopy
hyperthyroidism (feline), hyperadrenocorti-
Exploratory surgery
cism (Cushing's disease), heart disease, and
Advanced Image Scanning: fluoroscopy,
 primary hypertension.
MRI, cat scan
Obtaining Samples
s from
Different Body $
Systems and
Evaluating Cytology
Cytology is the study of cellular samples
choalveolar lavage (fluid flushed in and rea-
from fluid or tissue prepared directly on
 spirated through an endotracheal tube or
glass slides and stained for microscopic
 bronchoscope), fine needle aspiration of cu-
evaluation. Cytology is less invasive than
taneous or internal masses (cells drawn into
tissue biopsies and in some cases can pro-
a syringe), imprints of surface lesions and
vide a rapid diagnosis that would otherwise
masses removed for biopsy, swabs of sur-
take several days if done by histopathology.
face lesions, and scrapings of skin lesions.
The procedure for obtaining a cytologi-
Cytological preparations are usually read
cal sample is less complicated and, in many
by the veterinarian or submitted to a labo-
cases, can be done without anesthesia. As
ratory for evaluation by a veterinary pathol-
a result, cytology offers less risk to the pa-
ogist. The veterinary technician is often re-
tient. There are rare complications associ-
 sponsible for preparing the sample for eval-
ated with fine needle aspiration. Table 15.1
uation by the veterinarian or submission to
lists possible complications associated with
the laboratory. Technicians may be respon-
different sites. The primary disadvantage
sible for performing the initial evaluation of
of using cytology for evaluation of a dis-
skin scrapings and ear swab preparations
ease process is the fact that only individual
The quality of the information obtained
cells without any tissue architecture are ob-
from any cytological procedure depends
served. This is primarily a problem if neo-
greatly on the quality of the preparation
plasia (cancer) is a concern. In many cases
itself. Obtaining a high-quality cytological
of potential neoplasia, a follow-up biopsy
 sample requires patience and practice. Arti-
is needed to confirm the diagnosis. It is im-
facts that can interfere with cytological eval-
portant that the client understand the pos-
uation include the following:
sibility of further testing in these cases.
Common cytological  samples  include
● Too few cells
body cavity fluids, tracheal washes, or bron-
●Thick preparations
193
194
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table 15.1. Complications associated with fine
Skin Scrapings
needle aspiration.
Skin scrapings are usually obtained by ag-
gressively scraping the surface of the skin le-
Complication
Site
sion until it bleeds. It is important to scrape
deep enough into the dermis because der-
 Pneumothorax
Lung
matophytes and mites such as Demodex sp.
Hemorrhage
Liver, kidney, spleen, lung
are usually within or around hair follicles.
Tumor seeding 
Neoplastic lesions 
Although some mite species such as Sar-
Bacteremia
Abscess (internal or external)
Abscess (internal or external)
coptes spp are superficial, deep scrapings
Sepsis
will get both mite species. When evaluating
for dermatophytes, a potassium hydroxide
 Preparations with stain precipitate or ul-
solution (5-15% KOH) is often used to dis-
solve keratin debris in the skin scraping.
trasound gel
However, KOH preparations can be diff-
+
 Inadequate staining
Excessive lysis of cells
cult to evaluate without significant experi-
ence. Figure 15.1 shows photomicrographs
How a sample is handled prior to mi-
of scrapings from a dog with demodecosis
croscopic evaluation will have a great im-
and a cat with dermatophytosis.
pact on the usefulness of the procedure.
This chapter provides an overview of cy-
tology, with emphasis on sample collection
 and preparation of slides for microscopic
viewing. A short section on cytological find-
 ings is included to familiarize the technician
with the types of diseases that lend them-
 selves to a cytological diagnosis.
Types of Cytological Preparations
The most common cytological samples used
 in veterinary medicine for evaluation of dis-
ease processes, in order of frequency of use,
 are skin scrapings and ear swabs, fine needle
aspirates of mass lesion, aspiration of body
cavity fluids, and imprints of skin lesions or
Excised tissue. Skin scrapings and ear swabs
are primarily used to identify infectious
agents such as dermatophytic fungi (ring-
worm), mites (Demodex spp, Sarcoptes
e e (s s) sia (s)
(Stapbylococcus spp). Scrapings are most
commonly evaluated by the veterinarian or
technician to assist in determining if infec-
Figure 15.1. (a) Demodex canis mite, deep skin
scraping from a dog with generalized dermatitis.
tious disease is the cause of dermatitis (in-
(b) Arthroconidia of Microsporum canis (small round
flammation of the skin) or otitis externa (in-
blue-staining spores), fine needle aspirate of a skin
flammation of the external ear).
mass from a dog with a single mass lesion.
Chapter 15: Obtaining Samples and Evaluating Cytology 195
Swabs
s e ssd aq  ae sdad
slide onto a surface lesion or by lightly
Culture swabs can be used to obtain cells
touching a portion of an excised tissue to
from a surface lesion, a draining tract, the
the slide. Preparing a good imprint requires
ear, and the vagina. The samples are pre-
patience and a light touch. When sampling a
pared by swabbing the site and rolling the
surface lesion, a two-step process provides
swab onto a glass slide. Even though the
the most information. The first imprint is
identification of infectious agents is often a
made of the lesion before cleaning the site.
concern with this type of cytology prepa-
The second imprint is made after the site is
ration, they do not need any other stain
cleaned. If there is the possibility that a cul-
than routine Wright-Giemsa stain used for
ture will be needed, the site should be sur-
blood flms. Bacteria and fungal elements
 gically prepared after the cytological prepa-
will stain deeply basophilic (purple). Figure
rations have been made. An imprint prepa-
15.2 shows an ear swab preparation with
 ration of an excised lesion can provide a
scattered Malassezia sp. yeast elements.
quick assessment of the lesion. The opti-
 Because skin scrapings and ear swabs of-
mum surface size of tissue for an imprint is
ten contain bacteria and yeast, it is recom-
less than 1 cm?. In order to insure the ad-
mended that a separate set of staining sta-
herence of cells to the slide, it is important
tions be used for these preparations. Sev-
to blot all surface fluid from the sample be-
eral bacteria and yeast organisms can grow
fore making the imprint. Once the surface
in the stain solutions. As a result of this
is blotted, the tissue is lightly touched onto
growth, stains used routinely for surface le-
the slide with a straight down-and-up mo-
sions should be changed more often than
tion. If the tissue is moved back and forth
those used for other types of cytological
while on the slide, many of the cells may
preparations.
lyse. If the imprint surface is firm (fibrous),
a scalpel can be used to make score marks
across the surface after blotting. Once the
Imprint Preparations
surface is scored, the imprint is made as de-
scribed above.
Imprint cytology is probably the least com-
mon type of cytological preparation. The
Fine Needle Aspirates
Fine needle aspirates are most commonly
used to evaluate mass lesions in the skin,
subcutaneous tissue, and tissue within the
thorax and abdomen. The primary chal-
lenge is obtaining a cellular sample with
intact cells. There are several methods for
aspiration. Figure 15.3 illustrates two meth-
 ods for obtaining a fine needle aspirate sam-
ple from a cutaneous lesion.
 Once the sample is obtained, the next step
is to make the slide preparations. Figure
15.4 illustrates several methods for making
 a cytological preparation.
Once the preparations are made, the
Figure 15.2. Malessizia sp., ear swab from a dog.
slides should be air-dried. There is no reason
196
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
If the fine needle aspirate has a significant
amount of blood contamination, as is often
 the case with liver and spleen aspirates, it is
helpful to have a concurrent CBC to help in
the interpretation of the number of leuko-
cytes present. If a CBC is not available, a
blood film can be used as a comparison. If
the sample is to be sent to a reference labo-
ratory, this information can be very helpful
(a)
to the cytopathologist.
Body Cavity Fluids
Aspiration of body cavity fluids (pleural
fluid, peritoneal fluid, pericardial fluid, and
joint fluid) is performed to assess the cause
of the fluid accumulation. Body cavity fluids
should always be collected into an EDTA
tube if a full fluid analysis is needed. A com-
(b)
plete fluid analysis consists of the following:
Figure 15.3. (a) Fine needle aspirate technique using
A nucleated cell count
multiple stabs into the mass lesion at separate sites.
(b) Fine needle aspirate technique using a single entry
Protein determination by refractometer
through skin with redirection of the needle without
Cytological evaluation of the fluid
removing it completely from the mass.
Regardless of how acellular the fluid ap-
to "fix" cytological preparations. The sam-
pears, it should be placed in an EDTA tube
ple can be stored at room temperature until
to prevent the formation of a fibrin clot that
stained. Do not place the slides in a refrig-
would entrap cells and invalidate the fluid
 erator; moisture condensation on the slide
nucleated cell count. If the sample appears
will cause lysis of the cells. If the slides are
cellular (cloudy) and there is concern for
to be submitted to a reference laboratory,
sepsis, an additional portion of fluid can be
the preparations can be sent unstained. It
submitted in a sterile container for culture if
 is appropriate to stain a representative slide
 needed. The apparent cellularity of the fluid
to insure that there is suffcient cellularity
 predicts the type of slide preparation used
before the sample is sent to the laboratory.
for the sample. The blood film method or
The prestained slides should be sent along
 pull preparation can be used with hemodi-
with the unstained slides because cytolog-
luted samples. For highly cellular samples,
ical preparations can vary significantly in
 the pull preparation is most useful. If the
diagnostic quality.
sample is only slightly cloudy, a modifica-
 Cytological preparations should not be
tion of the blood film method can be used.
transported in the same packaging as
In this method, the push slide is abruptly
formalin-fixed tissue. If the formalin leaks,
lifted off the slide before the feathered edge
it will alter the staining quality of the
is formed. This method carries the nucle-
cells and make cytological evaluation of the
ated cells to the edge formed when the push
 preparation diffcult.
slide is lifted.
Chapter 15: Obtaining Samples and Evaluating Cytology197
(a) Blood Film Preparation
(b) Pull Preparation
(c) Squash Preparation
 Figure 15.4. Three slide preparation techniques for cytological samples
In addition, when the sample is clear or
fluids because of the increased possibility
just slightly hazy, a portion of the fluid can
that the fluid will clog the tubing in the in-
be centrifuged and a pull preparation can be
strument. Thick preparations can be diluted
made from the sediment. This procedure is
1:2 to facilitate accurate sampling using the
 done after the cell count is performed. If the
sediment preparations are submitted to a
 Joint fluid is a special case because of the
reference laboratory, they should be clearly
viscosity and contents of the fluid. Normal
labeled. It is helpful to the cytopathologist 
joint fluid is highly viscous and, in most
if a direct preparation of the uncentrifuged
cases, only a small amount of fluid can be
fluid is submitted with the sediment prepa-
obtained. As with any sample collected into
ration as a comparison.
a vacutainer, the vacutainer must be filled
When body cavity fluids are submitted to
at least to 1/4 the volume or the cell count
a laboratory,it is recommended that freshly
and total protein can be affected by vol-
 prepared unstained slides be submitted with
ume dilution and the high specific gravity of
the fluid, especially if the sample is sent by
EDTA, respectively. If an adequate volume
an overnight carrier. Cellular detail can de-
 cannot be obtained, a slide preparation and
teriorate rapidly over time and any bacteria
a total protein should be completed and a
 present, whether a contaminant or a true
WBC count performed by directly flling the
pathogen, will increase significantly.
Unopette TM
 pipette from the aspiration sy-
Cell counts of fluid samples can be per-
ringe. It is important to remember that joint
formed using the UnopetteTM
 just as for
fluid contains a large amount of hyaluronic
 blood samples. In-house hematology units
acid (hyaluronan) that will precipitate if the
should not be used to count body cavity
 UnopetteTM dilutent fluid contains acetic
198Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table 15.2. Criteria for classifying body cavity fluids.
Type of Fluid 
Total Cell Count
 Total Protein
Associated Diseases
 Transudate
Less than 1 000/μl
Less than 2.5 g/dL
Protein-losing renal disea se,
 protein-losing Gl disease 
Modified transudate
1000-5000/μl
2.5-3.5 g/dL
Cardiac disease, chronic liver
disease
Exudate 
Greater than 5,000/μl
Greater than 3.5 g/dL
Peritonitis, pleuritis 
acid. The mucin clot test, a method for test-
structures that are basic in nature will bind
ing joint fluid viscocity, is based on this prin-
with the acid stain and those that are acid
in nature will bind with the basic stains. An
both platelets and leukocytes contains 1%
example of this is the eosinophil granule.
 ammonium oxalate and will not cause the
These granules contain a large amount of
joint fluid to precipitate
major basic protein and stain brightly red
 Body cavity fluids are categorized by their
with the eosin stain. Nuclear material, on
cellularity and protein level as transudates,
the other hand, is highly acidic and stains
modifed transudates, and exudates.
. The
intensely blue with the basic dyes.
criteria for separation of fluids into these
 Diff-QuikTM is the most common stain
categories and the common causes for each
used for in-house cytological examination.
type of fluid are given in Table 15.2. Ex-
When used properly, Diff-QuikTM stain is
udate fluid can be further characterized by
suitable for most cytological preparations.
the cell types present as suppurative (neu-
However, the contents of mast cell granules
trophils), eosinophilic, mixed, lymphocytic
can leach out resulting in loss of their usual
(chylous), pyogranulomatous, or neoplas-
deep basophilic staining properties. This oc-
tic.
casionally results in difficulty in identifica-
tion of mast cell tumors (Figure 15.5)
Modifed Wright-Giemsa stains are avail-
Cytology Stains
able that are as quick as the fast stains;
they often produce more consistent stain-
Romanowsky stains are the standard cy.
ing because the staining procedure is based
tological stains because of their ability to
on a set time. Regardless of which type of
differentially stain the cytoplasm of leuko-
stain is used, a standard procedure should
cytes and tissue cells. The most commonly
be followed to produce high-quality slides
used Romanowsky stains are the modi-
for evaluation. Stains will deteriorate over
fied Wright-Giemsa stains and a fast stain
time, especially if they are not kept in a
preparation that is alcohol based (Diff-
closed container to avoid evaporation. In
QuikTM). All Romanowsky stains contain
most cases, the intensity of basophilic stain-
an acid dye (eosin) and a basic dye (methy-
ing will decrease first or the stain solution
lene blue, Azure A, or Azure B). The spec-
will start to precipitate, resulting in a large
trum of colors that are evident with Ro-
amount of granular debris on the slide.
manowsky stains is due to the interaction of
The stains should be discarded, the stain-
the acid and basic dyes giving a full range
ing jars should be cleaned, and fresh stain
 of reds, blues, and purples to specific nu-
should be prepared as soon as the quality
clear and cytoplasmic structures. Cellular
of the staining begins to decrease. In larger
Chapter 15: Obtaining Samples and Evaluating Cytology 199
 quality and to recognize inflammatory cells
 and a variety of infectious agents. A well-
 trained technician can assist in optimizing
the amount of time the veterinarian spends
reviewing cytological preparations.
Inffammafory Lesions
Inflammatory lesions are classified based
on the cells present in the inflamma-
tory response. The common inflammatory
 processes are suppurative, granulomatous,
pyogranulomatous, and eosinophilic. This
classification is based on the predominant
cell type in the cytological preparation.
Figure 15.6 contains photomicrographs
of the different types of inflammatory
processes.
The criteria for determination of the type
b]
and the common causes for each type of
inflammation are presented in Table 15.3.
Figure 15.5. Two slide preparations from the same
 In addition to evaluating the cells present,
aspirate sample. (a) Wrights-Giemsa stain. (b) Diff-
QuikTM tain: Note the lack of granules in the majority
the background staining characteristics can
of the mast cells.
 provide helpful information. High-protein
fluids often have a fine to coarsely granu-
lar cytoplasm with curved "folds" or pro-
laboratories, stains are changed on a rou-
tein crescents. Distinct clear vacuoles can
tine schedule to reduce the need to restain
be an indicator of lipid in the fluid or aspi-
slides.
rate. Cytological preparations from an in-
flammatory lesion often contain noninflam-
Evaluation of Cytological
matory cells such as fbrocytes and cells
that line the body cavity from which a fluid
Specimens
sample is taken (mesothelial cells from the
thorax and abdomen, synovial cells from
When a lesion is examined using cytology,
joints).
the primary question is whether the lesion
The morphology of the neutrophils
in
is inflammatory or neoplastic. If the lesion
an inflammatory lesion can increase or de-
is inflammatory, the next question is what
 crease the suspicion of sepsis. Neutrophils
type of inflammation is present and is there
in septic lesions show degenerative changes
an infectious agent present. A quality sam-
in their nucleus and are appropriately
ple with large numbers of intact cells is re-
called degenerative neutrophils. The nu-
quired to answer each of these questions.
 clear changes are loss of nuclear integrity,
Although veterinary technicians are not ex-
swelling, and smudging of the nuclear chro-
pected to be cytologists, a background in
matin. Inflammatory lesions with degenera-
the type of processes that can be identified
tive neutrophils should be closely evaluated
by cytology is useful. Technicians should be
for infectious agents. Figure 15.7 illustrates
able to screen cytological preparations for
 several common infectious agents seen in
200Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
(a)
C
 Figure 15.6. (a) Eosinophilic inflammation. (b) Pyogranulomatous inflammation with large macrophages and
neutrophils. (c) Neutrophilic inflammation.
cytological preparations. The lack of degen-
Neoplastic Lesions
erative neutrophils does not rule out sepsis.
 Lesions with large numbers of nondegen-
Oncologic cytology is the evaluation of sus-
erate neutrophils often have tissue necrosis.
 pected neoplastic lesions. This area of cytol-
 Samples from a hemorrhagic lesion such as
ogy is often the most challenging. When a
a hematoma can have macrophages that
lesion is determined to be noninflammatory
have  engulfed  erythrocytes  (erythropha-
 (lacking inflammatory cells) or when atypi-
gia) and nucleated cells (leukophagia).
cal tissue origin cells are seen in a prepara-
With chronic hemorrhagic lesions,
the
tion that is primarily inflammatory, the cy-
macrophages will contain a dark purple
tologist has to determine whether the find-
staining hemoglobin breakdown product,
 ings are normal for the site aspirated due
hemosiderin. Figure 15.8 shows several
to hyperplasia or consistent with neopla-
noninflammatory
y  cell types commonly
sia (benign or malignant). Just as with in-
found in cytological preparations.
flammatory lesions, neoplastic lesions are
Table 15.3.(
 Classifications of inflammatory processes.
Neutrophilic (Suppurative)
Greater than 85% Neutrophils
Eosinophilic
Greater than 50% eosinophils
Granulomatous
 Greater than 85% macrophages
Pyogranulomatous
Less than 50% macropha ges, greater than 50% neutrophils
Lymphocytic
 Greater than 85% lymphocytes
Chapter15:ObtainingSamplesandEvaluatingCytology
201
(C)
(e)
Figure 15.7. (a) Neutrophilic inflammation with intracellular rod-shaped bacteria. (b) Neutrophilic inflammation
with intracellular and extracellular coccoid bacteria. (c) Pyogranulomatous inflammation with large Coccidioides
sp. spherules. (d) Neutrophilic inflammation with Cryptococcus neoformans yeast. Note the clear halo (capsule)
around the yeast bodies and the small oval buds off of two of the yeast bodies. (e) Fungal mycelia in a corneal
scraping. (f) Large macrophage containing small Histoplasma capsulatum yeast forms.
classifed based on the morphology of the
are malignant, they are called sarcomas.
cells present.
If they are considered benign, they are
 Tumors that arise from the supportive
named according to their tissue origin. As
tissues of the body are called mesenchymal
 an example, a fbroma is a benign prolif-
tumors. When it is determined that they
eration of fibrous connective tissue and a
202
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
SS
(b)
(C)
[d]
Figure 15.8. (a) Small cluster of plasma cells and several large, clear cholesterol crystals (large, angular, clear
platelike structures) (b) Aspirate of a skin pustule with numerous neutrophils and several squamous epithelial cells.
(c) A large cluster of large fat cells (adipocytes). (d) Three mesothelial cells from the thoracic cavity.
fibrosarcoma is the malignant counterpart
histiocytoma, transmissible venereal tumor,
to the fbroma.
 plasma cell tumor, and some melanocytic
Tumors that arise from the skin, mucus
tumors are considered round cell tumors.
membranes or glands of the body are ep-
Table 15.4 lists several tumors with tissue
 ithelial tumors. A papilloma is a benign tu-
of origin and benign and malignant forms.
mor that arises from the squamous epithe-
lial cells of the skin; squamous cell carci-
Table 15.4. Tumor terminology.
noma is a malignant tumor of the squamous
cells of the skin. Glandular tumors, such as
those that arise in the mammary gland are
Tissue of
Benign
termed adenoma if benign, and adenocarci-
 Origin 
Form
 Malignant Form
noma if malignant.
Round cell tumors are the third category
Connective
 Fibroma 
Fibrosarcoma
of neoplasia. These tumors are mesenchy-
tissue
mal in origin but instead of arising from
Bone
Osteoma
Osteosarcoma
supportive tissues, their origin is individual
Squamous
 Papilloma 
Squamous cell
cells that are found in the interstitial tissues
epithelium 
 carcinoma 
of the body or, in the case of lymphoma, in
Glands 
Adenoma
Adenocarcinoma
lymph nodes. Lymphoma, mast cell tumor,
Chapter15: Obtaining Samples and EvaluatingCytology
203
Table 15.5.   Cellular characteristic of tumor types.
Tumor Type
Tendency to Form Clusters
Cell Shape
Cellularity of Sample
 Mesenchymal tumors
Low to moderate
 Elongate, spindle, oval
Low to moderate
Epithelial tumors
Moderate to high
 Polygonal
Moderate to high
Round cell tumors 
Low, usually are individual
Round to polygonal
High
cells
The criteria that define each of the three
origin seen in young dogs, from cutaneous
categories of neoplasia are general cell
lymphoma, a highly malignant neoplasm of
shape, cellularity of sample, tendency of the
 lymphocytes. The morphology of the cells
cells to form clusters, the pattern of cell in
from these two neoplastic processes can be
the clusters, and whether the cells have dis-
quite similar. If the specimen comes from
tinct cytoplasmic borders. Table 15.5 lists
a 1-year-old dog with a single lesion, the
the cellular characteristic of mesenchymal,
cytopathologist will likely provide a diag-
epithelial, and round cell tumors.
 nosis of histiocytoma. If the lesion is from
The most challenging aspect of oncologic
an older dog with multiple skin masses,
cytology is the differentiation between be-
all of which reveal the same cells, the cy-
 nign and malignant lesions. Although there
topathologist will likely provide a list of
are distinct cellular characteristics that as-
potential diagnoses that includes cutaneous
sist in this determination, other facts can be
lymphoma, with the recommendation that
just as important as the morphology of the
biopsies from multiple masses be submit-
cells. If the cytological preparation is going
ted for histological evaluation, and pos-
 to be sent to a laboratory for evaluation, a
sible special stains to help make a final
complete description of the lesion, includ-
diagnosis.
 ing specific location and size, is needed. The
The cell characteristics that are indica-
location provided should be as specific as
tions of malignancy are primarily found
aq ae ss .us, e 'aueisu oh 'aqissod
 in the nucleus. Nuclear molding, marked
in the skin (cutaneous) or beneath the skin
variation in nuclear size (anisokaryosis),
(subcutaneous). An abdominal mass can be
multiple variably sized nucleoli or large
on the abdomen, in the abdominal wall, or
angular nucleoli, and abnormal mitotic
in the abdominal cavity. Terms such as in-
fgures are findings that indicate a high
traabdominal and intrathoracic are much
 probability of malignancy. There are few
more specific than simply using the terms
cytoplasmic characteristics that are indica-
abdominal and thoracic to describe the lo-
tive of malignancy. Increased cytoplasmic
cation of a mass.
basophilia and formation of a large cen-
The signalment of the animal is also im-
tral vacuole that pushes the nucleus to the
portant in helping the cytopathologist de-
edge of the cell (signet ring forms) are two
velop a differential diagnosis if the cytol-
cytoplasmic characteristics that are asso-
ogy is not diagnostic for a specific process.
ciated with malignant cells. Figure 15.9
An excellent example of how this informa-
shows several photomicrographs of the
tion can be crucial for evaluation of a cyto-
four types of neoplasia and illustrates sev-
logical specimen is differentiating a histio-
eral of the cell characteristics that indicate
cytoma, a benign neoplasm of macrophage
malignancy.
enbs (q)
Clusters.
large
the
二
the
enpl
(a) Soft
Chapter15:ObtainingSamples and EvaluatingCytology
205
Although these cellular changes are
in the hyperplastic cells that mimic neopla-
strongly suggestive of malignancy, it is im-
sia. When inflammation is present in a le-
 portant to remember that in certain types of
sion, extreme care must be taken to prevent
malignant lesions, the cells will have none
overinterpretation of changes in the tissue
 of these characteristics. Apocrine adenocar-
cells present. Fibrocytes in chronic inflam-
cinoma of the anal sac is an excellent exam-
matory lesions can show several character-
 ple of this principle. The epithelial cells that
istics of malignancy, especially in young
make up this neoplasm are usually very uni-
animals. Mesothelial cells, the cells that
form and may have minimal numbers of mi-
line the body cavities, often proliferate and
totic figures and no nuclear or cytoplasmic
can form variable-sized clusters with signif-
 changes suggestive of the highly aggressive
icant anisokaryosis when fluid is present in
nature of these lesions.
these cavities. Even the most experienced
 On the other hand, hyperplasia, the pro-
 cytopathologist may not be able to differ-
cess of increased cell production in response
entiate hyperplasia from neoplasia in some
to inflammation, is associated with changes
cases.
Appendix A
Tables
Table A.1. Normal values for canine and feline complete blood count.
Test
 Canine Normal Range 
 Feline Normal Range
Packed cell volume
35-55%
24-44 %
 Hemoglobin 
12-18 g/dL
8-15 g/dL
Mean corpuscular volume (MCv)
60-77 fL
39-55 fL
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration
32-36 g/dL
7p,8 95-06
White blood cell count 
6,000-17,000 n/μl
 5,500-19,500 n/μL
Neutrophils, seg
3,000-11,400 n/μul
2,500-12,500 n/μl
 Neutrophils, bands
0-300 n/μl
0-300 n/μL
 Lymphocytes
1,000-4,000 n/μL
1,500-7,000 n/μL
Monocytes
150-1350 n/μl
0-850 n/μL
Eosinophils
100-750 n/μl
0-750 n/μl
 Platelets 
220,000-550,000 n/μl
300,000-500,000 n/μl
207
208Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table A.2.
 Normal values for canine/feline chemistry.
Test 
 Canine Normal Range 
 Feline Normal Range
Alkaline phosphatase 
10-150 U/L
0- 62 U/L
Albumin 
3.1-4.5 g/dL
2.4-4.1 g/dL
ALT (SGPT)
5-60 U/L
 27-76 U/L
Amylase
 500-1500 IU/L
500-1500 1U/L
AST (SGOT)
5-55 U/L
5-55 U/L
.155
0-14 U/L
 0-6 U/L 
Albumin
2.5-3.6 g/dL
2.3-3.3 g/L
Total protein 
5.1-7.8 g/dL
5.9-8.5 g/L
Globulin 
2.8-4.5 g/dL
3.6-5.6 g/L
Total bilirubin 
0-0.4 mg/dL
 0-0.4 mg/dL
BUN
p/8w 27-
15-34 mg/dL
Creatinine
0.4-1.8 mg/dL
0.8-2.3 mg/dL
Glucose
60-125 mg/dL
70-150 mg/dL
Calcium 
8.2-12.4 mg/dL
8.2-11.8 mg/dL
 Phosphorus
2.1-6. 3 mg/dL
3.0-7.0 mg/dL
Chloride (Cl)
105-115 mEq/L
111-125 mEq/L
Sodium (Na)
141-156 mEq/L
147-156 mEq/L
Potassium (K)
4.0-5.6 mEq/L
3.9-5.3 mEq/L
Table A.3. Normal blood gas levels.
Test
 Canine Normal Range 
 Feline Normal Range
 Blood pH
7.35-7.45
7.35-7.45
pC02
34-40 mm HG 
34-40 mm HG 
Anion gap
15-25 mEq/L
15-25 mEq/L
Base excess
0-+6
-5 -+2
 Sodium bicarbonate 
 20-24 mg/dL
16-20 mg/dL
Table A.4. Normal clotting times.
Test
 Canine Normal Range 
 Feline Normal Range
Prothrombin times (PT)
12-17 sec
15-23 sec
Partial prothrombin times (aPTT')
71-102 sec
 70-120 sec
Appendix A:Tables
209
Table A.5. Emergency diagnostics.
 Clinical Test
 Normal
 Packed cell volume
Canine >55%
Feline >45 % 
Canine <35 %
Feline ≤25 %
 Serum
Straw-colored
Buffy coat
 Buffy coat should be <1 % but visible
Total protein 
 Canine: 5-7.2 g dL 
 Feline: 5.8-8.5 g/dL
 Albumin
Canine: 3.1-4.5 g dL
 Feline: 2.4-4.1 g/dL
asoon(8 po01g 
 Canine: 60-115 mg/dL
 Feline: 60-130 mg/dL
Electrolytes
Sodium (Na)—Canine: 142-1 50 mEq/L
 Feline: 147-162 mEq/L
Chloride (Cl) —Canine: 105-117 mEq/L
 Feline: 114-126 mEq/L
 Potassium (K)-Canine: 4.5-5.4 mEq/L
 Feline: 3.7-5.2 mEq/L
Lactate
Lactate >3
(Normal can vary from machine to machine.)
 Clotting times
PT
Canine: 71-102 sec
 Feline 70-120 sec
.LLde
Canine: 12-17 sec
Feline: 15-23 sec
Blood pressure
 Systolic = 100-140 mm Hg
210Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
i-Mix
THERMOlyNE(C)
(心)
Figure A.1. How to draw blood and handle samples.
Appendix A:Tables211
(q)
(d)
(a)
[e]
{t
(g)
Figure A.2. Components of the complete blood count.
212(
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table A.6.
 Common poikilocytosis and associated diseases.
 Type of Cell
Noted 
Shape of Cell
Disease
Echinocytes 
Numerous uniformly distributed
Artifact of drying, snake bite, dehydration,
(crenated cell)
tent-shaped spikes
inherited erythrocyte defects
Acanthocytes
Irregularly spaced thin spikes
Prominent numbers: liver disease, renal
with knoblike tips; no central
disease, hemangiosarcoma
pallor 
 Small numbers iron deficiency,
 microangiopathy
Eccentrocytes
Dense eccentric displacement of 
Oxidative injury, onion toxicity
 hemoglobin with a clear edge
Schistocytes
 Small iregular fragments of the
 Microangiopathy, iron deficiency.
erythrocyte
hemangiosarcoma, valvular stenosis
Spherocytes
 Small dense cells with no central
 Large numbers: hemolytic anemia 
joled
 Small numbers: microangiopathy, iron 
deficiency.
Keratocytes
Surface blisters that rupture to
Iron deficiency, microangiopathy, liver
form small horn-lick extensions.
disease
 Burr cells 
Elongate cells with spikes similar 
 Feline liver disease, renal disease.
(ovalo-
to a crenated cell
echinocytes)
Table A.7. Causes of regenerative and nonregenerative anemia.
Regenerative Anemia
 Nonregenerative anemia
 Blood loss (trauma, coagulation defects)
Bone marrow neoplasia (leukemia, nonmarrow [metastatic])
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
Bone marrow fibrosis 
 Oxidative hemolytic anemia 
Infectious disease (FeLV, chronic ehrlichiosis)
 Erythroparasites
Toxicity
Chronic renal disease (lack of erythropoietin)
Table A.8. Semiquantitation method for polychromasia.
Degree of Polychromasia
 Number of Polychromatophilic Cells/1000x
Few
0-1
1+
1-2 (dog), 0-1 (cat)
2+
2-3 (dog). 1-2 (cat)
3+
3-6 (dog). 2-4 (cat)
4+
6 (dog), >4 (cat)
Appendix A:Tables
213
Table A.9. Reticulocyte percentages and absolute numbers and corresponding degree
of regeneration.
Reticulocyte Percentage (Corrected)
Absolute Reticulocyte
Degree of Regeneration
<1% (dog), <0.4% (cat)
<60,000 (Dog), <40,000 (cat)
No regeneration 
1-4% (dog), 0.5-2% (cat)
60-150,000 (dog), 40-70,000 (cat)
Mild regeneration 
5-20% (dog), 3-4% (cat)
150-300,000 (dog), 70-100,000(cat)
Moderate regeneration 
<20% (dog), >4% (cat)
300,000 (dog), >100,000 (cat)
 Marked regeneration
Table A.10. Diseases associated with erythrocyte destruction and mechanisms.
Immune-mediated 
 Extravascular hemolysis: macrophage
Intravascular hemolysis: lysis
hemolytic anemia 
removal of antibody coated erythrocytes
of erythrocytes by antibody
on the cell surface 
Heinz body 
Oxidative injury to hemoglobin (zinc,
anemia/eccentrocyte-
drugs):; extrava scular hemolysis:
associated 
 macrophage removal of erythrocytes with 
anemia
Heinz bodies
 Erythroparasites
Extravascular hemolysis: macrophage
Intravascular hemolysis: lysis
removal of infected erythrocytes (antibodies
of heavily infected
to the organism contributes to the
Erythrocytes (may be
phagocytosis)
antibody mediated)
Hypophosphatemia
Extravascular hemolysis: removal of
Intravascular hemolysis,
 erythrocytes with oxidative injury
 possibly due to disruption of
 erythrocyte metabolism.
Table A.11. Hereditary diseases associated with hemolytic anemia.
Disease
Common Breed
Hereditary spherocytosis
 Miniature schnauzers, Alaskan malamutes
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
Basenji, beagles, West Highland white terriers, cairn 
 terriers, miniature poodles 
Phosphofructokinase deficiency
English springer spaniels, American cocker spaniel
214(
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table A.12. Types of polycythemia.
 Relative 
Dehydration, splenic contraction 
 Absolute primary
Polycythemia vera 
 Absolute secondary
Hypoxia (general)
Renal hypoxia (renal masses)
 Erythropoietin-like substance produced by nonrenal neoplasia
Table A.13. Clinical diagnostics that help to monitor kidney function.
 Element That Suggests 
 Decreased Glomerular
 Other Factors That Elevate 
 Factors Indicating That True
 Element 
 Filtration
Element Level
Renal Azotemia is Occurring
BUN
Azotemia
Gl bleeding
USG >1.015
 BUN >26 mg/dL (Canine)
High protein meal
BUN >34 mg/dL (Canine)
Creatinine
Azotemia
None
USG >1.015
Crea >1.3 mg/dL (Canine)
Crea >2.2 mg/dL (Feline)
Phosphorus
P >5.5 mg/dL (Canine)
 Disease that affects
Increased phosphorus must
P >7.0 mg/dL (Feline)
calcium and phosphorus 
 be in association with 
balance.
 elevated BUN/creatinine and
low UsG.
 Potassium
K ≤4.0 mEq/L (Canine)
Any disease that can
 Decreased potassum must
K <3.7 mEq/L (Feline)
cause fluid loses (i.e.,
 be in association with
vomiting, anorexia, or
 elevated BUN/creatinine and
 diarrhea may lower body
low UsG.
potassium)
 Potassium
K >5.4 mEq/L (Canine)
 Hypoadrenocorticism 
Increased potassium must be
K >5.2 mEq/L (Feline)
(Addison's Dz)
 in association with acute
 elevations of BUN/creatinine
 and urinary obstruction.
 CAN BE ACUTELY LIFE 
THREATENING 
Albumin
Alb <3.1 g/dL (Canine)
Liver disease
Possible early warning of
Alb <2.4 g/dL (Feline)
Bleeding
impending renal disease.
Gastrointestinal Dz
Low albumin must be
 associated with a true renal
proteinuria (see Ch 11).
AppendixA:Tables
215
Table A.14. Risks of patients with reduced hepatic function.
Liver Function
Concern of Dysfunction
 Detoxification
improper detoxification of microbes and toxins, which remain in the body
affecting the central nervous system.
 Physicat symptoms due to builtd of toxins and bilirubin: Increased toxins can 
 produce nausea, anorexia, depression, vomiting, diarrhea, weakness, and weight 
Ioss.
Formation of
Anemia: Lack of red blood cell precursors 
building blocks
Increased clotting time: The liver produces clotting factors that finalize clot 
formation.
Hypoalbuminemia: Due to lack of blood albumin, the body can shift fluid from
the vascular supply to the tissue, increasing fluid accumulation in the body
producing ascites, edema, and pulmonary edema (with patients on IV fluids).
Glucose storage
(a eod
Notify DVM immediately
Algorithm: Diagnosis of renal dise
Table A.15.
01022
UAEL
Table A.16. Algorithm for hepatic clinical diagnostics
iclence of liver
count/TF
enzyr
ction
Fecal occult blood test
ratio
PCV/plate
liver
loss:
Renal
Bleer
Evaluate for chronic intestinal disease:
routine fecal evaluations:
 Evaluate blood folate levels
ElevatedBUN
 smear
Chemistry:
Fecal
Elisa
clinical
Do
of the！
 Algorithm for clinical diagnostics
The patient shows signs of chronic
gastrointestinal disease
appetit
melena)
Aatulence
Table A.17.
Acuterenalfailure:
 Dehydration
Azotemla
 pue ued jeuuopqe guisanul 
Gallbladderobstruction:
weakness
secondar
Icterus
for
(dehydration)
tor
evident,
RBC
as
lipemia
inc
Blood film:
disease
CBC:
ncreas
severe
eased dotting factors
 Algorithm for acute exocrine pancreatic patient 
ndinghepatic disease:
ecre
品
Table A.18.
Diarr
Pancreatic exocrine insufficiency
If severe disease is evident, monitor for secondary
Ultrasound: changes in pancreatic tiss
DecreasedTll
concerns.
Blood folate levels: low
NA
incre
um: lipemia
ossible
clinical
od
Atered liver enzymes
2
Altered cholesterol
k
Hyperglycemia
Diabetes mellitus:
 Urine glucose
含
eht
AppendixA:Tables
221
 The patient shows signs of acute pancreatitis:
Check clinical diagnostics:
Chronic vomiting
CBC: usually WNL
Weight loss
 Chronic diarrhea Possibly no symptoms
 Blood film: can be WNL
Chemistry: changes in amylase and
 lipase—not reliable 
PL: (?)
 Possibly no changes in clinical diagnostics
Evaluate advanced modalities:
 UItrasound: changes in pancreatic tissue
± biopsy
If severe disease is evident, monitor for secondary
concems.
Diabetes mellitus (?):
Hyperglycemia
Urine glucose
 Altered liver enzymes 
 Altered cholesterol
Recheck blood glucose
cnce patient relaxes.
Fructosamine level
home samples
ketoacidoticpatients
Identify diabetic
Hyperglycemia: stress
V5. diabetes
Elevations in cholesterol
Altered liver enzymes
overall change
Hyperglycemia
secondarily (Type Ill):
Serum: lipemia
levels
5r
mellite
clinical 
Chemistry:
CBC: no
(Diabetes
liabetes
patient
eatic
mellit
ine
diabe
en
右
for
signs
lgorithm
SM
A.21.
AppendixA:Tables
223
Table A.22.
. Electrolyte abnormalities, their causes and secondary concerns.
Element 
 Normal Finding 
 Presence of Abnormality Suggests
Sodium
Canine: 142-150 mEq/L
Hyponatremia: Associated with loss of solute from
Feline: 147-162 mEq/L
vomiting and diarrhea and hypoadrenocorticism. Evaluate
potassium levels.
Hypernatremia: Associated with increased intake and loss 
of large quantities of fluids.
 Potassium
Canine : 4.0-5.4 mEq/L
Hypokalemia: Associated with chronic gastrointestinal
Feline: 3.7-5.2 mEq/L
 loss (vomiting/diarrhea), chronic renal disease, and 
long-term IV fluid therapy. Severe hypokalemia can be 
 associated with treatment of the DKA patient.
Hyperkalemia:
· Artifactual hyperkalemia can be associated with
specific breeds (Japanese canine breeds), chronic
 intestinal/parasitic disease, and severe abnormalities in 
white blood cell count and platelet count.
● Disease: Associated with hypoadrenocorticism and
 urinary obstruction. Evaluate sodium level.
Chloride
Canine : 105-117 mEq/L
 Hypochloremia: Closely associated with causes of
Feline: 114-126 mEq/L
hyponatremia and loss of solute.
Hyperchloremia: Closely associated with hypernatremia
 and increased intake and loss of large quantities of fluids.
Calcium
Canine : 9.2-11.2 mg/dL
Hypocalcemia: Associated with eclampsia, acute/chronic
 renal failure, and ethylene glycol intoxication.
 Feline: 7.2-11.4 mg/dL
Hypercalcemia: Associated with specific types of cancers.
acute renal failure, overproduction of parathyroid 
 hormone, hypoadrenocorticism, specific rodenticides, 
 and specific types of infection.
 Phosphorus
Canine : 2.3-5.5 mg/dL
Hypophosphotemia: Associated with the treatment of the
 Feline: 3.0-7.0 mg/dL 
 DKA patient. If levels <1.0 mg/dL, hypophosphotemia 
 Can produce a hemolytic anemia.
Hyperphosphotemia: Associated with decreased
 excretion of phosphorus from the kidneys secondary to
renal disease and failure. Can be also associated with 
 diseases that produce severe prerenal and postrenal 
 azotemia (see Chapter 5).
224
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table A.23.
 Elements of the urine and their meanings.
Urinary
Element
 Normal Finding 
 Presence of Abnormality Suggests
 Urine specific
Canine >1.025
 Decreased urine specific gravity can suggest the kidneys' inability
 gravity
Feline >1.035
to concentrate urine. This can occur simply due to increased fluid 
intake (oral, IV fluids) or be secondary to renal or hormonal 
diseases.
 Urine glucose
 Negative
Artifact: Decreased USG <1.005 can hide glucosuria on the 
(glucosuria)
reagent strip (false negative). Further contamination of the urine
 may produce a false positive.
 Disease: True glucosuria can suggest diabetes mellitus or in some
cases stressed patients with hyperglycemia and glucosuria (see
Chapter 7).
Urine ketones
Negative
 Artifact: Test checks for only one kind of ketone, so a negative
(ketonuria)
does not always rule out ketonuria. Further, false positive ketone 
reactions can be seen with administration of captopril,.
 D-penicillamine, iopronin, and cystine.
 Disease: A true ketonuria is always present with glucosuria and 
 suggests the patient is suffering from diabetes ketoacidosis (see
Chapter 7).
Conjugated 
 Negative
 Artifact: Can show false positive based on contamination of
bilirubin
sample.
(bilirubinuria)
 Disease: Can support evidence of liver disease, IMHA, or
 gallbladder obstruction in the patient.
Blood 
Negative
Artifact: Test can show positive for blood, hemoglobin, or 
myoglobin. Disease that affect red blood cell destruction (e.g.
(hematuria)
IMHA) or muscle disease can cause increased release of 
hemoglobin or myoglobin and make this test falsely positive. To
help confirm the diagnosis of hematuria, the urine supernatant 
should be evaluated after the urine is spun. Patients with true 
hematauria will have a clear supernatant because the cells have 
 been condensed into the pellet.
 Disease: Hematuria suggests disease that produces bleeding into
the urinary bladder—e.g, urinary tract infections, urinary crystals
and stones (urolithiasis), or bladder/renal tumors.
 Protein
 Canine: negative 
 Artifact: Artifactual proteinuria can occur if urine pH is alkaline
to trace
(>7.5).
(proteinuria)
 Feline: negative 
 Disease: The presence of urine protein (especially in diluter urine)
can suggest evidence of urinary tract disease or renal disease with
 glomerular damage.
Sediment
(<0-2 WBC hpf)
 Evidence of increased white blood cells supports the presence of
white blood
infection or inflammation within the urinary tract. Increased white
cells
 blood cells are most commonly observed with urinary tract
 infections.
Sediment-
(<0-3 WBC hpf)
 Evidence of increased red blood cells supports the presence of
red blood
bleeding within the bladder suggesting urinary tract infections,
cells
 chronic bladder crystals or stones, or bladder or renal tumors.
AppendixA:Tables
225
Table A.23.(Continued)
 Urinary
Element
 Normal Finding 
 Presence of Abnormality Suggests 
Sediment-
(<1-2/lpf)
Increased evidence of epithelial cells can suggest the presence of
epithelial cells 
 some types of bladder cancer. When noted, the urinary sample 
 should be sent to the lab for cytological evaluation.
Sediment
None
True bacterial or fungal elements in the urine supports renal or
bacteria or
urinary tract infection. If these elements are noted, the type of 
 sn&uny
microorganism should be documented. Further, the presence of 
white blood helps to further confirm that an infection is evident.
Casts-
 Negative
Caused by Protenuria 
hyaline 
Casts-
 Negative 
The presence of granular casts can suggest renal tubular necrosis.
granular
Casts-
 Negative
Uncommon. Their presence does suggest serious renal disease and 
 cellular
its cause is dependent on the type of cell found. Red blood cell 
casts suggest renal hemorhage or inflammation, whereas white
blood cell casts suggest renal infection.
Casts-— waxy
 Negative
If evident, they can suggest chronic renal tubular damage
secondary to chronic kidney disease.
Casts--fatty
 Negative
 Can suggest patients with increased fat content, most notably in 
the cat.
Crystals-
Negative
 Artifact: Can precipitate out in samples that sit for too long at room
triple
temperature.
phosphate
Disease: Suggestive of crystallization of ma gnesium, phosphorus,
and ammonia out of dietary elements in urine with an alkaline pH.
Crystals-
 Negative
 Artifact: Can precipitate out in samples that sit for too long at room
calcium
temperature.
oxalate
Disease: Suggestive of crystallization of calcium and oxalate out of
dietary elements in urine with an acidic pH.
Crystals-
Negative
These crystals are evident with ethylene glycol intoxication 
monohydrate
 (antifreeze) within the first & hours of ingestion.
calcium
oxalate
Crystals--
Negative
Normal findings in concentrated urine in canines. Can suggest 
bilirubin
diseases that produce hyperbilirubinemia (e.g., liver disease,
gallbladder obstruction, or IMHA).
Crystals--
Negative
Evident in patients with liver dysfunction and in dalmatians.
ammonium
biurate
crystals
or increased red blooc
Observe urine bilirubin, blood serum color, liver enzymes, red blood cell
Observe urine sediment, Pcv/TP,
emoglobinuria: supernatant red
Concerns of UTl, bleeding mass,
Observe PCV/TP, CBC, blood film.
Hematuria: supernatant clear 
 or other systemic diseas
or animal that has adequate
Concerns of red blood cell
bleeding problem.
disease
destruction.
(aa) szo> 5sn/(auue) sol> 55n
disease
liver
concerns
on IV fluids
renal
count. Consult veterinarian.
 Document turbidity on urinalysis report.
Suggests inabilityto concentrate urine:
Observe chemistry (renal function: BUN,
YELLOWW
cell breakdown
sediment. Consult veterinarian.
hematuria or hemoglobinuria.
If supernatant clear: hematuria
 Flowchart A—Evaluating urine color, turbidity, and specific gravity.
2
2
Continue on to Flowchart B.
the urin
appearance
Is the urine
oncentratec
nor
YES
Table A.24.
I blood cell breakdown
nediated hemolytic anemia)
pog
uun
icose in the urine with
diseas
alkaline
mellitus
can be a seriou
Ispner
renal
causes.
ection.
daryto
NOTIFY
pa
other
e!p
pue
哈
eans
Hd
the
=
otein
YES
YES
YES
 on to Flowchart C.
heurine？
bilirub
heurine
nere
nere
here
Continue
.24
M
N
aggregates of protein or cels that form inside the kidney tubules. They can suggest acute or
lary tract disease (urolithiasis, urinary tract infection, mass, or 
ror masswithin
secondary to infection.
It is important to determine
 Notify veterinarian.
infection, mass, or 
 or tumor or other systemic disease that affects the
tumor
tract
ssible
the
possible.
ano
tumor
. Notify veterinarian.
ntfor
field
TEF
rysta
FY
JION
protein.
ronic renal disease, infection, or neoplasia.
bla
counts;
a
white
6
S
YES
YES
-Evaluating urine sediment.
with
(onuo)
:e/n
lowchart C-
aosposp s-arund
Cortisol suppresses
ACTHSTIN
REEV
ou 11
Hd)
Nim
ON
 Identified metabolic acidosis
Is the anion gap elevated?
Renaldisease
Lactic
suixo,
Diabe
Elev
123
ON
either on ventilator or manually
s
Table A.26. Algorithm: Causes of acidosis.
ure ventilation
Is the patient still acidotic?
(pCO,>40 mm Hg)
Identified respiratory acidosis
Recheck blood g
ala
s
od a si
Medication
2im
AppendixA:Tables
231
Table A.27.Primary hemostasis.
Test
Outcome
 Platelet count
Decreased platelet number will affect the body's ability to produce the
initial clot (<40,000/ μl).
 Platelet function tests
 Sent out to lab when presented with a bleeding animal with normal
 platelet number and normal clotting times.
 Buccal mucosal bleeding
 Done as an in-house lab test for lack of von Willebrand's factor (von 
Willebrand's disease)
Table A.28.Secondary hemostasis.
Test 
Cascade Affected
 Possible Causes
 Prolonged PT
Extrinsic cascade
 Factor Vll deficiency
Normal a PTT
Normal PT
Intrinsic cascade
Factor Vill or IX deficiency
 Prolonged aPT'T
 Prolonged PT
Both cascades
 Multiple factor deficiencies: 
 Prolonged aPTT
Vitamin K antagonism (rat poison)
Liver disease
DIC
 Inherited Dz:
 Factor X
Thrombin 
232(
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table A.29. Overview of Code I diagnostics.
Clinical
Test 
Outcome
 Other Diagnostics
Cause/Action
 Packed 
Canine >55%
Should be a marked
 Dehydration:
cell 
 Feline >45 %
increase in albumin/
 Notify veterinarian.
volume
total protein.
Prepare patient for aggressive fluid
therapy.
Canine <35 %
 Check purple top for
 Notify veterinarian.
Feline <25 % 
Clot or agglutination.
Causes:
 Check albumin/total 
● Blood loss
 protein for decrease.
● Chronic anemia of disease
·IMHA 
·
Artifact
Serum
Straw-colored
If hemolyzed, check 
 Document all changes to serum and
 PCV for anemia; check 
 notify veterinarian.
 purple top for
 agglutination.
 If icteric, check PCV
for anemia and purple
top for agglutination.
Check patient for 
physical jaundice.
If lipemic, check 
medical history for the 
last time patient ate.
Buffy coat
Buffy coat should be
 Check white blood cell 
 Decreased buffy coat: viral
<1% but visible
count and blood film.
infection/immunosuppression
Increased buffy coat:
 infection/inflammation/cancer
Total
Canine: 5-7.2 g dL
 Low total protein:
 Low total protein can suggest 
protein
 Feline: 5.8-8.5 g/dL
 Evaluate PCV/T'P,
bleeding, renal disease, liver disease,
 albumin.
 chronic intestinal disease, or possibly
 High total protein:
disease that produces a decreased 
Evaluate PCV/T'P,
immune response (low
albumin, and globulin.
 immunoglobulin).
 High total protein: dehydration or 
disease that produces an increased 
immune response (high 
immunoglobulin>
Albumin
Canine: 3.1-4.5 g dL
Low albumin: Evaluate 
 Low total protein can suggest 
Feline: 2.4-4.1 g/dL
 PCV/TP, clotting times, 
 bleeding, renal disease, liver disease,
urinalysis, renal
 chronic intestinal disease.
enzymes, liver 
High total protein: dehydration 
enzymes.
 High albumin:
Evaluate PCV/T' P.
Appendix A:Tables233
Table A.29.
(Continued)
Clinical 
Test 
 Outcome
 Other Diagnostics
Cause/Action 
Blood
Canine: 60-115 mg/dL
Low blood glucose:
Low blood sugar: sepsis
glucose 
Feline: 60-130 mg/dL
 Check white blood cell 
Notify veterinarian immediately.
 count/blood film.
Increased blood glucose: diabetes
Increased blood
mellitus, stress 
glucose: urinalysis,
fructosamine,
chemistry.
Electrolytes
Sodium (Na):
Chemistry
Decrease in electrolytes is caused by
Canine: 142-150 mEq/L
 Urinalysis
vomiting, diarrhea, fluid therapy.
Feline: 147-162 mEq/L
Increase in potassium: FLUT'D,
Chloride (Cl):
hypoadrenocorticism 
Canine: 105-117 mEq/L
 Notify veterinarian immediately.
Feline: 114-126 mEq/L
Potassium (K):
Canine: 4.5-5.4 mEq/L
 Feline: 3.7-5.2 mEq/L
Lactate
Lactate >3
Blood gas
Increased lactate supports decreased 
(Although normal can 
ability to oxygenate tissue (perfusion).
 vary from machine to
This makes the tissue burn energy
machine.)
through fermentation and lactate
builds up. Serial lactates serve as a
monitor of how the body is
 responding to treatment to increased 
 oxygenation of blood and body
perfusion.
 Clotting
PT:
Increased clotting 
 Increased clotting times support the 
times
Canine: 71-102 sec
times: Evaluate
patient's ability to clot blood (see 
 Feline 70-120 sec
PCV/TP, albumin, CBC
Chapter 13).
aPTT:
(platelet count).
 Notify veterinarian immediately.
Canine: 12-17 sec
Feline: 15-23 sec 
Blood
Systolic >100-140 mm
Any abnormalities, notify veterinarian
pressure
Hg
immediately.
checkPCV
 purple top tube, spherocytes.
tered
NotfyDVM
a
agglutination
filrry.
bloodf
Table A.30. Algorithm: Evaluating blood film on emergency patients.
wet prep
nfe
rforrmy
isible
Appendix A:Tables
235
Table A.30.
(Continued)
Heinz Bodies - Oxidative injury to hemoglobin:
Concems are acetaminophen toxicity onions,
Step ll: Evaluate red blood cellinternal
garlic.
morphology under high oil (100x).
Notltfy DVM
Howell-Jowell bodies - Nuclear remanants from 
immature red blood cells, supports a regenerative
response. Check for polychromasia, Nucleated
RBC, reticulocytes.
Record In Chart
agents. Notify DVM, posslbly send Into lab.
Increased band neutrophils - Can suggest early 
massive infection / sepsis.
 Step IV: Check fo abnormal populations of 
white blood cells.
Notlfy DVM
Increased eosinophils- Can suggest fungal.
parasitic or allergic disease.
Record In chart / notify DVM
Step V: Calculate platelet count under 100x
Increased mast cells - Can suggest serious mast
objective:
cell disease / mast celleukemia.
Estlmated platelet number = the average
Notlfy DVM
number of platelets x 15000 
If decreased, notfy DVM
(Count Is not valld # platelet clumps are
ered edge)
Posslblke evaluate clottlng tlmes
Table A.31. Complications associated with fine needle aspiration.
Complication
Site
 Pneumothorax
Bun7
Hemorrhage
 Liver, kidney, spleen, lung 
 Tumor seeding 
 Neoplastic lesions 
Bacteremia
Abscess (internal or external)
Sepsis
Abscess (internal or external)
236Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Table A.32.Criteria for classifying body cavity fluids.
Type of 
pind 
Total Cell Count 
Total Protein
Associated Diseases
 Transudate
Less than 1000/μL
Less than 2.5 g/dL
Protein-losing renal disease.
protein-losing Gl disease 
Modified
1000-5000/μL
2.5-3.5 g/dL
Cardiac disease, chronic liver
transudate
disease
Exudate
Greater than 5000/μL
Greater than 3.5 g/dL
 Peritonitis, pleuritis
Table A.33. Classifications of inflammatory processes.
Neutrophilic (suppurative)
Greater than 85% neutrophils
Eosinophilic
Greater than 50% eosinophils
Granulomatous
Greater than 85% macrophages
 Pyogranulomatous
Less than 50% macrophages, greater than 50% neutrophils
Lymphocytic
 Greater than 85% lymphocytes
Table A.34.Tumor terminology.
Tissue of Origin
 Benign Form
Malignant Form
Connective tissue
 Fibroma 
Fibrosarcoma
Bone
Osteoma
Osteosarcoma
 Squamous epithelium 
 Papilloma 
Squamous cell carcinoma
Glands
Adenoma
Adenocarcinoma
Table A.35. Cellular characteristic of tumor types.
Tendency to
Tumor Type
 Form Clusters 
Cell Shape
 Cellularity of Sample 
Mesenchymal tumors
Low to moderate
 Elongate, spindle,
Low to moderate
oval
Epithelial tumors
Moderate to high
 Polygonal
Moderate, to high
Round cell tumors 
Low, usually are
Round to 
High
ind ividual cells
 polygonal
Appendix B
Clinical Pathology for the
Veterinary Team DVD Instructions
Introduction: The following material is to
recommend clinical diagnostics and evalu-
help each participant get the full enjoyment
ate the outcome.
of the interactive case studies which expose
Computer Requirements: The Power-
the student to medical history, physical ex-
 Point program can work on any PC/ Mac
amination findings, clinical diagnostics and
computer with a CD-ROM / DVD drive. In
virtual slides to help them create problem
 order to utilize the virtual slide portion of
lists for each case. It is important to un-
this program, Mac Users will need to have
derstand that the goal of the program is to
software that allows the computer to emu-
have the student practice their knowledge
 late a PC Desktop environment. Scan scope
in an interactive environment; it is the re-
 should then be loaded onto this portion of
sponsibility of the veterinarian to interpret
the MAC interface and be utilized with the
 medical history and physical exam findings,
DVD.
237
238Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Opening the Program:
Step I: Open Program Button and Click on my computer
Step II: Click on DVD / CD-ROM Drive and open DVD:
Appendix B: DVD Instructions
239
 o  a, (    
orite Link
FileFolce
Aprlication
Folders
LVTECMoblel
Desktep
Public
O5（C)
DVDRWDI
COVERY(D:)
E:)Cin PathC
Clin Path CD
Control Panel
2 items
DVD+R
Step IV: Double Click on PPTVIEW File
Search
Favorite Links
Name
Date modified
Type
Size
Tags
Images
Case4
6/17/200912:04PMScanScope Virtual.
1,090,980KB
Documents
Case5
6/17/200912:32PM
ScanScope Virtual...
1,364,926 KB
Case Work Shee for Cl9/11/2009831 AM
Adobe Acrobat D..
427KB
Pictures
Clinical Pathology for t 9/11/2009 8:44 AM
Microsoft Office .
261,431 KB
More
ImageScope
3/10/2009 8:07 AM
Application
27,628KB
Folders
INTLDATE.DLL
11/4/2008 2:43 AM
Application Extens...
78KB
Desktop
microsoft.vca0.crt.ma.
9/11/2009 8:44 AM
MANIFESTFile
1KB
VTECMobile
msvcm80.dll
7/27/200811:03AM
Application Extens..
468 KB
Public
msvcp80.dll
7/27/200811:03AM
Application Extes..
545 KB
Computer
MSVCR80.dll
7/27/200811:03AMA
Application Extens..
621KB
OS（C:)
OGL.DLL
2/5/200911:36 AM
Application Extens..
1,603KB
play
RECOVERY(D:)
11/2009 8:44 AM
Windows Batch File
1KB
DVD RW Drive(E)Clin Path Cas
playlist
11/20098:44AM
Text Document
1KB
PPTVIEW
28/20097:21AMApplication
Clin Path CD
1.967KB
Removable Disk（F:)
pptview
0/26/20065:49PMMANIFESTFile
1KB
FreeAgentDrive (G:)
/26/20065:52PMApplicationExtens.
330KB
Network
PVREADME
8/24/20068:01AM
HTMLDocument
5KB
Control Panel
SAEXT.DLL
10/26/20066:12PMApplicationExtens.
285KB
Recycle Bin
PPTVIEWDate modified:3/28/20097:21AM
Application
Size:1.91MB
Date created:9/11/2009 9:03AM
240(
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
 Step V: Select Clinical Pathology for the Vet Team CD-ROM - It will begin the show.
《DVD RW Drive(E:）ClinPathCasesClin PathCD
0
 Organize Views 
Favorite Links
Datemodified
Type
Size
Tags
6/17/2009 12:04PMScanScope Virtual
Images
1,090,980KB
Case5
6/17/200912:32PM
ScanScope Virtual...
1,364,926KB
Documents
9/11/20098:31 AMAdohe Actohat D.
Pictures
Microsoft OfficePav
More》
Folders
Look in:Cin Path CD
Desktop
Name
Type
Size
VTECMobileI
Clinical Pathologyfort..
Microsoft Office P...
Recent Places
261,43
Public
Computer
 OS(C:)
RECOVERY(D:)
Desktop
DVD RW Drive(E:) Clin
ClinPath CD
Removable Disk(F:)
VTECMobileI
FreEAgent Drive(G:)
Network
Control Panel
Computer
Recycle Bin
PPTVIEW
Application
Filename:
Open
Fles of type.
PowerPoint Presentatons
 Instructions on how to load Scan Scope unto your computer to view Virtual Slides
Step I: Select Install Scan Scope Tab on Program.
CASE LIBRARY
Casel
CaseIl
CaseIl
Case IV
CaseV
Case VI
Case Work Sheet
Install Scan Scope
Exit Program Tab
Appendix B: DVD Instructions
241
 Most computers will have a pop-up which asks do you want to open this file, please click
on “ok".
CASE LIBRARY
Case l
Case IlI
？
TeanCD-RoMamag
Case IV
Case VI
 Install Scan Scope
Exit Program Tab
Step Il: Program will open, select next.
e
HP（C:
OVDRWDrve IE)
ageseep
06/22/2007
242(
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Step Ill: Read Aperio software agreement, accept agreement and select next.
Seah
06/22/2007
 Step IV: Aperio will make suggestion where fle will be placed on hard drive. It is a very
small file and in most cases it will place the file on the hard drive. Selecting next will start
installation.
e
园
06/22/2007
Appendix B: DVD Instructions
243
Step V: Finish - When done, exit out of scan scope and re-select the CD-ROM program
e
bleDiskc(G
06/22/2007
Step VI: Reselect CD-ROM Tab and enter program
244
4Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
To Navigate in the PowerPoint Environment: Once in the PowerPoint environment, you
will be able to navigate through each slide by clicking on selected tabs to move forward,
answer a question, evaluate a heart rhythm, or make choices where to go in the program.
To fully enjoy this process, please follow the following guidelines to navigate in this envi-
ronment:
1.
When the program begins, you may get a Macro Warning: These programs contain
commands called "Macros" that allow the participant to move throughout the
environment, listen to sound files and view image files contained on these CDs. These
are not meant to affect your computer or its ability to function. In order to use the
CD-ROMS you will need to select to activate the macros in this presentation.
rity Alert-Macre
In ordertoviewthisprogram
nyrusesoro
properly, please select enable
Macro and click okay. The
program will then load and run
normally.
2.
When selecting a tab, make sure that the mouse arrow has change to a small hand
before left clicking the mouse button. This will select the proper tab, and will not move
 you one slide forward in the program.
CASE LIBRARY
CASE LIBRARY
nstalScan Soop
Exit Progn
stalScanS
Exil Pro
CORRECTwAY-The mouse has gonefrom
Incorrect Way: In this image the
arrow to hand, showing you are selecting the
arrow has not changed into the
proper tab.
hand and by clicking the mouse
will move the program forward
one slide only.
Appendix B:DVD Instructions
245
3.
When using the mouse, you inadvertently click or use the dial to move one slide
forward. If you do inadvertently move to the next slide and are out of place, simply
right click the mouse which will bring up the following options:
By right clicking the mouse,
Case IV
Case V
the following options
become available, please
highlight “Previous" and click
with the left mouse button.
A
otoSlide
This will move you back one
slide space.
4.
 There is no narration for the slide: On occasion the PowerPoint may not initiate the
narrative sequence; to restart the narration process, simply click the left mouse button
once.
Appendix
C
Case Worksheet for
Clinical Pathology Cases
Clinical
Pathology
fortheVeterinaryTeam
Andrew J Rosenfeld, DVM and Sharon Dial, DVM
Case #.
Signalment:
Chief Complaint:
247
248
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Triage Exam:
Temperature:
Pulse:
Respiration:
Capillary Refill Time:
Mucus Membrane Color:
Hydration:
Mentation:
Where should the patient be placed?
Lobby
Lobby
Exam
Tech
Emergency
History Questions:
1.
２３４５６７８９
10.
Appendix C: Clinical Pathology Worksheets
249
Full Exam - List Abnormal
Cardiovascular
Respiratory
Abdomen
 Lymph Nodes
Integument (skin)
Eyes / Ears / Nose / Throat
 Reproductive System
Musculoskeletal System
 Neurologic System
Problem List - Based on History & Physical Examination
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
250Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Which Testing Protocols are indicated?
 Level I Diagnostic:
Full Diagnostic:
1. PCV / TP
CBC
2. Blood Film
Chemistry
3. Blood Glucose
 Urinalysis
4. BUN
 Electrolytes
5. Blood Gas
 Clotting Times
6. Electrolytes
 Blood Gas
7. Clotting Time
 ACTH Response Test
 Thyroid Screen
 Other:
PCV / TP / Serum
Clinical Test
Finding
Concern
 Complete Blood Count: If not getting a complete blood count with this case, please move
to the next table.
 Clinical Test
Finding
Concern
Appendix C: Clinical Pathology Worksheets
251
Blood Film:
Concern
Observation
Agglutination vs. Rouleaux
 Red Blood Cell Membrane
Red Blood Cell Internal Architecture
Abnormal Red Blood Cells
Impression of White Blood Cell Population
Platelet Evaluation
252
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Chemistry: If not getting a complete chemistry with this case, please enter the emergency
data base associated with chemistry.
Clinical Test
Finding
Concern
BUN
Glucose
Appendix C: Clinical Pathology Worksheets
253
Electrolytes:
Clinical Test
Concern
ClinicalTest
Finding
Concern
254
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Blood Gas: If not getting a blood gas with this case, please move to the next table.
ClinicalTest
Finding
Concern
Clotting Time: If not getting a clotting time with this case, please move to the next table.
 Clinical Test
Finding
Concern
Appendix C: Clinical Pathology Worksheets
255
 Problem List - Based on Clinical Diagnostic Testing
1.
4.
5.
6.
7.
&.
9.
10.
Other Testing - Please write down other tests that should be evaluated:
1.
23
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Comments:
Additional Resources
Although there are many excellent technical
William J; Irizarry Rovira, Armando R.;
 books to help create a good medical library,
and DeNicola, Dennis B. Wiley-Blackwell,
the authors suggest the following.
Ames, IA, 2d edition, 2008. ISBN #978-
0813828091.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry:
Text and Clinical Case Presentations Set.
Books
Thrall, Mary Anna; Baker, Dale C.; Camp-
bell, Terry W.; and DeNicola, Dennis B.
The S Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and
Feline, Third Edition. Tilley, L., and Smith, F.
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, St. Louis, 1st
edition, 2004. ISBN #978-0781768504.
Wiley-Blackwell, Ames, IA, hardcover, 2009.
TheVeterinary
Medical
Team Handbook.
ISBN #978-0-7817-7063-7.
Rosenfeld,
A.
Wiley-Blackwell, Ames, IA,
Essentials of Veterinary Hematology- Jain, Nemi
C. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames, IA, 1st edition,
2007. ISBN #978-0-7817-5759-1.
1993. ISBN #978-0812114379.
Clinical Anatomy and Physiology for Veteri-
nary Technicians. Colville, T., and Bassert, J.
Online Resource
Mosby, St. Louis, 2002. ISBN #0-323-00819.
4.
Virbac University: Online programs in den-
Veterinary Hematology: Atlas of Common Do-
tistry, dermatology, endocrine, heartworm,
mestic and Non-Domestic Species. Reagan,
 and management: www.virbacuniversity.com
257
Glossary
Acanthocytes (Chapter 4): A change in
Adrenal cortex (Chapter 11): The outer tis-
the red blood cell population noted by
 sue layer responsible for producing dif-
irregular, spiky projections of the red
ferent types of steroids for maintenance
blood cell membrane that have variable-
of blood glucose, electrolytes, and sex
sized knobs on the spike tips and gen-
hormone production.
erally do not retain an area of central
Adrenal medulla (Chapter 11): The tissue in
pallor.
the middle of the gland that is responsi-
Acidosis (Chapter 12): A condition that
 ble for producing epinephrine and nore-
occurs when the patient's blood pH is
pinephrine to assist the central nervous
<7.35.
system in times of crisis (fight or flight
ACTH (adrenocorticotrophic  hormone)
response).
(Chapter 11): A hormone produced by
 Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (Chapter
the pituitary gland that stimulates the
6): An enzyme is responsible for the
adrenal gland to produce cortisol.
 conversion of 2-oxoglutarate to pyruvate
Activated   partial  thromboplastin
1
time
and glutamate in the liver cells (hepato-
(aPTT) (Chapter 13): An assay that eval-
cytes).
uates the intrinsic clotting pathway.
Albumin (Chapter 5): Protein produced in
Addisonian crisis (Chapter 11): A life-
the liver and released in the bloodstream
threatening crisis produced by a lack of
 to carry molecules throughout the body.
aldosterone in the body.
 Albuminuria (Chapter 5): The presence of
Adenocarcinoma (Chapter 15): A malig-
albumin in the urine.
 nant tumor that arises from glandular
Aldosterone (Chapter 8): The hormone re-
tissue.
sponsible for the reabsorption of sodium
Adenoma (Chapter 15): A benign tumor
and expulsion of potassium in the distal
that arises from glandular tissue.
 convoluted tubules in the kidney.
259
260Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Alkaline phosphatase (SALP
or ALP)
Band neutrophil (Chapter 4): An imma-
(Chapter 6):: 
A phosphatase present
 ture neutrophil whose nucleus is not seg-
within the liver, intestine, bone, kid-
mented.
neys, and placenta. On most chem-
Basophil (Chapter 3): A white blood cell
istry panels, alkaline phosphatase activ-
that is rarely seen in peripheral blood.
ity represents the combined activity of
Although its function is unknown, fun-
 all combined tissue alkaline phosphatase
gal and parasitic infections increase the
levels.
basophil population.
Amylase (Chapter 7): A pancreatic enzyme
 Basophilic stippling (Chapter 4): Stippling
that cleaves large sugar molecules into
of erythrocytes that is characterized by
smaller single sugars.
fine basophilic reticulum seen on Wright-
Amyloidosis (Chapter 6): An accumula-
Giemsa stain. The reticulum is aggre-
tion of an inert protein in the liver
 gated RNA (just as in reticulocytes) and
that can chronically destroy normal liver
is seen most occasionally seen in regen-
tissue.
erative anemia.
 Anemia (Chapter 2): Decreased circulating
Bernard-Soulier syndrome (Chapter 13): A
erythrocytes.
 genetic platelet function disorder that
 Anemia of chronic disease (Chapter 14): Se-
inhibits platelets from adhering to von
vere anemia produced by a chronic dis-
Willebrand's factor.
ease that decreases the body's ability to
Bile acids (Chapter 6): Chemicals produced
 regenerate red blood cells.
by the liver to help emulsify fat within
Angiotension (Chapter 5): A hormone in the
the small intestine.
body that is activated by renin to help
Bile canaliculi (Chapter 6): Small channels
 cause a potent constriction of the blood
in the liver that take detoxifed toxins
vessels.
into the gallbladder.
 Anion (Chapter 12): A negatively charged
Bilirubin (Chapters 5, 6): Atoxic metabolite
ion.
 produced from the red blood cell destruc-
Anion gap (AG) (Chapter 12): The unmea-
tion in the spleen and the breakdown of
sured anions in a serum sample.
hemoglobin.
Anisokaryosis (Chapter 15): A marked vari-
Blood folate levels (Chapter 7): A measure
ation in nuclear size.
of the blood levels of the B vitamin folate.
Aplastic anemia (Chapter 4): A severe ane-
 Low levels can help support chronic gas-
mia produced by a lack of progenitor
trointestinal disease and bacterial over-
 cells within the bone marrow.
growth.
Ascites (Chapter 6): An accumulation of
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) (Chapter 5):
fluid in the abdomen secondary to liver
 Blood urea nitrogen as an amalgamation
dysfunction.
 of two ammonia molecules produced by
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (Chapter
the liver.
6): An intracellular enzyme, present in
Bowman's capsule (Chapter 5): A special-
all cells, which has higher levels of activ-
ized filtering structure within the renal
ity in muscle and liver cell damage.
cortex.
Azotemia (Chapter 5): Increased blood am-
Buccal mucosal bleeding time (Chapter 13):
monia.
A clinical diagnostic commonly done to
screen dogs for von Willebrand's disease.
Babesiosis (Chapter 4): An infection or dis-
A small shallow cut is made in the mu-
ease caused by Babesia canis or Babesia
cosal surface of the upper lip and the time
gibsoni, internal erythroparasites within
from the initial cut to cessation of bleed-
the erythrocyte cytoplasm.
 ing is recorded.
Clossary
261
BUN/creatinine ratio (Chapter 8): A ratio
data set divided by the average of the
of blood levels of BUN/creatinine, which
 same data set. A low ratio suggests good
can help support the concern of gastroin-
precision.
 testinal bleeding.
Compensating metabolic alkalosis (Chap-
Burr cells (ovalo-echinocytes) (Chapter 4):
ter 12): A condition that occurs when a
Oval-shaped cells with numerous small
 patient suffering from metabolic acido-
spikes similar to those on crenated
sis increases respiration (lowers pCO2)
cells commonly seen in diseases asso-
to lower blood carbon dioxide levels and
ciated with changes in the erythrocyte
try to decrease overall acid levels in the
membrane lipid. Feline hepatic lipidosis
body.
is commonly associated with increased
Convoluted tubules (Chapter 5): A struc-
numbers of burr cells.
ture within the nephron that functions
to aggressively reabsorb all of the nec-
Calcium (Chapter 8): A body element that is
 essary nutrients back into the bloodst-
needed by almost every cell in the body to
ream.
control cellular activity, aid in muscular
 Cortisol (Chapter 11): A steroid hormone
 contraction, help heart function, and aid
 produced by the adrenal gland.
nerve conduction as well as other body
Creatinine (Chapter 5): An amino acid
functions.
 that is a metabolite of muscle creatinine,
Carbon dioxide (Chapter 12): A gas pro-
which is produced in the body during
duced through respiration and excreted
normal muscle metabolism.
by the body as a toxin.
 Crenated erythrocytes (Chapter 4): An arti-
Casts (urinary) (Chapter 9): Formed el-
fact seen on blood flms when the blood
ements that are literally casts of the
film dries slowly.
tubules within the renal cortex in which
Crystaluria (Chapter 5): The presence of
they form.
crystals in urine.
Cation (Chapter 12): A positively charged
Cytauxzoon felis (Chapter 4): A protozoan
ion.
erythroparasite of cats similar in appear-
Chediak-Higashi syndrome (Chapter 4): A
ance to Babesia gibsoni.
rare inherited disorder that is character-
ized by abnormal leukocytes.
D-dimer assays (Chapter 13): A clinical di-
 Chloride (Chapter 8): An abundant anion
 agnostic to identify increased degrada-
in the extracellular fluid.
tion of fibrin.
Cholelithe (Chapter 6): Gallbladder stones.
Degenerate left-shift (Chapter 3): The re-
Chylothorax (Chapter 4): An accumulation
lease of immature neutrophils from the
of lymphocyte-rich fluid (lymph) in the
bone marrow.
thoracic cavity.
Demodex (Chapter 15): A skin mite.
Chylous (Chapter 15): A milky fluid consist-
Dermatophytic fungi (Chapter 15): A fun-
 ing of lymph and emulsified fat extracted
gal infection of the skin.
from chyme by the lacteals during diges-
Diabetes mellitus (Chapter 7): A disease
tion and passed to the bloodstream.
produced by decreased insulin produc-
Coagulation factors (Chapter 13): Chemi-
tion in the body.
cals produced by the liver that function
Diabetic Ketoacidotic (Chapter 7): A condi-
in the formation of fbrin.
tion of severe diabetes wherein patients
Coagulopathy (Chapter 13): The inability
 produce a toxin called acetone.
of the blood to clot.
Disseminated  intravascular  coagulopathy
Coefficient of variance (Chapter 1): The
(DIC) (Chapter 14): A syndrome seen in
ratio of the standard deviation of a
 association with many disease processes,
262
2Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
which places the patient in a procoagu-
rate to maintain the normal rate of ery-
lation state.
thropoiesis.
Dohle body (Chapter 4): Angular, ba-
 Ethylene glycol (Chapter 5): A toxin found
sophilic cytoplasmic inclusions, also in-
in antifreeze that can cause severe renal
dicating toxic change.
disease.
Extrinsic pathway (Chapter 13): A stepwise
Eccentrocytes (Chapter 4): Erythrocytes
chemical reaction that is involved in the
with fusion of a portion of the cell mem-
formation of a fibrin clot.
brane that causes the hemoglobin to be
Exudates (Chapter 15): A fluid obtained
pushed to the side.
from a body cavity with a total protein
of >3.5 mg/dL and a total cell count of
spiky protrusions from their surface.
>5000 cell/μL.
Eclampsia (postparturient  hypocalcemia)
(Chapter 8): A serious condition of the
Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD)
dog shortly after pregnancy due to in-
(Chapter 10): A syndrome of urinary
creased demands of blood calcium sec-
tract disease and obstruction in the fe-
ondary to lactation.
line.
Elastase (Chapter 3): A neutrophilic enzyme
 Fermentation (Chapter 14): The process of
used on foreign debris and bacteria to
producing energy from glucose in a low
break down tissue.
oxygen environment.
Elliptocytosis (Chapter 3): A genetic dis-
Fibrin (Chapter 13): The mortar that is
ease due to a defect in one of the net-
formed during secondary hemostasis,
work proteins in which the cells are oval-
which is the process of stabilizing the
shaped rather than the normal biconcave
platelet plug. Fibrin holds the platelets
disc.
together.
Endothelial cells (Chapter 13): Cells that
 Fibrinogen (Chapter 13): The protein pre-
line all blood vessels
cursor that circulates in the plasma.
Eosinophil (Chapter 3): A white blood cell
Fibrinogen degradation  product  (FDP)
that is involved in response to para-
(Chapter 13): A clinical diagnostic to
sitic infections, fungal disease, some pro-
identify increased degradation of fibrin.
tozoal diseases, allergies, and immune-
 Fibrinolysis (Chapter 13): The breakdown
complex disease.
of blood clots that is the opposing mech-
Eosinophilia (Chapter 4): An increased
anism that reestablishes blood flow after
number of circulating eosinophils in the
the vessel is repaired by dissolving the
blood.
clot that is obstructing the vessel.
Epinephrine (Chapter 11): A neurochemi-
Fight or flight response (Chapter 11): A
cal transmitter involved with the sympa-
 group of behaviors associated with the
 thetic nervous system.
release of epinephrine from the sympa-
Epistaxis (Chapter 12): Bleeding from the
thetic nervous system.
Folate (Chapter 8): A B vitamin pro-
nose.
Erythrocyte (Chapter 2): A red blood cell.
duced in the intestine of the canine and
Erythrophagia
(Chapter
15):
Body
feline.
macrophages
that
have
engulfed
erythrocytes.
Gallbladder (Chapter 6): A collecting site
Erythropoiesis (Chapter 3): Production of
for deactivated toxins within the liver.
red blood cells in the bone marrow.
 Gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) (Chap-
Erythropoietin (Chapter 3): A hormone
ter 6): An indicator of gallbladder ob-
produced from the kidneys at a constant
struction or lack of bile flow. GGT
Clossary
263
is an intracellular enzyme responsible
spherical light or clear staining inclu-
for cleaving C-terminal glutamyl groups
sion that may extend out from the cell
from one substrate or molecule to an-
membrane.
other, and it is thought to be involved
Hemangiosarcoma (Chapter 14): A type of
in pathways used to protect cells from
tumor arising from blood vessels.
oxidative injury.
Hematemesis (Chapter 7): Vomiting blood.
Gangliosidosis (Chapter 4): A rare inherited
Hematocrit (Hct) (Chapter 2): A calculated
disease that is characterized by abnormal
measurement of the percent of red blood
leukocytes.
cells present in the blood.
Glanzmann's
 thrombasthenia
(Chapter
Hematology (Chapter 3): The study of the
13): A genetic platelet function disorder
cellular components of blood.
that inhibits platelets from adhering to
Hematoma (Chapter 5): A very large col-
each other.
lection of blood under the skin, usually
Glomerular filtration (Chapter 5): The rate
caused by traumatic blood draw.
at which renal glomeruli flter blood.
Hematopoiesis (Chapter 3): The production 
Glomeruli (Chapter 5): Specialized struc-
of blood cells.
tures within the renal cortex that remove
Hematuria (Chapter 9): Blood present in the
toxins from the bloodstream.
urine.
Glucagon (Chapter 7): A pancreatic enzyme
Hemoconcentration (Chapter 9): An in-
that responds to lower blood sugar levels
crease in the red blood cell population
to stimulate the conversion of glycogen
of blood secondary to dehydration.
and fat back into glucose.
Hemoglobin (Hgb) (Chapter 2): A chemi-
Glucose (Chapter 7): Blood sugar.
cal compound within the red blood cell
Glucosuria (Chapter 7): Glucose present in
that has the ability to carry oxygen and
the urine.
carbon dioxide.
Glycogen (Chapter 6): A form of glucose
Hemoglobinemia (Chapter 4): A process
stored by the liver.
whereby red blood cells are lysed within
Glycolysis (Chapter 3): The metabolic path-
the vessels and hemoglobin is released
way that converts glucose, CeHi2O6,
 into the bloodstream.
into pyruvate, CHsO. The free energy
 Hemoglobinuria (Chapter 9): The presence
released in this process is used to form the
of hemoglobin in the urine.
 high energy compounds, ATP (adenosine
Hemogram (Chapter 2): The collection of
triphosphate).
specific measurements that allow the vet-
Granulomatous disease (Chapter 11): Sev-
erinarian to evaluate a patient's erythro-
eral infectious diseases, primarily fungal,
cytes, leukocytes, and platelets.
whereby normal tissue is replaced by in-
Hemolysis (Chapter 5): Lysis of red blood
flammatory cells that form multiple gran-
cells, releasing hemoglobin into the
ulomas.
serum.
Granulopoiesis (Chapter 3): Production of
Hemosiderin (Chapter 15): A hemoglobin
neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils
breakdown product.
in the bone marrow.
Hemostasis (Chapter 13): The process of
turning free-flowing blood into a station-
Heinz body (Chapter 4): A cellular in-
ary clot.
clusion that is formed by oxidative in-
Hepatic encephalopathy (Chapter 6): A
jury to the hemoglobin in the ery-
neurologic syndrome caused by the
throcyte and are most common in the
buildup of toxins entering the central
cat. The hemoglobin denatures and ad-
 nervous system that have not been prop-
heres to the cell membrane forming a
erly detoxified by the liver.
264
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Hepatic lipidosis (Chapter 6): A disease syn-
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
drome that occurs commonly in the cat
(Chapter 11): A decreased production
and horse (pony) when these animals
of aldosterone and/or cortisol by the
have a disease entity that produces a pro-
adrenal gland.
found anorexia. The animals shunt large
Hypoalbuminemia (Chapter 5): Low blood
amounts of fat into the liver to transform
albumin levels.
it into sugar. This fatty infiltration affects
Hypocalcemia (Chapter 8): Low blood cal-
the ability of the liver to function.
cium levels.
Hepatitis (Chapter 6): The activation of the
Hypochromia (Chapter 4): Red blood cells
immune system by some foreign antigen
with decreased staining of their cyto-
within the liver.
plasm.
Hepatomegaly (Chapter 11): Enlargement
Hypoglycemia (Chapter 8): Low blood glu-
of the liver.
cose levels.
Howell-Jolly bodies (Chapter 4): Small rem-
Hypokalemia (Chapter 5): Low blood
nants of the erythrocyte nucleus that oc-
potassium levels.
casionally remain after the nucleus un-
Hyponatremia (Chapter 8): Low blood
dergoes division.
sodium levels.
Hyaluronic acid (hyaluronan) (Chapter 15):
Hypophosphatemia (Chapter 8): Decreased
Joint fluid.
phosphorus concentration.
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease)
Hypoproteinemia (Chapter 5): Low blood
(Chapter 11): A disease characterized by
protein levels.
 an overproduction of cortisol caused by
Hyposthenuria (Chapter 5): Excretion of
primary adrenal or pituitary disease.
urine of unusually low specific gravity
Hyperbilirubinemia (Chapter 4): Increased
and limited concentration of solutes.
bilirubin in the bloodstream.
Hypotension (Chapter 14): Decreased
Hypercalcemia (Chapter 8): High blood lev-
blood pressure.
els of calcium.
Hypercalcemia of malignancy (Chapter 8):
Latrogenic hyperadrenocorticism (Chapter
An increase in blood calcium levels
11): A disease produced from long-term
caused by specific types of cancer.
administration of exogenous steroids
Hypercholesterolemia (Chapter 9): High
(i.., prednisone), which can disrupt the
blood cholesterol levels.
normal negative feedback loop by caus-
Hyperglycemia  (Chapter 
7): Increased
ing suppression of ACTH section by the
blood glucose levels.
pituitary gland.
Hyperkalemia (Chapter 5): High blood 
Iterus (Chapter 6): Jaundice.
potassium levels.
Hiopathic disease (Chapter 11): A disease
Hypernatremia (Chapter 8): Increased
produced by an unknown cause.
serum sodium concentration.
Immune-mediated
hemolytic
anemia
Hyperphosphotemia (Chapter 5): Increased
(Chapter 3): An immune disease wherein
blood phosphorus levels.
body antibodies attach to the membrane
Hyperproteinemia (Chapter 9): High blood
of normal erythrocytes inappropriately
protein levels.
causing the body to destroy its red
Hypersplenism (Chapter 4): A splenic dis-
blood cells as if they were foreign
ease in which the spleen removes exces-
bacteria, resulting in a regenerative
sive numbers of erythrocytes due to ab-
anemia.
 normal macrophage function.
Immune response (Chapter 3): The body's
Hypertension (Chapter 5): Increased blood
cellular and chemical response to a for-
pressure.
eign pathogen or material.
Clossary
265
Immunoblasts (Chapter 4): Large lympho-
Left-shift (Chapter 4): A release of imma-
cytes with deeply basophilic cytoplasm
ture neutrophils into the bloodstream.
and prominent nucleoli.
Leukocytes (Chapter 1): White blood cells.
Immunoglobulin (Chapter 3): Proteins pro-
Leukocytosis (Chapter 1): An increased
duced from lymphocytes that recognize
white blood cell count.
 specific foreign material.
 Leukopenia (Chapter 1): A decreased white
Immunology (Chapter 3): The study of a
blood cell count.
complex cellular defense that recognizes
Leukophagia
(Chapter
15):
Body
foreign substances and infectious agents
macrophages that have engulfed white
and mounts a reaction to destroy the for-
blood cells.
eign agent.
Lipase (Chapter 
7):A
pancreatic
en-
Induction (Chapter 6): A process whereby
zyme that breaks down fat into smaller
an enzyme is stimulated to be produced
 molecules so they can be absorbed by the
by an organ.
intestine.
Insulin (Chapter 7): A pancreatic enzyme re-
Lipemia (Chapter 5): A condition that sug-
leased in times of increasing blood sugar
 gests an increased white precipitate of fat
to stimulate the conversion of sugar into
or lipid in the serum.
 Loops of Henle (Chapter 5): Specialized
Intrinsic pathway (Chapter 13): A stepwise
structures within the renal medulla that
chemical reaction that is involved in the
aid in the concentration of urine.
formation of a fbrin clot.
Lymph nodes (Chapter 3): Small round
Ischemia (Chapter 14): Lack of tissue oxy-
or oval structures within the subcuta-
genation.
neous tissue that function to filter ex-
tracellular fluid (lymph) for foreign ma-
Jaundice (Chapter 5): A conditions that
terial and produce white blood cells
occurs when bilirubin, a waste product
(specifically lymphocytes) that then pro-
from red blood cell production, builds
duce antibodies in response to foreign
up in the tissue.
infection.
Juxtoglomerular cells (Chapter 5): Cells
Lymphangiectasia (Chapter 4): Dilated lym-
within the renal arterioles that secrete a
phatic vessels of the gastrointestinal
hormone called renin to help maintain
tract.
blood pressure.
 Lymphatics (Chapter 3): Specialized thin-
walled vessels that carry lymph through-
Keratocytes (Chapter 4): Erythrocytes that
out the body.
have small blisters on their surface that
 Lymphocyte (Chapter 3): A white blood cell 
occasionally rupture.
 responsible for producing acquired in-
Ketones (acetone) (Chapter 7): A chemical
munity to infection.
 compound that is produced in the severe,
Lymphocytopoiesis (Chapter 3): Produc-
uncontrolled diabetic.
tion of the lymphocyte from the bone
Kohler illumination (Chapter 1): The pro-
marrow.
cess of adjusting the condenser to pro-
Lymphocytosis (Chapter 4): An increase in
duce the best focus of the illumination
blood lymphocyte numbers.
source.
 Lympholysis (Chapter 4): Destruction of
lymphocytes.
Lactate (Chapter 14): A blood toxin that
 Lymphoma (Chapter 4): A cancer arising
builds up secondary to altered energy
from the white blood cells of the body.
production from glucose in the body due
Lymphopenia (Chapter 4): Decreased num-
to decreased oxygen levels in the tissue.
bers of circulating lymphocytes.
266
Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Macroplatelets (Chapter 2): Large platelets
Mineralocorticoid (Chapter 11): A hor-
found in the blood.
mone released by the adrenal cortex to
Malabsorption (Chapter 7): The inability to
 help reabsorb electrolytes from the kid-
absorb nutrients properly.
neys.
Malassezia (Chapter 15): A common yeast 
Minimal clinical databases (Chapter 14): A
found in the ears and on the skin of pa-
set of clinical diagnostic tests run to eval-
tients.
 uate an emergency or hospitalized pa-
Maldigestion (Chapter 7): The inability to
tient.
digest food properly.
 Modified transudates (Chapter 15): A fluid
Mean   cell 
hemoglobin
concentration
obtained from a body cavity with a to-
(MCHC) (Chapter 2): The ratio of
tal protein between 2.5-3.5 mg/dL and
hemoglobin to red blood cell size.
a total cell count between 1000-5000
 Mean cell volume (MCV) (Chapter 2): A
cell/μL.
direct measurement of cell size, which
Monocyte (Chapter 3): A large white blood
is related to the magnitude of the dis-
 cell whose primary function is to migrate
rupted electrical current as each
1 cell
to the tissues to become a macrophage,
passes through the instrument.
a tissue white blood cell that is in-
 Mean  corpuscular  hemoglobin
(MCH)
volved in controlling chronic infectious
(Chapter 2): The amount of hemoglobin
diseases.
 present in the red blood cells.
Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (Chapter 4): A
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentra-
rare inherited disease that is character-
tion (MCHC) (Chapter 9): The average
ized by abnormal leukocytes.
percent measurement of hemoglobin
Mycoplasma  bemofelis and Mycoplasma
concentration
in each
Par
blood
bemominutum (Chapter 4): Two ery-
cell.
throparasites that attach to the surface
Megakaryopoiesis (Chapter 3): The pro-
of the erythrocyte.
duction of platelets in the bone marrow.
 Myoglobin (Chapter 9): A compound simi-
Melena (Chapter 7): The presence of di-
lar to hemoglobin that is responsible for
 gested blood in the feces, as noted by a
carrying oxygen and removing carbon
dark, tarry-looking stool.
dioxide in the muscle tissue.
Mesenchymal tumors (Chapter 15): Tu-
Myoglobinuria (Chapter 9): The presence
mors that arise from the supportive tis-
of myoglobin in the urine.
sues of the body.
 Metabolic acidosis (Chapter 12): A condi-
Necrosis (Chapter 4): Tissue death.
tion that occurs when the blood pH de-
 Neoplasia (Chapter 6): Cancer.
creases below 7.35 due to the buildup
Neutropenia (Chapter 3): A decreased neu-
of toxins, decrease in glomerular filtra-
 trophil population.
tion, and/or the loss of bicarbonate rich
Neutrophil (Chapter 3): The most common
fluids.
granulocyte in the peripheral blood of
 Metarubricytes (Chapter 4): Nucleated red
dogs, cats, humans, and horses.
blood cells (nRBC).
Neutrophilia (Chapter 3): An increased
Microangiopathy (Chapter 4): The forma-
neutrophil number.
tion of fibrin strands or small fbrin clots
 Nitrous oxide (Chapter 13): A chemical re-
within capillaries, which is associated
 leased from endothelial cells to prevent
with disseminated intravascular coagu-
clot formation.
lation.
Nonregenerative anemia (Chapter 4): An
Microcytic (Chapter 4): A red blood cell
anemia with no evidence that the bone
with decreased volume.
marrow can respond.
Clossary
267
Norepinephrine (Chapter 11): A chemical
 Pellet (Chapter 9): The cellular sample of a
neurotransmitter involved with the sym-
fluid that has been separated by centrifu-
pathetic nervous system.
gation.
Phagocytize (Chapter 3): A cell's ability to
 Oncotic pressure (Chapter 5): The force ex-
extend its cell wall around foreign ma-
erted by albumin on the fluid component
terial and cells and internalize the struc-
of the blood, pulling fluid from the tissue
tures.
into the blood so that the large protein
Pheochromocytoma (Chapter 11): Cancer
molecule can be moved through the vas-
of the adrenal medulla.
cular supply.
Phosphorus (Chapter 8): A mineral integral
in many cell functions, including bone
Packed cell volume (PCV) (Chapter 14): A
formation, energy metabolism, muscle
clinical diagnostic test that evaluates the
contraction, and acid/base balance.
red blood cell column as compared to
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
the entire column of blood and fluid in a
(PDH) (Chapter 11): A form of hypera-
hematocrit tube.
drenocorticism caused by a pituitary tu-
Pancreatic  exocrine  i
insufficiency
{PEI})
mor, which produces excessive amounts
(Chapter 7): A rare congenital or ac-
of ACTH and causes overstimulation of
quired disease of the acinar cellsresulting
both adrenal glands resulting in constant
 in a lack of production of exocrine pan-
 production of cortisol.
creatic enzymes.
Pituitary gland (Chapter 11): A small gland
Pancreatitis (Chapter 7): An inflammation
that sits at the base of the brain and pro-
or infection of the pancreas producing a
duces releasing hormones for other en-
leakage of lipase and amylase onto the
docrine glands of the body.
organ surface.
Poikilocytosis (Chapter 4): An indication
Panhypoproteinemia (Chapter 9): Abnor-
that the red blood cells seen on re-
mally small amounts of total protein in
view of a blood film have variable
the circulating plasma.
shapes.
Papilloma (Chapter 15): A benign tumor
 Polychromatophilic red blood cells (Chap-
that arises from the squamous epithelial
     
cells of the skin.
larger than normal erythrocytes, have a
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) (Chapter 8):
larger central pallor, have a blue hue
 A hormone released by the parathyroid
when stained with Wright-Giemsa stain,
gland that increases the blood level of
and have a muddy blue hue when stained
calcium by removing calcium from the
with Diff-Quik TM
bone.
Polycythemia (Chapter 4): The counter-
Parfocal (Chapter 1): Having the focal
 point to anemia; an increase in red blood
 points of a lens all in the same plane.
 cell count, Hct/PCV, and hemoglobin.
This means that if the image is in focus at
Polycythemia vera (Chapter 4): A neoplastic
10×, there should be little need to focus
process that results in production of high
at the higher magnification objectives.
numbers of red blood cells.
Pelger-Huet anomaly (Chapter 4): A genetic
Polydipsia (Chapter 5): Increased thirst.
disease found in many breeds of dogs and
 Polyphagia (Chapter 8): Increased appetite.
occasional cats. In individuals affected
Polyuria (Chapter 5): Increased urination.
with Pelger-Huet anomaly, all circulat-
 Poodle macrocytosis (Chapter 4): A genetic
ing neutrophils and eosinophils are hy-
trait that results in a normal MCV higher
posegmented and resemble band forms
than other dogs.
of these granulocytes.
Porphyrin (Chapter 9): A heme pigment.
268
3ClinicalPathology for the Veterinary Team
 Portacaval shunt (Chapter 6): A small blood
Pseudohyperkalemia (Chapter 8): Non-
vessel, called a shunt, that can occur from
pathologic conditions that produce a
the portal vein to the caudal vena cava
non-life-threatening or artifactual hy-
producing a bypass of blood flow around
perkalemia, including chronic GI par-
the liver. In affected patients, blood tox-
 asitism, specifc breed variations, and
ins enter the general bloodstream pro-
marked thrombocytosis.
 ducing severe neurological and systemic
Pyuria (Chapter 9): Neutrophils in the
signs.
urine.
 Portal venous system (Chapter 6): The large
venous system carrying bacteria, nutri-
Refractometer (Chapter 5): An instrument
ents, and toxins from the intestine into
used to measure the concentration of
the liver.
urine.
Postparturient hypocalcemia (Chapter 10)::
Regenerative anemia (Chapter 4): An ane-
Eclampsia.
mia with evidence that the bone marrow
 Postrenal azotemia (Chapter 5): A rise in
 can respond by increased production of
kidney enzymes due to an obstruction of
erythrocytes.
the bladder, which produces a retrograde
Renal azotemia (Chapter 5): A condition
backflow of urine to the kidneys.
caused by a disease that primarily affects
Potassium (Chapter 5): An intracellular ion
the kidneys and decreases medullary con-
centration.
lowing skeletal and cardiac contraction
Renal cortex (Chapter 5): The part of the
muscle, depolarization of nerves, and
kidney that is responsible for the filtra-
other metabolic functions.
tion of toxins out of the blood, balanc-
Prerenal azotemia (Chapter S): A condi-
ing of blood electrolytes, and control of
tion caused by decreased blood perfu-
blood pressure.
sion of the kidneys producing decreased
Renal medulla (Chapter 5): The part of the
glomerular fltration.
kidney that is responsible for the concen-
Prostaglandin I (Chapter 13): A chemical
 tration of urine to prevent dehydration.
released from endothelial cells to prevent
Renin (Chapter 5): A hormone secreted by
clot formation.
juxtoglomerular cells of the kidney that
Protein-losing enteroopathy (Chapter 7):
activate angiotensin.
Low body albumin. Patients with mal-
 Renin-angiotensin system (Chapter 5): A
absorption/maldigestion disease (e.g., in-
system utilized by the kidneys to help
flammatory bowel disease, lymphangec-
maintain blood pressure.
tasia, intestinal neoplasia) can have de-
Respiration  (Chapter
14): A
process
 pletions in essential amino acids and pro-
whereby energy is produced from glucose
 teins, producing hypoalbuminemia.
in the presence of oxygen.
Protein-losing  nephropathy (Chapter.
5):
Respiratory acidosis (Chapter 12): A con-
A syndrome wherein increased body
dition that occurs when the blood pH
protein (albumin) is excreted in the
decreases below 7.35 due to the buildup
urine.
 of carbon dioxide from improper gas ex-
Proteinuria (Chapter 5): The presence of
change in the lungs.
protein (albumin) in the urine.
 Reticulocytes (Chapter 1): Immature red
Prothrombin (Chapter 13): The inactivated
 blood cells released from the bone mar-
form of thrombin.
row at a less mature phase in response
Prothrombin time (PT) (Chapter 13): An
to body need. These cells maintain rem-
assay that evaluates the extrinsic clotting
nants of their internal structures and will
pathway.
stain differently under specific stains.
Clossary
269
Reticulocytosis (Chapter 2): An increased
 Stress leukogram (Chapter 5): Changes
number of immature red blood cells.
noted in a complete blood count when 
Ringworm (Chapter 15): A common fungal
the patient is in a stressful environ-
skin infection.
ment.
 Romanowsky stain (Chapter 3): A stain
Struvite crystals (Chapter 9): The most com-
used to evaluate blood smears.
 mon crystal seen in companion animal
Romanowsky stain Diff-Quik TM) (Chapter
urine.
1): A stain system that stains the compo-
Supernatant (Chapter 9): The fluid portion
 nents of a cell different colors depending
left after a sample (urine) is centrifuged.
on the structure's pH.
Suppurative infection (Chapter 15): An in-
fection, or inflammatory disease, that
Sarcoptes (Chapter 15): A skin mite.
has the capability of forming pus (neu-
Schistocytes (Chapter 4): Small fragments
trophils).
of erythrocytes that are irregular in size
and shape.
Target cells (codocytes) (Chapter 4):
Sepsis (Chapter 4): Whole-body massive in-
Erythrocytes with a central area of
fection.
hemoglobin within the area of central
 pallor forming a target appearance.
 iron-containing basophilic inclusions.
Thrombin (Chapter 13): An enzyme re-
Sodium (Chapter 8): The most abundant
sponsible for the formation of fbrin;
 positively charged ion in the extracellular
also, the inappropriate formation of a
fluid that helps regulate electrical poten-
clot in the blood vessel.
tial in the body.
Thrombocytopenia (Chapter  
1): A de-
Sodium/potassium balance (Chapter 11):
creased platelet count.
The ratio of blood serum levels of sodium
Thrombocytosis (Chapter 1): An increased
compared to potassium.
platelet count.
Spherocytes (Chapter 4): Small erythrocytes
Thrombopoietin
(Chapter
3): A hor-
with no central pallor. Spherocytes are a
 mone responsible for the production of
hallmark of immune-mediated hemolytic
platelets.
anemia, but they also can be seen in small
Total protein (TP) (Chapter 14): A mea-
numbers in association with other types
surement of the serum that evaluates the
 of erythrocyte damage.
 sum of blood albumin and globulin lev-
Squamous cell carcinoma (Chapter 15): A
els.
 malignant tumor of the squamous cells
Toxic 1
neutrophil (Chapter 4): A neu-
of the skin.
trophil that has increased cytoplasmic
Standard deviation (Chapter 1): A measure
 basophilia and a moth-eaten or foamy
of the variability or dispersion of a pop-
 change to its cytoplasm.
ulation, a data set, or a probability dis-
Transitional cells (urothelial cells) (Chapter
tribution.
9): Cells that line the bladder wall, vary
Staphylococcus (Chapter 15): A common
considerably in size, and have rounded
skin bacteria.
edges and variable amounts of cyto-
Stem cell (Chapter 3): Undifferentiated
plasm.
cells, from which individual cells will
Transudates (Chapter 15): A fluid obtained
 commit to a specific celltype.
from a body cavity with a total protein
Steroid  hepatopathy  (
(Chapter
11}:
A
of <2.5 mg/dL and a total cell count of
metabolic disease of the liver caused by
<1000 cell/μL
increased chronic steroid-affecting liver
Trigone (Chapter 5): A region in the neck
tissue.
of the bladder where the ureters enter.
270Clinical Pathology for the Veterinary Team
Urine protein/creatinine ratio (Chapter 5):
Whole blood clotting time (Chapter 13): A
A clinical diagnostic that measures the
clinical diagnostic measure of the time it
amount of protein in the urine in
 takes for blood drawn into a serum tube
comparison to the amount of creati-
to clot.
nine.
Urine specific gravity (Chapter 5): The mea-
Zona  fasciculata  and  Zona  reticularis
sure of concentration of the urine.
Jo s ra  (i )
the adrenal  cortex that produce 
a
Ventroflexion of the neck (Chapter 5): A
prednisone-like steroid called cortisol
syndrome that occurs when the body's
 and small amounts of androgens (sex
potassium is so low that the patient can-
hormones).
not lift its neck.
Zona granulosa (Chapter 11): The outer-
von Willebrand’s disease (Chapter 13):
most area of the adrenal cortex, which is
Deficiencies in factors that allow the
responsible for producing a steroid hor-
platelet to adhere to the subendothelial
mone called aldosterone, also called a
tissue.
mineralocorticoid.
hde
ge references followed by a denote algorichms; those followed by b denote text boxes; those followed by c denote charts; those
followed by f denote fgures; those followed by t denote tables.
A
Acanthocytes, 45, 46f, 47-48, 47t, 56, 212t, 259
function
Acetolactate, 143-144
mrtisol production, 152, 153f
Acetone, 114, 116, 143
Acidosis
mineralocorticoid production,152-153,154f
causes of, 167-169, 168f, 171a, 230f
hy peradrenocorticism (Cushing's disease), 155-164
defnition, 259
adrenalneoplasia,156-157,157f
discussng importance of monitoring blood gas with client,
clinical signs of,155,155f
173-174
diagnosis of, 157-162, 162f,229f
evaluation process, 170-173
iatrogenic, 157
algorithm for, 171a
monitoring,long-term,162-164,163f
step 1 (identity acidosis), 170
pituitary-dependent (PDH), 156, 156f
step 2 (determine type of acidosis), 170
bypoadrenocorticism (Addison's), 164-166
elas lenap doaaap)e daas
causes, 164
step4（treatment plan formulation）,172-173
diagnostic tests, 165-166, 166b
lactic, 167
primary,164-165
metabolic, 167-174, 168f, 170f
secondary,165
respiratory, 168-173, 169f
pheochromocytoma, 166
Acquired immunity, 33
Adrenal medulla, 151, 259
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)
Adrenal-mineralocorticoid axis, 119
ACTH stimulation test, 159-160
Adrenal-pituitary axis, 152
in hyperadrenocorticism, 163
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)
in hypoadrenocorticism, 165
defnition,259
Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), 180-182,
stimulation of cortisolrelease by, 152, 153f
181t, 182c, 191c, 259
AG（anion gap),172,208t,260
Addisonian crisis,152,153,157,259
Agglutination of erythrocytes, 14, 59, 59f, 60f
Addison's disease. See Hypoadrenocorticism
Akita
Adenocarcinoma,202,259
erythrocyte size, 53
Adenoma, 202, 259
hyperkalemia in, 122
ADH (antidiuretic hormone), 141, 142f
potassium values in, 17
Adipocytes, 202f
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
Adrenalcortex,151259
defnition, 259
Adrenal glands, 151-166
in hyperadrenocorticism, 159
anatomy,151,152f
increased activity, 99
adrenal cortex, 151
low activity, 99
adrenal medulla, 151
normal values, 99c, 208t
271
272
Index
Alaskan malamute, hereditary spherocytosis in, 60t
Anign gap (AG), 172, 208t, 260
Albumin
Anisokaryosis03204f050
decreased, causes of, 184t, 187-188
Anticoagulant, 12
defnition, 259
Antidiuretichormone (ADH),141,142f
emergency patient, evaluationof, 184t,187-188,232t
Antifreeze intoxication, hypocalcemia in, 125
increasedausesf84
Aplasticanemia,60,260
in intestinal bleeding, 108
APTT. See Activared partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)
inliverisease101
Ascites, 96, 260
in maldigestion/malabsorption syndrome, 105-106
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
microalbuminuria,138,145
decreased activity, 99
normal levels, 82c, 102c, 106c, 187c, 208t
defnition, 260
oncotic pressure, role in, 90, 96
in hyperadrenocorticism,159
production by liver, 96
renal function and,1-82,82t,3f90
normal values,99c,208t
in urine, 138,145,259
Albuminuria,138,145,259
Aspirate
body cavity uid, 196-198
Aldosterone
actions of, 119, 120f, 152, 154f
Aspirin,inhibition of platele function by, 177
decrease in bypoadrenocorticism, 121, 164
AST. See Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
defnition, 259
Automatedcell counters,1920
production of, 151, 152
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
Azotemia
defnition, 79, 260
decreased activity, 100
in FLUTD or urinary-obstructed patients, 123
defnition, 260
in hyperadrenocorticism,100,158-159
increased activity, 100-101
prerenal,83,83b,85f,268
normal values, 100c, 208t
renal, 85,85f, 86b, 268
urine specifc gravity for diffrentiating type of, 139, 141
ALT. See Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
American cocker spaniel, phosphofructokinase defciency in,
B
60t
Babesia canis, 73f, 74
Ammonium biurate crystals, 135, 137t, 225t
Babesia gibsoni, 74
Amylase
Babesiosis, 74, 260
defnition, 260
Bacteria, in urine sediment, 134, 137t, 225t
digestive action of, 108
Band neutrophils
normal levels, 110c, 208t
defnition, 63, 64f, 260
in pancreatitis, 110
Dohle body in, 65f
production of, 108, 109f
in infammatory leukogram,63
Amyloidosis
inmaturatin/rageool
defnition, 260
normal values,207t
liver, 97
Base excss (BE),173,208t
Anemia, 51-60
Basenji
aplastic, 60, 260
Fanconi Syndrome in, 142
of chronic disease, 109, 260
pyruvate kinase defciency in, 60t
defnition, 20, 51, 260
Basophilia, 71
Heinz body,50-51,8t,13t
Basophiic stippling, 50f, 51, 260
hemolytic
Basophils
agglutination of erythrocytes in, 59, 59f, 60f
appearance of, 42
diseases associated with, 58t
dehnition, 260
extravascular hemolysis,57,58-59,58t
function of, 42
hereditary causes,60t,213t
granulopoiesis, 40f
immune-mediated, 48, 58t, 59, 77, 213t, 264
B-cell, 43
intrav ascular hemolysis, 57-58, 58t
in liver disease, 96t, 103, 215t
nonregenerative
Bernard-Soulier syndrome, 177, 260
anemia of chronic disease, 109
Betahydroxybutyrate, 143-144
causes, 212t
Bicarbonate
causesof2t,601
loss in meabolic acidosis, 167, 168
defnition, 51, 266
normal levels, 208t 
in renal disease, 87, 87f, 88f
therapy for merabolic acidosis, 173
normocyti/normochromic, 60
Bile acids
PCV decrease with, 187
action of, 99
regenerative,1,260
defnition, 260
causes, 52t, 212t
in hyperadrenocorticism, 164
due to blood destruction, 57-59, 58f-60f, 58t, 60, 213t
in liver disease, 102
due to blood loss, 56
normal levels, 102c
indicators of,52-56
production of,99
iron defcieney, 56, 57f
Bile canaliculi, 95, 95f, 260
pancreatic tumors and109
Bilirubin
reticulocyte counts in, 53-54, 54t, 55f
conjugated in urine, 132, 136t, 144, 224t
in renal disease, 87, 87f, 88f
defnition, 260
Angiotensin, 260
jaundice from buildup of, 77
Angiotensin I,89,89f
in liver disease, 101
Angiotensin I1, 89, 89f
normal levels, 101c
Anion, 260
Bilirubin crystals, 137t, 138, 225t
Index
273
Bilirubinuria, 136t, 144
Bone growth, alkaline phosphatase inerease in, 101
Biopsy, in liver disease, 104
Bone marrow
Bladder, 78, 78f
hematopoiesis in, 33-35
Bleeding,intestinal,07-108
neutropenia and bone marrow injury, 67
Bleeding time, buccal mucosal, 180, 180f, 181t
structure of, 34, 34f
Blood.See aiso specifc components
Books,sugestdresour
components of, 33
Bowman's capsule, 77-79, 79f, 260, 263
in urinalysis, 132-133, 136t, 144-145, 144f, 224t
Buccalmucsal leedingtime180180f181t0
Blood count. See Complete blood count (CBC)
Buffy coat
Blood flm
emergency patient, evaluation of, 184t,187,232t
anatomy of, 28, 28f
evaluation of, 14
cytology samples, preparation of, 196, 197f
expansion of, 4
BUN. See Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
BUN/creatinine ratio
evaluation of 27-31, 29f, 30f
defnition, 261
examples, 16f, 211f
in intestinal bleeding, 107
as internal control for instrument measures, 5
normal values, 208t
in intestinal bleeding, 107
Burr cells (ovalo-echinocytes ), 45, 47t, 49-50, 212t,
preparation,14-15,14f16f
261
staining, 15
Butterfly catheters, 12, 14f
Bloodfolatelevels,106107,107c,1110
Blood gas.
metabolic acidosis, 169, 170f
C
monitoring in acidotic patient, 173-174
Cairn Terrier, pyruvate kinase defciency in, 60t
normal levels, 208t
Calcium
in renal disease, 91
defnition, 261
respiratory acidosis, 170
forms in blood,124-125
Blood glucose. See also Glucose
hypercalcemia,125-126127t,
emergency patient, evaluation of, 184t, 189-190, 233t
hypocalcemia,125125f2t,3
in byperadrenocorticism, 159
normal values, 125c, 127t, 208t
low, causes of, 190
role in body, 124
normal levels, 190c
Calciumxalatcrystals 1317t,132
Blood loss, anemia due to, 56
Calibrators, 9
Blood pH, 168-169, 208t
Canaliculi,95, 95f
Blood pressure
Cancer. See Neoplasia
emergency patient, evaluation of 185t, 191-192,233t
Canine distemper virus inclusions, 74
in hyperadrenocorticism, 161, 164
Canine pancreatic lipase inhibition (cPLI) test, 111
hypertension
Capillaria felis, 135
defnition, 264
Capillaria pica, 135
in emergency patient, 192
Carbon dioxide
hyperadrenocorticism and, 161, 164
buildup in respirarory acidosis, 168, 169, 169f
renal disease and, 88-89, 89f, 91
defnition, 261
hypotension,191-192,264
normal values, 191c
Casts（urinary),135,137t,225t61
renal disease and, 88-89, 89f, 91
Catheterization, for urine sampling, 129, 149
trauma patients, 192
Cation, 261
Blood sample
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, macroplatelets in, 23
in anticoagulant (EDTA-purple top tube), 12-14, 13f
CBC.See Complete blood count (CBC)
collection of, 12-14, 13f, 14f, 76, 183, 210f
jugular draw, 76
Cell-mediated immunity, 43
obtaining from emergency patient, 183
Cellular casts, 135, 137t, 148, 148t, 225t
red top tube (clot tube)
Central diabetes insipidus, 141
artifacts, 75-76
Centrifugal hematology instruments, 4
drawing and handling sample, 75-76
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, 71, 72f, 261
redrawing sample, 76
Chemistry. See Clinical chemistry
red serum (hemolysis), 77
Chloride, 124, 127t, 190c, 208t, 223t, 261
white serum (lipemia)76-77
Cholelithe, 103, 261
yellow serum (jaundice), 77
Cholestasis, 100
Blood sugar. See Blood glucose
Cholesterol,inhyperadrenocorticism,159
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
BUN/creatinine ratio
Chylothorax
defnition, 261
defnition, 261
in intestinal bleeding, 107
lymphopenia and, 70
normal values, 208t
defnition, 260
Grrhosis, 97
in intestinal bleeding, 107
Clinical chemistry. See also specifc tests
in liver disease, 101
equipment
normal levels, 80c,101c, 208t
dry systems, 5
renal function and, 79-80, 82t
evaluation of, 6-7
Body cavity luids
purchasing, considerations in, 5
cell counts on,197-198
wet systems, 5
classifcation of, 198, 198t, 236t
normal values,208t
components of analysis, 196
sample handling, 15, 17
join uidanalysi919
Clot retraction test, 180
preparation methods, 196-197, 197f 
Clotting, in blood colection tubes, 13-14, 75,
submission to laboratory, 197
76
274
Index
Clotting time
production of, 151, 152, 153f
abnormal,causes of191
urine cortisolcreatinineratio138159
in emergency patient,185t,190-191,233t
CPLI (canine pancreatic lipase inhibition) test, 111
increase in liver dysfunetion, 96t, 215t
Creatinine
measuring,76
BUN/creatinine ratio
normal values, 191c, 208t
defnition, 261
whole blood, 182, 269
in intestinal bleeding, 107
Clot tube (red top tube), 75-77
normal values, 208t
Coagulation, 175-182
defnition, 261
abnormalities, diagnostic tests for, 179-182, 180f, 181t,
normallevels,81c,208t
182c
renal function and, 81, 82t
activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), 180-182,
urine cortisol/creatinine ratio, 138
181t, 182c
rine protein/ereatinineratio,91,13869
buccal mucosal bleeding time, 180, 180f, 181t
Crenatederyhrocyes45,447t
clot retraction test,180
Cryptococcus neoformans, 201f
cuticle bleeding time, 180
Crystaluria, 261
D-dimer assay, 182
Cushing's disease. See Hyperadrenocorticism
fbrinogen degradation product (FDP), 182
Cuticle bleeding time, 180
platelet count, 179, 181t
CV (coeffcient of variance), 6, 261
platelet function tests, 179-180, 181t
Cystine crystals,138
prothrombin time(PT),180-182,181t,182c
Cystocentesis,129,149
whole blood clotting time, 182
Cytaxzoonfelis,73f,74,261
description of process,175
Cytol0gy, 193-205
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), 179
advantages of, 193
elementsofhemostasis,176-179
artifacts,193-194
coagulation factors, 177-179
complications associated with fne needle aspiration, 194t,
endothelial cells, 176
235t
platelets, 176-177
defnition, 193
extrinsic pathway,177,178f182
disadvantages of,193
Fbrinolysis, 175, 179
evaluation of specimens, 199-205
intrinsic pathway, 177, 178f, 182
inflammatory lesions, 199-200, 200f, 200t, 201f
in liver disease, 103
neoplasticlesins002002t,03t0
Coagulation factors
noninammatorycelltyes0
defciencies in, 178
stains, 198-199, 199f
defnition, 261
types ofpreparations19418
diagnostic tests for evaluation of, 180-182, 181t, 182c
body cavity fluids, 196-198, 198t, 236t
role in hemostasis, 177-178, 178f
ne needle aspirates, 195-196, 196f, 197f
vitamin K antagonism and, 178
imprint preparations, 195
Coagulopathy
skin scrapings, 194, 194f
dehnition, 261
swabs, 195, 195f
in liver disease, 103
Coccidioides sp.,201f
Code I database, 183-192
D
Code II darabase, 192
D-dimer assays, 182, 261
Code IlI database, 192
Degenerate left-shift, 261. See also Left-shift
Codocyte, 46f, 50
Dehydration
Coeffcient of variance (CV), 6, 261
PCV inerease with, 187
Collcring duct, 78, 79f
polycythemia from, 61
Compensating metabolic acidosis,169
prerenal azotemia from, 83, 85f
Compensating metabolic alkalosis, 261
Demodex, 194, 194f, 261
Complere blood count (CBC)
Dermatophytic fungi (ringworm),194, 194f, 261
blood flm evaluation,27-31, 29f, 30f
Detoxifcation, as liver function, 94-95,96t,215t
components of, 19-20, 30f
Dexamethasone suppression test
defnition,19
high-dose, 160-161
equipment needed for manual, 20f
low-dose, 160
hemogram, 19-27
Diabetesmelltus,114-118
erythrogram, 20-24
clinical diagnostics, 115-118
leukogram, 24-27
bloodglucose,116
in hyperadrenocorticism,158,163
complete blood count,115
in intestinal bleeding, 107
fructosamine levels, 116, 118
in liver disease, 102-103
lipemic serum, 115
normal values, 207t
liver enzymes,
,116
in pancreatic disease,109
urinalysis,116
in renal disease, 90
defnition, 261
sample collection for, 12
type I, 114
Condenser, adjusting microscope, 3, 3f
type Ii1,114-115
Conjugated biirubin,132,136t,4
type III, 115
Convoluted tubules, 261
Diabetic ketoacidotic, 121, 261
Corticosteroids, neutrophilia from, 41, 66
Differential cel count, 24
Cortisol
Diff-QuikTMstain, 15, 198, 199f
ACTH stimulation test, 159-160, 163
Dipetalonema reconditum, 74
actions of, 152
Diroflaria immitis,74,74f
defnition, 261
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), 49, 179, 182,
high-dose dexamethasone suppression test, 160-161
261
byperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease), 15s-164
Distribution curve from a normal population, 11f
low-dose dexamethasone suppression tst, 160
DNA synthesis, erythropoiesis and, 38
Index
275
Doberman Pinscher, von willebrand's disease in, 177
anemia, 51-60
Doble body, 64, 65f, 262
description, 51
Dry chemistry systems, 5
nonregenerative, 51, 60
Duodenum, 93
regenerative, 51, 52-60, 52t
DVD instructions
artifactual changes, 12-13
computer requirements,237
blood flm evaluation of morphology, 30f, 31
loading Scan Scope toview Virtual Slides, 240-243
canine distemper, 73f, 74
navigating in the PowerPoint environment, 244-245
defnition, 262
opening the program, 238-240
emergency patient,evaluation of,189
function, 36, 38, 38f
hemoglobin content, 36, 38
E
histograms, 23, 23f
Ear swab, 195, 195f
hypochromasia,52-53,52f,56,57f,264
Eccentrocyte, 45, 46f, 47t,49, 212t, 261
infectious disease agents of, 71, 73f, 74
life span, 36
Eclampsia (postparturient bypocalcemia), 125, 125t, 262
in liver disease, 103
EDTA,12,13f,7S
macrocytosis,52-53,52f
Ehrlichia canis, 70
macrophage phagocytosisof200
Ehrlichiosis, lymphocytosis in, 70
maturation, 36
Elastase, 41, 262
membrane structure, 38, 39f
Eletrocardiogram, in hyperkalemia, 124, 124f
metabolism,39-40
Electrolytes. See also specifc electrolytes
metarubricytes, 54-56, 266
abnormalities,causes and secondaryconcerns,127t,223t
microcytosis, 56
abnormalities inrenal disease,87-88
calcium, 124-126, 127t
inclusions, 50-51, 50f
chloride, 124, 127t
basophilic stippling, 50f, 51
emergency patient,evaluationof,185t,190,233t
Heinz body, 50-51, 50f
in bypoadrenocorticism, 165
Howell-jolly body, S0f, 51
phosphorus,126-127,127t
siderocytes, 51
potassium,121-124,127t
poikilocytes, 45-50, 46f, 47t
signs of derangement of, 190
nucleated red blood cells (nRBCs), 24, 54-56, 107f
poikilocytes
Elliptrocytosis, 38, 262
acanthocytes,45,46f,47-48,47t,56,212t,259
Emergency diagnostics, 183-192
burr cells, 45,47t,49-50,212t,261
blood sample, obtaining, 183
eccentrocyte45,46f47t,49,212t,6
code I database, 183-192
echinocytes45,46f,47,47t,212t,2
blood flm, 188-189, 188a-189a, 234t-235t
keratocytes, 45, 46f,47t, 49-50, 56, 57f, 212t, 265
blood pressure, 191-192, 191c
valocyte, 45,46f
blood sugar, 189-190, 190c
schistocytes, 45, 46f, 47t, 49, 49f, 56, 57f, 212t,
clotting rimes, 190-191, 191c
269
description,183
spherocytes, 45, 46f, 47t, 4849, 48f, 59, 126f, 212t,
electrolytes,190,190c
269
lactate, 191, 191c
stromatocyte, 45
PCV/TPP, 185-188, 186f
target cell,45,46f, 50,269
table of clinical rests,184t-185t, 232t-233t
polychromatophilic, 36, 52, 53, 53t, 267
codeIIdatabase,192
polycythemia,60-61,61t,214t,267
mde III database, 192
reticulocytes, 53-54, 55f, 55t, 107f, 213t, 268
normal levels, table of, 209t
shape and size, 39f
Endothelial cells
species variation, 39f
defnition, 262
in urine sediment, 134, 137t, 149, 149t, 224t
role in hemostasis, 176
Erythrogram,20-24
Endoroxin, neutropenia and, 68, 69f
Erythroleukemia, 72f
English Springer Spaniel, phosphofructokinase defciency in,
Erythroparasites
60t
anemia and, 57, 58t, 59
Eosinophilia,71,262
Babesia spp.,73f,74
Eosinophilic infammation, 200f, 200t
canine distemper virus inclusions, 73f, 74
Eosinophils
Cytoaxzoon felis,73f,74
appearance of, 42
bemolysis from, 213t
changes in disease, 71
Mycoplasma spp,71,73f,74
defnition, 262
Erythrophagia, 200, 262
function, 42
Erythropoiesis, 36-40
granulopoiesis, 40f
defnition,262
normal values, 207t
extramedullary, 36
in Pelger-Huet anomaly, 71
process, 37f
Epinephrine
stimulation of, 34-35
defnition, 262
Erythrpoitn53f1
effects on thebody, 151-152, 153, 155
Ethylene glycol intoxication
neutrophilia from increased circulating, 41, 66-67, 68f
defnition, 262
production of, 153
hypocalcemia in, 125
Epistaxis, 262
Ethylene glycol test,91
Epithelial cell casts, 135
Excitement
Epichelial cells, in urine sediment, 134, 137t, 149, 149t, 224t
lymphocytosis from,66-67,68,69
Epithelial tumors, 202, 203t
neutrophilia from, 41, 66-67, 68f
Erythremic myelosis (erythroleukemia),72f
Exploratory surgery,in liver disease,104
Erythrocytes
Extrinsic athway,17,17f1822
agglutination of, 14, 59, 59f, 60f
Exudates, 198, 198t, 262
276
Index
F
production of, 108, 109f
Factor IX, defciency of, 178
Glucometer,human,190
Factor Vli, defciency of, 178
Glucose
Factor X,deficiency of178
defnition, 263
Fanconi Syndrome,142
in diabetes mellitus, 116
Fat droplets,inurine sediment,134
metabolism of, 167
Fatty casts, 135, 137t, 225t
normal levels, 116c, 208t
FDP(6brinogen degradation product), 182,262
storage in liver, 96t, 215t
Feline hepatic lipidosis, burr cells in, 50
urinalysis artifacts, 132, 136t, 224t
Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD)
in urine,116136t,141143,63
azotemia, 123
Glucosuria,116,136t,141-143,263
dehnition, 262
Glycogen, 95, 263
hyperkalemia in, 122, 123
Glycolysis,39,263
FeLV-associated macrocytic nonregenerative anemia, 53, 60
CM-CsF(granulocyte/monocyte-colony stimulating factor),
Fermentation, 262
35f
Fibrin, 177, 262
Granular casts, 135, 137t, 225t
Fibrinogen, 177, 262
Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), 35f
Fibrinogen degradation product (FDP), 182, 262
Granulomatous disease, 200t, 263
Fibrinolysis
Granulopoiesis, 40-42
control of clot formation by, 175, 179
basophils, 42
defnition, 262
dehnition, 263
focal inbibition by injured endothelial cells, 176
eosinophils, 42
inherited disorders of, 179
monocytes, 42
tests forexcessive,182
neutrophils, 40-41
Fibromas, 201-202
process, 40f
Fibrosarcoma, 202
Great Dane, diabetes insipidus in, 141
Fight or fight response, 151, 153, 262
Great Pyrenees, Glanzmann's thrombasthenia in, 177
Filarial worms, 74, 74f
Growth factor,34,35f
Fine needle aspirates
aspiration methods,196f
complications associated with, 194, 194t, 235t
H
 slide preparation methods, 197f
Het. See Hematocrit (Het)
storage, 196
Heartworm,canine,74
transport, 196
Heinz body, 46f,49, 50-51, 50f, 263
uses of, 195
Heinz body anemia, 50-51, 58t, 213t
Folate, blood levels of, 106-107, 107c, 111, 262
Hemangiosarcoma, 263
Fructosamine, 116, 118
Hematemesis,107,263
Fungi, in urine sediment, 134-135, 137t, 225t
Hematocrit (Het), 186f, 263. See also Packed cell volume
(PCV)
Hematology,33-44
G
defnition,33,263
Gallbladder
hematopoiesis,33-44,34f,35f
alkaline phosphatase increase in disease, 101
erythropoiesis,36-40,37f
defnition, 262
granulopoiesis,40-42,40f
function of,93
lymphocytopoiesis,43-44
obstruction, 111
megakaryopoiesis,43,43f
stones (cholelithe), 103
instruments, 4-5
Gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT)
Hematoma, 76, 263
decreased activity, 100
Hemaropoiesis, 33-44, 34f, 35f
defnition, 262-263
cell lines, 35f
increased activity, 100
control of, 34-35
normal values, 100c, 208t
defnition, 33, 263
Gangliosidosis, 71, 72f, 263
erythropoiesis,36-40,37f
Gastrointestinal system
extramedullary, 35-36, 55
granulopoiesis40-42,40f
growth factors,3435f
byperkalemia in disease of, 122-123
lymphocytopoiesis,4344
bypokalemia in disease of, 121
megakaryopoiesis,43,43f
intestinal bleeding, 107-108
Hematuria, 131,136t,144, 144t, 263
albumin, 108
Heme, 36
 BUN and BUN/creatinine ratio, 107
Hemoconcentration, 263
completeblood count and blood lm,107,107f
Hemocytometer,25-27,25f-28f
maldigestion/malabsorption syndrome, 105-107
Hemoglobin (Hgb)
albumin,105-106,106c
definition, 263
blood folare levels, 106-107, 107c
erythrocyte content of, 36, 38
G-CSF (granulocyte-colony stimulating factor), 35f
Heinz body formation by oxidative injury to, 50
German Shepherd,pancreatic exocrine insuffciency (PEI) in,
hemosiderin, 200
108
measurement of20,22f
GGT. See Gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT)
normal values, 207t
Glandular tumors, 202
oxidative injury to,58t
Glanzmann's thrombasthenia, 177, 263
Globulin,208t
Glomerular fltration, 79, 263
in urine, 58, 131, 144-145, 144f, 263
lomeruli(Bowman's capsules), 77-79, 79f, 260, 263
Hemoglobinemia, 57-58, 58f, 263
Glucagon
Hemoglobinuria, 58, 13i, 144-145, 144f, 263
defnition, 263
Hemogram,19-27
Index
277
components of, 21t
monitoring, long-term,162-164,163f
defnition, 263
pituitary-dependent(PDH),156,156
erythrogram, 20-24
secondary diseases, 162, 163f
leukogram, 24-27
Hyperbilirubinemia, 57, 58, 58f, 144, 264
Hemolysis
Hypercalcemia
causes of, 126, 127t
defnition,264
defnition, 263
effecs of, 125-126
extravascular, 57, 58-59, 58t
Hypercalcemia of malignancy,126,264
intravascular, 57-58, 58t
Hyperchloremia,124,127t,172,223t
red serum and, 186
Hyperglycemia
Hemolytic anemia
defnition,264
agglutinationof erythrocytes in,59,9f60f
in diabetes mellius, 116
diseases associated with,5St
glucosuriain,142-143
extravascular hemolysis, 57, 58-59, 58t
transient in cats, 143
heredirary causes, 60t, 213t
Hyperkalemia,22124
immune-mediated, 48, 58t, 59, 77, 213t, 264
causes122-123,17t,223t
intravascular hemolysis, 57-58, 58t
artifactual, 122
Hemophilia A, 178
 breed predisposition, 122
Hemophilia B, 178
clinical chemistry changes, 123
Hemosiderin, 200, 263
feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD),
Hemostasis, 175-182. See also Coagulation
122
defnition, 175, 263
gastrointestinal disease, 122-123
elements of, 176-179
hypoadrenocorticism,122
coagulation factors, 177-179
potassium supplementation,122,123
endothelial cells, 176
clinical chemistry changes, evaluation of,
platelers, 176-177
123-124
primary,231t
defnition, 122, 264
defects in, 177
electrocardiogram in, 124,124f
diagnostic tests for abnormalities in, 179-180, 180f,
byponatremia associated with, 120
181t
in postrenal azotemia, 86
process, 176
signs associated with, 123
secondary,231t
Hypernatremia,121,223t,264
defects in, 178
Hyperosthenuria, 264
diagnostic tesrs for abnormalities in, 180-182, 181t,
Hyperphosphotemia,81,127,127t,64
182c
Hyperplasia, neoplasia distinguished from,
process, 177
205
Heparin, 12,17
Hyperproteinemia,264
Hepatic clinical diagnosis, algorithm for, 103a
Hypersensitivity, eosinophilia in, 71
Hepatic encephalopathy,95,96t,215t,263
Hypersplenism
Hepatic lipidosis, 97, 97f, 263-264
defnition, 264
Hepatitis, 97, 264
spherocytes in, 48
Hepatrocyte,95f, 98-99
Hypertension
Hepatomegaly,161,264
defnition, 264
Hereditary spherocytosis, 60t
in emergency patient, 192
Hgb. See Hemoglobin (Hgb)
hyperadrenocorticism and, 161, 164
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test, 160-161
renal disease and, 88-89, 89f, 91
High power feld (hpf), 133
Hyperventilation, in metabolic acidosis, 169
Histiocytoma, 204f
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease),
Histoplasma capsulatum, 201f
164-166
Howell-Jolly bodies, 50f, 51, 264
atypical Addison's disease, 165,166
Humidity chamber,27,27f
azotemia in, 123, 165
Hyaline casts, 135, 137t, 148, 148t,225t
causes, 164
Hyaluronic acid (hyaluronan), 197, 264
defnition, 264
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease), 155-164
diagnostic tests,165-166,166b
adrenal neoplasia, 156-157, 157f
hyperkalemia in, 122
clinical signs of, 155, 155f
hypoglycemia in,123
definition,264
hyponatremia associated with, 121
diagnosis,157-162,162f,229f
primary, 164-165
ACTH stimulation test, 159-160, 163
secondary, 165
alkaline phosphatase, 100, 158-159
sodium/potassium ratio in, 123-124
ALT and AsT, 159
Hypoalbuminemia
blood glucose,159
defnition, 264
blood pressure, 161
in gastrointestinal disease, 105-106
cholesterol, 159
in liver disease, 96t, 102, 215t
complete blood count, 158
in renal disease,82,90,145
decision tree, 163f
Hypocalcemia
discussing tests with client, 161b-162b
causes, 125, 127t
high-dose dexamethasone suppresson test, 160-161
defnition, 264
low-dose dexamethasone suppression test, 160
Hypocbloremia,124,127t,223t
radiology, 161, 161f
Hypocholesterolemia, 264
serum color, 158, 158f
Hypochromasia,5253,52f,56,57f264
ultrasound, 161
Hypoglycemia
urinalysis,159
dehnition, 264
urine cortisol/creatinine ratio, 138, 159
in bypoadrenocorticism, 123, 165
iatrogenic, 157, 264
in liver dysfunction, 96t, 215t
278Index
Hypokalemia
causes, 121, 127t, 223t
diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 121
Jaundice
gastrointestinal disease, 121
defnition,26S
cause of, 93
hospitalized animals on IVuids, 121
renaldisas
extravascular hemolysis and, 58-59
yellow serum and, 77, 186
ventrofexion of the neck, 121, 122f
Joint Huidcytology of197-198
defnition,121,264
Juxtaglomerular cells, 89, 89f, 265
ventrofexion of the neck and, 88, 89f, 121,
122f
Hyponatremia,120-121,127f,223t,264
Hypophosphotemia,58t,126,126f,127t,213t,
K
264
Keratocyte, 45, 46f, 47t, 49-50, 56, 57f, 212t, 265
Hypoproteinemia, 264
Ketones
Hypotension,191-192,264
defnition, 265
urinalsis artifacrs, 132, 136t, 224t
in urine, 116, 136t, 143-144
Ketonuria, 116, 136t, 143-144
Iatrogenic hyperadrenocoricism, 157, 264
Kidneys
Icterus. See aiso Jaundice
anatomy and function, 77-79, 78f, 79f, 80f, 81f
in anemia, 51
azotemia
appearance of serum, 58f
postrenal, 86, 86b, 86f
cause of, 93
prerenal, 83, 83b, 85f
clinical chemistry,effct on, 17
renal, 85,85f, 86b
defnition, 264
diagnostics, 214t
in liver disease, 101
renal disease, secondary concerns of, 87-90
Idiopathic disease, 264
anemia, chronic nonregenerative, 87, 87f, 88f
Immersion oil, 2-3
electrolyte abnormalities, 87-88
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA),48, S8t, 59,
hypertension,88-89,89f
77,213t,264. See also Hemolytic anemia
metabolic acidosis, 90
Immune response, 264
 protein-losing nephropathy, 90
Immunity
renal disease diagnosis, 216t
acquired, 33, 43
renal function evaluation,79-87, 82t
cell-mediated, 43
albumin, 81-82, 82c
blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 79-80, 80c
innate, 33
Immunoblasts, 69, 69f, 264
creatinine, 81, 81c
Immunoglobulin, 265
phosphorus, 81, 81c
Immunology,33,265
potassium, 82-83, 83c
Impedance counter, 4, 20, 22f, 23
table ofclinical diagnostics,82t
Imprint preparations, 195
 sodium-potassium balance and, 119, 120f
Inclusion, erythroeyte, 50-51, 50f
Kohler illumination, 3, 3f, 265
basophilic stippling,50f 51,260
KOH preparations, 194
Heinz body, 46f,49, 50-51, 50f, 263
Howell-jolly body, 50f, 51, 264
L
Labeling samples, 12
Infectious liver disease, 96
Laboratory, in-house clinical
Inflammation
clinical chemistry instruments, 5
classifcation of processes, 199, 200t, 236t
errors, types of, 9
eosinophilic infammation, 200f, 200t
evaluation of instrumentation, 6-7, 7c, 8f
granulomatous, 200t
hematology instruments, 4-5
lymphocytic,200t
location for equipment, 1
neutrophilic, 199-200,200f, 200t,201f
microscope,2-3,2f3f
pyogranulomatous inflammation, 200f, 200t, 201f
purchasing instruments, considerations in, 5
cytology of infammatory lesions, 199-200, 200f, 201f,
quality control, 7-12
201t
calibrators, 9
liver (hepatitis), 97
components of quality control system,8
monocytosis in chronic, 70
control producr use, 9-11, 11f
neoplasia distinguished from, 205
daily, 9-11
neutrophil response to, 41
documenting,10-11,10f
Infammatory leukogram, 62-67
referenceranges11
Innate immunity,33
rules, 9-10
Insulin. See αiso Diabetes mellitus
6-8 (sdos) saunpaooid guieuado piepueis
defnition, 265
responsibilities of veterinary technician in charge of, 4
production of,108,109f
Insulin resistance, 114
Intestinal bleeding, 107-108
blood samples, 12-14, 13f, 14f
uoddns png snouaaeiun
clinical chemistry, 15, 17
hyperkalemia and, 122, 123
urine, 17
hypokalemia and, 121
Lactate
overadministration of potassium-supplemented fuids,
defnition, 265
122
evaluation in emergency patient,185t,191,233t
Intrinsic pathway, 177, 178f, 182, 265
normal values, 191c
Iron defciency anemia, 56, 57f, 60
Lactic acid, 167'
Ischemia, 265
Lactic acidosis, 167
Islets ofLangerhans,108,109f
Laser-based flow cytometry, 4-5
Index279
Laser counter, 20, 22f
hepatic lipidosis, 97, 97f
Left-shift
infections,96
compensated, 62-63, 64-65, 64f, 65f
decompensated, 65
defnition,41,62,265
neoplasia, 97, 97f
noncompensated,41,63,64f,66f
pancreatic disease and, 111, 113
severity of, 62
portacaval shunt, 97-98, 98f
Leonberger,diabetesinsipidusi,141
toxin,97
Leukemia
functions in body, 94-96, 215t
atypical circulating leukocytes, 71, 72f
identifcation of liver damage versus hepatic dysfunction,
lymphoid, 69-70, 70f, 72f
98-99
Leukocyte (white blood cell) count
risks of patients with reduced function, 96t,
automated,24
215t
correcting for metarubricytes, 56
Loops of Henle, 77, 78, 79f,265
estimation from blood flm, 28-29
Low-dose dexamethasone suppresson test, 160
on joint fluid, 197
Low power feld (lpf), 133
manual, 24-27,25f28f
LPS (lipopolysaccharide), 68
normal values, 207t
Lymphangiectasia
in renal disease, 90
defnition, 265
lymphopenia and, 70
Ie 'fog igooydsow yo uojeneaa wig poog
Lymphatics,44,265
changes associated with disease
Lymph nodes, 44, 44f, 265
atypical circulating leukocytes, 71, 72f
Lymphocytes
distemper virus inclusions in neutrophils, 74
changes in disease, 68-70, 69f-70f
eosinophils, 71
immunoblasts,69,69f
lymphocytes, 68-70, 69f-70f
lymphocytosis, 68-70
monocytes, 70
lymphopenia, 70
neutrophils, 62-68, 63f-69f
circulation andmigration of44
overview, 61
dehnition, 265
defnition,265
functions, 43
distribution on blood flm, 14
in gangliosidosis, 71, 72f
emergency patient,evaluationof189
lymphoid system and, 44
in liver disease,103-104
normal values,207t
in urine sediment, 134, 136t, 149, 149t, 224t
types, 4344
Leukocytosis, 14,61, 265
Lymphocytic inflammation, 200t
Leukogram,24-27,61
Lymphocytopoiesis,43-44,265
Leukopenia, 14,61,265
Lymphocytosis
Leukophagia, 200, 265
causes of, 68-70
Levy-]ennings graph,10-11,10f
defnition, 68, 265
Lipase
excitement-associated,66-67,68,69
defnition, 265
Lymphoid leukemia, 69-70, 70f, 72f
digestive action of, 108
Lymphoid system, 44, 44f
normal levels, 110c
Lympholysis,70,265
in pancreatitis, 110
Lymphoma,204f,265
production of, 108, 109f
Lymphopenia,70,265
Lipemia
clinical chemistry, effet on,17
defnition, 265
M
in diabetes melltus, 115
Macrocytosis, 52-53, 52f
in byperadrenocorticism, 158, 158f
Macrophages
white serum and7677,186
erythrocyte engulfment (erythrophagia), 200
Lipidosisheparic,97,97f6364
nurse cells, 36
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 68
Macroplatelers,23,265
Lithium heparin, 17
Major basic protein,42
Liv er, 93-104
Malabsorption, defnition, 105,266
algorithm for hepatic clinical diagnosis, 103a, 217t
Malassezia
anatomy, 93-96, 94f, 95f
defnition, 266
diagnostics
in ear swab cytology, 195, 195f
for acute liver damage identifcation, 99-101
Maldigestion, defnition, 105, 266
alanineaminotransferase（ALT）,99,99c
Maldigestion/malabsorption syndrome, 105-107
albumin, 101-102, 102c
albumin,105-106,106c
alkaline phospharase (ALP),100-101,100c
blood folatelevels06-107107
26601-6(1) asase eese
Mast cell, 42
bile acids, 102, 102c
Mast cell tumor, 204f
bilirubin, 101, 101c
MCH (mean corpuscular hemoglobin), 266
blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 101, 101c
MCHC. See Mean cell hemoglobin concentration
coagulation screen, 103
(MCHC)
complete blood count (CBC), 102-103
M-CSF(monocyte-colony stimulating), 35f
exploratory surgery, 104
MCV. See Mean cell volume (MCV)
gamma-glutamyltransferase(GGT),100,100c
Mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
for liver dysfunction identifcation, 101-102
defnition, 266
radiography, 103
in hemolytic anemia, 58
ultrasound, 104
diseases,96-98
hy pochromasia, 56
normal values, 207t
amyloidosis, 97
in regenerative anemia, 52-53
coagulation abnormalities and, 178, 179
species variations, 39f
280Index
Mean cell volume (MCV)
N
defnition, 266
Necrosis
measurement of, 20, 23
defnition, 266
microcytosis, 56
inflammatory neutrophilia and, 62
normal values, 207t
in poodle macrocytosis, 53
Negative feedback loop, 152, 153f
monocytosis in, 70
in regenerative anemia, 52-53
Neoplasia
species variations, 39f
adrenal, 156-157, 161, 164, 166
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), 266
Megakaryocytes, appearance of, 43, 43f
Megakaryopoiesis43,43f,266
cytology, 193, 200-205, 202t, 203t, 204f
Melena, 105, 266
defnition, 266
hypercalcemia of malignancy, 126, 264
liver, 97, 97f
Mesothelial cells, 202f, 205
pancreatic,108-111
Metabolic acidosis
terminology of rumors, 202t, 236t
anion gap evaluation, 172
Neubauer grid, 25, 25f, 28f
base excess evaluation, 173
Neutropenia
blood gas testing, 169, 170f
causes of, 67-68, 69f
causes of, 167, 168, 168f
defnition,41,62,67,266
compensating,169
Neutrophilia, 62-67
defnition, 266
dehnition, 41, 62, 266
diagnosis of, 170-171
excitement-induced, 66-67,68f
in pancreatitis,113
infammatory,62-66
in renal disease, 90
stress (steroid-induced), 65-66, 67f
signs of, 168-169
Neutrophiic infammation,199-200,200f,200t,201f
treatment plan,173
Neutrophil pools
Metabolic disase, 97
circulating pool, 41, 62, 63f
Metamyelocytes,42,42f,62,63f
marginated pool, 4i, 62, 63f
Metarubricytes, 54-56, 266
maturation/storage pool,41,62,63f
Metarubricytosis, 55
proliferation pool, 41, 62, 63f
Microalbuminuria, 138, 145
Neutrophils
Microangiopathy, 49, 266
band, 41, 42f, 62-63, 63f, 64f, 65f, 207t, 260
Microcytic,defnition,266
canine distemper virus inclusions, 74
Microcytosis, 56
changesindisease,62-6863f-69f71
Microflaria,74,74f
Microrgaism,inurine sediment, 134133t,
cytology of infammatory lesions, 199
225t
defnition, 266
Microscope
degenerative, 199
components of, 2,2f
Dohle bodies in, 64, 65f
condenser adjustment, 3, 3f
dynamics, 41
40X objective, use and card of, 2
function of, 40-41
immersion oil, 2-3
granulopoiesis, 40f
maintenance,3
left-shift, 41
parfocal lenses, 3
in mucopolysaccharidosis, 71, 72f
Microsporum canis,194f
name of origin, 40
Microthrombi,179
neutropenia,41,6768
Mineralocorticoid
causes of, 67-68, 69f
defnition, 266
defnitign, 41, 62, 67, 266
produetionof15152-13
neutrophiia, 41, 62-67
Miniature Poodle, pyruvate kinase defciency in, 60t
defnition,41,62,266
Miniarure Schnauzer
excitement-induced, 66-67, 68f
hereditary spherocytosis in, 60t
inflammarory,62-66
lipemia in, 76
stress (steroid-induced), 65-66, 67f
Minimal clinical database, 266
normal values, 207t
in Pelger-Huet anomaly, 71, 72f
Modifed transudates, 198, 198t, 266
pools,62,63f
Monocyte-colony stimulating (M-CSF), 35f
Monocytes
appearance of, 42
changes with inflammation and compensated left-shift,
changes in disease, 70
65f
defnition, 266
changes with noncompensated left-shift, 66f
function of, 42
changes with sepsis, 69f
normal values, 207t
changes with stress neutrophilia,67f
production of, 40f
circulatingmarginatedpool,41,62,63f
Monocytosis, 70
maturation/storage pool,41,62,63f
Mucin clot test, 198
 proliferating pool, 41, 62, 63f
Mucopolysaccharidosis,71,72f,266
toxic,64,65f, 269
Mycoplasma hemocanis,73f,74
in urine,134
Mycoplasmaemofelis71,73f,266
Nitrous oxide, 176, 266
Mycoplasma hemominutum,71,74,266
Nonregenerative anemia
Myeloblasts, 35f, 40f, 62, 63f
anemia of chronic disease, 109
Myelocytes, 62, 63f
causes of, 52t,60, 212t
Myelomonocytic leukemia, 72f
defnition,51,266
Myoglobin, 131, 266
in renal disease, 87, 87f, 88f
Myoglobinuria, 131, 266
Norepinephrine, i51, 266
Index
281
 Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever, diabetes insipidus in,
Parfocal lenses, 3, 267
141
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO)
Nucleated red blood cells (nRBCs), 24, 54-56, 107f
evaluation of, 170, 172
Nurse cells, 36
normal values, 208t
PCV. See Packed cell volume (PCV)
PCV/TPP evaluation on emergency patient, 185-188, 186f
0
step 1: serum color evaluation, 185-186
Oncotic pressure, 90, 267
Onion toxicity,49
81 uoneuwexa neos yng g das
step 4:total protein/albumin evaluation, 187-188, 187c
Ovalocyte, 45, 46f
Ovalo-echinocytes, 46f, 47t, 50
PDH (pituitary-dependent byperadrenocorticism), 156, 156f,
Oxygen, erythrocyte transport of, 36, 38f
267
PEI. See Pancreatic exocrine insuffciency (PEI)
Pelger-Huet anomaly, 71,72f, 267
Pellet, 267
P
PH, blood, 168-169, 208t. See also Acidosis
Packed cell volume (PCV)
Phagocytize, 267
decreased, causes of, 184t, 186-187
Phagocytosis,of erythrocyte extruded nucleus,36
defnition, 267
Pheochromocytoma, 166, 267
emergency patient,evaluationof,14t,186-187,32t
Phosphofructokinase deficiency,60t
increased, causes of, 184t, 187
Phosphorus
measurement of, 4
defnition, 267
normal values,186c,207t
byperphosphotemia,127,127t,223t
species variations, 39f
hypophosphotemia,126126f27t,t
tube components,186f
normal levels1c,126c,127t,08t
Pancreas
renal function and, 81, 82t
anatomy,106f,108,109f
role in body, 126
endocrine
Pigmenturia,144
anatomy,109f
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH), 156, 156f,
diabetes mellitus, 114-118
267
clinicaldiagnostic11118
Pituitary gland, 152, 267
type I, 114
Plasma cells, 202f
type I1, 114-115
Platelet count
type Il1, 115
estimated from blood flm,29
function, 108
patient algorithm, 117a, 222t
histograms, 23,23f
exocrine
interfering factors, 23-24
acute canine patient,algorithm for,113a,219t
normal values, 207t
acute/chronicfelineptienalorithmfor15a
sample handling for,179
anatomy,109f
Platelet funetion tests, 179-180, 181t
chronic canine patient, algorithm for, 114a, 220t
Platelet plug, primary,176
clinical diagnostics
Platelets
blood folare levels, 111
activation of, 176
canine pancreatic lipase inhibition (cPLI), 111
blood flm evaluation of morphology, 31
clinical chemistry, 110
defects in function of, 177
complete blood count, 109, 110f
evaluation of clotting in red top tube, 76
function, 43
granules of, 43
utrasound, 111
in liver disease, 103
diseases
macroplatelers,23,65
pancreatic exocrine insuffciency (PEl), 108-111
megakaryopoiesis,43,43f
pancreatitis, 108-111
role in hemostasis, 176-177
tumors,108-111
thrombocytopenia, 177
function,108
Poikilocytes
secondary disease concerns
acanthocytes, 45, 46f, 47-48, 47t, 56, 212t, 259
gallbladder obstruction, 111
burr cells, 45, 47t, 49-50, 212t,261
hepatic failure,111,113
eccentrocytes, 45, 46f, 47t, 49, 212t, 261
metabolic acidosis, 113
echinocytes,45,46f47,47t,212t,262
renal failure, 111
keratocytes,45,46f,47t,49-50,56,57f,212t,65
Pancreatic exocrine insuffciency (PEI), 108-111, 267
ovalocyte, 45, 46f
Pancreatitis
schistocytes,45,46f, 47t,49,49f, 56,57f,212t,269
clinical diagnostics
spherocytes, 45,46f, 47t,4849, 48f, 59, 126f, 212t,269
blood folate levels, 111
stromatocyte,45
canine pancreatic lipase inhibition (cPLI),111
target cell, 45, 46f, 50, 269
clinical chemistry, 110, 110c
Poikilocytosis
complete blood count, 109
definition,267
radiology, 111
diseases associated with, 212t
ypsinlike immunoassay (TLI), 111
Polychromasia
defnition,108,267
appearance of, 107f
 patient presentation, 108
semiquantitation method for, 212t
Panhypoproteinemia, 267
Polychromatophilic erythrocytes, 36, 52, 53, 53t, 267
Papilloma, 202, 267
Polycythemia, 60-61, 61t, 214t, 267
Parasitism, eosinophilia in, 71
Polycythemia vera, 61, 267
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
Polydipsia78121,155,267
defnition, 267
Polyphagia, 155, 267
hypercalcemia from overproduction of, 126
Polyuria, 78, 155, 267
282Index
Poodle macrocytosis, 53, 267
Red blood cell (RBC) count
Porphyrin, 131,267
measurement of,20
Portacaval shunt, 97-98, 98f, 267-268
in renal disease, 90
Portal vein, 94, 94f, 95f
species variations,39f
Portal venous system,94268
Red blood cells. See Erythrocytes
Portuguese WaterDog, diabetes insipidus in,141
Reference ranges, in-clinic laboratory, 1112
Postparturient hypocalcemia (eclampsia), 125, 125t, 262, 268
Refractometer, 83, 131, 268
Postrenal azotemia, 86, 86b, 86f, 268
Regenerative anemia, 1,0
Potassium
causes,52t,212t
aldosterone and, 119, 120f, 152, 154f
defnition, 51, 268
defnition,268
due to blood destruction, 57-59, 58f-60f, 58t, 60, 213t
electrical rhythm, role in producing, 87-88, 88f, 119, 120f,
due to blood loss, 56
154f
95-2s go sioi
hyperkalemia, 122-124
in intestinal bleeding, 107, 107f
causes, 122-123, 127t,223t
iron dehciency, 56, 57f
clinical chemistry changes, evaluation of, 123-124
pancreatic tumors and109
electrocardogramin241
reticulocyte counts in, 53-54, 54t, 55f
signs associated with, 123
Renal azotemia, 85, 85f, 86b, 268
bypokalemia, 121, 223t
Renal cortex, 77-78, 80f, 268
diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 121
Renal disease
gastrointestinaldisease11
azotemia,386,586,5f86f
hospitalized animals on IV fluids, 121
diagnosis, 216t
renal disease, 82-83, 88, 121
abdominal radiography, 91
ventrofexion of theneck,121,122f
abdominal ultrasound, 91
normal levels,83c, 121c,127t, 190c, 208t
blood chemistry,90
renal function and, 82-83, 82t, 88
blood gas, 91
Potassium hydroxide preparations, 194
blood pressure monitoring, 91
Precision, evaluating instrument, 6-7, 8f
complete blood count, 90
Prerenal azotemia,83,83b,85f,268
diagnostic tests,90-92
Primary (central diabetes insipidus, 141
ethylene glycol test, 91
Promyelocytes, 62,63f
overview of, 84
Prostaglandin i, 176, 268
urinalysis, 91
Protein
urine culture and sensitivity, 91
hyperproteinemia, 264
urine protein/creatinine ratio, 91
hypoproteinemia,264
hypocalcemia in, 125
proteinuria, 82, 91, 136t, 145,146t,268
hypokalemia in,121
total protein
pancreatitis and, 111
decreased, causes of, 184t, 187-188
risk factors for development of, 145, 147t
defnition, 269
secondary concerns of, 87-90
emergency patient,evaluationof,184t,187-188,232t
anemia, chronic nonregenerative, 87, 87f, 88f
increased, causes of, 184t, 188
electrolyte abnormalities, 87-88
normal levels, 187c, 208t
hypertension, 88-89, 89f
urinalyisarifacts3336t
metabolic acidosis, 90
urine protein/creatinine ratio, 91, 138, 269
protein-losing nephropathy, 90
Protein C, 176
Renal medulla,78,80f, 268
Protein/creatinine ratio, urine, 91, 138, 269
Renal pelvis, 78
Protein-losing enteropathy,106,268
Renin,89,89f,268
Renin-angiotensin system, 77, 268
Resources, 257
Prothrombin,177,268
Respiration, 268
Prothrombin time (PT), 180-182, 181t, 182c, 191c, 208t,
Respiratory acidosis
268
blood gas testing, 170
Proximal convoluted tubules, 78, 79f
causes of, 168, 169, 169f
Pseudohyperkalemia,268
defnition, 268
PT. See Prothrombin time (PT)
diagnosis of, 172
PTH. See Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
691o swodus
treatment plant, 172-173
Pure red cel aplasia, 60
Reticulocytes
Purple top tube,13f
aggregate,53,54f
P waves, loss in hyperkalemia, 124, 124f
appearance of, 107f
Pyogranulomatous inflammation,200f,200t,201f
Pyruvate kinase deficiency,60t
count
absolute, 55t, 213t
Pyuria, 134, 268
estimating from blood flm, 53-54, 55f
in intestinal bleeding, 107
percentage(corrected),5t,213t
Q
defnition, 268
Quality control, for in-house laboratory, 7-8
punctate, S3, S4f
Reticulocyte stains, 53,54f
Reticulocytosis
R
buffy coat appearance in,14
Radiography
defnition, 268
in hyperadrenocorticism, 161, 161f
Ringworm. See Dermatophytic fungi
in liver disease, 103
Romanowsky stain, 15,40, 198,269
in pancreatic disease,111
Rottweiler, diabetesinsipidus in,141
in renal disease, 91
Round celrumors,202,03t,204f
Red blood cell casts, 135, 148, 148t
Rules, quality control, 9-10
Index
283
Supernatant, 269
Saline agglutination test, 59, 60f
Suppurative infection,269
SALP. See Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
Swabs, for cytological evaluation, 195
Sample handling
blood sample (red top tube),75-77
urine, 129-130
T
Sarcomas, 201, 204f
Sarcoptes,194,269
Target cells, 45, 46f, 50, 269
T-cell, 43, 44
Scan Scope, installing, 240-243
Thrombi'
SCF (stem cell factor), 35f
Schistocytes, 45, 46f, 47t, 49, 49f, 56, 57f, 179, 212t, 269
inappropriate formation of,175
Scrapings,skin,194,194
microthrombi in DIC, 179
Thrombin,177-178,269
Sepsis
Thrombocytopenia
defnition, 269
infammatory neutrophilia and, 62, 64
buffy coat appearance in, 14
defnition, 269
neutropenia and, 68,69f
hemostasis defect with177
Serum color
in intestinal bleeding, 107
of emergency patient, 184t, 185-186, 232t
Thrombocytosis
red, 77, 185-186
white, 76-77,186
yellow,77,186
Serum separator, 75-77
defnition, 269
Thrombopoietin,43, 269
Thymus, 44
TLI (trypsinlike immunoassay), 111
Siderocytes, 51, 269
Total biirubin, 208t
Sinusoids
liver, 94,95f
Total protein (TP)
decreased, causes of, 184t, 187-188
spleen, 44
skin serapings, 194,194f
defnition,269
emergency patient, evaluation of, 184t, 187-188, 232t
Sodium
aldosterone and,119,120f, 152,154f
increased, causes of, 184t, 188
normal levels, 187c, 208t
defnition, 269
Toxicephlsf9
elecrical rhythm, role in producing, 87-88, 88f, 119, 120f,
Transitional cells (urothelial cells), 134, 149, 149t, 269
154f
bypernatremia,121,127t,223t
Transmissible venereal tumor, 204f
hyponatremia, 120-121, 127t, 223t
Transudates, 198, 198t, 269
Trauma patients, blood pressure of, 192
normal levels, 119c, 127t, 190c, 208t
Sodium/potassium balance
Trigone, bladder, 78, 269
aldosteronesrolein,152-13
Triple phosphate crystals, 135, 137t, 225t
defnition, 269
Sodium/potassium ratio (Na/K), in hypoadrenocorticism, 
123-124,165
Soft-Coated Wheaten Terrier, diabetes insipidus in, 141
U
Spectrophotometer, components of, 22f
Ultrasound
Spherocyte,45,46f47t,4849,48f,59,126f1,
in hyperadrenocorticism, 161, 164
269
in liver disease, 104
Spleen
in pancreatic disease,111
functions of, 44
in renal disease, 92
hematopoiesis in, 35-36
Unopette system, 25-27, 25f, 25t, 26f, 197-198
structure of, 44
Ureters,78,78f
Squamous cell carcinoma, 202, 204f, 269
Squash preparation, 197f
Urinalysis
Stains
algorithm for evaluation of color, turbidity, and specifc
blood flm, 15
gravity, 140a
cytology, 198-199
chemical evaluation, 132-133
urine sediment, 133
algorithm for, 143a
Standard deviation, 6, 269
artifacts, 132-133
Standard operating procedures (SOPs), 8-9
blood, 132-133, 136t, 224t
Standard Poodle,diabete insipidus in,141
on centrifuged versus uncentrifuged samples, 132
Staphylococcus
conjugated bilirubin, 132, 136t, 224t
in cytological preparations, 194
fndings in disease, 141-145
defnition, 269
fow charr for evaluating, 227t
Stem cell,33-34, 35f, 40, 40f, 269
glucose, 132, 136t, 224t
Steroid hepatopathy, 162, 269
ketones,132,136t,224t
Steroid-induced neutrophilia, 41, 65-66, 67f
nonuseful reagentpads,133
meanings of tests,136t,224t
Steroids
iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism from, 157
protein,133136t,224
lymphopenia and, 70
color ofurine,131, 140a
neutrophiia, 41, 65-66, 67f
in diabetes mellitus, 116
Stress
errors, sources of30
lymphopenia and, 70
fndings in disease
monocytosis in, 70
bilirubinuria, 136t, 144
neutrophilia in, 41, 65-66, 67f
casts, 147-148, 147f, 148t
Stress leukogram,41,58,269
cells, 149, 149t
Stromatocyte, 45
chemical evaluation, 141-145, 143a
Struvite crystals, 135,137t,225t,269
crystals, 148, 148t
284Index
Urinalysis (Continued)
renal function evaluation, 79-87
glucosuria,136t,141-143
secondaryconcernsofrenal disease,87-90
bematuria, 136t, 144, 144t
Urothelial cells. See Transitional clls (urothelial cells)
hemoglobinuria,144-145,144f
ketonuria, 136t, 143-144
myoglobinuria,144-145
proteinuria, 136t, 145, 146t
V
sediment evaluation,146-149,146a
Vaccination, lymphocytosis associated with, 69, 69f
Vacutainer systems,12,75
urine specifc gravity, 139, 14i, 141t
Veniur,rcdurefr1
glucose, 116
gross evaluation, 131, 140a, 226t
Ventrofexion of the neck, 88,89f, 121, 122f, 269
in hyperadrenocorticism, 159
Virbac University (Web site), 257
in hypoadrenocorticism, 165
Vitamin K, antagonism by warfarin, 178
Von willebrand's disease, 177, 180, 269
ketones, 116
refrigeration of sample, 130
sample handling, 17
sampling technique,129-130
W
sediment evaluation, 91, 133-135, 138
Warfarin toxicity, 178
algorithm for evaluation, 146a
Waxy casrs, 135, 137t, 147, 147f, 148t,
casts, 135, 137t,225t
225t
ystals,135,137t,13825
Westgard rules, 9
epithelial cells, 134, 137t, 225t
erythrocytes, 134, 137t, 224t
diaberes insipidus in, 141
fndings in disease, 146-149
pyruvate kinase deficiency, 60t
fow chart for evaluating,228t
Wet chemistry systems, 5
meanings of tests, 136t-i37t, 224t-225t
White blood cell casts, 135, 148, 148t
microorganisms, 134-135, 137t, 225t
White blood celcount
performance of,133
automated,24
staining, 133
correcting formetarubricytes56
white blood cells, 134, 136t, 224t
estimationfrombloodflm,28-29
standard operating procedure (SOP) for, 130
on joint fluid, 197
stepsin performing,130131
manual, 24-27,25f28f
tests for evaluating changes in glomerular ltration,138
normal values, 207t
in renal disease, 90
White blood cells (leukocytes). See also specifc types
Urinary casts, 135, 137t, 147-148, 147f, 148t, 225t
blood flm evaluation of morphology, 30f, 31
Urinary crystals, 135, 137t, 138, 148, 148t, 225t
changes associated with disease
Urinary obstruction
atypical circulatingleukocytes,71,7
azotemia,123
distemper virus inclusions in neutrophils, 74
hyperkalemia in, 122, 123
eosinophils, 71
Urine cortisol/creatinine ratio, 138, 159
lymphocytes,68-70, 69f-70f
Urine culture and sensitivity, 91
monocytes, 70
Urine protein/creatinine ratio, 91, 138, 269
neutrophils, 62-68, 63f-69f
s 
overview, 61
deinition, 269
dehnition, 265
evaluation of, 136t, 139, 141, 141t, 224t, 226t
distribution on blood flm, 14
in hyperadrenocorticism,159
emergency patient,evaluation of,189
in hypoadrenocorticism, 165
in liver disease,103-104
measurement of, 131
in urine sediment, 134, 136t, 149, 149t, 224t
normal levels, 131c, 136t
Whole blood clotting time, 182, 269
Urobilinogen, 133
Wright-Giemsa stain, 15, i98, 199f
Urogenital system
anatomy of, 77-79, 78f, 79f
diagnostic tests, 90-92
Y
abdominal radiography, 91
Yeast
abdominal ultrasound, 91
cytology of 194, 195, 195f
blood chemistry,90
in urine sediment, 134-135, 137t, 225t
blood gas, 91
blood pressure monitoring, 91
complete blood count, 90
Z
ethylene glycol test, 91
Zinc toxicity,49
urinalysis, 91
Zona fasciculata, 151, 269
urine culture and sensitivity, 91
Zona granulosa, 151, 269
urine protein/creatinine ratio, 91
Zona reticularis, 151, 269