ULTRASONIC IMAGING and
ANIMAL REPRODUCTION:
COLOR-DOPPLER
ULTRASONOGRAPHY
BOOK4
O.J.GINTHER,VMD,PhD
CONTENTS
Part One
BASICS
CHAPTER1.ARTERIESAND HEMODYNAMICS
Arterial System
8
Locating Ovarian and Uterine Arteries
14
Hemodynamics
18
Sedation and Doppler Ultrasonography
23
CHAPTER2.B-MODE AND DOPPLERULTRASONOGRAPHY
25
Pulses and Echoes
Doppler Effect
34046185 57
CHAPTER3.PRODUCINGCOLOR-FLOWIMAGES
Principles of Color-flow Instrumentation
Power Flow
Adjusting the Scanner
Evaluation and Quantitation
Color-flow Artifacts
662878
CHAPTER 4.PRODUCING SPECTRAL GRAPHS
Principles of Spectral Instrumentation
The Spectrum
Adjusting the Scanner
81
Spectral Artifacts
Part Two
OVARIES
87
CHAPTER5.FOLLICLEBLOODFLOW
88
Follicle Selection
93
Future Ovulatory Follicle. Horses
105
Future Ovulatory Follicle. Cattle
107
Preovulatory Follicle.Women
107
Seasonally Transitional Follicles.Horses
Relationship ofFollicle Characteristics toFuture Pregnancy
111
Color-flow Signals in Oviduct. Horses
114
CHAPTER6.LUTEALBLOODFLOW
115
Arterial Morphology of the Ovaries
116
Luteal Color-Doppler Studies during the Estrous Cycle.Horses
122
A Color-Doppler Study of Induced Luteolysis.Horses
129
Luteal Blood Flow.Cattle
134
Luteal Blood-Flow.Women
140
Luteinized Hemorrhagic Anovulatory Follicles.Horses
141
Part Three
UTERUS AND PREGNANCY
CHAPTER7.BLOOD FLOWINUTERUSANDEARLYEMBRYO
151
Vascular Studies during the Estrous Cycle
152
Physical Embryo-uterine Interactions.Horses
156
Endometrial Vascular Perfusion.Horses
160
Spectral Analysis of Vessels in Mesometrium.Horses
163
Uterine Vascular Perfusion during Early Pregnancy. Cattle
166
Early Color-flow Indicator of Embryo Orientation.Horses
168
Dysorientation of Embryo Proper.Horses
172
Embryo Loss. Horses
176
Uterine Color-Doppler Studies.Women
178
CHAPTER8.BLOOD FLOWINLATEEMBRYOANDFETUS
179
Blood-flowDetection in the Embryo
180
186
Blood-flow Detection in the Fetus
195
Producing Spectral Graphs during Pregnancy
198
Published Spectral Data for theFetal Stage
202
Doppler Ultrasound and Pregnancy.Women
PartFour
STALLIONSANDBULLS
205
CHAPTER9.BLOODFLOWOFMALEGENITALIA
206
Abdominaland Pelvic Arteries
208
Intermal Genitalia
215
Testis,Epididymis,and Spermatic Cord
222
Spectral Graphs and Data for Male Genitalia
PartFive
APPENDIX
BIBLIOGRAPHY
227
SUBJECTINDEX
247
Part One
BASICS
Chapter1
ARTERIES AND HEMODYNAMICS
In transrectal vascular Doppler ultrasonography of large animalsbloodflow
velocities during an arterial pulse are displayed qualitatively as various colors in
color-flow mode and qualitatively and quantitatively as a graph in spectral mode.
A successful Doppler examination requires placement of a transducer with
reasonable orientation over a vessel of interest,which in turn requiresknowledge
on the configuration of the abdominal and pelvic vascular tree from the
transrectal perspective. Computed velocities are dependent on the angle of
transection of the vessel by the ultrasound beams, thereby introducing some
limitation to this approach for the major arteries of the broad ligament.Another
limitation to the utilization ofvelocities is the scarcity ofpublished information
on the relationships of blood velocity and flow to the functional status of the
tissue supplied by an artery. However, the nature of pulsatile blood flow in the
elastic,branching,and tapering arterial tree is an active area of current
investigation(l45).
Blood flow involves the collaboration of many factors including the
regulation and function of the heart, elasticity of vessel walls,regulation and
function of the vascular smooth muscle,variations in vessel dimension and
structure,interconnecting patterns of a myriad (millions) of branching
vessels （li5), and distance from the heart.The circuitous distribution of blood is
under the Newtonian laws of physics and involves all forms of energy (e.g.,
thermal,kinetic).
The pulsatility of arterial blood is a primary consideration in Doppler
examinations and directly involvesnot only the heart,but also the elasticity of the
major arteries (3o). During contraction of the left ventricle (systole) blood is
ejected into the aorta. The semilunar valves close at the completion of
contraction,and the ventricle begins to relax and fill with blood from the left
atrium （diastole).Blood continues to flow in major arteries during diastole: the
walls of the arteries were stretched during systole and rebounding from the
stretched position serves to continue to move the blood but at a reduced velocity.
Blood velocities during the phases of systole and diastole are displayed as color
changes or as a graph or spectrum.
Chapter 1
8
Arterial System
each side is attached to a large broad ligament, as shown in lateral (A)and
frontal-oblique B) views for a mare.The continuous sheet-like broad ligament is
divided into three areas:mesometrium (mm),attaching to theuterus;mesovarium
(mo),attaching to the ovary,and mesosalpinx projecting from the mesovarium
and attaching to the oviduct.The round ligament (rl;A) of the uterus delineates
the division between the mesovarium and mesometrium. During transrectal
scanning,the ovaries and uterus are lifted close to the rectal wall by other
abdominal viscera.
The attachments of themesometrium and mesovarium are important reference
points in transrectal Doppler ultrasound in that they indicate the area of entry of
the blood vessels into the organs. In mares, the ligaments originate from the
lumbar area and attach to the dorsal surface of the organs.In contrast,in heifers
and cows the ligaments originate from the upper flank,rather than the sublumbar
region; the attachment of the ligaments to the organs, therefore,is toward the
ventral aspect,and the organs ride in a ligamentous sling.For these reasons, the
free surface of the uterine horns is ventral in mares and dorsal in cattle.This
species diference is important in transrectal ultrasound and palpation approaches.
near the cranial tip of the nonspiraled uterine hon, and the ligament attaches to
identifying vessels for transrectal Doppler studies.
Circulatory System
A.MARE
nssope
B.MARE
C.HEIFER
broad
ligaments
uterine
Chapter1
10
HEIFER
Germinal
MARE
surface
Cortex
Medulla
Mesothelium
Mesovarium
the ovaryThecortex isinternalexcept for the point where the cortexreaches the
on the vascularizedmedullaso that thevesselscourse over the ovarian surfaceor
near the surface of the follicle. This arrangement leads to confusion in
distinguishing vessels of the medulla from vessels of the follicle wall during
Doppler examinations.In marked contrast,in cattle the greater curvature of the
ovary is the free surface.The preovulatory follicle impinges on the free surface
（future site of ovulation),and the base of the follicle is toward the mesovarial
attachment.Unlike horses,the cortex in cattle is external and the medulla,with its
large vessels,is internal.
A.MARE
Red= arteries
Blue=veins
Circulatory System
11
B.HEIFER
C.HEIFER
D.HEIFER
Latex-injected specimens (includes
facing page). The spatial relationship
between the ovarian artery and the
major vein draining the uterus is
intimate in cattle (D),but not in horses
（A).The functional implications of this
species difference are discussed
（pgs 136.137).For some cattle and for
some sides (left versus right), the
anastomosis between the ovarian and
uterine arterial systems is prominent
（B: arrow) and for others is less
prominent （C) or not evident.In
addition, there are anastomoses
between sides as depicted in the
drawing of a dorsal view in a mare (A)
The variations may affect Doppler
assessment of vascular impedance
for an organ (pg 116).
Red = arteries Black =veins
Chapter
12
bua = branch of uterine artery
MARE
cvc= caudal vena cava
dca = deep circumflex artery
eia = external iliac artery
jia = intermal iliac artery
ipa = internal pudendal artery
oa=ovarian artery
ov=ovarian vein
ua = uterine artery
uterine branch ovarian artery
Jboa
uteroovarian vein
va =vaginal artery
Jbva
Dorsal view and lateral view (facing page) of the arteries to uterus and
ovaries. In these drawings, arteries containing blood that reaches the ovaries,
oviducts, and uterus are depicted in red and continuations and branches supplying
other organs arenot.Theovarian arteryleaves the aorta,as shown,runs dorsally
along the abdominal wall,and enters the mesovarium.The right artery crosses the
vena cava ventrally. The ovarian artery passes along the cranial aspect of the
mesovarium. In mares,the artery is relatively straight and located a few
centimeters caudal to theuteroovarian vein.In contrast, the artery in cattle soon
becomes tortuous and adheres to the surface of the uteroovarian vein, as shown.
The uterine branch of the ovarian artery or uteroovarian arterial anastomosis is
highly variable among individuals and sides (pg 11).
A species difference of considerable importance in transrectal Doppler
ultrasonography is the origin of the uterine artery from the external iliac artery in
horses and from the umbilical artery in cattle. The aorta continues as a common
arteries.The uterus receives blood from the uterine branch of the ovarian artery,a
main supply from the uterine artery, and the uterine branch of the vaginal artery.
Circulatory System
13
MARE
aorta
iia
CVC
dca
ipa
Ov
(uov)
uboa
oa
ua
uma
ubva
bua
HEIFER
lla
uma
ubva
va
aorta
eia'
ua-
CVC
2
eng
OV
(uov)
eoqn
Chapter 1
14
and medial aspects of the horns.
Locating Ovarian and Uterine Arteries
Kidney.The caudal pole of theleft kidney of amare is shown in B-mode (A),
directed dorsally.
Circulatory System
15
aorta
vena cava
pedicle
Nonpregnant mare
中
Pregnant heifer
Ovarian artery. The ovarian artery (oa) can be imaged in B-mode,aided by
color-flow mode when needed. The image of the lumen of the ovarian and uterine
arteries may not be fully anechoic. Reverberation artifacts are common from the
surrounding echoic striations.For these reasons,it is difficult to image the
relatively small arteries; these sonograms and those on the next two pages,
therefore,may not depict the ovarian and uterine arteries clearly.The arteries can
be found in most mares (e.g., 70%) but may be more difficult to find in young
nonpregnant mares. In cattle, the arteries can be found in nonpregnant cows but
may not be detectable in nonpregnant heifers. Growth and pregnancy will enlarge
the ovarian and uterine arteries.The ovarian artery can be detected at its origin by
finding the aorta in longitudinal section and then moving the transducer from
side-to-side （A,D).The right artery passes across the lower surface of the vena
cava;because the transducer will be facing dorsally,the arterywill appear above
the aorta and vena cava on the ultrasound image (AB）The search for the artery
also can begin at the ovarian pedicle (C). Confirmation can be made when needed
by tracing the cross section of the artery beginning at either end and then through
the mesovarium to the other end.The artery is isolated from other arteries in the
mesovarium between the aorta and ovarian pedicle in mares (B,C) but can pass
near the pelvic inlet and therefore the external iliac artery (eia) in heifers (E）. In
cattle,but not in maresthe artery is tortuous and adhered to the uteroovarian vein
(uov:F); the two vessels can be confirmed in color-flow mode.
Chapter
16
dca
eia
Mare.Variation
Mare.Variation2
Uterine artery.Horses.The uterine artery originates from the external iliac
artery in horses,contrasting with an origin from a branch of the internal iliac
artery in catle (pg 12）. The large external iliac arteries are readily identified by
moving the transducer from side to side from a longitudinal position relative to
the aorta. In variation 1,the deep circumflex artery （dca) originates from the
external iliac artery (eia; A) before the origin of the uterine artery （ua; B,C).
Howeve,thecircumflex alsomay originate directly from the aorta just before the
origin of the external iliac (138) or at the origin of the external iliac (14). In
variation 2,the uterine artery originates from the external iliac artery before the
medial aspect of the periphery of the external iliac or from the opposite side.
arteries near their origins were 2 to 6mm and 6 to 7mm,respectively (14)
Circulatory System
17
aorta
Pregnantheifer
Uterine artery. Cattle.The uterine artery may be difficult to detect or identify
in nonpregnant heifers. However,it can be detected in cows (i7).For illustrative
purposes,a heifer 5 months pregnant was used for the above images. The search
for the artery can begin at the aorta.At the origin of the extemal iliacs, the aorta
decreases in diameter (arrow;A) to become a common artery that will terminate
as the left and right internal iliacs. After the origin of one of the extermal iliacs is
found,the transducer is moved further caudally to locate the intemal iliac artery
（iia; B) on the desired side. The umbilical artery （uma) begins as a major branch
of the internal iliac (C).The uterine artery （ua) originates from the umbilical
artery (D),and immediately thereafter blood-flow may not be detectable in the
umbilical artery （E).After finding the origin of the uterine artery, deliberate
examination of a cross section of the umbilical artery in B-mode may reveal a
mm).The small channel at the center of the artery presumably represents arterial
flow to the urinary bladder.A distinguishing feature of theuterine artery in cattle
courses through the mesometrium. The uterine artery is movable in the
mesometrium,compared to the more firmly attached external iliac;this can be
useful in identification.The artery can be traced until it begins to branch.
Chapter1
18
Hemodynamics
Plugflow
Natural
disturbed flow
Plugflow
Laminarflow
Turbulent flow
with eddies
Plug flow
Entrance length-
Laminae
Laminarflow
Parabola
Circulatory System
19
velocity is almost uniform across the artery and is called plug flow. After
traveling a short distance (entrance length) in a smaller artery (e.g., ovarian
velocity at the arterial lining.The flow occurs in infinitesimal cylindrical layers
(laminae) which slide over each other in a smooth orderly manner without mixing
between layers.The adhesive force between blood and the vessel lining causes
delays the next layer in decreasing fashion so that maximum velocity is attained
by the innermost layer. The mean velocity across the vessel is half of the
maximum velocity (3o).Natural disturbed flow occurs when the parallel lines of
flow are interrupted at a bifurcation, as shown. Turbulent flow is a random
seemingly chaotic pattern with blood components moving in different directions,
but with maintenance of the overall forward direction.At the extreme,circular
patterns or eddy currents may develop.The incidence of natural turbulent flow in
large animals is not known,but may be seen by ultrasonic imaging of the aorta
(pg 22）.In this regard, turbulent flow is considered (1o8)unlikely in normal human
circulation, except in the heart or entrance to the aorta,and is most likely a
response to an obstruction.
The driving force for arterial flow into the reproductive tract originates at the
left ventricle of the heart.Half of the total resistance to flow has been attributed to
arterioles (Io8).Resistance in a tissue (e.g.,uterus) varies dramatically according
to the constricted or relaxed state of the muscular walls of the arterioles.Thus,
specific tissues control local flow according to need. Tapering,bends,and
bifurcations in the arterial tree are other sources of resistance.
Knowledge of the various flow patterns is important to the Doppler
ultrasonographer.When thecolor-flow function isused,therange ofvelocitiesis
depicted by variations in color.In color-flow or power-flow mode the encoded
colors in a segment of arterymay range from red to orange to yellow for slow to
rapid velocities,respectively.Thus,at a section ofvessel that has laminar flow.
Doppler colors will range from red in the peripheral area,followed by orange in
the intermediate area,and yellow at the center.When spectral-mode (pg 61) is
used,therange ofvelocities at a small sample point in avessel is displayed bya
spectral graph.The greater thenumber of different velocities,the broader the line
thatprofiles the graph.
Chapter1
20
Systole
Diastole
One cardiac cycle
Baseline or timeline
Pulsatile arterial flow.The patterns of arterial flow,described above,are as
though arterial blood flow is steady,but with varying velocities across the lumen.
In reality,arterial flow to the reproductive tract is pulsatile in response to
heartbeats or pulsations of the left ventricle.The red line in the illustration shows
depicted velocity changes occur rapidly. The vessels on the images are
Circulatory System
21
diastole,blood flow is slower as indicated by the graphThe color-flow mapping
of slow velocities results in a uniform red signal.Arterial velocity at the periphery
of the artery isbelow theminimal for the selected velocity setting and therefore is
not detected (note anechoic area at the periphery). For this reason, the colored
area is smaller than for the other images. The slow velocity in the vein is in a
uniform blue. The blue indicates that flow is opposite to arterial flow depicted in
red.At the peak when the graph indicates the most rapid arterial flow, the color
coding is mixed because of an artifact known as aliasing-the actual velocity
exceeds the selected velocity range.The net effects for the operator are flashes of
changing colors during each arterial pulse on the real-time color-flow display and
may include flashes of grays. Pulsed-Doppler ultrasound (spectral mode; Chapter
4) represents the changing velocities during each pulse in the form of a graph
with a shape comparable to the velocity changes depicted in the drawing. The
shape of the graph is used by the operator for diagnostic or research information.
The changing flow pressure or velocity is not only a direct response to
heartbeats but also is a response to compliance, expressed as expansion and
contraction of the wall of major arteries (30.1o8). When blood is forced into a
compliant artery during ventricular systole,the arterial walls expand.At the end
of systole, the heart valves close and the stretched arterial walls contract. In
effect,the distended arterial walls are a form of energy storage,which provides
for continuous flow towards the tissues during diastole.Thus, blood flow
continues, even while the ventricle is refilling with blood during diastole.The
heart valves prevent backflow.In smaller arteries,continuation of forward flow
may not occur during diastole because the arteries have less elasticity and are too
far from the closed valves. Continued, still, or reversed flow may occur
depending on diameter and elasticity of the arteries and distance from the heart.
Chapter
22
~30sec
~30sec
Disturbed
Steady
Disturbed
reverb
eddy
Natural disturbed flow in aorta.These images of the caudal aorta of a mare
were taken in two sequences at an interval between images of approximately 30
secondsThe transducer was held constant,so that the motion ofblood particles
would be appreciated by comparing the images.The effect is,of course,much
artifacts (reverb) obscured part of the blood flow image.
Circulatory System
23
Sedation and Doppler Ultrasonography
Before sedation
After sedation
Variable
(Mean ± SEM)
(Mean± SEM)
PSV(cm/sec)*
89±8.5
73±9.1
PSVminus EDV(cm/sec)*
70±12.7
60±9.6
Length systole (sec)
0.39±0.02
0.38±0.04
Length diastole (sec)*
0.62±0.11
0.93±0.12
Heart rate (beats/min)*
70±12.7
60±9.6
A study using the carotid artery. Cattle. These data are from a study (27) on
the effects of sedation with xylazine during spectral examinations of the carotid
artery in 30 cows. The asterisks indicate variables with a significant difference
between groups. The decreased heart rate and increased length of diastole can be
considered directly related because the length of systole was not altered. Peak
systolic velocity (PsV) and end diastolic velocity (EDV) are used in the
calculation of the Doppler indices (resistance index,RI:pulsatility index,PI;
pg 71). The study demonstrated an effect of xylazine,a common sedative, on
cardiovascular function,as indicated by a decreaseinbloodvelocities.
In horses, the effect of sedation on color-Doppler results has not been studied
for the reproductive tract but has been examined for the carotid artery (137).
Sedation resulted in a decrease in blood-flow velocity and peripheral resistance
and an increase in the diameter of the carotid. Total flow remained unchanged,
owing to the compensation between increased diameter and decreased velocity.
Although these studies were done on the carotid arteries, the results indicate a
need for similar sedation studies for the arteries of the reproductive organs.
According to protocols of published reports,sedation has not been considered as
having an effect on the results.Furthermore,many reports do not indicate
whether a sedative was used. Some considerations to minimize potential
confusion are:1) standardization of a minimal sedation protocol,including
product, dose,and interval between treatment and examination:2) strict
3) acclimation of animals to the handling system:4) selection of animals that
scem most tolerant of the procedures:5) maintenance of a calm environment:and
6) using procedures that require minimal time.
Chapter1
24
protocols is the desire to obtain data frequently (e.g., every 5 minutes). The
duration of a sedation effect and the time required for obtaining data may
determine thepracticalities of examination frequency.Moreover,blood flow also
may be altered when an animal is restrained and examined without a sedative
and the effect may be dependent on the extent of tractability of an individual.
Considerable study isneeded.
Summary of circulatory system.Placement of a Doppler-ultrasound
transducer over a targeted vessel requires knowledge of vessel configuration from
a transrectal perspective.The uterine artery originates from the external iliac
artery in horses in marked contrast to an origin from the umbilical artery,a
is aneglected area of study.
Chapter2
PRINCIPLES OF B-MODE AND
DOPPLER ULTRASONOGRAPHY
B-mode or gray-scale imaging has become widely integrated into large-animal
clinical and research programs in reproduction.A related technology, just
beginning to be considered and utilized in theriogenology, is color-Doppler
ultrasound (87,116).Doppler ultrasound provides two distinctively different
approaches for assessing the vascular system: 1) blood-flow display in color on a
two dimensional B-mode image of a tissue structure or organ (Chapter 3) and
2) pulsed-Doppler spectral analysis of changing velocity in a small area of flow
during an arterial pulse (Chapter 4). Both types of flow assessment will be
considered in this book. Color-Doppler imaging provides real-time blood flow
visualization,ranging from high velocity flow in large vessels (e.g.,uterine and
ovarian arteries) to minimal flow through terminal vessels. The color-flow
imaging will be more attractive than the spectral approach to the clinician because
it provides an instantaneous impression of blood-flow,while an entire area of
interest (e.g., endometrium, follicle) is being scanned.With this approach,real-
time assessment by eye alone allows judgment on vascular status that reflects
current and future capabilities of the tissue or organ.When warranted and when
more time can be expended, the assessments by eye can be confirmed and further
considered by objective evaluations of color signals.
Many of the principles of Doppler ultrasonography are extensions of the
principles of B-mode ultrasonography. This chapter will integrate the two
modalities.B-mode considerationswill be briefandreferences and more detailed
information can be found in Book 1 of this series （65）.This chapter has sections
reviewing propagation and depiction of ultrasound waves and the relationships
among pulses,reflectors,choes,beams,canning linesand magesTheDopp
effect,the basis of color-Doppler ultrasonography,is discussed in more detail,
including the Doppler-shift frequency,angle of intercept between the ultrasound
beam and blood flow,role ofred cells as moving reflectors,and the Doppler
equation.
Chapter 2
26
Pulses and Echoes
Wave depiction
Pulse depiction
Compression
Sine
3MHz
5MHz
andexpansionof
wave
tissue particles
velength
Amplitude
Vibration of
tissue particle
Propagation and depiction of ultrasound waves.Each piezoelectric crystal
(Bk1-29,65) of the transducer is activated by alternating polarity of an electric
charge,and the resulting expansion and contraction sends mechanical
compression waves into the tissue. Crystal expansion causes compression among
neighboring tissue particles,and contraction causes decompression,as shown.
This tissueresponse is similar to theresponse of air particles toa drumhead.The
ultrasoundwave,as shown
Principles
27
made by the tissue particles in the medium per secondFrequency is measured in
hertz (Hz) units. One hertz is one cycle per second and a megahertz (MHz) is one
million cycles per second. Frequency is the basis for one of the tenets of
ultrasoundhigher frequency results in better resolution but reduced tissue
meters/second (1.5 millimeters in one millionth of a second). A wavelength is less
than 1 mm.Although these velocities,complexities,and characteristics should be
kept in mind, sound waves will be depicted as simple arrows in the diagrams that
follow.
Each crystal is subjected to a short series of electric excitations,resulting in a
short series ofvibrations known collectively as a pulse. The resulting energy is
generated in both directions. The crystal is backed by a highly energy-absorbent
damping material. The damping process absorbs the energy above the crystal and
quickly reduces the vibrations.As a result,a well-defined burst or pulse of waves
is produced and travels through the face covering and the gel coupler and into the
tissue. The short,pulsed nature of the generated waves allows an interval of
quiescence to permit reception of potential echoes by the same crystal.For
example, the pulse of waves might be 2 to 3 mm in length and contain four
waves. The frequency of ultrasound pulses is so great that 1,o00 pulses may be
emitted per second despite the requirement that there be a pause between pulses
for echo reception.A pulse is shorter for a higher-frequency crystal (e.g., 5 MHz)
than for a lower-frequency crystal (e.g.,3MHz),but the two frequencies have the
samenumber ofwaves per pulse.
High-frequency ultrasoundwavesunlikeaudible sound waves,tend to behave
like a directed beam rather than spreading out during propagation. This important
characteristic allows the operator to precisely locate small reflectors deep within
the tissue;two small reflectors can be differentiated only when the space between
them is greater than the width of the beam or ultrasound pulses (Bk1-46,65).The
heterogeneous nature of the tissue medium for ultrasound,in contrast with the
more homogeneous nature of the airmedium for audible sound,causes extensive
chapters, these interactions are fundamental to B-mode and Doppler
ultrasonography
Chapter 2
28
B
Pulse
Echo
Pulse
Specular
reflector
O
Nonspecular
reflectors
Transmitted
pulse
Beam
Relationships among pulses,reflectors,and echoes.The heterogeneous
nature of tissues results in tissue interfaces wherever tissues of different density
are in contactWhen anultrasound beam,specifically a pulseof thebeam,strikes
a surface or interface,most of the pulse continues through the interface aspart of
a transmitted beam,but theremainder isreflected as an echo,as shown.When the
force of the returning sound wave reaches the quiescent crystals, the resulting
compression and expansion produce a small voltage that is transmitted to a
receiver.The piezoelectric property of the crystal is such that it can both generate
signal when struck by the returning ultrasound waves.The delay between
propagation of a wave and reception of an echo is used to determine the distance
from the crystal to the reflector.The time intervals serve to assign the proper
ultrasound screen(Bk1-5s,65).
Principles
29
However,the pulse encountersmany scatterers simultaneously,and many echoes
together provide adequate power or energy for stimulating the piezoelectric
crystals.
A pulse is produced by firing a number of adjacent elements.As the pulse
travels through the tissues,it conforms to the confines of an imaginary beam
(Columns A,B.C).For simplicity,assume that the specular reflector in Column A
is 31 mm from the crystals.When the pulse strikes thereflector,part of the pulse
is reflected back as an echo,and the remainder continues on as a transmitted
pulse (Column B). In this illustration, the elapsed time for each pulse
transmission (crystals to reflector) and for each echo return is approximately
20 microseconds （31 mm x 1us/1.54 mm velocity).Attenuation is defined as
progressive weakening in intensity of the ultrasound waves or pulses as they
travel through tissue,thereby limiting the depth of penetration
Acoustic powerrefers to the rate of energy emitted through the transducer by
the scanner’s transmitter. The power may be adjusted by the operator through a
control often labeled AP. Increasing the power yields a more energetic signal
which is advantageous for detection of echoes from weak interfaces.Modern
instruments limit the amount of energy that can be emitted to avoid adverse
biologic ffects.Fortunately,diagnostic ultrasoundasopposed toheat generating
therapeutic ultrasound,does notutilize sustained high energy.owing to the short
duration involved in emission of a pulse.
The term B-moderefers to Brightness of the dots or pixels on the echo-display
screen.Each pixel or picture element corresponds to a location in the scanners
memory and to the location ofa tissuereflector.The distance from the top of the
image to the pixel represents the distance from transducer to tissue reflector.The
brightness of a pixel corresponds to the amplitude or power of that individual
echo signal. Brightness in B-mode is represented by shades of gray extending
from white (very bright or echoic) to black (no discernible echo; anechoic).
Chapter2
30
Beam
width
Linear array
of64elements
Focal
dep
point
Ye
Sequentialproduction
ofbeamsfor each frame
Thickness
Widthof field ofview
Beamsscanning lines,and frames.The beams depicted in this illustration
and elsewhere are imaginary; they merely represent the three-dimensional path
involved in each beam,since a delay must be allowed after the firing of each
pulse for the collection of echo information.Because of the high velocity of the
ultrasound pulsein tissue,the echo patterns for each beam can be collected in a
of a cluster of crystals, as shown for two beams in this illustration.The firing of
width of the field of view.For example,movement from beam-to-beam may
outlined in black and one in red.
received forabeam linebeforeanotherbeamcan beinitiated.Acompletesweep
Principles
31
limited by the speed of the pulse and returning echoes,thenumber of beam lines
collection of the resultant echoes are completed in about 0.25miliseconds.That
is,4000pulsesorlines of echo information canbecollected inone secondIffor
40 images are generatedper second
The field ofview encompassed by a sweep of beams extending the full length
of the array of elements corresponds to the tissue region being examined. The
terms width, depth,and thickness are used to define the three-dimensional area
corresponding to the field of view. Width and depth are easily related to the
resulting two-dimensional image on the ultrasound screen.The width of the field
corresponds to the length of the row of elements and is seen as the width of the
image on the screen.The depth of the field corresponds to the useful or displayed
depth penetrated by the beams.The remaining,smallest dimension can be called
the thickness. This important dimension represents the thickness of the sampled
slice of tissue; its magnitude must be imagined while viewing the image. The
operator must appreciate the magnitude of all three dimensions for a given
transducer in order to mentally relate the ultrasound field to the tissue mass.
Focusing imparts the hourglass shape to the beams,indicating greater resolution
in the focal area(Bk1-47,65).
Each vertical scanning line on the image records the information gathered by
a corresponding transducer beam. The echo display for each tissue reflector is
move horizontally across the screen and turn on and off producing a vertical
scanning line for each beam.Therefore,each point at which a raster line crosses a
scanning line represents one pixel or picture element. The power of the electric
signals originating from the memory of the scanner (Bk1-53.65) provides the
appropriate information for the power of the electron beam for each pixel.The
digital system records data into the memory,modifies data,and transfers data to
the screen so rapidly that each process does not interfere with any other.
Chapter2
32
instruments and transducers may have a feature for utilizing the harmonic as well
of the transmitted pulses or original echoes. One of several methods may be used
to filter out the lower frequency original echo so that the higher frequency second
harmonic echo can be used to form an improved B-mode image. Images that
include the harmonic echoes are less noisy and have fewer reverberation artifacts.
Some modern ultrasound instruments incorporate the feature of tissue harmonic
imaging,allowing the operator to adjust the scanner so that harmonic frequencies
can be considered.
Contrast agents. Ultrasound contrast agents consist of tiny (1 to 5 μm) gas
bubbles in which air or a gas is encapsulated by a shell (Iss). These small bubbles
produce echoes of large amplitude andmay be used to intensify the echoes from
originated from the contrast agent.
Principles
33
Doppler Effect
A.Stationary
B.Moving across
C. Moving toward
D.Moving away
Doppler effect of audible sound.TheDoppler effect of sound is a recognized
natural phenomenon. Consider the perceived sound of a car horn that is stationary
(Row A) or moving perpendicular to the listener (neither toward nor away;
Row B). When the listener and car are stationary or not moving toward or away
from each other, the wave frequency of the car horm at the ear drums is constant.
This is similar to B-mode ultrasound in that the source of the ultrasound
frequency (transducer) and the targeted tissue are approximately stationary.
returning echoes are similar. Now consider a car moving toward the listener
Chapter2
34
Orientation of red-cell flow to ultrasound beam
Moving
Moving
Moving
away
toward
across
Stationary
D
C
B
A
C(C
Positive
Negative
No
No
shift
shift
shift
shift
Blood
vessel
Red cell
Transmitted frequency
Returning frequency
Doppler effect of ultrasound.InDoppler sonography of blood vessels,the
stationary object is the transducer,and the moving reflectors that generate the
returning echoes are primarily red-blood cells （154.155), as depicted in the
illustration within short segments of a vessel. The Doppler-shift frequency or
simply the Doppler frequency (iss) is defined as the difference between the
frequency of the received echoes and the frequency of the transducer or the
transmitted ultrasound waves,as follows:
Doppler-shift frequeney =Received frequency-Transmitted frequency
Principles
35
The interval between pulses is expressed as the pulse-repetition frequency
decreasing the range of velocities to be sampled. A high PRF setting is used when
Conversely,a low PRF setting is used when the vessels are far from the
transducer or the flow is slow. A low setting increases the likelihood of aliasing
artifact and is described elsewhere (pgs 55, 81).
Scattering of echoes by red cells.Blood consists
of a suspension of red cells,white cells,and
platelets in a liquid plasma.It is generally assumed
Ultrasound
that the red cells are responsible for the scattering
beam
of ultrasound waves by blood because of the low
numbers of white cells and the small size of
Red cell
platelets (28). The interface of a red cell is much
narrower （7 μm) than the width of an ultrasound
beam (e.g.,2 mm) and therefore is a diffuse
reflector (pg 28). When a beam enters blood,it
encounters a multitude of red-cell scatterers. The
echoes rebound in many directions, so that only a
small portion of the scattered echoes (backscatter;
Bk1-68,65）reaches the transducer,as shown.InB-mode (gray-scale） imaging,the
scanner's computer.
Chapter2
36
180°
.06
60°
30°
OkHz
-6.5kHz
Angle(e):o°
3.3kHz
5.6kHz
E
D
Shift:6.5kHz
C
B
A
Beam
direction
Blood
vessel
Red cell
Blood flow
direction
Angle ofimpact between ultrasound beams and direction of blood flow.The
angle at which the ultrasound beams intersect or impact the path of flowing blood
is termed the Doppler angle or angle of insonation. The data given in this
illustration for the effect of the insonation angle on Doppler-shift frequency are
from an example given by Zagzebski (is4).Red cells are moving at a speed of 1.0
m/sec and interact with the pulses emitted by a 5MHz ultrasound transducer.The
reflected frequency from red cells moving directly toward the transducer
(Doppler angle of 0°:Column A) in this example is 5,006,490 Hz (5.0065 MHz).
The Doppler-shift frequency is a positive 6490 (6.5 kHz). That is, the reflected
kHz at 180°
qualitative adjunct to electronic analyses and spectral displays (158).
Principles
37
1.0
Relationship of angle to cosine.As
the Doppler angle increases from 0°
to90°,the effect on the Doppler-shift
0.5
frequency changes, but the changes
do not occur in a linear fashion (154).
0.0
Cosi
Instead, the changes are relative to
the cosine of the angles, as shown.
-0.5
The cosine is used because the cosine
function changes linear data of angle
degrees to conform to a sine wave as
-1.0-
90120150180
in an ultrasound wave (pg 26）. When
0
30
60
Angle (degrees)
the blood moves directly toward the
transducer,the angle is 0（pg 36),and
the cosine is 1 (highest cosine value). That is, the Doppler frequency is at the
maximum that can be obtained. At an insonation angle of 60°, the cosine （and
therefore the Doppler frequency) is 50% of the value at O°(broken lines). Note
this cosine relationship is shown for the data example on the previous page.A
computed Doppler-shift value at 0°(6.5 kHz) is 50%of the value at 60° (3.3
kHz). At 90° the cosine is 0.0 (dotted lines) and a Doppler-shift frequency is not
detected.Increasing the angle from 90° (cosine,0.0) to 180°(cosine,-1.0) results
in negative cosines in the same degree/cosine relationship as for the positive
cosines.At 0° and 180° blood flow is toward and away from beam direction,and
the cosines are at maximum positive and negative values,respectively
Cosine of
Velocity of
Transmitted
X
X
Doppler angle
2
blood flow
frequency
Doppler-shift
frequency
Velocity of sound in tissue
Doppler-shift frequency
Velocity
Cosine of Doppler angle
The Doppler equation.The first equation indicates that Doppler-shift
velocity,or the cosine of the angle doubles.If the frequency seting of a given
equation indicates that velocity is directly proportional toDoppler frequency and
inversely proportional to cosine of the Doppler angle.
Chapter2
38
quiescence between pulses allows for reception of returning echoes.The echo
patterns from each beam are collected in a fraction of a millisecond. The
proportion of sound waves that is reflected is received by the transducer,
converted to electric impulsesand displayed as an echo on the ultrasound screen.
Each pixel on the echo display screen corresponds to the location of a tissue
reflector.The distance from the top of the image to the pixel represents the
distance from transducer to tissuereflector. The brightness of a pixel corresponds
to the amplitude of the echo.
Doppler ultrasound is an emerging technology that has the potential to
increase the diagnostic,monitoring, and predictive capabilities of
theriogenologists and researchers.The instrument provides two distinctively
diferent approaches to assessment of the vascular systemblood flow display in
Chapter 3
PRODUCING COLOR-FLOW IMAGES
Color-flow Doppler ultrasound seems poised for a major positive impact on
on the B-mode (gray-scale) image, so that blood-flow velocities and perfusion
can be assessed visually on an image plane. The color spots (signals) or pixels
also can be assigned numerical values. The combination of B-mode and color-
flow imaging provides real-time anatomical details and physiologic blood-flow
information.Thus, the technology has potential for delivering a unique
perspective on the expectations for reproductive structures and events.The extent
of vascular perfusion of a structure (e.g.,preovulatory follicle,endometrium,
embryo proper) could indicate not only the current status of the structure,but also
could provide indications for the future success of the structure. For example,
color-flow study of the vasculature could help the clinician make judgments for
the following: 1) ovulatory potential of a large (>30 mm) follicle during seasonal
transition in mares (1),2) expected time of ovulation (so),3) functional status of
the corpus luteum （80),4） likelihood of embryonic loss,5） suitability of an oocyte
（indicated by follicle vasculature) for successful in vivo or in vitro fertilization,
6) suitability of the endometrium for receiving a natural or transferred embryo,
and 7) detection of abnormal or disturbed blood flow.Examples of research
hypotheses that have or could be tested by color-Doppler ultrasound are: 1) large
(> 30 mm) follicles that do not ovulate during seasonal transition in mares have
defective blood flow (b), 2) the follicle of a wave that is destined to become the
future dominant follicle has better vascular development at an earlier stage than
for a future subordinate follicle (2), 3) the internal luteal vasculature is a direct
target for a luteolytic dose of PGF2α (l7), and 4) changes in the vascular
 perfusion of the endometrium accompany changes in the intrauterine location of
major role for color-flow imaging in large animal theriogenology willrequire
Chapter3
40
Principles of Color-flow Instrumentation
Transmitter
controlled by the operator to vary the
PRF
AP
scanner sensitivity. This control is called
be required to give a more energetic signal
to weak reflectors. The transducer emits
ultrasound waves in pulses to allow time for
Transducer
reception of a returning echo before another
pulse is sent； the resulting interval between
pulses is called the pulse-repetition
frequency (PRF).In most instruments,the
PRF is controlled by increasing or
decreasing the range of velocities to be
sampled and is linked to the velocity scale.
Receiver
The PRF is adjusted to generate optimal
color signals.A low PRF may result in loss
of needed information between transmitted
pulsesbut may be required when the vessels
arefarfrom the transducer orthe blood flow
is slow.In the transrectal approach in large
Color gain
animals, the vessels of interest may be near
the transducer and a high PRF can be used.
Color Flow
41
B-mode beams
In
tissue
B-mode and
color-flowbeams
B-mode information
Color-flow information
Single pulse generates one
Set of multiple pulses (e.g.,10)
echo from each stationary
generates sequential echos
On
tissue reflector,corresponding
from moving reflectors （red cells),
image
to each image site(pixel)
corresponding to each image site
along the scanning line
along the scanning line
Pixel sites
Ultrasound beams for B-mode and color-flow imaging. Color-flow imaging
or color-velocity imaging is a technology that estimates Doppler-shif frequencies
to determine reflector (red cell) velocities (iss),whereas B-mode (gray-scale)
imaging determines echo amplitude. Velocities are encoded and displayed as
colored regions superimposed on the B-mode image. The color (e.g.red versus
orange; dark blue versus light blue) at each pixel indicates the relative velocity
for that site. Color is also used to indicate direction of flow (pg 52). Discrete
B-mode ultrasound beams and color-flow beams are emitted into the tissue. Each
represent an image scan line as shown. The transducer elements are switched so
Chapter3
corresponding site or pixel on the ultrasound screen.
phase shift, and two such determinations (pulse packet of three) are needed for a
Doppler shift estimate (io8). However,more are used per packet to improve
accuracy but at the expense of lower frame rates. Frame rates may be lower than
for B-mode imaging because of the multiple pulses needed for each scanning line.
Doppler-processed
signals
Echo
A stationary
sequence
Moving
reflector
reflectors
Stationary
echo
canceler
Color Flow
43
Filter processing.The filter, also called the wall filter
with reference to the vessel wall, has settings so that
Filter
frequencies less than the filter setting can be removed and
1
higher frequencies allowed to pass. Extraneous movement or
2
clutter and low-velocity blood flow (e.g,venous) can be
3
removed to allow better assessment of arterial flow.
4
5
Phase-shift autocorrelation. Several
Autocorrelator
techniques have been used to estimate mean
velocity for each site or depth along the scan
Consecutive
line.In some instruments,blood-flow velocities
phase shifts
perpacket
are displayed in color through an encoding of
the Doppler-shift frequencies.Another method
for more rapidly associating velocity with color
Average
phase shift
is termed phase-shift autocorrelation.After
receiving Doppler echo signals from the
moving reflectors, the signals are submitted to
Velocity
Color
estimates
the autocorrelator and phase shifts between
data for
consecutive pairs of echoes in each packet are
each pixel
1.Mean
2.Variance
used to estimate the average Doppler frequency
and velocity for the packet (154.1ss). The
resulting data are used to indicate direction and
Chapter3
44
blood flowfor each set or packet of pulses/echoes byaprocess calledphase-shift
autocorrelationThedata are used to indicate the direction andvelocityofblood
flow by gradation in the color pixels along each scan line.
Theechoesfrom the pulseof eachbeamimpart thefollowing nformation on
the corresponding pixels (picture elements)(is9):1) depth -indicated by the time
required for a pulse/echo sequence to travel to and from the site of thereflector
and used for both gray-scale and color-flow information;2) strength or amplitude
-indicated by brightness of the pixel and also used for both modes;3) presence
ofa Doppler shift -echo information is presented in color if there is a shift and in
gray scale if there is not a shift;4)magnitude ofDoppler shift -proportional to
blood flow velocity and Doppler angle and indicated by different colors and
shades: and 5) direction of blood flow - toward transducer indicated by one color
and away indicated by another color,as determined by a high echo frequency
(towards transducer) or low frequency (away from transducer)
The color-flow technology is highly efficient,providing an immediate
impression of the extent of vascular perfusion of a structure.Moving blood,even
used in spectral analyses,
not corrected for Doppler angle as in spectral analyses.
Color Flow
45
Autocorrelator
Transmitter
Consecutive
phase shifts
per packet
AP
PRF
Average
phase shift
Velocity
Color
estimates
data for
1.Mean
each pixel
Transducer
2.Variance
Scan lines
B-mode
Color mode
Artery
Echo
sources
Removed
Red
clutter
cells
Red
Clutter
cells
Stationary
reflectors
Filter
Removed
Stationary
Receiver
signals from
echo
stationary
Amplified
canceler
reflectors
data from:
Red
cells
Red
cells
Clutter
Clutter
Stationary
Color gain
reflectors
Chapter3
46
PowerFlow
Power-flow imaging. These sonograms compare conventional color-flow
(A.C) and power-flow displays (B,D).The sonograms are from double equine
corpora lutea (A,B) and the aorta of a 110-day equine fetus (C,D).The power-
power-flowmode is independent of the angle of insonation and direction of flow
mode shows both red and blue signals (pg 52).
ColorFlow
47
incompatible velocity ranges and Doppler angles.The extent of tissue perfusion
can be assessed qualitatively,but to a limited degree.PowerDoppler is ange
independent and is not influenced by aliasing (pg 55) because velocity is not
considered directly.The technique ignores velocity and instead estimates for each
pixel the strength or power of the Doppler signal.Frame rate may be decreased
with powerDopplerin someinstrumentsthereforeusing a small delineated area
rather than the entire image is important,even more so than with the color-flow
mode.With power-Doppler,noise that would overwhelm conventional color-flow
images can be given a uniform background color (e.g., light blue) in some
instruments, distinctive from the color used to represent flow.
The power-flow color bar. The color bar for power flow
changes from dark red to orange and finally yellow.These color
changes are crude indicators of changes in intensity.A change
from the lower portion of the bar (dark red) to the upper
extremity (yellow)represents increasing flow intensities or
velocities. A mixture of colors on an image represents a mixture
ofvelocities. Only the upper or red portion of a color-flow bar
(pg 52) appears on the power-flow bar because power-flow
Doppler recognizes only intensity regardless of direction of flow.
frame rate may be much slower.
Chapter3
48
Adjusting the Scanner
5.Velocity range （pgs 54,79)
1.Color-flow area (pg50)
6.Doppler angle (pg 79)
2.Color-line density (pg 51)
7.Color priority (pg49)
3.Gain （pgs40,49.53)
8.Thump （pg49)
4.Wall filter (pgs49,78)
Controls for optimal quality of color-flow images.The echoes that produce
canbeafcted byinadequatinstrument settings（5859）.Thebalancingofthe
pleasing images with optimal information as desired by the operator.However,
these factors are not under direct control of the operator-they do not have their
own control knobs. Instead,they result from adjustments of the above controls
(refer to indicated pages for examples).Because of the many trade-offs in
adjusting the controls and differences among models,the operator’s manual and
company representative may need to be consulted.
Most manufacturers provide preset packages of predetermined control
settings for specific applications,and availability of packages should be
and allow the operator to use a menu system for selecting packages for targeted
comparisons among animals.Preset packages provided by the company may
inappropriate for transrectal study of thevesselsof thereproductive tract of large
the preset menu of the scanner.
ColorFlow
49
is increased.However,if the gain control is set at ahigh level the colrow
Resolution. In B-mode imaging,resolution describes the minimum spacing
between two reflectors resulting in a distinction between the reflectors on the
image (Bk1-46,65）.Similarly,in color-flow imaging,resolution at a given focal
depth describes the minimum spacing betweenmoving reflectors compatible with
the calculation ofvelocity by the phase shift between reflectors (pg 43).Resolution
can be improved by changing color-line density,gain,or RF.
Wall filter.A high setting for wall filter allows high frequencies to pass but
eliminates the low frequencies that are generated from slow velocity flow (pg 43)
and from the high amplitude of clutter (pg 3）.This is not a problem with the rapid
velocityflowofmajor arteriesbutmaybe aproblemfor the small arterieswithin
gain, should be standardized for comparisons among animals.
other controls are adjusted (155).
Chapter3
50
Delineating area for color-
image field,
the color-flowi
delineated by green dots. The
frame rates for the three sonograms
are shown. Delineating an area or
Framerate:9 Hz
assigning a box to the B-mode
image decreases the amount of
processing of the Doppler signals.
thereby increasing the frame rate
and improving the clarity （154,155.
159).If the entire B-mode scan area
is used for color-flow sampling,
color-scan lines,in addition to the
B-mode scan lines, are created for
the entire field,resulting in a
16Hz
greatly decreased frame rate.
Decreasing the width of color-flow
sampling area increases the frame
rate by decreasing the number of
color-scan lines required for the
color-flow information.Adjust-
ment of the depth of field (A,C) is
done to limit the depth of the area
of interest. Greater depth requires a
9Hz
longer trip for the pulses and
echoes,thereby lowering the pulse-
ColorFlow
51
color-flow imaging (e.g.30 frames/sec).
B
4Hz
Framerate:9 Hz
Changing color-line density. These sonograms of an equine corpus luteum
show a low color-line density setting (A) and a high density setting (B); the
resulting frame rates are shown.The color-line density refers to the number of
Chapter3
52
relative to transducer orientation,without regard to known direction when
anatomical references are used.Only one color can be shown for each pixel and
therefore green is mixed with either red or blue, depending on direction,o
represent not only direction but also velocity.Pure green is not used. Adding
green to red or blue results in various colors extending toward yellow (extreme
for the red indicator of flow direction) to blue-green (cyan; extreme for the blue
direction).The color bar shows the relationship between direction of blood flow
and the colors on the image. The upper portion of the bar represents red and the
lower portion blue. The upper portion shifts from red to orange and yellow,
whereas the lower portion shifts from dark blue to cyan.A shift from the center of
the bar （demarcation between red and blue) to the extremities (upper or lower)
represents increasing flow velocity. When an adequate number of contiguous
pixels are encoded with the same color,the area becomes visible asa colored spot
on the image.An assortment of colors on the image of an artery represents
changing velocities or turbulence
A detailed discussion of the creation of color encoding for color-flowimaging
primary colors are used to color the pixels.
ColorFlow
53
Illustration ofcolor gain settings.Before the transducer was applied to tissue,
the gain control was maximized to saturation with color signals (A).The gain was
then reduced (B to D) until the color spots disappeared.The goal is to adjust the
color-flow mode controls to optimize sensitivity but avoiding over saturation.
High
Filter:low
Chapter3
54
10 cm/s
Velocity:6cm/s
20cm/s
40cm/s
Adjusting velocity range.Velocity settings for a Day-6 equine corpus luteum.
Color-flow signals were lost as the velocity settings were increased (A-D).
B
ColorFlow
55
Evaluation and Quantitation
Objective evaluation ofvascular perfusion.Color area extraction from a
color-flow image is shown for an equine follicle (8）.A color spot is enlarged
computer to give a quantitative measure of the extent of perfusion.Also,the
Chapter3
56
Score:
Subjective evaluation ofvascular perfusion.The sonograms illustrate the
scoring system for subjective quantitation of vascular perfusion of the
endometrium.We have used scoring extensively for ultrasound data,using the
extent of involvement from minimal to maximal (e.g., scores 1 to 4;Bk1-151, 65).
The scoring approach facilitates profiling and statistically analyzing changes
Validation of the scoring approach is given elsewhere (pgs 123,162).
Color Flow
57
Color-flow Artifacts
B
20cm/s
Velocity:10 cm/s
Chapter3
58
connecting arteries (blue).
B
conventional color Doppler imaging
ColorFlow
59
Flash artifacts. Flash artifacts or clutter can be extensive and obscure the
color-mode displays,as shown in these examples of equine embryonic vesicles
(A,Day33;B,Day18;C,structures masked;D,Day36）.The flash artifacts ar
from:A) mild interference from animal movement;B) intestinal movement;
discussed elsewhere(pg78).
Chapter3
60
conditioners or stabilizers are available at electric supply stores and should be
used to absorb surges.
Noise from RFI (radio frequency interference) or EMI (electromagnetic
interference) are common problems in the B-mode and color-mode technologies,
but may be continuous.It is not likely to damage the instrument,but generates
interference that extends from a minor annoyance to an inability to operate.The
static or noise can be caused by nearby radio transmitters and by electric motors,
especially when under the same transformer system. This type of electric
interference can be filtered by the same high-quality power conditioners used for
surge protectionWhenintrerenceisnotedlugging thescannerntoa diffrn
circuit may help,but owners of scanners that arenot battery powered should also
own a stabilizer and consider it an extension of the ultrasound equipment.
Three-dimensional imaging.This imaging modality has become practical and
apparently there are no publications on its use in horses and cattle.In women, the
the reproductive organs.
instruments.
Chapter 4
blood flow (insonation angle).The Doppler-shift frequency and the insonation
angle,based on the angle cursor,are used by the instrument for computing blood
velocity.The focused results from placement of a sample gate in an artery are
displayed on the screen by a graphic spectrum that represents the changing
velocities over time and depicts the arterial pulses generated by each cardiac
cycle. Peak systolic, end diastolic, and time-averaged maximum velocities are
computed and displayed for a selected cardiac cycle. Doppler indices (resistance
index,RI; pulsatility index,PI) are ratios that are computed from various
velocities.The indices are relatable to the hemodynamics of the tissue supplied by
to the sample gate.
Chapter4
62
Principles ofSpectral Instrumentation
Transmitter
AP
个
mode imaging (pg 29). For spectral mode, as
for B-mode,individual pulses are transmitted
and individual echoes received by the
transducer,unlike the pulse packets used for
color-flow mode (pg 42). The pulses of
Transducer
B-mode imaging are 2 or 3 cycles long,
whereas the minimum pulse length for
spectral mode is 5 cycles and may be as long
as 30 cycles (1o8). In most scanners, PRF is
linked to the velocity scale and changes in
PRF are represented by changes in the range
of velocities to be sampled; there may be no
Receiver
PRF-labeled control. Low PRF is more
sensitive to low velocities but more subject to
aliasing (pg 81), whereas high PRF reduces
aliasing but is less sensitive to low velocities.
However, the PRF should not be so high that
the spectral trace is reduced in height.A low
Color gain
PRF may result in loss of information
between transmitted pulses.
Spectral Graphs
63
Sample gate and Doppler angle
For spectral mode,the blood flow
characteristics in a focused area of a
vessel are assessed by placement of a
Pulse
sample gate or cursor for Doppler
Echo
sample volume into the B-mode or
color-mode image of the lumen of a
targeted vessel. The spectral mode
can be used only in conjunction with
a sample gate.When in place,the gate
automatically adjusts to a plane
compatible with the direction of the
ultrasound beams at the gate. Thus,
Doppler
angle
the vertical green line of the sample
gate that connects the two parallel
Sample
lines in the diagram represents the
gate
Angle
Doppler line of sight.The parallel
cursor
Artery
lines at the ends of the vertical line
indicate the length of the Doppler sample volume.Although the volume sampled
graph form.
movements.
Chapter4
64
angle cursor and the vertical connecting line of the sample gate (beam direction or
line of sight）.The actual line of sight is adjusted by the operatorby orientation of
the transducer.Adjustment of the Doppler angle by tilting the transducer is
limited in transrectal scanning. Slanted stand-off pads are available and may be
useful for scanning through the skin.
Demodulator
Removal of
50
unwanted
signals
100
200
Red
Red
cells
400
cells
Other
800
movement
1600
Noise
Filters
Spectral Graphs
65
Spectral FFT
analyzer
Array of velocities
Doppler signals of
at each timeline
moving red cells
segment
Red
cells
Spectral processing.Following amplification and demodulation,spectral
processing of the Doppler signals is done to separate the frequencies in Doppler
（108,110,113,153,155）
Chapter4
66
returning echoes serve asDoppler signals that arereceivedby the transducer.
operator-selected gate size has an impact on the resulting spectral display because
of the natural variation in velocities at the blood volumerepresented by the gate.
The sample gate is placed within the lumen of the artery to define the small
focused volume from which the information is obtained.In addition,an angle
cursor is placed parallel to the direction of blood flow at the sampledvolume.The
angle profoundly affects the velocity calculations.The actual angle of insonation
is a consequence of the orientation of the transducer or ultrasound beams relative
to the angle of blood flow; the angle cursor represents the judgment of the
operator and therefore introduces subjectivity into the resulting computations.
Doppler-shift frequencies are produced by the Doppler effect of moving red cells
and also by extraneous or unwanted movements within a gate or sample volume.
The returning weak echo signals are amplified by the receiver, and unwanted
signals are filtered by the demodulator.
The range of Doppler-shift frequencies from the moving red cells of an
focused area represented by the sample gate.
Spectral Graphs
67
Transmitter
Spectral FFT
analyzer
PRF
AP
个
Red
cells
Transducer
Arrayof
velocities at each
Pulse
timeline segment
Echo
Doppler
Timeline
angle
Sample
gate Angle
Artery
cursor
Spectral display
Demodulator
Receiver
Removal of
50
unwanted
Echo
signals
100
sources
Amplification
200
Red
cells
Red
400
Red
cells
cells
800
Noise
1600
Noise
Other
Filters
Other
movement
Gain
movement
Chapter4
68
The Spectrum
Cardiac Cycle
Jelocit
Time
Spectral display.The changes in Doppler-shift frequencies and signal
amplitudes are displayed as a waveform representing a cardiac cycle,as shown.
This processing depicts the pulsatile phenomenon of arterial blood flow at the
small focused volume of blood flow at the sample gate. The spectrum appears on
a separate area of the ultrasound screen,usually to the right or below the
B-mode/color-mode image. The graphic spectral display is called either the
Doppler frequency spectrum or velocity spectrum based on Doppler-shift
transducer frequency(i58).
Spectral Graphs
69
beats/min) and 1 sec in cattle (60 heart beats/min) would encompass 4000 and
8000 columns of Doppler-shift information in the spectrum of a cycle in horses
and cattle,respectively.The series of columns that make-up the spectrum consist
of pixels that are not visually discernible on the spectral display. The pixels are
not discernible even if magnified because the information at a pixel and
contiguous pixels is purposely smoothed by the scanner The height of the column
corresponds to the range of Doppler frequencies or velocities at each column of
pixels.The maximum velocity at each column is represented by the upper surface
of the spectral trace. The third dimension of each column of the array of
pixels becomes visible to the eye.
Chapter4
70
Velocity display.
In this example,the
operator has placed
an angle cursor into
an artery on the
color-flow image to
represent the angle
of insonation at the
J0.21G35C7
PSV
intersection of the
ultrasound beams
and the arterial flow.
TAMV
The vertical row of
EDV
3Hz=Frame rate
large green dots
47deg=Angle of insonation
represents the path
0.76 and 0.21 =Velocityrange (cm/s)
G35=Spectral gain
of the beams at the
C7=Spectral contrast
PI:1.413
PSV:54.0cm/s
cursor gate. The gate
RI:0.739EDV:14.1cm/s
TAMV:28.3cm/s
is rotated by the
instrument automatically so that the gate direction is compatible with the
directionof the beams.
A selected cardiac cycle of the resulting spectral graph has been delineated by
the vertical broken green lines,and a tracing of the maximal velocity values over
time (selected spectrum) is shown; the trace is sometimes called the envelope.
Some instruments automatically trace the outline of the designated cardiac cycle,
using built-in algorithms, and in some instruments the cycle is traced manually.
machine are given.
Spectral Graphs
RI=PSV-EDV
PI=PSV-EDV
PSV
TAMV
artery.Therefore,indices can be considered especially valuable to the clinician or
researcherhedicesarecomputduing haluesPVDVandAMa
obtained from the spectrum,and arenumerically displayed by the instrument.
The resistance index (Rl) is frequently used because it is convenient to
mentally relate to the negative relationship between the extent of resistance in the
tissues and the extent of vascular perfusionthe higher the resistance or Rl,the
lower the perfusion. The formula used by the computer in determining RI is
shown above.The pulsatility index (Pl) is also widely used.The numerator for the
PI formula is the same as for RI but TAMV, rather than PSV is used as the
in blood perfusion.
Chapter4
Window
Notch
The spectral window and notch.The area beneath the red trace of the
minimal velocity values of the spectral display is called the spectral window.
When the flow of red cells in the sample gate is at a uniform velocity,the
spectrum shows a thin line outlining the window. However, the spectral line
thickens or broadens in proportion to the extent of the flow disturbance,whether
normal or abnormal,at the gate (i58).Spectral broadening and window reduction
are equivalent terms. Profound natural disturbance occurs in normal arteries,
especially in the tortuous and branching arterial trees of the reproductive tract.A
wide sample gateinamajor artery also causes broadening of the spectrum,owing
to the inclusion of natural high and lowvelocity flow at the cross-sectional center
and periphery, respectively (laminar flow).When the flow is disturbed, the
simultaneous frequency shifts. Flow disturbance or flow in multiple directions
waveforms associated with pathology such as stenoses and plaques (158).
transient reversed flow is indicated.
Spectral Graphs
73
Pulsations on color-flow image and spectrum.The sample gate was placed in
the terminal aorta of a mare.The color-flow images correspond approximately to
images in real time （pg20).
Chapter4
74
velocity,the velocity-range settings varied.
Spectral Graphs
75
broadspectrum.
branching.Placement of an angle cursor was not attempted The cardiac cycles
because the instrument was not given angle information. However, the relative
changes in velocity during a cardiac cycle are meaningful.
D) The gate was placed on the brightest color-coded signal in the mesovarium
about l cm from the surface of an ovary. A corpus luteum or a dominant follicle
was not detected. The loss of some of the diastolic information and in some cases
all of the diastolic portion is characteristic of an ovary with limited activity or
high impedance (resistance）.The blood-flow dynamics underlying the lossof the
Chapter4
76
vascular bed that has low resistance; perfusion of the downstream tissues is
systolic profile and a reversed (below baseline) or absent diastolic profile
indicates high peripheral resistance.An example is the ovarian artery that supplies
an ovary without a corpus luteum or large follicle.
Waveforms and the resulting velocities obtained in the absence of an angle
cursor (C,D,E,F) or a poorly placed cursor cannot be considered accurate (pg 79).
However,this approach is useful for comparisons of relative velocities,if the
arteries are uniformly transected.For example,the angle of insonationmay not be
determinable because an adequate longitudinal section of a single large artery was
not attainable or the sample gate was placed on a colored spot without the
which in turm is attributable to greater velocity.
Spectral Graphs
77
Doppler technology.
The clinical andresearchusfulnessofDopplerdetminedvelocity is lited
by several sources of error, including those resulting from a beam width that is
narrower than the vessel and from inaccuracy in setting the cursor for angle of
insonation (li3）.The volume of blood flow is computed (pg 2oo) from velocity
(velocity x vessel cross-section) and requires precise measurement of the cross
section of the vessel at the point where velocity is determined. The accuracy of
the measurement of the cross-sectional area is a critical concem,especially for
smaller vessels.
Spectral summary.The maximum point in the traced outline of the spectrum
below the timeline.
Chapter4
AdjustingtheScanner
resetting of all desired controls for a specific purpose.
Gain adjustment.The gain controls have been set too low (A),normal (B)
and too high（C）.If the gain is too low,sensitivityisinadequate,and the spectrum
may be weak.If set too high,background noise interferes with the spectral trace.
Spectral Graphs
79
Angle cursor and
66deg
velocity.The cursor
was set at a reasonable
PI:
1.895
angle (A) and at
RI:
0.772
aberrant angles (B.C).
PSV:109.1cm/s
Note that the direction
EDV:24.9cm/s
of the angle cursor
was changed without a
TAMV:44.4cm/s
change in the actual
angle of insonation
between the sonic
二
20deg
beam at the gate and
the direction of blood
PI:
1.895
flow. Altering the
RI:
0.772
cursor angle had a
PSV:
47.2cm/s
drastic effect on
computed velocities.
EDV:
10.8cm/s
Relative velocities
TAMV:19.2cm/s
(PSV/EDV=4.4for
each setting of the
angle cursor),Doppler
80deg
indices (RI.PI).and
waveform of the
PI:
1.895
spectrum remained
RI:
0.772
consistent during
PSV:
255.4cm/s
changes in the angle.
The angle cursor can
58.3cm/s
EDV:
be placed after the
TAMV:104.1cm/s
image and spectrum
are frozen.
Chapter4
80
factor,if sampling sizeis adequate and other factors are standardized.For
example,the plane of transection of the artery should be similar between groups
by manipulating the transducer. In conclusion, the velocity readings
will not be absolute in the absence of an angle cursor, but the relative
velocities between groups may be meaningful,if variability in other factors can
beminimized.
一
Spectral Graphs
81
Spectral Artifacts
Aliasing artifact in a spectral
graph.In Spectrum A, the artifact
resulted from a pulse-repetition
frequency (PRF) that was too low
for depicting the actual velocity
changes in a cardiac cycle. The
aliasing is recognized by the
displacement of the top of the
systolic profile to below the base
line. In Spectrum B,the PRF has
been increased without lowering
the baseline,resultingin correction
of aliasing but with reduction in the
height of the spectrum.In
Spectrum C,the display is further
improved (greater magnification)
by also lowering the baseline.
Thus, lowering the baseline or
timeline allows a lower PRF
without aliasing by assigning the
中
entire range of velocities to one
direction of blood flow.
Aliasing is a common artifact of
the Doppler spectrum that results
from discrepancies between the
periodic sampling of the Doppler
signal by the instrument during
processing and the actual
frequency of the sampled signal
Chapter4
82
slow-moving flowbut also increases the likelihood ofaliasing.
个1.38m
1.38m
direction determination(28)
Spectral Graphs
83
10.20
Effect of clutter on spectrum. This example depicts clutter from high
amplitude,low Doppler-shift frequency echoes in a spectrum corresponding to
clutter in the color-flow image. The color-flow signals for clutter are confined to
the delineated area indicated by the green dots. The gate placement indicates the
source of the corrupted spectral display.The location of the sample gate is
indicated by the broken white circle on the color-flow image.The clutter was in
response to transducer movement. Other sources of clutter include visceral
movement, animal movement,and thumping of the vessel wallThe wal fiter
setting is therefore crucial (pg 49).
Part Two
OVARIES
Chapter5
FOLLICLE BLOOD FLOW
aspects of foliculogenesis in large farm species and has potential for providing
clinical information on the status and future success of a follicle and its oocyte.
However,realization of potential will depend on future experience and research.
During a specific wave, one of the follicles is empowered to become the
ovulatory follicle. This phenomenon is known as follicle selection.Follicle
selection has aroused the interest of biologists since at least the 1960s and can be
considered one of the most enduring mysteries in reproductive biology of the
monovular pecies.Original studiesnthisresearchareawere donenheiferu
in recent years the mare has become an increasingly productive model (9). The
mares is also discussed.
Chapter5
88
Follicle Selection
Diameter ofindividual follicles
45
iov
C
45
12
14
161820222
24
Days before ovulation
8
OV
Follicle type
Dominant
Predeviation
Subordinates
Other
111315171921232527
Minor wave
Days before ovulation
Follicle Blood Flow
89
357
Diameter
Dominant
Deviation hypothesis
Dominant
follicle
follicle
30-
25-
Subordinate
follicle
20
Subordinate
follice
15
10
Deviation
5-
Emergence
5678910
5-4-3-2-1
5
Days after future dominant follicle was 6mm
Days from beginning of deviation
Chapter5
90
PSV
24
35-
Diameter
20
30-
Follicle1
Follicle2
16
25
Follicle3
CIms
12
20
15
10
TAMV
15
Blood-flowarea
1.2
12
0.8-
9
cm/sec
cm2
6
0.4-
0
6.59.512.515.518.521.524.527.530.56.59.512.515.518.521.524.527.530.5
Diameter(mm) group based on Follicle1
Blood-flow changes and follicle selection.Horses.These data are from a
study in mares (n = 7) to determine whether reduced blood flow in the future
largest subordinate follicle precedes the beginning of diameter deviation (2).The
daily changes in blood-flow velocities and blood-flow area within the wall of
during diameter deviation.The sample gate (1 mm) was placed over the brightest
colored spotn thewall of thefollicleThusthevelocities areconsideredrelative
Follicle Blood Flow
91
well as by increased gonadotropin responsiveness (7o), to continue growing
despite the lower concentrations ofFSHwhereas the future subordinate follicles
are positioned to regress. It is known that a dominant follicle has a greater thecal
vascularity and blood supply than subordinate follicles (135.157:however, these
results demonstrated that the decreased vascularity in the future subordinate
follicle began well before the growth rate of the follicle began to diminish.
The earlier decrease for the two velocity end points than for the decrease in
Chapter5
92
grew to larger diameters than those without detectable blood flow.
Summary of follicle selection.The most dynamic, continually changing.
macroscopic system in the female body involves waves of well-vascularized
antral follicles that grow and regress during the estrous cycle.During a wave,one
of the follicles is empowered to become the dominant follicle in a process known
as follicle selection or deviation. The follicles of a wave initially grow in a
common-growth phase until the beginning of deviation. The largest follicle
(future dominant) usually has a size advantage and is the first to reach a critical
stage associated with a mechanism that inhibits the future subordinate follicles
before they reach a similar stage.The deviation process is similar in both species
and begins when the future dominant follicle is about 22.5 mm in horses and
anechoic band beneath the granulosa begin to increase differentially in the future
Follicle Blood Flow
93
Power-Doppler images of blood flow. The scale (left margin) is in 10-mm
Chapter5
94
Color-flow signals in folicle
Blood flow
wall beginning at 20 mm. Mares
were grouped into those that
-09
circumference
ovulated when the follicle was35
to 39 mm（n =8) or 40 to 44 mm
50
(n = 14;unpublished).Beginning
40
Follicle onDay-1
when the follicle was 20 mm and
of
40to44mm
every 5 mm thereafter,the
30
35to39mm
percentage of follicle wall with
color-flow signals was estimated
25
30
35
40
20
during real-time scanning. There
was a significant difference among diameters within each group,indicating that
the percentage of wall with color-flow signals increased progressively after
folliclesattaineda diameter of25mm.
B
similar anechoic band has been described in women (1oo,127).
Follicle Blood Flow
95
well as arterioles.
Chapter5
96
Preovulatory changes
during 36 hours before
457
Diameter
ovulation. These data are
43
Control
from a study (56) involving
41
control mares and hCG-
39
hCG
treated mares. Treatment with
37-
hCG was done when the
follicle was≥35 mm.For
3.07
Granulosa echogenicity
each ultrasound end point,
3
excluding diameter, the hour
92.5-
一
effect was significant for both
-36 to-12 hours and-4 to -1
hours with no difference
1.5
between groups. The absence
100
ofa mean diameter increase
Anechoicband
during the 36 hours before
90
ovulation in the controls is
consistent with other reports
80
(107).An increase in thickness
%
and echogenicity of the
granulosa began 36 hours
Blood flow
L06
before ovulation. These results
70
are compatible with the results
of histologic studies in mares;
50
expansion of the granulosa
doubled between 0 and 39
30
hours after hCG treatment
-36
-24
from an accumulation of
-12
-3
-4
-2
Hours before ovulation
mucosubstances between the
cells (l03). The increased
Follicle Blood Flow
97
mo
Chapter5
98
Serrated granulosa. These sonograms were taken 20 hours （A) and 1 to 4
serrated granulosa (sg,brackets） in images B.C and D.In a recent study (s7
before ovulation in any mare
Follicle Blood Flow
99
granulosa becomes common and extensive as ovulation approaches
signals in the following study.
Chapter5
100
Clock-face
100-
positions
80
mares(n=21)
60
40
20
Serration
Blood-flow
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
Clock-faceposition
Percentage of mares with the indicated clock-face positions for serration
and blood-flow signals. The percentage of mares with serration and percentage
with blood flow signals in the wall of the follicle one hour before ovulation at
each of 12 clock-face positions are shown for 21 mares with normal follicle
evacuation (non-septated;pg 102) during ovulation(75).Data were taken from film
clips of real-time hourly examinations of complete scans of the entire width of the
two-dimensional image of the follicle.The beginning of evacuation was based on
flow signals were recorded for each clock-face position. Granulosa serration was
defined as distinct irregularities of both the inner and outer surfaces of the
granulosa (57). An image was selected that represented the maximal cross-
sectional area of the antrum. Using the selected image as a reference,
approximation of at least 70% of the maximal area and included the apex.
Follicle Blood Flow
101
Apical
area
10
Basal
area
6
Serrated granulosa
Vascularized theca
Mean clock-face locations of serrated and vascularized area of preovulatory
follicle.During the hour before ovulation,clock-face positions were assigned
Chapter5
102
B
apex
discharged. Septated evacuations required >3 hours, occurred in 19% of
ovulations (75),and have also been termed atypical evacuations (29).
1007
Blood flow
90
Septated evacuations
80
ofcircumference
70
Normal evacuations
60
50
40
30
-11
-9
-7
-5
-3
Hours before beginning of evacuation
Follicle Blood Flow
103
the oocyte was included in the prolonged discharge.
Septated evacuation
Normal evacuation
B
apex
base
septated evacuation.
Chapter5
104
Before and after thebeginning of septated evacuation.For this example of
the beginning of evacuation,and much of the periphery of the follicle has color-
flow signals. Image Bwas taken 1 hour after the beginning of evacuation (3 hours
after image A)and blood flow signals were detected throughout the periphery
and on the septa. The septa apparently represented creases from wrinkling of the
follicle as fluid was slowly discharged
Summary of future ovulatory follicle.Horses.A vascularized medullary area
of the ovary surrounds the internal cortex. It is sometimes difficult therefore to
assign Doppler-encoded colored areas specifically to the vascular network of the
follicewallThe anechoicband isgray toblackrregularin thicknessocated in
the expected area of the thecal layers,and separated from the antrum by the
stratum granulosum.The color-Doppler signals of blood flow are dispersed
greatervascularization at theapex of thewall of thepreovulatoryfollicle.
Follicle Blood Flow
105
0.20 Blood-flow area
Blood flow relative to
LH surge. These data were
adapted from the initial
0.15
report (4) on blood flow in
cm2
the preovulatory follicle in
cows (ab = means with
significant differences;
0.10-
a
n=5).Color-flow images
were obtained at maximum
15TAMV
diameter in a plane from
apex to base. The area (cm)
of the colored spots in the
cm/sec
10-
follicle wall was determined
(pg 55）.A 1-mm wide sample
gate was placed at the
most intensive color signal
5
at the base of the follicle
determining time-
for
6
12
-24
-18
-12
-6
0
averaged maximum velocity
Hours from onset of LH surge
Chapter5
106
mm:
18
Blood-flow signals in follicle wall. Morphologic studies in cattle have
demonstrated an extensive vascular network in the thecal layers surrounding the
avascular basement membranes and granulosa in cattle (4). These images were
obtained in color-flow or power-flow mode as indicated by the color bars.
Diameter averaged for two dimensions is shown for the follicle of each image.
The periphery of the ovary (arrows) and location of the mesovarium (mo) are
shown in the upper-right panel. The smallest follicle (4 mm, arrow) in this series
before ovulation.
surge.
Follicle Blood Flow
107
viability of transferred embryos (pg 178).
Seasonally Transitional Follicles. Horses.
Mares have anovulatory and ovulatory seasons (reviewed in 64.74). The
resurging phase or transition between the anovulatory and ovulatory seasons
occurs in the spring.Thelater portion orallof theresurging phasemayconsist of
a period of waves in which the largest folicle reaches a diameter much larger
Chapter5
108
Diameter of largest follicle
MareA
Ov
50-
Anov
40
30-
20
10
50-
MareB
Ov
Anov
40-
Anov
Anov
Anov
30
20
-52-48-44-40-36-32-28-24-20-16-12-8-40
Daysbefore first ovulation of year
Ov=ovulation.
Follicle Blood Flow
109
No.FSH surges/mare
501Diameter
FSH
Ovulatory
-0.6±02
45
16
(n=11)
-1.8±02
14
40
Anovulatory
120
(n=6)
35-
30-
10
8
25
6
1.6
Blood-flow area
LH
3.0
1.2-
-2.5
2.0
1.50
/ml
0.4
1.0
0
0.5
-4-3-2-1012345678-12-10-8-6-4-202468
Days from follicle ≥30mm
Results of a vascular study. Dominant-sized anovulatory follicles were
distinguished from dominant ovulatory follicles by daily color-Doppler
determinations of blood-flow area,and comparisons were made between mares
with future dominant-sized (≥30 mm) anovulatory versus ovulatory folicles ().
The stars indicate days of a difference between groups.In the group with a future
dominant-sized anovulatory follicleH concentrationswerereducedbeginning
when the follicle was about 15 mm or about an average of 6 days before the
Chapter5
110
2.0
Blood-flow
507
Diameter
Ov
area
1.5
40-
cm2
1.0
30
Anov
0.5-
20
81216
81216
-4
0
4
4
0
Days from follicle≥30 mm
anovulatory (Anov) follicles expanded at the same rate as ovulatory (Ov) follicles
(. This occurred despite the reduction in LH beginning when the follicle was
about 15mm,the considerablereduction inblood flow signals in thewall of the
anovulatory 25 to 30 mm follicles,and the lower concentrations of follicular-
fluid factors at 30 mm.Expansion after 30 mm continued at a rate similar to
growth of ovulatory follicles.Therefore,expansionrate of dominant follicleswas
not an indicator of the status or health of the follicle.
Seasonal deficiency in LH
Hypothesis for anovulation.
?
1) A deficiency of circulating
LH occurs when the future
↓IGF-1
JInhibin-A
LVEGF
dominant-sized anovulatory
follicle is about 15 mm.2) The
LH deficiency results in low
LFolliculogenic
LAngiogenesis
factors
concentrations of follicular-fluid
suppressors
factors in the 30-mm follicle.3)
?
The low concentrations of free
Dysfunctional
↑FSH
IGF-1 contribute to the low
theca and
Underdeveloped
granulosa
vasculature
concentrations of other factors.4
to 6) The low concentrations of
Anovulatory
estradiol and especially inhibin
follicle
account for an increase in
concentrations of circulating
an underdeveloped vasculature.
Follicle Blood Flow
with pregnancy rate (11.23.33）.There was no significant relationship between
pregnancy rate and uterine artery or intraovarian Doppler pulsatility index (23).A
more recent in vitro fertilization study in women found that well-vascularized
follicles early in a follicular wave and on the day of hCG treatment late in the
wave resulted in higher pregnancy rate after embryo transfer (47% vs 12%;140).
Results of another study indicated that examining vascular impedance distal to an
quality of an oocyte(43).
followingpages.
Chapter5
112
Estradiol
Diameter
5
37
Pregnant
GH***
j/6d
2
Nonpregnant
35
Granulosalayer
2.7
(score)
2.4
2.4
H***
H**
Thickness
2.1
2.1
1.8
1.8
Anechoicband
100
of circumference
(score
2.4
99
H***
ominence
2.1
97
1.8
96
1.5
O
30
0
30
Hours afterhCG treatment
Vascularity of the preovulatory follicle and establishment of pregnancy.
Follicle Blood Flow
113
Color-Doppler signals
H***
%of circumference
80
GH**
Pregnant
60
2.6
Nonpregnant
50
P
Vascular indices
1.7
0.7
1.5
1.3
H**
H
GH***
GH*
0.6
1.1-
Blood velocities
16
8
14
TAMV(cm/s)
PSV(cm/s)
6
10
4
8
G*
G*
2
30
30
0
Hours after hCG treatment
Chapter5
114
greater in association with higher pregnancy rate.
in incidence of the waveform with continuous blood flow throughout the cardiac
cycle in the pregnant group is compatible with the other indicators of increased
vascular pefusionTheresultsalthoughinconclusiveprovide encouragement r
development of a waveform-classification approach as a research end point,
especially when the spectrum seems incompatible with the use of a vascular index
in a largeproportion of individuals
Color-flow Signals in Oviduct.Horses.
fluid
fold
unpublished).
Chapter 6
the CL of the estrous cycle and its vessels develop and regress in a short period of
time.
Several experimental approaches have not clarified whether the decreased
luteal blood flow at the end of diestrus is a cause or consequence of luteolysis
(120). However, color-Doppler studies in cows indicated that luteal blood flow
spontaneous (l17, 139) luteolysis. In horses, there was no indication that either an
exogenousPGF(64).
116Chapter 6
Arterial Morphology of the Ovaries
except in a smallarea where the artery passes obliquely across the vein; the vein
is located several centimeters caudal to the artery.
The uterine branch of the ovarian artery is an anastomosis between the
ovarian and uterine arteries and in cattle varies from prominent to miniscule
between sides and individuals and is more prominent on the CL side (73). Owing
to the variation in size of the uteroovarian anastomosis, there are considerable
diferences among individual cattle and between sides within an individual in the
the non-CLportion of the ovary.
MARE
HEIFER
Lateral
oboa
-uboa
oboa
-uboa
ba
Medial
Chapter 6
118
Day:1
12.4ng/ml
P4:1.7ng/ml
12.7ng/ml
10.0ng/ml
7.1ng/ml
Luteal Blood Flow
119
Day:1
9.7ng/ml
P4:1.3ng/ml
11.1ng/ml
14.9ng/ml
1.1ng/ml
Chapter 6
120
Power-flow mode
Color-flow mode
B-mode
Day:
Luteal Blood Flow
Color-flow mode
121
B-mode
Power-flow mode
Day:0
Chapter 6
122
mo
identical,plane (mo = mesovarium). Some color spots are clearly within the CL
and are surrounded by luteal tissue.Most signals,owever,are at the periphery of
the CL.Researchers that count the number of colored pixels associated with the
CL should use a definition of the outer limit of a colored spot at the periphery of
the CL that is accepted as representing luteal blood flow. An example requiring
such a decision is the large aggregate of multiple colors (B) in the area of the
attachment of the mesovarium (mo). The proportion of the colored spot
representing luteal versus stromal or mesovarial blood flow cannot be
determined Published papers have not defined how a decision on luteal versus
nonluteal blood flow was made. In addition, the selection of a still image for
counting colored pixels should be done withoutknowledge of source.
Luteal Color-Doppler Studies during the Estrous Cycle.Horses.
6
P
Pulsatility index ofovarian
artery. These data were
pu
approximatedfromareport by
Bollwein and associates (13） on
the pulsatility index (Pl) for
the ovarian artery in five
468101214-6-4
mares. The artery to the
Days from ovulation
dominant ovary containing the
2
preovulatory follicle or CL
concentrations and was attributable to elevated blood flow in the CL.
Luteal Blood Flow
123
For entire CL
Validation for estimating
Blood-flow area
percentage of CL area with
60-
blood flow. Visual estimation
of the percentage of the CL
area with blood-flow signals is
80
effective and rapid
an
Operator1
approach,as supported by
Operator2
20-
these results (78). The days
represented increasing Days 1
and 4),maximum (Day 10),
100For a single image
decreasing (Day 14),and
Blood flow
minimum Day 17)blood-flow
means. For the real-time
60-
validation of percentage of the
entire CL with blood flow
40-
(upper panel), the operators
%CL area with signals
independently evaluated the
Number of colored pixels
%20
film clips without knowledge
of source or reference to each
14
10
other’s findings.The selection
4
Days after ovulation
of a still image (lower panel)
described (pg 55; 87)
Chapter 6
124
35Blood-flow area
30-
Basal third
25
%ofCL
20-
Middle third
15
10
Apicalthird
sum:29
49
56
57
69
73
76
80
2
3
5
6
Daysafterovulation
Progression in appearance of blood-flow signals in developing CL.Data are
from a study of the progressive development of color signals in various portions
of the developing CL (75).The CL of five mares with data in a normal-evacuation
group (pg 1oo)that did not develop a central cavity or corpus hemorrhagicum were
used.The film clips were examined from the hour of ovulation (collapsed follicle)
Luteal Blood Flow
125
Normal evacuation
Septated evacuation
apex
apex
the periphery.
Chapter 6
126
Luteolytic
Preluteolytic
80
period
Actual data
period
Progesterone (ng/ml); CL area (cm2)
12
70
10
60
CL blood-flow area
50
8
40
6
30
4
Progesterone
2
CLarea
10
CLblood-flow area
100
Percentage data
Decrease
between periods:
Sixfold
80
Twofold
Twofold
%of maximum value
60
40
20
34
5678910111213141516171819
Equivalent days after ovulation
-10-9-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-101
Days from progesterone <2.0 ng/ml
Luteal Blood Flow127
(equivalent to mean Days 15 to 17) and was defined as the luteolytic period
Mean blood-flow area of the CL was maximum on Day 10.and Days 10 to 14
were defined as the preluteolytic period. The slopes of the decline in values
during the preluteolyticperiod and during the luteolytic period were calculated by
a linear regression analysis for each of the luteal end points for each individual,
using the percentages ofmaximum value.
Chapter6
128
    r  d  ss  s  o
During the luteolytic period, the decline in blood-flow area was twofold greater
than during the preluteolytic period, which is similar to the comparison between
periods for CL area.After Day 17, the percentage of maximal value was higher
for CL area andfor blood-flow area than for progesterone.
Summary of spontaneous changes in luteal blood flow. Horses. The
pulsatility index (Pl) of the ovarian artery supplying an ovary with a dominant
follicle or CL was low on the expected days of high progesterone production,
indicating elevated blood flow.Validation procedures supported the real-time use
of the estimated percentage of the entire CL with color-Doppler blood-flow
signals as an approximate quantification of the extent of luteal vascularity.This
to the precipitous decrease in progesterone.
Luteal Blood Flow
129
to the ovary.
24
Hour:0
Chapter 6
130
Progesterone concentration
75
50-
25
Control
0
-25
-50
PGF20
-75
75
0
CLblood-flow area
Hour
50
25
value
25
the
-50
75
20
Diameter of vascularpedicle
10-
0
-10
-20
CLarea
8-
7
6
5
3
O
602
50
812
Minutes after PGF treatment
24
72
48
Hours after PGF treatment
Luteal Blood Flow131
first hour n both groups,and therefore does not account for theincrease in
progesterone in the PGF group. This indication of increasing blood flow in both
groups during the first hour may have been a consequence of handing horses
every 5 minutes, even though docile and acclimated mares were used and
examinations were brief. In this regard,when the 5-minute intervals were
discontinued in the controls, the percentage of Doppler signals returmed to Hour 0
levelsbyHour12.
progesterone.
132
Chapter6
mo
Luteal Blood Flow
133
thetotal display.
Summary of vascularity study of induced luteolysis.Horses.A single
systemic injection of PGF was given during mid-diestrus. Blood flow was
asssed by estimating the percentage of CL with color-Doppler signals of blood
wasnotsupported.
Chapter 6
134
Luteal Blood Flow. Cattle.
plasma progesterone concentrationindicating activeangiogeness
50
Progesterone
CL
CLblood-flow area
blood-flow
CLvolume
40
volume
TAMV
CL
30
:(w/bu)
20
10
024
8
12
24
48
Hours after PGF treatment
horses(pg 130)
Luteal Blood Flow
135
Luteolysis and CL
20
Progesterone
blood flow after an
0
intrauterine injection of
PGF. Data are from a
20
Systemic
study that compared
from
IU,responsive
-40
systemic administration
IU,nonresponsive
Control
of15mgof PGF to
-60
b
intrauterine (IU) adminis-
°-80
tration of 1 or 2 mg （86).
The IU route was used to
avoid secondary effects of
Blood-flow area
70
systemic treatment. In this
regardnjctionof
60
a
about 10 times more
50
effective in inducing
CL
40
#
luteolysis when given into
the uterine horn ipsilateral
30
Systemic
to the CL than when given
20
IU,responsive
IU,nonresponsive
systemically. The IU
Control
10
effectiveness results from a
48
24
02
unilateral uteroovarian
Hours after treatment
luteolytic pathway in cattle
Chapter6
136
PSV
PI
60
IU,responsive
0.70
IU,nonresponsive
Systemic
a
Control
50
0.60
cm/sec
40
30
0.40
口
20
0.30
0.50
RI
TAMV
50
0.45
0.40
40
口
cm/sec
30
ab
0.30
20
0.25
02
24
02
24
Hours after treatment
Effect of systemic and intrauterine PGF treatment on spectral-Doppler
measurements.These data are also from the intrauterine (IU) experiment (pg 21),
confirmation and specific study of the underlying mechanism.
Luteal Blood Flow
137
Spontaneous luteolysis and
CL blood flow.Progesterone
began to decrease (luteolysis)
80
70
a day before the beginning of a
60
decrease in blood flow
-Progesterone
(ab = significant difference
50-
Blood flow(estimated)
within days: 86).There were
-Blood flow(pixel count)
no differences between the
30
percentage of CL area with
%20
blood-flow signals versus
10
number of colored pixels in a
0-
-3
-2
-1
4
still image (pg 55).
5
Days from progesterone<1 ng/ml
80
Association of CL blood-flow
PGFM
600
Blood-flow
Blood-
changes with pulses of PGFM
area
500
Plasma concentrations of PGFM.a
70
-flow
PGF metabolite,were used for
400
further study (86） of thePGF/blood
60
300
flow temporal relationships during
(%
spontaneous luteolysis.The role of
50
CL)
PGF pulses was studied by
100
examinations every hour during a
2
12-hour window each day during
2
-1
0折
1
3
Hours from PGFM peak
expected spontaneous luteolysis.At
Chapter6
138
Effect of velocity setting
5.510
CLarea
on CL color-flow signals.
5.0
A luteolytic dose of PGF was
infused into the jugular
4.5
vein during Hours O to 3
at mid-diestrus in seven
3.5
heifers (unpublished). Velocity
3.0
settings of 6 cm/sec and
2.5
10 cm/sec were used as factors
Blood-flow area
in the study. Blood flow was
80
assessed by two methods:
percentage of the CL with
color-flow signals during
scanning of the entire CL and
40
area (cm²) of color signals on
Velodty setting
a selected image of the CL.
20
6cm/sec
During the assessments for
-10cm/sec
both methods, the operator
Blood-flow area
was unaware whether PGF
was given. The CL area was
considerably reduced by PGF
3
treatment at 24 to 48 hours.
For both of the methods of
assessment of blood flow,the
main effects of velocity group
(higher for the setting of
2345
6 cm/sec) and hour were
48
Hours from treatment
significant,but the interaction
was not.For each method and
in cattle （pg 134).
Luteal Blood Flow139
when a two-dimensional cross-section was evaluated.
Summary of CL vascularity.CattleBlood-flow area and time-averaged
Chapter 6
140
Luteal Blood Flow.Women.
15
15
Progesterone (ng/ml)
CLvolume(cm3)
CL
10
volume
Progesterone
5
5
1.0
-0.35
Flow-area
ratio
Flow-area ratio
0.9
0.25
Index
0.8
PI
0.15
-14to-12-11to-9-8to-6-5to-3
-2to+1
Days before end of luteal phase
of CL vascularity.
Luteal Blood Flow
141
literature,concluded that the later decrease in blood flow compared to the
decrease in progesterone is compatible with histologic findings of larger luteal
microvessels during the late luteal phase, despite degeneration of capillaries and
an associated progesterone decrease.
Luteinized Hemorrhagic Anovulatory Follicles.Horses.
aspect of the HAFsyndrome
Chapter6
142
preovulatory follicle into an HAF. In conclusion, HAF formation occurred from a
viable follicle and began on the day of expected ovulation; there was no
indication that daily gray-scale examinations can be used to predict whether a
folliclewill ovulate or form an HAF.
Luteal Blood Flow143
evacuating area or fail to ovulate (HAF).
Day:0
for the Day 2 image.
Chapter6
144
Dav:-1
dimensional fibrin septae that develop inblood clots(114)
Luteal Blood Flow
145
horses (14） account for the gradual sequential changes seen in theulrasonic
images and depicted in this series.In addition,variation in anticoagulation
properties likely accounts for different ultrasonic morphology among HAFs.as
describedbelow.
Chapter6
146
（as) from the follicle wall that entered the hematoma when the HAF expanded,
based on real-time assessment.
Day:5
Luteal Blood Flow147
Day:5
Vascularization and decreasing diameter.The color-flow sonograms show
decreasing diameter of an HAF,with color-flow signals on both days.
Day:2
Chapter6
148
contributed to the sequential changes within a structure and to the variation
among structures.Follicle viability was supported by the similarity in B-mode
images between the ovulating controls and the HAF group in diameter and
discrete structural changes on the day before both ovulation and the beginning of
HAF formation.The viability of the cells of a follicle that formed an HAF also
was indicated by conversion of the follicle cells to luteal cells with an effective
level of progesterone output.Color-flowDoppler images showed vascularization
of the HAF wall,apparently similar to vascularization of a post-ovulatory CL.
Higher estradiol concentrations occurred a few days before HAF formation,but
other systemic hormones （progesterone,LH,FSH) were not altered before or
after conversion of a preovulatory follicle into an HAF.The percentage of follicle
circumference with blood flow (color-Doppler signals) on the day before
a viablepreovulatoryfollicle intoan HAF
Part Three
UTERUS
AND PREGNANCY
Chapter7
EARLY EMBRYO
about 9 to 18 mm in diameter (Bk2-127, 6) (67). The vesicle moves from one hom
to another an average of O.5 times per hour. Cessation of mobility (fixation)
occurs on Days 15 to 17. Orientation refers to the position of the embryonic disc
or embryo proper at the periphery of the vesicle (embryonic pole) relative to the
position of the mesometrial attachment and occurs after fixation. More
information is available for early pregnancy from Doppler ultrasound studies in
horses than in cattle.In horses, the early conceptus is relatively small, and the
mobility throughout the entire uterus occurs during the days that the embryo
blocks uterine-induced luteolysis.In contrast,the cattle conceptus blocks
the corresponding time(67).
Chapter7
152
Vascular Studies during the Estrous Cycle
3.47PI
3.0-
2.6-
2.2
1.8-
3579111315
3
Numberofdaysfrom ovulation
Uterine blood-flow study.Horses.These data were reproduced from a report
for five mares by Bollwein and associates (/3). The sample gate (2 mm wide) was
placed near the origin of the uterine artery （diameter,2 to 6 mm）;an angle cursor
apparently was not used. The high-pass filter (pg 78) was set at 100 Hz. The
pulsatility index (Pl) was high during the early luteal phase and again during
the late luteal phase and low during the mid-luteal phase and before ovulation.
The profile thus was bimodal. The PI increases when the distal vascular bed
another study (5) in which resistance index (Rl) followed a profile similar to the
increased uterine tone (pg 158).
Uterus and Embryo
153
0.30-
-0.95
0.25
(cm/sec)
RI
0.90
0.20
-0.85
Index
TAMV
TAMV
-0.80
0.15
0.75
91113-5-3
01
7
Number of days from ovulation
different from the previous mean.A low resistance index (RI) and high time-
velocity （TAMV) occurred before ovulation
averaged maximum
(Day-3) and a high RI and low TAMV ocurred during the equivalent of early
and mid-diestrus. Systemic estrogen concentrations of the periovulation surge
increased during the preovulatory increase in uterine blood flow and decreased
during the decrease in blood flow.These results confirmed earlier cattle studies
(51,148) that used surgical placement of pulsed-wave ultrasonic or electromagnetic
probes on the uterine artery.
endo
endo
mes
endo
Estrus
Diestrus
Chapter7
154
3.07
Endometrial
vascularity
2.5-
寸
02.0
1.5
1.0
8101214
6
Daysfromovulation
Endometrial vascularity study. Cattle. Changes in vascular perfusion of the
endometrium were studied on the indicated days of the interovulatory interval in
six nonpregnant heifers (Silva et al.,unpublished). The perfusion was estimated
by scoring the extent (number and size) of color-flow signals in the endometrium
during a 1 minute real-time scan.Scores from 1 to 4 (nil to maximal perfusion）
were used.The initial dorsal segment or the descending segment of each horn was
used. The technique was similar to that used and validated for mares (pg 160).
Mean length of the interval was 20 days,and the days were normalized to each
ovulation, as shown. Perfusion increased,beginning 4 days before ovulation and
was highest on Days -2 and -1. These perfusion data agree with the results of the
spectral study of the uterine artery (pg 153).
Uterus and Embryo
155
be at high concentrations.There was no effect on the ovarian artery supplying the
ovary with a dominant follicle or corpus luteum. Treatment with a progestin
(altrenogest) during both estrus and diestrus resulted in higher PI values for the
uterine arteries,indicating decreased uterine perfusion.The effects of uterine
infusion of semen during estrus on relative time-averaged maximum
velocity (TAMV) for the uterine arteries were studied (i8).The TAMV values
increased within 1 hour in both uterine arteries and in the ovarian artery
supplying the dominant follicle.In another study (20),a vasodilator (captopril)
decreased the PI values of the uterine and ovarian arteries,indicating increased
perfusion of the organs.
before ovulation.
Chapter7
156
Physical Embryo-uterine Interactions.Horses.
Linear-array
Embryonic vesicle
transducer
Upper surface
Transrectal placement of a linear-array ultrasound transducer.The diagram
shows spatial relationships among the uterine horns,transducer,and sonograms
(141).The colored spots are color-Doppler indicators of blood flow at the
mesometrial atachment (ma),along the surface of the horn, and in the embryo
Uterus and Embryo
157
-10'
<-20--
工
Embryo location changes
Body<→Hom
Numberof locationchanges
(n=7)
B
Uterine contractility
(n=13)
16
8
Number of days after ovulation
even after mobility has ceased.
Chapter7
158
Photographs depicting
changes in uterine tone.
The photographs were taken
with the mare's body on its
back (ventral views; 67). The
increasing uterine tone and
increasing embryo diameter
after Day 1l are believed to
result in the cessation of
mobility （fixation) at a
Day:3
flexure (arrows) in a caudal
uterine horn on about
Day 16. Apparently, the
flexure in a uterine horn
becomes an impediment to
continued embryo mobility
when a critical balance is
reached between a decrease
in horn diameter (same
as increasing turgidity)
and an increase in conceptus
diameter (58). The turgidity
6
of the horn continues to
increase at each end of the
embryonal bulge (Day 30),
thereby further confining the
conceptus. During embryo
loss from progesterone
reduction, the horn may
become flaccid and the
conceptus may dislodge
and travel in the uterine
lumen, even with the heart
30
still beating (72).
Uterus and Embryo
159
Mobile embryo blocks
uterine-induced luteolysis.
Mobility (Days 11-15)
Contraction
Embryo stimulates
Mobile embryo
uterine contractions
distributes substances
causing embryo
to increase uterine tone
mobility.
and decrease uterine
diameter.
By the time blockage of luteolysis
Fixation (Day 16)
is completed,uterine diameter
has decreased and embryo
diameterhas increased so
that fixation occurs at the
Flexure
flexure in a caudal horn.
Events associated with embryo mobility, first luteal response to pregnancy.
and embryo fixation. The encapsulated embryo stimulates myometrial
contractions and thereby travels throughout the uterus.especially on Days 11 to
Chapter7
160
Endometrial Vascular Perfusion.Horses.
Score:
Scoring color-flow images of the endometrium.Data in this section are from
vascular perfusion (pg 56).
Uterus and Embryo
161
Embryo detected (n=16)
Embryo detected
Horn ipsi to CL
2.2
Horn with embryo
Horn contra to CL
1O3
-Opposite horn
Embryo not detected (n=8)
2.0-
Embryo not detected
Horn ipsi to CL
—Horn ipsi to CL
1.8
Horn contra to CL
-Horn contra to CL
1.6
1.4
1.2
Endor
1.0-
4
7
10111213
9
14
15
Days from ovulation
significant effects on endometrial vascularity on Days 1 to 8but there were on
Days 9 to 16.An asterisk indicates a day of a difference between horns within the
pregnant group and between days within the horn with an embryo.Pound marks
(#) indicate the days of a difference between pregnant and nonpregnant groups.
Higher vascularity scores were found for the horn with the embryo at the time of
examination than in the opposite horn throughout Days 12 to 15.That is,changes
in vascular perfusion of the endometrium occurred locally in association with
location changes of the embryonic vesicle during the mobility phaseThe scores
embryo was not detected by Day 12 or thereafter.
Chapter7
162
Uterine horn
Endometrial end points
Without embryo
Probability
With embryo
(Mean±SEM)
Vascularity(score1to 4)
1.9±0.2
1.5±0.1
P<0.02
Subjective
1.7±0.2
2.1±0.2
P<0.02
Objective
P<0.04
4.7±0.9
3.6±0.6
Colored spots (No.)
243±46
316±67
P<0.10
Colored pixels (No.)
Subjective versus objective endometrial vascular end points.Data are from
Day 13 of pregnancy in seven mares (141). Subjective vascularity scores were
made in the barn by an operator who knew which horn contained the embryo.
Objective vascularity scores were obtained from real-time video clips by an
operator who had no knowledge of the identity of the mare,uterine horn,or
embryo location. Vascular perfusion of the endometrium also was assessed
objectively by ofline measurement of the number of colored spots and colored
pixels as indicators of blood flow area,as described (pg 55).Three still images
determination of number of spots and pixels and the average of the three images
judgments among days and mares.
Uterus and Embryo 163
+P1:0.743
R1:0.521
R:12.087
PK1:
14.9cm/s
endo
PK2:
7.2cm/s
avg:
B
Positioning of a sample gate and formation of a spectrum.For the color-
flow mode (A), the sample gate (2-mm wide) indicates the area sampled in the
sampled vessel was outside of the uterine horn but within l cm of the uterine
surface. The endometrium (endo) is indicated. The gate was placed over the
brightest colored area in the color flow/B-mode image,as shown (A).Maximum
brightness indicates maximum velocity of blood flow.The 9.96 displayed on the
color-flow image (A) is the setting for velocity-range limit (cm/sec） after which
aliasing will occur.The Doppler filter was set at 100 Hz. One cardiac cycle was
Chapter7
164
Percentage of uterine
Groups with:
80-
Embryo detected (n=16)
horns with adequate
Embryonot detected (n=8)
Doppler
signals for
60
analyses
spectral
of
vessels in the mesometrial
40
attachment.An asterisk
indicates a day with a
20
difference between groups
(141).The color-Doppler
****
signals in the endometrium
2345678910111213141516
were inadequate for the
Days from ovulation
production of spectral
waveforms,but signals in the mesometrial attachment were adequate in some
mares,as shown.The percentage of horns with adequate signals during Days 1 to
8 initially increased and then decreased.The unimodal increase and decrease
between Days 1 to 1l in the percentage of adequate Doppler signals for spectral
analyses of arteries in the mesometrial attachment of mares with no embryo
detected is compatible with the reported transient lower PI for the uterine artery
on Days 4 to 6 in nonbred mares (19). In the present study, pregnant mares showed
a similar unimodal profile during Days 1 to 8. The reason for the transient
increased incidence of Doppler spectral displays on Days 4 to 6 in both groups of
contralateral to the corpus luteum in the mares in which an embryo was not
blood flow in the uterine arteries (15).
Uterus and Embryo 165
TAMV
16
Results of spectral analyses
Horn of fixation
Opposite horn
The time-averaged maximum
14-
velocity (TAMV) increased during
the mobility phase in both horns
and was higher in the horn with
cm/
the embryo after fixation (141).The
10
pulsatility index (Pl;not shown)
decreased during the mobility
phase in both horns and was lower
12
Q
3
-2
-1
-3
5
in the horn with an embryo than in
Days from fixation
the opposite horn 4 days after
increases in blood flow were found in pregnant than in nonpregnant mares afer
Day 1l;apparently,TAMV and RI were not as sensitive as scoring of vascular
perfusion (pg 162) for detecting differences between horns during the mobility
phase.After Day 15,TAMV was consistently higher and RI consistently lower in
the ipsilateral than in the contralateral uterine artery (15).
Chapter 7
166
Uterine perfusion
2.57
Endometrial vascularity
study. Perfusion of the
endometrium and the
Horn with embryo
resistance index (RI) of
Oppositehorn
92.0
the uterus assessed at
Score
the mesometrium were
compared between the
1.5
uterine horns in 11
heifers(Silva and
Ginther,unpublished).
Vascular perfusion was
Mesometrial vascularity
assessed by scoring the
3.0-
extent of color-flow
寸
signals from 1 to 4 , as
Score 1t
2.5
described for mares
(pg 160). The extent of
vascular perfusion of the
2.0-
mesometrial attachment
was scored, similarly.
The RI was obtained
RI
from a sample gate
0.8
placed on the brightest
color-flow signal within
1 cm of the horn,as
0.7
described for mares. The
horn with the embryo
waspredetermined by an
0.6
ipsilateral location to the
ovary with the corpus
luteum,and the horn
81012141618202224
Days after ovulation
was compared to the
opposite horn.
Uterus and Embryo167
local uteroovarian pathway in cattle and the absence of the pathway in horses
accompanies the conceptus during the mobility phase in horses (pg 157), a similar
phenomenon was expected to occur during conceptus expansion in cattle.
However,this study in cattle did not indicate that endometrial vascularity
increased differentially in the uterine hon ipsilateral to the corpus luteum,even
though the horn contained the expanding conceptus at the expected time that
uterine-induced luteolysis was being blocked.Neverthelessin an calier study
(52), blood flow to each uterine horm of three cows during early pregnancy was
Chapter7
168
horm ipsilateral to the embryo than in the contralateral horn after Day 20.
Early Color-flow Indicator of Embryo Orientation.Horses.
Orientation refers to the position of the embryo proper relative to the
mesometrial attachment.Three factors are believed (67) to interact to cause
orientation:1) thick (three-layered) and thin (two-layered) portions of the yolk-
sac wall;2) asymmetrical encroachment from thickening of the dorsal turgid
uterine wall on each side of the mesometrial attachment; and 3) the massaging
action of uterine contractions.As a result,the thickest portion of the yolk-sac wall
(embryonic pole) rotates to a ventral position (antimesometrial). Orientation
contributes to species differences in the pattern of development of the fetal
membranes and the site of attachment of the umbilical cord.Earlier studies
indicated that orientation occurs somewhere between the days of fixation (Day
16) and first detection of the embryo proper (Day 19).A color-Doppler study (143)
revealed an early endometrial vascular indicator of completed orientation that
method was used to record the position of the indicator, as described below.
O'clock method of determining the
position of a structure at the
periphery of the embryonic vesicle.
The numbers (3, 6, 9, 12) refer to the
o'clock positions.Alignment with the
area of mesometrial attachment is at
12o'clock or 12 hours. The clock-
face position of the embryo proper is
at5hours
Uterus and Embryo
169
Day:17
Early endometrial indicators of thefuture position of the embryo proper on
Days 16and17.The early indicator consisted of colored spots in close apposition
Chapter7
170
Day:16
20
Continued development of the early indicator.The sonograms show (arrows)
an early indicator Day 16),an early indicator with an apparent embryo proper
Doppler assessment was confined to the area delineated by the dotted lines for
with the color-Doppler function.
Uterus and Embryo
171
Day after ovulation
Temporal and spatial
relationships of the
15.9±0.1
Fixation
orientation indicator to
16.4±0.1
other events. The mean
18.8±0.1
clock-face position of the
Intervals (days)
early indicator and the
Fixation to early indicator
0.5±0.1
embryo proper were not
Early indicator to embryo proper
2.5±0.2
different from one
Fixation to embryo proper
3.0±0.1
another and remained
approximately constant.
Position (clock-face hours)
The day-to-day change in
Early indicator
6.1±0.2
position of the early
6.3±0.2
Embryo proper
indicator and embryo
detection of the early indicator and the last examination of the embryo proper.
The anatomical origin of the color-Doppler signals that were used as early
indicators of the future position of the embryo proper and especially the colored
processes that appeared to permeate the vesicle wall are unknown. The major
that were stimulated or dilated as aresult of the close apposition to the embryonic
immediately afterfixation.
Chapter7
172
Dysorientation of Embryo Proper.Horses.
ma
Orientation
Dysorientation
Color-flow images showing normal orientation and dysorientation on
Day 19.Innormal orientation,the embryo proper （ep)is positioned opposite to
the mesometrial attachment (ma);the attachment is at 12 o'clock.In
dysorientation, the embryo proper is in the dorsal hemisphere of the embryonic
vesicle or at 10 o'clock.The yellow arrows indicate the outer periphery of the
endometrium. Encroachment or thickening of the endometrium between the
mesometrial attachment (upper right) and the embryonic vesicle is prominent for
normal orientation but is not apparent for dysorientation. Uterine tone was flaccid
for dysorientation, accounting for the more flattened shape of the vesicle,
compared to the vesicle shape withnormal orientation.
the early indicator of orientation by color-Doppler ultrasound.
Uterus and Embryo
173
Endometrial
encroachment
Ratio
Normal
orientation
3
(n=26）
2
Dysorientation (n=4)
Embryonic pole
No. hours from 6 o'clock
3
17
18
19
15
16
Days after ovulation
normal orientation process.
Chapter7
174
proper. However,owing to dysorientation of the embryo proper, one portion of the
joint membrane of the yolk sac and allantoic sac was first to reach the area of
endometrial encroachment at the dorsal aspect of the conceptus or the area of
mesometrial attachment. The first portion of the membrane to reach the
mesometrial area apparently became adhered,as indicated by the failure to detect
further movement: the adhesive qualities of the endometrial/vesicle interface have
been described (46).The other end of the jointmembranes continued to move as the
allantoic sac expanded until it also reached the mesometrial area. Thereby, the
flaccid uterus and minimal endometrial encroachment.
dysorientation is not known.
Uterus and Embryo
175
Orientation
Dysorientation
12o'clock
Embryo
6o'clock
Day20
Day18
Allantoic
sac
Yolk sac
Allantoic sac
Day24
Day25
Day28
Day29
Day33
Day31
Umbilical cord
Dav
Day45
Chapter7
176
attachment maintains correct positioning and corrects malpositioning of the
embryo proper if uterine tone is adequate.
Embryo Loss.Horses.
Uterine
24to0hours
Controls
before embryo loss
>10
70%
0%
5to10
26%
26%
<5
4%
74%
Percentage of uterine-index scores for controls versus mares with embryo
loss.Data are from a study (31 on development of a uterine index to diagnose
subsequent examination.
Uterus and Embryo
177
Reduced heart rate with future
embryo loss. This is a case history of
a mare that lost the embryo (no longer
detected by ultrasound) on Day 31.At
Day 24, the ultrasonic appearance of
the embryo was normal, as shown.
However,heart rate was3 standard
deviations (SD) below the heart rate
in controls on each of Days 24.27,
Day24
and 30. The plasma progesterone
concentrations on Day 30 and the
Heart rate
percentage of luteal blood flow were
200
Controls
similar to values in controls.
(n=8)
Endometrial vascularity score on
160
Days 24,27,and 30was lower than
wsie
in seven of the eight controls.
8120
3SD
Diameter of the conceptus was an
equivalent of 3 days smaller than for
80
controls during the mobility phase.
Embryo loss
(n=1)
Undersize of the conceptus during
24
27
30
mobility was associated with future
Days after ovulation
loss in 62% of mares (72）.This single
Chapter7
178
Uterine Color-Doppler Studies.Women
identify women with limited chance for pregnancy (122). It was suggested that
measures to decrease vascular impedance might enhance pregnancy rate by
improving embryo quality and uterinereceptivity.
2.Doppler studies did not demonstrate that abnormal blood-flow indices of
the utero-placental circulation during the first trimester were associated with
subsequent pregnancy failure (1o1).
3.Uterine arterial impedance was lower before embryo transfer,but not 5 to6
days afer transfer in women that became pregnant versus nonpregnant (32).
4.Values for impedance of flow (based on pulsatility index;PI) in the uterine
artery and ovarian stromal arteries at the time of hCG administration were lower
in women that conceived than in women that did not(152).
5. The absence of sub- and intra-endometrial color signals on the day of
embryo transfer decreased the chances of pregnancy by eightfold (l12).
Comparison to conventional approaches was not made.
Chapter8
AND FETUS
Doppler assessment of the umbilical arteries in farm species.
In contrast to thelimited nformationin farm speciesnumerous studies using
the Doppler vascular technology havebeen done in pregnant women over the past
two decades. Much of this work was stimulated by requirements for planning and
monitoring assisted reproduction programs,but provided considerable
physiologic and pathologic information.Doppler ultrasound for assessing the
from the uterine artery.
Chapter8
Blood-flowDetection in theEmbryo
embryo and fetus.as advocated for mares (64).
0.5 days after fixation on Day 16 and 2.5 days before detection of the embryo
proper (pg 168）.The indicator was a colored spot in the image of the endometrium
adjacent to the wall of the embryonic pole. Colored processes from the indicator
appeared to permeate the wall of the embryonic vesicle. Although the major
portion of the colored area likely represented enhanced blood flow in the
endometrium, the color processes may have represented movement of blood in
rudimentary embryonic vessels and contractions of the primitive heart,but this is
unknown.A detailed study of embryonic angiogenesis at this stage is lacking for
both species. Histologic and morphologic study in horses indicated that a heart
chamber and an anastomotic network of blood vessels in the yolk-sac wall
availableresearch area
Fetal Stage
181
Day:21
cm
y= vitelline vein
ap= apposed membrane
ep=embryo proper
ys=yolk sac
as= allantoic sac
va = vitelline artery
cg=chorionic girdle
Chapter8
182
Day43
Day30
Velocity:4cm/s
4cm/s
D
6cm/S
10cm/s
Effect ofvelocity setting on blood-flow detection in embryos.Horses.The
high velocity-range settings for the embryo proper (ep) and the fetus (fet)
detected fewer blood-flow signals (B.D).The low settings (A,C) detected more
apposition of the yolk and allantoic sacs (A). Color signals for the low settings
velocityrange.
on Day39 (arrows) represents blood flow in the umbilical cord.
Fetal Stage
183
VS
ep.
Day:22
am =amnion
ap=apposed membranes
as =allantoic sac
ep=embryo proper
mm=mesometrium
ys=yolk sac
Chapter8
184
signals (pg 50）.Similar to the equine embryos (pg 182),color-flow signals extend
into vessels beyond the heart for Day 28 and thereafter.A vessel at Day 36 is
from the developing umbilical cord.At Day 38,blood flow in the umbilical cord
is shown for two directions of flow indicated by red and blue.The vessels are
shown at their entrance to and exit from the abdomen. The apparent aorta is also
indicated Carotid artery identity is based on location cranial to the heart and
blood flow toward the transducer,opposite to the direction of flow
in the aorta.
Summary ofblood flow in embryos.In horses,embryonic blood flow is first
detectable by color Doppler in the pulsating heart (Days 17 to 20).Vessels have
been detected in the area of apposition between the yolk sac and allantoic
was needed to detect signals: signals were not detected with a setting of
umbilical cord,aorta,and carotid artery.
to the day of first detection in cattle
Fetal Stage
Day:21
ao=aorta
ca = carotid artery
ep=embryo proper
hd=head
ht=heart
mm =mesometrium
uma = umbilical artery
umv =umbilical vem
38
Chapter8
186
Blood-lowDetection in the Fetus
60 image.
Day 45:Sagittal plane through the entire fetus.
center,indicating the greater velocity of laminar flow.
Day 5 deft:Full sagital plane.The umbilical artery andvein are labeled on
the basis of flow away (blue) and toward (red) the beams of the convex
transducer,respectively.An anechoic section of apparent umbilical artery （arrow)
has no color signals,owing to flow perpendicular to the beams.The flow in the
vena cava and aorta is away and toward the beams,respectively.Aliasing is
considerable in the aorta,indicating a velocity that is greater than the range
setting.The carotid artery is flowing away from thebeams.
Day S1 (right:Approximately transverse section of a uterine horn that did not
contain the highly mobile fetus at this tme(Bk-158.6).Note aliasing is greater in
Yelocity in this area
expected for flow toward thehead andbeams.
as Dav 56io
direetion of flow is obscured by the spiraling of the vessels.
Fetal Stage
187
Day:45
a0=aora
ca=carotid atery
f=from limb
hd=head
hl=hind limb
mm=mesometrium
nk=neck
uc=umbilical cord
uma =umbilical artery
umv=umbilical vein
vc=vena cava
60
Chapter8
188
The velocity setting is given for each image.
yellowwhen flowis toward the beams.
right.The reds and blues vividly indicate flow in opposite directions.
Day 71:Spinal column (head to lef),showing flow toward the beams (red) in
the aorta and away from the beams (blue) for the continuation of the umbilical
artery
Day 90:Abdomen (left) and chest (right). Color codes for portions of
intestinal vessels are shown. The ductus venosus and hepatic veins that empty
into the vena cava are based on color of signals and expected direction of flow.
Identifications are based on locations and flow direction.
Day 100:Caudal half of fetal body.The two umbilical arteries appear on each
side of the urachus.The urachus is the allantoic duct,and a dilated portion will
become the urinary bladder.
Day 1l0 (right）:Chest and abdomenThe dorsal aspect of the fetus is inclined
toward the top allowing identification of the aorta.A vein (red) is shown entering
arteries.
anda vein (blue).
Fetal Stage
189
Velocity:
24cm/s
Day:65
12cm/s
60 cm/s
24cm/s
40cm/s
100
42cm/s
a0=aorta
dv= ductus venosus
fe=femur
ht=hean
st=stomach
hv=hepatic vein
1=tail
in= intestine
uma= umbilicalartery
lu=lung
umv=umbilical ven
Iv=liver
甜=uachus
pv=pelvis
rc=nb cage
=veebra
sc=spinal column
20cm/s
110
190
Chapter8
Horses. The velocity settings ranged from 7.5 to 12.0 cm/sec.
Identification of vessels may be difficult or unresolvable on a still image without
the benefit of real-time inspection of the surrounding area. In this regard, the
spectral function is a decided asset in clarifying arterial versus venous flow.
Day 170: Vessels in a limb with blood flow toward (red) and away (blue) from
beam direction.
Day 190:Color signals of blood flow in a hoof.
Day 27l:The head is to the right,and the neck shows a carotid artery (ca）
and a jugular vein (jv).Interpretation of the color signals for the carotid artery
and jugular vein requires basic knowledge on the principles of the color-Doppler
technology.The venous blood on the left (blue) is flowing toward the chest away
from the beams.The long anechoic area is attributable to absence of color signals
because the vessel is at 90° to the beams in this area.The small red signal is from
blood flowing toward the beams.The blood in the carotid artery is flowing
beneath the carotid image;identity is unknown.
aliasing as pregnancy advanced.
Fetal Stage
191
Day:140
170
190
271
150
40
130
Dav:121
80
6
Chapter 8
192
informationondirectionofflow.
Day:83
104
Side by side gray-scale and color-flowimages.Cattle.The images were made
with afunction that displayed the twomodes separately and simultaneously.
demonstrated by the color signals
suggests it is the umbilical artery and that the fetal torso is to the left.
Fetal Stage
193
uma
Cumv
dv
Day:44
Umv
hv
54
58
ao=aorta
hv= hepatic vein
ca =carotid artery
jv= jugular vein
dv = ductus venosus
uc=umbilical cord
fet=fetus
uma =umbilical artery
fl=front limb
umv=umbilical vein
ht=heart
vc =vena cava
Chapter8
194
Day:74
107
Placentomes imaged in two modes. Cattle.Placentomes with a wide base
(A,B) are compared for color-flow mode and power-flow mode.A pedunculated
placentome (C,D) is shown in gray-scale (B-mode) and power mode. Note that
the centimeter scale (left margin) is different between Days 74 and 107.
(fetal) and are the principal areas of placental exchange.Therefore,the structures
arehighly vascularized,as shown.
Fetal Stage195
arteries versus veins.
Producing Spectral Graphs during Pregnancy
个1.05
04
eia
0.55G35C11
Chapter 8
196
Day:48
70
110
170
Spectra of umbilical artery and vein.Horses.An angle cursor was used
except for Day 48. The velocity settings differ among images as shown by the
numbers at the upper edge of the image (e.g.,7.47 cm/sec for Day 48).
Day 48:The sample gate (arrow) involves both an umbilical artery (red) and
arterial spectrum below the baseline. Only the systolic portion of the arterial
to the pulses in the adjacent artery.
pronounced than forDay48.
Day llo:The intervening space has continued to decrease.
profile encroaches upon the beginning of the next profile
Fetal Stage
197
A
+0.23
.10G35
C11
Day58
Color-Doppler images and spectral displays of fetal vessels Day 58). Cattle
(A) Spectrum of carotid artery (ca) showing diastolic signals between the
prominent systolic signals. Placement of sample gate is near the ca arrow.
Initially, signals from the jugular vein (jv) appeared beneath the baseline,but
regard, the gate is stationary on the monitor, and movement of the tissue or
portionsof thegraph.
artery in mares at this stage (pg 196).
Chapter8
198
Published Spectral Data for theFetal Stage
placental impedance. Doppler study of the fetus and placenta in horses and cattle
may be a fruitful research area with both basic and applied ramifications.For
example,an applied Doppler approach isneeded to enable practitioners to make
diagnostic and prognostic judgments on fetal health, including providing
definitive information onwhether fetal death has occurred.
Blood flow in uterine and umbilical arteries (facing page).Horses.These
graphs were reproduced with modifications from a publication by Bollwein et al.
(21）.Uterine arteries were examined about 3 to 5 cm from their origin from the
external iliac artery in four mares. Pulsed-wave mode with a 7.0 MHz transducer
and a filter setting of 100 Hz was used for the first 10 weeks.Thereafter,a
continuous-wave mode with a 3.75MHz transducer and a filter setting of 400 Hz
was used.An angle cursor was placed at the sample gate. Blood volume was
calculated from the time-averaged maximum velocity (TAMV) and artery
ofa cattle study (pg200).
Fetal Stage
199
361
Uterine arteries,
blood-flow volume
both uterine arteries. The
32
28
disappearance of the notch
indicated decreased peripheral
24
20
resistance to blood flow
reflecting the vascularization of
the micro-cotyledons (64).In
women, the incidence of a
notch decreased markedly
during the second trimester,
0.91
Uterine arteries,
RI
as indicated by an incidence
0.8
of 52% at Week 14 versus
0.7
9%at Week 24 (49).Doppler
ultrasound in women is useful
for assessing trophoblast
0.5
invasion during the first
trimester (133） and for predicting
0.4-
the outcome of pregnancy
0.91 Umbilical arteries,
during the second trimester (8.
RI
An abnormal waveform reflects
0.8
increased impedance in the
0.7
tissues. Doppler results for
pregnancy abnormalities have
not been reported for horses
0.5
and cattle.
The two umbilical arteries
0.4
were identified on the basis of
2
610141822263034384246
pulsations on the Doppler
Weeks of pregnancy
images and flow direction
Chapter 8
200
TAMV
Ipsilateral horn
0.91RI
160
Contralateral horn
0.8
120
cm/sec
80
0.6
40
0.5
Blood-flow volume
Artery diameter
12
12
10
S
8
e
6
345678910
910
2
2
3
4
6
8
Months of pregnancy
Months of pregnancy
Spectral data for uterine artery throughout pregnancy. Cattle.The figures
were prepared from tabulated results published by Bollwein et al. (I2). Three
uniparous heifers were used. Waveforms were obtained at an insonation angle of
20° to 60°. Each examination required approximately 30 minutes.The day or
days that represented a month was not given.The resistance index (RI) decreased
during Months 1 to 8and remained at low level for Months 9 and 10.High RI
during the last trimester in women is a reported indicator of potential fetal distress
lower than in the contralateral artery. The first significant difference (paired t-test)
Fetal Stage
201
in large animals.
blood-flow volume and negatively correlated with Rl.
190 Heart rate
Embryo heart rate. Cattle.
The number of embryo heart
beats/minute was determined
170
through a function in spectral mode
per
in 10 heifers each day by L.A.
Silva. Heart rate increased rapidly
eartbe
for a few days after detection and
130
then more gradually until the
arbitrary end of the embryo stage
(Day 40).The scanner-determined
Days of pregnancy
heart rate on Day 40 seemed
were estimated with a stop watch.
Chapter 8
202
Doppler Ultrasound and Pregnancy. Women.
40Blood-flowvelocity
R
35
0.85
30
0.80
25
20
0.70
15
0.65
Blood-flow volume
0.18Artery area
6
0.16
Liters/min
5
R
0.10
2
0.08
67891011121314151617
67891011121314151617
Post-menstrual weeks of pregnancy
An early study. These graphs are smoothed representations of data reported
by Dickey and Hower (4i).Data are combined for the two uterine arteries. Note
that the reference point is menstruation, as is common for studies in women;
ovulation occurs about 2 weeks after menstruation.This Doppler study apparently
was the first clear demonstration that uterine blood flow increases nonlinearly as
pregnancy advances. Resistance index (RI) decreased slowly until Week 10 and
184,198,199).
Part Four
STALLIONS AND
BULLS
Chapter9
aspects of the genitalia in bulls
scrotum,spermatic cord,and penis （reviewed in58).Evaluationof blood-fown
the testicular artery is being used to diagnose and monitor neoplastic and
inflammatory changes of the testis,epididymis,and spermatic cord.The
technology is especially useful for assessing blood flow interference in torsion of
thespermaticcord.
In contrast to the wealth of information in men,studies in stallions were
Chapter 9
206
Abdominal and Pelvic Arteries (facing page)
summaries ofpublished accounts(125.138).
the spermatic cord (pgs 216,219).The cremaster artery originates from the external
iliac in stallions and traverses the abdominal wall near the inguinal ring and
supplies the cremaster muscle. In bulls, the cremaster artery originates from a
branch of an artery that supplies the scrotal and preputial areas (not shown).
The internal pudendal artery is a major branch of the internal iliac in both
species. However,anatomists consider the internal pudendal artery to be long in
the horse and short in cattle (/38),as shown in the sketches. The internal pudendal
follows the same course within the pelvic cavity in the stallion as the internal iliac
follows in the bull. The umbilical artery is a supplier to the genitalia in both
genders.The artery arises from the internal pudendal artery in the stallion and
directly from the internal iliac in the bullIn both species, the umbilical artery is
the primary source of the arterial supply to the ductus deferens.The proximal
portion of the ductus deferens is supplied by a branch of the prostatic artery.
The prostatic artery originates from the internal pudendal arteryin the stallion
from the internal iliac and passes through the obturator foramen.
bag=branches to accessory glands
bdd = branch to ductus deferens
ir=inguinal ring
cra = cremaster artery
oba=obturator artery
pa =penile artery
dda = ductus deferens artery
eia = external iliac artery
pra =prostatic artery
dpa = dorsal penile artery
jia= internal iliac artery
ta = testicular artery
uma =umbilical artery
ipa = internal pudendal artery
ura =urethralis artery
Male Genitalia
STALLION
207
aorta
ela
-ipa
-oba
uma-
pra-
pa
cra
bdd
bag
dda-
pa-
pa
BULL
pra
eia-
iia
bag
aorta
-ura
uma'
bdd-
pa
dda
dpa
Chapter 9
208
Internal Genitalia
Urinary bladder
Ductus
deferens
Vesicular gland
Pelvicbrim
Uterus masculinus
Ampulla
Prostate gland
Lobe
Vesicular gland duct
Isthmus
Ampullary duct
Prostatic ductules
Pelvic urethra
-Urethral lumen
Uterus masculinus
Urethral muscle
Bulbourethral gland
(exposed)
Anus
Male Genitalia209
contain a large amount of gelatinous secretion from the vesicular glands. The
gland has an obvious lumen (anechoic) containing the gel. After sexual
stimulation, the vesicular glands increase in height and change from flat and
irregular to rounded.Each ductus deferens (deferent duct,vas deferens) connects
the epididymis to the urethra, and the enlarged portion at the urethral end is
termed the ampulla.The pair of ampullae are situated between the necks of the
vesicular glands.The excretory ducts of the vesicular glands and the ampullae
for fluid.
forcolor-Doppler study.
Chapter 9
210
Teased
Rested
Bulbourethral gland
Ejaculated
Rested
Teased
Prostate gland
Ejaculated
Male Genitalia
211
am
Teased
Rested
Vesicular gland
am=ampulla
vg=vesiculargland
Ejaculated
Sonograms of accessory sex glands (this page and facing page). Stallions.
The images were taken from a single stallion before sexual stimulation (rested)
Chapter 9
212
Urinary bladder
Ductus deferens
Vesicular gland
Ampulla
Disseminate
prostate
Prostate body
Urethra
Spongy tissue
Urethral muscle
Pelvic urethra
Bulbospongiosus
Bulbourethral gland
Bulbourethral gland
Disseminate
(exposed)
prostate
Urethra
Spongy tissue
Bulbospongiosus
Urethral muscle
Anus
Male Genitalia213
urethral lumen.
tissue. An anechoic collection duct can be viewed extending from the proximal
end of each gland and running below the prostate body.The vesicular glands
contribute the bulk of the seminal fluid. The small seminal volume(e.g,5ml) in
bulls is consistent with the relatively solid appearance of the glands. In contrast,
the large seminal volume in stallions （e.g.,100 ml) is consistent with saccular
fluid-filled glands that collapse during ejaculation.
The ampullae are round or ovoid on cross section and are closely apposed
theurethral lumen.
Chapter 9
214
Prostate
Bulbourethral gland
Vesicular gland
Vesicular gland
am
al = ampullary lumen
am=ampulla
bg=bulbourethral gland
cp= capsule
vgl = vesicular gland lobe
Ampulla
that the vessel is a vein.
Male Genitalia
215
of teasing and ejaculation on thevesselshavenot been studied ineither species.
Testis,Epididymis,and Spermatic Cord
Chapter 9
216
Inguinal
ring
Spermatic cord
Testicular
artery
Ductus deferens artery
Pampiniform
plexus
-Ductus deferens
Body of epididymis
Head
Testis
Tail
Tunica
albuginea
Testicular
artery
testis,a standoff pad may be useful.
Male Genitalia
217
ep=epididymis
tes=testis
218Chapter9
many coverings of the testis or scrotal wall are not distinguishable byultrasound,
except that occasionally fluid can beimaged between the surface of the testis and
lining of thevaginal pouch.
The epididymis follows the caudomedial border of the testis,and therefore the
two epididymides are in close proximity to each other.The head is over the upper
pole of the testis and the tail projects ventrally forming a conspicuous cone; these
two parts are interconnected by a narrow body. The tail and head of the
epididymis can be identified on the ends of the testis because of demarcation by a
thin echoicline,reduced echogenicity compared to the testisparenchyma,and the
presence of numerous tubular structures.The ductus deferens is difficult to
identify and when imaged is an anechoic tubular structure 2 to 3 mm in diameter
channel for sperm traveling from the tail of the epididymis to the urethra.
Male Genitalia
219
Spermatic cord
Testicular artery
Pampiniform plexus
-Ductus deferens
artery
-Ductus deferens
Head of epididymis
Body of epididymis
Testis
Testicular artery
Tunica albuginea
Tail of epididymis
Chapter 9
220
Longitudinal section
08
Longitudinal section
口
Cross section
indicating a 90 angle of insonation (pgs 36,54).
Male Genitalia
221
B
es
Color-flow images of testis and epididymis. Bulls.The testis is shown in
longitudinal (A) and cross section (B）Themediastinum testis(mt） is in the plane
ofa portion (left)of the longitudinal section and centrally located in the cross
pole of the testis
Chapter 9
222
Spectral Graphs and Data for Male Genitalia
JD.O6G3SCII
of the epididymis (B).Note the delineated box and position of the sample gate.
1017035C11
40.23G35C11
0.12
Male Genitalia
223
In spermatic cord
Atperiphery of testis
Range
Mean
Mean
Range
26.1
12to51
PSV(cm/s)*
22.2
8to59
5.4
0.3 to 14.7
EDV(cms)
7.9
3.5 to 20.0
0.78
0.56 to 3.96
RI*
0.63
0.39to 0.85
1.99
0.96to3.96
PI*
1.15
0.55 to2.29
the caudal testicular pole. The sample gate seting was 1 mm, and angle of
correction was 30° to 60°. Peak systolic velocity (PsV), end diastolic velocity
(EDV),resistance index （RI）,and pulsatility index (P)were measured Themean
for three measurements of each end point was used. End points with an asterisk
are significantly different between locations of the artery.The authors noted that
assessment of longitudinal segments of the artery was tedious and time
consuming, owing to the convolutions in the spermatic cord and the tortuosity at
not attempted.
Chapterg
224
torsion of the spermaticcord
2) Blood flow apparently increased during thebreeding season in association with
1 hour after injection of a large dose of hCG (6000 IU; 130). No reports were
found that involvedDoppler assessment of the testicular artery in the abdomen or
before it enters the internal inguinal ring or the spermatic cord.
Spectral data.Bulls. Only one report,an abstract (Isi),was found on color
Doppler examination of bovine testicular arteries.The artery was examined in the
spermatic cord,a pole of the testisand in the testicular parenchyma in 25bulls.It
was stated that blood-flow in older bulls showed decreasing velocity and
increasing PI and RI,similar to the findings for older stallions (pg 223）.Sexual
stimulation had no effect,whereas sedation apparently was associated with
reduced blood-flowvelocity.A companion full report wasnot found.This should
be a productive area for both applied and basic research.
Summary of spectral-Doppler examinations of testicular artery.A study in
stallions indicated that the spectral waveforms for the convoluted testicular artery
of the spermatic cord were biphasic in that both systolic and diastolic portions
periphery.