THEPERFECT REVISIONAID IN ONEPACKAGE
evolve
SECONDEDITION
ColorAtlasof
Veterinary
Anatomy
2
VOLUME
The Horse
RaymondR.Ashdown
Stanley H.Done
Photography oy
SusanA.Evans
RadiopraphsProvided by
Elizabeth A.Baines
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
COLOR ATLAS OF VETERINARY ANATOMY
Volume2
THEHORSE
Commissioning Ediror: Robert Edwards
Developmenr Ediror: Lynn Watt/Ailsa Laing
Projecr Manager: Nancy Arnott
Designer/Design Direcriorn: Stewart Larking
Illusrarion Manager: Merlyn Harvey
llusraror: Samantha Elmhurst
COLOR ATLAS
OF
EVETERINARY
ANATOMY
Volume 2
THE HORSE
SECOND EDITION
Raymond R. Ashdown
With radiographs provided by
BVSc PhD MRCvS
Elizabeth A. Baines
Emeritus Reader in Veterinary Anatomy
MA VetMB DVR DipECVDI MRCVS
University of London
Lecturer in Veterinary Radiology
London
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Royal Veterinary College
Stanley H. Done
London
BA BVetMed PhD DECPHM DECVP FRCVS FRCPath
Visiting Professor of Veterinary Pathology
University of Glasgow Veterinary School, Glasgow
 Former Lecturer in Veterinary Anatomy
Royal Veterinary College
London
Photography by
Susan A. Evans
MIScT AIMI MIAS
 Former Chief Technician in Anatomy
Department of Veterinary Basic Sciences
 Royal Veterinary College
London
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
EDINBURGH
MOSBY
FISEVIER
@ 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the
Publisher's permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance
Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher
(other than as may be noted herein).
First edition 1987
Second edition 2011
ISBN 978-0-7234-3414-6
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress 
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden
our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become
necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and
using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information 
or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for 
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check the most
current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (i) by the manufacturer of each product to be
administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and 
contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own experience and knowledge of
their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, 
and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any
otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the
material herein.
ELSEVIER
your source for books,
journals and multimedia
in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
www.clsvict.com | www.bookaid.org |www.sabre.ofg
ELSEVIER
BOOK AIR
 Sabre Foundation
Th
publisher's
poliky is to use
paper manufactured
fom sustalneable forests
Printed in China
PREFACE
This book is intended for veterinary students and practising veterinary
The dissections follow the pattern of prosections that were used for
surgeons. Important features of topographical anatomy are presented
teaching at the Royal Veterinary College for many years.
in a series of full-colour photographs of detailed dissections. The
 The aim of these dissections and photographs is to reveal the topog-
structures are identifed in accompanying coloured line drawings, and
raphy of the animal as it would be presented to the veterinary surgeon 
the nomenclature is based on that of the Nomina Anatomica Veteri-
during a routine clinical examination. Therefore, lateral views pre-
naria (1992). Latin terms are used for muscles, arteries, veins, lymphat-
dominate and we have, as far as possible, avoided photographs of
ics and nerves, but anglicized terms are used for most other structures.
parts removed from the body or the use of views from unusual angles,
When necessary, information needed for interpretation of the photo-
or of unusual body positions. It is our earnest hope that this book will 
 graphs is given in the captions. Each section begins with photographs
 enable students and veterinary surgeons to see, beneath the outer
of regional surface features taken before dissection, and complemen-
surface of the animals entrusted to their care, the muscles, bones,
tary photographs of an articulated equine skeleton illustrate the
vessels, nerves and viscera that go to make up each region of the body
important palpable bony features of these regions. The dissections and
and each organ system.
photographs have been specially prepared for this book.
A significant difference between this and previous editions of the
 The horses used for this work were ponies of various ages and types
 volume is the addition of radiographs and scans which are placed in
(two stallions, one gelding, three mares and several colt foals). The
 a new chapter at the end of the book. A second major difference is the
specimens were embalmed, for the most part, in the standing position
 inclusion of clinical notes at the beginning of each main chapter. These
  n a   p s an rr s
the Royal Veterinary College. Every effort was made to ensure that
 significance. Finally, over l00 self-assessment questions are available
the final position corresponded to that of normal level standing. In 
 online with this new edition.
four cases red neoprene latex was injected into the arteries and blue
We feel that these additions to the book add considerably to its
 neoprene latex was also injected into the veins of the pregnant mare.
usefulness, especially to the aspiring veterinary surgeon.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The dissections and photography for this book were carried out at the
The idea of producing an atlas of equine anatomy was based on our
Royal Veterinary College, University of London. We are grateful to
 yearly teaching program of equine prosection. And we are very grate-
the Department of Anatomy for the provision of specialized facilities,
ful to the project editor, designer and illustrator for their hard work
without which this work could not have been possible. In particular
and for sustaining us with their optimism and enthusiasm.
we would like to thank Stephen W. Barnett, BA, MIST, formerly
Lizza Baines provided the radiographs for this new edition with
Chief Technician in Anatomy, for advice and assistance. The task of
 Elsevier and we are very grateful to her for help with all aspects of the
preparing and caring for the specimens before and during dissection
new chapter on radiographical imaging.
was undertaken by Douglas Hopkins and Andrew Crook. The photo-
graphs for Figs 8.31-8.35 were taken by Alan Coombs (Department
London 2011
RRA
of Veterinary Anatomy, University of Bristol) and those for Figs
SD
8.48-8.53 were taken by Malcolm Parsons (Department of Veterinary
Surgery, University of Bristol).
T1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Numerous original papers have been consulted during this work, but
McFadyean J (1922) The Anatomy of the Horse. A Dissection Guide.
[ue jo suen e Aq paoddns uaaq Aquru aaeq saipns 1no
3rd Edn. Edinburgh: Johnstone.
textbooks. We would especially acknowledge our debt to the follow-
McFadyean J (1964) Osteology and Arthrology of the Domesticated
ing, which were our constant companions throughout the preparation
Animals. 4th Edn. Edited by Hughes H V & Dransfield J W. London:
of the specimens and the text.
Bailliere Tindall, Cox.
Martin P, Schauder W (l938) Lehrbuch der Anatomie der Haustiere.
Berg R (1973) Angewandeie und topographische Anatomie der Haus
 Bd. IH1. Anatomie der Hauswiederkauer. 3rd Edn. Stuttgart: Schick-
tiere. Jena: Fisher.
hardt, Ebner.
Bradley O C, Grahame T (1946) The Topographical Anatomy of the
Nickel R, Schummer A, Seiferle E (1973) The Viscera of the Domestic
Limbs of the Horse. 2nd Edn. Edinburgh: Green & Son Ltd.
Animals. Translated and revised by Sack WO. Berlin, Hamburg:
Bradley O C, Grahame T (1946) The Topographical Anatomy of the
Paul Parey.
Thorax and Abdomen of the Horse. 2nd Edn. Edinburgh: Green &
Nickel R, Schummer A, Seiferle E (l975) Lehrbuch der Anatomie
Son Ltd.
der Haustiere Bd. IV. Nervensystem, Sinnesorgane, Endokrine
Bradley O C, Grahame T (1946) The Topographical Anatomy of the
Drusen. 2 Auflage. Seiferle E & Bohme G. Berlin, Hamburg: Paul
Head and Neck of the Horse. 2nd Edn. Edinburgh: Green & Son
Parey.
Ltd.
Nickel R, Schummer A, Seiferle E (1981) The Anatomy of the Domestic
 Butler J, Colles C, Dyson S, Kold S, Poules P (2008) Clinical radiology
 Animals Vol 3. The circulatory system, the skin and the cutaneous
of the horse, 3rd Edn. Chichester-Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Organs of the domestic mammals. Schummer A, Wilkens H,
Calderon W F (n.d.) Animal Painting and Anatomy. London: Seeley
Vollmerhaus BK & Habermehl KH. Translated by Siller WG &
Service.
Wright PAL. Berlin, Hamburg: Paul Parey.
Chauveau A, Arloing S, Lesbre F-X (1903) Traite d' Anatomie Comparee
Nickel R, Schummer A, Seiferle E (1984) Lehrbuch der Anatomie der
des Animaux Domestiques. 5° édition. Paris: Bailliere-Tindall.
Haustiere Bd. I Bewegungsapparat. 5 Auflage. Frewein J, Wille K-H
Dittrich H, Ellenberger W, Baum H (1907) The Horse. A Pictorial
& Wilkens H. Berlin, Hamburg: Paul Parey.
Guide to its Anatomy. Translated by Sisson S. London: Fisher
Popesko P (1971) Ailas of topographical anatomy of the domestic
Unwin. Leipsic: Dieterich.
animals. Vols I-Il1. Translated by Getty R & Brown J. Philadelphia:
 Ellenberger W, Baum H (1943) Handbuch der vergleichenden Anatomie
W.B. Saunders Company.
der Haustiere. 18th Edn. Edited by Zeitzschmann O, Ackernecht E
Sack W O, Habel R E (1977) Rooney's Guide to the Dissection of the
& Grau H. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Horse. Ithaca: Veterinary Textbooks.
Field E J, Harrison R J (1968) Anatomical Terms. Their origin and
Schebitz H, Wilkens H (1978) Ailas der Rontgenanatomie des Pferdes.
derivation. 3rd Edn. Cambridge: Heffer.
Berlin, Hamburg: Paul Parey.
Ghoshal N G, Koch T, Popesko P (1981) The Venous Drainage of the
Schmaltz R (1909) Ailas der Anatomie des Pferdes. 2 Teil. Topogra-
 Domestic Animals. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company.
phische Myologie. Berlin: Schoetz.
Goubaux A, Barrier G (l892) The Exterior of the Horse. Translated
Schmaltz R (1924) Atlas der Anatomie des Pferdes. 1 Teil. Das Skelett
and edited by Harger SJJ. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Co
des Rumpfes und der Gleidmassen. 4,5 Aufage. Berlin: Schoetz
Habel R E (1973) Applied Veterinary Anatomy. Ithaca: Habel.
Share-Jones J T (1907) The Surgical Anatomy of the Horse. London:
Hayes M H (1903) Veterinary notes for horse owners. 6th Edn. London:
Williams, Norgate.
Hurst, Blackett (54 good photographs of the teeth of horses of
Sisson S, Grossman J D (1953) The Anatomy of the Domestic Animals.
known ages [birth to 42 years] in Ch. 33, which is not included in
 4th Edn, revised Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company.
earlier Edns).
Sisson S, Grossman J D (1975) The Anatomy of the Domestic Animals.
Hayes M H (1952) Points of the Horse. 6th Edn. Edited by Brooke G
Vol. 1. Edited by Getty R. 5th Edn. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders
& Sanders M. London: Hurst, Blackett.
Company.
International  Committee  on  Veterinary  Anatomical  Nomenclature,
Tagand R, Barone R (1950-1957) Anatomie des Equides Domestiques.
World Association of Veterinary Anatomists (1992). Nomina Ana-
Lyon: Ecole Nationale Veterinaire.
tomica Veterinaria. 4th Edn. Gent: International Committee on
Taylor J A (1955-1970) Regional and Applied Anatomy of the Domestic
Veterinary Gross Anatomical Nomenclature.
Animals. Parts I-Il1. Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd.
Kovacs G (1963) The Equine Tarsus, Topographic and Radiographic
Vollmerhaus B, Habermehl K H (n.d.) Topographical Anatomical Dia-
Anatomy. Translated by McKay P. Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.
grams of Injection Technique in Horses, Catlle, Dogs and Cats.
Lydekker R (1912) The Horse and its Relatives. London: Allen.
Marburg, Lahn: Hoechst, Behringwerke A.G.
vii
This page intentionally eft blank
CONTENTS
Introduction
xi
The Hindlimb
185
The Head (including
the skin)
The Foot
225
The Neck
55
The Pelvis (including
the spine)
269
The Forelimb
73
Diagnostic Imaging of the
Head, Withers, Manus
and Pes
325
The Thorax
109
Index
345
The Abdomen
143
This page intentionally eft blank
INTRODUCTION
The range of the Veterinary Curriculum is continually expanding, and
thread of the narrative. Occasionally, for the sake of clarity, we have
im many subjects its depth is continually increasing, yet the overall
reversed photographs of dissections made on one side, so that they fit
length of the course remains constant. As a result, there is pressure to
allocate less and less time to some subjects, of which anatomy is a
is clearly indicated in the legends. In every dissection room it is, from
notable example. Furthermore, within departments of anatomy the
time to time, advantageous to mount extra demonstrations. For some
desire to give greater emphasis to functional and applied aspects of
 regions we also have done this to show a different dissection procedure
the discipline, to radiological anatomy and to teratology, makes it
 Or a different specimen. Students should beware of treating these
increasingly difficult to allocate adequate time to personal dissection
extras as optional or unnecessary complications - often they are of
of each species by each student. An obvious solution to this problem
 considerable importance.
is to rely more and more upon prepared dissections for the teaching
 A comment is needed on the technique of dissection shown in these
 of topographical anatomy. This saves much student time, but has
 photographs. In many instances we have not cleaned away all of the
connective tissue from the structures being displayed. In 'complete'
gain manipulative skills and is unable to see and feel the structures as
dissections it is often impossible to preserve accurately the original
they are progressively revealed by scalpel and scissors. Secondly, it
 topographical relationships of vessels and nerves. Also, such dissec-
means that the student must rapidly and in quick succession master
tions encourage the student to think that textbook drawings are real
complexities that were more surely understood by the leisurely methods
and that adipose, fascial and areolar tissues should not exist. We have
of 40 years ago. Nothing can fully compensate for the lack of personal
 tried to make the photographs represent the structures as they really
dissection by the skilled dissector supplemented by the intelligent use
 appear during the course of an actual dissection.
of graphic methods to record the work as it progresses. However, our
It is no part of our plan, as teachers of veterinary anatomy, to entice 
experience at the Royal Veterinary College over many years has con-
the students out of the dissection room, away from the specimens, and
vinced us that the work of the skilful prosector, carefully studied,
 into the comfort of armchairs for their study of practical topographi-
recorded and annotated, can be more useful than personal dissections
m see ue apaod o pandne aaey am 'rane de [
of large animals carried out hurriedly by a group of inexpert
which they can extend their own personal study of dissections of the
students.
horse at times when the dissections are no longer readily available.
One problem in the teaching of topographical anatomy from pre-
This is not an atlas of applied veterinary anatomy, but it is intended
m sapns suod jo Ano a usq sy suads pared
for veterinary students; considerable emphasis is given to those regions
enough good preparations of a full range of dissection stages of spe-
 and structures that seem important for the veterinarian in practice. As
cifc regions. It is our sincere hope that this photographic atlas of
far as possible, the photographs have been taken to provide infor-
pdad u up s rg aeso o du lm suns
mation about the animal as it is seen during a routine clinical examina-
specimens. For those students who are able to carry out their own
 tion - other views have been used only occasionally, even though they
detailed dissections, this atlas will provide a permanent reminder of
are sometimes more informative from a strictly anatomical stand-
what they saw, or should have seen, during each stage (often transi-
point. It is hoped that the clinical student and the practising veterinar-
tory) of the dissection.
ian may find this approach of value in examination, diagnosis and
The sequence of dissections presented in this volume is an expanded
treatment of the standing animal. The experimentalist may also find
version of that used by us for a series of twenty 3-hour sessions on the
that some of his problems of topographical anatomy are illuminated
topographical anatomy of the horse. Each stage of the work has been
by these photographs of dissections. We realize that his requirements
photographed in order to show many more stages of each major dis-
 are diverse and unpredictable and have made our labelling of the
section than could be shown in our practical demonstration classes.
various series of dissections as complete as possible with this in mind.
We hope that this will compensate for the loss of the third dimension
Radiographs and scans have been added to this new edition in the
that is inevitable in photographs of dissections. We have tried to
 hope that they will give a useful introduction to an increasingly impor-
 present the progression of required dissections as they occurred. Where
 tant aspect of veterinary anatomy.
in demonstrating all of the structures as planned, we have not substi-
RRA
tuted a different specimen in the sequence; this would have broken the
SD
This page intentionally eft blank
1.THE HEAD
(INCLUDING THE SKIN)
Clinical importance of the skin
infestation, equine ventral midline dermatitis and paraflariasis.
Bacterial skin diseases are widespread and include specific exotic
The surface of the horse is clinically important. Any part is liable to
infections such as glanders (a zoonosis). Much more likely is one
trauma because of the activities in which a horse participates. For
of a whole range of opportunistic bacterial infections including those
example, ponies collide with obstacles, thoroughbreds with fences, and
involving Dermatophilus (rainscald); in many cases where there are
hunters with any hazard in the feld. Therefore, the skin of the horse
 pyogenic organisms involved, wounds progress to form an abscess.
Mycoses include Sporothrix, histoplasmosis and, much more rou-
to the presence of other horses, so there is a real possibility of being
tinely, ringworm infections. A variety of hypersensitivity or similar
kicked. Head trauma is always a risk; brain damage as well as skull
reactions are also seen, including Culicoides hypersensitivity, urticaria
fractures may result, and the neurological effects can be detected by a
pemphigus, and lupus erythematosus. Nodular skin disease and
full neurological examination.
 neoplastic papillomatosis may be seen, but are not common. The
The skin is one of the largest and most important systems of the
exception is probably sarcoids which are very common in all horses;
erir
body in the horse. Physical examination of the surface of the horse
they are a type of fibroblastic skin tumour. In addition, melanomas
12
will help to assess general bodily condition. Also, the skin itself may
 Occur in grey horses. Other miscellaneous skin conditions include
of Ve
be examined and the distribution and sizes of lesions may be noted.
r o   n   
tlas
Clinical manifestations may include alopecia (hair loss) and pruritis
origin and associated with poisonous plants, especially ragwort
(itching). Physical examination may also detect signs of trauma in the
(Senecio).
form of wounds, bites, burns, thermal injuries, acute swellings
(oedema), insect stings and bites particularly midge bites from Culi-
coides, and the consequences of any initial injury. There are many
consequences of surface trauma and these include inflammation, infec-
Clinical importance of the head
tion, oedema, haematomas, chronic wound infections, lymphangitis
We will now consider the various regions and structures in the equine
(immunological disorders).
head, but disorders of the larynx and guttural pouch are discussed in
The skin will also show evidence of generalized systemic distur-
Chapter 2.
bances. It may show dehydration, congestion, oedema, possibly jaun-
The mucous membranes of the eye, mouth and nose give a
dice etc. and will be visibly affected when the horse is suffering from
 good assessment of the cardiovascular system and general bodily
any form of malnutrition. Many of these conditions will require treat-
state. They may reveal cyanosis (blue colour), which is a failure of
ment, and a thorough knowledge of anatomy will be important, par-
 oxygenation, pallor (anaemia), or even yellow as in jaundice, of which 
ticularly if diagnostic techniques (e.g. radiography, ultrasonography,
there are various causes in the horse. The ear is often involved in
 diagnostic nerve blocks), treatments (bandaging, corrective farriery)
surface injuries but may also suffer from infections. There may be
and surgery are required. There are also diagnostic techniques that can
pain on handling, discharges, swellings and abnormal head/ear
be applied to the skin - these include skin scrapings, stains, microbio-
carriage. Specific diseases include parasitic infections such as Otodec-
logical culture and biopsy techniques.
tes and also lesions from small biting flies. Sarcoids (fibroblastic
One of the important truisms is that the horse has four feet on the
tumours) are found throughout the body. They occur in many forms
ground; these are easily damaged. Always remember the old adage
on the skin and are often found in the ear. They may be occult, ver-
that the frst place to look for the seat of lameness is in the foot. Punc-
rucose, nodular, fbroblastic, malevolent or of a mixed type. Otitis
ture wounds are common, and these may progress to solar abscesses
media (inflammation of the middle ear within the tympanic cavity)
and other abnormalities discussed in the section on the foot. Piercing
 may result in rupture of the ear drum and may be associated with
of the feet by nails from incorrect shoeing, or from losing a shoe trau-
extension of guttural pouch disease or haematogenous spread of pus-
matically, is also a relatively common accident.
forming bacteria.
Treatment of wounds is a whole subject in itself. There are four
 The eye is often examined to give a general assessment of health.
phases: inflammation and debridement, repair, maturation and wound
 The *sunken eye' (loss of the periorbital fat from the eye socket) may
healing. The approach to wounds is important. Wounds to the trunk
be caused by dehydration or by wasting and emaciation. It is often
often heal by contraction and are treated by daily cleaning (wound
one of the first abnormalities detected at a full clinical examination.
lavage and debridement), because they cannot be dressed easily.
The eye may also be discoloured. Pale ocular mucous membranes may
Wounds in distal parts of the limbs are often complicated by oedema,
suggest one of several types of anaemia. There may be excessive red
and often heal with ‘proud fesh'. ‘First intention’ wound healing
cell destruction, resulting from renal or hepatic failure. Neonatal iso-
follows suturing, but wounds that are either infected, or too extensive
s o    n  s a  si
to suture, heal by *second intention’ and these repair, ultimately, by
is also a possibility. The mare produces antibodies to the RBCs of the
granulation tissue. Wounds require treatment and lots of time - in the
foal, which are then concentrated in the colostrum and the foal receives
horse, poor wound healing is a feature of a number of cases. There
these antibodies when suckled.
are many factors which delay wound healing, and these are beyond
Examination of the eye is performed quite frequently as part
the scope of this introduction. Nowadays, a whole new field of equine
of a pre-purchase examination. The eye is often involved in fractures
surgery is possible, using skin grafting to repair these abnormalities of
 of the orbit and periorbital region, associated with trauma in racing
wound healing.
or hunting. Young horses falling over backwards may fracture the
There is a multitude of skin conditions in the horse. Many of these
basisphenoid or basioccipital bone and, occasionally, the petrous tem-
are parasitic and include lice, mange of various types, and miscella-
poral bones. There is a good prognosis for these fractures if the eyeball
neous parasitic skin conditions including onchocerciasis, harvest mite 
itself is not involved in the process. There are several developmental
abnormalities of the eye that may be found, including microphthal-
tube is advanced gently to allow swallowing. Radiography, ultrasonics
mos, anopthalmos and endophthalmos up to the sclera. The sclera is
 and exercise tests including exercise endoscopy, are also used to
involved in pion. Orbital neoplasia can also occur, but is very rare.
examine these structures.
The head is obviously the most rostral part of the body and there-
The eyelids are often affected by trauma (eyelid lacerations are quite
common) which causes inflammation. Entropion and ectropion (in-
fore particularly prone to trauma. In these cases there may be facial
H
turning and out-turning of the eyelashes on the abnormal lids) are also
deformity or swelling. Jaw fractures occur reasonably commonly,
ead
seen in the horse.
especially to the body and the incisive region of the mandible. In the
 There are a whole variety of eye conditions, most of which require
upper jaw, the incisive bone is most commonly affected. These frac-
specialist ophthalmological investigations and are beyond the scope
ud
of this chapter. More straightforward diagnoses include infammation
sedation, and may require braces, splints or pins and long screw fixa-
of the conjunctiva (conjunctivitis). Foreign bodies may be found in
tion. These fractures may be accompanied by dental problems and
the conjuctival sac. The lacrimal duct may be narrowed or blocked.
other problems may follow extraction. Infections of the gingival
Corneal problems may include infammation (keratitis), ulceration
margins may lead to dental alveolitis.
and foreign bodies. Bacterial, viral and mycotic keratitis may occur.
One of the key anatomical relationships in the head of the horse
The uveal tract (iris, ciliary body and choroid) may be involved in
is between the nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses and teeth. The paranasal
 disease processes such as acute or recurrent equine uveitis. Neoplasia,
sinuses develop as progressive invasions of the diploe of the bones
such as squamous cell carcinoma of the third eyelid, is rare. Congenital
of the skull by the epithelium of the nasal cavity. The sinuses
and acquired cataracts are not common, neither is glaucoma. The
lighten the skull, insulate the brain from outside temperature variation
fundus of the eye of the horse is subject to a considerable range of
 and facilitate mucociliary clearance of the inhaled debris (look at the
variations. Pathological changes may include retinal detachment,
dust in a stable after the bedding or hay has been shaken out!).
retinal haemorrhage, retinal atrophy and inflammation. Optic nerve
These sinus cavities are normally air-filled, resonant, and lined by
neuropathy, optic neuritis and optic nerve atrophy are rarely
 a    S g sd a so
diagnosed.
indication of a sinusitis that can subsequently be confirmed by radi-
The mucous membrane of the nose should be inspected in a general 
 ography and endoscopy. Sinusitis may be associated with mycoses
assessment of health. Discharges at the nostril can be very variable
 or neoplasia. The discharge may be mucopurulent, mucoid or
and include serous fluid, mucus, mucopurulent or purulent discharges
serous.
and frank haemorrhage. They can originate from the nose itself or
Left and right sides of the head have paranasal sinuses that
from any part of the respiratory tract, including the sinuses and the
 are separated by midline septa. On each side, two maxillary sinuses
 guttural pouches or even from the lung.
(rostral and caudal) extend progressively into the diploe of the maxilla
The nostrils should be examined, as they may show a variety of
from the middle nasal meatus through the nasomaxillary opening. The
chan ges including hypertrophy of the alar folds, atheroma of the nasal 
large caudal maxillary sinus extends caudally into the sphenoid and
diverticulum (false nostril) or trauma and necrosis of the alar cartilage.
palatine bones to form the sphenopalatine sinus. It also extends
Foreign bodies and nasal polyps are commonly found, but amyloido-
through the frontomaxillary opening to form the frontal sinus. The
sis, ‘wry nose', fungal diseases and atheroma are rare. At the nostrils 
   o     sa s 
a specific haemorrhage, called epistaxis (idiopathic), may be seen in 
endoturbinate bone (the dorsal nasal concha) to form the dorsal
racehorses. It is associated with racing. Exercise-induced pulmonary
conchal sinus. The frontal sinus also extends into the second
haemorrhage (EIPM) is also seen at the nostrils. The nostrils are a
ethmoidal endoturbinate bone to form the middle conchal sinus. The
common site for nasal lacerations.
smaller rostral maxillary sinus also extends caudally into the caudal
 The upper respiratory tract is really important in equine practice.
 part of the ventral nasal concha through the conchomaxillary opening
Horses that have run into objects, or have been kicked, may suffer
to form the ventral conchal sinus. (The anatomy is complicated by the
from serious trauma to the nasal cavity. Many types of injury can
presence of the conchal bulla which lies ventral to the conchomaxillary
occur and new diagnoses are being added all the time, particularly as
opening).
a result of imaging techniques. These injuries include fractures to the
 The frontal sinus has a conchal part and a frontal part; drainage
walls of the paranasal sinuses or nasal passages; in these cases epistaxis 
goes into the caudal maxillary sinus through the frontomaxillary
will most obviously be a feature.
foramen. The ethmoidal and sphenopalatine sinuses also drain into
The nasal cavity provides a pathway through which the stomach
the caudal maxillary sinuses and thus into the middle meatus. The
0 pasn aq ueo adoosopua au1 'passed aq uo adoosopua 1o 2qm
rostral maxillary sinus has a drainage pathway into the middle nasal
examine the sinuses, pharynx, larynx, Eustachian tube, guttural pouch,
 meatus through the nasomaxillary opening. This sinus is divided into
trachea and major bronchi of the lower respiratory tract, and also the
 a lateral bony compartment and a medial conchal compartment
 oesophagus and stomach. It can be used to take pictures of anatomical
(within the ventral concha). These compartments are separated by the
abnormalities or lesions. It can be used to wash out structures and
 infra-orbital canal and a sheet of bone joining it ventrally to the roots
collect lavage fuids and tissues or discharges for culture, or cytology.
 of the teeth. In the young horse, the lateral component is almost
It can also be used for biopsy. Nasotracheal intubation is a very useful
entirely occupied by the roots of the cheek teeth. With age, the roots
technique for the investigation of respiratory disorders. Dynamic
recede towards the foor of the sinus and the sinus increases in size.
 Po ree au adosua reaqn Aq paan q uo ssdeoo A
 The ventral conchal sinus is accessible for surgery through the floor
is refected and the tube is passed along the ventral nasal meatus into
 of the concho-frontal sinus.
the pharynx and then into the trachea, with the head elevated to
Inflammation of the sinuses can occur by extension from the
 prevent the tube being swallowed. For orotracheal intubation the
 other mucosal surfaces. If they become filled with mucopurulent
ton gue must be pulled out, a speculum is placed in the mouth, and the
 exudates these must be drained by trephination because the natural
drainage ostia are not at the lowest points of the sinus system. Treat-
ridges ('shear mouth’ or “18-month mouth'). In cases of tramautic
ment of sinusitis involves trephining a hole in the bone over the sinus.
injury, teeth may be split.
The frontal sinus, dorsal and medial to the orbit, can be trephined
 Dental diseases may show as ^quidding' (drooling of the food from
along a line from the medial ocular angle (canthus) to the mid-line,
 the corners of the mouth), facial distortion, facial swelling and a nasal
about 1 cm caudal to the mid-point of this line. The caudal maxillary
 discharge. Overgrown teeth occur if the opposing tooth is missing.
sinus is trephined 3 cm lateral to the medial canthus and 3 cm dorsal
 Periodontal disease is also possible. Occasionally, cheek teeth may be
to the facial crest. The rostral maxillary sinus can be trephined at a
displaced and there may be supplementary teeth. Dental caries may
point half way along the line from the medial canthus to the rostral
 Occur, accompanied by alveolar periosteitis, as a result of bacterial
 fermentation leading to erosion of the enamel.
can be collected from the sinuses and can be cultured for bacterial
The rostral cheek teeth can be removed by oral extraction, princi-
examination and antibiotic sensitivity testing. The sinus can then be
pally by lateral buccotomy. This involves removal of alveolar bone,
flushed out and treated. Sinus cysts, sinus polyps and neoplasia occur
taking care not to damage the facial nerve. Retropulsion, with a
infrequen tly.
punch, is also used for removing the mandibular and maxillary teeth.
Four other conditions involving the head require some knowledge
The upper cheek teeth 4 and 5 (M', M') are taken out through the
of anatomy. Occasional horses may show acute salivation (idiopathic
maxillary sinus and 6 (M) through the frontal sinus. In this you have
sialo-adenitis). Even more rarely do we find occlusion of the salivary
to trephine (make a hole in the bone) over the tooth to be extracted
 ducts and possible mucocoele. Head shaking is also an equine phe-
and then punch it out. Care must be taken to avoid damage to the
nomenon. *Crib biting' is a habitual neurotic vice which can produce
 adjacent teeth. Complications do occur, including collateral damage,
 extreme wear in the incisor teeth. It can suggest an abnormality of diet.
dental sequestration, alveolar bone sequestra and oronasal fistulae. In
It fulfls a functional digestive need in that it helps to meet the demand
the mandible, retropulsion needs to be performed carefully because
for unsatisfied foraging behaviour. Lastly, there may be masseter
 the parotid duct runs along the ventromedial edge of the body of the
myopathy. In this, there is atrophy of the muscles, probably caused
mandible, with the facial vessels. They turn laterally and dorsally close
by damage to the masseteric nerve, which is superficial and easily
to the roots of the molar teeth.
damaged in accidents.
Peripheral nerve or cranial nerve damage is not common. There are
The lymph nodes are important. The streptococcal infection known
 probably two exceptions: damage to the facial nerve and damage to
as strangles (caused by Strepiococcus equi) is a particularly severe
the nerves associated with the guttural pouch (i.e. those traversing the
purulent infection of the submandibular nodes, but may extend to
foramen lacerum). The facial nerve can be damaged by trauma and
other nodes of the head and neck and even into the thorax. The
this leads to paresis and paralysis. All three branches can be affected
former epizootic disease (glanders) caused by Pfeifferella mallei also
together at the nucleus level (in the pons) but the auricular, palpebral
severely affects the lymph nodes of the head. Any local infection may
and buccal branches may be damaged separately on the face. The site
cause swelling of the parotid, retropharyngeal and submandibular
of the damage on the face determines which nerve, and therefore which
lymph nodes.
muscles, are affected. The buccal branches are probably the most
Alimentary tract disorders affecting the oral cavity are less common
 exposed, over the body of the mandible and the masseter muscle.
than disorders of the teeth or nasal cavity. Traumatic injuries to the
Damage to the facial nerve at any point will lead to abnormalities of
tongue may or may not include glossal nerve damage. Paralysis of
facial expression. All of the branches will be affected if the lesions
the tongue may indicate botulism. Viral stomatitis and oral ulceration
 (such as fractures of the hyoid bone, or the cranial floor, or damage
are also sporadically diagnosed
to the guttural pouch) occur near the base of the brain.
The teeth of the horse are hypsodont (high-crowned), composed
Local nerve blocks may be performed on the head, principally for
of enamel (hard and brittle, 98% inorganic), dentine (slightly softer,
facilitating wound repair (e.g. auriculopalpebral, lacrimal, zygomatic
70-80% inorganic), cementum (with structural affinities to bone)
 or infratrochlear nerves). In the past, mental and mandibular nerve
and the pulp (soft). Deciduous incisor teeth erupt soon after birth. The
blocks for dental surgery were also performed but general anaesthesia
central incisor teeth (il) erupt at less than 2 weeks, the second
is now a much safer option. Occasionally, both are used together. A
incisors (i2) at about 6 weeks, and third incisors (i3) at around
detailed analysis of the disorders of the central nervous system, espe-
69 months (you can remember 8 days, 8 weeks and 8 months
cially the infectious diseases, is beyond the scope of this clinical intro-
more easily). Two-year-olds then shed the central deciduous incisors,
duction but a brief list would have to include Japanese B encephalitis,
3-year-olds the second (lateral) incisors and 4-year-olds the third
equine protozoal encephalitis, rabies, Western, Eastern and Venezu-
(corner) incisors. If all permanent incisor teeth (11, 12, 13) are in wear,
elan encephalitis and equine herpes virus infections and now, of course,
the horse is over 5 years old. Foals have three deciduous premolar
West Nile virus infections.
cheek teeth. The permanent premolar teeth (P2, P3, P4) are usually
Recently, a specific protozoal myeloencephalomyelitis (associated
called ‘cheek teeth 1,2 and 3' in clinical work. They erupt at approx.
2.5, 3 and 3.5-4 years. The molar teeth (M1, M2 and M3) are usually
ized non-specific disorders such as vasculitis, epilepsy, ataxia and
called cheek teeth 4,5 and 6' in clinical work. They erupt at 1, 2 and
equine degenerative myeloencephalopathy should be listed. Equine
3.5-4 years of age.
motor neuron disease, botulism, tetanus and organophosphorus poi-
 In the young horse, developmental disorders of the teeth may
 soning should be included in the list.
include retained deciduous teeth, displacement of cheek teeth, and
 Pharyngeal lymphoid hyperplasia is an inflammatory condition of
dentigerous cysts which are usually manifest as a discharging tract at
the pharyngeal mucosa. Pharyngeal trauma, lacerations and foreign
the base of the ear. Teeth may also acquire disorders such as sharp
bodies may be seen. Dorsal displacement of the soft palate occurs nor-
edges (which require rasping - an energetic sport for the young and
fit!), undulating occlusal surfaces ('wave mouth'), or loss of enamel
fast exercise; it is diagnosed by endoscopy. In this condition, the free
border of the palatal arch becomes dislodged from its normal, sub-
joint can follow bacteraemia or septicaemia. If infected, it can be pal-
epiglottic, position. Unsupported soft tissue is then inhaled into the rima
 pated; quite often there is swelling in the joint capsule and the fuid
glottidis causing acute respiratory obstruction. It may be caused by
can be aspirated. Clinically, there is considerable diffculty in swallow-
fatigue or by disorders of the soft palate itself, or by disorders of the
ing (dysphagia) leading to ^quidding’ (dropping of food) and possibly
epiglottis and conditions that cause mouth breathing and pharyngeal
asymmetry of the masseter muscles.
Head
 discomfort. Remember the horse is an obligate nose breather.
The larynx and the auditory tube, including the guttural pouch, are
The temporomandibular joint is of considerable veterinary impor-
 discussed in the section dealing with the neck and the clinical problems
(inch
tance. It may be fractured, leading to displacement, but disease in this 
of airway obstruction.
luding the s
skin)
Fig. 1.1 Surface features of the head: rostral view. The palpable bony
features have been shaved. This young gelding was a red roan, with
conjoined star and stripe on frontal and dorsal nasal regions. The 
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
position of the hair vortex is variable and there may be two vortices.
scutiform cartilage
forelock
rostrafandcaudal
borders
ofauricie
white star
zygomaticarch
frontal bone,
position of supraorbital
temporal fine
foramen
frontal bone, zygomnatic
process
divergent hair vortex
wing of atias
dorsaf orbital rim
transverse processes of
cervicalvertebrae
palpebral fissure
white stripe
facialcrest
nasoincisive notch
infraorbitalforamen
position ofnasal
phntrum
diverticulum
medial and lateral alae of
maxillary and mandibular
nostril
orallabia
Fig. 1.2 Bones of the head: rostral view. The palpable bony features
shown in Fig. 1.1 are coloured red. The mental foramen is also shown
(see Figs. 1.4 and 1.5).
The Head
ski
phitrum
angleofmouth
ventral commissure of
nostril
linguatapexinproperoral
cavity, bearing fungiform
papilae
ig labialenamef coming
intowear
infundibuluminocclusaf
surface ofiz
secondary denfine in
occlusal surface of i
labial enamelofi
cavityoforalvestibule
finehairsandcoarse
fine hairs and coarse
tactile hairs of
tactie hairs of
maxillary
mandibular
fabium
labium
Fig. 1.3 The lips and incisor teeth: left rostrolateral view. The third temporary mandibular incisor tooth erupts at about 6-9 months of age, and by
18 months this tooth is usually well in wear. The hairs of both labia form divergent hair vortices and those on the maxillary labium may be long
forming a 'moustache'.
Fig. 1.4 Surface features of the head: left lateral view. The palpable bony
features have been shaved. The nasal region is markedly concave and the
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
frontal region is rather convex. This dished shape is characteristic of
Arab horses.
scutiform cartilage
forelock
frontal bone, zygomatic
！
rostralandcaudal
process
borders ofauricle
frontal bone,tempora!
mane
fine
wing of atlas
dorsaf orbital rim
zygomatic arch
paipebral fissure
mandibularcondyle
infraorbital foramen
mandibular ramus,
caudal border
nasoincisive notch
facial crest
fateralala of nostril
mandibular body, ventral
border
mentum, bearing tactile
hairs
mental foramen
maxillaryandmandibular
oral labia
Fig. 1.5 Bones of the head: left
lateral view.Thepalpablebony
features shown in Fig. 1.4 are
coloured red. The skull is not,
however, of the same dished shape.
Head
t
dorsaf commissure of
nasoincisive notch
nostril
medial ala bearing long
position of nasal
harrs
diverticulum
alarfold containing
lamina of alar cartilage
lateralala
orifice ofnasolacrimal
cornu of alar cartiage;
duct
positionofapex
ventral commissure of
tactilehairsofmaxillary
nostril
fabium
 Fig. 1.6 The nostril: left rostro-lateral view. The medial ala has been lifted to display the nasolacrimal orifice, using a glass rod placed in the dorsal
nasal meatus. A blue arrow indicates the dorsal entrance into the nasal diverticulum. The cavity of the diverticulum is shown in Fig. 1.7. Further
 details of the nostrils in the fresh state are shown in Figs. 1.39-1.41, including the relationships of the alar cartilage.
Fig. 1.7 Superficial structures of the head: left
lateral view. Further details of this dissection are
shown in Figs. 1.8-1.11. The lateral wall of the
 nasal diverticulum has been cut away. A yellow
paste was injected into the left guttural pouch,
and this appears at the left nostril.
scutiform cartilage
m.parotidoauricularis
m.frontoscutularis:
pars frontalis
Darotid gland
pars temporalis
wing of atfas
temporal line
supraorbital adipose
m.obtiguus capitis
tissue
cranialis
temporomandibular joint
m. splenius
zygomatic arch
m. fongissimus capitis
frontal bone, zygomatic
m. obliquus capitis
process
caudalis
m.malaris
m. cteidocephalicus
facial crest
n. cervicafis ff,
r. ventralis
m.levator labiimaxilfaris
n.faciafis VII
m.fevator nasofabialis
v.maxilfaris
a.v.faciafis
V. jugutaris externa
nasoincisive notch
m. sternomandibularis
m.zygomaticus
m.omohyoideus et
nasal diverticutum
m.sternohyoideus
m.masseter, pars
m. caninus
superficialis
parotid duct
parotid duct
m. buccinator, pars
buccalis
v.linguofacialis
m. depressor fabii
manoibularis
 borders of mandible
10
 Fig. 1.8 Superfcial structures of the parotid and masseteric regions:
left lateral view. This is a closer view of a part of the dissection shown
in Fig. 1.7.
The Head
m. frontoscutularis:
m.spfenius
parstemporalis
m. parotidoauricularis
n. auriculopalpebralis
V. auricularis caudafis
(VI1)
m.obtiguus capitis
supraorbital adipose tissue
craniafis
m. longissimus capitis
n. frontalis (opth. V)
m. obiiquus capitis
supraorbital foramen
caudafis
zygomatic arch
n.facialis Vl!
frontal bone, zygomatic
n.auriculotemporalis
process
(mand. V):
r.communicans
temporomandibularjoint
r. transversus faciei
a.carotis externa,
n. facialis Vll,r. coll
r.massetericus
parotid gland
v.massetericaventralis
a.v. transversa faciei
m. levator labii maxilaris
parotid duct
m. masseter, pars
v.maxillaris
superficialis
n. facialis Vlf:
.linguofaciatis
r. buccalis dorsafis
m. sternomandibularis
r. buccalis ventralis
m. omohyoideus et
m. zygomaticus
m.sternohyoideus
lacrimal bone
/m.malaris
m. fevator labi maxilaris
m. levator nasolabialis
nasal bone
m.zygomaticus
position of infraorbital
n. faciafis Vlfr. buccalis
foramen
dorsalis
V. angufaris ocuti
m.masseter, pars
superficiafis
v.dorsalis nasi
n. facialis Vllr. buccalis
a. fateralis nasi
ventralis
a.anguraris oculi
a.v.faciafis
position of nasoincisive
notch
 termination of facial crest
nasal diverticufum
parotid duct
alar cartiage, dorsal
border of lamina
m. buccinator, pars
buccafis
m.caninus
mandible
a.labialis maxillaris
m.depressor fabii
mandibularis
position of mental
m.depressorangufioris
foramen
Fig. 1.9 Superficial structures of the facial regions: left lateral view. This is a closer view of the dissection shown in Fig. 1.7. The nerve foramina are
revealed in Fig. 1.12. Further details of the nostrils are shown in Figs. 1.39-1.41.
11
Fig. 1.10 Superficial structures of the cranial and facial regions: left
craniolateral view. This figure does not show the fne branches of the
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
lacrimal nerve which, together with those of the auriculopalpebral and
frontal nerves, form a superficial nerve plexus. On the right hand side,
the skin incisions which expose the paranasal sinuses (Fig. 1.35-1.38)
are shown.
m.frontoscufuraris:
pars frontalis pars temporalis
m.interscutufaris
/m.parotidoauricularis
n.auriculopaipebratis
parotid gland
(VI)
 supraorbital adipose
zygomaticarch
tissue
a.v. transversa faciei
n.frontalis(opth. V)
n.auricutotemporalis
(mand. V) r. transversus
faciei
m.orbicutaris ooufi:
pars paipebralis of upper
n. facialis Vff:
eyelid
r. buccafis dorsalis
pars orbicufaris dorsalis
r. buccalis ventralis
etventralis
m.zygomaticus and
faciafcrest
m.malaris
m.masseter,pars
superficialis
m.levatorlabiimaxillaris
a.v.facialis
m.fevator nasolabialis
v.fabiafis communis
nasaf diverticutum
a.labiafismandiburaris
parotid duct
12
a.v.transversa faciei
n. facialis Vlf, r. colfi
n.auriculotemporalis
(mand. V) r.transversus
parotid gland
faciei
V.maxillaris
The Head
n. facialis Vll:
r.buccalis ventralis
V. jugularis externa
r. buccalis dorsalis
v.finguofacialis
m.masseter,pars
angle of mandible
superficialis
mandibulargland
parotid duct
a. labialis mandibutaris
m. sternohyoideus et
m.omohyoideus
v.labialis communis
positionof vascular notch
ofmandible
skin)
m.buccinator
a.y.facialis
m.depressorlabii
mandibularis
inn.mandibulares
body of mandible
ffap of skin, reffected
Fig. 1.11 Structures traversing the mandibular vascular notch: left ventrolateral view.
This view, which is a part of the dissection shown in Fig. 1.7, shows the palpable 
structures at the ventral and caudal borders of the mandible. The vascular notch is
a distinct groove in the ventral border of the mandible; shown in Fig. 1.23.
Fig. 1.12 The infraorbital and mental foramina
and nerves: left lateral view. The overlying parts
of the labial muscles (shown by dotted blue
lines) have been resected to expose the foramina
and reveal the relationships between muscles
and foramina.
m.fevator labii
rostraltermination of
maxillaris
maxilla
faciaf crest
m.levator nasolabialis
m.masseter,pars
n. infraorbitalis (max. V)
superficialis
atinfraorbitalforamen
parotid duct
nasal bone
a.v.facialis
m. levator labii maxillaris
longitudinalraphe of
m. levator nasotabialis
m. buccinator, pars
buccalis
incisive bone
m.depressor labii
nasal diverticulum
(opened)
mandibularis
m.caninus
n. mentalis (mand. V)at
mentalforamenin
m.zygomaticus
mandibularbody
m.orbicularis oris
n. auriculopaipebralis
(V/)
m. parotidoauricularis
m.splenius
m. frontoscutularis,
plastictube
 s
n. facialis Vll:
r.coi
zygomatic arch
r. digastricus
temporomandibular joint -
gutteraf pouch (yellow
V. temporalis superficialis -
nectionmass)
wing of atlas
(mand. V) -
-a. auricularis caudalis
nn. parotidei
a.v.transversa
faciei
m. digastricus, pars
occipitomandibularis
a.carotis extema
 m. cleidocephalicus
m. masseter
-V. maxillaris
n. facialis Vl:
n.cervicalisI
r.buccafisdorsafis
rventralis
r buccalis ventralis
m.stenomandibularis
angle of mandibie
parotid duct
hn. mandibuares
v. jugularis extema
mandibular gland
a.facialis
m. stemomandibularis
skin reflected
v.flinguofacialis
m. omohyoideus et
m. stemohyoideus
 Fig. 1.13 The parotid region after removal of the parotid gland: left caudolateral view.
 The parotid duct has been pinned in place after removal of the gland. A plastic
tube was inserted into the most dorsal part of the guttural pouch and a paste of
yellow plaster was injected to fill the pouch and the auditory tube (see Fig. 1.7). The
boundaries of the triangle of Viborg are shown in green.
temporomandibular
joint capsule
m. frontoscututaris
external acoustic meatus
zygomatic arch
n.auriculopalpebralis
(V/I)
mandibular condyle
n.facialisV!
m.masseter,pars
profunda
guftural pouch
n. facialis Vlf,
n. massetericus (mand. V)
ff.buccales
sinus v. buccalis
inn.parotidei
m. masseter, origin from
m. digastricus, pars.
facialcrest
occipitomandibutaris
sinus v. transversa faciei
v.transversa faciei(cut)
sinusv.profundafaciei
V.maxifaris
dorsaf buccal gland
m. sternomandibufaris
n. buccalis (mand. V)
v.linguofacialis
n. faciafis Vff.
v.maxillaris
r.buccalis dorsalis
r.massetericus
(displaced ventrally)
mandibular gland
m.buccinator:
mandibularramus
pars molaris
m. masseter, insertions
pars buccalis
onmandible
mandibular body
parotid duct
a.v.facialis at vascufar
nofch of mandibie
 Fig. 1.14 The mandible after removal of the masseter muscle: left lateral view. Most
 of the masseter muscle has been removed and the transverse facial vein has been 
 transected to expose the condyle, ramus and body of the mandible. The veins of this
region are shown injected with blue latex in Fig. 1.43.
14
auricularcartiage
styloid process
scutiform cartifage
R,auriculopaipebralis
The Head (including the s
annular cantilage
(VI)
a.v.temporalis
n.facialis VlI
superficialis
gutturalpouch
a.v. transversa faciei
a.carotis externa
m.masseter,pars
Inn.parotidei
profunda
m. pterygoideus medialis
mandibular ramus
m.digastricus pars
v.buccalis
occipitomandibufaris
V.profunda faciei
mandibufar giand
skin)
v.maxillaris
v.maxilaris
n.lingualis (mand.V)
Inn. cervicales profundi
craniales
/.transversafacie
m. cricopharyngeus
n. buccalis (mand. V)
m. pterygoideus lateralis
dorsaf buccaf glands
n. alveolaris (mand. V)
n. faciafis Vil,
1.buccalis dorsalis
n.myfohyoideus
(displaced)
a.v.facialis
parotid duct
m.mylohyoideus
mandibuiar body
V. subfingualis
m. depressor labii
mandibularis
Fig. 1.15 Structures lying medial to the mandible: left lateral view. Removal of most of 
the left side of the mandible reveals the pterygoid muscles and associated structures.
The mandibular alveolar nerve was cut at the mandibular foramen; the cut end,
therefore, demonstrates the level of the foramen on the medial aspect of the mandible.
auricufar cartilage,
styloid process
annutar cartiage
plastictube in dorsal
extremity of guttural
a.v.temporalis
superficiafis
pouch
n.auriculopaipebralis
V. transversa faciei
(VI1)
a.alveolaris
n. facialis VlI
manoibularis
a.auriculariscaudalis
V.maxilaris
v.buccalis
a.carotis externa
guttura pouch, lateral
n.a/veolaris
part
mandibutaris (mand. V)
m.digastricus:
n. lingualis (mand. V)
v.transversafaciei
ventercaudalis
V. profunda faciei
m. cricopharyngeus
 dorsal buccal glands
mandibular gland
n.buccalis (mand. V)
n.facialis Vll,
m.stylohyoideus
r. buccalis dorsalis
stylohyoid bone
V. sublingualis
m. depressor labi
mandibularis
a.v.facialis
m.mylohyoideus
Inn. mandibulares
n.mylohyoideus
(mand.V)
Fig. 1.16 Structures lying medial to the pterygoid muscles: left lateral view (1). The
medial pterygoid muscle has been removed, but the pharyngeal fascia, which covers 
the stylohyoid bone and associated structures, has been preserved. The dissection
 of the structures lying in the pharyngeal fascia is shown in Figs. 1.17-1.21.
15
Fig. 1.17 Structures lying medial to the pterygoid muscles: left lateral view
(2). Removal of the pharyngeal fascia and two parts of the digastricus 
muscle exposes the structures lying around the wall of the pharynx. This
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
fgure illustrates the general anatomy of bones, muscles, blood vessels 
and lymph nodes. Fig. 1.18 shows the nerves of the region.
scutiform cartilage
annular cartilage
m.frontoscutularis,
auricular cartiage.
parstemporalis
styloid process
a.v.temporalis
m. longissimus capitis
superficialis
m. obliquus capitis:
a. transversa faciei
craniahis
caudalis
temporomandibularjoint
v. transversa faciei
m.occipitohyoideus
guttural pouch:
m.masseter,pars
medial part
profunda
lateralpart
a.maxillaris
m. cleidocephaficus
V. maxillaris
t. linguofacialis
mandibular ramus
a.carotis externa
m.pterygoideuslateralis
Inn.retropharyngei:
m. palatopharyngeus
mediales
laterales
a. palatina ascendens
mandibular gfand
Stylohyoid bone
m. stylohyoideus
v. buccalis
Inn. cervicales profundi
palatine glands
craniales
m.styloglossus
m.hyopharyngeus
a.lingualis
m. cricopharyngeus
m.hyoglossus
m.thyropharyngeus
a.facialis
m. sternomandibularis
m.myiohyoideus
. linguofacialis
m.thyrohyoideus
a.y.sublingualis
m.digastricus,
m.omohyoideus et
venterrostralis
m.sternohyoideus
16
Fig. 1.18 Structures lying medial to the pterygoid muscles: left lateral view
(3). This is a closer view of the dissection in Fig. 1.17 to show the nerves
 of the region. Further details are shown in Figs. 1.20, 1.21 and 1.25-1.27.
The Head
1(including
the
ski
n.auriculopalpebralis(vit)
n.facialis Vff:
plastic tube used to fill
r. digastricus
guttural pouch
rr.buccales
v. transversa faciei
a. auricularis caudalis
a.carotis externa,
V.maxillaris
r.massetericus
a.v.alveolaris
mandibularis
guttural pouch, medial
gutturaf pouch,latral
part
part
inn.retropharyngei
n.aiveotarismandibularis
laterales
(mand. V)
m.stylohyoideus
n.hypoglossus XiI
stylohyoid bone
a.carotis externa
n. glossopharyngeus Ix,
r.fingualis
m.digastricus.venter
caudalis
t.linguofacialis
inn.retropharyngei
n.lingualis (mand. V)
mediales
v.buccafis
n.laryngeus craniatis (X)
palatine gfands
mandibular gland and
duct
rn1.buccalis (mano. V)
v.linguofacialis
m.myiohyoideus
v.facialis
n. hypoglossus Xi!
n.mylohyoideus
m.digastricus,
(mand.V)
venterrostrafis
Fig. 1.19 The buccal wall: left lateral
view. The mylohyoid and buccinator
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
 muscles have been partially resected.
m. pterygoideus lateralis
gutturalpouch
n.mandibularis (V)
facial crest
n. glossopharyngeusiX
n. buccalis (mand. V)
m. tensor veli palatini
t.finguofacialis
m. pterygopharyngeus
m. palatopharyngeus
n.hypoglossus XiI
dorsal buccal glands
stylohyoid bone
v.profunda faciei
palatine glands
n. infraorbitalis (max. V)
a.fingualis
V. transversa faciei
m.hyoglossus
v. facialis
tongue
termination of parotid
duct
m.myiohyoideus
a.facialis
n.facialis Vlf,
r. buccalis dorsalis
m.styloglossus
a.facialis
mandibular duct
m.buccinator
m. digastricus, venter
rostralis
m.depressor labii
inn.mandibulares
mandibularis
n. lingualis (mand. V),
v. labialis communis
f.superficialis
v. labiafis maxillaris
V.sublingualis
v.labialis mandibularis
sublingual gland
n. mentalis (mand. V)
ventral buccal glands
18
Fig. 1.20 The mandibular and
sublingual glands: left lateral view.
The buccal wall has been removed,
exposing the labial surface of the 
5
tongue and the maxillary cheek
teeth. The mandibular gland has
been displaced slightly rostrally,
to display the vessels and nerves
lying caudal to it.
11
v.maxilaris
m. occipitohyoideus
m.masseter,pars
a.carotis externa
profunda
m.stylohyoideus
n. mandibularis (mand. V)
mandibular gland
mandibular ramus
n.hypoglossus XlI
m. pterygopharyngeus
n. glossopharyngeus ix
m. palatopharyngeus
V.occipitafis
n.accessorius Xl,
palatine glands
r.ventrafis
Inn. cervicales profundi
thyrohyoid bone
craniales
n.cervicatist,
M1
r. ventralis
m.styloglossus
m.cricopharyngeus
bg
a.carotisexterna
P(woff tooth)
Inn.retropharyngei
mediales
tongue
n. laryngeus craniatis (X)
subinguat gland
mandibufar gland and
n.mentalis (mand. V)
duct
m.digastricus
m.digastricus,venter
a.v. facialis
rostralis
m.geniohyoideus
m.hyoglossus
Fig. 1.21 Structures lying medial to the mandibular gland: left lateral view.
The mandibular gland has been displaced ventrally to reveal the vessels,
lymph nodes and nerves. Further details of the structures lying caudal to
the guttural pouch are shown in Fig. 1.26.
m, occipitohyoideus
m. longissimus capitis
a. auricularis caudalis
m. obfiquus capitis:
v.maxillaris
cranialis
caudalis
a.carotis exferna
Inn.retropharyngei
r.massetericus
laterales
m.stylohyoideus
a. carotis interna
n. hypoglossus XilI
n. laryngeus cranialis (X)
guttural pouch:
n. cervicalis!,
lateralpart
r.ventralis
medial part
n.accessorius xf,
n. glossopharyngeus IX:
r.venfrafis
r.pharyngeus
f. lingualis
a.v.occipitalis
n.glossopharyngeus IX
stylohyoid bone
7. sinus carotici
m. styiopharyngeus
a.carotis externa
 a. palatina ascendens
r.glandularis
f. finguofacialis
n.vagus X,r.pharyngeus
a.fingualis
a. carotis communis
thyroid cartilage,
n. laryngeus cranialis (X)
cranial cornu
v.maxillaris
thyrohyoid bone
Inn. cervicales profundi
a.faciafis
craniales
m.sternomandibutaris
m.styiohyoideus
Inn.retropharyngei
m.mylohyoideus
mediales
a.v.sublingualis
m. cricopharyngeus
mandibufar duct
m.hyopharyngeus
Inn.mandibutares
m.thyropharyngeus
mandibular
. V. linguofacialism. omohyoideus et
giand (reflected)
m. sternohyoideus
20
Fig. 1.22 The sublingual gland and maxillary cheek teeth: left
lateral view. The sublingual fold and the buccal wall have 
been pinned back. For details of the dentition of this young
horse, see Fig. 1.24.
The Head
skin
buccai mucosa
linguaifungiformpapillae
gingiva
subfingual gland
n.lingualis (mand. V)
wolf tooth
v.sublingualis
sublingual fold
m.myiohyoideus
sublingual duct orifices
n. mentalis (mand. V) at 
mental foramen
m. geniohyoideus
mandibular alveolar
m. digastricus, venter
canal
rostralis
Fig. 1.23 The mandible and its relationships: left lateral view. After
dissecting the deeper structures (Fig. 1.20) the mandible has been
replaced to show its relationships to those structures and to the adjacent
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
landmarks. The relationships to surface and superficial features are
shown in Figs. 1.4 and 1.7.
zygomatic arch
mandibutar condyle
frontal bone, zygomatic
wing of atlas
process
m. masseter, pars
guttural pouch:
profunda
lateral part
mediai part
n. hypoglossus Xi!
mandibularramus
mandibuiar gland
m. sternomandibularis
a. carotis externa
Inn.retropharyngei
facial crest
mediales
m. cricopharyngeus
infraorbitalforamen
n. laryngeus cranialis (X)
n.buccalis (mand.V)
angleofmandible
.linguofacialis
mandibularbody
m.omohyoideus et
mental foramen
m. sternohyoideus
inn.mandibulares
vascular notch
22
Fig. 1.24 The maxillary and mandibular cheek teeth: left lateral view. This
is a closer view of part of Fig. 1.23. The frst premolar tooth erupts at
about 6 months and the frst molar tooth at about 12 months. The second
premolars will be replaced at about 2/ years of age. Note that the
The Head
parotid duct opens opposite the rostral (mesial) border of the third
premolar in this individual.
skin
facial crest
dorsal buccal glands
m.levatorlabii maxilaris
n. buccalis (mand. V)
v. transversa faciei
foliatelingualpapilae
n. infraorbitalis (max. V)
V.profunda faciei
a.v.faciafis
gingivae
M,M
woff tooth,p
p.p4
p².02
n.faciafis Vf
r. buccalis dorsalis
mandibular body
n, mentalis (mand. V)
occhusal surface of p3
termination of parotid
duct
 Fig. 1.25 Relationships of the pharynx: left lateral view. The middle part 
of the stylohyoid bone, the mandibular and sublingual glands and parts
 of the lateral retropharyngeal lymph nodes have been removed. Further
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
details of this dissection are shown in Figs. 1.26-1.28.
n.facialis Vl!
a.carotis externa
auricular and annular
wing of atlas
cartilages
inn.retropharyngei
laterales
m.styiohyoideus
n. glossopharyngeus IX
mandibular ramus
n.hypoglossus Xi!
guttural pouch:
n. cevicalis I,
lateralpart
medial part
r. ventralis
a. carotis interna
a.v.occipitalis
stylohyoid bone
m.stylopharyngeus
n. buccalis (mand. V)
a.carotiscommunis
m.pterygopharyngeus
n.accessoriusXf.r.ventralis
Inn. retropharyngei
V.maxillaris
mediales
Inn. cervicales profundi
m. palatopharyngeus
craniales
v. linguofacialis
facial crest
m.cricopharyngeus
palatine glands
m.thyropharyngeus
v.facialis
m.hyopharyngeus
M
m. omohyoideus et
m.styloglossus
m. sternohyoideus
thyrohyoid bone
m.stylohyoideus
m.mylohyoideus
m. digastricus, venter
mandibular body
rostralis
labial surface
Inn.mandibulares
of tongue
24
ganglion cevicale
craniale
m. digastricus, origin
m. obliquus capitis
The Head
from occipital bone,
cranialis
jugular process
m. obliguus capitis
m. occipitohyoideus
caudalis
Inn.retropharyngei
wing of atlas
laterales
m. cleidocephalicus
m. stylohyoideus
a.v.occipitalis
n. glossopharyngeus Ix
n. accessorius Xl,
r. dorsalis
f. sinus carotici
n. vagus X
gutturalpouch,
n. laryngeus cranialis (X)
medial part
t.sympathicus
t. linguofacialis
a. carotis interna
a.carotis externa
f. glandularis
n.accessorius Xi,
f. ventralis
n. hypoglossus Xi1
n. vagus X,r.pharyngeus
Inn.retropharyngei
mediales
a. carotis communis
Fig. 1.26 Structures lying caudal to the guttural pouch: left lateral view. This is a closer
view of a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 1.25. The vessels and nerves have been
slightly separated from each other; this has disturbed the normal relationships of the
structures (compare with Fig. 1.21).
m, occipitohyoideus
Inn.retropharyngei
V.maxillaris
laterales
n. glossopharyngeus iX
a.carotis externa
r.massetericus
.sinuscaroticr
a.v.alveolaris
m. styiohyoideus
mandibularis
n. glossopharyngeus IX
n. atveolaris (mand. V)
r. lingualis
r.pharyngeus
gutturalpouch,tral
a. carotis externa
part
r.glandularis
stylohyoid bone
guttural pouch, medial
m. pterygopharyngeus
part
m. stylopharyngeus
t. linguofacialis
m.tensorveli palatini
Inn.retropharyngei
a. palatina ascendens
mediales
thyroid cartilage, rostra!
m. palatopharyngeus
cornu
m.hyopharyngeus
thyrohyoid bone
palatine glands
n. laryngeus cranialis (X)
a. lingualis
at thyroid foramen
n. glossopharyngeus IX
7. lingualis
m. stylohyoideus
m.thyropharyngeus
m.styloglossus
-m, thyrohyoideus
m.hyoglossus
V.lingualis
m. myiohyoideus
v. linguofacialis
n. hypoglossus Xil
a.v. sublingualis
m. digastricus, venter
Inn.mandibulares
rostralis
a.v. facialis
Fig. 1.27 The pharyngeal wall and guttural pouch: left lateral view. This is a closer view of a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 1.25. Fig. 1.26 shows
further details of the caudodorsal region of this dissection.
25
Fig. 1.28 The lingual muscles: left lateral view. The sublingual
gland (Fig. 1.20) has been removed to expose the muscles of
the tongue.
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
stylohyoid bone
f. linguofacialis
dorsal buccal glands
m.hyopharyngeus
m.styloglossus
foliate lingual papilla
thyrohyoid bone
m.hyoglossus
m.thyrohyoideus
m.mylohyoideus
m. stylohyoideus
n. hypoglossus Xif
v.faciafis
m.geniohyoideus
m.digastricus,venter
m.styloglossus
rostralis
m.genioglossus
Inn.mandibulares
mandibular ramus
v.sublingualis
26
Fig. 1.29 The pharyngeal muscles and thyroid gland: left lateral view. The
sternomandibularis muscle and the main tributaries of the external
jugular veins have now been removed. The structures hidden by the large
lymph nodes are shown in Fig. 1.30.
The Head
(including the
skin
guttural pouch
n.accessorius X!
m.pterygopharyngeus
a.v. occipitalis
m.stylopharyngeus
Inn.retropharyngei
t. linguofaciafis
mediales
m. hyopharyngeus
n. laryngeus cranialis (X)
paiatine glands
Inn. cervicales profundi
craniafes
n. glossopharyngeus IX
r. lingualis
m.cricopharyngeus
m.thyropharyngeus
m.styioglossus
a. thyroidea cranialis
m. hyoglossus
m. cricothyroideus
thyrohyoid bone
a.carotis communis
m. stylohyoideus
thyroid gland
m.thyrohyoideus
f. trachealis
n. hypogfossus XII
m.omohyoideus
v.linguofacialis
trachea
Inn.mandibulares
m. digastricus, venter
m. sternothyroideus
rostralis
m. sternohyoideus
guttural pouch, medial
inn.retropharyngei
par
mediales
m.hyopharyngeus
m. longus capitis
thyroid cartilage, rostral
nUoo
a. thyroidea cranialis
thyrohyoidbone
m. cricoarytenoideus
dorsalis
m.stylohyoideus
m. thyropharyngeus
carotis communis
m.thyrohyoideus
t.vagosympathicus
m. digastricus, venter
rostralis
inn.mandibulares
oesophagus
m.cricopharyngeus
t. trachealis (displaced)
m.cricothyroideus
a.laryngea craniafis
m. sternothyroideus
thyroid gland
.m. sternohyoideus
Fig. 1.30 The pharyngeal and laryngeal muscles: left lateral view. Removal of almost all of the large lymph nodes lying dorsal to the pharynx and
larynx reveals the dorsal cricoarytenoid muscle and the caudal laryngeal nerve.
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
n. glossopharyngeus IX
t.linguofacialisa.carotis exterma
a.carotis interna
guttural pouch
n.vagus X,r.pharyngeus
stylohyoid bone
muscular wall of pharynx
m. styfopharyngeus
cut edge of
m. pterygopharyngeus
mm.constrictores
m. paiatopharyngeus
medius et caudales
oharyngis
palatine glands
thyroid cartilage:
thyroid cartilage.
dorsal border
rostral cornu
caudalcornu
rostral border
obiigue line of tamina
thyrohyoid bone
caudalborder
m.stylogfossus
m. cricoarytenoideus
m.stylohyoideus
dorsalis
(insertion)
v.lingualis
t. vagosympathicus
m.hyoglossus
oesophagus
m.mylohyoideus
n. hypoglossus XiI
n. laryngeus caudalis
V. sublingualis
a. thyroidea cranialis
n. laryngeus cranialis (X)
m.cricopharyngeus
at thyroid foramen
(origin)
Inn.mandibulares
cricoid cartifage
m.thyropharyngeus
a. laryngea cranialis m. cricothyroideus
(origin)
Fig. 1.31 The pharynx and larynx: left lateral view. The caudal (cricopharyngeal, thyropharyngeal) and middle (hyopharyngeal) constrictors of
the pharynx have been removed to expose the thyroid cartilage and other laryngeal structures, and the deep muscles of the pharynx ('rostral
constrictors').
28
Fig. 1.32 The
topography of the larynx:
left lateral view. The
lateral wall of the nasal
The
and laryngeal parts of
Head
the pharynx has been
excised. The
cricothyroid muscle has
been removed, and the 
 rostral cornu of the
thyroid cartilage has
been cut (see Fig. 1.34).
the
The outline of the
skit
mandible (broken blue
line) has been traced
from Fig. 1.23; its
 relationship to the
larynx varies with
fexion and extension of
the atlanto-occipital
joint.
m. longissimus capitis
m. rectus capitis dorsalis
major
m.obliquus capitis:
cranialis
nuchal ligament
caudalis
mm.constrictores
guttural pouch,
pharyngis medius et
lateral and medial
caudalesfcut in
parts
dorsal pharyngeal wall
mandibular ramus
laryngeal aditus
Inn.retropharyngei
stylohyoid bone
mediales
marker in orifice of
auditory tube
laryngeal pharynx
nasal pharynx
thyroid cartilage
soft palate
a.thyroidea cranialis
palatine glands
m.fongus capitis
stylohyoid bone
thyroid gland
thyrohyoidbone
 oesophagus
oral pharynx
 n. vagus X
ceratohyoid bone
a.carotis communis
basihyoid bone
m. sternohyoideus
m.hyoglossus
m. sternothyroideus
Inn.mandiburares
m.omohyoideus
m. digastricus, venter
rostralis
n. taryngeus caudalis (x)
29
n. hypoglossus Xi!
m.stylohyoideus
n. vagus X
n. laryngeus cranialis (X)
n.mandibularis
t.sympathicus
(mand. V)
n.accessorius XI
n. glossopharyngeus IX
n.vagus x,r.pharyngeus
r. pharyngeus
a.carotis interna
a.v.occipitalis
m. fevator veli palatini
n. giossophyaryngeus IX
r. sinus carotici
m. tensor vefi palatini
a. carotis communis
n. laryngeus cranialis (X)
(cut)
arytenoid cartiage:
corniculate process
palatine glands
muscular process
n. glossopharyngeus ix
m.cricoarytenoideus
r.inguaiis
dorsafis
thyroid cartilage:
a. thyroidea cranialis
craniaf cornu
thyroid fissure
n. laryngeus caudalis (X)
thyroid foramen
t.vagosympathicus
caudal cornu
 oblique line on lamina
a. laryngea cranialis
m. cricothyroideus
thyrohyoid bone
cricoid cartilage
m.styfohyoideus
m.sternohyoideus
a. lingualis
m.omohyoideus
n. hypoglossus XilI
m.sternothyroideus
Fig. 1.33 Superficial structures of the larynx: left lateral view. This is a closer view of the specimen shown in Fig. 1.32. The cranial laryngeal nerve
has been cut and displaced to reveal the thyroid foramen.
30
The Head (including the s
guttural pouch
a. carotis externa
n.accessorius Xf
styiohyoid bone
n. vagus X,r. pharyngeus
n.laryngeus cranialis (X)
m. stylopharyngeus
arytenoid cartilage:
mm.constrictores
coniculateprocess
pharyngis medius et
muscular process
caudales in cut
m.arytenoideus
wall of pharynx
transversus
soft palate
m. cricoarytenoideus
dorsalis
m. cricoarytenoideus
fateralis
palatine glands
a. thyroidea cranialis
thyroid cartilage.
cricothyroid joint
cranial cornu
oesophagus
n. laryngeus caudalis (X)
thyrohyoid bone
a. laryngea cranialis
m.styiohyoideus
cricoid carilage
laryngeal saccule
m. vocalis
m. cricothyroideus
m. vestibularis
 thyroid gland
thyroidcartilage(cutedge)
cricothyroid figament
 cricotracheal ligament
Fig. 1.34 The larynx after removal of the thyroid lamina: left lateral view. The rostral thyroid cornu was cut (see Fig. 1.33). The caudal cornu was 
disarticulated from the cricoid cartilage, exposing the synovial joint. Finally, the cartilage was cut close to the median plane and removed.
3
m.temporafis in
frontaf bone.
temporal fossa
temporal line
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
supraorbital foramen
roof of frontal paranasa!
sinus
frontal bone. zygomatic
process
medial ocular angle
white marker in
nasolacrimal duct
wall of caudat maxillary
paranasal sinus
nasal bone
X
 bony septum between
maxifary sinuses
bulla in ventral
nasal concha
alveoli containing crowns
of cheek teeth
wall of rostral maxillary
paranasaf sinus
origin of m. masseter
maxilla
rostral limit of facial crest
n. infraorbitalis (max. V)
at infraorbital foramen
a.v.faciaflis
nasoincisive notch
Fig. 1.35 Frontal and maxillary paranasal sinuses: right lateral view (1).
The outer layers of compact bone of the frontal, nasal, maxillary and
lacrimal bones have been removed from the parts occupied by the sinuses,
and the outer walls of the sinuses have been cut away. Associated
external landmarks are shown in this fgure. This horse was about 1/4
 years old; a series of dissections of the paranasal sinuses of a horse aged
under 9 months is shown in Figs. 1.54-1.59. The sinuses of older animals 
are shown in Figs. 1.44-1.47.
extensionoffrontalsinus
into dorsal nasaf concha
alveofi containing crowns
Cavity of frontal sinus
ofMand p4
white marker in
septum between
nasolacrimal duct
rostralandcaudal
maxillary sinuses
extension of rostral
cavity of caudal maxilary
maxillary sinusinto
sinus
ventral conchal sinus
bulfla of ventraf nasaf
m.masseter.origin from
facial crest
concha
rostrallimit of facial
v.angularis ocufi
crest
n. infraorbitalis (max. V)
v. dorsalis nasi
at infraorbital foramen
a. labiatis maxillaris
a.v.lateralis nasi
Fig. 1.36 Frontal and maxillary paranasal sinuses: right lateral view (2). This is a closer
view of a part of Fig. 1.35. In this young horse, the crowns of the cheek teeth, enclosed
by bony alveoli, reduce the sizes of the maxillary sinuses and hide the infraorbital canal
which traverses these sinuses. The position of the infraorbital canal is indicated by the
broken blue lines.
32
frontal bone, zygomatic
process
m. temporalis
tempora fine
The Head
zygomatic arch
fronfal bone
supraorbital foramen
frontal sinus
cavity of caudal maxillary
innerwall of frontal sinus
mouided on ethmoid
bone
frontomaxiliary opening
extension of frontal sinus
nasolacrimal duct
into dorsal nasal concha
floor of caudal maxilary
frontal sinus
skin)
nasal bone
crest
osseous septum
alveoli of p. M
protruding into maxillary
floor of rostral maxilary
sinuses
sinus
n. infraorbitalis (max. V)
rostral fimit offacialcrest
in infraorbitalforamen
maxila
a.v.facialis
Fig. 1.37 Frontal and maxillary paranasal sinuses: right dorsolateral view. In some
 individuals, the frontal sinus extends considerably further caudally at its medial
aspect. This view of the maxillary sinuses shows that at this age (about 1% years)
the ventral limit of the sinus is restricted by the cheek teeth but in older animals it
extends well below the facial crest. The infraorbital canal is not visible but a small 
 part of the caudal maxillary sinus can be seen through the frontomaxillary opening.
caudal fimit of frontal
sinus
zygomatic arch
temporal line
frontal bone
m.temporalis
cavity of caudal maxillary
supraorbital foramen
SInUS
dorsal rim of bony orbit
frontomaxilary opening
alveofusofmolar tooth
thin plate of bone and
protruding into caudal
membrane separating
maxilary sinus
frontafand caudal
maxillary sinuses
caudal maxilary sinus
nasal bone
rostralfimit of frontal
rostrafmax.
sinus
Fig. 1.38 The frontal paranasal sinus and frontomaxillary opening: dorsal view. In
this yearling horse, the infraorbital canal cannot be seen from the frontomaxillary
 opening. In older horses it is clearly visible, lying just medial to the alveolus of
the last molar tooth. Compare with Figs. 1.47 and 1.59.
33
Fig. 1.39 The nostrils: rostral view. This fgure, and Figs. 1.40, 1.41 are
of an unembalmed pony, to supplement those of embalmed specimens
(Figs. 1.1, 1.6).
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
m. levator tabii maxillaris
dorsafcommissure
lateralala
alar nasaf cartilage,
lateral border of famina
medialala
alar nasal cartilage, apex
ventralcommissure
ofcornu
divergent hair vortex
m. dilator naris apicalis:
pars superficialis
tactile hairs ofmaxillary
pars profundus
fabium
Fig. 1.40 The nasal vestibule and nasolacrimal duct: left rostrolateral view.
The left nostril is being held open to reveal the nasolacrimal orifce. In 
finger in dorsat
medialalaof nostril
diverticutum
orifice ofnasolacrimal
nasal septum
duct in floor of nasar
vestibule
lateral ala of nostril
divergent hair vortex of
finger in ventra!
maxillary labium
commissure of nostril
34
Fig. 1.41 The alar cartilage of the nostril: rostral view. The cartilage is
 readily palpable in the medial ala and at the ventral commissure of the
nostril.
The Head
1(including
the
skin
entrance to nasal
m.fevatorfabimaxillaris
diverticufum
alar fofd
lamina of alar cartiage
entrance to nasal cavity
fo ped enss eaoeo
cornuofalarcartilage
maxillarylabium
Fig. 1.42 Surface features of the eye: left lateral view. This specimen was
photographed shortly after exsanguination and death to supplement the
surface features shown in Fig. 1.64. The eyelids are held apart to open up
the angles and commissures between them. The upper corpora nigra
(granula iridica) are just visible; the lower corpora nigra cannot be seen.
s
uppereyelid (paipebra)
(corneoscteral junction)
bearing eyelashes
margin of third eyelid
iris, corpora nigra
(paipebra It)
position of punctum
lateral ocular angle
lacrimale
medial ocular angle
lightreflected from bufbar
conjunctivaofcornea
facrimalcarunclewithin
lacrimal liake at medial
commissure
iris, pupilary margin
position of punctum
lacrimale
towereyelid(palpebra)
m.masseter,origin
position of temporo-
n. auriculopaipebralis
from zygomatic arch
mandibularjoint
(VI)
n.facialis VI
a.buccalis
V.maxillaris (cut)
a.malaris
a.v. transversa faciei
sinus v.buccalis
a. auricutaris caudatis
sinus v.profunda faciei
m. longissimus capitis
m. splenius
m.levator tabi
maxilaris
m. digastricus
v.masseterica
sinus v. transversa
ventralis
faciei
m. cteidocephalicus
m. masseter, origin
a.carotis externa
from facial crest
r.massetericus
V. profunda faciei
V. occipitalis
V. maxilaris (cut)
v. transversa faciei
n.accessorius XI
r. ventralis
n. infraorbitalis (max. V)
n.cutaneus colfi
(CH)
a.v. lateralis nasi
mandibuiarramus
m. masseter, insertion on
n.facialis Vlf
r.buccalis dorsalis
v.linguofacialis
a. labialis maxillaris
m.levator nasolabialis
m. sternomandibufaris
parotid duct
m.omohyoideus
a.labialis
a.v.facialisatvascutar
connection to
mandibularis
notch of mandibular body
v. masseterica ventralis
m.buccinator
v. labialis communis
v.buccalis
m. sternohyoideus
Fig. 1.43 The veins of the masseteric region: left lateral view. The veins have been injected with blue latex via the cephalic vein, and the masseter
 muscle has been removed.
36
Fig. 1.44 The cheek teeth of a 6-year-old horse: right lateral view. The
outer tables of the maxilla, zygomatic and lacrimal bones and mandible
have been partially removed from this macerated skull to demonstrate
the dental alveoli and the unerupted parts of the high-crowned cheek
The
teeth. Calcifed roots have formed in all of the teeth except the third
molars. The paranasal sinuses are shown in Fig. 1.45.
the
facialcrest
squamosal partof
frontalbone:
temporaibone:
temporaf fine
zygomatic process
zygomatic process
mandibularfossa
supraorbital foramen
mandible:
frontal sinus
condyloidprocess
coronoid process
lacrimalbone
ramus
roots of cheek teeth
partsofcheekteeth
in rostral maxillary sinus:
incaudalmaxillary sinus:
M?
(1001)W
P
maxillary tuberosity
infraorbitalforamen
eruptedc
nasal bone
maxilla
unerupted crown M in
mandrbularalveoius
incisivebone
roots of M2.M
p3.
1001
P(woff tooth)
unerupted crown
eruptedcrown
diastema
P3:
erupted crown
unerupted crown
root
ventral border of mandible
mental foramen
37
Fig. 1.45 The paranasal sinuses of the 6-year-old horse: right dorsolateral
view. This is a part of the skull shown in Fig. 1.44. The relationships of
the dental alveoli to the maxillary sinuses are clearly seen, but it should 
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
be remembered that the membranous walls of the sinuses have been lost
during maceration (compare with Fig. 1.46). The conchal extensions of
the frontal and rostral maxillary sinuses are often named as separate
sinuses (dorsal and ventral conchal sinuses of the NAV).
orbital rim, lacrimaf bone
mandibte, coronoid
frontal sinus:
process
caudalpart
conchal part fin
dorsal nasaf concha)
foramina of orbit
ethmoida!
optic
orbital
round
rostral maxilary sinus:
infraorbitalcana!
conchal part (in
ventral concha)
lateral part
caudal maxiltary sinus:
dentafalveoliM,p4
bony septum
nasalbone
faciat crest, rostral
extremity
nasoincisive notch
P4.unerupted crown
incisive bone
infraorbital foramen
inmaxilla
38
temporaf bone,
frontaf sinus,cauda!
zygomatic process of
boundary
squamosal part
frontal bone
fossa forlacrimal sac
supraorbitalforamen
in zygomatic process
Head
origin of m. obliquus
venfralis
dorsaf rim of bony orbit
foramina of orbit
extension of frontal sinus
remnant of lacrimal
intodorsafnasalconcha
bone, traversed by
lacrimalduct
extensionofrostra!
the
extension of caudal
maxilary sinus into
maxilary sinus into
ventrainasalconcha
sphenopaiatine sinus
infraorbitalcanal
traversing maxillary
maxilary tuberosity
sinuses:
caudal
rostra!
rootsofcheekteeth
in dentalalveoli
n. infraorbitalis (max. V)
in infraorbital foramen
molar teeth,M-M
bony septum
rostral terminationof
facialcrest
Fig. 1.46 The infraorbital canal and paranasal sinuses of a 9-year-old horse: right lateral view. In older animals, the crowns of the cheek teeth have
 become shorter and the dental alveoli do not obscure the infraorbital canals when seen in lateral view. (Compare with dissections of younger
animals shown in Figs. 1.35 and 1.59). In this dried specimen, the mucous membrane of the paranasal sinuses has been preserved. The frontal
sinus is shown in Fig. 1.47.
frontalbone:
fronta sinus, caudal
zygomatic process
boundary
supraorbital foramen
ethmoid bone
communicationof
caudatl maxillary sinus
with sphenopalatine
sinus
infraorbitalcanal in
caudalmaxillary sinus
dental alveolus of M3
frontomaxillary opening.
(mediai rim damaged)
caudal maxillary sinus
frontalsinus,extension
bony septum (damaged)
into dorsal nasaf concha
rostrat maxilary sinus
infraorbita foramen
andcourseof
facial crest
infraorbital canal
Fig. 1.47 The infraorbital canal and paranasal sinuses of a 9-year-old horse: dorsal view. The canal traversing the caudal maxillary sinus is clearly
visible through the nasomaxillary opening in this older animal (compare with Figs. 1.38 and 1.59). This dried specimen is shown in lateral view
in Fig. 1.46.
39
forelock
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
external occipital
protruberance
base of pinna
white star
locationofcerebrt
divergent hair vortex
locationoffrontal
paranasal sinus
Fig. 1.48 Surface features of the cranial regions in a yearling horse: dorsal
view. The position of the divergent hair vortex in relation to the medial
ocular angle varies between individuals. The estimated positions of
frontal sinuses and cerebrum indicated here are based on the dissection
shown in Fig. 1.52. Lines drawn from the base of each pinna to the
medial ocular angle of the opposite side will cross in the middle of the 
cerebrum.
pinna
forelock
mm.scutuloauriculares
superficiales
m.interscutularis
m. parietoauricularis
scutiform cartilage
(cutedge)
parietal bone
m.temporalis
supraorbital adipose
tissue
temporal line
medial ocuiar angle
lacrimalbone
frontalbone
Fig. 1.49 Superficial structures of the cranial regions in the yearling horse:
dorsal view. The muscles of the external ear have been cut away to reveal
the frontal bones and the temporalis muscles.
40
scutiform cartilage
m.temporalis in
temporalfossa
The Head
parietal bone
frontalbone
temporal fine
bordering temporal
fossa
interfrontal suture
skin)
frontal bone:
cut edge of outer plate
intact inner plate
frontai sinus
ethmoid bone
medial ocular angle
frontomaxillary
opening
Fig. 1.50 The temporal fossae and frontal paranasal sinuses of the yearling
horse: dorsal view. The dorsal parts of the temporalis muscles have been 
resected, and the caudal parts of the frontal sinuses have been exposed by
removal of the outer plates of the frontal bones. The coronoid processes 
of the mandible are not visible in the temporal fossae.
pinna
forelock
 scutiform cartilage
m.temporalis
parietalbone
falx cerebri cut away
from internal sagittal
crest)
cerebrum covered by
meninges
frontaf bone,internal
and externafplates
frontal sinus
lacrimal bone
medialocularangle
ethmoid bone
Fig. 1.51 The topography of the cerebrum in the yearling horse: left 
dorsolateral view. The roof of the cranium has been removed. The fused
layer of dura mater and cranial endosteum was readily separated from 
the bone except in the midsagittal plane where the falx cerebri is adherent
to the internal sagittal crest of the cranium.
41
Fig. 1.52 The topography of the cerebrum in the yearling horse: dorsal view.
The parietal, frontal and ethmoid bones have been cut away further to
display the full extent of the left cerebral hemisphere and the degree to
which the frontal paranasal sinus overlaps the cranial cavity.
sinus communicans
biue wire entering
parietal bone, cut
 sinus petrosus dorsatis
surface
 soutiform cartilage
blue wire entering
sinustemporalis
twobluewirespassed
sinus transversusin
into sinus sagittafis
transverse groove of
dorsalis
parietalbone
arachnoid villi in
frontaland parietal
openedsinus
bones, cutedge
sagittalis dorsalis
m.temporalis
openings of
VV.cerebri dorsales into
cerebrum,covered by
meninges
cut edge of falx cerebri
ethmoid bone,
cribriform plate
frontalsinuses
ethmoid bone
a.ethmoidalis
bone covering dorsal frontomaxillary
externa
nasal meatus
opening
42
Fig. 1.53 The left cerebral hemisphere in a yearling horse: left dorsolateral
view. The outer layer of meninges (dura mater and fused cranial
endosteum together with the arachnoid membrane) has been removed
on the left side to expose the subarachnoid cavity in which lies the brain,
The
surrounded by the delicate pia mater.
Head
the
ski
parietal bone, cut surface
sinus communicans 
sinus occipitalis
dorsalis
sinus transversus
sinus petrosus
dorsalis
sinister
sinus temporalis
falx cerebri in which
funs the sinus
m.temporalis
sagittlis dorsalis
duramater(cutedge)
sinus sagittalis
subarachnoid cavity
dorsalis
gyriandsuiciof
cerebralhemisphere,
arachnoid vilfus
covered by pia mater
frontal sinus
rostral end of falx
cerebri
ethmoid bone:
cribriformplate
labyrinth
a.ethmoidalis
externain dorsal
offactoryburb
nasaf concha
septum between
frontalsinuses
frontal bone and frontal
sinus
fateral ocular angle
fused periosteum and
periorbita
lacrimalbone
zygomatic bone
nasal bone
position of maxiltary
sinuses
facial crest
n. infraorbitalis (max. V)
atinfraorbitalforamen
nasoincisive notch
temporary premolarteeth
inmaxilaryalveoli
nasal diverticutum
incisive bone
m. masseter (cut edge)
Fig. 1.54 The bones of the facial region of the foal: left lateral view.
 Removal of the periosteum from the facial bones of this foal shows the
 positions of paranasal sinuses and dental alveoli lying between superficial
 and deep plates of the fat bones. The bony sutures were painted white.
unerupted M':
calcifiedcrown
uncalcifed crown
gingiva
rostralmaxillary
paranasal sinus
mandible
erupted p*
n. infraorbitalis (max. V)
erupted p3:
root
wafl of bony alveolus
unerupted crown
eruptedcrown
eruptedp²
erupted p2
gingiva
Fig. 1.55 The maxillary cheek teeth of the foal: left lateral view. Removal
 of the superficial plate of the maxillary bone exposes the crowns and roots 
 of the cheek teeth. The deciduous premolars erupt at about the time of
birth. The frst molar tooth erupts at 6-9 months of age. The mandibular
cheek teeth and the incisors of this foal are shown in Figs. 1.57 and 1.63.
44
m. levator labii maxillaris nasal bone incisive bone
n. infraorbitalis (max. V)
at infraorbitaiforamen
The
maxila, cut edge of
superficial plate
a.lateralis nasi
nasal diverticulum in
nasoincisive space
p²,crown
dorsal nasai cartilage
P2crown
entrance into nasaf
diverticurum
skin)
alar cartilage of nostril:
lamina in medial ala
apex of cornu in lateral
ata
entrance to nasal cavity
distribution of sensory
(n.infraorbitalis max.V)
r. buccalis dorsalis)
nerves to maxilary labium
a. incisiva from
a.palatina major
musculature of maxilary
labium
Fig. 1.56 The maxillary labium and nostril of the foal: left rostrolateral
view. Further details of this region are shown in Fig. 1.57. See also Fig.
1.6 for surface features and Figs. 1.39-1.41; Fig. 1.12 for dissections of
muscles.
dorsal nasal cartiage
nasoincisive notch
maxilla
alar fold of ventral
concha
P2
incisive bone
nasat diverticurum
alar cartilage of nostril:
lamina
cornu
entrance into nasal cavity.
fungiform fingual papillae
a. incisiva emerging from
interincisive canal
72.12
infundiburum ofi
Fig. 1.57 Structures of the nostril and nasoincisive space of the foal: left
rostrolateral view. The nostril has been dissected to expose the alar
cartilage and the incisive bone. The wall of the nasal cavity lying in
the nasoincisive space has been resected to show the alar fold and the
ventral part of the nasal diverticulum. The third deciduous incisors erupt
at 6-9 months of age.
45
nasolacrimal duct in
canal in lacrimal bone
frontalparanasalsinus
maxilary paranasa!
osseous septum
nasalbone
rostra!
infraorbitalforamen
M1
nasoincisive notch
facial crest
m.levatorfabiimaxillaris
nasolacrimal duct in
maxillary lacrimal groove
incisive bone
alar fold of ventral
maxillarylabium
concha
marker in nasolacrimal
orifice
Fig. 1.58 The paranasal sinuses and nasolacrimal duct of the foal: left lateral view.
A white marker has been placed in the nasolacrimal duct. Further details of this 
dissection are shown in Fig. 1.59.
ethmoid bone protruding into frontal sinus
deepplate of frontaibone
{roof of craniai cavity)
frontal sinus
 medial boundary of
frontomaxifary opening
extensionoffrontalsinus
into dorsa nasaf concha
alveolus ofdeveloping
Minffoor of caudal
maxilfary sinus
osseousfacrimalcanal in
facrimal bone
alveolus of p in foor
ofrostralmaxifarysinus
marker in nasolacrimal
duct
m.massefer
infraorbital foramen
faciaf crest
Fig. 1.59 The frontal and maxillary paranasal sinuses of the foal: left
dorsolateral view. In this foal, aged about 6 months, the maxillary sinuses 
 are small and the developing teeth bulge into their ventral foors. The
 infraorbital canal is hidden by these teeth; in later life it becomes a
conspicuous feature of the maxillary sinuses, as shown in Figs.1.45
and 1.46.
46
zygomatic bone
(cut surface)
frontal sinus
retina (displaced)
The
a. ethmoidalis externa
lateraiocularangle
Head
ethmoidal labyrinth cut
transversely and
n. opticus ff
longitudinally,showing
ethmoidai meatuses
orifice of auditory tube.
 (including the s
middle conchal sinus
medial lip
sphenopalatine
soft palate
paranasal sinus
free edge of nasal
m.masseter
septum
mandible
containing vomer
skin)
nasopharynx
foliate lingual papila
oropharynx
valfate linguat papilla
palatine bone, horizontal
(danaged)
famina
maxilla, palatine process 
mucousmembraneof
a.v. palatina major
incisive bone:
interincisive canal
angle of mouth
body
palatine part
cavernous tissueofhard
a.incisiva
palate
linguaf apex bearing
fungiform papilae
Fig. 1.60 The nasal septum of the foal: left dorsolateral view. The left nasal cavity and
maxillary dental arcade have been removed by a transverse and a median incision.
The pattern of blood vessels in the submucosa of the septum is just visible. A green
tube has been passed through the right nasal cavity and the nasopharynx to enter
the orifce of the auditory tube. The apparent dorsal lingual torus is an artefact in
this specimen; see Fig. 1.74.
 mucosa of frontal sinus
frontalsinus
a.ethmoidalis externa
n. offactorius Ito
ethmoidat labyrinth
vomeronasal organ
 sphenopalatine sinus
nasalcavernoustissue
covering vomer
orifice of auditory tube.
vomer
medial fip
palatine bone, horizontal
nasopharyngeal surface
lamina
of soft palate
 grooves in cartilage for
a.y.sphenopalatina and
choanae
n.nasalis caudalis
(max. V)
P4
a.v. palatina major
maxilla, palatine process 
cartilaginous nasal
septom
 convoluted enamel of ps
incisive bone:
D2
interincisive canal
a. incisiva
2
infundibular and outer
enamel ofi
Fig. 1.61 The cartilaginous nasal septum and mandibular teeth of the foal: left
dorsolateral view. The nasal mucous membrane has been removed to show that in this
foal little ossification of the nasal septum has occurred; at a later stage the caudal part
of the nasal septum will ossify to form the perpendicular ethmoidal plate. The frst
mandibular molar erupts at 9-12 months and the third deciduous incisor at 6-9
months. No mandibular 'wolf tooth' is visible.
47
Fig. 1.62 The right nasal cavity of the foal: left lateral view. Most of the
nasal septum has now been removed to reveal the structures of the right
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
lateral wall of the nasal cavity. The common nasal meatus cannot be
satisfactorily labelled; it lies between the nasal conchae and the nasal
septum.
frontat sinus
choana
mucosa covering
sphenopalatine sinus
endofurbnatesof
ethmoidal labyrinth:
(dorsaf concha)
vomer
I (middle concha)
-VI(ethmoidal
conchae)
nasopharynx
remains of nasal septum
soft palate
dorsa concha containing
dorsal conchal sinus
oral pharynx
(frontal)
ventral concha
mandible
ventral conchal sinus
(rostral maxillary)
palatine bone
nasaf meatuses:
oral cavity
dorsal
middle
ventra!
maxilla, palatine process 
dorsal concha
a.v. palatina major
ventral concha:
alarfofd
basal foid
cavernous tissue of hard
palate
remains of nasaf sepfum
 m. levator labi maxilaris 
angle of mouth
oral vestibule
incisivebone:
palatine process
i1.12
body
a.incisiva in
interincisive canaf
48
Fig. 1.63 Orbital and nasal structures of the foal:
left dorsolateral view. This view of the dissection shown in 
Fig. 1.62 shows structures on the transversely cut surface,
 and those of the right nasal cavity are seen in medial view.
The tip of the epiglottis is just out of view in the depths of
Head
the nasopharynx (see Figs. 1.32-1.34).
periorbita
m.rectus dorsalis
frontai bone
frontalsinus
sclera
m.rectus medialis 
cornea
dorsal nasal concha
n. opticus ll at optic
(ethmoid endoturbinatel)
fundus
middlenasalconcha
palpebral fissure
(ethmoidendoturbinate ll)
m.retractor buibi
ethmoidnasalconchae
m. rectus ventralis
(ethmoid endoturbinates
(IA-
zygomatic bone
sphenopalatine sinuses
a.v.infraorbitalis
cartilaginous nasal
a.n. palatinus major
developing M in maxilta
n. infraorbitalis (max. V)
pharyngeal recess
soft palate
vomer
m.masseter
ventral nasal meatus
mandible
 orifice of auditory tube in
oral pharynx
nasaf pharynx
lingual papillae:
foliate
ventralnasal concha
vallate (damaged)
vomer
choana
palatine bone
P4
t
mandible,coronoidprocess
in temporalfossa
The Horse
temporal bone,
white star, a divergent
squamosal part
hair vortex
temporomandibular joint
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, 
frontal bone:
temporalline
supraorbitafforamen
zygomatic process
mandibularcondyle
dorsaf rim of orbit
zygomatic arch
medial ocular angle
cornea
nasalbone
palpebra//!
lacrimal bone
zygomatic bone:
maxilla
termination of
facial crest
Fig. 1.64 Surface features and bony landmarks of the eye of the foal: right lateral view.
On the head of this young foal, the right eye (Figs. 1.64-1.71) and the left nasal cavity
(Figs. 1.54-1.63) were dissected. The direction of the hairs on the eyelids has been
 emphasised by peroxide bleaching. The blue lines show the bones surrounding the eye,
traced in part from Fig. 1.66.
n.auriculopalpebralis
(VI)
scutiform cartiiage
supraorbital adipose
fissue
m. frontoscutularis:
pars frontalis
pars temporalis
m.corrugator superecili
m. zygomaticoauricularis
a. auricutaris rostralis
a.v. transversa faciei
parotid gland
m.orbicularis oculi
a.temporalis
superficialis, r. articufaris
temporomandibularis
m. levator nasofabialis
n.auriculotemporalis
(mand. V)r. transversus.
faciei
m.levatorfabii maxillaris
m.zygomaticus
a.angufaris ocuti
m.malaris
faciat crest
a.facialis
 Fig. 1.65 Superficial structures of cranial and facial regions of the foal: right lateral
view. Further details of the surrounding structures are shown in Figs. 1.8 and 1.9.
50
supraorbital adipose
tissue
scutiform cartilage
m.temporalis
n.auriculopalpebralis
position of
Head
(VI) :
frontozygomatic suture
r.zygomaticus
f.auricularis
position of frontal sinus
parotid gland
facrimal gland
temporomandibular joint:
joint capsule
m. orbicularis oculi, pars
joint cavity
palpebralis
the
a.temporalis
m, orbicularis oculi
superficialis, r. articularis
attached to medial
temporomandibularis
palpebralligament
mandibular condyle
nasal bone
temporozygomatic
suture
position of frontal sinus
m.masseter:
pars profunda
m. levator nasolabialis
pars supericialis
m. tevator labi maxillaris
orbital periosteum and
base ofperiorbita
maxila
lacrimalbone
a.facialis
position of maxilary
sinuses
 Fig. 1.66 Deeper structures of the cranial and facial regions of the foal: right lateral
view. The air-flled paranasal sinuses are detectable through the thin outer tables of 
the facial bones in ihis young foal. The facial sutures were painted white.
m.temporalis in temporal
fossa
n. auriculopaipebralis
a.temporalis
(VI)
profundarostralis
parotid gland
Cut through froniat bone.
mandible,coronoid
zygomatic process
process
a.temporalis
superficialis,r.aricuaris
n. frontalis (opth. V) in
lemporomandibufaris
supraorbitalforamen
cut through zygomatic
arch (temporal bone,
periorbita fused with
squamosal part)
frontal periosteum
a. transversa faciei
n. massetericus (mand.V)
medial paipebral
traversing mandibular
figament
aftachedtorostral
notch
lacrimal process
m. masseter(cut surface)
m.masseter attached fo
periorbita separated
remnant of facial crest
from zygomatic bone
fracturedsurfaceof
zygomatic arch(zygomaticbone)
Fig. 1.67 Cranial and facial regions of the foal, prepared for removal of the zygomatic
arch and zygomatic proces: right lateral view. Parts of the frontal, zygomatic and
squamosal temporal bones about to be removed are shown by the broken blue line
(see also Fig. 1.66).
51
a.femporafis supericiais
m.temporalis
r.articularis
temporomandibufaris
a.temporalis
profunda rostralis
mandible:
condyle
a.supraorbitalis
coronoid process
supraorbital foramen
a. transversa faciei
n. frontalis (opth. V)
m. rectus dorsalis
m.jevator palpebrae
a. lacrimalis
superioris
m. rectus lateralis
facrimalgland
periorbita
n. tacrimalis (opth. V)
n.zygomaticus (max. V)
v. vorticosa emerging
r.zygomaticofacialis
from sclera
a. ophthaimica externa
m. obliquus ventralis
r.muscufaris
facrimal bone
n. oculomotorius !!
f. ventralis
a.mafaris
m. rectus ventralis
m. orbicularis ocufi
Fig. 1.68 The orbit of the foal: right ventrolateral view (1). The cut surfaces of the
Zygomatic arch and the zygomatic process of the frontal bone are crosshatched on
the accompanyingdrawing.
synovialcavity of
m.temporalis
temporomandibular joint
temporal bone,
frontal bone, zygomatic
process (cut edge)
squamosal part
(cutedge)
n. frontatis (opth. V) in
m. levator paipebrae
supraorbitat foramen
superioris
a. supraorbitafis
m.rectus dorsalis
periorbita (cut edge)
a.n.lacrimalis
trochlea
a.ophthaimica externa
r.muscularis
m. obfiquus dorsalis
periorbita (cut edge)
vv.vorticosae
n. zygomaticus (max. V)
m.rectus lateralis
m. retractor bulbi
m. orbicularis oculi
n.oculomotorius I!l
r.ventralis
zygomatic bone
m.rectus ventralis
(cut surface)
Fig. 1.69 The orbit of the foal: right ventrolateral view (2). The levator muscle of the
upper eyelid, the dorsal rectus muscle and the lacrimal gland have been removed.
The view is slightly more dorsal than that shown in Fig. 1.68.
52
Fig. 1.70 The abducens nerve of the foal: right lateral view. The lateral
rectus muscle has been transected and pinned back to show the nerve.
Note also that where the periorbita has been resected, the deep facial
vein traversing it has been slightly torn.
The Head
skin)
m.temporalis
v. vorticosa
m. rectus lateralis
m. obliquus ventralis
mandible,coronoid
a. malaris
process
n.abducens VI
m.orbicufaris oculi
m.retractor bu/bi
medialpalpebrar
figament
a. ophthalmica externa
、lacrimal bone
m.rectus ventrafis
n. oculomotorius !l.
maxilla
r. ventralis
zygomatic bone,
v.profunda faciei
cut surface
m.temporalis
frontal bone
n.auricutopalpebralis
m. tevator palpebrae
(VI)
synoviaf cavity of
temporomandibular joint
cut surface of frontal bone
(zygomatic process)
parotid gfand
mandible:
 periorbita (cut edge)
coronoid process
n.frontafis (opth. V) in
condyle
supraorbital foramen
m. rectus dorsalis
n.trochlearis IV
n. lacrimalis (opth. V)
a. ophthalmica externa
 m. obliquus dorsalis
r.muscufaris
m.retractor burbi
m.rectus lateralis
m.orbicufaris ocufi
v. vorticosa
v.profunda faciei
nasal bone
m.masseter
facrimal bone
cuf surface of zygomatic
maxila
bone
rostral end of facialcrest
 a. facialis
Fig. 1.71 The dorsal oblique muscle and trochlear nerve of the foal: right lateral view.
The lateral rectus muscle has been resected from the eyeball.
53
nosril
tactile hairs of maxillary
labium
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
uneruptedleftandright
unerupted right?
unerupted left and right
palatineridges
tactile hairs of
unerupted righti2
mandibular labium
Fig. 1.72 The incisor teeth of the new-born foal: right lateral view. Both frst and 
second incisor teeth are still covered by the gingiva, and the distinction between them
 is not easily seen in this still-born foal. The tongue has been pulled out through the
 left diastema.
unerupted right i just
maxilary labium
visibie throughintact
gingiva
incisive papilla
diastema
palatineraphe
palatine ridges
tactile hairs of
mandibular tabium
unerupted right i
Fig. 1.73 The mouth of the new-born foal: right ventrolateral view. In this still-born
foal, the maxillary frst temporary incisors are just beginning to cut the gingiva
 close to the midline. The frst incisors usually erupt just before, or just after, birth.
 The second temporary incisors usually erupt at 34 weeks of age.
m.masseter (cut)
maxilary temporary teeth
palatineraphe and
ridges (abnormal)
dorsal fingual surface
mandibular temporary
teeth
Fig. 1.74 Dentition of the new-born foal: left lateral view. The
discolouration of the enamel layer makes the crowns more easily visible.
Considerable protrusion of the crown from the gingival surface occurs
 before actual penetration of the gingiva. This stil born foal shows an
abnormality of the hard palate but the dentition is normal. Note the fat
surface of the tongue; compare with Fig. 1.60.
54
2.THE NECK
Clinical importance of the neck
Blood can be collected from the jugular vein and from other veins,
including the transverse facial vein, the superficial thoracic vein caudal
Airway obstruction results from blockage at one or more of several
to the elbow, and the cephalic vein in the medial aspect of the forelimb.
sites. Choanal stenosis (at the nostrils) is the most obvious cause.
The saphenous vein on the medial aspect of the hind leg is also avail-
 Obstruction may also be caused by pharyngeal lymphoid hyperplasia,
able. For arterial blood-gas analysis, the transverse facial artery, facial
palatal cysts and defects, pharyngeal paralysis, neoplasia, pharyngeal
artery and dorsal metatarsal artery can be used. The jugular groove is
cysts, congenital tracheal abnormalities and tracheal obstruction, and
important. It contains the jugular vein, an important structure for
damage resulting from tracheotomy intubation. It is important to
 intravenous anaesthesia, administration of medications and for obtain-
ing blood samples. The cranial third of the groove is the most acces-
as a nasal discharge or cough.
sible and likely to pose fewer hazards. It is also used for jugular
A.I
The larynx lies at the junction between head and neck. The carti-
catheters. The vein normally has a visible jugular pulse in the lower
lages of the larynx are locked into the caudal wall of the nasopharynx
third of the neck. Distension of the jugular vein, or an abnormal pulse,
by the palato-pharyngeal arch of the soft palate in an artificial seal.
 suggests primary cardiac disease, or heart compression caused by fluid
12
of Ve
This is disconnected for the act of swallowing, in which the palato-
 Or masses in the mediastinum or pericardial sac. Thrombosis of the
pharyn geal muscles participate.
jugular vein (septic or non-septic) may occur after venepuncture or
las
 In the condition of 'roaring’ or 'whistling', the horse has an exces-
catheterisation and the effect on venous return from the head may
sive inspiratory noise and poor exercise tolerance. More correctly, the
ultimately produce oedema of the muzzle. The thyroid gland is impor-
condition is called recurrent laryngeal neuropathy. Damage to the
tant clinically. Foals rarely suffer from hypothyroidism, even though
cranial laryngeal nerve prevents the normal, symmetrical, abduction
there is no build-up of iodine stores. In old horses there may be thyroid
of the arytenoid cartilages during inspiration. Air turbulence in the
adenomas causing palpable thyroid enlargement and hyperparathy-
larynx results. It is usually left-sided. The left recurrent laryngeal nerve
roidism also occurs.
is significantly longer than the right. The usual aetiological suggestion
The cervical vertebrae are clinically important. Equine accidents
is that stretching or damage to the nerve results from its course around
during racing or hunting may cause cervical vertebral trauma, particu-
the aorta in the thorax. There are various gradations of the disorder.
larly at the atlanto-occipital articulation. The important malformation
It is really a progressive neurogenic atrophy. Treatment is beyond the
known as cervical vertebral stenosis is more colloquially known as
"wobbler syndrome'. It occurs in 18- to 30-month-old thoroughbreds.
developed over the years including removal of the laryngeal ventricle
 It is probably of complex aetiology but may involve cervical vertebral
(ventriculectomy), prosthetic ligature, and arytenoidectomy. All of
displacement, developmental abnormalities of the cervical vertebrae,
these techniques require a detailed knowledge of the anatomy of the
or cervical arthropathy. It is also possible, using ultrasonic guidance,
larynx. Other defects of the larynx may include epiglottic entrapment,
to accomplish facet arthrocentesis for the joint spaces between the
sub-epiglottic cysts (these are usually derived from embryonic tissue
 cranial and caudal processes of the vertebrae when neck pain is sus-
from the thyroglossal duct and are often found in an entrapment),
pected. It is essential not to puncture the vertebral artery. The cervical
arytenoid chondritis and defects of the 4th branchial arch leading to
musculature is readily accessible and not noticeably subject to adverse
con genital abnormalities.
effects and so is most often the site for intramuscular injection in the
In young horses, pharyngeal lymphoid hyperplasia, probably in
horse. The cervical transverse processes can be felt, and a site l0 cm
response to an infection, is a common problem. In epiglottic entrap-
or less above the vertebrae in the middle third of the neck, a hands-
ment, the cartilage of the epiglottis becomes enveloped by a fold of
breadth in front of the scapula and ventral to the nuchal ligament, is
glosso-epiglottic mucosa arising between the epiglottis and the base of
ideal. The pectoral muscles are sometimes used and also the lower half
 the tongue and extending laterally as the aryepiglottic folds. It is not
 of the semimembranosus and semitendinosus muscles in the hind leg.
clear why it occurs. Lateral oedema is not unusual. There can be
Dysphagia (difficulty in swallowing) may involve the mouth (oral
paralysis or paresis of the larynx, particularly when the lymph nodes
foreign body) or pharynx, but is perhaps more likely to be associated
are damaged by infection with Streptococcus equi (strangles).
with the oesophagus. It can also result from oral irritation, brain
Obstructive airway disease may involve the pharynx, but can be
stem disease or cranial nerve damage, rabies, or 'grass sickness' (now
associated with guttural pouch problems. Other causes of obstructive
known as equine dysautonomia). Oesophageal obstruction may be
airway disease include emphysema, pharyngeal paralysis, palatal
caused by a variety of factors, including foreign bodies, dental prob-
defects, or displacement of the soft palate.
lems and retro-oesophageal abscesses such as guttural pouch empyae-
Occasionally the trachea is the original source of an obstructive
mia. Simple intraluminar oesophageal obstruction may be caused by
problem, as the horse is notoriously susceptible to allergic respiratory
food, woodchips or bedding and may be indicated by salivation,
disease. The trachea can be palpated in the neck. Its superficial posi-
retching and coughing. Passing of a nasal tube will indicate the site of
tion facilitates transtracheal aspiration, by which uncontaminated
"choke’ and then the material can, hopefully, be fushed onward or
   sa r a   a  
flushed retrograde. Oesophageal perforation may result from oesoph-
is made through the skin in the ventral midline; the strap muscles are
ageal obstruction, foreign body perforation, external wounds,
separated and an incision made between the cartilaginous rings,
repeated intubation, extension of infection or injury, or even correc-
through the annular ligament, into the trachea. Then a catheter can
tive surgery. Oesophagotomy should be carried out over the site of
be used to flush with saline for a tracheal wash or for bronchoalveolar
obstruction. It requires an 8 - 10 cm longitudinal skin incision in the
lavage. Tracheal obstruction is not common but may occur following
ventral midline. The positions of the longus colli, sternocephalicus,
trauma or result from a dorsal mass pressing on the trachea. The
and sternothyrohyoideus muscles, jugular vein, and the brachioce-
obstruction is usually cervical, occasionally thoracic. Tracheal endos-
phalicus and omohyoideus muscles should be noted to carry out
copy is used for investigating dynamic airway collapse.
oesophagotomy successfully. The common carotid artery, recurrent
56
 laryngeal nerve and vagosympathetic trunk must be treated with the
condition affecting the pouch is tympany which occurs mainly in foals,
utmost care on both sides.
is often bilateral and can be felt and seen as swellings caudal to the
The lymph nodes of the neck are valuable clinical indications of
mandible. In this condition, the ostium acts as a non-return valve; air
pathological changes in their drainage areas. The lateral retropharyn-
enters but does not escape. It can be relieved by creating a fistula with
元
geal lymph nodes are supposedly superfcial but are not usually pal-
the pharynx, or with the opposite pouch, or by dilating the ostium.
Z
pable unless enlarged with fuid or infamed or neoplastic. The medial 
There may be chronic inflammation (guttural pouch diverticulitis);
 retropharyngeal nodes are not palpable but the deep cervical chain of
mucus accumulates in the pouches and this may lead to chronic infec-
lymph nodes may be palpable if enlarged. The superficial cervical
tions and the presence of solid concretions or chondroids. Far more
(formerly pre-scapular) lymph node takes drainage from caudal neck,
shoulder and most of the fore limb. It is one of the largest lymph nodes 
pouch, particularly in the upper part of both lateral and medial com-
in the horse's body, and it takes drainage from a very wide area,
partments (close to the vessels). The erosive process may therefore
includ ing all of the front limbs. If often extends to a chain of accessory
damage the internal carotid artery (medial compartment) or external
nodes and is palpable in thin horses, even when not enlarged.
maxillary artery (lateral compartment). This may result in a severe
 The major clinical features of the caudal part of the head, bordering
haemorrhage as the first clinical sign, which may rapidly prove fatal.
the neck, are the paired diverticula of the auditory tubes (guttural
 In addition, the close relationship with the nerves and other structures
 pouches). They lie ventral to the cranium and dorsal to the pharynx
may cause pharyngeal paralysis, laryngeal hemiplegia or facial palsy.
and oesophagus. The volume of each pouch is approximately 300 ml.
The erosion may even extend into the temporomandibular joint. The
Left and right pouches are in contact medially (mid-line). The archi-
complications can be assessed by endoscopy, ultrasonography and
tecture of each pouch is complicated by the stylohyoid bone which
radiography. Treatment can be achieved through a variety of
divides each pouch into lateral and medial compartments. The pouch
approaches such as; a) an incision cranial to the wing of the atlas; b)
is lined by pseudostratifed ciliated epithelium and is therefore secre-
through Viborg's triangle which gives only restricted access; c) a para-
tory. The drainage points of the pouches into the auditory tubes are
pharyngeal approach with the horse in dorsal recumbency in which a
not, unfortunately, at the lowest point of the pouch. These openings
ventral midline incision is made, permitting an approach lateral to the
are patent during swallowing, and gravity aids drainage when the head
larynx, trachea and cricopharyngeus muscle; or d) a technique known 
is down. The ostia of the auditory tube are slits, under cartilage flaps,
  s    ,  
that open onto the dorsolateral wall of the pharynx. The clinical
ventral to the lin guo-facial vein.
Synovial bursae deep to the funicular part of the ligamentum nuchae
rounding structures. The medial compartment is crossed by cranial
may become enlarged and infected. At the arch of the atlas vertebra
nerves IX to Xll and by the internal carotid artery, whereas the lateral
(Cl), the cranial nuchal (atlantal) bursa may give rise to poll evil'.
compartment is crossed by the external maxillary artery and vein, and
 Over the supraspinous processes of T2-T4, between the funicular and
the facial nerve lies on the dorsal surface. Thus, any infection in the 
laminar parts of the ligament, lies the supraspinous bursa, which may
guttural pouches can potentially erode and damage these structures
 give rise to “fistulous withers'. These are serious conditions requiring
leading to a wide variety of clinical signs. Also, the pouch is a natural
antibacterial therapy and, possibly, surgical drainage. Brucella abortus
reservoir for Streptococcus equi, the cause of strangles. The simplest
 has been incriminated in both conditions.
mane
crestof neck
1:.
the withers,
spinousprocesses
of T3, T4, 75
scapular cartilage,
dorsal border
scapula:
cranial border
spine
transverseprocesses
 of cervical vertebrae 
humerus: major
tuberosity (cranial
and caudaf parts)
deltoid tuberosity.
outine of m.
cutaneus coif
uina, olecranon.
humerus, lateral
epicondyle
radius,lateral
tuberosity
Fig. 2.1 Surface features of the neck and shoulder: left lateral view. The
mane has been moved over to the right side to display the crest, which
was not well developed in this young gelding. The palpable bony features 
have been shaved. The surface features of the cranial parts of the neck are
shown in Fig. 1.4.
Fig. 2.2 Bones of the neck and shoulder: left lateral view. The palpable
bony features shown in Fig. 2.1 have been coloured red. The dorsal
border of the scapular cartilage is represented by a red wire.
58
Fig. 2.3 Superfcial musculature of the neck. The superfcial fascia and the
cutaneous omobrachial muscle have been removed, but the large
cutaneous muscle of the neck has been preserved.
The
Neck
n. cervicalis If, r. ventralis
v.maxillaris (cut)
tendonof
fibroadipose tissue of
m. fongissimus capitis
crest
a. carotis interna
nn. cervicales IV, V
a.v.occipitalis
rr.dorsales
m. trapezius, pars
a.carotis externa
cervicalis,party
n. accessorius Xi.
covered by superficial
f.ventralis
cervicalfascia
Inn. retropharyngei
n. accessorius Xl,
mediales
r.dorsalis
Inn.cervicales
m. serratus ventralis
profundi craniales
cervicis
v.linguofacialis
n. cervicalis IV,
r. ventralis
m.omohyoideus et
m.sternohyoideus
m.subclavius
v. jugularis externa in
m. supraspinatus
jugular groove
n. cervicalis V.
n.cervicafis Il.
r. ventrafis
r.ventralis
n. cervicalis VI,
m. sternocephalicus
r.ventralis
(n.supractavicufaris)
(m.sternomandibularis)
m. brachiocephalicus
m.cleidocephalicus
adipose tissue
(m. cieidomastoideus)
overlying inn.cervicales
superficiales
m.omotransversarius
superficial fascia
(m.cfeidocervicalis)
m.cutaneus colfi
m.pectoralis
v. cephalica
descendens
m. serratus ventralis
cervicis
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
m. cleidocephalicus
m. subclavius
m.supraspinatus
v. jugularis externa in
jugular groove
m.sternocephalicus
cut edge of
m.cutaneus
omobrachialis
n. cervicalis V,
r.ventralis
m. omotransversarius
n. cervicalis Vf,
f.ventralis
(n. supraclavicularis)
adipose tissue covering
us
m.cutaneus collf
sternum, manubrium
m. cleidobrachiais
m.pectoralis
V. cephalica
skin of neck, reffected
m.pectorals
fransversus
Fig. 2.4 The muscles covering the superficial cervical lymph nodes: left
craniolateral view. The insertion of the cutaneous muscle of the neck into
the cervical fascia has been removed.
n. cervicalis V,
f. ventralis
m. cleidocephalicus
m. omotransversarius
m.sternocephalicus
v.jugularis externa in
jugular groove
n. supraclavicularis (CVI)
a.cervicalis
superficialis,
r.ascendens
Inn. cervicales
s
m.subciavius
a.cervicafis
supericialis,
r.deltoideus
V.cephalica infateral
pectoralgroove
m. cutaneus colf
m, cleidobrachialis
m.pectoralis
m.pectoralis
transversus
Fig. 2.5 The superficial cervical lymph nodes: left craniolateral view. The
cutaneous muscle of the neck has been refected and the adipose tissue
surrounding the lymph node has been removed.
60
m.splenius
adipose tissue of crest
tendon of
m. longissimus capitis
mane
m. cleidocephalicus
The
m.omotransversarius
m.rhomboideus cervicis
V.occipitalis
inn.cervicales
m.trapezius,pars
profundi craniales
cervicalis
v.maxilaris
n.cervicalis
v.linguofaciafis
r.dorsalis
m.omohyoideus et
m.serratusventralis
m. sternohyoideus
cervicis
v. jugularis externa
Inn.cervicales
nn. cervicales IIf,/V
superficiales
rf.ventrales
m. subclavius
m. fongus capitis
transverse process
m.supraspinatus
ofC4
m. scalenus ventralis
n. supraclavicutaris (CVi)
m.ifiocostaliscervicis
humerus, major
m.sternocephalicus
tuberosity
m.omohyoideus
m.cleidobrachialis
a.carotiscommunis
m.pectoralis
descendens
 Fig. 2.6 Contents of the jugular groove: left lateral view. The dorsal border of the groove, formed by the brachiocephalicus muscle, has been
removed, leaving the contents of the groove and its ventral border (sternocephalicus muscle) in position.
m. cleidocephaficus
remnant offibroadipose
m. omotransversarius
cervical crest
m. rhomboideus cervicis
V.occipitalis
 m. splenius
V.maxillaris
m. trapezius, pars
v. linguofacialis
cervicalis
m.longus capitis
m. serratus ventralis
cervicis
transverse processes
of C3,4
V.jugularis externa
n. accessorius Xl,
f.dorsalis
m.omohyoideus
m. scalenus ventralis
m.iliocostalis
cervicis
 m. sternothyroideus
dorsal extremity of
m.sternohyoideus
Inn.cervica/es
superficiales
trachea
m.subclavius
intermediate tendon
n.supraclavicutaris
m. sternothyrohyoideus
(Cvi)
a.carotis communis
ventral extremity of
Inn.cervicafes
m. sternocephalicus
superficiales
(dexter)
m. brachiocephalicus
a.cervicalis
m. sternocephalicus
superficialis
(sinister)
r.deltoideus
m.pectoralis
V. cephalica in fateral
descendens
pectoralgroove
Fig. 2.7 Strap muscles of the neck: left lateral view. The brachiocephalicus and sternocephalicus muscles have been resected to display the
6
Fig. 2.8 Cervical lymph
nodes and viscera: left
lateral view. The deep
lymph nodes and the
tracheal lymph duct 
have been exposed by
removal of the
omohyoid muscle and
the jugular vein.
inn.retropharyngei
m. omotransversarius
mediales
m.rhomboideus cervicis
n.laryngeus cranialis(X)
m.splenius
m. cricopharyngeus
m.serratus ventralis
m.thyropharyngeus
cervicis
m.thyrohyoideus
transverse process
of C4
Inn.cervicales
profundfi craniales
m.omohyoideus et
a. carotis communis
m. sternohyoideus
insertion of
m. longus coffi
m. sternothyroideus
a. thyroidea cranialis
n. cervicalis V.
thyroid gland
f. ventralis
m. longus capifis
In.cervicafis
m.liocostalis
cervicis
profundusmedius
 m. scalenus ventralis
t. trachealis
m. sternohyoideus
t. vagosympathicus
intermediate tendon
oesophagus
Inn.cervicales
trachea
profundicaudales
m. sternothyrohyoideus
m. sternocephalicus
(dexter)
62
Fig. 2.9 Cervical structures at the thoracic inlet:
left lateral view, (1). The forelimb has been 
removed.
The Neck
m.splenius
fibroadipose cervicaf
crest
m.rhomboideus cervicis
m.omotransversarius
m. semispinalis
m. longus capitis
n.cervicafis,IVr.ventrafis
m. longissimus cervicis
f. vagosympathicus
m. serratus ventralis
m.sternothyroideus
cervicis
m.longissimus thoracis
rm. sternohyoideus
m. serratus ventralis
trachea
thoracis
t.trachealis
m. scalenus ventralis
In.cervicafis
m. scalenus dorsalis
profundus medius
n. thoracicus longus
m.longus coi
plexus brachialis
a.carotis communis
n.phrenicus,roots
oesophagus
from CVt,CVI!
m. sternothyrohyoideus
v. jugularis externa
inn.cervicales
profundi caudales
a.thoracica externa
m. sternocephalicus
m.rectus thoracis
(dexter)
m. sternocephalicus
inn.cervicales
(sinister)
profundicaudales
a. cervicalis superticialis
m. pectoralis ascendens
m. subclavius
a.v.axilaris
descendens
m.pectoralis
m.omotransversariu
m.splenius
m.longus capitis
m. serratus venfrafis
cervicis
thyroid gland
trachea
m. sternothyroideus
nn. cervicales IV, V,
m. sternohyoideus
rr.ventrales
oesophagus
n.laryngeus
m.iliocostalis
recurrens (X)
cervicis
t. vagosympathicus
m. scalenus ventralis
t. tracheafis
cut edges of carotid
in.cervicafis
sheath
profundus medius
intermediatetendonof
a. carotis communis
m. sternothyrohyoideus
Inn.cervicales
profundi caudales
Fig. 2.10 Contents of the carotid sheath: left lateral view. The fascial sheath has been incised. The enclosed nerves, artery and the associated
lymphatic trunk have been slightly separated at the position of the black pin.
m. longissimus cervicis
m.longissimus thoracis
 origins of m. serratus.
ventralis cervicis
m.iliocostalis thoracis
n. cervicalis Vf,
r.dorsas
f.ventralis
m.iliocostalis cervicis
oesophagus
m. scalenus dorsalis
a.carotis communis
n. thoracicus longus
trachea
plexus brachialis
t. trachealis
n.phrenicus,roots
from CVI,CVI!
inn.cervicales
rib 1
profundi caudales
m. scalenus ventralis
m. sternothyrohyoideus -
a. thoracica externa
a.v.axilfaris
v.cephafica
m. sternocephalicus
inn.cervicales
(dexter)
profundi caudales
a.cervicalis
m.rectus thoracis
superficialis
m.subclavius
m.sternocephalicus
(sinister)
costal cartiages 1.2
m.pectorafis
apex of manubriun
descendens
m.pectoralis
transversus
m. cutaneus colf
Fig. 2.11 Cervical structures at the thoracic inlet: left lateral view, (2). The ventral serrate and pectoral muscles have been cut back to expose the
 sternum, ribs, and cervical structures at this level.
64
Fig. 2.12 Cervical
structures at the thoracic
inlet: left lateral view,
(3). The scalenus 
The
muscles have been
 removed in the most
caudal part of the neck.
m.longus coli
m.longissimus cervicis
t. vagosympathicus
m.fongissimus thoracis
a.carotis communis
m. iiocostalis cervicis
trachea
m.scafenus dorsafis
t.trachealis
nib 1
oesophagus
plexus brachialis
m. sternothyrohyoideus
n. faryngeus recurrens
carotid sheath, cut
ganglioncervicalemedium
edges
ductus thoracicus
t. vagosympathicus
v. jugularis externa
n. phrenicus (CVi,CVIl)
v.cava cranialis
v.cephalica
inn.cervicales
profundi caudales
m.cutaneus colf
m. sternocephalicus
a.v.axilaris
(sinister)
origin of m.pectoralis
a.cervicalis
descendens
superficialis
m.subcfavius
a. thoracica externa
Fig. 2.13 The deeper
muscles of the neck: left
lateral view (1). The
splenius and ventral
serrate muscles have 
been removed. The frst
rib has been taken out
and the second rib cut 
short. The cranial part
of the dissection is
shown in Fig. 1.31.
m. semispinatis
capitis
m. splenius
m. rhomboideus cervicis
nn. cervicales lf, IV,
m.obliquus capitis
rr.ventrales
caudalis
nn.cervicates,
m. obliquus capitis
rr.dorsales
cranialis
a.occipitafis
tigamentum nuchae
(funicular part)
a. carotis interna
m. semispinalis capitis
a. carotis externa
m. longissimus capitis
m. sptenius, insertion 
m.longissimus atlantis
m. omotransversarius
m.splenius
m.fongus capifis
m. fongissimus cervicis
m.iliocostalis
thyroid gland
cervicis
n.laryngeus
recurrens (X)
m. fongissimus thoracis
f. trachealis
m.longus coff
(displaced ventrafty)
rib1{removed)
trachea
oesophagus
n.vertebrafis
In.cervicalis
a. scapularis dorsatis
profundus medius
a. cervicalis profunda
a.carotis communis
m.sternocephalicus
f. costocervicalis
(dexter)
a.vertebralis
t. vagosympathicus
ganglion
m. sternothyrohyoideus
cervicothoracicum
66
m.semispinalis capitis:
m.complexusm.biventercervicis
ligamentumnuchae
m.splenius
(funicularpart)
The Neck
m. rhomboideus thoracis
dorsoscapularfigament
m. splenius
m. longissimus cenvicis
m. longissimus thoracis
m.longus capitis
m.iliocostalis thoracis
mm.intertransversarii
dorsales cervicis
t. vagosympathicus
ductus thoracicus
n. vertebralis
ganglion
cervicothoracicum
m.iliocostalis
ganglin cervicale
cervicis
medium
t. sympathicus
Fig. 2.14 The deeper muscles of the neck: left lateral view (2). The cervical part of the intermediate spinal erector muscles (m. longissimus) has been
removed.
m. obliquus capitis
caudalis
 m. semispinalis capitis
m.rectus capitis
(cutedge)
dorsalis major
ligamentum nuchae
(funicularpart)
n. cervicalis Ifl.
rf.dorsalis et ventralis
ligamentum nuchae
(lamelfarpart)
C3.C4 articular processes
m. semispinalis capitis
mm.multifidi
m. spinalis cervicis
a. cervicalis profunda
m. iliocostalis thoracis
C6, transverse process
plexus brachialis
(CVII, VilI r. ventrales)
ductus thoracicus
1. vagosympathicus
n.taryngeus
n.cervicalis V,rr. dorsalis
recurrens (X)
etventralis
mm. intertransversari
cervicis
Fig. 2.15 The cervical nerves and nuchal ligament: left lateral view. Removal of the semispinalis capitis muscle has exposed the nuchal ligament. The
dorsal branches of the cervical nerves emerge from the deepest layer of spinal muscles.
Fig. 2.16 The nuchal
ligament: left lateral
view. Removal of the
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
spinalis cervicis muscle
exposes the broad
lamellar part of the
ligament and the related
 thoracic interspinous
ligaments. The
dorsoscapular ligament
(Fig. 2.14) has also
been removed.
Jigamentum nuchae:
funicular part
lamellarpart
m.rectus capitis
dorsalismajor
m. spinalis (dexter)
m. rhomboideus thoracis
wing of attas
uaueb snoudseidns
m. obliquus capitis
m.interspinalis
cranialis
m. obliquus capitis
interspinous figaments
caudalis
position of synovial
m. spinalis thoracis
joint between axis
and C3
m. fongissimus thoracis
n. cervicalis Il,
spinous
fr.dorsafis et
ventralis
processes T3,T4
m.longus capitis
spinous
processes T1, T2
thyroid gland
m.iliocostafis thoracis
a.cervicalisprofunda
oesophagus
m.longus colli
trachea
ductusthoracicus
mm.multifidi
t.sympathicus
synoviat joints berween
ganglion
C5,C6 and C6. C7
cervicothoracicum
m. sternocephalicus
m. sternothyrohyoideus
ganglion cervicale
(dexter)
(sinister)
medium
t. vagosympathicus
v.jugularis externa dextra
68
Fig. 2.17 The atlas and
axis vertebrae: left
lateral view. The
pharyngeal structures 
are dealt with in detail
in Fig. 1.26 and Figs.
1.32-1.34.
alfas,atravra
nuchal ligament,
and alar foramina
n.cervicalis1,
adipose tissue of
f. dorsalis
cervical crest
a.vertebralis
m.rectus capitis
r.descendens
dorsalis major
atlas,crania!
dura mater
anticular process
n. cervicalis If, radices
occipital bone, condyle
ventralis et dorsalis
a. meningea caudalis
occipitafbone,jugular
axis,dens
process
wing of atlas
axis:
m.occipitohyoideus
cranial articular process
lateralvertebralforamen
m. digastricus
spinous process
atlas,transverse
foramen
n. cervicalis 
a.vertebrafis
n. vagus X
nuchal ligament,
m.stylohyoideus
lameflar part
a.carotis interna
axis,caudal articular
a.occipitalis
process
t. finguofacialis
m. multfidus cervicis
a.carotis externa
C3, craniat articular
m.fongissimus atfantis
process
n.accessorius XI
a.vertebralis,
a.carotis communis
r. dorsalis
a. vertebrafis leaving
axis
mm.intertransversari
transverse foramenof axis
transverse process
m.longus coli
m. longus capitis
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
m.rectus capitis
remnant of m. obtiquus
figamentum nuchae:
dorsafis minor
capitis caudalis
funicular part
lamellar part attaching to C2,3,4 and 5
external occipital
protuberance
occipital condyle
atlas
densof axis
supraspinous figament
axis
guttural pouch
n.cervicalis}
r.ventrafis
m. spinalis(dexter)
m. fongus capitis
a.cervicafis profunda
m. iliocostafis cervicis
head of rib 1. removed
a.intercostalis
suprema
m.fongus colli
a.scapularis dorsafis
thyroidgland
C3, transverse process
synoviat joint between
plexus brachialis
C6and C7
(CVII,VI; TI,I)
nn. cervicales V,Vf.
a.vertebralis
ff.ventrales
Fig. 2.18 The cervical vertebrae and nuchal ligaments: left lateral view. Removal of the deepest muscles (multifidis, intertransverse and obliquus
capitis) reveals the cervical attachments of the ligament. Note that there is no attachment, in this specimen, to the dorsal spinous process of C6.
Further details of this dissection are shown in Figs. 2.19 and 2.20.
70
The
caudal articular
Craniaf articutar
process, C5
process,C6
arch of C6
 spinous process, 71
a.vertebralis,f.dorsafis
transverse foramen, C5
mm.muftifidi
a.v.n.vertebralis
a. cervicalis protunda
crossing intervertebral
e   
caudalarticular
C6
process, C7
n. cervicalis Vf,
craniat articufar
Tr.dorsalis et
ventralis
process,T1
n. cervicalis Vilt,
r.oorsais
n. cervicalis Vill.
transverseprocessand
foramen,C6
fr.dorsalis et
ventralis
a.v.n. vertebralis at
transverse process, C7
mm.intertransversari
cervicis
m. longus coli
n. cervicafis VI,r. ventralis
m.levator costarum
costotransverse
oesophagus
figament, rib 1
trachea
space from which head
a.carotis communis
of rib 1 was removed
plexus brachialis:
t.trachealis
CVII, VI
m, sternocephalicus
t. vagosympathicus
n.vertebralis
m. longus coll
(dexter)
m. sternothyrohyoideus
m.Wiocostalis
8. vertebralis
cervicis
Fig. 2.19 The last two cervical and first thoracic vertebrae: left lateral view. The transverse canal houses the vertebral artery, vein and nerve. It begins
at the caudal transverse foramen of C6. There is no C7 transverse foramen.
Fig. 2.20 The nuchal ligament at the atlanto-axial
articulation: left lateral view. This is a closer view
of part of the dissection shown in Fig. 2.18.
ColorAtlasofVeterinaryAnatomy,
m.rectus capifis
dorsalisminor
nuchal figament,
funicufar part
 occipital protruberance
position of cranial
atlas,cranial
nuchal bursa
articular process
n. cervicalis I,
occipital condyle
r. dorsalis
atlas, position of alar
a.vertebralis
r.descendens
andlateral vertebral
foramina
m.rectus capitis
dorsatis major (dexter)
atfas:
wing
m.obfiquus capitus
transverse foramen
caudalis(smal remnant)
position of caudal
a.vertebralis
nuchalbursa
nuchat figament:
atlantoaxialdorsa!
funicularpart
interspinous tigament
lamellarpart
n. cervicalis I
axis:
spinous process
lateralvertebraiforamen
s
a. carotis communis
cranialarticularprocess
transverse process
sites of inconstant
synovial bursae
cartiages of spinous
processes T3, T4, 75
supraspinous synovial
bursa over spinous
processes of T2, T3
nuchaf ligament:
funicular part
lamellar part
interspinous tigaments
T2, T3 spinous processes
m. interspinalis
 spinous processes
m.longissimus
of T4. 75
thoracis
m. spinalis thoracis
Fig. 2.21 The nuchal ligament at the withers: left lateral view. The funicular part of the ligament has been twisted to the right side, to reveal the 
spinous processes of T4 and T5. Synovial bursae are sometimes located between the spinous process of each thoracic vertebra and the funicular part
 of the nuchal ligament. The supraspinous bursa lies between the two parts of the nuchal ligament.
72
3. THE FORELIMB
Clinical importance of the forelimb
fractures following surgical repair, are the most crucial aspect of
equine orthopaedics.
The foal grows rapidly, especially from birth to 10 weeks-of-age.
The scapula (four centres of ossification) is not easily fractured, but
Fusion of growth plates in the limb bones gives an approximate esti-
the tuber scapulae can be fractured and the articular surface of the
mation of the age of the young horse. Lighter breeds tend to fuse
glenoid cavity may be affected. The proximal humerus has three
earlier than the heavier breeds. The proximal humeral growth plate
centres of ossification which fuse together at about 3-5 months of age;
closes at about 24 42 months of age and the distal at 12-24 months.
the distal humerus has two centres. This bone also is not commonly
my,
In the radius, the proximal growth plate fuses at 12-24 months of age
fractured as, like the scapula, it is supported by strong musculature,
and the distal plate at 24 months (it has continuous growth for the
 but all the other bones of the forelimb are more exposed.
first 60 weeks of life). The ulnar growth plates fuse at around 24-36
A fractured radius requires a Robert Jones bandage to prevent
months. The proximal growth plate of metacarpal bone Ill is fused at
adduction. Fracture of the ulna often involves the articular surface of 
birth, as are the distal growth plates of phalanges I and I1. The distal
the trochlear notch. This, and separation of the olecranon (also not
cerir
growth plate of metacarpal bone Ill fuses at 6-9 months and the
ucommon following a fall or being kicked by another horse) are
t
of Ve
proximal growth plates of phalanges I and 11 fuse around 6-12
both seen as “dropped elbow' because the triceps muscle is unable to
months.
prevent it.
 In the young horse there may be abnormalities of conformation and
Fracture of the accessory carpal bone and chip fractures of the
if there are angular bone abnormalities they are best sorted out by 70
carpus may lead to carpal sheath injuries.
days of age. They are usually crooked legs, with flexure and contractile
 The activities of the horse predispose to a wide variety of joint
Color
deformities. The young horse may also suffer from osteochondrosis
lesions, often associated with the extra stresses which result from gal-
dissecans in the shoulder and elbow and this may be unilateral or
 loping and jumping. There are a variety of joint diseases, including
bilateral. Sub-chondral bone cysts may also affect the young horse.
idiopathic synovitis, traumatic arthritis, and osteoarthritis. Osteoar-
Equine limbs are often subjected to trauma, especially 
the
thritis may be primary or secondary following mechanical disruptions
forelimbs.
and cytokine-mediated inflammation (antibody-associated, free radical
 paa aq A p s an edas n Asea no si 1
damage, or enzyme damage). The initial sign is nearly always a result
the complex subject of lameness. It is important to localise the site(s)
 of extra fuid accumulation in the joint and appears as a soft tissue
of the problem and to characterise the nature of the pathological
 swelling around the joint. Most of the joints with great mobility have
changes. This requires a good history, an overall inspection, a com-
 a large joint capsule from which fluid is easily aspirated, but “low
plete physical examination which includes palpation and manipulation
motion' joints, such as those of the carpus, are much more difficult to
and, ultimately, a detailed evaluation. Clinical examination will 
aspirate.
reveal deformity, swellings or thickenings, skin wounds, and muscle
 These synovial structures may also be affected by external puncture
wasting.
wounds. Quite often there is a small wound, followed 2-3 days later
 Palpation detects heat and pain as well as the precise location and
by swelling, followed by synovial fuid leaking from the joint. Joints
consistency of swelling. Superficial pain is usually tested by poking the
 are also affected by haematogenous spread of organisms (particularly
skin and deep pain is tested by using hoof testers, limb flexion or deep
in foals), local penetration, or local extension from peri-articular
digital palpation. Analgesia is used for joints and also for diagnostic
structures.
nerve blocks. In chronic disorders, the induced analgesia may not
Arthrocentesis followed by intra-articular medication is commonly
completely block out the diagnostic lesions. If more than one site, or
 both limbs, are involved it may be even more difficult. After using
analysis aids in the interpretation of joint disease and is particularly
analgesia on the nerves in the upper parts of the limbs, loss of motor
important in horses with septic arthritis. Synovial fuid analysis
function and stumbling may result. Manipulation of the joints allows
requires visual assessment, examinations of volume, total protein,
evaluation of movement and detects restrictions, instabilities, pain and
inflammatory cells and a cytological analysis.
crepitus. Abnormalities of gait may be detected. These results can then
The shoulder joint may show luxation or sub-luxation, particularly
 be further investigated by the available techniques such as radiology,
if there is laxness in the ligaments of the joint and tendons of the
ultrasonography, scintography, magnetic resonance imaging, com-
muscles. Intra-articular analgesia of the shoulder joint requires access 
puted tomography and the use of regional anaesthesia and specific
between the cranial and caudal prominences of the greater tubercle of
nerve blocks to localise the site of lameness.
the humerus, with the needle directed in a horizontal and slightly
 There are several types of fractures. The direction and location of
caudo-medial direction, to enter the synovial cavity.
the fracture line within a single bone may have a significant effect on
The elbow joint is very large and is often affected by septic arthritis.
the feasibility of repair. The relative displacement of the fractured
Capped elbow is an acquired bursa at the point of the elbow. Intra-
pieces is also important. In some instances the fracture is incomplete.
articular analgesia of the elbow joint is possible. The lateral humeral
It may be stable or unstable, but probably the most important feature
 epicondyle and the lateral tuberosity of the radius are palpated, and
is whether it is open or closed, as an open fracture is almost invariably
the needle inserted between them, cranial or caudal to the lateral liga-
infected. The treatments of individual fractures are beyond our remit
ment, in a horizontal direction, to a depth of 45 cm.
but fractures of proximal limb bones are difficult, often impossible, to
Carpal joint disease is quite common. There are 7 or 8 bones in the
repair and distal limb fractures are more accessible. In nearly all frac-
 carpus. The proximal carpal row has radial, intermediate, ulnar and
 s    i  s s
accessory carpal bones. The distal row has carpal bones I1, Ill, IV and
of diagnosis and treatment continually improve, but the fact that they
sometimes carpal bone 1. There are approximately 26-27 separate
 all require formation of a callus, followed by subsequent remodelling,
articulations between these bones. There are essentially three joints --
will never change. Anaesthetic recovery and aftercare for these
the antebrachio-carpal, which both rotates and glides; the middle
74
[a- a p no sq as e si m no 
dorso-medial aspect of the deep digital fexor tendon, approximately
articulation which has very little movement.
2 cm proximal to the accessory carpal bone. Midway between the
Intra-articular analgesia of the carpal joints is possible as a diag
proximal recess of the sheath and the accessory carpal bone, caudal
nostic technique. With the limb fixed in a flexed position, the injection
to the distal radius, the sheath extends laterally and medially to the
5
sites are easily palpable. The radio-carpal joint is found by locating
deep digital flexor tendon.
 Foreliml
the depression between the radius and the proximal row of the carpal
Damage to the nerves of the forelimb is usually caused by trauma
bones. For the middle carpal joint, locate the depression between the
from normal activities or by aggression from other horses. Damage to
proximal and distal rows of the carpal bones. For both joints the
the suprascapular nerve, which is motor to the supraspinatus and
needle is inserted medial to the extensor carpi radialis tendon or
infraspinatus muscles, results in 'shoulder slip'. Atrophy of the shoul-
between that tendon and the common digital extensor tendon.
der muscles may take 18 months to recover.
Muscles and tendons, and the synovial structures associated with
Radial nerve damage may accompany humeral fractures. The loss
them, are very commonly subjected to injury in any type of working
 of innervation to the extensor tendons of the digit causes a dropped
horse. Rupture of the common digital extensor, usually in the sheath
elbow and inability to stand, resulting in long periods of lateral recum-
over the lateral aspect of the carpus, can occur in foals with carpal
 bency. Damage to the ulnar and median nerve may result in the loss
contracture. The fbrous palmar carpal joint capsule is dense, and
 of skin sensation to palmar metacarpal and to palmar and dorsodistal
closely attached to the palmar aspect of the carpal bones. It forms the 
digital regions. Analgesia of the antebrachium can be carried out by
dorsal wall of the carpal canal. It continues distally to form the acces-
blocking the median nerve medially, 5 cm distal to the elbow joint,
sory head of the deep digital flexor tendon (the accessory or inferior
where the nerve runs along the caudal aspect of the radius. The ulnar
check ligament). The carpal fascia on the palmar aspect of the carpal
nerve is blocked 10 cm proximal to the accessory carpal bone, in a
region forms the flexor retinaculum (transverse carpal ligament)
groove between the fexor carpi ulnaris and the extensor carpi radialis
between the free palmar edge of the accessory carpal bone and the
(ulnaris lateralis) muscles.
medial aspect of the carpus. This completes the carpal arch, which
Damage to the musculocutaneous nerve results in an inability to
contains the superficial digital fexor and deep digital flexor tendons.
flex the elbow, as there is no effective innervation of the biceps brachii,
Carpal flexor tendon sheath injuries are less common than injuries to
coracobrachialis and brachialis muscles. There is also a loss of sensa-
the digital flexor tendon sheath, but can be a severe cause of lame-
tion to the dorsomedial aspect of the limb from the carpus to the
ness. They often result from fractures of accessory carpal bones. The
fetlock. The nerve can be blocked subcutaneously on either side of the
 tendon sheath extends from 4-8 cm proximal to the accessory carpal
 cephalic vein, about half way between the carpus and the elbow, to
bone to 5-10 cm distal to the carpal bone. The proximal sheath is
 anaesthetise both cranial and caudal branches of the metacarpal
caudal to the distal radius and cranial to the deep digital flexor
 nerves.
 tendon. The accessory ligament of the superficial digital flexor tendon
 The axillary nerve may be damaged. This results in reduced flexion
(radial or superior check ligament) forms part of the medial wall of
 of the shoulder and lateral instability of the shoulder joint, as there
the sheath. The short radial head of the deep digital fexor muscle
is no effective innervation of deltoid and teres major and minor
 protrudes into the sheath proximally and is inserted into the
muscles.
75
withers (spinous processes
of T4,5 and 6)
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
scapula:
dorsat border of cartilage
cranial angie
caudal angle
cranialborder
auids
cervical vertebrae,
transverse processes
humerus:
cranial and caudal
divisions
of major tuberosity
deltoid tuberosity
position of divergent hair
vortex
uina,olecranon
humerus, lateral
epicondyle
radius, lateral tuberosity
Fig. 3.1 Surface features of the scapular and brachial regions: left lateral view. The
palpable bony prominences have been shaved. The cranial border of the scapula is 
covered by the subclavius and supraspinatus muscles and is not clearly palpable. The 
acromion is small or absent in the horse and is never palpable. The divergent hair
vortex situated just cranial to the humerus is usually very clearly visible but it does 
not show well in this lateral view.
Fig. 3.2 The bones of the forelimb. Scapular and brachial regions: left lateral view. The
palpable bony prominences shown in Fig. 3.1 have been coloured red. The palpable
edge of the scapular cartilage is shown by a red wire. The tips of the spinous
processes at the withers have not been coloured.
76
humerus, cranial and
caudal divisions of major
C
tuberosity
 The Forelimb
deltoid tuberosity
posifion of divergent hair
vortex
uina,olecranon
humerus, lateralepicondyle
radius, lateral tuberosity
radius, lateral
prominence of distaf
extremity
position ofradiocarpa!
joint
accessorycarpatbone
proximalextremityol
metacarpal bone/V
Fig. 3.3 Surface features of the brachial, antebrachial and carpal regions: left lateral 
view. The palpable bony prorminences have been shaved. The surface features of the
 manus and the location of the carpal pad (chestnut) on the medial side of the limb in
the distal antebrachium, are shown in Figs. 7.1, 7.3, 7.5 and 7.7. The lateral
prominence on the distal extremity of the radius is often called the lateral styloid
process, but it is partly metaphyseal.
Fig. 3.4 Bones of the forelimb. Brachial, antebrachial and carpal regions: left lateral
view. The palpable bony prominences shown in Fig. 3.3 have been coloured red. The
articular process situated just distal to the marked metaphyseal prominence of the
radius is the so-called “lateral styloid process of the radius': it is, in fact, the distal
 epiphysis of the ulna and it articulates with the ulnar carpal bone.
cervical crest
superficiaffascia
(cutedge)
scapula.spine
m.frapezius:
parsthoracica
superficial fascia
pars cervicalis
(cutedge)
m.cutaneus trunci
humerus, major
tuberosity
m.cutaneus
humerus,deltoid
omobrachiafis
tuberosity
m. triceps brachii
brachial fascia
superficialfascia
(cutedge)
olecranon
Fig. 3.5 Cutaneous muscles of the scapular and brachial regions: left lateral view. The
superficial fascia, in which the cutaneous muscles lie, has been opened both dorsally
and ventrally to show the underlying muscles. These muscles are more fully revealed
in Fig. 3.6.
m.frapezius:
pars cervicalis   pars thoracica
nn. spinales rf. cutanel
scapura,spine
dorsales laterales:
nn.thoracici If. cutanei
71
dorsales laterales
m.latissimus dorsi
m.serratus ventralis
cervicis
m.infraspinatus
m. subclavius
aponeurosis of
m.deftoideus
m.supraspinatus
m.tensorfasciae
Inn.cervicales
antebrachii
superficiales
m. omotransversarius
m.deftoideus
m. serratus ventralis
m.omohyoideus
thoracis
a. carotis communis
m. triceps (caput ongum)
v. jugularis externa
n. intercostobrachiafis
n. supraclavicularis (CV)
deepfascia covering
m. cleidocephalicus
m.obliquus externus
humerus, major tuberosity
abdominis
n.cutaneus brachi
m. cutaneus trunci
lateralis (n. axilaris)
v. thoracica superficialis
m. cleidobrachialis
olecranon
m. triceps brachi (caput
m.cutaneus omobrachialis
(aterale)
in superficial fascia
 m. pectoralis descendens
V.cephalica
Fig. 3.6 Superficial structures of the scapular and brachial regions: left lateral view (1).
The superficial fascia and the cutaneous muscles have been removed. During the
 previous dissection of the neck (see Chapter 2) the omotransversarius and
brachiocephalicus muscles (shown intact in Figs. 2.3 and 2.4) were transected
(Fig. 2.7).
78
m. rhomboideus cervicis
m.trapezius, pars
thoracica
m.splenius
scapula:
 m. serratus ventralis
cranialangle
 The Forelimb
cervicis
cartilage
m. subclavius
caudal angle
m.deltoideus
m. serratus ventralis
thoracis
m.iliocostalis
cervicis
scapula,spine
m. supraspinatus
m.omohyoideus
v. jugularis externa
m. infraspinatus
m. omotransversarius
m.sternothyroideus
humerus,major tuberosity
m. latissimus dorsi (cut)
m. cleidocephalicus
deepfasciacovering
m.obliquus externus
m. sternocephalicus
abdominis
m. triceps brachir:
caput longum
m. cutaneus trunci
caputlaterale
m.fensor fasciae
antebrachii
m.pectoralis
V. thoracica superficialis
descendens
n. cutaneus antebrachi
m. pectoralis ascendens
lateralis (n. radialis)
m.cutaneus omobrachialis
Fig. 3.7 Superficial structures of the scapular and brachial regions: left lateral view (2).
The cervical trapezius muscle has been removed and the latissimus dorsi transected to
show the scapular attachments of the cervical and thoracic parts of the ventral serrate
muscle. The full extent of this muscle is seen when the scapula is removed (Fig. 3.10).
Fig. 3.8 Axillary structures before removal of
the left forelimb: dorsal view. The trapezius,
rhomboideus and ventral serrate muscles have
been cut, and the scapula has been abducted and
viewed from above to display the emergence of
the brachial plexus between the two parts of the
scalenus muscle. Fig. 3.9 shows a further stage in
this dissection of the axilla.
m.scalenus:
m.serratus ventralis
dorsalis
ventralis
emergence of plexus
nmedianus
brachialis
n.thoracicus lateralis
n.musculocutaneus
n.thoracodorsalis
n.suprascapuraris
a.v.suprascapularis
n.radialis
nn. pectorales caudales
n.subscapufaris
feft forelimb
n.axillaris
79
Fig. 3.9 Axillary structures before removal of the left forelimb: caudal 
view. The forelimb has now been further abducted to display the axilla
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
more completely. The nerves and blood vessels of the axilla have been 
further dissected to reveal their topographical relationships. Further
details of trunk and limb are shown in Figs. 3.10 and 3.15.
m.serratusventraliscervicis
n. suprascapularis
m.scafenus ventralis
m. serratus ventralis
n.subscapularis
thoracis
n.thoracodorsalis
n.medianus et
n.musculocutaneus
m.subclavius
n.axilaris
m.serratusventralis,
a.axillaris
 cervicis et thoracis
v.axillaris
a.v.suprascapu
n.radialis
m.subscapularis
nn. pectorales caudales
Inn.axillares
m.latissimus dors
n.thoracicuslateralis
m.feresmajo
rib cage
a.v.subscapularis
m.oectorarsascendens
m.cutaneusfru
v.thoracica superficialis
a.v. thoracodorsalis
80
Fig. 3.10 The pectoral and ventral serrate muscles after removal of the
forelimb: left lateral view. Pectoralis, rhomboideus, trapezius and ventral
serrate muscles have been incised to remove the forelimb. The nerves of
 The Forelimb
the brachial plexus are not arranged to show the disposition before
removal of the limb. This is, however, shown in Fig. 3.48.
m. rhomboideus thoracis
m.rhomboideus cervicis
cutedge ofm.trapezius
m.splenius
(pars thoracica)
m. fongissimus thoracis
 rn. serratus ventralis:
deepmiddleand
thoracis
cervicis
superficial parts
m. serratus dorsalis
m.iliocostalis
cranialis
cervicis
m. iliocostalls thoracis
m. scalenus ventralis
mm.intercostalesexterni
n. phrenicus (CVI)
n. thoracicus longus
a. carotis communis
m. scalenus dorsalis
Inn. cervicales profundi
caudales
plexus brachialis
m. sternothyrohyoideus
n.thoracodorsalis
v.juguiaris externa
n.thoracicusfateralis
Inn.cervicales
superficial tendinous
superficiales
part of m.serratus
ventralis thoracis
a. cervicalis superficialis
nn.pectorales caudales
f. deftoideus
m.serratus ventralis
thoracis interdigitating
m.subclavius
with m.obliquus
externus abdominis (cut)
v.cephalica
a.v. axillaris
a. thoracica externa
m. pectoralis
descendens
m. rectus thoracis
m. pectoralis ascendens
m. pectoralis transversus
81
m. pectoralis descendens
m. triceps brachi(caput
laterale)
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse 
m.pectorafis ascendens
m.cleidobrachialis
n. cutaneus antebrachii
m. biceps brachii
lateralis (n.radialis)
n.cutaneus antebrachii
craniafis (n.axilfaris)
m. pectoralis transversus
n. cufaneus antebrachii
mediars
v.cephalica
(n. musculo cutaneus)
m. extensor carpi radialis
m.fexor carpi radiatis
m. extensor digitorum
radius
communis
m. extensor carpi radialis
V. cephatica accessoria
v. cephalica accessoria
radius:
r.carpeus dorsalis
medial styloid process
lateral styloid process
metacarpal tuberosity
Fig. 3.11 Superficial structures of the left antebrachium and carpus: rostral view.
The limb has been removed from the trunk. The skin and superficial fascia have
been removed to show the superfcial vessels and nerves, but the antebrachial 
 muscles are still invested by the strong antebrachial fascia. The specimen at this
stage of dissection is also shown in Figs. 3.12-3.14.
n.cutaneus antebrachii
m. triceps brachii:
cranialis (n. axillaris)
capuf longum
caput faterale
m. omotransversarius
m. cutaneus trunci
m. cleidobrachialis
v. thoracica superficialis
m. brachialis
v. cephalica
m. pectoralis ascendens
n.cutaneus antebrachii
ofecranon
ateralis (n. radialis)
m. extensor carpi radialis
m.ffexor digitorum
profundus (caput uinare)
radius, lateral tuberosity
n. cutaneus antebrachii
m. extensor digitorum
caudafis(n.uinaris)
communis
m. abductor digitit
m. extensor carpi uinaris
longus
m. extensor digiforum
m. extensor carpi radialis
laterafis
a. interossea cranialis
m.extensor digitorum
communis
accessory carpal bone
rete carpi dorsale
n. uinaris, r. dorsalis
Fig. 3.12 Superficial structures of the left antebrachium and carpus: lateral view. The
specimen is at the same stage of dissection as that shown in Figs. 3.11, 3.13 and 3.14.
82
m.cutaneus trunci
n.pectorafiscaudalis
v. thoracica superficialis
m.pecforalisascendens
m.tensor fasciae
V.mediana cubiti
 The Forelimb
antebrachii
m. pectoralis transversus
a.V. coffateralis uinaris
n. cutaneus antebrachii
caudafis (n.uinaris)
m. fexor carpi uinaris:
deep antebrachial fascia
n. cutaneus antebrachii
medialis
m. extensor digitorum
(n. muscufocutaneus)
communis
V.cephalica
m. extensor carpi uinaris
radius:
fateralstyloidprocess
m. flexor carpi uinaris
mediat styloid process
n. uinaris r. dorsalis
a.v.radialis
medial coflateral carpal
fatera collateraf carpal
figament
ligament
 accessory carpal bone
radialcarpalbone
uinar carpal bone
Fig. 3.13 Superficial structures of the left antebrachium and carpus: caudal view. The
a comment on the use of the term “lateral styloid process'see note on Fig. 7.4
m. cutaneus trunci
m.pectoralis ascendens
v. thoracica superticialis
a.v. coflateralis ulnaris
m.tensor fasciae
m. pectoralis
antebrachii
descendens
m. pectoralis transversus
v.cephalica
n. cutaneus antebrachi
m. biceps brachii
caudalis (n. ulnaris)
V. mediana cubiti
deep antebrachia fascia
n.uinaris
v.cephalica
lacertus fibrosus
m. flexor carpi radiafis
m.extensor carpiradialis
m. ffexor carpi uinaris
n. cutaneus antebrachi
n. cutaneus antebrachi
medialis
mediais
(n. musculocutaneus)
(n. musculocutaneus)
V. cephalica accessoria
a.v.radialis
radius
radiusmediastyoid
accessory carpal bone
process
extensor retinaculum
flexor retinacufum
m. abductor digiti !
fongus
proximalextremityof
metacarpaf bone
metacarpal tuberosity
 Fig. 3.14 Superficial structures of the left antebrachium and carpus: medial view. The
 specimen is at the same stage of dissection as that shown in Figs. 3.11-3.13.
83
Fig. 3.15 The left scapular and brachial regions:
medial view. The muscles that join the limb to the
trunk have been cut, see Fig. 3.10, but their
attachments to the scapula and humerus have
been preserved. No attempt has been made to
display the axillary vessels and nerves in their
correct topographical positions. These are shown
in Figs.3.43-3.51.
m.rhomboideus thoracis
m. rhomboideus cervicis
scapular cartilage
m.serratus ventralis
m. serratus ventralis
cervicis
thoracis
a. scapularis dorsalis
n.subscapularis
n.suprascapularis
m.subscapularis
m. supraspinatus
n. thoracodorsalis
m. subclavius
m. fatissimus dorsi
n.axiflaris
a. suprascapularis
m.teres major
n.medianus
a.v. thoracodorsalis
n.musculocutaneus
n.radialis
a.v. subscapularis
n.unaris
a.v.axiffaris
n. thoracicus fateralis
 nn. pectorales craniales
inn.axillares
a.v. thoracica externa
m. cutaneus trunci
m.pectoralis
descendens
nn.pectorales caudales
m.pectoralis ascendens
v. thoracica superticialis
V.cephalica
a.v. coliateralis uinaris
V. mediana cubiti
n. uinaris
m. pectoralis transversus
84
n.thoracodorsalis
n.suprascapularis
n.axilaris
n.subscapularis
 The Forelimb
7
a.suprascapularis
.radials
n.uinaris
n.medianus
n.musculocutaneus
a.v.axillaris
a.v.subscapularis
.thoracodorsalis
nn. pectorales craniales
n.fhoracicus fateralis
Inn.axiflares
v. thoracica superficialis
nn. pectorales caudales
a.v. thoracica externa
Fig. 3.16 The nerves of the brachial plexus of the left forelimb: medial
view. This is a closer view of a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 3.15.
m.tensor fasciae antebrachiin. pectoralis caudatis
 m. pecforalis ascendens
v.thoracica externa
a. collateralis ulnaris
n. cutaneus antebrachii
caudatis (n.uinaris)
m.biceps brachii
m.pectoralis descendens
m. ffexor carpi radialis
cut edge of deep
antebrachial fascia
V.cephalica
V.mediana cubiti
v.mediana
lacertus fibrosus
m.brachialis
a. mediana
r. muscularis to
mm.ffexores
n.medianus
m. pectoralis transversus
radius
m. ffexor carpi radialis
m.extensor carpi radialis
v. cephafica
m. ffexor carpi uinaris
V. cephalica accessoria
Fig. 3.17 The left median artery, vein and nerve at the medial cubital region: medial view. The transverse pectoral muscle has been refected ventrally
to display the position of the artery, vein and nerve. These structures, lying medial to the medial radial tuberosity and the medial humeral
epicondyle, have been revealed by removal of the deep antebrachial fascia. At this site the pulse may be taken and the median nerve is surgically
accessible.
85
a.suprascapularis
m. infraspinatus
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
m.supraspinatus
m. deftoideus
a.axilaris
m. triceps brachi (caput
humerus, minor
fongum)
tuberosity
m. pectoralis ascendens
humerus, major
fuberosity
n.medianus et
n. musculocutaneus
m. triceps brachii(caput
[aterate)
m. coracobrachialis
m. biceps brachi
humerus, detoid
tuberosity
m. cleidobrachialis
m.brachialis
n. cutaneus antebrachi
lateralis (n. radialis)
V.mediana cubiti
a.v.mediana
m.extensorcarpiradialis
medial collateral cubital
n.cutaneus antebrachi
figament
medialis
(snaueinoonosnu u)
lacertus fbrosus
m. extensor digitorum
communis
m. ffexor carpi radialis
v.transversa cubiti
radius
m.extensor carpi radialis
m. extensor digitorum
communis
m.abductor digiti !
longus
rete carpi dorsale
radius,distal end:
medial styioid process
extensor retinacufum of
carpus
Fig. 3.18 Structures of the left brachial region, antebrachium and carpus: rostral view. The long tendon in the biceps muscle (lacertus fbrosus) is
clearly seen inserting with the extensor carpi radialis. This specimen is also shown in Figs. 3.19-3.24.
86
scapufa,cranialangle
scapula, carilage
m. serratus ventralis
scapula, caudal angle
The Forelimb
cervicis (cut edge)
(ebpa ino) soeio
m.serratusventrafis
m.triceps brachi(caput
scapula, tuberosity of
(unbuo)
spine
m. supraspinatus
m.tensor fasciae
m. infraspinatus, tendon
antebrachii
passing over major
tuberosity
m.deltoideus
humerus, greater
tuberosity
n. cutaneus antebrachif
m.teres minor
Cranialis (n. axillaris)
humerus, delfoid
m.triceps brachi (caput
tuberosity
laterale)
m. biceps brachi
a. circumffexa humeri
n.cutaneus antebrachii
fateralis (n.radialis)
cranialis
m.biceps brachi,
olecranon
lacertus fibrosus
m. cleidobrachialis
humerus, lateral
m. brachialis
epicondyle
radius, lateral tuberosity
m. extensor carpi radialis
m. extensor carpi ulnaris
(m. uinaris lateralis)
m.extensor digitorum
communis
m. flexor digitorum
profundus (caput uinare)
m. extensor digitorum
fateralis
m.abductor digiti!
snbuol
profundus(caput
m.ffexor digitorum
humerale)
carpus
n. ulnaris,r. dorsalis
metacarpus
accessory carpal bone 
Fig. 3.19 Structures of the scapular and brachial regions and the antebrachium: left lateral view. The strong omobrachial, brachial and antebrachial
fasciae have been removed. This specimen is also shown in Figs. 3.18 and 3.20-3.24.
87
m.biceps brachii
m. triceps brachi:
caput tongum
n.cutaneus antebrachii
caput taterale
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
cranialis (n. axitaris)
a.circumflexa humeri
n. cutaneus antebrachi
lateralis (n. radialis)
Cranialis
olecranon
lacertus fibrosus
a. coffateralis radialis
m. cleidobrachialis
m.ffexor digitorum
profundus (caput uinare)
humerus, fateral
epicondyle
radius,lateraftuberosify
m.extensor carpi uinaris
(m.uinaris lateralis)
m.extensor digitorum
fateralis
m.extensor carpi radialis
V. coffateralis ulnaris
m. extensor digitorum
communis
m.abductor digiti!
longus
m. ffexor digitorum
profundus (caput
a. interossea craniafis
humerate)
radius, distal extremity
rete carpi dorsale
n. uinaris, r. dorsalis
carpus
metacarpus
ccessory carpaf bone
Fig. 3.20 Structures of the antebrachium and carpus: left lateral view. This figure reveals the distal part of the specimen shown in Fig. 3.19.
m. triceps brachi (caput
jongum)
n.medianus et
n.muscufocutaneus
m. triceps brachi (caput
laterale)
v. brachialis
m.tensor fasciae
olecranon
antebrachii
radius,lateral tuberosity
-- v.transversa cubiti
m. flexor digitorum
n.medianus
profundus, caput uinare
n.cutaneusantebrachii
a.v. collateralis uinaris
caudalis (n. uinaris)
m. fexor carpi ulnaris:
caput uinare
caput humerale
n.uinaris
m.fexor digitorum
superficialis
m.ffexor digitorum
profundus(caput
humeraie)
m. extensor carpi uinaris
radius,
m. flexor carpi uinaris
lateral styloid process
radius, medial styloid
rete carpi dorsale
process
n. ufnaris r. dorsalis 
n. cutaneus antebrachii
medialis
accessorycarpafbone
(n.musculocutaneus)
a.v.radialis
Fig. 3.21 Structures of the left brachial region, antebrachium and carpus: caudal view. The specimen is at the stage of dissection shown in Figs. 3.19,
3.20, 3.22, 3.23 and 3.24.
88
scapular cartiage
m. serratus ventralis,
scapular origins
scapula, caudat angle
m.supraspinatus
 The Forelimb
m.subscapularis
m. teres major
n.suprascapularis
m. triceps brachii (caput
n.axiffaris
longum)
 a. suprascapufaris
a. thoracodorsalis
a.axillaris
n.radialis
 m. pectoralis ascendens
v.brachialis
m. coracobrachialis
n. ufnaris
m. biceps brachii
a.brachialis
inn.cubitales
n. medianus et
n. muscufocutaneus
m. cleidobrachialis
m. tensor fasciae
V.mediana cubiti
antebrachii
a.v. mediana
a. ulnaris coflateralis
n.medianus
n.cutaneus antebrachi
caudalis
m.extensorcarpiradialis
m.flexor carpi radialis
lacertus fibrosus
m.flexor carpi uinaris
a.v. transversa cubiti
a.v.radialis
radius
n.cutaneusantebrachii
medialis
extensor retinacutum
(n. musculocutaneus)
ffexorretinacut
v.cephalicaaccessoria
m. abductor digitiI longus
Fig. 3.22 Structures of the left scapular and brachial regions, antebrachium and carpus: medial view. The specimen is at the stage of dissection shown
in Figs. 3.18-3.21 and Figs. 3.23-3.24. Compared with the earlier stage of dissection, shown in Figs. 3.14 and 3.15, further details of the nerves,
arteries and veins of the antebrachium are exposed by removal of the muscles that joined the limb to the trunk.
m.subscapularis
n.subscapularis
n. suprascapularis
m. teres major
n. axilaris, rami to
m.teres major
m.tensor fasciae
m. supraspinatus .
antebrachii
- n. axillaris
a.thoracodorsalis
-a. suprascapularis
、a. axillaris
n.radiafis
a.subscapularis
n.uinaris
n.medianus et
n. musculocutaneus
a.v.brachialis
m.pectoralis ascendens
fnn.cubitales
m. coracobrachialis
a.v. coffateralis uinaris
n.muscufocutaneus,
n. cutaneus antebrachi
f.muscularisdistafis
caudalis
m. cleidobrachialis
a.v.mediana
-m. biceps brachi
et n.medianus
V. mediana cubiti
mediaf collateral cubital
ligament (including.
m.brachialis
m.pronator teres)
lacertus fibrosus
m. fexor carpi radialis
rm. extensor carpi radialis
m. ffexor carpi uinaris:
radius
caputuinare
a.v. transversa cubiti
Fig. 3.23 The left brachial region and antebrachium: medial view. This is a closer view of a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 3.22.
89
m.tensor fasciae
inn.cubiales
antebrachii
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
n.medianus
n. cutaneus antebrachii
caudalis(n.ufnaris)
m.biceps brachi
a.v.collateralis uinaris
V.mediana cubiti
deep antebrachial fascia
m. brachialis
a.v.mediana
n. medianus
m. flexor carpi ulnaris
(caput uinare)
ramus muscularis to
mm. fexores
m. biceps brachii,
lacertus fibrosus
m.extensor carpiradialis
a.v.transversa cubiti
m.ffexor carpi radialis
m.fexor carpi uinaris
(caput humerale)
radius
extensor retinacurtum
(cutedge)
a.radialis
radius,medial styfoid
process
v.cephalica
n.cutaneus antebrachif
nedialis
(n. muscufocutaneus)
v.radialis
v.cephalica accessoria
m. abductor digiti !
fexorretinacufum
fongus
Fig. 3.24 The left antebrachium and carpus: medial view. This is a closer view of a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 3.22.
90
m.rhomboideuscervicis
scapular cartilage
 The Forelimb
m. serratus ventralis
cervicis
scapufa:
cranial border
spine
m. infraspinatus
supraspinous fossa
n. suprascapularis
m.subscapularis
scapula:
coracoid process
scapula,neck
supragienoid
a. suprascapularis
m.infraspinatus
m. coracobrachialis
m. supraspinatus
m. triceps brachi (caput
(insertions on minor and
longum)
major tuberosities)
a. axillaris
humerus, major
tuberosity
m.biceps.tendon in
intertuberal groove
n. cutaneus antebrachii
humerus, minor
Cranialis (n. axillaris)
tuberosity
m.coracobrachialis
m. triceps brachi (caput
jaterale)
m.biceps brachii
n. cutaneus antebrachii
fateralis (n. radialis)
m.cleidobrachialis
n. cutaneus antebrachii
m.brachialis
medialis
(n. musculocutaneus)
m.extensor digitorum
lacertus fibrosus
communis
fossa to show the suprascapular nerve and the origin of the biceps brachi muscle. The deltoid muscle has also been removed. The intermediate
 tuberosity of the humerus is not visible in the intertuberal groove; it is covered by the biceps tendon which is moulded upon the double groove
between major and minor tuberosities. This specimen is also shown in Figs. 3.26 and 3.28.
91
scapula:
m. serratus ventralis
 supraspinous fossa
thoracis
cartilage
spine
origin of m. deitoicdeus
caudalangie
cranial border
m.infraspinatus
caudal border
m. triceps brachii (caput
m.subscapularis
(ongum)
a.suprascapularis
m.teres minor
n. suprascapularis
n.axillaris
scapula:
m. deltoideus (cut)
neck
humerus,deltoid
supraglenoid tubercie
tuberosity
m. supraspinatus (cut)
m. biceps brachii
humerus, major
m.triceps brachi (caput
tuberosity
(aterale)
a.circumflexa humeri
n. cutaneus antebrachil
caudalis
lateralis(n.radialis)
a. circumffexa humeri
m. extensor carpi radiafis
cranialis
olecranon
m.brachialis
humerus, fatera!
lacertus fibrosus
epicondyle
m.extensor digitorum
m. cleidobrachialis
communis
Fig. 3.26 Deeper structures of the left scapular and brachial regions: lateral view.
 Removal of the deltoid muscle shows the full extent of the infraspinatus muscle and
also the teres minor muscle.
Fig. 3.27 The humeral groove, brachialis muscle and radial nerve: left
lateral view. The lateral head of the triceps muscle has been resected to
reveal the brachialis muscle in its humeral groove, and the associated
 nerve and artery. In older textbooks this feature of the shaft of the
humerus is called the musculospiral groove.
m. biceps brachii
(tendon in
a. circumflexa humeri
intertuberal groove)
caudalis
n.axilaris
m. infraspinatus
humerus,major
tuberosity
m.teres minor
n.cutaneusantebrachii
m. triceps brachi (caput
craniafis (n. axilfaris)
(aterale)
a. profunda brachii
m. deltoideus
n.cutaneus antebrachii
humerus, deltoid
tateralis (n. radialis)
tuberosity
n.radialis
m. brachialis in humera!
m. triceps brachii (caput
sufcus
mediale)
a. circumffexa humeri
m. triceps brachi (caput
craniafis
(aterale)
humerus,lateral
m.ffexor digitorum
epicondyle
profundus(caput ulnare)
m.exfensor
m.extensor digitorum
m.extensor
carpiradialis
communis
carpi uinaris
92
m.rhomboideus thoracis
m. serratus ventralis:
el cervicis
pars thoracis
parscervicis
scapufar cartiage
 The Forelimb
m.teresmajor
m.subscapularis
n.subscapufaris
n.axilaris{reffecteo
n. suprascapularis
ventralfy)
a.suprascapularis
a. subscapularis
scapula, supraglenoid
m.tensor fasciae
tubercleandcoracoid
antebrachir
process
a.thoracodorsalis
m. coracobrachialis,
n.radialis
tendon
humerus,minor
n.medianus et
n.musculocutaneus
tuberosity
n.uinaris
m. biceps brachii
m. triceps brachii (capu!
m. supraspinatus
longum)
a.axillaris
a. brachialis profunda
m. coracobrachialis
a. brachialis
m. pectoralis ascendens
m. triceps brachil(caput
n.musculocutaneus
mediale)
r.muscularis proximalis
n.uinaris
m. biceps brachii
n. cutaneus antebrachit
caudalis (n.uinaris)
n.musculocutaneus
r. muscularis distalis
olecranon
Inn.cubitales
humerus,medial
m. cleidobrachialis
epicondyle
v.mediana cubiti
a. uinaris collateralis
m.ftexor carpi uinaris
a.v.mediana
(caput uinare)
n.medianus
m.flexor carpi ufnaris
m. brachialis
m.flexor carpi radiafis
lacertus fibrosus
Fig. 3.28 The left brachial artery and ulnar and median nerves: medial view. The specimen is at the stage of dissection shown in Figs. 3.25 and 3.26.
The veins have been removed from the brachial region to show the arteries and nerves more clearly. The supraspinatus muscle has been removed to
show the origins of the biceps brachii and coracobrachialis muscles from the scapula. The tensor muscle of the antebrachial fascia has been
removed.
93
Fig. 3.29 Deep vessels and nerves of the left antebrachium: lateral view.
Part of the common digital extensor muscle has been removed to show
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
the cranial interosseous artery and branches of the radial nerve.
m. cleidobrachiafis
m. triceps brachii
(caput faterale)
m. brachiafis
olecranon
m.biceps brachir
(lacertus fibrosus)
a. collateralis radialis
n. cutaneus antebrachi
medialis
m.ffexor digitorum
(n.musculocutaneus)
profundus (caput utnare)
m. extensor carpi
radialis
lateralcoflateralcubital
figament
m. extensor digitorum
humerus,latera!
communis
epicondyle
m.extensor digitorum
a.v. transversa cubiti
lateralis
a.v. interossea cranialis
n.radialis
doeds snoassosalui le
uina
radius
a.v. interossea cranialis
m. abductor digiti!
m.extensorcarpiuinaris
longus
(uinarislateralis)
m.extensor carpi
radialis
m.ffexor digitorum
profundus (caput
a.v. interossea cranialis
humerale)
m.extensordigitorum
m.extensor digitorum
communis
lateralis
94
Fig. 3.30 Deep vessels and nerves of the left antebrachium: medial view (1).
The fexor carpi radialis and fexor carpi ulnaris muscles have been partly
removed (see also Fig. 3.22) to show the median nerve with its muscular
The Forelimb
branches and the common interosseous artery.
n. cutaneus antebrachii
n.uinaris
caudalis (n. uinaris)
a.brachialis
m. triceps brachii (caput
longum)
n.medianus
ofecranon
a.coflaterafisuinaris
m. friceps brachii
Inn.cubitales
(caputmediate)
m. fexor carpi uinaris
v. brachialis
(caput ufnare)
V. mediana cubiti
a.v. colfateralis uinaris
m. fexor digitorum
humerus,medial
profundus(caput ulnare)
epicondyle
n. cutaneus antebrachi
m.ffexor carpi uinaris
(caput humerale)
mediars
(n. musculocutaneus)
m. ffexor carpi radialis
facertus fibrosus
medial radial fuberosity
m.brachialis
n.medianus
medial coffateral cubita!
ff.musculares
figament(includes
to mm. ffexores
m.pronator teres)
m. ffexor digitorum
a. profunda antebrachil
superficialis
a.v.transversa cubiti
m.extensor carpi
n.medianus
radialis
V. mediana
lacertus fibrosus
n. paimaris medialis
m.ffexor carpiradiafis
n. pailmaris lateralis
m.flexor carp
radius
95
Fig. 3.31 The deep vessels and nerves of the left antebrachium: medial view
(2). The fexor carpi ulnaris muscle has been removed to display the
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse 
structures lying deep to its tendon of insertion (see also Fig. 3.32). A part
 has been removed from the superficial digital fexor muscle to show the
radial and humeral heads of the deep fexor muscle.
m. triceps brachi (caput
m.triceps brachii fcaput
longum)
mediale)
n.Cutaneus antebrachii
a. coffateralis uinaris
caudalis(n.uinaris)
m.ffexor digitorum
Inn.cubitales
profundus (capuf uinare)
m. biceps brachi
n.ulnaris
V.mediana cubiti
m.ffexor digitorum
superficialis
n. cutaneus antebrachii
a. profunda antebrachii
medialis
(n. musculocutaneus)
m.ffexor digitorum
lacertus fibrosus
profundusfcaput
humerale)
m. ffexor carpi radiafis
m.ffexor digitorum
m.fexor carpi uinaris
profundus(caput
n.medianus (r. muscularis)
radiale)
a.v. transversa cubiti
m. ffexor digitorum
superficialis
V.mediana
n.paimaris lateralis
n.medianus
(n. medianus)
n. paimaris medialis
n. uinaris r. dorsalis -
n. paimaris lateralis
n.uinaris r.paimaris
m. ffexor carpi radialis
m. extensor carpi radialis
v. cephalica
radius
n. paimaris lateralis
a.mediana
(n.medianus et n.uinaris)
V. mediana r. paimaris
radius,medial stytoid
m. ffexor carpi uinaris
(cuf edge of tendon)
process
accessory carpa bone
medial collateral ligament
a.v.radialis
m. abductor digitiI longus
96
Fig. 3.32 Vessels and nerves of the left carpus: medial view. This is a closer
view of a part of the dissection shown in Fig. 3.31. The deeper structures 
are shown in Figs. 3.41 and 3.42. The more distal regions of the limb are
The
shown in Figs. 3.36 and 3.40.
 Forelimb
m.ffexordigitorum
n.medianus
profundus(caputulnare)
m.extensor carpiradialis
m.flexor digitorum
profundusfcaput
n. palmaris lateralis
humerale)
n. pamaris medialis
m.ffexordigitorum
profundus(caput
radiale)
v.mediana
m.flexor digitorum
radius
superficialis
n.paimaris medialis
n.uinaris
m. ffexor carpi radialis 
a.mediana
n. palmaris tateralis
n. uinaris r. dorsalis
a.radialis
n. uinaris r. palmaris
radius, medial styloid
process
a. mediana r. paimaris 
m. extensor carpi ulnaris
v.cephalica
cut edge of m. flexor
V. mediana r. paimaris
carpi uinaris
n.palmaris lateralis
V.radialis
(n. medianus et n. uinaris)
radial carpal bone
accessory carpat bone 
m.abductor digiti!
cuf edge of ffexor
longus
retinacuum
v. radialis r. paimaris
metacarpal bonel!
superficialis
proximal extremity
97
m.extensor carpiradialis
radius:
Fig. 3.33 Structures of
medial styloid process
lateral styloidprocess
the left carpus and
The Horse
 proximal metacarpus:
a. interossea cranialis
dorsal view. Figs. 3.34-
medial collateral carpal
3.36 show these regions
ligament
synovialtendonsheaths
 at the same stage of
dissection. The
Anatomy,
m.abductor digiti!
Cut edge of extensor
snbuo!
retinacufum
approximate extents of
the synovial tendon
lateraf coflateral carpal
 sheaths are indicated by
ligament
dotted blue lines.
Color Atlas of Veterinary 
metacarpal tuberosity
rete carpi dorsale
m. extensor digitorum
fateralis
rete carpi dorsale
a.radiafis r.carpeus
dorsafis
metacarpal bone 
tendon ofm.extensor
digitorum lateralis
m. extensor carpi radiatis
m.extensor digitorum
Fig. 3.34 Structures of
lateralis
a.interossea cranialis
the left carpus and
radius, laterat styloid
n. uinaris r. dorsalis
metacarpus: lateral view.
process
The specimen is that
m. extensor digitorum
shown in Figs. 3.33,
communis
m.extensor carpi uinaris,
3.35 and 3.36. The
intermediate carpal bone
insertions
 accessory ligament of
ulnar carpar bone
rete carpi dorsale
the deep digital fexor
carpaf bone IV
accessory carpal bone
muscle is also known as
metacarpal bone I!f.
tateral collateral
the check ligament or
tuberosity
ligament
carpal head of this
tendon from m.extensor
ofcarpus
muscle.
digitorumcommunis
metacarpal bone IV.
(caputradiale)
proximal extremity
tom.extensor
digitorum fateralis
deep metacarpal fascia
m. extensor digitorum
(cut)
communis
m.fexor digitorum
m.extensor digitorum
profundus
fateralis
a.metacarpea
n. palmaris lateralis
paimaris I/I
m.fexor digitorum
m.ffexor digitorum
 profundus, tigamentum
superficialis
accessorium
n. paimaris medialis
a. metacarpea dorsaiis
r.communicans
metacarpal bone I#l
v. digitalis
paimaris communis ?
metacarpal bone IV
distal extrermity
m. ffexor digitorum
snpunord
m.interosseus
(suspensory figament)
m. fexor digitorum
superficialis
98
n. ufnaris r. dorsalis
n.paimaris lateralis
Fig. 3.35 Structures of
(n. medianus)
the left carpus and
n. uinaris r. paimaris
a. mediana, r. pamaris
metacarpus: palmar view.
m. extensor digitorum
radius, medial styfoid
The specimen is that
The
lateralis
process
shown in Figs. 3.33, 3.34
 Foreliml
m.ffexor carpi uinaris
v.cephalica
and 3.36. The fexor
(insertion)
carpi ulnaris muscle has
m. extensor carpi uinaris
V. mediana r. paimaris
been removed to expose
(insertions)
n. paimaris tateralis
 the origin of the lateral
lateral coflateral carpat
(n. medianus et n.
 palmar nerve.
uinaris)
figament
m. abductor digiti!
accessory carpal bone
longus
flexor retinacufum of
a.v. radialis
carpus
n. paimaris medialis
deep metacarpal fascia
(n.medianus)
{cut)
n.paimaris medialis
m. extensor digitorum
f. communicans
fateralis
a.metacarpea dorsalis 
a. metacarpea dorsalis
m.flexor digitorum
superficialis
m.interosseus
(suspensory tigament)
m. fexor digitorum
m. ffexor carpi radialis
Fig. 3.36 Structures of
superficialis
the left carpus and
radius, medial styloid
n.uinaris
process
 proximal metacarpus:
n.medianus
medial view. The
metacarpal tuberosity
a.v. mediana r.paimaris
 specimen is that shown
in Figs. 3.30-3.35. The
v.cephalica
m.abductor digiti!
 arteries in this dissection 
jongus
are shown more clearly
accessory carpa/bone
in Fig. 3.40.
n. paimaris lateralis
metacarpal bone f/,
(n. medianus et
proximal extremity
n.ufnaris)
a.v.radialis
metacarpa tuberosity
a. radialis r. carpeus
dorsafis
a.v. digitalis paimaris.
communis
n. paimaris medialis
metacarpa bone I!!
r.communicans
a.metacarpea dorsalis1
n. paimaris medialis
metacarpal bone il,
m.interosseus
distalextremity
m.fexor digitorum
m. extensor digitorurm
superficialis
communis
99
m.extensor carpi radialis
a.transversa cubiti
Fig. 3.37 Muscles and
arteries of the left carpus
radius
and metacarpus: dorsal
The Horse
a.interossea craniafis
view. This specimen is
radius,medial styloid
also shown in Figs.
process
radius,lateralstyfoid
3.38-3.40. The dissection
process
shows the three major
Anatomy,
m. abductor digiti!
longus
arteries contributing to
rete carpi dorsale
the dorsal arterial
metacarpal tuberosity
network on the carpus.
The disposition of the
Color Atlas of Veterinary A
a. radialis r. carpeus
lateral coflateraf carpal
synovial tendon sheaths
dorsalis
ligament
 of the carpus is shown in
Fig. 3.33.
m.extensor digitorum
lateralis
metacarpal bone Il
m. extensor digitorum
communis
phalanx!
tendons from
m.interosseus
to m. extensor digitorum
communis
m.extensor digitorum
m. extensor digitorum
Fig. 3.38 Muscles and
communis
fateralis
 arteries of the left carpus
a. interossea craniafis
n.uinaris r. dorsalis
 and metacarpus: lateral
(displaced)
view. The veins, nerves
radius,lateralstyloid
m. extensor carpi uinaris
 and superfcial tissues 
process
have been removed to
rete carpi dorsale
display the muscles of
accessory carpal bone
lateraf coffateral ligament
the region. The arteries
accessoriometacarpal
have been preserved to
metacarpal tuberosity
figament
provide reference points
tendon from m.extensor
metacarpal bone IV,
for the positions of
digitorum communis to
proximal extremity
other superficial
m. extensor digitorum
 structures that have been
fateralis
removed (compare with
Fig. 3.34).
m. ffexor digitorum
profundus
m.extensor digitorum
fateralis
m.fexor digitorum
profundus,figamentum
accessorium
a.metacarpea dorsalis I#!
m. flexor cdigitorum
metacarpal bone IV,
distalextremity
superficialis
a. digitalis paimaris
metacarpal bone I!!
communisll
proximaf sesamoid bone
m.interosseus
paimar figament of
metacarpat bone I!l,
distalextremity
fettockjoint
proximal phalanx
m.interosseus,tendon to
m.extensor digitorum
communis
100
m. extensor carpi uinaris
m. ffexor carpi radialis
Fig. 3.39 Muscles and
n.uinaris
m.fexor digitorum
arteries of the left carpus
m. extensor digitorum
superficialis
 and metacarpus: palmar
lateralis
n.medianus
view. The fexor
The
n. uinaris r. paimaris
a.radialis
retinaculum, which
m. exfensor carpi uinaris
V. cephalica
forms the palmar wall
 of the carpal canal, has
radius, fateral styfoid
radius,media styloid
process
process
been cut to expose the
n. paimaris fateralis 
a. V. mediana r. paimaris
carpal canal. Further 
accessory carpal bone
m.ffexor carpi uinaris,
details of the canal and
fateral collateral carpa!
insertion (cut)
its contents are shown
ligament
medial collaterafcarpal
in Figs. 3.41 and 3.42.
accessorio-metacarpal
figament
tigament
ffexor retinaculum cut to
metacarpal bone IV
expose carpalcanal
m. extensor digitorum
metacarpal bone I!
lateralis
a. metacarpea dorsalis I!
metacarpaf bone I//
m.flexor digitorum
m. interosseus
superficialis
a. digitalis medialis
a.digitafis laterafis
paimar ligament of
fetlockjoint
n. uinaris r. dorsalis
V.cephalica
Fig. 3.40 Muscles and
radius, medial styloid
arteries of the left
m.extensor carpi uinaris
process
carpus and metacarpus:
v.medianar.parmaris
m. abductor digitit
medial view. This
accessory carpa/ bone
longus
dissection is also
medialcollaterat ligament
shown in Figs.
cut edge of flexor
ofcarpus
retinacutum
3.37-3.39.
m. extensor carpi radialis
a.v.radialis
inserting on metacarpal
a.mediana
tuberosity
metacarpat bone I!
m.ffexor digitorum
profundus, igamentum
proximalextremify
accessorium
a.radialis
f.carpeus dorsalis
a. digifalis paimaris
communis /
a.metacarpeadorsalis
m.ffexor digiforum
superficialis
metacarpafbonefl
m.flexor digitorum
profundus
m. interosseus
metacarpal bone ff,
m. extensor digitorum
distalextremity
communis
paimar igament of
fetiock joint
medial coflateral
proximal sesamoidbone
metacarpophalangeal
figament
medialtendonfrom
m.interosseusfom.
extensor digitorum
communis
101
m.ffexor digitorum
facertus fibrosus in
profundus (caput ulnare)
m.extensorcarpiradiafis
 Anatomy, The Horse
m.fftexor digitorum
profundus(caput
n.medianus
humerale)
radius
m.extensor carpi uinaris
v.mediana
m. fexor digitorum
superficialis
v.radiafis
Color Atlas of Veterinary 
n. uinaris
n.paimaris lateralis
(n. medianus)
a.mediana
m. fexor carpi radialis
V. mediana r. paimaris 
m. flexor digitorum
n. paimaris medialis
(n.medianus)
accessorium
a. mediana r. paimaris
(cut)
n. uinaris r. paimaris
 accessory carpat bone -
a.radiafis
m. flexor carpi uinaris,
insertion
radius, medial styloid
n.palmaris lateralis
process
(n.medianus et
n.uinaris)
synovial cavity and cut
n. ufnaris r. dorsafis
eogeofsynoviafcarpa!
{displaced)
sheath of flexor tendons
m. abductor digiti 
longus
cut edge of carpal flexor
retinaculum
a.radialis
a.radiafisr.carpeus
dorsalis
a. digitalis paimaris
communis f
metacarpaf bone f!
metacarpal bone Ifl
m.interosseus
a.metacarpeadorsalisf
m.ffexor digitorum
m. flexor digitorum
superficialis
profundus
Fig. 3.41 The left carpal canal and its contents: oblique caudomedial view (1). After opening the carpal canal as shown in Fig. 3.39 the more
superficial contents have been displaced medially to show the deeper fexor tendons. The lateral palmar nerve and the radial artery do not run 
through the carpal canal but traverse the fexor retinaculum.
102
m.flexoroigitorum
facertus fibrosus in
profundus (caput uinare)
m.extensorcarpiradialis
m. ffexor digitorum
 The Forelimb
profundus (caput
radius
humerale)
m. extensor carpi uinaris
n.medianus
m. ffexor digitorum
V.mediana
superficialis
a.mediana
n. paimaris lateralis
a.radiafis proximalis
n.palmaris medialis
n.ufnaris
v. radialis
m. flexor carpi radialis
V. mediana r. paimaris
n. paimaris medialis
(n.medianus)
n.paimaris fateralis
(n.medianus)
m.flexor digitorum
superficialis,ligamentum
synovialcarpalsheathof
accessorium
ffexor tendons, synovial
cavity
cut edge of carpal
synovialsheath
n. uinaris r. paimaris
 accessory carpal bone
a.radialis
n.paimaris lateralis
medial carpal collatera!
(n.medianus et
ligament
n. uinaris)
cut edge of insertion of
m. flexor carpi ufnaris
n. uinaris r. dorsalis
m. abductor digiti t
snbuoy
a.digitalispalmaris
a.radialis
communis/!
m.flexor digitorum
mefacarpal bone i/.
profundus
proximai
extremity
m. flexor digitorum
a, radialis r. carpeus
superficialis
dorsalis
a. metacarpea dorsalis f!
metacarpal bone!!
metacarpal bone I1
Fig. 3.42 The left carpal canal and its contents: oblique caudomedial view (2). The tendon of the superficial digital fexor muscle has been pulled out
digital fexor tendon is shown in Figs. 3.34 and 3.38.
103
Fig. 3.43 Structures at the thoracic inlet of a young foal: right side in
 medial view. The left thoracic wall and the thoracic viscera have been
removed. The caudal cervical and cranial thoracic regions of the right
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
side are displayed. The subsequent dissections of this specimen 
(Figs.3.44-3.51) show the right forelimb, dissected from its medial aspect
while still attached to the trunk.
a. vertebralis
plexus brachialis sinister
{sinistra)
(C7,C8,T1,72)
m. longissimus thoracis
m.scalenus:
t. sympathicus
dorsalis
ventralis
a.Y. scapularis dorsalis
(sinistra)
m. longus coffi
a.y. cervicalis profunda
oesophagus
(sinistra)
t. vagosympathicus
a. cervicafis profunda
(sinister)
(dextra)
trachea
t. costocervicalis
(dexler)
a.carotis conmunis
(dextra et sinistra)
plexus brachialis
(dexter)
a.v. vertebralis (dextra)
ribs 1,2
m.omohyoideus
Inn.mediastinales
t. vagosympathicus
craniales
(dexter)
a. subclavia dextra
m. scalenus ventralis
、a.cervicalis superficialis
V. jugularis externa
(dextra)
pleural covering of
intercostal spaces 1, 2
m. sternocephalicus
m.sternothyrohyoideus
a.v.axillaris
V. cephalica
a.thoracicaexterna
manubrium of sternum
a.v. thoracica inferna
ribs 1.2
(leftcostal cartilage
attachments,cut)
Inn. sternales craniales
Inn. sterna/es craniales
104
m.longus colli
a.v. vertebralis
plexus brachialis
 The Forelimb
trachea
a. cervicalis profunda
a.carotiscommunis
t.costocervicalis
f.vagosympathicus
rib 1 with part of its.
endothoracicfascia
removed
/.jugularisexterna
m. scalenus ventralis
v.cephaica
m.intercostalisinternus
in first intercostal space
m.sternothyrohyoideus
a.v.axillaris
a.v.cervicalis
superficialis
a.thoracica externa
sternum, manubrium
a. thoracica interna
costal cartilage of rib 1
(left}
Fig. 3.44 Right brachial plexus and axillary vessels of the foal: medial view (1). The
structures lying medial to the insertion of the ventral scalenus muscle have been
removed to show how the muscle separates the brachial plexus from the axillary
vessels at the cranial border of the first rib.
m. scalenus ventralis
a.v.vertebralis
(dexter)
(dextra)
oesophagus
plexus brachialis
trachea
position from which rib 1
a.carotis communis
has been removed
(dextra)
m.intercostafisexternus
t. vagosympathicus
in firstintercostalspace
(dexter)
a.v.axillaris
a.thoracica externa
V. cephalica
ribs 2. 3
m.pectoralis
m. intercostalis internus
descendens
in second intercostal
space
m.subclavius{or
m. transversus thoracis
right costal cartilages 2, 3
m.pectoralstransversus
(cutends)
a.thoracica interna
rr. intercostales ventrales
Fig. 3.45 Right brachial plexus and axillary vessels of the foal: medial view (2). The
sternum and the right first rib have now been removed, revealing the origins of the
subclavius muscle and the nerves arising from the brachial plexus.
105
Fig. 3.46 Structures of the right axilla in the foal:
2
medial view (1). The frst fve ribs and the ventral
serrate muscle have been removed to reveal the
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
right axilla. The subclavius muscle has also been
cut away.
oesophagus
remnantsofright
fhoracic wall
trachea
t.costocervicalis
a.v. vertebralis
a.carotis communis
a. cervicalis profunda
t. vagosympathicus
n.thoracodorsafis
m.subclavius
plexus brachialis
n. pectoralis cranialis
a.thoracica externa
a.v.axillaris
nn.pectorales caudales
V.cephafica
 n. pectoralis craniafis
n. thoracicus lateralis
m.pectoralis
v.thoracica superficialis
descendens
m.pectoralistransversus
 m. pectoralis ascendens
plexus brachialis
n.thoracodorsalis
n.pectoralis cranialis
m.subclavius
n. medianus
a.v.axillaris
m.pecforalis ascendens
m.cutaneus frunci
nn.pectorales caudales
n.thoracicus faferalis
m.pectoralis ascendens
V. thoracica superficialis
medialdeepantebrachial
fascia
Fig. 3.47 Structures of the right axilla in the foal: medial view (2). The superficial
pectoral muscles have been removed.
106
m. longus coli
2
t. costocervicalis
 The Forelimb
a. cervicalis profunda
trachea
a.v.vertebralis
m.subscapularis
t. vagosympathicus
m.teres major
n.pectorafiscranialis
n.thoracodorsatis
m.subcfavius
n.axillaris
n. muscufocutaneus
a.v.subscapufaris
n.thoracicus lateralis
n.uinaris
a.axilfaris
a.v. thoracodorsalis
n.medianus
n.radialis
v.axillaris
 n. intercostobrachialis
v. thoracica externa
Inn.axiffares
nn.pectorale
caudales
V. thoracica superficiales
m.pectoralisascendens
、n. thoracicus laterafis
Fig. 3.48 Structures of the right axilla in the foal: medial view (3). Further dissection
reveals the vessels and nerves of the region more fully and shows the axillary lymph
nodes.
a.v.vertebralis
m. longus coffi
m. scafenus ventralis
m.subscapularis
trachea
n.axillaris
n. pectoralis cranialis
m. teres major
a.carotis communis
a.v. subscapularis
t. vagosympathicus
a.thoracodorsalis
m.subclavius
n.musculocutaneus
m.latissimus dorsi
a.axilfaris
n.radialis
ansaaxilfaris
v.axillaris
n.pectoralis craniafis
n.uinaris
n.medianus
v.thoracicaexterna
m. pectoralis ascendens
Fig. 3.49 Structures of the right axilla in the foal: medial view (4). The axillary vein
has been shortened to reveal the axillary loop formed by musculocutaneous and 
median nerves. The removal of the thoracodorsal and lateral thoracic vessels and 
 nerves reveals more clearly the muscles of the axilla.
107
trachea
m.longus colfi
oesophagus
t.costocervicalis
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
m. scafenus ventralis
a. cervicalis profunda
a. carotis communis
m. subscapularis
m.subcfavius
n. axillaris
a.v. vertebralis
m. latissimus dorsi
m. pectoralis ascendens
m.teres major
n. musculocutaneus
a.v. subscapularis
ansa axillaris
nn. pectorales caudales
n.radialis
m.coracobrachialis
n.uinaris
n.musculocutaneus
a.v. brachialis
f.muscularis proximalis
m.biceps brachii
m. pectoralis ascendens
n.medianus
Inn.cubitales
n.musculocufaneus
m. tensor fasciae
r. muscularis distalis
antebrachii
V.cephalica
m. fexor carpi radialis
v. mediana cubiti
n. cutaneus antebrachii
m.extensor carpi radialis
caudais (n. uinaris).
 Fig. 3.50 Structures of the right axilla and brachial region of the foal: medial view. The
 ascending pectoral muscle has been removed.
oesophagus
m.longus colfi
t. vagosympathicus
a.v.vertebrafis
trachea
t. costocervicalis
a.carotis communis:
a. cervicalis profunda
dextra et sinistra
pfexus brachialis
t. vagosympathicus
m.subscapularis
m. scalenus ventralis -
n. axillaris
m.subclavius
a.circumflexa humeri
m.pectoralis ascendens
caudalis
a.suprascapularis
a. thoracodorsalis
a.axillaris
m.teres major
a.circumffexa
a.v. subscapularis
humeri cranialis
a.v.brachialis
n.musculocutaneus
r.muscufaris proximatis
n.medianus
n.ufnaris
m. coracobrachialis 
m. biceps brachi
inn.cubitales
n.muscufocutaneus
m. tensor fasciae
r.muscularis distalis
antebrachii
Fig. 3.51 The right axillary artery in the foal: medial view. The nerves of the brachial
plexus have been removed from around the axillary artery to show its branches and
the brachial artery.
108
4. THE THORAX
109
Clinical importance of the thorax
tract and causing purulent discharges and abscesses. False strangles is
similar and is caused by S. zooepidemicus. Other bacterial infections
The thorax contains two major organs that are of considerable impor-
of the respiratory tract include pneumonia associated with Rhodococ-
tance in clinical medicine in the horse - the lungs and the heart - but
cus equi, particularly in foals and young horses where there may be up
the nostril is the point at which physical abnormalities of the respira-
to an 80% mortality. This disease can also lead to a severe arthritis
The
tory tract such as blood, excess mucus, or a purulent nasal discharge,
with antigen/antibody complexes in the joints of young horses. A
are seen. The real test in clinical diagnosis is to ascertain whether this
second category of pulmonary disease is associated with parasites
abnormality is coming from the upper or lower respiratory tract and
 including parasitic pneumonia caused by the migration of P.equorum
from which component part of either.
and also lungworms such as Dictyocaulus arnfeldii (commonly picked
Other physical abnormalities of respiration are most commonly
up from donkeys, which are carriers of the infestation) and, occasion-
detected by watching (abnormal excursions of the thoracic walls) or
ally, pulmonary hydatidosis. There are several severe viral infections
listening (coughing, roaring or rales) to the breathing and it is usually
of the equine respiratory tract. One of the most important is equine
these that will necessitate further, more detailed, examination of the
 influenza. Equine herpes virus may cause upper and lower tract disease,
respiratory tract. One of the most common findings is dyspnoea (dif-
specific laryngitis, pharyngitis and abortion. Other important viral
diseases include rhinovirus infections, equine viral arteritis, African
las
typically, the affected horse has a second expiratory effort. The respi-
horse sickness and equine infectious anaemia (swamp fever). Pulmo-
ratory tract includes a variety of clinically important components such
nary oedema, acute respiratory distress syndrome and aspiration
as the nasal cavity, nasopharynx, larynx, and guttural pouches, as well
pneumonia are also not unknown.
as trachea and lungs. Examination of the mucous membranes of the
Non-infectious respiratory disease is also important. Epistaxis
eye and the mouth (paleness, blue discolouration, abnormal capillary
 (nosebleed) ocurs in approximately 5% of racehorses after galloping.
refill time) may suggest general abnormalities of the cardiovascular
Exercise-induced pulmonary haemorrhage occurs  after exercise.
system such as anaemia or hypoxia.
Reversible airway obstruction occurs with an asthma-type equivalent
The arterial pulse will give information on the heart and circulation.
which can also be found on summer pastures. Chronic obstructive
This can be taken from several arteries, including the transverse facial,
 pulmonary diseases (now called RAO - recurrent airway obstruction,
facial, digital, brachial, femoral and the external carotid. Also, the
aorta can be palpated per recium. In the horse there is also a jugular
gens. Occasionally the horse may suffer from amyloidosis, pulmonary
pulse, which can be seen from the thoracic inlet to halfway up the neck 
effusions (these can be checked by thoracocentesis) and pneumotho-
when the horse is in the normal standing position.
l a  ir r e s aq p aq  m x
The area of the chest available for clinical examination is limited
 intercostal space and aspirating the air. As well as abnormalities of
by the presence of the forelimb, thoracic musculature and the decreas-
 the heart, the equine thorax may also suffer damage to great vessels
ing thickness of the lung in its caudal parts within the chest. The
as in equine viral arteritis, thrombophlebitis, or purpura haemorrhag-
effective area for listening is bounded caudally by a line that runs from
ica. Arterial rupture and aneurysm (particularly of the internal carotid
the 18th rib to the middle of the thorax at rib 13, to shoulder level at
 artery) have been known to follow damage to the arteries from migrat-
rib 1ll, and finishes at the point of the elbow. For both organ systems,
ing nematode larvae.
further evaluation is carried out using auscultation, percussion, MRI 
 Equine cardiology is an important subject, with auscultation as the
scanning (upper respiratory tract and sinuses), endoscopy, radiogra-
 most important clinical technique. In addition, an electrocardiogram
phy (mainly in foals due to size limitations and X-ray power required
(ECG) or 12-lead ECG can be used for the diagnosis and assessment
in adults) and laboratory-based evaluations. A wide variety of diag-
of the severity of valvular, pericardial, myocardial and great vessel
nostic techniques can be applied to the thorax. Lung biopsy is not
disease. Up to 4 heart sounds may be heard in normal horses. The
widely used; less invasive techniques have replaced it and pneumotho-
first, which marks systole, is the closure of the atrioventricular (A-V)
rax sometimes followed its use. If it is necessary to perform lung
valves and opening of the semi-lunar aortic and pulmonary valves.
biopsy, the ventral half of intercostal spaces 7-10 can be used. Endos-
The left atrioventricular valves are best heard in the left 5th intercostal
copy is widely used for the collection of samples from all levels of the
space, midway between the level of the point of the shoulder and the
respiratory tract. Tracheal and broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) can be
point of the elbow. The right A-V valves are best heard in the right 4th
used to obtain samples for microbiology and cytology from as low as
intercostal space, midway between the level of the point of the shoul-
the 4-5th generations of the bronchial tree, using sterile saline. Tra-
der and the point of the elbow. The second sound, which marks dias-
cheal aspirates can be drawn directly from the trachea by inserting a
tole, is caused by the closure of the semilunar valves and the opening
sterile needle between the tracheal cartilages. Thoracocentesis (removal
of the atrioventricular valves. The aortic valves can be heard in the
of fluid from the chest) uses intercostal spaces 6-9 on either side of the
 left 4th intercostal space at the level of the point of the shoulder. The
chest, with spaces 7-8 being the best. The site is just above the costo-
pulmonary valves are heard on the right side in the 4rh intercostal
chondral junction. The caudal part of the intercostal space is used, as 
 space, midway between the level of the point of the shoulder and the
the intercostal artery, vein, lymphatics and nerve lie in the rostral
point of the elbow. The third heart sound occurs early in diastole and
part. During this procedure, care is needed to avoid the superfcial
is heard in only one-third of horses. It marks the point at which the
thoracic vein. Pleural fluid can be collected for cytology and
blood decelerates, at the end of rapid ventricular flling. The fourth
bacteriology.
sound, audible in most horses, is the atrial contraction in late
There are many examples of infectious respiratory disease includ-
diastole.
ing, in former times, the bacterial zoonosis, glanders. Strangles, associ-
 There are various cardiac complaints in the horse. Congestive heart
ated with streptococcal infection (S.equi subspecies equi) is one of the
failure can be left-sided or right-sided. Pericarditis, pericardial effusions,
most serious disorders, localising in the lymph nodes of the respiratory
and myocarditis (ionophore toxicity) occur. Aortic root rupture results
110
in sudden death with massive haemorrhage into the thoracic cavity.
atrial fibrillation, ventricular fibrillation, atrio-ventricular block and
Many abnormal sounds may be heard in the examination of the heart.
sino-atrial block. Congenital heart defects do occur rarely in foals.
They include cardiac murmurs which can indicate stenosis of valves,
The Thorax
incompetence of valves, shunts, and pre-systolic and systolic murmurs.
foramen ovale, myocarditis and fibrocarditis.
Ectopic beats also occur in some horses. Disorders of cardiac rhythms
Clinical considerations for the spine in the thoracic region are dealt
include sinus arrhythmia, sinus tachycardia, ventricular tachycardia,
with in the section on the spine in Chapter 8 (p. 269).
111
Fig. 4.1 Surface features of the neck, shoulder
and thorax: left lateral view. The hair over the
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
palpable surface features was shaved before
embalming commenced. Rib 18 was small and
not clearly palpable. The surface projections of 
the thoracic and cervical vertebrae, cupola of the
diaphragm and diaphragmatic line of pleural
 refection are based on the dissections shown in
Figs. 4.17 and 4.22.
fumbarvertebrae.
withers,spinous
processes of T3.T4 and T5
transverse processes
paralumbar fossa
scapula:
dorsal border
rib 17
caudal angle
cranial border
costal arch
spine
cervical vertebrae,
transverse processes
thoracic and cervical
cupola of diaphragm
vertebrae,transverse
processes
humerus:
cranial and caudal parns
of major tuberosity
deltoid tuberosity
diaphragmatic line of
lateralepicondyie
pleural reffection
hair ridge and vortex
radius, lateral tuberosity
uina,olecranon
Fig. 4.2 Skeleton of proximal forelimb and
thorax: left lateral view. The palpable features
shown in Fig. 4.1 are coloured red except for
the spinous processes at the withers. Note that
 in this articulated skeleton rib 18 is large. In
the dissected specimen this rib was small (see
Fig. 4.9) and the last distinctly palpable rib was
rib 17.
112
The Thorax
m.frapezius (pars
thoracica)
deepfascia (refected)
m.trapezius (pars
cervicalis)
m.infraspinatus
adiposetissuewithin
superficial fascia
scapula.spine
deep fascia (reffected)
m.cutaneus
omobrachialis(reflected)
m. obliquus externus
abdominis
m.cutaneus
fascia
cut edge of superficial
fayer of superticiat fascia
m. triceps brachir,
covered by deep
brachialfascia
m. cutaneus trunci
m. pectorafis asc
cendens
V.thoracicasuperficialis
uina,ofecranon
deep fascia of
V. epigastrica cranialis
antebrachium
superficialis
Fig. 4.3 The cutaneous muscles and superficial fascia of the trunk: left lateral view. The skin has been carefully removed to display the cutaneous
muscles which lie just beneath the dermis, within the superficial fascia. An earlier stage of the dissection is shown in Fig. 5.3.
113
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,The Horse
m. trapezius (pars
nn. thoracici rr. cutanei
thoracica)
mediales dorsales
m. serratus dorsalis
scapula,caudalangle
caudalis
m.supraspinatus
m. obliquus externus
abdominis
scapula.spine
m. latissimus dorsi
m.infraspinatus
mm.intercostales externi
m. tensor fasciae
antebrachii
nn.intercostales
rr.cutanei laterales
m.deffoideus
m. serratus ventralis
thoracis
m. triceps brachi (caput
jongum)
yellow abdominaltunic
covering m. obliquus
m.cutaneus trunci
externus abdominis
m. triceps brachi(caput
v.thoracica superficialis
[aterale)
m.pectoralis ascendens
deep antebrachial fascia
nn.intercostales
olecranon
fT. cutanei ventrales
Fig. 4.4 Superficial structures of the shoulder and thorax: left lateral view. The superficial fascia, including the cutaneous muscles, has been removed.
The deep fascia has also been removed from the muscles of the scapular and brachial regions.
114
The Thorax
m. trapezius (pars
thoracotumbarfascia
thoracica)
m.serratus dorsafis
m.rhomboideuscervicis
caudalis
m. serratus ventralis
m. serratus dorsalis
cervicis
cranialis
m. latissimus dorsi (cuf
edge)
scapular carilage
m. serratus ventrafis
scapula.
thoracis
caudal angle
m.tensorfasciae
m.obliquus externus
antebrachii
abdominis
n. intercostobrachialis
mm.intercostalesexterni
m. triceps brachii (caput
nn. intercosfales
(ongum)
ff. cutanei laterales
window removed from
yellow abdominatl tunic to
'show
m. obliquus externus
m.cutaneus frunci
abdominis
v. thoracica superficialis
m.triceps brachii (caput
faterale)
m.pectoralisascendens
Fig. 4.5 The thoracic wall after removal of the latissimus dorsi muscle: left lateral view. The origins of the external oblique abdominal muscle from
the ribs have been cut; the elastic deep fascia (yellow abdominal tunic) has rolled the muscle ventrally to show the external intercostal muscles that
lie beneath the oblique muscle.
115
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
m. trapezius pars
dorsoscapular
m. serratus dorsalis
thoracica
figament
Cranialis
m.rhomboideus thoracis
m.rhomboideuscervicis
m.serratus dorsalis
m.splenius
caudalis
m.longissimus thoracis
mm. intercostales externi
et cervicis
rib 17
m. iiocostalis thoracis et
cervicis
costal arch
m.serratus ventralis
cervicis
m.obliquus internus
m. scalenus dorsalis
abdominis
m.iliocostaliscervicis
n.thoracicus longus
m.scalenus ventralis
a. carotis communis
plexus brachialis
trachea
n.thoracodorsalis
n. phrenicus (CVI)
n. thoracicus tateralis
m. sternothyrohyoideus
n. pectoralis caudalis
v. jugularis externa
Inn. cervicales profundi
a. thoracica externa
caudales
nn.intercostales
m. sternocephaficus
a. cervicalis superficialis
f.deffoideus
v.cephalica
m. rectus abdominis
a.v. axillaris
m.subclavius
m. pectoralis descendens 
rr.cutanei ventrates
nn.intercostales
m.pectoratis
m.rectus thoracis
m. pectoralis
m. obliquus externus
ascendens
transversus
abdominis
Fig. 4.6 The thoracic wall after removal of the forelimb: left lateral view. The cut surfaces of the muscles joining the scapula and humerus to the
trunk have been left in place. The external oblique abdominal muscle has been partially removed to show the caudal ribs more clearly.
116
thoracolumbar fascia
m. gluteus medius
covering m. longissimus
thoracis
rib 18
m.retractor costae
The Thorax
m. serratus dorsalis
caudalis
a.v.jium circumffexa
profunda
m.serratus dorsalis
cranialis
m. obliquus internus
abdominis
mm. intercostales externi
costal arch
nn.intercostates (XV,XV)
costal insertion of
rr. cutanei laterales
m. serratus ventralis
thoracis
nn. intercostales (XIv,XV)
running between
mm. intercostales interni
m.obliquus internus
puesuwopge
m. rectus abdominis
m. transversus abdominis
yellow abdominal tunic
m. obliquus externus
covering m. obliquus
abdominis
externus abdominis
v. thoracica superficialis
m. cutaneus runci
nn.intercostales
m. pectoralis ascendens
If. cutanei ventrales
Fig. 4.7 The caudal ribs and costal arch:left lateral view. The external oblique abdominal muscle has been removed. This is part of the dissection
shown in Fig. 4.6.
Fig. 4.8 Muscles and nerves of the thoracic
walleft lateral view. The cranial dorsal serrate
muscle and its origin from the superficial part of
the dorsoscapular ligament have been resected.
One of the external intercostal muscles has been
removed.
m.trapezius (pars
m.spinalis thoracis
thoracica)
m.fongissimus thoracis
dorsoscapular igament:
dorsafpart
m.iliocostalis thoracis
ventral part
m.rhomboideus thoracis
m.serratus dorsalis
caudalis
m. rhomboideus cervicis
m.serratus dorsalis
m.splenius
cranialis (cut edge)
m. longissimus cervicis
n.thoracicusr.cutaneus
m. serratus ventralis
fateralis dorsalis
cervicis
m.intercostalis internus
mm.intercostales externi
nn.intercostales
n.thoracicus longus
ff. cutanei faterales
m. serratus ventralis
thoracis
edge of origin of m.
m. scalenus dorsatis
obfiquus externus
abdominis
plexus brachialis
n. phrenicus (root from
m. serratus ventrafis
CVI)
thoracis(superficial
a.v.axillaris
tendinous part)
a. thoracica externa
costal arch
117
Fig. 4.9 The rib cage: superficial structures in left
lateral view. The muscles of the forelimb have
now been cut away to reveal the full extent of
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
the rib cage. The external intercostal muscle in
the eleventh intercostal space has been removed
to show the internal intercostal muscle. The
eighteenth rib in this specimen was very small;
see Fig. 4.2.
m. rhomboideus cervicrs
m.splenius
m. retractor costae
m. fongissimus cervicis
rib 18
et thoracis
m. liocostalis cervicis et
m. serratus dorsalis
thoracis
caudalis
m.scalenus dorsalis
n.costoabdominalis
(TXVI)
m. scalenus ventralis
r.cutaneus fateralis
n. phrenicus roois from
nn.intercostales
CVI,CV
TXV-XVII
f. cutanei laterales
a. thoracica exferna
m. obliquus internus
m.sternothyrohyoideus
abdominis
V.jugularis externa
m. intercostalis internus
a.v.axillaris
mm. intercostales externi
m. rectus abdominis
a. cervicalis superficiatis
yellowabdominaftunic
Inn. cervicales profundi
covering m. obliquus
caudales
externus abdominis
m. sternocephalicus
m. obliquus externus
abdominis
m.rectus thoracis
nn.intercostales
a. thoracica interna
rr. cutanei ventrales
ff. perforantes
m. pectorafis ascendens
m.fongissimus cervicis
m. iliocostalis cervicis
m.iiocostalis thoracis
n. cervicalis VI
a.scapufaris dorsafis
plexus brachialis
m.scalenus dorsalis
n.phrenicusroots from
CVt, CVII
rib 3
a. carotis communis
n.thoracicus longus
trachea
mm.intercostafes externi
Inn. cervicales profundi
m.scatenus ventralis
caudales
m. sternothyrohyoideus
a.thoracicaexterna
(reffected dorsally)
V. jugutaris externa
a.v. axillaris
a. cervicalis superficialis
v.cephafica
Inn. cervicales profundi
m. sternocephalicus
caudales
(sinister et dexter)
m. rectus thoracis
 origin of m. pectoralis
a.thoracica interna
descendens
manubrium of sternum
fr.perforantes
m.subclavius
m. pectoralis ascendens
m. pectoralis transversus
Fig. 4.10 The thoracic inlet: superficial structures in left lateral view. This is a closer view of a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 4.9.
118
Fig. 4.11 The rib cage: deeper structures in left lateral view. The external
 intercostal muscles have been removed from the frst eleven intercostal
spaces. The structures within these spaces are shown in Figs.4.12 and 4.13.
The internal oblique abdominal muscle has also been removed. Dorsally,
The
the iliocostalis muscle has been removed from two intercostal spaces.
Thorax
m.longissimus fhoracis
rib 18
origins of m. obliquus
m.liocostalis thoracis
externus abdominis
n. costoabdominalis(TXVIl)
mm.intercostales externi
costal arch(costa)
cartitages of ribs 10 to18)
nn.intercostales
(TXV, XVI)
m.transversus
abdominis
mm.ntercostafesintern
rib 12, costochondral
junction
rib 1
costal cartilage of first
asternal rib (nb 10)
rib3
costal cartilage of fast
rib6
sternal rib (nib 9)
m.rectus abdominis
m.rectus thoracis
yellow abdominal funic
m. obliquus externus
nn.intercostales
abdominis
rf.cutanei ventrales
mm.levatores costarum
Fig. 4.12 Structures of the
 intercostal spaces: left
lateral view. This is a
closer view of a part of
window showing
the specimen shown in 
endothoracicfascia
Fig. 4.11. The intercostal
mm. intercostales interni
 vessels and nerves have
 been displaced from the
m.obliquusexternus
costal groove. A window
abdominis (origin)
has been cut in the 9th
internal intercostal
rib 11
muscle.
a.intercostalis dorsalis
groove
n. intercostalis (TX)
rib5,costochondral
m.obliquus externus
junction
abdominis
Fig. 4.13 The endothoracic
fascia of the intercostal spaces:
left lateral view. The intercostal
a.scapularis dorsalis
 muscles have been removed.
The endothoracic fascia
n.intercostatis (T)
remains intact in the frst three
eftungexposedin
intercostal spaces.
intercostalspace4
a.intercostafis dorsalis
endothoracicfasciain
intercostal spaces 1-3
119
m. spinalis thoracis
m.fongissimus thoracis
mm.levatorescostarum
m.iliocostalisthoracis
m.retractor costae
rib 10
rib 18
rib6
rib 3
costal cartilage,rib 18
a. scapularis dorsalis
diaphragm:
rib 1
central tendon
costal part
m. scalenus dorsalis
plexus brachialis
left tung:
dorsal border
m. scafenus ventrafis
caudal (basal) border 
n. phrenicus (CVt, VIl)
cranialfobe
cranial border
a.thoracica externa
caudal lobe
a.v.axilaris
m.transversus
a. cervicalis superficialis
abdominis
Inn. cervicales profundi
caudales
costal arch
m.rectus thoracis
mm. intercostales interni
m.subclavius
(cut away along
diaphragmatic ine of
m.pectoralis
pleural reffection)
descendens
m. pectaralis transversus
m. rectus abdominis
m.pectoralis
a.thoracica interna
m. obliquus externus
ascendens
rr. intercostales ventrales
abdominis
Fig. 4.14 The topography of the thorax: left lateral view. The intercostal muscles, endothoracic fascia and pleura of the intercostal spaces have been 
removed to show the ribs and the thoracic viscera.
120
dorsoscapular tigament
ahisthoracis
m.longissimus
thoracis
The Thorax
cervicis
m.splenius
m.iliocostalisthoracis
a. scapufaris dorsalis
left lung. dorsal border
m. scalenus dorsalis
Jeft lung:
craniallobe
cardiac notch
tettfung:
caudaiborder
plexus brachialis
m.scalenus ventralis
diaphragm:
a.axilaris
costaf parf
sternai part
a. thoracica externa
thoracic thymus
rib 5, costochondral
pericardium
a.thoracicainterna:
m.obliquus externus
fr.intercostalesventrales
abdominis
f.perforans
m.subclavius
m.rectus thoracis
m. pectoralis transversus
m. pectoralis ascendens
Fig. 4.15 Thoracic viscera and ribs in situ, with the rib cage intact: left lateral view. This is a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 4.14. In this yearling
horse, the thoracic thymus was still large; this structure regresses after the frst year of life.
Fig. 4.16 The thoracic inlet: deeper structures: left lateral view. This is a
closer view of a part of the dissection shown in Fig. 4.17. The dorsal and
ventral scalenus muscles have been removed.
t. vagosympathicus
m. longus coll
a.scapularis dorsafis
t. trachealis
rib 2
trachea
plexus brachialis
a. carotis communis
gangfion cervicale
medium
t. vagosympathicus
t. sympathicus
oesophagus
n. laryngeus recurrens (X)
n. vagus X
Inn. cervicales profundi
pleuralcavity
caudales
ductus thoracicus
m.sternothyrohyoideus
(sinister)
n. phrenicus (CVi, CVI)
teft tung:
skin,reflected
V.cava cranialis
craniaf lobe
a. cervicalis superficiatis
pericardium
V. cephalica
a.v.axilaris
m.sternocephalicus
(sinister et dexter)
a. thoracica externa
position of
thymus, thoracic part in
sternum, manubrium
mediastinum
121
Fig. 4.17 Thoracic
viscera in situ: left
lateral view. Ribs 1, 3
The Horse
and 6 have been left in
place to show the costal
relationships of the
viscera. The lungs
Anatomy,
have been fixed in a
contracted position. In
life, the caudal, or
 basal, border lies more
Color Atlas of Veterinary
caudally, as shown by
the broken blue line: its
position varies with the
respiratory movements.
m.longissimuscervicism.spinalisthoracis
m.longissimus thoracis
m.rhomboideus cervicis
m.retractor costae
m.splenius
rib 18
m. iliocostalis thoracis
mm.intercostates interni,
a.scapuiaris dorsalis
cuf away along
jung. dorsal border
diaphragmatic ine of
pleuralreffection
plexus brachialis
lefttung
diaphragm:
caudal (basal) border
central tendon
cranial border
costal part
oesophagus
costal arch
n. phrenicus
costodiaphragmatic
ductus thoracicus
ecess,openeqby
v. jugufaris externa
a.v.axillaris
diaphragm, cupola
Inn. cervicales profundi
caudales
m.transversus
abdominis
a. thoracica exferna
m. rectus abdominis
thymus
pericardium
yellow abdominat tunic
covering m. obliquus
m. pectoralis descendens
externus abdominis
m.subclavius
m.pectoralis
m.pectoralis
costomediastinalrecess,opened
m.cutaneus trunci
transversus
ascendens
by removal of fhoracic wall
rib 16
rib 11
mm. intercostales interni
fineof pieurafreflection
cutalongdiaphragmatic
rib 1
plexus brachialis
left fung:
oesophagus
caudai (basal) border
a.axillanis
caudallobe
cranial lobe
a.cervicalis superficiafis
ventrai border
cardiacnotchin
a. thoracica externa
apex
thymus
rib 1
rib 3
pericardium
mm.pectorales
costal cartiage,rib 6
border in life while at rest. The two lobes of the left lung are not clearly distinguishable externally in the horse.
122
The Thorax
m.longissimus
m.iliocostalisductus
aorfta
diaphragm,
fhoracis
m.fongus coffi
thoracis
thoracicus
thoracica
oesophagus
central tendon
m.splenius
m. longissimus cervicis
right lung. accessory
fobe (covered by caudal
a. intercostalis suprema
ventral mediastinum)
a. scapularis dorsalis
V. phrenica cranialis
a. cervicalis profunda
left principal bronchus
m. iliocostalis cervicis
teft tung, residuaf tissue
rib 1
Inn. tracheobronchales
plexus brachialis
medii
inn. tracheobronchales
ganglion
cervicothoracicum
sinistri
vv. putmonales
t. trachealis
(red latex)
- a. puimonalis sinistra
oesophagus
n. vagus X
a. vertebrafis
n.phrenicus
n. taryngeus recurrens
- t. brachiocephalicus
(X)
gangfion cervicale
leff atrium
medium
V. cava cranialis
inn. mediastinales
- Inn. sternafes craniales
craniafes
a.v.axilfaris
v. jugularis externa
thoracic thymus (in
a. subclavia sinistra
cranialventral
Inn. cervicales profundi
mediastinum)
caudales
left ventricle
 costal cartiages of ribs 1
sternopericardial
and3
ligament
Fig. 4.19 The mediastinum after removal of the left lung: left lateral view. The lung has been removed at its hilus, leaving only a small remnant of
lung tissue between the cut ends of its pulmonary artery and principal bronchus. The pulmonary veins have been filled with red latex injected into
the right common carotid artery; it has filled the left ventricle, penetrated the left atrium (see Fig. 4.25) and so entered the pulmonary veins. Further
details of the structures in this dissection are shown in Fig. 4.20 (see also Fig. 4.21).
123
Fig. 4.20 Vessels and nerves of the cranial mediastinum: left lateral view.
This is a closer view of a part of the dissection shown in Fig. 4.19. A
further stage in the dissection of this region is shown in Fig. 4.24.
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
m. longissimus cervicis
m.iliocostalis thoracis
m. fongissimus thoracis
m.longus colfi
m. serratus ventralis
cervicis (insertions)
t.sympathicus
rib 1
a. scapularis dorsalis
plexus brachialis:
a.intercostalis suprema
71. 711
CVIf. CVI!
oesophagus
m. iliocostafis cervicis
ductus thoracicus
a.vertebralis
Inn.mediastinales
n.vertebralis
craniales
n.phrenicus CVi, CVI1
inn.tracheobronchales
ganglion
cervicothoracicum
n.laryngeus recurrens
ganglion cevicale
(X)
arcus aortae
n.taryngeus recurrens
(X)
n. vagus X
n. vagus X
ansa subclavia
t. sympathicus
nn.cardiaci
Inn. cervicales profundi
caudales
t. brachiocephalicus
v. jugularis externa
n.phrenicus
vas efferens from
inn. cervicales profundi
t.bicaroticus
caudales
pericardium covering
ductus thoracicus
t.puimonalis
m. sternocephalicus
a. subclavia sinistra
v.cephafica
a. cervicalis superficialis
V. cava cranialis
f.ascendens
a.v.axillaris
Inn. sternales craniales
a. thoracica externa
right ventricte
a.cervicafis superficialis
thoracic thymus
r.deltoideus
costochondral junctions
a. thoracica interna
of ribs 1.2 and 3
124
Fig. 4.21 Thoracic vessels and nerves in relation to the ribs: left lateral
view. Three ribs have been pinned back into place, after dissection of the
thoracic vessels and nerves, to facilitate location of these structures in
The Thorax
relationship to the ribs. See also Fig. 4.19.
eftprincipal
diaphragm,
bronchus
aorta thoracica
oesphagus
feff crus
m. longus colf
diaphragm:
ductus thoracicus
central tendon
costaf part
a. cervicalis profunda
Inn. tracheobronchales medii
Inn.mediastinales
right tung. accessory fobe,
craniales
coveredbycauda!
a.n. vertebrafis
ventral mediastinum
t. cosfocervicafis
vv.pumonales
t. vagosympathicus
n.phrenicus
n.vagus x
a.subciavia sinistra
caudal ventrat mediastinum
V.jugularis externa
a. purmonalis sinistra.
f. brachiocephaficus
inn. tracheobronchales
V.cava cranialis
sinistri
feft atrium
a.v.axillaris
left ventricle,covered by
thoracic thymus
pericardium
rb1
rib3
rib 6
Inn.sternales
costochondral junctions:
caudales
Fig. 4.22 The diaphragm and costal arch: left lateral view. The ribs and
the internal intercostal muscles have been cut along the diaphragmatic 
line of pleural refection to show the caudal extent of the pleural cavity.
The costal attachments of the diaphragm are slightly more caudal, as
shown in Fig. 5.15.
caudal mediastinum:
diaphragm,
m.liocostatis
ventral
dorsal
centrar tendon
thoracis
aorta thoracica
rib 18
oesophagus
spfeen, caudaf extremily
costaf cartilages, ribs
right lung. accessory
17.18
lobe
left principal bronchus
smaff intestine
diaphragm, costal part
Inn. tracheobronchales
sinistri
descending colon
mm. intercostales interni
a. pulmonalis sinistra
costal arch
n. phrenicus
ascending colon:
vv.puimonafes sinistri
leftdorsaicolon
feftventraf colon
heart in pericardium:
feft atrium
costodiaphragmatic
left ventricle
recess
sternopericardial
costochondral junction,
ligament
rib 9
125
Fig. 4.23 The heart,
great vessels and nerves
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
of the thorax: left
lateral view. The
pericardium has been
removed to display the
left aspect of the heart.
The head of the first
rib has been removed
to reveal the
cervicothoracic
(stellate) ganglion. The
fragile ventral caudal
 mediastinum has been
damaged during
dissection.
caudal dorsal
mediastinum
gangfion
a.cervicalis
a. scapularis
cervicothoracicum
profunda
dorsalis
aorta thoracica
plexus brachialis (CVl,
oesophagus
CVI)
t. vagalis X dorsalis
ganglion cervicale
medium
t. vagalis X ventralis
m. longus colfi
a. subctavia sinistra
ductus thoracicus
 pericardium, cuf edge
oesophagus
right tung. accessory
ductus thoracicus
lobe
n.vagusX
V. cava craniafis
arcus aorae
t. vagosympathicus
left principal bronchus 
Inn. tracheobronchales
a.carotis communis
medii
vv.puimonales
v.jugularis externa
n. phrenicus (cut)
.v.axifaris
a. puimonalis sinistra
n. laryngeus recurrens (X)
V.cephalica
ligamentum arteriosum
t.pulmonalis
a.cervicalis superficialis
left auricle
right auricle
Inn. sternales craniales
a. coronaria sinistra
a.thoracica externa
r.circumffexus in
 coronary groove
cervical thymus
caudal ventral
mediastinum
a. thoracica interna -
feft ventricle
costal cartilage rib 1conus arteriosus
right ventricie |pericardium, cut edge
mediastinal pleura
fhoracic thymus
V. interventricutaris
(reffected)
 paraconalis in paraconal groove
126
The Thorax
nn.cervicales Vill, Vl. rami communicantes nn.thoracicit,I
a. cervicalis a. intercostalis
arcus
fr.ventrales
to CVI,TI
ff. ventrales
profunda
suprema
aortae
ganglion
a.scapularis
cervicothoracicum
rib 1.removed
f. sympathicus
dorsalis
trachea
a.n.vertebralis
n. vagus X
m.longus colli
left principat bronchus
ansasubciaviacauoalis
oesophagus
n. laryngeus recurrens (X)
n.cardiacus
a.puimonafis sinistra
cervicothoracicus
figamentum arteriosum
ganglion cervicale
pericardium,cut edge
medium
v.puimonalis
n. taryngeus recurrens (X)
：
t.brachiocephalicus
t. sympathicus
n. phrenicus (cut)
n. vagus X
a. carotis communis
nn.cardiaci
a. subclavia sinistra
V. costocervicalis et
ductus thoracicus
V. vertebralis
v. jugufaris externa
rightauriclein
vasa efferentia tymphatica
pericardial cavity
from inn. cervicales
leff auricle
profundi craniales
s
t.puimonalis
a. coronaria sinistra:
dexter
m. sternothyrohyoideus
f.circumffexus
r.interventricutaris
a.v.axifaris
paraconalis
v. cephalica
a.fhoracica
externa
a. thoracica
conus arteriosus
interna
m.sternocephaficus
a. cervicalis superficialis
thymus
V. cava cranialis
(dexter et sinister)
Fig. 4.24 Vessels and nerves of the cranial mediastinum: left lateral view. This is a closer view of a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 4.23.
The phrenic nerve has been cut short: its position is shown in Fig. 4.20.
127
Fig. 4.25 Positions of the left atrioventricular and pulmonary heart valves:
left lateral view. A window has been cut in the walls of the left atrium and
left ventricle to show the left atrioventricular valve. Note that red latex
The Horse
injected into the right common carotid artery has entered the left
ventricle, passed through the atrioventricular valve and filled the left
atrium and the pulmonary veins. The pulmonary trunk and conus 
 arteriosus have been opened: red latex has not traversed the pulmonary
capillaries.
Color Atlas of Veterinary .
arcus
a. puimonalisa.puimonalis
left principal
aortae
n.vagus x
dextra
sinistra
bronchus
m. longus colfi
Inn.tracheobronchales
a. scapufaris dorsalis
medfi
 a. intercostalis suprema
caudalventral
mediastinumcovering
oesophagus
rightlung(accessory
ductus thoracicus
obe]
ligamentum arteriosum
vv.puimonales
a.vertebralis
{redlatex)
n. laryngeus recurrens (X)
t. puimonalis, cut edges
ansa subclavia caudalis
n.phrenicus
a. subclavia sinistra
pericardium
nn. cardiaci
caudalventra!
V.costocervicalis et
mediastinum
v.vertebralis
feft atrium containing red
V. cava cranialis
fatex
pericardium
v. cordis magna
r.Circumffexus
right auricle
a. coronaria sinistra
r.circumffexus
lef auricle
leftatrioventricularvalve,
orifice oft. pufmonalis
parietat cusp,with latex
in left ventricle
pulmonary valve, cusps
conus arteriosus
 chordae tendineae
cervical thymus
thoracic thymus
cavity of feft ventricle
a. thoracica interna
Jeftventricle
Inn. sternales craniales
pericardium, cut edge
rib5
a.coronaria sinistra
V.cordis magna in
r.interventicularis paraconalisinterventricularparaconal groove
128
Fig. 4.26 Positions of the aortic and pulmonary valves: left lateral view.
The cranial part of the left atrium has been removed to show the aortic
valve lying caudodorsal to the pulmonary valve at the level of the
The Thorax
fourth rib.
rib 4
a. intercostalis dorsafis V
ductus thoracicus
aorta thoracica
arcus aorntae
t.vagalisX dorsafis
oesophagus
a.intercostalis suprema
t. vagalis X ventralis
n. laryngeus recurrens (X)
inn. tracheobronchales
orifice of a. pumonalis
medll
dextra
left principal bronchus
n.vagus x
a.puimonalis sinistra
nn.cardiaci
V.cava caudatis at caval
t.pulmonalis
foramen
 sinus of aortic vaive cusp
vv. pufmonares
puimonaryvalve
fatex in right atrium
a. coronaria sinistra:
r.interventricularis
.circumffexus
v.cordis magna
r.circumflexus
paraconalis
conus arteriosus
lef AV valve, parietal
cusp covered by fatex
thoracic fhymus
wall of leff ventricle
V.cordis magna in
liver,leflobe
paraconal groove
rib 2, costaf cartilage
diaphragm, sternal part
m.subclavius
costal cartiiage, rib 5
 m. pectorafis transversus
m.rectus thoracispericardium (cut edge)
(cut edge)
129
Fig. 4.27 The heart, arteries and recurrent
laryngeal nerves: left lateral view. Both left and 
right sides of the rib cage have been removed
 The Horse
and the topographical relationships of the
thoracic structures are considerably disturbed.
 The oesophagus and trachea have been partially
 resected and the veins have been removed. The
right side of this specimen is shown in Fig. 4.40.
t. sympathicus sinister
a. intercostaiis  Inn. mediastinales medi
suprema
plexus brachialis (TI, I)  n. vagus X dexter
m. longus colfi
rib 5
a.cervicalisprofunda
aorta thoracica
(dextra et sinistra)
a. intercostalis dorsalis
pfexusbrachialis
(CVIt,CVi)
a.broncho-oesophagea
1. cesophageus
a.vertebralis
(dextra et sinistra)
ductus thoracicus
rm. scalenus dorsalis
pesophagus
n.vertebralis
a. broncho-oesophagea
trachea
r. bronchalis
Inn.tracheobronchales
oesophagus
medii
a. carotis communis
left principal bronchus
sinistra
trachea
t. sympathicus dexter
inn, tracheobronchales
m.sternothyronyoideus
sinistri
sinister
a. putmonalis sinistra
n. faryngeus recurrens
(X) sinister
vv.puimonales
(X)dexter
arcus aortae
t. bicaroticus
left atrium
m. sternocephalicus
v.cordis magna
dexter
f.circumffexus in
a. subclavia dexra
coronary groove
t. brachiocephaficus
figamentum arteriosum
a. subclavia sinistra
1. puimonafis
feft atrioventricufar valve
a.axilaris
aortic valve, left cusp
sternum, manubrium
a. coronaria sinistra
a. cervicalis superficialis:
1.ascendens
left ventricle
r. deltoideus
right ventricle
a.thoracica externa
rib 1 (right and left)
interventricular
a. thoracica interna
putmonary valve, cusps
paraconalgroove
(dextra et sinistra)
in conus arteriosus
130
pericardium
 m. transversus abdominis
left ventricle
a.musculophrenica
The
m. transversus thoracis
vagina m. recti abdominis.
 Thorax
faminainterna
attachments of diaphragm:
costal
sternal
umbilicus
sternopericardial
figament
linea aiba
m. transversus
abdominis, covered by
parietal peritoneum
xiphisternum
costalcartilages
muscular abdominal wall
of costal arch
(cut edge)
 Fig. 4.28 The sternopericardial ligament and abdominal foor: left dorsolateral view. The abdominal viscera and the diaphragm have been removed.
m.transversusthoracis
pericardium
a.musculophrenica
costaf caniages of costal
arch
m. rectus abdominis
a.v. epigastrica cranialis
diaphragm, attachments:
costar
sternal
umbificus
finea a/ba
vagina m.recti abdominis,
famina interna
m.transversus
abdominis
xiphisternun
sternopericardial
ligament
Fig. 4.29 The terminal branches of the internal thoracic artery and abdominal foor: left dorsolateral view. The transverse abdominal muscle has been
removed on the right side to display the cranial epigastric vessels.
rib6,
a.v. epigastrica m.rectus
costal carilage
Craniafis
abdominis
a.muscufophrenica」costal arch
xiphisternum
linea alba
attachmentsof
diaphragm, sternal part
remnantsof
stemopericardia!
ligament
m. transversus abdominis
diaphragm, attachments 
of costai part
a.v. thoracica interna.
dextra
m. transversus thoracis
rib 1
rib 9, costaf cartiage
a.thoracica interna
rr. intercostales ventrales
Fig. 4.30 The thoracic foor: left dorsolateral view. After removal of the thoracic viscera and diaphragm, the right transverse thoracic muscle has
been dissected to show the course of the internal thoracic vessels. The left internal thoracic vessels, running ventral to the transverse thoracic and
abdominal muscles, have not been exposed.
131
Fig. 4.31 The topography of the thorax: right lateral view. The iliocostalis
and longissimus muscles have been partly cut away to show the angles of
the ribs. It should be remembered that in life the frst five ribs are covered
 The Horse
by the forelimb; the olecranon lies adjacent to the costochondral junction
of the ffth rib in normal level standing (see Figs. 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4).
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,
ib18
m.trapezius:
m. iliocostalis thoracis
pars thoracica
pars cevicalis
small intestine
m.rhomboideus
right tung:
m. spinalis thoracis
dorsal border
caudal (basal) border
m.splenius
m. longissimus cervicis
diaphragm, costat part
m.longissimus thoracis
costal arch 
rib6
ascending colon, right
plexus brachialis
ventral cofon
right tung. craniat border
caecum,base
nib 1
diaphragmatic fine of
a.v.axillaris
pleuralreflection
mm. intercostales interni -
heart inpericardium
costochondral junction, rib 5
ascending colon, right
m.subclavius
dorsal colon
m. cutaneus trunci
m. pectoralis ascendens
(reflected)
m. pectoralis transversus
Fig. 4.32 Thoracic viscera in situ: right lateral view. This view
corresponds with that shown in Fig. 4.17 for the left thorax. The caudal,
 or basal, border of the lung is much more cranial after fixation than it is
in life; the broken blue line shows its approximate position in life when
at rest.
m.psoas minor
a. scapularis dorsalis
diaphragm:
costal part
cervicis (cut edge)
m.serratusventralis
centraltendon
a.v. intercostalis dorsalis
right lung, cranial border
cardiac nofch in ventral border
right iung:
plexus brachialis
dorsal border
caudal (basal) border
rib 1
a.vertebralis
diaphragmatic line of
pieuralreflection
trachea
a.v.axillaris
caecum,base
a.cervicalis superficialis
 ascending colon, right
a. thoracica externa
ventralcolon
m.subclavius
pericardium
thoracic thymus
costochondral junctions,
m. pectoralis descendens
ribs 3and6
 m. pectoralis ascendens
132
a.v.intercostafis dorsalis
right tung. dorsal border
X1
diaphragm
t.costocervicalis
central tendon
a. cervicalis profunda
The Thorax
costal par
m. serratus ventralis
trachea
cervicis
a.v. axilaris
plexus brachialis
right tung:
caudal border
m. scalenus ventralis
cranial border
cardiac notch in ventral
n. phrenicus (root from CvVl)
border
t. vagosympathicus
caudaf lobe
a. carotis communis
V.jugufaris externa
pericardium
v.cava cranialis
thoracic thymus
ribs 1.3
a.thoracica interna
m. sternocephalicus
costochondral junction
m. sternothyrohyoideus
rib6
Inn. cervicales profundi
costomediastinafrecess
caudales
 Fig. 4.33 The right lung and thoracic inlet: right lateral view. Three ribs have been left in place to mark the positions of the viscera in relation to the
rib cage. Further details of the thoracic inlet are shown in Fig. 4.34. The two visible lobes of the lung are not clearly demarcated by an external
 groove in the horse. The accessory lobe of the right lung is seen from the left side in Fig. 4.19; it lies to the left of the caudal vena cava (Fig. 4.39)
within the right pleural cavity.
Fig. 4.34 The thoracic inlet: right lateral view. This is a closer view of a
part of the specimen shown in Fig. 4.33. The phrenic nerve has been cut
 just cranial to the subclavian artery.
a.scapularis
m.longus colli
right lung, dorsal border
dorsalis n. vertebralis
frachea
t. sympathicus
m. serratus ventralis
thoracis
pfexus brachialis
m. scalenus dorsalis
(CVI1-TI)
m. sca/enus ventralis
right fung. cranial border
n. phrenicus (root from
CVI)
a.vertebralis
cut edge of
m.brachiocephalicus
n. vagus X
f. sympathicus
n. laryngeus recurrens (X)
n. vagus x
a. carotis communis
a. subclavia dextra
Inn. cervicales profundi
n. phrenicus (cut)
caudales
ganglion cevicale
pericardium in cardiac
medium
notch
v. jugularis externa
ductus fhoracicus
vasa efferentia
lymphatica sinistra
s
V. cephalica
dexter
m. sternomandibularis
rib 1
m. sternothyrohyoideus
a.v.axillaris
rib3
a. cervicalis superficialis
f.ascendens
thoracic thymus
f. deltoideus
Inn. sternales  a. thoracica
nn.cervicales
m.subclavius
m.pectoralis
craniales
interna
profundi caudales
descendens
133
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,The Horse
plexus brachiafis
a. cervicalis profunda
(CVII-TI)
n. vertebrafis
a.scapularis dorsalis
gangton
cervicothoracicum
a.intercostalis suprema
a. vertebralis
t. sympathicus
ansa subclavia
rib 1
ganglion cervicale
medium
n.cardiacus
t. sympathicus
cervicothoracicus
trachea
n.vagusX
a. carotis communis
right tung. caudal fobe
v. jugufaris externa
t. costocervicalis
ductus thoracicus
n. laryngeus recurrens (X)
vasa efferentia
n. vagus X
lymphatica sinistra
t. brachiocephalicus
ductus
lymphaticusdexter
right ung, cranial lobe
a.v. axillaris
n. phrenicus (cut)
v.cephalica
a.subclavia
m. sternocephalicus
Inn.mediastinales
m.sternothyrohyoideus
Craniales
a.cervicalis superficialis:
pericardium
r.ascendens
r.deftoideus
t.bicaroticus
Inn. cervicales profundi
rib3
caudafes
inn. sternales craniales a. thoracica m.subclavius
m.pectoralis
interna
descendens
Fig. 4.35 Nerves and vessels of the cranial mediastinum: right lateral view. The first rib has been partially resected to show the recurrent laryngeal
nerve looping round the right costocervical trunk. The most dorsal part of the frst rib remains covering the cervicothoracic (stellate) ganglion and
obscuring its connections with other nerves.
134
The Thorax
v.azygos
V.costocervicalis
v.vertebralis
caudaldorsal
a.scaputaris dorsalis
mediastinum
aorta thoracica
a. intercostalis suprema
diaphragm, central tendon
t. vagalis X dorsalis
t. sympathicus
1. vagalis X ventralis
a. cervicalis profunda
oesophagus
plexus brachialis
inn. tracheobronchales
medii
a.n. vertebralis
right principal bronchus
remnants of right fung at
ganglion
hilus
cervicothoracicum
a.puirmonalis dextra
trachea
rib6
f. sympathicus
ganglioncervicale
v.v.pulmonafes
meoium
V. cava caudafis
n.vagus X
n.phrenicus
V.jugutaris externa
caudal mediastinum,
n.phrenicus
ventral part
a.v.axilaris
coronary groove
V. cava cranialis
diaphragm.
a. cervicalis superficialis
sternalpart
costaf part
rib 1
right ventricle covered by
right atrium covered by
pericardium
rib 3, costochondral thymus, thoracic parta. thoracica interna
junction
Fig. 4.36 The mediastinum after removal of the right lung: right lateral view. In removing the right lung, that part of the ventral mediastinum lying
 dorsal to the caudal vena cava has been torn: the left thorax has already been dissected, and this part of the mediastinum appears as a large black
space.
135
m.longus coli
trachea
v.costocervicalis
v. vertebralis
aonta thoracica
oesophagus
V.cava cranialis
v.azygos
t.costocervicalis
inn. tracheobronchales.
t. brachiocephalicus
medii
rib 1
right principat bronchus
a. subclavia dextra
a.broncho-oesophagea
r. bronchalis
a.vertebralis
a. puimonalis dexira
a. carotis communis
vV.pulmonales
t. sympathicus
v.cava caudalis
n. vagus
n. phrenicus (cut ends)
n.phrenicus (cut)
caudafventral
a.v. axillaris
mediastinum
a. cervicalis superficialis
right atrium
a. cervicans supericialis
subsinuosal
interventricular groove
r.deltoideus
coronary groove filed
inn. cervicales profundi
anssn esodipe ym
caudales
[a. coronara dextra not
pericardium (cut edge)
a. thoracica interna
VV. cordis dextrae
inn. sternales craniales
right ventricie
thoracicthymus
Fig. 4.37 The heart and great vessels: right lateral view. The pericardium has been cut away to show the atrium and ventricle within the pericardial
cavity. The dotted line shows where an incision has been made in the atrial wall to expose the cavity of the right atrium as in Fig. 4.38. Note the
position of the subsinuosal groove (see Fig. 4.40).
aa. et vw. intercostales
v.azygos
dorsales
m. fongus coffi
aorta thoracica
right principal bronchus
trachea
oesophagus
V.costocervicalis
Inn. tracheobronchales
crista terminalis
medt
v.vertebralis
a.broncho-oesophagea
r.bronchalis
pericardium, cut edge
a.puimonalis
rightauricle
vv.puimonales
n. vagus X
sinusvenarumcavarum
cava craniafis
right atrium, septal wall
. subclavia dexira
V.cava caudalis
n. phrenicus
n.phrenicus
atriatl wall, cut edge
inn.mediastinales
intervenous tubercle
craniales
right AVvalve:
a.axillaris
angufar cusp
a. cervicalis superficialis
septal cusp
inn. cervicales profundi
diaphragm,sternal part
caudales
adipose tissue in
a. thoracica interna
coronary groove
m. subciavius
vV.cordis dextrae
thoracic thymus
aa.intercostales
right ventricle
ventrales
Fig. 4.38 The cavity of the right atrium and the right atrioventricular valve: right lateral view (1). The wall of the right atrium has been partly
removed to show the position of the right atrioventricular valve (compare with Figs. 4.37 and 4.39).
136
The Thorax
oesophagus
t.sympathicus
v. azygos
V.costocervicalis
inn. tracheobronchales
plexus brachialis
medii
v.vertebralis
right principat bronchus
sinusvenarumcavarum
remnants of right fung
crista terminalis
a. puimonalis dextra
t. brachiocephalicus
V. cava caudatis
n. vagus X
n.phrenicus
v. cava cranialis
vV. pufmonales
n. phrenicus
intervenous tubercle
inn.mediastinales
sinus coronarius
craniales
right atrioventicular valve:
septai cusp
Inn. cervicales profundi
angular cusp
caudales
parietal cusp
right auncle
a.coronaria dextra
right atrium
coronary groove
rib 1
chordae tendineae
 pericardium, cut edge
window in wall of right
thoracic thymus
ventricie
a.thoracicainterna
vv.cordis dextrae
aa.intercostales
right ventricle
ventrales
Fig. 4.39 The cavity of the right atrium and the right atrioventricular valve: right lateral view (2). The window cut in the wall of the right atrium in
Figs. 4.37 and 4.38 has been enlarged to show the auricle and the coronary sinus. A window has been cut in the wall of the right ventricle to show
the parietal cusp of the right atrioventricular (tricuspid) valve.
137
Fig. 4.40 The heart, arteries and recurrent laryngeal nerves: right lateral
view. The specimen is at the same stage of dissection as that shown in
Fig. 4.27. A large part of the medial wall of the right atrium, and its
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
auricle, have been removed to show the aortic arch and the origin of
the right coronary artery. Only the frst part of this artery has been filled
with red latex. Removal of the rib cage while in the standing position
has greatly altered topographical relationships of the heart (see Figs. 4.36
and 4.37). Note the position of the subsinuosal groove: this is usually
correct.
rib 10
m.longus colli
t. sympathicus
n.vagusX
a.v. intercostalis dorsalis
v.azygos
arcus aortae
aorta thoracica
inn.mediastinalesmedli
a. bronchooesophagea
a.intercosfalis suprema
a. scapularis dorsalis 
ductus thoracicus
oesophagus
n.faryngeus recurrens
(X) sinister
Inn. fracheobronchafis
medii
t. brachiocephalicus
trachea
2. subclavia sinistra
right principal bronchus
a. broncho-oesophagea
a.cervicalis profunda
r. bronchalis
1.costocervicalis
a. putmonalis dextra
n. laryngeus recurrens
vv.puimonales
(X)dexter
intervenous tubercle
f. bicaroticus
V. cava caudalis.
a. vertebralis
oval fossa
a. subclavia dextra
crista terminalis
sinus coronarius
t. puimonais
right atrioventricular
a. axilfaris
varve
a.coronaria dextra
subsinuosaf groove:
a. coronaria dextra
a. cervicalis superficiafis:
r.interventricutaris
r.ascenoens
subsinuosus
r. deltoideus
V. cordis media
rib 1
vV.cordis dextrae
pericardium (cut edge)
a.thoracica interna
sternopericardial
aa.intercostates
m.subclavius
ventraies
rib 6
m.pectoralis
descendens
rib3
m.pectoralis ascendens
138
a. broncho-oesophagea
r. bronchalis
vv. pulmonales
v.azygos
The Thorax
right atrium, medial wall
a.pulmonalis
v. cava caudalis
ovalfossa
arcus aortae
intervenous tubercle
cristaterminalis
v. cordis magna
conus areriosus
sinus coronarius
(opened)
 pericardium, cut edge
right atrium, medial wall
window cut into f.
a.coronaria dextra
puimonalis
f. circumffexus in
right atrium,cut edge
coronary groove
subsinuosal
a. coronaria dextra
interventricular groove
cusps of right AV valve:
chordae tendineae of
septal
mm. papillares parvi
angufar
chordae tendineae of
a.coronaria dextra
m.papillaris
subarteriosus
f.circumffexus in
coronary groove
chordae tendineae of
m. papillaris magnus
店
a. thoracica dextra
right ventricle
vv. cordis dextrae
Fig. 4.41 The right atrioventricular valve: right lateral view. This is a slightly more
dorsal view of a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 4.40. The right coronary artery is
shown passing to the right of the pulmonary trunk, and entering the coronary groove.
Here it is not flled with latex, and its lumen has been opened when incising the
groove. Broken lines show where a part of the artery was cut away after displaying
the lumen of the right ventricle (Fig. 4.39). The parietal cusp of the right
atrioventricular valve is not visible, it is shown in Fig. 4.39.
conus arteriosus,medial
wall incised
v.cava caudalis
arcus aortae
oval fossa
t. brachiocephalicus
right atrium, mediat wal!
t. pulmonalis
sinus coronarius
aortic vaive cusps (aortic
(opened)
sinusesfilledwithlatex):
righf cusp
septal cusp
right atrium
a.coronaria dextra
a.coronaria dextra
leaving sinus of right
r. circumffexus
aortic cusp
right atrioventricular
vaive
pericardium, cut edge
right ventricle, lumen
right atrium, cut edge
vv. cordis dextrae
Fig. 4.42 The aortic valve, in right lateral view. Part of the medial wall of the right
atrium has been removed, and a window has been cut in the wall of the conus 
arteriosus to show two cusps of the aortic valve. The third leff cusp is shown in
Fig. 4.26 as is the left coronary artery.
139
Fig. 4.43 The rib cage of a new-born foal: left lateral view. The intercostal
structures have been removed to show the extent of the left pleural cavity
and the relationships of the viscera to the ribs. The corresponding view in
the adult horse is shown in Fig. 4.14.
nn. thoracic
rib 18
rr. cutanei aterales
dorsales
left rung, caudal fobe.
m. longissimus thoracis
caudaf (basal) border
m.iliocostalis thoracis
left costodiaphragmatic
recess
rib 1
plexus brachialis
diaphragm, costal part
m. scalenus ventrafis
left fung:
a.v.axinfaris
cranial lobe
caudal lobe
Vjugutaris externa
m. fransversus
perrcardium
abdominis
diaphragmatic line of
m. subclavius
pleuralreflection
m.pecloralis
nn.thoracici
descendens
fr. ventrales (intercostales)
m. pectoralis transversus
costal arch
m. pectoralis ascendens
diaphragm, sternal part
Fig. 4.44 The left lung of the new-born foal: left lateral view. Ribs 2-5
and 7-11 inclusive have been removed, leaving their costal cartilages, to 
show the topography of the left lung.
m.iliocostafis thoracis
leff fung, caudaf lobe
mm.intercostares
externi
rib 12
t. costocervicafis
rib 6
feft ung. cranial lobe
rib 1
diaphragm.
costal part
m.scalenus ventralis
sternaf part
a.v.axilaris
pericardium
costochondral junction,
rib 6
teft fung, cardiac notch in
ventral border
m.rectus thoracis
costal cartilage,rib 10
140
The Thorax
n. cardiacus
aorta thoracica in
cervicothoracicus
ventrafis
n.vagus X
oesophagus
mediastinum
m. iliocostalis thoracis
I. vagalis X:
dorsalis
ventrafis
dorsal mediastinum,
cranial part
diaphragm,costatpart
ductus arteriosus
ventrat par! of caudal
ductus thoracicus
mediastinum covering
accessory lobe of right
fung
t.v.costocervicafis
rib 1
left bronchi:
cauda!
n.phrenicus
cranial
a.v.axillaris
a.v.puimonahissinistra
f.brachiocephalicus
a.v. pericardiaco
phrenica
thoracic thymus in
cranial part of ventrat
mediastinum
rib 6
conus arteriosus
 pericardium covering
costomediastinal recess
diaphragm, sternal part
hearfinmrodle
forming cupola
mediastinum
Fig. 4.45 The mediastinum of the new-born foal: left lateral view. Removal of the left lung exposes the mediastinum, which divides left and right 
 pleural cavities. No attempt has yet been made to dissect out the contents of the mediastinum. The structures lying in the mediastinum are shown,
after dissection, in Fig. 4.46.
141
Fig. 4.46 Vessels and nerves of the mediastinum
of the new-born foal: left lateral view. This
dissection should be compared with that in Fig.
4.45, in which the correct topographical
relationships of the structures are preserved.
a.v. intercostalis
rib 6
dorsalisV
aorta thoracica
m. longus coffi
vasa vasorum
ductus thoracicus
t. vagalis X dorsalis
ductus arteriosus
oesophagus
oesophagus
t. vagalis X ventralis
arcus aortae
Inn. tracheobronchales:
t.v. costocervicafis
medfi
a.v. cervicalis profunda
sinistri
nn. cardiaci
teft fung
principal bronchus to
cervicothoracici
n. vagus x
a.v.puimonalis
nn. cardiaci
nn. cardiaci
n. vagus X, r. cardliacus
n. phrenicus
n. cardiacus
t. brachiocephalicus
cervicothoracicus
V. cava cranialis
n. laryngeus recurrens (X)
Dericardial cavity
left atrium
conus areriosus
leffventricle
right auricte
pericardium, cut edge
rib 1
a. coronaria sinistra
.circumflexus
right ventricle
r. interventricufaris
 pericardium, cut edge
paraconalis
V. interventricularis
thoracic thymus
paraconalis
Inn. tracheobronchales
t. vagalis X dorsalis
medi
arcus aortae
t. vagalis X ventralis
Inn. tracheobronchales
left lung principal
sinistri
bronchus
ductus arteriosus
a.v. pulmonalis sinistra
n. faryngeus
recurrens (x)and
cavity of leff atrium
n.cardiacus
cervicothoracicus (cut)
apexoftubuiar
oramenovale
t.puimonalis
a. coronaria sinistra:
left atrium
f. marginis
pectinate muscle
ventricutaris sinistri
f.proximalis
ventricularis sinistri
conus arteriosus
leff auricle
V.cordis magna
Fig. 4.47 The cavity of the left atrium of the new-born foal: left lateral view. The vessels and nerves of the mediastinum have been removed, and the
lateral wall of the atrium has been partially excised. The tubular foramen ovale, which in foetal life is a communication between caudal vena cava
 a u  o s a e ad  i a r   s u s a si   
142
5. THE ABDOMEN
4
Clinical importance of the abdomen
be responsible for 40% of cases and may be associated with increased
vagal tone. The condition of ^grass sickness’ (equine dysautonomia)
The equine clinician spends a large amount of time attending to
in horses is essentially an impaired motility of the gut, resulting in
Hor
medical and surgical conditions of the equine abdomen. This is prin-
spasmodic colic. Impactive colic is often the result of abnormal feeding,
cipally due to the occurrence of colic (abdominal pain) which can arise 
including coarse feed, and failure of a proper fresh water supply. Poor
The
from any of the abdominal organs. Colic is believed to be the single
dentition leading to poor mastication, lack of regular worm treatments
most important clinical cause of death in the horse. It is also the most
and failure to remove foreign bodies from the diet, can contribute.
my,
common acute emergency. Approximately 90% of cases may respond
 Inactivity (i.e. following box rest for orthopaedic conditions) can also
Anato1
to medical treatment, particularly pain relief, supportive therapy and
contribute to the problem.
prevention of dehydration.
The transverse colon is often the site of impaction with enteroliths
A.I
Diagnostic techniques used in the examination of the abdomen
and faeces and, in the foal, with meconium. Enteroliths are caused by
 include palpation, auscultation, percussion and rectal examination.
 the precipitation of magnesium and ammonium phosphate crystals
Radiography is useful in foals and endoscopy is useful for investiga-
around a nucleus such as a stone, nail or other foreign body. As they
 tion of stomach disorders, particularly gastric ulceration. Ultrasonog-
 increase in size they are particularly prone to getting stuck in the small
ofve
 raphy is particularly useful in cases of intussusception and for viewing
colonic displacements. The ultimate diagnostic techniques are laparos-
caecum and in the pelvic flexure of the colon. Caecal impaction, if
copy and laparotomy (surgical opening of the abdomen). For lapa-
severe, may be followed by caecal perforation. Pelvic fexure impaction
rotomy, the horse is usually placed in dorsal recumbency and surgery
is often caused by a combination of coarse roughage, sand and gas.
will involve a midline incision. In this way most of the small intestine
The stomach can become impacted with corn and bedding, and the
can be exteriorised but not the rostral 1 metre and the last 15-20 cm.
 duodenum can be impacted with coarse ingesta.
The apex and part of the body of the caecum can be lifted out. In
 Flatulent colic is a result of excessive production of gas associated
addition, the left ventral colon, left dorsal colon and parts of the right
with fermentation of the feed (usually of poor quality). Excessive gas
dorsal colon and right ventral colon can be lifted out. As in a rectal
production can be detected by listening for a 'ping’ when simultaneous
examination, identification of the various parts of the large bowel is
 percussion and auscultation is carried out. It can be relieved by caecal
fundamental in cases of displacement or distortion. The major help in
trocarisation in which a trocar and a cannula are inserted into the
 this is the presence of the taeniae in the wall of the large intestine; the 
caecum though the right paralumbar fossa.
caecum and the right and left ventral colon all have 4, the pelvic flexure
 Obstructive more colic and infarction is usually a result of nema-
1, the left dorsal colon 1, and the right dorsal colon has 3 taeniae.
tode parasites. The 4th and 5th stages of Strongylus vulgaris damage the
One of the key factors in problems of the digestive system is the
blood supply by migrating through the walls of the cranial mesenteric
inability of the horse to vomit. Once inside the digestive tract, the
 artery. The resultant thrombi cause intra-vascular oclusion of the
ingesta (no matter how indigestible or toxic) is there to stay. It is,
vessels and ischaemia. The ileum may become thickened (hypertro-
however, the peculiar anatomy and disposition of the large intestine
phic) in response to persistent parasitic infestation.
e s  se    saso asa 
A particular form of obstruction occurs with sand (picked up
are the four components of the large colon (two dorsal and two ventral 
with the food) and also with the ingestion of foreign materials
parts) of different calibres and weights; the flexures (particularly the
(e.g. plastic bags). Idiopathic colic (where there is at present no
pelvic fexure); the blind-ending sac of the caecum; the long small
 known cause) may, perhaps, include colitis X. Colitis can also result
intestine, which is freely movable; and the considerable narrowing of
from prolonged drug therapy (e.g. right dorsal colitis with phenylbu-
the lumen from the large colon to the small colon. The left ventral and
tazone therapy). In addition, strangulation of the bowel can occur and
left dorsal colon are freely movable. The left colon can become dis-
also torsion. Both will cause impaction and obstruction. Small intes-
placed to the lateral surface of the caecum, next to the body wall. The
tinal volvulus occurs when a segment of the small intestine rotates
pelvic fexure may be displaced forward to the sternum, lateral to the
around the long axis of its mesentery. A 180 degree rotation of the
caecum. The left colon can also be displaced to a position between the
jejunum may also occur, and frequently the ileum is involved because
 dorsal body wall and the suspensory ligament of the spleen.
of its fixed attachment at the ileo-caeco-colic junction. Large bowel
 Diet, management, and the presence of particularly virulent para-
volvulus involves a rotation of the dorsal and ventral parts of the
sitic infestations of the gut around the branches of the cranial mesen-
colon on their horizontal axes and this also frequently involves the
teric arteries are significant factors in the occurence of colic. Intestinal
caecum.
parasites are less of a common problem these days, thanks to the effec-
 Enteritis is not common in the horse but there is, on occasion, an
tive endoparasiticides and better management. Colic can be classified
acute severe enteritis in horses associated with clostridial infections. It
as mild, moderate or severe abdominal pain. It is usually associated
 causes an acute colic and is often diagnosed only at surgery or post-
with an obstruction to the passage of contents, caused by a failure of
mortem examination. There are up to 10 parasites that may live in the
gut motility. This causes a rise in intra-abdominal tension, and pain
large bowel and cause irritation which may lead to diarrhoea. Severe
results from the tensions in the mesenteries. Ischaemia of the affected
 diarrhoea, with irritation and constant straining, may lead to intus-
sns es an jo uo 'sisis i aq pmog si lo
 susception. Sudden dietary changes and parasitic infestation are
and eventually necrosis and inflammation. Several sorts of colic
usually a cause of this condition. There is also a real possibility of
are described. The details are beyond the scope of this introduction
salmonellosis in any horse that is stressed or has been subjected to
but they include spasmodic, impactive, flatulent, obstructive, non-
surgery. Several other conditions may also cause acute enteritis such
stran gulation infarction, enteritis and idiopathic cases.
as Potomac horse fever in certain parts of the world. Chronic inflam-
Displacements of organs, particularly large bowel displacements
matory bowel disease can also occur. It usually involves internal
and torsions, can occur in several sorts of colic. Spasmodic colic may
parasites but also may involve strangles, Rhodococcus equi or even
144
M. paratuberculosis. A naso-gastric (stomach) tube can be used to
 as t u sus 'dnf no sy ro a e sao padd
 deliver large volumes of oral rehydration therapy.
imtra-abdominal pressure. If abdominal contents pass through one
Dysfunctions of the liver can be investigated by percutaneous liver
of the normal openings in the diaphragm (caval, oesophageal or
biopsy in the right 12-13th intercostal space, with sedation and local
aortic hiatuses) colic may result.
anaesthesia. It should be carried out between lines drawn from the
It is also possible to have an internal herniation of abdominal
tuber coxae to the point of the shoulder and to the point of the olec-
viscera through the epiploic foramen. Through this foramen, the
ranon. The liver normally lies deep to intercostal spaces 10-14 but may
greater peritoneal cavity communicates with the lesser cavity or
atrophy considerably with age. Liver disease is quite common in the
 omental bursa. It lies in the right dorsal quadrant of the abdomen,
horse, probably as a result of eating plants of the genus Senecio, par-
situated on the ventral surface of the liver, dorsal to the portal fissure.
ticularly ragwort. It is often associated with damage to the bile ducts.
Dorsal to the foramen lie the caudate process of the liver, hepatic
It causes weight loss, and investigations should include analysis of liver 
portal vein, gastro-pancreatic fold and the caudal vena cava. Ven-
trally, there are relations to the right lobe of the pancreas, the
thy can occur; nervous signs result from circulating waste products.
gastro-pancreatic fold and the portal vein. Rostrally, lies the hepato-
Complete liver failure is quite rare, as there is a huge functional reserve 
duodenal ligament. Caudally, lie the pancreas and mesoduodenum.
 in the equine liver, and over 70% has to be damaged before this will
 There is no real age association for this internal hermia, but there are
occur.
suggestions that the condition may be more common in the horse that
 The horse is particularly prone to peritonitis, probably because of
crib bites or wind sucks (8 times more likely). In old horses, this
the fragility of the gut. It can be primary or secondary, diffuse or
foramen may be 10 cm long, mainly due to the atrophy of the right
localized. It is usually acute and diffuse and follows gastro-intestinal
 lobe of the liver. This atrophy may predispose to internal herniation.
disease. Haemoperitoneum follows migration of strongyle larvae
In these animals there is the possibility of a segment of small intestine
through the cranial mesenteric vessels, or foaling or rupture of the
passing through the foramen. The intestine may enter the omental
spleen or liver following traumatic accidents.
bursa from right to left, or may slip through the foramen from left to
Uroperitoneum may result from rupture of the bladder. In a foal,
right. The amount of intestine that slips through varies from several
during the frst week of life, this must be differentiated from other
centimetres to all of the small intestine.
types of colic which are caused by distension. If an accumulation of
All the boundaries of the abdomen may have ruptures which do not
peritoneal fuid is suspected, abdominocentesis can be performed.
traverse the natural openings but traverse defects in the walls or mem-
Needles are used to drain fluid from a site about 5 cm caudal to the
branes. Complex internal ruptures may occur, as when the gastro-
xiphoid cartilage in the right paramedian position (this avoids pene-
splenic ligament is torn and the distal jejunum goes from a caudal to
trating the spleen). Abdominal ultrasound can be used. (The normal
a cranial direction. Mesocolic rupture may occur during parturition,
 approach for paracentesis of the abdomen is midline through the linea
imvolving the mesentery of the small colon. It is a complication of
αalba at the most dependent area.)
rectal prolapse often accompanied by prolapse of bladder, uterus,
 Extermal hernias are protrusions of an organ or part of an organ
vagina and intestine or any combination thereof.
through a normal opening in the wall of the cavity. Umbilical,
Abdominal abscesses usually involve the mesenteric lymph nodes
inguinal and perineal are the usual types. In young animals the con-
and are associated with the usual pus-forming bacteria of the
 j p Ans ro s j el aq o s [
horse - streptococci, E coli, salmonella or Rhodococcus equi. Abdomi-
Most inguinal hernias fall into this group. Umbilical hernias occur
nal neoplasia is rare. Alimentary lymphoma is seen infrequently, but
in about 2% of thoroughbred horses, are more common in females 
lipomas are a common cause of colic, especially in grey horses. Intes-
than in males, and have a strong hereditary component. Diaphrag-
tinal or other alimentary melanomas are also common in grey horses.
matic hernias are internal hermias. They can occur as congenital
 Clinical considerations for the spine in the abdominal region are 
defects but are more likely as a result of trauma, as when a horse is
 dealt with in the section on the spine in Chapter 8 (p. 269).
145
Fig. 5.1 Surface features of the abdomen: left
lateral view. The hair has been shaved over
the palpable bony prominences. The umbilicus
     
lies in the median plane, just cranial to the
 prepuce, and its position in the female is shown 
in Fig. 5.55.
rib 18
ilium, tuber sacrale
lium, fuber coxae
hair vortexoftubercoxae
costal arch
lumbarvertebrae.
transverse processes
hair ridges of flank
and groin
convergent hair vortex
patella
of stiffe fofd
swelling produced by
gravitationof
embaiming fluid
convergent hair yortex
of abdomen
femur, lateral
epicondyie and trochlea
tibia:
tuberosity
prepuce(swollen by
lateralcondyle
embaiming fuid)
 Fig. 5.2 Bones related to the abdomen: left
lateral view. The palpable bony prominences 
shown in Fig. 5.1 are coloured red, except for
the tuber sacrale.
146
The Abdomen
adipose layer of superficial fascia
adipose superficial fascia
('panniculus adiposus')
('oannicutusadiposus')
tyingdeeptom.cutaneustrunci
overtying thoracolumbar fascia
m.trapezius.pars
fhoracica
ilium, tubercoxae
scapula,dorsalimit
of spine
m. obliquus externus
abdominiscoveredby
m.cutaneus
adipose superficial fascia
omobrachialis
m. cutaneus trunci with
superficialpartof
m.cutaneus trunci
superticial fascia
covered by superficia!
removed
fibrous fayer of
superficiatfascia
 to dermisf panniculus
fascialying superficialto
carnosus')
m. cutaneus trunci
m. triceps brachi
m. cutaneus trunci,
caudaf edge in stiffefold
m. pectoralis ascendens,
position of olecranon 
caudal edge
Fig. 5.3 The cutaneous muscle of the trunk: left lateral view. The muscle lies in the superficial fascia; superficially it is closely adherent to the dermis
 and forms the ^panniculus carnosus'. Deep to it, the superficial fascia contains extensive fat deposits ('panniculus adiposus'). The cutaneous nerves 
are shown in Figs. 5.4 and 5.10. See also Fig. 5.9.
147
m. fatissimus dorsi
m.trapezius,pars
nn.thoracici Xiv-XVlIl,
thoracolumbar fascia
thoracica
fr. cutanei dorsales
m.infraspinatus
ilium,tubercoxae
m. serratus dorsalis
m.serratus ventralis
caudafis
thoracis
(TXV).r.cutaneus
n.costoabdominafis
m.tensor fasciae
fateralis
antebrachii
mm.intercostales
externi
m.deltoideus
nn.intercostales,
ff.cutaneilaterafes
n. intercostobrachialis
m.obliquus externus
abdominis,covered by
m. cutaneus trunci
yelfow abdominal tunic
m. triceps brachii
covering tendonof
caput fongum
m.obtiquus externus
caput laterale
abdominis
m.cutaneus
m.pectoralis ascendens
position of costal arch
nn. intercostales,
omobrachiafis
rr.cutaneiventrales
olecranon
v.thoracica
m. cutaneus trunci
superficialis
Fig. 5.4 The external oblique abdominal muscle and cutaneous nerves of the thoracic and abdominal wall: left lateral view. The cutaneous muscles have
been removed. Further details of the nerves are shown in Fig. 5.10.
148
The Abdomen
m. tatissimus dorsi
m.trapezius.
m. serratus
thoracolurmbar fascia
parsthoracica
dorsalis craniafis
scapular cartiage
lium,tubercoxae
scapula,caudatangle
m.infraspinatus
m. serratus dorsalis
m. serratus ventralis
caudafis
thoracis
m.teres major
m.tensor fasciae
antebrachii
mm.intercostales
externi
m.latissimusdorsi
m. triceps brachi
caput longum
n.intercostobrachialis
m. obliquus externus
abdominis,line of
origin from rib cage
m.cutaneus
v.thoracica
nn.intercostales.
windowcut in yelfow
omobrachialis
supericialis
ff. cutanei laterales
abdominal tunicto show
musctebetlyandtendon
m.pectoralis
Om.obliquusexternus
ascendens
abdominis
Fig. 5.5 The external oblique abdominal muscle and yellow abdominal tunic: left lateral view. The latissimus dorsi muscle has been excised. The origins of 
the external oblique muscle have been severed; the curling of the muscle that results is due to the outer elastic fascia of the yellow abdominal tunic.
149
Fig. 5.6 The internal oblique abdominal muscle: left lateral view. The origin
of this muscle from the tuber coxae is shown in Fig. 5.11. The ventral
parts of the ventral branches of the intercostal nerves (and also the
The Horse
lumbar nerves; see Fig. 5.7) run between the transverse and the internal
 oblique muscles.
rib 18
um,tuber coxae
a.v. circumflexa ilium
m.serratus dorsafis
profundar.cranialis
caudalis
nn.spinales TXVil,
m. serratus dorsalis
Lf, rr. ventrales
cranialis
m. obliquus internus
line of origin of
abdominis, dorsal part 
costal arch
m. obliquus externus
abdominis
m.obliquus internus
abdominis, ventral part
mm.intercostales
m. transversus abdominis,
externi
covered by
m.obliquusinternus
m.serratus ventralis
thoracis
abdominis
m. rectus abdominis
rib 10
yellowabdominal
nn. intercostales X,XI.
m.obliquus externus
tunic covering
rf. cufanei faterales
m. obliquus externus
abdominis
abdominis
m. cutaneus trunci
m.iliocostafisfumborum
n. tumbalis I, r. ventralis
a.v. circumflexa ilium
rib 17
profunda,r.cranialis
n. intercostafis XVII
m. serratus dorsalis
a.v. circumffexa ilium
caudalis (remnants)
profunda,r.cranialis
mm.intercostales
m. obliquus internus
externi(remnants)
abdominis
n. costoabdominalis
(TXVI)
rib 12
m. transversus abdominis
nn. intercostates Xff, xil,
costat arch
rr. cutanei laterales
m. rectus abdominis
mm.intercostales interni:
m. obliquus internus
abdominis
costalcartiages
m. obliquus externus
yellow abdominal tunic
nn. intercostales Xit, Xi.
ff. Cutanei ventrales
m.cutaneus trunci
Fig. 5.7 The transverse abdominal muscle: left lateral view. The 18th rib in this specimen was very small (see Fig. 5.15 and compare with Fig. 5.43).
The more caudal part of the origin of this muscle is seen in Fig. 5.12.
150
 The Abdomen
dorsoscapuiar
m. gluteus medius
ligament
n.umbalis I,
m. spinalis thoracis 
f. ventralis
m. retractor costae
m.longissimus fumborum
rib 18
m.iliocostalislumborum
n.costoabdominalis
(TXV)
mm.intercostales
interni in intercosta!
spaces 15,16
a.v. circumflexa ifium
profunda,r.cranialis
diaphragm, costal part
m.transversus
left tung, caudal lobe
abdominis
n.intercostafis TxIV
costal arch
m. rectus abdominis
craniat fimif of
abdominalcavity
m. obliquus internus
abdominis
rib5
m.obliquus externus
Qiaphragm,sternalpart
abdominisandyellow
abdominal tunic
m.pectoralis ascendens
m. cutaneus trunci
Fig. 5.8 The transverse abdominal muscle and diaphragm: left lateral view. This dissection shows the extent of the abdominal cavity in relationship to
the rib cage. A view of the superficial viscera on the left side is shown in Fig. 5.14.
151
m.liopsoas
jium, tuber coxae
superficialfascia
sacrum
ilium:
tuber sacrale
shaft
n.femoralis
a. iiaca externa
m.cutaneus
omobrachialis
m.sartorius
femorallamina
m.cutaneustrunci
inn.subiliaci
femoral fascia
m.pectoralisascendens
m.cutaneustrunciin
stiffe foid
positionofolecranon
Fig. 5.9 The cutaneous muscle of the trunk in a new-born female foal: right lateral view. The right hindlimb has been removed but the femoral fascia
on its medial aspect has been preserved. The femoral lamina, joining the femoral fascia to the deep fascia of the abdominal wall, has also been 
152
 The Abdomen
n.gluteus caudalis ilium,tuber sacrale n.femoralis m.iliopsoas ilium,tuber coxae
n.ischiadicus
thoracofumbar fascia
m.sartorius
m.trapezius,pars
a.v. iliaca externa
thoracica
a.v. liacofemoralis
m. serratus dorsafis
caudalis
acetabulum
nn.fumbalest,l1.
iliacfascia
rr. cutanei laterales
transverse acetabular
ventrales
ligament
n. lumbalis Iff,
accessory ligament of
femoralhead
femorislateralis)
m.pectineus
V. pudenda externa
m.latissimus dorsi
femoral tamina
rib 13
probe in inguinal canal
intercostat spaces
caudaledge of
m. serratus ventralis
m. obfiquus
thoracis
('inguinal ligament)
m.cutaneus trunci
(reffected)
deepfasciacovering
tenoonofm.obliquus
nn.thoracici,
externus abdominis
ff. cutanei laterales
femoralfascia
m.obliquusexternusabdominis
Fig. 5.10 The external oblique abdominal muscle of the foal: right lateral view. The cutaneous muscle has been refected cranially. The superficial
fascia has been removed from the femoral lamina to show its attachments to the deep abdominal and femoral fasciae.
153
n. cutaneus femoris
cut edge of 'inguinal
n. costoabdominalis(TxVIll)
(ateralis (LIl)
figament"
r. cutaneus fateralis
sacrum
ilium, tuber coxae
thoracolumbar fascia
n.femoralis
m. serratus dorsalis
caudalis
a.v. iliacofemoralis
rib 18
n. genitofemoralis (LI)
nn. fumbales I, ff.
ff. cutane faterales
figament of femoral head
ventrates
m.latissimus dorsi
transverse acetabular
m.obliquus externus
figament
abdominis(cuf edge)
accessory tigament of
m.cutaneus trunci
femoraf head
(reffected)
symphyseal tendon
m. serratus ventralis
thoracis
a. pudenda externa
nn.intercostales (TVl
IX)rr.cutanei faterales
superficiaf inguinal ring
rib 6,costochondral
m. obliquus externus
junction
abdominis.
n. intercostalis (TXI#f)
'pelvic'tendon
topua jeuwopge,
r. cutaneus venfralis
m.obliquus externus
abdominis (refected
femoralfascia
ventraffy)
caudal borderventral partdorsal part
m.obliquusinternusabdominis:
Fig. 5.11 The internal oblique abdominal muscle of the foal: right lateral view. The external oblique muscle has been refected ventrally and it can be
seen that the red probe has passed through the superficial inguinal ring. The caudal border of the internal oblique muscle, marked by a broken blue
line, is the craniai boundary of the deep inguinal ring.
154
The Abdomen
irm:
n. cufaneus femoris
m. obliquus internus
lateralis(LII)
tubersacrale
shart
tubercoxae
abdominis (origin)
n.femoralis
rib 18
a.v.jliaca exierna
a.v.iliacofemoralis
a. circumffexa iium
n. genitofemoralis (LI) -
profunda
iliac fascia
nn. fumbales f, f,
 accessory tigament of
rf.ventrales
femoral head
a. pudenda externa
n.costoabdominalis
superficialinguinal
(TXVI!)
jeuuopqe, pue oried,
inn.ifiaciilaterales
tendons of m. obliquus
externus abdominis
m.transversus
deep inguinal ring.
abdominis, caudat border
transverse fascia
m. obliquus internus
abdominis,reffected
nn. lumbales f, I,
ventrally (caudal border)
fr.ventrales
nn. fumbales f-ffl on
rib6.costochondral
medial surface ot
junction
m.obliquus internus
abdominis
n.thoracicus Xiff,
r. ventralis
m. rectus abdominis
m. transversus abdominis
m.obliguus externus
vagina m. recti abdominis,
abdominis
faminaexterna
Fig. 5.12 The transverse abdominal muscle of the foal: right lateral view. The internal oblique muscle has been refected ventrally to display the
transverse abdominal muscle. The transverse fascia of the caudal part of the abdomen is not covered by the transverse muscle. The red probe lies in
the inguinal canal, and its tip occupies the deep inguinal ring, caudal to the internal oblique abdominal muscle. The two principal parts of the
ventral ramus of the third lumbar nerve are shown: the more dorsal (lateral cutaneous femoral) is the last of the lateral cutaneous spinal nerve
series. The more ventral (genitofemoral) is the last of the medial cutaneous spinal nerve series.
155
diaphragm:
m.liocostalis
Jumbar part
costal part
iium,tubercoxae
oesophagus
rib 18
rib7
spleen
aorta thoracica
smaff intestine
n. vagus x
descending colon
right lung, accessory
mediastinum
ascending colon, left
dorsalcofon
vv. puimonales, left tung 
costal arch
n.phrenicus
ascending colon, left
diaphragm,centrattendon
ventral colon
heart, left ventricle
abdominalwall
in pericardium
patellta
diaphragm, sternal part 
femur,lateral
costal cartiage, rib 6 
epicondyle and trochlea
m.transversus
abdominis (remnant)
tibiafltuberosity
Fig. 5.13 Abdominal viscera caudal to the costal arch: left lateral view. The ascending colon has been infated to imitate its condition in life. In this
specimen the spleen extends caudal to the costal arch to a greater extent than usual, but note that rib 18 is small (compare with Fig. 5.43). This 
young horse was bled out under chloral hydrate anaesthesia.
156
rib 17
mm.intercostalesinterni
m. iliocostalis thoracis
The Abdomen
diaphragm
aorta thoracica
stomach
rib 7
oesophagus at
oesophagea! hiatus of
diaphragrn
n. vagus X
spleen
n.phrenicus
liver,feft laterallobe
greateromentum
smalf intestine
heart, leff ventricle 
diaphragm:
sternaf part
costal part
ascendingcolon:
left dorsafcolon
left ventratcolon
m.pectoralisascendens
m. cutaneus trunci
Fig. 5.14 Abdominal viscera after partial removal of the left body wall and diaphragm: left lateral view. The ascending colon has been infated to
imitate its condition in life. See also Figs.5.43, 5.49 and 5.52.
diaphragm, tumbar part.
m.iiocostalis
left crus
ribs 17,18
spleen
m.intercostalis
internusXVi!
n. intercostalis XVI,
r. cutaneus fateralis
ribs 17,18costal
cartilages
mm.intercostales
interni
caudaf attachment
Cranial attachments
small intestine
intercartiaginous
pats
descending colon:
taenia
haustra
diaphragm,attachments
of costal part
mm.intercostates
ascending colon,
externi,
left dorsalcofon
intercartilaginous parts
(nof sacculated)
Fig. 5.15 The costal arch and attachments of the diaphragm: left lateral view. The last two internal intercostal muscles, and the intercartilaginous
 parts of the intercostal muscles, have been retained. In this specimen, the very small rib 18 is a floating rib, but its costal cartilage is recognizable in 
the costal arch.
157
rib 11
diaphragm,tumbarpart,teftcrus
stomach attachment of
left kidney
greater omentum to
greater curvature
descending colon
aorta thoracica
mesocolonof
descending colon
oesophagus
t. vagafis X dorsalis
(pelvic flexure)
smallintestine
t. vagalis X ventralis
fiver,left coronary
descending colon
ligament
v. cava caudafis
leftdorsalcoion
diaphragm, central
left ventraf colon
tendon
greateromentum,from
heart, ieft ventricle
which spleen has been
Cut
liver,leftfateral
lobe
smaff intestine
feft dorsalcofonat
left ventral colon near
diaphragmatic ffexure
sternalflexure
Fig. 5.16 Abdominal viscera after removal of the spleen: left lateral view (1). The costal arch has been resected. The right lung was removed in
dissecting the right thorax and abdomen. The broken blue line indicates how the pelvic fexure of the ascending colon is formed (see Figs. 5.24 and
5.32). A closer view of this specimen is shown in Fig. 5.17. See also Fig. 5.50.
158
 The Abdomen
m. spinalis fhoracis
m.psoas minorm.psoas major
m. liocostalisthoracis
m.longissimus thoracis
t.sympathicus
m.levator costae
n. splanchnicus major
m.intercostalis
internus
aorta thoracica at
dorsamediastinum,cut
aortichiatus
edge
t. sympathicus
diaphragm,lumbarpart:
leftcrus
rib 10 
rightcrus
a.intercostalis
left kidney
dorsalis IX
aorta thoracica
a.v.fienafis
diaphragm, tumbar part
plexusfienalis
at oesophageal hiatus
inn.fienalis
fiver, teff triangular
rigament
descending colon
oesophagus
stomach.greater
t. vagatis X dorsalis
curvafure
t. vagalis X ventralis
liver, leftlaterafl lobe
greateromentum,cutedge
stomach, fundus(saccuscaecus)
Fig. 5.17 Abdominal viscera after removal of the spleen: left lateral view (2). The fundus, or saccus caecus, of the stomach is collapsed; its position
when distended is shown by a broken blue line. Further dissections of the aortic hiatus and adjacent structures are shown in Figs. 5.19 and 5.20.
159
Fig. 5.18 Abdominal
viscera after partial
removal of the liver: left
lateral view. The left
side of the liver has
been cut away by a
sagittal incision to the
left of the median 
plane.
diaphragm, lumbar part:
 oesophageal hiatus
Jeft crus
right crus
liver, oesophagea!
rib18
notch
teftkidney
diaphragm, centra!
tendon
oesophagus
abdominaf walf, cut
edge
n. vagus X
a.v.lienalis
V.cava caudalis at
caval hiatus of
diaphragm
 small intestine
vv. pulmonales injected
withred latex
mesocolonof
descending colon
left atrium
Inn.fienales
fiver,cut surface.
leffmediallobe
left iateral lobe
ascending colon:
left dorsaicolon
left ventralcolon
left ventricle
greater omentum
taenia of right dorsa!
diaphragmati flexure
coonbegnnngat
descendingcoion
parietal surface
fundus
cardia
greater curvature
stomach:
160
Fig. 5.19 The aortic hiatus and related structures: left lateral view. The left
and right diaphragmatic crura, which surround the aortic hiatus, have
been cut. The left kidney has been displaced ventrally to reveal the
structures immediately caudal to the aortic hiatus.
The Abdomen
ganglion et plexus
n. spianchnicus major
coefiacomesentericus
m. psoas major
m.iiocostafis thoracis
rib 18
a. intercostalis dorsalis XV. 
m. psoas minor
rib13
aorta thoracica
n. splanchnicus fumbalis
diaphragm, lumbar part,
aorta abdominalis
leffcrus
t
a. mesenterica cranialis
aorta abdominalis
lettkidney
pancreas, left lobe
left adrenal gland
a. gastrica sinistra
diaphragm:
a. coeliaca emerging
fumbarpart,rightru
from aortic hiatus
oesophageai hiatus
mesocolonof
n. vagus x
descending colon
a.v. fienalis with
stomach:
plexus fienafis
saccus caecus
attachment of greater
transverse colonteading
omentum
intodescending colon
Fig. 5.20 The aortic and oesophageal hiatuses: left craniolateral view.
This is a more cranial view of the specimen at a slightly later stage of
dissection than that shown in Fig. 5.19. A right lateral view of
the specimen, at this stage of dissection, is shown in Fig. 5.37.
diaphragm, lumbar part:
leftcrus
right crus
m.psoas minor
right kidney
lefftureter
a.gastrica sinistra
aorta abdominalis
[covered by plexus
coeliacus)
left kidney
a.v. fienalis and plexus
left adrenaigiand
lienalis
mesocolon
pancreas, left lobe
transverse cofon
pancreas, right lobe
descending coton
n.vagus X
stomach:
SaccuS caecus
oesophageal
lesser curvature
diaphragmatic hiatus
58-
greatercurvature
161
m.iliocostalisthoracis
rib 13n.splanchnicus major
aorta thoracica
draphragm, fumbar part.
feftcrus
a.coeliaca
aorta abdominalis
a.v. pfexus fienais
mesocolon of
descending colon (cut)
diaphragm, fumbar part.
a. mesenterica cranialis
right crus
left kidney
t.vagalisXdorsalis
 pancreas, left fobe
1. vagalis X ventralis
farisversecoion.cf
edgeafterremovalof
oesophagus
descending colon 
diaphragm. cut edge o!
caecum,booy
cupola
root of great mesentery
susperding smal/
heart, eft ventricte 
intestine
stomach.
lesser curvature
ieum
greater curvature
ascending colon.
ascending colon,
diaphragmatic Hexure
left dorsaicolon
jefunurr!, origin
ctuocdenum.ascending part
Fig. 5.21 The small intestine: left lateral view (1). The very long descending colon (measuring 300 cm in this specimen) has been removed to reveal
 the small intestine lying medial to it and the root of the great mesentery.
162
Fig. 5.22 The small intestine: left lateral view (2). The mass of the small
intestine has been displaced cranially to reveal the terminal part of the
ileum near its junction with the caecum. The root of the great mesentery
of the small intestine lies between the transverse parts of colon (cranially)
The Abdomen
and duodenum (caudally).
a.v. lienalis and plexus
letkidney
lienalis
mesocolon
diaphragm, fumbar part,
transverse colon (cut)
 duodenum, ascending part
n. vagus X
root of great mesentery
oesophagus
caecum,body
stomach:
feum closeto
saccus caecus
ieocaecal junction
greater omentum
ascending colon, left
dorsal coion
ascending colon,
diaphragmatic fexure
Inn.caecales
terminalpart of
coils of ileum
ileocaecalfold
diaphragm, tumbar part,
rib 18
Jeftcrus
m. psoas major
m. psoas minor
aorta thoracica
ureter
a.coeliaca
aorta abdominalis
diaphragm, tumbar part.
mesocofon of
right crus
descending colon (cut)
a.mesentericacranialis
a.v. fienalis and plexus
jienalis
left kidney
ganglion
caecum, body
coeliacomesentericum
Inn.caecales
pancreas, left lobe
duodenum, ascending
greater omentum
attached to
greater curvature of
stomach
great mesentery
root of greaf mesentery
transverse cofon
coils of ileum
coils of jejunum
Fig. 5.23 The small intestine: left lateral view (3). The coils of the small intestine have been rearranged to show more clearly the transition of the
ascending duodenum into the jejunum and the relation of the root of the great mesentery to the duodenum and transverse colon. Note that the
ileum is considered to be that part of the small intestine which is filled with ingesta and the jejunum that part which contains very little ingesta.
163
Fig. 5.24 The loop of the ascending colon: left lateral view. The pelvic
fexure has been pulled outside the abdomen, displaying the entire left side
 of the colonic loop and the diaphragmatic and sternal fexures. The normal
topographical positions of those parts are shown in Figs. 5.14 and 5.32.
heart:
caecum,medial
vv.putmonales
taenia
feft atrium
left ventricle
caecum,body
termina ifeum
Inn.caecales
positionof
a.v.ileocolica,
coils of ileum
r. colicus in mesocolon 
abdominal wall, cuf edge
ascending colon:
peivicffexure
left ventraicofon
ascending cofon:
diaphragmatic ffexure
mesocolon
sternalffexure
left dorsafcoion
position ofa.v.colica
inn.cofici
dextrainmesocofon
Fig. 5.25 The caecum: left lateral view. The loop of the ascending colon
has been removed from the abdomen (see Fig. 5.24). The coils of the
of the apex of the caecum on the floor of the abdomen.
transverse cofon
mesocolon of
{cut end)
descending colon (cut)
stomach, saccus caecus
left kidney
with attachment of
greater omentum
termination of ascending
duodenum
jejunum
inn.caecales
jleum, near leocaecal
junction
m.obliquus internus
abdominis
terminationof
jileocaecalfold
m. obliquus externus
abdominis
foop of ascending colon,
caecum,body
pulled out of abdomen:
diaphragmatic ffexure
m. rectus abdominis
feft ventraicolon
vaginam.recti
164
caecum.apex
abdominislaminaexterna
Fig. 5.26 Roots of the coeliac and cranial mesenteric arteries: left lateral
view. The abdominal parts of the digestive tract have now been removed
and the leff kidney pinned to the abdominal roof. The roots of the coeliac
and cranial mesenteric arteries, and the vessels arising from them, are
The Abdomen
ensheathed by a plexus of sympathetic nerves derived from the coeliac
 and cranial mesenteric ganglia. These nerves have not been removed:
they obscure the details of the arterial branchings. The root of the
cranial mesenteric artery is enlarged by a parasitic infestation (see
Fig. 5.28) and this enlargement (verminous aneurysm) is more clearly
seen on the right side (Fig. 5.42).
m. liocostalis thoracis
m. longissimus thoracis
m.psoas minor
rib 18
n. splanchnicus major
m. psoas major
a.intercostalis
ganglion coeliaco-
dorsafis XV
mesentericum
aonta thoracica
left adrenal gland
diaphragm, tumbar part.
left kidney
left and right crus
enciosing aortic hiatus
a. mesenterica cranialis
a.coeliaca
efplexusmesentericus
cranialis
a. gastrica sinistra
aa.jejunales
plexus coeliacus
mesocolonof
a.hepatica
descending colon
a.lienalis
a. ieocolica:
a.colica media
aa.caecales,medialis
etlateralis
a.colica dextra
r.colicus
Fig. 5.27 Roots of the cranial and caudal mesenteric arteries: left lateral
view. Removal of the left kidney exposes the origin of the renal artery and
the caudal mesenteric artery has been dissected within the mesocolon.
rib 15
m.psoas major
n. splanchnicus major
m.psoas minor
aorta thoracica
aorta abdominalis
diaphragm, tumbar part,
a.mesentericacaudalis
leftcrus
a. gastrica sinistra
a.rectalis cranialis
a.cofica sinistra
a. coeliaca
a.hepatica
mesocolonof
descending colon
plexus coeliacus
a.renalis sinistra
a. colica media
a.fienalis
a. mesenterica cranialis
(aneurysm)
a.ileocolica:
f.coficus
aa.jejunates
aa.caecales mediales et
laterales
a.coficadextra
165
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
rib 18
 m. longissimus thoracis
base of caecum
nematode worm in
peritoneal cavity
m.iliocostalisthoracis
smaff intestine
inn.caecales
ascending colon,origin
of right yentral coion
mm.intercostales
fromcaecum
externiet interni
mm.intercostales
interni
bodyofcaecum
right tung.caudat fobe
costalarch
abdominal wal!
base of caecum
diaphragm, costal part
Inn.coliciaccessori
in caecocolic fold
rib5
ascending colon:
right dorsal colon
rightvenfralcolon
m.cutaneus trunci
costalcartilage of
(reffected with skin)
rib11
Fig. 5.28 Abdominal viscera caudal to the costal arch: right lateral view. The abdominal wall has been removed but the diaphragm and rib cage
have been retained. The large intestine has been moderately infated to imitate the condition found in life. Nematode worms (Strongylus spp.)
are frequently found in the peritoneal cavity during dissection of young horses carrying a heavy intestinal worm burden. See also Fig. 5.42.
166
 The Abdomen
rib 18
liver,right lateral fobe
aorta thoracica
wireiniium,tubercoxae
m. longissimus thoracis
right kidney in
perirenal adipose tissue
dorsa mediastinum
small intestine
oesophagus
inn.caecales.
n.vagus X
caecum.
t.sympathicus
base
body
/rib 5
caecocolic fold ,
V. azygos dextra
ascending colon, right
Jiver, right medial lobe
ventraf cofon
right bronchus
costal arch
a.putmonalis dextra
mm.intercostales
interni
yV. putmonales {red
(atex)
Inn. colici accessori 
V.cava caudalis
ascending colon:
right atrium
rghtaorsafcolon
right ventral cofon
n.phrenicus
diaphragm, costal part 
rightventricle
m. cutaneus runci
ascending cofon,
(reflected)
diaphragmafic ffexure
Fig. 5.29 Abdominal viscera, after partial removal of the right body wall and diaphragm: right lateral view. The right lung and the fragile ventral
 mediastinum have been removed during dissection of the thorax. See also Figs. 5.44 and 5.46.
167
Fig. 5.30 Abdominal viscera: right lateral view. The costal arch has
been removed; note that rib 18 is small in this specimen. The dorsal
mediastinum has been removed and part of the longissimus muscle
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
has been resected. Further details of this stage of the dissection are
shown in Figs. 5.31-5.33. The liver of the horse lacks a gall bladder
and therefore the term quadrate lobe has been avoided; this lobe has
been called the right medial lobe.
rib 18
right kidney
duodenum, caudal ffexure
t. sympathicus
caecum:
a.v.intercostalis
base
dorsalis V!
body
abdominal wall
v.azygos dextra
fiver:
aorta thoracica
right coronaryfigament
t. vagalis X dorsalis
caecocolic junction
oesophagus
t. vagalis X ventralis
Inn. caecales
tiver:
yv.puimonales
right laterallobe
(red latex)
right medial lobe
V.cava caudatis
caecocoicfold
ascending colon:
n.phrenicus
right ventral colon
ascending colon
right dorsal colon
diaphragmatic fexure
Inn. colici accessori
a.v.ileocolica,r. colicus
diaphragm, sternal part
m. cutaneus trunci
 costal cartilage, rib 5
Fig. 5.31 The right kidney: right lateral view.
The caecum and colon have been infated to
show the relationship of the right kidney to the
last rib, duodenum, liver and caecum. The right
kidney may extend, caudal to the costal arch, as
far as the frst lumbar transverse process.
rib 18
remnants of dorsa!
mediastinum
caecum,base
right kidney
diaphragm.
descending duodenum
fumbar part, right crus
centraf lendon
Inn.caecales
liver:
-right coronary igament
caudate process
ascenongco
right laterallobe
-trianguiar figament
168
suspensory wire in tuber
rib 18
coxae
The Abdomen
right kidney
ascending colon,
left dorsai colon
 perirenal adipose tissue
m.transversus
abdominis
caecum,base
ascending colon,
pelvic ffexure
iver.
right coronary ligament
m. obliquus internus
righttaterallobe
abdominis
right triangutar
ligament
m.obliquus externus
abdominis
Inn.caecales
smaff intestine
caecocoficjunction
m. cutaneus trunci
ascending colon:
right ventral colon
inn.coliciaccessorii
right dorsal colon
Fig. 5.32 The pelvic flexure: right lateral view. The large intestine has been deflated and the caecum has been displaced cranially (compare with
 Fig. 5.30) to show the pelvic fexure of the ascending (large') colon. The position of this fexure varies greatly, but it usually lies close to, or even
within, the pelvic cavity (see also Fig. 5.16).
rib 18
m. psoas minor
rib 14
right kidney
sympathicus
duodenum.
mesoduodenum
caudatffexure
descending part
aorta thoracica
base of caecum,
aqherent
to dorsar body wall
hepatorenalfigament
fiver:
m. obfiquus internus
right coronary figament
abdominis
caudateprocess
rightlateraflobe
triangutar ligament
inn.caecales
ascendingcolon.
caecocohcun
rightdorsalcolon
right ventral colon
inn.coliciaccessoni
caecum.base
Fig. 5.33 The caudal fexure of the duodenum: right lateral view. The caecum and colon have been defated to display the course of the duodenum
around the right kidney and caecal base more completely. In the duodenum, the rate of passage of ingesta is rapid and the organ rarely, if ever,
appears tubular. The full extent of the duodenum is seen (in right lateral view) in Fig. 5.34 and the ascending duodenum in Fig. 5.23.
169
fiver, cut surface of
V.cava caudafis
rib 18
(bue wire)
m.liocostalis thoracis
rightkidney
m.longissimus thoracis
diaphragm, tumbar part.
right crus
a. hepatica
caecum:
base
aorta thoracica
Inn.caecales
caecocolic junction
booy
1. vagalis X dorsalis
oesophagus
Inn.tracheobronchales
descending duodenum
meol
remnants of right fung
right principal bronchus
inn.coliciaccessorii
a. puimonalis dextra
(red fatex)
ascending colon:
blue wire in cavity of
right ventral colon
right dorsalcolon
right atrium
right atrioventricular
varve
ascending colon
mesocolon
diaphragmatic ffexure
m. cutaneus trunci
Fig. 5.34 Abdominal viscera after partial removal of the liver: right lateral view. The liver has been removed after making a sagittal incision along the
line of the caudal vena cava. A blue wire has been laid in this vein and at its cranial end the wire traverses the right atrium and enters the right
ventricle. The large intestine has been infated. See also Fig. 5.47.
170
Fig. 5.35 Relationship of the pancreas: right
lateral view. The large intestine has been deflated
to show the dorsal surface of the pancreas.
The Abdomen
During removal of the liver the caudal vena cava
was cut near its entry into the hepatic portal
sulcus and the portal vein and hepatic artery
were cut close to the hepatic porta.
rib18
aorta thoracica at
aortic hiatus
m.psoas major
t.sympathicus
m. psoas minor
a.renalis
v.azygos dextra
right adrenal gland
n. sptanchnicus major
mesocolon of
diaphragm, lumbar part,
descending colon
right crus
right kidney
v.cava caudalis
pancreas, dorsa surface
V.portae
m. cutaneus trunci
a.hepatica
descending duodenum
t. vagalis X dorsalis
caecum,base
oesophagus
m.obliquus internus
abdominis
t. vagalis X ventrafis
ascending colon:
bile duct (cut)
pelvic ffexure
duodenum, cranial
right ventral colon
ffexure
m.obliquus externus
ascending colon,
abdominis
right dorsar colon
right kidney
Fig. 5.36 The ileal and
"caecocolic’ orifices of the
descendingduodenum
caecum: craniodorsal view.
A sagittal incision has
caecal body
been made in the
craniodorsal wall (greater
curvature) of the caecal
edges of dorsal incision
in caecal base
base (see Fig. 5.34) and
the contents have been
removed to expose the 
cavity of caecal body
two orifces in the ventral
wall (lesser curvature).
ileal orifice
Embryological studies
show that the ileal orifce
marks the true junction 
ileal papila
between caecum and
colon; the 'caecocolic'
fold separating ileal
orifice is, in fact, a
anq`caecocoo
 constriction in the initial
orifices
part of the colon.
cavity of caecal base,
ascending colonj
'caecocolic'orifice
flanked by caecocolic
valve folds
ascending cofon:
right dorsal colon
right ventral colon
inn.colici accessori
171
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
m.psoas minor
n.sptanchnicus major
n.splanchnicus lumbalis
rib 14
V.cava caudalis
ductus thoracicus
pfexusintermesentericus
aortic hiatus
inn.renales
 nn. splanchnici minores
a.renalis
v.cava caudalis
right adrenal gland
v.portae
right kidney
a.hepatica
pancreasdorsalsurface:
stomach,pylorus
left lobe
notch and ring
lesseromentum(cut)
 cut edge of peritoneum
diaphragm,tumbarpart:
body
right crus
right lobe
oesophagealhiatus
descending duodenum
duodenum, cranial part
caecum, base
stomach, parietal
bile duct
surface
ascending colon,right
duodenum, cranial
dorsafcolon
ffexure (incised)
Fig. 5.37 Relationships of the pancreas: right craniolateral view. The specimen is at a similar stage of dissection to that shown in Fig. 5.35, but this
view shows the dorsal surface of the organ, and its relationship to the stomach, more clearly. The pancreatic duct, which leaves the gland near the 
bile duct, is not distinguishable (see Fig. 5.38).
172
Fig. 5.38 The duodenal papillae: right lateral view. The cranial fexure of
the duodenum has been incised (see Fig. 5.37) and opened to reveal the
major papilla (bile duct and pancreatic duct) and the minor papilla
The Abdomen
(accessory pancreatic duct; see Fig. 5.39).
pancreas,dorsalsurface
majorduodenalpapilla
of body
minor duodenal papilla
descending duodenum
ascending colon,right
crania/ffexure of
dorsalcolon
duodenum
duodenum,cranial
flexure,reffected
caudally
pancreas, dorsa/ surface
of right lobe
cut edge of peritoneum
accessory pancreatic
duct
pancreas, cranial part
of body adherent to
transverse colon
descending duodenum
ascending colon, right
dorsafcoion
Fig. 5.39 The accesory pancreatic duct: right lateral view. The cranial
flexure of the duodenum has been refected caudally to expose
the transverse colon, the body of the pancreas attached to it, and the
accessory pancreatic duct. Although this duct lies ventral to the
pancreatic duct, it is derived embryologically from the dorsal 
pancreatic duct.
173
n.splanchnicus lumbalis
nn.sptanchniciminoresn.splanchnicusmajor
rib 18
t.sympathicus
m.psoas major
ductus thoracicus
m. psoas minor
aorta thoracica
V.cava caudalis
diaphragm, right crus
Inn. jumbales aortici
a. coeliaca in aortic 
right ureter
hiatus
plexus intermesentericus
a. gastrica sinistra
Inn.renales
right ureter
plexus coeliacus
gangliorr aorticorenalia
diaphragm,tumbar part,
right crus
a.renafis
rightkidney
a.hepatica
right adrenal gland
 ganglion coeliaco-
V. cava caudalis v. portae in pancreatic
mesentericus dexter
ring
Fig. 5.40 The aortic hiatus and adjacent structures: right lateral view (1). Part of the right diaphragmatic crus has been removed to display the coeliac
artery arising from the aorta in the aortic hiatus. Dissection of the specimen in the standing position causes the kidney and adjacent structures to
drop ventrally after cutting the diaphragmatic crus.
174
Fig. 5.41 The aortic hiatus and adjacent structures: right lateral view (2).
Further dissection reveals the origins of the cranial mesenteric and renal
arteries just caudal to the aortic hiatus. See also Fig. 5.42.
The Abdomen
nn.splanchnici minores
t.sympathicus
et fumbales
 n. splanchnicus major
v.cava caudalis
ductus thoracicus
inn.renales
aorta thoracica
a.mesentericacranialis
right ureter
a.coeliaca
a.renalis
ganglion
plexus coefiacus
aorticorenalia
v.cavacaudatis
right kidney
a. hepatica
V. portae in pancreatic
right adrenal gland
Fig. 5.42 Roots of the coeliac and cranial mesenteric arteries: right lateral
view. The abdominal parts of the digestive tract have been removed and
the right kidney has been pinned to the abdominal roof (see Fig. 5.41).
The nerve plexus on the root of the cranial mesenteric artery has not
been dissected in detail. This artery is pathologically enlarged by
nematode worms (Strongyhus spp). The left lateral view of this specimen
is shown in Fig. 5.26.
rib 18
a.renalis
right ureter
right kidney
diaphragm, lumbar part,
n. splanchnicus major
rightcrus
a.coefiaca
aorta abdominalis
aorta thoracica
ganglion coeliaco-
a.gastrica sinistra
mesentericus dexter
right adrenal gland
plexus coefiacus
mesocolon
a.hepatica
a.fienalis
V.cava caudatis
plexus mesentericus
aa.jejunales
cranialis
a.ileocolica:
a.coticamedia
aa.caecales
medialis et lateralis,
a.mesentericacranialis
f. colicus
(eniarged by aneurysm)
175
Fig. 5.43 Abdominal viscera of a non-pregnant mare: left lateral view. The
thoracic and abdominal walls have been removed and the left lung has 
been excised. The colon has been moderately infated to resemble its size
in life. Note that the spleen does not extend caudal to the costal arch in 
this specimen.
 Color Atlas of Veterinary .
diaphragm, lumbar part,
rib 18
leff crus
m.psoas major
t. sympathicus
left kidney
oesophagus
ductus thoracicus
spleen
ascendingcoion.
n. vagus X
leftdorsafcofon
n.phrenicus
leftventralcolon
stomach,greater
left atritum
curvature
diaphragm, cupola
tiver:
left ventricle
teftriangular igament
left lobe
ascending colon,
diaphragmatic ftexure
greateromentum
Fig. 5.44 Abdominal viscera of a non-pregnant mare: right lateral view. The
abdominal and thoracic walls have been removed and the diaphragm has
been excised. The caecum and colon have been moderately infated to
resemble their size in life.
rib 18
rightkidney
descending duodenum
a.v.intercostafis
dorsalis Xl
base of caecum
fiver,right triangular
v.azygos dextra
figamentandits
attachment to diaphragm
aorta thoracica
inn.caecales
right fung. caudal lobe
caecu,body
Jiver, right fobe
caecocolic junction
costal arch
Inn. colfici accessori
diaphragm
a.y.lleocolica,
r.coficus
ascending cofon:
right dorsalcolon
small intestine
right ventral colon
176
Fig. 5.45 The female tract in the abdomen of
a yearling mare: left craniolateral view. The
abdominal wall has been removed and the
The Abdomen
digestive organs excised after cutting the
descending colon close to its transition into the
rectum. The empty urinary bladder lies entirely
within the pelvis.
m.psoas minor
m. psoas major
aorta abdominalis
m.psoas minor
v.cava caudalis
liac fascia (reffected)
right ureter
leftureter
Inn.iliacimediales
a.ovarica
a.ovarica
ovarian suspensory
figament
broad ligament
mesovarium
pelviccavity
mesocoion(cutedge)
leftuterinetube in
mesosaipinx
broad igament
leftovary
right ovary with targe
rectum
foficle
infundibutum of uterine
mesocolon
tube
left uterine horn
rightuterine horn
uterine body
terminaldescendingcolon
cranialboundariesof
deepinguina rings
m.obliquus internus
abdominis covered by
median vesicufar
figament
peritoneumanc
transverse fascia
m.rectus abdominis
177
m. longissimus
m.jiocostalis
rib 18
thoracis
thoracis
right kidney
a.v.intercostalis
dorsalis IX
descending duoderum
V. azygos dextra
ductus thoracicus
caecum,base
aorta thoracica
tiver, right triangutar
oesophagus
ligament
a.v.oesophagea
costal arch
n.vagusx
.cavacauoafis
smaff intestine
ascending colon,
liver,rightmediarlobe
iqhtventrafcolor
right dorsal coion
diaphragm.cupola
ascendingcolon
diaphragmatic ffexure
caecum,booy
small intestine
liver,right lateral
fobe
Fig. 5.46 The abdomen in early pregnancy (1): superficial right lateral view. This mare was over 8 years old, and was 3% months pregnant at the time
of death. The large intestine has been infated to imitate its condition during life. Figs. 5.46-5.48 show right abdominal topography in this mare.
The terminology used for the right lobe of the liver is dealt with in Figs. 5.30 and 5.53.
178
rib 18
caecum, base
The Abdomen
right kidney
descending duodenum
v.portae
 pancreas, right fobe
stomach:
saccus caecus
cardia
s
parietalsurface
duodenum, cranial part
smalf intestine
ascending cofon:
right ventral colon
caecum, body
Fig. 5.47 The abdomen in early pregancy (2), after removal of the liver: right lateral view. Compared with the non-pregnant abdomen, the small
intestine tends to be displaced laterally and cranially from the confines of the loop of the colon. The pregnant uterus also displaces the caecal body
laterally. The caudal vena cava has been removed with the liver.
supporting wire
right ureter
fransfixing ifium,
tubercoxae
V.cava caudalis
a.v. circumffexa ifium
profunda
aorta abdominais
a.v.ovarica in
mesovarium
a. colica sinistra
feft ovary
a. circumffexa ilium
profunda
right ovary
a.rectalis cranialis
a.uterina media in
broad igamenit
descending colon (cut)
right uterine horn
parietalperitoneumof
leff abcominal walf
m.obliquus internus
abdominis
left uterinehorn
linea alba of abdominal
m.rectus abdominis
wall
Fig. 5.48 The abdomen in early pregnancy (3): ovaries and uterus in right craniolateral view. The abdominal digestive organs have been removed to
show the female reproductive tract which occupies the caudal abdomen. The fetus lay in the left horn and body of the uterus and was 20 cm in
length from crown to rump. Further details of the reproductive organs are seen in Figs. 8.57-8.61. With advancing pregnancy, the uterus occupies a
ventral position between the right and left parts of the loop of the ascending colon. The caecum is displaced to the right, and the small intestine and
descending colon are displaced mainly to the left.
179
stomach, saccus
m.longissimusthoracis
caecus
rib 18
m.iiocostalis thoracis
a.intercostalis
descending colon
aorta thoracica
t. vagalis X dorsalis
oesophagus
t. vagalis X ventralis
spleen
V. phrenica cranialis
V.cava caudalis
convergenthairvortex
n. phrenicus
of stiffefold
greater omentum
liver, teft tateraf lobe
diaphragm,cupofa
ascending colon:
left dorsalcolon
left ventral colon
pelvic fexure
stomach,grealer
curvature
Fig. 5.49 The abdomen in early pregnancy (4): superficial left lateral view. The spleen extends rather more caudally than usual but this was also the
case in the specimen shown in Fig. 5.13. The pelvic Hexure of the ascending colonic loop lies more ventral and cranial than usual; this may be due
to the enlargement of the pregnant uterus (see Fig. 5.51). Figs. 5.49-5.51 show the left abdominal topography in this mare.
180
rib 18
aorta thoracica
 stomach, saccus caecus
The Abdomen
teft kidney
n. vagus X
transverse cofon
diaphragm, umbar part.
right crus at
oesophageal hiatus
descending colon
stomach,lesser
curvature
greater omentum
attachingtogreater
curvature of stomach
descending colon
smallintestine
ascenoing colon,
diaphragmatic ffexure
ascending cofon:
pelvic ffexure
costal arch
 removal necessitates removal of part of the greater omentum. The caudal vena cava has also been removed.
m. gluteus medius
supporting wire through
ilium, tuber coxae
m.longissimus
lumborum
rib 18
a. mesenterica caudatis
a.rectatis craniatis
a.v.circumflexa
a. circumffexa ilium
ijium profunda
profunda
aorta abdominalis
suspensory ligament of
ovary
a.colica sinistra
mesovarium
m. obliquus internus
a.v.ovarica
abdominis
leftovary
rightovary
m.tensorfasciaelatae
right uterine horn
m.gluteussuperficialis
left uterine horn
fnn.subiliaci
m.vastus laterafis
m. rectus abdominis
m. biceps femoris
m.obfiquusexternus
m. obliquus internus
abdominis
abdominis
nail fixing patella to
m.rectus abdominis
femoral trochlea
Fig. 5.51 The abdomen in early pregnancy (6): ovaries and uterus in left craniolateral view. The right craniolateral view of this specimen is shown in
Fig. 5.48.
181
The Horse
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,
aonta thoracica
oesophagus
rib8
diaphragm,abdomina!
surface of central
tendon
n. vagus X
liver,eftriangular
V. phrenica cranialis
ligament
bronchus to left tung
rib 18
left kidney
a.v.puimonalis
spfeen
cavity of left atrium
position of pelvic
ffexure
fiver:
ascending colon:
leftaterallobe
feft dorsaicolon
left media lobe
left ventral colon
right tung, accessory
allantois
lobe
a.umbilicalis
cupola of diaphragm
umbilicus
left ventricle
V.umbilicalis
costal cartilages, cut
peritoneum lining
ends
perifonealcavity
Fig. 5.52 Abdominal viscera of the new-born foal: left lateral view. The colon has not been infated. Compare the relative size and topographical
 position of the liver in this foal with that of the adult horse (Figs. 5.14, 5.43 and 5.49).
182
 The Abdomen
oesophagus
lesser omentum, cut edge
t. vagafis X ventralis
V.cava caudalis
left kidney
V. portae, f. sinister:
rightkidney
pars transversa
parsumbilicalis
v.portae
a.hepatica
rightlung.acces
fiver,caudatelobe,
fobe
caudateprocess
inn.hepatici
V.cava caudalis
common bile duct
left coronary ligament
lesseromentum,cut
edge
v.hepatica
fiver, cut surface
fiver:
right triangutar
falciform ligament
rightlaterallobe
ligament
rightmediallobe
V.umbificalis in
umbilical fissure
diaphragm, cupola
v.umbilicalis
Fig. 5.53 The portal and umbilical veins of the new-born foal: left lateral view. The stomach and intestine have been removed. The left lobe of the
liver has been excised to expose the visceral surface of the right and caudate lobes. In the late fetal foal there is no clearly defined anatomical
connection between the umbilical vein and the caudal vena cava; the ^ductus venosus' is absent. The umbilical vein, as in other mammals, drains 
into the left branch of the portal vein. Because there is no gall bladder in the horse, the term ^quadrate lobe' has been avoided; the lobe to the right
 of the umbilical vein has been considered as the right medial liver lobe, in conformity with zoological mammalian nomenclature.
183
Fig. 5.54 The caudal abdomen of the new-born female foal: left lateral
view. This is a more caudal view of the specimen at the stage of
dissection shown in Fig. 5.53.
The Horse
Anatomy,
Color Atlas of Veterinary 
rib 17
m.biceps femoris
left kidney
m. giuteus medius
 uterine broad figament
m.ifiacus
uterine tube
m.gluteus profundus
proper ligament of ovary
m. psoas major
mesosaipinx, free edge
n.femoralis
right kidney
left uterine horn
V.portae
a.v.iliacaexterna
infundibulumofuterine tube
ligament of femoral head
left ovary, parts covered by
transverse acetabular tigament
germinalepithelium
a.v.obturatoria
and perifoneum
n.obturatorius
liver:
pubis
caudate process
 accessory tigament of femoraf head
right lateralfobe
descending colon
peritoneum covering:
m.pectineus
diaphragm
symphyseal tendon
ventral abdominai wall --
faterat vesicutar figament
a.v.umbiicafis umbilicus
allantoic urinary bladdermedian vesicular figament
Fig. 5.5s Umbilicus and mammary glands of the new-born foal: ventral
view. Part of the left side of the abdominal wall has been removed, as
shown in Figs. 5.52-5.54. This fgure is a ventral view of the specimen
at the stage of dissection shown in Fig. 5.54.
left ovary
a.umbilicalis
right kidney
m.pectineus
fiver, caudate
accessoryfigament of
process
femoralhead
Jeft teat, bearing two
symphyseal tendon
papilary orifices
remains of umbifical
mammary glands
cord af umbiicus
right teat
ventral midline
mediatfemoralregion
convergent hair vortex
of right hindlimb
184
THE HINDLIMB
185
Clinical importance of the hindlimb
of direct trauma, usually from a kick. Osteochondrosis dissecans is also
fairly common in the stife joint. The stifle joint relies on the particular
The hindlimb can be examined clinically by radiography, by ultraso-
anatomy of the femur for fixation in extension. The medial ridge of
nography and MRI scanning, and by nerve blocks and anaesthesia of
 the femoral trochlea can act as a catch' for the patellar fibrocartilage
the joints. The major difference between the fore and hind limbs is
and the medial patellar ligament, enabling the joint to be locked in
The
that in the hindlimb the foot is not the major source of clinical lame-
extension. One of the most common injuries of the stife is upward
ness. Also, examination of a hindlimb has many more safety implica-
fixation of the patella, diagnosed by palpation and radiography. In
tions than examination of a forelimb. In foals and young horses,
 this condition the patella does not spontaneously unlock when attempts
trauma and genetics in any combination are the major contributors to
are made to fex the joint. Problems may also occur when the lateral
lameness problems.
femoral trochlear ridge is hypoplastic and there is no ridge to hook
A.IT
'Epiphyseal fusion times’ are not always a true indicator of growth
over the patellar ligaments. It is often congenital and in that case it is
plate closures. There are breed variations - generally the growth plates
often bilateral. The femoro-patellar joint communicates with the
close earlier in the lighter breeds than the heavier breeds. In general,
 medial femoro-tibial joint and, in 25% of horses, also with the lateral
distal growth plates heal earlier than proximal ones. For the femur,
femoro-tibial joint. In the other 75% of horses the lateral femoro-tibial
ofv
the proximal growth plate fuses at 24-36 months and the distal at
joint is separate. The two synovial cavities of the femoro-tibial joint
las
24-30 months. For the tibia the corresponding values are 24-30
 do not directly communicate with each other. The seat of lameness
months and 17-24 months. The lateral malleolus of the tibia has a
can be detected by anaesthesia of these synovial cavities. The femoro-
separate ossification centre, which is shown embryonically to be the
patellar joint is approached for intra-articular analgesia by inserting
distal epiphysis of the fbula. The separate ossification centre for the
a needle proximal to the tibial crest, lateral or medial to the middle
tibial tuberosity fuses to the epiphysis at 9-12 months of age and to
patellar ligament, with the needle directed slightly proximal. The
the metaphysis at 30-36 months. The proximal end of the fibula ossi-
 medial femoro-tibial joint is approached proximal to the tibia, with
fies soon after birth. Two or three separate ossification centres in the
the needle inserted between the medial patellar ligament and the
fibrous shaft may remain separate for many years. The proximal
medial  collateral ligaments.  The  lateral  femoro-tibial  joint is
growth plate of metacarpal bone Ill is fused at birth and the distal
 approached proximal to the tibia, with the needle inserted caudal to
plate fuses at 9-12 months. In foals, the most rapid growth period is
the long digital extensor tendon and cranial to the lateral collateral
from birth to 10 weeks. The activity of the growth plate determines
ligament. The femoro-tibial joint is the site of a wide variety of stifle
 bone length and, to some extent, bone shape. Abnormalities of endo-
 injuries including those to the menisci, the articular cartilage, the col-
chondral ossification may affect bone length and also the axial align-
lateral ligaments and the cruciate ligaments (commonly caused by
ment of the ends of the bones and the shapes of the joints. These effects
twisting of the stifle). All of these can be investigated by arthroscopy
are visible in the foal.
under general anaesthesia.
The hock has six tarsal bones - tibial (talus) and fbular (calcaneus),
There are four synovial sacs in the hock. The frst is in the tarso-
central, and tarsal bones I, II (fused) and II1, IV. The epiphysis of the 
crural joint. The second is in the proximal intertarsal joints (this com-
fbular tarsal bone is evident by 2 weeks and fuses between 2436
municates with the sac of the frst joint). The third is in the
months. Intra-articular fractures of the tarsus are not so common as
distal intertarsal joints (this communicates with the sac in the tarso-
in the carpus, because the hind limb is not so often involved in trauma.
metatarsal joint) and fnally there is the synovial sac of the tarso-
The hip joint is one of the “high motion' joints of the horse, all of
metatarsal joint. The hock can be investigated using intra-articular
these have large synovial spaces which can be entered with a needle.
analgesia. The proximal joint (tarso-crural) is entered by inserting a
Therefore, anaesthesia of the joint can be used for diagnostic purposes,
needle either side of the saphenous vein, just distal to the medial mal-
antibiotics and anti-inflammatory drugs can be administered, and
leolus. The distal intertarsal joint can be found on the medial aspect
samples can be taken for culture or cytology. The *low motion' joints,
of the hock, just distal to the proximal border of the medial branch
for example the tarsus, have small synovial spaces and are bounded
(cunean) of the tendon of the cranial tibial muscle. The needle is
by a wealth of collagenous ligaments, tendons and joint capsules. They
inserted in a lateral direction, horizontally, between the third and
are therefore much less accessible clinically. Intra-articular analgesia
central tarsal bones. The tarso-metatarsal joint is approached via a
of the coxo-femoral (hip) joint may be used as a diagnostic test. To
small depression proximal to the head of the lateral splint bone (meta-
reach the hip joint, which is not easily palpated because of the massive
tarsal bone IV). A needle is inserted in a horizontal and slightly down-
gluteal muscles, a needle is inserted between the cranial and caudal
ward direction to a depth of approximately 2-3 cm.
 processes of the greater trochanter of the femur. The needle is directed
Osteoarthritis of the small hock joints does occur. 'Bog spavin' is a
in a slightly cranial, medial and distal direction to reach the joint.
descriptive term for synovial effusion of the tarso-crural joint. It is the
Coxo-femoral luxation does occur, but rarely, and attempts to reduce 
result of a low-grade synovitis. The swelling appears in the proximo-
the dislocation are usually unsuccessful as it is diffcult to keep the
medial part of the hock. It is not a major cause of persistent hindlimb
femoral head in place. Osteoarthritis of the hip joint is rare.
lameness in the horse. Osteochondrosis dissecans, a degenerative condi-
Fractures of the femur are relatively rare and little can be done to
tion of cartilage, also affects the hock, particularly the distal interme-
repair them. Fracture of the tibia is more common and requires
diate rid ge of the tibia and the lateral trochlear rid ges of the tibio-tarsal
'Robert Jones type' fixation.
joint. The hock joint can also suffer from bacterial infection and
The stifle joint is the most common site of pathological problems
inflammation, similar to gonitis of the stifle joint. This often results in
in the hindlimb. Osteoarthritis is quite common in this joint. The
extensive necrosis and ultimately joint collapse. Another important
femoral articular cartilage may be 3-4 cm thick and is the thickest in
condition of the hock is fuid distension of the tarso-crural joint
the equine joints. The medial femoral condyle is a common site for
which occurs dorso-medially between the fbularis (peroneus) tertius
bone cysts. Patellar fracture does occur rarely and is usually the result
muscle and the medial malleolus; dorso-medially between the medial
186
malleolus and the deep digital fexor tendon; and caudo-laterally
and complete breakdown of the tendon. Sub-tarsal analgesia and
between the lateral malleolus and the tuber calcis. Tarso-crural dislo-
ultrasonography can be used for diagnosis.
cation (luxation) is a rare event which is virtually impossible to repair
Fluid distension of the tarsal sheath of the deep flexor tendon is
and is an indication for immediate euthanasia.
known as ‘thoroughpin'. It is usually caused by trauma. The sheath
 A considerable amount of clinical time is spent dealing with the
begins approximately 5-7 cm proximal to the level of the medial mal-
H
problems associated with the muscles and tendons of the hindlimb.
-as snsea ar go pin radn an o Asip spaxa pe snoa
dli
Rupture of the fbularis (peroneus) tertius muscle (which runs from
ings can be found on either side of the common calcaneal tendon and
itmb
the extensor fossa of the distal femur to the dorso-lateral aspect of
cranial to the tendon.
metatarsal bone Il, the calcaneus and tarsal bones IIl, IV) occurs
The femoral nerve can be damaged by penetrating wounds of the
when there is overextension of the hock joint, usually in racing. It is
caudal flank which result in abscesses. The nerve is also damaged
important, as this tendinous muscle is part of the hindlimb stay appa-
rarely by tumours, aneurysms, and pressure during parturition. Since
ratus, which enables the hock and stife to fex or extend in unison.
it innervates the quadriceps group, which fexes the hip and extends
'Capped hock' is distension of the subcutaneous bursa overlying the
the stifle, forward movement is limited. The cranial gluteal nerve may
superficial digital fexor tendon (SDFT) at the point of the hock. It is
be damaged by trauma; if this happens atrophy of the gluteal muscles
usually only of cosmetic significance. It results from trauma. ‘Deep
may follow. The sciatic nerve can be damaged by systemic bacterial
au yeauapun esinq reiouss saiel aun on aaeuep s! yoou paddeo 
infections such as salmonellosis, but also by infectious processes
tendon, resulting in swelling on both sides of the tendon. Traumatic
extending from the sacrum and the pelvis. Damage will affect both
injury to the semitendinosus muscle results in scarring with adhesions 
tibial and fbular (peroneal) nerves.
between the semitendinosus and semimembranosus muscles. Rupture
 Paralysis of the tibial nerve, which innervates the extensors of the
of the gastrocnemius muscle can occur and tendinitis of the muscle is
 tarsus and the flexors of the digits and stifle, is not uncommon. Diag-
also a possibility. The muscles of the hindlimb that are injured most
nostic blocking can be achieved by injection 10 cm proximal to the 
often are the major fexor muscles together with their tendon sheaths
tuber calcis on the caudo-medial aspect of the limb, in the space
and suspensory ligaments. The SDFT is easily damaged and may be
partially dislocated (sub-luxated) when the horse is in work. Most
 tendon. The nerve lies beneath the superficial fascia, about I cm deep,
commonly, this occurs laterally but sometimes medially. The problem
and the needle should be directed just cranial to the common calcaneal
is made much worse when the tendon is also split. Surgical correction
tendon, with care not to penetrate the skin on the lateral aspect.
 os  o si  s   s o
The fibular (peroneal) nerve innervates the flexors of the tarsus and
known by the colloquial name of 'curb' which is desmitis (inflamma-
the extensors of the digit. It can be blocked 10 cm proximal to the
tion) of the SDFT. It is seen clinically as a swelling on the plantar
point of the hock, in a groove between the long and lateral digital
aspect of the hock, approximately 10 cm distal to the point of the
extensor muscles, just above the musculo-tendinous junction. This is
proximal to the lateral malleolus of the tibia, on the lateral aspect of
of the splint bones (metatarsal bones II and IV). The extensor muscles
the thigh. The deep branch of the fbular (peroneal) nerve can be
and their tendon sheaths can also be damaged, but in these cases the
blocked 2-3 cm below the superficial fascia and the superficial branch
injuries are not so severe, and conservative treatment is usually suc-
1-2 cm below the fascia.
 -uo suoisat nsoo oste sneedde osuadsns au on sanun 'issao
Below the hock, the plantar nerves can be blocked between the deep
fned to the proximal third of the metatarsus are usually referred to as
digital fexor tendon and the suspensory ligament. The plantar meta-
 proximal suspensory desmitis. Here there is localized oedema, swell-
tarsal nerves can be ring-blocked on the proximal metatarsus. The
ing, heat, distension of the medial palmar vein and possibly pain. The 
plantar metatarsal nerves are blocked axial to the splint bones, abaxial
condition may be mild, moderate or severe and can become chronic.
to the suspensory ligament, and along the plantar cortex of metatarsal
More rarely there are avulsion ('tearing') fractures of the whole tendon
bone Il1.
187
ilium, tuber sacrale
sacrum, spinous
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
processes
hair vortex inregion of
tuber ischiadicum
lium, tuber coxae
femur, cranial and
caudal parts of greater
trochanter
ischium, tuber
ischiadicum
femoral region
hair ridge
femur, third trochanter
hair vortex in region of
stiffefofd
patella
femur, trochtear ridges:
medial (tuberculum)
lateral
patellar ligaments
fateral,intermediate
prepuce
Fig. 6.1 Surface features of the pelvic and femoral regions of the gelding:
left lateral view. The palpable features have been shaved. An incision 
marks the point where the patella was nailed to the femoral trochlea,
in order to fix the stife joint. The intermuscular septum between the 
biceps femoris and semitendinosus muscles (the so-called 'poverty line')
is rarely visible after embalming (see Fig. 6.9).
Fig. 6.2 Bones of the pelvic and femoral regions: left lateral view. The
palpable bony features shown in Fig. 6.1 have been coloured red, except
the tuber sacrale and the sacral spines. In this skeleton the patella has
not been positioned so distally in the trochlea: in the embalmed horse the
hindlimb was fully extended before nailing the patella to the trochlea.
188
hairridgeterminatingon
hair vortex in region of
stifle fold
femur, third trochanter
 The Hindlimb
femoratregion
skin incisionoverpatella
patella
femur, trochtear ridges.
medial(tuberculum)
jateral
patellar ligaments, lateral
andintermediate
tibia:
lateral condyle
extensor suicus
tuberosity
crest
Crus
prepuce
caicaneus:
tuberosity
cranial border
tibia, ateral malfeolus
tarsus
talus, faterat ridge of
frochlea
Fig. 6.3 Surface features of the femoral region, crus and tarsus: left lateral
view. The palpable features have been shaved. The patella is also marked
by the skin incision made for nailing it to the femoral trochlea.
Fig. 6.4 Bones of the femoral region, crus and tarsus: left lateral view. The
features shown in Fig. 6.3 have been coloured red. The bones of the pes 
are shown in Fig.7.36.
189
lium
tubersacrale
tuber coxae
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
glutealregion
sacral and caudal
vertebrae, spinous
processes
root of tail
femur, cranial and
caudaldivisions of
greater trochanter
hair ridge
anus
ischium, tuber
ischiadicum
femur, third trochanter
perineal region
femoralregion
patella
position of stifle joint
poplitealregion
tibia, lateral condyle 
crus
Fig. 6.5 Surface features of the pelvic and femoral regions: left caudolateral
view. The palpable features have been shaved.
Fig. 6.6 Bones of the pelvic and femoral regions: left caudolateral view.
The palpable bony features shown in Fig. 6.5 have been coloured red
 except for the tuber sacrale and the vertebral spinous processes.
190
CrLIS
calcaneus,tuberosity
 The Hindlimb
tibia,medial malleolus
talus,distaf tuberosity
 tarsat pad ('chestnut')
metatarsaf bone ff
proximal extremity
metatarsus
metatarsal boneff.
approximate position of
distalextremity
metatarsophalangeal
position of
(fetlock) joint
long harrs(cirrus
metatarseus) of fetiock
pastern
Fig. 6.7 Surface features of the right tarsus and metatarsus: medial view.
The palpable features have been shaved. Further details of the pes are
shown in Figs. 7.39 and 7.40.
Fig. 6.8 Bones of the right tarsus and metatarsus in medial view. The
 palpable bony features shown in Fig. 6.7 have been coloured red. Further
details of the pes are shown in Fig. 7.40.
161
ium,tuber coxae
nn. ctunium medii(Slf,IV)
fr. cutanei faterales
m. gluteus medius
dorsales
m. obliquus externus
abdominis covered by
m. gluteus superficialis
yellow abdominaf tunic
m. tensor fasciae latae
m.semitendinosus
(caput vertebrale)
n.fumbafis{
r.cutaneus lateralis
'poverty line'
ventralis
Inn.subiliaci
femur, third trochanter
m. obliquus internus
nn. clunium caudales
abdominis
m.vastuslateralis
m.semimembranosus
m.rectus femoris
fascia lata (cut edge)
m.rectus abdominis
m.biceps femoris
m. cutaneus trunci in
stiffefold
n.cutaneus surae
nail in patella
[ateralis (n.fibularis)
Fig. 6.9 Superficial muscles of the pelvic and femoral regions: left lateral view. When cleared of connective tissue, the intermuscular groove between
the biceps femoris and semitendinosus muscles ('poverty line') shows clearly. In the living animal, this groove is best seen if the horse is in a poor
condition. The most dorsal and cranial part of the biceps femoris muscle may be considered to be part of the superficial gluteal muscle.
m. giuteus medius
nn. clunium medii
m.grute
Derficialis
ischium,tuber
ischiadicum
m.tensor fasciae latae
femur, third trochanter
m.semitendinosus
(caput vertebraie)
fascia lata (cut edge)
m. semimembranosus
m.vastuslateralis
(caput fongum)
n. cutaneus surae
nn.ctunium caudales
laterafis
(n.fibularis)
m. biceps femoris
cut edge of crural fascia
n. cutaneus surae
deepcrural fascia
caudalis (n. tibialis)
(superficial layer)
skin {reffected)
V. saphena fateralis
fascia lata have been removed.
m. grufeus medius
m.gluteus superficialis
m.iliacus faterafis
a.v.glutea cranialis
n. gluteus cranialis
yellow abdominat tunic
(to m. tensor fasciae tatae)
covering m. obliquus
externus abdominis
m.semitendinosus
(caput vertebrale)
n.cutaneus femoris
Jateralis (LI#)
m. semimembranosus
(caput fongum)
a.v. circumtfexa ium
m. gluteus superficiafis
profunda
(insertion)
m. vasfus laterafis
yellow abdominaf tunic
covering m.obliquus
m.rectus femoris
externus abdominis
m.biceps femoris
fnn.subilaci
(dispiaced ventrally)
nail in patella
Fig. 6.11 Muscles of the pelvic and femoral regions: left lateral view. The superficial gluteal muscle and the tensor of the fascia lata have been
removed.
192
fascia lata (cut edge)
m. biceps femoris
patella
m.semitendinosus
The Hindlimb
fateral patellar ligament
I. cutaneus surae.
lateralis (n.fibularis
communis)
tibial crest
cut edge of deep crural
fascia
deep crural fascia:
superficialfayer
n. cutaneus surae
(cutedge)
caudalis (n,tibialis
deep layer
et n. fibufaris)
m. extensor digitorum
V. saphena fateratis
fateralis
m. biceps femoris,tendo
accessorius
m. extensor digitorum
snbuof
n.fibularis (peroneus)
superficiafis
m.fexor digiti ongus
m. gastrocnemius
crural extensor
m. ffexor digitorurm
retinaculum
superficialis
m.biceps femoris,
n.cutaneus surae
caudalis (n. tibialis et
tendo accessorius
n.fibularis)
tendo caicaneus
communis
middle extensor
calcaneal tuberosity
retinaculum
v.tibialis caudalis
tibia,
lateralmafleolus
n.tibialis
Fig. 6.12 Superficial structures of the left crus: left lateral view. Part of the most superficial layer of the deep crural fascia has been removed to
display the superfcial fbular (peroneal) nerve. The medial view of the region at this stage of dissection is shown in Fig. 6.13.
medial deep femoral
prepuce
fascia
tibial fuberosity
V.saphena mediafis.
r.caudalis
r.craniafis
m.semitendinosus
{insertion)
tibial crest
m. semitendinosus
n.saohenus
m.gastrocnemius
(caput mediale)
tibia
m.fexor digitorum
longus
m.tibiafiscraniafis
m.ffexor digitorum
superficialis
m.extensor digitorurm
m. ffexor digiti I longus
longus
m.bicepsfermoris
(tendo accessorius)
m. fexor digitorum
tendo calcaneus
communis
cruralextensor
m.semitendinosus(jioins
retinaculum
tendo accessorius of
m. biceps femoris)
n.tibialis,r.cutaneus
calcaneaftuberosity
tarsalis medialis
m.tibialiscranialistendo
medialis (cunean)
tibia, mediat maffeofus
Fig. 6.13 Superficial structures of the left hindlimb: medial view. The skin and superfcial fascia have been removed and the deep fascia overlying
 the cranial tibial and long digital extensor muscles has been excised. Further dissections of this region are shown in Figs. 6.28, 6.30 and 6.56.
193
Fig. 6.14 Superficial structures of the left hindlimb: left lateral view. The
biceps femoris muscle has been removed. Further details of the muscles,
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
nerves and vessels are shown in Fig. 6.15.
lium, tuber coxae
origin of m.bicepsfemoris
(caput vertebrae) from
m. gluteus medius
vertebralandpelvic
ligaments andfasciae
m. obliquus externus
abdominis
a. glutea caudafis
m.ifiacus fateralis
n. gluteus caudalis
n. cutaneus femoris
broad sacrotuberous
lateralis(L!)
figament
a. v. circumtfexa ilium
n. cutaneus temoris
profunda
caudalis
m. obliquus internus
abdominis
femur, greater trochanter
m.obliquus externus
ischium,tuber
abdominis
ischiadicum
m.rectus femoris
origin of m.bicepsfemoris
(caput petvinum) from
m. vastus lateralis
tuberischiadicum
m.rectus abdominis
femur third trochanter
nail fixing patella
m.semitendinosus:
m. gastrocnemius (caput
caput vertebrale
laterale)
capuf pelvinum
m. biceps femoris
n. tibialis
insertion
n.cufaneus surae
prepuce
caudalis
patellar ligaments.
lateral
V.saphena lateralis
middle
n. fibufaris communis
femorotibial joint cavity
tibial tuberosity
m.sofeus
m. tibialis cranialis
n.fibularis profundus
m. extensor digitorum
longus (tendon in
extensor sufcus of tibia)
n. fibularis superficialis
rm. extensor digitorum
fateralis
m. flexor digiti Ilongus
194
Fig. 6.15 The stife and tarsal regions and crus: left lateral view. This is a
closer view of a part of the dissection shown in Fig. 6.14.
 The Hindlimb
m.adductor
n.tibialis
m. vastus faterafis
n.fibulariscommunis
m. semimembranosus
a.v.caudalisfemoris
m. semitendinosus
m.rectus femoris
n.cutaneus surae
caudatis (n. fibialis)
nail in patella
V.saphena lateralis
patella
m.gastrocnemius
Inn.poplitei profundi
(caputtaterale)
fateral patelfar ligament 
m. biceps femoris,
insertion onlateral
patellarligament
 middie pateliar ligament
lateral meniscus in
m.gastrocnermius
(caput laterale)
femorotibialjoint
m.soleus
femorotibial joint, ateral
m. biceps femoris,
collaterat figament
insertion joining tendo
cafcaneuscommunis
tibia,lateral condyie
(tendo accessorius)
n.fibularis profundus
tibialtuberosity
n. fibularis superficialis
m.tibialis cranialis
m. extensor digitorum
fateralis
m.extensor digitorum longus
m. ffexor digiti I longus
cruralextensor
m. flexor digitorum
retinaculum
superficialis
v. tibialis caudafis
m. biceps femoris, tendo
accessorius
n.tibialis
tendo calcaneus
tibia, lateral malleolus
communis inserting on
calcaneal tuberosity
talus
calcaneus
195
Fig. 6.16 The sciatic and gluteal nerves: left
lateral view. The middle gluteal muscle has been 
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
removed.
tuber sacrale
m. gluteus medius, origin
m.biceps femoris,
a.v. glutea craniafis
capuf vertebrale
greater ischiatic foramen
dorsal sacroiliac
figarnent
m. gluteus accessorius.
m.sacrocaudalis
origin
dorsalis lateratis
tuber coxae
a.v. glutea caudalis
Inn.ischiadici
lium,shaft
broad sacrotuberous
ligament
m. obliquus internus
n. gluteus caudalis
abdominis
n.isohiadicus
m. semimembranosus
yeirowabdominaltunic
 covering m. obliquus
m.semitendinosus
externus abdominis
(caput vertebrale)
n. cutaneus fermoris
n. gluteus cranialis
caudalis
lesser ischiatic foramen 
n. cutaneus femoris
mm.gemeli
fateralis(Lill)
femur, greater trochanter
a.v.circumflexa ilium
tuber ischiadicum
epunjosd
a.v.obturatoria
m.jliacus
n. fibularis communis
n.tibiafis,
m. gluteus profundus
f.muscufaris
m.biceps femoris (cut
m. gltuteus medius
edge of ischiat origin)
(insertion)
m. quadratus femoris
m. gluteus accessorius
femur, third trochanter
(insertion)
a.v.circumffexa femoris
m.rectus femoris
medialis
m.semitendinosus
m. vastus lateralis
(caputpevinum)
196
Fig. 6.17 The sciatic, fibular and tibial nerves in the pelvic and femoral
regions: left lateral view. The middle and deep gluteal muscles have been
removed and part of the semitendinosus muscle has been resected.
 The Hindlimb
tuber coxae
m.sacrocaudalis
a.v. glutea caudalis
dorsafis lateralis
a. v. glutea cranialis
broad sacrotuberous
ligament
n. gluteus caudafis
m.semitendinosus
n.ischiadicus
(caput vertebrale,cut)
n. cutaneus femoris caudalis
a.v. pudenda interna
n. gluteus cranialis
m.gfuteus profundus
(cut edges)
m. obturatorius internus
(pars iliaca)
m. gluteus medius fcut
n.cutaneusfemorislateralis
edgey
mm.gemelfi
a.v. circumffexa ifium
profunda
femur, greater trochanter
m.iliacus
m. quadratus femoris
m.capsularis
m. semimembranosus
yellow abdominaf tunic
m. vastus lateralis
m.semitendinosus
m. obliquus abdominis
(caput peivinum)
internus
n.tibialis,rr. musculares
m.rectus femoris
femur, third trochanter
m. vastus intermedius
m.semitendinosus
femur
(caput fongum)
m.vastusfateralis(insertion)
m.adductor
nail fixing patella
n.tibialis
m.semimembranosus
lateral patelfar ligament
Inn. poplitei profundti
Jateral femoropateffar
n. cutaneus surae
ligament
caudalis
mediat ridge of femoral
n. fibularis communis
(wnnojagn eayoon
lateral ridge of femoral
m. biceps femoris
trochiea
m.gastrocnemius (caput
(part of insertion)
[aterafe)
middle pateftar figament
tateral condyle of fermur
fateral coflateral figament
m. extensor digitorum
laterat meniscus in
longus, tendon in extensor
opened cavity of
sufcus of tibia
femorotibialjoint
tibiaftuberosity
lateral condyle of tibia
197
Fig. 6.18 The left quadriceps femoris muscle: cranial view. The lateral
vastus muscle, which was removed (see Fig. 6.17), has been replaced to
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
show the complete quadriceps femoris muscle with its sesamoid bone 
(patella) and tendons of insertion ('patellar ligaments'). The intermediate
vastus muscle is shown in Fig. 6.20. Further details of the genual
articulation (stife joint) are shown in Fig. 6.19.
m. iliacus
femorat insertion of
m.gluteus medius
m. obliquus internus
abdominis
femur,greater trochanter
yelfow abdominal tunic
m.semmembranosus
covering m.obliquus
exiernus abdominis
m.vastus faterafis
{repiaced)
m.sartorius
m.semitendinosus
m.rectus fenoris
(capuf vertebrale)
m.biceps femoris
m.vastusmedialis
(part of insertion)
patella with nail
m.gastrocnemius
(caput faterafe)
accessory carfiage of
patella
femur, lateral epicondyle
patellar ligaments.
n. fibufaris communis
medrar
middle
lateral
meniscus:
media!
lateral
femoral trochlea.
medial ridge
lateralcoffateral figament
(tuberculum)
groove
tibial condyle,lateral
m. extensor digitorum
m. extensor digitorum
longus
lateralis
198
Fig. 6.19 The left stifle joint: cranial view. The femoropatellar joint was
hooked over the tuberculum of the trochlea (stife in the “locked'
The Hindlimb
position). During movement these are not so hooked and the patella
moves freely in the trochlear groove.
m. rectus femoris
m.vastuslateralis
(replaced)
m. vastus medialis
m.semtenoinosus
patella (nailed to femoral
n. fibularis communis 
trochlea)
laterat patellar tigament
 accessory cartilage of
patella
m. biceps femoris
(part ofinsertion)
femur.
medial ridge of trochlea
m.gastrocnemius
 middle patellar ligament
femur, lateral epicondyle
femur,
lateral ridge of trochiea
femur,extensor fossa
medial patellar ligament
lateral meniscus
mediaf meniscus
femorotibiat joint, latera!
colfateraf figament
n.extensordigiforum
tibia, lateral condyle
 tendons in extensor
fibula,proximal extremity
sufcus of tibia
n.fibularis profundus
tibialtuberosity
m. extensor digitorum
lateralis
m.tibiafis craniafis
n.fibularis superficialis
m. extensor digitorum
tibial crest
longus
199
Fig. 6.20 The medial and intermediate vastus muscles and the femoral
nerve: left lateral view. The lateral vastus and rectus femoris muscles have
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse 
been partially resected.
ilium, gluteal surface of
m.biceps femoris
wing
(vertebral origins)
m.sacrocaudalis
a.v.gluteacaudalis
dorsalis fateralis
n.gfuteus caudalis
m.semitendinosus
(origin,caput pelvinum)
broad sacrotuberous
n.ischiadicus
ligament
iium, shaft
n. cutaneus femoris
caudalis
m.iliacus lateralis
m. gluteus profundus
(cutedge)
m.capsularis
m. gfuteus medius
femur, greater trochanter
m.rectus femoris
(cuf edge)
ischium, fuber
ischiadicum
mm.gemelli
m.vastus fateralis
(cutedge)
m. gluteus accessorius
m. biceps femoris forigin
m. sartorius
fromtuberischiadicum)
a.v. circumffexa femoris
m. quadrafus femoris
lateralis
m.semimembranosus
n.femoralis
m.semitendinosus
n.tibialis,r.muscutares
m. vastus medialis
m.adductor
femur
n.tibialis
m.rectus femoris
(epa no)
m.semimembranosus
Inn. poplitei profundi
m. vastus intermedius
n. fibularis communis
patella with nail
n. cutaneus surae
m.biceps femoris
caudalis
m.gastrocnemius
lateral patelfar figament
(caput laterale)
200
a.V.gfutea cauoalis
broad sacrotuberous
wing of ilium
igament
n. gluteus caudatis
m.obfuratorius internus
 The Hindlimb
n.cutaneus femoris
caudafis
fuber ischiadicum
m.obturatoriusinternus
(pars iliaca)
mm.gemelfi
n.gluteus cranialis
n. ischiadicus
m. semitendinosus
iium
(caputpeivinum)
m. rectus femoris (origin)
m. quadratus femoris
m. capsufaris
m. gluteus profundus (cut
n. tibialis,
edges)
f.musculares
Craniaf division of greater
frochanter
a.v. circumffexa femoris
medialis
m. giuteus medius
(m.glufeus accessorius
m. semimembranosus:
insertionj
caput longum
m. vastus intermedius
caput brevis
m. gluteus medius
(cut edge)
m. semitendinosus
(caputpevinum)
m. vasfus lateralis
femur, third trochanter
n. fibutaris communis
femur
n.tibialis
m.adductor
n.cufaneus surae
a.v.caudalis femoris
caudalis
m. gastrocnemius (caput
jateraie)origin fromrim of
m.semitenoinosus
supracondyioid fossa
(caput vertebrale)
Fig. 6.21 The medial muscles of the thigh: left lateral view. The pelvic head of the semitendinosus muscle has been transected and the muscle has
been displaced caudally to show the two heads of the semimembranosus muscle.
iium, wing
broad sacrotuberous
figament
a.v. glutea cranialis
n.cutaneus femoris
caudalis
n. gluteus caudalis 
a.v.pudenda
n.glufeus craniafis
lesser ischiatic foramen
greaterischiaticforamen
m. obturatorius internus
(cut)
n.ischiadicus
m. semimembranosus
capuf fongum
m.ifiacus lateralis
mm. gemelf (cut)
m.rectus femoris
ischium
femur,greater trochanter
m. ischiocavernosus
m. obturatorius externus
m.vastus lateralis
m.quadratus femoris
femur, third trochanter
(cut edges)
m. gracilis
m. vastus
medialis
a.v. circumffexa femoris
intermedius
medialis
a.v.caudalis femoris
m. adductor
m.rectus femoris(cut)
n.tibialis
n.fibularis communis
m.semimembranosus
patella
n.cutaneus surae
caudalis
m.gastrocnemius
(caput faterale)
m. semitendinosus
displaced caudally to show the adductor and gracilis muscles. The gemelli and quadratus femoris muscles have been resected to show the external
 obturator muscle. The tibial and fbular nerves have been cut.
201
Fig. 6.23 The pelvis and femur and associated muscles: left lateral view.
The medial parts of the quadriceps femoris muscle (medial and
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
intermediate vastus muscles) have been resected. The bony pelvis and
femur, together with the proximal tibia, are suffciently visible to allow
comparison with Figs. 6.1 and 6.2. Further details of this dissection are
shown in Figs.6.24 and 6.25.
iium:
 sacrum, lateral crest
tubersacrale
tuber coxae
broad sacrotuberous
figament
shaft
n.ischiadicus
ischium:
yellow abdominatl tunic
lesser ischiaticnotch
tuber ischiadicum
m. obliquus internus
abdominis
m.semitendinosus
m. obliquus externus
m. semimembranosus
abdominis
temur:
m. vastus medialis
articufar head
greater trochanter.
m.vastus faterafis
Cranial, caudat divisions
m. sartorius
lesser trochanter
third trochanter
m.pectineus
shaft
lateral border of
supracondyloid fossa
m.adductor
m. quadriceps femoris
n. tibialis
patetfa naied to femoral
m. semitendinosus
trochlea
m. rectus abdominis
m.semimembranosus
femur(distalend):
n. fibularis communis
mediat trochlear ridge
trochlear groove
m.gastrocnemius
(caputtaterale)
figaments)
extensorfossa
n.cutaneus surae
caudalis
prepuce
tibia:
m.soleus
lateralcondyle
extensor sulcus
- n. fibufaris profundus
tuberosity
crest
m. ffexor digiti I longus
m. tibialis cranialis
m, extensor digitorum
fateralis
m. extensor digitorum
longus
n. fibularis superficialis
202
Fig. 6.24 The hip joint and medial muscles of the thigh: left craniolateral
view. This is a closer view of the part of the dissection shown in Figs. 6.23
and 6.25, taken from a more cranial angle to show further details of the
 The Hindlimb
hip joint.
m.rectus femoris
broad sacrotuberous
igament, caudaledge
m.fiacus fateralis
m. gluteus medius
(insertion)
acetabulum(cranial
n. cutaneus femoris
caudalis
joint capsure)
n.ischiadicus
femur, articular suface
of head
ischium,tuber
ischiadicum
m.capsularis
m.semimembranosus
V. pudenda interna
m. vastus medialis et
m. vastus intermedius
m. gluteus profundus
(origin)
(cut edges)
femur,greater rochanter
a.v.circumflexa femoris
lateralis
(origin of caput
m. semitendinosus
v.n.femorafis
pelvinum)
m. gluteus accessorius
m. iliopsoas, insertion into
{insertion)
lesser trochanter
m. vastus lateralis
(origin)
m.pectineus
femur,third trochanter
m. sartorius
m.adductor
n. tibialis
fermur
.m. semitendinosus
a.femoralis
m.semimembranosus
m.quadriceps femoris:
n.fibularis communis
m.vastus intermedius
m.vastusmeoiais
n. cutaneus surae
m.rectus femoris
m. vastus ateralis
caudafis
(insertion)
m.gastrocnemius
(caput iaterale)
femoral trochlea, media!
 patella, accessory
ridge (tuberculum)
cartiage
203
Fig. 6.25 The medial muscles of the thigh: left lateral view. This is a closer
view of a part of the dissection shown in Fig. 6.23.
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
ilium
broad sacrotuberous
ligament
m.iliacus lateralis
n. cutaneus femoris
m. rectus femoris
caudalis
acetabutum, cranial
n.ischiadicus
border
tuberischiaoicum
femur,articular surface
a.v. pudenda interna
m.capsularis
m. gluteus profundus
(cutedge)
m. vastus mediafis
mm.gemelli(cut edge)
a.v.circumffexafemoris
lateralis
ischium
n. femoralis
m.semitendinosus
m.liopsoas, insertion 
(caput peivinum)
m.semimembranosus
n.saphenus
(caput brevis)
a.v. femoralis
m. ischiocavernosus
m.pectineus
a.v.obturatoria
m.sartorius
m. quadratus femoris
m. vastus intermedius
m. vastus tateralis
m. vastus medialis
femur, third trochanter
m.rectusfemoris
m.adductor
m. semimembranosus
nai in patella
shaft of femur
medial ridge of femora!
n.tibialis
trochlea (tuberculum)
n.fibufaris communis
lateral femoropatellar
m. semitendinosus
figament
n. cutaneus surae
m. biceps femoris
caudalis
m. gastrocnemius
patellarligament)
(caputfaterale)
204
Fig. 6.26 The acetabulum and structures of the
medial thigh: left lateral view. The hindlimb has
been removed, and the cut ends of the muscles 
The Hindlimb
cleaned up to show their relationship to each
other and to the vessels and nerves. Further
dissections of this region are shown in Chapter
8, Figs. 8.17 and 8.18.
m.gruteus
sacrotuberous
m.capsularis
profundus
n.ischiadicus
ligament
m. obturatorius internus
a.v. pudenda 
fibrocartilage of
(parsiliaca)
articuar surfaces
ischiatic spine
interna
acetabular lip
greater ischiatic foramen
n. cutaneus femoris
caudalis
m.iliacus lateratis
mm.gemelli
n.gfuteus cranialis
lesser ischiatic foramen
ilum
sacrotuberous ligament,
caudal border
m.rectus femoris
m. obturatorius internus
acetabular notch
(parsiliaca etpars
(schiopubica)
capsule of hip joint at
cranial borderof
tuber ischiadicum
acetabulum
ischium
igament of femoral head
m.biceps femoris, origin
from ischium
m. iliacus medialis
m. obturatorius externus
transverse acetabular
m. quadratus femoris
figament
m. semitendinosus,
m.sartorius
caput pelvinum
a.v.circumfexa
m.semimembranosus
temoris tateralis
m.ischiocavernosus
n.femoralis
v.obturatoria
a.v.femoralis
penile body
Inn. inguinales profundi
m.buibospongiosus
m.pectineus
a.v. profunda femoris
n.obturatorius
m.adductor
symphyseal tendon
accessory figament m. gracilis a.v. obturatoria
offemur
205
V.dorsalis penis
penile body
Fig. 6.27 Superficial structures
of the right femoral and crural
m. graciis
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
m. bu/bospongiosus
regions in the gelding: medial
a.v.saphena
view. A window cut in the deep
m. retractor penis
deep crural fascia and
 crural fascia and tendon of the
insertion of m. gracifis
 gracilis muscle shows the tibial
m.sartorius
 insertion of the semitendinosus
m. semitendinosus
n.saphenus
muscle.
m. tlexor digitorum
snbuoy
tibial tuberosity
V. saphena, r. caudalis
m. semitendinosus,
n. tibialis
tibial insertion
tibia
tendo caicaneus
communis
m.tibialis cranialis
superficial crural fascia
V.saphena,
investing superficial
r. craniafis
vessels and nerves
m. gracilis
n.saphenus
m. sartorius
m.semitendinosus
m. vastus medialis
/.saphena,r.caugalis
mediaf ridge of femora!
trochlea (tubercultum)
m.gastrocnemius
medial patellar figament
middle patelfar ligament 
m.semitendinosus
{larsal tendon joins tendo
v.saphena
accessorius of m, biceps
femoris)
a.saphena
tibial tuberosity
m.flexor digitorum
superficialis
tibial crest
m.biceps femoris
m.semitendinosus
(tendo accessorius)
(insertion into tibial crest)
deep crural fascia
m.popiteus
a. saphena, r. caudalis
V.saphena,r. cranialis
common caicanea!
m.fexor digitorum
tendon
profundus (covered by
a.tibialis caudalis
m.ffexor digitorum
calcaneus,tuber
longus
calcanei
m. tibialis cranialis
n. tibialis.r. cutaneus
tibia
tarsalis medialis
cruralextensor
tibia, medial malfleofus
retinaculum
Fig. 6.28 The left saphenous artery, vein and nerve: medial view. The superficial dissection of this region is shown in Fig. 6.13. The tarsal tendon of
the semitendinosus muscle, which blends with the deep crural fascia, has been partly resected to show the caudal saphenous vein and the tibial nerve 
more clearly (see also Fig. 6.29).
v.saphena
m.vastus medialis
Fig. 6.29 The stifle joint
locked in extension: medial
a.saphena
accessory cartilage of
view. This is a closer view of
patella hooked over
a part of the dissection
m.sartorius
tuberculum
shown in Fig. 6.28. The
 genual (stife) joint was fxed
n.saphenus
femur,tubercutum of
in fullextension and shows
mediat trochiear ridge
the ‘patellar locking
m. gracilis
 mechanism' in action.
middle pateflar
figament
medial patelfar ligament
hookedround
lateralpatellar
tuberculum
ligament
tibialtuberosity
m. gracifis et m. sartorius
tendons inserting on
 medial patellar ligament
tibial crest
tibial insertion of
mediartibial condyle
m.semitendinosus
206
m. vastus mediafis
m.adductor
mediaf collateral
ligament of genual (stiffe)
medial meniscus
joint
The Hindlimb
m.gastrocnemus
medial patellar figament
(caputmediale)
femur,tubercutum of
m. semitendinosus:
medial trochfear ridge
tibiaf insertion
tarsal insertion
middle patellar figament
tendo calcaneus
m.popiteus
communis:
m.gastrocnemius
deep crural fascia.
m. ffexor digitorum
insertion of m. graciis
superficialis
(cut)
m. biceps femoris.
tendo accessorius
m. ffexor digitorum
profundus:
m.ffexor diti longus
n.tibialis
m.ffexordigitorum
fongus
a. saphena, r. caudafis
2147
V.saphena, r. caudalis
m. tibialis cranialis
a. tibialis caudalis
deep crural fascia
calcaneaf tuberosity
cruralextensor
retinacuium
medial coflateral
ligament
tibia, media malleolus
V. saphena medialis.
m. tibiafis craniafis.
f. cranialis
tendo medialis (cunean)
m. tibiatis craniafis,
m. fibularis tertius, tendo
tendo medialis
medialis
 Fig. 6.30 Left stife, crural and tarsal regions: medial view. The gracilis and sartorius muscles and the deep fascia have been removed. This dissection
is also shown in Figs. 6.31 and 6.32.
m. vastus mediafis
patela with nail
m.adductor
m.semitendinosus
patella, accessory
patellar ligaments:
cartilage
medial
middle
femoral frochlea:
lateral
medial idge
groove
n. fibutaris communis
m. extensor digitorum
m, gastrocnemius (caput
[aterale)
tertius,tendons of
origin
femorotibiat joint:
fateral collatera figament
femorotibia medial
lateral mensicus
collfatera figament
medialmeniscus
Jateral condyle of tibia
tibiafl tuberosity
m. extensor digitorum
fongus
m.semitendinosus,tibial
insertion
n.fibutaris supericiatis
tibiaf crest
tendo calcaneus
tibia, medial surface
communis
m. tibiafis cranialis
m. extensor digitorum
lateralis
m. fibufaris tertius
V. saphena medialis,
crural extensor
f.craniafis
retinacufum
tibia, medial malleolus
m. tibiatis cranialis, tendo
tibia, lateral malleolus
medialis (cunean)
m.extensor digitorum
tarsafextensor
fongus in tendon
retinacufum
sheath
Fig. 6.31 Left stifle, crural and tarsal regions: cranial view. This dissection is also shown in Figs. 6.30 and 6.32.
207
n.fibufariscommunis
7.semimembranosus
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
m.gastrocnemius
(caputfaterale)
m.semitendinosus
deep crural fascia
cut edge of fascia
(m.gracilis removed)
m.biceps femoris
(tendo accessorius)
m. semitendinosus,
m.gastrocnemius
tarsal part
n.cutaneus surae
caudalis (n. tibialis)
tibia
 m. extensor digitorum
m. ffexor digitorum
snfuor
fateralis
m. flexor digitiI tongus
n. tibiafis
a.tibialis caudafis
m.flexor digitorum
superticialis
saphena,r.caudalis
tendo calcaneus
 communis on caicanear
tuberosity
tibia, mediat mafleolus 
Fig. 6.32 Left stifle, crural and tarsal regions: caudal view. This dissection is also shown in Figs. 6.30 and 6.31.
m. adductor (insertion)
m. pectineus (insertion)
a.popfitea
a.femorafis
femur
m.gastrocnemius:
caputlaterale
m. vastus medialis
capuf mediale
accessory cartilage of
n.tibialis
patella
tubercufum of medial
m.adductor et
trochlearlipoffemur
m.semimembranosus
(insertions)
m. sartorius ef m. gracilis
(insertions)
femur, medial condyle
medial pateltar igament
medial meniscus
stifle joint, capsule
tibia, medial condyle
middle patellar ligament
m. semifendinosus,
insertion with m. biceps
medialcollateral
femoris,accessory
ligament,femorotibial
tendon, into tendo
joint
 caicaneus communis
m.popliteus
m. flexor digitorurm
longus
tibial tuberosity
m.tibialis caudatis
m. graciis (insertion)
m.triceps surae
m. semitendinosus
{insertion)
n.tibialis
tibia
m.ffexordigitorum
m.tibialis cranialis
superficialis
m. extensor digitorum
m. ffexor digiti I fongus -
jongus
the medial aspect of the stifle joint. The patella has been fixed in the locked' position.
208
femur,third trochanter
m. pectineus
m.quadratus femoris
femur, insertion of
a.femorars
The Hindlimb
m.adductor
m.vastusintermedius
a.caudafisfemoris
m. rectus femoris
m.vastus medialis
n. fibufaris communis
m. extensor digitorum
a.poplitea
lateralis
n.cutaneus surae
n.tibiafis
caudalis (n. tibialis)
m.gastrocnemius
(caputmediale)
m.soleus
m.semitendinosus,
m.gastrocnemius
tendo calcaneus
(caput iaterale)
communis
v. saphena tateralis
m. ffexor digiti I fongus
m. tibialis caudalis
m.flexor digitorum
m.extensor digitorum
longus
iateralis
n.tibialis
m. flexor digitorurm
superficialis
m. flexor digiti I longus
Fig. 6.34 The left crural region: caudal view. The specimen is at the same stage of dissection as that shown in Fig. 6.33.
femur, third trochanter
m.pecfineus
femur, insertion of
m.adductor
a.femoralis
m. vastus intermedius
1.caudalis femoris
m. gastrocnemius
(caput taterale)
m. vastus medialis
m.rectus femoris
a.poplitea
m. biceps femoris
n. tibialis
femur, tateral condyle
m. ffexor digitorum
tateral collatera ligament
superficialis
of fenorotibial joint
m. popfiteus
m.gastrocnemius:
caput mediale
m.tibialis caudalis
tendon
caput laterale
m.extensordigitorum
lateralis
m. ffexor digitorum
fendo calcaneus
profunous:
communis
m.flexordigitorum
m.triceps surae
fongus
m. ffexor digitorum
m.tibiatis caudalis
superficialis
m. ftexor digiti longus
Fig. 6.35 The left stifle and crural regions: caudal view. The lateral head of the gastrocnemius muscle has now been removed (compare with
Fig. 6.34) to show the superficial digital fexor and popliteus muscles.
209
m.vastus mediafis
femur, origin of m. vastus
lateralis
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,The Horse
m. vastus intermedius
m. gastrocnemius (caput
lateralerginfromf
supracondyloid fossa)
m.rectus femoris
a. popliea
patelfa fixed by nail in
n.tibiafis
femoraltrochlea
femur:
m.biceps femoris
tateralepiconoyle
lateral condyle
medial femoral trochlear
m. ffexor digitorum
ridge (tuberculum)
superficialis
lateral pateliar figament
m. popliteus (origin from
popliteal fossa)
laterat femoropatellar
laterafmeniscus
figament
fibia, tateral
m. extensor digitorum
condyle
communis et m.fibularis
tertius,tendon of origin
m. tibialis caudalis
fromfemoralextensor
fossa tying in extensor
n.fibuaris communis
groove of tibia
m. gastrocnemius (cut):
caputmediale
capuf laterale
tibial tuberosity
m.fltexor digiti longus
n.fibularis profundus.
n. cutaneus surae
n.fibularis superficialis
caudalis(n.tibialis)
m.extensor digitorum
/.saphenalateralis
lateralis
m.extensordigitorum
tendo calcaneus
snbuo
communis
Fig. 6.36 The left stifle region and popliteal space: left lateral view. The specimen
accessory cartitage of
nail fixing patefla
patella
m.biceps femoris
trochfea of femur:
latera colateral ligament
medialridge
fateralridge
lateral meniscus
patellar ligaments:
fateral tibial condyle
lateral
middle
n. fibularis communis
medial
m.extensor digitorum
medial coflateral
longus
femoropatelfa ligament
n. fibularis profundus
medial meniscus
medial tibial condyle
n. fibularis superficialis
tibiaf tuberosity
m. extensor digitorum
tibialcrest
lateralis
m. fibularis tertius
m. tibialis craniafis
m. fibularis tertius
m.extensor digitorum
longus
fibial extensor
tibia,lateralmalleolus
retinacuum
tibia, mediat malleolus 
m. extensor digiforum
longus
talus, medial trochiea 
m. tibialis cranialis.
tendomedialis(cunean)
m. extensor digitorum
tendo cranialis
Jateralis
medial collateral tarsa!.
talus, lateral trochlea
figament
V. saphena medialis.
tarsalextensor
f. cranialis
retinacurum (cut)
Fig. 6.37 The left stife, crural and tarsal regions: cranial view. The middle part of the muscle belly of the long digital extensor muscle has been
resected to show the fbrous belly of the third fbular muscle. The joint cavities of the stifle and tarsocrural joints have been opened to demonstrate
their positions more definitely. This dissection is also shown in Figs. 6.38 and 6.39.
210
naif in patella
lateralfemoropatellar
m.biceps femoris
ligament
n. tibialis
trochiearridge
meoial
The Hindlimb
femur, condyle
tateral ligament of
m.popfiteus
patellia
m.fexor digitorum
femur, lateral epicondyle
superficialis
lateral meniscus
fateralcoffateratigament
of femorotibiat joint
tibia, lateral condyie
tibial tuberosity
m.gastrocnemius
{caput mediale)
m.extensordigitorum
n. fibularis communis
longus
n.fibufarisprofundus
n. fibularis superficiatis
m.gastrocnemius
m. fibufaris tertius
(caputtaterale)
m. ffexor digiti Ifongus
m.tibiafis cranialis
n. cutaneus surae
m. extensor digiforum
caudalis
fateralis
v.saphena lateralis
m. extensor digitorum
m. ffexor digitorum
longus
superficialis
tibial extensor
m.biceps femoris.
retinaculum
tendo accessorius
tendo calcaneus
lateralmalleolus
communis
attachment of m.fexor.
fong fateral coffateral
digitorum superticiatis fo
ligament of tarsus
calcaneus
calcaneus
m.fexor digitorum
trochlea of talus
superficialis
m. extensor digitorum
long plantar tigament of
lateralis
tarsus
m.gastrocnemius
tibial tuberosity
(caput mediale)
m. gracili (insertion)
m.popliteus
/ tibial crest
m. semitendinosus
m. tibialis cranialis
{tarsaland tibial
insertions)
n.tibialis
m. fibularis tertius
m. tibialis caudalis
m. extensor digitorur
m. fexor digitorum
snbuo!
longus
tibial extensor
m. ffexor digitorum
ss
retinacufum
talocruratl joint cavity
m.biceps femoris,
tendo accessorius
m. ffexor digitorum
m. ffexor digitiI fongus
longus, tendon in
malleolar groove
a. tibialis caudalis
farsalextensor
a.saphena
retinaculum
tendo caicaneus
r.anastomoticus,
v.saphenamedialiset
communis
V. tibialis craniafis
n. plantaris medialis
medial trochlea of falus
n. plantaris tateralis
joint capsule of
a. plantaris medialis
tarsocrural joint (cut)
long plantar tarsal
figament
m.tibialiscraniafis.
m. ffexor digitorum
tendo mediafis (cunean)
profundus
m. flexor digitorum
long mediat collateral
supericialis
tarsa figament
flexor retinacutum,
V. saphena medialis,
closing tarsal groove
r. cranialis
Fig. 6.39 The left crural and tarsal regions: medial view. The specimen is at the stage of dissection shown in Figs. 6.37 and 6.38.
211
m.ffexor digitorum
m. gastrocnemius
digiti I tongus)
m.biceps femoris, tendo
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
m.fibularis tertius
accessorius
m. tibiafis cranialis
v. saphena fateralis
m.extensor digitorum
m. flexor digitorum:
lateralis
superficiafis
n. fibutaris supericialis
profunous
n. fibularis profundus
n. cutaneus surae
caudalis (n. tibialis)
m.extensor digitorum
snbuor
attachment of m. fexor
tibial extensor
digitorumsuperficiafisto
retinacufum
calcaneus
tibia, latera malleolus
calcaneus
longlateral tarsal
tendon
figament
tarsocrural joint capsute
long plantar tarsal
figament
fateral trochlea of falus
m. fibutaris tertius, tendo
tarsalextensor
lateralis
retinacufum (cut)
m.ffexor digitorum
a. tibialis cranialis-
superficialis
a.v. tarsea perforans
metatarsal bone IV
n. fibularis profundus.
n. metatarseus dorsalis IIl
m. extensor digitorum
brevis
a. metatarsea dorsalis I#f
metatarsalextensor
retinacuum
v.n. plantaris lateratis
metatarsal bone Ill
m.ffexor digitorum
n. fibularis superficialis
profunous
Fig. 6.40 The left tarsus: lateral view. The lateral saphenous vein and the accompanying nerve have been shortened to simplify the dissection of the
lateral region of the tarsus. The tarsal retinaculum has been cut to reveal the cranial tibial vessels more clearly. A medial view of the tarsus is shown
in Fig. 6.44. See also Figs. 6.57 and 6.58.
m. tibialis cranialis
m. extensor digitorum
longus
m. fibufaris tertius
tibial extensor
retinacufum
tibia, medial malfeorus
tibia,lateral malfeofus
medial trochlea of talus
m.fibutaris tertius:
m. tibialis cranialis:
tendolateralis
tendomedialis(cunean)
tendocranialis
tendo cranialis
tarsocrural joint capsufe
(cut)
n. fibularis superficiatis
tateral frochlea of tarus
a.v. tarsea perforans
middfe extensor
retinaculum (cuf)
V.saphena medialis,
r.craniafis
m. extensor digitorum
lateralis
v. metatarsea dorsalis I!
m. extensor digitorum
brevis
n.metatarseusdorsafisfl
(n. fibutaris profundus)
 metatarsal extensor
retinacufum
m. extensor digitorum
metatarsal bone If!
longus
Fig. 6.41 The left tarsus and metatarsus: dorsal view. The tarsal extensor retinaculum has been removed and medial and lateral parts of the
tarsocrural joint cavity have been opened. This dissection is also shown in Figs. 6.42 and 6.43.
212
n.fibularis profundus
v.saphenalateralis
tendo calcaneus
m. extensor digitorum
communis
lateralis
n.cutaneus surae
The
m.extensor digitorum
caudatis (n. tibiafis)
m. flexor digiti I longus
: Hindlimb
longus
tibial extensor
m. flexor digitorurm
retinaculum
superficialis,
attachment to
tibia,tateralmalfeolus
calcaneus
n. fibutaris superficialis
lateral collateral tarsa!
caicaneus, tuberosity
ligament
talus, lateral trochiea
long plantar tarsal
figament
a.v. tibiatis cranialis
m.flexor digitorum
m.extensor digitorum
superficialis
brevis
mefatarsal boneIV
mefatarsaf extensor
retinaculum
metatarsal bone !
m. extensor digitorum
n. metatarseus dorsalis
(snpunoid suenag u) !
longus
a.v.n. plantaris tateralis
a. metatarsea dorsalis It
n. plantaris medialis,
metatarsa bone IV.
r.communicans
distal extremity
m.interosseus medius
mefatarsophalangeal
joint capsuie,proxima!
pouch
Fig. 6.42 The left tarsus and metatarsus: lateral view. The tarsal extensor retinaculum has been removed. This dissection is also shown in Figs. 6.41
and 6.43.
m. ffexor digitorum
m. tibialis cranialis
superficialis
m. fibularis tertius
m. biceps femoris, tendo
accessorius
m. extensor digitorum
snBuo
n.tibialis
m. fexor digitorum
n. plantaris lateralis
longus
m.tibialis caudalis
tibial extensor
retinaculum
m. flexor digiti I tongus
a.n. plantaris mediatis
r.anastomoticus.
a. tibialis craniafis et
tuber calcanei
a.saphena
fong medial collatera!
tibia, medial malleofus 
tarsa ligament
 tarsocruraf joint capsule.
opened
ffexor retinaculum (cut)
talus, medial trochtea
m.fexor digiforum:
centra tarsal bone
superficialis
(position)
profundus
m. tibialis cranialis,
tendo medialis (cunean)
n. piantaris medialis
metatarsal extensor
V. digitalis dorsalis
retinacufum
communis I
metatarsal bone !l,
m.interosseus medius
proximalextremity
metatarsaf bone il.
V. saphena medialis
distalextremity
r. cranialis
n. piantaris medialis,
metatarsar bone l
r.communicans
n.metatarseusdorsalislf
metatarsophalangear
(n. fibutaris profundus)
joint capsuie,proximaf
m. extensor digitorurm
yonod
snbuol
Fig. 6.43 The left tarsus and metatarsus: medial view. This dissection is also shown in Figs. 6.41 and 6.42. The fexor retinaculum which closes the
 medial aspect of the tarsal groove (see Fig. 6.39) has been cut to show the deep digital fexor tendon and the medial plantar vessels and nerve
Occupying the tarsal groove (see also Fig.6.44).
213
m. triceps surae
m.tibialis craniafis
m. flexor digitorum
m. fibufaris tertius
superficialis
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse 
n.tibialis
m. extensor digitorum
longus
m. ffexor digitorum
tibia
longus
m.flexor digitiI longus
a.v.tibialis caudalis
m. tibiafis caudalis
tibialextensor
retinaculum
m. biceps femoris, tendo
tarsocrural joint cavity.
accessorius
proximalpouch
a. tibiafis caudalis,
m. flexor digitorum
r.anastomoticus
longus in malleofar
n. piantaris tateralis
groove
calcaneus, tuberosity
tibia, mediaf malleolus
m.flexor digitorum
V. saphena medialis
Superficialis,attachment
r.anastomoticus
tarsocrural joint cavity
a. plantaris medialis (cut)
talus, medial trochlea
m,ffexor digitorum
V. saphena medialis,
profundus, crossing.
sustentaculum tali
f. articularis
fong medial coliateraf
long plantar ligament 
tarsaifigament and canal
plantar tarsometatarsal
for tendon(opened)
figament
m.tibialis cranialis, tendo
n. plantaris medialis
medialis (cunean)
m.ffexor digitorum
m.fibularis tertius, tendo
superficialis
medialis
metatarsal extensor
m. ffexor digitorum
retinacufum
metatarsal bones II I#I
m.tibialis caudalis
m. extensor digitorum
m.flexor digitorum fongus
fongus
Fig. 6.44 The left tarsus: medial view. The saphenous artery has been resected to show more clearly the origin of the two plantar nerves from the
tibial nerve. The distal part of the canal for the tendon of the long digital fexor muscle has not been opened. It is indicated by broken blue lines.
Union of this tendon with that of the rest of the muscle occurs one third of the way down the metatarsus (see Fig. 6.49). This stage of dissection
is also shown in Fig. 6.45.
m. tibialis cranialis
tendo calcaneus
communis
m.fibufaris tertius
m. extensor digitorum
lateralis
tibial extensor
retinaculum
tibia, medial malleolus
m.fibutaris tertius:
tendomedialis
tendolateralis
talus:
medialtrochiea
lateraftrochlea
tibia, fateral malfeolus 
tong lateral cotlateral
m. tibialis cranialis:
tarsafigament
tendo medialis (cunean)
tendo cranialis
a.tibiafis cranialis
tarsocrural joint:
capsule
m, extensor digitorum
cavity
lateralis
m. fibufaris tertius:
m. extensor digitorum
tendo medialis
snbuot
tendo medius
tendolateralis
m. extensor digitorum
metatarsal extensor
brevis
retinaculum
V.metatarseadorsalisf
metatarsal bones I1,IlI, IV
n.metatarseusdorsalis
(n. fibularis profundus)
a.metatarseadorsalis
Fig. 6.45 The left tarsus: dorsal view. The superficial fbular nerve has been removed and the dorsal metatarsal nerve has been resected. This stage of 
dissection is also shown in Fig. 6.44.
214
m.gastrocnemius:
m.vastus medialis
caputiaterale
accessory patellar
cartiage
The Hindlimb
m.semimembranosuset
m.adouctor(inserfions)
tuberculum of media!
trochlearridge
m.ffexor digitorum
superficialis
mediat pateliar igament
stiffe joint:
femur,medial condyle
medial meniscus
n. tibialis
medialcollateral
ligament
tibiattuberosity
m.popliteus
m. gracilis, insertion
m. semitendinosus.
tarsal insertion
tibial cresf
m. semitendinosus, tibial
m. tibialis caudalis
insertion
tibia
m.fexor digitorum
m. tibialis cranialis
jongus
m. ffexor digitiI longus
m. ffexor digitorum
tibial extensor
superficialis
retinaculum
n.tibialis
a. tibialis caudalis
tibia,medialmafleofus
m.biceps femoris,
tarsocrural joint cavity
tendo accessorius
n. plantaris medialis
mediat fong coftateral
tarsal ligament
n.plantaris lateralis
m. ffexor digitorum
m. tibialis cranialis.
profundus
tendo medialis (cunean)
Fig. 6.46 Deep structures of the left crus: medial view. The gastrocnemius muscle has been resected. This stage of dissection is also shown in
Fig. 6.47.
m. quadriceps femoris
origins of
m.gastrocnemius:
caputfaterale
femur,lateral condyie
caputmediale
m. semimembranosus et
m. popliteus covering
m. adductor (insertions)
fateralmeniscus
femorotibial coffateral
femur, medial condyte
ligamenis
medial meniscus
n.tibialis
m.popiteus
m. extensor digitorum
jateralis
m. flexor digitorum
superficialis
m. semitendinosus.
tarsal insertion
m. ffexor digitorum
m. biceps femoris
profundus:
m. flexor digitorum
(tendo accessorius)
longus
m. fibiafis caudalis
m.gastrocnemius
m.ffexor digiti longus
m.ftexor digitorum
superficialis
a. tibialis caudalis,
r.anastomoticus
caicaneus, tuberosity
m. flexor digitorum
m.ffexor digitorurn
longus
overtying sustentaculum
fali
fibia, medial malleolus
Fig. 6.47 Deep structures of the left crus: caudal view. The gastrocnemius muscle has been resected. This stage of dissection is also shown in
Fig. 6.46.
215
n.fibufaris sup
m.popfiteus
The Horse
m.tibialis caudals
m. ffexor digitorum
longus
Anatomy,
m.extensor digitorum
lateralis
 m. biceps femoris, tendo
accessorius
Color Atlas of Veterinary 
m. triceps surae
(m. gastrocnemius et
m.soleus)
m.ffexor digiti I longus
limits of synovial bursa
caicaneal tuberosity.
Qverlaid by synovial
bursa
attachments of m.flexor
digitorumsuperficialisto
calcaneal tuberosity
tibia, medial mafleofus
long plantar tarsa!
m. flexor digitorum
fgament
profundus
Fig. 6.48 The common calcaneal tendon: caudal view. The tendon of the superficial digital fHexor muscle (see Fig. 6.47) has been removed to show the
synovial bursa between it and the point of the hock, and its attachments to the calcaneal tuberosity.
m.triceps surae
m. ffexor digitorurm
profundus:
m.biceps femoris.
m.tibialis caudalis
tendo accessorius
m.flexor digitiftongus
m. fexor digitorum
snbuoj
m. flexor digitorum
m. ffexor digiti I longus et
superficialis:
m. tibialis caudalis (cut)
attachrments to
entering tarsal groove
caicaneus
 synovial bursa deep to
tendon
tibia, medial mafleolus
tarsus,lateralcollatera
ligament
calcaneus,
sustentacutum tali
forming dorsaf wall of
tarsal groove
m.flexor digitorum
profundus,accessory
ligament (origin from
tarsus, medial coltateraf
tarsai bone I)
ligament
tarsus, long plantar
m. flexor digitorum
ligament
fongus (cut)
tarsa ftexor retinaculum
metatarsal bone IV
forrning plantar wall of
[cut}
tarsal groove
m.interosseus medius
(origin frommetatarsal
bone lll)
metalarsal bone
Fig. 6.49 Tarsal groove of the left tarsus: plantar view. The tendons of the deep digital fHexor muscle have been cut and removed from the tarsal
groove, showing the sustentaculum tali, over which two tendons of the deep digital fexor muscle run. The origins of the accessory ligament (tarsal
head of the deep digital fexor muscle) and the suspensory ligament (interosseus medius muscle) are also revealed.
216
laterat patellar figament
tateral femoral condyle
femur,extensor fossa
m.popiiteus
m. fibularis tertius et
The Hindlimb
m. extensor digitorum
lateral meniscus
snns yosuaxa ur snsuol
oftibia
n.tibiafis,r.muscularis
femorotibialjoint,latera
fibial tuberosity
collateral ligament
-lateral condyie of tibia
m. extensor digitorum
fongus
n. fibularis profundus
m. tibialis cranialis
n. fibufaris superficiafis
m. fibularis tertius
m. biceps femoris,tendo
m. extensor digitorum
accessorius
lateralis
m. extensor digitorum
m. triceps surae
longus
tibialextensor
m. ffexor digiti longus
retinacuum
tibia, fateraf maffeofus
boundaryofsynovial
bursa lying deep to
tatus,ateral trochiea
m.ftexor digitorum
superficialis
m. fibularis tertius, tendo
calcaneus, tuberosity
lateralis
m. flexor digitorum
a. tibialis cranialis
superficialis, attachment
a. tarsea perforans
to cafcaneus (cut)
a.dorsalis pedis
calcaneus
m. extensor digitorum
long plantar tarsat
brevis
figament
Fig. 6.50 Deep structures of the left crus: lateral view. The specimen is at the stage of dissection shown in Figs. 6.48 and 6.51.
m. flexor digitorum
m.vastus medialis
superficialis (origin from
jo essopiopuooerdns
medial condyle of femur
femur)
medial patelfar ligament
m. gastrocnemius
forigins from
medial meniscus
supraconoyloid
mediaf coflateral
tuberosities)
ligament ofstiffe
tateral condyle of femur
m. popiteus 
n.tibialis, r. muscularis
m. tibialis cranialis
m.biceps femoris,
tibia
tendo accessorius
m. ftexor digitiI fongus
tendon in malfeolar
m. tibialis caudalis
groove
fimitsofsynoviatbursa
tibia, medial malleolus
n.plantaris lateralis
tarsocrural joint cavity.
(n. tibialis)
opened
m.triceps surae
m. flexor digitorum
jongus
m. flexor digitorum
altachmenis to
superficialis,
medialcolfateral
ligament of stifte joint
calcaneal tuberosity
m.fexor digitorum
cafcaneus,tuberosity
proftundus
n. plantaris medialis
long plantar tarsal
(n. tibialis)
ligament
Fig. 6.51 Deep structures of the left crus: caudomedial view. The specimen is at the same stage of dissection as that shown in Figs. 6.48 and 6.50.
217
Fig. 6.52 Structures of pelvic, femoral and crural regions in the mare: left 
caudolateral view (1). The tensor fasciae latae, superficial gluteal and
biceps femoris muscles have been removed. Parts of the middle gluteal
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
and semitendinosus muscles have been resected. The pelvic and femoral
regions of this specimen are shown in Chapter 8 (Figs. 8.62-8.64).
itium,
m. gluteus medius,origins
tubersacrale
dorsal sacroiliac tigament
a.v. glutea cranialis
m.gluteus accessorius
sacrum, tateral cresf
a.v.ilioumbalis
n. gtuteus cranialis
m. obliquus internus
a.v. glutea caudalis
abdominis
n.ischiadicus
m.iliacus fateralis
m.sacrocaudalis
n.cutaneus
dorsafis laterafis
femoris lateralis
n. giuteus caudalis
n. gluteus cranialis
broad sacrotuberous
a.v. circumffexa ilium
figament
profunda
n. cutaneus femoris
a.v.iliacofemoralis
caudalis
m. gluteus profundus
a.v. pudenda interna
femur,greater trochanter
m.semimembranosus,
caput longum
yelfow abdominal tunic
a.v. Circumffexa femoris
m. obturatorius internus
medialis
vulva
femur, third trochanter
tuber ischiadicum
m.vastus lateralis
mm.gemelli
m.rectus femoris
a.v. caudafis femoris
m. quadratus femoris
n. tibialis
Inn. poplitei profundi
patella
a.v.obturatoria
m. semitendinosus, capuf
femur, extensor fossa
vertebrale et caput
lateral patellar ligament
pelvinum
lateral collaterat ligament
m. semimembranosus
of stiffe joint
n.cutaneus surae
caudalis {displaced)
tendon in tibial extensor
n. fibufaris communis
sufcUs
tibial tuberosity
m. extensor digitorum
m. extensor digitorurm
longus
lateratis
218
m.gluteus medius
dorsal sacroiliac
(origins)
figament
ilium:
- a.v. glutea cranialis
sacrum, lateral crest
 The Hindlimb
tubersacrale
gluteal line
n.ischiadicus
tuber coxae
shaft
m.sacrocaudalis
dorsais laterais
m.gtuteusaccessorius
(origin)
a.v. glutea caudalis
broad sacrotuberous
a.v.iliolumbalis
ligament
a.v. pudenda interna
m. coccygeus
n. gluteus cranialis
m.gruteusprofundus
n.cutaneus femoris
fateralis (LI)
-m. sphincter ani externus
n. cutaneus femoris
m.liacus faterafis
caudalis
a.v. iliacofemoralis
m.capsularis
m. gluteus medius
(insertion)
m.rectus femoris
tuber
femur, greater trochanter
ischiadicum
m. glufeus accessorius
m. quadratus femoris
(insertion)
m. vastus tateralis
a.v.obturatoria
femur,third frochanter
m. semimembranosus,
capuf fongum
(m. gluteus superficialis,
insertion)
m. semifendinosus:
caput pelvinum
n.fiburaris communis
caput vertebrale
a.v. caudafis femoris
n.tibiafis
m. gastrocnemius, caput
n.cutaneus surae
laterale
caudalis (n. tibialis)
Fig. 6.53 Structures of pelvic, femoral and crural regions in the mare: left caudolateral view (2). The accessory head of the middle gluteal muscle and
the deep gluteal muscles have been resected. The long head of the semimembranosus muscle has been cut away and the superfcial perineal
structures are displayed caudal to the caudal edge of the broad sacrotuberous ligament. The middle part of the ischiatic nerve and the caudal
cutaneous femoral nerve have been removed.
iium:
dorsal sacroifiac
tuber coxae
ligaments
tuber sacrale
sacrum, lateral crest
gluteatfine
n.ischiadicus
m. gluteus accessorius
a.v.glutea caudais
a.v. glutea cranialis
n.hypogastricus
a.v.iliofumbalis
m.sacrocaudalis
a.v.iliacofemoralis
dorsalislateralis
nn. pelvini
m.iliacus fateralis
m.liacus medialis
n. rectalis caudalis
m. psoas major
n.pudendus
a.v. pudenda interna
m.rectus femoris
m.coccygeus
m.sartorius
m. levator ani
m.capsularis.
m. gruteus profundus
n.femoralis
a.perinealis dorsalis
(a. glutea caudafis)
acetabulum
articular surface
notch
a.v. perinealis ventratis
ligamentof femoral head
m. obturatorius internus
accessory femoral
ligament
mm.gemelli
transverse tigament
-m. quadratus femoris
a.v.circumflexafemoris
-m.semimembranosus
medialis
m. semitendinosus,
a.v.femoralis
caput pelvinum
m. obturatorius externus
n. saphenus
m.adductor
Inn.inguinales profundi
m. pectineus
a.v. pudenda externa
m. graciis
Fig. 6.54 The acetabulum and associated structures in the pregnant mare: left caudolateral view. The left hindlimb and broad sacrotuberous ligament 
have been removed. The cut ends of the muscles, vessels and nerves have been dissected to show their topographical relationships. Further
dissections of this region in this specimen are shown in Chapter 8 (Figs. 8.66-8.71).
219
a.iiacainternasinistra
a.V. gfutea caudalis
v.iliaca communis
a.umbiicalis
sinistra
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
n. pudendus
aorta abdominalis
nn.pelvini
a.liaca externa sinistra
broad sacrotuberous
a.mesentericacaudalis
ligament
a.v. circumffexa ilium
n. rectalis caudalis
profunda
a.ovarica dextra
a.v.pudenda interna
a.vaginalis
a. uterina dextra
m.obturatorius internus
m. sarforius
pars iliaca
a.v.iliaca externa
a.v.obturatoria
n.obturatorius
m.obturatorius internus,
a.v.femorafis
pars ischiopubica
n. genitofemoralis(Ll)
 ischium
parietal peritoneum and
transversalis fascia
pubis
a. profunda temoris
m. graciis
m. obliquus abdominis
internus
m.adductor
a.v. epigastrica
v. labiafis ventralis
caudalis
m. gracilis
m.rectus abdomini
m.sartorius
a.v.pudenda externa
V.saphena medialis
a.saphena
mediat femoral fascia
(cuf edge)
n.saphenus
Fig. 6.55 The right pelvic wall of a pregnant mare: medial view. The left side of the pelvis and the pelvic viscera have been removed. The dissections 
leading to this stage are shown in Chapter 8 (Figs. 8.62-8.92). Further stages are shown in Figs. 6.59-6.62.
V. saphena medialis
m.gracilis
m.sartorius
a.saphena
m.semitendinosus
mediat femoral fascia
(cutedge)
n. saphenus
V. saphena medialis.
r.caudalis
medial patelfar ligament
tarsa tendon of
m. semitendinosus
deep fascia over stiffe
region
tendon ofm.fexor
digitorum superficiatis
superficiat layer of deep
crural fascia (cut edge)
digital ffexor muscles
coveredby deeplayer of
deepcrural fascia
tibia
n.tibialis,r.cutaneus
tarsalis medialis
V.saphena medialis.
f. craniafis
calcaneal tuberosity
Fig. 6.56 The right stifle and crural regions of the mare: medial view. The superficial fasciae and parts of the superfcial layer of deep fascia have been 
removed.
220
n.saphenus
V. saphena medialis.
r.caudalis
V.saphenamediatis
 The Hindlimb
r.cranas
n.tibialis,
f.cutaneus farsalis
m.tibialis cranialis
medialis
a.v.tibiafis caudalis
m. lexor digiti longus
tibia
m. fexor digitorum
tibia, medial malleolus 
longus
medial collateral tarsal
a.tibialis caudalis,
ligament
r.anastomoticus
a.v.n. plantaris medialis
m.tibialis cranialis,
tendo medialis (cunean)
calcaneal tuberosity
metatarsa bone Ifl
a. plantaris tateralis
n. metatarseus dorsalis !!
fong piantar ligament
(n. fibularis profundus)
metatarsal bone I.
V. metatarsea dorsalis I
proximalextremity
deep metatarsal fascia.
metatarsaf bone f/
cuf edge
m.extensor digitorum
m. ffexor digitorum
fongus
superficialis
V.digitalis dorsalis
m. ffexor digitorum
communis I/
profundus
Fig. 6.57 Superficial structures of the right tarsus: medial view. More distal parts of this specimen are shown in Fig. 7.74.
n.cutaneus surae
m. extensor digitorum
caudalis (n.fibialis)
lateralis
v. saphena fateralis
n. fibularis superficialis
tendo caicaneus
tibialextensor
communis
retinaculum
a.v. malfeolaris caudatis
lateralis
a.v.tibialis cranialis,
fr. cutanei
calcaneal tuberosity
m. extensor digitorum
tibia, fateral malleofus 
fateralis
lateraf colfateral farsa!
talus,trochlea
ligament
position of centraf
tarsal bone
figament
position of thirg
tarsaibone
tarsalexfensor
metatarsal extensor
retinacufum
metatarsal boneIV
(proximal extrermity)
m, extensor digitorum
lateralis
n.metafarseusdorsafisfl
(n. fibularis profundus)
m.extensor digitorum
snbuoj
a. plantaris laterais,
ff.cutanei
a. metatarsea dorsalis II
m. ffexor digitorum
superficialis
metatarsat bone Ifl
v.n. plantaris lateralis
m. interosseus medius
221
a.v. glutea caudalis
a. uterina dextra
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,The Horse
m.psoas major
a.v. vaginalis
m.jlacus
m. obliquus internus
abdominis
a.v. circumfexa iium
profunda
m. obturatorius interna
m. tensor fasciae latae
n. cutaneus femoris
lateralis (LII)
a.v.obturatoria
n.obturatorius
a.v. profunda femoris 
a.v.femoralis
m. obturatorius internus 
pubis
V. pudenda externa
m. sartorius
m.rectus femoris
accessory figament of
femur (cut surface)
m. gracilis (cut edge)
m. vastus medialis
m.adductor
m. semimembranosus
a.saphena
n.saphenus
V. saphena medialis
m.semitendinosus
Fig. 6.59 Vessels and nerves of the right pelvic and femoral regions in the pregnant mare: medial view. The ischiopubic part of the internal obturator
muscle has been removed. The abdominal wall and most of the gracilis muscle have been resected (compare with Fig. 6.55).
a.v.iliaca externa
a.v.obturatoria
n. obturatorius
m. tensor fasciae fatae
broad sacrotuberous
ligament
a. profunda femoris
t. pudendoepigastricus
m. obturatorius interna,
parsiliaca
m.rectus femoris
a.v.femoralis
m.obturatoriusinternus
(cutedge)
accessory femoral
figament
m.pectineus
pubis
n.saphenus
V.pudenda externa
v. saphena medialis
a. saphena
m.adductor
m.vastus medialis
m.sartorius
m.semimembranosus
m.gracilis (cranial
part,cut)
Fig. 6.60 The right pectineus muscle: medial view. The cranial remnant of the gracilis
muscle has been resected to show the pectineus muscle and the origin and
termination of the saphenous vessels.
222
Fig. 6.61 Femoral and saphenous vessels and nerves in the mare: right
 medial view. The sartorius muscle has been removed.
 The Hindlimb
a. mesenterica caudalis 
m. sacrococcygeus
dorsalis
a.ovarica
a.V. glutea caudalis
m. sartorius, origin from
m.sacrococcygeus:
tendon ofm.psoas minor
ventralismedialis
ventralis lateralis
a. uterina
n.pudendus
a.v. circumffexa ilium
a. iliaca interna sinistra
profunda
m. obliquus internus
a.umbilicalis
abdominis
a.v. pudenda interna
a. iliaca externa
m. obturatorius internus,
m.psoas major
pars iliaca
n.cutaneus femoris
n.obturatorius
lateralis
a.v.obturatoria
m. ifiacus fateralis
ischium
m. tensor fasciae latae
m.obturatorius internus
(cutedge)
n.femoralis
siqnd
a.v. iliaca externa
V. pudenda externa
a. profunda femoris
accessoryfemoral
snoysebideopuapnd 
ligament
a.v.femoralis
m.graciis
(originofcranial part)
m.rectus femoris
m. vastus medialis
m.pectineus
femoral tuberculum
m.adductor
m. sartorius (insertion)
m. gracilis(insertion)
m.semimembranosus
medial patear ligament
m.semitendinosus
223
Fig. 6.62 Deep structures of the right pelvic and femoral regions in the
mare: medial view. The adductor and semimembranosus muscles have
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
been removed. The broad sacrotuberous ligament and the pudendal
nerve which runs in it, have been resected to show the nerves lying lateral
to the ligament.
aorta abdominais
a.v. glutea caudatis
a. ovarica
n. pudendus (St, IV)
a.mesentericacaudalis
a. pudenda interna
a. iliaca interma sinistra 
n. ischiadicus (LVI, SI I)
n. gluteus caudatis (SI,I)
a.v.circumflexa ilium
profunda
a.v. pudenda interna
m. psoas minor
n. cutaneus femoris
caudalis
a. umbilicalis
m. biceps femoris
m. obliquus internus
abdominis
a.v.obturatoria
m.psoas major
n.obturatorius
a.v.iliaca externa
m. obturatorius internus
m.adductor(cut)
m. iliacus fateralis
a.v. circumffexa femoris
t. pudendoepigastrica
medialis
n.femoralis
a.v.obfuratoria
m. tensor fasciae latae
m. adductor (insertion)
a.v. circumffexa femoris
m.semimembranosus
lateralis.
(cut)
a.v.femoralis.
m. biceps femoris
m. rectus femoris
n. tibialis
m. pectineus
a.v. popitea
m.vastus mediafis
m. semitendinosus
V. saphena medialis
a, caudalis femoris
s
a.saphena
m.semimembranosus et
femoral tubercurum
m. adductor (inserfions)
m.gastrocnemius
m. sartorius (insertion)
(caput mediale)
medial patelfar ligament
m. gracilis (insertion)
224
7. THE FOOT
Clinical importance of the foot
the bone, direct trauma or osteoporosis. Sesamoiditis (degenerative or
In vertebrate anatomy, the *foot' includes the carpus or tarsus and the
 bony change in the proximal sesamoid bones) is an important disease
regions distal to these joints. Contact between the foot and the poten-
of the foot in the horse. 'Ringbone' is an enlargement of one or both
tially dangerous ground underfoot (frequently mud or concrete) pro-
of the bones which form the proximal or distal interphalangeal joint.
duces a variety of disorders which cause many clinical problems. The 
The term “false ringbone’ is often used when only the shaft of the
lower limb is subjected to tremendous stress and strain through normal
 proximal or middle phalanx is affected.
locomotion, and is frequently involved in trauma. Approximately 60%
There are several types of fracture (#) of the pedal bone (distal
of the weight of a horse is carried on the forefeet and approximately
phalanx):
90% of all forelimb lameness occurs in the foot.
Type I - non-articular fractures of the palmar/plantar process
 Correct foot balance is required and is sometimes forgotten. Various
 Type II - parasagittal articular fractures from the DIP joint to the
imbalances of conformation can occur. The foot has to be balanced
medial and lateral solar margin
and evenly placed around its centre of weight-bearing (midpoint of the
Type Ill - mid-sagittal articular fractures
circle of the laminar suspension). In dorso-palmar imbalance, the foot
 Type IV - fractures of the extensor process
has a long toe and a low heel, so the load is transferred to the heels.
Type V -comminuted fractures of the pedal bone secondary to foreign
Latero-medial imbalance is often the result of uneven trimming which
body penetration
results in sheared heels; one heel (usually the medial one) strikes the
 Type Vl - non-articular marginal fractures
 ground before the other.
Type Vll - non-articular fractures of the palmar/plantar process.
 In young horses, fractures of the growth plates are the most
common. The younger the foal when the fracture occurs the better the
 Inflammation of the distal phalanx (pedal osteitis) is quite common.
 prognosis. If the fracture is transverse, across the bone (as is usual in 
'Sidebone' is ossification in the ungular cartilages of the pedal bone
the pedal bone) rather than longitudinal, along the long axis, the bone
 and is relatively common, whereas bone-cysts in the pedal bone are
heals more quickly. Approximately 80% of the fractures of the equine
much rarer. Fracture of the distal sesamoid ('navicular bone') may be
foot occur in the manus. Distal limb fractures are often acute, with
in the form of a chip fracture or a simple sagittal fracture close to the
severe ligament damage and soft tissue swelling. The fracture may be
ridge of the sesamoid bone. Comminuted fractures of this bone are
closed or open (exposed to potential infection). Bruised or sore shins
fortunately rare, as they are impossible to repair.
(dorsal metacarpal disease) are the result of stress or fatigue to the
Problems of the joints of the foot involve a considerable amount of
 bone as this part of the bone receives more stress compression than
the equine practitioners time, expertise, energy and patience. In the
the other parts of the bone. Condylar, metaphyseal and diaphyseal
foal, the most common cause of acute lameness is septic arthritis/
fractures of the third metapodial (metacarpal and metatarsal) bones
osteomyelitis. Most are septicaemic infections and in at least 50% of
may occur. Chip fractures are also quite common. In the ‘proximal
 the cases, multiple joints are involved. There are basically three types
metapodial syndrome' there are avulsion stress fractures of the proxi-
of injury. One is related to the epiphyses, the second to the epiphyseal
mal palmar and plantar cortices.
cartilages and the third to the cuboidal bones in the carpus and tarsus.
'Splints’ are bony exostoses of the second or fourth metapodial
Villonodular synovitis in the form of a chronic proliferative hyper-
bones. Fractures of the second and fourth metapodial bones usually
trophic response is also not uncommon.
occur in the distal third of the bone. They usually result from kicks,
The joints of the manus and pes of the older horse are also subjected
but may also occur spontaneously. Fractures of the middle phalanx
to a wide range of abnormalities. Sub-luxations occur and must be
occur frequently from the sudden compression and simultaneous
torsion to which the foot is often subjected. This is particularly severe
proximal (PIP) and the distal (DIP) interphalangeal joints. Angular
with sudden stops and starts.
deformity (joint laxity) of the fetlock is also a possibility. This, and a
Fractures of the distal phalanx (pedal bone) are not uncommon.
similar interphalangeal disorder, have a poor prognosis. Flexural
They often occur when the horse kicks out and hits something solid.
deformity of the fetlock is either con genital or acquired. It may be due
The digital pulse is increased in this fracture. If the distal interphalan-
to relative shortening of the musculo-tendinous part of the superficial
 geal joint (DIP) is also involved, there may be considerable effusions
digital flexor muscle, the deep digital flexor muscle, or the sesamoidean 
into the joint. Fracture of the proximal sesamoid bone may result from
ligaments. Traumatic and degenerative arthritis of the proximal
225
interphalangeal joint (PIP or pastern joint) and distal interphalan geal
Laminitis is a specific condition of the foot of the horse, usually
joint (DIP or coffn joint) has been described, and infectious arthritis
affecting the forelimb. This is inflammation of the sensitive laminae of
of the joint is also known.
the corium (dermis) within the wall of the hoof. It is essentially a
Hor
The joints of the foot are accessible for the collection of joint fluid
peripheral vascular disorder caused by systemic damage. Release of
samples, or the administration of anaesthesia, or treatments. The
vasoactive substances (catecholamines) can cause ischaemic necrosis.
The
fetlock joint is accessible via its palmar/plantar synovial recess. This
There are many different predisposing factors, particularly grain
 is located just proximal to the joint, between the palmar aspect of the
overload and postoperative recovery after colic surgery. Laminitis can
distal metapodial bone Ill and the suspensory ligament, at a level
 be graded as 1, 2, 3 and 4. Type l is developmental, type 2 foot pain 
and lameness, type 3 sub-clinical (recovery without mechanical failure)
bearing position, the needle is inserted at right angles to the axis of
and type 4 chronic (this leads to displacement of the distal phalanx).
the limb, in a slightly downward direction, to a depth of 2-3 cm. The
 The progression usually starts with excess grain overload, leading to
PIP (pastern) joint is entered through a site dorsal and just lateral to
a rise in lactic acid, then the caecal pH falls. Gram-negative bacteria
the common (forelimb) or long (hindlimb) digital extensor tendon and
rapidly multiply and extra endotoxin is released. Vasoactive agents are
at the level of, or just distal to, the palmar or plantar process of the
then released and circulate. This leads to vasoconstriction, ischaemia
proximal phalanx. With the limb in a weight-bearing position, the
and necrosis. Another theory suggests that proteinases are activated
needle is inserted in a distal and medial direction. The DIP (coffin)
in the distal lamellae and this degrades the type IV collagen which
joint is located by finding a depression that is approximately 2 cm
 attaches the hoof to the distal phalanx. This results in loss of mechani-
dorsal to the coronary band and on the midline. The needle may be
cal support.
inserted just medial or lateral to the common (forelimb) or long (hind-
Various other foot problems can be listed. ‘Mud rash' (otherwise
limb) digital extensor tendon or directly through the tendon. With the 
known as greasy-heel) is associated with bacterial infections caused by
limb in a weight-bearing position, the needle is inserted in a distal and
Dermatophilus and Staphylococci. Cracks in the hoof wall run verti-
palmar or plantar direction, to a depth of 2.5 cm.
 a o ns st a , q A an  
Tendonitis is inflammation of the tendon sheaths. Usually the
wall from the distal phalanx. *Thrush' is a degenerative condition of 
superficial (SDF) and deep (DDF) digital flexor tendons are affected.
 the central and collateral sulci of the frog; it is associated with surface
These tendons suffer severe stress in the leg of the horse. They are also
invasion by micro-organisms under anaerobic conditions. “Canker' is
damaged when the muscles are fatigued. The SDF is more likely to be
a chronic, infectious, hypertrophic, moist, podo-dermatitis of the frog
damaged because it suffers much more strain in over-extension than
the DDF. The damage is most likely to occur at mid metacarpal level
between the laminar horn and dermis (corium) in the wall of the hoof.
in the SDF or, for the DDF, at the level of the fetlock joint. Both
"White line disease’ is a rare, progressive crumbling of the hoof wall
tendons are avascular and repair therefore takes time.
 at the junction between the wall and sole. 'Nail bind' is a direct injury
Tendon lacerations are quite common as a result of wire cuts,
or bruising of the solar or laminar dermis caused by a shoe-nail.
over-reaching, Or striking injuries. Damage to the DDF causes
‘Quittor' is the necrosis of the ungular cartilages of the distal phalanx;
lifting of the toe. Damage to the SDF causes sinking of the fetlock.
 it often results in purulent discharges and sinus formation above the
If both the tendons are sectioned then the fetlock sinks to the
coronary band.
ground.
The hoof wall is rigid except at the heels, where the laminae are
The ligaments of the foot may also suffer damage, usually as a result
 attached to the ungular cartilages, which can ‘expand’ (move abaxi-
 of trauma. Desmitis (inflammation of a ligament) can affect the distal
ally) on bearing weight. The structures within the ‘rigid', box-like
sesamoidean ligaments of the fetlock. Breakdown of the suspensory
regions of the toe and quarters are also subjected to continuous move-
apparatus can also occur, usually in racehorses when going at full
ment on bearing weight, so there is a potential for problems of dimin-
speed: an acute over-extension of the fetlock can disrupt any or all of
ished blood supply to these regions. The hoof has a diminished
the components of the suspensory apparatus - suspensory ligament,
 response to injury and a slow rate of healing, yet it contains many
sesamoid bones, and distal sesamoidean ligaments. The most common
important structures. Superfcial wounds that penetrate only cornified
site of any such injury is at the proximal attachment of the suspensory
tissue may, nevertheless, produce a sub-solar abscess. Pododermatitis
ligament to the proximal plantar cortex of the metacarpal/metatarsal
is the inflammation of the solar dermis (corium) with or without sec-
bones.
ondary infection. Deep wounds that penetrate the germinal epithelium
The ‘navicular syndrome’ is responsible for 30% of all of forelimb
introduce infections, usually Closiridia. These are life-threatening
 lamenesses. The syndrome is chronic palmar foot lameness affecting
emergencies with serious long-term consequences. Wounds that
the distal sesamoid ('navicular') bone. It involves the fbrocartilage of
involve the synovial structures are particularly serious and require
its fexor surface, the palmar part of the distal interphalangeal joint,
immediate and aggressive treatment.
the deep digital fexor tendon, the podotrochlear ('navicular) bursa,
Wounds greater than l cm in depth are dangerous as these pene-
the collateral sesamoidean ('navicular’ suspensory) ligaments and the
trate the sole. Wounds of 1.2 cm will penetrate the hoof and wall.
distal sesamoid impar ligament. There are two theories for its cause:
Wounds over 1.5 cm deep will penetrate the frog. These deep penetrat-
the vascular theory and the biomechanical theory. It is thought to be
ing wounds can be classifed into three groups: Type l wounds pene-
associated with abnormal pressure/vibration forces between the deep
trate the corium and cause septic osteitis in the distal phalanx, with a
digital fexor tendon and the flexor surface of the navicular bone. Also,
 distal cushion abscess. Type 2, penetrating deep puncture wounds,
penetrating wounds can reach the deep digital fexor tendon and may
gain access into the caudal third of the frog and can enter many struc-
result in necrosis in the tendon. Penetration into the podotrochlear
tures including the digital fexor tendons (the SDF and DDF). The
(navicular') bursa may also involve the impar ligament and progress
hoof also contains other structures that can be penetrated, including
into the distal interphalangeal joint (DIP) and result in infectious
the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint, tendon sheaths, tendons (par-
arthritis. The digital sheath of the deep digital fexor muscle extends
ticularly the tendon of the DDF) and ligaments (the distal sesamoid
to the midshaft of the middle digit. Penetration into this digital sheath
impar ligament and the collateral ligaments of the DIP), the distal and
may result in infectious tenosynovitis.
middle phalanges and the distal sesamoid ('navicular') bone and its
The hoof may be damaged by treading on something sharp or by
bursa. Type 3 wounds penetrate the coronary band, leading to septic
chondritis of the cartilaginous structures such as the articular carti-
However, when the hoof is damaged, it can be supported and pro-
lages and ungular cartilages of the distal phalanx, and may subse-
tected by casts and shoes.
quently extend into the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint.
226
Several nerve blocks are used to localise the site of lameness in the
 necessary to block these medial and lateral dorsal metatarsal nerves
manus or pes. Perineural analgesia of the distal digital region can be
with subcutaneous circumferential ring-blocks at the dorsal aspect of
achieved by blocking the lateral and medial palmar/plantar nerves at
the “buttons' of the splint bones. This is the Low 6-point nerve block
the level of the middle phalanx. The needle is inserted subcutaneously
for the hindlimb.
5
over the palpable neurovascular bundle, just proximal to the ungular
 Perineural analgesia of the metacarpal and digital regions can be
H
cartilage of the distal phalanx on each side. This is the Palmar/Plantar
achieved by blocking the lateral and medial palmar, and also the
digital nerve block. These nerves can be blocked at a more proximal
palmar metacarpal nerves, just distal to the carpus. The needle is
level by inserting the needle subcutaneously over the palpable neurov-
imserted deeply, axial to metacarpal bone IV, until it reaches the
 ascular bundle, on the abaxial surface of the lateral and then the
palmar surface of metacarpal bone Ill. Here the lateral palmar met-
medial proximal sesamoid bone. This is the Abaxial sesamoid nerve
acarpal nerve is injected. The palmar nerve is blocked by inserting
block.
the needle subcutaneously at the same level into the space between
 Perineural analgesia of the distal metacarpal and digital regions can 
the DDF and the suspensory ligament. This is repeated on the
be achieved by blocking the lateral and medial palmar, and palmar
medial side in relation to metacarpal bone I1. These constitute the
 metacarpal nerves, proximal to the fetlock. The sites for subcutaneous
High palmar nerve block. In the hindlimb, only one injection site is
injections are immediately distal to the distal extremities (*buttons') of
needed on each side to inject the nerves. The needle is inserted just
the metacarpal bones II and IV, to block the palmar metacarpal nerves
distal to the tarsometatarsal joint and axial to metatarsal bone IV,
 on both sides. At the same level, the sites for subcutaneous injections
until it reaches the plantar surface of metatarsal bone Ill. After
are located between the DDF and the suspensory ligament on each
injecting the lateral plantar metatarsal nerve at this site, the needle is
side, to block the palmar nerves. This is the Low 4-point nerve block
partially withdrawn and a second injection is made between the
for the forelimb. For the hindlimb, the same four injections are made,
DDF and the suspensory ligament, to block the lateral plantar
 but there is an important anatomical difference. The dorsal metatarsal
nerve. This procedure is repeated on the medial side, in relation to
nerves exchange fbres with the plantar metatarsal nerves in the proxi-
metatarsal bone II and the tendon and ligament. This is the High
 mal phalangeal region and they innervate the hoof. It is therefore
plantar nerve block.
227
radius, medial styloid
antebrachium
Fig. 7.1 Surface features
process
 of the left manus: cranial
view. Figs. 7.3, 7.5 and 7.7
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse 
show further views of this
specimen. Palpable
features have been shaved.
Figs. 7.2, 7.4, 7.6 and 7.8
show the bones of the
carpus, radiocarpal joint 
radius, lateral styloid
region. Fig. 7.9 shows the
process
 solar surfaces of the hoof.
metacarpus, metacarpa!
bonelfl
digit Il:
pastern
positions of lateral and
medial cartiages
coronet
periople
wallof hoof
metacarpophalangeal
lateralquarter
(fetlock) joint
toeofwall
medial styloid process
radius
Fig. 7.2 The bones of the
left manus: cranial view.
groove for rm.extensor
digitorumcommunis
The prominences shaved
groove for m.abductor
 in Fig. 7.1 have been
digififlongus
radius, aterat styloid
coloured red, except for
process(may include
(sisyddaeun es
 the salient medial styloid
 process. For a comment
groove for m.extensor
distal epiphysis of uina
(lateral styloid process)
 on the lateral styloid
carpiradialis
process, see Fig. 7.4.
antebrachiocarpal
(radiocarpal)
metacarpal bones:
joint
second
third
 proximal carpaf row:
fourth
uinar
intermediate
radial
intercarpal joint
carpometacarpat joint
metacarpal tuberosity
extensoreminence
meiacarpophatangeal
(fettock)joint
proximal phalanx
proximal interphalangea!
(pastern)joint
middlephafanx:
distal phalanx:
extensor process
extensor process
areasforaftachment
parietafsurface
of collatera igaments
parietal suicus
paimar process (angle)
dista interphalangea!
notch.
(coffin) joint
sotar border
228
antebrachium
carpus:
Fig. 7.3 Surface features of
radiocarpaljoint
the left manus: lateral view.
The specimen was embalmed
in the standing position,
The
with the limb arranged 
Foot
metacarpal bone IV.
 to imitate its position in
radius, lateral styfoid
proximal extremity
 normal level standing.
process
Palpable features have been
shaved. In some breeds of
ffexor tendons
horse the long hairs of the
fetlock are extremely well 
developed, covering the
metacarpus
whole pastern region.
position of proximal
sesamoid bones
m. interosseus medius
(suspensory tigament)
pad(ergot)
fong hairs of fetlock
(cirrus metacarpeus)
metacarpal bone ///
metacarpal bone IV.
digit:
distal extremity
pastern
position of lateral
cartilage
coronet
wallof hoof (lateral
quarter)
periople
metacarpophalangear
heer
(fetlock)joint
toe
radius
accessory carpalbone
Fig. 7.4 The bones of
the left manus: lateral
groove for m. extensor
groove for m.extensor
digitorum:
carpi uinaris
view. The prominences
communis
shaved in Fig. 7.3 have
laterafis
proximal carpal row:
been coloured red. The
lateral styloidprocess
intermediate
distal epiphysis of the
(may inctude distat uinar
eun
ulna fuses with that
diaphysis)
 of the radius at about
distal epiphysis of uina
distal carpal row:
1 year, to form the
{fateral styioid process)
fourth
third
lateral articular
antebrachiocarpal
condyle. The
{radiocarpal) joint
metacarpal bones:
prominence just
third
intercarpal joint
 proximal to it is
probably of diaphyseal
metacarpal tuberosity
origin, but it is 
 commonly called the
metacarpat bone IV,
lateral styloid process
distalextremity
 of the radius.
metacarpa bone Ill.
attachment of collateral
ligament
proxinal phalanx:
extensor eminence
ligament
metacarpophalangea!
ridge for ligamentous
(fetlock)joint
area for part of insertion
atachments
proximal interphalangeal
of m. ffexor digiltorum
(pastern) joint
superficialis
middle phalanx:
ffexor tuberosily
distal phalanx:
attachment of collatera!
extensorprocess
attachmentofcoflateral
gament
ligament
attachment offateral
cartilage
distal interphatangeat
parietal suicus
(coffin) joint
parietal surface
paimar process(angle)
distal sesamoid
solar border
(navicular)bone
229
carpus,accessory
eggs of bot fly
Fig. 7.5 Surface features of
carpal bone
/(Gastrophilus)
the left manus: caudal view.
At the palmar aspect of
The Horse
the fetlock, the spur-like
keratinised ergot
(metacarpal pad) lies
hidden in the long fetlock
Anatomy,
hairs (cirrus metacarpeus);
radius:
metacarpus.flexor
it is visible in Fig. 7.9.
laleraf styfoidprocess
tendons
medial styloid process
The eggs of the bot fly,
Gastrophilus, are adherent 
Color Atlas of Veterinary A
to the hairs on the medial
aspect of the carpus;
this horse was killed in
September.
m.interosseus medius
(uweby Aosuadsns)
proximalextremities:
metacarpal bone IV
metacarpal bone l!
positions of proximal
sesamoid bones of
metacarpophalangeal
(fettock) joint
distal extremities:
metacarpaf bone IV
metacarpal bone f!
digit lfl:
pastern
positions of fateral and
medial cartiages
coronet
wall of hoof
Jong hairs of fetlock
(cirrus metacarpeus)
radius,
proxirmal carpal row:
Fig. 7.6 The bones of
medial styloid process
accessory
the left manus: caudal 
unar
fateral styloid process
intermediate
view. The parts shaved
(may include distal uinar
radial
in Fig. 7.5 have been
epiphysis)
coloured red, except for
distal epiphysis of uina
 the salient medial
{laterat styloid process)
distal carpal row:
styloid process. The
fourth
third
inconstant and variable
second
frst carpal bone was 
 antebrachiocarpal joint
first (position)
 not present on this
skeleton, but its position
 is indicated in the
intercarpal joint
melacarpal bones:
drawing.
ourth
third
carpometacarpaljoint
second
distalextremities of
proximal sesamoid
bones
bones
fourth
second
metacarpophalangeal
(fetlock) joint
proximafphalanx:
tuberosities for
attachment of figaments
proximal interphalangeal
trigone
(pastern)joint
ridge forligament
attachments
area for part of insertion
distaf interphalangeal
of m. ffexor digitorum
{coffin)joint
superficialis
middle phalanx:
distal phalanx:
flexor tuberositly
parietal suicus
articulation with distat
paimar process (angle)
sesamoid bone
solar groove and
foramen
articulation with distal
sesamoid bone
distal sesamoid bone
solar surface
230
carpal pad(chestrut)
carpus, radiocarpal joint 
Fig. 7.7 Surface features
 of the left manus: medial
view. The position of the
carpal pad or ‘chestnut'
The
 in relation to the
Foot
underlying structures is
antebrachium
variable, but it is usually
 present in all members of
metacarpaf bone!.
the genus Equus, lying
proximalextremity
 proximal to the carpus.
radius, medial styloid
process
metacarpus:
metacarpal bone ll!
metacarpal bone lf, distal
extremity
m. interosseus medius
position of proximal
flexortendons
sesamoid bone
metacarpophalangea!
(fetiock) joint
digitl!
pastern
coronet
periople
(medial quarter)
cartiage
position of medial
long hairs of fetiock
hee!
(cirus metacarpeus)
toe
medial styioid process
radius
Fig. 7.8 The bones of the left
manus: medial view. The
parts shaved in Fig. 7.7 have
groove for m. abductor
 been coloured red, except
for the medial styloid
proximal carpalrow:
process. The inconstant first
accessory
carpal bone was not present
radial
antebrachiocarpal
 on this skeleton, but its
(radiocarpal)joint
 position has been indicated.
Outlines of the medial
cartilage of the distal
melacarpophalangeal
phalanx (stippled) and of
intercarpal joint
joint
the hoof have been added
(see Figs. 7.61 and 7.66).
distal carpal row:
metacarpal bones:
third
hro
second
second
position of first
outfines of:
medial cartilage
hoof
231
06
surfaces of thelateral
hoof wall(quarter):
supericial
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
pamar
deep(lamellar)
junction between sole
and wall
ergot (metacarpaf pad)
reffected part of the wall
(bar)
sofe:
junction between
sole and wall
junction between
sole and frog
lateral,medial crura
centralsuicus
interbulbar groove
lateral angle of the sole
burbs of heer
ergot surrounded by long
fetlockhairs
 junction between frog
(cirrus metacarpeus)
and wall
Fig. 7.9 Solar surfaces of the hooves: left forelimb (above) and left hindlimb (below). The wall is overgrown on both hooves, but no attempt has been
made to trim or prepare the feet for this photograph, other than by wet brushing.
a.metacarpea dorsalis I
n. patmaris lateralis
(n.uinaris et
n.medianus)
m. extensor digitorum
lateralis
n. pamaris medialis
(n.medianus).
a. metacarpea paimaris
r.communicans
m. ffexor digitorum
n. metacarpeus palmaris
superficialis
lateralis (n.ulnaris,
r.protundus)
m.flexor digitorum
profundus
 metacarpa bone Ill
m. interosseus medius
 proximal sesamoid bone
 metacarpal bone IV,
distalextremity
m.extensor digitorum
communis
v. digitatis paimaris
communis
m. interosseus medius
n.digitalis
paimaris lateralis:
r.dorsafis
r. dorsalis phalangis
r.paimaris
mediae
a.v. digitalis
V.tori digitalis
laterafis
r. dorsalis phalangis
proximalis
vv.coronales
lateral cartiage of the
ligament of the ergot
hoof
(cut)
Fig. 7.10 Superficial structures of the distal left manus (1): lateral view. The skin and superficial fascia have been removed. Other views of this
S-  n   s  So  S a r-   s  
232
a.rmetacarpea dorsalis
a. metacarpea dorsalis
(lateralis)
(medialis)
n. paimaris medialis
m. ffexor digiftorum
The
superficialis
(n. medianus).
r.communicans
metacarpal bonesIf I!.
m.interosseus medius
FV
(suspensory figament)
V. digitalis palmaris
V.digitalis paimaris
communis if
communis //
n. digitalis
palmaris lateralis:
n.digitafis
paimaris medialis:
r.paimaris
r. paimaris
r. dorsafis
r.dorsalis
paimar annular ligament
sesamoid bones
of metacarpophalangeal
joint
a.v. digitalis lateralis
a.v. digitalis medialis
ligamentof theergot
r. dorsalis phatangis
m.ffexor digitorum
proximalis
superficialis
n. digitalis paimaris
m. ffexor digitorum
medialis,r. paimaris.
profuncus
deep branch
branch to digital cushion
cartilages of distal
phalanx
r. tori digitalis
digital forus
coronet
Fig. 7.11 Superficial structures of the distal left manus (2): palmar view. Other views of this dissection are shown in Figs. 7.10 and 7.12. The carpal
m.fexor digitorum
a. metacarpea dorsatis ff
superficialis
 metacarpal bones If, Il
a.v. digitalis paimaris
communisf!
deep metacarpal fascia
(cutedge)
n. patmaris medialis
m. interosseus medius
(n. medianus),
r. communicans
m.extensor digitorum
sunwoo
proximalsesamoidbone
n. metacarpeus paimaris
lateralis (n.ufnaris.
r. profundus)
metacarpophalangea!
(fetlock) joint
a.v. digitalis
n.digitalis
medialis
paimaris medialis:
r.dorsalis
m. extensor digitorum
f. paimaris
communis
proximat interphalangeal
m. interosseus medius
(pastern)joint
r. dorsalis phalangis
proximalis
cartiage of distal
phalanx
r.dorsalis phalangis
mediae
coronet
periople
buib of heel
wallof hoof
Fig. 7.12 Superficial structures of the distal manus (3): left medial view. Other views of this dissection are shown in Figs. 7.10 and 7.11. The carpal
and proximal metacarpal regions are shown in Figs. 3.34-3.36. The ligament of the ergot has been removed.
233
m. extensor digitorum
m. extensor digitorum
communis
lateralis
The Horse
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,T
metacarpophalangea!
(fetlock)joint
：metacarpal bone I
invested by deep
metacarpai fascia
m. interosseus medius
(suspensory igament)
r. dorsalis phalangis
mediae (cut)
r. dorsalis phalangis
proximalis(cut)
coronet
wall of hoof
Fig. 7.13 Superficial structures of the distal left manus (4): dorsal view. The nerves and veins have been removed but the arteries have been left to
provide reference points for comparison with the previous dissection (Figs. 7.10-7.12). Other views of this dissection are shown in Figs. 7.14-7.16.
A dorsal view of carpal and proximal metacarpal regions is shown in Fig. 3.33.
m. extensor digitorum
m.flexor digitorum
communis
superficialis
m. extensor digitorum
m. fexor digitorum
lateralis
profunous
a.digitafis paimaris
a.metacarpea dorsalis !!
communisIl
metacarpophalangea!
m.interosseusmedius
joint.paimar annuiar
figament
metacarpal bone Il
a. digitalis
lateralis
metacarpal bone IV -
 proximaf sesamoid bone
metacarpat bone f.
m. extensor digitorum
distalextremity
tateralis (insertion)
m.interosseus
proximalphalanx,
m.exlensor digitorum
r. dorsalis phalangis
communis
proximalis
m. ftexor digitorum
profundus
proximal interphalangeal
joint
m. ffexor digitorum
superficialis,insertion
proximaiphalanx
7. fori digitallis
distal extremity
a.coronalis
r. dorsalis phalangis
mediae (cut)
cartilage of distal
phalanx
periople
coronet
234
a.metacarpea dorsalis1
m. tlexor digitorum
The
a.digilalis
superficialis
Foot
medialis
lateralis
m.interosseus medius
metacarpophalangea!
joint,pamarannular
figament
proximal phafanx.
proximal extremity
r. dorsalis phalangis
manica flexoria
proximalis.
medialis
lateralis
m.flexordigitorum
profundus
middlephalanx,proximal
extremity
m.flexor digitorum
superficialis
cartilages of distat
phafanx.
lateralis
r. tori digitafis
medialis
medialis
lateralis
coronet
burbar torus
Fig. 7.15 Superficial structures of the distal manus (6): palmar view. Other views of this dissection are shown in Figs. 7.13,7.14 and 7.16.
a.digitalispaimaris
a.metacarpeadorsalisfl
communisI!
metacarpal bone l
metacarpal bone I!
m. ffexor digitorum
superficialis
deep metacarpal fascia
(cutedge)
m.fexor digitorum
profundus
m. extensor digitorum
communis
metacarpal bonell,
distalextremity
metacarpafbone f
distalextrermity
m. interosseus medius
metacarpophalangeal
metacarpophalangea!
(fetfock) joint
joint.pamarannuar
igament
proximal phalanx,
proximalextrerity
proximar sesamoid bone
a.digitalis
m.interosseus medius
medialis
r. dorsalis phatangis
proxinafis
m.extensor digitorum
superficialis
paimar liganent of
proximafinterphalangeal
m.extensor digitorum
joint
profundus
f. dorsalis phalangis
middle phalanx,
mediae
proxinal extremity
proximat interphalangeal
r. tori digitalis
(pastern) joint
Fig. 7.16 Superfcial structures of the distal manus (7): left medial view. Other views of this dissection are shown in Figs. 7.13, 7.14 and 7.15.
235
metacarpus
metacarpophalangeal
(fettock)joint
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
cirrusmetacarpeus
digit l:
pastern
coronet
bulb ofheel
periople
coronafplane of
wall
sectioning
toe
Fig. 7.17 The right manus: medial view. The digit has been sawn through in a coronal plane, to produce the specimens for Figs. 7.19-7.24.
sole of hoof:
wall of hoof:
junction between wal!
bearing surface
and sole
inner surface of
overgrownwall showing
indistinct Jamelfae
frog of hoof.
crura, lateral and mediai
frog of hoot:
apex
paracuneal suicus and
junctionbetween frog
and sole
frog.central sulcus
coronal plane of
sectioning
buibs of the heel
angle of sole
bar of wall
junction between
interbulbargroove
frog and wall
Fig. 7.18 The right manus: solar surface of the hoof. The digit has been sawn through in a coronal plane, to produce the specimens for
Figs. 7.19-7.24. The wall is overgrown, but the foot has not been trimmed; only wet brushing has been carried out.
cartilages of distal
middle phatanx, dista!
phalanx, lateral and
era
mediaf, blending with
collaterat igaments of
the joint and the
coronet
chondrocoronal
igaments
distal sesamoid
(navicular)bone
distal interphalangeal
joint:
synovial cavity
synoviafcavityof
podotrochlear bursa
synovial fringe
distal phalanx, bases of
distal sesamoid impar
paimar processes
figament
wafl of hoof
m.flexor digitorum
profundus
sole of hoof
digital cushion
frog of hoot
Fig. 7.19 The right manus: coronal section through the hoof (1). The plane of sectioning passes through the extreme distal part of the distal sesamoid
bone and through the ligament joining it to the distal phalanx (see Fig. 7.66). The inner surfaces of the joint cavity and synovial bursa (synovial
membranes and articular cartilage) are indicated by blue dots.
236
The
m. extensor digitorum
common integument:
communis
epidermis
dermis (corium)
hypodermis(superficial
fascia)
middle phalanx
pfexus coronarius
cartilage of sesamoid
coronary cushion
articular surface of distal
phalanx
periopie
medial cartitage of distal
phalanx, blending with
coronary corium
wall of hoof:
chondrocoronal ligament
outerlayer(giaze)
inner layer(ameliar)
middle layer(pigmented
and non-pigmented
[ayers)
Synovialmembraneof
dista interphalangea!
joint
pfexus parietalis
plexus paimaris
distal phatanx
sofe of hoof
distal sesamoid impar
junctionbetweenwatf
ligament
m. ffexor digitorurn
junction between frog
profundus(tendonof
insertion)
andsole
paracuneai suicus
overgrown part of hoof
digital cushion
walf, bearing lamellae
 on its inner surface
frog of hoof
Fig. 7.20 The right manus: coronal section through the hoof (2). This is the distal part (including the toe) of the specimen shown in Fig. 7.19. A sliver
 of the distal sesamoid bone (see Fig. 7.66) was included on this surface of the saw cut, but it was removed from the joint cavity of the distal
interphalangeal (coffn) joint to show the cartilage of the sesamoid articular surface of the distal phalanx.
237
common integument:
periosteum of middle
epidermis
dermis (corium)
phalanx
The Horse
hypodermis (supericia)
fascia)
phalanx biending with
medialcollateral
figament and
r.dorsalis phalangis
chondrocoronal igament
mediae in hypodermis
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, 
distat interphalangeal
periople
oint:
proximal pouch
 plexus coronarius in
synovial fringe
coagulated material in
hypodermis
joint cavity
articutar cartilage of
coronary cushion
middle and distal
phalanges
papilfary coronary
cartiage of sesamoid
articuiar surface
corium
joint cavity
plexus parietalis in
hypodermis
 bursa podotrochlearis
wall of hoof:
distal sesamoid impar
outerlayer
figament
middle layer(pigmented
digitaf cushion
inner fayer (lamellar.
m.ffexor digitorum
lamellaeof corium)
profundus, tendon of
innertayer (famefiar,
insertion
Irog of hoof:
corium
corium)
horny fayer (tubutar horn)
paracuneal suicus
sole of hoof:
papiflary corium
horny fayer(tubutar horn)
plexus paimaris in
hypodermis
Fig. 7.21 The right manus: coronal section through the hoof (3). This is a closer view of the medial part of the specimen shown in Fig. 7.20. See also
Figs. 7.75 and 7.76.
perioplic cushion
hair-bearing common
integument.
epidermis
dermis (corium)
perioplic corium
hypodermis (superficial
(papilary)
fascia)
periopfic groove on inner
 suriace of the hoof
medial cartiage of distal
phalanxblending with
coflateraf ligamcnt of
perioplic horr
joint and chondrocoronai
(fine tubutar horn of
ligament
epidermis)
coronary fold
plexus coronarius in
hypodermis
coronary cushior
papillacof coronary
coronary corum
(Aeded)
developing horn tubules
coronarygroove onnner
surface of hoof
papillae of coronary
corum arranged in rows
at jurcthorn with
farmelar coritrm
hon of eprdermal
hoof walf:
(uter iayer (glaze)
hoofwalinterdgtating
larmeflae ofcorium of
horn, pigmented and
on p/gmontedfayers)
with horny lamefiae of
hoof wall
 Ao  oad a 'i'  u os s an o  si s  goq n qn s g s   ' 
are usually held to be derivatives of the hypodermis (superficial fascia) but appear continuous with the dermis of the common integument. The
clearly visible horn tubules of the wall of the hoof are formed by the epidermal germinal layer overlying the papillae of the coronary corium.
Dissections of the coronet region are shown in Figs. 7.57-7.60.
238
m.extensor digitorum
hair-bearing common
communis
integument.
periosteum of middle
epidermis
phatanx
hypodermis,
The
fateralcartilageofdistal
(superficial fascra)
phalanx, blending with
plexus coronarius in
lateral colateral figament
hypodermis
periopfe
figament
perioplic and coronary
distal interphalangea!
cushions
joint:
proximal pouch
coronary corium
plexus parietalis in
synovial fringe
hypodermis
articular surface of distaf
layers of hoof wall.
phalanx
outer layer (glaze)
joint cavity
middle layer
distal sesamoid impar
(pigmented and
ligament
non-pigmentedfayers)
inner layer (iameliae
m. fexor digitorum
interdigitating with
lameltar coriumy 
profundus
inner layer {famellae
digital cushion
interdigitatingwithnew
frog of hoof:
horn produced from
hon
pfexus paimaris in
distal phalanx
hypodermis
white zone (lamellar)
junction between frog
and sole
middle tayer of hoof
paracuneal suicus
walf (non-pigmented
partj
 sole of hoof:
corium
junction between wall
hon
andsole
Fig. 7.23 The right manus: coronal section through the hoof (5). This is a closer view of the lateral part of the specimen shown in Fig. 7.20. A sliver
 of the distal sesamoid bone was removed from the surface of the slice.
pfexus parietafis
fayers of the hoof wall:
outerlayer(glaze)
pigmented part)
distal phalanx
middie layer (tubular
horn, non-pigmented
part)
inner layer {famellar part
a. marginis sofearis
interdigitating with
famellae of corium)
fameflae of parietal
V.marginis solearis
corium interdigitating.
with horny iameliae of
hoof walf
plexus paimaris
finear terminal papiltae
derived fromlamellaet
corium
0.2
sole of hoof:
papillae of corium
horn tubuiesformedfrom
non-pigmented fubuta
germinal layer of
hornofmiddletayer
epidermis overtying the
bordering fhe
farrier's guide
interdigitating horny
white zone on solar
famellae of white zone
surface of hoof (farrier's
guide)
newlamelaeprooucer
by terminal papillae
horn of sole
(new horn)
Fig. 7.24 The right manus: coronal section through the hoof (6). This is part of the specimen shown in Fig. 7.23. At the junctional region between
sole and wall the spaces left at the distal ends of the lamellae of the parietal corium are filled by new horn to produce a lamellated 'white zone' that
is translucent. The white colour seen on the *prepared' foot is that of the inner, non-pigmented horn of the wall (see Figs. 7.9, 7.18 and 7.59).
Dissections of the parietal lamellae are shown in Figs. 7.57-7.60.
239
n.cutaneus antebrachii
n. cutaneus antebrachi
Fig. 7.25 Superficial
cranialis (n. axilfaris)
medialisn.
structures of the right
rnusculocutaneus)
forelimb (1): cranial
The Horse
view. The skin has been
removed, and the 
cephalicaaccessoria
vessels and nerves
m.extensor carpiradial
within the superficial
Anatomy,
fascia have been
dissected. Figs 7.25-
radius
7.28 show the
relationships between
Color Atlas of Veterinary 
the superfcial vessels
radius fateral styloid
process (may include
radius, medial styloid
and nerves of the digit 
distal uina)
process
(shown in Figs.
7.29-7.32) and those of
more proximal regions
carpus
of the limb.
m.extensor digitorum
communis
a. metacarpea dorsalis Il.
f. cufaneus
m. extensor digitorum
metacarpal bone!
lateralis
a.v. digitafis paimaris
communis If, r. cutaneus
digit 11
metacarpophalangeal
(fetlock)joint
coronet
m. interosseus medius
m.extensor carpi ufnaris
n. cutaneus antebrachi
Fig. 7.26 Superficial
tateralis (n. radialis)
structures of the right
v.collaterafis ulnaris
a.v. transversa cubiti,
forelimb (2): lateral
ff.cutanei
view. This dissection is
also shown in Figs.
a.coffateralis uinaris,r
m.extensor carpi radialis
carpeus dorsalis
7.25, 7.27 and 7.28. For
a.v. interossea cranialis
further details of the
n. uinaris, r. dorsalis 
 digital region see Fig.
m. extensor digitorum
lateralis
7.30.
carpus, accessory
m. extensor digitorum
carpal bone
communis
radius, shaft 
m. ffexor digitorum
superficialis
rete carpi dorsale
radius,taterat styloid
m. ffexor digitorum
profundus
process (may include
distal urna)
carpus,lateral collatera!
V.digitalis palmaris
communis il!
figament
m. extensor digitorum
n.paimaris lateralis
communis
(n.uinaris et n.
m. extensor digitorum
medianus)
fateralis
n. paimaris medialis
a.melacarpea dorsafis #
(n. medianus).
metacarpal bone Ifl 
r.communicans
metacarpat bone IV.
distalextremity
m.interosseus medius
a.v.digitafis paimaris
communis Iff, r. cutaneus
a.v.digitalis fateralis
metacarpophalangeal
(fetlock) joint
digit II
figamentof the
(cut)
coronet
240
a.coflaterafis ufnaris
v. mediana, r. paimaris
Fig. 7.27 Superficial
structures of the right
forelimb (3): caudal view.
v.mediana
This dissection is also shown
a.collateralis uinaris,
in Figs. 7.25, 7.26 and 7.28.
r. carpeus dorsalis
Foot
 For further details of the
V.coffateralis uinaris
digital region see Fig. 7.31.
n. uinaris, r. dorsa.us
radius, medial styioid
process
radius, lateraf styloid
process (may include
distal uina)
a.v.radialis
V.cephalica
m.fexor dinitorum
superficialls
ffexorretinaculum
n.palmarislaterafis
V. digitalis paimaris
uno
(fetlock)joint
n.paimarismedialis
figament of the ergot
n.medianus)
(cut):
r.communicans
lateral
medial
a.v. digitalis medialis
digitII
n. cutaneus antebrachii
m. ffexor carpi radialis
Fig. 7.28 Superficial
medialis
structures of the right
(n.musculocutaneus)
forelimb (4): medial
a.collaterafis uinaris
view. This dissection is
also shown in Fig. 7.25,
.cephafcaaccessora
7.26 and 7.27. For
v.mediana
further details of the
V.cephalica
 digital region, see Fig.
m. ffexor carpi uinaris
7.32. The full extent of
the ligament of the
radius
 ergot is shown in this
/.mediana,r.paimaris
figure.
v.cephalica
accessory carpat bone
a.v.metacarpea
dorsalis If, r. cutaneus
a.v. radialis in ffexor
retinaculum
a. metacarpea dorsafis //
n.pamaris medialis
(n. medianus)
metacarpal bone Il
V. digitafis paimaris
metacarpal bone
communis
m.extensor digitorum
n. paimaris medialis,
communis
r.communicans
a. v. digitalis patmaris
metacarpal bone f, distal
communis ff, r. cutaneus 
extremity
metacarpophalangea!
a.v. digitalis medialis
(fetlock) joint
digit 
ligament of the ergot
241
a.v.metacarpea dorsalis.
Fig. 7.29 Superficial
carpus
,r.cutaneus
structures of the right
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
manus (1): dorsal view. In
this figure the skin has
been replaced after
dissection of the
superficial structures in
m. extensor digitorum
 order to show the blood
communis
 vessels of its deeper
cutaneous vessels in
spodhy pue sap
layers and their origins
from the metacarpal and
digital vessels (see also
Figs. 7.30-7.32).
metacarpal bone fl
m.extensor digitorum
lateralis
metacarpophalangea!
(fetlock)joint
aa.vv.digitales paimares
communes, rf. cutanei
a.v. digitalis mediafis
r.dorsalis phalangis
proximalis
digit I!!
coronet
V.mediana.r.paimaris
n. ufnaris, r. dorsalis
Fig. 7.30 Superficial
(r. cutaneus)
structures of the right
manus (2): lateral view.
metacarpal bone f!
This is a closer view of
n. paimaris lateralis
 part of the dissection 
(n. medianus et n.
uinaris)
m. extensor digitorum
shown in Fig.7.26.Other
communis
views of this part of the
 specimen are shown in
m.ffexor digitorum
m, extensor digitorum
Figs. 7.31 and 7.32. See
superficialis
lateralis
also Fig. 7.29.
m. ffexor digitorum
V. digitafis paimaris
profundus
communis 
n.patmaris medialis
metacarpal bone IV.
distalextremity
(n.medianus)
r.communicans
n. digitalis paimaris
lateralis,r. caudalis
a. metacarpea dorsalis Ifl
m.interosseus medius
a.v. digitalis paimaris
(suspensory ligament)
communisf,.cutaneus
.digitalis
n. metacarpeus paimaris
paimarislateralis
lateralis (n.uinaris,
r. profundus)
a.V.digitalis lateralis
n.digiahs
a.v. digitalis tateralis.
paimaris lateratis:
r. dorsalis phalangis
f.dorsalis
proximalis
f.intermedius
r.palmaris
r.toridigitalis
ligament of the ergot
corone!
242
V.digitalis palmaris
v.mediana,r.paimaris
Fig. 7.31 Superficial
communis //
{r.cutaneus)
structures of the right
manus (3): palmar view.
This is a closer view of a
he
part of the dissection
.ufnaris,r.dorsalis
shown in Fig. 7.27. Other
m.flexor digitorum
views of this part of the
superficialis
specimen are shown in
Figs. 7.30 and 7.32 (see
m. extensor digitorum
also Fig. 7.29).
lateralis
n. paimaris medialis
(n. medianus)
n. paimaris fateralis
(n. medianus et n.
uinaris)
.commu
metacarpal bone Ill
a.v.digitafis medialis
V. digitafis paimaris
communisiIl
n.digitalis
paimaris rnedialis
.v.digitafislateralis
figament of the ergot
(cut)
n.digitafis
paimaris lateralis
a.v.n.digitafis paimaris
a.v.n. digitalis paimaris
 mediafis, r. tori digitalis
Jateralis,r.tori digitalis
v. digitalis paimaris
Fig. 7.32 Superfcial
a.metacarpea dorsalis
structures of the right
manus (4): medial view.
This is a closer view of
a part of the dissection
shown in Fig. 7.28.
n. paimaris medialis
 Other views of this part
(n. medianus),
of this specimen are
r. communicans
shown in Figs. 7.30 and
7.31 but note that in
this figure the medial
m.extensor digitorum
ligament of the ergot
communis
has not yet been cut
m.interosseus medius
short. See also Fig.
(suspensory ligament)
7.29.
netacarpal bone Il, dista!
extremity
n.metacarpeus paimaris
medialis (n. uinaris,
r. profundus)
a.v.digitalis paimaris
n.digitalis
communis ff. f. cutanei 
paimaris medralis
a.v. digitalis medialis
a.v.digitalis medialis
r. dorsalis phatangis
figament of the ergot
proximalis
n. digitalis
paimaris medialis:
f.dorsafis
r. intermedius
f.paimaris
corone
7. digitalis tori
243
tibia, medial malfeofus
crus
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
tibia,lateralmalleolus
metatarsus, metatarsa!
bone l/f
tarsus, trochlea of talus
digit!l
pastern
coronet
periople
metatarsophalangeal
wall of hoof
(fetfock) joint
toe
Fig. 7.33 Surface features of the left pes: cranial view. Figs. 7.35, 7.37 and 7.39 show further views of this specimen. Palpable features have been
shaved. Note that in this specimen the palpable structures on the medial aspect of the hock were demonstrated on the right leg (see Fig. 7.39) and
are not seen in this figure. Figs. 7.34, 7.36, 7.38 and 7.40 show the bones of this region and Fig. 7.9 shows the solar surface of the hoof. A note on
 the terminology applied to the lateral prominence of the tibia is given in Fig. 7.36.
tibia,medialmaleofus
tibia,lateralmalfeotus
may includedistal
fibula)
tafus:
lateralfrochlea
medialtrochlea
caicaneus
distaltuberosity
 central tarsal bone
metatarsalbones.
metatarsal tuberosity
secong
fourth
vascutar canal
third
distal tarsalrow:
articular conoyle
third
fourih
metatarsophalangeal
(fettock)joint
proximal phafanx:
extensor eminence
articular condyle
eminence for collateral
middle phalanx:
extensor process
figament
eminence for coffateral
fgamen!
articutar condyle
distaf phalanx.
extensor process
paimafprocesses
proximat interphalangeat
depression for coffateral
(pastern)joint
figament
parietaf surface
medial,lateral
Daretalsuici
distal interphalangeal
vascular foramina
(coffin) joint
solar border
Fig. 7.34 The bones of the left pes: cranial view. The prominences shaved in Fig. 7.33 have been coloured red.
244
CrUS
caicaneus:
caicanea tuberosity
cranialborder
tibia,lateraf maffeofus
Foot
common calcaneal
trochlea of taltus
tenoon
metatarsal bone IV.
proximal extremity
metatarsus, metatarsat
position ofproximal
sesamoidbones
ffexortendons
Jonghairs offetlock
(cirrus metatarseus)
covering metatarsal pad
(ergot)
metatarsal bone IV,
approximatepositionof
digit If:
distal extremity
pastern
position of tateral
cartilage
coronet
periople
wallof hoof
metatarsophalangeal
heer
{feffock) joint
toe
i a oi e q ai a 'rod hs ai u pna sm nas a sma l d l a no s  s 
 position in normal level standing, but the metatarsus should be more vertical. The position of the distal end of the fourth metatarsal bone has not
been shaved; it can be seen in Fig. 7.42.
tibia-
calcaneal tuberosity
lateral malleolus (may
incude distal fibufa)
coracoidprocess
taius
lateraf trochiea
calcaneus
distaltarsalrow.
central tarsal bone
fourth
third
metatarsal bones:
metatarsal tuberosity
metatarsa bone IV, dista
fourth
third
extremity
metarsophaiangeal
articulation between
(fetlock)joint
metatarsal ff and
proximalsesamoid
proximal phalanx.
bones
extensoreminence
process for attachment
of tigaments
 area of attachment for
proximalsesamoidbone
pfantar igaments of
proximal
proximal interphalangeal
(pastem)joint
distal phalanx:
extensor process
depressionfor
middle phafanx:
atlachment of collatera!
extensor process
ffexortuberosity
ligament
parietalsulcus
parietal surface
plantar process
distal sesamoid
solar border
(navicular)bone
Fig. 7.36 The bones of the left pes: lateral view. The prominences shaved in Fig. 7.35 have been coloured red. The distal epiphysis of the fbula fuses
with that of the tibia during the frst year of life. It forms part of the lateral articular surface and may contribute to the palpable lateral malleolus.
245
calcanealtuberosity
CruS
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
tarsal pad (chestnut) -
tibia, mediaf malleolus
tarsometatarsal hair
ridge
metafarsus
sesamoid bones
digit f:
pastern
long hairs of fetiock
coronet
(cirrus metatarseus)
position of meoiar
covering meiatarsal pad
(ergot)
interbuibar groove
Fig. 7.37 Surface features of the left pes: caudomedial view. The specimen is viewed from a slightly medial angle to show the tarsal pad or *chestnut'
more clearly. This structure is usually superficial to the fused lst and 2nd tarsal bones; it may be absent in the horse, and it is not found in other
species of the genus Equus.
cafcaneus:
tibia
tuberosity
groove form.ffexor
medial maffeofus
digitorum profundus
sustentacutum for talus
tatus:
lateral, medial trochlea
proximaltuberosity
distal tarsaf row:
distal tuberosity
fourth
third
first and second (fused)
central tarsaf bone
metatarsalbonefdistal
metatarsal bones:
extrermity
m.interosseus medius
metatarsal boneIV,distat
origin)
extremity
fourth
metatarsophalangeal
proximal sesamoid
(fettock)joint
bones
middlephalanx:
proximal phalanx:
flexor tuberosity
tuberosity
eminencesforcollateral
trigone
figaments and for m.
ridges for oblique
ffexordigitorur
sesamoidean figament
superficialis
eminence for collateral
aricufar condyles
figament and for tendon
distal interphalangeal
of m. ffexor digitorum
superficialis
(coffin) joint
articular condyles
distal phalanx:
proximalinterphaiangeal
articuiar surface
(pastern)joint
paimar process
solarsurface
foramen of parietat
distalsesamoid bone
suIcUs
Fig. 7.38 The bones of the left pes: caudomedial view. The prominences, shaved in Fig. 7.37 and 7.39 have been coloured red.
246
Crus
calcaneus
The
talus, distal tuberosity
Foot
tibia,medialmalleolus
tarsal pad (chestnut)
metatarsal bone IV.
proximalextremity
metatarsaf boneI/f
positionofproximat
sesamoid bone
long hairs of fetfock
metatarsatboneIv,
(cirrus metatarseus)
distal extremity
digit :
pasten
position of medial
cariage
coronet
periople
wall of hoof
fetlockjoint
toe
Fig. 7.39 Surface features of the right pes: medial view. The position of the distal extremity of the fourth metatarsal bone has not been shaved; it can
be seen in Fig. 7.44. The medial hoof wall is severely damaged along its solar surface (see Fig. 7.9).
tibia
calcaneus.
tuberosity
groove for m.fexor
digitorum profundus
medialmaleolus
sustentacufum for talus
talus
mediaf trochiea
proximaltuberosily
distal tuberosity
distal tarsal row :
fourth
first and second (fused)
central tarsal bone
third
metatarsal bones:
second
third
metatarsal tuberosity
metatarsalbonelf,distal
extremity
Fig. 7.40 The bones of the right pes: medial view. The prominences shaved in Fig. 7.37 and 7.39 have been coloured red. Outlines of the medial
cartilage of the distal phalanx (stippled), and of the hoof, have been added (see Figs. 7.61 and 7.66).
247
n.metatarseus dorsalisI
n.fibularis superficialis
(n. fibularis profundus)
The Horse
metatarsal bone l!
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,T
V.digitalis dorsafis
communis I!
m. extensor digitorum
snfuo!
metatarsalbone
n. metatarseus dorsafis Il!
n.metatarseus dorsalis I
(n. fibularis profundus)
(snpunyosd suenayu)
m. extensor digitorum
(suspensory figament)
longus
waflof hoof (toe)
coronet
Fig. 7.41 Superfcial structures of the distal left pes (1): dorsal view. The more proximal parts of this specimen are shown in Fig. 6.41. This dissection
is also shown in Figs. 7.42-7.44.
m. extensor digitorum
n. plantaris tateralis
fateralis
(n. tibialis)
m. extensor digitorum
a.metatarsea dorsalis 
longus
V. digitalis pfantaris
metatarsal boneI
communis I/!
m.interosseus medius
(suspensory ligament)
m. flexor digitorum
superficialis
metatarsal bone IV, distal
extremity
n. metatarseus dorsalis I!
n. plantaris medialis
(n.fibuiaris profundus)
(n. tibialis), r.
metatarsophalangea!
joint capsufe,plantar
exfension
a.v.digitalis
lateralis
m.interosseus medius
(suspensoryligament)
n.digitalis plantaris
fateralis (n. tibiafis):
r. dorsalis
a.v.digitalis
r. piantaris
lateralis,r.dorsalis
phalangis proximalis
paimar annular ligament
V.coronalis
tateral cartilage of dista!
coronet
phalanx
Fig. 7.42 Superficial structures of the distal left pes (2): lateral view. The more proximal parts of this dissection are shown in Fig.6.42. This dissection
is also shown in Figs. 7.41, 7.43 and 7.44.
248
n.plantaris
V. digitalis dorsalis
lateralis(n.tibialis)
communisI
m. ffexor digitorum
The
superficiafis
n.plantarismedialis
(n. tibialis).
f.communicans
m. interosseus medius
(uaweby kiosuadsns)
a.v. digitalis lateralis
plantar annular figament
n. digitalis
n. digitalis plantaris
plantarisfateralis
medialis,
f.caudalis
ligament of the ergot
(cut)
a.v.digitalismediatis
cartilages of distal
proximal digital annular
phalanx
figament
digitalsheath.plantar
pouch
distaldigitalannular
ligament
a.V.n. digitafis pfantaris
medialis, r. tori digitalis
interbuibarcleft
burb of the heef
Fig. 7.43 Superficial structures of the distal left pes (3): plantar view. This dissection is also shown in Figs. 7.41, 7.42 and 7.44.
V. digitalis dorsalis
n.metatarseusdorsalis
sunuwoo
I (n.fibularis profundus)
m. ffexor digitorum.
superficialis
metatarsal bone I!!
profundus
n.plantarismedialis
m. extensor digitorum
(n.tibialis),
fongus
r.communicans
m.interosseusmedius
metatarsaf bone lIl.
(suspensory ligament)
distalextremity
a.v. digitalis medialis
metatarsophalangea!
joint capsute, plantar
extension
n.digitalis
plantaris medialis:
f.dorsalis
r.plantaris
V.coronalis
a.v. digitalis
coronet
mediafis,r.dorsalis
phalangis proximalis
periople
tigament of the ergot
medial cartilage of distal
bulb of theheel
phalanx
dissection is also seen in Figs. 7.41-7.43.
249
m.extensor digitorum
m.extensor digitorum
longus
lateralis
The Horse
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,T
metatarsal bone I//
metatarsophalangeal
(fettock)joint
m. interosseus medius 
m. extensor digitorum
longus et lateralis,
expandedtendon
insertingonallthree
phalanges
coronet
periople
wall of hoof (toe)
Fig. 7.45 Superficial structures of the distal left pes (5): dorsal view. The vessels and nerves have been removed to show the tendons and superficial
ligaments more clearly. Figs. 7.46-7.48 show further views of this dissection.
m. exiensor digitorum:
metatarsal boneI!!
snbuo
lateralis
metatarsal bone IV
m. flexor digitorum:
a. metatarsea dorsalis !l
superficialis
m.interosseus medius
profundus
(suspensory ligament)
metatarsal bone IV,distal
interosseousmetatarsal
extremity
figament
metatarsophalangeal
a.digitalis
joint capsule, plantar
laterafis,
extension
r.articularis
coflateral sesamoidean
metatarsophalangea!
ligament
joint,atralolter
ligament
 plantar annular igament
m. interosseus medius
distal sesamoidean
jigament
proximal phalanx,
proximal digital annular
jateraltuberosity
ligament
a. digitafis fateralis,
interphalangeal joint,
r.plantaris phalangis
lateralplantarfigament
proxmais
r. dorsalis phalangis
middle phalanx
mediae
m.flexordigitorum:
superficiafis (insertion)
profunous
m. extensor digitorum
fongus
distat digitat annular
ligament
 distal phafanx, lateral
a.v.digitalis
faterafis
Fig. 7.46 Superficial structures of the distal left pes (6): lateral view. The major artery of the foot (third dorsal metatarsal) has been retained,
together with the cut ends of other vessels (compare with earlier dissection, Fig. 7.42). Other views of this dissection are shown in Figs. 7.45, 7.47
and 7.48.
250
m.flexor digitorum
m. interosseus medius
superficialis
(ueweoy Arosuedsns)
The
a. digitalis mediafis et
plantar digitalannular
Foo1
lateralis
ligamentcovering
proximal sesanoid
bones)
a.v. digitalis medialis et
faterafis,rr.articulares
proximal digitahannular
figament
proximalphalanx,lateral
 and mediaf tuberosities
m. ffexor digitorum
snpunyord
m. ftexor digitorum
digitaf tendon sheath.
(suoasu) steioadns
(wall of opened sheath)
coronet
distal digital annular
ligament
cartilages of distal
a.v.digitalis
fateralis et medialis
medial
bulbs of heel and
wafl of hoof at heet
interbulbarcleft
 plantar surface of the digit. Other views of this dissection are shown in Figs. 7.45, 7.46 and 7.48.
m. interosseus medius
m. extensor digitorum
(suspensory ligament)
longus
rmetatarsal bone If!
a.digitalis plantaris
metatarsal bone I
communis 
metatarsaf bone If, distal
m.fexor digitorum:
extremity
melatarsophalangeal
superficialis
joint, plantar extension
(cavity opened)
a. digitalis medialis.
medial coffateral
f.articularis
figament
collateral sesamoidean
ligament
piantar annufar igament
proximal phalanx.
tuberosity
proximal digital annular
figament
distal sesamoidean
ligaments
midolephalanx
m. extensor digitorum
fonqusjoinedby
m.interosseus medius
m. ffexor digitorum:
superficialis
profundus
a. digitafis mediafis:
r.plantarisphalangis
proximafis
distal digital annufar
r. dorsalis phalangis
figament
mediae
corone!
Cartilages of distal
phalanx:
periople
laterar
medial
a.v. digitalis
mediaris
buibs of the heer
waff of hoof
Fig. 7.48 Superficial structures of the distal left pes (8): medial view. No dorsal metatarsal artery occupies the intermetatarsal groove on the medial
      sn o s s s    
251
m.interosseusmedrus
m.ffexor digitorum
superficialis
The Horse
m. ffexor digitorum
superficialis, manica
Anatomy,
flexoria
a. digitalis
medialis et fateralis
ColorAtlasofVeterinary
plantar annular ligament
proximal digitalannular
ligament removed
removed (cut edges)
(sabpa no)
m. fexor digiforum
profundusinopened
synovial digital sheath
m.flexordigitorum
superficialis,insertions
onproximalandmiddle
phaianges
distaldigifal annular
figamentremoved(cut
edges)
cartilages of distal
phalanx:
lateral
medial
interbulbar cleft
Fig. 7.49 The flexor tendons of the left digit: plantar view (1). The annular ligaments have been removed from the fetlock and the digit.
m. flexor digitorum
m.interosseusmedius
superficialis
m. ffexor digitorum
a.digitalis,
profundus (tendon not
medialis et lateralis
enclosed by digital
sheath)
m. flexor digitorum
superficialis,manica
flexoria
proximal limit of synovial
plantar annular ligament
(cut)
m.ftexor digitorum
profundustendon
oblique distal
sesamoidean figament
sheath,
proximalinterphalangeal
medialproximal
(pastern)joint.plantar
sesamoid bone
cavity
Droximal digitat annnutar
m. ffexor digitorum
ligament (cut)
profundus (tendon
enclosed by pouch of
plantar figament of
proximalinterphalangeal
distal digitaf annular
(pastern)joint
ligament(cut)
m. ffexor digitorum
dista!phalanx,lateral
superficialis,medial
and medial cartilages
insertion (cut)
Fig. 7.50 The flexor tendons of the left digit: plantar view (2). The medial half of the superficial digital fexor muscle has been excised to reveal the
deep digital fexor muscle lying beneath it. The proximal limit of the synovial digital tendon sheath is visible, but its distal limit lies within the hoof
(see Fig. 7.66).
252
proximal limit of synovial
a.digitafismedialis
digital sheath
The
Foot
pfantarannularligament
m. ffexor digitorum
[cut)
profundus
proximal sesamoid
bones
proximal digital annular
ligament(cut)
oblique distal
sesamoidean ligament
m. digitorum
phalanges(cut)
piantarfigament of
proxima interphalangeal
(pastern) joint
distalphalanx,lateral
proximal interphalangea!
and medial cartiages
(pastern)joint,plantar
extension of synovial
cavity (opened)
distal digitat annufar
m. ffexor digitorum
ligament (cut)
profundus
Fig. 7.51 The deep digital fexor tendon of the left pes: plantar view. The lateral and medial halves of the superficial digital fexor tendon have been 
removed. This dissection is also seen in Fig. 7.52. The insertion of the deep digital fexor tendon into the distal phalanx within the hoof is shown in 
Fig. 7.54.
m.fexor digitorum
 a. metatarsea dorsalis If
superficialis
metatarsat bone I!!
m.extensor brevis
metatarsalboneV
m. extensor digitorum
lateralis
m.interosseusmedius
(suspensory ligament)
m. extensor digitorum
longus
metatarsophalangeal
(fetlock)joint,ptantar
extension of joint cavity
intermetatarsat igament 
proximat limit of synovial
a. digitalis fateralis
digitalsheath
m. interosseus medius.
plantar annular ligament
(cut),coveringproximal
tendolateralis
sesamoid bone
proximal digital annular
distal sesamoidean
ligamenf (cut)
figaments:
straight
obtique
plantar ligament of
proximaf interphalangeal
joint
m.flexor digitorurn
superficialis
distal digitalannular
m.fexor digitorum
ligament(cut)
profundus
distal phalanx, lateral
coronet
cartilage
Fig. 7.52 The deep digital fexor tendon of the left pes: lateral view. The specimen is at the same stage of dissection as that shown in Fig. 7.51.
253
m.ffexor digitorum
burb of heel (cut)
profundus:
part covered by manica
ffexoria
 part distal to manica
flexoria
distal phafanx, medial
cartilage
m.interosseusmedi
crus of frog (cut)
m.fexor digitorum
superficialis
wall of hoof:
bar
bearing surface
sole ofhoof
inner (iamellar) surface
angle
junction with frog
junction with sofe
junction with wal!
m. ffexor digitorum
profundus
apex ot frog
s oi joy a yo ps rd ai  psa a s asl go m  'sa s  d n oxn s da l u ' 
the tendon in relationship to the bulbs of the heel, the frog and the sole of the hoof.
 proximal sesamoid
proximat phatanx,latera!
bones (joined by
and medial tuberosities
intersesamoidean
figament and covered by
hyaline cartiage)
distal sesamoidean
ligaments:
oblique
m. interosseus medius
straight
crus of frog, remnant
m. ffexor digitorum:
superficiafis(cut)
profundus (cut)
joint capsule, distal
[coffin) joint
bulbof heet
distal sesamoid
(navicufar) bone in
distal phalanx, medial
podotrochiear bursa
cartilage
distal sesamoid impar
walfl of hoof:
ligament
bearing surface
bar
inner famellar surface
- junction with sofe
m.flexor digitorum
 profundus inserting on
distal phaianx
sole of hoof,
culedge
distal phalanx,
solar surface:
semiunar line
cutaneous surface
apexof frog
Fig. 7.54 The left distal sesamoid (navicular) bone: plantar and solar view. Removal of further parts of the sole shows the insertion of the fexor 
tendon. A window has been cut in this tendon to show the distal sesamoid bone and its podotrochlear bursa. Removal of part of the deep fHexor
tendon reveals the intersesamoidean and sesamoidean ligaments. See also Fig. 7.80.
254
proximal sesamoid
bones joinedby
intersesamoidean
m.interosseusmedfius
Jigament and covered by
hyaline cartifage
The
proximal phalanx:
fateral tuberosity
distal sesamoidean
Foot
trigone
straight
plantar ligament of
proximatinterphalangea!
attachments of proximal
(pastern)joint
distaphalanx,lateral
m. ffexor digitorum:
carfilage
superficialis
profundus
joint capsule, distal
interphalangea!
(coffin)joint
coronet
bulb ofheel
distal sesamoid bone in
 podotrochiear bursa
distal phatanx, medial
distal sesamoid impar
crus of frog (remnant)
figament
crusoffrog(remnant)
wall of hoof
distal phalanx,
 Cutaneous surface
sofe of hoof
plexus plantaris
apex of frog
Fig. 7.55 The sesamoidean ligaments and the left distal sesamoid (navicular) bone: lateroplantar view. The dissection is at the same stage as that
shown in Fig. 7.54. The cruciate and short sesamoidean ligaments are shown in Figs. 7.78 and 7.79. See also Fig. 7.77.
m. flexor digitorum
laterat collateraf igamenf
profundus:
of tarsus
m.tibialis caudalis et
m.ffexor digiti longus
(tendon in tarsal groove)
m
longus
medial coflateral
ligament of tarsus
fong plantar ligament of
tarsus
m. interosseus medius,
origin from metatarsal
bone ll
metatarsal bone IV
metatarsal bone Il!
m. extensor digitorum
lateralis
arcusDfantaris
a.metatarsea
profundus distalis
dorsalis
m. interosseus medius.
a. metatarsea dorsalis l,
 tendo medialis et tendo
lateralis
r. perforans distalis 
metatarsophalangea!
a.v. digitatis medialis
(fetock)joint:
synovial fringe along
proximaledge
distalsesamoidean
 sesamoid bones and
igaments:
intersesamoidean
straight
figaments
oblique
Fig. 7.56 The left interosseus medius muscle (suspensory ligament): plantar view. The tendon of the deep digital fexor muscle has been transected in
 the tarsal groove and removed to show the interosseus muscle. Each tendon of this muscle unites dorsally with the long digital extensor tendon (see
Figs. 7.45 and 7.52).
255
Fig. 7.57 The structure of the hoof wall: medial view (1). The superficial
part of the middle layer has been removed from the plantar part of the
medial quarter of the hoof wall. Further dissections are shown in Figs.
7.58-7.62. See also Figs. 7.75 and 7.76.
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,
m. flexor digitorum:
m. extensor digitorum
superficialis
fongus
profundus
distaf sesamoidean
a.v. digitallis
ligaments
medialis:
medial plantar ligament
ofproximal
r. tori digitalis
interphalangealjoint
distal phalanx, medial
proximal digital annular
cartilage
figament
dermis of hairy skin and
skin at junction with hoof
 corium of periople
waff
tubular horn overlying
 periople of the hoof
coronary corium
wall of hoof:
bulb of heel
toe
tubutar horn overying
medialquarter
lamellar inner fayer
heer
 cut surface of outer and
fubular horn in region of
middlelayers
cut surface of middle
and sofe
layer
Fig. 7.58 The structure of the hoof wall: medial view (2). The outer and
middle layers of the wall have been removed from the medial quarter of
the hoof. The depth of wall removed from the bearing surface is shown in
Fig. 7.59.
m. extensor digitorum
piantar ligament of
longus
proximalinterphaiangeal
proximal phalanx,medial
(pastern) joint
tuberosity
dermis of skin and
m. interosseus medius.
corium ofperiople
tendomedialis
periople
(uaweby Aiosuadsns)
corium of coronary region
proximal digitaf annular
[stillcovered by a thin
ligament (attachment)
layerofhorn)
a.v.digitafis
waff of hoof cut in
longitudinal section:
medialis:
middieandouterlayers
r.dorsalis phalangis
mediae
inner(iameliar)layer
r. tori digitalis
interdigitating with
distal phalanx,media!
lamellae of the parietal
cartilage
corium
junction benween wall
wall of hoof of heel fcut
and sofe (famelfar white
surface)
zone)
burb of heel
5ole of hoof (exposed)
256
Fig. 7.59 The structure of the hoof wall: plantar and solar view. The
bearing surface of sole and wall has been trimmed to show more clearly
the so-called 'white' zone of the wall which forms the junction between 
wall and sole (see Fig. 7.24). In the untrimmed hoof this lamellar zone is
The
less clearly seen (see Fig. 7.54). The removed parts of the medial wall,
Foot
(see Fig. 7.58), are indicated by broken lines.
joint capsule,distal
m. ffexor digitorum
interohalangear
profundus
(coffin)joint
mediarburbofheel fcut)
distal sesamoid
(navicular)bone
distal phalanx,media
cartiage
crus of frog (remnant)
angle of sole
medial bar of hoof wall
tamelfar junctional zone
hoof wall(removed)
betweenwaffandsole
(white zone)
white zone {removed)
distal sesamoid impar
figament
sofe:
cut surfaces
uncut surface
frog:
dista! phalanx:
paracuneal suicus
semilunar line
cuf surface
cutaneous surface
apex
257
Fig. 7.60 The structure of the hoof wall: medial view (3). The middle layer
of hoof wall has been removed from the more dorsal half of the medial
wall, exposing the long coronary papillae. The entire hoof wall has been
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
removed from the more plantar half of the wall, together with the parietal
venous plexus, to expose the medial cartilage of the distal phalanx.
m. ffexor digitorum:
plantar tigament of
superficialis
proximafinterphalangeal
profundus
joint
periople
a. digitalis medialis:
dermis of skin and
r. dorsalis phalangis
corium of periople
mediae
r. dorsalis phalangis
papilae of parietal
distalis
corium
outer surface of hoof walf
cavity of synovial digital
at toe
sheath
hoof walf, outer and
middle layers
distatphalanx:
medialcartilage
hoof wall inner (lfameffar)
parietal groove
fayer interdigitating with
mediat walf
lamellae of parietal
corium
medial bulb of heer
exposed tametfar white
wallof hoof at heer
exposed sole of hoof
plexus plantaris
Fig. 7.61 The structure of the hoof wall and the medial cartilage of the
distal phalanx: medial view. Removal of most of the remaining inner layer
of the wall exposes the whole abaxial surface of the medial cartilage. The
lamellae are also seen within the remaining part of the hoof wall.
a. digitafis
m.extensordigitorum
mediafis:
longus
r. dorsalis phatangis
medial chondrocoronal
mediae
r. dorsalis phalangis
ligament
distalis
dermis of skin and
distal interphalangeal
periopliccorium
joint, medial colfateraf
plexus coronaris
igament
papillary coronary
corium
distat phalanx:
distat phalanx,extensor
medial cartifage
parietalsufcus
process
medial wall
hoof walf:
medial coflateral
middfe and outer layers
chondro-ungular liganent
inner (famelfar) ayer,
interdigitatingwith
medial burb of heer
lamellae of parietal
coriurn
hoof walf, at hee!
plexus parietalis
famellae of white zone
horn of sole
plexus plantaris
258
plantar annularigam
distalsesamoidean
ligaments:
The
Foot
proximalphalanx,latera
tuberosity
lateral plantar ligament of
proximat interphalangear
joint
attachmentsofproximal
annular digitat figament
cavity of synovial digital
sheath
m. ftexor digitorum:
superficialis
profundus
lateralcartilageofdistal
phalanx
medial cartilage of distal
coronet
phalanx
remains of bulbar
cushion
bulb of heer
Fig. 7.62 The medial cartilage of the distal phalanx: lateroplantar view. The dissection is at the same stage as that shown in Fig. 7.61. The medial
cartilage curls behind and beneath the bulbar cushion, which has been removed.
median plane of
metatarsus
sectioning
fetlock
digrt
periople
wall of hoof:
mediaf quarter
coronet
toe
Fig. 7.63 The right pes: dorsal view. The specimen has been sawn through the median plane, to produce the specimen for Figs. 7.65 and 7.66.
259
metatarsal pad(ergot)
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
bu/bs of heel and
interburbar sulcus
crura of frog
bar of waff
angleofsole
suicus of frog (indistinct)
paracunealsufcus
waff of hoof:
bearing surface
inner surface (lamellar)
sofe of hoof
apex of frog
median pfane of
sectioning
wafl of hoof at toe
Fig. 7.64 The right pes: solar view. The specimen has been sawn through in the median plane to produce the specimen for Figs. 7.65 and 7.66.
m. extensor digitorum
longus
metatarsal bone ll
m. fexor digitorum:
profundus
superficialis
a.metatarseadorsalisll,
r.perforans distalis
arcus plantaris
profundus distalis
metatarsophalangeal
joint cavity
proximal sesamoid bone
proxima phalanx
distal sesamoidean
anbio
straight
metatarsal pad (ergot)
proximal interphaiangeal
joint cavity
synoviat digital sheath
middle phalanx
distal interphalangea!
distal phalanx
distal sesamoid bone
podotrochlear bursa
bulbar cushion
digital cushion
tateral bulb of the hee!
 blue dotted lines. Epiphyseal fusion is completed in metatarsal bones and phalanges; this occurs at about 12 months of age (range 6-15 months) in 
each bone.
260
Fig. 7.66 The right digit in median section:
medial view. This is a closer view of a part of the
specimen shown in Fig. 7.65. The limits of the
synovial cavities are indicated by blue dotted
The
lines. The line marked by arrows indicates the
Foot
plane of sectioning shown in Figs. 7.19 and
7.20.
a.v. digitalis plantaris,
f. dorsalis phalangis
metatarsophalangeal
proximalis
proximal phafanx
(fetiock) joint cavity
metatarsal bone I!!
comrmon integument of
m. extensor digitorum
digit.
fongus
epidermis
dermis (corium)
distal sesamoidean
hypodermis
ligaments:
proximal interphalangeal
(pastern)jointcavity
middle phatanx, extensor
synovial cavity of digital
process
sheath
a.v. digitalis plantaris.
m. ffexor digitorum:
r.dorsalis phalangis
profundus
mediae
superficialis
coronet
cartilage covering ffexor
process of middle
distal interphalangeal
phatanx
(colfin) joint cavity
plexus coronarius
dermis (corium) of
common integumenf 
distal phalanx, extensor
process
distal sesamoid impar
papillae of coronary
ligament
corium
wall of hoof:
buibar cushion
outerlayer
middtelayer
inner layer (lameliar)
coronet
plexus parietalis
lateral buib of the heer
arcus terminafis in sofar
podotrochlear bursa
canal of distal phatanx
-digitat cushion
terminal papillae of
lameflar corium
trog
junction between sole
papillae of corium of frog
and wall of hoof
plexus plantaris
white zone
junction between sole
sole of hoof
bolpue
261
n.fibularis superficialis
n.saphenus
Fig. 7.67 Superficial
structures of the right 
hindlimb (1): cranial
The Horse
v.saphena medialis:
view. The skin has been
f.cranialis
 removed and the vessels
f.anastomoticus
 and nerves within the
superficial fascia have
Anatomy,
been dissected. Figs.
tibial extensor
7.68-7.70 also show this
retinaculum
tibia,medialmalfeolus
 specimen. The dissection
shows the relationship
Color Atlas of Veterinary 
tibia,lateral malleolus
between the superfcial
(may inciude distal fibula)
vessels and nerves of the
digit (Figs. 7.71-7.74)
 and those of the more
v. metatarsea dorsalis f
proximal regions of the
limb.
m. extensor digitorum
v. digitalis dorsalis
laleralis
communis if
n.metatarseus dorsalis f
(n.fibularis profundus)
metatarsafbone
m.extensor digitorum
metatarsophalangeal
longus
(fetlock)joint
a. digitafis medialis:
r. dorsalis phalangis
proximafis
r. dorsalis phalangis
mediae
m.interosseus medius.
tendofaterafis
coronet
m, flexor digitorum
V. saphena lateralis
Fig. 7.68 Superfcial
profundus (m. flexor
digiti fongus)
structures of the right
hindlimb (2): lateral
tendo calcaneus
n.cutaneus surae
view. Figs. 7.67, 7.69
communis
caudalis (n. fibiaiis)
 and 7.70 also show
this specimen.
a. malfeolaris caudalis
lateralis
n.fibufaris superficialis
calcaneus,tuberosity
long plantar tarsal
m. extensor digiforum
figament
longus
metatarsal bone IV.
proximal extremity
m.extensor digitorum
lateralis
n. plantaris fateralis
(n.tibialis)
m. extensor digitorum:
a. metatarsea dorsalis If
lateralis
snbuol
m.ffexor digitorum
superficiafis
m. interosseus medius
metatarsar bone I/
(suspensory tigament)
n.metatarseus dorsalis
.. plantaris medialis (n.
tibialis), r.communicans
 (n. fibutaris profunous)
a.v. digitafis lateralis 
m. interosseus medius,
n. digitatis plantaris tateralis
tendolateralis
metatarsal pad (ergot)
m.extensordigitorum
figament ofergot
longus
m. flexor digitorum
profunous
coronet
262
v. saphena medialis:
tendo caicaneus
Fig. 7.69 Superficial
f.cranialis
structures of the right
r.caudafis
hindlimb (3): caudal
a. malfeotaris caudalis
view. Figs. 7.67, 7.68
lateralis
and 7.70 also show this
specimen.
n. saphen
n.fibularis superficialis
cafcaneus,tuberosity
fibia, latera malleolus
(may inctude distal
fibufa)
n.cutaneus surae
caudalis (n. tibialis)
m.ffexor digitorum
profundus
a. metatarsea dorsalis I
V. digitalis dorsalis
communis}
 metatarsal bone IV
m.ffexor digitorum
superficialis
n. plantaris medialis
m. interosseus medius
(sergnu)
a.v.digitalis tateralis
n.digitalis piantaris tateralis
metatarsophalangeal
n. plantaris medialis
[fetfock}joint
(n. tibialis), r.
communicans
metatarsal pad (ergot)
ligaments of the ergot:
n.digitalis
laterar
plantaris medialis
medial
a.v. digitalis medialis
coronet
V. saphena medialis,
Fig. 7.70 Superficial
n.saphenus
f.caudalis
structures of the right
hindlimb (4): medial
V. saphena medialis,
n.tibialis,r.cutaneus
view. Figs. 7.67-7.69
r.craniatis
tarsalis medialis
also show this
 specimen. The more
m.ffexor digiti longus
 proximal parts of this
m. ffexor digitorum
dissection are shown
fongus
in Fig. 6.56.
tendo calcaneus
a.v. tibialis caudalis
communis
calcaneus, tuberosity
fibial shaft
n. plantaris medialis
fibia, medial malleolus
(syergnu)
n.plantaris medialis
v.mefafarseadors
(sgeiqn u)
metatarsarbone
a. digitafis plantaris
communisf!
v. digitalis dorsalis
communis I
n. plantaris medialis,
r.communicans
metatarsal boneI//
metatarsal bone ff, distaf
extremity
m. interosseus medius
n. digitalis piantaris medialis
a.v.digitalis medialis
n.metatarsea dorsafis
(n. fibularis profundus)
metatarsal pad (ergot)
coronet
Jigament of the ergot
263
V.digitalis dorsatis
m.extensor digitorum
lateralis
communis I
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
m.extensor digitorum
n.metatarseus dorsalis I!
snbuor
(n.fibufaris profundus)
n.metatarseus dorsalis
I (n.fibutaris profundus)
metatarsalboneil
m.interosseus medius
(suspensory figament)
. metatarsea dorsalis Il
tendo lateralis et tendo
medialis
a. digitalis medialis:
a. digitalis lateralis,
r. dorsalis phaiangis
r.dorsalis
phalangis proximais
proximalis
r.coronalis
corone
Fig. 7.71 Superficial structures of the distal right pes (1): dorsal view. This is a closer view of a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 7.67.
n. plantaris lateralis
.metatarsea dorsalis
(n. tibialis)
m. flexor digitorum
superficialis
m. extensor digitorum
fongus
m.interosseus medius
n.metatarseusdorsalis
 metatarsal bone IV
II (n. fibularis profundus)
metatarsal bone ift
metatarsophalangeal
(fetiock)joint
n.plantaris medialis
(n. tibiafis), r.
communicans
m.interosseus medius,
metatarsal bone IV, distal
tendolaterafis
extremity
a.v.digitalis lateralis
a.v.digitafis
n. digitalis plantaris lateralis
lateralis:
r.dorsalis phalangis
metatarsal pad (ergot)
proximalis
r. dorsalis phalangis
mediae (r. coronalis)
n.digitalisplantarislateralis:
r. tori digitalis
f.dorsalis
r.plantaris
figament of ergof
coronet
Fig. 7.72 Superficial structures of the distal right pes (2): lateral view. This is a closer view of a part of the specimen seen in Fig. 7.68.
264
v. digitalis dorsalis
n. plantaris fateralis
(n.tibialis)
communis I/
 metatarsal bone IV
The
n. plantaris medialis
 Foot
(n.tibiafis),
r.communicans
a. rmetatarsea dorsafis Iff
metatarsaf boneIl
m. ffexor digitorum
superticialis
m. interosseus medius
(uaweb Arosuadsns)
a.v.digitafis mediafis
n. digitalis plantaris
fateralis,r.caudafis
n.digitafis
plantar annular ligament
plantaris medialis
f.caudalis
a.v.digitafislateralis
proximal digitaf annular
ligament
n.digitalis plantaris lateralis
m. ffexor digitorum
profundus in digita!
sheath
figaments ofergot
a.v.n. digitalis medialis,
a.v.n. digitafis tateralis,
r. tori digitalis
r. tori digifalis
'  n s   go p e go  rs e s s 'ma d  s    po ss gi ' 
n. metatarseus dorsalis I
v. digitafis dorsalis
(n. fibularis profundus)
communis Il (v. saphena
mediafis,r. cranialis)
metatarsalboneI!
m. flexor digitorum:
Superficialis
profundus
metatarsal bone f
7. plantaris medialis
(n.tibialis).
r.communicans
m. extensor digitorum
longus
a. digitalis plantaris
communisl
n.digitalis plantaris mediafis
r.caudalis
m. interosseus medius
r. plantaris
(suspensory tigament)
r.dorsafis
metatarsal pad (ergot)
metatarsal bone If, distal 
extremity
ligament of the ergot
m. interosseus medius.
tendo medialis
a.v.digitafis
medialis:
r.dorsalis phalangis
proximalis
r.coronalis
a.v.digitalis mediafis
-7. tori digitafis
Fig. 7.74 Superfcial structures of the distal right pes (4): medial view. This is a closer view of a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 7.70. Note the
 origin of the coronal ramus from the dorsal artery of the proximal phalanx. It usually arises from the dorsal artery of the middle phalanx.
265
Fig. 7.75 The corium of the hoof: right lateral view. The keratinised hoof
(epidermis) has been removed after cold water maceration, exposing the
corium (dermis). Most of the hair has been lost in this method of
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
preparation but the papillary and lamellar structure of the corium has
been preserved.
corium of the burbof the
hair-bearing skin at
heel (continuous with
coronet
perioplic corium)
perioplic corium
(papillary)
coronary corium
(papillary)
parietal corium of the wall
coronary corium of the
(lamellar)
bar of the walf
papilfary corium of
junction between sole
andwafl (terminal
corium of the frog
papilfae of fthe white zone
(papillary)
are inciuded)
hair-bearing skin ofthe
interbulbar suicus
coronet
coriumof
bulb of heet (papillary)
coronary corium
(papiltary)
corium of frog (papillary):
bar of the wall:
CrUS
central suicus
coronary corium
lameffar corium
apex
papillary corium at
junction between sole
solar corium (papillary):
angleof sole
terminal papilae of the
paracuneal surcus
white zone)
concave plate of the sole
Fig. 7.76 The corium of the hoof: solar view. The periople (Fig. 7.75), bulbs and frog form a
proximal collar (frog' and “frogband'") around the wall and sole. Modern anatomical terminology
however, fails to recognise the unity of these three parts of the hoof.
266
distalsesamoidean
annularplantarligament
ligaments:
(cut)
obique
The
intersesamoidean
fibrocartilage
ligament covered by
Jateralabaxialplantar
ligament of proximal
interphalangeal joint
(cut)
proximal attachments of
proximal digital annular
ligament
m.flexor digitorum
superficialis (insertions)
Droximal phalanx,
ridge-ike boundary of
trigone
m. ffexor digitorum
profundus (cut)
proximat interphatangeal
(pastern)joint:
abaxial plantar figament
axial pfantarfigament
plantarextensions of joint
digitat sheath (cut)
cavity (opened)
Fig. 7.77 The sesamoidean and plantar ligaments of the digit: plantar view (1). The superfcial and deep fexor tendons have been resected, and the
lateral abaxial plantar ligament has been removed.
intersesamoidean
distal sesarmoidean
figament
oblique
figaments:
straight
cruciate
proximal sesamoid
proximal attachments of
bones exposed beneath
proximal digital annular
fibrocantilage
igament
pfantar igaments of
proxima/interphalangeal
joint:
axial
proximarphalan
abaxial
Fig. 7.78 The sesamoidean and plantar ligaments of the digit: plantar view (2). The straight and oblique ligaments have been removed to expose the
cruciate ligaments which lie close to the capsule of the metatarsophalangeal (fetlock) joint.
metatarsal bone Ifl
edgeof articular
cartiage
synovialmembrane
sagittal ridge
 lateral collateral figament
mediaiandlateral
trochlear surfaces
short distal sesamoidean
ligaments
proximal sesamoid
bones
fateral coflateral figamenf
of metatarsophalangeal
(fetfock)joint
position of cruciate
figaments, covered by
edge of articular
joint capsule
cartiage
m.extensor digitorum
proximal phalanx,medial
fongus, insertion into
and lateral articular
extensor process of
surfaces
proximal phalanx
Fig. 7.79 The metatarsophalangeal joint cavity: dorsal view. The joint has been opened from its dorsal aspect, and fexed to show the joint surfaces.
The plantar part of the joint capsule has been dissected to show the short sesamoidean ligaments within it.
267
m.ffexor digitorum
cartitage covering flexor
 superficiafis, insertions
tuberosity of middte
intoproximalandmiddle
phalanx
The Horse
phalanges
synovial cavity of distal
collateral sesamoidean
interphalangealjoint
figament
exposed by removal of
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,
joint capsule
joint capsule of distal
interphatangeal joint
cartilaginous surface of
distal sesamoid bone
lamellar corium of bar
pathological lesions in
distal sesamoid bone
angle of sole,with
papillary solar corium
distat sesamoid impar
ligament
m, ftexor digitorum
 profundus, insertion into
distal phalanx,
phalanx
cutaneous surface
Fig. 7.80 The distal sesamoid bone: plantar and solar view. Removal of the tendon of the deep digital fexor muscle has opened up the podotrochlear
bursa to reveal the distal sesamoid bone. Partial excision of the roof of the podotrochlear bursa reveals the synovial cavity of the distal
 interphalangeal joint. The cartilage covering the podotrochlear surface of the distal sesamoid bone shows evidence of pathological change
('navicular' disease).
fong hairs covering
keratinised hard waff of
coronet
hoof at toe
horn tubufes separated
from intertuburar horn at
distal surface of wall
keratinised wall of hoof at
heel
soft ceflular mass
soft ceffuar mass
developed from the sole
of the hoof
Fig. 7.81 The hoof of an unborn foal: lateral view. The soft cellular masses developed from the sole and the frog rapidly dry out after birth, and
when weight is taken on the foot they are quickly worn away to expose the hard keratinised structures beneath (compare with Fig. 7.39).
apex ofceflufar mass
soft ceflular mass
developed from the frog
developed from sole of
hoof
sof ceflular mass
developed from the frog.
horn tubules separated
central suicus
crura
from intertubular horn at
distal surfaceof walf
periople
hard keratinised waff or
hoof
bulb of heer
hair ridge on plantar
long hairs covering
aspect of digit
coronet
Fig. 7.82 The hoof of the unborn foal: solar and plantar view. The overgrowth of the cellular masses derived from the angle of the sole and from the
frog hide the infected parts of the wall (the bars). When the foal begins to walk, however, the soft tissues dry and are worn away. The solar surface
of the hoof quickly becomes like that of the adult horse (see Fig. 7.9).
268
8. THE PELVIS
INCLUDING
THE
 SPINE
Clinical importance of the pelvis
affected horse moves forward at a walk. Chronic sacro-iliac injury
results from over-use, trauma, and the saddle. It has a high incidence
Lameness associated with the pelvis can be investigated by clinical
 of 8-15% in racehorses. There is usually a history of poor performance,
examination, ultrasonography, scintigraphy, radiology in the young
resistingjumping, lack of hindlimb impulsion, behavioural chan ges and
horse, local anaesthesia and nerve blocks. The pelvis has a very impor-
back soreness. Examination of the joint by ultrasonography often
tant function in providing the link between the spine (for support) and
 reveals degenerative changes in the joint. Anaesthesia of the joint will 
the hindlimb (for propulsion). At times the pelvis may be carrying the
 confirm the seat of lameness. For the right sacro-iliac joint, a site 2 cm
whole weight of the horse. It transfers the propulsive effort but,
cranial to the left tuber sacrale, at a 45-60 degree angle to the joint and
because of the strong ligamentous and musculature attachments, has 
 slightly caudal towards the right greater trochanter of the femur, along
very limited movement itself. It is continuously subjected to non-
the medial aspect of the right ilial wing, will reach the joint and vice
compressive forces. It could be said that the sacro-iliac ligaments and
versa for the left joint. Nerve damage within the pelvic cavity may affect
joint are subjected to the most disruptive forces in the locomotory
the obturator nerve, which is sometimes damaged in foaling. This nerve
system. The pelvis gives passage, through the greater sciatic foramen,
imnervates the adductor, gracilis, and pectineus muscles. Loss of adduc-
to the cranial gluteal artery and vein and the gluteal nerves; also to
tion of the hindlimb results in a wide stance, with inability to keep the
the largest single nerve in the equine body, the sciatic nerve. In addi-
limb under the body.Trauma to the cranial and caudal gluteal nerves
tion, the obturator foramen gives passage to the obturator nerves and
Occurs sometimes, with a resultant atrophy of the gluteo-biceps (biceps
vessels.
femoris) muscle.
 Fractures of the pelvis are relatively rare, as the pelvis is protected
'Ruptures′ occur when a part of the body is displaced through a
by such strong muscle groups. They do, however, occur in traumatic
break in bodily structure. ('Hernias′ are displacements through natural
   a  ss ss s ns  r sn
bodily openings.) Ruptures are often associated with kicks, being
pelvic injury may be in shock and may be very reluctant to bear weight
 stuck half over fences, and road traffic accidents. Damage to the pre-
or move. There may be fractures of the wing or the shaft of the ilium,
pubic tendon, followed by rupture, is occasionally described in asso-
acetabulum, pubic bone or ischium. The most common fracture is
ciation with the presence of twin foals, hydro-allantois or giant fetal
 oversize. Rupture of the abdominal muscles may occur following
onset of very acute unilateral or bilateral lameness, often following
trauma. Inguinal or scrotal hernias may occur in colts (usually con-
exercise and trauma. The sacral or ischiatic tuberosities often appear
s go nss  sl r s (a) ro 's (
umeven in height when viewed from behind.
imtestine, or part of the great omentum, or both, enter the vaginal
The sacro-iliac joint is clinically the most important locomotory
process through the vaginal ring. These parts may remain close to the
structure in the pelvis. It is a diarthrodial joint; it has a joint capsule, is
superficial inguinal ring (inguinal hernia) or may enter the scrotum
thin and tight, with a total capacity of only 1-2 ml. There is hyaline
(scrotal hernia). In scrotal hernia, the hernial sac comprises the scrotal
cartilage on the sacral joint surface and fbro-cartilage on the ilial
 skin, tunica dartos, and the tunica vaginalis of the vaginal process,
surface. The shape of the articulation varies with age and between
and also contains the testis, and epididymis. If the blood supply to the
individuals so there is considerable variation. The joint is stabilized by
 contents of the hernial sac is affected (strangulated hernia), surgery is
three pairs of sacro-iliac ligaments. The dorsal sacro-iliac ligament is 
urgently needed. Surgical treatment usually involves replacing the
divided into dorsal and lateral parts. There is an interosseus ligament
abdominal contents by twisting the vaginal process. The twisted neck
d a s  s  a e o 
of the process is then sutured to the edges of the superficial inguinal
affected by damage to these ligaments. Which results in a sore back or 
 ring (abdominal and pelvic tendons of the external abdominal oblique
persistent hindlimb lameness. The injuries fall into two groups. Firstly,
 muscle). The vaginal tunic is incised and the testis and epidymis are
there are acute injuries, desmitis, and luxation/subluxation of the joint.
removed. Femoral hernia (or ?rupture) occurs through the femoral
Secondly, there is chronic injury in the form of sacro-iliac osteoarthritis
 ring, alongside the femoral artery, and is rare, but (as in the human
or desmitis or both. Both are seen as hindlimb lameness and/or poor
 cases) may be more common in females than in males.
performance. The acute injuries result from a fall, from slipping, or
 Examination of the pelvis by rectal examination is not so easy in
from overwork. Which often causes overstretching of the dorsal and
I the horse as in the ox because the rectum is friable and easily torn. It
ventral ligaments. Sometimes, if the sacro-iliac joint is particularly
 can be used to evaluate inguinal hernias and cryptorchidism (unde-
269
whether there is an incarceration of the intestine in the inguinal canal.
a rare event with only about 4% of foalings having difficulty. It may
The superficial inguinal ring is located 6-8 cm cranial to the ilio-
pectineal eminence of the pubis and 10-12 cm lateral to the midline.
 the internal iliac artery rupture has been known after a long period of
Hor
The perineal region is a favoured area for the occurrence of melanoma
dystocia. Interventions which may prove necessary include retropul-
in grey horses.
sion, forced extraction, amputation of fetal parts (foetotomy), or Cae-
The
The male and female reproductive tracts are associated with the
sarean section. The latter operation requires mid-line laparotomy with
pelvic region and will be discussed here. The intra-abdominal features
 an incision along the greater curvature of the uterus.
my,
a ode q p aq r sss a p a og go
Examination of the stallion for soundness requires examination of
horse is a long-day breeder and is seasonally polyoestrus. Examination
the musculo-skeletal, respiratory, and cardiovascular systems, as well
An
 of the external and internal genital tract of the mare is an important
as the reproductive tract and semen evaluation. The semen should have
aspect of stud practice. Vaginal examination using a speculum, and
 a high progressive motility, a pH of 7.2-7.6, a volume of around 70 ml
digital examination, are possible. Vulval bleeding occurs occasionally.
(quite variable but not too important), a concentration of 8 x 10° and,
One of the more unusual conditions is pneumo-vagina (wind-sucking)
 in terms of morphology, at least 60% should be normal and 10% still
ofve
which constitutes a risk for subsequent bacterial infection. There may
motile after 6 hours. If a second sample is taken on the same day, the
 be fibroids and sacculations of the uterus. Trans-rectal ultrasonogra-
values should be at least 50% of the first sample. There are ejaculatory
las
phy is very useful in pregnancy, to assess the ovarian follicles and
dysfunctions, some of which may have an anatomical basis, or an
corpora lutea, the presence of small or hypoplastic ovaries, the pres-
abnormality of the locomotory system may make it diffcult to mount.
ence and size of follicles, and the state of the uterus. It is particularly
The external genitalia have to be examined. Penile trauma is quite
important to detect endometritis or chronic endometriosis. The most
 common and includes abrasions, lacerations and rupture of the corpus
cavernosum penis. The penis can be affected by a variety of conditions
loriella equigenitalis which is the most important infectious genital
 includinginability to retract the organ (due to inanition or debility after
 disease of the mare and stallion. Endometrial cysts, peri-glandular
breeding), haematomas, coital exanthema, infammation (balanitis)
fibrosis, and cystic glandular distension, may also be revealed. Muco-
and, rarely, squamous cell carcinoma and papilloma. Removal of these
metra (mucus accumulations in the uterus) also occurs occasionally.
tumours may require surgery. Contraction of the preputial ring can also
Enlarged ovaries may indicate tumours such as granulosa-cell tumours.
occur following injury and may prevent extrusion of the penis (acquired
Endoscopy can be used to collect microbiological samples and samples 
phimosis). The prepuce can be an important source of bacterial patho-
for endometrial biopsy or cytology.
gens, particularly for the mare at mating. Examination of the scrotum
Uterine torsion is not uncommon as a cause of colic in the late term
may reveal acquired swellings, acute trauma, scrotal lacerations, tes-
mare (usually at around 8 months). It may be 180-540 degrees torsion,
ticular torsions or even hydrocoele (fuid within the vaginal process).
cranial to the cervix and vagina, and rupture of the uterus may result
The scrotum is an area that is often involved in trauma, so may
from the torsion.
show signs of scars on its surface. Torsion of the spermatic cords is an
 Placentitis is an unusual occurrence. It may be necessary to carry
extremely rare event. Congenital abnormalities of the scrotum may be
out ovariectomy because of abnormal behaviour, to curtail reproduc-
a result of male pseudo-hermaphroditism or the testicular feminization
tive activity, or for pathological conditions such as granulosa-cell
syndrome. The testes should be palpated and their size and consistency
tumours or haematomas in the ovary. The operation can be carried
are related to the use of the stallion and his daily sperm output. The
out through the fank or by ventral midline, oblique paramedian or
left testis is often larger and more pendulous than the right. Abnor-
vaginal approaches. Inflammation of the Fallopian tubes (oophritis)
malities may include hypoplasia (revealed in the young horse), degen-
may also require their removal.
eration of the testes following trauma, inflammation (orchitis) which
 Pregnancy failure in the mare is not uncommon as a result of
may follow trauma or bacterial infection or both, and neoplasia in the
embryonic death or abortion. Pregnancy diagnosis in the mare is pos-
form of a seminoma. It may also be possible to palpate the epididymis
sible per recium and is accurate after about 28 days and optimal
(which is on the dorso-lateral border of the testis) for abnormalities.
around day 42. Trans-rectal ultra-sonography will give results from
The tail of the epididymis is at the caudal pole of the testis. The inter-
day 10 to term. Usually the first scan is 14-15 days. To detect twins
nal genitalia may be palpated per rectum.
before implantation, scan at 16 days. The heart beat should be visible
Castration of the stallion (also known as gelding) is one of the most
at 26-28 days. Transabdominal ultra-sonography can be used from
common operations carried out in equine practice and is usually
day 80 to term. It is possible during pregnancy to have umbilical cord
carried out to prevent male behaviour, rather than for medical or
abnormalities, placental insuffciencies, pregnancy in the uterine body,
surgical reasons. The exception to this is for the horse that has an
insuffciency of hormones from the corpora lutea and, the worst pos-
-on pasoo pue uado are araui (proondao) snsen papuosapn
sibility of all, uterine torsion. Prolonged gestation is rare, with only
 niques for castration. The operation can be carried out in the field, in
1% exceeding 370 days. Premature udder development occurs occa-
the standing position, or in lateral recumbency. The operation can be
sionally. There are several causes of abortion including bacterial,
followed by a variety of complications (infection, haemorrhage, swell-
fun gal, and viral agents. In the latter group, equine infectious anaemia,
ings, septicaemia, tetanus, schirrhous cord, hydrocoele, penile pro-
equine herpes virus l and equine viral arteritis, are the most
lapse, evisceration, and furunculosis) so care must be taken with
important.
hygiene. In the cryptorchid horse ('rig') the testis and epididymis fail
 Parturition is a time when intervention may be necessary. Caesar-
to descend into the scrotum. In half of these cases, the testis is retained
ean section is essential if second stage labour is delayed, but it is rare 
in the abdomen (usually near the deep inguinal ring) and the vaginal
to get a live foal delivered by this operation. From the mare's point
process is absent, or short (containing only the tail of the epididymis).
of view it is preferable to perform an embryotomy. Parturition occurs 
 In the other cases the testis lies in the inguinal region or canal. It may
in 3 stages. The frst stage, which lasts about one hour, is rupture of
lie superficial to the superficial inguinal ring of the external abdominal
the fetal membranes; the second stage lasts about 30 minutes and the
oblique muscle, but it may not be palpable externally. In this position
foal is born. Stage three relates to expulsion of the foetal membranes
it will be lying between the origin of the lateral scrotal lamina from
and lasts about 1 hour. Uterine involution takes about 6-10 days and
the dorsolateral edge of the ring (abdominal tendon of the external
the foaling heat occurs 7-9 days after foaling. Post-partum complica-
abdominal oblique muscle) and the origin of the medial scrotal lamina
tions include retained placenta, haemorrhage, recto-vaginal fistula,
from the yellow elastic lamina medial to the ring. The cryptorchid
 perineal lacerations, uterine rupture, endometrial haemorrhage,
testis in the inguinal position is usually much smaller than the descended
uterine prolapse, and endometritis. Dystocia (difficult parturition) is
testis, and the scrotum may be poorly developed. In most cases it can
270
be removed by surgery in the inguinal region but some cases require
by conformational abnormalities. It causes pressure points between 
a paramedian abdominal incision.
the adjacent spines with over-riding. Adventitious bursae develop
between the spines in response to the persistent rubbing, and where
there is persistent over-riding new bone develops in response. Affected
Clinical importance of the spine
horses buck when ridden, have a very poor hindlimb action, and a
Pelvis
poor jumping performance. The rider's weight is usually carried by
Clinical considerations of the spine involve the regions of the head.
T12-T18 and the most likely sites of lesions are in T15-T17.
(incl
neck, thorax, abdomen, and pelvis. Changes in the conformation, mus-
In older horses there are also conditions associated with loss of
Cluding
culature and general well-being may affect the spinal column. Clinical
strength in the ligaments around the small joints of the vertebrae,
examination, lameness tests, regional anaesthesia, diagnostic and con-
causing lesions in the transverse processes and the articular processes
trast radiographyand scintigraphy, are widelyused in diagnosis. Clinical 
of the vertebrae.
the
examination at exercise, either in hand or by lunging, are used in diag-
 In considering the spine as a whole it is important to realise that
nosis. Also, marks may be seen and swellings detected on palpation.
 most of the conditions likely to be a common cause of abnormalities
 There are only 36 bones in the equine vertebral column (excluding
 are found in the pelvic region. The sacral vertebrae are an important
the tail), but there are many ligaments. Some are extremely powerful,
 aq  s o a n  s an go 
such as the nuchal and supra-spinous ligaments, and there are many
damaged (see Pelvic section). One of the conditions not mentioned in
smaller ligaments such as the interspinous, sacroiliac, sacrotuberous,
the pelvic section is fracture of the sacrum. In this injury, the periph-
iliolumbar, intertransverse and dorsal and ventral longitudinal liga-
eral nerves of the hindleg (sciatic, fbular, tibial and obturator) are
ments. Clinical signs that suggest spinal problems include acute or
often involved. The femoral nerve is extremely well protected and less
chronic *back' pain, reduced fexibility of the spine, lateral curvature 
likely to be damaged. Fracture of the sacrum may also cause neuritis
 of the spine, asymmetry of the hindquarters, neurological defcits and
 of the cauda equina, which affects sacral and coccygeal nerve
atrophy of the dorsal muscles and hindquarters.
roots.
The diseases and disorders of the spinal column, dorsal muscula-
 The neurological problems of the equine spine can be investigated
ture, and central nervous system are sometimes extremely diffcult to
by radiography, ultrasonography, myelography, and by collection and
differentiate. Many conditions of the back are diagnosed by elimina-
 analysis of cerebrospinal fluid. The fluid is best collected with the horse
tion of the other possibilities, rather than by the finding of probable
umder a general anaesthetic, in lateral recumbency, with the head
diagnostic indicators. ‘Back problems’ often have very indeterminate
flexed to ninety degrees and with a straight spinal column. The needle
clinical signs such as poor performance, behavioural or temperamental
is inserted in the midline between the cranial borders of the wings of
changes, and difficulty of control when being mounted or ridden.
the atlas, to a depth of 5-8 cm. Fluid can also be collected from the
 Reluctance to go faster or to jump is also a very common feature. Ver-
humbo-sacral space. For this the horse, needs to be sedated, restrained
tebral trauma occurs quite often when horses fall at speed, when
and standing level on all four feet. The needle is inserted on a line that
taking jumps, or in serious collisions. Fracture of the spinous pro-
 joins the cranial borders of the left and right tuber coxae, at the inter-
cesses, vertebral body and neural arches is most likely in the frst three
section with the midline. One to two cm behind this intersection is a
thoracic, frst three lumbar and T12 vetebrae. If the horse falls over
depression; the caudal aspect of the 6rh lumbar vertebra lies cranially
backwards it is more likely to suffer from fractures of the dorsal
and the cranial border of the 2nd sacral spinous process lies caudally;
spinous processes. In many of these cases the horse will remain on the
the rim of the tuber sacrale lies laterally. It is important to remember
 ground or be *winded'. Fractures or other injuries of the cervical, tho-
that L5 is less prominent than L6 and sometimes diffcult to palpate,
racic, and lumbar vertebrae are not uncommon in these types of
as is Sl which is heads promiuent than S2. The sub-arachnoid space
trauma, and may be accompanied by fractures of the long bones and/
can then be located at a depth of 12-13 cm.
or accessory carpal bone, making diagnosis even more difficult. A
Infectious disease of the equine spine is not an uncommon phenom-
horse pulling up lame is more likely to have problems with the superf-
enon. In many parts of the world viral encephalitides are common,
cial digital fexor tendons, or fracture of the accessory carpal bone or a
imcluding Eastern, Western and Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis.
lateral condyle.
Equine herpes virus l and West Nile virus infections may also occur.
 The spine may be subjected to a variety of conditions. Abnormali-
Various other disorders also affect the central nervous system includ-
ties of conformation are seen in foals; congenital scoliosis (lateral
ing equine degenerating myelo-encephalopathy (EDM), verminous
curvature) is not uncommon; much less common are lordosis (ventral
encephalitis (associated with aberrant parasites), equine protozoal
curvature), kyphosis (dorsal curvature) and synostosis (fusion of the
vertebrae). Muscular damage affecting the spine includes strains,
gitis, botulism, tetanic hypocalcaemia, hyperkalaemic periodic paraly-
myopathies, myositis, white muscle disease (vitamin E and selenium
sis and fun gal menin gitis.
deficiency) and external rhabdomyolysis. Ligamentous strains are also
Neural disorders of uncertain aetiology include post-endurance-race
very common. Misalignment of the vertebrae leading to pinched
cerebral syndrome, pareses associated with upper and lower motor
nerves is also not uncommon. One of the most common conditions is
neuron diseases, trembling, and ataxia. This latter may be induced by
over-riding or fracture of the spinal processes of the thoracic verte-
plant poisons and may be seen as a lack of proprioception, and a syn-
brae. Spondylitis is inflammation of a vertebra; ossifying spondylitis 
drome involving both the vestibular system and the cerebellum. Neuro-
and discospondylolisthesis are associated with traumatic incidents and
 are not uncommon.
allergy to inhaled antigens), self-mutilation syndrome and wind-sucking.
 One of the most common causes of back pain in the horse is the
Tail damage is usually seen as a tail with kinks’ or with a tendency
condition known as “kissing spines', in which there is crowding or
to be flaccid. However, these signs can be caused by sacral fractures
over-riding of the spinous processes of the vertebrae under the saddle
which result in nerve damage and neurogenic atrophy of sacral and
area. It has a high incidence and a very low mortality and is caused
coccy geal muscles.
271
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
convexity of m. gluteus
medius
Fig. 8.2 Bones of the pelvic, femoral and stifle regions: left lateral view.
Wum, tuber coxae
The bony features shown in Fig. 8.1 are coloured red.
been obscured)
tail head
femur. greater trochanter:
caudal part
notch
craniat part
intermuscular groove
between
m. biceps femoris and
m. semitendinosus
convexityof
m. semitendinosus
converging hair ridge
femur, third trochanter
hair vortex of stifle fold
incision (through which
patella wasnailedto
femoral trochfea)
femoraf trochtea, lateral
and medial ridges
lateral patellar ligament
tibia,extensor suicus
Fig. 8.1 Surface features of the pelvic and femoral regions of the gelding:
left lateral view. The palpable bony features have been shaved. The
rounded conformation of the gluteal musculature obscures the sacral
tuberosity of the ilium in this horizontal lateral view, and the ischiatic
tuberosity is similarly obscured by the semitendinosus muscle (see Fig.
semitendinosus muscles (so-called poverty line') is much less 
 conspicuous after embalming; in emaciated horses it is very prominent.
272
The Pelvis (including the spine)
ilurn, tuber sacrale
 Fig. 8.4 Bones of the pelvic, femoral and stifle regions: left caudolateral
convexity of m. gfuteus
medfus
view. The bony features shown in Fig. 8.3 are coloured red, except for
position of sacrocaudal
the tuber sacrale.
junction
tailhead
ilium, tuber coxae
anus
caudal parf
notch
cranial part
ischium:
tuber ischiadicum
perineum
convexity of
m.semitendinosus.
converging hair ridge
third trochanter
intermuscular groove
m. biceps femoris
convexity of m. gracilis
femur, lateral ridge
of trochlea
tibia, lateral condyle
Fig. 8.3 Surface features of the pelvic and femoral regions of the gelding:
left caudolateral view. The positions of the sacral and caudal vertebrae 
are shown in Figs. 8.93 and 8.95.
273
Fig. 8.5 Surface features of the penis and prepuce of the gelding: left
lateral view. At birth, the free part of the penis is adherent to the
internal lamina of the prepuce (see Fig. 8.47) but this adherence rapidly
breaks down (Figs. 8.48 to 8.53) and in geldings and stallions the free 
part of the penis is separated from the prepuce by the preputial cavity.
The urethral process is enclosed by a narrow cavity, the fossa glandis;
the sinus urethralis is a dorsal enlargement of this fossa, and its position
 is indicated by the probe.
fossa glandis
ventral abdominaf wall
probe in sinus urethralis
preputialcavity
urethral orifice
preputial ring.
formed in internat
urethral process
preputial fold
preputia rifice,formd
free part of penis,
fold
glans penis
lumbarvertebra:
lamina
transverse process
spinal cord in vertebral
m. psoas major
vertebral body
m. psoas minor
v.cava caudatis
aorta abdominalis
right ureter
left ureter
rectum in pelvic cavity
cut edge of mesocolon of
descending colon
urinary bladder
v.iliaca externa
caudal border of
m.obliquus internus
abdominis, forming
Cranial boundary of deep
cut stump of
Bu jeunbu
yojoo bupuaosap
vaginalprocess,position
remainsofstructures
of orifice
formingspermaticcord
buu peunbu daap je
remains ofductus
deferens and genital foid
abdominat wallined by
peritoneumand
transverse fascia.
m. obliquus internus
median vesicular
abdominis
figament at pelvic brim 
m. rectus abdominis
Fig. 8.6 The pelvic inlet of the gelding: cranial view. The trunk has been cut through at the level of the third lumbar vertebra after removal of the
abdominal viscera. The urinary bladder is empty and entirely pelvic in position. The peritoneum of the inguinal regions remains intact. The
corresponding region of the mare is shown in Fig. 5.45 (non-pregnant) and Fig. 8.57.
274
m. cremaster covered by
remains
oeritoneumano
of the spermatic cord:
transverse fascia
vascular
duct (ductus deferens
The Pelvis (including the spine)
and genital foldy
probe in cavity of vaginal
process
orificeofcavityofvaginaf
process
caudai border of
m.obliquus internus
abdominis,forming
deepjo Aepunog jeueno
inguinal ring
m. obfiquus internus
m.rectusabdominis
abdominis,coveredby
exposed by partial
peritoneum and
removal of overlying
transverse fascia
adipose tissue
 Fig. 8.7 The right inguinal canal of the gelding: cranial view. This is a closer view of a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 8.6, at a slightly later stage
 in the dissection. After castration, the components of the spermatic cord atrophy. A probe has been inserted into the persistent and still patent
orifice leading to the cavity of the remaining stump of the vaginal process.
vertebral body. L3
m.psoas major
m.psoas minor
m.psoas major
aorta abdominalis
m. psoas minor
left ureter
V.cava caudalis
right ureter
mesocolon
m.sartorius
descending cofon
urinarybladder
m.lacus
m.pectineus
t pudendoepigastricus
m.cremaster
V.pudendoepigastrica
 a.v. pudenda externa
remnants ofductus
deferens and genital foid
prepubic tendon of
m. rectus abdominis
m.obliquus
internus abdominis
a.v. epigastrica caudalis
linea alba of
abdominaiwal
superficial inguinat ring.
m. rectus abdominis
Fig. 8.8 The right inguinal region of the gelding: cranial view. Removal of the peritoneum and transverse fascia reveals the musculature bordering the
a n r a n re a rm  ai   s al raai oi i aq oe s  s a   d
 position of the superfcial inguinal ring, formed within the tendon of the external oblique abdominal muscle, is indicated by a broken blue line.
275
m. gluteus medius
m.gluteussuperficialis
ijium, tuber coxae
m. biceps temoris
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
n. cutaneus femoralis
lateralis
'poverty line'
m. fensor fasciae latae
n.umbalis !
m.semitendinosus
r.cutaneus ateralis
ventralis
m.semimembranosus
yellow abdominaf tunic
covering tendon of
m. obfiquus externus
abdominis
caudalis)
fascia lata (cut edge)
m. vastus laterafis
in. subiliacus
m.obliquus intermus
abdominis
m.rectus femoris
m.biceps femoris
Fig. 8.9 The lateral pelvic wall: left lateral view (1). Removal of the skin and superficial fascia exposes the muscles of the hindlimb that lie lateral to
the bony pelvis. The surface features of these regions are shown in Figs. 8.1 and 8.3.
m. gluteus medius
m. semitendinosus
m.biceps femoris
ijium,tuber coxae
m. ifiacus faterafis
n. cufaneus femoris
lateralis(L)
m.semimembranosus
a.v. circumfexa ilium
profunda
n. gluteus cranialis
1111
a.v.liacofemorafis
m. rectus femoris
femur, third trochanter
yellow abdominat tunic
covering m.obtiquus
externus abdominis
m. vastus tateratis
Fig. 8.10 The lateral pelvic wall: left lateral view (2). The superficial gluteal muscle and the tensor muscle of the lateral fascia have been removed.
m. gluteus medius 
m.biceps femoris, origin
of caput vertebrale
n.ischiadicus
broad sacrotuberous
figament
m.quadratusfemoris
a. glutea caudalis
n. cutaneus femoris
n. giuteus craniafis
caudalis
a.v. ifiacofemoralis
m.semitendinosus,
m: iliacus laterafis 
caput vertebrale
n.cutaneus femoris
femur, greater trochanter
taterafis (LII)
ischium
a.v. circumffexa ilium
m. piriformis
profunda
a.v.circumflexa
ischium, tuber
femorismedialis
ischiadicum
m.rectus femoris
m. biceps femoris.
caput pelvinum
m. vastus faterafis
a.v.obturatoria
femur, third trochanter
m.semitendinosus,
n.fibutaris
caput pelvinum
n. tibialis
a.v. caudalis femoris
Fig. 8.11 The lateral pelvic wall left lateral view (3). The biceps femoris muscle has been removed, exposing part of the broad sacrotuberous 
ligament which stretches from the vertebrae to the ischium. The vertebral head of the biceps femoris muscle is thought to be of gluteal origin.
276
ilium, tuber sacrale
m.biceps femoris.
 dorsal sacroiliac ligament
m. gfuteus medius.
broad sacrotuberous
origin
The Pelvis (including the
figament
ilium,tuber coxae
a. glutea cranialis
inn.ischiadici
n. gtuteus caudatis
a.v. glutea caudalis
n.cutaneus femoris
caudalis
m. semimembranosus
m.semitendinosus
n.ischiadicus
n. gfuteus craniatis
m.gluteus medius
inserting on femur.
m.gluteus profundus
greater trochanter
m.liacus lateralis
position of fesser
yellow abdominal tunic
ischiaticforamen
spine)
covering m. obliquus
externus abdominis
ischium,tuber ischiadicum
m.rectus femoris
m. obturatorius internus
m.vastus fateralis
m.biceps femoris,
femur, third trochanter
caput pelvinum
n. tibialis
a.v.obturatoria
n. fibularis
- m. semitendinosus
Fig. 8.12 The lateral pelvic wall: left lateral view (4). The removal of the middle gluteal muscle exposes the broad sacrotuberous ligament, its greater
ischiatic foramen and the structures that run lateral to it.
dorsal sacroiiac
m.sacrocaudalis
figament
dorsafislateralis
m. biceps femoris (origin
of caput vertebrale)
inn.ischiadici
foramen in broad
a.v. glutea caudalis
 sacrotuberous ligamenf
n. gluteus caudafis
m. semitenoinosus
n.cutaneus
broad sacrotuberous
femoriscaudalis
ligament
n.ischiadicus
position of fesser
ischiaticforamen
m. gluteus profundus
m. gfuteus medius
femur.greatertrochanter
major vessels or nerves traverse the lesser ischiatic foramen; the caudal gluteal vessels traverse a more dorsal and cranial foramen in the broad
sacrotuberous ligament (see Fig. 8.14).
m.biceps femoris.
m.sacrocaudalis
vertebralhead
dorsafis fateralis
ijium,tuber sacrale
a.grutea caudalis
dorsal sacroiliac
m. semitendinosus.
ligament
caput vertebrale
n. gluteus caudalis
n.cutaneus
 greater ischiatic foramen
femoris caucalis
broad sacrotuberous
n. gtuteus cranialis
ligament,caudatborder
a.v.iiacofemoratis
broad sacrotuberous
a.v.circumffexa ilium
ligament
profunda
m. semimembranosus
n.cutaneus
jesser ischiatic foramen
femoris fateralis
m.iacus
ischium,
tuber ischiadicum
m. gfuteus profundus
m.semitendinosus.
m.rectus femoris
caput pe/vinum
m. gluteus medius
femur, greater trochanter
and synovial bursa
m. obturatorius internus
m.vastus lateralis
m. quadratus femoris
Fig. 8.14 The broad sacrotuberous ligament: left lateral view (2). Removal of the vertebral head of the semitendinosus muscle exposes the caudal
border of the ligament, from which all three hamstring' muscles arise. The three large foramina in the broad sacrotuberous ligament have been
demonstrated more clearly in this dissection.
277
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
greater ischiatic
n. cutaneus femoris
notch
m. gluteus profundus
caudalis
broad sacrotuberous
n. gluteus cranialis
n. gluteus caudalis
n.ischiadicus
tgament
ilum, shaft
a.v. pudenda interna
a.v.liacofemoralis
mm.gemelli
m. ifiacus faterafis
broad sacrotuberous
ligament, caudal border
m. rectus femoris 
lesser ischiatic foramen,
m.capsuraris
dorsal border
acetabular rim
ischium,
tuber ischiadicum
ligamentof
femoral head
m. obturatorius internus
accessory femora!
mm.gemeli
ligament
ischium: lesser ischiatic
m.iiacus medialis 
notch
a.circumffexa
transverse acetabular
femoris lateralis
ligament
a.v.n.femoralis
m. quadratus femoris
mm. biceps femoris et
n.saphenus
semitendinosus
m.sartorius
Inn. inguinales profundi-
m.semimembranosus
-m.ischiocavernosus
fateraf scrotal
(mammary) lamina
penis
covering remains of
vaginal process
a.v.obturatoria
m.pectineus
n. obturatorius,r. cranialis
symphyseal tendon
m.adductor
a.v. profunda femoris
m.gracilis
m.obturatorius externus
Fig. 8.15 The hip joint after removal of the femur: left lateral view. After removal of the hindlimb, the muscles that attached the limb to the body
have been cut back to show the related vessels and nerves of the hindlimb.
278
Fig. 8.16 The pelvic cavity and the inguinal region: left lateral view (1).
The broad sacrotuberous ligament has been removed, exposing the
muscles and nerves of the pelvis. Removal of parts of the gracilis muscle
The Pelvis (including the spine)
reveals a superficial view of the inguinal and penile regions. The next
stage of the dissection is shown in Fig. 8.20.
iliurm.
sacrum
tuber sacrale
dorsalis lateralis
tuber coxae
n. rectalis caudalis
n. gluteus:
caudalis
m. sacrococcygeus
Cranialis
ventralislateralis
n.cutaneus femoris
m.coccygeus
broadsacrotuberous
m. obturatorius internus,
ligament,caudalborder
pars iliaca
n.pudendus
n.ischiadicus
Inn.anorecfales
m.gluteus profundus
a. pudenda interna
m.capsularis
m. levafor ani
m.rectus femoris
 m. sphincter ani externus
acetabulum
m.obturatoriusinternus
and synoviai bursa
m.ifiopsoas
a.v.n.femoratis
anus
mm.gemeli
m. sartorius
ischium
a. circumffexa femoris
lateralis
ischium,
n.saphenus
tuber ischiadicum
m. quadratus femoris
m.pectineus
Inn. inguinales profundi
m. ischiocavernosus
n.obturatorius
a.v.obturatoria
f.craniafis
m. obturatorius externus
m.gracilis
m.adductor
cut edges of scrotal
plexus dorsalis penis
(mammary) faminae:
latera!
a.v. pudenda externa
medial
m. buibospongiosus
n.cutaneus
m.retractor penis
medialis ventralis:
L
VV. circumffexa penis
L (n.genitofemoralis)
from corpus spongiosum
vaginal process
penis
enclosing remains of
 penile body
inn.inguinales
(geiding)
superficiales
279
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
n. cutaneus femoris
n.ischiadicus
n. rectalis caudalis
caudalis
dorsal sacroiiac
m.sacrocaudalis
m.sacrocaudafis
figament
a.v. glutea caudalis
venfralislateralis
dorsalislateralis
ilium, shaft
m.coccygeus
a.glutea cranialis
broad sacrotuberous
ligamenf,caudal border
n.giuteus:
caudatis
Cranialis
n. pudenous
a. pudenda interna
inn. anorecfales
a.v. iliacofemoralis
 m. sphincter ani externus
m. obturatorius internus,
pars iliaca
m.gluteus profundus
m.levator ani
m.rectus femoris
a. pudenda interna
m.capsularis
m.liopsoas
m. obturatorius internus
and synovial bursa
yelfow abdominal tunic
covering m. obfiquus
.ischiocavernosus
a.circumflexa
femorislateralis
Lberischiaoicum
accessory femoral
transverseacetabufar
a.v.obturatoria
m.biceps femoris
ligament
ligament
ischium
m.quadratusfemorismm.gemeli
Fig. 8.17 The pelvic cavity after removal of the broad sacrotuberous ligament: left lateral view. This is a closer view of a part of the dissection shown
in Fig. 8.16.
280
Fig. 8.18 The pelvic outlet and the penile root: left caudolateral view. This
is a closer view of a part of the dissection shown in Fig. 8.16. The more
caudal view shows the relationship of the structures in the perianal
The Pelvis (including the spine)
region.
sacrum
m.sacrocaudalis
ventratisfateralis
a.v. glutea caudalis
n.guteus caudalis
m.coccygeus
n.rectalis caudalis
Inn.anorectales
femoris caudalis
broad sacrotuberous
igament,caudalborder
m. gfuteus profundus
 m. sphincter ani externus
n.pudendus
m.levator ani
n.ischiadicus
anus
a. pudenda interna
ischium, tuber
m. obturatorius internus
ischiadicum
acetabulum
m.quadratus femoris
synovial bursa
m.ischoc
mm. gemeli
m. retractor penis, pars
penina
a.v. profunda femoris
a.v.obturatoria
m.obturatoriusexternus
m.bulbospongiosus
n.obturatorius
f.craniatis
 plexus dorsalis penis
m.adductor
penile body
m.gracilis
vv.circumflexa penis
from corpus spongiosum
V. pudenda externa
penis
281
a.v. profunda femoris
a.v.obturatoria
n.saphenus
m.sartorius
a.v.n.femoralis
m. obturatorius exiernus
m.quadratus femoris
a. circumffexa femoris
7777
m.bicepsfemoriset
lateralis
m.semitendinosus
Inn. inguinales profundi
femoralfamina
m. ischiocavernosus
m. pectineus
m.adductor
yellow abdominal tunic
m. gracilis
m.obliquus internus
abdominis
n.obturatorius
laterafscrotal
(mammary)lamina
arisingfromlaterairimof
plexus dorsalispenis
(drained by v. pudenda
superficiaf inguina ring
interna, v. pudenda
externa and
a.v.pudenda externa
V.obturatoria)
n.cutaneusmedialis
ventralis:
vy. circumffexa penis
II(n. genitofemoralis)
(from corpus
L
spongiosum penis)
medial scrotalimammary
Inn.inguinales
m. bulbospongiosus
m. retractor penis
lamina
superficiates
m. cremaster covering
remains of vaginal
process (geiding)
Fig. 8.19 The inguinal region and the penis: left lateral view. This is a closer view of a part of the dissection shown in Fig. 8.16. The lateral scrotal/
mammary lamina has been partly removed to reveal the structures entering and leaving the inguinal canal, but the superficial inguinal ring is not yet
distinct. The scrotal structures and penis of the stallion are shown in Figs. 8.36 to 8.44
282
Fig. 8.20 The pelvic cavity and the inguinal region: left lateral view (2).
The adductor and external obturator muscles have been removed. The
ischiatic nerve and the coccygeus muscle have been shortened. The
The Pelvis (including the spine)
iliopsoas and sartorius muscles have been shortened and the large
external pudendal veins have been partially excised.
lium:
m.sacrocaudalis
tuber sacrale
dorsalis medialis
tuber coxae
sacral transverse
processes(lateral sacral
n.ischiadicus
crest)
m. obturatorius internus,
 a.v. glutea caudalis
pars iiaca
n.pudenaus
m. gluteus profundus
n. rectalis caudalis
m.ifiacus
m.sacrocaudalis
m. psoas major
ventralisfaterafis
m.sacrocaudalis
m.sartorius
dorsarslaterais
m.cremaster
m.coccygeus
m. rectus femoris
a. pudenda interna
n. femoralis
m. levator ani
iliac fascia
 m. sphincter ani externus
n.saphenus
m.obturatorius internus
acetabulum
synovial bursa
accessory femoral
mm.germeli
ligament
tuber ischiadicum
a.v. femoralis
a.v. prolunda femoris
ischium
inn. inguinales profundi
m. ischiocavernosus
m. obturatorius externus
m.pectineus
at obturafor foramen
m. gracilis
a.obturatoria
 scrotalmammary lamina:
: symphyseal tendon
lateral
medial
n.obturatorius,
f.cranialis
n. genitofemoralis (ILI)
 plexus dorsalis penis
a.v. pudenda externa
vv. circumflexa penis 
m. refractor penis,pars
remnants of vaginal
process,enclosedby
penina
m.cremaster
m.buibospongiosus
283
Fig. 8.21 Inguinal structures of the gelding: left lateral view (1). The origin 
of the lateral scrotal/mammary lamina from the deep abdominal fascia
(yellow abdominal tunic) has been cut at the base of the superficial
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
 inguinal ring to reveal more clearly the structures that traverse the
inguinal canal. A blue rod indicates one of the several components of the
external pudendal vein that traverse the thigh muscles, and do not
traverse the inguinal canal.
m.ihacus
n.ischiadicus
m.psoas major
m.sactocaudalis
m. sartorius
ventralis laterafis
n.femoralis
n. pudendus
m.cremaster
m.coccygeus
m.obturatorius internus,
a.v.iliaca exferna
pars iliaca
blue rod from
a.pudenda interna
V.pudenda externa
iliac fascia
m.levator ani
m. giuteus profundus
a.circumflexa
femorislaterafis
m.obturatorius internus
a.femoratis
mm.gemelli
a. profunda femoris 
m.rectus femoris
v. femoralis (cut)
m. capsularis
t. pudendoepigastricus
a.v.obfuratoria
V. pudendoepigastrica
accessoryfemoral
m. obliquus externus
figament
abdominis (pelvic
m.obturatoriusexternus
tendon) covered by
at obturatorforamen
deepfascia
femoral tamina
n.obturatorius
femoral ring
V. pudenda externa
traversing m. gracilis
 symphyseal fendon
m.pectineus
m. gracillis
n. genitofemoralis
 plexus dorsalis penis
a.v. pudenda externa
blue rod in a tributary of
m, obliquus externus
V. pudenda externa
abdominis (abdominal
medial scrotallmammary
lamina arising from
yelfow abdominar tunic
yellow abdominaltunic
n. cutaneus mediatis
VV. circumffexa penis
ventralis,LI
 penile body
vaginal process covered
m. buibospongiosus
m, retractor penis,
Buu jeunbu eoadns
pars penina
284
m.cremaster
ifiacfascia
The Pelvis (including the spine)
m. obliquus externus
a.v.femorafisatlevelof
vascular lacuna
border, 'inguina!
and vascular lacunae
m.obliquus externus
abdominis, pelvic'tendon
cleared of deep fascia
a.v. pudenda externa
traversing inguinaf canal
Outer rim of superficial
inguinalring
n. genitofemoralis (L#)
'abdominal' tendon
medialscrotalimammary
coveredbydeepfascia
lamina
(yellow abdominal tunic)
Fig. 8.22 Inguinal structures of the gelding: left lateral view (2). The specimen is at the same stage of dissection shown in Fig. 8.21 except that the
 deep fascia (from which the lateral scrotal/mammary lamina arises) has been removed from the pelvic tendon of the external oblique abdominal
 muscle. The deep fascia covering the abdominal tendon of the external oblique muscle gives rise to the medial scrotal/mammary lamina and has not
been removed.
contents of muscular
 m. gluteus profundus
lacuna
m.iliacus
ilum, shaft
m. psoas major
m. sartorius
m.coccygeus
n.femoralis
n.pudendus
m.obliquus internus
abdominis
a. pudenda interna
iliac fascia
m.jevator ani
articufar region of
m. obturatorius internus:
acetaburum
pars ischiopubica
a.circumffexa
pars iliaca
femoris lateralis
synovial bursa
a.v.femoralis
、mm. gemeli
a. profunda femoris
tuber ischiadicum
a.v. pudenda externa
a.obturatoria
m.obfiquusexternus
jo sabpe ino'suruopqe
ischium
'pelvic tendon'
m.cremaster
m. obturatorius externus
surrounding vaginal
process
m.rectus femoris
m. obliquus internus
abdominis
m. capsularis
superficiaf inguinal ring:
accessory femoral
ligament
n.obturatorius
a.v. pudenda externa
V.pudenda externa
inguinat ring
traversing thighmuscies
m.obliquus externus
abdominis, abdominar
.m. gracilis
yellow abdominaf tunic
m.pectineus
rmedial scrotallmammary
plexus dorsalis penis
lamina
vv. circumflexa penis
apex ofremains of
vaginal process
m.butbospongiosus
(gelding)
penis
position of scroturm
m.retractor penis.
(gelding)
pars penina
Fig. 8.23 Inguinal structures of the gelding: left lateral view (3). The pelvic tendon of the external oblique abdominal muscle has been sectioned to
expose the contents of the inguinal canal. The dorsal (lateral) edge of the abdominal tendon of this muscle can just be seen - it forms the medial rim
of the superficial inguinal ring. The internal abdominal oblique muscle, around whose caudal border the vaginal process passes at the deep inguinal
ring (see Fig. 8.25) can also be glimpsed. The scrotal viscera and penis of the adult stallion are shown in Figs. 8.36-8.44.
285
Fig. 8.24 Inguinal structures of the gelding: left lateral view (4). Removal
of the apex of the vaginal process and cremaster muscle exposes the
medial rim of the superfcial inguinal ring and the origin of the accessory
ligament of the femur from the deep fascia of the abdominal wall. The
origin of the medial scrotal/mammary lamina from this fascia is also
clearly seen. The deep inguinal ring lies caudal to the internal oblique
abdominal muscle.
n.femoralis
m. recfus femoris
a.v.iliaca externa
m. gluteus profundus
acetabular anicular
iliac fascia
cartiiage
round and accessory
m. obliquus internus
abdominis
m.cremaster
ischium
a.circumffexa
transverse acetabufar
femorislateralis
ligament
a.v.obturatoria
a.v. femoralis
pubis,iliopubic
a.v. profunda femoris
eminence
m.obturatorius externus
a.v. pudenda externa
at obturafor foramen
n.genitofemoralis (LIl)
n.obturatorius
m. obliquus externus
abdominis, peivic tendon
(cut)
symphyseal tendon
accessory femoral
m.obliquus internus
figament
abdominis
m.pectineus
superficiat inguinat ring.
medialrim
m.gracilis
m.obtiquusexternus
V. pudenda externa
abdominis, abdominal
tendon,covered by
yelfow abdominat tunic
V.penis craniafis
(v. pudenda externa)
n.cutaneus medialis
ventralis (LIf)
vy. circumftexa penis
draining corpus
spongiosum penis
origin of medial.
scrotallmanrnaryiamina
m.buibospongiosus
funic
m.retractor penis.
 plexus dorsalis penis
euuedsied
286
Fig. 8.25 The pelvic cavity of the gelding: left lateral view. The pubis and
ischium have been cut just lateral to the pelvic symphysis. The shaft of 
the ilium has been transected and the left coxal bone removed, taking
The Pelvis (including the spine)
care to preserve the muscles attached to its internal surface
(ischiocavernosus and internal obturator) and to its ischiatic spine
Aedsip oi paouai uq sey asnuu snaooo aul jo so (ue ieaan)
the levator ani muscle more completely.
ijium: tuber sacrale
sacrum,fine of
transverse processes
n.pervinus
(lateral crest)
n.ischiadicus
a.v. glutea caudaiis
ilium, cut end of shaft
n.rectais caudalis
m.ijiacus
m. psoas minor
n.pudendus
m.psoas major
m. sacrocaudalis
a.v.jiaca externa
ventrafislateralis
m.retractor penis,
m.sartorius
pars rectalis
n.femoralis
m. coccygeus,origin
a.v.obturatoria
m. levator ani
n.obturatorius
m. sphincter ani externus
iliacfascia
a.pudenda interna
m.cremaster
m. obturatorius internus:
Darsihaca
Dubis.cut edge
pars ischiopubica
of cranial ramus
m. ischiocavernosus
m. obturatorius externus
at obfurator foramen
ischium,cutedge
near symphysis
accessory femoral
ligament
a.v. penis media
(a.v. obturatoria)
m. pectineus
suspensory ligament of penis
m. obfiquus internus
-symphyseal tendon
abdominis, caudal edge
V. pudenda externa
inguinat ring)
m. obliquus externus
V.penis cranialis
(v. pudenda externa)
abdominal tendons at
caudal angle of
 plexus dorsalis penis
m. bulbospongiosus
m.obliquus externus
abdominis (cut edge)
m. retractor penis,
medial scrotal/mammary
pars penina
lanina (cut)
Vv. circumffexa penis
287
n. pudendus
m. sphincter ani externus
m. levator ani
The Horse
a. pudenda interna
m. ischiocavernosus cut
away from attachment to
ischium
m. obturatorius internus.
m.bufboglandularis
pars iliaca
crus penis, cut away
pars ischiopubica
from
ischium:
cavernous spaces
a. obturatoria
funica aibuginea
bulbourethral gland
ischium (cut surface)
v. dorsafis penis
a.v.obturatoria
(a.v. penis media)
suspensory figament of
m.ischiocavernosus,
penis
attachment to tunica
albuginea of penis
m. retractor penis,
symphyseaftendor
pars penina
m.bulbospongiosus
plexusoorsaispenis
penile body
Fig. 8.26 The penile root: left lateral view. This is a closer view of a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 8.25.
Fig. 8.27 The pelvic viscera of the gelding: left lateral view. The internal
obturator muscle has been removed and the ischiocavernosus muscle
dissected off from the penile crus. The internal pudendal artery and the
pudendal nerve have been displaced dorsally. The rectum in this specimen
was kinked close to its line of peritoneal refection and the urinary
bladder was empty and contracted. The bulbourethral gland has been
removed; it is shown in Fig. 8.26. The hypogastric nerves, which leave the
caudal mesenteric ganglion and enter the pelvis, are shown in Fig. 8.70.
n.rectalis caudalis
n.pudendus
sacrum,transverseprocesses
caudal fimit of broad
a.v. glutea caudalis
(ateral sacral crest)
 sacrotuberous figament
n.ischiadicus
dorsais
m. sacrocaudafis
n. pelvinus
a.v. pudenda interna
lateralis
m.iiacus
m.sacrocaudalis
ilium, cut edge of shaft -
ventralislateralis
m..obturatorius internus.
rectum
pars iliaca
Inn. anorectales
m. psoas major
caudaf limit of
perifoneum
m.sartorius
m. retractor penis,
m. psoas minor
pars rectalis
n.femorafis
m. sphincter ani externus 
a.v.iliaca externa
prostate gland, left lobe
a.v.iliacofemoralis
feft vesicular gland
a.obturatoria
a.v. pudenda interna
iliac fascia
a. bu/bi penis
m.cremasfer
n. dorsalis penis
a.urogenitalis
m. burbospongiosus
a.umbilicalis
crus penis
m.obturatorius internus.
left ureter
pars ischiopubica
pubis.
accessory lemoral
leftductus
urinary
a.v. profunda penis
cuf surface
figament
Ideferens
bladder
(a.v.obturatoria)
m.pectineus
m.obturatorius externus
ischium, cut
288
surface
前um:
n.pelvinus
tuber sacrale
broad sacrotuberous
The Pelvis (including the spine)
sacrum, auricular process
rectum
m.iliacus
prostate gland.
m.psoas major
laterallobe
left ureter
vesicular gland
descendingcolon
m.rectococcygeus
urinary bladder
a.V. pudenda interna
ductus deferens
a.buibi penis
m.cremaster
n.dorsalis penis
pubis, cut surface
crus penis
m.obliquus internus
a.obturatoria
abdominis
a. profunda penis
V. pudenda externa
suspensory ligament of
m.pectineus
accessory femoral
m.ischiocavernosus
ligament
v.dorsalis penis
m.obliquusexternus
abdominis,coveredby
symphyseal tendon
yellow abdominaf tunic
penis,body
  a ssh u s ae ss se go sr go sa rah s d l   n  sd a  
m. gfuteus
mm.multifidi
m.gluteus
m.rectus abdominis.
medius
medius
m. obiiquus
covered by aponeurosis
ilium,
ventral sacroiliac
a.v. glutea m. sacrocaudalis
externus
of m.obliquus internus
tuber coxae
tigament (cut)
caudalis
dorsalis medialis
abdominis
abdominis
sacrum:
V. pudenda externa
lateralcrest
auricular surface
medial scrotalimammary
lamina
m.ijiacus
m. retractor penis.
a.v.ifiaca externa
pars penina
a.iliacofemoralis
vv. circumffexa penis
n.femoralis
 plexus dorsalis penis
a.v.circumffexa
m. bu/bospongiosus
ilium profunda
m.graciis
n.cutaneus
femorislateralis
prepuce:
prepenile part
m. obliquus externus
preputialfofd
abdominis
preputialring
m. obtiquus internus
n. saphenus
abdominis.
V. saphena medialis
caudaf border
m. psoas
n.obturatorius
a.v.pudenda
n.rectalis
free part of penis
mayor
interna
caudalis
a. obturatoria
a.umbilicalis
n. pudendus m. sacrocaudalis
glans penis
mediat femoral fascia
et n. pelvinus
ventralisfateralis
Fig. 8.30 The distal parts of the penis and the prepuce: left
Fig. 8.29 The sacroiliac joint and adjacent structures: left lateral view. The middle
lateral view. This is a slightly more cranial view of a part of
part of the blade of the ilium has been removed to reveal the articulating auricular
 the specimen shown in Fig. 8.28. Most of the prepenile part
surface of the sacrum.
 of the prepuce has been removed to show the preputial fold.
The preputial fold has been partly resected to show the free
part of the penis which it encloses. The free part of the penis
is shown in Fig. 8.5. The penis of the adult stallion is shown 
 in Figs. 8.42-8.44. Developmental aspects are shown in Figs.
8.46-8.53.
289
m.obfiquus externus
raphe on free pari of
abdominis
penis
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
prepuce,penile part
yellow abdaminal tunic
(deep fascia)
preputial ring
prepuce, prepenile part
lateral scrotal
(mammary)iamina
preputial orifice
superficiat (peripenile)
femorallamina
fascia
medial deep
femoralfascia
medial scrotal
(mammary) tamina
m.vastus medialis
m. sartorius
externalspermatic
(scrotal)fascia
n.saphenus
a.v.saphena
raphe on scrotum
m.graciis
m.pectineus
superficial inguinal fascia
Fig. 8.31 Superficial structures of the right inguinal region in a young stallion: right ventral view. The right hindlimb has been cut away and the stump
is draped with a green cloth. The yellow abdominal tunic has been incised to reveal the tendon of the oblique external abdominal mucles to which it
adheres closely. Figs. 8.31-8.35 show ventral views of inguinal structures for comparison with the lateral dissections of the gelding shown in Figs.
8.21-8.24. See also Figs. 8.73-8.75.
Fig. 8.32 The external spermatic fascia and the right vaginal process of the
yearling stallion: ventral view. The external spermatic (scrotal) fascia has
been incised and held open with hooks to show the vaginal process. The
lateral part of the fascia is, in fact, the lateral scrotal (mammary) lamina.
The medial part of the fascia is not adherent to the medial edge of the
superfcial inguinal ring; the abdominal tendon of the oblique external
abdominal muscle is therefore not covered by deep fascia at this location.
yellow abdominal tunic
medialscrotal
(mammary) famina
external spermatic
and lateral parts
m.obliquusexternus
scrotum
abdominis, abdominal
tendon
lateralangie of
superficialinguinairing
scrota organs enciosed
lateralscrofal
(mammary)famina
testis
femoral famina
medial deep
femoralfascia
superficial inguinal fascia
290
m. obliquus externus vaginal process
(reffected craniatly)
yelfow
abdominis:
abdominal
|m.cremaster tunic
The
medialscrotaf
(mammary) amina
 Pelvis (including the
yelfow abdominal tunic
(cut edge)
scrotal(dartos) septum
superficiaf inguinal ring:
medial and fateral
boundaries
a. pudenda externa at
medial angle of
superficiaf inguinat ring
spine)
V. pudenda externa
medial deepfermoral fascia
yelliow abdominar tunic
lateral angle of
superficiat inguinaf ring
Fig. 8.33 The right superficial inguinal ring of the yearling stallion: ventral view. The deep fascia (yellow abdominal tunic) overlying the superficial
inguinal ring has been removed together with the external spermatic (scrotal) fascia. The superficial inguinal ring (indicated by the broken blue line)
is revealed, dividing the tendon of the oblique external abdominal muscle into parts with pelvic and abdominal insertions. The vaginal process has 
been reflected cranially to show the medial aspect of the superficial ring.
m.obliquus
m.obliquus externus
abdominal
yelfow
internus.
abdominis,abdominal
abdominis
tendon (cut edge)
tunic
cranial boundary of deep
inguinal ring (m. obliquus
internus abdominis,
caudal border)
mediaf scrotal
(mammary) tamina
scrotal (dartos) septum
scrofum
superficialinguinat ring.
medial angle
a.v. pudenda externa
m. obliquus externus
abdominis.pelvic tendon
(abpe ino)
deep
m.sartorius femoral triangle
inguinal
v.saphena
ring
m.cremaster
medialis
m. gracilis
Fig. 8.34 The right deep inguinal ring of the yearling stallion: ventral view. A part of the oblique external abdominal muscle, including the superfcial
inguinal ring, has been removed to display the oblique internal abdominal muscle. The vaginal process has been displaced cranially and the deep
inguinal ring is just visible lying caudal to the oblique internal muscle. The position of the superficial inguinal ring is shown by a broken blue line.
m.obiquus
yelfow
m.rectus
externus
abdominal vaginal preputial
abdominis abdominis
tunic
process
"orifice
superficial peripenite
fascia
medial scrotal
(mammary)tamina
yellow abdominal tunic
medial angie of
supericiaiinguinal ring
scrotum
a.v. pudenda externa
m. obliquus externus
abdominis,pelvic
tendon, cut edge
a.v. epigastrica caudalis
m.tensor m.obliquus
fascia
m.sartorius
fascia
internus
transversalis
fatae
abdominis
v.saphena m. gracilis
medialis
Fig. 8.35 Deep structures of the right inguinal region, yearling stallion: ventral view. The internal and external oblique abdominal muscles have been
removed from the inguinal region to display the rectus abdominis muscle and the transverse fascia. The vaginal process has been displaced cranially.
The position of the superficial inguinal ring is shown by a broken blue line.
291
m.cremaster incised and
reffected
scrotal skin
parietal tunica vaginatis
covering spermatic cord
tunica vaginalis covering
left testis and epididymis
Fig. 8.36 The vaginal process of the adult stallion: left lateral view. The left scrotal wall has been removed. The cremaster muscle has been incised
and refected from its insertion on the tunica vaginalis to reveal the tubular part of the vaginal process which encloses the spermatic cord. Figs.
8.37-8.41 show further dissections of fresh organs from this stallion to complement the dissections of the gelding shown in Figs. 8.21-8.30.
visceral tunica vaginalis.
m. bulbospongiosus
surrounding structures of
m. retractor penis
spermatic cord
m. cremaster (reflected)
 parietaf tunica vaginalis
(reffected)
leftestis andepididymis
scrotal skin
process
cauda epididymidis still
enciosed by tunica
vaginalis
Fig. 8.37 The contents of the vaginal process of the adult stallion: left lateral view. A longitudinal incision through the wall of the vaginal process
a   s r  a s a s  d a ro  ai u  rs ai si ( i )
'internal cremaster muscle' - it extends distally onto the tunica albuginea of the testis.
m.retractor penis
testicutarbursa
/isceraun
(epididymal sinus)
capulepididymidis
figament of cauda
epididymidis
m.cremaster
a. testicularis on
epididymat border of
corpus epididymidis
testis
tunica vaginalis
(cutedge)
properligamentof testis
a.v. testicularis within
leff testis
tunica atbuginea of testis
Fig. 8.38 The left testis and epididymis of the adult stallion: lateral view. The lateral wall of the vaginal process has been removed. Arrows show the
direction of How of blood within the testicular vessels.
292
ductus deferens
marker in a. testicutaris
visceral tunica vaginalis
The Pelvis (including the spine)
vascular part of
withsmoothmusclecoat
spermatic cord
('m. cremaster internus)
mesoductus deferens
incised m. cremaster and
parietal tunica vaginalis
caput epididymidis
cauda epididymidis
parietaftunica vaginalis
right testis in cavity of
(internal andexternal
vaginal process
surfaces)
Fig. 8.39 The contents of the right vaginal process of the adult stallion: medial view (1). The excised viscera have been arranged to show the
disposition within the body. The medial wall of the vaginal process (parietal tunica vaginalis) has been opened to show the contents.
ductus deferens
 mesoductus deferens
vascular part of
spermatic cord
(a.testicularis enmeshed
suouidedsnxadu
ofv.testicularis)
m.cremaster and
cauda epididymidis
parietal tunica vaginalis
proper ligament of testis
a.v.testicufaris in tunica
parietal tunica vaginalis
albuginea of testis
(cut edge)
Fig. 8.40 The contents of the right vaginal process of the adult stallion: medial view (2). The ductus deferens has been displaced caudally to show the
vascular part of the spermatic cord which is still enclosed by the visceral tunica vaginalis and its muscular layers (internal cremaster muscle').
ductus deferens
parietal tunica vaginalis
 smooth muscle coat of
(inner surface)
spermatic cord('m.
cremaster internus')in
tateral part of visceral
mesoductus deferens
tunica vaginalis
a. testicularis
mesofunicurus et
mesotestis
a.v.testicuiaris
r.epididymidis
figament of cauoa
epididymidis
v.testicularis
(ptexus pampiniformis)
cauda epididymidis
epididymis:
caput
corpus
 proper ligament of testis
a.v.testicutaris intunica
albuginea
right testis
Fig. 8.41 The contents of the right vaginal process of the adult stallion: medial view (3). The excised organs have been arranged to display the
peritoneal suspension of the testis, epididymis and spermatic cord within the opened vaginal process.
293
Fig. 8.42 Penis and prepuce of the adult stallion:
left lateral view (1). The excised organs have
been arranged to represent their disposition in
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
the body. Coloured markers have been inserted
in the cranial penile artery and in one main stem
of the cranial penile vein that drains the dorsal
penile plexus into the external pudendal vein.
a.v.penis cranialis
(a.v. pudenda externa)
plexus dorsalis penis
penile body
free part of penis.
covered by prepuce
m.buibospongiosus
prepuce:
m. retractor penis,
'base
pars penina
penile{internal) part
prepenile(external) part
gians penis,
 containing smegma
dorsaiprocess
prepufiat orifice
Fig. 8.43 Penis and prepuce of the adult stallion:
left lateral view (2). The left side of the prepuce
has been removed to display the ^double' inner
structure of the prepuce and the free part of
the penis. The extensive deposits of smegma
 normally found within the prepuce have been
removed.
glans penis:
dorsal process
neck
penile body
m. buibospongiosus
prepuce, penile (internal)
part, cut
preputial fold
urethral process
preputial ring
prepuce, prepenile
(external)part
(withremnantsof smegma)
preputial oriice
294
Fig. 8.44 Penis and prepuce of the adult stallion:
left lateral view (3). A perspex rod has been
inserted into the dorsal diverticulum of the fossa
The Pelvis (including the spine)
glandis (urethral sinus).
free part of penis:
corona of glans penis
rodin urethrat sinus of
glans penis, dorsal
process
urethral process and
orifice
neck of glans penis
m.bubospongiosus
prepuce, penile
(internal) part
preputial ring
prepuce, prepenile
(external) part
Fig. 8.45 Umbilical,
inguinal and perineal
regions of the new-born
colt: ventral view. The
perineal region extends 
from the anus to the
umbilical cord
scrotum, and is marked
by a distinct mid-line
cutaneous junction fine
raphe. The skin overlying
umbilicus
 the prepuce is marked by
 a raphe and the left and
ventrat abdominal wall,
teft umbilicalregion
 right sides of the scrotum 
are divided by a scrotal
raphe. The umbilical cord
preputial orifice
dries to a shrivelled
thread in the normal, live 
foal soon after birth (see
Fig. 8.48). Further details
preputialraphe
 of this specimen are
leff inguinalregion
shown in Figs. 8.46 and
8.47.
scrotum with scrotal
raphe
left medialfemoral
region
perinealraphe
perineal region
anus
tai
295
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
preputialring
prepuce,prepenilepart
preputialorifice
'preputialraphe
Fig. 8.46 The preputial orifice of the new-born colt: ventral view. The prepenile part of the prepuce has been everted to show the preputial ring, but
no attempt has been made to protrude the free part of the penis from the penile part of the prepuce.
urethral orifice
fossa glandis
urethral process
corona glandis
preputial ring
line ofseparation
separated penile part of
between penis and
prepuce
prepuce
preputial orifice
prepuce. prepenile part
Fig. 8.47 The non-protrusive penis of the new-born colt: ventral view. At birth, the epithelium of the free part of the penis is fused with that of the
 penile part of the prepuce. Only the urethral orifce and a small part of the glans penis can be protruded through the preputial ring. Separation of
the free part of the penis from the penile part of the prepuce takes place in the first month after birth. (Figs. 8.48-8.53).
umbilical hair vortex
umbiicus
prepuce,evertedsection
fine of separation
abdominalhairvortex
between penis and
prepuce,everted
prepuce
prepenile part
urethral fossa
preputial ring
urethral process
glans penis, corona
glandis separated from
penile prepuce
Fig. 8.48 Penile development in a grey colt: 2 days, left ventrolateral view. Separation between penile integument and the penile part of the prepuce
extends only very slowly over the corona glandis during the frst 2 to 3 weeks after birth; the rest of the penile integument remains frmly adherent
 ectodermal cells.
296
umbilical cord
The Pelvis (including the spine)
glanspenis,corona
glandis separated from
urethral process
penile part of prepuce
urethral fossa
fine of separation
evertedpenileprepuce
between freepart of
 penis and prepuce
Fig. 8.49 Penile development in a grey colt: 9 days, left ventrolateral view. The line of separation between penile integument and penile prepuce is
clearly shown.
abdominal hair vortex
fine of separation
between penis and
preputialring
prepuce
prepuce, everted section
urethral process
of penile part
glans penis,
prepuce, everted section
corona glandis
of prepenile part
preputial orifice
Fig. 8.50 Penile development in a grey colt: 15 days, left lateral view. The line of separation between penis and penile prepuce moves back gradually
Over the corona glandis during the first two weeks of life.
umbiicus
preputial orifice
prepuce, everted
prepenile part
prepuce,evertedsection
of penile part
fine of separation
preputial ring
between penile
integument and
penile prepuce
Fig. 8.51 Penile development in a grey colt: 22 days, left lateral view. The organ has been bent caudally during manipulation.
297
The Horse
separated parts of
glans penis:
coflum glandis
preputial pockets formed
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,
corona glandis
byseparationbetween
penile integument and
persistent penile
penileprepuce
frenufum
position of preputial ring
prepenile prepuce
 position of preputial
orifice
Fig. 8.52 Penile development in a dun colt: 24 days, ventral view. This fgure and Fig. 8.53 show the final stages leading to completion of the process
of separation at the end of the frst month after birth. At 24 days, separation between penile integument and penile prepuce has extended past the
corona glandis, and is rapidly proceeding down the shaft of the free part of the penis. However, the frenulum is still intact.
urethral process
corona glandis
collum glandis
preputiat cavity at base
newty ruptured frenulum
of free part of penis
 afong raphe on penis
newlyrupturedfrenufum
alongrapheonpenile
part of prepuce
Fig. 8.53 Penile development in a dun colt: 32 days, ventral view. Separation between the free part of the penis and its penile prepuce is now
complete. The frenulum, a direct connective tissue union, often resists rupture after keratinisation of the ectodermal lamella (controlled by male
hormone) has separated the rest of the penis from its prepuce. In this colt, the persistent frenulum seen at 24 days (Fig. 8.52) has ruptured by 32
days leaving a linear sore along the ventral surfaces of penis and penile prepuce.
umbilical cord
left stiflejoint
preputial ring
amnioculaneous
urethral process
prepuce,everted
prepenile part
preputial orilice
right stiffe joint
Fig. 8.54 Penile development in the young colt; protruded penis of the foetus: ventral view. In this 9-month foetus, the penis is still adherent to its
penile prepuce and could not be protruded through the preputial ring, even though the prepenile part of the prepuce has been everted. The urethral
 orifce is not occluded and urination is possible during foetal life. Figs. 8.49-8.53 show the process by which the corona of the glans penis slowly
 separates from the penile part of the prepuce during the first month after birth.
298
Fig. 8.55 The perineal region
base of tail
of a pregnant mare: caudal 
view. This mare was 100
The
days pregnant. The dorsal
 parts of the vulval lips have
 Pelvis
been sutured together
(Caslick's operation') and
(including t
 scars remain. This mare was
photographed immediately
before embalming was
commenced. Fig.8.56 shows
further details of this
 the spine)
cavity of anal canal
 specimen.
anus
perineum
vulva,dorsal
commissure
scars from sufures
vutvat lips
cavity of vestibule
clitoris
vuva, ventral
commissure
Fig. 8.56 The clitoris
of a pregnant mare:
base of taif
caudal view. The thumb
has been placed in
the ventral vulval 
commissure in order to
expose the glans, lying in
the fossa of the clitoris.
anus
perinealraphe
vulva, dorsar
commissure
scars from sufures
dorsaf parts of lips of
vuiva. surgically united
cavity of vestibule
prepuce of clitoris
glans clitoridis tying in
the fossa clitoridis
299
thoracic vertebra:
aorta thoracica
vertebral canal with
spinalcord
a.mesenterica caudalis
body
ribs, cut ends
a.rectalis cranialis
peritoneum of
abdominalroof
a. ovarica sinistra:
r.ovarica
r.uterina
a.V. circumffexa ilium
left ovary
profunda
mesocolon
right ureter
infundibutum
v.iiaca communis
descending colon
a.v.ovarica dextra
urinary bladder
right ovary
abdominal wall,cut edge
infundibulum
m.transversus
abdominis,coveredby
peritoneum
right uterine horn
(non-pregnant side)
left uterine horm
finea alba
m.rectus abdominis
Fig. 8.57 Reproductive organs and pelvic inlet of a pregnant mare: cranial view. The abdominal organs have been removed, and the abdominal wall
sectioned just cranial to the tuber coxae. The vertebral column has been sectioned at caudal thoracic level. The mare was 100 days pregnant, the
foetus being located in the body and left horn of the uterus. The arteries and veins have been filled with red and blue neoprene latex.
a.rectalis craniafis
a.v. circumflexa ilium
(a.mesenterica caudalis)
profunda
a.v. ovarica dextra
mesovarium
mesocolon
a.v. ovarica sinistra:
r.ovarica
f. uterina
right ovary
left ovary
descending coion
proper figament of ovary
infunoibufum
uterus:
vagina
rghthorn
reflectedleft horn
urinary bladder
body
inn.subiliaci
median vesicular
ligament
pubis
a.v.epigastricacaudalis
vagina
m.recti abdominis.
feft stifferegion
lamina interna
m.rectus abdominis
linea alba
Fig. 8.58 Reproductive organs and pelvic inlet of a pregnant mare: left cranio-lateral view. The pregnant body and left horn of the uterus have been
displaced to the right to show the pelvic inlet.
300
v.iliaca communis
ovarian suspensory
Fig. 8.59 The left ovary of a
ligament
 pregnant mare: left lateral
left ureter
view. The left ovary
The
mesovarium
contained a single corpus
a.v. ovarica sinistra
luteum (pregnant 100 days)
Pelvis (
a.mesenterica
and was larger than the
caudalis
teft ovary
right ovary. The ovarian
bursa of the left ovary has
(including
a.v. ovarica dextra
 been filled with cotton wool;
Uterine tube
 it bulges out laterally and
a.v.circumffexa iium
profunda dextra
ovarian bursa,filled with
 the uterine tube traversing
cotton wool
its wall is clearly
the
entrance to ovarian
infundiburum;
recognisable. The fmbriae
bursa
abdominalorifice
of the infundibulum have
fimbriae
been spread out to show the
rightovary
ovarian proper ligament
orifice leading into the
lumen of the left uterine 
infunaiburum
left uterine horn,apex
tube. See also Figs. 8.76 and
m.obliquus externus
8.77.
descending colon
Aq peiaaco suuopge
yellow abdominal tunic
right uterine horr
Inn.subiliaci
a.v.circumffexa iium
righf ureter
Fig. 8.60 The right ovary
profunda
 of a pregnant mare: right
v.liaca communis dextra
a.v. ovarica dextra
et sinistra
 cranio-lateral view. The
r. uterina
right ovary has been 
a.mesenterica
positioned to show its
ovarian suspensory
caudalis
 medial surface. It contains
ligament
a.rectalis cranialis
no corpus luteum, and is
mesovarium
ovarian suspensory
considerably smaller than
the left ovary. The ovarian
right ovary
figament
left ovary
bursa and uterine tube are
ovulation fossa
 shown in Fig. 8.61.
right infundibulun
infundibulum
ovarian
proper figament
mesocolon
a.uterina
 ovarian proper ligament
apex of right
uterine horn
a.v. ovarica sinistra
uterinebody
descending colon
(pregnant)
left uterine horn
(pregnant)
right ureter
Fig. 8.61 The ovarian bursa and
the uterine tube: right
v.iliaca communis
dextra et sinistra
craniolateral view. The right
 ovary has been pushed medially,
and a rod has been inserted into 
a.mesenterica
caudafis
the ovarian bursa. The uterine
a.v.ovaricadextra
tube, or salpinx, runs in the 
ovarian suspensory
descending coion
 mesosalpinx, which forms the
igament
uterine tube
lateral wall of the ovarian bursa.
(saipinx}in
a.v. rectalis cranialis
wall of ovarian bursa
(mesosaipinx)
mesocolon
infundibulum
a.v. ovarica sinistra
rodin
f.uterina
entrance to right
ovarian bursa
infundibufum
ovarian
proper figament
left ovary
uterotubat junction
descending coton
right
uterine hon
left uterine horn
301
ilium, tuber sacrale
dorsaf sacroiliac tigamen!
nn. spinales (LVf, Sl, Sff)r. ventrales *
n. gluteus caudatis
a.v. gfutea craniafis
n.ischiadicus
greater ischiatic foramen
m. sacrocaudais
n.gluteus craniafis
dorsafis lateralis
a.v.pudenda interna
a.v. glutea caudalis
m. gluteus accessorius
tail
ColorAtlasofVeterinaryAnatomy,
m. gluteus profundus
broad sacrotuberous
a.v. iacofemoralis
ligament
femur, greater frochanter
n. cutaneus femoris
caudalis
a.v.obruratoria
lesser ischiatic foramen
m. quadratus femoris
m. obturatorius internus
a.v.circumffexa
femorismedialis
tuber ischiadicum
femur, third trochanter
m. semitendinosus
n. tibialis
n.fibufaris (peroneus) -
m.semimembranosus
Fig. 8.62 The lateral pelvic wall of the mare: the sacrotuberous ligament, left caudolateral view. The
superficial muscles (tensor fasciae latae, superficial gluteal, biceps femoris, the vertebral head of
the semitendinosus, and the middle gluteal) have been removed to expose the sacrotuberous
ligament. Further dissections of the lateral pelvic wall in this pregnant mare are shown in Figs,
8.63 to 8.70.
ifum:
dorsal sacroiiac
tuber sacrale
ligament
tuber coxae
a.v. gfutea cranialis
n. guteus caudalis
m. gluteus accessorius
(origin)
a.v. glutea caudatis
m.iliacus lateralis
n.ischiadicus
lium, shaft
a.v. pudenda interna
a.v.iliacofemoralis
m. gftuteus profundus
n. gluteus cranialis
n.coxars
n.cutaneusfemoris
caudafis
(insertion)
femur, greater trochanter
Fig. 8.63 The cranial gluteal nerve and the coxal lymph node of the mare: left caudolateral view.
The middle part of the accessory gluteal muscle has been removed to show the cranial gluteal
 nerve passing between it and the deep gluteal muscle. This nerve supplies the tensor fasciae latae
muscle. The coxal lymph node is not always present in the horse.
jium:
dorsal sacroiliac
tuber sacrale
ligament
tuber coxae
m. gluteus accessorius
n.ischiadicus
a.v. gfutea cranialis
a.v. gluteus caudalis
n. gluteus cranialis
broad sacroluberous
n. cutaneus femoris lateralis
igament
a.v.circumffexa ilum profunda
m.coccygeus
a.v.iliacofemoralis
m. sphincter ani externus
m.iliacus lateralis
m. jevator ani
n. rectafis caudalis
m.gluteus profundus
r.cutaneus
a. perinealis ventralis
m.rectus femoris
n.cutaneus femoris
caudalis
femur,greater trochanter
m. obturatorius internus
tuber ischiaoicum
m. semitendinosus
m.vastuslateralis
m. semimembranosus
Fig. 8.64 The lateral pelvic wall of the mare: the sacrotuberous ligament, left lateral view. The deep
gluteal muscle and the ischiatic nerve have been partly resected. The attachments of the
semimembranosus muscle to the caudal edge of the sacrotuberous ligament have been removed,
and the perineal structures displayed.
302
lim.
dorsal sacroiiac figament
tuber sacrale
m. sacrocaudafis dorsalis:
tuber coxae
medialis
n. ischiadicus, arising
lateralis
The Pelvis (including the spine)
from LVf, SI, Si
nn. pelvini
m.gluteus accessorius
a.v.glutea caudafis
a.v.glutea cranialis
n. rectalis caudalis
n. gluteus craniatis
n. pudendus
n. hypogastricus
m.coccygeus
iium, shaft
rectum
m.jlacus lateratis
nn.anorectales
a.v.iiacofemoralis
sacrotuberous figament.caudat border
ilium, greater sciatic notch
a.v. vaginalis
a.v.pudenda interna
 m. sphincter ani externus
m. obturatorius internus 
n. perinealis profundus
m.vastuslateralis
a. perinealis ventralis
m. quadratus femoris
m. levator ani
n.fibularis-
sacrotuberous figament, caudat border
n.tibialis
ischium, tuber ischiadicum
m. semimembranosus
m. semitendinosus
Fig. 8.65 The lateral pelvic wall of the mare: blood vessels and nerves in left lateral view. The broad
 sacrotuberous ligament has been removed to expose the blood vessels and nerves that lie deep to
it.
n.hypogastricus
n.ischiadicus
n. gluteus cranialis
nn.petvini
m. gluteus profundus
plexus pelvinus
m. iliacus faterafis
n.rectalis caudalis
m.rectus femoris
n. pudendus
m. psoas major
n. perinealis profundus
acetabulum
m. iliacus medialis 
a.v. glutea caudatis
a.v. profunda femoris -
mm.gemelli
m. sartorius
m. obturatorius internus,
m.pectineus
pars ischiopubica
a.v.n.femoralis
Inn.inguinates profundi
m. quadratus femoris
m.obturatorius externus
m. semitendinosus
n.obturatorius
m. graciis
m.adductor.
a.v. pudenda externa
m. semimembranosus
 Fig. 8.66 The pelvis of the mare after removal of the hind leg: left lateral view. The muscles joining
the leg to the pelvis have been cut short.
iium:
a.v. glutea cranialis
tuber sacrale
n.ischiadicus
tuber coxae
gluteal line
a.v. glutea caudalis
gluteal surface
greater ischiatic notch
shaff
n.rectalis caudalis
m.iliacus fateralis
n. pudendus
m.psoas major
a.pudenda interna
a.iliacofemoralis
sacrotuberous figament, caudal fimif
a.v. jiaca externa
m. rectus femoris
m. obturatorius internus
at lesser ischiatic notch
n.femoralis
n.saphenus
inn.anorectales
a. profunda femoris
m.obturatorius externus
a.circumffexa femoris
in obturator foramen
lateralis
sacrotuberous figament, caudat limit
a.femoralis
a.v.obturatoria
Inn.inguinales profundi
ischium,tuber
n.obturatorius
ischiadicum
Fig. 8.67 The bony pelvis of the mare in situ left lateral view. Structures overlying the bony pelvis
have been removed to show the position of the bones in relationship to the arteries, nerves and
 lymph nodes. The veins have been removed to show the arteries and nerves more clearly.
303
in muscular lacuna
n.ischiadicus
m. psoas major
nn. pelvini
m.sartorius
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy,The Horse
n.femoralis
a. pudenda interna
ijiac fascia (femoraf ring)
lium, shaf!
a.v. iliacofemoralis
transverse acetabutar
ligament
m. gluteus profundus
m.obliquus externus
a.v.iliaca externa {in
abdominis covered by
vascufarlacuna,
yeffow abdominal tunic
m.rectus femoris
iliopubic eminence
ligament of femoral head
t. pudendoepigastricus
accessory figament of 
m.pectineus
femur
n.obturatorius
ischium
a.v.obturatoria
femoraf lamina
m.obturatoriusexternus
lateral mammary
suspensory lamina
m.adductor
inn.inguinales
V. pudenda externa
superficiales
m.gracilis
Fig. 8.68 The iliac fascia of the mare: left lateral view. The superficial inguinal ring is covered by the lateral mammary lamina. The
pudendoepigastric vessels are seen passing towards the inguinal canal. The contents of the muscular and vascular lacunae of the iliac fascia are
also seen.
sacrum:
ventral sacroiliac
lateralcrest
tigament
auricufar surface
m.iliacus
dorsal sacroiiac
figament
m. psoas major
a.v. glutea cranialis
a.circumffexa fium
n.ischiadicus
profunda
a. glutea caudalis
n.genitofemoralis
a.v. ifiacofemorafis
m.sartorius
a. pudenda interna
n.femoralis
a.v. obturatoria
m. psoas minor
ilium, cut edge of shaft
a.v. ijiaca externa
In. gluteus profundus
yelfow abdominal tunic
covering m. obliquus
m.rectus femoris
externus abdominis
acetabulum
iliacfascia
m. obturatorius internus
.puoendoepigastricus
at lesser ischiatic notch 
a.v.obturatoria
iliopubic eminence
ischium,tuber
m.pectineus
ischiadicum
n.obturatorius
m.obturatoriusexternus
at obturator foramen
fateral mammary
suspensory lamina
symphyseal tendon
V.pudenda externa
m. gracilis
Fig. 8.69 The vessels and nerves of the pelvis of the pregnant mare: left lateral view. The shaft of the ilium has been sawn through, and the wing of
the ilium carefully removed to expose the auricular surface of the sacrum, which forms the sacroiliac articulation. The muscles of the hindlimb
arising from the tuber ischiadicum and the ventral surface of the ischium have been removed to show more clearly the symphyseal tendon of the
gracilis muscle.
304
Fig. 8.70 The sacroiliac region of the pregnant mare: left lateral view. This
is a closer view of a part of the dissection shown in Fig. 8.69.
The Pelvis (including the spine)
m.longissimus
dorsalsacroiliac
ligament
venfral sacroiliac
n,ischiadicus:
ligament
LV1
sacrum: auricular
S,1
surface, lateral crest
m.sacrocaudalis
a.v.glutea cranialis
dorsafislateralis
m.jiacus
broad sacrotuberous
n. gluteus cranialis
figament, cut edge
a. pudenda interna
n. hypogastricus
a.vaginafis
nn. peivini (Slf,IV)
m. psoas major
n.rectaliscaudalis
n.femoralis
(SIV.V)
m.sartorius
n. pudendus (Sm,IV)
m.obturatoriusinternus,
pars iliaca
plexus pelvinus
a.v. iiacofemorafis
rectum
m.psoas minor
vagina
a.v. obturatoria
broadsacrotuberous
a.v.jiaca externa
tigament, caudal edge
m. gluteus profundus
m.coccygeus
m.rectus femoris
n. perinealis profundus
iliac fascia
m.tevator ani
acetabulum.
vestibule
articular surface
m. obturatorius internus,
notch
pars ischiopubica
transverse acetabufar
ligament
m. obturatorius externa
t. pudendoepigastricus
a.v.obturatoria
accessory femoral
broad sacrotuberous
tigament
figament,caudaf edge
m.pectineus
n. cutaneus femoris
caudalis
n.obturatorius
m.gracilis
tuber ischiadicum
305
Fig. 8.71 The pelvis of the pregnant mare: left lateral view (1). The bony
pelvis has been sawn through close to the iliopubic eminence and the
pelvic symphysis, and the left side has been removed to expose the
internal obturator muscle.
m. psoas major
a. iliacofemoralis
m. obliquus internus abdominis
m. psoas minor
m.sartorius
a.v.obturatoria
n.femoralis
m.levator ani
yellow abdominal tunic covering
m.obliquus externus abdominis
m. sphincter ani externus
a.v.iaca externa
m.obturatorius internus:
iliac fascia
pars iiaca
pars ischiopubica
n.obturatorius
a.v. obturatoria
pubis (cut edge)
ischium (cut edge)
latera/ suspensory
scrotal/mammary lamina
m. adductor (origin)
t. pudendoepigastricus
 symphyseal tendon
accessory femoral ligament
a.v. clitoridis media
m. pectineus (origin)
m. graciis
v. pudenda externa
y.labialis ventralis
m. obturatorius externus
(v. mammaria caudais)
femoral famina
a.v. pudenda externa
sacrum, auricutar
ventral sacroiliac figament
surface
a.v. glutea cranialis
lium, tuber coxae
 sacrum, lateral cresf
m.psoas major
a.v. gutea caudalis
n. ischiadicus
a.iliacofemoralis ef
a.obturatoria
nn. peivini
n. hypogastricus
m.sanorius
a. pudenda interna
n.rectalis caudalis
a.v.n. femorafis
n. pudendus
pubis
recturm
iliac fascia
m.coccygeus
m.obliquus externus
 sacrotuberous ligament
abdominis,caudal
border
m. psoas minor
vagina
accessory femoral
a.vaginalis
m. pectineus
m. sphincter ani externus
m.levator ani
m. gracilis
m. constrictor vuivae
lateral mammary
a. perinealis ventralis
suspensory famina
overlying superficial
m. constrictor vestibuli
bu jeuinbur
vestibule
Inn.inguinales
superficiafes
ischium
n. fumbalis !
m. obturatorius internus.
r. cutaneus medialis
pars ischiopubicaat
ventralis
obturator foramen
Fig. 8.72 The pelvis of the pregnant mare: left lateral view (2). The muscles of the pelvic diaphragm (coccygeus and levator ani muscles) have been
cut short to reveal the pelvic viscera. The remaining part of the left pelvic bone has been cleared of muscle to show the position of the obturator
foramen.
306
Fig. 8.73 The inguinal canal of the pregnant mare: the superficial inguinal
ring in left lateral view. The lateral mammary suspensory ligament has
been cut away along the medial edge of the pelvic tendon of the external
The
oblique abdominal muscle; this line is the lateral rim of the superficial
inguinal ring. The sharply defned medial rim of the ring (also the lateral
e Pelvis (including the spine)
edge of the abdominal tendon) is exposed.
iliac fascia
a. vaginalis
pubis
a. pudenda interna
accessory femoral ligament
t. pudendoepigastricus
vagina
m. obliquus externus abdominis:
caudalborder
m. obturatorius internus,
pelvic tendon
pars ischiopubica
m.graciis
obturator foramen
n.genitofemoralis
(n.fumbalisIt,r. cutaneus
medialis ventralis)
ischium
superficial inguinat ring:
symphyseal tendon
lateral rim
medial rim
 m. obliquus internus abdominis
a.v.pudenda externa
m.obliquus externus abdominis,
v. labiafis ventralis
 abdominal tendon
n. fumbalis I,I. cutaneus
inn.inguinales
medialis ventralis
superficiales
Fig. 8.74 The inguinal canal of the pregnant mare: the deep inguinal ring
in left lateral view. The external oblique abdominal muscle has been
removed, but parts of the pelvic and abdominal tendons of insertion have
 been left in order to indicate the position of the superficial inguinal ring,
which lies between them. The caudal edge of the internal oblique muscle
is the cranial boundary of the deep ring, while the lateral edge of the
rectus abdominis muscle forms its medial boundary.
a.v.iliaca externa
a. pudenda interna
a.v.obturatoria
a.vaginafis
m. cremaster
vagina
jfiac fascia
rectum
n. genitofemoralis (L:
pubis
r.caudalis
accessory femoral figament
f. cranialis
obturator foramen
m. obliquus internus abdominis.
caudal edge forming cranial
ischium
boundary of deep inguina ring
m. pectineus
t. pudendoepigastricus
m. rectus abdominis,
n.ilioinguinafis (LII) -
(mediat rim of deep inguinal ring)
superticial inguinat ring in
V. pudenda externa
m. obliquus externus abdominis:
a..clitoridis media (a.v.obturatoria)
peivic tendon
abdominal tendon
symphyseal tendon
m. obliquus externus
vulva
abdominis,abdominal
v. labialis ventralis
tendon
a.v. pudenda externa at
Inn. inguinatles superficiales 
superficiatinguinaf ring
307
Fig. 8.75 The inguinal canal of the pregnant mare: the transverse fascia
in left lateral view. The internal oblique abdominal muscle has been
removed, but the pelvic and abdominal tendons of the external oblique
muscle have been retained to show the position of the superfcial inguinal
ring. The rectus abdominis muscle is clearly visible. The origin of the
caudal epigastric vessels can be seen situated within the inguinal canal.
The transverse abdominal muscle does not extend caudally into the
inguinal region of the horse.
m. psoas major
sacrum:
n. femoralis (LIV,V)
auricular surface
lateralcrest
n. obturatorius (LIV,V)
a.v. glutea cranialis
a.v.jliacofemoralis
a.v. glutea caudalis
m.sartorius
n. ischiadicus (LVI,SI,I)
a.v. iiaca externa
nn. pelvini (Sl,IV)
a.circumflexa ilium
n.rectafis caudalis
profunda
(SIV,V)
n. cutaneus femoris
laterals (Lil)
n. pudendus (Slf,IV)
m. obliquus internus
n. hypogastricus
abdominis
n. gluteus cranialis
(LV1.S1)
m.transversus
abdominis
rectum
n. genitofemoralis (L):
pfexus peivinus
r.cranialis
r.caudalis
a. vaginalis
iliac fascia
a. pudenda interna
m.cremaster
a.v.obturatoria
n. ilioinguinalis (LI)
m.psoas minor
t. pudendoepigastricus
vagina
pubis
transverse fascia
m.obturatoriusinternus
m. obliquus externus.
abdominis. pelvic and
ischium
 abdominal tendons
obturator foramen
a.v. epigastrica caudalis
m. pectineus
a.v. epigastrica caudalis
v.pudenda externa
superficialis
traversing m. gracilis
inn.inguinales
m. gracilis
Superficiales
a.v. pudenda externa at
m. rectus abdominis
superficial inguinal ring
n. ilioinguinalis (Ll)
f. cutaneus medialis
a.v.labialis ventralis
308
sacrum, auricular
a.v. glutea cranialis
surface
n.ischiadicus
a.obturatoria
The Pelvis (including the spine)
a.v.glutea caudalis
n.gfuteus cranialis
n.hypogastricus
a.v.iiaca externa
n. rectalis caudalis
m. psoas major
n. pudendus
left ovary covered by
ovarianbursa
nn. pelvini
a. vaginalis
rectum
a. uterina in broad
broad sacrotuberous
ligament
figament, caudat fimif 
a. pudenda interna
m.coccygeus
parietal pervic
m.fevator ani
peritoneum,cutedge
m. sphincter ani externus
pubis(cut)
vestibule
m.pectineus
obturatorforamen
left uterine hon
(oregnant)
m. constrictor vestibuli
m.gracilis
ischium
uterine body (pregnant)
v. pudenda externa
m. rectus abdominis
a.v. cfitoridis media
vaginam.rectiabdominis.
symphyseal tendon
famina interna
lamina externa
vulva
m. constrictor vuivae
inn. inguinales
superficiales
a.v. tabiatis ventralis
Fig. 8.76 The contents of the pelvis of the pregnant mare: left lateral view. The remnants of the tuber coxae and the left lateral abdominal wall have
been removed to expose the uterus and ovary. A broken blue line shows the approximate caudal limit of the peritoneal cavity.
m.psoas major
a.v. glutea craniatis
a.mesentericacaudalis
a.obturaforia
mesovarium
ovarian suspensory
n.femoralis
ligament
mesosaipinx
n.obturatorius
left ovary {with corpus
{uteum of pregnancy)
a.v.iliaca externa
uterine tube (salpinx) -
m. psoas minor
ovarian bursa (filled) 
mesomefrium
round igament of uterus
entrance to ovarian
bursa
a.uterina
fimbriaeofinfundibulum
left uterinehorn
ovarian proper figament
(pregnant)
Fig. 8.77 The left ovary of the pregnant mare: left lateral view. This is a closer view of a part of the specimen shown in Fig. 8.76. The ovarian bursa
has been filled with cotton wool. The various parts of the broad ligament (mesovarium, mesosalpinx, mesometrium) are separately labelled.
309
a.v.ovarica
.mesentericacaudafis
ovarian suspensory
a.rectalis cranialis
a. ovarica sinistra:
a.v.ovarica dextra
r.ovarica
r. uterina
mesocolon
uterine fube
left ovary
righf ovary
infundibutum
a.v.vaginalis
in wall of vagina
ightuterinehorn
ovarian proper igament
left uterine horn
Fig. 8.78 The left ovary of the pregnant mare: cranial view. Topographical relationships are shown in Fig. 8.57.
Fig. 8.79 The contents of the pelvis of the pregnant mare: left craniolateral
view. The left ureter has been displayed. The apex of the empty urinary
bladder is invaginated (see Fig. 8.83); its relationship to the occluded left
umbilical artery is clearly seen.
n.obturatorius
sacrum, auricular surface
a.v.obturatoria
a.v. glutea cranialis
a.v. iliaca externa
a.gutea caudalis
leftureter
m.sacrocaudalis
aorta abdominalis
dorsalis lateralis
a. mesenterica caudalis
a. pudenda interna
a.v.ovarica:
sacrotuberous figament,
sinistra
caudallimit
dextra
m.coccygeus
a.v.circumflexa iium profunda
a.uterina
a.vaginafis
r. uterinus
right,left ovary
descending colon
a.glutea caudalis
 m. sphincter ani externus 
m.transversusabdominis
 covered by peritoneum
m. fevator ani
urinary biadder
a.umbilicalis
uterine horns
a.perinealisventralis
pubicbrim
m. constrictor vestibufi
median figament of bladder 
ischium
310
Fig. 8.80 Pelvic vessels and nerves of the pregnant mare: left lateral view.
The origin of the external iliac artery has been revealed. The left ureter
and umbilical artery have been removed.
The Pelvis (including the spine)
n.obturatorius
sacrum:
nn. fumbales IV.V,
auricular surface
lateral crest
fr. ventrales
n. femoralis (cut stump)
a.v.obturatoria
a.V. glutea craniatis
m. psoas major
n. ischiadicus (LVI,SI,)
m. psoas minor
a. glutea caudalis
a.v. iliaca externa
nn. peivini (St,IV)
n.hypogastricus
aorta abdominalis
n.rectalis caudalis (SIV,V)
a. mesenterica caudafis
n. pudendus (Sll,IV)
a.v. circumflexa ilium profunda
a. pudenda interna
a.v.ovarica
plexus peivinus
a. rectalis cranialis in mesocolon
a.vaginalis:
r.uterinus
teff ovary
r. vaginalis
a. uterina
rectum
viscerat peritoneum of
left ureter
vagina (cut edge)
urinary bladder
left uterine horn
a.umbilicafis
Fig. 8.81 Internal and external iliac vessels of the pregnant mare: left
lateral view. The lumbar and sacral vertebral bodies have been cut away
in the sagittal plane to display the iliac arteries and veins and the vessels
arising from them.
a. iliaca interna
bodies of vertebrae:
S1
6
a.iliolumbalis
intervertebral disc
v.iliaca communis
a. umbalis VI
a.v.circumffexa flium
r.sacrafis
profunda
a.v.gfutea caudafis
aorta abdominalis
n. sacralis ff,
a. mesenterica caudalis
r. ventralis
(n.ischiadicus)
a.ovarica
nn. pelvini
a. rectalis craniatis
n. pudendus
n. rectalis caudalis
a. uterina
a. glutea cranialis
a.v.iiaca externa
a.v.obturatoria
a.umbilicalis
mesocofon
a.v. pudenda interna
descending colon
a. vaginalis
311
Fig. 8.82 Internal and external iliac arteries of the pregnant mare: left
lateral view. The veins and nerves have been removed to show the arteries
more clearly.
v.ifiaca communis
a. circumffexa ilium
profunda
aorta abdominafis
a. iliaca intena
a.mesentericacaudalis
a.grutea caudatis
r.sacralis
a.ovarica sinistra
a.uterina
a.rectalis cranialis
a. glutea cranialis
a.iliofumbalis
rectum
a.obturatoria
a. pudenda interna
mesocolon
vagina
a. vaginalis
a. iliaca externa
right uterine horn
Fig. 8.83 Pelvic viscera of the pregnant mare: left lateral view (1). The
rectum has been removed and the left ovarian vessels refected ventrally
to show the topography of the female tract in this mare at 100 days
 pregnancy. A broken blue line indicates the caudal limit of the peritoneal
cavity on the wall of the vagina.
vertebral bodies (L5,6) 
m.sacrocaudalis dorsalis tateralis
a. iliaca interna
sacrum, lateral crest
v. iliaca communis
vagina
a.iliaca externa
broad sacroiiac
figament, caudat edge
aorta abdominalis
a.v. vaginalis
a.mesenterica craniafis
left ureter
a.ovarica sinistra
anal canal
uterine cervix
m. sphincter ani externus
a. uterina dextra -
urinary bladder
right ovary
 pubis, cut edge
vlerine body
vestibule
a. uterina sinistra
a. perinealis ventralis
right uterine horn
a.v. ovarica sinistra reffected
obturator foramen
ventrally, covering lef ovary
m.constrictor vestibu
left uterine horn
ischium, cut edye
a.v. pudenda externa
a.v.clitoridis media
312
Fig. 8.84 Pelvic viscera of the pregnant mare: left lateral view (2). The
female tract has been removed after incising the caudal vagina, to reveal
the topography of the urinary bladder, urethra, and ureters. The bladder
The Pelvis (including the spine)
 is empty and its apex is invaginated into the body of the organ.
vertebral bodies (S1.2)
m.sacrocaudalis
dorsalis lateralis
a. liaca interna dextra
a.iliaca interna sinistra
sacrum, lateraf cres!
a. iiaca externa sinistra
a.v. vaginalis dextra
a.iliaca externa dextra
broad sacrotuberous
a.ovarica dextra
ligament, caudal edge
a. uterina dextra
urethra
right ureter
anaf canal (cut edge)
a.v. iliaca externa dextra
m. sphincter ani externus
peritoneal fining of right
abdominal waf
obturator foramen
teftureter
vestibute
urinary bladder
ischium
 a. perinealis ventralis
pubis
m. constrictor vulvae
accessoryfigamentof
femur (cut surface)
symphysealtendon
V. pudenda externa
a.v. clitoridis media
Fig. 8.85 Pelvic viscera of the pregnant mare: left lateral view (3). The
urinary bladder and urethra have been opened. Wires have been inserted
 into the right and left ureteric orifices.
a.v. vaginalis dextra
broad sacrotuberous
igament, caudal edge
a.v. liaca externa dextra
right ureter and opening
anal canal (cut edge)
m.sphincter ani externus
ureteric folds
urinary bladder:
urethra,internaland
neck and trigone
externaf orifices
body
apex
vestibule
pubis
m. constrictor vufvae
accessory ligament
ischium (cut)
offemur
a.v. pudenda exferna
a. perinealis ventralis
left ureter and opening
into urinary bladder
a.v. clitoridis media
a. pudenda externa
symphyseal tendon
313
Fig. 8.86 The right pelvic wall of the pregnant mare: medial view (1). The
viscera have been removed, but the peritoneal and retroperitoneal lining
of the pelvic cavity have not yet been dissected. The left side of the
abdominal and pelvic foor has been cut away.
vertebrat bodies (L5.6)
V.glutea caudalis
v. iliaca communis
a.v. pudenda interna
aorta abdominalis
a.mesentericacaudalis
n.pudendus
a. iliaca externa sinistra
nn.pelvini
a. iliaca interna sinistra
a.y.vaginalis
a. ovarica dextra
m. retractor clitoridis
a. uterina dextra
retroperitoneal fissues
a. iliaca externa dextra
overlying m. levator ani
andm.coccygeus
n.obturatorius
anal canaf
a.umbiicalis
m. sphincter ani externus 
perifoneal broad
m. obturatorius internus.
ligament (cutedge)
parsischiopubica
a.v. obturatoria
vestibule
m. constrictor vulvae
n.obturatorius
a.v. epigastrica caudalis
ischium
pelvic floor:
a.v. pudenda externa
pubis
m. rectus abdominis
a.v. clitoridis media
mammary giand
a.v. labiatis ventrafis
a. pudenda interna
a.v. glutea caudalis
nn.pelvini
a.umbilicais
a.v. vaginalis
a.uterina
m.sacrocaudalis
a.v.iliaca externa
ventralis
m.sartorius
a.v. pudenda interna
n.obturatorius
a.v.obturatoria
transversafis fascia(cut)
m. levator ani
a.femoralis
m.obturatorius:
pars iliaca
a.profunda femoris
pars ischiopubica
t.v.pudendoepigastricus
pubis
m. obliquus internus
abdominis,caudar
ischium
jeunbur daapyjapiog
ringy
1.V.clitoridis media
a.v. epigastrica caudalis
(cut)
v.labialis ventralis
a.v, pudenda externa
V. pudenda externa
canar
between m. gracilis
and m. pectineus
a.v.saphena
n. saphenus
m.gracilis
Fig. 8.87 The right pelvic wall of the pregnant mare: medial view (2). The peritoneum and connective tissue have been removed to display the vessels,
 nerves and muscles of the pelvic wall. The rectus abdominis muscle and the mammary gland have been removed.
314
The Pelvis (including the spine)
v.iliaca communis dextra
a.v. glutea caudalis
vertebrat bodies (L5, 6)
n. obturatorius (LIV,V)
nn. pervini (S,V)
v. iliaca communis
n.ischiadicus et
sinistra
nn. ghutei (LV, VI,St,I)
a. pudenda interna
n.pudendus(S,V)
a.ovarica
n.rectalis caudalis
a.uterina
(SIV.V)
a. umbilicalis
a.v.pudenda intena
a.v. circumffexa iium
profunda
m.retractorclitoridis
m. obliquus internus
abdominis
m.coccygeus
n.cutaneusfemoris
lateralis (LIl)
m.sartorius-
anaf canaf (cut)
a.v.vaginalis
n.obturatorius
a.v.iliaca externa
a.v.obturatoria
m: tensor fasciae latae
m.obturatoriusinternus:
a. profunda femoris
pars iliaca
pars ischiopubica {cut)
t.pudendoepigastricus
vestibufe (cut)
m.sartorius
a.femoralis
V. pudenda exierna
pubis
ischium
ilium, shaft
obturator foramen (right)
Fig. 8.88 The right pelvic wall of the pregnant mare: medial view (3). The abdominal wall has been resected. The ischiopubic part of the internal
 obturator muscle has been removed to display the position of the obturator foramen.
315
Fig. 8.89 The deep surface of the broad sacrotuberous ligament of the
pregnant mare: medial view. The pudendal nerve disappears from sight in
this medial view because it runs between superficial and deep laminae of
thebroad sacrotuberous ligament.
a.v. pudenda interna
a.v.glutea caudalis
a.umbilicalis
nn. pelvini
n. ischiadicus et nn. glutei
m.osoasmnor
n. pudendus
broad sacrotuberous figament
a.v.vaginaris
a.v.iliaca externa
n. rectalis caudalis
m. sartorius
m.sacrocaudafisventralis
n. obturatorius
a.v.obturatoria
sacrotuberous ligament
iium, shaft
Inn. anorectales
obturator foramen
a.v.pudenda interna
a. profunda femoris
m. levator ani, origin 
t. pudendoepigastricus
a. perinealis ventralis
pubis
m. obturatorius interna:
parsiliaca
a.femoralis
parsischiopubica
m. pectineus 
lesser ischiatic notch 
V. pudenda externa
ischium
a. mesenterica caudafis
a. iliaca externa sinistra
a. ovarica sinistra
a. iliaca interna sinistra 
a.ovarica dextra
aa.uferinae
a.iliaca interna dextra
aortaaboo
a.pudenda interna
a.jliacaexterna dexfra
nn.penvini
a.circurmfexa iium
a. caudalis ventrolateralis
profunda
a.v.glutea caudalis
v. iiaca communis
n. pudendus
m. psoas minor
n. gluteus caudalis
m.psoas major
a. glutea caudatis
a. glutea cranialis
a.v.jwaca externa
n. cutaneus femoris
n.obturatorius
caudalis
m.obfiquus
y. iliaca interna
internus abdominis
n.ischiadicus
a.obturatoria
greater ischiatic notch
a.v.iliacofemoratis
v.gfutea cranialis
ium, shaf!l
a.v.circumfexa
ilium profunda
psoas fubercle
pubis
n.cutaneus
femoralis tateralis
m. gracilis
V.pudenda externa
m. fensor fasciae latae
m.pectineus
m.jiacus lateralis
m. iliacus mediais
m. recfus femoris
a.v.n. femoralis
m. vastus mediafis
Fig. 8.90 Structures related to the shaft of the right ilium of the pregnant mare: medial view. The broad sacrotuberous ligament has been removed to show
the nerves that pass through the greater ischiatic foramen and then run lateral to this ligament. The sartorius muscle has been removed to show the 
316
m.longissimus
vertebralamina
lumborum
epidural space
m. quadratus umborum
spinal cord in vertebral
The Pelvis (including the spine)
canaf
transverse process, L4
dura mater
plexusvertebralis
m. obliquus internus
internus ventralis
abdominis
veriebral body, L4
m. psoas major
v.iliaca communis dextra
aorta abdominalis
m. psoas minor
a.ovarica dextra
a.v. circumffexa ilium
V.pudenda interna
profunda
m. psoas minor
n.gluteus caudafis
m.psoas major
a.v.liaca externa
m. obliquus internus
abdominis
V.gfutea craniafis
m.iliacus faterafis
a.v. gfutea caudalis
n. cutaneus femoris
n.cutaneus femoris
lateralis
caudalis
a.v.circumffexa
greater ischiatic
ilium profunda
notch of ilium
n.ischiadicus
m.iliacus medialis
psoas tubercle
m.tensorfasciaelatae
pubis,pecten
a.v.n.femoralis
a.v.profunda femoris
m. rectus femoris
V.pudendaexterna
m.vastus medialis
m.pecfineus
a.V.umbahs
vertebrarbodies
L5,6,S1,2
n. obturatorius (LrV,V)
a.glutea caudalis
m.osoasminor
a.v.glutea cranialis
a.v.ifiacofemoralis
a.caudalisventrolateralis
.pudendus(Sff,IV)
m. psoas major
a.v.glutea caudatis
ifium
n.gluteus caudafis(St,)
m.ifiacus lateralis
n. cutaneus femoris
caudalis (Sr,)
psoas fubercle
a.obturatorius
m.ilacus meoiafis
n. ischiadicus (LV,VI,SI)
n.femoralis (LIV.V)
ischium
obturator loramen (right)
m.tensorfasciaelatae
a.v.fernorar
V.pudenda externa
m.rectus femoris
.gracs
m. vastus mediafis
m.pectineus
Fig. 8.92 The right femoral nerve and cranial gluteal artery of the pregnant mare: medial view. The internal and external iliac vessels have been removed
to show the emergence of the femoral nerve between the psoas major and minor muscles. The course of the nerve is indicated by a broken line.
317
Fig. 8.93 The gluteal
and caudal fasciae, left 
supporting wire in ilium,
tuber coxae
caudal view. Figs.
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse 
8.93-8.103 show a series
of dissections of sacral
and caudal (coccygeal)
vertebrae and nerves in 
a 2 % year-old horse.
deep gluteal fascia
Here, the skin and 
superficial fasciae have
been removed. Hair
has been clipped over
the principal bony
landmarks.
base of tail(dock)
deep caudal fascia
ischium, tuber
ischiadicum
 Fig. 8.94 Superficial
muscles of the left
m.gluteus medius
sacral and caudal
regions: dorsal view.
m. gluteus superficialis
m. biceps femoris
plexus caudatis dorsalis,
r.cutaneus
m.semitendinosus,
caput vertebralis
plexus caudafis dorsalis.
r.cutaneus
m.sacrocaudalis
dorsalis medialis
m.sacrocaudatis
dorsalis lateralis
ischium,tuber
ischiadicum
deep caudal fascia
318
Fig. 8.95 Structures of
the sacral and caudal 
regions: left caudo-
The
dorsal view. The
epaxial muscle mass
e Pelvis (including the spine)
has been removed
m.gluteus medius
from the last two
sacral and frst seven
caudal vertebrae.
spinous processand
laminaofS5
spinous process
and lamina, Cau 1
a. caudalis lateralis
unfused laminae.Cau 4
figamentaflava
Dlexicaudalesdorsales
mm.sacrocaudales
dorsales
deep caudal fascia
Fig. 8.96 Structures of
the sacral and caudal
regions: dorsal view. The
m.gluteus medius
epaxial muscle mass has
been removed from the 
caudal sacral and frst 
spinous processes and
laminae of S5, Cau 1,2
seven caudal vertebrae.
a. caudafis faterafis
spinous process and
laminae, Cau3
ligamentum fiavum
unfused faminae, Cau 4
nn. caudates IV.
fr. dorsales
plexi caudales dorsales
a. caudalis dorsolateralis
mm. sacrocaudales
dorsales
deep caudal fascia
319
Fig. 8.97 Structures 
of the caudal region:
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
spinous process and
dorsal view (1). The
aminaeorCau2
ligaments have been 
removed from the
dorsa interspinous
interarcuate space
figament
between the spinal
figamentum ffavum of
interarcuate space
 arches of third and
nn.caudales t,l,
fourth caudal
ff. dorsales
vertebrae to expose the
contents of the
vertebral canal.
 spinous process and
laminae of Cau 3
a.v.caudalis lateralis
n.caudalis I#f,
r. dorsalis
adipose tissue
surrounding nerves in
vertebral canal
n.caudalis IV,
r.dorsalis
plexi caudales dorsales
Fig. 8.98 Structures of
the caudal region: dorsal
view (2). The epidural
adipose tissue of the
vertebral canal has been
removed from the
interarcuate space to
show the caudal nerves 
within the canal.
componentsofvertebral
arch, Cau3
nn.caudales Iff,
rf.dorsales
fitum terminafe
nn. caudales in vertebral
canal
components of veriebrar
arch,Cau4
320
Fig. 8.99 Structures of
the caudal region:
dorsal view (3). The
 interarcuate spaces have
The
spinousprocess and
 been dissected and the
 Pelvis
adipose tissue of the
 vertebral canal removed
(including
to show the vertebral
n.caudalis !,
arch of the third caudal
r.oorsahs
vertebra. In the fourth
n. caudalis I.
caudal vertebrae the
r.dorsalis
 laminae do not fuse and
the
 nerves in vertebral cana!
 there is no spinous
 spine)
process.
vertebral arch (spinous
process and laminae) of
Caur3
fifum terminale
n. caudalis I,
r.dorsalis
laminae, Cau 4
Fig. 8.100 Topography
 of sacral and caudal
croup
vertebrae: right
m. gfuteus superficialis
dorsocaudal view. The
m. gfuteus medius
 hamstring and caudal
spinousprocesses
 muscles have been
S3,4.5
removed from the
- m. biceps femoris
 vertebral arches and the
dock
 positions of these arches 
spinous processes,
 are seen in relationship
Cau 1,2.3
to the croup and to the
dock (root of tail).
m.semitendinosus
(caput vertebrale)
vertebral laminae of
Cau 4.5
ligamentaflava
occupying caudal
321
m.gluteus medius
m. gluteus superficialis
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
m. biceps femoris
spinous processes.
$3.4.5
m.semitendinosus
ligamentum favum
removed from
interarcuate space
 spinous processes,
Cau 1,2,3
cut pedicle,Cau
deep caudaffascia
Fig. 8.101 Topography of sacral and caudal vertebrae: right dorsolateral view. The pedicles of the fth sacral and the frst three caudal vertebrae have 
been sawn through to display the caudal nerves by laminectomy (see Figs. 8.102 and 8.103).
m. gluteus medius
m. glurteus superficialis
spinousprocessesS3.4
m. biceps femoris
vertebral pedicies
(cut)S5
nn.caudales in
vertebralcanal
m. semitendinosus
deep caudal fascia
Cau 1,2,3
Fig. 8.102 Topography of caudal nerves and vertebral canal: right dorsolateral view. The vertebral laminae have been removed from the ffth sacral
and first three caudal vertebrae to show the topographical position of the vertebral canal and its contents in relationship to the dock and the sacral
spinous processes.
322
spinousprocess,S4
ThePelvis (including the spine)
m.gufeusmeoiu
cuf pedicles, S5
fium terminale
cut pedicles,Cau 1
n. sacralis V
f. dorsalis
cut pedicies, Cau 2
n.caudalis 1
f. dorsafis
cuf pedicles, Cau 3
n.caudafisf
.dorsafis
n. caudalis I!.
r.dorsalis
laminae,Cau4
Dfexicaudalesdorsales
figamentaflava of
interarcuate space
Fig. 8.103 The caudal nerves: dorsal view. The arches of the vertebrae have been removed as indicated in Figs.8.10l and 8.102 and the spinal nerves
have been dissected.
323
This page intentionally eft blank
9. DIAGNOSTIC
IMAGING OF THE
HEAD.WITHERS
MANUS AND PES
Clinical considerations for diagnostic imaging
bony structures, so is particularly useful in demonstrating incomplete
a a  san p  r p sa
Radiography is a very useful diagnostic tool in equine medicine, par-
bone has been fragmented into multiple pieces). The lack of superim-
ticularly in the skull and the distal limbs, although higher-powered
position provided by CT is particularly useful in the head, although it
equipment will also enable images of the spine, proximal limbs and
is also used to demonstrate change in the limb bones. If appropriate
pelvis to be made. However, in order to be able to interpret radiologi-
equipment is available, CT may be performed in the standing animal,
cal abnormalities appropriately, knowledge of normal radiological
 obviating the need for general anaesthesia.
anatomy must be gained. In general, the distal limb of the equine
 The presence of cartilaginous epiphyseal (or growth) plates must be
animal is not too complex. In contrast, the head is extremely complex
 remembered when interpreting radiographs of the limbs in young
and so it is of paramount importance to have an atlas of normal
 horses. The following times of epiphyseal fusion have been determined
radiographic anatomy, or a normal radiograph, available for compari-
radiographically:
son when attempting interpretation of this area.
· After birth, the distal epiphysis (lateral malleolus) of the fbula fuses
The commonest clinical indication for radiography of the limbs is
with the tibia at about 3 months of age. The distal epiphysis of the
lameness, and the commonest causes of lameness in equine animals
ulna (lateral styloid process) fuses with the radius at a slightly later
are tendon or ligament problems (tendinitis or desmitis), inflamma-
age (49 months).
tory conditions (such as laminitis affecting the laminae of the
· The distal metapodial epiphyses at the fetlock joints and the proxi-
hoof) and trauma ( soft tissue injuries and fractures). Although radi-
mal epiphyses of the proximal and middle phalan ges all fuse at about
ography will not demonstrate primary chan ges in the soft tissue struc-
6-9 months of age.
tures, it may demonstrate secondary effects on the bones, such as
· The distal epiphysis of the radius fuses at 2-3 years and that of the
 degenerative joint disease or sclerosis (when the bone becomes dense
distal tibia fuses considerably earlier (17-17.5 months).
and hard).
At least two views of the affected area should be taken (orthogonal
Epiphyseal fusion is a gradual process. The epiphyseal growth plate
projections) and, in the case of the limbs, the contralateral limb may
 stops producing new metaphyseal bone and becomes itself converted
also be imaged, to provide a control for comparison. In the distal limb,
to bone, uniting the epiphysis with the shaft. The process can be traced
 it is routine to take at least two additional oblique projections of the
radiographically or histologically until fusion is complete. Gross ana-
region of interest in order to assess as much of the region as
tomical fusion, however, is ^complete fusion', when a standard mac-
possible.
eration technique fails to separate the epiphysis from the shaft. For
Advanced cross-sectional imaging modalities, such as computed
the horse, the results of some investigations by these three methods of
 study are summarized by Getty in Sisson & Grossman (1975, pp 272
sition from overlying structures. CT is of particular value in assessing  & 298).
325
nasalbon
ncisive bone
nasal proces:
maxillarydiastema)
maxillary premolar tooth(P2)
ongue: apical region and
frer
owerincisor
teeth (li-3)
interalveolar border
mandi bular
dible
canine
(mandibulardiastcema)
tooth
Fig. 9.1 Radiograph of the rostral teeth: lateral view. The canine teeth are large in this horse (probably a male). The first premolar teeth (wolf teeth)
arenotpresent.
326
Diagnostic Imaging of the Head, Withers, Manus and Pes 
eune
eriodoncal
losed'roots
andibularcanalat
membrane
M
che dencal alveolae
open' roots of P4
Fig. 9.2 Radiograph of the cheek teeth: lateral view. Compare the roots of P4 (erupts c. 4 y) with those of M, (erupts c. 9-12 m).
327
P
P3
P4
M
ventral borderof che
man dibular
body of the man dible
canal
Fig. 9.3 Radiograph of the mandible: lateral oblique view. Dentally immature horse. The developing crowns of the permanent mandibular premolar
teeth (P,-P4) lie beneath the roots of the temporary premolar teeth (pz-p4). They produce palpable bony prominences on the ventral borders of the
mandibles in chronological sequence, between the ages of 1/ and 34 years. Each prominence disappears after each temporary premolar tooth is
lost and the crown of the permanent premolar tooth comes into wear.
 A similar developmental sequence of palpable prominences in the maxillary bone occurs, between the ages of 2 and 5 years, at the level of the
infraorbital foramen, when the upper permanent maxillary premolar teeth (P-p4) develop and eventually replace the temporary maxillary premolar
teeth. At about 2 years of age, the palpable infraorbital foramen lies dorsal to the prominence related to p² and the developing P’ tooth. At about
3% years of age, all three maxillary prominences are in line with the supraorbital foramen. See Fig. 1.55 and compare the positions of p? and p? and
the infraorbital foramen in the foal with those shown for P', P’ and the infraorbital foramen in the adult horse (Fig. 1.44). None of these 
 mandibular or maxillary bony prominences are seen in the horse at 6 years of age (Fig. 1.44).
328
 Diagnostic Imaging of the Head, Withers, Manus and Pes
developingdentcal
rownOfM3
audal root of M2
tooth
beriodor
membrane
developingdencal roocsofpermanent
premolarteechPg.P4
Fig. 9.4 Radiograph of the mandible of an older horse: lateral view. The third molar tooth erupts at c. 3.5-4 y. M, and M, erupt at c. 9-12 m and 2 y
 respectively.
329
 Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
nasoincisive
dorsal conchal
infraorbical
sinu s
canals
ventra
fronta
oncha
sinus
ethmoid
bone
maxillary
sinus
bones
malael
orbit
ostralborder
amus
stylohyoid
epigloctis
Fig. 9.5 Radiograph of the cheek teeth and nasal region: lateral view.
330
Diagnostic Imaging of the Head, Withers, Manus and Pes 
ethmoturbinate
oones
nfraorbicalcanal
haxillary sinus
asopharynx
soft palate
(m. palatinus)
endocrachealcube
in oral cavity
oral cavity
(occluded on
ocher side almost
completely)
bot of tongue
mandible
Fig. 9.6 Computed tomography image of the head: transverse plane through the eyes. On the left side, the oral cavity has been almost obliterated by
the buccal and lingual soft tissues. The third molar tooth shows as three parts because of its oblique orientation in the mandible (see Fig. 1.44). The
most ventral part of the mandible forms the mandibular canal: this contains the inferior alveolar artery, vein and nerve, which supply the dental
alveoli of the mandibular teeth. At the rostral termination of the canal, the mental foramen (Figs. 1.44, 1.12), the mental nerve gives off branches
which supply the lower lip (labium) and chin (mentum). The nerve continues as a number of fne dental branches which run within the bone of the
incisive part of the mandible to supply the canine and incisor teeth.
331
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
basioccipical
oone
basisphenoid
pouches
rilage(apex)
stylohyoid
bone
aterallaryn geal
crachea
epiglot
arynx
softpalate
ngle of
mandible
Fig. 9.7 Radiograph of the laryngeal region: lateral view. The joint between the basisphenoid and basioccipital bones (basis crani) is cartilaginous.
332
 Diagnostic Imaging of the Head, Withers, Manus and Pes
ygomatic process
of temporal bone 
ondylarprocess
ofmandible
cemporomandibularjoint
(articulardiscnotvisualised:
divides the joint cavicy into
two cavities and gives 
congruence)
pharyngeal muscles
endotracheal tube
in laryngeal vestibule
epiglottis
Fig. 9.8 Computed tomography image of the head: transverse plane through the temporomandibular joints. The guttural pouches lie between the basis
crani, the medial pterygoid muscles of the mandible, and the muscular wall of the pharynx. The temporomandibular joint has a hinge-like
the maxillary cheek teeth and this is accomplished by a rotatory action of the condyles in which one articular disc moves rostrally and the other
moves caudally. It is thought that the medial pterygoid muscles (Fig. 1.15), acting singly, produce this important grinding action.
333
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
oone
gUttcural
pouches
arytenoid
epiglottis
Carilage
Fig. 9.9 Radiograph of the laryngeal region: lateral view. The position of the larynx is well demarcated by the epiglottis, arytenoid cartilages, and the
aryepiglotticfolds.
334
Diagnostic Imaging of the Head, Withers, Manus and Pes
ofthoracic
spinous
processes
carilaginous
plate
T2
T3
T6
Fig. 9.10 Radiograph of the summits of the spinous processes of thoracic vertebrae T2-T8: lateral view. Osteometry shows that the dorsal spinous
processes of the fourth and ffth vertebrae, T4, T5, are the longest in the series. Radiography, however, shows that in the adult horse, during level 
standing, the highest point of the withers is usually formed by the spinous process of T6 or T7 (Butler et al 2008). The ends of the spinous processes
of T2-T6 (T7, T8) show centres of ossification in yearlings. The cartilage is gradually replaced by bone until, by 10 y, the thin cartilaginous plates 
which join the ossifed ends to the spinal processes begin to disappear. The cartilages at the dorsal tips persist for a much longer time (Ellenberger &
Baum, 1943). The more ventral details in this radiograph are lost, due to superimposition of the scapulae, their cartilages, and the appendicular and
axial muscles (Figs 3.2, 3.7 and 4.15).
335
radius
ntebra chiocarpal
joint
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
essory carpa
bone
proximal row
radial, intermediate,
carpaljoint
carpal bones,
11, IV
distal row
pasoduuadns
carpometacarpal
joint
ligament
carpal
netacarpa
bones
superimposed
metacarpal bone Ill 
Fig. 9.11 Radiograph of the carpus: lateral view. The accessory carpal bone can be assessed on this view. For the accessoriometacarpal ligament,
see Fig. 3.38.
adius
lateral styloid process
ulnar carpal bone
accessory carpal
bone
interm ediate carpal
medial styl oid process
antebrachiocarpal
joint
canal between
radial and 
intermediate
carpal bones
radial carpal bone
middle carpal joint
carpal bone Ill
carpal bone IV
carpal bone Il
joint
metacarpalboneIV
metacarpal bone Ill
metacarpal bone Il
Fig. 9.12 Radiograph of the carpus: DorsoPalmar (DP) view. The lateral styloid process of the ulna usually fuses with the radius during the frst
year of life.
336
radius
intebrachiocarpal
Diagnostic Imaging of the Head, Withers, Manus and Pes
radial carpal bone
mediate carpal
lnarcarpalbon
iddle carpal joint
Fig. 9.13 Radiograph of the carpus: DorsoLatero-PalmaroMedial Oblique (DLPMO) view. The radial facet of carpal bone III, and the 4"h carpal and
metacarpal bones, can be assessed.
ra dius
ntebrachiocarpal
joint
ccessory
carpal bone
mediate
carpal
adial carpal bone
niddle carpal joint
arpal bone Ill 
arpalbone
carpal bone l
irpalbonell
Fig. 9.14 Radiograph of the carpus: DorsoMedio-PalmaroLateral Oblique (DMPLO) view. Carpal bone 1, embedded in the medial collateral
ligament of the carpus (Fig. 3.13), is inconstant and sometimes unilateral.
337
     s
lateral proximal
medial proximal
sesamoid bone
sagiccal ridge
lateral an d
medialcondyles
(superimposed)
irpophalangeal
joint
 Fig. 9.15 Radiograph of the fetlock: lateral view.
apex
lateral,
abaxial
 proximal
margin
sesamoid
bone
axial margin
lateral, medial
epicon dyles 
m etacarpal bone Ill 
base of medial
proximal
sesamoid bone
medial
meta carpal
bonelll
medial proximal
cubercle,
proximal phalanx
sagitcalridge
metacarpalbone ll
proximal phalanx
lateral proximal tubercle,
proximal phalanx
Fig 9.16 Radiograph of the fetlock : DorsoPalmar (DP) view.
338
hetacarpalboneIll
medial proximal
sesamoid bone
 Diagnostic Imaging of the Head, Withers, Manus and Pes 
apex
ateral
articular
proximal
surface
sesamoid
base
nedial
epicondyle
ta carpa
bone Il 
medial
condyle
lateral proximal
tubercle of proximal
 phalanx
metacarpophalangeal
joint
proximal phalanx
Fig. 9.17 Radiograph of the fetlock: DorsoLatero-PalmaroMedial Oblique (DLPMO) view. The lateral proximal sesamoid bone is highlighted.
metacarpal bone Ill
and ics laceral
epicondyle
lateral proximal
sesamoid bone
medial
articular
proximal
surface
sesamoid
base
lateral condyle of
metacarpal bone Ill
medial proximal
tubercle of proximal
phalanx
metacarpophalangeal
joint
Fig. 9.18 Radiograph of the fetlock: DorsoMedio-PalmaroLateral Oblique (DMPLO) view. The medial proximal sesamoid bone is highlighted.
339
mal phalan>
proximal
interphalangeal joint
medial, lateral condyles
middlephalanx
distal interphalangeal joint
proximal
borders
articular
of distal
sesamoid
flexor
(navicular)
less!p
palmar
processes
surface
distcal
bhalanx
process
dorsal
surface
Fig. 9.19 Radiograph of the digit and hoof: lateral view.
nedial, lateral con dyles
of proximal phalanx
interphalangeal joint
medial, lateral
eminences
middle phalanx 
distal interphalangeal
joint
parietal
sulcus
solarcana
bhalanx
solar border
sole
frog
central suleus
Fig. 9.20 Radiograph of the digit and hoof: standing DorsoPalmar (DP) view. Mediolateral foot balance can be assessed on this view.
340
proximal phalanx
medial condyle
 Diagnostic Imaging of the Head, Withers, Manus and Pes
condyle
middle phalanx 
ossification of ungular
cartilage
pue ew xo.d
discal borders
of discal sesamoid
(navicular) bone
ateral
process
extensor
process
medial 
phalanx
palmar
process
solarborder
vascular
channels
Fig. 9.21 Radiograph of the digit: DorsoProximo-PalmaroDistal Oblique (DPrPDiO) view. Some ossification of the ungular cartilages is present. The
distal sesamoid (navicular) bone is superimposed on the middle phalanx.
middle phalanx
distal phalanx
proximal
borders
of discal 
medial and 
lateral
sesamoid
(navicular)
discal
bone
extensor process,
distcal phalanx
discal interphalangeal
joint
Fig. 9.22 Radiograph of the digit: DorsoProximo-PalmaroDistal Oblique (DPrPDiO) view. This view shows the four borders of the distal sesamoid 
(navicular) bone.
middle phalanx (P2)
joint berween P2
andnavicularbone
articular
cortex
discal
medulla
flexor cortex
bone
sagiccal ridge
distal phalanx,
palmar process
Fig. 9.23 Radiograph of the digit: PalmaroProximo-PalmaroDistal Oblique (PPrPDiO) view. Corticomedullary definition in the distal sesamoid
(navicular) bone can be assessed.
341
tibia
calcaneal tuberosity
Color Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy, The Horse
arsocrural joint
calcaneus
medial
ochlear
ridges of 
lateral
cal us
calu s
(cal caneus)
proximal
central carsal bone
centrodiscal joint
carsal bone IV
carsal bones
II, I an d II
*sal joint
Fig 9.24 Radiograph of the hock: lateral view.
cibia
medial malleolus 
sagiccal or discal
intermediate ridge
sustenca culum cali
of calcaneus
lateral malleolus 
(fibula)
calcaneus
calus and ics discal
tuberosity
proximal
intercarsal joint
centraltarsalbone
centrodiscal carsal
joint
rsal bones I, Il
fused
arsal bone IV
arsal bone Ill
hetatarsalboneIv
oint
etatarsalbonell
hecatarsal bone Il 
metatarsal bone IV
Fig. 9.25 Radiograph of the hock: DorsoPlantar (DP) view. The distal epiphysis of the fbula fuses with the tibia during the frst year of life.
342
tibia
calcaneal tuberosity
socrural joint
Diagnostic Imaging of the Head, Withers, Manus and Pes
nedial malleolus
calcaneus
medial
trochlear
ridges of
lateral
calus
calus
proximal
 intercarsal joint
Il tarsal bone
centrodiscal joint 
tarsal bone IV
arsal bones I, Il 
fused
arsal bone Ill 
carsal
joint
letatar'salbonell
Fig. 9.26 Radiograph of the hock: DorsoLatero-PlantaroMedial Oblique (DLPMO) view. The calcaneal tuberosity can be assessed. (It should be
completely fused to the calcaneus by 3y.)
ibia
calcaneus
arsocrural joint
sagiccal or discal
intermediace ridge
(tibia)
medial
crochlear
ridges of
ateral
calus
of calcaneus
oroximal
intercarsal joint 
central carsal bone
centrodiscal jint
tarsal bone Ill
joint
arsal bone IV
arsal bones I. Il 
fused
*sal bone IV
metatarsal bone Il
metacarsal bone Il
Fig. 9.27 Radiograph of the hock: DorsoMedio-PlantaroLateral Oblique (DMPLO) view. The lateral trochlear ridge of the talus can be assessed.
343
This page intentionally eft blank
INDEX
 References in this index are to page numbers, not to fgures. The index lists the
Arteries, lymph nodes, muscles, nerves, veins and their trunks are indexed under
pages on which each structure has been labelled in the drawings that accompany
the usual abbreviations (a., In., m., n., v., t.), as in the labels. For most other
the photographs.
structures the anglicized names are used, but the classical name has been retained
where it is much more familiar than the anglicized form (e.g.corpus luteum).
 l  s     a  
 conform to the
 ul re n s u ssi si x  ( e e
abels.
a. circumflexa femoris laleralis, 203,
a. interossea communis, 87, 88
a. saphena, 193,206, 213,220, 222,
A
204, 205, 224, 280, 282,
a. interossea cranialis, 87, 88, 94,
224, 290, 291
abdominal tunic, yellow, 114-119, 122,
284-286, 303
98-101
a. scapularis dorsalis, 66, 84, 118-124,
148-151, 192, 196-198, 202, 218,
a. circumfexa femoris medialis, 196,
aa. jejunales, 165, 175
126-135
276, 277, 280, 284-286, 289,
200, 201, 224
a. labialis mandibularis, 12, 13
a. sphenopalatina, 47
290-291, 301, 304, 306
a. circumfexa humeri caudalis, 92
a. labialis maxillaris, 11, 32, 36
a. subclavia sinistra et dextra, 126,
abdominal wall, 164, 166, 168
a. circumfexa humeri cranialis, 87, 88,
a. labialis ventralis, 307-309, 314
130, 133-137
accessory femoral ligament, 205, 219,
92
a. laryngea cranialis, 30, 31
a. sublingualis, 16, 20
222, 223, 278, 280, 283-287,
a. circumfexa ilium profunda, 179,
a. laleratis nasi, 1l, 32, 36
a. subscapularis, 80, 84, 85
289, 304, 305
181, 192, 194-197, 220-224, 276,
a. lienalis, 159-163, 165, 175
a. supraorbitalis, 52
acetabulum, 205, 219, 269, 279, 283,
277, 300-304, 310, 311, 315, 316
a. lingualis, 16, 18, 20, 25, 30
a. suprascapularis, 79, 80, 84-86,
285, 303-305
a. coeliaca, 161, 163, 165, 172, 174,
a. lumbalis, 311
89-93
adrenal gland, 165, 172, 174, 175
175
a. malaris, 52, 53
a. tarsea perforans, 212, 217
alar nasal cartilage, 9, 11, 34, 35, 45
a. colica media, 165, 175
a. malleolaris caudalis lateralis, 221,
a. temporalis superficialis, 50-52
comu, 45, 46
a. colica sinistra et dextra, 164, 165,
263
a. testicularis, 292, 293
lamina, 45, 46
179, 181
a. marginis solearis, 239
a thoracica nxtema, 63, 65, 84, 85,
ameurysm, of a. mesenterica cranialis,
a. collateralis radialis, 88, 94
a. maxillaris, 16
116,118,120,122-127
165
a. collateratis ulnaris, 83-85, 240-243
a. mediana, 85, 86, 89, 90, 93-102
a. thoracica intema, 1l6, 1l8, 120,
amnular cartilage, 15, 16
a. coronaria dextra, 137-139
a. meningea,
124-130, 133-137
amnular ligaments, digital,
a. coronaria sinistra, 126-130
caudalis, 69
a. thoracodorsalis, 80, 84, 85, 89, 90,
distal, 249-253
a. digitalis lateralis, 100, 101, 232-235,
rostralis, 43
93
palmar, 233, 234
240-243, 248-253, 262-265
a. mesenterica caudalis, 144, 165, 181,
a. thyroidea cranialis, 27-31,62
plantar, 249-253
a. digitalis medialis, 10l, 233, 235,
300, 301
a. fbialis, 206-208, 211, 213-215, 221,
proximal, 249-253
241-243, 249, 251-253, 255-256,
a. mesenterica cranialis, 165, 175
263
amsa subclavia caudalis, 124, 127,
258, 262, 263, 265
a. metacarpea dorsalis Il, 97, 99,
a. transversa cubiti, 86, 88-90, 94
134
a. digitalis palmaris communis II,
101-103, 232-235, 240-243
a. transversafaciei, 11, 13-16, 36, 50,
amtebrachial fascia, 83, 85
99-103, 233, 235, 241-243
a. metacarpea dorsalis IIl, 98-101,
51
antebrachium, 75, 228, 230
a. digitalis palmaris communis Il,
232, 234, 240-242
a. ulnaris collateralis 89, 90, 93
anus, 279-281, 306, 313-316
240-243
a. metatarsea dorsalis [Il, 212-213,
a. umbilicalis, 220, 223, 224, 289, 310,
aorta,
a. digitalis plantaris communis Il, 263,
221, 250, 253, 262, 265
311, 315
abdominalis, 162-165, 179, 220,
265
a musculophrenica, 131
a. uterina, 301, 308-311, 316
224, 274, 275, 310-312
see also a. plantaris medialis
a. obturatoria, 196, 204, 205, 218-224,
a. uterina dextra, 312-314, 316
arcus aorticus, 122-132, 134-138
a. digitalis plantaris communis IIl,
276-277
a. uterina sinistra, 312, 314, 316
thoracica, 126, 128, 135-138,
see a. plantaris lateralis
a. occipitalis, 20, 24, 27, 30, 59
a. vaginalis, 220, 222, 310-316
156-159, 161-163, 165-172
a. epigastrica caudalis, 220, 291, 300,
a. oesophagea, 178
a. vertebralis, 66, 69-72, 133-135, 138
aortic hiatus, 145, 159, 165, 171,
308, 314
a. ophthalmica, 52, 53
artery, see arteria/arteriae
174
a. epigastrica cranialis, 131
a. ovarica, 300,301, 310, 312-317
arytenoid cartilage, 30, 31, 56, 332
aortic valve, 110, 128, 129, 139
a. ethmoidalis exterma, 42, 43, 46
a. palatina ascendens, 16, 20, 25
atlas, 70, 72, 332
arachnoid villi, 42, 43
a. facialis, 10-20, 25, 32-36, 50-53
a. palatina major, 47, 48, 49
alar foramina, 69
 arcus plantaris profundus, 255
a. femoralis, 195, 201-204, 208, 209,
a. penis, 287, 294
lateral vertebral foramina, 69, 72
arteria/arteriae,
218-224, 276-279, 282-285, 303,
a. perinealis ventralis, 219, 303, 310,
wing, 57,69,72,271
a. alveolaris mandibularis, 15, 25
314-317
313
atrioventricular valve,
a. angularis oculi, 1l, 50
a. gastrica sinistra, 16l, 165, 172,174,
a. plantaris lateralis, 213
lft, 110, 128-130
a. auricularis caudalis, 14-17, 20, 36
175
 see also a. digitalis plantaris
right, 136-139
a auricularis rostralis, 50
a. glutea caudalis, 194, 196-201,
communis III
atrium,
a. axillanis, 63, 80, 84-86, 89, 91
218-224,276, 277,302, 306-311
a. plantaris medialis, 21l, 214, 221
left, 126-139
a. brachialis, 89, 90, 92, 93
a. glutea cranialis, 197, 218, 219, 277,
see also a. digitalis plantaris
night, 128-130, 136, 137
e broncho-oesophagea, 130
302-311
communis [I
auditory tube (orifice of),
a. buccalis, 36
a. hepatica, 165, 172-175
a. poplilea, 220, 224
 medial lip, 47
a. bulbi penis, 288, 289
a. ileocolica, 165, 168
a. profunda femoris, 205, 220, 222,
 in nasal pharynx, 49
aa. caecales mediates et laterales, 165
a. iliaca extema, 220-224, 303-306,
223, 278, 282-285, 303, 315
auricular cartilage, 15, 16
a. carotis communis, 24-30, 61-64, 69,
314-317
a. pudenda extema, 220, 222, 275,
axis,
78-81, 126-127, 130-134
a. iliaca interma, 220-224, 312-314
279-289, 313-317
caudal articular process, 69
a. carotis exterma, 1l, 14-25, 28, 31,
a. iliacofemoralis, 220-224, 276-280,
a. pudenda interma, 197, 201, 204,
dens, 69, 70, 72
36, 37
302-308, 316
205, 218-220, 223, 224, 278
dorsal arch, 72
a. carotis interma, 20, 24, 28, 30, 59,
a. incisiva, 45, 47, 48
a pulmonalis, 126-130, 138, 139
dorsal spinous process, 69, 72, 271
69
a. intraorbitatis, 49
a. radialis, 83, 88-90, 95-106,
a. caudalis femoris, 195, 201, 218, 219,
a. intercostais dorsalis, 119, 132, 133,
240-243
224, 276
136-138, 159, 165, 176, 180
a. rectalis caudalis, 102, 240-243
B
a. caudalis lateralis, 319-322
a. intercostalis suprema, 70, 123-127,
a. rectalis cranialis, 165, 179, 181, 300,
basihyoid bone, 29
a. cervicalis profunda, 66-71, 130
129, 130, 138
301, 311, 312
bile duct, 145, 172, 173
a. cervicalis superficialis, 60-65,
a. intercostalis ventralis, 12l, 131,
a. renalis dextra, 17l, 172, 174
bladder, se urinary bladder
116-127, 132-137
136-138
a. renalis sinistra, 165
bone, see umder individual names
345
broad ligament, 177, 184
colon, descending, 156-165, 274, 300,
genital fold, 274, 275
E
bronchus,
301, 310
genual joint, see stife joint
left, 128, 129
hautra, 156
epidermis, (hoof), 237, 239
gingiva, 44
right, 135, 137
mesocolon, 162-165, 170
epididymis, 269, 270, 290-293
gingival margin, 3, 21, 39
Hor
buccal gland, 14, 15, 19
taenia, 157
epiglottis, 5,30, 31, 56, 330, 332,333,
glans clitoridis, 299
butbourethral gland, 288
conchal sinus, see frontal sinus.
334
glans penis, 294-298
The
maxillary sinus
ergot (metatarsal pad), 235, 264
gluteal fascia, deep, 318
conus arteriosus, 126-129
hgament, 232, 233, 240, 241,
guttural pouch,2,3,4, 5,14-18,
C
corium, 226, 266, 267
263-265
28-29,31,56,57,110,332,333,
caecocolic junction, 168, 169, 171
cormea, 3,35, 49, 50
ethmoid bone, 41, 42, 43, 46-48, 331
334
caecum,
coronary cushion, 236, 237
 cribriform plate, 41, 43
lateral part, 15-17, 20, 22, 24, 25,
ethmoid nasal conchae, 49
apex,164
coronary groove, 136
29, 269
 of Veterinary
base, 166-172,176,178
coronary sinus, 138, 139
 extensor retinaculum (carpus), 86, 89,
medial part, 16, 17, 20, 22, 24, 25,
body, 162-167, 178
oronet, 228-236, 242, 243, 244-251,
90
27, 29, 186
caecocolic orifce, 171
253, 255, 262-264, 266,
extensor retinaculum (hock), 193, 206,
ileal orifice, 171
268
207, 211, 213
H
calcaneal tendon, common, 187,
coronoid process (mandible) 37, 38
206-216
corpus luteum, 309
F
heart, 110, 111, 123-130, 135-139, 270
Atlas
calcaneus, 186, 187, 211-217, 221, 342,
see aiso ovary
of foal, 141, 142, 270
343
costal arch, 116, 118, 120, 122, 146
facial crest, 4,6,8, 10, 18, 32, 33, 37,
hepatorenal ligament, 169
sustentaculum tali, 246, 247, 342
costal cartilages, ll8-122
39, 46, 53
Color
hock, see tarsus
tuberosity, 186, 189, 191, 211-217,
costochondral junction, 110, 118-121,
see also maxilla, zygomatic bone
hoof, 226, 227, 228-234, 236-239,
221, 244-247, 262, 263
132, 133
falciform ligament (liver), 183
244-251, 254-261, 266, 268, 325
carotid sheath, 64, 65
costodiaphragmatic recess, 122
falxcerebri,43
humerus,
carpal bones,
costomediastinal recess, 133, 141
fascia, see under individual names
deltoid tuberosity, 58, 76-78, 86,
IV, 74, 98, 227, 336, 337
cicoid cartilage, 28, 30, 31
fascia lata, 192
92, 112
acccccory, 74,75, 77, 83,87,88,
cricothyroid ligament, 31
fascia transversalis, 291, 314
lateral epicondyle, 76, 87, 88, 92,
96, 97, 102, 103, 228-231,
cricotracheal ligament, 31
see also transverse fascia
94, 112
240, 241, 271
crista terminalis, 136-138
femoral fascia,
major tuberosity, 58, 86, 87, 91,
intermediate, 98
Cruciate ligaments (distal
medial, 289-291
112
radial, 83
 sesamoidean), 267
deep, 193
medial epicondyle, 93
ulnar, 83, 98
crural extensor retinaculum, 193, 206,
femoral ring, 269, 304
musculospiral groove, 92
see aiso carpus
207
femoral triangle, 291
surface features, 76, 112
carpal canal, 75, 102,103
crural fascia, 193, 206-208
femorotibial joint, see stife joint
hyoid apparatus, see individual bones 
carpal ligaments,
crus, 189-191
femur, 188, 189, 208-210
 lateral collateral, 83, 98
crus penis, 288, 289
articular surface,74, 202-205
cubital ligaments,
geater trochanter, 186, 188, 189,
I
medial collateral, 83
 carpal pad see chestmut
 lateral collateral, 94
197-204, 269, 272, 273, 276,
ileac orifce and papilla, 171
carpus,
 median collateral, 86
277
ileocaecal junction, 163
bones, see carpal bones
lateral condyle, 198, 199, 215,271
ileum, 125, 132, 144, 160-167
carpometacarpal articulation, 77
lesser trochanter, 202, 203
iliac fascia, 283-288, 304-308
D
extensor retinaculum, 86
medial condyle, 198, 199
iliopubic eminence, 304, 316, 317
fexor retinaculum, 86
dental alveoli, 3, 32, 33, 37-39, 44-46
third trochanter, 188-209, 272, 273,
ilium,
radiocarpal joint, 77, 96-103
dentition,
276, 277
gluteal line, 200, 202, 218, 219
synovial cavity and synovial
incisor(1, i), 4, 7, 45-48, 54
trochlea, 186,215,272,273
shaft, 186, 200, 202, 205, 225, 269,
sheath, 102, 103
molar (M), 4, 19, 23, 24, 32, 33,
tuberculum, 188, 198, 203, 204,
278-283,325
cartilage, see umder individual names
37-39, 44, 46, 49
206-208,210, 211
tuber coxae, 145, 188-197,202,
caudal fascia, 318, 319
premolar (P, p), 19,21, 23, 32, 33,
fetlock joint, see
218, 269, 271, 272-279, 283,
caudal vertebrae, 318-322
37, 38, 44-47, 49, 54
metacarpophaiangeal and
302, 303
 caval foramen, see diaphragm
see aiso dental alveoli
metatarsophalangeat joints
tuber sacrale, 188, 189, 218, 269,
ceratohyoid bone, 29
diaphragm,
fbula, 186, 187, 189, 190, 199, 271,
271, 277,279, 283, 302, 303
cerebrum, 41, 42
aortic hiatus, 145, 159,165, 171,
325
wing, 57,201,202,269, 271
falxcerebri, 41, 42, 43
174
see also tibia, lateral maileolus
incisive bone, 3, 38, 44-47, 326
gyni and sulci, 43
caval foramen, 129, 145
filum terminate, 323
infraorbital canal, 38, 39
location, 40
central tendon, 120, 122, 123, 132,
fexor retinaculum (carpus), 89, 90, 97,
infraorbital foramen, 6, 8, 1l, 22, 38,
cervix, see uterus
156, 158, 160
102, 241
39, 44-46
chestnut,
costal attachments, 120, 122, 131,
fexor retinaculum (hock), 211
inguinal canal, 270, 275, 284-286
carpal pad, 231
151,156,158,160
foramen, see umder individual names 
inguinal ligament, 290-293
tarsal pad, 247
costal part, 132-133
foramen ovate (heart), 11l, 142
inguinal ring,
choanae,47-49
costodiaphragmatic recess, 122
fossa glandis, 274, 295, 296
deep, 270, 274, 275, 282, 284-289,
chondrocoronal ligaments, 236,
crura, see lumbar part
frontal bones, 33, 37, 3942, 44, 46-51,
307, 308, 304
237
cupola, 112, 122
53
superfcial,269,270,275,285,290,
chordae tendineae, 128, 137
lumbar part, 156-159, 161, 168,
mterfrontal suture, 41
291, 306-308
 coffn joint, see interphalangeal joint,
170-172
temporal line, 6,8,32, 33,37,40
interphalangeal joint,
distal
oesophageal hiatus, 157, 159-16l,
Zygomaticofrontal process, 6, 8, 10,
distal (coffn), 225, 226, 228-231,
colon, ascending,
172, 181
11, 32, 33, 37, 39, 52, 53
236, 244, 246
diaphragmatic fexure, 158, 162,
stemal part, 131, 151, 156
frontal sinus, see paranasal sinus
proximal (pasterm), 225, 228-231,
164
diaphragmatic line of pleural
233-235, 244-247
left dorsal, 144, 156-158, 160, 164,
reflection, 112, 122, 132
interspinous ligament, 68, 72, 320
180
digital cushion, 236-239, 260, 261
G
intervenous tubercle, 137, 138
left ventral, 144, 156, 158, 160,
dorsoscapular ligament, 81, 116
ganglion aorticorenalia, 174, 175
intestine, see caecum, colon,
164, 180
ductus arteriosus,1ll,142
ganglion cervicale medium, 25, 65, 68,
duodenum, ileum, jejunum
origin, 166
ductus deferens, 275, 292, 293
124-127
ischiatic foramen,
pelvic fexure, 158, 169, 171
ganglion cervicothoracicum, 66-68,
greater,196,201,205,27,
right dorsal, 144,166-173
ductus thoracicus, 68, 122-134, 138,
123-125, 135
lesser, 196, 205, 277,278,302
right ventral, 144, 166-171
141
ganglion coel acum, 165, 172
ischium, 188, 189, 223, 269, 278-287,
stermal flexure, 158
duodenum, 144, 145, 168-171, 173
 ganglion stellatum, see ganglion
302, 318
transverse, 144, 161
dura mater, 43, 317
cervicothoracicum
spine, 205
346
tuber ischiadicum, 188, 189, 192,
lnn. colici, 166-171
tuberosity, 99-101, 228, 229
m. extensor digitorum communis, 82,
196, 200-204, 273, 278-285
1n. coxalis, 302
IV, 77, 99-103, 227, 228-235,
86,87, 92,94, 98-101, 232-239
lnn. cubitales, 88, 89, 90, 93, 96
240-243,336, 337
m. extensor digitorum lateralis, 87, 88,
ln. hepaticus, 183
metacarpal fascia, deep, 98-101, 235
94, 98-101, 193-195, 198-199,
ln. iliacus medialis, 177
metacarpophalangeal joint, 228-231,
202, 207-212, 214-216, 217, 218,
jejunum, 144, 145, 162, 163
In. inguinale profumdum, 205, 278,
233-236, 240-242, 338, 339
221
joint, see under individual names
279, 282, 283, 303
metacarpus, 87, 88, 228-231
m. extensor digitorum longus,
Inn. inguinales superficiales, 278, 279,
metatarsal bones:
193-195, 197-199, 202, 207-215,
282, 306-309
I1, 187, 191,213,214,216,221,
217, 189, 248-255, 260, 262-265
K
ln. ischiadicus, 196, 277
228, 231, 244, 342
m. fibularis (peroneus) tertius, 207,
kidney,
lnn. lienalis, 159, 160
III,213,214,221,244-247,342
210, 212-214
left, 160-165
ln. lumbalis aorticus, 174
IV, 187, 212-214, 221, 244-247,
m. flexor carpi radialis, 82, 85, 86, 89,
right, 168-175
ln. mandibulare, 13-15, 18, 20, 22,
342
.90, 95-97, 102
24-29
metatarsal pad (ergot), 241, 245, 264
m. fHexor carpi ulnaris, 83, 85, 88-90
L
 ln. mediastinalis cranialis, 124, 134,
metatarsophalangeal joint, 244-251,
m. Hexor digiti I 1ongus 193-195, 202,
137
253, 255, 259-264, 267
206-217, 221
 labium, mandibular, 6-9
In. mediastinalis medius, 130, 138
metatarsus, 187, 191, 244-246, 259
m. flexor digitorum longus, 193,
maxillary, 4, 6-9
ln. parotideum, 14, 15
mouth,
206-209, 211, 213-217, 221, 263
vulvae, 218, 299, 307
In. popliteus, 195,197,200,218
angle,47,48
m. flexor digitorum profundus, 87, 88,
lacrimal bone, 38-41, 44, 50-53
lnn. renales, 172, 174, 175
labia, 6-9
94-103, 193, 194,206, 209-216,
lacrimal caruncle, 35
ln. retropharyngeus lateralis, 16, 17,
see also oral cavity
221,232-239,248-255,260,
lacrimal duct, 3, 39
20, 24, 25, 57
muscle, see musculus/musculi
262-265
lacrimal lake, 35
In. retropharyngeus medialis, 16, 17,
musculus/musculi:
m. flexor digitorum superficialis,
large intestine, see caecum and colon
19, 20, 22, 25, 27, 29, 59, 62
m abductor digiti I longus, 86-90, 94,
95-103, 193-195, 207-215, 217,
larynx, 2,3, 5,28-31, 56, 57, 110, 332
 ln. stermalis cranialis, 124, 126,
97, 99-102
220, 221, 232-235, 240-243,
laryngeal aditus, 29
133-136
m adductor, 195, 200-205,207,
248-255, 260, 262-265
laryngeal pharynx, 29, 30
ln. subiliacus, 152, 181, 192, 196, 217,
219-224, 278, 282
m. frontoscutularis, 10-12, 14, 16, 50
laryngeal saccule, 31
300
m arytenoideus transversus 31
m. gastrocnemius, 193, 195, 199, 200,
lgament, see umder individual names
 ln. tracheobronchalis medius, 126-130,
m biceps brachii, 82, 85-93
203-212,215,218,224
ligamentum arteriosum, 126-130
135-138, 142, 170
lacertus fbrosus, 86-93
mm. gemelli, 197, 201, 204, 205,
lgamentum favum, 319-323
ln. tracheobronchalis sinister, 124,
m biceps femoris, 192-194, 272, 273,
278-284
ligamentum nuchae, 67-69, 72
130, 142
276-280, 318-322
m. genioglossus, 26
hnea alba, 131, 145, 275, 300
m biventer cervicis, 67
m. geniohyoideus, 19, 21, 26
lngual apex, 7
m brachialis, 75, 85-87, 92, 93
m. gluteus accessorius, 196, 302, 303
lngual papillae,
M
m brachiocephalicus, 59, 133
m. gluteus medius, 192, 194, 196, 201,
filiform, 23, 26, 47
mammary gland, 184
see also mm. cleidobrachialis and
272-274, 276, 277, 318-322
fungiform, 21, 45, 47
lateral suspensory lamina, 304,
cleidomastoideus
m. gluteus profundus, 277, 278-287,
vallate, 47,49
305
m buccinator, 10-14, 18, 36
302, 303
liver,
see aiso scrotum, suspensory
m bulbospongiosus, 206, 279-289,
m. gluteus superfcialis, 192, 318-322
caudate process, 145, 168-169, 183
laminae
294-295
m. gracilis, 201, 205, 206, 211, 215,
falciform ligament, 183
mandible, 3,4, 16-22, 57,331
m caninus, 10, 11, 13
219-223, 273, 278-283, 290, 291,
left lateral1obe, 158, 160, 176, 180,
condyle, 8, 14, 37, 50, 51, 53
m capsularis, 203, 278-280, 284,285
303-308
182
coronoid process, 37, 38
m cleidobrachialis, 60,61, 78, 79, 82,
m. hyoglossus, 16-19, 25-29
left medial 1obe, 160, 182
insertions, m. masseter, 14
87-90
m. hyopharyngeus, 20, 24-27
left triangular ligament, 159, 176
mental foramen, 8, 11, 13, 22, 37
m cleidocephalicus, 10, 14, 16, 78, 79
m. iliacus, 196-205, 218, 219, 222-224,
night coronary ligament, 168
ramus, 8
m cleidomastoideus, 36, 59-61
276, 277, 283-287, 302, 303
right lateral 1obe, 167-169, 178
vascular notch, 13,22
m coccygeus, 279-281
m. iliocostalis, 6l, 62, 64
right medial lobe, 167-169, 178
mandibular gland, 13-17, 19, 20, 22
m complexus, 67
m. iliocostalis cervicis, 66, 67, 71, 81,
right triangular ligament, 168, 176,
duct, 17-20
m constrictor vestibuli, 29, 31
116, 118, 120, 124
178
mandibular labium, 6-9, 54
m coracobrachialis, 86, 89-93
m. iliocostalis lumborum, 150, 151
lung,
manica fexoria, 235, 254
m cornugator supercili, 50
m. iliocostalis thoracis, 67-70, 81,
left, cardiac notch, 121, 122
m cremaster, 282-287, 290-293
116-123, 132
left, caudal border, 120-123
bones, 228-231
m cricoarytenoideus dorsalis, 30, 31
m. iliopsoas, 204, 279, 280
left, caudal lobe, 120-123
hoof, 236, 237
m cricoarytenoideus lateralis, 31
see also m. iliacus, m. psoas major
left, cranial border, 120-123
maxilla, 3,4, 13, 32, 33, 37,45,47,
m cricopharyngeus, 15, 16, 19-22,
m. infraspinatus, 75, 78, 79, 86, 87,
left, cranial lobe, 120-123
48-53, 57
24-28, 62
91, 92
left, dorsal border, 120-123
dental alveoli, 3, 32, 33, 38, 39, 44,
m cricothyroideus, 27-31
mm. intercostales extemi, 81, 92,
right, accessory lobe, 125, 126
46
m cutaneus colli, 58-60
114-119, 157
right, cardiac notch,132,133
lacrimal groove, 46
m cutaneus femoris, 194
mm. intercostales intermi, 1l6-119,
right, caudal lobe, 132, 133
tuberosity, 37, 38
m cutaneus omobrachialis, 78, 79,
122, 133, 148-151, 157, 166, 167
right, cranial lobe, 132, 133
 see also facial crest, zygomatic arch
113, 147-149
m. intercostobrachialis, 148, 149
right, dorsal border, 132, 133
maxillary labium, 6-9, 34, 35, 54
m cutaneus trunci, 78, 79,83, 84,
m. interosseus, 98-103, 232-235,
lymph node,
mediastinum,
113-117, 133, 147-151, 192
240-243, 248-255, 260-265
see lymphonodus/lymphonodi
caudal, 135
m deltoideus, 78, 79, 86, 87, 148
m. interscutularis, 12, 40
lymphonodus/lymphonodi:
cranial, 127
m depressor anguli oris, 11
mm. interspinales, 67, 72
hn. anorectales, 279, 280, 303, 306,
dorsal, 126, 130
m depressor labi mandibularis,
mm. intertransversari cervicis, 67, 69,
316
ventral, 128
10-13, 15, 18
71
h. axillaris, 80, 84, 85, 107
mental foramen, (mandible), 18, 11,
m depressor labi maxillaris, 15
m. ischiocavemosus, 205, 278-283
hn. caecales, 163, 164, 168-170, 176
13, 22, 37
m digastricus, 14-21, 24-29, 36,69
 m. latissimus dorsi, 78-80, 84,
h. cervicalis profundus caudalis,
mentum, &
pars occipitomandibutaris 14, 15
114-119, 148
62-65, 116,118, 120, 122, 124,
mesocolon, 162-165, 170, 274, 275,
venter rostralis 16, 17, 19
m. levator ani, 279-281, 302, 305, 306
133-137
300, 301
m dilator naris apicalis, 34
m. levator labi maxillaris, 10-13, 23,
 n. cervicalis profundus cranialis,
mesometrium, 309
m extensor carpi radialis, 82, 88-91,
34-36, 45-51
16-20, 24, 27, 59-62, 81
mesosalpinx, 177, 184, 301, 309
94, 98-103
m. levator nasolabialis, 10-13, 36, 50
h. cervicalis profundus medius, 62-64,
metacarpal bones:
m extensor carpi ulnaris, 83, 87, 88,
m. levator palpebrae superioris, 52, 53
66
II, 99-103, 227, 228, 230, 336, 337
94, 96, 97, 102
 m. levator veli palatini, 30
h. cervicalis superficialis, 60-63, 78,
IIl, 98-103, 228-235, 240-243, 336,
m extensor digitorum brevis, 212-214,
mm. levatores costarum, 71, 120
79, 81
337, 338, 339
217
 m. longissimus atlantis, 66
347
m. longissimus capitis, 10, 1l, 16, 20,
vagina m. recti abdominis, lamina
m. tensor veli palatini, 18, 25, 30
nm. clunium caudales, 192
59, 61, 66, 36
intema, 131, 300
m. teres major, 80, 84, 89-93, 149
nn. clunium medi, 192
m. longissimus cervicis, 63-67, 118-124
 m rectus capitis dorsalis major, 67-69,
m. teres minor, 87, 92
n. costoabdominalis, 148, 151
m. longissmus lumborum, 151
72
m. thyrohyoideus, 16, 25,27, 62
n. cutaneus antebrachii caudatis,
Hor
m. longissimus thoracis, 63-69, 72, 81,
m rectus capitis dorsalis minor, 70-72
m. thyropharyngeus, 16, 20, 24-28, 62
88-96
117-124, 133
m rectus femoris, 192, 194-204, 218,
m. tibialis caudalis, 195-209, 211-217
n. cutaneus antebrachi cranialis, 78,
The
m. longus capitis, 27, 29, 61-63, 66-70
219, 276-280, 284, 285, 302-304
m. tibialis cranialis, 193-195, 199, 202,
79, 92
m. longus colli, 62-71, 123-128, 130,
m rectus thoracis, 81, 116-120
206, 214, 217, 221
n. cutaneus antebrachi lateralis, 82,
138
m retractor bulbi, 49, 52, 53
m. transversus abdominis, 1l17-122,
91
m. malaris, 10-12, 50
m retractor costae, 118, 120, 122
150, 300
 n. cutaneus antebrachi medialis,
m. masseter, 5, 10-14, 32, 36, 44-53
m retractor penis, 206, 279-289
m. trapezius, 59,61, 113-117, 133,
86-88, 240, 241
m. multifdis cervicis, 68, 70
m rhomboideus, 115-118, 133
147-149
n. cutaneus colli (CII), 36
m. mylohyoideus, 15-21, 24, 26
m rhomboideus cervicis, 6l-63, 66,
m. triceps, 78, 79
n. cutaneus femoris caudalis, 194-197,
m. obliquus capitis caudalis, 10, 1l1,
81, 116-122
m. triceps brachi, 78-82, 86-93,
200-204, 218, 224, 276-280, 302,
16-20, 25, 29
m rhomboideus thoracis, 67, 68, 81
113-117, 147-149
305
m. obliquus capitis cranialis, 10, 11,
m sacrocaudalis dorsalis lateralis,
m. triceps surae, 209, 214, 216, 217
n. cutaneus femoris lateralis, 194-197,
16-20, 25, 29
200, 277, 279, 281, 283,
see also m. gastrocnemius. m.
219, 222, 223, 276, 277, 302
m. obliquus dorsalis, 49, 52, 53
302-305, 312
soleus
n. cutaneus surae caudalis, 193, 194,
Atlas
m. obliquus extemus abdominis,
 m sacrocaudalis dorsalis medialis,
m. ulnaris lateralis, see m. extensor
197, 200-204, 208-215, 218-221
113-116, 118-122
283-287, 318-319
carpi ulnaris
n. digitalis palmaris lateralis, 232, 233,
“abdominal tendon', 154, 290
 m sacrococcygeus ventralis lateralis,
Color
m. vastus intermedius, 200-204
242, 243
'pelvic tendon', 154, 290, 291
223, 279
m. vastus lateralis, 192-204, 218, 219,
n. digitalis palmaris medialis, 233, 243
m. obliquus intemus abdominis,
m sartorius, 200, 203-206, 220-224,
276, 277, 302, 303
n. digitalis plantaris lateralis, 248, 249,
115-121, 150-155, 192-198, 218,
278, 279
m. vastus medialis, 197-204, 222-224,
262-265
222-224, 276, 277
m scalenus dorsalis, 63, 64, 79, 80,
290, 291
n. digitalis plantaris medialis, 249,
m. obliquus ventralis, 52, 53
116-120, 133
m. vestibularis, 31
263, 265
m. obturatorius extermus, 205,
m scalenus ventralis, 61-64, 79-81,
m. vocalis, 31
n. facialisVIl, 10-18, 23, 36, 45
283-286, 303-305
116-120, 133
m. zygomaticoauricularis, 50
n. femoralis, 200, 203-205, 219, 223,
m. obturatorius intemus, 20l-205,
 m scutuloauricularis, 40
m. zygomaticus, 10-13, 50
224, 278-289, 303-306
222-224, 277-279, 287, 288,
m semimembranosus, 187, 192,
n. fbularis communis, 195-204,
302-306
195-208, 215, 218-223, 276-278
207-213, 217, 218, 277
N
m. occipitohyoideus, 16, 19, 20, 25,
m semispinalis capitis, 63, 66, 67
n. fibularis profundus, 195-204,
69
m semitendinosus, 56, 192-209,
nares,
207-213
m. omohyoideus, 10-16, 20, 22, 24,
218-223, 272, 273, 276, 277,
see nostril
n. fbularis superfcialis, 193-195, 199,
27-30, 36, 56, 59-62, 78, 79
318-322
nasal bone, 11, 13, 32-38, 44-46,
207-213, 216, 217
m. omotransversarius, 59-66, 78, 79
m serratus, scapular origins, 87,
50-53, 326
n. frontalis, 1l, 12, 52, 53
m. orbicularis oculi, 12, 50-53
89-91
nasal, cartilage, dorsal, 45
n. genitofemoralis, 279, 282-286,
m. orbicularis oris, 11, 13
m serratus dorsalis caudalis, 114-119,
nasal cavity, common ventral meatus,
304-308
m. palatopharyngeus, 16-19, 24, 25,
149, 150
3,4, 34, 35, 45, 110
n. glossopharyngeus [X, 17-20, 24-30
28
m serratus dorsalis cranialis, ll4-119,
nasal concha,
n. gluteus caudalis, 194-20l, 218,
m. parietoauricularis, 40
149, 150
dorsal, 3, 32-39, 43-49
277-281, 302
 m. parotidoauricularis, 10-14
m serratus ventralis cervicis, 59-63,
middle, 47, 49
n. gluteus cranialis, 196, 197, 201, 205,
m. pectineus,203-205,209,222,9,
78-81, 84, 92, 93, 133
ventral, 3, 32, 39, 48, 49
277-280, 302
278-286, 290
m serratus ventralis thoracis, 63,
see also ethmoid bone
n. hypogastricus, 219, 306-308
m. pectoralis ascendens, 63, 80-86, 89,
78-81, 84, 92, 114-119, 148
nasal diverticulum, 3, 6, 8-13, 35, 45,
n. hypoglossus Xll, 17-30
90, 93, 113-116, 132-138,
m soleus, 194, 195, 202
100
n. ilioinguinalis, 307, 308
147-149
m sphincter ani extermus, 278-281,
nasal meatuses, 42, 47, 48
n. infraorbitalis, 13, 18, 23, 32-36, 44,
m. pectoralis descendens, 60-63,
302-306
nasal septum, 34, 47-49, 331
45, 49
78-84, 132-138
mm. spinalis et semispinalis thoracis
mucosa, 47
nm. intercostales, 114-119, 148-151,
m. pectoralis transversus, 60, 82, 84,
et cervices, 67-70, 72, 117, 133,
nasoincisive notch, 6-11, 32, 38, 44-46,
159
85
151
326
n. intercostobrachialis, 78, 79,
 m. peroneus tertius see m. fbularis
m splenius, 10, 11, 14, 36, 61-67, 81,
nasolacrimal duct, 9, 32-34,46
114-119, 148, 149
tertius
116-123, 133
 nasomaxillary opening, 3, 46
n. ischiadicus, 196-205, 218, 219, 224,
m. popliteus, 206-211, 215-217
m stermocephalicus, 59-68, 71, 121,
nasopharynx, 29,47,48,56,110,331
277-279, 302-306
m. psoas major, 165, 174, 222, 274,
133, 134
navicular bone, see distal sesamoid
n. laryngeus caudalis, 27-31
275, 288, 289, 300, 303-306,
 see also m. stenmomandibularis
bone
n. laryngeus craniatis, 17-30, 62
308-311
m stermohyoideus, 10, 16, 24, 29, 30,
nerve, see nervus/nervi
n. laryngeus recurrens, 64-67, 124-130,
m. psoas minor, 132, 165, 172, 174,
56, 59, 61-64
nervus/nervi:
133, 134, 138
175, 274, 288, 289, 300, 304-306
m stermomandibularis, 10, 1l, 14-16,
n. abducens, 53
n. lingualis, 15-18, 21
m. pterygoideus lateralis, 15, 16, 18
20-22, 36, 133
n. accessorius XI, 19, 20, 24, 30, 31,
nn. lumbales, 192
 m. pterygoideus medialis, 15
 see also m. stermocephalicus
59, 69
n. mandibularis, 18, 19, 25, 30
m. pterygopharyngeus, 18, 19, 24, 27,
m stemothyrohyoideus, 27-31, 63-68,
n. alveolaris mandibularis, 15, 17, n.
n. massetericus, 14, 51
28
72, 81, 133
auriculopalpebralis, 11-17, 36,
n. medianus, 79, 80, 84-90, 93-97, 102
m. quadratus femoris, 196, 197, 200,
see aiso m. stemohyoideus, m.
50-53
n. mentalis, 18-23
205,218, 219, 276-282
stermothyroideus
n. auriculotemporalis, 11-14
n. metacarpeus palmaris lateralis, 232,
m. quadriceps femoris, 202, 203, 215
m stermothyroideus, 63, 64, 134
n. axillaris, 79, 80, 84, 85, 89-93
233, 242
 see also m. rectus femoris, m.
m styloglossus, 16-19, 24-28
n. buccalis, 14-18, 22-24
 n. metacarpeus palmaris medialis,
vastus intermedius, lateralis,
m stylohyoideus, 15-20, 24-31
n. cardiacus cervicothoracicus,
243
medialis
 m stylopharyngeus, 20, 24-28, 31
127-129, 134
n. metatarseus dorsalis II, 212-214,
m. rectus,
m subclavius, 59-63, 78-81, 84,
nm. caudales, 319-322
221, 248
dorsalis, 52, 53
116-120, 129, 132-138
nn. cervicales,
n. metalarseus dorsalis Il, 213,
lateralis, 52, 53
m. subscapularis, 80, 84, 89-93
n. cervicalis I, 19, 20, 24, 69, 72
248-255
medialis, 49
m supraspinatus, 59,61, 78, 79, 84-93
n. cervicalis II, 10, 14, 70, 72
n. musculocutaneus, 79, 80, 84, 85, 93
ventralis, 52, 53
m temporalis, 32, 33, 40-43, 51-53
n. cervicalis Il, 59, 61, 68
n. mylohyoideus, 15, 17
m. rectus abdominis, 1l6-122, 194,
m tensor fasciae antebrachii, 78, 79,
n. cervicalis IV, 59-64
n. obturatorius, 205, 220-224,
202, 291,301, 308
83-90, 93, 114-119, 148, 149
n. cervicalis V, 59-66, 70
278-283, 287, 303-306, 309
vagina m. recti abdominis, lamina
m tensor fasciae latae, 195, 222-224,
n. cervicalis Vl, 59, 66, 70-72
n. oculomotorius IIl, 52, 53
extema, 309
276, 277
n. cervicalis VIl, VIII, 71
n. olfactorius I, 47
348
n. opticus II, 47, 49
orbit, 2,4,33,38, 39, 50
philtrum, 6, 7
vaginal process, 269, 270, 278-282,
n. palatinus major, 49
foramina, 38, 39
pia mater, 43
285
n. palmaris lateralis, 95-103, 232,
oropharynx,47,48,49
pinma, 40, 41
see also mammary gland,
240-243
ovarian bursa, 301, 309
plantar ligament, long (hock), 21l-214
suspensory lamina
n. palmaris medialis, 95, 96, 98, 99,
ovary, 177-181, 270, 300, 301,
plantar ligaments, proximal
scutiform cartilage, 6, 8, 10, 15, 16,
102,103,232,233,240-243
309-312
interphalangeal joint, 225, 226,
40-42, 50, 51
5
n. pectoralis caudalis, 79-85, 116-120
corpus lutem, 309
250, 252,253, 255, 256, 258,
sesamoid bones,
n. pectoralis cranialis, 84, 85
infundibulum, 301, 309
259, 267
distal (manus), 230, 236
n. pelvinus, 219, 220, 304-311
ligaments,
 pleura, pleural reflection,
distal (pes), 245, 246, 254, 255,
n. peroneus, see n. fbularis
proper, 300, 301, 309, 310
diaphragmatic line, 120, 122, 132
257, 260, 268
n. phrenicus, 63,65,81, 116-122,128,
suspensory, 301, 309, 310
pleural cavity, 125, 140
proximal (manus), 225, 227,
167, 168, 176, 180
mesovarium, 300
plexus brachialis, 63-66, 71, 79-81,
229-233, 235
n. plantaris lateralis, 21l-215, 217,
116-127, 133-135
proximal (pes), 245-247, 251, 252,
221, 248, 249, 262, 264, 265
plexus caudalis dorsalis, 318-323
254, 255, 260, 267
n. plantaris medialis, 211-215, 221,
P
plexus coeliacus, 165
sesamoidean ligaments,
249, 262-265
 palate,
plexus coronarius, 236-239
collateral, 250, 251
n. pudendus, 219-224, 279-289, 303,
hard, 47,48
plexus intermesentericus, 172, 174
distal sesamoidean, 250-255,
305
soft, 4, 5, 29-31, 47-49, 56
plexus lienalis, 159, 161, 163
259-261, 267
n. radialis, 79, 80, 84, 85, 89-94
palatine bones, 3, 47-49
plexus mesenterica cranialis, 175
distal sesamoid impar, 236-239,
n. rectalis caudalis, 219, 279-281, 302,
palatine glands, 24-31
plexus palmaris
254, 255, 257
303, 311
palatine sinus, see paranasal sinus
plexus parietalis, 237-239, 261
mtersesamoidean, 254,255, 267
n. saphenus, 193, 204, 206, 219-222,
palmar ligaments, proximal
plexus pelvinus, 305
sinus communicans, 42, 43
262, 263, 278, 279, 303
interphalangeal joint, 225, 226,
plexus plantaris, 258, 261
sinus coronarius, 139
rm. spinates, 78, 79
234, 235
podotrochlear bursa, 236, 238, 254,
sinus occipitalis dorsalis, 43
n. splanchnicus, 159, 161, 163, 165,
palpebra, II, 4, 35
255
sinus petrosus dorsalis, 43
171, 172, 175
palpebral fissure, 6, 8, 49
poverty line', 272, 273, 276
sinus sagittalis dorsalis,42, 43
n. subscapularis, 79, 80, 84, 85, 89-93
pancreas, 161-163, 171-173, 179
prepubic tendon, 269, 275, 304
sinus temporalis, 42, 43
m. supraclaviculares, 60, 61, 78, 79
duct, 145, 173
prepuce, 270, 274, 289-291, 294-298
sinus transversus, 42,43
n. suprascapularis, 79, 80, 84, 85,
panniculus adiposus, 147
preputial orifice, 290, 294-298
sinus urethralis, 274
89-93
panniculus camosus, 147
pubic brim, 310
sinus v. buccalis, 14, 36
m. thoracici, 1l6-119
paraconal interventricular groove,
pubis, 222-224, 270, 300, 307-317
sinus v. profunda faciei, 14, 36
n. thoracicus lateralis, 79, 80, 84, 85,
130
pulmonary valve, 110, 128-130
sinus v. transversa faciei, 14, 36
116-120
paranasal sinus,
punctum lacrimale, 35
 sinus venarum cavarum
n. thoracicus longus, 63,116,118,
frontal, 32, 33, 37-39, 41-44
pylorus, 172,179
sk ull,
120
maxillary,
bones, 7, 9, 37-46
n. thoracodorsalis, 79, 80, 84, 116,
caudal, 32, 33, 37-39, 46
see also under individual names
R
118, 120
rostral, 32, 33, 37-39, 46
 small intestine,
n. tibialis, 193-197, 200-211, 214-221,
palatine, 28
radiocarpal joint, 77, 96-103, 337
 see duodenum, ileum, jejunum
263, 277
sphenopalatine, 39, 47
radius, 74,75,77,82,94,95,325, 336,
spermatic cord, 270, 274, 291-293
n. trochlearis IV, 53
 parietal bones, 40-43
337
 sphenopalatine sinus, see paranasal
n. ulnaris, 83-90, 93-103, 240-243
parotid gland, 10-13, 50-53
lateral styloid process, 86, 88, 98,
sinus
n. vagus X, 20, 25, 28-31, 69, 124-130,
pasterm joint, see interphalangeal
325
spleen, 144, 145, 156, 157, 176, 180
133-137
joint, proximal
lateral tuberosity, 58, 74, 76, 87, 88
splint bones,
see also t. vagalis X dorsalis, t.
patella, 186, 188-190, 193-195,
medial styloid process, 82, 86, 88,
see metacarpals II & IV and see
vagalis X ventralis
197-199
97-102, 228,231
metatarsals II & IV
n. vertebralis, 66, 67, 71
accessory cartilage, 207, 208
rectum, 110, 269, 270, 274, 275,
stermopericardial ligament, 123, 125,
n. zygomaticus, 52
303-312
ligament,
131, 138
nostril,
intermediate, 74, 186, 188,
rate carpi rinrsale, 93, 88, 98
stermum,
alar cartilage, 3, 9, 11, 34, 35, 45,
194-198
retina, 3,47, 75
manubrium, 118, 121
46
lateral, 186, 187, 193-200, 206,
ribs, 112, 118-122, 130-135
xiphoid cartilage, 131
alar fold of ventral concha, 9, 35,
272
stife joint, 186, 194-199, 202, 206-211
45, 46, 48
medial, 186, 187,198, 199,
capsule, 208
S
dorsal cartilage, 45
206-208, 210
collateral ligament,
dorsal commissure, 9
pelvic fascia, 308, 313
acroiliac articulation, 273, 304
lateral, 186, 195-199, 207
lateral ala, 6, 8, 35, 45
pelvis,
Mcroiliac ligament,
medial, 186, 207, 208
medial ala, 6, 35
bones, 146, 188-190
dorsal, 196, 218-222, 280, 302
femoropatellar ligament, 197, 204
ventral commissure, 9
see also ilium, ischium, obturator
ventral, 304-306
see also femur, patella, tibia
nuchal ligament, 56, 67-69, 72
foramen, pubis
Mcrotuberous ligament, 194, 197,
stomach,
penis, 205, 206, 270, 274, 278-290,
200-205, 218, 219, 222, 276-281,
cardia, 179
294-298
302-305, 316
fundus (saccus caecus), 159-164,
0
see also glans penis, crus penis
acrum, 188, 202, 279-281, 289, 310,
179-181
obturator foramen, 269, 303, 306, 307,
penicardium, 121-125
311, 318-322
greater curvature, 158-164, 176,
316, 317
 see aiso stemopericardial ligament
alivary gland, see buccal,
180, 181
occipital bone,
perineal raphe, 295, 299
mandibular, parotid, palatine
lesser curvature, 159-162, 181
condyle,70,72, 186,271
perineal region, 270, 290, 295,299
and sublingual glands 
pylorus, 172,179
jugular process, 69
periople, 228-234, 238, 239,
scapula, 56, 57, 58,74,75,76, 112
stylohyoid bone, 15-20, 24-31, 57, 330,
protuberance, 40, 70, 72
244-247
cartilage,3,56,57,87,91,93
332, 333, 334
 ocular angle,
periorbita, 2, 44, 46, 52, 53
coracoid process, 91, 93
subarachnoid cavity, 43
lateral, 35, 44
pes,
spine, 91,111, 145,271
sublingual gland, 18, 19, 21
medial, 4, 50
bones, 244-247
supraglenoid tubercle, 91, 93
subsinuosal interventricular groove,
oesophagus, 3, 27-31, 56, 57, 63, 68
hoof, 256-261
scrotum, 269, 270, 290-293
138
oesophageal hiatus, see diaphragm
phalanges, see manus, pes
dartos tunic and fascia, 291
supraorbital adipose tissue, 40, 50
olecranon, see ulna
pharyngeal recess, 53
lateral suspensory lamina, 282-284,
supraorbital foramen, 6, 32, 33, 37-39,
olfactory bulb, 43
pharyngeal wall,28, 29
290
46-53
omentum, greater, 157-164, 269
pharynx,
medial suspensory lamina, 283-287,
suprarenal gland, see adrenal gland
 oral cavity,
laryngeal part, 3, 24, 27-31
290, 291
supraspinous ligament, 68, 70, 72
vestibule, 7
 nasal part, 29
raphe, 290, 295
 suspensory ligament, see m.
see also mouth
 oral part, 29
septum (dartos), 291
interosseus
349
symphyseal tendon, 278, 283-287,
t. trachealis, 62, 64, 121-123
v. colica dextra, 164
. profunda faciei, 14, 15,18,23, 36,
304-307, 313
t. vagalis X dorsalis, 126-130, 158,
v. collateralis ulnaris, 83-85, 230-243
53
163, 168, 180
v. cordis magna, 128, 130
v. profunda femoris, 205, 222, 278,
t. vagalis X ventralis, 126-130, 158,
v. cordis magna dextra, 136-139
282, 283, 303
Hor
T
163, 168, 180
v. coronalis, 248, 249
v. pudenda extema, 220, 222, 275,
talus, 186, 191, 210-214, 221, 244-247,
t. vagosympathicus, 27-30,62-64, 125,
v. costocervicalis, 127,128, 135-137
279-289, 302, 303, 316, 317
The
342
126, 133
v. digitalis dorsalis communis Il, 213,
v. pudenda interma, 197, 20l-205, 218,
lateral trochlea, 186, 212-214, 342
tuber coxae, see ilium
221, 249, 262, 263, 265
220, 223, 224, 294, 295
medial trochlea, 210, 212-214, 244,
tuber ischiadicum, see ischium
v. digitalis lateralis, 232, 233, 240-242,
v. pudendoepigastricus, 284, 285, 304
246, 247, 342
tuber sacrale, see ilium
248-253, 262-265
v. pulmonalis, 126-130, 160, 168, 170
tarsal bones,
tunica albuginea (testis), 290, 291
v. digitalis medialis, 233, 241, 243,
v. radialis, 83,88-90, 95-102, 240-243
central, 221, 244-247
tunica dartos, see scrotum
248-255,262-265
V. saphenalateralis,192195,20614,
frst and second (fused), 227, 246,
tunica vaginalis, see vaginal process
v. digitalis palmaris communis II, 232,
220-224, 262, 289-291
247, 342, 343
233, 7, 15-243
v. saphena medialis, 206-214, 224,
fourth, 227, 244-247, 342, 343
U
v. digitalis palmaris communis IIl,
262, 263, 314
third, 186, 221, 244-247, 342, 343
233, 240-243
v. sphenopalatina, 47
see also calcaneus, talus
ulna, olecranon, 74, 76-78
v. digitalis plantaris communis III,
v. sublingualis, 15-21, 28
tarsal pad, see chestnut
see also radius, lateral styloid
248
v. subscapularis, 80, 84, 85
Atlas
tarsus,
process
 see also v. plantaris lateralis
v. suprascapularis, 79, 80
bones, see tarsal bones extensor
umbilical cord, 270, 285, 295
v. dorsalis nasi, 1l, 32
v. tarsea perforans, 212, 217
retinaculum, 207, 210, 212
mmbilicus, 295
v. dorsalis penis, 206
v. testicularis, 290-293
Color
fexor retinaculum, 75, 21l, 216
ureter, 172, 174, 175, 274, 275, 288,
v. epigastrica caudalis, 220, 291, 300,
v. thoracica extema, 84, 85
superfcial structures, 193
301, 313
308, 314
v. thoracica intema, 148, 149
surface features, 191, 244-247
urethra, pelvic, 313
v. epigastrica cranialis, 113, 131
v. thoracica superficialis, 78-80, 83-85,
tarsocnural joint, 186, 21l-214
urethral process, 274, 294-298
v. facialis, 10-20, 25, 32, 33, 36
113-115
 tarsometatarsal articulation,
uinary bladder, 274, 275, 288, 300,
v. femoralis, 195, 201-204, 218-224,
v. thoracodorsalis, 80, 84, 85
244-247
312-313
278-285, 303, 316, 317
v. tibialis caudalis, 193, 214, 263
temporal bone, 2, 50, 52
see also vesicular ligaments
v. glutea caudalis, 277,302, 306-311
v. tibialis cranialis, 221
mandibular fossa, 37
uterine tube, 177, 300, 301
v. glutea cranialis, 302-305, 308-311
v. transversa cubiti, 86, 88-90, 94
see aiso zygomatic arch
 infundibulum, 300, 301
v. ileocolica, 168, 176
v. transversa faciei, 11-18, 23, 36, 50
temporal line, 41, 50
uterus,
v. iliaca communis, 300, 301l, 311,
v. umbilicalis, 182-184
see also frontal bone temporal
cervix, 312
312
v. vaginalis, 222
fossa, 32, 41
non-pregnant, 177
v. iliaca exterma, 220, 222-224
v. vertebralic, 72
temporomandibular joint, 5, 10, 14,
pregnant, 178, 179, 181, 300, 301,
v. iliaca interma, 220, 223, 224
v. vorticosa, 52, 53
16, 36, 57
309, 310
v. iliacofemoralis, 277, 278, 280,
ventricle,
tendo calcaneus communis, 206-216
302-308
left, 126-130, 136-139
testis, 269, 270, 290-293
v. intercostalis, 136, 159, 176
right, 130, 135-139
thoracic vertebrae, 58, 70-72, 78, 79,
1
v. intercostalis dorsalis, 138, 142
vertebra,
149, 271
vagina, 145, 269, 270, 300, 305-312
v. interossea communis, 87, 88, 94
caudal, 318-322
 thoracolumbar fascia
vagina m. recti abdominis, see m.
v. interventricularis paraconalis,
cervical, 56, 58
thymus, 121-126, 132-137
rectus abdominis
126
lumbar, 146, 271
thyrohyoid bone, 19, 20, 24-31, 333
vaginal process, 269, 270, 275, 278,
v. jugularis exterma, 10, 14, 36, 59-68,
sacral, 188, 271
thyroid cartilage, 20, 25-31
279, 282-285, 290-293
78-81, 116-127, 133-135
thoracic, 78, 79, 271
thyroid gland,27-31,56,62,66-70
vasa efferentia lymphatica, 133, 134
v. labialis communis, 13, 18, 36
see also atlas, axis
ibia, 342, 343
vein, see vena/venae
v. labialis mandibularis, 18
vesicular ligament (urinary bladder)
crest, 189, 193
vena/venae,
v. labialis maxillaris, 18
laterial, 184, 274
extensor suicus, 189, 190,272
v. alveolaris mandibularis, 25
v. labialis ventralis, 307-309, 314
median, 184, 300
lateral condyle, 189, 190, 195, 272
v. angularis oculi, 11, 32
v. lateralis nasi, 32, 36
vestibule (vaginal), 312
lateral malleolus, 186, 193, 212-214
v. axillaris, 63, 65, 80, 84, 85
v. lienalis, 159, 163
vomer, 47-49
medial malleolus, 191, 193,
v. azygos, 135-138, 168-171, 176,
v. lingualis, 25, 28
vulva, 218, 270, 299, 307
212-214, 262, 263
178
v. linquofacialis, 10-13, 16-24, 27, 36,
tuberosity, 186, 189, 193-195, 197,
v. brachialis, 89, 90
59, 61
W
215
v. buccalis, 14-19, 36
v. malleolaris caudalis lateralis,
tibial extensor retinaculum, 210-215
v. caudalis femoris, 195, 20l, 218,
221
withers, 57, 58, 76, 325
tongue,3,4,18,19,1,50,56
219
v. marginis solearis, 239
 see also thoracic vertebrae
see also lingual apex, lingual
v. cava caudalis, 159, 167-175, 274,
v. masseterica, 36
wolf tooth (P), 21, 23
 papillae, individual muscles
275
v. masseterica ventralis, 36
tooth, see dentition
foramen, 129
v. maxillaris, 10-20, 24, 25, 36, 61
trachea, 3, 27, 56, 57, 62-71, 110, 127,
v. cava cranialis, 65, 126, 127, 133,
v. mediana, 83-90, 93-102, 240-243
X
133-136, 332
136-139
v. metatarsea dorsalis [I, 212-214,
xiphistemum, 131
transverse fascia, 155, 177, 274, 275,
v. cephalica, 65, 78-85, 95-101,
221, 263-265
308
116-127, 133, 134, 240-243
v. obturatoria, 277, 278-287
Y
truncus,
v. cephalica accessoria, 60, 82, 86, 89,
v. occipitalis, 19, 20, 24, 27, 30, 36,
t. bicaroticus, 124, 134,138
90
61
 yellow abdominal tunic, see
t. brachiocephalicus, 4, 13-130,
W. cerebri dorsales, 42
v. oesophagea, 178
 abdominal tunic, yellow
136-139
v. circumfexa femoris lateralis, 203,
v. ovarica, 179, 300, 301
t. costocervicalis, 4, 15, 134-138
204, 205, 224
V. palatina major,47, 48
t. linguofacialis, 27, 28
v. circumflexa femoris medialis, 196,
V. perinealis ventralis, 219
Z
t. massetericus, 14
200, 201, 224
v. phrenica cranialis, 178, 180
zygomatic arch, 6, 8, 10-12, 22, 33, 50,
t. pudendoepigastricus,222-224, 284,
v. circumflexa ilium profunda, 179,
v. plantaris lateralis, 212, 213, 221
51
304
181, 192-197, 220-224, 276, 277,
 see also v. digitalis plantaris
 see also zygomatic, maxillary and
t. pulmonalis, 123-130, 138, 139
300-304, 310, 311
communis III
temporal bones
t sympathicus, 30, 123-127, 134, 138,
w. circumfexa penis, 279, 281-289
v. poplitea, 224
zygomatic bone, 44, 47-53
172-176
v. clitoridis media, 313, 314
v. portae, 172, 174, 175, 179
zygomaticofrontal process, 50-53
350