JRA
Colour Manual
Diseases
sofBirds
Japan International Agricultural Council
Colour Manual
Diseases of Birds
Editedby
Japanese Society on Poultry Diseases
Japan International Agricultual Council
March, 2000
Editing committee (OThe chairman)
Yoshiji Ando (National Institute of Animal Health)
Jane K.A. Cook (Former: Houghiton Lab., AFRC Institutc for Animal Hcalth, UK)
Hiroshi Hihara (National Institute of Animal Health)
 Isamu Inoue (School of Veterinary Medicine, Nihon University)
Minoru Maeda (Research Institute for Animal Science)
Kikuyasu Nakamura (National Institute of Animal Hcalih)
Koichi Otsuki (School of Vcterinary Mcdicine, Totiori University)
(Shizuo Sato (Zen-Noh Institutc of Animal Health)
Kameo Shimura (National Institute of animal Health)
Toshiaki Taniguchi (National Insitute of Animal Hcalth)
Shigeo Yamaguchi (National Institute of Animal Hcalth)
Isao Yoshida (Kyoritsu Shoji Laboratories, Kyoritsu Shoji Co.)
Noboru Yusasa (National Institute of Animal Health)
Preface to the English Edition
A boost in food production corresponding lo an increase in the world population that is
countries where the rate of population growth is high, cffectivc food production, particularly on
an immediate increasc in production of animal protein has been requircd for insuring a suficiency
of nourishmcnt for the nation. Conventionally, in most of thesc developing countrics, an
increasc in production of chicken eggs and meat which have a high produclion eficiency and
outstanding nutrition as a source of animal prolcin has becn expcctcd and poultry industries havc
been promoted.  However, therc are various barricrs against thc developmcnt of poultry in-
dustries in these countrics. Above all, a delay in brccding techniques to improve chickens 10
makc it fit into the environmcntal conditions in the arca, dificulties of maintaining the quality and
a sufficient amount of feed, a high mortality rate reduction of productivity caused by diseases,
cspccially infections have bccn indicatcd.  Therefore, thc diffusion of knowledgc and tcchnology
on hygicnic managemcnt around these area is urgently ncccssary to prevent losscs of fowls and to
enhance the production.
It is rcally useful that the colorcd manual, English vcrsion of " Diseases of Birds" edited by
Japanese Society on Poultry Diseases as a part of overseas technical support in Japan will bc
published from Japan International Agricultural Council as refcrcnccs on poultry hygienc inl
accordance with the requirement mentioned above. This book was first published in commem-
oration of 30ih anniversary of the foundation of Japanesc Socicty on Poultry Discases in 1995.
and subscquently the 3rd edition published in 1999 following revisions in twice was translated in
English.
Classical acute infections such as Newcastle discasc, fowl plague, fowl cholcra and pullorum
diseasc which havc causcd cxtensive damage to the worldwide poultry industries or reccnt
cpidemic diseases including infectious bursal disease, swollen head syndrome, avian ancmia viral
infection and Salmonella Enteritidis infection, and other diseases caused by disturbancc of
nutrition arc described in brief with color photos of clinical symptoms and lesions in this book.
In addition, diseases of poultry other than chickens and pct birds arc also described. Both were
written by thc specialists, so that this book might bc an optimal manual to obtain knowledge of
avian diseascs easily.
Finally, I gratefully acknowledge the contributions of thc authors and editors who gavc a
great deal of cooperation in editing and corrcction of this book.
March, 2000
Shizuo Salo
Thc Chairman of the Board of Directors
Japanese Society on Poultry Diseascs
List of Writers (In order of writing)
Kazuhisa Hiramatsu
KYOTO BIKEN Laboratories
Hiroshi Kida
Faculty of Veterinary Medicinc, Hokkaido Univcrsity
Yuichi Kudo
Nippon Institute for Biological Scicnce
 Miharu Odagiri
Aburahi Laboratories, Shionogi & Co., Ltd.
Kosuke Okada
School of Velerinary Mcdicinc, Iwate University
Hiroshi Hihara
National Institute of Animal Hlealth
Yosaburou Otaki
Nippon Institute for Biological Science
Isao Yoshida
Kyoritsu Shoji Laboralories, Kyoritsu Shoji Co.
Hitoshi Kawamura
Tochigi Laboratory, GHEN Co.
 Shigeo Yamaguchi
National Institute of Animal Health
Kozo Takase
The Chemo-Sero-Therapeutic Research Institute
Noboru Yuasa
Nalional Institute of Animal Health
Takeshi Yagihashi
Nippon Institute for Biological Science
Masayuki Nakamura
School of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Kitasato University
epeaeg onye.l.
 Nihon Velerinary and Animal Sciencc University
Kikuyasu Nakamura
National Institute of Animal Health
Mitsuaki Gohda
 Institute for Field Crops and Livestock Hygienc, JA Aichi-Kcizairen
Katsumi Kume
Rescarch Center for Veterinary Science, Thc Kitasato Institute
Tatsuro Suzuki
Chiba Prcfectural Institute of Animal Hcalth
Shizuo Sato
Zen-Noh Institutc of Animal Health
Ryozo Azuma
Department of Zootechnical Sciencc, Tokyo Univeisity of Agriculturc
Isamu Inoue
School of Vetcrinary Medicine, Nihon Univcrsity
Kameo Shimura
National Institute of Animal Health
Takashi Isobe
National Institute of Animal Healih
Kozo Fujisaki
National Institute of Animal Hcalth
Noriyuki Taira
National Institutc of Animal Health
Junsukc Shirai
National Institute of Animal Health
 Koichi Otuki
School of Veterinary Medicinc, Tottori University
Kazuyoshi Tezuka
Marubeni Feed Co., Ltd.
Minoru Maeda
Rescarch Institute for Animal Science
Chitoshi Itakura
Faculty of Vcterinary Medicinc, Hokkaido University
Kan-ichi Oshima
Broiler Inspection Ccnter, Iwaie Veterinary Medical Association
Toshiaki Taniguchi
National Institute of Animal Health
Shigeru Miyazaki
National Institute of Animal Health
Fuminori Funabashi
Laboratories, Chikusan Konosha Co., Ltd.
Kazuki Takehara
School of Veterinary Medicinc and Animal Sciences, Kitasato Univcrsily
Shinji Yamada
The Chemo-Sero-Therapeutic Research Institutc
Kalsuya Hirai
School of Veterinary Medicine, Gifu University
 Kenji Kanazawa
Kuroiso Animal Hospital
Kunitoshi Imai
National Institute of Animal Health
4
Introduction
1. Discases of birds arc listed by dividing thcm into 41 headings. For a diseasc that is not in the
heading, find it in the index unde1 the name of thc discase (p. 214 216).
2.  IDiseases are listed in the order of : viral diseases of chickens, bacterial diseases of chickens,
parasitic discases of chickcns, discases whose cause has not bccn identified, and diseascs of birds
Other than chickens.
 3. Terms uscd in this book arc principally in accordance with the Code of Terms for Diseases of
Birds “90 [Journal of thc Japancse Socicly on Poultry Diseases. 26, 113 125 (1990)] and
English-Japanesc Veterinary Dictionary, cdited by A. Hascgawa, Chikusan Publishing Co.,
LTD. Toky0 (1992).
4. The microbiological examinations are supplied in a separate section (p. 182 194).
 5.  Vaccination programs are inscrted in a separate section (p. 195-203).
 6.  A list of vaccines and diagnostic agents currently markctcd in Japan is inscrted on pagcs 201-
203.
7. For use as a diagnostic manual, an outlinc of diseases is given in Tables (p. 204-211).
8. Among English abbreviations, which appcar in the text, ELiSA (cnzyme-linked im-
    )       
(haematoxylin-cosin) are used respectively without showing their full names.
9. As for livestock infectious discases (notifiable infectious diseases) and rcportable infectious
diseascs, according to the livestock infectious discasc prcvcntion law, [n] and/or [r] for their
first lclters is markcd at the right of the name of thc disease.
Contents
Prefacc to the English Edition
-Shizuo Sato......
3
List of Writers (ln order of writing)
4
Introduction
5.
 Diseases of Chickens
Newcastle Disease (n)
....Kazuhisa Hiramatu...
10
2.
Avian Influenza (n, r)
·Hiroshi Kida'
14
3.
Infectious Bronchitis (r)
-Yuichi Kudo-
18
4.
Infcctious Laryngotrachcitis (r}
... Minharu Odagir....
22
5.
Marek's Disease
“r]
....-.Kosuke Okada....
+..
26
6.
Lymphoid Leukosis (r)
...-Hiroshi Hihara'
30
Infcctious Bursal Disease {r:
... Yosaburou Otaki-
34
8.
Fowl Pox (r)
--Isao Yoshida....
38
9.
Avian Encephalomyelitis :
--Hitoshi Kawamura'
42
10.
Egg Drop Syndrome-1976-
....Shigeo Yamaguchi..
46
11.
Viral Tenosynovitis/Arthritis -
--Kozo Takase'
50
12.
Chicken Anaemia Virus Infection
-Noboru Yuasa'
54
13.
Mycoplasmosis (r)
-- Takeshi Yagihashi-
58
14.
Salmonellosis (n, t)
--Masayuki Nakamura:
62
15.
Fowl Cholera
n
--Takuo Sawada·
66
16.
Colibacillosis
-Kikuyasu Nakamura-
70
17.
Staphylococcosis --
-Mitsuaki Gohda-
74
18.
Infectious Coryza'
..- Katsumi Kume.
78
19.
Clostridial Infections
-.'Tatsuro Suzuki.....
82
20.
Miscellaneous Bacterial Diseases 
-Shizuo Sato-
86
21.
Fungal Discases 
-.Ryozo Azuma-
90
22.
Coccidiosis
..·Kameo Shimura.
94
23.
Leucocytozoonosis (r) .....
.-- Takashi Isobe-
98
24.
Other Protozoan Discases 
..-Isamu Inoue-
102
25.
Ectoparasitic Diseases
...·Kozo Fujisaki......
106
26.
Endoparasitic Diseascs/Helminthiasis
..... Noriyuki Taira..
.
110
27.
Stunting Syndromc
...-Junsuke Shirai..
114
28.
Swollen Head Syndrome
.-. Koichi Otsuki-.
118
29.
Ascitcs in Broiler Chickens
-- Kazuyoshi Tezuka:
·
122
30.
Bone Diseases
.--Minoru Macda.-
126
31.
 Skin Diseases
.--Chitoshi Itakura·
130
32.
Muscular Diseases:
---Kan-ichi Oshima'
134
33.
Nutritional and Metabolic Disorders ·
..-Toshiaki Taniguch...
:138
34.
Tumours of Non-infcctious Aetiology
..Minoru Maeda.-.
142
35.
Poisoning
·Shigeru Miyazaki.
146
 Diseases of Japanese Quail, Ducks, Geese and Turkeys
Diseases of Japanese Quail....
-Fuminori Funabashi--
152
2.
Discases of Ducks and Geese '
-- Kazuki Takehara'
156
3.
Diseases of Turkeys
.-Shinji Yamada...
160
 Discases of Pet Birds
1.
Chlamydiosis
.... Katsuya Hirai... 166
2.
Discascs of Pet Birds.........
... Katsuya Hirai... 170
3.
Diseases of Pigeons
.... Kenji Kanazaw...... 176
 Outline of Diagnosis and Vaccination Programme
Microbiological Examination .....Kunitoshi Imai, Shizuo Sato and Kamco Shimiura....
182
1.
Virus isolation-
182
2.
 Bacterial cxamination
185
3.
187
4.
Gene diagnosis
188
5.
Serological cxamination ....
188
Chicken Vaccination Programme
............. Japanese Socicly on Poultry Discascs......
195
Thc Diagnostic Main Points of Major Diseases in Chickens
Kuniloshi Imai, Shizuo Sato, Kamco Shimura and Kikuyasu Nakamura-
204
Contributors of the original photos (alphabctical order)
212
Indcx of disease namc
214
Diseases of Chickens
1.
Newcastle Disease [n]
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
A disease with high infectivity caused by Newcastle disease virus.
Designated as a notifiable disease.
This disease is classified into two types: Asian type causing haemorrhagic
lesions in the intestines and American type without these lesions.
The lesions are inflammation, haemorrhage and necrosis of tracheal and intestinal
mucosa and lymphatic organs.
aui aa pue sna aul jo uoeoyuap! pue uoieiosi Aq pauiwieiap si sisoubeia
serological reaction, referring to epidemiology. symptoms, and lesions.
 Preventive measures are appropriate vaccination and maintenance of routine
hygiene
Outline of Disease
Newcastle disease (ND) is an acute, infectious disease causcd by ND virus (NDV) of thc
family Paramyxoviridae. The disease is designated as a notifablc infcctious disease, since
prevalencc of highly virulenl strains causes serious damage due to high morality, and control is
condueted with the utmost care.
Nine scrotypcs of viruses of the genus avian Paramyxovirus are known, and NDv is a virus
of serotype 1. Pathogenicity of NDV is higher than that of other paramyxoviruses.
Paramyxoviruscs possess haemagglutinins (HA), and the scrotype is distinguishable by the
hacmagglutination inhibition (Hl) reaction.  In Japan, there has been no repor1 up to the present
Of the isolation from chickens of any paramyxovirus except NDV.
Pathogenicity of NDV differs according to strain, and there are various kinds of viruses, c.
g. lentogenic strains which seldom show pathogenicity even in day-old chicks, mesogenic strains
which causes respiratory and nervous signs, although mortality is low, and velogenic strains which
cause high morality, often over 90% at times. Although NDV infects practically all avian
species and causes disease, the chicken has the highest susccptibility, regardless of its type and age.
Since a large quantity of virus is excreted from an infected bird and the viability is comparativciy
high, NDV is rapidly and widely propagated.
An oatbreak of ND in Japan was already obscrved in about 1930 and frequently occurred
with great damage in about 1967. As live vaccine has been used since then, large-scale
recurrence has not been observed until the present time.
 A small-scalc rccurrencc, howevcr, is sporadically observed, and the virus still exists in the
fieid.
Introduction of a virus carrying chicken, invasion by infected wild birds and spreading of
virus by contaminated materials or humans can be considered as transmission routes.
10
Symptoms and Lesions
According to thce type and site of lesions thal occur, based on the properties of thc virus
strain, discase typcs are classified into Asian type, which is also called an acute, lethal type or a
visceral lype, and Amcrican type, which is also callcd a chronic type or a ncurotropic type.  As
for the coursc of a disease, there are various kinds of ouibreaks depending on pathogcnicity of the
strain (virulence), ranging from a casc with remarkably high mortality to one with few symptoms.
Clinical symptoms in the Asian type are loss of appetite, depression, lethargy, dark greenish,
diarrhoca, respiratory symptoms such as oral brcathing, and then sudden dcath in one to three
 days afier onset.  Dccrcascd cgg production and nervous signs such as torlicollis arc obscrved in
cases where the discase is protracted.  In the Amenican type, the progress after onset is long, and
grccnish diairhoca devclops as wcll as rcspiratory and nervous signs. In a serious case, death
occurs in 2-7 days after onsct. Alihough the mortality rate is about 5% in adult birds, it
occasionally reaches 50% or more in young chicks.  Furthermore, as vaccine is used on the farm
and thc conditions of antibody production in the chicken infuence the symptoms and morlality
rates, an infected flock docs not ncccssarily show signs following infection with the prevalent virus
strain.
As for gross lesions with thc Asian typc, haemorrhages and ulcers arc observed in the
proventriculus and inlcstinc (Fig. 1, 2) and especially dcvelop in arcas where lymphatic tissue
grows. Splcnomcgaly and focal necrosis of the spleen, hyperaemia and congeslion of the
  o         
and petechial haemorrhages in adipose tissue such as the coronary region, are obscrved. With
  ri  e   d i  
follicles and hypertrophy of 1he respiralory tract mucous mcmbrane and airsacculitis is also
obscrvcd.  From a histopathological vicwpoint, inflammation of mucous membrancs and degen-
are found in the central ncrvous syslcm.
IDiagnosis
Epidemiological diagnosis: When infcetion occurs, irrespcctivc of agc, with rapid spread, high
incidence rate and high morlality rate, ND must be suspected. Before making a final judgcment,
however, it should be remembercd that the pathological features scen differs according to the
immune status of the bird.
Clinical diagnosis: Greenish diarrhoca, rapid deterioration of clinical condition in general, with
 r  'ss  jo o r  i ss sm
prolonged decrease of cgg production are particularly observed.
Pathological diagnosis: Gross lesions and histopathological lesions of the central ncrvous
systcm or lymphatic tissucs arc points of referencc for diagnosis.
Virological diagnosis: Isolalion and identifcation of virus or antigen detcclion in organs by
fuorcsccnt antibody techniqucs arc definitive for diagnosis. For isolation of the virus, trachca,
lung, splecn, and rectum or faeccs arc used, and thc isolation is performcd by inoculation of
embryonated cggs or tissue culturc.  Haemagglutination of the isolatcd virus and identification
by HI test using known anti-NDV scrum is performed.  Identification of virus by HI test is
important because other viruses, such as influenza virus, paramyxoviruses other than NDV, and
cgg drop syndrome-1976 virus possess haemagglutinating ability.  As for the isolated virus,
pathogcnicity of the virus should bc further confirmed by performing tests for pathogenic type,
such as pathogenicity in onc-day-old chicks and cight-weck-old chickcns, and plaque forming
Newcastle Discasc [n]   11 
ability in chick embryo fibroblasts.
 Also, antibody titrc should be measurcd by using pair sera takcn in the early stage of disease
and one to two wceks after disease is seen.
Differential diagnosis: Although infectious laryngotracheitis and infectious bronchitis are
similar, in that they induce rcspiratory symptoms with bronchial lesions, neither disease causes 
any nervous symptoms. In cases showing nervous signs, these should be distinguished from
Marek's diseasc, avian encephalomyelitis, or avian encephalomalacia.  Furthermorc, acutc, lcthal
discascs, such as fowl plaguc and fowl cholera that do not usuaily exist in Japan, should bc
differentiated by etiological tests or scrology.
Prevention/Trcatment/Mcasures
In Japan, live and inactivated vaccines are currcntly uscd for the prevention of this disease.
Although complele prevention is possible by proper usc of vaccines, the designning of vaccination
program, such as inoculation timc and the selection of vaccinc type, or improvement of
vaccination icchnique are important for devclopmcnt of protective antibody.  Furthermore, in
order to prevent virus spread to other flocks, general hygicnc and prevention of invasion of 
infected wild birds are requircd.  In addition, as this disease is a notifiable disease, once diagnosis
is confrmed, stringcnt mcasures should bc taken, based on the livestock infectious disease
prevention law.
12
Ncwcastle Disease [n]
Fig.1.Proventriculus and gizzard
infectedwith Asian type ND:
Petechialhyperaemia andhaemo-
rrhages dispersed over the pro-
ventriculusmucous membrane and
petechia in adipose tissue around
the gizzard.(Original:Odagiri)
Fig.2.Intestine infected with Asian
type ND:Haemorrhages and ulcer
in the duodenum mucous mem-
brane.(Original:Odagiri)
Fig.3.Larynx and trachea infected
with Asian type ND:Note the
hyperaemiaand
haemorrhages.
(Original: Odagiri)
Newcastle Disease[n]
13
2.
Avian Influenza
[n, r]
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis 
Local or systemic disease caused by infection with A type influenza virus.
The pathology varies from an inapparent infection to fowl plague (notifiable
Common symptoms with fowl plague are oedema and cyanosis in the comb.
wattle, head, and leg squama.
Lesions are hyperaemia and haemorrhages of the comb, wattle, skin, and internal
organs. In cases of acute death these lesions are absent.
 Epidemiological observation of occurrence, symptoms, gross lesions and isolation
of virus are used for diagnosis.
Vaccine is effective for prevention.
Vaccination is not used in Japan.
Outline of Discase and Epidcmiology
Avian influenza is an infectious discase causcd by A type inffucnza virus of the family
Orthomyxoviridae. Symptoms and morlality rate differ depending on thc causal virus strain,
avian species, presence of stress and other infections. A discase tha1 is acute and high in both
morbidity and mortality rate, is called fowl plague. Although a virus that causes fowl plague
 possesses hacmagglutinin (HA) of the H5 or H7 subtype, it does not nccessarily mcan that H5 and
H7 viruses are always strains with high virulence.  That is to say, antigcnicity and pathogenicily
 of viruscs do not coincide. With an influenza virus, infectivity depends on cleavage of the HIA
In April 1983, in a laying farm in Lancaste1, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., laycrs showed signs of
respiratory disorder, drop in egg produetion, and loss of appetite for food and watcr. H5N2
influcnza virus isolated from the trachea of an infected hen was judged in pathogenicity tcsts in
chickens not to bc a highly virulcnt strain. In October of that year, howcver, hens suddenly
stopped laying cggs and bcgan to die. Furthermore in Novembe1, morc than 30% of the hens in
20 laying farms dicd showing swelling and necrosis of the comb and wattle and ncrvous
 symptoms. After thrcc months, the fowl plaguc had spread to thc states of Virginia and New
Jersey, bordcring Pennsylvania. The governmcnt of the United States of Amcrica spent 60
million dollars by the time this infection was cradicated in the spring of the following ycar.
Thc
reason why the virus became pathogenic was elucidated as follows.  As the HA molecule lost a
glycosylation sitce ncar the cleavagc sitc duc to a point mutation in the HA gcnc, it was easily
affected by proteolytic cnzymcs inside thc host cells and cleavage was possible.  It is bclieved tha1.
the causal virus was transmitted from wild ducks to thc hcns in the firsl outbreak.
In 1983, an H5N8 virus caused damagc to turkeys in Ireland. Thc identical virus was
isolated from ducks in the neighbouring duck farm. Although this virus caused only inapparent
infection in ducks, it was shown to bc highly virulcnt for turkeys. In 1985, fowi plague, caused
by H7N7 virus, broke out to chickens in thc State of Victoria, Australia.  The identical virus was
isolatcd from a starling nearby.
In cvcry corner of the world, various kinds of type A influenza virus have been isolated from
14
 e e a ai i sn  eu a on sade a e ie iei sg a
rate and also HA subtypes (H1-14) and ncuraminidasc (NA) subtypcs (N1-9).  Although ducks
do not show any symptoms when they are infected with an influenza virus, the virus proliferates
in their intestine, parlicularly in thc simple columnar cpithelial cells, which form crypts in the
colon.  Thus, a lot of influenza virus is shed via faeces into lakes whcrc ducks gathcl.  The virus
spreads to waicr birds and mammals through water; this mcans that the duck is both a reservoir
for influenza virus and also a carrier.
In Western countrics, influcnza causcs thc greatest damage to the turkcy.  That is because
turkcys have a high susccptibility to influenza virus and also have a lot of opportunity to be in
contact with wild birds due to open-air feeding. In Japan, fowl plaguc has not bccn observed at
least since the last outbreak in 1926.  As we scldom feed ducks and turkeys togeiher, there is no
infection routc to chickcns through thcsc birds, and hygienic control in the chicken industry is
well managed.
Symptoms and Iesions
Symptoms are diverse according to spccics, age, sex, virus strain, mixed infections, and
environmcntal faetors. Thcy includc loss of activity, loss of appetite for food and water, egg
production drops, weakness, coughing, sneezing, rales, lacrymation, rufling of fcathcrs, oedema
and cyanosis in the head, comb, and wattle (Fig. 1), nervous symptoms, and diarrhoea. The
diseasc develops with some, or a combination of, the above-mentioncd symptoms.
Gross lesions of minor infuenza are swelling of the sinus mucous membrane, catarrhal
inflammation, fibrinous inflammation, mucous pus infammation, chcesy inflammation, ocdema of
the trachca mucous mcmbranc with scrous or cheesy cxudatc, air sac hypertrophy, and catarrhal
or fibrinous peritonitis or enteritis. In layers, exudatc may be obscrved in the oviduct.  Major
lesions of fowl plaguc arc congestion, hyperacrmia, haemorrhage, transudation and necrosis in
organs and muscles. Oedema, cyanosis or haemorrhage is observed also in the leg (Fig. 2).  A
case of acute fowl plague lacks thlese lesions.
Histopathological changes are hyperaemia, hacmorrhage, necrotic foci, infltration of lym
phocytes, vascular dilation, and cell fltration around vessels of the comb, wattle, spleen, liver,
lung, kidney, heart muscle, brain, and skeletal muscle (Fig. 3).  As fowl influenza usually occurs
as a mixcd infection with bacteria, mycoplasma, and other viruses, pathological changcs caused by
them should also bc considered.
Diagnosis
As influenza of fowl has varicd symptoms, it cannot be diagnoscd by clinical signs, except in
the epidemic period.   Isolation and identifcation of the virus givcs definilive diagnosis.  A high
conccntration of antibiotic is added to swabs of respiratory organs or the cloaca, respiralory
inoculation in the allanto-amniotic cavity of 10-day-old embryonatcd chicken cggs.  Allanto-
amniotic fluid is examincd for haemagglutination following death of the embryo, or after 72
hours.  In the case of a positive rcaction, a precipitation reaction in agar gel is observed between
the infected allanlo-amniotic fluid and antiserum against type A influenza virus.  When a
precipitation line caused by the virus internal protein antigen is formcd, the antigcn subtypc of
  a    d  i   n ss
Discases requiring difercntial diagnosis are Newcastle disease, other paramyxovirus infec-
Avian Infuenza [n, r]   15
lions, chlamydia, mycoplasma, and other bacterial infections.
.In infuenza of chickens, a mixcd
infection with thesc microorganisms is frequently observed.
Prevention/Treatment/Mcasures
Ihcre is no treatment for fowl influenza.  Although H5 and H7 virus inactivaled vaccines
arc used for prcvention in U.S.A, and Auslralia, i1 is not practicable in Japan.  It is important to
prevcnt contact with wild birds, turkeys, and ducks and 1o apply all-in, all-out systems.  Disinfec-
tion and hygienic control of humans, foodstuff, vehicles, and othcr cquipment should be effectively
managcd.  As fowl plague is designated as a notifiable disease, it should immcdialcly be rcported
to thc administrativc authorities and all their instructions obeycd in cases where this disease is
suspected.
16
Avian 【nflucnza [n, r]
Fig.1.Symptoms of fowl plague:Swelling of the comb,wattle and eyelids,and cyanosis.(Original:Webster,R.
G.)
Fig.2.s
Skin of theleg squama:Haemorrhage of the squamousregion.(Original:Webster,R.G.)
Fig.3.Histological lesions ofwattle three days afterinoculation of influenza virusinto thenasal cavity:Vesiclein
the epidermis （oedema as a gross lesion),congestion of dermal lamina,haemorrhage and infiltration of
inflammatory cells.HE stain.(Original:Webster,R.G.)
AvianInfluenza[n,r]
17
3. 
Infectious Bronchitis [r]
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
An acute respiratory disease of chickens caused by an infection with infectious bronchitis
virus.
There are many virus strains with different antigenicity.
Although chicken flocks are
repeatedly infected, most of these are inapparent infections.
Some infectious virus strains cause high mortality due to nephropathogenicity.
As for gross lesions, these are catarrhal degeneration of respiratory organs, atrophy of
ovary and oviduct, and swelling of kidney.
Although diagnosis is mainly confirmed by virus isolation, it has been simplified by the
PCR technique.
Preventive  measures are management of general hygiene control measures and
immunization with live and inactivated vaccines
Outline of Disease
Infectious bronchitis (IB) is an acute respiralory discasc causcd by IB virus (IBV) and is
designated as a rcportablc infcctious disease according to the livestock infectious discasc prcven-
tion law. Infected chickens mainly show rcspiratory disorders, egg laying disorders and
nephropathogenicity.  Respiratory infection caused by IBV docs not remain only as rcspiratory
signs and may frcqucntly rcsult in morc scrious disease such as poor growth or secondary
complications caused by mycoplasma and Escherichia coli. Egg laying disorders frequently
occur with non-laying, resulting from infection at a very early age.  Apprcciable dccreasc in cgg
 production due to infection in laying period and long-term deterioration of cgg quality also
occurs.
Diarrhoeal faeces, on the other hand, gcncrally indicate nephropathogenicity. Mortality
may increase, mainly among young birds and thc mortality ratc may be from several percent to
about 20%, depending on the infecting IBV strain.  The degrcc of thesc disordcrs is not always
the same because they are infuenced by the bird itself, by cnvironmcntal factors, and by thc
pathogenicity of thc particular virus strain.
IBV bclongs to thc coronavirus group and is a round or plcomorphic particle with a virion
75 to 140 nm in diamctcr.  'Thc spike protein on thc surface of thc envelope consists of the S1 and
haemagglutination than the S2 region. Thus, differences in thc amino acid scqucnce in this
region are considered to cause virus strains with distinctly different antigenicity.
As IBV spreads very rapidly, it spreads easily through focks in Japan.  Also, many flocks
houscd in thc field arc repeatcdly infectcd by IBVs with different antigenicity and the brcadth and
or inapparcnt infection when infected more than once.
18
Symptoms and Lesions
Clinical observation: Respiratory signs are obscrvcd as abnormal breathing from about the
third day after virus infection and cease after one to two weeks if there is no introduction of othcr
diseases.  Dccreasc of egg production occurs almost at the samc tinc as the rcspiratory signs, and
the d1op is up to sevcral to more than 50% from the normal.  Although egg production recovers
 after 3 to 4 wccks, it seldom returns to the lcvel before infection. Eggshell abnormality such as
soft shell eggs or deformed cggs (Fig. l) or deterioration of internal quality, such as aqucous,
thick albumen continues.  Frequently, diarrhoea is observed.  Dehydration occurs but it is very
rare that dehydration leads to death.  According to the infecting virus strain, howevcr, a rapid
incrcase of mortality may be observed that peaks in thc first week after slight signs in thc
respiratory organs.
Post mortem observation: ln rcspiratory organs, catarrhal allcration such as ocdcma o1
hyperirophy of the trachca is the main sign and is gencrally slight (Fig. 2). In the ovary.
haemorrhagic ovarian follicles and soft ovarian follicles are observed, and ycllow turbidity occurs
in the peritoncal cavity, duc to cggs in the pcritoneal cavity.  In nou-laycrs, the oviduct is afectcd
and is markedly atrophicd (Fig. 3).  In young chicks, a cyst may be formed in 1he oviduc1.
Although frequency of visible lesions in kidneys is not generally high, whenn some mortality
 occurs, onc sces strong discoloration and swelling with a marbled pattern caused by pigmcntation
by urea salts (Fig. 4).
Histopathological observation: In the mucous epithelium of the trachca, cilia disappear and the
epithelium sloughs off. In the lamina propria, hyperaemia, ocdema, and intcnsc hypertrophy by
infiltration of cells arc obscrvcd. On the surfacc of thc lracheal mucous mcmbrane, exudate
consisting of heterophilic leukocytes and cxfoliated epithelium is obscrved. In the ovary, the
follicular membrane is intenscly hypertrophied, and the granulosa underneath becomes irregular
and may contain hacmorrhagc from the follicular mcmbrane. Mucous mcmbranc folds and
kidneys, degeneration, disintegration, uratc deposits, and fatncss of the tubular cpithelium are
observed, and necrosis of the epithelium and hetcrophilic lcukocytcs arc sccn into thc lumen.
Generally, infiltration of the lymphoid cells is observed.
Diagnosis
As stated abovc, many different antigenic typcs of IBV repeatedly infect. commercial chicken
focks. Live or inactivated vaccincs immunise against some of them. 'Ihus, diagnosis of this
discase depends morc on virological tcchnique than on cpidcmiological and clinical diagnosis.
Isolation of virus is performed by passage in embryonated cggs or in kidney cultures
inoculated with homogenates of trachca, lung, kidney or intestinal conlents froin infected
chickens. Cross-ncutralization tcst using known IBVs and immunc antiscrum is uscd for
identification and typing.  Reccnily however, PCR is frequcntly used as a more simplificd and
 o s        o n     
polymorphism (RFLP) using different rcstriction enzymes and an amplificd gennc.
Differential diagnosis: Mycoplasmosis and colibacilliosis cause respiratory signs, egg laying
disorders and developmcntal defccts. As mixed infcctions with IB and other discases frequently
occur, particular attention should be paid to diagnosis. Also, Ncwcasile diseasc and infcetious
laryngotracheitis may causc mainly respiratory signs and drops in cgg production, depending on
the virus strain involved. Egg drop syndrome-1976 (EIs-76) shows deercasc of cgg laying
Infectious Bronchitis [1] 19
performance and cggshcll abnormality. As the signs of these discases arc similar, idcntification
of the causal virus is required for differential diagnosis. In Newcaslle diseasc and EDs-76,
increase of antibody titre deleciable by hacmagglutination inhibition (IH1) test aids diagnosis.
 In infectious laryngotracheitis, detection of intranuclear inclusion bodics in thc cpithelial cells of
the trachea in infected birds contributcs to diagnosis.
Prevention
As this discasc is widcsprcad in Japan and always exists, the only way of control is good
management of general hygiene control and appropriate cnforcement of vaccination. The
antigenicity of thc prevalent strains in the field varies and does not neccssarily corrcspond to the
antigenicity of the vaccine strain.  Therefore, it is important to strive to cope with thc problcm
of diferent antigenicity betwcen field strains and vaccine strains by a combination of live and
inactivated vaccincs, selecting a vaccine with as wide a range of antigcnicity and as high an
immunogenicity as possible, in order to induce strong immunity in the chicken.
Fig. 1. Abnorimal cggs in a commcrcial chicken flock infected with IB virus: Misshapen and small cggs. Norma
cgg is at the middle of thc left hand side. (Original: Sato)
Fig. 2. Trachea of a chicken experimentally infected with a field strain of IB virus: Hyperacmia of the mucous
meinbrane and incrcase in mucus.
Fig. 3. Ovary and oviduct of a chickcn cxperimentally infected with IH virus: Regression of ovarian foliceles and
marked atrophy of the oviduct are observed in an infccted casc as compared with a normal case on the left.
Fig. 4. Kidney of a chicken infected with a field strain of 1BV: Discoloration and swelling arc noted, as is the
marbling cffect caused by pigrnentation by urea salis. (Original: Nakamura)
20 Infectious JBronchitis [1]
Infectious Laryngotracheitis[r]
21
4.
Infectious Laryngotracheitis [r]
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
An acute respiratory disease of chickens caused by infectious laryngotracheitis virus.
An infected fowl shows marked respiratory symptoms such as coughing. gasping.
expectoration of bloody exudate and is often suffocated.
Acute exudative  inflammation  with  catarrhal and haemorrhagic symptoms develop
strongly in the respiratory and mucous membranes of the larynx and trachea
Characteristic presence of epithelial cells in the mucosa of lesions, e.g. collective
emergence of intranuclear inclusion bodies and giant cell formation.
Isolation and identification of the virus defines the disease, although it can be diagnosed
by observation of symptoms and lesions.
A live vaccine is used for prevention
Outline of Disease
Infectious laryngotrachcitis (ILT) is an acutc, rcspiratory discasc causcd by ILT virus, a
herpes virus and is designated as a reportable infectious diseases, according to the livcstock
infcctious disease prevention law. In Japan, this disease has steadily become wide spread since
the rccurrcncc in Osaka in 1962 and currently is found in many areas. It is known that this
disease becomes well established once it infiltrates into a farm.  It is not casy lo cradicatc despitc
irrcspectivc of typc, sex and age. However, the kind of damage caused varies according to the
scason and also depending on thc fecding method.  In an outbreak the mortality rate in infected
birds is a generally about 10 to 15%.
Symptoms and Lesions
An infectcd bird shows markcd rcspiratory signs such as nasal discharge, coughing. often
expectoralion of bloody cxudalc, gasping and dyspnoca (Fig. l) and is often suffocated. Oph-
thalmic changes, such as reddening of the conjunctiva, swelling, and lacrymation are also
observed. As the signs indicate, lesions frequenily develop in thc respiralory mucosa of thc
larynx and trachea and show strong exudative inflammation, which leads to catarrhal and
hacmorrhagic cxudate (Fig. 2).  As a consequence, the respiratory tract is severely restricted and
pathological fcaturc from dyspnoca to suffocation is obscrved.  Exudative conjunctivitis is
observed. Histological changes are vcry charactcristic and prcscnt with intranuclcar inclusion
bodics in the epithclial cclls in the mucosa of lesions.  Also, giant cell formation by the fusion of
 cells is seen (Fig. 3).  These characteristic observations are seen in the larynx and trachea for 24
 yd a lssd 's g  g r is  sa ja un pxa re so tt 0
the third or fourth day.
The region from the lamina propia to the submucosa is highly hypertrophied because of
marked hyperacmia and oedema and frequent infltration of heterophils, lymphocytes and
22
macrophages. Giant cell formation of epithelial cells and desquamation of the cells coincides
with the pcak of emcrgcncc of intranuclcar inclusion bodics, and consequently crosion of the
mucous mcmbrane occurs, which often lcads 1o hacmorrhage. On the surfacc of the mucosa,
where epithelium cells are desquamated, heterophils, lymphocytes, macrophages, and a lot of
cxudate consisting of serous fuid and ovcrgrowth with fibrin arc observcd. When thesc
characteristic IIT lesions are observed by thc fluorescent antibody techniquc, the virus antigcn is
corresponds to the altered appearance of the cells.  Infiltration of the mucosa by other cell types
is not observed.
Diagnosis
 Pathological diagnosis: This disease affects the respiratory organs or conjunctiva. Localized
mucosa infcctcd by this virus shows strong cxudativc inflammation with charactcristic cpithclial
cell effects, indicating vius prolifcration in that rcgion. 'Thesc characteristic lesions devclop in
thc conjunctiva and respiratory organs (lacrymal duct, mucosa of the nares and sinus, larynx and
trachea, bronchus, lung and air sac). Other organs and tissucs are not affected.
Virological observation: As the causal virus is found in cpithelial cells and exudate from lesions
of the mucosa, isolation from these sites is performed. Embryonated eggs or chicken kidney cell
culturcs are suitable for virus isolation. On inoculation of the former via the chorioallantoic,
membrane largc pocks on thc membrane are clearly observcd. Also, in tissuc culturc, a huge
cytopaihic cffccl (CPE) is obscrvcd. Boih of them rclale lo ILT virus prolifcration, and
syncylium formalion and aggregation of intranuclear inclusion bodies are observed.
Neutralization tests and ELISAs are performed to detect antibody. These tests however,
 arc only uscful to dcterminc the immune status of a bird and are not suitablc for diagnosis of the
disease.
 Differential diagnosis: There are many kinds of respiratory discase, such as Newcastlc discasc
that rcquire diferentiation. Lesions of ILT arc an acute cxudalivc inflammation, bascd on
characteristic epithelial cell change and limited to the larynx and trachea as the main respiratory
organs, as wcll as the conjuncliva. Thcsc ILT lesions fundamenially differ from Newcastle
discase and infectious bronchitis, whcrc lesions quickly spread 1o internal organs; from
diphtheritic form of fowl pox, which shows abnormal proliferation of the mucous mcmbranc, 0r
from respiratory mycoplasmosis, which always develops chronic catarrhal infammation. How-
cvcr, as cvcry discasc may show similar signs and visible effects, differcntiation is required. As a
quick diagnosis, there is a rapid detection of tracheal intranuclear inclusion bodies by making of
a slide simears of the mucosa of a lesion in an infected bird.  By applying this method to at least
three chickens, which show peak symptoms, ILT can almost certainly be diagnoscd.
Prevention/Treatment/Measures
 Thc virus is mainly spread through droplet infcction and is direcily transmitted from fowl 10
fowl. Birds may also be infected from contaminated breeding equipment. However, cgg
transmission from parents to their chicks has not been dcmonstratcd and infcction through this
route does not occur. As the virus is not resistant to heat or common disinfectants, it is not
difficult to prevcnt sprcad to a non-infcctcd arca. It is also possible to avoid recurrence of disease
if thc wholc infecicd flock is incincrated and immediate treatment by disinfection and use of
detergents is carried out. Preventivc mcasurcs in an infccted arca arc not casy, and use of live
vaccine is recommended for protection against recurrence.  Although the virulence of current
vaccines is low, vaccination should be handled with the utmost carc as discase, which cannot bc
Infectious Laryngotracheitis |r]  23
distinguishcd from natural infection, may occur when the vaccination is performed poorly
24
【nfectious Laryngotracheitis[r]
Fig.1.Symptoms in achicken
naturally infected with ILT:Dys-
pnoea is observedandmarked
depression and cyanosis.
Fig.2.Larynx and trachea ofa
chicken with experimental ILT
infection:Hyperaemia of the mu-
cous membrane and increase in
mucus three days after inoculation
（top),haemorrhage of the mucous
membranewithyellow-whitecream
like exudate 4 days after inocula-
tion(middle),yellow-white cheesy
exudate 7 days after inoculation
(bottom).
Fig.3.Histological lesion of tra-
cheal mucosa (3 days after experi-
mental infection):Intranuclear in-
clusion bodies collectively seen in
epithelial cells, which form giant
cells by the cell fusion(→).HE
stain.
Infectious Laryngotracheitis[r]
25
5.  Marek's Disease [r]
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Tumorigenic proliferation of T lymphocytes by Marek's disease virus. a herpesvirus, is
characteristic.
The virus spreads via the airborne route by dander of the skin, and day-old chicks are the
most susceptible.
Diagnosis is performed by virological tests, not by pathogenicity tests, as inapparent
infection is usual.
Tumorigenic lesions frequently develop in every organs such as the liver, spleen, kidney.
heart, proventriculus, peripheral nerves and skin.
Marek's disease is differentiated from lymphoid leukosis by age when the disease
develops and histological tests.
Usual hygiene control is important as vaccination does not prevent virus infection and
only reduces the tumour development.
Outline of Disease
Marek's diseasc (MD) is a chickcn disease, which is caused by infection with MD virus
(MDV), a herpesvirus, by airborne transmission and is characleriscd by tumorigcnic proliferation
of T lymphocytes.  Virus cxists in feather follicle epithelial cells, which arc a sourcc of infcction
via dander, lcading to rapid spread. In a recent study, it was concluded that the MD tumour is
formed by tumorigenesis of a CD4 positivc T cell as a hclper T cell.  Historically, this disease
originated from the cxamination by Marek in Hungary in 1907 of four chickcns that showed leg
paralysis. Thereafter, it was temporarily called neural type leukosis. In 1961, howcvcr, it was
suggestcd by Biggs in the United Kingdom that this disease should be called MD as an
independent discase. Furthcr, sincc detection of thc virus became possible by tissue culture in
1967, various kinds of vaccines were immcdiately developcd, and MD vaccinc became the first
vaccine that was effcctivc in preventing cancers.
Symptoms and Lesions
Symptoms: Although there is classical (typical) MD and acute MD, thcsc are substantially thc
and lcgs, and torticollis dcvclop. It occurs mainly among chickens of three to fivc-months old,
and the mortality rate is less than 1o%. In the acute typc, on the othcr hand, thc mortality rate
is high and usually reaches 10 to 30% and occasionally 50%. Thc pcak of developmen1 is two
to four-months of age, but is sometimes aiso scen in chicks less than one-month old.  Although
peripheral nerves are affected, tumours are mainly formed in internal organs.
MD, which is detected at inspection of broilers, is this acute type of MD, and it is popularly
callcd visccral type MD.  Ovcr and above that, there is skin type MD, in which tumours form
mainly in the feather folliclcs, and cyc type MD, which shows contraction of pupils and
deformation and dccoloration of the iris.
26
Gross lesions: I'umour formation is obscrved in the liver (Fig. 1), which occasionally can bc
cnlargcd evcn ten times or more.  Diffuse nodular lesions with a white appearancc are observed.
 e     s  o 's gs   is   ss s  s
The splccn is markedly swollen and uniformly whitc or develops a lo1 of 1umours. Haemorrhagc
and necrosis arc not observed in the nodules. In the bursa of Fabricius, tumour lesions white in
colour uniformly form.  As to skin lesions, various sizcs of tumours arc formed in the skin (Fig.
2), and may form scabs on the surface of the skin.
In various othcr internal organs bcsides the above, and in tissues such as the proventriculus,
ovary, kidney (Fig. 3), heart, and muscle, tumours also form.  This is one of the reasons for
making a condemned total body for MD at the time of meatinspcction.
Lesions of peripheral nerves: MD was originally characteriscd by peripheral nerve lesions;
these are swelling, oedema and disappearancc of the normal striation of peripheral nerve fbres
(Fig. 4), and thc periphcral nervc in a serious case enlarges more than tcn times. Regions are
casily seen in the brachial and plexus lumbosaeral plexuscs, and cervical vagal trunk.  The lesions
are also found in other parts of the nerves.  Particularly, the root of the dorsal ganglion is a
region where round. In MD of hroilers, however, invisible nerve lesions do occur.
Histological lesions: Histological lcsions arc classified into tumour lesions and non-tumour
reaction lesions.  In non-tumour lesions, small lymphocytes and a few large lymphocytes arc
mixed.  Tumour lesions consist of proliferation of lymphoid cells of various sizes from small to
large.  This typc is mostly obscrved in Ml). In the liver, the tumour cells are observcd in the
Glisson's capsule of the hepatic portal region.  In the spleen, multiple focal proliferalion of
lymphoid cells is observed in lymphatic tissue surrounding the alleriolae.  These displace thc
original tissuc with devclopmcnt of lesions and prolifcrate into the surrounding area
Diagnosis
Most chickens that are older than 40 to 50 days are infected with MDv.  However, not
every bird necessarily develops the disease.  Thus, virological tests, such as isolation of MDV and
lesions and histological changes should be used fo1 diagnosis.
Differcntial diagnosis: What is required in differcntial diagnosis is differentiation from lymph-
oid leukosis (LL) and reticuloendotheliosis (RE) that show proliferative lesions of the lymphatic
system, as does M I).
LI. mostly develops in chicks infected via the cgg, and the infection rate is low.  Also, the
peak of infection is belween 4 and 10-months of age. These, therefore, make possible to
diferenciate MD from LL at mcat inspection of broilers. However, Il. should bc diagnosed
histologically, as differentiation of the two discascs is difficult by visible inspcction.
Foci of LL havc follicular proliferalion. The tumour cell in LL is large and scarce in
chromalin as compared with that of MD and contains a light, clcar and large nucleolus, and the
cytoplasm is basophilic.  Tumour cells are nol pleomorphic and are uniform blast cells (see
scction on lymphoid leukosis).  I1 is characterislic that proliferalion of tumour cells in 1he bursa
of Fabricius is intrafollicular in thc case of LL, whilst it is mainly interfollicular in the case of
MD. As for RE, there was oncc a case of discase in the field due to an accidcntal contamination
of MD vaccinc by RE virus. However, natural infection has not been confirmed in Japan.
In RE, there is an undifferentiatcd, large cell, which has a lot of basophilic cytoplasm and a
light, clcar and large nucleus, and proliferalion of a tumour cell (RE cell), which has a basophilic
largc nuclcolus in thc nucleus.  In the livcr, focal nccrosis is obscrvcd with proliferation of RE
cell at the sinusoid. In these cascs, abundant karyokinesis is observed.
Marck's Disease [r]
27
Prevcntion/Treatment/ Measures
Turkcy herpes virus (HVT, scrotype 3), non-pathogenic MDV (serotype 2), and lowly
virulent MDV, which belongs to the samc serotype l as the pathogenic strain are currently used
As a preventive mcasure, basic hygiene measures should be faithfully operated with suficicnt
understanding that the infcction roulc is airbornc via dander of thc feather follicles and that very
young chicks have the highcsl susceptibility.  In other words, thc mcasures arc accurate inocula-
tion, all-in, all-out management systcms, complete disinfection of the chicken house, maintenance
 of the house cnvironmcnt using for cxamplc, solid floors, control of temperature and humidity
inside the housc and so on. Not only lowering 1he contamination rate but also increase in body
wcight have been reported by these improvements.
Fig. 1. Liver and spleen of a chicken rcared commercially: Markedly diffuse swclling.  Norimal organs (bottom).
(Original: Nakamura)
Fig. 2. Skin of a hen cxperimentally infected with MD virus: Tumours in the region of the root. (Original: Imai)
Fig. 3. Kidney of a field case: Neoplastic tumours arc whitc grcy. (Original: Nakamura)
       () d       
swollen than the right hand. (Original: Sato)
28
Marek's Iiscase [r]
Marek's Disease []
29
6.  Lymphoid Leukosis [r]
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
B lymphoma of fowls caused by avian leukosis virus (ALV). It sporadically develops in
birds older than 120 days.
ALV is transmitted by infection via the egg and contact infection, and most infections are
inapparent infections.
Clinically. diminished appetite, cessation of egg laying, defecation of greenish diarrhoea.
shriveled comb. and marked decrease of body weight are observed.
Tumour lesions in liver, bursa of Fabricius and other internal organs.
s.There is no nerve
lesion.
Si snioigee to esng pue jaali aue ul shnowni jo uoedied qeuaixa 'sabiis laiel aun ul
possible.
Conditions of occurrence, symptoms, and pathological observations.
Diagnosis  is
performed by putting these all together.
No vaccine is available. Therefore, selection of ALV-freedams by ELISA is recommended.
Outlinc of Disease
Lymphoid leukosis (LL) is a B lymphoma of fowls that is caused by avian leukosis virus
(ALV), and its occurrence has been observcd in every corner of the world for a long time.  Therc
is no vaccinc for the disease, although it is one of the significant discases in the poultry indusiry.
As 1he discase frequently occurs during the egg laying period, be1ween 180 and 200 days of age,
it causes particularly grcat damage to farmers who have invested in thc brceding bird until that
time.  The occurrcncc rate for LL in the field varics according to the infected condition of
chicken flocks with thc ALV and the susceptibility to the disease of the fock. Average
occurrencc rate is estimated at sevcral perccnt. According to reccnt inspection rcsults, it is
reported that 1.4% of spcnt fowls had avian leukosis (most of them were LL).  Abroad, it is rare
in one outbrcak that 23% of thc birds in a group dcvclopcd LL and in Japan, that 27% of birds
devcloped LL.
As to infection routes, there are two: onc is vertical transmission (infection through the cgg)
and thc other is horizontal transmission (contact infcction).  Chicks vertically infected with
ALV do nol producc antibody against ALV and develop an immunological tolerancc.  Thcy
further continue to excrcte a lot of virus in the faeces and saliva throughout their life and bccome
the most dangerous infection source.  In non-infectious chicks that hatch at the same time as the
infcctcd chicks, horizontal infection of ALV occurs. In the case of infection for a short time
aftcr hatching, the chicks mostly develop an immunological tolerance, the same as those infected
through the egg. In the casc of infection after chicks have developed immunity, antibody is
produced after a transicnt viraemia and virus is cleared from serum.  Among them, howcvcr, the
virus stillremains in the hody and the birds become persistcntly infected.  The incidence of LL in
 an immunological tolerant birds is several timcs higher than in thosc with antibody.
Discases causcd by ALV besides LL are erythroblaslosis, myeloblastosis, myelocytomatosis,
fibrosarcoma, hacmangioma, nephroblastoma, osteopetrosis, and thc like.
30
Symptoms and Iesions
LL frequently dcvclops about the time of onset of lay (5 to 7 months old).  Occurrencc of
disease is rare before 4 months old. As to gencral symptoms, diminished appetite, ccssation of
cgg production, defecation of greenish diarrhoca, atrophy of the comb, and marked decrcasc of
body weight are observed. Finally, cxtcrnal palpation of tumours in the livcr and bursa of
Fahricius may be possible.
 In LL, white tumour lesions are formcd in internal organs cxprcssing the various lypes.
Above all, neoplastic swelling in the livcr is 1he most frequcn1 and marked (Fig. 1). Lesions
occur also in spleen, bursa of Fabricius (Fig. 2), kidney, ovary, bone marrow, and thymus.
According to thc types of tumour lesions in the liver, it is classificd into four typcs, difuse type,
granular lype, nodular type, and mixed type.  Usually, each type is associated by considerablc
swelling of the liver.  A border between the tumour and the surrounding tissues is obvious, and
the cells that constitute the tumour arc largc lymphoblastic cclls of uniform sizc.  'Ihese 1umour
cells arc largcr than thc lymphocyics observed in lymphoid tissue of healthy chickens.
Erythroblastosis is a neoplasma in which an erythroid cell in thc bone marrow bccomes
tumorigenic and cmerges in the periphcral blood, and the liver characteristically shows a reddish
brown colour.  Natural occurrcnce of erythroblastosis in the field is rare.  Myeloblastosis and
abnormally, and are rarely obscrvcd in thc field. Hacmangiomu is observed as tumours or
ruptures in the skin and intcrnal organs of chicks al various ages.  Nephroblastoma is a lesion in
which nephroblastic cells become tumorigenic and proliferate, and pinkish white or ash grey
tumours of various sizes are observcd in thc kidneys.  Ostcopctrosis has a lesion with osteoblast
proliferation and the bonc is thickened like a booi.  It is characterised by a swollen metatarsus
"boot like" giving rise to a stilted gaiter limping
Diagnosis
The incidence of LL is usually low at any one time, and it tends to occur mostly in chicks over 4
months old. The symploms are ataxia, poor egg production, loss of vitality, and diarrhoea.
The possibility of LL would be high if swelling of the liver and bursa of Fabricius could be
confirmed by cxternal palpation and nccropsy.  Diagnosis of this discase would be comparatively
casy if thc characteristics of visiblc lesions could be confirmed by necropsy.  When it is difficult
to differentiate this discase from Marek's discase and reticuloendotheliosis macroscopically,
  n t  s o  a  s  q si 
lymphoblastic cells with a comparativcly uniform sizc (Fig. 3), tumour cells in Marek's disease
consist of lymphoid cclls of various sizes, i.e. large, medium and small (Fig. 4). On the other
hand, in reticuloendotheliosis caused by reticuloendotheliosis virus 'I strain, the tumour consists
 of undifferentiatcd reticulum cells of a comparatively uniform sizc. Furthermorc, ncrve lesions
arc not observed in LL. As the tumour cell of LL is a B lymphoblast cell and possesses
immunoglobulin M (IgM) on thc surface, for differcntialion between LL and Marek's diseasc,
there are diagnostic methods using fluorcscent staining with FITC-labelled anti-chicken IgM
serum of chickcns infected with LL, by using a single radial immunodiffusion method. Of these
mcthods, that to detcc1 IgM by fluorescent antibody techniquc is thc quickcst at the prcsent time
(Fig. 5).  ALV detection and antibody detection are of no use for diagnosis of this disease as
Iymphoid Leukosis [1] 31
ALV is widespread in chickens in the ficld and AIV infection is not always relatcd to disease.
To isolate ALV, serum and emulsions of tumours are uscd.  Thc samples are inoculatcd into
chicken embryo fibroblasi cell cultures, and afler subcullure, group-specific antigen is detected by
ELISA and the COFAL test (complemenl-fixation test for avian leukosis viruses). Thcn, the
producer activation test) and PM (phenotypic mixing) test are applicd for AI.V isolation.
For
detection of antibody, EI.ISA, neutralization test and fuorescent antibody techniques arc used.
Prevention/Treatment/Measurcs
 In order to prevent infection of chickcns with lL and other diseases caused by ALV
infection, and the various factors of productivity lowered by AI.V infection, the best approach is
eradication of ALV from brecding henns. For eradication, the following proccdure is
recommended as the most practicablc mcthod.  ALV-shedding hcns are delccted by ELISA and
culled, then the hatched chicks are inspected and only non-AIV-infected chicks are bred in a
clcan (AI.V-free) cnvironment.
32
I .yinphoird Leukosis [r]
Fig. 1.Nodular type liver:Dense occurrence of large and small white nodules,whose borders are distinct.
Fig.2.Section of bursa of Fabricius:White neoplastic swelling of membrane plica.
Fig.3.
Histological lesion of aliver withLL:Tumour lesion consists of uniform,large lymphoblastic cells.HE
stain.(Original:Nakamura)
Fig.4.Histological lesion in a liver from Marek's disease:Tumour lesion consists of lymphoid cells of various
sizes,large,medium and small.HE stain.(Original:Nakamura)
Fig.5.Cell surfaceIgM of anLL-tumour cell:IgM detection by fluorescent antibody technique.
LymphoidLeukosis[r]
33
7.
Infectious Bursal Disease
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
An acute infectious disease caused by infectious bursal disease virus with high mortality
rate on occasion.
Depending on the strain, yellow oedematous alteration to the bursa of Fabricius, and
atrophy of thymus and adiposity of the bone marrow occur.
Histopathogically.
 necrosis   and   inflammatory   reaction   of  lymphatic 
tissueare
characteristic.
Marked inhibition of humoral immunity and disease exacerbated by secondary infection
with bacteria.
Although it may be possible to diagnose on the basis of lesions of bursa of Fabricius,
virus antigen should be detected for confirmation.
Differential diagnosis with Newcastle disease and haemorrhagic aplastic anaemia
syndrome is required.
Preventive measures are vaccination, all-in, all-out rearing, and lowering of the level of
infection by disinfection.
Outline of Disease
Infectious bursal discase (IBD), which is commonly called Gumboro discase, is characterised
by necrosis and an inflammatory rcaction of lymphatic tissue.  Most important are lesions of the
bursa of Fabricius.
IBIV, a member of the birnaviridae, is a virus that possesscs double-stranded RNA. It has
no cnvclope and is a spherical particle with a diamcter of 55 to 65nm.  IBDV is very stable and
resists treatmcnt with cther and chloroform.  It is inactivated at pH 12 but is not inactivatcd at
pH 2. 11 is also not inactivatcd a1 30°C, or by treatment for onc hour with 0.5% of phcnol or
0.125% thimerosal. On thc othcr hand, infectivity is markcdly lowered by 6 hours trea1ment
with 0.5% formalin. Of disinfectants, iodine and chloramine arc most effective against IBDV.
Two scrotypes (serotype l and 2) of IBD are found. Both scrotypes infcct chickens. Diseasc,
howevcr, is obscrved in the case of infection by serotype 1.
When chicks are infected with IBDV shortly after hatching (about O to two weeks), humoral
immunity is markedly inhibited. As a conscquence, particularly in the case of broilers, cxacerba-
tion of colibacillosis, slaphylococcus infection and inclusion body hepatitis is observed.
Thc
incidcnce of thcse conditions has, however been markedly reduccd according io the usc of
vaccines,
The mortality rate from IBD, which has prcviously bcen a problem in Japan, was low to
between 0 to several percent. Since thc summer of 1990, howcvel, therc has been an outbreak of
IBD, which is characterised by a higher mortaliy rate (it may reach over 50%) than following
infection with the earlicr type of IBDV, among a broiler fock in Kyushu. Thercafter, it has
occurred mainly in west Japan and is currently spreading over the whole country. It is said that
this IBD outbrcak is duc to a vcry virulent IBDV (vvIBDV) strain.  In a flock infected with a
vvIBDV, inhibition of humoral immunity is morc severe than with the carlier strain. Although
34
immune supprcssion is rarely obscrvcd in 2 to 4 wecks old chicks infectcd with the carlicr IBDV
typc, immunity is strongly suppressed in those infcctcd with the vvIBDv.
Symptoms and Lesions
According to pathogenicity and antigenicity, 1BDV serotype 1, is rcadily classified into three
groups, vvIBDV, earlier typc IBDV, and variant type IBDV.
In SPF chicks that arc cxpcrimentally inoculated with vvIBDV, clinical symptoms such as
depression, rufling of feathers and hypohydraemia are frequently observcd about two days after
inoculation.  Whilc rccovcry in some chicks is observcd from about 5 days aftcr inoculation, the
mortality rate may reach 80%. Macroscopically, dark red coloured skelelal muscle, and
hacmorrhaged, dark grecn colourcd liver and foci formation in the splccn are observed in dead or
affected chicks. Bursa is swollcn and bccomes oedcmalous, and finally it is covcrcd with a
gelatin-like substance, as was observed in bursa in pathogenic type IBD cases in the field (Fig. 1).
On the membranc surface of the bursa, folds are discoloured with hacmorrhages (Fig. 2). 'T'he
adipose and looks yellow or pink.  In chicks whcrc the disease has progresscd 1o some extent,
alteration is not observed. Histopathologically, nccrosis of lymphocytes in bursa and in-
fammatory reaction (Fig. 4), necrosis of lymphocytes in the thymus, dccrease of lymphocytes
and inflammalory rcactions in the splccn and caccal tonsil, proliferalion of myclocytcs in the bonc
marrow, and hepalitis with adiposity of hepatocytcs arc obscrved to a moderalc to high degree.
In chicks inoculated with variant typc IBDv, few clinical signs are observed. Rapid
atrophy of bursa without inflammatory rcaction occurs.  Atrophy of the thymus is not obscrved.
In 1his connection, the cxistence of the variant typc IBDV has not yet been confirmcd in Japan.
Diagnosis
Pathological diagnosis: In the field this discase is frequently observed in a flocks of 3 to 5 weeks
old, whcn maternal antibody is waning.
In affected chicks as mcntioned abovc, characteristic lesions such as yellow and oedcmatous
alteralion of the bursa is seen. It is possible to diagnosc the disease by confirming thc gross
lesions. For an accurate diagnosis, however, IBDV should be isolated from the bursa.
Virological diagnosis: Embryonated cggs or lymphoblastoid cell lines are used for isolation of
IBDV from the bursa.  In chick cmbryo fibroblasts and chicken kidncy cullurcs, growth of IBDV
field strains is not good, therefore neither of thcse cultivated cells are suitable for isolation of
IBDV. IBDV antigen is casily dctectcd in the bursa of an affcctcd bird. The agar gel
precipilation reaction, thc fluorcsccnt antibody technique and latex agglutination rcaction arc
employed for detection of antigen.  Recently, gene detcction using PCR has also been performed.
It is further reported that a distinction betweenl vvIBDV and the earlier typc of IBDV can be
achieved from the restriction enzymc clcavagc pattern of cDNA amplified by PCR.
Diffcrential diagnosis: Clinical symptoms or high mollality rate in a flock infccicd with
vvIBDV are similar lo Newcastle disease. Furthermore, in a fock infectcd with a vvIBDV,
transicnt anaemia and haemorrhagc of skclelal muscles are obscrved.  Differential diagnosis from
chick anacmia virus (CAV) infcction and haemorrhagic aplastic anaemia syndromc, in which
CAV is involvcd, is required. In a bird with a mixed infection of CAV and pathogenic IBDV,
      i      i    
anaemia.
Infectious Bursal Discasc[] 35
Prevcntion/Treatmcnt/Measures
It is suggested that the IBDV contamination rate is lowered by an all-in, all-oul rcaring
systcm and by disinfection. Howcvcr, immunisation by vaccination is the main prevcntative
mcthod for IBD. A brceding hen is immunised using live and inactivated vaccincs and
commcrcial chicks are protccicd against IBDV infection shortly after hatching by maleinal
 antibody. Then, following disappearance of maternal antibody in the commercial chicks, they
arc actively immuniscd using livc vaccine and arc thcrcby protected agains1 IBDV infection.  In
cases where IBD develops subclinically, baclerial infection may be exacerbated by im-
 munosuppression.  Such cases require anlibiotics to treat bacterial infcctions.  Howcvcr, there is
currently no treatmcnt for IBD itself.
Fig. l. Bursa of an carlier type IBD case in the ficld: The bursa is yellow and is covered with gclatinous likc
cxudate. (Original: Taniguchi)
Fig. 2. Bursa of a field case of IBD infected with a vvIBDV: It is slightly atrophied with strong haemorrhages
(left).  It is swollen and is tinged with yellow (right). (Original: Tanimura)
Fig. 3. Thyunus of a bird experimentally infected with a vvlBDV: Strong atrophy of lobc (bottom). 3086 control;
3032 pathogenic type virus; 3083 and 3087 vvIBIV strain. (Original: Taniinura)
Fig. 4. Histological lesion of bursa of a bird experinentally infecied with earlier type IBD: Airophy of folliclc by
necrosis and degcneration of lymphocytes in the lymph folliclc and infammatory oedema and cellular iniltration
in the stroma. HF stain. (Original: Taniguchi)
36
Infectious Bursal Discasc [r]
3086
3032
3083
3087
Infectious Bursal Disease[r]
37
8.  Fowl Pox [r]
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Fowl pox is a viral disease that shows characteristic pocks on skin and mucous
membranes of chickens.
Poxviruses of birds are closely related to each other and show the strongest pathogenicity
in the specific host
The disease is transmitted by mosquitoes and biting gnats and by wound infection. Two
types exist, cutaneous form and diphtheric form, according to the site of the pocks.
Progress of pocks in the cateneous form : rash (→) papule (→) erosion (→) crust (→)
desquamation.
Progress of the diphtheric form :moist sweling (→) cheesy pseudomembrane (→)
desquamation.
Diagnosis is by epidemiology. characteristic progression of the pocks. detection of
intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies, isolation of the virus, and so on.
Live vaccine is effective for prevention.
Outline of Disease
Fowl pox is an acute viral discase that shows characlcristic pocks on the skin and mucous
mcmbranes of fowls.  This disease has existed since prehistory and still exists, not only in Japan,
but also throughout the world.  Although this disease occurs at any time during thc year and at
any place, thcre is a tendency that in particular, the cutencous form frequcntly occurs bctween
summcr and autumn and thc diphtheric form in the winter.  The spread of vaccination and
improvcment of hygienc controlling tcchniqucs havc rcccntly diminished the damage causing by
fowl pox,
The causative agent belongs to the poxvirus group, as does human variola (smallpox), which
had raged previously. Although thc form and character arc similar to variola virus, it has no
pathogenicity for humans and other animals. In size it is the largcs1 virus, and it has a
cylindrical, brick shapc. 'Thc virus prcfcrcntially invades epithelium, produces papules on the
surfacc, and forms intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies (Bollinger bodies) in infected cells. As the
virus is very resistant to dryness, it can survive quite a long time in naturc. On thc othcr hand,
it is comparativcly casily destroyed by hcat and is immcdiatcly inaclivated by general disinfect-
ants.
 In avian species, turkey pox, pigeon pox, canary pox and sparrow pox are known in addition
to fowl pox. Although these are closely related to cach other, they havc the strongest
 pathogenicity for their specific host, and cach charactcristic of their immunity differs to some
extent. In addition, pox occurs in ducks, gccsc, groosc, guinca fowl, quail, partridges, and
pheasants.  Although it is not yct ccrtain tha1 the poxvirus that infects these birds is specific for
each species, it has been found that some infections in groose and quail arc causcd by fowl pox.
As fowl pox is transmited by mosquitoes and biting gnats, spread of the diseasc in summer
is closely related to the activity of these blood-sucking insccts, and the duration of sprcad is longer
85
in warm areas than in cool ones. Besides mosquitoes and biling gnats, fowl pox virus can infcct
through wounds on skin or mucous membrancs.  Loss of feathers, bites by louse and biting louse
and dcterioration of thc mucous membrane caused by othcr diseases give opportunity for
infection, as docs simple wounds.  Propagalion of virus in an adult chickens and spread to a fock
is by these routes of infection i.e. contact and droplet.  The spreading capacity, howcvcr, is
obviously limited, as infection by fowl poxvirus rcquires some wound.
Irrespective of scx, age and specics, fowl pox is uniformly infcctious.  Practically, however,
there are some differences to be observed as follows: Leghorn brceds with a largc comb and wattle
arc morc likcly to bc infccted than other brccds, and in young chicks, on the other hand, there is
a tendency that the shank and mucous mcmbranc will be invaded.  There is a tendency for the
disease to develop frequently among chicks from about one month old to onsct of lay. Thc
discasc infrequcntly develops in chickcns older than two years, because they have developed
immunity by being exposed to mosquitoes and biling gnats during the summcr.  Thc diphtheric
form is particularly prone to develop among one- to three-month old chicks hatched from aulumn
to early spring.
Symptoms and Lesions
 In the casc of the cutancous form fowl pox, which differs from the progress of the general
wounds, it is characterized by the following typical progress of development. 1.  A small ash
grey papule emerges 5 to 6 days after infection. 2. Papules gradually enlarge with yellowish
colouring, and they may mcrgc into cach other. 3. The peak is reached 3 to 5 days after
cmergence of the papule, and hacmorrhage is obscrved in thc centre. Finally, thc wholc rcgion
develops into a dark red erosion. 4. A dry chocolale-coloured crust forms. 5.  The crust is
naturally desquamated after 10 days.  The appcarance of the diphtheric form pox differs slighily
from that of the culaneous form.  'Thc altcration of the mucosa of the larynx and trachea begins
with moist swelling, it forms a cheesy pseudomembrane. The virus proliferated in the pock
region enters the blood and viracmia may devclop.
 Transmission of pox occurs if there is a
wound anywherc on the body during this phase
 Pocks frequently develop in regions without feathers such as comb (Fig. 1), wattle, cyelids,
and beak.  They may also develop on the shank, inside the wing and the periphery of the cloaca.
The diphtheric form develops in thc oral cavity, particularly in the larynx region, the nasal cavity
and the trachea (Fig. 2), and it may further develop in the bronchus. Pocks in the trachcal
 mucosa are localised and rarely covers the whole region.
Whcn lesions cmergc in thc first bronchi, thc mucosa of the bronchi is hypertrophied, and
pneumonia is observed around it. The mucosa of the nasal cavity, the nasolacrymal duct and
 infraorbital region are also hypertrophied. Exudate accumulates in the lumen and a great deal
Of exudate may be observed as a cheesy lump. No alteration is observed in the parenchymal
Organs.
The occurrence of general sympioms varies according to region and degrcc of incidence of
 pock, according to age of chicks, or thc prescnce of a mixed infection. When young chicks are
infected, their growth is inhibitcd, and when the respiratory organs are afectcd, the degrcc of
growth rclardation incrcases.
. The mortality rate increases in cases of complicalions with othcr
respiratory organisms. In layers, egg production may be affected and may cease for one to two
months.
aftcr 3 to 4 wecks, but may be longcr in cascs of mixed infcction. The cutaneous form can heal
faster than the diphthcric form.
Fowl Pox []
39
Diagnosis
 Fowl pox causes pocks on the skin (cutaneous form) and mucous meimbranes (diphtheric
tic, diagnosis is not difficult, Factors related to season and age can be of reference for diagnosis.
Whilc the catencous form cmcrges from summer to early auturmn when the mosquito and biting
 gnat appears, the diphtheric form emerges more frequently in winter. Birds that are over Iwo
 years old and have bccn rcarcd through the summer, gcnerally resist the disease, and the disease
frcquently develops betwcen one month old and onset of lay. Howcver, as in case of the
diphtheric forrm, the respiratory symptoms resemble othcr respiratory diseases (infeclious bron-
chitis, infectious laryngotracheitis, Newcastle diseasc, infectious coryza, mycoplasmosis and so
 On).  Also, there are many mixed infcctions with these diseases, and the prescnce of pocks in the
larynx and lower tracheal should be investigated by autopsy. Determinative diagnosis is
performed by virus isolation or detection of intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies (Bollingcr bodies)
from the tissues of pock region (Fig. 3).
Prevention/Treatment/Measures
 As this virus or this discase has somc particular characteristics, it is desirable to apply hygicne
control by duly considering these features. That is to say, to be particularty careful about the
elimination of blood-sucking insects such as mosquito, biting louse and lousc, prcvention of
scattering of dust and droppings, prevention of incursion of wild birds, and enforcemcnt of
disinfection.
Fowl poxvirus vaccine is very efiective and wing web application of attenuated virus is
fundamental.
 Oral administration and production of polyvalent vaccines, in which othcr viruses
are incorporated together with poxvirus, are currently under development.
40
FowlPox [1↓
Fig.1.Comb of a chicken experi-
mentallyinfected with poxvirus:
Large and small pocks appear dark
red.(Original:Sagawa)
Fig.2.Trachea of a chicken in-
2
fectedin the field:Pocks in mucous
membrane.(Original:Sato)
Fig.3.Histological pox lesion in
feather follicle region:Acidophilic
inclusion body seen in intracyto-
plasm of swollen and hyperplastic
cells(Bollinger bodies)（→).HE
stain.(Original:Sanada)
FowlPox[r]
41
9.  Avian Encephalomyelitis
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Chicks infected with avian encephalomyelitis virus shows nervous signs (leg paralysis,
tremour of head and neck).
symptoms. In most chicks infected with the virus, it is an inapparent infection.
There is no gross lesion. Histologically, central chromatolysis of a neuron in the central
nervous system is characteristic.
When a layer is infected, egg production transiently drops, showing a V curve.
Characteristic pathological observation is in the central nervous tissue. Diagnosis is by
detection of virus antigen and isolation of virus.
Prevention of egg transmission by vaccination to breeding hens and of infection in young
chicks by maternal antibody.
Outline of Diseasc
Chicks are infected through egg from brccding hens that are infected with avian encephalo-
myelitis (AE) virus, and chicks hatching with infccted chicks show symptoms. Sometimcs older
chicks or adult birds free from antibody are infcctcd with the virus and show nervous symptoms
such as lcg paralysis and trcmor of the head and neck. When laycrs arc infecled, egg production
drops transicntly showing a V curvc.
AE virus (AEV) belongs to Picornaviridac (the genus is undetermined). It has positive
singlc-stranded RNA, has a diamctcr of 26 to 30nm, and is vcry resistant to heat.  Although thc
pathogenicity for thc biid differs according to the strain isolalcd, thc antigenicity is the same.
Natural infcction occurs mainly in chickens but pheasants, turkeys and quail are also affected.
When a biceding hen is infected, the egg production drops with a V curve for about 9 to 14
days after infection, and thc virus is shed into the hatching cgg for aboui 2 1o 14 days affcr
infcction. The virus proliferatcs in the cmbryo during ineubation, and an cmbryo that survivcs
deaih will hatch. While thesc chicks infectcd via egg are affected with the disease directly after
hatching or for 6 days after hatching, healthy chicks hatched during thc samc period are
horizontally infected and develop the disease from about 10 days old.  That is, occurrcnce of AF
in a fock shows a two-crest modc.  The infectivity rate for chicks in thc field is 40 to 60% and
the mortality rate is about 25% and sometimes ovcr 50%. Most of breeding focks in the field
arc immcdiately anlibody positivc aftcr thc infection.  As maternal antibody passes to chicks,
Occurrence of this disease in the progeny of the affected focks stop and will not occur again.
Symptom and Lesions
Symptoms in young chicks begin with depression and trcmors, and thcn ataxia. Subsequent-
ly, they show paralysis of the leg and folling on sides, and finally die after bcing incapable of
feeding and drinking (Fig. 1). In a flock that has survived this period without dying, blindness
sporadically occurs due lo opacity of the lcns.  In layers, there is a drop of cgg production with
Characteristic gross lesions are not obscrved. lHisiopathologically, gliosis wih nodular
aggregates and ccll infiltration particularly in the lumber region of the spinal cord and midbrain
 of the central nervous system are characteristic (Fig. 2). In Purkinje's cells of the cerebcllum,
a large amount of virus antigen is found and atrophy and loss of cells are observcd.  Hyperplasia
of lymphoid follicles in intcrstitial connectivc lissues such as the gizzard, pancreas and hcart is
also one of the charactcristic lesions (Fig. 3).
Diagnosis
Epidemiological diagnosis: The discase begins dircctly after hatching and lasts for three weeks.
It is obscrved in chicks hatched from thc same Hock at thc samc time.  Because, if a fHock is
antibody positive, thc hatchcd chicks do nol develop the diseasc, serologically monitoring of
brceders is important.
Histopathological diagnosis: As thcrc is no charactcristic gross lesion, besides thc above
nique or the fluorcscent antibody tcchnique are used to detcct virus antigen in central nervous
tissues.
Virological diagnosis: AEV prolifcrates well in chick embryo fibroblasts, brain, kidncy and livcr
cells. However, as cytopathic cffcct is not scn, specific antigen in the cyloplasm is detected by
an indirect or direct fluorescent antibody technique (Fig. 4). As for chick embryo fibroblasts,
the subculiured ccll has higher sensitivity than primary cultures. Furthermorc, the sensitivity is
incrcased if 3% dimethyl sulphoxide is added to thc medium.  As growih of the virus is slow,
fluoresccnt antibody detcction is performed on the fourth and scventh day after inoculation.
Brain and spinal cord arc used as materials for virus isolalion.
Brain and spinal cord emulsion of affcctcd chicks arc inoculated into the yolk sac of 6 day-old
 s s  se     e i sa  
obscrved.
Anlibody is assaycd by the indirect fuorescent antibody techniquc, agar gel precipitalion
rcaction, ELISA or neutralization test.  Yolk sac ncutralization antibody test (embryo sensitivity
test), in which embryo-virulent AEV is inoculated into the yolk sac of embryonatcd cggs and the
prcsence of cmbryo ataxia is recorded, is widely used.
As AEV is widesprcad in thc ficld and most flocks are antibody positive as a rcsult of
inapparent infeciion, antibody assay is not practical for diagnosis of the diseasc. However, as 
virus infcction of a brceding flock that is antibody negative, may lcad the disease of thc progeny.
it is imporlanl to determinc the antibody status of a flock by serology prior to collect hatching
cggs.
Differential diagnosis: Discases that requirc differentiation from AE arc cnccphalomalacia,
Newcasile discase and Marck's disease. As Newcastle disease causes respiratory signs and
Marek's diseasc is not seen in baby chicks, differenliation from thesc diseases is casy.  Although
cnccphalomalacia devclops directly afler halching in the casc of chicks hatched from hens with
vitamin F deficicncy, in most cascs, the disease develops in chicks under two months old.
Besides paralysis of the legs, thc symptoms of this diseasc can be differentiatcd frorn AE by
observing epileptoid symptoms and malacia and haemorrhagc in thc tissues of the cercbellum and
cerebrum.
Prevcntion/Treatmcnt/Measurcs
In order to prevcnt baby chicks becoming infected through the cgg. immunisation of
A vian Encephalomyelitis 43
brccding flocks is required.  A serological test is performed on 100-120 day-old breeding flocks.
 If they are antibody ncgativc, they are immuniscd with livc vaccine and the takc is confirmcd by
serology afler one month to cnsure that thcy arc then antibody positivc. For layers, thc samc test
 is performed and vaccination is used if necessary.
Fig. 1. Symptoms in chicks infected nalurally: Inability to stand caused by paralysis of legs and abnormal gait.
(Original: Horiuchi)
( ) a t  s  o sa eu a s l   i
n )   sd   ' e i  o  r ()
 Fig. 4. Chick embryo fbroblasts infected with AE virus: Specific fluorescence is observed in the cytoplasm (4 days
after infection).Fluorescent antibody techniquc.
44
Avian Encephalomyclitis
AvianEncephalomyelitis
45
10.
Egg
rome-1976
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Egg drop syndrome is caused by a aviadenovirus known as egg drop syndrome 1976 virus.
A transient egg drop or failure to peak production lasting for 3 to 8 weeks.
Poor shell formation, such as shel-less eggs, thin shelled or broken eggs, discoioured
eggs.
Gross lesion is oedema of plica of the uterus of the oviduct
Histological lesions are necrosis and desquamation of mucous epithelium of the uterus
and atrophy of the submucosa of the uterine gland.
Intranuclear inclusion bodies are observed in the mucous epithelium of the uterus
Serological tests are performed by the haemagglutination inhibition test.
Outline of Diseasc
Egg drop syndrome-1976 (EDs-76) is named after the ycar when this discase was first
reporicd and is an infcctious disease that is mainly characterized by drops in egg production with
poor shcll quality due to EDS-76 virus infeetion.  Clinical symptoms are slight or non-existent.
No respiratory signs arc observed and diarrhoea is only rarcly observcd. No mortality occurs.
This discasc is observed irrcspective of type of bird and season and frequently devclops at the pcak
of lay, at 30 to 40 weeks old.  This disease is transmitted by infcction through thc cgg and by
horizontal infection.  The presence of infection in a flock is confirmed by antibody detcction
using the haemagglutination inhibition (HI) test for EDS-76 virus.
Symptoms and Lesions
   i     s s o    
secn. After infection, egg production suddenly bcgins to drop and rcachcs the lowest point in
 so n s si aano a e a dp  e p sam d m g  A si doip aa
When infection occurred before peak, a drop, where the peak itself is lowered, is obscrved. In
either case, abnormal shell formation, such as shell-lcss, thin shellcd, broken or discoloured eggs
than 10% of cggs collccted.
No abnormality in egg yolk and egg white is observed. Gross lesions arc observcd in the
oviduct.  From the early stage of development to the pcak, thc mucosal plica of thc ulcrus show
oedema, and white exudate and chcesy substanccs arc obscrved in the uterus (Fig. 2). Regressed
ovarian follicles may be observed in thc ovary.  No lesions are observcd in other organs.
Transmission of Disease
 This discasc is transmitted both through the egg and horizontally. An infccted fertile egg
normally hatchcs containing 1he virus and grows into a chicken.  Al onset of lay 1he virus begins
46
10 replicate as a resull of the associated stress.  Thc virus is shed in the faeces and sputum and
thus spreads the infection.  For that reason, there is a tendency for the infcction to occur more
quickly in floor rearing flocks and more slowly in cagc houscd oncs.  Also, as there is no airbornc
transmission, the infection spreads poorly between flocks if good biosccurity is practiscd.
Mechanism of Infection
 Infectious virus proliferales in the intestinc, trachea and liver and disappears 7 to 10 days
after infection, coincident with the rise of antibody titre. In the epithelium of the uterus,
however, the virus continues to rcplicate, even after the rise of antibody, and reaches a peak titre
in 10 to 14 days aftcr infection.  During this period, necrosis and dcsquamalion of the mucous
controls cxcreltion of shcll calcium, occur. In fowls infected with EIs-76 virus, thcrcforc, cggs
with abnormal shell formation arc characteristically produced due to insuffcicnt deposition of
shell calcium and shcll pigmentation.
Diagnosis
Whcn a drop in cgg production occurs, with production of ahnormal shelled cggs, this diseasc
is suspected.Determinative diagnosis is done by antibody detection and pathological investiga
tion,
Serological diagnosis: EDS-76 virus posscsses a hacmagglulinin (HA), and thc antibody is
detected by the HI test using fowl crythrocytes.  At the time of discase, antibody is prcsen1 and
the titre increascs 1: 8 to 1: 512. This disease may be diagnosed by the characleristic symptoms
and antibody dctection using paired serum samples.
Histopathological diagnosis: When the uterus, which has gross lesions, is his1opathologically
obscrved, ocdema of mucosal plica, infiltration of lymphocytes and dccrease and atrophy of thc
secretory glands are obscrved (Fig. 3).
From the carly stage of devclopment to the peak, intranuclear inclusion bodies, which are
formcd by proliferation of EDs-76 virus, arc observed in cpithelial cells (Fig. 4). Also, by using
Differential diagnosis: A layer shows a drop in cgg production as a result of infectious diseases
and stress. Discases, which particularly require differentiation, are infectious bronchitis and
avian cnccphalomyelitis.  With infectious bronchitis, an abnormal cgg such as a deformcd egg is
the egg drop is transient and looks similar, there is no production of abnormal eggs.  Avian
encephalomyelitis differs from this disease also in that the hatching rate is lowered in the fertile
cggs, and after hatching the chicks show ncrvous symptoms and dic. Each diseasc can be
ap Apogne q pur saas puouqe jo si oun jo uonaioqo Aq pneusio
Prevention/Treatment/Measures
This disease is transmitted in two ways, onc is via the eggs laid by brecding hens infected with
thc virus and the other is due to horizontal infection among susccptible laycrs.  In a laying fock,
one application of inactivated vaccine is cffective for prevention of replication.  However, in
Japan, whcre the occurrcnce of this discase is sporadic, it is important to prevent replication of
this disease by isolating or culling an antibody positive group and striving to cradicate the diseasc.
Particularly, as a brccding flock infected with this discase spreads infection to progeny, it should
be eradicated. As the virus is shed in faeccs and is stablc under natural conditions, a con
Egg Drop Syntdrome-1976  47
taminated shed should be carefully clearcd and disinfected.
Fig. 1. Abnormal cggs in a casc of EDs-76: Normal egg (top, right), discolourcd cgg (middle, right), broken egg
(botiorm, right), shell-less cgg (bottom left).
Fig. 2. Lterus (of oviduct of an afected hen: Oedcimatous swelling of thc mucosal plica and white exudate and
cheesy substanccs in the utcrus cavity.
Fig. 3. Histological lesions of inucosal plica of utcrus of oviduct: Marked swelling and cell infiltralion of
submucosa. HF stain. (Original: Taniguchi)
Fig. 4. Histological lesions of mucosal plica of ulerus of oviduct: Intranuclcar inclusion body in mucosal epithelial 
48
Egg Drop Syndrome-1976
Egg Drop Syndrome-1976
49
11.
Viral Tenosynovitis/Arthritis
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Chronic diseases of the hock joint, particularly of the tendon sheath of the gastrocnemius
sniaoai ueiae Aq pasneo sanssll luaiqwe sl! pue uapual
Affected fowls clinically show lameness. The degree of the infection is dependent on the
pathogenicity of the virus and the age of the bird.
The tendon and its surrounding tissues show oedematous and hypertrophy and thickening
tendon.
Besides clinical, post mortem and histological observations, isolation of virus and
confirmation of the pathogenicity are used for diagnosis.
Although a vaccine is effective for passive immunisation of chicks, the effect is reduced if
the serotype of the virus is different from the vaccine.
Outline of Disease
The lesions, which are relaled to viral tenosynovitis/arthritis, are rupturc of thc
gastrocnemius tendon and blue leg.   Rupture of the gastrocnemius tendon is believed to develop
following tcnosynovitis as a result of the tendon damage.  That is, the tendon and tendon sheath
are in a state of poor claslicity and thc tendon is casily ruptured after rapid movement or when
a load placed on it. Considerable haemorrhage from the ruptured rcgion infiltratcs into thc
subcutancous tissue and is the reason for the blue leg.  Tenosynovitis is causcd by avian reovirus
(ARV) infection but at thc same timc, it is questionable if all tendon rupture is due 1o ARV
tenosynovitis.  Arthritis is also caused by fowl adenovirus, but this occurs rarely and is so slight
that the lesion can be disregarded.
ARV is an RNA virus with a diameter of 7Onm. It is widespread in chicken flocks and is
onc of the viruscs that is casiest to isolate. ARV exists as many serotypes and the pathogenicity
differs with strain. Experimental tenosynovitis is influenced by many conditions, c.g.
pathogenicity and infecting dose of the ARV, age of the chicken whcn infectcd infcction routc and
statc of immunity.  When chicks that possess no maternal antibody are infected with virulent
ARV, thcy are prone to develop serious tenosynovitis.
Damagc is mostly duc to the blue leg that is observed on average in 1% of broilers at
slaughter. Also, hock joinis, which devclop tcnosynovitis, arc pronc to devclop pyogcnic
arthritis caused by Staphylococcus and E. coli.  Damage by these secondary infections cannot be
disregarded.
Symptoms and Lesions
Affecied chickcns show lamencss or inability 1o stand.  The gastrocnemius tcndcn and is
ambient tissues of the hock joint region show oedematous.  With the progress of the disease, the
gastrocnemius muscle shows incrcasc hypcrtrophy and sclcrosis and finally, bluc leg wiih rupturc
of the tendon after 7 wccks of age (Fig. 1).  The tendon rupture frequently occurs unilaterally
50
or bilaterally in the gastrocncmius tcndon, and il is seen much more frequenlly in the slaughler
house than in the farm. When it bccomcs chronic, without rupture of the tendon, nodular
hypertrophy is seen in the digital fexor and tarsometatarsal extensor tendon arcas, with
hyperplasia of the fbrous connective tissues, and becomes large enough to be palpated (Fig. 2).
Histopathologically, the discasc is characteriscd as chronic tenosynovitis. In thc acutc
period, fbrinogen inside the synovial membrane, exudation of serous fluid, ocdcma of subsynovial
tissues, infltration of fbroblasts and macrophages, hyperplasia of synovial cells, and cellular
infltration by lymphocytes and plasma ceils are observed (Fig. 3).  Lsing the fuorescent
antibody tcchniquc, viral spccific antigen is obscrvcd along the tendon sheath (Fig. 4).  Fibro-
nous hyperplasia of the connective tissue become noticeable in the chronic stage.  At the same
time, pyogenic infammation due to secondary infection by bacteria is often observed.
Diagnosis
Clinical diagnosis: It is diagnoscd in chickcns with lcg wcakness. Swelling of the digital joint
in the acute period is sligh1 and is difficult to detect.  In a chronic case, nodular hypertrophy in
the digital joint can be palpated. In a case of the haemorrhagc in thc lower thigh is ohscrved,
diagnosis is casy.
Histopathological diagnosis: Chronic and hyperplastic infammatory alteration of the tcndon
sheath and the surrounding tissues is scen. Howevcr, pyogenic inlammation duc lo sccondary
infcclion by bacteria may also be observed.
Virological diagnosis: Chicken kidney cell culture, chick embryo liver cell culture Or
embryonated cggs arc used for isolation of ARV from lesions. In case of tendon rupture,
isolation from matcrial in the late pcriod of infcction is difficult in most cases.  As thcrc are many
inapparent infections, pathogenicity for chickens of the isolated strain is confirmed by inoculation
into the foot pad.  When the causative virus has high pathogenicity for chickens, thc foot pad arc
scriously swollcn.
Differcntial diagnosis: There are a lot of causes of leg weakness.  Above all, it should be
differentiated from arthritis caused by staphylococcus, colibacillus and mycoplasma.  If bactcrial
isolation is attemptcd and these bacteria arc not found, then thcy can be climinalcd for thc limc
bcing
P'revention/Treatmcnt/Measurcs
Washing and disinfection of poultry sheds and equipment are strictly conducted in order t0
climinate ARv. After placing thc chicks in the shed, hygicne control is carefully managcd, and
all attempts that can be made to prevent the chicks becoming infected that could lead to disease,
which serotype TS-142 is included, has becn devclopcd.  When a brccding hcn is injcctcd with
this vaccine, high neutralizing antibody titres can be induccd and passive immunity is confcrred
 On the hatched chicks. IHowever, protection against ARV of different serotypes cannot be
expected.
As tendon rupture occurs mostly in oldcr broilcrs with large body wcight at thc limc of
transport, weight control by restrictcd fccding may rcduce the occurrence tendon rupture.  In
this case, however, dccreasc of cconomic efficiency by loss of body weight may occur. Also, as
the shock of collecting birds for transport may promotc thc rupture, it is desirable to try catching
thcm carcfully to rcduce the shock to thcm.
Ss
¥51
Fig. 1. Blue leg observed in slaughterhouse: Rupture of tendon and obvious hacmorrhage. A 57 day-old broiler.
surroundingarea(*).
Fig. 3. Histopathological lesions in the tendon shcath of the digital joint of a chick 21 days after cxperimcntal
infection with avian rcovirus at day-old: Hypertrophy and ccllular infiltration of the rendon shcath. HE stain.
Fig. 4. Digilal joint of a chick 42 days after experimental infection with avian reovirus at day-old: Viral specifie
antigen fluorescence (bserved along the tendon sheaih. Fluorescent antibody technigue.
52Viral Tenosynovitis/Arthritis
Viral Tenosynovitis/Arthritis
53
12.
Chicken Anaemia Virus Infection
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Anaemia caused by injury of the bone marrow medulla resulting from chicken anaemia
virus infection.
Chicks infected via the egg mostly deveiop the disease and most chicks show an
inapparent infection.
Marked decrease of erythrocytes, leukocytes, thrombocytes and haematocrit count
Gross lesions are yellowness of the medulla, atrophy of the thymus and bursa of
Fabricius, and haemorrhage of muscle and proventriculus.
Epidemiological observations and gross lesion determine the diagnosis at the time of
occurrence and virus isolation is also attempted
practicable in Japan.
Outline of Disease
Chicken anaemia virus (CAV) is a virus that causes a strong anaemia (aplastic anaemia)
resulting from mcdulla injury in chicks. CAV is a smal, single-stranded circular DNA virus and
shows strong resistance to heat treaiment and disinfectants. The name Circoviridae has bccn
suggested for the family of new viruses, to which CAV belongs. This virus was called chicken
anaemia agent (CAA) until its propcrties had been confirmed. Furihermore, diseascs causcd hy
this virus are also called chicken anacmia virus infcction, chicken anaemia disease or chicken
infectious anaemia.
CAV is widespread in chickcn flocks and most chickens that are commercially rearcd arc
infected with this virus. Most chickens, however, do not devclop the diseasc cxccpt as young
chicks. If once infected they have inapparent infection.  When a breeding hen rcaches the egg
laying period without infection and is then infected with the virus aftcr on set of lay, chicks
develop the diseasc by infection via the egg.  The chicks show clinical signs at 1 to 4 weeks in this
case, and the mortality and culling rates are from a few percent to 16%. The causc of disease in
older chicks is considercd to bc immune supprcssion, due to infection with infcctious bursal
discase virus.
CAV infects cclls in the haemalopoictic system of the bone marrow medulla and harms thc
function of haematopoictic tissues.  Becausc of this, the hacmatopoiesis of all types of blood cells
such as erythrocytes, leukocytcs and thrombocytes, and syslemically severe anaemia (pan-
cytopoenia) devclop.  Those haematopoietie and circulatory disordcrs are a  causc of
hacmorrhagic diathesis, dysfunction of lymphoid organs and immune supprcssion.
Symptoms and Lesions
An experimentally infecied casc shows signs of clinical abnormality one week after virus
inoculation, and the peak of mortality is after two to threc weeks. Chicks losc appctitc and
vitality and crouch down. Skin, muscle or systcmic organs of affected or dead chicks arc
54
and subcutaneous tissue (Fig. l) and in the proventriculus mucosa, among the internal organs.
In the bone marrow medulla, aplasia occurs and it turns light pink or yellowish white (Fig. 2).
Atrophy of lobulcs of the thymus is observed (Fig. 3). Lesions in the medulla and thymus arc
always observed in affected birds. Furthermore, atrophy of the bursa of Fabricius and swelling
of the livcr arc obscrved.
Histopathology in the medulla of a serious casc, haematopoietic tissue is displaced by adipose
tissues and normal cells are rarely observed. Lymphocytes in the lymphatic tissues decrease
markedly and oftcn correspond to the atrophic gross lesion sccn in the tissucs of the lymphatic
systcm.
Diagnosis
Epidemiological diagnosis: The diseasc mostly develops in chicks infcctcd via the egg. In that
casc, diseasc is scen within 4 weeks.  It occurs in chicks hatchcd from the same breeding hen ovcr
the same period.  As the rate of infection is low when a breeding flock possesses anlibody due to
infection, antibody status in a breeding flock is also useful for diagnosis.
Clinical and pathological diagnosis: Haemocytes count of affected birds is lower than that of
hcalthy ones, and the affectcd birds are anaemic. Erythrocyte volume (haematocrit value) is
over 30% in a normal birds and in an affectcd birds may decrease to lcss than 10%.  Determi-
nation of the hacmatocrit value is a simplc mcthod to detcrmine the dcgrcc of anacmia.  In a
bird, which is infccted with CAV and shows anaemia, the above-mentioned gross lesions certainly
occur, and particularly, lesion of medulla are characteristic
Virological diagnosis: As thc virus sprcads widcly in flocks and there arc many cases of
inapparent infcclion, the rcsult of virus isolation cannot direcily bc rclated to diagnosis. How-
ever, it would be if virus was isolated frequently.  The fuorescent antibody technique, neutrali-
zation test or ElISA are used to detect antibody.  Although thesc are not useful for direct
diagnosis due to many inapparent infections, it is hclpful for prevention of infection to know the
immune stalus of a flock.
Differential diagnosis: There are diseases called haemorrhagic syndrome, haemorrhagic
from CAV infcction).  These discascs are characlerised by mycloid disorders and it is considcrcd
that lhey are toxicity from sulfa drugs and othcr drugs or caused by adenovirus infection.
HIowever, since the pathogenicity of CAV became clcar, CAV has been regarded as the main cause
of these diseascs.
Inclusion body hcpatitis (IBH) of chicken is charactcriscd by discoloration, oedcma and
hacmorrhage of the livcr (Fig. 4) and is a disease, which is caused by fowl adenovirus and
develops in 3 to 7 weck-old broilers.  Also in thc case of IBH, atrophy of the thymus and bursa
of Fabricius, discoloration of the medulla and haemorrhage of skcletal muscle may bc obscrvcd
and similar lesions lo CAV infection are scen. In CAV infection, however, sincc the character-
istic lesions in IBH such as pelechial haemorrhage of the liver and the presence of intranuclear
inclusion bodies arc not observed, it can casily be differentiated from IBH. However, due to the
difficulty of reproduction of IBH with adenovirus, it is also now considered that CAV infection
is associatcd with outbrcaks of IBH
 In Europe, there is a disease called anacmic dermatitis or bluc wing disease that devclops in
two to three week-old broilers. Haemorrhagc of subcutancous tissue and muscle, and atrophy of
lymphatic tissues also characterise the disease. Although the cause has not yct been establishcd,
it is suggested that the disease is caused by CAV infection.
Chicken Anacmia Virus Infcetion
Prevention/Treatment/Measurcs
It is considered that immunisation of brecding hens is cffcctive for prevention of disease
caused by CAV infection through the egg.  In Europe, therc arc some countrics whcrc a vaccine
is used for this purpose. In Japan, howevcr, vaccination is not performed. CAV may have
strong ability to cause thc above-mentioned diseases, and hygiene control is important for
preventing mixed infcclions.
Fig. 1. Muscles of a chick experinentally infected with CAV: Haemorrhagic lesions do not necessarily oecur but
are often observed in skeletal muscics and the mucosa of proventriculus.
  a n  a ai e  xi e s l  o  
the bottom
Fig. 3. Thymus of a chick experimcntally infected with CAV: Lobules are markedly alrophic caused by loss of
lymphocyles (top). Controls arc at thc bottom.
Fig. 4. Liver of a field case of inclusion body hcpatitis in chickens: oedema, petcchial haemorrhages.
56
 Chickcn Anaemia Virus lnfection
1
Chicken AnaemiaVirusInfection
57
13.
Mycoplasmosis [r]
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Mycoplasmosis of chickens is a chronic respiratory disease caused by two kinds of
mycoplasma that infrequently cause arthritis
 Economic damage from egg production drops in layers and condemnation due to air sac
disease inbroilers.
The infection is generally inapparent. The disease develops as a result of poor feeding
environment and a mixed infection with microbes and becomes serious.
Infectious status of a flock is determined serologically by the rapid plate agglutination
test.
Mycoplasma gallisepticum vaccine reduces the effect on egg production.
Outline of Disease
Mycoplasma (M) is one of the groups of microorganisms that taxonomically diffcr from
bacteria.  More than ten kinds of M isolatcd from fowls are known and among infcctious M for
chickens are Mycoplasma gallisepticum (MG) and M. synoviae (MS). The pathogenicity of MG
is stronger than MS, and in the present siluation in Japan, MG infection is widespread in
commercial layers and causes great economic damage, which is a factor in rcducing productivity
in the industry. As for MS infection, sporadic cases are observed as rcspiratory diseasc and
synovitis, but thc actual cxtcnt of damage is not clear.  In focks of layers and broilers, cleaning
 has recently been improvcd, rcsulting in succcssful prevention mcasures against both mycoplas-
mas.
Thc main infection site of MG and MS is the respiratory lrac1.  Both M arc transmittcd
horizonlally. Thesc arc quickly transmitted by the direct uptake of respiratory tracl cxcrction
from infected birds, through equipmenis, personals and drinking watcr contaminated by M.
MG adhercs to dusts, faeces and feathers outside the bird and survives in drinking walcr for a
long timc.  Thc transmission of MS all ovcr the flock is faster than MG and infection occurs in
a short pcriod.  When laycrs are infcctcd with mycoplasmas, thc mycoplasmas proliferate in the
lower parl of the respiralory tract and arc the cause of infection through thc cgg (vertical
transmission) by spread to the adjoining reproductive organs. This transmission causes M
infection of the next generation and problems in brccding flocks.  The incidencc of infcction
o sso o e s   p   a n n Aa s  ae qn
discase.
 In a farim with good fccding cnvironment, if birds are infected with mycoplasmas, the
infection gcncrally passcs as an inapparent one. However, when various adverse factors are
addcd, some birds may dcvclop the discase by incrcased transmission.
The faclors that aecelcrate transmission are mixed brceding of young non-infected birds and
oldcr infected birds, high-density breeding. poor environment in the shed (venlilalion and control
of temperature), mixed infection with other microorganisms. 'Ihis includcs evcry kind of virus,
Haemophilus paragallinarum (causal agent of infectious coryza), Escherichia coli, and olher
58
specics of M, etc. Speed of transmission to a fock and severity of discasc are affccted by thc
cxtent of the above-mcntioncd factors.
MS is known originally as an M that cause synovitis, and in MG, there is an M that
prefcrentially causcs arthritis.  When thc chickcns infected with thcse M in their respiratory
tracts are cxposcd to factors (e.g. immunc suppression by infection with infcctious bursal discase),
M sprcads to the joints, settles there and causes arihritis.
At the carly stagc of infection, MG only affects the rcspiratory tract and forms a lesion
Infected birds dcvelop immunity and usually show signs of recovery (whcn they arc not affectcd
by the afore-mentioned adverse factors).  Then, M restrictively settles down to a persistently
infectious statc.  Such a bird develops resistance to leinfcclion.
Symptoms and Iesions
The incubation period is not certain, being influenccd by the exlcnt of adverse factors.
Major clinical symptoms are respiratory diseases such as abnormal breathing, nasal discharge
coughing and sncezing.  Complications with infcctious coryza are facial swclling and lacryma
tion. A bird with synovitis shows lameness.
 In layers, cgg production decreascs.  Particularly, when MG affecis a flock at the beginning
of lay, the damage is more serious. Broilers become stunted and feed cfficiency is lowered. In
brccding chickcns, thc fertility and hatchability ratcs are lowcred and thc occurrcnce of poor
quality chicks increascs.  The damage continues for a long time due to persistcn1 infection by
covcred with ash grcy or ycllowish grcy viscous cxudate. Sometimcs pncumonia is obscrved.
Airsacculitis frequently develops in the anterior thoacic, posterior thoracic and abdominal air sacs
(Fig. l). Air sac walls becomc hypertrophicd and turbid, and viscous or yellowish cheesy
cxudatc adhercs to them lo various dcgrccs.  Whcn therc is a mixcd infcclion with colibacilli,
perihepatitis and pericarditis occur.
In a case showing synovitis, arthritis occurs, the joints and toe pad are swollen (Fig. 2), and
brcast blister is formed frcquently. In these rcgions with swellings, viscous or creamy, ash grcy
cxudatc is deposited.
Major histological findings in the respiratory organs are characterised by degcneration of
mucous epithelium, infiltration of lymphocytes and hyperplasia of lymphoid follicles in the lamina
propria and air sacs (Fig. 3).
Diagnosis
In case of infection, this discase can bc assumcd to some extcnt by observing the respiratory
Organs and by post-mortem observation.  However, the following antibody tests furthcr cnhance
the certainty of diagnosis, and then urgent mcasurcs are takcn. Isolation of M should be
attempted for morc certain diagnosis, but isolation and idcntification require a long time. Also,
as mixcd infection with bacteria and virus are usually conisidered in most cascs, it is necessary to
look for these at the samc time.
Specific antibody is detectcd by the scrum (or wholc blood) plate agglutination test,
employing a commercial antigen.This tcchnique wiih high sensitivity is simple and practical and
incidencc of M contanination of a fock (especially a brccding flock), sampling accuracy is
improved by testing the number of samples that is slatistically required. There are times where
non-spccific reactions occur (particularly about the beginning of lay).  In thal case, thc time of
the test should bc revised or the result should be confirmcd by performing a haemagglutination
Mycoplasmosis [r]   59
inhibition test, which is highly specific.
For isolation of M, slarting materials are swabs from the nasal cavity, infraorbital sinus,
trachea and air sac.  Thcse arc inoculated into mycoplasma liquid mcdium with addcd horsc
serum (for MG) or swine serum (for MG and MS) and are cullured at 37'C for over 1wo weeks
in a sealed atmosphere.  Then the medium, in which multiplication is suspected, is examined for
biological, biochemical and serological properties so that the M may be identified.
Prevention/Treatment/Measures
Breeding flocks should be produced and maintained as groups frcc of M.  In thesc flocks,
prevcntivc mcasurcs are fully undertakcn by controlling the cntry of humans, animals and goods
from outside, good hygiene control and appropriate administration of antibiotics. As a preven-
tive measurc for MG infection, macrolide or tetracycline antibiotics arc uscd, mainly in brceding
and rcaring flocks in commercial laycr farms thal are highly contaminated by MG.  Antibiotic
treatment against MS infection is difficult as compared with MG.
 In Japan, MG inactivated and livc vaccines arc currcntly cmployed in commercial laycrs.
Immunisalion has to been completed before the period of MG infection so that egg production
 drops caused by MG infection are prevented.
60
Mycoplasimosis[r]
Fig. 1.Air sac of a chicken infected
withMG:Hypertrophyand turbi-
dityof wallsand adherenceof
cheesy exudate.
Fig.2.A hock joint of a chicken
infectedwithMS:Swelling of joints
and stagnant white viscous fluid.
(Original:Sato)
Fig.3.Histological lesions in air sac
ofa chicken infected with MS:
Infiltration of lymphocytesand
hyperplasia oflymphoidfolliclesin
the lamina propria. HE stain.
(Original:Taniguchi)
Mycoplasmosis[r]
61
14.
Salmonellosis [n, r]
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
to the age of two weeks. A carrier bird is generally subclinically infected.
perihepatitis are observed.
 In carrier birds, with several types of salmonellae. such as Salmonella enterica subsp.
enterica serovar Galinarum-Pullorum biovar Pullorum, ovarian lesions are observed and
infection through the egg also occurs.
 Pullorum disease is diagnosed by the whole blood (serum) rapid agglutination test. Fowl
paratyphoid fever is diagnosed by isolation of bacteria.
Control of this disease is establishment of disease-free status of breeding flocks and
hygienic control of the hatchery and poultry farms, particularly control measures against
mice,and decontamination of feedstuffs.
A vaccine for prophylaxis and the competitive exclusion CE method are practicable.
In chickens infected with S. Enteritidis and S. Typhimurium, one should be careful about
food poisoning via contaminated eggs.
Outline of Disease
Salmonellosis is a discase that is not negligible and devclops commonly in humans and
animals by infection with salmoncllae. Salmonellae are classified into about 2,300 scrovars and
 some of them show pathogenicity for humans and animals.  Fowl salmonellae are classificd into
thc following diseases: Pullorum diseasc causcd by Salmonella Gallinarum biovar Pullorum, fowl
typhoid causcd by S. Gallinarum biovar Gallinarum, and fowl paratyphoid caused by other
serovars. Pullorum discase and fowl typhoid are designatcd as notifiable diseases, and fowl
paratyphoid, which is causcd by S. Enteritidis and S. Typhimurium, is dcsignated as a reportable
infectious disease.
Pullorum diseasc was once prevalent but was cradicatcd by continuous exposure and culling
of carricr birds.  The discase incidence has currently decreased to the extcnt that only onc case
has been reported in the last fcw ycars.  Fowl typhoid has not occurred in Japan. On thc other
hand, fowl paratyphoid seems to occur to somc cxtent, but as it is rare, the concerns in the poultry
industry are low and there are only a few cases rcportcd annually. Howcvcr, the disease was
recently regarded as scrious, since contaminated eggs produced at a very low frcquency by carrier
hens are relatcd to food poisoning. However, the economic disadvantagc to the chicken is
 negligible as a result of infectious discase caused by S. Enteritidis.
As for the transmission roulcs of salmonclla in chickens, via the egg (on or inside the egg),
contaminated feedstuff (deniable in the case of S. Enteritidis) and contaminated farm arc
gencrally recogniscd.
thc casc of chickcns naturally infected with S. Gallinarum biovar Pullorum and is one in a
thousand for S. Enteritidis. Furthermore, infection on the egg also occurs, although the
62
frcquency is low.
Transmission through feedstuff: Particularly in broilers. it is known that this could bc a
considcrable infection sourcc.
Transmission originating in thc environment: It is known that horizontal transmission occurs
by contaminated drinking water, and that animais such as mice, dogs, cats, wild birds and fies and
bcetles carry salmonellae.  It has recently been found that mice positively replicate S. Enteritidis
in thcir bodies and pollute the surrounding cnvironment by defecating into it.
I1 has further bcen found that various kinds of stress enhance susceptibility to salmonella
infection and promote defecation. In this case, heat, temporary suspension of food and watcr
supply (for about one to two days) and forccd moulting are known as strcsses.
Symptoms and Lesions
Thc diseasc and mortality in salmonellosis arc gencrally limited to two to three weeks after
hatching and wastage caused by death and culling is under just a few percent, cxcluding S.
Gallinarum biovar Pullorum, S. Fntcritidis and S. Typhimurium. Howcver, there are occasions
when adult chickens develop the disease and are killed by septicemia. Furthcrrmore, thc
symptoms of pullorum disease and fow! typhoid are similar.
In the case of young chicks: Incidcnce of thc diseasc in young chicks is greatly influenced by the
scrotype of the causal salmonella, quantity of infectious bacteria, environmental conditions and
the presence of a mixed infection.  In an acute case, death occurs quickly, or within two to three
days aftcr hatching, without any obscrvable signs.  As for general signs in chicks that devcloped
the discase after halching, thesc are loss of vitality and appetitc, huddling, ruffled feathers, loss of
shcen of the fcathers and diarrhoeal facces adhering around the cloaca.  As for macroscopic
observations at autopsy, in chicks that die or arc culled within one wcek of age, there is almost no
lesion to obscrvc exccpt that discoloured or unabsorbcd yolk sac remains due 1o malabsorption
(Fig. 1). In thc casc of death at about two weeks of age, the following lesions arc obscrvcd.
Crcam or cheesy unabsorbable yolk, slight oedema and interspcrsion of small necrosis with an ash
increase of fluid in the pericardium (pericarditis), turbidity and hypertrophy of peritoncum Or
adhcrence of cheesy substances in the tissue (peritonitis), and adherence of fibrinoid substanccs in
the pericardium and liver capsule (Fig. 2).
 In the casc of adult chickens: In carrier chickens with subclinical infection, generally no lesion
is observed. However, in a bird showing decrcased cgg production, abnormality of the ovary is
frequcntly observed. In a mild case, parl of the ovarian follicle is atrophied and shows a
soft-boilcd cgg-like appcarance with a dull, white surface (Fig. 3).  Also in a typical casc, thc
folliclc is further atrophied and deformed and shows a dark ycllow or grcenish brown colour.
Thc inside is covered with hypertrophied tunica, becorming oily or cheesy. The ovarian follicle
may be pedunculated and detached.  Thesc cases arc rcported in infections with S. Gallinarum
biovar Pullorum, S. Enteritidis and S. Typhimurium.
Diagnosis
In cases in young chicks when peak mortality is seen from two or three, until 7 to 10 days
after hatching, the occurrencc of salmoncllosis can be suspected. Howevcr, as there is also a
similar observation in colibacillosis and no characteristic signs, cvcn in post morlem obscrvation,
bacteriological tcsis arc rcquircd.
In 1he case of pullorum disease, diagnosis is performed by the whole blood rapid agglutina
tion test or the scrum agglutination test (pullorum disease test: most carriers up to 3 to 4 wccks
Salnonellosis [n, 1]  63
old may be negative).  Furthcrmorc, chickens infected with the following bacteria may often
show a positive reaction. S. Enteritidis, whose O antigen is identical to S. Gallinarum bioval
Pullorum; salmonellac such as S. Typhimurium, S. Icidelbcrg; S 11 1, 4, 12, 27: b: [e,n,x]
(Sofia), or other enterobacicria (c.g. Proteus), whose O antigen is partily identical to S.
Gallinarum biovar Pullorum.  When these suspicious reactions are seen, isolation of bacteria is
performed in ordel to confirm them. In these circumslanccs, direct culturc and cnrichment
og posn si unpou pinbi si iqissod se sonss pue sueao Aueu se susn pauoad sue siniino 
enrichment culture and a combination of TS aga1 mcdium and DHl. agar medium is used for
isolation and cullure.
In the case of an infcction by a scrovar cxccpt S. Gallinarum biovar Pullorum, defccation of
bacteria is often observed.  Thereforc, cnrichment culturc of the latter is performed in HTT
medium (In thc case of S. Enteritidis, culture of caecal faeces is beltcr).  Also, in thc case of fioor
breeding, collection by using thc drag swab technique is recommended). For isolation and
culturc, a combination of DHL agar medium and BG agar medium is uscd. When a colony,
 suspicious as salmonella is found its biochemical property is investigated and for a strain that is
identified as salmonclla, confirmation is by serotyping.
Prevention/Treatment/Measures
 In the case of pullorum disease, carrier hens are identifed by thc pullorum diseasc test and
culled and the breeding fock is cleanscd. In thc casc of fowl paratyphoid, enforcement of
cleaning and disinfcction is important. Biological control, that is control of cntry of humans
 sosrodu q iuoudinba jo on aui pue sannpod ueiado jo sieo lue q piaaid
should be controlled; cnforcement of routine feeding management without strcss 1o the birds and
 prcventive measures to minimise contamination of fccdstuff, are all required. At the same time,
moniloring systcms bascd on a proper isolation method for salmonclla are introduced.
Furthermore, in Europe and LSA, live or inactivated vaccines against salmonella and the
competitive exclusion (CE) mcihod, which is cffcctive for a very short period (until onc to two
wecks aftcr hatching), are used practically and cmployed also in Japan.
64Salmoncllosis [n,r]
Luo
G2
G
Fig.1.The internal organs of chicks
at5 days after oral inoculation of
10²of S.Enteritidis,immediately
after hatching:Malabsorbed yolk.
A control chick (left).
Fig.2.Heart and liver of the same
case 10 days afterinoculation:
Adherence of fibrinoid substances
to thepericardium and surface of
the liver.
Fig.3.Ovary of a carrier hen with
S.Gallinarum biovar Pullorum:
Ovarian follicle showingwhite dull
surface with a soft-boiled egg-like
appearance and atrophied ovarian
follicle.(Original:Sato)
Salmonellosis [n,r]
65
15.
Fowl Cholera [n]
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Septicaemia caused by infection with Pasteurella multocida
Turkeys, waterfowl and wild birds have higher susceptibility than chickens. and adult hens
have higher susceptibility than chicks.
Clinical symptoms are depression, fever, loss of appetite, ruffled feathers, diarrhoea, rapid
breathing and cyanosis.
Epidemiological observations and symptoms :to diagnose this disease at the time of
occurrence, macroscopic and histological observation of lesions and isolation of the
bacterium
A vaccine is not yet available for practical use in Japan. The affected flock is culled and
the farm is completely disinfected.
Outline of Disease
Infectious disease caused by infection with Pasteurella multocida occurs in almost all avian
species and usually progresses to acute sepsis.  Although the incidence and the mortality rate are
high, a chronic progression and comparalivcly moderate infection arc oflen obscrvcd.  In Japan,
this disease is designated as a notifiable infectious disease and chickens, ducks, turkeys and quail
arc infectcd with this bacterium and more than 70% of thcm dic in acutc scpsis.
This bacterium is non-motile, non-spore-forming rod shaped bacterium and the bacteria in
the infected host and freshly isolated bacteria clearly show bipolar staining.  The bacteria grown
on agar medium form round and semitransparent colonics that are non-haemolytic.  The major
capsule antigen of strains originating from avian spccics is A typc and causcs acutc fowl cholera
but rarcly, strains of B, D or F typc arc also isolated. Major somatic arc typcs 1, 3, and 4 that
werc dcsignatcd by Heddleston and O5, O8, and O9 designated by Namioka.  Since this disease
occurred in Europe late in the latter half of the eighteenth century, it has occurred sporadically
or in epidemics in Asian, African, the Middle East and European countries.
 q 'tah  sa o ne    j  o   r ' 
mass outbrcak occurred in hill mynas imported from Thailand. Further, infcetion causcd by P.
multocida has annually occurred in phcasants, copper pheasants, geese, ducks, turkeys and
cormorants sincc 1980 bu1 in no case has legal action been taken.  Although this disease is
observed through the year, its occurrence varies between the seasons. Turkeys, waterfowl and
wild birds have higher susccptibility to this organism than chickcns; broilcrs have higher suscep-
tibility than layers, and adult birds have higher susceplibility than chicks.
Environmcntal strcss factors such as a change of climate, nutrienis, trauma and excitement
inffuence the occurrence and the progress of this disease. The mortality rate in a natural
 infcction is 17-68% in turkcys, 0-20% in chickens and between these rates in ducks. The entry
route of this bacterium into the body is not orally but via the rmucosa of thc respiralory organs in
gcncral and thcre are also cascs of wound infection via mucous membranes and skin. The
organism, when once invaded, spreads systemically via the blood. Many of thc infcction sourccs
are unclear.  Wild birds that havc had contact with infected pouliry become an infection source
66
for other avian spccics. Infection through the egg does not occur. Also, livestock and wild
diary of cnvironmental factors such as feedstuff, drinking water and wooden pens contaminated
by defecation of sick birds.  In waterfowl, a mass outbrcak often occurs when a pond or a marsh
is polluted.
Symptoms and Lesions
 In thc acute typc, it is often the case that the symptoms cmcrge only a few hours before death.
Generally, the symptoms are depression, loss of appetite, ruflled fcathers, leakage of mucilage
from the beak, diarrhoea, rapid brcathing and the likc. Cyanosis is seen in the comb and watile
Buag 'ura oq i spui uun pun isry e anm pue snonbe si eoouiei yeap aroaq Aoai
rnixed with mucus. Deaih usually occurs after two or three days. Fowls, which show acute
scpsis in the early stages, either die aflcr bcing unable to stand, or from cmaciation and
 dchydration, or pass to the chronic type, or rccover. In birds that dic quickly, no remarkable
change is observed microscopically. In the case of deaih after acutc progression, petechial
 haemorrhages and hacmorrhagic foci arc observed in the spleen, lung and duodcnum, as wcl as
subcutaneously and in coronary adiposc tissuc (Fig. l). However, haemorrhagic changes in
chickcns are slight compared with those in other avian specics and may be nol observed. Liver
and spleen are swollen and a lot of small yellowish white spots of ncerosis arc observed (Fig. 2).
 In the lung, hypertrophy is markcd. Incrcasc of fuid in the pericardium and ascites and
abnormal ovarian follicles occur. Hlistologically, a lot of bacteria are observed in congcsted
blood vesscls and a lot of bacterial foci and multiple focal nccroscs with hetcrophilic leukocytes
arc observed in the liver and splcen. In hacmorrhagic lesions of the duodenum (Fig. 3),
delachment of the mucous epithelium occurs and a lot of bacterial foci arc observed.
 In 1he chronic typc, swcllings are usually observed in the watlle, infraorbital sinus and joints
of the leg and wing. Exudativc lcsions are observed in the conjunctiva and pharynx and
torticollis sometimes occurs.  As a result of infection of the respiratory tract, abnoimal respira-
tory sounds (Russell) and dyspnoea of the trachea occur and this may causc death after the birds
become weak.
Diagnosis
Epidemiological diagnosis: This discase may frcquently occur right after laying in thc casc of
layers and at 30 to 50 days old in broilers.  The occurrence is usually limited to specific flocks or
houscs and may recur even though it has been eradicalcd.
Clinical and pathological diagnosis: The above-mentioned progression, and 1he symptoms
and lesions are characteristic, but diffcrcntial diagnosis is rcquired, since multiple lesion necrosis
is also obscrved in othcr bacterial infections.
Pathological and serological inspection: Blood or organs of sick birds are smeared and staincd
with Methylene blue or Giemsa.  Bipolar small bacilli are obscrved and cultured in agar medium
and the bactcria arc isolated and identified. An infection test with thc isolaled bacteria is
performed 1o reproduce the same symptoms as in natural cases. Until now, in diagnosis of fowl 
cholera, the scrotypcs seen are 5: A, 8: A and 9: A (Namioka), the pathogenicity test rcquires
that chickens over 90 days of age arc killed in two or thrcc days by intramuscular inoculation with
a quantity of bacteria less than 10,0o0, and 5: A typc has thc highcst pathogcnicity.  According
to recent information, howcver, thc relationship bctwccn thc serotype of the bacterium isolated
and pathogcnicity is not necessarily constant.
Differcntial diagnosis: Ihc occurrcncc of this disease is similar to Newcastle disease and fowl
Fowl Cholcra [n]
67
pcst but it can be differcntiated by isolation of the bacterium and thc spread of infection.
Besides, as to bacteria that are isolated from birds and are similar to P. mullocida, thcsc are P.
gallinarum, P. haemolytica, Riemerella (Moraxella) anatipestifer and Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
but these are distinguishable by biological properties.
Prevcntion/Treatment/ Measures
In various countries, inactivated or live vaccincs are used. As in Japan, vaccincs are nol
made for practical use, it is most importanl that general hygiene control is completely managed.
When a fock is diagnosed with this disease, which is legally notifable, the measurcs taken are tha1
the affected fock is immediately culled and incinerated and the farm is disinfected.  These
in other cases.  Although most of the strains that have ever been isolated domestically have
strong sensitivily to antimicrobial agenis, trealmcnt with thesc agcnts may prod ucc carricr birds
and may sprcad the disease.
Fowl Cholera [n]
68
Fig.1.Heart of a goose that died in
the field:Petechial haemorrhage of
the epicardium(coronary adipose
tissue).
Fig.2.Liver of a dead duck from a
field case:Congestion and multiple
occarrence of small white necrosis
2
lesions.
Fig.3.Duodenum ofa dead phe-
asantfromafieldoutbreak:
Hyperaemia
andhaemorrhage
observed also in the serosa.
Fowl Cholera[n]
69
16.
Colibacillosis
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
colisepticaemia causes, is the most serious.
This disease frequently occurs in 6-9 week-old broilers and induces respiratory disorders
and immunosuppression. Baby chicks are infected through the egg.
Symptoms are loss of vitality, respiratory signs, ruffled feathers and pasted vents due t0
white to yellowish green diarrhoeal faeces.
 Major lesions are pericarditis, perihepatitis, airsacculitis, peritonitis, salpingitis, ophthalmia
of the eyeball and arthritis.
E. coli is isolated in pure culture from major organs (heart, liver, etc.) and areas with
lesions (joint, eye, etc.) of affected chickens.
Preventive measures are incubation hygiene, improvement of the environment, hygiene
control in poultry sheds and administration of antimicrobial agents to affected birds.
Outline of Disease
This discase is causcd by Escherichia coli.  Although E. coli always cxits in the intestine of
chickcns, healthy birds do not devclop the diseasc. However, when birds are under infectious or
environmenlal stress, they develop scpticaemia aflcr respiratory infection and cxperience the
disease (Colisepticacmia).  This disease causcs serious economic damagc to the poullry industry.
Abovc all, the occurrcncc rate in broilers is high. That is to say, thc disease occurs most in
broilers at 6 to 9 weeks old, dircctly before slaughtcr and is one of the serious diseases of broilers.
The serotype of E. coli isolated from cases is thc O antigen (somatic antigcn), and the O2, O
78, and O1 types arc comparatively frequent.  There are also a lot of othcr serotypcs of E. coli
thal cannot be classified.  Furthcrmore, serotypcs are not particularly related to pathogenicity.
Colibacillosis observed in day-oid chicks within scvcral days after hatching is caused by
infection via the egg.  In most cases, faeccs contaminate the surface of hatching cggs, and thcn
thc disease occurs by penetration of E. coli through the egg shell (infection on the egg).
Howevcr, it also happens that the ovary or oviduct of the laying hen is contaminated by E. coli
and E. coli cntcr the eggs (infection in the egg).  Thcre is a report of an cxperimental study
showing 1ha1 26.5% of eggs produccd by a laying hcn inoculated with E. coli containcd the
organism.
In adult chickens that have begun to lay, the major infection routc is via the respiratory tract.
 Dust in a poultry housc contains 10 to one million E. coli per gm and it is believed that they
survive for a long timc.  It is presumed that thcy cause respiratory infection by inhalation of the
E. coli-containing dust and bacteraemia and septicaemia devclop when the bactcria infiltratc into
the capillaries through the walls of the air sacs.
Although in healihy chickens, ciliary movement of the cpithelium of respiratory organs can
prcclude bacteria, damage of respiratory epithclium duc to various causes permits E. coli to
proliferate. Evcn if chickens show bacteracmia, septicaemic lesions result in slight damage as
long as prophylaxis is used and the body functions normaly. However, this normal function is
70
impaired by various kinds of stress. Mycoplasma, infcctious bronchitis virus, mildly pathogcnic
Newcasile disease virus and Haemophilius paragallinarum, thc causal agent of infectious coryza,
all destroy thc mucous epithelium in the upper respiratory tract tissues, such as nostril, larynx,
trachea and air sac and facilitate adherence and attachment of E.coli to the mucous epithelium.
Infectious bursal disease virus that destroys the bursa of Fabricius of chickens inhibits humoral
antibody production and cnhances susceptibility to E. coli.
Symptoms and Lesions
Some infected birds first show loss of vitality and respiratory symptoms. Then, thc chickens
affectcd by scpticaemia show a raised temperature (42.2 to 43.5*C), ruflled feathers soiled with
faeces and then they dic. Morbidity in an affected flock is generally more than 10%, and
mortality is usually less than 5%, but may infrcquently reach 20%%.  Chickens with arthritis show
leg wcakness.
 Macroscopically, the pericardium, cpicardium, viscral perihepatic cavity, intcstinal serosa,
 a i e ou e   r s e  
(Fig. 1).  The splcen and liver arc modcrately swollen. Salpingitis, arthritis, ophthalmitis (Fig
2), yolk sac infection and pncumonia are also sometimes observcd.  Histologically, necrosis of
the ellipsoid and lyinphoid follicle of the spleen (Fig. 3), and fibrinous thrombus in the liver
sinusoid are also observed. The above-mentioned fibrinopurulent inffammation in serosa is
characteristic (Fig. 4). In the region of thc Jesion, gram-negative bacili are difuscly and
sporadically obscrved.  Respiralory lesions such as airsacculitis, tracheitis and pneumonilis and
a marked decrease in lymphocytes in the bursa of Fabricius and thymus are also obscrved.
Diagnosis
histologically, fbrinopurulent scrositis is characteristic of this discasc.
Bactcriological diagnosis: For growth of the organism, use selective media for enteric bacteria.
such as DHL agar. Thc prescnce of red cloudy colonics grown on DHI. agar shows that
identification of E. coli has been achieved.
Differcntial diagnosis: In salmonellosis, nccrosis of the spleen is observcd in cases of septicae-
mia, and this often involves focal necrosis in the liver. Howcver, in colibacillosis, nccrosis of thc
spleen is likcwisc obscrved, but nccrosis of the liver may not occur, or more likely fibrinous
thrombus in liver sinusoids is characteristic. In the epicardium affected by salmonellosis,
fibrinous changes occur in the carly stages, as in the casc of colibacillosis, but cellular infiltration
is important with the progression of infection. Pericarditis observcd in pasteurellosis has
characteristic fbrinous alteration that is similarly observed in colibacillosis but necrosis occurs
also in the liver. Staphylococcus, Salmonella, Pasteurella and Streptococcus also cause arthritis
and the lesion cannot be differentiated from that of colibacillosis. Pericarditis docs not occur in
this diseasc.
Fulthermore, isolation and identification of the bacteria from the lesions is desirable for
determinative diagnosis.
Prevcntion/Treatment/Measures
Abroad, an inactivated vaccinc is used but it is not effcctive. For trcatment, an antibiotic is
cmploycd and it is desirablc 1hat thc drug for use should be selected by checking thc sensitivity.
since there are lots of drug resistant bacteria.  As for control mcasurcs, the factors that canse
Colibacillosis   71 
 a pn  pe nr n sss s  sro ans
brecding control is maintained. Also, the opportunity for transmission of the pathogen by thc
chicks is minimised and incubation hygiene improved to minimisc contamination by infected
matcrials.
72
Colibacillosis
Fig.1.Lesions of theheart andliver:Turbid hypertrophy of the pericardium and fibrinous exudate on the surface
of theliver.
Fig.2.
Ophthalmia of the eyeballCheesy substances in the anterior chamber of the eyes (upper part of the eyeball).
Fig.3.
Histological lesions in the spleen:Necrosis of ellipsoid frequently occurs with fibrinous exudation.HE stain.
Fig.4.
pericardialcavity.HEstain.
Colibacillosis
73
17.
Staphylococcosis
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Oedematous dermatitis is an endemic infection caused by Staphylococcus aureus and an
acute disease that causes a mass outbreak in 4- to 20-week-old chickens
Diffuse hypertrophy. wine-like exudates and necrosis of the skin are widely observed
subcutaneously inside the wing regions of affected chickens.
Lesions rapidly reach the thoracoabdominal region, and the leakage of exudate gives out a
stench. Affected birds are mostly dead within a few hours.
In arthritis and planter abscess ("bumblefoot"! and dermatitis of toe pad and planter,
limping and swelling of affected parts and purulent inflammation are observed in 4- to 20-
week-old chickens.
Purulent myelitis and purulent osteomyelitis occur in broilers and yolk sac infection is also
observed in day-old chicks.
This disease is diagnosed by Isolation of S. aureus from lesions and regions of lesions and
the symptoms in sick birds.
 Preventive measures are improvement of environment in the poultry house and breeding
control, prevention of immunosuppressive diseases and treatment by early administration
of antimicrobial agents.
Outline of Discase
This discase is caused by Staphylococcus aureus and has various disease types. This
bacterium is a gram-positivc coccus found widely in naturc and is always present in healthy
humans and animals. It is also isolatcd in poultry houscs and from skin, fcathcrs, the oral cavity
and eyelids of healthy fowls. S. aureus enters the body through thc skin, mucous mcmbranes and
respiratory tract, and as a large number of bacteria are required for infection, proliferation of this
bacterium in the body is considcrcd to be the cause of infection.
Symptoms and Lesions
Oedcmalous dermatitis: This discasc was once called Battery disease.  It develops mostly in 4-
t0 20-week-old chickcns and is obscrvcd irrcspectivc of agc.  Thc occurrcnce rate is 1 to 15% but
infrequently reaches as much as 50%. Furthermore, similar lesions to this discasc arc observcd
in cascs of gangrenous dermatitis caused by Clostridium septicum, but most cases in Japan are
caused by S. aureus. Howevcr, it is suggestcd that onc should understand that similar skin
lesions are caused by infection with boih baclcria, sincc therc is an infection by only Clostridium
and also a mixed infeclion wiih these two bacteria.
Some brown or reddish coloured serous exudate is observed in the connective tissue of the
abdomen. The wings (ventral), neck, shank, breast and back skin has crosions, and lcaked
excretion givcs out a peculiar stcnch. Generally, the lesions are obscrvcd mostly in thc wing
regions (Fig. 1) but at autopsy they are also observed in the abdomen.  It is not uncommon for
74
The comb and wattle are swollen with a dark red colour and show markcd oedcma. Frothy
or rcddish effusions leak out of the crosive or incised palts of the skin.  Aftcr that, the lesions
becomc dark red, dried and cxcalatcd.  This disease frequently develops in adult fowls and also
in hot seasons, but mass outbrcaks arc rarc. Lesions in the submaxillary region arc obscrvcd
 mostly with dermatitis of the wattle and thc submaxillary region is oedematous. In the face,
ocdema is observed around the cyelids or subcutaneously in the side of the facc.  In lcgs without
feathers, the skin is swollen and dark red.  Thc skin is furthcr torn and an cffusion leaks ont of
the skin, and the squamac may be excalated. The frequcncy of emcrgencc of the lesions in thc
submaxillary, facc and legs is low. Some birds may die after loss of vitality but other birds
cventually recover.
Arthritis: This discase shows purulcni arthritis and joinis are swollen.  Pools of lransparent
viscous liquid or opaque feculent secretions are observcd in articular cavities and chccsy
substanccs may also bc obscrvcd therc.  Lesions are sccn mostly in thc foot joints and arc
obscrved also in the knce, fcmoral hook and digital joints. Many fowls show lamencss or dislikc
walking.
 Purulent osteomyelitis: 'This discase which is callcd britile bone syndrome or Hetari discasc,
shows leg weakness, difficulty in walking or sitting down, reluctancc to movc, rufling of feathers
and depression, and results in death after several days. This discase occurs mostly in broilers
[xoid oun Asdoine 1e pouado aie saot yoq uaum sioae un sinsoo Aioiei pue pio sep ot iao
femoral nccks are casily broken. Chccsy substances may be obscrved in the head region and
medulla of the femoral bone (Fig. 2).
Bumblefoot and inflammation of the plantar: the digital pad and circumference of thc toc (it
mostly cxlends from the plantar) arc swollen and show purulent inflammation.  When 1he
plantar is incised, the formation of yellow feculent effusion, cheesy substances or swelling is
observed. Chickens show lamcness and dislike to put thcir tocs on the ground.
 Internal organ type and septicaemia: These diseases generally show depression, loss of appetite
pu qoo su uss are suds ioe saep oai o suo un yop un nsu pue nop pun
wattle show cyanosis but on thic contrary, may show anaemia.  The signs arc observed both in
broilers and layers and in the case of layers, they occur mostly in mcdium and large sized chickcns.
 Similar nccrosis lcsions are also obscrved in the splccn and lung. On thc other hand, therc may
be cases when chickcns spi1 blood, and thc adherence of viscous fluid in thc oral cavity and
fealhers and blood clots in blood vesscls are observcd.  These birds die within a few days and are
   s s s      
although thcre may be complications with oedcmatous dermatitis.  Furthermore, most of them
show scpticacmia but thcrc are occasions when S. aureus is locally isolatcd from the lung.
Other diseases: These are omphalitis (a loose umbilicus of young chicks, wcakness, high
mortality in chicks); breast blister (brcast callosity); nccrosis (swclling, ycllowness, cheesy sub-
stances) of costal cartilage (costal hcad); purulcnt spondylitis (leg weakness, leg paralysis,
swelling of the sccond and sixth thoracic vertebrae, necrosis, pressure to spinal cord).  Thc abovc
diseasc typcs may occur as singlc cases but in a mass outbrcak, scveral discase lypes may
frequcntly be found in an individual or a flock.
Diagnosis
 In addition to the above observations and lesions, a disease, in which S. aureus is isolated, is
staphylococcosis.  This disease may cause complications with respiralory diseascs, fowl pox and
colibacillosis. Even though an individual is diagnosed with staphylococcosis, other diseascs may
 be the main cause in the flock. Thus, it is necessary to understand the pathology in the cntire
Staphylococcosis
7
flocksufficicntly.
Nutrient agar medium or staphylococcus sclcctive medium is uscd as culture media to isolate
      s s p  n s
coagulase or haemolysin are invcstigatcd and idcntificd.
Prevention/Treatment/Measures
This disease is caused by infection with S. aureus, but it is also bclicvcd that an inducing
factor is required on the part of thc bird for infcction to occur.  Therefore, adverse physical
conditions and factors that decrease resistance of the bird should be avoidcd to prcvent the
bacleria proliferating into the body.  One should be careful about cnvironmcnt inside thc poultry
shed (ventilation, humidity and tempcrature), improvcment of breeding conditions (breeding in
high density, noise and confict caused by stress, cannibalism and wounds to thc skin) and
prcvcntiou of immunosuppressive disease and deficiency of nutrients such as vitamins. For
treatment, novobiocin, pcnicillin, tetracycline, macrolidc and ncw quinolonc drugs are ad-
prcscncc of resistant strains.
76Staphylococcosis
Fig.1.Oedematous dermatitis:The
skin of the wing region (inside the
wing,ventral) shows erosion and
leakage of exudate.
Fig.2.Purulent osteomyelitis:Pro-
ximal femoral necks are easily
broken. Cheesy substances are
observed in femoral neck region
(→).(Original:Sato)
Fig.3.Internal organ type: In liver,
scattered,irregular formed yellow
necrotic lesions.Thickening of the
liver capsule is partially observed.
Staphylococcosis
77
18.  Infectious Coryza
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
An acute respiratory disease caused by infection with Haemophilus paragallinarum.
This disease is observed mainly in layers, and cessation of egg laying occurs in affected
hens.
Affected hens recover naturally 2 to 5 weeks after onset and egg laying performance also
recovers as clinical signs disappear.
This disease is diagnosed by epidemiological observation of the disease, clinical
observation and bacterial isolation
Application of a vaccine is exceedingly effective for the prevention of this disease.
Outline of Disease
 Infcctious coryza is an acutc respiratory discase that is caused by infeetion with Haemophilus
paragallinarum (Hpg) and is mainly charactcrised by nasal discharge, swollcn facc and cessation
of egg laying.  This discase is observed mainly in layers and the organism is isolatcd only from
the nasal cavity and thc infraorbital sinus. Hpg is gram-negative, non-motile, non sporc-
forming, small rod shaped capsulalcd bacillus.  Thc nutritional requirements of this bacterium
arc strict and it requires V factor (nicotinamide adenine dinuclcotide: NAD) for its growth.
Whcn this bacterium is ouiside the body of the bird, it can survive for only a short time.
Hpg is classified into three typcs, A, B and C, based on thc agglutinin and is classificd into at
least 7 types from HA-1 to HA-7, based on the erythrocyte agglutinin (HA).  This discasc occurs
mainly in hot and humid countrics.  Although A (HA-1) and C (HA-4) type bacteria are
commonly observed in all countrics, the other serotypes of bacteria tend to spread differently in
each country.
In Japan, thc occurrence of cascs of A (HA-1) typc bacteria after 1962 and C (HA-4) type
bacteria after 1975 were frequently obscrved in the field and caused serious cconomic damage.
However, since the development and application of effective vaccines, it has rarely occurrcd.
Ihis discasc generally shows a high incidence in non-immunised chickens but they do not die
if infectcd only with Hpg.  The symptoms become scrious in a mixcd infection with mycoplasma.
The bactcrium spreads by direct contact with affcctcd birds and drinking watcr or feed
contaminated by nasal discharge of the infccted birds. As for thc transmission from farm to
farm, wild birds arc considered to be in an important carrier. Young chicks are comparativcly
resistant to this bacterium.  Thc disease occurs throughout the year but it is observed more in
somc scasons than oihers.
Symptoms and Lesions
Thc incubation period of this discasc is gencraly onc to three days and chickcns in
non-immunised flocks are affected in a comparatively shorl pcriod.  The affecled birds rccovcr
naturally from the discasc 2 to 5 wceks after onsct.
78
The affected birds show respiratory signs and nasal discharge (Fig. 1), oedematous swelling
of the face and wattle (Fig. 2), ralcs and mouth brcaihing arc observcd. In laycrs, egg
clinical signs.
At autopsy, thc mucous membranes in thc nasal cavity and infraorbital sinus are
hypertrophied, and pools of serous fluid and mucus are observed inside thesc cavitics (Fig. 3).
and cggs with hacmatomas are often obscrvcd in the ovary.
Histopathologically, degeneration and sweling of cpitheliocytes in the infraorbital sinus
mucosa, oedema in the submucous mcmbrane and infiltration of hcterophils arc obscrvcd.
Diagnosis
Epidemiological diagnosis: In addition to the acute discasc, emergence of the aforementioned
characteristic clinical symptoms makcs the diagnosis of this discasc casy.
Bactcriological diagnosis: The prcscncc of this bacterium can be confirmed using smcars of
nasal discharge from affected birds.  Tcst samplcs arc collccted by swabbing the nasal cavity, and
the infraorbital sinus is uscd for isolation of thc bacterium.  Thc swabs are smcarcd onto solid
media such as blood agar, chicken mcat infusion agar with 5% chicken scrum or tryptic soy agar
with A-NAD and are cultured for 24 hours at 37*C under 5-10% carbon dioxide, and the growth
of tiny dewdrop colonics is observed. Furthermore, in cultivation on blood agar, since thc
growth of Hpg is aided by NAD (V-factor) that Staphylococcus produces, the swab is cross-
streakcd with a Staphylococcus culturc and ineubatcd at 37*C in a scaled ja1 in which a candle is
allowed to hurn.Then larger colonies form around the staphylococcal colonics on the agar
(satellite phcnomenon). A similar phenomenon can be obscrved by using a piece of filter paper
containing A-NAD, instcad of thc Staphylococcus culturc (fecders).
Typc classification of the bacteria isolated is performcd by an agglutination lest or
s pds e si (ssn s   rui isn ()  
 of type. For the HA reaction, an antigen, produced by treating thc capsule containing bactcrium
ultrasonically and with rhodanic kalium, is uscd.  An (HA-1) type bacterium agglutinates fresh
and glutaraldehyde-fixed chicken erythrocytes, but C (HA-4) type bacterium agglutinates only
the fixcd chicken erythrocytes.
Serological diagnosis: In addition to the acule progression of this disease, bccause antibody
production is slow in young infected chicks, it is difficult to use serological diagnosis.
Differcntial diagnosis: Diffcrentiation from infectious bronchitis, mycoplasmosis, avian
thc nasal dischargc.
Prevcntion/Treatment/Measures
Prevention: The application of vaccine is exceedingly effectivc.  In Japan, bivalent (A · C type
bacterium) vaccine is mainly used but in addition, various kinds of inactivatcd whole ccll
vaccincs, mixed with Newcastle discase, infectious bronchitis and infectious bursal disease viruses
Since this antibody has a very high correlation with protection, the immune status of vaccinated
old. A second vaccination is desirably complcted two or thrce wccks beforc moving thc rcaring
chickcns to the laying house, at aboul a 10-week intcrval betwccn thc two doscs.
Infectious Coryza  79
Treatment: For trcatment, injcctions or additivcs in the drinking water of dihydrostrcplomycin,
tyophenicol, tetracycline and sulphamonomethoxine are mainly applied to affected birds.
Measurcs: As for conlrol mcasurcs againsl this discasc, in addition lo vaccination, prcventing
the causal agent from entering the poultry shed is important. For that purpose, therefore, it is
ncccssary to prcvent wild birds from invading the poultry shcd.
80
InfectiousCoryza
Fig.1.Nasal discharge observed in an infected chicken:Thenasal discharge shows transparency at the early stage
but it subsequentlybecomes cloudy andalsobecomesyellow.
Fig. 2.The head of an infected chicken: Obvious swelling of the head.This is one of the major characteristics of
thisdisease.
Fig.3.Sections of a maxilla cut between a nostril and the eyes:In the affected bird,mucous membranes in the
nasal cavity and infraorbital sinus are hypertrophied,and a pool of mucus fill inside the cavities.Right:A
healthy chicken asa control.(Original:Sato)
InfectiousCoryza
81
19. Clostridial Infections
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Necrotic enteritis is caused by proliferation of orally ingested Clostridium perfringens in
the small intestine.
The lesions are limited in the small intestine, and turgidity. caused by gas, bloody and dark
muddy contents and the formation of a pseudomembrane, are observed
Necrotic dermatitis is caused by infection with C. septicum, resulting from wounded skin.
In necrotic dermatitis, the skin of the wings, breast, vent and leg are purple and become
swollen and moist.
Botulism develops when the C. botulinum toxin in the feed is absorbed from the
alimentary tract.
Chickens on floor feeding develop the disease by ingesting bacteria in the faeces and
absorbing the proliferated toxin via the caecum.
Characteristic symptoms of botulism are flaccid paralyses of the legs, wings, neck and
eyelids.
Necrotic enteritis
Pathogenesis and incidence: This discase is induccd when chickens ingest feed and litter
contaminated with Clostridium perfringens and the bacteria proliferate in the small intcstinc.
The prescnce of factors (large numbers of C. perfringens, dense fibrous litter, ctc.), which caust
injury of the intestinal mucosa and decreased immunity (due to infection with infectious bursal
discase virus) makc this disease develop more easily. In the field, thc occurrence of disease has
This diseasc is obscrved mostly in 2 to 5 week old broilers on foor feeding. It occurs frcqucnily
from April to Sepiember, when both temperature and humidity rise. In houscs where it has
occurred before, there is a tendency to recur if therc is insuffcient disinfection. Morbidity and
mortality rates dcpcnd upon thc treaimcnt and range from under 1% to over 60%.
Symptoms and lesions: At the beginning of the anorexia, affected chickens tend to dislike
walking and to have ruffed feathers.  Hacmorrhage is also markedly observed. They shed
 e h r  s nss  s rn r x r  
mixed in the faeces. Chickcns that losc vitality and are obviously collapsed, die quickly. Gross
lcsions arc gcnerally limited to the small intestine.  The intestine is fragile and markedly swollen
(Fig. 1).  The intestinal walls are hypertrophicd by the formation of yellow or green pseudo-
membrane in the intestinal mucosa, or the mucous membrane may become desquamative and
slough of (Fig. 2). The intestinal contcnts conlain white or yellowish white cellular dehris and
 become bloody. brown or dark tar-like. The liver is hyperaemic, congestcd and swollen, and
 yellowish whitc foci of miliary size and uniform shape sporadically occur in it.
 Histopathologically, necrotic and fbrinous inflammation is observed mainly from the duodc-
num to the jejunum and ilcum.  Upper parts of intestinal villi are extensivcly necrotic and a large
number of largc gram-positive bacilli are observed adhering to thc nccrosed villi.   The intestinal
 mucosa epithclium is degenerated and necrotic, and in the intestinal cavity, sloughed cpithelium
82
is obscrvcd with fibrin and cffusion and frcqucntly adheres firmly to thc dcfcctive mucosa of thc
villi, forming a pseudomcmbrane.  In the lamina propria of mucous membranc, ocdcma and
hyperaemia of blood vessels are obscrved.  In the liver, degcneration and necrosis of hepatocytes
are observed.
Diffcrcntial diagnosis: IDiscascs that arc similar in symptoms and lesions to this discase are
ulcerative enteritis (quail disease), coccidiosis (especially, Limeria brunelfi infections) and
histomoniasis (blackhead). In ulcerative enteritis caused by infection with C. colinum, the
lesions arc ulcerative foci betwccn thc duodenum and caecum and marked nccrotic foci in thc
livcr.  However, lesions in necrotie cnteritis are gcnerally limitcd to the jejunum and ileum and
are rarely obscrved in the caecum and othcr organs.
.Lesions of E. brunetti infections and
nccrolic cntcritis may look similar. As for hislomoniasis, crosion, ulcer and coagulalion arc
observed in the cacca, and necrotic foci are observed in the liver.
Prevention and treatment: An oral administration (especially, via thc drinking water) of
antimicrobial drugs such as penicillin and telracyclinc is cffcctivc for thc carly trcatmcnt of
affected birds. As for prcvention, disinfection of poultry house must be donc thoroughly and
feeding and hygicne control improved to prevent them allowing cntry of this disease.
Gangrenous dermatitis
Pathogcnesis and incidence: Gangrcnous dermatitis is a discasc which is causcd mainly by
infection with C. septicum and lcads 1o acule death with dermalitis lesions, and cases caused by
C. perfringens are rare. After the skin and alimentary tracts of hirds are damaged, or after
dcstruction of tissues or immunosupprcssion causcd by othcr pa1hogcns (IBD virus, avian
adenovirus, chicken anaemia virus, etc.), it is believed that infltration and proliferation of
Clostridium causcs this disease. In cases of the feld, it has bccn reporled that the diseasc
dcveloped in chickens and turkeys from 17 days to 20 wccks old.F
HIowever, it dcvclops moslly
in 4 to 8 week old broilers, and the mortality rate is 1 to 60%.
Symptoms and lesions: Characteristics of this disease are that it occurs suddenly and has a
short incubation period, and affected birds are gencrally dead within 24 hours. ln thc birds 
showing anorexia, dcprcssion, slipped tendon and ataxia, the skin of the wings, breast, ven1 and
leg bccome purple and oedcmalous and moist. As for charactcristic lesions, ocdema and
degcncrative necrotic alteralion is observed in the skin, subcutis and muscle and serous cxudatcs
are formed (Fig. 3).  Also, white necrotic lesions may be obscrved in the liver.
Histopathologically, oedema and cmphysema are observed with largc bacilli found sub-
cutaneously. In the muscular syslcm, hyperaemia, haemorrhagc and necrosis are marked.
In
the liver, necrotic foci, in which there are cell bodies, exist sporadically.
Sirmilar lesions to this discase are observcd in oedcmatous dcrmatitis causcd by infection with
Staphylococcus aureus, which frequently occurs in Japan, and there are often cascs of mixcd
infection with Clostridium. It is thought that S. aureus may promote clostridial infections and 
the formation of lesions.
Mcasures: The same as in thc case of necrotic cntcritis.
Botulism
Pathogencsis and incidcncc: This disease is a toxaemia that is characterized by locomotive
paralysis. The locomotive paralysis occurs when an cxotoxin produccd by C. botulinum is
absorbed into the digcstive traci. C. botulinum is classified into 7 types from A to G type
according to 1he type of toxin produced. Most cases that occur frequcntly in poultry (chickcns,
turkeys, ducks, etc.) or wild birds (wild duck, pheasant, ctc.), belong to C type but there is also
Clostridial Infcctions   83
the A type which rarely occurs in chickens.  'This discasc occurs in birds of every age.  In the
case of broilers, for cxample, it frequently occurs at 2 1o 8 weeks old and thc mortality rate ranges
from 1% to 60%.  As 1o scason, it frequcntly occurs in the hot and humid months from June 1o
August.  The infection mechanism of C type bacterium in broilers fed on the foor is via feed and
faeccs and is called cyclic toxico-infection.
 Contamination by the bacterium incrcascs and thc
accumulation of toxin in chickens causes thcm to devclop the disease due to the repelition of thc
defecation-ingestion of faeces cycle.
Symptoms and lesions: Birds that ingest the toxin orally, develop 1he diseasc in from sevcral
 hours to one or two days.  The symptoms are commonly charactcrised by faccid paralyses of
lcgs, wings, ncck and eyelids. First, birds squat down, dislikc walking and show lameness if they
arc forccd to walk. Then, the wings trail and paralysis of the ncck (limbcr neck) is obscrvcd.
 Due to paralysis of the eyelids, they also look as if they have fallen into a coma or have died (Fig.
4). Thcy die in one to three days after onset.  Stains caused by whitc diarrhocic faeces are often
 observed around the cloaca.  Gross lesions and histopathological lesions are not found.
Diagnosis: When this discase is suspected from the symptoms and lesions of the birds,
detecting a toxin from the affecled birds can be used for diagnosis. Serum or extracts of
gasirointestinal contents are injected intravenously into the tail of a mousc (o.3ml) or intra-
abdominally (o.5ml) and thc injcctcd micc arc observcd for from several hours to several days.
When the mouse gives a characteristie sign of abdominal respiration (the abdominal depression -
waist constriction) and is dcad, material for diagnosis is mixed equally with botulinus antitoxin
and a neutralization tes1 is conducicd by injccting it intra-abdominally into the mouse.
Measures: the dead or affected birds should immediately be cullcd and disposed of and at thc
same time, contaminated litter should be removed. Also, in order to eradicate 1he sporcs of this
84
Clostridial lnfcctions
Fig.1.Necrotic enteritis:The small intestine is faccid and swollen.Dark red contents are seen transparently
fromtheoutside.
Fig.2.Necrotic enteritis:The small intestine is swollen with a darkred false pseudomembrane.
Fig.3.Necrotic dermatitis:Reddish brown serous exudate and foams of gas are formed in the abdominal
subcutaneoustissue.
Fig.4.Botulism:Flaccid paralysis of legs,wings,neck and eyelids.(Original:Yamauchi)
ClostridialInfections
85
20.
Miscellaneous Bacterial Diseases
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Avian erysipelas, avian listeriosis and avian Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections are
septicaemic diseases and rarely occur in chickens.
Avian Campylobacter infection causes hepatitis in avian species but is inapparent in
chickens
These diseases lack characteristic symptoms and lesions.  Bacteriological tests are
required for diagnosis.
jo labbun aut jol yool ol Aessaoau osle s! l! 'saseasip asaun to loiuoo pue sisoubeip log
infection and to consider a mixed infection.
aouasaud aut jo asneoag Asea si sisoinoiagns ueiae jo sisoubeip leiuaiah!p pue sisoubeid
of tubercular nodes in a chronic infection and of a specific disease.
Avian Erysipelas
This diseasc is an acute septicaemic discasc caused by infection with Erysipelothrix
Originally, this diseasc is a pathogen of crysipelas consisting of 16 scrotypcs, and types 1a, 1b, 2,
4, 5, 8, 9, 11, 15 and 16 have been isolated from chickens. This bacterium is wide spread in
nature and causes scpticaemia or arthritis in mammals and birds. In birds, turkeys have a high
susceptibility and mass outbrcaks occur, but in othcr avian spccies, it occurs sporadically. Since
humans also develop crysipclas (crylhacma, oedcma and pain of infected regions, rcgional
lymphadenitis and fever) through wound infection, the disease is regarded as serious from the
viewpoint of public health. Furthermore, this bacterium and E. tonsillarum, in the same genus,
arc not pathogenic for chickens.  This bacterium is highly resistant in the natural environment
and can survivc for over 80 days under dricd conditions and for 4 months in rotten mcats.
In Japan, this diseasc rarely occurs in avian spccies, and there have bccn only three cases
reported in layer farms, besides those in quail, ducks, turkeys and pheasants. As to the infection
route of this bacterium, arcas of the skin aftcr moulting and wound infcction causcd by
cannibalism arc rcgardcd as scrious.  As a triggcr for infcction, stresses caused by raising in high
 density, moulting and dccrcased immunity due to mixed infections, have been suggested.
The affecled chickens suddenly show cyanosis of the wattle, decrease or loss of vitality and
appetite. They stand still, shed light green diarrhoeic faeccs and show drops in cgg production.
Thcy gcnerally dic in a short timc, and the mortality ralc is varicd, ranging between 1 to 30%.
In Japan, mortality and cull ratcs in laycr flocks (15-25 months old) are 2.7-6.2% and those in the
flocks whcrc therc is a mixed infection with Marek's disease are 17.5%.  In all flocks, thc daily
average egg gain decrease from 50g to 42-46.2g
As for gross lesions, congestion of the subcutis, haemorrhagc of the subcutis and pericardial
adiposc tissuc, dark red swelling in the liver (Fig. 1), splcnomcgaly (Fig. 2), swelling and
discoloration of kidney, haematoma in ovarian follicles, and eggs in the abdominal cavity are
observed. As histopathological observation to demonstrate septicacmia, systemically markcd
lesions of blood vessels, nccrosis in the livcr and kidney, infiltration of hcterophilis and activation
86
of the reticulocndothelium are observed.  Also, pcrihcpatitis and perisplenitis are seen.  Eggs arc
shcd into the abdominal cavity with pcritonitis, and foci of bacteria are observed in tissues of the
livcr and splccn of dead chickens.
As prcventive measures for turkeys, an inaclivated vaccine is used in Canada and thc USA
 but is not uscd for othcr poultry as the disease in them is sporadic. For trcatment, antimicrobial
agcnts, which are effective for avian E. rhusioputhiae, such as penicillin, tctracyclinc and
macrolides arc administered in the drinking water.
Avian Listeriosis
An acute septicaemic discase causcd by Listeria monocytogenes, whosc host range covers
mammals, including humans, birds and fish, In birds, this disease sporadically occurs in warm
arcas but it is not known in Japan.  The lesion of this discasc is similar to avian erysipelas
infeclion and it is often sccn as a mixed infection with othcr discascs.
Avian Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection
This disease is a septicaemic discasc caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa and mainly occurs in
young chicks, but in affected chicks that do not die opacity of the cornca (ophthalmia of the
eyeball) and slipped tendon (arthritis) are often observed. In Japan, i1 occurs mostly in chicks
under about two weeks of agc, and the affcctcd chicks show diarrhoea and loss of vitality and
appctitc. The mortality and cull rates in chicks under about onc weck old are 10-60%. The
 major gross lesions are hyperacmia and haemorrhage, pericarditis and malabsorbed yolks. In 5-
11 day old chicks, slipped tendon discase causcd by arthritis is observed in 2.4% of cascs and
unilateral ophthalmia of the eyeball in 0.8% of 1hem.  As to infcction sources, contamination of
brccding hcns or incubators and vaccination equipment are somctimcs suggcstcd.
Avian Campylobacter infection
This disease is an avian hcpatitis causcd by Campylobacter jejuni. It is also a chronic
infection, which is called avian vibrionic hepatitis, but it is generally inapparent in chickcns.
Sincc retention of this bacterium in the intestine is obscrved from two-week-old and can reach
more than 1o%, mcat contaminated with this bacterium in the slaughterhouse can cause food
poisoning in humans. This discase, therefore, is also regarded as serious from the standpoint of
public healih.  Also in Japan, this bacterium has been designated a food poisoning bacterium
since 1982.
Avian Tuberculosis [r]
A chronic infection caused by infcetion with Mycobacierium avium, which is an acid-fast
bacillus in group IHI of the Mycobacterium genus. In strains of avian origin, type 1 and type 3
are the major of the thrce scrotypes and type 2 is the major atypical acid-fast strain of human and
swine origin.  In developed countries, the incidence of 1his disease has already decreascd.  The
incidence in chickens is not known, but there have been cases of infection reported in famingo,
chrysolophus, bluc-carcd phcasant, hoodcd mcrganser and migratory birds (Anatidae) in zoolog-
ical gardens.
In infected chickens, cmaciation, discoloration of the comb and wattle and egg produclion
drops are observed and birds die for 2-3 months in the carly cases and for several months in most
cascs,
Miscellaneous Bacterial Diseases 87
Thc affectcd chickcns contaminate thc fccding cnvironmcnt by discharging bacteria in thcir
faeces and the bacteria survive in or soil for as long as 4 years.  Major gross lesions are swelling
 0f the liver and spleen and sporadic of yellowish white tuberculous nodes in the liver, spleen and
mucosa of the small intesline and caccum (Fig. 3). Histopathologically, diagnosis and differen-
tial diagnosis are easy, due to the prcscnce of tuberculous granulomala as spccific findings.
Cheesy necrotie lesions are seen in the centre of thc nodulc and thcrc is an intermediate laycr
consisting of epithelial cells and Langhan's cells around that. Round cells and a connective
tissuc laycr surround an cxtcrnal layer and the bacteria are sporadically shed in the cheesy
necrotic lesions and the epithelial ccll laycr.
 Diagnosis by the tuberculin test or plate agglutination reaction is also altempled.
88
Miscellaneous Bacterial Discascs
Fig.1.A case of a layer infected
withErysipelothrixrhusiopathiae:
Dark red swollen liver.(Original:
Shibatani)
Fig.2.A case ofa layer infected
with E.rhusiopathiae:Marked sple-
nomegaly.(Original:Shibatani)
Fig.3.A case of hooded merganser
infected with avian tuberculosis:
sporadicoccurrences of many
yellowishwhite tuberculousnodules
from miliary to ared-bean size in
the liver.(Original:Public health
centre of livestock in Nagano
prefecture)
MiscellaneousBacterial Diseases
68
21. Fungal Diseases
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Aspergillosis and mucormyosis are two major fungal diseases of poultry
Particularly in litter in the breeding house, true fungi sometimes occur and infect
birds when they inhale the spores.
In chickens, the disease occurs mostly in day-old chicks, and they show loss of
vitality. respiratory symptoms, difficulty in standing and finally an acute sudden
death.
At autopsy. hyperplasia and nodules in the air sacs, and nodules and white
mycelia are observed in the lungs.
Presence of granuloma and mycelia in affected tissues.
lsolation by culture is easy in the case of fungal infection and it is possible to
identify presumptively the  species or genus according to its morphological
features.
the infection of fungus and its proliteration
Outline of Disease
Incidencc: A discasc caused by Aspergillus fumigalus is called aspergillosis, and a disease caused
             
considcred two of the major diseases caused by fungi in avian specics. Morbidity caused by the
formcr is high in chicks under one week old, particularly those aged 1-4 days.  As for thc lattcr,
according to past rcports, infection in chicks younger than one month old has been known in
Japan.  Youngcr chicks havc gcncrally highcr susccptibility to the fungus and furthermore, the
main infection route of both fungi is via respiratory organs. It is thereforc, considered that the
quantity of inhaled fungi is related to morbidity. In every case, the discasc occurrcncc is rclatcd
to an cnvironmcnt where the fungi grow.  The diseases cause a mass outbrcak and commonly
form lesions in lungs and air sacs. It is not rarc to scc lesions in the brain and other organs by
a haematogenous transmission from the primary lesions. Il also happcns that the fungus in thc
family Mucor infiltrates into the alimentary tract and lesions develop in the intcstinal walls.  In
this case, it is irrespective of age.
Aetiology: In the case of aspergillosis, it is almost always caused by A. fumigatus but may rarely
be causcd by A. favus and other specics. Bcsides infecting birds, thc formcr also causes
mould-originated abortion in cows and pulmonary mycosis in humans. It is originally saprobic,
but the pathogen is found in humans and animals. As for fungi in thc family Mucoraccac,
Absidia corymbifera, Rhizopus microsporus, Rhizopus cohni, Rhizopus chicncnsis, Rhizomuco1
pusillus, and the like, have been reported and these are also considered to bc pathogcnic spccics.
Furthcrmorc, fungi in the family Mucoraceae are also pathogenic for humans and animals
and cause mucosal lesions in bovinc discasc, abomasum of sheep and vcntriculus of swinc.
Peripheral lymph nodes became infltrated with fungi via infection in the blood vessels.
Symptoms and Iesions
Chicks show symptoms such as loss of vitality and appetite, lethargy, depression, diffieulty in
transmission of the fungus, birds show nervous symptoms such as torlicollis and inability to stand.
The abovc symploms arc observed commonly boih in aspcrgillosis and mucormycosis.
In the case of aspergillosis, lesions are seen in the lung, air sac, bronchus and trachea, and a
lesion is incidcntally observed also in the visceral organs.  In lungs, yellowish white nodules, from
miliary 1o soybean sizc are seen (Fig. 1) but thcsc are not noticcable in 0-5 day-old chicks that are
 growing rapidly.  The walls of thc air sacs are thickened, and the sizes of nodules are varied bu1
they are hard, containing cheesy, nccrotic lissues in thc central scction. A large one shows
conccntric disks.  Slightly bluish hyphae may adhere to the surfacc of thc disk (Fig. 2).
Histologically, the centre of the nodule is a necrotic lesion and hyphae are seen in it.  Around thc
nodulc, there is a laycr where epithcloid ccll, giant cclls and macrophages accumulate.
Mucus, fibrin, nuclear fragments, leukocytes and inflammatory cells are obscrved in the ai1
sac, sccondary bronchus and primary bronchus, and hyphac penetrate thc wall of the blood
vessels. In air sacs, the vesiclc of the fungus and phialide arc often observed. Inside lesions, it
is characlcristic that thc hyphae radiate towards the pcriphcry.
[n mucormycosis, the causal fungi are various, and nodules in lungs and adhercnce of cheesy
substanccs to the pleural cavity and abdominal cavity are also seen. As mentioned above, the
fungus pcnetrates the walls of blood vesscls by its infiltration through them, forms a clot, and is
haemorrhagic infraction.  Thc fungal clemcnt inside the lcsion is a wide hypha lacking a septum.
  n ara sid   pr e n o se n re s  s
a bulb.
Diagnosis
Mycological diagnosis is rcquired and the lesion is culturcd on Sabouraud's agar or malt agar.
days aftcr culture and gradually bccomc grecn and finally dark grccn. The periphery of the
fungal colony on the plate is impresscd on the glass slide using ccllotapc and thc smcars that arc
            
scopicaily.
Thc vesicle of the fungi has a clubbcd shape and the adherencc of filaments around the top
half is a feature of this fungus (Fig. 3).
 In the casc of fungi in the family Mucoraccae, the growth in thc medium looks like a floccus
 Oor like felt and is dull greyish brown. Sporangia emerge in a sporangiophore.   After matura-
tion, the capsule is opened or is dissolved and the sporcs diffuse from inside thc sac 1o the
periphery.  The hypha is ihick and cocnocytic, lacking a septum (Fig. 4).  In the genus Mucor,
   a oe         m
out or do not branch out. In the Absidia genus, thc sporangiophorc emerges on a branched
slolon. ln the Rhizopus genus, thcrc is a stolon but rhizoids root and several sporangiophores
   n       o a  
form bctwccn Rhizopus and Mucor.  An accuratc identification of a fungus should bc conducted
in a specialiscd institutc.
Fungal Discascs
91
Preventive Measures
This disease mostly develops by the infiltration of fungus sporcs into thc rcspiratory organs
of a bird.  This kind of situation should, therefore, be avoided.  As for malerials used for liiter,
 one should be careful about damp-dry sawdust, since it may easily cause proliferation of A.
fumigatus. According to a recent casc of mass infcction with the genus Mucor, the disease
occurrcd when the culture bcdding material for the velvet shank was uscd for litter.  It should bc
recognised that the secondary usc of bcdding material for mushrooms carries a risk of causing the
proliferation of pathogenic fungi. General materials that are well dried should bc used for littcr.
Chicks may also bc affectcd by this discase after a long period of transportation. Breeding in
high density under steamy conditions also causcs cncrgy cxhaustion of the birds. Mcasures in
brccding management that prevent living organisms from replicating are imporlanl.
92
Fungal IDiseases
Fig.1.Aspergillosis:Large and small nodules caused by A.fumigatus infection in thelungof LadyAmherst‘s
pheasant.Disks shaped nodules are also observed.(Original:Hori)
Fig.2.Aspergillosis:Widespread adherence ofwhite hyphae in the air sac of a Japanese crane.(Original:Horii)
Fig.3.A.fumigatus in slide culture:Vesicle（→) and phialide（) are observed.
Fig.4.Histological lesions in the lung pleura of a duck with mucormycosis:Hyphae of Mucor sp.without a
septum that proliferateinside the tissue.HE stain.(Original:Murakami)
FungalDiseases
93
22.
 Coccidiosis
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Coccidiosis is a disease that is mainly characterised by various kinds of diarrhoea,
such as bloody diarrhoea caused by protozoa in Eimeria species.
sdoup uononpoid bba pue eiwaeue 'tubiam Apog jo aseaisap sasneo aseasip siul
Fowls with bloody diarrhoea have a high mortality rate.
in the caecum.
In the small intestine, haemorrhage, necrosis and swelling and opaque whitening
and punctiform or broken line necrosis of mucous membranes are observed.
diagnosis.
Outlinc of Disease
Coccidiosis results from infection by protozoa of the Eimeria spccics.   There are 8 species of
 Eimeria that parasitize fowls. Symptoms, regions of parasitization and lesions arc different in the
different species. This is onc of the diseases that causc the grcatest damage to chickens. Thc
infection occurs by oral ingcstion of oocysts.  The affected bird shows diarrhoea, anorexia and
dccrcasc of body weight and may dic.  This disease develops irrespcctivc of agc, sex and breed of
chickcns. I1 is prone to occur in birds rearcd on thc floor, but occurrence in layers in multiple
 cages has recently been rcported. The incidence among chicks (up to 10 weeks old) is minimised
by medication but in broilcrs on thc other hand, it is pronc to occur after withdrawal of
shed from bccoming contaminated with oocysts and to apply prophylaxis 1o thc chickcns. A
vaccine with weak virulcncc is practicable.
Symptoms and Lesions
Infection with coccidiosis is caused by oral ingestion of sporulated oocysts.  Sporozoites are
released from oocysts in the alimentary 1ract and form schizonts by infiltrating into the cpithelial
cells of the mucous membrane.  Merozoites form in the schizonts; they form schizonts again in
         
formed, these perform gamogcncsis, become oocysis and arc cxcrcted. In an acute disease,
symptoms correspondingly oecur at the second schizont phase.
Thc symptoms and lesions are classified into thrcc types according to the pathotypc of
disease.
Acute caecal coccidiosis: This is caused by an infcction with Eimeria tenella. Aftcr 4-5 day
latent pcriod, chickens develop the discasc by defecating bloody diarrhoca (Fig. 1). Anaemia is
commonly obscrvcd, and the birds are reluctant to move and become somnlence. The mortality
rate is high, and the lesion is limitcd to the caecum. Hlaemorrhage and necrosis are observed in
thc caccum. Swelling of the caccum and hypertrophy of the walls arc also observcd and the
94
contents contain clots of blood and cheesy substances (Fig. 2). In the recovery period, the
caecum is markcdly atrophied and sclcrosal.  There are no contents in thc caecum at this stage,
or only small pieces of chcesy substance.  In thc histopathological specimen at the pcak of
disease, conglomerations of large, second schizonts are observed with haemorrhage around thc
lamina propria mucosa (Fig. 3).
Acute small intestine coccidiosis: This discase is caused by infection with E. necatrix.  The
chickcns and hens right after thc bcginning of lay.  The hens dic aftcr the sudden defecation of
 an cxtensivc, mucous bloody droppings after a latent pcriod of 4-5 days. Rcgions of parasitiza-
tion are the middle of the small intesline and the caccum.  In the small intestine, first and sccond
form haemorrhage and ash grey, necrotic lesions devclop dcnscly (Fig. 4) and thcse arc fuscd in
the case of a serious infection. Shortening of thc length and increased thickncss (abou1 twice)
are obscrved in the small intestine. 'Thc mucous membrane in the swollen regions becomes
hypertrophied and friablc with a pulp-like texture.  In the rccovcry period, the small intestine is
pink.  No lesions are observed in the caecum and reclum, but the blood from thc uppcr intcstinc
may bc deposited there. Oocysts arc obscrvcd only in the caecum. In a histopathological
spccimen, a conglomcration of sccond schizonts is observcd, corrcsponding to haemorrhage and
necrotic lesions of the small intestine.
Chronic small intestine coccidiosis: This discase is caused by six kinds of Eimeria: E. ac-
eruvulina,E. maxima, E. brunetti, F. mitis, E.praecox,and E. hagani.‘The symptoms arc
slightly different depcnding on the kind of infection.  Affccicd chickcns defecate watcry,
diarrhoea, mucous and solid droppings. Decrease of body weight and ruffled fcathcrs are
obscrved but death rarely occurs.  Egg production drops are also observcd.  In the field, damage
caused by infections with E. aceruvufina and E. maxima are observed.  In infection with E.
 brunetti, imperccptible haemorrhage is obscrved in the small intestine, and the pathogenicity is the
strongcst among the above infcctions, but it is rarely observcd in Japan.  Lesions are limited to
the small intestine, and an impercepiible, punctatc or brokcn linc necrosis is obscrvcd in the
intestinal walls.  In a serious case, the intestine is opaque and white, with a thick ribbon shape
and is promincnt.  The walls lose clasticity and become hardencd. Parasitism by the protozoa
is limited to the mucous cpithelium,  In a field case, a singlc infection is rarc and mixcd infection
with 1wo or three specics is frequent.
Diagnosis
Although it is possible to diagnose this discase by symptoms and lesions, microscopy is used
A small portion of mucosa cxciscd from the lesion is fincly cut onto a glass slide, scvcral drops
of physiological salinc are added and then contrast microscopy is performed.
Schizonts, merozoites and oocysts are obscrved.  When preparing an cmulsion of intestinal
         d  d  o  n '
methanol fixation. For the detection of oocysts from faeces, it should be fcmembered that
diagnosis cannot be done during the acute phasc.
Diseases that require differential diagnosis are hislomoniasis and necrotic enteritis.  Caecal
lesions of histomoniasis arc similar to acutc caecal coccidiosis but histomoniasis infection differs
from acute caecal coccidiosis in the presence of pus in the lesion, adhesion, peritonitis and necrosis
of the liver. Necrotic cnteritis is similar to acute small intcstine coccidiosis in the gross lesions, but
necrotic enteritis differs in that the swollen region in the small intestine is its under part and the
walls of the intestine become thinner.
Coccidiosis
95
Prevention/Treatment/Measures
Prevcntion: All kinds of synthetic anticoccidial drugs and ionophorcs arc applicablc as prophy
lacties.  Howcvcr, these are only usable up to 10 weeks in layers and up to 7 days before slaughter
in broilers. Furthermore, il is necessary for each farmer to select an effective prophylatic, since
drug-resistant coccidia have increased.  In order to prevent drug-resistant strains from increas-
ing, the following systems have been employed.  A shuttle system in which the drug used during
thc brccding cycle is changed in the first period and again in thc latcr period, and a rotation syslcm
in which the drugs are changed at certain times or al every season.  A live vaccine is also
cmploycd.
Trcatment: A sulfa drug o1 a mixlurc of a sulfa drug and a pyrimidinc drug arc used.  'Thc
 mixture is effctively used in the field, sincc drug resistant strains are increasing.  The sale of egg
and mcat producis is prohibiicd during ccrtain pcriods aftcr drug administration.
 Measures: Heating disinfection using boiled water is the most effective when oocysts are an
infection source, but it is difficult to apply it on a large-scale poultry site. As a disinfectant,
orthodichlorobcnzcnc prcparation is cffcetive but it is applicd in a small pool or a mat of
disinfectant as it takes 5-6 hours to destroy sporulated oocysts.  A breeding control system is also
rcquired to avoid carrying oocysts into thc poultry housc.
96
Coccidiosis
Fig.1.Acute caecal coccidiosis:Bloody faeces observed in an infected bird.
Fig.2.Caecum with acute caecal coccidiosis:Clots of blood and cheesy foci inside the caecum (5 days after
experimentalinfection).
Fig.3.Histological lesions ofa caecumwith acute caecal coccidiosis:A large number of second schizonts and
haemorrhage.HEstain.
frequenthaemorrhage andnecrosis.Thelesionevenreaches the duodenumand thelower part of the smallintestine.
Coccidiosis
97
23. Leucocytozoonosis [r]
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
This disease is a protozoal disease of haematophytes through the intermediary of
Culicoides arakawae.
This disease frequently develops in the summer in layers which an antiprotozoal
drug cannot be used.
Clinical symptoms are anaemia, defecation of green faeces, emaciation and egg
production drops.
Gross lesions are petaechiae in the subcutis, pectoralis and all systemic organs,
and haematic pools in the visceral cavity.
Clinical symptoms, autopsy observation and detection of the protozoa are used
for diagnosis.
An antiprotozoal drug is effective, but vermicide is applied for layers.
Outline of Disease
This discasc is causcd by a hacmatozoon observed in avian species, and approximately 70
specics of protozoa are known, such as Leucocytozoon caulleryi and L. sabrazesi in chickens, L.
simondi in ducks and geese, L. smithi in turkeys and so on.  There is a chicken discasc causcd by
Leucocytozoon caulleryi in Japan.This discase devclops through the intermediary of a very small
haematophagous protozoon called Culicoides arakawae.  Thus, the incidence of this disease in
 Japan is frequcnt from July lo September in summer, when Culicoides arakawae cmergcs, and it
is observed in all areas except Hokkaido.
Chickens are infected when Culicoides arakawae sucks blood from thc chickens and at the
same timc protozoa are implantcd inlo the body. The protozoon grows to a large sized
  r    a  an  q rs   
another protozoon called a gametocyte by parasitizing inside an crythrocytc. In this process, thc
erythrocyte is ruptured, causing anaemia and defccation of grccn facccs. When a Culicoides
arakawae sucks thc blood of a bird with developing gametocytes, it becomes infectious and
transmits to other birds by sucking blood.  In flocks where no antiprolozoal drug is cmploycd or
there is no infection history, it is possible for chickcns at any agc to develop various symptoms.
 However, with broilers or layers, prophylactic mcasurcs can bc lakcn by applying an antiprotozoal
drug.  The disease frcquently devclops to laycrs in which no antiprotozoal drug can be applied
and causes damagc, such as cgg production drops.
Symptoms and Lesions
Diverse forms are seen depending on thc age of thc chickens, the body weight and the numbcr
of infctious protozoa as follows: (1) those that show haemoptysis, haemorrhage and finally die.
show anaemia, slow growth, soft shelled cggs, cgg production drops and moulting, and defecatc
grcen facces, bu1 arc resistant and survive. (4) Those that resist discasc and survive without any
98
symptoms. Gcncrally, older and heavier chickens have milder symptoms, and birds infected with
more Culicoides arakawae protozoa develop morc scvcrc symptoms.
. I1 is subclinical for two
weeks after infection.  Thereafter, chicks infected severely show symptoms such as hacmoptysis,
deprcssion, crouching, ataxia and ruffling fcathcrs, and finally dic. Evcn the survivors among
thcm show a crouched posture, anacmia, dcfccation of grccn facccs, cmaciation and cgg
production drops.
 As for gross lesions, in chickens that show haemoptysis and die, pin point or soybean-sized
petacchia and irregular shaped bloody patch are obscrved in thc sub cutis, muscles, kidney, bursa
of Fabricius and all systemic organs (Fig. 1).  In addition, bloody pools in the abdominal cavily
and thc prescncc of blood in thc trachca and crop are also ohserved. Furthermore, foci of
scrosa and pancreas.
3. In chickens whose watile is anacmic and facccs arc green, swollcn spleens 
arc often observed.
In the histopathological obserbation, emboli of blood vessels by schizonts, destructive or
diapedia hacmorrhage, haemostasis, oedema, foreign-body giant ccells in broken schizonts,
macrophagcs and lymphocyte infiltration toward brockcn schizonis ale obscrvcd.
Diagnosis
It is almost possible to assume this discase from the time of incidence (summer), clinical
symptoms (haemoptysis, haemorrhage, anaemia, defecation of green faeces, cgg produetion
drops, and so on) and autopsy observation (petacchia in all kinds of organs), but parasitological
diagnosis is requircd for accuracy.
Parasitological diagnosis: In chickcns that die by hacmoptysis or haemorrhagc, aftcr confirm-
ing gross lesions, a portion of the region where the haemorrhage is observcd, is excised.  A fresh
spccimen o1 tissue fragmcnt is thcn prcparcd and protozoal schizonis arc confirmed (Fig. 2).  In
chickens that show anacmia and defecation of grecn faeccs, a periphery blood smcar spccimen is
prepared and protozoal merozoites (Fig. 3) or gametocytes (Fig. 4) arc dctccted after staining
with Gicmsa.
Also, the presence of infection can be shown by antibody detection using for example the
agar-gcl precipitation test, counter immunoeleclrophoresis, indirect immunofluorescence or
ELISA.
 Differential diagnosis: Fowl malaria is similar to leucocytozoonosis as another haematozoic
discasc. As causal protozoa, there are two kinds of Plasmodium, P. gallinaceum and P.
juxtanucleare.
The former is dangerous with very high pathogenicity, but in Japan, only the latter is found,
which has comparativcly low pathogenicily and infrequcnt incidence. Howevcr, it occasionally
 may cause symptoms such as anaemia and defecation of green faeccs of a yellow-cream type.
This diseasc occurs from summer to autumn and is carricd by Culex pipiens pallens.  This disease
can be distinguished morphologically from the protozoa by microscopy using a blood smear.
Also, anaemia is causcd by avian leukosis, sulpha drug intoxication and mass parasitism by
tion. In any case, parasitological and serological tests can clearly differcntiate the diseases.
Prevention/Treatmcnt/Measures
 For prcvcntive mcasurcs, a mixlure of amprolium, cthopabate and sulfaquinoxaline or a feed
additive of halofuginone, polystyrene and calcium sulphonatc arc applied to broilers up to onc
week before proccssing and layers up to 10 wecks old.  ‘This discasc does not causc damage to
1.eucocytozocnosis [1| 99
broilers in the demedication period of one weck before processing.  Layer chickens over 10 weeks
old and before egg production, can be protected from the disease by using the following animal
drugs. A sulfa drug such as sulfadimethoxinc, sulfamonomethoxine, sulfaquinoxalinc and
sulfaisomczolc, a mixture of pyrimcthamine and sulfadimethoxine, or a mixture of
pyrimethamine-related substances and a sulfa drug (ormcthoprim and sulfamonomcthoxine,
dyberizinc and sulfaquinoxaline, trimethoprim and sulfadimethoxine) may be used. For layers,
as the application of antiprotozoal drugs is prohibited, it may bc bcncficial to use a windowless
house that is airtight and may prevent Culicoides arakawae from entering.  In an open housc the
number of Culicoides arakawae as vector is rcduced by such insccticides as carbamate of sabin,
proboxu1 and BPMC, pyrcthroid of allethrins and the organic phosphorus, fcnilrothion. The
disease should be minimised by reducing the number of infectious biting midges and infectious
protozoa to thc minimum.
100 I.cucocytozoonosis [r]
Fig.1.Pectoralis of a chicken that died 13 days after an experimental infection:Frequent incidenceof petaechia.
Fig.2.Histologicallesions of thethymus of a chickthat died 14 days after anexperimentalinfection:Formation
ofschizonts.HEstain.
Fig.3.A blood smear of a chick that died 15 days after an experimental infection:Schizonts in erythrocytes(→).Giemsa stain.
Fig.4.Ablood smearof a chick that died 20 days after an experimental infection:Formation of gametocytes.
The violet-stained protozoon is a macrogametocyte （→)and the burgundy coloured protozoon isa
microgametocyte(>).Giemsastain.
Leucocytozoonosis[r]1
101
24.
Other Protozoan Diseases
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Fowl toxoplasmosis is a protozoan disease caused by Toxoplasma gondii and
lacking in characteristic symptoms in the field
Heterakis eggs in the caecum where Histomonas protozoa are found.
In histomoniasis, focal necrosis in the liver and necrotic and ulcerous enteritis in
the caecum are characteristic.
Parasitizing
region of the protozoa is the respiratory mucous epithelium.
Outline of Disease
Toxoplasmosis is a protozoan disease caused by Toxoplasma gondii.  Histomoniasis (black-
head, enterohcpatitis) is a protozoan discase caused by Histomonas meleagridis, and
cryptosporidiosis is a protozoan discasc caused by Cryptosporidium sp.  Toxoplasma has a final
host for animals in cats and has a wide range of intermediate hosts such as 27 kinds of mammals,
including humans and 63 kinds of birds and rcptiles.  The protozoan is found in all parts of thc
world, and natural infcction has bccn reporled in chickens, turkcys, ducks and wild birds, but
there has been no rcport from Japan.
Histomoniasis develops in many avian species, and young guinca fowl and turkeys havc
particuiarly high susccptibility.  This disease is also widespread in Japan, and its occurrence in
chickcns and turkcys has been observed in the field. As a cause of Histomonas infection, worms
in the chicken caecum play a part in transmission, and the protozoa enter the Heterakis cggs in thc
caecum. Chickcns ingest the Heterakis cggs and arc infectcd.
 The host range for cryptosporidiosis is broad in mammals, birds and reptiles, and most of the
mammals develop diarrhoea due to parasitization in the mucous epithelium of the intestinc. In
 birds, rcspiratory symptoms devclop following parasitization in the intestine, bursa of Fabricius,
mucous epithelium and fine cilia of the mucous epithelium in the upper trachea. Species of
Cryptosporidium that parasitize birds differ according to thc kind of poultry to bc infccled and the
rcgion of parasitization. Cryptosporidium baileyi parasitizes chickcns, turkcys, and ducks. C.
meleagridis parasitizes turkeys and chickens. Cryptosporidium sp. parasitize quail. This proto-
so u paoi uaaq sru usrid jo ao e pue ueder u piidsaim oe s uo
Symptoms and Lesions
Toxoplasmosis: Chickens show strong resistance to this infection.  In cascs of experimental
infection, they show varied symptoms according to age and route of inoculation. The disease
Occurs following intraccrcbral inoculation in chicks up to three weeks old and intra-abdominal
inoculation of onc-day-old chicks.  Following intravenous, intra-abdominal, intramuscular or
intradermic inoculation in chicks at onc day of agc, it becomes parasitaemic and chronic.  As to
clinical symptoms, these are loss of vitality, emaciation, anaemia, atrophy of thc comb, cgg
102
production drops, whitish facces, diarrhoca, trembling, ataxia, opisthotonus, torticollis and
typhlosis. However, sympioms in turkeys and ducks are slight. Macroscopically, swelling of
the liver and spleen, nccrosis of the livcr, pericarditis, mycocarditis, necrotic cnteritis, hyperaemia
of lungs and cnccphalitis are observed. In an cxperimental intracerebral and intramuscular
inoculation, histopathologically, cysts arc obscrved in the brain, optic nerve, myocardium,
 pancrcas and testis (Fig. 1) but cmergencc of proliferative protozoa is rare, exccpt in the brain.
Histomoniasis: This diseasc occurs mosily in medium sizcd chicks from carly in July to late
Octobcr and also occurs mostly in floor pens.(
Clinical symptoms are rise of temperaturc in thc
carly pcriod of infcction and a drop of tcmperature after that, rufHed fcathers, anaemia,
cmaciation, anorexia, watery diarrhoca faeccs and sopor. In thc casc of a slight infection,
diarrhoea is the major symptom and recovery takcs thc coursc of naturc. Macroscopically,
lesions arc limitcd to the caecum and liver.
The caecum shows necrotic and ulccrous cntcritis
and chccsy substanccs are found in it.  The liver is somewhat swollen and shows characleristical-
ly rosctte-shaped and round, focal nccrotic lesions (Fig. 2).
 Histopathologically, a large number
of eosinophilic and PAS positive Histomonas protozoa are obscrved in thc livcr and caecum (Fig.
3).
Cryptosporidiosis: This discase occurs mos1ly al a young age.
When the intestine and bursa of
Fabricius arc infectcd with the disease, it generally passes as a subclinical infection.  Whcn thc
upper trachca is parasitizcd, respiratory symptoms develop such as dyspnoca, coughing, sneezing
and nasal discharge, bu1 death rarely follows a single infection with this protozoon,
Macroscopically, when the upper trachea is parasitized, increase of mucus in the infraorbital sinus
and trachea is the only obscrvation. Histopathologically, on thc surfacc or in the cavity of
epithelial cells of infected lissues, separate and oval or round protozoa with a diamctcr of 2.0-3.5
μm are obscrved (Fig. 4). Furthermore, no lcsion is observed in the intestine, and in the bursa
of Fabricius, swclling and hyperplasia of bursal epithelial cells are noted and the epithelium is
   q     l    n  i  
specimen, but it is possible to observe it by electron microscopy.
Diagnosis
Toxoplasmosis: As it is difficult to diagnosc clinically, identification of protozoon is required.
Thc isolation method for thc protozoan is inoculation of cmbryonaled cggs, lissuc culture and the
 brain and abdominal cavity of a mouse with an emulsion of infected organs.
If a mousc is used, it is dead 5-10 days after inoculation of a highly virulent strain.
Howcver, if it does not dic, duc to a wcakly toxic strain, a cysl test and an antibody tcst arc
performed after four wccks. As for serological diagnosis, complement fixation, ELISA, indirect
fluorescent antibody technique and dye-tests arc used.
Histomoniasis: With the cmergcncc of clinical symptoms, a grcat deal of palc yellow-brown,
watery diarrhoea is defccated and changes to deep ycllow whcn dried. Pathologically, lesions are
limied to the liver and caccum, and it is easily diagnosed from the characterislic gross lesions.
HHistopathologically, the Histomonas protozoan is still confirmed.  As for differential diagnosis, it 
is necessary to diffcrentiate thc discasc from caecal coccidiosis caused by Eimeria lenella, bu1 a
mixed infcction of both is scldom obscrved.
Cryptosporidiosis: A test for oocysts in faeces is performed by the direct method or by sucrose
flotation. In this case, it is observed microscopically by silver staining or acid-fast bacillus
staining, since diffcrentiation from yeast is diffcult. Protozoa in tissues are looked for and
Py.
(Other Protozoan Diseases  103
P'rcvention/Treatment/Measures
Toxoplasmosis: sulphadiazine and triple sulfa drugs arc cffective fo1 prophylaxis and trcatmcnt.
 To improve hygiene control, preventive mcasures are taken to eliminate rodents, coprophagous
insects and cats as infcctious sources.  Oocyst can be practically destroyed by drying or heating
Ovcr55°℃
Histomoniasis: Fowl caccum worms that play a role in transmission are dewormed. As a
drug, 0.5 g of phenothiazine is administered per 1 kg of body weight.  Also, as mcasurcs against
protozoa, 0.01-0.02% is succcssivcly applicd to drinking water or fecd for prevention and 0.1-
Cryptosporidiosis: There is no effective drug available at present.  Although 10% formalin and
5% ammonia is effective in destroying oocysis as an infection sourcc, this is not practicablc.
Application of a stcam cleaner is better since oocysts are dcstroyed above 65'C.
104Other Prolozoan Diseases
Fig.1.Toxoplasmosis:Cyst of To-
xoplasma gondiPAS stain.
Fig.2.Liver with
histomoniasis
(blackhead,enterohepatitis):Fre-
quent incidence of characteristic,
rosette-shaped or round maculae.
Fig.3.
Histologicallesionsofa
caecum with histomoniasis:Histo-
monas protozoa observed in the
subcutaneous mucous and lamina
propria （red staining （→）.PAS
stain.(Original:Murakawa)
Fig.4.Cryptosporidiosis:Protozoa
observed in the mucous epithelium
of the bursa of Fabricius （→).
HE stain.(Original:Itakura)
OtherProtozoanDiseases
105
25.
Ectoparasitic Diseases
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Ectoparasites that cause serious problems in Japan are biting midges, biting lice,
chicken mites and northern fowl mites, and these are few in number.
Ol anp eiwaeue 'bung pue uoezniseied oi anp ssas s! abewep ioaia
bloodsucking and skin disorders.
 Indirect damage is incidence of diseases through the intermediary of pathogens
such as Leucocytozoon infection caused by biting midges
Morphological  identification   of   the   causal
I  ectoparasites  makes  effective
extermination practicable by the use of drugs.
Outline of Disease
The damagc that cctoparasites cause to chickcns is classified mainly into two kinds, dircct
damage such as strcss duc to parasitization and biting, anacmia due to blood sucking, cgg
 production drops, loss of weight and skin disorders, and indirect damage caused through the
 intermediary of pathogens such as bacteria, viruses and parasites.  Major ctoparasites that cause
serious damagc to chickens in Japan, are northern fowl mites, chicken mites, biting licc, biting
 midges and mosquitocs. Hxcluding the fact that bloodsucking of biting midges is incidental, all
of thesc cctoparasites are hacmotophagous, and biting midgcs and mosquitoes also carry diseascs
biologically as vcctors.  Mosquitoes that prcfcrably suck the blood of chickcns arc Culex pipiens
pallens and Culex bitaeniorhynchus.  Mosquitoes carry viral diseases such as fowl pox, as wcll as
a malarial protozoan, such as Plasmodium. In addition to the damagc to the chickens, there has
rcccntly bcen a serious problem concerning livcstock pollution caused by fics such as Musca
stabulans, Fannia canicularis and Musca domestica that may abnormally emcrgc from chicken
houses and from chicken facces.
Biting midges: Biting midgcs are vcry small insects belonging to biting midge family, Deptera.
Specics that cause damage by bloodsucking are those of Culicoides that have the particular
 marking of thc genus on their wings (Fig. 1). Over 80 species of this genus are currently known
 in Japan and the most typical kind is Culicoides arakawae that transmits leucocytozoonosis.  The
imago of this species has a body length of 1-2 mm, and only the femalc is haematophagous and has
sevcral cycles of bloodsucking and laying throughout its life.  The feelers of thc male are long.
and look dense, so that these can bc difcrcntiatcd from the female that has no feclers.
Veins and markings on the pair of wings on thc thorax are important poinis to idcntify thc
species. There arc thrcc stages of cgg, larvae from the first 1o ihe fourth stagc and pupa in the
immature period, and they livc in paddy fields.  They winter in the soil of paddy ficlds mainly at
their third stage.  It is belicved that there is no transmission of leucocytozoon protozoa through
the egg of a biting midgc.
Biting lice: Biting lice have high host spccificity and the major species are the same all ovcr in
un iopeoq si peoy oui auai Apoq u u g inoqe si siods sn jo oe aui pom aui
the thorax and thc gnathite is of the mastication type that is suitable for biting hairs and skin.
There are 9 species of lice that parasitize chickens in Japan, in 5 gcnus as follows. Philopteridac,
106
whose 5 curled fcelers jut outwards from the head, for cxamplc, the chicken head licc
Cuclotogaster heterographa, thc brown chicken licc Goniodes dissimilis, G. gigas, fuff lice G.
gallinae and wing lice Lipeurus caponis.  Also Menoponidac, whose feclers arc hidden in a groove
of the brain and cannot be sccn from behind, such as Menacanthus pallidulus, chicken body lice
M. stramineus (Fig. 2), M. cornutus and shaft lice Menopon gallinae. The parasitizing region of
the surface of the chicken body is roughly divided by species. M. stramineus parasitizes mostly
thc feathcrs and thc periphcry of thc cloaca, Cuclotogaster heterographa parasitize moslly in the
brain, and Lipeurus caponis parasitize mostly bciween the rami of the wing feathcrs. Major
transmission is by contact among hosts, but biting lice that parasitize chickens cnter the chicken
shed via cquipmcnt, clothes, wild birds, rats, and the like.
Northern fowl mites and chicken mites: Both belong to the Dermanyssus gallinae family
parasitus fimetorum group of Mesostigmata.  Northcrn fowl mites Ornithonyssus sy/vialum (Fig
3) preferably parasitizc wild birds, rodents and humans as well as chickens. The female imago
is 0.6-0.7 mm long and is smaller than the chicken mitc.  Thc colour of thc body is ash grey 1o
dark red. The back, reproductive sternitre and the dorsal region arc morc clongated than those
of chickcn mitcs.  Thcy live on the surface of chickens throughout their livcs and differ from
chickcn mitcs that attack chickens only at bloodsucking.  Larval mites cxuviate to the first
nymph mites without bloodsucking.  The first nymphs begin sucking blood just aflcr exuviation
and becomc the sccond nymph mitcs on the following day.  Thc sccond nymphs differ from
chicken mites bccause they do not suek blood and metamorphosc into imaginal mites within onc
day after exuviation. The seasonal tide of northern fowl mites shows closc relationship 10
temperature. Generally, they emerge from winter to the bcginning of spring bul rarcly in the
summer season.  The regions that thcy mostly parasitize are nits of mitcs, moults and excretions
that arc dark brown and may look differcnt by contamination with chicken faeccs (Fig. 4).A
relationship betwccn respiratory allergy of workers in the chicken shed and emergence of northern
fowl mites has rccently been suggeslcd.
Chicken mites (Dermanyssus gallinae) originally parasitized chickens but also parasitize
humans. 'The fcmale imago is 0.8-0.9 mm in length at the non-bloodsucking stagc, becomes
longer than 1 mm in the blood-saturated state and is larger than thc northcrn fowl mitc (Fig. 5).
 In most cascs, the colour of the body is from red 1o black.  'The life cycle for chicken mites
is pursuanl with t.hat of northern fowl mites but in the casc of chicken mites, the second nymphs
are also hacmatophagous and one gencration takcs 8-9 days.  Furthermorc a great differencc
from northern chicken mitcs is that they suck the blood of chickens only at nigh1 and cscapc
nolice in the shade of the chicken shed, cage or litter during daytime.  When chicken mites
cmerge, chickcns cannot keep quiet at night due to the bloodsucking of the mites, and excretions
Of chicken mites are obscrved as white stains in the shed and on equipment. Chicken mites
frcquently prolifcrate from spring to autumn and become inactive during winter.
Itch mites: Two kinds of mites of this group that parasitize in Japan arc Knemidokoptes laevis
gallinae and K. mutans.  The formcr parasitizes thc skin near the bottom of the fcathers, cxccpt
the regions of the wing and tail. The latter parasitizes only under the squamae and causes
symptoms such as deformation of lcgs and inability of stand (Fig. 6) and a1 the same time, causcs
chronic diseases such as disorders of the cireulatory systcm and the kidney.
Prevention/Treatmcnt/Measures
Organophosphorus compounds such as malathon, carbamate such as carbamyl and proboxur
and pyrethroid such as permcthrin have a highly exterminatory cffect on all thc ectoparasitcs, and
a combination of thcse drugs may also permit reduction of the concentrationl of drug applicd.
Howcver, a 7-10 day interval is rcquired for rcapplication, since these drugs do not cxterminatc
Ectoparasitie Diseascs 107
thc nits. The following measurcs arc requircd for the prcvention of northern fowl mites.
Inhibiting entry of the mites into the shed, early cull of carricr birds that do not show obvious
clinical symptoms and the regular practicc of exterminating thc ectoparasites. Chickens infeclcd
with itch mites should be identificd, separated and culled at an carly stagc since in most cases, it
is difficult to cxlerminatc them.
108
Ectoparasitic Diseases
Fig.1.Veins and marking on a wing of a female
Fig.2.The upper part of a female chicken body
biting midge.
louse.
Fig.3.Tergum,breastplate and fundament of
Fig.4.Parasitization ofnorthern fowl mites on a
femalenorthernfowlmites.
chicken.
Fig.5.Ventral view of female chicken mites.
Fig.6.Legs of a bantam that are deformed by
parasitization by Knemidokoptes laevis gallinae.
(Original:Murano)
EctoparasiticDiseases
109
26.  Endoparasitic Diseases/Helminthiasis
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
In cage breeding. endoparasites are rare since chickens do not have contact with
the ground and intermediate hosts.
 Many kinds of parasites are observed in wild birds and cause diseases
corresponding to the region parasitized, and may also cause death.
In "ground fowls" under a breeding system allowing contact with soil.
endoparasitic diseases often occur.
Most endoparasites parasitize the digestive tract and the major symptoms are
digestive disorders like diarrhoea and emaciation.
e buisn adA Aq waui junoo pue sbba aul jos ol s! sisoubeip waou-aiue jolen
faeces test.
 As for dead chickens, incising intestines retrieves the parasites, but there are also
small species that cannot be confirmed macroscopically.
Outline of Diseases
Major cndoparasites that parasitize poultry arc shown in Table 1. Although wild birds
living in nalure arc infccted with very many kinds of parasitcs, thcre arc a few opportunities for
cndoparasitic infection in thc currcnt breeding systems where birds havc no contact with the
 ground.   Most cndoparasites observed in Japancsc poultry are nematodes and these are Ascaridid
galli (Fig. 1, 2), Capillaria obsignata (hairworm), Heterakis gallinarum (Fig. 3), Syngamus
trachea (Fig. 4) and Strongyloides avium.  Also, Trematoda such as Postharmostomum gallinum,
cestoda such as Raillietina cesticillus (Fig. 5) and acanthoccphala (Fig. 6) are observed.
Symptoms and Lcsions
 In the casc of minor parasitism, infection is subclinical. Symptoms correspond to the
ccstoda and acanthocephala parasitize the digcstivc tract, therefore emaciation and feather
staining occur duc to such digestive disorders as diarrhoca and bloody diarrhoca. Syngamus
trachea literally parasitizcs the trachea.  When many Syngamus fracheae parasilizc chicks, they
develop bronchopneumonia and may die.
Diagnosis
For an anlc-mortem diagnosis of a respiratory parasite (Syngamus trachea) and parasilcs in
the digestive tract, detection of cggs or proglottid is pcrformcd by a faecal test. Since the shed
facccs arc uscd in faecal test of chickens, it is important to diffcrcntiatc thcsc parasitcs from
parasites originating from the littcr or from a similar parasite.  When eggs of Strongyloides avium
arc dcfccatcd outside the body, they enclose in sevcral hours.  In this case, therefore, they should
be carefully differcntiated from the many species of ground nematode occurring in bcdding and
110
Table 1. Major cndoparasites that parasitizc chickens (helminths)
Parasitcs
Length (mm)
Width (mm)
Region parasitizcd
Remarks
Nematoda
30 80
0.5 1.2!
Small intesline
Large nematoda
Ascaridia galli
60-120
0.9-1.8
Cupillaria obsignata
8.6 10
[0.05311
Small intestine
'I'here are several species
10-18
0.031 0.085
一
一
Heterakis gulinarum
:”4 131
Caecurn
This cgg is similar to that of ascaridia
815
一
一
—
Syngamus trachea
2-6
0.2-0.31
Trachea
Parasitization under the copulative
5 40
0.4 0.8
stale. Earth worm is an intermediate
host.
一
i
Strongyloides avium
2.2
0.04 -0.045
Small intestinc
Only the fernale is percutaneou-
siy
infectious by parasilization.
3.7-7.5
1 2"!
Caccum
'There arc 10 famifies in one rsrder.
Postharmostomum gulinum
They nostly parasilize wild birds.
(Brachylaemus commutatus)
Cestoda
40 130²:
Small intestine
Therc are 7 families in onc order.
Raillietina cesticiftus
Tenehrio (Colerptcra) is an inter-
nediate host.
Acanthocephala
4.0 10.1
0.72.4
Small intestine
 There are 10 families in 3 orders. The
Corynosoma sp.
outward form is similar to thc
proglotlid of cestoda.
1) I.evine, N.1D. (1968), 2) Lapage, G. (1962), 3) Taira (1994)
from thc larvae.
 Bcsides, in faccal tcst, EPG (the nurmber of eggs per gram of facces), is
investigated as the need arises, and the tcsting proccdure and the results of EPG should be
carefully examined sincc the shed faeces differ in their freshness, the mixed excretions in flocks
and the varied walcr content of thc faeccs.
 In the case of dead chickens, incising trachca and thc digestivc tract is uscd to recover
parasites.
 Ascaridia galli is a large parasite whose sizc reaches 3-12 cm and is casily confirmed
macroscopically.
 This parasite may rarely be observed in a chicken egg (Fig. 1).
On the other
hand, Strongyloides avium is only 2.2 mm in length, and its parasitizing state in the small intcstinc
cannot be confirmed macroscopically.
Prevention/Treatment/Measures
 It is generally believed that it is not particularly necessary to be careful in the case of cage
housing, since parasitism by cndoparasilcs is rarely observed.
 Howcver, in a shed that has a
structure where there is contact with chicken faeces, e.g. a system lo collect faeces by conveyer
belt in a multistagc cagc, it is possible that an infection by nematodes, particularly percutancous
Endoparasitic Diseases/Helninthiasis
111
infection by Strongyloides avium, could occur.  For treatment, effective anti-parasilic drugs, such
as ivermcctin or doramectin are administcrcd and rencwal of litter and disinfection are
performed.
112
StunitingSyndromc
Fig.1.Ascaridia galli observed in a chicken egg.
Fig.2.Ventral of the tail end,round sucking disk
(Original:Ikeda)
offront fundament,copula aculeus andcloaca of
amaleAscaridia galli are observed.
Fig.3.Side of the tail end,sucking disk of front
Fig.4.Syngamus trachea always showing red
fundament,copula aculeus and developedpapilla
under the copulative state.
ofamaleHeterakisgallinarum areobserved.
Fig.5.Cephalon including scolex of Raillietina
Fig.6.Acanthocephala obtained from the small
cesticillus and storobila that is close to it.
intestineofa deadquabird thatresembles the
proglottid ofcestoda inappearance andis the
size of a grain ofrice.
Stunting Syndrome113
27. Stunting Syndrome
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
This syndrome occurs in broilers about two weeks of age and is a generic term
for disease that is mainly symptomatic of stunting.
Remarkable uneven growth of chicks, abnormal feather growth, abnormal
distension of the abdomen and discoloration of the legs.
Major pathogenic changes are atrophy of the pancreas and proventriculitis
Improvement of the breeding environment precludes the occurrence
Outline of Disease
Stunting syndrome is mainly symptomatic of stunting and is a generic lcrm for diseasc that
 only manifest as stunting. This syndrome occurs in broilcrs about two weeks of age. There is
no establishcd theory, but from its epidemiology, some viral infcction that is not highly pathogenic
is considered to be the causc of thc syndrome.  As possible viral causes, avian reovirus (ARV),
 avian enterovirus, avian rotavirus, parvovirus, calicivirus and togavirus are listed.
This disease was first introduced as stunting syndrome in 1976 and sincc then has bccn called
various names, such as runting syndrome, malabsorption syndrome and pale bird syndrome
This discasc was not significant whilst it was masked by highly important, acutc infcctions,
but it is a discasc noticcd again as the incidence of the acute infections has recently dccreascd.
This new disease attacks broilcrs that grow rapidly and is regarded as serious.
Symptoms and Lesions
In chicks with this diseasc, uncvenness in sizc, loss of vitality, diarrhoea or death, are
observed at about 4 days of age. Furthermorc, al 7-10 days, uncvcnness in the size of thc chicks
becomes more marked and the mortality rate rises. During this period, some chicks may also
devclop nervous signs, due to a deficiency caused by malabsorption of vitamins.
Over two wccks of age, thc difference in size becomes much greater, and in extreme cases,
some chicks are only half the normal sizc.  In this pcriod, growth of the fcather becomes retarded
and chicks, called helicopter chicks from their appearance, are obscrvcd. Also chicks (palc
birds) with abnormal distension of the abdomen and discoloration of the skin of the legs (leg
squamae) are also observed.
Pathological findings of these stunting chicks up to onc-wcck-old arc catarrhal cntcritis,
provcnlriculitis, pancrcatitis and nephritis. The intestine of a stunting chick over two weeks old
is swollen with undigested feed (Fig. 1). Furthermore, among stunting syndrome focks in the
feld, atrophy of the pancreas is regarded internationally as common and the pancreas looks like
only a vestige of itself with a ribbon shape (Fig. 2, 3). In this period, atrophy of the bursa of
Fabricius and thc thymus is observcd.
114Stunting Syndromc
Diagnosis
As the pathogen is not identified, the aforcmentioned clinical symptoms, pathological
these findings arc not ncccssarily seen.  Although there are a lot of common cases wih regard to
clinical symptoms, pathological and biochemical changes may not scen.
Dcvelopmental Epidemiology
It is said that this disease is prone to develop in chicks introduced from a spccifie hatchery.
Common characteristics of the farms where the syndromc is observed are (l) poor hygiene
control, (2) breeding in exceedingly high density and (3) mismanagcment of fundamental feeding
control.
Since chicks that arc fed with intcstinal cmulsions from stunting chicks and chicks that
cohabit with stunted chicks become stunted, this diseasc is strongly suspectcd to bc an infectious
disease. Also, in inoculation test in SPF chicks using ARV and avian cntcrovirus isolated from
chicks in flocks with stunting syndrome, stunting is reproduced. However, the extreme stunting
observed in thc ficld has nol been reproduccd cxpcrimcntally, and atrophy of the pancrcas in
particular has not been reproduccd.
.. For that rcason, the cause has not yet becn detcrmincd.
An avian enterovirus, called avian nephritis virus (A.NV) is widespread in the field.  This
virus causcs valious rcnal diseascs cxpcrimcntally, from slight, transient nephritis to urate
desposition caused by renal disfunction or early death, due to aculc renal failurc.
Thesc discascs appear markedly when the virus is administered to chicks up to one week of
agc. Howevcr, only 20-30% of thc chicks show scrious signs and the rest an inapparent
infection, without showing any symptoms. Instead, all the chicks infected with the virus in this
 period become stunted. Beyond 2 weeks of age, all the chicks show in inapparent infection and
 do nol develop stunting, as long as there is no mixcd infcction with other discases, such as
infectious bursal disease.  There has recently bccn a reporl on thc isolation of an cntcrovirus that
differs from ANV in serological properties and pathogenicity, and thus, many other enteroviruses
that differ in the properties hitherto reported, can bc considcrcd to exist in the ficld. Among
avian cnteroviruses that have not yet been isolated, there may be a causal virus of stunting
syndrome. ARV was initially considered as thc rmost probable causal virus of stunting syndrome.
However, recently, ARV has not been scriously rcgardcd as a causc bccause of thc strong
pathogenicity of the virus causing stunting syndrome, but the mortality rate in infected chicks is
high and also no atrophy of pancrcas is reproduccd.
Rotavirus also is not considered as a main cause, since it has only been reported twice and
cannot reproduce the symptoms such as stunting syndrome scen in the field. Parvovirus is also
nol considcrcd as a main cause since there is only a report from Kisary in Hungary and stunting
syndrome as observed in the field has not been reproduced with the virus.
As for other caliciviruses and togavirus-like particles, thesc arc not confirmed as a causc,
sincc thcir cxistcncc has only bcen confiimcd eleclron-microscopically in faecal material from
stuntcd chicks and intestinal epithelial cells or the pancreatic duct. Neither virus has becn
isolated.
 In inoculation tests with only the viruses mentioned above, stunting syndrome as observed in
the ficld, has not yct becn rcproduccd. Howcver, it is belicvcd that some bacteria togcther with
these viruses or a virus not yet isolated may be involved as infectious factors in the development
of the syndrome, becausc charactcristic lcsions arc rcproduccd by inoculation of faecal matcrial
from stunted chicks.
Stunting Syndrome  115
Prevention/Treatment/Measures
As mcnlioned above, the cause of stunting syndrome is not clarified and thus, prcvention
 measures for this disease are difficult. However, as poor sanitation, brccding in high density and
insuficient feeding control are scen in farms whcrc the discase is prone to develop, the occurrence
 of the disease could be controlled by improving these factors.  An infectious discase is also
suspected.  Therefore, early cull of stuntcd chicks and complete disinfection in the poultry housc
where the disease devclops may bc required.
 There is no particula1 ticatmen1 but amelioration of symptoms may be observed by
 administration of antibiotics and vitamins, due to clinical recovery.
116
StuntingSyndromic
Fig.1.Faeces of achickwith
stunting syndrome(18 days old):
Undigesteddiarrhoealfaeces.
(Original:Tsuneyoshi)
Fig.2.Pancreas of a chick with
stunting syndrome(13 days old):
Marked atrophy.(Original:Tsune-
yoshi)
Fig.3.Histological lesions of duo-
aenal orifice and pancreatic duct
ofa chickwith stunting syndrome
(18 days old):Marked stenosis of
the pancreatic duct （→).HE
stain.(Original:Tsuneyoshi)
StuntingSyndrome
117
28.
ome
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Swollen head syndrome is a new chicken disease that is mainly characterised by
swelling of the head. Several pathogens are associated with this disease.
Turkey rhinotracheitis (TRT) virus is considered to be a major pathogen.
Symptoms and lesions are liable to vary depending on the secondary pathogen
that infects the chickens.
This disease frequently develops in young broilers and develops also in layers
Isolation of TRT virus is difficult. Only the pathogen with which the chickens are
secondarily infected is generally isolated.
In serum of chickens with clinical symptoms, TRT virus antibody is confirmed at
a high titre
Vaccination is not applicable in Japan
Damage should be prevented by
managing breeding control carefully.
Outline of Disease
Swollen hcad syndrome (SHS) is a ncw chickcn diseasc that is characleriscd by swclling of
thc face and head and is caused by multiple virus or bactcrial infection.  Turkey rhinotracheitis
(TRT) virus has been shown to cause the syndrome cxperimentally and it is considercd that thc
virus plays an important part in the developmcnt of the disease.  TRT virus suddcnly emcrged in
South Africa in 1971 as a new type of virus that caused a serious respiratory disease to turkeys,
and the virus beiongs to the pneumovirus genus in Paramyxoviridae. Although TRT virus
belongs to the Paramyxoviridae as well as Newcastle disease virus, haemagglutination is not
 observed with TRT virus. Furthermore, this virus is frequently called avian pneumovirus,
The turkey industry is very minor in Japan, and thus the damagc caused by TRT is low.
Howcver, before 1989, TRT virus had alrcady invaded thc country, irrespcctivc of the turkey
industry. SHS has rccently bcen confirmed in several prefectures where large-scale poultry
 In the case of turkeys, they are infected with TRT virus at all agcs, and thc damagc becomes
particularly serious whcn 7-14 day-old turkcys develop this diseasc.  The symptoms first begin
with sncezing and aqucous nasal dischargc that gradually bccomes scrous and the nasal cavity is
blocked. Finally, thcy suffer dyspnoca and reveals gasping. In this case, secondary infections
with baeteria such as Escherichia coli, Pasteurella and Haemophilus occur and complicate the
clinical symptoms.
 The transmission of TRT is cxccedingly rapid and the infectivity and infection rates are morc
than 90%. Thc mortality ratc is roughly 2%, but may reach over 30%. In countrics whcre the
turkcy industry is active, SHS occurs shortly after entry of TRT virus. Even in countries where
itself in chickens is casily misscd and virus isolation is very diffcult since distinct clinical
symptoms emerge following a mixed infection with other respiratory pathogens. Thc clinical
symptoms are influenccd greatly by the kinds of secondary pathogens. Not uncommonly, cascs
118
remain as inapparent infections, although they are infected with TRT virus.
Symptoms and Lesions
The clinical sympioms are very varied and frequently develop in broilers at 3-6 weeks old.
Lachrymation and respiratory symptoms also develop, bul swelling of thc hcad is highly
characteristic (Fig. 1).  The symptoms in broilers arc more severc than in layers.  Particularly.
swelling round the cyes is a characlcristic observation. As chickens may fecl ilching. thcy
scratch their faces with their legs, and they may show slight nervous symptoms.  The chickens
that survive devclop a serious tracheitis and then septicaemia after sccondary infcction by E. coli.
than 1% but may rise to about 20% in cases of poor husbandry. Females havc gencrally a higher
morbidity rate than males.  Thc age of morbidity varics.  The infection lasts 2-3 weeks.
Respiratory signs emcrgc firs1.  Thcn, a lethargic state wherc the head is bcnt to the back and
sinks into the fcathers (Fig. 2), swelling round the cycs and of thc hcad, lachrymalion and
 Olorrhoea are observcd. Green diarrhoeal faeces and egg production drops are also obscrved.
Pathologically, cxtended peritonitis is a characteristic observation in broilers and brecdcrs of
layers. At thc carly stagc of infection, moist inflammation is observcd in the ovary and eggs may
also bc obscrved in the peritoneal cavity.:
 Swelling of the head skin is marked and gelatinous fluid
or densc pus may be seen subcutaneously (Fig. 3). Trachcitis is also obscrved but this is not.
serious. In broilers that devclopcd thc discasc at a younger age, hyperaemia of the conjunctiva
with swelling of the lachrymal gland may frcquently be observed bcfore the formation of oedema
in the subcutis of the hcad. In the carly stages of SHS, finc petcchiae arc observed in markedly
discoloured mucosa of the nasal turbinates.]
 Marked macroscopical alteralion to the trachca
docs not occur.
 However, cosinophilic intraccllular inclusion bodics are found in the ciliary
cpithelium of these lissucs, Characteristic observations are markcd oedema in the subcutis of the
head, abscess formation with bacterial foci, heterophils and diffuse cellular infiltration of mono-
cytes.
Diagnosis
Epidemiological diagnosis: As mentioned above, this disease frcquently develops in broilcrs at
3-6 wccks old. It occurs mostly in broilers but also in layers. The age of susceptibility is not
certain but there is an instance where a layer was affectcd at over 400 days old.  The incidence
ratc differs betwccn flocks but is 0.1-10%.'
 The incidcnce rate depends greatly on the secondary
pathogens as wcll as on thc seriousncss of the clinical symptoms and also dcpcnds grcatly on flock
husbandry. It is unclear if TRT virus is shcd through thc cgg, but it should be remcmbered that
transmission of SHS is very high.
Pathological diagnosis: The isolation of TRT virus is performed by chicken embryo yolk sac
inoculation, using Vero cells or chickcn embryo tracheal ring organ culturcs, but i1 is extremely
dificull to isolate this virus. E. coli, Staphylococcus and fungi arc oflen isolated from lesions.
Haemophilus, Mycoplasma and infectious bronchitis virus may also be isolated. As it is strongly
suspccted that 'TRT virus is associated with this disease, the dctection of 'IRT antibody can be an
nique and thc ELISA can be used as antibody tcsts.
 Differential diagnosis: In differential diagnosis from infectious coryza, it is important lo focus
on thc ocdema in the subcutis round thc cyes that occurs consistently in cases of SHS and
remember that swelling of infraorbital sinus tissue occurs in cases of coryza. However, diffcrcn-
tial diagnosis from othcr discases is gencrally difficult since the clinical symptoms of SHS that.
Swollen Head Syndrome   119
emerge depend on thc different secondary pathogcns. In SHS, nasal discharge may not be
obscrvcd.
Prevention/Treatment/Measures
There arc some countrics in Europe whcrc a vaccine developed for turkeys is used bul it is not
applicable in Japan.   It is considered that TRT virus is already widespread ovcr thc major poultry
producing arcas in Japan. Whcn this virus once cnlcrs thc pouliry housc, it is difficult to
     n     i n   i 
the poultry house, in order to prevent SHS from causing damage.
120Swollen IIcad Syndrome
Fig.1.Clinical symptoms of an
affected chicken:Swelling is ob-
served round the eyes.The eyes
are closed.The head is entirely
swollen and round.（Original:
Kuniyoshi)
Fig.2.Symptoms of an affected
chicken: Swelling round the eyes,
twistedneck andopisthoponous
nervous symptoms so that the
head is bent to the back and sink
into thefeathers.
Fig.3.Subcutis of the head and
neckofan affectedchicken:
Gelatinous fuid or sometimes,
pyogenic exudate is widely ob-
served.(Original:Lo)
SwollenHeadSyndrome
121
29. 
 Ascites in Broiler Chickens
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
This disease mainly occurs in broilers and is caused by a circulatory disorder
(cardiac hypofunction),
The age of incidence is after 5-6 weeks old and continues to the time of
slaughter.
Major symptoms are depression, duck-like waiking, abdominal distension and
congestion of the comb.
Macroscopic changes are pools of ascitic fluid in the perihepatic peritoneal sac,
cardiac dilatation (round the heart)., and congestion and oedema of the lung.
The cause have not yet been clarified but there is a report that the disease is
caused partially by environmental factors
Preventive measures are elimination of unhealthy, environmental factors that load
the heart, and inhibition of rapid growth.
Outline of Disease
A discasc, in which ascites occurs has always been commonly reportcd. As to
developmental causes, loxicity (crotalaria, salt, PCB, tar, administration of furazolidone at a high
concentration, etc.) and adenocarcinoma arc known. Reccntly, the incidence of ascites caused
by other factors has been observed in broilers.  Among thesc, cascs in brceding at a high altitude
of 3,0o0 m and an experimental environment lacking in oxygcn havc bccn rcportcd.
Since a casc was reported in the winter of 1976, a lot of cases have bccn confimcd in Japan.
This disease lrends to occur frcqucntly in wintcr, except for occasional cases, and its incidence is
1-6%. It also trends to occur more frcqucntly in an opcn housc than in a windowless one and to
occur more frequently in males than in females.  Thc incidcncc is obscrved from the age of 5-6
wccks to the time of slaughter. As for feed, high calorie food has a tendency to lcad to this
discasc, and fccding pellcts results in higher incidence that feeding mash. Ascites has been
 experimentally reproduced by cold strcss (undcr 10 °C), and thcrc has bccn a report that a chicken
affected in the winter was held al 25°C and then the symptoms disappcarcd in 14 days.
The breeding improvement for broiler chicks has been striking and an improvement of more
than 50 g in weight has bccn secn annually. As a result, the oxygen demand in the body increases
and cardiac hypofunction is prone to occur, due to the infuence of cold strcss that loads thc
cardio respiratory function. For that reason, it is presumed that a drop of arterial pressure and
sac.
At poultry inspection, ascites is observed through the year and accounts for 15-18% of total
condemnotions.
122
Symptoms and Lesions
Major symptoms are dcprcssion, duck-likc walking. abdominal distcnsion (Fig. 1) and
congestion of the comb. Howcver, in the carly period of the diseasc, it remains subclinical and
growth is almost normal.
The autopsy observations are as follows.  Pool of asciles to the pcrihepatic pcritoneal sac
(200 ml at the most) (Fig. 2), swclling of thc liver in the early period of discase.  Atrophy and
hardcning in cascs of cxccss ascitic fuid arc obscrved in thc latter period.  Hepatic capsules are
hypertrophied and may form a watcr blisler on thc surface of thc livcr.  Thc hcart becomcs
round, and dilatation of thc atrium and ventricle, dilatation of the postcrior vena cava, and
increasc of pericardial fiuid arc observcd. Thc weight of the heart incrcascs morc than 1.5 times.
Congestion and oedema are observed in the lung.
Histopathological lesions are blood scasis, adiposis and centrilobular necrosis in the liver,
congestional ocdema in the lung, and slight degcneration or necrosis in the cardiac musclc (Fig.
3) are obscrved.
As for blood properties, the haematocrit value is high and reaches more than 40% (there is
a report of a corrclation hetwecn haematocrit value and hypertrophy of thc right ventriclc), and
values of biliverdin, calcium and glucosc arc high.
 In observations by electrocardiograms, decrcase of heartbeat (70-80%), increase of cardiac
potential and change of position arc obscrved.  As for blood pressurc, artcrial prcssurc drops to
less than 1/2 and venous pressure rises 3-5 times.  'Thesc correspond to the observation of loading
Of the right heart.
Diagnosis
IDiagnosis of ascites is casily performed by palpation of an affected chicken or post-mortem
observation.  However, the cause of the condilion and thc mechanism of developmcn1 are not yct
clarified sufficiently.
As for devclopment under conditions of cold stress and oxygen deficicncy, it is possible to
judgc it up to a point by environmcntal invcstigation.  As for oxygen levcl, there is a rcport that
thc diseasc devclops under a situation of less than 17% oxygcn. As for temperature, the
condition tends to bc observed at temperaturcs of less than 10 "C and when thcre arc large
deviation in temperature during thc day.
In the examination of blood, a rise of haematocrit value in an affccted flock is indicative also
of a load on thc right ventriclc. An clcctrocardiogram and measurcment of blood pressurc can
be valuablc for diagnosis.
Sudden death syndromc has a similar mcchanism of dcvelopmcn1 to ascites and has become
a serious cause of dcath in broilcrs that grow rapidly.  There is a report that thc age of infection
in thc 1980s was from 3 wccks old to depletion and its incidence was 0.06-1.39%. 1n the 1990
s, the diseasc was obscrved from one week old and continued to the age of slaughtcr.  The discase
develops most in males and is also obscrved more in flocks that grow rapidly. Thcre is a report
regarding scasonal trend, suggesting that it develops frequently in the order, autumn, summcr,
spring and winter.
As to macroscopical observation of dead birds, oedcma and hyperacmia of the lung, prescnce
Of clots in the atrium, and hypcrtrophy of the left vcntricle are observed.  As to histopathological
lesions, alteration of myocardial fibre and hypcracmia of the lung are observed.  In the livcr,
centrilobular necrosis of hepatocyles and nccrobiosis arc observed.  In biochemical investigation,
it is rcported that there is a drop in haematocrit value. From the above-mcntioned viewpoints,
Ascitcs in Broiler Chickens 123
an acute cardiac failure is considered, but there are sill unclcar points as to the cause.
Prevention/Trcatmcnt/Mcasures
 Brceding improvements have conccntrated on improving growth rate and meat produetion of
broiler chickens.  It is therefore prcsumed that ascites and sudden death syndrome have occurrcd
     n    n      
cannot respond to thc various kinds of loads.
As it is clear that environmcntal factors are rclatcd to the development of ascites, it is
ncccssary to control environment (temperalurc and oxygcn). Furthcrmorc, restrictive feeding
and wcight gain inhibition by lighting-time control, which are conducted in somc farms, can be
onc of the measures. Fundamentally, breed improvcment, which is indexed to reinforcement of
circulatory funclion, is rcquired.
124Ascites in Broiler Chickens
Fig.1.Abdomen of an affected
chicken:Abdominal
distension
with ascites.Achicken with
these symptoms shows duck-like
walking.(Original:Taniguchi)
Fig.2.Abdomen with a pool of
ascites:Straw colour,transparent
ascites pool in the perihepatic
peritoneal sac.The liver is atro-
phied and the capsule is hypertro-
phied and cloudy.(Original:
Maeda)
Fig.3.Histological lesions in the
liver:Centrilobularnecrobiosis and
bionecrosis of hepatocytes.
HE
stain.(Original:Maeda)
Ascites in Broiler Chickens
125
30. Bone Diseases
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Bone diseases occur mostly in broilers. Twisted leg. tibial dyschondroplasia and
spondylolisthies are observed.
This development is related to the bird's rapid growth and is based on genetic
preposition. However, the breeding environment and composition of feed are also
relevant
Osteoporosis, rickets and osteopetrosis in layers are caused by the composition of
the feed and by viral infection, but are rare.
Diagnosis is performed by observation of the symptoms and gross lesions.
Twisted leg
Twisted leg is also called valgus and varus deformalion of the hock joint, displaccmcnl of the
tendon, perosis and dislocation of the Achilles tendon and occurs most frequently in broilers as a
bone discase.
Incidence and symptoms: This disease develops from one weck of agc and dcvclops scqucntially
until slaughter, even after culling. It develops most in male birds. The incidcncc varics
according to brccd and flock but is generally 0.5-2.5%. However, it may also reach over 5%.
A rcgion bclow thc hock of one or both lcgs twists outside or inside, and an affected bird suffers
leg weak and astasia.  Thcrcfore, they have difficulty in fecding, despite their good appetite, and
then growth is delayed.  They remain incurabic.
 Lesions: Both heads of the tibia and metatarsal bone, which form the hock joint, are deformed
and thc adaptation of both bones becomes abnormal.  Therefore, the leg below the metatarsal
bone twist outside or inside and finally, the Achilles tcndon locatcd at thc backside of the hock
joint slips exteriorly or interiorly.  The hock joint is deformed and swollen (Fig. 1).  The
dcformation is causcd by ostcodystrophy at thc cartilage of the epiphysis and becomes more
serious with age.  Necrosis or clcavage (ostcochondrosis) may also occur at the cartilagc of the
cpiphysis or diaphysis (Fig. 2).  A fracture may sometimes occur at part of the lesion.
Diseasc factors, diagnosis and preclusion: This disease based on genetic preposition is related to
growth of the broilers. Aiso, it is known that thc type of housing (materials of the floor and
litter) and composition of fecd (phosphorus and calcium) may somctimes cnhance the incidence
rate.  Symptoms and gross lesions of the hock joint are used for diagnosis.  Slippery floors and
hard litter are avoided and also, an additional level of minerals is carefully considered in the case
of feed prepared on thc farm.
Tibial dyschondroplasia
Tibial dyschondroplasia is a disease that forms abnormal cartilage mass at the proximal
cpiphysis of the tibia and mctatarsal bonc and is sccn in broilers. In somc areas, this disease is
callcd fowl dyschond1oplasia o1 osteochondrosis.
Incidence and symptoms: In a specifc breed or flock, a high incidence of 1-1o% may occur but
126
in Japancse broilcrs, it is gencrally less than 0.1 %.  The incidcnce ratc is higher in males.  Thc
incidcncc sharply riscs al 4-6 wceks of age.  Therc are also latent chickens that have lesions but
do not devclop the diseasc.  In most affected chickens, the knec joints are bilaterally swollen and
   i    aq    'a n n i  
emaciation after astasia.
Lesions: Proxirmal tibial and metatarsal bone are swollcn and sometimcs curved and fractured.
At thc swollen hcad, lingual formcd, abnormal cartilage mass arc formcd in thc epiphysial
cartilage lamina and infiltrate to the diaphyseal cancellous bone to the medullary cavity. The
docs not bccomc ossificd and inhibits normal osteogencsis.  This abnoimal cartilagc is similar to
foetal cartilage and the incursion of the blood vesscls required for ossification is incomplete (Fig.
3).
Disease factors, diagnosis, and preclusion: This disease is rclated to the rapid growth of
broilers, shows high incidence in a spccific breed and is caused by genetic predisposition. The
lype of breeding also cnhanccs the incidence ratc. Also in an cxperimcnlal case, Fusarium
roseum (trne fungus) contaminated feed and iis toxin, or a high salinity lcvel increases the
incidcnce. Diagnosis can be pcrformcd on the basis of symptoms and by confirming abnormal
cartilage at thc proximal tibiotarsus. Changing brced, improvcment of housing floor and
modification of feed can reduce the incidence.
Spondylolisthesis
This disease has the synonym of *kinky back' and dcvelops specifcally in broilers.
Incidcncc and symptoms: Thc incidence is not high and is generally 0.1-2%. It differs with
breed. This diseasc begins to devclop from onc-wcck-old and rcach a pcak at 4-6 wecks old.
Affectcd chickcns dislikc walking and take a sitting posture, like a dog. by supporting the body
with the hock or try to move by using their wings bccause of paralysis of the legs. Finally, they
become emaciated and dehydrated.
       n         
cord is presscd a1 thc regions from the fifth to the scventh vcrtebra and is sometimes deformed.
Articular cartilagc at thc sixth thoracic vertcbra has a fissure, necrotic foci and pyoid foci. In
articular musclcs, exudale including tissue fragments and bacterial masses, are obscrved. Sia-
 phylococcus aureus may be detected in the lesion. Somc chickcns havc slight lesions and vcry
 mild or subclinical symptoms (fig. 4).
 Discasc factors, diagnosis, and prcclusion: It is a genctic discasc that is rclatcd to growth
predisposition of broilers.
 From the anatomical structure of the spina, lesions emcrge at the sixth thoracic vertcbra.
According to the fock, a lesion may also bc infectcd with some baclcria.  Symptoms and curvcd
spina at autopsy are diagnostic. Preclusion is basically a matter of brecding, but keeping thc
incubation cnvironmcnt and the growth cnvironment for chicks clean is important to rcducc the
morbidity.
Osteoporosis
A disease, which occurs in layers brcd in cagcs, is also called “caged fatigue" or cage breeding
it once develops. Chickens with high egg production are prone to be affected by this discasc and
show astasia in the cage, fracture of legs, egg produclion drops and produetion of thin shell eggs.
The bones of the leg and other paris are weak, and the substantia compacta becomes thin and
Bone Discascs   127
porous. In thc substantia spongiosa, osteoid trabeculae cmerge. Diagnosis is performed by
anatomical observalion.  Changing the composition of feed and change from cage breeding to
floor breeding cures affected birds
Rickets
 A disease, which occurs in layers at about the beginning of lay, shows as a slipped tendon and
fracture.  This disease occurs vcry rarely and may occur when layers are fed in 1he laying period
with fecd more suitablc for large chicks.  Epiphysis of the long boncs of the legs and wings arc
swollen, and the cartilage increases. The parathyroid gland is also enlarged. Such characteris-
tic lesions diagnose this discasc. Changing the composition of feed curcs affected hens.
Osteopetrosis
This disease has thc synonyim of thick-bone disease and rarely occurs in layers; young layers
of 8-12 weeks old arc more often affcclcd by this discasc than thosc of other agcs. Symptoms
such as limping and dysbasia, and swelling of thc middle portion of long boncs such as the
metatarsus are characteristic. External periosteum proliferates and the ossein is deposited
This is a disease caused by infection with avian leukosis virus.
I28Bone Diseases
Fig.1.Twisted leg: In the affected leg (left),
proximal epiphysis of the metatarsal bone is
deformed and smaller（→) than the healthy
leg （right）.The hockarticular cavity
spreads,andAchilles tendon isobserved at the
back ofthehock.
Fig.2.Histological lesions in the metatarsal
boneofatwistedlegcausebyosteo-
chondrosis:Haemorrhage and necrotic foci
（→)occur in the proliferation layer at the
cartilage of the epiphysis.HE stain.
2e
Fig.3.Tibialdyschondroplasia:In the pro-
ximal tibial and metatarsal bone,cartilage
mass that infiltrates to diaphyseal cancellous
bone and the medullary cavity in a lingulated
shape.Curved epiphysis is also obvious.
Fig.4.Spondylolisthesis:In an affected carcass
（top),the sixth thoracic vertebra（→）curves
dorsallyand left,as comparedwithahealthy
carcass (bottom).
BoneDiseases
129
31. Skin Diseases
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Exudative deep dermatitis is a fibrinopurulent exudative inflammation that occurs
from the femur to the abdominal and sternal tract.
Wound infection by Escherichia coli is suspected as the cause.
 Scabby hip syndrome develops also in the skin of the femur to the abdominal and
sternal tract.
Breast blister is a cystiform dilatation of the sternum bursa.
The above diseases develop in broilers and are detected at autopsy after feather
removal by scalding.
Exudative deep dermatitis in broiler chickens
Outline of disease: This disease develops in broilcrs, is characterized by a fibrinopurulent
exudative inflammation in the subcutis and is a comparativcly ncw discase confirmed about 10
ycars ago. This disease, thereforc, has scveral names as follows: Dccp dcrmatitis in broiler
chickens, dermatitis of broilers caused by Escherichia coli, cellulitis, purulen1 infammation of
loose connective tissue, ctc.  I regard the title name as suitablc.
Diagnosis of this disease on the livc bird is dificult, and it is first obscrvcd as lesions at
autopsy or mcat inspection after feather removal. Thc incidence rate of this disease at mcat
inspection varies with flock.  The cause is still unclear bul thc dcnsity in brceding chickens may
 grcatly influence the frequency of development, in addition to the state of flock hygicne control,
particularly tcmperature and humidity. Besides, accoiding to my experience, in a fock
diagnoscd with this disease, there are many cases when the chickens suffered from septicaemic
colibacillosis in thcir brceding period.  Furthermore at autopsy, this discasc can also be observed
in broilers at 35-40 days old.
As a cause of this disease, colibacillosis is most frcquently suspected. As to grounds for
that, therc is a report that E. coli was isolatcd from cxudate in the subcutis and the isolatcd
bacteria have bccn used to reproduce the dermatilis lesions. On the other hand, however, thcrc
is also an opinion that anothcr factor is required, since E. coli cannot casily reproduce the
dermatitis lesions.
As to infection route, a wound infection of an affected region is the most probable.  That is
based on the fact that the dermatitis is rcproduccd by inoculating E. coli in the subcutis, or by
smcaring 5-10 picked feather stems with E. coli.
Because of this, brceding birds housed in high density have easy skin contact and this is
rcgarded as a developmental factor.  In addition to this, I focus on the fact that fowls pick theil
own skins with their beaks, indicating that il may bc duc to an itch. That is, the activity is
regarded as an inducement to cause wound infcction by E. coli.
Adone ie punon nsr si pue yeop srnaq pnou sou si ssasp stu suisai pun sidas
It generally develops in well growing chickcns, and thc skin of the affected part is relaxed and
hypcrtrophicd, showing slight oedema.
When the skin is inciscd, thc subcutis of the affected part is widely hypcrtrophicd to a slight
130
Or serious degree and can easily be cxfoliated from thc subcutaneous muscles. Also, a small or
largc amount of yellowish chcesy substance exudes between them (lig. I). Thc chccsy sub-
stances arc obscrved as particlcs in the case of small amounts, or as ping-pong ball like coagula.
The regions where the above lesions most frcquently cmcrge are the lateral superior leg (femur)
and thc abdomcn to the sternum.  In this case, either the right or left side is affectcd; it is rarc
that the both sidcs arc symmctrically affcctcd. Also, round the cloaca, a great deal of cheesy
exudate is observed in either ihe right or left subcutis and the lesions may rcach from there to the
subcutis of the rump region. In the subcutis of the back and neck, the lesion is rarely observed.
Histopathlogically, exudation of helerophils and fibrin are mainly observed in the subcutis.
The exudates deteriorate with the lapse of time, and macrophages and foreign body giant cclls
gradually surround the periphery (Fig. 2).
Diagnosis: Diagnosis is donc by macroscopic cxamination. When the exudates in the subcutis
bacteria isolated varies and a causal relationship between a serotype and lesion formation cannot
be defincd
 Prevention and treatment measures: Since E. coli is suspcctcd as a causc of this discase, hygienc
control is important, From the vicwpoint of incidence factors, breeding in high density should
 be avoided.  There is no lrcatment for this discasc.
Scabby hip syndrome
A disease in which scabs form in the epidermis occurs in broilers. As synonyms of this
disease, there are hroiler dermatitis, scabby hip dermatitis, and contagious dermalitis (differing
from contact dermatitis of humans and mammals).
Lesions of this discasc are charactcrized by scab formation in thc skin of the femur and the
abdomen to the sternum (Fig. 3). The process of scab formation is varied, but cxcalaiion of
feathers occurs when the extent becomes severe.  Furthermore, there is also a lesion where scab
formation is not so markcd but thc skin is thinner and is hypertrophied over a comparatively wide
area. The subcutis becomes oedematous.
Histopathiologically, this diseasc is characterised by exudative infammation that mainly
shows necrosis of the epidermis and hcterophil infiltration. When the progression is long, foreign
body giant cells may react in the periphery of the necrotic foci, and fibrous conncctivc tissuc may
also proliferatc widcly in the dermis.
Although Staphylococcus and E. coli arc isolated from the foci of this discasc, these bacteria
are sccondary infcctions, and it is prcsumcd that something else is the primary factor. In any
casc, as for incidcnce factors, brccding chicks in high density, pollution of littcr, Marek's discase
of the skin, or picking with 1hcir own beaks should bc considcrcd.
Breast blister
 In chickens and turkcys abovc 4 wccks old, a stcrnal bursa is formed in the ventral of the
posterior sternum that is composed of synovial tissues, as well as in the arlicular capsular ligament
and tendon shicathl.
Whcn liquid componcnts collcct in the sternal bursa and there is a cystiform dilatation, it is
called a breast blister or keel bursitis (Fig. 4). The pool of liquid componcnts is scrous and
bccome 1urbid when there is secondary infection by bacteria. When lesions continue, the
surrounding subcutis may bc ocdcmatous and connective tissues may proliferate.
 Breast blisters frequently occur in broilers towards slaughtcr, gcnerally in wcll-growing
broilers and also in males.  Thc incidence ralc is about 10% at thc peak but differs with fock.
Skin Discascs 131
As a cause, gcnetic factors arc considercd. Furthermorc, as chickens rcst by lcaning their body
 on the sternum, such a physical factor should also be considcred. To confirm this, the discase is
called callus of the sternum and the cpidermis of thc lesions may be hardened.  Also in cases of
Mycoplasma gallisepticum and M. synoviae infections, liquid components may collcct in the sternal
bursa as well as lesions of other tendon sheaths.
Fig. 1. Exudative decp dermatitis: Ilypertrophy occurs widely in the femur, abdonen and sternum. A great dcal
 of yellowish chcesy material cxudes parlicularly in front of the leg. A 55 day-old broiler.
Fig. 2. Histological lcsions of cxudative deep dermatitis: Fibrin and helerophils cxist mainly in thc subcutancons
adipose tissue (above), exude markedly and deteriorate. Macrophage and foreign body giant cclls rcact round
0rgans.A 56 day-old broiler.HF stain.
Fig. 3. Scabby hip syndrome: Epidcrmis of the latcral superior lcg (femur) is hypertrophied with scab forination
Thc under part has an almost normal cpidcrmis. A 62 day-old broiler.
Fig. 4. Breast blister: The sternal bursa expands and proliferation of granulation tissue and pools of bloody
cffusion are observed in the bursa. (Original: Amano)
132Skin Discascs
6486
Skin Diseases
133
32.
Muscular Diseases
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Causes of muscular abnormalities are varied, such as muscular degeneration
(myopathy) and inflammation (myositis).
In deep pectoral myopathy. being limited to the deep pectoralis, discoloration of
muscle. necrosis, and atrophy are observed in the final stages.
In vitamin E deficiency. white streaks are observed, corresponding to the course
of the fibres of the pectoralis and leg muscles.
In ionophore toxicity. oedema of the fascia and irregularly patchy. discoloured
foci are observed, particularly in the hip muscle.
Deep pectoral myopathy
The deep pectoralis is surrounded by the T-head sternum and welldevclopcd fascia. It is
known that the amount of blood fowing into it rapidly increases when a load like a wing
movement is givcn to the decp pcctoralis, the weight of the muscle increases by 2o% and the
fascial pressure increases 5 times. As a consequence, the inflowing blood stagnates, muscle tissuc
on the contrary falls into lack of oxygen, and ischacmic nccrosis cmcrgcs. Thcse changes are
observed in broilers and turkeys whosc pecctoralis is well developed. Experimentally, by inducing
severe wing movcment, they develop the disease in most cases bilaterally, but sometimes latcrally.
Symptoms and lesions: In the case of the presence of lesions, dolour of the breast muscle and
abnormality of wing movement are considered, but it is difficult to find these in the fieid. During
dressing of the carcass in the siaughterhouse or at autopsy for other purposes, it is found
incidentally. In the case of progressed lesions, caved-in or flat breast muscle is sccn that secms
to bc an atrophy of the pectoralis after feather removing. Lcsions arc limited to thc deep
pcctoralis and what is seen in other regions should bc regardcd as another discase.
 In experimental reproduction, thc first cvents are swelling, oedema and hyperaemia of the
muscle bundlc, and then pcachy-rcd coloured foci emerge at one third of the rcgion in ihe centre
of the deep pectoralis and expand backwards or forwards. Fasciae bccome thicken and loose
transparcncy, and necrotic foci with a green colour are thcn obscrvcd at the centrc. Sometimes,
these may form an obviously purple red boundary laycr (Fig. 1).  When the histological changcs
in an experimental case are observed with the lapse of time, it progresses as follows: Oedema and
disappearance of glycogcn in 15 minutcs after extreme loading, liquefactive necrosis of the
musculature aftcr onc hour, and further, ischaemic necrosis after 24 hours. ILcsions are typical
hyaline dcgcneration, swelling of muscle fbre and rupture.
Furthermore in a case with a long progresson, reproductive muscle fbre, which is multi-
nucleate and has a basic stained cytoplasm, is frequently obscrved. Thc discase is poor in
reactive change, and fbrosis and infiltration of macrophages, heterophils and lymphocytes are
observed (Fig. 2). After 3 wecks, atrophy is mainly observed postcrior of thc necrotic foci and
infiltration of fibrous adipose tissue is sccn after 6 wccks. There is also a clot in a blood vessel,
and infiltration of lymphocytes is observcd around the blood vessel.
 Diagnosis: As mentioned above, this disease is suspected in cascs where discoloured alteration
1.34
and necrosis are limited to the deep pectoralis.  Whal is scen in other rcgions should bc rcgardcd
as another discase. Furthermore, it is important to recognize the situation of the breeding
environment that induces this diseasc, such as disturbing chickcns excessivcly.
Preventive measures: As it is known that this condition does not occur in quict brceding
environments, the breeding environment should be improvcd by avoiding excessive disturbing and
then causal factors are prccluded.
Myopathy due to avitaminosis E
Chicken avitaminosis E is known to causc chicken enccphalomalacia, cxudativc predisposi-
tion and myodystrophia.  Avitaminosis F is observed in day-old to 6 wcek-old chicks and
develops most frequently at 4 weeks of age.  The causes of ihis disease are vitamin E deficiency
in the feed and simultaneous defciency of methionine and cysteine.  This disease occurs also in
chicks that hatched from thc eggs of brceding hens with avitaminosis E.  In cases causcd by feed,
thc incidence rcaches over 10% with symptoms of anorexia, deprcssion, retardent growth and
listlessness.
 As for gross lesions, discoloration of the skelctal muscle and white striac corresponding to thc
course of the muscle fibres of the pectoralis and leg muscle are observed obviously (Fig. 3).
Histologically, typical hyaline degeneration is obscrved, and swelling of muscle fibres, loss of
striation, hyalinization, rupture, disintcgration (Fig. 4) and calcification may bc obscrved.
ation is sometimes observed with thc production of many myoblasts.  In cases with deficicncy of
vitamin E and selenium, foci arc obscrvcd in the gizzard and myocardium.  Cystcinc is known to
prevcnt this diseasc.  Therefore, improvemcnt of the nutritional status of the breeding hen should
be cxamined as well as that of the fced. Furthermorc, an antioxidant is also cffective in
prevcnting vitamin E oxidation.
Ionophore toxicity
Cell death occurs when migration of potassium from the myocyte and influx of calcium into
the myocyte are promoted by permcability disturbance of the myocyte membranc. When
diterpene, polyether and macrolide antibiotics are administered at the same time, and it is known
that this toxicity is caused by administering monensin with thiamtilin or oleandomycin
simultancously.  Fowls devclop the diseasc on the following day or scveral days aftcr administra-
tion of these drugs and show marked decrease of water intake, limping, dislikc of walking.
diskinesia, lethargy and paralysis. Also, in turkeys, dyspnoca js observed.
Nidi are often obscrved in skeletal muscle, particularly in the hip muscle, but not in the
pecloralis. The fascia is oedematous and has patchy, discolourcd nidi. It is not a spccific
degencration but the following lesions arc also obscrved in multiple by muscle fibrc with lysis of
rnyofibrils.  Deposilion of basophilic fine granules, vacuolar degeneration, increase of basophilic
muscle fibre and regenerative hypertrophied nuclei are also observed. One type of muscle fibre
(Type I) is selectively attacked.
 Differential diagnosis is required since in a case of cassia toxicity, alterative necrosis is also
observed in the pectoralis and semitcndinosus muscle.
Hercditary myopathy
 This discase that is observed in chickens in New Hampshire and also in turkeys, occurs from
right after hatching to 10o days of age.  In the affected chickens, unevenness in size of the muscle
Muscular Diseases   135
  u i n  s   e   s
positions of nuclei are observed.  The muscle fibre shows vacuolalion and coagulativc necrosis, Or
is charactcrizcd by ringed fibres that show an annular structure in transverse. Fibrosis is
gcnerally slight although adiposc infiltration is also obscrved.
Myositis
This disease is frequently observed by direct expansion or haematogcnous transition from
purulent cellulitis or arthritis thal are caused by various kinds of pyrogenic bacteria such as
Staphylococcus and E. coli.  Highly inflammatory oedema and infiltraion of hetcrophils and
 macrophagcs arc dominant.  This discase develops with haemorrhage and infiltralion of lympho-
cytes. If an abscess forms, fibrous and granulomatous cncapsulation is observcd.
Fig. 1. Deep pcctoral myopathy in a broiler: Sinistral muscle (right) is atrophicd and grcen in colour from the
centre to the back. Red lamina is observed al the boundary of the grcen focus. Diffuse hacmorrhagc is
observed at about thc centre one third of the dextral muscle (left). ‘The energence of the changc is nol
neccssarily syinmctrical
Fig. 2. Histological lesions in a broilcr with decp pectoral myopathy: In oid lesions, with hyperplasia of the
has necrotic, disintegratcd rnuscle fbre (right, down) and plural, largc nuclci and is slightly basically stained, are
(bserved.IHE stain.
Fig. 3. Superficial pectoralis of an adult turkcy with avitaminosis E: Musclc fascia is oedematous. White strcaks
 are obviously obscrved, corrcsponding to the course of the musclc fibrcs. (Original: Itakura)
    e r   e j sd p a i sn r t 
obscrved.HF stain. (Original: Itakura)
136Muscular Jiseascs
Muscular Diseases
137
33.
Nutritional and Metabolic Disorders
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Urate deposit is a disease with white coloured urate deposits in internal organs
and articulations.
Urolithiasis is a disease with calculi due to urate deposits in the ureters and
kidney. and is often observed in adult chickens
to highly fatty accumulation in hepatocytes.
Amyloidosis is a metabolic disease where amyloid protein deposits in blood
vesseis and connective tissue.
Avian encephalomalacia causes
6 haemorrhage, necrosis and malacia to the
metencephalon and cerebrum.
Nutritional disorders arc caused by deficicncy of mincrals such as calcium and phosphorus
and spccific nutricnts such as vitamins. Mciabolic disorders are causcd by metabolic ab-
normality of protcin, fat, carbohydratc and mineral and are a causc of uratc dcposits, fatty liver
and osteopathia.  Many abnormalities and diseases caused by nutritional and metabolic disorders
are known and wc review the following diseases that wc have a rclatively largc number of
opportunities to cncountcr.
Urate deposits (Gout)
Outline of disease: Urate deposits are prone to develop as a result of genctic abnormality of
urine mctabolism and feeding of high protein feed and also developed by vitamin A deficicncy,
excess fecding of calcium, nephritis type infectious bronchitis (IB nephritis) and urolithiasis.
This disease is frequently observed in acutely dcad chicks or in emaciated chickens thal wcre
shedding white, diarrhoeal faeces and is classified into visceral type, in which deposits occur in the
  n         n  s 
chickens affccted with the articular type, swelling of hock joints and legs and dysbasia may bc
obscrved.
Lesions: In thc visceral typc, whitc, chalk-likc powder or paste-like cryslalline substances
frequently deposit on the surface of internal organs such as heart and liver (Fig. 1).  The kidney
is discoloured and swollen with white urate deposits in the urinary tubules.  In the liver, white,
necrotic foci may be multiply observed. In the articular type, white urate deposits in thc
articular cavity, such as the toe and hock joints, and sometimcs looks likc a yellowish, white
adiposc tissue.
Histologically, needle-shaped crystalline substances are observed, and nodular lesions with
infltration of giant cells (gout node) and necrotic foci are observed in thc urinary tubulcs, within
the collecting tubule and in the lobules of the liver (Fig. 2). In articular gout, similar nodes are
observed in the articular cavity and bursa of joints, and in the tendon sheath.
Diagnosis: Uratcs are white and can easily be differentiated from inflammalory products such
as fibrin, with the naked eye.  Necdle-like crystallinc substanccs and gout nodes can be effective
138
polarizing microscopc and silver staining, and the murexidc reaction arc cfcctivc for proof of
urates.
Urolithiasis
Outline of disease: Urolithiasis is a disease, in which largc and small calculi containing urates
thc growing chicks are fed feed containing exccssive amounts of calcium or feed prepared for
adult birds from an young stage and may also develop as a result of nephritis-type infectious
bronchitis infcction. In affected flocks, cgg production drops and increasc in mortality rale are
observed.
Lesions: In moribund birds, charactcristic alteration is observed in the ureter and kidney.
Bilaterally or unilaterally the ureters cxpand 1o two to three timcs their size and sometimes reach
the thickncss of a pencil. Inside the cavity, viscous liquid, or white or grecn calculi collect (Fig.
3). In the kidncy, atrophy of particular renal tissue and cyst formation are obscrved, and the
atrophy frequently occurs in the anterior middle lobes of the kidney. Histologically, urinary
tubules contain casts and small calculi, collecting tubules and papillary tubules often dilatc like a
cyst, and the epithelium becomcs thin. Rcnal tissuc around dilated urinary tubules and collect-
ing tubules is markedly atrophied and shows proliferation of stromal conncctive tissue.  In the
stroma of the kidney, cellular infiliration, such as with heterophils, lymphocytes and macrophages
is slight. At the carly stage, pools of chalky substances and gout nodes may be obscrved in the
urinary tubules.
 Diagnosis: It is possiblc to pcrform diagnosis from thc gross lesions of the kidney and uretcr.
Howcver, the carly lesions of this discase are difficult to differentiate from IB ncphritis.  In the
case of calcinosis, chalky deposits are obscrved, not only in the kidney but also in the lung and
intestines.
Fatty liver-haemorrhagic syndrome
Outline of discase: Fowl fatty liver-haemorrhagic syndrome (FLHS), which was once called
fatty liver syndromc and liver-hacmorrhagic syndrome, frequently occurs in fatty hens and is
fccds rich in unsaturated fatty acid and carbohydraic, rapc secd oil meal, fced containing small
amount of calcium; excessive oestrogcn levels, choline deficiency and mycotoxin. Suddcn cgg
production drops and sporadic death are obscrved in chickens. Accumulaled mortalily may
reach ovcr 5%.
Lesions: In a macroscopical test, the liver is yellow, swollcn and friable. On thc surface and
inside of livcr, punctate or patchy fresh hacmorrhages and haematomas are observcd (Fig. 4).
Large and small necrotic foci in the liver and blood clot may be observed in the abdominal cavity.
Histologically, in the cytoplasm of hcpatocytes, a largc numbcr of fatty vacuolcs arc obscrved, and
the hepatocytes are swollen and dilated.
The sinusoid is narrow, and lysis and decrcasc of gittcr fibre round the hepatocyte cord arc
 s  s s  p  s    '
hepalic Iobcs or on scveral lobuics, and necrotie nidi and acidophitic, irregular coagulations arc
oftcn observed inside the parenchyma.
Diagnosis and prevention: This disease can really be diagnosed by the marked fat accumulation
and haemorrhages. In a biochemical test, the fat content in thc livcr reaches 40-70%, and thc
ratio of oleic acid in the lipid increascs.  Limitation of carbohydrate in feed, inclusion of fish
meal, limitalion of encrgy yicld and administration of vitamin B2 and choline are effectivc for
Nutritional and Metabolic Disorders  139
preventing the development of this disease.
Amyloidosis
Amyloidosis is a metabolic diseasc in which amyloid primary protcin deposits inside thc
such as ducks and gccsc. It is rare to sce this discase in livc birds prior to dcath. It is also
common for this discase to develop sequcntially following tuberculosis and mycosis.
             
comparatively uniform fine fibre, which is slightly staincd by cosin, positive in the Congo red stain
and shows a grccn birefringence under a polarizing microscope.  In amyloidosis that sequentially
develops after tuberculous nodes, amyloid corpusclc may also deposit insidc conneclive tissue
 round tubcrculous nodes, and amyloid corpuscles may bc also observcd in the lungs.
Avian encephalomalacia
Avian cnccphalomalacia, which is prone to develop in chicks at 2-5 weeks old, is caused by
vitamin E deficiency in chick feed, incrcasc of peroxide, and high concentrations of unsaturated
falty acid such as linolcic acid and lauryl suceinic acid.  The afectcd chicks show ataxia, ptosis
of the wings and leg paralysis.  In a macroscopic tcst, frcsh, rcd haemorrhagic nidi (Fig. 6) are
observed in the cerebellum and rarely also in the cerebrum, and soft nidi, with dark purple to
yellowish-whitc colour are obscrved. Cavc-in and defect are obscrvcd partially in thc cerebral
hemisphcrc and cercbellar vermis. Hislologically, hacmorrhage, thrombi, ischacmic degenera-
tion and necrosis of nerve cells are observed in the cerebellum.  In a lapscd case, infiltration of
fat granular cclls and proliferation of glial cells are observed. At thc time of symptoms,
differenliation from avian cncephalomyelitis is rcquired. Hyaline thrombus, hacmorrhage and
ischaemic degcncration of nerve cells diagnose avian encephalomalacia.
140 Nutritional and Metabolic Disorders
Fig.1.Urate deposit:White urates that deposit
Fig. 2.Histological lesions of a kidney with urate
on the surface of internal organs such as the
deposits:Needle-like,urate crystals and giant cell
liver and heart.
reaction around them.HE stain.
Fig.3.Urolithiasis:In a kidney with a unilateral
Fig.4.Fatty liver-haemorrhagic syndrome:Yello-
ureter that has markedly expanded,discolo-
wish liver,haematoma in the right lobe and a
urationof theanterior lobe and atrophy of the
blood clot in the abdominal cavity.
middlelobe are notable.
5
6
Fig.5.Amyloidosis:Duck's liver that is discolo-
Fig.6.Avian encephalomalacia:Haemorrhage of
uredand swollenby deposits of amyloidprotein.
the cerebullum.(Original:Shoya)
(Original:Maeda)
Nutritional andMetabolicDisorders
141
34.
 Tumours of Non-infectious Aetiology
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
ueao se yons suebio aaonpoidal aul to sinowni dojaaap Auanbait siare
adenocarcinoma, oviduct adenocarcinoma and leiomyoma of the oviductal
ligament.
develop squamous cell carcinoma.
Developmental factors of these tumours are unclear.
In tumours of reproductive organs, a relationship with egg laying is presumed,
and developmental difference between breeds is also pointed out.
Gross lesions and characteristic, histological lesions diagnose tumours of
introduction of another breed reduces the incidence rate
Ovarian adcnocarcinoma
These tumours havc the highcst incidence among tumours of thc reproductive organs in
layers (Table 1). Theca cells, ovarian stroma cells and residual cells of thc embryonal cord are
 e  s oq pan  si as op o si ar i 's
bcginning of lay, but most of them suddenly occur afler two years.  Intra-abdominal dissemina-
tion casily occurs. At the timc of occurrencc, an infuence of gonadotropin in hypophysis is
presumed. Thcre is no hormonal activity in the tumor cells.
Symptoms: The presence of small tumours inside thc ovary docs not nccessarily cause cgg
 production drops or symptoms. However, intra-abdominal transition of the tumour and eggs in
the peritoncal cavity occur, ascites collects, thcn thc abdomen is swollen, and duck like walking
is observed. Also, egg laying ceascs.
Gross lesions: Rather hard tumours with a white to ash grey colour, from miliary to soy bcan
sizc, frequently cmergc on the surface of the ovary. They may sometimes show a cauliflower-
shape. Dissemination is observcd as tumours on the scrosae of the abdomen, oviduct, intestines.
panereas, liver and gizzard. Adhesion betwcen the inlestines and pancreas infrequently occurs
Histological lesions: Growih of a glandular structure and abundanl stromata is characteristic.
The stroma contains smooth muscle fibres (Fig. 1). Sometimes the glandular structure is
In cases possessing an obvious gland, thc cytoplasm of the tumour cell contains strongly stained
eosinophilic granulcs, and in glandular cavitics cxudates exist that stain PAS positivc. There is
sometimes a great deal of stroma with a structural form that js similar to sclcrosal carcinoma.
Diagnosis: Histological lesions diagnose this disease.  When it is diagnosed on the basis of a
disseminated lesion, differcntiation from oviduct adcnocarinoma is required.
142
Table 1. Frequency of tumours of non-infectious aeticology (excluding lymphoma)
Nobel, et al. (1964)
Maeda (1982)
Fredrickson (1991)
Classification by tissue
Intra-abdominal tumours
Tumours ohserved
inn layers
culled laycrs
through the life of a fock
Ovarian adenocarcinoma
89(91.8)
79(78.2)
142(73.2)
Uviduct adenocarcinoma
5( 5.2)
14(13.9)
40(20.6)
Lciomyoma of oviductal ligament
6( 5.9)
Ovarian fibrosis
2( 2.0)
Cholangiocarcinoma
1( 1.0)
1( 1.0)
1( 0.5)
Hepatoma
1( (0.5)
7( 3.6)
Lung adenocarcinoma
1( 0.5)
Mesothelioma
1( 0.5)
Gizzard adenocarcinoma
1( 0.5)
Lnknown
1( 1.0)
Total
97
101
194
（):%
Oviduct adenocarcinoma
'T'herc is a casc that frequcntly devclops in a specific flock and also a case that constantly
develops.  A case that frequently develops shows an increase of over 40% and involvement of a
virus infection and/or genetic factors is presumed. This carcinoma initially dcvclops in the
magnum and infundibulum of the oviduct.
Symptoms: Egg production drops, eggs in peritoneal cavity and egg-costiveness are observed.
When tumours disseminate into the abdominal cavity and peritonitis supcrvcnes, ascites
collects and the abdomen becomes fatulent.
 Gross lesions: On the surface of the oviduct mucous membrane, it emerges as a rather hard, fine
tumour.
Thereafter, tumours protrude into the cavity with uncertain margins (Fig. 2). They
furthermore jut outwards from the serous membrane of the muscle laycr.
Histological lesions: A ductal or acinous structure is formed.
In the intraductal tumour, the
tumorous cells is a cell posscssing a light, bright nuclcus and cytoplasm that stains widely and
strongly, and has cosinophilic sccreta (ovoalbumin) in the ductal cavity. The stroma scarccly
develops.
 In the metastasized nidus, a ductal structure is formed, but no sccretions arc observed.
A small amount of stroma additionaily enters the nidus.
Diagnosis: Observation of gross lesions and histological lesions in oviductal mucosa are
important. When only disscminalcd lcsions are seen, differentiation from ovarian ad.
cnocarcinoma is required.
 Leiomyoma of oviductal ligament
 Lciomyoma of oviductai ligament is a tumour that emcrgcs from the smooth muscle forming
the radical of the oviductual ligamcnt. A mctastasized nidus is formed in thc oviductual
ligament and serosa of the oviduct, but as a benign tumour.
 Symptoms: There is no specific symptom, and the tumour is found at inspection for culling thc
birds. The incidence is not so high as that of the two former conditions, but there is a difference
among brceds, and a fock with good egg laying pcrformancc has a high incidence.
Gross lesions: The tumours arc obscrvcd in the radical of oviductual ligament with sizes from
1 cm? to that of a fist. They are white and have a lustre on the surfacc, thal sometimes look like
a white meat block, but it is gcncrally harder than that.  The metastasized nidus is a tumour of
Tumours of Non-infectious Aetiology
143
( i) ais os o A o
Histological lesions: They consist of the crossing band of smooth muscle fibrcs and collagenous
fibres. The tumour cell has an cosinophilic cytoplasm in the shape of a spindle with a densc
staincd nucleus in the centre (Fig. 4).
Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin
Both in broilers and laycrs, this carcinoma dcvclops as a nodular lcsion multiplying in the
skin of the back and leg.  In broilers, it is generally found at meat inspection and thc incidence
has recenily bccome higher.  Tumour lesions remain in the skin and subcutis and do not sprcad
to the proximal skeletal musclc. Thus, there is an opinion to regard it simply as hypcrplasia of
epidermal pricklc cell (epidermal acanthosis).
Gross lesions: The skin becomes nodular, hypertrophicd with a yellowish white colour, it
hardcns and the fcathers moult. At thc centre of thc nodc, scabs or an ulcer form, and
haemorrhagc is somctimcs obscrved.  The surrounding area of the nodc is covercd by connective
tissue.
Histological lesions: The epidermis markcdly proliferatcs mainly in the prickle cell lamina and
further infiltrates into thc dermal papilla or subcutis with a cord shapc.  In thc cpidcrmal tissue
that has proliferated, the scqucncc of basal cells becomes irregular, the pricklc cells are acidophilic
and there is cornification of the cytoplasm that sometimes forms a cancerous pearl.  Also,
nuclear fission occurs frequently. Among the proliferated cpidermal tissucs, proliferation of
conncctive tissucs and infiltration of inflammatory cells are obscrvcd.
As for other tumours of non-infectious aetiology, hepatoma, cholangiocarcinoma,
mesothelioma, lung cancer, gliosis and rhabdomyosarcoma develop quite frequently.
144Tumours of Non-infectious Aetiology
Fig.1.Histological lesions of ovarian adenocarcinoma:A tumour tissue whose glandular duct structure is obvious.
Stromal connective tissue has developedand contains smoothmuscles（→).HE stain.
Fig.2.Oviduct adenocarcinoma:Reddish brown tumours developed in themagnum region of the oviduct mucus
membrane.(Original:Inoue)
Fig.3.Leiomyoma:tumours of leiomyoma developed in theradical of the oviductal ligament.(Original:Inoue)
awide cytoplasm.Theradical of the oviductal ligament.HEstain.
TumoursofNon-infectiousAetiology145
35.
Poisoning
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Gizzard erosion is poisoning caused by ingestion of fishmeal containing a toxin
called gizzerosin.
Gross lesions are hypertrophy, fragility, defects of keratinoid layer.
Black
contents in the gizzard.
Fungi, which contaminate feed. produce various kinds of mycotoxin.
Aflatoxin induces liver disorders. Trichothecene induces bone marrow disorders.
Ochratoxin induces kidney disorders.
 Sulfa drugs are prone to induce toxicity by accumulation.
disorders, nephropathy. anorexia, egg production drops, and so on.
Gizzard erosion
Outline of disease: Gizzard erosion is a discase characterised mainly by crosion and ulccration
of the gizzard that is caused by a substancc called gizzcrosin in a typc of a fish meal.  When a
product is ovcrheatcd during the process of drying the fish, frec histidine in the fish reacts with the
fish mcat protein and gencrates gizzerosin. Since frce histidine is contained morc in fish with red
ficsh than in fish with white flcsh, therc have bccn a lot of accidcnts when fish mcal made from fish
with red flesh, such as sardine and mackerel, is used as raw material. When hot-blast direct
drying was forrmerly employed for drying fishmeal, thc possibility that the product was ovcrhealcd
was high. However, since steam indirect drying is currently cmploycd, therc is seldom a report
of this happening.  It is considcred that gizzerosin cnhanccs sccrction of gastric juice and reduces
the pH level in the gizzard, causing gizzard erosion.
Symptoms and lcsions: Anorexia, discharge of diarrhoeal faeccs, depression, reduction of
growth ratc and irregular growth are observed and a serious casc leads to dcath. As black
contcnts are sometimes vomited from the gizzard, it may also be called melcncmesis but this is
 rather rare. The musclaris in the gizzard bccomcs thin, flabby and rclaxed. Inside the gizzard,
black contents collcct, and this state may be observed widcly from the crop to the rcctum.
Swelling of thc gizzard keratinoid fold, fragility, erosive state of the gizzard such as fissurc,
dcfects of thc keratinoidlaycr and further perforation are observcd (Fig. 1). Histologically,
exfolialive cpithelial cells, heterophil infiltration and haemorrhagc arc observed in thc markedly
 hypertrophied or atrophied keratinod layer. In the glandular layer of the gizzard, the main cells 
 and the surfacc cells becomc swollen, viscous granules are observed on the surface cells, and
However, in scrious lesions, degcnerative necrosis is observed in the glandular tissue.
Catarrhal changes to thc mucous membrane are observed in the gizzard, duodcnum and small
intestine.
Diagnosis: Definitivc diagnosis cannot be performed on the basis of symptoms and gross
lcsions, but is pcrformcd by the assay of gizzcrosin in formula fceds that use fish meal.
Furthermore, biological proof, using one-day old broiler chicks, is also effcctive.
146
fish meal oflen looks burnl, with litle water.  If this discasc is suspccted, one should discontinuc
using the feed concerned immediately.
Mycotoxicosis
Outline of discase: Mycotoxin is a secondary metabolite that fungi produce, and causes various
kinds of poisoning to humans and livestock.  Although sevcral hundred kinds of mycotoxins arc
currently known, mycotoxins that cause problems of conlamination to fecds are afiatoxin,
produced by Aspergillus favus, T-2 toxin that the genus Fusarium fungus produces, trichothecenes
mycotoxin such as nivalenol, and ochratoxin that fungi of ihc genus Aspergillus and the gcnus
Penicillium produce.
Symptoms and lesions: In the casc of an acute poisoning by aflatoxin in turkcys, anorexia.
ataxia, dyspnoea and anaemia have been observed. Histologically, necrosis of hepatic cells,
hyperplasia of the bile duct and haemorrhagc of the intestine and kidncy are observed (Fig. 3).
 In an experimental administration of T-2 toxin to chickens, cgg production drops, thin-shelled
eggs and decrease of leukocytcs were obscrved.  'The major target organ of trichotheccncs
mycotoxins, such as T-2 toxin, is the bone marrow and it is said thal decrcase of lcukocytes and
thrombocytes arc common lcsions.  Ochratoxin is a mycotoxin that possesses a rennal toxicity and
causcs damage to the proximal urinary tubulc.  In a case with a high concentration, fatty liver is
also obscrved. Furthermore, in chicken eggs, it is believed that ochratoxin causcs a lowcred
quality of eggshell and presence of blood.
Diagnosis and prevention: Detection of a mycotoxin is used for diagnosis. For some
mycotoxins, ani ELiSA kit is commcrcially available.
For prevention of poisoning, it is important to be careful about fecd or raw materials and to
 prevent fungi from developing.
Sulfonamide poisoning
Outline of disease: Although sulfa drugs are widely used for the purpose of preventive
trcatment of bacterial and protozoan infections, a continuance type of suifa drug such as
sulfamonomethoxine and sulfadimethoxine that is widely used in Japan, is excrcted slowly from
the kidney and causes intoxication when it is misapplied.
 Thc antimicrobial action of sulfa drugs is due to bacterial intibition from synthesizing folacin
and thc toxicity to advanced anirmals is low, since they ingcst folacin as a vitamin cxtcrnally.
Lesions and symptoms: As toxicity symptoms, reduction of fced intakc, dyspepsia, anaemia and
decrease of leukocytes, due to disturbance of haematopoietic function, egg production drops and
misformed egg shells are observed (Fig. 4).
Diagnosis and prevcntion: Diagnosis is performed on the basis of thc prcscncc of the ad-
ministered sulfa drug and detcction of it in blood or organs.  An ELISA kit for the detection of
 the sulfa drug is also commercially available. As a preventive measure, propcr use of the drug
is important.
Poisoning 147
Fig. 1. Gizzard erosion: Gizzard contents show as black (top). Hypertrophy, vulnerability, fragility, defect and
perforation of mucous membrane (- *) are observed in the gizzard (bottom).
Fig. 2. Histological observation of mucous membrane in the gizzard: Loss of keratinoid layer, degenerative
necrosis and cellular infiltration are obscrved in thc glandular tissuc of the gizzard. HE stain.
bilc duct.HE stain. (Original: Hirano)
hacmatopoietic functional disturbance. (Original: Taniguchi)
148Poisoning
Poisoning 149
Diseases of Japanese
Quail, Ducks, Geese
and Turkeys.
Diseases of Japanese Quail
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Newcastle disease is mainly characterised by acute loss of vigour. greenish
droppings, drops in egg production and the laying of non-spotted eggs.
Marek's Disease often occurs in Japanese quail aged 6-7-months, resulting in
emaciation, followed by a high mortality rate.
In salmonellosis. lethal white diarrhoea caused by Saimonella Typhimurium
infection occurs at a high frequency.
Ulcerative enteritis is characterised by ulcers in the lower small intestine,
frequently resulting in perforative peritonitis.
In fungal infection, pneumonia caused by Aspergillus fumigatus often occurs in
chicks immediately after hatching.
Coccidiasis is classified into the acute form, in which the caecum is affected and
the chronic form in which the small intestine is affected.
Cestodiasis is characterised by abdominal swelling and drops in egg production
As the notcworthy diseases of Japanese quail, Newcastle disease, Marek's Disease, ulcerative
enteritis (quail disease) and coccidiosis arc presented. Japancsc quail are raised mainly in
Toyohashi but also across Japan, and if these farms arc infcctcd with cpidemic discases, the
diseases cause morc damage in quail farms than in chickcn farms, since Japancsc quail arc always
raised at a high density. However, reccntly, vaccination has become used widely and facilities
have also improved, so that thc occurrence of epidemic discases has significantly decreased.
Howcvcr, Salmonellosis, fungal infection and avian cnccphalomyelitis havc bcen occurring.
caused by poor hygienic measures in breeding quail and in the hatchery.  Therc is a rcport of
quail bronchitis caused by avian adenovirus in other countries.
Newcastle Discase.
This discasc is causcd by thc samc virus that causes chickcn Newcastle disease (ND).
Infccted quail are characterised by defecation of loosc and greenish droppings, drops in egg
production, and the laying of non-spotted cggs and soft-shell eggs. Nervous signs, such as
paralysis of the legs are sometimes obscrved. However, unlike chickens, respiratory symptoms 
are obscrved in only a fcw cases. 'The mortality rate is about 1o% in mature quail, howcver it
sometimes reaches 50% in quail at thc age of onsct of lay. In a gross cxamination, swollen
spleens, and blood follicles and soft follicles in thc ovary are often observcd. Atrophy of thc
of chickens, hacmorrhagc in the proventriculus and small intestine is mild and respiratory
symptoms are rarc.
 Diagnosis should be by measurement of the haemagglutination inhibition ( HI) antibody titre
and isolation of the virus, sincc charactcristic lcsions are few. As for prophylactic trcatment, live
virus vaccination is conducted by spray, howevcr intramuscular administration of 3 doses the live
vaccine is also performed in quail in contaminated arcas.
152
Marek's disease
Marck's discase (MID) in Japancsc quail is caused by Marek's disease virus. MD occurs at
a high frequency in Japanesc quail agcd 6-7 months or over and the mortality rale often reaches
50-60% within 2-3 months of onset. No nervous signs are seen. Howcver, anorexia, depression
and emaciation arc observed. In a gross cxamination, swelling of thc liver and splcen (Fig. 1),
white thickening of the duodenal wall (Fig. 2), and swclling of the proventriculus are observed.
Howcvcr, white nodulcs that are often observed in chickens are rarely sccn, but yellowish white
foci about 1 mm in diameter are obscrved. Histological cxamination revcals ncoplastic prolifera-
tion of lymphoid cells in the liver, spleen, ovary and intestinal mucous membranc.  Infiltration of
lymphocytes and plasma cells is somctimes obscrved in thc periphcral nerves.  Histopathological
cxamination is required for making a diagnosis, sincc thc small ycllowish whitc foci in the liver
caused by this discasc arc similar to foci of bactcrial nccrosis. For prevention, similarly to
chickens, vaccination with herpesvirus of turkeys (HVT) in Japanese quail aged 14 to 35 days is
effective.
Salmonellosis
 Fluffing, watcry droppings and white diarrhoea are observed in chicks for several days after
hatching, resulting in dcath.  'Thc causcs are mainly Salmonella Typhimurium, S. London, or S.
Infantis, and the morlality rate ranges from 5 to 70%, depending on the flock in which the
manifestations of this disease appear. In a gross examination, reticular foci of nccrosis and
hacmorrhage in the liver, swclling of the spleen, and swciling and retention of checsy exudate in
the caecum are observcd.  Tumorous formation is sometimes ohserved in thc subcutaneous tissue
of the head in mature Japanese quail.  Histological examination rcvcals multiple focal nccrosis in
the liver and spleen and pscudomcmbranous cnteritis associalcd with various exudates, including
catarrhal exudale, in thc lower intesline as well as in the caecum. Large abscesses are observed
in the subcutancous tissue of the head (Fig. 3). Salmonella can be dciccted in thesc foci.
Antibiotics (new quinoloncs) that show sensilivity to Salmonella are effective for the prevention
of the devclopment of this discase and for therapy. If egg (vertical) transmission is suspected,
hygicnic mcasures should bc peiformed in quail farms as well as in the brceding quail. In
addition, control of rodents and other pests in 1he farms and disinfection of equipment and
devices for husbandry are required.
Ulccrative cnteritis (Quail disease)
This discase is causcd by Clostridium colinum infection. Depression, anorcxia, ruffle
feathers and standing with closed cyes are observed in quail that develop this disease. Subse-
qucntly, excretion of watery diarrhoea is observed, showing an acutc coursc and resulting in dcath
in many cases.  In a gross examination, haemorrhagc and ulccrs arc observed in thc lowcr small
intestinc and caccum (Fig. 4).  Thc ulcer is well demarcated and of various sizes up to 5 mm in
diamctcr.  Pseudomembranous-like yellowish exudate is often obscrvcd in a large ulcer.  ‘The
ulcer is oficn perforaled, rcsulting in perforativc peritonitis. Small yellowish white foci of
nccrosis are scattered in the liver, and swclling, haemorrhagc and necrosis are also observed in the
spleen.  Histological examination rcvcals many bacterial foci similar to C. colinum in the ulccr of
the intestinal tract or in foci of necrosis in the liver.  Difercntial diagnosis should be conducted,
since this discasc often occurs associated with histomoniasis (blackhead) or coccidiosis.  Admin-
istration of strept.omycin and terramycin is effective for therapy.
Discascs of Japancse Quail.  153
Fungal disease
Pneumonia caused by Aspergillus fumigatus oftcn occurs in chicks aged 2 to 3 days.
 Depression and gasping are observed in clinically ill birds. Acute death within 3 to 4 days aftcr
onset and 30-40% morlality are seen.  Nervous signs are sometimes observed in mucormycosis
Gross examination reveals white lesions around the bronchi in the lung and air sacs and
histological cxamination reveals granulomatous lesions associatcd with the growth of fungi
 Since therapy for this diseasc is dificult, adcquatc disinfection of the hatchers, brooders and cages
should be conducted for prevention.
Parasitic diseases
Eimeria tsunodai that shows as acute coursc and E. bateri and E. uzura that show a chronic
course are clinically important in coccidiosis. Drops in egg production and bloody dropping are
obscrved in E. tsunodai infection, occasionally resulting in death.  Thc caccum is the prefcrablc
 sitc of infection and swelling and atrophy are seen. Haemorrhage and cheesy materials are
 observed in the caecum. Fine whie lesions arc obscrved in the mucous membranc from thc
 duodenum to the lower small intestine.  Administration of sulfa drugs is usually carricd out for
prevention and therapy.
Abdominal swelling and drops in cgg production are observed in the case of cestodiasis
 parasites. Since bugs are intermediate hosts in cestodiasis, a pesticide should be used to conirol
thcm.  Administration of bithionol at a dose of 150-200 mg/kg is used for treatment.
154Diseascs of Japancsc Quail.
Fig.1.Liver of a Marek's disease case:Swelling and
white neoplastic lesions are observed throughout the
liver.(Original:Imai).
Fig.2.Small intestine of Marek's disease case:White
hypertrophic lesions(→).A lesion such as this is often
observed in the intestinal tract of Japanese quail.
Fig.3.Salmonellosis:Abscess formation occurs in the
subcutaneous tissue of the head andit protrudes like a
knobfrom the surface of thehead.
Fig.4.Ulcerative enteritis:Haemorrhage andulcer in the
lower small intestine and caecum.
1763
Diseases of Japanese Quail.
2.
Diseases of Ducks and Geese.
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
 Duck viral hepatitis is a lethal disease in ducks aged under 5 weeks and mainly
affects the liver.
op ui sniasadsay aq pasnee uooasu anoe ue s! aa saua gea yona
to the rectum and haemorrhagic necrosis in the liver.
Goose parvovirus infection occurs in goslings but not in ducks.
Riemerella anatipestifer infection is characterised by airsacculitis, pericarditis and
perihepatitis.
Discases including Ncwcastle disease and fowl plague that cause serious symptoms in
chickens also occur in ducks, howcver duck viral hepatitis, duck viral cntcritis, goosc parvovirus
infection and Riemerella anatipestifer infection are clinically important in ducks and gccse.
Duck virus hepatitis.
Duck virus hepatitis occurs in ducklings with a high lethality and is highly contagious.
Three types of viruses, DHV-1 and -3, picornaviruscs, and DHV-2, an astrovirus, causc duck
hcpatitis virus (DHV). In DHV-1 infcction, the mortality rate is 95% in ducklings aged less
than onc wcck, about 50% in ducklings aged one to three wecks and low in ducklings aged 4 to
    'o m   s    ' h    5
 Of the ducklings, and ducklings that developcd this infection usually die.  Thc mortality rate for
DHV-3 infcction is 30% or less.
 t-e a s y p a noe  aons g e z 'ia Aq snn A
after onsct.  Inactivity, lethargy and convulsion of both lcgs likc kicking are obscrved in infected
dueklings, resulting in dcaths with opisthotonus. It takes about one hour from onsct to death.
With each typc of virus, thc major lesions arc swelling or ecchymosis in the livcr (Fig. 1).
Swelling of the spleen and kidney are also observcd.  Histological examination revcals prolifcra-
lion of hepatic cells and interlobular biliary cpithelium, and hacmorrhage and cellular infltration
in the livcr and also focal necrosis in the livcr and hyperplasia of the interlobular biliary tract.
 Diagnosis can be performed by virus isolation.  The viruses can bc isolatcd by inoculation of
emulsified livcr or blood of infected birds into duck eggs. DlIV-1 and 2 can be also isolatcd in
chicken eggs.  In addition, thc antibody titre is mcasured by neutralisalion lest.  If stricl control
is successful during the 4-5 weeks aficr hatching, DVH can bc prevented, since only ducklings are
infected.  Vaccination is used for prevention in some foreign countrics.
Duck virus enteritis.
Duck virus cnteritis, causcd by duck cnteritis virus (lDEV), is an acutc infection in ducks,
doa snasady aui on siuoiaq aaa  'anleid xonp se oi pajoi osie si pue 'sueas pue asaan
and is identified serologically, evcn though thc pathogcnicity varies according to the strain.
 Natural infection is only observed in ducks.  The incubation period is from 3 to 7 days in ducks
156
and the birds dic within 15 days of onset. Ducklings die at a high rate, however mature ones also
die and total mortality rangcs from 5 to 100%.  Thcrc have been no reports of outbrcaks of this
disease in Japan.
Anorexia, severe thirst, depression, ataxia, ruffe feathers, rhinitis and watery diarrhoea are
     t      
 i si   sd s  s     s 
digestive mucous membrane from the oesophagus to the rectum (Fig. 3). The formation of
cells is also sccn (Fig. 2).  Lcsions of the intestinal tract are observed in the area which lymphatic
tissue develops.  Haemorrhagc is observed in the ovarian folliclcs of maturc ducks.  Histological
cxamination revcals intranuclcar inclusion bodies in hepatic cells and in the mucosal cpithelium of
the intestinal tract.
Diagnosis can be made by these gross findings and by the detection of intranuclear inclusion
bodies. Determinative diagnosis can pcrformed by isolation and idcntification of the virus.
DEV can be isolated on duck cmbryo fibrobiast cells or the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) of
duck cggs. For prcvention, infected birds are isolated to be fed.  Inactivated vaccines and
live-attcnuated vaccines developcd for chickens arc also availabie in some foreign countries.
Goose parvovirus infection
This disease, caused by goose parvoviruses, is an acutc lethal discase in goslings and in young
Muscovy ducks and is also referred to as Derzsy disease.  It has been reportcd that thcre is a
single serotype of this virus.  The infectivity is very high and goslings are infected at any age.
However if goslings aged 5 weeks or ovcr arc infected, thc discase progresses in a subclinical
course. Sudden death without clinical signs, except for loss of appetite and collapse, that is rarely
obscrved in infected gosfings generally, occurs in infected goslings aged 2 weeks or less (the
mortality rate is 70-100%).  In goslings that have maternal antibodies or which are 3 weeks 0r
over, leg weakness, epilation, diarrhoea and decreased growth are obscrvcd, howcver the mortal-
S    e       n     i  s
a round apex.
 Histological cxamination revcals nccrosis of thc heart, myocarditis and skeletai myositis
(Fig. 4).  Intranuclear inclusion bodies are observed in hepatic cells and in Kupfer cells.
periphepatitis and pericarditis associated with a large amount of ascites are observed in chronic
cascs.
In this infcetion, diagnosis can be performcd by isolation of thc virus and serological
methods, since characteristic lcsions are few. Emulsified liver is subcultured in cmbryonating
geese or Muscovy duck eggs and the virus may be isolated.  It is dificult to isolate directly by cell
culture. Antibody assays are conducted by using the agar gel precipitation test or a neutraliza-
tion test, however the neutralization test is more sensitive. As a preventive measure against
infection in goslings, vaccination of brecding gccsc is effectivc, howevcr the vaccinc is not
available in Japan.  As for other measures, the strict isolation of gosiings until they are 4 to 5
weeks old is effective.
Rimerella anatipestifer infection
This disease causcd by Riemerella (Pasteurella, Moraxella) anatipestifer infcction occurs
mainly in ducklings but also occurs in turkeys and pheasants.  Economical damage will be serious
in ducks due to a high mortality ratc and weight loss. Ducklings agcd 5 wccks or less are
cspccially susccptiblc to this discase, resulting in dcath within 1-2 days aftcr onsct.  'Thc mortality
Diseases of Ducks and Geese.157
 rate varies depending on othcr factors such as the environmcnt, and ranges from 5 to 75%.
Depression, lacrimation, nasal discharge, coughing, sneezing, grcenish diarrhoca, tremor of
the head and ncck and coma are often observed.  Decreased growth is obscrved in ducklings that
have experienced this disease.  The most characteristic gross lesion is fibrinous exudate adhcred
to the surface of the serous mcmbrane of thc pericardium, liver and air sac. Fibrinous
inflammation is observed in the air sac and lung. Monocyte infiltration and degeneration of
parcnchymal cells around the portal are observed in the livcr in the acute stage. Fibrinous
meningitis is obscrvcd in the central nervous system.
This disease can be predicted from thesc clinical symptoms and the gross lesions as mcntioned
above, however definitive diagnosis can bc made by isolation and identification of the pathogenic
 organism. Exudate that is collected from the lesion is incubated on blood agar at 37°C, by using
the candle jar method in order to isolate the pathogenic organism. It is possible to prevcnl
infection with an inactivated vaccine, however the vaccinc is not availablc in Japan.  It has been
reported that thcre arc 19 serotypes of R. anatipestifer, and since this disease can be prevcnted
only by vaccine of thc corrcsponding serotype, multivalent vaccines are uscd.  Antibiotics and
sulfa drugs arc used for therapy.
158  Diseascs of Ducks and Gecse.
Fig.1.Duck viral hepatitis:Swelling and echy-
Fig.2.Duck viral enteritis:Multiple pe-
mosis in the liver.（Original:Maeda and
techial haemorrhage and white small
Ryo).
necrotic foci in the liver.（Original:
Taniguchi).
Fig.3.Duck viral enteritis:Haemorrhage of
theintestinalmucousmembrane andretention
ofhaematoid exudate in the intestinal lumen.
(Original:Taniguchi).
Fig.4.Histologicallesions of the skeletal
musclein goose parvovirus infection:Myode-
generation is marked.
Diseases of Ducks and Geese.
159
3. Diseases of Turkeys.
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
Haemorrhagic  enteritis  is  caused   by   haemorrhagic  enteritis  virus  and
characterised by swelling of the spleen and haemorrhages in the small intestine
Turkey rhinotracheitis, caused by turkey rhinotracheitis virus, is characterised by
respiratory symptoms and swelling of the head.
Bordetellosis  is  characterised   by  respiratory 
/symptoms,inflammation and
thickening of the tracheal mucous membrane, and curvature and deformation of
the annular ligaments of the trachea.
Viral hepatitis is characterised by swelling, haemorrhage and necrotic foci in the
liver and spleen.
In addition, coronavirus enteritis, coccidiosis and mycoplasmosis are clinically
important diseases
Haemorrhagic entcritis
This discase is caused by haemorrhagic cnteritis virus, which belongs to avian adenovirus
(AAV) Group II. A virus of the same group also causes marble splccn discase of pheasants and
Or embryonating eggs; howevcr, it has bcen shown that thc virus grows in turkey lymphosarcoma-
derived established cell lines.   The infection is observcd at a high frequeney in turkey poults agcd
from 8 to 12 wccks, and the clinical course varics from a peracute and lethal coursc to a mid
coursc or spontaneous remission, showing a mortality rate that ranges from 1 io 60%. This
disease is mainly transmitted horizontally. Turkcys that havc suffcred from this disease are not
infected again.
Symptoms and lesions: This diseasc occurs suddenly and results in deaths within 24 hours in
 acute cascs. Deprcssion, bloody droppings, anaemia in the skin of the head, and decrease in fced
and water intake are observed. Dark reddish droppings are observed adhcrcd to the feathers
around the vent.  Bloody droppings are sometimes shed when the abdomen of an infected turkey
is pressed.  The course of this discase lasts around 10 days and infcclcd turkeys show immune
suppression. The splecn and small intestine arc thc prcferablc silcs for the gross lesions.
Significantly, marked swelling and white pulp arc obscrvcd in the spleen, and scctions show
marbling (Fig. l).  The intestinal lumen is filled with dark reddish haemorrhagic exudate, and
haemorrhagc and necrosis of the intestinal mucosa are observed.  Hacmorrhage is also seen in
the skclctal musclcs,  cardiac muscle and  liver. Histological examination rcvcals
rcticuloendothelial cells that arc affected seleetively in thc spleen and the formation of slighily
basophilic inclusion bodies in thc nuclei of these cells. In addition, hyperplasia of thc white pulp,
with swelling and proliferation of reticuloendothclial cells and decrease in lymphocytes in the
lymphoid tissuc around the arteries arc obscrved. In the small intestine, degeneration and
haemorrhage into thc lumen are observed.
Diagnosis: This disease can be diagnosed by these symptoms, by the lesions and by the detection
160
of the intranuclear inclusion bodies.  Material (including emulsified splecn and contents of the
intestine) is inoculated into susceptible birds to reproduce the signs.  Definitive diagnosis can be
made by isoiation of the virus (by using lymphosarcoma-derived established cell lines).  In
addition, antigen and antibody can be detected by using an agar gel prccipitation test with infected
spleen. Differential diagnosis is necessary between this disease, acute infections including
coronavirus enteritis, coccidiosis, fowl cholera and swinc erysipelas, and toxicity.
Prevcntion and therapy: A livc vaccine is used in somc countrics.  Progression of this disease
can be prcvented by administration of immunc sera and antibiotics.  Furthcrmorc, improvement
of brecding managcment protects birds against death and from cconomic loss.
Turkey rhinotracheitis.
This discasc is caused by thc pncumovirus, turkcy rhinotracheitis virus (TRT).  TRT virus
is also considered as one of the causes of SHS (swollen head syndrome) in chickens.  This virus
rcplicatcs in the ciliated cpithelium of the bronchial pathway or in the oviduct.  It is transmittcd
 e ne 'saa t  g   sod   so s s a  
frequency and presents with a sneezc, cough, bubbling raies, nasal discharge, epiphora and
conjunctivitis. Inflammation of the infraorbital sinus and swclling of the cyelid and mandible arc
from 0.4 to 90%, according to the affected flock.  However, a high mortality rate is observed in
young turkcys or secondarily infected turkcys.  Drops in egg production and the laying of
abnormal shellcd eggs are obscrvcd in mature iurkeys, howcvcr hatchability is normal. In thc
gross lesions, increase in mucus in thc nasal cavity and trachea and mild thickening of the mucous
membrane of the nose and trachea are observed.  Histological examination reveals loss of cilia in
the tracheal epithelium and infiltration of lymphocytes, plasma cclls and hcterophils in the lamina
propria.  Eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion bodies are sometimcs obscrved in cpithelial cells.
Diagnosis can bc done by isolation of the virus using embryonating eggs or tracheal organ
cultures.  However the virus is difficult to isolate and a sample that is collcctcd at an appropriate
time should be used.  Increase in antibody titrc should be confirmcd by means of a neutralization
test, thc fluorcsccnt antibody method, agar gel prccipitation test or ELISA. In some countries,
live or inactivated vaccines are used, however these vaccines are not sufficiently cffective for
antibiotics is cffectivc for the prevention of secondary infections.
Bordetellosis
 This is causcd by Bordetella avium, and is also referred to as turkey coryza. This disease
occurs in young turkeys aged from 2 to 6 weeks and causes inflammation of the uppcr respiratory
tract. Morbidity is high (100%), but mortality is 10% or less. Mucoid nasal discharge, foamy
lacrimation, and moist rales, as well as gasping are obscrvcd in young turkeys. Nasal discharge
and sccrctions from the trachca are obscrvcd adhering to the feathers of the body surfacc.  In
scrious cascs, hoarscness or loss of cry occurs. If airsacculitis complicatcs this disease, the
symptoms wifl become serious and the mortality rate will be high.  Gross lesions include
 oedematous swelling and hyperaemia of the mucous membranc of the upper respiratory tract
including the infraorbital sinus, nasal cavity and trachca, and increase in mucus production.
Curvature and deformation of thc annular ligaments of the trachca arc also obscrved.
Histological examination reveals loss and desquamation of thc cilia of the tracheal epithelium, and
the exudate in the upper respiratory tract consists of mucus and heterophils.  This disease can bc
diagnoscd by thesc clinical signs and lesions, as well as by isolation of R. ayium.
Diseases of Turkeys.
16.
Differential diagnosis is required, since a bacterium similar to B. avium is often isolatcd from
thc upper rcspiratory tract. The pathogenic bacterium causes manifestation of this diseasc in one
day-old turkey poults. Elevation of antibody titre is confirmed by using the rapid agglutination,
micro-agglutination or ELISA methods.  Differential diagnosis from mycoplasmosis or other
             
prevention of infection.  Administration of antibiotics that show sensitivity to this pathogcn is
effective for therapy.
Other diseases
Turkey coronavirus enteritis is also referred to as bluecomb discase, and is causcd by a
 coronavirus. Chickens are not susceptible. Anorexia, depression, whitish-greenish or watcry
diarrhoca, dehydralion and dark changcs in the head skin are observed in young turkeys and the
morlality rate ranges from 0 to 50%.  Drops in cgg production and pale eggshells are observed
    n      s     
caccum, ccchymosis of the intestinal mucous membrane, white changcs in thc pancrcas and
deposits of urates.  This discase can be diagnosed by detection of the antigcn of thc pathogenic
virus using a fluorescent antibody test.
It is believed that turkey viral hcpalitis is causcd by a uncnveloped small virus, however its
character has not bcen defincd.  Depression and sudden deaths arc observcd in infectcd turkeys,
bul thc mortality rate is low.  Local grcyish-whitc foci of nccrosis and haemorrhage in the liver
and round greyish-white or pink foci of necrosis in thc spleen arc all obscrved.
 Turkcys are highly susccptible to Pasteurella multocida and are likely to be susceptible to fowl
 cholera. Deprcssion and prostration arc seen, followed by death. Enlargement, haermorrhage
and necrosis are observed in the liver and splecn (Fig. 3). This diseasc is cndemic in USA, and
vaccination is used for its prevention.
Coccidiosis prcscnts with watery and mucoid diarrhoea, rufle feathers and anorexia,
followed by dcath. Enlargemcnt of thc intestinal tract and the prcsence of mucoid droppings
into the intestinal traci, and hypcraemia, ocdema and hacmorrhagc of the intestinal mucous
 membrane are observed in the gross examination. This diseasc takes a scrious course in young
turkeys. However, the mortality rate varies, depending on the type of bird and on husbandry
mcthods.
Mycoplasmosis caused by Mycoplasma gallisepticum, M. synoviae and M. meleagridis pres-
cnts with mild rcspiratory symptoms, swelling of infraorbital sinus, decrcascd growth, leg
weakness, twisted neck, and tenosynovitis.
 In addition, Newcastle discase, influenza, avian encephalomyelitis, reticuloendotheliosis,
salmonellosis, swine erysipclas, and histomoniasis that are common discascs in chickcns arc also
clinically important in turkeys.
162  Diseases of Turkeys.
Hemorrhagic enteritis
virus
Control
4
days
PI
Fig.1. Spleen of chickens expei-
mentally infected with haemo-
rragic enteritis virus:Swelling of
the spleenandhyperplasia of the
splenic
white
pulp.（Original:
Taniguchi).
Fig.2.Naturally infected case of
turkeyrhinotracheitis:Marked swel-
lingofthe
head.(Original:
Saito).
Fig.3.Acase of infection with
Pasteurella multocida:Swelling of
the spleen and foci of necrosis.
(Original:Nagai).
Diseases of Turkeys.
163
Diseases of Pet Birds.
Chlamydiosis.
Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
This is a zoonotic disease between birds and humans, and is caused by
Chlamydia psittaci
This disease runs various courses according to avian species, from apparent
infection, with a high lethality. to inapparent infection.
luainnd pue snoiss to abheuosip pue uoneioewa 'eaouheip 'sbuiddop asoo
exudate persist for a long time in psittacines.
Swelling. fragility and greyish-white necrotic foci in the spleen and liver, and
hypertrophy of the epicardium and air sac are observed.
Diagnosis can be made on the basis of symptoms, gross lesions, detection of the
pathogen and antibody production.
Tetracyclines should be administered with feed and drinking water for a long
period for prevention of the disease.
Outline of the disease
Chlamydia is a bactcrium thal can grow only in cells in thc same way as a virus (an obligalc
intracellular parasite). Chlamydia consists of 4 strains, Chlamydia trachimatis and C. pneumo-
nia, whose main host is humans, and C. psittaci and C. pecorum, whose natural hosts are most
mammals, birds and amphibians. C. psittaci has a wide host range ineluding birds (psittacines,
chickens and wild birds), mammals (human, domestic animals and companion animals) and
apparcn1 infcctions. In birds, this infection has bccn demonsiratcd in 145 spccics of 18 o1ders
including 57 species of psittaciformes. This organism is widely distributed all over Japan,
including in pet bird breeding and rearing farms.
 Young birds show a high morbidity and a high
mortality, howevcr mature ones show mild symptoms, or the infection runs an inapparcnt coursc.
Infected bi1ds excrele the organisms to loose stools for a long period, and subscquenily become
emaciated. Post-mortem findings are characterised by swelling of the spleen and liver and
necrotizing lesions, including external pericarditis and airsacculitis. Psittacines, finches, turkeys,
sis). In humans, this discasc is charactcriscd by rcspiratory signs including pneumonia and
bronchitis, and somctimes runs a lethal course.
Chlamydiosis was first described as a disease of psittacines in 1892, and occurred all over the
world. Sincc C. psittaci was first isolatcd from pct birds in Japan in 1954, this paihogen has been
isolated from imported and domestic birds in ordinary houscholds, pct shops, and zoological
gardens at a high frcquency and has been widely distributed all over the country.  This disease
has occurred in chickens and wild birds all over the world since 194o.  Thcre wcrc cpidcmic
outbrcaks of this discase in turkey and duck farms in Europe and USA, and it is considered as a
very important disease, because of the possibility of economic loss and as a source of infection for
 humans. Chickens are resistant to this pathogen and rarely develop thc discasc. 'Thcre have
been no outbreaks of this discasc in chickcns in Japan.  Birds arc infccted by discharge, secrction
166
Chlamidiosis.
and feather dust of infected birds or carriers, contaminated feeders, feed and drinking water,
inhalation of dricd aerosols of facccs containcd thc pathogen and invasion of thc pathogcn from
wounds that are caused by pricking or biting among birds. Whcn thc pathogcn first invadcs a
flock, the mortality rate often reaches 90% within several weeks without reference to the bird's
agc.
About 10t- 10* organisms arc cxcrcted into the faeces at the onset of disease in psittacines, and
even convalescent birds or inapparently infected birds excrcte the pathogen for a long period.
This disease is transmitted horizontally by contact, inhalation and ingestion. There is no egg
lransmission. The morbidity and mortality ratcs arc 10-30% in young birds. In maturc
 psittacines the infection runs a relalively chronie course, however in finches it runs an acute lethal
course with a high mortality rate.
'This disease in fowls, including turkeys and ducks, is transmittcd by importation of carriers
from abroad and by fying in of infected wild birds. Young birds show high morbidity and the
epidemic form varies from apparent infections that show a high morbidity, accounting for 50-
80% of the group, to inapparent infections. The mortality rate is 10-30% with virulent strains
and 1-4% with ali avirulent strain.
Symptoms and lesions
 Depression, anorexia, ruffle feathers, emaciation, serous exudate from the cyes and nosc, and
grecnish-whitc diarrhoca arc gcnerally observcd in clinically ill birds. The manifestation of
inapparent infection is induced by mixed infection with other organisms, caused by a bad
husbandry environment, and stress caused by changes in climate, transport and fccding in a
high-density population.  Cockatoos and mcdium-sized lorikeets show typical symptoms, howev-
cr small-sized lorikeets often show only some of these symptoms. Finches, such as common
canaries, Java sparrow and white-backed Munia and turkcys havc a short incubation period and
infection runs an acute lethal course. Ducks, gecse, chickens and pigcons mainly show serous
and purulcnt conjunctivitis (Fig. 1) and rhinitis (paranasal sinusitis).
Post mortem findings are characterised by swelling and fragility of thc livcr and splcen (Fig.
2 and 3), greyish-white foci of necrosis, hypcrtrophy of the epicardium and ai1 sac, and retention
of fibrinous cxudatc.  Histological findings are charactcriscd by narcotising lesions of the liver
 and splcen.Therc are small to rclatively large necrotic foci in the hepatic cells of the liver.  In
the spleen, infiltration and increase of macrophages associated with swclling and activation of
reticuloendothelial cells around the capsulc arc obscrved and various foci of necrosis are seen.
Diagnosis
This disease is widely distributed and occurs all ovcr the world. Thesc symptoms and
pathological changes as mentioncd abovc arc obscrvcd in dead birds. However, definitive
 diagnosis can be made by detcction of the pathogen and antibody.
 Aetiological diagnosis: Thc antigen is detected in organs and exudate of infected birds by using 
the fluorcscent antibody technique or Macchiavello's and Gimcncz stain (Fig. 4). The
pathogenic organisms are isolated from all organs of dead birds and from faeces and conjunctiva
 of clinically ill birds by using yolk sac inoculation of embryonating cggs aged 5 to 7 days old or
cell culturcs. Contaminated materials are inoculated into the abdominal cavity of micc and
guinca pigs. The identification of the pathogen can be achieved by fluoresccncc staining with
known antisera. Antibody can bc detecied by using a complement fixation test in psittacines and
pigcons.  In addition, a latex agglutination test, an enzyme antibody techniquc and the indirect
haemagglutination test can also be used.
Chlamidiosis.167
Differential diagnosis: The manifestation of disease in inapparently infected birds is induced by
mixed infeclion with bacteria, viruses, fungi and protozoa, caused by a bad husbandry environ-
ment, by transport or feeding in a high-density population, nutritional deficiency, and disturbance
of the host defencc mechanism. Thus, the mortality rate varies from 10 to 100%, depending on
thesc conditions. In the post-mortem examination of dcad birds, in which chlamidia are
dctected, bacteria including Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas pyocyaneum, Salmonella, olher gram
negative bacilli, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus; viruses including reovirus, paramyxovirus, and
influcnza virus, and Giardia are detected at a high frequcncy in various organs.
Prevention, therapy and control measures.
Tetracyclincs arc cffective and administered with food and drinking water.  Their adminis
tration varies according to the clinical situation, occurrence of inapparently infected birds, the
kinds of the birds, favourite feed of the birds, and brceding mcthods. Successive administration
 of anlibiotic mixed with food and drinking water for 30-40 days is required. Since thcre are no
vaccincs, good hygienic measures are basic procedures for prevention.
168Chlamidiosis.
Fig.1.Duck with conjunctivitis
（Original:Farmer,H).
Fig.2.Swollen spleen of budgeri-
gars(on the filter left side,right
side is normal).
Fig.3.Swelling and necrotic foci in
liver and cloudiness and hyper-
trophyoftheepicardiumin
amazons.
Fig.4.Inclusion bodies of C.
psittaci:Smearofspleenofa
budgerigar stained bythe Gimenez
method.
Chlamidiosis.
169
2. Diseases of Pet Birds.
Psittacine herpesvirus infection, Pacheco's parrot disease
This diseasc is an acute lethal (50-90%) infection caused by a herpesvirus. Epidemic
outbrcaks occur.  Diarrhoca and anorexia arc observed at first, mainly fo!lowed by cyc and nasal
dischargc, and subscquently this disease runs an acute coursc, resulting in sudden dcath
Post-morlcm examination revcals swelling, discoloration, and small nccrotic foci in the livcr and
spleen. Histological examination reveals neciosis of the liver and spleen, and eosinophilic
intranuclear inclusion bodies in the hepatic and reticuloendothelial cells (Fig. 1). Macaws
usually show an inapparent course and can become a source of infection.  Diagnosis can be made
tine of newly introduccd birds, usc of an inaclivatcd vaccinc and intramuscular administration of
vitamin C are effeclive for prcvention.
 Psittacines are also susceptible to different serotypes of herpesviruses that causc respiratory
lesions.  Lethal (50-90%) acute infections caused by various herpesviruscs that are diffcrcnt
from each other irnmunologically, occur in pigeons, hawks, owls, cranes, storks and cormorants.
French moult.
This is also referred to as "Koro" in Japan and is caused by a papovavirus in smallsized
lorikects.  It shows a mortality rate of 5-30%, with impairmcnt of the wings. Shedding and loss
of flight wings and tail feathers (Fig. 2) and dcformation and hypoplasia of the feathers are
observed in young birds from new born 1o 6-weck old. Stasis and haemorrhage of the crop arc
observed in young birds, showing a high mortality. Post-mortem examination revcals swelling
and discoloration of the livcr and kidney, and histological examination rcvcals cell infiltration and
hacmorrhagc in feathcr slcm, feather folliclcs and feathcr pulp, and vacuolar degcneration and
d  a o      sq  
findings and isolation of the virus.  Thcre are no vaccines and hygicnic measures are important.
Avian pox.
This disease, caused by poxvirus, is characterised by pocks in various avian specics.
Keratoconjunctivitis, followed by blindness is observcd in psittacines and the mortality ratc is low.
Howcver, the diseasc will be worscned by mixcd infection with Staphylococcus and Escherichia
coli.  Thc mortality rate is high in canaries and other finches. Pocks develop on thc face, bcak,
cyelids, and legs, and lacrimation, oedema and hyperaemia of the conjunctiva, swclling of the
eyelid and conjunctivitis are observed (Fig. 3). Diagnosis can be achicved on the basis of
epidemiological and pathological findings and isolation of the virus.  Therc is both an inactivated
vaccine and a livc vaccinc for usc in psittacincs and canarics. Hygicnic supervision and control
of mosquitocs are effcctivc for the prevention of discase.
Newcastle disease
This is an acutc lethal infection which occurs in chickens, howevcr epidcmic outbrcaks also
oecur in psittaciformes, passeriformes and anseriformes.  Thc mortality rate varics depending on
170
     s      
gars and finches have low susceptibility.  There is an acute form that shows mainly as respiratory
symptoms and a chronic form that shows as ncrvous symptoms in large-sized psittacines.
Sudden death occurs in finches.
Post-mortem cxamination revcals pelcchial haemorrhage and hyperaemia in various organs,
and hacmorrhagic and necrotising gastritis.  Hisiological findings are characterised by necrotis-
ing changcs and nonsuppurative encephalitis.  Diagnosis is by cpidemiological and pathological
findings and isolation of the virus.  The live N) vaccine for chickcns is cffective.   Isolation and
quarantine of newly introduced birds and slaughter of clinically ill birds should be a rcquirement.
Psittacine circovirus infection, Psittacinc bcak and feather discase
This is an infection caused by a circovirus and all psittaciformes are susccptible to this
disease. Foci of necrosis are obscrved in fcather stem and bcak resulting in feather loss (Fig. 4).
 Rufle fcather, anorcxia and panlcukopoenia are observed in acute cases in young birds. Fcather
problems are observed at a low incidence, however thc mortality ratc is high. Histological
lesions are observed in the bursa of Fabricius.  Developmental abnormality of primary Or
sccondary fceathers, feather loss, hypodynaemia and abnormal changes, such as bristle or shrink-
age, in thc down and feathers are observed in chronic cascs.  Elongation and destruction of the
beak, and nccrosis and ulceration of the palate arc also obscrvcd.  Fcathers, beak and nails show
various nccrotic foci and histological examination reveals hyperkeratosis and basophilic in-
tranuclcar inclusion bodies in necrotic cells in the feathers, bcak and bursa of Fabricius.  Therc
are no vaccines, however isolation of the infected birds and ancillary trcatment against secondary
infections are effectivc.
Salmonellosis
Salmonellosis is caused by Salmonella infcction and consists of the acute form and the
chronic form, showing mortality of 30-50%. 51 and 10 serotypes are isolated from various avian
spccies, cxcluding poultry, and from pet birds, respectively. S. Typhimurium is commonly
isolatcd. Epidermic outbrcaks occur in wholesale markets, breeding farms, bird shops and
zoological gardens. Greenish-white diarrhoea, depression, swelling of the splcen and liver,
necrotising nodules (Fig. 5) and cxtcrnal pcricarditis are observed. Diagnosis can be achicved
by isolation and identification of Salmonella from the organs of dead birds and from faeces of
brown rais and hygicnic measures, including the prcvention of contamination of feed and
drinking water, are important.
Gram negative Enterobacteriaceae infection.
This disease shows various clinical picturcs and is causcd by enterobacteria such as
granivorous and carpophoagous birds and these birds are infectcd with enterobacteria as a result
of strcss, such as a hostile environment, transport and fccding in a high density population,
resulting in an epidcmic outbreak.  Infected birds present diarrhoca and gastritis followed by
scpsis and acute death. Enteritis, airsacculitis and hepatitis are also observed (Fig. 6). The
Organs of dead birds and facces of clinically ill birds.  Hygienic measurcs, use of broad spectrum
antibiotics, and control of wild birds and brown rats should be followcd.
Diseases of Pet Birds.171
Aspergillosis
birds present clinically with gasping, dyspnoea, depression, anorexia, vomiting, weight loss and
ataxia. Bean-to hen's egg-sized yellowish cheesy exudale is obscrved in the air sacs and lungs 
(Fig. 7) and the number of lcukocytes increascs. The pathogenic organisms arc detected by
 direct microscopical cxamination of the foci. Isolation and identifcation of the organism is
ics, as well as hygicnic measures are requircd for thc prcvention of secondary infections.
Candidiasis
Candidiasis is caused by Candida infcction in small-sizcd psittacines.  This discase is
induced by chronic administration of antibiotics, fccding of a high carbohydrate dict and
hypovitaminosis. This disease also occurs in large-sizcd psittacines and depression, anorexia,
 s ssn u o s ss i  dor o jo ray  siss
characterised by necrotic, pscudomembranous ulccrs in which greyish-white coagulates of milky
cxudatc adhere to the mucous mcmbrane of thc upper digestive tract, especially the tonguc, larynx
 and crop (Fig. 8). Diagnosis can be made by histological findings in the narcotic lesions and
isolation and identification of the pathogenic organisms using Sabouraud's glucosc agar. Admin-
istration of mycostatin and nystatin is effectivc.
Giardiasis
Epidemic outbreaks of this disease are caused by Giardia infection in small-sized lorikeets
and canaries, showing a mortality rate of 20-50%. Chronic tan-likc white foamy diarrhoea and
weight loss are observed. Enteritis and ulcers of the intestinal mucous mcmbrane are secn.
Trophozoids can bc confirmed in samples when frcsh faeces are suspendcd in a salinc solution
(Fig. 9). Isolation of infected birds, hygienic measurcs including washing and disinfection, and
administration of dimctoriadazole mixed with drinking watcr should be applied.
172 Discascs of Pct Biruis.
Fig.1.Histological lesions of the
spleen ofabudgerigar thatwas
experimentally
infected
with
herpesvirus:An intranuclear inclu-
sion body （→).
HE staining
(Original:Itakura).
Fig.2.Loss of flight and tail
feathers of budgerigars caused by
parvovirusinfection.
Fig.3.Swelling of the eyelid and
conjunctivitis ofacockatiel caused
by poxvirusinfection.
Diseases ofPetBirds.
173
Fig.4.Loss of body feathers of a cockatoo
Fig.5. Necrotic lesions of the liver ofa
caused by circovirus infection （Original:
turtledove caused by Salmonella Typhi-
Nakamura).
murium infection.
Fig.6.Histological lesions in the
liver of a budgerigar caused by
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis infec-
tion:Theformationofnecrotic
foci and clumps of bacteria into
the necrotic foci.HE staining.
174
Diseases ofPetBirds.
Fig.7.Yellowish cheesy exudate in
the air sacofayellow-crowned
amazoninfectedwithAspergillus.
Fig.8.Histological lesions in the
gizzardof acockatielinfected
with Candida:IncreaseinCandida
and haemorrhage in the prolife-
rated keratinoid layer (Original:
Itakura).
5
Fig.9.Parasites in diarrhoea of a
budgerigar infected with Giardia
(→).
Diseases of Pet Birds.
175
Diseases of Pigeons.
 Main Points on Disease and Diagnosis
important in pigeons.
Common  findings among  these diseases  are sudden  death  and frequent
diarrhoea.
Newcastle disease and inclusion body hepatitis often occur in young pigeons, and
salmoneflosis often occurs in mature pigeons used for breeding.
Diarrhoea and nervous symptoms are the major signs in Newcastle disease,
however haemorrhage of the intestinal tract and respiratory symptoms are rarely
observed.
 Pigeon inclusion body hepatitis, caused by avian adenovirus presents with
diarrhoea, emaciation, vomiting and sudden death.
Salmonella Typhimurium infection (salmonellosis) occurs frequently and causes
diarrhoea and egg-laying disorders.
Newcasile discase, inclusion body hepatitis, and salmonellosis arc clinically infcctious dis-
eases in pigeons, and these discases commonly prescnt with death and frequen1 diarrhoea.
Racing pigeons have bcen raised in Japan and an outbreak has occurred after a race, or after
introducing ncw birds. In addition to thcsc diseascs, therc are fungal infections that occur and
protozoan infections, such as trichomoniasis.
Newcastle discase
Pigeon Newcastle discase has occurred sporadically since the diseasc first occurred in Europc
from 1971 to 1973. In 1983, an epidemic 0ccurred mainly in Europe and subsequently this
discasc has occurred sporadically in Japan up to this day.  The cause is avian paramyxovirus 1
that has thc same antigenicity as chicken ND virus. Howcver, since thc pathogcnicity docs not
always coincides with that of thc conventional chicken ND virus, thc avian paramyxovirus 1 is
referred as a variant virus.  The symptoms are characterised by diarrhoea and nervous signs.
Watery diarrhoea is secn due to polydypsia and polyuria and tooth pick-likc droppings are often
defecated. Grccn droppings arc observed in acutc cases. Shivcring of the head, lorsion of thc
neck (Photo. 1) and paralysis of the wings and legs are observed as nervous symptoms.  Torsion
of the neck is often caused by unilateral blindness. Paralysis is observed in 2-3% of infected
pigeons.  Therc is no fecling of heat, no swelling or oppressive pain in the paralyscd arca of the
wings and legs.  Thc mortality rate is as low as 10% or less, unless sccondary infections occur.
In a gross examination, no haemorrhage of the gastrointcstinal trac1 such as thc gizzard, as is seen
in chickens, is found. Histological examination reveals nonsuppurative encephalitis or peri
atrophy of lymphocytes in the spleen, bursa of Fabricius, and thymus are observed, and localiscd
 inlerstitial ncphritis, accompanied by necrosis of the tubular epithelium, is observed in the kidney.
When typical symptoms are observed, a suspicion of ND is cntertained from the clinical signs,
however many cases present with only watery diarrhoca, so that thc diagnosis should be made by
176
isolation of thc virus, antibody assay and pathological cxamination.  ND virus vaccine is effective
for prevention.  During the brceding period, hatching is should be stoppcd and vaccination is
conducted in parent pigeons. Hatching can be restarted 3 wccks after vaccination. Vaccination
of chicks before fledging is important in a loft in which the onset of the diseasc is prcdictcd.
Vaccination with live-live-inactivated vaccines (the live vaccine, B1 strain, is given at 10 doses by
eye drop or intramuscular administration) or live-live-live vaccines in chicks, and live-live or
live-inactivated vaccines in mature birds is recommended.
Inclusion body hepatitis.
Inclusion body hepatitis (IBH) is an infectious disease that is characterised by the formation
of intranuclcar inclusion bodics in the liver.  This discase may bc causcd eithcr by avian
adenovirus (AAV) or by pigeon herpesvirus. IBH due lo AAV has occurred sporadically in
Japan since the later half of the 1980s, howcver it tends to have increascd subsequently. There
is a serological cross-rcaction belwcen pigeon and chicken adcnoviruses.
tion, depression, vomiling, and anorexia, resulting in sudden dcaths or bcing culld. A small
amount of brown or green diarrhoea with a bad smell is observcd. Replacemcnt of bactcria
occurs, caused by long term administration of antibiotics for treatment, resulting in multiple
ingluvitis by Candida, and the diseasc is transmitted by vomit.  Underlying diseascs such as
trichomoniasis and pigcon pox oflcn becomc serious when associated with this discase.  Death 12
hours of onscl is observcd in chicks aged around 4 days old in a loft that is infected during the
hrccding period, with a mortality rate that often rcaches 40-100%.
Gross cxamination revcals discoloration and dark red congestion ir the livcr (Fig. 2) and
also atrophy of the liver in chronic cases. Oedema is observed throughout the intestinal tracl.
Thc histological findings are characteriscd by basophilic or cosinophilic intranuclear inclusion
bodies in hepatic cells, the mucosal epithelium of the intestinal tract and the rcnale cpithclium in
kidney (Fig. 3). The formation of nccrotic foci in the liver is milLd.
 In cascs caused by pigcon herpesvirus, multifocal necrosis is observed in the liver, splcen and
cells in thc pancreas.
Since this discase prcsents with various symptoms, diferential diagnosis from drug-induced
suffering or mycoloxicosis is required.  Haematological examination reveals slightly decreased
haemalocrit values (36-52% compared to 56-68% in normal pigeons).  In biochemical examina-
tion, a decreasc in albumin and a raisc in GPT are obscrved. Diagnosis canl be made by the
detection of inlranuclcar inclusion bodics, togcthcr with a pathological cxamination, and it should
bc confirmed by isolation of the virus from lesions.  The isolation and culling of infected birds is
required for the prcvention of spread. Thcre arc no cffectivc drugs for trcatmcnl, and somc
affected birds may bc relicved by keeping them warm.
Salmomellosis
Salmonella Typhimurium is often isolatcd. Morbidity is generally about 5% in rearing pigeons,
howcver it reaches 50% or more in a contaminated loft.  This organism is also isolated from
imported pigeons.  Infected pigcons present with diarrhoea, cmaciation, paralysis of the wings
and legs, and egg laying disorder, resulting in death. Jelly-likc or mucus and yellow to grccn
loose droppings or diarrhoea are observed. Swelling and oppressive pain of the joint of the wings
and legs are obscrved. Dysequilibrium somctimes occurs. As for thc cgg laying disorder, eggs
Diseases of Pigcons.177
in the peritoneal cavity increases in some layers and infertile eggs are observed. If carriers arc
introduced into a clcan group, diarrhoea and cmaciation occur immcdiately in thc pigeons of the
same group. In the next year, thc infection sprcads to peripheral groups. Dead cmbryos and
dead in shcll cmbryos occur at a high rate and by 3 years aftcr onset, pigeons that do not lay or
 have arthritis both increase. Gross cxamination reveals muliple or disscrminated pin point-sized
white foci of necrosis and hacmorrhagic ovarian follicles.  Peritonitis due to cggs in the
peritoncal cavity is observed at a high frcqucncy.
Histological cxamination reveals necrotic foci and chcesy nodules in thc liver at a high
frequency and sometimcs, granulomatous lesions, that contain a nccrotic mass in thc centre, are
seen in lung, kidney, ovary and bonc marrow.
Diagnosis can be achieved by isolation of the organism and confirming it is positive for thc
pathogcn by the whoie blood agglutination rcaction. Howcvcr, at the first cxamination, mosl
pigeons havc alrcady had antibiotics administered, so that it is diffieult to isolate the organisms in
the usual manner. Collection of faeccs is conductcd for at least 3-5 days continuously, and
isolation of the organism from these faeces, dust and cobwcbs in the loft is rcquired. As to
peritoneal cavity and tibial myelitis can be hclpful for diagnosis (Fig. 4).  Biochcmical examina-
tion revcals increascs in globulin and decreascs in the A/G ratio.
Confirmation by isolation and selection of carriers should bc conducted for prevcntion.
Administralion of new quinolones is cffective for trcatment.
178Discascs of Pigeons.
Fig.1.Symptomsof ND:Torsion
of the neck.
Fig.2.Inclusion body hepatitis due
toadenovirus infection:Atrophy,
discolorationanddisseminated
white spots in the liver.
Fig.3.Histological lesions of the
liver in inclusion body hepatitis:
An inclusion body appears in the
nucleus of hepatic cells(→).HE
staining.(Original:Taniguchi).
Fig.4.Salmonellosis:Swelling of
the distalend of the tibia and
2V2116
inflammation of the bone marrow.
X-ray photograph.
Diseases of Pigeons.
179
Outline of Diagnosis and
Vaccination Programme
Microbiological Examination
A diagnosis is madc by investigating the actiology, patlerns of occurrcncc, clinical, post-
mortem and histopathological findings and the results of the microbiological examination.  It is
sometimcs possible to make a diagnosis by cstimating only the pattern of occurrence or thc
post-mortcm findings.  Howevcr the microbiological cxamination is important to confirm thc
 diagnosis. In this chapter, an outline of the mcthods for microbiological cxamination will be
described.
An adequate samplc collection is required in any microbiological examinalion. Samples
should be collected immediately after death or as soon as possible.  If dead or deslroyed chickens
are left as thcy are, the organs will be contaminated with increasing number of enterobacteria
after death, and thesc contaminated organs will disturb the accurate examination and cause
             h s
moistened with antiseptic solution, such as cationic soap, to prcvent thc specimen being con-
taminatcd due to the relcase of fcathers during the post-moricm examination.  A post-mortem
cxamination and the collection of samples should bc conducted aseptically.  Thcrcfore, blood or
tissue debris adhcred to equipment including scissors, knives and forccps should be wiped off with
alcohol cotton swabs, and the bladcs or tips of the instruments dippcd in alcohol and sterilised
with a flame before every collection of diffcrent organs.  Collected samples are put into sterile
plaies and stored in a frcczer or a refrigerator, according to the charactcr of thc targel
microorganism.
1.  Virus isolation
 Cultured cells derived from chickens and embryonating eggs are gencrally used for isolation
of a chicken virus. When a virus invades and multiplies, cell cultures and eggs often show some
changcs, which becomc indiccs for isolation of the virus. As to a sample for virus isolation,
         ns    
respiratory tract will bc suitable as a sample in respiratory infections, and the bursa of Fabricius
will be suitable as a sample for infectious bursal disease (IBD).  Facccs arc used as samplcs for
isolation of many viruscs.
(1)  Isolation by ccll culture
Chicken kidney (CK) cell culture is widely used, due to its high scnsitivity to many viruses
(Table 1).  Kidneys of young chickens or chick cmbryos aged 19-20 days old are used for CK
ccll culture. In addition, primary cultures of chick embryo fibroblasts, chick embryo liver cells,
and chick embryo brain cells can be used for isolation of some types of viruses.  Avian leukosis
derived-establishicd cell lines are used for isolation of IBD virus, and Marek's discase derivcd-
established ccll lines are uscd for isolation of chickcn anacmia virus.
A change in cell cultures caused by viral infection and virus muitiplication is referred to as
cytopathic effect (CPE).  CPE consists of the formation of a syncytium in which many infccted
cells are aggregated and fused to form a largc cell (Fig. l), and rounding changes, in which the
shape of each cell become round (Fig. 2).  When these cells are stained, characteristic changes
such as intranuclear inclusion bodies (Fig. 3) and cytoplasmic inclusion bodies (Fig. 4) arc
 observed, according to the species of the virus. Identification can be achieved according to the
shape of thc CPE and thc staining of the cells in some viruses (Table 1). Some viruses have a
characteristic that enables them to adsorb erythrocytes to the cells whcn thc viruses grow in cell
182
 cultures (hacmadsorption) (c.g. influenza virus, Newcastle disease virus and EDs-76 virus). In
addition, these viruses show haemagglutination (HA). 'Thus, this haemadsorption and HA
activity are used for isolation or identifieation of these viruses.
(2)  Isolation via embryonating cggs
There are suitable ages of embryonating eggs and suitable routes for inoculation, according
to the viruses (Table 2).  The inoculation routes that are usually used are yolk sac inoculation,
allantoic inoculation and chorioallantoic inoculation. Gencrally, embryonating cggs agcd 4-6
 days old are used for yolk sac inoculation, eggs aged 7-11 days old for allantoic inoculalion and
 eggs aged 10-11 days old for chorioallantoic inoculation. I
If a virus is contained in a sample,
changes in the cmbryos or in the chorioallantoic membrane are observed (e.g., death, hyperaemia
or haemorrhagc, ocdema, curling and dwarfng of the cmbryos, swelling of the chorioallantoic
membrane, and pock formation; scc Fig. 5 and 6).1
 In addition, allantoic fluid somctimcs shows
HA activity due to replication of the virus.
 Furthermore, chicks after hatching sometimcs
present with symptoms and lesions, such as those seen in avian encephalomyelitis virus infection,
even though there are no changes in the eggs during hatching
When a virus is isolated, the isolated virus is identified by its shape and its physiochemical and
immunological propcrtics.
 Somclimes, detcrmination of thc serotype and confirmation of its
pathogenicity may be required.
When a virus that is of the samc typc as that found in chickens is isolatcd from birds other
than chickens, a procedure the same as that for chickens is used.
 However, when a virus that is
specific to a particular bird species is to be isolated, host derived-cell cultures or embryos are
usually uscd.
Table 1.
Infectivity and cytopathic cffccts of avian viruses in chicken kidncy cell cultures (Added to
Kawamura's original)
Direct
Cytopathic ffects
Viruses
isolation from
Other characteristics
chickens
Non slained
Haematoxylin-eosin staining
Avian influenza
Adequate
uul
Marked vacuolation of the
Hlaemagglutin ation
cytoplasm
Newcastle disease
Adequate
Fusing
Cyloplasmie inclusion body
Haemaggluin ation
Infectious laryngotracheitis
Adequate
Fusing
Intranuclear inclusion body
Infectious bronchitis
Inadequale
Fusing
Cyloplasmic granulation
Atlenuated
virus
(this
is
sometimes a part of field strains)
shows cytopathic cffects.
lowl pox
Adequatc
Rounding
Cyloplasnie inclusion body
Avian adenovirus
Adequate
Rounding
Intranuclear inclusion body
Avian reovirus
Adequate
Fusing
Cytoplasmic inclusion hody
Avian nephritis
Adequate
Marek's disease
Adequate.
Rounding
 Intranuclcar inclusion body
Thc cell associated viruscs havc
strang infectivity.
Avian encephalumyelitis
Inadequate
No growth
Chicken anaemia
[nadequate
No growth
Microbiological Exainination 183
Table 2.
 lsolation procedure for avian virus using cmbryonating cggs
IAges
Examination
. lnoculation 1
Viruses
Findings in the chick ermbryo
route
Special
Serological
g
findings
reaction
'Haemagglutination
7~11 /Allantoic
LAllantoic
Ieath within 2 days of onset, Haemagglutina-
Avian inffuenza
inhibition
test and
inoculation
|fluid
 hyperaemia and haemorrhage.
[ion
lagat-gel
precipitation test.
!.
/
.Virulent strain : Death within
2
days, hyperaemia and haemorrhage.
Newcastle disease
|Allanloic
Avirulent strain : Death betwecn'Haemagglutina- IHaemaggluination
inoculation
|fluid
'the 3rd and 6ih day affer inocu-tion
inhibition test
 lation, rufing and dwarfing of the.
embryo.
7~11 Allantoic
I[Allantoic
Small irregular-shaped
pocks are
inoculalion
fluid formed throughout the surfacc of
I Chorioalantoic the endoblasts of the choricrallan-
lnfcctious
membrane tonic membrane. The embryo dies Intranuclear
between the 4th and 6th day.
Neutralization
laryngotracheitis
inclusion body .test
10~11
Chorioallantoic
+Chonioallantoic
Swelling of the surfacc of the
liroculation
membrane
membtane
cctoblast and pock formation at the
inoculalcd area.
Curling and dwarling of embryos
occurs after primary inoculation or
Infectious bronchitis
+Allantoic
after the third subeullure. If no
Neutralizalion
jnoculation
,fuid
changes  in the  embryos
arc
test
obscrved in the third passage, it is
 interpreted as virus-negative.
IChoricallantoic
'Swelling ol the chorioallantoic.
Fowl pox
10~11/membrane
Choricoallartoic
Imembrane and pock formation are Cyioplasmic
Agar gel precipi
mcmbrane
linoculation
 day after inoculalion.
7~11'Allantoie
Allantoic
Some scrotypes of viruses do nol
tinoculation
fuid
Ikill embryos. Curling and dwarfing!
Iof the emhryos and swelling of the
—
jchorioallantoic mernbrane arc ob-
Iserved.
Intranuclear
'Agar gel prccipi-
Avian aienovirus
10~11.Chorioallantcic
Chorioallatoic IResuting in death between the 3rd inclusion body 'tation test
4~6
membrane
Iand sth day.
inoculation
Yolk sac iuo-'
—
culation
—
4--6
s '
↑Yolk sac
Deaths bctween the 3rd and 8tht
inoculation
Iday. Ruffing and dwarfing of thel
Iembryos.
7-11Allantoic
|Allantsic
Agar gel prccipi-
Avian reovirus
inoculation
fluid
'day.
Icmbryos.
10~11'Chorioallantoic
|Chorivallantoic
'Curling
and dwaring of the cmbryos.1
: Swcling of the chorioallanloic membrane.
—
einbrane
membrane
inoculaticn
 and pock formation are observed.
—
Charioallantoic
Death betwecn the 3rd and 7th'
ILmbryo
'Neutralization
Infcctious bursal diseasc
10-11,
menbrane
day. (Oedema and hacmorrhage on
inoculatio
the body surface.
'test
4-6
Iyolk sac
 in0-, Embryo
The tining of death is earlier after
culation
subculture/passaging. Dwarfing of
10~11Chorioallantoic
embryas and hyperirophy of the
Neutralization
Avian nephritis
Chorioallantcic
chorioallantoic membrane arc oh-
test
membrane
membrane
inocrlation
served.
Manifestalion
'Yolk sac inor Brain
Avian
:4-6
.No findings.
of hatching.
encephalomyelis
culation
Changes in ner-
test
ve cells.
L
Manifestation
Yolk sac ino- Fmbryo
Chicken anaemia
4~6
INo findings.
'culation
of hatching..
'Anaemia is ob-
test
served.
184
 Microbiological Examination
2. Bacterial examination
A bacterial examination consists of a microscopic cxamination, in which stained smear
prcparations of samplcs are cxamincd and a cultivation test, in which pathogens are isolatcd and
identified from these samples.
(1)  Collection of samples for bacterial cxamination
Ascptic manipulation is rcquircd in bacterial examination morc than in examination for
viruscs.  In samplcs that arc suspcctcd of bactcrial contamination, the surface should be sterilised
with heated spatulas, and the inside cultured. Cardiac blood, and liver (yolk-sac is also collected
from young chicks) are collected as samples from chickcns that dicd as a result of scpsis.  In
addition, since thc intcrnal distribution of pathogcnic organisms is not constant in destroyed, ill
birds and in carriers, other major organs, such as reproductive organs, respiratory tract, the
contents of the intestinal tract, and lesions are collected from these birds as necessary.  Mucus
and nasal exudate, the infraorbital sinus, trachca, air sac, inside of thc abdominal cavity, articular
cavity, and oviduct are collcctcd with sterilc swabs. Samples can be inoculatcd direcily into the
isolation mcdium in cach collcction. Samples that cannot be inoculated immediately after
collection are stored in a refrigerator at below 4"C.
(2)Microscopic cxamination
"Slide smear preparations" of cardiac blood and organs of dead birds, or of secretions from
the respiratory tract and exudate from lesions or contents of the intestinal tract of clinically ill
birds are fixed by flame, stained and cxamined by microscopy. Gicmsa, Gram or mcthylene blue
staining methods are usually used.  However if necessary, other special staining methods, such as
the fluorescent antibody technique, using specific antibody, of an ELISA can be applicd to prcdict
 or identify the pathogenic organisms.
(3)   Cultivation test
 Sincc thcrc is a rclativcly largc number of organisms in the blood and organs of dead chickens
caused by sepsis, or in primary lesions of respiratory disease and arthritis, dircct isolation is used.
However since the internal distribution and the numbcr of bactcria are not constant in destroyed,
ill chickens or in carriers, enrichment culture is also used concurrently in these birds.
( Isolation culture: Blood, organs and exudate of lesions are collected by an inoculating loop
or swab, or a piecc of organ is cut and scorcd with scissors, and subscqucntly thc scction is
smcarcd dirccly onto an agar plate. If enrichment culture is to be performed, a piece of the
sample (about 1-2 g) is cut, minced with scissors, and put into an amount of enrichment medium
abou1 10 times the amount of the sample. Alternatively, the enrichment mcdium may be added
to a piece of the sample and processed with a mincer or an homogenizcr, foliowcd by incubation
at 30-37°C for 18-48 hours.  After completion of the enrichmcn1 culture, one inoculating loop of
the sample is smearcd onto an agar plate for isolation culture.
For the culture of common aerobic bacteria, blood agar (containing 5-lo% cquine or ovinc
 defibrinated blood), nutrient agar, heart infusion broth, tryptose soy agar and dextrosc-hydrogen
sulphide lactose agar are used.  If nccessary, sclcctivc mcdia tha1 are targeted for specific
organisms, including cntcrobacteria, Staphylococcus, anaerobic bacteria, Campylobacter,
Mycoplasma and fungi arc used.  As enrichment medium for aerobic bacteria, nutricnt broth,
tryptose soy broth, and heart infusion broth are used.  In addition, selenitc cystinc mcdium and
Hajna tetrationate medium are used for enterobactcria; Prcston's mcdium for Campylobacter;
cookcd mcat broth and thioglycollate medium (TGC medium) for anaerobic bacteria, and
mycoplasma broth for Mycoplasma are all used as cnrichmcnt mcdia.  Common aerobic bacteria
arc usually incubated at 35-37*C for 18-48 hours. However, Haemophilus, which is a micro-
aerophilic bacterium, is incubated by using the candle jar mcthod (CO2 conccntralion of 2-3%)
Microbiological Examination 185
or a CO, incubator. For isolation of Campylobacter, an agar plate inoculated with the sample is
put into an anacrobic jar and incubated by using thc Campy Pak system (BBL). or
Campylobacter Gas Generating Kit (Oxoid) at 43°C for 48 hours. For anacrobic bactcria, thc
sample is incubaled at 35-37°C for 24 hours, using the Gas Pak systerm (BBL.), in the same manner
as for Campyfobacter.  When mycoplasmas are to be isolated, a high moisturc cnvironment is
required. For Mycoplasma synoviae, an agar plaic inoculaied with the sample is incubated under
 a CO, environment at 35-37°C for 3-5 days by using the candle jar method.  Fungi are incubatcd
aerobically at 35-37°℃ for 4-5 days.
 For thc bacterial colonies that grow on the isolation medium, characteristics, such as the
shapc, coiour, and hacmolysis, Gram stain findings and the numbcr of growing colonies are
recorded. Identification of the organism that has been presumed as pathogenically significant is
then carried out.
2 Identification of isolated organisms: Specific pathogenic organisms can sometimes be
identified by the cultural property of the organisms isolatcd, the staining characters and shapes of
the organisms that were revealed by the microscopic cxamination.  However the strains or types
of organisms are generally determined by their biochemical characters or by thcir serological
properties as well as by thcir pathogcnicity. In addition, various simple rapid test kits are
commercially available for identificalion of major pathogenic organisms.  API system (Aska),
ID test system (Nissui) and BIO test 1 (Eiken), arc available for quantitative identification of
organisms by their biochemical properties. Furthermore, identification techniques using the
serological propertics of thc organisms, consist of the fuorescein antibody technique, ELISA and
latex agglutination tcst. Those for the gene characteristics of the organisms, consist of the DNA
probe technique and 1he PCR method.
. In addition, for Salmonella, a simple and rapid test is a
test kit that uses the motility and the anti-fagclla multivalent anlibody of the organisms.  The
tcsl kit is ineubated at 35-37*C after the cnrichment culture solution is inoculated into the kit.
Then salmonellae grow and migrate in the semisolid agar.  The organisms reach the upper layer
 of the agar column between about 8 and 14 hours after the incubation and form a U-shaped white
band (immuno band) where they meet the antibody (Fig. 7).
(4)   Antibiotic sensitivity tcst
When antibiotics are used in chicken focks for thc prevcntion and treatment of infections,
organisms. In thc disk mcthod, a disk containing aliquots of antibiotics is put onto an agar plate
inoculated with thc lcst organisms and thc growth inhibition of the antibiotics is determined
qualitatively by using diffusion of antibiotics into the medium.   This qualitative test is important
bccause it is a rapid procedure. In addition, a dilution method (an agar plate method and a tube
test) is used as a quantitative test for determination of the minimum concentration of antibiotics
routine test.
 In the disk method (Showa disk, single concentration method), test organisms that grown on
agar incubated medium for 16-18 hours are suspended at thc conccntration of McFaland No. 2,
and one drop of the suspension is sprcad cvenly on the surface of an agar plate for sensitivity test,
using a Conradi stick. Disks are put onto the agar plates using forceps, slightly pressed, and
incubated at 35-37"C for 16-18 hours.  The diameter of the growth inhibitory circle is measured
by a caliper rule and the values are judged by using sensitivity scales as in the following 4 steps.
  s i : .  1 s  + - s 1 1 isr 
186  Microbiological Examination
3. Parasite examination
(1) Faecal examination
 Since the ova, proglottides and oocysts of gastrointestinal parasites are excrcted into the
faeccs, a faecal examination is a basic mcthod for diagnosis.
(1) Faecal flotation techniques (Qualitative test)
 A faecal suspension is made and addcd with a hyperbaric solution, such as a sucrosc solution
(128 g of granulated sugar + 1o0 ml of distilled water), or saturated salt solution to float the ova.
 s  s   ir-  s    s 
immediately below the cover slip.
② EPG and OPG examination (Quantitativc test)
 Eggs per gram (EPG) or oocysts per gram (OPG) in a given amount of faeces are mcasured
by using a McMaster counter or a counter for planktons, or are calculated by the Wisconsin
modification.  The results are used for the judgemcnt of parasitic and clinical conditions.
(2)  Examination of parasites in the gastrointestinal tiact
①Examination of roundworms and tapcworms
Worms are collectcd by disscction of the gastrointestinal tract.  A worm whose head is
 inserted deeply into the mucous membrane is collectcd carefully so as not to leave its head in thc
mucous membrane. Since it is easy to miss juvcnile worms, the intestinal tract is put into saline
solution and cxamined aftcr shaking its mucosal relief pattern into the solution. Collected
②Examination of protozoa
The mucous membrane of the gastrointestinal tract is scraped off and cmulsificd with saline
solution and examined under a microscope.  Microscopic examination is performed by bringing
down thc condenser in order to raise the contrast. The schizonts, mcrozoits, gametes and
Oocysts can thcn be observcd. Smear preparations of the cmulsion are madc and staincd with
Giemsa after methanol fixation.
(3)  Examination of Schistosome
A blood smcar is prepared and stained with Gicmsa after methanol fixation.  The antibody
or antigcn can be detccted by using the agar gel precipitation test for leucocytozoonosis.
(4)  Examination of ccioparasitcs
(1) Collecting methods for parasites
Skin and the attachment site of the feathcrs are observed carefully and thc parasites are
coliccted, sincc it is difficult to find parasites from outside the feathers. It is importanl to
dcterminc the parasitized area for identification. Since most ecioparasites in chickens infest
feathers, or rest in the fcathers, parasites arc coliccted togethcr with feathers. If the collected
feathers are put into a sealed container, the parasites leave the feathers, thereforc it is casy to
collect thcm. Flying cctoparasitcs, such as biting gnats, are co!lected with a light trap. Chicken
mites that do not movc during daylight arc scparated from thc dust collectcd in the corner of the
cage, or are collecled during the night.
② Observation of parasites
After thc parasites are killed in a sccond with warrm water at 50-60'C, to make thc collected
parasitcs elongate, they are preservcd in immcrsion preparations (70o% alcohol containing 1%
ether). Thc parasites that are taken from this immcrsion preparation are observed, or are
mounted in lactophenol solution, gum chloral, phenol or balsam and observed under a dissccting
microscope.
Microbiological Examination  1
187
4.  Gene diagnosis
The polymerase chain reaction method is oftcn referred to as the PCR method from the
initials of its English name.  This method uses the rcaction in which only a specifc scgment of
DNA is synthesized by a DNA polymerase and this reaction is rcpcatcd to replicate (amplify) a
targeted site of DNA.  The reaction consists of the following 3 steps.
I)Dissociation of the double stranded DNA by denaturation with heat (denaturation)
 2)  Binding bctwcen thc oligonuclcotidc which is called a primer, and a singic strand of DNA
(annealing)
3)  Synthesis of double strand DNA by DNA polymcrasc in the presence of 4 kinds of
deoxynuclcolide triphosphatc (dNTP) (extension).
Thcse 3-step rcactions are usually repcated 20-30 times by using a DNA amplifier to amplify
the targeted site of DNA (Fig. 9).  Thcreforc, cven pathogenic organisms that are present at an
undctectable conccntration, or are dead, can also be deicctcd if thc gene is present (c.g., in a
section of tissue cmbeddcd in paraffin). In addition, it is a uscful mcthod when there are no
adequate cell cultures for isolation.  Because of these advantages, this method secms to be widely
applicable in the future as a diagnostic method instcad of isolating the pathogens.  In addition
thc PCR method can also be performed by synthesising complemcntary DNA from RNA with
reverse transcriplase.
5. Serological examination
(1)  Neutralisation test: NT
 This is the most reliable method for the diagnosis of viral infections.  Viruses arc mixed with
antibody and reacicd with it for a given period (antigen-antibody reaction). Subsequently the
mixture is inoculated into animals, embryonating eggs or cell cultures that are sensitive to the
virus in order lo cvaluatc whethcr the virus is neulralised (inactivated) or not (persistence of
virus), by the antibody.  'The specificily of this method is high, because prcscncc or absence of
infectivity of viruses is used as an index. As an index of infectivity, death or signs of infection
in animals, death or lesion formation in embryos of cmbryonating eggs, and CPE or plaquc
formation (Fig. 1o) in cell culturcs are used. Thus, whether viruscs are ncutralised or not by the
antibody is determined by the degrec of changes in thesc marker systcms.
Thc aims of a neutralisation test are the following two points. 1) Identifcation of an
isolated virus: This test is conducted to decide the virus group to which the unknown isolatc
belongs.  When the isolatcd virus is reactcd with antiserum (antibody) against a known virus and
the infectivity of the isolaled virus is inhibited, it is judged (identification) that the isolatcd virus
 has the same antigenicity as the known virus. 2) Determination of neutralizing antibody: The
titre of the neutralizing antibody that is induced in the host, such as the chicken, by the viral
infection is measured (determination). Gcnerally, the tcst serum that is diluted serialy is
 rcacted with a given virus and the dilution ratio of the serum that inhibits 50% or morc of the
infectivity of the virus is regarded as the neutralizing antibody titrc. Determination of thc
ing antibody titre in paired scra collcctcd at both the acute and the convalescence stages is
serum at the convalescence stage compared with that at the acute stage, it is judged that viral
infection has occurred.
(2)  Agar gel prccipitation test: AGP test
This test is also referred to as the double immunodiffusion test or Ouchterlony lcst. An agar
188 Microbioleogical Examination
nsoi ne paoeds sonou us i iee %1 uisn Aq ysp e u puo si ydop un uu s-7 jo aieid
  n a () s  e n 'ir   os e  n s
holes scparatcly and then thcy diffuse into thc agar.  If an antigen and its corrcsponding antibody
are prcscnl and diffusc, a white precipitate linc, that is thc binding of thc antigen and antibody.
appears between the two holes in which the antigen and antibody arc scparately containcd.  This
is shown in the photograph.  Thc formation of a precipitate line is observed within a few days,
depending on the amount of anlibody or antigen.  Bccause of the casy proccdure, with no special
equipmcnt or reagents, this method is used widely to tes1 for viruscs, bacteria and protozoa.
Detection and determination of both antigens and antibodies, and antigen analysis can bc
achieved by this method, however its sensitivity is not high. Five-8% NaCl is added to agar gel
when chickcn sera arc cxamined.
(3)   Labelled antibody method
(①Fluorescent antibody test: FA test
 This is a method in which antigenic materials such as microorganisms that are prescnt in
tissues or cells are detected by reacting with antibody (fluorescent labclled antibody) labclled with
fuorescent dyes.  Whether the antibody is bound to the antigen or not is judgcd by observing the
fluorescencc that is shown by the fuorcsccnt dye undcr microscopy (Fig. 12). Fluorcscein
isothiocyanate (FITC) is often used as the fluoresccnt dyc for labelling antibodics.
 n   r s   e  s n ss
This is a mcthod in which thc antibody against the antigen to bc detected is directly labelled with
fluorescent dyes lo dctcct thc antigen. 2) Indirect fluoresccnt antibody tcst: This is a mcthod in
which an antigen is reacted with thc corresponding antibody (primary antibody) and subscqucnt-
ly the antigen-antibody complex is reacted with an antibody (fluorescent secondary antibody)
against thc primary antibody.
Thc direcl method is less sensitivc than the indircct method, bu1 it has a high specificity.
The indirect method can detect antigcn and can also show what antibody against the correspond-
ing known antigcn is containcd in the serum of the bird, if known antigens are used.
②
 Enzyme labellcd antibody tcchniquc
This is also referred to as the cnzyme antibody lcchnique.  Thc principle is thc same as for
the FA method. Therefore, antigenic materials, such as microorganisms, that are present in1o
tissucs or cells arc detected by using antibody (enzyme-labelled antibody) labelled with enzymes
instead of fluorescent dycs.  Peroxidasc and alkaline phosphatase arc cnzymcs that are uscd for
labelling.  This method consists of the direct method and the indirect method, the same as for
FA. Whether thc reaction is positive or negative is judged by the colouring of the enzyme-
labelled antibody that is bound to the antigcn after the cnzyme substratc is added to thc antigen.
For example, when thc substrate for pcroxidase is addcd, brown chromalic figurcs are observed
under microscopy (Fig. 13).  The advantage of this method is to be able to observe reactions by
microscopy, unlike the FA mcthod, and to bc able to prescrvc the samplc for a long period since
the discoloration that is found with a fluorcscent dye is not observed.
The avidin-biotin peroxidase complex method (ABC method) is a modification of this
mcthod.  This is a method that uses the property that avidin and biotin are strongly bound to
cach other specifically.  Primary or sccondary antibodics are rcquired to be biotinized for the
reaction.  Biotinized antibody is bound to the avidin of the ABC complex by adding the ABC
complex (a complex of avidin and biotinizcd peroxidasc) that has been preparcd aftcr reaction
with the biotinized antibody. As mentioned above, this reaction is visualised by adding a
substrate against peroxidase.  This method has the advantagc of a high sensitivity.
③) Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay: ELISA
The principle is the same as for the enzymc labelled antibody techniquc.  Antigens and
antibodies are bound (solid phase) separately to the support medium, such as a polystyrene tube
Microbiological Examination  189
  r     i  '        
acronym of the English name.
The rcaction usually takes placc in wclls of a 96-well microtitre plate.  'There arc two
methods, one in which antibody is detected and the other in which antigen is detected.
Gcnerally, this mcthod is used for the detection of antibodies and we describe the detection of
antibodics herc.  After the antigcn against the antibody to be detected is absorbed onto the wells
of a microtitre plate (solid phase), thic diluted test sera are added to the wells and reacted for a
given period. After the washing step, the secondary antibody that is labelled with an enzyme is
added and rcacted for a given period. After the washing step, the cnzymc substrate is added.
If antibody is detected in the test scra, the antibody is bound to the antigen by an antigen-antibody
reaction.  Thus, the enzyme-labelled secondary antibody is coloured after adding the enzyme
substrate, since the enzyme-labelled secondary antibody is bound to the primary antibody (Fig.
14).  The degrec of this colouring is measured by speciat cquipment.  Peroxidase and alkaline
phosphatase arc used as enzymes. In addition, similar to the cnzyme antibody method
mentioned above, the ABC mcthod is sometimes used instead of labelling the sccondary antibody
with cnzyme directly.
(4)Agglutination
Agglutination is a reaction in which materials callcd agglutinins are bound to the surface of
granules, such as crythrocytes or bacteria, cross-linked with muitiple granulcs to form a large
aggregate that can be visualiscd by the naked cye. Materials that induce agglutination include
various viruscs and antibodies.  Major methods using agglutination are the following.
(①)Whole blood agglutination test
This is also referred to as the whole blood rapid agglutination test.  This method is uscd for
diagnosis of pulorum disease and mycoplasmosis. A bacterial suspension for the rapid aggiuti-
nation tcst for diagnosis of pullorum disease and mycoplasmosis is commercialy available. The
procedure is easy. A given amount of the diagnostic reagent is put onto a glass platc and one
drop of chicken blood added, followed by agitation. Thc samples in which aggregation is
observed within one minute in pullorum discase and Mycoplasma gallisepticum infection, and
within two minutes in M. synoviae infection are judged as positive (Fig. 15).
(2)  Serum agglutination tcst
This is also referred to as the serum rapid agglutination test. Whole blood is used in the
whole blood agglutination test, but sera instead of blood are used in this method.
(③ Tube agglutination test
This is a convenicnt method for the determination of antibody.  Tesi sera arc diluted with
saline solution or phosphate bufer saline solution in doubling diutions (starting from 1: 12.5 in
pullorum diseasc and 1: 5 in other infections).  An equivalent amount of antigen is added to cach
test tube, mixed well, sensitised in an incubator at 37'C for 2 hours, storcd al 4*C ovcr night and
then read. When a bacteriai suspension is used as an antigen for a rapid agglutination test, the
pullorum disease antigen is diluted 100 times and the MG and MS antigens are diluted 12.5 times.
When the amount of aggregated antibody in egg yoik is to be measurcd, egg yoik that has bccn
diluted 1: 5 with 8% NaCi is placed at 4'C for over 24 hours, or I mi of egg yolk is added to 7
ml of 0.1% X carragheenan sohution, homogenized with a mixer and then 1his homogenized egg
yolk is placed at 4°C for over 24 hours. Subsequently, as in the former method, the translucent
liquid under the lipid layer, which is foating, is collectcd and this solution is regarded as the I:
5 diluted stock solution.  In the latter method, the supernatant aftcr centrifugation (3,000 rpm.
10 minutes) is regarded as the 1: 8 diluted stock solution.  Then thesc solutions are examined by
using 8% NaCl as diluent and by the same procedure as for the scrum test.
③) Latex agglutination test
This is a kind of indirect (passive) aggiutination test. Agghutination can be achieved by
190 Microbiological Examination
using an cmulsion of polystyrcne particles (polystyrcne latex). This is a mcthod in which an
antigen is adsorbed onto the surface of polystyrene particles and the agglutination is caused by the
rcaction bctwecn thc antigen and the antibody.  Thus, soluble antigcns that cause no agglutina-
tion can also cause agglutination.  In addition, it is also possible to detect an antigen by adsorbing
thc antibody onto the surface of particles.
)Hacmagglutination inhibition test: HI tcst
Viruses such as Newcastle disease virus, avian influenza virus, EDs-76 virus, Mycoplasma
gallisepticum and M. synoviae which cause mycoplasmosis, and Haemophilus paragallinarum,
which causcs infectious coryza, show haemagglutination by themselves (Fig. 16).
Whcn chickcns are infected with thesc viruses or bactcria, antibodics that inhibit
hacmagglutination appcar in thcir scra.  Thesc antibodies are referred to as hacmagglutination
inhibition (HI) antibodies.  Therefore, diagnosis of these diseases or judgement of the cffects of
vaccines can be made by dctecting the HI antibodics.  In addition, isolated organisms can bc
identificd by using known HI antibodies.
Microbiological Examination 1
191
Fig.1.Syncytial alteration in chicken kidney
Fig.2.Round cell degeneration in chicken
cell cultures inoculated with Newcastle
kidney cell cultures inoculatedwith Influ-
disease virus.No staining.
enza virus. No staining.
Fig.3.Intranuclear inclusion bodies in
Fig.4.Cytoplasmic inclusion bodies in
chickenkidney cell cultures inoculatedwith
chicken kidney cell culturesinoculated with
adenovirus.HE staining.
reovirus.The inclusion body is shown as a
pachychromaticblue body between the
nuclei.May-Grunwald-Giemsa staining.
Fig.5.Changes in chick embryos inoculated
Fig.6.Pocks on the chorioallantoic mem-
with infectious bronchitis virus (dwarfing).
brane caused by infectious laryngotracheitis
On the right is a normal chick embryo.
virus.
(Original:Yamaguchi).
192
MicrobiologicalExamination
8
Fig.7.An U-shaped band appears on the
Fig.8.Growth inhibitory circles are formed
top of the tubein salmonella positive cases
around discs by sensitive strains ina
in1-2test.
sensitivity testwith thediscmethodfor
Escherichia coli (Original:Terakado).
Detectionof CAVgene fromfield
samplesbythePCRmethod.
Name ofisolated strains
NS-175
9
M:Marker
Fig.9.Electrophoretic patterns in the PCR
Fig.10.Plaque formation in chicken kidney
method:When amplified DNA is electro-
cellcultures inoculatedwithinfectious
phoresed with agarose gel,bands
are
laryngotracheitis
virus
(Original:
formed at a specific site（depending on the
Yamaguchi).
molecular weightof the DNA)to targeted
DNA.
11
12
Fig.11.Agar gel
precipitationtest
in
Fig.12.Fluorescent antigen in chick embryo
pullorum disease:White positive lines are
fibroblasts thatare inoculatedwith avian
observedbetween theantigen andthe
leukemia virus.
antibody (serum).
MicrobiologicalExamination
193
Fig.13.An example of the enzyme antibody
Fig.14.Detection of turkey rhinotracheitis
technique:The surface of the nasal mucosa
virus antibodies by ELISA:The samples
towhich H.paragallinarum is adhered.
that are stained yellow in the wells are
The pathogen of infectious coryza is stained
positive(Original:Sagawa).
brown (Original:Nakamura).
C0QO
15
Fig.15.Whole blood agglutination test for
Fig.16.Haemagglutination:This is an ex-
pullorum disease:When the sampleof
ample ofhaemagglutinationby Newcastle
chicken blood and the antigen aremixed by
disease virus.Blood cell suspension is
agitation,agglutination of the antigen is
addedto theviruses thathavebeen diluted
observed in antibody-positive chickens(the
serially from theleft side of thisphoto-
upper part).
graph.Agglutination of blood cell is
observed in positive wells.Whilst,innega-
tive wells,blood cells are precipitated into
the wells and they have a fried egg-shaped
appearance(Original:Yuasa).
194
Microbiological Examination
Chicken Vaccination Programme
Vaccines for chickens are widely applicd in the field for the prevention of infections. In
vaccination programmes, an individual programme that corresponds to the conditions in cach
flock is required, since invasion and contamination by pathogens (inapparent infection, presence
or absencc of clinical signs and damage), the sanitary environment (removal of poultry facccs,
routine cleaning, conditions for the microbial contamination), location (inside the chicken house
and in the external environmen1, climatc and geographical region), the surrounding cpizcotic
situation of poultry diseases, all vary from onc flock to another. The total vaccination pro.
gramme [Journal of Japancse Society on Poultry Diseascs, 29, 193 199, (1994)] that was
discussed and published by the working party of the Japanese Society on Poultry Discascs is
reprinted in this chapter. This vaccinalion programme indicates a basic pattern for application
of vaccines. 
 In addition, a list of the vaccincs whosc production is permitted for chickens is
shown in an attached table.
A. Laying hens
 The vaccination programme for laying hens is shown in Fig. 1.
(Prccautions and references)
I. 
Newcastle disease (ND)
1.  When maternal antibody with uniform and high titrcs is cxpcctcd (when breeding hens are
 inoculated with oil adjuvant vaccines), it is possible to omit vaccination of chicks agcd 1-4 days.
 2. Inoculation by eye or nasal drop can bc conducted in chicks at 7-10 days old (at debeaking)
instead of vaccination at 1-4 days and at 14 days in low risk arcas.
3.
When an cpidcmic outbrcak of this disease is expected, or spread of vaccine antibody titre
 is observed in chicks (10-20 wcck-old), livc vaccincs should be inoculated as necessary.
4. When vaccinalion by spray is uscd, it is important to ensure that all chickens can inhale the
vaccine effectively. This mcthod cannot bc uscd in young chicks without a history of live
vaccination (B 1 strain) via eye or nasal drop, or in maturc chickcns whose antibody titre has
signifcantly decreascd (the interval since vaccination is very long), since vaccine reactions
(respiratory signs or drops in cgg production) are sometimes observed after inoculation by spray.
 5.  In administration via the drinking watcr, the water containers should be kept clean and not
be made of metal, and all chickens should be able to drink the water cqually in a short time
When tap watcr is uscd, thc water should be boiled or stored over night, since tap water contains
chlorine. Alternativcly, 0.2 g of sodium thiosulphatc (hypo) or 20 g of dried skimmed milk may
be added to 10 L of tap water. When well water is uscd, it should be confirmed that the water
 does not contain metallic compounds and shows no high acidity or alkalinity (the pH range
should be from 6.0-8.0).
 6. Inactivated vaccines are rcturncd to room temperature before usc and well stirred to cnsure
they are homogeneous (particularly, oil adjuvant vaccine should be well stirred before use). In
addition, the vaccine is sometimes stirred during use to keep it homogeneous.
 7. The antibody titre is measured in a fiock that was vaccinated over one year ago with oil
adjuvant vaccincs (or which underwent forced moulting), and if the titre is low, vaccination
should be carricd out.
195
l4
14
28
60
0%1~0!1
Ni)
1. From then on. inoculation
1.(B1)I(B1)I.(B1)
L(81)
1(B1)
of I (B1; every 2 - 3 months.
110- 120
2. From then on, inoculation
K
K
of K every 2 - 3 months.
6
90~120
1.(131) or K
K(}
K()
128
60
120
3. From then on, inoculation
L.(TCNI))
1. (TCN!D)
L(TCND)
of L (TCND) every 6 months.
~↓4
28
60
110~ 120
4. From t.hen on, inoculation
了
of I. every 2-3 months as
60
110~120 —
necessary
1.or K
K (ir K()
5. From then uu, inoculation
60
of 1.or Kcvery 2 3 months
KO
as necessary.
~14
FP
30~60)
90]~120
IC
K
K
60
K()
70~90
11.T
I.
80~100
MG
K()
60~ 90
90~120
K
K
14~28
[B[]
I.
90~ 110
AE
I.
60~80
1 20~ 140
EDS-76
K
K
M1)
1.
6. Notes) figuren: ages (days), O: hatching day, 1: the first feediny day,
L: live vaccine, K: inactivated auminium gel adjuvant vaccine. KO:
inaetivated oil adjuvant. vaccine,
B1: B1 strain of ND virus, TCND: TCND strain of ND virus.
The abbreviations for the disease names are the same as in the dese-
ription of this article.
Fig. 1. Vaccination programme for laying hens
196Chicken Vaccination Programme
H1.   Infectious bronchitis (IB)
1. When ND and IB live vaccines are inoculated independently, an interferencc phenomenon
occurs bctwccn thc two vaccincs and the effect of cach vaccine is inhibited, therefore, an interval
of more than 1 wcck between the two vaccinations is required.
2. Since there arc many serotypes of IB virus, vaccination can also be conductcd by the
combined use of various scrotypes. However, when different strains of live vaccine arc used,
Over 2 wecks interval betwecn them is required, sincc interference occurs if vaccination is done
with a short interval.
3.  Since thc size of parlicles in vaccination with coarse spray should be as much as twice
(about lo0 microns) that for ordinary spray, caution is required whcn thc sprayer is sclcctcd.
4. Other precautions arc the same as those described in the ND section (I-4, 5, 6 and 7).
111. Fowl pox (FP)
1. The developmcnt of pocks should be confirmed on the 6-7th day after inoculation.
 2.  A sccond inoculation is donc in thc other wing, not uscd for the first inoculation (left or
right).
IV.  Infectious coryza (IC)
 1.Immunization cannot be achieved by only one inoculation of aluminium gel adjuvant
vaccine and a high antibody titre can be expected 3 weeks after the second vaccination.  It is
prcfcrable that the inicrval bctwccn the two inoculalions is about 2 months.
2. Othcr prccautions are thc samc as thosc described in the ND seclion (I-6 and 7)
V. Infectious laryngotracheitis (ILT)
 1. When infection with IL'I virus is cxpected becausc of the occurrence of ILT in surrounding
farms, maturc chickens should bc inoculatcd again after inoculation at 7o-90 days old.
2.When ILT vaccines and ND or IB live vaccine (including ND and IB combined live
vaccines) are to be inoculatcd, morc than 1 week interval bctwccn thc vaccinations is required,
since interference occurs betwccn thesc viruscs and the effecis of the vaccincs are reduced.
3. The vaccinc that is inoculaled into day-old chicks is a frozen live vaccine (preserved in
liquid nitrogen), and is a special vaccine for newborn chicks that is administered subcutancously
or intramuscularly.
V1.  Mycoplasma gallisepticum (MG) infection
1. Precautions for use are the same as those described in the ND section (1-6).
2. It is preferable that the interval between thc first and thc sccond (booster) inoculalion of
aluminium gel adjuvant vaccines is about one month.
V11. Infcctious bursal disease (1BD)
 1. The livc vaccine is inoculated when maternal antibody has dccreascd (when the antibody
titre has decreased to the value at which the vaccine will take).  Two or more inoculations of live
vaccines, 1 week apart, are rcquired whcn the time that the maternal antibody has dccrcascd is
unknown, or when ihe matcrnal antibody titrcs are widely dispersed.
2. The live vaccines consist of a vaccinc for chicks aged 10 weeks or undcr and another for
chicks aged 2-4 weeks and 10-16 weeks.  It is preferable that the vaccine for young chicks is
sclected taking into account thc matcrnal antibody titre of the chicks and invasion of very virulent
IBD virus.
 3. Precautions for administration via the drinking water are thc samc as those described in ihe
ND section (1-5).
Chicken Vaccination Programme 1
19
Vll1. Avian cnccphalomyclitis (AE)
 1. When mature chickens that do not have any antibody are inoculated with this vaccine, egg
production is sometimes affected.
IX.  Egg drop syndrome-1976 (EDs-76)
 1. This vaccine is inoculated twice into chicks before thcy rcach maturity, and it is prefcrablc
that the interval between the first and thc sccond inoculation is ovcr 2 months.
X.Marek's disease (MD)
 1.  Care is required not to kill the cells in the frozcn vaccincs, since thc virus is cell-associated
in such vaccincs that are preserved in liquid nitrogen (ampoules from liquid nitrogen should be
stirred gently in a water bath at 37"C to thaw the vaccine quickly). In addition, after thawing.
thc vaccinc should be inoculatcd into birds as soon as possiblc (within 2 hours).
XI.Other infections
1.1
 Inoculation of ND and IB live vaccines by spray saves in labour and is an excellent method
for immunisation, however there is a possibility that this route of vaccination allows infections by
Mycoplasma and Escherichia coli, compared to administration of live vaccincs via the drinking
waler, eye or nasal drop and the inoculation of inactivated vaccines.  If there is a risk of thesc
infections, measures against them should be conducted concurrently.
B. Breeding chickens
Since vaccines for ND, IB, FP, IC, ILT and MD are the same as those for laying hens, only
thc other vaccincs arc shown in Fig. 2.
198 Chicken Vaccination Programme
70~100
AF
I.
:4~28
70
120~150
IBL)
Lor K
K
120~150
K or K)
60~90
120~ 140
Re
+
K
K
1. Notes) See Fig. 1 for the key to I, K and KO
 2. Nntes) See Fig. 1 for the key to I and B1
Abhreviations of the disease names are the sameas in the description
of this article.
 Fig. 2. Vaccination programme for breeding hens
1-~4 
14
28
ND
L (B1) L (B1)
1. (J31)
[ ~14
28
[B
I
I
14~-21
14~28 
1B1)
L
(~14
FP
L
0
MD
2. Notes) See Fig. 1 for the key to L and B1
Abbreviations of the disease names are the: same
as in the: deseripti:m
of this article.
Fig. 3.  Vaccination programmc for broilers
Chicken Vaccination Programme
199
(Precautions and references)
1.IBD
1. The aim of vaccination at 14 to 28 day-old is to protect chicks during rear from IBD (See
laying hens VII-1).
 2. The livc vaccine is inoculated into chicks aged 70 days that have not devcloped antibody
during rcar, to provide additional basic immunity.
3. The inoculation of inactivated vaccines is a booster for chicks thal wcre given basic
immunity with the live vaccine, in ordcr to inducc antibody with a prolonged high titrc and to
transfer thc antibody to their chicks.
 4. Other prccautions are the same as those described in the ND section for laying hens (I-5,
6, 7).
11.AE
1.  Immunization should bc conducted in chicks during rear, and development of antibody is
confirmed before the collection of hatching eggs. If the vaccine is inoculated into chickcns
during cgg laying, the eggs cannot be collected as hatching eggs for 3-4 weeks after vaccination,
since transmission of viruses into thc eggs occurs.
H11. Avian reovirus infection
1. The aim of inoculation of avian reovirus vaccine is to give antibody to the breeding hcns
and to providc their chicks with maternally derived antibody.
2. It is prefcrable thai thc inoculation is conducted twice and that the interval belween
vaccinations is over 8 wceks.
IV. Other infections
1. When MG vaccines are inoculated into breeding hens, it is difficult to differentiate bctwecn
the vaccinc-induccd MG antibody and the natural infection-induced MG antibody, and transfeI
of antibody into thc chicks also occurs.
2. Precautions for inoculation of ND and IB live vaccine by spray are the same as ihose
described in the scction on othcr infections of laying hens (Xl-1).
C. Broilers
The vaccination programme is basically the same as that in chicks of laying hens and is shown
in Fig. 3.
(Precautions and references)
 1. Administration via the drinking water or inoculation of live vaccine by spray is often used
 in broilers. For lhese inoculations, sec precautions and references 1o laying hens (1-4, 5). In
addition, when the vaccine is administered via the drinking water, the antibody titre should be
 measured sometimes, since insufficicnt elevation of the antibody titre is often observed. Inocu-
lation by spray is an excellent mcthod for immunization, however mild respiratory signs
sometimes occur after inoculation (particularly the first time), depending on the rearing condi-
tions. Therefore, a good cnvironment inside the poultry house (ventilation or tcmperature)
should bc maintaincd.
 2. Inoculation of live vaccine sometimes induces Escherichia coli and Mycoplasma infections,
depending on the rearing conditions. When there is a risk of these infections, measures against
them should be conducted concurrcntly.
200  Chicken Vaccination Programme
List of vaccines for chickens
(As of August in 1999, Data from The Association of Veterinary Biological Products)
Vaccines
Administration and Dosage*
Manufacturcrs and Importers***
Newcasll discasc livc vaccine (B, strain) (dry) 0.03ml via eye or nasal drop, by drirking waterA, 1), H, F, H, J
or spray
Newcastle discase live vaccine (VG/GA strain) via eye or nasal drop, by drinking water or coarse
N**
(dry)
spray
Newcastle disease livc vaccine (Clonc 30 strain) via cye or nasal drop, by drinking water or coarsc
M**
(dry)
spray
Tissue_culture Newcastle diseasc live vaccine 0.2 m/, i.m., older than 4 weeks
D
(TCND strain) (dry)
Newcastle discasc (containing oil adjuvant) 0.5 ml, older than 30 days, i.m. in the lcg
F
inactivated vaccine (oil)
Infectious bronchitis live vaccine (dry)
(0.03 ml) via eye or nasal drop, by drinking water
A,E
Ivia cye or nasal drop, by drinking water or spray
H,J
via eye or nasal drop, by drinking watcr or coarse spray
A,F
Infectious laryngotrachcitis live vaccine (dry)
(0.03 ml) via eye or nasal drop
A, E, J
(0.03 m/) via cye drop at 14 days or over
F
Infectious laryngotacheitisfrozen live vaccine (fozen)O.2ml, s.c. or i.m. at day-old
A
 Avian encephalomyelitis live vaccine (liquid)
Drinking watcr
C
Avian encephalomyelitis live vaccine (dry)
0.2 ml, p.o., several % of a chicken flock
Marek's discasc frozen live vaccine (Hv'r)0.2 m, s.c., i.p., or i.m.
J
(frozcn)
0.2 ml, sc., i.p.
A
0.2 ml, s.c. in neck.
C, N**
Marck's discase frozen live vaccine (MDV)!0.2ml, s.c., i.m.
E
(frozen)
0.2 ml, s.c. in neck.
C, N**
Marek's disease hivalent frozen live vaccine O.2 ml, s.c. in ncck.
N**
(HVT·MDV1)(frozen)
Marek's disease
bivalent frozen live vaccine 0.2 ml, s.c. in neck at day old.
（，N**
(HVT · MDV2) (frozen)
0.05 ml at 18~19 days of embryonaled egg
Infectious
bursal discasc live vaecine (for In drinking water at 2-4 wccks.
M**
chicks) (dry)
 In drinking water, younger than 70 days
N**
 In drinking watcr younger than 10 weeks
A, C, D, H
Infectious bursal discasc live vaccine (dry)
0.2ml, p.o., 5% of a chicken fock, or admini-
stration to all chickens via drinking water.
Infectious  bursal disease  live
vaccine
(for Drinking water al 2-10 weeks.
L**
chicks, mesogenie) (dry).
 lnfectious bursal discase inactivated vaccine (liquid) 0. 5-1ml, i.m.
Avian reovirus infection inactivated
1 vaccinc 0.25 mf, 5 weck-old or over, s.c. at the central A
(oil)
rcgion of neck
Fowl pox live vaccine (liquid) (dry)
 0.01 m, puncture into wing wcb memibranc
C, D, J
Egg drop syndrome-1976 (EDS-
liquid
0.5 mf, 60 day-old or over, i.m.
76) inactivated vaccine
0il
0.25m, 5 week-old ur over, s. at the central rcgion of ncck
A, F*
*: See instructions with cach vaccine for further information on administration and dosage.
$*: Importation
*** : The abbreviations for the manufactures and imnporters are shown in the last pagc of this table.
Chicken Vaccination Programmc
201
Vaccines
Administration and Dosage
 Manufacturcrs and Importers
Infectious
coryza
(A · C type) inactivated0.25~0.5 ml, twicc, i.m.
D
vaccine (liquid)
0.5 ml, 30 day-old or over, twicc (a 1 to 2 month 
H, J
interval), i.m.
0.5 rml, 30 day-old or over, i.mn.
F
Salmonella
Enteritidis
inactivated
vaccine 0.5ml,
12 week-old or over, breeding hens,
○**
(containing oil adjuvant) (oil)
laying hens, s.c.in shoulder
L**
(frozen)
Mycopiasma
galfisepticum
in-
0.5ml, twice (a 1 month interval), 5 week-old or J
liquid
aclivated vaccine
over, i.m.
0.51n, 3 wcek-old or over, laying hens, breeding C
hens, s.c. in neck
cil
0.5m, 5 week-old or over,i.m. in legs
：』
0.25 m, 5 week-oid or over, s.c.at the cntral region of neck
.A
Ncwcastle discasc and infectious bronchitis With drinking waler, via eye or nasal drop and A, C,F, I1, J
combined vaccine (dry)
by spray
With drinking watr, via eye or nasal drop and as coarse spray
M**
With drinking water, via cyc or nasal drop
:E
Ncwcastle disease and infcctious
bronchitis 0.3~1 ml, i.m.
J
combined inactivated vaccine (liquid)
Newcastle disease and infectious bronchitis combined 0.5 ml, 30 day-old or over, i.m. in legs
H
(containing oil adjuvant) inactivated vaccine (oil)
0.3 m, 5 wecks or over, i.m. in lcgs
**
Newcastle disease and infectious l
bronchitis 0.25 ml, 5 weeks or over, s.c. at the central
A
(bivalent) combincd (containing oil adjuvant) region of neck
inactivated vaccine (oil)
Newcastle discase, infectious bronchitis (biva-0.5 ml, 35 day-old or over, i.m. in legs
lent)
PUB
infectiouscoryza(A·C
Lype)
combined inactivated vaccine (liquid)
Newcastle diseasc, infeclious bronchitis and0.5 ml, 35 day-old or ovcr, i.m. in lcgs
infectious coryza (A - C type) liquid combined
inactivaled vaecine (liquid)
Newcastle diseasc, infectious bronehitis and 0.5 ml, 30 day-oid or ovcr, i.m.
H
infectious coryza (1rcated with A·C 1ype)
combined inactivated vaccine (liquid)
Newcastle discasc, infectious bronchitis andO.5 ml, & wcck-old or over, s.c. at the central
H
infectious
coryza..
. (A ·C type) combined region of dorsal neck
(containing oil adjuvant) inactivated vaccine!
(oil)
Newcastle disease, infectious bronchitis (biva- 0.5 ml, 5 week-old or over, s.c. in neck
lent) and
infectious coryza (A·C
typc)
combined (containing oil adjuvant) inactivated
vaccinc (oil)
Infectious coryza (A ·C type)
and Myco- 0.5 ml, 5 week-old or over, i.m. in legs
plasma
galisepticum
infection
combined
(containing oil adjuvant) inactivated vaccine
(oil)
Newcastle disease, infectious bronchitis (biva- 0.5 ml, 5 weck-old or over, s.c. in neck
lent) and infeclious bursal discasc combincd
(containing oil adjuvant) inactivated vaccine
(oil)
Ncwcastle discase, infectious bronchitis (biva- 0.5 m, 5 weck-old or over, s.c. in neck
C+*
lent) and Mycoplasma galfisepticum infection
combined (containing oil adjuvant) inactivated
vaccinc (oil)
202
Chicken Vaccination Programmc
Vaccines
Administration and Dosage
Manufacturers and Importers
Newcastle disease, infectious bronchitis, infec- 0.5 ml, 50 wcck-old or over, i.m. in lcgs
tious coryza. (A ·C typc) and Myeoplasma
gallisepticum infectiou combined (containing oil
adjuvant) inactivated vaccine of (oil)
Chicken coccidiosis  (triple) combined live 0.02 ml, 3 to 6 day-old, with food
IJ
vaccine (liquid)
List of diagnostic agents for chickens
Diagnostic agents
Usage
Packaging
Manufaclurers and
Importers**:
Rapid diagnostic
bacterial suspension for Agglutination
1 vials (20 ml)
B
pullorum discasc
Rapid diagnostic bacterial suspension for Agglutination
1 vials (5 ml)
F, H, J
Mycopiasma gallisepricum infection
Rapid diagnostic bacterial suspcnsion
1for Agglutination
I vials (5 ml)
D, J
Mycopiasma synoviae infeclion
Diagnostic hacmagglutination
antigen
for III reaction
1 vials (5 m)
D, H
(y) eoo 
Diagnostic haemagglutination
antigen
for HI reaction
1 vials (5 ml)
11'1
infeetious coryza (C type)
Diagnostie precipilation antigen for chicken Agar gel prccipitation
1 vials (1 ml)
11
lcucocytozoonosis
Diagnostic latex agglutination antigcn for Agglutination
1 kit (for 20 samples)
infectious bursal disease
Iiagnostic El1SA kit for infectious bursalELISA method
1 kil (96-well) 5 or 10 sheets L**, 0), 1**
dliseasc
Diagnostic  hacmagglutination  antigen  for Hl reaction
5 vials (1 ml each)
A,』
Newcasile disease
 Diagnostic ELlSA kit for Ncwcastle disease
ELISA method
1 kit (96-well) 5 or 10 shccts P**, O, L*
Diagnostic ELISA kit for infectious bron-
ELISA method
[1 kit (96-well) 5 or 10 shec
chitis
Diagnostic ELISA kit for infectious laryngo.' ELISA method
For 41 samples
tracheitis
Diagnostic ELISA kit for avian encephalo- El.lSA method
I kit (96-well) 5 or 10 sheets
myelitis
 Diagnostic precipilation antigen for avian Agar gel precipitation
1 vial
cnccphalomyelitis
(l m, for ab
**: lmporlation
***: Abreviation for the manufactures and importers
A : The Chemo-Sero-Therapeutic rescarch Institutc
I : Synthetic Feed Lahoralory Co., Ltd.
B : Chiba Serum lnstitute
J : Nisscken Co., I.td.
C : GHEN Corporation
K : Rescarch Foundation for Microbial Diseasc of Osaka University
D : The Kitasato Institule
L : NIPPON BIOLOGICALS, INC.
E : Kyoritu Shoji Co., ILtd.
M : Intcrvet K.K
F : Kyoto Biken Laboratories, Inc.
 N : Merial Japan Limiled
G : Matsuken Pharmacy Co., L.td.
O : CAF Laboratories Inc
H : Nihon Pharmacy Co., I.td.
P : IDEXX Laboratories, Inc.
Chicken Vaccinalion Programme
203
The diagnostic main points of major diseases in chickens
Discasc name
Ages (days) of the
Main host
Transmission
Mortality
manifestation
Newcastle discase (N1)) N1) virus
Chickens,
All agcs (days)
Rapid, horizon- Asian type : 90% or over
(Notifable infectius
pheasants,
tal
Anerican type : 50% or
(disease)
quails, pigcons
ovcr in young chickens,
and turkeys
about 5% in mature
chickens, and about 10%
in mature quails.
Avian influenza (Report-Influenza virus
Turkeys, water- All ages (days)
Rapid, horizon-
090%orover
able infectious diseases),:
fowls and chick-
tal
Fowl plague (Notiable:
ens
infectionus
disease)
Infectious bronchitis (IB)IB virus
Chickens
All ages (days)
Rapid, horizon-
Young chickens (kidney
(Reportable infectious
tal
form) : several to 20%
discase)
Infectious
[1.T virus
Chickens
All ages (days)
Cage feeding :
10-50%
laryngotracheitis (I1'T)
lale
 ( Reportable infectious
Floor feeding :
disease)
rapid, horizontal
Marck's discase (Report- MD virus
Chickens, quails Chickens : 3-week old or Slow,
via
cgg,;Classical (1ypical) MD:
ablc infectious disease)
over (It occurs frequent-horizontal
10% or less
ly at ages of 2-month old
Acute MD : generally
(12A0 10)
30% or less
Quails : It occurs
quently at agcs of 6 7-
month old or ovcr.
Lymphoid leukosis (I.I.)Avian leukasis
Chickens
4-month old or over (It Slow, via
cgg
(Reportablc
infectious|virus
occurs frequently at age horizontal
disease)
of 5 7-month old)
 Infectious bursal discase|IH1) virus
Chickens
2 15-weck old. (It oecurs Rapid, horizon- Earlier type : 0 to several
(IBD) (Rcportablc
frequently at ages of 3-5- tal
%, Very virulenl type :!
infeclious discasc)
week old)
50% or less
Fowl pox (Reportable
Fowl poxvirus
Chickens
All agcs (days) (ItSlow, blood-
Cutancous form: low
 infectious disease)
 Occurs frequently at ages sucking insects,
a single infection,
around 1-inonth old or in contact
Diphtheritic form : high
young laying hens)
(sometimes 30 50%).It
jis raised presence of a
mixed infection.
204
Gross lesions
Diagnosis
Prevention and
Symploms
Measures
Asian type : A great number of Asian type : Hemorrhage and ulcer of glandu-'Clinical and postmortal fin- Vaccines 
sudden dcaths, grecnish diarrhoea, lar slomach and intestinal tract, swellng and dings, isolation of the virus,
respiratory syrnptoms, nervous symp-while spots of spleen, hyperemia and haemor- and detection of the antigen
torns, abnorinal cgs, and drop and.rhage of respiralory mucous membrane, de- from organs. Serurm reac-
stop of cgg production.
generalion and haernorrhage of ovarian folli- tion : HI
American type : Greenish diarrhoca,
1, clc and dot haemorrhage of adipose tissue.
respiratory symptoms, nervous symp-American type : Thickening of respiratory
 Ioms and drop in egg produetion.
mucous membrane, air-sacculitis and abnor-
and no egg produetion afler the re- cle, and atrophy of ovarian and oviduct.
cowery of this disease.
A grcat nunber of sudden deaths, Edema and cyanosis of face, comb and waltle,|Clinical and postmortal fin-'There are no
rcspiratory symptoms, drop and stopjinflammation and oedema of mucous nem-dings, and isolation of the outbreaks of
fowl plaguc in
and diarrhoea.
hyperemia and haemorrhage of various organs;
Japan, now.
;and muscles, and edema and cyanosis of legs.
production, abnormal cgg shell, thin of trachea and bronchi, haemorrhagic ovarian |dings, isolation of the virus.
albumen, and diarrhoca.
follicle, soft ovarian follicle, cgg in peritoneal PCR, and detection of the
cavity, thinning and atrophy of oviduct, cyst antigen from organs. Serum
forrmation of oviduct, and discolouralion, Teaction : NT
Iswelling and deposit of urate in kidney.
Respiratory symptoins (uasal dis- Catarrhal and haemorrhagic exudative infla-,Clinical, postmortal and his- Vaccincs
chargc and bloody cxpectration), nmalion of mueous memhrane in respiratory tological findings, isolation
redncss and swelling of conjunetiva, apparatus, yellowish white and hemataid of the virus, detection of in-
and laerimation.
pseudomembrane formation on the surface of tranuclcar inclusion bodics,
Inucous membrane and exudative conjunctivi- and detcction of FA anli-
tis.
gens. Seruin rcaction : NT
Emaciation, paralysis of legs, wings Sweling of peripheral nerve, and tumor le- Chinical, postmorlal and his- Vaccines
and neck, and gait abnormality.
sions of muscles, skins and other various tofogical findings. Isolalion
organs.
of the virus and serum reac-
Lion : Unuseful
Stop of cgg produetion, greenish Swelling and tumor lesions of various organs Pustumortal and histological Sclection ALV.
weight.
nerve, muscles, skin and proventriculus.
virus and serum reaction : ElISA
Unuseful
Loose droppings, watery diarrhoca, Earlier, type : Swelling, cdema and covering Clinical, postmortal and his- Vaccines
tumr andeprsinryvintwithjll-imarialsnursafFabricusologicalndingand isl
|type : severe dehydration.
liscoloration and haemorrhagc of the surface lion of the virus. lDctection
of mucous mcmbrane, cxudatc flled in the!of the antigen : AGP and
lumen, and the atrophy at the convalesccuce LA. Serum reaclion : AGP,
slage. Very virulent type : Dark reddish LA, NT and ELISA
changes in skeletal muscles (sometimes haem-
orrhage). dark greenish changes in liver,
necrasis in splcen, and fatty changes in bone
marrow.
Drop and stop of cgg produclion. Cutaneous form : Developmient of poxes in Clinical and histological fin- Vaccines
Diphiherilic form : respiratory sym- hairless skin in a whole body. Diphtheritic : dings, and detection 
ol
torns.
'Development
o
poxcs
and
chesy cytoplasmic
inclusion
 pseudamembrane formation in larynx, nasal bodics. Isolation of the virus
cavily and tracheal mucous membrane, and scrum reaction :
: Unuse-
byperplasia of mucous meinbrane of nasal ful
cavity. nasolacrinal canal and infraorbilal
 sinus, and rctention of cxudate into the lunen.
The diagnostic main points of major discases in chickens
205
1Disease name
Cause of disease
Main host
Ages (days) of the matmi-
I'ransmission
Mottality
festation
Avian cncephalomyelitis AE virus
Chickens
60-day old or under (ltRapid, cgg.
Chicks : about 25%
j(AE)
Occurs frequently at 1-2-'horizontal
week old), laying hcns
Egg drop syndrome-1976 El)s-76 virus
Chickens
 I1 occurs frequently atCagc feeding :
No deathis
(EDS-76)
30-40-wcck old.
slow
Floor feeding :
rapid, via egg.
horizontal
Viral
Avian reovirus
Chickens (espe-
4-wcek uld or over
Rapid,
No dcaths
1enosynovitis/arthritis
cially broilers)
horizontal
Chicken anemia virus
Chicken aneinia Chickens
6-wcck ald or less
Rapid, via egg,
Fgg transmission:50%
infection
virus
horizontal
or less
Mycoplasmosis (Report- Mycopiasma
Chickens and
Laying henns : 60-day old Slow,
No deaths in a single
able infectious diseases)
jgallisepticum,
.turkeys
or Over
horizontal,
infection
M.synoviae
3roilers : 30 50- day old via egg
Salmonellosis (Pulorum Saimonella
Chickens and
2-weck old or under in Show (rapid in Pullarum disease : scver
disease and fowl typhoid): Pullorum 
and other avian
chicks infected via egg.
young chicks), al tens % or over
(Norifiable infections dis- other Salmonel- specics
via egg, horizon- Paratyphoid in poultry
ease)
a
Lal
several % or lcss
Paratyphoid in poultry :
S.
Enteritidis and S.
Typhinirium infections
(Reportable
infections
discase)
Fowl cholera (Notifiable Pasteureila
Chickens,
Laying hens : after the Rapid,
70% or over
infectious discase)
multocida
turkeys, water- start of cgg laying
horizontal
fowls and wild Broilers : 30 50-day old
hirds
Coli bacillosis
Escherichia cofi
Chickens,
It occurs frequently in Rapid,
Gencrally several %
turkeys, quails
broilers aged 6-9 wccks horizontal,
less, occasionally 20%
andi ducks
old
via cgg
206
 The diagnostic main points of major diseases in chickens
Symptoms
Diagrnosis
Prevcntion and
Giross lesions
Measures
Chicks : gait abnormality, paralysis No findings
Clinical and histological fin-| Vaccines
'of legs, blindness. Laying hens : V.
dings : perivascula cellular
shaped drop in cgg production.
infiltration,
and  central
chromatinolysis of  large.
neurocytes in central nerve.
Serum reaction : N'T,
Iembryo sensitivity test
and ELISA
|Drop in egg produetion (transient V- Oedematous swelling of mucosal folds of Clinical and histological fin- Vaceine
shaped drop), produclion of abnor-|uterus, and white or cheesy exudate into the dings, isolation of the virus,
mal eggs (non-shell eggs, thin-shel cavity of uterus.
and detcction of IA anti-
egHs,
cracked cggs,
decolourized
'gens. Serum reaction : HI
eggs).
Lameness and astasia
Ocdernatous swclling of joints of legs, thicken-| Gross and histological fin-' Vaccines
ling and hardening of gastrocnemius tendon, dings, and isolation of the
"blue leg" with haemorrhage by tendon rup- virus.
Seruin rcaction :
ture. Chronic cases : nodal hypertrophy of'Unuseful
upper lateral ankle joints.
Anaemia and decreased growth
Yellow bone marrow, atrophy of thymic gland' Postmorial lesions and isola-'No findings
and bursa of Fabricius, hacmorrhage of skin, tion of the virus. Serum re-
 muscles and proventriculitis, and dermatitis action : Unuseful
by secondary bacterial infections.
Nasal discharge, lacrimation, gasp- Flushing or yelowish-gray changes hypertro- Clinical and postmortal fin|Vaccines
ing, abnormal respiratory murmur,!phy and covering with grayish-whitc or dings.
Serum rcaction
indurated enlargement of eyelid and yellowish-gray white mucoid exudate in nasal Whole blood (serum) agglu-
face, swelling of joints, and lamencss cavity, infraorbital sinus and tracheal mucous tination reaction, HI
membrane, and air-sacculitis. Mixed infection
with Escherichia coli : Pericarditis and peri-
hepalitis.
Synovitis : Swelling of joints and
plantar, and relention of viscous cream-like
exudale
Depresion, anorexia, rufe feathers, Young chicks : Remnant yolk.
Isolation of organisins.
Pullorum
dis-|
huddling, white diarrhoea adhered to Two-week old or over : Pericarditis, small Serum reaction : Whole
:easc : Selcction
around vent.
nodules in liver (typhoid nodules), and peri- blood (serum) agglutination 'and culling.
Carriers : generally asymptomatic in-| hepatitis
reaction (Salmonella
Other salmonell-
fection.
pullorum, Salmonella
osis : culling
is
Enteritidis, and Sulmonella
'fecommended.
Typhirmurium).
fcathers, diarrhoca, rapid brcathing,odenum, subcutaneous tissuc and adipose'servation and isolalion uf outbreaks of this
der u asasip -dand ius un unanq aun pur uams 'ey Aieon jo anss pue sea pue quo jo sisoun
deaths within 2 3 days.
yellowish-white necrotic nodules of liver and aralions(
olblood and.
splecn, pulinonary cdema, inereascs in peri- organs.
cardial fluid and ascites fuid, and abnormal
:ovarian follicle. Peracutc cases : no gross le.
sions
Depression, anorexia, rufle feathers Pericardiurn, epicardium, hepatic peritoneal Postmortal and histrlogical: Hygienic meas-.
!diarrhoea, and respiralory symptoms. |sac, intestinal serous mcmbranc, peritoneum findings, and isolation of the ures of hatching.
young chicks : no respiratory symp-land air sac : cloudy hyperirophy with yellow bacterium. Serum reaction : Heallh manage-:
toms, and deaths with sepsis.
cxudate,
swelling of spicen and liver,| L'nuseful.
'ment.
Arthritis : leg wcakness and lame-
oviductitis,
arthritis (swelling of joints),
ness.
ophthalmitis (cloudiness), omphalitis, and
pneumonia,
The diagnostic inain points of major diseascs in chickcos 
207
Discase name
Cause of disease
Main host
Ages (days) ol the mani
'Transinission1
Mortality
festation
Staphylococcosis
Staphylococcus
'Chickens and
30 65-day old
Rapid,
1 5%, occasionally 50%
aureus
turkeys
horizontal
Infectious coryza
Haemophilus
Chickens,
Chicks aged 14-20 wecks Rapid,
No deaths in a single
paragallinarum
quails,
iold
horizontal
infcction
 phcasants and
gccsc
Clostridium
Chickens,
nteritis
It occurs frequcntly in Rapid,
5 50%
perfringens
turkeys,
broilers aged 2 8 wecks horizontal
 pheasants and
Iald
quails
Hotulisml
Clostridium
 Most avian
Broilers aged 2-8 weeks Rapid,
10-60%
botulinum
species
old
uptake of toxin.
horizontal
Fungus infectior
Aspergillus
 Most avian
Chickens : Under 1-week Rapid,
High, occasionally 50%
(aspergillosis,
fumigatus,
species
old. Most avian species : contaminated
mucormycosis)
family Mueor
1 4-day old 
bedding,
inhalation
Coccidiosis
Chickens
All ages (days)
Floor feeding :
sp
High in E. Etenella or E.
rapid,
necatrix infection
horizontal
208  The diagnostic main points of major diseascs in chickens
Symploms
Giross lesions
Diagnosis
Prevenlion and
Measurcs
Anorexia, dysorexia, deprcssion, loss Oedcmatous
dermatitis : Feathers, 
 comb, Clinical, postmortal and his- [mprovement of
of gloss of feathers, ruflle feathers wattle, face, mandible and hairless skin of legs. tological findings, and isola- a feeding
and dcaths. Arthritis : Fcvcr, lame- Arthritis, purulent myelitis, bumiblefoot and tion of the organism. Serum environrnent.
ncss and a dislike of walking. Puru- plantar inflammalion, hepatitis, pneumonia,
a,rcaction : Nothing available
lent nyelitis : Leg wcakness, difficul- haemorrhage and oedeina of lung, omphalitis,
ly walking、 astasia and deaths. thoracic water vacuole, swclling and necrosis
Bumblefoot and planiar inflamm- of ribs, and purutent spondylitis.
ation : Lameness and abnornal gait.
Visceral form : Diarrhaca, cyanosis
 tof watlle and conb, and anacmia.
 Nasal dischargc, cdematous swelling Mucoid reicntion into nasal cavity and in- Clinical and postinortal fin- Vaccincs
ing, and drop in cgg production.
itonilis, sofl ovarian follicle and hacmorrhagic organism by smear prepara-
ovarian follicle.
tions of nasal discharge, and j
isolation of the organisim.
Serun reaction : Serum ag-
ghutination reaction, Hl and 
AGP
Anorexia, rufle fcathers, anaemia, Fragile and distended intestinal tract, thicken- Poslmortal findings, identi- Health
and deaths.
grccn pscudomembrane formation in mucous smcar preparations of thc le-
membrane, desquamation and loss of inucous sions in intestinal mucous
membranc, and hyperemia, congestion, cu- mcmbranc, identification of
largement and yellowish white foci of nccrosis the toxin by mice, and isola-
of liver.
tion and determination of
the organism.
Squatting down, a dislike of move- No findings
Chinical findings, detecticn All out
ment, droopy wings, paralysis of neck
of the toxin, identifeation of
(droopy neck), paralysis of eyelid,
the toxin by anti serum and
white
diarrhoea.
contamination
lisolation of the organism.
around vent, and deaths within 1-3
days.
Depression, anorexia, hypochondria, Aspergillosis : Yellowish-white
miliary- cor Identification of fungal tu- Health
dyspnea
and ncrvous
symptoms soybean-sized nodules in lung, thickening of hereular lesions, and isola management
(twisted neck and astasia).
air sac, white nodules in various organs, and tion and identification of the
blue-green fungi adhered to the surface of the fungus.
nodules. Mucormycosis : Cheesy exudate ad-
dhered 1o liver and pleuropcritoncal cavity,
land haemorrhage and congestion into liver
 and pleuruperitoncal cavity.
Acute ceacal coccidiosis : bloody Acute cacal coccidiosis :Haemorrhage and Postmortal findings and de-A
Administration
droppings and anaemia. Acute sinall necrosis of mucous membrane of ceacun, tection of the schizont.of prophylactic
intestitnal coccidiosis : Passing volu- swelling of ceacum, thickening of the ceacal mcrozoit and oocysl.
drugs.
minous mucous and bloody drop- wall, blood clot or cheesy contents, atrophic
pings, followed by deaths. Chronic sclerotizalion of ceacum and a srmall amount
small intestinal coccidiosis : Watery of chcesy contents into ceacun at the conva-
bloody droppings and carncous drop- osis : Petechial haemorrhage and grayish.
pings, weight loss, fufing and rately white foci of necrosis in sinallintestine, short-
deaths.
ening of the length and increascs in the thick-
ness of intestine, and hypertrophy
PU?
fragility of mucous membrane in the swollen
intestine. Chronic small intestinal coccidiosis :!
Fine, dot, wiggly line-like necrosis in the intes-
tinal wall. Serious case : White changes in int-
testinal tract, distinct blood
1vcsscl. and
sclcrotization of intestinal wall.
The diagnostic main points of major discases in chickens
209
[Diseasc name
Causc of disease
Main host
Ages (days) of the mani-
Transmission
Mortality
festation
Leucocytozoonosis
Leucocytozoon
Chickens
It nccurs frequently in
Blood sucking
:High, depending on the
(Reoprtable infectious
caulleryi
laying hens.
by Cuticoides
number of infected
diseases)
(protozoa)
arakawae
prolozua
Cryptosporidium discase
Cryptosporidiuin
Chickens,
Young chicks
Relatively easy
Almosl no deaths
(pratozoa)
turkeys, ducks
and quails
Fetoparasitosis
Chickcn mites,
Avian species
All ages (days)
Easy, no direct
Chicken mites and
northern fowl
transmission by northern fowl mites :
mites, biting
biting gnats
occasionally deaths.
lice, biting gnats
Biting licc and biing
gnats : no dcaths.
Stunting syndrome
Lnknown
Chickens
Abuut 2-week old
 Rapid,
Almost no deaths
(viruses ?)
(especially,
horizontal,
broilers)
via egg?
vollen head syndrome
Multiple
Chickens
Broilers : 3- 6-week cold
2 3 wecks,
1% or less, and
pathogens
Brceeding hens : about
horizontal
occasionally 20%
(viruscs and
30-wcck old
bacterium)
Ascites
Unknown,
Hroilers
week old or over
parssibly
circulatory
disorder
210‘
'The diagnostic 1main points of major discases in chickens
Symptoms
Gross lesions
Diagnosis
Preventinn and
Measures
Expectration , deaths by bleeding, Petechial haemorrhage or irregular ccchymo- Clinical
and
postmortal  Administration
anacimia, grcen diarrhoea, marantice sis of subcutaneous tissuc, muscles and various findings.
Haemorrhaged of prophylactic
fdeaths by stavation, green droppings, organs, retention of blood into abdominal arca : Identication of theidrugs.
'retarded growth, sof eggs, drop in'cavity,trachea and crop, exlernal pericarditis, schizont. Blood smcar : De-
cgg produetion and molting.
thc clumping of pinpoint-like protozoa in he-|lection of merozoit and
patic serous tnembrane and pancreas, and gametocytc. Scrum reaction
swelling of spleen.
AGP and ELISA.
Respiratory symptoms
Increases in t
mucus in infraorbital sinus or Feccs : Detection
of the'Nothing
trachea.
O0cyst and the protozoa by available
'the histopathological exami-
nation.
Anaemia, decreased growth and drop Chicken
mitcs : Anaemia.
.. Northern  fowl Clinical findings, and exami- Dispersion of
'in egg production.
. Biting gnats : mites : Anaenia, and the clumping around nation of parasitized site drugs
'Transmission of Leucocytozoon.
cloaca. Biting lice : Lacy pattern of feathers. |and collected insects.
rhoea, nerve syinptoms, hypoplasia ventlieulitis, pancreatis,
, and nephritis. 2cal cxaiminations are availa- available
of feathers, abdominal sweing and -week old or over : Swelling of inteslinal tract' ble.
discolouration of lcgs.
caused by indigest feed, atrophy of pancreas,
and atrophy of bursa of Iabricius and thymic
gland.
Htoilers : Swelling of head (especial- Peritonitis, rctention of gelatin-like condenscd'Postmortal and histological lmprovement of
ly, oedema around eye lid), lacrima- pus into subcutaneous tissne, and mild trache- indings, and isolation of the a feeding
tion, rcspiratory
symploms,
milditis. Young broilers : Swelling of lacrimal suspicious viruses and mi- cnvironment
nervous
symptoms,
and
deaths gland, hyperemia of conjunetiva, and discol- croorganisms. Serum rcac-
calsed 
by
secondary infections.'ouration  and  petechial  hacmorrhage
of tion : Deleetion of the anti-
Laying
hens : Respiratory
symp- mucous mcmbrane of nasal turhinate.
body
against
turkcy
loms,
drowsiness,
opisthotonus,
rhinotrachcitis viruses.
tremor of head, swelling around cye
lid and head, lacrination , otorrhca,
green diarrhoea, and drop in cgg pro-
duclion.
Iswelling and congestion of comb.
.congestion of lung.
dings
environmental
worsening
faclors imposed
a load on hcart.
lnhibition of a
rapid growth.
The diagnostic main points of major discases in chickens 
211
Contributors of the original photos (aiphabetical order)
Hiroshi Amano
Shizuoka Prcfectual Institutc of Animal Health
Ryozo Azuma
Faculty of Agriculture, Tokyo Aguriculture Univcrsity
H. Farmcr
Houghton Poultry Rcsearch Station
Kozo Fujisaki
National Institute of Animal Health
Shikcn Funabashi
Laboratorics, Chikusan Konosha Co.,Ltd.
Mitsuaki Gohda
Institute for Field Crops and Livestock Hygine, JA Aichi-Keizairen
Hiroshi Hihara
National Institute of Animal Health
Katsuya Hirai
School of Veterinary Medicine, Gifu Univcrsity
Kazuhisa Hiramatu
KYOTO BIKEN Laboratories
koichi Hirano
 National Institute of Animal Health
Hiroshi Kida
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine , Hokkaido Universily
Natsuko Hori
Omiya Livestock Hygiene Service Center, Saitama Prefeclure
Teiji Horiuchi
Itsuo Ikeda
Zen-Noh Tohoku Business Station
Kunitoshi Imai
 National Institute of Animal Health
Isamu Inouc
School of Vetcrinary Medicne,Nihon University
Kenji Kanazawa
Kuroiso Animal Hospital
Koji Kawamura
Kawamura Animal Hospital
Hitoshi Kawamura
Tochigi Laboratory, GHEN Co.
 Sachiko Kuniyoshi
Chubu Livestock Hygiene Servicc Center, Yamaguchi Prefecturc
Takashi Isobe
National lnstitule of Animal Health
Chitoshi Itakura
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido University
Yuichi Kudo
Nippon Institutc for Biologica! Science
Katsumi Kumc
The Kitasato Institute, Research Center for Veterinary Scicnce
Minoru Maeda
Reseach Instiute for Animal Science
Shigeru Miyazaki
National Institute of Animal Hcalth
Satoru Murakami
Tobu Livestock Hygiene Service Center, Chiba Prefecture
Yasushi Murakawa
The Cheno-Sero-Therapeutic Rescarch Institute
Takako Murano
 Inba Branchi Ofice,Chiba Prifecture
Makoto Nagai
Hokubu Livestock Hygiene Service Ccnter, Ishikawa Prefecture
Kikuyasu Nakamura
National Institute of Animal Health
Masayuki Nakamura
 School of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science, Kitasato University
Miharu Odagiri
Aburahi Laboratory, Shionogi & Co., Ltd
Kosuke Okada
School of Vctcrinary Medicine, Iwate University
Kan-ichi Oshima
 Broiler Inspcction Ccnter, Iwate Veterinary Medical Association
Yosaburo Otaki
 Nippon Institute for Biological Science
Koichi Otsuki
 School of Veterinary Medicine, Yottori University
Akio Saito
Hirakishin Institute Co.
Teruo Sagawa
Kyoritsu Shoji Laboratorics, Kyoritsu Shoji Co.
Yasuyuki Sanada
Kyoritsu Shoji Laboratories, Kyoritsu Shoji Co.
Shizuo Sa10
Zen-Noh Institute of Animal Health
Takuo Sawada
Nihon Vetcrinary and Animal Science University
Masuhiro Shibatani
Wadayama Livestock Hygiene Service Center, Hyogo Prcfecture
Kamco Shimura
 National Institutc of Animal Health
 Junsuke Shirai
National Institute of Animal Health
 Shigemi Shoya
National Institute of Animal Health
212
Tatsuro Suzuki
Institute of Animal Health, Chiba Prfecture
 Noriyuki Taira
National Institute of Animal 1Health
Kozo Takasc
T'hc Chemo-Sero-Therapeutic Research Institute
Kazuki Takehara
 School of Vcterinary Medicinc and Animal Science, Kitasato University
Toshiaki Taniguchi
National Institute of Anirnal Health
Nobuhiko Tanimura
National Institute of Animal Health
Nobuyuki Terakado
National Institute of Animal Health
Kazuyoshi Tezuka
Marubeni Feed Co., Ltd.
Mamoru ‘Isuncyoshi
 Nobeoka Livestock Hygiene Service Center, Miyazaki Prefecture
Y.S. Lu
Taiwan Institutc of Animal Health
R.G. Wcbster
St. Judo Children's Resaerch Station
Takeshi Yagihashi
 Nippon Institute for Biological Science
Shinji Yamada
The Chemo-Sero-Thcrapcutic Rcscarch Institutc
Shigco Yamaguchi
 National Institute of Animal Hcalth
Yasutaka Yamauchi
Isao Yoshida
Kyoritsu Shoji Laboratorics, Kyoritsu Shoji Co.
Noboru Yuasa
National Institute of Animal Hcalth
Hokubu Livestock Hygiene Servicc Centc1, Ibaraki Prefccture
Nagano Livestock Hygiene Service Center, Nagano Prcfccturc
213
Index of disease name
Index of disease name
Cestodiasis
.·110
Acanthocephaliasis
...110
Cestodiasis (of Japanese quail) ........ 154
Acute Marek's disease--.-
26
Chicken infectious anaemia
...54, 55
Adenocarcinoma
.·142
Chlamydiosis
..166
Adenovirus infection
....54, 55
Circoviras discasc (of psittacines) ...... 171
Adenovirus infection (of turkeys)...... 160
Classical Marek's disease
26
AE : avian encephalomyelitis .......
42
Clostridial infection -*..
82
Aflatoxin poisoning
...147
Coccidiosis
94
Amyloidosis .....
....- 140
Coccidiosis (of Japancsc quail)...... 154
Aplastic anemia
54
Arthritis(caused by Staphylococcus aureus)
Colibacillosis........
70
75
Ascariasis **
Coronavirus enteritis
Ascites (of broilers)
Cryptosporidium infection
..............-102
Aspergillosis :
90
Deep dermatitis (of broilers) ....... 130
Aspergillosis (of Japanesc quail)
......-154
 Dccp pectoral myopathy ....
-.-134
Aspcrgillosis (of pet birds)....
....172
Derzsy disease .".
.157
Avian encephalomalacia
.......43, 135, 140
Dermatitis (caused by Escherichia coli)
Avian enterovirus infection
...-115
.-130
 Avian infectious encephalomyelitis
...42, 47
 Dermatitis(of broilers)
....131
Avian influenza
14
Dislocation of Achilles tendon
.........126
Avian nephritis viral infcction
....- 115
Displacemcnt of tcndon
...-126
Avian pox:
.·170
Duck plague ·
....156
Avian reovirus infection
..............0.,115
Duck virus enteritis -"-
....156
.87
Duck virus hepatitis
...-156
Battery disease ......
74
EDS-76 : egg-drop syndromc-1976
.....
46
Blackhead
Enterobacteriaceae infection
...·.
64
Bluecomb discase.....
...-162
Enterobacteriacea infection (of pet birds)
Bluc lcg'
50
..·171
55
Erysipelas ...
....
86
Bordetellosis -..-
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae infection
...
86
Botulism
..
83
Erythroblastosis
30
Brcast blister
Exudative dccp dermatitis
....130
75
Eye lype Marek's discase
26
Broilcr dermatitis--
...-131
Fibrosarcoma
30
Bumblefoot
.
75
FLHS : fatty liver haemorrhagic syndrome
Caecal trematodiasis
..........139
Caged fatiguc
Fowl cholera
66
Calcinosis
Fowl cholera (of turkeys)
...............162
Campylobacter infection 
87
Fowl paratyphoid
62
Canary pox
...
38
Fowl plague
..................
14
Candidiasis
Fowl pox
38
Capillariasis
 Fowl typhoid
63
Cassia toxicity
French molt ...
.--170
CAV infcction : chickcn anemia virus
Fungal disease
90
infection
54
Fungal disease (of Japanese quail)
.....·154
214
Gangrenous dermatitis -
74, 83
Mycoplasmosis (of turkcys)
·162
Gapes (Syngamus trachea infection)...110
Myeotoxicosis
·147
Gastrocnemius tendon rupture
50
Mycoloxicosis of trichotheccncs
Giardiasis ...
-172
Myeloblastosis
.30
Gizzard crosion
...146
Myelocytomatosis
30
Goose parvovirus infection .....
...152
Myodystrophia
·135
Gout ...
..-138
Myopathy by vitamin E deficiency
·135
Gumboro disease ·
34
Myositis
·136
Hacmangioma
30
ND : Newcastlc discase
10
Haemorrhagic aplastic ancmia syndrome
Necrotic enterilis
82
..
55
Nematodiasis
--110
Haemorrhagic (anemia) syndrome
......
55
Nephroblastoma
30
Hacmorrhagic enteritis
Neural typc lcukosis
26
Hercditary myopathy
..135
Newcasilc discasc (of Japancsc quail)
..·152
Helicopter chick
..·114
Newcastle diseasc (of pct birds)
-170
Herpesvirus infection (Psittaci formes)--. 170
Ncwcastle disease (of pigcons)
·176
Hetari disease
75
Ochratoxin poisoning
·147
Histomoniasis--
-83, 103
Oedematous dermatitis
74
IB : infectious bronchitis
18
Omphalitis
75
IBH : Inclusion body hepatitis
55
Osteochondrosis
· 126
ILT : infectious laryngotracheittis--
22
Osteopetrosis
·30, 128
Inclusion body hcpatitis (of pigcons)
..-177
Osteoporosis -
"·127
Infectious bronchitis
·18, 47
Ovarian adcnocarcinoma
-·142
Infectious bursal disease :
34
Oviduct adcnocarcinoma
·143
Infcctious coryza -"
78
Pale bird syndrom
-- 113
Infcctious laryngotracheitis
22
Pancytopenia
54
Infammation of plantar
75
Papovavirus infection
--170
14
Paramyxovirus infection "-
15
Ionophore toxicity
...-135
 Parasilosis of biting midges
--106
Kcel bursitis --
-131
Parasitosis of biting lice
Kinky back
-127
Parasitosis of chicken mites
·107
Koro -..
Parasitosis of Hetcrakidae *"
-- 110
Leiomyoma
....143
Parasitosis of northern fowl mites ...
-·107
Lciomyoma of oviductal ligament .
...143
Parvovirus infection
·115
Leucocytozoonosis
98
Pasteurella multocida infection
66
Listeriosis *
Perosis
.·.··..
--126
Liver-Haemorrhagic syndrome ..
....139
Pigeon pox
38
LL : Lymphoid leukosis --
-27,30
Pock
 Malabsorption syndrome
·114
Psittacosis .-
.-166
Malaria :
99
Pullorum disease 
62
Marble splccn discase
- 160
Purulent osteomyelitis -. -
75
MD : Marek's discase :
-26, 31
Purulent spondylitis --.
75
Marek's discasc (of Japanese quail)
.·153
Quail discase-
--153
Melenermesis ..
·146
Rickets `
-·128
Mucormycosis -:
90
RE : Reticuloendotheliosis --
·28, 31
Mucormycosis (of Japanese quail)
....-154
Rimerella anatipestifer infection
--157
Mycoplasma gallisepticum infection
58
Rotavirus infection ..·
Mycoplasma synoviae infection
............
58
Runting syndrome
-114
Mycoplasmosis - -
58
Sulfonamide poisoning
.......147
215
Salmonellosis
62
Trematodiasis
Salmoncllosis (of Japancse quail)
......-153
TRT : turkey rhinotracheitis -......-118, 161
Salmonellosis(of pet birds) ........
Tuberculosis ..............
Salmonellosis(of pigeons)
..-177
Turkey coryza ......
.--161
 Scabby hip syndorome
-131
Turkey pox
····.··.
38
SHS : Swollcn head syndromc
....118,161
Turkey viral hepatitis ......
 Skin type Marek's disease
26
Tumor (noninfectious)
.....142
Smallpox
38
Twisted leg
126
 Sparrow pox :
38
Typical! Marek's disease ..........
26
Spondylolisthesis
.... 127
Uleerous en1critis .-.
.·153
Sprenomcgaly
..160
Ulcerous enteritis (of chickens)---.
83
Squamous carcinoma (of skin)
.144
Urate deposit
139
Staphylococcosis
74
Urolithiasis
139
Stunting syndrome
....114
Valgus and varus deformalion of hock joint
Strongyloidiasis
....110
.·126
Sudden death syndrome ........
--123
Viral hepatitis (of turkeys).....
.162
Thick-bonne disease .........
Viral tenosynovitis/arthritis
50
Tibital dyschondroplasia .....
....126
Visceral type of Marek's disease
26
216
Japan International Agricultural Council
2/F, Sankaido Bldg.
1 ·9 13, Akasaka, Minato-ku,
Tokyo 107 0052, Japan
Phone : (81 3) 3568 8771
Fax : (81 3) 3568 8775
Printed by
Soubun Printing Inc., Tokyo, Japan
Phone : (81-3) 3893-3692
Fax : (81 3) 3893 3603
217