Canine and Feline
NUTRITION
AResolirce torCompanion Animal Prolessionals
CASE
DARISTOTLE
HAYEK
RAASCH
ELSEVIER
MOSSY
THIRD EDITION
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Canine and Feline
THIRD
EDITION
NUTRITION
A Resource for Companion Animal Professionals
Linda P Case, MS
Michael G. Hayek, PhD
Autumn Gold Consulting
Associate Director
Mahomet, Illinois;
Research and Development
Adjunct Assistant Professor
Procter & Gamble Pet Care 
College of Veterinary Medicine
Lewisburg, Ohio
University of Illinois 
Urbana, Illinois
Melody Foess Raasch,
DVM
Leighann Daristotle, DVM, PhD
Manager
Manager
Scientific Communications
Scientific Communications
 Procter & Gamble Pet Care
Procter & Gamble Pet Care
 Mason, Ohio
Lewisburg, Ohio
with 68 illustrations
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
3251 Riverport Lane
Maryland Heights, Missouri 63043
CANINE AND FELINE NUTRITION, THIRD EDITION
ISBN: 978-0-323-06619-8
Copyright @ 2011, 2000, 1995 by Mosby, Inc. an affliate of Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.No part of this publication maybe reproduced or transmitted in any form orby any means,
electronicormechanical,includingphotocopying,recording,oranyinformation storageandretrieval system,without
permission in writing from the publisher. Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Rights Department: phone:
(+1) 215 239 3804 (US) or (+44) 1865 843830 (UK); fax: (+44) 1865 853333; e-mail: healthpermissions@elsevier.
om. You may also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier website at http://www.elsevier.com/permissions.
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this feld are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our
understanding, changes in research methods, professonal practices, or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and
using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. ln using such information or
methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they
have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check the most
current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (i) by the manufacturer of each product to be
administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and
contraindications. lt is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own experience and knowledge of
their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, and
to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors assume any liabil.
snayo ro auaatau gei snord go raeu e se hradord ro suosrad on seuep ropue Anfut Aue rog n
 or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Canine and feline nutrition : a resource for companion animal professonals / Linda P Case .. et al.]. — 3rd ed.
p.;cm
Includes bibliographical references and index
ISBN 978-0-323-06619-8 (pbk. : alk. paper)
aspects. 6. Cats—Diseases Nutritional aspects. 1. Case, Linda P
[DNLM: 1. Dogs. 2. Animal Feed.3. Animal Nutritional Physiological Phenomena. 4. Cats. 5. Nutrition
Disorders—veterinary. SF 427.4 C223 2011]
SF427.4.C37 2011
636.7'0852dc22
2010001713
Vice President and Publisher: Linda Duncan
Acguisitions Editor: Heidi Pohlman
Publishing Services Manager:Patricia Tannian
Senior Project Manager:KristineFeeherty
Design Direction: Jessica Williams
Working togcther to grow
libraries in developing countries
Printed in the United States of America
www.elsevier.com|www.bookaid.org
www.sabre.org
FLSFVIFR
BOOKAI1)
Sabre loundation
Last digit isthe print number:987654321
pu sop lia apioid oi anius oum pu san ano uiua sin pun
cats with the very best care and nutrition, throughout life.
Preface
Humans have a long and very complex history c
of
principles of nutrition; nutrient requirements of dogs
association with dogs and cats. This relationship has its
Suipaay ruonsaias pue uonsnpoid pooy iad isies pue
foots in domestication and has evolved to exist today in a
management throughout the life cycle; and the dietary
vast vatiety of forms. Both the dog and the cat originally
management of nutritionally responsive disorders.
served a number of functions for humans.
While
Current research is reviewed, and balanced discussions
some dogs and cats still fulfll these roles, the primary
of
different
  n se
feason that most people share their lives with dogs and
atet
presented.
Compatisons between the nutrient
cats today is companionship. In recent years, scientifc
requirements and feeding practices of dogs and cats are
studies of human-animal interactions have fevealed
addressed throughout the book. In order to facilitate
that these relationships are important and enduring
use by readers with a wide range of backgrounds and
components of many pet owhers? lives. Pet ownership has
interests, illustrative tables and boxes are included;
also been shown to providle numerous physiological and
these present technical material at a level that can be of
psychological benefits. Keeping companion animals has
 practical use. The third edition includes more than 30
become a national pastime, and proviling proper care to
new tables and fgures. Newly structured Key Points are
dogs and cats is of great interest and concern to both pet
owhers and professionals who work with these animals.
important learning points in each chapter. References
Along with proper health care and medical attention,
now follow each chapter (rather than sections) to allow
nutrition is an essential component of pet care. An
easy reference. The third edition also includes two new
understanding of basic nutrition and
thie
hutfient
 chapters and numerous added sections within existing
requirements of healthy dogs and cats is integral to
chapters.
the understanding of practical feeding practices. Such
Section I is wtitten as a basic introduction to the
knowledge enables pet professionals to provide optimal
science of nutrition, excluding application to specifc
nutritional care throughout life, which contributes to
lasting health and longevity. This new edition of Canine
according to the basic nutrients and the processes of
and Feline Nutrition:A Resource for Companion Animal
digestion and absorption. In the third edition, hew
Professionais provides a thorough examination of the
sections regarding taste receptors and their comparative
science of companion animal nutrition and practical
differences between dogs and cats are examined and
feeding management for dogs and cats. Information
discussions of small and large intestine microbial
        
populations and their relevance to nutritional health
scientists, nutritionists, breeders, exhibitors, judges,
have been expanded. These chapters are of value to
ttainers, and hobbyists. The book also continues to
students and professionals who require introductory
serve as a textbook for companion animal management
information about the science of nutrition.
and nutrition courses in the felds of animal science
Section 2 addresses the specific nutrient require-
and veterinary medicine. It is the authors intent that
ments of dogs and cats. Chapters in this section
this book will complement general animal nutrition
examine energy
/balance in companion animals,
comparative nutrient requirements, and the metabolic
information about the two most popular companion
idiosyncrasies ofthe cat. New information regardingthe
animal species, the dog and the cat.
cat's metabolic adaptations that reflect its carnivorous
This new edition of Canine and Feline Nutrition has
history has been added to the new edition. Updated
been reorganized into five sections. These address basic
 information regarding the energy requirements of dogs
vi
vili Preface
and cats living in homes and the effects of various life
importance of proper feeding management throughout
stage and environmental factors upon energy needs
 growth, especially for large and giant breeds of dogs, is
(and estimate equations) is included in the third
 emphasized. New information regarding the nutritional
edition. The essential fatty acid section of Chapter 11
nheeds and feeding of geriatric dogs and cats and the
has been expanded to review current understanding
fedling of a variety of types of working dogs is included
of the omega-3 and the omega-6 fatty acid families
in this newest edition. The importance of both amount
and their relevance to pet nutrition, as has the section
and type of dietary fat included in diets for geriatric and
examining taurine nutrition for both dogs and cats in
for working animals is reviewed. The final chapter in this
Chapter 12. New information regarding vitamins D
section examines currently popular nutritional fads and
and E nutrition for dogs and cats and several of the
fallacies reported among pet owners and enthusiasts.
essential minerals has been added to the fnal chaptef
Finally, Section 5 examines the occurrence, tfeatment,
of this section.
and management of nutritionally responsive disorders
Section 3 provides a detailed and updated overview
in dogs and cats. This section has been extensively
of the formulation, production, and use of commercial
revised and expandled in the new edition. The chapters
and noncommercial pet foods. Chapters include
dealing
with
inherited
disorders of metabolism,
information regarding the history, regulation, and
diabetes mellitus, urolithiasis, nutritionally manageable
marketing of commercial foods; nutrient content and
dermatoses, chronic kidney disease, dental health, cancef,
types of foods; and procedures for evaluating the diets
 gastrointestinal dlisease, and feline hepatic lipidosis have
of dogs and cats. New sections examine the roles of
all been updated to include reviews of recent research
all governing agencies, including the Food and Drug
and recommendations for appropriate diets and feeding
Administration, in regulating pet food production
protocols. Two new chapters have been adlded in the
and safety. An expanded section reviews the new 2006
third edition; these address diet and mobility and the
National Research Council's Nutrient Requirements of
Dogs and Cats. Current research and use of functional
this section 
continue to provide an important resource
ingredients in pet foods is another new section in
for veterinarians,
nutfitionists,
, and breeders who are
the third edition. Finally, pet foods have been newly
involved in the treatiment or study of these disordlers.
classifed to refect the wide variety of pet food forms
In sum, the third edition of Canine and Feline
and types that afe available to consumers today.
Nutrition: A Resource for Companion Animal Professionals
 Information regarding organic and natural foods, raw
continues to provide a comprehensive study of the
diets, and vegetarian/vegan foods has been added.
science of companion animal nutrition. l
Revisions
Practical information about the selection of appropriate
that include reviews of current research, new chapters
pet foods is included and should be of value to both pet
and sections, updated fgures and tables, user-friendlly
owhers and companion animal professionals.
Key Points, and easily accessible references collectively
Section 4 includes feeding and diet recommendations
enhance the book's utility and value as a feference for
throughout all life stages for dogs and cats. The third
students, companion animal professionals, and pet
edition includes fecent research that has focused on
owners.
the nutrient needs of neonatal puppies and kittens and
the importance of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), milk
Linda P Case, MS
 production and composition in queens and bitches,
Leighann Daristotle, DVM, PhD
and new information regarding the development of
Michael G. Hayek, PhD
 gastrointestinal function in puppies and kittens. The
Melody Foess Raasch, DVM
Acknowledgments
Many colleagues and friends were instrumental in the
 afe also appreciative of the outstanding group of editors
preparation of the completed manuscript for this book.
 and staff at Elsevier, who provided editorial expertise
Nutritionists and veterinarians with acclaimed expertise
 and exceptional attention to detail for all three editions
in the nutrition, feeding management, and therapeutic
of this book. Special thanks to Anthony J. Winkel,
nutritional cate of companion animals have feviewed
DDS, DVM, who provided the initial encouragement
and edited past and current editions. Collectively,
for the third edition, and to our developmental editor,
they have provided constructive advice and valuable
 Maureen Slaten, for her unfailing support throughout
recommendations. The authors express sincere gratitude
the research, writing, and production process. Finally,
to Marcie J. Campion, PhD; Tad B. Coles, DVM; Gary
we would like to express our gratitude to two of the
M. Davenport, PhD; Amy Dicke, DVM; Elizabeth
book's previous authors, Daniel P Carey, DVM, and
Flickinger, PhD; Jocelynn Jacobs, DVM; Russ Kelley,
Diane A. Hirakawa, PhD. Their shared vision for
MS; Allan J. Lepine, PhD; Gregory A. Reinhart, PhD;
increasing our understanding of canine and feline
Anna Kate Shoveller, PhD; Gregory D. Sunvold, PhD;
nutrition and for improving the health and quality
Mark A Tetrick, DVM, PhD; and Donna Waltz, PhD.
of life of all companion animals continues to be the
The authors also thank Bruce MacAllister, who cfeated
 most important guiding principle that underlies every
all of the original artwork for the new edition; Susan
chapter of this book.
Yaeger, who provided many of the new graphics; and
Sharon Nichols, who helped to compile breed statistics
Linda P. Case, MS
and charts. We thank Jean Gravning and Laurie Geyer,
Leighann Daristotle, DVM, PhD
who generously shared photographs of their Nova
Michael G. Hayek, PhD
Scotia Duck Tolling Retrievers, Quincy and Pete. We
Melody Foess Raasch, DVM
ix
Energy and Water
Like all living animals, dogs and cats require a balanced
the performance of the body's metabolic work, which
 diet to grow normally and maintain health once they
includes maintaining and synthesizing body tissues,
are mature. Nutrients are components in the diet that
engaging in physical work, and regulating normal body
have specifc functions within the body and contribute
temperature. Given its importance, it is not surprising
t0 growth, tissue maintenance, and optimal health.
 that energy is always the first requirement to be met by
Essential nutrients ate those components that cannot
an animal's diet. Regardless of a dog's or cat's needs for
be synthesized by the body at a rate that is adequate
 essential amino acids from dietary protein or essential
to meet the body's needs. Therefore essential nutrients
fatty acids (EFAs) from dietary fat, the energy-yielding
must be supplied in the diet. Nonessential nutrients
nutrients of the diet are frst used to satisfy energy needs.
e pauao pue aoq au aq pziss aq ue
Once energy needs are met, nutrients become available
through de novo synthesis or from the diet. Along with
for other metabolic functions.
a requirement for energy, all animals have a metabolic
fequirement for six major categories of nutrients. These
afe water, carbohydrates, proteins, fats, minerals, and
Energy is needed by the body to perform metabolic
vitamins. Energy, although not a nutrient per se, is
work,which includes maintaining and synthesizing
required by the body for normal growth, maintenance,
body tissues, engaging in physical work, and reguiat
reproductive performance, and physical work. Approxi-
ing normal body temperature.Erergy isalways thefirst
op e 1o () 1 A1p a jo %08 01 %0g A1
requirement met by an animal's diet.
or cat's diet is used for energy.
Animals are capable of regulating their energy
Nutrition is the study of food, its nutrients, and other
intake to accurately meet their daily caloric require-
components, including an examination ofthe actions
ments. When allowed free access to a balanced, mod-
of specifc nutrients, their interactions with each other
erately palatable diet, most dogs and cats will consume
and their balance within a diet.The six categories of
nutrientswater,carbohydrates,proteins,fats,miner
als, and vitamins—have specifc functions and contrib
concentration of energy in a given quantity of food (see
ute to growth, body tissue maintenance, and optimal
p. 6). When the energy density of a diet is decreased,
heaith.
animals respond by increasing the quantity of food they
consume, which results in a relatively constant energy
intake.34 If an animal's food intake is regulated by total
With the exception of water, energy is the most
energy intake, the composition of all other nutrients
critical component that must be considered in a diet.
in the diet must be balanced with respect to the diet's
Like all animals, companion animals require a constant
energy density. This balance should be calculated to
source of dietary energy to survive. Plants obtain energy
ensure that, when a dog or cat consumes a quantity of
from solar radiation and convert it to energy-containing
food adequate to meet his or her caloric needs, all othet
nutrients. Animals consume plants and use them either
nutrient requirements will be met in the same volume
directly for energy or to convert plant nutrients into
of food.
other energy-containing molecules. The primary form
Although all dogs and cats have the ability to prop-
of stored energy in plants is carbohydrate; the main form
erly regulate their energy intake, this natural tendency
of stored energy in animals is fat. Energy is necessary for
can be overridden by environmental factors. Providing
3
4 Canine and Feline Nutrition
unrestricted access to foods that are both highly palat-
The caloric value of foods can be measured using
 able and energy-dense can lead to chronic overconsump-
direct calorimetry. This process involves the complete
tion in some companion animals. Today's competitive
combustion (oxidation) of a premeasured amount of
pet food market includes many foods that are high in
food in a bomb calorimeter, resulting in the release and
both palatability and caloric density. Coupled with
 measurement of the food's total chemical energy. This
this fact is a decline in physical activity among many
 energy is called the food’s gross energy (GE). The three
pets in today's society. Many companion animals now
 nutrient classes that provide energy in an animal's diet
lead happy but relatively sedentary lives exclusively as
afe carbohydfates, fats, and pfoteins. Animals cannot
ou preaueq au uo paaou aary sie siad asnoy
use all ofa food's GE because energy losses occur during
the house, where their former working roles as mousers
digestion and assimilation. Digestible energy (DE) signi-
and pest-controllers have been effectively eliminated.
fes the amount of energy available for absorption across
Likewise, dogs have evolved from working companions
the intestinal mucosa. Apparent DE can be calculated
to unemployed house dogs that may lack adlequate daily
by subtracting the indigestible energy excreted in the
exercise. These two changes have led to an epidemic of
feces from the GE of the food. Additional energy losses
obesity among dogs and cats; although reported inci-
 occur as a result of the production of combustible gases
dence fates vary, surveys have shown that obesity is a
 and the excretion of urea in the urine. The incomplete
common nutritional problem observed by practicing
oxidation of absorbed dietary protein by the body
fesults in the producticn of urea. Because the produc-
indicate that it may no longer be wise to rely on the
tion of combustible gases in dogs and cats is minimal.
inherent abilities of dogs and cats to regulate energy
intake. Although companion animals certainly have this
lizable energy (ME) is the amount of energy ultimately
ability, many do not self-regulate because of the nature
available to the tissues of the body after losses in the
of the food they eat and the type of lifestyle they lead. In
feces and urine have been subtracted from the GE of
most cases, portion-controlled feeding is the best way to
the food.
ME is the value that is most often used to express
status (see Section 4, pp. 194-197)
the energy content of pet food ingredients and com-
mercial diets. Similarly, the energy requirements of dogs
and cats are usually expressed as kcal of ME. ME can be
MEASUREMENT OF ENERGY
subdivided to calculate net energy (NE) and the energy
IN THE DIET
lost to dietary thermogenesis. Dietary thermogenesis also
calledl the specifc dynamic action of food, refers to the
Energy has no measurable mass or dimension, but the
energy needed by the body to digest, absorb, and assim-
-suen Aiaunn si spooy u pauos aiaua jej
 ilate nutrients. NE is the energy available to an animal
formed by the body into heat, which can be measured.
for the maintenance of body tissues and for production
Energy in food is expressed in units of kilocalories (kcal)
needs such as physical work, growth, gestation, and
or kilojoules (kJ). A calorie refers to the amount of heat
lactation (Figure 1-1). The percent of ME that becomes
energy necessary to raise the temperature of 1 gram (g) of
available as NE is called the effciency of utilization.
water from 14.5° Celsius (C) to 15.5° C. Because a calorie
The ME of a diet or food ingredient depends on both
is a very small unit, it is not of practical use in the science
the nutrient composition of the food and the animal
of animal nutrition. The kcal, which is equal to 1000
that is consuming it. For example, because of the length
calories, is the most commonly used unit of measure. The
and structure of its gastrointestinal tract, a nonruminant
kilojoule is a metric unit and is defned as the amount
herbivore such as a horse can derive a greater amount
 of mechanical energy required for a force of 1 newton
of energy from grass than can a dog or cat. Therefore
(N) to move a weight of 1 kilogram (kg) by a distance of
the ME value of grass for a horse is higher than the
1 meter (m). To convert kcal to kJ, the number of kcal is
ME value of grass for a companion animal. Several dif-
multiplied by 4.184. In the United States, kcal is the most
ferent methods are used to estimate the ME values of a
commonly used unit for energy in human and pet foods.
food ingredient or diet for a given species, each with its
Energy and Water  5
Fecal
Dietary
Net energy of
energy
thermogenesis
 maintenance
Gross energy
-* Digestible energy——* Metabolizable energy
Urinary
 Net energy of
energy
production
Figure 1-1 Partitioning of dietary energy.
Cakulation
dogs, species-specifc correction factors have been deter-
Metabolizable energy = (GErod) - (GEfeces + GEurine)
mined; for cats 0.86 kcal/g digestible protein and for
dogs 1.25 kcal/g digestible protein.7,8
Example
1100 kcal = 3600 (food) - 2500 (feces + urine)
Figure 1-2 Calculation and example of metabolizable energy
Calculation Methods
GE, Gross energy.
Although direct measurement in the target species is the
 most accurate method for estimating ME, it is also very
own stfengths and limitations. These include the direct
time consuming and costly, and requires access to large
determination of ME through feeding trials and total
numbers of representative animals. As a result, routine
collection procedures; calculating an estimate of ME
determinations of ME are conducted with mathemati-
using analyzed levels of protein, carbohydrate, and fat
cal formulas that estimate ME from analyzed carbohy-
in the diet; and, most recently, predicting ME using
drate, protein, and fat content, or from fber content of
regression equations based upon a food's fber content.
the food. Recently, although not yet commonly used
New research also suggests that some in vitro methods
in industry, experimental methods that utilize in vitro
enzymatic assays, measurement of the ratio of total
certain types of commercial pet foods.
amino acids to non-amino acid nitrogen, or near-inffa
red spectroscopy have also been reported as accurate
 predlictors of the energy value of dog foods.10.12
Direct Determinatior
in Feeding Trials
The gold standard for determining ME is through
Pet food manufacturers measure afood's metabolizable
data collected in actual feeding ttials with the species
in question. The diet or food ingredient is fed to a
triais or by caicuiation from analyzed nutrient leveis or
 group of test animals, and feces and urine are collected
standard table values. New in vitro methods of estimat-
throughout a predesignated time period. Determina
ing ME inciude enzymatic assays, measurement of the
tion of the GE content of the food, feces, and urine
armino acids and amino acid nitrogen, and nearinfrared
allows direct calculation of ME by subtraction (Figure
spectroscopy.
1-2). Because this approach provides the most accurate
estimate of ME, many pet food manufacturers periodi-
cally use feeding trials to measure DE or ME of their
   r     sn
foods and ingredients. Data that are collected can be
diets include constants that account for fecal and uri-
used to refect changes in ME values as new products
nary losses of energy. The GE values, which represent
afe developed and to ensure the accuracy of predic-
total energy content, for mixed carbohydrate, fat, and
tive equations that may be used more routinely. When
protein are 4.15, 9.40, and 5.65 kcal/g, respectively.8
digestibility tfials afe used, ME values afe determined
 However, as mentioned earlier, animals are incapable of
using DE values and a corfection factor to account for
using all of the energy present in food nutrients. Ineff-
urinary energy losses from the metabolism of protein.
 ciency in digestion, absorption, and assimilation results
Because cats digest protein calories more efficiently than
in energy losses. In human foods, the Atwater factors
6 Canine and Feline Nutrition
of 4-9-4 kcal/g are commonly used to estimate ME
ate referred to as modifed Atwater factors. Although
values for carbohydrate, fat, and protein, respectively.
these values provide a better estimate of ME values for
These factors are calculated using estimated digestibility
pet foods than do the Atwater factors, they may still
coefficients of 96% for fat and carbohydrate and 91%
underestimate the ME values of highly digestible foods
for protein.13 A digestibility coeffcient is the proportion
 and overestimate ME values for foods containing high
of the consumed nutrient that is actually available for
absorption and use by the body. The ME value of pro-
In general, calculation of ME from analyzed levels of
tein was further reduced to account for urinary losses
catbohydrate, fat, and protein in the diet using modified
of urea.
Atwater factors provides a feasonably accurate estimate
The Atwater factors work quite well for estimating
the ME of homemade dog and cat diets and for com-
mercial products with very high digestibilities such
+ (8.5 × g NFE). This is the equation recommended
 as milk replacers for puppies and kittens and enteral
by the Association of American Feed Control Officials
feedling formulas.8 However,
digestibility
data col-
(AAFCO)
) to manufacturers that are feporting ME
lected in dogs and cats fed typical commercial pet foods
values on their pet food labels. AAFCO is a regulating
have shown that Atwater factors tend to overestimate
 group responsible for the standards governing commef-
the ME values of most commercial foods. This miscal-
cially prepared pet foods. Modified equations have been
culation occurs because the c
digestibility of many pet
suggested for use with dry cat foods and for weight loss
food ingredients is lower than the digestibility of most
foods that contain high levels of fber.15
foods consumed by humans.
Digestibility data col-
lected in dogs from 106 samples
 of dry, semimoist, and
ENERGY DENSITY
canned commercial dog foods showed that the average
digestibility coefficients for cfude protein, acid-ether
The energy density of a pet food refers to the number of
extract (a measufe of fat content), and nitrogen-free
calories provided by the food in a given weight or vol-
extract (NFE) (a measure of soluble carbohydrate con-
ume. In the United States, energy density is expressed
tent) were 81%, 85%, and 79%, respectively.14 The fact
as kcal of ME per kg or pound (lb) of diet. In most
 that some pet food ingredients are generally lower in
 European countries, the unit kJ/kg is used. The impor-
digestibility than the foods consumed by humans causes
tance of energy density in companion animal nutrition
the Atwater factors to be inaccurate for use in estimat-
cannot be overemphasized. It is the principal factor that
ing the ME of pet foods. The National Research Coun-
 determines the quantity of food that is eaten each day
cil's (NRCs) 1985 recommendations for dogs suggested
and therefore directly affects the amount of all other
that digestibility coeficients of 80%, 90%, and 85% be
 essential nutrients that an animal ingests. A diet's energy
used for the protein, fat, and carbohydrate in commer-
density must be high enough to allow the pet to con-
cial dog food, respectively. When GE values were fead-
sume a sufficient amount of the food each day to meet
justed for digestibility and urinary
losses, ME values
its energy needs. If the energy density is too low, food
of 3.5, 8.5, and 3.5 kcal/g wefe assigned to protein, fat,
intake will be festficted by the physical limitations of
and carbohydrate, respectively (Table 1-1). These values
the gastrointestinal tract, resulting in an energy deficit.
TABLE1-1 DIGESTIBILITY COEFFICIENTS AND FACTORS
HUMAN FOOD
PET FOOD
MODIFIED
DIGESTIBILITY
DIGESTIBILITY
ATWATER
NUTRIENT
COEFFICIENT
ATWATERFACTOR
COEFFICIENT
FACTOR
Car bohydrate
%96
 4 kcal/g
85%
3.5 kcal/g
Protein
%16
4 kcal/g
%08
3.5 kcal/g
%96
9 kcal/g
%06
8.5 kcal/g
Energy and Water  7
In other words, the animal would not be physically able
this method of expressing nutrient levels. The energy-
to consume enough of the low-energy diet to meet its
contributing nutrients, protein, fat, and carbohydrate,
caloric requirements. Such a diet is said to be "bulk-
can be expressed either as g per 1000 kcal ME or as a
limited." If levels of the essential nutrients in such a
 percentage of the total ME of the diet. The latter expres-
diet ate not balanced relative to energy density, multiple
sion is called the caloric distribution of a food and eas-
nutrient deficiencies could also occuf.
ily allows comparisons between foods with differing
When the caloric density of a pet food is high
 moisture or energy contents. Caloric distribution only
enough for an animal to consume a sufficient quantity
considers the energy-containing nutrients of the food
to meet its daily energy needs, energy density will be the
and does not provide anl expression of other essential
primary factor that determines the quantity of food that
nutrients in the diet (see Section 3, pp. 145-147).
is consumed each day. There is an inverse relationship
between energy density and the volume of food that is
consurmed. As a food’s energy density increases, the total
Energy density (the number of calories provided by a
volume of foed that is consumed decreases. However,
food in a given weight or volume) is the most impor-
siad e apiaao ueo poog nad aqeieied Aiuiy e sua
tant factor in determining the quantity of food that a
tendency to correctly regulate intake. The sale of pet
pet eats each day A food's energy density directly affects
foods that are energy dense and highly palatable has led
the amount of all other essentiat nutrients that an ani
to recommendations for the use of portion-controlled
mal ingests. Therefore, the most accurate way to express
feedling to manage pets' daily food intake. Maintenance
levels of essentiat nutrients in the food is in terms of ME
of normal body weight and growth rate are the criteria
(units per 7000 kcal of ME). This approach aiso allows
most often used to determine the appropriate quantity
comparisons between all types of foods.
of food. Therefore, even when under the pet owner's
control, a dog's of cat's level of energy intake is still the
primary factor affecting the quantity of food that is fed.
Using nutrient density or caloric distribution, values
 can be compared in any type of food or diet, regarlless
it is important that d
diets are properly balanced,
SO
that requirements for all other nutrients are met when
complete and balanced dry dog food contains 27%
energy needs are satisfed. For this reason, it is more
protein (as a percentage of weight) and supplies 3800
kcal of ME/kg. Modified Atwater factors can be used
terms of ME rather than in terms of percentage of the
to estimate the proportion of energy that protein con-
food's weight. Expressing nutrient content as units per
tributes to the food. The calculations in Table 1-2
1000 kcal of ME is called nutrient density and provides
show that 24.8% of the food’s energy is contributed by
a standardized format that can be used to compare
 protein. These figures can be compared with a canned
all types of foods because it accounts for both mois-
dog food that contains 7% protein on a weight basis
ture and energy density differences between products.
and supplies 980 kcal of ME/kg. When expressed as a
Actual nutrient intake can be readily determined from
percentage of calories, the protein in the canned food
a pet's daily energy requirement, and foods of dissimilar
also supplies approximately 25% of the food's calories
energy content can be compared quickly based upon
(see Table 1-2). If expressed as huttient density, the
TABLE1-2 SAMPLE CALCULATION TO CONVERT PERCENTAGE OF WEIGHT TO PERCENTAGE
OF ENERGY IN THE DIET
MODIFIEDATWATER
KCAL/100 G
FOODTYPE
PROTEIN (%)
FACTOR
OF FOOD
×100%
Dry
(27
×
3.5)
÷
380
24.8
Canned
(7
×
3.5)
÷
98
25.0
8Canine and Feline Nutrition
TABLE1-3 DETERMINATION OF ENERGY DENSITY FROM GUARANTEED ANALYSIS
NUTRIENT
PERCENTAGE IN DIET
MODIFIED ATWATER FACTOR
KCAL/100 G 0F F00D
Protein
26
×
3.5
二
91
Carbohydrate
×
3.5
三
129.5
Fat
15
×
8.5
=
127.5
Total Calories
=
348
348 kcal/100 g x 1000 g/kg - 3480 kcal/kg(energy densiry).
3480 kcal/kg x 1 kg/2.2 Ib - 1581.8 kcal/lb food (energy densiry).
g of protein per 1000 kcal ME are 71 g of protein pef
included on a pet food label, it can be estimated using
1000 kcal of food.
the proximate analysis of the food. If the proximate
analysis is not available, the guaranteed analysis pro-
compared in terms of percentage of protein on a weight
vided on the label of all pet foods can be used as a rough
basis, yet actually contain the same amount of protein
estimate of nutrient content. The modifed Atwater fac-
 of total calories. Differ-
tors provided earlier are used to calculate the amount of
ences in the watef content and :
 energy density of the two
energy contributed by carbohydrate, protein, and fat.
 For example, the guaranteed analysis on a bag of dry
tent when expressed as a percentage of weight. Attempt-
dog food reads as follows:
ing to compare the twe foods when protein is expressed
 Crude protein: not less than 26%
Crude fat: not less than 15%
sion to units of energy
compafison
Crude fber: not more than 5%
of levels of the 
ontaining nutrients in different
An estimate of the mineral content of the food, com-
monly called ash, must then be made. High-quality dry
caloric requirements, these two foods will supply
an
'Yse %g pue s uaamiaq uneiuos Aeiauas spooy iad
equal quantity of protein when fed at the correct level.
The food’'s carbohydrate content can then be estimated
by subtraction:
100% - % protein - % fat - % fiber - % ash - %
Tip: Reading food labeis and comparing contents of
moisture = % carbohydrate
foods in the store can be very confusing. For exampie,
100%-26%-15%-5%-7%-10%=37%
The calories provided by each nutrient in 100 g of
ofweight, merely reading the protein content printed on
food can then be estimated (Table 1-3). The total calo-
the label ofα canned dogfood(7% protein) and a dry
ries obtained from 100 g of food are 348, or 3480 kcal/
dog food (27% protein) does not tell the whole story. But
kg of food. This fgure can also be divided by 2.2 to
when a simpie formuia is applied to determine the pro-
Jo Ajuenb aul pooy Jo ql Iod Aiisuap Aiaua oi auos
tein as a percentage ofcalories, one can see that the pro-
food to offer can be estimated by dividing the pet's daily
tein content ofthe dry and canned foods in this example
energy requirement by the energy density of the diet.
is aimost exactiy the same (see Table 7-2).
For example, if an adult dog requires 1100 kcal/day
and is fed a diet containing 1582 kcal/lb, approximately
11 cunces (oz) of food should be fed each day. An 8-oz
The energy density of a food must be known in order
cup of dry pet food might weigh 3 oz. Therefore this dog
to estimate the quantity of food necessary to meet a
would require a little more than 3l2 cups of this food
pet's energy requirement. When manufacturers choose
per day (Box 1-1). It is important to be aware that each
to include energy density information on their labels,
 dog and cat is an individual and that these calculations
AAFCO requires that it be expressed in kcal of ME
 provide only a guideline or starting point when deter-
per unit weight or volume. If ME information is not
mining a pet's daily needs. The amount of food should
Energy and Water  9
of overfeeding at a young age, can predispose an animal
BOX 1-1 SAMPLE CALCULATION TO
to obesity later in life.19,20 Although research on fat
ESTIMATE AMOUNT OF FOOD
cell hyperplasia during growth has not been conducted
REQUIRED DAILY
in the dog or cat, it is possible that these species are
Energy requirement of an adult dog: 1l00 kcal/day
affected in a similar manner. In adult dogs and cats,
Energy density of the diet: 1582 kcal/lb
surplus energy intake leads to obesity and its medical
 e  - d    s
STEP 1
plete discussion).
1100 kcal/day ÷ 1582 kcal/lb = 0.69 Ib of food
 Inadequate energy intake results in reduced growth
rate and compromised development in young dogs and
STEP 2
cats and in weight loss and muscle wasting in adult
0.69 Ib x 16 oz/lb = 11.04 oz
pets. In healthy animals this condition is most com-
If an 8-oz cup of dry dog food weighs 3 oz, then:
 monly seen in hard-working dogs or pregnant or lactat-
STEP3
ing females that are being fed a diet too low in energy
11 oz of dry pet food ÷ 3 oz/cup = 3.66 or ≈ 3% cups
density.
of dry pet food per day.
WATER
be adjusted to attain optimal growth in young animals
and a healthy body weight and condition in adult ani-
In terms of survivability, water is the single most impor-
mals. (Adult pets in optimal condition afe well-muscled
tant nutrient for the body. Although animals can live
and lean. Although their ribs cannot be readily seen,
ueq aiou pue jej Apoq iaun jo ie isoue susol 1ae
they should easily be felt when palpated.)
m Aoq 1o o1 Auo jo ssi e 'uad a  1
results in death.2l Approximately 70% of lean adlult
e aoq a un snss au pe m si im ao
ENERGYIMBALANCE
composed of between 70% and 90% water. Intracel-
Energy imbalance occurs when an animal's daily energy
lular Auid is approximately 40% to 45% of the body's
consumption is either greater or less than its daily
weight, and 6
extracellular fuid accounts for 20% to
requirement, leading to changes in growth rate, body
25%. The presence of an aqueous medium within cells
weight, and body composition. Excess energy intake is
and in many tissues is essential for the occurrence of
Abisua si ueqi sies pue ssop ul uouuoo aiou yonu
most metabolic pro
deficiency. Overconsumption of energy has been shown
Within the body, water functions as a solvent that
to have several detrimental effects on dlogs during their
growth, especially those of the large and giant breedls.
for nutrients and the end products of cellular metabo
When an excess amount of a balanced, high-energy pet
lism. Because of its high specifc heat, water is able to
food is fed to growing puppies, maximal growth rate
absorb the heat generated by metabolic reactions with a
and weight gain can be achieved. However, studies with
minimal increase in temperature. This property allows
 growing dogs have indicated that maximal growth rate
the many heat-generating reactions within the body to
is not compatible with healthy bone growth and devel-
continue with a minimal change in body temperature.
opment.16 Feeding growing puppies to attain maximal
Water further contributes t
 t0 temperature regulation
growth rate appears to be a signifcant contributing
by transporting heat away from the working organs
factor in the development of skeletal disorders such as
through the blood and, in some species, by evaporat-
osteochondrosis and hip dysplasia17,18 (see Section 5,
ing in the form of sweat on the outer surface of the
pp. 491-500 for a complete discussion).
body. Water is an essential component in normal diges-
sdans aaua ue ym pess qod puos ys
tion because it is necessary for hydrolysis (the splitting
during growth involves fat cel hyperplasia. Studies with
of large molecules into smaller molecules through the
laboratory animals have shown that the generation of
addition of water). The digestive enzymes of the gas-
an excessive number of fat cells in the body, as a result
 ttointestinal tract are secreted in solution. This aqueous
10 Canine and Feline Nutrition
medium facilitates the interaction of food components
%g on dn urenuos suonei pauues auos inq 'aem %/
with the digestive enzyimes. Elimination of waste prod-
water. Within limits, increasing the water content of an
ucts from the kidneys also requires a large amount of
animal's food increases the diet's acceptability. Many
water, which acts as both a solvent for toxic metabolites
 owhers ate able to increase their pet's consumption of a
ahd a cattier medium.
dry food by adding a small amount of water to it imme
diately before feeding. Studies have shown that both
dogs and cats ate able to maintain water balance with
Water is the singie most important nutrient for the body
no source of drinking water when fed diets containing
for survival. Water within the celis is necessary for most
 more than 67% moisture.22.24 Dogs appeat to be able to
metabolic processes and chemical reactions, is impor-
readily compensate for changes in the amount of water
tant for temperature regulation, and is an essential
 present in food by increasing or decreasing voluntary
component of normal digestion. Elimination of waste
water intake. Cats also have this ability, but they appear
products from thekidneys also requires a large amount
to be less precise in their adjustments and are more
likely to underconsume water than are dogs.25
Metabolic water is the water produced during oxi-
 dation of the energy-containing nutrients in the body.
All animals experience daily water losses. Urinary
 Oxygen combines with the hydrogen atoms contained
excretion accounts for the greatest loss of volume in
in carbohydrate, protein, and fat to produce water
most animals. Obligatory loss from the kidneys is the
 molecules. The metabolism of fat produces the greatest
minimum fequired for the body to fid itself of the
amount of metabolic water on a weight basis, and pro-
daily load of urinary waste products. A certain quan-
 tein catabolism produces the smallest amount. For every
tity of water is necessary to act as a solvent for these
100 g of fat, catbohydrate, and protein oxidized by the
end products. The remaining portion of urinary water
body, 107, 55, and 41 milliliters (ml) of metabolic watef
loss, called facuitative loss, is excreted in response to the
ateproduced,
 fespectively. The fate of metabolic watef
normal water reabsorption rate of the kidneys and to
 production depends on an animal's metabolic rate and
mechanisms responsible for maintaining proper water
balance in the body. Fecal water accounts for a much
bolic water is fairly insignificant because it accounts for
smaller portion of water excretion. In healthy animals,
only 5% to 10% of the total daily water intake of most
the amount of water that actually appears in the feces is
animals.
very low compared to the amount that is absorbed across
The last source of water intake is voluntary drink-
the gastrointestinal tract and retufned to the body duf-
ing digestion. Fecal water loss becomes substantial only
 tion include the ambient temperature, type of diet,
when aberrations in the intestines’ capacity to absorb
level of exercise, physiological state, and health. Water
water occur. A third route of water loss is evaporation
intake increases with both increasing environmental
from the lungs during respiration. In dogs and cats this
temperature and increasing exercise because more
water loss is very important for the regulation of normal
 evaporative water is lost as a result of the body's cooling
body temperature during hot weather. Panting substan-
mechanisms. The amount of calories consumed also
tially increases respiratory water loss and thus heat loss.
affects voluntary water consumption. As energy intake
Because of these mechanisms of temperature regulation,
increases, more metabolic waste products afe pro-
water losses from fespiration and evaporation during
duced and the heat produced by nutrient metabolism
'ss pue sop yog u yoiy Aia aq ues riem iy
increases. In these circumstances, the body fequires
Daily water consumption must compensate for
 more water to excrete waste products in the urine and
these continual Huid losses. A pet's total water intake
to contribute to thermoregulation.
comes from three possible sources: water present in
Diet type and composition can also dramatically
food, metabolic water, and drinking water. The quan-
affect voluntary water intake. For example, in a study
tity of water present in the food depends on the type of
of dogs that were fed a diet containing 73% moisture,
diet. Commercial, dry pet food may contain as little as
they obtained 38% of their daily water needs from
Energy and Water11
drinking water. When they were abruptly switched to a
 t0 accurately regulate water balance through voluntary
 r r   a  n
intake of water.
immediately increased to 95% of more of the total daily
intake.25 In the same study, increasing the salt content
of the diet caused an increased drinking response in
Pets obtain water from food,metabolic water, and
both dogs and cats. When the level of salt in the diet
of a group of cats was increased from 1.3% to 4.6%,
or decreased, most pets are naturally able to achieve
voluntary water intake nearly doubled. Generally, if
ftesh, palatable water is available and proper amounts of
voluntary intake of drinking water.
a well-balanced diet are fed, most healthy pets are able
References
1. Cowgill GR: The energy factor in relation to food intake: experiments on the dog, Am J Physiof 85:45-64, 1928.
 2. Durrer JL, Hannon JP: Seasonal variations in caloric intake of dogs living in an arctic environment, Am J Physiol 202:375-384,
1962
3. Romsos DR, Hornshus M], Leveille GA: lnfuence of dietary fat and carbohydrate on food intake, body weight and body fat of
adult dogs, Iroc Soc Exp Bio Med 157:278-281, 1978.
4. Romsos DR, Belo PS, Bennink MR: Effects of dietary carbohydrate, fat and protein on growth, body composition and blood
metabolite levels in the dog, / Nutr 106:1452-1464, 1976.
5. McGreevy PD, Thomson PC, Pride C, and others: Prevalence of obesity in dogs examined by Australian veterinary practices and the
risk factors involved, Vet Rec 156:695-707, 2005.
86:1825, 2008
7. Association of American Feed Control Offcials (AAFCO): Ofcial publication, 2008, AAFCO.
8. National Research Council: Nutrient reguirementsofdogs, Washington, DC, 2006, National Academy of Sciences, National
Academy Press,pp 2848.
9. Kienzle E, Biourge V, Schonmeier A: Prediction of energy digestibility in complete dry foods for dogs and cats by total dietary fber.
J Nutr 136:2041S-2044S, 2006.
10. Hervera M, Daucells MD, Llanch F, Castrillo C: Prediction of digestible energy content of extruded dog food by in vitro analyses,
Anim Phys Anim Nutr 91:205-209, 2007.
11. Castrillo C, Baucells M: Vicente F, and others: Energy evaluation of extruded compound foods for dogs by near-infrared
spectroscopy, J Anim Phys Anim Nutr 89:194-198, 2005.
12. Yamka RM, McLeod KR, Harmon DL, and others: The impact of dietary protein source on oserved and predicted metabolizable
energy of dry extruded dog foods, J Animm Sei 85:204-212, 2007.
13. Harris LE: Biological energy interelationships and glosary ofenergy terms, Washington, DC, 1966, National Academy of Sciences,
National Academy Press.
14. Kendll PT, Burger 1H, Smith PM: Methods of estimation of the metabolizable energy content of cat foods, Feline Pract 15:38-44,
1985.
15. LaFlamme DP: Determining metabolizable energy content in commercial pet foods, J Anim Phyiol Anim Nutr 85:222-230, 2001.
dogs,J Am Vet Med Asoc 201:857-863, 1992.
17. Richardson DC: The role of nutrition in canine hip dysplasia, Vet Chin North Am Small Anim Pract 22:529-540, 1992.
12 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 18. Hedhammer A, Wu FM, Krook L, and others: Overnutrition and skeletal disease: an experimental study in growing Great Dane
dogs, Cornell Vet 64(Suppl 5):1-160, 1974.
19. Bjorntorp P: The role of adipose tissue in human obesity. In Greenwood MRC, editor: Obesity: contemporary iswes in clinical
nutrition, New York, 1983, Churchill Livingstone.
20. Bjorntorp P Sjostrom L: Number and size of fat cells in relation to metabolism in human obesity, Metabolism 20:703-706, 1971.
21. Maynard LA, Loosli JK, Hintz HF, and others: Animal nutrition, ed 7, New York, 1979, McGraw-Hill.
22. Caldwell CT: Studies in water metabolism of the cat, Physiol Zool 4:324355, 1931.
 23. Danowski TS, Elkinton JR, Winkler AW: The deleterious eect in dogs of a dry protein ration, J Clin Invest 23:816-823, 1944.
Jo naip e uou apos shuauaanar anea shn aaur o nes aup yo Age op pue nes ur euadokh ah ppa A o Dd suand 'y7.
fish or meat, Am J Physiol 196:625-632, 1959.
25. Anderson RS: Water balance in the dog and cat, / Smaff Anim Pract 23:588-598, 1982.
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates
thie
lactose, which is present in the milk of all mammalian
constituents of plants, making up between 60% and
species. Like fuctose, galactose is released during diges-
90% of dry-matter (DM) weight. This class of nutrients
tion. Within the body, galactose is converted to glucose
comprises the elements carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
by the liver and eventually enters the circulation in the
A structural classification
 scheme separates carbohy-
form of glucose.
Disaccharides
ate made up of two monosaccharide
sacchatides.Monosaccharides,
often referred to as the
units linked together.
Lactose, the sugar found in the
form of carbohydrate. A
monosaccharide is 
comptis
of
a single unit contain-
and a molecule of
galactose. It is the only carbohydrate
sevef
carbon atoms. The three
of animal origin that is of any significance in the diet.
hexoses(6-0
catbonnono
charides) that ate nutrition-
nized as table sugar, contains
ally and metabolically
the
：mos
 important afe glucose,
a molecule of
a molecule of fructose.
fructose,ahd
It is found in cat
 maple syrup. Maltose is
made up of two
commercially prepated
corn syrup and sweet fruits such
disacchatide is not commonly
found in most foods,
 3s grapes and berries. It is also the chief end product of
but it is formed as an intermediate product in the body
starch digestion and glycogen hydrolysis in the body.
during the digestion of starch.
Glucose is the form of carbohydrate found circulating
Polysaccharides comprise
1
many single monosac-
in the bloodstream and is the primary carbohydrate
charide units linked together in long and complex
used by the body's cells for energy. Fructose, commonly
chains. Starch, glycogen, dextrins, and dietary fber
teferred to as fruit sugar, is a very sweet sugar found in
are all polysaccharides. Starch is a nonstructural plant
honey, ripe fruits, and some vegetables. It is also formed
 storage polysaccharide and is the chief carbohydrate
from the digestion or acid hydrolysis of the disaccha-
 source present in most commercial pet foods. The two
ride sucrose. Galactose is not found in a ffee form in
   s   s 
foods. However, it makes up 50% of the disaccharidle
of linear glucose chains) and amylopectin (comprised
CHO
Q
CH,OH
日
OH
H
H-
OH
H
OH
HO
H
HO
H
HO
日
日
OH
HO
H
OH
H
人
OH
H
OH
H-
OH
CH,OH
CH,OH
CH,OH
Galactose
Glucose
Fructose
Figure 2-1  Basic carbohydrate structure.
13
14  Canine and Feline Nutrition
of branched glucose chains). Cereal grains such as
TABLE 2-1 DIETARY FIBER FERMENTATION
corn, wheat, sorghum, barley, and fice are the major
IN DOGS
ingredients that provide starch. Glycogen is the stor-
age form of carbohydrate in the body. It is found in
FIBERTYPE
SOLUBILITY
FERMENTABILITY
the liver and muscle, and it functions to help maintain
Beet pulp
LoW
Moderate
normal glucose homeostasis in the body. Dextrins are
Cellulose
LOw
LoW
polysaccharide compounds that afe formed as inter-
Rice bran
Low
Moderate
mediate products in the breakdown of starch. They
Gum ara bic
High
Moderate
afe created during normal digestive processes in the
Pectin
High
High
Carboxymethylcel-
High
Low
foods. The monosaccharide units found in starch, gly-
lulose
Methylcellulose
High
Low
cogen, and dextrin molecules have an alpha-confgu-
Cabbage fiber
LoW
UBIH
ration and are linked together by alpha-bonds. This
Guar gum
High
High
type of bond can be readily hydrolyzed by the endog-
Locust bean gum
High
Low
enous enzymes of the gastrointestinal tract and yields
Xanthan gum
High
Low
monosaccharide units upon either digestion or chemi-
From Reinhart GA, Sunvold GD: In vitro fermencation as a prediccor of
cal hydrolysis.
fber urilization. In Recent adoances in canine and feline mutritional research:
Although the exact defnition of dietary fber con-
procedingfthe99lamsntentionlrtsymosiWilmingon,
tinues to be debated, dietary fber (also referred to as
Ohio, 1996, Orange Frazer Press.
nonstarch polysaccharides) comprises several forms of
plant carbohydrate. The major carbohydrate compo-
nents of dietary fber include cellulose, hemicellulose,
highly fermentable in the large intestine. Conversely,
pectin, and the plant gums and mucilages.
.Lignin,a
insoluble fbers retain some water within their struc-
large phenylpropane polymer, is the only
tural matrix but do not form viscous solutions. These
drate component of fiber. Plant fiber differs from starch
and glycogen in that its monosaccharide units have a
to incfease
fecal
mass
 and decrease intestinal transit
-eiaq Aq rauason payu are pue uoneinsyuos-eiaq
time. For example, in dogs and cats, pectin and other
bonds. These bonds resist digestion by the endogenous
soluble fbers are highly fermentable, beet pulp is mod-
 enzymes of the gastrointestinal tract. As a result, dietary
erately fermentable,
 and cellulose is honfermentable
fiber cannot be broken dlown by enzymes of the intesti-
(Table 2-1).
nal tract to monosaccharide units for absorption in the
Ruminants
and
animals are able to
small intestine.
derive a significant amount of energy from the SCFAs
Although dogs and cats do not directly digest dietary
produced by the bacterial fermentation of fber. How-
fber, microbes found in the large intestine (colon) are
evel, honherbivores, such as the dog and the cat, can-
able to break down certain types of fber to varying
not do this because of the relatively short and simple
degrees. This bacterial fermentation produces short-
structure of their large intestine. Although SCFAs are
chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and other end products.
produced in these species, there is no mechanism for
The SCFAs that are produced in greatest abundance
the absorption of large amounts of SCFAs in the large
are acetate, propionate, and butyrate. The magnitude
intestine. Therefore the total energy balance of dogs and
of bacterial digestion depends on factors such as the
cats is not significantly affected by the production of
species of animal, the type of fber present in the diet,
SCFAs from dietary fiber.
the gastrointestinal transit time, and the intake of other
However, the SCFAs that afe produced from fiber
dietary constituents. Soluble fbers are those that form
 are an important energy source for the epithelial cells
a viscous solution upon contact with water; it is the
lining the gastrointestinal tract in dogs and cats. The
physical properties of these fibers that affect gastroin-
 ai  a  s  
testinal functions such as stomach emptying time and
active cells that have a high turnover fate and fely
ttansit time.' Most soluble fbers are moderately or
on SCFAs as a signifcant energy source. A series of
Carbohydrates  15
TABLE 2-2 EFFECTS OF FIBER SOURCE ON THE CANINE COLON
CELLULOSE
BEETPULP
PECTIN/GUMARABIC
INTERPRETATION
(u3lam Apog B)/a) u3lam uoo
6.09
6.52
6.62
More is better
Surface:area ratio
0.146
0.156
0.154
More is better
Cryptitis (number affected of five dogs)
4
1
E
Less is better
DNA content (microgram [μg]/mg)
47.4
40.4
38.4
Less is better
Daca from Reinharc GA, Moxley RA, Clemens ET: Diecary fbre source and ics effeces on colonic microstrucrure and histopathology of Beagle dogs, /Nutr
1 24:2701S-2703S, 1994.
studies found that dogs fed diets containing moder-
In the body, carbohydrate has several functions.
ately fermentable fber have increased colon weights,
The monosaccharide glucose is an important energy
mucosal surface area, and mucosal hypertrophy when
source for many tissues. A constant supply of glucose
compared with dogs fed a diet containing a nonfer-
is necessary for the proper functioning of the central
 mentable fber source (Table 2-2).2 These changes pro-
nervous system (CNS), and the glycogen present in
vide a measure of the absorptive capacity of the colon
the heart muscle is an important emergency source
and indicate increased
Although a highly fermentable fber source has similar
muscle can be hydrolyzed to supply additional carbo-
effects on colon weight and morphology, diets con-
hydrate fuel to cells when circulating glucose is low.
taining this type of fber result in poor stool quality.
Carbohydrate also supplies carbon skeletons for the
It appears that the best fber sources for companion
formation of nonessential amino acids and is heeded
animals are those that are moderately fermentable and
for the synthesis of other essential body compounds
provide adlequate levels of SCFAs for the intestinal
such as glucufonic acid, heparin, chondroitin sulfate,
mucosa.3-5 Fiber in the diets of dogs and cats also func-
the immunopolysaccharides, 
deoxytibonucleic acid
tions as an aid in the proper functioning of the gastro-
(DNA), and ribonucleic acid (RNA). When conju-
intestinal tract and as a dietary diluent that decreases
gated with proteins or lipids, some carbohydrates also
the total energy density of the diet (see Section 2,
become important structural components in the body's
p. 77, and Section 5, pp. 333-335). Finally, certain
tissues.
fermentable fbers act as prebiotics when included
Dietary carbohydrate provides animals with a soufce
in diets. Prebiotics afe food ingredients that provide
benefits by stimulating the proliferation of certain
functioning. However, only a limited amount of car-
desirable bacterial species in the gastrointestinal tract
bohydrate can be stored in the body as glycogen, so
although they are not directly digested by the host
when dietafy catbohydrate is consumed in excess of the
animal (see Section 5, pp. 467-472 for a complete
body's energy needs, most is metabolized to body fat
dliscussion).6
catbohydrate in excess of an animal's energy needs can
lead to increased body fat and obesity. In addition to
Moderately fermentable fiber sources (as opposed to
its function in supplying energy to the body, digestible
catbohydrate also has a protein-sparing effect. Just as
highlyfermentable and ronfermentablefber sources),
animals eat to meet their energy needs,the body satisfes
which are a source of buik and provide adequate leveis
its energy requirement before using energy-containing
of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) in the large intestine,
are good fber sources for cats and dogs. The SCFAs are
nutrients in the diet for other purposes. If adequate caf-
bohydrate is supplied in the diet, protein will be spated
the gastrointestinal(Gi) tract,and these fiber sources
g pasn aq uau ues pue aiaua iy pasn suq o
heip to maintain Gi tract heaith
tissue repair and growth. Finally, although dietary fber
does hot contribute appfeciably to ehergy balance in
16 Canine and Feline Nutrition
dogs and cats, a moderate level in the diet is beneficial.
Plant fber provides SCFAs to cells lining the intestine,
Because carbohydrates are an excelent energy source
helps to stimulate normal peristalsis, provides bulk to
for the body, optimal levels ofdigestible carbohydrate in
intestinal contents, and reduces gastrointestinal transit
time (see Section 2, p. 77).
Qs an energy source.
References
1. Alvarez E, Sanchez P: Dietary fiber, Nutr Hosp 21(Suppl):60-71, 2006.
 2. Reinhart GA, Moxley RA, Clemens ET: Dietary fibre source and its effects on colonic microstructure, function and histopathology
of Beagle dogs, / Nutr 124:2701S-2703S, 1994.
3. Sunvold CD, Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, and others: Fermentability of selected fbrous substrates by dog fecal microflora as
inHuenced by diet, / Nutr 124:2719S-2720S, 1994.
4. Hallman JE, Moxley RA, Reinhart GA, and others: Cellulose,beet pulp, and pectin/gum arabic effects on canine colonic
microstructure and histopathology, Vet Clin Nutr 2: 137-142, 1995.
5. Sunvold GD, Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, and others: Dietary fber for cats: in vitro fermentation of selected fiber sources by cat
fecal inoculum and in vivo utilization of diets containing selected fber sources and their blends, J Anim Sci 73:2329-2339, 1995.
6. Grizard D, Barthomeuf C: Non-digestible oligosaccharides used as probiotic agents: mode of production and beneficial effets on
animal and human health, Reprod Nutr Dev 39:563-588, 1999.
3
Fats
Dietary fat is part of a heterogeneous group of com-
In addition, others have reported that the inclusion of
pounds known as the lipids. These compounds afe
high concentrations of MCTs in dog diets can nega-
dlassified together because of their solubility in organic
tively affect diet palatability and cause reduced food
solvents and their insolubility in water. They can be
intake.24 Therefore additional studies of benefts for
further categorized into simple lipids, compound
this class of fats for pets with gastrointestinal disease ate
lipids, and derived lipids. The simple lipids include the
warranted before their use in therapeutic diets can be
triglycericles, which are the most common form of fat
recommended.
 present in the diet, and the waxes. Triglycerides are made
Saturated fatty acids contain no double bonds
up of three fatty acidls linked to one molecule of glyc-
between carbon atoms and thus afe “saturated" with
erol (Figure 3-1), and waxes contain a greater number
hydrogen atoms. Monounsaturated fatty acids have one
of fatty acids linked to a long-chain alcohol molecule.
double bond, and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs)
Compound lipids are composed of a lipid, such as a fatty
contain two or more double bonds (Figure 3-2). The
acid, linked to a nonlipid molecule. Lipoproteins, which
double bonds between carbon atoms in unsaturated
function to carry fat in the bloodstream, are a type of
fatty acids may exist in either cis or trans confgurations.
 compound lipid. The derived lipids include sterol com-
Cis isomers have the hydrogen atoms on each side of
pounds, such as cholesterol, and fat-soluble vitamins.
the double bond oriented in the same plane, while trans
Triglyceride is the most important type of fat in
 r ai  o se a   s
the diet; it can be differentiated in foods according to
bond oriented in opposite planes. Most of the natu-
the types of fatty acids that each triglyceride contains.
rally occurring unsaturated fatty acids are cis isomers.
q a pu qa u-uoq u aa s a
Conversely, trans double bonds are most commonly
saturated, monounsaturated, or polyunsaturated. Most
introduced into fatty acids during the food manufactur-
oay io (spooy nad pue ueny u yoq) ssaoid su
fatty acids that have an even number of carbon atoms
genation. In humans, the inclusion of trans fatty acids
ranging between 16 and 26. Two exceptions are butter
in the diet can negatively affect lipoprotein metabolism
and coconut oil, which contain appreciable amounts
in the same manner as diets that are fich in saturated
of medium- and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs).
fat. However, the impact of these fats upon canine and
Medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs) refer to tfiglyc-
feline fat metabolism and health has not been studied
erides that primarily contain fatty acids with between
extensively. In general, the triglycerides in animal fats
8 and 10 carbon atoms. These fatty acids have been
contain a higher percentage
 of saturated fatty acids
shown to be rapilly hydrolyzed and absorbed in human
than do those in vegetable fats. Most plant oils, with
subjects, reportedly directly entering the portal venous
the exception of palm, olive, and coconut oils, contain
blood system rather than being transported through
between 80% and 90% unsaturated fat; animal fats
the lymphatic system.' For this reason, MCTs have
contain between 50% and 60% unsaturated fat.
been identifed as a form of dietary fat that may pro-
 Fat has numerous functions within the body. Tri-
vide benefit to dogs with digestive disorders that affect
glycerides are the body's primary form of stored energy.
normal fat digestion and absorption.2 However, a study
a rapun nuasaid are uoneinunsse eg jo sodap ioie
that examined the digestion and absorption of MCTs in
 skin (as subcutaneous fat), around the vital organs, and
healthy adult dogs found evidence that these fats were
 in the membranes surrounding the intestines. Some of
absorbed in the same manner as long-chain fatty acids
these depots can be readily observed in obese dogs and
(via that intestinal lymphatic system) and found no
cats. Fat depots in the body have an extensive blood
evidence of direct transport via portal venous blood.3
and nerve supply and are in a constant state of fux,
17
18 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 Falty acid 1
Fally acid 2
CH
Q
CH-O-
C—RFatty acid3
Figure 3-1  Triglyceride structure.
lauric acid
CH3—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—COOH
Monounsaturated
Palmitoleic acid
CH—CH2——CH2—CH2-CH2—CH2—CH=CH—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2COOH
paoanyosunsiod
 Linoleic acid
CH—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH=CH——CH2——CH=CH——CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—COOH
Alpha-linolenic acid
CH—CH2—CH=CH—CH2—CH=CH——CH2——CH=CH—CH2CH2CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH2—COOH
Arachidonic acid
CHCH2—CH2—CH2CH2—CH=CH—CH2——CH=CH—CH—CH=CH—CH2CH=CH—CH2—CH2CH2—COOH
Fgure 3-2  Types of fatty acids.
providing energy in times of need and storage in times
 participate in the transport of nutrients and metabolites
of energy surplus. They also serve as insulators, protect-
across these membranes. Lipoproteins provide for the
Iael aansaoid e se pue 'ssol jeay woy Apoq au Su!
transport of fats through the bloodstream. Cholesterol
that guards against physical injury to the vital organs.
is used by the body to form the bile salts necessary for
Although animals have a very limited capacity to store
proper fat digestion and absorption, and it is also a
carbohydrate in the form of glycogen, they have an
precursor for the steroid hormones. Along with other
almost limitless capacity to store surplus energy in the
lipids, cholesterol forms a protective layer in the skin
form of fat.
that prevents excessive water loss and the invasion of
In addition to providing energy, fat has numerous
foreign substances. The essential fatty acid (EFA) ara-
metabolic and structural functions. Fat insulation sur-
chidonic acid is the precursor of a group of physiologi-
rounds myelinated nerve fbers and aids in the transmis-
cally and pharmacologically active compounds called
sion of nerve impulses. Phospholipids and glycolipids
prostacyclins,prostaglandins,leukotrienes,andthrombox-
setve as stfuctural components for cell membranes and
anes. These compounds perform extensive hormonelike
Fats19
actions in the body and are involved in processes such as
In the n-3 family, alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) is also
vasodilation and vasoconstfiction, muscle contfaction,
considered to be essential for dogs and cats although
blood pressure homeostasis, gastric acid secretion, regu-
 exact requirement levels are not well defined.1l Similar
lation of body temperature, regulation of blood clotting
to the n-6 family of fatty acids, the conversion of ALA
mechanisms, and control of infammation.
to physiologically essential long-chain PUFAs such as
In the diet, fat providles the most concentrated form
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid
of energy of all the nutrients. Although the gross energy
(DHA) is limited, which may lead to a dietary require-
(GE) of protein and carbohydrate is approximately 5.65
ment during periods of reproduction and development
and 4.15 kilocalories per gram (kcal/g), respectively,
(see Section 4, pp. 211 and 228-229 for a complete
the GE of fat is 9.4 kcal/g. In addition to containing
dliscussion). Beneficial effects of several of the n-3 fatty
more energy, the digestibility of fat is also usually higher
acids are reported when these fatty acids are included
than that of protein and carbohydrate. An early study
in the diet at nutritional levels and balanced with n-6
reported estimates of apparent fat dligestibility between
fatty acid content. These effects felate to the fatty acid
Jo sanxu pay uaym sop 1npe ul %s6 pue %08
 composition of cell membranes and the production of
plant and animal fat.6 A second study reported that the
eicosanoids (see Section 4, pp. 211 and 228-229 and
 apparent digestibility of the fat in several commercially
Section 5, Chapters 31, 32, 35, 36, and 37 for complete
prepared dry-type dog foods vatied between 70% and
discussions).
90%.7 More recently, a comparison of apparent nutri-
All of the EFAs are polyunsaturated. Linoleic acid
ent digestibilities among six extruded dry dog foods
and the linolenic acids contain 18 catbon atoms and
reported that fat digestibility was greater than 90% for
2 and 3 double bonds, fespectively. AA contains 20
all six foods.8 In each of these studies, within food types,
carbon atoms and 4 double bonds (see Figure 3-2). In
the apparent fat digestibility was consistently higher than
 most animals, the best sources oflinoleic acid are vegeta-
either protein or carbohydrate digestibility. Therefore,
ble cils such as corn, soybean, and saffower cils. Poultry
E sapoid nai siad e ui ney jo auaad au sursau!
fat and pork fat also contain appreciable amounts of lin-
very concentrated, readily digested source of energy that
Aa uenus siey rnq pue mon jaaq am pie siao
substantially increases the caloric density of the food.
little. Another form of linoleic acid is called conjugated
Dietary fat also provides a source of EFAs and acts
linoleic acid (CLA). CLA is actually a group of com-
as a carrier that allows the absorption of the fat-soluble
pounds, a naturally occurring mixture of linoleic acid
vitamins. The body has a physiological requirement
isomers that contain modifed double bonds. CLAs are
for two distinct families of EFAs: the n-6 and the n-3
 naturally produced by rumen bacteria in ruminant ani-
series.9 This terminology denotes the position of the
mals or through food processing. One particular CLA
first double bond in the molecule, counting from the
isomer has been shown to have antiatherogenic prop-
terminal (methyl) end of the chain. The most important
'ses pue shop ul zt'slapou leue Aioeioqel ui sans 
fatty acid of the n-6 series is linoleic acid (see Figure
CLA has been reported to provide body composition
3-2). In most animals, gamma-linolenic acid (GLA) and
 benefts for overweight animals.13,14 Additional studies
atachidonic acid (AA) can be synthesized from linoleic
afe needed to fully explore the potential dietary benefits
acid by alternating desaturation and elongation reac-
of this form of linoleic acid. The final EFA, AA, is found
tions. Therefore, if adequate linoleic acid is provided
only in animal fats. Some fish cils afe rich in this EFA,
in the diet, there is not a dietary requirement for GLA
and pork fat and poultry fat also supply a small amount.
or AA. Although the dog is able to synthesize adequate
amounts of these fatty acids during all life stages, the
cat is one of the few species that does not synthesize
Fat provides the most concentrated form of energy of
adequate amounts of AA during all stages of life, even
allthe nutrients,isa source ofthe essentialfatty acids,
when adequate linoleic acid is present in the diet.l As
and facilitates absorption of the fat-soluble vitamins
a result, AA is considered to be conditionally essential
for the cat during pregnancy and for normal neonatal
food.
development.
20 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Fat in the diets of companion animals also plays a
some pets to overconsume. Therefore, although fat
role in contributing to the palatability and texture of
 does lend increased palatability to a diet, this effect can
food.15 This is obviously a critical function because no 
 rapidlly lead to overeating as the energy density of the
pet food, regardless of how well-formulated it is, can 
 diet fises. For this reason, well-balanced pet foods that
be nutritious if it is not eaten. A study conducted with
 afe energy-dense and contain modlerate to high levels
cats found that diets containing 25% to 40% fat were
of fat must often be fed on a portion-controlled basis
preferred to low-fat diets, but increasing the fat content
further tended to decrease the diet's acceptability.I This
effect of dietary fat is complicated by the fact that as the
As the fat content increases, so does the energy density
fat content in the diet increases, so does energy density.
of the diet. Portion-controlled feeding is usually the best
Animals require decreased quantities of calorie-dense
foods to satisfy their energy requirements. However, the
foodcontainingmoderate to highleveis offat
increased palatability of foods high in fat can encourage
References
1. Bach AC, Babayan VK: Medium chain triglycerides: an update, Am J Clin Nutr 36:950-962, 1982.
2. Remillard Rl, Thatcher CD: Dietary and nutritional management of gastrointestinal diseases, Vt Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
19:797-817, 1989.
3. Newton JD, McLoughlin MA, Birchard SJ, Reinhart GA: Transport pathways of enterally administered medium-chain triglycerides
in dogs. In Reinhart GA, Carey DP, editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition, Wilmington, Ohio, 2000, Orange Frazer
Press.
4. Van Dongen AM, Stokhof AA, Geelen JH, Beynen AC: The high intake of medium-chain triglycerides elevates plasma cholesterol
in dogs (an observation), Fohia Vet 44:173-174, 2000.
 5. Emken EA: Do trans fatty acids have adverse health effects? In Nelson GJ, editor: Heaith effects ofdietary fatty acids, Champaign, Ill,
1991, American Oil Chemists Society, pp 245-263.
6. Orr NWM: The food requirements of Antarctic sledge dogs. In Graham-Jones O, editor: Canine and feline nutritional requirements,
London, 1965, Pergamon Press
7. Huber TL, Wilson RC, McGarity SA: Variations in digestibility of dry dog foods with identical label guaranteed analysis, J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 22:571-575, 1986.
8. Ahlstrom O, Skrede A: Comparative nutrient digestibility in dogs, blue foxes, mink and rats, J Nutr 128:2676S-2677S, 1998.
Ifosu oa  su roe u se pe uod u e u aosu  pe 6
International Congress of Nutrition, London, 1986, John Libbey.
10. Bauer JE: Metabolic basis for the essential nature of fatty acids and the unique dietary fatty acid requirements of cats, J Am Vet Med
Assoc 229:1729-1732, 2006.
11. Carlson SE: Are n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids essential for growth and development? In Nelson GJ, editor: Heaith effects ofdietary
fatty acids, Champaign, 1l, 1991, American Oil Chemists Society.
12. Nicolosi RJ, Rogers EJ, Kritchevsky D, and others: Dietary conjugated linoleic acid reduces plasma lipoprotein and early
atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemic rabbits, Artery 22:266-277, 1997.
13. Bartges JM, Cook M: Infuence of feeding conjugated linoleic acid on body composition in healthy adult cats. In Proc 17th ACVIM,
1999, p 729.
14. Schoenherr W, Jewell J: Effect of conjugated linoleic acid on body composition of mature obese Beagles, FASEB J 13:A262, 1999.
15. Bauer JE: Facilitative and functional fats in diets of cats and dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc 229:680-684, 2006.
16. Kane E, Morris JC, Rogers QR: Acceptabiity and digestibility by adult cats of diets made with various sources and levels of fat,
J Anim Sci 53:1516-1523, 1981.
Protein and Amino Acids
Proteins are complex molecules that, like carbohydrates
which transports iron; and retinol-binding protein,
and fats, contain carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. In
which carries vitamin A. In addition to their transport
addition, all proteins contain the element nitrogen,
functions, plasma proteins also contribute to the regu-
and the majority contain sulfur. All proteins contain
lation of acid-base balance. Finally, the body's immune
approximately 16% nitrogen. This consistency led to
system relies on protein substances; the antibodies that
the development of the nitrogen balance test, which has
maintain the body's resistance to disease afe all com-
been used traditionally to e
timate an animal'sbody pro-
posed of large protein molecules.
tein status. Nitrogen balance tests measufe intake and
excretion of nitrogen in animals that are fed a test diet.
 Net loss or gain of nitrogen then indicates increases of
Proteins are the major structural components of the
'Z uonsas sas) saaiasai uaoid Apoq (eioi ui soseaiap
body Enzymes essentiat for nutrient digestion are pro-
p. 89). Amino acids are the basic units of proteins and
teins, as are many hormones, such as insulin and giuca
ate held together by peptide linkages to form long pro-
gon.Blood proteins act as important carrier substances
tein chains (Figures 4-1 and 4-2). Proteins can range
and contribute to the regulation of acid-base balance
in size from several amino acids to large, complex mol-
Finally, the body's immune system relies on protein
ecules that consist of several intricately folded peptide
substances; the antibodies that maintain the bodys
chains, and can be classifed as either simple of complex
resistance to disease are all composed of large protein
forms. Once hydrolysis begins, simple proteins yield
moiecuies.
only amino acids or their derivatives. Examples include
albumin in blood plasma, lactalbumin in milk, zein in
corn, and the structural proteins keratin, collagen, and
Protein present in the body is not static; it is in a con-
elastin. Complex or conjugated proteins are madle up of
stant state of Hux involving degradation and synthesis.
a simple protein combined with a nonprotein molecule.
Although tissues vay greatly in their rate of turnover, all
Exarmples of complex proteins include the nucleopro-
protein molecules in the body are eventually catabolized
teins, glycoproteins, and phosphoproteins.
and replaced. During growth and reproduction, additional
Proteins in the body have numerous functions. They
protein is needed for the accretion of new tissue. A regulat
are the major structural components of hair, feathers,
infux of protein and nitrogen, supplied by the dliet, is nec.
skin, nails, tendons, ligaments, and cartilage. The fbrous
 essary to maintain normal metabolic processes and provide
protein collagen is the basic material that forms most of
for tissue maintenance and growth. The body has the abil-
the connective tissue throughout the body. Contractile
ity to synthesize new proteins from amino acids, provided
proteins such as myosin and actin are involved in regu-
that all of the necessary amino acids are available to the tis-
lating muscle action. All of the enzymes that catalyze the
sue cells. At the tissue and cellular level it is inconsequential
body's essential metabolic reactions and are essential for
whether the amino acids that are present were synthesized
nutfient digestion and assimilation afe also protein mol-
by the body, supplied from the diet as single amino acid
ecules. Many hormones that control the homeostatic
units, or supplied from the diet in the form of intact pro-
mechanisms of vatious systems in the body afe com-
tein. Therefore it is coirect to state that the body does not
posed of protein; for example, insulin and glucagon afe
 s r  as rd  n e  a
two protein hormones involved in the control of normal
requirement for certain amino acids and a level of nitro-
blood glucose levels. Proteins found in the blood act as
 gen. This requirement is still addressed as a protein require-
important carfier substances. These substances include
 ment in the diet because most practical diets contain intact
hemoglobin, which carries oxygen to tissues; transferrin,
 protein sources, not individual amino acids.
21
22  Canine and Feline Nutrition
R
R
Y
H.N
OH+H
N
日
COOH
0
Amino acid
Amino acid
Dipeptide chain
Figure 4-1 Peptide linkage.
+HN
Alanine
BOX 4-1 ESSENTIAL AND NONESSENTIAL
HD
—CH3
AMINO ACIDS FOR DOGS AND
CATS
N-
-H
ESSENTIAL AMINO
NONESSENTial AMiNO
ACIDS
ACIDS
Glutamine
OO—H—H—
Arginine
Alanine
Histidine
 Asparagine
Isoleucine 
 Aspartate
N-
一H
Leucine
Cysteine
Glycine
CH2
Lysine
Glutamate
Methionine
Glutamine
Phenylalanine
Glycine
Taurine (cats only)
Hydroxylysine
N
-H
Threonine
Hydroxyproline
Lysine
H
+HN-H-²HHH
 Tryptophan 
Proline
Valine
Serine
cOO
Tyrosine
Figure 4-2
 Sinmple protein chain.
It provides the essential amino acids, which are used for
There are 22 alpha-amino acids found in protein
 protein synthesis in the growth and repair of tissue, and
chains. The term aipha denotes the attachment of the
amino group (NH2) to the frst (alpha-) carbon in the
is essential for the synthesis of the nonessential amino
molecule. Of these 22 alpha-amino acids, if an adequate
acids and of other nitrogen-containing molecules, such
source of nitrogen is supplied in the diet, dogs and cats
 as nucleic acids, purines, pyrimidines, and certain neu-
afe able to synthesize 12 at a sufficient rate to meet the
totransmitter
substances.
Amino acids supplied  by
bodys needs for growth,
perfotmance,
and mainte-
 dietary protein can also be metabolized for energy. The
gross energy (GE) of amino acids is 5.65 kilocalories
amino acids, and they may
e either supplied in the diet
Of synthesized by the body.
The temaining
10amino
accounted for, the metabolizable energy (ME) of pro-
tein in dog and cat diets is approximately 3.5 kcal/g;
to meet the body's needs.
afe the essentialamino
thesameamountofenergysup-
In
pliedby dietary
catbohydrate. Animals afe unable to
addition to these 10, the cat has an alditional require-
store excess amino
i5s
lus amino acids afe either
ment for taurine, a beta-sulfonic acid (see Section 2,
used directly
 for energy of afe converted to glycogen
 pp. 97-99). The essential and nonessential amino acids
or fat for energy storage. An ancillary function of the
are listed in Box 4-1.
protein in dog and cat diets is to provide a source of
Protein and Amino Acids 23
BOX4-2METHODSTODETERMINEPROTEINQUALITY
CHEMICAL SCORE
Limiting amino acid in the test protein (%)
Particular amino acid in the reference protein (%)
ESSENTIAL AMINO ACID INDEX (EAAl)
Amino acid in the test protein (%)
Summed for all essential amino acids
Same amino acid in the reference protein (%)]
TOTAL ESSENTIAL AMINO ACID CONTENT (E/T)
Amount of nitrogen from essential amino acids in the protein source
Amount of total nitrogen in the protein source
PROTEIN EFFICIENCY RATIO (PER)
Weight gained by animals (g)
Protein consumed by animals (total g)
BIOLOGICAL VALUE (BV)
Food nitrogen - (fecal nitrogen +urinary nitrogen)
Food nitrogen -fecal nitrogen
NET PROTEIN UTILIZATION (NPU)
BV of protein x Digestibility of protein
Havor. Different favors afe created when food proteins
is affected by both the digestibility and the quality
afe cooked in the presence of carbohydrate and fat.
of the protein included in the diet. Proteins that are
In general, as the protein content of a dog or cat diet
highly digestible and contain all of the essential amino
increases, so does its palatability and acceptability.
acids in their proper proportions relative to the ani-
mal's needs are considered high-quality proteins. In
contrast, those that are either low in digestibility or
Because the protein in the body is in a constant state of
limiting in one or more of the essential amino acids are
flux,a regular intake of dietary protein is necessary to
of lower quality. The higher the quality of a protein in
maintain normal metabolic processes and provide for
a diet, the less quantity will be needed by the animal
tissue maintenance and growth. Like fat, protein content
to meet all of its essential amino acid needs. Various
also contributes to the palatability and acceptability of
methods for evaluating the protein quality in foods
food.
have been developed (Box 4-2). Each of these methods
has specific advantages and disadvantages with respect
to efficacy of evaluating the overall quality of protein
The degree to which a dog or cat is able to use
soufces included in foods formulated for companion
dietary protein as a source of amino acids and nitrogen
animals.
24 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Several analytical tests predict protein quality based
using an analytical analysis based on amino acid com-
entirely on the protein's essential amino acid compo-
position would not feveal this change. Two additional
sition. A chemical score is an index that involves com-
in vitro protein quality assays that attempt to provide
paring the amino acid composition of a given protein
an estimate of both amino acid composition and avail-
source with the amino acid pattern of a reference pro-
ability are the protein solubility index and the immo-
tein of very high quality. Egg protein is typically used
bilized digestive enzyme assay.4,S However, these assays
as the reference protein and is given a chemical score
have hot been tested extensively with protein soufces
of 100. The essential amino acid that is in greatest def-
 that ate typically used in companion animal diets, and a
cit in the test protein is called the limiting amino acid
fecent study found that they did not produce consistent
-0id ieu a on Ae soq au u lm ii asna
tesults.6
tein. The percentage of that amino acid present in the
 A thorough assessment of a protein source ultimately
protein relative to the corresponding value in the refer-
requires that feeding trials be conducted in which the
ence protein determines the chemical score of the test
 protein in question is fed to a predetermined number
protein. The three amino acids in food proteins that are
of test animals. Protein effciency ratio (PER) is one of
most often limiting are methionine, tryptophan, and
the simplest and most commonly used feeding tests
lysine. In some pet foods, arginine and isoleucine have
for measuring protein quality. Weanling male rats of
also been reported to be limiting according to analysis
 growing chicks are fed an alequate diet containing the
by chemical score.2 Although a chemical score provides
test pfotein for up to 28 days. Changes in weight afe
useful information concerning the amino acid defcits
 measured, and PER is calculated as the grams of weight
of a protein soufce, its value is based entirely on the
gained divided by the total grams of protein consumed.
level of the most limiting amino acid in the protein and
The PER value indlicates the ability of a protein source
does not take into account the proportions of all of the
 to be converted into tissue in a growing animal. One
remaining essential amino acids.
criticism of using PER as a measure of protein quality
A modified version of the chemical score, called the
in dog and cat foods is that this test assumes that weight
essential amino acid index (EAAI), measures the contri-
 gain in growing animals is directly related to nitrogen
bution that a protein makes to all of the essential amino
retention. Although this has been proven to be true in
acids, rather than only to the one in greatest deficit.
 rats, this may not be a consistent relationship in grow-
 A protein's EAAI is calculated as the geometric mean of
ing dogs and cats. In addition, any factor that infuences
the ratios of each of the essential amino acids in the test
the test animals' rate of growth during the study, regard-
protein to their corresponding values in the reference
less of whether it is related to protein quality, will affect
protein.3 Finally, the total essential amino acid content
the calculated PER value. One method of accounting
(E/T) is calculated as the proportion of the total nitro-
for these problems is to include a positive and negative
control group in the PER study. The positive control
amino acids. Although the chemical score and EAAI
group is fed a diet containing a reference protein (egg),
and the negative group is fed a protein-free diet. The
fle, the E/T measures the total quantity of essential
effects of the nonprotein group are subtracted from
amino acids within a particular protein source.
the effects in the test protein group when the study is
Estimations of protein quality from amino acid com-
completed.
 position ate helpful in assessing protein quality when
 Biological value (BV) and net protein utilization pro-
combinations of different proteins are used in a food
vide accufate measures of protein quality, but they afe
and for assessing protein sources that have been supple
 more time consuming and labor intensive to conduct
mented with purified amino acids. However, these tests
than are PER tests. BV is defined as the percentage of
are limited by the fact that they provide no informa-
absorbed protein that is retained by the body. It is a
tion regarding the digestibility of a protein or the avail-
measure of the ability of the body to convert absorbed
ability of its amino acids. For example, the heat used
 amino acids into body tissue. Nitrogen balance stud-
 in processing can damage food protein, resulting in a
ies must be conducted in which nitrogen from food,
decreased availability of certain amino acids. Simply
feces, and urine is collected and measured. Animals are
Protein and Amino Acids 25
required to be in a state of physiological maintenance,
in nitrogen balance experiments can be affected by the
and the diet must contain adequate carbohydrate and
level of protein in the diet, the energy intake, and the
fat to ensure that the protein in the diet is not metab-
 physiological state of the animal. Overall, in adldition
1y 4  aq   a a  
 to one or more of the tests described earlier, the quality
accounting for fecal and urinary losses of endogenous
 of protein in a pet food is best assessed through in vivo
nitrogen when the animal is consuming a protein-free
feeding trials in which the food is fed to the animals for
diet. One problem with using BV as a measurement of
which it was developed. Palatability, acceptability, and
protein quality is that it does hot account for pfotein
long-term effects on growth, health, and vitality must
digestibility. Theoretically, if the small portion of a very
 also be evaluated to fully determine the quality of a par-
indigestible protein that is absorbed is used efficiently
ticular protein or mixture of proteins in a food.
by the body, it could still have a very high BV value.
This limitation can be addressed by measuring a pro-
tein's net protein utilization (NPU). NPU is calculated
Aithough several laboratory tests are available for
as the product of a protein's BV and its digestibility.
evaiuating the quality of protein in food, all have their
NPU therefore measures the proportion of consumed
limitations. in addition to these tests, the quality of pet
food protein is best assessed by feeding triais in which
100% digestible would have BV and NPU values that
the food is fed to the animais and life stage for which it
were the same. On the other hand, a poofly digested
was developed. The true quality of a protein or proteins
protein would have a much lower NPU value than
in food must also be evaluated on a long-term basis by
BV value. Although BV and NPU are considered very
assessing the overall heaith and vitality ofthe pet.
important indicators of protein quality, data collected
References
1. Brown RG: Protein in dog foods, Can Vet J 30:528-531, 1989.
3. Oser BL: An integrated essential amino acid index for predicting the biological value of proteins. In Albanese AA, editor: Protein and
amino acid mutrition, New York, 1959, Academic Press.
4. Araba M, Dale NM: Evaluation of protein solubility as an indicator of over-processing soybean meal, Poult Sci 69:76-83, 1990.
5. Schasteen C, Wu J, Schulz M, Parsons CM: An enzyme-based digestibility assay for poultry diets, Proc Multi-State Poult Feeding and
Nutr Conf, 2002.
6. Dust JM, Grieshop CM, Parsons CM, and others: Chemical composition, protein quality, palatability, and digestibiity of alternative
protein sources for dogs, J Anim Sci 83:24142422, 2005.
Vitamins
Vitamins are organic molecules that are needed in
VITAMIN A
minute amounts to function as essential enzymes,
enzyme precursors, or coenzymes in many of the body's
The general term vitamin A actually includes several
metabolic processes. Although they are organic mol-
related chemical compounds called retinol, retinal, and
ecules, vitamins are not classified as carbohydrate, fat,
retinoic acid. Of these molecules, retinol is the most bic-
s 1 so  s s 1o a Aa :od 10
logically active form. In the body, vitamin A has func-
tural compounds. With a few exceptions, most vitamins
tions involving vision, bone growth, reproduction, and
-dns aq snu pue Apoq aun Aq pazisauuAs aq nouues
maintenance of epithelial tissue. The role of vitamin A
plied in the food.
in vision is well established. In the fods of the retina,
A general classification scheme for vitamins divides
retinal combines with a protein called opsin to form
them into two groups: the fat-soluble vitamins and
rhodopsin, also known as visual purple. Rhodopsin is a
the water-soluble vitamins. The fat-soluble vitamins
light-sensitive pigment that enables the eye to adapt to
ate A, D, E, and K; the water-soluble group includes
vitamin C and members of the B-complex vitamin
I opsin, and the energy that
 group. Fat-soluble vitamins are digested and absorbed
is released produces nerve transmissions to the optic
using the same mechanisms as dietary fat, and their
nerve. In the dark, rhodopsin can then be regenerated
metabolites are excreted primarily in the feces through
by the combination of new retinal and opsin molecules.
the bile. In contrast, most of the water-soluble vitamins
afe absorbed passively in the small intestine and afe
available to fegenerate rhodopsin; thus the fods of the
excreted in the urine. Excesses of fat-soluble vitamins
eye become
 increasingly sensitive to light changes,
are stored primarily in the liver. With the exception of
which eventually results in night blindness.
cobalarmin, the body is unable to store significant levels
Vitamin A is also essential for the formation and
of the water-soluble vitamins. As a result, the fat-soluble
maintenance of healthy epithelial tissue. This tissue
vitamins, specifically vitamins A and D, have a much
includes the skin and the mucous membranes lining
higher potential for toxicity than do the water-soluble
the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts. Vitamin A is
vitamins. Similarly, because they can be stored, deficien-
believed to be necessary for both the proliferation and
cies of fat-soluble vitamins develop much more slowly
differentiation of cells and for the production of the
in animals than do defciencies of the water-soluble
mucoproteins found in the mucus produced by some
vitamins. A summary of food sources and signs of defi-
types of epithelial cells. Mucous secretions of epithelial
ciency and excess for the vitamins is given in Table 5-1.
tissue maintain the integrity of the epithelium and pro-
vide a barrier against bacterial invasion. In the absence
of vitamin A, the differentiation of new epithelial cells
Sunainas-snsnu aineu on adki snouenbs au puoiaq
The fat-solubie vitamins are A, D, E, and K; the
water-soluble group includes vitamin Candmembers of
cells fails to occur, and normal epithelial cells are
replaced by dysfunctional, stratified, keratinized cells.2
the B-complex vitamin group. Fat-soluble vitamins are
Epithelial tissue that does not function properly leads
digested and absorbed using the same mechanisms as
to lesions in the epithelium and increased susceptibility
dietary fat, and their metabolites are excreted primarily
to infection.
in the feces through the bile Most of the water-soiuble
Normal skeletal and tooth development and repro-
vitamins are absorbed passively in the small intestine
and are excreted in the urine.
ductive performance also depend on vitamin A. The
vitamin's fole in bone growth appears to involve the
27
28 Canine and Feline Nutrition
TABLE 5-1 VITAMIN DEFICIENCIES, EXCESSES, AND MAJOR DIETARY SOURCES
VITAMIN
DEFICIENCY
ExCESS
SOURCES
A
Impaired growth, reproductive failure,
Skeletal abnormalities,
Fish liver oils, milk, liver,
loss of epithelial integrity, dermatoses
hy peresthesia
eggyolk
D
Rickets, osteomalacia, nutritional
Hypercalcemia, bone
Liver, some fish, egg yolk,
secondary hy per parathyrcidism
resorption, soft tissue
sunlight
calcification
E
Reproductive failure, pansteatitis in cats
Nontoxic; may increase
Wheat germ, corn and soybean
vitamin A and D
cils
requirements
K
Increased clotting time, hemorrhage
None recorded
Green leafy plants, liver,
some fish meals
Thiamin
CNS dysfunction, anorexia, weight loss
Nontoxic
Meat, wheat germ
Riboflavin
CNS dysfunction, dermatitis
Nontoxic
Milk, organ meats, vegetables
Niacin
Black tongue disease
Nontoxic
Meat, legumes, grains
Pyridoxine
Microcytic hypochromic anemia
None recorded
Organ meats, fish, wheat germ
 Pantothenic acid
Anorexia, weight loss
None recorded
Liver, kidney, dairy products,
legumes
Biotin
 Dermatitis
Nontoxic
Eggs, liver, milk, legumes
 Folic acid
Anemia,leukopenia
Nontoxic
Liver, kidney, green leafy
vegetables
Cobalamin
Anemia
Nontoxic
Meat, fish, poultry
Choline
Neurological dysfunction, fatty liver
Diarrhea
Egg yolk, organ meats,
legumes, dairy products
C
Not required by dogs and cats
Nontoxic
Citrus fruit, dark green
vegetables
CNS, Central nervous system.
activity of the osteoclasts and osteoblasts of the epi-
beta-catotene is the most plentiful in foods and has the
thelial cartilage and may be related to cellular division
highest biological activity. Animal products do not con-
and the maintenance of cell membranes through glyco-
tain catotenoids but can provide active vitamin A when
e   sg s s
included in the diet. Fish liver cils contain the highest
have shown that vitamin A is also essential for spermato-
amounts, and more common foods such as milk, livef,
genesis in males and normal estrous cycles in females.
and egg yolk also contain vitamin A.
The ofigin of all vitamin A is the catotenoids, which
Like most animals, dogs
ate capable of convert-
{atotepolrls
sate darkfed
ing cafotenoids to active
vitamin A; therefore they do
colorof
not tequite
anima
of this vitamin in the
many plants.
ch
diet. How
cafotefe
toes contain high
cat is unable to conveft cafotenoid pigments to vitamin
color is masked by the deep
COIoI
of chlorophyll.
A and must feceive a source of preformed vitamin A in
When animals consume
plants,
，an
enzyme located in the
intestinal
β-catotene
e of vitamin
15,15'-dioxygenase, converts
s these compounds (which
A,carotenoid
are commonly called provitamin A) to active vitamin A
immune fespohise.
(Figure 5-1). The active vitamin is then absorbed and
stored principally in the liver. Although several differ-
carotenoid called lutein, and that these pigments may
ent cafotenoids afe capable of pfoviding vitamin A,
have a function in cell-mediated and humoral immune
Vitamins
CH
日
CH
CH
HC
HC
CH
CH
CH
CH
HC
HC
CH
CH
HC
HC
CH,
CH
HC
HC
CH
CHOH
HC
Two active vitamin A
molecules
HC
CH
HC
CH
HC
CHg
HC
CH
CH2
CH
CH
Beta-carotene
 ose a   se'sas ss u ssn
forms of this vitamin. These are vitamin Dz (ergocal-
a role in weight maintenance.
ciferol) and vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol). Vitamin D2
is formed when the compound ergosterol, which is
found in many plants, is exposed to ultraviolet (UV)
VITAMIND
fadiation. This conversion occurs only in harvested
Vitamin D consists of a group of sterol compounds
or injured plants, not in living plant tissue. Therefore
that fregulate calcium and phosphorus metabolism
this form of vitamin D is only of significance to rumi-
in the body. As with vitamin A, there are provitamin
nants and nonruminant herbivores that are consuming
30 Canine and Feline Nutrition
sun-dried or ifradiated plant materials. In addition, most
categorization, precursors of vitamin D are obtained
species, including cats, use ergocalciferol less effciently
through the diet, and vitamin D's functions are intri-
than cholecalciferol.6 The second form of provitamin
cately involved with normal calcium and phosphorus
D, vitamin D3, is the form that is of greatest nutritional
homeostasis in the body. Both ingested and endogenous
importance to omnivores and carnivores such as the dog
vitamin D (cholecalciferol) are stored in liver, muscle,
and cat. It is synthesized by the body when 7-dehydro-
 and adipose tissue. Cholecalciferol is an inactive storage
cholestetol, a compound found in the skin of animals, is
form of vitamin D. To become active, it must frst be
exposed to UV light from the sun. This form of vitamin
transported from the skin or intestines to the liver;
D can be obtained either through synthesis in the skin
there it is hydroxylated to 25-hydroxycholecalciferol.
or from the consumption of animal products that con-
This compound is then transported through the blood-
tain cholecalciferol. Dogs and cats appeat to be depen-
stream to the kidneys, where it is further converted to
dent upon dietary sources of vitamin D because they
 one of several possible metabolites. Metabolites include
have limited ability to convert 7-dehydrocholesterol in
1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol, also called calcitriol,
the skin to cholecalciferol.7,8
which is the most active form of vitamin D (Figure
Aoq a a iss si  u ae asg
5-2). The conversion of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol to
and because of the regulatory functions that it performs
calcittiol in the kidneys occurs in fesponse to elevated
within the body, some controversy exists regarding its
parathyroid hormone (PTH), which is released from
classification. Although some scientists believe that
 the patathyroid gland in response to decreasing serum
vitamin D should be considered a hormone, others
calcium. A decrease in serum phosphorus also stimu
continue to classify it as a vitamin. Regardless of its
lates the formation of active vitamin D in the kidneys.
7-Dehydrocholesterol
Ultraviolet
Skin
irradiation
Cholecalciferol
[ingested and endogenous]
Liver
25-Hydroxycholecalciferol
↑ PTH
Kidney
↓Serum phosphate
1 ,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol
Promotes Ca2+ absorption
Promotes Ca2+ resorption
in intestine
in bone
Figure 5-2  Conversion of 7-dehydrocholesterol to active vitamin D. PTH, Parathyroid hormone.
Vitamins31
Although inactive vitamin D is considered a vitamin,
the membrane bilayer of cells. The liver is able to store
calcitriol is often classified as a hormone because it is
appreciable amounts of vitamin E.
produced in the body and because of its mechanism of
Vitamin E's chief function in the diet and in the body
action in the body.
is as a potent antioxidant. Polyunsaturated fatty acids
Active vitamin D functions in normal bone tissue
(PUFAs) that are present in foods and in the lipid mem-
development and maintenance and is an important
branes of the body's cells are very vulnerable to oxidative
component in the homeostasis of the body's calcium and
damage. Vitamin E interrupts the oxidation of these fats
phosphorus pools. These effects are mediated through
by donating electrons to the free radlicals that induce lipid
the infuence of vitamin D on calcium and phosphorus
peroxidation (see Section 3, Figure 16-2, p. 156). Pef-
absorption from the gastrointestinal tract and their
oxidation of the body's lipids can destroy the structural
deposition in bone tissue. At the site of the intestine,
integrity of cell membranes, resulting in impairment of
vitamin D stimulates the synthesis of calcium-binding
normal cellular functioning. Peroxidation of fats in foods
protein, which is necessary for the effcient absorption of
causes fancidity and a loss of the nutritional value of the
dietary calcium and phosphorus. Vitamin D also affects
food's essential fatty acids (EFAs). In addition to its action
im sunse Aq uesynes pue ymns auog juou
on PUFAs, vitamin E also protects vitamin A and the
PTH to mobilize calcium from bone and by causing an
sulfur-containing amine acids from oxidative damage. As
increase in phosphate reabsorption in the kidneys. The
 a direct result of these functions, an animal's requirement
net effect of vitamin D's actions in intestines, bones, and
for dlietary vitamin E depends on the level of PUFAs in
kidneys is an increase in plasma calcium and phospho-
its diet and the degree to which dietary fatty acids have
fus to the level that is necessary to allow for the normal
undergone peroxidation during processing and storage.
mineralization and remodeling of bone. A deficiency
 Increasing PUFA levels in pet foods causes a concomi-
of vitamin D causes impaired bone mineralization and
tant increase in a dog's or cat's vitamin E requirement.
fresults in osteomalacia in adult animals and rickets in
A second important interfelationship exists between
growing animals (see Section 2, pp. 108-110).
the tface mineral selenium and vitamin E. Selenium is
 Dietary sources of vitamin D for dogs and cats are
a cofactor for the enzyme glutathione peroxidase, which
vatied. In general, most natural food substances con-
functions to reduce the peroxidles that are formed dur-
tain very little vitamin D, although egg yolks, liver, and
ing the process of fatty acid oxidation. The inactivation
certain types of fish contain moderate amounts. Among
 of these peroxidles by glutathione peroxidase protects the
the few concentrated food sources of vitamin D are the
 cell membranes from further oxidative damage. By pre-
fish liver oils, particularly cod liver oil. Because natural
venting the oxidation of cell-membrane fatty acids and
foods are low in this vitamin, most commercially pre-
the formation of peroxidles, vitamin E spares selenium.
pared pet foods are enriched with a purifed form of
Likewise, selenium creates a similar effect and is able to
cholecalciferol (vitamin D3).
reduce an animal's vitamin E requirement.
In nature, vitamin E is synthesized by a vatiety of
plants. Food sources that are rich in the tocopherols
VITAMINE
include wheat germ and the oils of corn, cottonseed,
Vitamin E is the term used to describe a group of
 soybean, and sunfower. In general, the vitamin E con-
chemically related compounds called the tocophero/s and
tent of an oil increases accordling to its linoleic acid
tocotrienols, which have varying levels of biological activ-
 concentration. Most animal food sources supply only
ity relative to the most potent form, alpha-tocopherol.9
 limited amounts of vitamin E. Egg yolk can contain a
There are four naturally occurring tocopherols; of these,
 moderate amount of vitamin E depending on the diet
alpha-tocopherol is the most active form of vitamin E
of the hen, but milk and dairy products are very poor
and is the compound most commonly included in pet
sources. The vitamin E in commercially prepated foods
foods. Several active synthetic forms of vitamin E have
is susceptible to oxidation and destruction along with
also been produced and afe used in processed foods.
the fat in the diet. Therefore proper storage of foods is
Within the body, vitamin E is found in at least small
necessary both to prevent oxidative changes to fat and
amounts in almost all tissues and is incorporated into
to maintain proper vitamin E levels.
32 Canine and Feline Nutrition
VITAMIN K
vitamins act as coenzymes for specifc cellular enzymes that
are involved in energy metabolism and tissue synthesis.
Vitamin K comprises a group of compounds called the
Coenzymes are small organic molecules that must be pres-
quinones. Vitamin K, (phylloquinone) occurs naturally
ent with an enzyme for a specific reaction to occur. The
in green plants, and vitamin Kz (menaquinone) is syn-
vitamins thiamin, fibofavin, niacin, pyridoxine, panto-
thesized by bacteria in the large intestine. Several syn-
thenic acid, and biotin afe all involved in the use of food
thetic analogues have also been prepared. Menadione
 energy. Folic acid, cobalamin, and choline are important for
(vitamin Ks), the most common form of synthetic
cell maintenance and growth and/or blood cell synthesis.
vitamin K, has a vitamin activity two to three times
higher than that of natural K,. Like all animals, dogs
Thiamin
and cats have a metabolic need for vitamin K. Howevet,
at least a portion of this requirement can be obtained
Thiamin, also referred to as vitamin B, is a component
from bacterial synthesis of the vitamin in the intestine.
of the coenzyme thiamin pyrophosphate, which plays
The best-known function of vitamin K is its fole in
 an important role in carbohydrate metabolism. Thiamin
the blood clotting mechanism. Specifically, it is required
 pyrophosphate is necessary for the decarboxylation and
for the liver's synthesis of prothrombin (factor II) and
transketolation reactions that are involved in the use of
three other clotting factors
factors VII, IX, and X—in
carbohydrate for energy and conversion to fat and the
the liver. Vitamin K acts as a cofactor for the enzyme
metabolism of fatty acids, nucleic acids, steroids, and
that carboxylates glutamic acid residues in a prothrom-
certain amino acids. Because of its importance in carbo-
bin-precursor protein to form gamma-carboxyglutamic
hydrate metabolism, an animal's thiamin fequirement is
acid. The conversion of these amino acids facilitates the
infuenced by the level of carbohydrate present in the diet.
binding of prothrombin to calcium and phospholipids,
A deficiency of thiamin can significantly affect the func-
 a process necessary for the occurrence of normal blood
 tioning of the central nervous system (CNS) because of the
clotting. It appears that vitamin K has a similar role in
system's dependency on a constant soufce of carbohydrate
the activation of other proteins that contain glutamic
 for energy. Natural food sources of thiamin include lean
acid residues in bone and kidney tissue.10
pork, beef, liver, wheat germ, whole grains, and legumes.
Vitamin K is found in green, leafy plants such as
Although it is present in a large variety of foods, thiamin
 spinach, kale, cabbage, and caulifower. In general, ani-
is a heat-labile vitamin and thus readlily destroyed by the
mal soufces contain lower amounts of vitamin K; livef,
high heat involved in the processing of many pet foods.
egg, and certain fish meals are fairly good sources. The
To ensure adequate levels in pet foods, most companies
synthesis of vitamin K by bacteria in the large intestine
 supplement their formulations with this vitamin before
of dogs and cats can contribute at least a portion, if not
 processing to ensure that the amount in the finished prod-
all, of the daily requirement in these species. Therefore
uct is still suffcient. Naturally occurring thiamin defciency
-is sq an u si jn aidns a e
is very rare in dogs and cats and is usually the result of the
cant when bacterial populations in the large intestine afe
presence of antithiamin factors in the diet rather than an
teduced, such as during medical treatment with certain
 absolute vitamin deficiency.
types of antibiotics, or when there is interference with the
absorption or use of vitamin K from bacterial sources.
Riboflavin
Vitamin K is also routinely administered in the tfeat-
 ment of rodenticide poisoning in pets because the active
Ribofavin is named for its yellow color (favin) and
ingredlient in many of these poisons is an anticoagulant.
because it contains the simple sugar D-ribose. It is rela-
tively stable to heat-processing but is easily destroyed
B-COMPLEXVITAMINS
by exposure to light and irradiation. Ribofavin func-
tions in the body as a component of two different
The B-complex vitamins afe watef-soluble vitamins
coenzymes, favin mononucleotide and favin alenine
that were originally grouped together because of similat
dinucleotide. Both of these coenzymes are required in
metabolic functions and occurfence in foods. These nine
oxidative enzyme systems that function in the release
Vitamins 33
of energy from carbohydrates, fats, and proteins, as
This coenzyme is necessary for many of the transami-
well as in several biosynthetic pathways. Food sources
nation, deamination, and decarboxylation feactions of
of ribofavin include milk, organ meats, whole grains,
 amino acid metabolism and is active to a lesser extent
and vegetables. In addition, microbial synthesis of ribo-
in the metabolism of glucose and fatty acids. Pyridoxal
Aavin occurs in the large intestine of most species. The
5'-phosphate is also required for the synthesis of hemo-
quantity that is synthesized appears to depend on both
globin and the conversion of tryptophan to niacin. In
the species of animal and the level of carbohydrate that
the same manner that the thiamin fequirement vaf-
is fed. However, the extent to which this source contrib-
ies with the carbohydrate level in the diet, the pyri-
utes to the daily ribofavin requirement of the dog and
doxine requirement of an animal is infuenced by the
cat is unknown.
level of protein in the diet. The three forms of vitamin
Bg afe widespread in foods. In animal tissues such as
organ meats and fish, the predominant forms are pyri-
Niacin
doxal and pyridoxamine. Conversely, plant foods such
Niacin (nicotinic acid) is closely associated with ribo-
as wheat germ and whole grains provide this vitamin
favin in cellular oxidation-reduction enzyme systems.
principally as pyridoxine and pyridoxamine. Naturally
After absorption, niacin is rapidly converted by the
occurring dietary defciencies of this vitamin in dogs
body into nicotinamide, the metabolically active form
and cats have not been reported.
of the vitamin. Nicotinamide is then incorporated into
two different coenzymes, nicotinamide adenine dinu-
cleotide (NAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinuclec-
Pantothenic Acid
tide phosphate (NADP). These coenzymes function as
Pantothenic acid was named after the Greek term pan,
hydrogen-transfer agents in several enzymatic pathways
meaning “all," because this vitamin occurs in all body
involved in the use of fat, carbohydrate, and protein.
tissues and in all forms of living tissue. Once absorbed,
Meat, legumes, and grains all contain high amounts
pantothenic acid is phosphorylated by adenosine tfi-
of niacin. However, a large proportion of the niacin 
phosphate (ATP) to form coenzyme A. This coenzyme
present in many plant sources is in a bound form and
is essential to the process of acetylation, a universal
unavailable for absorption. The niacin in animal sources
feaction involved in many aspects of carbohydrate, fat,
is found primarily in an unbound, available form. In
and protein metabolism within the citric acid cycle.
addition to consuming niacin in the diet, most animals
Pantothenic acid is found in virtually all foods. As a
also synthesize this vitamin as an end product of the
result, deficiencies of this vitamin are extremely rare.
metabolism of tfyptophan, an essential amino acid.
 Rich sources of pantothenic acid include organ meats,
As a result, the level of tryptophan in the diet directly
Pue isisnpoid Airep ylos ssa haupry pue iaa! se yons 
affects an animal's dietary requirement for niacin. Dogs.
legumes.
but not cats, ate capable of synthesizing niacin from
tryptophan. Although cats
S possess all of the needed
Biotin
The vitamin biotin is a coenzyme required in several
 t0 acetyl coenzyme A, rather than to NAD.1l Therefore
carboxylation feactions. It acts as a carbon dioxide caf-
cats must feceive theif entire niacin fequirement from
fier in reactions in which carbon chains are lengthened;
the diet.
specifically, biotin is involved in certain steps of fatty
acid, nonessential amino acid, and purine synthesis.
Biotin is found in many different foods, but its bioavail-
Vitamin Bg—Pyridoxine
ability varies greatly. Eggs provide a very rich source of
Pyridoxine, vitamin Bg, comprises three different com-
biotin, but egg white contains a compound called avi-
pounds: pyridoxine, pyridoxal, and pyridoxamine.
din, which binds biotin and makes it unavailable for
Pyridoxal, which is a component of the coenzyme
absorption. Thoroughly cooking eggs destroys avidin
pyridoxal 5'-phosphate, is the biologically active form.
and allows the biotin in the yolk to be used. Other food
34 Canine and Feline Nutrition
sources of biotin include liver, milk, legumes, and nuts.
and dairy products. This vitamin is also unique for a
Intestinal bacteria also synthesize biotin; it is believed
B vitamin because, once absorbed from the diet, excesses
that a large proportion, if not all, of an animal's require-
can be stored by the body. The liver is the primary stor-
ment can be met from this source.12 Deficiencies ate not
age tissue; muscle, bone, and skin also contain small
 generally a problem; however, the treatment of dogs and
amounts of cobalamin. Defciencies of cobalamin are
cats with antibiotics that decrease the bacterial popula-
extremely rare as a result of the very small amounts that
tion of the large intestine can cause an increase in the
ate needed by the body and the body's ability to store
dietary requirement for biotin.
appreciable amounts of the vitamin.
Folic Acid
Choline
Folic acid (folacin) is active in the body as tetrahydrofo-
The last B vitamin, choline, acts as a donor of methyl
lic acid. This compound functions as a methyl-transfer
units for vatious metabolic feactions in the body. Cho-
agent, transporting single-carbon units in a number of
line is a precursor for the neurotransmitter substance
metabolic feactions. An important fole of folic acid is
acetylcholine and is necessary for normal fatty acid
its involvement in the synthesis of thymidine, a com-
transport within cells. Unlike other vitamins, choline
ponent of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). When folic
is also an integral part of cellular membranes. Choline
acid is deficient in the body, the inability to produce
is a component of two important phospholipids-
adequate DNA leads to decreased cellular growth and
phosphatidylcholine (lecithin) and sphingomyelin.
maturation. This is manifested clinically as anemia and
Lecithin is essential for normal cell-membrane stfucture
leukopenia in defcient animals. Food soufces of folic
and function, and sphingomyelin is found in high con-
acid include green, leafy vegetables and organ meats
centrations in nefvous tissue.
such as liver and kidney. Like several of the other B
The body is capable of synthesizing choline from the
vitamins, folic acid is synthesized by the bacteria of the
amino acid serine. In this reaction, methionine acts as
large intestine in dogs and cats. It appears that most, if
a methyl donor; folacin and vitamin Biz are also nec-
not all, of the daily requirement of dogs and cats can be
essary. Many animals afe capable of synthesizing ade
met from this source.
quate choline for their needs and so do not require a
dietary source. Because choline and methionine both
function as methyl donors in the body, diets that are
Cobalamin
high in methionine can replace some of an animal's
Cobalamin (vitamin Biz) contains the mineral cobalt
choline fequirement. Choline is also widespread in
and is unique in that it is the only vitamin that con-
food sources. Egg yolk, organ meats, legumes, dairy
tains a trace element. It is also the only vitamin that
products, and whole grains all supply high amounts of
is synthesized only by microorganisms. Similar to folic
choline. Because of its synthesis in the body, its presence
acid, cobalamin is involved in the transfer of single-
in many foods, and the ability of methionine to spare
carbon units during vatious biochemical reactions. It is
choline, naturally occurring dietary deficiencies of chc-
also involved in fat and carbohydrate metabolism and is
line have not been feported in dogs and cats
necessary for the synthesis of myelin. As a result, a def-
ciency of vitamin B,z leads to both anemia and impair-
VITAMIN C(ASCORBIC ACID)
ment of neurological functioning. In most animals,
absorption of cobalamin from the diet is facilitated by a
Ascorbic acid, commonly known as vitamin C, has a
group of glycoproteins called intrinsic factors, which are
chemical structure that is closely related to the mono-
produced primarily by the pancreas and secondarily by
saccharide sugars. It is synthesized from glucose by
the gastric mucosa in dogs and cats.13,14 The absence of
plants and most animal species, including dogs and cats.
this factor can lead to vitamin Bz deficiency.
When present in foods, ascorbic acid is easily destroyed
Cobalamin is only found in foods of animal origin.
by oxidative processes. Exposure to heat, light, alkalies,
Rich sources of cobalamin include meat, poultry, fish,
oxidative enzymes, and the minerals copper and iron
Vitamins 35
all contribute to losses of vitamin C activity. Oxida-
This is a relatively low amount compared to other
tive loss of vitamin C is inhibited to some extent by
mammalian species. However, controlled research
an acid environment and by the storage of foods at low
studies in the dog have shown that dogs do not require
temperatures.
an exogenous source of vitamin C for normal develop-
The body requires ascorbic acid for the hydroxylation
ment and maintenance.1 6-18 Similarly, no requirement
of the amino acids proline and lysine in the formation
for dietary ascorbic acid has been demonstrated to exist
of collagen and elastin and for the synthesis of acetyl-
in the cat.19
cholinesterase. Collagen is the predominant structural
protein in animals and is a primaty constituent of oste
cid, dentine, and connective tissue. It is produced in
quantity by osteoblasts during skeletal growth; therefore
must be supplied in food. Well-balanced pet foods are
it is important for nofmal bone formation. When ascor
formulated to provide the necessary supplementation.
bic acid is not available, the synthesis of several types of
Vitamin C,however, is one vitamin that can be syn-
connective tissue within the body is impaired. In ani-
thesized from glucose by dogs and cats; in contrast,
mal species that have a dietary requirement for vitamin
humans must receive vitamin Cfrom dietary sources.
C, such as humans, nonhuman primates, and guinea
pigs, a vitamin C deficiency results in a condition called
scury. Clinical signs of scurvy include impaired wound
In recent years a number of breeders, dog show
healing, capillary bleeding, anemia, and faulty bone
enthusiasts, and pet owners have been foutinely admin-
formation. Bone abnormalities that afe associated with
istering high levels of supplemental vitamin C to their
scufvy afe the result of impaired cartilage synthesis
dogs' diets in the hope of preventing or curing certain
With the exception of humans and several other ani-
developmental skeletal disorders. To date, no controlled
mal species such as guinea pigs, fruit-eating bats, and
research studies have been published that show any
some other species, all animals are capable of producing
efficacy of supplemental ascorbic acid in this role; on
adlequate levels of endogenous vitamin C and therefore
the other hand, a substantial amount of evidence exists
do not have a dietary requirement for this vitamin.
that directly refutes this claim.20,2l Currently the use of
Ascorbic acid is produced in the liver from either glu-
high amounts of supplemental vitamin C in the diets
of healthy dogs and cats is not recommended and may
adlult dog produces approximately 40 milligrams per
even be contraindicated.
kilogram (mg/kg) body weight of ascorbate each day.15
References
1. Goodman DS: Vitamin A and retinoids in health and disease, N Engl J Med 310:1023-1031, 1984.
2. Chew BP, Park JS, Wong TS, and ochers: Importance of beta-carotene nutrition in the dog and cat: uptake and immunity.
In Reinhart GA, Carey DP, editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition, lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2,
Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
 3. Schweigert FJ, Raila J, Wichert B, Kienzle E: Cats absorb b-carotene, but it is not converted to vitamin A, J Nutr 132:1610S-161 2S
2002.
4. Kim HW, Chew BP, Wong TS, and others: Dietary lutein stimulates immune response in the canine, Vet Immunof Immunopathot
74:315-327, 2000.
5. Kim HW, Chew BP, Wong TS, and others: Modulation of humoral and cell-mediated immune responses by dietary lutein in cats,
Vet Immunol Immunopathol74:331341,2000.
6. Morris JG: Cats discriminate between cholecalciferol and ergocalciferol, J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 86:229-238, 2002.
36Canine and Feline Nutrition
 7. How KL, Hazewinkel AW, Mol JA: Dietary vitamin D dependence of cat and dog due to inadequate cutaneous synthesis of vitamin
D, Gen Comp Endocrinol 96:12-18, 1994.
8. Morris JF: Ineffective vitamin D synthesis in cats is reversed by an inhibitor of 7-dehydrocholeserol-delta-7-reductase, / Nut?
129:903-909, 1999.
9. Chow CK: Vitamin E. In Rucker RB, Sutte JW, McCormick DB, Machlin LJ, editors: Handbook ofvitamins, New York, 2001,
Marcel Dekker, pp 165-197.
10. Gallop PM: Carboxylated calcium-binding proteins and vitamin K, N Engi / Med 302:1460-1465, 1980.
11. lkeda MH, Tsuji H, Nakamura S, and others: Studies on the biosynthesis of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides. ll. Role of
picolinic carboxylase in the biosynthesis of NAD from tryptophan in mammals, / Biot Chem 240:1395-1401, 1965.
12. Murthy PNA, Mistry SP: Biotin, Irog Food Nutr Sci 2:405-455, 1977.
 13. Fyfe JC: Feline intrinsic factor (1F) is pancreatic original and mediates ileal cobalamin absorption (abstract),J Vet Irtern Med 7:133,
1993
14. Vaillant C, Horadagoda NU, Batt RM: Cellular localization of intrinsic factor in pancreas and stomach of the dog, Cell Tise Res
260:117-122, 1990.
15. Belfeld WO, Stone l: Megascorbic prophylaxis and megascorbic therapy: a new orthomolecular modality in veterinary medicine,
J Int Acad Prev Med 2:10-25, 1975.
16. Innes JRM: Vitamin C requirements in the dog: attempts to produce experimental scurvy. In Innes JRM, editor: Report of the
17. Naismith DH: Ascorbic acid requirements of the dog, Proc Nutr Soc 17:21, 1958.
18. Naismith DH, Pellett PL: The water-soluble vitamin content of blood, serum and mik of the bitch, Proc Nutr Soc 19:15, 1960.
19. Carvalho da Silva A, Fajer AB, DeAngelis RC, and others: The domestic cat as a laboratory animal for experimental nutrition
studies. ll. Comparative growth and hematology on stock and purified rations, Acta Physiol Latin Am 1:26-43, 1950.
 20. Grondalen J: Metaphyseal osteopathy (hypertrophic osteodystrophy) in growing dogs: a dlinical study, J Small Anim Pract 17:721-735,
1976.
21. Teare JA, Krook L, Kalfelz FA, and others: Ascorbic acid deficiency and hypertrophic osteodystrophy in the dog: a rebuttal, Cornell
Vet 69:384401, 1979.
Minerals
Minerals are inorganic elements that are essential for
CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS
the body's metabolic processes. Only about 4% of an
animal's total body weight comprises mineral matter;
Calcium and phosphorus are usually discussed together
however, like the vitamins, the presence of these ele-
because their metabolism and the homeostatic mecha-
ments is essential for life. A geheral classification scheme
nisms that control their levels within the body are closely
divides minerals into two groups, macrominerals and
interrelated. Calcium is a principal inorganic compo-
microminerals. Macrominerals are those minerals that
nent of bone. As much as 99% of the body's calcium is
occur in appreciable amounts in the body and account
found in the skeleton; the remaining 1% is distributed
for most of the body's mineral content. They include
throughout the extracellular and intracellular Auids.
calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, sulfur, iron, and the
Phosphorus is also an important component of bone.
electrolytes sodium, potassium, and chloride. Micro-
Approximately 85% of the body's phosphorus is found
minerais, often referfed to as the trace elements, include
 in inorganic combination with calcium as hydroxyapa
a larger number of minerals that afe present in the body
in very small amounts. These minerals are required in
of this mineral is found (in combination with organic
very small quantities in the diet
substances) in the soft tissues.
Minerals have a variety of functions in the body.
The calcium in bone provides structural integrity to
They activate enzymatically catalyzed reactions, provide
the skeleton and also contributes to the maintenance of
skeletal support, aid in nerve transmission and muscle
proper blood calcium levels through ongoing resorption
contractions, serve as components of ceftain transport
and deposition. The calcium in
1 bone tissue is not in a
 proteins and hormones, and function in maintaining
static state but is constantly being mobilized and depos-
water and electrolyte balance. Significant interrelation-
ited as bone growth and maintenance take place and
ships exist among many of the mineral elements that
as the body's needs for plasma calcium Huctuate. The
can affect mineral absorption, metabolism, and func-
level of circulating plasma calcium is strictly controlled 
tioning. Specifically, excesses or deficiencies of some
through homeostatic mechanisms and is independent
minerals can significantly affect the body's ability to use
of an animal's dietary intake of calcium. Circulating
other minerals in the diet. As a fesult, the level of most
calcium has essential roles in nerve impulse transmis-
minerals in the diet should be considered in relation to
sion, muscle contraction, blood coagulation, activa-
other components of the diet, with a goal of achieving
tion of certain enzyme systems, maintenance of normal
 an optimal overall dietary balance. Although most of
the minerals are discussed separately in this section,
function.
the importance of these interrelationships is adldressed
 Phosphorus that is present in bone is found primarily
when they afe of practical significance to the nutrition
in combination with calcium in the compound called
of dogs and cats. A summary of food sources and signs
bydroxyapatite. Like calcium, this phosphorus lends
of mineral deficiency and excess is shown in Table 6-1.
structural support to the skeleton and is also released
into the bloodstream in fesponse to homeostatic
mechanisms. The phosphorus that is found in the soft
Minerais are inorganic elements that make up onty
tissues of the body has a wide range of functions and is
involved in almost all of the body's metabolic processes
about 4% of an animals total body weight;nonethe
less, the essential minerais must be present in the diet to
It is a constituent of cellular deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA), several B-vitamin
sustain life and maintain heaith.
coenzymes, and the cell membrane's phospholipids,
37
38 Canine and Feline Nutrition
TABLE 6-1 MINERAL DEFICIENCIES, EXCESSES, AND MAJOR DIETARY SOURCES
MINERAL
DEFICIENCY
EXCESS
SOURCES
Calcium
Rickets, osteomalacia, nutritional
Impaired skeletal development;
Dairy products, poultry
secondary hyper parathyrcidism
contri butes to other mineral
and meat meals, bone
deficiencies
Phosphorus
Same as for calcium deficiency
Causes calcium deficiency
Meat, poultry, fish
Magnesium
Soft tissue calcification, enlargement of
 Dietary excess unlikely; absor ption is
Soybeans, corn, cereal
long bone metaphysis, neuromuscular
regulated according to needs
grains, bone meals
irritability
anins
 Not reported 
Not reported
Meat, poultry, fish
Iron 
Hypochromic microcytic anemia
 Dietary excess unlikely; absor ption is
Organ meats
regulated according to needs
Copper
Hypochromic microcytic anemia,
Inherited disorder of copper
Organ meats
impaired skeletal growth
metabolism causes liver disease
Zinc
Dermatoses, hair depigmentation,
Causes calcium and copper deficiency
Beef liver, dark poultry
growth retardation, re productive failure
meat, milk, egg yolks,
legumes
Manganese
Dietary deficiency unlikely; impaired
Dietary excess unlikely
Meat, poultry, fish
skeletal growth, reproductive failure
lodine
Dietary deficiency unlikely; goiter,
Dietary excess unlikely; goiter
Fish, beef, liver
growth retardation, re productive failure
Selenium
Dietary deficiency unlikely; skeletal and
Dietary excess unlikely; necrotizing
Grains, meat, poultry
cardiac myopathies
myocarditis, toxic hepatitis and
nephritis
Cobalt
Dietary deficiency unlikely; vitamin B12
Not reported
Fish, dairy products
deficiency, anemia
which are important for regulating the transport of
In turn, the active vitamin D produced by the kidneys
solutes into and out of cells. Phosphorus is also nec-
in response to PTH acts at the site of the intestine to
essary for the phosphorylation reactions that are part
increase the absorption of dietary calcium and phospho-
of many oxidative pathways for the metabolism of the
ttiphosphate (ATP), adenosine diphosphate, and cyclic
is to increase the serum concentration of calcium and
adlenosine monophosphate.
decrease the serum concentration of phosphorus. The
As mentioned previously, the body has several stfictly
net effect of active vitamin D is to increase levels of both
controlled homeostatic mechanisms that are designed
serum calcium and phosphorus (Figure 6-1).
 to maintain a constant level of circulating plasma cal-
When the blood calcium level is normal, PTH secre-
cium. These mechanisms involve parathyroid hormone
tion is inhibited through a negative feedback mecha-
(PTH), calcitonin, and active vitamin D (calcitriol).
nism, and calcitonin, a hormone produced by the
PTH is released into the bloodstream in response to a
parafollicular cells (C cells) of the thyroid gland, is
slight decrease in plasma calcium. This hormone stimu-
released. Calcitonin functions to reduce blood calcium
lates the synthesis of active vitamin D in the kidneys
-e qn as nn ad u aq s
and increases the resorption of calcium and phospho-
ity and decrease osteoclastic activity in bone tissue. The
rus from bone. It also works on the kidney tubules to
end result is a decrease in calcium mobilization from
increase calcium reabsorption and dec
rease phosphorus
the skeleton. Calcitonin is also released in response to
feabsorption, resulting in increased retention of calcium
hypercalcemia and the release of certain hormones, such
in the body and increased losses of urinary phosphate.
 as gastrin. Under normal physiological circumstances,
Minerals 39
↑ Ca reabsorption +
Release of PTH 
Slight ↓ plasma Ca2+
↓Preabsorption
(kidney tubules)
↑Resorption
Synthesis of active
of Ca and P
vitamin D
(bone)
(kidney)
1Mobilization
of Ca (bone)
↑ Ca and P
absorption
(intestine)]
Normalplasma Ca levels
t Plasma Ca2+ levels
Inhibit PTH
Calcitonin released 
(thyroid)
Blood Ca2+
Figure 6-1  Regulation of calcium and phosphorus balance. PTH, Parathyroid hormone.
PTH and active vitamin D are the most important
phosphorus-containing compound found in the outer
regulators of calcium homeostasis, with calcitonin play-
husks of cereal grains. Although this compound is high
ing a more minor role. However, calcitonin may be of
in phosphorus, the mineral is poorly available to the
increased importance in the normal homeostatic mech-
body. The recommended ratio of calcium to phosphorus
anisms of calcium regulation during growth, pregnancy,
in pet foods is between 1:1 and 2:1.1 Feeding animals
and lactation.
foods that have an improper calcium:phosphorus ratio
In addition to having common homeostatic mecha-
 Ot supplementing balanced foods with high amounts of
nisms in the body, calcium and phosphorus also have
either one of these minerals can lead to calcium or phos-
 an important relationship to each other within the diet.
phorus imbalance. Such problems are usually mani-
Once adlequate levels of calcium and phosphorus have
fested as skeletal disease in growing and adult animals
been included in the diet, it is important to consider
(see Section 5, pp. 497-499 for a complete discussion).
the ratio of the amount of
calcium tot
phosphorus.
intheir
calcium content.Dairy
phosphorus, fesulting in decreased
grains, meat, and organ tissues contain very little. The
tion. Similarly, high levels of phosphorus or phytate in
bioavailability of calcium in a food is infuenced not only
the diet can inhibit calcium absorption. Phytate is a
by the source of the mineral, but also by other dietary
40 Canine and Feline Nutrition
constituents and the animal's life stage (see Chapter 13,
glutathione peroxidase to protect cells
sagainstthe
pp. 111-113). Phosphorus, on the other hand, is widely
destructive effects of peroxides. It may also have a role
-soud yoq uieiuos ieun spoog 'spooy ul panqmsi
in the transport of amino acids across cell membranes.
 phorus and calcium include dairy products and legumes.
In addition, sulfur is a constituent of the two B vitamins
 Fish, meats, poultry, and organ meats are also very rich
biotin and thiamin. Within the body, sulfur exists
sources of phosphorus. However, these foods are very
almost entirely as a component of organic compounds.
deficient in calcium, and so their inclusion in the diets
punoy s inyins sApoq au jo uoniodoid isssiel auL
of dogs and cats must be balanced by a dietary source of
within proteins as a component of the sulfur-containing
calcium to ensure that an adequate calcium:phosphorus
amino acids cystine and methionine.
fatio is still maintained.
Most dietaty sulfur is provided by methionine and
cystine. Inorganic sulfates present in the diet are very
annqinuos iou op pue Apoq aun Aq paqiosqe Ajuood
MAGNESIUM
Although magnesium is a macromineral, its amount in
sulfur deficiency has hot been demonstrated in either
the body is much lower than that of calcium and phos-
dogs or cats, and it is believed that diets containing ade-
phorus. Approximately 60% to 70% of the magnesium
quate amounts of the sulfur-containing amine acids do
found in the body exists in the form of phosphates and
provide adequate amounts of sulfur.
carbonates in bone. Most of the remaining magnesium
is found within cells, and a very small potion is pres-
RON
ent in the extracellular Huid. In addition to its role in
providing structure to the skeleton, magnesium func-
Iron is present in all body cells, but the largest propor-
tions in a number of metabolic reactions; a magnesium-
tion of the bodys iron is found as a component of the
ATP complex is often the form of ATP that is used as a
protein molecules hemoglobin (>65%) and myoglobin
substrate in many of these processes. As a cation in the
(-4%). Hemoglobin is found in fed blood cells and
intracellular Huid, magnesium is essential for the cellular
ttansports oxygen from the lungs to the tissues; myo-
metabolism of both carbohydrate and protein. Protein
globin binds oxygen for immediate use by muscle cells.
synthesis also requires the presence of ionized magne-
Iron is also a cofactor for several other enzymes and is a
sium. Balanced in the extracellular fuids with calcium,
 component of the cytochrome enzymes, which function
sodium, and
1 potassium, magnesium allows muscle
in hydrogen ion transport during cellular respiration.
contraction and proper transmission of nerve impulses.
Dietary iron is supplied either as inorganic ions
Magnesium is widespread in food sources and is
(ferric or ferrous iron) or as organically bound iron,
abundant in whole grains, legumes, and dairy prod-
principally as part of the heme molecule. The amount
ucts. Naturally occurring magnesium deficiency is not
of iron that is absorbed is affected by multiple factors,
common in dogs and cats. However, excess magne-
including the body's need for the mineral, the environ-
sium in the diets of cats has been implicated as a fisk
ment of the intestinal lumen, and the types of foods
factor for struvite urolithiasis (see Section 5, pp. 362-365
that are fed.23 Inorganic iron in the ferrous state (+2)
for a complete discussion).
is more feadily absorbed than iron that is in the fertic
state (+3). Therefore an acidic (reducing) environment
SULFUR
in the intestine generally enhances iron absorption.
Similarly, organic heme iron, which originates from the
e jo sisauus aun ioy Apoq au Aq panbai si inyins
hemoglobin and myoglobin in animal food sources, is
number of sulfur-containing compounds. These include
better absorbed than nonheme iron, which is found in
chondroitin sulfate, a mucopolysaccharide found in cat-
 plant sources and some animal foods. Low stores of iron
tilage; the hormone insulin; and the anticoagulant hep-
in the body and increased metabolic need, such as dur-
atin. As part of the amino acid cysteine, sulfur is found
ing periods of growth and gestation, result in increased
in the regulatory tripeptide glutathione. Glutathione
efficiency of iron absorption. Dietary factors that can
is present in all cells and functions with the enzyme
inhibit iron absorption include the presence of phytate,
Minerals41
phosphates, and oxalates in the diet and the intake of
sites in the liver. As a component of several different
excess dietary zinc of calcium.
metalloenzymes, copper is required for the conversion of
Iron is transported in the bloodstream while bound
the amino acid tyrosine to the pigment melanin, for the
to the tfansport protein tfansferrin, and it is stored in
synthesis of the connective tissues collagen and elastin,
tissues while bound to two other proteins, ferritin and
and for the production of ATP in the cytochrome oxi-
hemosiderin. Ferritin and transferrin afe also involved
dase system. Another copper metalloenzyme, superoxide
in the regulation of iron absorption and transport. Chief
dismutase, functions to protect cells from oxidative dam-
storage sites for iron in the body are the liver, spleen,
age by superoxide radicals. Copper is also necessary for
and bone marrow. Most animals are very efficient at
 normal ostecblast activity during skeletal development.
conserving iron, so losses of this mineral from the body
The highest concentration of copper in the body is
are minimal. The iron of hemoglobin is recycled and
found in the liver. After absorption from the intestine,
teused when red blood cells are catabolized, and only
copper, complexed with the plasma protein albumin, is
minute amounts afe lost by fenal excretion. As a fesult,
transported through the portal vein to the liver. Metallo-
the requirement for iron only increases drastically dur-
thioneins, small-molecular-weight cytoplasmic proteins,
ing periods of unusual blood loss, such as in cases of
bind copper and are involved in regulating its transport
parturition, major surgery,
, injury, or severe parasitic
 into the liver. Copper is stored in the liver, where it is 
infection or gastrointestinal d
disease. Iron defciency
incorporated into ceruloplasmin and other proteins for
results in a hypochromic, microcytic anemia, which is
use by the body. Excess copper is excreted in the bile.
often manifested clinically by fatigue and dlepression.
Sources of copper include liver and the bran and
Conversely, iron, like most trace elements, is toxic if
germ portions of grains. I
 In pet foods, supplemental
ingested in excessive amounts.
copper is often included in the form of cupric chlo-
Organ meats such as liver and kidney ate the richest
ride or cupric sulfate. Because of copper's importance
in iron metabolism and hemoglobin formation, copper
whole grains also provide adlequate amounts. All of the
deficiency results in a hypochromic, microcytic anemia
u uon a jo %og Aiaixdde pue siueld u uo1
 similar to that seen with iron defciency. Other signs
animal foods is in the form of nonheme iron, which
of deficiency include depigmentation of colored hair
is not absorbed as efficiently as heme iron. Common
coat and impaired skeletal growth in young animals.
 sources of iron that are included in commercial dogs
 Although copper defciency is not common in dogs and
and cat foods include steamed bone meal, dicalcium
 cats, an inherited disorder of copper metabolism that
phosphate, and ferrous sulfate heptahydrate. Anemia
results in copper toxicosis occurs in several different
as a result of a dietary deficiency of iron is extremely
breeds of dogs (see Section 5, pp. 298-299).
rate in dogs and cats. A chronic blood loss that occurs
during severe parasitic infections or hemorrhage is more
ZINC
likely to be the cause of iron defciency in these species.
The trace mineral zinc is widely distributed in many
tissues of the body, and its actions infuence carbohy-
COPPER
drate, lipid, protein, and nucleic acid metabolism. Zinc
The metabolism and functions of copper are closely tied
is a component of many of the metalloenzymes, which
to those of iron. Copper is necessary for normal absorp-
include carbonic anhydrase, lactic dehydrogenase, alka-
tion and transport of dietary iron. Along with iron, cop-
line phosphatase, carboxypeptidase, and aminopepti-
 per is essential for the normal formation of hemoglobin.
dase. Zinc also functions as a cofactor in the synthesis
Most of the copper found in blood is bound to the
of DNA, RNA, and protein and is essential for normal
-ddon e si und s 'usedon urd sed
cellular immunity and reproductive functioning. Like
dependent ferroxidase that functions as a carrier of cop-
iron, the absorption of zinc from the diet is affected by
per and also in the oxidation of plasma iron, which is
several factors. Metallothioneins have a high affinity for
necessary for binding to transferrin. Ceruloplasmin may
binding to zinc and are involved in the regulation of
also be involved in the mobilization of iron from storage
zinc absorption and metabolism.
42 Canine and Feline Nutrition
The body's effciency of zinc absorption increases with
processes and regulates basal metabolic rate. The princi-
 increasing need for this mineral. Animal sources of zinc,
 pal sign of iodine deficiency is goiter, an enlargement of
such as meat and eggs, are generally more feadlily absorbed
the thyroid gland. Cretinism, a syndrome characterized
than are plant sources. Dietary compounds that act to
by failure to grow, skin lesions, central nervous system
decrease zinc absorption include excess levels of calcium,
(CNS) dysfunction, and multiple skeletal deformi
iron, copper, and fber, and the presence of phytate.5
ties, can occur in young animals that are fed a severely
Because of its role in protein synthesis, zinc defi-
deficient diet. However, naturally occurring iodine
ciency is usually associated with growth retardation in
dleficiency does not commonly occur in dogs or cats.
 young animals. Other clinical signs include anorexia,
testicular atfophy, impaired
reproductiveperformance,
SELENIUM
immune system dysfunction,
conjunctivitis, and the
development of skin lesions. In dogs and cats, skin and
As an essential component of the enzyme glutathione
hair coat changes are usually the frst clinical signs of
peroxidase, selenium protects cell membranes from
zinc deficiency; these signs have been dlescribed as dull,
oxidative damage. Glutathione peroxidase deactivates
coarse hair coat and skin lesions that show parakera-
lipid peroxides that are formed during oxidation of
tosis and hyperkeratinization.6 Although not common,
cell-membrane lipids. In this role, selenium has a close
naturally occurring zinc-responsive dermatoses
have
relationship with vitamin E and the sulfur-containing
been identifed in companion animals.7-9 In addition,
amino acids methionine and cystine. Vitamin E pro-
 a genetically infuenced abnormality in zinc absorption
tects the polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) in cell
and metabolism is reported in some dog breeds, result-
membranes from oxidative damage, and thus it prevents
ing in an increased zinc requirement in affected animals
the release of lipid peroxides. By reducing the number
(see Section 5, pp. 299-300).10
of peroxides that are formed, vitamin E spares the cellu-
lar use of selenium. The sulfur-containing amino acids
MANGANESE
afe important in selenium metabolism because they are
 hecessary for the formation of glutathione peroxidase.
Like most of the other microminerals,
，manganese
Sources of selenium include cereal grains, meat, and
functions as a component of several cell enzymes that
fish. Because selenium is abundant in foods, naturally
catalyze metabolic reactions. A large proportion (
of
occurring defciencies are not a problem in dogs and
 manganese is located in the mitochondria of cells where
cats. However, like other trace elements, the ingestion
it activates a humber of metal-enzyme complexes that
of excess selenium is toxic.
fegulate nutrient metabolism. These complexes include
pyruvate carboxylase and superoxide dismutase. Man-
COBALT
ganese is also necessary for normal bone development
and reproduction. Foods that are good
Isoufces
of
Cobalt is a constituent of vitamin B2. Currently no
1whole-grain cereals
function for cobalt in the body has been identified
Animal-based ingredients afe generally poor sources of
Additional cobalt does not appear to be required by dogs
and cats when their diet contains adequate amounts of
mo 'sies no sop raia ul podai uaaq nou s
vitamin B12-
manganese deficiency is characterized in other species
by decreased growth, impaired 
1 reproduction, and
CHROMIUM
disturbances in lipid metabolism.
Chromium is a component of the organic complex
known as giucose tolerance factor. This factor functions
IQDINE
to enhance the action of the hormone insulin, which
Iodine is required by the body for the synthesis of
is necessary for the normal metabolism of glucose and
the hormones thyroxine and triodothyronine by the
other nutrients. In humans, chromium deficiency has
thyroid gland. Thyroxine stimulates cellular oxidative
been shown to be associated with abnormal glucose
Minerals 43
utilization and insulin resistance.ll It has also been
Sodium
suggested that a low dietary intake of chromium
of an impaired metabolism of chromium may be a
Ionized sodium is the major cation found in the extra-
factor associated with the development of diabetes (see
cellular Auid. Sodium in this compartment provides
 Section 5, pp. 352-353). A few recent studies with dogs
the primary osmotic force that maintains the aque-
and cats have examined the effects of supplemental
ous environment of the extracellular Auid. It func-
chromium (usually supplied as chromium tripicelinate)
tions in conjunction with other ions to maintain the
on glucose metabolism, insulin sensitivity, and immune
normal irritability of nerve cells and the contractibil-
responsiveness (see Section 5, pp. 352-353 for a com-
ity of muscle fbers. Sodium is also necessary for the
plete discussion).12-14
maintenance of the permeability of cell membranes.
The sodium “pump" controls the electrolyte balance
between the intracellular and extracellular fuid com-
OTHER MICROMINERALS
partments. The chief source of sodium in the diet is
There afe several trace elements that have been shown to
table salt (sodium chloride), which is used for food
be required by other species of mammals, but they have
preservation in most commercially prepared foods.
pue sop iog euass aq on paiensuouap uaaq iah 1ou
In addition to processed products, foods that have
cats. These include molybdenum, tin, Huorine, nickel,
naturally high sodium content include dairy products,
silicon, vanadium, and arsenic. It is highly likely that
meat, poultry, fish, and egg white. Because of this min-
dogs and cats also require these elements, even though
eral's abundance in foods, sodium deficiency is not a
problem in dogs and cats. Conversely, excess sodium
These minerals are widespread in food ingredients and
intake has been implicated as a possible causal factof
are required by the body in very
yminuteamounts.Con
in hypertension in some human populations.15 These
versely, all have been shown to be highly toxic when fed
observations, coupled with the high sodium content of
in large doses.
some commercial pet foods, led investigators to exam-
ine the effects of high sodium intake in dogs. Results
indicate that hypertension is not a common problem
ELECTROLYTES
in this species. Moreover, dogs and cats appear to be
physiologically capable of adapting to widle variations
Potassium
in sodium intake.16.19
Potassium is the main cation in the intracellular fuid
Approximately one third of a cell's potassium is bound
Chloride
to protein; the fest is found in the ionized form.
Ionized potassium within cells provides the osmotic
Chloride ions account for about two thirds of the total
force that maintains proper fuid volume. Cellular
anions present in the extracellular fuid. They are nec-
 potassium is also required for numerous enzymatic reac-
essary for the regulation of normal osmotic pressure,
tions. The small concentration of potassium present in
water balance, and acid-base balance in the body. Chlo-
the extracellular fuid aids in the transmission of nerve
fide is also necessary for the formation of hydrochloric
impulses and the contraction of muscle fbers. The
acid (HCl) in the stomach. HCl is fequired for the acti-
maintenance of potassium balance is especially impor-
vation of several gastric enzymes and for the initiation
tant for the normal functioning of heart muscle. Many
of digestion in the stomach. Because most of the chlo-
ane usy pue hinnod 'siea 'unssenod ureuoo spooy
fide that animals consume is associated with sodium,
all rich sources, and whole-grain cereals and most veg-
the daily amount consumed generally parallels sodium
etables also contain high amounts. Because of the abun-
intake. Like potassium and sodium, dietary chloride
dance of potassium in most foods, potassium deficiency
deficiency has not been found to be a common problem
of a dietary origin is highly unusual in dogs and cats.
in dogs and cats.
44Canine and Feline Nutrition
References
1. Association of American Feed Control Offcials (AAFCO): Offcial publication, 2008, AAFCO.
2. Fernandez R, Phillips S: Components of fiber impair iron absorption in the dog, Am J Chin Nutr 35:107-112, 1982.
3. Hill EC, Burrows C, Ellison G, Bauer J: The effect of texturized vegetable protein from soy on nutrient digestibility compared to
beef in cannulated dogs, J Arim Sci 79:2162-2171, 2001.
4. Meyer H: Mineral metabolism and requirements in bitches and suckling pups. In Anderson R, editor: Nutrition and behaviour in
dogs and cats, Oxford, UK, 1985, Pergamon Press, pp 13-24.
5. Hunt JR, Johnson PE, Swan PB: Dietary conditions infuencing relative zinc availability from foods to the rat and correlations with
in vitro measurements, / Nutr 117:1913-1923, 1987.
6. Sanecki RK, Corbin JE, Forbes RM: Tissue changes in dogs fed a zinc-deficient ration, Am J Vet Res 43:1642-1646, 1983.
 7. Sousa CA, Stannard AA, 1hrke PH: Dermatosis associated with feeding generic dog food: 13 cases (198 1-1982), J Am Vet Med Asoc
192:767-680, 1988.
8. Ohlen B, Scott D: Zinc-responsive dermatosis in puppies, Canine Pract 13:6-10, 1986.
9. Huber TD, Lafamme D, Medleau L, and others: Comparison of procedures for assessing adequacy of dog foods, J Am Vet Med
Assoc 199:731-734, 1991.
10. Colombini S, Dunstan R: Zinc-responsive dermatosis in northern-breed dogs: 17 cases (1990-1996), J Am Vet Med Asoc 211:
451453, 1997.
11. Anderson RA: Chromium, glucose tolerance and diabetes, Biot Trace Element Res 32:19-24, 1992.
12. Appleton D], Rand JS, Sunvold GD, Priest J: Effect of chromium supplementation on glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity in
normal cats. In Iroceedings XXrV WSAVA Congress, Lyon, France, 1999.
editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition: lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange
Frazer Press, pp 555-564.
14. Spears J, Brown T, Sunvold C, Hayek M: Infuence of chromium on glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity. In Reinhart CA,
Carey DP, editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition: lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio,
1998, Orange Frazer Press, pp 103-112.
15. Houston MC: Sodium and hypertension, Arch Intern Med 146:179-185, 1986.
16. Wilhelmj CM, Waldmann EB, McGuire TF: Effect of prolonged high sodium chloride ingestion and withdrawal upon blood
pressure of dogs, Iroc Soc Exp Bio Med 77:379-382, 1951.
17. National Research Council: Nutrient reguirements of dogs and cats, Washington, DC, 2006, National Acadery Press.
18. Kirk CA, Jewell DE, Lowry SR: Effects of sodium chloride on selected parameters in cats, Vet 7her 7:333-346, 2006.
19. Luckschander N, Iven C, Hosgood G, and others: Dietary NaCI does not afect blood pressure in health cats,J Vet Intern Med
18:463-467, 2004.
Digestion and Absorption
The process of digestion breaks down the large,
facilitate both chewing and swallowing and also serves
complex molecules of many nutrients into their sim-
plest, most soluble forms so that absorption and use
the taste buds and impart favor to food. In addition
by the body can take place (Table 7-1). The two basic
to its function in digestion, saliva is also important to
types of action involved in this process are mechani-
cal digestion and chemical (or enzymatic) digestion.
Compared t
Mechanical digestion involves the physical mastication
cies that thoroughly masticate their food, dogs and
(chewing), mixing, and movement of food through
no chewing. However, there are also important differ-
splitting the chemical bonds of complex nutrients
ences between dogs and cats. Although domesticated
through enzymatically catalyzed hydrolysis. The three
dogs and cats have the same number of incisor and
major types of foods that require digestion are fats,
canine teeth (six incisors and two canines on both the
carbohydrates, and proteins. Before absorption takes
top and bottom jaws), the dog's mouth contains mofe
place, most of the fat in food is hydrolyzed to glycerol,
premolarsand
molars than does the cat's mouth
free fatty acids (FFAs), and some monoglycerides and
These teeth are associated with an increased capac-
diglycerides. Complex carbohydrates afe broken down
ity to chew and crush food, which is indicative of
to the simple sugars-
-glucose, galactose, and fruc-
tose. Protein molecules are hydrolyzed to single amino
acid units and some dipeptides. As dietary nutrients
are digested, they are transported through the diges-
TABLE 7-1 DIGESTIVE END PRODUCTS OF
tive tract by a series of contractions of the muscular
CARBOHYDRATE, PROTEiN,
walls of the gastrointestinal tract. The process of diges-
AND FAT
tion and absorption begins when food frst enters the
NUTRIENT
ENZYMES
END PRODUCTS
mouth and ends with the excretion of waste products
Car bohydrate
Amylase
Glucose
and undigested food particles in the feces (Figures 7-1
Lactase
Galactose
and 7-2).
Sucrase
Fructose
Maltase
Protein
Dipeptidase
Dipeptides
Digestion and absorption begin in the mouth, with the
Amino peptidase
 Single amino
mastication (chewing) of food and its mixture with
Pepsinogen
acids
saliva. Digestion continues throughout the gastrointes-
Pepsin
tinal system and ends with the excretion of waste prod-
Nucleotidase
ucts and undigested food particles in the feces.
Nucleosidase
Trypsin
Chymotry psin
Carboxypeptidase
MOUTH
Nuclease
In all species, the mouth functions to bring food
Fat
Intestinal lipase
Glycerol
into the body, initiate physical mastication, and mix
Pancreatic lipase
Free fatty acids
the food with saliva. Saliva is secreted in response to
Monoglycerides,
the sight and smell of food. It acts as a lubricant to
diglycerides
45
46 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Esophagus
Gallbladder
Liver
Pancreas
Smallintestine(duodenum)
Large intestine (colon)
lleocecalvalve
Rectum
Salivary glands
-Small intestine(ileum)
Small intestine(jejunum)
Pyloricsphincter
Stomach
Cardiacsphincter
Figure 7-1CGastrointestinal systerm of the dog.
a diet containing a larger proportion of plant mate-
glutamate, disodium guanylate, “meaty” favors). Dogs
fial. Thus the dentition of dogs is suggestive of a more
and cats possess taste systems that afe consistent with
omnivorous diet than is the dentition of cats, which is
the general pattern seen in other carnivorous species.
more typical of the pattern seen in most obligate car-
Early studies classified the cat's taste system into four
nivores.' Although both dogs and cats afe considered
general types of units (I, II, IIA, and IIB).2 A similar
to be “meat-eaters,” the dog has evolved to consume
and closely corresponding set of units has been identi-
a diet that is more omnivorous in nature than that of
fed in the domestic dog.3 In general, both dogs and
the cat.
cats are highly sensitive to the tastes of amino acids and
Another important role of the mouth is its impor-
to various types of organic acids and nucleotides. All of
tance in taste perception (gustation). Taste refers to the
these are substances found in abundance in animal tis-
sensation that afises from stimulation of the taste buds,
sues.4 Another similarity between dogs and cats is that
spherical or ovoid clusters of papillae that are located on
 neither species exhibits a strong preference for salt solu-
the surface of the tongue. Taste receptor cells are located
tions. Although there is evidence that salty favors may
at the tip of each taste bud and are classified into five
enhance the attractiveness of some foods for dogs and
general receptor types: sweet (sugars), sour (acids), salty,
that cats show a slight preference for salt at relatively
bitter (alkaloids, peptides), and umami (monosodium
high concentrations, these species do not demonstrate
Digestion and Absorption47
Esophagus
Gallbladder
Smallintestine(duodenum)
Liver
Pancreas
Large intestine(colon)
-lleocecalvalve
Salivary glands
Rectum
-Smallintestine
Stomach
Cardiac
Pyloric
sphincter
sphinct
Fgure 7-2 Gastrointestinal syster of the cat
the “salt appetite" that is reported in other omnivores
dogs are typically repelled by most bitter favors. There
and herbivorous species.
is speculation that these differences between dog and
Dogs and cats also have several interesting differ-
cat taste systems refect the cat's evolutionary adher.
ences in taste feceptors. One of the most dramatic is
ence to a more strictly carnivorous feeding pattern,
in their sensitivity to the taste of sweet. Dogs, but not
leading to taste preferences for foods derived from only
cats, are sensitive to and show preferences for sweet
animal tissue, and a loss of the ability to perceive fa-
foods.67 (This is one of the reasons that theobromine
vors that are more typically found in fruits and vegeta-
toxicity, as a result of chocolate ingestion, is a signif-
bles. In contrast, the dog evolved from a canid species
cant risk to pet dogs but not to pet cats.) Recent stud-
that, although also a predator, was more omnivo-
ies have shown that one of two receptor genes known
fous in nature. Further, the process of domestication
to encode for the sweet-taste receptors in taste buds is
selected for a more varied omnivorous diet in dogs,
 not expressed in cats.8 This defect may be responsible
as scavenging gradually replaced cooperative hunting
for the lack of response to sweet favors observed in the
as a primary feeding behavior.1 0 The impact that taste
domestic cat and in several other felid species. In lieu
and other special sense perceptions such as odors and
of these receptors, cats possess a receptor that is highly
food textures have upon food selection and preferences
sensitive to quinine, tannic acid, and alkaloids—favors
 in dogs and cats are discussed in detail in Chapter 19
that are thought to be perceived as bitter. In contrast,
(see pp. 191-193).
48 Canine and Feline Nutrition
action. It functions to slightly alter the composition
Dogs show a preference for sweet foods, while cats do
of ingested fat and protein in preparation for further
not. Conversely, cats (but not dogs) are attracted to
action by dligestive enzymes in the small intestine.
favors that are typically perceived as bitter These dif-
Along with previously formed pepsin, HCl also con-
ferences may refect the cat's evoiutionary adherence to
verts pepsinogen to the enzyme pepsin. This enzyme
a more strictly carnivorous feeding pattern and the dog's
initiates hydrolysis of protein molecules to smaller poly
historically more omnivorous diet.
peptide units in the stomach. The activity of pepsin is
highest in the acidic environment of the stomach and is
 reduced and eventually inactivated when food leaves the
ESOPHAGUS
stomach and is exposed to the heutral pH of the small
noinn yeos ai on ynou aun o sasd poo
intestine.12
the esophagus. The cells of the mucosal lining of the
 Both neurological and hormonal stimuli are impor-
 esophagus secrete mucus in response to the presence of
tant for the secretion of HCl and mucus by the stom-
food, which further aids in lubricating food as it passes
ach. Neurological stimuli are produced in response to
to the stomach. As the food reaches the end of the
the anticipation of eating, the sight and smell of food,
esophagus, the cardiac sphincter, a ring of muscle at the
and the presence of food in the stomach. In addition,
junction between the esophagus and stomach, felaxes
 psychological stimuli such as fear, stress, and anxiety
to allow food to enter the stomach. This ring relaxes in
can affect gastric secretions and gastrointestinal func-
response to the peristaltic movements of the esophagus.
tioning in animals. The hormone gastrin is released
It then immediately constricts after food has passed to
in response to the presence of food and distention of
prevent refux of the stomach contents back into the
the stomach. It is produced by mucosal glands in the
lower esophagus.
antrum portion of the stomach. Gastrin stimulates the
secretion of HCl and mucus and alse increases gastric
motility. Another local hormone, enterogastrone, is
STOMACH
produced by glands located in the duodenal mucosa.
The stomach acts as a reservoir for the body, allowing
food to be ingested as a meal rather than continuously
of fat entering the duodenum and counteracts the
throughout the day. The proximal section of the stomach
pue uonoid pe Suaiuu Aq us jo Aiie
is capable of expansion to allow storage of large meals, a
gasttic motility.
function that is assumed to be of greater importance for
Peristaltic movements of the stomach slowly mix the
    1 s  a   o 
ingested food with gastric secretions, preparing it for
for cats, who prefer to eat multiple small meals per day
 entry into the small intestine. The mucosal cells located
(see Chapter 19, pp. 192-193). In addition to its storage
in the antral portion of the stomach secrete mucus that
function, the stomach also initiates the chemical diges-
 has a more alkaline pH and is low in digestive enzymes.
tion of protein (and possibly of fat, in the dog), mixes
Thorough mixing in this portion results in the produc-
food with gastric secretions, and regulates the entry of
tion of a semifuid mass of food calledl chyme. Chyme
food into the small intestine. The gastric glands, which
must
t pass through the pyloric sphincter to enter the
are located in the mucosal lining of the corpus por-
small intestine for further digestion. Like the cardiac
tion of the stomach, secrete mucus, hydrochloric acid
sphincter,
 the pyloric sphincter is a ring of muscle
(HCl), and the proteolytic enzyme pepsinogen. In dogs,
that is usually in a constricted state. This ring relaxes
in response to the strong peristaltic contractions that
appears to be much less important for fat digestion than
ofiginate in the stomach and travel toward the intes
pancreatic lipase.ll For this reason, it is believed that
tine. While open, the sphincter allows small amounts
the majority of fat dligestion still takes place in the small
of chyme to enter the duodenum. The pyloric sphinctef
intestine. Mucous secretions protect the gastric mucosa
controls the rate of passage of food from the stomach
and also lubricate the ingested food. HCl is necessaty to
into the small intestine. The rate of gastric emptying is
maintain a proper pH for the occurrence of enzymatic
affected by a number of factors, including the osmotic
Digestion and Absorption 49
pressure, particle size, and viscosity of the chyme, as well
as the degree of gastric acidity and volume. In general,
Nutrient Digestion
large meals have a slower rate of emptying than small
The pancreas and the glands located in the duode-
meals, liquids leave the stomach faster than solids, and
nal mucosa secrete enzymes into the intestinal lumen
very high-fat meals may cause a decrease in stomach-
that chemically digest fat, carbohydrate, and protein.
emptying rate. Diets that contain soluble fber as a fber
Enzymes secreted by the intestinal cells include intes
source cause a decreased rate of stomach emptying when 
tinal lipase, amino peptidase, dipeptidase, nucleotidase,
compared with diets that contain insoluble dietary fber
nucleosidase, and enterokinase. Intestinal lipase con-
(see Chapter 2, p. 14, Table 2-1). In addition, there is
verts fat to monoglycerides, diglycerides, glycerol, and
evidence in cats that dry cat foods leave the stomach at
FFAs. Amino peptidase breaks the peptide bond located
a slower rate than canned foods, except when very small
at the N-terminal of the protein molecule, slowly releas-
meals are consumed.13 The shape of the kibble in dry
 ing single amino acids from the protein chain. Dipep-
cat food can also infuence the rate of gastric emptying.
tidase breaks the peptide bond of dipeptides to release
with triangulat-shaped pieces leaving the stomach at a
two single amino acid units. Both nucleosidase and
slower rate than round pieces.14
nucleotidase hydrolyze nucleoproteins to their constitu-
-uo asuroiaa fisei 'sieans asouad pue saseq ia
SMALL INTESTINE
pancreas, to its active form (trypsin).
Before reaching the small intestine, most of the diges
The fnal digestion of carbohydrate takes place at
the brush border of the small intestine. The cells of the
cal in nature. The chyme that is delivered through the
brush border secrete the enzymes mal tase, lactase, and
 pyloric sphincter to the duodenum is a semifuid mass
sucrase, which respectively convert the disaccharides
made up of food particles mixed with gastric secfetions.
maltose, lactose, and sucfose to their constituent mono-
Carbohydrates and fats are almost unchanged in com-
sacchatides; glucose, ffuctose, and galactose. Protease
position, but the protein in the food has been partially
enzymes secreted by the pancreas include trypsin, chy-
hydrolyzed to smaller polypeptides. Even this digestion
motrypsin, carboxypeptidase, and nuclease. Several of
is not crucial, however, because the enzymes of the small
these are secreted in an inactive form and are activated
intestine are capable of completely digesting intact
by other components in the small intestine after release.
dietary protein. Therefore the major task of chemical
In addition, pancreatic lipase and amylase afe released
digestion and the subsequent absorption of nutrients
into the intestinal lumen and respectively function to
occur in the small intestine.
hydrolyze dietary fat and starch into smaller units. Cho-
Further mechanical digestion also occurs in the
lesterol esterase secreted by the pancreas catalyzes the
simall intestine through the coordinated contractions of
formation of cholesterol esters. Free cholesterol must be
its muscle layers. These movements thoroughly mix the
esterifed to fatty acids to facilitate its absorption into
food mass with intestinal secretions, increase the expo-
the body. The pancreas also secretes a large volume of
sure of digested food particles to the mucosal surface,
bicarbonate salts into the small intestine. These salts
and slowly propel the food mass through the intestinal
function to neutralize the acidic chyme and provide the
ttact. Constant sweeping motions of the intestinal villi
 proper pH for the digestive enzymes to function.
that line the surface of the mucosa mix the chyme that is
Bile is another important component of nutri-
in contact with the intestinal wall and increase the effi-
ent digestion in the small intestine. It is produced by
ciency of absorption of digested particles. After food has
the liver and stored in the gallbladder. Bile's primary
entered the small intestine, large quantities of mucus
function in the small intestine is the emulsification of
afe secreted by the Brunner's glands, which are located
dietary fat and the activation of certain lipases. These
immediately inside the duodenum. This mucus protects
two processes result in the formation of very simall
the intestinal mucosa from irritation and erosion by the
water-soluble globules called micelles. The formation
 gastric acids that are entering from the stomach and fur-
of micelles results in an increased surface area for the
ther lubricates the food mass.
action of lipase and also arranges lipid molecules into
50 Canine and Feline Nutrition
water-miscible forms that are able to gain access to the
compounds. In both dogs and cats, small intestinal
aqueous layer covering the microvilli, ultimately facili-
bacteria have also been found to produce short-chain
tating absorption of fat into the body.
fatty acids (SCFAs), which may further infuence the
Hormonal control of digestion in the small intestine
lumen environment and intestinal health.17,18 In addi-
involves several components. Secretin is produced by
tion, certain nutrients and dietary components may
the mucosa of the upper portion of the duodenum in
infuence small intestinal microbial populations. Fof
response to the entry of acidic chyme into the duode-
example, fructooligosaccharides (FOS), a type of natu-
num. It stimulates the release of bicarbonate from the
rally occurring fber that is fermented by certain intes-
pancreas and controls the rate of bile fow from the gall-
tinal bacteria, have been found to enhance the growth
bladder. Cholecystokinin is also released from this por-
of beneficial bacteria and reduce the numbers of poten-
tion of the intestinal mucosa in response to the presence
tially pathogenic bacteria in the small intestine of dogs
of fat in the food mass. This hormone stimulates con-
and cats.19,20 A similar fber, mannanoligosaccharides
traction of the gallbladder, fesulting in a release of bile
(MOS) can also beneficially alter small intestinal bac-
into the intestinal lumen. Cholecystokinin also stimu-
terial populations, albeit via a different mechanism21
lates secretion of the pancreatic enzymes.
(see Chapter 35, pp. 467-470 for a complete discussion).
NutrientAbsorption
Most of the important tasks ofchemical digestion and
the subsequent absorption of nutrients occur in the
In dogs and cats, the chemical digestion of food is
smallintestire.
completed in the small intestine. Digestible protein,
carbohydrate, and fat are hydrolyzed to amino acids,
dipeptidles, monosacchatidles,
glycerol, FFAs, and
Small Intestinal Microflora
monoglycerides and diglycerides. As these small units
Although of greater significance in the large intestine,
afe produced, they ate absorbed by the body along with
the small intestines of healthy dogs and cats also con-
dietary vitamins and minerals. Absorption involves the
tain resident microbial populations. In dogs, bacterial
transfer of digested nutrients from the intestinal lumen
numbers in the duodenum and ileum are relatively low,
into the blood or l
lymphatic system for delivery to tis-
rarely exceeding 104 colony forming units (CFUs) per
 sues throughout the body. Like digestion, the greatest
milliliter (ml).'5 These numbers increase to approxi-
 part of absorption takes place in the small intestine.
mately 106 CFU per ml in the distal portion of the
The structure of the inner wall of the small intestine
ileum as it approaches the ileal-cecal junction. Species
is designed to provide a high amount of surface atea
that are typically found in the dog's small intestine
for the absorption of nutrients. The mucosal folds, villi,
include primarily streptococci, lactobacilli, and Bif-
and microvilli of the mucosa produce an absorptive
dobacterium spp. in the duodenum and jejunum and
inner surface afea that is approximately 600 times that
several species of anaerobic bacteria and Escherichia coli
of the outer serosal layer of the intestine. Villi are finger-
in the ileum. Compared with dogs, healthy cats have
like projections that cover the convoluted folds of the
significantly higher concentrations of microbes present
mucosa. Each individual villus contains a vascular het-
work of venous and arterial capillaries and a lymph ves-
as 108 CFUs.16 Also, species differences are found when
 sel called a lacteal. These function to transport absorbed
-su leus au u nuasaid easeq jid sueduo
 nutrients to either the portal or lymphatic circulations.
tines of cats and dogs. The primary microbes found in
The surface of each villus is covered with numerous,
the duodenum of cats include the aerobe Pasteurelila and
minute projections called microvilli. These afe often
the anaerobes Bacteroides, Eubacteria,and Fusobacteria.
collectively referred to as the brush border of the small
Microfora present in the small intestine function to
intestine. The cells lining the luminal surface of the villi
  s  n  r
 are highly specialized absorptive cels called enterocytes.
peting for available nutrients, maintaining an appro-
These cells have a lifespan of only 2 to 3 days, during
priate lumen envifonment, and producing inhibitory
which they absorb nutrients from the lumen of the
Digestion and Absorption  51
small intestine. Old cells ate continually sloughed off
particles. The central lacteal drains into the major
and excreted in the feces, giving these cells one of the
lymph vessels, and the particles eventually enter the
highest turnover fates of any tissue in the body
blood circulation near the heart.
Nutrient absorption is accomplished in the small
The liver functions to further process the absorbed
intestine through several processes. Some small mol-
 monosaccharides and amino acids that arrive through
ecules are absorbed by passive diffusion according to the
the portal circulation. Some monosaccharides are con-
osmotic gradient; for example, electrolytes and water
verted to the storage catbohydrate form glycogen, and
molecules both fow across the mucosa in response
a certain quantity of glucose is secreted directly into
t0 osmotic pressure. Facilitated diffusion involves the
the circulation. Some amino acids are released into the
transport of large molecules across the cellular mem-
bloodstream, where they circulate to tissues for absorp-
brane in concurrence with the pressure gradient. Carrier
tion into cells. Excess amino acids afe either convefted
proteins located in the membranes of the enterocytes
to other nonessential amino acids or metabolized by the
facilitate transport of these nutrients into the cells. In
liver for energy.
contrast, active transport involves the transport of nutri-
Most minerals are absorbed by the body in an ion-
ent molecules across the intestinal epithelial membrane
ized form. The water-soluble vitamins are transported
against a concentration gradient. This transport mecha-
by passive diffusion, but some may be absorbed by an 
 nism differs from passive diffusion in that more energy
active process when the diet contains low levels. Vita-
is required to transport materials against a concentra-
min Biz is unique in its fequirement for an intrinsic
tion gradient. For example, the most common type of
( ‘d 'g 1andeu aas) uondiosqe 1adoid 1oy 1ooe
active transport mechanism involves a membrane pro-
Fat-soluble vitamins are made soluble by combination
tein carfier coupled with the active transport of sodium
with bile salts and are then absorbed by passive diffusion
(the sodium pump).
through the lipid phase of the mucosal cell membrane.
Although some passive dliffusion is believed to occur,
 In general, when there is normal fat absorption, there is
most simple carbohydrates are absorbed by the body
normal fat-soluble vitamin absorption.
through an active process that is linked to sodium
ttansport and uses a specifc carfier protein. Single
LARGE INTESTINE (COLON)
amino acids and some dipeptides and tripeptides are
also absorbed in this manner. Small peptides that are
The contents of the small intestine enter the large intes-
absorbed into the cell are immediately hydrolyzed to
tine through the ileocecal valve. The cecum is an intes-
single amino acid units before being released into the
tinal pocket located next to the junction of the colon
portal circulation. Sugars and amino acids are absorbed
and the small intestine. This portion of the intestine
into the villus capillaries and from there enter the por-
 varies in size and functional capacity among species of
tal vein, which transports these nutrients to the liver.
mammals. The cecum of nonruminant herbivores such
Absorption of fat involves the interaction of the fat-
as the horse and rabbit is relatively large and has a highly
containing micelles with the aqueous layer surrounding
enhanced digestive capacity. Likewise, both the cecum
the brush border. Micelles contain bile acids, monoglyc-
and large intestine of the omnivofous pig afe enlarged
etides, diglycerides, and long-chain fatty acids. Because
when compared with those of the carnivorous species.
they are water-miscible, the micelles are able to tfavel
 Microbial digestion of dietary fber in the cecum and
to the brush border, where they are disrupted and their
colon of nonruminant herbivores contributes signif-
component fat particles are absorbed into the cell. The
cantly to the nutrient intake and balance of these ani-
bile remains in the lumen and eventually moves down
mals. In compatison, carnivorous species such as the
the intestine to be feabsorbed and circulated back to
cat and mink have a vestigial cecum, and the length of
the liver. Within the enterocyte, most of the fatty acids
their large intestine is relatively short. Relative to body
and glycerol are fesynthesized into triglycerides, com-
size, the dog's cecum is not as large as the pig's, but it is
bined with cholesterol, phospholipid, and protein, and
 somewhat larger than the cat's. This observation is con-
released into the central lacteal as either chylomicrons
sistent with the fact that the dog has adapted to con-
of very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL)
transport
suming a diet that is mofe cmnivofous in nature than
52 Canine and Feline Nutrition
that of the cat. The extent to which bacterial digestion
digestion of these materials produces various gases,
of dietary fber in the cecum and colon contributes to
SCFAs, and other byproducts. When protein reaches
 energy balance in these species is small compared to
the large intestine in an undigested state, bacterial
the contribution for nonruminant herbivore species.
degradation results in the production of the amines
However, SCFAs produced by bacterial fermentation
indole and skatole. In addition, hydrogen sulfde gas
of fber are an important energy source for colonocytes
is produced from the sulfur-containing amino acids
and contribute to intestinal health.22,23 In addition,
of undigested or poorly digested protein. Hydrogen
adherent bacteria in the large intestine infuence func-
sulfide gas, indole, and skatole impart strong odors to
tion of the intestinal mucosa and help to regulate the
fecal matter and intestinal gas. Certain types of carbo-
enteric immune system22 (see Section 5, pp. 465-467
hydrates found in legumes such as soybeans are resis-
for a complete discussion of the role of colonic bacteria
tant to digestion by the endogenous enzymes of the
in intestinal health).
small intestine. These carbohydrates feach the colon
A chief function of the large intestine in dogs and
and are metabolized by bacteria, with a resultant pro-
cats is the absorption of water and certain electrolytes.
duction of intestinal gas (fatulence). Hydrogen, car-
Unlike the small intestine, the large intestine has no
bon dioxide, and methane gases are produced from the
villi and therefore has a lower capacity for absorpticn.
bacterial digestion of carbohydrates. A similar effect
Although it is able to effciently absorb water and elec-
occurs with certain types of fber. While nonferment-
trolytes, it has no mechanisms for active transport.
able fibers fesist digestion in the small intestine and
Along with a large volume of water, sodium is absorbed
fermentation in the large intestine, fermentable fbers
into the body from the large intestine. As mentioned
afe used as an energy source by intestinal bacteria,
 previously, the bacterial colonies of the colon are capa-
resulting in the production of gases and SCFAs. The
ble of digesting some of the indigestible fiber and other
 degree to which fatulence and strong fecal odors occur
nutrients in the diet that have escaped digestion in the
 in dogs and cats that are fed poorly digestible materials
small intestine. The products of this bacterial digestion
varies with the amounts and types of materials fed and
contribute to the characteristic smell and color of canine
the intestinal Hora present in the colons of individual
and feline feces. Undigested food residues, sloughed
animals.
cells, bacteria, and unabsorbed endogenous secretions
make up the fecal matter that eventually reaches the rec-
tum and is excreted from the body.
fo  o  
Fecal characteristics in dogs and cats can be signif-
the large intestine (colon) in dogs and cats is the absorp-
tion of water and certain electrolytes, especially sodium.
matter that is present in the animal's diet. Bacterial
References
1. Morris JG, Rogers QR: Comparative dog and cat nutrition. ln Burger IH, Rivers JPW, editors: Nutrition ofthe dog and cat
Cambridge, England, 1989, Cambridge University Press.
 2. Boudreau JC, Alev N: Classification chemoresponsive tongue units of the cat geniculated ganglion, Brain Res 54:157-175, 1973.
3. Boudreau J, White T: Flavor chemistry of carnivore taste systems. In Bullard RW, editor: Flavor chemistry ofanimal foods, American
Chemical Society symposium series 67, Washington DC, 1978, ACS, pp 102-108.
4. Kumazawa T, Nakamura M, Kurihara K: Canine taste nerve response to umami substances, Physiot Behav 49:875-881, 1991.
5. Yu S, Rogers QR, Morris JG: Absence of salt (NaCl) preference of appetite in sodium-replete or depleted kittens, Appetite 29:1-10,
1997.
6. Ferrell F: Preference for sugars and nonnutritive sweeteners in young Beagles, Neurosci Biobehav Rev 8: 199-203, 1984
Digestion and Absorption 53
 7. Houpt KA, Coren B, Hintz HF, Hilderbrant JE: Efect of sex and reproductive status on sucrose preference, food intake, and body
weight of dogs, / Am Vet Med Asoc 174:1083-1085, 1979.
8. Li X, Li W, Wang H, and others: Cats lack a sweet taste receptor, J Nutr 136:1932S-1934S, 2006.
9. Bradshaw JWS: The evolutionary basis for the feeding behavior of domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) and cats (Felis catus), J Nutr
136:1 927S-1931S, 2006.
10. Macdonald DW, Carr GM: Variation in dog society: between resource dispersion and social fux. In Serpell J, editor: 7be domestic
dog: is evotution, behaviour and interactions with people, Cambridge, England, 1995, Cambridge University Press, pp 199-216.
 11. Carriere F, Laugier R, Barrowman JA, and others: Gastric and pancreatic lipase levels during a test meal in dogs, Scand J
Gastroenterot 28:443-454, 1993.
12. Smeets-Peeters M, Watson T, Minekus M, Havenaar R:A review of the physiology of the canine digestive tract related to the
development of in vitro systems, Nutr Rer Rev 11:45-69, 1998.
13. Goggin JM, Hoskinson JJ, Butine MD, and others: Scintigraphic assessment of gastric emptying of canned and dry diets in healthy
cats, Am J Vet Res 59:388-392, 1998.
14. Armbrust LJ, Hoskinson J, Lora-Michiels NM, Miliken GA: Gastric emptying in cats using foods varying in fber content and
kibble shapes, Vet Radiol Utrasound 44:339-343, 2003.
15. Kearns RJ, Hayek MG, Sunvold GD: Microbial changes in aged dogs. In Reinhart GA, Carey DP editors: Recent advances in canine
and feline nutritional research: lams nutrition ymposiwm proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press,
pp 337-351.
16. Johnston K, Lamport A, Batt RM: An unexpected bacterial fora in the proximal smmall intestine of normal cats, Vet Rec 132:362-
363, 1993.
18. Strickling JA, Harmon DL, Dawson KA, Gross KL: Evaluation of oligosaccharide addition to dog diets: infuences on nutrient
digestion and microbial populations, Anim Feed Sci Technot 86:205-219, 2000.
19. Sparkes AH, Papasouliotis K, Sunvold G, and others: Bacterial fora in the duodenum of healthy cats and effect of dietary
supplementation with fructo-oligosaccharides, Am / Vet Res 59:431-435, 1998.
 20. Willard MD: Effects of dietary supplementation of fructo-oligosaccharides on small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in dogs, Am J
Vet Res 55:654659, 1992.
21. Ofek 1, Beachey EH: Mannose binding and epithelial cell adherence of Escherichia coli, Infect Immunol 22:247-254, 1978.
22. Buddington RK, Buddington KK, Sunvold GD: The use of fermentable fbers to manage the gastrointestinal tract. In Reinhart
CA, Carey DP editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutritional research: Iams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 3
Wilrmington, Ohio, 2000, Orange Frazer Press, p 169-179.
23. Drackley JK, Beaulieu AD, Sunvold GD: Energetic substrates for intestinal cells. In Reinhart CA, Carey DP, editors: Recent
advances incanine andfeline nutritionat research,lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2Wilmington,Ohio,1998,Orange
Frazer Press, pp 463-472.
8
Nutritional ldiosyncrasies of the Cat
Although the dog and cat have about equal status as
cats have remained carnivores throughout their evo-
companion animals in our society, it is important to
lution. Cats cannot obtain all necessary nutrients
fecognize that they belong to two separate species. This
from plants and piant products and must consume
truth is evidenced by well-defined physiological, behav-
some animal tissues to meet their needs for high pro-
ioral, and dietary dlifferences. In the following chapters,
tein leveis, taurine, arachidonic acid, and preformed
differences between the cat's and the dlog's requirements
vitamin A
for a number of nutrients are discussed in detail. These
differences include the cat's unique energy and glucose
metabolism, higher protein requirement, a requirement
The adherence of the cat to a highly specialized diet
for dietary taurine, sensitivity to a defciency of the
has resulted in specific metabolic adaptations that man-
amino acid arginine, inability to convert beta-carotene
ifest themselves as peculiarities in nutritional require
to active vitamin A, and inability to convert the amino
ments. The consequence of these changes is an animal
acid tryptophan to niacin.
that cannot obtain all necessary nutrients solely from
An examination of the phylogeny and evolutionary
plants and plant products and therefore fequires the
relationship of the domestic dog and cat offers some
consumption of animal tissues to meet certain nutrient
clues to their inherent dietary dissimilarities. Although
requirements.
 These specific nutritional idiosyncrasies
both species are of the class Mammalia and the order
areexhibitedin the
estic cat (Felis catus) but not in
Carnivora, the dog belongs to the modern-day Canoi-
dea superfamily, and the cat belongs to the Feloidea
significance in light of the
superfamily.! Included with the dog in the Canoidea
prevailing
ie
superfamily are several families with very diverse dietary
be fed as if they
habits. For example, the Ursid (bear) and the Procyonid
The nutritional idiosyncrasies of the cat result in
(raccoon) families are both omnivorous, but species of
more stringent dietary requirements than those of
the Ailurid (panda) family are strictly herbivorous. The
only carnivorous species included with dogs are the Mus-
all of these nutritional peculiarities afe of metabolic
telids (weasels). The Feloidea superfamily, on the other
 greater practical importance
hand, includes three families: the Viverrids (genet), the
than others when considering the optimal nutrition
Hyaenids (hyena), and the Felids (cat) (Figure 8-1). All
and proper feeding practices for pet cats (Box 8-1).
of the species in these families, including the cat, have
The domestic cat's high protein fequirement, along
evolved as strict carnivores. Therefore, the evolutionary
with its need for taurine, arachidonic acid, and pre-
history of the dog suggests a predilection for a dliet that
formed vitamin A, imposes a requirement for the
is more omnivorous in nature while the history of the
inclusion of animal tissues in the diet of this spe-
cat indicates that this species has consumed a purely car-
cies. Although it is possible to develop a cereal-based
nivorous diet throughout its evolutionary development.
fation for cats (i.e., vegetarian or vegan diets), such a
formulation requires close attention to nutrient levels
and the appropriate supplementation with purified
Although equaly popularas pets,dogs and cats have
forms of taurine, arachidonic acid, and preformed
diverse nutritional needs. Dogs are omnivores, while
vitamin A.2,3
57
58 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Canoidea
Feloidea
Million
Period
of years*
Raccoon
Bear
Panda
Dog
Weasel
Genet
Hyena
Cat
Holocene
0.01
Pleistocene
SD
1.8
Car
Mustel
Pliocene
5.5
Miocene
22
Oligocene
Ceni
Pinnipeds
35
Eocene
49
 Paleocene
onts
65
*From present
Fgure 8-1Phylogenic tree of the dog and cat.
(From Morris J, Rogers Q In Burger IH, Rivers JPW, editors: Nutrition of the dog and cat, Cambridge, England, 1989, Cambridge University Press.)
BOX 8-1 NUTRITIONAL IDIOSYNCRASIES OF THE CAT
IDIOSYNCRASIESOFPRACTICALIMPORTANCE
IDIOSYNCRASIESOFACADEMICINTEREST
High protein requirement
Unique energy and glucose metabolism
Taurine requirement
Sensitivity to arginine deficiency
Arachidonic acid requirement
Ina bility to convert tryptophan to niacin
Preformed vitamin A requirement
References
1. Colbert EH: Evotution ofthe vertebrates, ed 3, New York, 1980, John Wiley & Sons.
2. Gray CM, Sellon RK, Freeman LM: Nutritional adequacy of two vegan diets for cats, J Am Vet Med Asoc 225:1670-1675, 2004.
3. Morris JG: Idiosyncratic nutrient requirements of cats appear to be diet-induced evolutionary adaptations, Nutr Res Rev 15:153-168, 2002.
9
Energy Balance
All animals must meet their bodies energy needs.
Basal Metabolic Rate and Resting
Energy balance is achieved when energy expenditure
Fed Metabolic Rate
is equal to energy intake, resulting in minimal changes
in the body's store of energy. Positive energy balance
Basal metabolic rate (BMR) contributes the greatest por-
occurs when caloric intake exceeds energy expenditure.
tion of an animal's total energy expenditure. It is defined
In growing and pregnant animals, a positive energy bal-
as the amount of energy expended while an animal is
ance is needed for the synthesis of new tissue and fetal
resting in a thermoneutral environment and in a post-
development, respectively. I
 animals, positive energy balance results primarily in an
resents the energy cost of maintaining homeostasis in all
increase in the quantity of fat stored by the body. Nega-
tive energy balance occurs when caloric intake is lower
rest, when the body is not digesting food. Homeostasis
than energy expenditure. Weight loss and decreases in 
refers
to a state
of internal stability within the body
both fat and stores oflean body tissue occur dluring neg-
A related value is the resting fed metabolic rate (RFMR),
ative energy balance. The daily energy requirement for
which is measured when the animal is not in a postab
dogs and cats depends on the amount of energy that the
sorptive state and so includes the heat produced when
food is consumed (dietary thermogenesis). The RFMR
energy requirement of a pet, and these factors must all
accounts for approximately 60% to 75% of an ani-
be considered when determining the number of calories
mal's total daily energy expenditure. Factors infuenc-
and the quantity of food required by a particular com-
ing RFMR include sex and reproductive status, thyroid
panion animal.
gland and autonomic nervous system function, body
composition, body surface area, and nutritional state.
Research has shown that BMR and RFMR are posi-
ENERGY EXPENDITURE
tively correlated with the total amount of respiring cell
The body's energy expenditure can be partitioned into
   s   a  n s
three major components: basal metabolic fate, vol-
 mass is the closest approximation available of the total
untary muscular activity, and dietary thermogenesis.!
respiring cell mass. The amount of fat-free mass or lean
A fourth component, called adaptive or nonshivering
seue ue jo iosipaid ssuons au si anssn Apoq
thermogenesis, represents energy that is expended in
metabolic rate, followed by body surface atea and body
fesponse to environmental conditions and yields heat
Apoq pue sseu Apoq ueal siad e s ss'(a) iyoiam
but no useful work. Nonshivering thermogenesis
EY
surface area increase, BMR and RFMR increase pro-
first demonstrated in small,
， wafm-blooded
animals
portionately. Similarly, when an animal becomes over-
and is essential for cold adaptation in many species
weight and expetiences an increase in body fat and a
including dogs.23
decrease in the proportion of lean tissue to total BW,
Voluntary Muscular Activity
Voluntary muscular activity is the most variable
metabolic rate),(2) the energy expended during voun
component of energy expenditure. Muscular activity
tary muscle activity,and (3) the energy/heat producea
by thermogenesis.
contributes approximately 30% of the body's total
energy expenditure in moderately active individuals.
59
60 Canine and Feline Nutrition
The metabolic efficiency of performing physical work
stresses include changes in ambient temperature, altera-
is invariable, but the total amount of energy expended
tions in food intake, and emotional stfess. For example,
is affected by both the duration and the intensity of
cold adaptation in small mammals has been shown to
the activity. In addition, the energy cost of any type
rely on incfeased heat production that is disassociated
of weight-bearing activity, such as walking or running.
from any productive work and is separate from shiv-
fises as BW increases. This effect is a direct result of the
 ering thermogenesis.10 This heat loss, referred to as
adlded energy necessary to move a greater body mass.
nonshivering thermogenesis, also occurs in dogs that ate
Therefore the energy expendliture of a pet with a high
exposed to cold environments.1l
activity level depends on the duration and intensity of
Overconsumption affects thermogenesis in some ani-
the exercise and the size and weight of the animal.
mals. When energy intake increases above daily needs in
fats, dietary thermogenesis increases above the normal
levels necessary for the metabolism of food and mainte-
Dietary Thermogenesis
ssol Aiaua paseaiu s!ul z'aineiaduan Apoq jo aouu
Dietary thermogenesis, also called the specific dynamic
is a result of less effcient use of food calories. In the long
effect of food or meal-induced thermogenesis, refers to the
term, the amount of weight gained during the period
heat produced in response to and following the con-
of overeating
g is less than that normally expected from
sumption of a meal. The ingestion of nutrients causes
the increased caloric intake. This process may represent
an cbligatory increase in heat production by the body as
a tesult of the metabolic costs of digestion, absorption,
metabolism, and storage of nutrients. This heat is not
although this process has been shown to occur in labo-
useful to an animal that is living in a thermal neutral
fatory animals and some human subjects, dogs do not
environment, but will contribute to the maintenance of
 appear to show a similar increase in dietary thermogenesis
body temperature when an animal is exposed to a cold
intesponse
 to overeating.13 Dietary thermogenesis during
environment. A series of studies showed that dietary
periods of overconsumption has not been studied in cats.
thermogenesis occurs in two phases in dogs. The frst
is a fise in metabolic rate that occurs in response to the
Factors Affecting Energy
presence of food, called the cephalic phase; the second,
Expenditure
postprandial phase, occurs for up to six hours after the
consumption of a meal.7,8 Together, the two phases of
Vatious factors infuence a pet's total daily energy
 dietary thermogenesis represent approximately 10% of
expenditure (Table 9-1). An individual animal's BMR
daily energy expenditure for dogs. However, the magni-
is affected by body composition, age, caloric intake,
tude of this heat production is infuenced by the caloric
and nutrient composition of the diet and by the nutri-
tional state of the animal. The number of meals fed each
TABLE9-1FACTORSAFFECTING
day also affects dlietary thermogenesis, with an increase
COMPONENTS OF ENERGY
 in the number of meals causing an increase in the total
EXPENDITURE
ag (g d  a    r
COMPONENT
FACTORS
cats generally consume diets that are higher in protein
Basal metabolic
 Gender, reproductive status, hormonal
than dogs and tend to consume multiple meals per day,
rate
status, autonomic nervous system
dietary thermogenesis may account for slightly more
function, body composition, body
 than 10% of metabolizable energy (ME) in the cat.
surface area, nutritional stage, age
Voluntary muscular
Weight-bearing activity, duration of
Another type of heat production is called adap
tive thermogenesis. This is an additional energy expen-
activity
exercise, intensity of exercise, size
and weight of animal
diture that is not accounted for by the obligatory and
Meal-induced
 Caloric and nutrient composition
short-term thermogenesis of meal ingestion. Adaptive
thermogenesis
 of meal, nutritional state
thermogenesis is manifested primarily as a change in
Adaptive
Ambient temperature, alterations in
the BMR in response to environmental stresses. These
thermogenesis
food intake, emotional stress
Energy Balance 61
and hormonal status. The BMR component of energy
expenditure naturally decreases as a pet ages, primarily
As pets age, regular exercise is important to maintain
as a result of a gradual loss of lean body tissue. Changes
in BMR can also occur as a fesult of food restriction.
the body's lean mass.Voluntary activity burns energy,
When caloric intake is decreased, an initial decrease in
increases lean body tissue, and resuits in a higher basal
BMR occurs because of hormonal infuences. If caloric
metabolic rate.
restriction continues, the loss of lean body tissue due
to weight loss causes a persistent reduction in BMR.
This decrease will not be cofrected until normal levels
of lean body tissue have been restored. Similarly, per-
FOOD AND ENERGYINTAKE
sistent overeating can lead to an increase in total
energy expenditure. Part of this increase results from
The other half of the energy balance equation is energy
the increase in lean body tissue with weight gain and
intake. Food intake is regulated in all animals by a
increased dietary thermogenesis. A pet's reproductive
status also affects resting metabolic rate (RMR). A study
controls and external cues. The internal signals and
with cats reported that gonadectomized (neutered) male
 external stimuli that affect appetite, hunger, and satiety
and female cats have lower estimated RMR values than
afe presented in Box 9-1. A growing number of studies
those for intact cats of the same age.14 These differences
have investigated the internal signals that govern food
intake in dogs and cats. Although much of the scientific
Section 5, pp. 316-318).
knowledge regarding these signals has been collected
Changes in voluntary activity and exercise level can
primarily in laboratory animals, it can be used to pro-
signifcantly affect energy expenditure in dogs and cats.
vide insight into mechanisms that may be operating in
Just like people, companion animals tend to become
other species.
observed when the pet reaches maturity. In many breeds
and individuals, play behaviors do not persist strongly
Internal Controls of Food Intake
into adlulthcod, and the onset of maturity is accompa-
In all mammals, the natural state for the body is one of
nied by a decline in physical activity. Later in life, vol-
 sd a aq y   si ais s 
untary activity may decline further because of chronic
food in the gastrointestinal tract; the digestion, absorp-
disease, the onset of arthritis, or a decreased tolerance
tion, and metabolism of nutrients; and the amount of
for exercise. These changes will be refected in a decline
nutrients stored in the body at any one time. The sys-
tems controlling food intake are complex, and include
increasing a pet's daily exercise will increase the energy
feedback to the brain from adipose and the gastroin-
requirement. A portion of the higher energy expen-
testinal tract via hormonal and nervous system signals.
diture occurs because of the direct calorie-consuming
benefit of exercise. However, just as important, the
long-term, cumulative effects of exercise cause changes
in BW and condition. Regular exercise results in a
BOX g-1 FACTORS AFFECTING ENERGY
higher proportion of lean tissue to fat tissue in the pet's
INTAKE
body. The amount of exercise necessary to decrease body
fat and maintain or increase lean body tissue is related
INTERNAL SIGNALS
ExTeRNaL STIMUlI
to the duration and intensity of the physical activity.
Gastric distention
Food availa bility
As discussed previously, an increase in lean body tissue
Physiological response to sight,
Timing and size of
sound, and smell of food
increases BMR. Therefore voluntary activity not only
meals
Changes in plasma concentrations
 Food composition
directly burns energy; it also contributes to a higher per-
of specific nutrients, hormones,
and texture
centage of lean bodly tissue and a higher BMR over the
 and peptides
 Diet palata bility
long term.
62 Canine and Feline Nutrition
During a meal, food causes stomach distension and
and, when it is increased, reduces food intake and BW.
the immedliate release of gastrointestinal hormones such
 Blood leptin concentrations do not change in response
as cholecystokinin (CCK) and glucagon-like peptide
to meals, but are proportional to total body fat stores in
1 (GLP-1), which signal fullness in the short term.15
dogs and cats.26,27 Increased leptin concentrations also
Physical distention of the stomach and the distal small
afe associated with the diminished insulin sensitivity
intestine stimulates the vagus nerve and relays satiety
seen in overweight cats.28
information to the brain.1 However, the presence of
Insulin may be an important internal control signal
food in the stomach alone will not inhibit food intake
for both appetite and satiety. The exogenous adminis-
until significant gastric distention occurs, so the fela-
tration of this hormone stimulates hunger and increases
 tive importance of this mechanism in infuencing meal
food intake in human subjects. The mechanisms
size and meal termination, especially when consuming
involved appear to be an insulin-inaduced decrease in
an energy-dense diet, is fairly minor. A second physi-
the use of cellular glucose (glucoprivation) and severe
ological control of food intake is the ileal brake. Under
hypoglycemia.
Insulin may also act directly on the
normal physiological conditions, undigested nutrients
hypothalamus to mediate this effect. Studies with rats
can reach the terminal small intestine and cause delayed
have shown that both insulin and the adlrenal gluco-
 gastric emptying and reduced intestinal tract motility,
corticoid corticosterone function synergistically with
making the ileal brake a relatively important mecha-
central neurotransmitter substances to stimulate eating.
nism in food intake control.17 Activation of the ileal
 In human subjects, feelings of hunger are positively cor-
brake reduces hunger and food intake in addition to
related with low levels of blood glucose.29 Excess plasma
infuencing gastrointestinal motility and secretions.
glucose, however, does not depress food intake.
In the stomach, gastric cells release one of the few
is uis u P aq ose a un
known orexigenic hormones, ghrelin. Blood ghrelin
and the cessation of eating. It has been theorized that
peaks prior to meal initiation and the administration
the size of the fat deposit in an animal's body may
of ghrelin stimulates appetite and increases gastric
be fegulated by the concentration of insulin in the
 cerebrospinal Auid. The insulin levels in the cerebro-
small intestine, I-cells in the duodenum and jejunum
spinal Huid increase and decrease proportionately as
release CCK in response to the presence of fat and
fat cells increase and decrease in size. These changes
 protein. CCK mediates gastric acid secretion, gastric
happen without the daily fuctuations that occur in
emptying, gall bladder contraction, and pancreatic
plasma insulin levels. The insulin receptors of the cere-
enzyme secretion in multiple species, including the
brospinal fuid, which afe not accessible to the plasm?
dog and cat, where it also acts as a potent anorectic
insulin pool, appear to be involved in the regulation of
food intake and total body adiposity. A study with rats
(PYY) both are released from L-cells in the ileum and
demonstrated that when insulin was infused into the
colon and infuence satiety in response to the pres-
cerebrospinal fuid over a petiod of several weeks, food
ence of unabsorbedl catbohydrates and fats.22,23 GLP-1
intake and BW decreased significantly.30 On the other
increases insulin secretion and reduces pancreatic
hand, when the spinal pool of insulin was experimen-
enzyme secretion. It also reduces gastric acid secretion,
tally decreased by the injection of insulin antibodies,
aenuns on suonsuny pue daei uidua smse smos
 food intake and BW both increased. These changes
the ileal brake, exerting an endocrine distal-to-proximal
 occurred independently of changes in plasma insulin
feedback in the gastrointestinal tract.24 In contrast,
concentration. Insulin levels in cerebrospinal Auid
 PYY acts as a paracrine or neurocrine agent, as plasma
may modulate the brain's response to other internal
levels do not refect the local activity of PYY.25
satiety signals, such as the release of gut peptides, and
Other hormones infuence the sensation of satiation
may be important in the long-term control of body
fat stofes.
leptin and insulin. Leptin is a product of the ob gene and
The complex actions of the myriad of orexigenic
 and anorexic hormones ate feceived and coordinated
the availability of energy stores to the hypothalamus
by the brain. Specifically, the hypothalamus is known
Energy Balance 63
to be involved in mediating both 
1 quantitative and
suggest weaker satiety signaling in obese individu-
qualitative changes in food intake. The afcuate nucleus
als.i6 In addition, other physiological conditions,
in the hypothalamus plays a central role in mediating
such as spaying and neutering, may impact internal
signals of energy storage and needs. The arcuate nucleus
controls of food intake. In a survey of dogs in the
stimulates food intake through neuropeptide Y (NPY)-
United Kingdom, neutered females and males were
containing neurons and signals satiety through pro-
approximately twice as likely to be obese as their intact
opiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons.31 Insulin and
counterparts.33 Neutering has been demonstrated to
leptin inhibit NPY-containing neurons and stimulate
increase food intake, BW, and body fat in male and
POMC-containing neurons. PYY also inhibits NPY
female cats, which can be mitigated almost entirely
release in the brain.16 In addition, several different neu-
by the administration of estradiol.34,35 Furthermore,
rotransmitter substances are believed to be involved in
intact female rats and ovafiectomized female rats and
this process.3l Stimulatory neurotransmitters include
male rats administered estrogen, were much more
catecholamine, norepinephrine, and three classes of
sensitive to the anorectic effects of leptin in the brain
heuropeptides (opioids, pancreatic polypeptides, and
 compared to male rats and ovariectomized female rats
galanin). Direct injections of these compounds into
 not supplemented with estrogen.36 This suggests that
the hypothalamus of rats potentiate eating in both
sex hormones play a central role in regulating internal
hungry and satiated animals. In addition, obesity as a
satiety signals.
tesult of overeating can be induced in laboratory ani-
mals by the chronic administration of norepinephrine.
Although multiple sites of the brain and nervous system
External Controls of Food Intake
respond, the medial pafaventricular nucleus is the afea
External controls of food intake include stimuli such as
of the hypothalamus most sensitive to these neurotrans-
diet palatability, food composition and texture, and the
mitters. Interestingly, there is evidence suggesting that
timing and environment of meals. Exposure to highly
these compounds affect specifc nutrient selection by
palatable foods is considered an important environ-
animals, rather than simply increasing
g total  caloric
mental factor contributing to food overconsumption in
intake.31 Norepinephrine injection causes an increase
humans, laboratory animals, and companion animals.37
in the consumption of carbohydrates, and the admin-
Studies with human subjects have demonstrated that
istration of opioids and galanin results in increased fat
the quantity of food consumed vaties directly with its
consumption.
 palatability, and palatability does not appear to increase
Aberrations in any of the internal control systems for
with levels of food deprivation. In other words, if food
appetite, hunger, and satiety can result in pathological
is perceived to be very appealing, an individual tends
changes in food intake. For example, lesions involving
to consume more of it, regardless of the initial level of
the ventromedial center of the hypothalamus lead to
hunger. Similarly, when rats are offered a highly palat-
Overeating, but lesions of the lateral nucleus result in an
able diet, they overeat and become obese.38 This effect
inhibition of food intake. Endocrine imbalances such as
has been observed with high-fat diets, calorically dense
insulinoma, hypopituitarism, hyperadfenocorticism, and
diets, and “cafeteria”" diets that provide a large variety of
possibly hypothyroidism may affect food intake. Any
 palatable food items.3,40 It appears that the novelty of
metabolic dysfunction that affects neurotransmitter sub-
being presented with several different types of palatable
stances or the gut peptides could also potentially result in
foods can override normal satiety signals.41 A similar
changes in food intake.
 practice that is not uncommon with companion animals
Interestingly, the condition of obesity can fur-
is the feeding of a variety of table scraps and calorically
ther perturb appetite, hunger, and satiety signaling.
 dense treats. The persistent feeding of highly dlesirable
Excess weight gain can elicit insulin resistance in cats
 and appealing foods to some dogs and cats may override
the body's natural tendency to balance energy intake
cbese humans have faster gastric emptying rates and
 and lead to the overconsumption of energy.
lower postprandial PYY and GLP-1 responses. These
 Dogs and cats have preferences for certain favors and
abnormalities were ameliorated with weight loss and
types of pet foods, and these preferences are infuenced
64 Canine and Feline Nutrition
by a number of factors. For example, an early study
free-choice without difficulty begins to overconsume
reported that beef was a preferred type of meat for
and gain weight when another dog is added to the
dogs, and that cooking the meat enhanced its attrac-
household. In most dogs, social facilitation causes
tiveness.42 It was theorized that early experience with
a moderate increase in the dog's interest in food and
cooked meat, such as that present in commercial pet
an increased rate of eating. However, for some, the
foods, was the cause of the development of a preference
increase in food intake that occurs in fesponse to
for cooked products. Dogs also have a strong preference
another animal's presence can be extreme enough to
for sucrose, while cats do not show a strong attraction
singularly cause excessive food intake. In some situ-
to sucrose-sweetened foods or Auids.43,44 Both dogs
ations, however, the addition of a new dog of cat to
and cats prefer warm food to cold food, and palatability
the home can inhibit food consumption in other pets.
generally increases along with the fat content of the diet
This can occur when agonistic relationships develop or
(although this increase in acceptance may be related t0
when one pet is fearful of another.
texture as well as taste). Many of the taste preferences
There is also evidence that food choice in dogs can
of dogs and cats can be explained by the type of taste
be infuenced by the experience of conspecifics and by
buds or “units” found on their tongues (see Chapter 7,
the behavior of their owner. For example, in a small
3y sies pue sop ynoq “aiduexa 10 s'(y-9y *dd
pilot study, 12 pairs of dogs were matched according
a high proportion of taste buds that are sensitive to
to body size and then randomly assigned to be either a
amino acid Havers. It is postulated that these provide
them with the ability to distinguish among the different
were taken to anothet room and were offered a serving
types of meats that may be found in a carnivorous diet.
of dry dog food favored with either dried basil or dried
thyme. After the demonstrator had consumed at least
 20 grams (g) of the food, the two dogs were reunited
Not surprisingiy, most dogs prefer canned and semimoist
and allowed to socialize for 10 minutes. The observer
pet food rather than dry; cooked rather than uncooked
dog was then removed and offered an equal amount of
meat; beef over other meats; and warm food rather
both of the favored foods. Although all of the observer
than cold. To a degree, palatability increases along with
dogs sampled both foods, dogs showed a signifcant
the fat content of the diet.
preference for the favor that had been previously con-
sumed by their paired demonstrator dog. Because all of
the observer dogs sniffed the mouths and heads of their
Palatability is an important diet characteristic
demonstrators, it was theorized that olfactory cues may
that is heavily promoted in the marketing of com-
be important for the social transmission of food prefer-
mercial pet foods. In addition to the pet's prefer-
ences. Interestingly, another set of studies demonstrated
ences, many pet owners select a pet food based
that dogs were capable of performing correctly in quan-
on their own perceptions of the food's appeal (see
tity discrimination tasks and consistently selected alarge
Section 3, pp. 177-180 for a complete discussion of
quantity over a small quantity of palatable food.47,48
palatability of commercial pet foods)
 Recently, another form of social learning affecting
The timing and social setting of meals also infuence
food choice has also been described in dogs. An owher's
eating behavior. Dogs and cats rapidly become condi-
food preferences can infuence the food choices that
 tioned to receiving their meals at a particular time of
their dog makes. In one study, a group of 50 dogs was
day. This conditioning manifests itself both behavior-
frst tested for quantity discrimination and showed a
ally and physiologically. Pets generally become more
significant preference for the larger quantities of food
active at mealtime, and gastric secretions and gastric
(1 piece vs. 8 pieces of kibble). However, when the
motility increase in anticipation of eating. In addition,
owner of the dog demonstrated a preference for the
dogs tend to increase food intake when consuming
 simaller quantity of food before allowing the dog to
food in the presence of other dogs in their social group
choose, dogs switched and began to choose the smaller
(conspecifics). This process is called social facilitation.
Pay op e 1eqn puy siaumo nad auos 'aidexa 1og
 dogs were presented with two bowls containing identical
Energy Balance 65
quantities of food, and the owner showed an interest in
one of the bowls, their dogs chose the preferred bowl
intake is the nutrient composition of the diet. Nutrient
82% of the time. These results illustrate the impor-
composition affects both the efficiency of nutrient
tance of the dog's social environment, and specifcally
 metabolism and the amount of food that is voluntarily
the infuence of an owner's preferences, upon feeding
 consumed. Dietary fat, protein, and fber are the nutri-
behavior in dogs. Similar studies are needed that exam-
ents of greatest interest. Although most animals decrease
ine the infuence of owner behavior and food choice on
their intake of a high-fat diet in an attempt to balance
food preferences in cats.
energy needs, the greater caloric density of the diet and
its increased palatability can still cause increased energy
consumption in some individuals. In addition, dietary
A dogs social environment can infuence feeding behav
fat has a weaker effect on satiety than either carbohy-
iorandfood selection.Forexaple,dogs oftenrespond
drate or protein.52 Additionally, the metabolic efficiency
to the presence ofother dogs by increasing theirrate of
of converting dietary fat to body fat for storage is higher
eating and are aiso capabie of learningfood preferences
than the efficiency of converting dietary carbohydrate
from other dogs. Similarly, the owner's behavior can
 or protein to body fat. Only 3% of the energy content
infuence a dog's food choices!
of fat is lost when it is stored as body fat. This loss can
be compared with a loss of 23% of the energy content of
dietary carbohydrate and protein when these nutrients
The frequency with which meals are provided is
are converted to body fat.37 Therefore, if an animal is
another external factor that can affect food intake and
consuming more than its caloric requirement of a par-
energy needs of dogs and cats. Metabolically, increasing
ticular diet and if the excess calories ate providled by fat,
the number of meals per day while keeping total energy
more weight will be gained than if the excess calories are
intake constant results in increased energy loss from dietary
coming from either carbohydrate or protein.
thermogenesis. In a study with adult dogs, a group that
This phenomenon was illustrated in an early study with
was fed four times per day increased oxygen consumption
companion animals; puppies that consumed a high-fat
30%, but a second group that was fed the same amount of
 dliet had similar growth in lean body mass when compared
food in just one meal daily exhibited only a 15% increase
with puppies fed diets lower in fat, but the former accumu-
in oxygen consumption.50 In contrast, the presence of
food, particularly palatable food, is a potent extemal cue
dogs were fed either a high-fat or a high-carbohydrate diet,
for meal ingestion and offering increased number of meals
the dogs fed the high-fat diet consumed only 13% more
pef day may lead to excess conisumption in individuals
 energy than those fed the high-carbohydrate dliet, but they
that are highly sensitive to external cues. A study was con-
dlucted to compare the effects of free-choice feedling with
this increased weight gain was attributed to the small dif
portion-controlled feeding on the growth and dlevelop-
ference in energy intake, there appeared to be increased
 ment of growing puppies.51 Puppies that had access to
efficiency of fat deposition in the dogs consuming the
food throughout the day gained weight more rapilly and
high-fat diet. Finally, the protein content of a diet may also
were heavier than puppies fed using the portion-controlled
 infuence energy intake; this effect may be related to palat-
amounts of skeletal growth as measured by forelimb and
 A recent study reported that dogs preferentially avoided a
body length. These results indicate that both groups were
protein-free dliet and tended to select foods that contain
developing maximally, but the fee-choice fed group was
9s'uaoid uay saoes iau jo %oe pue sz uamaq
depositing more body fat than was the portion-controlled
In contrast, an eatlier study reported that cats did not
group. In addition to affecting growth, multiple feedings
demonstrate a clear preference for high vs. low levels of
of a highly palatable food may lead to overconsump-
 protein when offered diets containing varying concentra-
tion and excess weight gain in adult dogs and cats. This
61 pue gI siaideu aas) zsurases io uranond Aos jo suon
tendency to ovefconsume may more than compenisate for
for complete discussions of food selection and factors
the increased energy loss from dlietary thermogenesis.
affecting satiety).
66 Canine and Feline Nutrition
DETERMINATION OF ENERGY
BOX 9-2 CALCULATION OF ESTIMATED
REQUIREMENTS OF DOGS
ENERGY REQUIREMENTS OF
ADULT DOGS AT MAINTENANCE
AND CATS
INACTIVE ADULT DOGS*
The total daily energy requirement of an animal is
ME requirement = 95 × Wk0.75
the sum of the energy that is needed for the BMR,
Exampfes:
dietary thermogenesis, voluntary muscular activity, and
 maintenance of normal body temperature when exposed
ME requirement ofa 10-kg (22-lb) dog =
95 × (10 kg)0.75 = 534 kcal ME/day
to adverse weather conditions. Adult animals in a state
of maintenance only require enough energy to support
ME requirement of a 22.7-kg (50-lb) dog =
activity and maintain the body's normal metabolic pro-
95 × (22.7 kg)0.75 = 988 kcal ME/day
cesses and tissue stores. On the other hand, dogs and cats
ACTIVE ADULT DOGS*
that are growing, reproducing, or working have increased
ME requirement = 130 x Wk0.75
energy needs.
Exampfes:
ME requirement of a 10-kg (22-lb) dog =
Dogs
130 × (10 kg)0.75 = 731 kcal of ME/day
 Formulating an exact equation to estimate the energy
ME requirement of a 22.7-kg (50-lb) dog =
fequirements of dogs is a difficult task because of the
130 × (22.7 kg)0.75 = 1352 kcal ME/day
wide variety of body sizes and weights in this species.
The amount of energy that is used by the body is corre-
ME, Merabolizable energy.
lated with total body surface area. Body surface area per
*NOTE: Escimares use equations provided by che Narional Research
Council:Nutrient requirements ofdogs and cas, Washingcon, DC, 2006,
unit of weight decreases as animals increase in size. As a
Narional Academy Press. (Orher energy equations are available and may
result, the energy requirements of animals with widely
also be used.)
differing weights are not well correlated with BW; they
are more closely related to BW raised to a specified
inactive adult dog has an estimated daily caloric require-
        
Representing weight as metabolic body weight helps to
same dog, if considered active, would have an estimated
caloric requirement of 1352 kilocalories (kcal), a differ-
animals of varying sizes. Historically, coefficient values
ence of more than 360 kcal per day. Therefore, once a
used with dogs have ranged between 0.67 and 0.88.58
K value has been selected for use, the resulting caloric
An allometric equation for ME requirement is rep-
estimate must be considered to be just a starting point
resented as ME = K (representing a constant) x weight
to determine the daily energy requirement of a particu-
(W) kilograms (kg)0.75. This provides a reasonable start-
lar animal. Variability among individual dogs and the
ing point when estimating the daily energy require-
day are shop yrum napun suoniuos jenusuuoiaua
 ments for different sizes of adult dogs at maintenance.
can result in a requirement that is substantially more of
The National Research Council (NRC) guidelines pro-
less than this initial estimate.
vidle a series of K values that are used to adljust for dliffer-
The initial amount of food that is estimated should
 ent activity levels and living situations (Box 9-2).9
 be adljusted according to the dog's long-term response
However, an important consideration (and limi-
to feeding. For example, using the previous example,
tation) when using an allometric equation lies in the
 an inactive adult dog weighing 50 pounds (22.7 kg)
selection of an appropriate K value. For example, a
would require approximately 988 kcal of ME per day.
value of 95 is recommended for inactive pet dogs living
If a food containing 3800 kcal/kg (1727 kcal/lb) was
 in home environments, while a value of 130 is suggested
fed, the dog would require 0.260 kg (260 g) of food.
 so a   s d  r
This is equal to 9.1 cunces (oz). One 8-oz cup of dry
exercise. Using these values, a 50-pound (1b) (22.7-kg)
dog food typically contains 3 to 4 oz of food. Therefore
Energy Balance 67
TABLE 9-2 CALCULATION OF THE AMOUNT OF FOOD TO FEED DOGS AND CATS
ENERGY
REQUIREMENT
ENERGY
CUPS
(KCAL OF
DENSITY
QUANTITY
PER
ME/DAY)
(KCAL/KG)
(KG)
POUNDS
OUNCES
DAY
Dog
988
÷
3800
Ⅱ
0.26
十
2.2
0.572
9.2
=
2.6
(22.7 kg)
Cat (4 kg)
253
÷
4200
=
0.060
2.2
0.132
=
2.12
=
0.60
Puppy
1462
÷
3800
=
0.385
2.2
=
0.846
=
13.5
=
3.86
(10 kg)
Kitten
250
÷
4200
=
0.059
X
2.2
=
0.129
=
2.06
=
0.58
(1 kg)
ME. Merabolizable energy.
the initial feeding level of this dog should be a little
more than 2%2 cups of food per day (Table 9-2). Alter-
TABLE 9-3 ENERGY REQUIREMENTS FOR
DIFFERENT STAGES OF LIFE
natively, if this dog was considered to be somewhat
active, with a requirement of 1352 kcal per day, feeding
STAGE
ENERGYREQUIREMENT
same food would meet
s300
this requirement. Therefore,
 if the owher is uncertain
Postweaned
2 × adult maintenance ME
about their dog's actual :
. an initial feed-
ugam Apog 1inpe %0t
evel
1.6 × adult maintenance ME
ing amount of 3 cups mi
80% adult body weight
1.2 × adult maintenance ME
then be adjusted up or
ponse to the dog's
Late gestation
1.25 to 1.5 × adult
maintenance ME
Lactationt
by allome-
3 × adult maintenance ME
The energy
y fequifements
predicted
Prolonged physical work
2 to 4 × adult maintenance ME
ttic equations are calculated for dogs at adult main-
 Decreased environmental
1.2 to 1.8 × adult maintenance
temperature
ME
needs include
growth,
gestation,
 lactation, periods
Cats
of stfenuous
physical work,
 and exposufe to extfeme
Postweaned
 250 kcal ME/kg body weight
environmental conditions
(Table 9-3).
. The body type
20 weeks
130 kcal ME/kg body weight
and conformation of particular breeds can also affect
30 weeks
100 kcal ME/kg body weight
Late gestation
1.25 × adult maintenance ME
Lactation
3 to 4× adult maintenance ME
 energy requirements than adult Great Danes of similar
ME, Metabolizable energy.
y be a refection of vatiation
*Adulr maincenance for a dog of comparable weighr.
tEquation based upon number of puppies and week of lacration:
in proportions of lean body tissue in the two breeds and
ME - adulr mainrenance + |BW (kg) x (24n + 12m) x L]. (BW - body
differenc
s in activity levels.
weighr; n - number of puppies up to 4; m - number of puppies berween 5
and 8; L - week of lacrarion.)
is necessary because such information may be helpful in
explaining the predisposition to obesity seen in certain
 3800 kcal/kg is fed (see Table 9-2). If a more energy-
breeds and breed types.
dense food was fed, a smaller volume would be esti-
After weaning, growing puppies f
require approxi
 mated. When puppies reach about 40% to 50% of their
mately twice the energy intake per unit of BW as adult
adult weight, this level of food should be reduced to 1.6
e,an active puppy
times maintenance levels; it should be further reduced to
that weighs 22 1b (10 kg) would fequire 2 x 731 kcal,
1.2 times maintenance levels when 80% of acdult weight
or 1462 kcal, per day. This would correspond to a little
 is achieved (see Table 9-3).9 The age at which a puppy
less than 4 cups of food per day when a food containing
will attain these proportions of adult weight will vary
68  Canine and Feline Nutrition
with the adult size of the dog. In general, large breeds
 equation that accounts for both the number of pup-
of dogs mature more slowly than do small breeds. With
pies in the litter and for the week of lactation (see
the exception of the giant breeds, most puppies achieve
Table 9-3).5,63
  pe  umq nuam e i Jo 
 Both physical work and environmental stresses can
of age and 80% of adult weight between 412 and 8
cause increased energy needs in dogs. Short bouts of
months. Large breeds of dogs do not attain full adult
intenise physical exercise may cause only a slight incfease
size until they are more than 10 months of age; small
in energy requirement, but a regular program of pro-
breeds reach adult size at a slightly ealier age.60 It is also
longed exercise may increase energy needs up to two
important to recognize that attaining adult size is not
to four times maintenance fequirements. In addition,
synonymous with physical maturity in terms of skeletal
exposure to cold and hot weather conditions can also
maturation and muscle development (see Chapter 22,
increase a dog's energy requirement. Dogs must expend
pp. 221-226). Although there is limited information
published regarding breed differences in energy needs
in cold conditions and for the body's cooling mecha-
during growth, activity differences among breeds and
nisms in wafm conditions. Depending on the severity,
temperament types can affect energy requirements dur-
living in cold weather conditions can increase energy
ing development, especially during the latter half of the
requirements by 1.2 to 1.8 times maintenance.64
growth period.6l
Energy needs increase substantially for female dogs
during gestation and lactation. During the frst 3 to
The energy requirements of cats and dogs are higher
duringgrowth,reproduction,physicatativity,andexo-
the same as for maintenance. After the fourth week
sure to cold environmental conditions. During lactation,
of pregnancy, energy requirements increase gradually
the energy needs ofdogs and cats can increase as much
to provide for rapid fetal growth. The energy needs
as three times normal, depending on litter size. Table
of a pregnant female will increase to approximately
9-3provides methods ofcaiculating energy requirements
1.25 to 1.5 times the normal maintenance require-
and the amounts to feed.
ment by the end of the gestation period. Alternatively,
increased needs during the latter half of gestation (after
 4 weeks until parturition) can be estimated using the
equation ME (kcal) = maintenance energy + (26 kcal
× BW kg).62
Cats
 Lactation is one of the most energy-demanding
The mature BW of most domestic cats vaties between
stages of life for an animal. Depending on the size of
about 2 and 7 kg (4 and 15 1b). Because cats do not
the litter, the energy needs of a bitch during lactation
show the extreme variability in body size and weight
can increase to as much as three times the normal main-
that dogs do, their energy needs have been tradlitionally
tenance fequirement. Using the previous example, a
expressed as a linear relationship with BW. However,
female with a normal weight of 22.7 kg and main-
this approach tended to overestimate the energy needs
tenance energy needs of 988 kcal may require up to
 of larger cats. Recent studlies of the maintenance energy
3 x 988 kcal, or 2964 kcal, during peak lactation. This
requirements of cats of different sizes and ages have
is equal to almost 8 cups of food per day. The ability
found that using metabolic BW provides a more accu-
of a bitch to consume this large volume of food may
be limited by the size of her stomach. Therefore it is
An exponent of 0.67 has been suggested for cats with
important to feed a food that is highly digestible and
optimal or leanb
body
7 condition, and an exponent of
nutrient dense during this stage of life and if necessary,
0.40 is suggested for cats that are overweight or obese.
to increase the number of meals that are offered (see
Maintenance energy needs for lean cats are estimated
Section 4, pp. 204-205 for a complete discussion). When
a more precise estimate is needed, energy require-
weight cats with the equation ME = 130 × BW0.40.
ments of lactating females can be calculated using an
Although these two equations account for different body
Energy Balance 69
sizes and body conditions in cats, an individual animal's
activity level and age will also infuence the maintenance
BOX 9-3 CALCULATION OF ENERGY
REQUIREMENTS OF ADULT CATS
energy requirement. In a fecent study, indirect calorimetry
AT MAINTENANCE
was used to measure daily energy expenditure of young
adult cats of both sexes.67 The results provided an esti-
LEAN ADULT CATS (NRC FORMULA)*
mate of approximately 60 kcal/kg BW for young adults,
ME = 100 × W0.67
regardlless of sex. Another study providled similar values
for young adlults and also showed that the energy needs
Exampfes:
of midll-aged cats generally decreased to approximately
ME requirement of a 4-kg (8.8-lb) cat =
45 kcal/kg BW.68 Similar to dogs, these age-related
100 × (4 kg)0.67 = 253 kcal of ME/day
changes in energy needs have been attributed to the
ME requirement of a 6-kg (13.2-lb) cat =
adldlitive effects of reduced activity and changes in body
100 × (6 kg)0.67 = 332 kcal of ME/day
composition.69,70
As with dogs, energy equations for cats provide a
ALTERNATE FORMULA (YOUNG ADULT CATS)
ME = 60 × Wkg
 rough estimate to use as a starting point when deter-
 mining an optimal amount of food for an individual.
Examples:
An example using these equations is provided in Box
ME requirement of a 4-kg (8.8-lb) cat =
9-3. Using the NRC equations, an adult 4.0-kg (8.8-1b)
60 × 4 kg = 240 kcal of ME/day
cat in optimal body condition would require approxi
ME requirement of a 6-kg (13.2-lb) cat =
-ena ae   rd  J Y  A
60 x 6 kg = 360 kcal of ME/day
tion (60 kcal/BWkg) provides an estimate of 240 kcal.
If the cat was a senior, the estimate is reduced to
OVERWEIGHT CATS (NRC FORMULA)
approximately 180 kcal. Finally, the estimated energy
ME = 130 × Wk0.40
need of an overweight adult cat weighing 8 kg (17.6 1b)
Examples:
is approximately 299 kcal per day. See Table 9-2 for
ME requirement of a 6-kg (13.2-lb) cat =
feeding estimates for an adult cat in optimal body
130 × (6 kg)0.40 = 266 kcal of ME/day
condition.
The energy requirements of cats increase during
ME requirement of a 8-kg (17.6-lb) cat =
130 × (8 kg)0.40 = 299 kcal of ME/day
 growth, reproduction, physical activity, and extreme
environmental conditions (see Table 9-3). The
OLDER ADULT CATS+
energy and nutrient requirements of growing kittens
ME = 45 × Wkg
are highest per unit of BW at about 5 weeks of age.
Exampfes:
 Young, rapilly growing kittens require approximately
200 to 250 kcal of ME per kg of BW. This require-
ME requirement of a 4-kg cat = 45 × 4 kg =
180 kcal of ME/day
t go s o Aq  o1 o s 
a g s 1o s  Aq  01 0n e
ME requirement of a 6-kg cat = 45 × 6 kg =
a 3-month-old kitten weighing 1 kg (2.2 1b) requires
270 kcal of ME/day
up to 250 kcal/day. If a dry kitten food containing
ME, Merabolizable energy, NRC, Narional Research Council.
4200 kcal/kg is fed, the kitten should be given 59 g
*NationalResearhCouncil:Nutrient rquirement ofdogs and ca,
of approximately 2 oz of food. This is equal to a little
Washingon, DC, 2006,Natinal Academy Press. Otherney
equations are available and may also be used.)
more than % cup of food per day. A more complex
Wicherr B, Muller L, Gebert S, and ochers: Addicional data on energy
equation that accounts for differences in expected
requiremencs of young adult cacs measured by indirecr calorimecry, /Ani
adult size and that is calculated specifically for a post-
Phys Ai Nutr 91:278281, 2007.
Laflamme DP Ballam JM: Effect of age on maintenance energy
weaned kitten's current BW is provided by the NRC.
requiremenrs of adulr cacs. In Proc Purina Nutr Forum, Sr Louis, 2001.
However, this equation relies upon an estimate of adult
weightinformation that may not be available to
 many owners. The estimates provided by this equation
70 Canine and Feline Nutrition
afe usually similar to estimates provided by the more
of 50 to 60 ml/BWkg.74 Using this formula, a 23-kg
 general recommendations.
(50-1b) dog would require 1150 to 1380 ml of watef
Studies with reproducing queens have indicated that
per day. Another formula estimates dogs’ exogenous
energy requirements of cats increase throughout gesta-
water fequirement in a thermoneutral environment
tion, rather than only during the last 4 to 5 weeks.71 By
as two to three times the dry-matter (DM) intake of
the end of the 9-week gestation, an increase of about
food, expressed in grams. Using the previous example,
25% above normal maintenance energy needs is usu-
 an inactive adult dog weighing 23 kg requires approxi-
ally required. The accretion of excess maternal body
mately 1000 kcal/day. If the dog is fed a dry food that
tissues during gestation allows the queen to prepare
has an energy density of 3500 kcal/kg, the dog should
adlequately for the intense energy demands of lacta-
receive 285 g of food per day. Dry pet foods contain
tion. The queen then uses these maternal stores and
 approximately 8% moisture. Therefore the dog will be
additional dietary energy to meet her increased energy
consuming 262 g of dry matter (DM). Multiplying this
needs during lactation. Depending on the size of the
 i i  e s  a ra
litter, a queen's dietary energy requirement during peak
lactation may be as high as 2.5 times her maintenance
the pfevious estimate. Finally, other fecommendations
fequirement (see Chapter 20, pp. 200-205 for a com-
 suggest that dogs require an amount of drinking water
plete discussion).
that is roughly equal to the number of kcal consumed
During all physiological stages, the energy require-
ment ofa particular cat is infuenced by the cat's activity
would be equal to 1000 ml/day, which is similar to
level, body condition, and length and thickness of the
the estimate provided by the frst equation. In general,
cat's coat and by the environmental conditions in which
water fequirements of cats afe thought to be somewhat
the cat is living. Therefore these estimates should be
lower than those for dogs. For example, the relationship
used only as a starting point when determining the
between water intake needed to maintain balance and
exact needs of an individual animal. Evaluation of the
caloric intake in cats is reported to be 0.6 to 1, lowef
cat's BW and condition can then be used to adljust the
 than recommendation for dlogs.75 Therefore, while the
initial energy requirement estimate.
formulas that are used for dogs can also be used for
cats, they may generally overestimate maintenance
WATER
needs for cats.
The best method of ensuring adequate water
The daily drinking water requirement of a dog or cat
intake in both dogs and cats is to provide fresh, clean
depends on several factors. Voluntary water intake will
water at all times, fegardless of the animal's physi-
  ss   ae n sssi  as
ological state, caloric needs, or DM intake. Dogs
in water losses from the body, such as increased physical
activity, increased body or environmental temperature,
cats and respond more rapidly to mild dehydration
changes in the kidneys ability to concentrate urine, of
by voluntarily increasing their water consumption.76
the onset of lactation. An animal's water needs increase
In contfast, cats afe less senisitive to dehydration
dramatically during periods of intense or prolonged
than dogs and take longer to restore water balance
exercise, when exposed to high environmental tempera-
through spontaneous drinking. Cats are also capable
ture or humidity, and in females, during the weeks of
 of producing more concentrated urine than dogs, an
peak lactation. In addition, the amount of water pres-
adaptaticn that helps to conserve water loss. The cat's
relatively weak thirst drive and tendency to consume
intake. If the water content of the food is very high,
smaller volumes of water afe attributed to its evolu-
both dogs and cats are able to maintain normal watef
tion from a desert-dlwelling species. However, the cat's
drinking behaviors and production of a concentrated
Several approaches are used to estimate dog and
urine are also risk factors for urolith formation in
cats’ maintenance water needs. Fluid therapy esti-
susceptible cats (see Chapter 30, pp. 365-366 for a
mates are based upon BW and use an estimate
complete discussion).
Energy Balance 71
References
1. Blaxter K: Energy metabolism in animais and man, Cambridge, UK, 1989, Cambridge University Press
2. Sellers EA, Reichman S, Thomas N, and others: Acclimatization to cold in rats: metabolic rates, Am J Physio! 167:65 1-655, 1951.
3. Davis TR: Contribution of skeletal muscle to nonshivering thermogenesis in the dog, Am / Physiot 213:1423-1426, 1967.
4. Ravussin E, Burnand B, Schutz Y, and others: Twenty-four hour energy expenditure and resting metabolic rate in obese, moderately
obese and control subjects, Am J Chin Nutr 35:566-573, 1982.
5. Forbes CB, Welle SL: Lean body mass in obesity, Int J Obes 7:99-107, 1983.
Sop ur arpuadxa araua uo (uruus pue Suruamey) suoneea nyelam go nraha srayo pue H unre 'T roe 'sa neanon 9
(abstract), J Vet Intern Med 14:390, 2000.
7. Diamond I, Brondel L, Leblanc L: Palatability and postprandial thermogenesis in dogs, Am / Physot 248:E75-E79, 1985.
8. LeBlanc J: Nutritional implications of cephalic phase responses, Appetite 34:214-216, 2000.
9. National Research Council: Nutrient reguirements of dogs and cats, Washington, DC, 2006, National Academy Press.
10. Rothwell N, Stock MJ: Luxuskonsumption, diet-induced thermogenesis and brown fat: the case in favor, Cin Sei 64:19-23, 1983.
11. Davis TR: Contribution of skeletal muscle to nonshivering thermogenesis in the dog, Am J Phyiol 213:1423-1426, 1967.
12. Sims EAH: Experimental obesity, dietary-induced thermogenesis, and their clinical implications, Clin Endocrinot Metabot
5:377-395, 1976.
13. Crist KA, Romsos DR: Evidence for cold-induced but not for diet-induced thermogenesis in adult dogs, J Nutr 117:1280-1286,
1987.
14. Root MV: Early spay-neuter in the cat: effect on development of obesity and metabolic rate, Vet Clin Nutr 2:132-134, 1995.
15. Graaf CD, Blom WAM, Smeets PAM, and others: Biomarkers of satiation and satiety, Am J Chx Nutr 79:946-961, 2004.
16. Naslund E, Gryback P, Backman L, and others: Distal srmall bowel hormones: correlation with fasting antroduodenal motility and
gastric emptying, Dig Dis Sci 43:945-952, 1998.
17. Maljars PWJ, Peters HPF, Mela DJ, Masclee AAM: lleal brake: a sensible food target for appetite control. A review, Physiot Behav
95:271-281, 2008.
18. Maljaars J, Peters HPF, Masclee AM: Review article: the gastrointestinal tract: neuroendocrine regulation of satiety and food intake,
Aliment Pharmacot 7ber 26(Suppl 2):241-250, 2007.
19. Bhatti SF, Hofand LJ, van Koetsveld PM, and others: Effects of food intake and food withholding on plasma ghrelin
concentrations in healthy dogs, Am / Vet Res 67:1557-1563, 2006.
Endocrinot 32:93-105, 2007.
21. Inui A, Okita M, Inoue T, and others: Mechanism of actions of cholecystokinin octapeptide on food intake and insulin and
pancreatic polypeptide release in the dog, Peptides 9:1 093-11 00, 1998.
22. Wen J, Phillips SF, Sarr MG, and others: PYY and GLP-1 contribute to feedback inhibition from the canine ileum and colon,
Am J Physaiol 269:G945-G952, 1995.
 23. Bado A, Cloarec D, Moizo L, and others: Neurotensin and oxyntomodulin-(30-37) potentiate PYY regulation of gastric acid and
somatostatin secretions, Am J Physiol 265:G1 13-G1 17, 1993.
     ro       o a d     
 25. Koda S, Date Y, MurakamiN, and others: The role of the vagal nerve in peripheral PYY3-36-induced feeding reduction in rats,
Endocrinotogy 146:2369-2375,2005
 fwy saop u suoenuuos uaododi pue pidi eurseld uo Aisago yo souangu o zaa iT assensI a isoyt 'I amasna 97
Res. 66:81-86, 2005.
72 Canine and Feline Nutrition
27. Hoenig M, Thomaseth K, Waldron M, Ferguson DC: Insulin sensitivity, fat distribution, and adipocytokine response to different
28. Appleton DJ, Rand JS, Sunvold CD: Plasma leptin concentrations are independently associated with insulin sensitivity in lean and
overweight cats,J Feline Med Surg 4:83-93, 2002.
29. Silverstone T, Besser M: Insulin, blood sugar and hunger, Postgrad Med J 47:427-429, 1971.
30. Woods SC, Porte D Jr, Bobbioni E: lnsulin: its relationship to the central nervous system and to the control of food intake and
body weight, Am / Chix Nutr 42:1063-1071, 1985.
31. Leibowitz SF, Hoebel BG: Behavioral neuroscience and obesity. In Bray G, Bouchard C, editors: Handbook of obesity, etiology and
pathophyiology, ed 2, New York, 2004, Marcel Dekker, pp 301-371.
32. Rocchini AP, Yang JQ, Gokee A: Hypertension and insulin resistance are not directly related in obese dogs, Hypertension
43:10111016, 2004.
33. Edney AT, Smith PM: Study of obesity in dogs visiting veterinary practices in the United Kingdom, Vet Rec 118:391-396, 1986.
34. Martin L, Siliart B, Duon H, and others: Leptin,body fat content and energy expenditure in ntact and gonadectomized adult
cats: a preliminary study, J Anim Physiot Anim Nutr 85:1 95- 199, 2001.
35. Cave NJ, Backus RC, Marks SL, Klasing KC: Oestradiol, but not genistein, inhibits the rise in food intake following gonadectomy
in cats, but genistein is associated with an increase in lean body mass, J Anim Physiot Anim Nutr 91:400-410, 2007.
36. Clegg DL, Brown LM, Woods SC, Benoit SC: Gonadal hormones determine sensitivity to central leptin and insulin, Dhabetes
55:978-987, 2006.
37. Blundell J,Stubbs J: Diet composition and the control of food intake in humans. ln Bray G, Bouchard C, editors: Handbook of
obesity, etiology and pathophysiotogy, ed 2, New York, 2004, Marcel Dekker, pp 427-460.
38. Scalafani A, Springer O: Dietary obesity in adult rats: similarities to hypothalamic and human obesity syndromes, Physiol Behau
17:461 471, 1976.
39. Slattery JM, Potter RM: Hyperphagia: a necessary precondition to obesity? Appetite 6:133-142, 1985.
40. Rogers PJ, BlundellJE: Meal patterns and food selection during the development of obesity in rats fed a cafeteria diet, Neurosc?
Biobehav Rev 8:441-453, 1984.
41. Rols BJ, Rowe EA, Turner RC: Persistent obesity in rats following a period of consumption of a mixed energy diet, J Physiol (Lond)
298:415427, 1980.
42. Lohse CL: Preferences of dogs for various meats,J A Arim Hosp Assoc 10:187-192, 1974.
43. Castonguay TW, Giles TC, Harrison JE, Rogers QR: Variations in sucrose concentration and its effect on food intake in the
dormestic cat, Soc Neurosci Abst 13:464, 1987.
44. Houpt KA, Smith SL: Taste preferences and their relation to obesity in dogs and cats, Cax Vet J 22:77-81, 1981.
45. Thorne CJ: Understanding pet response: behavioral aspects of palatabiliy In Proceedings ofthe petfood forum, Chicago, 1997, Watts
Publishing.
2007.
47. Ward C, Smuts B: Quantity-based judgments in the domestic dog ( Canis tupus familiaris), Anim Cogn 10:71-80, 2006.
48. West RE, Young RJ: Do domestic dogs show any evidence of being able to count? Anim Cogn 5:183-186, 2002.
49. Prato-Previde E, Marshall-Pescini S, Valsecchi P: ls your choice my choice? The owners effect on pet dogs (Canis fupus familiaris)
performance in a food choice task, Anim Cogn 11:167-174, 2008.
50. Leblanc J, Diamond P: The effect of meal frequency on postprandial thermogenesis in the dog (abstract), Fed Proc 44:1678, 1985.
51. Alexander JE, Wood LLH: Growth studies in Labrador Retrievers fed a calorie-dense diet: time-restricted versus free choice feeding
Canine Pract 14:4147, 1987.
Energy Balance73
52. Backus R: Management of satiety, Waltham Focus 16:27-32, 2006.
53. Romsos DR, Belo PS, Bennink MR, and others: Effects of dietary carbohydrate, fat and protein on growth, body composition and
blood metabolite levels in the dog, J Nutr 106: 1452-1464, 1976
54. Romsos DR, Hornshus MJ, Leveille CA: Infuence of dietary fat and carbohydrate on food intake, body weight and body fat of
adult dogs, Iroc Soc Exp Biof Med 157:278-281, 1978.
55. Gerstein D, Woodward-Lappel G: Clarifying concepts about macronutrients' effects on satiation and satiety, J Am Diet Asod
104:1151-1153, 2004.
 56. Torres CL, Hickenbottom S], Rogers QR: Palatability affects the percentage of metabolizable energy as protein selected by adult
Beagles, / Nutr 133:3516-3522, 2003
57. Cook N, Kane E: Self-selection of dietary casein and soy protein by the cat, Physiol Behav 34:583-594, 1985
58. Kienzle E, Rainbird A: Maintenance energy requirement of dogs: what is the correct value for the calculation of metabolic body
weight in dogs? Am / Clin Nutr 121:S39-S40, 1991.
59. Earle KE: Calculations of energy requirements of dogs, cats and smallpsittacine birds, J Small Anim Pract 34: 163-173, 1993.
60. Allard RL, Douglass GM, Kerr WW: The effects of breed and sex on dog growth, Compan Anim Pract 2:15-19, 1988.
61. Rainbird A, Kienzle E: Investigations on energy requirements of dogs in relation to breed and age, Kleintierpraxis 35:145-158,
1990.
62. Meyer H, Zentek J: Body composition of newborn puppies and nutrient requirements of pregnant bitches, Adv Anim Physiol Anim
Nutr 16:7-25, 1985.
63. Scantlebury M, Butterwick R, Speakman JR: Energetics of lactation in the domestic dog (Canis familiaris) breeds of two sizes
Compar Biochem Physiot-Part A 125:197-210, 2000.
64. Blaza SE: Energy requirements of dogs in cold conditions, Canine Pract 9:10-15, 1982.
65. Earle KE, Smith PM: Digestible energy requirements of adult cats at maintenance, J Nutr 121:S45-S46, 1991.
66. Nguyen PH, Dumon R, Frenais B, and others: Energy expenditure and requirement assessed using three different methods in adult
cats, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 23(9A):86, 2001.
calorimetry, J Anim Phys Anim Nutr 91:278-281, 2007.
68. Lafamme Dr, Ballam JM: Effect of age on maintenance energy requirements of adult cats. In Proc Purna Nur Forum, St Louis, 2001.
69. Taylor EJ, Adams C, Neville R: Some nutritional aspects of ageing in dogs and cats, Iroc Nutr Soc 54:645-656, 1995.
70.Man,Siliart,mn H,andther Lpinbdyft contnt and yndi nntact adgondctmzed a
cats: a preliminary study, J Anim Physiot Anim Nutr 85:1 95- 199, 2001.
71. Loveridge GG, Rivers JPW: Body weight changes and energy intakes of cats during pregnancy and lactation. In Burger IH, Rivers
JPW, editors: Nutrition ofthe dog and cat, New York, 1989, Cambridge University Press.
72. Danowski TS, Elkinton JR, Winkler AW: The deleterious effect in dogs of a dry protein ration, / Chin Invest 23:816-823, 1944.
73. Prentiss PG, Wolf AV, Eddy HE: Hydropenia in the cat and dog: ability of the cat to meet its water requirements solely from a diet
of fsh or meat, Am J Physiof 196:625-632, 1959
74. Schaer M: General principles of Huid therapy in small animal medicine, Vet Clin North Am Smalf Anim Pract 19:203-213, 1989.
75. Seefeldt SL, Chapman TE: Body water content and turnover in cats fed dry and canned rations, Am J Vet Res 40:183-185, 1979.
76. Anderson RS: Water balance in the dog and cat, J Small Anim Prect 23:588-598, 1982.
10
Carbohydrate Metabolism
All animals have a metabolic requirement for glucose.
Of puppy viability. Ultimately, the difference in the
This requirement can be supplied either through endog-
results of the two experiments was attributed to dliffer-
enous synthesis or from dietary sources of carbohydrate.
ences in the protein levels of the diets that were fed. The
Gluconeogenic pathways in the liver and kidneys use
diet in the frst study contained only 26% protein, com
propionic acid, lactic acid, glycerol, and certain amino
 pared with 51% and 45% protein diets in the second set
acids to produce glucose, which is then released into the
of experiments. Feeding a higher protein diet provides
bloodstream to be carried to the body's tissues.
sufficient amounts of gluconeogenic amino acids to
allow the maintenance of plasma glucose levels despite
 the heavy demands of gestation and lactation. Alanine,
DIETARYREQUIREMENT
glycine, and serine appear to be the principal gluconeo-
FOR CARBOHYDRATE
genic amino acids in dogs.
s.4 The reduced blood levels of
alanine exhibited by the dogs in the frst study suggest
The dog is capable of meeting its metabolic requirement
that insufficient alanine was available to allow adequate
for glucose from gluconeogenic pathways throughout
The
hypoglycemia observed in these
growth and adult maintenance, provided that sufficient
dogs was probably a result of the lack of gluconeogenic
fat and protein afe included in the diet.' However, the
 need for an exogenous source of catbohydrate during
sufficient glucose during gestation and lactation.
the metabolically stressful periods of gestation and lac-
These results were further supported by a study that
tation has been debated. During gestation the female
dog's needs increase because glucose provides a major
t0 ameliorate the effects of carbohydrate-free diets on
 gestation and lactation.5 These data confrmed that
lactation, aclditional glucose is needed for the synthesis
feeding carbohydrate-free diets to pregnant and lactat-
of lactose, the disaccharide present in milk. It is assumed
ing dogs can cause adverse effects. However, perfor-
that the female cat's glucose requirement also increases
mance was not impaired when the protein level in the
during these physiological periods.
diet was sufficiently high. The investigators estimated
An early study with dogs examined the degree of
that if carbohydrate is provided in the diet, female dogs
reproductive success in females that were fed diets with
require about 7 grams (g) of digestible crude protein per
varying levels of carbohydrates.2 The data indicated that
unit of metabolic body weight. However, if no carbohy
pregnant dogs did require a source of carbohydrate to
drate is supplied in the diet, this protein requirement
whelp and rear healthy puppies. Dogs that had been fed
must be increased to approximately 12 g of protein.
a carbohydrate-free diet throughout gestation became
Lactating females appear to fequire between 13 and
hypoglycemic and ketotic near the end of their preg-
18 g of protein per unit of metabolic weight when fed
nancies, and also showed reduced blood concentrations
a diet containing carbohydrate and 30 g when fed a
of the amino acid alanine. Only 63% of their pup-
catbohydrate-free diet. This information indicates that
pies were alive at birth, and puppy mortality was high
although glucose is a metabolically essential nutrient
shortly after birth. However, these fesults were subse-
for the dog, carbohydrates are not an indispensable
quently refuted by data from a second study that also
component of the diet, even during the metabolically
examined the effects of feeding a carbohydrate-free diet
 demanding stages of gestation and lactation. Although
to female dogs throughout gestation and lactation.3
specific studies
These data indicated that a carbohydrate-free diet did
nancy and lactation in the cat, this species’ unique pat-
not affect duration of gestation, litter size, litter weight,
tern of gluconeogenesis, coupled with its catnivorous
75
76 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 nature, suggests that it too can survive all stages of life
These data support the supposition that the hepatic
while consuming a carbohydrate-free diet.
gluconeogenic enzymes in cats always have a high rate
of activity, necessitating the rapid conversion of excess
Although giucose is a metabolically essential nutrient
adaptation to change in dietary protein concentration is
for the dog and the cat, digestible carbohydrates are
also seen in other carnivorous species, including trout,
not an indispensable component of the diet. Dogs,
vultures, and barn owls.10.12
and probably cats, can synthesize adequate giucose
There afe also differences between cats and omnivores
from gluconeogenic pathways to meet their metabolic
in the relative importance of vatious gluconeogenic and
needs throughout life, provided that sufcient protein
catbohydrate-metabolizing pathways. Compated with
omnivorous species, the cat has a high hepatic activity
acids.
that the cat is able to convert the amino acid serine to
glucose by a route that does not involve either pyruvate
of serine dehydratase. An alternative pathway has been
CARBOHYDRATE METABOLISM
proposed for the conversion of serine to glucose.14 It has
IN CATS
been observed that a high activity of the frst enzyme in
 this alternative pathway, serine-pyruvate aminotransfer-
Compared with the dog and other omnivorous species,
Aieap snonoaiures yim paneioosse aq on sieadde 'sse
the cat has several unique mechanisms for metaboliz-
habits in mammals.
ing dietary carbohydrate. The cat's ability to maintain
After glucose is absorbed into the body, it must be
normal blood glucose levels and health when fed a
phosphorylated to glucose-6-phosphate before it can
carbohydrate-free diet is partly related to its unique
be metabolized. The liver of most omnivorous animals,
pattern of gluconeogenesis. In most animals, maxi-
including the domestic dog, has two primary enzymes
mal gluconeogenesis for the maintenance of blood
that catalyze this reaction: glucokinase and hexokinase.
glucose levels occurs during the postabsorptive state,
Hexokinase is active when low levels of glucose afe
when dietary soluble carbohydrate is no longer avail-
delivered to the liver, and glucokinase operates when-
able. However, carnivorous species are similar to rumi-
ever the liver receives a large load of glucose from the
nant species in that they maintain a constant state of
portal vein. The cat's liver has active hexokinase but has
gluconeogenesis with a slightly increased rate imme-
diately after feeding.6 Because the body is limited in
that is present functions at a very low rate, and its activ-
its ability to conserve amino acids, and a carnivorous
ity cannot be up-regulated in response to a large intake
diet typically contains little soluble carbohydrate, the
of carbohydrate. Interestingly, fecent studies show that,
immediate use of gluconeogenic amino acids for the
compared with dogs, the activity of feline hepatic hexo-
maintenance of blood glucose levels is an adaptive
kinase and two other glycolytic enzymes, phosphofruc-
advantage.
lI gt'yy Aiaanelai are 'ssury anenad pue asuron
 The enzyme activity values in the cat's liver indicate
is possible that the high activity rates of these enzymes
that gluconeogenic amino acids in the diet are deami-
compensate for the low activity of glucokinase in the
natedand
l converted to glucose, father than
being
cat's liver. Cats also show minimal activity of hepatic
directly oxidized for energy.7 Liver phosphoenolpyru
glycogen synthetase, an enzyme essential for converting
vate carboxykinase (PEPCK), a major gluconeogenic
enzyme, does not change in activity level when cats that
these metabolic patterns may limit the cat's ability
to1
rapidly
y minimize the hyperglycemia that occurs
fasting.8 In adldition, no signifcant changes in hepatic
after a large dietary glucose load. Conversely, the cat's
PEPCK activity occur when cats are switched from a
 carbohydrate-metabolizing enzyme patterns support an
low-protein diet (17.5%) to a high-protein diet (70%)."
ability to maintain normal blood glucose levels through
Carbohydrate Metabolism  77
the consistent delivery of glucose via gluconeogenic
    1 s   %
catabolism of amino acids.
lizable energy (ME).22 Although kittens can digest this
high level of lactose, some adult cats develop diarrhea
when consuming high levels of lactose. As a result of
As obligate carnivores, cats possess several urique met-
a loss of lactase activity with age, feeding adult com-
abolic adaptations that allow them to maintain normal
Aep iaqo io yu jo siunoue siel seuue uonued
blood glucose concentrations through the consistent
products often results in maldigestion. Small quantities
delivery of glucose via the giuconeogenic catabolism of
of these foods can be digested by most pets, but large
amino acids.
quantities cause diarrhea because of the osmotic effect
of the sugar that escapes digestion and the volatile fatty
acids that are produced by bacterial fermentation of
the sugar in the large intestine. In addition, adult cats
have low intestinal activity of sucrase, suggesting lim-
UTILIZATION OF DIETARY
ited capacity to digest sucrose (table sugat).23 Although
CARBOHYDRATE
it has not been demonstrated in puppies and kittens,
 data from other species indicate that very young ani-
The fact that dogs and cats do not require catbohydrate
mals have low levels of sucrase activity during the fist
in their diets is usually immaterial because most com-
few weeks of life. For this feason, sucrose solutions
mercial foods include at least a moderate level of this
should not be used as energy sources for very young or
nutrient. In general, dry pet foods contain the highest
orphaned puppies and kittens.
amount of carbohyerate. Commercial dry foods may
include up to 60% carbohydrate, and canned foods
contain anywhere between 0% and 30% (as-fed basis).
As dogs and cats reach maturity their ability to digest
The largest proportion of carbohydrate in pet foods is
milk and other dairy products decreases because of
decreased lactase activity in the intestinal mucosa.
Pancreatic amylases are the major enzymes involved in
Similaryitisthoughtthatveryyoung animalshavelow
the digestion of amylase, amylopectin, and maltodextins.
levels of sucrase, which indicates that oral sucrose
Although the activity of pancreatic amylase is higher in
soiutions arenot recommended for very young or
dogs than in cats, both dogs and cats effciently digest
orphaned puppies and kittens.
cooked starch.18-20 Dietary starch provides an economi-
cal and digestible energy source, and it is also essential
for the extrusion process used in the preparation of
Fiber is the other carbohydrate component com-
most dry pet foods. The digestibility and utilization of
monly present in pet foods. Although dietary fber is
dietary starch by dogs and cats is affected by several fac-
not a required nutrient per se, the inclusion of opti-
tors, including the type of starch, degree of heat treat-
mal amounts of fber in the diets of companion ani-
ment, and size of the starch granules. Heating greatly
mals is necessary for normal functioning and health
increases digestibility, and fnely ground starch is more
of the gastrointestinal tract. Nonfermentable fber
functions to inciease the bulk of the diet, contrib-
 Although cooked starch provides an excellent energy
utes to satiety, and maintains normal intestinal transit
source, certain individual disaccharides, such as sucrose
time and gastrointestinal tract motility. Fermentable
and lactose, are not well tolerated by pets. An animal's
fbers have varying effects upon gastric emptying,
ability to digest and use these sugars is governed by the
and their fermentation by colonic bacteria produces
levels and activities of sucrase (beta-fructofuranosidase)
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) that are important
and lactase (beta-galactosidase) found in the cells of the
 energy sources for colonocytes, the mucosal cells of
intestinal lumen. As in most species, the activity of lac-
the colon (see Section 5, pp. 465-467 for a complete
tase in dogs and cats is high early in life and decreases
discussion). Common sources of dietary fber in pet
 e aide ss y s i'e 
foods include tomato, citrus, and grape pomace; beet
78Canine and Feline Nutrition
pulp; powdered cellulose, pea fber, and the hulls of
 commercial pet foods. In addition, protein sources in
soybeans and peanuts. Cofn, fice, wheat, oats, and 
 cereal-based pet foods add varying amounts of dietafy
barley all contribute digestible carbohydrates and sup-  fber to the fation. The amount of fber in pet foods
ply small amounts of dietary fber, as do various types  varies with the type of food and the ingredients that
of vegetables that are used with increasing frequency in  are included (see Chapter 16).
References
1. Romsos DR, Belo PS, Bennink MR, and others: Efects of dietary carbohydrate, fat and protein on growth, body composition
and blood metabolite levels in the dog, / Nutr 106:1452-1464, 1976.
dogs, / Nutr 111:678-689, 1981.
3. Blaza SE, Booles D, Burger IH: Is carbohydrate essential for pregnancy and lactation in dogs? In Burger IH, Rivers JPW, editors:
Nutrition ofthe cat and dog, New York, 1989, Cambridge University Press
4. Brady LJ, Armstrong MK, Muriuri Kl, and others: Infuence of prolonged fasting in the dog on glucose turnover and blood
metabolites, J Nutr 107: 1053-1061, 1977.
 5. Kienzle E, Meyer H: The effects of carbohydrate-free diets containing different levels of protein on reproduction in the bitch.
In Burger IH, Rivers JPW, editors: Nutrition ofthe dog and cat, New York, 1989, Cambridge University Press.
6. Morris JC, Rogers QR: Nutritionally related metabolic adaptations of carnivores and ruminants. In nternational symposium on
plant, animal and microbial adaptations to terrestriat environments, man and the biosphere, Halkidiki, Greece, 1982
7. Beliveau CP, Freedland RA: Metabolism of serine, glycine and threonine in isolated cat hepatocytes (Felis domestica), Comp Biochem
Phyiot 71B:13-18, 1982.
 8. Kettlehut IC, Foss MC, Migliorini RH: Glucose homeostasis in a carnivorous animal (cat) and in rats fed a high-protein diet,
Am / Phyaol 239:R115-R121, 1978.
 9. Rogers QR, Morris JC, Freedland RA: Lack of hepatic enzymatic adaptation to low and high levels of dietary protein in the adult
cat, Enzyme 22:348-356, 1977.
10. Cowey CB, Cooke DJ, Maty AJ, Adron JW: Effects of quantity and quality of dietary protein on certain enzyme activities of
rainbow trout, / Nutr 111:336-345, 1981.
11. Migliorini RH, Linder C, Moura JL, and others: Gluconeogenesis in a carnivorous bird (black vulture), Am J Physiol 225:
1389-1392, 1973.
12. Myers MR, Klasing KC: Low glucokinase activity and high rates of gluconeogenesis contribute to hyperglycemia in barn owls
(7yto alba) after a glucose challenge, / Nutr 129:1896-1904, 1999.
13. Rowsell EV, Carnie JA, Wahbi SD, and others: L-serine dehydratase and L-serine-pyruvate aminotransferase activities in different
animal species, Comp Biochem Physiol 63:543-555, 1979.
14. Morris JG, Rogers QR: Metabolic basis for some of the nutritional peculiarities of the cat, J Small Anim Pract 23:599-613, 1982.
15. Ballard FJ: Glucose utilization in mammalian liver, Comp Biochem Physiol 14:437-443, 1965.
16. Washizu T, Tanaka A, Sako T, and others: Comparison of the activities of enzymes related to glycolysis and gluconeogenesis in the
liver of dogs and cats, Res Vet Sci 67:203-204, 1999.
17. Zoran DL: The carnivore connection to nutrition in cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:1559-1567, 2002.
18. Morris JG, Trudell J, Pencovic T: Carbohydrate digestion by the domestic cat (Felis catus), Br J Nutr 37:365-373, 1977.
19. Kienzle E: Carbohydrate metabolism in the cat. 1. Activity of arnylase in the gastrointestinal tract of the cat, J Anim Physiol Anim
Nutr 69:92-101, 1994.
20. Kienzle E: Carbohydrate metabolism in the cat. 2. Digestion of starch, J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 69:102-114, 1994.
Carbohydrate Metabolism79
21. De Wilde RO, Jansen T: The use of different sources of raw and heated starch in the ration of weaned kittens. In Burger lH, Rivers 
JPW, editors: Nutrition of the cat and dog, New York, 1989, Cambridge University Press.
22. Keen CL, Lonnerdal B, Clegg MS, and others: Developmental changes in composition of cats' milk: trace elements, minerals,
protein, carbohydrate and fat, / Nutr 112:1763-1769, 1982.
23. Meyer H, Kienzle E: Dietary protein and carbohydrates: relationship to clinical disease. In Proceedings of the Purina internationaf
nutrition ymposium,Orlando,Fla, 1991.
Fat Requirements
such as long-distance sled races have found that the con-
FAT AS AN ENERGY SOURCE
The dietary fat requirement of dogs and cats depends
fatty acids for energy, which can ultimately contribute to
on the animal's need for energy (calories) and for
improved performance4,5 (see Chapter 24, pp. 245-248
essential fartty acids (EFAs). Dietary fat contributes
for a complete discussion).
 more than twice the amount of metabolizable energy
However, most adlult pets today live relatively sed-
(ME) per unit weight than does protein or carbohydrate
entary lifestyles and do not need foods containing high
and is also a highly digestible nutrient. The apparent
concentrations of fat. Although high-fat pet foods are
digestibility of most fats included in pet foods is typi-
capable of providing good nutrition and supporting
optimal health, sedentary animals may be inclined to
the level of fat in a pet's
overconsume these diets because of their high palatability
diet appreciably increases
and energy density. If adult pets are fed performance
cats are able to maintain health when consuming diets
diets, stfrict portion-controlled feeding should be used to
that contain wide fanges of fat
content,provided that
prevent excessive energy consumption and weight gain
Likewise, feeding high-fat, energy-dense foods during
in energy density. Because animals normally eat or are
periods of rapid growth must be strictly monitored.
This is especially important for large and giant breeds
energy-dense ration will result in decreased consump-
of dog because high-fat (energy-dense) foods that are
tion of the total volume of food. Therefore,if nutrients
balanced for all essential nutrients are capable of sup-
afe not adjusted in relation to fat, nutrient defciencies
umg pe pay ane Aau j ymois jo aei yoy e huiod
can tesult.
Maximal growth rate has been shown to be incom-
patible with proper skeletal development in dogs and
is a risk factor for the development of several skeletal
Dietary fat provides a concentrated source of energy
disorders. Portion-controlled feeding should therefore
that is highly digestibte. Dogs and cats can thrive on
be used to control a growing pet's weight gain, rate of
foods containing a wide range of fat content, provided
growth, and body condlition (see Section 4, pp. 231-233,
that other nutrients are adjusted to account for the
and Section 5, pp. 496-497).
changes in energy density.
FAT AS A SOURCE
Periods of high energy demand in dogs and cats
OF ESSENTIAL FATTY ACIDS
occur during growth, gestation, lactation, and pro-
longed periods of physical exercise. Feeding an energy-
In addition to providing energy, fat is necessary in the
dense, high-fat diet during these periods can allow an
diet of dogs and cats as a source of the EFAs. Twe fami-
animal to consume adequate calories without having to
lies of fartty acid are essential: the omega-6 (n-6) and
ingest excessive amounts of dry matter (DM). In addi-
the omega-3 (n-3) fatty acids. The n-6 fatty acids have
tion, feding a diet containing a sufficient concentration
their frst carbon double bond located at the sixth posi-
of dietary fat during strenuous physical work may have
tion on the carbon chain from the methyl end and the
metabolic benefts. Fatty acids are the primary source
n-3 fatty acids have the frst double bond located at
of energy used by the body during prolonged physical
the third carbon position (see Chapter 3, p. 19). The
 exertion. Studies of dogs engaging in endurance events
 parental forms of the n-6 and n-3 families are linoleic
81
82 Canine and Feline Nutrition
acid and alpha-linolenic acid, respectively. Linoleic acid
also upon EPA and DHA) upon the cat. Early studies
is comprised of an 18-carbon chain and has two double
reported that when linoleic acid but not AA was
bonds (18:2n-6), and alpha-linolenic acid is the same
included in the diet, cats developed impaired platelet
length, but contains three double bonds (18:3n-3).
 aggregation and thrombocytopenia, and queens failed
Aoq au u paao aq ues spie aey asau jo yiog
to other long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCP-
reproductive performance was not impaired by a lack of
UFA) through elongation and desaturation reactions.
dietary AA. This difference was attributed to the testes
The LCPUFAs of greatest physiological importance
ability to produce adequate AA from linoleic acid for
afe arachidonic acid (AA), synthesized from linoleic acid,
its own use. More recent studies confrmed that adlult
and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic
 male cats do not demonstrate a dietary requirement for
acid (DHA), produced from alpha-linolenic acid (see
 AA, and further examined the needs of reproducing
Chapter 31, Figure 31-3, p. 388). During metabolism,
females.14 These results suggest that like males, female
the n-6 and n-3 families compete for the same enzymes
cats do not typically require a dietary source of AA for
and metabolic pathways, although their end products
initial reproductive success. However, a dietary source
dliffer. Because of the basic difference in the location of
 of AA may be needed for healthy litters in queens that
the frst double bond, interconversion between the two
experience multiple pregnancies. These studies suggest
families of fatty acids is not possible. Therefore dietary
that while adlult cats have less capacity for producing
requirements for linoleic acid (n-6) and alpha-linolenic
AA than do adult dogs, they are still able to synthesize
acid (n-3) and their respective derivative LCPUFAs must
 adequate amounts to meet their needs during normal
be addressed distinctly, and the competitive relationship
 adlult maintenance. The degree to which adult cats are
between the two families of fatty acids must always be
capable of converting alpha-linelenic acid to its deriva-
considered when examining dietary effects of EFAs.
tive LCPUFAs has not been studied in detail. However,
Two key liver enzyimes involved in the production of
one study of the effects of dietary fatty acids on skin and
LCPUFAs afe delta-6-desaturase and delta-5-desaturase.
 plasma fatty acid profles provided evidence that sug-
In dogs, as in humans, the rate of conversion of the par-
 gested negligible conversion of alpha-linolenic acid to
-g-1ap Aq paieinlai si sneT rauo on pie Aiiey iua
EPA or DHA in cats.15
desaturase. This enzyme functions at a high enough rate
Finally, it is known that EFA status of the body
to providle dogs with adequate quantities of AA to meet
is negatively infuenced by the physiological stress of
needs when dietary linoleic acid is present.6 In addition,
adult dogs are capable of converting alpha-linolenic to
have shown that reproducing female dogs develop
both EPA and to a precursor of DHA, docosapentaencic
reduced EFA status and these changes afe exacer-
acid (DPA), although at relatively low rates of conver-
bated with increasing number of litters.17 Specifcally,
sion.7 There is evidence that the DPA that is produced
increased EFAs are needed during gestation and lacta-
in the liver of dogs and cats from alpha-linolenic acid is
tion to supply fetal tissues with EFAs through the pla-
transported to target tissues such as the retina, where it
centa and after birth through the milk. Of particular
is converted to DHA.8,9 As a result, the adult dog does
importance to reproducing females and their devel-
  rn   i e  
oping fetuses is DHA, which is needed for normal
probably does not require EPA or DHA, provided that
 neurological and retinal development in puppies and
adequate levels of linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid
kittens (see Chapter 22, pp. 228-229 for a complete
afe provided in the diet. Conversely, there is evidence
discussion).18 Because females have limited ability t0
that adlequate EPA and DHA may be necessary for
enrich their milk with DHA and EPA from dietary
healthy reproductive perforrmance in dogs (see below).
alpha-linolenic acid, the best way to supply developing
In contrast, cats afe father unusual in that the fate
fetuses and neonates with needed LCPUFAs is through
of delta-6-desaturase activity in the feline liver is lim-
 dietary enrichment of the mother's diet with these fatty
ited, leading to feduced production of LCPUFAs
 acids during pregnancy and lactation.19,20 In addi
tion, recent evidence shows that, similar to humans
dependency on dietaty sources of AA (and possibly
and other species, newborn puppies can convert milk
Fat Requirements 83
alpha-linolenic acid to DHA early in life, but they lose
and the circulatory system. Because of the competition
this ability after the neonatal stage oflife.21,22 The min-
between linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid for the
imum amount of alpha-linolenic acid that is needed to
same metabolic pathways, the effects of these fatty acids
supply adequate DHA for the neonate is not known
will be infuenced by both their absolute quantities in
and requires further study. Therefore, while dietary n-6
the diet and by their relative levels to each other.
a Aq paiinbai nou Aiqeqoid aie sanaT g-u pue
dogs of cats during adult maintenance, increased
demands occur during early development, growth,
Linoleic Acid and Arachidonic Acid
 gestation, and lactation to make these LCPUFAs con-
Linoleic acid has essential functions in maintaining the
ditionally essential.23
epidermal water barrier of the skin. It is incorporated
into a fraction of cellular phospholipids in the epidermal
keratinocytes called ceramides. Ceramides are extruded
imcreased essential fatty acids (EFAs) are needed dur
from keratinocytes into the intercelular spaces as lamel-
inggestationandlactationtosupplyfetal tissues with
lar granules and function to enhance cell cohesion and
EFAs through the piacenta and after birth through the
create an effective water barrier.24 Linoleic acid's impor-
milk. Of particuiar importance to reproducing femaies
tant role in skin health is refected in the changes to skin
and fetuses is docosahexaenoic acid, which is needed for
and coat that are seen during EFA deficiency. Linoleic
normal neuroiogical and retinal development in puppies
acid is also important as a precursor of the LCPUFAs
and kittens. The best way to supply the needed long-
that are incorporated into cell membranes in the form of
chain polyunsaturatedfatty acidsis through dietary
enrichment ofthe mother's diet with these fatty acids
tion to maintain normal membrane fuidity, structure,
during pregnancy and lactation.
and function. The type of fatty acids that predominate
in a cell membrane differs among cell types and is also
infuenced by the fatty acid composition of the diet.
The n-6 fatty acids that are derived from linoleic acid
ate found as storage fatty acids in adlipose tissue, and
FUNCTIONS OF ESSENTIAL
in liver, kidney, and muscle cells. Linoleic acid-derived
FATTY ACIDS FOR DOGS
fatty acids found in cell membranes also have interactive
AND CATS
an ioj jueodu ane jeu suaoid Aoensai ym saoi
 metabolism and signaling.
Most mammals, including dogs and cats, are capable of
 The most important LCPUFA produced from lin-
synthesizing the nonessential 16- and 18-carbon fatty
oleic acid is AA, which is a major cell membrane fatty
acids from glucose or amino acids. These fatty acids
acid and a precursor of certain types of eicosanoids.
belong to twe families, the n-7 and n-9 fatty acids, and
The eicosanoids afe a diverse group of 20-carbon sub-
ate produced in highest quantities when an animal is
stances that are produced and released from cell mem-
fed a low-fat diet. Alternatively, when fed a diet con-
branes in response to physical or chemical trauma and
taining adequate fat, animals preferentially use the fatty
that have local effects upon immune and infammatory
acids provided by the dliet to meet their needs. The two
responses. The four primary types of eicosanoids are
18-carbon EFAs, linoleic acid (n-6) and alpha-linolenic
the prostaglandins, prostacyclins, thromboxanes, and
acid (n-3) are synthesized by terrestrial plants, while
leukotrienes. AA, which generally comprises more than
marine plants are capable of inserting further double
20% of the total fatty acids in cell membrane phos
bonds and elongating these carbon chains to produce
pholipids in the skin, is converted to prostaglandins of
the n-3 LCPUFAs. However, no plants are capable of
the 2 series (prostaglandin E2) and leukotrienes of the
producing AA from linoleic acid. As a fesult, AA is
4 series (leukotriene Ba). These eicosanoids are proin-
found only in animal tissues. Each of the EFAs and
Aammatory and are important mediators of infamma
those that are classified as conditionally essential have
tory and allergic fesponses (see Chapter 31, pp. 386-395
important roles in cell membranes, the immune system,
for a complete discussion).
84 Canine and Feline Nutrition
capable of converting DPA to DHA, and it is theorized
Arachidonic acid, produced from linoleic acid,is a
that circulating DPA produced in the liver provides the
major cell membrane fatty acid anda precursor
substrate for this conversion. Similarly, adult cats are
ofcertain types of eicosanoids. The eicosanoids are
able to convert small amounts of alpha-linolenic acid to
20-carbon substances that are released from cell mem
EPA and DPA in the liver and feline neurological tissue
branes in response to physical or chermical trauma
appears to be able to convert DPA to DHA.27 There-
andhave localeffects on immune and infammatory
fore, dietary alpha-linolenic acid may provide a source
responses. The four primary types of eicosanoids are
of retinal and nerve tissue DHA, although it is not
the prostagiandins, prostacyclins, thromboxanes, and
known if amounts that are converted can meet physi-
leukotrienes.
ological needs throughout life. Providing at least small
amounts of dietary DHA may be a more effective way
of meeting requirements, at least during fetal growth
and early in life.
Alpha-Linolenic Acid, EPA,
and DHA
DIETARY FAT AND ESSENTIAL
Alpha-linolenic acid does not appear to have direct
FATTY ACID REOUIREMENTS
functions itself, although there is evidence that it may
contribute to a healthy transepidermal water bar-
fier.25,26 This effect is attributed to alpha-linolenic acid
Dogs
providing a sparing effect for linoleic acid as a source
Although there is not an absolute fequirement for
of LCPUFAs, which allows increased accumulation
dietary fat per se, fat is needed in the diet to provide
of linoleic acid in ceramide ffractions of the skin. The
EFAs and energy and to enhance diet palatability.
primary role of alpha-linolenic acid is as the parent
A minimum amount of dietary fat is also needed as
fatty acid for the synthesis of EPA and DHA. EPA
 a carrier for the fat-soluble vitamins. Most dry dog
is incorporated into cell membranes and, like AA,
foods that are marketed for adult maintenance contain
serves as a precursor for the eicosanoids. Important
between 5% and 13% fat (DM basis). In comparison,
eicosancids produced from EPA are prostaglandins
the fat content of dry dog foods that are formulated
of the 3 series (prostaglandin E3) and leukotrienes of
for gestation, lactation, or performance may be 20%
the 5 series (leukotriene Bs). These eicosanoids are
 Or greater. The current Association of American Feed
less potent mediators of infammation than those pro-
Control Officials’ (AAFCO's) Nutrient Profles mini-
duced from AA and can effectively redluce infamma-
mum fat recommendations are 5% for adult mainte-
tory and allergic responses when they replace AA. This
 nance and 8% for growth and reproduction (DM basis)
is the basis for the use of n-3 fatty acids in the manage-
provided in a food containing 3500 kcal/kg.28 An adlult
ment of certain infammatory skin diseases and other
dog maintenance food should also provide a minimum
infammatory disorders (see Section 5, pp. 386-396
of 1% of the food's dry weight as linoleic acid.
for complete discussions).
Although a requirement for alpha-linolenic acid
 DHA is found in large amounts in the cell mem-
-bai wnu e 'sop ig puseisa uaaq nou s
branes of neurological tissues and is one of the most
ment of approximately 0.044% DM (or 0.09% ME) in
abundant fatty acids found in the retina. It is essential
foods containing approximately 1% linoleic acid is sug-
for normal neurological and visual development dur-
 gested.23 Because the n-3 and n-6 farty acids compete
 ing fetal and neonatal life. Alpha-linolenic acid can be
for metabolic pathways, the amount of alpha-linolenic
converted to DHA in very young animals and less eff-
acid in the food must always be determined relative to
ciently in adults. There is also evidence that adult dogs
the level of linoleic acid. If the linoleic acid content of
are capable of converting dietary alpha-linolenic acid to
the food is higher than 1%, alpha-linolenic acid should
an intermediate fatty acid, DPA, which is found in cir-
also be increased to maintain an appropriate balance
 culating plasma phospholipids.22 The canine retina is
between the two families of fatty acids. The current
Fat Requirements 85
National Research Council (NRC) recommends that a
content. To a limit, increasing fat results in enhanced
ratio of linoleic acid to alpha-linolenic acid of between
palatability.
Similarly, decreasing fat below a certain
2.6 and 26 should be maintained in all foods. Although
level causes decreased acceptability of the diet. This
EPA and DHA are considered to be conditionally essen-
effect is believed to be the result of both the texture and
tial during certain stages of life for dogs, a minimum
the favor that fat contributes to a pet food. Because
dietary fequirement for these LCPUFAs has not been
low-fat diets may not be readily accepted by pets, their
established for dogs. The cufrent NRC provides an adle-
potential for causing an energy or EFA defciency is
quate intake (AI) estimate of 0.11 g of EPA and DHA
exacerbated by their causing a decrease in food intake.
combined per 1000 kcal of diet.23
Because linoleic acid is important for the main-
tenance of the epidermal water barrier, and because
skin cells have a high rate of turmover, the skin is par-
Cats
ticularly vulnerable to EFA deficiencies. In dogs, linoleic
A minimum level of fat is needed in the cat's diet for
acid deficiency results in a dry, dull coat; hair loss; skin
the same purposes as with dogs. Also similar to dogs,
lesions; and poor wound healing. Over time, the skin
cats are capable of thriving on a relatively wide range
becomes pruritic, greasy, and susceptible to infection.
of dietary fat, provided the diet includes proper levels
A change in the surface lipids in the skin alters the normal
of all essential nutrients. In general, cat foods contain
bacterial fora and can predispose the animal to secondary
slightly higher ameunts of dietary fat than do most dog
 bacterial infections.30 Epidermal peeling, interdigital exu-
foods. For example, dry maintenance cat foods con-
dation, and otitis externa have also been reported in EFA-
tain between 8% and 13% fat (DM basis). The cufrent
deficient dogs.31 Linoleic acid deficiency in cats fesults in
AAFCO's Nutrient Profles minimum fat recommenda-
similar dermatological signs. In addition, kittens will fail
tion for cats during all life stages is 9% in a food con-
to grow normally, and may develop fatty degeneration of
taining 4000 kcal/kg.28
the liver and fat deposition in the kidneys.32.33
Exact estinmates for the EFA requirement in cats afe
Although not reported in dogs and cats, deficiency
difficult to make because adequate levels of linoleic acid
signs of n-3 fatty acids in other species include nervous
in the diet decrease the cat's requirement for AA, and
 system abnormalities, decreased visual acuity, retinal
high levels of AA can meet some of the needs for lin-
abnormalities, and reductions in learning and mem-
oleic acid.29 In addition, fecent evidence suggests that
ory.34,35 These signs refect the high concentrations of
most adult cats do not have a dietary requirement for
 n-3 LCPUFAs found in the brain and retinal rod cells
AA and are capable of synthesizing adequate levels
of most species and the importance of these fatty acids
from dietary linoleic acid. The AAFCO's Nuttient Pro-
during early development. Although signs of n-3 EFA
fles for cat foods recommends 0.5% linoleic acid and
 deficiency have not been reported in dogs and cats, the
0.02% AA in diets containing 4000 kcal of ME/kg.
high concentrations of DHA in nervous and retinal tis-
The current NRC provides similar estimates along with
sues and high demands during reproduction and early
the caveat that the AA recommendation is a presumed
development suggest that defciencies in dogs and cats
adequate intake rather than a minimum requirement for
would produce similar signs.
adult maintenance.23 Similar to dogs, requirements have
Today, overt EFA deficiencies afe hot common in
not been established for alpha-linolenic acid or for any of
dogs and cats. When they do occur, deficiencies afe usu-
its LCPUFA derivatives for the cat. The NRC provides
ally associated with the consumption of diets that are
 an AI estimate of 0.1 g of EPA and DHA combined per
either poorly formulated or have been stored improperly.
1000 g diet in a food containing 4000 kcal/g.23
Most well-formulated diets contain sufficient amounts
of EFAs. However, exposure to high environmental tem-
 peratures and humidity for long periods can promote
DEFICIENCIES AND EXCESSES
oxidation of the unsaturated fatty acids in the food. This
Low amounts of fat in the diet can lead to deficiencies
process is commonly referred to as rancidity If insuff-
in both total energy and EFAs. In addition, the palat-
cient antioxidants are present, EFA activity is destroyed.
ability of dog and cat diets is strongly affected by fat
As the unsaturated fats are destroyed by oxidation, not
86 Canine and Feline Nutrition
only is EFA activity lost, but so ate the vitamins D, E,
of the diet can promote the formation of fewer infam-
and biotin. EFA deficiency in dogs and cats can also
matory agents, resulting in a reduction in clinical signs
occur as a complication of other diseases, such as pancre-
(see Section 5, pp. 386-395 for a complete discusson).
atitis, biliary disease, hepatic disease, and malabsorption.
Excess fat intake can also be detrimental to a pet's
health. As stated previously, dogs and cats are able to digest
and assimilate diets containing high levels of fat. How-
Although uncommon,essential fatty acid(EFA)def-
evet, providing more fat than the gastrointestinal tract can
ciency results in a dry, dufl coat; hair loss; skin lesions,
effectively digest and absorb results in fatty stools (steat
and poor wound healing. Over time, the skin becomes
orthea) and diarrthea. This problem is most commonly
pruritic, greasy, and susceptibie to infection. A change in
observed when pet owhers providle their dlog or cat with
the surface lipids in the skin aiters the normal bacterial
fora and can predispose the animal to secondary bac
long-term consumption of diets that are very high in fat
terial infections.EFAdeficiency canresuit fromfeeding
may lead to weight gain and obesity because of the high
poorly formuiated or rancid foods, but it can occur sec-
palatability and energy density of the diet. Feeding diets
ondary to pancreatitis, biliary disease, hepatic disease,
that ate very high in fat and do not have all other nutri-
ormaiabsorption.
ents balanced relative to energy density may result in the
dlevelopment of deficiencies in other essential nutrients.
Lastly, excessive levels of LCPUFAs in the diet cause
Although commercially prepated foods will not
an increase in an animal's vitamin E requirement.
Vitamin E functions as an antioxidant in the body, pro-
believe that supplementing their pet's diet with corn
tecting cellular membrane lipids from peroxidation. The
oil or some other type of fat will improve coat quality.
vitamin is preferentially oxidized before the unsaturated
This will only be effective if the pet is truly suffering
fatty acids, thus protecting the fatty acidls from rancidity;
from an EFA or fat deficiency. If that is the case, com-
however, vitamin E is destroyed in this process. There-
pletely changing the diet to a well-formulated pet food
fore as the level of unsaturated fatty acids in an animal's
that supplies all of the essential nutrients in their correct
diet increases, so does the animal's requirement for
proportions, including fat and EFAs, is recommended.
vitamin E. If a pet food contains very high levels of
Simply adding a source of fat or EFAs to a defcient diet
LCPUFAs or if an owner is supplementing a balanced
without assessing levels of both n-3 and n-6 fatty acids
dliet with high amounts of corn or vegetable oil, vitamin E
in the diet may of may not solve the EFA deficit and has
in the diet must concomitantly be increased. For exam-
the potential to further imbalance a food that is already
ple, when hunting dogs were fed high amounts of high
inadequate. Conversely, fatty acid supplementation of
fat food scraps as their primary diet, they developed clin-
altering the fatty acid levels or ratios in the diet can be
ical signs of vitamin E defciency.36 Similarly, a condition
effective in treating certain infammatory and hyper-
called pansteatitis, or “yellow fat disease,” occurs in cats
proliferative skin diseases in companion animals. Recent
research indicates that modifying the fatty acid profile
marginal or low in vitamin E (see Section 4, p. 279).
References
1. Peachey SE, Dawson JM, Harper EJ: The effect of ageing on nutrient digestibility by cats fed beef tallow, sunflower oil, or olive
oil-enriched diets, Growth Dev Aging G3:49-58, 1999.
2. Kane E, Morris JG, Rogers QR: Acceptability and digestibility by adult cats of diets made with various sources and levels of fat,
J Anim Sci 53:1516-1523, 1981.
3. Meyer H, Zentek J, Freudenthal U: Digestibiity of beef tallow in dogs, Wien Tierarzt Monat 79:202, 1992
Fat Requirements 87
5. Reynolds A], Taylor CR, Hoppeler H, and others: The effect of diet on sled dog performance, oxidative capacity, skeletal muscle
pp 181-198.
6. Dunbar BL, Bauer JE: Conversion of essential fatty acids by delta-6-desaturase in dog live microsomes, J Nutr 132:1701S-1703S,
2002
7. Bauer JE, Dunbar BL, Bigley KE: Dietary Haxseed in dogs results in differential transport and metabolism of (n-3) polyunsaturated
fatty acids, / Nutr 128:2641S-2644S, 1998.
8. Alvarez RA, Aguirre GD, Acland GM: Docosapentaenoic acid is converted to docosahexaenoic acid in the retinas of normal and
prcd-affected Miniature Poodle dogs, Invest Sci 35:402-408, 1994.
9. Pawlowsky R, Barnes A, Salem N Jr: Essential fatty acid metabolism in the feline: relationship between liver and brain production
of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, J Lipid Res 35:2032-2040, 1994.
10. Rivers JPW, Sinclair AJ, Crawford MA: Inability of the cat to desaturate essential fatty acids, Nature (Lond) 258:171-173, 1975.
11. Hassam AC, Rivers JPW, Crawford MA: The failure of the cat to desaturate linoleic acid: its nutritional implications, Nutr Metabol
21:321-328, 1977.
12. MacDonald ML, Anderson BC, Rogers QR, and others: Essential fatty acid requirements of cats: pathology of essential fatty acid
deficiency, Aa / Vet Res 45:1310-1317, 1984.
 13. MacDonald ML, Rogers QR, Morris JG: Efects of linoleate and arachidonate defciencies on reproduction and spermatogenesis in
the cat, / Nutr 114:719-726, 1984.
14. Morris JG: Do cats need AA in the diet for reproduction? Proc Symp Compar Nutr Soc 4:65-69, 2002.
15. Chew BP, Park JS, Wong TS, and others: Role of omega-3 fatty acids on immunity and infammation in cats. In Carey DP,
Norton SA, Bolser SM, editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutritional research: proceedings ofthe 2000 lams internationat
nutrition symposium, Wilmington, Ohio, 2000, Orange Frazer Press, pp 55-67.
16. Holman RT, Johnson SB, Osburn PL: Deficiency of esential fatty acids and membrane fuidity during pregnancy and lactation,
Proc Nati Acad Sci U S A 88:4835-4839, 1991.
17. Kelley R, Lepine AJ: lmproving puppy trainability through nutrition. In Iroc North Am Vet Conf 2005, pp 21-26.
 18. Lauritzen L, Hansen HS, Jorgensen MH, Michaelson KE: The essentiality of long-chain n-3 fatty acids in relation to development
and function of the brain and retina, Irog Lipid Res 40:1-94, 2001.
19. Bauer JE, Heinemann KM, Bigley KE, and others: Maternal diet alpha-linolenic acid during gestation and lactation does not
increase canine milk docosahexaenoic acid, / Nutr 134:2035S-2038S, 2004.
20. Heinemann M, Waldron MK, Bigley KE: Long-chain (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids are more effcient than alpha-linolenic acid
 in improving electroretinogram responses of puppies exposed during gestation, lactation, and weaning, J Nutr 135:1960-1966,
2005.
21. Bauer JE, Heinemann KM, Lees CE, Waldron MK: Docosahexaenoic acid acumulates in plasma of canine puppies raised on
alpha-linolenic acid-rich milk during suckling but not when fed alpha-linolenic acid-rich diets after weaning, / Nutr 136:
2087S-2089S, 2006.
22. Bauer JE, Dunbar BL, Bigley KE: Dietary Haxseed in dogs results in differential transport and metabolism of n-3 polyunsaturated
fatty acids, / Nutr 136:1991S-1994S, 2006.
23. National Research Council: Nutrient reguirements ofdogs and cats, Washington, DC, 2006, National Academy Press.
24. Kirby NA, Hester SL, Bauer JE: Dietary fats and the skin and coat of dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc 230:1641-1644, 2007.
25. Rees CA, Bauer JE, Burkholder WJ: Effects of dietary faxseed and sunfower seed supplementation on normal canine serum
polyunsaturated fatty acids and skin and hair coat condition scores, Vet Dermatof 12:111-117, 2001.
26. Campbell Kl, Roudebust P: Effects of four diets on serum and cutaneous fatty acids, transepidermal water losses, skin surface
lipids, hydration and condition of the skin and hair coat of dogs. In Proc Ann Am Asoc Vet Derm, 1995, pp 80-81.
88Canine and Feline Nutrition
27. Pawlosky RJ, Denkins Y, Ward G: Retinal and brain accretion of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids in developing felines: the
effects of corn-based maternal diets, Am J Clin Nutr 65:465-472, 1997.
28. Association of American Feed Control Offcials (AAFCO): Offcial publication, 2008, AAFCO.
29. MacDonald ML, Rogers QR, Morris JG: Nutrition of the domestic cat, a mammalian carnivore, Ann Rev Nutr 4:521-562, 1984.
30. Codner EC, Thatcher CD: The role of nutrition in the management of dermatoses, Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 5:167-177,
1990.
 31. Hansen AE, Wiese HF: Fat in the diet in relation to nutrition of the dog. 1. Characteristic appearance and changes of animals fed
diets with and without fat, Tex Rep Biof Med 9:491-515, 1951.
32. Sinclair AJ, McLean JG, Monger EA: Metabolism of linoleic acid in the cat, Lipids 14:932-936, 1979.
33. Rivers JPW: Essential fatty acids in cats, J Small Anim Pract 23:563-576, 1982.
34. Neuringer M, Anderson CJ, Conner WE: The essentiality of the n-3 fatty acids for the development and function of the retina and
brain, Ann Rev Nutr 8:517-541, 1988.
35. Conner WE, Neuringer M, Reisbeck S: Essential fatty acids: the importance of n-3 fatty acids in the retina and brain, Nutr Rev
50:2129-2134,1996.
36. Davidson MC, Geoly FJ, Cilger BC, and others: Retinal degeneration associated with vitamin E deficiency in hunting dogs, J Am
Vet Med Asoc 213:645-651, 1998.
12
Protein Requirements
A requirement for dietary protein actually represents
using analytical tests, the Kjeldahl method and the Leco
the need for essential amino acids and adequate non-
Nitrogen Protein Analyzer? Measuring nitrogen intake
essential amino acids to maintain body protein and
and excretion provides a fough estimate of the body's
to supply nitrogen for the synthesis of nonessential
protein status. Nitrogen balance is calculated as:
amino acids and other essential nitrogen-containing
compounds (see Section 1, p. 21). This requirement is
Nitrogen balance = Nitrogen intake frorm food -
commonly expressed as a protein fequirement because
Nitrogen excretion through urine and feces
amino acids and nitrogen-containing compounds are
 most typically supplied in the diet in the form of intact
The nitrogen in the feces is comprised of unabsorbed
protein. Adult animals require dietary protein to main-
'sasinos snoussopua woy uaonu pue uaoid Aieiap
tain whole-body protein turnover.l This turnover rep-
 such as intestinal cells and gut microfora. Urinary
resents the synthesis and breakdown of proteins in all
nitrogen is composed primarily of urea, which is the
tissues of the body, including skin, hair, skeletal muscle,
 end product of amino acid catabolism. Further nitrogen
digestive enzymes, hormones, serum transport proteins,
losses occur from desquamated cells of the skin surface,
and mucosal cells. It is the sum of the losses of all of
hair, and nails. However, these losses afe very difficult to
the body's individual proteins and nitrogen-containing
measure and are usually not considered when measuf-
compounds that ultimately determines an individual's
ing nitrogen balance in experimental studies.
daily protein (amino acid) requirement. Young animals
Requirement
studies with
1 growinganimalsuse
have the same maintenance requirements as adult ani-
maximum positive nitrogen balance and growth rate
mals, plus an added requirement for the deposition of
growth of new tissue.
protein in the diet. Studies of adult companion animals
at maintenance use zero nitrogen balance to indicate
dietary protein adlequacy. Zero nitrogen balance pro-
Protein in the diets of adult dogs, adult cats, puppies
vides an indirect measure of whole-body protein turn-
and kittens is recessary for the repiacement of protein
over and suggests that the body's daily loss of protein is
losses in the skin, hair, digestive enzymes, and mucosal
replaced by intake, without a net gain or loss in total
cells, as well as amino acid losses from normal cellula
body protein. Although the majority of requirement
proteincatabolism.Puppies and kittens aiso require pro-
studies have used zero nitrogen balance to assess the
tein forgrowth.
 protein requirement of adult animals during mainte-
nance, it is important to recognize that there are certain
limitations to the use of the nitrogen balance technique.
First, nitrogen balance does not provide information
DETERMINING PROTEIN
regarding the adlequacy of (or requirement for) indi-
vidual amino acids. Therefore amino acid require-
REQUIREMENTS
ment studies have been conducted independently of
Historically, the response criteria that have been used
protein requirement studies (see pp. 95-101). Second,
to determine protein requirements in dogs and cats
the minimum level of protein needed to maintain zero
ate nitrogen balance and growth rate. Nitrogen bal-
 nitrogen balance may not be adequate to promote opti
ance studies are based upon the fact that protein, on
 mal performance and health. For example, in an early
the average, contains 16% nitrogen. The nitrogen con-
study, when adult dogs were fed diets containing just
tents of food, feces, and urine are commonly measured
enough protein to attain zero nitrogen balance, they
9
90 Canine and Feline Nutrition
TABLE 12-1 STATES OF NITROGEN BALANCE
STATE
BALANCE
PHYSIOLOGICALSTAGE
Zero
N intake = N excretion
Maintenance
Positive
N intake > N excretion
Growth, gestation, recovery from illness
Negative
N intake < N excretion
Inadequate nutrition, severe illness or injury, urinary N loss during
renal failure, gastrointestinal tract loss during certain diseases
N, Nirrogen.
were found to be more susceptible to the toxicity of
illness or injury results in a catabolic state in animals
certain drugs.3 In addition, higher levels of protein in
that is evidenced by excessive breakdown of the body's
the diet may be needed to obtain adlequate individual
tissues and negative nitrogen balance. Excess losses of
amino acid intakes to maintain lean
1 body mass and
nitrogen from the urine during renal failure or from the
protein reserves. (Although protein is not stored in the
 gastrointestinal tract during some types of gastrointes-
body as is fat and, to a lesser degree,
 catbohydrate, the
tinal disease can also cause negative nitrogen balance to
term reserves refers to the ability
of the body to mobi-
occur (Table 12-1).
of stress.) For example, many diseases
s cause a loss of
FACTORS AFFECTING PROTEIN
protein depot. Therefore it is prudent to consider that
REQUIREMENT
estimates obtained using zero nitrogen balance may rep-
resent a minimum protein requirement for adult ani-
The determination of the exact protein requirements
mals. Adequate intake (AI) estimates for dogs and cats
for dogs and cats is a difficult task because many factors
affect an individual animal's need for protein. Dietary
amount for healthy adults, especially during periods of
factors that affect protein turnover (nitrogen balance)
physiological stress. AI estimates also account for vatia-
include protein quality and amino acid composition,
tions in the population of interest.
protein digestibility, and the energy density of the diet.
Nitrogen equilibrium (zero balance) is the normal
In adldition, an animal's activity level, physiological state,
state for healthy adult animals during maintenance.
and prior nutitional status can all infuence protein
An animal is described as being in a state of positive
fequirement as determined by nitrogen balance, whole-
nitro gen balance when protein intake exceeds excretion.
Positive nitrogen balance occurs when new tissue is
An animal's protein fequirement vaties inversely with
being synthesized by the body, such as during the physi
the protein source's digestibility and with its ability to
ological stages of growth and gestation or the recovery
provide all of the essential amino acids in their correct
phase following a prolonged illness. Positive nitrogen
quantities and ratios. As protein digestibility and qual-
ity increase, the level of protein that must be included
intake of a significant imbalance of the essential amino
in the diet to meet the animal's needs decreases. Early
acids. Negative nitrogen balance results when protein
protein fequirement studies with dogs and cats used
excretion exceeds intake. An animal that exhibits nega-
either purifed or semipurified diets; the protein and
tive balance is losing nitrogen from tissues more rap-
 amino acids in these types of diets are highly digestible
idlly than it is being replaced. This loss of nitrogen may
and available. In contrast, most of the protein soufces
occur for several reasons. If the animal is consuming an
used in commercial pet foods have comparatively lowef
insufficient amount of energy or is anorectic, body tis-
digestibility coefficients. For example, protein digest
sues must be catabolized to provide energy to the body.
ibility in a semipurifed diet approaches 95%, but that
If inadequate levels of available protein and/or amino
of high-quality, commercial diets range between 80%
acids or an inappropriate fatio of amino acids are fed,
and 90%. On the other hand, low-quality, commercial
tissue feplacement cannot occur. Sevefe of prolonged
pet foods can have protein digestibilities of less than
Protein Requirements 91
 of the dietary protein will be metabolized as an energy
BOX 12-1 FACTORS AFFECTING PROTEIN
source. At caloric intakes that are less than the animal's
REQUIREMENT
energy requirement, protein will not be available for the
building or replacing of body tissues because it will all
Protein quality: As protein quality increases, protein
requirement decreases.
be used for energy. Therefore, when a diet is limiting in
both energy and protein, weight loss and a loss of lean
Anino acid composition: As amino acid com position
body tissue result. Nitrogen balance studies have shown
im proves, protein requirement decreases.
that when the dietary protein level is held constant,
Protein digestibility: As protein digestibility increases,
nitrogen fetention incfeases as caloric intake increases
protein requirement decreases
 and approaches the animal's energy requirement.4
Energy density: As energy density increases, protein
A second aspect of the relationship between protein
'saseaioui laip aul jo aseuaniad e se uawainba
and energy must also be examined. Assuming that ade-
quate nonprotein energy is present in the diet, as the
energy density of the diet increases, a higher propor-
75%. Because of these differences, fequirement studies
tion of protein is required for maximal nitrogen reten-
with purifed or semipurifed diets generally underes-
tion; however, the protein-to-energy ratio remains the
same. The most important factors that affect the energy
ing mixed protein diets that contained less available of
density of commercial pet foods afe dietaty fat concen-
inappropriate ratios of the essential amino acids.
tration and diet digestibility. The relationship between
Protein quality also infuences an animal's protein
requirement. The higher the biological value of a pro-
results of one of the frst requirement studies of grow-
tein, the less the amount that is needed to meet all of 
ing dogs.2 When a diet containing 25% crude protein
an animal's essential amino acid needs (see Section 1,
and 20% fat was fed, maximal growth rate resulted.
pp. 23-25). Therefore, as the quality of the protein in the
Howevel, when the fat content of the diet was increased
test diet incfeases, the estimated fequirement decreases.
to 30%, 29% crude protein was necessary to support
Again, the diets that were used in eatly amino acid and
 maximal growth. The reason for this change relates to
protein requirement studies had amino acid contents
an animal's tendency to eat to satisfy its energy needs.
that were adjusted to carefully fit the needs of the experi-
Provided that these controls are in place, an animal will
ment. Few, if any, naturally occurring protein sources
naturally consume less of a more energy-dense ration.
have amino acid compositions that specifically ft the
requirements of the animal consuming it. Most practi-
cal sources of dietary protein contain excesses of some
-  '    
amino acids and slight or severe deficiencies of others
 controlled feeding schedules are still regulated according
relative to an animal's requirement. Commercial pet
t0 a pet's energy requirements. When lower quantities
foods correct for these inadlequacies by using mixtures
 of food are fed because of greater energy density, protein
of protein sources that have complimentary profles of
must contribute a higher proportion of the diet so that
essential amino acids and individual amino acids.
the animal is still able to meet its total protein needs.
The caloric density of the diet used in a require-
Although protein is the most commonly used example,
ment study significantly affects the estimated protein
this relationship with energy also applies to all other
requirement. This effect occurs because the presence
essential nutfients.
of nonprotein calories has a protein-sparing effect.
Finally, protein requirement studies must take into
 A diet must frst meet an animal's energy needs before
oisud pue sneis jeuonnu nod sjue ue junonne
the energy-containing nutrients can be used for other
logical state. The amount of absorbed protein needed to
purposes. Therefore, adequate nonprotein calories in
 produce nitrogen equilibrium depends on the degree of
the form of carbohydrate or fat spare the protein in the
 protein depletion. Although it seems paradoxical, dogs
diet from being metabolized for energy. If sufficient
with depleted body protein reserves require lower levels
nonprotein calories are not provided, at least a portion
of nitrogen to achieve nitrogen balance than do dogs
92 Canine and Feline Nutrition
with normal reserves.6 This effect may be the fesult of
to consider that when lower-quality protein sources ate
an increased efficiency of absorption and use of dietary
fed, protein requirement estimates will increase signifi-
protein when in a depleted state, and to the metabolic
cantly, typically as high as 20% of the ME calories.17 For
down-regulation of protein catabolism. Ensuring that
this reason, the current American Association of Feed
Apoq aienbape aaey pue aoueieq uasonu u ane ssop i
Control Oficials’ (AAFCO's) Nutrient Profles for dogs
protein feserves by feeding a high-protein diet before
fecommends that adult maintenance dog foods contain
the onset of a fequirement study can help to eliminate
at least 18% of ME calories as protein (see below).18
this discrepancy. Conversely, correcting for lean body
The protein requirement of growing puppies is sig-
mass (a measufe of protein reserves) can also at least paf-
nificantly higher than that of adult dogs. Early studies
tially account for differences in protein fequirements.
-ad wn pndan siinns und px sun
However, nitrogen balance studies still cannot provide
tein requirements of between 17% and 22% of ME for
information regarding the presence or degree of change
in protein synthesis, breakdown, and oxidation that can
weight gain as an indicator of minimum protein needs.
Dccur in response to differing levels of protein or essen-
 More recent studies, which also used weight gain as the
tial amino acids in the diet. In recent years the use of
major response criterion, reported minimum require-
13C-labeled leucine infusion as a measure of whole-body
ment estimates for recently weaned puppies of approxi-
protein metabolism has been used to further elucidate
 mately 180 g crude protein/kg diet in a food containing
these changes.7,8 Physiological state also dlirectly affects
the body's need for protein and will therefore affect the
However, the protein sources used in all of these stud-
outcome of requirement studies that use nitrogen bal-
ance. For example, in growing puppies and kittens, the
free amino acids. Interestingly, weight gain in growing
rate of growth and, subsequently, the protein require-
dogs is maximized at lower pro tein intakes than is nitro-
 ment decrease slightly with age.?12
 gen retention. For example, nitrogen balance data with
 young puppies fed a highly digestible protein source
 provided a slightly higher protein requirement estimate
PROTEIN REQUIREMENTS
of 20% of ME.21 The current NRC recommends that a
minimum of 16% of a diet's calories should be supplied
Dogs
as high-quality protein to maximize nitrogen retention
Numerous studies have been conducted on the mini-
 in newly weaned puppies between the ages of 8 and 14
mum protein requirement of the adult dog. However,
weeks.16 After 14 weeks, the minimum requirement
differences in the protein sources, energy densities, and
decreases to about 12.25% of ME. However, just as
amino acid ratios of the experimental diets have led to
with adult maintenance diets, these estimates increase
a great deal of confusion regarding this requirement.
substantially when feeding practical diets that contain
Early studies showed that when diets containing very
less available protein sources. The NRC recognizes this
high-quality protein sources are fed, adlult dogs require
and recommends minimum levels of 21% (250 grams/
between 4% and 7% of their metabolizable energy
kilogram [g/kg]) for puppies less than 14 weeks of age
(ME) calories to be supplied as protein.13-15 The cur-
 and 17.5% for puppies over 14 weeks of age when fed
rent National Research Council (NRC) recommends a
 practical diets.16 The current AAFCO Nutrient Profles
 a     n d 
 tecommend a minimum level of 22% protein ME for
tein per kg diet in foods with an energy density of 4.0
 growth and reproduction and do not distinguish between
kilocalories (kcal) ME/g, when proteins that are of high
'(7-7I alqe) saiddnd suassaope pue paueam Aimau
quality (both bioavailable and with the correct amounts 
of the essential amino acids) are fed.1 This is equivalent
Cats
to just 7% of the diet's ME. The NRC's recommended
allowance is slightly higher (8.75% of ME), presum-
Early studies of the cat's nutrient fequirements showed
ably to account for lower digestibility coefficients of
that it has a protein requirement substantially higher
eliodul si il 'siaip esnseid ul pasn sainos uanoid
Protein Requirements  93
TABLE12-2
AS A PERCENTAGE OF METABOLIZABLE ENERGY (ME)
NRC*
AAFCOt
Dogs
 Adult maintenance
8.75% of ME
18% of ME
Growth and reproduction
21% of ME (Puppies ≤ 14 weeks)
22% of ME
17.5% of ME (Puppies > 14 weeks)
Cats
 Adult maintenance
17.5% of ME
22.75% of ME
Growth and reproduction
~20% of ME
26.25% of ME
AAFCO, Association of American Feed Conrrol Officials; NRC, National Research Council
*Narional Research Council: Nutrient requiremens of dogs and cas, Washingcon, DC, 2006, Narional Academy Press.
tAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO): Offcial publication, 2008, AAFCO.
When growing kittens were fed varying levels of dietary
other obligate carnivores such as the fox and the mink,
protein, supplied as minced herring and minced liver,
has a higher requirement for dietary protein (see
growth was reported to be satisfactory only when pro-
pp. 94-95 for a complete discussion). For example,
tein exceeded 30% of the dry weight of the diet.24 In
although the cat requires 20% of a 100%-available,
comparison, growing puppies fed mixed diets required
well-balanced protein for growth and 12% for mainte-
only 20% protein for adequate growth and develop-
nance, the dog requires only 12% and 4%, respectively.
ment. One of the frst studies of the protein require-
It should be hoted that these values afe substantially
  t  p is e a o i
lower than the protein requirement of a cat fed a practi-
was necessary to maintain nitrogen balance when cats
cal diet containing protein sources that afe not balanced
were fed a mixed diet containing liver and whitefish as
for individual amino acids or highly bioavailable.
 the primary protein sources.25
The current NRC recommendations use nitrogen
Subsequent experimentation using crystalline amino
balance data from a study reporting on a group of 18
acids and protein isolates allowed more precise defini-
adult cats to provide a recommended minimum require-
tion of the minimum protein requirements of growing
ment of protein for adult cats of 160 g crude protein/kg
kittens and adult cats. One study reported a protein
food in a diet containing 4 kcal/kg.1,29 This is equiva-
kittens fed either cfystalline amino acid diets of casein
a safety allowance to this minimum provides an estimate
diets supplemented with methionine.26 Another study
of 200 g/kg food (17.5% of ME) as a recommended
reported requirements as low as 16% of ME calories
allowanice (RA) (see Table 12-2). The NRC's mini-
when growing kittens were fed a purified dliet contain-
mum requirement for kittens after weaning is 180 g/
ing all of the essential amino acids in their assumed
kg, equivalent to 15.75% of ME and the RA is 225 g/kg
correct concentrations and ratios.27 Using a similar
(-20% of ME). Once again, it is important to recognize
semipurifed diet, the protein requirement of adult
that all of these values assume highly available and well-
cats was determined to be 12.5% of ME.28 The pro-
balanced protein sources that contain all of the neces-
found effect that protein digestibility, amino acid bal-
saty amino acids. 30,31 Conversely, the AAFCO Nutrient
ance, and amino acid availability have on determining
 Profles provide nutrient estimates for use in the actual
an animal's dietary protein requirement is illustrated by
forrmnulation of pet foods. Therefore, it is not surprising
the substantially lower values that were cbtained when
that the AAFCO Nutrient Profles for cat foods, as with
semipurifed and purified diets were used to determine
dog foods, suggest a higher level of protein for inclu-
requirements. However, the comparison of these figures
 sion in commercially prepated foods.i8 A level of 30%
with the ideal minimum protein requirements of other
of the diet (dry matter [DM]) is suggested for growth
mammals still demonstrates that the cat, together with
 and reproduction in foods containing 4 kcal of ME/g of
94 Canine and Feline Nutrition
food. This value is equivalent to 26.25% of ME calories.
and seven nitrogen catabolic enzymes in the liver were
A level of 26% of the diet, equivalent to 22.75% ME, is
then measured. With the exception of one transaminase
suggested for adult maintenance (see Table 12-2).
enzyme, no significant differences in enzyme activity
were found between the cats fed the low-protein diet
and the cats fed the high-protein diet. Several gluconeo-
THE CAT'S HIGH PROTEIN
genic and lipogenic enzymes were also measured, none
of which exhibited any change in activity in response
REOUIREMENT
to the changes in dietary protein level. On the other
The cat's comparatively high dietary requirement for
hand, similar rat hepatic enzymes decrease in activity
 protein is the result of increased needs for the main-
from 2.75-fold to 13-fold after rats are changed from a
tenance of whole-body protein turnover, rather than
high-protein diet to a low-protein diet.34
increased needs for growth. Approximately 60% of
In addition to the inability of the cat's protein-
the growing kitten's protein requirement is used for
catabolizing enzymes to down-regulate in response to
the maintenance of body tissues; only 40% is used for
feduced dlietary protein, the enzymes involved in nitro-
growth. The opposite is true in most of the other species
gen catabolism function at relatively high rates of activity.
that have been studied. For example, the growing rat
This metabolic state causes the cat to catabolize a sub-
requires only 35% of its dietary protein for maintenance
stantial amount of amino acids after each meal, regard-
and 65% for growth; similarly, the growing dog uses
less of its protein content. Thus the cat does not have the
only 33% of its protein fequirement for maintenance
capability to conserve nirogen from the body's general
and 66% for growth.32 The higher growth rate of pup-
 nitrogen pool and has a higher urinary obligatory nitro-
pies compared with kittens causes this increased need for
gen loss when fed low-protein (or protein-free) diets.36
 dietary protein during growth; when compared during
 This dlifference is of important significance when consid-
adult maintenance, cats have almost twice the require-
 ering the nutritional care of cats that are ill or anorectic,
ment for bioavailable protein compared with dogs.
 as long-term food deprivation causes a much higher loss
The elevated protein requirement for maintenance
results from the inability of the amino acid and amino
cies (see Chapter 33, pp. 432-434 for a complete dis-
acid nitrogen catabolic enzymes in the cat's liver to
cussion).37 The only alternative that ensures adequate
effectively down-regulate in response to reduced dietary
 conservation of body protein stores is the consistent
protein intake. When most mammals are fed diets
consumption of a diet containing high levels of pro-
high in protein, the enzymes involved in amino acid
tein. Recent studies have shown that although cats do
catabolism, nitrogen disposal, and gluconeogenesis
 not adapt to low-protein diets, they do efficiently adlapt
incfease in activity to use the carbon backbone of suf-
 t0 medium- and high-protein diets.38,39 This appears to
plus amino acids and convert excess nitrogen to urea
 occur via increased liver mass, increased delivery of sub-
for excretion. Conversely, when low-protein diets are
 strate to urea cycle enzymes, and to allosteric regulation
fed, the activity of these enzymes declines (i.e., is down-
of rate-controlling enzyme activities. It can be theorized
regulatedl), which allows for the conservation of amino
that because of the cat's strict adherence to a camivorous
acids for whole-body protein synthesis and results in
 diet, it experienced little selective pressure throughout its
lower amounts of nitrogen to be produced via the urea
evolutionary history to develop metabolic adaptations
cycle.3334 This adaptive mechanism is a distinct advan-
to low-protein diets. Additionally, a high rate of gluco-
tage because it allows animals to conserve amino acids
 heogenesis from amino acid catabolism would provide
while consuming low-protein diets. The ability to up-
endogenous glucose to an animal that evolved to ingest a
and down-regulate these catabolic enzymes provides
low-carbohydrate diet, thus having selective advantage.
40
a mechanism by which potentially toxic amino acids
Another factor that contributes to an animal's
can be catabolized when animals are consuming high-
 dietary protein requirement is its need for essential
protein diets. For example, an early study fed adult cats
 amino acids. When the protein nutrition of the cat was
either high-protein (70%) or low-protein (17.5%) diets
frst studied, it was postulated that its high dietary pro-
for 1 month.35 The activities of three urea cycle enzymes
tein requirement might be the result of an unusually
Protein Requirements 95
high requirement for one of more of the essential amino
metabolic needs. However, arginine has been shown to
acids. However, results of several experimental studies
be essential for both dogs and cats throughout life.44.46
have shown that with the exception of slightly highet
Arginine is needed by the body for normal protein syn-
requirements for leucine, threonine, methionine, and
thesis and as an essential component of the urea cycle.
arginine, as well as a unique dietary requirement for
Arginine functions in the ufea cycle as an ornithine
taurine (see below), the cat's requirements for specific
and urea precursor. In this capacity arginine allows
essential amino acids are not significantly higher than
the large amounts of nitrogen generated from amino
those of other species such as the rat, dog, or pig.41 More
acid catabolism to be converted to urea for excretion
fecently, studies have shown that the growing kitten
from the body. If nitrogen cannot be liberated through
 appears to be less sensitive to the amino acid imbalances
the urea cycle by the presence of arginine, then both
that are seen in omnivores and herbivores when one of
free urea and ammonia will begin to fise in the blood.
more amino acid is limiting and total protein level of
A lack of arginine in the diet causes an immediate and
the diet is increased.42,43 In other animals, but not in
severe deficiency response in the cat. Cats will develop
cats, increasing dietary crude protein causes a concomi-
hyperammonemia within several hours of consuming a
tant increase in essential amino acid fequifements.
single arginine-free meal.47 Clinical signs include emesis
(vomiting), muscle spasms, ataxia, hyperesthesia (sen-
sitivity to touch), and tetanic spasms. These signs can
The protein requirement of the cat is higher than that
eventually lead to coma and death. Dogs show similaf.
of the dog as a result of the cat's greater need for the
but less severe, clinical signs of arginine deficiency fol-
maintenance of normai body tissues rather than from
lowing consumption of an arginine-free meal, suggest-
increased need forgrowth. This is because of the inability
ing a low level of endogenous arginine production.48
ofcertain catabolic enzymes in the cat's liver to down
The metabolic basis for the cat's extreme sensitivity
regulate in response to changes in dietary protein intake.
thesize de novo ornithine. In most animals, the amino
acids glutamate and proline act as precursors for crni-
ESSENTIAL AMINO ACIDS IN
thine synthesis in the intestinal mucosa. However, the
cat's intestinal mucosal cells have extremely low levels
DOG AND CAT NUTRITION
The following 10 amino acids have been identified as
enzyme in this pathway.49 The cat also has low activity
being essential for growing puppies and kittens: arginine,
 of a second essential enzyme, ornithine aminotransfer-
histidine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phe-
ase.50 In addition to being unable to synthesize orni-
 nylalanine, threonine, tryptophan, and valine. Although
thine, the cat is also unable to synthesize citrulline from
both the dog and the cat have a dietary requirement for
ornithine for use by extrahepatic tissues, even if dietary
arginine, the cat is unusual in its immediate and severe
ornithine is provided. Studies in the fat demonstfated
teaction to the consumption of an arginine-free meal. The
that the normal route of arginine synthesis for use by
other amino acids that are of special concern in the feeding
extrahepatic tissues involves both the liver and the
of dogs and cats are lysine, the sulfur amino acids (SAAs)
kidneys. Arginine cannot leave the liver to provide fof
methionine and cysteine (and the production of felinine),
extrahepatic tissues because high activity of liver argi-
and the amino-sulfonic acid, taurine. Of less practical con-
nase prevents its accumulation to a concentration above
cern, but of academic interest, is the cat's inability to con-
that of the bloodstream. However, citrulline, which is
vert the amino acid tryptophan to the B vitamin niacin.
 produced from ornithine either in the intestinal mucosa
or in a urea cycle intermediate in the liver, can tfavel
to the kidneys where it is then converted to arginine.
Arginine
This arginine provides the kidneys and other tissues
The amino acid arginine is not considered a dietary
of the body with their needs for normal growth and
essential for many adult animals because most spe-
tissue maintenance in most animals. In the cat, how-
cies can synthesize adequate amounts to meet theif
ever, citrulline is not produced in the intestinal mucosa
96 Canine and Feline Nutrition
(because of the inability to produce ornithine), and the
of processing damage that can occur in commercially
citrulline produced in the liver appears to be unable to
prepared pet foods. The exposure of protein to exces-
sive heat induces cross-linking
 between amino acids,
kidneys. As a direct result of these metabolic deficien-
resulting in decreased digestibility of the food's total
cies, arginine becomes anl essential amino acid for both
protein. Even mild heat treatment can result in a feac-
tion between the epsilon-amino group of lysine and the
nance in the cat (Table 12-3). The importance of argi-
amino groups of free amino acids with reducing sugars.
nine for normal functioning of the urea cycle, coupled
The resultant Maillard products afe fesistant to diges
with the cat's high and infexible rate of protein catabo-
tion and result in a feduction in the amount of avail-
lism, causes the cat to be extremely sensitive to argi-
able lysine that can be supplied by the food. The limiting
nine deficiency. Like the cat, the growing dog also has a
amino acids in cereal proteins afe lysine and tryptophan.
Conversely, meat products contain adequate amounts of
of the growing dog to an arginine-deficient diet is not as
these amino acids. The inclusion of meat proteins in a
 severe as that observed in the immature cat.48
Suisssoid panonuos Aadod yim paidnos poog iad
methods, ensures that the ration contains an adequate
level of available lysine. In a completely cereal-based
Arginine defciency in the cat has immediate and devas-
dog food, either supplemental lysine or a meat source of
tating effects. Severe hyperammonemia, emesis, muscle
lysine must be added (see Section 3, pp. 150-151).
spasms,ataxia,hyperesthesia,and tetanic spasms can
lead to coma and death. Taurine defciency can lead to
Methionine and Cysteine
retinal degeneration and dilated cardiomyopathy
The SAA methionine is essential for dogs and cats, but
cysteine is dispensable. Cysteine may become indis-
Lysine
pensable if there is not enough methionine to provide
The growing dog's dietary requirement for lysine
for the total sulfur (methionine + cysteine) requirement.
appears to increase as the level of total protein in the diet
increases.5l This effect has been demonstrated in other
cysteine, approximately half of the methionine require-
species and may be the result of amino acid imbalances
unid jo sjaal auiq ie susal ym sususeue pue
is preferable to address a total SAA requirement rather
intake. Although this effect has been demonstrated with
than a specifc methionine fequirement for animals
other essential amino acids, it is especially important
Interestingly, cats have a higher need for SAA (methi-
with lysine because lysine is often the frst limiting amino
onine and cysteine) when compated with most othet
acid in cereal-based dog foods.52 In addition, the lysine
mammals. For example, while growing dogs require a
that is present in the diet is susceptible to certain types
minimum of 1.40 g/1000 kcal of ME, the minimum
fequirement of growing cats is approximately 25%
higher than this (1.75 g/1000 kcal).16
TABLE 12-3 ARGININE SYNTHESIS
The cat's greater need for SAA appears to be the
result of several metabolic factors. First, the cat, along
MosT
with other members of the Felidae family, uses methio-
REACTION
MAMMALS
CATS
nine and cysteine to produce a unique sulfur amino acid
Glutamate + proline →
Normal
Low
called felinine.5S Felinine is synthesized in the liver and
ornithine (intestine)
Ornithine → citrulline 
 Normal
Little activity
is excreted in the urine of all cats, but is found in high-
(intestine)
est concentration in the urine of adult, intact males.56
Citrulline travels to the 
 Does occur
Does not
The urine of intact tom cats contains felinine concen-
kidney
oCcur
trations that are up to sixfold greater than those found
Citrulline → arginine
Does occur
Does not
in castrated males and intact females. Conversely, cas-
(kidney)
oCcur
trated males and intact females excrete proportionally
Protein Requirements 97
higher amounts of a felinine metabolite, called N-acety/-
methionine being an important consideration for pet
felinine, which may drive a higher sulfur amino acid
food companies during the formulation of nutritionally
requirement for these cats.57 When both felinine and
balanced cat and dog foods.
N-acetyl-felinine are combined, intact male cats still
   r s   'l 
 males and intact females. This suggests that male intact
Taurine
cats may have a greater requirement for the SAAs than
Taurine is a unique beta-amino-sulfonic acid that is not
sterilized female and male cats. Although it has not been
incorporated into large proteins but is found as a free
exclusively proven, it is believed that felinine, or more
amino acid in tissues or as a constituent of small pep-
likely, a breakdown product of felinine, acts as a urinary
tides. It is synthesized by most mammals from methio-
pheromone for terfitorial marking in male cats and is at
nine and cysteine during normal sulfur amino acid
least partly responsible for the pungent odor of sprayed
metabolism (Figure 12-1). The myocardium and retina
urine.58 Other potential causes for the cat's high SAA
 contain high concentrations of free taurine, and these
 requirement are its needs for the maintenance of a thick
two tissues afe able to concentrate taurine to levels that
hair coat and for the increased methylation reactions
are 100-fold to 400-fold greater than those found in
necessary for the synthesis of phospholipids. Increased
 plasma.59 Taurine is conjugated with a number of com-
phospholipid s
 synthesis is believed to be necessary for
pounds and is involved in many aspects of metabolism.
the absorption and transport of the high level of fat
Its most important roles are in bile acid conjugation,
that is normally included in a cat's diet. Lastly, the cat's
retinal function, and normal functioning of the myocar-
requirement for dietary taurine further adds to the cat's
dium. Taurine also appears to be necessary for healthy
total requirement for SAAs in the diet.
 Methionine is usually the frst limiting amino acid in
most commercial pet foods that contain animal tissues
CATS
Cats afe able to synthesize only small amounts
and plant protein sources. This fact, coupled with the
of taurine and so fequire a dietary soufce of taurine to
high SAA requirement for cats and the need for methio-
 meet daily needs.62 This inability is partially the result
nine as a precursor for taurine (see below), results in
of the cat's low activity of twe enzyimes that are essential
Methionine
Cysteine
Cysteine sulphinic acid (CSA)
CSA decarboxylase
Altemate (competing) pathway
(low axtivity)
Hypotaurine
Pyruvate
Taurine
Figure 12-1
 Taurine synthesis and metabolisr in the cat
98 Canine and Feline Nutrition
for taurine synthesis: cysteine dioxygenase and cysteine
 eventually leads to cardiac failure. Along with the retina,
sulfinic acid decarboxylase. In addition, the competing
the myocardium is one of the tissues in the body that is
 pathway of cysteine catabolism, which produces pyru-
 able to concentrate taurine to levels much greater than
vate and sulfite rather than taurine from methionine and
those found in the plasma. The classic study by Pion
cysteine, is very responsive to increased cysteine concen-
et al.70 reported data from 21 clinical cases of DCM in
trations (see Figure 12-1).63 The cat is not unique in its
 pet cats. All of the cats were found to have significantly
limited capacity for taurine synthesis. Low levels of de
lower plasma taurine concentrations when compafed
novo synthesis have also been reported in humans, Old
with clinically normal cats. When the affected cats were
World monkeys, rabbits, and guinea pigs. However, the
supplemented with taurine (0.5 g twice daily), all the
cat requires dietary taurine because of an unusually high
 cats clinically improved within 2 weeks. At 3 to 4 weeks,
metabolic demand. The domestic cat uses only taurine
the cats showed improved echocardiographs that even-
for bile-salt formation and, in contrast to other animals,
tually resulted in complete normalization of left ventric-
cannot convert to conjugation of bile acids with gly-
ular function. At the time of publication, all surviving
cine when the taurine supply is limited.64 For example,
cats were clinically and echocardiographically normal.
although humans and Old World monkeys also have
 In addition, two experimental cats that had been fed a
only a limited capacity for taurine synthesis and prefer
purifed diet containing marginally low levels of taurine
to conjugate bile acids with taurine, they will switch to
for 4 years developed DCM. These cats also exhibited
glycine conjugation when dietary taurine is low. Con-
full recovery as a result of taurine supplementation. The
versely, the cat has a continual requirement for taurine
 authors proposed that low levels of taurine in plasma
to replace fecal losses that occur from incomplete recov-
and myocardial tissue are a major cause of the develop-
ery of bile salts by the enterohepatic circulation. The
 ment of DCM in cats. Although the exact biochemical
dog also uses only taurine to conjugate bile acids, but
defect of taurine-induced DCM is not fully understood.
provided that the diet contains adequate protein and
taurine appears to confer a calcium- and potassium-sta-
SAA, dogs are capable of synthesizing adequate taurine
asua Aan h pue anssn eay uo naa suz
to meet their metabolic needs (see pp. 99-100).
cationic stability and membrane integrity.
Feline central retinal degeneration (FCRD) was the
Finally, taurine is needed for normal reproduc-
frst clinical defciency syndrome recognized as caused
tive success in queens. Gestating cats that afe taurine-
by taurine deficiency in the cat. Taurine's primary role
depleted are more likely to resorb or abort fetuses, have
in the proper functioning of the retina involves the pho-
fewer live births, and produce kittens with lower birth
toreceptor cells, where it regulates the fux of calcium
weights and growth rates.7l72 The effects of taurine
and potassium ions across the photoreceptor pigment-
 deficiency on reproduction appear to be related to fetal
epithelial cell barrier.S When taurine is absent, the
development rather than to an effect on the queen's
photofeceptor cell membranes become disrupted and
 estrus cycle or ability to ovulate.73 In adldition, queens 
dysfunctional, which eventually leads to cellular death
that are fed taurine-deficient diets have significantly
and the loss of cells. A concomitant degeneration of the
lower concentrations of taurine in their milk, without
underlying tapetum lucidum can also occur. Although
 any other changes in nutrient content.71
abnormalities in electroretinograms can be observed in
An exact dietary taurine requirement for cats is
as few as 6 weeks of consuming a taurine-free diet,
impossible to define because the need for dietary tau-
visual impairment is only cbserved clinically when cats
rine is affected by the type and composition of the diet
are in the later stages of retinal degeneration.-68 At this
that is fed. The most important factors are the level and
 point, irreversible blindness occurs in most cats.69
type of dietary protein and fber, and the degree of heat
Taurine is also necessary for normal functioning of
 treatment that is used during processing. There are tw0
the myocardium. Although it is not the only underly-
 primary mechanisms through which diet characteris-
ing cause in cats, a deficiency of taurine fesults in the
tics infuence taurine status in cats. First, certain fibers
 development of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM).70 This
 and peptides in food can bind with taurocholic acid in
degenerative disease has been reported in several species
the small intestine, making it unavailable for enterohe-
and  causes decreased myocardial contfactility,  which
 patic reutilization.74,75 Rice bran has been implicated
Protein Requirements 99
as a cause of decreased plasma and whole-blood tau-
Taurine is present primarily in animal tissues, with
rine levels in both cats and dogs, and it is theorized
greatest concentrations found in muscle tissue. Seafoods
that either the fber, fat, or protein found in fice bran
provide the most concentrated source ( ≥ 1000 mg/kg of
forms nonabsorbable complexes with bile acids (see
dry weight), and poultry also contains high levels.80
 Although a carnivorous diet ensures the cat an adequate
feces, leading to increased daily loss of taurine (i.e.,
taurine intake, the consumption of a diet containing
incfeased taurine tufnover). Second, thermal process-
high amounts of plant products and cereal grains may
ing of certain types of protein results in the production
not provide sufficient taurine. Of special concern are
of Maillard products, which can contribute to taurine
cereal-based dog foods that contain lower levels of pro-
depletion.77 Maillard products are complexes of reduc-
tein and taurine. Therefore, while these diets are ade-
ing sugars and amino acids that are formed during
quate for dogs, the practice of feeding dog foods to cats
heat tfeatiment. Because these products afe less digesti-
 may result in taurine deficiency and the development of
ble than untreated protein, they provide an intestinal
FCRD, and so should be strongly discouraged.
environment that favors increased numbers of taurine-
degrading  bacteria.  Increased bacterial
1 populations
include species that are capable of cleaving taurocholic
Feeding cereai-based dog foods to cats can be harmfut
acid and oxidizing free taurine for energy, reducing the
such foods have lower protein and taurine leveis and
enterohepatic reutilization of bile acids. Maillard prod-
can cause protein and taurine defciency
ucts may also affect taurine status by indirectly infuenc
ing the release of the hormone cholecystokinin (CCK),
which in turn stimulates the felease of additional bile
DOGS
SUnlike the cat, dogs that are fed diets con-
acids into the intestinal lumen during digestion.78 In all
 taining adlequate levels of protein and SAA are capable
of these situations, a substantial proportion of the tau-
of synthesizing enough taurine to meet their needs. As
rine requirement of adlult cats is required to replace tau-
 a result, a need for dietary taurine has not been gener-
rine lost in the feces or oxidized by microbes. Therefore
ally recognized in dogs. However, in recent years, the
any factor that can bind taurocholic acid or increases
high prevalence of DCM in certain breeds and fami-
the microbial degradation of taurine will lead to an
lies of dogs, along with evidence of low plasma and
increased dietary requirement.
whole-blood taurine levels in some of these dogs has
Because of the effects of protein level, fiber, and heat
led researchers to examine taurine status as a poten-
processing upon the availability of taurine, the current
NRC provides several different recommendations.16
increased incidence of DCM in American Cocker Span-
The NRC's AI for all life stages when a food contain-
 iels and Newfoundlands may refect a genetic anomaly
ing a highly available and digestible protein source is
in taurine homeostasis that makes certain breeds more
fed just a 400-mg taurine/kg diet (in a food containing
susceptible to taurine-responsive DCM.83,84 Although
4000 kcal/kg). However, this estimate is not generally
not related to a specific breed, a familial component to
DCM (and potentially to taurine homeostasis) has also
dry diet and 1700 mg taurine/kg wet (canned) diet are
been reported in cats.85
provided for commercial foods. The current AAFCO
Dietary factors that are important considerations
Nutrient Profles for cat foods provide the same mini-
for taurine status in dogs include low dietary protein,
mum for dry foods and a slightly higher minimum for
feeding a primary protein source that contains low of
canned (1000 mg/kg and 2000 mg/kg, respectively).18
less available SAAs, and the use of rice bran. For exam-
Higher nutrient intake recommendations are provided
ple, although anecdotal, researchers reported taurine
for canned foods compared with dry foods to account
deficiency and DCM in twe unrelated dogs that were
for the high heat treatment, water content, and gener-
fed a vegetarian diet containing soybean curd as its pri-
ally higher protein levels in canned foods, factors which
mary protein source. Soybean protein is low in SAAs
lead to greater taurine losses during production and
and the formation of bile acid complexes may further
during feeding.62,79
contribute to fecal loss of taurine.86 A controlled study
100 Canine and Feline Nutrition
reported that feeding a diet containing marginally low
may require a dietary source of taurine under certain
sieA  1og sop 1jnpe Ayjey on (W %0t) ua1o1d
environmental or physiological conditions or when
caused signifcant feductions in plasma taurine con-
fed foods containing certain types of protein or dlietary
centrations even though the diet met AAFCO guide-
fber. Simply increasing dietary protein might achieve
lines for protein and individual amino acids.82 Another
taurine homeostasis, provided the protein source was of
study identifed lamb meal as a consistent dietary
high quality and not excessively heat processed. Increas
ingredient of commercial dog foods that were associ-
ing the protein concentration of poor-quality proteins,
ated with feduced plasma and whole-blood taurine
or in diets that are excessively heat-treated, may be
 concentrations in healthy dogs.76 This fnding was cor-
counterproductive as these diets can fesult in increased
roborated by a study that measured taurine status in a
microbially mediated fecal loss of taurine.91
group of 19 adlult Newfoundlands that were fed com-
mercial dry diets.84 However, neither of these studies
was controlled and both included dogs fed a variety of
Cats'Inability to Convert
Tryptophan to Niacin
commercial foods. It was theorized that the association
between lamb meal and taurine status could be due
The requirement for the B vitamin niacin is met in most
 u nsaid sie oue aee jn slaail mo o
animals through both the consumption of dietary nico-
lamb meal, to excessive heat damage of the protein,
tinamide and through the conversion of the essential
of to the confounding factor of the inclusion of rice
amino acid tryptophan to nicotinic acid (Figure 12-2).
bran in many lamb meal-containing foods.87 Similar
The efficiency of conversion of tryptophan to niacin
to cats, rice bran may function to increase gastrointes-
tinal tract loss of taurine through the formation of bile
Tryptophan
acid conjugates.
Most recently, there is evidence that breed size and
 maintenance energy requirements of dogs infuences
Formylkynurenine
fate of endogenous taurine synthesis and, ultimately,
the need for dietary taurine.88.89 It is theorized that
increased body size in dogs is associated with enhanced
risk for developing taurine deficiency and that this risk
Kynurenine
 may be exacerbated by genetic predispositions in some
breeds of dogs.90 Newfoundlands have been shown to
have a significantly lower rate of de novo taurine syn-
3-Hydroxykynurenine
thesis when compated with Beagles on a metabolic
body weight and liver weight basis. It appears that this
difference may be attributed to lower total intake of
3-Hydroxyanthranilate (3-HAA)
food (and thus of taurine precursors, methionine and
3-HAA oxidase
cystine) relative to metabolic body weight, leading to
reduced taurine balance and resulting in taurine deple-
2-Amino-3-acroleyl fumarate
tion. These results were supported by a controlled study
that compared taurine synthesis rates in large dogs com-
pared with Beagles and found that the large dogs had
Quinolinate
 Picolinic acid
lower de novo synthesis of taurine compared with small
dogs when fed diets containing marginally low levels
Picolinic acid carboxylase
of SAAs.89 Together, these studies suggest that certain
Nicotinic acid
Acelyl coenzyme A
 depletion and development of DCM and this suscep-
mononucleotide
tibility may be related to breed size and metabolic rate.
(niacin)
Dogs with increased susceptibility to taurine depletion
Figure 12-2 Niacin synthesis.
Protein Requirements 101
varies among species but is generally quite low (3%).92
adults. When protein defciency occurs with adequate
This is a fesult of the existence of more dominant com-
energy intake, concentrations of plasma amino acids
peting pathways of tryptophan metabolism. A branch
decrease in the short term and serum albumin concen-
point in the pathway involved in tryptophan catabo-
 tration decreases in the long term. Reduction in plasma
lism results in the synthesis of either quinolinic acid or
 protein levels can eventually lead to edema or ascites. A
picolinic acid. Quinolinic acid is further metabolized
- a  s  d pn 
to form niacin; picolinic acid is converted to glutarate.
ciency; this state is referfed to as protein/caiorie mainutrition
Although most species have high levels of picolinate
(PCM). When PCM occurs, the animal exhibits lethargy,
carboxylase activity that fesult in a higher production
feduced digestive efficiency, compromised immune func-
of picolinic acid, a substantial amount of niacin is still
tion, and reduced resistance to infectious disease. There is
produced from the quinolinic acid branch. The activity
also some evidence that geheral undernutrition and pro-
of picolinate carboxylase in cats is 30 to 50 times higher
tein deficiency during development can affect brain devel-
than its activity in rats, resulting in negligible niacin
 opment and leaming capabilities later in life.
synthesis from tryptophan in the cat.
Protein deficiency is rate in companion animals that
Animal tissues are well supplied with nicotinamide.
afe fed balanced commercial pet foods. This is probably
The regular consumption of a carnivorous diet through-
because the majority of commercial foods contain more
out evolutionary history would probably not result in
 protein than is needed to meet the minimum require-
selective pressure for the cat to synthesize niacin from
Aensn sin insso saop auayap uaioid uau eg lu 
precursor substances. However, it has been postulated
because owners are arttempting to economize by feeding
that the high-protein diet of the cat would exert pressure
low-quality, poorly formulated rations during periods
toward a high rate of tryptophan catabolism (ie., the
of high nutrient need, such as pregnancy or lactation.
Additionally,
, cats that are fed cereal-based dog foods that
olism of tryptophan would prevent the accumulation of
contain marginally adequate levels of protein afe at fisk
the amino acid and its intermediates, such as serotonin,
for the development of protein and/or taurine deficiency.
to toxic levels. Animal proteins contain significantly
higher levels of tryptophan than do plant proteins. Thus
the high activity of picolinic carboxylase in the cat may
PROTEIN EXCESS IN DOGS
prevent the accumulation of tryptophan and its byprod-
AND CATS
ucts in the bloodstream following the consumption of a
meal containing high amounts of animal protein.
As discussed previously, there is some evidence suggest-
The inability of the cat to convert tryptophan to niacin
ing that it may be beneficial to feed animals levels of pro-
is oflittle practica significance to the feeding management
tein that are higher than the minimum level necessary
of pet cats because nicotinamide is widely distributed in
to maintain nitrogen equilibrium, and that whole-body
feed ingredients. Soufces of this vitamin in commercial
 protein turnover provides a better estimate of an ani-
pet foods include animal and fish byproducts, distillers?
mal's maintenance protein needs. When protein in
grains and yeast, and certain oil meals. Therefore the
excess of needs is consumed, there afe two possible uses
chance of inducing a niacin deficiency through improper
for the additional protein (amino acids). If the animal
feeding practices is slim, regardless of the cat's inability to
is in negative energy balance, the excess protein will
Xpoq aun Aq asn ig ueu on udondan aau
be used as an energy source. Conversely, if the animal
is in zero or positive energy balance (i.e., consuming
PROTEIN DEFICIENCY IN DOGS
tively), the excess protein will be deposited as fat and
AND CATS
the nitrogen will be excreted in the urine. Unlike fat and
catbohydrate, excess amino acids afe not stored by the
Signs of protein deficiency include fetarded growth in
body for futufe use.
 young animals and weight loss, reduced lean body mass,
All companion animals have the ability to metabolize
and impaired feproductive and  work performance in
excess protein. This pfocess fesults in the producticn of
102  Canine and Feline Nutrition
ufea and its excretion in the urine. Historically, protein
but they may be mofe susceptible to fenal insult than
i s re r r s n ai
afe younger animals still possessing renal reserve capac-
was theorized to have detrimental effects on kidney
ity. This knowledge led to the untested practice of sys-
function, especially in aging animals. This was based
tematically reducing the protein content in the diets of
on the theory that the catabolism of excess protein and
elderly animals in an attempt to prevent or minimize
subsequent urinary excretion of urea and other nitrog-
progression of kidney dysfunction. However, fecent
studies have shown that geriatric dogs actually benefit
of renal dysfunction.94 However, while the control of
from slightly higher levels of high-quality protein and
dietary protein is used to reduce uremia and its associ-
ated clinical signs in animals with chronic renal disease,
age-associated loss of muscle mass.l00 Therefore there is
there is no evidence showing that pro tein intake initiates
no evidence indicating a need to systematically reduce
of contributes to the progression of kidney dysfunction
 protein levels in the diets of healthy older pets. It is
(see Section 5, pp. 412-414 for a complete discussion).95
fecommended that protein in the diets of geriatric pets
As animals age, they experience reduced renal weight
 should not be restricted simply because of adlvancing age
and a gradual decline in kidney function. These are nor-
(see Section 4, pp. 268-270 for a complete discussion).
mal occurrences and have been extensively studied in
humans and rats.9G,97 However, these changes should
not be extrapolated to suggest a need to reduce dietary
 protein.98 A study with dogs evaluated clinical changes
in renal function in a colony of Beagles for a period of
the development of kidney dysfunction in heaithy dogs
13 years. The data from this study indicate that normal
and cats. Moreover there is no evidence that the protein
kidney aging can lead to a nephron loss of up to 75%
intake of geriatric pets should be restricted just because
before clinical or biochemical signs occur." Animals
ofoidage.
with less than a 75% loss are usually clinically normal,
References
 1. Shoveller AK, Atkinson JL, Davenport GM: Protein and amino acids for adult dogs: recommendations. In lawms Vutr Symp, OVC
Proc, 2006, pp 11-17.
2. Bradstreet RB: The Kjeldaht method for organic nitrogen, New York, 1965, Academic Press.
3. Allison JB, Wannemacher RW, Migliarese JF: Diet and the metabolism of 2-aminofuorene, J Nutr 52:415-425, 1954.
4. Allison JB: Optimal nutrition correlated with nitrogen retention, Am / Clin Nutr 4:662-672, 1956.
5. Ontko JA, Wuthier RE, Phillips PH: The effect of increased dietary fat upon the protein requireent of the growing dog, J Nutr
62:163-169, 1957.
6. Allion JB, Seeley RD, Brown JH, and others: The evaluation of proteins in hypoproteinemic dogs, J Nutr 31:237-242, 1946.
7. Humbert B, Bleis P, Martin L, and others: Effects of dietary protein restriction and amino acids defciency on protein metabolism
in dogs, J Anim Physiot Anim Nutr 85:255-262, 2001.
8. Humbert G, Martin L, Dumon H, and others: Dietary protein level affects protein metabolism during the postabsorptive state in
dogs, / Nutr 132:1676S-1678S, 2002.
 9. Case LP, Czarnecki-Maulden CL: Protein requirements of growing pups fed practical dry-type diets containing mixed-protein
sources, Am J Vet Res 51:808-812, 1990.
10. Payne PR: Assessment of the protein values of diets in relation to the requirements of the growing dog. In Graham-Jones O,
editor: Canine and feline nutritiona! reguirements, London, 1965, Pergamon Press.
Protein Requirements 103
11. Dickinson CD, Scott PP: Nutrition of the cat. l. Protein requirements for growth of weanling kittens and young cats maintained
on a mixed diet, Br J Nutr 10:311-316, 1956.
12. Anderson PA, Baker DH, Sherry PA, and others: Nitrogen requirement of the kiten, Am J Vet Res 41: 1646-1649, 1980.
'96l 'ez-s9zs aan f'urases pauawaddns-auruoryau ro urass uo saop ypim saipns aoueieg uaonin sI peues 's ploury '1
14. Kade CF Jr, Phillips JH, Phillips WA: The determination of the minimum requirement of the adult dog for maintenance of
nitrogen balance, J Nutr 36:109-121, 1948.
15. Melnick D, Cowgill GR: The protein minima for nitrogen equilibrium with different proteins, J Nutr 13:401-424, 1937.
16. National Research Council: Nutrient reguirements ofdogs and cats, Washington, DC, 2006, National Academy Press
17. Schaeffer MC, Rogers QR, Morris JG: Protein in the nutrition of dogs and cats. In Burger IH, Rivers JPW, editors: Nutrition of
the dog and cat, New York, 1 989, Cambridge University Press.
18. Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO): Offcial publication, 2008, AAFCO.
19. Heiman V: The protein requirements of growing puppies, J Am Anim Hos Asoc 111:304 308, 1947.
 20. Gessert CG, Phillips PH: Protein in the nutrition of the growing dog, J Nutr 58:415-421, 1956.
 21. Burns RA, LaFaivre MH, Milner JA: Effects of dietary protein quantity and quality on the growth of dogs and rats, J Nut
112:1843-1853, 1982.
22. Delaney SJ, Hill AS, Backus RC, and others: Dietary crude protein concentration does not affect the leucine requirement of
growing dogs, J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 85:88-100, 2001.
23. Jansen GR, Deuth MA, Ward GM, and others: Protein quality studies in growing kittens, Nutr Rep Int 11:525-536, 1975.
 24. Dickinson CD, Scott PP: Nutrition of the cat. l. Protein requirements for growth of weanling kittens and young cats maintained
on a mixed diet, Br J Nutr 10:311-316, 1956
diet, Br J Nutr 14:361369, 1960.
26. Smally KA, Rogers QR, Morris JG: The nitrogen requirement of the kitten using crystalline amino acid diets or casein diets.
In Iroceedings of the twelffh international congress on nutrition, San Diego, 96:538, August 16-21, 1981 (abstract).
27. Anderson PA, Baker DH, Sherry PA, and others: Nitrogen requirement of the kitten, Asm / Vet Res 41:1646-1649, 1980.
28. Burger 1H, Blaza SE, Kendall PT: The protein requirement of adult cats, Proc Nutr Soc 40: 102a, 1981.
29. Burger IH, Blaze SE, Kendall PT, Smith PM: The protein requirement of adult cats at maintenance, Feline Pract 14:8-14, 1984.
30. Taylor TP Morris JG, Willits NH, Rogers QR: Optimizing the pattern of essential amino acids as the sole source of dietary
nitrogen supports near-maximal growth in kittens, / INutr 126:2243-2252, 1996.
31. Rogers QR, Morris JG: Some highlights in elucidating the peculiar nutritional needs of cats, Compend Cont Educ Vet
30(Suppl):9-16, 2008.
32. Russell K, Lobley GE, Millward DK: Whole-body protein turnover of a carnivore, Felis silvestris catus, Br J Nutr 89:29-37, 2003.
33. Schimke RT: Adaptive characteristics of urea cycle enzymes in the rat, J Biol Chem 237:459-467, 1962.
34. Szepesi B, Freedland RA: Alterations in the activities of several rat liver enzymes at various times after initiation of a high protein
regimen, J Nutr 93:301-310, 1967.
35. Rogers QR, Morris JG, Freedland RA: Lack of hepatic enzymatic adaptation to low and high levels of dietary protein in the adult
cat, Enzyme 22:348-356, 1977.
36. Hendriks WH, Moughan P Tarttelin MF: Urinary excretion of endogenous nitrogen metabolites in adult domestic cats using
a protein-free diet and the regression technique, J Nutr 127:623-629, 1997.
37. Biourge V, Groff JM, Fisher C: Nitrogen balance, plasma free amino acid concentrations and urinary orotic acid excretion during
long term fasting in cats, / Nutr 124:1 094-1103, 1994.
104Canine and Feline Nutrition
38. Rogers QR, Morris JG: Up-regulation of nitrogen catabolic enzymes is not required to readily oxidize excess protein in cats,
J Nutr 132:2819-2820, 2002.
39. Russell K, Murgatroyd PR, Batt RM: Net protein oxidation is adapted to dietary protein intake in domestic cats (Felis silvestris
catus), / Nutr 132:456-460, 2002.
40. Backus RC: Advances in knowledge about feline metabolism, Compend Cont Educ Vet 30(Suppl):17-24, 2008.
41. Rogers JG, Morris QR: Essentiality of amino acids for the growing kitten, J Nutr 109:718-723, 1979.
kittens, J Anim Physiot Anim Nutr 90:344-353, 2006.
43.Strieker MJ, Morris JC, Rogers QR: Increasing dietary crude protein does not increase the methionine requirement of kittens,
Anim Physiot Anim Nutr 91:465474, 2007.
44. Burns RA, Milner JA, Corbin JE: Arginine: an indispensable amino acid for mature dogs, J Nutr 111:1020-1024, 1981.
45. Ha YH, Milner JA, Corbin JE: Arginine requirements in immature dogs, / Nutr 108:203-210, 1978.
46. Morris JG, Rogers QR: Arginine: an essential amino acid for the cat, / Nutr 108:1944-1953, 1978.
47. Morris JC, Rogers QR: Ammonia intoxication in the near-adult cat as a result of a dietary deficiency of arginine, Sience
199(4327):431432, 1978.
48. Czarnecki GL, Baker DH: Urea-cycle metabolism in the dog with emphasis on the role of arginine, / Nutr 114:58 1-586, 1984.
1985.
50. Morris JG: Nutritional and metabolic responses to arginine in carnivores, J Nutr 1 15:524 531, 1985.
51. Milner JA: Lysine requirements of the immature dog, / Nutr 111:40-45, 1981.
52. Brown RG: Protein in dog foods, Cax Vet J30:528-531, 1989.
53. Teeter RG, Baker DH, Corbin JE: Methionine and cystine requirements of the cat, J Nutr 108:291-297, 1978.
54. Burns RA, Milner JA: Sulfur amino acid requirements of the immature Beagle dog, J Nut 111:2117-2122, 1981.
55. Hendriks WH, Rutherford SM, Rutherford KJ: Irmportance of sulfate, cysteine and methionine as precursors to felinine synthesis
by domestic cats (Feis catus), Comp Biochem Physiol C 129:211-216, 2001.
56. Hendriks WH, Tartelin MF, Moughan PJ: Twenty-four hours felinine excretion patterns in intact and castrated cats, Phyiof
Behav 58:467-469, 1995.
 57. Rutherford-Marwick KJ, McGrath MC, Weidgraaf K, Hendriks WH: Gamma-glutamylfelinylglycine metabolite excretion in the
urine of the domestic cat (Felis catus), J Nutr 136:2075S-2077S, 2006.
58. Rutherford SM, Kitson TM, Woolhouse AD, and others: Felinine stability in the presence of selected urine compounds, Amino
Arids 32:235-242, 2007
59. Huxtable RJ: The physiological actions of taurine, Physiof Rev 72:101-163, 1992.
60. Backus RC, Ko KS, Fasceti A], and others: Low plasma taurine concentration in Newfoundland dogs is associated with low
pasma methionine and cyst(e)ine concentration and low taurine synthesis, / Nutr 136:2525-2533, 2006.
61. Sturma JA, Lu P: Role of feline maternal taurine nutrition in fetal cerebellar development: an immunohistochemical study, Amino
Acids 13:369-377, 1997.
62. Morris JC, Rogers QR: The metabolic basis for the taurine requirement of cats. Taurine: nutritional value and mechanisms of
action, Adv Exp Med Biol 315:33-44, 1992.
 -   o      s    s 
64. Rabin AR, Nicolosi RJ, Hayes KC: Dietary infuence of bile acid conjugation in the cat, J Nut 106:1241-1246, 1976.
65. Hayes KC, Carey RE, Schmidt SY: Retinal degeneration associated with taurine deficiency in the cat, Science 188:949-951, 1975.
Protein Requirements 105
 66. Hayes KC, Rabin AR, Berson EL: An ultrastructural study of nutritionally induced and reversed retinal degeneration in cats, Axm J
Pathof 78:505-524, 1978.
67. Wen CY, Sturman JA, Wisniewski HM, and others Tapetum disorganization in taurine-depleted cats, Invest Ophthabmot Vis Sci
18:1201-1206, 1979.
68. Leon A, Levick WR, Sarossy WR: Lesion topography and new histological features in fline taurine defciency retinopathy, Exp
Eye Res 61:731-741, 1995.
69. Barnett KC, Burger 1H: Taurine deficiency retinopathy in the cat, / Small Anim Pract 21:521-526, 1980.
70. Pion PD, Kittleson MD, Rogers QR, and others: Myocardial failure in cats associated with low plasma taurine: a reversible
cardiomyopathy, Sience 237:764-768, 1987.
71. Sturman JA, Gargano AD, Messing JM, Imaki H: Feline maternal taurine deficiency: effect on mother and offspring, J Nut?
116:655-667, 1986.
72. Sturman JA, Messing JM: Dietary taurine content and feline reproduction and outcome, / Nutr 121:1 195-1203, 1991.
73. Dieter JA, Stewart DR, Haggarty MA, and others: Pregnancy failure in cats associated with long-term dietary taurine
insufficiency, / Reprod Fertit Suppt 47:457463, 1993.
74. Hickman MA, Morris JC, Rogers QR: Intestinal taurine and the enterohepatic circulation of taurocholic acid in the cat, Ads Exp
Med Biof 315:45-54, 1992.
75. Stratton-Phelps MR, Cackus RC, Rogers QR, Fasceti AJ: Dietary rice bran decreases plasma and whole-blood taurine in cats,
/ Nutr 132:1745S-1747S, 2002.
76. Delaney SJ, Kass PH, Rogers QR, Fasceti AJ: Plasma and whole blood taurine in normal dogs of varying size fed commercially
prepared food, J Aim Physiol Anim Nutr 87:236-244, 2003.
77. Kim SW, Rogers QR, Morris JG: Maillard reaction products in purifed diets induce taurine depletion in cats which is reversed by
antibiotics, / Nutr 126:195-201, 1996.
78. Morris JG, Rogers QR, Seungwook WK, and others: Dietary taurine requirement of cats is determined by microbial degradation
of taurine in the gut, Vet Clin Nutr 1:118-127, 1994.
79. Douglass CM, Fern EB, Brown RC: Feline plasma and whole blood taurine levels as infuenced by commercial dry and canned
diets, / Nztr 121:S179S180, 1991.
80. Spitze AR, Wong DL, Rogers QR, Fasceti AJ: Taurine concentrations in animal feed ingredients; cooking infuences taurine
content, J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 87:251-262, 2003.
81. Freeman LM, Michel KE, Brown D): Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy in Dalmatians: nine cases (1990-1995), J Axm Vet Med
Asoc 209:15921596, 1996.
82. Sanderson SL, Gross KL, Ogburn PN: Effects of dietary fat and L-carnitine on plasma and whole blood taurine concentrations
and cardiac function in health dogs fed protein-restricted diets, Am J Vet Rer 62:1616-1623, 2001.
83. Kittleson ME, Keene B, Pion PD: Results of the Multicenter Spaniel Trial (MUST): taurine- and carnitine-responsive dilated
cardiomyopathy in American Cocker Spaniels with decreased plasma taurine concentration, J Vet Intern Med 11:204-211, 1997.
84. Backus RC, Cohen C, Pion PD, and others: Taurine defciency in Newfoundlands fed commercially available complete and
balanced diets, J Am Vet Med Asoc 223:1130-1136, 2003.
85. Lawler DF, Templeton AJ, Monti KL: Evidence for genetic involvement in feline dilated cardiomyopathy, J Vet Intern Med
7:383-387, 1993.
86. Kim SW, Morris JG, Rogers QR: Dietary soybean protein decreases plasma taurine in cats, / Nutr 125:2831-2837, 1995.
87. Johnson ML, Parsons CM, Fahey CG Jr: Effects of species raw material source, ash content, and processing temperature on amino
acid digestibility of animal by-product meals by cecectomized roosters and ileally cannulated dogs, / Anim Sci 76: 1112-1 122,
1998.
88. Backus RC, Ko KS, Fascetti AJ, and others: Low plasma taurine concentration in Newfoundland dogs is associated with low
pasma methionine and cyst(ejine concentrations and low taurine synthesis, / Nutr 136:2525-2533, 2006.
106 Canine and Feline Nutrition
energy requirement, / Nutr 1 37:1171-1 175, 2007.
90. Torres CL, Backus RC, Rascetti AJ, Rogers QR: Taurine status in normal dogs fed a commercial diet associated with taurine
deficiency and dilated cardiomyopathy,J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 87:359-372, 2003.
91. Backus RC, Morris JC, Kim SW, and others: Dietary taurine needs of cats varies with dietary protein quality and concentration,
Vet Chin Nutr 5:18-22, 1998.
92. lkeda M, Tsuji H, Nakamura S, and others: Studies on the biosynthesis of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. ll. A role of
picolinic carboxylase in the biosynthesis of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide from tryptophan in mammals, J Biol Chem
240:1395-1401, 1965.
93. Kalflz FA: Evaluation and use of pet foods: general considerations in using pet foods for adult maintenance, Vet Chix North Am
Smalf Anim Pract 19:387403, 1989.
'86 /0 I-01 gos wy (pms m ap ssop e pue uaord :ury poo8epo yonu oo1 Hq Aydm '56
 95. Finco DR, Brown SA, Crowell WA, and others: Effects of aging and dietary protein intake on uninephrectomized geriatric dogs,
Am / Vet Res 55:1282-1290, 1994.
 96. Lowenstein LM: The rat as a model for aging in the kidney. In Gibson DC, Adelman RC, Finch C, editors: Development of the
rodent as α modef system ofaging, Washington, DC, 1978, US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
97. Goldrman R: Aging of the excretory system: kidney and bladder. In Finch EE, Hayflick L, editors: Handbook of the biology of aging,
New York, 1977, Van Nostrand Reinhold.
98. Milward DJ, Fereday A, Gibson N, Pacy PJ: Aging, protein requirements, and protein turnover, Am J Clin Nut 66:774-786,
1997.
99. Cowgill LD, Spangler WL: Renal insufficiency in geriatric dogs, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 11:727-749, 1981.
100. Davenport C, Gaasch S, Hayek MC, Cummins KA:Efect of dietary protein on body composition and metabolic responses of
geriatric and young-adult dogs, J Vet Intern Med 15:306, 2001
13
Vitamin and Mineral Requirements
FAT-SOLUBLE VITAMINS
and retinyl acetate. The largest quantities of these com-
Vitamins are organic dietary constituents that are necessary
pounds are found in fsh liver oils and animal livers.
for growth and the maintenance of life, but they are not
Nutrient requirements for vitamin A and its content
used by the body as an energy source or incorporated as
in pet foods afe expressed either as international units
part of tissue structure (see Section 1, pp. 27-36). The fat-
(IUs) or retinol equivalents (RE). One IU of vitamin A
soluble vitamins include vitamins A, D, E, and K. These
is equal to 0.3 micrograms (μg) of retinol or 0.3 RE. The
vitamins are absorbed from the small intestine in much the
2006 National Research Council (NRC) recommenda-
same way as dlietary fat and are stored primarily in the liver.
tions suggest an adlequate intake (Al) for dogs, during
all life stages, of 303 RE/1000 kilocalories (kcal) of diet
and a recommended allowance of 379 RE/1000 kcal.4
VitaminA
These values are equivalent to 1060 RE/kilogram (kg)
All animals have a physiological requirement for active
and 1326 RE/kg in a food containing 3.5 kcal/gram (g).
vitamin A (retinol). However, most mammals, including
The 2008 Association of American Feed Control Off-
the dog but with the exception of the cat, have the ability
cials (AAFCO) Nutrient Profles for dog foods recom-
to conveft vitamin A precursors to active vitamin A (see
mends that dog foods containing an energy density of
Section 1,pp.27-29).Carotenoid pigments,ofwhich beta-
3.5 kcal/kg should include a minimum of 5000 IU/kg
carotene is the most important, are cleaved by a dioxy-
for growth, reproduction, and adult maintenance.5 This
genase enzyme in the intestinal mucosa to yield vitamin
value is equivalent to 1500 RE/kg diet.
A aldehyde (retinal). Retinal is then reduced by a sec-
Because cats cannot convert carotenoid pigments to
ond enzyme to form active vitamin A (retinol). Retinol
active vitamin A, the requirement is expressed in units
is esterified to fatty acids and absorbed into the body
of retinol for cats. The NRC's recommendations for cats
suggests an AI of 200 μg retinol/1000 kcal of food for
essential for the splitting of the beta-carotene molecule
growing kittens and adult maintenance, and 400 μg/
is either absent or grossly deficient in the domestic cat.
1000 kcal during pregnancy and lactation.4 The rec-
Studies have shown that neither dietary nor intravenous
ommended allowances are 250 μg and 500 μg, respec-
beta-carotene can prevent the development of vitamin A
tively. These recommended allowances ate equivalent to
deficiency in the domestic cat.?3 As a result, the cat must
1000 μg/kg and 2000 μg/kg in a food with an ME of4.0
have a source of preformed vitamin A present in the diet.
kcal/g of dry matter (DM) (Table 13-1). The AAFCO
Nutrient Profles recommend a minimum of 5000 IU/kg
of diet on a dry-matter basis (DMB) for adult mainte-
All animais have a physiological requirement for vita
nance and 9000 IU/kg for growth and reproduction in
min A, but most mammais, inciuding the dog, are able
foods containing 4.0 kcal/kg.5 These values are equiva-
to convert vitamin A precursors suchas thecarotenoid
lent to 1500 μg and 2700 μg, respectively.
pigments to active vitamin A. The cat, however cannot
Vitamin A deficiency is rarely observed in dogs and
convert carotenoids toretinolandso rmust haveasource
cats because commercial pet foods contain adlequate
ofdietary preformed vitamin A.
amounts and because dogs are able to convert the carot-
encids found in plant matter into active vitamin A.
Experimental vitamin A deficiency fesults in abnormal
The most common forms of preformed vitamin A in
bone growth and neurological disorders in young ani-
foods are derivatives of retinol, such as retinyl palmitate
 mals. Stenosis of the neural foramina causes pinching of
107
108 Canine and Feline Nutrition
TABLE 13-1 RECOMMENDED FAT-SOLUBLE VITAMIN LEVELS (ADULT MAINTENANCE)
VITAMINA
VITAMIN D
VITAMIN E
VITAMIN K
Dog*
NRC (Recommended allowance)
1326 RE
483 IU
26.25 IU
1.40 mg
AAFCO
1500 RE
500 IU
50 IU
Catt
NRC ( Recommended allowance)
1000μg
280 IU
38 IU
1.0 mg
AAFCO
1500μg
500 IU
30 IU$
0.1 mg
AAFCO, Association of American Feed Concrol Offcials; 7U, inrernational unirs; NRC, National Research Council; RE, rerinol equivalents.
*Estimares are per kg of dier concaining 3500 kcal/kg.
tNo requirement escablished.
Estimates are per kg of die containing 4000 kcal/kg.
SAddiional viramin E is needed in diets conraining high amouns of hsh oils.
IA diecary source of viramin K is nort needed except in food containing 25% or more hish (dry-marer basis).
cranial and spinal nerves as they pass through the abnor-
mally shaped bone. If the defciency persists, shorten-
Vitamin D
ing and thickening of the long bones occuf, along with
Vitamin D is essential for normal calcium and phos-
abnormal development of the bones of the skull.6 Vita
phorus metabolism
 and homeostasis. The actions of
min A deficiency in adult animals affects reproduction,
vitamin D on the intestine, skeleton, and kidneys fesult
vision, and functioning of the epithelium. Clinical signs
 in increased plasma levels of calcium and phosphorus.
include anorexia, xerophthalmia and conjunctivitis,
cofneal opacity and ulceration, skin lesions, and mul-
of bone and cartilage and maintains the concentfa
tiple disorders of the epithelial layers in the body.
tion of calcium in the extracellular fuid that is neces
Vitamin A toxicity is not common in the animal
saty for normal muscle contraction and nervous tissue
kingdom because the precursor for vitamin A, beta-
excitability. Many animals have the ability to synthesize
carotene, is not a toxic substance. The intestinal mucosa
vitamin D, (cholecalciferol) from 7-dehydrocholesterol
regulates the hydrolysis of beta-carotene and the subse-
when the skin is exposed to ultraviolet (UV) radiation.
quent absorption of retinol into the body. In addition,
However, dogs and cats have limited ability to convert
the dog appears to have a relatively high tolerance for
7-dehydrocholesterol in the skin to vitamin D3 and
preformed vitamin A.8,9 The cat differs from the dog
therefore are dependent upon a dietary source of this
because it cannot use catotenoids and must consume all
essential vitamin.l0 Studies with cats have found that
of its vitamin A as preformed retinyl palmitate or free
this inability is caused by a high activity of the enzyme
fetinol from animal tissues. The absorption of preformed
7-dehydrocholesterol-delta-7-reductase, which catalyzes
vitamin A is not regulated by the intestinal mucosa, and
the conversion of 7-dehydrocholesterol to cholesterol.11
high amounts of this vitamin ate teadily absorbed by the
Because cats rapilly convert 7-dehydrocholesterol to
body. If cats are fed foods having a concentrated source
 cholesterol, they have limited capacity for synthesizing
of vitamin A, they are unable to protect themselves from
cholecalciferol antd, ultimately, active vitamin D (see
absorbing toxic levels. These foods include organ meats,
Section 1, pp. 29-31).
such as liver and kidney, and vatious fish oils. Vitamin
The level of dietary vitamin D that is needed by a
A toxicosis in cats results in a disorder called deforming
dog or cat depends upon the calcium and phosphorus
cervical spondylosis. The effects of excess vitamin A on
levels in the diet and the age of the animal. Recent stud-
bone growth and remodeling cause the development
of bony exostoses (outgrowths) on the cervical ver-
in vitamin D3
3 metabolism and calcium homeostasis
tebrae. These changes eventually cause pain, diffcult
between large and small-breed dogs during periods of
movement, lameness, and crippling in sevefe cases (see
Section 4, pp. 280-282 for a complete discussion)
susceptibility of large-breed dogs to developmental
Vitamin and Mineral Requirements
6109
skeletal disease may be related to relationships between
deficiency has also been produced in kittens that were
elevated concentrations of circulating growth hormone,
fed a diet containing no vitamin D and 1% calcium and
insulin-like growth factor, and active vitamin D3 during
 phosphorus.19 Deficiency signs were exacerbated when
growth (see Section 5, pp 496-497 for a complete discus-
the diet's phosphorus level was decfeased to 0.65% and
sion). Regarlless of breed-size differences, all growing
calcium was increased to 2%. Because practical ingre
animals experience a high rate of skeletal calcifcation
 dients that are included in commercially produced pet
and so are more sensitive to dietary deficiency than afe
foods naturally contain vitamin D3, defciency is rare in
adult animals. The interrelationship between vitamin
companion animals, and when observed is usually asso-
D, calcium, and phosphorus has been demonstrated
 ciated with either a strict vegetarian diet, the presence of
by studies that have produced experimental vitamin D
disease, or an inborn error of metabolism.
defciencies in dogs and cats by limiting or imbalancing
Vitamin D deficiency in adult animals leads to
calcium and phosphorus levels.14,15 For example, stud-
osteomalacia. This disorder is caused by decalcifica-
ies with kittens found that clinical signs of vitamin D
tion of bone and results in an incfeased tendency of the
deficiency did not occur when the level of calcium in a
long bones to fracture. Cats with vitamin D deficiency
vitamin D-deficient diet was increased from 7 g/kg to
become reluctant to move and show decreased incli-
12 g/kg.16 However, plasma levels of 25-hydroxycho-
nation to groom themselves. A progressive posterior
lecalciferol were less than normal in these kittens and
paralysis develops, eventually leadling to quadriparesis
increased significantly when the kittens were switched
in advanced cases. These neurological changes are asso-
to a diet containing 124 IUs of vitamin D/kg. Normal
ciated with degeneration of the spinal cord caused by
plasma levels of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol were main-
 abnormal growth and remodeling of cervical vertebrae.
tained when the diet's vitamin D content was further
In most animals, vitamin D defciency develops con-
increased to 250 IU/kg. The current AAFCO Nutrient
comitantly with defciencies or imbalances in dietary
Profles advise that dog foods and adult maintenance cat
calcium and phosphorus. Low levels or imbalances of
foods contain a minimum of 500 IU/kg of vitamin D.
these minerals exacerbate vitamin D deficiency and may
The recommendation for kitten diets is 750 IU/kg.
precipitate the signs of rickets in growing animals or
osteomalacia in adults.
Hypervitaminosis D caused by excess levels of dietary
Unlike many animais, dogs and cats have limited ability
vitamin D is well documented and results in hypercal-
to convert 7-dehydrocholesterol in the skin to vitamin D3
cemia and calcification of soft tissues. The most com-
and therefore must have a source ofvitamin D, in their
mon cause in pet dogs and cats is not dietary, but rather
diets. The level that is needed depends on the animals
occurs as a result of accidental cholecalciferol rodenticide
age and stage ofdevelopment,as wellas the concentra-
 poisoning.20.22 In addition, several cases of hypervita-
tions of calcium and phosphorus in the food. in dogs,
minosis D were reported to occur in dogs in the United
breed size may aiso infuence an individual animals
Kingdom and cats in Japan; these animals were fed
vitamin D requirement.
commercial foods that mistakenly contained excessive
levels of vitamin D.23,24 In both these cases, the com-
mercial foods contained excessively high concentrations
As in other species, experimental induction of vita-
of vitamin D because of a manufacturing error that sub-
 min D deficiency in growing dogs and cats results in the
 sequently led to product recalls. A survey of commercial
development of rickets.17,18 Rickets is characterized by
 cat foods marketed in the United States found that none
bone malformation caused by insufficient deposition of
of the foods was deficient in vitamin D content, based
calcium and phosphorus. The long bones are affected,
y/ni osz jo susuanbai wnuuu Aienqie ue uodn
resulting in bowing of the legs and thickening of the
but some did contain less than the AAFCO minimum
joints. When the defcient diet is replaced with a food
of 500 IU/kg.19 Conversely, 20 of the 49 foods sampled
containing vitamin D, signs resolve, normal bone min-
contained more than 7500 IU/kg, and 15 contained
eralization can occuf, and circulating levels of vitamin
 more than 10,000 IU/kg, levels that are well above the
D metabolites increase to hormal values. Vitamin D
AAFCO's maximum allowance of 5000 IU/kg. The
110 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 sources of high vitamin D levels are generally ingrelients
with varying levels of success reported (see Section 5,
such as fish meals and fish oils that contain naturally high
concentrations of the vitamin, rather than supplemental
reflect a pharmacological response to high doses of vita-
vitamin D. Regardlless of these findings, no reports of
 min E, rather than a response to a dietary defciency
clinical vitamin D toxicity in cats have been reported
state. Although study results have been conficting, it
in the United States, although there is some evidence of
has also been theorized that dogs engaging in prolonged
a connection between feline oral resorptive lesions and
ot strenuous activity that results in oxidative stress may
high dietary vitamin D (see Chapter 34, p. 447). The
beneft from supplemental vitamin E, and that vitamin
lack of toxicity reports may be in part due to evidlence
E may help to enhance the immune response (see Sec-
 on riss ai a on rde s n
tion 4, pp. 255-256 for a complete discussion).32
erol toxicosis, when compared with other species.25
A condition called pansteatitis, or yellow fat disease,"
occurs in cats that are fed diets containing marginal of
low levels of vitamin E and high amounts of unsatu-
VitaminE
fated fatty acids. Signs of pansteatitis include anorexia,
Vitamin E functions as a biological, chain-breaking
depression, pyrexia (fever), hyperesthesia of the thorax
antioxidant that heutralizes ffree fadicals and prevents
 and abdomen, a reluctance to move, and the presence
the peroxidation of lipids within cellular membranes.
of “swollen fat."33,34 A diet that contains high levels of
An animal's requirement for vitamin E depends on
fish oil may cause a threefold to fourfold increase in
dietary levels of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs)
a cat's daily requirement for vitamin E. Early cases of
and selenium, a tface mineral. Vitamin E and selenium
pansteatitis occurred almost exclusively in cats that were
function synergistically. Although vitamin E protects
fed a canned, commercial, fish-based cat food, of which
cell membrane fatty acids by quenching the free radicals
red tuna was the principal type of fish. Later cases of the
formed during oxidation, selenium (as a component
disease occurred in cats that were fed diets consisting
of the enzyme glutathione peroxidase) reduces perox-
wholly or largely of canned red tuna, fish scraps, and,
ide formation. This process further protects membrane
in two cases, an imbalanced homemade diet comprised
fatty acids from oxidative damage (see Section 1, p. 31).
almost completely of whole pig's brain.35 Red tuna
Increasing the level of unsaturated fat in the diet causes
packed in cil contains high levels of PUFAs and low
 'ai g  sje ue ui ssea 
levels of vitamin E. The adldition of large amounts of
commercial pet foods, vitamin E also protects unsatu-
fish products to a cat's diet appears to be the most com-
fated dietary fats ffrom destructive oxidation. The vita
mon cause of this disease (see Section 4, p. 279).
min is preferentially oxidized before the unsaturated
fatty acids, thus protecting them from rancidity. How-
VitaminK
ever, in this process, vitamin E is destroyed. Therefore,
as the level of unsaturated fatty acids in a food increases,
Vitamin K includes a class of compounds known as qui-
its concentration of vitamin E should also increase.
nones. This vitamin is necessary for normal blood coagu-
A naturally occurring deficiency of vitamin E is not
lation because of its role in the synthesis of prothrombin
common in dogs and cats. However, the ingestion of
(factor II) and several other clotting factors (see Section
 -eusualddns 1o spooy paions Ajood 1o paredaid Ajood
1, p. 32). Evidence in both dogs and cats indicates very
tion with large amounts of PUFAs can precipitate a relative
low dietary requirements for vitamin K, probably due
to the ability of bacterial synthesis in the intestine to
vitamin E defciency in dogs results in skeletal muscle
fully meet the animal's need for this nutrient. Howevef,
degeneration, decreased reproductive performance, retinal
interference with vitamin K synthesis or absorption
can cause a deficiency, with signs of hemorrhage and
Supplementation with large amounts of vitamin E has
decreased levels of prothrombin in the blood.
been theorized to be beneficial in the treatment of some
Naturally occurring vitamin K deficiency has not been
types of skin disorders in dogs, such as discoid lupus
feported in dogs and has only been feported anecdot-
erythematosus, demodicosis, and acanthosis nigricans,
ally in case studies of cats consuming diets containing
Vitamin and Mineral Requirements
111
high amounts of fsh. In two separate situations, cats
the diet increases, so does a dog's or cat's requirement
fed canned commercial cat foods containing either
for vitamin Bg.41 Finally, genetics can also play a role
salmon or tuna developed clinical signs of vitamin K
in B-vitamin metabolism. An example is an inherited
defciency.36 Signs included the development of gas-
dlisorder in Giant Schnauzers that causes malabsorption
tic ulcers, increased coagulation times, and decreased
of vitamin Bz (see Section 5, pp. 297-298).
sefum concentrations of vitamin K-dependent clot-
ting factors. Surprisingly the vitamin K concentra-
MINERALS
tion in the diets was found to be 60 μg/kg diet, a level
considered to be adequate for companion animals.
As with most other nutrients, problems with mineral
Surviving animals responded positively to vitamin K
nutrition in dogs and cats are often a result of excesses
supplementation and demonstrated normalized clotting
or imbalances from interactions with other nutrients
times within 24 hours of vitamin K therapy. A subse-
rather than a result of frank defciencies in the diet. This
quent series of studies by the same laboratory failed to
section focuses on those minerals that afe of most prac-
induce vitamin K deficiency in cats fed various types
tical significance in the nutrition and feeding manage-
of purified diets. The experimental diets contained low
ment of dogs and cats today.
levels of vitamin K (4 to 30 μg/kg diet) and various
factors with the potential to interfere with vitamin K
Calcium and Phosphorus
synthesis or absorption. These results suggest that kit-
Y uea Arenap mol aiaa aey sai payund pay sual
Calcium and phosphorus are macrominerals necessary
requirements and that there may be a factor present in
for the formation and maintenance of the skeleton.
some canned cat foods containing fish that interferes
These nutrients are also involved in a wide range of
with vitamin K synthesis or absorption. Although this
metabolic reactions (see Section 1, pp. 37-40). When
factor or underlying cause has not been identifed, it is
considering canine and feline requirements for all
fecommended that canned fish-based cat diets include
nutrients, availability in the diet must be taken into
supplemental vitamin K in the form of 1.0 milligrams
account. This is especially important for calcium and
(mg) menaquinone/kg food in a food containing
phosphorus because of the many factors that can
4000kcal/kg.
affect the bioavailability of these minerals. The dietary
requirement for available calcium is quite low. An early
study reported that 0.37% available calcium or 0.5%
WATER-SOLUBLEVITAMINS
to 0.65% total calcium was adequate for growing pup-
The water-soluble vitamins that are of importance t0
pies.42 Similarly, when cats are fed purifed diets con-
the dog and cat are all B-complex vitamins. Most of
taining highly available nutrients, normal growth can
these vitamins are involved in the metabolism of food
be supported by as little as 150 to 200 mg of calcium/
and the production of energy in the body (see Section 1,
day.43 Howevel, up to twice this amount is needed
pp.32-34). Because ofthe availability ofwell-formulated
when they were fed practical diets. The current AAFCO
and well-balanced pet foods today, simple defcien-
Nutrient Profles for dogs and for cats recommend a
cies of the B-complex vitamins ate rare in compan-
minimum level of 1.0% calcium and 0.8% phospho-
ion animals. However, there are several situations in
rus for growth/reproduction, and 0.6% calcium and
which B-vitamin nutrition may be of concern in the
0.5% phosphorus for adult maintenance. The NRC
 nutritional management of dogs or cats. Thiamin def-
recommends a minimum level of 0.8% calcium for all
ciency can occur when pets are fed certain types of raw
size puppies, noting that this level most likely exceeds
fish containing an enzyme that destroys this vitamin,
the minimum needs of most dogs other than large and
while biotin defciency can be induced by feeding ani-
 giant breeds.4 Although there is evidence that adult
mals large armounts of raw egg whites (see Section 4,
cats can consume diets with a fatio as low as 0.6:1 with
 no adverse effects, dietary calcium/phosphorus ratios
ment for vitamin Bg (pyridoxine) is directly affected by
between 1.2:1 to 1.4:1 afe considered optimal for ani-
the level of protein in the diet. As the protein level in
 mals by most nutritionists.44
112 Canine and Feline Nutrition
When formulating rations, pet food manufacturers
that can bind other minerals, including calcium, and
must account for differences in calcium and phospho-
 make them unavailable for absorption. Although phy-
tate is very high in phosphorus, the availability of phy-
Absorption coefficients for calcium have been reported
tate phosphorus is only about 30%.51 On the other
to vary between 0% and 90%, depending on the com-
hand, some of the animal-source proteins that are
position of the diet, the age of the animal, and the
included in pet foods are high in phosphorus but fela-
total calcium content of the diet.45 Numerous studies
tively low in calcium; these products include fresh meat
have shown that, within limits, as the calcium content
 Of poultry, meat or fish meals, and organ meats. As a
of a diet decreases, the dog's efficiency of absorption
result, pet foods must be carefully formulated to ensure
increases, and calcium availability gradually decreases as
that both adequate levels and a proper fatio of calcium
dogs mature.46,47 In addition, calcium absorption coef-
to phosphorus are maintained.
fcients decline with age as young growing animals reach
Deficiencies of calcium and phosphorus are unusual
maturity.47 Another factor to consider in dogs is adult
today because of the production of well-formulated
size. Recent data show that the minimum requirement
 pet foods. Because phosphorus is present in so many
-se so ui azis aa yim aia ose e unes i
foods, a dietary deficiency of this mineral is extremely
 suaai rniy ais aaey sidnd pa
rare. However, calcium imbalance in growing dogs of
small-breed ones. Studies with Great Dane puppies
cats still occurs as a result of improper feeding prac-
indicate that 0.55% total calcium was not adequate,
tices. A calcium deficiency develops most commonly
while 0.82% supported normal growth.4849 Con-
when puppies or kittens are fed unconventional diets
versely, a study with growing Miniature Poodles found
that contain a high proportion of muscle of organ
that small-breed puppies grew normally when fed as low
meats. This type of diet results in a syndrome called
as 0.36% and as high as 1.2% calcium.50 Because large-
nutritional secondary byperparathyroidism. The low cal-
breed puppies ate also more sensitive to excessively high
cium and extremely high phosphorus content of an
levels of calcium in the diet, dietary calcium levels for
all-meat diet leads to inadequate absorption of cal-
growing large- and giant-breed dogs must be carefully
cium and transient hypocalcemia. The lowered blood
formulated to support healthy skeletal development (see
levels of calcium stimulate the release of parathyroid
Section 5, pp. 499-500 for a complete discussion).
hormone (PTH). PTH causes increased production of
calcitriol (active vitamin D) and thus increased bone
resorption of calcium, resulting in a restoration of nor-
im general, as the caicium content of a food decreases,
mal blood calcium levels. When calcium is defcient in
the dogs efciency of absorption increases. in addition,
the diet, chronically elevated levels of PTH maintain
calcium absorption coeffcients decline with age as
blood calcium levels within a normal range. However,
young growing animals reach maturity Finaly, large-
these elevated PTH levels lead to bone demineraliza-
breed puppies have slightly higher calciur requirements
tion and a loss of bone mass.52 In dogs, the mandibles
than srali-breed ones. Because large-breed puppies are
(jaw bones) show the earliest signs of bone deminer-
also more sensitive to excessively high levels of calcium
alization; this leads to periodontal disease and loss of
inthediet,dietarycaiciumlevelsforgrowinglarge-and
teeth. Over time, severe bone loss leads to compres-
giant-breed dogs must be carefully formuiated to sup-
sion of the spinal vertebrae and spontaneous fractures
port heaithy skeletal development.
of the long bones. Affected dogs and cats exhibit joint
pain and swelling, lameness, and a reluctance to move.
Splaying of the toes, excessive sloping of the metatar
A fnal consideration is the differing calcium and
sal and metacarpal bones, and lateral deviation of the
phosphorus availability among the ingredients that afe
 carpus are also observed. Treatment involves correction
commonly used in pet foods. In general, the calcium
of the diet through provision of a nutritionally com
and phosphorus in plant products are less available than 
 plete and balanced ration. It is advisable to completely
the minerals found in animal products. Cereal grains
replace the defcient diet with a balanced commercially
contain phytate, a phosphorus-containing compound
 prepared pet food rather than attempt to balance the
Vitamin and Mineral Requirements
6113
current diet through the addition of calcium supple
formulated for feeding through gestation and lactation,
ments (see Section 4, p. 277).
calcium supplementation is not necessary and is prob
A second problem that involves calcium homeosta-
ably contraindicated.
sis in the body is the occurrence of puerperal tetany of
Just as too little calcium during growth can be det-
eclampsia in lactating bitches and queens. Eclampsia is
fimental to dogs and cats, so can excessive amounts.
a disease that is seen most frequently in small and toy
The most common cause of excess calcium in a pet's
breeds of dogs and, less frequently, in cats.53 Its onset is
diet is supplementation of an already complete and
immedliately before or 2 to 3 weeks after parturition and
balanced pet food with high-calcium foods or mineral
is more common in dams of large litters. The disorder
 supplements. Although adequate calcium is essential for
 appears to be caused by the failure of the dam's calcium
 normal bone growth and skeletal development, several
regulatory mechanisms to maintain serum-ionized cal-
health risks are associated with excessive dietary cal-
cium levels when there is a loss of calcium to the milk.
cium. One of the most well-documented risk factors
One of the foles of ionized calcium in the body is to
is the association between calcium intake and develop-
stabilize electrical charges across nerve and muscle cell
mental skeletal disorders in large- and giant-breed dogs
membranes. In the absence of normal serum calcium
(see Section 5, pp. 497-499 for a complete discussion).
levels, cell membranes become hyperexcitable, leading
to convulsive seizures and tetany. Some dogs develop
Magnesium
nonspecific signs such as excessive panting, changes in
behavior, vomiting, or diarrhea.54 Serum calcium levels
Magnesium is present in both soft tissues and bone. It
may decrease to less than 7 mg/deciliter (dll). Normally,
is essential for normal muscle and nervous tissue func-
serum calcium is strictly maintained at a level of 9.5
zua jo raqnu e ui anoi aay e sieid pue suuo
to 10.5 mg/dl. Prompt medical care is necessary and
reactions (see Section 1, p. 40). Although it has not
consists of intravenous administration of calcium boro-
been studied in dogs, magnesium absorption in growing
gluconate.55,56 Prognosis is very good if the disorder is
kittens decreases with age. This reduction in efficiency
treated at an early stage.
is exacerbated when excessive dietary calcium is fed.
Although controlled studies have not been con-
Although uncommon, magnesium defciency results
ducted with companion animals, research with dairy
in muscle weakness, ataxia, and, eventually, convulsive
cattle has demonstrated that the consumption of a diet
 seizures. Naturally occurring magnesium deficiency has
high in calcium during pregnancy actually increases the
not been reported in dogs and cats. Conversely, excess
incidence of this disorder, and moderately low intakes of
magnesium is a risk factor in the development of certain
calcium can prevent its occurrence.57 It is theorized that
types of feline lower urinary tract disease (see Section 5,
a relative hypercalcemia, caused by a high-calcium diet
pp. 362-365 for a complete discussion).
of calcium supplementation during pregnancy, exerts
negative feedback on PTH synthesis and secretion by
the parathyroid gland. This effect causes a decrease in
Copper
both the bodys capability to mobilize calcium stores
Copper is needed by the body for iron absorption and
from bone and its ability to increase calcium absorption
transport, hemoglobin formation, and normal func-
in the intestine. When calcium is suddenly needed for
tioning of the cytochrome oxidase enzyme system (see
lactation, the body's regulatory mechanisms are unable
 Section 1, p. 41). The normal metabolism of copper in
to adapt quickly enough to the sudden calcium loss.
 the body involves the passage of excess copper through
Calcium is diverted preferentially to milk production,
the liver and its excretion in bile. Disorders that affect
and the animal's serum calcium decreases. Although a
 bile excretion often result in an accumulation of copper
correlation between excess calcium during pregnancy
in the liver, sometimes to toxic levels. In these cases,
and eclampsia has not been demonstrated in dogs of
liver copper toxicosis is a secondary disordler that devel-
cats, it is prudent to avoid calcium supplements dur-
 ops as an effect of the underlying liver disease. However,
ing pregnancy in these species. If a bitch or queen is
 a primary hepatic copper-storage disease exists in cer-
being fed a high-quality commercial food that has been
tain breeds of dogs. In these cases, the underlying cause
114  Canine and Feline Nutrition
of the disease is an accumulation of copper in the liver
develop in these species. Within 2 weeks of consuming
that eventually results in degenerative liver disease (see
a zinc-defcient ration, dogs will develop desquamating
Section 5, pp. 298-299).
skin lesions on the foot pads, extremities, joints, and
groin. Lesions frst appear as small, erythematous areas
Umq isn ip ou siu ue seua Aenuaa ie
Zinc
lesions. Microscopically, the lesions show parakeratosis,
With the exception of iron, zinc is the most abun-
hyperkeratinization, and an infammatory infltration
dant micromineral present in the body's tissues. It is
 of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and macrophages.64 Coat
important for normal catbohydrate, lipid, protein, and
 changes have also been reported to occur with zinc def-
nucleic acid metabolism, and it is necessary for the
 ciency. Affected dogs develop a dry, harsh hair coat with
maintenance of epidermal integrity, taste acuity, and
fading coat color. When a diet containing adlequate zinc
immunological functions.58 Zinc is a cofactor for the
 is provided, these clinical signs rapidlly resolve. Although
enzyme delta-6-desaturase, and so is essential for the
not common, naturally occurring zinc defciency has
conversion of linoleic acid to afachidonic acid in the
-uadxau 'paneinuoy Aood pag shop u! panodai uaag
body. It is also a cofactor for ribonucleic acid (RNA)
 sive, dry dog foods.6S Young, rapidlly growing dogs of
 and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) polymerases, making
 the large and giant breeds seem to be most susceptible,
it an important mineral for rapidlly dividing cells, such
but several cases have also been reported in adult animals
as those found in the skin. These two functions have
(Figure 13-1) (see Section 3, pp. 168-169).66 Another
led researchers to study the synergistic use of zinc and
dietary cause of a relative zinc defciency is feeding exces-
supplemental fatty acid for the promotion of skin and
sive calcium (see Section 5, pp. 497-499). An inherited
coat health in dogs, and potentially for the treatment of
disorder of zinc metabolism occurs in certain breeds of
certain types of infammatory skin diseases (see Section
 dogs and also causes clinical signs of zinc deficiency (see
5, pp.384-390).59,60
Section 5, pp. 299-300 for a complete discussion).
Zinc deficiency has been reported in a variety of ani-
mal species, including dogs and cats61-63 Clinical signs
Sodium
dation, abnormalities in hair and skin condition, gas-
The concern over the connection between sodium
trointestinal disturbances, and impaired reproductive
intake and essential hypertension in humans has
performance. The disruption of normal cellular division 
resulted in interest in the sodium content of pet foods
n an q n q s sisssnd  
 and its implications for companion animal health. An
ing cause of many of these signs. Experimental studies
 animal's requirement for sodium is primarily infuenced
of zinc deficiency in dogs and cats have found that skin
by the unavoidable daily loss of this mineral from the
and coat changes are usually the frst clinical signs to
body.67 In adults, during maintenance, these losses are
moa uunp suaambal paseanui on anp o uieunow asauag sumoe ipidei gunon e ui uaiyap ouIl auna
(Courtesy Candace 5ousa, DVM, Animal Derm atology Clinic, Sacramento, California.)
Vitamin and Mineral Requirements 115
usually quite low. The body's ability to conserve sodium
a relationship in dogs and cats. Essential hypertension
results in a very low dietary sodium requirement in dogs
is infrequently seen in companion animals. Data ffom
and cats. Maintenance fequirements of adults afe esti-
studies that examined the effect of salt intake on canine
mated to fange between 0.03% to 0.09% sodium (DM
 blood pressure indicate that this species is resistant to
basis), with slight increases required during pregnancy
salt retention and hypertension.69 Adult dogs that were
and lactation. Most commercial pet foods contain well
fed high-sodium dliets were able to resist very high levels
above these amounts of sodium.
of salt intake without weight gain of edema, and theif
In all animals, the immediate effect of increased salt
renal systems adjusted quickly to changes in dietary
intake is increased water consumption. Sodium bal-
sodium.70 When hypertension does occur in dogs and
ance in dogs is maintained primarily through changes
cats, it is usually a secondary disorder occurring as a
in urinary excretion of the mineral.6 An increase in
result of fenal disease. Although additional controlled
intake above the body's requirement is accompanied by
research needs to be conducted, the dog appears to be
increases in urinary water and sodium excretion. The
resistant to the development of salt-induced hyperten-
 most important risk attributed to long-term salt excess
sion. In addition, companion animals readily adapt
is its effect on blood pressure. Although this association
to the sodium levels in pet foods by altering urinary
has been shown to be a causal factor in the development
excretion of sodium.7l These levels are probably of no
of essential hypertension in certain human subpopula-
 harm when fed to animals that are healthy and have free
tions, there are no data supporting the existence of such
access to fresh water.
References
 1. Goodman DS, Huang HS, Kanai M, and others: The enzymatic conversion of all-trans beta-carotene into retinal, J Biot Chem
242:3543-3554, 1967.
2. Thompson SY, Braude R, Coates ME, and others: Further studies on the conversion of beta-carotene to vitamin A, Br J Nut?
4:398420, 1960.
3. Gershoff SN, Andrus SB, Hegsted DM, and others: Vitamin A defciency in cats, Lab Invest 6:227-239, 1957.
4. National Research Council: Nutrient reguirements ofdogs and cats, Washington, DC, 2006, National Academy Press.
5. Association of American Feed Control Ofcials (AAFCO): Offcial publication, 2008, AAFCO
6. Hayes KC: On the pathophysiology of vitamin A deficiency, Nutr Rev 29:3-6, 1971.
7. Crimm PD, Short DM: Vitamin A deficiency in the dog, Am J Physiof 118:477-482, 1937.
 8. Cline JL, Czarnecki-Maulden CL, Losonsky JM, and others: Effect of increasing dietary vitamin A on bone density in adult dogs,
J Anim Sei 75:2980-2985, 1997.
9. Goldy GG, Burr JR, Longardner CN, and others: Effects of measured doses of vitamin A fed to healthy Beagle dogs for 26 weeks,
Vet Chin Nutr 3:42-49, 1996.
10. How KL, Hazewinkel AW, Mol JA: Dietary vitamin D dependence of cat and dog due to inadequate cutaneous synthesis of
vitamin D, Gen Comp Endocrin 96:12-18, 1994.
129:903-908, 1999.
12. Hazewinkel HAW, Tryfonidou MA: Vitamin D3 metabolism in dogs, Mol Cell Endocrinof 197:23-33, 2002.
13. Tryfonidou MA, Holl MS, Vastenburg M, and others: Hormonal regulation of calcium homeostasis in two breeds of dogs during
growth at different rates, J Anim Sei 81:1568-1580, 2003.
14. Campbell JR, Douglas TA: The effect of low calcium intake and vitamin D supplements on bone structure in young growing dogs,
Br J Nutr 19:339-347, 1965.
116 Canine and Feline Nutrition
15. Brickman AS, Chilumula RR, Coburn JW, and others: Biologic action of 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3 in the rachitic dog,
Endocrinotogy 92:728-734, 1973
16. Morris JG, Earle KE: Vitamin D and calcium requirements of kittens, Vet Clin Nutr 3:93-96, 1996.
17. Hazewinkel HAW: Nutrition in relation to skeletal growth deformities, / Smalf Anim Pract 30:625-630, 1989.
18. Mellanby T: The part played by an “accesory factor" in the production of experimental rickets, J Physiol 52:1-14, 1918.
19. Morris JF: Vitamin D synthesis by kittens, Vet Clin Nutr 3:88-92, 1996.
20. Bahri LE: Poisoning in dogs by vitamin D3-containing rodenticides, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 12:1414-1417, 1990.
21. Murphy MJ: Rodenticides, Vet Clin North A Small Anim Pract 32:469-484, 2002.
22. Peterson EN, Kirby R, Bovee KC: Cholecalciferol rodenticide intoxication in a cat, / Am Vet Med Assoc 199:904-906, 1991.
23. Mellanby R], Mee AP, Bery JL, Herrtage ME: Hypercalcaemia in two dogs caused by excessive dietary supplementation of
vitamin D, J Small Anim Pract 46:334338, 2005.
24. Sato R, Yamagishi H, Naito Y, and others: Feline vitamin D toxicosis caused by commercially available cat food, J Jpr Vet Med Asoc
46:577-581, 1993.
25. Sih TR, Morris JG, Hickman A: Chronic ingestion of high concentration of cholecalciferol in cats, Am J Vet Rer 62:1500-1506, 2001.
26. Van-Vleet JF: Experimentally-induced vitamin E-selenium deficiency in the growing dog, J Am Vet Med Asoc 166:769-774, 1975.
27. Hayes KC, Nielsen SW, Rousseay JE: Vitamin E deficiency and fat stress in the dog, / Nutr 99:196-209, 1969.
28. Hayes KC, Rousseau JE, Hegsted DM: Plasma tocopherol concentration and vitamin E deficiency in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
157:64-71, 1970.
29. Riis RE, Sheffy BE, Loew E, and others: Vitamin E deficiency retinopathy in dogs, Am J Vet Res 42:7486, 1981.
 30. Scott DW, Walton DK: Clinical evaluation of oral vitamin E for the treatment of primary canine acanthosis nigricans, J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 21:345-350, 1985.
31. Figueiredo C: Vitamin E serum contents, erythrocyte and lymphocyte count, PCV, and hemoglobin determinations in normal dogs,
dogs with scabies, and dogs with demodicosis. In Iroceedings ofthe annual American Academy ofVeterinary Dermatologists and the
American Coltege of Veterinary Dermatotogy, 1985, p 8.
32. Hinchcliff KW, Reinhart GA, Reynolds AJ, and others: Exercise and oxidant stress. ln Reinhart CA, Carey DP, editors: Recent
advances in canine and feline nutrition, lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
33. Cordy DR: Experimental production of steatitis (yellow fat disease) in kittens fed a commercial canned cat food and prevention of
the condition by vitamin E, Cornell Vet 44:310-318, 1954.
34. Gaskell CJ, Leedale AH, Douglas SW: Pansteatitis in the cat: a report of five cases, J Small Aim Pract 16:117-121, 1975.
35. Nize MM, Vilela CL, Ferreira LM: Feline pansteatitis revisited: hazards of unbalanced home-made diets, J Feline Med Surg
5:271-277,2003.
36. Strieker MJ, Morris JG, Feldman BF, and others: Vitamin K deficiency in cats fed commercial fsh-based diets, / SmallAnim Pract
37:322-326, 1996.
37. Smith DC, Proutt LM: Development of thiamine deficiency in the cat on a diet of raw fish, Proc Soc Exp Biof Med 56:1-5, 1944
38. Houston D, Hulland T]: Thiamine deficiency in a team of sled dogs, Cax Vet J29:383-385, 1988.
39. Pastoor FJH, Herck H, van Klooster A, and others: Biotin deficiency in cats as induced by feeding a purified diet containing egg
white, / Nutr 121:S73-S74, 1991.
40. Shen CS, Overfield L, Murthy PNA, and others: Efect of feeding raw egg white on pyruvate and propiony CoA carboxylase
activities on tissues of the dog, Fed Proc 36:1169, 1977.
41. Bai SC, Sampwon DA, Morris JG, and others: The level of dietary protein affects the vitamin B-6 requirerment of cats, J Nutr
121:1054-1061, 1991.
42. Jenkins KJ, Phillips PH: The mineral requirements of the dog. 1l. The relation of calcium, phosphorus and fat levels to minimal
calcium and phosphorus requirements, / Nutr 70:241-246, 1960.
Vitamin and Mineral Requirements
S117
43. Scott PP: Minerals and vitamins in feline nutrition. In Grham-Jones O, editor: Canine and feline nutrition reguirements, London,
1965, Pergamon Press.
44. Kealy RD, Lawler DF, Ballam JM: Dietary calcium:phosphorus ratio for adult cats, Vet Clin Nutr 3:28, 1996.
45. Hedhammer A: Nutrition as it relates to skeletal disease. In Proceedings of the Kal Ka symposiuwm, Columbus, Ohio, 1980.
46. Schoenmakers 1, Hazewinkel H, van den Brom W: Excessive Ca and P intake during early maturation in dogs alters Ca and P
balance without long-term effects after dietary normalization, J Nutr 129:1968-1974, 1999.
47. Tryfonidou MA, van den Broek J, van den Brom WE, Hazewinkel HAW: lntestinal calcium absorption in growing dogs is
influenced by calcium intake and age but not by growth rate, / Nutr 132:3363-3368, 2002.
48. Hazewinkel HAW, van den Brom WE, van 'T Klooster AT, and others: Calcium metabolism in Great Dane dogs fed diets with
various calcium and phosphorus levels, / Nutr 121:S99-S106, 1991.
49. Lafamme D: Effect of breed size on calcium requirements for puppies, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 23:66-69, 2000.
50. Nap RH, Hazewinkel H, van den Brom W: 45Ca kinetics in growing Miniature Poodles challenged by four different dietary levels
of calcium, / Nutr 123:1826-1833, 1993.
51. Erdman J: Oilseed phytates: nutritional implications, J Am Oi Chem Soc 56:736-741, 1979.
52. Hintz HF, Schryver HF: Nutrition and bone development in dogs, Comp Anim Pract 1:44 47, 1987.
53. Smith FO: Postpartum diseases, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 16:521-524, 1986.
54. Brobat KJ, Casey KK: Eclampsia in dogs: 31 cases (1995-1998), J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:216-219, 2000.
55. Austad R, Bjerkas E: Eclampsia in the bitch, J Small Anim Pract 17:793-798, 1976.
56. Bjerkas E: Eclammpsia in the cat, / Small Anim Pract 15:411-414, 1974.
s a  pms ay e edard nap ue e q sisared suaed o uou n uosgo a uos y sia 
58:430431, 1975.
58. Catalanotto FA: The trace metal zinc and taste, Am / Clin Nutr 31:1098-1103, 1978.
59. Kirby NA, Hester SL, Bauer JE: Dietary fats and the skin and coat of dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc 230:1641-1644, 2007.
60. Marsh KA, Ruedisueli FL, Coe SL: Efects of zinc and linoleic acid supplementation on the skin and coat quality of dogs receiving a
complete and baanced diet, Vet Dermatof 11:277-284, 2000.
61. Kane E, Morris JG, Rogers QR, and others: Zinc deficiency in the cat, / Nutr 111:488-495, 1981.
62. Wolf AM: Zinc-responsive dermatosis in a Rhodesian Ridgeback, Vet Med 82:908-912, 1987.
63. Van den Broek AHM, Thoday KL: Skin disease in dogs associated with zinc deficiency a report of five cases, J Smal Anim Pract
27:313-323, 1986.
64. Banta CA: The role of zinc in canine and feline nutrition. In Burger IH, Rivers JPW, editors: Nutrition ofthe dog and cat, New York,
1 989, Cambridge University Press.
65. Sousa CA, Stannard AA, 1hrke PJ: Dermatosis associated with feeding generic dog food: 13 cases (1981-1982), J Am Vet Med Asoc
192:676-680, 1988.
66. Fadok VA: Zinc responsive dermatosis in a Great Dane: a case report, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:409-414, 1982.
67. MithelA:alt intake,anmahealhandhrtnsn shu seing ogs IurgeRverW, ditr: f
the dog and cat, New York, 1989, Cambridge University Press.
68. Smith RC, Haschem T, Hamlin RL, and others: Water and electrolyte intake and output and quantity of feces in the healthy dog
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 59:743-748, 1964.
69. Spangler WL, Gribble DH, Weiser MG: Canine hypertension: a review, J Am Vet Med Asoc 170:995-998, 1977.
70. Cupta B, Linden R, Mary D, Weatherill D: The infuence of high and low sodium intake on blood volume in the dog, J Exp Physio!
66:117-128, 1981.
71. Kirk CA, Jewell DE, Lowry SR: Efects of sodium chloride on selected parameters in cats, Vet 7her 7:333-346, 2006.
4
History and Regulation of Pet Foods
 Pet owners generally have two options available when
Gaines broke into the market with a new type of dog
choosing the type of food to feed their companion
food called a “meal.?" The meal consisted of a number of
animals. They may either prepare a homemade diet
dried, ground ingredients that were mixed together and
or purchase a commercially prepared dog or cat food.
sold in 100-pound (lb) bags. Pet owners enjoyed the
Today the majority of pet owners in the United States
convenience of this new product because they were able
feed their companion animals commercially prepated
to buy fairly large quantities at one time and because the
foods.1,2 The popularity of commercial products is evi-
denced by the growth of the pet food industry over the
In the early 1900s, pet foods were marketed only
past 50 years. In 1958 total pet food sales in the United
through feed
stofes.
The National Biscuit Company
States were estimated to be $350 million. This amount
(Nabisco), which purchased Milk Bone in 1931, was
increased to $1.43 billion in 1972, $5.1 billion in 1986,
and almost $12 billion by 1996.3 In recent years, as pet
owners have become increasingly interested in the qual-
ity and safety of the foods that they feed their pets, pet
made from
byproducts of human foods, customers
supply growth has continued to refect the importance
and store owhers considered it unsanitary to sell such
that pets have in our lives. Between 2002 and 2007, the
products next to foods that were meant for human con-
U.S. market for pet foods and supplies grew by more
sumption. However, Nabisco persisted, and Milk Bones
than 34% and saw the introduction of a wide vatiety of
fnally made it into the supermarket. The convenience
new types of foods that are formulated for different life
stages, activity levels, and health conditions.4
fapidly overcame customer concerns. Improved distri-
bution and availability resulted in increased sales and
popularity of commercial pet foods. By the mid-1930s,
HISTORY
many brands of dog food were sold in grocery stores. At
Prior to the middle of the nineteenth century, foods for
this time, although some dry biscuits and meal products
 dogs and cats were not commercially prepared. Own-
were available, canned pet foods were stillthe most pop-
ers fed their pets table scraps or homemade formulas
ular type of pet food product sold in the United States.
made from human foods and leftovers. The frst com-
Itspopularity
continued to grow and by 1941.
mercial dog food to be marketed was in the form of
canned dog food comprised 90% of the pet food maf-
a biscuit. It was produced and sold in 1860 by James
ket. However, with the onset of World War I, govern-
 Spratt, an American living in London.5 Following suc-
 ment meat-rationing and the shortage of metal resulted
cess in England, Spratt began selling his product in the
in fewef fesoufces
 being available for the processing
United States. In the early 1900s, several other groups
of pet food. The pet food industry responded by pro-
observed Spratt's success and began to develop and sell
ducing and selling a larger proportion of dry foods.
pet foods. Milk-Bone, originally called “Maltoid" bis-
However, once the war was over, canned foods again
cuits, was created by the F.H. Bennett Biscuit Company
became more popular with pet owners. It was not until
in 1908 as a convenient way to provide nutrition to
the development of the extrusion process that dry pet
dogs of varying sizes. Canned dog food was first intro-
foods increased in popularity. The extrusion process
duced by the Chappel brothers of Rockford, Illinois in
and expanded pet foods (foods produced through the
1922. The Chappels named their product Ken-L-Ration
extrusion process) were frst developed by researchers
and followed it with the introduction of a dry prod-
at Purina laboratories in the 1950s. Extrusion involves
uct several years later. Around the same time, Samuel
first mixing all of the pet food ingredients together and
121
122 Canine and Feline Nutrition
then rapidlly cooking the mixture and forcing it through
a complete discussion). The public's increased interest
an extruder (specialized pressure-cooker). This process
 in nutrition and health, coupled with the large num-
causes a rapid expansion of the bite-sized food particles,
 ber of commercial products available, has led many pet
resulting in increased digestibility and palatability of
 owhers, hobbyists, and professionals to critically evalu-
the food. After extrusion and drying, a coating of fat or
ate the type and the safety of the foods they select for
 o   s ra aiie r
their animals. An increasing number of pet owners are
outside of the food pieces. In 1957, Purina Dog Chow,
now interested in learning more about the regulation of
an expanded product, was frst introduced to grocery
the foods they buy and the formulation and nutrient
stores. Within 1 year, this new product had become the
content of these foods.
best-selling dog food in the United States. Today the
majority of dry pet foods sold in the United States are
extruded products, and dry pet foods make up the larg-
Pet food's designed for specifc stages of life, physiological
est proportion of the U.S. market.24
states, and disease states are available today Some of
Because little was known about the nutrient require-
the most recent niche products inciude those produced
ments of dogs and cats when pet foods were frst manu-
from organic ingredients,varioustypesof raworgrain
factured, the same food was commonly marketed for
free diets,foods that target the heaith of specifc body
both species. Manufacturers merely labeled the cans
systems, and even foods that are patterned after popu-
or bags differently. However, as more knowledge was
lar huran diet pians. These trends represent a response
acquired about the different nutrient needs of dogs and
to the pet-owning public's desire to supply their compan-
cats, and as cats became increasingly popular as pets,
ion animals with the best nutrition possible during all
separate pet foods were formulated for each. Some of
stages of lijfe.
the frst cat foods were comprised almost entirely of fish
products and were sold in 1-lb cans. However, as pet
food manufacturers learned more about the preferences
GOVERNING AGENCIES
of cats (and of their owners), they created more palat-
able products and sold the new “gourmet”" products in
A number of agencies and organizations regulate the
smaller cans. Starting in the mid-1970s, in response to
production, marketing, safety, and sales of commercial
the growing interest in quality pet cafe, some companies
 pet foods in the United States. Each agency has unique
 n e  r s rd, n
 and sometimes overlapping responsibilities and vary-
and sold exclusively through pet supply stofes, feed
ing degrees of authority. Although some regulations are
stores, and veterinatians. These were the frst products
mandatory, others are optional suggestions. The follow-
ing discussion identifes the major agencies and theit
the same period, some manufacturers created breeder
foles in pet food regulation and provides an overview of
panqaind Suoue AjeAol pueiq seinosua oi sueiso1d
the current regulations that govern the production and
breeders. These breeders would then fecommend the
sale of pet foods in the United States (Table 14-1).
'siaanq uay pue Addnd 1aqi oi sionpoid
During the new millennium, companies have con-
Association of American Feed
tinued to develop foods that are designed for specific
stages of life, physiological states, and disease states.
Control Officials
Some of the most recent niche products include those
The Association of American Feed Control Officials
 produced from organic ingredients, various types of raw
(AAFCO) is the most instrumental agency in the
of grain-free diets, foods that target the health of spe-
regulation of commercial pet foods. AAFCO was frst
cifc body systems, and even foods that are patterned
formed in 1909 and is an association of state and federal
after popular human diet plans. These trends represent
feed control officials that acts in an advisory capacity
a response to the pet-owning public's desire to supply
to provide models for state legislation. AAFCO pro-
their companion animals with the best nutrition possible
duces its Official Publication (OP) each yeaf, and this
during all stages of life (see Chapter 17, pp. 167-173 for
publication is the basis for pet food regulations in the
History and Regulation of Pet Foods 123
TABLE14-1 GOVERNING AGENCIES OF COMMERCIAL PET FOODS
AGENCY
FUNCTION
Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)
Sets standards for substantiation claims and provides an advi-
sory committee for state legislation; produces the AAFCO Official
Publication annually; most important regulations are the MWoder
Pet Food Regulations and Moder Feed Bill, and the Pet Food
Nutritional Profiles
National Research Council (NRC)
Collects and evaluates research and makes nutrient recom-
Requirements of Dogs and Cats"
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Has authority over a pproval of new ingredients; enforces the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and oversees the Animal
with state regulators regarding safety and contamination issues;
regulates the inclusion of health claims on pet food labels
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
Regulates pet food labels and research facilities
Pet Food Institute (PFI)
Trade organization that represents pet food manufacturers; has
no direct regulatory powers
State Feed Control Offices
Enforces the Commercial Feed Lawwithin states
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Regulates the use of pesticides in raw material and feeds; regu-
lates processing plant discharges
Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
Regulates trade and advertising
United States and internationally. Most important for
The Pet Food Committee of AAFCO acts as the liai-
pet foods are AAFCO's Model Pet Food Regulations and
son between AAFCO and the pet food industry, and
ModelFeedBill,and thePetFoodNutritionalProfiles (see
has produced a manual entitled AAFCO Pet Food and
below). These regulations specify labeling procedures,
Specialty Pet Food Labeling Guide to help explain the
ingredient defnitions, and nomenclature for all ani-
Model Pet Food and Specialty Pet FoodRegulations and to
mal feeds and pet foods. AAFCO is an association and
facilitate compliance with regulations. AAFCO regula
tions help to ehsufe that nationally marketed pet foods
the guidelines of federal and state legislation including
are uniformly labeled and nutritionally adequate. Their
laws adlministered by the Food and Drug Administra-
services include providing interpretations of AAFCO's
tion (FDA) and the U.S. Department of Agriculture
 pet food regulations and suggestions to regulating agen-
(USDA). Although a common misconception is that
cies for uniform enforcement. A large proportion of
AAFCO is a trade association made up of industry rep-
AAFCO's fegulations specify the type of information
resentatives, members of AAFCO are required to be
either state, federal, or foreign government employees.
food labels (see
e Chapter 15 for a complete discussion
Members include representatives of each state's feed
of the pet food label). An important accomplishment
regulatory agencies, the FDA, and the USDA. All of
of AAFCO during the 1990s was the development of
AAFCO's policies must be voluntarily accepted by state
practical Nutrient Profles to be used as standards for the
feed control offcials for actual implementation; many
formulation of dog and cat foods. Committees consist-
state governments have mandated AAFCO regulations
ing of canine and feline nutritionists from universities,
government, and the pet food industry worked together
somewhat between states, AAFCO's policy statements
to establish two sets of standard nutrient profles: one
and fegulations sefve to promote uniformity in feed
for dogs and one for cats. The profles are based on
regulations throughout the United States.
ingredients commonly included in commercial foods,
124 Canine and Feline Nutrition
and nutrient levels are expressed for processed foods
nutrient bioavailability and is calculated from either
at the time of feeding. Minimum nutrient levels to be
the nutrient's minimum fequirement or adlequate
-osaies omi ioy papiaoid anre pooy iad ayi u! papniou!
intake value. The final recommendation is safe upper
fies: (1) growth and reproduction and (2) adult mainte-
limit, which represents the maximum concentration
 nance. Maximum levels are suggested for nutrients that
of a hutrient that has not been associated with adverse
have been shown to have the potential for toxicity or for
effects (when data are available). Nutrient requirements
when overuse is a concefn.
afe expressed in terms of both the diet (amount per kilo-
gram [kg] dry matter or per 1000 kilocalories [kcal]
and in terms of the animal's metabolic body weight.
National Research Council
Before the development and acceptance of the AAF-
The National Reseatch Council (NRC) is a private,
CO's Nutrient Profles, the NRC's reports on nutrient
nonproft organization that collects and evaluates
fequirements for dogs and cats were the fecognized
research that has been conducted by others. The NRC
 authorities for pet food forrmulation and substantiation
functions as the working arm of the National Academy
of nutritional adlequacy claims on the labels of com-
of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and
 mercial pet foods. In 1991 the agency requested that
Institutes of Medicine, and it conducts services for the
their fecommendations hot be used to substantiate
federal government, the scientifc community, and the
nutritional adequacy in dog and cat foods. AAFCO's
general public. The NRC includes a standing commit-
Nutrient Profles replaced the NRC recommendations as
tee on animal nutrition that identifes problems and
the standard to be used by pet food manufacturers, both
needs in animal nuttition, recommends appointments
for the formulation of pet foods and as label claims in
of scientists to subcommittees, and reviews feports.
the 1990s. The new NRC's Nutrient Requirements for
NRC subcommittees have been established for dog and
 Dogs and Cats is unlikely to replace the AAFCO pro-
cat nutrition. These groups develop reports that pro-
fles as a standard for pet food formulation and labeling.
vide recommendations for the nutrient requirements of
However, it can provide a detailed resoufce for futufe
dogs and cats throughout vatious stages of life. Signs of
revisions of the profles as well as valuable information
nutrient deficiency and excess in these species are also
for nutritionists, pet food companies, and pet owners.7
included in these reports. Traditionally, two volumes
were produced, the Nutrient Requirements of Dogs and
the Nutrient Requirements of Cats, with the last editions
Food and Drug Administration
published in 1985 and 1986, respectively.
As a federal agency, the U.S. FDA in the Department
In 2006, following almost 6 years of work, the cur-
of Health and Human Services has jurisdiction over all
rent subcommittee produced a revised edition, a com-
animal feeds, including pet foods, that are in interstate
bined volume entitled Nutrient Requirements of Dogs
 commerce. The FDA enforces the Federal Food, Drug.
and Cats. An important addition to the newest edition
and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) which requires that pet
is the use of several dlifferent requirement classifica-
foods, like human foods, be pure and wholesome, be safe
tions. A nutrient's minimum requirement represents the
to eat, contain no harmful substances, and be truthfully
minimal concentration of a bioavailable nuttient that
labeled. Most recently, the FDA produced a draft frame
is needed as supported by published data. Conversely,
work of its Animal Feed Safety System (AFSS), a program
adequate intake is presented as the amount of the nutri-
designed to strengthen regulations that ensure the safety
 ent that is presumed to suppor life when no minimum 
of animal feeds and pet foods. In August of 2007, the
fequirement has been established for the species or life
FDA signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
stage. Therefore one of these two requirement recom-
with AAFCO that increases the FDA's involvement in the
mendations (but not both) is provided for each species,
 approval and defnition process for new ingredients and
nutrient, and life stage. The third measufe, recomended
 provides for FDA authority over approved ingredients.
allowance, represents the amount of a nutrient present
The MOU specifically allows the FDA to take enforce-
in food that supports the relevant life stage. The rec-
ment actions against foods that are found to contain
ommended allowance includes a factor to account for
prohibited ingredients. Shortly afterwardl, in September
History and Regulation of Pet Foods 125
of 2007, the U.S Congress passed the Food and Drug
includes the inspection of the meat ingredients used in
Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA).
pet foods to ensure proper handling and guarantee that
This legislation addresses both human and pet food
such ingredients afe not included in the human food
safety issues and further strengthens the FDA's role (see
 supply. A second important role that the USDA plays in
Regulation of Pet Food Safety below).
Pet food manufactufers that ship their products
facilities. All kennels and catteries that afe operated
acfoss state lines (or that import products ffom out of
by pet food companies, private groups, or universities
the country) must follow FDA rules that specify proper
must fulfill USDA fequirements for physical stfucture,
identifcation of the product, a net quantity statement
housing and care of animals, and sanitation. Once these
on the label, proper listing of ingredients, the manufac-
turer's name and address, and acceptable manufacturing
latly inspected by USDA officials. Although many pet
procedures.8 FDA regulations also specifcally require
food companies maintain their own kennels, some con-
that canned pet foods are processed in conformance with
tract their feeding tfials out to private research kennels
low-acid canned food regulations to ensure that these
Of universities. It is important that the facilities in which
products afe free of viable microorganisms. Feed con-
these tests are conducted maintain proper care of theif
trol officials within each state are usually relied upon to
animals and conform to sound sanitation practices.
inspect facilities and enforce these regulations, although
the FDA is authorized to take direct action if necessary.
Stipulations of the new law mandates cooperation and
Pet Food Institute
communication between the FDA andl state regulators
The Pet Food Institute (PFI) is a trade organization that
when dealing with pet food safety and contamination
represents manufacturers of commercially prepared dog
issues and also requires the FDA to rapidly investigate
and cat foods. The PFI works with the Pet Food Com-
and communicate information to the public.
mittee of the AAFCO to evaluate current regulations
Last, the FDA regulates the inclusion of health claims
 and make recommendations for changes. However, as a
on pet food labels. One type of health claim, a drug claim,
 group, the PFI does not have any direct regulatory pow-
is defined as the assertion or implication that the con-
ers over the production of pet foods, pet food testing, of
sumption of a food may help in the treatment, preven-
statements included on labels.
tion, or reduction of a particular disease or diseases. The
Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM), a department of
PET FOOD REGULATIONS
the FDA, has primary regulatory authority over health
claims on pet food labels. If a health claim is considered a
As stated previously, the FDA stipulates basic labeling
drug claim, the CVM will not allow its use on the label.
fequirements for animal feeds (including pet foods)
All new drugs are subjected to an FDA approval process
that include a statement of identity (dog food of cat
before being marketed. New foods, on the other hand,
food), inclusion of an accurate and complete ingredient
ate not required to undergo similar premarket testing and
list, net weight declaration, and the name and address
FDA authorization. Therefore the inclusion of any health
of the manufacturer or distributor. AAFCO regula-
claims on a pet food that indicates that the consumption
tions address the nutrient content of pet foods, ingredi-
of the product will treat or prevent a specific disease con-
ent nomenclature, and most types of label claims. The
stitutes a drug claim, and such a product would be subject
to the same series of tests required of all new drugs.
mented is a template for state legislation; it specifies
labeling procedures and ingredient nomenclature. Pet
food regulations still vary somewhat from state to state,
United States Department
but adherence to AAFCO's regulations minimizes these
ofAgriculture
differences. Each year AAFCO's OP includes a section
The USDA is responsible for ensuring that pet foods
containing the current regulations for pet foods. These
afe clearly labeled to prevent human consumers from
 regulations govern the defnitions and terms, label for-
mistaking these products for human foods. This role
mats, brand and product names, nutrient guarantee
126 Canine and Feline Nutrition
claims, accepted ingredients and food additives, state-
Most commonly, limited claims signify feeding for adult
ments of calorie content, and descriptive terms that afe
 maintenance only. In these cases, the food must either be
to be used with or included in commercial pet foods.
shown to meet the AAFCO's Nutrient Profles for adult
In addition, AAFCO-sanctioned feeding protocols for
 maintenance or have passed AAFCO's feeding tfrials for
 proving nutritional aclequacy and metabolizable energy
maintenance. Foods that contain the statement “intended
(ME) are included.
for intermittent or supplemental use"ate not expected to
meet requirements for either “complete and balanced”" or
for a limited claim. AAFCO also requires that all prod-
Definitions, Terms, and Label
 ea pe aao, a i p si
Format
include specific feeding directions on the product label
The definitions and terms section of the AAFCO's pet
If a secondary life stage is mentioned outside of the nutri-
food regulations identify the Principal Display Panel
statement on the label, instructions for
(PDP) as the part of a container's label that is intended
feeding pets in that life stage must also be included.
  '    a n   
followed by a section that defines the format to be used
in the PDP and sets rules for ingredient and guaranteed
Staterments and claims made on pet food labels, and
analysis statements to be included on labels. Statements
even the name of the food itself are reguiated by the
that are allowed on labels are described and strictly reg-
Association ofAmerican Feed Control Ofciais(AAFCO).
ulated; these ate called statements of nutritional adequacy
or purpose of the product. For example, the commonly
plete and balanced nutrition for all stages of life” must
used “complete and balanced nutrition for all stages of
besubstantiatedeitherthroughfeeding trials orby for
life" claim must be substantiated through one of sev-
muiating the food to meet the AAFCO's Nutrient Profiles
eral possible methods. The frst method (option cne)
for dog and cat food's.
involves demonstrating through a series of feeding tri-
E u yeaq sioddns Aonojsnes poog iad au ieun s
Brand and Product Names
group of dogs of cats throughout gestation, lactation,
and growth. The tests that the manufacturer uses must
Brand name refers to the name by which a pet food
follow a set of feeding trial protocols that have been
 manufacturer's products are identified and distinguished
established and sanctioned by AAFCO. The second
from the pet foods of other companies. AAFCO regu-
method (option two) fequires that the food be formu-
lates both brand and product names. For example, if a
lated to contain ingredients in quantities that ate suff-
pet food product name includes a favor designation,
cient to provide the estimated nutrient requirements for
the Havor must be shown to be detectable by a recog-
all stages of life for the dog or cat. This can be achieved
nized testing method, and the soufce of the favor must
either through calculation using standard ingredient
be designated in the ingredient list. Similarly, the use
tables or through laboratory analysis of nutrient levels.
 uo 1 1 1sn %o1 , 1o l, n a jo
If the second option is used, the AAFCO's Nutrient
designated ingredient, an amount of water hecessary fof
Profles for dog and cat foods are used as the standard
 processing, and trace amounts of preservatives and con-
against which to measure nutrient content. A third, less
diments are present in the product. The inclusion of one
frequently used method is called the “family method of
of more ingredient names in a descriptive pfoduct name
substantiation." A product that is shown to be nutri-
is allowed if the ingredients constitute a minimum of
tionally similar to a tested product, but has not been
25% of the pet food, singularly or in combination. If
tested using feeding tfials itself, may bear the same
in combination, none of the named ingredients can be
nutritional adequacy statement as the tested product
less than 3% of the formula. For example, the use of
(see Chapter 15, pp. 134-135 for a complete discussion
the name “lamb and fice dinner” requires that 25% of
of nutritional adequacy statements).
 greater of the formula is lamb meat and rice, with rice
Limited label claims must be substantiated for the
 making up the lesser of the two ingredients while still
particular stage of life for which they are formulatedl.
 providing at least 3% of the formula. When the phrase
History and Regulation of Pet Foods 127
"with" is used to designate the inclusion of a specific
the exception of dog and cat foods that ate labeled with
ingredient, the identifed ingredient must comprise at
a claim of “less calories"” or “lite." In these cases, a caloric
least 3% of the product's dry weight. The “3% rule" does
content statement is mandatory. In 2005, the American
not apply, however, to claims for specific nutrients such
College of Veterinary Nutrition submitted a proposal
as vitamins, minerals, and fatty acids or to ingredients that
 tequesting that AAFCO mandate caloric content state-
ate classified as condiments. Finally, any product claims
 ments on most foods, with the intent of providing addi-
of “new and improved" afe only allowed to be stated on
tional relevant information on pet food labels.1° In 2008.
the PDP and can be used for a maximum period of 6
AAFCO tentatively accepted this proposal, but had not
 months after the introduction of the changes.
yet determined specific regulations for inclusion on the
label. As currently directed, a caloric content statement
Nutrient Guarantees and Types
must be presenited sepafately from the guaranteed analy.
sis table, and energy must be expressed as ME in units
of Ingredients
of kcal per kg. The caloric content may also be expressed
AAFCO identifies acceptable terms for designating the
as kcal per lb, cup, or other commonly used household
poog iad uo siunu paqosaid iog sisieue paaueiens
 measuring unit. The calorie claim must be substantiated
labels. Comparisons that are made between nutrient
either by calculation using modifed Atwater factors or
levels in the pet food and the AAFCO's Nutrient Profiles
through feeding trials specified by the AAFCO. Similar
must be listed in the same units as those used in the pub-
to nutritional adequacy substantiation, the method that
lished profle. When such comparisons are made, it is
is used must be stated on the label.
also required that the product must meet the Nutrient
Profles to which the compatison is madle. Foods that afe
forrmulated as vitamin or mineral supplements are regu-
The caloric content of a pet food must be expressed as
lated separately and must state nutrient levels in the units
metabolizable energy (ME) in units ofkilocalories (kcal)
designated by AAFCO. Both the FDA and AAFCO
per kilogram (kg). Energy density may aiso be expressed
require that all ingredients must be listed in the ingre-
as kcal per pound (ib), cup, or other commonly used
dient statement and shown in letters of the same font
household measuring unit.
and size. The AAFCO also fequires that no pet food,
with the exception of those labeled as sauces, gravies,
juices, of milk replacers, contain a moisture level greater
REGULATION OF PET FOOD
than 78%. (For a complete discussion of the guaranteed
SAFETY
analysis panel and ingredients included in pet foods, see
Chapter 15, pp. 131-134 and Chapter 16, pp. 147-160.)
 State feed agencies, the FDA, and the USDA provide
guidelines, regulations, and oversight to ensure that pet
foods are safe and wholesome. The FFDCA requires
Drug and Food Additives
that pet foods are neither aduiterated nor misbranded.
Artificial color may be added to pet foods only if it has
Adulteration encompasses the presence of a chemical,
ae saie yns siad on ssey aq on uon uag
physical, or microbiological contaminant in the prod-
 approved and listed by the FDA. Health claims, includ-
uct, or the use of an ingredient that is not sanctioned
 ing the inclusion of drugs or the pharmacological use of
for use in pet foods. Pet food ingredients are included in
nutrients, are regulated by the AAFCO through FDA
the AAFCO Feed Ingredient Definition list that is pub-
state offcials or through the FDA directly.
lished annually or are accepted as food additives. Per
the MOA between AAFCO and the FDA, this list is
Statement of Caloric Content
Uaaq jou sey neq io paoidde iou st teui aappe 1o jua
Beginning in 1994, AAFCO accepted the inclusion
 accepted as safe via FDA regulatory discretion is con-
of caloric content statement on pet food labels. Cur-
 sidered to be prohibited, and its inclusion in a pet food
rently, this statement is optional for all products with
 constitutes adulteration. The term “misbranding" refers
128 Canine and Feline Nutrition
to the use of false or misleading claims or the failure to
not detected immediately because melamine had not
label a product in accordance with FDA and AAFCO
been identified as a contamination risk and so was not
regulations. In both types of inffactions, manufactur-
foutinely tested for. It was only when feseatchers discov-
ers of adulterated or misbranded foods face seizure
ered co-contamination with cyanuric acid in affected
of their product, fines and injunctions, and possibly
 pet foods that the cause of ilness was ascertained.12,13
criminal prosecution. The degree of tolerance for the
When present alone, neither melamine nor cyanuric
presence of pesticides in foods is established by the U.S.
acid is highly toxic. However, when present together
Environmental Protection Agency and these regulations
and consumed orally, the two compounds form an
are jointly enforced by the FDA and the USDA. The
insoluble complex in the kidneys, leading to crystalliza-
FDA maintains a monitoring program that tests pet
tion in the renal distal tubules, tubular necrosis, and
foods and pet food ingredients for the presence of pes-
acute kidney failure.14,15
ticides, mycotoxins, and heavy metals through its Feed
The 2007 recall led the governmental regulating
Contaminants Program. In addition, most pet food
 agencies and the pet food industry to strengthen safety
 companies have quality control programs that test both
evaluation pfactices and to feexamine the fisk profiles
ingredients and finished products for nutrient level and
of all ingredients included in pet foods. The FDAAA,
for the presence of contaminants.
 among other provisions, established an early warning
Several pet food recalls in recent years have led pet
system to alert the public about unsafe human and
owners and professionals to question the effectiveness of
pet foods, and required state and federal authorities
quality and safety assurance programs that are currently
to work more closely together to improve food safety
in place. The most extensive fecall to date occufred in
pfograms.l
6 The new law specifically requires that com-
2007; it affected more than 150 brands of pet foods and
    s
numerous pet food companies.!l In this case, economic
hours of discovery and provide records to the FDA to
adulteration of ingredients occurred at the supplier level.
facilitate tracing the contamination to its origin. The
Melamine, a nitrogen-containing compound, had been
legislation also includes provisions for increasing the
added to wheat gluten and rice protein concentrate to
timeliness of food recalls, alerts to the public, and noti-
artificially increase the analyzed protein content of these
fcations throughout the ingredient supply chain.17
ingredients. Melamine is used in the manufacture of plas-
Last, although not related directly to pet food safety, the
tics and fertilizer and is not approved as a food ingredient
FDAAA requires the FDA to work with the AAFCO
in either human or animal foods in the United States. The
to create new FDA regulations pertaining to the nutri-
laboratory measurement of nirogen provides an estimate
tional information reported on the pet food label. Col-
of protein concentration and is used by companies to
lectively, the strengthened regulations are intended to
confirm reported protein levels in ingredients. Therefore
iid on Aiqe sinsnpu pue siae au aaoidu
adding melamine would erroneously increase the appar-
humans and companion animals from both foodborne
ent protein level of an ingredient. The adlulteration was
 illnesses and from foods adulterated with contaminants.
References
 1. Zicker SC: Evaluating pet foods: how confident are you when you recommend a commercial pet food? Top Companion Anim Med
23:121-126, 2008.
2. Lafamme DP, Abood SK, Fascetti AJ, and others: Pet feeding practices of dog and cat owners in the United States and Australia,
J Am Vet Med Asoc 232:687-694, 2008.
4. Phillips T: US pet food sales go boom, Pet Food Ind, November 2007.
5. Lazar V: Dog food history, Pet Food Ind Sept/Oct:40-44, 1990.
History and Regulation of Pet Foods129
6. Phillips T: Learn from the past, Pet Food Ind, October 2007.
7. Dzanis DA: Petfood insights: the new NRC is here, Pet Food Ind, August 2006.
8. Benz S: FDA's regulation of pet food, FDA Vet, XVl( Jan/Feb) 2000.
9. Dzanis DA: Recall update: regulatory changes, Pet Food Ind, February 2008.
10. Dzanis DA: Understanding regulations affecting pet foods, Top Companion Anim Med 23:117-120, 2008.
11. Rovner SL: Anatomy of a pet food catastrophe, Chem Engineer News 86:41-43, 2008.
12. Donovan L: Chemical combination in pet food proves lethal, Vet Tech 29:36-37, 2008.
13. Rosenthal M: Pet food recall: company plays integral role in cracking the case, Vet Forum 25:24-27, 2008.
14. Cianciolo RE, Bischoff K, Ebel JG, and others: Clinicopathologic, histologic and toxicologic findings in 70 cats inadvertently
15. Puschner B, Poppenga RH, Lowenstine LJ, and others: Assessment of melamine and cyanuric acid toxicity in cats, J Vet Diagn Invest
19:616-624, 2007.
16. Nolen RS: Congress strengthens pet food safety regulations, J As Vet Med Asoc 231:1320-1322, 2007.
17. Dzanis DA: Anatomy of a recall, Top Companion Anim Med 23:133-136, 2008.
15
Pet Food Labels
The pet food label is an important component of com-
AAFCO's Nutrient Profles (Box 15-1). An expiration
mercial pet foods because many consumers rely primar-
date indicating the time span from the date of produc-
ily on the label for information about the product's
tion to the date of expiration of the product is optional,
nutritional adequacy and palatability. Current regula-
as is a “best if used by” date. The “best if used by” date
tions require that all labels of pet foods manufactured
is the date at which the product is no longer considered
and sold in the United States contain the following
 fresh and should no longer be sold.
:pooy 1e>, 1o <pooy Sop, spiom taueu ionpoid :suan!
net weight; name and address of the manufacturer;
WHAT CONSUMERS CAN
guaranteed analysis for crude protein, crude fat, crude
fber, and moisture; list of ingredients in descending
LEARN FROM THE PET FOOD
order of predominance by weight; and a statement of
LABEL
nutritional adequacy or purpose of the product. Pet
food manufacturers must also include a statement that
Guaranteed Analysis Panel
indicates the method that was used to substantiate the
hutritional adequacy claim, either through the Associa-
s! aqel pooy iad aq uo jaued sisaeue paanueens aul
tion of Ametican Feed Conttol Officials's (AAFCO's)
often one of the frst places that consumers look for
feeding trials or by formulating the food to meet the
information about the product. This panel provides
BOX 15-1 TYPICAL COMMERCIAL PET FOOD LABEL
WUF-WUF DOG FOOD
Net weight 8 pounds (Ib)
FEEDING INSTRUCTIONS
CUPS PER DAY
Toy breeds (5-10 Ib)
0.5-1 cup
Small breeds (10-30 Ib)
1-2 cups
Medium breeds (30-50 Ib)
2-4 cups
Large breeds (50-80 Ib)
4-5 cups
Giant breeds (80-120 Ib)
5-7 cups
GUARANTEED ANALYSIS
Crude protein
Not less than 26%
 Crude fat 
Not less than 14%
 Crude fiber
Not more than 4%
Moisture
Not more than 10%
Manufactured by Wuf-Wuf Inc., Bowserville, Ohio
Wuf-Wwuf is formulated to meet the nutritional levels esta blished by the Association of American Feed Control Officials'
Dog Food Nutrient Profifes for all life stages.
Ingredients: Chicken, chicken byproduct meal, ground corn, rice flour, fish meal, chicken fat (preserved with mixed
bcopherols and citric acid), ground grain sorghum, dried beet pulp, chicken digest, dried egg product, brewer's dried yeast,
flax, dicalcium phosphate, calcium carbonate, DL-methionine, potassium chloride, mineral supplement, vitamin su pplement.
131
132 Canine and Feline Nutrition
information regarding the amount of protein and fat
analysis panel to provide a fough estimate of protein,
contained in the pet food. Manufacturers are required
fat, and fiber content in a particular pet food. However,
to include minimum percentages for crude protein and
these numbers should only be considlered as a starting
crude fat and maximum percentages for moisture and
point when comparing diferent products or brands,
-en jeuodo 'spooy nes pue sop yoq ioy iaqy apni
 and they should not be assumed to represent the actual
antees that may be listed include, but are not limited to,
levels of these nutrients in the food.
magnesium (minimum percentage), taurine (minimum
When examining the guaranteed analysis panel of a
percentage), linoleic acid (minimum percentage), and
pet food, consumers must always take into account the
ash (maximum percentage). It is important to recognize
moisture (water) content of the product. The amount
that these numbers represent only minimums and max-
of water in a food significantly affects the values listed
imums and do not refect the exact amounts of these
in the guaranteed analysis table, because most pet foods
nutrients in the product. For example, a pet food that
display nutrient levels on an “as-fed" (AF) basis, rather
has a label claim of “minimum crude fat: 11%" cannot
than a dry-matter basis (DMB). As-fed means that the
have less than 11% fat, but may have more. Although
percentages of nutrients were calculated directly, with-
one product with this claim may contain 13%
fat
 out accounting for the proportion of water in the prod-
another carrying the same claim may have 11.5% fat.
uct. Pet foods can vary greatly in the amount of water
Assuming all other nutrients are comparable, the 1.5%
they contain. For example, dry cat and dog foods usually
difference in fat content can make a significant differ-
contain between 6% and 10% water, but canned foods
ence in a product's caloric density and palatability.
contain up to 78% water.2 In order to make valid com-
The terms crude protein, crude fat, and crude fber all
parisons of nutrients in foods with different amounts
fefer to specific analytical procedures used to estimate
of moisture, it is necessary to frst convert nutrients
these nutrients in foodstuffs. On the average, protein
to a DMB. Similarly, the caloric content of a pet food
contains 16% nitrogen. Crude protein is the estimate of
 also affects the interpretation of the guaranteed analysis
total protein in a foodstuff that is obtained by multiply-
panel. Caloric density must always be considered when
ing its analyzed level of nitrogen by a constant. Slight
comparing levels of protein, fat, carbohydrate, and
inaccuracies in this estimate afe caused by vatiations in
other nutrients in different pet foods (see pp. 145-147).
nitrogen content between proteins and by the presence
of nonprotein nitrogen compounds in the foodstuf.
Crude fat is an estimate of the lipid content of a food
When looking at the pet food label, many consurmers
that is obtained through extraction of the food with
read the guaranteed analysis panel. This inciudes mini
ether. In addition to lipids, this procedure also isolates
mum percentages ofcrude protein and crude fat and
certain organic acids, oils, pigments, alcohols, and fat-
the maximum percentages of moisture and crude fber
soluble vitamins. On the other hand, some complex lip-
Consumers should be aware that these percentages do
ids, such as phosphelipids, may not be isolated with this
not represent actual amounts of protein and fat and
method. Crude fber represents the organic residue that
remains after plant material has been treated with dilute
uctsor brands maybe misieading
acid and alkali solvents and after the mineral compo-
nent has been extracted. Although crude fber is used
to report the fber content of many commercial prod-
Ingredient List
ucts, it usually underestimates the level of true dietary
The ingredient list is another important item that con-
fber in a product. It has been determined that the crude
sumers examine when choosing a pet food. The terms
fber method recovers only 50% to 80% of the cellulose,
used for ingredients in pet foods are limited to those
10% to 50% of the lignin, and less than 20% of the
assigned by AAFCO through AAFCO's Ingredients
hemicellulose in a given sample. Consequently, crude
Definition process. This process includes oversight
fiber may be a measurement of most of the cellulose in
by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), when
a sample, but it underestimates all of the other dietary
 applicable. The hew FDA Amendments Act (FDAAA),
fber components. Consumers can use the guaranteed
 passed in late 2007, requires increased involvement of
Pet Food Labels 133
the FDA in ingredient definition and standards (see
is using fixed or vatiable formulation. Although the
Chapter 14, pp. 124-125). Cumulatively, these regu-
 pet owner may pay slightly more for a fixed formula-
tion diet, the consistency between batches of food is a
 dients that are defined and accepted by these agencies.
distinct advantage to the dog or cat that is consuming
New ingredients can only be introduced following sub-
the food.
mission of data to AAFCO and the FDA and comple-
Although the ingredient list can provide general
tion of the approval process. In addition to formally
information about the type of ingredients included in
 approved ingredient defnitions, terms for ingredients
a food, it does not provide information about the qual-
that afe considered to be “common and usual" are also
ity of its components. Ingredients used in pet foods
allowedl. Examples of these include ingredient designa-
vary significantly in digestibility, amino acid content
tions that afe also used in human foods, such as beef,
and availability, mineral availability, and the amount 
wheat, oats, and water.
of indigestible material they contain. Unfortunately,
 The pet food ingredient list must include all ingre-
there is usually no way of determining the quality of
dients in the food, and the list is arranged in decreas-
the ingredients 
 by using the ingredient list. In fact,
ing ordler by predominance by weight. The list may be
some premium foods with high-quality, highly available
quite simple, containing just one or two ingredients,
ingredients may have an ingredient list that is almost
such as in certain types of treats (i.e., freeze-dried livef
identical to that of a generic food that contains poor-
of salmon). More commonly, pet foods contain mul-
tiple ingredients to provide a diet that is complete and
availability. Therefore the ingredient list alone should
balanced. In no case can any single ingredient be given
 hever be used to compare two pet foods because the dif-
undue emphasis in the list, nor can designations of the
ferences in the qualities of ingredlients are impossible to
quality of ingredients be included. The ingredient list
know from this information.
indicates where the principal components of a pet food
Like the guaranteed analysis, the list of ingredients
comefrom-
animal products or plant products. In gen-
can be deceptive, in some cases, because manufactur-
eral, if an ingredient from an animal source is listed first
ers afe not fequired to list the ingredients on a DMB
of second in a canned pet food or within the first three
This is usually not a problem in dry pet foods because
ingredients of a dry pet food, the food can be assumed to
most of the ingredlients included in these diets have
contain animal products as its principal protein source.
a felatively low moistufe content. However, canned
products may contain ingredients with vastly different
amounts of moistufe. As a result, an ingredient that
The list ofingredients may include just one or two ingre-
actually contributes a low proportion of nutrients to
dients, or50 ormore, depending on the product. Because
the food may be listed frst if it has a high water con-
ingredients are included to provide a needed nutrient
tent, while an ingredient that contributes a large pro-
anda dietarybenefit,thebeliefthatcertainingredients
portion of the nutrients to the food may be lower on
are included just to provide fller" is usually faise.
the ingredient list if it has a low moisture content.
A common example involves the use of texturized veg-
etable protein (TVP) in canned pet foods. TVP is com-
Most popular and generic brands of pet food are
 posed of extruded soy four that is dyed and shaped to
forrmulated as “variable-formula diets." This means that
 fesemble meat products. The actual meat ingredients in
the ingredients used in the food will vary from batch to
a product that contains TVP are usually listed high on
batch, depending on the availability and market prices 
the ingredient list because they have a very high mois
of ingredients. In contrast, many premium foods are
ture content. Conversely, TVP has very low moisture
produced using fixed formulas. In this case, the com-
and so its total weight is much lowef, and it is found
pany will not change the formulation in response to
much later in the ingredient list. This can be mislead
normal Auctuations in market prices. Checking the
ing because most of the protein in such a food comes
ingredient list of several bags of a particular pet food
from the TVP and not from the animal-source ingredi-
ents that are listed first.
134 Canine and Feline Nutrition
A second way that the ingredient list can be con-
 complete and balanced nutrition for a particular stage
fusing to consumers is the manner in which certain
of life, such as adult maintenance. A third claim is
 ingredients are presented. Manufacturers may separate
found on products that are intended for intermittent
dlifferent forms of similar ingredients so that they can
 or supplemental feeding only. Last, products that are
be listed separately on the label and appear further
intended for therapeutic feeding, under the supervision
down the list. For example, an ingredient list may
of a veterinarian, bear the statement “use only as directed
include kibbled wheat, ground wheat, wheat Hour,
by your veterinatian” (Box 15-2).
faked wheat, wheat middlings, and wheat bran. These
When the “complete and balanced nutrition" claim
ingredients are called “split ingredients" and may in
is used for any or all life stages, manufacturers must
some cases represent two or more forms of the same
indicate the method that was employed to substantiate
product. Examples of split ingredients are ground
this claim. AAFCO regulations require that the manu-
wheat and wheat four, which differ only in the fine-
facturer either performs AAFCO-sanctioned feeding
ness of the grind used during processing. Individually,
trials on the food (option one) or formulates the diet
these ingredients make up only a small fraction of the
to meet AAFCO's Nutrient Profles for dog and cat
diet and therefore can be listed low on the ingredi-
foods (option two).3 The terminology for labels of pet
ent list. As a whole, wheat actually constitutes a large
foods that have passed the AAFCO feeding tests is as
proportion of this diet. Consumers should be aware
follows:
that listing different forms of the same ingredient sug
“Animalfeeding tests usingAAFCO procedures substanti
product's ingredient content on the part of the manu
ate that(brand) provides compfete and balanced nutrition
facturer.
for (life stages)."
Option 2 is commonly referred to as the “calculation
The ingredient list can tellconsumers the principal com-
method" because it allows manufacturers to substanti-
ponents of the pet food and whether the components
ne aq   pe ao, a ae
are from plant or animal sources. if an animat-source
the nutrient content of the formulation of the diet using
ingredient islisted frst orsecond in a canned petfood or
standard tables of ingredients or by analyzing the prod-
within the frst three ingredients ofa dry food, the food
uct through laboratory analyses. When option 2 is used,
can usually be assured to contain animal products as
the label terminology will read as follows:
its principal protein source However,theingredient list
does not provide information about the quality of the
"(Brand) isformutated to meet the nutritionat levets estab-
ingredients.
fished by the AAFCO Dog (or Cat) Food Nutrient Proffes
for (life stages)."
Nutritional Adequacy
Though less frequently used, a company may also
Another item on the pet food label that can provide
-qns jo pouiau Aurey, au pales yoeoidde ue asn
information to consumers is the claim of nutritional
stantiation." A family consists of pet food products
adequacy. With the exception of treats and snacks, the
that contain similar ingredients, use the same process-
label of all pet foods that are in interstate commerce
ing method, are within the same moisture control and
must contain a statement and validation of nutritional
 energy category, and are intended to have the same label
adequacy. Current AAFCO regulations allow four pri-
 claim. One product within a family will be required to
 mary types of nutitional adlequacy statements. The frst
pass complete AAFCO feding trial protocols (option
and most common claim is “complete and balanced
s J npoid peal, au pales si nnpoid siul '(l
for all life stages." This statement signifies that the food
product passes, it is assumed that the other prod-
has been formulated to provide complete and balanced
ucts within the family will also pass because they are
nutrition for gestation, lactation, growth, and main-
 nutritionally similar to the lead product and contain
tenance. A limited claim states that the food provides
similar ingredients. Once a particular nutritional claim
Pet Food Labels 135
BOX 15-2 LABEL CLAIMS OF NUTRITIONAL ADEQUACY AND HOW TO INTERPRET THEM
Claim 1: "Wuf-Wuf is formulated to meet the nutrient levels esta blished by the AAFCO's Nutriert Profifesfor dog foods
for all life stages."
Interpretation: This dog food has been formulated to meet the AAFCO's Nutriert Profies for both growth and adult
maintenance using either calculation or laboratory analysis of nutrient levels
Claim 2: "Animal feeding tests using AAFCO procedures substantiate that Wuf-Wuf provides complete and balanced
nutrition for all life stages."
Interpretation: This dog food has been su bjected to AAFCO feeding studies, including those for gestation, lactation, and
 growth. This su bstantiation method shows that the food is com plete for allife stages.
Claim 3: "Animal feeding tests using AAFCO procedures su bstantiate that Wuf-Wuf provides com plete and balanced
nutrition for adult maintenance.
 Interpretation: This food has undergone AAFCO feeding protocol studies for maintenance only and has not been tested
for gestation, lactation, or growth.
Claim 4: "Wuf-Wuf Veterinary Diet (Gastrointestinal Formula) is intended for intermittent or su pplemental feeding only
Use as directed by your veterinarian.'
Interpretation: This food is intended for special nutritional or dietary needs that require the involvement of a veterinarian
for diagnosis, management, and follow-up.
AAFCO, Association of American Feed Control Officials.
is established for the lead product, pet foods within the
more or less than the fecommended feeding amount on
same family are entitled to carry the same nutritional
the label.
adequacy claim. When this type of substantiation
method is used, the label statement will read as follows:
Caloric Content Statement
“(Brand)provides complete and balanced nutritionfo
In 1993 committee fecommendations were made to
(lifestages)andiscomparabteinnutritionatadequacy
AAFCO for the measurement of meabolizable energy
t如 a product which has been substantiated using AAFCO
(ME) and the inclusion of ME values on pet focd labels
feeding tests."
This new provision was accepted in 1994, making the inclu-
sion of a caloric density statement on the label optional for
pet food manufacturers. The inclusion of a caloric content
Feeding Guidelines
statement, along with a breakdown of the percentage of
AAFCO regulations require that dog and cat foods cat-
calories that are contributed by fat, carbohydrate, and pro-
rying the label claim of “complete and balanced" for
tein, provides infonmation about the suitability of the food
any or all stages of life must include feeding directions
for different stages of a pet's life. Forexample, hard-working
on the product label. At a minimum, these instructions
dogs may benefit from a dliet with an increased proportion
oam) rd nnid jo (arun uia) paa, aeis isn
 of ME calories supplied by fat and protein, while sedentary
unit) of dog or cat."4 The directions on a particular
dogs beneft from foods containing moderately reduced
dog or cat food have been developed specifically for
fat. In addition, it is much more accurate to compare foods
that particular formulation's energy and nutrient con-
 accordling to the percentage of calories that are contributed
tent and also consider the pet's life stage and activity
by carbohydrate, protein, and fat than to compare them by
level. However, because the guidelines refect an average
the percentage of these nutrients by weight (see Chapter
estimate, individual dogs and cats may fequire slightly
16, pp. 144-147 for a complete discussion).
136 Canine and Feline Nutrition
The caloric content statement must be presented
may be labeled “natural with added vitamins and min-
separately from the guaranteed analysis table, and
erals."4 Acceptable “tartar control" claims include state-
energy must be expressed as ME in units of kilocalories
 ments that a food or treat cleans teeth, freshens breath,
(kcal) per kilogram (kg). The caloric content may also
of whitens teeth by virtue of its mechanical (abrasive)
be expressed as kcal per pound (Ilb), cup, or other com-
action during chewing. Likewise, label claims that
 monly used household measuring unit. Similar to the
imply pharmacological effects that prevent or control
nutritional adlequacy statement, the calorie claim must
qeisa yonoiu paaoidde ssaun panjuad iou ane reiei
be substantiated either by calculation using modifed
d no snp ue mau rog siod vae Pu
Atwater factors or through a testing method specifed by
maceuticals (see Chapter 34 for a complete discussion).
AAFCO. In 2005, the American College of Veterinary
Statements that a food or treat can treat, prevent, 0f
Nutrition submitted a proposal requesting that AAFCO
reduce fisk of a specific disease afe all considered to be
mandate caloric content statements on most foods. In
drug claims by the FDA's Center for Veterinary Medi-
 2008, AAFCO tentatively accepted this proposal, but
g 'so ad uo d ou ae ue () a
has not yet determined specific regulations for the inclu-
example, a claim of “prevents itchy skin" or "hypoal-
sion of this information on the label (Box 15-3).
lergenic" is not allowed. Conversely, the claims of
"promotes healthy skin" and “promotes glossy coat" are
acceptable because they do not address a specific disease
ADDITIONAL LABEL CLAIMS
state.2 When a specific nutrient or formulation claim is
Together, AAFCO and FDA evaluate and regulate the
made, it is acceptable if the claim relates directly to the
addition of new descriptive terms on the pet food label.
function that the nutrient has in the body but is not
The challenge of this responsibility lies in providing
allowed if the claim relates to a function that is separate
consumers with as much factual information as possible
from nutritive value. For example, a claim of “contains
and allowing only claims that can be reliably substanti-
taurine for heart health" in a cat food is acceptable, while
ated. For example, two terms that were evaluated and
a claim of “contains vitamin C to prevent infection" is
aie siaqel pooy iad uo asn ioy sieak juaoai ui paidaee
 not permitted.6 A label claim controversy involved the
“natural" and “tartar control." AAFCO requires that
formulation of cat foods intended to prevent a cat's
the claim of “natural" can be used only when all of
risk of developing feline lower urinary tract disease
the food's ingredients and components of ingredients
(FLUTD). Any claim that a food, a food ingredient,
be derived solely from plant, animal, or mined sources
of nutrient prevents or reduces the risk of FLUTD is
(i.e., ate not synthetic analogs), and do not contain
disallowed because this constitutes a drug claim. How-
synthetic additives or processing aids. If chemically syn-
 evet, the CVM has exercised regulatory discretion in the
thesized vitamins cf minerals afe included, the product
 spirit of providing helpful information to pet owners by
ThE PET FOOD LABEL DOES PROVIDE INFORMATION
THE PET FOOD LABEL DOES NOT PROVIDE INFORMATION
ABOUT:
ABOUT:
Net weight of product
Exact levels of nutrients
Name and location of manufacturer or distributor
Digestibility and nutrient availa bility
Minimum crude protein and crude fat content
Quality of the ingredients
Maximum moisture and crude fiber content
List of ingredients
 Nutritional adequacy statement
 Method of su bstantiation of adequacy claim
Feeding instructions
Caloric density (optional)
Pet Food Labels 137
allowing claims of “reduces urine pH to help maintain
PETFOODADVERTISINC
 nisus pasnan, pue ea ien Aeun
for urinary tract health." However, in these cases, the
Pet food manufacturers are in a unique situation when
CVM set limits for acidification and magnesium con-
they consider the marketing techniques used to sell
tent, and companies afe fequired to pfovide safety and
their products. Although it is the dog or the cat that
efficacy data to the FDA for review. Additional regu-
is consuming the food and the animal's health that is
lations for these products include providing specifc
directly affected by the product's quality, it is the pet
feeding instructions and having a nutritional adequacy
 owher who is making the decision to buy the product.
statement for adlult maintenance only (see Chapter 30,
Therefore manufacturers must not only consider what
 pp. 359-372 for a complete discussion of FLUTD).
aisuos osie isnu Aaun 'sies pue shop ing snonnu si
AAFCO also closely regulates label descriptive terms
the pet owner's needs and perceptions. Although some
for reduced calorie products. Acceptable terms include
"light" (or “lite"), “less or reduced calories,” “lean,"
best nutrition for their companion animals, others are
“low-fat,” and “less or reduced fat." Specific maximum
 more interested in the cost of the food, its availability in
energy contents are designated for all pet foods mar-
stores, or the convenience of feeding it. In today's mar-
'aduexa iog "(al, io) auo, uai au Susn paay
ket, there are products that appeal to all of these needs
a “light" dry dog food can contain no greater than
 and to the many different types of pet owners.
3100 kcal of ME/kg. Similarly, a dry dog food contain-
Most of today's marketing strategies are aimed toward
ing the designation of “less or reduced calories" must
 convincing pet owners that a particular food offers some
include the percentage of reduction from the product
benefit to the pet above and beyond that of all other
of comparison and a caloric content statement. The
products.7 Because most foods cafry the “complete and
terms “lean" and “less fat" are regulated by designating
balanced” label claim, offering complete nutrition is
the maximum percentages of fat within categories
6of
not perceived by many owners to be a unique selling
dog and cat food. For example, a dry dog food that is
point. Rather, acceptability and palatability, cost, feed-
labeled “lean" can contain no greater than 9% crude fat.
ing convenience, digestibility, and suitability of the food
As with the “reduced calories” term, the terms “less of
for the pet's lifestyle, age, or physiological state are all
reduced fat" must include the percentage of reduction
important considerations for today's owner. In recent
from the product of comparison.
years, as knowledge about canine and feline nutrition
Another important category of foods that include
has advanced, pet food companies have started to pro-
label claims are veterinary medical foods (VMF). These
duce foods that specifcally meet the needs of compan-
foods afe intended to be fed as a sole soufce of nutri-
ion animals during different stages of life, for different
tion to pets that have specific medical conditions. They
breeds and breed sizes, and for pets that live a vatiety
 -a yononn iuo uondosaid Aq pios Aeidi ane
of lifestyles. Examples of these foods include high-per-
natians. The label claim that identifes a VMF is “use
 formance diets for working dogs, growth diets for large
only as directed by your veterinarian." VMF products
 and small breeds, and reduced-calorie products for sed-
ate subject to all of the same labeling requirements and
 entary adults. The sale of these foods is accompanied by
nutritional adequacy substantiation (for adult mainte-
educational programs for pet owners about the nutri-
Ie[ndod on Aienuo 'spooy nes pue sop 1auio se (asueu
ent needs of their companion animals during different
belief, because VMF products are foods, they cannot
stages oflife.
 includle drug claims. However, the CVM exercises regu-
 Because there is no way to dletermine whether a food
latory discretion in allowing the use of informational
 contains superior nutrition by examining it or by feed-
brochures and other materials that afe intended to edu-
ing it a few times, many pet owners rely on a product's
cate veterinarians in the proper use of these foods when
s  r  a  
treating pets with various types of chronic disorders.
criteria. Palatability is a subjective measure of how well
The proper use of VMF products always includes con-
an animal likes a particular food, and acceptability is
tinued veterinary supervision (see Section 5 for com-
an indication of whether the amount of food eaten
plete discussions).
 is enough to meet the animal's caloric requirements
138 Canine and Feline Nutrition
(see Chapter 18, pp. 177-180 for a complete discussion
to feed significantly larger portions of the cheaper food to
of palatability). These are both important consider-
their pet (see Chapter 18, pp. 177-180). Also, companies
 ations because regarlless of a food's nutritional value, it
that produce inexpensive dog and cat foods may not ded-
cannot nourish an animal if it is not eaten. Palatability
icate the funds or possess the capability to conduct thor-
and acceptability are also very powerful marketing tools.
 ough testing of their products. In general, when pricing
Most pet owners enjoy giving their companion animal a
 dog and cat foods, it is safe to assume that buyers usually
food that is eagerly accepted and eaten, and they will be
“get what they pay for." Premium and super-premium
products cost more primarily because they contain high-
However, many highly palatable foods are high in fat
quality ingredients and because they have been subjected
and as a result afe energy dense. This increased palat-
to more figorous testing than inexpensive generic and
ability, coupled with a high energy density, can lead to
 hame-brand products. Marketing techniques that pro-
overeating and obesity if the food is fed on a free-choice
mote low-priced foods as equivalent in value to more
basis or if portion size is not catefully controlled. Own-
'soua iad au jeu pooy e yid Aureas pinous sn
that the food offers the same benefits as a premium food
but they should be aware that extremely palatable foods
but at a substantially lower cost.
can induce overeating.
In today's busy society, convenience and ease of
Caveat emptor:Purchasing a low-cost pet food may
 convenience of feeding dry pet foods and the availabil-
seem economically practical, but low-cost pet foods
ity of these foods in supermarkets contributed greatly
usually contain low-quality,less-digestible ingredients
to their initial success. Dry foods keep well after open-
Therefore, more food must be fed to an anirmal to pro-
ing, do not require reffigeration, and require little if any
vide adequate nutrition than if the animal was being
preparation before feeding. Packaging foods in portion-
feda high-quality, highly digestible food.Thus the per-
Sie ieun anbiuun iaoue si sues no saunod pazis
meal cost of the inexpensive food may be higher
pet owners who desire convenience. Many canned cat
foods and semimoist pet foods are marketed to provide
    i d  a
Other commonly used marketing tools for pet foods
need to measure out a portion of food before feeding.
include the development of products that resemble
Although it is not the chief consideration for some pet
01 sieadde Aisnoraqo siuL 'sueunq Aq paunsuos spooy
owhers, for others the cost of the food is very important.
the sense of taste of the pet owner, more so than that
There afe a number of commercial foods available today
of the animal that will eat the food. These products afe
varied and creative. Some foods have the appearance of
while still providing superior nutrition. However, it is
chunks of meat, and others look like stews, containing
important for pet owners to know that to produce a low-
a vatiety of meat and vegetables. The actual content of
cost product, ingredients that afe of lower quality, and
these foods is usually not the ingredient that they afe
thus lower cost, must be used. Therefore a cheaper prod-
 madle to resemble. For example, TVP can be shaped and
uct is probably going to be a lower-quality food, even
dyed to resemble chunks of meat. Flavor varieties are
though the guatanteed analysis panel may not refect this.
also a strong selling tool. Because owners enjoy vatiety
In adldlition, when considering the price of a pet food,
in their diets, they believe that this is also important for
the actual cost of feeding the animal must be calculated,
their pets. Almost all of the pet foods and treats sold
    n     a i 
 in grocery stores come in a variety of favors. Although
quality, cheap ingredients have significantly lower digest-
these differences may appeal to owners, it is unknown
ibilities than the ingredients used in premium foods.
A greater quantity of a food with low digestibility must be
certain Havors (see Chapter 18, pp. 177-180). Nonethe-
fed to an animal to provide the same amount of nutrition
less, it is the owner who buys the food, and some will
as found in a food with higher digestibility and nutrient
be induced to buy a foed that looks like ground steak or
availability. As a fesult, owhers may find that they have
pronounces itself to be “salmon-favored."
Pet Food Labels 139
Promoting the addition or deletion of a particu-
of a particular ingredient may contribute to a superior
lar ingredient in a pet food is another tactic used to
 product. The use of fish and fish meal in cat foods is an
increase sales. Whether this information is grounded in
 example. Cats are actually dlesert animals by ancestry
fact is a moot point because there is always a segment
 and probably had very little access to fish in their origi
of the pet-owning population that is willing to believe
nal diets. However, the use of clever and cute adlvertise-
in the value or in the hazard of a given ingredient. For
 ments has convinced pet owners that all cats inherently
example, some owners believe that soy is a poor-quality
love the taste of fish. The presence of fish in certain cat
ingredient, while others have targeted corn as an unde-
foods is then promoted as a distinct beneft. Although
sirable ingredient. Pet foods that are marketed as con-
it is true that cats enjoy the taste of fish, this ingredient
is no more palatable to most cats than are several other
whether or not they are founded in fact. Similarly, the
high-protein ingredients included in cat foods
pet-owning public can be convinced that the presence
References
1. Van Soest PJ: The uniformity and nutritive availability of cellulose, Fed Proc 32:1804-1808, 1973.
2. Bren L: Choosing pet food by the label, FDA Corsumer, May/June 2001.
3. Michel KE: Expert summit on pet food, Vet Forwm 25:12-18, 2008.
4. Association of American Feed Control Oficials (AAFCO): Pet food regulations. In AAFCO Ofcial Publication, Atlanta, 2008,
AAFCO.
5. Dzanis DA: Understanding regulations affecting pet foods, Top Companion Anim Med 23:117-120, 2008.
6. Dzanis DA: Interpreting pet food labels; special use foods, FDA Consumer, Jan/Feb 1999.
7. Brown RG: Understanding advertising in pet nutrition, Cax Vet J35(4):246-250, 1994.
16
Nutrient Content of Pet Foods
The most important consideration in choosing a com-
regulations do not currently allow the inclusion of these
mercial pet food for a companion animal is its nutrient
Ansn ane Aa asii seyod pong iad au uo siiean
content. Nutrient content refers not only to the exact
supplied to consumers in the form of informational bro-
levels of nutrients in the food, but also to the dligestibility
chures and through company websites. Such additional
and availability of all the essential nuttients. Nutrients
information may include the essential vitamin and min-
can be supplied in commercial pet food through a large
eral content and the energy density of the food.
 number of different ingredients. Commonly used pet
food ingredients vary in form and quality, and it is this
diversity that can make the selection of a suitable dog of
Tip: Additional information about the nutrient content
cat food a challenging task. This chapter discusses the
and energy density of high-quality petfoods can be
methods used to determine and express nutrient con-
found in pamphiets obtained from the pet supply store
tent in pet foods and examines many of the commonly
or veterinarian where the food was purchased, or it can
used pet food ingredients and adlditives.
be obtained directly from the manufacturer via websites
or telephone.Reputablemanufacturerswil readily sup
ply information, and many have toll-free telephone
METHODS FOR DETERMINING
numbers listed on the package.
NUTRIENT CONTENT
Laboratory Analysis
Calculation
When pet food manufacturers formulate and produce pet
The second method that manufacturers may use to detef-
foods, there are two ways they can determine the level of
 mine nutrient content is calculation of the average nutri-
 nutrients present in the food. The frst and most accurate
ent content of the food's ingredients using values reported
way is to conduct a laboratory analysis of the fnished
in standard tables. The amount of essential nutrients
product. Proximate analysis is a commonly used panel
contributed by each ingredient in the food are then
of tests that provides information about a select group of
nutrients. The laboratory procedures involved in proxi-
tial nutrients in common feed ingredients. Although this
 mate analysis provide the percentages of moisture, crude
method of nutrient determination is certainly less costly
 protein, crude fat, ash (minerals), and fber that ate con-
and time-consuming than laboratory analysis, there are
tained in the foed. Nitrogen-free extract (NFE), which
several significant problems with using calculation alone
represents a rough estimate of the soluble carbohydrate
to determine the nutrient content of pet foods.
fraction of the food, can be calculated by subtraction. The
First, there is a lack of complete and accurate data
guaranteed analysis panel of the pet food label is generated
for the nutrient content of many ingredients included
from the proximate analysis results. Association of Ameri-
in commercial pet foods. As a fesult, manufacturers
can Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) regulations require
must rely upon tables that contain approximations of
that this panel reports only maximum or minimum levels
the types of ingredients they ate using. These tables may
of a select group of nutrients.
contain information that is outdated or misleading. For
Pet food companies that are producing high-quality
example, as grain yields have increased in the United
products and are interested in theeducation of pet owners
 States, the average percentage of protein in corn and
will provide consumers with additional information
 soybeans has decreased.2 Standard tables do not always
about the exact nutrient content of their foodls. Because
 refect these changes. A study conducted by the Office
141
142 Canine and Feline Nutrition
of the Texas State Chemist measured the protein con-
amino acids in the fnished product.7 Again, if table
tent of corn, oats, and grain sorghum samples taken
values alone afe used to predict protein content, these
from different locations within the state.3 The average
effects cannot be predicted. Laboratory analysis of fn-
cfude protein content in 200 samples of yellow corn
ished products, followed by feeding trials with animals,
was 7.87%, with a tange of 5.97% to 10.25%. Pro-
are the only methods for obtaining reliable information
tein values were less than 8% in 62% of the samples,
about nutrient availability after pet food processing.
and 31.5% of the samples had protein contents below
7.5%. The National Reseatch Council's (NRC's) 2006
standard value for corn used in the formulation of
Determination of Digestibility
dog and cat foods is 9.1%.4 If this value is used when
Current AAFCO regulations do not require that com-
formulating a pet food using the calculation method,
panies determine the digestibility of their foods (see
the pet food might contain less corn protein than pre-
Chapter 18, p. 182). However, the digestibility of
dicted. A similar trend of decreasing protein content
 a pet food must always be considered. Digestibility pro-
was observed in oats and grain sorghum, which could
vides a measure of a food's quality because it directly
lead to miscalculations with these grains. These dis-
determines the proportion of nutrients in the food that
crepancies illustrate the need for pet food companies to
ate available for absorption into the body. Pet food
directly analyze the nutrient content of their pet foods
companies evaluate the digestibility of their products
through feeding studies (in vivo methodology). Digest-
values for the nutrient content of ingredients.
ibility estimates may also be obtained through the use
A second problem with the calculation method is
of in vitro methods that have been developed or refined
that the quality of ingredients cannot be determined.
in recent years.8-10 Feeding trials are the most accurate
Ingredient quality affects the level and availability of
 method and measure the disappearance of nutrients
nutrients in finished pet foods. Standard tables repre-
 as they pass through the gastrointestinal tract and are
sent averages and cannot refect differences in ingredient
absorbed into the body. The test diet is fed to a group of
quality among raw ingredients. The processing of a pet
 animals for a pretest period of 5 to 7 days to allow accli-
food further affects ingredient quality. Nutrient losses
 mation to the diet. Following this period, the amount of
can occur during processing or storage, and studies have
food consumed and the amount of fecal matter excreted
shown that the digestibility and nutrient availability of
afe recorded for 3 to 5 days. The fecal matter that is
plant-based and animal-based ingredients may be signif-
collected represents the undigested residue of the food
icantly affected by procesing methods.5-7 For example,
that was consumed. Laboratory analyses of both feed
dogs digest soybean Hour more efficiently than soybean
and fecal matter ate conducted to provide the levels of
grits when incorporated into a canned diet. This differ-
nutrients in each, and amounts of digested nutfients afe
ence is probably related to the smaller particle size of the
calculated by subtraction. These fgures, expressed as per-
Aour. Subsequent work showed that dogs fed different
centages, are called digestibility coeffcients. In this type of
forms of rice assimilate blended rice more efficiently than
study, the fgures that are derived are called “apparent"
whole fice.6 This difference was attributed to reduced
digestibility coefficients because the fecal matter also
food particle size and possibly to increased damage to
contains metabolic waste products that originated from
starch granules in the blended product. In either case,
the animal and not from the food (Table 16-1).
it is apparent that the processing method used for plant
True digestibility can be determined by estimating
ingredients significantly affects digestion and nutrient
the normal metabolic loss of the nutrient and deduct-
availability. Differences in the type of processing system
ing that value from the amount of the nutrient mea-
and the cooking temperature for animal-based ingre-
sured in the fecal matter. True digestibility trials are
dlients are also important. When the effects of cooking.
 most commonly conducted for protein. The animals afe
temperatures and processing systems on 46 sources of
fed a protein-free of very-low-protein diet for a short
meat and bone meal or poultry byproduct meal were
 period, and a baseline level of protein excretion is mea-
examined, it was found that higher processing tempera-
 sured. This fgure can then be used to account for the
tures caused decreases in the true digestibility values of
 endogenous metabolic loss of protein in the feces when
Nutrient Content of Pet Foods 143
CHARACTERISTICS IN DOGS
DIET
A
B
c
Protein digesti bility (%)
70.25
66'08
85.86
Fat digesti bility (%)
82.70
90.42
90.72
Fiber digesti bility (%)
17.44
48.53
61.48
Fecal score'
3.95
4.47
4.48
Fecal volume
162.38
89.18
46.48
Dara provided by Iams Technical Center, Lewisburg, Ohio, 1993.
*Based on a I co 5 rating: I - loose and warery, 5 - hrm. Scores of 4 ro 5 are considered normal.
BOX 16-1 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT DIGESTIBILITIES ON THE AMOUNT OF PROTEIN AVAILABLE
TO THE DOG
DIET A
 28% protein
70.25% of the protein is digestible
Therefore 70.25% of 28% protein = 0.7025 x 28 = 19.67% digestible protein
DIET B
 28% protein
85.9% of the protein is digestible
Therefore 85.9% of 28% protein = 0.859 × 28 = 24.05% digestible protein
the digestibility trial is conducted. It can be argued that
similar total protein contents. Digestibility also affects
apparent digestibility is actually a better indication of a
 fecal volume and form and defecation frequency (see
diet's ability to supply nutrients than is true digestibility.
Table 16-1). As a diet's digestibility increases, fecal vol-
The endogenous losses that occur in the fecal mattef
ume decreases significantly. In addition, a highly digest-
represent cellular and enzymatic losses that are the result
ible pet food produces frm and well-formed feces (see
of the cost of digesting and absorbing food. Therefore
Chapter 18, p. 182 for a complete discussion of factors
apparent digestibility represents the actual net gain to
that affect nutrient digestibility in pet foeds). Although
the animal from the digestion of the food.
manufacturers are not required to conduct digestibility
Information about the nutrient content of a food
trials on their feeds, reputable companies that produce
means little if the product's digestibility is not known.
quality products conduct these trials to ensure that their
foods contain levels of nutrients that will meet animals'
dog foods reveal that they each contain 28% protein. If
daily requirements for absorption into the body.
the protein digestibility of diet A is 70.25%, this means
that the food actually provides less than 20% digestible
Determination of Metabolizable
protein. On the other hand, if the digestibility of diet
Energy
B is 85.8%, it provides about 24% digestible protein
(Box 16-1; also see Table 16-1). The amount of protein
The metabolizable energy (ME) of a pet food is another
available to the animal is higher in diet B than in diet A,
important consideration when selecting a diet (see
even though laboratory analyses indicate that they have
 Chapter 1, pp. 4-6). ME indicates the amount of energy
144 Canine and Feline Nutrition
in a pet food that is available to the animal for use.
Although digestible energy (DE) measures the amount
EXPRESSIONOENUTRIENT
of energy that is absorbed across the intestinal wall, ME
CONTENT
accounts for digestibility and for losses of energy in
the urine and through expired gases (Hatus). Although
The guaranteed analysis panel of a pet food usually
expired gases account for a significant proportion
reports nutrient levels on an “as-fed" (AF) basis. This
of energy in most farm animals, it is an insignifcant
 means that the nutrient content in the diet is measured
energy loss in dogs and cats. Therefore the analysis of
directly, without accounting for the amount of water in
the ME of foods for dogs and cats includes only urinary
the product. This type of measurement is considered AF
losses of energy.
because it represents the level of nutrients in the food
as they are consumed by the animal. For example, if
10 ounces (oz) of a semimoist cat food contains 2.5 oz
which is a measufe of the total energy in the diet, ME
of protein, it contains 25% ([2.5 ÷ 10] x 100) protein
provides an accurate representation of the amount of
on an AF basis. Similarly, if 10 oz of a dry cat food also
energy that is actually available to the animal. ME is
contains 2.5 oz of pfotein, it too has a protein content
 determined most accurately through feeding trials with
of 25% on an AF basis. Comparing these two foods on
the target species. Studies in recent years have also pro-
 an AF basis would indicate that they contribute similar
vided in vitro methods for ME estimation and facto-
levels of protein to the cat. However, because of the large
rial equations for the calculation of ME using standard
energy values for protein, carbohydrate and fat, and in
foods, the diluting effect of water makes comparisons
 some cases, dietary fber.1l,12 Finally, a rough estimate of
between pet foods on an AF basis difficult to interpret.
the ME of a pet food can be calculated using the values
Animals eat and are fed to meet their caloric needs.
that are provided in the guaranteed analysis panel on
Therefore a food with high water content has its nutrients
the label (see Chapter 1, pp. 7-8).
essentially “diluted"
" when compared with a food con-
The AAFCO allows (and may soon require) the
taining less water. Regardless of the amount of moisture
inclusion of caloric claims on pet food labels (see
in the diet, an animal still needs to eat a certain amount
Chapter 15, pp. 135-136). Ifan ME statementis included,
of dry matter (DM) to meet its daily caloric require-
it must be separate and distinct from the guaranteed
 ment. Conversion of nutrient data to a dry-matter basis
analysis panel and must be identifed as “calorie content."
(DMB) allows more accurate compatisons to be made
A pet food's ME must be expressed as kilocalories (kcal)
per kilogram (kg) of product. Additional units such as
semimoist cat food discussed previously contains 25%
pais!l aq osie Aeur (ql) punod 1o dns Sunseau iad jey
water and 75% DM; the dry food contains 10% water
   , a aa  a o
and 90% DM. The percentage of protein on a DMB
ment on the pet food label, the ME statement must be
au jo seuaiad au Suri Aq paneinses aq uen
accompanied by a substantiation claim. AAFCO regu-
nutrient on an AF basis by the proportion of DM in
lations allow manufacturers to determine ME content
the diet. The protein content of the semimoist food on
using one of three possible methods:
a DMB is approximately 33%, but the protein content
1. Calculation using modifed Atwater factors and
of the dry diet is 28% (Box 16-2). Therefore, although
values for crude protein, crude fat, and NFE
their label guarantees indicate similar protein contents,
obtained from proximate analysis. (Samples must be
the semimoist food actually contains a higher level of
taken from at least four production batches of the
 protein than does the dry food on a DMB.
product.)
One of the most accurate ways to compare foods is by
2. Calculation from dligestible nuttients or DE. (Data
calculating the levels of nutrients as a proportion of ME.
are obtained from digestibility trials without urine
This is called mutrient density and is the most accurate
collection.)
way to express a food's nutrient content because it allows
3. Direct determination from digestibility
ttials
an accurate compatison of nutrient content between all
(including urine collection).
types of pet foods. Although the DM method eliminates
Nutrient Content of Pet Foods  145
consumed when the dog is fed diet B. Excess protein
BOX 16-2 CONVERTING NUTRIENTS
is invariably used directly for energy or converted to
FROM AN AS-FED (AF} TO
fat for the storage of energy. On the other hand, if the
A DRY-MATTER BASIS (DMB)
diets contain marginal levels of protein, the dog may
FORMULA:
be deficient in protein when consuming diet A, which
 Percentage of nutrient on an AF basis ÷ proportion
had a higher caloric density. This example illustrates the
of DM in the diet
need to increase nutrient density as the caloric density
of a diet increases. Although protein is a commonly
EXAMPLE:
used example, this concept applies to all of the essential
Semimoist food contains: 25% protein
nutrients. Because an animal will be fed less of a calori-
75% DM
m aq su go d a g s a
in these foods must be higher so that the animal can
Dry food contains: 25% protein
still meet its needs for all essential nutrients while eat-
90% DM
ing a lower quantity of food. The nutrient level in pet
For semimoist food: (25 ÷ 75) × 100 = 33% protein on
foods must be carefully balanced so that when caloric
a DMB
requirements are satisfied, the requirements for all other
For dry food: (25 ÷ 90) × 100 = 28% protein on a DMB
nutrients are met at the same time.
The simplest way to solve the confusion of differ-
ences in caloric densities is to express nutrients as a pef-
differences in nutrient expression due to differences in
centage of ME or as units per 1000 kcal of ME, rather
water content, it does hot account for differences
in
than as a percentage of weight. This is certainly the most
energy content. Nutrient density accounts for differ-
accurate way to present nutrient content data and com-
ences in both water content and caloric content, and
pate different foods. Nutrient densities of foods with
it expresses nutrient levels in pet foods based upon the
different moisture contents can be compared because
energy that is available for the animal to use (the ME).
water does hot contribute any calories to the distribu
tion. In addition, foods with differing caloric contents
needs, the amount of food consumed and thus the
afe equalized using this method, allowing for accurate
amount of nutrients taken in depends directly on the
representation of nutrient levels. Although using DM
caloric content of the food. Nutrient density expresses
calculations eliminates distortions that are the result of
the energy-containing nutrients such as protein, fat, and
differences in moistufe content, such compatisons do
catbohydrate as a percentage of ME or as grams (g) pef
not take into consideration the calories of the foods or
1000 kcal of ME. The nutritional standard for nutrients
the amounts that must be consumed by the animal to
that do not contain energy (vitamins and minerals) is
meet energy needs. Comparisons using nutrient densi
units per 1000 kcal of ME.
ties calculated on a caloric basis can be used with foods
For example, diets A and B contain the same
of different DM and energy content and with different
amount of protein (26%) on a DMB. Howevel, the two
weights or volumes.
foods have dlifferent energy densities. Diet A contains
Comparisons of caloric distribution are also impor-
4000 kcal/kg and diet B contains 3500 kcal/kg. Because
 tant. The three nutrient groups that contribute energy
diet B is lower in calories, a greater quantity (volume
to the dliet are protein, carbohydrate, and fat. The rela-
of food) needs to be consumed to meet a particular
 tive contribution that each of these groups makes to a
animal's caloric needs. A dog that requires 2000 kcal/
day would consume 500 g of diet A or approximately
g 'ee ened e rog pooy nd aqins e lusoo
570 g of diet B. If the two diets contain the same per-
example, a hard-working dog requires sufficient protein
centage of protein on a weight basis, the dog would
 t0 supply needs for muscle development and main-
consume more total protein when he was fed diet B
tenance and increased calories to supply the necessary
than when he was fed diet A (Table 16-2). If the pro-
 energy for werk. Diets for working dogs should contain
tein level is sufficiently high, excess protein will be
slightly increased protein and a fairly high proportion of
146 Canine and Feline Nutrition
TABLE 16-2 PROTEIN INTAKE RELATIVE TO DIETARY METABOLIZABLE ENERGY
ENERGY
ENERGY
FoOD
PROTEIN
PROTEIN
 REQUIREMENT
DENSITY
INTAKE
IN DIET
CONSUMED
(KCAL)
(KCAL/G)
(G)
(%)
(G)
Diet A
2000
÷
4.0
500
26
100
130.0
=
十
Diet B
2000
÷
3.5
=
571
26
÷
100
148.5
Adult Maintenance
Endurance Performance
 38% Carb
27% Protein
28% Carb
24%Protein
38% Fat
45% Fat
Growth (Dogs)
Growth (Cats)
27% Protein 
32% Carb
32% Protein
22% Carb
41%Fat
46%Fat
Figure 16-1 Recommended caloric distribution of pet foods.
fat. Recommended caloric distribution ranges for per-
percentage of ME. A maintenance diet with this caloric
formance, expressed as a percentage of ME calories, are
distribution has an energy balance that is shifted from
25% to 30% protein, 40% to 45% fat, and 25% to 30%
fat to dligestible carbohydrate. This profle better meets
carbohydrate. In contrast, a diet formulated for hor-
the reduced energy needs of a less-active dog and makes
mally active adult dogs during maintenance should have
weight gain less likely. The profle of ME distribution for
 a lower proportion of fat and an increased proportion of
growing dogs is 25% to 30% protein, 40% to 45% fat,
digestible carbohydrates. A suggested distribution range
and 30% to 35% carbohydrate, and a profle for growing
for adult maintenance is 20% to 25% protein, 35% to
cats is 30% to 35% protein, 45% to 50% fat, and 20%
40% fat, and 35% to 45% carbohydrate, expressed as
to 25% carbohydrate (Figure 16-1).
Nutrient Content of Pet Foods 147
Pet food companies that provide nutritional infor-
BOX 16-3 EXPRESSION OF NUTRIENTS AS A
mation about their products to consumers through
PERCENTAGE OF METABOLIZABLE
brochures and websites often include caloric distribu-
ENERGY (ME)
tion and nutrient density information. If the infor-
mation is not available, pet owners can calculate a
TOTAL CALORIES 1N 100 G OF FOOD:
fough estimate of the food's ME and caloric distribu-
Protein = 3.5 kcal/g × 26 g = 91 kcal
tion of protein, fat, and carbohydrate from the food's
Fat = 8.5 kcal/g x 15 g = 127.5 kcal
proximate analysis. If the proximate analysis is not
known, the guaranteed analysis panel on the label can
Carbohydrate = 3.5 kcal/g × 37g = 129.5 kcal
be used, although it is much less accurate. Calcula-
Total kilocalories = 91 + 127.5 + 129.5 = 348 kcal/100 g
tions that can be used to estimate total ME per kg are
of food 
provided in Section 1, pp. 4-6. The example used is a
dry dog food that contains the following guaranteed
PERCENTAGEOFMECONTRIBUTEDBYEACH
NUTRIENT (CALORIC DISTRIBUTION):
analysis:
Protein = (91 kcal/348 kcal) × 100 = 26%
Crude protein: not less than 26%
Crude fat: not less than 15%
Fat = (127.5 kcal348 kcal) x 100 = 37%
Crude fber: not more than 5%
Carbohydrate = (129.5 kcal/348 kcal) x 100 = 37%
Moisture: not more than 10%
Mineral content is estimated to be about 7%, and
carbohydrate content is determined by subtraction:
100%-26%-15%-5%-10%-7%=37%.Mod
ingredients in each food to conform to the label, and
ifed Atwater factors can be used to calculate the num-
the ingredient list cannot contain any reference to the
ber of calories contributed by each nutrient in 100 g
quality of the ingredients that were used. Every ingre-
of food (see Chapter 1, Table 1-3, p. 8). The total
dient that is part ofa commercial pet food is included
calories in 100 g of food equals 348. The total calo-
 for a specifc purpose. A few of the major ingredi-
fies of ME per kg of this food is 3480, or 1582 kcal/
ents may contain only one major nutrient or nutri
Ib of food. The percentage of ME calories contrib-
 ent group, and others may contribute several essential
uted by protein is approximately 26%. The propor-
nutrients to the diet. For example, corn is an excellent
tions of calories contributed by fat and carbohydrate
 source of starch and is a principal source of digestible
are 37% (Box 16-3). This pet food has a distribution
 carbohydrate in many dry pet foods. Although corn
that would be appropriate for an adult dog during
contains a small percentage of protein, the amount
maintehance.
of protein that is contributed to the total diet is very
If a pet food’s caloric distribution is calculated from
low. Therefore corn is considered to be primarily a
the guaranteed analysis panel, it is important to fec-
source of digestible carbohydrate when included in
 ognize that the calculated numbers represent only a
pet foods, rather than an important source of protein.
rough estimate and not the actual caloric distribution
Conversely, chicken contains high levels of protein
of the food. Companies that produce quality products
and fat and is considered to be a soufce of both of
and are aware of the importance of nutrient density
these nutrients. A good rule for determining whether
will make available the ME and caloric distribution
 of not an ingredient in a pet food is a protein source is
information for companion animal professionals and
to compare the level of protein in the ingredient with
consumers.
the level of the ingredient in the food. Anything that
has a protein content that is greater than its percent-
PET FOOD INGREDIENTS
age in the diet is considered to be a source of protein
for that ration. For example, if a pet food contains
The ingredient list on a pet food label contains all
20% chicken byproduct meal that has a protein con-
of the food soufces included in the formulation
tent of 65%, chicken byproduct meal constitutes a
of the diet. Pet food regulations require the actual
 protein source for that food.
148 Canine and Feline Nutrition
BOX 16-4 COMMON PET FOOD INGREDIENTS
PRIMARY NUTRIENT CONTRIBUTION
Protein
Carbohydrate
Fat
Dietary Fiber
Beef
 Alfalfa meal
Animal fat
 Apple pomace
 Brewer's dried yeast 
Barley
 Chicken fat 
Barley
Chicken meal
Brewer's rice
 Corn oil
Beet pulp
 Chicken liver meal
Brown rice
Fish oil
Cellulose
 Chicken byproduct meal
Carrots
Hax seed (full fat)
Citrus pulp
Chicken
Dried kelp
Poultry fat
 Oat bran
 Chicken byproducts
Dried whey
 Safflower oil
Peanut hulls
Corn gluten meal
Flax seed
 Soybean oil
 Pearled barley
Dried egg product
 Flax seed meal
 Sunflower oil
Peas
Duck
 Grain sorghum 
vegeta ble oil
Rice bran
 Fish
Ground corn 
Soybean hulls
Fish meal
Ground rice
Soybean mill run
 Flax seed meal
Ground wheat
Tomato pomace
Lamb
Molasses
Lamb meal
Oat meal
 Meat byproducts
Pearled barley
Meat meal
Peas
Meat and bone meal
Potatoes
 Poultry byproduct meal
Rice flour
Rabbit
Wheat (ground)
 Salmon
Wheat flour
 Soy flour or grits
 Soybean meal
Turkey
by all ingredients must be considered when evaluating
To determine if an ingredient on the label is a protein
a pet food. The following discussion reviews common
source for the food, compare the level of protein in the
pet food ingredients and the major nutrients that they
ingredient with the level of the ingredient in the food
contribute to pet foods (Box 16-4)
if the ingredient's protein content is greater than its
percentage in the food, it is considered to be a source of
protein for that ration.
Protein Sources
The protein in dog and cat foods can be supplied by
animal sources, plant sources (grains), of a combina-
When the ingredient list of a pet food is examined,
tion of the two. In general, high-quality animal source
 the nutrient or nutrients contributed by each ingredient
 proteins provide superior amino acid balances for com-
should be a primary concern. Both the amount and
panion animals when compared with the amino acid
quality of the ingredient in the product determine
balances supplied by grain proteins. However, animal
how efficiently the ingredient can provide nutrition to
protein sources can fange from excellent quality to poor
animals consuming the complete diet. It is also impor-
tant to consider that a pet food is made up of a number
atively consistent in their quality and ability to supply
Papiaoid inoy io saq isiy aun isnf iou 'siuaipaisu jo
 amino acids. The protein in grains is not as balanced or
at the start of the list. Nutrients that are contributed
available as the protein in high-quality animal sources,
Nutrient Content of Pet Foods 149
but it is superior in these characteristics compared with
digestibility. Several factors infuence this. Meat protein
poor-quality animal protein sources.
sources can contain varying amounts of bone. If meat
and bone meal is included as an ingredient, the amount
ANIMAL-SOURCE PROTEINS
Animal
pto-
of bone contained in the product affects its quality as
tein sources that are commonly included in pet foods
 a protein source as well as the mineral balance of the
include beef, chicken, chicken meal, lamb, lamb meal,
entire dliet. The matrix of bone is composed of the pro-
dried egg, fish, fsh meal, meat and bone meal, meat
 tein collagen. Collagen is very poorly digested by dogs
byproducts, and meat meal. In recent years, novel pro-
and cats, yet it will be analyzed as protein in the pet
tein sources such as rabbit, salmon, duck, turkey, and
food. All muscle meats are very low in calcium content
venison have also been included in some dog and cat
and have calcium:phosphorus fatios between 1:15 and
foods (see Chapter 31, pp. 399-400). The term meat,
1:26. When bone is included with a meat ingredient,
as defned by AAFCO, can represent any species of
the calcium level of the product is increased, and the
slaughtered mammal. Most commonly, this includes
calcium:phosphorus ratio may be normal ized. However,
the striated muscle of pork, beef, or sheep. The term
inexpensive meat and bone meals often contain excess
pouitry includes the fesh and skin of domestic poul-
levels of minerals. In this case, the problem becomes
try, most typically chicken, turkey, or duck. When a
one of supplying too much calcium, phosphorus, and
specifc species is used, such as chicken, this must be
 magnesium, rather than an insufficient amount of these
idlentified as such. When the term byproduct is included
nutrients. An excessively high calcium level in a pet
in the ingredient name, this means that secondary
food that contains meat and bone meal, poultry meal.
products are included with the ingredient in addition
or fish meal is an indication that the meal included in
to the principal product. Byproducts of meat and poul-
the product may be of poor quality and contains exces-
tty products are the parts of these animals that are not
sively high amounts of bone.
typically used as human foods in the United States.14
Two other important factors are the form of the
This includes organ meats, blood, fat tissue, stomach
 protein source and the degree of processing of cook-
and intestines, but may not include hair, horns, teeth,
ing that was involved during the food's production.
hoofs, feathers, or fecal matter.! For example, when
For example, the label of a dry dog food might include
1 nen suea siun iinod, se psil st suaipaiaun ue
chicken, chicken meal, or chicken byproduct meal as
includes the clean combination of fesh and skin with
its frst ingredient. Although the animal source is the
or without bone derived from part or whole carcasses of
same for these three ingredients, their protein content
poultry, exclusive of feathers, heads, feet, and entrails.
and quality can differ signifcantly. There is a great
On the other hand, “poultry byproduct" refers to the
 deal of confusion among pet owners and professionals
clean parts of carcasses of slaughtered poultry (fesh
 regarding the difference between “chicken" (or, some-
and skin), which may also contain bone, heads, feet,
 a , e e r, s
and intestines. If it includes heads and feet, poultry
observed on the pet food label. Chicken is the “ciean
byproduct meal may be lower in nutritional value
combination offlesh and skin with or without accompa-
than fresh poultry; however, the inclusion of nutrient-
nyingbone,derived from theparts ofwhole carcasses of
rich internal organs may offset this. Another com-
poultry or a combination thereof,exclusive of feathers,
mon term that is often part of an ingredient's name
heads,fet, and entrails."Following slaughterand pro-
is meal. This term simply refers to any ingredient that
cessing, the resulting chicken is divided into blocks
has been ground or otherwise reduced in particle size.
and frozen or chilled. Cooling is necessary because of
For example, “chicken meal" is the dry, ground, whole
the very high water content in whole chicken; chicken
chicken, exclusive of heads, feet, viscera, or feathers,
%0/ pue sg uamaq sunuos sony nad u pasn
Suisssoid sues ai s! leau ionpoidiq uayiu, pue
u yoy Aiaa Aeida ose si uay aua st aem
method, but may include byproducts.
fat. Because ofits high moisture content, the inclusion
Depending on the supplier and the type of refn-
of whole chicken in a pet food may place the ingredi-
ing process that the pet food manufacturer uses, ani-
ent frst on the ingredient list. Howevef, chicken in
mal protein sources can vary greatly in quality and
this form contributes a very small proportion of the
150 Canine and Feline Nutrition
food's protein and may actually be a more substantial
source of fat in the food. These facts are not neces-
Several factors infuence the guality of animal source
sarily shortcomings. There is evidence that poultry
protein ingredients in dog and cat foods. These inciude
fat is a strong palatability enhancer for dogs and cats,
the form and moisture content of the ingredient, the
and the protein that is contributed by fresh chicken
is usually of high quality.16,17 However, consumers
and the processing methods used to prepare the ingre-
dient.in addition,some protein sources also contribute
must also be aware that when chicken is included as
an ingredient, it may in fact be a minor contributof
a signifcant amount of fat to the food.
to the protein of the food and may be more important
as a fat soufce.
In contrast, chicken meais are produced through the
Last, animal source proteins are included in the
rendering of whole chicken (as defined by AAFCO,
diets of dogs and cats as a primary component of a
above). This cooking process is used to remove a high
homemade diet or as some form of treat or supple-
proportion of the animal fat.14 The resultant mixture
 mental food. The category of aiternative pet foods is one
is dried and ground to a meal that has a consistency
of the fastest growing sectors of the pet food market
similar to that of corn meal. When protein meals are
today. These products include raw food diets, organic
included in pet foods and are found high on the ingre-
foods, and rations that are promoted as “all natural" of
dient list, they comprise a principal protein source for
holistic.19 These are available as both commercial prepa-
the fation because of their low moisture and reduced
rations and as homemade recipes. Even though the
fat content. Because rendering involves cooking, meals
majority of pet owners still feed a commercial food as
are heat-treated twice (once during rendering and again
their pet's primary diet, table scraps, human foods, and
during extrusion), which may increase heat-related
raw foods made up at least a small proportion of the
 diets of many dogs and cats.20 The most commonly fed
pared with the ingredient's fresh equivalent. However,
animal-soufce
protein ingredients that owners report
studies of the effects of rendering and extrusion on
feeding are beef and poultry. These ingredients may be
animal-source proteins have found these reductions to
purchased frozen from a commercial supplier, from a
be small, especially when the quality of the fresh prod-
 rendering plant, or from the owner's grocery store.21,22
uct is high. Additionally, increased demand for high-
Other animal-source proteins that are fed to dogs and
siaiiseynueu pooy iad Aq siuaipaiou pooy nad Aenb
cats afe commercial treats such as freeze-dried livef
has led to the production and increased availability of
 of salmon. These foods are highly palatable to most
pet-food-grade animal source proteins that are higher
pets and can be used as potent primary reinforcers in
in both protein and digestibility than are typical feed-
training. However, they are not nutritionally balanced
grade sources.18
and so should not provide more than 5% of a pet's
Finally, a byproduct meal refers to the meal produced
nutritional intake (see Chapter 17, pp. 173-174 for a
from rendering and drying of an animal byproduct
complete discussion of alternative pet foods).
protein source. When chicken (or more commonly,
poultry) byproduct meal is produced, the fresh chicken
GRAIN-SOURCE PROTEINS
SGrain sources of
can include the byproducts identified previously. While
protein used in pet foods include corn gluten meal, vari-
the cooking process is the same as that used for just
ous forms of soy (meal, four, and grits), alfalfa meal,
fresh chicken, the inclusion of feet and heads reduces
fax seed meal, and wheat germ. Pet foods that contain
protein quality and digestibility of the end product.
 grain products as the major source of protein usually
When a byproduct meal is listed high on an ingredi-
include a combination of soy products and corn gluten
ent list, it represents a primafy protein source in the
meal. Corn gluten meal is the dried residue that remains
food as a result of its dry form. These same relationships
after most ofthe starch, fber, and germ-containing por-
and defnitions apply to meat, meat meal, and meat
tions of the corn grain have been removed. As a pro-
byproduct meal and other animal source proteins such
tein source, corn gluten meal is relatively consistent
as lamb or fish.
in quality, containing approximately 60% protein.23
Nutrient Content of Pet Foods  151
This protein source is not as digestible as high-quality
30% carbohydrate, which is comprised principally of
animal protein ingredients, but its protein is compa-
soluble oligosaccharides and polysacchariles.29 These
rable to or more available than some meals and byprod-
indigestible fbers travel to the large intestine, where
they are fermented by colon bacteria, resulting in the
a high proportion of protein, but its protein is defi-
 production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and gas.
cient in the essential amino acids lysine, arginine, and
SCFAs provide an important energy source for colono-
tryptophan.
cytes and contribute to the health of the large intestine
Soybean products have been included in pet foods
when produced at optimum levels. In addition, soy-
for a number of years. Texturized vegetable protein
bean oligosaccharides afe assumed to be responsible for
(TVP), which contains approximately
50%
crude
teduced postprandial insulin levels observed in dogs
protein, is the form that is often found in canned and
fed TVP diets, an effect that may be of benefit in the man-
semimoist foods. TVP is produced by the extrusion of
agement of diabetes (see Chapter 29, pp. 348-352).30 The
defatted soy four and has the advantage of retaining
osmotic action of the SCFAs and possibly increased
a meatlike texture and appearance through the high
electrolyte concentrations in the colon lead to incfeased
fecal water content. This effect is not noticeable when
a common human soy food, TVP has a bland favor and
pasunouoid aq ues inq 'pay are aos jo siaaal aneiapou
atoma and absorbs the favors of the ingredients with
in diets containing 50% or more soy protein. This can
which it is cooked. A recent study of dogs’ ability to
digest TVP in canned foods reported that small intesti-
estingly, investigations of the ability of dogs to digest
nal digestion ofTVP protein was just slightly lower than
and ferment soy catbohydrate found that when dogs
the digestibility of beef protein (73.4% vs. 77.0%).27 As
were fed diets containing either conventional soybean
the proportion of TVP was increased, protein digest-
(as whole beans or meal) or a low-oligosacchatide vati-
ibility decreased slightly to about 70%. The decrease in
ety, they digested low-oligosaccharide soy as extensively
digestibility was accompanied by incfeased fecal volume
and the production of softer stools. Several forms of
cannot be digested by the enzymes of the small intestine,
soy may be included in dry, extruled pet foods, but the
they are nearly 100% fermentable in the large intestine.
most common forms are defatted soybean meal and soy
This information is significant when considering the
Aour. A study comparing the ability of adult dogs 
to
[esay asnesaq pooy nad e ui Aos jo uoniodoid pue adki
digest soy products to poultry meal that were included
 consistency, defecation frequency, and colon health may
in an extruded, dry food found that small intestinal
be affected
and total tract protein digestibility of the soy prod-
Soy also contains phytate and several metabolic
ucts did not differ from each other but were all signifi-
inhibitors that affect an animal's ability to digest and
cantly more digestible than poultry meal.28 Conversely,
absorb other nutrients. Soy trypsin inhibitors function
another study found that soybean meal protein had
to reduce the digestibility of protein in the diet. How-
slightly lower small intestine and total tract digestibility
 ever, trypsin inhibitors, like many other antinutri-
coefficients when compafed with low-ash poultry meal.
tional factors, are heat labile and are largely destroyed
The difference between these two studies refects the dif-
by heating during the processing of pet foods. Hemag-
ferent qualities of poultry meal that were tested (low-ash
glutinins in soy are lectins that are capable of binding
poultry meal had a higher digestibility coefficient), as
 carbohydrate and agglutinating red blood cells. How-
soybean meal digestibility coefficients remained consis-
ever, these have not been shown to be toxic, and like
tent. Because soy protein is limiting in the sulfur amino
acid methionine but is rich in lysine, it is valuable as
aqedes s! pue jeay Aq paioae Auesyiuais iou si anei
a complementary protein to corn gluten meal in com-
of interfering with the absorption of certain minerals
mercial pet foods.
even after processing. Therefore pet food manufac-
Although soy protein is well digested by dogs, soy
turers must account for the effects of phytate when
catbohydrate is poorly digested in the canine small
balancing the mineral component of soy-containing
intestine. Soy four and TVP contain approximately
foods.
152 Canine and Feline Nutrition
As a result, corn grits contains a higher proportion of
Although soy is classifed as a piant source of protein
digestible starch while corn meal is slightly higher in
for pet foods, some forms of soy ingredients also con-
fber and protein. The extruded corn starch in both
tribute signijfcantamounts ofcarbohydrateandfber
 ingredients provides an available and digestible source
to the food. These components can have both benefts
of energy to dogs and cats.35
and potential drawbacks, depending upon their level in
Wheat and rice grains ate usually processed and
the food.
ground to produce fours for inclusion in pet foods.
Cereal fours contain primarily the starch and pro-
tein from their respective grain, so are lower in fber,
fat, and ash than ground grains.36 Wheat four is often
Carbohydrate Sources
included as an ingredient in biscuits because its high
Ingredients that contribute digestible carbohydrates to
i e re sn  () 
commercial pet foods include various forms of corn,
ture and palatability to baked products.34 Wheat con-
fice, sorghum, wheat, and oats. Barley, cafrots, fax
tains slightly more protein than other cereal grains; the
seed, molasses, peas, and potatoes may also be included,
 principle wheat protein is gluten. Gluten is actually a
but usually in lesser amounts. With the exception of
mix of two proteins, glutenin and gliadin, and is often
molasses, all of these ingredients contribute varying
maligned as the cause of food hypersensitivity in dogs
amounts of co mplex carbohydrates in the form of starch.
and cats. However, dietary hypersensitivity can develop
 The source and the form of the grain significantly affects
to many different dlietary proteins or protein-containing
the amount of starch that it contributes to a food.33 For
complexes, of which wheat gluten is just one possibility.
example, whole wheat is comprised of approximately
Studies of dogs affected with dlietary hypersensitivity
50% starch, while wheat four contains approximately
have reported that the proteins found in beef, soy, and
70%.34 The difference is caused by the removal of the
dairy products are the most common food allergens in
fber-containing bran and protein-rich germ to produce
dogs and cats.37 The widespread perception of wheat as
fout from the complete grain. The form of the carbohy-
a potent food allergen is possibly related to a disorder
drate ingredient is also important. Grinding to produce
called gluten-induced enteropatby.38 Analogous to celiac
a meal breaks open the grain's hard outer coating (the
disease in humans, this malabsorption disorder appears
bran), making the starch more available and digestible.
u Aeud uaas s pue siseq snauss Suons e aaey o1
Cooking of plant starch greatly enhances its digestibil-
purebred Irish Setters.
ity. Therefore heat treatment of these ingredlients during
Rice is one of the most highly digestible starches fed
processing ensufes maximal use by companion animals.
to dogs and cats. Its digestion leads to relatively rapid
In dry pet foods, a certain proportion of the diet must
postprandial increases in blood glucose levels, when
be male up of starch to allow for proper expansion of
the kibbles. During expansion, temperatures within
ingly, while wheat as a pet food ingredient has acquired
the extruder come close to 150° C. This temperature
 an erfoneous reputation as an “allergy-causing" ingredi-
increases the size of the starch granules and improves
ent, fice enjoys a reputation as the supposed “hypoaller-
both digestibility and palatability.
genic” pet food ingredient. This perception developed
because fice was used as a hovel carbohydrate source in
COMMON GRAIN SOURCES
The primary
some of the frst foods that were developed as elimina-
cereal grains that are included in pet foods are corn,
tion diets for pets with dietary hypersensitivity. As an
wheat, and rice. Ground com and corn grits are the
two most common forms of corn that supply digestible
characteristics. Rather, it was initially selected because
starch to pet foods. Ground corn is also called
1corn
it provided a source of carbohydrate to which most pets
meal on the pet food label; it is produced when the
entire grain is chopped and then fnely ground. Corn
misconception, the rice starch that is supplied by fnely
grits is ground corn without the outer coating of the
 ground rice four provides a highly digestible source of
corn kernel (the bran) or the protein-containing germ.
energy for dogs and cats.
Nutrient Content of Pet Foods 153
OTHER STARCH SOURCES
Oats, barley, sor-
intestinal enzymes, but it is required in the diet to pro-
ghum (milo), and potatoes are other carbohydrate ingre-
 mote normal gastrcintestinal tractfunctioningand health
dients that are found in commercial pet foods today.
(see Section 1, pp. 14-16 and Section 5, pp. 465-470).
Barley and sorghum are both grains that are ground and
Common sources of indigestible fber in commercial
 sometimes precooked prior to being added to a dry pet
 pet foods include beet pulp; apple and tomato pomace;
food. One of the benefits of these two starch sources is
peanut hulls; citrus pulp; the bran of oats, rice, and
that they are more slowly digested than rice and corn and
wheat; peas; and cellulose.
contribute to reduced or delayed postprandial glucose
Bran is a milling byproduct consisting of the outer
and insulin responses.40 These attributes may make these
coarse coat (pericarp) of cereal grains that was removed
grains suitable for starch mixes that are used in foods
during the production of four. The bran of several
designed to aid in glycemic control (see Chapter 29,
grains is used in pet foods and contains varying levels
pp. 348-350 for a complete discussion). Peas and len-
of fermentable and nonfermentable fber, fat, and pro-
tils have been studlied as alternative starch sources of
tein. The use of tice bran as a pet food ingredient has
inclusion in pet foods, but tend to have lower digest-
increased in recent years because it has been shown to
ibilities  than conventional
1 starches, even
following
be a palatable source of fermentable fber, essential fatty
acids (EFAs), and several naturally occurring antioxi-
fber content of these ingredients as well as to differ-
dants.44 Rice bran contains an unusually high fat con-
ences between grains and legumes in the predominant
tent for a cereal grain, with more than one third of the
type of starch that they contain. However, these sources
fat contributed by polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs).
also modulate plasma fuctuations in blood glucose
However, when the bran is separated from the rice dur-
when compared with rice and corn and may have some
ing the milling process, the cellular damage associated
benefit as ingredients for diabetic or older pets. Various
with breaking the seed coat results in the release of plant
forms of potatoes have been included in canned and
lipases. These enzymes immediately begin to hydrolyze
dry pet foods in recent years.42 Canned stews and din-
the oil in the bran, which can lead to oxidative rancidity
and loss of palatability. Therefore adlditional processing
ally appealing to pet owners and provide an excellent
is necessary to denature the plant lipase and prevent
source of digestible starch. Potato starch is also used in
destruction of the bran's fat. This is accomplished by
canned products as a texture enhancer. Various forms
of dried potatoes are found in dry pet foods, including
tion. The resultant product is called stabilized rice bran
potato four, buds, starch, and isolated potato protein.
and can be used as a fber source for pet foods.45
Potato protein may also have use in elimination or al ter-
Pulp is the solid residue that remains after juices
native diets for pets with dietary hypersensitivity.*
afe extracted from fruits or vegetables; pomace specifi-
  did iaaq au i o dind a  s a
lou) siaaq resns uoy paaap si spooy nad u! papniu
The form and degree of heat treatment signifcantly
red beets) and is considered to be a high-quality fber
affect how digestible and palatable a starh source is
source. It contains 60% to 80% total dietary fber, of
for dogs and cats, in addition, different starch sources
vary in the type of starch that they provide, the level of
use of beet pulp as a fiber source for dogs and cats have
indigestible fber, and the rate at which they infuence
found that including beet pulp in the food does not
postprandial changes in blood glucose and insulin con-
negatively affect palatability (as do some other fber
centrations.
in a food, the moderately fermentable fber of beet pulp
helps to provide adequate bulk for gastrointestinal tract
FIBER SOURCES
SAlthough it is not a digestible
functioning while also promoting gastrointestinal cell
nutrient, dietary fber is typically classifed with car-
health through the production of SCFAs (see Section 1,
bohydrate ingredients. Dietary fber is not digested by
pp. 14-16, and Section 5, pp. 465-467).
154 Canine and Feline Nutrition
only small amounts of vitamins and minerals 
safe
Fat Sources
fequired by animals and because other ingredients also
The fat in a pet food contributes calories and EFAs and
supply these nutrients, purifed forms of vitamins and
enhances palatability. Commenly used sources of fat in
 minerals are present in small amounts in pet foods and
commercial pet foods include various types of animal
are listed low on the ingredient list of the label.
fats and vegetable oils. The general term “animal fat" refers
Minerals vary greatly in their bioavailability, and
to fat that comes from the tissues of mammals and/or
many factors can affect the mineral availability within a
poultry. Animal fat must contain a minimum of 90%
dliet. It is important not only to have adequate amounts
total fatty acids, not more than 2.5% unsaponifable
 of each mineral relative to the animal's requirement, but
mattef, and not more than 1% insoluble impurities.
also to consider the relationship between minerals and
The unsaponifable portion of a fat contains lipid com-
the overall balance of the ration. Excess levels of any
pounds other than triglycerides and fatty acids, such
 mineral may adversely affect the ability of the body to
as sterols, pigments, and fatty alcohols. If the product
absorb other minerals in the diet. For example, excess
is completely made up of a single type of fat, such as
levels of calcium, copper, and possibly vitamin D can all
poultry or beef fat, a descriptive term denoting the spe-
inhibit the absorption of zinc in dogs.50 Manufacturers
cies of the animal source can be used. Chicken fat and
must always consider these felationships when balanc-
poultry fat are the two most common types of animal
ing the mineral component of their pet foods. In recent
fat included in dog and cat foods. In recent years, fish
years, there has been some interest in the use of chelated
oil has also been included in many pet foods because it
trace minerals in pet foods. These ingredients are also
is a rich source of n-3 fatty acids, specifically the long-
referred to as organic minerais. They are produced syn-
chain PUFAs eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosa-
Ue se yns 'pues siueio ue jo isisuos pue Aenan
hexaenoic acid (DHA). Similarly, the terms vegetable fat
amino acid, peptide, or polysaccharide that is covalently
Of vegetable oil refer to the product obtained from the
linked to the trace mineral. It is theorized that chelated
extraction of the oil from seeds. If a specific plant is the
minerals are more bioavailable than naturally occurring
exclusive source of the oil, this may be indicated on the
minerals, either because digestion yields a more readily
label. Most commonly, corn, safflower, and soybean oils
utilized ionic form or because the mineral and ligand are
afe used in commercial pet foods. Sunfower oil is also
absorbed together as an intact molecule.51 There is evi-
occasionally used, as it provides a concentrated source
dence that chelated minerals may confer some beneft
of linoleic acid.4 Flax is an important plant source of
to animals that are marginally defcient in the respective
fat because ground whole Haxseed is an excellent source
mineral (and so alrealy have high absorption efficiency)
of the omega-3 fatty acid alpha-linolenic acid.
and in diets that contain levels at or heat requirements.
In addition to specifc fat sources, ingredients such
However, because the body's efficiency of mineral
as chicken, poultry, and vatious meat products also con-
absorption is dependent upon its mineral status, bene-
tribute a signifcant amount of fat to pet foods. Fish meal
fits of the inclusion of chelated minerals in pet foods afe
is an excellent protein source and also supplies fish cil,
 questionable. Per AAFCO guidelines, pet foods are for-
which contains long-chain omega-3 fatty acids. Finally,
 mulated to include a buffer above minimum needs for
if an antioxidant has been added to the fat source as a
essential nutrients and are also typically fed to replete
 preservative, this must be indicated following the listing
animals. Therefore the small increment in increased
of the product on the ingredient list (see pp. 155-158).
bioavailability that may be conferred thrcugh organic
chelating may not be of beneft to the majority of ani-
 mals. However, some pet food companies do include
Vitamin and Mineral Sources
chelated minerals in their foods, as an added “buffer'
Almost all of the major ingredients discussed earlier also
 and because of pet owner perceptions of a beneft.
contribute vitamins and minerals to the diet. When
 One of the biggest concerns about vitamins in
a balanced ration is formulated, vitamin and mineral
 commercial pet foods is their loss during processing
levels are made adequate through the addition of puri-
 and storage. Adequate quantities of vitamins that
fed of semipurified forms of these nutrients. Because
 account for losses dluring processing and storage must
Nutrient Content of Pet Foods  155
be added to pet foods to ensure that suffcient levels
One of the chief concerns in the production of com-
are present at the time of feeding. The high heat and
 mercial pet foods is safety. A product must be proven to
pressure used in the canning process result in losses
be both nutritious and safe for consumption by com-
of the B vitamins thiamin and folic acid. Compensa-
panion animals throughout its designated shelf-life. The
tory levels of these vitamins must be added to main-
manufacturer must ensure that the food remains free
tain adequate postprocessing levels. In dry, extruded
of contamination with harmful bacteria and toxins and
pet foods, there are considerable losses of vitamin A,
is protected from degradation and the loss of nutrients
ribofavin, folic acid, niacin, and biotin. However, if
during storage. The method of preservation that is used
vitamin A is added as part of the fat coating that is
for a pet food depends to some degree on the type of
sprayed onto the food after extrusion, there is little to
food. The low moisture content of dry pet foods inhib-
no loss of the vitamin during storage. In semimoist
 its the growth of most organisms. The heat sterilization
foods, slight losses of vitamin A and ribofavin have
and anaerobic envifonment of canned foods kills all
been cbserved.52 Studies have provided recommenda-
microbes. Semimoist pet foods often have a low pH and
tions for levels of vitamins to add to preprocessed pet
contain humectants that bind water within the prod-
food to ensure that levels after processing and storage
uct, making it unavailable for use by invading bacteria
afe still sufficient to meet an animal's nutrient needs.
or fungi. Frozen pet foods, although less common, are
In addition, manufacturers who ehsufe thorough test-
protected by storage at extremely low temperatures.
ing of their products conduct nutrient analyses of
Many commercial foods also contain added ingredients
their fnished products; this testing may not be done
that aid in the preservation process. For example, potas-
by manufacturers who use the calculation method fot
sium sorbate prevents the formation of mold and yeasts;
nutritional adequacy substantiation.
glycerol and certain sugars act as humectants.
Ingredients that contribute vitamins and minerals
 A primary nutrient in pet foods that requires protec-
to pet foods must be balanced in terms of their overall
 tion during storage is dietary fat. The inclusion of high
quantities, their bioavailability, and their relationships 
levels of fat in some dry pet foods has resulted in the
to each other. Commonly included sources of minerals
 heed for methods of protecting these fats from oxidative
in commercial pet foods include potassium chloride,
 destruction during storage. Foods that are formulated
calcium carbonate, dicalcium phosphate, monosodium
for dogs and cats contain vegetable oils, animal fats, and
phosphate, manganese sulfate of manganese oxide,
the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K. These nutrients
copper sulfate, zinc oxide, sodium selenite, potassium
 all have the potential to undergo oxidlative destruction
iodide, ferfous sulfate, and cobalt catbonate. Examples of
sources of vitamins include choline chloride, D-activated
 peroxidation, occurs as a three-stage process.53 Initiation
animal sterol (a source of vitamin D), alpha-tocopherol,
occurs when a ffee fadical, usually oxygen, attacks a
thiamin or thiamin mononitrate, niacin, calcium panto-
PUFA and results in the formation of a fatty acid radi
thenate, pyridoxine hydrochloridle, ribefavin, folic acid,
cal. Exposure of the fat to heat, ultraviolet fadiation,
biotin, menadione dimethylpyrimidinol (a source of
of certain metal ions such as iron and copper acceler-
vitamin K), vitamin A acetate, and vitamin B2-
ate this process. The fatty acid radical continues to react
with oxygen, resulting in the formation of peroxides.
Peroxides react with other fatty acids to form more fatty
Additives and Preservatives
acid radlicals and hydroperoxides (Figure 16-2). This
 second phase is called propagation because the reaction
to enhance or preserve the product's color, Havor, tex-
 is autocatalyzed and increases geometrically in rate. The
ture, stability, or nutrient content. Preservatives afe
feaction is only terminated when all of the available
adlditives that are included with the express purpose
fatty acids and vitamins have been oxidized. The sub-
of protecting nutrients in the food from oxidative of
 sequent decomposition of the hydroperoxides produces
microbial damage. All preservatives are classified as
 offensive odors, tastes, and changes in the texture of the
additives, but not all additives have a function in food
food. In addition, oxidation of lipids in pet foods results
preservation.
in a loss of caloric content and the formation of toxic
156 Canine and Feline Nutrition
No Antioxidant
O,
R—H
R—H
—H+R
Fatty acid
Freeradical
Peroxide
Hydroperoxide
 Antioxidant Added
Antioxidant
A
R—H
+R*
A
H
Fatty acid
 Free radical
Halts free
radical formation
Figure 16-2   Antioxidant action.
forms of peroxides that can be harmful to the health of
found in certain grains, vegetable cils, and some herbs
companion animals.54 For example, a study with grow-
and spices. While these compounds exist in natufe, the
ing Coonhounds found that dogs that consumed diets
term “natural" can be misleading to consumers because
containing oxidized lipids had reduced serum vitamin
all of these compounds are processed in some way to
E levels and compromised antioxidant status during
make them available for use in commercial foods.58
growth.5S Very high levels of oxidlized lipids also caused
The mixed-tocopherols are probably the most widely
decreased growth rates and negatively affected some
distributed natural-derived antioxidant. These are com-
measures of immune function.
posed of four homologues: alpha-tocopherol (vitamin
Pet food manufacturers include antioxidants in com-
E), beta-tocopherol,
gamma-tocopherol, and delta-
mercial pet foods to prevent the autooxidation process.
tocopherol. Physiologically, alpha-tocopherol (vitamin
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) defines anti-
biological function as an anti-
 oxidants as substances that aid in the preservation of
 s ane ro yn s inq Apoq au u juio
foods by retarding deterioration, rancidity, or discolor-
ation as the fesult of oxidative processes
56Various types
delta-tocopherol both have low biological activity, but
of antioxidants have been accepted for use in human
they afe more effective than alpha-tocopherol as feed
and animal foods since 1947.57 These compounds do
antioxidants. Generally, delta-tocopherol is more stable
not reverse the effects of oxidation once it has
stafted;
father, they fetard the oxidative process
PUE
Iptevent
gamma-tocopherol.
Themixed
1tocopherols
that afe
destruction of the fat in the food. Therefore, to be effec-
used in foods afe cbtained primarily from the distilla-
tive, antioxidants must be included in the diet when
tion of soybean cil residue and have the highest effi-
it is initially mixed and processed. The inclusion of
 cacy of the natural-derived antioxidants in protection
antioxidant compounds in commercial pet foods pre-
of fats in pet foods. The tocopherols also have excel-
vents fancidity; maintains the food's favof, odor, and
texture; and prevents the accumulation of the toxic end
synthetic antioxidant preservatives. Howevef, tocoph
products of lipid degradation.
erols are an expensive ingredient, have less antioxidant
Antioxidant ingredients can be categorized into two
activity compared with synthetic antioxidants, and are
basic types—natural-derived products and synthetic
fapidly decomposed as they pfotect fat from oxidation.
products. Natural-derived antioxidants are commonly
As a result, the shelf-life of pet foods stabilized with
Nutrient Content of Pet Foods 157
tocopherols alone may be shorter than that of foods pre-
rigorous processing procedures that can include expo-
served with a mixture of several different antioxidants.59
sure to high heat, steam, and pressure. In addition,
Other hatural-derived ingredients with antioxidant
they must be protected from damaging oxidative reac-
activity that may be included in pet foods include
tions during varying lengths of storage. An effective
ascorbic acid (vitamin C), rosemary extract, marigold
extract, and citric acid. Ascorbic acid functions natu-
its antioxidant functions after being subjected to the
rally as an antioxidant by scavenging oxygen. Howevet,
high heat, pressure, and moisture of food processing
it is a watef-soluble compound and is not easily solubi-
(i.e., have gocd cafry-through). Most natural-derived
lized with the lipid fraction of foods, which affects its
antioxidants have lower cafry-through than synthetic
function as an antioxidant for the fat in commercial
products, so high concentrations must be included in
pet foods. Vitamin C has been shown to work syner-
the food to compensate for losses during processing.
gistically with other antioxidants, such as vitamin E
When natural-derived antioxidants are used in pet
and butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), and it is often
foods, the products of choice afe the mixed tocopherols,
included in pet foodls for this reason. Ascorbyl palmitate
usually in combination with ascorbic acid and rosemary
is a compound that is similar in stfucture to ascorbic
extfact. In other cases, these ingredients afe used to
acid. Although ascorbyl palmitate is not normally found
supplement the action of synthetic antioxidlants that ate
in nature, its hydrolysis yields ascorbic acid and the free
also included in the food. Because these hatural-derived
fatty acid (FFA) palmitic acid, both of which are natural
compounds tend to be significantly more expensive
compounds. The antioxidant function of ascorbyl pal-
than synthetic antioxidants, it can be difficult to attain
mitate is the fesult of the ascorbic acid portion of the
the necessary level of natural-derived antioxidants with-
molecule.
out it becoming cost-pfohibitive.
 Rosemary extract is a spice that is obtained from the
Effective synthetic antioxidants for pet foods include
dried leaves of an evergreen shrub, Rosmarimus ofcinalis.
butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA), BHT, tertiary butyl-
Although it is added to pet foods as a favor enhancet, it
hydroquinone (TBHQ), and ethoxyquin. BHA and
also has effectiveness as a natural-derived preservative in
BHT are approved for use in both human foods and
high-fat diets and has been shown to enhance antioxidant
animal feeds and have a synergistic antioxidant effect
efficiency when included in combination with tocopher-
ols, ascorbic acid and citric acid.59 As with the tocopher-
[ue jo uonid au u aesa yiy e pue yno
ols, rosemary extract generally has high consumer appeal.
fats, but they are slightly less effective when used with
Similarly, marigold extract is a source of lutein, a naturally
vegetable oils.57 TBHQ is an effective antioxidant fof
occurring antioxidant that may also have positive effects
 most fats and is approved for use in human and animal
on immune function. Citric acid is found in citrus fruits,
foods in the United States. However, this compound
such as oranges and lemons, and is often included in
au Aq 1o ‘uedef 1o epeue u! paaoidde uaaq iou sey
combination with other natural-derived antioxidants in
Eufopean Economic Community, so it is not used in
pet foods. Lecithin, monoglycerides, and diglycerides are
pet foods that have an international market. Ethoxy-
natural-derived compounds that are added to pet foods
quin is approved for use in animal feeds and in human
t0 act as emulsifying agents. In this capacity, they func-
foods. Like BHT and BHA, ethoxyquin has good carry-
tion to prevent separation of fat from other components
through, and it has an especially high effcacy in the
of the diet,allowing greater contact between antioxidants
protection of fats. Ethoxyquin is more effcient as an
and the lipid components in the food.
antioxidant than BHA or BHT, which allows lower
The hatural-derived antioxidant formulations that
levels of the compound to be included in the feed. It
afe available for use in pet foods have improved greatly
is especially effective in the protection of oils that con-
in recent years. However, they still have limited value
tain high levels of PUFAs and demonstrates synergistic
when used as the only type of antioxidant in a com-
 protection when used in combination with BHA.59,60
mercially produced pet food because the concentration
Starting in the late 1980s, consumer concern was
that must be included to provide an aclequate level of
 raised regarding the safety of synthetic antioxidants, spe-
protection is very high. Commercial pet foods undergo
 cifcally ethoxyquin, in pet foods. One of the arguments
158 Canine and Feline Nutrition
made against ethoxyquin was its use as an antioxidant
resultant puppies. However, liver pigmentation changes
in the rubber industry. The biochemical mechanism
 and increased liver enzymes were seen in some female
through which ethoxyquin prevents oxidation of rubber
dogs following
lactation. These results led to a request
is exactly the same mechanism by which it works to pro-
by the FDA Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM) to
tect the fat in pet foods. Similarly, BHA and BHT were
pet food manufacturers to voluntarily reduce the maxi-
both originally usedl to protect petroleum products from
mum level of ethoxyquin in their foods from 150 mg/
the oxidative changes that led to ^
“gumming."57 The fact
The pet food industry has honored
that a compound acts as an antioxidant in other situa-
this request. However, there are no studies to date that
tions does not preclude it from being an effective anti-
support the contention that ethoxyquin is responsible
oxidant in foods. Like most compounds, ethoxyquin,
for the vatiety of health problems that were originally
BHA, and BHT have multiple uses.6l
reported by pet owners to the FDA
Ethoxyquin has been included in feeds for animals
6tofecognize that
since 1959, and its safety in foods has been studied in
Icts that humans and animals consume
rabbits, fats, poultry, and dogs. The original studies
become toxic
 when consumed at high enough levels.
on which the FDA based approval for the inclusion of
The inclusion of antioxidants in commercial pet foods
ethoxyquin in animal feeds included a 1-
-year chronic
totthe
toxicity study in dogs. Data from this and other stud-
rimental oxidativ
 The proper use of all types
ies were used to determine a safe tolerance level of 150
of antioxidants
Jo (sy[s] sueisiu os I) (udd) uou ad siied
toxic
C compounds in pet foods. In
food.62 Subsequently, the manufacturer of ethoxyquin
most cases, synthetic antioxidants are included in foods
conducted a 5-yeat, multigenerational study in dogs.
because of their efficacy, good carry-through, and cost.
The data from this study failed to show any adverse
In contrast,
 carry-through, instability, and high
side effects of ethoxyquin when it was fed at a level of
levelsneeded
1 for effective protection make hatural-
300 mg/kg of the diet.63 During the 1990s, an inde-
derived antioxidants mofe challenging to use as the only
pendent fesearch facility conducted a study for the
manufacturer of ethoxyquin on the effects of ethoxy-
Pet
foods
alsc
contain
some additives that afe
quin upon the long-term health of dogs.64 Two genera-
included expressly
7 to contribute to characteristics of
tions of male and female dogs were fed diets containing
color, texture, of palatability. For example, coloring
either 0, 180, or 360 ppm of ethoxyquin for a period of
42 months. During this time, the dogs mated and pro
Some examples
include
 carotenoid pigments, ifon
duced viable litters of puppies. There were no effects of
oxide, tartrazine, sunset yellow, and allura fed. Othef
the antioxidant upon the health or fertility of the adult
coloring agents, such as nitrites, bisulftes, and ascor-
dogs, or upon the health, growth, or mortality of their
bate, are included to prevent discoloration of the pet
TABLE 16-3 COMMON ANTIOXIDANTS USED IN PET FOODS
COsT
AVAILABILITY
CARRY-THROUGH
EFFECTIVENESS
Natural-Derived
Mixed tocopherols
High
Low
Poor
Low
Ascor bic acid
High
LoW
Poor
Low
Ascorbyl palmitate
High
Low
Poor
LOW
Synthetic
BHA
Low
Moderate
Good
High
BHT
Low
Moderate
Good
High
TBHQ
Low
Poor
Good
High
Ethoxyquin
Low
Good
Excellent
High
BHA, Burylated hydroxyanisole; BHT, burylated hydroxytoluene; TBHQ, cerriary burylhydroquinone.
Nutrient Content of Pet Foods 159
food. As with human foods, an artifcial color can be
ingredients that are comprised of AAFCO-approved
used in a pet food only if it has been accepted as safe by
ingredients or nutrients, and for which specifc veteri-
the FDA. Flavor ingredients are included in some pet
nary health claims ate not made. Currently, all com-
foods to support label claims regarding Havor. AAFCO
 ponents in pet foods must be classified either as a feed
regulations require that the designated favor be detect-
ingredient (AAFCO-approved or -recognized) or as a
able by a recognized testing method.' A related group
drug. Therefore, if the CVM determines that a pet food's
of adlditives are those included to enhance palatability.
label claim for a functional ingredient constitutes a drug
These compounds are usually sprayed onto the outside
claim as opposed to a general health claim, they can
of dry pet foods to make the food more appetizing to
intervene and require that the ingredient be classified
pets. A commonly used palatability enhancer is digest.
The term digest refers to solutions that are produced
 For example, while the claim of “supports joint health"
through the enzymatic degradlation of various types of
may be acceptable for foods that include chondropro
meat or meat byproducts. This process is conducted
tective agents such as chondroitin sulfate and glucos-
under controlled conditions and is stopped when the
 r s, s    
protein in the mixture is partially digested. The fesult-
 or “decreases lameness" is not permissible.
ing slurry of liquid is highly palatable to dogs and cats
Similar to human foods, a wide variety of micro-
and is usually sprayed onto dry foods as an outer coat-
and macfonutfients, hutrient combinations, and novel
ing. In some cases, the digest is dried and added to the
ingredients are included as functional ingredients in
food as a powder following the application of a layer of
pet foods. Controlled studies providing empirical data
fat. Digest can also be used as a means of designating the
for health benefits are available for some, but not all,
food's favor. Other examples of palatability enhancers
of these compounds. In addition, because some nutti-
in commercial pet foods include garlic, onion, and
ent combinations afe proprietary, study results may not
vatiousspices.
be published or are generally unavailable in the public
Finally, emulsifers and thickening agents are impor-
afena. Pet food companies and nutritionists in academia
tant additives for the effect they have upon the pet
continue to study functional uses for nutrient combina-
food's texture. In canned pet foods, gums, glycerides,
tions and novel ingredients as they are identifed. Cur-
and modified starches are included for the production of
rently, the primary categories of pet health effects that
 a thick sauce or gravy. Examples of these ingredients ate
 afe targeted include joint health, skin and coat condi-
carrageenan, guar gum, gum arabic, and carboxymeth-
tion, gastrointestinal
1functioning,
，immune health,
ylcellulose. These agents can also be sprayed onto the
 lower urinary tract health, and obesity.
cutside of a dry food so that when water is adlded to the
Two functional ingredients that have been widely
food before feeding, they create a gravy or thick sauce.
accepted as chondroprotective agents for joint health
in human and pet foods afe glucosamine and chon-
droitin sulfate. Others include green-lipped mussel
Functional Ingredients
powder (a soufce of glycosaminoglycans, omega-3 fatty
Functional ingredients are dietary components that are
included in a food with the intent of providing a specific
UC-II (see Chapter 37, pp.
.503-504 for a complete
type of health beneft. These ingredients have become
discussion). Feeding pets to promote a healthy skin
very popular in human diets, in part because of the pass-
and coat condition has been a focus of nutritionists
ing of the Dietary Supplemental Health and Education
and pet owners for many years. Owners may be par-
Act (DSHEA) in 1994. This act limited the FDAs regu-
ticularly focused on coat condition because coat shine
latory oversight of functional ingredients used in human
and skin health are perceived as a barometer of a pet's
foods, leading to an increase in these products in the
overall nutritional health. Functional ingredients that
human foods market. In recent years this interest has
have been studied for their value in promoting skin
been expanded to companion animal diets.6 Although
health include modified levels of omega-3 and omega-6
the CVM argues that DSHEA does not apply to pet
fatty acids, conjugated linoleic acid, and formulas that
foods, it has tended to allow the inclusion of functional
combine various oils and B-vitamins (see Chapter 31,
160 Canine and Feline Nutrition
pp. 386-394 for a complete discussion). Gastrointesti-
agents that may control infammation of the urinary
nal function can be supported through the inclusion of
tract and reduce the risk of urolith development (see
Chapter 30). Finally, the high prevalence of overweight
ics such as fructooligosaccharide and mannanoligosac-
conditions in companion dogs and cats has led to the
charide.7 Fiber combinations are also included in cat
investigation of numerous functional ingredients that
foods for the control of hairballs. Another approach to
gastrointestinal health is the use of probiotics, which are
contfol glycemic response (see Chapters 28 and 29).
preparations of specifc bacterial species that function
to favorably modify the microbial balance of the large
intestine.68 The effects of probiotics are infuenced by
numerous factors and their mode of action appears to
the intent of providing specifc heaith benefits.Similar to
be multifaceted. Published studies in human subjects,
humar foods,a wide variety of micro- and macronutri
and increasingly in dogs and cats, show that probiotics
ents, rutrient combinations, and novel ingredients are
have value as functional ingredients to promote gastro-
inciuded asfunctionalingredients.The primary categores
intestinal health and may also benefit skin health and
immune function (see Chapter 35, pp. 470-472 for
skin and coat condition，gastrointestinal functioning
a complete discussion). Functional ingredients that
immune heaith,lower urinary tract heaith,and obesity
support lower urinary tract health in cats include
References
1. Association of American Feed Control Ofcials (AAFCO): Pet food regulations. In AAFCO Ofcial Publication, Atlanta, 2008,
AAFCO.
 2. Weigel J: Changing values: reference vs. actual. In Proceedings ofthe petfood forum, Chicago, 1996, Watts Publishing.
'S66t oeory uof pogfiad at fo sbuapti u 'snpord anof uo noedut aup upuesrapun sasueyp suaparaut Tyoprya ?
Watts Publishing.
4. National Research Council: Nutrient reguirements of dogs and cats, Washington, DC, 2006, National Academy Press.
5. Wiernusz CJ, Shields RG, Van Vlierbergen D], and others: Canine nutrient digestibility and stool quality evaluation of canned diets
containing various soy protein supplements, Vet Clix Nutr 2:49-56, 1995.
6. Bisset SA, Guilford WG, Lawoko CR, and others: Effect of food particle size on carbohydrate assimilation assessed by breath
hydrogen testing in dogs, Vet Clin Nutr 4:82-88, 1997.
7.Wang X: Efect of procesing methods and raw material soures on protein quality ofanimal protein meals, PhD thesis, Urbana, Il, 1996,
University of lllinois.
8. Lankhorst C, Tran QD, Havenaar R, and others: The effect of extrusion on the nutritional value of canine diets as assessed by in
vitro indicators, Anim Feed Sei Tech 138:285-297, 2007.
9. Smeets M, Minekus M, Havenaar R, and others: Description of a dynamic in vitro model of the dog gastro-intestinal tract and
evaluation of various transit times for protein and calcium, Aitern Lab Anim 27:L935-L949, 1999.
dogs, J Aim Sci 83:160-171, 2005.
11. Lafamme DP: Determining metabolizable energy content in commercial pet foods, J Anim Phyiol Anim Nutr 85:222-230, 2001.
12. Hervera M, Baucells MD, Torre C, and others: Prediction of digestible energy value of extruded dog food: comparison of methods,
J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 92:253-259, 2008.
13. Fahey G, Hussein SH: The nutritional value of alternative raw materials used in pet foods. In Proceedings ofthe petfood forum
Chicago, 1997, Watts Publishing
Nutrient Content of Pet Foods 161
14. Thompson A: 1ngredients: where pet food starts, 7op Companion Anim Med 23:127-132, 2008.
15. Aldrich G: Chicken first: marketing ploy or quality enhancement? Pet Food Ind, May 2007.
16. Cramer KR, Greenwood MW, Moritz JS, and others: Protein quality of various raw and rendered by-product meals commonly
incorporated into companion animal diets, J Axim Sei 85:3285-3293, 2007.
17. Murray SM, Patil AR, Fahey GC Jr, and others: Raw and rendered animal by-products as ingredients in dog diets, J Arim Sei
75:2497-2505, 1997.
18. Dozier WA, Dale NM, Dove CR: Nutrient composition of feed-grade and pet-food-grade poultry by-product meal, J Appl Poult Res
12:526-530, 2003.
19. Phillips T: Alternative pet food sales booming in the US and Canada, Pet Food Ind, September 2008.
20. Lafamme DP, Abood SK, Fascetti AJ, and others: Pet feeding practices of dog and cat owners in the United States and Australia,
J Am Vet Med Asoc 232:687-694, 2008.
21. Michel KE: Unconventional diets for dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 36:1269-1281, 2006.
22. Finley R, Ribble C, Aramini J, and others: The risk of salmonellae shedding by dogs fed Salmonella-contaminated commercial raw
food diets, Can Vet / 48:69-75, 2007.
23. Aldrich G: Corn gluten meal, Pet Food Ind, April 2005
Am / Vet Res 51:808-812, 1990.
 25. Yamka RM, Kitts SE, True AD, Harmon DL: Evaluation of maize gluten meal as a protein source in canine foods, Arim Feed Sci
Tech 116:239-248, 2004.
26. Aldrich G: Textured vegetable protein: all about appearance, Pet Food Ind, September 2008.
27. Hill RC, Burrows CF, Ellison CW, Bauer JE: The effect of texturized vegetable protein from soy on nutrient digestibility compared
to beef in cannulated dogs, J Arim Sei 79:2162-2171, 2001.
 28. Clapper GM, Grieshop CM, Merchen NR, and others: lleal and total tract nutrient digestibilities and fecal characteristics of dogs as
affected by soybean protein inclusion in dry, extruded diets, / Anim Sci 79:1523-1532, 2001.
29. Aspinall GO, Begbie R, McKay JE: Polysaccharide components of soybeans, Cereal Sci Today 12:224 261, 1967.
30. Hill RC, Burrows CF, Bauer JE, and others: Texturized vegetable protein containing indigestible soy carbohydrate affects blood
insulin concentrations in dogs fed high fat diets, J Nutr 136:2024S-2027S, 2006.
31. Zuo Y, Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, and others: Digestion response to low oligosaccharide soybean meal by ileal cannulated dogs,
J Anim Sci 74:2441-2449, 1996.
32. Yamka RM, Kitts SE, Harmon Dl: Evaluation of low-oligosaccharide and low-oligosaccharide low-phytate whole soya beans in
canine foods, Anim Feed Sci Tech 120:79-91, 2005.
33. Heaton KW, Marcus SN, Emmett PM: Particle size of wheat, maize, and oat test meals: effects on plasma glucose and insulin
responses and on the rate of starch digestion in vitro, Am J Clin Nutr 47:675-682, 1988.
34. Aldrich G: Wheat, Pet Food Ind, February 2005.
35. Twomey LH, Pethick DW, Borw JB, and others: The use of sorghum and corn as alternatives to rice in dog foods, J Nutr
132:1704S-1705S, 2002.
36. Murray SM, Fahey CC, Merchen NR, and others: Evaluation of selected high-starch Hours as ingredients in canine diets, J Anim Sci
77:2180-2186, 1999
37. Jeffers JG: Responses of dogs with food allergies to a single-ingredient dietary provocation, J Am Vet Med Asoc 209:608-611, 1996.
38. Garden OA, Pidduck H, Lakhani KH, and others: lnheritance of gluten-sensitive enteropathy in lrish Setters, Am / Vet Res
61:462468, 2000.
39. Bouchard GF, Sunvold GD: Improving canine glycemic response to a meal with dietary starch, Iroc VAVC, 1999, pp l6-19.
162 Canine and Feline Nutrition
40. Carciof AC, Takakura FS, do-Oliveria LD, and others: Effects of six carbohydrate sources on dog diet digestibility and postprandial
glucose and insulin response, J Anim Phyuiol Anim Nutr 92:326-336, 2008.
41. Bednar CE, Patil AR, Murray SM, and others: Starch and fiber fractions in selected food and feed ingredients affect their small
intestinal digestibility and fermentability in vitro in a canine model, 7 Nutr 131:276-286, 2001.
42. Aldrich G: Potatoes: common or novel carb? Pet Food Ind, October 2005.
43. Foster AP, Knowles TG, Moore AH, and others: Serum lgE and IgG responses to food antigens in normal and atopic dogs, and dogs
with gastrointestinal disease, Vet Immunot Immunopathot 92:113-124, 2003.
44. Spears JK, Grieshop CM, Fahey GC: Evaluation of stabilized rice bran as an ingredient in dry extruded dog diets, J Anim Sc?
82:1122-1135, 2004.
45. Aldrich G: Rice bran: fller or functional fber? Pet Food Ind, February 2008.
46. Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, Corbin JE, and others: Dietary fiber for dogs. 1. Effects of graded levels of dietary beet pulp on nutrient
intake, digestibility, metabolizable energy and digesta mean retention time, J Anism Sci 68:4221-4228, 1990.
47. Sunvold GD, Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, and others: Dietary fiber for dogs. IV. In vitro fermentation of selected fiber sources by
dog fecal inoculum and in vivo digestion and metabolism of fiber-supplemented diets, J Anim Sci 73:1099-1 109, 1995.
48. Sunvold GD, Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, and others: Dietary fber for cats: in vitro fermentation of selected fber sources by cat
fecal inoculum and in vivo utilization of diets containing selected fber sources and their blends, J Anim Sei 73:2329-2339, 1995.
49. Aldrich G: Sunflower oil fHower power in a jug, Pet Food Ind, March 2007.
50. Kunkle GA: Zinc-responsive dermatoses in dogs. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy Vl, Philadelphia, 1980, Saunders.
51. Aldrich G: Are chelated minerals worth it? Pet Food Ind, May 2008.
52. Adams CR: Stability of vitamins in processed dog food, Pet Food Ind, Jan/Feb:20-21, 1981.
53. Zicker SC, Wedekind KJ, Jewell DE: Antioxidants in veterinary nutrition, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 36:1183-1198, 2006.
 54. Shermer WD: Effective use of antioxidants: optimizing ingredient quality In Iroceedings ofthe petfood forum, Chicago, 1995, Watts
Publishing.
55. Turek JJ, Watkins BA, Schoenlein lA, and others: Oxidized lipid depresses canine growth, immune function, and bone formation
J Nutr Biochem 14:2431, 2003
56. Hilton JW: Antioxidants: function, types and necessty of inclusion in pet foods, Cax Vet J 30:682-684, 1989.
57. Dziezak D: Preservatives: antioxidantsthe ultimate answer to oxidation, Food Tech 9:94-102, 1986.
58. Coelho M, Parr J: The benefits of antioxidants. In Proceedings of the petfood forum, Chicago, 1996, Watts Publishing
59. Reynhout GS, Berdahl DR: Natural antioxidant systemsexperiences in the human food industry. In Proceedings ofthe petfood
forum, Chicago, 1997, Watts Publishing.
60. Gross KL, Bollinger R, Thawnghmuch P, Collings CF: Effect of three different preservative systems on the stability of extruded dog
food subjected to ambient and high temperature storage, / Nutr 124:2638S-2642S, 1994.
61. Coelho M: Ethoxyquin: science vs marketing, Pet Food Ind, Sept/Oct 1995.
62. Dzanis DA: Safety of ethoxyquin in dog foods, / Nutr 121:S1 63-S164, 1991.
63. Monsanto Chemical Company: A five-year chronic toxicity study in dogs wich santoquin: report to FDA, 1964.
64. Monsanto Chemical Company: Ethoxyguin Backgrounder, December 1996.
65. Winter J: Pet foods get functional, Functionat Ingred Mag, July 2006.
66. Phillips T: Functional fixes, Pet Food Ind, August 2008.
      sd e   s     
24:701-714, 2006.
68. Trejo AV, Hayek MG, Kelley RL: Managing microbes for wellness. In Proc NAVC Conf June 2008.
17
Types of Pet Foods
The majority of pet owners in the United States feed
product has almost completely disappeared from the
their companion animals commercially prepared pet
commercial market.
foods. These products are available in several forms
The development of the extrusion process during
that vary according to the processing methods used,
the 1960s resulted in the almost complete replacement
the ingredients included, and the methods of pres-
ervation. Foods can also be categorized accordling to
Today, expanded products fepresent the most com-
their nutrient content, the purpose for which they are
mon type of dry pet food produced and sold in the
formulated, and the quality of ingredients they con-
United States. The extrusion procedure involves mix-
tain. One of the broadlest classifcations of commercial
ing all of the ingredients together to form dough, which
pet foods divides products according to processing
is then cooked under conditions of high pressure and
method, methods of preservation, and moisture con-
temperature (80° to 200° C).1 The machine that is used
tent; these categories are the dry, wet, and semimoist
to cook and shape expanded foods is called an cxtruder.
foods. In recent years, a variety of foods have been
The dough moves very quickly through the extruder
 developed to meet specifc needs of some pet owners.
and is further mixed as it proceeds. The high cooking
These include natural and organic foods, raw food
temperature, movement of the dough, and rising pres-
diets, and vegetarian products. This chapter exam-
sure causes cooking to occur very rapidlly (within 10 to
ines the various types of commercial pet foods, the
270 seconds). When the cooked dough reaches the end
advantages and disadvantages of each, and the use of
of the extruder, it exits through a die (small opening).
homemade diets.
The die forces the soft product into the desired shape,
and a rotating knife cuts the forms into the desired
kibble size. B
Extrusion causes rapid cooking of the
DRY PET FOODS
starches within the dough, resulting in increased digest-
Dry pet foods contain between 6% and 10% moisture
ibility and palatability. After cooling, a coating of fat
and 90% or more dry matter (DM). This category of
 pet foods includes baked kibbles, biscuits, meals, and
expanded kibbles (a process called “enrobing"). Hot-air
expanded (extruded) products. Baked kibbles and
drying reduces the total moisture content of the product
biscuits are prepared in a similar manner, although
to 10% or less.
the shape of the end product differs. In each case,
A certain level of starch must be included in
all of the ingredients are mixed into a homogeneous
aul jo Suissasoid 1adoid molle o1 sionpoid papuedxa
dough, which is then baked. When biscuits are made.
product. Similarly, baked biscuits often contain wheat
the dough is formed or cut into the desired shapes
as an ingredient because the starch and gluten of
and the individual biscuits are baked much like cook-
wheat contribute to the appealing texture and favor
ies or crackers. When baked kibble is produced, the
of biscuits. The cooking process of both extruded and
dough is spread onto large sheets and baked. After
baked dry foods improves the digestibility of the com-
cooling, the large sheets are broken into bite-size
plex carbohydrates in the product and enhances the
pieces and packaged. Many dog and cat treats are
food's palatability. Heat treatment and storage can
baked biscuits, and a limited number of companies
result in minor losses of some vitamins, so compensa-
still produce complete and balanced baked kibble.
tory amounts of these nutrients are included by manu
Dry meals, the major type of dry pet food sold before
facturers when the diet is formulated. The heat used
1960, are prepared by mixing together a number of
in the extrusion process also sterilizes the product,
       
 and the low amount of moisture that is present in dry
163
164 Canine and Feline Nutrition
foods aids in the prevention of growth of bacteria of
TABLE 17-1 NUTRIENT CONTENT OF DRY,
fungus.
SEMIMOIST, AND WET DOG
Ingredients
commonly
used in dry pet foods
FOODS
include a variety of cereal grains, meat, poultry or fish
products, some milk products, vegetable fats/oils, and
AF BASIS
DM BASIS
vitamin and mineral supplements (see Chapter 16 for
Dry
a complete discussion). The caloric density of dry pet
Moisture (%)
6-10
0
Fat (%)
7-20
8-22
Protein (%)
16-30
calories (kcal) of metabolizable energy (ME)/kilogram
18-32
Car bohydrate (%)
41-70
46-74
(kg), or between 1300 and 2000 kcal/pound (lb) cn
ME (kcal/kg)
2800-4050
3000-4500
o  s   () is a- 6
slightly higher in energy density than dog foods. The
Semimoist
Moisture (%)
15-30
energy density of dry pet foods is somewhat limited
Fat (%)
7-10
8-14
by the processing and packaging methods used. How-
Protein (%)
17-20
20-28
ever, most dry pet foods can easily meet the energy
Carbohydrate (%)
40-60
58-72
needs of the majority of companion animals. Products
ME (kcal/kg)
2550-2800
3000-4000
that are formulated for adult maintenance will only
Wet
be bulk limited if fed to hard-working dogs or pup-
Moisture (%)
75
Fat (%)
5-8
20-32
cases, foods have been developed to meet the specific
Protein (%)
7-13
28-50
 energy requirements of working dogs and growing
Car bohydrate (%)
4-13
18-57
puppies. Depending on the purpose of the food, the
ME (kcal/kg)
875-1250
3500-5000
DM content of dry dog foods ranges between 8% and
AF,Asfed; DM, dry matrer; ME meabolizable energy.
22% fat and 18% and 32% protein (Table 17-1). Cat
foods of all types contain slightly higher levels of pro-
tein than dog foods.
Dry dog foods are the most popular type of pet food pur
Dry dog foods
s afe very convenient for owners and
chased by consurmers in the United States. Dry foods are
economical and easy to store and feed, and they may be
'eauss ul z'saieis paun aun ui siaumo iad Aq iuonoq
benefcialto dental hygiene.High-quality dryfoods have
high nutrient densities anddigestibilitiesmeaning that
semimoist foods, and they store well because of theif
less food can be fed, more nutrients will be absorbed
ad used, and stool volume will decrease.
be purchased at one time, and dry products have a fea-
sonably long shelf-life when stored undler proper condi-
tions. Many pet owhers prefer feeding dry foods because
A potential disadvantage of dry pet foods, when
e to their pet fof
compared with semimoist or wet foods, is that dry
.In
siul 'sies pue ssop auos oi alqeie jed ssal aq Aeu spooy
some cases, dogs and cats can be fed free
-choice with a
disadvantage is especially true of foods that are low
dry food and not overconsume. However, the high fat
 in fat or that contain poorly digestible or low-quality
content and palatability of some of the foods marketed
today coupled with the sedentary
itesty
preclude free-choice feeding for many
ahd
cats.Dry
pet food may also offer some dental
lvglene2
advantages.
and are highly palatable to most companion animals.
1EL1
low in moisture
biscuits or pet food may aid in the prevention of plaque
afe used to formulate dry pet foods, harsh or impropef
and calculus accumulation on teeth
1 (see Chapter 34,
processing of the ingredients can cause a feduction in
pp. 442-445 for a complete discussion).3
nutrient availability and the loss of nutrients. As a result,
Types of Pet Foods 165
code and date. Pressufe sterilization of canned products
and nutrient availabilities. Companies that manufac-
is called retorting. Temperatures and times for retort-
Aid inq ‘azis ues pue ionpid au ym Aea su
only use properly treated ingredients and manufactur-
 s       y  
ing methods to ensure that the digestibilities of their
high heat and pressure involved in processing canned
products remain high after processing.
foods kills harmful bacteria and causes some nuttient
losses. Manufacturers of high-quality products conduct
the research necessary to determine the extent of these
WET PET FOODS
losses and then adljust their formulations to compensate
asouspooy iad iam jo sadi Arud omi ane ar
for them. After exiting the fetort, the cans afe cooled
that provide complete and balanced nutrition and those
under controlled conditions to ensure the sterility of the
that provide a dietary supplement or treat in the form of
product and the integrity of the sealed cans. To desig-
a canned/pouched meat or meat byproduct. Complete
and balanced wet foods may contain blends of ingre-
the final step of production. Wet foods afe also sold in
dients such as muscle meats, poultry or fish meats of
pouches and tfays. These containers afe more delicate
byproducts, cereal grains, texturized vegetable protein
and so fetorting procedures are adjusted to prevent
(TVP), and vitamins and minerals. Some of these prod-
damage to package structures and seals. Generally, the
ucts contain only one or two types of muscle meat of
cooking pressure is lower and more tightly controlled to
animal byproducts, with enough supplemental vitamins
ensure that rupture or shrinkage of the packaging does
and minerals to make the product nutritionally com-
not occut.
plete. The second type of wet food, often referredl to
In general, wet foods are more palatable and digest-
as “meat products,” consists of the same types of meat
ible than many dry pet foods, and they contain a higher
listed earlier but without supplemental vitamins and
DM proportion of protein and fat (see Table 17-1).4
minerals. These foods afe not formulated to be nutri-
When measured on a DMB, the caloric content of wet
tionally complete and are intended to be used only
Sgenerally
y ranges between 3500 and 5000
ea pue anados Aeane ue on nuaaddns e se
kcal/kg or about 1600 and 2300 kcal/1b. The fat con-
 diet. For example, some pet owners add a small amount
tent of wet pet foods ranges between 20% and 32%,
Aip paueeq pue aiaido siad inau on pooy nam jo
and protein levels ate usually between 28% and 50%.
food every day. The high fat content of the wet supple-
Most wet 
oroducts contain a relatively small proportion
ment enhances the texture and palatability of the pet's
catbohydrate when compared with that in
diet. Although many complete and balanced dry foods
other types
ofpet
I foods (see Table 17-1). Wet foods
are also highly palatable and provide a balanced diet,
are also more expensive than dry pet foods. Although
some pet owners believe that a dry diet alone becomes
expense is often not a concern for owners of cats of
boring or bland to their pet. Adding a spoonful or two
small dogs, it can become significant when feding
of a product that looks like meat or stew makes many
large dogs or multiple pets. Nutrient and price com-
owhers feel they are making the meal more enjoyable
patisons between wet and dry pet foods should always
for their pet.
be made on either a DMB of a caloric-density basis
From a processing standpoint, there ate three general
because wet foods contain a very large proportion of
types of wet foodsloaf, chunks or chunks in gravy,
water (see Chapter 15, p. 132). In the United States the
and a chunk-in-loaf combination. Wet pet foods are
 moisture content of pet foods can be as high as 78%, or
 prepared by frst blending the meat and fat ingredients
 equal to the natural moisture content of the ingredients
with measured amounts of water. Measured amounts of
used, whichever is greater. On average, wet pet foods
dry ingredients are then added and the entire mixture
contain about 75% water; this amount can be com-
is heated. Canning occurs on a conveyor line. Most pet
pated with dry pet foods, which contain approximately
foods are typically sold in either 3-, 5.5-, or 13.2-ounce
6% to 10% moistufe.
(oz) cans. After filling, the canis afe then sealed with a
 Some advantages of wet pet foods include their long
double seam, washed, and labeled with a manufacturer
 shelf-life and high acceptability. The sterilization and
166 Canine and Feline Nutrition
sealing of the cans and pouches allows these products
to be kept for long periods before opening, without
Tip:There are two primary types of wet pet foods-
the need for special storage considerations. Because of
those that provide compiete and baianced nutrition and
those that do not. Compiete and baianced wet foods
their nutrient content and texture, wet foods tend to
be highly palatable to dogs and cats. However, this can
contain vitamins and minerais in addition to muscle
be a disadvantage for some companion animals. Dogs
meats, pouitry, meat, or fsh byproducts, cereal grains,
and cats that have moderate to low energy requirements
and/or texturized vegetable protein.Foods thatare not
may be predisposed to the development of obesity when
compiete andbalanceddo notcontain allthe necessary
fed exclusively wet pet foods. If fed free-choice, the high
vitamins and minerais and shouid be considered as α
palatability of these products can override an animal's
dietary supplement onty.
inherent tendency to eat to meet its caloric require-
ments, resulting in the overconsumption of energy.
Conversely, dogs and cats that have increased energy
SEMIMOIST PET FOODS
needs of feduced interest in food because of illness
may benefit from the high palatability and energy den-
Semimoist pet foods contain 15% to 30% water and
sity of wet food. Feeding a wet diet is also an approach
include fresh or frozen animal tissues, cereal grains, fats,
to ensuring adequate water intake in cats that afe at
and simple sugars as their principal ingredients. These
high risk of developing lower urinary tfact disease (see
products are softer in texture than dry pet foods, which
Chapter 30, pp. 365-366).
contributes to their acceptability and palatability for
Gourmet-type wet cat foods are especially popu-
some animals. Several methods of preservation ate used
lar with cat owners. These products may or may not
to pfevent contamination and spoilage of semimoist
be nutritionally complete, and they contain pri-
foods and permit an extended shelf-life. The inclusion
marily animal tissues such as fish, shrimp, tuna, 0f
of humectants such as salt, simple sugars, glycerol, of
liver. These foods are often sold in small, one- of
corn syrup reduces the water activity of the food, which
two-serving cans and appeal to owners’ desires to
 prevents the growth of contaminating organisms.8 Fur-
ther
f protection is provided by preservatives such as
degree of risk in the exclusive feeding of these prod-
potassium sorbate, which prevents the growth of yeasts
ucts to some cats. More so than dogs, which have
and molds. Small amounts of organic acids may also
an evolutionary history of scavenging and consum-
be included to decrease the pH of products and inhibit
ing a wide variety of food types, cats appear to be
bacterial growth
more susceptible to the development of neophobia,
The high simple sugar content of many semimoist
the rejection of foods that have not been previously
dog foods and treats contributes to the palatability and
encountered. This is more likely to develop if a cat is
digestibility of these products. Although dogs have
fed a diet of a certain type or that contains a single
been shown to enjoy the taste of simple sugars, cats
type of ingredient starting early in life and continu-
ate less likely to select sweet foods.5-1l Semimoist pet
foods that contain a high proportion of simple carbo-
accept only this one food item and will refuse to eat
hydrates have digestibility coefficients that are similar to
any other type or flavor of food. This can be a prob-
those of wet foods. However, because of their lower fat
lem if the food is not complete and balanced, or if
content, the caloric density of semimoist foods is usu-
the cat experiences a health condition that warrants
ally less. The ME content of semimoist foods typically
a change in diet. Therefore, if wet foods are used
ranges between 3000 and 4000 kcal/kg on a DMB, of
with cats, it is advisable to feed complete and bal-
about 1400 to 1800 kcal/lb. Semimoist foods contain
anced rations that contain more than one principal
between 20% and 28% protein and between 8% and
ingredient and to occasionally offer different flavors
14% fat on a DMB. The proportion of carbohydrate
of food. The gourmet products can be used as sup-
in semimoist foods is similar to that of dry foods (see
plemental feeding, but they should not make up the
Table 17-1). Howevef, an important difference is that
entire diet.
the carbohydrate in semimoist pet foods is largely in
Types of Pet Foods 167
the form of simple carbohydrates, with a relatively smal1
the form of baked biscuits. Over time, different shapes,
proportion present as starch.
sizes, and favofs of biscuits were developed and mar-
n d  o  so nd nio
keted. Because treats are often purchased on impulse
because they generally are less odorous than wet foods,
or because of novelty, owners afe more likely to tfy a
and many come in convenient single-serving packages.
new favor or type of treat than they are to completely
These foods are also available in a large vatiety of shapes
switch dog of cat food. To capitalize on this, manufac-
and textures that often resemble different types of meat
 turers have continued to develop new types of dog and
products, such as ground beef, meat patties, or chunks of
cat shacks. Today, treats can be categofized into fouf
beef. Although these different forms do not necessarily
basic types—semimoist, biscuits, jerky, and rawhide
refect nutrient content or palatability for the pet, they
products. Cat treats are usually in the form of either
do appeal to the tastes of many pet owners. Semimoist
semimoist or biscuit products, while rawhides and jerky
foods do not require refrigeration before opening and
 products are highly palatable to many dogs. Many treats
have a relatively long shelf-life. The cost of these foods
ate made to resemble foods that humans normally eat,
when compared on a DMB is usually between the cost
such as hamburgers, sausage, bacon, cheese, and even
of dry and wet products. However, products sold as
ice cream. Examples of several popular treat concepts
include snacks that are made with all-natural ingredi-
wet pet foods. Because they afe lower in energy density
ents, biscuits that promote dental health, and chews
than wet foods, semimoist diets can be fed free-choice
made from livestock body parts such as ears, hooves,
to some pets. However, these products dry out and lose
and event noses.
appeal when left in a pet's bowl for an extended period
Although treats and snacks do not have to be nutri-
of time.
tionally complete, a significant propotion of these
products are formulated to be complete and balanced,
and some biscuits and semimoist treats carry the same
SNACKS AND TREATS
nutritional label claims as dog and cat foods. In gen-
Snacks and treats have become increasingly popular
eral, treats and snacks are highly attractive to pets and
with pet owners in fecent years. A survey conducted in
spooy iad jo sadai iaqo ueu aiou Apuesyuais isos
1965 showed that Nabisco's Milk Bones dominated the
when compared on a weight basis. Part of this cost is a
treat market, and the choice of snacks at that time was
refection of the larger amounts of marketing effort and
extremely limited. However, today almost every major
money directed toward making the product attractive
pet food company markets one or more types of dog
to pet owners.13
and cat shacks. This incfease can be theorized to reflect
some of the changing roles that dogs and cats have had
PET FOOD CLASSIFICATIONS
in our society within the last few decades. Pet owners
purchase treats not because of their nutritional value
In addition to classifying pet foods according to the type
'sad nau on uoae pue aaol sumous jo Aem e se ing
of processing method that is used, they can also be clas-
Feeding and caring for a pet is a nurturing process, and
sified with respect to overall quality, the types of ingredi
giving pets “special" snacks generates the positive feel-
ents that ate included (or excluded), availability, and cost.
ings that accompany nurturing and the expression of
A recent survey of the consumer habits of pet owners
affection. Pet owhers also use tfeats as training aids
to
reported that the continuing devotion and commitment
reinforce desired behaviors, at times of arrival or depar-
to companion animals is refected in increased interest
ture, as a means of providing a sense of variety in the
in “premium” and “super-premium” products, those that
 pet's diet, and as an aid to proper dental health.12
aim b ,1'ads ai ad a jo pua iauiy au uo ane
Because emotional benefits are a primary motiva-
vatiety of new pet food products have also been intro-
Jiyp jo st nad aui on Aiqeeed 'siean sunq 1og 101
duced in recent years. Some of these target the needs
inmportance. Owners ate less concerned with the nutri-
of consumers in niche matkets and are formulated to
tional value of a snack than they are with its appearance
contain of eschew a specific type or quality of ingredient
and acceptability. In the eafly years, all dog tfeats were in
(organic foods, “natural" foods, and vegetarian food),
168 Canine and Feline Nutrition
while others employ a particular method of prepara-
that are formulated to support immune health and
tion or processing (raw diets and homemade diets). Pet
proper body condition in senior pets. The companies
owners select these foods for a variety of reasons. These
may include beliefs about the wholesomeness and safety
provide educational materials about their products
of foods; a desire to follow a prescribed “food philoso-
 and about companion animal nutrition and feeding to
phy” that refects a religious, ethical or personal belief
pet owners and professionals. Although some of these
system; or beliefs about the therapeutic value of certain
 products can be found in grocery stores, many are only
types of ingredients.15 For example, according to arecent
available through pet supply stores, feed stores, or vet-
report, the market segment of raw, frozen, organic, and
erinatians.
natural pet foods, while still relatively small, is growing
Most of the premium and super-premium brands
of pet food are produced using fixed formulations.
 this growth is a belief among pet owners that these foods
This means that the manufacturer does not change the
are more healthful and of higher quality than more con-
ingredients composition from batch to batch based on
vehtional products.
ingredient availability or market price. In addition,
manufacturers of these products conduct research and
feeding studies to ensure the wholesomeness of their
Today pet owners enjoy a wide variety of pet foods to
foods and to validate the use of new ingredients and
choose from. The premiur and superpremium foods
forrnulations. These studies confrm to the pet owner
provide consumers with a guarantee of quality ingredi-
that the food has been adequately tested and is based
ents and high nutrient availability Other foods are mar
upon sound nutritional principles. Premium and super-
keted to cater to pet owners' needs to provide a food
premium pet foods afe usually more costly cn a weight
that is alf-natural, organic, vegetarian, or comprised of
basis than basic nutrition brands because of the high-
raw ingredients.
and fesearch that is conducted on these products. How-
ever, because these foods are usually very digestible and
nutfient dense, smaller amounts can be fed, and the cost
Premium and Super-Premium
per serving is often comparable to many basic nutrition
Brands
brands of pet food.
The term preium pet food refers to products developed
to provide optimal nutrition for dogs and cats during
Basic Nutrition and Economy
different stages of life. These foods target companion
Brands
animal owners, hobbyists, and professionals who are
very involved with their companion animal's health
Basic nutrition brands include foods that are marketed
nationally or regionally and sold in grocery store chains
highly digestible and have good to excellent nutrient
and through mass-merchant stores. The companies
availability are used in these products. Manufacturers
that produce these foods devote a substantial amount
of most premium pet foods formulate and market prod-
of energy and fnances to advertising, which results in
ucts for different stages of life and lifestyles and for dif-
high name recognition of their products among con-
ferent breed sizes (dogs). For example, dog foods have
sumers. The principal marketing strategies used to sell
been developed for hard-working dogs (performance
these products relate either to the diet's palatability and
diets), adult dogs during maintenance, growing dogs
appeal to the pet owner (basic nutrition brands), of
of difrent sizes, and for females during lactation and
to its price (economy brands). Many of these brands
gestation. Super-prermium foods are those that include
 afe produced using variable formulations. This means
high-quality ingredients along with various types of
that the ingredients included in a particular brand may
functional ingredients or nutrients that providle specific
vary from batch to batch, depending on ingredient
health benefts. Examples include foods that contain
joint protective agents for large-breed dogs and foods
poultry meal may be the primary protein source in
Types of Pet Foods 169
Happy Pal dog food the first time a pet owner purchases
and generic brands a poor choice for pet owners when
a bag. However, because of changes in market prices,
selecting a commercial pet food.
the second bag may include lower amounts of poul-
tty meal and higher amounts of other protein sources
such as poultry byproduct meal or a cereal grain. When
Premium andsuper-premium pet foods contain
vatiable formulation is used, the guaranteed analysis
high-quality ingredients,are backed by nutritional
panel will not change, but the source and the quality
research, and target specifc life stages and heaith
of the ingredients may be altered without notice. This
benefits.Basic nutrition brands focus on owner appeal
alteration can result in variable product quality and
and palatability to the pet, while economy brands are
digestibility and may cause gastrointestinal upset in
marketed for owners who are most concerred with the
some pets when a new bag of food is fed. In general,
cost of a product. Finally, because generic pet foods are
basic nutrition brands of pet food that are marketed
produced on a least-cost basis, contain lower-quality
for palatability have high brand-recognition among pet
ingredients,and may not be formulated tobecomplete
owners and have an appearance that appeals to own-
and baianced, they are not a good choice for most pets.
ers’ perceptions of wholesome food for their dog of
cat. These foods tend to have lower digestibilities than
the premium and super-premium brands of foods, but
they typically contain higher-quality ingredients and
Private-Label Brands
have higher digestibilities than do the economy brands.
Private-label pet foods are products that carry the house
Ingredients, palatability, and digestibility may vary sig-
name of the grocery store chain or mass-merchant
nifcantly among brands, as well as among different
retailer in which they are sold. Some of these products
products produced by the same manufacturer.
 are siano a siseq iso-isa e uo psni ae
Economy brands are those foods that are formu-
duced to refect the pet care philosophy of the spon-
lated on a least-cost basis and are priced substantially
 soring store or outlet. Because some of these products
lower than other comparable brands. They include
are produced by the same companies that make generic
generic brands (no label) and some private-label
foods, they can be similar in quality to generic pet
brands of food (see below). Generic products repre-
foods. In addition, private-label foods often claim to be
sent the least expensive and typically the poorest qual-
comparable to premium foods, although they sell for a
much lower price. As in any industry, “clone”" products
Many of these are produced and marketed locally of
 are marketed that may imitate the name, packaging, bag
regionally. Because the manufacturers of economy
colors, and/or ingredient lists of premium foods.
brands are chiefy concerned with producing a low-
cost product, inexpensive, poof-quality ingredients afe
often used, and few, if any, feeding studies are con-
Organic and Natural Brand Labels
ducted. Some of the generic products are not formu-
Although organic foods still account for just over 5%
lated to be nutritionally complete and will not carry a
of total pet food sales, these foods experienced an
label claim. Feeding studies with dogs have shown that
incfease in fetail sales of almost 50% between 2003
generic products have signifcantly lower digestibilities
-puedxa Aipide1 e ssssns aseanus su 9t Zooz pue 
and nutrient availabilities than premium and popular
 ing level of interest, similar to that which is occurring
brands of food.18 Another study reported the develop-
in the human foods marketplace. Pet owners’ interest
ment of zinc-responsive dermatosis in dogs that were
in and concern about the source of pet food ingredi-
E pue suaaiu aienb-ood at'spoo ad sauss pa
  u ' s i i  e s si
low fat content can result in low palatability, leading to
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) established
reduced acceptance of these foods by some dogs. Alto-
the National Organic Program, which provides a set
gether, problems with ingredient quality, nutrient bal-
of standards for organic human foods. These regula-
ance and availability, and the uncertainty of adequate
tions require that animal-source ingredients come only
testing and quality control generally make economy
from animals that received no antibiotics or growth
170 Canine and Feline Nutrition
hormone, and plant-source foods cannot be treated
evolutionary history as a carnivore. Proponents of raw
with pesticides, synthetic fertilizers, or ionizing radia-
dliets assert that because the dog's wild ancestors hunted
tion. Bioengineered products are also prohibited. The
and consumed prey species, present day dogs are best fed
USDA inspects and certifes producers and human food
foods that are not heat-treated or processed. These claims
processors, but has not extended their organic certifi-
may also refect prevailing perceptions about the hunt-
cation program to pet foods. Although the Association
ing behavior and eating patterns of wild wolves and the
of Ametican Feed Conttol Officials (AAFCO) does not
relationship between the dog and its wild ancestors.21
have written labeling regulations for organic pet foods,
Proponents of raw food diets for dogs also make numer-
it does recognize the term organic and requires compli-
ous claims for the health benefits of raw meat diets.
ance with USDA standards for pet food ingredients that
These include, but afe not limited to, improved immune
ate labeled as organic.5
function, enhanced vitality and overall health, increased
 Related to organic products are the “natural" foods,
 energy, decreased body odor, and improvements in skin
which are formulated to include no artifcial additives
and coat condition. Howevef, with the exception of tes
(particularly preservatives), coloring agents, or favors.
timonial anecdotes, there are no objective data to sup-
In addition, these foods are usually promoted as being
 port or refute any of these claims. Although raw diets
free of unintentional contaminants such as pesticides
can be formulated to be complete and balanced, there
and heavy metals. Natural foods are preserved using
is no evidence that they promote superior health or cure
combinations of natural-occurring antioxidants, such
dlisease in dogs or cats.
as the mixed tocopherols, ascorbic acid, and rosemary
Raw diets come in several forms. Commercially
extract (see Chapter 16, pp. 156-157). Because the nat-
available products include complete fations that are
ural-occurring antioxidants are generally not as effective
sold frozen or less commonly, as slightly cooked (pas-
as synthetic preservatives, the shelf-life of most natural
teurized) or dehydrated refrigerated foods. Other com-
foods is shorter that the shelf-life of foods that include
 panies providle a grain or supplement mix, which the
synthetic preservatives. Therefore, it is important that
 owher then adds to raw meat that is purchased locally
both retailers and consumers monitor the “"best used
Another approach is to prepare homemade raw food
by" dates of these products to avoid selling or purchas-
diet using recipes obtained through popular books of
 ing an unsafe product. Finally, although organic and
through the Internet. Regardless of the source or type
natural pet foods are often discussed together, the label
 of raw food diet that is fed, there are two primary cat-
A csiueio, yim shomauouas you s! eineu, jo
egories of concerns that are raised about these diets. The
 spooy ienu, uouyp Aq s! poonad sueo ue
frst is nutritional adequacy and the second focuses on
afe marketed as “all natural" are not necessarily organic,
food safety. In one report, food samples from five raw
because all of the USDA standards for organic certifica-
food diets for dogs were analyzed for nutrient content.22
tion may hot have been followed.
Three of the products were homemade and two were
commercially prepared. All three of the homemade
diets had numerous nutrient deficiencies and excesses
Raw Food Diets
when compared with the AAFCO nutrient profle for
Raw food diets have become popular in recent years
dogs. The two commercial products also had several
with a small proportion of pet owners and enthusiasts.
nutrient imbalances. When compared with AAFCO
Although the majority of people continue to feed com-
 nutrient profles for adult dogs, one commercial food
mercially available foods as their pet's primary diet, a
was defcient in calcium and phosphorus, and had a
fecent survey of owners in the United States and Australia
calcium:phosphorus fatio that was dangerously low
found that approximately 25% of dogs were fed raw
(0.15). This food also contained excessively high levels
meat or bones on a regular basis to supplement theif
of zinc. Both commercial raw foods contained excessive
normal diet.20 The number of pet owners who fed raw
levels of vitamin D. Although additional studies that
diets as their pet's primary diet was much simaller, com-
examine a wider fange of commercial and homemade
prising less than 3% of owners. A primary motivation
faw dliets are necessary, these results suggest that the risk
for feeding a raw diet relates to beliefs about the dog's
of nutrient imbalance is a valid concern when feeding
Types of Pet Foods171
 a raw food diet. It is also likely that home-prepared raw
whose products were testedl. Saimonella enterica was also
diets vary most dramatically in nutrient content because
found, but in a lower incidence rate than that reported
of variation in the types of ingredlients that are used,
in other studies (7.1% of the raw meat samples).
the potential for using substitutions, and the untested
Collectively, these studies indicate that homemade
aclequacy of some tecipes.23
and commercially prepared raw meat diets for pets
Food safety concerns with raw food diets include
present a risk to both pets and their owners of exposure
the danger of gastrointestinal obstruction or perfora-
t0 potentially pathogenic bacterial species. Contami-
tion that is associated with feeding any type of bone.
nation with enteric bacteria has been found in a wide
However, the most prevalent concern is the risk of meat
vatiety of animal-source meats, with chicken represent-
contamination with foodborne pathogens and trans-
ing a frequent source of Saimonella species. Although
b2'aIdosd oi pue siad ynoq on suoujed asaul jo uoissu
 human-grade meats are often used with homemadle raw
Proponents of raw food diets counter these concerns by
diets, this is not necessarily the case with commercially
 claiming that bacterial pathogens do not cause illness in
 prepared raw pet foods. This is an important considler-
dogs because of a unique adaptation of the canine intes-
ation because of the difference in regulatory oversight
tinal tract that protects dogs from infection.25 However,
between human-grade and non-human-grade meats.
there is no evidence to support this claim, and there are
There afe cuffently no fegulations that monitor bacte-
 documented cases of fecal shedding of Salmonella spp.
fial contamination of raw meat pet foods in either the
and of salmonellosis in dogs and cats that were fed raw
United States or Canada.3l In the United States, the
meat.24,26,27 Moreover, such a claim does not address
USDA's Food Safety Inspection Service is fesponsible
risks associated with fecal microbe shedding in pets fed
for ensuring that the domestic meat supply of meats
raw meat or the risk of transmission of raw food patho-
consumed by humans is not contaminated. Howevef,
gens to humans.
their oversight does not extend to bacterial contamina-
Several studies have examined the prevalence of
tion in meats that are non-human grade and which can
microbial contamination in faw food diets. In a small
be included in raw pet foods. Because of this regula-
pilot study, 8 out of 10 samples of chicken-based,
tory omission, the Food and Drug Administration
home-prepared raw diets for dogs were contaminated
(FDA) has produced a set of guidelines for manufac-
with Saimonella species.28 The raw food diets were sig-
turers to promote safe manufacturing practices of raw
nificantly more likely to be contaminated than were
pet foods.32 The FDA guidelines fecommend includ-
the commercial dry dog foods in the control group. A
ing only animal meats from USDA-inspected sources
second study evaluated 25 commercially available faw
 and which have passed USDA inspections for meats
pet diets and found coliform bacteria in all 25 foods.29
intended for human consumption. However, compli
In all cases, coliform level, which is used as an index of 
ance with these guidelines is voluntary and the FDA
sanitation, exceeded the maximum allowable concen-
has no official authority to either track of enforce con-
tration for raw meat of 10,000 colony-forming units
formity. Therefore, when consumers purchase a raw pet
(CFU)/gram (g). Although chicken is most commonly
food that has been produced from meats that were not
cited as the primary meat fed in home prepared raw
intended for human consumption, there is no assur-
diets, the commercial foods in this study contained a
ance that these meat sources were inspected for bacterial
wide vatiety of meats, including chicken, beef, lamb,
contamination.
rabbit, ostrich, venison, and salmon. Another study
The presumed risks of microbial transmission to
of commercially prepared raw foods collected 240
humans from faw pet foods can come either from
samples from 20 different commercially prepared faw
handling the diet during preparation and feeding or
 meat dliets for dogs.30 Samples were collected on fouf
from exposure to feces of an animal that is shedding
occasions, every 2 months, and were tested for the
foodborne microbes. Fecal shedding of Salmonella spp.
presence of enteric pathogens. More than 50% of the
has been associated with feeding as little as a single
raw diet samples were contaminated with non-type-
 contaminated raw food meal.33 In addition, dogs that
specific Escherichia coli. At least one positive culture was
 are fed raw meat are significantly more likely to shed
found in products from all vendors and manufacturers
 Salmonella spp. than are dogs that are fed commercial
172 Canine and Feline Nutrition
dry dog foods.34 Salmonellosis is a significant health
is crucial because of increased risk of the pet shedding
risk to humans, with more than one million people
foodborne microorganisms.
infected annually in the United States.35 The over-
whelming majority of these infections afe associated
with foodborne contamination. Although the propor-
fan ownerchooses tofeed a raw diet to his orher pet,
tion of infections that occur as a fesult of owners han-
risks can be reduced by selecting a product that complies
dling raw meats intended for pets is unknown, this is a
with Association of American Feed Control Ofcials
potential mode of transmission. Other potential patho-
Nutrient Proflesand that is guaranteed to contain only
 gens that could be transmitted from raw pet food diets
human-grade ingredients. Another way to reduce risk is
to humans include E. coli, Campylobacter spp., Toxo-
to suppiement a compiete and balanced dry pet food
plasma spp., and Clostridium spp.24 The transmission
with small amounts of fresh, but cooked, vegetables,
of enteropathogenic bacteria to humans is of greatest
grains, and meats. Cooking meats slightly can reduce
concern for high-risk populations such as the elderly,
risk ofbacterial contamination because most foodborne
infants, and immunocompromised individuals. For
pathogens reside on the surface of raw meat products.
example, because of the increased risk of fecal shedding
of foodborne pathogens in dogs fed raw diets, animal-
assisted therapy programs in Canada are cautioned to
exclude these dogs from programs that visit immuno-
Vegetarian Diets
compromised populations.34
A wide range of dietary practices are included under
If an owner decides to feed a faw diet, it is advis-
the umbrella term of vegetarianism. For example, ovo-
able to select a product that carries a guarantee of the
vegetarians consume plants and eggs, lactovegetarians
inclusion of human-grade meats and compliance with
 consume plants and dairy products, and ovolactoveg
AAFCO nutrient profles. Another approach that may
etarians consume plants, eggs, and dairy products. One
feduce fisk of nutrient imbalances and foodborne ill-
of the most restrictive forms is veganism, in which only
ness is a compromise in which the pet is fed a high-
foods of plant origin are consumed and no animal prod-
quality conventional pet food that is supplemented
ucts are included in the diet. Pet owners may decide to
with fresh, but cooked, vegetables, grains, and meats.
feed a vegetarian or vegan diet to their pets for a variety
Cooking meat lightly to sear the surface will signif-
of reasons. In many cases, an owner's decision to feed
cantly reduce bacterial contamination because most
his or her pet a vegetarian diet follows directly from
foodborne pathogens reside on the surface of raw meat
personal religious beliefs, ethical concerns, or health
products. (If a ground meat is fed, this is not the case,
considerations that dictate the owner's diet choices.
and the entire meat should be lightly cooked.) Finally,
 Although there are limited studies available, one report
if owners insist upon feeding raw meat, they must
found that 32 of 34 owners who were feeding their cat
practice meticulous hygiene and thoroughly c
disin-
 a vegetarian diet were vegetarian themselves, and the
fect all surfaces, utensils, and feeding bowls after use.
majority (82%) cited ethical reasons for choosing this
Although these are the same fecommendations that afe
dietary regiment for their cats.36 Owners who were
promulgated for the preparation of meats meant for
feeding a vegetarian diet to their cat were more likely to
human consumption, those foods, unlike raw pet diets,
believe that a vegetarian diet had health benefits for cats
are eventually cooked thoroughly, reducing risk. There-
and that conventional commercial pet foods were hot
fore, additional precautions are needed when raw meat
healthful or wholesome.
is handled, prepared, and fed to pets. Because many of
Commercial vegetatian diets are available for both
the pathogens found in raw meat will grow in meat left
dogs and cats. For dogs, creating a vegetarian and even
at room temperature, unconsumed raw foods should
 a vegan food that is complete and balanced is not par-
be promptly discarded and should never be left in a
ticularly difficult given the more omnivorous nature
bowl. For the same reason, raw diets should never be
of the canid species. A number of plant-based dry and
fed on an ad libitum basis. Finally, the proper handling
wet foods that carry the complete and balanced label
and disposing of feces from pets that are fed raw meat
claim are available for dogs and have been shown to be
Types of Pet Foods173
be compromised until after cats had received a deficient
nivore, the cat has several nutrient fequirements that
diet for months or years. Finally, while vitamin A def-
impose a requirement for animal-source ingredients in
ciency is also of concern in cats fed vegetatian foods and
the diet (see Section 2, pp. 57-58). Specific nutrients
 has been shown to be deficient in at least one vegan
that are of concern in a vegetarian diet formulated for
product, there is currently no reliable blood assay that
cats are taurine, preformed vitamin A, and arachidonic
refects vitamin A status in animals. Therefore, vitamin
acid. These nutrients ate found principally in animal tis-
A status could not be assessed in the cats that were fed
sues and are deficient in plant-source ingredients. When 
vegetatian diets.
a vegetarian or vegan diet is formulated for cats, it is
The results of these studies demonstrate the dlifficulties
necessary to include synthetic forms of some or all of
inherent in creating a vegetarian diet for cats that supplies
these nutrients. One type of commercial product that
all of the cats' needed essential nutrients. Because clinical
is marketed for cats is a supplemental mix that purport-
signs of taurine, cobalamin, and vitamin A defciencies
edly supplies all of the nutrients that are deficient in a
can develop over periods of months and years, a response
to a diet that contains marginally low concentrations of
made vegetatian diet. Recipes for the homemade por-
these nutrients may take years to manifest. Therefore
tion of the diet ate supplied by the manufacturer of the
owhers who wish to feed a vegetarian food to their cats
supplerment. There are also several vegan wet cat foods
should take great cate in pet food selection and care-
that are marketed as providing complete and balanced
fully monitor their cat's health status through frequent
nutrition to cats. Although this is theoretically possi-
veterinary examinations. Periodic measurement of target
ble, studies that have analyzed vegetatian cat foods and
 nutrients such as whole blood taurine levels and serum
compared their nutrient content with AAFCO nutrient
cobalamin should be conducted. Although dietary tau-
profles for cats have reported numerous nutrient defi-
rine is not a concern for the majority of healthy dogs,
ciencies in both the homemade/supplemental mix and
the fact that a vegetatian diet may contain marginal
levels of taurine dictates that dogs fed vegetarian dliets
nutrient inadequacies found were low taurine content,
should also be monitored periodically for taurine status
insufficient protein, and low preformed vitamin A.
(see Chapter 12, pp. 99-100).
A primary concern for cats that are fed vegetarian
diets is long-term health in response to a diet that may
be marginal or even deficient in these essential nutrients.
Creating a complete and baianced vegetarian food for
Because of the many factors that can affect a cat's tau-
dogs is not diffcult, given the more omnivorous nature
rine status and the documented and serious health risks
of the canid species. A number of piant-based dry and
associated with deficiency, this nutrient has feceived
wetfoods that carry the compiete and balanced labe
the most attention. When whole blood and plasma
claim are available for dogs today However, this is not
taurine levels wefe assessed in cats that were being fed
true for the cat, an obligate carnivore. Specifc nutrients
vegan diets, 3 of 17 cats had whole blood taurine levels
that are of concern in a vegetarian diet formulated for
that were lower than the reference range.36 However,
cats are taurine, preformed vitamin A, and arachidonic
the blood levels were not considered to be within the
acid. These nutrients are found principaly in animal
critical concentration for taurine defciency, and none
tissues and are defcient in plant-soure ingredients
of these cats showed clinical signs of deficiency. Serum
cobalamin levels were also measured in this study.
Cobalamin (vitamin B2) is only found in animal tissues
Homemade Diets
or fermented products and so must be added as a sup-
plement to vegetarian cat foods. Although one of the
Although the majority of pet owners in the United
diets in the study contained marginally low cobalamin
States enjoy the convenience, economy, and reliability
levels, none of the cats showed compromised cobalamin
of commercially produced pet foods, some owners
status. Howevef, the body has the ability to coniserve
 prefer to prepare homemade diets for their pets. A
cobalamin for long periods of time, so status might not
recent survey of pet feeding practices of pet owners in
174 Canine and Feline Nutrition
the United States and Australia reported that 93% of
free-of-charge via vatious Internet sources. Even when
dlogs and 98% of cats were fed commercial pet foods for
an adequate fecipe is acquired, owners may begin to
at least half of their daily intake.20 Of the owners who
use ingredient substitution over time as a result of avail-
fed a homemade diet to their dog or cat, less than 30%
ability, cost, of owner's beliefs about an ingredient's
used a recipe that was specifically designed for dogs of
wholesomeness. Such substitutions may or may not
cats. Of these recipes, half had been cbtained from the
imbalance the end product.
owner's veterinarians and the other 50% were either
When a properly formulated and tested recipe is
found on the Internet or obtained from unidentified
used, there can be benefts of homemade diets for
sources. These results suggest that while the number of
some owners and their pets. For some owners, prepar-
owners who rely completely upon homemade pet foods
ing a homemade food for their pet provides an addi-
is relatively small, the use of inadequate recipes is rela-
tional outlet for caretaking and management of theif
tively common among them.
pet's health. Although preparing a homemade diet
Owners may choose to prepare a homemade diet
tends to be time consuming and costly, engaging in
for their pet for a vatiety of reasons. In recent years,
this activity and believing that they are doing a good
incfeased concerns about the use of additives and arti-
thing for their pet is highly rewarding for many pet
fcial preservatives in commercial pet foods has led to a
owhers. A homemade diet may also be the best choice
desire by some owners to avoid commercially prepared
for some types of medical conditions. For example, a
foods. There is also a perception in some owners of
homemade ration produced from a single protein and
reduced nutrient quality that results from food process-
single carbohydrate source can be used for the initial
ing techniques. Most recently, distrust in the safety of
diagnosis of food allergies or intolerances. The fexibil-
commercial pet foods has increased in response to pet
ity of such a diet allows for single item substitutions
s  o l a sq asa sg ai o
as various ingredients are tested for the pet's allergic
number of owners seeking to supplement or completely
response. A properly formulated therapeutic diet can
replace their commercial pet food with a homemade
also be easily modified to alter nutrient levels to closely
dier.23
 meet an individual pet's needs. However, it is impera-
A principal problem with feeding a homemade diet
tive to keep in mind that these benefts all rely upon
is that many of the recipes that are available have not
the identification of a suitable and pretested recipe as
been adlequately tested for nutritional adlequacy of even
well as long-term compliance with preparation and
for nutrient content. Interestingly, most of the recipes
feeding instructions.
that are available contain too much, father than not
If an owner wishes to prepate a homemade food,
enough, protein. This anomaly is attributed to the com-
the frst step is to obtain a recipe that has been proven
mon belief that, as carnivores, dogs and cats should be
to be nutritionally adequate and complete. Once an
fed diets that are comprised almost completely of meat
adequate recipe is found, the ingredients that are
products. As a result, these recipes often contain an
purchased should conform as closely as possible to
inverse Ca:P ratio.Reported imbalances with home-
the recipe and should be consistent between batches
madle cat diets afe inadequate levels or inappropriate
of food. Most recipes allow the owner to prepare a
sources of fat.23 Homemade recipes are also often not
relatively large volume at one time and freeze small
balanced for essential vitamins and minerals.39 Although
 portions for extended use. Ingredients should never
many owners attempt to correct for these imbalances by
be substituted of eliminated from the fecipe because
feeding a vitamin-mineral supplement, the majority of
of the danger of imbalancing the ration. Pet owners
pet supplements that are sold for this purpose are not
should also be aware of the dangers of feeding single
balanced themselves.23 Balanced recipes for homemade
food items in lieu ofa prepared diet. Foods that owners
diets for dogs and cats can be obtained from veterinary
enjoy are not necessarily the most nutritious foods to
nutritionists and from several online services provided
feed to their pets. Similarly, projecting current human
through the American College of Veterinary Nutriticn.
nutritional guidelines such as a reduction in fat and
However, because of the cost of these services, many
owhers may continue to use fecipes that are available
and cats.
Types of Pet Foods175
Aunb pue adhi aun on uonue syads Sud
Veterinary (Therapeutic) Diets
of research that supports the clinical benefits. Well-
In the past several decades, a host of human health claims
controlled, randomized clinical studies in which the
have become associated with the consumption of certain
diet was fed to pets with naturally occurring diseases
types of foods, ingredients, and nutrients. Examples
are the most desirable. Results from clinical trials can
inclutle the relationship between fiber consumption and
A1oneioqel e u! pauojad saipnis Aq paoddns aq osje
dietary fat intake and heart and gastrointestinal health.
or kennel seting that uses an appropriate model for the
As a direct fesult of this trend in human foods, com
disease in question. In all cases, the diet or dietary com-
panion animal nutritionists and pet food manufactur-
ponent should be demonstrated to provide a realistic
ers have begun to investigate the use of diet and dietary
level of benefit and an acceptable level of risk to justify
ingredients for the nutritional management of disease
its use. Examples of veterinary diets that afe cuffently
conditions in dogs and cats. This has resulted in a rapid
available to small-animal veterinafians include diets
increase in the number of therapeutic, or veterinary, diets
for animals recovering from trauma or severe illness,
that are available to veterinarians and pet owners. These
 foods designed to manage kidney or gastrointestinal
foods can be distinguished from pet foods formulated
disease, and products for the diagnosis and manage
for healthy animals by their mode of sale and the manner
 ment of adverse reactions to food (food allergies). As
in which they are labeled. Specifically, veterinary diets
 more knowledge is acquired concerning the benefits
are sold only through veterinary clinics and are labeled
 of diet and certain nutrients in the management of
for use only under the direction of a veterinarian.40,41
companion animal disease, mofe vetefinary diets afe
Companion animal professionals should critically
expected to become available (see Section 5 for complete
 evaluate any therapeutic diets that they are considering.
discussions).
References
1. Lankhorst C, Tran QD, Havenaar R, and others: The effect of extrusion on the nutritional value of canine diets as assessed by in
vitro indicators, Anim Feed Sei Tech 138:285-297, 2007.
2. Harlow J: US pet food trends. In Proceedings ofthe petfood forum, Chicago, 1997, Watts Publishing.
3. Samuelson AC, Cutter GR: Dog biscuits: an aid in canine tartar control, J Nutr 121:S162, 1991.
4. Kalfelz FA: Evaluation and use of pet foods: general considerations in using pet foods for adult maintenance, Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 19:387-403, 1989
5. Association of American Feed Control Oficials (AAFCO): Pet food regulations. In AAFCO Oficial Publication, Atlanta, 2008,
AAFCO.
6. Bradshaw JWS, Healey LM, Thorne CJ, and others: Differences in food preferences between individuals and populations of
domestic cats, Felis sylvestris catus, Appl Anim Behav Sei 68:257-268, 2000.
7. Stasiak M: The effect of early specific feeding on food conditioning in cats, Dev Psychobiof 39:207-215, 2001.
8. Carter B, Fontana A Jr: Water activity: the key to pet food quality and safety, white paper, Pet Food Ind, 2008.
10. Li X, Li W, Wang H, and others: Cats lack a sweet taste receptor, J Nutr 136: 1932S-1934S, 2006.
 11. Bradshaw JWS: The evolutionary basis for the feeding behavior of domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) and cats (Felis catus), J Nutr
136:1927 S-1931S, 2006.
12. Morgan T: Treat trends, Pet Food Ind, pp 32-37, September/October 1997.
13. Lazarus C: Resealable treats, Pet Food Ind, pp 8-12, November/December 1996.
14. Phillips T: US pet food sales go boom, Pet Food Ind, November 2007.
176Canine and Feline Nutrition
15. Michel KE: Unconventional diets for dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 36:1269-128 1, 2006.
16. Alternative pet food sales booming in the US and Canada, Pet Food Ind, September 2008.
17. Kallfelz FA: Evaluation and use of pet foods: general considerations in using pet foods for adult maintenance, Vet Clin North Am
Smalf Anim Pract 19:387-403, 1989.
18. Huber TL, Wilson RC, McGarity SA: Variations in digestibility of dry dog foods with identical label guaranteed analysis, J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 22:571-575, 1986
19. Sousa CA, Stannard AA, lhrke PJ, and others: Dermatosis associated with feeding generic dog food: 13 cases (1981-1982), J Am Vet
Med Assoc 192:676-680, 1988.
 20. Lafamme DP, Abood SK, Fascetti AJ, and others: Pet feeding practices of dog and cat owners in the United States and Australia,
J Am Vet Med Asoc 232:687-694, 2008
21. Case LP: Perspectives on domestication: the history of our relationship with man's best friend, J Anim Sei 86:3245-3251, 2008.
22. Freeman LM, Michel KE: Evaluation of raw food diets for dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:705-709, 2001.
23. Remillard RL: Homemade diets: atributes, pitflls and a call for action, Top Companion Anim Nutr 23:137-142, 2008.
 24. LeJeune JT, Hancock DD: Public health concerns associated with feeding raw meat diets to dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
219:1222-1225, 2001.
25. Billinghurst 1: Feeding the adut dog: give your dog α bone, Alexandria, Australia, 1993, Bridge Printery, pp 265-280.
26. Stiver SL, Frazier KS, Mauel MJ: Septicemic salmonellosis in two cats fed a raw-meat diet, J Am Anim Hos Asoc 39:538-542, 2003.
27. Stone GG, Chengappa MM, Oberst RD: Application of polymerase chain reaction for the correlation of Salmonella serovars
recovered from Greyhound feces with their diet, J Vet Diagn Invest 5:378-385, 1993.
28. Joffe DJ, Schlesinger DP: Preliminary assessment of the risk of Salmonella infection in dogs fed raw chicken diets, Can Vet J
43:441442, 2002.
29. Weese JS, Rousseau J, Arroyo L: Bacteriological evaluation of commercial canine and feline raw diets, Cax Vet J 46:513-516, 2005.
30. Strohmeyer RA, Morley PS, Hyatt DR, and others: Evaluation of bacterial and protozoal contamination of commercially available
raw meat diets for dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 228:537-542, 2006.
31. Finley R, Reid-Smith R, Weese JS: Human health implications of Satmonella-contaminated natural pet treats and raw pet food,
Chin Infect Dis 42:686-691, 2006.
32. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Center for Veterinary Medicine: Manufacture and labeling of raw meat foods for companion
and captive non-companion carnivores and omnivores, Guidance for industry #122, Washington DC, 2005, FDA
33. Finley R, Ribble C, Ararmini J, and others: The risk of salmonellae shedding by dogs fed Satrmonella-contaminated commercial raw
food diets, Cax Vet J 48:69-75, 2007.
therapy dogs fed raw diets in Ontario and Alberta, Zoonoses Public Heaith 55:470-480, 2008.
35. Voetsch AC, Van Vlider T], Angulao F]: FoodNet estimate of the burden of illness caused by nontyphoidal Satmonella infections in
the United States, Clin Infect Dis 38:S127-S134, 2004.
36. Wakefield LA, Shofer FS, Michel KE: Evaluation of cats fed vegetarian diets and attudes of their caregivers, J Am Vet Med Asoc
229:70-73, 2006.
37. Gray CM, Sellon RK, Freeman LM: Nutritional adequacy of two vegan diets for cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 225:1670-1675, 2004.
38. Kienzle E, Engelhard R: A field study on the nutrition of vegetarian dogs and cats in Europe, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 23:81, 2001.
39. Streiff EL, Zwischenberger B, Butterwick RF, and others: A comparison of the nutritional adequacy of home-prepared and
commercial diets for dogs, / Nutr 132:1698S-1700S, 2002
40. Dzanis DA: When pet foods are drugs, FDA Vet 8:4-5, 1993.
41. Kronfeld DS: Health claims for pet foods: particulars, J Am Vet Med Asoc 205:174177, 1994.
18
Evaluation of Pet Foods
The large variety of pet foods produced and sold in the
 on their label if they have substantiated this claim using
United States can make the selection of a proper diet a
one of two possible methods. Option one requires that
complex and confusing process. The information pre-
the pet food be successfully evaluated through a series
sented earlier in this section illustrates the need for pet
 of AAFCO-sanctioned animal feeding trials, and option
owners and professionals to critically evaluate a product
tWo requires that the food is formulated to rmeet the min-
before feeding it to their pets. Because many pet foods
imum and/or maximum levels of nutrients established
are intended to provide the primary source of nutrition
by the AAFCO's Nutrient Profles for dlog and cat foods
for a pet, it is extremely important that owners select
ose Aew z uondo an neyn sanueduo '(se I- I dd sas)
a product capable of providing optimal nutrition and
conduct feedling tests on their products, but may not be
prometing long-term health. This chapter provides
using AAFCO protocols for those studlies.
tools that companion animal owners and profession-
The frst criterion that a pet owner should use when
als can use to evaluate pet foods. These criteria aid in
evaluating a food is a check for the complete and balanced
distinguishing between products that are inadlequate,
claim. The most important criterion is that the life stage(s)
acceptable, or optimal in their ability to provide proper
designated in the claim correspondls to the pet's stage of
nutrition to a companion animal (Box 18-1).
life and activity level. Examples of common claims afe
"Supplies complete and balanced nutrition for all stages of
COMPLETE AND BALANCED
a cat's life" or “This food provides complete and balanced
nutrition for growing puppies" Pet food manufacturers
ad au Aq pasn s! spasueeq pue anaduos, aseiud au
are required to inclucle the method of substantiation that
food industry to signify that a pet food contains all of the
was used for the complete and balanced claim on the pet
see iien au j eu siaal ne sunu uss
food label. If a statement that AAFCO feeding trials were
fequirements. Because animals eat of are fed to meet their
conducted is inclucled, this means that the food was
energy requirements, nutrient levels in a food must be
adlequately tested using AAFCO feeding trials with dogs
balanced so that when an animal meets its caloric needs,
and cats. If the statement claims that the food meets the
its requirements for all other nutrients are fulfilled at the
AAFCO's Nutrient Profiles, this signifies that the food was
same time. The regulations of the Association of American
formulated to meet the nutrient profle for the intended
Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) allow pet food manu-
stage of life (adult maintenance or growth/reproduction).
facturers to include the complete and balanced claim
When selecting a pet food,owners should first check for
BOX 18-1 FACTORS TO CONSIDER IN THE
α “compiete and balanced" label claim. The food should
EVALUATION OF PET FOODS
also be appropriate for their pet's breed size, age, and
Complete and balanced nutrition
activity level.
Palatability
Digestibility
 Metabolizable energy content
Feeding cost
Reputation of manufacturer
PALATABILITY
Dental health contribution
The palatability and acceptability of a pet food is a cru
Taurine content (cats)
Urinary health properties (cats)
cial consideration because a food must be acceptable to
nu nndo apinid m ii ry rio u nad a
177
178 Canine and Feline Nutrition
A pet's daily intake of essential nutrients is a function
eaten. However, limitations of this approach include the
of the quantity of food eaten and the concentration of
available nutrients in the food. Because of this relation-
caloric density afe fed and the inability to discern short-
ship, the amount of food that is eaten is as important as
or long-term effects of novelty (see below).
 the food's nutrient and energy content. An unpalatable
In recent years, the assessment of food preferences
food will be rejected by a dog or cat regardlless of the
 and palatability in dogs and cats has become significantly
level or balance of nutrients that it contains. Similarly, a
 more sophisticated as methods have been developed to
diet can be palatable but still not contain aclequate levels
 measure animals' responses to the smell, taste, and tex-
of some nutrients. Contrary to popular belief, dogs and
ture of foods.4 Because of the highly developed olfactory
cats are not capable of detecting specific nutrient def-
acuity of dogs and cats, it is not a surprise that the odof
ciencies or imbalances in their diets and will continue
 of a food significantly infuences food preferences in both
to consume an imbalanced diet until the physiological
effects of the deficiency of excess cause illness of a reduc-
choice, cats first smell the foods and will preferentially
tion in foed intake. Following this, learned aversions to
consume the food with the most attractive odor, usually
imbalanced diets can develop. For example, afi arginine-
without tasting the less attractive food(s).7 Olfaction is
deficient diet rapidly leads to emesis, hyperammonemia
and severe illness in cats. When cats were fed a single
 in importance to dogs and cats during food selection.8
arginine-free meal, they demonstrated single-trial aver-
Fof example, when cats cannot discriminate among foods
sive responses to the deficient food when presented with
using olfaction, they will then use taste to make a choice.
the food on a subsequent occasion.
The sense of touch is involved in food selection when dogs
and cats react to a food's shape and texture. Together with
the size of kibble pieces, these sensations make up the
Animal-Related Factors
"mouth feel" of a food. For example, increasing the size
Palatability is defined as the subjective pleasure that an
 of kibble pieces generally decreases rate of eating in dogs,
individual experiences in association with eating a par-
because they spend more time chewing and masticating
ticular food.2 Therefore palatability should not be con-
the food pieces than they do when fed foods with small
sidered to be an intrinsic property of the food, but rather
kibble sizes. Cats are especially senisitive to the size and
 a property of an animal's perception of the food and the
shape of kibble pieces because of their tendency to eat
tendency to select cne particular focd cver another. His-
slowly and because they chew foods less thoroughly when
torically, palatability in dogs and cats has been measured
compared with dogs. For example, cats tend to reject
using food acceptability and preference tests. A food
kibble pieces with sharp edges, presumably because these
sauuexa (isan ued-auo, e pales ose) isan soueidanse
pieces have an uncomfortable “mouth feel." Other ani-
initial response to a hew food and may also record the
 mal-related factors that may infuence a pet's acceptance
time that it takes an animal to taste and consume the new
of a particular food include past experiences, age, and
food. Because no choice is involved in this initial screen-
breed. The feeding environment and an owner's behavior
ing, this test only provides information about whether
can also affect a pet's response to a new food. Most repu-
of not the dog or cat finds the new food to be appeal-
table pet food manufacturers recognize this and conduct
ing and is willing to eat it. Factors that can affect initil
controlled palatability tests both with kenneled animals
acceptability include the animal's degree of hunger and
 and within a wide variety of home environments.
an individual's response to novelty. Food preference tests
(also called “two-pan tests") are based upon the assump-
tion that a greater intake of one food over another is an
An individual dog's or cat's pereption of a new food
indication of higher palatability.3 Using this approach,
is affected by the food's smel, taste and “mouth feel
animals afe offered the simultaneous choice of twc
Because their ofactory sense is very sensitive, the odor
foods for a predetermined number of days and intake is
recorded. One food will be ranked higher in palatability
for dogs and cats.
than a second food if a greater volume of the frst food is
Evaluation of Pet Foods179
Two conficting effects that can significantly infuence
of these two responses and factors that determine which
an individual dog or cat's food selection are the primacy
behavior an individual animal will show are not com-
effect and novelty effect.10 The primacy effect occurs
pletely understood. Recently, a series of studies with
when an animal is fed a specifc type or favor of food
cats led investigators to speculate that these opposing
for a long period of time (most commonly beginning at
responses may be explained by cats possessing certain
weaning) and the individual shows an enhanced prefer-
innate favor preferences. When a vatied diet is fed to kit-
ence for that food to the exclusion of novel foods. For
tens, being exposed to multiple food Havors would tend
example, an eafly sefies of studies found that limiting
to “mask” inborn favor or food preferences; conversely,
the Havor experiences of puppies and kittens at an early
feeding a limited diet early in life would be more likely
age led to fixed food preferences in which all novel foods
to allow expression of inborn favor preferences.17 Cats
afe rejected later in life.1l When the same experimenters
 in this study appeared to possess an innate preference for
fed foods of varying favors and textures early in life, the
the favor of tuna when compared with beef. This prefer-
dogs and cats showed increased acceptance of novel foods
ence was only expressed when kittens that were raised
as adults. This form of neophobia is most commonly
 on a beef-favored food were presented with tuna as the
 reported as a problem when a cat has been fed one type
novel favor. Conversely, other investigators argue against
or favor of food for many years and a change in nutrient
the existence of a select set of innate favor preferences
needs or health status suddenly requires a change in food.
 in cats and suggest that observed dlifferences in prefer-
Although neophobia can also occur in dogs, it is less com
ence are a result of early learning from the mother and
mon, possibly because the dog's scavenging nature and
 possibly litter-specific predispositions.1 More studies ate
more omnivorous dliet make dogs more resistant to the
needed to explore innate and learned Havor preferences
development of fixed food preferences. Although it has
 and to further elucidate the importance of primacy and
been speculated that there are breed-specific differences
novelty in food selection in both dogs and cats.
soy ou nafi io idaoe mi auuai ai ui sop u
Food Properties Affecting
Paradoxically, the novelty effect can also occur with
Palatability
animals that are fed a single food item for a long period.
In these cases, instead of rejecting novel foods, the indi-
There afe several properties of food components that
vidual shows an enhanced (though sometimes transient)
can directly affect palatability and food selection in dogs
preference for a new food or treat when it is offered.12,13
and cats.18 The quality of ingredients, and the way that
In another early study, puppies that had been fed a single
they are cooked, processed, and stored, signifcantly
type of canned food starting at weaning and continuing
affects acceptability and palatability. For example, the
until they were 16 weeks of age showed a strong prefer-
extrusion of grain starches imparts a desirable texture
ence for novel foods when they were offered.14 Dog train-
and Havor to dry pet food kibbles. However, if mold
sn susn Aq Auun s uo azede Aenaai si
uaaq 1ou seq isnpoid aup J! 1o paunsso sey yimoio
that dliffer from a dog's daily food or by varying the type of
 properly extruded, grains will be perceived as highly
 tteats that are used as food reinforcers during consecutive
unacceptable. Poorly extruded starches cause food
taining sessions. It is possible that the attraction to a hew
 particles to have high bulk dlensities, which negatively
food (novelty) in some animals is actually a refection of
affect the texture and chewiness of the product. Poorly
a mild aversion to or boredom with a food that has been
 processed or poorly stored foods may also contain high
fed for a long period of time. This has been called the 
levels of oxidized oils and fats. High concentrations of
“monotony effect" and has been used to explain attrac-
aldehydes produced by fat oxidation are unpalatable to
tion to novel foods in cats more often than dogs.15,1 It is
-Isod si sies pue ssop yoq roy Aqeieied poog 'sleue
theorized that cats may have an evolutionary bias toward
tively correlated with protein level. Animal-source pro-
selecting more than a single food choice or prey species to
teins are generally considered to be more palatable than
avoid nutrient deficiencies from developing.
plant-source proteins, although the extrusion process
Although the primacy and the novelty effects have
significantly increases the palatability of plant-based
both been observed in dogs and cats, the incompatibility
180 Canine and Feline Nutrition
with starch, the overprocessing of protein or the inclu-
components pass through to the large intestine, where
sion of poor-quality protein sources in a food can lead
they are partially or largely fermented by colonic bac-
to compounds that are perceived as unpalatable.
tefia. Rapid of excessive bacterial fermentation leads
Low-quality pet foods may have decreased palat-
to the production of gas (fatulence), loose stools, and
ability as a result of the inclusicn of poor-quality ingre-
occasionally diarrhea. In addition to these side effects,
dients or harsh processing methods. Although not the
 a greater quantity of a poorly digested food must be
only factors involved, proper processing, handling, and
fed to the animal because the pet is absorbing a smaller
storage of pet foods containing high-quality ingredients
proportion of nutrients from the food. As the quan-
contribute to a food’s acceptability and palatability.
tity of food that is consumed increases, rate of passage
Once an acceptable degree of palatability has been met,
through the gastrointestinal tract also increases. A more
however, the owner must evaluate other diet charac-
rapid passage of food through the intestines further
teristics that are important for the delivery of optimal
conttibutes
s to poor digestibility, high stool volume,
nutrition. Because most commercial pet foods available
and gas production. A food’s digestibility is decreased
today are highly palatable to dogs and cats, problems of
by the presence of high levels of nonfermentable fber,
 overconsumption and weight gain are more common
ash, phytate, and poor-quality protein. Improper pro-
than are problems of diet rejection. Therefore, although
cessing or excessive heat treatment can also adlversely
palatability is important, it should not be used as the
affect digestibility. In contrast, pet food digestibility is
sole criterion when evaluating a food.
increased by the inclusion of high-quality ingredients
and increased levels of fat, as well as the use of proper
DIGESTIBILITY
processing techniques.
In general, dogs and cats digest foods of animal
The digestibility of a pet food is an important criterion
origin better than those of plant origin. This differ-
because it directly measures the proportion of nutrients
ence is primarily the result of the presence of lignin,
in the food that are available for absorption. True and
cellulose, and other nonfermentable fbers in plant
apparent digestibility can only be measured through
ingredients. However, it is important for owners and
controlled feeding trials (see pp. 142-143). The results of
professionals to 1
fecognize that low-quality animal
these trials provide digestibility coefficients for a food's
products containing high amounts of skin, hair, feath-
dry matter (DM), crude protein, crude fat, and nitro-
ers, and connective tissue afe also not well digested
 gen-free extract (NFE), which is a measure of the car-
by dogs and cats. Although a pet food that contains
bohydrate fraction in a food. A series of early studies of
high-quality animal products has a higher digestibility
commercial brandls of dog foods reported average digest-
than a plant-based food, pet foods that contain poor-
ibility coefficients for crude protein, crude fat, and NFE
quality animal ingredients may have lower digestibili-
of 81%, 85%, and 79%, respectively.21 Premium and
ties than plant-based products with similar nutrient
profiles.22
digestibility coefficients than these values, while basic
nutrition products have similar or lower digestibilities.
Digestibilities as high as 89%, 95%, and 88% for crude
Digestibility represents the proportion of nutrients in
protein, crude fat, and carbohydrate, fespectively, can
afood that is available for absorption by an animal's
 occur in dry premium and super-premium pet foods. As
body Factors that can negatively affect a food's
the quality of ingredients included in the food increases,
digestibility inciude the inciusion of poor quality
so will the food's DM and nutrient digestibility.
ingredients and high levels offber ash,and phytate.
improper processing and excessive heat treatment
Food Properties
food digestibility is increased by the incilusion of high
A pet food that is low in digestibility contains a high
proportion of ingredients that cannot be digested
techniques.
by the enzymes of the gastrointestinal tract. These
Evaluation of Pet Foods 181
shorly after weaning and continuing until the dogs
Animal-Related Factors
punoy osle sioiesnsaau asau ie'sse jo suou SI aiam
There is some evidence that apparent digestibilities of
that large- and giant-breed dogs (Giant Schnauzers and
the major organic nutrients in commercial pet foods are
Great Danes) had consistently looser stools that con-
higher for dogs than for cats.23,24 Both the dog and the
tained higher fecal moisture, and that the reduced fecal
cat belong to the order Carnivora and are classified as
quality was not related to lower diet digestibility. In fact,
simple-stomached carnivores. The cat is a sttict carni-
in this study, the large- and giant-breed dogs had signif-
vofe, but the dog is mofe cmnivofous in natufe. One
cantly higher digestibility coefficients than the smaller
way in which this difference is reflected is in the abili-
breeds, regardless of age. These differences did not
ties of the twe species to digest certain types of dietary
appear to be due to a difference in the volume of food
components. A study comparing the digestive capa-
that was consumed because food intake did not differ
bilities of dogs and cats found that when fed the same
significantly among breeds when expressed as a func-
dog or cat food, dogs had higher apparent digestibility
tion of metabolic body size. Because the large dogs also
coefficients and obtained more digestible nutrients per
unit of food eaten than cats for almost all nutrients and
that the higher fecal water in large dogs may have been
types of foods.24 It was suggested that some of these dif-
caused by greater colonic fermentation of carbohydrate
ferences could be explained by a greater ability of the
 and protein fractions of the diet. Higher microbial mass
 dog to digest (ferment) certain types of fber in the large
and increased organic acid production in the colon can
intestine. Data from studies of the fermentative capaci-
contribute to increased fecal water.32 Another possible
ties of canine and feline colonic microfora support this.
explanation for the higher fecal water is reduced absorp-
While both dogs and cats are capable of fermenting cer-
tion of electrolytes in the large intestine of large breed
tain fiber types, the cat is less tolerant of wide ranges of
dogs. A strong relationship between poor stool qual-
fber fermentability than the dog.25.27
ity (i.e., high water content) and reduced sodium and
Within species, animal-related factors that may affect
chloride absorption in the colon has been feported in
digestibility include body size, breed, age, and physi-
dogs, and Great Danes have been shown to have lower
ological state. Size effects may occur in dogs because of
apparent absorption of sodium and potassium when
the wide range in body size and body types that occur
 compared with Beagles.33,34
It is important to recognize that the use of purebred
tfointestinal tfact decreases with incfeasing
body
size,
dogs to represent different body sizes in all of the afore-
which may infuence the digestion effciency.2
28,29 While
mentioned studies may confound the potential effects
the empty intestinal tract comprises 6% to 7% of the
of size and breed, making it difficult to separate differ-
body weight of small dogs, it decreases to 3% to 4% in 
ences that are primarily due to size from those that may
large- and giant-breed dogs. One group of researchers
have a genetic component. The breeds used to fepre-
examined the apparent digestibilities of canned and dry
sent the large and giant breeds were Giant Schnauzers,
commercial foods in 10 breeds of dogs that ranged in
Great Danes, and Irish Wolfhounds. Other studies
have examined digestibility efficiencies among different
tended to have looser stools and higher fecal moisture
 breeds of dogs of the small- and medium-size catego-
when compated with small- and medium-size dogs, but
fies and have found no differences in digestibility eff-
there were no significant differences in organic matter
digestibility coeffcients among dogs of different sizes
However, with the exception of the three breeds identi-
ot breeds. In adldition, the giant breed of dog that was
fed previously, no studies to date have been conducted
tested in this study, the Irish Wolfhound, had lower
that compare digestive capacity among the many large
fecal moisture than other breeds, suggesting that body
 and giant breeds of dogs. Given the results suggesting
weight alone was not responsible for the observed dif-
differences in these dogs, especially those pertaining to
ferences in fecal scofes.
electrolyte absorption, such research would be helpful
Another study measured apparent digestibility in
in fully elucidating the underlying causes of differences
four breeds of dogs fed a dry extruded diet starting
in fecal quality that have been reported.
182 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Although a limited number of studies have been
group of dogs, the effect of each diet on growth and
conducted, it appears that a dog's and cat's digestibility
development was significantly different. Dogs that were
efficiency increases gradually from weaning until ado-
fed the R2 diet grew significantly less and ate less food
lescence, and then remains stable in healthy animals
than did the R1-fed dogs. The R2-fed dogs became
throughout adulthood.37 The lower digestibility values
 anorexic, had significantly lower body weights and body
observed in puppies and kittens may be caused by the
lengths, and showed poor coat quality and graying of
increased food consumption, relative to body size, that
the hair coat. These dogs also had depressed hemoglo-
is needed to meet increased energy and nutrient needs
bin and hematocrit values and lower serum cholesterol,
of growth, of could refect a true difference in digestive
alkaline phosphatase, calcium, and phosphorus levels.
efficiency (for a complete discussion, see Chapter 22,
The authors of the study concluded that the R2 diet had
p.
a lower palatability and that its nutrients were less avail.
able than those in the R1 diet. Subsequent digestibility
newly weaned and young puppies and kittens may have 
trials found that the R2 diet was 18% lower in apparent
lower capacities to digest certain nutfients. For example
digestibility than diet R1. In another study, digestibility
pancreatic amylase activity is lower in puppies than in
trials of four commercial dog foods with identical guar-
anteed analysis panels showed that the national brand
There is also indirect evidence that young kittens may
 of food had a significantly higher digestibility than did
the three price brands that were examined.4 It is impor-
Ae sua pue saddnd sunnn au noedu aeu saua
tant to note that in both of these studies the analyti-
to digest dietary starch and fat, respectively. Conversely,
cal values obtained through chemical analysis provided
similar to many other species, intestinal lactase activity
no information that would indicate differences in the
Sis Aiunieu yim saseaisp pue ssop Sunon u yoy s!
digestibility of the foods.
nifying an adaptation to milk consumption eafly in life.
Currently, AAFCO regulations do not allow pet
Finally, nutrient digestibility does not generally change
food manufacturers to include quantitative or compara-
in healthy older dogs, but may decrease in older cats
tive digestibility claims on their labels.45 This informa-
(see Chapter 25, p. 265 for a complete discussion).42
tion can only be obtained by actually feeding the food.
Many manufacturers of premium and super-premium
brands of foods include information about ingredient
Differences among Commercial
and product digestibility with the educational materials
PetFoods
they give to the retailers, pet supply stores, and veteri-
Regardless of differences in the digestive capabilities of
narians, as well as on their websites. However, most basic
dogs and cats and among animals of different breeds
nutrition brands of pet food do not provide information
and ages, it is important to be aware that commercial
regarding digestibility. If digestibility information is not
pet foods can dliffer significantly in digestibility and
feadily available, this information may be obtained by
nutrient availability. The labels of two products may
writing or calling the company directly. As a general rule
have the same ingredient lists and guaranteed analysis
of thumb, pet owners should choose foods that have a
panels, but when the products ate fed, they may have
DM digestibility of 80% or greater and should reject
different digestibilities. This vatiability will directly
 any foods that have digestibilities lower than 75%.
affect the ability of each diet to providle adlequate levels
Finally, buying a package of pet food and actually
of nutrients to an animal. A greater quantity of a poorly
feeding it to a pet can also provide valuable informa-
digested diet must be fed to an animal in order to meet
tion about a food's digestibility. A product that is highly
its nutrient requirements. This fact is illustrated by a
digestible and contains available nutrients will produce
study with growing dogs that compafed two commer-
low stool volumes and well-formed, frm feces. In addi-
cial dry dog foods (R1 and R2) using feeding trials that
tion, the fecal matter will not contain mucus, blood, or
followed the AAFCO feeding test protocols.43 Chemi-
 any recognizable components of the pet food. Defeca-
cal analysis of the two dliets showed that they contained
 tion frequency should be relatively low, and bowel move-
idlentical levels of nutrients. However, when fed to a
 ments should be regular and consistent. Normal growth
Evaluation of Pet Foods 183
rates and body weight should be easily maintained by
The consumption of 25% more of diet B is necessary to
the food without the need to feed excessive quantities,
meet this dog's daily caloric requirement. Hard-working
and long-term feeding should result in healthy skin and
yoiy aaey Ile susanb pue saupuiq Supeiel pue ssop
hair coat. Although these observations do not provide
quantitative information about digestibility, they are a
 met by feeding a food that is relatively high in energy
and nutrient density. On the other hand, a diet with a
absorbable nutrients to a companion animal.
adlult pets that lead sedentary lifestyles. However, if the
ME content of a pet food is too low, the quantity of food
When fed to companion animais, pet foods that are
that the pet heeds to eat in order to meet its fequirement
highy digestibie and contain available nutrientswill
may exceed the physical capacity of the gastrointestinal
produce welf-formed, frm feces and low stool volume
tract. The consumption of an excessive quantity of food
and defecation frequencies. Long-term feeding should
leads to increased rate of passage through the gastroin-
support optimal growth and body condition along with
testinal tract and decreased digestibility. In general, pet
heaithy skin and hair coat condition.
owhers should select a pet food that contains between
3000 and 5000 kcal/kg on a dry-matter basis (DMB),
depending on the needs of the animal.
Before 1994, AAFCO regulations prohibited the
inclusion of statements of caloric density on pet food
METABOLIZABLE ENERGY
labels. But in 1994 the AAFCO passed a regulation
CONTENT
allowing voluntary label claims of ME content. In 2008,
AAFCO accepted a proposal to make calorie statements
 The ME of a pet food represents the amount of energy
mandatory (see pp. 135-136). The caloric density regu-
that is available for an animal for use (see pp. 143-144).
lation fequires
s companies that include ME claims to
The energy density of pet foods is typically expressed as
substantiate the ME content through either a calcula-
kilocalories (kcal) of ME per unit weight (kilogram [kg]
tion method using modified Atwater factors or through
or pound [Ib]). ME can be determined either through
data collected from a series of digestibility trials with
feeding trials or through calculation using standard
animals. As in the case of complete and balanced claims,
energy values for protein, carbohydrate, and fat (see
the method that the company uses to substantiate the
Section 1, pp. 4-6).
ME claim must be stated (see pp. 134-135). In addition
Energy density should be considered when evaluat-
to knowing the caloric density of the pet food, it is also
 ing a pet food because it will directly affect the quan-
 helpful for pet owners to know the relative energy contri-
tity of food that must be fed to meet the pet's energy
butions that are provided by the carbohydrate, protein,
requirement. For example, two dry dog foods that are
and fat fractions of the food. The dietary proportion
adlvertised as performance diets for working dogs have
of fat should be higher for hard-working animals and
ME values of 4500 kcal/kg (diet A) and 3600 kcal/kg
lower for sedentary adult or elderly animals. Similarly,
(diet B). If a sled dog that is training in mild weather
the proportion of calories supplied by digestible carbo-
conditions requires 4500 kcal/day, it will need to con-
hydrate should be increased in diets that are intended
sume 1 kg of diet A cr 1.25 kg of diet B (Table 18-1).
for adult maintenance or for elderly animals.
TABLE 18-1 DETERMINATION OF COST PER SERVING
METABOLIZABLE
ENERGY REQUIREMENT
KCAL/KG
QUANTITY/DAY
PRICE/LB
PRICE/KG
COST/DAY
Diet A
4500
÷
4500
1 kg (2.2 Ib)
$1.28
$2.82
$2.82
Diet B
4500
÷
3600
1.25 kg (2.75 Ib)
$1.06
$2.33
184 Canine and Feline Nutrition
manufacturer's response to questions should be timely,
FEEDING COST
thorough, and direct. A pet food manufacturer should
As the quality of the ingredients included in a pet food
be expected to readily supply information about the
increases, so does the cost to the manufacturer. There-
pet food's ingredients, types of testing, digestibility
fore, as a product's quality increases, so does its price pef
information, ME content, and nutrient content. Pet
unit weight. When making price comparisons between
food manufacturers that produce quality products are
foods, it is important to consider the cost of actually
concerned with their reputations and with serving the
feeding the food as opposed to the cost per unit weight.
needs and concerns of the pet owners who buy their pet
The cost per serving of a premium or super-premium
foods. This concern will be evidenced by the company's
product is often equal to or just slightly higher than that
accessibility to consumers and their response to ques-
of an inferior product because a smaller quantity of the
tions about their products
high-quality pet food is fed. Using the previous exam-
 ple, the price of diet A is $45 for a 40-1b bag and the
OTHER FACTORS
price of diet B is $37 for a 40-1b bag. Although a bag of
diet A is actually more expensive than that of diet B, the
Several other factors may be considered when evaluat-
cost of feeding diet B to a hard-working dog is higher
ing commercial pet foods. A cat food’s taurine content
because of its lower energy density (see Table 18-1).
should be noted. The availability of taurine in a diet
When evaluating a food for the frst time, owners can
is infuenced by a number of factors, including other
record the purchase date and the price of the food.
nutrients and the type of processing that is used. There-
When the package is empty, dividing the cost of the
fore the adequacy of the taurine level of a diet can only
paisel Seq aun reyi siep jo 1oqunu au Aq nonpoid
be assessed through actual feeding trials. Pet food man-
provides the cost per day to feed that particular food.
ufacturers should be able to show that their product will
A second product with the same het weight can then be
maintain normal blood taurine levels in cats when it is
compared in the same manner.
fed on a long-term basis. Whole-blood taurine should
be maintained in adult cats at a level of 250 nanomole
 per milliliter (ml) or greater.46 Generally, extruded dry
Although some economy or private-iabel (store brand)
foods that contain at least 1000 milligram (mg)/kg
foods may appeal to pet owners because of their low
(0.10%) and canned cat foods that contain at least
cost, owners are cautioned that the cost is usually a
2000 mg/kg (0.20%) on a DMB are adequate.
reffection of the inexpensive,low-quality ingredients
Cat foods also should be evaluated with regard to
used and the lackofthoroughfeed-trial testing.
 their ability to support urinary tract health. A urinary
pH of 7 or higher is an important risk factor for the
development of struvite-induced feline urolithiasis (see
Chapter 30, pp. 362-365 for a complete discussion).
 Feeding a diet that maintains a urinary pH between 6
REPUTATION OF
and 6.8 when fed ad libitum may inhibit the develop-
THE MANUFACTURER
ment of the struvite crystals that may cause this disor-
der. However, a diet that produces an overly acidifed
The reputation of the pet food manufacturer should
urine (less than 6) can put the cat at risk of metabolic
always be considered when selecting a pet food. Compa-
acidlosis and skeletal decalcifcation. Pet owners who
nies that have a national reputation for producing con-
have concerns about their cats' urinary tract health can
sistent, high-quality products and devoting resources to
select a diet that has been formulated to promote an
consumer education about proper nutrition for com-
 appropriate acidic urine pH. Although magnesium was
panion animals should be selected. The inclusion of a
once implicated as an important risk factor for struvite
urolithiasis, it is now known that magnesium levels in
customer service website indicate a company that wel-
the diet only become significant when urinary pH is
comes inquiries about their products. In addition, the
 maintained at too high a level.47 However, it is still wise
Evaluation of Pet Foods 185
to avoid products that have magnesium contents greater
Although dry pet foods and the feeding of hard biscuits
than 0.1% of the diet's DM. Currently, pet food manu-
as treats may contribute to dental health and reduce
facturers in the United States are not allowed to include
 calculus formation, feeding dry pet food should not
information about urinary pH on the cat food label.
be considered an altefnative to fegulaf dental cafe and
This information can be obtained through educational
teeth cleaning.
literature produced by the company or by contacting
The overall best judge of a commercial pet food is
the manufacturer directly.
the animal itself. Once a pet food has been evaluated
Another factor that may be assessed is a pet food's
and selected, pet owners should feed the product for
ability to contribute to dental health. Some dry pet
a minimum of 2 months before evaluating its total
foods and hard biscuits may contribute to dental
effect on their pet's health. A food that provides optimal
health because the type of formulation that they use
nutrition supports normal development and body con-
enhances chewing abrasion and reduces plaque and
dition, healthy skin, a shiny coat, normal fecal volume
calculus formation (see Chapter 34, pp. 442-446 for
and consistency, and overall vitality in the pet. Signs of a
a complete discussion). In addition, there are numer-
poor diet include weight loss or poor growth, poor coat
cus ofal chewing devices available that afe designed
quality, the development of skin problems, and a lack
to improve dogs' dental health or maintain healthy
of vigor. Whenever any of these signs are observed, a
gingivae. Most fesearch indicates that diet alone is
thorough examination by a veterinarian should be con-
unable to maintain clinically healthy gingivae of
ductedl. Although changing the diet may be warranted.
prevent periodontal disease in the absence of regular
 other medical causes of these problems should always
tooth-brushing and other types of oral cleansing.48,49
be investigated.
References
1. Morris JG, Rogers QR: Arginine: an essential amino acid for the cat, J Nutr 108:1944 1953, 1978.
2. Araujo JA, Studzinski CM, Larson BT, Milgram NW: Comparison of the cognitive palatability assessment protocol and the
two-pan test for use in assessing palatability of two similar foods in dogs, Asma J Vet Res 65: 1490-1496, 2004.
3. Thorne CJ: Behaviour and palatability testing. In Proceedings ofthe petfood forum, Chicago, 1997, Watts Publishing
4. Thombre AG: Oral delivery of medications to companion animals: palatability considerations, Adu Drug Delivery Reu
56:1399-1413, 2004.
5. Mugford RA: External infuences on the feeding of carnivores. In Kare MR, Maller O, editors: The chemical senses and nutrition,
New York, 1977, Academic Press.
6. Bradshaw JW: Sensory and experiential factors in the design of foods for domestic dogs and cats, Iroc Nutr Soc 50:99-106, 1991.
7. Hullar I, Fekete S, Andrasofszky E, and others: Factors infuencing the food preference of cats, J Anim Physiot Anim Nut?
85:205-211, 2001
8. Houpt KA, Hintz HF, Shepherd P: The role of olfaction in canine food preferences, Chem Senser 3:281-290, 1978.
'zl dd pui poog ser sueeied pe Sussaord suaaraur ssans yo ajuen ap geied eno i Suruuag 'N ipaai 6
May/June 1999
10. Stasiak M: The development of food preferences in cats: the new direction, Nutr Neurosci 5:221-228, 2002.
11. Kuo ZY: The dynamics ofbehaviour development: an epigenetic view, New York, 1967, Random House.
12. Griffn RW, Scott GC, Cante CJ: Food preferences of dogs housed in testing-kennels and in consumers homes: some comparisons,
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 8:253-259, 1984
13. Mugford RA: Comparative and developmental studies of feeding in dogs and cats, Br Vet J 133:98, 1977.
186 Canine and Feline Nutrition
14. Ferrel F: Effects of restricted dietary favour experience before weaning on post weaning food preferences in puppies, Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 8:191-198, 1984
15. Bradshaw JWS: The evolutionary basis for the feeding behavior of domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) and cats (Felis catus), J Nutr
136:1 927S-1931S, 2006.
16. Thorne CJ: Feeding behavior of the cat: recent advances, J Small Anim Pract 23:555-562, 1982.
17. Stasiak M: The effect of early specific feeding on food conditioning in cats, Dev Psychobiot 39:207-215, 2001
18. Kestrel-Rickert D: What constitutes palatability? 1n Proceedings of the petfood forum, Chicago, 1995, Watts Publishing
19. Zaghini G, Biagi G: Nutritional peculiarities and diet palatability in the cat, Vet Rer Comm 29:39-44, 2005.
20. Hullar 1, Fekete S, Szocs Z: Effect of extrusion on the quality of soybean-based cat food, J Anim Physiof Anim Nutr 80:201-206,
1998.
proximate analysis and digestible nutrient content, J/ Sei Food Agric 3:823-828, 1982.
Vet Rer 51:808-812, 1990.
23. Kendall PT: Comparable evaluation of apparent digestibility in dogs and cats, Iroc Nutr Soc 40:45a, 1981.
24. Kendall PT, Holme DW, Smith PM: Comparative evaluation of net digestive and absorptive efficiency in dogs and cats fed a
variety of contrasting diet types, J Small Anim Pract 23:577-587, 1982.
25. Sunvold GD, Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, and others: Dietary fiber for cats: in vitro fermentation of selected fiber sources by cat
fecal inoculum and in vivo utilization of diets containing selected fber sources and their blends, J Anim Sei73:2329-2339, 1995.
26. Sunvold CD, Titgemeyer EC, Bourquin LD, and others: Fermentability of selected fbrous substrates by cat faecal microfora,
/ Nutr 124:2721S-2722S, 1994.
27. Sunvold GD, Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, and others: Dietary fiber for dogs. IV. In vitro fermentation of selected fiber sources by
dog fecal inoculum and in vivo digestion and metabolism of fiber-supplemented diets, / Anim Sci 73:1099-1 109, 1995.
29. Meyer H, Kienzle E, Zentek J: Body size and relative weights of gastrointestinal tract and liver in dogs, / Vet Nutr 2:31-35, 1993.
30. Meyer H, Zentek J, Habernoll H, Maskell 1: Digestibility and compatibility of mixed diets and faecal consistency in different
breeds of dog, / Vet Med 46:155-165, 1999.
31. Weber M, Martin L, Biourge V, and others: Infuence of age and body size on the digestibility of a dry expanded diet in dogs,
JAnim Physiol Anim Nutr 87:21-31, 2003
32.Zentek J: Infuence ofdiet composition on microbial activity in the gastro-intestinal tract of dogs. ll. In vitro studies on the
metabolic activities of the small-intestinal microHora, J Anim Physiot Anim Nutr 74:62-73, 1995.
33. Rolfe VE, Adams CA, Butterwick RF, Batt RM: Relationships between fecal consistency and colonic microstructure and absorptive
function in dogs with and without nonspecific dietary sensitivity, Am / Vet Res 63:61 7-622, 2002.
34. Zentek J, Meyer H: The normal handling of dietsare all dogs created equal? / Smalf Anim Pract 36:354-359, 1995.
35. James WT, MacCay CM: A study of food intake, activity, and digestive effciency in different type dogs, Axm J Vet Res 11:412-413,
1950.
36. Kendall PT, Blaza SE, Smith PM: Infuence of level of intake and dog size on apparent digestibility of dog foods, Br Vet J
139:361-362, 1983.
37. Fahey GC, Barry KA, Swanson KS: Age-related changes in nutrient utilization by companion animals, Ann Rev Nutr 28:425-445,
8007
 s od o s u se pespuans raa agego esl  si 
1 993, Watts Publishing, pp 21-35.
002 09z-6yz-0y na an pody suamy Surmoa ur Agnsp nuaredde u sasuep paea-aay T rauni fa radeH 6
Evaluation of Pet Foods187
40. Kienzle E: Enzymeaktivitaet in pancreas, darmwand und chymus des hundes in abhangigkeit von alter und futterart, J Anim Physiol
Anim Nutr 60:276-288, 1988.
41. National Research Council: Nutrient reguirements ofdogs and cats, Washington, DC, 2006, National Academy Press.
42. Burkholder WJ: Age-related changes to nutritional requirements and digestive function in adult dogs and cats, J Am Vet Med Asoc
215:625-629, 1999.
industry. 1In Burger 1H, Rivers 1PW, editors: Nutrition of the dog and cat, New York, 1989, Cambridge University Press.
44. Huber TL, Wilson RC, McGarity SA: Variations in digestibility of dry dog foods with identical label guaranteed analysis, JAm
Anim Hosp Assoc 22:571-575, 1986.
45. Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO): Pet food regulations. In AAFCO Offcial Publication, Atlanta, 2008,
AAFCO.
diets, / Nutr 121:S179-S180, 1991.
47. Tarttelin MF: Feline struvite urolithiasis factors affecting urine pH may be more important than magnesium levels in food, Vet Rec
121:227230, 1987
48. Gorrel C, Rawlings JM: The role of tooth brushing and diet in the maintenance of periodontal health in dogs, J Vet Dent
13:139-143, 1996.
49. Rawlings JM, Gorrel C, MarkwellPJ: Effect of two dietary regimens on gingivitis in the dog, J SmallAnim Pract 38:147-151,
1997.
19
Feeding Regimens for Dogs and Cats
may be more common in some breeds than in others,
NORMALFEEDINGBEHAVIOR
there is little empirical evidence for this and a wide
An examination of the way that the wild ancestors of
fange of feeding behaviors are observed among indi-
the dog and cat hunted and consumed food provides
vidual dogs, even within breeds.2 The tendency to eat
insight into the normal eating behaviors exhibited by
rapidlly can be a problem for some dogs because it may
domesticated pets. Both dogs and cats are classifed in
predispose them to choke or swallow large amounts
the order Carnivora, but only cats are true carnivores;
of air. If social facilitation is the cause of rapid eating,
dogs are more omnivorous in nature. This difference is
feeding the dog separately from other animals, thus
manifested by unique anatomical and metabolic charac
removing the competitive aspect of mealtime, often
teristics, as well as in the differing ways the two species
normalizes the rate of eating. In other cases, changing
prefer to obtain and ingest food.
the diet to a food that is less palatable or to one that
An obvious difference between the domestic dog and
is difficult to consume rapidly solves the problem. For
example, some dogs readily gorge themselves on canned
felids were required to expend considerable amounts of
of semimoist foods but return to eating at a normal rate
 energy locating and capturing prey and did not have areli-
when fed a dry foodl. The size of kibble pieces can also
able source of nutrition. In contrast, our domestic pets are
affect rate of eating, with larger piece size tending to
provided with a consistent source of palatable and nutri-
slow rate of eating. Finally, if a dog attempts to eat dry
tious foods and they do not generally expend energy to
food too quickly, adding water to the dog's food imme
diately before feeding decreases the rate of eating and
and cats still exhibit some of their
huntingahd
minimizes the chance of swallowing large amounts of
Dehavlots
ceftainly
air. Other approaches include adding a large ball to the
affect mealtime behaviors and interactions with owhers.
bowl or purchasing a feeding bowl that includes a centef
hub that functions to slow eating rate.
Dogs
The wolf, the dog's wild relative, obtains much of its
Eating too rapidly can be a probiem for some dogs
food supply by hunting in a pack. Cooperative hunting
because it may predispose them to choke or swallow
behaviors allow the wolf to prey on large prey species
large amounts of air in multipie dog homes,feeding
that would otherwise be unavailable to a wolf hunting
dogs individually to remove the competitive aspect of
alone. As a result, most wolf subspecies tend to be inter-
mealtirme helps to normalize the rate of eating in other
mittent eaters, gorging themselves immediately after a
kill and then not eating again for an extended period of
α specially designed feeding bowt, changing to a food
time. Competition between members of the pack at the
that is less palatable, orfeeding a food with larger kibble
site of a kill leads to the rapid consumption of food and
pieces can decreaserate ofeating.
the social facilitation of eating behaviors. Many wolves
and other wild canids also exhibit food hoardling behav-
iors; small prey or the remainder of a large kill are bur-
Social facilitation is observed in domestic dogs that
ied when food is plentiful and later dug up and eaten
ate fed together as a group. The most common manifes-
when food is not readily available.
tation of social facilitation occurs when the presence of
Like their ancestors, domestic dogs tend to eat rap-
another animal at mealtime stimulates another dog to
idly. Although it has been suggested that rapid eating
consume more food or to eat more fapidly. For example,
191
192 Canine and Feline Nutrition
it is not unusual for a pet owner to comment that his
rarely return to dig them up. Related activities that are
dog was a poor eater until a second dog was introduced
common in dogs are scavenging and coprophagy (stool
into the family. Studies have shown that puppies and
 eating).6 Many dogs readily consume garbage, carrion,
dogs usually consume more food when fed as a group,
insects, and feces that they encounter in the yard or
compared with when they are fed alone.? If food is
while out walking.78 Plant eating, in particular grass
available at all times, the effects of social facilitation
eating, is also frequently reported by owners. Contrary
 eventually become minimal. On the other hand, if dogs
to popular beliefs, there is no evidence that grass/plant
 ate fed their meals as a group and have not been trained
eating in dogs is a sign either of illness or nutrient def-
to eat only from their own bowl (and not to steal from
[u e aq on siedde uea ssia ey otrg dun 
others), competitive interactions and resource guard-
canid behavior as it is widespread among wolves and
o a n so  o  sq 
has not been shown to be associated with gastrointesti-
 sid smoq umo in  auo nia oi s
problem (Box 19-1).
Another form of social facilitation in dogs felates
play a role similar to that described in chimpanzees,
to food preferences and selection. Although there are
who consume entire leaves from vafious plants, which
limited published data available, there is evidence that
then function to purge intestinal parasites as they travel
dogs are capable of learning preferences for novel favors
from other familiar dogs.4 Dogs also react to human
plant eating evolved in dogs and cats to serve the saime
 pointing gestures during food selection and some will
function. Although scavenging garbage and coprophagy
even select a smaller quantity of focd over a larger quan-
ate considlered to be normal behaviors in dogs, these
tity if their owner directs more attention toward the
behaviors can present a health and sanitation risk and
smaller pile of food.5 Given the large number of homes
 generally should be prevented. Keeping the yard picked
today that include more than one dog, the infuence
up, using supervision, and teaching dogs a reliable
that the behavior of other dogs and of the owner may
“"leave it” command are the best approaches to control-
have upon an individual dog's food choice is an impor-
ling scavenging and stool-eating behaviors.
tant consideration.
Vestiges of the wolf's food hoarding behaviors are
ing schedule consisting of large meals interrupted by
often observed in dlomestic dogs. For example, some
 periods of fasting is the most natural way to feed dogs.
dogs frequently bury bones in their yard or hide coveted
However, when dogs are given free access to food, they
food iterms such as biscuits or chew bones in furniture of
will consume many small meals frequently throughout
under beds. However, unlike their wild ancestors, many
the day. This pattern is similar to that seen in cats, with
domestic dogs forget about outdloor hidden caches and
the exception that dogs tend to eat only during the day-
time.3 The domestic dog is quite capable of adapting to
a humber of different feeding regimens. These regimens
BOX 19-1 PRACTICAL FEEDING TIPS:
METHODS TO DECREASE THE
include  portion-controlled  f
 feeding,  time-controlled
RATE OF EATING
feeding, or free-choice (ad libitum) feeding. These regi-
mens, and the advantages and disadvantages of each, afe
Feed a less palatable food
dliscussed later in this chapter.
Feed a food with larger kibble pieces to encourage
chewing.
Cats
 Add water to the dry food just before serving.
It is common to think of the domestic cat as a descen-
Use a feeding bowl that is designed to slow rate of
dant of the wild felid species that prey on large, grazing
eating.
animals. However, the primary ancestor of the cat is the
Train adult animals to eat only from their own bowl
small, African wild cat, Felis libyca. This cat's primary
prey are small rodents that are similar in size to feld
seaie jualap u! pue sued jelaras woij saidd nd paay
mice.'3 Therefore the immediate ancestor of the cat
Feeding Regimens for Dogs and Cats 193
is not an intermittent feeder like the larger wild cats;
WHAT TO FEED
rather, it is an animal that feeds frequently throughout
the day by catching and consuming a large number
Pet owners have a choice of feeding a commercially pre-
of small rodents. Like the majority of wild felids, the
 pated food or a homemade diet. Most pet owners pre-
African wild cat is a solitary animal, living and hunting
fer the convenience, cost-effectiveness, and reliability
alone for much of its life and interacting with others
of feeding commercial products. The decision of what
of its species only during mating season. This solitary
type of commercial product to feed can be male with
nature has resulted in an animal that tends to eat slowly
 an understanding of the advantages and disadvantages
and is generally uninhibited by the presence of other
 '(91-e91 dd 'g uonas aas) poy 1o ad yoea jo
animals.
a homemade diet is fed, care must be taken to ensure
Most domestic cats living in homes consume their
that a complete and balanced ration is prepared, that all
food slowly and do not respond to other cats by either
ingredients and the fnal diet are stored safely to avoid
increasing the rate of eating or consuming a highet
spoilage, and that there is consistency of ingredients and
volume of food. In multiple cat homes, cats often eat
nutrient content between batches of food. Surveys have
peaceably from the same bowls either together or at dif-
shown that more than 90% of pet owners in the United
 States continue to feed commercially prepared pet foods
as the primary component of their pet's diet.18 There-
a less assertive cat and not allowing access to the food
fore most of the discussion in this section concerns
bowl or supplanting the cat if he or she was already eat-
feeding commercial diets to pets; reference is made to
homemade diets in special situations.
feeding stations located in different ateas of the home
One of the most important considerations when
should always be provided in multiple-cat homes.
choosing a dog or cat food is the pet's stage of life and
If fed free-choice, most cats will nibble at their food
lifestyle. Nutrient and energy needs differ according to
throughout the day, as opposed to consuming a large
an animal's age, activity level, reproductive status, and
amount of food at one time. Several studies of eating
health. As knowledge about these needs has increased,
behavior in domestic cats have shown that if food is
specific diets have
e been developed to efficiently meet
available free-chcice, cats eat frequently and randomly
the needs of pets during different ages and physiological
throughout a 24-hour period.2,15 It is not unusual for
states.
a cat to eat between 9 and 16 meals per day, with each
Several important factors must be considered when
meal having a caloric content of only about 23 kilo-
selecting a food for dogs and cats in all physiological
calories (kcal). (Interestingly, the caloric value of a small
 states. Nutrient content and bioavailability are of pri-
-ns uq sey i (lesy oe Aianeiidde si asno piy
mary importance:
gested that the eating behaviors observed in domestic
The food should provide all of the essential
cats are similar to those of feral domestic cats eating
nutrients in adequate amounts and in the proper
fodents of other small animals.16 However, just like the
balance to meet the needs of the pet's lifestyle and
dog, the cat is capable of adapting to several types of
stage of life.
feeding schedlules.17
The food must supply sufficient energy to maintain
ideal body weight or support optimal tissue growth.
Caloric needs must be met when the food is fed in
Domestic cats tend to eat slowhy and do not respond to
an amount that is well within the limits set by the
animal's appetite and by the storage and digestive
suming a higher volume offood. in multiple cat homes,
capacity of its gastrointestinal tract.
cats often eat peaceablyfrom thesame bowis either
 The food must be appetizing to the dog or cat and
together or at different times ofthe day ffed free-choice,
should be acceptable when fed as the primary diet
cats nibble at the food throughout the day,as opposed
over an extended period of time. The form and
to consuming a large amount of food at one time.
texture of the food must be appealing and should be
easily chewed and ingestedl.
194 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Feeding the pet food for extended periods of
dry out as easily as semimcist products. However, even
time should support proper gastrointestinal
if dry food is used, the food bowl or dispenser should
tract functioning and consistently result in the
be cleaned and refilled with fresh food daily. Compared
 production of regular, firm, and well-formed
with other feeding methods, free-choice feeding requires
stools.
the least amount of work and knowledge on the part
The long-term effects of feedling the food must
of the owner. The food and water supply is replenished
be assessed. The food should support those
only one time daily, and it is not necessary to determine
measurements of vitality and health that are
the pet's exact daily requirements.
somewhat subjective, such as good coat quality
If dogs are fed free-choice in a kennel setting, the
healthy skin condition, proper body physique and
kennel noise that usually occurs in fesponse to meal-
muscle tone, and high energy level (Box 19-2).
time will be decreased or eliminated; this fact is con-
sidered a distinct advantage by many kennel owners
In addition, the constant presence of food in the ken-
WHEN AND HOW TO FEED:
nel can help to relieve boredom that may be associated
FEEDING REGIMENS
with confinement and to minimize undesirable behav-
iors such as coprophagy (stool eating) and excessive
e suai huy jo sad Aed aar ae a
barking. Another feeding approach that can help to
may be used when feeding dogs and cats. These regi-
reduce kennel-related behavior problems is to use food
mens are called free-choice (also called ad libitum or self-
delivery toys. These consist of hard rubber or plastic
balls, disks, or other odd shapes that are designed with
feeding. One method of feeding may be preferred over
compartments that hold kibble or soft foods. Depend-
another, depending on the owner's daily schedule, the
ing on the type of toy that is used, the dog must either
number of animals being fed, and the acceptability of
push the toy around or manipulate the toy with his
the method by the pet or pets.
paws and teeth to obtain the food. These interac-
tive toys can be used to provide part or even most of
a dog's daily food and have been used as a form of
Free-Choice Feeding
environmental enrichment in shelters and kennels.
 Free-choice feeding involves having a surplus amount of
Although limited studies of this type of enrichment
food available at all times. The pet is able to consume as
have been conducted, results suggest that the inclusion
much food as is desired at any time of the day. This type
of feeding relies on the animal's ability to self-regulate
individually relieves boredom, improves activity, and
food intake so that energy and nutrient needs are met.
reduces barking.15,20 Free-choice feeding can also be
Suipay jo adki su ioy alqeins isou s! pooy iad Ai0
ae ssop jo dnoia e araum sjauuay io sauoy u! pasn
because it will not spoil as quickly as canned food of
housed together and have access to several food dis-
 pensers. Feeding in this way ensures that all ofthe dogs
BOX 19-2 FACTORS TO CONSIDER WHEN
will be able to consume adequate food, because there
SELECTING A PET FOOD
is always surplus food available. It is important that
food dispensers are spaced far enough apart to allow all
Nutrient content and bioavaila bility
dogs to eat and to reduce the risk of resource-guarding
Palata bility and acceptance
behaviors.
When dogs are fed free-choice, they tend to con-
Effect on gastrointestinal tract functioning
sume frequent, small meals throughout the day. This
 Caloric density
Diet digestibility
Long-term feeding effects on body condition, skin and
small meals are consumed, as compared with when
coat health and vitality
this loss is usually more than compensated for by the
Feeding Regimens for Dogs and Cats 195
tendency of dogs that are fed free-choice to increase
optimal weight and condition on this type of regimen,
their total daily food intake. This effect of a free-choice
others habitually overeat and should not be fed free-
regimen can be an advantage for dogs of cats that are
choice.
“poor keepers" and do not eat enough to meet theif
energy needs when fed one or two meals per day. Ani-
Time-Controlled Meal Feeding
mals with very high energy needs may also beneft
from consuming frequent meals on a free-choice regi-
Meal feeding involves controlling either the amount
men. Feeding numerous small meals per day is often
of time that the pet has access to food or the portion
prescribed for pets with dysfunctions in the ability to
size that is fed. Similar to a free-choice regimen, time-
digest, absorb, or utilize nutrients, and for dogs that 
controlled feeding relies somewhat on the pet's ability
have a history of gastric dilatation. However, because
to fegulate its daily energy intake. At mealtime, a sur-
free-choice feeding allows the animal rather than the
plus of food is provided and the pet is allowed to eat
owher to decide when it is time to eat, animals that
for a predetermined period of time. Most adult dogs
require frequent feeding as a treatment for medi-
and cats that are not physiologically stressed are able to
cal condlitions are better fed on a portion-controlled,
consume enough food to meet their daily needs within
rather than a free-choice, basis.
15 to 20 minutes. Although one meal per day can be
Although free-choice feeding is convenient for the
sufficient for feeding adult pets during maintenance,
-es an pue raeay st aep iad sea omn sid
s! jewjue ue Jl 'poqau siun yim paisaiapun os Aeu
isfying. There is some evidence that feeding a large vol-
sick, or one or more dogs are prevented from eating in a
ume of food at one time is a risk factor for with gastric
group, a change in food intake may not be noticed until
dilatation in large breeds of dogs, so dividing food into
the dog has lost substantial weight. If the decreased
two smaller portions per day may be prudent.22 More-
intake is the result of a medical prcblem, valuable time
over, feeding two times per day reduces hunger between
may be lost before the problem is diagnosed. The oppo-
meals and minimizes food-associated behavior prob-
site situation, ovefconsumption and the development of
lems, such as begging and stealing food.
Pay ane yeui sies pue soop un uouon Aury si isaqo
As in the case of free-choice feeding, there afe some
free-choice. Although almost all animals are capable of
dogs and cats that do not adapt well to time-controlled
eating to meet their caloric needs, the regulatory mecha-
feeding. Pets that afe very fastidious may not con-
nisms that control food intake can be overridden if an
sume enough food within the allotted period. In con-
animal is leading a felatively sedentary lifestyle and is
  n    s r 
fed a highly palatable and energy-dense food. In this
throughout the allotted period. A time-controlled feed-
situation, a dog or cat often consumes more energy
ing program may actually exacerbate gluttonous behav-
than is required to meet its daily needs. In growing ani-
, is a en u a a na e asq r
mals this can fesult in an accelerated growth fate and
the clock" whenever a meal is offered.
increased deposition of body fat; in adult animals it
leads to obesity.
Portion-Controlled Meal Feeding
Most dogs and cats overconsume when they afe
frst introduced to a free-choice feeding regimen.
 Portion-controlled feeding is the feeding method of
However, over time many can adjust their intake t0
choice in most situations. This procedure allows the
meet caloric needs. It is advisable to begin free-choice
 owner the greatest amount of control over their pet's
feeding by setting out a dish of food immediately after
diet. One or several meals are provided per day, and
the dog or cat has consumed a meal. This extra food
meals afe premeasured to meet the pet's daily caloric
 helps to prevent engorgement by the pet the frst time
and nutrient needs. As in the case of time-controlled
that a surplus amount of food is available. The ability
     d e  
to adapt to free-choice feeding depentls on the physi-
meal per day, but providing two or more daily meals
ological state, energy level, temperament, and lifestyle
is preferable. Portion-controlled feeding enables the
of a pet. Although some adult dogs and cats maintain
 owher to carefully monitor the pet's food consumption
196 Canine and Feline Nutrition
and immediately observe any changes in food intake
basis, owners select a quantity of food based primarily
of eating behavior. The pet's growth and weight can be
strictly controlled with this method by adjusting either
to meet energy needs. If the pet gains too much weight 
the amount of food or the type of food that is fed. As a
(energy surplus), the owner decreases the amount that
result, conditions of underweight, overweight, or inap-
is fed. Conversely, if weight is lost, an increased amount
 propriate growth rate can be corrected at an early stage.
of food is provided.
Meal feeding is also often preferred by owners because
Commercial pet foods are formulated to contain the
it represents a time of pleasurable interaction with theif
proper amount of essential nutfients when a quantity is
pets, characterized by daily and familiar feeding rou-
fed that meets the pet's energy requirement. Balancing
tines of communication, petting, and handling.
energy density with nutrient content ensures that when
A disadvantage to portion-controlled feeding is that
an animal's caloric needs are met, its needs for all other
it demands the greatest time commitment and knowl-
essential nutrients are met by the same quantity of food.
edge on the part of the owner. Guidelines for feeding are
Therefore the best way to determine how much to feed a
provided on the bags or containers of most pet foods;
 particular animal is to frst estimate the animal's energy
 these can be used as a starting point when determining
needs and then calculate the amount of a particular pet
the amount to feed. Additional advice can be obtained
food that must be fed to meet that heed.
from veterinarians, breeders, and pet food companies.
A number of factors affect an individual dog's of
The time commitment of portion-controlled feeding is
'sbe apnjul sioisey assul uauaiinbai Asiaua sies
a ssaun siaumo nad isou yim anss ue nou an
reproductive status, body condition, level of activity,
large numbers of animals are involved. Most owners
breed, temperament, environmental conditions, and
coordinate their pets’ meals with their own and find
health. When determining a pet's energy requirement,
that mealtime becomes an enjoyable routine for both
these factors are accounted for by adding or subtracting
their pets and themselves
calories from the quantity of food that is determined
to support the maintenance energy requirement of
the adult pet (see Chapter 9, p. 67). The maintenance
Both dogs and cats are capable of adapting to several
requirement refers to the amount of energy (kcal/day)
necessary to support a normally active adult animal
used depends on several factors: the owner's scheduie,
that is not reproducing and is living in a temperate
the number of animais beingfed,and the pet's accep
climate. For example, energy needs during the latter
tance of the feeding method. Meal feeding is often
stage of gestation in dogs and cats increase from 1.25
preferred by owners and their pets, because it allows
to 1.5 times the female's maintenance requirement. If
owners to carefully monitor their pet's intake and repre
an active 15-kilogram (kg) (33-pound [1b]) bitch is esti-
sents a time ofpleasurabie interaction each day
mated to require 991 calories per day for maintenance,
she would require approximately 1239 to 1486 kcal/
day at the end of gestation. Using the lower estimate, if
DETERMINING HOW MUCH
a food containing 4500 kcal/kg is fed, this would cor-
TOFEED
ip Aep iad pooy jo sdno y Aaneuixoidde oi puods
ing gestation, an increase of approximately V2 cup of
In all animals, food intake is governed principally by
food (Table 19-1). The information presented later in
energy requirement. When companion animals are fed
this section provides estimates for accounting for these
free-choice, the underlying control over the amount
factors when estimating the energy requirements of a
of food consumed is primarily the animal's need for
given animal.
energy. Although highly palatable or energy-dense foods
Another way to determine the amount to feed a dog
can override the natural tendency to eat to meet energy
of cat is to use the guidelines included on the commer-
needs, energy is still the dietary component that most
cial pet food label. All pet foods that cafry a “complete
strongly governs the amount of food consumed. When
and balanced" claim ate required to include feeding
companion animals are fed on a portion-controlled
instructions on the product label.23 These guidelines
Feeding Regimens for Dogs and Cats 197
TABLE 19-1 DETERMINATION OF QUANTITY TO FEED DURING MAINTENANCE
AND GESTATION (15-KG DOG)
ENERGY
REQUIREMENT
(KCAL OF
METABOLIZABLE
ENERGY
QUANTITY
CUPS
ENERGY)
DENSITY*
(KG)
LB
OZ
PER DAY
Maintenance
991
4500
0.220
X
2.2
=0.48
7.8
÷
=2.21
Gestation
1239
4500
0.275
×
2.2
=0.60
=2.76
*Energy densicy (kcal/kg) can be obcained from produc lirerarure or by contacring che per food manufacurer.
tAn 8oz measuring cup conains approximarely 3.5 oz of dry food.
usually provide estimates of the quantity to feed for
Determining how much to feed a dog or cat is based
 several different ranges in body size. Such instructions
on age, reproductive status,body condition,level of
provide only a rough estimate that can be used as a start-
activity, breed, temperament,and environmental con
ing point when frst feeding a particular brand of food.
ditions. Commercial pet food labels provide general
Adjustments in these estimates should be made based
guidelines, but every pet must be evaluated and fed as
cn the owner's knowledge of the individual animal and
an individual
on the animal's response to feeding.
References
1. Bradshaw JWS: The evolutionary basis for the feeding behavior of domestic dogs {Canis familiaris) and cats (Felis catus), J Nutr
136:1927S-1931S, 2006.
New York, 1977, Academic Press.
 3. Houpt KA: lngestive behavior: the control of feeding in cats and dogs. In Voith VL, Borchelt PL, editors: Readings in compenion
animal behavior, Trenton, NJ, 1996, Veterinary Learning Systems.
4. Lupfer-Johnosn G, Ross J: Dogs acquire food preferences from interacting with recently fed conspecifics, Behav Proc 74:1 04 106,
2007.
5. Prato-Previde E, Marshall-Pescini S, Valsecchi P: Is your choice my choice? The owners effect on pet dogs (Canis hupusfamilaris)
performance in a food choice task, Anim Cogn 11:167-174, 2008.
6. Wells DL: Comparison of two treatments for preventing dogs eating their own faeces, Vet Rec 153:51-53, 2003.
 8. Gazzano A, Mariti C, Sighieri C, and others: Survey of undesirable behaviors displayed by potential guide dogs with puppy walkers,
J Vet Behav 3:104-114, 2008.
9. Sueda KLC, Hare BL, Cliff KD: Characterization of plant eating in dogs, Appt Anim Behav Sei 111:120-132, 2008.
10. Hart BL: Why do dogs and cats eat grass? Vet Med (Dec 2008):648-649, 2008.
11. Anderson Z: Food habits of wolves (Canis lupus) in Latvia, Acta Theriologica 49:357-367, 1998.
12. Hufman MA, Canton J: Self-induced increase of gut motility and the control of parasitic infections in wild chimpanzees, Int J
Primatof 22:329-346, 2001.
198Canine and Feline Nutrition
13. Serpell JA: The domestication and history of the cat. In Turner DC, Bateson P, editors: The domestic cat: the biology ofits behaviour,
Cambridge, UK, 1988, Cambridge University Press, pp 151-158.
14. Knowles RJ, Curtis TM, Crowell-Davis SL: Correlation of dominance as determined by agonistic interactions with feeding order
in cats, Am / Vet Res 65: 1548-1556, 2004.
16. Hart BL, Hart LA: Canine and feline behavioral therapy, Philadelphia, 1985, Lea & Febiger.
17. Bradshaw JW, Cook SE: Patterns of pet cat behaviour at feeding occasions, Appi Anim Behav Sci 47:61-74, 1996.
 18. Lafamme DP, Abood SK, Fascetti AJ, and others: Pet feeding practices of dog and cat owners in the United States and Australia,
I Am Vet Med Asoc 232:687-694, 2008.
19. Schipper LL, Vinke CM, Schilder MBH, Spruijt BM: The effect of feeding enrichment toys on the behaviour of kenneled dogs
(Canis familiaris), Appl Anim Behav Sci 114:1 82-195, 2008.
Palauuay go rorayag pue Age Suryrom parodar uodn suauyrua Surpaay go naa aui sI meysperg In Aauooy 'vs maurn ot
working dogs, J Forersic Sei 53:1400-1404, 2008.
 21. Leblanc J, Diamond P: The efet of meal frequency on postprandial thermogenesis in the dog (abstract), Fed Proc 44:1678, 1985.
22. Raghavan M, Clickman N, McCabe G, and others: Diet-related risk factors for gastric dilatation-volvulus in dogs of high-risk
breeds, J Am Aim Hosp Assoc 40:192203, 2004.
23. Association of American Feed Control Offcials (AAFCO): Pet food regulations. ln AAFCO ofcial publication, Atlanta, 2008,
AAFCO
20
Pregnancy and Lactation
It has been observed that successful gestation and lacta
At least 2 weeks prior to breeding the queen of
tion in companion animals is the result of a combina
bitch should be transitioned (if needed) to a high-
tion of factors. These factors include selection of heal thy
quality, highly digestible food that is adequate for ges-
 breeding animals, use of correct breeding management
tation and lactation. Changing to this diet early in the
techniques, maintenance of a healthy environment,
dam's reproductive cycle allows her to be fully adjusted
and the consistent and long-term provision of a proper
to the new food when breeding takes place and pre-
diet.l·3 Ideally, the correct feeding and management of
vents the need to abruptly change diets during either
reproducing animals begins during growth 
1anddevel
gestation or lactation. Pet foods that have increased
opment of the dam and sire and continues throughout
nutrient density are needed because of the increased
mating, gestation, and lactation (Boxes 20-1 and 20-2).
nutrient and energy fequirements of reproduction.
 Feeding a nutrient-dense food allows these needs to be
 met without excess food consumption, thus avoiding
PREBREEDING FEEDING
the likelihood of gastrointestinal upset or weight loss.
AND CARE
The bitch or queen should be fed this food through-
out pregnancy and lactation. For dogs, the food
The selection of breeding animals should include
should contain animal-based protein as the primary
screening for any faults or anomalies that are believed to
protein source at a level of 28% to 30% (as fed).6
be genetically transmissible.4,5 All animals should also
Protein level for a reproducing queen should be slightly
undergo a thorough assessment of temperament, struc-
higher (-32%).3 Energy density of the food should be
ture, and health before being adlmitted into a breedling
s! (pay se) 1ey %oz isal 1e Alleaus uy Aaeja1
program. Conformation shows and various types of
recommended.
performance tests can be used by breeders to evaluate
 Both omega-6 and omega-3 farty acids should be
their animals and compare them to established breed
supplied in the diet, ideally balanced in a ratio between
standards. Once an adult dog or cat has been selected
5:1 and 10:1. This is important because a female's essen-
for breeding, a complete physical examination should
tial fatty acid (EFA) status is negatively infuenced by
be administered. This should include a fecal check for
 the physiological stress of pregnancy and lactation.7
internal parasites, serological tests for brucellosis and
This risk is greatest in females who have had multiple
herpesvirus in dogs, and the administration of any
litters.8 This occurs because an increased supply of EFAs
required vaccinations.
ate needed during gestation and lactation to supply
Before breeding, both the sire and the dam should be
fetal tissues with fatty acids via the placenta and after
in excellent physical condition, well-exercised, and not
birth through the milk. Of particular importance to
overweight or underweight. It is especially important
reproducing females and their developing fetuses is the
that the dam be at optimum weight and in prime con-
n-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). DHA is
dition. If the dam is underweight, she may be unable
essential for normal neurological and retinal develop-
to consume enough food during gestation to provide
ment in puppies and kittens (see Chapter 21, p. 211).9
for her own nutritional needs as well as the needs of her
Because adult animals have a limited ability to synthe-
developing fetuses. Lack of proper nutrition in the dam
size DHA from alpha-linolenic acid, the best way to
can result in decreased birth weight and increased neo-
supply developing fetuses and neonates with DHA (and
natal mortality. Conversely, an overweight condition
 other essential long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids)
in the dam can lead to the development of very large
is through enrichment of the mother's diet during preg-
fetuses and dystocia.
nancy and lactation.10,11
199
200 Canine and Feline Nutrition
BOX 20-1 PRACTICAL FEEDING TIPS:
Ahigh-quality,highiydigestibiefoodwithslightly
GESTATION
increased protein andarelatively highenergydensity
shouid be selected for reproducing bitches and gueens
Feed a food thatis highly digestible and energy- and
Optimal levels of omega-6 to omega-3fatty acids are
nutrient-dense.
needed, and should be balanced in a ratio ranging
Do not increase feed intake until the fifth or sixth week
between 5:1 and 101and shouid contain adequate
of gestation (dogs).
levels ofdocosahexaenoic acid and otheressential fatty
Provide several small meals per day during late
acids.The food should also contain sufcient concentra
gestation.
tions of antioxidants to offset the oxidative stress that is
Increase feed intake to a pproximately 1.25 to 1.5 times
associatedwithpregnancy
maintenance by the end of gestation.
Dams should gain no more than 15% to 25% of body
weight by the end of gestation.
FEEDING MANAGEMENT
Dams should weigh 5% to 10% above normal body
weight after whelping.
DURING GESTATION
AND PARTURITION
BOX 20-2 PRACTICAL FEEDING TIPS:
Bitches
LACTATION
ais u y ns jo o r ssa saq nid u
Feed a diet that is highly digestible and energy- and
occurs during the frst 5 weeks of pregnancy.15 Although
nutrient-dense.
the fetuses are developing rapidlly, they are very small
Provide adequate calories to prevent excess weight
until the last third of the 9-week gestation (Figure 20-1).
loss.
As a result, there is only a slight increase in the dam's
 a e     a
weight and total nutritional needs during the frst 5 weeks
of gestation (Figure 20-2).16 After the ffth week, fetal
Feed two to three times maintenance during peak
weight and size increase rapidly for the remaining 3 to
lactation.
4 weeks of gestation. In the dog, more than 75% of
 Provide free-choice feeding or several small meals per
weight, and at least half of fetal length, is attained between
day during peak lactation.
the fortieth and ffty-fifth day of gestation.17 Although
Slowly reduce dam's intake after fourth week of
optimal nutrition is important throughout reproduction.
lactation.
it is especially crucial during the last few weeks of gesta
tion to ensure optimal fetal growth and development.
A fnal consideration is the level of antioxidants
If a bitch is at ideal weight at the time of breeding.
in the food. During gestation, females experience
no increase in food intake is necessary until the ffth
increased oxidative stress as a result of the increased
week of gestation. Contrary to popular belief, a bitch
 oxygen consumption and altered metabolism that is
 should not receive a greater amount of food immedi-
associated with pregnancy.12,13 Although limited stud-
ately after she has been bred. An increase of food at this
ies have been conducted with companion animals, one
time is unnecessary and could lead to excessive weight
study reported reduced antioxidant status in female
 gain during pregnancy. It is not unusual for bitches to
 dogs during gestation.14 These changes, when consid-
undergo a transient period of appetite loss at approxi-
ered in combination with recommendations to increase
 mately 3 weeks of gestation. However, this change lasts
dietary EFAs during pregnancy, suggest that antioxidant
for only a few days and is usually not a health concern.
nutrients such as vitamin E, vitamin A, and magnesium
After the ffth or sixth week of pregnancy, the bitch's
should also be increased in foods that are selected for
food intake should be increased gradually so that at the
pregnant bitches.
time of whelping her daily intake is approximately 25%
Pregnancy and Lactation 201
300-
250-
200-
(grams)
150
Weight 
100
50-
1
13436384042444648505254586062
Gestational Age (days)
Fgure 20-1  Fetal puppy body weight (g) throughout gestation.
Bitch weight
Whelping
10
20
30
40
50
6063
0
10
20
30
40
Gestation
Lactation
Days
Fgure 20-2 Weight gain pattern in bitches during gestation and lactation.
to 50% higher than her hormal maintenance heeds,
weight is 15 kilograms (kg) (33 pounds [lb]) should
depending on the size of the litter and the size of the
weigh between 17 and 19 kg (37 and 41 1b) at the end
of her pregnancy.
dum jo aun ay Aq % on %s I Aaxadde Aq
 As the developing puppies increase in size, there is a
 Using the previous example, a bitch whose optimum
reduction in the abdominal space available for expansion
202 Canine and Feline Nutrition
400
350
300%
300
250%
250
200%
200%
200
150%
150
125%
Maintenance
100
2
50
1
3
4
5
8
2
4
5
8
Gestation
Lactation
(weeks)
Whelp
(weeks)
Wean
Figure 20-3  Nutritional needs of the bitch during gestation and lactation.
of the bitch's digestive tract after a meal. Therefore it is
A slight drop in body temperature, occurring 12 to
helpful to provide several small meals per day during
1 8 hours before the start of labor, is a fairly reliable indi-
the last few weeks of gestation so that abdominal space
cator of impending parturition.
does not limit the bitch's ability to consume an adequate
s pre r a pm sy r ae au
quantity of food. It is important to provide enough food
all of the fetal placentas, and when her puppies are
during this period because dams that are underweight
resting normally, she should be provided with fresh
 during middle and late gestation may
have difficulty
water and food. Most bitches will begin eating within
of
24 hours of whelping. If necessary, the dam's appetite
milk production that occur during lactation. Likewise,
can be stimulated by moistening her food with warm
it is also important not to overfeed pregnant bitches.
water. Adding water to the food also ensures that adle-
Excessive intake and weight gain will be refected in
quate Auid is consumed, which is an important consid-
heavier fetuses and may result in complications at the
eration. If the bitch has been adequately prepared for
time of whelping.
lactation, she should have a postwhelping weight that is
5% to 10% above her prebreeding maintenance weight
(Table 20-1).
During the later stages of gestation,it is advisable to
feedfemales several smallmealsper day to ensure that
Queens
she is abie to consume an adequate quantity offood. it
 The weight gain pattern that occurs in pregnant queens
because dams that are underweight during middie and
is slightly different from that observed in bitches (Figure
late gestation may have difcuity maintaining body
 20-4).18 Although most of the bitch's weight increase
condition for the high demands of milk production that
occurs during the last third of gestation, pregnant
occur during lactation.
queens exhibit a linear increase in weight beginning
around the second week of gestation. A second differ-
ence between bitches and queens involves the type of
Mammary gland development and milk production
occur 1 to 5 days before parturition, and many bitches
all of the preparturition gain is lost at whelping. In con-
refuse all food approximately 12 hours before whelping.
trast, weight loss immediately following parturition in
Pregnancy and Lactation 203
ENERGYINTAKE RELATIVE
FEEDINGS
PERIOD
TO MAINTENANCE
PER DAY
COMMENTS
Maintenance
100%
2
Maintenance intake = kcals needed to maintain
optimal body condition
Prebreeding
100%
2
 Bitches should be fed to maintain optimal
condition (i.e., no weight gain)
Gestation (Weeks 1-4)
100%
2-3
Gradually increase to 3 portions per day by the
fourth or fifth week
Gestation (Week 5)
Gradual increase
2-3
Gradually increase to 3 portions per day by the
to 125%-150%
fourth or fifth week
Gestation (Week 6 to
125% -150%
3-4
By end of gestation, female's BW
whelping)
increase should be ~15%-25% above
optimal BW
Lactation (Week 1)
150%-200%
4-6
 Postwhelping BW should be ~10-15 above
optimal BW
Lactation (Weeks 2-5)
%000-%00
4-6
If 4 or more feedings per day are not possible,
female should be fed free-choice
Lactation (Week 6 to
Gradual reduction
4-6
 Puppies are consuming primarily solid food by
weaning)
to 150%
the end of week 6
Postweaning (Weeks 1-2)
125%-150%
2-3
Feed to regain any weight that was lost during
lactation
Postweaning (Week 3
100%
2
Feed to attain and maintain optimal body weight
and after)
and condition
e  g go   u   a      y e
June 15-16, 2001, Iams, p 16.
BW Body weighr.
11
006
 Energy intake/needs
Whelping
800
Body weight
310:
700
Energy
queen
600
一
6
500
weight 
400
alor
Body
8
300
200
7
100
2
3
5
2
3
4
6
Breeding
Birth
Weeks of pregnancy
Weeks of nursing
Figure 20-4  Weight gain pattern in queens during gestation and lactation.
204 Canine and Feline Nutrition
the cat accounts for only 40% of the weight that was
The degree of stress that lactation imposes on the
gained during pregnancy. The remaining 60% of the
bitch or queen depends on the dam's nutritional status
is0l Aienpeis s! pue iey Apoq s! ues iubjam suaanb
and weight at parturition, her litter size, and her stage of
during lactation. Thus it appears that the queen is able to
 n s pe s s m sag 'ni
 prepare for the excessive demands of lactation by accu-
minimal body energy stores at parturition are at great-
mulating surplus body energy stores during gestation.
est tisk for excessive weight loss and malnourishment
Similar to dogs, female cats should be fed a diet, that
during lactation. Because a lactating bitch or queen will
is intended for reproduction throughout gestation and
sacrifice her own body condition to continue to pro-
lactation. Litter size is positively infuenced by the pro-
duce an adequate quantity of nutrient-rich milk, feed-
vision of adequate fat in the queen's diet, and fat in the
ing females to prevent loss of condition and nutrient
diet should provide optimal levels of EFAs, particularly
depletion is of utmost concern.
arachidonic acid.19 Taurine is also an important nutri-
Depending on the size of the litter, a bitch or queen
ent to consider because both conception rate and kitten
will
consume two to three times her maintenance
energy requirement during lactation (see Figures 20-3
rine is limiting.3,20 The amount of food that the queen
and 20-4). A general guideline is to feed 1.5 to 2 times
feceives should be gradually increased beginning the
the mother's maintenance needs during the frst week
second week of gestation and continuing until parturi-
of lactation, 2 times maintenance during the second
tion (see Figure 20-4). At the end of gestation, the queen
week, and 2.5 to 3 times maintenance during the third
food than her nofmal maintenance heeds. Because most
3 to 4 weeks postpartum and is followed by the intro-
cats adapt well to free-choice feeding, this is often the
duction of solid or semisolid food to the litter. After
best way to provide the pregnant queen with adequate
the fourth week, the amount of milk consumed by the
nutrition during pregnancy.
The queen's weight gain
puppies and kittens will decrease as their solid food
should be monitored closely to prevent excessive weight
intake gradually increases. Many pet foods formulated
 gain during this time. Queens typically gain between
for adult maintenance do not provide sufficient nutri-
12% and 38% of their prepregnancy body weight by
ent density for a bitch or queen during lactation. For
 the end of gestation.21
example, early studies with lactating bitches found that
when a diet containing approximately 4200 kilocalories
(kcal)/kg (1900 kcal/1b) was fed, little or no weight loss
FEEDING MANAGEMENT
occurred during the entire period of lactation. However,
DURING LACTATION
bitches with four or more puppies that were fed a diet
with a lower energy density (3100 kcal/kg) lost weight
For both bitches and queens, the most important nutri-
dluring lactation.25
tional considerations during lactation afe calories and
A highly digestible, nutrient-dense diet should be
water. Ample energy intake allows for sufficient milk
fed to all lactating queens and bitches, regardless of
production and prevents drastic weight loss in the dam.
litter size. Premium pet foods that are formulated for
For example, Beagle puppies require approximately
 growth, performance, or high activity are recommended
5.5 ounces of milk per day. For an average litter size,
because these foods are formulated to provide optimal
this translates to the production of more than a quart of
levels of energy and nutrients to pets that are experi-
milk per day in a Beagle bitch.22 Latge-breed dogs pro-
encing conditions of physiological stress. Even when a
duce substantially more than this volume. In addition,
premium-quality food is fed, the quantity of food that
because milk is 78% water, a female's water require-
the dam requires during peak lactation may exceed the
ment increases drastically during lactation. Ample water
capacity of her gastrointestinal tract. Therefore the daily
intake is essential for the production of a sufficient vol-
fation should be divided into several meals or should be
ume of milk. The high water turnover rate of newborn
fed free-choice. After 3 weeks, it is advisable to feed the
 puppies and kittens adds further to the mother's daily
bitch and queen separately from the litter to prevent the
water requirements.23
 puppies and kittens from consuming the dam's food.
Pregnancy and Lactation  205
Fresh, cool water should always be readily accessible to
 management during gestation and lactation ensure that
the lactating queen and bitch.
weight loss is minimized, even when large litters afe
By 3 to 4 weeks of age, puppies and kittens begin to
raised. The condition of the bitch or queen at the time of
be interested in solid food. At the same time, the dam's
breeding infuences her ability to withstand the stresses
interest in nursing starts to decline. As this occurs, the
of gestation and lactation and significantly affects her
dam's daily food intake should be slowly reduced. By
body condition at the end of the reproductive cycle. An
the time that the puppies and kittens are of weaning
animal that is in poor condition when bred loses greater
age (7 to 8 weeks), the dam's food consumption should
amounts of weight than is desirable and will require an
be less than 50% above her normal maintenance needs
extended period of repletion after weaning. The repletion
(see Table 20-1).
-nnu jo saions unebai on Apoq suep aun smoie poad
ents lost during gestation and lactation. Continuing to
feed the nutrient and energy dense food that was used
The most important nutritional considerationsfor repro
for gestation and lactation for at least 3 weeks after
ducing females during lactation are caiories and water
weaning will support optimal nutrient repletion in the
Providing enough calories and free access to plenty of
bitch and queen.26
fresh water will support optimal milk production and
prevent drastic weight loss in the mother during the
SUPPLEMENTATION DURING
physiological stressful period of lactation.
GESTATION AND LACTATION
It is not unusual for dog and cat breeders to add nutri-
FEEDING THE DAM DURING
ent supplements to the dies of their females during
WEANING
gestation and lactation. Regardless of the belief that
this can be helpful, it is important to understand that
Bitches and queens naturally begin the gradual process
an animal will only show a positive health response to
of weaning when their puppies and kittens are about
supplementation when the food that is being fed fails
5 to 6 weeks of age. Most breeders impose complete
 to supply optimal nutrition. Therefore, it is safer (and
weaning by 7 to 9 weeks of age so that the puppies and
often more economical) to instead select a food that is
kittens can be transferred to their new homes. Puppies
designed to support optimal health of a female and her
and kittens that begin eating solid food at 3 to 4 weeks
fetuses throughout breeding, gestation, and lactation, as
of age are usually consuming the major portion of their
opposed to feeding a suboptimal food and attempting to
diet in the form of solid food by the time they are 6 to 7
correct nutrient deficiencies through supplementation.
weeks old (see Chapter 21, pp. 212-213).
The most common essential nutrient that is supple-
 If the dam continues to produce milk immediately
mented during pregnancy, especially in dogs, is calcium.
before weaning, several days of limited feeding aids
Breeders may supply calcium either through mineral
in decreasing milk production. If milk production is
supplements or by adding calcium-containing foods,
allowed to continue at a high level during weaning.
such as cottage cheese of other dairy products, to their
there is an increased chance for the dam to develop mas-
dog's food. The added mineral is believed to ensure
titis. All food should be withheld from the dam on the
 healthy fetal development during pregnancy and aid in
day of weaning, provided she is in good physical condi-
 milk production during lactation. However, lactating
tion. The dam's daily ration should then be gradually
bitches naturally regulate the deposition and mobiliza-
teintroduced at 25%,50%,75%, and,fnally, 100% of
tion of their body's calcium reserves in response to the
her maintenance level on successive postweaning days
need for milk production. Calcium homeostasis is tightly
(see Table 20-1).
controlled by several hormones, most importantly para-
In general, bitches and queens lose some weight
thyroid hormone (PTH) and calcitonin. PTH is secreted
during lactation, but the amount should not exceed
in response to decreased serum calcium concentrations
10% of their normal body weight. Proper feeding and
during periods of high need (i.e., milk production).
206 Canine and Feline Nutrition
It functions to increase skeletal resorption of calcium
and convulsive seizures. Dogs respond well to intrave-
by promoting osteoclastic activity and also incfease the
nous treatment with calcium borogluconate, but the
efficiency of calcium absorption in the small intestine.
disorder can be life-threatening if not detected and
Dietary supplementation with calcium maintains
treated promptly. Although calcium needs are high
serum calcium levels and causes down-regulation of
during both gestation and lactation, the bitch and
PTH synthesis and secretion. Ultimately this reduces
queen normally obtain the additional nutrient require-
the pregnant female's ability to meet the high demands
ments through consumption of higher amounts of the
for calcium mobilization that occuf with the onset of
normal diet. Therefore calcium supplementation is
lactation. If this effect is severe, especially in small of
unnecessary and, given the risk for developing eclamp-
toy breeds, the mother is at risk of developing eclampsia
sia, contraindicated.
(also called puerperal tetany). Eclampsia most commonly
occurs at parturition or 2 to 3 weeks latef and is caused
by a failure of the female's calcium-regulating mecha-
During pregnancy,suppiementation with caicium or
nisms to maintain serum calcium levels when calcium
any other mineralis not necessary or recommended jf a
is being lost via milk during lactation. Hypocalcemia
welf-baianced, high-quality commercialfood isfed.
develops and the dog develops ataxia, muscular tetany,
References
1. Kelley R: Nutritional managerment of the bitch: pre-breeding to whelping. In roc Symp Canine Repro for Breeders, Westminster
Kennel Club Dog Show, New York, February 2001, pp 14-17.
2. Lawler DF, Bebiak DM: Nutrition and management of reproduction in the cat, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 16:495-519,
1986.
4. Battaglia CL: Selecting sires. In Iroc Tufs Anim Expo Symp, Boston, 2001, p 20-23.
6. Kelley Rl: Factors infuencing canine reproduction and nutritional management of the pregnant bitch. lIn Proc Tufs Anim Expo
Symp, Boston, 2001, pp 9-14.
 7. Holman RT, Johnson SB, Osburn PL: Deficiency of essential fatty acids and membrane fuidity during pregnancy and lactation,
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 88:48354839, 1991.
8. Kelley RL, Lepine AJ, Ruffing J, and others: lmpact of maternal dietary DHA and reproductive activity on DHA status in the
canine. In Iroc 6th Cong Internat Soc Study Fatty Acids Lipids, 2004, p 149.
9. Lauritzen L, Hansen HS, Jorgensen MH, Michaelson KE: The essentiality of long-chain n-3 fatty acids in relation to development
and function of the brain and retina, Prog Lipid Res 40:1-94, 2001.
10. Bauer JE, Heinemann KM, Bigley KE, and others: Maternal diet alpha-linolenic acid during gestation and lactation does not
increase canine milk docosahexaenoic acid, / Nutr 134:2035S-2038S, 2004.
11. Heinemann M, Waldron MK, Bigley KE: Long-chain (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids are more efficient than alpha-linolenic acid in
improving electroretinogram responses of puppies exposed during gestation, lactation, and weaning, J Nut 135:1960-1966, 2005.
12. Poston L, Raijmakers TM: Trophoblast oxidative stress, antioxidants and pregnancy outcome—a review, Placenta 25:S72-S78,
2004
13. Liurba E, Garatacos E, Martin-Gallan P, and others: A comprehensive study of oxidative stress and antioxidant status in
pre-eclampsia and normal pregnancy, Free Radical Biol Med 37:557-570, 2004.
14. Vannucchi Cl, Jordao AA, Vannucchi H: Antioxidant compounds and oxidative stress in female dogs during pregnancy, Res Vet Sci
83:188-193, 2007.
Pregnancy and Lactation207
15. Bebiak DM, Lawler DF, Reutzel LF: Nutrition and management of the dog, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
17:505-533, 1987.
16. Lepine A: Feeding management of the reproductive cycle. In Proc North Am Vet Conf 1997, pp 27-29.
17. Moser D: Feeding to optimize canine reproductive efficiency, Probt Vet Med 4:545-550, 1992.
18. Loveridge GG: Bodyweight changes and energy intake of cats during gestation and lactation, Anim Tech 37:7-15, 1986.
 19. MacDonald ML, Anderson BC, Rogers QR, and others: Essential fatty acid requirements of cats: pathology of essential fatty acid
deficiency, Axm J Vet Res 45:1310- 1317, 1 984.
20. Jayawickrama L, Jacobsen K, Lepine AJ, and others: Factors affecting milk intake of kittens, FASEB J 12:A836, 1998.
 22. Oftedal O: Lactation in the dog: milk composition and intake by puppies,J Nutr 114:803-812, 1984.
23. Lepine AJ: Nutritional considerations affecting canine reproduction. In Iroc NAVC, 1997, pp 23-27.
 24. Coffman M: Care and feeding of the lactating bitch. In Iroc Symp Canine Repro for Breeders, Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show,
New York, February 200 1, pp 21-24.
25. Ontko JA, Phillips PH: Reproduction and lactation studies with bitches fed semi-purifed diets, J Nutr 65:211-218, 1958.
26. Kelley R: Managing the brood bitch. In Vital health care and management ofcompetitive dogs, Proc lams breeders symposium series,
2003,pp 22-28.
21
Nutritional Care of Neonatal Puppies and Kittens
The neonatal period in puppies and kittens is consid-
is important for their survival. In adldition to antibod-
ered to be the first 2 weeks after birth. The offspring
ies, examples of bioactive factors found in colostrum
of dogs and cats are altricial, which means that pup-
include lysozyme, a bacteriolytic enzyme that prevents
pies and kittens are born in a relatively immature state
the growth of certain types of bacteria, and bile salt-
and afe completely dependent upon their mother's cafe.
activated lipase, which aides in the digestion of fat.2,3
Because of this immature state, preweaning mortality
In some species, such as humans, fats, fabbits, and
estimates for puppies and kittens are estimated to be
guinea pigs, a significant proportion of passive immu-
as high as 40%, and the vast majority of deaths occuf
nity is acquired
birth (in utero). In contrast,
during the neonatal period.l As more information has
puppies and kittens, like pigs, horses, and ruminant
become available about the needs of newborns, it is
species, obtain the
gfeatest
 proportion of maternally
apparent that proper nutritional support during this
derived antibodies through the colostrum. These differ
time is essential for maintaining health and preventing
ences are due to the types of placentas found in dif-
neonatal illness and mortality.
ferent species, reflecting the number of placental layers
The frst 36 hours of a puppy's or kitten's life are
that antibodies must transverse to reach developing
a critical time because the process of birth and the
fetuses. The dog and cat have an endotheliochorial pla-
sudden ehvironmental changes that hewborns experi-
centa consisting of four layers. This type of placenta
ence are physiologically stressful. Therefore every effort
allows only about 10% to 20% of passive immunity
should be made during this time to minimize stress and
to be transferred in utero. Therefore, for puppies and
vatiations in the environment. A quiet, watm whelping/
kittens, the major proportion of passive immunity is
queening area should be provided, and human visitors
acquired after birth via the colostrum. This emphasizes
outside of the immediate family should be prevented
 the importance of immediate nursing and the provision
from disturbing the litter during the frst few days.
of colostral antibodies and bioactive factors to puppies
and kittens immediately after birth
In older neonates and adult animals, normal diges-
COMPOSITION OF NATURAL
tive processes would result in the complete digestion of
MILK
the immunological compounds found in colostrum,
making them unavailable to the body as immune medi-
Like all mammals, female dogs and cats produce a spe-
ators. However, the intestinal mucosa of newborn dogs
cial type of milk called colostrum during the frst few
and cats is capable of absorbing intact immunoglobu
days following parturition. Colostrum provides both
lins provided by colostrum. The time during which
specialized nutrition and passive immunity to newborn
the newborn's gastrointestinal tract is permeable to the
puppies and kittens. Passive immunity is provided in
intact immunoglobulins in colostrum is very short. The
the form of immunoglobulins (antibodies) and other
term closure refers to the change in the gastrointestinal
bioactive factors that are absorbed across the intestinal
tract's absorptive capacity that precludes further absorp-
mucosa of newborns. Most of these factors are large,
tion of large, intact proteins. The mechanisms behind
intact proteins. Once absorbed into the body, passively
closure are not fully understood, but they appear to
acquired antibodies offer protection from a number
be hormonally mediated, possibly related to increased
of infectious diseases. Because the immune system of
circulating insulin that appears after the initiation of
puppies and kittens is not fully developed until they are
suckling.4 This limits the ability of the neonatal intes
about 16 weeks of age, the transfer of this protective
tine to absorb intact proteins to about the frst 48 hours
immunity from the mother to newborns via colostrum
of life.5 Therefore it is vitally important that newborn
209
210 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 puppies and kittens receive adequate colostrum as soon
TABLE 21-1 AVERAGE NUTRIENT
 as possible during the first day after birth.
COMPOSITION OF DOG
AND CAT MILK
Within the frst 24 hours after birth, colostrum provides
DOGMILK
CAT MILK
intact immunogiobulins and other bioactive factors
Protein (%)
8-10
7-8
which function to protect puppies and kittens from
Lactose (%)
3-4
3-4
infectious diseases. The nutrient content of colostrum
Fat (%)
11-13
5-7
differs signifcantly from mature milk, and its protective
Calcium (mg/L)
1400-2200
700-1800
components are absorbed for just a short period oftime
Magnesium (mg/L)
90-100
65-70
following birth.
Iron (mg/L)
2-7
6-8
Zinc (mg/L)
4-6
6-7
Copper (mg/L)
1.0-1.4
1.0
In addition to the immunological benefits of colos-
Energy (kcal/L)
1500-1800
850-1600
trum, the volume of Auid ingested immediately after
Adapted from Adkins Y, Lepine AJ, Lonnerdat B: Changes in protein
birth contributes signifcantly to postnatal circulating
and nurrient composition of milk chroughour laccation in dogs, Am J Vet
Res 62:1266-1272, 2001; and Dobenecker B, Zorrmann B, Kienzle E,
volume.l A lack of adequate Huid intake shortly after
Zentek J: Investigations on milk composicion and milk yield in queens,
Nutr 128:2618S-2619S, 1998.
birth can contribute to circulatory failure in newborns.
Water turnover is very high in neonates, necessitating
high fuid intake to maintain normal blood volume
The nutrient pattern of dog's milk is somewhat dif-
throughout the neonatal period.5 For this reason, the
ferent. The most recent study reported that while milk
consistent ingestion of adequate fuids by neonates and
protein is very high on the frst day of lactation (>10%),
the production of sufficient milk volume by the mother
it decreases gradually for the following 3 weeks and
afe as important as the milk's nuttient content.
then, after day 21, increases slightly until weaning.10
Like the milk of many mammalian species, dog and
This is in contrast to an earlier study that reported
cat mammary secretions change during
lactation to
a pattern of change that was similar to that of cat's
effectively meet the needls of their developing young.
Several forms of colostrum are produced during
the
that reported for cat's milk and does not show the dra-
ftst 24 to 72 hours after birth, after which the com-
matic decrease e
early in lactation that is reported for cat
position slowly transforms to mature milk. The protein
mammaty
etions. Because of this higher fat content
content in cat colostrum that is produced on the first
and possibly due to its slightly
higherprotein concen-
-M0Y (g ue 11es) yy Aia sI uon Jo Aep
ever, protein rapidly declines to about half this value by
In both species the total energy content of the milk
the third day of lactation.67 Protein concentration then
decreases gradually from colostrum to the milk that is
slowly increases throughout lactation to again reach
produced during midlactation. Energy concentration
a concentration of about 8%. Lipid concentration in cat
milk follows a similar pattern. On the frst day of lacta
concentration in dog's milk is lowest in colostrum and
tion, the total lipid concentration is relatively high, but
increases gradually until midlactation (see Table 21-1).
rapidly decreases until the third day of lactation. Values
The type of protein found in the milk is also an
then gradually increase until the forty-second day of lac-
important consideration. In cats, colostrum protein has
tation, after which they decline slightly
68In addition
a casein-to-whey
 ratio of about 40:60. This ratio shifts
to the stage of lactation, the queen's diet can also affect
to a slight predominance of casein as the colostrum
the fat content of queen's milk. For example, queens fed
transitions to mature milk, with a final ratio of about
a food that contained 22% crude fat (dry-matter [DM]
60:40. This shift from a predominance of whey early
basis) produced milk containing up to 17% fat.? Lastly,
in lactation to a predominance of casein is also seen in
lactose concenitrations in cat milk stay relatively constant
humans and horses. It is significant because the amount
or increase slightly throughout lactation (Table 21-1).
of casein in the milk may affect protein digestion,
Nutritional Care of Neonatal Puppies and Kittens 211
mineral utilization, and the milk's amino acid compo-
However, an important finding of this study was that
sition.12 In contrast, the casein-to-whey ratio in dog's
the milk did not become enriched with the respective
milk is more similar to that of humans and cows in that
derived fatty acids, arachidonic acid (AA) from linoleic
casein predominates throughout lactation and remains
acid, and DHA, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), or doc-
relatively constant at a ratio of 70:30.10
osapentaenoic acid (DPA) from alpha-linolenic acid.
Calcium concentrations in dog and cat milk are sim-
These findings are in agreement with those reported in
ilar, increasing in both species over the course of lacta-
humans and suggest that supplementation of maternal
tion. The concentrations of protein and calcium in milk
diets with linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid does not
are highly correlated during lactation because casein
 provide an effective approach for increasing the long-
has a high calcium-binding capacity.10,1l The milk of
chain PUFAs in milk.17 Recent studies have shown that
both dogs and cats also has a relatively high iron con-
while newborn puppies can convert milk alpha-linolenic
centration. These two species afe similar to the rat and
acid to DHA early in life, they lose this ability after
several marsupial species in their ability to concentrate
iron in their milk at a level that is substantially higher
 version is very low, so very large doses of alpha-linolenic
than the concentration found circulating in the moth-
acid afe necessafy to see a significant incfease in tissue
ef's plasma. The high iron content in milk may feflect
DHA levels.19 Both AA and DHA are essential dur-
 a high requirement for this mineral early in life. Similar
 ing perinatal life; DHA is especially crucial for normal
to other nutrients, iron concentration is stfongly infu-
 neurological and retinal development.20,21 Therefore it
enced by the stage of lactation, with values increasing
is prudent to provide a food to the mother that con-
slightly during the frst 2 days of lactation and then
tains n-3 and n-6 long-chain PUFAs during gestation
gradually declining (see Table 21-1).13
and lactation to ensure adequate enrichment of her milk
The fatty acid profle of mother's milk has received
with these EFAs. This is the best approach to ensuring
consiclerable interest in recent years in fesponse to recog-
 asupply of AA and DHA to puppies and kittens during
nition of the importance of long-chain polyunsaturated
the perinatal period (see Chapter 22, pp. 228-229 for
fatty acids (PUFAs) to fetal and neonatal development.
adlditional information about DHA and development).
As discussed in Chapter 20, maternal essential fatty acid
(EFA) status is depleted during reproduction, and this
effect is exacerbated by an increasing number of pari-
NORMALDEVELOPMENT
   s ss i   si's
OF PUPPIES AND KITTENS
ing a diet with an improved fatty acid profle, litter size
is positively affected.15 This effect is most pronounced in
 The two primary activities of all newborns are eating
females who have had several litters. The same series of
and sleeping. During the frst few weeks of life, puppies
studies found that puppies of mothers who were fed a
and kittens should nurse every few hours, at a mini-
mum of four to six times per day. The frequent intake
(n-6) and alpha-linolenic acid (n-3) PUFAs had a higher
of small amounts of milk is necessary because of the
EFA status at birth than did puppies born to mothers fed
simall size of the neonate's stomach. Infrequent or weak
a diet containing a less favorable EFA profle. This effect
nursing often signifies chilling, illness, of congenital
was most pronounced for the n-3 PUFA docosahexaenoic
Aq Aianeiau on papuane aq pinous pue suaqoid
acid (DHA), which is necessary for normal retinal and
a knowledgeable breeder or veterinarian. The eyes of
neurological development in neonates.
 puppies and kittens open between 10 and 16 days after
Enrichment of milk with long-chain PUFAs is
birth and their ears begin to function between 15 and
dependent upon the types of EFAs that are included in
 17 days after birth. Normal body temperature for pup-
the maternal diet. A study of the effect of the maternal
pies is 94° Fahrenheit (F) to 97° F for the first 2 weeks
diet on fatty acid profles in canine mammary secretions
of life. Normal kitten temperature during this time is
found that concentrations of the two 18-carbon parent
about 95° F. By 4 to 5 weeks of age, bodly temperatures
fatty acids, n-6 and n-3, in milk increased in parallel with
 have reached the normal adult temperature in both spe-
an increase in these fatty acids in the maternal diet.16
cies (approximately 101.5° F).
212 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 Because puppies and kittens have no shivering refex
between 160 and 175 g (5 to 6 oz) of milk per day.27
for the frst 6 days of life, an external heat source is
However, the technique used in the study may underes-
 necessary.22 The dam is the best source of this warmth.
timate intakes by up to 30%, suggesting that daily intake
After 6 days the puppies and kittens are able to shiver,
was substantially higher than this.28 Naturally, puppies
but they are still very susceptible to chilling. Keeping
 of larger breedls are expected to consume a greater vol-
the environment wafm and free from drafts is of utmost
ume of milk, with smaller breeds and kittens consuming
importance dluring the frst few weeks of life to prevent
less volume. Similarly, the volume of milk that a female
hypothermia. It is recommended that the environmen-
dog produces varies with her size. German Shepherds
tal temperature be kept at 70° F during this period,
produce about 900 g (32 oz) of milk per day in eatly
assuming the dam is providing an adequate amount
Ap rad (zo o)  01 0n dn jo ssun yim uoe
of warmth and protection to the newborns. Newborns
during peak lactation.29 In contrast, a much smaller
should be weighed daily during the frst 2 weeks and
breed, the Dachshund, produces between 100 and 180 g
then every 3 to 4 days until weaning. A helpful guide-
(3 to 6 oz) of milk per day in eatly lactation. Other infu-
line is for puppies to gain between 1 and 2 grams (g) per
ences upon the volume of milk produced are litter size,
day for every pound (lb) of anticipated adult weight for
the age at which supplemental food is introduced, and
the frst 3 to 4 weeks of life. For example, if the antici-
age of weaning. In healthy puppies and kittens, the dam's
pated adult weight of a dog is 25 Ib, the puppy should
 milk supports normal growth until the young ate 3 to 4
be gaining between 25 and 50 g/day (0.9 to 1.8 ounces
weeks old. Supplemental feeding with commercial milk
[oz]). Kittens usually weigh berween 90 and 110 g
replacer is usually not necessary, with the exception of
at birth and should gain between 50 and 100 g (1.8 t0
unusually large litters. Even in those cases, dividing the
se jo syuou g oi g ane Aau inun yaam iad (zo g'
litter into two groups and allowing each group to feed
The gastrointestinal tracts of newborn puppies and
 every 3 to 4 hours can often allow adlequate intake for all
kittens afe uniquely suited to digest and absorb the milk
of the puppies or kittens.23
produced by the mother dog and cat, respectively.23
After 4 weeks, milk alone no longer provides ade-
Immediately after birth, the ingestion of milk is a potent
quate calories or nutrients for normal development.
stimulator for enteric growth and for the development of
At approximately the same time, puppies and kittens
the intestinal mucosal cells.24,25 Fat and lactose ate the
become increasingly interested in their environment
primary sources of energy in milk; puppies and kittens
 and begin to spend more time awake and playing with
have high intestinal lactase activity and are capable of
each other. The time at which the dam's milk is no lon-
digesting milk fat very early in life.23 Similarly, both the
 ger solely able to meet the nutrient needs of the off-
type and amount of protein found in the milk are intri-
 spring corresponds to the time at which the young are
cately matched to the developmental state of life. Gastric
becoming interested in trying new foods and when they
acid production is low in puppies and kittens until they
afe developmentally capable of handlling the introduc-
afe about 3 weeks of age. However, this does not appeaf
tion of semisolid food.
 to inhibit their ability to digest milk proteins. The renal
capacity of neonates is also not fully developed and is sen-
INTRODUCTION OF SOLID
sitive to excessive or poor quality protein intake. Milk pro-
tein is of high quality and at a concentration that is closely
FOOD
matched to the metabolic capabilities of the developing
young. Lastly, at bith, the gastrointestinal tract of pup-
Supplemental food should be introduced to puppies
pies and kittens is sterile. Microbial colonization begins
and kittens when they are 3 to 4 weeks of age. A com-
within the first day of life as the newborns ingest milk.
 mercial food made specifically for weaning puppies of
This continues to evolve when solid food is introduced at
kittens can be used, of a thick gruel can be made by
 mixing a small amount of warm water with the mother's
Volume of milk intake is affected by age, rate of
food. Cow's milk should not be used to make the gruel
growth, and for dogs, breed size. An early study of
because it is higher in lactose than bitch's and queen's
neonatal Beagle puppies reported that puppies consumed
milk and may cause diarrhea. Puppies and kittens
Nutritional Care of Neonatal Puppies and Kittens   213
amountofwarmwater with themothersfood.Nutri
BOX 21-1 PRACTICAL FEEDING TIPS:
tional weaning is usually compiete by 6 weeks of age,
INTRODUCING SOLID FOOD
but complete weaning should not be instituted until
TO PUPPIES AND KITTENS
puppies and kittens are at least 7 to & weeks of age.
Begin introducing semisolid food at 3 to 4 weeks of age
Feed a gruel of growth dry diet mixed with warm water.
Feed the gruel in a shallow dish.
NUTRITIONAL CARE
Feed puppies and kittens several times per day; remove
the bowl after 30 minutes.
OF ORPHANS
Begin feeding dry food at -6 weeks of age
The bitch and queen normally supply warmth, stimu-
lus for elimination and circulatory functions, passive
should also not be fed a homemadle “weaning formula.
immunity, hutrition, maternal attention, ahd security
Although the foods that are used to make these formu-
to their puppies and kittens. Technically, an orphan is
aaoq Aue 'nea uamnu yiy jo aiensn ane se
any young animal that does not have access to the milk
formulas afe not nutritionally balanced of complete.
of cate of its mother. Circumstances that may render
The use of this type of formula should be avoidled unless
 young puppies and kittens orphans includle the death of
its exact nutfient composition is known.
the dam, the production of an inadlequate quantity of
The semisolid food should be provided in a shallow
quality of milk, or rejection of the young by the dam.
dish, and puppies and kittens can be allowed access to
Whatever the underlying circumstance, once puppies
fresh food several times per day. The bowl should be
removed after 20 to 30 minutes. At first, little of the
the provision of maternal care, proper nutrition, and
semisolid gruel will be consumed, and the litter's major
a suitable environment. Although it is difficult, if not
food source will continue to be the dam's milk. How-
impossible, to fully compensate for the absence of the
 ever, by 5 weeks of age, puppies and kittens are readlily
mother, the use of proper diet, management techniques,
 consuming semisolid food. The deciduous teeth erupt
and feeding techniques can result in the development of
between 21 and 35 days after birth. By 5 to 6 weeks of
normal, healthy puppies and kittens.
 age, puppies and kittens are able to chew and consume
dry food. Nutritional weaning is usually complete by
Maintaining the Proper
6 weeks of age, although some bitches and queens con-
Environment
tinue to allow their young to nurse for 8 weeks of age or
longer (Box 21-1). Puppies will suckle occasionally and
Orphaned animals must be kept in a warm, draft-free,
will continue to interact with the mother dog at 7 weeks
and clean environment. Maintaining the appropri-
of age even when offered free access to solid food.30
ate temperature is of the utmost importance because
It is believed that the psychological and emotional bene-
chilling can decrease the survivability of newborns.
fits of suckling may be as important as the nutritional
-01d 1eaq Apoq 1ay ‘uasaid si uanb 1o youq e uau
benefts in puppies that are older than 5 weeks of age.
vides an excellent heat source and protection against
For this reason, complete weaning (behavioral weaning)
drafts. In her absence, the ambient temperature must
should not be instituted until puppies and kittens are at
be increased. For the first week of life, the ambient
least 7 to 8 weeks of age.
temperature should be kept between 85° F and 90° F.
This temperature can be dlecreased slightly to between
pue saam qnoy on puos a sunp  o pue  og
Puppies and kittens can be introduced to semisolid food
to between 70° F and 75° F during the ffth week. After
when they are 3 to 4 weeks of age A commercial food
the litter reaches 5 to 6 weeks of age, a room temperature
of approximately 70° F can be maintained (Table 21-2).
used, or a thick gruel can be made by mixing a small
Generally, newborn kittens and small puppies require
214 Canine and Feline Nutrition
TABLE 21-2
 PROPER ROOM TEMPERATURE
TABLE 21-3 NUTRIENT COMPOSITION OF
FOR ORPHAN PUPPIES
MILK FROM VARIOUS SPECIES (%)
AND KITTENS
SPECIES
FAT
PROTEIN
LACTOSE
DRYMATTER
AGE (WEEKS)
TEMPERATURE (° F)
Dog
5.0
5.0
4.5
22.8
0-1
85°-90°
180
7.0
7.5
4.0
18.5
2-4
80°-85°
Cow
3.8
4.7
4.7
12.4
5-6
70°-75°
Goat
4.5
4.6
4.6
13.0
More than 6
70°
Adapred from Baines FM: Milk substirures and the hand rearing of or-
phan puppies and kirrens,JSmall Asm Pract 22:5-578, 1981; Adkins
YZickCinnhhagenrind
composirion of car milk during lacration, Asm / Vet Res 58:370-375,
 slightly higher ambient temperatures than do large pup-
1997; and Keen CL, Lonnerdal B, Clegg MS, and ochers: Developmental
-01d on pasn aq Aeu duel neay 1o ped Suneay v 'said
changes in composition of cas' milk: crace elemencs, minerals, prorein,
carbohydrate and fat, / Nutr 11 2:1763-1769, 1982.
vide heat, although a pad is often preferred because it
allows for the maintenance of a normal day/night light
through a well-formulated milk replacer. A milk replacer
cycle. Regardlless of the type of heater used, the heat
will nourish the puppies and kittens for the frst few
source should provide a temperature gradient within
weeks of life until their digestive and metabolic func-
the whelping box so that the puppies and kittens can
tions develop to the point at which semisolid food can
be introduced. It is important that the chosen formula
must also be considered. If the environment is too dry,
closely approximates the composition of the natural
neonates are subject to dehydration. If dry heat is used
milk of the bitch or queen. Feeding a formula that is
to keep the whelping box watm, pans of water should
not similar in composition to the species’ natural milk
be placed neat the heaters to maintain room humidity.
can fesult in diarrhea and digestive upsets and has the
A relative humidity of approximately 50% is effective
potential to compromise growth and development.
in preventing dehydration and maintaining moist nasal
Several commercially produced canine and feline
 milk replacers are available. Most of these products are
tens.31 Drafts in the room can be controlled by provid-
composed of cow's milk that has been modified to simu-
ing a whelping box or incubator with high sides.
late the composition of bitch's and queen's milk (based
on crude protein and crude fat levels). A comparison of
the compositions of the milk of different species shows
Orphaned puppies and kittens represent a challenge to
that bitch's and queen's milk have larger proportions of
breedersand foster homes.They depend completely on
their calories from fat and protein and lower propor-
humansformateralcare,propernutrition,anda suit
tions from lactose than the milk of ruminant species
ableenvironment.Maintainingproperwarmth,normally
such as the cow and goat. Although the percentages (by
provided by body heat from the bitch or queen, is critical
weight) of these nutrients only differ slightly, the more
to ensure survival of the newborn puppies and kittens.
dilute composition of ruminant milk exaggerates the
felative differences between these values. This is reflected
by the lower DM content of goat's and cow's milk as
compared to the milk of dogs and cats (Table 21-3).32
What to Feed
For example, when converted to a calorie basis, the
One of the greatest challenges involved in raising
lactose content of cow's milk is nearly three times that
orphaned puppies and kittens is providing them with
found in bitch's milk.33 For this reason, puppies that
adequate nutrition. Because the best possible nutrition
 are fed straight cow's milk will develop severe diarrhea.
for young animals comes from their dam, foster mother-
Evaporated cow's milk is occasionally recommended
ing is the best solution for orphaned newborns. Unfor-
for raising orphans because it has levels of protein, fat,
tunately, a foster mother of the same species is usually
calcium, and phosphorus that are similar to bitch's milk
not available. The alternative is to provide nutrition
However, the lactose content of evaporated milk is still
Nutritional Care of Neonatal Puppies and Kittens 215
-!ppe ul 'suamy pue saiddnd sunon ioy yoiy oon yonu
the development of replacers that closely conform to the
tion, the casein-to-whey protein ratio in cow's milk is
 nutrient profles of natural milk and that promote growth
not ideal for puppies, and cow's milk contains an exces-
 rates that are close to those of nursing neonates.36,37
sive proportion of casein for neonatal kittens.34
Because the Association of Ametican Feed Contfol
There atre numerous recipes available for the formu-
Officials (AAFCO) does not currently provide detailed
lation of homemade milk feplacers. Most of these use
guidelines for testing milk replacers, it is essential that
a combination of cow's or goat's milk and eggs. Eggs
breeders obtain information from manufacturers about
are added to increase the protein content and dilute the
a replacer's nutrient composition, nutritional integrity.
lactose concentration of the ruminant milk. Regard-
and feeding efficacy. Also, it is important to note that
less of the popularity of a homemade formula, breed-
 even a well-formulated commercial milk replacer can-
ers should be adlvised that most of these recipes were
 not providle newborns with the antibodies that are nor-
originally developed through trial-and-error, and their
mally found in colostrum. Therefore, if newborns are
actual nutrient compositions are not known. A pub-
orphaned before they have received colostrum, extra
lished analysis of several commonly used homemade
cafe must be taken to maintain a clean envifonment and
formulas found that these recipes contain a wide range
 prevent the transmission of disease.
of nutrient compositions.33 Although some formulas
seem to be adequate for feeding puppies and kittens,
many contain a nutrient composition that is drastically
Becausemosthomeradeformulashave notbeen thor-
different from that of natural bitch's and queen's milk.
oughty tested for nutritional adequacy,commercial milk
A homemade formula should only be used if its nutri-
ent composition is known and if the formula has been
kittens.A repiacer that closely matches dog's or cat's
proven to be safe and effective for raising orphaned
mik in nutrient composition and performance shouid
 puppies or kittens. If a well-researched product that is
be chosen. Cow's mik or goat's milk shouid never be
formulated for puppies and kittens is available, this is
used as a puppy or kitten milk replacer
 preferable to a homemade formula.
Commercial milk replacers are the preferred source
of nutrition for orphans. A product that has been tested
for the specifc purpose of raising neonatal puppies and
How Much to Feed
kittens should be selected. In addition, unlike home-
Calorie and fuid intake must be adjusted so that the
made formulas, the nutrient content and the biologi-
 puppies and kittens are able to consume enough forrmula
cal integrity of commercial preparations is guaranteed.
to meet their nutrient needs for growth and, at the same
However, some commercial formulas can vary in their
time, not underconsume or overconsume fuid volume.
ability to provide orphans with adequate nutrition and
During the frst few weeks, the food intake of the neo-
calories. For example, a study that compared feeding
 nate is largely limited by stomach volume. Most new-
 queen's milk, a commercial milk replacer for cats, and
(j) siau og on ol Aiuo auey res saiddnd uog
an experimental milk replacer to kittens ranging from
 of milk per feeding. Kittens are able to handle approx-
2 to 6 weeks of age found that the commercial prod-
imately V3 to %2 of this amount.33 Therefore the con-
uct caused chronic diarrhea and the development of
centration of the formula is extremely important. The
lens opacities and cataracts.3S Suboptimal levels of the
 milk replacer for puppies should have a caloric value of
essential amino acid arginine in the commercial for-
between 1400 and 1800 kilocalories (kcal) of metaboliz-
 mula appeared to be the cause of the cataracts, and an
able energy (ME) per liter (L), a concentration that is
unusually high crude fber content may have been the
similar to that of bitch's milk.10 Queen's milk has a caloric
cause of the diarrhea. When the kittens were switched
t0 a growth diet at 6 weeks of age, the lens opacities
 energy concentration is lower than this, more feedings
fesolved almost completely, and diarrhea subsided dur-
 per day will be necessaty to meet the neonate's needs. In
ing the sixth week of feeding. Additional studies of the
this case, the intake of excess fuid would adversely affect
nutrient composition of dog and cat milk have led to
water balance and may stress the immature kidneys.
216 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Conversely, if the energy density of the formula is too
If the concentration of the formula is correct, neonates
high, digestive upsets and diarrhea may occur.
that are bottle-fed should be able to self-regulate their
There are various estimates of the caloric needs of
formula intake. Feeding orphans four to six times per
 newborn puppies. A generally accepted guideline sug-
day is usually practical, with the feedings spaced at
gests that during the frst 3 weeks of life, orphaned pup-
even time intervals. This schedule is often feasonable
pies need to teceive between 130 and 150 kcal of ME
for human caretakers, and it also allows the neonates to
per kilogram (kg) of body
weight per day. After 4 weeks
 obtain their needed hours of uninterrupted sleep.
of age, caloric needs increase to 200 to 220 kcal/kg of
body weight.33 Less is known about the optimal energy
intake of newborn kittens, but one guideline suggests
Methods of Feeding
feding 20, 25, 30, and 35 ml/100 g of body weight
Two possible methods may be used to feed orphaned
during the third, fourth, ffth, and sixth week of life,
puppies: bottle-feeding with a small animal nurs-
ing bottle or delivering the formula directly into the
only as guidelines because the individual requirements
stomach using a stomach tube. If puppies and kittens
are bottle-fed, they should be held in a natural nurs-
be weighed daily to ensure that they are receiving enough
ing position with the head tilted slightly upward. The
nourishment to support normal 
weight increases. Gen-
bottle should be held in a manner that minimizes aif
eral guidelines for determining the volume to feed are
intake by the puppy or kitten. To allow proper nursing
provided in Tables 21-4 and 21-5.
and suckling behavior, a nipple that fills the puppy's of
Once determined, the total volume of formula
should be divided equally among the daily feedings.
 orphans usually reject the bottle when their stomachs
TABLE 21-4 VOLUME OF MILK REPLACER TO FEED ORPHAN PUPPIES (GENERAL GUIDELINES)
VOLUME/DAY
BODy weIGht (oz)
BoDy Weight (G)
Volume/DaY (Oz)
(TBSP OR CUP)
Volume/Day (G)
5
140
1.5
3 tbsp
45
10
285
2.5
3% cup
75
20
570
5.0
% cup
150
06
850
8.0
1 cup
235
50
1420
12.0
1%2cup
355
70
1990
17.0
2%s cup
505
100
2840
25.0
3% cup
740
Data from P&G Per Care, Lewisburg, Ohio.
TABLE 21-§ VOLUME OF MILK REPLACER TO FEED ORPHAN KITTENS (GENERAL GUIDELINES)
VOLUME/DAY
BODY weIGht (oz)
BODY weiGHt (G)
VOlumE/DAY (Oz)
(TBSPORCUP)
VOLUME/DAY(G)
4
115
1.00
2.0
30
6
170
1.50
3.0
45
8
225
1.75
3.5
50
10
285
2.25
4.5
65
12
340
3.00
6.0
06
14
440
3.75
7.5
110
Daca from P&G Per Care, Lewisburg, Ohio.
Nutritional Care of Neonatal Puppies and Kittens  217
are full. However, the correct volume of formula should
Grooming, cleaning, and feeding of the orphans should
still be estimated and measured for each feeding. This
be conducted on a regular basis, and the box should be
 step aids in record keeping and minimizes the risk of
cleaned several times per day.
overfeeding.
Orphans should be weighed regularly. There may
Some breeders prefer to use a feeding tube with
be a small decrease in body weight during the frst
orphans. This method of feeding is faster and, if con-
2 to 3 days because of the restricted feeding of the new
ducted properly, reduces the risk of formula aspira-
formula. After this, if a well-formulated milk replacef
tion. However, caution is advised because repetitive
is used, growth will closely approximate that of dam-
placement of a feeding tube can cause irritation to the
raised puppies and kittens.36,37
esophagus. In addition, tube feeding does not allow
Orphans show an incfeased demand and tolerance fof
 neonates to engage in normal suckling behaviors. The
 iaag na uo ae ya pue uado sha iaui auo po
necessary equipment is an infant feeding tube attached
this time, a small shallow bowl of formula should be pro-
        
vided before each borttle-feeding. The puppies and kit-
less than 300 g (10 oz), a number 5- or 8-French-
tens should be encouraged to lap formula from the bowl.
sized tube can be used. For larger puppies, a number
The bowl of formula should not be left out for more than
10-French tube is appropriate.
The depth of inser-
20 or 30 minutes at a time. Once the litter readily initi-
tion can be estimated by measuring
the distance from
aa aei on unaq ues Aaun i yoea ie bunddei sae
feedings from the bowl. In general, puppies adjust to lap-
is marked on the tube and should be readjusted every
 ping at an earlier age and more rapidly than kittens.
2 to 3 days to account for growth. The syringe is filled
When the orphans are 3 to 4 weeks old, a gruel can
with a measured volume of watm formula, and extra
be made using milk replacer and dry dog or cat foed or a
air in the syringe and tube is expelled. To insert the
 puppy or kitten weaning formula. Once semisolid food
tube, the puppy or kitten is held upright, the mouth
is introduced, fresh water should be available at all times.
is opened slightly and the tube is gently inserted over
The thickness of the gruel can be gradually increased with
the tongue to the back of the throat. This contact will
time. This gradual change allows the puppies and kittens
induce a swallow refex, and the tube should pass eas-
to become accustomed to chewing and swallowing solid
ily down into the stomach. If any resistance is felt,
food and enables their gastrointestinal tracts to adapt to
this indicates that the tube may be in the trachea, and
the new food. By 6 to 8 weeks of age, puppies and kittens
should be femoved and reinserted. When the tube is
should be consuming normal dry food (Box 21-2).
inserted properly into the stomach, the puppy or kitten
will be breathing normally and not crying or showing
distress. Formula should be administered slowly over a
BOX 21-2 PRACTICAL FEEDING TIPS:
2- to 3-minute period. Because the neonate cannot self-
ORPHAN PUPPIES AND KITTENS
regulate intake when tube-fed, formula volume must
always be carefully measured to avoid overfeeding of
Provide a warm, draft-free, clean environment.
undlerfeecling.
 Feed a milk replacer that closely approximates the
Fresh formula should be made up daily and warmed
 nutrient com position of bitch's or queen's milk.
t0 approximately 100° F before feeding. A slightly
Estimate the correct amount of formula based on the
restricted quantity of formula should be fed for the
orphan's age and weight.
Divide the formula into four to five equal feedings per day.
ment to the milk replacer. If puppies and kittens are
Bottle-feed or use a feeding tu be.
overfed during the frst few days, diarrhea may result,
leading to dehydration and increased susceptibility to
Weigh orphans regularly: one time per day for the first
infection. After each feeding, and several times daily, the
week and one to two times per week thereafter.
anal/genital area of the newborns should be massaged
Introduce semisolid food at3 to 4 weeks.
gently with a damp cloth. This action simulates the
Wean to dry pet food by 6 to 8 weeks
dam's licking and stimulates urination and defecation.
218Canine and Feline Nutrition
References
d su x on ag uofsp sp d  oa suys u ssso u pue ddn I suyso 1
1995, Saunders.
2. Halliday JA, Bell K, Shaw DC: Feline and canine milk lysozymes, Comp Biochem Physiol 106B:859-865, 1993.
3. Iverson SJ, Kirk CL, Hamosh M: Milk lipid digestion in the neonatal dog the combined actions of gastric and bile salt stimulated
lipases, Biochem Biophys Acta 1083:109-119, 1991.
4. Donovan SM, Odle J: Growth factors in milk as mediators of infant development, Ann Rev Nutr 14:147-167, 1994.
5. Lepine AJ: Nutrition of the neonata puppy In Proc Canine Reprod for Breders Symposium at Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show,
February 2001, pp 26-30.
S ia fwy uone urnp su nes go uoisuos uraord pue suau u sauy sao pue y auidat s iaa  su g
58:370-375, 1997.
7. Dobenecker B, Zottmann B, Kienzle E, Zentek J: lInvestigations on milk composition and milk yield in queens, J Nutr
128:2618S-2619S, 1998.
8. Keen CL, Lonnerdal B, Clegg MS, and others: Developmental changes in composition of cats' milk: trace elements, minerals,
protein, carbohydrate and fat, J Nutr 112:1763-1769, 1982.
10. AdkinsY, LepineAJ, Lonnerdal B: Changesin protein and nutrient composition of milk through out lactation in dogs, AmJ Vet Res
62:1266-1272, 2001,
11. Lonnerdal B, Keen CL, Hurley LS, and others: Developmental changes in the composition of Beagle dog milk, Am J Vet Res
42:662-666, 1981.
12. Kunz C, Lonnerdal B: Re-evaluation of the whey protein/casein ratio of human milk, Acta Pediatr 81:107-112, 1992.
13. Lonnerdal B: Lactation and neonatal nutrition in the dog and cat. In Proc North Asm Vet Conf, 1997, pp 13-16.
14. Kelly RL, Lepine AJ, Rufng J, and others: Impact of maternal dietary DHA and reproductive activity on DHA status in the canine.
In Proc 6th Cong Internat Soc Study Fatty Acids Lipids, 2004, p 149.
15. Lepine AJ, Kelley RL: Effect of fatty acids on canine reproductive health. In WSAVA Proc, 2004, pp 34 39.
docosahexaenoic acid in canine milk, / Nutr 134:2035S-2038S, 2004.
 17. Francois CA, Connor SL, Wander RC, Connor WE: Supplementing lactating women with faxseed oil does not increase
docosahexaenoic acid in their milk, Am J Chin Nutr 77:226-233, 2003.
18. Bauer JE, Heinemann KM, Lees GE, Waldron MK: Docosahexaenoic acid accumulates in plasma of canine puppies raised on
alpha-linolenic acid-rich milk during suckling but not when fed alpha-linolenic acid-rich diets after weaning, J Nutr 136:
2087-2089, 2006.
19. Heinemann KM, Bauer JE: Docosahexaenoic acid and neurologic development in animals, J Am Vet Med Asoc 228:700-705, 2006.
20. Heinemann KM, Waldron MK, Bigley KE, and others: Long-chain (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids are more effcient than
alpha-linolenic acid in improving electroretinogram responses of puppies exposed during gestation, lactation, and weaning, J Nut?
135:1960-1966, 2005.
21. Bauer JE, Heinemann KM, Lees GE, Waldron MK: Retinal functions of young dogs are improved and maternal plasma
rae pue uoneoe ronesss surnp sproe Aney panemesunjod c-u ureyo-suo sururenuos saip ypm parane are spidgoydsoyd
weaning, / Nutr 136: 1991S-1994S, 2006.
22. Pownall R, Crighton GW: Factors infuencing body temperature in newborn dogs, Br Vet J 133:191-196, 1977.
23. Zentek J: Nutrition and physiology of the young dog and cat. 1n WSAVA Proc, 2004, pp 16-20.
Nutritional Care of Neonatal Puppies and Kittens219
24. Paulsen DB, Buddington KK, Buddington RK: Dimensions and histologic characteristics of the smallintestine of dogs during
postnatal development, Axm J Vet Res 64:618-626, 2003.
 25. Heird WC, Schwarz SM, Hansen IH: Colostrum-induced enteric mucosal growth in Beagle puppies, Pediatr Res 18:512-515, 1984.
27. Oftedal OT: Lactation in the dog: milk composition and intake by puppies, J Nutr 114:803-812, 1984.
28. Hendriks WH, Warmberg S: Milk intake of suckling kittens remains relatively constant from one to four weeks of age, / Nut?
130:77-82, 2000.
29. Russe 1: Laktation der Hundin, Zentralbf Veterinarmed 8:252-282, 1961.
30. Malm K, Jensen P: Weaning in dogs: within—and between—litter variation in milk and solid food intake, Appi Anim Behau Sci
49:223-235, 1996.
31. Monson WJ: The care and management of orphaned puppies and kittens, Vet Tech 8:430-434, 1987.
32. Monson W]: Orphan rearing of puppies and kittens, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 17:567-576, 1987.
33. Baines FB: Milk substitutes and the hand rearing of orphan puppies and kittens, J Small Anim Pract 22:555-578, 1981
34. Lepine AJ: Nutrition of the neonatal canine and feline. In Reinhart CA, Carey DR editors: Recent advances in canine and feline
nutrition, lams nutrition symposium proceeding, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
35. Remillard RL, Pickett JP, Thatcher CD, and others: Comparison of kitens fed queen's milk with those fed milk replacers, Am J Vet
Res 54:901-907, 1993.
36. Lepine AJ, Kelley RL, Bouchard G: Effect of feline milk replacers on growth and body composition of nursing kittens (abstract). lIn
Iroc Am Coll Vet Intern Med Forum, 1998, p 737.
37. Kelley RL, Lepine AJ, Bouchard G: Effect of milk composition on growth and body composition of puppies (abstract), FASEB Proc
12:A837, 1998
22
Growth
Most puppies and kittens are fully weaned and ready
2 months in giant breeds. Toy, small, and medium breeds
to be placed in their new homes by 7 to 9 weeks of
01 6 4jaieurxoidde Aq iubram Apoq anpe urene ssop Jo
age. For puppies, this represents an ideal time to enter
10 months of age, while large and giant breeds attain
a hew home because the primary socialization period
atlult weight when they are between 11 and 15 months
occurs between 5 and 12 weeks of age. At 7 weeks of age
old.1,2 Although body weight stabilizes at these ages,
the puppies have spent suficient time with their litter
development continues for several more months. Toy-
to allow proper canine socialization. The remainder of
and small-breed dogs and cats reach mature body size
this important developmental period can then be spent
when they are between 9 and 12 months old, while the
bonding to their new owners. The primary socialization
-pisuos Alesidki 1ou ane ssop Jo spaaiq iuels pue ss1e]
period for kittens occurs between 2 and 7 weeks of age.
ered to be mature until they are 18 to 24 months of
Although this period is not as well defined in kittens as
age (Figures 22-1 and 22-2).3,4 Although the mature
it is in puppies, this means that eafly handling while
size of many breeds has changed since they were initially
kittens are still with their litter mates is important. Like
constructed, the growth curves shown in Figure 22-2
-ly 1oy ase isaq aui aq on sreadde syaam 6 on / 'sarddnd
illustrate the relative growth rate diffrences among dog
tens to go to their new homes.
breeds of different sizes.
GROWTH PATTERNS
Large ard giant dog breeds experience a longer growth
By the time they reach their adult weight, most dogs and
and maturation period than the small and toy breeds
cats have increased their birth weight by fortyfold to fifty-
Although body weight stabilizes several months earlier
fold. Enormous vatiation exists in the mature size, body
toy- and smali-breed dogs and cats reach mature body
type (conformation), body weight, coat type, and temper-
size when they are between 9 and 12 months oid. Body
ament of different breeds and types of dogs. For example,
size and conformation of the large and giant breeds of
 a 5-pound (lb) Chihuahua and a 150-lb Newfoundland
both achieve complete development and growth within
Of age.
relatively similar periods of time. The thirtyfold differ-
  s       s
the Newfoundland's rate of growth and amount of tissue
Dog breeds also differ in conformation. For example,
accfetion far exceeds that of the Chihuahua. Such dra-
breeds such as the Greyhound and Irish Wolfhound
matic differences in body size and type afe not cbserved
were developed to chase prey species while acting as
in cats, which vary felatively little in mature size.
hunting aids. The long legs, deep chest and relatively
In both dogs and cats, the most rapid growth period
slender conformation of these breeds contributes to
occurs during the frst 3 to 6 months of life. Patterns
speed and agility. In contrast, other large breeds such
of growth differ among dog breeds of different sizes,
as
 Mastiffs and Newfoundlands were selected for
 poad ymoia asuol e huuaadxa spaaq 1iel yim
strength and endurance and have heavier body confor-
than small breeds. While both large and small dogs
mations that refect their original working functions.
show exponential growth rates during the frst several
Because different breeds of dogs have different rates of
 months of life, this period of rapid growth is shorter
growth, mature weights, and body types, the food that
in small breeds and ends earlier, at about 3 months
 is fed during growth should refect these differences. In
of age.! Conversely, exponential growth continues
 recent years, pet food companies have recognized these
e rg pue saq s u u nae 1o
differences and have developed products that provide
221
222 Canine and Feline Nutrition
E
Figure 22-1 A, Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever at 9 weeks of age. B-E, Samme dog at 7 months, 2 years, 5 years, and 7 years
i    v xa ue  aepa o seys H ue/u ')  jo sea L ie op uaa aa aes 
and Jon Gravning, Owners, and Laurie Geyer, breeder. F, Can/lnt'l CH Skylark's Pistol Pete CD OA NAJ WC VC ROM, Laurie Geyer,
breeder/owner.)
 optimal nutrition for growing dogs of different mature
Large- and Giant-Breed Dogs
sizes and weights, and in some cases different breeds.
Although there is some evidence that growth patterns
The genetic selection for breeds of dogs that have a
may differ among similarly sized breeds with differing
large mature size has concurrently selected for the
body compositions, the most important hutritional
potential to grow very rapidly. Although the genetic
distinction during growth is that observed between the
potential for rapid growth is not in itself a health
large and giant breeds and small and toy breeds.
risk, feeding practices that allow maximal growth
Growth 223
140
Great Dane
120
100
08
German Shepherd
Setter
60
Bulldog
40
Human
Cocker
20
8
12
16
20
24
28
Age (in months)
Figure 22-2 Rate of weight gain in several dog breeds from 0 to 28 months
rate contribute to risk for developmental orthopedic
incidence and severity of hip dysplasia when com-
dliseases such as osteochondrosis, hypertrophic osteo-
pared with dogs that were fed ad libitum.9
dystrophy and hip dysplasia.5-7 The most important
Although the underlying causes of developmental
nutrient that affects growth rate is energy.
.Lafge
skeletal dliseases are multifaceted and vary with the type
breed puppies that are overfed or fed energy-dense
of disorder, it is without question that excess energy
(high-fat) foods during periods of rapid growth are
intake and the resultant rapid growth rate in large dogs
able to reach their maximum genetic growth poten-
can contribute to abeffations in normal bone and car-
tial. Growing at a fapid rate is incompatible with
tilage development.
During rapid growth, the bone
healthy skeletal development. For example,
when
that supports d
developing cartilage in joints becomes
Great Dane puppies were either allowed to eat ad
less dense and weaker than normal, causing the bone
libitum or were limit-fed to 60% to 70% of ad libi-
 matrix to inadequately support the overlying joint car-
tum intake, the dogs that were limit-fed grew more
tilage.10 The damaged cartilage surface, coupled with
slowly and showed a dramatic reduction in skeletal
 disturbances to the normal function and metabolism of
abnormalities when compared with the ad libitum-
cartilage-forming cells in the joint, lead to joint defects
fed dogs.8 Conversely, controlling rate of growth
such as those seen in osteochondrosis. These changes are
supports healthy skeletal development. A longitudi-
exacerbated by the mechanical stress of a heavier body
nal study with Labrador Retrievers found that dogs
weight on the developing skeleton. Similarly, increased
that were limit-fed to maintain a lean body condi-
weight bearing on developing hips and a growth dispar-
tion grew at moderate rates and showed a reduced
ity between soft tissue and skeletal tissue are considered
224 Canine and Feline Nutrition
to be factors in the development of canine hip dysplasia
eatly in life.19 Regarlless of possible differences among
(for a complete discussion, see Chapter 37, pp. 491-494).
breeds, including more calcium than the body needs,
 In addition to the food’s energy density, another
either through diet or supplementation, is unnecessary
sel u yey jeaays iog jueiiodu si ieyn suanu
 and poses significant risk for the development of several
and giant breeds is calcium. Active calcium absorption
types of skeletal disease in large- and giant-breed dogs
mechanisms are not fully mature in growing puppies
(for a complete discussion, see Chapter 37, pp. 497-500).
until they are about 6 months of age.1l,12 Prior to this
Two other nutrients that afe of interest when feed-
age, up to 70% of the calcium that is absorbed from
ing large-breed dogs during growth are protein and
the diet eniters the body through passive absorption in
vitamin D. Although high protein intake was identi-
the small intestine. Because passive absorption cannot be
fed as a potential contributor to rapid growth rate in
down-regulated, the amount of calcium that is absorbed
eatly studies, it was subsequently discovered that the
is directly proportional to its concentration in the diet.13
Active absorption is functional in growing puppies, but
energy intake and was not related to the protein level in
cannot effectively down-regulate in response to excess
the food. When growing Great Dane puppies were fed
dietary calcium. As a result, puppies are unable to pro-
foods that had identical caloric densities (3600 kilocalo-
tect themselves from absorbing excess (and unneeded)
fies (kcal) metabolizable energy/kilogram (ME/kg) but
calcium when it is present in the diet. As puppies
varied in protein content (31.6%, 23.1%, or 14.6%),
mature, active absorption mechanisms become tightly
 dietary protein did not affect skeletal development.20
regulated through the actions of vitamin D3, parathyroid
However, the lowest protein diet (14.6%) was not suffi-
hormone, growth hormone, and calcitonin.14 Together,
cient to promote optimal growth and health. Although
these hormones tightly regulate the amount of calcium
it is important that adlequate level of protein is provided
that is absorbed, protecting the older puppy from exces-
 and that protein level is balanced with the food's energy
sive calcium uptake. However, the time at which the
density, protein by itself does not negatively affect
bodys calcium absorption mechanisms mature is too
 growth rate or skeletal development in large-breed dogs.
late to protect puppies from excessive dietary calcium
Because of its fole in calcium metabolism and
uptake during the most rapid growth period between 3
homeostasis, the impact of dietary vitamin D on skel-
and 5 months of age. As a result, puppies from weaning
etal development in dogs has been examined in recent 
 to 6 months are highly susceptible to excessive dietary
years.21 As discussed in Chapter 13 (pp. 108-110),
calcium and its effects on the developing skeleton.
dogs and cats require a dietary source of vitamin D3
Several studies have shown that an excessive level
(cholecalciferol) because they are unable to produce
of dietary calcium or supplementation with this min-
adequate amounts of the vitamin from its precursor,
eral during the rapid growth period negatively affects
 7-dehydrocholesterol, found in skin. Dietary vitamin
skeletal development in large breeds of dogs (most
D3 is converted to 24-dihydroxycholecalciferol in the
liver. Blood concentrations of this metabolite closely
fed a food containing 3.3% calcium from weaning
parallel dietary intake. 24-dihydroxycholecalciferol is
until 6 months of age showed an increased incidence
 converted in the kidney into one of the two biologically
of osteochondritic lesions when compared with pup-
active forms of vitamin D; 1,25-dihydroxycholecalcif-
pies fed a food that contained 1.1% calcium.16 Inter-
erol or 24,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol. The biologically
estingly, although small and medium breeds of dogs
 active forms of vitamin D infuence calcium homeo-
have the same patterns of passive and active calcium
 stasis by fegulating calcium absorption in the intestine
absorption during growth, these breeds are not as sus-
and resorption in the kidney, and bone formation and
ceptible to developmental skeletal disease when exposed
resorption. The frst compound, 1,25-dihydroxychole-
calciferol, is fecognized as the most biologically active
giant breeds respond as dramatically to excess dietary
form and exerts its effects on all three tissues (intestine,
calcium as do Great Danes. There is some evidence
kidney, and bone). The less active form, 24,25-dihy-
that such differences may be related to genetic differ-
droxycholecalciferol, works principally at the skel-
ences among breeds in calcium uptake and metabolism
etal level to pfomote the formation of new bone. As a
Growth 225
species, dogs afe felatively tolerant of excess dietary vita-
feeding an appropriate diet and using proper feeding
min D and possess effective mechanisms to maintain
practices throughout the growth period reduces risk
nofmal calcium homeostasis even when fed excess lev-
(i 'd ss) y ays A sos 
The time period that is of greatest importance is the
Dane puppies raised on foods containing nontoxic but
 period of rapid growth, between 3 and 5 months of age.
excess concentrations of vitamin D; (10- and 100-fold
 An appropriate food for large- and giant-breed puppies
greater than reccmmended levels) developed abnormal
has reduced fat and energy density, a balanced level of
changes to growth plates and skeletal remodeling, even
high-quality protein that is adjusted to energy density,
 though they rmaintained normal calcium homeostasis.24
and a level of calcium and phosphorus that is slightly
The higher concentration caused the development of
less than that found in puppy foods intended for small
fadius curvus syndrome in some dogs. These changes
breeds of puppies. A recommended nutrient profle for
were not caused by calcium, but rather by a direct effect
a growth diet formulated for large and giant breeds is
 of vitamin D3 on developing growth plates.
one that contains 26% to 28% protein, 14% to 16%
It was theorized that differences in vitamin
1D
fat, 0.8% to 0.9% calcium, 0.6% to 0.8% phospho-
metabolism may exist between large- and small-breed
fus, and a caloric density between 360 and 400 kcal per
 dogs. Studies to test this found that concentrations of
saiddng nodu aenba are saeid supaah iz'dn
 24,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol in the plasma of growing
should be meal-fed two or three times daily, and por-
large-breed dogs (Great Danes) were significanitly lower
tions should be premeasured. Limit-feeding should be
than the levels observed in small-breed puppies (Minia-
closely adjusted to maintain a lean, not plump, body
ture Poodlles).14 Concentrations in the Great Danes were
condition, throughout growth (see pp. 231-233).
found to be negatively correlated with the activity of
 Although rate of growth will be lower than that of a dog
growth hormone.2 Great Dane puppies also had lower
who is fed a more energy-dense food, ultimate adult size
plasma levels of 25-dihydroxycholecalciferol and slightly
will not be compromised and risk of skeletal disease will
lower 1,25-dihyelroxycholecalciferol levels. Despite
be teduced (Table 22-1).
these differences, intestinal absorption of calcium did 
not differ between the two breeds of puppies; however,
Great Dane puppies showed irregularities in growth
Large and giant breeds of dogs have the potential to
 plate development that were not seen in the Poodle pup-
growvery rapidly during their first 6months of life.
pies.26 Differences in vitamin D, metabolism between
However alowing these dogs to achieve their genetic
large and small breeds may be another factor that infu-
potentiaisforgrowthrateisnotcompatiblewithhealthy
ences an individual dog's susceptibility to developmental
skeletal development.An appropriatefood forlarge-and
skeletal disease. Further studies are needed to examine
effects of different levels of dietary vitamin D on the
a balanced level of high-quality protein that is adjusted
production of biologically active vitamin D metabolites
to erergy density,and alevel of caicium and phospho-
during growth in large and small breeds, and the effects
rus that is slightly less than that found in puppy foods
on the developing skeleton. Currently, commercial dog
intended for small breeds of puppies.
foods contain vitamin D; (cholecalciferol) to supply the
needed source of this vitamin since dogs cannot produce
cholecalciferol from 7-dehydrocholesterol in the skin.
asaq ui suaunsnipe joddns Aeu ypreasai [euonipp
Small- and Toy-Breed Dogs
levels with enhanced understanding of its role in skeletal
 Dogs of the small and toy breeds have higher energy
 health in growing large-breed dogs.
requirements per unit of body weight than do the large
Multiple factors, including genetics and husbandry
and giant breeds. This occurs because basal metabolic
practices, infuence a dog's risk for developing skeletal
fate is related to total body surface atea. Small and
disease. Breeders can help to reduce the incidence of
toy breeds have higher ratios of surface area to body
developmental skeletal disease through careful screen-
Au ry aaey os pue saq siel op ue uiam
ing and selection of breeding animals. In addition,
 heeds per unit of weight (lb or kg). In addition to their
226 Canine and Feline Nutrition
TABLE 22-1
 SUMMARY OF PROTEIN, ENERGY, AND CALCIUM EFFECTS ON SKELETAL
DEVELOPMENT AND NUTRITIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LARGE AND GIANT
BREEDS
EFfeCT Of NUTRIenT LevEl ON SKElETal DEvElOpMEnT
NUTRITIONAL
NUTRIENT
Low
MEDIUM
HIGH
RECOMMENDATION
Protein
 Decreased growth rate
Normal growth rate
Normal growth rate
26%-28%
(if deficient)
Energy
 Decreased growth rate
Normal growth rate
Increased growth rate and
360-400 kcal/cup
(if deficient)
risk of skeletal disease
Calcium
 Decreased growth rate
Increased bone mineral
Increased bone mineral
0.8%-0.9%
 Decreased bone minerall
content and strength
content and strength
(Ca:P ratio = 1.2:1)
content and strength
Proper conformation
Poor conformation
Reduced risk of HOD
Increased risk of HOD
Adapred from Lepine AJ: Oprimal nurition for che growing rerriever and upland dog In Nutrition and care ofthe sporting dog. Dayton, Ohio, 2002, The Iams
Company, pp 17-22.
HOD, Hyperrophic osteodyserophy.
relatively high energy needs, small breeds of puppies
 as growth rate decreases. After weaning, growing pup-
also have small stomachs that hold limited amounts of
ad ae Aiaua au aimi Aaiidde anbai said
food. A dog food formulated for growing small and toy
unit of body weight as adult dogs of the same weight.28
breeds should be higher in energy and nutrient density
 1o %os 01 %0y 1noe yoe1 saiddnd uau
than a food formulated for large dogs, and it should
adult weight, this fequirement declines to about 1.6
-e pue aqnsali auiy are ieqn siuaiaiaui uiuo
times maintenance levels. When 80% of adult weight
able. The size and shape of the kibble pieces should be
is achieved, energy needs are approximately 1.2 times
designed for small mouths to facilitate easy chewing and
 maintenance levels. As discussed previously, the age at
consumption.
weight will vary with the adlult size of the dog. Although
all puppies grow most rapidlly when they are between 3
Small- and toy-breed puppies should befed foods that
and 5 months of age, large breeds of dogs reach matu-
are higher in energy (and nutrient)density than foods
rity at a later age than do small breeds. With the excep-
designed for large-breed puppies. The food should also
tion of the giant breeds, most puppies achieve 40% of
contain ingredients thatare highly digestibie and avail
their adult weight between 3 and 4 months of age and
able, and kibble pieces shouid be small enough for small
80% of adlult weight between 4 12 and 8 months. Very
mouths.
large breeds of dogs do not attain adult size until they
ate 10 months of age or older.29 General guidelines for
determining energy needs for growing dogs are pro-
NUTRIENT NEEDS DURING
vided in Table 22-2.
Similarly, growing cats have energy needs that are
GROWTH
significantly higher than are the maintenance needs
of adult cats. The energy and nutrient requirements of
Energy
 growing kittens are highest per unit of body weight at
For all dogs and cats, regardless of size or breed, nutri-
about 5 weeks of age. Young, rapidly growing kittens
ent and energy needs during growth exceed those of any
Jo  Iad 3 J [e 0 on 0 Axide ab
other stage of life except lactation. During the period
body weight. This requirement declines to 130 kcal/kg
of rapid growth the energy needs of growing puppies
ate approximately twice those of adult dogs of the same
age. An example of energy needs for a growing kitten is
size. After 6 months of age, these needs begin to decline
provided in Table 22-3.
Growth 227
ADJUSTMENTFACTOR
AGE
(×ADULT ME)
EXAMPLE
Small and medium breeds
ME requirement = 130 × Wk0.75
Weaning to ~4 months
2
7-lb puppy:
[2 × (130 × 30.75)] = 590 kcal/day
4-6 months
1.6
16-lb puppy:
[1.6 ×(130 × 7.30.75]] = 923 kcal/day
6-10 months
1.2
 22-lb puppy:
[1.2 × (130 × 100.75]] = 877 kcal/day
~10-12 months
1 (Adult)
26-lb dog:
130 × 11.80.75 = 827 kcal/day
Large and giant breeds
Weaning to ~4 months
2
16-lb puppy:
[2 × (130 × 7.30.75]] = 1151 kcal/day
4-8 months
1.6
34-lb puppy:
[2 ×(130 × 15.40.75] = 1617 kcal/day
9to~12months
1.4
52-lb puppy:
[(1.4 × (130 × 23.60.75] = 1948 kcal/day
~12-18 months
1.2
58-lb dog:
[(1.2 × (130 × 26.40.75]] = 1815 kcal/day
18-24 months
1 (Adult)
64-lb dog:
130 × 290.75 = 1624 kcal/day
ME, Merabolizable energy.
TABLE 22-3 CALCULATION OF ENERGY REQUIREMENTS FOR GROWING CATS
AGE
KCAL/KG BODY WEIGHT
EXAMPLE
6-20 weeks
250
3-lb kitten: 250 × 1.4 = 350 kcal/day
4-6% months
130
5-lb kitten: 130 × 2.3 = 299 kcal/day
7-8% months
100
6-lb kitten: 100× 2.7= 270 kcal/day
 9-11 months
80
7-lb kiten: 80 × 3.2 = 256 kcal/day
12 months
60
7.5-lb cat: 60 × 3.4 = 204 kcal/day
Protein
should contain slightly higher protein levels than foods
 The protein requirement of growing puppies and kit-
developed for maintenance only. More importantly, the
tens is higher than the protein requirement of adlult
protein included in the diet should be of high quality
animals. In addition to hormal maintenance heeds,
 and highly digestible. This type of protein ensures that 
young animals also need more protein to build the new
sufficient levels of all of the essential amino acids are
tissue that is associated with growth. Because young
being delivered to the body for use in growth and devel-
animals consume higher amounts of energy
sY pue A
opment. The actual percentage of protein in the diet is
higher quantities of food than adult animals, the total
 not as important as is the balance between protein and
amount of protein that they consume is naturally
energy. The minimum proportion of energy that should
higher. Pet foods fed to growing puppies and kittens
be supplied by protein in foods for growing dogs is 22%
228 Canine and Feline Nutrition
of the ME kcal, and the minimum for growing cats is
Docosahexaenoic Acid
26%.30 Optimal levels ate between 25% and 29% of
ME kcal for puppies and 30% and 36% for kittens. As
Long-chain n-6 and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
discussed previcusly, the percentage of protein in foods
(LCPUFAs) are essential early in life for normal neu-
formulated for growing large- and giant-breed dogs will
 rological development (see Chapter 11, pp 84-85 and
id jo aia a u () r as a
Chapter 21, p. 211). The twe fatty acids of greatest sig-
found in foods for small- and medium-breed puppies
nificance afe afachidonic acid (AA), derived from lin-
because of the lower energy content and the need to
oleic acid, and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), derived
balance pro tein with energy.
from alpha-linolenic acid. Both of these fatty acids are
essential during perinatal life; DHA is especially crucial
for normal neurological and retinal development.31,32
To support the growth of new tissues,foods for growing
 In human fetuses, AA and DHA rapilly accumulate in
puppiesand kittens should have slightly higher protein
brain and retinal tissues during the latter half of gesta-
content than foods formulated for adult maintenance.
tion and together make up approximately 50% of the
The protein in thefood shouid be ofhigh quality and
total fatty acids found in the brain's grey matter.3 The
levels must be adjusted to be balanced with the food's
analogous period of brain growth and maturation in
erergy density.
 puppies occurs between 1 and 60 days of age.34 Both a
 prenatal and postnatal supply of DHA is considered to
be essential for puppies and kittens.35-37
Calcium and Phosphorus
Recent studies have shown that newborn puppies
Diets for growing dogs and cats should contain optimal,
can convert milk alpha-linolenic acid to DHA early in
but not excessive, amounts of calcium and phosphorus.
life, but this ability is lost or greatly reduced after wean-
The Association of American Feed Control Officials's
ing.35 Even prior to weaning, the eficiency of conver-
(AAFCO's) Nutrient Profles recommends that dog and
 sion is very low, so very large doses of alpha-linolenic
cat foods formulated for growth contain a minimum
acid are necessary to see a significant increase in tis-
of 1% calcium and 0.8% phosphorus on a dry-matter
 sue DHA levels.3G However, the dog, like other spe-
 basis (DMB) .30 These recommendations are based upon
cies, does seem capable of converting alpha-linolenic
diets containing 3500 and 4000 kcal/kg. Some com-
acid to an intermediate LCPUFA, docosapentaenoic
mercially available pet foods contain slightly more than
acid (DPA). When adult dogs were fed a diet that was
the recommended levels of calcium and phosphorus.
enriched with alpha-linolenic acid, DPA, but not DHA,
These levels are not considlered excessive but might not
accumulated in plasma phospholipids.38 Because DHA
be optimal for large- and giant-breed dogs during peri-
is highly conserved in retinal tissue and is important for
ods of rapid growth. Growth diets formulated for large
 normal functioning of the retina, it is theorized that the
breeds should contain lower percentages of calcium and
retina and other neural tissues of dogs can convert cif-
phosphorus because of the lower energy densities of these
 culating DPA to DHA and that plasma DPA acts as the
diets and the need to carefully control calcium intake to
 reservoir for this fatty acid. Together, these studies show
support proper skeletal development. Dietary calcium
that DHA may be provided to growing dogs either as
and phosphorus supplements should never be added
alpha-linolenic acid (the most inefficient route), as DPA
to a balanced, complete food that has been formulated
(either from hepatic conversion of alpha-linolenic acid
for growing dogs or cats (see Section 5, pp. 497-500).
or directly via diet), or as preformed DHA in the diet.
Because conversion is inefficient and is affected by
age, supplying DHA direcly in the food of growing
 puppies and kittens is the most effective approach to
ments are not necessaryforgrowingpets and can be harm-
ensure adequate intake. Tests of retinal function and
fui in large and giant breeds of dogs, contributing to the
sensitivity in 12-week-old puppies improved more dra-
developrment of certain developmental skeletal disorders.
 matically when puppies were exposed to diets contain-
ing preformed DHA throughout fetal and postnatal
Growth229
life than when they were exposed to a food contain-
ing alpha-linolenic acid but not DHA.31 The effects of
numbers and their distribution continues to develop
DHA on neural development have also been examined
for the frst 4 months of life. Therefore the consump-
in growing dogs by testing learning ability and mem-
tion of an adequate volume of colostrum shortly after
ory. Both the ability to learn a new task and memory
birth is essential for protection against infectious disease
 of learned tasks were significantly improved in puppies
during the frst several months of life (see Chapter 21,
fed a food containing high DHA throughout gestation,
 pp. 209-210 for a complete discussion of colostrum).
lactation, and weaning when compared with puppies
Vaccination programs are typically initiated when
that had been exposed to a low-DHA food during the
 puppies and kittens are between 6 and 8 weeks of age.
same period.39 Puppies exhibited these responses when 
Following the initial vaccination, fepeated vaccines
they were tested daily between 10 and 16 weeks of age,
(boosters) are administered every 3 to 4 weeks until ani-
illustrating the postweaning effects of DHA. Although
mals afe 16 weeks of age. (Orphaned neonates that did
a limited number of studies have been conducted with
not receive colostrum should receive their frst vaccina-
growing dogs, these recent results, together with cor-
tion much earlier, starting at 2 to 3 weeks.) The pur-
roborating evidence in other species, suggest that the
 pose of vaccinations is to deliberately stimulate humoral
provision of DHA early in life is essential for opti-
(antibody-producing)
and
 cell-mediated  immune
responses to specifc (attenuated) antigens without caus-
Although dogs (and presumably cats) are capable of
ing disease. Successful vaccination produces immune
some conversion of alpha-linolenic acid to its long-
memory that will protect the animal from subsequent
chain derivatives, this conversion is not highly efficient.
 exposure to actual infectious agents.
Therefore, it is prudent to include at least small amounts
The importance of nutrition for proper immune
of the preformed LCPUFAs, especially DHA, in foods
function has been studied in many species. Most dra-
that are formulated for growing dogs and cats.
matically, frank defciencies of energy protein, essential
fatty acids, and certain vitamins and minerals are known
Syuaadns aunuu sjeuue ue nsage Aiaanesau oi
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) is α conditionally essen-
In recent years, focus has shifted to specifc nutrients
tial fatty acid that has an important role inearly neu-
that support the immune system and have the potential
rological development. Although dogs (and presumably
to enhance an animal's immune response. Antioxidant
cats)are capable of some conversion of aipha-linolenic
nutrients have been targeted because of their role in
acid to its long-chain derivatives, this conversion is not
scavenging the free radlicals (also called reactive oxygen
highly efcient. Therefore at least small amounts of the
species) that afe produced during oxidative metabolism
preformed long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, espe-
and immune system functioning. Examples of free radi-
cially DHA, shouid be included in foods that are formu
cal compounds include superoxide, hydrogen peroxide,
lated forgrowing dogs and cats.
and hydroxyl radlicals. Lymphocytes (B and T cells) are
highly active cells and produce a high number of free
radicals during normal cellular activity. In addition,
the cel-mediated immune response uses a mechanism
Antioxidant Nutrients and Immune
called the “respiratory burst" that generates free radi-
Function
cals, which are then converted to bactericidal agents to
Puppies and kittens are born with functional but imma-
destroy invading antigens. Although free radicals are
ture immune systems.42 For example, day-old puppies
produced as part of the body's normal and necessary
afe capable of developing an immune fesponse to vacci-
immune defenses, excess production is harmful to the
nation, but the response is lower in magnitude than that
host animal, causing oxidative damage to cells and tis-
of an adlult dog and will not confer complete protection
sues. Because the membranes of immune cells contain
when maternal antibodies are present. Lymphocytes,
an unusually high proportion of PUFAs and because
specifically T-cell populations, afe smaller in kittens and
these cells produce more free radicals than other cells,
afe less fesponsive to antigenic challenge than those of
immune cells are especially vulnerable to injury and
230 Canine and Feline Nutrition
loss through excess free fadical production. The body
to beta-carotene have not been reported in cats, adult
has several endogenous mechanisms that scavenge free
cats feadily absorb dietary beta-cafotene and rapidly
fadicals and maintain an optimal oxidant to antioxidant
incorporate it into circulating immune cells.52 These
fatio in tissues. These mechanisms work in conjunction
results suggest that the immune system of cats also may
with exogenous antioxidant nutrients that are supplied
benefit from this nutrient. Another carotenoid pigment,
in the diet. For growing dogs and cats, including an
lutein, has been shown to have membrane-protecting
optimal concentration of these nutrients in their diet
effects similar to alpha-tocopherol and beta-carotene,
may help the developing immune system to respond
and has a synergistic effect when fed with other carot-
optimally to vaccination. The most widely used nutti-
 enoid pigments.5354 Feeding adult dogs supplemental
ents that have antioxidant activity in the body afe vita-
lutein showed benefts similar to those observed with
min E, beta-carotene (provitamin A), lutein (another
beta-carotene, specifically enhanced DTH and lympho-
cafotenoid antioxidant), vitamin C, favonoids, zinc,
 cyte proliferation responses.SS
and selenium.
Vaccination programs for puppies and kittens are
Of the group of tocopherols that make up vitamin E,
timed to coincide with the period that colostrum-
alpha-tocopherol has the highest biological activity in
 derived immune protection is decreasing and the young
the body (see Chapter 5, p. 31). It is needed to main-
 animal's active immune system is maturing. Serial vacci-
tain cell membrane fuidity and protects cellular com-
 nation programs are designed to ensure that the puppy
ponents from oxidative damage. Immune cells contain
and kitten's developing immune system has adequate
higher amounts of alpha-tocopherol than other cells,
exposure to vaccine antigens to allow production of
which is suggestive of the need for additional antioxi-
antibodies and to generate the immune memory that
dant protection by these cells. Both supplemental and
is needed to protect the animal from subsequent expo-
intramuscular injections of vitamin E have been shown
sure to infectious agents. Identifying nutrients that may
to improve measufes of immune function and reduce
 support or enhance a healthy immune response during
damage to blood cells in several species, including dogs
initial vaccination in puppies and kittens is an impor-
tant area of study because young animals are especially
fange for this vitamin, because studies with human sub-
vulnerable to infection as their immune systems are
jects have shown that excessive supplementation with
 maturing and because vaccination presents an immune
vitamin E can cause a reduced antibody titer response
challenge to growing animals.
to vaccination.48 Similarly, a study with cats found
Although limited studies have been conducted with
that while moderate supplementation with vitamin E
 dogs and cats during the period of initial vaccination,
enhanced the immune response, high levels did not
there is evidence that dietary antioxidants support
have a significant impact. 46
healthy immune responses. In one study, 40 puppies
Beta-carotene and lutein are carotenoid plant pig-
 were fed either a control puppy food or the same food
supplemented with vitamin E, lutein, and beta-caro-
shown to modulate the immune response in humans and
 tene.4z Puppies were fed the test foods starting at wean-
other animals.49 Supplementation with beta-catotene
ing (6 weeks) and continuing for 4 months, and were
(provitamin A) modulates nonspecific cellular defense
vaccinated according to a standard protocol (see p. 229)
mechanisms and increases the number and function of
The group of puppies fed the antioxidant-supplemented
immune cells. Adult dogs that were supplemented with
food showed significantly greater lymphocyte prolifera-
tion responses when compared with unsupplemented
anisuasiday aai-peiap psueua ue pue siaaa
 puppies. The enhanced response became more pro-
nounced the longer the puppies were fed the supple-
(A test of DTH is used as a measure of an animal's cell-
 mented food. Following vaccination, the supplemented
mediated immunity.) A subsequent study corroborated
the DTH results and also reported that supplementing
patainfuenza, and parvovirus, and a higher immuno-
alult dogs with beta-catotene increased T- and B-cell
globulin M response to an antigenic challenge than
 proliferation responses.51 Although immune responses
the fonsupplemented group. Another study examined
Growth 231
the response of growing puppies to supplementation
not excessive enough to impact stomach fill, provided
with vitamin E, vitamin C, beta-carotene, and sele-
quality ingredients are included and nutrients are prop-
erly balanced to energy.
ing completion of their vaccination series, puppies fed
It is equally important that growing dogs and cats
the supplemented foods had higher antibody titers to
not be overfed. Overfeeding during growth leads to an
distemper virus when compared with titers of puppies
accelerated growth rate and can predispose the animal
fed nonsupplemented foods. In addition supplementa-
to obesity later in life. As discussed previously, rapid
tion with antioxidant nuttients increased the numbet
growth rate is an important risk factor in the devel-
of memory T cells and related lymphocyte proliferation
opment of skeletal disease (see pp. 222-225). One of
fesponse to vaccine antigens. These studies provide evi-
the most common causes of overnutrition in growing
dence that the immune function of growing puppies
puppies and kittens is the addition of supplemental
(and presumably kittens) may beneft from the provi-
foods to a balanced diet that has been formulated for
sion of certain antioxidant nutrients during growth
tc
growth. Supplementation is unnecessary and may be
support immune function during periods
sofimmune
detrimental; therefore it is not fecommended
challenge.
FEEDING MANAGEMENT
PET FOOD DIGESTIBILITY AND
DURING GROWTH
ENERGY DENSITY
Once a puppy or kitten has been placed in a new
Diet digestibility and energy density are important con-
home, the owner may wish to feed a food that is dif-
siderations when feeding growing pets because of the
ferent from the food that was fed to the litter. If the
quantity of food necessary to meet the requirements for
puppy or kitten's diet is going to be changed, the new
growth and development. Growing dogs and cats have
food should be introduced very gradually. No dietary
 higher requirements for energy and essential nutrients
change should be made at all within the first few days
than aclults, but they also have less digestive capacity,
smaller mouths, and smaller and fewer teeth. This is
to a hew home and leaving the dam and litter mates
asau 'ssop jo spaiq Aon pue ies iog ann Aeiadsa
is very stressful, and providing a brand new diet at the
differences limit the amount of food that a young ani-
same time can exacerbate this stress. Most breeders
mal can consume and digest within a meal or a given
send a small package of food along with the puppy of
amount of time. If a diet is low in digestibility or energy
kitten. This food should be fed for the frst few days
that the animal is in the new home. After 2 or 3 days,
of low digestibility are exacerbated by t
the fact that as
the new food can be introduced by mixing it in quaf-
increasing amounts of a food must be fed, diet digest-
ter increments with the original diet. The proportion
ibility decreases further. When a poor-quality food with
of the new food should be increased for 4 successive
a very low-energy density is fed to growing puppies and
days until the puppy or kitten is consuming only the
pui aq iu yoeis siad au jo suil au sui
hewdiet
before adlequate nutrients have been consumed. The
result is compromised growth and impaired muscle
and skeletal development. Young animals benefit from
Dogs
eating a food that is properly balanced for both essen-
Proper feeding of young dogs supports normal muscle
tial nutrients and energy so that it is not necessary for
and skeletal development and a rate of growth that is
them to consume an excessive volume of food at each
typical for the dog's particular breed. All dogs grow and
meal and so that intake will not be limited by the size
develop rapidlly during the frst year of life, but smal
of the animal's stomach. Although the energy den-
ui se 1uno e 1e Ane ai spaaq on pue
soop paaiq-ssiel roy paeinuoy ane zeu spooy jo Ais
large breeds (see Figure 22-2). Still, the most fapid
should have lower energy densities, this reduction is
period of growth for all dogs occurs between 3 and
232 Canine and Feline Nutrition
5 months of age. Overfeeding for maximal growth rate
FEED FOR MODERATE GROWTH RATE As
and eafly maturity should be avoided in all dogs, but is
dliscussed previously, the second reason that overfeed-
crucial in large- and giant-breed puppies. In addition
ing for maximal growth rate and development is not
t0 negative effects upon skeletal development (see
desirable relates to its potential to affect skeletal devel-
pp. 222-225), overnutrition early in life results in an
opment. A concern for skeletal development is impor-
increased number of fat cells and higher total body fat
tant when feeding large and giant breeds of dogs, which
during adulthood.57,58 Conversely, the mild restriction
 generally exhibit a higher incidence of developmental
of calories during growth and throughout life contrib-
bone disofders. The two most important nutritional
utes to incteased longevity.S9,60
factors that can negatively affect skeletal development
that leads to maximal growth rate and feeding excess
When obesity occurs in a young animal, there is often
amounts of calcium (see pp. 494-500). Feeding growing
an increase in both the size and number of fat cells in
dogs moderately restricted levels of a well-balanced diet
the body. This condition, called hyperplastic obesity is
t0 achieve a lean body condition and moderate rate of
believed to be more resistant to treatment than is hyper-
 growth does not affect either final body size or dlevelop-
trophic obesity, which involves only an increase in fat
ment. Dogs that are fed restricted levels of food that
cell size.6l The presence of additional numbers of fat
 support a slower growth rate still attain normal adult
cells results in a higher percentage of body fat, even if
size, but they do so at a slightly later age. It is advisable
the animal is not yet overweight. Thus an animal with
to feed growing dogs enough to attain an average, rather
fat cell hyperplasia has a higher percentage of total body
than a maximal, growth rate for the dogs particular
fat than an animal that weighs the same amount but
breed. This goal can best be achieved through portion-
has a normal number of fat cells.62,63 Normal adipo-
controlled feeding of a food that is formulated for the
cyte hyperplasia occurs during specific critical periods
dog's size and body type, and the frequent assessment of
 growth rate, weight gain, and body condition.
that these periods occur in dogs and cats is not known.
However, data in other species indicate that adlipose tis-
FEEDING MANAGEMENT
Growing dogs have
sue growth normally occurs during either infancy of
a very steep growth curve, and their total daily energy
adolescence.62,66,67 If these data ate true for the dog and
pooy jo iunoue aul 'mois Aau se aseaisui op spaau
cat, it is probable that the level of nutrition provided to
that is fed should be adjusted in response to a weekly
 growing pets is of importance in determining the num-
or biweekly assessment of the dog's body condition and
ber of fat cells that the animal has at maturity.
weight. A dog that is too thin has easily palpable ribs
It has been postulated that superfuous fat cell
with little or no overlying fat layer. The tail base may be
hyperplasia during the critical periods of adipose tis-
 prominent, and the ovethead profle will be an exagger-
 sue growth may produce a long-term stimulus to gain
 ated hourglass. A dog that is overweight has a moderate
excess weight in the form of excess adipocytes
that
to heavy layer of fat overlying the ribs. In very over-
require lipid filling.68 The existence of excess numbers
weight puppies, the ribs may be difficult to even feel.
of adipocytes fesults in both an increased predisposition
There may be a thickening around the base of the dog's
toward obesity in adulthood and an increased difficulty
tail due to fat stored in that area. The dog's profle will
in maintaining weight loss when it occurs. This theory
show only a slight hourglass shape, and in very over-
has been supported by several studies showing that early
weight dogs, there is no waist at all. Overweight dogs
overnutrition results in increased numbers of fat calls
that afe older than 6 months lose their abdominal tuck
and increased total body fat throughout adult life.58,62
and may show abdominal distention. Growing dogs
The use of proper feeding techniques that allow judi-
that are at their ideal weight have ribs that are easily
cious control of a growing dog's weight are therefore
palpable with just a thin layer of overlying fat. The bony
important for long-term weight control (see Section 5,
 prominences of the hips are easily felt but not promi-
Chapter 28, for a complete discussion of overweight
hent. The dog's profile from above has an hourglass
conditions in dogs).
shape with a well-defined waist. Owners should assess
Growth 233
body condition regularly and adjust the amount of food
volume of an adult food to meet its energy needs. This
that is fed to maintain the dog's ideal body condition
may result in the inadvertent consumption of excess
throughout the growth period.
amounts of other nutrients (such as calcium). If very
Portion-controlled  feeding is the  fecommended
large volumes of food are fed to meet the puppy's energy
feeding regimen for growing dogs. A puppy's daily por-
needs, this can also lead to digestive upsets, gastric dis-
tion of food should be divided into at least two but
comfort, or diarrhea. It is therefore best to choose a
01  si Addnd au iun Aep iad seau sqn Aiqeiaaid
highly digestible growth diet in which the nutrient and
6 months of age. After 6 months, two meals per day can
-uaq Aeur ssop Jo spaanq iueis pue snel auos 'pay aq
dog's size and body type (or breed).
efit from three or more feedings per day as a precaution
In addition to controlling food intake, owners
against the development of gastric dilatation-volvulus
should also provide fegular periods of exercise for
(see Section 5, pp. 459-461). Free-choice feeding is not
their growing dog. Exercise aids in the achievement
 o ad s asnq sop  r puo
of proper energy balance and supports normal muscle
feeding regimen makes it difficult to monitor and con-
development. Young dogs should be exercised at a
ttol weight gain and growth rate and has been associated
level that maintains a lean, well-muscled body con-
with a greater incidence of developmental bone disease.
dition throughout their growing period. Daily fun-
If a pet owner eventually wishes to switch a dog to a
ning, swimming, or retrieving for 20 to 40 minutes is
free-choice regimen, this should be done only after the
adequate for most dogs. High-impact activities such as
dlog has achieved mature size.
longed periods of running should be strictly supervised
and provided only in moderation. There is evidence
Portion-controlled feeding is the recommended feeding
that exercise that is overly vigorous or intense may
regimen for growing dogs. This feeding regimen allows
predispose young dogs to skeletal abnormalities such
control of the puppys weight and rate of growth. Young
as osteochondritis dissecans (OCD).69 Care should
puppies do best when fed three meals a day This can
always be taken to avoid excessive periods of exercise
be reduced to twice daily feeding after 4 to 6 months
involving prolonged concussion to developing joints
The amount of food that is fed shouid be adjusted in
in growing dogs, especially dogs of the large or giant
response to aweekiy or biweekiy assessmentofthe
breeds (see Box 22-1).
dog' body condition and weight. Maintaining a lean
and welimuscied body condition throughout growth
Cats
supportsa moderaterate ofdevelopment andprevents
overweight conditions.
Like dogs, growing cats should be fed to achieve nor-
mal growth and development. A high-quality, com-
 mercial cat food that has been formulated for growing
Although this is becoming less common, some
kittens is recommended. Supplementation of this diet
breeders continue to fecommend feeding an adult
is not necessary and can be detrimental. Normal feline
 n       
feeding behavior results in the frequent consumption
and giant-breed puppies. It is erroneously believed that 
of many small meals throughout the day (see Chap-
owhers can more easily achieve a lower rate of growth
ter 19, pp. 192-193). If adequate exercise is provided,
 in their puppy by feeding an adlult food because main-
 most growing cats can self-regulate their energy intake
 snisup aia iamoi ay aeidai siap auul
when fed free-choice and will not overeat. In general.
growth diets. However, adult maintenance foods are
excessive caloric intake and accelerated growth rate afe
not formulated for growth, and their nutrients are not
 not common problems in growing cats. However, if
balanced with the energy of the diet for the needs of
inadequate exercise is provided or a highly palatable
 0i dn saninbai Addnd Surmois e asnesag 'ssop Sumons
diet is fed, excessive weight gain can result. In these
twice the amount of energy per day as an adlult of the
situations, portion-controlled feeding should be used
same weight, the puppy may need to consume a larger
(Box 22-1).
234Canine and Feline Nutrition
BOX 22-1 PRACTICAL FEEDING TIPS: GROWING DOGS AND CATS
Feed a highly digestible, nutrient-dense food formulated for growth
Meal-feed using a portion-controlled regimen.
Feed three to four meals per day until 4 to 6 months of age; feed two or more meals per day after 6 months
ouoo Apog ueal euoddns ol pue paang siad e ioy ymoe jo atei aeaae ue aauoe ot paa
Avoid overfeeding to promote maximal growth rate.
Energy density and calcium should be carefully controlled in foods selected for large- and giant-breed puppies
Provide regular daily exercise.
Do not add nutrient su pplements to a pet's balanced diet.
References
 1. Hawthorne AJ, Booles D, Nugent PA, and others: Body-weight changes during growth in puppies of different breeds, J Nut?
134:2027S-2030S, 2004.
2. Trangerud C, Grondalen J, Indrebo A, and others: A longitudinal study on growth and growth variables in dogs of four large breeds
raised in domestic environments, J Anim Sci 85:7-83, 2007.
3. Douglass GM, Kane E, Holmes E]: A profile of male and female cat growth, Comp Anim Pract 2:9-12, 1988.
4. Allard RL, Douglass GM, Kerr WW: The effects of breed and sex on dog growth, Comp Anim Pract 2:15-19, 1988.
5. Lauten SD: Nutritional risks to large-breed dogs: from weaning to the geriatric years, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
36:1345-1359, 2006.
6. Hedhammer A, Wu F, Krook L, and others: Overnutrition and skeletal disease: an experimental study in growing Great Dane dogs,
Cornelf Vet 64(Suppl 5):1-159, 1974.
dogs, / Am Vet Med Assoc 201:857-863, 1992.
 8. Dammrich K: Relationship between nutrition and bone growth in large and giant dogs J Nutr 121:S114-S121, 1991.
9. Smith GK, Paster ER, Powers MY, and others: Lifelong diet restriction and radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis in the hip joint in
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 229:690-693, 2006.
oo 'uonkea Sop Buods yfo suo po zoa u sop puedn pue raaar Sumoe aup roy uoanu jeudo :I audat 01
2002, The lams Company, pp 17-22.
132:1 665S-1667S, 2002.
12. Hazewinkel HAW, Goedegebuure SA, Poulos PW, and others: Infuences of chronic calcium excess on the skeletal development of
growing Great Danes, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:377-391, 1985.
13. Tryfonidou MA, van den Broek J, van den Brom WE: lntestinal calcium absorption in growing dogs is infuenced by calcium intake
and age but not by growth rate, / Nutr 132:363-368, 2002.
14. Tryfonidou MA, Holl MS, Oosterlaken-Dijksterhuis MA: Growth hormone modulates cholecalciferol metabolism with moderate
effects on intestinal mineral absorption and specific effects on bone formation in growing dogs raised on balanced food, Domest
Anim Endocrinot 25:155-174, 2003.
15. Coodman SA, Montgomery RD, Fitch RB, and others: Serial orthopedic examinations of rowing Great Dane puppies fed three
diets varying in calcium and phosphorus. In Reinhart GA, Carey DP, editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition, lams
Growth235
 wnjes sxa Surureuos naip e pay Aesuoryp ssop Suno u supuy lesaooudon H Iayumazh vs ainngaapa '9t
Pathol 23:594-605, 1986
 17. Nap RC, Hazewinkel HAW, van den Brom WE: Calcium kinetics in growing Miniature Poodles challenged by four different levels
of calcium, / Nutr 123:1826-2833, 1993.
18. Stephens LC, Norrdin RW, Benjamin SA: Effects of calcium supplement and sunlight exposure on growing Beagle dogs, Am J Vet
Res 46:2037-2042, 1988.
19. Dobenecker B: Apparent calcium absorption in growing dogs of two different sizes, J Nutr 134:2151S-2153S, 2004.
 20. Nap RC, Hazewinkel HAW, Vorrhout G, and others: The infuence of the dietary protein content on growth in giant breed dogs,
JVet Comp Orthop Trauma 6:1-8, 1993.
21. Hazewinkel HAE, Tryfonidou MA: Vitamin D; metabolism in dogs, Mol Cell Endoerinof 197:23-33, 2002.
22. Tryfonidou MA, Oosterlaken-Dijksterhuis MA, Mol JA, and others: 24-hydroxyase: potential key regulator in hypervitarminosis D
23. Tryfonidou MA, Stevenhagen JJ, van den Bernd GJ, and others: Moderate cholecalciferol supplementation depresses intestinal
24. Tryfonidou MA, Holl MS, Stevenhagen JJ, and others: Dietary 135-fold cholecalciferol supplementation severely disturbs the
endochondral ossification in growing dogs, Domest Anim Endocrinot 24:265-285, 2003.
25. Tryfonidou MA, Hazewinkel HAW: Different effects of physiologically and pharmacologically increased growth hormone levels on
cholecalciferol metabolism at prepubertal age, / Steroid Biochem Mo! Biol 89/90:49-54, 2004.
26. Tryfonidou MA, Holl MS, Vastenburg M, and others: Hormonal regulation of calcium homeostasis in two breeds of dogs during
growth at different rates, J Axim Sei 81:1568-1580, 2003.
feline nutrition, lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
28. National Research Council: Nutrient reguirements ofdogs and cats, Washington DC, 2006, National Academy Press.
29. Allard Rl, Douglass GM, Kerr WW: The effects of breed and sex on dog growth, Companion Anim Pract 2:15-19, 1988.
30. Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO): Ofcial publication, Atlanta, 2008, AAFCO.
31. Heinemann KM, Waldron MK, Bigley KE, and others: Long-chain (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids are more fficient than
alpha-linolenic acid in improving electroretinogram responses of puppies exposed during gestation, lactation, and weaning, J Nut?
135:1960-1966, 2005.
32. Bauer JE, Heinemann KM, Lees GE, Waldron MK: Retinal functions of young dogs are improved and maternal plasma
phospholipids are altered with diets containing long-chain n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids during gestation, lactation, and after
weaning, J Nutr 136:1991S-1994S, 2006.
33. O'Brien JS, Fillerup DL, Mead JF: Quantification and fatty acid and fatty aldehyde composition of ethanolamine, choline, and
serine glycerophosphatides in human cerebral grey and white matter, J Lipid Res 5:329-338, 1964.
 a  w g  nesd p urg a   u sp do  o  sa r 
1982.
35. Bauer JE, Heinemann KM, Lees GE, Waldron MK: Docosahexaenoic acid accumulates in plasma of canine puppies raised on
alpha-linolenic acid-rich milk during suckling but not when fed alpha-linolenic acid-rich diets after weaning, J Nutr
136:2087-2089, 2006.
36. Heinemann KM, Bauer JE: Docosahexaenoic acid and neurologic development in animals, J Am Vet Med Asoc 228:700-705, 2006.
37. Bauer JE: Metabolic basis for the essential nature of fatty acids and the unique dietary fatty acid requirements of cats, J Am Vet Med
Assoc 229:1729-1732, 2006.
38. Bauer JE, Dunbar BL, Bigley KE: Dietary faxseed in dogs results in differential transport and metabolism of n-3 polyunsaturated
fatty acids, / Nutr 128:2641S-2644S, 1998.
236Canine and Feline Nutrition
39. Kelley R, Lepine A]: lmproving puppy trainability through nutrition. 1n Iroc NAVC, 2005, pp 21-26.
composition of brain stem phospholipids and synaptic membrane fuidity in adult mice: a comparison of sardine oil diet with palm
oil diet, Mech Ageing Dev 101:119-128, 1998.
41. Lim SY, Suzuki H: Dose-response effect of docosahexaenoic acid ethy ester on maze behavior and brain faty acid composition in
adult mice. Int J Vitam Nutr Res 72:77-84, 2002.
42. Massmino SP, Daristotle L, Ceddia MA, Hayek MA: The infuence of diet on the puppy's developing imrmune system. In Proc
WASVA, 2004, pp 51-55.
lymphoid tissues, Lab Anim Sci 49:395-400, 1999.
immunodeficiency, / Immunof153:4006-4015, 1994.
45. Gershwin ME, German BJ, Keen CL, editors: Nutrition and immunology principles and practice, Totowa, NJ, 2000, Humana Press.
46. Hayek MC, Masirmino SP, Burr JR, Kearns RJ: Dietary vitamin E improves irmmune function in cats. In Reinhart GA, Carey DP
editors:Recent advancesin canine and feline nutrition, lamsnutrition symposim procedings, vol3,Wilmington,Ohio, 2000,Orange
Frazer Press, pp 555-564.
47. Heaton P, Reed CF, Mann SJ: Role of dietary antioxidants to protect against DNA damage in adult dogs, J Nutr 132:1720S-1724S,
2002
48. Meydani SN, Meydani M, Blumberg JB, and others: Vitamin E supplementation and in vivo immune response in healthy elderly
subjects: a randomized controlled trial, JAMA 277:1380-1385, 1997.
49. Chew BS, Park JS: Carotenoid action on the immune response, J Nutr 134:257S-261S, 2004.
In Reinhart GA, Carey DR editors: Recent advances in canine andfeline nutrition, lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2,
Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press, pp 513-533.
In Reinhart CA, Carey D, editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition, lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 3,
Wilmington, Ohio, 2000, Orange Frazer Press, pp 389-401.
52. Chew Bl, Park JS, Weng BC, and others: Dietary beta-carotene absorption by blood plasma and leukocytes in domestic cats, J Nutr
130:2322-2325, 2000.
 53. Sujak A, Gabrielska J, Grudzinski W, and others: Lutein and zeaxanthin as protectors of lipid membranes against oxidative damage:
the structural aspects, Arch Biochem Biophys 371:301-307, 1999.
54. Stahl W, Junghans A, de Proer B, and others: Carotenoid mixtures protect multilamellar liposomes against oxidative damage:
synergistic effects of lycopene and lutein, FEBS Lett 427:305-308, 1998.
55. Kim HW, Chew BP Wong TS, and others: Dietary lutein stimulates immune response in the canine, Vet Immunol Immunopathot
74:315-327, 2000.
56. Khoo C, Cunnick J, Friesen K, and others: The role of supplementary dietary antioxidants on immune response in puppies, Vet Ther
6:43-56, 2005.
57. Faust IM, Johnson PR, Hirsch J: Long-term effects of early nutritional experience on the development of obesity in the rat, J Nutr
110:2027-2034, 1980.
58. Johnson PR, Stern JS, Greenwood MRC, and others: Effect of early nutrition on adipose cellularity and pancreatic insulin release in
the Zucker rat, / Nutr 103:738-743, 1973.
59. Ross MH: Length of life and caloric intake, Am / Chin Nutr 25:834 838, 1972.
60. Kealy RD, Lawler DF, Ballam JM, and others: Effects of diet restriction on life span and age-related changes in dogs, J Am Vet Med
Assoc 220:1315-1320, 2002.
61. Bjorntorp P Sjostrom L: Number and size of fat cells in relation to metabolism in human obesity, Metabolis 20:703-706, 1971.
Growth237
62. Faust IM, Johnson PR, Hirsch J: Long-term effects of early nutritional experience on the development of obesity in the rat, J Nut?
110:2027-2034, 1980.
63. Faust IM, Johnson PR, Stern JS, and others: Diet-induced adipocyte number increase in adult rats: a new model of obesity, Am J
Physiol235:E279-E286,1978.
64. Bertrand HA, Lynd FT, Masoro EJ, and others: Changes in adipose mass and cellularity through the adult life of rats fed ad libitum
or a life-prolonging restricted diet, J Gerontof 35:827-835, 1980.
65. Hirsch J, Knittle JL: Cellularity of obese and non-obese adipose tissue, Fed Proc 29:1516-1521, 1970.
 66. Etherton TD, Wangsness PJ, Hammers VM, and others: Effect of dietary restriction on carcass composition and adipocyte
cellularity of swine with different propensities for obesity, J Nutr 112:23142323, 1982
67. Lewis DS, Bertrand HA, Masoro EJ: Pre-weaning nutrition on fat development in baboons, J Nutr 113:2253-2259, 1983.
68. Vasselli JR, Cleary MP, van ltallie TB: Modern concepts of obesity, Nutr Rev 41:361373, 1983.
Am / Vet Res 53:2119-2124, 1992
23
Adult Maintenance
A dog or cat that has reached mature adult size and
dogs are to provide daily exercise and to closely regu-
is not pregnant, lactating, or working strenuously is
late food intake. Exercise can be in the form of daily
defined as being in a maintenance state. This category
walks or runs or several sessions of vigorous games such
includes most of the dogs and cats kept as household
as fetch or hide and seek. Swimming is also an excel-
pets. Primary nutritional concerns during this period of
lent form of exercise. Most dogs enjoy swimming if
life are the provision of a nutritionally complete and
introduced to water at an early age and in a gradual
balanced food that supplies adequate energy and all of
manner. There are also many types of organized dog
 the pet's daily nutrient needs. Feeding proper amounts
activities and dog sports available to interested owners.
of a high-quality, well-formulated food throughout a
Popular examples include agility, rally, fyball, freestyle,
dog or cat's adult life contributes to optimal health and
obedience competitions, and tfacking. These sports afe
the maintenance of ideal body weight and condition.
enjoyable activities for both owners and their dogs and
provide mental stimulation along with the benefts of
physical activity.
The majority of dogs and cats kept as househoid pets
Monitoring an adult dog's daily food intake is best
are in the aduit maintenance state. Proper nutrition and
accomplished through portion-controlled feeding (see
as 0n aqe ane sop awos (961-561 dd 61 1andeu)
tors in the heaithy maintenance of pets.
regulate their food intake when fed free-choice. However,
many dogs tend to ovefconsume and gain weight. Pro-
viding two or more premeasured meals at regular times
Adult dogs should be fed food that is formulated for
 each day is a simple way to carefully regulate a dog's food
their life stage, activity level, and if appropriate, breed
 intake. The feeding guidelines printed on pet food labels
size. Although canned, semimoist, or dry food can be
provide an estimate of the amount needed to feed an
fed, dlry foods are often preferred for this stage of life.
 average adult dog that is living indoors and provided
In general, canned and semimoist foods have higher
with a moderate amount of exercise. Alternatively, an
caloric densities on a dry-matter basis (DMB) than dry
 estimate of the amount to feed can be calculated using
foods (see Chapter 17, p. 164). When canned or semi-
the dog's ideal body weight (see Chapter 9, pp. 66-68,
moist foods are fed to adult dogs, they may contribute
and Table 9-2, p. 67). Although each of these approxi-
to the development of overweight conditions if intake is
mations can be used as a starting point, every dog should
not closely monitored. Dry dog foods ate less calorically
be fed as an individual. Adjustments afe made in accof-
dense, and they can also help to maintain proper tooth
dance with the dog's activity level, temperament, body
and gum hygiene (see Chapter 34, p. 442 for a complete
condition, and weight status. Body condition scoring
discussion). Dry foods ate also easier and mofe econom
systems provide a reliable method for owners and vet-
ical to feed to large groups of dogs than are other types
erinatians to use when assessing body condition in dogs
of foods.
and cats.45 Because body weight alone is not necessarily
The availability of highly palatable pet foods coupled
a reliable indicator of a dog's body condition, these visual
with the sedentary lives of many dogs has resulted in a
 tools have been developed as aids for determining opti-
high incidence of obesity in the adult dog population.
mal body condition and for the diagnosis of obesity in
It is estimated that 20% to 40% of American dogs and
companion animals. Examples of body scoring systems
cats are either overweight or obese.',2 Similar incidence
for dogs and cats are provided in Figures 23-1 and 23-2,
rates are reported in other industrialized countries.
respectively. The use of body scoring is discussed in detail
The two most effective ways to prevent cbesity in adult
in Chapter 28, pp. 322-326.
239
240 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Body Condition Scores
·Ribs, lumbar vertebrae, and pelvic bones
visible at a distance and felt without pressure
BCS 1
· No palpable fat over tail base, spine, or ribs
Thin
· Diminished muscle mass
· Extreme concave abdominal tuck when
viewed from side
· Severe hourglass shape when viewed
from above
· Ribs palpable with little pressure; may be visible
BCS 2
· Minimal palpable fat over ribs, spine, tail base
Underweight
· Increased concave abdominal tuck when
viewed from side
· Marked hourglass shape to waist when viewed
from above
Ribs and spine palpable with slight pressure
BCS 3
but not visible; no excess fat covering
IDEAL
·Ribs can be seen with motion of dog
· Good muscle tone apparent
· Concave abdominal tuck when viewed from side
· Hourglass shape to waist when viewed
from above
· Ribs palpable with increased pressure; not
BCS 4
 visible and have excess fat covering
Overweight
· Ribs not seen with motion of the dog
· General hefty appearance
· Abdominal concave tuck is reduced or absent
when viewed from the side
· Loss of hourglass shape to waist with back
slightly broadened when viewed from above
BCS 5
· Ribs and spine not palpable under a
Obese
heavy fat covering
· Fat deposits visible over lumbar area.
tail base, and spine
· Loss of hourglass shape to waist
· Complete loss of abdominal tuck with
rounded abdomen
· Back is markedly broadened
Fgure 23-1 Assessment of body conditions in the dog.
(Copyright @ Procter & Gamble Co, Cincinnati, Ohio, 2009.)
Adult Maintenance 241
Body Condition Scores
· Ribs, lumbar vertebrae, and pelvic bones
BCS 1
visible at a distance and felt without pressure
Thin
· No palpable fat over tail base, spine, or ribs
· Diminished muscle mass
· Extreme concave abdominal tuck when
viewed from side
· Extreme hourglass shape when viewed from above
· Ribs palpable with litle pressure; may be visible
BCS 2
· Minimal palpable fat over ribs, spine, tail base
Underweight
· Increased concave abdominal tuck when
viewed from side
· Marked hourglass shape to waist when viewed
from above
· No visible ventral fat pad
· Ribs and spine palpable with slight pressure
but not visible; no excess fat covering
BCS 3
· Good muscle tone apparent
IDEAL
· Concave abdominal tuck when viewed from side
· Hourglass shape to waist when viewed
from above
· Minimal ventral fat pad palpable
· Ribs palpable with increased pressure; not
visible and have excess fat covering
BCS 4
· General hefty appearance
Overweight
· Abdominal concave tuck is reduced or absent
when viewed from the side
· Loss of hourglass shape to waist with back
slightly widened when viewed from above
· Visible ventral fat pad
·Ribs and spine not palpable under a heavy
fat covering
BCS 5
· Fat deposits visible over lumbar area, tail
base, and spine
Obese
· Loss of hourglass shape to waist
· Complete loss of abdominal tuck
· Back is markedly widened
·Prominent ventral fat pad, which may sway
from side to side when walking
Fgure 23-2  Assessment of body conditions in the cat.
(Copyright @ Procter & Gamble Co, Cincinnati, Ohio, 2009.)
242 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Like dogs, adult cats should be fed a food that has
As a result, indoor cats are more prone to overweight
been formulated for maintenance. Cats are generally
conditions. A vatiety of interactive cat toys, designed
nonvoracious feeders and prefer to eat many small
to stimulate chase and play behaviors in cats, afe avail-
meals frequently throughout the day (see Chapter 19,
able and can help to increase activity in a sedentary cat.
pp 192-193). Some cats adapt well to free-choice feed-
ing and can maintain their normal body weight on this
purchase several types of toys that their cats enjoy and
type of regimen, while others do best if fed several pre-
fotate the toys to maintain interest. Some cats also enjoy
 measured meals per day. Although any type of food can
going for walks outdloors with their owners and can be
be fed to adult cats, dry cat foods are best suited for free-
    s   n
choice feeding because they keep fresh longer than other
as with dogs, a visual body score chart can be used to
foods. In addition, cats are less likely to overconsume
(7-ez ainsig aas) uoniuos Apoq sies inpe ue aieniaa
dty foods when fed free-choice. In general, cats that live
If an adult cat cannot maintain normal body condition
entirely indoors have less opportunity or inclination to
on a free-choice regimen, portion-controlled feeding
exercise than do cats that have access to the outdloors.
should be used.
References
1. McGreevy PD, Thomson PC, Pride C, and others: Prevalence of obesity in dogs examined by Australian veterinary practices and the
risk factors involved, Vet Rec 156:695-707, 2005.
2. Scarlett JM, Donoghue S, Saidla J, and others: Overweight cats: prevalence and risk factors, Int J Obes 18:S22-S28, 1994.
3. Colliard L, Paragon BM, Lemuet B, and others: Prevalence and risk factors of obesity in an urban population of healthy cats, J Feline
Med Surg 11:135-140, 2009.
4. Lafamme D: Development and validation of a body condition score system for dogs, Canine Pract 22:10-15, 1997.
5.Laflarme DP, Schmidt DA, Deshmukh A: Correlation of body fat in cats using body condition score or DEXA,J Vet Intern Med
8:214, 1994.
24
Performance
Dogs work with people in a vatiety of capacities, includ-
with his team of dogs in 1911. Sled dog teams con-
ing acting as aids for the blind and the physically dis-
tinue to provide transportation in certain areas of the
abled, herding and guarding sheep, hunting, pulling
world. In addition, mushing and sled dog racing have
sleds on arctic expeditions and races, and performing
becorme popular outdoor sports for many dog enthu-
protection and drug detection tasks for the police and
siasts. Today, sled dog races are held in many parts of
military. In addition, many owners and their dogs par-
the world, including Europe, Alaska, and several of the
ticipate in a variety of dog sports, including agility, Fly-
lower 48 states.
ball, obedience trials, tracking tests, hunting trials, and
The Iditarod is one of the most well-known and pub-
lure-coursing tests. The type of training, level of exer-
licized long-distance sled dog races. Informally called the
cise, and daily routine that a dog experiences vary with
"the last great race on earth," the Iditarod is run every
the type of work or sport. In general, all working dogs
 March, beginning in Anchorage and ending in Nome.
have higher energy requirements than adult dogs dur-
The ttail that is followed is symbolically designated to
 ing periods of normal maintenance. Depending on the
be 1049 miles long (1000 miles because it is at least that
type and intensity of work, modifcations in the nutri-
long, and 49 miles because Alaska was the forty-ninth
ent composition of the diet and changes in the daily
state to be admitted to the union). Officially, the face
feeding regimen of a performance dog may be necessary.
distance is 1158 miles by the northern foute or 1163
 miles by the southern route. Because of its great length
and the difficult terrain, the Iditarod represents the ulti-
ENDURANCE PERFORMANCE
mate endurance test for the canine athlete. Dog teams
Endurance performance in dogs, as in humans, involves
prolonged periods of exercise at sub-maximal levels of
tures and over difficult snow-covered terrain. Nutrition-
exertion. Much of what we currently understand about
ists and exercise physiologists interested in the care and
the nutritional needs of hard-working endurance dogs
nutrition of these dogs have used this race and similar
comes from studies of Alaskan sled dogs. Sled dogs
long-distance sled dog races to collect valuable informa-
working in cold environments fepresent the ultimate
tion about the energy, nutrient, water, and electrolyte
canine endurance athletes. These dogs have been used
needs of working dogs. In addition, studies of certain
as the accepted mode of transportation in Alaska and
types of hunting dogs, search and rescue dogs, and
sufrounding territories for many years. During the
au supresai uoneuonui apond ose shop Aeiu
Gold Rush of the late 1800s, prospectors traveled to the
needs of dogs that work for long periods of time at sub-
Yukon Territory and used dogs to cross the northern
maximal levels of exertion. This research has provided
tundra in search of gold. As mining camps and towns
information for the development of diets that provide
developed, sled dog trails were forged to connect coastal
optimal nutrition for working dogs; it has also contrib-
towns to interior camps. These trails provided the major
aes 1adoid aun inoqe uoneuoju! panoidui o pain
 transport routes for the provision of food and supplies
and husbandry of dogs engaged in endurance exercise.
to the camps. Although most of the mining camps are
now mere ghost towns, dogs and dog sledding remain
Physiology
an integral part of the area's economy and culture. In
addition to their importance in Alaska, sled dog teams
 The type of work that occurs during endurance compe-
have been used by explorers of the North and South
 titions differs from that performed during short races
Poles. Robert Perry reached the North Pole via dog sled
 of sprinting events, such as Greyhound racing or lure
in 1909, and Roald Amundsen feached the South Pole
 coursing. Greyhounds engage in brief, intense bouts
243
244 Canine and Feline Nutrition
of high-speed running, while sled dogs pull for several
As the intensity of exercise increases,a shift toward
hours at a time at slower speeds. Dogs used for hunting
more anaerobic metabolism occurs, and carbohydrate
typically engage in both types of exertion. These dogs
often work for hours at a time over a period of several
This carbohydrate is supplied by muscie glycogen and
days (endurance), interspersed with occasional bouts of
via gluconeogenesis.
high-intensity sprinting. Metabolically, the energy nec-
essary for short and intense sprints is obtained primarily
through anaerobic pathways and secondarily through
An examination of the types of muscles that are
aerobic metabolism. In contrast, the energy that is
involved in endurance exercise provides information
needed for endurance work is predominantly derived
about the types of energy sources needed. The skeletal
from aerobic metabolism.
muscles of dogs contain three main types of muscle
ise) qlI pue elI sadA1 pue (ypuimi mols) I adAi :siaqy
twitch). Slow-rwitch fbers have a high capacity for
Greyhounds engage in brief intense bouts of high-
aerobic metabolism, and fast-twitch fbers can use
speed running, sied dogs pull for several hours at a
both oxidative (aerobic) and anaerobic pathways.7 The
time at slower speeds, and dogs used for hunting typi
slow-twitch fbers use fatty acids and glucose for fuel
cally engage in both types of exertion. Metabolically,
and are believed to be important for endurance events.
  
Although these fibers are found in all skeletal muscles,
obtainedprimarily throughanaerobicpathwaysand
their numbers predominate in antigravity muscles such
secondarily through aerobic metabolism. in contrast,
as the dog's anconeus and the quadratus muscles.8 In
the energy that is needed for endurance work is pre
 general, endurance athletes have higher numbers of well-
dominantly derived from aerobic metabolism.
developed, slow-twitch fbers, and athletes involved in
high-speed sprinting events have a higher proportion of
fast-twitch fbers. Athletic conditioning is important for
Fat and carbohydrate are the two principal fuels
conditioning muscles and building muscle mass. Ath-
 that supply energy to working muscle. During the low-
letic training for endurance events increases the body's
intensity (aerobic) exercise associated with endurance,
reliance upon fatty acid oxidation during submaximal
fat is the most important fuel used. This is supplied
bouts of exercise. This adaptation has been demon-
by free fatty acids (FFAs) derived from triglycerides of
adAi au 1aAoaion z'ssop pue 'sueunq 'sieI u paens 
muscle and other tissues. As the intensity of exercise
of diet that is fed affects the use of fatty acids by work-
increases, a shift toward more anaerobic metabolism
ing muscles, independent of the effects of training.,9
occurs, and carbohydrate becomes increasingly impor-
tant as a source of energy. This carbohydrate is supplied
Glycogen Loading
by muscle glycogen and, as muscle glycogen becomes
depleted, is supplemented by the production of glucose
Although it is generally accepted that energy is the
by the liver (gluconeogenesis). This metabolic response
nutrient of most concern for working dogs, there has
to different intensities of exercise and training has been
been much debate about the best way to supply dietary
observed in rats, humans, and dogs.1-5 For example, the
energy to enhance endurance performance. Increas-
fate of muscle glycogen utilization in trained dogs com-
ing stamina and strength are goals for the nutritional
pleting a high-intensity anaerobic test is almost twenty-
programs of many human athletes. As a result, a great
fold greater than the rate observed in dogs during a
deal of research has been conducted concerning ways
period of aerobic exercise.6
to supply fuel to long-distance runners and cyclists.1,10
An important limiting factor in prolonged exercise is
the amount of glycogen present in the working muscles
Fat is the most important fuel used during low-inten-
because the onset of fatigue is highly correlated with
sity, aerobic exercise. This is supplied by free fatty acids
 muscle glycogen depletion.11,12 In addition, endurance
derived from triglycerides of muscle and other tissues.
for submaximal exercise can be increased by raising
Performance 245
muscle glycogen stores and decreased by lowering mus-
that feeding a high-carbohydrate diet to sled dogs may
be responsible for the occurrence of a form of exertional
human endurance athletes is to either increase muscle
thabdomyolysis. Exertional rhabdomyolysis is a disor-
glycogen stores or delay muscle glycogen depletion dur-
der caused by fapid anaerobic metabolism of muscle
ing periods of exercise.
glycogen, resulting in an accumulation of lactic acid.
The procedure of glycogen loadling (also called carbo-
Lactic acid accumulation can have several adverse side
bydrate loading) was developed for human athletes with
effects, including damage to muscle-tissue membranes,
the intent of increasing muscle glycogen stores before
edema, and inhibition of lipolysis and glycolysis. These
periods of prolonged exercise. Glycogen loading was
studies were the impetus for the theory that dietary fat is
initially accomplished by frst depleting muscle glyco-
 metabolically the preferred fuel for hard-working dogs.
gen through exhaustive exercise and/or consumption of
Subsequent controlled studies with several types of
a low-carbohydrate diet, followed by the consumption
working dogs have supported this hypothesis and have
also provided
important
 information regarding the
liminary glycogen depletion phase presumably resulted
feding management and training for working dogs.
in glycogen supercompensation when the subject con-
Both the level :
 of conditioning and the type of diet
sumed a diet that is high in starch for several subsequent
fed significantly
7 affect energy use in working dogs. In
 dlays. The benefcial effects that higher initial glycogen
a study with
stores have on endurance afe believed to be the fesult
was fed a high-fat diet containing 60% of calories as
of the availability of larger amounts of glycogen for
fat, while the second group was fed a high-carbohydrate
anaerobic energy metabolism in the working muscles.
diet, containing 60% of calories as carbohydrate.22 The
Howevef, controlled studies have shown that in the frst
dogs completed standard aerobic and anaerobic tests on
stage, glycogen depletion is unnecessary and may even
a treadmill prior to conditioning, after a 4-week aero-
bic training period, and again after a 4-week anaero-
Today, many endurance athletes regularly consume a
bic training period. Results of the aerobic tests showed
high-carbohydrate diet and concentrate on carbohy-
that both groups of dogs relied primarily upon FFAs
drate loading for the last few days prior to an endurance
 and used little glycogen to complete the tests (Figures
event but do not engage in the preliminary depletion
24-1 and 24-2). Dogs that were fed the high-fat diet
phase.
had signifcantly greater preexercise and postexercise
FFA concentrations when compared with dogs fed the
high-carbohydrate diet, even before they were condi-
Providing Energy for Working
tioned through training. The concentration of FFAs in
Dogs: Fat or Carbohydrate?
the blood is a major determinant of fatty acid utiliza-
There are important differences between human ath-
tion by muscle, and it is an accepted indicator of fatty
letes and working dogs. In dogs, approximately 70% to
 acid metabolism. These results showed that feeding a
90% of the energy for sustained work is derived from
high-fat diet to working dogs before and during athletic
fat metabolism, and only a small amount of energy is
 training enhances the dog's ability to mobilize and use
 derived from cartbohydlrate metabolism.17,18 Similarly,
fatty acids as fuel.
eatly feld studies with sled dogs and laboratory studies
A second controlled study examined the effect of
with Beagles indicated that the ability to use fatty acids
 diet on oxygen consumption (Voz max), mitochondrial
through aerobic pathways was more important than the
volume, and maximal rates of fat oxidation in a group of
use of muscle glycogen through anaerobic pathways dur-
 endurance-trained Labradlor Retrievers. When dietary
fat was increased from 15% to 60% of calories, dogs
team that was fed a high-carbohydrate diet performed
showed almost 50% increase in Voz max and a 45%
poorly and developed a stiff gait while racing.2l When
 increase in maximal fat oxidation during aerobic exer-
the dogs were changed to a diet containing increased
cise tests. These values indicate enhanced efficiency of
levels of fat and protein, performance improved and the
fat utilization and capacity for aerobic work. Mitochon-
observed lameness resolved. The researchers suggested
drial volume in muscles incfeased 5o% in fesponse to
246 Canine and Feline Nutrition
08
80-
kd
60
50
aso
40
40
A
HCD
HFD
B
HCD
HFD
IPreexercise
IPostexercise
Figure 24-1 Muscle glycogen concentrations in trained and untrained dogs (aerobic tests). A, Untrained and, B, aerobically
trained. HCD, High-carbohydrate diet; HFD, high-fat diet; mmofes, millimoles
(From Reynolds A], Taylor CR, Hoeppler H, and others: The effect of diet on sled dog performance, oxidative capacity, skeletal musle microstructure, and muscle
gycogen metabolism. In Carey Dr,Norton SA, Bolser M, editors: Recent advancs ir caine ad /elie mutritioal reseach, lars irtermationa mutritional symposiu,
Wilmington, Ohio, 1996, Orange Frazer Press.)
3.0
3.0-
2.5
2.5
2.0
2.0
1.5
E
1.0
1.0
0.5
0.5
0.0
0.0-
HCD
HFD
B
HCD
HFD
Preexercise
IPostexercise
Figure 24-2 Serum free fatty acid concentrations in trained and untrained dogs (aerobic tests). A, Untrained and,
B, aerobically trained. HCD, High-carbohydrate diet; HFD, high-fat diet; mmofes, millimoles.
apsnw pue amaanisosiw apsnw lenalays Aapede aniepixo asuewjqyjad gop pals uo naip jo aaaja ayl :siayio pue 'H jaddaoH'do joliel' splouay wog)
gycogen metabolism. In Carey DR, Norton 5A, Bolser 5M, editors: Recet advarc ir carire ard feline mutritional research,las international rutritional symposiut
Wilmington, Ohio, 1996, Orange Frazer Press.)
increasing fat in the diet. There is speculation that feed-
adlequate  muscle glycogen  stores  are  still  important
ing a high-fat diet improves aerobic work capacity and
during exercise. As in other species, muscle glycogen
efficiency in dogs by stimulating mitochondrial growth.
 depletion during prolonged exercise is associated with
Although fat is the primary metabolic fuel for endur-
fatigue and a decline in performance in working dogs.
'y siun Aiddns isaq siap neg-uoiy pue 'ssop aue
The two factors that appeat to have the greatest infuence
Performance247
on muscle glycogen stores afe athletic conditioning and
Alaskan sled dogs examined muscle glycogen levels
dliet (see Figure 24-1). In the study described previously,
during prolonged bouts of exercise. In the frst study,
only small amounts of glycogen were used by dogs dur-
36 conditioned sled dogs consuming a high-fat, low-
 ing the aerobic tests.? Howevet, some glycogen metabo-
Jo uonnuuo au ssd on Areu seme si usl
for up to 5 consecutive days.26 Muscle glycogen was
 FFA metabolism during aerobic work. In adldition to this
measured prior to the start of the exercise period and
need, racing sled dogs experience periods of intense run-
immediately following each day's run. The frst day's
ning near the end of races or when covering difficult ter-
workout caused a fapid depletion in glycogen levels
rain. Similarly, hunting dogs and certain types of service
 t0 about 21% of preexercise levels. However, glycogen
[u jo s on og 0n pasaun Auanbasqns siaaa
 interspersed with occasional bouts of high-intensity physi-
stores after the second day of exercise and remained at
cal exertionl.
  a a g rn  re  
To learn more about the needs of dogs during these
change was especially remarkable since the dogs were
 periods, researchers also examined energy metabolism
consuming relatively little carbohydlrate in their train-
in endurance-trained sled dogs during bouts of intense
ing diet. The underlying metabolic cause for muscle
anaerobic activity.? Completion of an initial 4-week
 glycogen replenishment may have been enhanced use
ttaining period signifcantly increased the muscle gly-
 of noncarbohydrate fuel sources during subsequent
cogen levels in all of the dogs in the study, regardlless
days of exercising or to the rapid replenishment of
of the type of diet that was fed. While dogs that were
Apnis au yanouiy 'spoud isai suunp saiois usoskia
fed a high-carbohydrate diet stored more muscle glyco-
gen than those fed a high-fat dliet, the carbohydrate-fed
dogs also metabolized more glycogen to complete the
over the 5-day period, suggesting that utilization of
anaerobic test. As a result, muscle glycogen levels at the
completion of the standard anaerobic test were depleted
sible for the maintenance of muscle glycogen in the
similarly in the groups of dogs fed the two different
exercising dogs.27
diets. As in other species, dogs performing anaerobic
 A subsequent study was conducted to determine the
 r s o a o a  sis
underlying cause of glycogen replenishment in dogs
source. The researchers concluded that feeding high-fat
 during multiple days of endurance work.28 Changes
diets to endurance-trained dogs not only prepates mus-
 in muscle glycogen and muscle triglyceride concentta-
cles to efficiently mobilize and use FFAs as an energy
tions were measured in a group of sled dogs over a 4-day
xis jo dnono y sunu suuen Aep rad au-ool jo poad
that helps to prolong glycogen use.
similarly trained dogs served as the nonexercising con-
Finally, although dogs react similarly to other species
trol group. All of the dogs were fed a high-fat training
by showing rapid glycogen depletion following a single
 diet and muscle biopsies were performed immediately
bout of strenuous exercise, there is recent evidence that
after each day's run and again following feeding and a
trained sled dogs afe resistant to prolonged glycogen
 period of rest. Following the frst day's run, dogs had
depletion when subjected to repeated exercise episodes
utilized more than 60% of the glycogen stored in skel-
over multiple days. Early studies with human athletes
etal muscle, corroborating the results of the previous
suggested that completing consecutive days of pro-
 study. However, running the same distance on each sub-
longed running results in cumulative muscle glycogen
aseaisap euonippe s e Aquo u paninsai Aep iuanbas 
depletion, and it is this depletion and the inability to
in glycogen stores. This change diminished to almost
negligible levels on the final day. In contrast, as the use
for the onset of fatigue and loss of performance.23,24
of muscle glycogen decreased, the use of muscle triglyc-
Continuing to exercise when muscle glycogen stores
 eride increased. These findings are supported by previ-
afe low has also been associated with incieased protein
 ous work showing that extramuscular fat and protein
degradation in skeletal muscle, a potential risk factor
 substrate play an important role in supporting work in
for injury.2 Recent studies with a group of trained
sled dogs during periods of prolonged and submaximal
248 Canine and Feline Nutrition
exercise. It appears that plasma FFAs become the pre-
In a study of the protein needs of dogs during endur-
 dominant energy substrate during this time. Because
ance training, diets supplying either 16%, 24%, 32%,
 blood urea nitrogen (BUN) concentrations also increase
 or 40% of calories from protein were fed to sled dogs
during prolonged and submaximal exercise, protein
throughout a 12-week training period.38 Dogs that were
substrates may also be important. Together the results
fed 40% protein maintained a larger plasma volume and
of these studies suggest that the primary metabolic
red blood cell mass during training than dogs fed diets
adaptation that occurs during prolonged and repeated
 containing less than 40% protein. The amount of pro-
bouts of exercise in dogs is a reduced rate of glycogen
tein in the diet also appeared to infuence susceptibility
depletion caused most likely by increased reliance on
to injury. While there were no injuries in any of the dogs
fat-related energy substrates, most importantly plasma
that consumed the 32% or 40% protein diets, all of the
FFAs. Although there is some evidence that human ath-
dogs fed the 16% diet were injured at some point during
letes subjected to multiple days of endurance exercise
the 12-week period, which kept them out of training for
also shift their metabolism away from muscle glycogen
2 or more days. It appears that the proportion of energy
and toward fat-based substrates, the dog may be espe-
that is supplied by protein should be increased in the
cially effcient at this type of shift given the dog's natu-
diets of endurance dogs in training to ensure adlequate
rally high aerobic metabolic capacity and demonstrated
tissue accretion, prevent tissue loss, and possibly aid in
response to training and to high-fat diets.29.31
the prevention of injury. Optimal protein concentrations
of between 30% and 40% of calories are recommended
in foods formulated for endurance dogs (Box 24-1).
Both the level of conditioning and the type of diet fed
affect energy use in working dogs. Feeding a high-fat
diet to working dogs before and during athietic train-
BOX 24-1I
PRACTICAL FEEDING TIPS:
ing enhances the dogs ability to mobilize and use fatty
ENDURANCE PERFORMANCE
spare gycogen stores from depietion.
Feed a highly digestible, energy- and nutrient-dense
 diet (4000 kcal of meta bolizable energy/kg or greater).
Diet should contain:
Protein for Working Dogs
Calories from protein: 30% to 35%; high-quality
 animal source proteins
Endurance training and racing result in increased
protein needs for dogs.32 Several physiological and
Calories from fat: 50% to 65%
metabolic changes contribute to an increased dietaty
Calories from carbohydrate: 10% to 15%
requirement. Athletic conditioning results in adlap-
 Omega-6:omega-3 fatty acid ratio between 5:1 and
tive anabolic changes that facilitate effcient delivery
10:1
of oxygen and nutfients to working muscles. These
Moderately fermentable fiber: 3% to 7%
changes include increases in blood volume, red blood
cell mass, capillary density, mitochondrial volume, and
Provide continual access to clean, fresh water.
the activity and total mass of metabolic enzymes.33 The
Feed two or more meals per day on a portion-controlled
increased tissue mass associated with athletic training
ba sis.
must be supplied by additional protein in the diet. In
Feed the largest meal of the day after the day's training
addition, there is a slight but significant increase in pro-
is com plete.
tein catabolism during endurance exercise associated
Provide a meal 1.5 to 2 hours before training or an
endurance event.
This occurs as a result of exercise-induced muscle dam-
Feed a carbohydrate-containing su pplement
age and oxidation of protein. It is estimated that up to
awod o asiaxa auenua ae atia
o pap aq ues ssop uisiaxa ui aaua yo 01
glucose repletion.
the metabolism of gluconeogenic amino acids.36,37
Performance 249
While providing enough protein in the diet is impor-
Caloric Requirement during
tant, feeding a diet that contains more protein than the
Endurance Work
dog needs is neither necessary nor benefcial. Protein
consumed in excess of the needs of tissue replacement
and growth will be used as an energy source. Protein is
depends on the intensity and duration of the exercise
cne of the least desirable muscle energy fuels because it
and the envifonmental conditions in which the ani-
is inefficiently metabolized and cannot be stored in the
body like fat or glycogen. The diet should supply ade-
needs increase to between 1.5 and 2.5 times the normal
quate calories as fat and carbohydrate so that the pro-
 maintenance requirements in dogs working in ambient
tein that is fed can be used primarily for tissue protein
increase requirements by about 50%. Data for these
canine athlete, the most efficiently used fuel
estimates were collected from draft dogs that were cov-
be fat, with carbohydrate supplying a smaller propor-
ering relatively short distances and traveling at slower
tion of the calories in the diet.
speeds than racing sled dogs. Typical dog teams used
for hauling freight travel less than 20 miles per day at
speeds of about 5 miles per hour. Energy needs for these
Performance dogs have increased needs for dietary pro-
dogs are estimated to be between 4000 and 8000 kilc-
tein. Athletic conditioning leads to increases in blood
calories (kcal)/day.41,42
volume, red blood cell mass, capillary density, and mito
In contrast, dogs trained for racing in long-distance
chondrial voiume. The increased tissue mass associated
sled races typically run 70 miles or more per day and
tavel at speeds of up to 9 miles per hour. Studies of
in the diet. in addition, there is a slight but signijfcant
these dogs found that racing sled dogs competing in a
increase in protein catabolism during endurance exer-
 medium distance race (300 miles) expended an average
 a a p   5 
009'01 Jo seIe ue Pansu0 pue Aep/eY 0o7' II Jo
kcal/day (Figure 24-3).43 These values are equivalent
in exercising dogs can be derived from the metabolism
to buming 460 kcal/kilogram (kg) of body weight per
ofgluconeogenic amino acids.
day and consuming 440 kcal/kg of body weight per day.
The feseafchers observed that the calculated values for
15,000
10,000
kcal/day
5,000
Fit Exerfion
Fit Sedentary
Untrained
Sedentary
(kep/leoy) aneu anueisip wunipau e ui gunaduuon sop pas jo aumpuadxa <aaug  eyz aune
(From Hinchcliff KW, Reinhart GA, Burr JR, and others: Energy metabolism and water turnover in Alaskan sled dogs during running. In Carey DP, Norton 5A, Bolser
5M, editors: Recent advarce ir carire ard felire rutritional researh, larrs irterational rutritional symposiurr, Wilmington, Ohio, 1996, Orange Frazer Press.)
250 Canine and Feline Nutrition
sustained metabolic rate for these dogs appears to exceed
in Alaskan sled dogs over a 5-day endurance test
o s ro sna r pd aisnnd
also reported progressive reductions in serum globulin
their size. These extraordinarily high energy requirements
(protein) concentrations and incfeased sefum chloride,
and expenditures predicate the need to provide a diet that
urea nitrogen, and creatine kinase (CK).51 While only
is energy dense and highly digestible to allow the inges-
 mild aberrations were observed and no clinical signs
tion of needed calories in a volume of food that the dog's
were reported, exercise-associated hyponatremia, cation
stomach and gastrointestinal system are capable of han-
depletion, and hypoproteinemia have been observed in
dlling. However, the vast majority of working dogs do not
some endurance-trained dogs during periods of pro-
work for the duration and at intensities that result in such
longed racing.44,46,52 These changes may be attributable
dramatic increases. Although a limited number of stud-
to the solute diuresis and urine sodium losses mandated
ies have been conducted, measured estimates for hunting
by the large energy intake (and resultant solute loads),
dogs fall between the earlier estimates provided of 1.5 and
and to mild exercise-induced damage to muscles.
2.5 times maintenance fequirements (see p. 255)
Although reported in few studies, values for urine
osmolality do not appeat to change dramatically
in
response to exercise. However, there may be a shift in
Water and Electrolyte
the type of solutes present in the urine.46 Endurance
Requirements
exercise caused a decrease in urinary sodium, potassium,
The same fesearchers who measured caloric intake and
 and chloride concentrations and an increase in urine
expenditure in facing sled dogs also examined water
ufea concentration. Increased urinary ufea will occuf as
intake, water turnover, and electrolyte balance during
a direct result of the higher energy and protein intake of
facing dogs. This change imposes significant incfeases
in a 300-mile race had a measured water turnover rate
 in obligatory urinary water and sodium loss, even in the
of approximately 250 milliliters (ml)/kg of body weight
face of renal cation conservation. Although decreases in
per day. This is equal to about 5 liters (L) per day for an
serum cation concentration have not been associated
average-size sled dog. By compatison, sled dogs that were
with clinical signs in any of the dogs studied, these data
not racing had water tumovers of only 0.9 L per day.
indicate the importance of providing racing sled dogs a
Dogs lose water primarily through respiration, urine,
diet with an adlequate level of sodium.
feces, and, to a very small degree, perspiration. The
extreimely high water loss in working sled dogs is primar-
Glycogen Repletionafter
ily a result of increased urinary water loss. In all animals,
Endurance Exercise
n  a mn i si ss r a
solute load, which in turn is affected by the quantity of
As discussed previously, feeding dogs a diet that is for-
food consumed and the composition of the diet.47 Diets
mulated to spare glycogen is more successful than feed-
ing a diet designed to increase muscle glycogen stores
intake result in higher obligatory solute loadls. Because
(i.e., glycogen loading) for endurance performance.
ane Aau uaum kep/esy oo'zl on dn sunsuos ssop pals
However, glycogen depletion is still associated with
racing, they have extremely high solute loads and, as a
fatigue and impaired performance in racing sled dogs,
soo 'sasson raim Aeun Aioesqo yly Aia nsai
must be provided with fresh water frequently during rac-
bohydrate
supplementation immediatelyf
following
ing to offset these losses and prevent dehydration.
exercise has been used as a strategy for resolving this
Electrolyte balance is also an important consider-
depletion and for providing an immediately available
ation in exercising animals. Exercise-induced hypo-
source of energy. Both the timing of the supplement
natremia occurs in horses and humans and may
 and its nutrient composition are important.
be associated with clinical signs.48,49 Decreases in
The rate of muscle glycogen repletion follow-
serum sodium and potassium levels have also been
ing exhaustive exercise is substantially enhanced if a
observed in sled dogs during long-distance races.4,46,50
carbohydrate supplement is ingestedl immediately after
A recent study that measured serum chemistry changes
Performance 251
within 30 minutes of fnishing an exhaustive training
Feeding
a carbohydrate-containing
supplement
session, the rate of glycogen repletion during the follow-
 a on rs aq s as re a
-Ayoqies j ueq ie pingaaiu on dn si sinou z Su
effective means of muscle glycogen repletion in sled
drate had not been ingested. If ingestion of carbohydrate
dogs. In one study, sled dogs were fed either a water and
is delayed for 2 hours after exercise, the rate of glyco-
glucose polymer solution, or water alone, immediately
 gen repletion to working muscles is only half the rate
observed when catbohydrate is consumed immediately
the glucose polymer (1.5 grams [g]/kg of body weight)
after exercise. The mechanism believed to be responsible
for this effect involves enhanced blood fow to muscles
repletion when compared with dogs that were not sup-
plemented (Figure 24-4). Plasma glucose levels incteased
How to muscle fesults in increased
glucosetfahisport
significantly
within 100 minutes of supplementation
and, subsequently, enhanced glucose uptake and glyco-
and were presumably responsible for enhanced deliv-
delayed, blood glucose level still increases, but the rate
study
examinedt
a ra  e s a
 of muscle glycogen repletion is slowed. Because protein
alone, water with a glucose polymef, of water with the
ingestion is associated with increased and prolonged
lg'aneshjoipay uaoid pappe ue pue rauaiod asosngs
insulin release, it has been theorized that including pro-
Postexercise supplementation was provided after each
of supplement enhanced glycogen repletion within 24
evef, fesults of studies that examined the effectiveness
hours of exercise,
of postexercise carbohydrate plus protein supplements
biochemical measufes
of
glucose metabolism (insu-
with human athletes have reported inconsistent results,
lin, glucose, or glucagons levels) between the dogs fed
indicating that protein may not be needed for efficient
the glucose polymer alone and those that were fed the
replenishment of muscle glycogen stores.
glucose polymer plus a protein hydrolysate. Therefore
108
70-
60
50
+
40
30
20
10
0
Treatment A
Treatment B
Treatment C
Preexercise
Postexercise
Figure 24-4 Muscle gycogen concentration in sled dogs before and after a 30-kilormeter run. Treatment A, Water-only following
exercise; treatment B,t water plus 1.5 g/kg glucose polymer after exercise; treatment C,t water-only following exercise.
*Biopsied 1 hour before and immediately after exercise.
+Biopsied 1 hour before and 4 hours after exercise.
(From Reylds A], Taylr RHepplerH, and thers:Theeffetfdiet on sddgpefrmance, xidative apacity, keletal muslemictructure, andmusle
gycogen metabolism. In Carey DP, Norton 5A, Bolser 5M, editors: Recent advarce ir carire ard feline mutritional research, lars irternational mutritional symposiunt,
Wilmington, Ohio, 1996, Orange Frazer Press.)
252 Canine and Feline Nutrition
130-
120-
110
100
Bu
06
—— Unsupplemented
80
-- Carbohydrate
supplemented
70
60
50
0
100
200
300
aukiod asoane ay/e s'l io aiem pay saop pas ui asiuaxa lange suoeuanuan asoane poolg  syz auna
(From Perforarce dog rutritiorr syrmposi
iupr, Dayton, Ohio, 1995, The lamis Com pany Used with permission.)
it appears that postexercise carbohydrate supplementa-
tion in endurance-trained dogs helps to enhance muscle
The practice of providing a carbohydrate supplement
 glycogen repletion, but including protein with the sup-
immediately after exhaustive exercise or during
plement does not further enhance this effect.
muitipie-day athietic events is especially helpful when
working dogs are fed diets that supply most oftheir calo-
 polymer as a
ries as fat and when bouts of exercise are separated by
afterexhaus-
tive exercise of during multipl
onty a few hours. The provision of a high carbohydrate
a
snack immediately following long bouts of exercise can
especially helpful when sled
working dogs are fed diets that supply most of their
dramaticallyinfuencegycogenreplenishentandmay
calories as fat and when bouts 
of exercise afe sepa-
enhance performance.
rated by only a few hours.
long-distance face, sled dogs 
time, followed by a 2- to 4
Practical Feeding and Diets
rest periods the dogs are usually provided with a small
for Endurance Dogs
meal or snack and are fed their full meal once they
have finished running for the day. Although it is now
It is now evident that dietary fat is an important com-
generally accepted that endurance-trained dogs per-
ponent in the diet of working dogs because of its ability
form best when fed a high-fat, low-carbohydrate food
-!ppe ul 'sapsnu Suyiom on Asiaua Aiddns Apuaya o1
as the primary diet, providing a high-carbohydrate
tion to its beneficial effects upon aerobic metabolism,
shnack immediately following long bouts of exercise
fat also has a significant infuence upon a diet's energy
can dramatically infuence glycogen replenishment
density and digestibility. The most efficacious way to
and may enhance performance.
incfease both ehergy density and diet digestibility is to
Performance 253
supply energy in the form of high-quality fat. A classic
Depending upon the type of work and the envi-
study with Beagles demonstrated the importance of diet
fonmental conditions, water losses can increase by
tenfold to twentyfold during exercise. Therefore it is
either a commercial, dry diet formulated for mainte-
important that dogs are providled with water at frequent
nance or one of three highly digestible, high-fat diets.
intervals throughout a session of work. Even mild dehy-
After a period of dietary adaptation, endurance was
dration can lead to reduced work capacity, decreased
measured using a standard treadmill test. The dogs fed
strength, and hyperthermia.62 Working dogs should be
the maintenance diet experienced exhaustion after 103
given frequent opportunities to drink small amounts
minutes, but the dogs fed the more energy-dense, highly
of fresh water during periods of extended work. In
digestible diets did not expetience
exhaustion until they
addition, water can be added to meals as a method of
had run for a signifcantly longer period (137 minutes).
Analysis of these data showed
that performance level in
ing or racing. This practice prevents the dlevelopment of
the Beagles was positively
correlated with diet digest
even mild dehyelration. Cool water is preferable because
ibility and the intake of digestible fat.
it is more palatable to most dogs and is more effective in
An animal with increased energy needs must con-
helping to cool the body.63
sume a great deal of food to meet those needs. During
long-distance racing or other forms of endurance work,
dogs? elevated energy needs require the intake of a large
Working dogs should be fed on a portion-controlled basis
volume of food. If the food that is fed is low in digestibil-
so that the trainer can strictly regulate the timing and
ity, a large amount of dry matter (DM) must be ingested,
the size of meais. in generat, hard-working dogs should
and intake may be limited by the dog's gastric capacity
be fed two to three meais per day, with a small meal fed
and his or her ability to digest and assimilate large boluses
1.5 to 2 hours before long periods of submaximal exer-
of food. Therefore, in adldition to the need for a high fat
cise. Frequent access to cool water shouid be provided at
content as an energy source, high digestibility is neces-
regularintervaisthroughout a session of work.
sary to limit the total volume of food that the dog must
consume at each meal. Although some maintenance
diets can supply enough energy if consumed in large
g A Aa 'sop suom Aq snunb yno
SPRINT-RACING
yim ssop u auruoad aul snu pue suu-ing
PERFORMANCE
very high energy requirements. Foods formulated for
working dogs should contain high-quality sources of
The exercise that sprint-racing dogs engage in is sub-
protein, fat, and carbohydrate to ensure high digestibil.
stantially different from that required of endurance sled
ity and availability of nutrients and minimize the volume
dogs. Greyhound races are extremely short, sprinting
of food that must be fed to meet a dog's needs.
events. In the United States, racing takes place on an
Feeding practices that are best suited for hard-
oval tract and involves distances between %6 and % of a
working dogs are designed to minimize gastrointestinal
 mile. During a race, dogs reach speeds of 36 to 38 miles
expansion during bouts of work and maintain a high
O on oe Auo roy pads s ununu Aa inq 'inoq rd
work capacity throughout the session of exercise. Dogs
 seconds. Other types of sprint-racing activities include
should be fed on a portion-controlled basis so that the
dogs that are trained for lure-coursing events, dogs
 trainer can strictly regulate the timing and the size of
engaged in Flyball, agility, and Frisbee competitions,
meals. The main meal of the day should be fed after the
 and some types of hunting activities, such as retrieving
day's session of training to allow adequate digestion of
on land or strenuous swimming.
food. If possible, at least two meals should be provided
It is known that brief, intense periods of exercise pre-
per day, and a small meal can be provided 1.5 to 2 hours
clude the mobilization and delivery of fatty acids and
before endurance activity. A carbohydrate-containing
the adequate oxygenation of tissue necessary for aerobic
clrink or food can be fed immediately following exhaus-
metabolism.64 Thus the primary source of energy
tive periods of work.
for this type of exercise is the anaerobic metabolism
254 Canine and Feline Nutrition
of carbohydrate. Both muscle glycogen and circulat-
weight because slight restriction of food and the main-
ing blood glucose supply energy to muscles during
tenance of a lean body condition afe associated with
brief bouts of intense work.6S This process differs from
improved performance in sprinting events.72 The food
endurance exercise, in which FFAs and a small amount
fed to dogs involved in sprinting events should also con-
of glycogen supply energy to the working muscles.
tain moderate to high levels of digestible fat and protein
Post-race biochemical data collectedl from racing Grey
and a moderate amount of highly digestible carbohy
hounds indicate that the sprint-racing dogs rely pri-
drate. Similar to endurance-trained dogs, catbohydrate
supplementation after intense bouts of exercise for
lactate levels increase up to fftyfold from pre-race values
sprinting dogs may also be helpful in enhancing reple-
to post-race values, which refects the significant contri-
tion of muscle glycogen stores.
bution of anaerobic metabolism of carbohydrate to the
energy demands of the race.66,68,69
 It appears that the
in contrast to endurance dogs, sprint-racing dogs draw
both lactate levels and blood pH return to normal val-
energyfromtheanaerobicmetabolisofcarbohy-
ues within 1 hour of the race. Training also increases
drates; muscle glycogen and circuiating blood giucose
the body's ability to metabolize accumulated lactic acid
fuel muscles during their brief periods of intense work.
following an intense bout of exercise.70
Many hunting dogs engage in short and intense periods
Studies with human athletes indicate that dietary
ofrunning periodically throughout the day Thesedogs
modifcation is more effective in infuencing endurance
should befed energy-densehighty digestibie diets that
athletes than sprinters. This may be a fesult of the fact
have been formuiated for performance and shouid be
that two factors that infuence endurance during pro-
fed tomaintainaleanandwelimusciedbodycondition.
longed periods of exercise are the body's ability to use
the working muscles. As discussed previously, both of
DOG SPORTS AND SERVICE
these factors can be infuenced by diet. Sprinters, on the
DOGS
glucose through anaerobic metabolism. A study with
human runners showed that although the practice of
Most of the understanding of the nutritional needs of
 glycogen loadling increased the amount of exercise time
exercising dogs is based upon the previously reviewed
until exhaustion, it did not appeat to infuence running
studies of endurance sled dogs, racing Greyhounds, and
speed at the beginning of the race.l0 Conversely, there
 dogs running in controlled settings on treadmills. How-
is some evidence that feeding racing Greyhounds a food
ever, most working dogs fall somewhere in between the
that is very high in protein and fat, and that has reduced
extremes of submaximal endurance work (sled dogs)
catbohydrate, may have a moderately negative effect on
and the short bursts of intense exercise seen in sprint
racing performance.7l In this study, the high-protein
facing (Greyhounds). For example, dogs that work as
diet provided excess protein (37% of metabolizable
-Idan sein piay aaaduos ul io suoueduos sununy
energy [ME]) and was compared with a diet contain-
cally work for several hours at submaximal levels that
ing moderate and adlequate levels of protein (24% of
 ME). Therefore it was speculated that the reduced per-
Aushing or retrieving game. Conversely, most dogs used
formance was a result of reduced levels of carbohydrate
 as service dogs that aid disabled owners work for long
 needed for racing and the inefficient use of protein as
periods, but at relatively low levels of intensity. A wide
an energy source.
fange of dog-related activities and sports are also enjoyed
 Sprint-racing dogs should be fed a diet that is energy
today by both owners and their dogs. Dogs competing
dense and highly digestible. Feeding a food that has
in agility or Flyball events can be compated most closely
been formulated for performance ensures that DM
with sprint-racing dogs, while tracking dogs and obedi
intake during racing or training is not excessive. Intake
'ssop pauen-aueinpua on reuis arou are shop aua
should be carefully monitored to ensure optimal body
Performance 255
longer periods. Although each of the many ways in
too low, the quantity of food that must be consumed
which dogs work and compete in sports have not been
t0 meet increased caloric needs may exceed the physi-
studied, an understanding of the metabolic changes and 
cal capacity of the dog's stomach and intestinal tract.
nutrient needs associated with both submaximal endur-
 In practice, this leads to an increased rate of passage.
ance work and high-intensity exercise are helpful when
decreased diet digestibility, and the production of
making recommendations for these different types of
increased volume and decfeased quality of stools. Fof
canine athlete.
example, a year-long study of body condition and
The goals for the nutrition and feeding of all work-
 hunting performance in a group of Pointers reported
ing dogs afe to maintain optimal body condition and
that dogs fed a calorie-dense and highly digestible food
weight, support performance, and prevent fatigue and
maintained body condition and performed signifcantly
injury. Of greatest concern is ehergy. All working dogs
better throughout the hunting season than did dogs
will have energy needs that are higher than comparable
fed a food that was lower in both energy density and
dogs living a sedentary lifestyle.
.Howevel, the dura
digestibility.74
tion and the intensity of the work will determine the
The source of dietary fat may also be important.
magnitude of this difference. Dogs working at low or
Although there are limited studies available, there is evi-
moderate intensity for long periods of time (hunting
dence that foods containing predominantly saturated
dogs, service dogs, and military/police dogs) will require
fatty acids may negatively affect olfactory acuity in werk-
a consistent increase in caloric intake to maintain body
ing dogs.75 This is an important consideration for hunt-
weight. For hunting dogs, an increase is needed dur-
ing dogs, tracking dogs, and dogs used in the detection
ing the training period and hunting season, but not
of narcotics and explosives. Although the underlying
during times of the year when dogs are not working.73
mechanism is not fully understood, it is theorized that
Although the energy needls of service dogs and of dogs
altering the proportion of saturated and unsaturated
competing in obedience or other dog sports have not
fatty acids in a dog's diet modifies the fatty acid compo-
been studied, it is expected that an incfease is needed to
sition of cells of the nasal epithelium and affects a dog's
maintain condition during prolonged periods of train-
ability to detect
t low concentrations of odorants. Specif-
ing and competing but not during off-season periods
cally, the composition of cell membrane phospholipidls
infuences fuidity and permeability of cell membranes,
which might in turn affect response to odorants. Intef-
All working dogs will have energy needs that are higher
estingly, the same study was the frst to demonstrate that
than a comparable dog living a sedentary lifestyle. Dogs
physical conditioning improves a dog's ability to main-
working at low or moderate intensity for long periods
tain olfactory acuity following a bout of exercise. Dogs
of time (hunting dogs,service dogs and military/police
that were not conditioned showed a feduced ability
dogs) will reguire a consistent increase in caloric intake
to detect odors following a 1-hour period of running,
tomaintain body weight.Forhunting dogs,anincrease
 and also showed reduced overall olfactory acuity over an
is needed during the training period and hunting sea-
 8-week period when fed a food that was high in satu-
son, but not during times ofthe year when dogs are not
rated fat. Conversely, dogs that were well conditioned
did not show a reduction in olfactory acuity in response
and of dogs competing in obedience or other dog sports
to exercise and were not affected by the type of fat in the
increase to maintain condition during prolonged periods
diet. Although additional work is needed, these results
of training and competing but are at maintenance dur-
suggest that the source and type of fat included in the
ingoff-seasonperiods
diet of working dogs should be considered along with
the overall concentration of fat.
In recent years, the role that antioxidant nutrients
As discussed previously, the best way to provide the
play in reducing oxidative stress during exercise and
extra energy needled by canine athlete is to increase
 other types of physiological stress has been studied.76
dietary fat and feed a food that is both energy dense
Strenuous exercise imposes significant oxidative stress
and highly digestible. If energy content of the food is
and can lead to oxidative damage of cells and tissues.
256 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Canine athletes that are fed high-fat diets may be at
of cold-induced thermogenesis, a mechanism involving
increased risk because of an increased propensity of
 an increase in metabolic rate during exposure to a cold
fatty acid oxidation associated with high-fat intake.
environment. The increased metabolic fate produces
The most frequently studied antioxidant nutrient is
additional body heat that is used to maintain body
alpha-tocopherol (vitamin E). A study with racing sled
temperature. Although the increased energy needs of
dogs reported that the circulating lipoproteins of dogs
 dogs in arctic environments are very great and result
supplemented with vitamin E, beta-carotene, and lutein 
in large increases in daily energy intake, dogs housed
showed increased resistance to in vitro oxidative dam-
 outside during moderately cold weather also experience
age, and a reduction in exercise-related deoxyribonucleic
 a degree of cold-induced thermogenesis.
acid (DNA) damage when compared with lipoproteins
A study with Labrador Rettievers and Beagles showed
of unsupplemented dogs.77 However,
,asubsequent
that as environmental temperatures decreased from 59°
study failed to show any protective benefit when racing
Fahrenheit (F) (thermal neutral zone) to 47° F, the
 sled dogs were supplemented with a similar combination
dogs' ME intake increased and remained high until the
of vitamin E, beta-carotene, and lutein.78 In this study,
 ambient temperature was increased.8l During the cold
muscle damage was assessed using postexercise CK levels.
period, there was a slight decrease in mean body weight
More recently, the polyphenols and favonoids that are
 despite increased energy intake. Results from this study
present in certain fruits and vegetables, particularly in
 indicate that an average increase in ME intake of 25%
blueberries, have been studied. These compounds have
is necessaty to maintain body weight in dogs housed in
strong antioxidant properties and exert their effects
cool conditions. This fgure can be used as a general
via several biochemical pathways. A group of uncon-
guide for increasing the ME intake of dogs that are
ditioned sled dogs were supplemented with approxi-
housed outeloors during the winter months. Howevef,
mately 20 g of wild blueberries per day for 2 months and
factors such as the dog's size, its coat type and length,
were exercised for a distance of 7 miles on 2 consecu-
the type of shelter that is provided, and weather condi-
tive days.79 Plasma CK levels increased similarly in both
nu auesyuis mous suntp pue pm se yns suon
the supplemented and the control groups of dogs, but
ence the amount of food needed by dogs housed in cold
levels were within a range that is considered normal for
environments. For example, a study with Beagles, Lab-
exercising dogs and not indicative of exercise-induced
rador Retrievers, and Siberian Huskies found that the
muscle damage. Although the aldition of blueberries
ME requirements of Siberian Huskies are less affected
did not affect CK response to exercise, supplementa-
by Huctuations in environmental temperature than are
tion did cause an elevation in plasma total antioxidant
the ME intakes of Beagles and Labrador Retrievers.82 It
potential (TAP), which is a measure of the body's anti-
appears that the double coats of Huskies act as a protec-
oxidant status. Although additional studies are needed,
tive barrier to insulate them against large fuctuations in
these preliminary results suggest that exercising dogs
environmental temperature.
The energy needs of dogs and cats also increase
dant nutrients.
with high environmental temperatures and humidity.
The exposure to high ambient temperature causes an
increase in the amount of energy that must be used to
WEATHEREXTREMES
cool the body. Working dogs in humid environments
Adverse weather conditions in the form of extreme cold
experience slight increases in energy needs; at the same
 or heat result in increased energy needs in dogs and
cats. This increase can be quite substantial depending
Therefore it is important to provide dogs working in
on the severity of the weather. A study of dogs living in
hot environments with a diet that is high in caloric and
 an arctic environment showed that an increase in energy
intake of 70% to 80% was necessary for the dogs to
without the consumption of large quantities of food. It
maintain normal body temperatures without experienc-
ing weight loss.80 Dogs are capable of a significant level
continuously in warm or humid environments.
Performance 257
References
 1. Bergstrom J, Hermansen L, Hultman E, and others: Diet, muscle glycogen and physical performance, Acta Phyiol Scand
71:140-150, 1967.
2. lssekutz BJR, Miller H1, Paul P: Aerobic work capacity and plasma FFA turnover, J Appt Physiot 20:293-296, 1965.
3. Miller H, Issekutz B, Rodahl K: Effect of exercise on the metabolism of fatty acids in the dog, Am J Physiol 205:167-172, 1963.
4. Paul B, Issekutz B, Miller Hl: lInterrelationship of free fatty acids and glucose metabolism in the dog, Am J Physiol 211:1313-1320,
1966.
5. Conlee RK, Hammer RL, Winder WW, and others: Glycogen repletion and exercise endurance in rats adapted to a high fat diet,
Metabolism 39:289-294, 1990.
6. Reynolds AJ, Fuhrer L, Dunlap HL, and others: Effect of diet and training on muscle glycogen storage and utilization in sled dogs,
1 Appt Physiot 79:1601-1607, 1997.
7. Armstrong RB: Distribution of fber types in locomotory muscles of dogs, Am J Anat 163:87-98, 1982.
8. Cuy PS, Snow DH: Skeletal muscle fbre composition in the dog and its relationship to athletic ability, Res Vet Sei 31:244-248,
1981.
 9. Reynolds A, Hoppeler H, Reinhart G, and others: Sled dog endurance: a result of high fat diet or selective breeding? FASEB J
9:A996, 1995
10. Karlsson J, Saltin B: Diet, muscle glycogen and endurance performance, J Appl Physiol 31:203-206, 1971.
11. Creen HJ: How important is endogenous muscle glycogen to fatigue in prolonged exercise? Can J Phyiol Pharmaco G9:290-297,
1990
utilization during performance, fnt / Sports Med 2:114118, 1981.
 13. Fielding RA, Costill DL, Fink WJ, and others: Effects of pre-exercise carbohydrate feedings on muscle glycogen use during exercise
in well-trained runners, Eur J Appl Physiol 56:225-229, 1987
14. Ahlborg BJ, Bergstrom J, Brohult J: Human muscle glycogen content and capacity for prolonged exercise after diferent diets,
Forvarsmedicin 3:85-89, 1967.
15. Bergstrom J, Hultman E: A study of glycogen metabolism during exercise in man, Scar J Clin Lab Invest 19:218-228, 1967.
16. Blom PCS, Costill NK, Vollestad NK: Exhaustive running: inappropriate as a stimulus of muscle glycogen supercompensation,
Med Sci Sports Exerc 19:398-403, 1987.
17. Therriault DC, Beller GA, Smoake JA, and others: Intramuscular energy sources in dogs during physical work, J Lipid Res
14:5461, 1973.
18. Paul P lssekutz B: Role of extramuscular energy sources in the metabolism of the exercising dog, Am J Physiol 22:615-622, 1976.
19. Downey RL, Kronfeld DS, Banta CA: Diet of Beagles affects stamina, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:273-277, 1980.
 ay siop pas Suoer ur asraxa ansxa on sasuodsar soge sauo pue ya uerue 'sa Piauory a paue o7
containing medium, low and zero carbohydrate, Am J Clin Nutr 30:409-418, 1977.
21. Kronfeld DS: Diet and the performance of racing sled dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc 162:470-473, 1973.
22. Reynolds AJ, Fuhrer L, Dunlap HL, and others: Lipid metabolite responses to diet and training in sled dogs, J Nutr
124:2754S-2759S, 1994.
 23. Costill DL, Bowers R, Branam G: Muscle glycogen utiization during prolonged exercise on successve days, J Appl Phyio!
31:834 838, 1971.
24. Kirwan JP Costill DL, Mitchell JB: Carbohydrate balance in competitive runners during successive days of intense training,
J Appl Physiol 65:2601-2602, 1988.
258 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 25. Bloomstrand E, Stalin G: Effect of muscle glycogen on glucose, lactate and amino acid metabolism during exercise and recovery in
human subjects, J Physiol 514:293-302, 1999.
26. McKenzie E, Holbrook T, Williamson K, and others: Recovery of muscle glycogen concentrations in sled dogs during prolongec
exercise, Med Sci Sports Exerc 37:1307-1311, 2005.
 27. Hinchcliff KW, Jose-Cunilleras E, Davis MS: Muscle triglyceride concentration and fat metabolism during endurance exercise by
sled dogs, Physiologist 47:302, 2004.
 28. McKenzie EC, Hinchcliff KW, Valbeerg SJ, and others: Assessment of alterations in triglyceride and glycogen concentrations in
muscle tissue of Alaskan sled dogs during repetitive prolonged exercise, Axm J Vet Res 69:1097-1103, 2008.
 29. Brouns F, Saris WHM, Beckers SE: Metabolic changes induced by sustained exhaustive cycling and diet manipulation, Int J Sports
Med 10:S49-S62, 1989.
30. McClelland G, Zwingelstein C, Taylor CR, Weber JM: Increased capacity for circulatory fatty acid transport in a highly aerobic
mammal, Am J Physiol 266:R1280-R1286, 1994.
31. lssekutz B Jr, Issekutz AC, Nash D: Mobilization of energy sources in exercising dogs, J/ App! Phyiof 29:691-697, 1970.
32. Adkins TO, Kronfeld DS: Diet of racing sled dogs affects erythrocyte depression by stress, Cen Vet J 23:260-263, 1982.
33. Querengaesser A, 1ben C, Leibetseder J: Blood changes during training and racing in sled dogs, J Nutr 124:2760S-2764S, 1994.
34. Carter SL, Rennie CD, Hamilton SJ, Tarnopolsky MA: Changes in skeletal muscles in males and females following endurance
training, Can J Physiol Pharmacol79:386-392, 2001.
35. Wakshlag JJ, Kalfelz FA, Barr SC, and others: Effects of exercise on canine skeletal muscle proteolysis an investigation of the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and other metabolic markers, Vet Tber 3:215-225, 2002.
Vet Med Asoc 202:401-405, 1993.
37. Gollnick PD: Energy metabolism and prolonged exercise. In Lamb DR, Murray R, editors: Perspectives in exercise science and sports
medicine, vol 1, Carmel, lnd, 1988, Benchmark Press.
38. Reynolds A]: Effect of diet on performance. 1In Proc Perform Dog Nutrition Symp, Fort Collins, Colo, 1995, Colorado State University.
39. Orr NWM: The feeding of sledge dogs on Antarctic expeditions, Br J Nutr 20:1-11, 1966.
40. Gannon JR: Nutritional requirements of the working dog, Vet Ann 21:161-166, 1981.
41. Orr NWM: The food requirements of Antarctic sledge dogs. In Graham-Jones O, editor: Canine and feline nutritional requirements,
Oxford, England, 1965, Pergamon Press.
42. Wyatt HT: Further experiments on the nutrition of sledge dogs, Br J Nutr 17:273-279, 1963.
43. Hinchcliff KW, Swenson RA, Schreier CJ, and others: Metabolizable energy intake and sustained energy expenditure of Alaskan sld
dogs during heavy exertion in the cold, Am / Vet Res 58:1457-1462, 1997.
44. Hinchcliff KW, Swenson RA, Burr JR, and others: Exercise-associated hyponatremia in Alaskan sled dog: urinary and hormonal
responses, J App! Physiol 83:824829, 1997.
45. HinchclifKW, Swenson RA, Schreier CJ, and others: Efect of racing on serum sodium and potassium concentrations and acid-
base status of Alaskan sled dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:161 5-1618, 1997.
46. Hinchcliff KW, Reinhart GA, Burr JR, and others: Effect of racing on water metabolism, serum sodium and potassium
concentrations, renal hormones, and urine composition of Alaskan sled dogs In Reinhart GA,Carey DP, editors: Recent advances in
canine and feline nutrition, lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
47. Kohn CW: Composition and distribution of body Huids in dogs and cats. In DiBartola S, editor: Fluid therapy in small animal
practice, Philadelphia, 1992, Saunders.
48. Surgenor S, Uphold RE: Acute hyponatremia in ultra-endurance athletes, Am J Emerg Med 12:441-444, 1994.
49. Schott HC, McGlade KS, Molander HA, and others: Body weight, Auid, electrolyte, and hormonal changes in horses competing in
50- and 100-mile endurance rides, Am J Vet Res 58:303-309, 1997.
Performance 259
 50. Burr JR, Bradley DM, Vaughn DM, and others: Serum biochemical values in dogs before and after competing in long-distance
races, J Am Vet Med Asoc 211:175-179, 1997.
51. McKenzie EC, Conilleras EJ, Hinchcliff KW, and others: Serum chemistry alterations in Alaskan sled dogs during five successive
days of prolonged endurance exercise, / Am Vet Med Assoc 230:1486-1492, 2007.
52. Kronfeld DS, Hammel ER Ramberg CF: Hematological and metabolic responses to training in racing sled dogs fed diets containing
medium, low or zero carbohydrate, Am J Clin Nutr 30:419-430, 1977.
53. Armstrong R, Saubert C, Sembrowich W: Glycogen depletion in rat skeletal muscle fbers at different intensities and duration of
exercise, Pfugers Arch 352:243-256, 1974.
54. Bergstrom J, Hultman E, Roch-Norlund AE: Muscle glycogen synthetase in normal subjects: basal values, effect of glycogen
depletion by exercise and of a carbohydrate rich diet following exercise, Scand J Clin Lab Invest 29:231-236, 1972.
Corneff Vet 75:366-374, 1985.
9sI aaxg saos s pw suauaddns rauod asona e yo uonsu g paaodu aoueua A ramoh  ra T  9s
1983.
57. Ivy JL, Katz AL, Cutler CL, and others: Muscle glycogen synthesis after exercise: effect of time of carbohydrate ingestion,J App!
Physiot 64:1480-1485, 1988.
supplementation and the application of amino acid or protein hydrolysate mixtures, Am / Clin Nutr 72:1 06- 111, 2000.
59. Jentjens Rl, van Loon LJ, Mann CH: Addition of protein and amino acids to carbohydrates does not enhance post-exercise muscle
glycogen synthesis, J Appt Physiot 91:839-846, 2001.
60. Reynolds A], Carey Df, Reinhart GA, and others: The effect of post exercise carbohydrate supplementation on muscle glycogen
synthesis in trained sled dogs, Am / Vet Res 58:1252-1256, 1997.
61.Wakshlag J, Snedden K, Otis AM, and others: Effects of post-exercise supplements on glycogen repletion in skeletal muscle,
Vet Ther 3:226-234, 2002.
62. Cisolf CV: Water and electrolyte metabolism in exercise. In Fox EL, editor: Nutrient utilization during exercise, Columbus, Ohio
1983, Ross Laboratories.
63. Fink WJ, Greenleaf JE: Fluid intake and athletic performance. In Haskell W, Scala J, Whittam J, editors: Nutrition and athietic
performance: proceedings of a conference on nutritional determinants of athtetic performance,1981.
64. Askew EW: Fat metabolism in exercise. In Fox EL, editor: Nutrient utilization during exercise, Columbus, Ohio, 1983, Ross
Laboratories.
65. Saltin B, Karlsson J: Muscle glycogen utilization during work of different intensities. In Saltin B, Karlsson J, editors: Muscle
metabolism during exercise, vol 2, New York, 1 971, Plenum Press.
66. Rose RJ, Bloomberg MS: Responses to sprint exercise in the Greyhound: effects on hematology, plasma biochemistry and muscle
metabolism, Internationat greyhound symposium, Orlando, Fla, 1983.
67. Dobson GB, Parkhouse WS, Weber SW, and others: Metabolic changes in skeletal muscle and blood of Greyhounds during 800-m
track sprint, Am / Physiot 255:R513-R519, 1988.
68. llkiw JE, Davis PE, Church DB: Hematologic, biochemical, blood-gas, and acid-base values in Greyhounds before and after
exercise, Am / Vet Res 50:583-586, 1989
 g d  a o a    u s ey  ap  o  pi 
100A:623-627, 1991.
70. Donovan DM, Brooks GA: Endurance training affects lactate clearance not lactate production, Am J Phyiol 244:E83-E92, 1983.
71. Hill RC, Lewis DD, Scott KC, and others: Effect of increased dietary protein and decreased dietary carbohydrate on performance
and body composition in racing Greyhounds, Am / Vet Res 62:440-447, 2001.
260 Canine and Feline Nutrition
72. Hill RC, Lewis DD, Randell SC, and others: Effect of mild restriction of food intake on the speed of racing Greyhounds, Am J Vet
Res 66:L1065-L1070, 2005,
 s nd e o  u ra  e as rag o pe f s     
136:2063S-2065S, 2006
74. Lepine AJ, Altom EK, Davenport GM, Kelley Rl: Effect of diet on hunting performance of English Pointers, Vet Ther 2:10-23,
2001.
75. Altom EK, Davenport GM, Myers LJ, Cummins KA: Effect of dietary fat source and exercise on odorant-detecting ability of canine
athletes, Res Vet Sei 75:149-155, 2003.
76. McMichael MA: Oxidative stress, antioxidants, and assessment of oxidative stressin dogs and cats,JAm Vet Med Asoc
231:714-720, 2007.
resistance to oxidative damage during prolonged exercise in sled dogs, Am J Vet Res 61:886-891, 2000.
78. Piercy RJ, Hinchclif K W, DiSilvestro RA, and others: Efect of dietary supplements containing antioxidants on attenuation of
muscle damage in exercising sled dogs, Am / Vet Res 61:1438-1445, 2000.
79. Dunlap KL, Reynolds AJ, Duffy LK: Total antioxidant power in sled dogs supplemented with blueberries and the comparison of
blood parameters associated with exercise, Comp Biochem Physiof 143:429-434, 2006.
80. Durrer JL, Hannon JP: Seasonal variations of intake of dogs living in an arctic environment, Am J Physiof 202:375-378, 1962.
81. Blaza SE: Energy requirements of dogs in cool conditions, Cax Pract 9:10-15, 1982.
83. McNamara JH: Nutrition for military working dogs under stress, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 67:615-623, 1972.
25
Geriatrics
Improvements in the control ofinfectious diseases and in
A variety of theories have been proposed to explain
the nutrition of dogs and cats have resulted in a gradual
the phenomena of aging and senescence. Several of
increase in the average lifespan of companion animals.
these focus on genetic controls, such as the somatic
While the maximum lifespan of a given species remains
mutation and gene regulation theories. Others exam-
relatively fxed, the average lifespan within a population
ine the impact of temporal changes in homeostatic
of domesticated animals can be significantly affected by
mechanisms of different body systems or the accumu-
health care, genetics, and nutrition. By 2002, it was esti-
lation of the damaging products of celular aging. For
mated that 30% to 40% of dogs and cats in the United
example, the oxidative stress theory postulates that
States were 7 years of age or older, and approximately /
aging is linked to energy expenditure and the cumu-
of these pets were older than 11 years.1,2 The increased
lative cellular damage caused by the free radlicals that
number of senior and geriatric pets and the understand-
ate the byproducts of oxidative metabolism.5,6 None
ing that most of these dogs and cats have been cherished
of these theories singularly explains all of the changes
family members for many years necessitates increased
that ate observed during aging; nor are they necessarily
attention to the care and nutrition of this portion of
mutually exclusive. Most likely, aging and senescence
our companion animal population. Nutritional goals
 ate multifactorial processes infuenced by genetics and
for aging pets include supporting health and vitality,
a myriad of internal and external environmental factors.
preventing the onset or slowing the progression of age-
related health disorders, and enhancing the pet's quality
LIFESPANS OF DOGS AND CATS
of life and, if possible, life expectancy.
From an evolutionary perspective, domesticated dogs and
Aofua jeu saipads oml jo alduexa anbiun e juasad sies
AGING VERSUS SENESCENCE
an extended life stage beyond successful maturation and
The aging process refers to the natural series of life stages,
reproduction. Natural selection works principally on sur-
beginning with conception and continuing through
sjenpiAipu! ue inouanonu pue on dn ssauy pue [eA
development, adulthood and fnally senescence (geriatric
reproductive age and this impact diminishes as an animal
stage). Although it is often misconstrued as such, aging is
enters its postreproductive years. In the wild, nondomes-
not a pathological process, but rather comprises the nor-
mal time-dependent changes that occur during the life of
tive life, and older animals rapidly experience increased
every individual. As many pet owners who cherish their
vulnerability to predation, accidents, and disease. In con-
senior dog or cat will attest, living with a healthy older
trast, companion dogs and cats are protected from the
dlog or cat can be a wonderful experience. For example,
-usoid iau paedu Aeosll ary eun sansad
older pets are often well behaved, are enjoyable to live
tor species. Many live well into their geriatric years, a life
with, and have a well-established set of endearing hab-
 phase that is accompanied by age-related degenerative dis-
its. Other changes associated with older pets are neither
eases and increased incidence of vatious types of cancef.
positive nor negative, such as the development of a gray-
Because genes that regulate late-life deterioration have
ing muzzle or a slightly reduced activity level. Undesir-
not been subjected to the same pressures of natural selec-
able age-related changes are those associated with illness,
tion as those that support reproductive success, it can be
changes in mobility, changes in cognitive function and
 argued that seeing an increase in the diseases of senescence
the development of behavior problems. The deteriorative
is a natural byproduct of domestication. Incleed, several
changes that may negatively affect a senior pet's overall
of the theories of aging suggest that the same genes that
health and quality of life are referred to as senescence.?
confer early maturation and a high rate of reproductive
261
262 Canine and Feline Nutrition
success may, at the same time, contribute to illness or dis-
TABLE 25-1 SUGGESTED AGES FOR
ease later in life.78 Such genes would persist in a popula-
GERIATRIC DOGS AND CATS
tion because of their beneficial impact upon reproductive
fitness. In the case of species that invariably die young
AGE CONSIDERED
because of extrinsic (environmental) factors, the negative
SPECIES/SIZE
GERIATRIC
effects of such genes upon senior fitness would be irrel-
s300
evant and therefore would be maintained. Conversely,
Toy/small breeds (5-20 Ib)
11.5 years
when extrinsic factors are naturally absent or are con-
Medium breeds (21-50 Ib)
10.0 years
tolled by human intervention (i.e., the species enjoys a
Large breeds (51-90 Ib)
9.0 years
relatively low postreproductive mortality rate), genes that
Giant breeds (>90 Ib)
7.5 years
promote longevity may begin to confer a selective advan-
Cats
12.0 years
tage. Although the relationship between extrinsic mor-
tality and longevity has been shown to be complex and
dogs, many of which may contribute to a shortened
infuenced by other factors, this theory helps to explain
the infuence of domestication on dog and cat longevity.
breeding is less widespread in the domestic cat, inbreed-
 The maximum lifespan of the dog is estimated to
ing in purebred cats may eventually lead to similar
be about 27 years, but few dogs live to be older than
18 years of age. When all breeds are considered, the
 ing these problems, reputable breeders use careful selec-
average lifespan of the domestic dog is approximately
tion and screening practices to reduce the incidence of
13 years.P Intraspecifc vatiations in longevity are of
 genetically infuenced health problems in their breed.)
special interest with dogs because of the widle range in
Because breeds of dogs differ in average lifespan and
body size and conformation between breeds. Many of
susceptibility to disease, an individual dog's breed, size,
the large and giant breeds have a signifcantly shorter
and current health must be considered when determin-
lifespan than the average of 13 years, while small and
ing whether or not he/she should be considered geriat-
toy breeds tend to live longer. Numerous studies have
 ric. General guidelines divide dogs into four categories
shown that when examined across b
breeds, there is a
based upon their adult size, with smaller dogs consid-
signifcant negative relationship between lifespan and
 ered elderly at a later age than larger dogs (Table 25-1).16
However, the dog's body condition, activity level, over-
of giant breeds appears to be a result of the artificial
all health, and the presence of chronic or debilitating
selection for extremely large (
rapid early growth rates. Developmental skeletal diseases
more slowly than most dogs and do not tend to show
related to higher growth rates are an important (but not
breed differences in aging or longevity. The average life-
the only) contributing factor to the shorter lifespan of
span of cats that are kept indoors is approximately 14
these dogs. For example, a recent pilot study found that
 years, and the cat's maximum lifespan may be as high as
mature body weight was more strongly correlated (nega-
tively) with lifespan in dogs than other measures of size,
 as si o  ' a  iy s s
 not find breed to be a signifcant factor, they reported
that some heavy but short-in-stature breeds, such as the
Bulldog, experienced a shorter lifespan due to the infu-
the domestic dog is approximately 13 years. However
ence of inherited structural disorders. The construc-
many ofthe large and giant breeds have a significantly
tion of breed standards that enforce a closed studbook
shorter lifespan than this average, while some small and
and require absolute reproductive isolation has led to
toy breeds live much longer in general, cats age more
inbreeding practices and the overuse of a small numbet
slowly than most dogs and do not tend to show breed
of individuals (usually males) in an already limited gene
pool. This has contributed to the propagation of the
cats that are kept indoors is approxirmately 14 years.
more than 500 identifed inherited diseases of purebred
Geriatrics 263
BOX 25-1 AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN LABO-
BOX 25-2 AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN LABO-
RATORY VALUES FOR DOGS
RATORY VALUES FOR CATS'
UNCHANGED
DEcREaSED
INCREASED
UNCHANGED
DEcREASED
INCREASED
Alanine
Albumin
Globulin
 Eosinophils
Alanine
Cholesterol 
aminotransferase
 Abumin:globulin 
Platelets
Hematocrit 
 aminotransferase
Globulin
Blood urea nitro-
ratio
Neutrophils
Lym phocytes
Akaline phosphatase
Monocytes
gen (BUN)
Creatinine
Serum
Neutrophils
As partate
BUN:creatinine
Hematocrit 
 potassium
Serum
aminotransferase
ratio
Hemoglobin 
Serum
 potassium
Albumin
Cholesterol
Lymphocytes
sodium
 Abumin:globulin ratio
Creatine kinase
Red blood cells
Serum
Oreatinine kinase
Eosinophils
Serum calcium
triglycerides
Hemoglobin 
 Gamma-glutamyl-
 Serum calcium
transferase
Serum phosphorus
Lactate
White blood cells
dehydrogenase
Magnesium
*Dara collecred from 40 young and old cacs (0.9 vs. 8.9 years) . (From
Serum chloride
Hayek MG: Age-relared changes in physiological funrion in rhe dog and
cac: nurritional implications. In Reinharr GA, Carey DP, edirors: Recent
Total biliru bin
advances in canine and felie nutrition, lams mutrition symposium proceed
ings, vol 2, Wilmingron, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.)
*Daca colleted from 36 young and old Fox Terries (1.8 vs. 11.5 years)
and Labrador Rerievers (1.5 vs. 9.6 years) . (From Hayek MG:
umu :nes pue bop au ui uomsuny lesibojoiskyd ui sasueys paelai-aov
nional implications. In Reinharr GA, Carey DP, edirors: Recent adoances
7 years, another may exhibit no clinical signs even at
in canine and feline mutrition, lams mutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2
Wilmingcon, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.)
12 years. It is also not unusual for more than one chronic
disease to be present in a single geriatric pet. This vati-
ability necessitates that older animals be assessed as
individuals, using functional changes in body systems
AGE-ASSOCIATED
rather than chronological age to categorize them with
PHYSIOLOGICAL CHANGES
 the geriatric population.
In all animals, the biological effects of aging include
Metabolic Effects and Changes
a gradual decline in the functional capacity of organs,
beginning shortly after the animal has reached maturity.
in Body Composition
A set of prelirminary studies reported age-related changes
 An animal's basal metabolic rate (BMR) naturally slows
in laboratory values for the dog and cat (Boxes 25-1
with aging. This decline is caused primarily by changes in
and 25-2).18,19 Although the limited number of animals
body composition, specifically a loss of lean body tissue.
that were examined preclude using these
data
to make
Normal aging in all animals is associated with decreases
generalized conclusions about
changes
 in lean body tissue (muscle) and total body water and
to
blood chemistry and cell data,
these data suggest that
an increase in the proportion of body fat. A decline in
multiple physiological s
 systems are affected during the
anssn Apoq ueal jo ssol aun sanuedo ranem Apog
significance
because lean tissue contains 73% watef, while adipose
of these changes is not known and
be relevant
tissue contains
only
15%
6 water. Age-related changes
of the body
in body com
 differ for dogs and cats. An
the
compromised
eafly study
function that must occur before
clinical
the body fat content of young dogs was between 15%
depends on many
factorsin
slife.
Althou
gh
ohe
and 20%, while that of older dogs was between 25%
and 30%.20 In contrast, the body fat content of adlult,
264 Canine and Feline Nutrition
TABLE 25-2 BODY COMPOSITION IN
90
YOUNG AND OLD CATS
80-
AND DOGS'
70
LEAN
FAT
BONE
MASS (%)
MASS (%)
MASS (%)
09
Young cats
69
30
50
Old cats
64
35
1
Young dogs
79
18
3
40
Old dogs
70
27
E
*Dara collced from 40 young (less han 1.5 years) and old(greater
30
than 7 years) cars, and 36 young (less than 1.5 years) and old (grearer
20-
Davenporr GM: Nurition and aging in companion animals, J Anti
Aging Med 1:117, 1998.)
10
0-
Cat
Dog
Cat
Dog
normal weight cats has been reported to be between 8%
Percent lean body mass Percent fat body mass
and 13%, but did not change significantly between the
■YoungOld
collected from a colony of young and old cats and dogs
found that the body fat of young cats averaged 30%
Figure 25-1 Body composition of senior and young-adult
'51e? pue s8op
and increased to 35% in
cats
s that were older than 7
(From Hayek MG, Davenport GM: Nutrition and aging in com panion animals,
years (Table 25-2, Figure
The higher body fat
/Anti Aging Med 1:117, 1998.)
tefle
dence of obesity amon
regimen and bod
Normal aging in dogs and cats is associated with
studied. In dogs
x increased ffom
reduced resting metabolicrate,adecline in activity evel,
fat
a mean of 18%
years to 27% in
decreased lean body mass, and increased body fat.
than
.
dogs older than
In both dogs and cats,
However lifestyle factors can infuence these changes.
the percentage of
 mass declined with age (see
While some pets voluntarily reduce their physical activ
Figure 25-1)
ityas they become older others remain active and ath-
Lifestyle factors must
：considered when assess-
letic well into their senior years and maintain a lean
and well-muscled body condition.Therefore each dog
While some pets
voluntatily
 reduce their physical
ad cat must be assessed individualy to determine the
activity as they
become oldef, others femain active
need for a change in daily caloric intake.
and athletic well into their senior years. It is estimated
that total daily energy
decrease by
as much as 30% to 40%
during the
e last third of a
Changes in the Integumentary
pet's lifespan as a fesult of both reduced activity and
System
decreased metabolic fate.
C7
because physi-
cal activity helps to offset age-
associated losses of lean
 The skin loses elasticity and becomes less pliable with age
body tissue, the BMR in clder pets
very active
 as a result of increased pseudoelastin in the elastic fbers.
may not decrease
significantly.
Therefore, while BMR
This loss of elasticity is often accompanied by hyperkera-
tosis of both the skin and the follicles. Follicles may atro-
again pets must be assessed individually to determine
phy, resulting in areas of hair loss. The loss of melanocytes
whether or not a decrease in daily caloric intake is
(pigment cells) in the hair follicles and reduced activity of
watranted.
the enzyme tyrosinase results in the production of white
Geriatrics 265
hairs, often observed atound the muzzle and face of older
categories. Interestingly, these older cats (12 to 14 years)
dogs and cats. Changes in sebum production can result in
were able to maintain norrmal weight by consuming
scaly skin and cause an older animal's hair coat to become
 more food than the younger cats. These results suggest
dry and dull. The incidence of skin neoplasia also increases
that cats are capable of self-regulating their intake very
with age. The median age for the development of skin
precisely, even in the face of reduced digestive capacities.
tumors is about 10.5 years in dogs and 12 years in cats.24
Although not determined in this study, possible under
lying causes for age-related decreases in digestive capa-
bility include reductions in pancreatic enzyme secretion
Changes in the Gastrointestinal
or bile acid secretion in elderly cats. These data indicate
System
that a slight to moderate reduction in gastrointestinal
It has been suggested that a number of changes take
functioning may occur in some healthy older pets.
place in the gastrointestinal tract as animals age. These
include reduced salivary and gastric acid
secfetions
and decreases in villi size, fate of cellular turnover,
diets for geriatric dogs and cats.
and colonic motility.23 Although it has been theo-
rized that the aging of the gastrointestinal tract leads
to a decreased ability to digest and absorb nutrients,
Changes in the Urinary System
studies on healthy older dogs and cats show confict-
Although a gradual decline in renal function is nor-
ing results. A study comparing the digestive effciency
mal in older animals, a substantial loss of functioning
of 1-yeat-old Beagles to elderly Beagles (10 to 12 years
nephrons must occur before changes in fenal function
cld) found no difference in the older dogs’ ability to
afe signifcant. Still, chronic renal failure is a major
digest and absorb nutrients.25 Similarly, a later study
cause of illness and mortality in geriatric cats and is
reported no significant difference in digestibility coef-
the third leadling cause of death in old dogs. Therefore,
ficients measured in young adult Beagles and very old
age-related changes in renal health have been studied
Beagles (16 or 17 years old).26 In contfast, while a more
 in detail in dogs and cats.30.32 One of the frst studies
fecent study found no significant differences in protein,
evaluated clinical changes in renal function in a colony
fat, or energy digestibility l
between young (less than
of Beagles over a period of 13 years.32 Results showed
aiayn 'ssop (plo sieak g ueqi 1aieaio) plo pue (plo sieak 9
that nephrosclerosis was the most frequently diagnosed
was a trend toward reduced digestibility coefficients in
kidney
 lesion in older dogs. The data from this study
the older group of dogs.27
also indicated that normal kidney aging may lead to
Fewer studies have been conducted with geriatric
nephron loss of up to 75% before clinical or biochemi-
cats. However, data that are available indicate that aging
cal signs occur in older dogs. Animals with less than
changes in the digestive capabilities of cats may be more
 75% loss are usually clinically normal but may be more
significant than those observed in dogs. One study
susceptible to renal insult than younger animals still
reported no significant differences in overall digestive
 possessing renal reserve capacity.
am ieu sieo pue sies iinpe sunon uamiaq Auaa
In contfast, another study that compafed nutrient
older than 10 years of age, but the older group of cats
utilization and metabolism in young and old Beagles
had a lower mean fat digestibility coefficient (0.80)
reported no loss of renal functioning associated with
-103 uaaq sey puan s!uL sz'(88'o) dnois SunoA aui ueqi
 aging.2S These results were supported by a subsequent
roborated by subsequent studies.27,29 When six differ-
study that examined the effects of aging and dietary
ent age groups of cats were studied, protein digestibility
protein intake on renal function and morphology in
decreased slightly and fat digestibility decreased signif-
 dogs.33 All of the dogs were between 7 and 8 years old
E 01 pal spuan omi asaui rauaol z'pase sies se Aus
at the start of the study and were uninephrectomized to
highly signifcant linear relationship between age and a
reduce renal mass by 50%. This procedure was included
decline in diet energy digestibility. The oldest group of
in the study design because a reduction of renal mass
cats (12 to 14 years) had significantly lower digestibility
makes fesidual renal tissue mofe vulnerable to insult
coefficients for energy than all of the younger age
 and would be expected to exacerbate any effects of aging
266 Canine and Feline Nutrition
or diet. Over a 4-year period, none of the dogs showed
trauma. In some cases, the cumulative and pathological
a decline in renal functioning. Age-related changes to
outcome of these changes is the development of osteo
the kidneys included the development of moderate
arthritis. Following an initial peak in incidence due to
renal lesions, but these were not affected by diet and
developmental bone diseases in young dogs, the risk of
did not significantly affect renal functioning. When
developing joint problems increases in dogs that are 5
the dogs in this study were compared with young dogs
ued suol jo suasaid au yg'lapio io sse jo sieaa / 01
that had been uninephrectomized, the older dogs had
associated with osteoarthritis may also affect a pet's
   n ss n
appetite and ability to eat. Along with medical ther-
indistinguishable from those of the young dogs. How-
apy, there are several nutraceuticals that may aid in the
ever, the clder dogs did show a blunted fenal response
management of arthritis in older pets (see Chapter 37,
s re m pen m le ud e o
pp. 502-506 for a complete discussion).
Results of these studies illustrate the importance
evaluating geriatric patients as individuals when assess-
ing renal function. Aging alone is not associated with
Changes in the Immune System
clinical signs of reduced renal functioning or chronic
Similar to humans and other animals,immunocom
tenal disease.
When renal disease does occur in older pets, it
 mediated immunity (i.e., T-cell immunity) is the most
directly affects nutrition and dietary management
because clinical kidney insufficiency is associated with
 Reduced T-cell responsiveness is implicated as having
weight loss, muscle wasting, altered plasma protein
a fole in numerous degenerative diseases such as osteo-
profles, decreased caloric and nutrient intake, intesti-
afthritis, cancer, and incfeased susceptibility to infection.
nal malabsorption, and reduced assimilation and use
Studies with dogs have also demonstrated age-related
of nuttients. The accumulation of the metabolic end
declines in mitogen stimulation, chemotaxis, and phago-
products of protein, of which urea is the most abun-
cytosis.36 Older dogs may have decreased white bloed
dant, may further contribute to the development of the
cell  and immature heutrophil counts and increased
clinical and physiological abnormalities of renal failure.
mature neutrophils and circulating levels of immuno-
Dietary modification can be instituted to minimize the
globulin G.38 Although only two breeds were compared,
accumulation of these end products in the bloodstream
there is evidence that the rate of decline in the immune
and to slow progression of disease, while still supplying
system may differ between breeds of dogs.39 Older cats
adlequate energy and protein to maintain weight and
may exhibit reduced mitogen response, and delayed type
minimize muscle wasting (see Section 5, pp. 417-425
for a complete discussion).
free radlical theory of aging predicts that the cumulative
effects of free radical reactions and their byproducts lead
t0 cellular damage and death, the potential exists to ame-
Changes in the Musculoskeletal
liorate age-related dysregulation of the immune system
System
through nutritional intervention (see pp. 270-271).
As discussed previously, aging is associated with a decline
in the percentage of lean body (muscle) mass. Bone
Changes in the Cardiovascular
mass also decreases slightly as animals age. Both the
 number and size of muscle cells decrease with age, and
System
the cortices of the long bones become thinner, dense,
Heart-related disease is a common cause of morbidity
and britle. The composition of the articular cartilage
in older pets and is estimated to occur in up to 30% of
matrix changes with age; specifically redluced number of
aged dogs.41 The incidence in cats is not known, but
chondrocytes leads to decreased production of glycos-
it is thought to occur less frequently.42 Cardliac output
aminoglycans, type 1 collagen, and chondroitin sulfate.
decreases by as much as 30% between midlife and old
Aging cartilage becomes less resilient and has limited
 age. Maximal heart rate and oxygen consumption dur-
ability to regenerate in response to intense activity of
ing exercise also decrease significantly. For example,
Geriatrics267
a study comparing cardiovascular responses during exer-
predisposing the pet to obesity. In other cases, intimi-
cise in young and old dlogs found that aging led to a
dation by the new pet may cause the older animal to
loss of cardiovascular reserve and adaptability, which
suddenly decrease food intake.
was presumed to contribute to cardiovascular disease in
One of the most noticeable changes in the behavior
some older dogs.43 In animals with adult onset heart dlis-
of geriatric pets is their fesistance to a change in daily
ease, fbrosis and myocardial necrosis eventually inter-
foutine. A move to a hew fesidence, the introduction of
fere with normal conduction pathways and result in
a hew pet, or a change in the owner's work schedule may
arrhythmias. Normal vascular changes of aging include
be met with depression, alterations in elimination pat-
hyaline thickening of the media of the blood vessels and
tetns, and/or changes in eating habits. It is important
increased deposition of calcium in the intima of the
- i ae s    q o
aorta and the media of the peripheral arteries.44 All of
posed to behavior problems when their environment is
these changes contribute to a progressive increase in the
altered.46 Introducing changes gradually and allowing
workload of the heart, which can eventually lead to the
the elderly pet sufficient time to adapt is often effective
development of congestive heart disease or heart failure.
in minimizing stress and preventing the occurrence of
behavioral problems.
Changes in cognitive function in older dogs and cats
Changes in the Special Senses
may occur due to age-related functional changes in the
Old age may result in a general decline in an animal's
central nervous system. Cognitive dysfunction syndrome
(CDS) refers to a collection of geriatric behavior changes
of vision, hearing, and taste. Nuclear sclerosis or cata-
that have no organic cause and which may include dis-
facts of the lens are frequently seen in older dogs and
 ofientation, anxiety, memory loss, and reduced ability
cats and can lead to partial or complete blindness. Hear-
to learn or react to environmental changes.&5 Behavior
ing impairment caused by cochlea degeneration is also
changes reported by owners of affected dogs and cats
common. Finally, a decrease in taste acuity may lead to
include decreased interaction with the owner or other
decreased interest in food, reduced intake, and weight
 pets, increase in irritability or aggression, loss of house
loss in some older pets.
or litter box training, disruption of normal sleep pat-
terns, and a drastic increase or decrease in activity
level.47 Although several categories of CDS in dogs
Changes in Behavior
and cats have been identifed, it is generally accepted
The most common behavioral problems that occur in
 that the underlying causes involve progressive changes
old dogs and cats ate secondary to degenerative disease
that are both neuropathological and neurochemical in
and other geriatric changes.45 Several of these behav-
hatufe. Neuropathclogical changes include heufonal
ioral changes may affect a pet's ability or desire to
loss, thickening of the meninges, and the formation of
obtain adequate nutrition. For example, pets suffering
 beta-amyloid deposits and plaques.48,49 Neurochemical
from the chronic pain of arthritis may become increas-
changes include alterations in neurotransmitter levels
ingly irritable and reluctant to engage in any type of
and receptors.50 Studies of these changes have found a
activity, including eating. On the other hand, the devel-
correlation between cognitive disorders in old animals
opment of diabetes mellitus in dogs may be accompa-
and the accumulation of oxidative damage to brain
nied by a ravenous appetite. Depression or pathological
-dassns Aenied aq on sieadde ureiq aul zs'is's
 mourning as a result of the loss of a beloved housemate
tible to the damaging effects of oxygen free ralicals
 of owner can result in severe anorexia in older pets. If
because of its high lipid content, high rate of oxidative
prolonged, this can lead to weight loss and increased
susceptibility to illness. Changes in the social struc-
 In response to this knowledge, nutritional interven-
ture of the family, usually because of the introduction
tions, most commonly the provision of vatious anti
 5 1 so   o 1 d 1 1
 oxidant nutrients, have been studied for their effcacy
change their eating patterns. In some instances, social
 in slowing progression or managing signs of CDS
facilitation may cause an abrupt increase in intake,
(see pp. 270-271).
268 Canine and Feline Nutrition
monitor the dietary intake and weight status of these
NUTRIENT CONSIDERATIONS
pets to ensure that their intake matches their energy
FOR OLDER PETS
needs as energy expenditure begins to decline. This is
most easily accomplished by selecting a pet food that is
When considering the nutrition and feeding practices
formulated to be less energy dense, while still providing
that can support healthy aging in dogs and cats, ben-
 optimal levels of essential nutrients for senior pets.
eficial interventions include those that provide optimal
levels of essential nutrients while helping to delay age-
related physiological changes and reduce accumulation
Most dogs and cats experience slight to moderate reduc-
of detrimental byproducts that contribute to cellular
senescence. Senior and geriatric dogs and cats have a
weight should be carefully monitored in oider pets to
need for the same nutrients that were required during
ensure adequate consurption ofcalories and nutrients
eatlier physiological states. However, the quantities of
while at the same time preventing the development of
'sueus Aeu iuiam Apoq jo jun iad panbai suannu
obesity Foods that are formulated for senior pets will
and the way in which nutrients are provided to the pet
be slightly lower in energy density while still providing
 may require modifcation. Such changes usually depend
optimal leveis of essential nutrients.
on changes in energy requirements and the presence of
degree of degenerative disease. Nutrients that may be of
specifc concern or of added beneft to senior dogs and
Protein and Amino Acids
cats afe discussed in the following sections.
The decrease in lean body mass that occurs with aging
results in a loss of the protein reserves that can normally
Energy
be used by the body during reactions to stress and ill-
Most senior pets experience a slight to moderate reduc-
 hess. Stress triggers nervous, metabolic, and hormonal
tion in daily energy needs. A controlled study of the
adaptations that allow an animal to adapt to changes in
energy needs in older dogs and cats found that as cats
the environment and aversive stimuli such as infectious
Aaissaiaid aiea ip suaanbai nau ase sop pue
 agents or injury. The mobilization of body protein is
declines.27 Dogs that were older than 8 years consumed
a characteristic physiological response to stress. Older
approximately 18% fewer calories than breed-matched
animals afe subject to a high incidence of disease and
dogs less than 6 years of age. While the effect in cats
physiological stress and are therefore especially vulner-
was less pronounced, a decline in energy requirements
able if their ability to react is compromised. It is impor-
with age was also seen. However, it is important to note
tant that geriatric pets be provided with high-quality
that the oldest group of cats (12 to 15 years) actually
protein at a level that is sufficient to supply the essential
consumed a greater quantity of food. It was theorized
amino acids needed for body maintenance needs and to
that this increase occurred to compensate for a slightly
minimize losses of lean body tissue.
reduced capacity to digest dietary fat and protein in the
Studies conducted with human subjects have shown
oldest group of cats.
that the efficiency of protein use is slightly lower in the
elderly than in young adults. The amount of available
depending on individual temperament, presence (
of
energy in the form of egg protein required for nitrogen
degenerative disease, ability to digest and assimilate
 balance was reported to be 4% in young men, but it
nutrients, and amount of daily exercise. Caloric intake
increased to 6% in elderly men.55 Similar results have
should be carefully monitored in older pets to ensure
been reported in dogs. An early study compared the
adlequate intake of calories and nutrients while at the
 protein requirements in young and old animals.56 The
same time preventing the development of obesity.
fatio of liver and muscle protein to deoxyribonucleic
Dogs and cats that are between 7 and 9 years of age afe
acid (DNA) was measured and used as an estimate of
beginning to age and are at the highest risk for cbesity.
body protein feserves. Protein:DNA ratios were maxi-
Therefore pet owners and veterinarians should carefully
mized when young adult dogs were fed a semipurified
Geriatrics 269
diet containing 12.4% protein. Old dogs, on the other
SS
6
-0id Apoq azjuxu oi uiaiid 'g 1 pannbai 'puy
ma:
4.6
tein reserves. This increased need did not appear to be
Apog
4.1
caused by reduced digestive capacity in the older dogs.
lean
A subsequent study compated the digestive capabilities
ou punoy pue ssop Pio-eaA-I on ssop Plo-leaA-ZI Jo
cent
1.4
0.9
1.2
difference in the ability of old dogs to digest protein
0.1
3
0
and other nutrients from four different diets when com-
Senior dogs
 Young adult dogs
 pared with young adlult dogs.57
A more recent study examined the effects of feed-
-0.3
ing graded levels of dietary protein to groups of young
-1.2
1.1
-2
-1.3
containing either 16%, 24%, or 32% cfude protein for
ent
a period of 8 weeks. At the end of the feeding period,
Per
whole body protein turnover and rates of protein syn-
-4.4
-4.9
thesis and degradation were measured using adminis-
-6
ttation of the tracer amino acid 15N-glycine.5′ Results
Senior dogs
Young adult dogs
showed a positive correlation between whole body pro-
16% CP (chicken)
tein turnover and dietary protein level in both young-
32% CP (chicken+ corn gluten meal)
adlult and geriatric Beagles. Regardless of age, the
32% CP (chicken)
rates of whole body protein synthesis and degradation
Figure 25-2  Change in lean body mass and body fat in
increased with increasing level of protein intake, while
 young-adult and senior Beagles fed different levels and sources
of protein. CP, Crude protein.
nitrogen balance did not change. Although the study
showed that young and elderly dogs do not appear to
(From Davenport G, Gasch 5, Hayek MG, and others: Effect of dietary protein
on body composition and metabolic responses of geriatric and young-adult
have a protein requirement that is higher than 16%
dogs,/ Vet lrnterm Med 15:305, 2001.)
to maintain nitrogen
balance,i
increased nitrogen
Aux through the body's metabolic pool that is associ-
increased rates of protein synthesis and lower fates of
ated with higher protein intake may be an important
protein degradation in the younger dogs. Increasing
source of dietary amino acids needed for tissue repair,
dietary protein did not signifcantly affect nitrogen
immune system support, and energy in older animals.
onu asuangu kiaanisod on puan pip inq asueig
This theory is supported by evidence from a study
 retention. Senior dogs of both breeds also showed a
that fed young-adult and senior dogs foods that con-
decrease in whole body protein degradation when con-
iys raa se paddns uaiid t in g1 paui
 suming the 30% protein diet. Breed differences were
or chicken plus corn gluten meal.6o After 7 weeks of
 observed, and these effects differed with age group.
feeding, the senior dogs that were fed the 32% protein
 Senior Fox Terriers showed a pronounced increase in
diet had increased percent lean body
body protein accretion in response to the higher pro-
tein diets, when compared with the 18% protein diet.
However, this change did not lead to an increase in lean
a change in lean body tissue in response to increasing
body
y mass. Conversely, both young and old Labrador
dietary protein.
 Retrievers and young Fox Terriers showed increased lean
Finally, there is some evidence of breed differences in
 body mass in response to increasing dietary protein.
the rate of whole-body protein turnover in senior dogs.
When all data atre considered, the minimum dietary
When young-adult and senior Labrador Retrievers and
protein fequirement of geriatric dogs is probably
Fox Terriers were fed diets containing 18%, 24%, of
between 16% and 24% when supplied as a high-quality
30% protein, the young dogs had higher net protein
 protein source. However, additional benefits such as
(nitrogen) accretion when compared with the older
a on papiaoid aq Aeu seu Apoq ueal jo oddns
 dogs, regarlless of breed.6l This dlifference was due to
dogs if they are fed a diet containing more than 24%
270 Canine and Feline Nutrition
protein. Providing higher protein may help to offset a
older pets aiso transiate into ar increased proportion of
loss of protein reserves and support an older animal's
protein caloriesin foodsformulated for seniors.Contrary
ability to respond to stress. In addition, the decreased
to α common nutritional myth, dietary protein neither
total energy needs of clder pets may result in the need to
causes nor contributes to chronic renal disease in older
slightly increase the proportion of protein calories in the
pets.Therefore protein in the diets of heaithy geriatric
diet. Premium and superpremium pet foods formulated
dogs and cats should never be restricted simpiy because
of oldage.
tein sources and therefore can provide an adequate level
and quality of protein to older animals. However, pet
food brands that contain minimal amounts of protein
from poor-quality sources may not be capable of pro-
Fat
viding adequate protein nutrition to senior pets. Simi-
It has been theorized that the increase in the percentage
larly, energy-dense foods with reduced levels of protein
of body fat that occurs with aging is partially a result
that are formulated for dogs and cats with existing kid-
aii oi aoq a jo Aui susun ue jo
ney failure do not supply appropriate levels of protein
lipids.2s Slightly decreasing the amount of fat in the
for healthy elderly dogs and cats.
diet may beneft geriatric dogs and cats, provided that
As discussed previously, decreased fehal function-
the fat that remains in the diet is both highly digestible
ing is a normal occurrence with aging in humans, rats,
and rich in essential fatty acids (EFAs). A decrease in the
and to some degree, dogs and cats. As a direct result of
 proportion of calories contributed by fat also decreases
this knowledge, and because of a series of studies con-
the diet's energy density. This is an advantage for older
ducted on rats, some investigators once recommended
 pets that have reduced energy needs.
that all elderly pets receive moderately reduced protein
The type of fat that is included in foods for senior
 pets is also important. There is evidence suggesting that
sion of kidney dysfunction.62 However, it is essential
aging is associated with a gradual decline in the ability
that healthy, geriatric dogs and cats receive adequate
t0 desaturate EFAs.63,64 This change appears to be due
amounts of high-quality protein to minimize losses of
to decreased activity of desaturase enzymes, most spe-
body protein reserves, satisfy maintenance protein needs,
cifically delta-6-desaturase.6S Studies of old and young
and support the ability to respond to stress. Although
 Beagles and Labrador Retrievers showed significant age-
a reduction in protein intake affects the expression of
related differences in serum levels of arachidonic and
clinical signs of chronic renal failure once a certain level
eicosapentaenoic acid.66 The data from this preliminary
of dysfunction has occurred, there is no evidence to sup-
 study indicated that there also may be breed-specifc,
port a systematically reduced protein level in the diets
 age-related differences in the ability to elongate omega-3
of healthy older pets. It is recommended that the pro-
and omega-6 fatty acids
tein in the diet of geriatric dogs and cats should not be
restricted simply because of old age. Rather, elderly pets
should receive foods containing optimal levels of high-
Antioxidant Nutrients
quality protein. If chronic renal disease is diagnosed,
IMMUNOCOMPETENCE
The free radical hy-
moderate protein restriction and other dietary modifica-
pothesis of aging proposes that the accumulation of
tions afe implemented as feeded in fesponse to an indi-
feactive oxygen byproducts over time leads to oxidlative
vidual pet's clinical signs (see Section 5, pp. 417-425).
stress and damage to cells and tissues. The cells of the
immune system are particularly vulnerable to oxida-
tive stress because they contain high concentrations of
Older pets have slightly higher protein requirements than
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and because some
the maintenance needs of young aduit animats. This is
of the immune system's mechanisms of action directly
necessary to prevent or minimize age-associated fosses
involve exposure to highly oxidizing environments.
in the body's protein reserves and to support the ability
Therefore, nutrient interventions to slow some of the
to respond to stress. The decreased daily energy needs of
physiological signs of aging and to support a healthy
Geriatrics271
immune system have focused on antioxidant nutrients.
been demonstrated in other species.70,71 Further research
Supplementation with vitamin E and the cafotenoids,
is needed to explore the potential efficacy of other anti-
beta-cafotene and lutein, have been shown to maintain
oxidant nutrients in supporting immunocompetence in
 of even improve age-associated declines in immune
older dogs and cats.
function in several species, including dogs and cats.
A study examined the effects of beta-catotene
COGNITIVE DYSFUNCTION SYNDROME
supplementation on immune cell population and
Providing dietary antioxidants also has demonstrated
immune response in young and old Fox Terriers and
efficacy in the tfeatment and management of signs of
Labrador Retrievers.67 The results corroborated other
 CDS in dogs and cats. In general, combinations of several
work showing that both T-cell and B-cell populations
antioxidant and mitochondrial cofactors (L-carnitine
in older dogs were reduced when compated with the
 and dl-alpha-lipoic acid) have been studied (rather than
 populations of these cells in young adult dogs. Supple-
inclusion of one of two individual nutrients).72 (Note:
mentation with a moderate level (20 milligrams [mg]/
 Supplements for cats must exclude dl-alpha-lipoic acid
kilogram [kg]) of beta-carotene increased CD4+ T cells
as it is toxic to cats.) Recently, preliminary studies have
in the older dogs to levels not different from those of
been condlucted to examine the neuroprotective effects
the young adults and increased in vitro T-cell response
of supplementation with the phospholipid phospha-
to concanavalin A (Con A). However, this effect was
tidylserine in older dogs.73 Collctively, studies of the
not seen when a high level of beta-carotene was fed
effects of antioxidant and mitochondrial cofactor sup-
(40 mg/kg). Older dogs supplemented with beta-
plementation on cognitive dysfunction in dogs and cats
 u a r ons on Pn ose a
suggest that this type of nutritional intervention may
B-cell populations, but this trend was not statistically
provide moderate beneft to some animals.74.76 Spe-
significant. There is also evidence that combined sup-
cific improvements that have been reported in labora-
plementation with antioxidant nutrients and mito-
tory studies of dogs receiving the supplement include
chondrial cofactors (vitamin E, vitamin C, L-carnitine,
reduced number of errors when performing object of
dll-alpha-lipoic acid, and various sources of carotenoids)
landmark discrimination tasks, or other tests of learn-
plus environmental enrichment (exercise and training/
 ing and cognitive function.77,78 Interestingly, one study
learning opportunities) significantly enhanced some
reported that although a combination of antioxidants
measures of immunocompetence in older dogs.68 While
were fed to aging Beagles, measured improvements in
a modest effect was observed for supplementation and
environmental entichment individually in this study,
blood concentrations of vitamin E.79 Clinical trials with
the combination of these two factors was more effec-
older dogs living in homes have feported significant
tive than either factor alone. However, the inclusion of
reductions in disorientation, improved social interac-
multiple nutrients and several forms of environmental
tion, and fewer house-soiling incidlents in response to
enrichment precluded conclusions regarding the eff-
supplementation.80,81 However, because no studies have
cacy of particular nutrients or enrichment types.
examined the benefits of supplementation with a single
The effect of supplemental vitamin E on immune
nutrient, conclusions cannot currently be made regard
function in older cats has also been studied. Young-
 ing the respective infuence of any particular nutrient or
alult and senior cats were fed either a control diet
even class of nutrient.
containing 60 international units (IU) vitamin E pet
kg or supplemented diets containing either 250 IU/kg
or 500 IU/kg. Similar to the response of the dog to
FEEDING MANAGEMENT
beta-cafotene, supplementation with moderate, but not
AND CARE OF OLDER PETS
high, levels of vitamin E resulted in improved T- and
 B-cell proliferation responses in old cats. Although the
Major objectives of the feeding and care of geriatric dogs
mechanisms underlying this phenomenon are not com-
and cats should be to maintain health and optimal body
pletely understood, the differing effects of moderate vs.
weight, slow or prevent the development of chronic ill-
high levels of vitamin E on immune function has also
ness, and minimize or improve clinical signs of diseases
272 Canine and Feline Nutrition
that may already be present. Routine care for geriatric
nutrition for senior pets are suitable. Lower-quality pet
 pets should involve adherence to a consistent daily rou-
foods are not generally recommended for elderly pets
tine, regular attention to normal health care procedures,
because some of these products provide poorly available
and periodic veterinary examinations to assess for the
nutrients.
presence or progression of chronic disease. Stressful situ-
Proper care of the teeth and gums is important for
ations and abrupt changes in daily routines should be
geriatric pets. If an owner is unable or unwilling
to
avoided. If a drastic change must be made in an older
fegularly examine and brush a pet's teeth, yeafly den-
pet's routine, attempts should be made to minimize
tal prophylaxis by a veterinarian is necessafy to decrease
stfess and accomplish the change in a gradual manner.
buildup of dental calculus and the development of peri-
Optimal body weight can be maintained and obesity
odontal disease. Dental problems can lead to decreased
prevented through the judicious contrel of caloric intake
food intake, anorexia, and systemic disease if not treated
and adherence to a regular exercise schedule. Although
 promptly in older animals (see Chapter 34, pp. 437-441
some adult dogs and cats are able to maintain normal
for a complete discussion)
body weights when fed free-choice, this may no longer
Regular and sustained periods of physical activity
be possible as the pet ages. Decreasing energy needs may
help to maintain muscle tone, enhance circulation,
lead to obesity in some older pets if a free-choice regi-
improve gastrointestinal function, and prevent excess
men is continued. It is recommended that senior and
weight gain. The level and intensity of exercise should
geriatric dogs and cats be fed at least two to three simall
be adjusted to an individual pet's physical and medi-
meals per day, rather than one large meal. Feeding sev-
cal condition. Many dogs, if healthy and maintained
eral small meals per day promotes improved nutrient use
in good condition, can enjoy walking, funning, and
and may decrease feelings of hunger between meals. The
playing active games with their owners well into old
timing and size of meals should also be strictly regulated.
age. Almost all older dogs beneft from and enjoy two
A regular schedule minimizes gastrointestinal stress and
15- to 30-minute walks per day. Although most cats
supports normal nutrient digestion and use. Fresh watet
 do not readily accept walking on a lead, playing games
should be available at all times to older dogs and cats.
with older cats can be an acceptable form of exercise
Geriatric cats and some older dogs may become very
(Box 25-3).
particular about their eating habits. The pet's willing
 nhess to eat new foods may decrease. It may be necessary
for owners to provide an especially strong-smelling of
highly palatable food to their older cat. Other dogs and
BOX 25-3 PRACTICAL FEEDING TIPS:
ELDERLY COMPANION ANIMALS
cats may accept only one particular brand or favor of
food. If possible, pet owners should accommodate these
 Provide regular health checkups at least two times per
needs, provided that the preferred food can provide
year.
adequate nutrition to the pet.
 Avoid sudden changes in daily routine, environment,
Ifa chronic disease state that requires specific nutrient
 or diet.
alterations is present (e.g., diabetes, renal disease, ostec-
arthritis, congestive heart failure), the pet should be fed
Feed a diet that contains high-quality protein and is
a diet that is appropriate for the management of the dis-
specifically formulated for geriatric pets.
ofder (see Section 5 for complete discussions). Healthy
 Use portion-controlled feeding to prevent conditions of
older pets can be fed a diet that contains high-quality
either obesity or weight loss; feed to maintain ideal body
Aenb-uaiy jo siaaal yoy on aneiaou siuaaisu
weight.
protein, and moderately reduced amounts of fat. Other
Provide a moderate level of regular exercise and regular
nutrients that may be beneficial include increased levels
opportunities for play and enjoya ble interactions.
of antioxidant nutrients, and the inclusion of mitochon-
Maintain proper care of teeth and gums.
drial cofactors such as L-carnitine and dl-alpha-lipoic
aeuew ol laip anadeayl e apiaoid essasau uaun
acid. Premium and superpremium commercial pet
or treat disease
foods that contain high-quality ingredients and targeted
Geriatrics273
References
sourcebook, Schaumburg, lll, 2002, AVMA, pp 6-23
2. Goldston RT, Notesworthy GD, Wilard MD, and others: Establishing a geriatrics management program, St Louis, 1996, Ralston Purina.
3. Waters DJ: Aging well how the science of aging informs the practice of wellness. In Iroc NAVC, 2008, pp 4-7.
4. Sharma R: Theories of aging. In Timiras PS, editor: Physiological basis of aging and geriatrics, Boca Raton, Fla, 1994, CRC Press, pp 37-46.
5. Harman D: Aging, a theory based on free radical and radiation chemistry, J Gerontof 11:298-300, 1956.
6. Beckman KB, Ames BN: The free radical theory of aging matures, Physiof Rev 78:547-581, 1998
7. Williams G: Pleiotropy, natural selection, and the evolution of senescence, Evohution 11:398-411, 1957.
 8. Kirkwood TB: The disposable soma theory of aging. In Harrison DE, editor: Genetic effects on aging, vol 2, Caldwell, NJ, 1990,
Telford Press, pp 9-19.
9. Brace Jl: Theories of aging, Vet Chin North Am Small Anim Pract 11:811-814, 1981.
10. Deeb BJ, Wolf NS: Studying longevity and morbidity in large and small breeds of dogs, Vet Med 89:702-713, 1994.
11. Patronek CJ, Waters Dj, Clickman LT: Comparative longevity of pet dogs and humans: implications for gerontology research,
J Gerontol Biol Sci Med Sci 52:171-178, 1997.
12. Galis F, van der SluijsI, van Dooren TJM, and others: Do large dogs die young? J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evof 308:119-126, 2007.
13. Greer KA, Canterberry SC, Murphy KE: Statistical analysis regarding the effects of height and weight on life span of the domestic
dog, Res Vet Sci 82:208-214, 2007.
14. Arman K: A new direction for kennel club regulations and breed standards, Can Vet J 48:47-58, 2007.
15. Ackerman L: Tbe genetic connection: α guide to heatth probtems in purebred dogs, Boulder, Colo, 1999, AAHA Press, pp 1-28.
16. Coldston RT: Introduction and overview of geriatrics. In Goldston RT, editor: Geriatric and gerontology ofthe dog and cat,
Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders, pp 1-9.
17. Fortney WD: Clinical perspectives and issues related to senior companion animals. In Iroc WSAVA, 2001, pp 48-52.
18. Strasser A, Niedmuller H, Hofecker G, and others: The effect of aging on laboratory values in the dog, J Vet Med 40:720-730, 1993.
19. Hayek MG: Age-related changes in physiological function in the dog and cat: nutritional implications. In Reinhart GA, Carey DP, editors
 20. Meyer H, Stadfeld C: Investigation on the body and organ structures of dogs. In Anderson RS, editor: Nutritior ofthe dog and cat,
Oxford, England, 1980, Pergamon Press.
 21. Munday HS, Earle KE, Anderson P: Changes in body composition of the domestic shorthaired cat during growth and development,
J Nutr 124:2622S, 1994.
 22. Hayek MC, Davenport GM: Nutrition and aging in companion animals, J Anti Aging Med 1:117-123, 1998.
23. Mosier JE: Effect of aging on body systems of the dog, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 19:1-13, 1989.
24. MacDonald J: Neoplastic diseases of the integument, Iroc Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17-20, 1987.
25. Sheffy BE, Williams AJ, Zimmer JF, and others: Nutrition and metabolism of the geriatric dog, Cornell Vet 75:324-347, 1985.
26. Buffngton CA, Branham JE, Dunn CC: Lack of effect of age on digestibility of protein, fat and dry matter in Beagle dogs. In Burger
1H, Rivers JPW, editors: Nutrition of the dog and cat, Wattham symposium #7, Cambridge, Mass, 1989, Cambridge University Press.
27. Taylor EJ, Adams C, Neville R: Some nutritional aspects of ageing in dogs and cats, Proc Nutr Soc 54:645-656, 1995.
 28. Anantharaman-Barr HC, Gicquello P, Rabot R: The effect of age on the digestibility of macronutrients and energy in cats. In Ioc
Brit Small Anim Vet Asoc Cong, Birmmingham, England, 1991, p 164.
29. Taylor EJ, Adams C, Coe S, and others: The effects of aging on the digestion of the cat. In Proc First Cong Europ CNVSPA-FECAVA,
1995, pp 309-310.
274Canine and Feline Nutrition
30. DiBartola SP, Rutgers HC, Zack PM, Tarr MJ: Clinicopathologic findings associated with chronic renal disease in cats: 74 cases
(1973-1984), / Am Vet Med Asoc 190:1 196-1202, 1987.
31. Cowgill LD, Spangler WL: Renal insufciency in geriatric dogs, Vet Clin North A Small Axim Pract 11:727-749, 1981.
32. Kaufman GM: Renal function in the geriatric dog, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 6:1 08-109, 1984.
33. Finco DR, Brown S, Crowell W, and others: Effects of aging and dietary protein intake on uninephrectomized geriatric dogs, Am J
Vet Res 55:1282-1290, 1994.
34. Egenvall A, Bonnett BN, Olson PB Hedhammer G: Gender, age and breed pattern of diagnoses for veterinary care in insured dogs in
Sweden during 1996, Vet Rec 146:551-557, 2000.
35. Meydani SM, Hayek MG: Vitamin E and aging immune response, Clix Geriatr Med 11:567-576, 1995
36. HogenEsch H, Thompson S, Dunham A, and others: Effect of age on immune parameters and the immune response of dogs to
vaccines: a cross-sectional study, Vet Immunol Immunopathol 97:77-85, 2004.
37. Strasser A, Teltscher A, May B, and others: Age-associated changes in the immune system of German Shepherd dogs, J Vet Med Asoc
47:181-192, 2000.
38. Strasser A, Niedermuller A], Zimmer JF, Ruan GD: The effect of aging on laboratory values in dogs, / Vet Med 40:720-730, 1993.
39. Kearns R], Hayek MG, Turek Jl, and others: Effect of age, breed and dietary omega-6 (n-6):omega 3 (n-3) fatty acid ratio on immune
function, eicosanoid production, and lipid peroxidation in young and aged dogs, Vet fmmunot fmmunopathot 69:165-183, 1999.
40. Hayek MG, Massimino SP, Burr JR, Kearns RJ: Dietary vitamin E improves immune function in cats In Reinhart GA, Carey DP,
Frazer Press, pp 555-563.
41. Hamlin RL: Managing cardiologic disorders in geriatric dogs. In Proc Geriatr Med Symp, 1987, pp 14 18.
42. Markham RW, Hodgkins EM: Geriatric nutrition, Vet Chin North Am Small Anim Pract 19:165-185, 1989.
43. Strasser A, Simunek M, Seiser M, and others: Age-dependent changes in cardiovascular and metabolic responses to exercise in
Beagle dogs, Zentralbt Veterinarmed A 44:449-460, 1997.
44. Bright JM, Mears E: Chronic heart disease and its management, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27:1305-1329, 1997.
45. Landsberg G, Araugo JA: Behavior problems in geriatric pets, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 35:675-698, 2005.
46. American Association of Feline Practitioners (AAFP): Panel report on feline senior care, 2005, AAFP/AFM, pp 15-17.
47. Neilson JC, Hart BL, Clif KD: Prevalence of behavioral changes associated with age-related cognitive mpairment in dogs, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 218:1787-1791, 2001.
48. Dimakopoulos AC, Mayer RJ: Aspects of neurodegeneration in the canine brain, J Nutr 132:1579S-1582S, 2002.
49. Head E, Moffat K, Das P, and others: Beta-amyloid deposition and tau phosphorylation in clinically characterized aged cats
Neurobiol Aging 26:749-763, 2005.
50. Araujo JA, Studzinski CM, Milgram NW: Further evidence for the cholinergic hypothesis of aging and dementia from the canine
model of aging, Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biot Psychiatry 29:411-422, 2005.
51. Skoumalova A, Rofna J, Schwippelova Z, and others: The role of free radicals in canine counterpart of senile dementia of the
Alzheimer type, Exp Gerontol 38:711-719, 2003.
52. Head E, Liu J, Hagen TM: Oxidative damage increases with age in a canine model of human brain aging, / Neurochem 82:375-381, 2002.
53. Rofina JE, Singh K, Skoumalova-Vesela A, and others: Histochemical accumulation of oxidative damage productsis associated with
Alzheimer-like pathology in the canine, Ayloid 11:90-100, 2004.
55. Zanni E, Calloway DH, Zezulka AY: Protein requirements of elderly men, / Nutr 109:513-524, 1979.
56. Wannemacher RW, McCoy JR: Determination of optimal dietary protein requirements of young and old dogs, / Nutr 88:66-74, 1966.
57. Sheffy BE, William AJ: Nutrition and the aging animal, Vet Clin North Am Small Arim Pract 11:669-675, 1981.
Geriatrics275
58. Williams CC, Cummins KA, Hayek MG, Davenport GM: Effects of dietary protein on whole-body protein turnover and endocrine
function in young-adult and aging dogs, J Anim Sei 79:3128-3136, 2001.
nutrition and metabolism, San Diego, 1992, Academic Press.
60. Davenport C, Gasch S, Hayek MC, Cummins KA:Efect of dietary protein on body composition and metabolic responses of
geriatric and young-adult dogs, / Vet Intern Med 15:306, 2001
61. Davenport GM, Hayek MG, Flakoll PJ, Firkins JL: Protein and the aging animal. In Iroc WSAVA, 2001, p 39-44.
62. Branam JE: Dietary managemment of geriatric dogs and cats, Vet Tech 8:501-503, 1987.
63. Bolton-Smith C, Tavendale R, Woodward M: Evidence for age-related differences in the fatty acid composition of human adipose
tissue, independent of diet, Eur J Clin Nutr 51:619-624, 1997.
64. Lornzini A, Hrela ,Biai PL, and others: Age-related changes in ential faty acidmeabolism inlured rat heart myy,
Prostagiandins Leukot Esent Fatty Acids 57:143-147, 1997.
65. Biagi PL, Bordoni A, Hrelia S, and others: Gamma-linolenic acid dietary supplementation can reverse the aging infuence on rat
liver microsome delta-6-desaturase activity, Biochem Biophys Acta 1083:1 87, 1991.
66. Reinhart GA, Vaughn DM, Hayek MG, and others: Effect of age on canine hepatic delta-6 and delta-5 desaturase activity (abstract),
J Anim Sci 75(Suppl):227, 1997)
 'shop ur saigeiea jesroounuut uo suaores-ag Aieaip pute aat go saha israypo pue 'y soot fy suieay 's ouruisse '/9
Intern Med 17:835-842, 2003.
68. Hall JA, Picton RA, Finneran PS, and others: Dietary antioxidants and behavioral enrichment enhance neutrophil phagocytosis in
geriatric Beagles, Vet Immunol Immunopathol 113:224233, 2006.
69. Hayek MC, Massimino ST, Ceddia MA: Interaction of nutrition and the aging immune system of the dog and cat. In Proc WSAVA,
2001, pp 22-28.
 70. Leshchinsky TV, Klasing KC: Relationship between the level of dietary vitamin E and the irmmune response of broiler chickens,
Poultry Sci 80:1590-1599, 2001.
71. Friedman A, Bartovl, Sklan D: Huoral immune response mpairment following exces vitamin  nutrition in the chick and
turkey, Poultry Sci 77:956-962, 1998.
72. Landsberg G: Therapeutic agents for the treatment of cognitive dysfunction syndrome in senior dogs, Prog Newropychopharmaco!
Biot Psychiatry 29:471-479, 2005.
 73. Osella MC, Re C, Odore R, and others: Phosphatidylserine (PS) as a potential nutraceutical for canine brain aging: a review, J Vet
Behav 3:41-51, 2008.
74. Landsberg G: Therapeutic options for cognitive decline in senior pets, J Am Anim Hosp Asoc 42:407-413, 2006.
75. Head E, Zicker SC: Nutraceuticals, aging and cognitive dysfunction, Vet Clixn North Am Small Anim Pract 34:217-228, 2004.
76. Roudebush I Zicker SC, Cotman CW, and others: Nutritional managerment ofbran aging in dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc 227:722-728, 2005.
77. Milgram NW, Head E, Zicker SC: Landmark discrimination learning in the dog: effects of age, an antioxidant fortified food and
cognitive strategy, Neurosci Biobehav Rev 26:679-695, 2002.
79. IkedaDouglas CJ, Zicker SC, EstradaJ,andothers: Prior experience, antioxidants and mitochondrial co-factors improve cognitive
dysfunction in aged Beagles, Vet 7her 5:5-16, 2004
80. Dodd CE, Zicker SC, Jewell DE, and others: Can a fortifed food affect the behavioral manifestations of age-related cognitive
decline in dogs? Vet Med 98:396-408, 2003.
81. Heath SE, Barabas S, Craze PG: Nutritional supplementation in cases of canine cognitive dysfunction—a clinical trial, App! Anim
Behav Sei 105:284-296, 2007.
26
Common Nutrition Myths and Feeding Practices
Like any science, nutrition has a number of myths and
pue) Aisei AiaA aq Aeu [moq siad au ul dn pua jeu
folklore about the feeding of dogs and cats. Some of
much appreciated), they usually do not provide bal-
these myths and feeding practices have their origins
anced nutrition for a dog or cat. If table scraps are fed
in scientifc fact, but the facts have been exaggerated,
to pets, the amount should be carefully monitored.
obscured, or misapplied. Others are feeding practices
A good rule of thumb is that table scraps should never
that owners enjoy for emotional reasons but which
make up more than 5% to 10% of a pet's total daily
have potential health risks for their pets. Some of these
caloric intake.
beliefs have arisen from nutritional misinformation per-
petuated by a lack of scientifc proof or disproof and
by the pervasive desire to find easy solutions to medical
lftable scraps arefed to dogs orcats,the amount should
or behavioral problems through diet. Although some of
be carefully monitored, and the total amount should
these practices and beliefs cause no harm to pets, others
never make up more than 5% to 10% of a pet's total
have the potential to adlversely affect health or contrib-
daily caloric intake.
ute to a dietary imbalance. A number of common feed-
ing practices and nutritional myths are discussed in this
chapter, as is the scientific research that addresses these
Meat and Poultry
beliefs.
 Some owners believe that because cats and dogs are caf-
nivorous in nature, they should be able to survive on
FEEDING"HUMAN FOODS"
an all-meat diet. However, the muscle tissue of meat
TO DOGS AND CATS
and poultry alone cannot supply complete nutrition to
companion animals. Although meat and poultry pro-
adoad, sies pue shop ian supaay Aofua siaumo auos
vide high-quality protein, as a single food source they
foods" for the same reasons that they feed treats and
are deficient in calcium, phosphorus, sodium, iron,
snacks. Providing a special treat is a way of show-
copper, iodine, and several essential vitamins. It is true
ing affection and love, and adding table scraps and
that, in the wild, the ancestors of dogs and cats survived
other choice food items to a pet's food allows owners
on freshly killed meat. However, the fact that they con-
to express their affction for their pet and to feel that
sumed their entire prey, including bones, organs, and
they are enhancing their pet's enjoyment of the meal.
intestinal contents, is often overlooked. Just as with
Although most of these foods become harmful only if
table scraps, the addition of meat and poultry to the
they make up a high proportion of the pet's diet, some
diet should be strictly limited because of their potential
human foods are unsuitable for companion animals and
to imbalance a pet's diet (Table 26-1).
should not be fed at all (Box 26-1).
Fish
Table Scraps
Most cats and some dogs love the taste of fish. Interest-
The table scraps that most owners select to feed to their
ingly, the cat foed advertising campaigns used by some
dogs (and less frequently to cats) are the uneaten por-
pet food companies have convinced people that cats
tions of meals that are highly palatable to dogs, such as
 prefer the taste of fish over many other food items. In
fat trimmings and leftover meat. Vegetables and grains
reality, cats enjoy fish to about the same degree that they
are less frequently fed. Therefore, while the leftovers
 enjoy many other animal-source proteins. Although fish
277
278Canine and Feline Nutrition
The addition of extra foods should be limited to no more than 5% to 10% of the pet's daily caloric requirement.
Any meat, fish, or poultry that is fed should be well cooked, and all bones should be removed
 The use of milk and cheese should be strictly monitored. Some adult dogs and cats are lactose intolerant and cannot
 efficienty digest dairy products.
The exclusive use of any single food item should be avoided, even when adding it to the pet's diet in small amounts.
Correction of the nutrient im balances of a poor diet by adding table scra ps should not be attem pted.
Vitamin and/or mineral su pplements are unnecessary for healthy pets when a complete and balanced pet food is fed,
and they can be detrimental to health.
 Pet owners should be aware of the development of undesirable behaviors, such as begging during mealtimes and
 stealing food
 The addition of all extra foods should be discontinued if weight gain, gastrointestinal tract upset, or signs of nutrient
im balance are seen.
TABLE 26-1 NUTRIENT COMPOSITION OF A PERFORMANCE DRY DOG FOOD WITH ADDED
PROPORTIONS OF BEEF (DRY-MATTER BASIS)
75% D0G
50% D0G
25% D0G
NUTRIENT
DRYDOGFOOD
FOOD/25%BEEF
FOOD/50% BEEF
FOOD/75%BEEF
Protein
34%
%6E
46%
55%
Fat
23%
24%
25%
26%
Car bohydrate
%5E
%0E
23%
14%
Crude fiber
1.9%
1.6%
1.3%
0.75%
Calcium
1.3%
1.1%
%180
0.53%
 Phosphorus
1.0%
%68'0
0.73%
%85'0
Calcium:phosphorus
1.3:1
1.2:1
1.2:1
1:1
ratio
Potassium
0.87%
0.89%
0.92%
%96'0
Sodium
0.60%
0.53%
0.44%
0.31%
Magnesium
0.11%
%60'0
0.08%
0.06%
Iron
215mg/kg
183 mg/kg
142 mg/kg
85mg/kg
Vitamin A
21,700 IU/kg
18,500 IU/kg
14,400 IU/kg
8600 IU/kg
Vitamin D
1950 IU/kg
1670 IU/kg
1290 IU/kg
770IU/kg
Vitamin E
153 IU/kg
130 IU/kg
100 IU/kg
60 IU/kg
Thiamin
19.5 mg/kg
16.7 mg/kg
13 mg/kg
7.7 mg/kg
Riboflavin
25 mg/kg
21 mg/kg
16.5 mg/kg
10 mg/kg
Niacin
64 mg/kg
55 mg/kg
42 mg/kg
25mg/kg
Meta bolizable energy
4700 kcal/kg
4800 kcal/kg
5000kcal/kg
5200kcal/kg
Caloric distribution
Protein
27%
31%
35%
41 %
45%
45%
47%
48%
Car bohydrate
28%
24%
18%
10%
*Imbalanced nucriens are expressd in bold print. Nurrient levels were compared to che Associatrion of American Feed Control Oficials Nucrient Profles and
correced for differences in energy densiy.
+Beef - fresh ground round.
Common Nutrition Myths and Feeding Practices 279
is a good source of protein for dogs and cats, similar to
meat and poultry, it does not supply complete nutri-
BOX 26-2 SIGNS OF PANSTEATITIS IN CATS
tion. In general, most types of deboned fish are deficient
Depression and anorexia
in calcium, sodium, iron, copper, and several vitamins.
 Some types of fish also contain small bones that are dif-
Hyperesthesia (sensitivity to touch) of the chest and
abdomen
ficult to femove before cooking. Care should be taken
if feeding fish because these bones may lodge in a pet's
Reluctance to move and decreased agility
 throat or gastrointestinal ract and cause perforation of
Presence of abnormal fat deposits under the skin and
obstruction.
in the abdomen
Dietary history that includes items that are high in
FISH (TUNA) AND PANSTEATITIS
Tuna is
unsaturated fats and low in vitamin E
commonly fed to cats because it is readily available
and inexpensive, and because most cats love the taste.
Although less available than tuna packed in water,
an intermediate polymerization product of unsaturated
fatty acids that have undergone peroxidation as a result of
because of the enhanced favor and texture provided by
insufficient intracellular vitamin E (Box 26-2).
the cil. However, tuna (and several other types of fish,
Some of the earliest published cases of pansteatitis
such as sardines) that is packed in cil also contains high
occurred in cats that were fed canned, fish-based com-
levels of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). If tuna is
mercial cat foods comprised wholly or predominantly
fed regularly, the excessive intake of PUFAs can result
 of red tuna and that were defcient in vitamin E.46
in a vitamin E deficiency. This risk occurs because an
Pansteatitis has also been described in cats that were fed
animal's vitamin E requirement is directly affected by
unconventional or homemadle diets consisting largely of
the level of unsaturated fatty acids present in the diet.
tuna, sardines, or other oily fsh.79 Although reported
As the level of PUFAs increases, an animal's vitamin
infrequently, there is evidence that cats fed all-meat diets
E requirement also increases. When cats are fed high
 may be at increased risk of developing pansteatitis.9
amounts of PUFAs with no concomitant increase in
 Treatment of pansteatitis involves changing the
vitamin E, their body fat is not sufficiently protected
cat's diet from one that is comprised primarily of fish
from oxidative degradation, resulting in oxidative stress
and replacing it with a well-balanced cat food. Dietary
and the formation of peroxides and hydroperoxides.
changes may be difficult in cats that have become accus-
Over time, the accumulation of reactive peroxides in
tomed to eating only a single food item. This problem
alipose tissue leads to a pathological condition called
has been most commonly reported in cats receiving
pansteatitis, which is characterized by chronic infam-
 only red tuna as the principal component of their diet
mation and yellow-brown discoloration of body fat.
for an extended period of time. Along with correction
Clinical signs of pansteatitis in cats include anorexia,
of the diet, vitamin E (alpha-tocopherol) should be
administered orally at a dose of 10 to 25 international
abdomen. The cat may demonstrate changes in behavior
units (IU) twice daily for several weeks, until all clinical
and agility and develop a poor or roughened hair coat.23
 signs have resolved and the cat is reliably consuming a
Owners typically report that their cat has become intoler-
 balanced food.? Corticosteroid therapy may be used in
soaueinsqns o uonedied piay ro dn payid suiag go iue
sevefe cases to decfease inflammation and feduce pain.
and intraabdominal fat deposits is painful to the cat and
Prognosis for recovery from pansteatitis is usually very
reveals the presence of granular or nodular fat deposits.
good, but may take several months in advanced cases.
Information concerning the cat's dietary history is needed
for diagnosis, and confrmation is provided by histologi-
RAW FISH AND THIAMINASE Certain types
cal examination of a fat biopsy sample. The fat of cats
of fish, such as carp and herring, contain a compound
with pansteatitis is very frm and deep yellow to orange,
that destroys thiamin and may cause a thiamin def-
with a diffuse infammatory response.34 The orange pig-
ciency.l0,ll Consumption of these types of fish has
ment (commonly referred to as ceroid) is believed to be
been shown to cause thiamin defciency in a variety
280 Canine and Feline Nutrition
of species. For example, experimental studies with
supplementation should also be administered for several
cats have produced signs of thiamin deficiency within
 months following the initial clinical episode.14 In most
23 to 40 days of consuming diets composed solely of
affected pets, these clinical signs will decrease within
raw carp or raw salt-water herring.10 The subcutane-
 several days. However, if severe neurological damage has
ous administration of thiamin resulted in recovery in
occurred, the pet may never make a full recovery. A per-
all cases. Although both carp and herring can cause
manent intolerance of physical exercise and some degree
thiamin deficiency, perch, catfish, and butterfish do not
of persistent ataxia occasionally occurs in animals that
 have recovered from thiamin deficiency.
that contain thiaminase include whitefish, pike, cod,
goldfish, mullet, shark, and founder. However, it is not
known whether the thiaminase levels present in these
Because of the risk of inducing thiamin defciency, raw
fish are suffcient to produce defciency in animals.1l
fsh shouid never be fed to dogs and cats. There is aiso
Thiaminase is a heat-labile enzyme and is denatured by
the potential for parasite trarsmission when raw fsh is
normal cooking temperatures. As a result, the potential
fed. Therefore, jfany type offsh is added to a pet's diet,
for thiamin deficiency exists only when uncooked fish
it should always be well cooked, and onty very small
is fed to pets.
amounts shouid be fed.
Although naturally occurring thiamin deficiency is
uncommon in dogs and cats, clinical cases have been
Jo asnesaq aqndaosns anou aq oi readde sie 'paiiodai
Liver
their high dietary requirement for thiamin and because
of the tendency of owners to feed cats diets containing
Liver is an excellent source of iron, protein, coppef,
fish products.12 Most clinical cases have involved cats fed
vitamin D, and several B vitamins. However, like other
diets that contained a large proportion of raw fish.10,13
single food items, it is not a nutritionally complete
Similarly, a group of sled dogs that was fed a diet con-
food. Liver is severely defcient in calcium and exces-
sisting of frozen, uncooked carp developed clinical signs
sively high in vitamin A (see below). Both of these
of thiamin defciency during a 6-month period.14 The
nutritional imbalances can cause bone disorders. Vita-
adldition of oatmeal, a dry dog food, and 100 milligrams
min A toxicosis has been shown to develop slowly over a
(mg) of thiamin per day to the diets of the affected dogs
period of years in cats that were regularly fed fresh liver
resulted in complete recovery within 2 months.
 as their primary dietary protein source (see below).16,17
Because thiamin is essential for hormal carbohy-
 Although small amounts of liver adlded to a cat's diet are
drate metabolism, the central nervous system is severely
 not harmful, liver as a primary component of the diet
affected by a deficiency of this vitamin. Initial clinical
should be avoided
signs of defciency include anorexia, weight loss, and
depression.13,15 As the deficiency progresses, neurologi-
VITAMIN A TOXICOSIS IN CATS: DEFORM-
cal signs of ataxia, paresis, and, eventually, convulsive
ING CERVICAL SPONDYLOSIS Cats that are
seizufes develop. The terminal stage is characterized by
fed diets composed exclusively of liver or other organ
sevefe weakness and prostfation and eventually leads to
meats are at risk of developing vitamin A toxicosis. This
death. A diagnosis of thiamin deficiency in dogs and
 practice is usually the result of well-meaning but poorly
cats is made based on clinical signs and the dietary his-
informed owners whe believe that cats, being carnivores,
tory of the animal. Elevated plasma pyruvate and lactate
will thrive on an all-meat or all-liver diet. The bone
concentrations are also useful in confrming a diagnosis.
 deformities of vitamin A toxicity develop very gradually
Treatment includes dietary correction that includes
and may go undetected for several years. However, over
elimination of raw fish from the diet and its replace-
time severe and irreversible crippling occurs, and diag-
ment with a well-balanced pet food and thiamin ther-
nosis is often too late to be ofany help.18,19
apy. Thiamin should be administered intravenously
The pathological result of vitamin A excess in cats
of subcutaneously at a dose of 75 to 100 mg twice
is the development of a syndrome called deforming
daily until neurological signs subside.12 Oral thiamin
cervical spondylosis. The effects of excess vitamin A on
Common Nutrition Myths and Feeding Practices 281
bone growth and remodeling lead to the development
of bony exostoses (outgrowths) along the muscular
BOX26-3
SIGNS OFDEFORMING CERVICAL
SPONDYLOSIS IN CATS
insertions of cervical vertebrae and the long bones of
the forelimbs. Over time, these bony processes cause
Anorexia and weight loss
pain and impaired mobility.20 Vitamin A-induced skel-
etal disease is not a practical problem in dogs, but it has
Increased lethargy and reluctance to move
been produced experimentally. Although uncommon in
 Persistent lameness in one or both front legs
dogs, studies have shown that extremely high intakes
Decreased ability to self-groom
of vitamin A during growth will result in decreased
length and thickness of long bones, premature closure
Decreased ventriflexion of the head
of epiphyseal growth plates, and the development of
 Posture changes by adopting a marsupial-like sitting
osteophytes.2l However, dogs appear to be relatively
position
tesistant to vitamin A toxicosis because subsequent
Dietary history that includes items that contain a high
 studies found that feeding up to 400,000 IU/kilogram
concentration of vitamin A
(kg) of dry matter (DM) to puppies or 787,000 IU/kg
of DM to adult dogs for periods of 6 months or 1 year
Council's (NRC's) current Nutrient Requirements, a
caused no signs of toxicity and did not adlversely affect
 1-kg kitten requires approximately 50 μg of vitamin A
bone density measurements.22,23
per day (1000 μg/kg of dry diet).26 The safe upper limit
Initial clinical signs of deforming cervical spondylo-
for a kitten of this size is approximately 4000 μg per day.
sis in cats include anorexia, weight loss, lethargy and an
Using the previous study's data, the dose of vitamin A
increasing reluctance to move. Cats become unkempt in
necessaty to produce acute toxicity is therefore more
appearance, presumably because of an inability to self-
than 300 times the recommended allowance. An adult
groom. As the disease progresses, a very characteristic
cat weighing 5 kg (11 lb) would have to consume at
postural change is observed; cats adlopt a marsupial-like
least 85,000 μg of vitamin A daily to teach this toxic
sitting position, holding the front legs elevated off the
level. The daily vitamin A requirement for an active
ground. They also often walk with their hind limbs
 5-kg adlult cat is approximately 80 μg/day. Therefore an
fexed, and ventrifexion of the head is decreased or alto-
adult cat would have to consume 1000 times its daily
 gether absent. A fixed-stare expression is often observed,
fequirement of vitamin A to achieve toxic levels. It is
probably as a result of reduced ability to move the neck
indisputable that a cat will never consume this level
and turn the head. Lameness in one or both of the
when being fed a nutritionally balanced pet food.
front limbs is seen in the later stages.24 Development of
However, it would also be dlifficult for a cat to con-
exostoses occurs primarily in the frst three joints of the
 sume this high a level of vitamin A while being fed an
cervical vertebrae and joints of the forelegs. It has been
theorized that the nofmal movements involved in a cat's
(530 IU)/g.27 An adult cat consuming 6 ounces (oz) of
regular licking and grooming practices result in these 
liver per day would be ingesting only 27,200 μg of vita-
 predilection sites. It appears that chronic intoxication 
 min A per day, quite a bit less than the levels described
with vitamin A increases the sensitivity of the perios-
previously needed to create acute toxicity. However,
teum to the effects of low levels of trauma and repetitive
all of the case studies reported in the literature found
movements that would nofmally be insufficient to cause
that deforming cervical spondylosis developed in cats
an infammatory response (Box 26-3).25
that were fed liver diets. There are two possible expla-
Experimental studies show that the level of vitamin
nations for this discrepancy. First, it is known that the
A required to produce skeletal lesions within only a few
livers of production animals vary greatly in vitamin A
months' time in growing kittens is between 17 and 35
 content.27 The level of 160 μg of vitamin A per gram of
micrograms (μg)/gram (g) of body weight.25 A 1-kg
beef liver is an average, not an absolute value. Second,
(2.2-pound [lb]) kitten would have to consume a mini-
 and more importantly, all of the reported case studies
mum of 17,000 μg (-56,000 IU) of vitamin A per day
 occurred in aclult cats that had been fed liver dliets for
to attain this level. According to the National Research
 a very long time.28,29 The experimental work that has
282 Canine and Feline Nutrition
been conducted involved much higher levels of vitamin
Intestinal lactase activity declines as puppies and kittens
A and produced signs of toxicity in very short periods of
teach adulthood. As a result, many adult cats and dogs
time (i.e., months, rather than years). At lower doses of
do not produce sufficient amounts of lactase to handle
 vitamin A, cervical spondylosis appears to develop slowly
the large quantity of lactose present in milk. Lack of suf-
over the lifetime of the cat, and clinical signs of the dis-
fcient lactase results in an inability to completely digest
ease do not become evident until much later in adult life.
 milk and subsequently causes digestive upsets and diar-
This conclusion is supported by the fact that the average
rhea. Dairy products such as cheese, buttermilk, and
yogurt contain slightly lower levels of lactose. Even
4.25 years.20 Therefore the reported level of vitamin A
though these products may be better tolerated by some
required to produce toxicity in the cat (17 to 35 μg/g of
 dogs and cats, they still have the potential for causing
body weight) may refect the experimental production of
are sannuenb siel jt saoue equ Aieiaip pue eauinei
acute toxicity, but the level that can produce deforming
fed. Most pets can tolerate and enjoy an occasional bowl
cervical spondylosis, if excess vitamin A is consumed by
of milk, but like all supplementation, the practice of
pet cats for a long time, is probably significantly lower.
feeding milk should be carefully limited.
Regular supplementation of a cat's diet with livef,
 Dairy products should not be used as a supplemen-
even if added to a balanced diet, has the potential to
tal source of calcium or protein. Excess dietary calcium
cause skeletal problems if the practice is continued for
can contribute to the development of skeletal dlisorders in
several years. When liver is fed exclusively, vitamin A
 growing dogs and is not helpful in preventing eclampsia in
toxicosis may occur concurrently with nutritional
lactating females (see Section 4, pp. 205-206 and Section
5, pp. 497-500). Although dairy products supply high-
calcium, high-phosphorus content of organ meats.28
quality protein, they contain deficiencies and excesses of
Cod liver cil fed as a supplement also has the poten-
 other nutrients and may contribute to a dietary imbalance
tial to induce vitamin A toxicity. Adding 1 tablespoon
if large amounts are added to an otherwise adlequate diet.
(tbsp) of cod liver oil to a cat's food twice daily will
result in an intake of approximately 10,000 μg of addi-
Oils and Fats
tional vitamin A per day. Fish liver oils afe also exces-
sively high in vitamin D, and excessive supplementation
Cod liver oil, vegetable oils, and animal fats are occa-
may result in the combined effects of vitamin A and
01 10 ase1 aaoidul 01 pooy siad e 0n Pappe Aeuois
vitamin D toxicosis.
supply fat and additional vitamins. It is true that fish
The tfeatment of vitamin A toxicosis in cats includes
oils afe excellent soufces of vitamin A, vitamin D, and
removing the source of excessive vitamin A from the
the omega-3 (n-3) fatty acids. However, both of these
diet, replacing the source with a complete and balanced
vitamins afe toxic when consumed in excess. Because
pet food, and providing supportive therapy. The prog
vitamins A and D are stored in the liver, the effects of
nosis is guarded because resolution of skeletal lesions
 excess intake are cumulative and develop over long peri-
may never be complete. In addition, if the cat has been
ods. The daily addition of 1 or 2 tbsp of cod liver oil
fed a liver diet for a long time, the change to a balanced
(or another vitamin A supplement) to a small pet's diet
pet food may be dlifficult, if the cat has developed a fixed
has the potential of eventually developing into a toxic-
food preference.
ity problem. In addition, oversupplementation with fat 
may result in either obesity of an eventual decrease in
the quantity of food that is consumed. Food intake may
Milk and Dairy Products
decrease because energy needs will be met with a lower
Almost all cats and dogs love the taste of milk. Although
quantity of food. Defciencies of other nutrients may
milk and dairy products are excellent sources of cal-
then develop. Excessive intake of dietary fat may also
cium, protein, phosphorus, and several vitamins, exces-
cause digestive problems in some pets.
sive intake may cause diarfhea in young and adult pets.
Some owhers add fat to their pets' diets with the
Milk contains the simple sugar lactose. Lactose requires
intention of improving coat quality. Dogs have a
breakdown in the intestinal tract by the enzyme lactase.
requirement for the essential fatty acid linoleic acid and
Common Nutrition Myths and Feeding Practices 283
possibly for alpha-linolenic acid, and cats require these
developed a scaly skin rash, elevated blood cholesterol
fatty acids plus dietary arachidonic acid (see Section 2,
levels, and defects in nerve transmission. Eventually, the
pp. 81-86). Animals that are deficient in essential fatty
underlying cause was identified as a deficiency of bio-
acids will develop poor coat quality and skin problems.
 tin, brought about by an inhibitory substance in egg
Poor quality or improperly stored pet foods may con-
white that decreased availability of biotin. This factor
tain inadequate levels of these fatty acids. However, if a
was named “avid-albumin" or avidin. Avidin is a protein
high-quality food is being fed, adlding fat or oil should
that is a secretory product of the hen's oviduct and is
not be hecessaty. In most cases, 
diet is not the prin-
subsequently deposited in the albuminous portion of
cipal cause of skin problems or poor coat quality in
 the egg. When consumed, avidin combines with dietary
companion animals. More probable causes of skin dis-
biotin in the intestine and prevents its absorption. The
orders include internal and external parasitic infections,
avidin in egg white is so effective in this capacity that
allergies, and various hormonal imbalances. If a coat of
faw egg white has been used to experimentally induce
skin problem persists in a dog or cat, even when a high-
biotin defciency in laboratory animals. Regardless, the
quality food is fed, a veterinarian should be consulted.
danger of a pet owner inducing a biotin deficiency in a
dog or cat by feeding supplemental eggs is slight because
 the yolk of the egg contains large quantities of biotin.
Eggs
In addition, cooking eggs denatures avidin and destroys
Many dog owners are in the habit of regularly supple-
its biotin binding ability. Practically speaking, potential
 menting their dog's diet with eggs. The reasons for this
risk for biotin defciency will only occur if an owner
practice are varied. Some owners believe that feeding
 supplements the pet's food with only the white of the
eggs improves hair quality and adds luster and shine to
faw egg. As in other species, signs of biotin deficiency in
their dogs coat. Others wish to increase or improve the
dogs and cats include dermatitis, loss of hair and poor
 protein in their dog's diet by adding egg protein. Eggs
growth rate.
can also increase a food's palatability and acceptability
fort some dlogs and cats.
EGG WHITE TRYPSIN INHIBITOR The white
of the egg also contains another potentially damaging
logical values of common protein sources. Cooked egg
inhibitory substance. This substance is actually a group
protein is highly digestible and provides all of the neces-
 of proteins that have antitryptic activity. The antitryptic
sary essential amino acids required by dogs for adequate
tion than avidin, yet its capacity for causing nutritional
iron, vitamin A, vitamin D, and several B vitamins. Eggs
problems in pets is potentially much greater. Early stud-
are also a soufce of essential fatty acids; approximately
ies reported that dogs fed as litle as two raw egg whites
4% of the fat in egg yolk is in the form of linoleic acid.
per day in their food exhibited loose stools, and when
Although egg is a high-quality food ingredient, the
the amount was incfeased further, chronic diarrhea and
white of the egg (albumen) contains several inhibitory
weight loss developed.30 Dried (uncooked) egg white
substances that alter the metabolism of specific nutri-
was found to be just as active in causing diarfhea and
ents. The two most important afe avidin, an inhibitor of
weight loss as was fresh, raw egg white. The utilization
biotin absorption, and a compound that interferes with
the action of the pancreatic protease, trypsin (trypsin
digestibility) was reported to be only 58.6%. Subsequent
inhibitor). The antitryptic activity of egg white is a char-
 feeding studies and in vitro tests of protein digestibility
acteristic that is much less well documented in current
 confrmed that the factor responsible for these effects
literature than avidin, yet one that has the potential for
was a group of trypsin inhibitor proteins found in the
causing severe nutritional imbalances.
white of the egg.31 Egg white trypsin inhibitor reduced
a food’s protein digestibility when included at just
AVIDIN AND BIOTIN A syndrome termed “egg
7% of the diet, and a linear relationship was reported
white injury" was frst described in the 1920s. Animals
between the amount of egg white trypsin inhibitor and
fed raw egg whites as a component of their food
loss of protein digestibility.32
284 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Similar to avidin, heat treatment denatures the tryp-
thecbromine. Caffeine is most abundant in coffee, tea,
sin inhibitor of egg white and allows utilization of the
 and cola beverages, and theophylline is found primarily
 protein in the eg white and of other protein sources
in tea. Theobromine is the most abundant methylxan-
in the food. For example, the most recent study with
thine that is contained in the cacao bean, which is the
dogs confirmed that the inclusion of raw (dried) egg in
source of cocoa and chocolate products. The main sites
the diets of growing puppies impaired diet digestibility
of action of xanthine compounds in the body are the
and caused chronic diarrhea and weight loss in all of
central nervous system, cardiovascular system, kidneys,
the puppies during a 14-day feeding period.33 However,
smooth muscle, and skeletal musculature. Theobromine
when the same amount of heat-treated dried egg white
 in paticular acts as a smooth muscle relaxant, coronary
was included in the food, stools were normal, the pup-
aftery dilatator, diuretic, and cardiac stimulant.
pies showed healthy growth rates, and diet digestibil-
Although it is not a common clinical pro blem, theo-
ity coefficients were improved. Laboratory analysis of
bromine toxicity in dogs can be life-threatening when
-sis sem Ainse ionqu uisdan ieu pamous a yea
it occurs. The dog is unusually sensitive to the physi-
nifcantly reduced in the heat-treated egg white, when
ological effects of theobromine, when compared with
compared with raw egg white.
 other species. This sensitivity appears to be the result of
Again, the practical relevance of this knowledge to
 a lower rate of theobromine metabolism, resulting in a
the feeding of companion animals is that if an owner
longer half-life in the bloodstream and tissues. After a
insists on adding egg products to a pet's food, the eggs
single dose, the half-life of theobromine in the plasma
should always be cooked thoroughly before feeding.
of adult dogs is approximately 17.5 hours.35 In com-
This is necessary to denature both avidin and the trypsin 
parison, theobromines half-life in human subjects is 6
inhibitors present in the egg white. In addition, feeding
-oau uaaq sey aI zeg'sinoy e Auo s a! siei u isinoy
faw eggs is not recommended due to the risk of bacte-
rized that the extended half-life in dogs may potentiate
rial contamination. A general guideline is to limit eggs
acute toxicity reactions to theobromine after the con-
unipau e 1oy yaam 1ad sasa payoos omi 1o auo isnf on
 sumption of foods containing chocolate.35
or large dog. This level should not result in a dietary
Dogs having thecbromine toxicity experience vomit-
imbalance and will not affect energy consumption to
ing, diarrhea, panting, restlessness, increased urination
 the degree of causing weight problems.
of urinary incontinence, and muscle tremors. These
signs usually occur about 4 to 5 hours after the dog has
consumed the food containing chocolate. The onset of
fowners wish to add an occasional egg to their pet's
 generalized motor seizures signifies a poor prognosis in
food, eggs shouid always be cooked thoroughly to dena-
ture avidin and the trypsin inhibitors present in the egg
-sod se uoos se lunoa sunpu Aq pnean si Aixo
white. Feeding raw eggs is also not advisable because of
sible. An activated charcoal “shake” given by gastric
the risk of bacterial contamination.A general guideline
lavage may aid in decreasing the quantity of the drug
is to limit eggs to just one or two cooked eggs per week
that is absorbed into the bloodstream. Unfortunately,
for a medium orlarge dog
there is no specific systemic antidote for theobromine
poisoning
Although few controlled studies on the level of theo-
bromine that constitutes a toxic dose have been con-
Chocolate
ducted in dogs, data frem long-term studies and case
Most dogs enjoy sweet favors, including the taste of
feports indicate that toxicity can occur when a dog
chocolate. Cats, on the other hand, are much less likely
consumes a dose of 90 to 100 mg/kg of body weight
to find sweet foods palatable (see Section 1, pp.46-48).34
Chocolate contains a methylxanthine called theobro
bromine, mode of theobromine administration, pres-
mine, which is toxic to dogs when consumed in large
ence of other foods in the gastrointestinal tract at the
quantities.  Three methylxanthine compounds 
afe
time of ingestion, and variations in theobromine con-
commonly found in foods: caffeine, theophylline, and
tent between chocolate products cause wide vafiations
Common Nutrition Myths and Feeding Practices 285
in the susceptibility of individual dogs to chocolate
limited to occasional small treats,there is nodanger
poisoning. Chocolate products differ significantly in
of theobromine toxicity. However because many dogs
theobromine content and, therefore, in their ability to
will overconsume sweet foods if given the opportunity,
produce theobromine poisoning.
all chocolate products should be stored in areas inac-
Chocolate liquor, commonly called baking or cook
cessible to pets,and large amounts of chocolate should
ing chocolate, is the base substance from which all other
never be fed to dogs.
chocolate products are produced. The average theobro-
mine content of baking chocolate is about 1.22%.41
A 1-oz square contains approximately 346 mg of theo-
bromine. Therefore, ifa medium-sized dog weighing 25 1b
FEEDING BREWER'S YEAST
(11 kg) consumed 3 oz of baking chocolate, a poten-
OR THIAMIN REPELS FLEAS
tially fatal dose of 94 mg of theobromine/kg would be
ingested. Commercial
1 cocoa powder
(unsweetened)
The use of either brewer's yeast or the B-vitamin thiamin
has an average thecbromine content of 1.89%, which
(one of the yeast's components) as a repellent for exter-
is the highest theobromine content of all commonly
nal parasites has a long history as a nutritional myth.
consurmed chocolate products. However, dogs are less
This practice can be traced back to several studies with
likely to consume baking chocolate or cocoa powder
human subjects that were conducted during the 1940s
than other sweeter chocolate products. The adldition of
In one study, when subjects were given oral doses of
sugar, cocoa butter, and milk solidls to baking chocolate,
100 to 200 mg of thiamin per day, it was reported that
to produce sweet chocolates, results in a signifcant dilu-
they
 experienced lower numbers of mosquito bites
tion of theobromine content. For example, the level of
and decreased severity of dermatological reactions.42
thecbromine in semisweet chocolate pieces is 0.463%.
Another early study reported that benefits were observed
A 25-lb dog would have to consume approximately % Ib
when infants and children with severe fea infestations
of semisweet chocolate to reach a potentially toxic level
were treated with 10 mg of thiamin per day.43 Howevef,
of 95 mg/kg. Similarly, milk chocolate contains 0.153%
 theobromine. The ingestion of approximately 1% lb of
milk chocolate would result in a potentially lethal dose
significant effect of thiamin supplementation on insect
for a 25-1b dog.
infestations.44
 Dogs generally love the taste of chocolate, and own-
Companion animal owners and professionals, anx-
ers occasionally give chocolate candy or foods contain-
ious to fnd safe and convenient means for control-
ing chocolate to their dogs as a special treat. If a dog's
ling fea and mite infestations, quickly adopted this
intake of chocolate is strictly limited to occasional
practice for use in dogs and cats. Howevef, there is no
small treats, there is no danger of theobromine toxic-
evidence to indicate that feeding thiamin or brewer's
ity. All of the published case studies of theobromine
yeast has a repellent effect on feas or mites in these
toxicity in dogs have been the result of a pet acciden-
species. Two controlled studies have reported that
tally ingesting a large amount of chocolate.38-40 Still,
heither brewer's yeast nor thiamin repelled feas or
-o Ai so A do an  j
mosquitoes in dogs. In the frst study, dogs that were
sume chocolate-containing foods. Therefore all choco-
sa simaq aau 1o aa jo Aep 1d s 1 P
late products should be stored in areas inaccessible to
had the same weekly Hea counts as did a group of dogs
 pets and large amounts of chocolate should never be
that were not supplemented.44 In the second study,
sop on pay
neither fea counts nor the number of fea bites on
of thiamin per day.45 Although supplementing pet's
Most dogs enjoy sweet favors, including the taste
diets with brewer's yeast is probably not harmful,
of chocoiate. However chocoiate contains theobro-
it is not effective in either fepelling of controlling fea
mine, which is toxic to dogs when consured in large
populations in homes or on the skin of companion
quantities.jf a dogsintake of chocolate is strictly
animals.
286 Canine and Feline Nutrition
skin disorder is most commonly seen in breeds of dogs
FEEDING GARLIC OR ONIONS
that have very dense, heavy coats, and it may be related
REPELS FLEAS
to poor ventilation of the skin or inadequate grooming
to remove matted hair and debris. Hot-spot lesions can
Feeding either of these two food items will certainly
develop within just a few hours. The lesions are usu-
make a pet's breath smell, but it will not have any effect
ally frst noticed as a patch of missing hair. A round,
on Heas. Moreover, feeding large amounts of onion of
red, moist area that is painful to touch rapidlly develops.
garlic to dogs of cats can be toxic. Excess consumption
The area often has a yellowish center surrounded by a
of onions fesults in the formation of Heinz bodies on
reddened ring of infammation. Self-trauma occurs in
circulating red blood cells, which ultimately fesults in
the form of biting and scratching at the affected area
the development of hemolytic anemia. In severe cases,
because the lesions are usually intensely pruritic. If not
this anemia can be fatal.46-48 The toxic compound in
treated, the spots may spread to other areas of the body.
onions that is responsible for this effect is N-propyl
Any factor that causes irritation, pruritus, of self-
disulfde. Signs of hemolytic anemia produced by onion
trauma can lead to acute moist dermatitis. Allergic reac-
toxicity include diarrhea, vomiting, depression, fever,
tions, external parasites, skin infections, an unhealed
and dark-colored urine. Although
1 vomiting and diar
injury of
 improper grooming
g can all initiate self-
rhea may be immediate, the remaining signs 
usually
trauma and the development of a hot spot. It is believed
001 1o u, oon si neun iap e ieqn siaumo iad sos Aq
garlic
high in protein is the cause of hot spots. However, there
(Allium sativum) can cause oxidative damage to fed
ishoeviden
e that a relationship exists between acute
blood cells, leading to both Heinz body formation and
moist dermatitis and protein levels in the diet. Diet may
a condition called eccentrocytosis.49,50
 play a role if the pet has an adverse reaction to food of
red blood cells that contain abnormal hemoglobin and
an essential fatty acid deficiency. Adverse feactions to
have been cbserved in cases of garlic and onion toxicity
in dogs. When severe, eccentrocytosis can result in ane-
 cause intense pruritus, which in turn
mia. If onion or garlic toxicity is suspected, veterinary
care should be sought immediately. Many dogs love the
Fatty acid defciencies can occur when improperly for-
taste of onions and gatlic and may overconsume if given
 mulated or improperly stored pet foods are fed and are
 the opportunity. Therefore onion- and gatlic-containing
characterized by a number of dermatological signs (see
foods should be fed only in small amounts to dogs and
Section 2, pp. 85-86). However, both of these condi-
cats, and they certainly should not be expected to have
tions occur infrequently and afe not a primary underly.
an effect on fea infestations.
ing cause of hot spots.
THE OCCURRENCE OF "RED
Contrary to popuiar belief there is no evidence that feed-
ing dogs and cats brewer's yeast, garlic, or onions effec-
COAT" IN DOGS
tively repeis feas or mites
The term “red coat” refers to a perceived change in coat
color from almost any normal base color to a red or
reddish brown. This change has been most frequently
DIET CAUSES ACUTE MOIST
'ssop paiq io/pue niq!yxa oum sienpiaipul Aq paodai
DERMATITIS ("HOT SPOTS")
Among other factors, diet has been identifed as a
potential underlying cause of “red coat." The pet foed
Acute moist dermatitis is a condition that is commonly
ingredient beet pulp has been identified specifically, pre-
referred to as “hot spots" because it frequently occurs
sumably because of the perception that this ingredient is
during warm months of the year and because the lesions
fed. However, the beet pulp that is included in pet foods
that develop are infamed and feel hot to the touch. This
is derived from sugar beets (not red beets) and is actually
Common Nutrition Myths and Feeding Practices 287
light brown. Moreover, there is no evidlence suggesting a
because hair growth occurs randomly throughout the
connection between the consumption of beet pulp and
coat, it would be expected that any change in color
a change in coat color in dogs. Conversely, in adldition
would not be uniform, but would occur in only the
to a number of environmental causes, there ate several
hairs that were growing at the time that the infuencing
nutritional deficiencies that can affect coat texture and
factor was present. Resting hairs would not be affected
color in dogs and cats.
by any factor that affected a change in coat color in the
An understanding of normal coat color develop-
growing hairs.
ment is necessary to completely understand the poten-
The second way that a change in coat color can occuf
tial causes of a change in coat color. In dogs and cats, an
is through the deposition of a substance on the outside
individual hair takes between 6 and 8 weeks to grow;
of the hair shaft. This change could involve substances
this phase is calledl the anagen phase of hair growth.
that are applied by the dog's owner, secreted by the dog's
skin, or licked onto the hair by the dog. Environmen-
tal infuences of this type include changes caused by
before being shed to make room for a new hair. The
sunlight exposure (ultraviolet [UV] irradliation), or by
color of a hair is determined by the type and amount
ambient temperature and humidity. This type of coat
of pigment that is deposited during the anagen phase
color change involves most or all of the hair shaft, and
while the hair is still in the hair follicle. Melanocytes,
 all of the hairs within a region of the body are typically
specialized  pigment-producing cells
within the f
fol-
affected. Therefore the :
licle, secrete either yellow-red pheomelanin or black-
brown eumelanin that is then deposited within the
 ance of a coat color change that is seen when a systemic
hair. Genetic factors affect the amount of each type of
factor is the underlying cause.
pigment that is produced, the distribution of pigment
There are several known factors that can affect hair
within the hair shaft, dilution or masking of color,
coat color in dogs and that could be responsible for
and distribution of color in different areas of the body.
imbuing a red hue to the coat. Aging of hair naturally
These factors result in the wide variety of hair colors
causes a change in color. As a hair approaches the end
and coat patterns that are seen in different breeds of
 of its resting period and is ready to be shed, black hairs
dogs. In addition to genetics, other factors that may
typically turn reddish to reddish brown. This change
affect the color of the hair during its growth or resting
occurs primarily near the tip of the hair, with the base of
cycle include medications, topical substances, aging.
the hair remaining black. However, in some cases, espe-
envifonment, and diet.
cially when hairs are retained for a long period without
A change in the color of a hair may be produced in
 shedding, the entire hair may turn red. When the dog
one of two possible ways. A systemic factor can cause a
sheds his or her coat, these hairs afe femoved, and a
change in the color of hairs as they develop in the hair
return to normal color is seen. In adadition to the age
follicle (e.g., a change in the pigment-producing cells).
of the hair, exposure to sunlight can also cause black
Because it occurs during pigment deposition, this type
hairs to turn red. When this occurs, the change in color
of color change extends from the skin surface outward
usually affects variable portions of the ends of the hairs.
si ne ney a jo uonod au pue 'dn iey au pemon
The color of the hair at the base (near the dog's skin)
affected depends on the length of time that the infu-
remains black. Topically applied dips or shampoos that
encing factor was in effect. For example, if the change
contain insecticides can also turn hair a fed hue. This
was only in effect for 2 weeks, the color change will
effect can be seen with any natural coat color, but it
appear as a horizontal band of color on the length of
will be most noticeable in white or light-colored dogs.
individual hair shafts. Because individual hairs within
When an applied agent is the cause, the change in color
the entire coat are at different stages of development,
is uniform throughout the hair shaft. Similarly, frequent
the color change in the hair coat would be dispersed
shampooing, use of certain types of rinses, and blow
throughout the coat at different levels on each hair
drying can all alter hair coat color.
shaft. By definition, this type of change in coat color
A commonly observed cause of regional coat-color
takes weeks to months to appear or disappear. Also,
change in dogs is porphyrin staining. Porphyrin is
288 Canine and Feline Nutrition
a substance found in the tears and saliva of dogs that
hairs. Because the essential amino acid phenylalanine is
turns red upon exposure to sunlight. Porphyrin is a
the precursor for tyrosine, available tyrosine is expressed
normal end product of hemoglobin metabolism and is
as the sum of these two amino acids. The authors of
the substance responsible for the reddish staining that
these studies concluded that a total aro matic amino acid
is seen around the eyes of some breeds of dogs. Dogs
content of 18 g/kg diet or more is needed by cats to
that self-groom or lick excessively will also dleposit por-
prevent discoloration of black coats to reddish brown
phyrins on their coat, causing these areas to stain red.
and possibly to prevent the development of deficiency-
Therefore licking that is associated with allergic reac-
related neurological signs.
tions or other dermatological problems may cause red-
Because most of the red-coat problem claims had
dening of the coat. In these cases, the entire length of
come from dog owners as opposed to cat owhers, a
the hair in certain regions of the body will be affected
pilot study with 12 black dogs (6 Labrador Retrievers
(see p. 287). However, there are no health risks associ-
and 6 Newfoundlands) was conducted to examine the
ated with this phenomenon and it does not indicate a
 potential role of tyrosine in the “redl-coat" problem.56
dietary deficiency or imbalance.
Adult dogs were fed a commercial large-breed dog food
The frank deficiency of certain essential nutrients
with cf without supplemental phenylalanine and tyfo-
can adversely affect coat quality and color. A lack of
sine included at -2.0 and -2.5 times the Association of
Ametican Feed Control Officials' (AAFCO's) minimum
ciency can lead to hypopigmentation of the coat that
requirement. After 5 months of feeding, the coats of
dogs fed supplemental phenylalanine and tyrosine were
However, other clinical signs accompany copper defi-
reported to be blacker than the coats of the nonsupple-
ciency, including anemia, skin lesions, and impaired
mented dogs. The nonsupplemented dogs had a red hue
growth in young animals. The anemia of copper def-
in their coats, suggesting that modestly reduced tyrosine
ciency eventually causes clinical illness in affected dogs,
levels in a food could explain the “fed-coat" syndrome
and in addition to color changes, the dog's coat will
also become fough and coarse. Similarly, zinc def-
because only three dogs were fed each diet in this study
ciency causes changes to hair texture and color.51 Dogs
and only a single base dog food was fed, adlditional stud-
fed zinc-deficient foods develop a dry, harsh hair coat
ies with dogs are needed to fully examine this relation-
that fades in color. When a diet containing adequate
ship. Regardless, many pet food manufacturers have
zinc is provided, these clinical signs resolve. Although
subsequently increased the levels of phenylalanine and
not common, naturally occurring zinc defciency has
tyrosine in their foods to ensure that adequate tyro-
been reported in dogs fed poorly formulated, inexpen-
sine is available for optimal hair pigmentation in dark-
sive, dry dog foods.52 However, attention by reputable
colored breeds.
manufacturers to both the concentration and the bio-
availability of these minerals in pet foods minimizes the
risk of deficiencies of copper or zinc as causes of coat
ETHOXYQUIN CAUSESHEALTH
color change in dogs.
PROBLEMS IN DOGS AND CATS
Recent studies with
1  growing kittens have shown
that insuficient dietary levels of the aromatic amino
Ethoxyquin is a synthetic antioxidant that is included in
acids phenylalanine and tyrosine cause a feduction in
some animal and human foods as a preservative to protect
the total amount of melanin pigments deposited
in
fats and fat-soluble vitamins from oxicdative dlegradlation
hair; this manifests as black hairs changing to reddish-
(see Section 3, pp. 155-158 for a complete discussion
brown.53,54 When kittens were fed foods containing less
of antioxidant preservatives). Without the inclusion of
than 16 g total aromatic amino acids per kg of diet, they
antioxidants in pet foods, oxidative processes lead to
also developed several sensory neurological abnormali-
rancidity of the food. Rancid fat is offensive in odor
ties.5S Tyrosine is the precursor for both eumelanin and
and favof and includes compounds that ate toxic when
pheolmelanin, and plasma levels of tyrosine are posi-
consumed. The inclusion of antioxidants in commercial
tively correlated with the amount of pigment found in
pet foods ensures the food’'s safety, nutritional integrity,
Common Nutrition Myths and Feeding Practices 289
and favor. Starting in the late 1980s ethoxyquin was
identifed by dog breeders and owners as a potentially
HIGH-FAT PET FOODS CAUSE
dangerous synthetic preservative. Depending on the
HYPERLIPIDEMIA
source of the information, ethoxyquin was believed to
be responsible for reproductive problems, autoimmune
Today, most people are aware of the relationship of
disorders, behavior problems, and vatious types of can-
dietary fat and cholesterol to the development of ath-
cers in dogs and cats.
efosclerosis and coronary artery disease in humans, and
-suupy Snuq pue poog aqi Aq [eaoidde on 1od
of the importance of limiting these nutrients in their
tration (FDA), ethoxyquin's safety in foods was studied
 diet. In recent years, this knowledge has led some pet
in a vafiety of species, including rabbits, rfats, poultry,
 owners to apply these same nutritional principles to the
and dogs. The original studies on which the FDA based
diet of their companion animals. However, there exist
approval for the inclusion of ethoxyquin in animal feeds
 some very basic differences between these species in the
included a 1-year chronic toxicity study in dogs. Data
ways in which dietary fat is assimilated and metabolized.
from this and other studies were used when ethoxyquin
Unlike humans, dogs and cats are capable of consum-
was first marketed to determine a “safe tolerance level"
ing a wide range of dietary fat while still maintaining
of 150 parts per million (150 mg/kg) of food.57 Subse-
quent studies failed to show any adverse health or repro-
dogs and cats frst evolved as carnivorous predators
ductive effects of ethoxyquin when it was fed to several
with a diet that normally contained a high proportion
Jo Sy/sur oge on dn jo siaal ne pue sop jo suoneiausa
of animal fat. The capability to consume, digest, and
the diet (the highest concentration that was tested).58
assimilate a high-fat diet has remainedl with these spe-
However, data from another study showed that feeding
cies throughout the domestication process.
high levels of ethoxyquin may result in pigment accu-
 Both hyperlipidemia and atherosclerosis are rare
mulation in the liver and an increase in serum levels
conditions in dogs and cats. When cases of these con-
of certain liver enzymes.59 A series of in vitro studies
ditions do occur, they are either of genetic origin of
also reported that ethoxyquin had both cytotoxic and
develop secondary to other disease states. For example,
genotoxic effects upon cultured human
1lymphocytes
an inherited defect in lipoprotein lipase activity in cats
causes elevated triglyceride and cholesterol levels.65
there is also evidlence that direct exposure to high levels
The disorder eventually leads to the development of
of ethoxyquin cause health problems in human work-
 severe peripheral nerve paralysis. It is proposed that
an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance, similar to
forms of ethoxyquin has been undertaken in recent
that of an analogous disease in humans, is responsible
years.62-64
for this disorder. There is also some evidence for the
In fesponse to the new data, pet food manufactur-
existence of an inherited defect in lipid metabolism
ers have voluntarily limited ethoxyquin concentrations
in Miniature Schnauzers, Beagles, and, possibly, Brit-
in pet foods to 75 parts per million or less in foods
 tany Spaniels.G-68 Abnormally elevated plasma cho-
that use this preservative. No harmful effects of eth-
lesterol concentrations have also been identifed in
 0xyquin have been demonstrated at these levels. Most
 Briards, suggesting the existence of an inherited dis-
manufacturers have also developed foods that con-
order of lipid metabolism in this breed (see Section 5,
tain no ethoxyquin. In addition, numerous foods are
pp. 300-304).69 A second cause of hyperlipidemia in
 now available that are preserved entirely or primarily
companion animals is the presence of certain preex-
using naturally derived antioxidants (see Section 3,
isting disorders. Diseases that may cause secondary
0n saqel pei semIe pinous siaunsuo (sI-9sI dd
hyperlipidemia include diabetes mellitus, hypothy.
ensure that the product that they select includes ingre-
roidism, pancreatitis, hyperadrenocorticism, nephrotic
dients that they feel confdent about feeding to their
 syndrome, and liver disease.70 Certain medications
dog or cat. As with other additives and ingredients,
 such as glucocorticoids and immunosuppressant drugs
ethoxyquin must be included in the list of ingredients
may also result in transient increases in blood lipid
and should be identifed as a preservative.
levels in some pets.
290 Canine and Feline Nutrition
When elevated triglyceride levels occur in dogs and
coprophagize in an attempt to obtain nutrients that
cats, they may produce clinical signs of anorexia, leth-
 are deficient in their diet. In addition, female dogs and
argy, abdominal pain, seizures, vomiting, diarrhea, and
wolves foutinely consume the feces of their puppies. It
development of a lipid-laden aqueous humor. Hyper-
has been theorized that this behavior may continue after
cholesterolemia, on the other hand, may be related to
 puppies are whelped, or that it can be socially facilitated
the development of atherosclerotic lesions, lipemia reti-
between dogs within the same household. The best way
nalis, and lipid opacification of the cornea.7 Tradition-
Aq Iae jeaj oi ssase il oi si buea joois iuaaid 0i
ally, the dietary treatment for hyperlipidemia in dogs
monitoring walks, restricting the dog's access to the feces
pue Ard qog oy'sa ie-mol e uaaq sey sies pue
 of wild animals such as rabbits and deer, and keeping the
 secondary hyperlipidemia appeat to respond well to a
yard free of feces. In addition, training techniques such
strict aclherence to low-fat, low-calorie diets in these spe-
as teaching dogs to “leave it" and to reliably come when
cies. However, feeding a low-fat diet to healthy pets with
called are helpful in deterring dogs from coprophagizing.
the intention of preventing hyperlipidemia and elevated
cholesterol levels is unnecessary. Balanced, low-fat diets
can be used for the treatment of obesity and for weight
Contrary to popular belief dogsthat coprophagize
are not attempting to balance a defcient diet, nor do
 However, the concerns that humans have with dietary
they have gastrointestinat disease. Rather, eating feces
lipids and heart disease do not apply to companion ani-
is α common type of scavenging behavior and is aiso
mals, except in the specifc circumstances discussed.
observed in female dogs that are caring for puppies. The
best way to prevent stool eating is to limit access to fecal
COPROPHAGY (STOOL
matter by monitoring waiks, restricting the dogs access
to the feces of wild animals such as rabbits and deer
EATING) IS CAUSED BY
and keeping the yard free offeces
A NUTRIENT DEFICIENCY
Coprophagy (stool eating) is relatively common in dogs
VITAMIN C SUPPLEMENTATION
majority of dogs that coprophagize are not consuming a
PREVENTS SKELETAL DISEASE
diet that is deficient in one of more essential nutrients, nor
IN GROWING DOGS
dlo they have gastrointestinal disease.7l Most dogs will con-
sume the feces of ruminant or nonruminant herbivorous
The practice of supplementing the dliets of growing dogs
species such as horses, cattle, deer, or rabbits. In addition,
with ascorbic acid can be traced back to a early report
many dogs that live with cats will eat cat feces if allowed
that compared the development of hyperrophic osteo-
access to the litter box. Although less common, some dogs
dystrophy (HOD) in young dogs with the bone abnor-
also consume canine feces, including their own.
malities associated with scurvy (vitamin C defciency)
The dog's evolutionary history provides a reason-
in humans.72 Radiographic examinations of dogs with
able explanation for this behavior. Although the dog's
HOD and humans with scurvy both show fadiotranslu
ancestor, the wolf, is considered to be a social predator,
cent zones in affected metaphyses and eventual subperi-
this species is also an adlept food scavenger. Unlike the
 osteal hemorthages. Follow-up studies adding supportive
more carnivorous feline species, most canids will eat car-
evidence for a role of ascorbic acid in HOD reported
casses killed by natural causes or other predators; vafious
dlecreased levels of ascorbic acid in the plasma and urine
types of vegetation and fruits; and even garbage. Eat-
of dogs with HOD.73-75 Because of these similarities, it
ing feces is a manifestation of scavenging behavior and
was theorized that an endogenous deficiency of ascof-
bic acid in dlogs was responsible for the development of
wolves. Although ingestion of herbivorous species? feces
HOD in growing dogs. HOD is characterized by exces-
may supplement the dog's diet with certain vitamins,
sive bone deposition and retarded bone resorption and
there is no evidence that dogs (or wolves) selectively
occurs most often in the distal ulna, radius, and tibia (see
Common Nutrition Myths and Feeding Practices 291
Section 5, pp. 493-494).76 Affected dogs exhibit acute
of growth than to an endogenous lack of ascorbic acid
 pain and swelling in the metaphyseal regions of the long
(see Section 5, pp. 493-494).
bones, intermittent pyrexia, and, occasionally, anorexia.
Although the original attention awarded to ascorbic
Although these original studies enjoyed widespread
siq 'COH on Alesypads pauread sop ul sneis pie
interest, a series of later studies found that a very cfucial
association was expanded without scientifc support to
dlifference between HOD in dogs and scurvy in humans
include several other developmental bone disorders such
had been overlooked by the early i
investigations.77
as canine hip dysplasia (CHD) and osteochondrosis.
HOD is characterized by osteopetrosis, involving excess
As a result, many breeders and professionals habitually
bone deposition in the metaphysis and periosteum and
 began to supplement growing dogs' diets with ascorbic
retarded bone resorption. Scurvy, on the other hand,
 acid in the hope of preventing the onset of these diseases.
is an osteoporotic condition, involving the demineral-
However, there is no evidence to support the claim that
ization of bone caused by impaired collagen formation
supplemental ascorbic acid can prevent the develop-
by osteoblasts in the developing skeleton. This major
 ment of either of these disorders in growing dogs.
difference provides incontrovertible evidence that the
 In addition to being unwarranted, ascorbic acid sup-
two conditions afe not the same disofder. Subsequent
plementation in dogs and cats may be detrimental. Excess
controlled studies of the efficacy of supplemental ascor-
ascorbic acid is excreted in the urine as oxalate, and a high
bic acid as a therapeutic treatment for HOD found no
concentration of oxalate has the potential to contribute to
beneft to bone health.78 A study with growing Labra-
the formation of calcium oxalate uroliths in the urinary
 dor Retrievers reported that supplementation with 500
tract. A more practical and scientifically supported route
mg of ascorbic acid per day from weaning to 4/ months
to preventing the dlevelopment of skeletal diseases in dogs
of age had no effect on the development of skeletal dis-
includles selective breeding practices that cull dogs with
orders.79 Both groups of dogs in the study were fed a
skeletal disease from the breeding pool of animals, the
highly palatable, energy-dense dliet on a free-choice regi-
 promotion of moderate growth rates in puppies, and feed-
men. Dogs in both the supplemented and the nonsup-
ing a high-quality, balanced, food that contain optimal
plemented groups developed skeletal lesions indicative
amounts of protein, moderately reduced fat, and moder-
 of HOD. In adldition, supplemented dogs were found
ate amounts of calcium, without added supplements (see
to have higher levels of circulating serum calcium. It
Section 5, pp. 494-500 for a complete discussion).
a ennaday aaeia, siu ie pesnd sem
have led to elevated calcitonin levels. Persistent hyper-
calcitoninism has the potential to contribute to the bone
changes observed in many of the developmental skeletal
dlisorders in young dogs (see Section 5, pp. 491-500). It
ment of certain skeletal lesions in growing dogs. A more
was concluded that supplemental ascorbic acid has no
practical and scientifically supportedrouteto preventing
preventive effect and may even exacerbate the develop-
the development of skeietal diseases in dogs inciudes the
ment of certain skeletal lesions in growing dogs. Similar
use of careful breeding practices and feeding puppies to
to other developmental skeletal diseases, HOD is more
promote moderate, rather than rapid, rates ofgrowth.
likely to be caused by overnutrition leading to a high rate
References
1. Momoi Y, Goto Y, Tanide K, and others: lncrease in plasma lipid peroxide in cats fed a fsh diet, J Vet Med Sei 63:1293-1296, 2001.
 2. Gaskell CJ, Leedale AH, Douglas SW: Pansteatitis in the cat: a report of five cases, J Small Anim Pract 16:1 17-121, 1975.
3. Cordy DR: Experimental production of steatitis (yellow fat disease) in kittens fed a commercial canned cat food and prevention of
the condition by vitamin E, Corneff Vet 44:310-318, 1954.
292 Canine and Feline Nutrition
4. Munson TO, Holzworth J, Small E, and others: Steatitis ("yellow fat") in cats fed canned red tuna, J Am Vet Med Asoc
133:563-568, 1958.
5. Griffiths RC, Thornton GW, Willson JE: Pansteatitis (yellow fat) in cats, J Am Vet Med Asoc 137:126-128, 1960.
6. Cropper N: Pansteatitis in cats fed fish-based commercial foods, Can Vet J 21:192-193, 1980.
7. Watson ADJ, Porges WL, Huxtable CR, and others: Pansteatitis in a cat, Aust Vet J 49:388-392, 1973.
8. Summers BA, Sykes G: Pansteatitis mimicking infectious peritonitis in a cat, / Am Vet Med Asoc 180:546-549, 1982
9. Niza MM, Vilela CL, Ferreira LM: Feline pansteatitis revisited: hazards of unbalanced home-made diets, J Feline Med Surg
5:271-277, 2003.
10. Smith DC, Proutt LM: Development of thiamine deficiency in the cat on a diet of raw fish, Pro Soc Exp Bio Med 56:1-5, 1944.
11. Jubb KV, Saunders LZ, Coates HV: Thiamine deficiency encephalopathy in cats, J Comp Pathol 66:217-227, 1956.
12. Loew FM, Martin CL, Dunlop RH,and others: Naturally ocurring and experimental thiamine deficiency in cats receiving
commercial cat food, Cax Vet / 11:109-113, 1970.
13. Jarrett J: Thiaminase-induced encephalopathy, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 65:705-708, 1970.
14. Houston D, Hulland TJ: Thiamine defciency in a team of sled dogs, Cax Vet J29:383-385, 1988.
15. Everett GM: Observations on the behavior and neurophysiology of acute thiamin defcient cats, Am J Physiof 141:139-149, 1944.
16. Baker JR, Hughes IB: A case of deforming cervical spondylosis in a cat associated with a diet rich in liver, Vet Rec 83:44-45, 1968.
 17. Seawright AA, Hrdlicka J: Severe retardation of growth with retention and displacement of incisors in young cats fed a diet of raw
sheep liver high in vitamin A, Aust Vet J 50:306-315, 1974.
18. Clark L, Seawright AA, Hrdlicka J: Exostoses in hypervitaminotic A cats with optimal calcium-phosphorus intakes, J SmallAnim
Pract 11:553-561, 1970.
19. Fry PD: Cervical spondylosis in the cat, / Small Anim Pract 9:59-61, 1968.
20. English PB, Seawright AA: Deforming cervical spondylosis of the cat, Aust Vet J 40:376-381, 1964.
21. Cho DY, Frey RA, Guffy MM, and others: Hypervitaminosis A in the dog, Am J Vet Res 36:1597-1603, 1975.
22. Goldy GG, Burr JR, Longardner CN, and others: Effects of measured doses of vitamin A fed to healthy Beagle dogs for 26 weeks:
Vet Clin Nutr 3:42-49, 1996.
 23. Cline JL, Czarnecki-Maulden GL, Losonsky JM, and others: Efect of vitamin A on bone density and mucosal epithelium in dogs
(abstract), / Anim Sci 73(Suppl):192, 1995.
24. Seawright AA, Steele DP, Clark L: Hypervitaminosis A of cats in Brisbane, Azust Vet J 44:203-206, 1968.
25. Seawright AA, English PB, Gartner RJW: Hypervitaminosis A and deforming cervical spondylosis of the cat, J Comp Pathot
77:29-38, 1967.
26. National Research Council: Nutrient reguirements ofdogs and cats, Washington, DC, 2006, National Academy Press.
27. United States Department of Agriculture: Nutritive value of foods, Home and Garden Buletin, No. 72, Washington, DC, 1981,
US Government Printing Ofce
28. Riser WH, Brodey RS, Shirer JF: Osteodystrophy in mature cats: a nutritional disease, J Am Radiol Soc 9:37-46, 1968.
 29. Lucke VM, Bardgett PL, Mann PGH, and others: Deforming cervical spondylosis in the cat associated with hypervitaminosis A,
Vet Rec 82:141-142, 1968.
30. Bateman WG: The digestibility and utilization of egg whites, / Biol Chem 26:263-291, 1916.
31. Lineweaver H, Murray CW: ldentification of the trypsin inhibitor of egg white with ovomucoid, / Biot Chem 171:565-581, 1947.
32. Mabee DA, Morgan AF: Evaluation of dog growth of egg yolk protein and six other partially purifed proteins, some after heat
treatment, / Nutr 43:261-279, 1951.
Common Nutrition Myths and Feeding Practices 293
33. Czarnecki-Maulden CL, Rudnick RC: Development ofa sucesful spray-dried egg white-based experimental die for dogs: effect of
heat treatment on diet utilization, Nutr Res 10:109-115, 1990.
34. Houpt KA, Smith SL: Taste preferences and their relation to obesity in dogs and cats, Cax Vet J 22:77-81, 1981.
35. Cans JH, Korson R, Cater MR, and others: Effects of short-term and long-term theobromine administration to male dogs,
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 53:481-496, 1980.
36. Welch RM, Hsu SY, DeAngelis RL: Effect of arvelor 1254, phenobarbital and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons on the plasma
dearance of caffeine in the rat, Clin Pharmacot 7her 22:791-798, 1977.
37. Drouillard DD, Vesell ES, Dvorchick BN: Studies on theobromine disposition in normal subjects, Clin Pharmacol Tber
23:296-302, 1978.
38. Hoskam EC, Haagsma J: Chocolate poisoning terminating in the death of two Dachshunds, Tijdschr Diergeneek 99:523-525,
1974.
39. Decker RA, Meyers GH: Theobromine poisoning in a dog, / Am Vet Med Awoc 161:198-199, 1972.
40. Glauberg A, Blumenthal PH: Chocolate poisoning in the dog, J Asm Anim Hosp Assoc 19:246-248, 1983.
41. Zoumas BL, Kreiser WR, Martin RA: Theobromine and caffeine content of chocolate products, J Food Sci 45:314-316, 1980.
42. Shannon WR: Thiamine chloride: an aid in the solution of the mosquito problem, Minx Med 26:799-803, 1943
43. Eder HL: Flea bites: prevention and treatment with thiamine hydrochloride, Arch Ped G2:300, 1945.
44. Halliwell REW: Ineffectiveness of thiamine (vitamin B) as a fea-repellent in dogs, J Asm Anim Hosp Assoc 18:423-426, 1982.
45. Baker NF, Farver TB: Failure of brewer's yeast as a repellent to feas on dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc 183:212-214, 1983.
46. Farkas MC, Farkas JN: Hemmolytic anemia due to ingestion of onions in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp Asoc 10:65-66, 1974.
47. Spice RN: Hemolytic anemia associated with ingestion of onions in a dog, Cax Vet J 17:181-183, 1976.
48. Kay JM: Onion toxicity in a dog, Mod Vet Pract 64:477-478, 1983.
49. Caldin M, Carli E, Furlanello T, and others: A retrospective study of 60 cases of eccentrocytotsis in the dog, Vet Clix Pathol
34:224231, 2005.
 50. Yamato O, Kasai E, Katsura T, and others: Heinz body hemolytic anemia with eccentrocytosis from ingestion of Chinese chive
(Allium tubersoum) and garlic (Allium sativum) in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp Asoc 41:68-73, 2005.
51. Fadok VA: Zinc responsive dermatosis in a Great Dane: a case report, J Am Anim Hosp Asoc 18:409-414, 1982.
52. Sousa CA, Stannard AA, lhrke P): Dermatosis associated with feeding generic dog food: 13 cases (1981-1982), J Am Vet Med Asoc
192:676-680, 1988.
53. Morris JG, Yu S, Rogers QR: Red hair in black cats is reversed by addition of tyrosine to the diet, / Nutr 132: 1646S-1648S, 2002.
54. Anderson PJB, Rogers QR, Morris JC: Cats require more dietary phenylalanine or tyrosine for melanin deposition in hair than for
maximal growth, / Nutr 132:2037-2042, 2002.
55. Dickinson PJ, Anderson PJB, Williams DC, and others: Assessment of the neurologic effects of dietary deficiencies of phenylalanine
and tyrosine in cats, Am / Vet Res 65:671-680, 2004
56. Biourge V, Sergheraert R: Red coat syndrome: a dietary cause. In Iroc WSAVA Cong, 2001.
57. Monsanto Chemical Company: A five-year chronic toxicity study in dogs with santoquin. In A report to the Food and Drug
Administration, 1 964.
58. Dzanis DA: Safety of ethoxyquin in dog foods, J Nutr 121:S163-S164, 1991.
59. Dzanis DA: Ethoxyquin, product families and more. 1n Proceedings of the petfood forum, Chicago, 1998, Watts Publishing
60. Blaszcyk A, Skolimowski J: Apoptosis and cytotoxicity caused by ethoxyquin and two of its salts, Cell Mol Biol Lett 10:15-21, 2005.
0 8/91 ng px 'sydu peraydrad ueuy u ubxa g p sep a  yzsg 1g
294Canine and Feline Nutrition
 62. Alanko K, Jolanki R, Estalander T, Kanerva L: Occupational 'multivitamin allergy? caused by the antioxidant ethoxyquin,
Contact Derm 39:263-264, 1998.
63. Blaszczyk A, Skolimowski J: Apoptosis and cytotoxicity caused by ethoxyquin salts in human lyrmphocytes in vitro, Food Chem
105:1159-1163, 2007.
64. Dorey C, Lockhart B, Lestage P, Casara P: New quinolinic derivatives as centrally active antioxidants, Bioorg Med Chem Lett
10:935-939, 2000.
65. Jones BR, Johnstone AC, Cahill Jl, and others: Peripheral neuropathy in cats with inherited primary hyperchylomicronaemia,
Vet Rec 119:268-272, 1986.
66. Rogers WA, Donovan EF, Kociba GJ: ldiopathic hyperlipoproteinemia in dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc 166:1087-1091, 1975.
67. Hubert B, Braun JP La Farge F, and others: Hypertrglyceridemia in two related dogs, Comp Ani Pract 1:33-35, 1987.
68. Whitney MS, Boon GD, Rebar AH, and others: Ultracentrifugal and electrophoretic characterization of the plasma lipoproteins of
69. Watson P, Simpson KW, Bedford PGC: Hypercholesterolemia in Briards in the United Kingdom, Res Vet Sci 54:80-85, 1993.
70. Bauer JE: Evaluation and dietary considerations in idiopathic hyperlipidemmia in dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc 206: 1684-1687, 1995.
71. Overall KL: Coprophagia. In Overall KL, editor: Clinicat behavioral medicine for small animals, St Louis, 1997, Mosby
72. Gratzl E, Pommer A: Moller-Barlow's disease in the dog, Wien Tierarztl Mschr 28:481-492, 513-519, 531-537, 1941.
73. Meier H, Clark ST, Schnelle CB, and others: Hypertrophic osteodystrophy associated with disturbance of vitamin C synthesis in
dogs, I Am Vet Med Asoc 130:483-491, 1957.
 74. Grondalen J: Metaphyseal osteopathy (hypertrophic osteodystrophy) in growing dogs: a clinical study, J Small Anim Pract
17:721-735, 1976.
75. Holmes JR: Suspected skeletal scurvy in the dog, Vet Rec 74:801-813, 1962.
76. Alexander J W: Selected skeletal dysplasias: craniomandibular osteopathy, multiple cartilaginous exostoses, and hypertrophic
osteodystrophy, Vet Clix North Am Small Anim Pract 13:55-70, 1983
Z86 1 y4e-/i61 yoyai i 'saneu ram u aseasip snoauenuods ayp go Apms e Xydonspoaiso srydonnady auue f prepoo 
78. Muir I, Dubielzig RR, Johnson KA, and others: Hypertrophic osteodystrophy and calvarial hyperostosis, Compend Contin Educ
Pract Vet 18:143151, 1996.
79. Teare JA, Krook L, Kallfelz A, and others: Ascorbic acid deficiency and hypertrophic osteodystrophy in the dog: a rebuttal, Cornel!
Vet 69:384401, 1979.
27
Inherited Disorders of Nutrient Metabolism
Clinical disease can occur in some companion animals
Australian Shepherds, Beagles, Shar-Peis, and cats.3-6
as a fesult of the inability to absorb, assimilate, of metab-
Studies of a human condition, Imerslund-Grasbeck
olize specific nutrients. In some cases, breed predisposi-
syndrome (I-GS), characterized by B12 malabsorption
tions can be found, and the disorder appears to have
and juvenile-onset megaloblastic anemia, revealed a
 a genetic basis. Five specific examples in dogs involve
similar mode of action to that of Giant Schnauzers and
lipid metabolism, purine metabolism, and the nutrients
Australian Shepherds with Bi2 malabsorption.7 Studies
vitamin Biz, coppet, and zinc. Although inherited dis-
revealed that Biz malabsorption in dogs is most often
orders of metabolism ate less well documented in cats, a
due to mutation of the amnionless gene, whereas in
familial hyperlipidemia has been reported in this species
humans I-GS is most often felated to mutation of the
(Table 27-1).
cubilin gene, both of which are essential for proper IF
function.8
Clinical signs develop when puppies are between
MALABSORPTION
6 weeks and 5 months of age, and include lethargy, fail-
OF VITAMIN B12
ure to thrive, loss of appetite, neutropenia (decreased
white blood cell count), and nonregenerative anemia.
Vitamin Bi2 (cobalamin) is required by the body as a
Vitamin Biz deficiency can be diagnosed in affected
coenzyme for several metabolic reactions and for nor-
puppies as early as 2 weeks of age by comparing their
mal deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) synthesis and eryth-
sefum cobalamin concentration with that of normal lit-
fopoiesis. Vitamin Biz deficiency results in macrocytic
termates. Other signs that have been feported include
anemia and neurological impairment. Absorption of
 elevated plasma ammonia levels and hyperammonemic
B2 from the diet requires the presence of a compound
called intrinsic factor (IF). In the dog, IF is produced by
these signs is not completely understood.9
the gastric mucosa and the pancreas and binds to cobal-
Vitamin Biz malabsorption diagnosis can be con-
amin as it passes through the gastrointestinal tract.
frmed through analysis of serum B
2 levels, response
The IF-B12 complex
to specific receptor sites
to parenteral administration of the vitamin, the pres-
on cells lining the intestinal mucosa and is absorbed
ence of elevated levels of methylmalonic acid in the
into the body. Without the presence of IF, cobalamin
urine, and genetic testing. For example, DNA genetic
absorption is severely impaired.
testing of Giant Schnauzers and Australian Shepherds
Like other species, dogs require very small amounts
is available at the University of Pennsylvania Metabolic
of dietary vitamin Bi2 because of the body's ability to
Genetic Screening
Laboratory.10 Elevated urinary lev-
store adlequate amounts of Bi2 in the liver for long
els of methylmalonic acid can confirm the diagnosis
petiods of time. In addition, efficient feabsorption of
because it is excreted only when the normal metabo-
excreted vitamin B,z through the enterohepatic circula-
lism of certain amino acids, fatty acids, and cholestefol
tion fesults in efficient conservaticn of this nutrient. As
is blocked because of the lack of a necessary B12
 a result, naturally occurring deficiencies of vitamin B2
 containing coenzyme. Normally, dogs excrete less than
afe not common in the canine species.
10 milligrams (mg) of methylmalonic acid per gram
Inherited vitamin Blz malabsorption was frst iden-
(g) of creatinine in the urine. Giant Schnauzers with
tified in Giant Schnauzers. Analysis of pedigrees and a
vitamin B2 malabsorption excrete between 4000 and
seties of breeding studies demonstfated a simple auto-
 6000 mg/g of creatinine.11
somal recessive mode of inheritance in this breed.2 The
Tests have shown that the intestinal absorption of
disorder has since been reported in Border Collies,
 nutrients in affected dogs is normal, with the exception
297
298 Canine and Feline Nutrition
DISORDER
BREEDS AFFECTED
TREATMENT
Mala bsor ption of vitamin B12
Giant Schnauzer
Intramuscular injections of B12
Copper-storage disease
Doberman Pinscher
Copper-restricted diet, zinc acetate supplementation
Bedlington Terrier
West Highland White Terrier
Cocker S paniel
Lethal acrodermatitis
 Bull Terrier 
None
Zinc malabsor ption
Siberian Husky
Zinc supplementation
Alaskan Malamute
Great Dane
Doberman Pinscher
Hyperli pidemia
Miniature Schnauzers, cats
Restricted-fat, restricted-calorie diet
Abnormal purine metabolism
Dalmatians
Reduced-purine diet, production of alkaline urine,
adequate hydration, allopurinol
of vitamin Bi2. Moreover, oral administration of vita-
hepatic necrosis, subacute hepatitis, chronic hepati-
min Biz, with or without IF, is not effective in resolv-
tis, and cirrhosis) associated with increased liver cop-
ing clinical signs or in raising serum Biz levels. These
per concentration has been noted in many dog breeds
results and immunoelectron microscopy studies of ileal
including Cocker Spaniels, Dalmatians, German Shep-
morphology indicate the defect may be located at the
herd Dogs, Keeshonds, Kerry Blue Terriers, Labradlor
level of the cell receptor in the small intestine. Specifi-
Retrievers, Old English Sheepdogs, Poodles, Samoyeds,
cally, affected dogs lack a rece
eptor for the IF-cobalamin
and rarely, even in cats.14.18
complex in their brush border microvilli.2 Long-term
 A primary, hepatic copper-storage dlisease, also known
treatment of this disorder involves the regular admin-
 as copper toxicosis, has been conclusively identifed in
istration of intramuscular injections of vitamin B12.
the Bedlington Terrier and may also occur in certain
This injection bypasses the intestine and provides tis-
sbeions-iaddos suues paauun 'shop jo spsaiq rauo
sues with the necessary vitamin. Complete resolution
disease involves the impaired removal of copper from
of clinical signs has been reported with a dosage as low
the liver, resulting in accumulation of the mineral as the
as 1 mg every 4 to 5 months. In other cases, a weekly
dog ages. Its development is independent of diet and
dosage of 0.5 mg has been used.10
eventually will cause chronic, degenerative liver dis-
ease. The mode of inheritance in Bedllington Terriers is
COPPER-STORAGE DISEASE
a simple, autosomal recessive gene that shows no sex
Copper is an essential micronutrient, needed for iron
West Highland White and Skye Tertiers.21,23 The mode
absorption and transport, hemoglobin formation, elec-
of inheritance in these breeds is hot fully understood
tron transport proteins, vatious antioxidants, and nof-
The concentration of copper in the liver does not reach
 mal functioning of the cytochrome oxidase enzyme
-uos siaal iaddos au op iou yy se ane eui siaa
system (see Section 1, p. 41 and Section 2, pp. 113-
huag u panaso se sle im aseaiu auaiss
114).12 The normal metabolism of copper in the body
Terriers.15,24 Other breedls that have been reported to be
i a yonii saddos ssasxa jo sessd ai saai
at risk for familial diseases of copper metabolism include
and excretion in bile. Disorders that affect bile excretion
Dalmatians, Cocker Spaniels, Labradlor Retrievers, and
often result in an accumulation of copper in the liver,
sometimes to toxic levels. In these cases, copper toxico-
 man Pinschers appear to be affected, a sex-linked mode
sis in the liver is a secondary disorder that develops as an
of inheritance is suspected in this breed.26 In addition,
effect of the primary liver disease.13 Hepatopathy (acute
affected Dobermans show reduced copper excretion and
Inherited Disorders of Nutrient Metabolism 299
increased oxidative stress, which suggests this is a hew
Treatment involves lifelong feeding of a copper-
variant of primary coppet toxicosis.27
restricted diet and the administration of medications that
Inherited copper-storage disease in Bedllington Ter-
either dlecrease intestinal absorption or increase urinary
fiers is caused by impaired removal of copper from the
liver, resulting in accumulation of the mineral as the
 mine and trientine, have been used in dlogs with copper-
dog ages. This eventually results in chronic, degenera-
storage disease and act by increasing urinary excretion of
tive liver disease in most animals. Normal liver copper
concentration in dogs ranges from 200 to 400 parts
drugs, controlled efficacy and treatment fegimen studies
 s e (m) im  jo (d) u ad
have not been conducted in dogs, and penicillamine may
remains constant throughout life.28 Bedlington Ter-
be toxic in some animals.21,34 Zinc acetate, which func-
fiers with coppef-storage disease begin to accumulate
tions to block the intestinal absorption of copper, may
the mineral shortly after birth. Biopsies of the livers of
-iao yi s rg ao g in a a
affected puppies show increased copper in the hepato-
disease.34,37 Results of a study that examined the efficacy
cytes as early as 5% months of age.2 During the frst few
 of zinc acetate in the treatment of copper-storage disease
 months of life, while copper is accumulating, there is no
 in Bellington Terriers and West Highland White Terri-
liver damage, and serum levels of liver enzymes remain
 ers found that acdministration at dosages that resulted in
within normal range. But when hepatic copper reaches
plasma zinc concentrations of 200 to 500 micrograms
a toxic level of approximately 2000 ppm, centrolobular
(μg)/deciliter (dl) suppressed hepatic inflammatory disease
hepatitis with concomitant elevation of liver enzymes
 and reduced hepatic copper concentrations. It appeared
develops. Individual dogs vary significantly regarding
that hepatic function could be restored by the long-
the age at which toxic levels are reached and in their
term administration of zinc acetate in affected dogs. The
susceptibility to clinical signs. Even after toxicity occurs,
administration of 100 mg of zinc acetate twice daily is
levels continue to accumulate, sometimes reaching as
recommended for the frst 3 months of treatiment. After
high as 10,000 ppm dw.13
this period, the dosage can be reduced to 50 mg twice
The identification of a DNA marker for the copper
daily. For maximum effectiveness, the zinc should not be
toxicosis locus in Bellington Terriers led to the ability to
administered with the dog's food. Plasma zinc concenitra-
reliably diagnose individual cases and identify pedigrees
tions should be measured every 2 to 3 months to confrm
and lineages in which the gene for this disorder is preva-
that the level has increased appropriately and that the
lent.30,31 However, recently this diagnostic method has
 concentration dloes not exceed 1000 μg/dl. Affected dogs
been complicated by the discovery of diverse haplotypes
aq isn sneis iaddos iiau pue Adeiaun Suoa aiinbai
that lead to false negatives in some Bedllington terriers
 monitored closely to guard against the potential for cop-
with copper toxicosis.32,33
3 Therefore serum chemistry
per deficiency.
profles continue to be useful as a preliminary screening
tool for the onset of liver disease in young dogs. Liver
ZINCMALABSORPTION
biopsies should be considered if elevated levels of the
livef enzyme alanine amino tranisaminase afe cbserved.
Although zinc defciency and zinc-responsive dermato-
Clinical signs of disease do not usually manifest until
sis can be caused by feeding an imbalanced diet, another
the dog is between 4 and 8 yeats old, although some
 potential cause involves an inherited predisposition for
may show signs as early as 1 yeat or as late as 11 years of
impaired zinc absorption. Several breeds of dogs appeaf
to be affected by zinc malabsorption, and varying lev-
sis begin to cause clinical signs that are associated with
els of severity for this disorder have been reported. The
liver disease. Lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, abdominal
most severe zinc-related disorder is lethal acrodermatitis
 pain, and ocasionally ascites and icterus are observed.
in Bull Terriers. This genetic disease is inherited as an
Some dogs suffer acute tubular necrosis in the kidneys
autosomal recessive gene and results in an inability to
and show polyuria and polydipsia in addition to signs
absorb dietary zinc, even when high levels of the min-
of liver disease.2l Acute episodes of liver necrosis may
eral ate added to the diet.38 At birth, affected puppies
cause sudden death in a small number of affected dogs.
show lighter pigmentation than is normal for the breed.
300 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Their growth is stunted, and severe skin lesions develop
of the affected skin surface is seen. The dogs are usually
nonpruritic until the lesions have become extensively
ciency, acquired T-cell deficiency, poor responsiveness 
 crusted. Mild to moderate weight loss and a dull, dry
of T lymphocytes to mitogen stimulation, and selective
 coat are also observed. Histopathological examinations of
deficiency of immunoglobulin A (IgA) also occurs.40,41
skin biopsies show diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis.
The immunodefciency results in increased susceptibil-
Another zinc-responsive disorder occurs in rapidly
ity to pyoderma and multiple infections throughout the
growing puppies of many breeds including Beagles,
body. There is also some evidence that the behavioral
German Shorthaired Pointers, Great Danes, Standard
disorders of tail-chasing and idiopathic aggression in
Poodles, and many others.44 The severity of signs is
this breed may be related to zinc malabsorption.2 This
highly variable within a litter. Some puppies appeatf
dlisorder is invatiably fatal and has a median survival age
nearly normal and others afe depressed, anorexic, and
of only 7 months. Nearly all affected dogs die before
emaciated. Hyperkeratotic plaques may occur with
15 months of age and there is currently no reliable test
thickened, fissured foot pads and planum nasale. In
that can identify carriers of this disease.38
both of these syndromes, oral supplementation with
Less severe zinc-responsive disorders occur in Alas-
zinc results in rapid resolution of the skin lesions. How-
kan Malamutes, Siberian Huskies (Figure 27-1), and,
ever, only Malamutes usually require supplementation
 Dccasionally, Great Danes and Doberman Pinschers.43-47
throughout life to prevent a recurrence of clinical signs.
Research has shown that Alaskan Malamutes afflicted
A therapeutic dose of 10 mg/kilogram (kg)/day of zinc
with  inherited chondrodysplastic dwarfism have an
sulfate (ZnSO4) usually suffices. Large dogs are often
impaired ability to absorb intestinal zinc.47 Dwarfism in
given 100 to 200 mg of ZnSO4 twice daily.44 ZnSO4
this breed has a simple autosomal recessive inheritance,
can cause emesis in some dogs, but this can be prevented
 Jo juauoduos e aq on sieadde uondiosqejeu suiz pue
in most cases by giving the mineral with the dog's food.
this disorder. Howevet, impaired zinc absorption has also
In a small proportion of cases, supplementation is nec-
been described in Malamutes that afe hot afflicted with
essaty only during periods of stress.
chondrodysplasia.43 The mode of inheritance of the zinc-
responsive dermatoses is currently unknown. The onset
of this syndrome usually occurs at puberty, and some
DISORDERS OF LIPID
dogs show signs only during times of physiological stress,
METABOLISM
such as pregnancy or exposure to weather extremes. Der-
matological signs include crusting, scaling, and under-
The term hyperlipidemia is sometimes used inter-
lying suppuration around the face, elbows, scrotum,
changeably with byperlipoproteinemia when referring
prepuce, and vulva. In chronic cases, hyperpigmentation
to elevated levels of triglycerides andl/or cholesterol in
B
Figure 27-1 Inherited zinc malabsorption in a Siberian Husky. A, Face. B, Hock.
(Courtesy Candace 5ousa, DVM, Animal Dermatology Clinic, 5acramento, Calif)
Inherited Disorders of Nutrient Metabolism 
301
animals that have been fasted for at least 12 hours.48
synthesized in response to the absorption of fat from
However, the term byperlipoproteinemia specifically
the intestine and function in the transport of dietary
refers to excessive circulating lipoproteins. Hypercho-
triglyceride to extrahepatic tissues and cholesterol to the
lesterolemia describes excessive circulating cholesterol,
liver. Chylomicrons appear in the blood approximately
while bypertrigiyceridemia refers to elevated concentra-
2 hours postprandially, causing a transient increase in
tions of triglycerides, either of which may occur alone
plasma triglyceride concentration. When they are deliv-
or in combination with hyperlipoproteinemia.49
ered to tissues, the tfiglycerides ate hydrolyzed to fatty
Most of the cases of hyperlipidemia seen in com-
acids and glycerol by the enzyme LPL. The second cate-
panion animals occuf secondary to another underly-
gory of lipoproteins, called very-low-density lipoproteins
ing disorder that affects lipid metabolism. Diseases that
(VLDLs), transport endogenous triglycerides freom the
may cause secondary hyperlipidemia include diabetes
liver to extrahepatic tissues for use as an energy source
 mellitus, hypothyroidism, pancreatitis, nephrotic syn-
 or for storage in adipose tissue. In contrast to chylomi-
cfons, VLDLs afe produced continuously, so that in the
lesterolemia, and liver disease.50.54 In addition, cetain 
fasting state, VLDLs are the main carriers of endoge-
medications such as glucocorticoids and immunosup-
 nously produced triglyceride. Low-density lipoproteins
pressant drugs may cause transient increases in blood
(LDLs) transport cholesterol from the liver to extrahe-
lipid levels. Familial, or primary, byperlipidemia refers
patic tissues for incorporation into cell membranes and
to cases in which a heritable basis for hyperlipidemia
for steroid hormone synthesis. Finally, the high-density
can be found. Two well-documented inherited disorders
lipoproteins (HDLs) also transport cholesterol, but
of lipid metabolism occur in dogs and cats: hyperlip-
they are responsible for moving excess cholesterol out of
extrahepatic cells back to the liver for excretion in bile,
(LPL) deficiency in cats. In addition, hypercholesterol-
a process called “reverse cholesterol transport."
emia has been reported in Miniature Schnauzers with
Postprandial hyperlipidemia is a hatural occuffence
hyperlipidemia, in Briards in the United Kingdom, in
that refects a transient rise in chylomicrons; in dogs
Shetland Sheepdogs in Japan, and in a family of Rough
it normally resolves within 6 to 10 hours following
Collies.53-56
sists for 12 hours or more after food is withheld war-
rants investigation.51 In dogs, fasting serum triglyceride
Lipoprotein Metabolism
concentrations greater than 150 mg/dl and/or total
A basic understanding of the mechanisms of lipid trans-
cholesterol concentration greater than 300 mg/dl are
port in the blood is necessary for an examination of
considered abnormally high. In cats, fasting triglyceride
hyperlipidemia. Because lipids are insoluble in watef,
concentrations of greater than 100 mg/dl and/or choles-
ttansport in the blood requires complexing with more
terol concentrations greater than 200 mg/dl should be
soluble molecules such as proteins and phospholipids.
investigated.G0
Free fatty acids (FFAs) are carried in the bloodstream by
A number of health problems may be caused by per-
albumin, a serum protein. Triglycerides and cholesterol
sistent hyperlipidemia in companion animals. Hypertri
glyceridemia, especially when severe, is associated with
macromolecular complexes made up of a lipid core sur-
abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, anofexia, seizufes,
founded by a thin cuter membrane. Apoproteins, the
hepatomegaly, and the abnormal deposition of lipid in
proteins that afe present in the lipoprotein's cuter mem
brane, are fecognition sites for target tissues and act as
glyceridemias in humans, elevated triglyceride levels in
enzyme cofactors in lipid metabolism reactions.57
dogs and cats may also increase the risk for develop-
Lipoproteins can be categorized according
to their
ment of acute pancreatitis.57,62 Hypercholesterolemia is
lipid components and resultant aqueous densities. Like
not common in dogs and cats, but has been reported in
humans, dogs have four major classes of lipoproteins,
Shetland Sheepdogs, Beagles, Briards, Collies, and Min-
e nuauoo pidi dud e sy m jo a
one or more transport functions.'l Chylomicrons are
with as many health fisks as is hypertriglyceridemia
302 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Corneal lipid depositions have been reported in dogs
Schnauzers lack evidence of diseases that cause second-
with hyperlipidemia and may be the result of elevated
ary hyperlipidemia.57
blood cholesterol.64,65 For example, a family of Col-
The underlying cause of primary hyperlipidemia in
lies was found to have familial idiopathic hypercho-
Miniature Schnauzers is not known, but is characterized
lesterolemia, and most of the dogs developed corneal
by excessive VLDL particles with or without concurrent
lipidosis.56 In contrast to humans, dogs and cats rarely
chylomicronemia, and mild hypercholesterolemia.57
develop atherosclerosis in response to hypercholesterol-
LPL activity was decreased in lipemic Miniature
emia, and when atherosclerosis is seen, it is usually the
Schnauzers compared to LPL activity in nonlipemic
result of congenital or spontaneous hypothyroidlism.66
Miniature Schnauzers and in other breeds. It is the-
orized that either a familial defciency of the enzyme
LPL or the absence of an apoprotein that functions to
Hyperlipidemia in Miniature
activate LPL may be responsible. The enzyme LPL is
Schnauzers
located in capillary and endothelial tissue and hydro-
Hyperlipidemia in Miniature Schnauzers is a well-
lyzes the triglycerides that are transported by chylomi-
documented familial disorder.62,67 It is reported that 
 crons and VLDLs for transport into cells. A defect in the
many clinically normal dogs of this breed are found to
synthesis or activity of this enzyme prevents the delivery
have persistent fasting hyperlipidemia during routine
of dietaty tfiglycerides to tissues and leads to the feten-
veterinary examinations.62 There is no sex predilection,
tion of chylomicrons and impaired VLDL metabolism.
and the disorder is usually first seen in Schnauzers that
The absence of an important apoprotein called apoli-
poprotein C-Il (apo C-II) would have a similar effect.
Apo C-II is normally a component of chylomicrons and
terized by chylomicron excess. Serum cholesterol levels
VLDL and is a cofactor for LPL. In humans, individu-
afe either normal or slightly increased.57 A recent inves-
als with an apo C-II defciency have clinical symptoms
tigation of the prevalence of hyperriglyceridemia in
similar to individuals with LPL deficiency.70,71
Miniature Schnauzers found that nearly a third (32.8%)
had triglyceride concentrations that were higher than
the reference range for healthy dogs. Only 5.4% of con-
Hyperlipidemia in Miniature Schnauzers is a well
trol dogs from the general population have hyperlip-
documentedfamilial disorder Although notall dogs
u uonisodsiaid snauss e isaans saop yim iua!
show clinical signs, more than 30% of the breed may
this breed.68 Increased serum lipase and amylase activi-
be affected. Because signs mimic those of acute pancre-
ties have been recognized in hyperlipidemic Miniature
atitis, the disease has been termed "pseudopancreatitis.
Schnauzers that present with acute pancreatitis. In these
cases, the pancfeatitis is believed to be caused by the
hypertriglyceridemia.
Feline Lipoprotein Lipase
Affected dogs are either asymptomatic or have recur-
rent episodes of abdominal pain or distress, vomiting.
Deficiency
and/or diarrhea. Seizures have also been associated with
A well-recognized inherited deficiency of LPL in cats
Aeu siaumO zg paaiq siu u ejuapidadaq suaisisiad
causes hyperchylomicronemia and has been shown to
report that episodes of abdominal distress last several
be inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.72.75 The
dlays, followed by spontaneous recovery. In many cases,
hyperlipidemia is caused by markedly elevated fast-
the clinical signs and history are similar to those of dogs
ing triglyceride concentrations as a result of increased
with acute pancreatitis, but radiographic and laboratory
chylomicrons and, to a lesser extent, VLDLs.76 Clinical
evidence does not often support this diagnosis. This
signs may or may not be present, and the severity of
syndrome has been termed “pseudopancreatitis" by one
clinical disease is not well correlated with the degree
investigator.62 Hyperlipidemia in Miniature Schnauzers
of hyperlipidemia. The age of onset of clinical signs
is believed to be heredlitary because of the high breed
predisposition and because most affected Miniature
suasiad iamo e aaey asuayap TaT ioy snosazooy
Inherited Disorders of Nutrient Metabolism 303
 of body fat compated to heterozygous carriers or normal
If there is a history of recurrent abdominal pain, vom-
cats, but lean body mass is not infuenced.77 Kittens
iting, of diarrhea, serum amylase and lipase activities
suckling queens homozygous for LPL defciency are at
should be measured to monitor pancreatic pathology.
a distinct disadvantage and often must be hand reared
Quantification of the plasma concentrations of each
or fostetedl.78
lipoprotein class may assist in the differential diagnosis
When cats present with clinical disease, the most
of hyperlipidemia. An estimate of the lipoprotein pat-
common signs includle the development of subcutane-
tern can be obtained through electrophoresis, but majof
ous xanthomas (lipid deposits) and lipemia tetinalis.
dlifferences exist between dog, cat, and human plasma
The xanthomas occur most often in afeas of the body
lipoproteins in circulation. Dogs and cats have HDL
where trauma caused damage to capilaries, leading to
predominance and are more resistant to LDL and cho-
extravasation of lipids.79 Variable peripheral neuropa-
lesterol elevations than humans.82 A precipitation tech-
thies are seen in some cases. The signs of nerve damage
nigue for canine plasma lipoprotein quantitation has
develop slowly and ate characterized by the loss of
conscious proprioception and motor function, with
 foutine veterinary clinical use.83 Some human commer-
fetention of sensation of pain. These heuropathies afe
cial laboratories offer precipitation and electfophoresis
thought to be caused by compression of nerves by lipid
studies to analyze and interpret dog and cat sera, but
granulomata at sites of trauma.57 A study of a family
this approach should only be used if staff are specifically
of cats reported that LPL-deficient cats produced an
trained to interpret electrophoresis scans of canine lipo-
abnormal LPL protein that failed to bind normally to
vascular endothelium, rendering it inactive.74 These
phoretic separation of lipoproteins is not a disease-specifc
results support the theory that an inherited disorder of
technique and cannot always differentiate between the
lipid metabolism involving a deficiency of active LPL
functional classes of elevated lipoproteins.58 Laboratory
occurs in the cat.
techniques that can accurately identify lipoproteins that
afe not adequately differentiated by electrophoresis are
not used by most diagnostic laboratories, and so samples
A well-recognized inherited defciency of lipoprotein
 must be referred to research laboratories.57
lipase in cats causes hyperlipidemia and appears to
If LPL defciency is suspected in a cat, determina-
be the resuit of ar autosomal recessive trait. The most
tion of plasma activity of this enzyme is suggested. LPL
common clinical signs inciude subcutaneous xantho
activity can be indirectly assayed by collecting plasma
mas and lipemia retinalis. Some cats develop peripheral
before and after the administration of heparin. Heparin
neuropathies that are siowly progressive and character
administration stimulates the release of endothelial LPL
and causes increased LPL activity.81,84 Diagnosis of LPL
function.
inactivity can be made by collecting blood prior to and
1 0 minutes after intravenous administration of heparin
and comparing plasma lipid concentrations.85 In the
normal cat, LPL activity increases following heparin
Diagnosis of Primary
administration, leading to increased hydrolysis of chy-
Hyperlipidemias
lomicrons triglycerides and VLDL. In the LPL-deficient
The diagnosis of primary hyperlipidemia is one of exclu-
cat, plasma lipid concentrations remain unchanged fol-
sion, as all causes of secondary hyperlipidemia must be
lowing heparin administration.86
nuled out frst. Primary hyperlipidemia is seen most fre-
quently as a familial disorder in Miniature Schnauzers
Dietary Treatment of Primary
and Beagles, although other breeds may be affected.80
The pet's breed, family lineage, age, and clinical history
Hyperlipidemia
can be used to support a diagnosis. A 12- to 18-hour
The aim of treatment for primary hyperlipidemia is to
fasting blood sample should be taken and cholesterol
feduce and maintain plasma lipid concentrations at lev-
and triglyceride concentrations should be measured.48,81
els that no longer predispose the dog or cat to health
304 Canine and Feline Nutrition
risks. Dietary intervention is recommended in ani-
 s i ii d  r s
mals that have fasting hypertriglyceridemia of greater
ides, but adverse effects are frequent and include vom-
iting, diarrhea, erythema, pruritus, and abnormal liver
750 mg/dl.60,61 Miniature Schnauzers that have fast-
function tests.81 Although use of the fbrates in humans
ing hypertriglyceridemia but no clinical signs should
is generally associated with 20% to 40% reduction in
be treated if the elevated concentration of triglycerides
serum tfiglyceride concentrations, feported adverse
persists in two conisecutive samples taken several weeks
effects of gemfibrozil in the dog and cat include abdom-
apart.62
inal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, and abnormal liver func-
In both dogs and cats, a diet that is restricted in fat
tion tests.81
and calories is recommended.85 Feeding less fat decreases
Marine fish oils, which contain high amounts of
the infux of triglyceride-containing chylomicrons into
omega-3 fatty acids such as eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA)
the bloodstream, reduces the load on LPL, and pro-
and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), have also been used
motes the clearance of chylomicrons and VLDLs. For
as an adjunct therapy for hyperlipidemia in dogs.48,72
successful dietary management, the diet should contain
less than 20% fat, with an ideal level ofbetween 8% and
that these oils reduce plasma triglyceride and choles-
12% (on a dry-matter
basis
terol concentrations by decreasing the production of
blood samples should
be
taken
weeks aftef
VLDLs.88,89 Improved triglyceride levels have been
several
switching to the hew 
diet. It is imperative that the
reported in hyperlipidemic dogs receiving supplemental
restricted-fat diet is the animal's only source of food.
marine oil at doses up to 30 to 60 mg/kg daily, with
All fatty table scraps and treats must be discontinued.
no clinical or biochemical side effects.f8,5990 Although
Owhers should be cautioned that dogs with hyperlipid-
not effective for all dogs, marine oil supplementation
emia may be susceptible to acute pancreatitis, and that
may help to normalize blood lipid levels in animals that
a single high-fat meal may fesult in the onset of this dis-
are not responding adequately to dietary fat restriction
ease. If a fat-restricted diet normalizes blood triglyceride
alone.
levels, dietary management should be continued for the
The amelioration of clinical signs is the best indica-
remainder of the pet's life.
tor of long-term prognosis in pets with primary hyper-
 Feeding alow-fat diet to cats with LPL defciency has
lipidemia. The animal's health is invariably improved
been shown to normalize blood lipid levels and cause a
if dietary fat restriction is strictly enforced and blood
regression of xanthomas and peripheral neuropathies
lipid levels can be lowered to normal or near-normal
within 12 weeks of lowering plasma lipid concentra-
concentrations. Naturally, the presence of any second-
tions.72,87 Similarly, clinical signs in Miniature Schnau-
afy, underlying disorders that could contribute further
zers usually resolve when serum triglyceride levels are
to hyperlipidemia, such as insulin-dependent diabetes
normalized.67 Most Miniature Schnauzers with hyper-
mellitus or hypothyroidism, increases the health risks
lipidlemia can be successfully managed by diet, but more
and makes long-term management more difficult in
these pets.
any clinical signs of acute pancreatitis develop, periodic
inary cate should be sought immediately. In some cases,
The goai of treatmentfor primary hyperipidemia is to
reducing the level of fat in the diet is not sufficient to
reduce and maintain plasma lipid concentrations at
tedluce blood lipid levels. Cases of pure hyperchylomi-
levels that no longer predispose the pet to heaith risks.
cfonemias respond better to dietary fat restriction than
A fat-restricted diet is recommended and is fed for the
cases of mixed hypertriglyceridemias.86
remainder of the pet's lijfe and is often suffcient to con-
Several lipid-lowering drugs are approved for use in
trotclinical signs. Although not effective for all dogs,
humans, but not in dogs or cats. Although there are
supplementation with omega-3fatty acids may help
some reports of success using drugs such as fbric acid
to normalize blood lipid levels in animals that are not
derivatives (clofbrate, gemfbrozil, etc.) and pharma-
responding adequately to dietary fat restriction alone.
cological doses of niacin, the efficacy of these therapies
Inherited Disorders of Nutrient Metabolism 305
There appeat to be two separate underlying mecha-
PURINE METABOLISM
nisms that are responsible for the Dalmatian's high
production of uric acid and low production of allan-
IN DALMATIANS
toin. A defective uric acid transport system in the liver
Purines are components of the nucleic acids that are
tesults in decreased oxidation of uric acid to allantoin
found in the nucleus of plant and animal cells. All
by urate oxidase.97 The second problem involves the
mammals are capable of synthesizing purines for tis-
 kidneys. Compared with other species and other breeds
puiiqo ose are saund ssunueu pue ymis ans
of dogs, Dalmatians have reduced renal tubular reab-
through the reuse of dietary or endogenous nuclear
 sorption of urate.91 In other breeds, 98% of the uric
 material. Nuclear material that is ingested and hydro-
 acid in the glomerular filtrate is reabsorbed in the proxi-
q pano aq ues ien sasq aund sureio paza
mal tubules and returned to the liver for further oxi-
-au pue yo iog pasn aq on sapnoanu ou
dation to allantoin. Dalmatians have feduced ability
nance by the body. Normal cellular turnover and tissue
to reabsorb uric acid in the proximal tubules, resulting
maintenance, along with the digestion of excess dietary
in increased urinary excretion of urate. In humans and
purines, fesults in purine catabolism. A primary end
some other primates, loss of urate oxidase activity alone
product of purine catabolism is uric acid. If the liver
 is the underlying cause of increased uric acid concentra-
enzyme urate oxidase is present, uric acid is further
tions.98 Evolutionary accumulation of several mutations
degraded to form the compound allantoin. Uric acid
to the urate oxidase gene is the cause of altered enzyme
that is not converted to allantoin is present in body tis-
activity in humans, but this is not the case in Dalma-
sues as its salt, monosodium ufate.
tians.94 Hyperuricosuria is found in all Dalmatians and
Most mammals, with the exception of humans, the
higher apes, and Dalmatians, convert most uric acid to
Because of the prevalence of this disorder, a Dalmatian x
allantoin and as a fesult excrete very little urate in the
Pointer outcross was used to introduce the normal allele
urine. Dalmatians afe unique in that they excrete both
into the Dalmatian gene pool. (Interestingly, the pig-
urate and allantoin in their urine as end products of
 mented spots of the low-uric-acid backcross dogs are
purine metabolism.91,92 Compared with other breeds
usually smaller and less well defned when compared
of dogs, Dalmatians have increased levels of urate and
 o e on pl s (s and i
decreased levels of allantoin in the bloodstream and
spot selection may have contributed to fixing the hyper-
urine.93 Other breeds of dogs excrete 10 to 60 mg
uricosuria trait in the Dalmatian breed.ioo Further
of urate per 24-hour period, and their serum urate
studies may identify the exact gene or genes that are
concentration is approximately 0.25 mg/dl.91,94,95 In
responsible. Once identified, backcross dogs could be
contrast, Dalmatians excrete approximately 400 t0
used for breeding purposes to attempt to eliminate the
600 mg of urinary urate in a 24-hour period.91,93,96
inherited disease from the Dalmatian breed.101
However, these values can range from less than 200 mg
Altered purine metabolism in Dalmatians does have
to greater than 1 g of uric acid. The mean serum urate
some medical significance. Although allantoin is highly
concentration in Dalmatians is about 0.5 mg/dll, with
soluble, urate has a low aqueous solubility. Its accu-
a range of 0.3 to 4.0 mg/dl, approximately twofold to
mulation in the body can result in the precipitation of
fourfold the values in other dog breeds.91,95
urate crystals in serum or urine. In humans, crystalliza-
tion occurs in body tissues when sefum ufate values afe
 greater than 6.5 mg/dll.102 The presence of urate crystals
Daimatians excrete both urate and allantoin in their
causes the medical afliction that is commonly called
urine as end products of purine metabolism. They have
“gout,”" which is characterized by infammation, swell-
higher leveis ofurate in their blood and urine than other
ing, and painful joints. Interestingly, although Dalma-
breeds of dogs, as well as reduced renal tubular reab-
tians do not convert uric acid to allantoin, their serum
sorption of urate.Excess urate in the urine can lead to
does hot attain ufate concentrations as high as those
the development ofurate urolithiasis in some dogs
in humans with gout. Rather, because of the reduced
reabsorption of urate in the renal tubules, Dalmatians
306 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 excrete large amounts of urate in the urine, preventing
urolithiasis in Dalmatians, it is not the sole cause. Most
buildup in the serum. Although this capability appears
Dalmatians excrete urate in the urine at a concentration
to protect Dalmatians from developing signs of gout,
above its solubility limits. However, not all Dalmatians
the shift of excess urate from the serum to the urine
develop urate uroliths, and urate excfetion is not well
causes other problems.
correlated with the development of uroliths.109 Other
The presence of a high concentration of urate in the
predisposing factors that may be involved include ufi-
nary ammonium concentration, ufine pH, the presence
of this breed to the development of urate urolithiasis.
of a urinary tract infection, and dietary purine intake.
In dogs, urate uroliths or calculi are composed primar-
The incidlence of urate urolithiasis in the Dalmatian
ily of ammonium urate. A sufficiently high concen-
breed is not known, but it has been suggested that the
ttation of both urate and ammonium in the urine is
majority of dogs never experience clinical signs of this
necessary for the formation of these uroliths. Studies
disease, and that the incidence rate may be as low as
show that although urate calculi account for only 5%
1%.1l0 Conversely, a recent study showed that preva-
of calculi found in dogs, 45% to 65% of those that
lence in male Dalmatians may be as high as 34%.111
afe seen come from Dalmatians. Furthermore, 75%
Treatment for urate urolithiasis in dogs usually
to 100% of calculi found in Dalmatians are composed
requires surgical removal of the calculi.112 Prophylac-
tic measures for Dalmatians that afe predisposed to
is signifcantly more common in male Dalmatians than
urate urolithiasis include feeding a diet that promotes
in females.96,105 A study of over 500 Dalmatian urate
alkaline urine and is low in purines, as well as ensuring
uroliths revealed a 50:1 ratio of males to females.107
adequate hydration.94 A reduced-purine diet decreases
The anatomical differences between the urethras of
 the amount of urate precursors present in the urine, and
males and females may partially explain this dispar-
the production of an al kaline urine increases the solubil-
ity.108 The small, rounded urate crystals pass readily
ity of urate uroliths.113 The diet should provide mod-
through the wider female urethra, but they may tend to
 d a-i o s  on 
lodge in the male urethra as it enters the narrow groove
restriction of protein results in decreased ammonium
in the os penis. Conversely, others have reported that
ion production from the catabolism of excess protein.
female dogs that are not Dalmatians are more likely to
i aq on pn osie unid u yi are ieun siuiu
form urate-containing calculi than males.96 Therefore
in purines. The moderate restriction of protein there-
it appears that additional factors may be responsible
fore also reduces purine intake. Oral administration of
for the higher incidence or urate urolithiasis in male
sodium bicarbonate is effective in changing the alkalin-
Dalmatians.
ity of the urine. It is hypothesized that control of any
Clinical signs of urolithiasis in the dog, regardless of
concomitant urinary tfact infections may also aid in
the type of urolith present, depend on the duration of
 preventing recurrence. 109
the urolithiasis, the size of the uroliths, their location in
Daily administration of the drug allopurinol is often
the tfact, and the presence or absence of a concomitant
used as a prophylactic method in Dalmatians that afe
urinary tract infection. General signs include frequent
predisposed to urate urolithiasis.1l4 Allopurinol is an
urination and the voiding of small amounts of urine,
inhibitor of the enzyme xanthine oxidase, which is nec-
the appearance of pain or straining during urination,
uoensupv z'saund jo uonepeiaap au ioy Aressa
and hematuria. Urethral obstruction is characterized
of this drug results in a decrease in uric acid production.
by anuria, depression, anorexia, vomiting, and/or diar-
However, this can result in increased levels of xanthine
rhea. Complete obstruction always constitutes a medi-
o je inies aiun on peal pue aun au u
cal emergency.
xanthine. An increased incidence of this type of calculi
Although high urinary uric acid excretion is a
has been feported in Dalmatians that have feceived
major predisposing factor for the development of urate
allopurinol.105,115
Inherited Disorders of Nutrient Metabolism 307
References
1. Batt RM, Horadagoda NU, Simpson KW: Role of the pancreas in the absorption and malabsorption of cobalamin (vitamin B-12)
in dogs, / Nutr 121:S75-S76, 1991,
 2. Fyfe JC, Giger U, Hall CA, and others: lnherited selective intestinal cobalamin malabsorption and cobalamin defciency in dogs,
Pediatr Res 29:2431, 1991.
3. Vaden SL, Wood PA, Ledley FD, and others: Cobalamin defciency associated with methylmalonic acidemia in a cat, J Am Vet Med
Assoc 200: 1101-1103, 1992.
 4. Huff A, Seng A, Wang I and others: Screening for hereditary diseases by the Josephine Deubler Genetic Disease Testing
Laboratory (PennGen) at the University of Pennsylvania, Tuffs' canine and feline breeding and genetics conference, 2005.
5. Fordyce HH, Callan MB, Giger U: Persistent cobalamin deficiency causing failure to thrive in a juvenile Beagle, / Small Anim Pract
41:407-410, 2000.
6. Battersby lA, Giger U, Hall EJ: Hyperammonaemic encephalopathy secondary to selective cobalamin deficiency in a juvenile
Border Collie, / Small Anim Pract 46:339-344, 2005.
border expression and intrinsic factor-cobalamin absorption, Blood 94:3604 3606, 1999.
8. He Q, Madsen M, Kilkenney A, and others: Amnionless function is required for cubiin brush-border expresson and intrinsic
factor-cobalamin (vitamin Bt) absorption in vivo, Blood 106: 1447-1453, 2005.
9. Fyfe JC: Haematology of selective intestinal cobalamin malabsorption. In Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain N, editors: Schaim's
veterinary hematotogy, ed 5, Philadelphia, 2000, Wiley-Blackwell.
10. HuffA, Seng A, Tuneva J, and others: Molecular, metabolic, and hematologic screening for hereditary diseases at the University of
Pennsylvania (PennGen), Tufs canine and feline breeding and genetics conference, 2007.
 11. Fyfe J, Jexyk P Giger U, and others: Inherited selective malabsorption of vitamin Btz in Giant Schnauzers, J Am Anim Hosp Asoc
25:533-539, 1989.
12. Linder MC, Hazegh-Azam M: Copper biochemistry and molecular biology, Am J Clin Nutr 63:797S-81 1S, 1996.
13. Thornburg LP: A perspective on copper and liver disease in the dog, J Vet Diagn Invest 12:101-110, 2000.
 14. Cooper VL, Carlson MP, Jacobson J, and others: Hepatitis and increased copper levels in a Dalmatian, J Vet Diagn Invest 9:201-203,
1997.
15. Thornburg LB Rotinghaus G, MeGowan M, and others Hepatic copper concentrations in purebred and mixed-breed dog.
Vet Pathot 27:81-88, 1990.
'S66I 67y 7e yoa  9eo asei e u raddo sneday assxa ypim perosse Aypedodah d ape 'sI sau '91
Vet Pathot 42:97-100, 2005.
 18. Fuentealba 1C, Aburto EM: Animal models of copper-associated liver disease, Comp Hepatol 2:5, 2003.
19. Brewer G]: Wilson disease and canine copper toxicosis, Am J Chin Nutr 67:1087S-1090S, 1998.
o 'z-6is s ia A 'sraai uouag ueensny u sisn raddoo sues par T piddh '5 uh 07
 21. Thornburg LP Polley D, Dimmitt R: The diagnosis and treatment of copper toxicosis in dogs, Cax Pract 11:36-39, 1984.
22. van De Sluis B, Rothuizen J, Pearson PL, and others: Identifcation of a new copper metabolism gene by positional cloning in a
purebred dog population, Hum Mot Genet 11:165-173, 2002.
 23. Ubbink GJ, van de Broek J, Hazewinkel HA, and others: Cluster analysis of the genetic heterogeneity and disease distributions in
purebred dog populations, Vet Rec 142:209-213, 1998.
24. Haywood S, Rutgers HC, Christian MK: Hepatitis and copper aumulation in Skye Terers, Vet Pathol25:408-414, 1988.
308Canine and Feline Nutrition
 25. Webb CB, Twedt DC, Meyer DJ: Copper-associated liver disease in Dalmatians: a review of 10 dogs (1 998-2001), J Vet Intern Med
16:665-668, 2002.
26. Johnson GF, Zawie DA, Gilbertson SR, and others: Chronic active hepatitis in Doberman Pinschers, J Am Vet Med Asoc
180:1438-1442, 1982.
27. Spee B, Mandigers PJ, Arends B, and others: Differential expression of copper-associated and oxidative stress related proteins in a
new variant of copper toxicosis in Doberman Pinschers, Comp Hepatof 4:3, 2005.
 28. Keen CL, Lonnerdal B, Fisher CL: Age-related variations in hepatic iron, copper, zinc, and selenium concentrations in Beagles,
Am / Vet Res 42:1884-1887, 1981.
29. Thornburg LP, McAllister D, Ebinger WL, and others: Copper toxicosis in dogs. 1l. Copper-associated liver disease in Bedlington
Terriers. 11. The pathogenesis of copper-associated liver disease in dogs, Cax Pract 12(33-38):41-45, 1985.
30. Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan V, Blanton SH, Cao Y, and others: Linkage of a microsatellte marker to the canine copper toxicosis locus in
Bedlington Terriers, Am / Vet Res 58:23-27, 1997.
31. Holmes NC, Herrtage ME, Ryder EJ, and others: DNA marker C04107 for copper toxicosis in a population of Bedlington
Terriers in the United Kingdom, Vet Rec 142:351-352, 1998.
32. Hyun C, Lavulo LT, Filippich LJ: Evaluation of haplotypes associated with copper toxicosis in Bedlington Terriers in Australia,
Am / Vet Res 65:1573-1579, 2004.
33. van de Sluis B, Peter AT, Wijmenga C: Indirect molecular diagnosis of copper toxicosis in Bedlington Terriers is complicated by
haplotype diversity, J Hered 94:256-259, 2003.
34. Brewer GJ, Dick RD, Schall W, and others: Use of zinc acetateto treat copper toxicosis in dogs, JAm Vet Med Assoc 201:564-568,
1992.
36. Twedt DC, Sternlieb l, Cilbertson SR: Clinical, morphologic, and chemical studies on copper toxicosis of Bedlington Terriers
J Am Vet Med Assoc 175:269-275, 1979.
Ay a euog u sioedy addo auue o uoad pe suaean au ro eesu yo sn  l 
editors: Kirk's current veterinary therapy Xll, Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders.
38. Jezyk PF, Haskins ME, MacKay-Smith WE, and others: Lethal acrodermatitis in Bull Terriers, J Am Vet Med Asoc 188:833-839, 1986.
39. Miller WH Jr: Nutritional considerations in smmall animal dermatology, Vet Clin North Am Small Ani Pract 19:497-511, 1989
small anima! practice, St Louis, 2000, Saunders.
41. McEwan NA, Huang HP, Mellor D]: lmmunoglobulin levels in Bull Terriers suffering from lethal acrodermatitis, Vet Immuno?
Immunopathol96:235-238,2003.
42. Dodman NH, Bronson R, Gliatto J: Tail chasing in a Bull Terrier, J Am Vet Med Asoc 202:758-760, 1993.
43. Willemse T: Zinc-related cutaneous disorders of dogs. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy X, Philadelphia, 1992, Saunders.
44. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr, Griffn CE: Zinc-responsive dermatosis. In Scott DW, Miller WH Jr, Griffn CE, editors: Muller and
Kirk's small animal dermatology, ed 5, Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders.
45. Codner EC, Thatcher CD: The role of nutrition in the management of dermatoses, Semin Vet Med Surg Small Anim) 5:167-177, 1990.
46. Fadok VA: Zinc responsive dermatosis in a Great Dane: a case report, J Am Anim Hosp Asoc 18:409-414, 1982.
47. Brown RC, Hoag CN, Smart ME, and others: Alaskan Malamute chondrodysplasia. V. Decreased gut zinc absorption, Growth
42:1-6, 1978.
48. Watson TDC, Barrie J: Lipoprotein metabolism and hyperlipoproteinemia in the dog and cat: a review, J Small Anim Pract
34:479487, 1993.
of canine clinical nutrition, lthaca, NY, 2008, International Veterinary Information Service (www.ivis.org).
Inherited Disorders of Nutrient Metabolism 309
50. Barrie J, Watson TDG, Stear MJ, and others: Plasma cholesterol and lipoprotein concentrations in the dog: the effects of age,
breed, gender and endocrine disease, J Small Anim Pract 34:507-512, 1993.
51. Bauer JE: Lipoprotein-mediated transport of dietary and synthesized lipids and lipid abnormalities of dogs and cats, J Am Vet Med
Asoc 224:668-675, 2004.
52. Johnson MC: Hyperlipemia disorders in dogs, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 27:361-370, 2005.
53. Whitney MS, Boon CD, Rebar AH, and others: Ultracentrifugal and electrophoretic characteristics of the plasma lipoproteins of
miniature schnauzer dogs with idiopathic hyperlipoproteinemia, / Vet Intern Med 7:253-260, 1993.
55. Sato K, Agoh H, Kaneshige T, and others: Hypercholesterolemia in Shetland Sheepdogs, / Vet Med Sci 62:1297-1301, 2000
56. Jeusette Il, Grauwels M, Cuvelier C, and others: Hypercholesterolaemia in a family of rough collie dogs,J SmallAnim Pract
45:319-324, 2004.
57. Whitney MS: Evaluation of hyperlipidemias in dogs and cats, Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 7:292-300, 1992.
58. Watson TD, Mackenzie JA, Stewart JB, and others: Use of oral and intravenous fat tolerance tests to assess plasma chylomicron
dearance in dogs, Res Vet Sei 58:256-262, 1995.
59. Downs LC, Crispin SM, LeGrande-Defretin V, and others: The effect of dietary changes on plasma lipids and lipoproteins of six
Labrador Retrievers, Res Vet Sci 63:175-181, 1997.
60. Armstrong PJ, Ford RB: Hyperlipidemia. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy X: smallanimal practice, Philadelphia,
1989, Saunders.
61. Barrie J: Hyperlipidemia. In Bonagura JD, editor: Kirk's current veterinary therapy Xll: small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1995,
Saunders.
62. Ford RB: Idiopathic hyperchylomicronemia in Miniature Schnauzers, J Small Anim Pract 34:488-492, 1993.
   doay e y e m so s re e p r   
40:820-828, 1979.
64. Crispin S: Ocular lipid deposition and hyperlipoproteinaemia, Irog Retin Eye Res 21:169-224, 2002.
65. Zech LA Jr, Hoeg JM: Correlating corneal arcus with atherosclerosis in familial hypercholesterolemia, Lipids Heaith Dis 7:7, 2008.
66. Liu SK, Tilley LP Tappe JB and others: Clinical and pathologic fndings in dogs with atherosclerosis: 21 cases (1970-1983),
J Am Vet Med Asoc 189:227-232, 1986.
67. Bodkin K: Seizures associated with hyperlipoproteinemia in a Miniature Schnauzer, Cax Pract 17:1 1-15, 1992.
68. Xenoulis PG, Suchodolski JS, Levinski MD, and others: Investigation of hypertriglyceridemia in healthy Miniature Schnauzers,
/Vet Intern Med 21:1224-1230, 2007.
69. Jaeger JQ, Johnson S, Hinchcliff KW, and others: Characterization of biochemical abnormalities in idiopathic hyperlipidemia of
Miniature Schnauzer dogs, ACVIM, Charlotte, NC, June 4-8, 2003
70. Rader D], Hobbs HH: Disorders of lipoprotein metabolism. ln Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Kasper DL, and others, editors: Harrison?
principles ofinternal medicine, ed 17, New York, 2008, McGraw-Hill
71. Connelly PW, Maguire GF, Little JA: Apolipoprotein CllSt. Michael. Familial apolipoprotein Cll deficiency associated with
premature vascular disease, / Clir Invest 80:1597-1606, 1987.
urrady Ard paur ya ses ur edoau peaydiah sao pue  h  ausf g sau 7
Vet Rec 119:268-272, 1986.
73. Johnstone AC, Jones BR, Thompson JC, and others: The pathology of an inherited hyperlipoproteinaemia of cats, J Comp Pathof
102:125-137, 1990.
hypertriglyceridemic cats, Clix Invest Med 13:259-263, 1990.
310 Canine and Feline Nutrition
75. Watson T, Gaffney D, Mooney C, and others: Inherited hyperchylomicronaemia in the cat: lipoprotein lipase function and gene
structure, / Small Anim Pract 33:213-217, 1992.
76. Jones BR: 1nherited hyperchylomicronaemia in the cat, / Small Anim Pract 34:493-499, 1993.
77. Backus RC, Ginzinger DG, Ashbourne Excoffon KJ, and others: Maternal expression of functional lipoprotein lipase and effects
on body fat mass and body condition scores of mature cats with lipoprotein lipase deficiency, Am J Vet Res 62:264-269, 2001.
78. Reginato CF, Backus RC, Rogers QR: lmproved growth of lipoprotein lipase deficient kittens by feeding a low-fat, highly
digestible diet, / Nutr Biochem 13:149-156, 2002.
79. Chanut F, Colle MA, Deschamps JY, and others: Systemic xanthomatosis associated with hyperchylomicronaemia in a cat,
Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Chin Med 52:272-274, 2005.
80. Bauer JE: Evaluation and dietary considerations in idiopathic hyperlipidemia in dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc 206:1684 1688, 1995.
81. Elliott DA: Dietary and medical considerations in hyperlipidemia. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors: Textbook of veterinary
internal medicine, ed 7, St Louis, 2010, Saunders.
82. Bauer JE: Comparative lipoprotein metabolism and lipid abnormalities in dogs and cats. Part ll. Diagnostic approach to
hyperlipemia and hyperlipoproteinemia, 2Ist annual forwm of the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Conference, 2003.
83. Barrie J, Nash AS, Watson TDG: Quantatative analysis of canine plasma lipoproteins, J Small Anim Pract 34:226-231, 1993.
84. Brunzell JD, Iverius PH, Scheibel MS, and others: Primary lipoprotein lipase deficiency, Adv Exp Med Biol 201:227-239, 1986.
85. Jones BR: Hyperlipidaemia in dogs and cats, World Small Animal Veterinary Asociation world congress proceedings, 2003
86. Bauer JE: Hyperlipidemias. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors: Textbook ofveterinary internal medicine, ed 5, Philadelphia, 2000,
Saunders.
 87. Crieshaber T, McKeever B Conroy J: Spontaneous cutaneous (eruptive) xanthomatosis in two cats, J Am Anim Hosp Asoc
27:509-512, 1991.
88. Kendrick JS, Higgins JA: Dietary fish oils inhibit early events in the assembly of very low density lipoproteins and target apoB for
degradation within the rough endoplasmic reticulum of hamster hepatocytes, J Lipid Res 40:504-514, 1999.
89. Minihane AM, Khan S, Leigh-Firbank EC, and others: ApoE polymorphism and fish oil supplementation in subjects with an
atherogenic lipoprotein phenotype, Arterioscler Tbromb Vasc Biol 20: 1990-1997, 2000.
90. Logas D, Beale KM, Bauer JE: Potential clinical benefits of dietary supplementation with marine-life oil, J Am Vet Med Asoc
199:1631-1636, 1991.
91. Duncan H, Curtiss AS: Observations on uric acid transport in man, the Dalmatian and the non-Dalmatian dog, Henry Ford Hosp
Med /19:105-114, 1971.
92. Kuster C, Shorter RC, Dawson B, and others: Uric acid metabolism in Dalmatians and other dogs. Role of the liver, Arch Intern
Med 129:492496, 1972.
93. Sorenson JL, Ling CV: Metabolic and genetic aspects of urate urolithiasis in Dalmatians, J Am Vet Med Asoc 203:857-862, 1993.
94. Duncan H, Wakim KC, Ward LE: The eects of intravenous administration of uric acid on its concentration in plasma and urine
of Dalmatian and non-Dalmatian dogs, J Lab Clin Med 58:876-883, 1961.
95. Briggs OM, Harley EH: Serum urate concentrations in the Dalmatian Coach Hound, / Comp Pathot 95:301-304, 1985.
96. Case LC, Ling GV, Ruby AL, and others: Urolithiasis in Dalmatians: 275 cases (1981-1990), J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:96-100,
1993.
97. Giesecke D, Tiemeyer W: Defect of uric acid uptake in Dalmatian dog liver, Experientia 40:1415-1416, 1984.
98. Oda M, Satta Y, Takenaka O, and others: Loss of urate oxidase activity in hominoids and its evolutionary implications, Mot Biof
Evof 19:640-653, 2002.
99. Trimble H, Keeler CE: The inheritance of "high uric acid excretion" in dogs, J Hered 29:280-289, 1938.
Inherited Disorders of Nutrient Metabolism 311
100. Safra N, Schaible RH, Bannasch DL: Linkage analysis with an interbreed backcross maps Dalmatian hyperuricosuria to CFA03,
Mamm Genome 17:340-345, 2006.
101. Safra N, Ling GV, Schaible RH, and others: Exclusion of urate oxidase as a candidate gene for hyperuricosuria in the Dalmatian
dog using an interbreed backcross, J Hered 96:750-754, 2005.
'pie suoxo uaa saruou u paeuis sop ueneuea ayp u Arase asesn mot saypo pue 'T raaiag 'd unn di n 701
Am / Physiol 220:973-979, 1971.
103. White EG: Symposium on urolithiasis in the dog 1. Introduction and incidence, J SmallAnim Pract 7:529-535, 1966.
104. Brown NO, Parks JL, Greene RW: Canine urolithiasis: retrospecive analysis of438 cases, JAm Vet Med Asoc 170:414418, 1977.
105. Osborne CA, Clinton CW, Bamman LK, and others: Prevalence of canine uroliths. Minnesota Urolith Center, Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 16:27-44, 1986.
106. Ling GV, Franti CE, Ruby AL, and others: Urolithiasis in dogs ll. Breed prevalence, and interrelations of breed, sex, age, and
mineral composition, Am / Vet Res 59:630-642, 1998.
107. Houston DM, Moore AE, Favrin MG, and others: Canine urolithiasis: a look at over 16,0o0 urolith submissions to the Canadian
Veterinary Urolith Centre from February 1998 to April 2003, Can Vet J 45:225-230, 2004.
108. Albasan H, Lulich Jp, Osborne CA, and others: Evaluation of the association between sex and risk of forming urate uroliths in
Dalmatians, J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:565-569, 2005.
109. Porter P: Urinary calculi in the dog. 1l. Urate stones and purine metabolism, J Comp Pathol 73:1 19-135, 1963.
110. Fetner PJ: Uric acid dermatitis, Daimatian Quartery, pp 11-13, 1991.
111. Bannasch DL, Ling GV, Bea J, and others: Inheritance of urinary calculi in the Dalmatian, / Vet Intern Med 18:483-487, 2004.
112. Collins RL, Birchard SJ, Chew DJ, and others: Surgical treatent of urate calculi in Dalmatians: 38 cases (1980-1995), J Am Vet
Med Aoc 213:833-838, 1998.
113. Bartges JW, Osborne CA, Felice LJ: Canine xanthine uroliths: risk factor management. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, editors: Current
veterinary therapy X!: small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1992, Saunders.
 114. Ling GV, Case LC, Nelson H, and others: Pharmacokinetics of allopurinol in Dalmatian dogs, J Vet Pharmacol Tber 20:134-138,
1997.
115. Ling CV, Ruby AL, Harrold DR, and others: Xanthine-containing urinary calculi in dogs given allopurinol, J Am Vet Med Asoc
198:1935-1940, 1991.
28
Development and Treatment of Obesity
Obesity is the most common form of malnutrition seen
their ideal body weight are generally classifed as
in companion animals in the United States and other
overweight, and those whose body weight is greatef
industrialized countries. Although incidence estimates
than 20% above normal are classified as obese.6 This
vaty depending upon the population that was surveyed
standard is corroborated by evidence in human sub
and methodology used, there is consensus that berween
jects that health problems associated with overweight
20% and 50% of dogs living in homes are overweight
conditions begin to increase when weight is 15% of
of obese.1-3 Using the lowest value of 20%, the transla-
greater above ideal. Similar to humans, numerous
tion of this fgure into actual dog numbers is sobering.
health risks are associated with overweight conditions
Of the 72 million dogs living in homes in the United
in dogs and cats.
Several metabolic aberrations are associated with
fecent studies of house cats report that between 25%
obesity in dogs and cats. Obese dogs and cats fre-
and 50% of the cats seen by
veterinafians afe over-
quently
develop
glucose
: intolerance and abnofmal
weight or obese.5.7 This means that at least 21 million of
the 82 million cats living in U.S. homes are overweight.
tent hyperinsulinemia is the
leorizedtobeanimpoftant
Middle-aged adlults (5 to 8 years) are most likely to be
factor in the eventual de
/elopment of diabetes mellitus
above their ideal body weight, while fewer young adults
in
overweight1
pets;
cats afe mofe than
and geriatric pets afe overweight.8 Similar to humans,
three times more likely
 to develop diabetes mellitus
dogs that are overweight when they are adolescents
than normal 
weight
cats.
Recent fesearch shows
afe more likely to gain excessive amounts of weight as
infuenced by the incfeased
adlults.9 It is theorized that the incidence of obesity in
 production of adipocyte cytokines by fat cells and asso-
companion animals has increased because a sedentary
lifestyle has become the norm rather than the exception
weight is reduced in obese dogs, glucose intolerance
for many. In addition, the provision of highly palatable
often improves to near-normal values.15 Obesity in
and energy-dense foods may further contribute to the
dogs is also associated with alterations in blood lipids,
energy imbalance that leadls to obesity.
including increased plasma cholesterol and triglyceride
essarily exceed the upper limit of the reference range
Unfortunately, like contemporary American humans,
for dogs, they may be associated with other obesity-
α large proportion of cats and dogs, between 25% and
related health problems.
50%, are overweight or obese. Living a sedentary lifestyle
Obesity may contribute to the development of pul-
monary and cardiovascular disease in dogs.18 Excess
dense foods,may be important contributingfactors.
weight puts a strain on the circulatory system because
increased cardiac workload is required to perfuse the
increased tissue mass. This increased workload may
cause additional stress to a heart that is already weak-
ened by fatty infiltration. Changes in pulmonary health
DEFINITION AND HEALTH RISKS
lead to diffculties breathing (airway dysfunction) both
Obesity is defined as the excessive accumulation of
during and after exercise.19 There is also some evidence
fat in the alipose storage areas of the body, eventu-
suggesting that overweight conditions contribute to sec-
ally contributing to adverse effects on health and mor-
ondary hypertension in dogs, altheough there is contro-
3A0qe %07 01 %0l a1e 1eY1 s1e> pue so 0111e1
versy about this relationship.20,21 Studies in cats have
313
314 Canine and Feline Nutrition
not been conducted, but it is theorized that a similaf
effect may be found in this species.
BOX 28-1 HEALTH PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED
WITH OBESITYIN DOGS AND CATS
Physical effets of carrying excess weight contribute
to exercise and heat intolerance, joint and locomotor
Glucose intolerance and abnormal insulin response
problems, and the development of osteoarthritis and
chronic lameness. In a long-term prospective study,
Alterations in blood lipids (elevated cholesterol and
tigyceride concentrations)
both the frequency and severity of osteoarthritis were
greater in Labradlor Retrievers that were fed ad libitum
Increased risk for pulmonary and cardiovascular disease
during the frst several years of life than in dogs that
Reduced exercise and heat tolerance
were fed 25% less food and that weighed significantly
Joint and locomotor (mobility) problems
less.22 Increased weight was signifcantly and positively
Reduced ability to self-groom and increased risk for
cofrelated with increased incidence
DUE
1 sevetity
of
dermatoses in cats
osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritic
also developed
earlier in life in dogs that were overweight than in lean
Increased surgical and anesthetic risks for morbidity
dogs. Similarly, cats that are overweight are more likely
 and mortality
to show reduced mobility and to develop lameness than
 Possible increased risk for certain forms of cancer
cats that are in optimal condition.13
Reduced quality of life
In cats, there is an association between overweight
conditions and certain types of dermatoses, such as
feline acne, alopecia, and scale formation. These changes
surgical and anesthetic fisk, and experience incfeased
ate presumed to be related to a redluced ability to self-
incidence of morbidity and mortality following surgical
groom and in some cases to the development of pres-
 procedures. For example, surgical time to complete
sure sores from reduced activity. Other potential health
ovatiohysterectomy is significantly longer in overweight
risks to cats include hepatic lipidosis (specifically in the
females than in lean dogs.27 It is without question that
event of rapid weight loss) and feline lower urinary tract
altogether the numerous health risks associated with
disease (FLUTD).6,23
overweight conditions in companion animals negatively
A link between obesity and certain types of cancer has
affect a pet's quality of life and contribute to both mor-
been reported in both dogs and cats by some authors.
bidity and mortality (Box 28-1).28
For example, one study reported that female dogs that
were obese prior to a diagnosis of mammary carcinoma
experienced increased risk of death from the disease
Heaith risks associated with overweight conditions in
when compared with dogs that were not overweight
dogs and cats inciude hyperinsulinemia, giucose intoier
at the time of diagnosis.24 Another study reported that
ance, diabetes melitus, puimonary and cardiovascuiar
being obese early in life increased a dog's risk of devel-
disease, exercise and heat intolerance, and orthopedic
 oping mammary tumors.25 Conversely other researchers
problems. Surgical risk is higher, and the incidences of
failed to fnd an association between canine mammary
postoperative morbidity andmortality increase.
aansadsoid jeuonipv gz'lusiam Apoq pue ruouie
studies that include larger groups of animals are needed
to better understand this relationship and to tease out
u pue rasue jo sadai uaamq saouana aqssd
DEVELOPMENT
relationship to body condition.
QF OVERWEIGHT CONDITIONS
Finally, obese dogs and cats are difficult to thor-
 oughly evaluate during veterinary examinations because
The fundamental underlying cause of obesity is an
of the presence of overlying layers of adlipose tissue and
imbalance berween energy intake and energy expendi-
difficulty obtaining blood. Diagnostic imaging such as
ture that results in a persistent energy surplus (positive
ultrasonography is also impeded in overweight animals.
energy balance). Over time, the energy surplus results
Like humans, overweight animals have an increased
in weight gain and a change in body composition. The
Development and Treatment of Obesity 315
increase in body fat occurs either by an enlargement of
energy imbalance. Conversely, some pets gain weight
fat cell size alone (hypertrophic obesity) or by an increase
 rapidlly, over a period of a few weeks or months. This may
in both fat cell size and fat cell number (hyperplastic
 occur when energy expenditure decreases significantly
obesity). Pets that dlevelop hyperplastic obesity are gen-
following the combined effects of neutering, attain-
erally believed to be difficult to treat and have a poor
ment of mature body size, and reduced activity level.
long-term prognosis. Normal adlipocyte hyperplasia
and is not accompanied by a reduction in energy intake.
occurs during specifc critical periods of development.
Feeding dogs free choice (ad libitum) may also lead to
 In most species, these periods ocur during eatly growth
rapid weight gain when a hew food is introduced or
and occasionally during puberty.29 Once adulthood is
when a new dog is adlded to the home. Both novelty and
feached, the total number of fat cells does not normally
social facilitation can contribute to a sudden increase in
increase further. Overfeeding during adulthood results
food consumption.
in an increase in fat cell size, but little or no change in
Iwo
occur during the development of
fat cell number. Although conditions of extreme and
obesity: the dynamic phase and the static phase. During
prolonged overfeeding can result in fat cell hyperplasia
the initial dynamic phase, an animal consumes more
in some animals, the majority of cases of adult onset
energy than is expended, and the surplus energy is
obesity are a result of fat cell hypertrophy alone.30,31
 deposited as body fat and, to a lesser degree, as lean
The body has the capacity to add new adipocytes,
body tissue. As the dog or cat gains weight, its resting
but is not able to reduce its existing adipocyte num-
metabolic rate (RMR) increases proportionately to the
ber. This phenomenon, called the “ratchet effect,
increase in lean body mass. Eventually the increased
indicates that body fat can always increase, but it
RMR, coupled with the increased energy expenditure
cannot decrease below a minimum level that is set
that is needed to move a larger body size, offsets the
by the total number of adipocytes and their need to
caloric surplus. At this point, zero energy balance is
remain lipid-filled. This fact is of importance when
achieved, and the animal stops gaining weight. The
considering growth rate and weight gain in young.
static phase of obesity occurs when the animal is no
developing dogs and cats. Data from several studies
longer gaining weight but achieves energy balance and
with laboratory animals show that overnutrition dur-
maintains its overweight condition for a prolonged
ing growth results in increased numbers of fat cells
period of time.
and total body fatness during adulthood.32,33 Super-
Auous fat cell hyperplasia during the critical periods
RISK FACTORS FOR OBESITY
of adipose tissue growth may produce a long-term
stimulus to gain excess weight in the form of excess
Although the problem of obesity appears very simple
adipocytes. The greater number of fat cells results in
 in terms of energy balance, a multitude of underlying
both an increased predisposition toward obesity in
factors can contribute to an animal's propensity to gain
adulthood and an increased difficulty in maintain-
weight and to maintain an overweight body condition.
ing weight loss when it occurs. Although this effect
Moreover, the development of obesity in an individual
has hot been specifically demonstrated in dogs and
dog or cat can be the result of several separate infuenc-
cats, it is theorized that persistent overnutrition dur-
ing factors occurring simultaneously (Box 28-2). Factors
ing development in growing pets may result in both
that may contribute to the development of obesity can
adipocyte hypertrophy and hyperplasia, leading to
be classifed as having either an endogenous or an exog-
 overweight conditions that are particularly refractory
enous origin. Endogenous factors include the animal's
to treatment. The potential for an animal to produce
age, sex, and reproductive status, hormonal abnormali-
excess numbers of fat cells during specifc critical
ties, hypothalamic lesions, and genetic predisposition
 periods illustrates the importance of proper weight
(breedl). Exogenous factors include social and environ-
control throughout growth.
mental infuences on food intake, diet composition and
palatability, and the pet's lifestyle (amount and type of
weight conditions gradually, over a period of months
 exercise). Although most cases of companion animal
obesity are a result of overfeeding, underexercising, of
316 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 Research studies have shown that completely sedentary
 BOX 28-2 RISK FACTORS FOR OBESITY
animals actually consume more food and gain more
IN COMPANION ANIMALS
weight than do animals that experience moderate activ-
nn e mo A nn seadde ii se'saaal Ai!
ENDOGENOUSFACTORS
Exogenous factors
 Age, sex, and reproductive
Voluntary activity level
External influences on
decrease in food intake. As a result, animals that are
status
 Presence of hormonal
food intake
maintained at or below this minimum activity level will
abnormalities or
 Diet composition and 
consume more than theif energy needs and will inevita-
hy pothalamic lesions
 palata bility
bly gain weight.
Genetic predisposition
Living environment and
type of lifestyle
Factors that infuence the amount of energy that is
expended for exercise inciude the type, duration, and
frequency of the activity Other factors that affect the
a combination of the two, it is important to recognize
activity level of dogs and cats inciude breed, tempera
that each of these twe conditions are typically the result
ment,age,reproductive status,and the presence ofcer-
 of a combination of external and internal infuencing
tain chronic illnesses or developmentat disorders.
factors.
Inadequate Exercise
Increasing Age
A sedentary lifestyle is an important contributor to
 Obesity is most common in middle-aged adult dogs
 decreased energy expenditure and to the development
 and cats. In one study, only 6% of female dogs between
of overweight conditions in companion animals.234
 9 and 12 months of age were evaluated as overweight,
In today's society, most dogs are kept as companions
 compared with 40% of mature adults.37 This same trend
and house pets rather than as active, working partners
is observed in cats.6,.7 As an adlult animal ages, lean body
to their human owners. (
Cats are also experiencing
mass gradually declines, resulting in reduced basal met-
decreased activity levels. A signifcant proportion of
abolic rate (BMR) and total daily energy needs. The loss
cats lead sedentary, indoor 
lives
rather than having
of lean body mass is exacerbated if aging is accompanied
the fun of farms and 1
s as in the past.
 by a decrease in exercise. The total daily energy needs
height
Living indoors and 
：been
of an average-size, 7-year-old dog may decrease by as
identifed as tisk factors for
 much as 20% when compared with its needs as a young
adult. If food intake does not decrease proportionately
feduced opportunities for outdoor exercise. Addi-
with decreasing energy needs as an animal ages, weight
tional factors that infuence the daily activity level
gain results.
of dogs and cats ate breed, temperament, age, repro-
ductive status, and the presence of certain chronic
illnesses or developmental d
Neutering
disorders. Moreovel,
a
vicious cycle can occur in which an overweight pet
The increased incidence of overweight conditions
becomes increasingly sedentary and reluctant to exer-
in neutered dogs and cats has been fecognized for
cise because of obesity-induced exercise intolerance
and mobility problems.
vations, showing that neutered adult pets generally
In normal animals experiencing moderate levels of
weigh more and maintain higher body fat than intact
exercise, physical activity contributes about 30% of
animals of the same breed and size.3941 The underly
the body's total energy expenditure. Decreased volun-
ing cause of these differences is probably a combi-
tary activity results in a direct reduction of this energy
nation of physiological and environmental factors.
expenditure and can also affect a pet's daily food intake.
Veterinarians often encourage clients to castrate of
Development and Treatment of Obesity 317
spay their pets shortly before they become sexually
Finally, an animal's BMR is affected by neutering.
mature. As a fesult, many dogs and cats are neutered
When RMR was measured using respiratory indirect
between 6 months and 1 year of age. This period cor-
calorimetry in neutered and intact cats, heat coeff-
fesponds to a natural decrease in activity level and in
 sies aea e ae ireiu ui aeais aiam siu
the animal's energy needs for growth. If owners are
in neutered animals.39 Intact males had heat coefficients
not aware of this change and continue to feed their
that were 28% higher than those of neutered males,
pet the same amount of food, excess weight gain will
and intact females had heat coefficients that were 33%
result. Because spaying and neutering often occur just
higher than those of neutered females. When RMR is
before maturity, the change in sexual status may be
expressed on the basis of lean body tissue, no difference
erroneously blamed for a weight gain that was actu-
is seen between intact and neutered animals, suggesting
ally the result of diminished energy needs and excess
that these dlifferences afe caused by the body composi-
food intake.
tion changes seen in neutered animals. Regardless, the
However, there is also a direct effect of reproductive
dramatic change in BMR can be interpreted to mean
status upon feeding behavior and food intake. Female
that neutered male cats may require 28% fewer calo-
dogs and cats typically decrease their food intake during
fies, and females 33% fewer calories, than their intact
estrus, and the cause of this change has been attributed
counterparts.
to estrogen. For example, a study with dogs exam-
Many shelters and veterinarians have adopted the use
ined the infuence of estrus on voluntary food intake
of early-age neutering (at 8 to 16 weeks of age) because
in 12 Beagle bitches.42 Results showed that there was
 of the benefts to pet population control. Recognition
a tendency for females to decrease food consumption
of the safety of these procedures for puppies and kit-
during the week that they were in estrus. The authors
tens led the American Veterinary Medical Association
then examined food intake patterns in ovariohysterec-
Jo idasuos aun Sujioddns uonnjosai c66t e aaoidde 01
tomized and control-operated bitches. Over a period of
early-age neutering. However, one concern has been the
90 days, the ovatichysterectomized bitches consumed
 potential of early-age neutering to infuence a pet's ten-
20% more food and gained significantly more weight
 dency to become obese. A study compared metabolic
than did the sham-operated controls. The authors
rates and development of obesity in cats that were surgi
attributed the difference in weight gain to an increase in
cally neutered at 7 weeks of age, surgically neutered at
food intake and a decrease in voluntary activity. More
7 months of age, or left intact.39 All of the cats in the
fecently, a study of ovarioectomized dogs showed that
 study were fed ad libitum until they were 2 years of age
maintenance energy needs decreased while voluntary
and were assessed regularly for body condition, meta-
bolic rate, and glucose tolerance. Because body weight
Similar fesults have been cbserved in cats.44 Both male
alone is not an accurate predictor of obesity, body con-
and female cats tend to increase voluntary food intake
dition scores were assigned and body mass index was
after neutering and consume more food than intact
calculated. The body condition scores and body mass
adults.45,46 Although the exact metabolic mechanism
indices of the neutered males and females were signif-
for this change is not known, hormonal alterations
cantly higher than those in the intact animals, indicating
following neutering in cats (in addition to the loss of
that neutered animals were mofe cbese than intact ani-
 estrogen in females) include increases in plasma con-
 mals. Howevef, no differences were observed between
 animals neutered at 7 weeks of age and those heutered
prolactin.47 It is theorized that increased IGF-1 may
at 7 months of age. More fecently, an epidemiological
stimulate adipocyte proliferation and that persistently
 study of dogs in the United States found that the fre-
high levels of prolactin contribute to the maintenance
 quency of obesity was slightly lower in dogs that were
of adlipose tissue and possibly to the dysregulation of
 neutered before 5.5 months of age when compared with
glucose metabolism seen in overweight cats. The ofexi-
 dogs neutered after 6 months.48 Together, these results
genic (appetite-stimulating) hormone ghrelin may also
 indicate that early-age neutering presents the same level
be involved in regulation of energy intake in neutered
of risk of weight gain as does neutering at the traditional
animals.
age of6 to 9 months.
318 Canine and Feline Nutrition
this difference is speculated to be due to the higher
Caloric intake shouid generally be reduced after neu-
proportion of lean body tissue seen in Great Danes.51
tering to prevent weight gain. Neutering increases α
 More research that examines energy differences among
pet's risk for overweight conditions via several mecha-
dog breeds is necessary to increase understanding of
nisms. The age that the dog or cat is neutered often
possible predispositions to obesity. Few data are avail-
corresponds with a natural decrease in the pet's growth
able concerning breed predilections to obesity in pet
rate and energy needs, which may lead to weight gain.
cats, but two studies have suggested that mixed-breed
Neutered animais aiso tend to consume more food and
cats are more likely to be overweight than purebred cats,
to have a reduced basal metabolic rate, both of which
 e mous sien xue ie sisns iaoe a
can contribute to an energy surplus ijffood intake is not
controlled.
 popular and more breeds are developed, such predilec-
tions may become more evident in this species.
Genetic Predisposition (Breed)
Endocrine Disorders
Certain breeds of dogs reportedlly have a disproportion-
ately high incidence of obesity, although the breeds that
Two endocrine disorders that may infuence body
ate identified tend to vary with both the time of the study
weight in companion animals are hypothyroidism and
and region of the world. Early studies in the United
hyperadrenocorticism. Hypothyroidism results in a
Kingdom identifed Cocker Spaniels, Labrador Retriev-
decreased BMR, which may in turn cause a predisposi-
ers, Shetland Sheepdogs, and the small Terfier breeds
tion for obesity. This disorder is diagnosed when clinical
as being predisposed to obesity, while Boxers, German 
signs are observed and plasma levels of one or both of
Shepherd Dogs, Fox Terriers, and the sight-hound
the thyroid hormone variants thyroxine (T4) and trio-
breeds had a relatively low incidence.49 Conversely, a
dothyronine (T3) are found to be below normal. Idic-
study in Gerrmany just a few years earlier reported that
 pathic atrophy of the thyroid gland is the most common
German Shepherd Dogs, Boxers, and Poodles were
 cause of hypothyroidism in dogs. This disorder occurs
 more likely to be overweight.50 These differences suggest
 most fequently in middle-aged and older dogs, and
that the popularity of a breed and regional differences
 certain breeds show a higher incidence than the general
 in type may infuence breed predispositions. A more
population. These breeds include Golden Retfievers,
recent report of dogs in the United States idlentified
Doberman Pinschers, Irish Setters, Boxers, Old Eng-
Labradlor Retrievers and Shetland Sheepdogs, as well as
lish Sheepdogs, Miniature Schnauzers, Airedale Terri-
Golden Retrievers, Cocker Spaniels, Dachshunds, Min-
ers, and some Spaniel breeds.53 Spayed females are also
iature Schnauzers, Springer Spaniels, Chihuahuas, Bas-
more likely to develop the disorder than other dogs.54
set Hounds, and Pugs as most likely to be overweight
Hypothyroidism can occur in cats, but it is much less
ot obese.8
 common and has not been well documented.
Although several  environmental  factors 
atealsc
Clinical signs of hypothyroidism include lethargy.
Jp uonisoduos Apoq pauanyu Aaiesnauss 'paaloau
a dulled mental attitude, and exercise intolerance.53
ferences may partially explain the higher frequencies
Common skin changes include alopecia; the develop-
 of overweight conditions in certain
1 breeds of dogs.
 ment of a dry, coarse coat; and skin hyperpigmentation.
For example, it can be theorized that breeds that were
Cold sensitivity and weight gain afe clinical signs that
developed for physical work and that naturally possess a
fesult directly from the decreased BMR associated with
higher muscle mass to body fat ratio will have a highet
hypothyroidism. Howevet, only a small percentage of
BMR than dogs of similar size that have a lower propor-
dogs exhibit all of these signs, and when obesity is seen,
tion of lean tissue and a higher proportion of body fat.
it is usually moderate. Regardless, an assessment of thy-
One example is a compatison of Great Danes, bred for
toid hormone levels should always be included in the
protection, with Newfoundlands, bred for coldl-water
differential diagnosis of obesity.
rescue work. Adult Newfoundlands have lower energy
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome) can
requirements than adult Great Danes of similar weight;
also tesult in increased body size. This disorder is caused
Development and Treatment of Obesity 319
by the production of excess corticosteroids by the adre-
 are fed highly palatable diets is a direct result of over-
nal cortex, which may be caused by either an adrenal
consumption. Similarly, studies with human subjects
gland or a pituitary gland tumor. It is most common
have demonstrated that the quantity of food consumed
in middle-aged and older dogs, and breed predilections
varies directly with its palatability, and palatability does
have been observed in Poodles, Dachshunds, Boxers,
 not appear to interact with levels of food deprivation. In
Brussels Griffons, and Boston Terriers.56 Cushings
other words, if food is perceived to be highly appealing.
syndrome can occur in cats, but it is quite fare. The
an individual tends to eat more of it, regardless of his of
primary clinical signs of this disorder include polyuria,
her initial level of hunger.59
polydipsia, lethargy, hair loss, and the development of
Palatability is an important diet characteristic that is
 a pendulous abdomen. True obesity occurs in approxi-
heavily promoted in the marketing of pet foods. Many
mately 50% of the cases, although the presence of an
owhers select a product based upon their pefceptions of
enlarged abdomen may be perceived to be obesity by
the food's appeal and their pet's acceptance of the diet,
some pet owners. Diagnosis is based on adrenal func-
rather than on indicators of nutritional adequacy. Semi-
tion tests, which will dlifferentiate between Cushing's-
 moist dog foods and treats contain variable amounts of
induced cbesity and obesity as a fesult of other causes.
simple sugars and other humectants that contribute to
palatability. Wet foods and some premium dry foods
are high in fat content. Fat contributes to both the pal-
Alterations in Food Intake
atability and caloric density of the food. Feeding pets
Food intake is regulated in all animals by a complex
highly palatable foods on an ad libitum basis may con-
system involving both internal physiological controls
ttibute to both the development and the maintenance
and external cues. Internal signals that affect appetite,
-o Aei sies pue sop Aue asnaq Aiisaqo Jo
hunger, and satiety include mechanical stimulation 
 consume these foods. Similarly, the common practice
from the gastrointestinal tract; physiological responses
 of feeding a vatiety of table scraps and other appealing
to the sight, sound, and smell of food; and changes in
eaiaao on siad Aue anpul ues sieo pue ssop on sian
plasma concentrations of specific nutrients, hofmones,
and gain excessive amounts of weight. For example, a
and peptides. External stimuli include factors such as
retrospective study of dietary patterns in adlult female
food availability; the presence of other animals; the tim-
 dogs found that up to 50% of calories supplied to some
ing and size of meals; a food's composition, texture, and
dogs came from table scraps, particularly for the toy
palatability; and the pet owner's beliefs and perceptions.
 breed dogs.0 Recent studies report that dogs fed many
Because owners exeft complete control over the feed-
tteats and table scraps or that are fed canned or home
ing of their dogs and cats, external cues that affect food
made foods as their primary diet afe more likely to be
intake are probably most important infuences upon
overweight.8,61 Table scraps and some homemade diets
intake and the development of obesity in companion
that are fed to pets can also contain a high proportion
animals.
of their calories from fat and thus contribute to a caloric
A well-researched external factor is feeding highly
imbalance.
palatable foods that induce animals to overconsume.
The social setting of meals and pet owners’ behavior
Studies with laboratory animals have shown that when
and beliefs also infuence eating
g behavior. Many ani-
rats are offered a highly palatable diet, they overeat and
mals incfease food intake when consuming food in the
become obese.57 This effect has been observed with
 presence of other pets. This process is called social facili-
high-fat diets, calorically dense diets, and “cafeteria"
tation and is usually more pronounced in dogs than in
diets, which provide a variety of highly palatable food
cats. In most dogs, social facilitation causes a moderate
items.58 Long-term exposure to highly palatable foods
increase in food intake and an incfeased rate of eat-
in human subjects also leads to permanent increases in
body weight, fat cell size, and fat cell number. Although
to another animal's presence can be extfeme enough
an endogenous predisposition to obesity and increased
 to cause weight gain. The owner's perceptions can also
efficiency of weight gain may occur in some animals, the
infuence food intake. For example, results of a fecent
largest portion of weight gain observed when animals
survey of cat owners reported that owners of overweight
320 Canine and Feline Nutrition
cats were more likely to interpret their cat's affliative
The caloric distribution of fat, catbohydrate, and
behaviors as requests for food than were owners of nor-
 protein is very important in determining a diet's poten-
mal weight cats.62 Similar results with dog owners have
tial contribution to weight imbalance in dogs and cats.
been reported; owners of overweight dogs tended to use
As the percentage of metabolizable energy (ME) calories
food as a way to pacify all types of attention-seeking
from fat increases in a pet food, the ability of the diet
behaviors, thus using food to reinforce undesirable
to meet the high energy demands of a hard-working
behaviors and as a “pet baby sitter" to induce the dog to
dog also increases. However, if this diet is fed to a dog
be calm and quiet.
that does not need it, weight gain may occur if intake is
Similarly, meal frequency affects both food intake
not strictly monitored. Likewise, a food that contains a
and metabolic effciency. An increase in the number of
lower percentage of ME from fat will aid in weight loss
meals per day results in increased energy loss to meal-
 or in the maintenance of normal body weight in a seden-
induced thermogenesis (see Section 2, p. 60). There is
tary animal. The selection of a pet food should therefore
also evidence in humans indicating that a decrease in
lipogenesis (fat tissue synthesis) occurs when multiple
to the animal's lifestyle and activity level (Figure 28-1).
meals are fed, as compated with consuming the same
number of calories in only one or two meals.63 How-
ever, if several meals are provided per day, portions must
importantfactors that can contribute to the develop-
be strictly controlled. Increased feeding frequency often
ment of obesity in dogs and cats inciude diet palat-
causes increased voluntary intake, thereby offserting any
ability,food composition and texture,and the timing
metabolic benefits of multiple meals.
and environment of meais. just like their human coun
A fnal external factor that may be a contributing
terparts, animais (especially dogs) tend to eat more,
cause of obesity in companion animals is the nuttient
regardless of their initial level of hunger when the food is
 composition of the diet. Nutrient composition affects
highty palatable and presented in a social setting More
both the efficiency of nutrient metabolism and the
weightis gained when excess calories come from dietary
amount of food that is voluntarily consumed. Dietary
fat thanfrom protein or carbohydrate.
fat is the primary nutritional factor infuencing the
development of obesity in humans. When fed ad libi-
tum, high-fat diets lead to weight gain and obesity.64
In recent years, the internal controls of hunger and
Although most animals decrease the volume of intake
satiety and their roles in obesity have received a great deal
of a high-fat diet in an attempt to balance energy needs,
of attention (see Chapter 9, pp. 61-63). A wide range of
the greater caloric density of the diet and its increased
 heuroendocrine factors are involved in hunger and sati-
palatability usually offset this adjustment and result in
 ety. The functions and interactions of these compounds
an overall increase in energy intake. Additionally, the
afe complex and are infuenced by numerous internal
metabolic efficiency of converting dietary fat to body
 and external controls. Two peptides that may be impor-
-o jo Auaia aun si ue aui si aos 1oy 1y
tant in the control of food intake in overweight animals
verting dietary carbohydrate or protein to body fat. Fof
afe ghrelin and leptin. Ghrelin (i.e., growth hormone-
example, a fecent study with dogs showed that modi-
feleasing factor) is an enteric, ofexigenic (appetite-
fying the diet's nutrient composition by increasing the
stimulating)
 peptide. It stirmulates the secretion of
 proportion of fat by 8% caused a signifcant increase
 growth hormone and has been shown to increase appe-
in abdominal fat deposition in the dogs, even though
tite and food intake in human subjects and rats.6 Plasma
total caloric intake did not change.65 Because dietary
 concentrations of ghrelin increase during the fasting
fat is more efficiently converted to body fat than pro-
 state and decease postprandially. Recent studies have
tein or carbohydrate, if an animal is consuming more
shown that obese dogs, like overweight human subjects,
than its caloric fequirement and if the excess calories
have lower circulating plasma ghrelin concentrations
ate provided by fat, more weight will be gained than if
 than do nonobese animals.67 There is also evidence that
the excess calories afe coming ffom either carbohydrate
cbese subjects that have lost weight have higher plasma
ofprotein.
ghrelin levels.68 It is postulated that this increase may
Development and Treatment of Obesity321
Adult Maintenance
Performance
38% Carb
27% Protein
28% Carb
24% Protein
38% Fat
45% Fat
Growth
Weight Management
27% Protein
32% Carb
 20% Protein
 56% Carb
24% Fat
41%Fat
Figure 28-1  Examples of dog food caloric distributions (expressed as a percentage of metabolizable energy calories)
affect appetite and may be an important factor in the
of diabetes in overweight cats. While leptin appears to
common tendency for previously overweight individu
increase energy expenditure in normal weight individu-
als to regain some or all of their lost weight.
als and reduces appetite when injected, its effects in
Leptin is a cytokine produced by adipocytes that acts
cbese dogs and cats and its relationship to the develop-
as a regulator of energy balance in the body. Its secre-
ment and maintenance of overweight conditions afe not
tion is regulated by a vafiety of neufoendocrine factors,
completely clear. There is some feseafch suggesting that
including insulin, glucocorticoids, and catecholamines.
vitamin A intake infuences leptin by normalizing serum
Circulating levels of leptin are directly proportional to
leptin levels during weight gain, which may contribute
the quantity of fat cells in the body; obese animals have
to redluced adiposity.7l Other internal regulators of food
chronically elevated plasma leptin.6 F
Recent studies
intake that require more study include adliponectin, a
with dogs show that plasma leptin concentrations are
cytokine that acts in synergy with leptin; tumor necro-
highly correlated with body fat and its measure can
sis factor-alpha (TNF-o), a proinfammatory molecule
be used as a quantitative marker for adiposity.70 This
that may be involved in insulin resistance; and a vatiety
relationship has also been demonstrated in cats, as well
of uncoupling proteins (UCPs) that ate located in the
as a relationship between plasma leptin concentrations
mitochondtial membrane and function to uncouple the
and insulin resistance, a fnding that may be important
respiration of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthesis
for understanding factors that affect the development
and which may be involved in dietary thermogenesis.72
322 Canine and Feline Nutrition
DIAGNOSIS
TABLE 28-1 TYPICAL BODY WEIGHTS
OF POPULAR BREEDS OF DOGS
The diagnosis of obesity in companion animals should
always include a veterinary examination for the pres-
BREED
MALE (LB)
FEMALE(LB)
ence of edema, ascites, hypothyroidism, hyperadrenc-
Basset Hound
65-75
50-65
corticism, and diabetes mellitus. After these diseases
Beagle (13")
13-18
13-16
have been ruled out, a comparison of the pet's current
Beagle (15")
17-22
15-20
body weight with previous weight measurements of
Boxer
55-70
09-05
with the pet's weight shortly after reaching adulthood
Chihuahua
2-6
2-6
may be indicative of abnormal
Chow Chow
45-50
40-50
weight gain. Body
weight in dogs and cats correlates moderately with body
Cocker S paniel
25-30
20-25
fat mass. Therefore recording a pet's body weight regu-
Collie
65-75
50-65
 Dachshund, Miniature
8-10
8-10
pue shop paiqaind Suiaioaui sases suos ul ez'uonipuos
Dachshund, Standard 
16-22
16-22
Dalmatian
50-65
45-55
cats, a comparison of the pet's body weight with the
Doberman Pinscher
65-80
55-70
weights suggested by the breed’s standard may also be
 English Springer Spaniel
49-55
40-45
a useful guideline for determining
g ideal body weight
German Shepherd
75-90
65-80
(Tables 28-1 and 28-2; also see Appendix 3, pp. 525-528).
Golden Retriever
65-75
55-65
Labrador Retriever
65-80
55-70
method of diagnosing obesity. Ultrasound provides a
Maltese
4-6
4-6
noninvasive, fapid method for estimating subcutane-
Miniature Schnauzer
16-18
12-16
ous fat, but it is does not provide an estimate of whole
Pekingese
10-14
10-14 
 Pomeranian
4-7
3-5
Likewise, estimates of lean and fat tissue in the body
Poodle, Standard 
09-05
45-55
using the heavy isotope deuterium oxide is noninvasive
Poodle, Miniature
17-20
15-20
 and accurate, but requires sequential blood sampling
 Poodle, Toy
7-10
7-10
Rottweiler
80-95
70-85
ms usq s () ndosqe Ai-x a
Shetland Shee pdog
16-22
14-18
to provide a very
: measurement of total body
Shih Tzu
12-17
10-15
fat and lean body mass
s and is frequently the method of
Siberian Husky
45-60
05-98
choice in clinical trials.76 This procedure has been used
Yorkshire Terrier
4-7
3-6
extensively in research settings to determine the body
However, DEXA is neither practical nor economical for
 and fat mass. Although commercially available BIA sys-
use by most practicing veterinarians. Finally, bioelectri-
tems afe available to practitioners, the fecorded values
cal impedance analysis (BIA) has been examined as a
ate infuenced by a number of factors, including but not
 rapid and noninvasive clinical method for determining
limited to the pet's
s size, age, posture, hydration status,
quantity of lean and fat tissue in pets.78,79 BIA involves
applying a series of electrodes to the surface of the
be a reliable measure of body composition when all of
 animal's body and measuring degree of conductance
these infuencing factors are controlled, its sensitivity to
and capacitrance when a low-level electrical current is
environmental conditions and need for standardization
applied. Because the body's fat free mass (FFM) con-
make it currently
/ impractical for most veterinary clinic
tains more water than does its adipose tissue, lean tissue
settings.80
has a higher conducting volume than fat tissue. Con-
versely, fat cells cause greater impedance to the passage
fat and obesity in dogs and cats is the use of morpho-
of current. BIA providles a comparative ratio of these
 metric techniques that combine the measurement and
 two properties, and allows calculation of a value of FFM
evaluation of visible body features and palpation of
Development and Treatment of Obesity 3
323
for the diagnosis of obesity and are predictive of percent
TABLE 28-2 TYPICAL BODY WEIGHTS
body fat.8i83 Comparisons of body composition data
OF POPULAR BREEDS OF CATS
collected using DEXA with assessments of body con-
BREED
MALE (LB)
FEMALE (LB)
dition using a nine-point BCS revealed significant and
A byssinian
7-10
6-8
positive correlations between body condition scores and
American Shorthair
10-15
8-12
percent body fat in both dogs and cats. Interestingly,
Birman
9-15
6-10
although the predictive value of the scoring system was
British Shorthair
12-18
9-15
 jo sn s a e a  rn a a
Burmese
8-12
6-10
species had a higher percentage of body fat than males
Cornish Rex
6-9
5-7
that were assigned the same body condition score.82,83
Devon Rex
8-10
5-8
Two limitations of BCS systems are that their subjec-
Egyptian Mau 
10-14
6-10
tivity can lead to wide interobserver vatiation and that
Exotic
7-14
6-10
Maine Coon
14-20
9-12
needed. Recently, a seven-point system has been devel-
Norwegian Forest Cat
10-16
8-12
oped that provides an easy-to-use fow-chart and set of
Ocicat
10-15
7-12
 Persian
9-14
7-11
requires validation studies to determine if it effectively
Ragdoll
12-20
8-15
7-11
5-8
identifies overweight and obese pets.
Russian Blue
6-9
BCS involves the assessment c
ofseveral different areas
Scottish Fold
9-13
Siamese
of the body. Dogs and cats that are at their ideal body
11-15
8-12
Sphynx
8-12
6-9
weight should have an hourglass shape when viewed
8-12
6-8
from above, showing an observable waist behind the
Tonkinese
-e paneos A5ay ui (e-87 pue 7-8z saini aas) sq
mals, the waist should be easily palpated beneath the
regions of the body that correspond to major adipose
 pet's hair coat. The loss of a waist as a result of excess
deposits. For dogs and cats, visual assessment is fol-
fat between the muscles of the abdominal wall and the
lowed by palpation of the thickness of tissue overlying
 presence of a pendulous abdomen as a result of fat accu-
the rib cage, lumbar area, and tail base, and the thick-
 mulation in intraabdominal sites are both indicative of
ness along the ventral abdomen. If a dog c
of cat is too
s have a tendency to develop fat
thin, the ribs will be easily
.An
animal of normal
 thorax and spine and atound the base
weight will have barely visible ribs that
caf
be easily felt
of the tail, while cats 
 often accumulate fat just anterior
when palpated. An overweight animal's ribs will not be
to the inguinal region.
In addition, overweight cats
visible and an overlying layer of fat can be felt. The pet is
develop folds of skin and underlying fat in the fank
diagnosed as grossly obese if the ribs cannot be felt at all.
 area. Subjective evaluation of the animal's gait, exercise
For practicing veterinatians and pet owners, visual
tolerance, and overall
1 appearance can also be used to
assessment of dogs and cats can be standardized by using
a body condition scoring (BCS) system.
The development of visual body condition assess-
afe available to practitioners and pet owners, all of which
 ment tools is also of benefit to pet owners. Veterinary
involve subjective ranking of body
composition based
 practitioners can use illustrative charts to teach clients
upon visual assessment and palpation (Figures 28-2 and
to monitor their pets' weights and body conditions.
28-3). The two most common s
systeims use either five
 Standardized visual aids are helpful because an ownet's
points (a score of 3 corresponds to ideal body condi-
 perception of his pet's weight is often inaccurate. A sur-
tion) or nine points (a score of 5 (
 cofresponds to ideal
vey of dog owners found that when clients were asked
body condition). Because the
hve
-point
system typi-
to identify whether their dog was overweight, under-
cally includles half-point assessments, the two scales afe
weight, of at ani appropriate body weight, approximately
in practice very similar. Clinical trials have shown that
 30% to 40% of owners of overweight dogs felt their dog
body scoring systems provide a highly reliable method
was at an appropriate body weight.83 Similarly, owners
324 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Body Condition Scores
·Ribs, lumbar vertebrae, and pelvic bones
visible at a distance and felt without pressure
BCS 1
· No palpable fat over tail base, spine, or ribs
Thin
· Diminished muscle mass
· Extreme concave abdominal tuck when
viewed from side
· Severe hourglass shape when viewed
from above
· Ribs palpable with little pressure; may be visible
BCS 2
· Minimal palpable fat over ribs, spine, tail base
Underweight
· Increased concave abdominal tuck when
viewed from side
· Marked hourglass shape to waist when viewed
from above
· Ribs and spine palpable with slight pressure
BCS 3
but not visible; no excess fat covering
IDEAL
·Ribs can be seen with motion of dog
· Good muscle tone apparent
· Concave abdominal tuck when viewed from side
· Hourglass shape to waist when viewed
from above
· Ribs palpable with increased pressure; not
BCS 4
 visible and have excess fat covering
Overweight
· Ribs not seen with motion of the dog
· General hefty appearance
· Abdominal concave tuck is reduced or absent
when viewed from the side
· Loss of hourglass shape to waist with back
slightly broadened when viewed from above
BCS 5
· Ribs and spine not palpable under a
Obese
heavy fat covering
·Fat deposits visible over lumbar area,
tail base, and spine
· Loss of hourglass shape to waist
· Complete loss of abdominal tuck with
rounded abdomen
· Back is markedly broadened
Fgure 28-2 Assessment of body conditions in the dog
(Copyright @ Procter & Gamble Co, Cincinnati, Ohio, 2009.)
Development and Treatment of Obesity 325
Body Condition Scores
· Ribs, lumbar vertebrae, and pelvic bones
visible at a distance and felt without pressure
BCS 1
Thin
· No palpable fat over tail base, spine, or ribs
· Diminished muscle mass
· Extreme concave abdominal tuck when
viewed from side
· Extreme hourglass shape when viewed from above
· Ribs palpable with litle pressure; may be visible
BCS 2
· Minimal palpable fat over ribs, spine, tail base
Underweight
· Increased concave abdominal tuck when
viewed from side
· Marked hourglass shape to waist when viewed
from above
· No visible ventral fat pad
· Ribs and spine palpable with slight pressure
but not visible; no excess fat covering
BCS 3
· Good muscle tone apparent
IDEAL
· Concave abdominal tuck when viewed from side
·Hourglass shape to waist when viewed
from above
· Minimal ventral fat pad palpable
· Ribs palpable with increased pressure; not
visible and have excess fat covering
BCS 4
· General hefty appearance
Overweight
· Abdominal concave tuck is reduced or absent
when viewed from the side
· Loss of hourglass shape to waist with back
slightly widened when viewed from above
· Visible ventral fat pad
·Ribs and spine not palpable under a heavy
fat covering
BCS 5
· Fat deposits visible over lumbar area, tail
base, and spine
Obese
· Loss of hourglass shape to waist
· Complete loss of abdominal tuck
· Back is markedly widened
·Prominent ventral fat pad, which may sway
from side to side when walking
Fgure 28-3 Assessment of body conditions in the cat
(Copyright @ Procter & Gamble Co, Cincinnati, Ohio, 2009.)
326 Canine and Feline Nutrition
of overweight cats tended to underestimate their cat's
Pet Owner Education
score on a standard body condition scale.85 Interest-
and Commitment
ingly, when cat owners and veterinarians were asked
to select overweight cats from a series of illustrations
Successful treatment of obesity in pets relies entirely
of cats’ silhouettes, owners and veterinarians were in
upon the pet owner's understanding of and commitment
  e     
to the weight-loss plan. Similar to human weight-loss
Because some owners may be unable or reluctant to
programs, lack of compliance or long-term commit-
recognize weight gain or obesity in their own pet, the
ment by the owner can lead a pet to fail to lose weight
-n on idiay aq a siu uoo Aoq jn asn
of rapidly regain weight that is lost in the early stage of
erinarians as a tool to teach about ideal body weight
the program. Some owners afe reluctant to admit that
and to convince some owners of their pet's overweight
their pet is overweight, while others find it difficult to
condition.
change many of the habits that contributed to their pet's
weight gain. There is also evidence that owners tend to
overfeport the amount of exercise that they provide to
Comparison of a pet's current body weight to an esti-
 their dogs, suggesting that misperceptions about a pet's
mated ideai body weight, visual assessment and the
activity needs may be an important contributor to over
use of body condition scoring are the most practical and
weight conditions.86 Owner education should therefore
reliabie means of diagnosing obesity Dogs and cats at
include a candid discussion of the serious health fisks
ideal body weight should have an hourglass shape when
and reduced quality of life associated with overweight
viewed from above,showing an observable and easily
conditions in dogs and cats. Once a program has been
paipable waist. Dogs have α tendency to develop fat
developed for a pet, including biweekly or monthly
deposits over the thorax and spine and around the base
check-ups and evaluations of body weight encourage
of the tait, while cats often accumuiate fat just anterior
 compliance and increase the chance of success.87
to the inguinal region. Subjective evaluation gait, exer-
Identifying and changing habits of the owner that
cise tolerance, and overall appearance car aiso be used
 may have contributed to the pet's initial weight gain
to support a diagnosis of obesity.
is essential. Such habits may include providing the pet
with high-calorie table scraps, feeding a palatable and
energy-dense food free-choice, encouraging or allowing
begging, and frequently feeding dog biscuits and treats.
TREATMENT OF OBESITY
Some alternative behaviors that can be practiced include
The short-term goal of the treatment of obesity is to
keeping the pet out of the kitchen while meals are being
reduce body fat stores. Although there are a variety of
Aep iad uais siean jo iaqunu au suiseaisap 'paiedaid
ways to attain this goal, it ultimately relies on the induc-
or feeding only treats formulated for weight control,
tion of a negative energy balance. Most simply, negative
and breaking treats into small pieces and giving the pet
 only a small piece at a time. Owners can also be encouf-
dietary intake, stimulating total energy expenditure, of
aged to provide attention, play, and exercise instead of
a combination of the two. The long-term goal of treat-
food treats, especially in response to attention-seeking
ment is for the pet to attain ideal body weight and con-
behaviors. Careful attention to daily activity patterns
dition and to maintain this weight for the remainder of
 and the gradual introduction of increased duration and
his or her life. Three important components must be
in some cases, intensity, of exercise is an important com-
included in all weight-reduction programs for compan-
ponent of all weight-loss programs (see p. 327). Some
icn animals: pet owner education, exercise, and dietary
owners may need to keep their dog of cat out of the din-
modification. Dietary modification and exercise create
ing area during mealtimes and to eliminate all “people
an energy deficit that will result in weight loss. Behavior
foods" from their pet's diet. If the owner is in the habit
modification can be helpful in changing the ownet's and
of providing food ad libitum, they must be instructed
the pet's behaviors, which will aid in weight loss and the
prevention of weight regain.
feeding regimen (see p. 335). Establishing a strictly
Development and Treatment of Obesity 327
regulated schedule so that all meals are provided at the
rate of weight loss over time. The inclusion of regular
same time each day can help to eliminate begging.
exercise along with caloric festriction minimizes of
completely eliminates this decline, allowing continued
weight loss throughout the program.92 Because regulat
ldentifying andchanging habitsofthe owner that may
physical activity helps to maintain lean body mass and
elevated BMR, exercise is also an important factor in
successful weight loss. Behaviors that can be practiced
 preventing weight regain following a successful weight-
inciude keeping the pet out of the kitchen while meais
lossprogram.
are being prepared, decreasing the rumber and size of
Although not yet demonstrated in dogs and cats,
treats that arefed,and substituting play andattention
some of the benefits of exercise to obese human sub-
for food reinforers. in addition, portion-controlled meal
jects occuf even in the absence of significant weight loss.
feeding must be used during weight loss programs and
For example, exercise contributes to the amelioration of
a regular daily feeding scheduie should be established.
 the metabolic abnormalities associated with overweight
conditions. These include improved glucose tolerance
and insulin sensitivity, and reduced leptin insensitivity
and adipocyte-induced infammatory responses.93.95
Exercise
While weight loss improves glucose homeostasis and
The inclusion of moderate, regular exercise in the
insulin sensitivity in overweight pets, it is not known
treatiment of obese pets affects body weight in several
if some of the metabolic benefits of exercise occur in
ways. Increased activity has the direct beneft of rais-
dogs and cats independently of changes in body weight.
ing daily energy expenditure and thus contributing to
Finally, improved mobility and a reduction in signs of
the energy deficit that is necessary for weight loss. An
pain and lameness associated with weight loss can con-
increase in exercise also aids in the regulation of food
tribute to a pet's interest in and enjoyment of exercise
intake. Studies with animals and humans have shown
and to long-term improvements in activity.96
that caloric intake varies proportionally with energy
Physical activity should always be initiated at a
expenditure during moderate to high levels of exercise.
low level with animals that afe accustomed to a com-
However, reduction of activity to a completely seden-
pletely sedentary lifestyle. Recommendations for exer-
tary level results in increased food intake and eventual
cise should consider the pet's age, degree of obesity,
weight gain.88,89 It appears that the normal physiologi-
 and the presence of chronic health problems that may
cal regulators of caloric intake do not function prop-
impact exercise tolerance. A general guideline of 15 t0
etly below a certain minimum level of physical activity,
30 minutes of moderate activity per day, provided at
 and an uncoupling of the relationship between energy
least 5 days per week, is usually a safe starting point.
expenditure and energy intake occurs. Even a small
 Daily exercise is ideal. Both the duration and the inten-
   ae     
 sity of the exercise can be increased as the animal begins
beneficial because of the possibility that normal physi-
to lose weight and increases its exercise tolerance. Out-
ological controls of food intake may be restored when
door walking, running, swimming, or playing fetch
activity increases.
and other games are fecommended forms of exercise
Exercise also causes desirable changes in body com-
for dogs. Although it is sometimes difficult to induce
position. Regular and continued exefcise fesults in a
an increase in physical activity in cats, many will enjoy
higher proportion of lean tissue to fat tissue. Because
walking outside on a harness or chasing and playing
lean tissue is more metabolically active than fat tissue,
with toys inside. Other approaches include using treat
increasing lean tissue contributes to the maintenance of
balls that require batting and chasing to obtain food,
a higher BMR during weight loss. Even during mod-
and placing the cat's food bowls in areas of the home
  e t uq sd sso-am 
that require climbing stairs or jumping up. Whatever
weight loss will be contributed by lean tissue.90,91 As a
the chosen activity, it is important that the exercise pro-
result, a decline in metabolic rate naturally occurs in
 gram is regular and continues even after the weight-loss
response to caloric festriction, fesulting in a decreased
 program has been completed.
328 Canine and Feline Nutrition
(0.7 to 1.3 lb) per week. A starting point of about 1 1b
Regular exercise contributes to the energy defcit dlur
of weight loss per week can be used as a target loss when
ing a weight-loss program,positively affects ananimal's
calculating this dog's energy needs for the weight-loss
normal physiological control of food intake and helps
 program; this can be adjusted as needed based upon the
to reduce the loss of lean tissue, which contributes to
dog's current intake and response to the caloric restric-
maintaining a normal resting metabolic rate during
tion (see Table 28-3 and Box 28-3). If this dog loses an
weight loss.
average of 0.7 lb per week, ideal body weight will be
attained within 4 months.
RECOMMENDED  LEVEL  OF
CALORIC
Dietary Management: Caloric
RESTRICTION
I When determining the number of
Restriction
calories needed for weight loss, an estimate of the pet's
The frst step to be taken when planning a diet is to weigh
caloric needs based upon current body weight must frst
the pet and set a goal for weight reduction (Table 28-3
be calculated. Although some nutritionists recommend
and Box 28-3). The degree of caloric restriction needed
using a pet's ideal body weight for this calculation, the
for weight lossis then estimated, and an appropriate food
accurate determination of ideal weight can be difficult
is selected. A final component of dietary management is
for the practitioner and owner if the pet was overweight
the type of feeding regimen and schedule that is use.
throughout development or has been overweight for a
long period of time. Using current body weight pro-
WEIGHT-LOSS GOALS
Dogs and cats that are
vides a slightly higher initial caloric estimate for weight
15% or more above their ideal body weight should be
loss, but this value can be reduced gradually based upon
 placed on a weight-loss program. When initiating such
the pet's response to feeding. Because most overweight
 a program, the determined rate of weight loss should be
pen ane ey suenba aaseu aneiaiare siad
high enough to ensure a noticeable change within several
for inactive adults should be used for these calculations
weeks, yet low enough to minimize excessive hunger and
(Box 28-4; see Box 28-3).
the loss of lean body tissue. Because of the large varia-
A reasonable guideline for the initial caloric restric-
tion in size and degree of obesity in individual animals,
tion for dogs is 60% of calories needed to maintain cur-
a fecommendled percentage of body weight loss per week
rent body weight (see Table 28-3 and Box 28-3).96,99
should be used rather than a set quantity of weight loss.
A slightly higher intake (70%) will result in a slower
Studies with humans have shown that weekly rates of
fate of loss, while reducing to 50% will lead to a more
1ulam Apoq Jo % 01 %z uey1 1ani ane 1eu1 ssl
rapid rate of loss. Because of the health risks associated
ate unhealthy because lean body tissue losses afe too
with fapid weight loss in cats, a mofe conservative ini-
great.27 Similarly, excessively rapid weight loss in obese
tial resttiction of 90% is recommended for cats. As with
pue suaiqond yiieay jo ysh aun saseaui sies pue soon
dogs, severe caloric restriction in cats results in increased
the development of undesirable behavior changes (see
losses of lean body tissue and lower losses of body fat.
p. 331). Rapid weight loss is specifically contraindicated
In addition, rapid weight loss increases the risk of devel-
in cats because of the risk of developing hepatic lipidosis.
oping idiopathic hepatic lipidosis, a serious and life
Alternatively, if the rate of loss is too low (0.5% or less),
threatening disorder in cats (see Section 5, pp. 431-434).
owhers may lose interest and motivation because results
 A useful approach with cats is to begin the weight-
will not be observed for several weeks. Therefore a goal
Aaua asueuueu jo on Suaay Aq wesoid ssol
of 1% to 2% per week is recommended for dogs and a
requirement (MER) and evaluate weight and body
fate of 1% to 1.5% is recommended for cats.98 Depend-
condition for 2 weeks.1oo If rate of weight loss is not
ing on the degree of obesity, this translates to a pro-
adlequate, restriction can be gradually reduced to 60%
'ea I se Suof se on squou may e uoy sisel yeu ueis
of MER, again monitoring for 2 weeks. If the cat still
For example, an adult dog with an ideal body weight
does not lose weight, intake can be restricted further,
of 25 kilograms (kg) (55 pounds [lb]) that actually
but reductions should be gradual and closely supervised
weighs 30 kg (66 1b) should lose between 0.3 and 0.6 kg
by the cat's veterinarian.
Development and Treatment of Obesity
329
TABLE 28-3 ENERGY REQUIREMENTS FOR WEIGHT LOSS IN DOGS AND CATS
DoGs
CURRENT WEIGHT
CURRENTWEIGHT
ME*
60%OFME
AMOUNTT
(LB)
(KG)
(KCAL/DAY)
(KCAL/DAY)
(CUPS/DAY)
5
2.3
177
106
0.42
10
4.5
294
176
0.70
15
6.8
400
240
0.96
20
9.1
497
298
1.19
25
11.4
589
353
1.41
13.6
673
404
1.62
35
15.9
756
454
1.82
40
18.2
28
502
2.00
45
20.5
915
549
2.20
22.7
988
593
2.37
55
25.0
1062
637
2.55
60
27.3
1135
681
2.72
65
29.5
1202
721
2.88
70
31.8
1272
763
3.05
75
34.1
1340
804
3.22
80
36.4
1408
845
3.38
85
38.6
1471
883
3.53
06
40.9
1536
922
3.68
95
43.2
1600
096
3.84
100
45.5
1664
998
4.00
105
47.7
1724
1034
4.14
110
50.0
1786
1072
4.29
115
52.3
1847
1108
4.43
120
54.5
1905
1143
4.57
CATS
CURRENTWEIGHT
CURRENTWEIGHT
ME*
60%OFME
AMOUNTt
(LB)
(KG)
(KCAL/DAY)
(KCAL/DAY)
(CUPS/DAY)
4
1.8
164
98.4
28'0
5
2.3
181
109
0.36
6
2.7
193
116
0.39
7
3.2
207
124
0.41
8
3.6
217
130
0.43
6
4.1
228
137
0.46
10
4.5
237
142
0.47
11
5.0
247
148
0.49
12
5.4
255
153
0.51
13
5.9
264
158
0.53
14
6.4
273
164
0.55
15
6.8
280
168
0.56
16
7.3
288
173
0.58
17
7.7
294
176
0.59
18
8.2
302
181
0.60
Continued
330 Canine and Feline Nutrition
TABLE 28-3 ENERGY REQUIREMENTS FOR WEIGHT LOSS IN DOGS AND CATS-cont'd
CATS
CURRENT WEIGHT
CURRENT WEIGHT
ME*
60% OF ME
AMOUNT+
(LB)
(KG)
(KCAL/DAY)
(KCAL/DAY)
(CUPS/DAY)
19
8.6
307
184
0.61
20
9.1
314
188
0.63
ME, Mecabolizable energy.
*Dogs: ME (inactive adult) - 95 x W0.75; cacs (overweight): ME - 130 x W0.40)
CalulaedfrweighnrldgfdhaprvieskalupAdjsmensmusbemadeffdswihhigerrloweralricdensi.
+Calculared for a weight-control cat food rhat provides 30o kcal/cup. Adjusemencs must be made for foods with higher or lower caloric densities.
BOX 28-3 CALCULATION OF ENERGY NEEDS
BOX 28-4 CALCULATION OF ENERGY NEEDS
FOR A WEIGHT-LOSS PROGRAM
FOR A WEIGHT-LOSS PROGRAM
(DOG)
(CAT)
TARGET WEIGHT LOSS PER WEEK
TARGET WEIGHT LOSS PER WEEK
ldeal body weight = 25 kg (55 Ib)
ldeal body weight = 4.5 kg (10 Ib)
Actual body weight = 30 kg (66 Ib)
Actual body weight = 6.5 kg (14.3 Ib)
Target weight loss per week =
Target weight loss per week =
30 kg x 2% = 0.6 kg/week (1.3 Ib)
6.5 x 1.5% = 0.1 kg/week (0.2 Ib)
This dog shouio lose up to 1.3 ib per week when piaced
This cat shouid lose approxirnately 0.2 ib per week
on a weight-loss prograrn.
when piaced on a weight-loss prograrn.
CALORIC REQUIREMENT FOR WEIGHT LOSS
CALORICREQUIREMENT FOR WEIGHT LOSS
 Metabolizable energy requirement (inactive adult) =
 Meta bolizable energy requirement (overweight adult) =
95 x Wkg0.75
130 x W0.40
(30 kg)0.75 x 95 = 1217.8 (approximately
(6.5 kg)0.40 × 130 = 275 kcal/day
1218 kcal/day)
Caloric restriction for weight loss =
Caloric restriction for weight loss =
275 × 0.60 = 160 kcal/day
1218 x 0.60 = 730.8 kcal/day
Volume of food to feed
Volume of food to feed
Aep ad sdno 0t'0= 00t/09t = (dn2/1e2x 00t) 1an
Diet A (400 kcal/cup) = 731/400 = 1.8 cups per day
Diet B (300 kcal/cup) = 160/300 = 0.53 cups per day
Diet B (250 kcal/cup) = 731/250 = 2.9 cups per day
initial caloric deficit is lower than the pet's current intake.
Once the initial daily caloric value for weight loss has
Finally, because there is some evidence that female dogs
been calculated, this value can be compated to the num-
require greater reductions in daily energy intake than
ber of calories that the pet is currently consuming. This
male dogs to achieve a similar degree of weight loss, the
information can be obtained by requiring the owner to
sex of the dog should be considered when estimating a
record all of the pet's food intake for several days, includ-
 starting energy deficit and making adjustments.101
ing brand names and label information, to allow an esti-
mation of total calories. If the caloric value for weight
RISKS OF SEVERE CALORIC RESTRICTION
reduction is hot sufficiently lower than the estimated
Severe caloric deficits will naturally result in more rapid
number of calories that the pet is reportedlly consuming
fates of weight loss. Howevef, as stated previously, fapid
each day, adjustments should be made to ensufe that the
weight loss causes greater losses of lean body tissue.
Development and Treatment of Obesity 331
Although dogs can lose weight and maintain health
a o pydiay aq ose Ae i 'ooy aiua-anai e
on energy defcits as low as 40% of maintenance
several small meals pet day rather than one or two large
requirements, the long-term use of this level of restriction
 meals. This practice may decrease signs of hunger and
leads to feduced BMR and other indicators of slowed
increase the energy losses of meal-induced thermogene-
metabolic rate, such as reduced serum T3 levels.102 There
sis.86 Once the target weight has been reached, the daily
is also evidence that, similar to human subjects, dogs
volume of food can be slowly incfeased until an amount
react to rapid weight loss with an increased tendency
that maintains ideal body weight is provided
for a rebound effect, meaning that they regain all of the
lost weight shortly after finishing the weight-loss pro-
gram.103 The underlying cause for this is presumed to be
A weight-ioss goai of 1% to 2% per week is recomrmended
the reduction in metabolic rate and possibly in voluntary
for dogs and 1% to 1.5% is recommended for cats. A rea-
activity that accompany excessive and rapid losses of lean
sonable guideline for initial caloric restriction is 60% of
body mass.104 Severely restricted diets also exacerbate
calories needed to maintain current body weight in dogs
feelings of hunger, leading to undesirable behaviors such
and 9o% in cats. Aithough more severe caloric defcits
as begging for food, raiding garbage, or stealing food. Pet
will resuit in more rapid rates of loss, it aiso leads to
 owners can be especially sensitive to these changes and
increased loss of lean body tissue, excessive hunger and
ases on seadde 1eu ioid e yim anunuos iou A
related behaviorproblems,and increased health risks.
their pet distress or that induces behavior problems.
Examples   The estimated daily caloric requirement of
an overweight 66-1b dog is 1218 kilocalories (kcal) (see
Dietary Management: Types
Box 28-3). Caloric restriction to 60% of this require-
of Foods for Weight Loss
ment equals 731 kcal/day. If a food that contains
400 kcal per 8-ounce (oz) cup is fed, this dog should
Some pet owners regularly feed their pets table scraps
receive about 1.8 cups of food per day. Conversely, if
and a large number of treats. When this is the case,
a weight-reduction food containing 250 kcal/cup
is
simply eliminating all of the extra tidbits and restrict-
fed, the dog should receive about 3 cups of food per
ing the pet's intake to 70% to 90% of its body weight
day. A caloric deficit of 3500 kcal is necessary to lose
fequirement may lead to adequate weight loss. This is the
1 lb of body fat. The daily calorie deficit provided by
preferred method to use with pets that are only slightly
this regimen is 487 kcal. Therefore this amount of food
overweight, afe exercised
1 regularly, and have well-
should result in a loss of approximately 1 lb per week
motivated owners. When this type of caloric restriction
(7 x 487 = 3409 kcal). If exercise is included in the pro-
is instituted, pets will naturally be hungrier than usual,
 gram, the additional energy deficit will be accounted for
 and begging behaviors may increase proportionately. In
by increased energy expenditure, and a slightly greater
addition, weight loss may be relatively slow due to the
weight loss will be seen. An example of caloric estimates
smaller caloric defcit. This may lead to poor compli-
for an overweight cat is provided in Box 28-4.
ance as owners will fail to see an appreciative weight
 change within several weeks. The lower limit of this type
MONITORING WEIGHT LOSS
Duting
the
of dietary regimen, in terms of the caloric deficit, is set
weight-loss program, the pet should be weighed once
by the nutrient requirements of the dog or cat. Because
each week, and a record or graph of weight loss should
a normal maintenance diet is being fed, it is imperative
be kept. Caloric intake can be adljusted as the pet loses
that the quantity provided is still sufficient to meet the
weight (see Table 28-3). If possible, follow-up veterinar-
pet's total nuttient requirements. Commercial pet foods
ian visits should be made every 2 to 3 weeks to record
that ate f
formulated for adult maintenance contain
progress. Portion-controlled feeding should be used,
adequate amounts of protein, fat, vitamins, and miner-
even if a commercially prepared, reducing diet is fed.
als to meet the needs of an animal at normal weight
Portion-controlled feeding allows strict monitoring
that is consuming adequate calories. If the volume of a
of a pet's total food intake and removes the opportu-
maintenance diet is reduced too drastically in an effort
nity for the pet to spontaneously increase its intake of
to limit calories, nutrient defciencies may develop.
332 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Commercially prepared foods with reduced energy
adult maintenance foods. Commercial, low-fat (lite)
densities are formulated to contain adlequate levels of
dlry foods contain between 6% and 11% fat on a dry-
nutrients while supplying fewer calories. Therefore, in
matter basis (DMB). This percentage is equivalent to
cases of moderate to severe obesity or when owners are
15% to 26% of the calories in a diet that has an energy
not strongly motivated to change their habits, a change
density of 3500 kcal/kg. The lower limit of fat content
of diet to a commercially prepared food with a reduced
for a food is dictated by the heed to provide essential
energy density is recommended for weight reduction.
fatty acids, fat that is needed for the transport of fat-
soluble vitamins, and for sufficient palatability to ensure
DIETARY FAT The most efficient way to reduce the
the food is accepted by the pet. While almost all of the
energy density of a food is to reduce its proportion of
pet foods that are marketed for weight reduction con-
fat. On a weight basis, fat provides more than twice the
tain decreased levels of fat, significant differences occuf
calories of carbohydrate or protein and is also highly
in their levels of protein, digestible carbohydrate, and
 palatable to most dogs and cats. Therefore decreasing
indigestible fber
the fat content of a pet food reduces the food's caloric
density and may also slightly decrease palatability. The
PROTEIN
Protein level in reducing diets is an
type of fat included in the food is also an important
important consideration with both dogs and cats to
consideration. As discussed pfeviously, adipose tissue
ensure that adequate essential amino acids are still pro-
is metabolically active; fat cells produce proinfam-
vided as the pet is fed restricted calories. Studies with
matory cytokines that may play a role in some of the
both dogs and cats have shown that increasing pro-
chronic diseases that ate associated with obesity. There-
tein in weight-loss diets improves body composition;
fore, including a source of n-3 fatty acids at levels that
increased body fat is lost while loss of lean body tissue
shift the body's response away from proinfammatory
 is minimized.101,113,114 For example, overweight cats fed
substances may contribute to a reduction in chronic
restricted amounts of a food containing 46% of ME as
infammation as the pet loses weight. Although there
 protein lost more body fat and retained more lean body
is some support for a beneficial antinfammatory effect
tissue than did cats fed the same amount (calories) of
of n-3 fatty acids during weight loss in human subjects,
a food containing 36% protein, even though overall
not all studies have shown a beneft and studies that
specifically target dogs and cats are needed.105,106 Othet
 Similarly, when overweight dogs were fed restricted lev-
potential benefits of including n-3 fatty acids to weight-
els of diets containing either 20%, 30%, or 39% of ME
loss diets include a feduction in plasma insulin
1and
from protein, all of the dogs lost weight, but those that
improved glucose tolerance during weight loss.107
were fed the 39% protein diet had the greater loss of
A form of linoleic acid called conjugated linoleic acid
Sl'sse ueal jo ssol saieus au pue iey apoq
(CLA) has also been studied for its effects during weight
Another benefit to increasing the proportion of pro-
loss. CLA is comprised of a mixture oflinoleic acid isomers
tein in a weight-loss food is that protein has a higher
that are produced by rumen and colonic bacteria. Includ-
dietary thermogenic response than fat. In other words,
ing CLA in the diets of mice and pigs has been shown to
a high proportion of dietary
 protein increases the ani-
reduce body fat and increase lean tissue, even when fed ad
 by increasing the amount
libitum.108,109 Some of the theorized mechanisms under-
of heat lost in response to meal ingestion. In addition,
lying these benefits include inhibition of lipogenesis and
although not yet demonstrated in dogs or cats, there
increased lipolysis via competitive inhibition of enzyme
 is evidence that high-protein diets may contribute to
systems involved in lipid metabolism. However, although
CLA has been beneficial in other species, studies of CLA
excess amino acids to glucose via gluconeogenesis
in dogs and cats feport conficting fesults. While some
induces less insulin secretion and subsequently delays
have reported mild improvements in body composition,
the onset of postprandial hypoglycemia, which is a
others have failed to find a beneft.l10.112
potent signal of hunger. The type of protein and the
Almost all pet foods that are formulated for weight
 proportions of its composite amino acids may infu-
loss contain lower concentrations of fat than typical
ence satiety to differing degrees. A fecent study with
Development and Treatment of Obesity 333
TABLE 28-4 LOW-FAT/HIGH-FIBER VS. LOW-FAT/HIGH-CARBOHYDRATE REDUCING DIETS
FAT
CRUDE
ENERGYDENSITY
ME ENERGY
FECAL SCORE
FECAL VOLUME
(%)
FIBER (%)
(KCAL/CUP)
(% OF GROSS ENERGY)
(1-5)*
(G/DAY)
Diet A
7.0
14.2
250
67.3
3.9
162.4
Diet B
9.7
3.0
270
87.8
4.5
46.5
Data on hle at Procer & Gamble Per Health and Nucrition Center, Lewisburg, Ohio.
ME,Merabolizable energy.
*Fecal score: I - warery, diarrhea; 5 - frm, compacr.
dogs showed that six adult, normal weight dogs dem-
total calories (see Figure 28-1). An adlded advantage is
onstrated increased satiety when fed ad libitum in
that, unlike reducing diets that are high in fber, this
response to a food that was high in both protein and
approach does not result in increased fecal volume of
fiber, but this response was not seen when fed increased
defecation frequency or have a negative impact upon
protein alone.l17 Finally, providing adequate protein in
 stool quality (see Table 28-4, diet B). Because many
the weight reduction foods for cat is especially impor-
 overweight pets are glucose intolerant, carbohydrates
tant because of the cat's higher protein requirement
that conttibute to a felatively slow inctease in blood glu-
and inability to adjust to drastic reductions in protein
cose levels and modulate insulin response are the best
intake.118 The risk of developing hepatic lipidosis dur-
choice.121 Examples include corn, sorghum, and barley.
ing weight loss is positively correlated with the level of
Conversely, because tice is highly digestible and rapidly
protein included in the reducing diet in cats.l19 There-
absorbed, it is not a good choice for inclusion in weight-
fore weight reduction foods for cats should contain at
loss foods (see Chapter 29, pp. 348-350).
least 30% of calories from high-quality protein.
Several studies have evaluated the efficacy of feed-
ing low-fat, normal-fiber diets to overweight and obese
 cats for the purpose of weight reduction.122,123 When
increasing the proportion of protein calories in a weight-
pet cats that were up to 40% overweight were fed a
loss food is necessary to ensure that adequate essential
low-fiber, moderate-fat, reducing diet to provide 60%
arino acids are still provided as the pet is fed restricted
of their calculated MER, all of the cats lost significant
calories. increasing protein in weight-loss diets also
amounts of weight, and more than half reached close to
improves body composition; increased body fat is lost
their ideal body weight within 18 weeks.122 Cats that
while loss of lean body tissue is minimized. Providing
were more than 30% above their ideal body weight
adequate protein in weight reduction foods for cats is
at the start of the study took longer than 4 months to
especially important because of the cat's higher protein
achieve targets weights, but they still lost weight consis-
requirement, inabiity to adjust to drastic reductions in
tently throughout the study.
protein intake, and risk for developing hepatic lipidosis
In a subsequent study, a group of obese cats were
during weight loss.
fed a low-fat, low-fiber diet festricted to intakes that
wefe calculated to achieve 1.5% body weight loss for
a 16-week period.123 The diet contained 9.2% fat, 1.9%
CARBOHYDRATE
When reduced energy foods
fber, and 33.5% high-quality protein. Fat contributed
ate formulated for weight loss, part of the fat can be
 23% of the ME calories in the diet. Cats lost an average
-isasi Aq paseidai aq ues ired pue 'uiaioid Aq paseidai
of 21% of their body weight and 49% of their body
ible carbohydrate. Carbohydrate has less than half of the
fat. DEXA body composition analysis showed that lean
caloric density of fat and, similar to protein, produces a
e e on Supal Xuis Aquo pasansap ssu Apoq
higher dietary thermogenic response than fat.120 Foods
fnal body condition that was lower in fat and higher
that feplace fat with complex catbohydrate without
in lean tissue. Ultrasound-guided liver biopsies were
adlding excessive levels of indigestible fber retain the
obtained at the start and periodically throughout the
level of digestibility of higher-fat foods, but contain less
334 Canine and Feline Nutrition
the development of hepatic lipidosis. Liver histology
 In one study, dogs fed a diet containing 10% crude
showed no lipid infltration, indicating that the weight-
fber, 2.7% soluble fber, and reduced fat consumed
loss program did not present a risk for the development
fewer total calories per day than dogs fed a lower-fiber
of hepatic lipidosis. Results of these studies indicate that
food.126 However, this difference was due to a dilu-
a low-fiber, low-calorie diet for cats can effectively and
tion effect of the daily diet that was fed on a portion-
safely result in weight losses in overweight pets.
controlled basis, not to feduced consumption of the
 challenge meal. When offered the challenge meal, dogs
fed the high-fber diet consumed the same volume of
Most comrmercial pet foods formulated for weight loss or
food as control dogs that were not fed the high-fber,
for consumption by sedentary pets have decreased lev-
low-fat diet. As a result, when total calories consumed
els of fat. Part of the fat can be repiaced by protein, and
were calculated, the dogs fed the high-fiber, low-fat diet
part can be repiaced with digestible carbohydrates, such
consumed fewer calories, principally because the energy
as corn, bariey, or sorghum. Replacing fat with digest-
density of the diet that was fed was significantly lower.
iblecarbohydratemaintainsafood'slevel ofdigestibility
The differences were due to portion-controlled feeding
and does not negatively impact fecal volume, defecation
of a diluted diet, and it is questionable whether any sig-
frequency,or stoot quality.
nifcant effect upon satiety was induced. Similar results
were reported in a more recent study.112 While dogs fed
a high-fber food (22% crude fber) consumed fewer
FIBER
RAn alternative way that the caloric density of
total calories per day than dogs fed a normal-fiber food,
a diet can be decreased is by diluting calories through
they consumed a significantly higher volume of food
the addition of indigestible fiber. The fationale is that
in addition to reducing the food’s caloric density, the
by increasing (not decreasing) food intake. Although
increased bulk will contribute to satiety and decrease
the authors interpreted this as a satiating effect of fiber.
voluntary energy
consumption. Howevef,
while
it is likely that the dogs consuming the high-fber food
dietary fber does effectively dilute caloric density (see
were attempting to conisume adequate calories but were
pp. 334-335), effects upon satiety in dogs and cats have
limited by gut fill rather than internal signals of satiety.
not been consistently demonstrated, and the interpre-
Optimal levels of dietary f
fber are necessary in the
tation of results of published studies is controversial.
diets of all pets, regardlless of weight. Fiber is needed for
One approach to examine satiety in dogs and cats is by
 proper functioning of the gastrointestinal tract and as a
measuring intake of a challenge meal. This procedure
source of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) for intestinal
involves providing animals with a high-fber food that
cells. However, the weight-reducing effect of high lev-
is periodically followed by the offer of an additional
els of indigestible fber in the diet is questionable, and
meal later in the day. The premise is that if satiety is
excessive fiber intake can produce a number of adverse
induced by increased fber, dogs will consume less of
side effects. High intakes of dietary fber cause decreases
the challenge meal, compared with dogs that are fed a
in nutrient digestion and availability through interfer-
normal maintenance diet. Although vatiable results are
ence with absorption of lipids, calcium, zinc, and iron,
reported, in most cases feeding pets a high-fiber diet has 
not significantly infuenced the volume of foed that was
Increasing the fber in foods that are formulated for
ingested in the challenge meal.124,125 Interpretation of
weight loss in dlogs has also been shown to redluce the
results from this type of study are easily confounded by
food's protein digestibility. 117 If a diet is simultaneously
factors such as other nutrient alterations in addition to
high in indigestible fber and low in fat or other nutri-
increased fiber, the amount of food fed prior to the chal-
ents, it is possible that long-term feeding may result in
lenge meal, the time that the animals are allowed access
 nutrient dleficiencies. Feeding restricted amounts for the
to foodl, and the interval after the last feeding. In addi-
 purpose of weight loss increases this risk.
tion, results may differ depending upon whether the
Increasing nonfermentable (insoluble) fber also
animals are overweight and if they ate limit-fed versus
affects fecal production and defecation frequency.
allowed to eat free-choice.
 Results of studies with dogs have shown that providing
Development and Treatment of Obesity 335
more than 10% of dietary dry matter (DM) as fber
 over a 7-week period when compared with dogs fed the
causes increased fecal production.129 Fecal quality is also
same food without added L-carnitine.134 There is also
affected by the type of fber that is used.130,131 When
 some evidence that including L-carnitine in a reduced
high amounts of nonfermentable fber are included in
calorie food for cats accelerated the rate of weight loss
the diet, feces are dry and hard, which may lead to con-
and helped to preserve lean body mass.135
stipation. In contrast, if too much fermentable fber is
fed, this can lead to loose, watery stools, or diarrhea.
Excess fber consumption also causes incfeased gas pro-
Feeding Regimen
duction and defecation frequency. Although not usu-
When any type of reduced-calorie food is used for
ally a health risk, these latter side effects are certainly
weight loss in dogs and cats, strict portion-controlled
disagreeable to most pet owners (see Table 28-4). In
feeding should always be used. Most dogs and cats,
addition, some high-fber diets appear to have reduced
given the opportunity, merely increase the volume of
palatability, especially for cats. This may induce further
food that they eat in an effort to keep energy intake the
reductions in intake, leading to nutrient defciencies of
same. The adlvantage of feeding a reducing diet is that
weight loss that is too rapid.
fewer calories can be consumed in a larger volume of
Although it is without question that fber dilutes
food and there is less risk of causing a nutrient imbal-
calories in a food, the lack of conclusive evidence for
ance during restricted feeding of the diet. For example,
benefts to satiety in dogs and cats coupled with asso-
if a reducing pet foed that contains 300 kcal/cup is fed,
ciated risks of reduced nutrient digestibility and nega-
the dog used in the previous example would receive
tive effects upon defecation frequency and stool quality
about 2% cups of food a day rather than slightly less
make the use of excessively high levels of indigestible
than 2 cups (see Box 28-3). This larger volume of foed
fiber in weight-loss foods a poor choice for most weight-
may result in a greater feeling of satiety and less ten-
loss programs for dogs and cats.
dency to beg or steal food. Moreover, these pet foods
ate specifically formulated by pet food manufacturers to
L-CARNITINE
L-carnitine is an amino acid deriv-
 provide balanced nutrition while lowering the amount
ative (from the amino acids lysine and methionine) that
of calories being consumed.
is produced endogenously in the liver of most mam-
mals. The cat is unique in that L-carnitine is synthesized
MAINTAININGWEIGHTLOSS
in the kidney.132 A primary function of carnitine is to
facilitate the transport of long-chain fatty acids (as acyl-
The dietary and exercise habits established during the
carnitine) acfoss the inner mitochondrial membrane
treatment of obesity must be maintained for dogs and
for beta-oxidation. Because L-carnitine is essential for
cats even after caloric festriction for weight loss has
the metabolism of fatty acids for energy, a deficiency
ended. The pet should be fed a well-balanced, complete
results in reduced oxidation of fat for energy and affects
food designed for acdult maintenance and should con-
both fat metabolism and energy production in the
tinue with the level of daily exercise that was included
body. Carnitine is classifed as a conditionally essential
in the weight-loss program. Pet owners should avoid
nutfient because even though it is well consefved
via
reverting to old habits such as feeding table scraps, pro-
renal reabsorption, its synthesis may not be adequate
viding a large number of treats, or allowing begging
in conditions during which energy production relies
behaviors. Some pets can be fed a normal adult main-
largely on beta-oxidation. In dogs, carnitine-respon-
tenance pet food once they have reached ideal body
sive dilated cardiomyopathy has been described and
weight. However, others easily gain weight when fed
carnitine deficiency may play a role in hepatic lipido-
these foods. A reduced-calorie (weight control) food
sis in cats.133 There is also evidence that supplemental
that is formulated for less-active adult pets is appropri-
carnitine enhances overall weight loss and reductions
 ate for weight maintenance in most animals follwing
in body fat in overweight animals. For example, dogs
successful weight loss. In all cases, portion-controlled
fed a reduced calorie food that was supplemented with
feeding two or more times per day is the feeding sched-
L-carnitine lost more body fat and total body weight
ule that should be used.
336 Canine and Feline Nutrition
PREVENTING OVERWEIGHT
BOX 28-§ PRACTICAL FEEDING TIPS:
CONDITIONS IN DOGS
MANAGEMENT OF OBESITY
IN DOGS AND CATS
AND CATS
Develop a program that will produce a target weight loss of
Although a variety of different factors may contribute
1% to 2% of total body weight per week (1% to 1.5%
to the development of obesity, the two most important
for cats).
causes are overfeeding and underexercising. Obesity
Select an appropriate food for weight loss.
in pets can be successfully treated. However, the ideal
Restrict caloric intake to 60% to 70% of meta bolizable
situation is to prevent its occufrence in the frst place
energy for current body weight.
Veterinatians, veterinary staff, shelter staff, and breeders
can have a large infuence on the prevention of obesity
 Eliminate all table scra ps and treats; change feeding 
habits that contribute to overeating and obesity.
adopters regarding appropriate feeding management for
Include a program of moderate, daily exercise.
 new puppies and kittens occur during routine visits and
 After desired weight loss has been achieved, adjust
intake to maintain ideal body weight.
In human subjects, h
 Prevent weight regain by continuing regular exercise
the presence of an abnofmal
ally high number of adipose
and strictly monitoring caloric intake.
cells, is difficult to treat and has
sa poor long-term prog-
nosis. The development of hyperplastic obesity usually
takes place during growth and often leads to obesity in
adult life. Although hyperplastic obesity has not been
During adulthood, portion-controlled feedling,
extensively studied in dogs and cats, it is assumed that
regular exercise, and avoidance of the development of
bad habits are the conditions necessary to prevent obe-
sity. As pets age, their energy requirements naturally
stage for a lifelong battle with obesity. It is imperative
decrease. Exercise tolerance also decreases as pets get
that adequate nutrients and calories for optimal growth
older, and these changes may predispose older pets to
weight gain. Maintaining moderate levels of exercise
excess amounts of a calorically dense food may stimulate
 and possibly changing the pet's diet to a ration that is
to an abnotmally high
low in energy density can help to prevent obesity in later
years (Box 28-5).
fed an amount of food that promotes a normal growth
fate and a lean body condition. Some pets afe able
to self-regulate and will not overeat. However, many
Tip: Many of the preventive and causative factors for
young dogs and cats overeat as a result of boredom,
obesity are the same forhumans and animals. Lowering
competition with other animals, or the availability of
both your own and your pets intake of fat and increas-
-iod sss jo aoe au un pooy aqeed a e
ing the amount of exercise performed will beneft you
tion-controlled feeding should be used, and the pet's
both. Peopie and their pets shouid take more waiks,
weight and rate of gain should be strictly monitored.
and people can even team up with their pets to improve
 Daily exercise should be started when pets are young.
heaith and maintain ideal weight.
and it should be continued throughout life
Development and Treatment of Obesity337
References
1. Colliard L, Paragon BM, Lemuet B, and others: Prevalcne and risk factors of obesity in an urban population of healthy cats,
J Feline Med Surg 11:135-140, 2008.
2. Robertson ID: The association of exercise, diet and other factors with owner-perceived obesity in privately owned dogs from
metropolitan Perth, WA, Prev Vet Med 58:75-83, 2003.
3. Holmes KL, Morris PJ, Abdulla Z: Risk factors associated with excess body weight in dogs in the UK, J Axim Physiol Anim Nut?
91:166-167, 2007.
4. American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA): US pet ownership and demographics sourcebook (2007 edition), Schaumburg
1ll, 2007, AVMA.
5. Scarlett JM, Donoghue S, Siadla J, Will J: Overweight cats: prevalence and risk factors, Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord
18:S22-S28, 1994.
6. Lund EM, Armstrong PJ, Kirk CA: Prevalence and risk factors for obesity in adult cats from private US veterinary practices,
Intern J Appl Res Vet Med 3:88-96, 2005.
7. Russll K, Sabin R, Holt S: Infuence of feeding regimen on body condition in the cat, Small Anim Pract 41:12-17, 2000.
 8. Armstrong J, Lund EM: Obesity: research update. 1n Proc Petfood Forum, Chicago, ll, 1997, Watts Publishing.
9. Glickman LT, Sonnenschein EG, Glickrman NW, and others: Pattern of diet and obesity in female adult pet dogs, Vet Clin Nut?
2:613, 1995
10. German AJ: The growing problem of obesity in dogs and cats, J Nutr 136:1940S-1946S, 2006.
11. Feldhahn JR, Rand JA, Martin G: lnsulin sensitivity in normal and diabetic cats, J Feline Med Surg 1:107-115, 1999.
12. Mattheeuws D, Rotiers R, Kaneko JJ, and others: Diabetes melltus in dogs: relationship of obesity to glucose tolerance and
insulin response, Am / Vet Res 45:98-103, 1984.
13. Scarlett JM, Donoghue S: Association between body condition and disease in cats, / Am Vet Med Asoc 212:1725-1731, 1998.
14. Gayet C, Bailhache E, Dumon H: lnsulin resistance and changes in plasma concentration of TNF-alpha, 1GF1 and NEFA in
dogs during weight gain and obesity, J Anim Physiot Anim Nutr 88:1 57-165, 2004.
 15. Mattheeuws D, Rottiers R, Baeyens D, and others: Glucose tolerance and insulin response in obese dogs, J Am Axism Hos Assoc
20:287-290, 1984.
 16. Pena C, Suarez L, Bautista I, and others: Relationship between analytic values and canine obesity, JAnim Phys Anim Nutr
92:324-325, 2008
 17. Jeusette IC, Lhoest ET, Istasse LP, Eiez MO: Infuence of obesity on plasma lipid and lipoprotein concentrations in dogs,
Am J Vet Res 66:81-86, 2005.
18. Mizell Hl, EdwardsTC, Montani JP: Abnormal cardiovascular responses to exercise during the develpment of obesity in dogs,
Am Hypertens 7:374-378, 1994.
19. Bach JF, Rozanski EA, Bedenice D, and others: Association of expiratory airway dysfunction with marked obesity in healthy adult
dogs, Am J Vet Res 68:670-675, 2007.
20. Bodey AR, Michell AR: Epidemiological study of blood pressure in domestic dogs, / Smalf Anim Pract 37:116-125, 1996.
21. Montoya JA, Morris PF, Bautisa l: Hypertension: a risk factor associated with weight status in dogs, / Nutr 136:2011S-2013S,
'9007
22. Kealy RD, Lawler DF, Ballam JM, and others: Five-year longitudinal study on limited food consumption and development of
osteoarthritis in coxofemoral joints of dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:222-225, 1997.
weight loss in obese cats, Am / Vet Res 55:1406-1415, 1994.
24. Shofer FS, Sonnenschein EC, Goldschmidt NM, and others: Histopathologic and dietary prognostic factors for canine mammary
carcinoma, Breast Canc Res Treat 13:49-60, 1989.
338 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 25. Alenza P, Pena L, Del Castillo N, Nieto Al: Factors infuencing the incidence and prognosis of canine mammary tumours,
/Small Anim Pract 41:287-291, 2000
Shoum uee Aeueu sueuaeu yim shop ut leaans uo srosy asoy go aouangu iN reuy d rapus 'f raguh 97
J Vet Intern Med 17:102-106, 2003.
ovariectomy: a nonrandormized prospective, clinical trial, Vet Surg 32:464-470, 2003.
 28. Kealy RD, Lawler DF, Ballam JM: Effects of diet restriction on lifespan and age-related changes in dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc
220:1315-1320, 2002.
29. Knittle JL, Fellner FG, Brown RE: Adipose tissue development in man, Am J Chin Nutr 30:762-766, 1977.
30. Bjorntorp P: The role of adipose tissue in human obesity. In Greenwood MRC, editor: Obesitycontemporary isswes in clinical
roatrition, New York, 1983, Churchill Livingstone.
 31. Lemonnier D: Effect of age, sex and site of cellularity of the adipose tissue in mice and rats rendered obese by a high fat diet,
J Clin Invest 51:2907, 1972.
32. Faust IM, Johnson PR, Hirsch J: Long-term effects of early nutritional experience on the development of obesity in the rat, J Nutr
110:2027-2034, 1980
33. Johnson PR, Stern JS, Greenwood MRC, and others: Effect of early nutrition on adipose cellularity and pancreatic insulin release
in the Zucker rat, / Nutr 103:738-743, 1973.
34. Allan FJ, Pfeiffer DU, Jones BR: A cross-sectional study of risk factors for obesity in cats in New Zealand, Prev Vet Med
46:183-196, 2000.
35. McGreevy PD, Thomson PC, Pride C, and others: Prevalence of obesity in dogs examined by Australian veterinary practices and
the risk factors involved, Vet Rec 156:695-707, 2005.
36. Applegate EA, Upton DE, SternJS: Fod intake, body composition and blood lipids follwing treadmillexercise in male and
female rats, Physiol Behav 28:917-920, 1982.
37. Glickman LT, Sonnerschein EG, Glickman NW: Pattern of diet and obesity in female adult pet dogs, Vet Clix Nutr 2:6-13, 1995.
38. Anderson RS: Obesity in the dog and cat, Vet Ann 14:182-186, 1975.
39. Root M: Early spay-neuter in the cat: effect on development of obesity and metabolic rate, Vet Clin Nutr 2:132-134, 1995.
40. Fettman MJ, Stanton CA, Banks LL, and others: Effects of neutering on body weight, metabolic rate and glucose tolerance of
domestic cats, Res Vet Sci 62:131-136, 1997.
41. Martin L, Siiart B, Dumon H: Hormonal disturbances associated with obesity in dogs, J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 90:355-360,
'9007
42. Houpt KA, Coren B, Hintz HF: Effect of sex and reproductive status on sucrose preference food intake and body weight of dogs,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 174:1083-1085, 1979.
43. Jeusette 1,DetilleusJ, Cuvelier C, and others: Ad libitum feeding following ovariectomy in female Beagle dogs: effect on
maintenance energy requirement and on blood metabolites, J Ani Phys Axim Nutr 88:117-121, 2004.
44. Armstrong PJ: Effect of ovariohysterectormy on maintenance energy requirement in cats, JAm Vet Med Asoc 209:1572-1581,
1996.
45. Martin L, Siliart , Dumon H, and others Leptin, body fat content and energy expenditure in intact and gonadectomized adult
cats: a preliminary study, J Anim Physiof Anim Nutr 815:195-199, 2001.
 46. Nguyen PG, Dumon HJ, Silart BS, and others: Effects of dietary fat and energy on body weight and composition after
gonadectomy in cats, Am / Vet Res 65:1708-1713, 2004.
47. Martin L, Siliart B, Dumon H: Spontaneous hormonal variations in male cats following gonadectomy, J Feline Med Surg
8:309-314, 2006.
48. Spain CV, Scarlett JM, Houpt KA: Long-term risks and benefts of early-age gonadectomy in dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc
224:380-387, 2004.
Development and Treatment of Obesity 339
49. Edney ATB, Smith PM: Study of obesity in dogs visiting veterinary practices in the United Kingdom, Vet Rec 118:391-396,
1986.
50. Meyer HL, Drochner W, Weidenhaupt C: Ein Beitrag zum Vorkommen und zur Behandlung der Adipositas des Hundes
Deutsche Tierarzthiche Wochenschrift 85:133-136, 1978.
51. Kienzle E, Rainbird A: Maintenance energy requirement of dogs: what is the correct value for the calculation of metabolic body
weight in dogs? Am J Clin Nutr 121:S39-S40, 1991.
 52. Robertson ID: The infuence of diet and other factors on owner-perceived obesity in privately owned cats from metropolitan
Perth, Western Australia, Prev Vet Med 40:75-85, 1999.
53. Milne KL, Hayes HM Jr: Epidemiologic features of canine hypothyroidism, Cornel Vet 71:3-14, 1981.
54. Panciera DL: A retrospective study of 66 cases of canine hypothyroidism, J Am Vet Med Asoc 204:761-767, 1994.
55. Panciera DL: Conditions associated with canine hypothyroidism, Vt Clix North Am Small Anim Pract 31:935-950, 2001.
56. Meyer DJ: Clinical manifestations associated with endocrine disorders, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 7:433-441, 1977
57. Scalafani A, Springer O: Dietary obesity in adult rats: similarities to hypothalamic and human obesity syndromes, Phyiol Behay
17:461-471, 1976.
58. Slattery JM, Potter RM: Hyperphagia: a necessary precondition to obesity? Appetite 6:133-142, 1985.
59. Hill SW: Eating responses of humans during meals, / Comp Phyiot Psych 86:652-657, 1974.
60. Sloth C: Practical management of obesity in dogs and cats, J Small Anim Pract 33:178-182, 1992.
 61. Kienzle E, Bergler R, Mandernach A: Comparison of the feeding behavior and the man-animal relationship in owners of normal
and obese dogs, / Nutr 128:2779S-2782s, 1998.
62. Kienzle E, Bergler R: Human-animal relationship of owners of normal and overweight cats, J Nutr 136:1947S-1950S, 2006
63. Fabry P Tepperman J: Meal frequency—a possible factor in human pathology, Am J Clin Nutr 23:1059, 1970.
64. Blundell JE: Nutritional manipulation for altering food intake. In Wurtman RJ, Wurtman JJ, editors: Humax obesity, New York,
1987, Academy of Sciences.
65. Kim Sl, Ellmerer M, Van Citters CW: Primacy of hepatic insulin resistance in the development of the metabolic syndrome
induced by an isocaloric moderate-fat diet in the dog, Diabetes 52:2453-2460, 2003.
66. Cummings DE, Overduin J: Gastrointestinal regulation of food intake, J Clix Invest 117:13-23, 2007.
saop u suoneuuos undal pue urye euseid uo ssoi yaam pue aisago sruoup yo saha H eegus f xnanaa 'I amasnaf 9
Res Vet Sci 79:169-175, 2005.
pw ag N Kraans ssedg onsea ro sso yaram paonpu-ap ranye saaa uarya euse sy okeeh 'a ajiaa aa suuum 89
346:1623-1630, 2002.
 69. Ishioka K, Soliman MM, Sagawa M: Experimental and clinical studies on plasma leptin in obese dogs, / Vet Med Sci 64:349-353,
2002.
70. Sagawa MM, Nakadomo F, Honjoh T, and others: Correlation between plasma leptin concentration and body fat content in dogs,
Am / Vet Res 63:7-10, 2002.
 71. Scarpace PJ, Sunvold GD, Bouchard GF: Vitamin A supplementation in cats abolishes the relationship between adiposity and
leptin, FASEB /14:A215, 2000.
72. Gayet C, Bailhache E, Martin L: Changes in plasma tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α), insulin-like growth factor (1CF1), non-
esterifed fatty acids (NEFA) and insulin sensitivity in overfed and food restricted dogs, J Vet Intern Med 17:417418, 2003.
73. Burkholder WJ: Precision and practicality of methods assessing body composition of dogs and cats, Compend Contin Educ Pract
Vet 23:1-15, 2001.
74. Morooka T, Niyama M, Uchida E: Measurement of the back fat layer in Beagles for estimation of obesity using two-dimensional
ultrasonography, / Small Anim Iract 42:56-59, 2001.
340 Canine and Feline Nutrition
75. Son HR, dAvignon DA, Lafamme DP: Comparison of dual x-ray absorptiometry and measurement of total body water content
by deuterium oxide dilution for estimating body composition in dogs, Am J Vet Res 59:529-532, 1998.
 76. Toll PW, Gross KL, Berryhill SA, Jewell DE: Usefulness of dual energy x-ray absorptiometry for body composition rmeasurement
in adult dogs, / Nutr 124(Suppl): 2601S-2603S, 1994.
77. Munday HS, Booles D, Anderson I, and others: The repeatability of body composition measurements in dogs and cats using dual
energy x-ray absorptiometry, J Nutr 124(Suppl):2619S-2621S, 1994.
78. Scheltinga MR, Helton WE, Rounds J, and others: Impedance electrodes positioned on proximal portions of limbs quantify fuid
compartments in dogs, / Appt Physiot 70:2039-2044, 1991.
79. Stanton Ca, Hamar DW, Johnson DE: Bioelctrical impedance and zoometry for body composition analysis in domestic cats,
Am / Vet Res 53:251-257, 1992.
80. Elliott DA:Evaluation of multi-frequency bioelectrical impedance analysisfor the assesment of extracellular and total body water
in healthy cats, / Nutr 132:1757S-1759S, 2002.
81. Mawby Dl, Bartges JW, d'Avignon A, and others: Comparison of various methods for estimating body fat in dogs, J Am Anim
Hosp Asoc 40:109-114, 2004.
82. Lafamme D: Development and validation of a body condition score system for cats: a clinical tool, Feline Pract 25:13-18, 1997.
 83. Lafamme D: Development and validation of a body condition score system for dogs, Canine Pract 22:10-15, 1997.
84. German AJ, Holden SL, Moxham G: A simple, reliable tool for owners to assess the body condition of their dog or cat, / Nutr
136:2021S-2022S, 2006.
 85. Colliard L, Paragon BM, Lemuet B, and others: Prevalence and risk factors of obesity in an urban population of healthy cats,
J Feline Med Surg 11:135-140, 2009.
 86. Slater MR, Robinson LE, Zoran DL: Diet and exercise patterns in pet dogs,J Vet Med Asoc 207:186-190, 1995.
'ssop roy sueraord suaunean Arsago go suauoduros e se uonesnpa raumo go uonenieaa I uonugng  kemooh 'af ajsste 8
J Am Vet Med Asoc 224:1932-1935, 2004.
 88. Melzer K, Kayser B, Saris WHM, and others: Effects of physical activity on food intake, Clhix Nutr 24:885-895, 2005.
89. Pi-Sunyer FX: Exercise effects on calorie intake. In Wurtman RJ, Wurtman Jl, editors: Human obesiy, New York, 1987, New York
Academy of Sciences.
 90. Butterwick F, Markwell PJ: Changes in the body composition of cats during weight reduction by controlled dietary energy
restriction, Vet Rec 138:354-357, 1996.
91. Banning M: Obesity: pathophysiology and treatment, J R Soc Heaith 125:163-167, 2005.
92. Schultz CK, Bernauer E, Mole PA: Effects of severe caloric restriction and moderate exercise on basal metabolic rate and
hormonal status in adult humans (abstract), Fed Proc 39:783, 1980.
93. Berggren JR, Jluver MW, Houmard JA: Fat as an endocrine organ: infuence of exercise, J Appf Physiof 99:757-764, 2005.
94. Nassis CP Papantakou K, Skendrei K, and others: Aerobic exercise training improves insulin sensitivity without changes in body
weight, body fat, adiponectin and infammatory markers in overweight and obese girls, Metabolism 54:1472-1479, 2005.
96. Impellizeri JA, Tetrick MA, Muir P: Effect of weight reduction on clinical signs of lameness in dogs with hip osteoarthritis
J Am Vet Med Asoc 216: 1089-1091, 2000.
97. Weinsier RL, Wilson LJ, Lee J: Medically safe rate of weight loss for the treatment of obesity: a guideline based on risk of
gallstone formation, Am / Med 98:115-117, 1995
98. Burkholder WJ, Bauer JE: Foods and techniques for managing obesity in companion animals, J Am Vet Med Asoc 212:658-662, 1998.
99. Lafamme DP, Kuhlman G, Lawler DF: Evaluation of weight loss protocols for dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Asoc 33:252-259, 1997.
100. Center SA: Clinical weight management for dogs and cats. In Iroc WSAVA, 2001, pp 56-69.
Development and Treatment of Obesity  341
101. Diez M, Nguyen P Jeusett I: Weight loss in obese dogs: evaluation of a high protein and low carbohydrate diet, J Nut?
132:1685S-1687S, 2002.
102. Brown RC, Ambrose J: The effect of weight loss on the resting metabolic rate in the obese dog (abstract), Fed A Soc Exp Biof
5:A961,1991,
103. Lafamme DP, Kuhlman G: The eect of weight loss regimen on subsequent weight maintenance in dogs, Nutr Res
15:1019-1028, 1995.
104. Crowell-Davis SL, Barry K, Ballam JM, and others: The efect of caloric restriction on the behavior of pen housed dogs: transition
from unrestricted to restricted diet, Appt Anim Behav Sci 43:27-41, 1995.
105. Krebs JD, Browning LM, McLean NK, and others: Additive benefits of long-chain n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and weight
loss in the management of cardiovascular disease risk in overweight hyperinsulinaemic women, Int J Obes 30:1535-1544, 2006
106. Devaraj S, Kasim-Karakas S, Jialal l: The effect of weight loss and dietary fatty acids on infammation, Gurr Atheroler Rep
8:477-486, 2006.
107. Wilkins C, Long RC Jr, Waldron M, and others: Assessment of the infuence of fatty acids on indices of insulin sensitivity and
myocellular lipid content by use of magnetic resonance spectroscopy in cats, Am J Vet Res 65:1 090-1099, 2004.
109. Dugan MER, Aalhus JL, Schaefer AL: The effct of conjugated linoleic acid on fat to lean repartitioning and feed conversion in
pigs, Can J Anim Sci 77:723-725, 1997.
110. Azain MJ: Conjugated linoleic acid and its effects on animal products and health in single-stomach animals, Proc Nutr Soc
62:319-328, 2003.
111. Leray V, Dumon H, Martin L: No effect of conjugated linoleic acid or garcinia cambogia on body composition and energy
expenditure in non-obese cats, / Nutr 136:1982S-1984S, 2006.
112. Jewell DE, Edwards GL, Azain MJ, and others: Fiber but not conjugated linoleic acid infuences adiposity in dogs, Vet The?
7:78-85,2006
113. Bierer TL, Bui LM: High-protein low-carbohydrate diets enhance weight loss in dogs, / Nutr 134:2087S-2089S, 2004
114. Lafamme DB Hannah SS: Increased dietary protein promotes fat loss and reduces loss of lean body mass during weight loss in
cats, Int J Appt Res Vet Med 3:62-68, 2005.
115. Hannah S: Role of dietary protein in weight management, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 21:32-33, 1999.
116.Veldhorst M,Smeets A, Soenen S, and others: Protein-induced satiety: effects and mechanisms of different proteins, Phyol Behav
94:300-307, 2008.
117. Weber M, Bissot T, Servet E, and others: A high-protein, high-fber diet designed for weight loss improves satiety in dogs,
J Vet fntern Med 21:1203-1208, 2007.
118. Center SA: Safe weight loss in cats. In Reinhart GA, Carey DP, editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition, lam
119. Biourge VC, Massat B, GroffJM, and others: Effects of protein, lipid or carbohydrate supplementation on hepatic lipid
accumulation during rapid weight loss in obese cats, Am / Vet Res 55:1406-1415, 1994.
120. Schwartz RS, Ravussin E, Massari M, and others: The thermic effect of carbohydrate versus fat feeding in man, Metabolism
34:285-293, 1985.
121. Sunvold CD, Bouchard CF: The glycemic response to dietary starch. In Recent advances in canine and feline muition, lams
mutrition ymposium proceedings vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press, pp 123-131.
122. Center SA, Reynolds AP Harte J, and others: Clinical effects of rapid weight loss in obese pet cats with and without supplemental
L-carnitine, / Vet Intern Med 11:1 18, 1997.
123. Bouchard GF, Sunvold GD: Dietary modification of feline obesity with a low fat, low fiber diet. In Reinhart GA, Carey DP
editors: Recent advances in canine and feline mutrition, lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998,
Orange Frazer I'ress.
342Canine and Feline Nutrition
124. Butterwick RF, Markwell PJ: Effect of aount and type of dietary fber on food intake in energy-restricted dogs, Am J Vet Res
58:272-276,1997.
125. Butterwick RF, Markwell P): Effect of level and source of dietary fibre on food intake in the dog (abstract), Proc Waltham Int Symp
Pet Nutr Health, 1993.
126. Jackson JR, Lafarmme DP, Owens SF: Eects of dietary fber content on satiety in dogs, Vet Clin Nutr 4:130-134, 1997.
127. Vahouny GV, Cassidy MM: Dietary fibers and absorption of nutrients (review), Proc Soc Exp Biof Med 180:432-446, 1985.
128. Fernandez R, Phillips SF: Components of fber impair iron absorption in the dog, Am J Clin Nutr 35:107-112, 1982.
129. Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, Corbin JE, and others: Dietary fiber for dogs. Part l. Effects of graded levels of dietary beet pulp on
nutrient intake, digestibility, metabolizable energy and digesta mean retention time, J Anim Sei 68:4229-4235, 1990.
130. Sunvold GD, Fahey CG Jr, Merchen NR, and others: Dietary fber for dogs. IV. In vitro fermentation of selected fiber sources by
dog fecal inoculum and in vivo digestion and metabolism of fber-supplemented diets, J Anim Sei 73:1 099-11 19, 1995.
131. Sunvold GD, Fahey CG Jr, Merchen NR, and others: Dietary fber for cats: in vitro fermentation of selected fiber sources by cat
fecal inoculum and in vivo utilization of diets containing selected fber sources and their blends, J Anim Sci 73:2329-2339, 1995.
132. Bremer J: Carnitine—metabolism and functions, Physiol Rev 63:1420-1480, 1983.
133. Carroll MC, Cote E: Carnitine: a review, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 23:45-52, 2001.
134. Sunvold GD: Carnitine supplementation promotes weight loss and decreased adiposity in the canine. In Proc XXlI WSAVA,
1998,p746.
135. Center SA, Reynolds AP, Harte J: Clinical effects of rapid weight loss in obese cats with and without supplemental L-carnitine
(abstract). 1n Iroc 15th ACVIM Forum, 1997, p 665.
29
Diabetes Mellitus
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is an endocrine disorder that
likely to be affected than males and may also develop an
aaneiai aun q pasnes si iI 'sies pue shop yioq ui sinooo
insulin-resistant type of DM during diestrus and preg-
of absolute defciency of the hormone insulin, which
nancy.? The increased incidence of DM in reproducing
is produced by the beta cells of the pancreas. Insulin
females may be explained by the insulin-antagonistic
stimulates the transport of glucose and other nutrients
effects of progesterone and mammary tissue-derived
across cell membranes for cellular use and is involved in
 growth hormone.8 Increasing age is an important and
a number of anabolic processes within the body. A lack
consistently identifed risk factor; most dogs with DM
of insulin activity leads to elevated blood glucose levels
ate older than 7 years at the time of diagnosis.1,9 Many
(hyperglycemia) and an inability of tissues to receive the
dogs diagnosed with DM are at normal body weight of
 glucose that they need (glucoprivation). Primary clini-
even underweight at the time of diagnosis, and obesity
cal signs include polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and,
has not
t been identifed as a consistent risk factor for
in some cases, weight loss. Diagnosis is usually made
DM in dogs. Although there is some evidence frem a
using the initial signs of the disorder, which include the
small pilot study suggesting that dogs diagnosed with
presence of a persistent hyperglycemia and a persistent
DM are more likely to have been chronically overweight
or concurrent glucosuria.
when compared with healthy matched controls, other
1! yonouiv ot'uoneisosse siun punoy sou aaey saipns 
INCIDENCE AND RISK FACTORS
is well documented that obesity in dogs leads to insulin
fesistance and impaired glucose tolerance, these changes
DM is currently one of the most frequently diagnosed
resolve with weight loss and do not typically lead to the
endocrine disorders in companion dogs and
-Iul ue sey NQ 'paipnis dnois ay uodn Supuadaq
 s a en sisd a m  
dence ranging between 0.13% and 2% of the popula-
dogs and cats.
tion of dogs and cats living in homes.1 A recent study of
 Finally, recent studies suggest a strong genetic com-
an insured population of Swedish dogs estimated that
ponent for DM among certain dog breeds.2,12 In the
1.2% of dogs would develop
DM before 12 years of
United States, breeds
1
that experience significantly
increased risk include Samoyeds, Siberian Huskies,
the last 30 years.? Similarly, there is evidence that the
Keeshonds, Finnish Spitz, Miniature Schnauzers, and
incidence of DM in cats has been steadily increasing. In
Miniature Poodles.3,12 A study of insured dogs in Swe-
1970, DM incidence in cats was feported to be less than
 den showed similar results and noted the prevalence of
0.1%; this increased by more than tenfold by 1999.4
northern breeds in these groupings.2 It was hypothesized
Although other factors may be involved, increases in
that metabolic changes that favor adaptation to a cold
both obesity and the frequency of selentary lifestyles in
environment may also increase susceptibility to DM.
 a s on p aiid aa s id
The Swedish study also reported a breed-sex interac-
recently, a study of pet cats in the United Kingdom
 reported the incidence of DM in an insured population
almost exclusively in some breeds, such as Border Col-
of adult cats to be 0.4%.5
lies, Norwegian Elkhounds, and Beagles. However, other
Risk factors for the development of DM in dogs
breeds did not show a sex predilection. Dog breeds that
include previous or concurrent hyperadrenocorticism,
have a low risk for developing DM include the Golden
recurrent episodes of pancreatitis (estimated to cause
Retriever, Boxer, Papillion, and Tibetan Spaniel.
28% of cases), stress, and the presence of a genetic
Although there afe several important differences
(breed) predisposition.3,6,7 Intact females are more
between DM in dogs and cats, cats experience many
343
344 Canine and Feline Nutrition
of the same fisk factors as those reported in dogs. The
in dogs: neutered males in cats) previous or concurrent
chance of developing DM increases as cats age; between
hyperadrenocorticism, pancreatitis, or acromegaly; and
70% and 90% of diabetic cats ate 7 years or oldef, and
the presence of a genetic (breed) predisposition. Aithough
more than 65% are 10 years or older at time of diagno-
many dogs diagnosed with DM are at normal body
sis.13 Obesity is well documented as an important risk
weight, or even underweight at the tire of diagrosis, obe
factor for DM in cats. Up to 80% of cats are overweight
sity is an important risk factor for DM in cats.
at the time of diagnosis, and overweight cats have an
almost fivefold increased risk of developing DM com-
pared with cats that are at their optimal weight.14 One
difference between dogs and cats is that neutered male
CLASSIFICATION QF DIABETES
cats have a higher fisk of developing DM than do intact
MELLITUS
cats of either sex or spayed females. Other predisposing
factors for cats include neutered status, indoor confine-
 DM is considered a heterogeneous syndrome, with its
ment and, related to living indoors, having a low level of
 primary characteristic being a persistent and detrimen-
physical inactivity.14,15 Cats with complicating diseases
tal hyperglycemia. In humans, diabetes is typically clas-
such as pancreatitis, pancreatic neoplasia, acromegaly,
sifed as either type I or type II. The classifcation of
hyperadrenocorticism, hyperthyroidism,
and denta
 diabetes in dogs and cats is generally patterned after the
disease ate also at increased risk.16-19 The administration
human classification, with some modifcation.
of medications such as progestagens and glucocorticoids
Type I Diabetes Mellitus
there is evidence for a breed-specific predisposition in
cats. Family lines of Burmese cats in Australia, New
Type I diabetes (formerly referred to as insulin-
Zealand, and the United Kingdom show a higher fre-
dependent diabetes mellitus [IDDM]} is identifed by
quency of DM when compared with other breds and
an absolute lack of endogenous insulin and a resultant
mixed-breed cats.5,21 In some lines, more than 10% of
 dependence upon exogenous insulin for survival. This
the individuals are affected.22
form of the disease is often caused by the immune-
Finally, there is evidence of a genetic component to
mediated destruction of the pancreatic beta cells by
 DM in cats that is not breed specifc. Some cats appeaf
T cells and antibodies. It is estimated that at least 50%
to be predisposed to developing glucose intolerance
of diabetic dogs have immune-mediated type 1 diabetes
because of naturally occurring low insulin sensitivity.
as indicated by the presence of islet cell antibodies.25
While these cats show no signs of DM when they are
 Evidence in human subjects with type I DM suggests
maintained at optimal body condition, they are more
involving the gut immune system, but this has not been
and become obese.1,23 For example, fasting hyper-
studied yet in dogs.26 The majority of diabetic dogs also
insulinemia prior to weight gain was found to be the
have an absolute insulin defciency, although the under-
strongest risk factor for development of impaired glu-
lying cause is not always known. As discussed previously.
cose tolerance in a group of cats that were fed to induce
there is a strong association between DM and pancre-
weight gain.23 This effect is theorized to be similar to
atitis in dogs. It is theorized that extensive pancreatic
the genetic component of type II DM that has been
damage and the loss of beta cells in dogs with recurrent
reported in human subjects. Insulin resistance is largely
of chronic pancreatitis may lead to the development
determined by genetics in humans, but its phenotypic
of DM. In human patients with type I DM, the rate
 expression and the development of DM is infuenced by
 of progression to absolute insulin defciency is highly
environmental factors, most notably obesity.24
variable and can occur fapidly (childhood onset) of
very gradually (latent autoimmune diabetes of adults
[LADA]). Because DM is typically diagnosed in dogs
Riskfactors for the development of diabetes melius(DM)
that are 7 years of age or older, it is theorized that the
in dogs and catsinclude increasing age, sex(intactfemales
form of DM observed in dogs may be similar to LADA
Diabetes Mellitus 345
in human subjects. Type I diabetes is not well docu-
of amylin and the greater loss of beta cells in this
mented in cats, and the prevalence of islet cell antibod-
species.27,32,33 Because the effects of glucose toxicity ate
yonoui az'z'paodai uq iou sey saisads siun ui sii
initially feversible, a substantial number of cats with
many cats with diabetes will require insulin therapy at
type II diabetes that are promptly treated with diet
some point during their disease, the pfoportion of cats
and insulin therapy may revert to a state that does not
that have type I diabetes (i.e., an absolute lack of endog-
require insulin weeks to months after hyperglycemia
enous insulin production) is very low.
has been controlled.34,35
Peripheral insulin resistance primarily manifests itself
after insulin binds to its cellular receptors, resulting in
Type Il Diabetes Mellitus
a decreased conversion of circulating glucose to glyco-
Type II diabetes is characterized by impaired insulin secre-
gen or fat. In addition to being a characteristic of type
tion; insulin resistance; and the deposition of amyloid in
II diabetes, insulin fesistance also occurs as an adaptive
the islets of the pancreas. (In humans, type I diabetes
response to low carbohydrate intake, allowing blood
was previously feferred to as non-insulin-dependent
glucose levels to be conserved and maintained immedi-
diabetes mellitus [NIDDM].) Human subjects with
 ately after eating a low-carbohydrate meal.36 It has been
type II DM do not usually require exogenous insulin
hypothesized that, as a species, the domestic cat is natu
therapy for survival, although insulin or oral hypoglyce-
rally insulin resistant when compared with other more
mic agents may be acdministered to better manage blood
omnivorous of herbivorous species. Insulin fesistance
glucose levels. With this form of DM, the total amount
would be expected to confer afi adaptive advantage for a
of insulin secfeted after a meal may be incfeased, nof-
 species that evolved as an obligate carnivore, consuming
mal, or decreased, and the pattern of insulin secretion
a diet that was high in protein but low in carbohydrate
is usually abnormal.29 Insulin resistance occurs when an
(see Section 2, pp. 76-77). A degree cf peripheral resis
elevated concentration of circulating hormone is needed
tance to insulin promotes the delivery of protein and fat
to adequately maintain blood glucose levels. Based upon
to tissues while conserving blood glucose levels. If this
glucose tolerance tests and measured levels of serum
theory is correct, it would follow that the consumption
insulin, it appears that insulin resistance is a common
of a diet that is high in carbohydrate (such as some com-
feature of both canine and feline diabetes.30,31 The per-
 mercially available dry cat foods) would require cats to
sistent hyperglycemia that results from insulin resistance
secrete much higher levels of insulin after eating than
and abnormal insulin secretion results in glucose toxicity.
would be secreted after eating a high-protein, high-fat
Glucose toxicity exacerbates the metabolic abnormalities
 meal. Over time, the beta cells of the pancreas may no
of diabetes and leacls to impaired insulin secretion and to
longer be able to meet this enhanced need, resulting in
the destruction and loss of beta cells
an abnormal or impaired insulin response. This hypoth-
More than 80% of cats with DM have type II DM;
esis has been feferred to as the “carnivore connection'
the remaining cases are usually secondary to other con-
 and has been examined in humans and cats.37
ditions such as actomegaly, pancreatitis, or neoplasia.
However, as discussed previously, the presence of
Amyloid deposition in pancreatic islets is a consistent
innate insulin resistance alone does not appear to lead
histological fnding in cats with diabetes. Amyloid is a
to DM. The development of cbesity, plus a sedentary
precipitation product of a pancreatic compound called
lifestyle, increasing age, and neuter status are factors
amylin. Amylin is cosecreted with insulin and helps to
that contribute to the exacerbation of insulin resistance
maintain normal blood glucose levels by stimulating
 in cats and may lead to development of type II DM.
the breakdown of muscle glycogen. Amyloid deposi-
Although more study of this hypothesis is needed, a
tion contributes to a loss of the insulin-secreting beta
fecent survey study of 96 diabetic cats and 192 matched
cells of the pancreas, eventually causing decreased or
control cats found no association between the amount
insuffcient insulin secretion. Although most diabetic
of dry cat food that was fed to cats and DM, but did
cats are identifed as having type II diabetes, more of
corro borate both a sedentary lifestyle and indoor con-
these cats require insulin therapy than do humans with
fnement as risk factors for DM.15 Table 29-1 summa-
type II diabetes, probably because of the deposition
fizes the classification of DM in dogs and cats.
346 Canine and Feline Nutrition
TABLE 29-1 FORMS OF DIABETES MELLITUS (DM)
FORM
MAJOR UNDERLYING CAUSE
INcidence (% of DM cases)
TREATMENT
Type I
Inability of beta cells to synthesize or
Dogs: >95%
Exogenous insulin and dietary
secrete insulin
Cats: 20% or less
management
Type II
Insensitivity of peripheral tissues to
Dogs: Rarely reported
Weight loss, dietary management
insulin; impaired insulin secretion
Cats: >80%
and/or hy poglycemic agents;
insulin therapy (in some cases)
Type i diabetes is characterized by an absolute lack of
Many of the health complications of DM can be
endogenous insulin and dependence upon exogenous
minimized or prevented through stringent control of
insulin. This form of the disease is often immune-mediated
blood glucose levels. The general therapeutic goals in
and is responsible for the majority of cases of diabetes
diabetes management are to minimize postprandial
mellitus (D/M) in dogs. Type ll diabetes is characterized by
(after-meal)
 hyperglycemia,  prevent  hypoglycemia
peripheral insulin resistance and in cats, the deposition of
when insulin is being administered, resolve and mini-
amyloid in the islets of the pancreas. More than 80% of
mize clinical signs, prevent or delay long-term com-
cats with DM have type Il DM: the remaining cases are
plications, and improve overall health. For some cats,
usually secondary to other conditions such as acromegaly
 management goals can also include achieving remission
pancreatitis, or neoplasia
(transient diabetes). Successful diabetic management
can be achieved through exogenous insulin adminis-
tration, administration of oral hypoglycemic agents,
diet, weight loss (if indicated), exercise, and the con-
CLINICAL SIGNS AND PHYSICAL
trol of concurrent illness. Oral hypoglycemic drugs
CHANGES
 may increase the deposition of amyloid in the pancreas
in cats and so are not often prescribed for cats. The
All of the clinical signs observed in pets with DM are
remainder of this chapter focuses primarily on the role
associated with the short- or long-term effects of hyper-
of diet and weight control in managing DM in dogs
glycemia and aberrations in carbohydrate, fat, and
and cats.
protein metabolism. Polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia,
and/or weight loss are usually the frst signs observed.
DIETARYTREATMENT
Cataracts are a consistent long-term complication of
DM in dogs.38 Many cats also develop evidence 
of
Dietary goals for dogs and cats with type I DM are
lens opacification as well.39
The microvascular effects
to improve regulation of blood glucose by delivering
of diabetes can contribute to the development of renal
snoloxa uaum soad sunp apoq au on sannu
develops in
insulin is active and to minimize postprandial Auctua-
some cases and can pfesent as weakness,
depression,of
tions in blood glucose levels. Dietary management does
urinary and bowel incontinence. In cats, this is often
 not eliminate the need for insulin replacement therapy,
seen clinically as a plantigrade stance.40 Bacterial infec-
 but it can be used to improve glycemic control. Dietary
tions, especially of the bladder, are common in ani-
treatment for pets with type II DM can be instrumen-
mals with poor glycemic control.41,42 Recently, a small
tal in improving glycemic control and making the need
case-controlled study with 20 diabetic cats feported
for lifelong exogenous insulin therapy less likely. Factors
that diabetic cats had a signifcantly increased risk of
that must be considered when developing an appropri-
heart disease-related death when compared with their
ate diet for a diabetic pet include the consistency and
matched cohorts.43 Because only a small number of
type of diet, its nutritional adequacy and nutrient com-
cats were examined, additional studies are needed to
position, the pet's caloric intake and feeding schedule,
explore this relationship.
and the presence of any other diseases.
Diabetes Mellitus 347
the gastrointestinal tract and the absorption of other
Consistency and Type of Diet
nutrients in the diet. Dry pet foods generally contain
Dogs and cats with diabetes should be fed a food that
higher levels of both complex carbohydrates and plant
contains consistent amounts and soufces of nutfients.
fber than semimoist or canned foods do.
Specifically, the type and quantity of nutrients that are
delivered to the bodly should remain constant from day
to day, and the proportions of calories in the diet that
Foods selected fordiabetic dogsand catsshould contain
ate supplied by carbohydrate, protein, and fat should
consistent amounts and sources of nutrients.The type
stay the same. For pets with type I diabetes, the provi-
and quantity of nutrients that are delivered to the
sion of a consistent diet allows the insulin dosage to be
p p op uouo upnoupog
adjusted to closely ft the needs of the animal. Similarly,
proportions of calories in the diet that are supplied by
if pets with type II diabetes are being treated with oral
carbohydrate, protein, and fat shouid stay the same. in
hypoglycemic agents, the provision of a consistent diet
addition, because oftheir high simpie carbohydrate con
is helpful in maintaining normal blood glucose levels.
tent, semimoist foods should not be fed to diabetic pets,
Changes in the ingredients or nutrient composition of
ever as treats
a diet can disrupt the tight coupling of blood glucose
levels with insulin activity that is needed for proper gly-
cemic control. Therefore only pet foods that are guar-
Nutritional Adequacy and Nutrient
anteed to use a fixed formulation should be selected fot
diabetic pets (see Section 3, p. 168). Manufacturers that
Composition
use fixed formulations ensure that the nutrient com-
The frst consideration when identifying a food for
 position and ingredients of a food remain consistent
a diabetic pet is the nutritional adequacy of the diet.
between batches. In contrast, manufacturers that use
 Because long-term management is involved, the food
variable formulations may change ingredients depend-
must be nutritionally complete and balanced and must
ing on the availability and market prices. If informa-
 supply optimum levels of all the essential nutrients
 tion about the formulation type is not readily available,
 fequired by the pet. The methods discussed in Section 3
it can be obtained by contacting the manufacturer
 can be used to determine the nutritional adlequacy of a
directly. In most circumstances, homemadle diets should
 commercial product. As discussed previously, the labels
also be avoided with diabetic pets because of difficulties
of over-the-counter pet foods will indicate if feeding tri-
with maintaining nuttient consistency.
als have been conducted or if the food has been formu
The type of commercial product that is fed is also
lated to meet the Association of Ametican Feed Control
of importance. Semimoist pet foods or snacks should
Officials (AAFCO's) Nutrient Profles. A food that has
not be fed to diabetic pets. Postprandial blood glucose
 been tested using the AAFCO's animal fedling test pro-
and insulin responses have been shown to be highest
tocols or that has been formulated to meet AAFCO's
when dogs are fed semimoist foods, compared with
Nutrient Profles should be selected. If a veterinary diet
when they are fed either canned or dry pet foods.44
is prescribed, the label may not show this information,
This increase appears to be caused by the high level
but the veterinarian should have literature available that
of simple carbohydrate found in semimoist products.
fully describes the selected product.
These nutrients require minimal digestion in the small
 intestine and are rapidly absorbed following a meal. In
contrast, the digestible catbohydrates found in dry and
Energy-Containing Nutrients
canned foods are madle up primarily of complex carbo-
Diabetes is a disorder that affects the body's ability to
hydrates (starch). Starches require enzymatic digestion
metabelize carbohydrate, protein, and fat. Therefore
to simple sugars before they can be absorbed into the
the proportion of these nutrients in foods designed for
body. This process slows the rate of delivery of glucose
managing DM is an important consideration. Over-
to the bloodstream. Complex carbohydrates and certain
all energy content of the fod must also be consid-
types of fber also affect the rate of food passage through
ered, especially in cases of underweight or overweight
348 Canine and Feline Nutrition
animals. Overweight animals with DM should be fed
control azotemia and clinical signs (see Chapter 32,
a food that is formulated for both weight and glyce-
pp. 417-419). Similarly, foods containing reduced
 mic control.45 Conversely, underweight animals should
protein and fat are often recommended for cats with
be fed foods with higher energy density to maintain of
uuyosisaous sunpai on yoeoidde ue se snneaiued
improve body condition.
cated for animals with severe liver disease.
PROTEIN
I In human diabetics, high-protein diets
afe not fecommended because of the incidence of
diabetic nephropathy, a condition that may be exac-
Diabetic dogs should befed high-quality protein in
erbated by the intake of large amounts of protein.
amounts that meet their daily requirements and the
However, this complication of diabetes is uncommon
protein content in foodsfor most diabetic cats should be
in dogs and cats, and protein restriction for diabetic
modestly increased. in cases when increased protein is
dogs and cats is neither necessary nor fecommended.
contraindicated because of concurrent renai or liver dis-
Rather, diabetic dogs should be fed high-quality pro-
ease, moderate protein restriction may be needed, and
tein in amounts that meet their daily requirements.
α food containing moderately increased fber shouid be
The protein content in foods for diabetic cats should
fed to controt glycermia.
be moderate or higher (>30%, dry-matter basis),
replacing digestible carbohydrate. Protein rather than
fat is used to replace carbohydrate because dlietary fat
incfeases insulin resistance and decfeases glucose toler-
FAT
 s s  so  aq  s
ance. When dogs or cats are supplied with a reduced
moderately restricted if the pet is overweight. Altera-
carbohydrate diet, increased protein is theorized to
tions in lipid metabolism can cause the development
support hepatic gluconeogenesis and promote nor-
of hypercholesterolemia and hepatic lipidosis in some
malized blood glucose (
entrations in diabetic cats.
diabetic animals. Restricted fat intake helps to prevent
 Large postprandial fuctuations in blood glucose con-
of minimize these changes and facilitates weight loss of
centrations are avoided because glucose produced via
weight management when it is needed. One potential
hepatic gluconeogenesis is released into the circulation
advantage of dietary fat in the nutritional management
at a slow and steady rate. In addition, reduced carbo-
of diabetes is its effects upon gastric motility. High levels
hydrate is believed to shift metabolism from glucose
of dietary fat delay gastric emptying and consequently
oxidation toward fat metabolism as the body's primary
 may modulate the postprandial glycemic response.46 In
energy source. Benefits of this shift for diabetic ani-
humans, diets containing monounsaturated fats have
mals include feduced insulin secretion, a shift from
been shown to decrease serum total cholesterol, very-
lipogenesis to lipolysis, and increased use of free fatty
low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs), and triglycerides
acids as a preferred energy source. In cats, increased
without increasing blood glucose levels. However, this
fat metabolism leads to an increase in the ketone body
advantage is offset by the potentiating effect of dietary
beta-hydroxybutyrate. F
However, the levels observed
fat upon insulin resistance and its potential to exacer-
in cats fed a high-protein, low-carbohydrate food are
bate the blood lipid abnormalities that occur as compli-
moderate and reportelly do not approach the danger-
cations of diabetes. Because of these discrepant effects
ous levels seen during metabolic acidosis associated
 and because of the contribution of dietary fat to energy
with uncontrolled DM.45
density, the diet for many diabetic pets should be rela-
 It is important to correctly diagnose the presence
tively low in fat while still containing adequate levels of
of concurrent illnesses when considering a food with
essential fatty acids (EFAs) (Boxes 29-1 and 29-2).
increased protein and decreased carbohydrate for dia-
betic cats. Cats with concurrent renal disease may expe-
CARBOHYDRATE
The carbohydrate content of
fience increased blood urea nitrogen when fed a food
diets for diabetic dogs and cats is an important consid-
containing even moderately incfeased protein. In these
eration because this nutrient has the greatest infuence
cases, moderate protein restriction may be needed to
upon postprandial blood glucose levels. A pet food that
Diabetes Mellitus 349
example, whole-grain starches have a lower glycemic
BOX 29-1 DIETARY MANAGEMENT
index than highly refined starches.48 Human subjects
OF DIABETES MELLITUS IN DOGS:
dermonstrate higher blood glucose and insulin responses
DIET CHARACTERISTICS
when refined forms of wheat starch are consumed, com-
Nutritionally complete and balanced
 pared with the response to potato or barley starches.49,50
Barley in particulat has been identifed as a starch source
Consistent proportion of carbohydrate, fat, and protein
that may be well-suited for diabetic dliets.50
 Consistency of ingredients (fixed formulation)
Similar vatiations in glycemic response have been
Greater than 40% of calories su pplied by complex
observed in dogs and cats. In one study, diets contain-
carbohydrate
ing 30% starch from corn, wheat, barley, fice, of sof-
ghum were fed to healthy adult dogs for a minimum of
Carbohydrate includes starch sources that minimize
gycemic response
 2 weeks.51 Feeding rice resulted in the highest postpran-
dial glycemic and insulin responses of the five starches
Moderate fiber level
High-quality protein source
resulted in a comparatively lower glycemic response, and
Moderately restricted in fat (≤20% of total calories)
feeding barley resulted in a moderate glucose response
and a reduced insulin response. Wheat and corn gen-
erally resulted in intermediate glycemic and insulin
responses. In a study with cats, two diets formulated to
BOX 29-2 DIETARY MANAGEMENT
contain a similar starch content (33%) from different
OF DIABETES MELLITUS IN CATS:
sources (sorghum and corn versus fice) were fed free-
DIET CHARACTERISTICS
choice to overweight cats.52 Cats fed the food contain-
ing rice consumed more food and gained more weight
Nutritionally complete and balanced
than cats fed the sorghum and corn diet. The cats fed the
Consistent proportion of carbohydrate, fat, and protein
fice-containing food were also more likely to experience
higher blood glucose and insulin levels following a meal.
Consistency of ingredients (fixed formulation)
Several factors may be responsible for these differences.
Carbohydrate includes starch sources that minimize
The proportion of amylose and the amount of dietary
gycemic response
fber that are associated with a starch source both affect
Moderately restricted in fat (<20% of total calories)
the glycemic response.53 Different types of rice contain
Increased protein and decreased carbohydrate (if not
varying amounts of amylose. Those with a high amylose
contraindicated) OR
content result in a higher glycemic response.48 The rela-
Optimal protein and selected carbohydrate/fiber blend,
tively low glycemic index of barley has been attributed
and reduced caloric content (if weight loss is needed)
to its high amount of associated fiber and beta-glucan.54
Because glycemic response is an important consideration
when selecting foods for diabetic pets, these results indli-
minimizes the glycemic response is desirable because
cate that both the amount and the source of the starch
lessening Auctuations in blood glucose contributes to
in the diet must be considered. While feeding rice may
better control of diabetes and its associated complica-
increase postprandial hyperglycemia, feeding barley or
tions. The term glycemic index refers to a ranking sys-
sorghum modulates the glucose and insulin response and
tem that categorizes foods based upon their effects on
therefore may be a better choice for dliabetic pets.
blood glucose levels. In general, complex carbohydrates 
Currently, a food that is low in simple carbohydrates,
(starches) have a lower glycemic indlex than simple car-
(is se xan ad sui
bohydrates because they are more slowly digested and
and has moderately increased fber is recommended for
absorbed.47 Types of starch also dliffer in their glycemic
diabetic dogs (see the next section). As a general rule,
effects depending upon the plant soufce, its physical
 complex carbohydrate should providle 40% or more of
form, and the type of cooking and processing used. For
the calories in foods for diabetic dogs. Diabetic cats may
350 Canine and Feline Nutrition
beneft from a food that contains increased protein, mod-
water-holding capacities, delay gastric emptying, and are
erate levels of fat, and reduced carbohydrate and fber.
believed to slow the rate of nutrient absorption across
As discussed previously, increasing protein and decreasing
the intestinal surface. Most soluble fibers afe also highly
carbohydrate in diets formulated for diabetic cats leads
fermentable by bacteria in the large intestine. Insoluble
 to improved glycemic control, modulation of the hyper-
fbers include cellulose, lignin, and most of the hemicellu-
glycemic states, and improved insulin sensitivity.SS One
loses. These fbers have less initial water-holding capacity.
study showed that when used in combination with insulin
cause a decrease in gastrointestinal transit time, and are
injections, feeding this type of food increased the likeli-
less efficiently fermented by gastrointestinal bacteria.0
hood for transient DM in recently diagnosed cats, when
Research with human subjects has shown that a diet
compared with diabetic cats that were fed a high-fber
 containing a high proportion of complex carbohydrate
diet.56 An alternative approach for cats is feeding a food
 and soluble fber dampens the postprandial glycemic
Jo puaq e pue uioid jo jaaal aiejdoidde ue sunujenuo
complex carbohydrates and dietary fbers that are formu-
 motes the slowed digestion and absorption of dietary
lated to aid in glycemic control (see discussion of carbohy-
carbohydrate, which results in a fattening of the glu-
drate sources, pp. 348-350 and discussion of fber blends,
 Cose response curve after meals. Postprandial hypergly-
cemia is reduced when both soluble and insoluble fbers
mulated for weight control (i.e., reduced fat and decreased
afe fed, but soluble fbers have the most pronounced
effect.63,64 Soluble fber also has the added beneft of
weight in overweight diabetic cats, further contributing
causing a dlecrease in the low-density lipoprotein ffac
 to normalizing glycemic control. Both dietary approaches
 tion of blood cholesterol in human subjects.65 The pro-
have been shown to be efficacious for managing long-
 posed mechanism of action for soluble fber is the ability
term glycemic control in diabetic cats.45,55,59
of this type of fber to form a gel in aqueous solutions,
which results in an impairment of the convective trans-
fer of glucose and water to the absorptive surface of the
intestine. These “gel-forming" fbers are referred to as
A food that is low in simple carbonhydrates and con-
viscous fbers. As fber viscosity increases, so does the
tains predominantly complex carbohydrates (starch)
fbet's ability to slow glucose diffusion, resulting in pro-
as its carbokydrate source is recommended for diabetic
nounced fattening of the glycemic response curve and
dogs.The type of starch that isfed is also an important
improved control of glycemia in diabetic subjects.6,67
consideration. Rice-containing diets resuit in high post-
Studies with dogs demonstrate similar effects of
prandial glycemic response, while sorghum and bariey
dietary fber. When groups of dogs with DM were fed
have lower glycemic responses, and so are more appro-
diets containing 15% fber, significant reductions in
priate. Diabetic cats can be fed a food that contains
24-hour blood glucose Huctuations and urinary glucose
increased protein and reduced carbohydrate or a food
excretion were reported.68 Slight reductions in monthly
that inciudes optimal protein, moderately increased
insulin requirements and blood glycosylated hemo-
fber, and, jf needed, reduced calories for weight control.
globin concentration were also observed. These effects
occurred when either insoluble fibers (cellulose) or sol-
uble fbers (pectin) were included as the food’s primary
fber source. However, it is important to note that the
DietaryFiber
experimental diets used in this study were created by
The role of dietary fber in the management of diabetic
adlding supplemental fber or carbohydrate to a balanced
pets has been studied extensively. Both the amount and
food, resulting in the dilution of calories and nutrients.
the type of fber have been considlered. One type of clas-
These diets were compared with a high-carbohydrate,
sification scheme dividles fber into two broad categories:
low-fat control diet that was not diluted. As a fesult,
soluble fiber or insoluble fiber. Soluble fbers include pec-
the control diet differed from the experimental diets not
tin, gums, mucilages, a few of the hemicelluloses, and
only in its fiber content, but also in fat content, caloric
fructooligosaccharides (FOS). These fbers have high
 density, and nutrient density. As a result, dogs consuming
Diabetes Mellitus  351
the high-fiber diets were also consuming fewer calories
diet. It was noted that although there were no signifi-
 per meal than dogs fed the control diet. Therefore it
cant differences, daily caloric intakes were lower for the
cannot be determined if the dampening effects of the
nine dogs while consuming the high-fber diets, and
fber-containing diets in this study were due to slowed
for the two dogs while consuming the low-fber diets.
absorption of glucose, ingestion of fewer calories, of a
These results suggest that caloric intake may have at
combination of these two factors.
least partially infuenced glycemic control in the dogs in
In a second study, dogs with type I diabetes were
this study, despite attempts to provide consistent daily
fed a commercial, canned diet that was diluted by the
caloticintake
addition of either 20 grams (g) of wheat bran (insoluble
These fesults suggest that feeding a diet contain-
fber) or 20 g of guar (soluble fber).6 When the dogs
ing increased amounts of insoluble fber may improve
consumed the canned food without added fber, they
control of glycemia in some dogs with naturally occur-
all developed hyperglycemia within 60 minutes of eat-
ring DM but may not be appropriate for all dogs. It is
ing, followed by development of a relative hypoglyce-
also important to note that during the course of this
mia between 90 and 240 minutes. The adldition of guaf
long-term study, 4 dogs (from an original group of 15)
to the food abolished the postprandial hyperglycemia
died or were euthanized because of diabetic complica-
in four of six dogs and significantly feduced it in the
tions, and 9 of the 11 remaining dogs developed con-
remaining two dogs. The addition of wheat bran also
cuffent disorders that afe commonly associated with
reduced the maximal postprandial peak in blood glu-
dliabetes. These disorders developed with approximately
cose, but to a lesser extent. These effects were observed
in both diabetic dogs and healthy control dogs.
fber diets and were controlled with appropriate treat-
Although the effect upon daily postprandial Huctua-
ment. However, this observation raises the question of
tions in blood glucose is an important criterion for a
whether or not the degree of glycemic control that is
diabetic diet, an equally important criterion is the diet's
reported when a high-fiber diet is fed has long-term
long-term infuence upon glycemic control and health.
clinical benefits. Although improved glycemic control
The effects of feeding increased amounts of insoluble
was observed in 9 of 11 dogs, overall health and quality
of life were not evaluated. Long-term studies of fber-
paue oz'soad yuou-g om sunp pauuexa sram
containing diets that include a larger number of dogs
qy Aia1 1 %7 10 %1 I 1a Suu1 si
 and examine the effects of fber-containing diets on the
supplied primarily by insoluble fber (cellulose), were
incidence and management of associated diabetic disor-
fed to 11 dogs. Caloric intake was controlled to pro-
ders are heeded.
-jui ssop yoea paureiuieu 1eun pooy jo sunoue ue ap
Feeding different types of soluble fbers and fber
tial body weight. The dogs accepted both diets equally
blends has also been studied in dogs.71-73 One group
and maintained body weight with only slight Huctua
of researchers examined the effect of feeding a blend of
tions. Daily caloric intake was slightly less when dogs
FOS and beet fber on diet digestibility and glycemic
consumed the high-fiber diet versus the low-fber diet,
response in healthy adult dogs.71 FOS are natural poly-
but this dlifference was not significant. Although there
mers of fructose that are found in vatious plants such
were no significant dlifferences between the two trteat-
as bananas, onions, and batley. This fiber (also feferfed
ment groups, when evaluated individually, glycemic
t0 as a “prebiotic") is resistant to hydrolysis in the small
control improved in 9 of the 11 dogs when they were
intestine but is highly fermented in the large intestine
consuming the high-fber diet, compared with when
(see Chapter 35, pp. 467-470). Sugar beet fber is a
they were consuming the low-fber diet. Signifcant
moderately fermentable fiber that is frequently included
reductions in daily insulin requirements, fasting bloed
in commercial pet foods. When healthy adult dogs were
glucose, 24-hour mean blood glucose, urinary glucose
fed diets containing either 0%, 5%, or 10% of an FOS
excretion, glycosylated hemoglobin 
concentfations,
and beet-fber blend, the highest fber diet caused sig-
and serum cholesterol were observed dluring the high-
 nificant decreases in postprandial glucose concentration
fber period. In contrast, 2 of the 11 dogs demonstrated
and preprandial (fasting) serum cholesterol concen-
better glycemic control while consuming the low-fiber
tration. Increases in fber intake were associated with
352 Canine and Feline Nutrition
increased fecal output and water content and slightly
the postprandial glycemic curve, it is possible that this
decreased protein digestibility. However, the fber blend
is an effect of decreased energy intake caused by dilution
had no effect on fasting blood glucose concentration
of the diet, father than a direct effect of fiber. More-
 or postprandial insulin response. Because daily caloric
 over, fiber's ability to providle long-term health benefits
intake was kept constant in this study, the glycemic and
or improved quality of life or to prevent or ameliorate
cholesterol effects were not attributable to decreased
energy intake. It was postulated that the infuence of
ated. The use of soluble fiber may have efficacy in delay-
soluble fber on serum metabolites may have been due
ing gastric emptying and slowing glucose absorption in
to the effects of its fermentation products on nutrient
the intestine. However, high amounts of soluble fbef
and lipid metabolism in the liver or upon secretion of
afe not well tolerated by dogs and can cause increased
gastrointestinal tract hormones that control nutrient
fecal water, loose stools, and diarrhea. Moreover, dogs
metabolism.
appear to have highly variable responses to the inclusion
The effects of increasing soluble fiber viscosity on fat-
of both types of fiber in their diets. Currently, the best
tening of the postprandlial glycemic response curve have
solution appears to be through creation of fber blends
also been studied in dogs.
72,74,75 Dog foods containing
that function to slow gastric emptying time, modulate
either 1% or
3% carboxymethylcellulose (CMC)
of
glucose absorption, and dampen the postprandial glyce-
 mic curve in diabetic pets. Several foods that meet these
and postprandial serum glucose and insulin concentra-
criteria are currently available as veterinary therapeutic
tions were measured.72 Dogs fed the high-CMC diets
diets for dogs and cats with DM.
developed soft feces or diarrhea, while dogs fed the low-
CMC diets had normal stools. The production of soft
feces or diarrhea in dogs consuming diets containing
increasing dietary fber can help to dampen the post
soluble fber has been reported previously and is consid-
prandial glycemic curve in diabetic dogs and cats.
ered to be a common side effect of feeding this type of
However, there is a great deal of individual variability
fber.76 As with insoluble fber, dogs had widely diver-
among animais and different fber types produce dif-
 gent responses to the consumption of CMC. Because
ferent resuits. The use of fber blends that include both
of these vatiations, no statistically significant effects of
soluble and insoluble fber types in foods for diabetic
CMC or viscosity were found. Howevet, dogs fed diets
pets appear to be the most effective approach to modu-
containing 1% high-viscosity CMC showed the lowest
late giucose absorption, and dampen the postprandial
Pue unsu pue asosn jeipuidisod roy sana ua
glycemic curve.
had the longest time for postprandial blood glucose to
return to the normal fasting range. In addition, serum
glucose concentrations consistently decreased below
Chromium
the normal fasting range by 30 minutes after eating in
dogs fed CMC-containing diets. This was not observed
The trace mineral chromium has been recognized as an
 in dogs fed the control diet. These results suggest that
essential nutrient needed for glucose metabolism since
the CMC may delay gastric emptying or slow nutrient
the late 1950s.77 The biologically active form of chro-
absorption. In contrast, dogs fed the 3% CMC diet had
mium functions as a potentiator of insulin action and
the highest postprandial increases, indicating enhanced
is called giucose tolerance factor. The precise composition
glucose absorption. These inconsistent results sug-
of this factor is not known, but it appears that nicotinic
 gest that high amounts of CMC may actually enhance
 acid is an essential component.78,79 Theories for the
glucose absorption, although a specific mechanism for
mechanism of action of glucose tolerance factor include
this response is not known.
direct interaction with insulin, effect on the produc-
Research examining the effcacy of high-fiber diets
tion of insulin feceptors, and a postreceptor metabolic
for the management of diabetic pets may have raised
interaction.80,81
more questions than it has answered. While increased
Chromium defciency in humans is associated with
amounts of insoluble fber have been shown to dampen
 abnormal glucose utilization and insulin resistance and
Diabetes Mellitus 353
has been hypothesized to be a factor in the development
intolerance and insulin resistance, that are genetically
of adlult-onset diabetes. Although variable results are
predisposed to glucose tolerance (i.e., Burmese cats), of
feported, improved glucose tolerance is seen in some
   ni a a  s
human diabetics when their diets are supplemented
with this mineral .8283 Chromium supplementation has
also been shown to increase glucose uptake by tissues
Caloric Intake and Weight Control
mium supplementation may have a role in improving
The relationship between obesity and type II diabetes
glycemic control in diabetic pets.
in humans and cats is well documented.8 The relation-
A set of experiments examined the effect of chro-
ship is not as well documented in dogs, but obesity
mium supplementation on glucose metabolism and
-Iadxa omi uI gg'ssop inpe Aieaq u Anisuas unsu!
baseline plasma insulin level and insulin response to a
iments, groups of 24 Beagles were fed diets contain-
glucose load increase linearly in dogs as a function of
ing either 0, 0.15, 0.3, or 0.6 parts per million (ppm)
their degree of obesity, but these changes do not always
of supplemental chromium tripicolinate. Dogs that
received supplemental chromium had lower plasma glu-
 Similarly, healthy but obese cats with normal fasting
cose concentrations for 30 minutes and slightly higher
plasma glucose concentfations showed abnormal results
glucose clearance fates for between 10 and 30 minutes
 on glucose tolerance tests and slightly elevated baseline
following intravenous glucose administration when
serum insulin concentrations.89 Significant delays in
 compared with the values for dogs that did not receive
initial insulin response and substantially increased insu-
supplemental chromium. Chromium supplementation
lin responses at a later phase of the glucose tolerance
was associated with lower fasting blood glucose levels,
test were found in the overweight cats. Decreasedl tissue
but it did not affect the serum insulin response to glu-
sehsitivity to insulin (insulin fesistance) and impaired
cose infusion. These fesults afe consistent with those
beta-cell responsiveness to stimuli are believed to be the
reported in humans and other species and suggest that
cause of these changes. There may be several underly-
chromium supplementation in dogs increases tissue
ing causes of insulin resistance. The tissue of obese ani-
sensitivity to the effects of insulin. Conversely, another
 mals experience a dlown-regulation of cellular insulin
study reported no beneficial effects when 13 insulin-
feceptors, and the feceptors that afe present may have
tteated diabetic dogs were supplemented with 20 to
reduced binding affinity for insulin.50.92 In some cases,
60 micrograms (μg)/kilogram (kg)/day of chromium
picolinate.87 It is possible that benefits were not seen in
also occurs.93 Ultimately, these changes decrease target
this study because the dogs' diabetes was well controlled
tissues’ ability to respond to insulin. Over time, beta-
and the dogs were chromium replete.
 cell hyperresponsiveness develops, baseline insulin and
Chromium supplementation has been studied in
insulin secretion increase in an attempt to compensate
cats as well. One study in healthy, normal weight cats
for the cellular resistance to insulin, and chronic hyper-
showed that the addition of chromium tripicolinate at
glycemia develops.
-0id pooy ay o1 (qdd) uoq 1ad sied 0o9 pue 009
Weight feduction is an important aspect of the
duced improvement in glucose tolerance as measured
by glucose half-life, area under the glucose curve, and
weight. When obesity is reduced in dogs and cats with
absolute glucose concentrations.88 Results of this study
abnormal insulin-secretory responses, glucose tolerance
indicated that chromium supplementation improved
often improves.1l In addition, weight loss in dogs with
tissue sensitivity to insulin in cats. Although the effects
type I diabetes can result in enhanced tissue sensitivity
observed in these studies were relatively small, these data
to insulin, resulting in lowered daily insulin require-
indicate that increasing the level of chromium in diets
ments. When a diabetic pet is overweight, caloric intake
formulated for pets with risk factors for diabetes and for
should be designed for weight loss and the eventual
diabetic pets may improve glucose tolerance and aid in
 maintenance of ideal body weight. A food that is formu-
glycemic control. Cats with naturally occurring glucose
lated to be complete and balanced—while containing
354 Canine and Feline Nutrition
moderately increased fiber, increased complex carbo-
 If insulin is administered early in the morning, the
hydrates, and reduced fat—is recommended for most
frst meal should be given immediately before the insu-
diabetic dogs. (Note: Adding complex carbohydrates of
lin injection. If the pet refuses to eat on any occasion,
fber to a normal diet in an attempt to decrease energy
the insulin injection can be withheld. This approach
density is contraindicated because this practice may
 protects against the risk of insulin-induced hypoglyce-
cause increased stool volume, loose stools, or diarrhea
mia, which can be life threatening. The remaining three
and can lead to nutrient imbalances.) Overweight dia-
eds aienba je uaii aq ue ae a ui sea inog 1o
betic cats benefit from either a low-carbohydrate/high-
intervals, depending on the action of the insulin used.
protein or an increased-fber food (see p. 350). In all
 Taking blood samples and measuring blood glucose lev-
cases that animals with DM are fed to promote weight
els every 1 to 2 hours throughout a 24-hour period will
loss, the pet's blood glucose should be carefully moni-
indicate if the feeding schedule coincides adequately
tored and adljustments of insulin can be made as glucose
with insulin activity. If postprandial blood glucose levels
tolerance improves
fise above 180 milligrams (mg)/deciliter (dl), the inter-
val between feeding and insulin administration should 
be decreased. If hyperglycemia still occurs, the size of
Weight reduction is an important component of the
the meal should be decreased and/or the number of
dietary management of overweight diabetic pets.
meals provided per day should be increased. Likewise,
When obesity is reduced in animais with abnormal
a meal should always be provided within 1 to 2 hours
insulin-secretory responses, glucose toferance usually
following the lowest blood glucose level.
 Once an appropriate pet food and feeding schedule
resuit in enhanced tissue sensitivity to insulin, resuiting
have been selected, the management program should
in lowered daily insulin requirerments. When a diabetic
be adhered to strictly. Pets that have previously been
pet is overweight, caloric intake shouid be designed
fed free choice should be gradually switched to the
for weight loss and the eventual maintenance of ideal
new regimen. Although most dogs will adapt quickly,
body weight.
cats can be very resistant to changes in their feeding
routine and in the type of food that is fed. This resis-
tance can make dietary management of a diabetic cat
diffcult for some owners. Mixing the new food into
Timing of Meals
the cat's previous food and changing to a meal-feeding
The feeding schedule for insulin-dependent animals
regimen over a period of several weeks can help decrease
should be planned so that nutrients are delivered to the
these problems. Allowing cats to nibble over the period
body during peak periods of exogenous insulin activ-
of insulin activity is also effective in some cases.94
nsu jo ad aq aq pauaap aq lm ueds su X
Supplemental foods should not be given, and feeding
lin used and the time of day it is administered. Several
times should vary as little as possible. Home monitor-
small meals should be provided throughout the period
ing of clinical signs and periodic monitoring of blood
 of insulin activity, as opposed to feeding a single large
glucose curves and serum fructosamine levels and/or
meal. Feeding several small meals helps minimize
glycosylated hemoglobin concentrations (GHb) can be
postprandial fuctuations in blood glucose levels. Other
used to adjust the dliet as the pet loses weight, has altef-
factors that affect the degree of hyperglycemia that
ations in exercise, of fequires adjustments in insulin
occurs following a meal include the composition of the
food and the type of insulin administered.
Diabetes Mellitus 355
References
 1. Rand JS, Fleeman LM, Farrow HA, and others: Canine and feline diabetes mellitus: nature or nurture? J Nutr 134:2072S-2080S,
2004.
2. Fall T, Hamlin HH, Hedhammer A, and others: Diabetes mellitus in a population of 180,000 insured dogs: incidence, survival and
breed distribution, / Vet fntern Med 21:1209-1216, 2007.
 3. Guptill L, Glickman L, Glickman N: Time trends and risk factors for diabetes mellitus in dogs: analysis of veterinary medical data
base records (1970-1999), Vet / 165:240-247, 2003.
4. Prahl A, Guptill L, Clickman NW, and others: Time trends and risk factors for diabetes mellitus in cats presented to veterinary
teaching hospitals, J Feline Med Surg 9:351-358, 2007.
5. McCann TM, Simpson KE, Shaw Dj: Feline diabetes mellitus in the UK: the prevalence within an insured cat population and a
question-based putative risk factor analysis, J Feline Med Surg 9:289-299, 2007.
diagnosed diabetic dogs (abstract), J Vet Intern Med 17:395, 2003.
7. Catchpole B, Ristic JM, Fleeman LM, Davison LJ: Canine diabetes mellitus: can old dogs teach us new tricks? Diabetologid
48:1948-1956, 2005.
canine diabetes and acromegaly, Acta Endocrinof 104:167-176, 1983.
9. Doxey DL, Milne EM, Mackenzie CP: Canine diabetes mellitus: a retrospective survey, J Small Anim Pract 26:555-561, 1985.
10. Klinkenberg H, Sallander MH, Hedhammar A: Feeding, exercise, and weight identifed as risk factors in canine diabetes mellitus,
J Nutr 136:1985S-1987S, 2006.
11. Mattheeuws D, Rottiers R, Baeyens D, and others: Glucose tolerance and insulin response in obese dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Asoc
20:287-290, 1984.
12. Hess RS, Kass PH, Ward CR: Breed distribution of dogs with diabetes mellitus admitted to a tertiary care facility, J Am Vet Med
Assoc 216:14141417, 2000.
13. Panciera DL, Thomas CB, Eicker SW, and others: Epizootiologic patterns of diabetes melltus in cats: 333 cases (1980-1986),
J Am Vet Med Asoc 197:1504-1508, 1990.
15. Slingerland Ll, Fazilova VV, Plantiga EA, and others: Indoor confinement and physical inactivity rather than the proportion of dry
food are risk factors in the development of feline type 2 diabetes mellitus, Vet J 179:247-253, 2009.
16. Buscher H, Jacobs M, Ong G, and others: Beta-cll function of the pancreas after necrotizing pancreatitis, Dig Surg 16:496-500,
1999
17. Petersen ME, Taylor RS, Greco DS, and others: Acromegaly in 14 cats, / Vet Med 4: 192-201, 1990.
 18. Elliott DA, Feldman EC, Koblik PD, and others: Prevalence of pituitary tumors among diabetic cats with insulin resistance,
IAm Vet Med Asoc 216:1765-1768, 2000.
19. Berg Rl, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, and others: Serum insulin-like growth factor-1 concentration in cats with diabetes mellitus and
acromegaly, J Vet Intern Med 21:892-898, 2007.
20. Peterson ME: Effects of megestrol acetate on glucose tolerance and growth hormone secretion in the cat, Res Vet Sci 42:354 357, 1987.
21. Lederer R, Rand J, Hughes IP, Fleeman LM: Chronic of recurring medical problems, dental disease, repeated corticosteroid
treatment, and lower physical activity are associated with diabetes in Burmese cats (abstract), / Vet Intern Med 17:433, 2003
22. Wade C, Gething M, Rand JS: Evidence of a genetic basis for diabetes mellitus in Burmese cats, J Vet Intern Med 13:269, 1999.
23. Appleton DJ, Rand JS, Sunvold GD: Insulin sensitivity decreases with obesity, and lean cats with low insulin sensitivity are at
greatest risk of glucose intolerance with weight gain, J. Feline Med Surg 3:21 1-228, 2001.
 24. Harris Ml: Epidemiological studies on the pathogenesis of non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM), Clin Invest Med
18:231-239, 1995.
356Canine and Feline Nutrition
25. Hoenig M: Pathophysiology of canine diabetes, Vet Clin North Am Smalt Anim Pract 25:253-256, 1995.
26. Akerblom HK, Vaarala O, Hyoty H: Environmental factors in the etiology of type I diabetes, Am J Med Genet 115:18-29, 2002.
27. Rand JS: Current understanding of feline diabetes mellitus: part 1, pathogenesis, J Feline Med Surg 1:143-153, 1999.
29. Struble AL, Nelson RW: Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in cats and humans, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
19:935-945, 1997.
30. O'Brien TD, Hayden DW, Johnson EH, and others: High dose intravenous glucose tolerance test and serum insulin and glucagon
levels in diabetic and non-diabetic cats: relationships to insular amyloidosis, Vet Pathof 22:250-261, 1985.
31. Mattheeuws D, Rotiers R, Kaneko JJ, and others: Diabetes mellitus in dogs: relationship of obesity to glucose tolerance and insulin
response, Am J Vet Res 45:98-103, 1984.
 32. O'Brien TD, Butler PC, Westermark P, Johnson KH: lslet amyloid polypeptide: a review of its biology and potential roles in the
pathogenesis of diabetes mellitus, Vet Pathof 30:317-332, 1993.
33. Link KRJ, Rand JS: Glucose toxicity in cats, / Vet Intern Med 10:185, 1996.
34. Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Ford SL, and others: Transient diabetes melltus in the cat. In Proc Arx Conf Vet Intern Med Forum, 1992,
p794.
35. Bennett N, Greco DS, Peterson ME, and others: Comparison of a low carbohydrate-low fiber diet and a moderate carbohydrate
high fiber diet in the management of feline diabetes mellitus, J Fetine Med Surg 8:73-84, 2006.
36. Brand Miller JC, Colagiuri S: The carnivore connection: dietary carbohydrate in the evolution of NlDDM, Diabetologid
37:1280-1286, 1994.
37. Zoran Dl: The carnivore connection to nutrition in cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:1559-1567, 2002.
200 cases, Vet Ophthatmol 2:169-172, 1999.
39. Williams DL, Heath MF: Prevalence of feline cataract: results of a cross-sectional study of 2,0o0 normal animals, 50 cats with
diabetes mellitus and one hundred cats following dehydrated crises, Vet Ophthatmo! 9:341-349, 2006.
40. Mizisin AP, Shelton CD, Burges ML, and others: Neurological complications associated with spontaneously occurring feline
diabetes mellitus, J Neuropathot Exp Newrol 61:872-884, 2002.
41. Forrester SD, Troy GC, Dalton MN, and others: Retrospective evaluation of urinary tract infection in 42 dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism or diabetes mellitus or both, / Vet Intern Med 13:557-560, 1999.
42. Bailiff NL, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, and others: Frequency and risk factors for urinary tract infection in cats with diabetes mellitus,
JVet Intern Med 20:850-855, 2006.
practice, J Small Anim Pract 49:17-25, 2008.
44. Holste LC, Nelson RW, Feldrman EC, and others: Effect of dry, soft moist, and canned dog foods on postprandial blood glucose and
insulin concentrations in healthy dogs, Am / Vet Res 50:984 989, 1989.
45. Kirk CA: Feline diabetes mellitus: low carbohydrates versus high fiber? Vt Clin North Am Small Ani Pract 36:1297-1306, 2006.
46. El-Berheri Burgess BRB: Rationale for changes in the dietary management of diabetes, J Am Diet Asoc 81:258-270, 1982.
47. Jenkins DjA, Wolever TMS, Taylor RH, and others: Glycemic index of foods: a physiological basis for carbohydrate exchange,
Am J Chin Nutr 34:362-366, 1981.
48. Jarvi AE, Karlstrom YE, Garnfeldt YE, and other: The infuence offood structure on postprandial metabolism in patients with
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, Am / Clix Nutr 61:837-842, 1995.
ayogre suarap urureuos sieau on sasuodsar unsur pue asosn euedisot siao pue o apse a auret if apua 6y
in normal and diabetic subjects, N Engt f Med 309:712, 1983.
50. Wolever TMS, Bolonesi C: Source and amount of carbohydrate affect postprandial glucose and insulin in normal subjects, J Nutr
126:2798-2806, 1996.
Diabetes Mellitus 357
51. Sunvold GD, Bouchard GF: The glycemic response to dietary starch. In Reinhart GA, Carey DP editors: Recent advances in canine
and feline nutrition, lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
52. Appleton DJ, Rand JS, Priest J, and others: Dietary carbohydrate source affects glucose concentrations, insulin secretion and food
intake in overweight cats, Nutr Res 24:447-467, 2004.
53. Coddard MS, Young G, Marcus R: The effect of amylose content on insulin and glucose responses to ingested rice, Axm J Clin Vutr
39:388-392, 1984.
54. Liljeberg HCM, Granfeldt YE, Bjorck IME: Products based on a high fber barley genotype, but not on common barley or oats,
lower postprandial glucose and insulin responses in healthy humans, / Nutr 126:458-466, 1996.
55. Bennett N, Greco DS, Peterson ME, and others: Comparison of a low carbohydrate-low fiber diet and a moderate carbohydrate-
high fiber diet in the management of feline diabetes mellitus, J Feline Med Surg 8:73-84, 2006.
56. Mazzafero EM, Greco DS, Turner AS: Treatment of feline diabetes mellitus using an alpha-glucosidase inhibitor and a low-
carbohydrate diet, J Feline Med Surg 5:183-189, 2003.
57. Nelson RW, Scott-Moncrieff JC, Feldman EC: Effect of dietary insoluble fber on control of glycemia in cats wich naturally acquired
diabetes mellitus, J A Vet Med Asoc 216: 1082-1088, 2000.
58. Frank G, Anderson W, Pazak H: Use of a high-protein diet in the management of feline diabetes melltus, Vet Tber 2:238-246,
2001.
59. Rand JS, Marshall RD: Diabetes mellitus in cats, Vt Chin North Am Small Anim Pract 35:211-234, 2005.
60. Anderson J W: Physiological and metabolic effects of dietary fiber, Fed Proc 44:2902-2906, 1985.
61. Crapo PA: Carbohydrate in the diabetic diet, J Am Coll Nutr 5:31-43, 1986.
Jo ponuos sogeau ayp uo iagy pue aeapiyoges reaip jo aouangur aneedas sraypo pue 'a rrorel 't asalar ' ipres '79
diabetes, Dhiabetotogia 26:116-121, 1984.
63. Nuttal FQ: Dietary fiber in the management of diabetes, Diabetes 42:503-508, 1993.
64. Valer S: Diabetic control is improved by guar gum and wheat bran supplementation, Diabetic Med 3:230-233, 1986.
65. Kay RM, Truswell AS: Effect of citrus pectin on blood lipids and fecal steroid excretion in man, Am J Clix Nutr 30:171-175, 1977.
66. O'Connor N, Tredger J, Morgan L: Viscosity differences between various guar gums, Diabetologia 20:612-615, 1981.
67. Holt S, Heading RC, Carter DC, and others: Efect of gel fber on gastric emptying and absorption of glucose and paracetamol,
Lancet 1:636-639, 1979.
68. Nelson RW, Ihle SL, Lewis LD, and others: Effects of dietary fber supplementation on glycemic control in dogs with alloxan
induced diabetes mellitus, Am / Vet Res 52:2060-2066, 1991
69. Blaxter AC, Cripps RJ, Gruffd-JonesTJ: Dietary fbre and postprandial hyperglycemia in normal and diabetic dogs J SmallAim
Pract 31:229-233, 1990.
70. Nelson RW, Duesberg CA, Ford SL, and others: Effect of dietary insoluble fber on control of glycemia in dogs with naturally
acquired diabetes mellitus, J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:380-386, 1998.
71. Diez M, Hornick JL, Baldwin P and others: lnfuence of a blend of fructo-oligosaccharides and sugar beet fber on nutrient
digestibility and plasma metabolite concentrations in healthy Beagles, Am / Vet Res 58:1238-1242, 1997.
72. Nelson RW, Sunvold GD: Effect of carboxymethylcellulose on postprandial glycemic response in healthy dogs. In Reinhart CA,
1998, Orange Frazer Press.
73. Burney Ml, Massimino SF, Field CJ, and others: Modulation of intestinal function and glucose homeostasis in dogs by the ingestion
of fermentable dietary fibers. In Reinhart GA, Carey DP, editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition, lam nutrition
symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
74. Reppas C, Meyer JH, SiroisJ, Dressman JB: Efect of hydroxyproplymethycellulose on gastrointestinal transit and luminal viscosity
in dogs, Gastroenterology 100:1217-1223, 1991,
358Canine and Feline Nutrition
75. Reppas C, Dressman JB: Viscosity modulates blood glucose response to nutrient solutions in dogs, Diabetes Res Clix Pract
17:8188, 1992.
76. Nelson RW: Dietary management of diabetes mellitus, J Small Anim Prect 33:213-217, 1992.
77. Schwarz K, Mertz W: Chromium (1ll) and the glucose tolerance factor, Arch Biochem Biophys 85:292-295, 1959.
78. Urberg M, Zemel MB: Evidence for synergism between chromium and nicotinic acid in the control of glucose tolerance in elderly
humans, Metabolism 36:896-899, 1987.
79. Olin KL, Stearns DM, Armstrong WH, and others: Comparative retention/absorption of 5lchromium from 5lchromium chloride,
5lchromium nicotinate and 5lchromium picolinate in a rat model, Trace Elements Electrolytes 1 1:182-186, 1994.
80. Evans CW: The effect of chromium picolinate on insulin controlled parameters in humans, Int J Biosoc Med Res 11:163-180, 1989.
81. Anderson RA, Polansky MM, Bryden NA, and others: Effects of supplemental chromium on patients with symptoms of reactive
hypoglycemia, Metaboism 36:351-355, 1987.
82. Mossop RT: Effects of chromium (ll) on fasting glucose, cholesterol, and cholesterol HDL levels in diabetics, Cent Af J Med
29:80-82,1983.
83. Glinsmann WH, Mertz W: Effect of trivalent chromium on glucose tolerance, Metabolism 15:510-520, 1966.
84. Bunting LD, Fernandez JM, Thompson DL, and others: Infuence of chromium picolinate on glucose usage and metabolic criteria
in growing Holstein calves, J Anim Sci 72:1 591-1599, 1994.
 85. Amoikon EF, Fernandez JM, Southern LL, and others: Effect of chromium tripicolinate on growth, glucose tolerance, insulin
sensitivity, plasma metabolites and growth hormone in pigs, J Anism Sei 73:1123-1130, 1995.
86. Spears JW, Brown TT, Sunvold CD, and others: Infuence of chromium on glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity. In Reinhart
CA, Carey DP editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition, lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington,
Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
87. Schachter S, Nelson RW, Kirk CA: Oral chromium picolinate and control of glycemia in insulin-treated diabetic dogs, / Vet Intern
Med 15:379-384, 2001.
88. Appleton DJ, Rand JS, Sunvold GD, Priest J: Dietary chromium tripicolinate supplementation reduces glucose concentrations and
improves glucose tolerance in normal-weight cats,J Feline Med Surg 4:13-25, 2002.
 89. Nelson RW, Himsel CA, Feldman EC, and others: Glucose tolerance and insulin response in normal-weight and obese cats,
Am / Vet Res 51:1357-1362, 1990
Domest Anim Endocrinol26:291-301, 2004.
91. Bar RS, Gordon P, Roth J, and others: Fluctuations in the affnity and concentration of insulin receptors on circulating monocytes
of obese patients: effects of starvation, refeeding and dieting, / Clix Invest 58:1123-1135, 1976.
binding to liver membranes, Endocrinology 104:76-81, 1979.
79:1221, 1985.
 94. Martin CJW, Rand JS: Food intake and blood glucose in normal and diabetic cats fed ad libitum, J Feline Med Surg 1:241-251,
1999.
95. Bennett N: Monitoring techniques for diabetes mellitus in the dog and the cat, Clin Tech Smalf Anim Pract 17:65-69, 2002.
30
Dietary Management of Urolithiasis
in Cats and Dogs
Lower urinary tract disease is a common disorder in
magnesium ammonium phosphate (struvite) of calcium
dogs and cats. It is estimated to occur in approximately
oxalate. However, a major difference between stfuvite
0.6% of the owned cat population and is diagnosed in
urolithiasis in cats and dogs is that most struvite uroliths
between 3% and 13% of cats presented for veterinary
in cats are not associated with urinary tract infection
cafe. In dogs, lower urinary tract disease is diagnosed in
(sterile struvite), while urinary tfact infection is com
 mon in dogs with struvite urolithiasis. Other, less ffe-
leges in North America.2 Urolithiasis is a specific type
quently seen mineral composites include ammonium
of lower urinary tract disease characterized by the pres-
urate, xanthine, cystine, calcium phosphate, silica, and
ence of urinary crystals (crystalluria) or macroscopic
dried, solidified blood (cats).
concretions (uroliths or calculi) within the bladder of
lowert urinary tract, as well as associated clinical signs.
Urethral plugs often contain varying proportions of
More than 80% of uroliths in both dogs and cats are
mineral matter and so are classified with urolithiasis. In
composed of magnesium ammonium phosphate
cats, urolithiasis is now considlered to be one manifes-
(struvite) or caicium oxalate. However, a major differ-
tation of a collection of lower urinary tract disorders
ence between struvite urolithiasis in cats and dogs is that
collectively referred to as FLUTD (feline lower urinary
most struvite uroliths in cats are not associated with uri
tfact disease).
nary tract infection (sterile struvite), whie urinary tract
 Urolithiasis is associated with a set of diverse risk
infection is common in dogs with struvite urolithiasis
factors and can be caused by several different types of
 mineral aggregates. Dogs show breed predilections for
-dassns aiou are pue uoneuoy yoin jo sadi ujeiian
tible to infection-induced urolithiasis than cats are.? In
Urolithiasis is typically a disease of aduit animais.In
both species, identification of the mineral composition
cats, it is rarely seen in animais younger than 7 year old,
of uroliths is important because dietary treatment of
and the majority of cats are first diagnosed when they
management must be directed toward the specifc type
are between 2 and 6years old. Cats less than 4 years old
of urolith present. This chapter reviews the types of uro-
are more likely to develop struvite uroliths, while cats
liths found in dogs and cats, historical shifts in canine
and feline urolith composition and location, risk factors
calcium oxalate uroliths.in dogs,the mean age at time
for their development, and dietary management to treat
of diagnosis is between 6 and 7 years. Struvite, urate, and
urolithiasis and to prevent fecurrence.
cystine caiculi are associated with younger adults, and
oxalate caiculi are associated with older adults
INCIDENCE
Urolithiasis is typically a disease of adult animals. In
Initial studies of urolithiasis in cats found that the
cats, it is rarely seen in animals younger than 1 yeat old,
majority of cases were caused by struvite and a very
and the majority of cats are frst diagnosed when they
small percentage was caused by calcium oxalate. How-
ate between 2 and 6 years old. In dogs, the mean age at
ue -aiins go siad aui sobet aea an aq 'a
time of diagnosis is between 6 and 7 years.5 More than
calcium oxalate-containing calculi observed in cats were
80% of uroliths in both dogs and cats ate composed of
approximately equal, and the prevalence of calcium
359
360 Canine and Feline Nutrition
oxalate uroliths continued to gradually increase as the
domestic shorthair, foreign shorthair, Himalayan, ori-
prevalence of struvite uroliths dlecreased.6 This recip-
ental shorthair, and Ragdoll cat breeds have a higher
focal trend continued until 2002, after which the
risk for struvite uroliths.!l It has been speculated that
 proportions of the two types of calculi again became
breed characteristics such as low activity and a ten-
approximately equal. A similar trend has been reported
dency towafd cbesity may be infuential factors. Breed
in dogs.7,8 During the period that the incidence of feline
 predilections for urolithiasis in dogs may be more pro-
calcium oxalate urolithiasis increased, there was a con-
hounced, but there is variability among study results.
comitant incfease in cat foods formulated to decrease
Calcium oxalate uroliths afe feportedly more common
urine pH with the intention of preventing struvite uroli-
in the Pomeranian, Miniature and Toy Poodle, Min-
thiasis. This change in formulation presumably reduced
iature and Standard Schnauzer, Lhasa Apso, Maltese,
the risk of struvite urolithiasis in the subpopulation of
Yorkshire Terfier, Cairn Terrier, Shih Tzu, Bichon Frise,
cats that were susceptible to this type of urolith. Con-
 and Samoyed breeds.5,7,14 Struvite uroliths are reported
versely, feeding an acidifying diet to healthy cats may
in the Bichon Frise, Shih Tzu, Lhaso Apso, Yorkshire
have increased the risk for developing calcium oxalate 
Terfier, Dachshund, Miniature Schnauzer, Poodle,
calculi. As recognition of this trend became widespread,
Pekingese, Pug, Welsh Corgi, Beagle, Cocker Spaniel,
foods were formulated to produce more moderate
Springer Spaniel, and Labrador Retriever.5,14,15 Con-
changes in urine pH, correcting the shift that may have
versely, Dachshunds, English Bulldogs, Newfound-
temporarily favored calcium oxalate formation.
land, Scottish Deerhound, Rottweiler, and Chihuahuas
In both species, age of onset of urolithiasis is related
 appear to be at increased risk for the development of
to the type of urolith present. For example, struvite,
urate, and cystine calculi are associated with younger
 calculi are most often seen in Dalmatians, English Bull-
dogs (mean age 4.25 to 5.92 years), and oxalate, silica,
 dogs, and Miniature Schnauzers. Further complicating
and brushite calculi are associated with older dogs
the situation, some canine urinary calculi have multiple
un 1auno sop u1 s'(sieaA 1/'g 01 y0'/ ae uea)
layers composed of a vatiety of elements.5
1 yeat old, the most common urolith is infection-induced
uaaq aieosl aaey sies pue ssop ui soin
struvite.? Similarly, cats less than 4 years old are more
located almost exclusively in the bladder and urethra.
likely to develop struvite uroliths, while cats older than
However a recent study reported a 10-fold increase
 7 years are at greater risk for developing calcium oxalate
 in feline kidney and ureter uroliths (nephroliths and
uroliths.6 Sex predispositions are also observed. Female
ureteroliths, respectively) during the 20-year period
cats have a higher prevalence of struvite urolithiasis than
Podai Apnns 1aqy 91'6661 pue 06l uamq
male cats, and more than 70% of cases of calcium oxa-
that only 10 feline uroliths submitted to the Minnesota
late urolithiasis are seen in male cats.10,11 Studies with
 Urolith Center for analysis were from the upper uri-
dogs have shown a similar relationship between sex
nary tract in 1990, while 139 cases submitted in the
and mineral prevalence.12 Struvite-, urate-, or calcium
 year 2000 were located in the upper urinary tract.17 The
phosphorus (apatite)-containing calculi afe more com-
 authors noted that this change occurred during a period
mon in female dogs, while oxalate-, cystine-, and silica-
in which the prevalence of chronic renal failure in cats
containing stones afe seen more often in males.
was also increasing. Survey radiographic evaluation of
 There is a clear genetic infuence on the develop-
the cats in this study revealed that 41% of the cats with
ment of urolithiasis in both dogs and cats. Early stud-
chronic renal failure had evidence of nephroliths or ure-
ies reported that, compared with domestic shorthair
 teroliths.17 Howevet, none of the cats had shown clinical
cats, Siamese had a decreased risk and Persians had
 signs attributable to upper urinary tract stones, sug-
an increased risk of developing FLUTD.10,13 More
gesting that these stones are often not detected. Acute
recently, studies of calcium oxalate and struvite uroliths
[ suiaa ue si sin Aq uonnnsno iean
in cats revealed that British shorthair, exotic shorthair,
syndrome in cats that is not completely understood
foreign shorthair, Havana Brown, Himalayan, Persian,
 and warrants additional study.18 The majority of upper
Ragdoll, and Scottish Fold cat breeds show a higher
 un  'se u e io sn nn en
risk of calcium oxalate uroliths and that Chartreux,
trast, in dogs, nephroliths and ureteroliths may contain
Dietary Management of Urolithiasis in Cats and Dogs 361
struvite, calcium oxalate, or other urolith types.19 Tra-
and frequent licking of the urogenital region. These
ditionally, many theories to explain calculi formation
signs are frequently the only signs that owners report
have focused on the urinary environment and satura-
to veterinarians. The most accurate method of diagnosis
tion with particular components such as calcium and
is double-contrast cystography, although survey radiog
oxalate. However, the increased prevalence of upper
-Aeuun z'Inyasn ose ane Aydeisouosenjn pue Aydei
aq Ae sioey iauo ieun sissns sauons ien Aren
sis is an important component in the diagnosis of all
involved. One theory proposed in humans, but not yet
urinary disorders and provides adlditional information.
investigated in pets, is that an initial, primary calcium
However, because urinary crystals (crystalluria) may
stone-forming event begins with injury in the vascular
be present or absent in animals with urolithiasis, and
bed at the tip of the renal papilla, which subsequently
because uroliths can be present without crystals, crystal-
leads to the formation of calcium oxalate-containing
luria by itself is not diagnostic.23 In addition, normal
uroliths in the kidneys.20,21
urine can contain crystals, especially ifit is concentrated
or has been reffigerated prior to analysis. When uroliths
ate found and removed, defnitive diagnosis is made by
CLINICAL SIGNS
chemical analysis of the type of urolith that is present.
Clinical signs of urolithiasis in dogs and cats are non-
In some cases, partial or total urethral obstruction
specifc and depend on the location, size, and numbet
may develop. When obstruction occurs, a variable mix-
of crystals or uroliths present within the urinary tract.
ture of mineral components and a proteinaceous col-
Uroliths may be found in the bladder, urethra, kidneys,
loidal matrix forms a plug that molds itself to the shape
of ureters. Although uroliths can be up to several mil-
of the urethral lumen.24 Although this can occur in any
limeters in diameter or even larger, most fange in size
dog or cat, it is most commonly reported in male cats,
from microscopic to the size of a grain of sand.
presumably because they have a longer and narrower
Initial clinical signs of lower urinary tfact disease
urethra with a sudden narrowing at the bulbourethral
include frequent urination, dribbling of urine, and uri-
glands as the urethra enters the penis.25,26 Ifobstruction
nation in inappropriate places (Box 30-1). Hematuria
is complete, uremia develops rapidlly and is character-
and a strong odor of ammonia in the urine are often
ized by abdominal pain, depression, anorexia, dehy-
observed. Pet owners may report additional signs of
 dration, vomiting, and diarrhea. Increased pressure in
dysuria, such as prolonged squatting or straining fol-
the urinary tract can cause renal ischemia, ultimately
lowing urination (often confused with constipation)
resulting in permanent renal damage. In severe cases
the distended bladder may rupture, causing a transitory
relief of signs, followed rapilly by the development of
BOX 30-1 CLINICAL SIGNS OF UROLITHIASIS
peritonitis and death. Uremia alone leads to coma and
IN DOGS AND CATS
death within 2 to 4 days, so partial or total obstruction
is always a medical emergency (see Box 30-1).
Frequent urination
Urination in ina ppropriate places
STRUVITE UROLITHIASIS
Prolonged squating or straining following urination
IN CATS
Hematuria
Licking of urogenital region
 Early studies reported that more than 95% of uroliths
Dribbling of urine
in cats were composed of struvite.27,28 Because stru-
vite crystals were found to be the most prevalent cause
Depression
of urolithiasis in cats, research during the early 1980s
Anorexia
focused on preventing these crystals from forming in the
Vomiting and diarrhea
ufine and on the development of effective dietary man-
Dehydration
agement for cats with struvite urolithiasis. Although it
 now appeats that a substantial proportion of cases may
362 Canine and Feline Nutrition
have other causes, prevention of the formation of stru-
form of disease, occurring most commonly in cats
vite crystals is still an important and effective protocol
<1 year of age and >10 years of age.33 Infection with
for the management of urolithiasis in many cats.
Evidence indicates that three distinct types of stru-
a pue siseiuin jo suis Aq pauedosse (snoo
vite urolithiasis occur in cats. These are: (1) sterile stru-
presence of struvite in the urinary tract are necessary
vite uroliths, (2) infection-induced stfuvite uroliths,
 for diagnosis. These microbes release the enzyme urease.
and (3) urethral plugs containing a variable quantity of
Urease hydrolyzes urea to ammonia, causing increased
struvite crystals. Treatiment and dietary management is
concentrations of ammonia and phosphate ion, two
directed at promoting the dissolution of struvite uro-
 components of struvite. The increased ammonia ion
liths and treating urinary tract infection and infamma-
further contributes to urine alkalinization. Abnormali
tion if these ate involved.
ties in local host dlefense mechanisms, such as a perineal
urethrostomy, and the quantity of urea that is found
in the cat's urine, may predispose a cat to infection-
Struvite Formation
induced urolithiasis.34,35 However, because most cats
Several conditions are necessary for the formation of
afe innately fesistant to bacterial urinary tfact infection,
struvite crystals or uroliths in the urinary tract.29 First, a
infection-induced struvite urolithiasis is encountered
sufficient concentration of the composite minerals mag-
less commonly than sterile struvite. Antimicro bial ther-
nesium, ammonium, and phosphate must be present. In
apy preferably based on culture and sensitivity, is essen-
addition, these minerals must remain in the tract for an
tial when treating cats with infection-induced struvite
adequate period to allow crystallization to occur. There-
to prevent fecuffence.
fore the production of concentrated urine and small
volumes of urine are important contributing factors.
Finally, a pH that is favorable for crystal precipitation
Several conditions are necessary for the formation
must exist within the urinary tract environment. Stru-
ofstruvite uroliths in cats. These inciude a sufcient
vite is soluble when urine pH is below 6.6, and struvite
concentration of the composite minerais magresium,
crystals form when urine pH is 7.0 and above.30 The
armonium, and phosphate, the production of concen
solubility of struvite crystals also depends on the prod-
trated urine, and urine pH that is Zo or greater How-
ucts of Mg2+, NH4+, and PO3-, called the struvite activ-
ever, while the presence ofaikaline urine is necessary for
ity product (SAP) as described by the following: SAP =
the initial formation of struvite crystais, not all cats wil!
([Mg2+] × [NH4+] × [PO3-]).31 The SAP also increases
present with urine that is consistently alkaline.
concomitantly with urine pH. As urine pH increases
above 6.8, the SAP begins to increase exponentially.
Sterile struvite urolithiasis in cats is associated with
Dietary Risk Factors
the previous factors and the absence of a detectable
urinary tract infection. However, while the presence of
Diet and feeding practices represent important risk fac-
alkaline urine is necessary for the initial formation of
tors for struvite urolithiasis in cats (Box 30-2). These
struvite crystals, studies of cats with sterile struvite uro-
include the food’s urine-acidifying and urine-protein-
lithiasis have found that the urine of affected cats is not
 excretion properties, level of magnesium and sodium,
consistently alkaline. For example, a group of 20 cats
digestibility, caloric density, and water content.36 The
with naturally occurring sterile struvite uroliths had a
 cat's feeding schedule may also be important. More than
mean urine pH of 6.9 ± 0.4 at the time of diagnosis.32
 any of the other risk factors involved, these are elements
Practitioners must be cautioned that the production of
of a cat's life over which pet owners have some control
neutral cf acidic urine upon presentation should not
and that can be modified during the treatment and
be interpreted as precludling struvite as the underlying
long-term management of struvite urolithiasis.
cause of urolithiasis.
As discussed previously, one of the factors necessary
Infection-induced struvite urolithiasis is less com-
for the formation of struvite in urine is the presence of
mon in cats than dogs, butit still represents an important
sufficient concentraticns of its three composite minerals,
Dietary Management of Urolithiasis in Cats and Dogs 363
percent of the cats that were fed 0.75% magnesium
BOX 30-2 DIETARY RISK FACTORS FOR
and 70% of the cats that were fed 0.38% magnesium
STRUVITE UROLITHIASISIN CATS
developed urolithiasis and obstructed within 1 year of
 Urine-acidifying properties ( production of an alkaline
less, whereas none of the cats fed 0.08% magnesium
urine)
obstructed.37 Similarly, when random-source and
Urine-protein-excretion properties
specific-pathogen-free cats were fed diets containing
yoiy pue nisu yoiy no wnisuaeu yoiy ran
High magnesium content
phosphorus levels, urethral obstruction was induced.42
High phosphorous content
The obstructing material was identifable as struvite by
High chloride content
radiographic crystallography in one of the seven cats.
These studies demonstrated the relationship between
High calcium content
increasing magnesium in the diet and an increased rate
Low moisture content
of urolith formation and urethral obstruction in cats.
Low digestibility and caloric density
However, the significance of these data to the fole of
Feeding regimen (meal-feeding)
 dietary magnesium in naturally occurring feline struvite
urolithiasis is questionable because the levels of dietary
Low water intake and balance
 magnesium used in these studies were all substantially
higher than those normally found in commercial cat
foods. The domestic cat requires only 0.016% avail-
magnesium, ammonium, and phosphate. Feline urine
able magnesium for growth and maintenance.43 The
Association of Ametican Feed Conttol Officials’ (AAF-
of the cat's high protein requirement and intake. Urine
CO's) Nutrient Profles requires cat foods to contain a
phosphate in healthy cats is also usually high enough
minimum of 0.04% magnesium.44 Most commercial
for struvite formation, regardless of dietary phosphorus
cat foods contain slightly higher than this amount but
intake. The concentration of urine magnesium, on the
 still less than 0.1%. Although the magnesium in natu-
rally occurring ingredients is not 100% available, these
by diet.37 Thus, early investigations of feline struvite
n i  m si ains si
urolithiasis focused on dietary magnesium as a potential
The amount of magnesium in cat foods is higher than
causal agent. The manipulation of dietary magnesium
the cat's minimum requirement for magnesium, but
pey sisuin aeudsoud suaaid in anpoid on siaal
it is still substantially lower than the levels used in the
 previously been well documented in rats and sheep.38,39
early experimental studies to induce struvite formation
This work was used to suggest a role of this mineral in
(0.4% to 1.0%)
the eticlogy of urolithiasis in domestic cats. One of
A second problem with data from early studies
the frst studies showed that urethral obstruction and
invelved the composition of experimentally produced
cystoliths could be induced in adlult male cats when
uroliths. The struvite found in naturally occurring
they were fed a diet containing either 0.75% or 1.0%
cases is composed of three minerals: magnesium,
ay Xpnas siy ul os'aneydsoqd %9'l pue unissuseu
ammonium, and phosphate. However, experimentally
obstructing uroliths were composed primarily of mag-
induced uroliths in some studies were actually made up
nesium and phosphate. Subsequent work showed that
of magnesium phosphate, with no detectable ammo-
high levels of dietary phosphorus were not necessary
for urolith development, but they did increase the risk
caused obstruction in cats fed experimental diets was
for urolith formation when dietary magnesium was also
also different from the composition of urethral plugs of
high.41 However, if magnesium intake was low, the inci-
cats with spontaneous disease. Although the experimen-
dence of urolith formation was low, regardless of the
tally induced plugs were composed almost exclusively
'dnoi aues au Aq Apnis iaiel e u 'snoydsoud yo paa
 of struvite crystal aggregations, urethral plugs found
cats were fed diets containing 0.75%, 0.38%, cr 0.08%
in spontaneous disease afe most often composed of a
magnesium on a dry-matter basis (DMB). Seventy-six
mucogelatinous protein matrix that contains varying
364 Canine and Feline Nutrition
amounts of minerals (usually struvite), sloughed tissue,
acidifying or alkalinizing components within the meal.
Depending on the nature of the diet and the size of the
The most important confounding factor of these
meal, the postprandial alkaline tide in cats can result in
studies involved the form of magnesium adlded to the
a urine pH as high as 8.0.49
experimental diets. A group of investigators examined
Many studies have demonstrated the importance
the effects of two dlifferent forms of supplemental dietary
of urine pH in the formation of struvite crystals in
magnesium on the urine pH of adult cats.48 The data
 cats.4852 One study examined the effects of feeding a
showed that the addition of 0.45% magnesium chlo-
 canned diet, a dry diet, or a dry diet supplemented with
ride to a basal diet resulted in a signifcant lowering of
a urine acidifer (1.6% ammonium chloride) on urine
urine pH. In contrast, when the cats were fed the same
pH and struvite formation in adult male cats.50 Urine
basal diet supplemented with 0.45% magnesium oxide,
pH was highest in cats fed the dry diet (mean = 7.55).
a significantly higher pH was produced. In a free-choice
The aldition of ammonium chloride reduced urine pH
feeding regimen, mean urine pH in cats fed the basal
to 5.97. The canned diet resulted in urine with a mean
diet was 6.9, and urine pH values in cats fed the mag-
pH of 5.82. The most signifcant findings of this study
nesium chloride- and magnesium oxide-supplemented
concerned urine struvite formation. Struvite crystals
diets were 5.7 and 7.7, respectively. When urine samples
were present in 78% of the cats fed the dry diet but only
were examined microscopically, crystal formation was
9% of the cats fed the dry diet plus ammonium chlo-
observed in cats fed the basal diet and the magnesium
ride. Intakes of dry matter (DM), magnesium, and other
oxide-containing diet, but not in cats fed the magne-
minerals were the same for cats fed each of the dry diets.
sium chloride-containing diet. Therefore the form of
None of the cats fed the canned diet dleveloped urinary
magnesium included in the diet infuenced urine pH
struvite crystals. In addition, when urine samples from
and the formation of crystals. The observation that high
all cats were adljusted to a pH of 7.0 using 0.5 molar
levels of magnesium result in increased struvite forma-
(M) sodium hydroxide, 46% of the cats fed the canned
tion may have been confounded by the effect of mag-
diet and all of the cats fed the ammonium chloride-
nesium chloride versus magnesium oxide on urine pH.
supplemented dry diet showed typical struvite forma-
It can be concluded that similarities exist between early
tion. These results show that at similar levels of energy,
studies of experimentally induced struvite urolithiasis
 DM, and magnesium intake, the most important factor
 and naturally occurring disease, but the presence of sig-
 affecting feline struvite formation is urine pH.
nificant differences and confounding factors show that
Regardless of the level of magnesium intake by a
magnesium intake is not singularly responsible for the
cat, the dietary manipulation of urine pH consistently
natural development of struvite urolithiasis. Subsequent
 affects struvite formation. When a dry diet containing a
 studies showed that dietary magnesium is less signif-
high level of magnesium (0.37%) was fed to adult male
cant as a dietary fisk factor for struvite urolithiasis than
cats, the addition of 1.5% ammonium chloride resulted
afe urine pH, urine volume, and water balance.
in a urine pH of 6.0 or less.31 Cats fed the diet without
As discussed previously, struvite crystals form in
supplemental ammonium chloride produced urine with
feline urine with a pH of 7.0 or greater and are solu-
a pH of 7.3. Of the nonsupplemented cats, 7 of the 12
ble at a pH of 6.6 or less. Normal, healthy cats typi-
formed struvite uroliths and obstructed on two occa-
cally have acidic urine with a pH between 6.0 and 6.5,
sions, while only 2 of the cats fed the acidifying diet
except after meals.37 In all animals, the consumption of
obstructed on a single occasion. When the diets of the
a meal results in a fise in urine pH within 4 hours. This
 seven obstructed cats were supplemented with ammo-
effect, called the postprandial alkaline tide, is caused by
 nium chloride, they experienced no further episodes of
renal compensation for the loss of gastric acids that are
struvite urolith formation or obstruction. Radiographic
secreted during digestion of the meal. To compensate
 examination prior to supplementation revealed visible
for the loss of acid and to maintain normal pH in body
uroliths, which dissolved after 3 months of consuming
Auids, the kidneys excrete alkaline ions, resulting in an
 the acidifying diet. Similar results have been reported
increased urine pH. The magnitude of the alkaline tide
 when diets containing levels of magnesium commonly
is directly proportional to the size of the meal and to the
found in commercial pet foods were fed. When adlult
Dietary Management of Urolithiasis in Cats and Dogs 365
cats were fed a purifed diet containing only 0.045%
reported that foods forrmulated to include higher fat,
magnesium, struvite formed, and the cats showed
lower protein, lower potassium, and increased urine-
clinical signs of urolithiasis when the diet produced an
acidifying potential could potentially minimize forma-
alkaline urine.47 However, if ammonium chloride was
tion of struvite uroliths in cats.36
added as an acidifying agent, clinical signs disappeared
As pet food manufacturers search for ingredients to
within 4 days and did not recur while the acidifying
include in cat foods that will naturally produce acidic
dliet was fed.
urine, each ingredlient must be separately evaluated for
The domestic cat is a carnivorous mammal. Com-
its effect on urine pH. Fof example, one study com-
pated with an omnivofous or herbivorous diet, a catniv-
 pared the urine-acidifying effects of corn gluten meal,
crous diet has the effect of increasing net acid excretion
poultry meal, and meat and bone meal when diets
and decreasing urine pH.S3,54 This urine-acidifying
 containing these ingredients were fed to cats.62 Of the
effect is primarily a result of the high level of sulfur-
 ingredients tested, corn gluten meal had the strongest
containing amino acids found in meats. Oxidation of
acidifying effect on urine. Unlike most plant protein
these amino acids fesults in the excietion of sulfate in
soufces, corn gluten meal contains higher concentfa-
the urine and a concomitant decrease in urine pH.5S In
tions of sulfur-containing amino acids than either poul-
addition, a diet that contains a high proportion of meat
try meal or meat and bone meal. Corn gluten meal is
is lower in potassium salts than a diet containing high
unusual in that it is a cereal protein that produces acidic
levels of cereal grains, which have been shown to pro-
urine when fed to cats. A study comparing meat meal
duce an alkaline urine when metabolized.56,57 Similarly.
with corn gluten meal as a protein source for dry cat
foods that contain high levels of digestible carbohydrate
food found that meat meal was similar to corn gluten
 s Hd   n n q 
meal in its effects upon urinary pH, SAP, number of
the inclusion of high levels of cereal grains and low lev-
struvite crystals in urine, and other measures of struvite
els of meat products in some commercial cat foods may
urolith risk.6 In adldition, DM digestibility and nitro-
be a contributing factor to the development of struvite
 gen utilization of the meat meal was signifcantly higher
ufolithiasis. For example, the stfuvite-producing, com-
when compared with DM digestibility and nitrogen
mercial dry diet that was used in one of the previously
utilization of corn gluten meal. Another study by the
discussed studies contained 46% cereal grains, primatily
same group compared fish meal with corn gluten meal
in the form of wheat meal. 50
as protein sources in cat foods and reported that the
Although a certain amount of cereal is necessary
for the extrusion and expansion process of dry foods,
 dry-matter digestibility or nitrogen utilization.64 How
high levels of these ingredients may contribute to the
ever, the fish meal protein source contributed to lower
production of alkaline urine. Conversely, the inclusion
ufine pH and SAP values. Conversely, when meat meal.
of large amounts of meat products in cat foods usually
chicken meal and corn gluten meal were compared,
contributes to the production of more acidic urine. Fur-
chicken meal had moderate digestibility and nitrogen
thermore, increasing meat-source protein may be pref-
utilization, but its relatively high calcium and phosphc-
erable to using ammonium chloride supplementation
rous content led to increased urinary pH.65
to reduce urine pH.59 Although supplementation with
urine acidifiers such as DL-methionine and ammo-
nium chloride decreased urine pH, supplementation
Water Balance andUrine Volume
did not reduce the concentration of urine organic frac-
Decreased urine volume may be an important risk fac-
tion, which may serve as the matrix for struvite urolith
tor for the development of urolithiasis in cats. Diets
formation.60 Increasing dietary protein also increases
that cause a decrease in total fuid turnover can result
ufea diuresis, which can contribute faverably to increased
in decreased urine volume and increased urine con-
urine volume.6l However, increased protein may not be
centration, both of which may contribute to struvite
needed provided a food already promotes acidic urine.
formation. It has been suggested that dry cat foods
A case-control study designed to identify dietary fac-
 contribute to decreased Auid intake and urine volume.
tors associated with decreased risk of struvite uroliths
An eatly study showed that cats fed a dry cat food had
366 Canine and Feline Nutrition
decreased total water intakes when compared with cats
is directly related to the fat and energy content of the
consuming similar energy levels from canned food.66
diet, with correlation coefficients of 0.96 and 0.94,
Cats did increase voluntary water intake when fed the
respectively.
dry food but not in sufficient amounts to fully com-
Some investigators have advocated feeding only
pensate for the lower moisture content of the food. In
 canned cat food to cats with a history of urolithiasis.69,70
another experiment, adult cats were fed a semipurifed,
The intent is to incfease water intake and cause a fesul-
basal diet containing varying levels of moisture.67 The
tant increase in urine volume and decrease in urine spe-
cats consuming a dliet containing 10% moisture had an
cific gravity. However, the water content of the dliet is
average daily urine volume of 63 milliliters (ml). This
probably not as important as are caloric density, fat con-
volume increased to 112 ml/day when the moisture
tent, and digestibility of the food. As was evident in the
content of the diet was increased to 75%. Urine spe-
previously mentioned study, a poofly digestible canned
cifc gravity was also slightly higher in cats that were
cat food may not contribute to increased urine volume
fed the low-moisture food. In both of these studies, the
 if large amounts of water are excreted in the feces. Con-
differences in urine volume were attributed to lower
versely, the consumption of a cat food (canned or dry)
total water intake in the cats that were conisuming low-
that is energy dense and highly digestible will result in
moisture foods.
lower total DM intake. This decrease will be accom-
However, in contrast to these studies, two other
 panied by decreased fecal volume and fecal water and
groups of investigators found no difference in watet
increased urine volume. These effects may be beneficial
consumption between cats fed dry diets and those fed
 in preventing urolithiasis in cats because urine will con-
canned diets. It appears that diet composition, espe-
tain a lower concentration of the mineral components
cially fat content and caloric density, infuences watef
that lead to urolith formation. In addition, an increase
turnover in cats fed different types of commercial diets.
in urine volume stimulates an increased frequency of
In a study examining the effects of diet type, compo-
urination, thus decreasing the time available for struvite
sition, and digestibility on water-excretory patterns in
formation.
cats, a comparison of three canned diets showed that
when cats were fed diets containing high levels of fat
(34% and 28% of DM), significantly less DM was con-
In addition to urine pH, decreased urine volume and
sumed than when cats were fed a canned diet contain-
the production of highiy concentrated urine are impor-
ing a relatively low level of fat (14%).68 Fecal DM and
tant risk factors for the development of urolithiasis in
fecal water content were lower in cats fed the high-fat
cats. Diets that cause a decrease in total fuid turnover
diets. Because total water intake was the same for all
can resuit in decreased urine volume and increased
cats, the cats consuming the high-fat diets excreted
urine concentration, both ofwhich may contribute to
significantly higher volumes of water in their urine to
struvite formation. Dietary factors that contribute to
achieve water balance. Further evidence supporting the
water turnover inciude the amount of water inciuded
importance of caloric density and fat content is dem-
in the food, and the food's caloric density, fat content,
onstrated by a compatison of a low-fat canned food to
and digestibility.
three dry cat foods in the same study. Water volume in
urine and feces was similar between cats fed the low-fat,
canned ration and cats fed the three dry diets. Other
than the large difference in water content, the nutrient
Feeding Method
 content of the low-fat, canned food was very similar to
The postprandial alkaline tide occurs as a result of meal
that of the dry diets. Energy digestibility of the canned
ingestion and the subsequent excretion and loss of gas-
diet was also equivalent to that of the dry diets (79.3%
tric acids.7l Many factors affect its duration and magni-
and 78.7%, fespectively) and was significantly lowef
tude. Domestic cats are nibblers by nature. When fed
than the mean digestibility of the high-fat, canned diets 
free-choice, most cats eat small meals every few hours
(90.3%). Statistical analysis of these data revealed that
 throughout the day.72,73 In general, this feeding regimen
the percentage of water excreted in the urine of cats
has the effect of reducing the magnitude of the alkaline
Dietary Management of Urolithiasis in Cats and Dogs 367
tide but prolonging its duration. In contrast, depend-
minimizing urolith formation. Although these results
ing on the alkalinizing effects of the diet, meal-feeding
indicate that the highest concentration of composite
 may cause greater fuctuations of shorter duration. The
minerals does not occur during the time they would be
effects of a feeding regimen are further complicated by
most likely to precipitate, this may not be a necessary
the type of diet fed, the eating patterns of the cat, and
condition for struvite formation. Research has shown
vatious dietary components.
that urine pH is directly related to the size of the meal,
In one study, cats were fed a dry, commercial food,
and this felationship can be described by a simple lin-
either on a free-choice basis or once daily. The urine
ear model.75 In other words, as the size of the meal
pH of cats fed ad libitum was maintained between 6.5
increases, so does postprandial urine pH. These data
and 6.9 throughout the day. In cats fed the same diet
also showed that as postprandial urine pH increased,
once daily, urine pH increased 2 hours after the meal to
the presence of struvite crystals increased accordingly.
7.7 and then gradually decreased for the remainder of
Struvite did not form when urine pH was maintained
the day.51 Another group of researchers fed cats two dry
at less than 6.6.
foods and three canned foods on an ad libitum basis and
recorded urine pH throughout a 24-hour period.37 One
of the dry foods and two of the canned foods resulted in
Dietary Management
constant urine pH values of less than 6.3. However, the
 r n   s  
other dry and canned foods produced pH values that
immediate cafe involves stabilization of the cat's con-
ranged from 6.5 to higher than 7.0. When the same
dition, Auid replacement therapy, and relief of blad-
foods were meal-fed once daily, all of the foods except
der distention and urethral obstruction. Removal of
one dry and one canned product resulted in peak urine
the obstruction can usually be accomplished by either
pH values of greater than 7.0 within 4 hours after the
Aushing the urolith or urethral plug out of the urethra
start of the meal. These values all declined to less than 
or by cystocentesis. However, while cystocentesis imme-
Ap auo ' an je sinoy il Axidde Aq 5'9
 diately relieves the distended bladder, it usually does
and one canned food maintained pH values of 6.6 of
 hot remove the obstructing uroliths. When a bacterial
less, even when meal-fed. These differences were attrib-
urinary tract infection is present, appropriate antimi-
uted to different urine-acidifying components/ingredi-
crobial therapy should be initiated. Long-term dietary
ents present in the foods. More recently, a study that
 management involves the removal or dissolution of any
examined the long-term effects of acidifying diets found
 remaining sruvite uroliths and the feeding of an appro-
that ad libitum feeding was essential to maintain a mean
 priate food to minimize the likelihood of recurrence.
urine pH of less than 6.5, even when an acidifying diet
Remaining struvite uroliths that are present in the
was fed.27 The lower urine pH in cats fed ad libitum was
urinary tract can be removed either through surgical
atributed to the consumption of numerous small meals
means or via diet-induced dissolution. Surgical inter-
throughout the day, which minimized the amount of
vention provides immediate relief to the animal, fol-
gastric acid secreted for each meal and subsequently
lowed by recovery within 3 to 7 days. On the other
decreased the postprandial alkaline tide.
hand, dietary dissolution is a noninvasive procedure but
In addition to urine pH, the effects of feeding regi-
can take several weeks to months to be effective. When
men on urine volume and composition are important
dietary intervention is used to dissolve existing struvite
considerations. In a study that examined the relation-
uroliths, a food that produces an acidic urine with a pH
ship between method of feeding, food and water intake,
 of 6.3 or lower and contains reduced magnesium should
urine volume, and urine composition, the period of
be selected.76 Adding sodium chloride to the diet has
highest urinary excretion of magnesium and phospho-
pue eisdipaiod anpui on susse ue se paissns uaoq
fus occurred preprandially and therefore did not coin-
resultant polyuria with the intent of producing a more
cide with the daily alkaline tide.74 This study also found
dilute urine and increasing the fequency of urination.77
that ad libitum-fed cats had increased frequency of uri-
However, feeding increased amounts of sodium to cats
nation and greater total urine volume when compated
increases fenal excretion of calcium and so may con-
with meal-fed cats. These effects may be beneficial in
tribute to the formation of calcium oxalate uroliths.76
368 Canine and Feline Nutrition
For this reason, supplementing a cat's normal food with
Diets that are moderate in caloric density and are
sodium chloride is not recommended.
highly digestible will be consumed in smaller amounts,
Depending on the size and number of the uroliths
thus lowering both DM and magnesium intake. The
present, complete dietary dissolution usually takes
lower DM intake fesults in decreased fecal matter and
between 5 and 7 weeks.78 There is also evidence suggest-
fecal water and increased urine volume. Feeding a wet
ing that infection-induced struvite uroliths may take
food with these characteristics may further contribute
longer for dissolution than sterile struvite uroliths.32
to increased urine volume and decreased urine specifc
Regardlless of the dlifference in time for dissolution, the
gravity.82 Although of less importance than urine pH
eradication of infection caused by urease-producing
 and dilution, decreased magnesium intake results in
bacteria is the most important factor in cats with
lowef concentrations of urine magnesium, which is nec-
infection-induced struvite urolithiasis.
essary for struvite formation. The percentage of magne-
 A urine pH between 6.0 and 6.3 is desirable during
sium in the diet is not as important as the total amount
the struvite dissolution phase of treatment.30,76 Once
of magnesium that a cat consumes. Although some
a food has been selected, urine pH should be moni-
fesearchers believe that magnesium concentration in the
tored 4 to 8 hours after initial consumption to ensure
diet should be 0.1% or less on a DMB, others main-
that adequate (but not excessive) acidifcation is occuf-
tain that the risk of struvite formation is only increased
ring. Only the prescribed foed should be fed, with no
adlditional supplements or other cat foods. During the
Because the cat's requirement for dietary magnesium
dissolution phase, cats should be monitored for stru-
is substantially lower than the amount usually found
vite dissolution at 2- to 4-week intervals, using either
in cat food, a general rule of thumb is to select a food
palpation cf fadiography. Periodic evaluation of urine
that contains 0.12% magnesium or less. There are sev-
sediment for crystalluria may be helpful in assess-
eral high-quality, nutritionally complete commercial cat
ing progress, but because many healthy, normal cats
foods that meet the criteria discussed. However, a cat
develop urine struvite crystals, the presence of crystal-
food should not be selected only on the basis of its mag-
luria should not be interpreted as evidence of persistent
 hesium content. The food's caloric density, digestibility,
urolithiasis.62,79 The therapeutic food should be contin-
 and urine-acidifying properties should all be considered
ued for at least 1 month following complete dissolu-
when selecting a maintenance cat food for the preven-
tion of struvite.30,80,81 After this period, the diet can be
tion of stfuvite urolithiasis (Box 30-3).
changed to a maintenance product demonstrated to be
effective in the management of struvite urolithiasis.
A maintenance food that is fed to prevent the recur-
Risks Associated with
rence of struvite urolithiasis should produce a slightly
Overacidification
acidifed urine, be moderate in caloric density and high
Even though the maintenance of a urine pH of 6.6 of
in digestibility, and contain a relatively low level of mag-
lower prevents the formation of struvite crystals, the
nesium. A urine pH of 6.6 or less prevents the forma-
production of urine that is too acidic can be detrimental
tion of struvite crystals. Therefore a pH range between
t0 a cat's health. If more acid is consumed than an ani-
6.0 and 6.5 is desirable for long-term maintenance.
 mal is capable of excreting, metabolic acidosis occurs.
 Dietary ingredients that have the effect of increasing
 Several studies have shown that when cats are fed a
urinary acid excretion include proteins of animal ori-
 severely acidifying diet for several months, they develop
(uuon pie ouue-inyins yoy sau jo asnsaq) us
 metabolic acidosis, decreased levels of serum potassium,
and compounds that result in an elevated absorption
 and depletion of body potassium stores.8485 Other
of chloride, phosphate, or sulfate.57 Conversely, most 
 studies indicate that the long-term feeding of highly
cereal grains contain high levels of potassium salts
 acidifying diets containing marginal levels of potassium
that have the effect of producing alkaline urine.50 The
 causes hypokalemia and kidney disease in some cats.86,87
exception is cofn gluten meal, which produces acidic
For example, three out of nine cats fed an acidifying diet
urine because of its high concentration of sulfur amino
containing 40% protein and marginal levels of potas-
acids.62
sium developed chronic renal failure within 2 years.86
Dietary Management of Urolithiasis in Cats and Dogs 369
lower serum phosphorus, bicarbonate, and base excess
BOX 30-3 DIETARY MANAGEMENT FOR
values, these values all remained within laboratory refer-
PREVENTION OF STRUVITE
ence ranges. Measurement of bone mineral density after
UROLITHIASIS
2 years of feeding also showed no effect of diet. When
 Perform surgical removal or medical dissolution of
fed ad libitum, the diet used in this study resulted in the
uroliths (initial treatment)
production of urine with an average pH of 6.2. Anothef
Treat and prevent recurrence of bacterial urinary tract
study using 1.7% phosphoric acid to induce moderate
infection (if present)
acidification of urine also reported a lack of detrimental
Select a food that produces acidified urine (pH 6.0 to 6.5)
effects after 1 year of feeding.'2 An important difference
between these studies and those discussed previously is
Avoid overacidification of urine.
that the more fecent studies used diets that included
 Select a food with a reduced magnesium content
corn gluten meal, animal protein, and/or phosphoric
(<0.12% dry-matter basis for cats).
acid as urine-acidifying components. Feeding a diet
Select a food that is highy digestible and moderate in
that contains ingredients that promote moderate urine
caloric density.
acidification appears to present less risk for overacidi-
fcation than does supplementing a cat's diet with a
Feed either a canned food or add water to a dry food to
increase water intake.
urine-acidifying agent such as ammonium chloride.
       
Feed free choice or provide many small meals
throughout the day.
the formation of another type of urolith. Although stru-
vite is soluble in acidic urine, acid pH may increase the
Do not feed other foods, su pplements, or treats.
likelihood of calcium oxalate formation. The prolonged
feeding of a highly acidified diet leads to a loss of calcium
in the urine, making this mineral available for the forma
The consumption of an acidifying diet of urine-
tion of calcium-containing uroliths. Acidifed urine also
acidifying agents that cause acidosis results in increased
contains lower levels of citrate, which normally inhibits
ufinary losses of potassium and calcium and may com-
the formation of calcium oxalate by preferentially inter-
promise electrolyte balance.5 When acid intake is too
acting with calcium and making it unavailable to bind
high, the body will reestablish acid-base balance at a
with oxalate.93 Similarly, feeding a low-magnesium diet
decreased blood bicarbonate concentration. Carbonate
 can exacerbate this problem because urine magnesium
and phosphate are resorbed from bone to supply cations,
also appears to inhibit calcium oxalate formation.94 As
and the calcium that is resorbed is excreted in the urine.
discussed previously, the incidence of calcium oxalate
Prolonged losses of calcium as a result of renal acidosis
urolithiasis in cats increased while struvite urolithiasis
 may eventually lead to bone demineralization and osteo-
decreased over time until the last few years. It is the-
porosis.8889 Urinary acidifying agents have been shown
orized that the widespread feeding of acidifying diets
to have detrimental effects on bone mineralization in
that contain low levels of magnesium may have been an
cats. When a diet containing 3% ammonium chloride
important contributing factor to this trend
was fed to growing kittens, urine pH was signifcantly
decreased, but the kittens also exhibited impaired
growth, decreased blood pH, increased urine calcium
Even though the maintenance of urine pH of 66 or lower
excretion, and bone demineralization of the caudal ver-
prevents the formation of struvite crystais, the production
tebrae. Similar changes were reported when adult cats
ofurine that is too acidic can be detrimental to a cat's
were fed a diet containing 1.5% ammonium chloride.90
heaith. Problers associated with overacidifcation inciude
In contrast, a 2-year study found that adult cats that
metabolic acidosis, decreased levels of serur potassium
were fed two acidifying diets ad libitum maintained
and depietion of body potassium stores. Long-term effects
normal ranges for all hematological and serum bio-
chemical profles, as well as normal blood gas values.9l
cium oxalate urolithiasis, and kidney disease.
Although cats fed the two acidifying diets had slightly
370 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Infection-induced struvite is the most common
STRUVITE UROLITHIASIS
urolith in dogs less than 1 year of age. Female dogs
IN DOGS
show a higher incidence of infection-induced struvite
when compared with males.97 One potential cause for
Until late in the twentieth century, there was very lim-
this difference is anatomical. The shorter urethra of the
ited information available regarding the incidence of
female dog may facilitate the ability of opportunistic
urolithiasis and the prevalence of different types of uro-
bacteria to move up the urethra and into the bladder
liths in dogs. However, analysis of data collected at the
to cause infection.io2 It has also been suggested that
Minnesota Urolith Center and the Urinary Stone Analy-
dogs confined indoors may have longer periods of urine
sis Laboratory in California has provided valuable infor-
retention, increasing the potential for bacterial growth
mation regarding the age, breed, and sex of affected dogs
within the urinary tract.
and the mineral composition and location of calculi.15,95
-d sq si pu so oq u sisnn nn
tionately decreased over the last 20 years compated t0
Struvite urolithiasis in dogs is primarily a disease asso-
calcium oxalate urolithiasis.96 But struvite uroliths are
ciated with infection. Urease-producing bacteria are
still the most commonly reported canine urolith.14 Sim-
often found in dogs withstruvite urolithswhileurinary
ilar to its occuffence in cats, stfuvite urolithiasis is a dis
tract infections are often absent in dogs with calcium
ease of primarily adult dogs, altheugh infection-induced
oxalate calculi Possibly because of anatomical differ
struvite uroliths occur in some young dogs.,95 As stated
ences, female dogs show a higher incidence of infection
previously, the mean age of diagnosis is between 4 and
induced struvitewhen compared with maie dogs
6 years, and female dogs are disproportionately more
likely to be affected than males (see p. 360).
Dietary Management
Sterile versus Infection-lnducec
Surgical removal of uroliths is necessary in most cases
Struvite
of struvite urolithiasis in dogs, especially if the uroliths
Struvite urolithiasis in dogs is primarily a disease associ-
ate obstructing the ureters or renal pelvis. An adlvantage
ated with infection, in contrast to struvite uroliths in
to surgical intervention is that clinical signs are quickly
cats.96 Urease-producing bacteria such as Staphylococ-
relieved and treatment can then focus on eliminating
cus, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus, and Proteus are often
urinary tract infections and preventing recufrence. Ure-
found in dogs with struvite uroliths.97 This associa-
thral uroliths afe usually fushed into the bladder by
tion between urinary tract infection and struvite uro-
retrograde hydropropulsion where they can be removed
lithiasis in dogs is well documented.98-100 In contrast,
surgically or dissolved medically.
urinary tract infections afe often absent in dogs with
Medical dissolution of struvite uroliths using an
calcium oxalate-, cystine-, urate-, of silica-containing
acidifying, restricted protein, calculolytic diet has also
been used with dogs. The intent of restricting protein
naty calculi specimens found Staphylococcus interme-
is to decrease urinaty urea, an important substrate fof
dius in 30% of affected males and in 54% of affected
ufease-positive bacteria and the source of increased
females.95,97 There is a significant correlation between
ammonia. However, proper antimicrobial treatment is
the presence of struvite calculi and a positive culture for
 more effective than protein restriction for controlling
this organism in both sexes. It has been suggested that
bacterial populations in the canine urinary tract.103 In
dogs producing urine with a high concentration of urea
addition, festficted-protein diets have been associated
may be more susceptible to infection-induced struvite
with low palatability and acceptance by dogs. Because
ufolithiasis because bacterial urease convefts the ufea tc
 most struvite calculi found in dogs contain significant
ammonia. An incfease in ammonia levels contributes
amounts of nonstruvite minerals, which may not dis-
one of the components of struvite and also to increased
solve in response to an acidifying diet, medical (dietary)
urinary pH.
dissolution is no longer recommended for most cases of
Dietary Management of Urolithiasis in Cats and Dogs  371
feeding of diets formulated to prevent struvite forma-
antimicrobial therapy must be instituted if urinary tract
tion in the subpopulation of cats that are actually at
infection is present. This should be continued for 3 t0
risk for calcium oxalate crystalluria may fesult in an
4 weeks after the removal of uroliths.
increased incidence of clinical calcium oxalate urolithia-
The protocol for averting recurrence of struvite uroli-
sis.105 Cats with this type of urolithiasis usually produce
thiasis includes preventing urinary tract infection while
a concentrated urine (specifc gravity of 1.040) that is
feeding a diet that produces mederately acidic urine and
slightly acidifed (pH 6.3 to 6.7).106 Mild acidemia is
reduces the concentration of struvite components.104 A
feported in some, but not all, cats with calcium oxalate
food that promotes the production of urine with a pH
ufolithiasis
between 6.4 and 6.6 is recommended. Once an appro-
In cats, calcium oxalate uroliths are found most
priate acidifying food has been selected, no other foods,
often in the urinary bladder, but they also occur in vati-
supplements, or treats should be fed. The diet should
ous combinations in the urethra, kidneys, and ureters.
also contain sufficient but not excessive amounts of
The vast majority of feline ureteral calculi contain cal-
high-quality protein. Keeping the dog's urinary tract
cium oxalate.2l The number of reported upper urinary
free of bacterial infection is the most important factor
tract uroliths is increasing, and these uroliths have been
for prevention of infection-induced struvite urolithiasis.
associated with chronic renal failure.107 Howevef, as
Following a complete course of full-dose antimicrobial
 an emerging clinical syndrome, acute ureteral obstruc-
therapy, a reduced therapeutic dose of an antimicrobial
tion remains poorly understoed.18 Clinical signs of
agent is often administered for up to 6 months. Periodic
ureteral calculi are nonspecifc and include anorexia,
urine cultures should be conducted every 2 to 3 months
lethargy, weight loss, polyuria, polydipsia, vomiting.
to monitor the effectiveness of the regimen, and these
and hematuria.2l Metabolic changes may include azo-
should be continued for up to 2 years following the
temia, hyperphosphatemia, and, in a small number of
completion of antibiotic tfeatment.
cases, hypercalcemia. Interestingly, ultrasonography of
the contralateral kidney of cats with unilateral ureteral
calculi often revealed preexisting renal parenchymal
Surgical removal of uroliths is necessary in most cases
disease.21
of struvite urolithiasis in dogs, especially jf the uroliths
are obstructing the ureters or renal pelvis. Keeping the
Risk Factors
dogs urinary tractfree of bacteriatlinfection is the most
important factor for prevention of infection-induced
Several dietary components are potential contribu-
struvite urolithiasis in dogs. To decrease the likelihood
tors to the development of calcium oxalate calculi in
ofrecurrence, a food that promotes the production of
cats.36,104,106 Factors that may be important include the
urine with a pH between 64 and 66 and contains suf
food’s urine-acidifying properties and levels of moisture,
fcient but not excessive amountsofhigh-quality protein
protein, potassium, phosphorous, magnesium, calcium,
should be fed.
sodium, and vitamin Bg. As with struvite, the focus has
been on factors that either increase or dlecrease the con-
centration of the calculi's components in the urine (in
this case, calcium and oxalate) and those that affect the
CALCIUM OXALATE
solubility of calcium oxalate crystals. Urine supersatura-
UROLITHIASIS IN CATS
tion with calcium and oxalate is one factor to consider
regarding calcium oxalate urolith formation.4 When
As dliscussed previously, during the past two dlecades,
sodium chloride is added to deionized water, the solution
the prevalence of feline calcium oxalate uroliths has
is considered saturated at the point where the addition
been increasing, and the prevalence of struvite uroliths
of any more salt will result in crystals, unless some othet
has been substantially decreasing. A suggested cause of
change takes place, such as with temperature or pH. But
this trend is the increased use of urine-acidifying diets
urine is more complex than salt and water. Ions, pro-
containing low levels of magnesium. The inappropriate
teins, and perhaps as yet unidentifed substances form
372 Canine and Feline Nutrition
a complex solution in urine, one that apparently allows
calcium leads to increased serum calcium and hyper-
calcium and oxalate to femain in solution at high con-
calciuria. It has been postulated that because hypercal-
centrations. Thus, when compared with water, normal
cemia promotes urinary excretion of calcium, it may
feline urine may be supersaturated with calcium and
predispose the precipitation of calcium oxalate calculi
oxalic acid.32 In this state calcium oxalate crystals do
While serum concentration of minerals, including
not precipitate, but if crystals are already present they
calcium, ate normal in most cats with calcium oxa-
will be maintained or even grow. Because of the com-
late urolithiasis, moderate hypercalcemias (11 and 13
plex relationships between urine components, the exact
milligrams [mg]/deciliter [dl]) have been reported.106
initiating cause of calcium oxalate formation in feline
This observation warrants routine evaluation of serum
urine is not completely understood.108
calcium concentrations in affected patients, because
A study of urine samples from cats fed a variety
hypercalcemia promotes urinary calcium excretion and
of diets found that reduction of urine pH and mag-
 may promote the formation and precipitation of cal-
nesium concentration significantly increased struvite
cium oxalate crystals (Box 30-4).
solubility but concurrently decreased calcium oxalate
solubility.109 In addition, in vitro studies have shown
that increased amounts of urinary magnesium reduce
Dietary Management
the formation of calcium oxalate crystals. This observa-
Unlike struvite uroliths, calcium oxalate uroliths in cats
tion has led to the use of magnesium supplementation
cannot be dissolved using a calculolytic diet. Therefore
in humans to prevent the formation of calcium oxalate
this type of urolith must be removed from the urinary
calculi. However, because increased dietary magnesium
tract using surgical intervention, lithotripsy, or uro-
is a risk factor for struvite urolithiasis in cats, increasing
dietary magnesium with the intent of preventing cal-
 cystoliths may be retrieved through catheterization. If
cium oxalate formation is contraindicated in this spe-
hypercalcemia is present, appropriate treatment to cor-
cies. Similarly, providing a diet that has an alkalinizing
rect the underlying cause must be instituted. Following
effect upon urine pH may prevent calcium oxalate uro-
removal of uroliths and recovery from surgery, emphasis
lith formation but is an important risk factor for stru-
is placed on preventing recurrence though the use of an
vite formation.
appropriate diet.
Several factors may affect the concentrations of cal-
 Goals of dietary management include reducing uri-
cium and oxalate in urine. The consumption of high
-ue pue aneexo pue wniies jo suonenuasuos Aieu
amounts of sodium leads to incfeased fenal excfetion
 taining dilute urine with a pH between 6.3 and 6.9.113
of calcium.106 Vitamin D and ascorbic acid levels in
The food that is selected should contain ingredients
the diet may be important because vitamin D promotes
that afe highly digestible and include optimal levels of
intestinal absorption of calcium, and ascorbic acid is a
precursor of oxalate. Vitamin Bg has been identifed as
a potentially important nutrient because experimentally
BOX30-4DIETARY RISKFACTORSFOR
CALCIUM OXALATE UROLITHIASIS
induced vitamin Bg deficiency has been associated with
IN CATS
hyperoxaluria and the formation of renal calcium oxa-
late calculi in kittens.110 However, naturally occurring
 Urine-acidifying properties (production of an acidified 
hyperoxaluria has not been reported in cats. Moreovef,
urine)
supplementation with vitamin Bg for cats that are not
Excess vitamin D and ascorbic acid intake
Low water intake and balance
A final possible risk factor is the presence of hyper-
calcemia. As discussed previously, some cats with cal-
Reduced sodium content
cium oxalate urolithiasis have mild acidemia. A slight
Reduced potassium content
but persistent acidemia promotes the mobilization of
Any factor that may contribute to hypercalciuria or
carbonate and phosphorus from bone to buffer the
hypercalcemia
excess hydrogen ions. The concomitant mobility of
Dietary Management of Urolithiasis in Cats and Dogs 373
calcium and magnesium. Restriction of dietary calcium
experimental diets have shown that feeding foods that
is not fecommended unless absorptive hypercalcemia
maintain RSS below a target RSS value (i.e., undersatu-
exists. In those cases, moderate festriction is advocated
fation) effectively reduces the crystallization potential
to prevent negative calcium balance. Although increased
for both types of urinary crystals. Urine pH, which is
urine magnesium concentration feduces the formation
 an important factor in struvite formation, has not been
of calcium oxalate crystals, this is also a risk factor for
found to be a strong predictor of calcium oxalate forma-
struvite urolith formation. Therefore magnesium levels
tion.1l4 Recent evidence also suggests that urine RSS
in the diet should be adequate but not high. Because
is more strongly correlated with struvite precipitation
the consumption of excess levels of sodium may induce
potential than is urine pH.115 Therefore a “single-diet"
incfeased renal excretion of calcium, moderate festtic-
approach that effectively prevents both types of urolith
 tion of dietary sodium has been recommended.112 The
formation has been suggested and is characterized by
 production of a dilute urine can be achieved by feedling
foods that produce a dilute (reduced RSS values) and
a diet that is high in digestibility and moisture. Feed-
 moderately acidified urine. These changes are accom-
ing a canned ration or adding water to a high-quality,
plished by increasing diet moisture (canned or pouched
highly digestible dry food is the best way to achieve this.
Suisiour Aiaieiapou Aq 'sses suos ui 'pue (spooy
Potassium citrate is often included in diets that are for-
 sodium chloride to increase water consumption.116-118
mulated to prevent recurrence of calcium oxalate ufo-
lithiasis. Potassium citrate has an alkalinizing effect on
urine pH, and when excreted in the urine, citrate forms
CALCIUM OXALATE
a soluble salt with calcium, reducing its availability to
UROLITHIASIS IN DOGS
form a complex with oxalate (Box 30-5).36,106,113
In recent years, the effect of reducing urine rela-
Like struvite uroliths, calcium oxalate uroliths can
tive supersaturation (RSS) has been examined as an
develop in dogs of any age, but it is primarily a disease
 approach for preventing the formation of both calcium
 of adult animals. More than half of the cases occur in
oxalate and struvite uroliths in cats.1l4 Studies with
dogs between the ages of 5 and 12 years.119 In contrast
to struvite urolithiasis, male dogs are more likely than
females to be affectedl. The incidence of calcium oxalate
BOX 30-§ DIETARY MANAGEMENT FOR
urolithiasis in both sexes has increased dramatically in
PREVENTION OF CALCIUM
the past 25 years, possibly in response to the increased
OXALATE UROLITHIASIS
use and availability of dog foods that promote the pro-
 Perform removal of uroliths through surgery,
duction of acidifed urine.
urohydropropulsion, or catheterization {initial
treatment).
Risk Factors
Treat hypercalcemia (if present).
 Select a food that produces neutral or slightly acidified
Risk factors are similar to those for cats and include
mild acidemia, decreased urine pH, hypercalciuria,
urine (pH 6.3 to 6.9).
production of concentrated urine, and possibly con-
 Select a food with optimal calcium and magnesium
sumption of an acidifying diet or excessive amounts of
levels.
vitamin C. Miniatufe Schnauzers afe most commonly
 Select a food that is highy digestible and moderate in
affected, accounting for about 25% of cases of calcium
caloric density.
ae ieu spaanq rano ll'shop ui sisin aieio
Select a food with moderate sodium and supplemental
more frequently affected include the Lhasa Apso, York-
potassium citrate.
shire Terfier, Miniature Poodle, Shih Tzu, and Bichon
Feed either a canned food or add water to a dry food to
Frise. Hypercalcemia is not common, but it is seen
increase water intake.
with primary hyperparathyroidism, pseudohyperpata
Do not feed other foods, supplements, or treats
thyroidism, malignant lymphoma, and hyperthyroid-
ism. Hypercalcemia is associated with increased urine
374 Canine and Feline Nutrition
calcium excretion, normal serum calcium values, and
is extremely uncommon. Recently a cat with xanthine
normal or low serum parathyroid hormone concen-
urolithiasis was evaluated for hereditary xanthuria but
 tration.120 There is also evidence that the presence of
was found not to be homozygous for a recessive mutant
hyperadrenocorticism increases a dog's risk for develop-
 xanthine dehydrogenase allele.123 This is in contrast to
 an autosomal recessive trait for xanthuria that has been
also be associated with administration of glucocorti-
 described in humans and dogs. Treating feline xanthuria
coids, urinary acidifers, vitamin D, and diuretics that
 is limited to feeding a high-moisture food containing
act on the ascending loop of Henle.2
feduced purines and monitoring xanthine concentra-
tion in utine.
Calcium phosphate is found in 1% or less of natu-
Dietary Management
rally occurring feline uroliths.124 A primary risk factor
As in cats, the only effective treatment for dogs with
auasid au si saads iauo u yoin jo adi siq io
clinically active calcium oxalate uroliths is removal via
of primary hyperparathyroidism. However, this asso-
surgery, lithotripsy, or urohydropropulsion. If hypercal-
ciation has not been reported in cats.125 Cats with cys-
ciuria is present, the underlying cause, if known, should
tine uroliths have increased urine concentration of the
be addressed. If an acidifying food or supplemental
amino acids cystine, arginine, lysine, and ornithine.29
vitamin C is being fed, the dog should be switched to
Although medical protocols for the dissolution of this
a food that promotes a heutral urine pH and contains
type of urolith have not been developed, cystine is solu-
ingredients that are high in quality and digestibility. All
ble in alkaline urine and precipitates in acidifed urine.
vitamin supplements should be discontinued. Increased
Therefore urine-acidifying foods should not be fed to
water intake is fecommended to promote the produc-
cats with this type of urolith.
tion of dilute urine and reduce supersaturation of urine
Another type of FLUTD that is not urolith-related
with calcium oxalate.ll2 This can usually be accom-
but may respond to dietary management is found in a
plished through either feeding a canned diet or adding
subpopulation of cats affected by a dlisease that is similar
water to a dry food immediately before feeding. As with
to interstitial cystitis in humans. In cats, the disorder has
cats, potassium citrate is often included in diets that
been termed idiopathic cystitis to refect its unknown eti-
are formulated to prevent fecurrence of calcium oxa-
ology. A diagnosis is made based upon clinical signs of
late urolithiasis in dogs because of its urine-alkalinizing
lower urinary tract disease, abnormalities of urinalysis,
effect and ability to sequester calcium and inhibit cal-
and urinary tract lesions identifed by imaging studies.
cium oxalate formation (see Box 30-5).
Clinically, a diagnosis of idiopathic cystitis is a diagno-
sis of exclusion in cats that present with signs of lower
OTHER DIET-RESPONSIVE
urinary tract disease for which no obvious cause can be
found. Current evidence suggests that feline idiopathic
URINARY CONDITIONS IN
cystitis represents a syndrome that has a number of
different underlying causes, some of which may occuf
CATS
simultaneously and be interrelated.126 Treatment and
Other mineral types found in feline uroliths include
prevention strategies will therefore vary according to
ammonium urate, xanthine, cystine, silica, brushite,
the underlying mechanisms involved. The currently
potassium magnesium pyrophosphate, dried solidified
fecommended dietary management of idiopathic cysti-
blood (DSB), and calcium phosphate.6,122 Ammonium 
o uonoid aoid oi nai sieo au sueu oi si si
urate and xanthine uroliths make up a relatively small
 more dilute urine. This can be accomplished by adding
fraction of uroliths seen in cats and are most commonly
water to a dry food or switching to a canned fation.
located in the urinary bladder. Although the underlying
Potential benefits of producing less-concentrated urine
cause is usually not known, the production of acidic,
include the dilution of any noxious substances that may
highly concentrated urine and the consumption of a
contribute to the disorder, more frequent urination pat
food high in purine precursors (such as liver) may be
 terns that decrease bladder contact time with urine, and
risk factors for these types of urolith. Xanthuria in cats
feimoval of any excess crystals (if they exist).
Dietary Management of Urolithiasis in Cats and Dogs 375
directed toward preventing the recurrence of the pri-
OTHER TYPES OF UROLITHS
maty mineral.
FOUND IN DOGS
Silica crystals are also often found in association with
other types of minerals, but these are seen more often
Other mineral types found in the urinary calculi of dogs
in males than females.130 Certain breeds of dog appeat
include urate (usually in Dalmatians; see Chapter 27,
to have an increased risk for silica urolithiasis. These
pp. 305-306), calcium phosphate, silica, and cystine.
include the German Shepherd Dog, Old English Sheep-
Xanthine urolithiasis in dogs is most often iatrogenic,
dog, Miniature Schnauzer, Shih Tzu, Lhasa Apso, York-
associated with allopurinol treatment, especially in cases
shire Terfier, and Golden Retriever. Surgical removal is
 in which dietary recommendations limiting purine are
the conventional treatiment. A measure used to prevent
not followed. Although much less common, xanthine
fecurrence is increasing water consumption to produce
urolithiasis can be caused by a heritable defect in the
more dilute urine.
enzyme xanthine oxidase. There have been case reports
Cystine urolithiasis is relatively rare in dogs, but when
of this condition in Dachshunds, Cavalier King Charles
it occurs it is almost always in males. Certain breeds
 Spaniels, Australian Shepherds, and Dalmatians.127.129
afe at increased risk, and it is associated with reduced
Calcium phosphate is the third most common type
fenal tubular feabsorption of several basic amino acids
of mineral found in canine uroliths; this type occurs
such as lysine, arginine, ornithine, and citrulline. The
more often in females than males. In most cases, cal-
Newfoundland breed has been used as a model to study
cium phosphate is found as a component of mixed-
cystinuria.13l Following surgical removal, preventive
mineral uroliths with either stfuvite of calcium oxalate.
 measures include feeding a urine-alkalinizing diet and
Because calcium phosphate is typically considered to be
increasing water consumption to promote the produc-
a secondary component, dietary management is usually
tion of less-concentrated urine.
References
1. Senior D: Lower urinary tract disease—feline. In WSAVA Proc, 2006.
2. Bartges J: Canine lower urinary trace cases. In ACVIM Proc, 2003
3. Zoran Dl: Role of diet in feline and canine urolithiasis. Presented at Wester veterinary conference, Las Vegas, 2006.
4. Bartges JW: Lower urinary tract disease in older cats: what's common, what's not, Vet Cix Nutr 3:57-62, 1996.
5. Ling CV, Franti CE, Ruby AL, and others: Urolithiasis in dogs. 1: Mineral prevalence and interrelations of mineral composition,
age, and sex, Am / Vet Res 59:624629, 1998.
6. Cannon AB, Westropp JL, Ruby AL, and others: Evaluation of trends in urolith composition in cats: 5,230 cases (1985-2004), J Am
Vet Med Assoc 231:570-576, 2007.
7. Lekcharoensuk C, Lulich JP, Osborne CA, and others: Patient and environmental factors associated with calcium oxalate urolithiasis
in dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc 217:515-519, 2000.
8. Picavet P Detilleux J, Verschuren S, and others: Analysis of 4495 canine and feline uroliths in the Benelux. A retrospective study:
1994-2004, J Anim Physiol Ani Nutr (Berl) 91:247251, 2007.
9. Seaman R, Bartges JW: Canine struvite urolithiasis, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 23:407-420, 2001.
10. Willeberg P: A case-control study of some fundamental determinants in the epidemiology of the feline urological syndrome, Nord
Vet Med 27:1-14, 1975.
11. Lekcharoensuk C, Lulich JP, Osborne CA, and others: Association between patient-related factors and risk of calcium oxalate and
magnesium ammonium phosphate urolithiasis in cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:520-525, 2000.
12. Ling GV, Franti CE, Ruby AL, and others: Urolithiasis in dogs. ll. Breed prevalence, and interrelations of breed, sex, age, and
mineral composition, Am / Vet Res 59:630-642, 1998.
376 Canine and Feline Nutrition
13. Willeberg P Priester WA: Feline urological syndrome: associations with some time, space and individual patient factors, Am J Vet
Res 37:975-978, 1976.
14. Houston DM, Moore AE, Favrin MG, and others: Canine urolithiasis: a look at over 16 0o0 urolith submissions to the Canadian
Veterinary Urolith Centre from February 1998 to April 2003, Cax Vet J45:225-230, 2004.
15. Weichselbaum RC, Feeney DA, Jessen CR, and others: Evaluation of the morphologic characteristics and prevalence of canine
urocystoliths from a regional urolith center, Am / Vet Res 59:379-387, 1998.
16. Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JB and others: Trends in the frequency of calcium oxalate uroliths in the upper urinary
tract of cats, J Am Anim Hosp Asoc 41:39-46, 2005.
17. Ross S, Osborne C, Polzin D, and others: Epidemiology of feline nephroliths and ureteroliths. Presented at 23rd axnua! forum of
the American College of Veterinary Internat Medicine conference, 2005.
18. Cowgill LD: Ureteral obstruction: a new dilemma in feline nephrology. Presented at 23rd annual forum ofthe American College of
Veterinary Internat Medicine conference, 2005.
19. Ling GV, Ruby Al, Johnson DK: Renal calculi in dogs and cats: prevalence, mineral type, breed, age and gender interrelationships
(1981-1992), / Vet Intern Med 12:1121, 1998.
 20. Stoller ML, Meng MV, Abrahams HM, and others: The primary stone event: a new hypothesis involving a vascular etiology, J Urol
171:1920-1924, 2004.
 21. Kyes AE, Hardie EM, Wooden BG, and others: Clinical, clinicopathologic, radiographic, and ultrasonographic abnormalities in
cats with ureteral calculi: 163 cases (1984-2002), J Am Vet Med Asoc 226:932-936, 2005.
22. Langston C, Gisselman K, Palma D, and others: Diagnosis of urolithiasis, Compend Contin Educ Vet 30:447-455, 2008.
 23. Chew DJ, Buffngton T: Diagnosis and medical treatment of non-obstructive feline lower urinary tract disease. In Proc WSAVA,
2000, pp 15-20.
 24. Gaskell C: Feline urological syndrome (FUS)—theory and practice, J Small Anim Pract 31:519-522, 1990.
25. Osborne CA, Johnston GR, Polzin DJ, and others: Feline urologic syndrome: a heterogenous phenomenon? J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
20:17-32, 1984.
26. Bovee KC, Reif JS, Maguire TG, and others: Recurrence of feline urethral obstruction, J Am Vet Med Asoc 174:93-96, 1979.
27. Jackson OF: The treatment and subsequent prevention of struvite urolithiasis in cats, J Small Anim Pract 12:555-568, 1971.
 28. Bohonowych RO, Parks JL, Greene RW: Features of cystic calculi in cats in a hospital population, J Am Vet Med Assoc 173:
301-303, 1978.
29. Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Thumchai R, and others: Feline urolithiasis. Etiology and pathophysiology, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Iract 26:217-232, 1996
30. Buffington CA, Rogers QR, Morris JG: Effect of diet on struvite activity product in feline urine, Am / Vet Res 51:2025-2030,
1990.
31. Buffington CA, Cook NE, Rogers QR, and others: The role of diet in feline struvite urolithiasis syndrome. In Burger IH,
Rivers JPW, editors: Nutrition of the dog and cat, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 1989, Cambridge University Press.
32. Osborne CA, Lulich JP Kruger JM, and others: Medical dissolution of feline struvite urocystoliths, J Am Vet Med Asoc 196:
1053-1063, 1990.
33. Bartges JW: Rock 'n' roll cats: feline urolithiasis. Presented at Atlantic Coast veterinary conference, 2006.
34. Osborne CA, Kruger JM, Lulich JP, and others: Disorders of the feline lower urinary tract. In Osborne CA, Finco DR, editors:
Canine and feline nephrology and urology, Baltimore, 1995, Williams & Wilkins.
35. Osborne CA, Polzin DJ, Abdullahi SU, and others: Struvite urolithiasis in animals and man: formmation, detection, and dissolution,
Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 29:1-101, 1985.
36. Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP, and others: Association between dietary factors and calcium oxalate and magnesium
ammonium phosphate urolithiasis in cats, / Am Vet Med Asoc 219:1228-1237, 2001.
Dietary Management of Urolithiasis in Cats and Dogs 377
37. Lewis LD, Morris ML Jr: Diet as a causative factor of feline urolithiasis, Vet Clix North Am Smaff Anim Pract 14:513-527, 1984.
38. Bushman DH, Emerick RJ, Embry LB: Experimentally induced ovine phosphatic urolithiasis: relationships involving dietary
calcium, phosphorus and magnesium, / Nutr 87:499-504, 1965.
39. Chow FHC, Brase JL, Hamar DW, and others: Effect of dietary supplements and methylene blue on urinary calculi,J Uro!
104:315-319, 1970.
40. Rich LJ, Dysart l, Chow FHC, and others: Urethral obstruction in male cats: experimental production by addition of magnesium
and phosphate to diet, Fetine Pract 4:44-47, 1974
41. Lewis LD, Chow FH, Taton GF, and others: Efect of various dietary mineral concentrations on the ocurrence of feline
urolithiasis, J Asm Vet Med Asoc 172:559-563, 1978.
42. Kalfelz FA, Bressett JD, Wallace RJ: Urethral obstruction in random source and SPF male cats induced by high levels of dietary
magnesium or magnesium and phosphorus, Feline Pract 10:25-35, 1980.
43. National Research Council: Nutrient reguirements of dogs and cats, Washington, DC, 2006, National Academy Press.
44. Association of American Feed Control Offcials (AAFCO): Pet food regulations. AAFCO offcial publication, Atlanta, 2008,
AAFCO
45. Fnco DR, Barsanti JA, Crowell WA: Characterization of magnesium-induced urinary disease in the cat and comparison with
fline urologic syndrome, Am J Vet Res 46:391-400, 1985.
46. Ross LA: Feline urologic syndrome: understanding and diagnosing this enigmatic disease, Vet Med 85:1 194-1203, 1990.
47. Osborne CA, Kruger JP, Lulich J and others: Feline matrix crystalline urethral plugs: a unifying hypothesis of causes, J Small
Anim Pract 33:172-177, 1992.
48. Buffngton CA, Rogers QR, Morris JG, and others: Feline struvite urolithiasis: magnesium effect depends upon urinary pH, Feline
Pract 15:29-33, 1985.
49. Cook NE: The importance of urinary pH in the prevention of feline urologic syndrome, Pet Food Ind 27:24 31, 1985.
50. Tarttelin MF: Feline struvite urolithiasis: factors affecting urine pH may be more important than magnesium levels in food, Vet Rec
121:227-230, 1987.
 51. Taton GF, Hamar DW, Lewis LD: Urinary acidification in the prevention and treatment of feline struvite urolithiasis, J Am Vet
Med Asoc 184:437443, 1984.
52. Taton CF, Hamar DW, Lewis LD: Evaluation of armmonium chloride as a urinary acidifer in the cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:
433-436, 1984.
53. Chan JCM: Nutrition and acid-base metabolism, Fed Proc 40:2423-2428, 1981.
54. Klahr SD: Disorders of acid-base metabolism. In Chan JCM, Gill JR, editors: Disorders of mineral, water, and acid-base metabolism,
New York, 1982, Wiley and Sons.
55. Kane E, Douglass GM: The effects of feeding a dry commercial cat food on the urine and blood acid-base balance of the cat, Feline
Pract 16:9-13, 1986.
56. Holzworth J: Nutrition and nutritional disorders. In Holzworth J, editor: Diseases ofthe cat: medicine and surgery, vol 1,
Philadelphia, 1987, Saunders.
57. Harrington JT, Lemann J Jr: The metabolic production and disposal of acid and alkali, Med Clix North Am 54:1543-1554, 1970.
urine and macromineral balance in clinically normal cats, Asm / Vet Res 65:138-142, 2004.
59. Funaba M, Yamate T, Hashida Y, and others: Effects of a high-protein diet versus dietary supplementation with armmonium
chloride on struvite crystal formation in urine of clinically normal cats, Am J Vet Res 64:1 059-1064, 2003.
60. Funaba M, Yamate T, Narukawa Y, and others: Effect of supplementation of dry cat food with D, L-methionine and ammonium
chloride on struvite activity product and sediment in urine, / Vet Med Sei 63:337-339, 2001.
378Canine and Feline Nutrition
 61. Funaba M, Hashimoto M, Yamanaka C, and others: Effects of a high-protein diet on mineral metabolism and struvite activity
product in clinically normal cats, Am / Vet Res 57:1726-1732, 1996.
62. Skoch ER, Chandler EA, Douglas GM, and others: Infuence of diet or urine pH and the feline urological syndrome, / Small Anim
ract 32:413-419, 1991.
63. Funaba M, Matsumoto C, Matsuki K, and others: Comparison of corn gluten meal and meat meal as a protein source in dry foods
formulated for cats, Am J Vet Res 63:1247-1251, 2002.
64. Funaba M, TanakT, Kaneko M, and others: Fish meal vs. corn gluten meal as a protein source for dry cat food, J Vet Med Sei
63:1355-1357, 2001.
65. Funaba M, Oka Y, Kobayashi S, and others: Evaluation of meat meal, chicken meal, and corn gluten meal as dietary sources of
protein in dry cat food, Can J Vet Res 69:299-304, 2005.
66. Anderson RS: Water balance in the dog and cat, / Small Ani Pract 23:588-598, 1982.
67. Gaskell CJ: Nutrition in diseases of the urinary tract in the dog and cat, Vet Anx 25:383-390, 1985.
68. Thrall BE, Miller LG: Water turnover in cats fed dry rations, Feline Pract 6:10-17, 1976.
69. Seefeldt SL, Chapman TE: Body water content and turnover in cats fed dry and canned rations, Am / Vet Res 40:183-185, 1979.
70. Sauer LS, Hamar D, Lewis LD: Effect of diet composition on water intake and excretion by the cat, Feline Pract 15:16-21, 1985.
71. Allen TA: Measurement of the infuence of diet on feline urinary pH, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26:363-368, 1996.
 72. Kane E, Rogers QR, Morris JG, and others: Feeding behavior of the cat fed laboratory and commercial diets, Nutr Rer 1:499-507,
1981.
73. Hart BL: Feline behavior, Feline Pract 9:10-12, 1979.
74. Finco DR, Adams DD, Crowell WA, and others: Food and water intake and urine composition in cats: infuence of continuous
versus periodic feeding, Am J Vet Res 47:1638-1642, 1986.
75. Finke MD, Litzenberger BA: Effect of food intake on urine pH in cats,J Small Anim Pract 33:261-265, 1992.
76. Osborne CA, Lulich JB Thumchai R, and others: Diagnosis, medical reatment, and prognosis of feline urolithiasis, Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 26:589-627, 1996.
sud panpd Aeuauradsa go uouaaard ur aproy unos go raa rao pue I nresa He mo a u L
uroliths in male cats, J Am Anim Aosp Assoc 12:514517, 1976.
78. Osborne CA, Polzin Dj: Prospective clinical evaluation of feline struvite urolith dissolution, Iroc Ax Coll Vet Int Med 1:4-11,
14-16, 1986.
79. Buffington CA: Acid questions: potential dangers associated with cat food acidification, Pet Food Ind 4 8, 1983
80. Osborne CA, Polzin D], Lulich JP, and others: Relationship of nutritional factors to the cause, dissolution, and prevention of
anine uroliths, Vet Chin North Am Small Anim Pract 19:583-619, 1989.
81. Osborne CA, Kruger JM, Polzin D], and others: Medical dissolution of feline struvite uroliths, Minn Vet 24:22-32, 1984.
82. Buffington CAT, Chew D]: Lower urinary tract diseases in cats: the Ohio State experience. Presented at Annuat conference
83. Burger 1H: Nutritional aspects of the feline urological syndrome (FUS), / Smalf Anim Pract 28:447-452, 1987,
84. Dow SW, Fettman MJ, LeCouteur RA, and others: Potassium depletion in cats: renal and dietary infuences, J Am Vet Med Asoc
191:1569-1575, 1987.
85. Dow SW, Fettman MJ, Roger QR: Taurine depletion induced by experimental dietary potassium depletion and acidification of
cats. Presented at American College of Veterinary Internat Medicine, San Diego, 1989, p 1040.
 86. DiBartola SP, Buffngton CA, Chew DJ, and others: Development of chronic renal disease in cats fed a commercial diet, J Am Vet
Med Aoc 202:744751, 1993.
Dietary Management of Urolithiasis in Cats and Dogs 379
87. Fettman M]: Feline kaliopenic polymyopathy/nephropathy syndrome, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 19:415-432, 1989.
88. Buffington CA: Feline struvite urolithiasis: effect of diet. Presented at European Society of Veterinary Nephrology and Urology annuat
ymposium, Barcelona, Spain, 1988, lntercongress.
89. Kurtz l, Maher T, Hulter HN, and others: Effect of diet on plasma acid-base composition in normal humans, Kidney Int 24:
670-680, 1983.
90. Ching SV, Fettman MJ, Hamar DW, and others: The effect of chronic dietary acidifcation using ammonium chloride on acid-base
and mineral metabolism in the adult cat, / Nutr 119:902-915, 1989.
91. Jackson JR, Kealy RD, Lawler DF, and others: Long-term safety of urine acidifying diets for cats, Vet Clix Nutr 2:100-107, 1995.
 92. Fettman MJ, Coble JM, Hamar DW, and others: Effect of dietary phosphoric acid supplementation on acid-base balance and
mineral and bone metabolism in adult cats, Am / Vet Res 53:2125-2135, 1992.
93. Tetrick MA: The role of diet in managing feline lower urinary tract diseases. In Proc WSAVA, 2000, pp 20-24.
94. Schwille PO, Hermann U: Environmental factors in the pathophysiology of recurrent idiopathic calcium urolithiasis (RCU), with
ermphasis on nutrition, Urol Res 20:72-83, 1992.
95. Ling GV, Franti CE, Johnson DL, and others: Urolithiasis in dogs. IV. Survey of interrelations among breed, mineral composition
and anatomic location of calculi, and presence of urinary tract infection, Am J Vet Res 59:650-660, 1998.
96. Kirk CA, Biourge VC: Managing struvite/oxalate urolithiasis: point/counterpoint. Presented at North American veterinary
conference, Orlando, Fla, 2006, pp 749-752.
infection, age, sex, and mineral composition, Am J Vet Res 59:643-649, 1998.
98. Osborne CA, Klausner JS, Polzin DJ, and others: Etiopathogenesis of canine struvite urolithiasis, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Iract 16:67-86, 1986.
99. Weaver AD, Pillinger R: Relationship of bacterial infection in urine and calculi to canine urolithiasis, Vet Rec 97:48-50, 1975.
100. Clark WE: Staphylococcal infection of the urinary tract and its relations to urolithiasis in dogs, Vet Rec 97:204-206, 1974.
101. Osborne CA, Lulich J, Bartges JW, and others: Canine and fline urolithiasis: relationship to etiopathogenesis to treatment and
prevention. In Osborne CA, Finco DR, editors: Canine and feline nephrology and urology, Baltimore, 1995, Williams & Wilkins.
102. Escolar E, Bellanato J, Medina JA: Stucture and composition of canine urinary calculi, Res Vet Sci49:327-333, 1990.
103. Rinkardt NE, Houston DM: Dissolution of infection-induced struvite bladder stones by using a noncalculolytic diet and antibiotic
therapy, Cax Vet J 45:838-840, 2004
104. Ling GV: Urinary stone disease. In Ling GV, editor: Lower urinary tract disease ofdogs and cats, St Louis, 1995, Mosy.
105. Osborne C: Feline calcium oxalate urolithiasis: perspectives from the Minnesota Urolith Center. Presented at Petfood forum,
Chicago, 1 997, Watts Publishing.
106. Osborne C, Lulich J, Thumchai R, and others: Feline calcium oxalate uroliths: pathophysiology, clinical findings, diagnosis,
treatment, and prevention, Vet Clin Nutr 1:105-114, 1994.
107. Lulich J: Feline urolithiasismanaging the consequences of an epidemiological shift in urolith type. Presented at Fi's European
symposium on advances in feline medicine, Brussels, 2006.
108. Westropp JL: How to manage calcjum oxalate urolithiasis in cats and dogs. Presented at North American veterinary conference
Orlando, Fla, 2007, pp 717-718.
109. Buffington CAT: Nutritional diseases and nutritional therapy in the cat, ed 2, London, 1995, Churchill Livingstone.
110. Bai SC, Sampson DA, Morris JG, and others: Vitamin B-6 requirement of growing kittens, / Nutr 119:1020-1027, 1989.
111. Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Carlson M, and others: Nonsurgical removal of urocystoliths in dogs and cats by voiding
urohydropropulsion, J Am Vet Med Asoc 203:660-663, 1993.
380Canine and Feline Nutrition
112. Osborne CA, Lulich J, Forrester D,Albasan H: Paradigm changes in the role of nutrition for the management of canine and
feline urolithiasis, Vt Clin North Am Small Arim Pract 39:127-141, 2009.
  o s a ur xa i o sise og o a ao u h  i   a 1
Chn Med 101:264273, 1983.
114. Biourge V: Urine dilution: a key factor in the prevention of struvite and calcium oxalate uroliths, Vet Focus 17:41-44, 2007.
115. Tournier C, Malandain E, Esperandieu M, and others: Relative supersaturation: a beter predictor of struvite urolith dissolution
kinetics than urinary pH. 1n Iroc ECVIM, 2008, p 205.
116. Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Lekcharoensuk C: Efects of diet on urine composition of cats with calcium oxalate urolithiasis, J Am
Anim Hosp Asoc 40:185-191, 2004.
117. Hawthorne AJ, Markwell PJ: Dietary sodium promotes increased water intake and urine volume in cats, J Nutr 134:2128S-2129S,
2004.
 118. Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP: Association between dietary factors and calcium oxalate and magnesium phosphate
urolithiasis in cats, J Am Vet Med Awoc 219: 1228-1237, 2001.
119. Lulich J, Osborne C, Thumchai R, and others: Epidemiology of canine calcium oxalate urolithiasis: case study. Presented at Annual
conference veterinary internal medicine forum, 1995,pp 490-492.
120. Lulich JP Osborne CA, Smith CL: Canine calcium oxalate urolithiasis: risk factor management. lIn Kirk RW, Bonagura JD,
editors: Gurrent veterinary therapy X!, Philadelphia, 1 992, Saunders.
121. Hess RS, Kass PH, Ward CR: Association between hyperadrenocorticism and development of calcium-containing uroliths in dogs
with urolithiasis, / Am Vet Med Asoc 212:1889-1891, 1998.
122. Houston DM, Moore AE, Favrin MG, and others: Feline urethral plugs and bladder uroliths: a review of 5484 submissions
1998-2003, Cen Vet J 44:974977, 2003.
123. Tsuchida S, Kagi A, Koyama H, and others: Xanthine urolithiasis in a cat: a case report and evaluation of a candidate gene for
xanthine dehydrogenase, J Feline Med Surg 9:503-508, 2007.
124. Osborne CA, Thumchai R, Lulich JP and others: Epidemiology of feline urolithiasis, Proc Ann ConfVet Intern Med Forum, 1979.
125. Klausner JS, Osborne CA: Canine calcium phosphate uroliths, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 16:171-184, 1986.
126. Kruger JM, Osborne CA, Lulich JP: Changing paradigms of feline idiopathic cystitis, Vet Clin North Am SmalAnim Pract
39:15-40, 2009.
127. Ling CV, Ruby AL, Harrold DR, and others: Xanthine-containing urinary calculi in dogs given allopurinol, J Am Vet Med Assoc
198:1935-1940, 1991.
128. van Zuilen CD, Nickel RF, van Dijk TH, and others: Xanthinuria in a family of Cavalier King Charles Spaniels, Vet Q 19:
172-174, 1997,
129. Flegel T, Freistadt R, Haider W: Xanthine urolithiasis in a Dachshund, Vet Rec 143:420-423, 1998.
130. Aldrich J, Ling GV, Ruby AL, and others: Silica-containing urinary calculi in dogs (1981-1993),J Vet Intern Med 11:288-295,
1997.
131. Robinson MR, Norris RD, Sur RL, and others: Urolithiasis: not just a 2-legged animal disease, J Urof 179:46-52, 2008.
31
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses
The skin (integument) is the largest organ in the body;
imbalances that may manifest as dermatoses. A third
together skin, hair, and dermis make up 24% of the
way nutrition can affect the health of the skin relates
body weight (BW) of a newborn puppy and 12% of
to infammatory skin disease. The development of an
the BW of an adlult dog.' The integument is meta-
adverse feaction to one or more components in the diet
bolically active. It provides sensory input, acts as a bar-
can
fier to protect the body from physical and infectious
and cats. In addition, diet can be an important com
injury, is important for normal temperature control and
ponent in the management of other forms of infam-
matory skin
dise
cats such as atopic
nutrients. The health of a pet's skin and hair coat can
dermatitis and feline milia
dermatitis
be affected by a variety of nutrients, most importantly
protein, vitamin A,
PROTEIN AND SKIN HEALTH
(EFAs), and zinc (Figure 31-1). I
Dogs
 and cats that afe
consuming high-quality, compl
ete,
balanced pet foods
The importance of protein for the maintenance and
ate unlikely to suffer from a serious deficiency or excess
development of skin and coat health is well docu
of any of these nuttients.
mented. Hair is more than 90% protein and contains
high amounts of the sulfur amino acids, methionine
homemade diet that is not cofrectly
balanced, can con-
and cystine. Normal turnover of skin cells and kerati-
tribute to skin disorders. In addition,
nization also impose a demand for protein. Togethef
functional disease that affects a pet's ability to dige
skin and coat needs account for up to 30% of an ani-
absorb, or use nutrients can cause secondary nutrient
mal's daily protein requirement.2 Although uncommon,
Guard hair
Secondaryhairs
Erectormuscle
Sebaceousgland
Epidermis
Follicle
Dermis
Hairbulb
Fgure 31-1 Cross-section of the skin and associated structures and the role of nutrients.
381
382 Canine and Feline Nutrition
protein deficiency in dogs and cats can be seen in asso-
An important finding of this study is that while the type
ciation with starvation, as a fesult of disease-induced
of fat significantly infuenced serum and skin fatty acid
anorexia, or in fesponse to prolonged feeding of an
and cholesterol concentrations in this study, the protein
inadequate diet. Changes to the skin and hair coat
soufce did not affect lipid profiles.
that develop during protein defciency include abnor-
The results of these two studies indicate that pro-
mal keratinization, depigmentation of hair shafts, and
tein source does not significantly affect changes in
changes in sebaceous and epidermal lipids. Coat hairs
fatty acid values or skin architecture in the dog. The
become brittle and break off easily, and coat growth
effects of dietary protein on infammatory skin disease
slows or stops. The lipid layer of the epidermis becomes
in dogs are more related to allergenicity and frequency
abnormal and loses its function as a protective bar-
of exposufe rather than to an infuence upon fatty acid
rier. The skin becomes scaly, greasy, and susceptible to
metabolism or homeostasis (see pp. 397-398). While
it is possible that fat content in various protein sources
fed balanced, complete pet foods, signs of protein def-
ciency are highly unlikely.
tions, such effects afe associated with the protein's fatty
Dietary protein may also affect skin heal th in terms
acid composition and not with protein characteristics
of hypersensitivity fesponse and effects upon subcu-
per se.
taneous lipid metabolism. The importance of dietary
protein for pets with adverse food reactions is discussed
later in this chapter (pp. 396-402). It has also been the-
VITAMIN A-RESPONSIVE
orized that feeding different types of proteins may affect
DERMATOSES
skin and serum lipid concentrations in dogs. For exam-
ple, plant proteins have been reported to be hypocho-
Vitamin A is necessary for normal epithelial cell differ-
lesterolemic compared with animal proteins, when fed
entiation and maintenance and for the process of kera-
to monkeys and rabbits.3.4 In a study with dogs, six dif-
tinization (see Section 1, pp. 27-29). Both deficiencies
ferent protein sources (chicken, pork, lamb, fish, beef,
 and excesses of this vitamin cause skin lesions in dogs
and soy) were sequentially fed to a group of 12 dogs.5
and cats. Signs include hair loss and poor coat condi-
No differences were observed between protein treat-
tion, hyperkeratinization of the epidermis and hair fol-
ment groups in skin histology, signs of infammation
licles, scaling of the skin, and an increased susceptibility
Or pruritus, or skin fatty acid levels. Several of the dogs
to secondary bacterial infections of the skin.! Vitamin
fed pork showed an increase in scale production and a
A toxicity is most commonly caused by feeding an all-
decrease in hair regrowth following skin biopsies, sug
liver diet or by oversupplementation with cod liver
cil. Nutritional defciencies of vitamin A (retinol) are
in dogs with seborfhea. However, additional research is
uncommon and afe accompanied by visual and diges
needed to further investigate the role of pork in skin
tive problems.2
heal th in dogs and cats.
More
common
than deficiencies
of excesses,
Another study compared the effects of feeding soy
however, are certain types of skin disorders that are
protein versus a meat-based protein source and soy oil
responsive
totreatment
 with supplemental  vita-
min A or fetinoids (natural and synthetic vitamin A
and cutaneous fatty acid concentrations in dogs.6
analogs). The administration of vitamin A and the
 Dietary protein had no effect upon serum cholesterol
retinoids
s appears to have both physiological and
concentration and only marginal effects upon serum
pharmacological effects. These compounds have been
and skin fatty acid concentrations. However, dogs fed
used successfully in humans and animals to treat cases
soy oil-containing diets had higher linoleic acid (LA)
of idiopathic seborrhea that are not caused by a vita-
and lower oleic acid concentrations in skin and serum
 min A defciency.78 Seborrhea is a general term that
when compared with dogs fed diets containing poul-
describes the overproduction of oils and other protec-
Pey osie iey Aninod Suureiuoo siaip pay soq '1ey An
tive secretions by the sebaceous glands in the skin. The
higher concentrations of serum arachidonic acid (AA).
 skin usually becomes faky, greasy, or both. Because
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses 3
383
the epidermal lipid layer is abnormal, the animal
A second skin disorder that has been shown to be
 becomes prone to secondary bacterial skin infections
fesponsive to vitamin A supplementation is sebaceous
that can cause pruritus and further damage to the
adenitis. This chronic skin disease is characterized
skin. Treatment of seborrhea in companion animals
by the development of lymphocytic, granulomatous,
is usually directed toward determining the underly-
Or pyogranulomatous infammation of the sebaceous
ing cause and correcting it. However, in a substantial
glands, resulting in scaling, skin lesions, and hair
number of cases, an underlying mechanism cannot be
loss. Over time, sebaceous glands are progressively
identifed and treatment is directed primarily toward
destroyed, and infammation diminishes. Sebaceous
the relief of clinical signs.
adenitis is genetically infuenced. Standard Poodles,
Certain types of seborrhea in dogs and cats respond
Akitas, Chow Chows, and Vizslas afe more ffrequently
favorably to vitamin A. The most common form is
 affected with this dlisorder than the general population
idliopathic seborrhea in Cocker Spaniels, which can
of dogs.15,16 In Poodles, the disease is believed to be
often be kept in complete remission with vitamin A
transmitted by an autosomal recessive gene.17 Some
of the treatments used to manage sebaceous adenitis
therapy has also been reported in Labrador Retrievers
include antiseborrheic shampoos, topical application
 and Miniature Schnauzers.10,12 Vitamin A-responsive
of propylene glycol or EFAs, and systemic administra-
seborrhea is characterized by dry and scaly skin that
tion of cyclosporine of synthetic fetinoids (vitamin A
progresses to oily changes. Affected dogs eventually
derivatives).
develop large, hyperkeratotic plaques (composed of
A study of 30 dogs examined the efficacy of using
sebum and keratin) and marked follicular plugging.
tWo synthetic retinoids, isotretinoin and etretinate, t0
Lesions afe most prominent on the underside of the
tteat the clinical signs of sebaceous adenitis.18 Dogs that
thorax and abdomen. Hair loss and skin changes are
had been diagnosed with the disorder were treated for
accompanied by secondary bacterial folliculitis. Pru-
a minimum of 2 months with one of the two retinoids.
ritus and infammation may or may not be present.
Forty-seven percent of the dogs given isotretinoin
Almost all reported cases also show moderate to severe
and 53% of the dogs given etretinate were success-
otitis externa.
fully treated and were maintained on retinoid therapy
Cases of vitamin A-responsive seborrhea usually do
  a sm n  
not respond to the traditional treatments for seborrhea,
Akitas respond poorly to synthetic retinoids, this study
which include medicated shampoos, antibiotic therapy,
reported successful treatment in 10 of the 11 Akitas
and glucocorticoid therapy. Although clinical signs
included in the study.18,19 These results suggest that reti-
can be used in support of a diagnosis, the diagnosis of
 noids may be an effective treatment for some dogs with
vitamin A-responsive seborrhea can only be confirmed
sebaceous adenitis. An initial dosage of 1 milligram
through favorable response to supplementation. A dose
(mg)/kilogram (kg) of BW per day of either isotretinoin
of 10,000 international units (IUs) per day is suggested,
of etfetinate is recommended.
It is important to note that these skin conditions are
used.9-i2 A decrease in clinical signs is usually seen
not caused by a vitamin A defciency. In all reported
within 4 weeks, with complete femission within 2 t0
cases, the dogs were being fed a high-quality, complete
6 months of starting treatment. Attempts to reduce the
and balanced, commercial dog food. Moreover, serum
level of vitamin A, or to withdraw therapy, result in a
levels of vitamin A were normal, and no other signs
relapse of clinical signs, indicating that lifelong therapy
 of vitamin A deficiency were observed. One group of
is necessary. The dosages used represent 6 to 10 times
investigators also reported that the skin changes seen in
the dog's normal requirement for vitamin A. However,
cases of vitamin A-responsive dermatosis differed sig-
no signs of vitamin A toxicity have been observed in
nificantly from those seen with a true vitamin A def-
the reported cases, even after several years of therapy.
ciency. It is likely that the effect of vitamin A is the
Other studies have indicated that much higher levels
result of a pharmacological action of the vitamin cn
of vitamin A are necessary to induce clinical signs of
 epithelial cells, rather than a result of the vitamin's role
vitamin A toxicity in dogs. 13,14
as an essential nuttient.7
384 Canine and Feline Nutrition
improvement within 60 days. Skin infammation,
Some cutaneous disorders that respond to vitamin A
crusting, and pruritus completely subsided, although
therapy are not actually caused by a vitamin A def-
hyperpigmentation did not improve. Clinical signs did
ciency in these cases vitamin A therapy is required
 not reappear in any of the dogs within follow-up peri-
throughout the pet's life,but therapeutic dosages have
ods of 7 months to 3 years. All of the dogs were main-
not been found to be toxic. it is believed that there is
tained on the vitamin E supplementation throughout
α genetic basis for vitamin A-responsive seborrhea in
this time. None of the owners attempted to decrease
Cocker Spanieis and for sebaceous adenitis in Standard
the dose or withdraw the supplementation, so it is
Poodles, Akitas, Chow Chows, and Viszias.
not known if long-term vitamin E supplementation is
necessary in all cases.
A medium-sized (20-kg) adult dog has a minimum
daily requirement for vitamin E of about 10 IUs. Most
VITAMIN E-RESPONSIVE
commercial pet foods will supply a 20-kg dog with
DERMATOSES
between 20 and 50 IUs/day. The levels that were fed in
this study represent 4 to 10 times the dog's normal daily
The term vitamin E refers to a group of compounds
intake of vitamin E, but no toxicity signs were observed
called the tocopherois that act as biological and food
in any of the eight dogs. The authors concluded that
antioxidants. Alpha-tocopherol is the most biologically
vitamin E may offer a therapeutic alternative for some
active form of vitamin E. Within the body, vitamin E
cases of primary canine acanthosis nigricans. In all
functions as a free-radlical scavenger, protecting cell
cases, the disorder is chronic and persistent, and therapy
membranes and tissues from oxidative stfess. An ani-
is directed toward control rather than cure. Many dogs
mal's dietary requirement for vitamin E is dependent
with acanthosis nigricans respond favorably to systemic
upon dietary intake of polyunsaturated fatty acids
tteatment with corticosteroids. However, concern ovef
(PUFAs), with an increase in requirement occurring
the immediate and long-term side effects of cortico-
 d   ss  ae s go s r a
steroid therapy dictates the need to fnd alternative of
and Section 2, p. 110). Vitamin E defciency is uncom-
uoiy pay sies u! paiodai uaaq sey inq 'shop un uou
tal vitamin E.
fat diets and results in a pathological condition called
Vitamin E therapy has also been used with varying
pansteatitis (see Chapter 26, p. 279 for a complete dis-
levels of success in dogs with discoid lupus erythema-
cussion). Although a poor hair coat may be seen
in
cats with pansteatitis, the primary manifestations of
with these disorders respond to vitamin E therapy, and
vitamin E defciency are related to the necrosis and
additional research needs to be conducted to determine
infammatory changes in subcutaneous and intraab
an effective dose fange of vitamin E. Conversely, vita-
dominal fat.
min E supplementation has been shown to be ineffec-
Conversely, supraphysiological doses of vitamin E
tive as an antinfammatory and antipruritic agent for
have some efficacy in the management of a skin con-
the treatment of atopic dermatitis (allergic dermatitis)
dition called primary acanthosis nigricans in Dachs-
in dogs (Table 31-1).
hunds. This disorder is characterized by hair loss and
extreme hyperpigmentation (blackening) and thick-
ening of the skin. As the disease progresses, varying
ZINC-RESPONSIVE
degrees of greasiness, crusting, fancid odor, and sec-
DERMATOSES
ondary bacterial infections develop. Pruritus is usually
absent or mild during the early stages of the disorder,
The essential mineral zinc has several functions that
but it may become mofe
pronounced as secondary
affect skin health and coat quality. As an integral
infections occur. In one study, a group of eight Dachs-
component of several metalloenzymes and a cofactor
hunds with acanthosis nigricans
were given 200 IUs
for both ribonucleic acid (RNA) and deoxyribonucleic
of alpha-tocopherol daily.20
0 All eight dogs showed
acid (DNA) polymerases, zinc plays an important fole
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses 3
385
excessive supplementation with calcium during growth
TABLE31-1 VITAMINE-RESPONSIVE
also has the potential to result in dermatoses associated
DERMATOSES
with zinc defciency.25,27
SUCCESS OF
VITAMIN E
DISORDER
BREEDS
SUPPLEMENTATION
in dogs, cases of diet-induced zinc defciency are asso
Demodicosis
All
Variable
ciated withfeedingfoods thatcontaineithermarginal
Primary
Dachshunds
Yes
levels of zinc, cereai-based foods that contain high
acanthosis
levels of phytate,poor qualityfoods that contain high
nigricans
Discoid lupus
All
Variable
amounts of caicium, or a combination ofthese factors
erythematosus
Crowing dogs are most susceptible to zinc defciency,
Dermatomyositis
Collies,
Variable
and excessive supplementation with calcium during
Shetland
growth also has the potential to result in dermatoses
Sheepdogs
associated with zinc deficiency.
 in regulating cellular metabolism and cell division. Zinc
The skin lesions of zinc-fesponsive dermatosis are
is also needed for the synthesis of fatty acids and is
seen on the face, over pressure points, and on the foot
essential for immune system health and normal infam-
pads (Figure 31-2).28,29 In extreme cases, the lesions
matory responses. In adult animals, a defciency of
eventually spread over the entire body. Affected areas
zinc manifests principally as changes to skin and coat
afe characterized by hair loss, redness, infammation,
health. In young animals, skin changes are accompa
crusting, and pruritus. Secondary skin infections are
nied by impaired growth, inappetance, and other heal th
nsi aip Aq ap Aensn si sisouia usss ose
problems.
breed, physical
examination, and skin biopsy. Positive
Dermatoses that respond to zinc supplementation
fesponse to oral zinc supplementation without chang
occur in companion animals for a number of reasons.
ing the diet can be used to confrm a diagnosis.28 How
Genetic disorders are fesponsible 
for impaired zinc
ever, because 
soop
 considerably in response and
AIEA
 absorption and metabolism in several breedls of dogs.23
because
awide
fange of effective dosages has been
A defect in the mucosal transfer system for zinc in the
small intestine occurs in Alaskan Malamutes, Siberian
appropriate
 In addition, zinc
Huskies, and American Eskimos. Bull Terriers with
requirements:
lethal acrodermatitis also have an inability to absorb
s physiological state,the presence
dietary zinc (see Chapter 27, pp. 299-300 for a com-
of inhibitory components in the diet, and the form of
plete discussion). Zinc deficiency can also result from
zinc that is used.30 A dose of 10 mg of zinc sulfate/kg
inadequate levels of the mineral in the diet and from the
per day or 1.7 mg of zinc methionine/kg per day is
presence of other nutrients or components that inter-
fere with zinc absorption.24,25 Specifically, incteased
of zinc methionine was suggested because of pre-
levels of calcium and phytate will interfere with the
sumed increased bioavailability of the organic form.
bioavailability of dietary zinc and can lead to zinc def-
However, increased bioavailability of zinc methionine 
ciency.2G Naturally occurring cases of zinc-responsive
appears to be significant only when there is high meta-
dermatoses afe rare in dogs and have not been reported
bolic demand such as during growth or when there are
in cats. The reported cases in dogs have all been asso-
inhibitory components in the food.31,32 Other authors
ciated with feeding foods that contain either marginal
 suggest an initial dosage that provides 2 to 3 mg/kg
levels of zinc, cereal-based foods
containing high levels
BW of elemental zinc/day.23 The initial dose should be
of phytate, poor-quality foods containing high amounts
administered for at least a 30-day period to determine
of calcium, of a combination of these factors. Grow-
the response to treatment. A response should be seen
ing dogs afe most susceptible to zinc deficiency and
within 6 weeks of initiation of supplementation and,
386 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Figure 31-2 Zinc dehciency in an adult male Labrador Retriever, caused by a diet of generic dog food.
(Courtesy Candace 5ousa, DVM, Animal Dermatology Clinic, 5acramiento, Calif)
in most cases, skin lesions show a rapid response, with
ESSENTIALFATTYACIDS
complete healing within 2 weeks.
AND SKIN DISEASE
Zinc supplementation confrms a diagnosis of zinc-
responsive dermatosis and aids in rapid recovery. In
As components of cell-membrane phospholipids and
cases that occurred as a result of an inadequate diet
precursors for a variety of regulatory compounds, the
(i.e., presence of inhibitory substances) of excessive
EFAs maintain the health and integrity of epithelial
supplementation, feeding a high quality complete and
tissue in the body. The omega-6 fatty acids that are
balanced food that supplies adequate levels of zinc is
considered to be essential nutrients include LA in dogs
fecommended. Additionally, there is some evidence
and LA and AA in cats (see Section 2, pp. 81-83).
that increasing EFAs may have a synergistic effect with
Although the essential nature of omega-3 farty acids
has been controversial, alpha-linolenic acid (ALA)
       s
is considered by most nutritionists to be condition-
the clinical effects of zinc defciency.34 This may occuf
ally essential for dogs and cats.3G LA is specifically
because clinical signs of EFA and zinc defciencies afe
responsible for maintaining the cutaneous water per-
similar. The presence a defciency in both nutrients
meability barrier, while AA, as a prostaglandin pre-
negatively affects sebum production and skin health.
cursor, is needed for hofmal epidermal proliferation.
It is possible that a subclinical EFA defciency occurred
Other nutrients that may be important to support a
in dogs that reportedly showed an additive response
healthy epidermal barrier in dogs include pantothe-
au J! Paisadxa aq PInom su (VI) Vea Pue suz 01
nate, choline, nicotinamide, histidine, and inositol.37
underlying cause of zinc defciency was a poor diet.
The long-chain omega-3 fatty acids, eicosapentaenoic
Alternatively, fat absorption may be reduced in dogs
acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), sup-
with zinc-responsive dermatoses, which could lead to
port normal cell membrane fuidity and also have
a subclinical defciency state.35 Continued supplemen-
antinfammatory and immunostimulatory properties.
tation with zinc after correction of the diet is neces-
Because of these functions and the skin's rapid cell
sary when an inherited problem with zinc metabolism
turnover rate, the skin is especially susceptible to EFA
exists.
deficiencies.38
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses3
387
In dogs and cats, signs of EFA deficiency become
TABLE 31-2 SOURCES OF OMEGA-3
apparent within 2 to 3 months of consuming a deficient
AND OMEGA-6 FATTY ACIDS
diet. Initial signs include a feduction in surface lipid pro-
IN PET FOODS
duction, which results in a dry, dull coat; hair loss; and the
eventual development of skin lesions. Over time, the skin
OMEGA-6 FATTY ACID
OMEGA-3 FATTYACID
becomes greasy, pruritic, and susceptible to infection. A
SOURCES
SOURCES
change in the surface lipids in the skin compromises the
Corn oil (70% linoleic acid)
Coldwater fish oils
permeability layer, alters the normal bacterial fora, and
(12%-15% EPA)
Safflower oil (78% linoleic
Flaxseed
predisposes the animal to secondary bacterial infections.2
acid)
(57% al pha-linolenic acid)
Epidermal peeling, interdigital exudation, and otitis
Sunflower oil (69% linoleic
Canola oil
externa have also been reported in EFA-deficient dogs.
acid)
(8% alpha-linolenic acid)
When EFA deficiency is uncomplicated by other nutri-
Cottonseed cil (54% linoleic
Soybean oil
ent imbalances, skin lesions show a response to dietary
acid)
(7% alpha-linolenic acid)
correction within 1 to 2 months.2
Soy bean oil (54% linoleic
Naturally occurring skin disease as a result of EFA
acid)
deficiency is rare in dogs and cats today. Healthy com-
Nore: The following facs and oils are poor soures of omega-6 and
omega3 fary acids: lard, murron fat, coconut oil, and olive oil.
panion animals that are fed high-quality foods are not at
EPA, Eicosapenraenoic acid (20:5n-3).
risk of developing an EFA deficiency. When a deficiency
does occur, it is usually the result of feeding a food that
Algae synthesize large amounts of omega-3 fatty
is either poorly formulated or has been stored improp-
acids. As a fesult, most matine animal tissues contain
erly. If the food has been stored at high temperatures of
high concentrations of the omega-3 PUFAs. Sources
beyond the stated expiration date, there is a risk of EFA
of omega-3 fatty acids in pet foods include cold-water
loss as a result of oxidative damage to the food. When
fish cils as well as whole-fat fax (fax cil is an enriched
source of ALA). Land animals, in contrast, have higher
the diet to a food that is well formulated and has been
concentrations of the omega-6 fatty acids in their tissues
stored properly, rather than to attempt to correct a defi-
because most planits consumed by these animals contain
ciency by adding supplemental fatty acids.
greater amounts of omega-6 than omega-3 fatty acids.39
Enriched sources of omega-6 fatty acids in pet foods
include corn, saffower, sunfower, and cottonseed oils.
Therapeutic Role of Omega-6
Soy and canola oils contain high levels of omega-6 fatty
and Omega-3 Fatty Acids
acids, as well as some ALA. Another omega-6 fatty acid,
EFA supplementation and dietary manipulation of EFA
gamma-linolenic acid (18:3n-6) (GLA), is found in
metabolism appear to have some efficacy in the treat-
borage, black currant, and evening primrose oil.40 Oils
ment of certain skin disorders that are not the result of
containing a large proportion of monounsaturated fatty
a dietary EFA deficiency. The PUFAs are divided into
acids, such as olive oil, and saturated animal fats afe not
several series based on the position of the frst double
considered enriched in either omega-3 or omega-6 fatty
bond in the carbon chain. Of greatest interest are the
acids (Table 31-2).
omega-3 and omega-6 series of farty acids. The omega-3
(or n-3) fatty acidls have the frst double bond located at
 the third carbon atom from the terminal methyl group.
Fatty Acids as Eicosanoid
The omega-6 fatty acids have the frst double bond at
Precursors
the sixth carbon atom (see Section 1, p. 19). The effects
In addition to providing structural integrity and Auid-
Ainh aueiquau  uodn spie aey jo sadai yoq jo
ity to cell membranes, membrane fatty acids also have
o siss no aei n pue d pue
specifc roles in the regulation of cell functions. The
new compounds, ate affected by the molecule's chain
PUFAs AA, GLA, EPA, and DHA are all precursors
length, the degree of saturation, and the position of the
for the synthesis of eicosanoids. Eicosanoids are immu-
first double bond.
noregulatory molecules that have local and short-lived
388 Canine and Feline Nutrition
n-6 Series
Enzyme
n-3 Series
Linoleic
Alpha-linolenic
Delta-6-desaturase
Gamma-linolenic
Stearidonic
Elongase
Dihomo-gamma-linolenic
Eicosatetraenoic
Delta-5-desaturase
Arachidonic
Eicosapentaenoic (EPA)
2- and 4-series eicosanoids
3- and 5-series eicosanoids
(Inflammatory)
(Less inflammatory)
Proaggregatory
Less aggregatory/non-
Vasodilatory
aggregatory
 Chemotactic
Not vasodilatory
Figure 31-3 Metabolism of omega-3 and onega-6 series fatty acids.
hormonelike effects. The four primary types of eico-
mediators with much less infammatory activity. Those
sanoids are prostaglandins, leukotrienes, prostacyclins,
compounds are antiaggregatory, not immunosuppres-
and thromboxanes. Eicosanoids afe involved in infam-
sive at levels normally found in the body, and vasodi-
latory.
. They include the 3-series prostaglandins, the
proliferation. When cellular injury
occufs, membranies
5-seties leukotfienes, hydroxyeicosapentaenoic acid, and
teleasetheif
fatty
acids.
which
1afethen
thromboxane As. For example leukotriene Bs (LTBs),
metabolized to eicosanoids.
produced from EPA, is approximately 10-fold less
eicosanoid synthes
y the availability
potent as a heutrophil chemoattractant than leukotriene
and type of fatty acid
1 the cell membrane
and by the activities
tabolicenzyme sys-
being less biolc
y active than LTB4, there is evidence
tems, cyclooxygef
'The
omega-3
that LTBmay
 inhibit the action of LTB4, possibly via
and omega-6 fatty acids produce different families of
competition for
eicosanoids and also compete for these two metabolic
pathways.41
AA to leukotrienes produced from EPA may be more
During an in
infammatory response, the release and
important than absolute amounts of these compounds.
metabolism of omega-6 fatty acids produces the 2-series
prostaglandins, the 4-series leukotrienes, hyeroxyeico-
Influence of Dietary Omega-6
satetfaenoic acid, and thromboxane Az (Figure 31-3).
 These agents are immunosuppressive at high levels, are
and Omega-3 Fatty Acids on
Eicosanoid Production
proinfammatory promote platelet aggregation, and act
as potent mediators of infammation in type-I hypersensi-
Research studies with humans, laboratory animals, and
tivity reactions.42,43 In contrast, the release and metabo-
companion animals have shown that levels of omega-6
lism of omega-3 fatty acids (specifcally, EPA) produces
 and omega-3 fatty acids present in tissue cell membranes
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses 3
389
can be manipulated by diet, and that these manipula-
 tions infuence the infammatory response. Increasing
100-
the amount of omega-3 fatty acids in skin and other
N
tissues leads to decreased production and activity of the
PMI
80
proinfammatory eicosanoids and increased synthesis of
%
60
the less-infammatory metabolites.47 Several factors are
responsible for this effect. First, as discussed previously,
2
40
LTB4 /1.
omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids compete directly for
the same enzyme systems. Therefore increasing the
20
inhibits the metabolism of omega-6 fatty acids when
5:1
10:1
25:1
50:1
100:1
fatty acids are released from membranes during an
Dietary n-6:n-3 ratio
infammatory feaction. Second, the compounds pro-
Baseline12 week
duced from the metabolism of omega-3 farty acids are
Figure 31-4 Effect of dietary omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid
less infammatory than those produced from AA.48
ratio on leukotriene Bz (LTB4) synthesis. PMNs, Polymmor-
Finally, two of the end products of EPA metabolism are
phonuclear leukocytes.
LTBs and 15-hydroxyeicosapentaenoic acid. There is
(From Reinhart GA, Davenport GM: Omega-3 fatty acids and inAamimation
evidence that these compounds inhibit the potent pro-
management. In Proceedings offourth worid congress of veterirary dermatoiogy,
2000, p 32.)
infammatory action of omega-6-derived leukotrienes.
The amount and type of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty
an omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid ratio of 1.4:1 had
acids and the ratio of these two classes of fatty acids in
altered plasma fatty acids (increased DHA and EPA
the diet must be considered when dletermining effects
and decreased AA) and had reduced prostaglandin E2
on plasma and tissue levels and consequent eicosanoid
(PGE2) production by peripheral blood mononucleat
cells.S3
Fish oil-supplemented dogs also showed a
dogs showed that feeding a diet containing an omega-6
to omega-3 ratio between 5:1 and 10:1 resulted in the
(DTH) skin test and a blunted response to immuni-
production of significantly lower levels of LTB4 and sig-
zation with a novel protein.54 A follow-up study was
nificantly higher levels of the less infammatory metabo-
conducted to examine the relationship between plasma
lite LTBs in the skin, when compared with levels that
fatty acid concentrations and leukotriene production
were produced when the dogs were fed a diet with ratios
by peripheral blood neutrophils in dogs fed these dliets
of 28:1 or higher.52 Similarly, the neutrophils of dogs
for 36 weeks. Plasma concentrations of EPA and AA
fed diets containing the lowest omega-6 to omega-3
refected dietary intake, and a strong and significant cor-
ratios (5:1 and 10:1) had decreased LTB4 and increased
relation was found between the plasma ratio of EPA:AA
LTBs concentrations (Figufe 31-4). Cells from lipo-
and the ratio of LTBs to LTB4 produced by stimulated
polysaccharidle-stimulated (LPS) skin biopsy samples
 neutrophils. Specifically, plasma EPA increased, plasma
synthesized 48% to 62% less LTB4 and 48% to 79%
 AA decreased, and LTBs produced by stimulated neu-
more LTB; when compared with samples cbtained
trophils increased in dogs fed fish oil-supplemented
 prior to feeding the experimental diets. Similar changes
diets. The same researchers demonstrated an interaction
were observed in neutrophils. These responses were con-
between dietary vitamin E intake and intake of omega-3
sidered to be clinically significant because decreases in
fatty acids, suggesting that the benefits of vitamin E on
tissue LTB4 concentrations of 50% or more are typically
DTH response are reduced when the intake of omega-3
large enough to attenuate an infammatory response.
fatty acids is very high.56 Together, these studies suggest
Additional research corroborated these results and
that there is an optimal level of omega-3 fatty acid intake
further refined understanding of the specific types and
and an omega-6 to omega-3 ratio that can modify the
amounts of omega-3 fatty acids that can modulate the
 production of proinfammatory compounds but that is
infammatory response. Healthy elderly Beagles fed 
    m  i 
diets that were supplemented with fish cil to achieve
system functions or vitamin E status.
390 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 In a study, a group of 15 healthy acdult dogs were
a selective favoring of highly unsaturated fatty acids for
fed a base diet supplemented with either sunfower oil
esterification into phospholipids when compared with
(source of LA), fish cil (source of EPA and DHA), of
their precursors. It is not known if these effects would
fish cil plus vitamin E.57 The fish oil-enriched diets pro-
have been observed if increased omega-6 fatty acids had
vided 1.75 grams (g) EPA/kg diet and 2.2-g DHA/kg
been supplied as AA instead of as LA. Regardless, these
diet, resulting in an omega-6 to omega-3 ratio of 3.4:1.
fesults suggest that when a favorable ratio is included
After 12 weeks of feeding the test diets, in vivo mea-
in the diet, increasing the source of EPA and DHA
surement of the serum of dogs fed fish oil-enriched
while maintaining a constant cmega-6 to omega-3 ratic
foods showed a blunted infammatory response to LPS
positively affects plasma fatty acid profles and, presum-
when compared with the response observed in dogs
ably (although not yet reported), the production of less
fed the sunfower oil-enriched diet. These results afe
infammatory eicosanoids.
especially significant because this was the frst report
that used an in vivo assay to examine LPS-stimulated
cytokine fesponse after feeding omega-3 fatty acid
Researh studies show that leveis of omega-6 and
enriched diets. Additional studies of the same dogs
orega-3 fatty acids in pets' diets infuence tissue leveis
showed that increasing omega-3 fatty acids in the diet
of these fatty acids and these modifcations infuence
the infammatory response.increasing the amount of
lipid peroxides or cause a reduction in serum vitamin E
omega-3 fatty acids in skin and other tissues leads to
concentrations.58 These results indicate that the dogs
decreased production and activity of the proinfam
did not experience increased oxidative stress in response
matory eicosanoids and increased synthesis of the less
to the altered fatty acid ratios and incfeased intake of
inffammatory metabolites.
EPA and DHA.
Although changing the ratio of omega-6 to omega-3
fatty acids is an effective approach to modifying the
 production of proinfammatory and less infammatory
Dietary Fatty Acids and Atopic
compounds, there is also evidence that when an equal
Dermatitis
fatio is fed and kept constant, increasing the omega-3
Dogs and cats are susceptible to a wide range of infam-
dose alone infuences the plasma fatty acid profie.59
 matory skin diseases. In dogs, these include allergic disor-
Healthy dogs were fed diets containing an omega-6 to
ders, parasitic infestations, bacterial infections, and adverse
omega-3 ratio of 1:1, with varying concentrations of
reactions to food. Cats show the same disorders with the
each class of fatty acid, supplied by corn cil and fish
addition of miliary dermatitis and eosinophilic granuloma
oil, respectively. Plasma concentrations of omega-3 fatty
complex. Infammatory skin disordlers that are associated
acids increased with increasing total intake of omega-3
with immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated type-1 hyper-
fatty acids, up to a certain level of intake, regardless
sensitivity (allergic) responses are most likely to respond
of the fact that omega-6 fatty acids were also increas-
favorably to modlifications of dietary fatty acid concen-
ing. These results suggest a dose-dependent response
trations. In dogs, these include atopic dermatitis (atopy),
to omega-3 intake that was independent of the ratio
of the two classes of fatty acids. However, it is impor-
 cussed below). In cats, allergic skin disease also manifests
tant to note that the diets that were fed in this study
 as miliary dermatitis.6o Because fea-bite hypersensitivity
is best treated via stringent fea-control programs, cuf-
It is unknown (and questionable) whether a similar
rent research studies have focused on the use of fatty acid
fesponse would have occurred if the fatio was more
 therapy to control atopic disease in dogs and cats.
similar to that seen in many commercial foods (i.e.,
In dogs, atopic dermatitis is considered to be
the most frequently diagnosed form of allergic skin
this study were supplied as EPA and DHA (fish oil),
disease.6l Many animals with atopy are sensitized to
while the omega-6 fatty acid was supplied as primarily
 multiple environmental allergens, which may include
LA (corn oil). Therefore the dose response may refect
house dust mites or dust, molds, weeds, grasses, and
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses 3
391
trees. In addition, a substantial proportion of dogs with
are also involved.68 The most important of these is epi-
atopic dermatitis afe simultaneously
affectedby an
dermal barrier function. Human subjects with atopic
adlverse food reaction.62 Recent studies suggest that dogs
dermatitis have irregularities in the lipid and ceramide
with atopic disease have almost four times greater risk of
components of their stratus corneum (the uppermost
developing concurrent food allergy than dogs without
protecting layer of the epidermis).69 A defect in this
atopy. For these reasons, differential diagnosis of allergic
layer can affect the skin's function as a protective bar-
skin disorders must always include consideration of the
fier, leadling to increased transepidermal water loss and
 presence of both atopy and adverse food reaction and
the role that multiple allergens and the pruritic thresh-
agents. Although these changes have not been definitely
old plays in the development of clinical signs.
demonstrated in dogs, there is evidence that the stratum
Atopy is characterized by pruritus, self-trauma to
corneum of atopic dogs has structural differences when
the skin, and secondary bacterial or yeast infection.63,64
compared with normal canine skin and that these dif-
Chronic otitis externa is also a common finding. Diag-
ferences may involve the lipid-containing ceramides.70
nosis of atopic dermatitis in dogs typically uses the
It is theorized that a stfratum cofneum with an impaired
criteria of Willemse, which includes case history infor-
lipid barrier predisposes an animal to the development
mation and clinical signs.6S Observations of breed and
of hypersensitive response to contact allergens because
family predilections, along with results of limited breed-
foreign agents are able to penetrate further into the skin.
ing tfials, indicate that some dogs are genetically pre-
Another potentially infuencing factor is the presence
of a defect in fatty acid metabolism. There is evidence
at increased risk include Chinese Shar-Peis, Dalma-
that dogs with atopy may have compromised ability to
tians, Irish Setters, Golden Retrievers, Boxers, Labradof
 metabelize omega-6 fatty acids due to reduced activity
Retrievers, Belgian Tervurens, and several Terrier and
of delta-5 andl/or delta-6 desaturase enzymes.71,72
toy breeds. Cats with atopic disease often develop mili-
Increased understanding of the fole of an optimally
tary dermatitis, which is characterized by small papules
functioning skin barrier has implications for both the
and crusts found most frequently on the head and neck.
 prevention and treatment of atopic disease. While it
Clinical signs develop when the animal is exposed to
the offending antigen(s) and IgE-sensitized mast cells
the most common cause of atopy, new evidence sug-
in the skin degranulate and release a host of infamma-
 gests that contact allergens are most important. Avoid-
tory mediators. These compounds include histamine,
 ance of known allergens and frequent bathing to reduce
heparin, proteolytic enzymes, chemotactic factors, and
time of exposure and penetration into the skin are now
vatious types of eicosanoids. As discussed previously,
routinely recommended for pets with atopic disease.73
au1 u juasaid spioe Aney Jo suoniodoid pue adAi au
Because secondary staphylococcal infections may be
cell membranes and activity of the cyclooxygenase and
responsible for many of the clinical signs of atopy, anti-
lipoxygenase enzyme systems determine the specifc type
 microbial treatment is also an important component of
of eicosanoids that will be produced during an infam-
management. Glucocorticoid or cyclosporine therapies
 ate typically prescribed to control infammation. Fatty
hypersensitivity response (IgE-mediated) is followed
- a u si asi ni si r a 
by a late-phase response that develops 6 to 12 hours
cellular ceramides of the stratum corneum may also be
following mast cell activation.67 In addition, some of
helpful and may allow reduction or discontinuation
the released cytokines function to recruit infammatory
of the use of these antinfammatory medications. In
cells to the local area, which can persist for several days
recent years, fatty acid therapy for atopic disease has
and are responsible for the chronic infammatory skin
focused both on modulating the infammatory response
changes seen in atopic animals.
au Aq paonoid spiouesosia jo sadii aui Suanie Aq
Although IgE-meliated immedliate-type and delayed
 mast cells and other skin cells involved in the infam-
(late-phase) hypersensitivities are responsible for the cas-
cade of infammatory agents after exposure to offending
 presenting cells), and providing nutrients that support a
allergens in most patients, it appears that other factors
healthier skin barrier.74
392 Canine and Feline Nutrition
of dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid and the monoenoic
Fatty Acid Supplementation
prostaglandins, rather than the formation of AA and
Supplements that are enriched with omega-3 fatty acids
its more infammatory metabolites.
are frequently recommended in the management of
When dogs? diets are supplemented with GLA, plasma
infammatory skin disease in dogs and cats. Omega-3
levels of dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid increase.75 Simi-
fatty acids included in these supplements are the
larly, when dogs with atopy that had been controlled
PUFAs, EPA (20:5n-3), and DHA (22:6n-3), which are
by feeding a supplement containing omega-3 fatty acids
found in certain types of fish oil. ALA (18:3n-3), found
and GLA were switched to a supplement containing only
in Hax, has also been used. However, the limited ability
olive cil (a poor soufce of both omega-3 and omega-6
of adult animals to convert ALA to long-chain PUFAs
fatty acids), plasma levels of dihomo-gamma-linolenic
for incorporation into cell membranes suggests that this
acid subsequently decreased.76 A return of clinical
omega-3 fatty acid has less value as a supplement for
signs in these dogs paralleled the reduction in dihomc-
affecting the production of infammatory mediators. In
 gamma-linolenic acid. As stated previously, it has been
addition to omega-3 fatty acids, the omega-6 fatty acid
theorized that one factor that may contribute to atopic
LA is needed for normal epidermal lipid barrier func-
dlisease in some dogs is low activity of the enzyme delta-
tion. Therefore supplementation with LA may result in
6-desaturase, the rate-limiting step for conversion of
reduced transepidermal water loss.33
LA to GLA.77 Providing GLA to this subpopulation of
A second, less common omega-6 fatty acid that
PIoe Auney Jo dans siul ssedkq on paioadxa aq Pinom ssop
has been studied for its antinfammatory effects is
metabolism and provide substrate for the production of
GLA. Once consumed, GLA is readily converted to
the monoenoic prostaglandins. Howevef, not all studies
dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid in the liver, where it
have shown a beneft of providing GLA to pruritic dogs.
is then further metabolized to either the monoenoic
 A study compating pruritic and healthy dogs found that
prostaglandins and thromboxanes or to AA (Figure
the unmedicated dogs with signs of atopy naturally had
31-5). The more active pathway is toward the pro-
higher concentrations of dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid
duction of the monoenoic prostaglandins (PGE,)
 in subcutaneous fat when compared with levels in the
because the rate-limiting delta-5-desaturase step for
AA production is quite slow in animals.4l Like the
dogs with atopy may have an abnormality in dihomo-
eicosanoids that are produced from EPA, PGE, is less
 gamma-linolenic metabolism caused by a deficiency
infammatory than the dienoic prostaglandins that are
in
delta-5-desaturase. Together these studies suggest
produced from AA. Therefore it is expected that pro-
that there may be several underlying causes and infu-
viding supplemental GLA will promote the formation
encing factors that contribute to atopy in dogs. While
some atopic animals show abnormal fat absorption and
n-6 Series
clearance, others may have defciencies of delta-6- and/
of delta-5-desaturase activities, and/or, as examined
Linoleic acid
more recently, impairments that affect the epidermal
Delta-b-desaturase
barrier.
[rate-limiting enzyme)
 Using supplementation of pets' regular diets with
Gamma-linolenic acid
omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids to manage the pru-
Adoe yim paneoosse sasuodsai Aioneuureuu pue sn
has met with variable success. A review of five sepa-
Dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid
rate clinical tests of a commercial supplement (DVM
Derm Caps) shows that fatty acid supplementation
was effective in controlling pruritus in 11% to 27% of
dogs with infammatory skin disease.79.83 This supple-
Monoenoic prostaglandins
ment contains EPA, DHA, LA, and GLA. In one study,
(Less inflammatory)
93 dogs with a diagnosis of atopic dermatitis were sup-
Fgure 31-5  Production of gamma-linolenic acid metabolites.
plemented at a dose that provided 15 mg EPA per 9 kg
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses3
393
(20 pounds [lb]) of BW79 One third of the dogs showed
activity of the enzyme delta-6-desaturase (see Section 2,
a good or excellent response to the supplement, and
Pp.81-83).
17 dogs (18%) required no additional therapy. A sec-
While a small number of allergic pets have been
ond study using the same supplement feported that
 shown to require no additional therapy when provided
11% of dogs with atopy, food allergy, or fea-bite allergy
with a dietary fatty acid supplement, most that respond
were adequately controlled by the supplement alone
still require concurrent treatment with antihistamines,
with no other tfeatiment necessary.80 Because these
corticosteroids, or cyclosporine to control pruritus.88,89
studies did not control dogs fegular diets, variability of
Howevel, there is some evidence that fatty acid supple
the background fatty acid intake among dogs fed differ-
mentation can have an additive of synergistic effect
ent commercial foods may have significantly infuenced
when used in combination with systemic antinfamma-
response rate. A more recent study fed 22 atopic dogs
tory medications, particularly corticosteroids.90 A well-
the same balanced homemadle food and aclministered a
 controlled double-blind study of 60 dogs with atopy
daily supplement containing 17 mg/kg BW EPA, 5 mg/
found that that after 2 months of supplementation,
kg BW DHA, and 35 mg/kg BW GLA.84 Supplemen-
dogs fed a fatty acid product containing borage seed oil
tation resulted in an overall omega-6 to omega-3 ratio
and fish cil required lower dosages of prednisolone to
of 5.5:1. The dogs in this study were also divided into
 control signs of pruritus when compared with dogs sup-
two groups: early stage (preimmunotherapy) and late-
 plemented with a placebo.9l After the initial lag period,
stage (nonresponsive to immunotherapy). More than
this beneft continued and became more pronounced
half (53%) of the early-stage dogs responded positively
until the end of the study period at 84 days.
to fatty acid supplementation, compared with only one
Finally, a substantial proportion of dogs and cats
dog from the group of seven dogs that had chronic and
with atopic disease show no response at all to fatty acid
refractory atopy. Interestingly, plasma fatty acid profles
 supplementation. There are several possible reasons for
also differed between the two categories of atopic dogs,
the vatiable responses that have been observed. First,
even though they were fed the same diets and supple-
there are a number of different agents that mediate
-dodqns ieu Aoa aui soddns aur su su
inflammation and pruritus in dogs and cats with allergic
ulations of atopic dogs exist, whose disease is infuenced
 dermatitis. Recent studies support the theory that atopy
by different factors, which in turn could affect clinical
 is not a single disease, but rather a syndrome that may
fesponse to supplementation.
have multiple contributing factors and causes, leading to
There is also evidence that supplementation with a
several population subsets of atopic animals. Therefore
combination of evening primrose oil (a source of GLA)
the manipulation of fatty acids would not be expected
and fish cil (a source of EPA and DHA) is effective in
to work in all individuals. A second factor may involve
the control of infammatory skin disease in some cats.85
 the manner in which fatty acid therapy is administered
When the diets of 14 cats that had a diagnosis of miliary
and the length of time of the test period. As mentioned
dermatosis were supplemented with various combina-
 previously, supplementing a companion animal's diet
tions of evening primrose oil and fish oil, improvements
 with a fatty acid-containing capsule does not account 
in clinical signs were observed in 11 of 14 cats fed a
 for the levels or proportions of fatty acids present in the
combination of 80% evening primrose oil and 20%
regular diet. The exact quantities and ratio of fatty acids
fish oil.86 Supplementation with fish oil alone was not
in the regular diet are often unknown. If the regular diet
effective. A second study with cats found that 40% of
 contains very high levels of omega-6 fatty acids, provid-
cats with nonlesional pruritus and 67% of cats with
ing an omega-3 farty acid supplement may not effec-
eosinophilic granuloma complex responded favorably
tively change the proportion of these types of fatty acids
to dietary supplementation with a product that con-
 present in the tissues. There also appears to be a time
tained EPA, GLA, DHA, saflower oil, natural glycerin,
lag for response that may be as long as 8 to 12 weeks
and vitamin E.87 It has been speculated that cats may
in some animals.?9l A fnal factor, and one that may be
true for diet modification as well, is that other skin fac-
Aey e-eauo yoel on umous uaaq aaey sies ssnesaq
 tors such as bacterial or yeast infections, the degree of
acid activity in the skin and because they have a lower
 erythema and presence of skin lesions, and presence of
394 Canine and Feline Nutrition
otitis externa may all be important contributors to clin-
Clinical studies have examined the effectiveness of
ical signs; their presence or absence may significantly
varying the dietary omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid ratio
infuence an individual animal's degree of response to
in managing infammatory skin disease. In one study,
fatty acid supplementation.92
31 pruritic dogs were fed a veterinary-exclusive com-
mercial food containing an adjusted fatty acid ratio
of 5:1 for a period of 8 weeks.95 All of the dogs had
been diagnosed with atopy, adverse feactions to food,
fatty acids and certain omega-6fatty acids(gamma
of a combination of these two conditions. Twenty-eight
dogs completed the trial, and 14 dogs (45%) showed
ful in controling pruritus and other signs of atopy in
a good-to-excellent response to the therapeutic food.
some dogs and cats. Aithough α complete amelioration
Another feeding trial was conducted with 18 non-food-
of signs is not usually seen,fatty acid suppierentation
allergic, atopic dogs fed a lamb-and-rice diet containing
may compiementother therapies and allow reduced
an omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid ratio of 5.3:1 .96 The
dosages of antiinfammatory medications. Stil,because
dogs? clinical responses were evaluated by both a veteri-
the effects of suppiementation depend upon thefatty
narian and the owner. In this study, 44% of the dogs
acid levels in the pet's normal diet and because many
(8 of 18) had a good or excellent fesponse to the test
diet within 7 to 21 days of feeding. Upon refeeding
animais respond to fatty acid supplementation.
the original diet, all showed a return of clinical signs.
Pruritus was again alleviated by reintroduction of the
test diet in all eight dogs. An important result of this
study was the positive response in dogs that had previ-
Diet Modification
ously been unresponsive to a dietary fatty acid supple-
sheueu on siaal pie Aney Aieiap Suou uau
 ment containing omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids. Of
infammatory disease, the goal is to supply optimal
11 dogs that had been previously treated unsuccessfully
amounts of LA to meet a dog's essential dietary require-
with the supplement, 7 (65%) had a good or excellent
 ment and at the same time produce a potentially less
response to the test diet.
infammatory fatty acid metabolic profle. Using a
A double-blind study compared three commercial
dietary approach in which the quantity and the ratio of
dog foods that were formulated specifcally to control
omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids are controlled may be
 signs of infammatory skin disease in dogs.97 A group
an effective means of altering tissue eicosanoid profles
 of 50 dogs with atopic dermatitis were randomly
and reducing pruritus in some allergic pets. For exam-
 assigned to one of the three therapeutic foods or to the
ple, results of an experiment with healthy adult dogs
control diet, a commercial adult maintenance food.
showed that feeding a food that contained an omega-6
Dogs were fed their assigned food for 12 weeks. Aftef
to omega-3 ratio between 5:1 and 10:1 led to changes in
8 weeks of feeding, dogs fed twe of the three therapeu-
skin leukotriene concentrations that afe considered to
tic foods showed a signifcant reduction in pruritus.
be clinically significant.52 Omega-3 fatty acid-enriched
Dogs fed the control food also showed some improve-
diets have also been shown to modify the biochemical
ment in overall severity of atopy. One of the thera-
components of the infammatory stage of wound heal-
peutic foods also signifcantly improved coat lustef.
ing in the skin of dogs.3 Specifically the concentra-
This food contained the highest levels of LA and ALA,
tion of antinfammatory fatty acids and eicosanoids
which corroborates other evidence that LA contributes
in 4-day-old skin wounds increased, and the concen-
positively to coat shine and luster.3 All three of the
ttation of proinfammatory fatty acids and eicosanoids
therapeutic foods used in this study had omega-6 to
decreased as the proportion of omega-3 fartty acids in
 omega-3 fatty acid ratios of between 3:1 and 5:1, while
the diet increased. The omega-3 farty acid concentra-
the control food had a ratio of 14:1. Although other
tions that were fed in these studies did not negatively
dietary factors also changed from the dogs' regular
impact platelet reactivity, coagulation assays, fbrinogen
diets (i.e., protein source, digestibility), these data sup-
concentration, or antithrombin Ill activity.94
 port the use of modlifed fatty acid profles to manage
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses 
395
atopy in dogs. The authors of this study also noted
dose of omega-3 fatty acids, even when high levels are
that the production of less infammatory leukotrienes
supplemented.
may not have been the only (or most crucial) mecha-
A feview of several therapeutic foods commonly
nism of action of the omega-3 fatty acids included in
fecommended for pets with skin or gastrointestinal
these foods. There is recent evidence that increasing a
infammation found that the omega-3 fatty acid con-
diet's PUFAs may also exert an effect by improving the
centration typically provided between 0.6% and 2%
skin's epidermal barrier, and may positively affect the
of the daily energy intake, with one food containing
immune system by regulating signal transduction or
 as high as 4%.40 It was suggested that a daily dietary
ttanscription.98,9 Therefore some of the response that
 omega-3 intake of between 2% and 4% of energy effec-
was seen may have been due to increasing the total
tively increases membrane and plasma omega-3 con-
amount of PUFA in the food, as opposed to an effect
centrations. Likewise, a reasonable starting dose for a
of omega-3 fatty acids alone.
fatty acid supplement is one that supplies 175 mg of
total omega-3 fatty acids per kg of BW per day (EPA
+DHA). This recommended dose is substantially higher
Recommended Doses and Ratios
than those recommended on the labels of most com-
Several studies have shown that allergic pruritus is not
mercial fatty acid supplements.
effectively controlled in most dogs using the recom-
As discussed previously, the ratic of dietary omega-6
 mended doses of omega-3 fatty acid supplements.100
to omega-3 fatty acids may be as important as the total
Other studies have reported that 2 to 10 times the rec-
amount of omega-3 fatty acids. The easiest and most
effective way to modulate this ratio is by incorporat-
results in pruritic dogs.76,77 High doses of supplements 
ing it directly into the pet's normal diet. Based on cur-
increase the fisk of causing an imbalanced fatty acid
rent studies, a fatio between 5:1 and 10:1 seems to
ratio in the diet and can become cost-prohibitive for
be the most effective in altering tissue lipid and eico-
some clients. Fatty acid supplements have also been
 sanoid concentrations and medifying the infammatory
associated with undesirable side effects such as leth-
response. However, evidence suggests that reducing
argy, vomiting,
diarrhea, and urticaria in some dogs
the ratio to as low as 3:1 may be even more effective.97
 The omega-6 fatty acid content should meet the EFA
fatty acids is oversupplementation, which may
lead
fequirements of dogs and cats, but it should not exceed
to decreased platelet aggregation and increased blood
4% of the metabolizable energy (ME) calories. Several
clotting time.
additional benefts of a total dietary approach include
Documentation of appropriate doses of supple-
improved client compliance, achievement of a specif-
ments and ratios of fatty acids to include in pet foods
cally targeted omega-6 to omega-3 ratio, and safety (no
is lacking and an exact effective dose range has not
danger of oversupplementation).
been identified. Experimental data show that changes
in skin concentrations of fatty acids afe maximized
after 3 to 12 weeks of supplementation or feeding a
Another approach to managing atopic disease in dogs
new diet and refect dietary concentrations.6 How-
and cats is a dietary approach in which both the quan
ever, great variability is seen with the type and ratio
of fatty acids that are used. One problem is that there
are currently no canine or feline recommended daily
urated fatty acids (PUFAs) and providing omega-6 to
allowances for omega-3 fatty acids. The Association of
omega-3fatty acid ratios between 3:1 and 70:1 are most
American Feed Control Officials' (AAFCOs) LA min-
effective. increasing omega-3 fatty acids and overall
imum requirement is 1% dry matter (DM) for dogs
long-chain PUFAs in the food may effectively decrease
and 0.5% for cats. In many commercial pet foods,
the production of proinfammatory agents, improve
omega-6 fatty acids contribute more than 4% of the
epidermal barrierfunction,andpositively infuence the
food's energy. It is therefore possible that excessive
immure response
levels of omega-6 fatty acids may obfuscate an effective
396 Canine and Feline Nutrition
TABLE 31-3 CAUSES OF ADVERSEFOOD
food reaction" is currently recommended instead of the
REACTIONS IN DOGS AND CATS
CLASSIFICATION
MECHANISM
Description and Incidence
 Food
Immune-mediated adverse
hy persensitivity
reaction to a food component
It is estimated that adverse food reactions account fof
Food intolerance
 Nonimmunological adverse
between 1% and 5% of all dermatoses, and between 10%
rea ction of a metabolic, idiosyn-
and 15% of infammatory dermatoses that are diagnosed
cratic, toxic, or pharmacological
in dogs and cats.104,105 A recent study using data from
nature to a food component
Metabolic adverse
Abnormal metabolic response to
a referral veterinary practice reported that adverse food
reaction
a food component, usually due to
feactions were responsible for 20% to 35% of nonsea-
an inborn error of metabolism
sonal dermatitis cases in dogs.l06 There is evidence that
Food idiosyncrasy
Abnormal response to a
dogs with adverse food reactions have an increased likeli-
food substance; resembles a
hy persensitivity response but does
not have an immunological basis
of these two disorders may explain some of the positive
Food toxicity
Adverse reaction to a
(poisoning)
contaminating organism or toxin
pp.390-391).
 present in a food 
Adverse reactions to food can develop at any age.
Pharmacological
Due to pharmacological
Unlike atopic disease and fea-bite dermatitis, which
reaction
or druglike effect of a food
component (e.g., histamine in
often take several years to dlevelop, signs of an adlverse
poorly preserved fish)
food reaction often frst occur in pets that are less than
1 year old. In two reports, 19% and 33% of dogs devel-
oped initial clinical signs when they were less than
Another study of 25 dogs diagnosed
CUTANEOUS ADVERSE FOOD
with food allergy found that more than 50% were less
REACTIONS
that
adverse reactions to food should
Dogs and cats can have adverse feactions to dietary
always be considered when an immature pet exhibits a
ingredients for a number of reasons (Table 31-3). Those
nonseasonal and persistent dermatitis.
that manifest as infammatory dermatologic disease are
The onset of adverse food reactions can be seen at
collectively termed cutaneous adverse food reactions.102
 any time of the yeat and are not typically associated with
These include both immune-mediated and
1non-
immune-mediated reactions. Dietary (or food) hyper-
had been fed the offending pet food for 2 years or more
sensitivity is an immune-mediated response to one of
before clinical signs developed.110 No significant sex
more components in the diet. The majority of food
 of age predilections have been observed. Although the
-uasiadaq I-adk paieipau-gol ue ane sanianisuasiaday
 presence of a genetic component has not been proven,
sitivity, involving mast cell degranulation (see p. 397).
-Ia5) ‘ssop paiqaind Suoue ieul puy pip Apnis auo
A food intolerance refers to an abnormal physiologic
 man Shepherd Dogs and Golden Retrievers appeared
fesponse to a food ingredient that is not immune-
to be overrepresented when compared with a general
mediated. Food intolerances include problems such as
a lack of the intestinal enzyme lactase, food toxicities,
 hot significant but suggests the possibility of a genetic
and pharmacological reactions to dietary ingredients.
 predilection in these breeds. Other breeds that may be
Because a clinical distinction is rarely made between
at increased tisk include the Soft-Coated Wheaton Ter-
adverse food reactions that are immune mediated and
fier, Dalmatian, West Highland White Terrier, Collie,
Chinese Shar-Pei, Lhasa Apso, Cocker Spaniel, English
each type of dermatological reaction in the pet popula-
 Springer Spaniel, Miniature Schnauzer, and Labrador
tion is not known, the more inclusive term of “adverse
Retriever.l11
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses 
397
intact across the intestinal mucosa and so are unlikely to
Dogs and cats can have adverse reactions to dietary
become food allergens. In dogs and cats, beef, soy, and
ingredients that inciude both immune-mediated
dairy products are the most common food allergens.!15
and non-immune-mediated reactions. Adverse food
Other dietary ingredients to which dogs and cats
reations are nonseasonat,show no sex orage predilec-
develop adverse reactions include wheat, pork, chicken,
tion, and do not have a clear genetic cause (aithough
corn, horse meat, egg, and fsh. It appears that these
certain dog breeds may have increased susceptibility)
ingredients ate common allergens because they are often
A pet may aiso deveiop an adverse food reaction to a
used in pet foods, thus increasing the likelihood of
food that has been fed regularly formonths or years.
exposure, as opposed to any characteristics that confer
In most cases, adverse food reactions manifest as der-
unique antigenicity.116
matological problems,with the most common sign an
There is some evidence that the processing proce-
intense pruritus.
dures used to produce commercial pet foods may infu-
This provides one explanation for the observation that
some allergic pets tolerate homemadle dliets but develop
Etiology
 an allergic response to commercial foods that contain
In cases of immune-mediated adverse food reaction, the
underlying immunological mechanisms afe cnly partly
in the 3-dimensional structure of proteins, which can
understood. The disorder is currently considered to be
destroy some epitopes (antigenic determinants) of
the result of type-I and/or type-IIl immediate hyper-
simultaneously expose others.1l8 In addition, heat-
sensitivity responses. A type-I response is responsible
processing can cause Maillard reactions. Some of the
for the severe pruritus that is seen after ingesting the
byproducts of the Maillard reaction (melanoidins) may
offending dietary antigen. A type-Ill response, on the
be more allergenic than the uncooked version of the con-
other hand, is thought to be responsible for the acute
intestinal signs (diarrhea) that are seen in a small num-
fed two protein sources (soy and casein) that were either
ber of animals.112 Delayed (type-IV) hypersensitivities,
unprocessed and in an aqueous suspension or heat-
-ae o saep i iv ozt'uoe pauues e oiu passanoid
offending antigen, may also be involved.
ing, both forms of dietary protein stimulated an increase
Food antigens are generally proteins, glycoproteins,
 in serum IgG but the degree of response was affected by
-unod are suaiid poog Ie ysnoury 'suaioidod! 10
protein source. Cooked soy protein produced a lower
tially antigenic (i.e., foreign to the body), the capacity
IgG response than did unprocessed soy sugesting that,
of a given protein to induce an allergic reaction is infu-
in the case of soy protein, cooking caused a reduction
enced by the permeability of the intestinal mucosa to
in the protein's antigenicity. Conversely, the serum IgG
the protein and the protein's capacity to stimulate IgE
response to casein was not affected by processing. How-
production and eventually histamine release from mast
ever, cooked casein (but not soy) caused a significant
cells.l13 Mast cell degranulation requires cross-linking
increase in salivary IgG levels. The authors interpreted
between the allergen and two or more IgE molecules
this to suggest that cooking increased the immunoge-
that are bound to IgE receptors present on sensitized
nicity of this protein source, although no adlverse reac-
mast cell membranes. This condition places a minimum
tions were observed in any of the cats during the study.
size limit on molecules that are capable of causing an
Animals may react to a single or multiple ingredi-
IgE-mediated reaction. The majority of allergens that
ents or nutrients in food, although there are confict-
have been identified in dogs and cats are proteins of
ing reports regarding the frequency at which multiple
large molecular weight, between 40 and 70 kilodaltons
 sensitivities afe observed in dogs and cats. While some
(kD).ll4 However, it is possible that smaller protein
 researchers have reported fnding many instances of
molecules may act as haptens, allowing a much smaller
 multiple hypersensitivities, others report that these are
protein molecule to be allergenic. Protein molecules
im suaisisuos suis ym sop sjo Apns y izto'ai 
that are larger than 70 kD are less likely to be absorbed
food hypersensitivity reported that the mean number
398 Canine and Feline Nutrition
of allergens per dog was 2.4, and 64% of the dogs
approximately 40% of reported cases, and secondary
bacterial infections are seen in about 20% of cases.124
when challenged.15 In addition, a study found that dogs
Other secondary changes may include chronic infam-
with diagnosed adverse food reactions had circulating
 mation, crusting, seborrhea, and hyperpigmentation.
IgE antibodies against bovine IgG, a protein found in
Persistent otitis externa, with or without infection,
cow's milk. These IgE molecules cross-reacted to beef
is often seen in both dogs and cats, and in some cases
and lamb proteins, suggesting that cross-reactivity may
it is the only presenting sign. A small number of cases
be the mechanism underlying some multiple hyper-
have also been reported that showed only a fecurrent
sensitivities.114 Regardless of the underlying cause, these
pyoderma that is not associated with pruritus. The pyo-
results indicate that multiple hypersensitivities should
derma subsided with antibacterial therapy but contin-
always be considered when diagnosing
g and treating
ued to fecuf until the diet was changed. Skin disease
adverse food reactions in dlogs and cats.
caused by an adverse food reaction is usually nonsea-
It has been proposed that early weaning of puppies
 sonal. However, if multiple sensitivities are present (e.g--
or kittens may predispose some pets to the development
adverse food reaction plus atopy or fea-bite allergy),
of food allergies later in life.1l2 In healthy animals, the
the adverse food reaction may not manifest clinically
small intestine possesses a protective barfier that limits
the absorption of macromolecules. In young puppies
Of cat reaches its pruritic threshold. This situation
and kittens, this protective barrier is not completely
aineu u [euoseas aq on eadde on suis au asnes ues
functional. When foreign food proteins are introduced
(Table 31-4).117,124
to the immature gut, some may pass across the intesti-
Although not common, gastrointestinal signs may
 nal barrier, penetrate the lymphoid tissue, and trigger
accompany the dermatological signs of adlverse food
 an immunological response and loss of oral tolerance.122
teaction. Reportedly, German Shepherd Dogs, Chinese
Disease states that disrupt the small intestine's immu-
Shar-Peis, and Irish Setters with adverse food reaction
nological barrier may have a similar effect. This theory
have an increased likelihood of showing gastrointestinal
may explain the early onset of food allergies in some
symptoms.122 Diarthea and, less frequently, vomit-
 pets. Further research is needled to determine the exact
ing are the most common forms of gastrointestinal
role that early weaning or the disruption of the intes-
signs. Some dogs show pruritus and skin changes and
tine's protective barrier may play in the development of
increased frequency of defecations per day (four of
ad verse food reactions.
more).12l Diarrhea that is associated with adverse food
reactions is often chronic and intermittent.
Clinical Signs
The most common dermatological sign of adverse food
TABLE 31-4 SIGNS OF ADVERSE FOOD
feaction in dogs and cats is an intense pruritus.123 Ini-
REACTIONS IN DOGS AND CATS
tially, this usually occurs between 4 and 24 hours after
DOGs
CATS
ingesting the offending antigen. Over time, chronic
cases show constant pruritus with no evident association
Intense pruritus (on the feet,
Intense pruritus (on
axillae, and inguinal area)
the head and neck)
between eating and an exacerbation of signs. The onset
Self-induced skin trauma
 Self-induced trauma
of pruritus is not accompanied by other skin changes.
Chronic inflammation of skin
Ulcerative dermatitis
However, the dog's intense scratching, biting, and self-
Papular eruptions
Miliary dermatitis
trauma quickly lead to secondary lesions. In dogs, areas
Hair loss
Hair loss
of the body most often affected afe the feet, axillae, and
 Hy per pigmentation/scaling
Cutaneous hyperes-
thesia
around the head, neck, and ears. In severe cases in both
Otitis externa
Seborrhea
species, generalized pruritus over the entire body is
Secondary bacterial infections
Vomiting/diarrhea
seen. Excessive scfatching and licking leads to hair loss
(e.g.,recurrent pyoderma)
and reddening of the skin. Papular eruptions occur in
Vomiting/diarrhea
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses3
399
used ingredients in commercial dog and cat foods
Diagnosis and Treatment
include chicken, beef, lamb, fish, egg, soy, milk, con,
Diagnosis of adlverse food reaction involves first ruling
fice, and wheat. Other protein-containing ingredients
out other potential causes of the allergic dermatosis.
that are less common but included in some products
These causes include atopy, fea-bite dermatitis, and
include turkey, venison, rabbit, oat, kelp, barley, fax,
drug hypersensitivities. Obtaining a full diet history is
alfalfa, and potatoes. The wide range of ingredients
essential and is needed for all phases of the diagnostic
found in commercial pet foods today makes it increas-
 and management program. When adverse food reaction
ingly difficult to compose a suitable elimination diet for
is suspected, the standard method of diagnosis includes 
 many pets and emphasizes the importance of includ-
three phases: (1) a food trial that involves feeding a
ing a complete diet history during the initial diagnostic
food that contains novel ingredients (called an elimina-
workup. Today, three types of elimination diet can be
tion diet) and demonstrating an amelioration of clinical
used; a homemade diet, a commercial limited-ingredient
signs, (2) rechallenging the pet with the original diet
food, or a commercial hydrolyzed-protein food.
and observing a return of clinical signs, and (3) a provo-
cation testfeeding selected ingredients to identify the
HOMEMADE DIET
A homemade pet food is
specifc offending dietary antigens (Box 31-1). Gener-
 often recommended for the elimination phase of diag-
ally, intradlermal skin testing and serological testing
nosis because some pets with adverse food reaction will
have been shown to be unreliable in diagnosing food
 still react to commercial diets and because few nonpre-
hypersensitivities in dogs and cats.115,125,126
scription commercial pet foods contain only one caf-
An elimination diet contains a single protein source
bohydrate and one protein soufce. For example, 20%
and a single carbohydrate source to which the pet has
of dogs that were asymptomatic when fed a homemade
not previously been exposed. In most cases, this means 
diet of lamb and rice became pruritic again when fed
selecting a food that contains ingredients not typically
a commercial preparation containing the same ingre-
included in commercial pet foods. The most commonly
dients.108 Another controlled study showed that 16%
of dogs with diagnosed food hypersensitivity devel-
oped allergic reactions to a commercial food that was
BOX 31-1 THREE PHASES OF FOOD
manufactured as an elimination diet for the diagnosis
HYPERSENSITIVITY DIAGNOSIS
that the processing of some commercial pet foods may
1. Feeding the elimination diet. The food should con-
enhance the antigenicity of certain food components. It
sist of a single protein and a single carbohydrate
is thought that the inclusion of poor-quality ingredients
source to which the animal has not been previously
that ate partially resistant to heat treatment or dligestion
exposed. The diet should be introduced gradually
over a 4-day period. Im provement in clinical signs is
may also increase the antigenicity of proteins in some
usually observed within 3 weeks but may take up to
economic brands of food. If a homemade elimination
10 weeks
diet is used, common protein sources are lamb (if the
2.
 Feeding a challenge diet to confirm. The pet's origi-
pet has not been previously exposedl), rabbit, venison,
nal food or a food that is known to cause an allergic
Of tofu. Potential carbohydrates includle rice (if not pre-
reaction in the animal should be fed. If pruritus
Z:1 Jo oei e 'sop 1og sooieod 1o (pasodxa Aisno
occurs within 4 hours to 14 days, a diagnosis of
to 1:4 parts protein source to carbohydrate source can
food hypersensitivity is confirmed.
be used. In cats, baby food composed of a single (or
3. Identifying the offending dietary ingredients. One
suspected offending ingredient should be added to
limited) protein and carbohydrate source is often used
the elimination diet. The animal should be moni-
successfully.
tored for signs of allergic response. This process
An advantage of using a homemade elimination diet
should be repeated for all suspected ingredients.
is that the food can be easily formulated in response
aq o Aasll ssow ae saiaui poo iad uowwo
the cause of food hypersensitivity (e.g., beef, soy,
to the patient's diet history and, if needed, modified to
 meet individual needs. Many pet owhers also appreciate
chicken, egg, dairy, wheat, corn).
having some control over the diagnostic and treatment
400 Canine and Feline Nutrition
siad iiaun oi ainquos oi aqe suiaq Aofua pue ssaoond
reduces the size (molecular weight) of the protein,
thereby reducing or completely eliminating its antige-
time consuming and can be expensive, depending on
nicity.129 Products vary in the source of protein and the
the type of ingredients that are used and the size of the
degree of hydrolysis and reduction in protein size that
dog. Owner compliance may also be low when a home-
results.130 Soy, chicken, casein, and liver protein are
 a d a a  si i a
most commonly used as source proteins in these prod-
diagnosis. For example, a research study that mandated
ucts. 131 Although not all hydrolyzed proteins have been
owhers to use a homemade food for initial diagno-
tested, one study showed that 11 out of 14 dogs with
sis of food allergy feported a drop-out fate of almost
confrmed adverse reactions to soy protein and corn
40% due to owner noncompliance.127 Last, with few
showed no signs of adverse feaction to a food contain-
exceptions, homemade foods used as elimination diets
are not nutritionally balanced, and so cannot be fed for
have reported that the efficacy of hydrolyzed protein
more than the period of time required for diagnosis. Fof
foods did not significantly dliffer from that of a home
examnple, a survey study that examined the homemade
made food when used as elimination diets to diagno-
diet recipes prescribed by veterinarians as elimination
diets reported that the vast majority (>90%) were nutri-
tionally inadequate.128
Therefore, once a diagnosis is
made, another diet change is needed, which increases
as of gfeater
than
 completion fates feported in stud-
ies that used a homemade elimination diet. However,
erly identified through provocation (see pp. 401-402).
because some hydrolyzed proteins may still be aller-
genic, a product that includes a protein source that the
COMMERCIAL
LIMITED-INGREDIENT
patient is known of suspected to be sensitized to should
FOOD
A vafiety of commercial limited-ingredient
be avoided if possible. S
Similar to limited-ingredient
(also called limited-antigen) foods are available for dogs
and cats. Most of these contain a single protein and sin-
gle carbohydrate source. These foods are formulated to
for long-term feeding of dogs and cats with confrmed
be nutritionally complete and balanced and afe adver-
adverse food teactions.
tised as appropriate for both the diagnostic phase and for
Limitations of hydrolyzed protein diets include the
long-term feedling for dogs and cats with acdverse food
feactions. However, owhers and
veterinarians should
has an adverse reaction to the food), acceptability t0
be awafe that not all of these products have been thor-
cughly tested as elimination diets and so may hot be
acids produced from protein hydrolysis have a variety
suitable for use in diagnosis. In addition, a vatiety of
of favors, ranging from sweet to extfreme bitterness.
protein sources are used in different products, which
These can subsequently affect the palatability of the
warrants careful selection using the pet's diet history as a
formulated food. Bitter favors are caused in part by
guide. For example, 50% of dogs diagnosed with adlverse
the hydrophobicity
(water-insoluble) components of
food reactions relapsed when fed a limited-ingredient
the protein and the degree to which these are exposed
Limited-
during hydrolysis. Conversely, some protein hydroly-
ingredient products are most often used in the diagnos-
sates contain peptides and amino acids that are highly
 tic phase when owners are not able or willing to prepate
palatable to dogs and cats and which, in fact, have
 a homemade elimination diet, when the dog is so large
been used for many
years as diet palatability enhancers.
as to make a homemade food cost prohibitive, or when
Although studies have reported acceptability problems
anl animal does not tolerate of accept a homemade food.
in up 10% of dogs fed protein hydrolysate diets, some
COMMERCLAL F
HYDROLYZED
PROTEIN
DIET
These foods are based upon the theory that
Finally, the fequired extfa processing and use of puri-
reducing pro tein size via enzymatic hydrolysis effectively
fed carbohydrate sources (for example, corn starch)
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses
401
in these foods incur significantly higher costs to the
RECHALLENGE
WITH ORIGINAL
DIET
manufacturer, which are then passed along to the con-
A conclusive diagnosis can only be made if the pet's for-
sumer. In general, hydrolyzed protein diets cost sub-
 mer diet is reintroduced as a challenge diet and the pre-
stantially more than limited-ingredient products, which
vious clinical signs again develop. Pets with an adverse
may make the expense of using them for diagnosis cost
food reaction will usually show pruritus within 4 hours
prohibitive for some pet owners.
to 3 days of refeeding their original food. When
the dog or cat has been fed the elimination food for
FEEDING THE ELIMINATION DIET ‘
The pet's
4 weeks or more, the response may be dlelayed for up to
diet should be gradually changed to the selected food
over a period of 3 to 4 days. The elimination diet should
duct this portion of the diagnostic program, especially if
then be fed exclusively, with no additional treats of
they have seen a dramatic improvement. However, the
table scraps. In addition, all chew toys that afe made
challenge test is important to rule out a placebo effect
of animal products must be removed, and chewable
of the elimination diet and to confirm (or negate) an
vitamins or heartworm medication must be replaced
adverse food reaction as the underlying cause of the pet's
with pure forms of medication. Some dogs and cats will
symptoms.
show irmprovement within a few weeks after eating the
elimination diet, while others may not begin to show
PROVOCATION TEST The final phase of diag-
signs for 6 to 10 weeks. A study of 51 dogs with a foed
nosis, identification of specific antigens, is accomplished
allergy reported that only 25% responded to an elimi-
by adding single food items to the elimination diet and
nation diet after 3 weeks of feeding, but more than 90%
assessing for a return of clinical signs. Because beef, soy.
and dairy products account for many of the adverse
teduction of pruritus and skin disease is accepted as
food reactions in dogs and cats, these ingredients should
Au siad suos cg dinisuasaday Aeap ioy snsou
be tested first. It is generally accepted that only a very
have a dietary hypersensitivity occurring concomitantly
small amount of allergen is necessary to evoke a hyper-
with other pruritic dermatoses, such as fea-bite allergy
sensitivity response.136 Adding powdered milk at a level
 Of atopy. When this occurs, feeding an elimination diet
of 12 to 2 tablespoons (tbsp) per meal provides exposure
often causes a decrease in pruritus and skin disease but
to the antigens found in dairy products.137 If no return
does not result in the complete resolution of signs. If
of signs is seen after 10 to 14 days, the next ingredient
pruritus is not diminished during the elimination
 Can be tested. Food items that are readlily available to pet
phase, then either food allergy is not the diagnosis or
owners can be easily tested. Cooked beef, wheat four,
the elimination diet being used still contains an ingredi-
and soy meal can each be tested by adding 1l2 to 2 tbsp
ent to which the pet is allergic.
 per meal. Only one new substance should be added and
tested at a time, and if a food causes an allergic reac-
tion, the elimination diet should be fed until all signs
An elimination diet contains a single protein source
afe resolved before proceeding to another item. If no
and a single carbohydrate source to which the pet has
clinical signs are observed within 14 days of adding a
not previousty been exposed. For most pets, this means
 oi e iou Aqid s nad a i is
selecting a food that contains ingredients not typically
food. Because a substantial number of animals afe aller-
inciuded in commercial pet foods. Three types of elimi
gic to more than one food component, testing should
nation diet can be used; a homemade diet, a commer
include as many common pet food proteins as possible.
cial limited-ingredientfood,oracommercialhydrotyzed
The identification phase of diagnosis can be very
protein food. The pet's food should be gradually changed
tedious and time-consuming for many pet owners. In
addition, some owners afe feluctant to fisk the fecur-
elimination diet shouid then be fed exciusively for 6 to
rence of clinical signs in their pet. After completing
10 weeks, while the pet is monitored for a change in
the elimination and challenge phases and arriving at
clinical signs.
a diagnosis of food allergy some pet owners choose to
simply fnd a balanced and complete food that their pet
402Canine and Feline Nutrition
tolerates without attempting to identify the specific
Although homemade diets may be used safely for the
 ingredients to which the pet reacts. Simply changing to
elimination phase of diagnosis, these are not recom-
a hew, commercial pet food is rarely effective because
 mended for long-term maintenance because they are
most commercial foods contain similar ingredients. A
expensive and inconvenient and may not be complete
food that contains a single protein and carbohydrate
 and balanced. Commercial products offer economy and
soufce to which the pet has hot been exposed and that
convenience, and unlike most homemadle diets, they are
is not expected to cause a feaction should be selected.
guaranteed to be nutritionally complete and balanced.
Feeding the elimination diet as a long-term mainte-
Some pets with diagnosed adverse food reactions even-
nance diet is acceptable if this diet has been determined
tually develop additional sensitivities to ingredients in the
to be complete and balanced.
new diet.124 In these cases, the identification phase must
be repeated, and another suitable diet must be found. Sim-
ilarly, it is possible for the original sensitivity to become
A conciusive diagnosis ofadverse food reaction can oniy
diminished and allow the pet to once again consume a
be made jf the pet's former diet is reintroduced as a
dliet containing that ingredient. Because adverse food reac-
challenge diet and clinical signs (pruritus) again develop.
tions do not always respond to corticosteroid therapy and
The fnal phase of diagnosis, identifcation of specifc
because of the long-term sicle effects of corticosteroids,
antigens, is accomplished by adding single food items to
emphasis is placed on strict adherence to dietary man-
the elimination diet and assessing for a return ofclinical
agement rather than on drug therapy. Any small dlietary
signs. However, because many pet owners are reluctant
indiscretion on the part of the owher or the pet does not
to risk the recurrence of signs in their pet, some opt to
cause direct harm but may lead to damage from pruritus
not complete α provocation test. Feeding the elimination
and self-induced trauma. In some cases, repeated failures
diet as a long-term maintenance diet is acceptable jfthis
to adhere to the new diet decrease the chance of obtain-
diet has been determined to be compiete and baianced
ing relief when fed an elimination dliet. It is therefore very
important that pet owhers afe aware of the heed for strict
compliance in ordler to control clinical signs.
Long-Term Management
The lifetime nutritional management of pets with
Long-term nutritional management of pets with adverse
adverse food reactions requires feeding a food that is
food reactions requires feeding a food that is palatable,
palatable, complete, and balanced, and that does not
compiete,and balanced,and that does not contain any
contain the offending antigen or antigens. The pro-
offending food antigens. No other foods can be fed.
tein included in the diet should be of high quality and
The protein inciuded in the diet should be of very high
highly digestible. Poorly digested proteins are more
quality and highiy digestible, and including a reduced
likely to retain their inherent antigenicity during heat
processing of the product. In addition, incomplete
infammation and pruritus. Because ary small dietary
digestion within the gastrointestinal tract may result in
indiscretion on the part ofthe owner or the pet can lead
increased antigenicity in some pocr-quality proteins.
to relapse, pet owners must understand the need for
The inclusion of a reduced omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid
strict compliance in order to control clinical signs.
ratio may also help manage infammation and pruritus.
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses403
References
1. Kirk RW: Nutrition and the integument, / Small Anim Pract 32:283-288, 1991.
2. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr, Griffin CE: Allergic skin disease in dogs and cats. In Scott DW, Miller WT Jr, Griffin CE, editors:
Muller and Kirks small animal dermatology, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2001, Saunders.
3. Terpstra AHM, West CE, Fennis JTCM: Hypocholesterolemic effect of dietary soy protein versus casein in rhesus monkeys,
Am / Chin Nutr 39:1-7, 1984.
4. Bauer JE, Covert SJ: The infuence of protein and carbohydrate type on serum and liver lipids and lipoprotein cholesterol in
rabbits, Lipids 19:844-850, 1984.
5.White SD,Rosychuk RAW, Scott KV, and others: Efects of various proteins in the diet on fatty acid concentrations in the skin,
Frazer Press.
concentrations in the serum and skin of dogs, Am / Vet Res 56:1465-1469, 1995.
7. Fadok VA: Treatment of canine idiopathic seborrhea with isotretionin, Am / Vet Res 47:1730-1733, 1986.
8. Strauss JS, Stranieri AM: Changes in long-term sebum production from isotretionin therapy, J Am Acad Dermatol 6:751-755,
1982.
9. Scott DW: Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis in the Cocker Spaniel, J Am Anim Hos Asoc 22:125-129, 1986.
10. lhrke P], Goldschmidt MH: Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis in the dog, / Am Vet Med Asoc 182:687-690, 1983.
11. Power HT, Ihrke PJ, Stannard AA, and others: Use of etretinate for treatment of primary keratinization disorders (idiopathic
seborrhea) in Cocker Spaniels, West Highland White Terriers, and Basset Hounds, / Am Vet Med Assoc 201:419429, 1992.
12. Parker W, Yager-Johnson JA, Hardy MH: Vitamin A responsive seborrheic dermatosis in the dog: a case report, J Am Anim Hosp
Asoc 19:548-554, 1983.
13. Cho DY, Frey RA, Guffy MM, and others: Hypervitaminosis A in the dog, Am J Vet Res 36:1597-1603, 1975.
14. Cline JL, Czarnecki-Maulden CL, Losonsky JM, and others: Effect of increasing dietary vitamin A on bone density in adult dogs,
Anim Sci 75:2980-2985, 1997.
15. Stewart LJ, White SD, Carpenter JL: lsotretinoin in the treatment of sebaceous adenitis in two Vizslas, J Am Axim Hosp Assoc
27:65-71, 1991,
17. Rosser EJ Jr, Dunston RW, Breen PT, and others: Sebaceous adenitis with hyperkeratosis in the Standard Poodle: a discussion of
10 cases, / Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:341-345, 1986.
18. White SD, Rosychuk AS, Scott KV, and others: Sebaceous adenitis in dogs and results of treatment with isotretinoin and
etretinate: 30 cases (1990-1994), J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:197-200, 1995.
19. Power HT, 1hrke PJ: Synthetic retinoids in veterinary dermatology, Vet Clin North A Small Anim Pract 20:1525-1539, 1990.
 20. Scott DW, Walton DK: Clinical evaluation of oral vitamin E for the treatment of primary canine acanthosis nigricans, J Am Anim
Hosp Asoc 21:345-356, 1985.
21. Ayres S, Mihan R: ls vitamin E involved in the autoimmune mechanism? Cxtis 21:321-325, 1978.
22. Watson TDG: Diet and skin disease in dogs and cats, / Nutr 128:2783S-2789S, 1998.
 23. White SD, Bourdeau R, Rosychuk RAW, and others: Zinc-responsive dermatosis in dogs: 41 cases and literature review,
Vet Dermatol 12:101-109, 2001,
24. Van den Broek AHM, Thoday KL: Skin disease in dogs associated with zinc deficiency a report of five cases, J Small Anim Pract
27:313-323, 1986
404Canine and Feline Nutrition
25. Sousa CA, Stannard AA,Ihrke PJ: Dermatosis ssociated with feeding generic dog food: 13 cases(1981-1982),J Axm Vet Med
Asoc 192:676-680, 1988.
27. Codner EC, Thatcher CD: Nutritional management of skin diseases, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 15:411-424, 1993.
28. Kunkle CA: Zinc-responsive dermatoses in dogs. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy VII, Philadelphia, 1980, Saunders
29. Colombini S, Dunstan RW: Zinc-responsive dermatosis in northern-breed dogs: 17 cases (1990-1996),J Am Vet Med Asoc
211:451 453, 1997.
30. Wedekind KJ, Lowry SR: Effects of zinc source, calcium level and fber on zinc bioavailability in puppies, J Nutr 128:
2593S-2595S, 1998.
31. Wedekind K], Clookings G, Hancock J: The bioavailability of zinc methionine relative to zinc sulfate isaffected by calcium level,
Pouitry Sei 73:114, 1994.
32. Wedekind KJ, Hortin AE, Baker DH: Methodology for assessing zinc bioavailability: efficacy estimates for zinc methionine, zinc
sulfate and zinc oxide, / Anim Sci 70:178-187, 1992.
33. Marsh KA, Ruedisueli FL, Coe SL, Watson TDG: Effects of zinc and linoleic acid supplementation on the skin and coat quality
of dogs receiving a complete and balanced diet, Vet Dermatol 11:277-284, 2000.
34. Cunnane SC, Sella GE, Horrobin DF: Essential fatty acid supplementation inhibits the effect of dietary zinc deficiency, Adu
Prostaglandin 7bromboxane Res 8:1797-1798, 1980.
 35. Van den Broek AHM, Simpson JW: Fat absorption in dogs with demodicosis or zinc-responsive dermatosis, Res Vet Sei 52:
117119, 1992
36. National Research Council: Nutrient requirements ofdogs and cats, Washington, DC, 2006, National Academy Press.
37. Watson AL, Fray TR, BaileyJ, and others: Dietary constituents are able to playa beneficial role in canine epidermal barrier
function, Exp Dermatol 15:74-81, 2006.
38. Lloyd DH: Essential fatty acids and skin disease,J Small Aim Pract 30:207-212, 1989.
 39. Logas D, Beale KM, Bauer JE: Potential linical benefits of dietary supplementation with marine-life oil, J Am Vet Med Asoc
199:1631-1636, 1991.
40. Remillard Rl: Omega 3 fatty acids in canine and feline diets: a clinical success or failure? Vet Clix Nutr 5:6-11, 1998.
41. Schoenherr WD, Jewell DE: Nutritional modifcation of infammatory diseases, Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 12:212-222,
1997.
42. Bibus DM: Dietary control of eicosanoids. In Proceedings ofthe petfood forum, Chicago, 1997, Watts Publishing.
43. Yammamoto S, Hayashi Y, Takahashi Y: Reactions of mammalian lipoxygenases and cycloxygenases wich various polyunsaturated
fatty acids. 1n Sinclair A, Gibson R, editors: Essentiat fatty acids and eicosanoids, Urbana, ll, 1992, AOCS Press.
44. Calder PC: Dietary fatty acids and the immune system, Nutr Rev 56:S70-S83, 1998.
45. James MJ, Givson RA, Cleland LG: Dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids and infammatory mediator production, Am J Clin Nut?
71:343S-348S, 2000.
46. Kragballe K, Voorhees JJ, Goetzl EJ: lnhibition by leukotrienes B5 of leukotriene B4-induced activation of human keratinocytes
and neutrophils, / Invest Dermatot 88:555-558, 1987,
47. Lands WEM: Control of eicosanoid response intensity. In Vanderhoek J,editor: Frontiers in bioactive lipids, New York, 1996,
Menum Press.
48. Lands WEM, LeTellier RP, Rome LH, and others: Inhibition of prostaglandin biosynthesis, Adv Biosci 9:15-27, 1973.
49. Boudreau MD, Chanmugam PS, Hart SB, and others: Lack of dose response by dietary n-3 fatty acids at a constant ratio of n-3
to n-6 fatty acids in suppressing eicosanoid biosynthesis from arachidonic acid, Am J Clin Nutr 54:111-117, 1991.
50. Waldron MK, Bauer JE, Hannah SS: Dietary PUFAs effects on neutrophil functions. In Proc Axx Coxf Vet Intern Med Forum,
1996, p 753.
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses 405
 51. Bauer JE, McAlister K, Harte J: Differential metabolism of dietary omega-3 fatty acids by LCAT in polyunsaturated
fat-supplemented dogs, / Vet Intern Med 9:213, 1995.
52. Vaughn DM, Reinhart GA, Swaim SF, and others: Evaluation of dietary n-6 to n-3 fatty acid rations on leukotriene B synthesis in
dog skin and neutrophils, Vet Dermatot 5:163-173, 1994.
53. Wander RC, Hall JA, Gradin JL, and others: The ratio of dietary (n-6) to (n-3) fatty acids infuences immune system function,
eicosanoid metabolism, lipid peroxidation and vitamin E status in aged dogs, / Nutr 127:1198-1205, 1997.
54. Hall JA, Wander RC, Gradin JL, and others: Effect of dietary n-6 to n-3 fatty acid ratio on complete blood and total white blood
cell counts and T-cell subpopulations in aged dogs, Am / Vet Res 60:319-327, 1999.
55. Hall JA, Henry LR, Jha S, and others: Dietary (n-3) fatty acids alter plasma fatty acids and leukotrienes B synthesis by stimulated
neutrophils from healthy geriatric Beagles, Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 73:335-341, 2005
56. Hall JA, Tooley KA, Gradin JL, and others: Effects of dietary n-6 and n-3 fatty acids and vitamin E on the immune response of
healthy geriatric dogs, A J Vet Res 64:762-772, 2003.
57. LeBlanc CJ, Horohov DW, Bauer JE, and others: Effects of dietary supplementation with fsh oil on in vivo production of
infammatory mediators in clinically normal dogs, A / Vet Res 69:486-492, 2008.
58. LeBlanc CJ, Dietrich MA, Horohov DW: Effects of dietary fish oil and vitamin E supplementation on canine lymphocyte
proliferation evaluated using a fow cytometric technique, Vet Immunof Immunopathof 119:180-188, 2007.
59. Hall JA, Picton RA, Skinner MM, and others: The (n-3) fatty acid dose, independent of the (n-6) to (n-3) fatty acid ratio, affects
he plasma fatty acid profile of normal dogs, / Nutr 136:2338-2344, 2006.
60. Rees CA: Canine and feline atopic dermatitis: a review of the diagnostic options, Clin Tech SmallAnim Pract 16:230-232, 2001.
61. Scott DW, Paradis M: A survey of canine and feline skin disorders seen in a university practice (1987-1988), Cax Vet J31:
830-835,1990.
      s   sas      o 
Muller and Kirk's small animal dermatology, ed 5, Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders.
64. Chalmers S, Medleau L: Feline allergic dermatoses: diagnosis and treatment, Vet Med 84:399-403, 1989.
65. Willemse T: Atopic skin disease: a review and reconsideration of diagnostic criteria, / Small Anim Pract 27:771-778, 1986.
66. Schwartzman RM: 1mmunologic studies of progeny of atopic dogs, Am J Vet Res 45:375-379, 1984.
reactions in the skin of normal and atopic dogs, Vet Dermatof 12:49-58, 2001.
68. DeBoer D: Canine atopic dermatitis: new targets, new therapies, J Nutr 134:2056S-2061S, 2004.
69. Fartasch M: Epidermal barrier disorders of the skin, Microsc Res Tech 38:361-372, 1997.
normal and atopic dogs, Vet Pathol 38:720-723, 2001.
71. Saevik BK, Thoresen Sl, Taugbol O: Fatty acid composition of serum lipids in atopic and healthy dogs, Res Vet Sci 73:153-158,
2002.
72. Fuhrmann H, Zimmermann A, Guck T, Oechtering C: Erythrocyte and plasma fatty acid patterns in dogs with atopic dermatitis
and healthy dogs in the same household, Cax J Vet Res 70:191-196, 2006.
74. Watson AL, Fray TR, BaileyJ, and others: Dietary constituents are able to playa beneficial role in canine epidermal barrier
function, Exp Dermatot 15:7481, 2006.
75. Lloyd DH, Thomsett LR: Essential fatty acid supplementation in the treatment of canine atopy, Vet Dermatof 1:41-44, 1989.
u ut jo ysy pue jo asoud suruaaa jo uoneunguon e pue go aao jo uosteduos pung-agnop y Ha phot ' puog '9
management of canine atopy, Vet Rec 131:558-560, 1992.
406Canine and Feline Nutrition
77. Campbell KL: Fatty acid supplementation and skin disease, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20:1475-1486, 1990.
78. Taugbol O, Baddaky-Taugbol G, Saarem K: The fatty acid profle of subcutaneous fat and blood plasma in pruritic dogs and dogs
without skin problems, Can J Vet Res 62:275-278, 1998.
t aop ui aseasip srarae go suauean ayn u sdes urap Aayo jen eu isiayo pue Aa noss a ugi 'Ha ral 6
nonblinded study, J Am Anim Hosp Asoc 25:163-168, 1989.
80. Scott DW, Buerger RG: Nonsteroidal anti-infammatory agents in the management of canine pruritus, J Am Amim Hop Asoc
24:425-428, 1988.
81. Miller WH, Scott DW, Wellington JR: Investigation on the anti-pruritic effects of ascorbic acid given alone and in combination
82. Scott DW, Miller WH, Decker GA, and others: Comparison of the clinical effcacy of two commercial fatty acid supplements
(EfaVet and DVM Derm Caps), evening primrose oil, and cold water marine fsh oil in the management of allergic pruritus in
dogs: a double-blinded study, Cornell Vet 82:319-329, 1992.
83. Paradis M, Lemay S, Scott DW: The efficacy of clemastine (Tavist), a fatty acid-containing product (DVM Derm Caps) and the
combination of both products in the management of canine pruritus, Vet Dermatol 2:17-20, 1991.
84. Abba C, Mussa PP Vercelli A, Raviri C: Essential fatty acids supplementation in different-stage atopic dogs fed on a controlled
diet, J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 89:203-207, 2005
85. Harvey RG: Effect of varying proportions of evening primrose oil and fsh oil on cats with crusting dermatosis (miliary
dermatitis), Vet Rec 133:208-211, 1993.
86. Harvey RG: Management of feline miliary dermatitis by supplementing the diet with essential fatty acids, Vet Rec 128:326-329,
1991.
 87. Miller WH Jr, Scott DW, Wellington JR: Effcacy of DVM Derm Caps Liquid in the management of allergic and infammatory
dermatoses of the cat, J Am Anim Hosp Asoc 29:3740, 1993.
88. Scott DW, Miller WH: Nonsteroidal management of canine pruritus: chlorpheniramine and a fatty acid supplement (DVM
Derm Caps) in combination, and the fatty acid supplement at twice the manufacturers' recommended dosage, Cornell Vet
80:381-387, 1991.
 89. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Combined treatment with concentrated essential fatty acids and prednisolone in the management of canine
atopy, Vet Rec 134:30-32, 1994.
combination of both products in the management of canine pruritus, Vet Dermatot 2:17-20, 1992.
91. Saevik B, Bergvall K, Holm BR, and others: A randomized, controlled study to evaluate the steroid sparing effect of essential fatty
acid supplementation in the treatment of canine atopic dermatitis, Vet Dermatof 15:137-145, 2004.
92. Nesbitt GH, Freeman LM, Hannah SS: Correlations of fatty acid supplementation, aeroallrgens, shampoo, and ear cleanser with
multiple parameters in pruritic dogs, J Am Anim Hos Asoc 40:270-284, 2004.
93. Mooney MA, Vaughn DM, Reinhart GA, and others: Evaluation of the effects of omega-3 fatty acid-containing diets on the
infammatory stage of wound healing in dogs, Am / Vet Res 59:859-863, 1998.
94. Boureaux MK, Reinhart GA, Vaughn D, and others: The effects of varying dietary n-6 to n-3 fatty acid ratios on platelet
95. Schick MP, Schick RP, Reinhart GA: The role of polyunsaturated fatty acids in the canine epidermis: normal structural and
canine andfeline nutritional research, Proceedings ofthe lams international nutrition symposium, Wilmington, Ohio, 1996,Orange
Frazer Press.
96. Scott DW, Miller JR, Reinhart GA, and others: Effect of an omega-3/omega-6 fatty acid-containing commercial lamb and rice
diet on pruritus in atopic dogs: results of a single-blinded study, Can / Vet Res 61:145-153, 1997.
97. Glos K, Kinek M, Loewenstein C, and others: The effcacy of commercially available veterinary diets recommended for dogs with
atopic dermatitis, Vet Dermatol 19:280-287, 2008.
Nutritionally Responsive Dermatoses 407
98. Hwang D: Fatty acids and immune responsesa new perspective in searching for clues for mechanism, Arx Rev Nutr 20:
431456, 2000.
 99. Stehle ME, Goebel T, Hancaruk M, Mueller RS: The infuence of polyunsaturated fatty acids on the T cell response in dogs with
atopic dermatitis, Vet Dermatol 18:194, 2007.
100. ScottDW, Buerger RG: Nonsteroidal anti-infammatory agents in the management of canine pruritus,JAmAxim Hosp Asoc
24:425-428, 1988
101. Vaughn DM, Reinhart GA: Dietary fatty acid ratios and eicosanoid production, Proc Ann Conf Vet Intern Med Forum, 1995.
102. AndersonJA: The establishment ofcommon lanuage concerning adverse reactionsto foods and food additives, JAlergy Ch
mmunol78:140-144, 1986.
103. Hillier A, Griffn CE: The ACVD task force on canine atopic dermatitis (X): is there a relationship between canine atopic
dermatitis and cutaneous adverse food reactions? Vet Immunot fmmunopathot 81:227-231, 2001.
104. Carlotti DN, Remy l, Prots C: Food allergy in dogs and cats: a review and report of 43 cases, Vet Dermatof 1:55-62, 1990.
105. Ackerman L: Food hypersensitivity: a rare, but manageable disorder, Vet Med 83:1142-1148, 1988.
106. Chesney CJ: Food sensitivity in the dog: a quantitative study, J SmallAnim Pract 43:203-207, 2002.
107. Rosser EJ: Food allergy in the dog: a retrospective study of 51 dogs. In Proceedings of the annual meeting of the American College of
Veterinary Dermatotogy, San Francisco, 1990, p 47.
108. White SD: Food hypersensitivity in 30 dogs, / Am Vet Med Asoc 188:695-698, 1986.
109. Harvey RG: Food allergy and dietary intolerance in dogs: a report of 25 cases, J Small Anim Pract 34:175-179, 1993.
110. Walton GS: Skin responses in the dog and cat due to ingested allergens: observations on one hundred confirmed cases, Vet Rec
81:709-713, 1967.
111. Rosser EJ: Diagnosis of food allergy in dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc 203:259-262, 1993.
Vet 7:469477, 1985.
113. Taylor SL, Lemanske RJ, Bush RK, Busse WW: Food allrgens: structure and immunologic properties, Arx Allergy 59:93-99,
1987.
114. Martin A, Sierra MP, Gonzalez JL, Arevalo MA: Identifcation of allergens responsible for canine cutaneous adverse food reactions
to lammb, beef and cow's millk, Vet Dermatol 15:349-356, 2004.
115. Jeffers JG, Shanley KJ, Meyer EK: Diagnostic testing of dogs for food hypersensitivity, J Am Vet Med Asoc 198:245-250, 1991.
116. Jeffers JG, Meyer EK, Sosis EJ: Responses of dogs with food allergies to single-ingredient dietary provocation, J Am Vet Med Asoc
209:608-611, 1996.
117. Hodgkins E: Food allergy in cats: considerations, diagnosis and management, Pet Vet, pp 24-28, Nov/Dec 1991.
118. Oobatake M, Ooi T: Hydration and heat stability effects on protein unfolding, Irog Biohys Mol Biol 39:237-284, 1993.
119. Otani H, Morita Sl, Tokita F: Studies on the antigenicity of the browning product between beta-lactoglobulin and lactose,Jpn J
Zootech Sci 56:1-74, 1983.
120. Cave NJ, Marks SL: Evaluation of the immunogenicity of dietary proteins in cats and the infuence of the canning proces, Am J
Vet Res 65:1427-1433, 2004.
122. Verlinden A, Hesta M, Millet S, Janssens GP]: Food allergy in dogs and cats: a review, Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 46:259-273, 2006.
123. Wills J, Harvey R: Diagnosis and management of food allergy and intolerance in dogs and cats, Aust Vet J 71:322-326, 1994.
124. Halliwell REW: Management of dietary hypersensitivity in the dog, J Small Anim Nutr 33:1 56-160, 1992.
766 1 089-//9:0oz 2osy paw 4e4 wy f 'soop ur A8rae poot po sisou3ep rot 5unsan uys po 1p!eA s rauoh 'D ayumy '571
408Canine and Feline Nutrition
126. Mueller R, Tsohalis J: Evaluation of serum allergen-specific IgE for the diagnosis of food adverse reactions in the dog, Vt
Dermatol 9:167-171, 1998.
the diagnosis of canine adverse food reaction, Vet Ther 3:244 251, 2002
128. Roudebush P, Cowell CS: Results of a hypoallergenic diet survey of veterinarians in North America with a nutritional evaluation
of homemade diet prescriptions, Vet Dermatol 3:23-28, 1992
129. Cordle CT: Control of food allergies using protein hydrolysates, Food Techno! 48:72-76, 1994.
130. Olson ME, Hardin JA, Buret AG: Hypersensitivity reactions to dietary antigens in atopic dogs. In Recent advances in canine and
pp 69-77.
131. Loeffer A, Soares-Magalhaes R, Bond R, Lloyd DH: A retrospective analysis of case series using home-prepared and chicken
hydrolysate diets in the diagnosis of adverse food reactions in 181 pruritic dogs, Vet Dermatof 17:272-279, 2006.
132. Jackson HA, Jackson MW, Coblentz L: Evaluation of the clinical and allergen specific serum immunoglobulin E responses to oral
dhallenge with cornstarch, corn, soy and a soy hydrolysate diet in dogs with spontaneous food allergy, Vet Dermatof 14:151-157,
2003.
133. Biourge VC, Fontaine J, Vroom MW: Diagnosis of adverse reactions to food in dogs: efcacy of a soy-isolate hydrolysate-based
diet, / Nutr 134:2062S-2064S.
134. Loeffer A, Lloyd DH, Bond R, and others: Dietary trials with a commercial chicken hydrolysate diet in 63 pruritic dogs, Vet Rec
154:519-522, 2004.
135. Cave NJ: Hydrolyzed protein diets for dogs and cats, Vet Clin Small Anim Pract 36:1251-1268, 2006
136. Walton GS: Skin diseases of domestic animals: skin manifestations of allergic response in domestic animals, Vet Rec 82:204 -207,
1968.
137. Johnson LW: Food allergy in a dog: diagnosis by dietary management, Mod Vet Pract 68:236-239, 1987.
32
Chronic Renal Failure
reabsorbed, and selectively excreted. The kidneys are
DESCRIPTION AND
also important in the normal regulation of fuid balance,
CLINICAL SIGNS
pH, and blood pressure and for the production of the
hormone erythropoietin and the active form of vitamin
Chronic renal failure in dogs and cats is characterized by
D. All of these functions can be affected in pets with
an irreversible and progressive loss of kidney function
chronic renal disease.
and the development of clinical signs that refect the
The compensatory
mechanisms of the healthy
kidneys decreasing ability to perform normal regula-
nephrons that remain after initial renal injury allow
tory and excretory functions.
There ate many poten-
the kidlneys to function normally even after the loss of
tial causes for the initial kidney
 damage that leads
to
 a large proportion of tissue. A loss of at least 70% to
chronic disease. These causes include, but ate not lim-
 85% of functional capacity usually occurs before a pet
ited to, trauma, infection, immunological disease, neo-
begins to show clinical signs of renal failure.2 One of
plasms, fenal ischemia (decreased blood fow to the
the frst signs that most pet owners notice is incfeased
kidneys), genetic anomalies,
and
exposufe to toxins.
water consumption and increased urination. This effect
is caused by a teduced capacity to concentrate urine,
fenal disease is most frequently diagnosed in clder pets.
resulting in an increased volume of urine and increased
In most cases the initial underlying cause of renal dam-
frequency of urination. Some dogs may appear to regress
age is no longer present when the pet develops chronic
intheirhouse
e-training and begin to house-soil or invol-
fenal failure. This is due to the ability of the kidney to
untarily empty their bladder while sleeping. Polydlipsia
compensate for large proportions 
of functional tissue
accompanies increased urination because the dog com-
loss. However, over time t
i n nd i   s
nisms may break down, leading to progressive loss of
Auid balance. Polyuria and polydipsia are less commonly
kidney function and signs of chronic disease.
cbserved in cats because cats usually become ufeimic
Nephrons are the functional units of the kidneys.
before they lose the ability to concentrate urine.? In addi-
Each nephron consists of a glomerulus and a system of
tion, owners of indoof cats that use litter boxes are less
tubules within which reabsorption and excretion occuf.
likely to notice increased urination when it does occuf.
The glomerulus is a tuft of capillaries where water, waste
products, and electrolytes from the blood are fltered.
The tubules originate at the base of the glomerulus and
The kidneys have an enormous reserve capacity; at
selectively reabsorb many of the blood components
least 70% to 85% of furctional loss occurs before a pet
present in the filtrate. When the filtrate reaches the final
begins to show clinical signs of renal failure. Common
portion of the tubule, it contains only those compounds
initial signs inciude increased water consumption and
that are going to be excreted as waste in the urine. The
increased urination. Some dogs may appear to regress
heal thy kidney contains thousands of nephrons and has
in their house-training and begin to house-soil or invol-
a substantial functional reserve.
Blocd How through the kidneys is very high, with
begin to use the litter box more often, but this change
approximately one fourth of cardiac output fltered
may not be noticed by owners.
through the kidneys each minute. The waste products
of protein catabolism, such as ufea, cfeatinine, uric acid,
and ammonia are removed and excreted in the urine.
Many of the clinical signs seen in dogs and cats with
In addition, electrolytes and trace minerals are fltered,
 advanced renal failure are associated with the degree
409
410 Canine and Feline Nutrition
of azotemia or uremia that is present. This is com-
have been used for many years as the primary indicatof
monly referred to as uremic syndrome.α Azotemia refers
of renal health in dogs and cats, they are relatively insen-
to the accumulation of nitrogenous waste products in
sitive tests and do not accurately refect the magnitude
the blood, waste products composed primarily of urea
of renal functional loss.7,8 This occurs because the rela-
nitrogen and/or creatinine. The term uremia technically
tionship between glomerular fltration fate (GFR) and
means elevated concentrations of urea in the blood, but
sefum ufea and cfeatinine concentrations is not lineaf,
it commonly refers to the collection of clinical signs
and up to 75% of renal function must be lost before
associated with renal failure. Although urea is singularly
BUN and creatinine values increase above the normal
only a minor ufemic toxin, serum urea levels afe associ-
range.7 After this point, values fise rapidlly in response
ated with the adverse clinical signs that reduce quality of
to small additional losses of renal function. Of the two
life and contribute to morbidity in patients with chronic
measures, plasma creatinine is a more sensitive indicator
renal failure. These signs include decreased appetite or
od Arep aq pge iou si pue uonunsp jeui jo
anorexia, vomiting, depression, electrolyte and pH dis-
tein intake.
In contrast, BUN is strongly affected by
turbances, mucosal ulcers, and weight loss. Some pets
the consumption of a protein-containing meal. A fast-
also develop chronic diarrhea and neurological signs.
ing BUN of
 greater than 35 milligrams (mg)/deci-
Aberrations in phosphorus and calcium metabolism
liter (dl) may be an indication of some level of kidney
lead to secondary fenal hyperparathyroidism, which
dysfunction.
causes fenal osteodystrophy (bone demineralization)
In 2006 the International Renal Interest Society
and deposition of calcium phosphate in soft tissues.
(IRIS) established a set of diagnostic guidelines for dogs
In many cases of chronic renal failure, the inability of
and cats with suspected chronic renal disease. IRIS
the kidneys to produce erythropoietin and a reduced
algorithms use fasting plasma creatinine level, presence
lifespan of red blood cells lead to the development of a
of pfoteinuria, and systemic blood pfessufe to diagnose
normocytic, normochromic anemia (Box 32-1).6
and stage kidney disease in dogs and cats. Separate algo-
Diagnosis of chronic renal disease in dogs
and
rithms are used for each species. Results allow practitio-
cats is based on medical history, clinical signs, serum
ners to classify patients into stages and substages of renal
chemistry, and urinalysis. Pets with chronic renal fail-
disease, each of which is associated with a set of recom-
ufe develop elevated blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and
mended treatment protocols. For example, plasma cre-
plasma creatinine levels as a result of reduced glomerular
atinine levels of between 2.1 and 5.0 mg/dl in dogs of
function. Although BUN and creatinine measurements
between 2.9 and 5.0 in cats are indicative of moderate
renal azotemia. Levels higher than 5.0, in either species,
indicate severe renal azotemia that is typically associated
BOX 32-1 CLINICAL SIGNS OF CHRONIC
with multiple extrarenal signs of disease. Tests for pro-
RENAL FAILURE
teinuria and multiple blood pressure measurements afe
used to further classify animals into substages. A loss
Polyuria
of concentrating ability and elevated serum phosphorus
Increased frequency of urination
(greater than 5 mg/dl) also provides supportive evidence
 Polydipsia
for a diagnosis of chronic renal failure. Laboratory
test results may also show a normocytic, normochro-
Depression
mic anemia; lymphopenia; hyperchclesterclemia; of
Diarrhea
 metabolic acidosis. Both lipase and amylase may be
Vomiting
increased in the absence of pancreatitis due to decreased
tenal filtration.
Anorexia
With chronic renal disease, the gradual decline in
Renal osteodystrophy
GFR is responsible for the inability of the kidneys to
Anemia
flter and excrete waste products efficiently. However,
eatly detection of kidney dysfunction is difficult in dogs
Neurological im pairment
and cats because clinical signs of uremia only develop
Chronic Renal Failure 411
after a large proportion of renal function has been lost.
glomerular  capillary l
hypertension,  increased  single
The most accurate and sensitive method for detecting
nephron glomerular fltration rate (SNGFR), and renal
early changes in renal function and for monitoring dis-
hyperrophy (growth of remnant nephrons).15,16 The
ease progression is to measure GFR. This test fequires
increase in GFR in the surviving nephrons causes the
24-hour urine collection by a veterinarian and mea-
kidneys’ total GFR to be higher than the level that
sures the rates at which blood is fltered through the
would be predicted following the reduction in renal
kidneys and waste products afe femoved and excfeted.
 mass. These changes enable a damaged kidney to com-
An estimate of GFR can also be obtained by measuring
 pensate and function for variable and extended periods
the renal clearance of exogenous creatine.10,1l Unfortu-
of time at normal or near-normal capacity. During this
nately, these tests usually require expensive equipment
compensatory phase, clinical signs of renal disease ate
and are time consuming and tedious to perform, so
hotevident
they are not available in most clinical settings. Efforts to
Depending on the extent of the damage to the
produce a simpler and less expensive method for mea-
 kidneys and on other factors that can infuence the pro-
suring GFR have reported success with using iohexol,
 gresson of disease, renal function may eventually begin 
an iodine-based radiographic contrast compound of
to decline. When this occurs, the progressive and irre-
gadolinium diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-
versible loss of functioning nephrons causes a gradual
teduction in total GFR and in the kidneys? ability to
because early detection of a decreasing GFR can be
the signal for nutritional interventions that can actu-
excrete waste products and the compromised regulatory
ally slow the progression of renal failure. Waiting for the
functioning of the kidneys lead to clinical signs of renal
appearance of azotemia or a loss of concentrating ability
failure. Renal failure can progress to end-stage disease
delays the use of these measures.
even after the initial cause of injury has been resolved
and in the absence of active renal disease. It appears that
the loss of a certain critical mass of nephrons can result
BUN and serum creatinine provide veterinary practitio
 in self-perpetuating, progressive renal disease. Studies in
ners with a rapid screening test for assessingglomerular
dogs have indicated that between %4 and 1%6 of renal
 mass must be destroyed before progression occurs.17
greater than 35 mg/dl is an indication of some level of
However, great variability is seen among individuals.
kidney dysfunction.Plasma creatinineleveis higher thar
Some dogs and cats never develop progressive disease,
5.0 mg/dl indicate advanced failure or end-stage disease
S i n dd i  n  
iRiS guidelines aiso use blood pressure and presence of
has been dlestroyed.
proteinuria to stage renal disease. The most accurate
Many factors may contribute to the progression
and sensitive method for detecting early changes in
of renal disease in dogs and cats. Evidence from early
renat function is to measure GFR. Early detection of a
studies with rats suggested that the alterations that
decreasing GFR is important because it may allow early
compensate for the initial loss of active tissue may
nutritional interventions thatcan slow theprogression
eventually contribute to progressive deterioration of
of renal failure.
the remaining tissue.18 These studies led to the hypoth-
esis that hyperfltration and hypertension of surviv-
ing nephrons ultimately would cause cellular injury,
resulting in progressive glomerulosclerosis and a loss
PROGRESSIVE NATURE
of nephron function. This hypothesis has been termed
the byperfitration theory and appears to explain the
The occurrence of chronic renal failure is preceded by
progressive nature of renal disease in several strains of
SSOl e sasnes ieyn Ainju io iinsu! [euai jo adi suos
of nephrons. Following this initial episode, the kidneys
m sies pue shop ui inoo uoisuaday pue Audon
undergo structural and functional compensatory adap-
decreased renal function, the role of these changes in
tations. Specifically, these changes include increased
412 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 indlicate that the adaptive changes that occur following
a loss of renal tissue do not lead to the progressive glo-
dietary protein also slowed the development of pro-
 merulosclerosis that has been reported in rats.23,24 In
 gressive disease in healthy Fischer 344 rats that were
contrast, therapies that reduce glomerular hypertension
 genetically predisposed to develop chronic renal disease
have been shown to protect the kidneys from further
as they aged.28,29
These effects have hot been cbserved in dogs. In con-
trast to rats, feeding elevated protein levels has not been
in glomerular hypertension may be beneficial to dogs
shown to cause a progression of renal disease in dogs
with chronic renal disease.
with either experimentally induced or naturally occur-
diets containing either 19%, 27%, or 56% protein
Role of Diet in Progression
were fed to dlogs with experimentally induced 34 redluc-
Other factors that may contribute to spontaneous
tion in renal mass for a period of 4 years.30 The dogs
 progression of renal disease in dogs and cats include
that were fed the high-protein diet (56% protein) had
systemic hypertension, hyperparathyrcidism, intrarenal
higher GFR and renal plasma fow rates than the dogs
infammation, hyperlipidemia,
fenal
mineralization,
that were fed the low-protein dliet (19% protein). How-
and renal ammoniagenesis.
Each of these factors is
ever, significant morphological or functional deteriora
infuenced to some degree by the animal's diet and
tion in the remaining nephrons of the kidneys was not
nutritional status. Chronically 
elevated serum phos
observed in any dogs. The investigators were unable to
phate levels can contribute to hyperparathyroidism and
 establish a cause and effect relationship between protein
renal mineralization; dietary f
as nage spie Ae
feeding and the progression of renal disease in the dogs
lipid levels, intratenal blood pressure, and infamma-
that were studied. Feeding the high-protein (56%) and
tion; dietaty sodium may infuence the development
the low-protein (19%) diets was associated with slight
of systemic hypertension; and metabolic acidosis affects
proteinuria, but the 27%-protein diet did not cause this
ammonia production in the kidneys
effect. In contrast to the fats that were studied, none of
the dogs in this study developed elevated BUN levels
failure are to ameliorate clinical signs of uremia (see
 of clinical signs of chronic renal disease in response to
p. 417) and, if possible, slow or stop the progression of
consuming moderate- cr high-protein diets.
the disease. Historically, dietary
y protein was the major
In another study, three groups of dogs with induced
nutrient identifed as important in slowing disease pro-
renal failure were fed three diets varying in protein, fat,
1 that protein is
catbohydrate, and mineral content.32 Over a 40-week
period, dogs that were
e fed the high-protein, high-
and cats, while other nutrients play a more significant
phosphorus diet (44.4% protein, 2.05% phosphorus)
role. Dietary components that can infuence the fate
showed the highest mortality rate. However, mortality
of progression of chronic renal failure in dogs and cats
was associated with ufemia caused by the increased
include phosphorus, the type of fatty acids included in
protein, rather than uremia caused by the development
the diet, and nutritional factors that affect the body's
of progressive nephron destruction. There was no evi-
acidl-base status.
 dence of a decline in GFR (an indication of progressive
renal disease) in the dogs fed the high-protein diet.
PROTEIN
 Feeding a high-protein diet results in
These results indicate that the increased mortality was
increased renal blood How and increased postprandial
GFR in all species that have been studied, including the
amounts of protein to dogs with renal failure and not
dog.19,27 This effect is seen in both healthy animals and
to an enhanced progression of renal disease caused by
animals with compromised kidney function. A series
the diet.
of early studies reported that dietary protein restric-
The previous studies do not support the hypothesis
tion reduced these effects and slowed the progression of
that protein affects the progression of chronic renal
chronic renal disease in a susceptible strain of male rats
failure in dogs. Additional evidence comes from studies
Chronic Renal Failure 413
that fail to demonstrate that restricting dietary pro-
Each group received one of four diets for a 12-month
tein inhibits the initial development or progression of
period: low protein/low calorie, low protein/high
renal disease. Early studies with rats reported that feed-
calorie, high protein/low calorie, or high protein/high
ing low-protein diets prolonged life and delayed the
calorie. GFR did not decrease in any of the groups dur-
development of chronic renal disease.15,33,34 However,
ing the 12-month study period. Mild to moderate renal
follow-up studies found that benefits that had been
 glomerular lesions were observed in all groups, but theif
development was not affected by either protein level
of caloric intake. On the other hand, nonglomerular
sumption significantly slowed growth (which continues
lesions in the kidneys were reported in cats fed the high-
throughout life in rats) and retarded the progression
calorie diets but not in those fed the high-protein diets.
of chronic renal disease. Unfortunately, the belief that
 The cat appears to be similar to the dog in that feeding
feeding a low-protein diet prevents the development
a diet containing adequate protein does not exacerbate
and the progression of renal disease had already been
chronic renal disease.
applied to several other species, including companion 
Because of the early fesearch studies with fats and
animals. This theory is without supportive scientifc evi-
because it has been hypothesized that elderly pets expe-
dlence in either dogs or cats.
fience some loss of renal function as a hormal process
 In dogs, moderate restriction of dietary protein is
of aging, it became popular during the 1980s to advo-
 not effective in rmnodifying glomerular hypertrophy after
cate feding low-protein diets to older animals, with the
a loss of kidney function. When dogs with a '%s loss of
intent of slowing the rate of renal deterioration. How
kidney function were fed a moderately festricted diet
 ever, no research has shown that there is an obligatory
loss of kidney function with aging in either dogs of
filtration, capillary hypertension, and glomerular hyper-
cats.39.41 Elderly pets require adequate levels of high-
tophy still occurred.15 A second study of dogs with a
quality protein to help to minimize losses of protein
7% loss of functional kidney tissue reported that renal
feserves and satisfy their maintenance needs (see Section
lesions were indistinguishable between dogs that were
4, pp. 268-270). Long-term restriction of dietary pro-
fed a diet containing
 15% protein and those that
tein in both dogs and cats is associated with several
were fed a diet containing 31% protein over a 14-month
inherent dangers. Protein deficiency results in impaired
period.36
immunological fesponse and fesistance to infection,
Studies with cats have reported similar results. When
feduced hemoglobin production and anemia, decreased
cats with experimentally induced renal failure were fed
 plasma protein levels, and muscle wasting.42,43 Restrict-
either a high-protein diet (51.7%) or a low-protein
diet (27.6%), cats consuming the low-protein diet
lead to further loss of protein reserves, malnutrition,
showed fewer and less severe glomerular lesions in the
and clinical signs associated with protein of amino acid
remnant kidney.37 However, the low-protein diet was
deficiency. Finally, foods with severely reduced protein
less palatable, and cats consuming this diet had signif-
 ate low in palatability, which can lead to reduced intake
cantly lower caloric intakes than those consuming the
that can further exacerbate protein deficiency. For
high-protein diet, leading to weight loss and signs of
example, when a diet containing 27.6% protein was
protein deficiency. Because of this confounding effect,
fed to cats with % renal ablation, the cats consumed
the authors of the study concluded that restriction of
significantly less food when compared with cats fed
calories and protein led to less glomerular injury in cats
51.7% protein.37 The cats fed the low-protein diet lost
with induced renal failure when compared with cats fed
weight and developed hypoalbuminemia, a clinical sign
a diet replete in calories and protein.
of protein malnutrition. In contrast, cats fed the high-
A subsequent study was undertaken to elucidate the
 protein diet gained weight and did not develop protein
separate effects of protein and calorie intake on the pro-
deficiency. Consideration of the detrimental effects
gression of renal disease in cats.38 A group of 28 adult
of protein restriction is particularly important in cats
female cats with experimentally induced renal failure
 because this species does not readily adapt to reduced-
pfotein diets (see Section 2, pp. 92-95).
414 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Current evidence suggests that mechanisms that
ability
toexcfete
phosphorus.
.Declining
kidney
can alter the progression of renal disease in the rat
[e and nn aru ue nn sea ose uou
do not have the same effect in the dog and cat. Dogs
(active vitamin D) and to degrade parathyroid hormone
appear to be resistant to the glomerulosclerosis and loss
(PTH). Collectively, these changes result in aberrations
 of renal function associated with aging and adaptive
in phosphorus and calcium metabolism and can ulti
changes in nephrons and protein-feeding in the rat.39
mately result in hyperphosphatemia, bone demineral-
Although high-protein feeding can exacerbate clinical
ization (osteodystrophy), and the deposition of calcium
signs by leading to azotemia in dogs with advanced
phosphate crystals in soft tissues. The deposition of
renal failure, these effects occur because the loss of
calcium and phosphorus in renal tissue causes infam-
renal function leads to an accumulation in the blood of
 mation, scarring, and subsequent loss of nephrons.45
-oid jo sionpoid pua snouasonjuuou pue snouasoniu
Therefore the restriction of dietary phosphorus may
tein metabolism, not due to direct damage to the kid-
help to control renal secondary hyperparathyroidism,
fesulting in decreased mineralization and less damage to
 a progressive destruction of nephron functioning in
the remaining functioning nephrons, ultimately slow-
the remaining normal tissue. It is hypothesized that the
ing the progression of renal disease.
absence of systemic hypertension in dogs with renal
Studies with fats have shown that phosphorus
disease and the fact that dogs do not normally develop
festriction is effective in minimizing or preventing pro-
 teinuria and in slowing the structural and functional
ences between dogs and rats. In addition, unlike the
changes that occur in the remaining healthy neph-
rat, the dog does not continue to grow throughout its
rons.46 Similar studies with dogs have found that the
life and typically consumes only one to two meals per
dietary restriction of phosphorus can slow the progres-
day, compared with the nibbling regimen of the rat.
sion of clinical disease and prolong survival in azotemic
In dogs, hyperfltration following the consumption of
dogs with induced chronic renal failure.47 In addition,
a meal that contains protein lasts for a short time, as
when diets containing 32% protein and varying levels
opposed to continuously throughout a 24-hour pericd
of phosphorus were fed to dogs with induced renal fail-
ure, the dogs that were fed the low-phosphorus diets
routine restriction of protein in cats with chronic renal
had significantly higher GFR values when compared
disease with the intent of slowing disease progression is
with dogs fed the high-phosphorus diets.48 However,
not supported.
over time, renal lesions developed that were not infu-
enced by the level of phosphorus in the dliet, indicating
that other factors were involved in the progression ofthe
Dietary protein is not a contributor to either the
disease. Beneficial effects of phosphorus festriction
initiation or progression of chronic renal disease in dogs
that are independent of the level of protein in the
diet were found in a study comparing the effects of
clinical signs by leading to azotemia in animais with
sop ui snuoqdsoud pue uaioid Aieiap mol pue yoiu
advanced renal failure, these effects occur because the
with a 1% reduction in renal mass.49 Survival time
loss of renal function leads to an accumuiation in the
and GFR stability were enhanced in dogs fed reduced
blood ofnitrogenous and nonnitrogenous end prducts
phosphorus (0.4%) but were not affected by the level
of protein metabolism, not due to increased damage to
of protein f
fed. There is also evidence that normal
the kidneys.
phosphorus intake in cats with induced renal disease
causes increased mineralization of renal tissue, and that
 dietary restriction can prevent these changes.50 Cur-
shondsoud Areia yiy ieun sissns asuaia un
PHOSPHORUS
SA dietary factor that is involved in
contributes to the progression of renal disease in dogs
the progression of renal disease in companion animals
and cats and that phosphorus festriction can reduce
is the level of phosphorus in the diet. As chronic renal
damage to renal tissue and disease progression (see
failure progresses, GFR declines and leads to a decreased
p. 420). However, because other factors are involved,
Chronic Renal Failure 415
progression of disease can still occur even with
from supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids, others
restricted dietary phosphorus.
have shown no change in condlition.58,59
Like rats and humans, dogs and cats with chronic
renal disease develop glomerular hypertension.16,21
A dietary factor that is invoived in the progression of
A study of diabetic dogs demonstrated that therapies
renal disease in cormpanion animais is the level of phos-
aimed at reducing glomerular hypertension significantly
phorus in the diet.Declining kidney function leads to an
lated that lowering glomerular pressure may also be of
degrade parathyroid hormone.Restriction of dietary
beneft to dogs and cats with other forms of chronic
thyroidism, resuiting in decreased mineralization and
sure through the effects of renal eicosanoid metabolism.
less damage to the remaining functioning nephrons,
Eicosanoids, produced from fatty acids, are one of sev-
uitimately stowing the progression of renat disease.
eral mediators ofinfammation in many different tissues
of the body (see pp. 387-390). During an infammatory
response, the felease and metabolism of omega-6 fatty
acids produces the 2-series prostaglandins, the 4-series
DIETARY LIPIDS
The amount and type of fat in
leukottienes, hydroxyeicosatetfaenoic acid, and throm-
a pet's diet may affect the progression of renal disease.
boxane Az (TXA2). Two omega-6-derived eicosancids,
Hyperlipidemia has been identifed as a causal factor in
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and prostacyclin, afe vasodila
uremic renal failure in some species.51,52 Like rats and
0 aupiy au ui uouny pue Aioueyuoid pue Aio
humans, dogs and cats with renal dysfunction often
increase fenal blood How and GFR. In contrast, TXAz
exhibit elevated serum cholesterol and triglycerides. In
causes vasoconstfiction and has vatiable effects on GFR.
addition, the degree of hyperlipidemia has been shown
Omega-3 fatty acid-derived eicosanoids are less potent
to be directly related to further losses of renal function in
infammatory agents, and omega-3-derived thrombox-
dogs with experimentally induced renal disease. When
anes have less vasoconstrictive and platelet-aggregating
dogs with induced renal failure were fed a diet enriched
effects. Because omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids com-
in polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) (safflower cil or
 pete for the same enzyme systems, increasing tissue con-
menhaden fish cil), they had lower blood lipid levels,
centrations of omega-3 fatty acids causes a diminution
compared with dogs fed a diet containing saturated
of the 2-series eicosanoids derived from the omega-6
fat.53 These results indicate that replacing a proportion
fatty acid arachidonic acid, thus down-regulating intra
of saturated fat with polyunsaturated fat may be help-
tenal infammatory responses.
ful in ameliorating the hyperlipidemia seen in pets with
A link between production of the 2-series of pros-
chronic renal disease.
taglandins and thromboxanes and progressive fenal
A second factor affecting the progression of renal
Uo paseq si Aioaun siu os'pasodoid uaq sey aseas
disease is the presence of increased vascular pressure in
studies that suggest glomerular hypertension is affected
the kidneys, specifcally within the glomerular capil-
by renal eicosanoids, and that supplementation with
laties. In rats, manipulations that increase glomerular
omega-3 fatty acids (marine fish oil) can reduce renal
pressure contribute to the progression of chronic renal
hypertension and may slow the progression of chronic
failure, and factors that reduce glomerular hyperten-
renal disease.6l One study measured the effects of three
sion are renoprotective.19,54 Modification of the level of
different types of fat on GFR in dogs with induced renal
omega-3 fatty acids in the diet affects glomerular pres-
failure.62 Dogs were fed a low-fat diet supplemented
sure and the progression of renal disease in rats. How-
with either menhaden fish oil (a source of omega-3 fatty
ever, while some researchers report benefits of feeding
acids), saffower oil (a source of unsaturated cmega-6
omega-3 fatty acids, others found that feeding this class
fatty acids) or beef tallow (a source of saturated omega-6
of fatty acid was associated with a worsening of disease
fatty acids) for a period of 20 months. Dogs fed the
in rats.S.57 Similarly, while some human patients with
 menhaden fish cil-supplemented diet had reduced pro-
immune-mediated forms of renal disease have benefited
teinuria and lower serum creatinine, cholesterol, and
416 Canine and Feline Nutrition
ttiglyceride values when compared with dogs fed either
renal blood How. The fise in PGEz is indicative of
safflower oil or beef tallow. While six out of seven dogs
increased intrarenal pressure, which over time may con-
fed the diet enriched with omega-6 fatty acids showed
tribute to the progression of disease.
progressive loss of renal function over the 20-week
period, dogs fed the diet supplemented with omega-3
OTHER CONTRIBUTING NUTRIENTS
A
fatty acids did not exhibit signs of progression and actu-
high level of dietary sodium has been identifed as a
ally had GFR test values indicating a slight increase
potentially exacerbating factor in progression of chronic
in renal function at the end of the trial (Figure 32-1).
tenal failure through enhancement of systemic hyper-
These results suggested that omega-3 fatty acids may be
tension. There is evidence in fats that sodium festfic-
renoprotective, while supplementation with omega-6
tion can slow the progi
ssion of chronic renal disease.64
fatty acids may contribute to disease progression.
For this reason,
mcd
sodium festriction has been
A second study examined the effects of fatty acid
tecommended for dogs
 cats with chronic fenal
supplementation in c
ssop
swith
natutally
occurring
failure.
restriction is not universally
accepted because systemic hypertension is not a consis-
ments containing either safflower oil or menhaden fish
tent fnding in dogs and cats with renal failure. In addi-
cil for a 6-week period. Dogs fed the omega-3 supple-
tion, studies of risk factors and of the effects of reduced
ment maintained GFR for the entire 6-week period and
sodium intake in dogs and cats with compromised
exhibited decreased levels of urinary PGE2. The dogs
fenal function have not shown a clear beneft of sodium
supplemented with saffower oil had increased GFR and
festriction.65-67 The unnecessary restriction of dietary
increased urinary PGEz concentrations. Although dogs
sodium may exacerbate compromised renal concentrat-
fed safflower oil had higher GFR values, it is theorized
ing ability due to reduced intratenal sodium content,
that this was a short-lived effect caused by increased
 and may cause increased production of angiotensin in
40
20
Rate
lon
afi
40
=
ab
60
-80
 Menhaden
Beef Tallow
Safflower Oil
Fish Oil
Figure 32-1
 Change in glonmerular fltration rate (%) in dogs supplemented with menhaden hsh oil, beef tallow, or safflower oil
*, P<.05
(From New corcepts irt marageet of renal failure, Dayton, Ohio, 1998, The lamis Company)
Chronic Renal Failure 417
response to lowered systemic levels of sodium. Because
Other nutrients of concern include dietary fat, fber,
the ideal dietary sodium intake for pets with chronic
phosphorus, sodium, potassium, and watef-soluble
fenal failure is not well defined and because of the fisks
vitamins (Box 32-2). In all cases, medical and dietary
of severe restriction, current recommendations afe to
 management should be customized to address the needs
provide a food that contains normal or moderately
of the individual patient and modifed as a patient's
festricted amounts of sodium to pets with chronic renal
stage of disease changes.
disease (see p. 423).68
Metabolic acidosis occurs commonly in pets with
chronic renal failure and is caused by the reduced ability
Protein
of the kidneys to excrete acids. For example, a retrospec-
A distinction must be made between restricting protein
tive study of cats with naturally occurring renal failure
with the proposed purpose of slowing or stopping the
reported that approximately 80% of cats had metabolic
 progression of renal disease and resricting protein with
acidosis at the time of diagnosis.69 The development of
the purpose of managing clinical signs. Although early
Supise aun Aq paieqiexa aq Aeu sies ui sisopie
studies with rats indicated that protein restriction was
nature of many commercial maintenance diets. Acidosis
beneficial in slowing the progresion of chronic renal
contributes to renal injury and uremia and leads to
disease, research does not support this effect in dogs and
increased renal tubular generation of ammonia. These
cats (see pp. 412-414).38,41 In contrast, when chronic
changes may all contribute to a progressive loss of renal
 tenal disease has been definitively diagnosed in a dog of
function. In addition, there is an apparent association
cat through the appearance of clinical signs, diminished
between metabolic acidosis and negative potassium bal-
GFR, and changes in blood chemistry data, modifica-
ance in cats, which may further contribute to disease
tion of dietary protein may be benefcial and is recom-
progression.70
mended for the management of clinical signs.
The accumulation of the nitrogenous end products
of protein and amino acid metabolism causes many of
DIETARYMANAGEMENT
the clinical and metabolic signs of chronic renal failure.
When chronic renal disease has been diagnosed in a dog
Urea is the most abundant of these metabolites and
of cat, medical management is directed toward normal-
can be readily measured in the blood. Although urea is
izing blood pressure, preventing or reducing proteinuria,
 only a mild uremic toxin, its concentration parallels the
normalizing plasma phosphate (if dietary restriction is
levels of other, more potent nitrogenous toxins and can
not sufficient), and preventing of correcting metabolic
be used as an index to monitor the extent of disease and
acidosis.? Dietary management is implemented with
clinical signs.7l Together these components produce
the goals of minimizing the clinical, biochemical, and
nausea, vomiting, osmotic diuresis, and a decreased
physiological consequences of the loss of kidney func-
tion. Alterations in the kidneys' ability to excrete waste
products and to regulate metabolism of certain nutri-
BOX 32-2 GOALS OF DIETARY
ents and hormones are the cause of the clinical signs
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC
that the animal experiences. Although dietary therapy
RENAL DISEASE
does not cure chronic renal disease, it can minimize
clinical signs and contribute to a pet's health, well-being,
Maintain nitrogen balance by providing optimal protein
and longevity. In addition, the medifcation of certain
 nutrition.
essential nutrients in the diet may slow the progression
Provide adequate non protein calories.
of disease. A major goal of dietary management is to
Minimize azotemia and associated clinical signs.
minimize the accumulation of protein catabolites in the
blood while still providing adequate protein for the pet's
Normalize serum phosphorus.
maintenance needs. To this end, adlequate calories from
Normalize blood pH.
nonprotein sources must be provided to minimize the
Normalize electrolyte balance and good hydration
Aaua ioy uaioid Areiaip io sanss Apoq iaura jo asn
418 Canine and Feline Nutrition
lifespan of red blood cells. Normalizing the levels of
diet containing 1.6 g/kg of protein or less caused signs
utea and other nitrogenous waste products in the blood
of protein deficiency.
8 This is equivalent to feeding a
 through moderate restriction of dietary protein contrib-
diet containing just 8.2% protein on a dry-matter basis
utes to a return of appetite, weight gain, and a lessening
(DMB). Increasing the protein level to 2 g/kg still aided
of other clinical signs.
in the control of BUN levels and clinical signs of renal
The generation of urea is directly proportional to
disease but did not cause protein malnutrition.79 The
the daily turnover of dietary and body protein. Protein
 potential to induce protein deficiency necessitates con-
that is ingested in excess of the animal's requirement is
servative restriction of dietary protein in dogs with renal
disease. Because ufemic animals tend to be in a catabolic
products that must then be excreted by the kidneys.
 state, their minimum protein requirement may be even
Similarly, when inadlequate calories are ingested of
slightly higher than that of a healthy animal. In addi-
when an animal is in a catabolic state, body protein is
tion, dogs with proteinuria may require more dietary
used for energy, also resulting in the synthesis of urea. A
 protein than dogs without proteinuria. In all cases, the
reduction in the excretory capacity of the kidneys results
highest level of protein that results in an amelioration of
in an elevation of urea and other components in the
clinical signs and controls BUN levels without compro-
blood, because they are retained by the body. A primary
 mising protein and amino acid nutrition should be fed.
goal of dietary therapy is to provide an optimal amount
In dogs with mild to moderate renal disease, a diet
of protein and adequate nonprotein calories to prevent
containing between 12% and 28% protein cn a DMB
the breakdown of body tissue for energy. These changes
is recommended, with the exact level dependent on the
minimize the amount of urea and other nitrogenous
animal's clinical and biochemical response. In cases of
end products that afe produced. In most cases, this
severe renal disease, when GFR has deteriorated to only
necessitates a moderate restriction of dietary protein
10% to 20% of normal, protein must be pfogressively
and a change in the type of protein included in the diet.
 a  s s   e e i 
Minimum protein and amino acid requirements 
minimum daily requirement. Depending on the degree
for pets with chronic renal failure have not been estab-
of clinical signs and the energy level of the diet, a pet
lished. Therefore the decision to control protein intake
food containing between 10% and 15% protein may be
is determined by the patient's clinical signs and degree
 heeded, provided that the protein is of high biological
of impairment of renal function. Protein restriction is
value.79 At this level of renal dysfunction, a balancing
01 S9 ueq 1aieais s! Nng siad e uaum Ajuo paisasans
act occurs between providing a diet that will ameliorate
80 mg/dl and when serum creatinine is greater than
clinical signs yet will still provide adequate amounts of
2.5 mg/d1.7273 Although the normal range for fasting
nutrients. Once a modifed diet has been selected and
BUN is between 10 and 24 mg/dl, most dogs do not
found to be acceptable to the pet, progressive improve-
show clinical signs of renal disease until BUN exceeds
ment of clinical signs such as a reduction in vomiting,
improved appetite, weight gain, and improved physi-
BUN values (30 to 60 mg/dl) and are not showing
cal activity is generally seen within 2 to 4 weeks.
clinical signs do not benefit from protein restriction.74
Weekly monitoring of BUN and serum creatinine and
The goal of dietary protein restriction is to maintain
evaluation of clinical response should be used to deter-
the animal's BUN below a level of 60 mg/dl. In dogs
 mine the need for either increasing or decreasing dietary
and cats, as in other animals, a direct felationship exists
protein level.
between the BUN to serum creatinine ratio and dietary
 Modifcation of dietary protein for cats with chronic
protein. The current National Research Council's mini-
renal failure must account for the cat's naturally higher
mum protein requirement for adult dogs is 80 grams (g)
 protein requirement and its inability to adapt to low-
of crude protein per kilogram (kg) diet (8.0%
protein diets (see Section 2, pp. 92-95). Although the
by weight), when high-quality proteins are fed.75
effcacy of feline renal diets containing several nutri-
Early recommendations were to feed very low levels
ent modifications has been studied in recent years (see
pp. 424-425), the effectiveness of restricted protein
 dogs with induced renal disease found that feeding a
intake alone in managing clinical signs of chronic renal
Chronic Renal Failure 419
disease in cats has not been studied extensively. In one
disease. Decisions regarding the type of diet to use can
study, when cats with naturally occurring renal failure
be made based on the veterinarian's recommendation,
were fed a diet containing either normal or reduced
the pet's response to treatment, and the capabilities and
levels of protein and phosphorus, the group fed lower
preferences of the owner.
protein and phosphorus exhibited decreasing BUN
and serum phosphorus levels over the 6-week study
perid.80 However, the health of cats fed both high
The decision to control protein intake in dogs and
and low protein and phosphorus deteriorated during
cats with chronic renal failure is determined by the
the study. Subjective changes in health were assessed as
patient's clinical signs and degree of impairment of
being less severe in the cats fed the restricted diet, but
renat function. The highest level of protein that resuits
long-term survival and the rate of disease progression
in an amelioration of clinical signs and controis blood
were not reported. Moreover, the design of this study
urea nitrogen levels, without compromising protein and
(and of subsequent studies) does not llow separation of
amino acid nutrition, shouid be fed. in cats, modifca
the effects of low protein from those of reduced phos-
tion of dietary protein must aiso account for the cat's
phorus. A general recommendation is that, similar to
naturally higher protein requirement and its inability to
dogs, cats with chronic renal failure should be fed the
adapt to low-protein diets. Onty protein sources that are
maximum level of protein that will control uremia
hightydigestible and ofhighbiologicalvalue shouldbe
fed to pets with renal disease; examples include eggs,
important to monitor cats that are consuming reduced
dairy products,soy protein isolates,and some lean mus-
protein diets for signs of protein malnutrition.81 Signs of
cle meats.
protein defciency include hypoalbuminemia, anemia,
weight loss, and loss of lean body mass. If these signs
occur, dietary protein should be increased to a level that
corrects these abnormalities.
In both dogs and cats, the type of protein included
Fat
in the restricted protein diet is very important. Only
It is important that diets formulated for pets with
protein sources that ate highly digestible and of high
chronic renal disease contain enough nonprotein calo-
biological value should be fed. These sources include
ainos lsiaua ue se pasn suraq woy uaioid areds oi sa
eggs, dairy products, soy protein isolates, and some lean
 Fat is an excellent energy source for dogs and cats and
muscle meats. Poor-quality proteins and ingredients
also promotes diet palatability. The type of fat included
that are not highly digestible should be avoided. The
in the diet is also very important. Hyperlipidemia has
therapeutic diet can be either a commercially prepared
 been shown to be causally linked to the progression of
fenal diet or a homemade diet. Advantages of using a
chronic renal disease in dogs and other species.47,51,82
commercially prepared diet include convenience, the
Additionally, hyperlipidemia in dogs with induced
assurance of consistency in the formulation, and ade-
renal failure can be ameliorated by feeding a food that
quate testing (see pp. 424-425). However, preparing a
is enriched in PUFAs, supplied as either safflower oil
homemade diet may allow greater fexibility in the level
or fish oil from cold-water fish species.8384 Unsaturated
of protein and other nutrients that are included, thus
fatty acids in the omega-3 family (e.g., certain marine
providing a diet that is specifically formulated to meet 
fish oils, fax oil) may be the preferred source because of
a pet's individual needs. Homemade diets may also be
the beneficial effects that this class of fatty acids have on
 more palatable for some pets than some commercially
intrarenal hemodynamics and infammation. Diets rich
prepared products. Because of their tendency to develop
in omega-3 fatty acids may help to slow the progression
anorexia, cats with renal disease should be fed diets that
of this disease in dogs and cats (see pp. 415-416).
are highly palatable and acceptable. Commercial feline
It is currently recommended that fatty acid supple
maintenance diets should be avoidled because many are
ments containing omega-6 fatty acids not be admin-
formulated to be acidifying and so may contribute to
istered to pets with chronic renal failure. Conversely,
an exacerbation of metabolic acidosis in cats with renal
increasing omega-3 fatty acids in the diet may be
420Canine and Feline Nutrition
beneficial. While one method of increasing omega-3
binding agents) should be adjusted until normalization
fatty acids is to add a supplement to the diet, another
of serum phosphorus is achieved. Calcium supple-
C-ehauo on g-ehawo jo onei aua isnipe on si yeoidde
 mentation and vitamin D supplementation should be
fatty acids in the food. Although an ideal ratio for
avoided until serum phosphorus levels are under con-
pets with renal disease has not been identified, current
ttol. Providing additional calcium in the presence of
evidence suggests that feeding a diet containing a ratio
hyperphosphatemia may further contribute to soft tis-
of 5:1 is beneficial.83
sue mineralization. Once sefum phosphorus concentfa-
tion has been normalized, calcium and/or vitamin D
(calcitriol) can be supplemented to aid in the control of
Phosphorus
renal hyperparathyroidism and bone disease. Calcium
The decrease in GFR that occurs during renal failure
carbonate at a dosage of 100 mg/kg of body weight is
results in a decreased ability to excrete phosphorus.
recommended.
This decreased ability leads to phosphorus retention,
Although
1 some studies with dogs showed that
hyperphosphatemia, and renal secondary hyperpara-
restriction of dietary phosphorus prevented or reversed
thyroidism. These factors are believed to promote the
renal secondary hyperparathyroidism, most research
formation of calcium phosphate crystals and the depo-
indicates that dietary restriction alone does not con-
sition of these crystals in the kidneys and other soft
sistently reduce serum PTH levels.74,86 Moreover,
tissues, which may lead to further loss of nephrons and
serum phosphorus does not appear to be a sensitive
 predictor of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.74
tionally, the chronic elevation of PTH that is caused by
It has been hypothesized that chronically elevated
retention of phosphorus results in excessive demineral-
PTH may be more affected by decreased levels of
ization of bone and pathological changes that are associ-
active vitamin D (calcitriol) than by elevated phos-
ated with bone loss.
phorus. As kidney function declines, the ability to
A goal of dietary therapy is to normalize serum
produce calcitriol is compromised. Subsequently, low
phosphorus concentration and prevent bone demin-
calcitriol levels stimulate the release of PTH. It there-
eralization and
deposition
of
calcium
phosphate
fore appears that festriction of dietary phosphorus
crystals in soft tissues. In moderate cases of renal dis-
alone may not be sufficient to prevent hyperpara-
ease, when serum phosphorus is slightly elevated, a
an iui se yiim siad sos u usii
decrease in the level of phosphorus in t
the diet may
01 Aiesssau aq Ae poi jo uoneisuue pue
phorus. Because dietary protein is a principal source
treat the hyperparathyroidism of renal disease in these
of phosphorus, restriction of protein and the use of
animals.87
teduced phosphorus protein sources contribute
to
this dietary modification. Howevel, as the disease
progresses, dietary festriction does not always control
A goal of dietary therapy in pets with chronic renal dis-
blood phosphorus levels and may not be sufficient to
ease is to normalize serum phosphorus concentration
 as pn si  a p
and control or reverse secondary hyperparathyroid-
thyroidism and bone disease. Intestinal phosphate-
ism. in moderate cases of renal disease, when serum
binding agents must then be used in conjunction with
phosphorus is slightly elevated, α decrease in the level
reduced dietary phosphorus to normalize the serum
of phosphorus in the diet may be sufcient to achieve
normalization of serum phosphorus. However as the
administered with a meal and limit the gastrointesti-
disease progresses, intestinal phosphate-binding agents
nal absorption of phosphorus. The compounds most
are often needed Compounds most commonly used are
commonly used are aluminum hydroxide and alumi
alurminum hydroxide and aluminur carbonate. Once
num carbonate.
hyperphosphatemia is controlled,calcium supplementa
Bloed phosphorus concentration should be moni-
tionandadministrationofcalcitriolmaybeinitiated.
tored regularly, and the pet's food (and when applicable,
Chronic Renal Failure 421
The underlying mechanism involves the effects of
Dietary Fiber
dietary fber on bacterial growth in the gastrointestinal
 The reduced ability of the kidneys to excrete nitrog-
tract. Feeding fermentable fber results in increases in
enous end products of protein catabolism is a major
bacterial growth and activity in the large intestine. This
cause of the uremic signs and laboratory abnormalities
is accompanied by increased colonic blood fow, tissue
seen in animals with chronic renal failure. As discussed
 previously, providing moderately reduced dietary pro-
incfeased fecal nitrogen is primatily due to exctetion of
tein that is of very high quality can decrease the body's
need to oxidize dietary amino acids and excrete the
bacteria that proliferate synthesize the enzyme urease,
nitrogenous end products. An additional approach to
which converts urea to ammonia and carbon dioxide.
managing nitrogen excretion is to alter the route of
The ammonia is subsequently used by bacteria as a
excretion. There is evidence showing that the amount
source of nitrogen for protein synthesis. This process
and type of fber included in the diet infuences nitro-
functions to remove urea nitrogen from circulation and
gen excretion and urea concentrations in the blood.
incorporate it into bacterial protein, which is ultimately
Specifically, feeding fermentable fber alters the fux of
excreted via the feces (Figure 32-2).
urea and ammonia in the large intestine and cecum,
The effect of fermentable fber on patterns of
resulting in a shift of urea excretion from the kidneys
nitrogen excretion has been studied in dogs. When
via urine to the large intestine via feces. Because an
healthy adult dogs were fed a diet containing a blend
alternative foute of urea excretion is available, BUN
of fermentable fbers (beet pulp, fructooligosaccharides
values decrease. Feeding fermentable fbers has been
[FOS], and gum arabic), apparent digestibility of dry
shown to cause a repartitioning of nitrogen into the
 matter (DM) and organic matter decreased slightly due
feces of several species, including humans, rats, dogs,
to excretion of nonfermentable fber components and
and cats.88-92
increased bacterial mass.43 This was accompanied by a
Nitrogen
Carbohydrate
(ammonia)
[fermentable fiber)
Bacterial fermentation of nitrogen
and carbohydrate results in
increased short-chain Fatty
acid (SCFA} production
Bacterial cell
Bacterial
cell grows and divides
into two bacterial cells
SCFA
production
Twice as much nitrogen is now in
the form of bacterial protein
 Increased intestinal
blood How
Nirogen excreted safely from the body
 Pull urea from the
as bacterial cells in the feces
blood into the colon
Figure 32-2 Effect of fermentable hber on patterns of nitrogen excretion.
(From New corcepts ir mamageemt of real failure, Dayton, Ohio, 1998, The lams Company)
422 Canine and Feline Nutrition
slight decrease in apparent protein digestibility (91.3%
renal disease has also been examined. Because ferment-
versus 88.2%). Dogs fed the fber-containing diet had
able fber is capable of repartitioning nitrogen excretory
excellent stool scores, with no adlverse effects such as
shiel au premon pue siaupry aun uoy keme suaed
 diarrhea or formation of soft stools. Changes in protein
intestine, it is possible that more dietary protein can be
digestibility due to feeding fermentable fbers to dogs
fed without negatively impacting azotemia and its asso-
have been shown to be caused by the increased exctetion
ciated signs. When dogs with experimentally induced
tenal insufficiency were fed either a control food or a
ibility of dietary protein within the small intestine.91,96
food supplemented with a fermentable fiber blend, GFR
These results support the theory that fermentable fber
was unchanged, while BUN values and utinary exctetion
can be used to repartition nitrogen excretion through
of urea nitrogen decreased (Figures 32-3 and 32-4).97
intestinal bacterial protein in dogs.
Because there was no change in renal function, this indi-
The efficacy of repartitioning
 hitrogen excfetion
cates that the reduced concentration of urea in the blood
using fermentable fiber in the diet for dogs with chronic
was a result of enhanced fecal nitrogen excretion.
100
90
70
=
60
Per
50
No Fiber
Fermentable Fiber
Fgure 32-3 Effect of feeding fermentable hber on percent nitrogen in urine.*, P <.05; f, expressed as a percent of no-hber value.
(From World 5mall Animal Veterinary Association: Clirical rutritior symposiur proceedings, Dayton, Ohio, 1998, The lams Company.)
100
06
80
28
70
60
50
No Fiber
Fermentable Fiber
'anien laqy-ou jo iuaniad ese passaidxa 4 iso'> d s uaoiu eaun poog uo yaqy algeiuauay suipaay jo ioaya ze auna
(From World 5mall Animal Veterinary Association: Clirical mutritior symposiun proceedings, Dayton, Ohio, 1998, The lams Company)
Chronic Renal Failure 423
In another study, the clinical response to feeding a
fermentable fbers with no adverse effects on gastrointes-
low- or moderate-protein diet containing a fermentable
tinal function or fecal score. Although less fesearch has
fber blend to dogs in various stages of chronic renal
been conducted with cats, there is evidence that includ-
failure was examined.98 All of the dogs in the study
ing moderate levels fermentable fbers in cats' diets
had previously been fed a conventional renal diet that
 results in increased fecal nitrogen and decreased urinary
was severely restricted in protein (14% DM). At the
-ou jo sunuonedai e Sunssns duonaxa uao
start of the study, the dogs were switched to either a
 gen that would be benefcial for cats with renal disease.99
moderate-protein (21.1%) or low-protein (17.5%)
renal diet, based upon initial BUN and creatinine
values. In addition to fber content and higher protein
Other Nutrients
level, the two experimental diets also had an adjusted
Additional nutrients that are of concern in the diets of
omega-6 to omega-3 farty acid ratio of approximately
 dogs and cats with renal disease include sodium, potas-
 5:1, compared with a ratio of 22:1 in the conventional
sium, the water-soluble vitamins, and, possibly, bicaf-
fenal diet. All of the foods also contained reduced
bonate. The major route of sodium excretion in dogs
levels of phosphorus. Blood chemistries, hematocrit and
is through the urine.l00 Hypertension is commonly
hemoglobin counts, and overall health were monitored
diagnosed in dogs and cats with renal disease and has
for a 10-week period and compated with values col-
lected at the start of the study.
of experiencing a ufemic crisis also increases in hyper-
Results indicated that the inclusion of dietary fiber in
tensive dogs with renal disease. However, restriction of
the two experimental renal diets successfully partitioned
-uadaq suonuos on yeoidde ue se unpos Anea
nitrogen excretion away from the kidneys. For example,
sion associated with kidney disease has not been shown
none of the dogs fed the moderate protein had increased
to be singularly effective in dogs and cats.103,104 More-
BUN values, and two showed reduced blood ammonia
 over, pets with renal disease demonstrate limited renal
values, even though the diet contained approximately
 fesponsiveness and have a decreased tolerance to sudden
50% more protein than the conventional renal diet
changes of sodium content in the diet.68 Therefore,
 that had previously been fed. It appears that adequate
while renal diets for dogs and cats often contain normal
protein to meet the nutritional recommendation for
 Or moderately reduced sodium concentrations, the rec-
adult maintenance was provided to these dogs without
 ommended treatment for high blood pressure is usually
the side effect of exacerbating azotemia. The dogs also
medical, rather than dietary.
showed a tfend toward lower sefum tfiglyceride val-
Potassium deficiency (hypokalemia) is seen in cats
with chronic renal failure as a result of increased uri-
calories provided by fat and the adjusted omega-6 to
nary loss and reduced intake, but is rare in dogs with
cmega-3 fatty acid ratio. Owners reported an overall
tenal disease.70,105 However, because not all cats with
improvement in the quality of their dog's coat in all of
chronic renal failure are hypokalemic, potassium status
the reported cases, again refecting better protein nutri-
should be monitored closely and dietary potassium
tion in these dogs. The dogs with more advanced renal
intake adjusted on an individual basis. Potassium can be
disease were fed the second experimental fenal diet,
n i se ndns r e se p
which contained approximately 25% more protein than
of potassium citrate, of can be added to subcutaneous
the conventional renal diet. Similar to the frst group of
Auids when necessary.106 In both dogs and cats, when 
dogs, these dogs either maintained or lowered BUN and
polyuria is present, supplementation with water-soluble
creatinine values over the 10-week period
vitamins is advisable because of excessive losses of these
These results suggest that including a blend of fer-
vitamins in the urine.
 mentable fber sources in the diet of dogs with chronic
Antioxidant vitamins may also be benefcial. The
renal failure is effcacious because it can allow higher
tissues of cats with spontaneous fenal disease that were
levels of protein to be fed to uremic dogs, thus providing
fed a fenal diet that included incfeased concentrations of
optimal protein nutrition and preventing the develop-
vitamin E, vitamin C, and beta-carotene had signif-
ment of protein deficiency. Dogs tolerate a blend of
cantly reduced oxidative deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
424 Canine and Feline Nutrition
damage.107 It is known that human subjects with
chronic renal disease have increased free radical produc-
BOX 32-3 PRACTICAL FEEDING TIPS:
tion and reduced antioxidant status, changes that may
DIETARY MANAGEMENT OF
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
 contribute to disease progression.108 Supplementation
with antioxidlant vitamins reduces measures of oxidative
Provide the highest dietary protein that will maintain a
stress in humans with kidney disease.109 Although it has
blood urea nitrogen of less than 60.
not been demonstrated in dogs and cats, there is evi-
Provide a highly digestible, high-biological value protein
dence from studies with rats that supplementation with
source.
vitamin E slows renal disease progression.110
Reduced renal mass is associated with an increase in
Provide an adequate amount of nonprotein calories.
the production of ammonia by the renal tubules. This
 Restrict dietary phosphorus and regularly monitor
results in a fise in renal tissue ammonia concentration,
 serum phosphorus level.
which can cause local toxic and infammatory effects
Feed a diet that has an adjusted omega-6 to omega-3
and further contribute to renal damage.76 In severe
fatty acid ratio of 5:1.
cases, systemic metabolic acidosis may occur as a result
Feed a diet containing a moderate level of fermenta ble
of compromised capacity to regulate acid-base balance.
fiber to aid in the control of azotemia
 Supplementation with sodium bicarbonate or potassium
Provide intestinal phosphate binding agents, if
citrate may ameliorate some of the damage as a result of
necessary.
increased ammonia production in the kidneys and will
aid in the treatment of metabolic acidosis. A dosage of
When necessary, provide su pplemental calcium and
 active vitamin D (calcitriol) once serum phosphorus is
5 to 10 grains of sodium bicarbonate, given orally every
 normalized.
10 to 12 hours, is recommended (Box 32-3)
 Monitor intake of sodium bicarbonate, potassium, and
water-solu ble vitamins closely.
Additional nutrients that are of concern for dogs and
Adjust diet as necessary.
cats with renal disease include sodiur, potassium, the
water-soluble and antioxidant vitamins, and, possibly
bicarbonate. Renal diets for dogs and cats contain
that is of high biological value, restricted phosphorus,
normal or moderately reduced sodium concentrations
increased omega-3 fatty acids (and in some, an adjusted
to help to control high blood pressure (aithough the prin
omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid ratio), and normal of
cipal treatment is medical). Dietary potassium intake
moderately reduced sodium. In recent years, controlled
is adjusted on an individual basis and is supplemented
clinical studies have been conducted to examine the
as needed. When polyuria is present, supplementation
efficacy of these foods when fed to pets with naturally
with water-soluble vitamins is advisable Antioxidant
occurring renal disease.
vitamins(vitamin E, vitamin C,and beta-carotene) may
In a double-blind, controlled study of 38 dogs with
aiso be benefcial. Finally, supplementation with sodium
naturally occurring renal disease, half of the dogs were
bicarbonate or potassium citrate aids in the control of
fed a commercial maintenance diet and half of the dogs
metabolic acidosis.
a prescription renal diet, all for 24 months.!ll Dogs
fed the renal diet had significantly fewer uremic epi-
sodes, reduced risk of death from renal disease, and an
 increased median interval of time before experiencing
their frst uremic emergency when compared with dogs
Efficacy of Dietary Management
fed the maintenance food. Median survival time in dogs
(Clinical Studies)
fed the renal diet was three times longer than the sur-
Commercial prescription diets for the management
vival time of dogs that were fed the maintenance food.
of chronic renal disease in dogs and cats are typically
Similar positive fesults have been feported in
formulated to include moderately feduced protein
cats. When a group of 50 cats with stable, naturally
Chronic Renal Failure 425
occurring renal disease were fed either a prescription
found in this study was that the food that was associ-
fenal food (reduced protein, low phosphate) with of
ated with the longest survival time (-23 months) also
without an intestinal phosphate binding agent, of
contained the highest level of the omega-3 fatty acid,
their normal, non-prescription maintenance diet, the
eicosapentaenoic acid.
29 cats fed the renal diet had a signifcantly longer
Collectively, these studies show that dietary manage
median survival time than cats fed their normal food
ment is an indispensable component of the treatment
(633 days versus 264 days).112 In another study, cats
 protocol for pets with chronic renal disease. The pri-
with stage 2 or stage 3 kidney disease were fed either
d i s a so  
an adult maintenance diet of a fenal diet. Similar to
phosphorus, fats, and essential vitamin levels. Once an
the study with dogs, feeding a renal diet signifcantly
reduced the number of uremic crises and significantly
sistent monitoring of the patient's response is essential
extended lifespan and reduced mortality in cats with
for continued well-being and long-term management.
It is generally recommended that dogs and cats with
tive study of survival times in cats fed seven differ-
chronic fenal disease be feevaluated within 2 weeks
ent prescription renal diets, or the pets’ conventional
 of initial diagnosis and beginning dietary treatment.
maintenance diet, reported that all of the renal diets
Biweekly visits should continue until the pet has stabi-
resulted in longer survival times and owner-reported
lized and has accepted the dlietary change. Once the pet
improvement in quality of life in cats with renal disease
 has stabilized, veterinary assessments can be conducted
when compared with cats with renal disease that were
 every 3 months, and continue to be crucial for success
fed maintenance diets.1l4 An interesting correlation
ful management for the remainder of the pet's life.
References
1. Polzin D], Osborne CA, Bartges JW, and others: Chronic renal failure. ln Etinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors: Textbook ofveterinary
internal medicine, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders
2. Squires RA: Uraemia. In Bainbridge J, Elliott J, editors: BSAVA manual of canine and feline nephrology and urology, Ames, lowa
1996, lowa State University Press
3. Ross LA, Finco DR: Relationship of selected clinical renal function tests to glomerular fltration rate and renal blood fow in cats,
Am / Vet Res 42:1023-1026, 1981.
4. Langston CE, May SN: Managing chronic renal failure, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 28:853-861, 2006.
5. Reinhart GA, Sunvold GD: New methods for managing canine chronic renal failure. In Proc Cong Worid Small Anim Vet Asoc,
1998, pp 46-51.
6. Bovee KC: The uremic syndrome: patient evaluation and treatment, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 1:279-283, 1979.
7. Krawiec DR: Quantitative renal function tests in cats, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 16:1279-1284, 1994.
8. Carey DP: Clinical assessment of chronic renal failure. In Reinhart GA, Carey DP editors: Recent advances in canine and feline
mtrition, lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
9. International Renal Interest Society: Staging of CKD and treatment recommendations (website). http://www.iris-kidney.com.
Accessed 2006
10. Finco DR, Coulter DB, Barsanti JA: Simple, accurate method for clinical estimation of glomerular fltration rate in the dog, Am /
Vet Res 42:18741877, 1981.
11. Finco DR, Brown SC, Crowell WA, and others: Exogenous creatinine clearance as a measure of glomerular filtration rate in dogs
with reduced renal mass, Am / Vet Res 52:1029-1032, 1991.
12. Watson ADJ, Lefebre HP, Laroute V, and others: Comparison of dearance tests to assess glomerular fltration rate in dogs. In Iroc
Ann ConfVet Intern Med Forum, 1998, p 711.
426Canine and Feline Nutrition
13. Brown SA, Finco DR, Boudinot FD: Evaluation of a single injection method, using inoxol, for estimating glomerular filtration rate
in cats and dogs, Am / Vet Res 57:105-110, 1996.
14. Nolan BG, Ross LA, Vaccaro DE, and others: Estimation of glomerular filtration rate in dogs by plasma clearance of gadolinium
diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid as measured by use of an EL1SA, Am / Vet Res 70:547-552, 2009.
15. Brown SA, Finco DR, Crowell WA, and others: Dietary protein intake and the glomerular adaptations to partial nephrectomy in
dogs, / Nutr 121:S125-S127, 1991
16. Brown SA, Finco D, Crowell WA: Single-nephron adaptations to partial renal ablation in the dog, Am J Physiol 258:F495-F503,
1990.
17. Churchill J, Polzin D, Osborne C, and others: The infuence of dietary protein intake on progression of chronic renal failure in
dogs, Semin Vet Med Surg Small Anim 7:244-250, 1992.
18. Anderson S, Brenner BM: The role of intraglomerular pressure in the initiation and progresson of renal disease, J Hypertens
4(Suppl 5):S236-S238, 1986.
19. Brenner BM, Meyer TW, Hostetter TH: Dietary protein intake and the progressve nature of renal disease: the role of
hemodynamicalymediated glomerular injury in the pathogenesis of progressve glomerular slerosis in aging, renal ablation and
intrinsic renal disease, N Engt / Med 307:652-659, 1982.
20. Shimamura T, Morrison AB: A progressive glomeruloslerosis occurring in partial five-sixths nephrectomized rats, Am J Pathot
79:95-106, 1975.
21. Brown SA, Brown CA: Single-nephron adaptations to partial renal ablation in cats, Am J Physiot 269:R1 002-R1008, 1995.
22. Gonin-maa D,Senior DF: Thehyperfltration theory:progresson of chronic renal failure and the effctsof diet in dogs, JAmVet
Med Asoc 207:1411-1415, 1995.
23. Finco DR, Crowell WA, Barsanti JA: Effects of three diets on dogs with induced chronic renal failure, Am J Vet Res 46:646-653,
1985.
 24. Polzin DJ, Leininger JR, Osborne CA, and others: Development of renal lesions in dogs after 11/12 reduction in renal mass, Lab
Invest 58:172-183, 1988.
 25. Brown SA, Walton C, Crawford P, and others: Long-term effects of anti-hypertensive regimens on renal hemodynamics and
proteinuria in diabetic dogs, Kidney Int 43:1210-1218, 1993.
 26. Gaber L, Walton C, Brown S, and others: Effects of antihypertensive agents on the morphologic progression of diabetic
nephropathy in dogs, Kidney Int 46:161-169, 1994.
27. Bourgoignie JJ, Gavellas G, Martinex E, and others: Glomerular function and morphology after renal mass reduction in dogs, Lab
Chin Med 109:380-388, 1987.
28. Maeda H, Cleiser CA, Masoro EJ, and others: Nutritional infuences on aging of Fischer 344 rats. ll. Pathology, J Gerontof
40:671-688, 1985.
29. Masoro EJ, Iwasaki K, Gleiser CA, and others: Dietary modulation of the progression of nephropathy in aging rats: an evaluation
of the importance of protein, Am J Clin Nutr 49:1217-1227, 1989.
30. Bovee KC, Kronfeld DS, Ramberg CF, and others: Long term measurement of renal function in partially nephrectomized dogs fed
56, 27 or 19% protein, Invest Nephrol 16:378-385, 1979.
31. Robertson JL, Goldschmidt M, Kronfeld DS, and others: Long term renal responses to high dietary protein in dogs with 75%
nephrectomy, Kidney Int 29:511-519, 1986.
32. Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, Hayden DW: Influence of reduced protein diets on morbidity, mortality, and renal function in dogs with
induced chronic renal failure, Asm J Vet Res 45:506-517, 1 984.
33. Tucker SM, Mason RL, Beauchene RE: Infuence of diet and feed restriction on kidney function of aging male rats, J Geronto!
31:264-270, 1976.
34. Berg BN, Simms HS: Nutrition and longevity in the rat. ll. Longevity and onset of disease with different levels of food intake,
 Nutr 71:255-263, 1960.
Chronic Renal Failure 427
35. Tapp DC, Kobayoshu S, Fernandes S: Protein restriction or calorie restriction? A critical assessment of the infuence of selective
calorie restriction on the progression of experimental renal disease, Semin Nephro! 9:343-353, 1989.
36. White JV, Finco DR, Brown SA, and others: Eect of dietary protein on kidney function, morphology, and histopathology during
compensatory renal growth in dogs, Am / Vet Res 52:1357-1365, 1990.
37. Adams LG, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, and others: Efects of dietary protein and calorie restriction in clinically normal cats and in
cats with surgically induced chronic renal failure, Am / Vet Res 54:1653-1662, 1993.
 38. Finco DR, Brown SC, Brown CA, and others: Protein and calorie effects on progression of induced chronic renal failure in cats,
Am / Vet Res 59:575-582, 1998.
39. Finco DR: Renal function in geriatric dogsare there dietary protein effects? Vet Clin Nutr 1:66-68, 1994.
40. Sheffy BE, Williams AJ, Zimmer JF, and others: Nutrition and metabolism of the geriatric dog, Cornell Vet 75:324-347, 1985.
 41. Finco DR, Brown SA, Crowell WA, and others: Effects of aging and dietary protein intake on uninephrectomized geriatric dogs
Am / Vet Res 55:1282-1290, 1994.
42. Osborne CA, Polzin DJ, Abdullahi S, and others: Role of diet in management of feline chronic polyuric renal failure: current
status, J Am Anim Hosp Asoc 18:11-20, 1982.
43. Reinhart GA, Sunvold GD: New methods for managing chronic renal failure. In Proc North Am Vet Corf Orlando, Fla, 1998,
pp 17-20.
44. Lafamme DP: Pet food safety: dietary protein, Top Companion Anim Med 23:154-157, 2008.
45. Polzin D], Osorne CA, Lulich JP: Efects of dietary protein/phosphate restriction in normal dogs and dogs wich chronic renal
failure, J Small Anim Pract 32:289-295, 1991.
46. Lau K: Phosphate excess and progresive renal failure: the precipitation-calcification hypothesis, Kadney Int 36:918-937, 1989.
47. Brown SA, Crowell WA, Barsanti JA: Beneficial effects of dietary mineral restriction in dogs with marked reduction of functional
renal mass, / Am Soc Nephrof 1: 1169-1 179, 1991.
48. Finco DR, Brown SA, Crowell WA, and others: Effect of phosphorus/calcium-restricted and phosphorus/calcium-replete 32%
protein diets in dogs with chronic renal failure, Am J Vet Res 53: 157-163, 1992.
49. Finco DR, Brown SC, Crowell WA, and others: Effects of dietary phosphorus and protein in dogs with chronic renal falure, AmJ
Vet Res 153:22642271, 1992.
50. Ross LA, Finco DR, Crowell WA: Effect of dietary phosphorus restriction on the kidneys of cats with reduced renal mass, Am J Vet
Rer 43:1023-1026, 1982.
51. French SW, Yamanaka W, Ostwald R: Dietary induced glomerulosclerosis in the guinea pig, Arch Pathol 83:204-210, 1967.
52. Heifets M, MorrisseyJ, Parkerson Ml, and others: Effect of dietary lipids on renal function in rats with subtotal nephrectoy,
Kidney Int 32:335-341, 1987.
 53. Brown SA: Managing chronic renal failure: the role of dietary polyunsaturated faty acids. In Proc NAVC, Orlando, Fla, 1998, pp 5-8.
 54. Fries JWU, Sandstrom DJ, Meyer TW, and others: Glomerular hypertrophy and epithelial cellinjury modulate progressive
gomerulosclerosis in the rat, Lab Invest 60:205-218, 1989.
55. Barcelli U, Miyata J, Ito Y, and others: Beneficial effects of polyunsaturated fatty acids in partially nephrectomized rats,
Prostagtandins 32:211-219, 1986.
56. Clark WF, Parbani A, Philbrick D], and others: Chronic effects of omega-3 fatty acids (fsh oil) in a rat 5/6 renal ablation model,
J A Soc Nephrof 1:1343-1353, 1991.
57. Logan JL, Michael UF, Benson B: Dietary fish oil interferes with renal arachidonic acid metabolism in rats: correlation with renal
physiology, Metabolism 41:382-389, 1992.
pw ug N ypedorydau ya ur go ysyro ern paonuo y srayo pue (y proho fa yenssrag Af opeuoa 8s
331:1194 1199, 1994.
 59. Clark WF, Parabtani A, Maylor CD, and others: Fish oil in lupus nephritis: clinical findings and methodological implications,
Kidney Int 44:75-86, 1993.
428 Canine and Feline Nutrition
60. Brown SA: Infuence of dietary fatty acids on intrarenal hypertension. In Reinhart GA, Carey DP editors: Recent advances in canine
and feline nutrition, lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press
61. Bauer JE, Markwell PJ, Rawlings JM: Effects of dietary fat and polyunsaturated fatty acids in dogs with naturally developing
chronic renal failure, J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:1588-1591, 1999
62. Brown SA, Brown CA, Crowell WA, and others: Beneficial effects of chronic administration of dietary omega-3 polyunsaturated
63. Bauer J, Crocker R, Markwell I, and others: Dietary n-6 fatty acid supplementation improves ultrafiltration in spontaneous canine
chronic renal failure (abstract), J Vet Intern Med 11:2, 1997.
64. Dworkin L, Benstein J, Tolbert E, and others: Salt restriction inhibits renal growth and stabilizes injury in rats with established
renal disease, J Am Soc Nephrol 7:437-442, 1996.
65. Greco DS, Les GE, Dzendzel G: Effect of dietary sodium intake on glomerular fltration rate in partially nephrectomized dogs, Am
 Vet Res 55:152-159, 1994.
66. Burankarl C, Amathur S, Cartier L: Effects of dietary sodium chloride (NaCl) supplementation on renal function and blood
pressure in normal cats and in cats with induced renal insufficiency. ln Proc 28th Worild Cong WSAVA, October 24, 2003.
67. Hughes KL, Slater MR, Geller S: Diet and lifestyle variables as risk factors for chronic renal failure in pet cats, Irev Vet Med
55:1-15,2002.
68. Elliott DA: Nutritional management of chronic renal disease in dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am SmallAnim Pract 36:1377-1384,
2006.
69. Lulich J, Osborne C, O'Brien T, and others: Feline renal failure: questions, answers, questions, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
14:127-152, 1992.
70. Dow S W, Fettman MJ, Smith KR, and others: Effects of dietary acidification and potassium depletion on acid-base balance,
mineral metabolism, and renal function in adult cats, / Nutr 120:569-578, 1990.
71. Langston CE: Managing chronic renal failure, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 28:123-128, 2006.
72. Finco DR: Chronic renal failure: dietary protein and phosphorus. ln Proc NAVC, Orlando, Fla, 1998, pp 9-10.
73. Carey DP: Clinical assessment of chronic renal failure. ln Reinhart GA, Carey DP editors: Recent advances in canine and feline
matrition, lams mutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
74. Hansen B, DiBartola SP, Chew DJ, and others: Clinical and metabolic findings in dogs with chronic renal failure fed two diets, Am
Vet Res 53:326-334, 1992.
75. National Research Council: Nutrient reguirements ofdogs and cats, Washington, DC, 2006, National Academy Press.
76. Polzin Dj, Osborne CA: Current progress in slowing progresson of canine and feline chronic renal failure, Comp Anim Pract
3:52-62,1988
77. Bovee KC: Diet and kidney failure. In Kal Kan symposium for the treatment ofdog and cat diseases, Vernon, Calif, 1977.
78. Polzin D], Osborne CA, Stevens JB, and others: Infuence of modified protein diets on the nutritional status of dogs with induced
chronic renal failure, Am / Vet Res 44:16941702, 1983.
79. Devaux C, Polzin Dj, Osborne CA: What role does dietary protein play in the management of chronic renal failure in dogs? Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26:1247-1267, 1996
 80. Harte J, MarkwllI Moraillion R, and ochers: Dietary management of naturally ocurring cronic renal failure in cats, J Natr
124:2660S-2662S, 1994.
 81. Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, Lulich JP: Diet therapy guidelines for cats with chronic renal failure, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
26:1 269-1275, 1996.
82. Keane WF, Kasiske BL, O'Donnell MP: Hyperlipidemia and the progresson of renal disease, Am J Clin Nutr 47:157-160, 1987.
 83. Brown SC, Brown CA, Crowell WA, and others: Does modifying dietary lipids infuence the progresson of renal failure? Vet Clin
Nbrth Am Small Anim Pract 26:1277-1285, 1996.
Chronic Renal Failure 429
84. Brown SC, Brown CA, Crowell WA, and others: Effects of dietary polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation in early renal
insuffciency in dogs, / Lab Chin Med 135:275-286, 2000.
 85. Barber PJ, Rawlings JM, Markwell PJ: Effect of dietary phosphate restriction on renal secondary hyperparathyroidism in the cat,
 Small Anim Pract 40:62-70, 1999
86. Kaplan MA, Canterbury JM, Bourgoignie JJ: Reversal of hyperparathyroidism in response to dietary phosphorus restriction in the
uremic dog, Kidney Int 15:43-48, 1979.
87. Nagode LA, Chew Dj, Podell M: Benefits of calcitriol therapy and serum phosphorus control in dogs and cats with chronic renal
failure, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26:1293-1331, 1996.
oaroxa pue uouaar uasonru uo suauaddns argy Arenarp yo laal pue adha au yo seaa og wnsg d asait 'I suall 8
patterns, Br J Nutr 75:461469, 1996.
89. Younes H, Remesey C, Behr S, and others: Fermentable carbohydrate exerts a urea-lowering effect in normal and nephrectomized
rats, Am J Physiol 272:G515-G525, 1997.
90. Bliss DZ, Stein TP, Schleifer CR, and others: Supplementation with gum arabic fber increases fecal nitrogen excretion and lowers
91. Howard MD, Sunvold GD, Reinhart CA, and others: Effect of fermentable fber consumption by the dog on nitrogen balance and
fecal microbial nitrogen excretion, FASEB / 10:A257, 1996.
92. Vickers RJ, Sunvold GA, Reinhart GA: Efect of selected fber blends on repartitioning of nitrogen disposal in the cat. In Iroc 9th
Ann ESVIM Forum, 1999, pp 178-179.
93. Sunvold GD, Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, and others: Dietary fiber for dogs. IV. In vitro fermentation of selected fiber sources by
dog fecal inoculum and in vivo digestion and metabolism of fiber-supplemented diets, J Anim Sci 73:1099-1109, 1995.
94. Hallman JE, Moxley RA, Reinhart CA, and others: Cellulose, beet pulp and pectin/gum arabic effects on canine colonic
microstructure and histopathology, / Vet Clin Nutr 2:137-142, 1995.
95. Howard MD, Kerley MS, Mann FA, and others: Dietary fiber sources alter colonic blood How and epithelial cell proliferation of
dogs, I Anim Sei 75:170, 1997.
96. Muir HE, Murray SM, Fahey GC Jr, and others: Nutrient digestion by ileal cannulated dogs as affected by dietary fbers with
various fermentation characteristics, J Anim Sci 74:1641-1648, 1996.
renal insuffciency. In Reinhart CA, Carey DP editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition, Iams nutrition symposium
proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
98. Tetrick MA, Sunvold GD, Reinhart CA: Clinical experience with canine renal patients fed a diet containing a fermentable fber
blend. In Reinhart CA, Carey DP editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition, lams nutrition symposium proceedings.
vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
99. Sunvold CD, Vickers RJ, Reinhart GA: Effect of fermentable fber blends on nitrogen repartitioning in the feline. In Proc NAVC,
2000, pp 20-24.
 100. Smith RC, Haschem T, Hamlin RL, and others: Water and electrolyte intake and output and quantity of feces in the healthy dog,
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 59:743-748, 1964.
101. Syme HM, Barber PJ, Markwell PJ: Prevalence of systolic hypertension in cats with chronic renal failure at initial evaluation, J Am
Vet Med Assoc 220:1799-1804, 2002.
102. Jacob F, Polzin D], Osborne CA: Association between initial systolic blood pressure and risk of developing an uremic crisis or of
dying in dogs with chronic renal failure, J Am Vet Med Asoc 222:322-329, 2003.
103. Greco DS, Lees GE, Dzendzel G: Effects of dietary sodium intake on blood pressure measurements in partially nephrectomized
dogs, Am / Vet Res 55:160-165, 1994.
104. Burankarl C, Mathur S, Cartier L: Efects of dietary sodium chloride (NaCl) supplementation on renal function and blood
pressure in normal cats and cats with induced renal insuffciency. In Proc WSAVA, October 2003.
430 Canine and Feline Nutrition
105. Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, Ross S: Dietary management of feline chronic renal failure: where are we now? In what direction are we
headed? J Feline Med Surg 3:75-82, 2000.
106. Polzin D], Osborne CA, RossS: Chronic kidney disease. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors: Textbook ofveterinary internal
medicine, ed 6, St Louis, 2005, Saunders.
107. Yu S, Paetau-Robinson l: Dietary supplements of vitamins E and C and betacarotene reduce oxidative stress in cats with renal
insufficiency, Vet Res Commun 30:403-413, 2006.
108. Hasselwander O, Young IS: Oxidative stress in chronic renal failure, Free Radical Res 29:1-11, 1998.
109. Peuchant E, Delmas-Beauvieux MC, Dubourg L: Antioxidant effects of a supplemented very low protein diet in chronic renal
failure, Free Radica! Biol Med 22:313-320, 1997.
110. Hahn S, Krieg RJ Jr, Hisano S: Vitamin E suppresses oxidative stress and glomerulosclerosis in rat remnant kidney, Pediat?
Nephrol 13:195-198, 1999.
111. Jacob F, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, and others: Clinical evaluation of dietary modifcation for treatment of spontaneous chronic
renal failure in dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc 220:1163-1170, 2002.
112. Elliott J, Rawlings JM, Markwell Pl: Survival of cats with naturally occurring chronic renal failure: effect of dietary management,
J Small Anim Pract 41:235-242, 2000.
113. Ross SJ, Osborne CA, Kirk CA, and others: Clinical evaluation of dietary modification for treatment of spontaneous chronic
kidney disease in cats, J Am Vet Med Asoc 229:949-957, 2006.
114. Mantinga EA, Everts H, Kastelein AMC, Beynen AC: Retrospective study of the survival of cats with acquired chronic renal
insufficiency offered different commercial diets, Vet Rec 157:185-187, 2005.
33
Feline Hepatic Lipidosis
Feline hepatic lipidosis (FHL) is an acquired disorder
accumulation continued during the weight loss stage
caused by the excessive accumulation of triglycerides in
of the study, presumably as a result of impaired fatty
the cells of the liver, which ultimately interferes with
acid oxidation. Another study reported that overweight
the liver's ability to function.! It is one of the most com-
cats experiencing rapid weight loss did not demonstrate
mon hepatobiliary disorders of cats and was historically
feduced VLDL tranisport from the liver, nor was there
associated with a very high mortality fate.23 Howevef,
a pronounced increase in triglyceride synthesis.12 Most
sisoidil sneday ym sies jo sisousoid uai-suol a
has dramatically improved, due in large part to the use
of early and aggressive tube feeding, which success-
mobilization to the liver as well as the oxidation of fatty
fully reverses the condition in many cats.4S Still, the
acids or synthesis and, possibly, secretion of VLDLs.3,4
underlying cause of hepatic lipidosis is not completely
FHL is relatively
 common and is usually seen in
understood. Its onset is almost
universally preceded
middle-aged cats with a history of obesity. Females are
by a period of anorexia and most, but not all, cats that
reported to be twice as likely to be affected as males,
develop FHL are overweight or obese. Less commonly,
but this may refect a higher incidence of obesity in the
hepatic lipidosis occurs secondarily to other pathologi-
females that were studied, rather than a true gender dif-
cal conditions such as infammatory bowel disease, renal
ference.6 There is also evidence that spayed females tend
disease, or diabetes mellitus.
to consume more food, which may predispose them to
overweight conditions.13 In the majority of cases, a cat
will have experienced a period of stress followed by pat-
INCIDENCE AND CAUSE
tial or complete anorexia. Although obesity in cats is
In healthy animals, a dynamic relationship
exists
 not consistently associated with hepatic accumulation
among the fatty acids that are located in adipose tis-
of lipids, the metabolic changes caused by prolonged
sue, traveling in the blood, and stored in the liver.
fasting can lead to rapid and severe hepatic fat accu-
Circulating fatty acids are taken up by the liver, where
mulation and the clinical signs associated with liver
 they are either metabolized for energy or converted to
disease. For example, when five healthy but obese cats
triglycerides and secreted back into the circulation. If
were fasted for a period of 4 to 6 weeks, three of the
the supply of fatty acids to the liver exceeds the liver's
cats remained healthy and two developed overt clinical
capacity to oxidize or secrete them, lipidosis develops.7
and laboratory signs of FHL.14 Subsequent studies by
Several studies support the theory that the origin of
the same group reported that voluntary fasting could
excess hepatic triglycerides in cats with FHL is from
be induced by changing the diets of obese cats from a
fatty acids mobilized from adipose tissue.8-10 Metabolic
highly palatable commercial diet to a less palatable puri-
changes that may contribute to hepatic lipidosis include
fed diet.!5 In this study, all of the cats refused to eat
impaired mitochondrial or peroxisomal oxidation of
the new diet and developed histological signs of hepatic
fatty acids in hepatocytes and reduced liver secretion of
lipidosis over a period of 4 to 7 weeks.
the very-low-dlensity lipoproteins (VLDLs) that carry
tftiglycerides in the bloodstream. Support for reduced
fatty acid oxidation is provided from a study of induced
Feline idiopathic hepatic lipidosis is fairy common
FHL in adlult female cats.ll Cats began to accumu-
among middle-aged, obese cats. it most often occurs
late hepatic lipids during the weight gain phase of the
aftera period of partial or compiete anorexia,usualy
study, and this increase was associated with a feduc-
brought on by stress.
tion in mitochondrial numbers in liver cells. Liver lipid
431
432 Canine and Feline Nutrition
-sisuos e aq on sieadde Susey pasuojoid yanouiv
 FHL. However, carnitine concentrations in the plasma,
tent finding in cats that develop FHL, the exact meta-
livel, and skeletal muscle of cats with hepatic lipidosis
bolic changes responsible for the rapid accumulation
have been reported to be normal.25,26 Another study
of lipid in the liver have not been completely eluci-
feported increased plasma concentrations of carnitine
dated. Cats diagnosed with FHL typically show signs of
during a period of weight gain in cats fed a diet con-
protein malnutrition such as muscle wasting, anemia,
taining normal carnitine levels, but liver carnitine did
and hypoalbuminemia. It has been hypothesized that
 not increase.27 The change in plasma concentration
deficiencies of arginine and methionine, secondary
was atributed to increased food consumption during
to anorexia and protein malnutrition, afe involved in
weight gain. Conversely, liver cafnitine levels were not
the onset of FHL. The cat requires a dietary source
higher in obese cats when compated with lean cats. It is
of the amino acid arginine for the production of urea in
possible that increased liver carnitine is necessary dur-
the liver. When the cat stops eating, prolonged anorexia
ing the overweight condition to support normal fatty
leads to a deficiency of arginine. Urea cycle activity is
acid oxidation in the liver and that insufficient levels
depressed, and ammonia begins to accumulate in the
 may contribute to the onset of FHL during periods of
blood. Byproducts of this disruption in the urea cycle
anorexia and rapid weight loss (see p. 433).
can interfere with lipoprotein synthesis in the liver.16
Moreover, a deficiency of one or more essential amino
acids may limit the synthesis of the proteins needed
CLINICAL SIGNS AND
for production of lipoproteins by the liver, leading
DIAGNOSIS
to an accumulation of triglycerides.17 For example,
methionine contributes to the development of hepatic
Clinical signs of FHL include complete or partial
lipidosis in rats.18 In addition, taurine supplementation,
anorexia with a duration of 7 days or longer, depression,
which is synthesized from methionine by most species,
jaundice, weight loss, and muscle wasting.28-30 Vomit
has been shown to feduce liver lipid concentrations in
ing and/or diarrhea are occasionally reported. Owners
 obese children.19 Because taurine is an essential nutri-
usually report that the cat suddenly stopped eating
    Ps aq s i si rg 
following a period of lifestyle change or stress. Com-
dietary taurine may contribute to FHL and providing
monly reported stresses include a move to a hew house,
supplemental taurine to the diet may help to prevent
the arival of new pets into the household, or a sudden
its development.ll Supportive research for the role of
change in diet. Laboratory fndings show increased
 protein and essential amino acids has shown that the
serum activities of liver-associated enzymes, increased
administration of small amounts of protein to obese
sefum bilirubin and bile acid concentrations, and, in
cats during fasting helps to prevent the accumulation
some cases, increased blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and
of hepatic lipids.20
plasma ammonia concentration.28 A nonregenerative
Carnitine is a compound that is synthesized from
anemia characterized by irregularly shaped erythrocytes
methionine and lysine, primarily in the liver. It is nec-
is typically seen. The initial diagnosis of FHL is made
essary for the transport of long-chain fatty acids into
using medical history, clinical signs, and the results of
cellular mitochondria for oxidation. Human subjects
 The diagnosis is confirmed by a livet
with carnitine defciency show severe fat accumulation
biopsy or f
fine-needlle aspirate showing excessive lipid
 in the liver and other organs and develop signs of liver
accumulation in the sampled hepatocytes.
disease.2l Carnitine concentrations have been shown to
be increased in the muscle and liver of obese women
TREATMENT
and also during periods of starvation in humans and
rats.22-24 Because of this association in other species
Regardlless of the metabolic cause of FHL, it is
and because of evidence of reduced fatty acid oxidation
 essential for the cat's recovery that an early diagno-
in the liver of obese cats, it had been theorized that a
sis is made and that supportive fuid and nutritional
deficiency of carnitine may be a contributing factor t0
therapy is stafted as soon as possible. Aggressive tube
Feline Hepatic Lipidosis 433
feeding is the treatment of choice because afflicted cats
weight loss and improved fatty acid oxidation, but did
will not eat voluntarily. Force-feeding is not recom-
mended because it can further stfess the cat and does
L-carnitine may
help
to protect overweight cats
not provide an accurate measure of the pet's caloric
from fasting-induced FHL, but may be less effective
intake. For these reasons, tube feeding with a naso-
 therapeutically, once FHL has developed and aggressive
 treatment is needed.
trostomy) tube is preferred by most veterinarians.31,32
The initial tube feeding should provide %4 to /2 of the
The use of a gastrostomy tube involves direct surgical
cat's calculated metabolizable energy (ME) requirement.
entry into the cat's stomach. This procedure allows
This is gradually increased over a 1-week period to the
accufate and consistent delivery of nutrients and does
 cat's ME requirement. A minimum of four feedings
not interfere with the cat's ability to swallow.29,31
should be provided per day. Signs of hepatic dysfunction
Although surgical complications are a risk, most cats
begin to resolve as soon as the cat is receiving adlequate
protein and energy intake. However, most cats require 3
than nasogastric tubes.
to 6 weeks of intense dietary therapy before laboratory
The composition of an ideal therapeutic diet for
values normalize, clinical improvement occurs, and the
cats recovering from FHL has not been determined.
cat's appetite returns. Because it appears that acquired
A variety of diets have been fecommended, includ-
food aversion is a component of the anorexia seen in
ing blenderized high-protein cat diets, human enteral
many cats with FHL, oral feeding should not be intro-
products, and veterinary enteral products.32,33 Because
duced until tube feeding is well established and the cat
it is generally accepted that the provision of optimal
voluntarily shows a strong interest in food when it is
levels of dietary protein is essential, a high-protein,
presented.
high-fat product is needed. Veterinary foods that are
The cat's owner must be willing to assist with the
formulated for recovery are often appropriate because
nursing care of the pet because cats with hepatic lipi-
they contain high levels of protein and are energy
dosis may not eat well for several months. As the cat's
dense. Cats that show clinical signs of hepatoencepha-
 appetite returns, the frequency of tube feedings should
lopathy initially need to be fed a reduced-protein diet.
be slowly decreased until the cat is consuming adequate
Protein content can be gradually increased as neuro-
calories voluntarily. When vomiting can be controlled
logical signs resolve.
and long-term
adlequate protein and calorie intake
 In addition to providing adequate protein, there is
is ensured, treatment is usually successful. However,
evidence that supplementation with L-carnitine may
improve fatty acid oxidation in overweight cats that
of weeks to several months, management can be diffi-
addns aram iey sie izl'THH on pasodsipid ane
cult for pet owners, and prognosis will be guarded until
mented with L-carnitine (1000 milligram/kilogram
the cat begins to eat voluntarily. Supportive treatment
[mg/kg] diet) during a weight gain and fasting proto-
involves minimizing any stress that the animal may
col designed to induce FHL had significantly increased
experience and, in some cases, administering appe-
plasma, muscle, and liver carnitine
 concentfations
tite stimulants. Although some investigators advocate
compared with unsupplemented cats during the weight
 supplying supplemental carnitine during tube feed-
fastedl,
ing, recent evidence indicates that this is probably less
supplementation with
1  carnitine  ameliorated  fasting
important than providing adequate carnitine to cats
ketosis in cats that did not develop FHL, but did not
that may be at high risk, such as overweight cats and
have this affect in cats that developed FHL. Conversely,
spayed females.11,13,27
unsupplemented cats showed dramatic increases
in
Throughout the treatment period, frequent menitor-
plasma free fatty acids and became ketotic during fast-
ing of liver-associated enzymes in serum can be used as
ing, whether or not FHL developed. Another study
an indicator of hepatic recovery. Because most cats with
showed that providing increased dietary L-carnitine
FHL have a history of obesity, it is prudent to pre
to obese cats that were fed for weight loss enhanced
vent weight fegain following fecovery. If the cat is still
434Canine and Feline Nutrition
overweight, a weight loss protocol that allows a slow rate
Early diagnosis is essential for successful treatment of
of weight loss and includes a diet containing optimal
levels of protein should be followed (see Chapter 28,
pp. 328-335). Veterinary supervision is wafranted
The dietary solution shouid inciude high levels of protein
to ensure a slow fate of weight loss and prevent the
and energy. Most cats require 3 to 6 weeks of intense
recurrence of FHL. Most importantly, the cat's lifestyle
dietary therapy before improverent is seen and the cat's
and living conditions should be managed to minimize
appetite returns.Ownercommitmentand compliance
of prevent stressful events that may lead to subsequent
episodes of anorexia.
References
1. Hubbard BS, Vulgamott JC: Feline hepatic lipidosis, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 14:459-464, 1992.
2. Zawie D, Garvey M: Feline hepatic disease, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 14:1201-1230, 1984.
3. Dimski DS, Taboada J: Feline idiopathic hepatic lipidosis, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 25:357-373, 1995.
4. Center SA, Crawford MA, Guida L, and others: A retrospective study of 77 cats with severe hepatic lipidosis, Am J Vet Res
5:724-731, 1993.
5. Biourge V, Pion P Lewis J, and others: Spontaneous occurrence of hepatic lipidosis in a group of laboratory cats, JVet Intern Med
7:194-197, 1993.
6. Center SA: Feline hepatic lipidosis, Vet Anx 33:244-254, 1993.
7. Thornburg LP, Simpson S, Digilo K: Fatty liver syndrome in cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:397-400, 1982.
 8. Hall JA, Barstad LA, Voller BE, and others: Lipid composition of liver and adipose tissues from normal cats and cats with hepatic
lipidosis (abstract), / Vet Intern Med 6:127, 1992.
 9. Hall JA, Barstad LA, Connor WE: Lipid composition of hepatic and adipose tissues from normal cats and cats with idiopathic
hepatic lipidosis, / Vet Intern Med 11:238-242, 1997.
pedoi pue ss npe fuieay jo sayord uraordodig wnras po uonezaerys isiauo pue t snauro I saaiiea 'th yezed ot
feline hepatic lipidosis patients, J Nut 128:2747S-2750S, 1998.
11. lbrahim WH, Bailey NB, Sunvold GD, Bruckner GG: Efects of carnitine and taurine on fatty acid metabolism and lipid
accumulation in the liver of cats during weight gain and weight loss, Am J Vet Res 64:1265-1277, 2003.
12. Ibrahim WH, Szabo J, Sunvold GD: Effect of dietary protein quality and fatty acid composition on plasma lipoprotein
concentrations and hepatic trglyceride fatty acid synthesis in obese cats undergoing rapid weight loss, Am J Vet Res 61:566-572,
0007
13. Flynn MF, Hardie EM, Armstrong PJ: Effect of ovariohysterectomy on maintenance energy requirement in cats, J Am Vet Med Axoc
209:1572-1581, 1996.
14. Biourge V: Sequential findings in cats with hepatic lipidosis, Feline Pract 21:25-28, 1993.
15. Biourge V, Groff JM, Munn R, and others: Experimental induction of feline hepatic lipidosis, Am / Vet Res 55:1291-1302, 1994.
16. Hardy PM: Diseases of the liver and their treatment. In Einger SJ, editor: Textbook ofveterinary internal medicine, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 1989, Saunders.
17. Alpers DH, Sabesin SM: Fatty liver: biochemical and clinical aspects. In Schiff L, Schiff ER, editors: Diseases ofthe liver, ed 6,
Philadelphia, 1987, Lippincott.
 18. Aoyama Y, Yasui H, Ashida K: Effect of dietary protein and amino acids in a choline-deficient diet on lipid accumulation in rat liver,
J Nutr 101:739-745, 1971.
Feline Hepatic Lipidosis 435
19. Obinata K, Maruyama T, Hayashi M: Effect of taurine on the fatty liver of children with simple obesity, Adu Exp Med Biot
403:607-613,1996
20. Biourge VC, Massat B, Groff JM, and others: Effects of protein, lipid, or carbohydrate supplementation on hepatic lipid
accumulation during rapid weight loss in obese cats, Am / Vet Res 55:1405-1415, 1994.
21. Chapoy PR, Angelini C, Brown WJ: Systeic carnitine defciencya treatable inherited ipid storage disease presenting as Reye's
syndrome, N Engl J Med 303:1389-1394, 1980.
 22. Harper P, Wadstrom C, Beckman L, Cederblad G: Increased liver carnitine content in obese women, Am J Clin Nutr 61:81-25, 1995.
23. Sandor A, Cseko J, Kispal C, Alkonyi l: Surplus acylcarnitines in the plasma and liver of starved rats derive from the liver, J Biof
Chem 265:22313-22316, 1990.
 24. Hoppel CL, Genuth SM: Carnitine metabolism in normal-weight and obese human subjects during fasting, Am J Physio!
238:E409-E415,1980.
 25. Jacobs G, Cornelius L, Keene B, and others: Comparison of plasma, liver, and skeletal muscle carnitine concentrations in cats with
idiopathic hepatic lipidosis and in healthy cats, Am J Vet Rer 51:1349-1351, 1991.
26. Jacobs C, Cornelius L, Allen S, and others: Treatment of idiopathic hepatic lipidosis in cats: 11 cases (1986-1987), J Am Vet Med
Assoc 195:635-638, 1989.
decreases ketosis during fasting and induced hepatic lipidosis, / Nutr 132:204-210, 2002.
28. Cornelius LM, Rogers K: Idiopathic hepatic lipidosis in cats, Mod Vet Pract 66:377-380, 1985.
29. Evans KL, Cornelius LM: Dietary management of feline idiopathic hepatic lipidosis, Feline Pract 18:5-10, 1990.
30. Biourge V: Feline hepatic lipidosis. 1n Proceedings of the petfood forum, Chicago, 1996, Watts Publishing-
31. Armstrong P Hand M, Frederick G: Enteral nutrition by tube, Vet Chin North Am Small Anim Pract 20:237-275, 1990.
e anpg a puadu huauaetueus puonrnnu pue sisuaaoped sisopid sneday auah T Bury N Pieuooe g aainog 7e
Vet 12:1244-1258, 1990.
33. Center S: Feline liver disorders and their management, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 8:889-902, 1986.
34
Dental Health and Diet
Periodontal disease and infammation of the gingivae
s! pue sheae og iseal ie ioy siad snsauop u! panodai
ate common disorders in dogs and cats.l Gingivitis
considered a worldwide problem. For example, gingival
is caused by the formation and persistence of dental
infammation and heavy calculus deposits were found
plaque on the surface of the teeth. If untreated, this
in 95% of research colony dogs, 2 years old or clder,
can progress to periodontal disease, which affects the
in a study conducted more than 40 years ago. Anothef
gingivae, periodontal ligament, cementum, and alveolar
eatly study reported moderate to severe periodontal dis-
bone. Periodontal disease is associated with oral pain,
ease in 75% of necropsied pet dogs that were betweenl
malodorous breath, ulceration, and the loss of alveolaf
4 and 8 yeats of age.
7 Recent survey studies of dogs and
bone and teeth. The bacteremia that often accompanies
cats living in several different areas of the world consis-
peridontitis may also lead to damage to other organs in
tently report prevalence rates of periodontal disease of
the body. Although a direct causal relationship has not
60% to 80%.1,8-10
been proven, periodontal disease has been implicated as
Periodontal  c
disease isstrongly
associated with
contributing to systemic diseases involving the kidneys.
increasing age in both dogs and cats. In dogs, increas-
Jn sinse leaass ym peians aianid si se s
periodontal disease severity, including the intensity of
disorder in dogs and cat, studies have focused on nutri-
gingival infammation, the quantity of calculus that is
tion and diet as fisk factors for its development and as
deposited, and the degree of bone resorption and tooth
potential means for reducing gingivitis and calculus for-
mobility.ll Similarly, a study with cats found evidence
mation, preventing its progression to periodontal dis-
of periodontal disease in 60% of cats older than 3 years,
ease and supporting long-term dental health
and another found that 40% of cats older than 7 years
of age had advanced periodontitis.12,13 Feline odonto-
clastic resorptive lesions (FORLs) are also a commonly
INCIDENCE AND DESCRIPTION
diagnosed dental disorder of cats as they age. A study
The types of dental health problems that occur in dogs
of 145 adult cats found evidence of FORLs in 48% of
and cats differ somewhat from those typically seen in
the animals studied.14 Other groups have found FORL
humans. Because of the sharp inclined planes of theif
dentition, dogs and cats are not susceptible to the for-
sive nature of periodontal disease and the likelihood
mation of tooth caries (i.e., cavities). In dogs, deminer-
that supragingival changes may go unnoticed by owners
alization of teeth is not common because of the alkaline
until there is signifcant damage to the periodontium
nature of their saliva. Cats, in comparison, can produce
may explain the increased incidence in older animals.
saliva with a more acidic pH, making tooth deminer-
Mouth size is a signifcant risk factor for periodon-
alization possible in this species. Overall, the three pri-
tal disease in dogs. Although all dogs can be affected,
aie sies pue sop ul uas aie ieun sua qoid jeiuap die
the small and toy breeds are more likely to develop
oral malodor, gingivitis, and periodontitis. The term
 periodontitis at an early age and tend to show more
periodontal disease typically refers to gingivitis and peri-
 severe disease when compared with large breed dogs.3,11
odonitis together. Odontoclastic resorptive lesions in
 The reduced jaw size and resultant crowding of teeth of
cats also afe associated with gingival infammation and
small dogs may be predisposing factors to this preva-
periodontal disease (Figures 34-1 and 34-2).4,5
lence. In addition, toy-breed dogs afe more likely
to
Periodontal disease is one of the most common dis-
have malocclusion problems, which may facilitate the
deposition of subgingival plaque that is more difficult
the most pfevalent type of oral disorder. It has been
to femove either via chewing or through homecare by
437
438 Canine and Feline Nutrition
4Upper molars
Upper carnassial
8Upperpremolars
2Uppercanines
6Upperincisors
6Lowerincisors
2Lowercanines
8Lowerpremolars
6 Lowermolars
Lower carnassial
Figure 34-1 Dentition of the dog.
2Uppermolars
6 Upperpremolars
6 Upperincisors
2Upper canines
6Lowerincisors
2 Lower canines
2 Lowermolars
4Lowerpremolars
Fgure34-2Dentition of the cat
the owner. As periodontal disease progresses, there is 
Periodontal disease is the most prevalent type of oral dis-
destruction and loss of alveolar bone along the roots
order seen by veterinarians. Survey studies of dogs and
of teeth. Because small dogs have a lower fatio of the
cats consistently report prevalence rates of periodontal dis-
size of the mandible (lower jaw) to the volume of teeth
ease of 60% to 80%. Risk increases as pets age, and small
when compared with large-breed dogs, the loss of bone
and toy breeds of dogs tend to be more severely affected
from the jaw has a greater impact.16 Alveolar bone loss
than larger breeds.incats,feline odontociastic resorptive
in small dogs can destabilize the jaw, leading to weak-
lesions are aiso a commonly diagrosed dental disorder
ness and eventually to increased risk of fracture.17
Dental Health and Diet 439
reduction in previously established halitosis in dogs.25
Oral Malodor
One explanation for this is that chronic infammation
Oral malodor (halitosis) is commonly reported in dogs
and tissue damage provides increased protein substrate
and cats and is perceived by many owners to be a signi-
for microorganisms in the mouth, enhancing the pro-
ficant problem.18 Moreover, malodor is considered to
duction of VSCs. The heavier plaque that occurs with
be a precursor or manifestation of more serious dental
dental disease may also provide a favorable anaerobic
disease and is often the frst clinical sign that owners
environment and additional substrate for the formation
report to their veterinarians. As in humans, halitosis
ofVSCs.26
in dogs and cats can be caused by oral or nonoral fac-
tors. Nonoral etiologies include gastrointestinal, lung,
and systemic disease. In the majority of cases in dogs
Oral malodor(halitosis) is commonly reported in dogs
and cats, the predominant source of halitosis is within
and cats and is perceived by many owners to be a sig
the oral cavity. Microbial metabolism of protein-
nifcant problem.Bad breath is also a signofmore serious
containing substances such as food debris, exfoliated
dental disease and is often the frst probiem that owners
epithelium, saliva, and blood result in the produc-
report to their veterinarians.
tion of volatile sulfur compounds (VSCs).15,20 These
compounds, particularly methyl mercaptan, dimethyl
sulfide, and hydrogen sulfde, produce breath malodor
when exhaled.20 They may also have detrimental effects
Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease
on the structural integrity of epithelial tissue in the
Gingivitis is a nonspecifc term referring to infamma-
mouth, further contributing to the pathogenesis and
tion of the gingivae (gums). It is considered to be the
progression of periodontal disease.2l
reversible stage of periodontal disease and can be pre-
In addition to the microbial fora in the mouth, two
vented by regular plaque removal and control. When
other factors that infuence the production of malodor
a clean tooth surface is exposed to saliva and gingival
asuos ason ue Hd a are siatans rny u
Huids, a pellicle, composed of a thin layer of proteins
tion of the saliva. Specifcally, saliva with a low pH
 and glycoproteins, forms within minutes. Oral debris
and a relatively high glucose concentration suppresses
 and plaque-forming bacteria, which are part of the nor-
odor formation, while the production of saliva with an
 mal oral fora, rapilly adlhere to the pellicle and begin to
alkaline pH and low glucose concentration is associ-
 proliferate. Within 24 hours, a smeoth layer of plaque
ated with incteased production of odor.22 Although not
covers the entire tooth surface. Newly formed plaque
feported in dogs and cats, it is pfesumed that these fac-
is a soft, gelatinous material composed of bacteria and
tors infuence breath odor in these species in a similar
their metabolic byproducts, oral debris, and salivary
manner.
components. It is generally thickest along the gingival
Breath malodor is consistently associated with gin-
margin because ffictional cleaning associated with nor-
givitis and periodontitis. Two independent studies with
-ns uaum eane siu u sssl yn s uoniseu je
dogs demonstrated significant correlations between the
pared with the apex of the tooth.
production of VSCs in the mouth and the amount of
Left undisturbed, aero bic and facultative anaerobic
plaque and calculus accumulation on the tooth
isuf-
bacteria proliferate as the plaque thickens and matures.
face.20,23 While the earlier study reported that degree
As bacterial populations increase, the pellicle becomes
of halitosis was a consistent predictor of the severity of
more firmly attached to the surface of the tooth and
gingivitis, the more recent study did not fnd a linear
bacterial colonies begin to stratify within the plaque
relationship with infammation severity. Another study
layers. The outer surface of the plaque will contain pri-
found that dogs with a high degree of oral malodor were
marily aero bic, gram-positive species, while the interior
more likely to have moderate to severe periodontal dis-
surface supports anaerobic populations of bacteria.27
Species of bacteria that tend to proliferate in dental
This association is further demonstrated by evidence
 plaque are classified as “periodontopathogens" because
that veterinary pericdontal therapy causes a significant
their proliferation and metabolic products contribute
440Canine and Feline Nutrition
t0 progression of periodontal disease. In dogs, the
disease is a fisk factor for kidney disease, bacterial
most commonly isolated
1 periodontopathogens are
endocarditis, and pulmonary disease, especially
in
three species of the black-pigmented anaerobic genus
older animals.
Porphyromonas: P gluae,P salivosa, and P denticans. 28
 Mature plaque is not removed by normal actions of
Over time, salivary minerals, in particular calcium
the tongue or by rinsing of the mouth. Rather, removal
carbonate and calcium phosphate, are deposited within
fequires mechanical abrasion from chewing, regular
the plaque, producing calculus. Calculus is a hard
tooth brushing, and if necessary, veterinary dental clean-
deposit that provides a rough and porous surface, pro-
ing. Therefore pets who do not receive regular home
moting accumulation of more plaque and also contrib-
 care or veterinary prophylaxis will eventually develop
uting to tissue irritation as it extends into the gingival
gingivitis. In some animals, gingivitis persists with-
sulcus.
out progressing into periodontitis. However, in most,
Gingivitis develops when contact between the
untreated gingivitis eventually progresses to periodon-
plaque bacteria and gingival tissues leadls to tissue dam-
tal disease. Clinical signs of gingivitis and periodontal
-eidns Aquo aljeniul 'asuodsai Aioeuueuu ue pue ase
disease include oral malodor, gingival sensitivity and
 gingival plaque, which is found on the visible portion
bleeding, tooth loss, and difficulty eating.
of the teeth along the gingival margin, is present. As
dental plaque matures, it begins to spread under the
gingivae. This form of plaque, called subgingival plaque,
Gingivitis (infammation of the gums) is considered to
forms within the gingival sulcus. Left untreated, the
be the reversible stage of periodontal disease and can
be prevented by regular plaque removal and control.
the area provides an oxygen-depleted environment that
Periodontal disease is a plaque-induced, progressive
allows proliferation of gram-negative, anaerobic bacte-
inffammatory disease affecting the gingiva, periodontal
fia. Periodontal disease becomes established when the
ligaments,and alveolar bone.Untreated gingivitis will
periodontal ligament is exposed to plaque, bacteria, and
sop ui odo sd 
bacterial byproducts.
and cats. Clinical signs of gingivitis and periodontal dis
Periodontal disease is a plaque-induced, progressive
ease include oral malodor gingival sensitivity and bleed-
infammatory disease affecting the gingiva, periodon-
ing,tooth loss,and diffcuity eating
tal ligaments (connective tissue between the tooth root
and socket), and alveolar bone. The presence and prolif-
efation of certain species of anaerobic bacteria and the
Feline Odontoclastic Resorptive
infammatory responses
the host contribute
eto
Lesions
the periodontium.
As the supporting connective tissues and adjacent
Although rare in dogs, odontoclastic resorptive lesions
bone are weakened, teeth become loose and may be
(feline tooth resorption) are one of the most common
lost. Periodontal disease itself causes discomfort and
dental problems reported in the domestic cat.32,33
 pain and, if left untreated, can lead to bacteremia. For
These lesions ate also called neck lesions or cervical line
example, a study of 39 dogs with periodontal disease
lesions, because the dental defect is often found at the
found that 15% of the dogs had bacteremia upon pre-
neck area of the tooth. They are characterized by odon-
sentation.29
This increased to 67% after veterinary
toclastic resorption of the tooth's enamel, dentin, of
dental manipulation. The transient increase in bactere-
cementum.34
mia following dental cleaning was a result of the release
Mandibular premolars and molars are the most fre-
of bacteria from disturbed periodontal pockets. There
quently affected teeth, although canine teeth and inci-
is also evidence that dogs with severe periodontal dis-
sors may also develop these lesions. As with periodontal
ease have increased blood bacteria levels immediately
disease, the incidence of FORLs is strongly associated
following mastication of a meal.30 Cats with periodon-
with increasing age.3S Although the underlying etiol-
titis are similarly susceptible to bacteremia.31 As stated
 ogy of odontoclastic lesions in cats is not completely
previously, the bacteremia associated with pericdontal
understood, it is clear that these lesions ate not dental
Dental Health and Diet 441
cafies. Several theoties have been advanced to explain
extraction of the tooth is usually necessary in more
FORLs. One study suggested that cats infected with
advanced stages of the disease.
feline immunodefciency virus were more likely to
develop FORLs, which supported virus-induced immu-
 nosuppression as an underlying cause.36 Howevet, other
Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions (FORLs) are one
 more extensive studies have failed to find corroborating
of the most common dental problems reported in the
evidence for this theory.37,38 Another theory postulates
domesticcat.Aithough the underlying cause is not com-
that FORLs develop in response to localized infam-
pletely understood, risk of developing α FORL increases
matory responses associated with gingivitis and peri-
in older cats. These lesions are painful and lead to dif
odontal disease.39 For this reason these lesions are often
fcuity or refusal to eat in affected cats. Other signs
classified as a form of periodontal disease in the cat.
inciude oral malodor, gingivitis, and excessive salivation.
Dietary infuences such as the food's acidifying effects,
Over time, there is eventual loss of the tooth crown and
diet texture (dry versus wet), feeding noncommercial
rmot; extraction of the tooth is usually necessary in more
foods, and vitamin D content may also play a role in
advanced stages ofthe disease.
FORLs (see p. 447).
Because resorptive lesions are very painful to the
cat, difficulties in eating and refusal to eat are often
the frst signs reported by owners. Other signs include
ROLE OF DIET IN THE
oral malodor, gingivitis, and excessive salivation. Gin-
gival infammation and proliferation afe commonly
DEVELOPMENT OF DENTAL
observed in cats with dental lesions, but it is not known
DISEASE
if this is aresult of the resorptive lesion or an underlying
cause. The infammation associated with FORLs may
The most important factor that infuences the devel-
provide a favorable environment for plaque formation
opment of gingivitis and periodontal disease in dogs
and bacterial proliferation, which lead to gingivitis and
 and cats is the presence and persistence of undisturbed
possible periodontitis. Alternatively, fesorptive lesions
 plaque on tooth surfaces. Therefore management and
may develop in response to the localized and chronic
feeding practices that minimize plaque and calculus
infammation of gingivae that is associated with peri-
formation or aid in their removal are important in
odontal disease. It is known that activity of odonto-
the prevention of periodontal disease. Factors that are
clasts, the cells responsible for tooth demineralization,
important include the frequency of tooth brushing.
is stimulated by chronic infammation and also by an
the type of diet that is fed, whether or not table scraps
acidic environment.34,40 In addition to dietary infu-
of noncommercial foods are fed, and the frequency of
ences in oral pH, bacterial populations associated with
access to chew toys, dental chews, and biscuits.
chronic infammatory disease in the cat's mouth may
 Once plaque has been deposited on the surface of
contribute to an acidic microenvironment necessary
the tooth, it is most efficiently femoved mechanically
for the tooth decalcifcation that occurs with resorptive
through the abrasion provided by diet, tooth brush-
lesions.
ing, or chewing on supplemental chew toys or foods.
Initial physical evaluation of a cat's mouth may not
Chemical agents such as rinses, pastes, and sprays can
reveal damage to the tooth because of the progressive
also be helpful but will not replace the necessary abra-
nature of the disorder. Over time, there is eventual loss
sion. For example, the antimicrobial agent chlorhexidine
of the tooth crown and root. Diagnosis usually requires
digluconate is effective for the reduction of breath mal-
cally categorized into four stages, with treatment and
However, the effectiveness of chlorhexidine and other
management procedures dependent upon the stage of
ae au uum uua aeia si siuse qie
the disease at the time of diagnosis.42,43 Although den-
used in conjunction with brushing. The use ofa chemical
tal prophylaxis and application of a Huoride cavity var-
 mouthwash or gel alone is not effective in removing the
nish may stop or slow progression of the early stages,
hartlened calculus that forms when plaque is allowed to
442 Canine and Feline Nutrition
accumulate. For this reason, an approach that provides
A similar relationship between wet and dry diet and
frequent and consistent mechanical removal of plaque
the development of dental disease was reported in an
and calculus is always recommended (see pp. 447-449).
eatly study with cats.52 In this study, the gingivae of
growing kittens fed a dry cat food remained healthy,
showing little infammation or accumulation of calcu-
Type of Food: Dry versus Wet
lus. In contrast, kittens fed a canned food for the same
Historically, the form of food that is fed has been impli-
period developed oral malodor, gingivitis, and calculus.
cated as a potential risk factor for the development of
 Another group reported that cats had greater plaque
dental disease in dogs and cats. Early studies reported
 accumulation when fed a canned diet, compared with
that dogs fed a soft (wet) diet developed clinical and his-
 plaque accumulation in cats fed a dry commercial food
tological signs of periodontal disease earlier in life than
for a period of only 2 weeks.53 The Polish survey dis-
those fed dry foods.46,47 The severity of disease in dogs
cussed previously also included 9074 cats.51 Cats fed
fed asoft diet was also greater than that observed in dogs
wet food only were less likely to be free of dental depos-
fed a dry biscuit diet. In another early study, dogs fed
 its or periodontal disease than were cats fed dry foods or
 a food that required mastication did not develop gin-
a mixture of dry and wet food. However, similar to dogs,
givitis during the 1-month trial period.48 In contrast,
 cats fed dry foods were still at risk of developing den-
dogs fed the same diet in a minced, soft form developed
tal disease. Current indications are that soft foods such
gingivitis and had signs associated with developing peri-
as canned commercial diets or home-prepared foods
odontal disease.
ate less effective than hard, dry foods in providing the
Survey studlies have also been used to identify dietary
abrasion needed to remove plaque that normally forms
risk factors associated with periodontal disease in dogs.
0n teeth. However, the mechanical abrasion provided
Data from a group of 63 pet dogs in the United States
by feeding a normal dry pet food does not effectively
showed that gingivitis and calculus were less common
prevent the development of gingivitis and periodontal
in dogs fed dry dog food as the major portion of their
disease, since in most studies a substantial proportion
diet, compared with those fed canned food.$9 However,
 of animals fed dry diets still developed signs associated
indicators of tooth mobility, tooth loss, and periodon-
with progressive dental disease.
tal disease did not differ significantly with the type of
diet fed. Another study conducted by the Japanese
Small Animal Veterinary Association collected data
The exciusive feeding of a wet (canned) food or a soft
from more than 2600 dogs.50 Analysis showed that
home-prepared diet is less effective at providing the
dental calculus was found in 34% of dogs fed primat-
needed mechanical abrasion ofchewing to heip remove
ily dry food and 42% of dogs fed primarily canned or
dental plaque thanfeeding a dry food. However, by itself,
home-cooked food. Most recently, a study conducted
the mechanical abrasion from consuming a normal dry
in Poland provided oral examinations to client-owhed
pet food cannot effectively prevent the development of
d Aeu ad jo dn e Aq a so
gingivitis and periodontal disease in dogs and cats.
tices.51 Data were collected for almost 30,000 dogs.
Following an adjustment for a possible confounding
age effect, the data showed that dogs fed only wet food
were significantly more likely to have dental calculus
Opportunities for Chewing
and periodontal disease than dogs fed only dry food
The dental health benefits afforded by feeding dry pet
of a mixture of dry and wet food. Results from these
foods are related to having frequent opportunities for
studies indicate that feeding canned foods only may
chewing and its associated mechanical cleaning action
increase risk or severity of periodontal disease. How-
on the surface of teeth. A study of 1350 dogs in Nerth
ever, the form of the food alone does not completely
America examined the relationship between the occur-
protect against dental disease; dogs can still accumulate
rence and severity of calculus and periodontal disease and
plaque and develop gingivitis and periodontal disease
the type of diet and chew toys that dogs received.54 There
when fed a dry dliet.
was a signifcant linear relationship between decreasing
Dental Health and Diet 443
calculus score and increasing number of chewing
 group found that the dental hygiene chew maintained
materials. Although less significant, this trend was also
 a benefit to oral malodor and the degree of plaque and
observed for gingivitis. When the type of food alone was
calculus throughout a 21-month period of offering one
considered, there was no significant association between
chew per day.58 These results indicate that chewing
feedling a diet made up exclusively of dry pet food and
materials are helpful in reducing the degree of gingi-
the degree of calculus, gingivitis, or tooth attachment
vitis through direct mechanical cleaning of the tooth
loss. However, in dogs that were fed dry food, access to
surfaces. However, because dogs given the dental chews
rawhide chews and other types of chewing materials was
still showed some level of plaque accumulation and gin-
significantly associated with a reduced accumulation of
givitis, it appears unlikely that this level of reduction
 calculus and less gingival infammation and attachment
can completely prevent the development of calculus,
loss. Rawhide chew materials were the most effective in
gingivitis, and periodontitis, even when given to dogs
preventing dental disease, followed by various types of
that are exclusively fed a dry diet.
hard bones. In this study, feeding regular (nondental)
In recent years, dental chew toys that provide
hard biscuits as a supplement to the dry diet did not
 mechanical abrasion, and which also include agents to
 provide any additional dental beneft. In contrast, dogs
reduce the formation of calculus or inhibit the growth
that were not exclusively fed dry food obtained little or
 of oral bacteria, have been dleveloped. For example, raw-
no dental beneft from additional chew materials. The
hide treats coated with polyphosphate salts may help to
authors concluded that there was a consistent (if not
teduce the formation of dental calculus by sequester-
always significant) trend toward a widespread
Iprotec-
ing salivary calcium.5 Polyphosphates are also used as
tive effect of access to supplemental chewing materials in
coatings on dental diets and have shown some efficacy
dogs that were fed dry pet food, compared with dogs fed
in reducing calculus formation (see pp. 445-446).
primarily soft food or a mixture of food types.
Another approach is to add an antibacterial agent, such
A smaller study of 67 dogs showed similar results.5
as chlorhexidine, to a dental chew. The intended effect
Providing dogs with rawhide chews as a supplement
 is to reduce bacterial populations present in plaque and
to their normal dry diet led to significant removal of
reduce their contribution to gingivitis and disease pro-
 preexisting supragingival calculus over a period of 3
 gression. Although one study reported a reduction in
weeks. Providing cereal biscuits instead of rawhide was
 plaque accumulation in dogs given this type of chew
somewhat helpful, but less so than providing rawhide
 device, another reported no added efficacy when a toy
chews. Two other studies examined the dental effects
of feeding a rawhide chew that was specifically formu-
lated to promote dental hygiene.56,57 In the frst study,
both the efficacy and the safety of supplemented dental
dogs were fed a dry maintenance dog food and provided
chew toys be critically evaluated prior to making any
shop au yo H ygep rao Aaa susnq yon ym
fecommendations for their use.
also received one rawhidle chew per day. Dental health
 The variable results associated with specifc types of
anbeid a sam e Jo Pad e rao Pssasse s
 chewing toys and different effects on mandibular and
accumulation and gingivitis occurred in all of the dogs,
 maxillary teeth suggest that owners should provide a
significantly less gingivitis developed when the rawhide
variety of different types of chewing materials to their
chew was added to the regimen. After the study period,
dogs. It appears that a cumulative effect is afforded by
deposits of calculus and stain were greater with tooth
feeding a dry food and providing adlditional and varied
brushing only, compared with the degree of calculus
chew toys. Ideally, dogs fed a dry pet food should have
and stain when the teeth were brushed and the chew
 at least one and, if possible, two of more opportunities
was provided. In the second study, the effects of the
for extended chewing each day. The additive effect of
chew on dental health were measured in the absence of
01 ssaooe suanba Suey snid pooy Aip e Sujunsuo
regular tooth brushing.57 Similar results were reported.
Posa Sumau, aneian e ssedins Aeu sion ma
While gingivitis developed in both groups of dogs,
that affords some level of protective effect not feached
the daily provision of chewing materials significantly
 when a canned or soft foed is fed and little opportunity
decreased the severity. A follow-up studly by the same
to chew is provided. It is also possible that dogs fed dry
444 Canine and Feline Nutrition
pet foods may by nature or through learning be more
frequent
chewing
opportunities.
Historically, the
 primary mechanism of action has been the mechani-
by data showing that dogs given rawhide chews varied
cal fiction and scraping on the surface of the teeth as
significantly in their level of interest and in the speed
the animal consumes the kibble or chews on the toy.
with which they chewed and consumed the rawhidle.62
In recent years, specific “dental diets" have been for-
Videotaping chewing episodes allowed the authors to
  aq s s  n 
divide dogs into categories of slow and fast chewers.
texture, shape and size of the kibble pieces. Howevef,
Dogs classified as slow chewers had less dental calculus
 while mechanical abrasion can be effective for reducing
accumulation at the end of the 12-month test period
plaque on the chewing surfaces, it may have limited of
when compared with fast chewers, indicating that the
no value for nonchewing tooth surfaces in the mouth.
amount of time a dog spends chewing each day is an
Therefore an additional approach is to include agents
important factor.
in the food that provide dental benefits by chemically
While providing chewing toys is benefcial for dental
infuencing the formation of dental plaque or calculus
health in dogs, this is generally not an approach that
throughout the oral cavity. A group of compounds that
can be used for cats. Although individual cats that enjoy
have been shown to be effective via this approach afe
chewing on hard bones or rawhide may exist, most pet
the polyphosphates, which affect the formation of den-
cats do not engage in frequent or prolonged bouts of
tal calculus.
chewing. An examination of the cats' evolutionary his-
 tory provides a possible explanation for this difference.
FOOD
TEXTURE AND KIBBLE
SIZE/
Unlike dogs, which evolved from a species that hunted
SHAPE
Food texture and kibble characteristics
large ungulates and spent a great deal of time chewing
can affect the oral environment by controlling dental
bones and tough connective tissue, the cat evolved from
plaque and presumably reducing the risk of develop-
the small African wild cat (Felis libyca), which hunts pri-
ing periodontal disease. Factors that are believed to be
marily small rodents, such as mice. The wild cat's prey is
important include the size, shape, and density of the
rapidly consumed, with minimal chewing, and numer-
food's pieces; the food's moisture level; and the modif-
ous mice afe caught and eaten each day. As a fesult, our
cation of certain nutrients, such as dietary fber.63 Thec-
domestic cat (Felis catus) has neither the dentition nor
retically, a dry food has the potential to mechanically
(it appears) the desire to spend large amounts of time
remove plaque if the shape and size of the pieces are
chewing on bones or other types of chew toys.
designed for both the species (dog or cat) and for the
size of the animal's mouth. To allow maximal mechani
cal cleansing, the texture of the food must also allow
Dogs can be offered reguiar opportunities for chewing by
the tooth to penetrate deeply into the kibble before it
feeding a dry foodand providing daily chew bones and
breaks or crumbles, and the size of the kibbles must
dental chews. For best resuits, a variety of forms and
promote chewing prior to swallowing. Although exact
types ofdental chews should be selected. However while
formulations afe often not feported, several studies
these activities can help to reduce plaque, caicuius, and
have examined the efficacy of dental diets formulated to
gingivitis,theywillnotcompietelypreventpiaqueforma
 enhance mechanical tooth cleansing in dogs and in cats.
tion in most dogs. Because cats do not typically engage
In one study, an adult maintenance food that was
formulated to reduce plaque, stain, and calculus forma-
approach that can be used for cats.
tion was compared with a conventional dry adult main-
tenance food.63 Dogs were fed each diet for a period
of 3 weeks. At the end of the test period, dogs fed the
specially formulated dental diet had 19% less plaque,
Dental Diets and Biscuits
44% less stain, and 32% less calculus accumulation
It is generally accepted that the development of plaque
when compared with dogs fed the maintenance food.
and gingivitis can be somewhat reduced (but not com-
However, signs of gingivitis and periodontitis were not
Siaoid pue spooy Aip Supaay Aq (panuaaaid Aiaad
reported. A previous study by the same group found
Dental Health and Diet 445
that dogs fed the oral care diet developed less oral
of the effectiveness of a dental chew designed for small
dogs reported a reduction in plaque and calculus when
study examining long-term effects of the same food
dogs were fed one chew per day throughout a 4-month
reported statistically signifcant reductions in dental
 period.67 These types of chews may also be preferable to
plaque (39%) and gingival infammation (36%) over
 providing harder chew bones, which some veterinarians
a 6-month feeding period.6s The authors concluded
 believe are more likely to splinter or cause slab fractures
that the type of processing and ingredients used in the
to the carnassial teeth.68
test food helped to reduce the accumulaticn of plaque,
 stain, and calculus but did not completely prevent theif
occuffence. Howevef, the clinical significance of these
Specially formuiated dentai or oral care pet foods are
results is not known, because the effect of this level of
formuiated to have kibble texture, shape, and size
reduction on the development of gingivitis or periodon-
characteristics that promote chewing and provide the
tal disease has not been studied.
mechanicai abrasion needed to remove piaque from the
Because of the documented importance of provid-
surface of teeth. Other dental care products inciude sup-
ing chewing materials for promoting dental health, a
plemental food bars, biscuits, and bones with α chewy
second study was conducted to compare the aforemen-
or resistant texture that encourages prolonged bouts of
tioned oral care diet with feeding a conventional dry
chewing. Some companies have produced dental chews
dog food plus an oral hygiene rawhide chew.66 During
specifcally for smalland toy breeds of dogs,recognizing
the 3-week test period, dental plaque, calculus, and gin-
  5    
givitis increased similarly in all of the dogs, regardless
by periodontal disease.
of feeding regimen. Because a control group of dogs
was not included in this study, no comparison could
be male between dental changes in dogs fed these tw0
POLYPHOSPHATES
The polyphosphates are a
regimens and dogs fed a conventional
maintenance
group of compounds that act to sequester salivary cal-
dog food. An additional fnding was that dogs fed the
cium, making it unavailable for the formation of calcu-
cral care diet lost significant amounts of body weight
lus within the plaque pellicle of the teeth. One of the
during the treatment period. This effect was associated
 most commonly studied forms, sodium hexametaphos-
with poor acceptance of the food and a failure to eat the
phate (HMP),
, has been incorporated into the outer
entire ration each day. As in the previous study, these
coating of kibble or snack biscuits.69,70 It is theorized
data showed that neither regimen effectively maintained
that when small amounts of HMP are included in food,
clinically healthy gingivae over a 3-week period, again
chewing allows the HMP to adhere to plaque, form sol-
suggesting that dietary approaches to (
oral hygiene,
uble complexes with calcium, and then be washed away.
while helpful, cannot replace other methods of den-
 Because the inorganic portion of tooth calculus in dogs
tal care such as tooth brushing and veterinary dental
contains predominantly calcium carbonate and small
prophylaxis.
amounts of calcium phosphate, inclusion of HMP helps
A variety of food bars and consumable bones have
to prevent or dectease calculus formation.7l
also been developed as dental health supplements in
A series of studies compared the dental effects of
fecent years. These products afe typically marketed to
daily supplementation with HMP-coated biscuits to
be used as a snack or treat, and have the added beneft of
dogs fed either dry dog food or dry dog food moistened
promoting dental health. Unlike biscuits, many of these
with water. 9,70 Ater pretreatment with dental prophy-
products are formulated to have an elastic and resis-
laxis (scaling and polishing), dogs were supplemented
tant texture that facilitates mechanical abrasion of the
daily with either conventional biscuits, experimental
entire tooth surface and promotes extended periods of
biscuits coated with HMP, or ne biscuits. In both types
chewing. Some companies have produced dental chews
 of feeding regimens (dry and moistened diet), the daily
specifcally for small and toy breeds of dogs, recog-
ingestion of HMP-coated biscuits reduced but did not
nizing that these are the dogs that are most seriously
completely prevent the formation of calculus. A more
affected by periodontal disease. For example, a study
 pronounced reduction of calculus occurred in dogs fed
446Canine and Feline Nutrition
the moistened diet than in those fed a dry maintenance
diet. Overall, reductions in calculus formation varied
The inciusion of potyphosphates such as hexameta
between 30% and 63%. The degree of gingivitis was
phosphate in dental diets or biscuits can promote
 hot measured in this study, nor was it possible to pre-
dental heaith by reducing caicuius formation. These
dict the clinical signifcance of the reported reductions
in calculus.
ingit unavailable for precipitation as dental caiculus.
Several studies have examined the efficacy of incor-
porating microcrystalline polyphosphate coatings onto
the outer coating of the kibbles in a complete and
OTHER INGREDIENTS In recent years, a number
balanced dog or cat food.72,73 In a set of studies with
of unconventional supplemental ingredients have been
adult dogs and cats, diets were formulated to contain
identifed as having potential dental health benefts for
the polyphosphate coating and were compared with the
dogs and cats. The polyphenols are a large group of com-
same food formulated without the coating.72 There was
pounds, several of which are found in green tea. One in
no differencein kibble shape, size, or texture between the
particulat, epigallocatechin gallate (catechin), has been
control and the test diets, to ensure that any observed
shown to have bacteriostatic action against canine den-
dlental effects would be due to a chemical effect of the
polyphosphate as opposed to a mechanical effect from
food may be helpful in reducing the growth of Porphy-
chewing. Following initial dental prophylaxis, animals
romonas bacteria in the oral cavity.76 Most recently, a
were fed either the test diet or the control diet for a
pilot study with 29 cats found that feeding cats a cat
4-week period, using a crossover experimental design.
food that included catechin caused a reduction in gingi-
Following the frst 4-week period, a second dental pro-
val infammation, oral malodor, and decreased Porphy-
phylaxis was performed and dietary treatments were
romonas numbers when compared with these measures
switched. Including a polyphosphate coating on the
in cats fed a control diet.77 Soluble zinc salts such as zinc
dry food’s kibbles was well accepted by both dogs and
ascorbate and zinc gluconate have been shown to con-
cats. In both of these studies, dogs and cats had signif-
 ttol plaque when included in cleansing gels and rinses
cantly lower mean tooth calculus scores after consum-
for cats, although no studies of their use in pet foods of
ing food with added polyphosphates, when compared
treats have been reported.78 Finally, there is some evi-
with calculus scores derived after feeding the normal
dence that certain types of oils, such as eucalyptus, lav-
maintenance diet. A follow-up study was conducted
ender, and rosemary oil, have an inhibitory effect on oral
to examine the effectiveness of incorporating the same
malodor and gingivitis. The effect on breath malodor is
type of polyphosphate microcrystals into a complete
attributed to both a masking effect and to a reduction
and balanced food designed for senior dogs.73 Similar
of VSCs. There is also evidence that eucalyptus oil may
to the earlier studies, adding an outer coating of poly-
inhibit the growth of periodontopathogens.79 Although
phosphate to the food significantly reduced calculus
of interest, each of these ingredients and compounds
accumulation when measured during a 5-week feeding
fequires adlditional controlled studies to elucidate both
period.
their potential for dental health benefts and for long-
Because the mechanism of action of polyphosphates
term safety when fed to dogs and cats before recom-
is to sequester salivary calcium, including these com-
mendations can be made.
 pounds in pet foods, biscuits, or chews is not expected
to infuence either plaque accumulation or the oral
VOHC SEAL OF ACCEPTANCE
The nutrient
microfora populations that are responsible for many
composition and processing methods of oral health foods
of the pathological effects of dental disease. Therefore,
 and chews that have been stucdlied are rarely described in
while polyphosphates have shown some efficacy in con-
 published studies. These limitations should be taken into
trolling calculus formation, complete dental care must
consideration when evaluating the efficacy of specially
also include methods that control plaque and the patho-
formulated diets or making recommendations regard-
 genic bacterial populations to maintain long-term oral
ing diet components that might affect the dental health
heal th.
of pets. One helpful guide that veterinarians and pet
Dental Health and Diet 447
owhers can use when selecting a dental diet is the Seal
food and that of a cat's tooth surfaces after eating are
of Acceptance awarded by the Veterinary Oral Health
correlated.83 Cats with resorptive lesions were found
Commission (VOHC). The VOHC was established in
to have lower tooth surface pH values than cats with-
1997 with the objective of providing independent over-
out lesions (7.93 versus 8.65). However, no relation-
views of pet products that are marketed for the mechani-
ship was found between the pH of the food that was
cal control of plaque or the mechanical and/or chemical
fed and the incidence or severity of FORLs. Although
control of calculus. The VOHC provides a set of effcacy
the surface pH values for the commercial diets studied
protocols for companies to use; data are then submit-
were all acidic (pH range between 4.9 and 6.3), inges-
ted to the VOHC for review. Products that are approved
tion caused only a very slight and transient decrease
by the VOHC carry the “VOHC Seal of Acceptance"
in tooth surface pH. The authors speculated that cats
on their label and may make a claim for plaque, tartaf
saliva quickly neutralized the acidic coating of the kib-
(calculus), or plaque and tartar control when fed. The
ble pieces, and thus resulted in only very slight altera-
VOHC website also maintains a current list of accepted
tions in tooth surface pH. Moreovef, even the transient
products. In 2009 there were 22 products on the VOHC
change in tooth surface pH that was observed cannot
list; these include complete and balanced foods, dental
be considered clinically significant because physiologi-
 chews and treats, and a water adlditive.
cal decalcification of bone and teeth occur only at a pH
between 4 and 5.84,85
Systemic acidosis that may lead to a persistently
DIET AND FELINE TOOTH
RESORPTION (FORL)
 gested as a potential contributor to FORLs. Recent in
vitro studies have reported that cultured feline osteo-
There is some evidence that an association exists
clasts become highly proliferative and cause in vitro
between dental resorptive lesions and certain aspects
bone fesorption
when exposed to an acidic environ-
of a cat's diet. A study that examined risk factors for
 fesearch demonstrating a direct
the development of odontoclastic lesions in 145 adult
relationship
 between a cat's diet, metabolic acid-base
cats feported that the two most important factors asso-
balance, and the development of FORLs is lacking.
ciated with resorptive lesions were increasing age and
More studies of a possible connection between the
feeding a cat food that contained low levels of magne-
urine acidifying characteristics of a cat food, oral pH,
sium.14 In addition, cats that had their teeth cleaned at
and risk of FORLs are needed to further explore this
least twice a week and were fed diets containing highef
potential factor. Similarly, while one study reported
levels of magnesium, calcium, phosphorus, and potas-
that cats with FORL had significantly higher levels
sium were less likely to develop oral lesions. Neither
of circulating vitamin D (25-hydroxy-cholecalciferol)
the type of diet fed (soft versus hard) nor the num-
when compared with cats that did not have FORL,
ym paieiposse sem Aep rad papraoid ssupay jo iaq
a subsequent study using the same design found no
the development of dental lesions. Although limited
association between FORL and vitamin D status.82,87
data are available, a positive association has also been
Studies that are designed to examine the potential rela-
reported between fesorptive lesions and feeding non-
tionship between dietary levels of vitamin D and the
commercial (homemade) diets, cat treats, table foods,
development of FORL afe needed.
and diets containing low amounts of calcium or high
amounts of vitamin D.80.82
PREVENTION OF DENTAL
The increased use of acid sprays as a coating on dry
cat foods and of urine-acidifying diets for the preven-
DISEASE AND HOME
tion of struvite urolithiasis in cats led to speculation
MAINTENANCECARE
that some commercial cat foods may feduce the oral
pH and promote an environment that is favorable for
Current evidence supports a significant role of diet in the
tooth demineralization. To examine this theory, a study
maintenance of dental health and prevention of plaque
was conducted to determine whether the pH of a cat
and calculus formation. However, simply feedling a dry
448Canine and Feline Nutrition
pet food or a food formulated as an oral care diet cannot
discussed previously, providing various types of chew
replace regular and consistent prophylactic dental care.
materials such as fawhides, dental devices, and, possi-
The primary approach for preventing the development
bly, some types of hard biscuits, can augment but not
 of gingivitis and periodontal disease includes a program
 replace the effectiveness of brushing.
of regular home care, periodic veterinary dental prophy-
Dental care products that contain oral disinfectants
laxis, and provision of carefully chosen and varied types
such as chlorhexidine gluconate or chlorhexidine ace-
of chewing materials (for dogs). Feeding a dry diet of
        
an oral cafe diet is considered to be adjunctive to these
odor and plaque formation in dogs.96.98 In addition,
procedures.
long-term use of chlorhexidine can effectively reduce
Veterinary dental prophylaxis is conducted undet
gingivitis and slow the progression of periodontal dis-
 general anesthesia and includes supragingival and sub-
crobial agent cetylpyridinium chloride may effectively
calculus and plaque that has formed above and below
 control oral malodor, and reduce plaque and calculus 
the gingival interface, and polishing removes micropit-
 accumulation in dogs when applied to teeth as a den-
ting on the tooth that provides a favorable surface for
this agent are needed before recommendations for its
use can be made. The effectiveness of chlorhexidine
of established gingivitis or periodontal disease, and the
is maximized when it is applied as a tooth-brushing
pet's age. Because moderate to severe dental disease is
solution, as this allows the mechanical removal of
most commonly seen in older dogs and cats, the risk of
plaque. However, studies with dogs have also shown
frequent anesthesia administration must always be con-
that applying a chlorhexidine-containing spray or gel
sidered.90 Generally, veterinary dental cleaning every
prevents plaque accumulation, improves breath, and
12 to 18 months is recommended for pets with healthy
helps prevent gingivitis and periodontal disease, even
gingiva. Pets with chronic gingivitis or periodontitis
when not accompanied by brushing.100 This is a dis-
will benefit from more frequent cleaning, usually every
tinct advantage for owners whose dog of cat will not
6 to 12 months.8 It is important for pet owners to be
tolerate frequent sessions of tooth brushing. The only
informed that when established dental disease is pres-
reported side effects of chlorhexidine-containing den-
ent, frequent veterinary cleaning is still necessary even
tal products afe an unpleasant taste and brown stain-
in the face of optimal home care. Although daily tooth
ing of the teeth in some animals. The staining occurs
brushing can effectively remove plaque, it cannot affect
after long-term use and, though it may be aestheti-
the degree of subgingival disease and may even mask
cally displeasing to some owners, is not harmful of
the progression of disease below the gingival surface.91
pathogenic
Therefore regular and continued professional therapy is
Regardlless of the type of dental agent used, all pet
essential for dogs and cats diagnosed with periodontal
 owhers should receive instructions on home dental care
disease.
 and should be encouraged to maintain a consistent pre-
The most effective method of home dental care
ventive program throughout their pet's life. Although
is regular tooth brushing.
. Brushing prevents plaque
meticulous home care does not necessarily preclude the
 heed for regular professional prophylaxis, it can reduce
Current evidence shows that the frequency of brush-
the accumulation of plaque, the deposition of calculus,
ing necessary to maintain clinically healthy gingivae
 and the development of gingivitis. This may effectively
depends on the initial condition of the tissue. For
 prevent periodontitis and allows a reduced frequency of
example, in studies of dogs with established gingivitis,
veterinary dental prophylaxis. Additional care involves
brushing daily was effective in returning the gums to
providing a variety of chew toys and products for dogs
health, but brushing three times per week was not suf-
and feeding a dry food. Diets consisting primarily of
fcient.92.54 Conversely, brushing three times per week
wet food with no opportunities for chewing hard kibble
m sp u y n uiu assn r
 or biscuits should be avoided unless another health con-
no signs of gingivitis or periodontal disease.92,9S As
dition requires their use or the pet will not accept a dry
Dental Health and Diet 449
pet food. If a soft or canned food provides the primary
basis of a pet's diet, frequent tooth brushing, the provi-
BOX 34-1 PRACTICAL TIPS: LONG-TERM
PREVENTIVE DENTAL CARE
sion of chew toys, and veterinary prophylaxis are doubly
OF PETS
important (Box 34-1).
Regular veterinary dental examinations and prophylaxis
(scaling and polishing) should be scheduled.
Lijfelong dental care for dogs and cats should include
Home dental care should include regular tooth brushing
(ideally, every day; minimum of two to three times per week).
and polishing), consistent home dental care (brush-
A pet dental solution or tooth paste containing
ing.ideally daily),and the provision ofa variety of
chlorhexidine (or another antimicrobial agent) should
chew toys and hard biscuits to pets who enjoy them.
be applied topically or used during tooth brushing
Although itcannot replace reguiar dental care,feeding
Hard biscuits and chewing materials such as hard
ol papinoud ag pinoys sAol adou pue 'sapiymeu 'sauog
teeth.
pets that enjoy them.
A dry pet food should be fed as the dog's or cat's
 primary diet.
References
1. Logan EL: Dietary infuences on periodontal health in dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 36:1385-1401, 2006.
2. DeBowes LJ, Mosier D, Logan E, and others: Association of periodontal disease and histologic lesions in multiple organs from 45
dogs, / Vet Dent 13:57-60, 1996.
3. Watson AD]: Diet and periodontal disease in dogs and cats: part 2, Vet Clin Nutr 5:11-13, 1998.
4. Okuda A, Harvey CE: Etiopathogenesis of feline dental resorptive lesions, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 22:1385-1404, 1992.
5. Lyon KF: Subgingival odontoclastic resorptive lesions: classification, treatment, and results in 58 cats, Vet Clix North Am Small
Ani Pract 22:1417-1432, 1992.
6. Rosenberg HM, Rehfeld CE, Emmering TE: A method for the epidemiologic assessment of periodontal health-disease state in a
Beagle hound colony, / Periodontot 37:208-213, 1966.
 peeaar e e e p aaeag u ass ead p a H a s de  ayu 
histometrical study, J Periodontal Res 10:243-255, 1975.
8. Hoffman TH, Gaengler P: Epidemiology of periodontal disease in poodles, J Small Ani Pract 37:309-316, 1996.
9. Kyllar M, Witter K: Prevalence of periodontal disease in pet dogs, Vet Med (Czech) 50:496-505, 2005.
11. Harvey CE, Shofer FS, Laster L: Association of age and body weight with periodontal disease in North American dogs, J Vet Dent
11:94105, 1994.
12. Crossey DA: Survey of feline dental problems encountered in a smallanimal practice in NW England, Br Vet Dent Asoc J2:2-6,
1991.
 13. Gengler W, Dubielzig R, Ramer J: Physical examination and radiographic analysis to detect dental and mandibular bone resorption
in cats: a study of 81 cases from necropsy, / Vet Dent 12:97-100, 1995.
14. Lund EM, Bohacek LK, Dahlke JL: Prevalence and risk factors for odontoclastic resorptive lesions in cats, JAm Vet Med Assc
212:392-395, 1998.
15. Van Wessum R, Harvey CE, Hennet P: Feline dental resorptive lesions: prevalence patterns, Vet Clix North Am Small Anim Pract
22:1405-1417, 1992.
450Canine and Feline Nutrition
16. Gioso MA, Shofer F, Barros PS: Mandible and mandibular frst molar tooth measurements in dogs: relationship of radiographic
height to body weight, J Vet Dent 18:65-68, 2001.
17. Shim Km, Kim SE, Yoo KH, and others: Case studies of repair of pathological mandibular fracture due to periodontal disease in
dogs, / Vet Clinics 24:653-657, 2007.
18. Perez G: Results from a home audit survey of pets and their care, Watham Centre Pet Nutr Data, 1996.
19. Spouge JD: Halitosis: a review of its cause and treatment, Dent Pract Dent Rec 15:307-317, 1964.
 20. Kim SE, Shim KM, Yoo KH, and others: Association between halitosis and periodontal disease related parameters in dogs
J Vet Clinics 24:192-196, 2007.
 21. Ng W, Tonzetich J: Effect of hydrogen sulfide and methyl mercaptan on the permeability of oral mucosa, J Dent Res 63:994-997,
1984.
health in patients with and without complaints of oral malodor, J Cin Dent 4:114 1 19, 1994.
23. Culham N, Rawlings JM: Oral malodor and its relevance to periodontal disease in the dog, / Vet Dent 15:165-168, 1998.
 24. Hennet PR, Delille B, Davor JL: Oral malodor measurements on a tooth surface of dogs with gingivitis, Asm J Vet Res 59:255-257,
1998.
25. Culham N, Rawlings JM: Studies of oral malodor in the dog, / Vet Dext 15:169-173, 1998
26. Kleinberg l, Westbay G: Oral malodor, Orit Rev Orat Bio Med 1:247-260, 1990.
27. Watson ADj: Diet and periodontal disease in dogs and cats: part 1, Vet Clin Nutr 4:135-137, 1997.
 28. Hardham J: Pigmented-anaerobic bacteria associated with canine periodontitis, Vet Microbiof 106:119-128, 2005.
29. Nieves MA, Hartwig P Kinyon JM, Riedesel DH: Bacterial isolates from plaque and from blood during and after routine dental
procedures in dogs, Vet Surg 26:26-32, 1997.
30. Geerts S, Nys M, DeMoi P: Systemic release of endotoxins induced by gentle mastication: associations with periodontitis severity,
J Periodontot 73:73-78,2002.
31. Colmery B, Frost P: Periodontal disease: etiology and pathogenesis, Vet Clix North Am Smal Anim Pract 16:817-834, 1986.
32. Reiter AM, Mendoza K: Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions—an unsolved enigma in veterinary dentistry, Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 32:791837, 2002.
33. American Veterinary Dental College: Position statement: feline tooth resorption (website). http://www.avdc.org/position-
statements.html. Accessed April 2007.
34. Okuda A, Harvey CE: Etiopathogenesis of feline dental resorptive lesions, Vt Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 22:1385-1401,
1992.
35. Ingham KE, Gorrel C, Blackburn J: Prevalence of odontoclastic resorptive lesions in a population of clinically healthy cats,
J Small Anim Pract 42:430-443, 2001.
36. Hofmann-Lehmannn R, Berger M, Sigrist B: Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection leads to increased incidence of feline
odontoclastic resorptive lesions (FORL), Vet Immunol Immunpathot 65:299-309, 1998.
37. Malik R, Kendall K, Cridland J, and others: Prevalence of feline leukaemia virus and feline immunodeficiency virus infections in
cats in Sydney, Aust Vet J 75:323-327, 1997.
38. Scarlett JM, Saidla J, Hess J: Risk factors for odontoclastic resorptive lesions in cats, J Am Anim Hosy Asoc 35:188-192, 1999.
 39. Reichart PA, Durr UM, Triadan H, and others: Periodontal disease in the domestic cat: a histopathologic study, J Periodontal Res
19:6/-/5,1984
40. Muzylak M, Arnett TR, Price JS, Horton MA: The in vitro effect of pH on osteoclasts and bone resorption in the cat: implications
or the pathogenesis of FORL, J Cell Physiol 213:144-150, 2007.
41. Holstrom SE: External osteoclastic resorptive lesions, Feline Pract 20:7-11, 1992.
Dental Health and Diet451
42. Okuda A, Asari M, Harvey CE: Challenges in treatment of external odontoclastic resorptive lesions in cats, Compend Conin Educ
Pract Vet 17:14611469, 1995.
43. Lyon KF: Subgingival odontoclastic resorptive lesions: classification, treatment and results in 58 cats, Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 22:1417-1432, 1992.
44. Hamp SF, Loe H: Long-term effect of chlorhexidine on developing gingivitis in the Beagle dog, J Periodontal Res 8:63-70, 1973.
45. Robinson JGA: Chlorhexidine gluconate—the solution for dental problems, J Vet Dent 12:29-31, 1995.
46. Burwasser P Hill TJ: The effect of hard and soft diets on the gingival tissues of dogs, J Dent Res 18:389-393, 1939.
48. Krasse B, Brill N: Effect of consistency of diet on bacteria in gingival pockets in dogs, Odont Rev 11:152-156, 1960.
49. Colden AL, Stoller N, Harvey CE: A survey of oral and dental diseases in dogs anaesthetized at a veterinary hospital, J Am Anim
Hosp Asoc 18:891-899, 1982
50. Japanese Small Animal Veterinary Association: Survey on the heatth of pet animats, 1985.
51. Gawor JP, Reiter AM, Jodkowska K, and others: Infuence of diet on oral health in cats and dogs, J Nutr 136:2021S-2023S, 2006.
52. Studer E, Stapley RB: The role of dry foods in maintaining healthy teeth and gums in the cat, Vet Med Small Anim Clin G8:
11241126, 1973.
53. Boyce EN: Feline experimental models for control of periodontal disease, Vt Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 22:1309-1321,
1982.
54. Harvey CE, Shofer FS, Laster L: Correlation of diet, other chewing activities and periodontal disease in North American client-
owned dogs, / Vet Dent 13:101-105, 1996.
 55. Lage A, Lausen N, Tracy R, and others: Effect of chewing rawhide and cereal biscuit on removal of dental calculus in dogs,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:213-219, 1990.
13:139-143, 1996.
'e-IeieI ua ia f'saop ur yeay jeuopoad Suureureu u mayp auaay jeuap, ejo alo au I saumey '5 airo 2s
1996.
58. Gorrel C, Bierer TL: Long-term effects of a dental hygiene chew on the periodontal healch of dogs, J Vet Dent 16:109-113, 1999.
59. Warrick JM, Stookey GK, Inskeep CA: Reducing calculus accumulation in dogs using an innovative rawhide treat system coated
with hexametaphosphate. 1n Iroc 15th Ann Vet Dent Forum, 2001, pp 379-382.
60. Rawlings JM, Gorrel C, Markwell Pj: Effect of canine oral health of adding chlorhexidine to a dental hygiene chew, J Vet Dent
15:129-134, 1998.
61. Brown WY, McGenity P: Efective periodontal disease control using dental hygiene chews, J Vet Dent 22:16-19, 2005.
62. Goldstein GS: The effect of rawhide strips on the removal and prevention of plaque and calculus. In Proc Vet Dent, Auburn, Ala,
1993.
63. Jensen L, Logan E, Finney O, and others: Reduction in accumulation of plaque, stain, and calculus in dogs by dietary means
/ Vet Dent 12:161-163, 1995
64. Simone A, Jensen L, Setser C, and others: Assessment of oral malodor in dogs, J Vet Dent 11:71-74, 1994.
65. Logan El, Finney O, Herrerrenn J: Effects of a dental food on plaque accumulation and gingival health in dogs, J Vet Dent
19:15-18, 2002.
66. Rawlings JM, Gorrel C, Markwell PJ: Efet of two dietary regimens on gingivitis in the dog, J SmallAnim Pract 38:147-151,
1997.
67. Hennet IP, Servet E, Venet C: Effects of feeding a daily oral hygiene chew on dental deposits in small breed dogs: a 4-month trial.
In Iroc I3th Europ Cong Vet Dent, 2004, pp 47-48.
452  Canine and Feline Nutrition
'Z-8[ Aienef Asn soti u[ sop ur seasip uouruos asou ay Sunuaid roy sl8aens-aseasip ieuopoad :Ia laeyprwre s9 
2007, pp 357-359.
69. Stookey GK, Warrick JM, Miller LL, and others: Hexametaphosphate-coated biscuitsignificantly reduce calculus formation in
dogs, / Vet Dent 13:27-30, 1996.
70. Stookey GK, Warrick JM, Miller LL: Sodium hexametaphosphate reduces calculus formation in dogs, Am J Vet Res 56:913-918,
1995.
71. Legeros RZ, Shannon 1l: The crystalline components of dental calculi: human vs. dog, / Dent Res 58:2371-2377, 1979.
72. Johnson RB, Cox ER, Lepine AJ: Dietary technology for inhibition of calculus formation in companion animals. In Proc World Vet
Dent Cong, 2003
73. Lepine A], Murray SM, Cox ER: Clinical investigation of dental diet efficacy in the senior dog. ln Proc Worid Vet Dent Cong, 2003.
 74. Hirasawa M, Kakada K, Makimura M: Irmprovement of periodontal status by green tea catechin using a local delivery system:
linical pilot study, / Periodonta! Res 37:433-438, 2002.
75. Sakanaka S, Okada Y: Inhibitory effects of green tea polyphenols on the production of a virulence factor of the periodontal-disease.
causing anaerobic bacterium Porphyromonal gingivalis, J Agric Food Chem 52:1688-1692, 2004.
76. lsogai E, lsogai H, Kimura K: Effect of Japanese green tea extract on canine periodontal diseases, Microbiot Ecol Heath Dis
8:5761, 1995
77. Isogai H, Isogai E, Takahashi K, Kurebayashi Y: Efect of catechin diet on gingivitis in cats, Intern J Appi Res Vet Med 6:82-86,
8007
78. Oarke DE: Clinical and microbiological effects of oral zinc ascorbate gel in cats, / Vet Dent 18:177-183, 2001.
79. Takarada K, Kimizuka R, Takahashi N: A comparison of the antibacterial effcacies of essential oils against oral pathogens,
Oral Microbiol Immunol 19:61-64, 2004.
 80. Donoghue S, Scarlett JM, Williams CA, and others: Diet as a risk factor for feline external odontoclastic resorption (abstract)
/ Nutr 124:2693S-2694S, 1994.
81. Zetner K, Steurer l: Role of commercial dry cat food in the pathogenesis of feline neck lesions, Prakt Tierarzt 73:289-297, 1992.
82. Reiter AM, Lyon KF, Nachreiner RF, Shofer FS: Evaluation of calcitropic hormones in cats with odontoclastic resorptive lesions,
Arvx J Vet Res 66:14461452, 2005.
83. Zetner K, Steurer I: The infuence of dry food on the development of feline neck lesions, / Vet Dent 9:4-6, 1992.
84. HallT], Chambers TJ: Optimal bone resorption by isolated rat osteoclasts requires chloride/bicarbonate exchange, CalcifTisue Int
45:378-380, 1989.
85. Dellmann HD, Brown EM: Textbook ofveterinary histology, Philadelphia, 1987, Verlag Lea & Febiger.
86. Muzylak M, Arnett TR, Price JS, Horton MA: The in vitro effect of pH on osteoclasts and bone resorption in the cat: implications
for the pathogenesis of FORL, J Cell Physol 213:144-150, 2007
87. Zhang P Cupp C, Kerr W: Vitamin D status in cats with and without feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions, Compend Contin
Educ Pract Vet 28:77, 2006.
88. Carmichael DT: Periodontal disease—strategies for preventing the most common disease in dogs. In Proc NAVC, 2007.
89. Aller S: Dental home care and preventive strategies, Semin Vet Med Surg Smalf Anim 8:204-212, 1993.
90. Hefferren Jl, Boyce E, Bresnahan ME: Aging and oral health, Vet Chin Nutr 3:97-100, 1996.
91. Korman KS: The role of supra gingival plaque in the prevention and treatment of periodontal disease, J Periodontal Res
16(Suppl):5-22, 1986.
92. Tromp JA, van Rijn LJ, Jansen J: Experimental gingivitis and frequency of toth brushing in the Beagle dog model: clinical
fndings, J Chin Periodontof 13:190-194, 1986.
 93. Corba NHC, Jansen J, Pilot T: Artifcial periodontal defects and frequency of tooth-brushing in Beagle dogs. 1. Clinical fndings
after creation of the defects, / Chin Periodontot 13:158-163, 1986.
Dental Health and Diet453
 94. Corba NHC, Jansen J, Pilot T: Artifcial periodontal defects and frequency of tooth-brushing in Beagle dogs. ll. Clinical findings
after a period of healing, / Clin Peridontof 13:186-189, 1986.
9/61 '80 1-901y8 soy suaa I puos sop aj8eag e fo eaau1a ayp uo Surysnrg-uoon go nraa aup uo Apms 1od v i saues '56
96. Briner W: Effect of chlorhexidine on plaque, gingivitis, and alveolar bone loss in Beagle dogs after seven years of treatment,
I Periodonta! Res 15:390-394, 1980.
 97. Tepe JH, Loenard C, Singer R, and others: The long-term effect of chlorhexidine on plaque, gingivitis, sulcus depth, gingival
recession and loss of attachment in Beagle dogs, J Periodontal Res 18:452-458, 1983.
op aun u saiura pue soporad go nuauean aun u suaee ergoruue yo asn geuaunada au go maar y shf paa oe
Can Vet J 29:705-708, 1988.
99. Kim SE, Shim KM, Yoo KH, and others: The effect of cetylpyridinium chloride on halitosis and periodontal disease-related
parameters in dogs, Biotech Bioproc Engineer 13:252-255, 2008.
100. Cummins D, Creeth JE: Delivery of anti-plaque agents from dentifrices, gels and mouthwashes, J Dent Res 71:1439-1449, 1992.
35
Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Disease
Gastrointestinal disease in dogs and cats is composed
population numbers, and because not all dogs that are
of a group of disorders with vatying and often unre-
treated successfully for SIBO show reduced intestinal
lated underlying causes. Regardless of the cause, most
bacterial counts following treatment. The designation
gastrointestinal disorders manifest as acute or chronic
of ARD refects the leading theory that antibiotic ther-
diarrthea and, in some cases, vomiting or anorexia.
apy and dietary tteatments for SIBO support a change
Nutritional support is an important component of
the population dynamics of the intestinal fora,
tteatment because of the gastrointestinal tract's essential
 opposed to simply a reduction in total number of
tole in nutrient digestion and absorption. A primary
microbes that are present. The goal is to shift the balance
 goal of dietary therapy is to maintain delivery of nutri-
of the microbiota away from pathogens and toward the
ents and prevent nutfient deficiencies and malnutrition.
less pathogenic and beneficial species that are present in
 In adldition, long-term dietary management can help
a healthy intestine. To reflect this change (and the lack
of total consensus), the inclusive tefm SIBO/ARD will
populations of intestinal microfora, promote normal
be used in this review.
Although some dogs with SIBO/ARD do not have
persistent clinical signs, most develop chronic episodes
While dietary management
V1
lnot always cufe the
of intermittent diarrthea that may be accompanied by
underlying disease, it can have a profound infuence on
vomiting or anorexia. SIBO/ARD may develop sec-
the ability of the intestine
 andis animpor
tant component of veterinary tfreatment for the control
be idiopathic. Factors that can lead to secondary SIBO
of many types of intestinal disease.
include impaired gut motility, the prolonged or exces-
sive use of oral antibiotics, and achlorhydria (decreased
acid production in the stomach). In a healthy animal,
NUTRITIONALLY RESPONSIVE
bacterial populations increase in number proximally
GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASES
to distally in the gastrointestinal tract. Normal peri-
stalsis helps to limit bacterial populations in the upper
Intestinal disorders in companion animals that have
small intestine by regularly Hushing bacteria distally
been shown to be responsive to dietary management
through the gastrointestinal tract. Reduced motility
include small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO)/
 allows increased substrate to be available to gut bacte-
antibiotic-responsive diarrhea (ARD), pathogen over-
fia, which can lead to increased mictobial populations
growth, exocrine pancreatic disease, several types
and changes in the balance of normal fora. Numer-
of infammatory
disorders, and nonspecific acute
ous health problems can contribute to a reduction in
diarrthea.
gut motility and increase risk of developing second-
ary SIBO. These include intestinal obstruction, neu-
ropathy, abdominal surgery, peritonitis, pancreatitis,
SIBO andARD
ufemia, hypokalemia, and endotoxemia. SIBO/ARD
SIBO occurs when there are quantitative and qualita-
 may also develop as a sequela to other forrms of intes-
tive changes to bacterial populations in the lumen of
tinal disease such as lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis
the proximal (upper) part of the small intestine.34 Some
and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI).5,6 Ani-
researchers have fecently argued that SIBO should
 mals with idiopathic SIBO/ARD will have a decrease
be fehamed antibiotic-responsive diarrhea (ARD)
in signs following the appropriate antibiotic regi-
because of the difficulty in SIBO diagnosis via bacterial
men. Finally, SIBO may have a genetic component.
455
456 Canine and Feline Nutrition
German Shepherd Dogs have been reported to have an
 species of bacteria found in cats with SIBO were Bac-
unusually high incidence of SIBO, and this has been
teroides species, eubacteria, fusobacteria, and Pasteurella
associated with a breed-specifc defciency of secretory
species. In addition, the cat appears to be unique in the
immunoglobulin A.7,8
relatively high number of clostridia found in the intes-
Historically, the gold standard for diagnosis of
tine, as compared with other carnivorous species. Even
SIBO has been via microbiological culture of duo-
when the challenges of defining and diagnosing SIBO/
denal Auid obtained endoscopically or during a lapa-
ARD are considlered, it is still generally accepted that
rotomy. A culture showing more than 105 total or 104
SIBO/ARD is an important cause of chronic diarrhea in
anaerobic colony-forming units of bacteria per mil-
dogs (and less commonly in cats), as well as a concomi-
liliter (CFU/ml) is considered to be consistent with
tant finding in several other forms of chronic intestinal
SIBO.9 However, the clinical relevance of these num-
disease.16
bers has been questioned because some healthy dogs
consistently have counts that are this high and because
a proportion of dogs with ARD/SIBO that respond to
SIBO/ARD occurs when there are quantitative and qual-
antibiotic tfeatment do not show a feduction in total
itative changes to bacterial popuiations in the lumen of
bacterial counts.91l For this reason, a total bacterial
the proximal (upper) part ofthe small intestine. Clinical
count in excess of 107 to 108 CFU/ml has been sug-
signs include chronic episodes ofintermittent diarrhea
 gested by some researchers as the standard for diagno-
that may be accompanied by vomiting or anorexia.
sis of SIBO in dogs and cats.10
SIBO/ARD may be a primary disease or can develop
In addition, elevated serum folate, reduced serum
secondarily to a number ofother intestinal disorders.
cobalamin, and elevated deconjugated bile acids provide
indirect supportive evidence for bacterial overgrowth
in the proximal small intestine.12-14 Although serum
folate and cobalamin are individually not very sensitive
PathogenOvergrowth
indicators of SIBO, when these values are concurrently
In healthy animals, the many genera and species of
altered, these changes atre consilered specifc for SIBO/
intestinal microbes exist in a commensal balance that
ARD. Serum folate increases as bacteria numbers in the
promotes normal digestive and immune function-
upper small intestine increase due to increased bacte-
ing.
rial production of folate. Serum cobalamin concentra-
rial species that are classifed as benefcial inhibit the
tion decfeases because bacteria interfere with cobalamin
 proliferation of harmful bacterial species, stimulate
binding to intrinsic factor and subsequently inhibit
immune function, aid in the digestion or absorption
absorption of the vitamin into circulation. Intestinal
of food, and synthesize essential vitamins.20 These
bacteria also cause the deconjugation of bile salts, which
effects are achieved through competition for oxygen,
afe then reabsorbed, making them unavailable to par-
luminal substrates, and living space within intestinal
ticipate in fat absorption. Deconjugated bile acids that
niches. In addition, some indigenous fora produce
remain in the intestinal lumen are also a significant con-
substances that directly inhibit the growth of other
ttibutor to the osmotic and secfetory diarrhea seen in
bacterial species. For example, saccharolytic species
dogs with SIBO/ARD.
of intestinal microbes produce short-chain fatty acids
Qualitative changes in the bacterial Hora of the simall
(SCFAs) during the metabolism of carbohydrate. In
intestine of pets with SIBO/ARD are as significant as
turn, these SCFAs inhibit the growth of some patho-
increased numbers, and these changes should always
 genic species of bacteria.21
be assessed. Species of bacteria that typically increase in
An animal's intestinal microbial population is not
dogs with SIBO/ARD include coliferms, staphylococci,
 static. Microbial populations are susceptible to change
and enterococci, with Clostridium and Bacteroides spe
and can be affected by stress, infection, antibiotic
cies predominating. Although clinical SIBO is less com-
administration, nutritional factors, motility problems,
mon in cats, subclinical cases have been reported based
 and immunosuppression. When a change in the normal
upon earlier diagnostic criteria.15 The most common
 population of microbes allows the proliferation of one
Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Disease  457
of more pathogenic species of bacteria, clinical illness
disease, and exposure to certain drugs or infectious
can result. Pathogen overgrowth may manifest as a sin-
gle problem or can occur secondarily as a component
infammatory syndrome called “triaditis,” in which
of SIBO/ARD or another form of intestinal disease.
chronic pancreatitis occurs concurrently with infam-
The proliferation of pathogenic species of bacteria causes
 matory diseases of the liver and intestine.3l In dogs,
harm to the host animal by producing toxins, carcino-
Miniature Schnauzers and Yorkshire Terriers may be at
gens, or putrefactive compounds. These compounds
 increased risk for developing pancreatitis, and a possible
may directly affect the intestinal mucosa, cause systemic
mode of inheritance has been identified in Miniature
disease, and inhibit the growth of beneficial bacteria.
Schnauzers.29,32
One of the most common intestinal pathogens in com-
EPI occurs when the exocrine pancreas produces
panion animals is Clostridium perfringens.15,22 Signs of
inadequate amounts of digestive enzymes fesulting in
an imbalanced intestinal microbe population or patho-
a maldigestion/malabsorption syndrome. In dogs, the
 gen overgrowth include vomiting, diarrhea, weight loss,
most common underlying cause of EPI is selective atro-
and, in some cases, systemic illness caused by the pro-
phy of the pancreatic acinar cells, which are respon-
duction of toxins.
sible for the production and storage of the digestive
enzymes.33 Canine EPI has a genetic basis; the major-
ity of cases are diagnosed in German Shepherd Dogs
Pancreatitis and Exocrine
and Rough Collies.34 The mode of inheritance in these
Pancreatic Insufficiency
two breeds appears to be autosomal recessive. A recent
Pancreatitis and EPl are well-defined gastrointestinal
report also found that Cavalier King Charles Spaniels
disorders in dogs and cats that can occur in acute and
I ioy ys PseaI 1e os ae sou mo Pue
chronic forms.23,24 Acute pancreatitis is a short-term,
when compared with the entire population of dogs,
usually feversible illness in which there is no evidence
 and there appears to be a juvenile-onset form of EPI
of tissue fbrosis or acinar atrophy.25 It may have an
in Greyhounds.35,36 EPI is less common in cats, but
extfemely fapid oniset, and in severe cases may lead to
can occuf as a sequela to chronic pancfeatitis. A gehetic
rapid tissue necrosis and a potentially lethal outcome.
basis for EPI has not been reported in cats.
 Chronic pancreatitis is a continuous, usually progressive
Although acute pancreatitis can be a medical emer-
infammatory disorder that is characterized by perma-
 gency, most cases of chronic pancreatitis are classifed
nent damage to pancreatic stfucture and exocrine (and
as mild, with the pet showing tfansient but fecuffent
sometimes endocrine) function. Acute pancreatitis is
signs. The most common clinical signs of pancreatitis
the most commen form that is diagnosed in dogs, while
afe complete or partial anorexia, depression and leth-
chronic pancreatitis is the primary manifestation seen in
 argy, vomiting, and weight loss.24 Pets often present
cats.26 However, dogs treated for acute pancreatitis may
with abdominal pain, dehydration, icterus, and dys
pnea. The clinical signs of EPI all relate to the reduced
tis. There is also recent evidence suggesting that many
ability to digest and absorb dietary nutrients. Fat diges-
tion and absorption is severely impaired, which can
contribute to both acute and chronic intestinal symp-
Of mild, cases of chronic feline pancreatitis may be eas-
toms.37 Other changes in intestinal function include a
ily missed.28
decrease in protein synthesis within enterocytes, mal-
The underlying cause of many cases of pancreatitis
absorption of some vitamins, and secondary develop-
is not determined, so many cases afe classified as idio-
 ment of SIBO/ARD or pathogen overgrowth. Studlies
 pathic. Identifed risk factors for developing pancreati-
indicate that SIBO/ARD is found in more than 70%
tis include being overweight or obese, hyperlipidemia,
of dogs with a diagnosis of EPI.38 Animals with EPI
consuming a high-fat meal or experiencing one or more
produce voluminous stools that are often loose and
bouts of dietary indiscretion (dogs), and the presence of
foul smelling. Frequent bouts of diarrhea and steatof-
other forms of gastrointestinal disease such as infam-
rhea afe common. Excessive weight loss and an emaci-
matory bowel disease or liver disease (cats), neoplastic
 ated appearance are classic signs of EPI, even while the
458Canine and Feline Nutrition
pet demonstrates a voracious appetite and polyphagia.
The diarthea caused by EPI is typically osmotic due to
Inflammatory Bowel Disorders
the passage of malabsorbed diet components along the
Infammatory diseases of the intestine are a diverse group
intestinal tract. However, secretory diarrhea of the lowef
of disorders that are generally categorized according to
small intestine and colon may also be present, as a result
the type of infammatory cel that predominates in the
 of bacterial deconjugation of bile acids and the metabo-
intestinal mucosa, the area of the intestine affected, of
lism of unabsorbed fat to hydroxy fatty acids.
the underlying cause, if known. Colitis is a general term
While clinical signs and history are helpful in diag-
for a condition that describes irritation or infammation
nosing pancreatitis and EPl, definitive diagnosis is made
 of the large intestine, and it is considered the most fre-
using results of the pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
quently diagnosed disorder of the large intestine in dogs
assay (pancieatitis) or the serum tfypsin-like immu-
 and cats.43 Colitis is further classified into several forms,
which include lymphocytic-plasmacytic, eosinophilic,
 acute pancreatitis requires Auid therapy and correction
histocytic, and granulomatous colitis. Lymphocytic-
of hypokalemia or other electrolyte or acid-base imbal-
plasmacytic enterocolitis is the most common form
 ances, if present.25 Pain management is also important 
of infammatory bowel disorder (IBD) in dogs.44 In
for pets with pancreatitis and is typically achieved via
recent years, a new classification has identifed a sub-
opicid administration or transdermal fentanyl patches.
There is evidence that pancreatic enzyime supplementa-
rhea (CILBD).45 Although limited data are available,
tion is helpful at reducing pain in human patients with
CILBD is presumed to be a stress-related disorder that
chronic pancreatitis. Although it has not been stud-
 may be concomitantly infuenced by other factors such
ied, this may be helpful in dogs and cats as well. Early
as infammatory disease, dietary indiscretions, pathogen
nutritional intervention via enteral feeding also may be
overgrowth, patasitic infection, and neoplasia. Clinical
beneficial in acute cases of pancreatitis. An important
signs of colitis and CILBD are the result of dysfunc-
component to the long-term management of both pan-
tion of the large intestine and include increased defeca-
creatitis and EPI is diet modification. For pets with pan-
tion frequency, tenesmus, and production of bloody of
creatitis, reduction of overweight conditions (if present)
mucoid diarrhea. When IBD affects the small intestine,
is important, and possibly the control of dietary fat (see
signs include production of large quantities of soft,
pp. 463-464). Long-term management of EPI includes
bulky stools or diarrhea, with occasional steatorrhea.
providing supplemental enzyme extracts with meals and
Pue ssol iusiam 'sseasip eunssui ssel on Aenuo
dietary modification to promote efficient digestion and
vomiting are common with small intestinal IBD.
reduce malabsorption. In addition, antibiotic therapy
IBD is considered to be a multifactorial disorder.
of dietary approaches to control SIBO are necessary for
Predisposing factors include genetics, exposure to
someanimals.
luminal antigens and loss of immune tolerance, com-
promised colonocyte health, increased mucosal permea-
bility, and impairment or insuffciency of the intestine's
Exocrine pancreatic insuffciency (Epi) isa specifc type
 normal protective mechanisms.46 A genetic basis may
of pancreatic disease that occurs when the exocrine
be involved in some forms of IBD; Boxers and German
pancreas produces inadequate amounts of digestive
Shepherd Dogs are at increased risk of developing lym-
enzymes. Clinical signs all relate to the reduced ability
phocytic-plasmacytic enterocolitis while Basenjis afe
to digest and absorb dietary nutrients. Animais with EP!
susceptible to a form called immunoproliferative enter-
produce vofuminous stoois that are often loose and fou!
smelling, and diarrhea and steatorrhea are common.
cat, including lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis and
Excessive weight loss and ar emaciated appearance are
eosinophilic enteritis, but no breed-specifc predilec
seen, even while the pet demonstrates a voracious appe-
tions have been reported.50,51 Additionally, distinguish-
tite. Diagnosis of EPl is made using resuits of the serum
ing between IBD and gastfointestinal lymphoma can
trypsin-like immunoreactivity assay.
be diagnostically challenging in cats. Infection with
an intestinal parasite or bacterial pathogen, bacterial
Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Disease  459
overgrowth, or presence of a food antigen may all trig-
(dilatation). This disorder is often, but not always,
ger an initial infammatory response, which can persist
accompanied by rotation of the stomach along its long
even after the initial cause has been resolved. Once an
axis (volvulus). Dilatation occurs when gas, Huid, and
immune response has been initiated in the small or large
secretions accumulate within the stomach and are not
intestine, production of infammatory eicosanoids and
expelled because of the occlusion of both the cardiac
tissue ischemia may sustain the infammatory response,
and pyloric sphincters. The condition rapidly worsens
resulting in a cycle of chronic illness.
as the distended and rotated stomach places pressure on
Treatment of IBD and CILBD is directed toward
the major abdominal blood vessels, the portal vein, and
eliminating the underlying cause (if one can be found),
caudal vena cava. This pressure causes a loss of blood
reducing infammation, and achieving long-term remis-
fow to the stomach and other vital organs, decreased
sion. Medical therapy of IBD includes the use of anti-
cardiac output, and the development of shock. At this
infammatory and immunosuppressive drugs such as
point the dog's condition rapidlly deteriorates, and if the
corticosteroids (prednisone or prednisolone), sulfasala-
GDV is not corrected quickly, shock and tissue damage
zine, and, in some cases, ofal cyclosporine of metfoni-
become severe and death ensues. In addition, cardiac
dazole (cats).52 However, these drugs are associated with
arrhythmias are observed in up to 40% of dogs with
undesirable and deleterious health effects when used for
GDV and can cause death within weeks or months fol-
long periods. In recent years, new regimens have been
lowing apparent recovery from GDV.54 Diagnosis is
developed that focus on dietary management (see pp.
usually based on clinical signs, with radiographs used to
461-472 for complete discussion).52,53 While drug ther-
 distinguish between GDV and gastric dilatation with-
apy is still often used in the initial treatment phase to
out gastric torsion. Although the course of GDV can be
reduce infammation and allow healing of the intestinal
quite variable among dogs, this disorder should always
tfact, dietary management can often maintain femis-
 be treated as a medical emergency.
sion and prevent relapse. Drug therapy is then only
Bloat most often affects large, deep-chested dogs.
reinstated if clinical signs return.
The breeds that have been identifed as being most sus-
ceptible include the Great Dane, Saint Bernard, Wei-
maraner, Irish Setter, Gordon Setter, Standard Poodle,
Nonspecific Acute Diarrhea
and Basset Hound.SS Although rare, the disorder can
Nonspecific acute diarrhea refers to short episodes of
also occur in small breeds of dogs and cats.56 Risk of
diarrhea for which a cause cannot be found. In most
GDV also increases as dogs age. A dog that is devel-
cases, the pet remains active, there is no evidence of
oping GDV will exhibit acute abdominal pain and
systemic disease, and the clinical signs are self-limiting.
distention, and it will often whine, pace, salivate, and
In dogs, this condition is commonly caused by dietary
appear anxious. The dog may attempt to vomit but will
indiscretions such as consuming gatbage, animal feces,
be unable to regurgitate any stomach contents. As the
 Of carrion. Overeating or a sudden change in the type
problem progresses, hypovolemic shock occurs, charac-
or brand of food that is fed can cause acute diarrhea
terized by pale mucous membranes, a rapid and weak
in both dogs and cats. Feeding a poorly formulated
pulse, increased heart rate, and weakness. In all cases,
or inalequately prepated homemade diet or excessive
veterinary care must be provided immediately.
amounts of table scraps can also lead to small or large
Initial treatment of GDV involves decompression of
intestinal diarrhea. In these cases, the diarrhea can be
the stomach and treatment for shock. Surgical interven-
treated symptomatically until the animal recovers or an
tion is usually also necessary and involves derotation
underlying cause can be found and treated.
and repositioning of the stomach, followed by prophy
lactic measures that help to prevent recurrence. Surgery
also allows assessment of the damage to the stomach
Gastric Dilatation-Volvulus
and other organs. Even with treatment, prognosis is
Gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV), commonly referred
often guarded. In a retrospective study of almost 2000
to as bloat, is a life-threatening disorder character-
cases, the case fatality fate was 33.6% in dogs tfeated for
ized by rapid and abnormal distention of the stomach
GDV at veterinary teaching hospitals.SS The strongest
460 Canine and Feline Nutrition
prognostic indicator appears to be the extent of gastric
determined to have a nervous or fearful temperament
necrosis that has occurred. Death occurs either during
were at higher fisk for eventually developing GDV. In
surgery because of irreversible shock or within several
contrast, a study of 74 Irish Setters with GDV and a
days of surgery as a result of cardiac complications of
group of matched controls found that the risk of GDV
 gastric necrosis.57 While nonsurgical treatment is asso-
was not associated with gender or temperament in that
ciated with a high rate of recurrence, the use of gas-
breed. The differences between these two studies may
tropexy to surgically stabilize the stomach signifcantly
refect differences between the general population of
reduces recurrence and postoperative mortality.58
dogs and the subpopulation of a specifc breed (Irish
GDV is considered to have a multifactorial etiol-
Setters). In both studies, however, the most significant
ogy. Potential infuencing factors that have been stud-
 precipitating factor identifed was an episode of envi-
ied include genetic predisposition, dietary management 
fonmental change of a stress-inducing event within sev-
practices, diet type and composition, and intrinsic
eral hours preceding the onset of clinical signs. In the
abnormalities such as elevated serum gastrin or altered
Irish Setters that were studied, two precipitating risks
gastric motility. Genetics plays an important fole in
that were identified were recent kenneling and a recent
GDV to the degree that body type and structure are
cat journey.
inherited characteristics. A study reported that the tw0
Several nutritional factors have been found to infu-
most important risk factors affecting a breed’s predis-
position for development of GDV are a relatively high
ing only one meal per day, having a fast rate of eating.
chest depth-to-width ratio and a large adult size.59
and experiencing aerophagia while eating. On the
Together, chest conformation and body size account fof
other hand, feeding table foods, having snacks avail-
76% of the variability in breed risk for GDV. Subse-
able between meals, and adding canned food to a dog's
quent studies with Irish Setters have shown that there is
diet all decreased the risk of GDV. This second group of
 practices all contribute to a more frequent meal sched.
chest depth-to-widlth ratio and an individual dogs risk
ule and afe assumed to fesult in a decfeased volume of
for developing GDV.60 Because chest depth-to-width
food being fed during a single meal. These findings are
fatios are signifcantly infuenced by genetics, it may be
in agreement with earlier reports that the majority of
possible to reduce the incidence of GDV through selec-
cases of GDV occur when the dog has fecently con-
tive breeding.61 Studies of the genetics involved in GDV
sumed a large meal or quantity of water.64 Finally, con-
 i uo si ii i ig a a p ae
0n [moq pooy paieaala ue Suisn jaaq rejndod on A1e1l
impossible to separate these effects from environmental
feed dogs who are increased risk of GDV does not help
infuences such as husbandry practices, medical care,
 to prevent bloat and may even increase risk.6S
 and feeding management. However, dogs that inherit a
The mechanism through which meal frequency
large, deep-chested body type have an increased suscep-
affects gastric health may have to do with the volume
tibility to this disease, and this conformation appears to
podai siaas us yim Apnis y 'py si ieu pooy jo
have a high heritability in some breeds of dogs.
that dogs fed one large meal per day throughout growth
Other studies have identified additional risk fac-
developed larger, heavier stomachs than did dogs fed
tors for GDV.62,63 While some of these, such as breed
jeq so yg'pouad aues au sunp Aep iad seau sain
and conformation, are characteristics that are inher-
 were fed once daily also had greater gastric distention 
ent to a particular dog, others are environmental fac-
than did dogs fed multiple meals, but no differences in 
tors over which owners have at least some measufe of
 gastric motility were seen between the two groups. The
control. In one study, a group of 101 dogs that had
investigators concluded that fedling one time per day,
acute episodes of GDV were individually matched with
 rather than feeding multiple small meals per day, may
dogs of the same age, breed, and size.63 Comparisons
 contribute to changes associated with GDV in suscep-
of the two groups showed that physical characteristics
tible dogs. It has also been postulated that strenuous
that significantly increased an individual dog's risk of
exercise, stress, or excitement may be contributing fac
GDV included gender, body weight, and temperament.
 tors, especially before or after a meal or a large volume
Specifically, male dogs that were underweight and were
of water is consumed.
Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Disease  461
Composition of the diet or type of diet that is fed
BOX 35-1 PRACTICAL TIPS: PREVENTION OF
has received attention as a possible cause of GDV, but
GASTRIC DILATATION-VOLVULUS
there are little actual data to support this theory. Dry
(GDV} IN SUSCEPTIBLE DOGS
dog foods were initially implicated because of the belief
that they absorb water and expand while in the stom-
 Use portion-controlled meal feeding as the feeding
ach, causing an abnormal amount of gastric distention.
regimen.
Another theory proposed that cereal-based, dry diets
 Feed several small meals per day to prevent overfilling
delay gastric emptying when consumed and contribute
 of the stomach.
to the accumulation of gas in the stomach. The pres-
ence of soybean products in pet foods has also been pro-
Do not allow the consum ption of a large volume of water
immediately before or after eating or exercise.
posed as a causative factor. It has been theorized that
soy provides a fermentative substrate for Clostridium7
 Feed susceptible dogs separately from other animals. If
 spp. bacteria within the stomach, which produces the
possible, su pervise mealtimes.
gas responsible for GDV. However, a study with large
Do not provide exercise for 1 hour before and 3 hours
breeds of dogs compared the effects of feeding a dry
after meals
cereal-based diet, canned meat of canned, cereal-based
Minimize stress and environmental changes.
diet on gastric motility and the rate of gastric empty-
If signs of GDV are observed, seek veterinary assistance
ing. Results showed no significant effect of diet on
immediately.
gastric function in any of the dogs that were studied.66
Another clinical study involving 240 dogs that had been
treated for GDV did not find any correlation between
meal feeding should be used. Several small meals should
the type of food that was fed and the occurrence of
be fed per day, as opposed to one large meal, to prevent
GDV.67 Lastly, although there is some disagreement,
overflling of the stomach.65 Similarly, although fresh
the fermentation theory has been largely refuted by the
water should be available at all times, dogs should not
 observation that the gas found in the stomachs of dogs
be allowed to drink a large volume of water before or
with GDV is made up primarily of atmospheric gas,
after eating, or after exercise. Because dogs often increase
indicating that swallowed air is usually the source of the
their rate of eating or the amount that they eat when in
gas, not fermented stomach contents. 68,69 Production of
the presence of other dogs, all susceptible dogs should
fermentative gas in the stomach of dogs with GDV can
be fed separately, and any stress that may be associated
occur after death and may lead to the effoneous conclu-
with the feeding environment should be minimized. If
sion that this gas was the initial cause of the disorder.
possible, feeding times should be scheduled so that the
For example, studies of postmortem tissue decomposi-
dog is supervised and can be observed for 1 to 2 hours
tion have been unable to demonstrate that the presence
after meals. Lastly, although exercise as a predisposing
of Clostridium bacteria in the stomach is primary to the
factor has not been confirmed, it is prudent to withhold
disease, father than secondary. Currently, the
 studies
exercise for 1 hour before and at least 3 hours after feed-
that are available support the conclusion that GDV is
ing. All dogs that have a susceptible body type or a his
not a dietary disorder per se, and that its development
tory of GDV should be carefully monitored for signs of
is not related to any component in pet foods nor to the
GDV. If signs are seen, veterinary care should be sought
type of food that is fed.
immediately (Box 35-1).
Although the type of diet and components within
the diet are not causal factors in GDV, several feed-
ing management practices can be used to help prevent
DIETARYMANAGEMENT OF
GDV in dogs that afe susceptible or have a history of
INTESTINAL DISEASE
GDV. In other words, although what the dog eats does
not appeat to affect the occurrence of GDV, how the
A diet used to manage gastrointestinal disease should
dog is fed and the feeding environment can be managed
be selected in accordance with the specific disease being
to minimize the chances of GDV. Portion-controlled
treated, the area of the gastrointestinal tract affected,
462 Canine and Feline Nutrition
and the ability of the diet to promote healing and
further exacerbates existing intestinal disease through
maintain femission. Specific diet characteristics that
reduced mucosal cell protein synthesis and impaired
should be considered include protein and carbohydrate
local immune function.70 Most seriously, a syndrome
sources, level and type of fat, level and type of dietary
called protein-losing enteropathy (PLE) occurs when
fber, potential benefits of prebiotics or probiotics, and
there is rapid and severe loss of protein from the small
dliet digestibility.
intestine.7l Although PLE is most commonly associated
with idiopathic lymphangiectasia, it may also represent
the end stage of several chronic intestinal disorders.
Managing Acute Disease
Therefore the diet should provide a high-quality protein
The immediate nutritional management of acute gastro-
source that is easily digested and assimilated and con-
intestinal disease usually involves short-term fasting of
tains all of the essential amino acids in their correct pro-
severely reduced food intake with the intent of provid-
 portions to minimize the risk of protein malnutrition.
Aioau au uodn paseq s! yseoidde siu cisai ins, su!
Any dietary protein that is not completely digested
that slowing gastrointestinal tract function by withhold-
and assimilated in the small intestine travels to the large
ing food allows normal gastric and peristaltic contrac-
intestine, where it can be metabolized by gut microbes,
tions to subside and promotes healing of the intestinal
causing changes in the intestinal microfora.72 A healthy
lining.' Traditionally, after a fasting period of 12 to 48
and balanced intestinal microfora is comprised pre-
hours, a bland diet consisting of highly digestible ingre-
dominantly of saccharolytic (carbohydrate fermenting)
dients has been recommended. However, while “resting
bacterial species, most of which are considered to be
the gut" may have benefits, especially when the animal
benefcial gut microbes.73 Conversely, other species,
is vomiting or diarrhea is severe, the use of “bland diet”
such as Bacteroides spp. and Clostridia spp. are capable
has been questioned due to a lack of evidence for its
of fermenting polypeptides and amino acids. These
efficacy.2 Moreover, while use of the term “bland” to
organisms are normally present in low numbers; how-
describe the refeedling diet enjoys ubiquitous usage, the
ever, when partially digested protein is delivered to the
definition of this term and the specific diet characteris-
large intestine it provides increased substrate for these
tics are vague and poorly defined. While a short-term
 pathogenic species, leading to their proliferation and to
fasting period to allow gut rest is helpful in the initial
the production of ammonia, phenols, indoles, and gas.
 tteatment stage of some intestinal disorders and may
This can lead to large intestinal diarrhea, further exacer-
help to prevent hypersensitivities when altered mucosal
bating intestinal disease.
permeability is present, studies of intestinal disease in
Dietary protein is also important because of its effect
-lodul AiaA sI 1aip Jo adAi aun 1eun mous sies pue shop
on immune-mediated responses in the gastrointestinal
tant and that diet characteristics other than “blandness"
tract. In at least some animals, the development of coli-
must be considered (see pp. 462-472). In the face of
tis appears to be an immune-mediated response to food
new information supporting the use of specifically for-
antigens that gain access to the colonic lamina propria
mulated diets for the treatment and management of
 and submucosa.72 Once an immune fesponse is trig-
gastrointestinal disorders, it is advised that the term
"blandness" be discontinued altogether when attempt-
tem of the large intestine to an offending antigen results
ing to describe a therapeutic diet.
in persistent infammation and disruption of intestinal
function. Some dogs and cats with chronic gastrointes-
tinal disease are also found to have an adverse food reac-
Long-Term Management—Diet
Composition
pet food that contains a single and novel protein soufce
PROTEIN SOURCE
 Diseases that affect the small
(for a complete discussion of adverse food reactions see
intestine, such as EPI, SIBO/ARD, and some forms
Chapter 31, pp. 396-402).74
of infammatory bowel disease, can impair protein
For all of these reasons, the proteins that are included
digestion and absorption. Prolonged malabsorption of
in diets for dogs and cats with intestinal disease must
dietaty protein can lead to protein malnutrition, which
be highly digestible. When adverse food reaction is
Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Disease  463
suspected, a single-source protein should be fed, pref-
protein only after mucosal infammation and perme-
erably one to which the dog or cat has not previously
ability has decreased, thus minimizing the risk of the
been exposed. Highly digestible protein sources have
second protein resulting in hypersensitivity. Although
reduced antigenicity because less intact dietary protein
this approach has theoretical merit, there is currently no
is absorbed into the mucosa of the small intestine and
clinical cr experimental evidence of its efficacy. Because
less arrives intact or partially digested in the large intes-
using a sacrifice diet and protein source requires identi-
tine. Providing a single protein source also minimizes
fying two novel protein sources and changing the pet's
the chance of feeding a protein to which the pet has
food twice during treatment, most veterinarians and
been previously sensitized. Because of a possible con-
nutritionists are not currently recommending this treat-
nection between food antigens and colitis, some authors
ment approach.77
recommend feeding an elimination diet to tfeat coli-
tis and other forms of infammatory intestinal disease.
Types of elimination diets and their use in the diag-
Proteins that are inciuded in diets for dogs and cats with
 nosis and management of dietary hypersensitivity ate
intestinal disease must be of high quality and highly
described in detail in Chapter 31 (see pp. 399-402).
digestible. When adverse food reaction is suspected, a sin-
Several studies of dogs and cats with colitis have
shown positive fesults when the animals are fed an
the dog or cat has not previousty been exposed. Because
elimination diet containing a single, novel protein
ofα possible connection between food antigens and colitis,
 source.75,76 Although response rates vaty among studies,
between 30% and 85% of dogs with idiopathic colitis
and other forms ofinfammatory intestinal disease
respond favorably to this type of regimen. Differences
in response rates may refect variations in the diets used
with respect to protein soufce and digestibility. Animals
that did not fespond with complete femission to a hovel
CARBOHYDRATE Similar to protein, a single caf-
 protein source often showed some degree of improve-
bohydrate source that can be easily digested and assimi-
 ment and required lower levels of antinfammatory
lated should be included in foods formulated for pets
medications to achieve and maintain remission.75 A
with gastrointestinal disease. Because gluten-induced
number of suitable commercially prepared veterinary
enteropathy is the cause of intestinal disease in some
diets are available. Most are formulated to provide com-
0n pasasns uaaq sey i sias us aened sao
plete and balanced nutrition and include single-soufce,
include only gluten-free carbohydrates in diets formu-
highly digestible protein (limited-antigen foods).
lated for intestinal disease.78,79 Cooked and blended
a ai yim see neun pisans uaq sy 
white fice is highly digestible and is gluten free.80
at increased risk of immunological sensitization to
Other gluten-free carbohydrate sources inclucde potato,
food proteins during the initial phase of treatiment.72
Chronic infammation of the intestinal mucosa can lead
digestible than fice, while corn may be contraindicated
 in dogs that have a hypersensitivity to this ingredient.81
tinal lining. As a result, intact food proteins may have
In contrast, wheat, oats, and barley all contain gluten.
a greater chance of gaining access to the lamina propria
and stimulating an immune response during periods
LEVEL AND TYPE OF FAT
A reduced fat diet is
of active disease.43 Therefore the novel protein that is
often beneficial for dogs and cats with gastrointestinal
fed during the initial phase of therapy may have only
disease. High-fat intake is specifically contraindicated
short-term beneft. This theory has led to the concept
in animals with EPl, postacute pancreatitis, and lym-
of using an initial “sacrifcial protein source" for the
phangiectasia because these diseases all involve severe
first 4 to 6 weeks of diet therapy. The protein source
impairment of fat digestion and assimilation. A low-fat
is then changed again to a second novel and highly
diet is also indicated whenever there is SIBO or reduced
available source to use as the pet's maintenance diet.
 surface area in the small intestine. Malabsorption of
The intent of this procedure is to introduce the second
dietary fat allows bacterial metabolism of unabsorbed
464Canine and Feline Nutrition
3
2.3
atty
otal
1.1
一
0.4
0.2
0.2
0
5:1
10:1
25:1
50:1
100:1
Dietary n-6:n-3 Ratio
Figure 35-1Effect of dietary onega-6:omega-3 fatty acid ratio on 12-week eicosapentaenoic acid concentrations in canine
intestinal mucosa.
(From World 5mall Animal Veterinary Association: Castroirtestinal heaitht syposiur, Dayton, Ohio, 1997, The lams Company)
dietary fat to hydroxy fatty acids, while bacterial over-
fatty acids in the diet significantly affects clinical dis
growth contributes to deconjugation of bile salts, both
ease.8384 When the diets of human patients with
of which stimulate secretory diarrhea in the distal small
ulcerative colitis were supplemented with fish oil, they
intestine and colon.13 A general recommendation is to
showed a 56% reduction in colitis symptoms and a
select a foed that contains approximately 11% or 15%
 30% reduction in colonic leukotriene B4 (LTB4) pro-
or less total fat (on a dry-matter basis [DMB]) for dogs
duction.85 Another study revealed that inclusion of
and cats, respectively, with gastrointestinal disease.82
fish oil in the diet of patients with IBD resulted in
The well documentedl antinfammatory benefits of
increased concentrations of EPA and docosahexaencic
acid (DHA) and decreased arachidonic acid in intesti-
this class of fatty acids in the management of infam-
 nal mucosa lipid membranes.86 Similarly, when human
matory intestinal disease. In addition to demonstrated
benefits for pets with infammatory skin disease (see
 3.2 grams (g) of EPA and 2.1 g of docosapentaenoic
Chapter 31, pp. 386-394), there is also evidence that alter-
acid per day, significant changes occurred in intestinal
ing the omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acid ratio to favor pro-
eicosanoids, and improvements in histological fndings
duction of omega-3 metabolites alters eicosanoid profles
and body weight were reported.87 Of particular interest
in the intestinal mucosa (Figures 35-1 and 35-2).82 When
in this study
was the finding that the degree of reduc-
tion of intestinal LTB4 was similar in magnitude to that
10:1 and 5:1, intestinal and colonic mucosa eicosapen-
observed in patients tfeated with prednisolone. This
taenoic acid (EPA) (20:5n-3) and docosapentaenoic acid
effect allowed a reduction in drug dosages in patients
(22:6n-3) concentrations increased and arachidonic acid
who were receiving the fish oil supplement.
levels decreased over an &-week period. Regional differ-
While canine colonic lipid and eicosanoid produc-
ences were seen, with small-intestinal mucosa having a
-adond a ussu aq pie Aqesoap are uo
greater concentration of stearic acid (18:0) and linoleic
tion of dietary omega-3 fatty acids, the effcacy of this
acid (18:2n-6) than colonic mucosa, and colonic mucosa
class of fatty acids in the treatment of intestinal disease
having greater concentrations of eicosatrienoic (20:3n-3)
has not beeni well studied in
and arachidonic (20:4n-6) acids.
Additional studies with humans and laboratory ani-
canine intestinal mucosa to dietaty omega-3 fatty acids,
mals have indicated that increasing dietary omega-3
support the use of diets containing optimized omega-6
Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Disease  465
2.8
2.5
otal
abr
0.6
0.2
0.2
5:1
10:1
25:1
50:1
100:1
Dietary n-6:n-3 Ratio
Figure 35-2 Effect of dietary omega-6:omega-3 fatty acid ratio on 12-week eicosapentaenoic acid concentrations in canine
colonic mucosa.
(From World 5mall Animal Veterinary Association: Castroirtestirnal heaitt symposiurr, Dayton, Ohio, 1997, The lams Comm pany)
to omega-3 fatty acid ratios as an aid in managing
With respect to gastrointestinal health, important
the infammation associated with intestinal disease. Clini-
fber considerations are the degree to which a fber type
cal studies of dogs and cats with naturally occurring intes-
is fermented by intestinal bacteria and the amount and
tinal disease afe hecessafy to further define the fole of
omega-3 fatty acids in the management of these disorders.
cats have active colonic bacteria and afe capable of fer-
The amount of fermentation
DIETARY FIBER
Dietary fber is defined as the col-
lection of all dietary constituents t
that afe not digested
of mammals.88
Fiber is
cellulose, gum karaya,
thok
iydrates plus lignin;
s include cellulose,
1
tineofthe
In contrast, pectin and guat
gum are rap
fermented by canine and feline colonic
benefits of dietary fiber
Ihealth and
microbes,
Whlle
 pulp and rice bran are moderately
in the treatment and management 
gastrointestinal
fermentable source!
of fber (Tables 35-1 and 35-2).
disease in dogs and cats afe
recognized. His-
ortantendproductsoffberfermenta
torically, the perceived benefits of fibe
were limited to
tionafethe
FAs
The
compounds, primatily ace
tic,butyric,
10115
types. Fiber was not considlered to be essential for the
diets of dogs and cats. Howevet, in the past 10 to 15
cell
 proliferation is enhanced in
years, in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that dif-
the presence of SCFAs, probably as a result of increased
ferent types of fiber have varying effects on the function
 availability of this enel
 source.27 This is an important
and health of the gastrointestinal tract. Today, it is well
effect because epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract
known that the type of fber included in diets for pets 
have high energy needs and a fapid turnover, with the
with gastrointestinal disease is as important as the level
every 3 days. For exam-
of fiber. The classification, charactefistics, and functions
ple, dogs that consumed diets containing fermentable
of dietary fber are discussed extensively in Chapters 2
fiber had increased colon weights, mucosal surface area,
and 10 (p. 14 and pp.77-78).
and mucosal hypertrophy when compared with dogs
466 Canine and Feline Nutrition
TABLE 3S-1 FERMENTATIONINDEX OF FIBER
TABLE 35-2 FERMENTATION INDEX OF FIBER
SOURCES FOR DOGS
SOURCES FOR CATS
FIBER SOURCE
FERMENTATION INDEx*
FIBER SOURCE
FERMENTATION INDEx*
Cellulose
0.2
Cellulose
0.1
 Oat fiber
0.4
 Xanthan gum
0.5
Gum karaya
0.6
Gum karaya
0.9
 Peanut hulls
0.9
Gum arabic
1.3
 Xanthan gum
1.0
Gum talha
1.8
 Gum arabic
1.0
Beet pulp
2.0
Gum talha
1.3
Rice bran
2.1
Psyllium gum
1.4
Carob bean gum
3.3
 Soy hulls
1.4
Sugar cane residue
3.4
Rice bran
1.8
Fructooligosaccharides
4.3
Beet pulp
2.5
Locust bean gum
4.8
Carob bean gum
3.4
Guar gum
5.1
Citrus pulp
3.4
Citrus pectin
5.5
Locust bean gum
5.3
Adapred from Sunvold GD, Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, and others:
Fructooligosaccharides
5.7
Dierary fber for cacs: in vitro fermencation of selecred fber sources by
Citrus pectin
5.9
cac fecal inoculum and in vivo urilizacion of diecs concaining selecced
fber sources and rheir blends, / Ai Sei 73:2329-2339, 1995.
Guar gum
7.3
*Tocal 24-hour shorr-chain fatry acid producrion (mmolg of substrate
Lactulose
8.3
organic marrer).
Adapred from Sunvold GD, Fahey GC J, Merchen NR, and orhers:
Dierary fiber for dogs. IV. In vicro fermencacion of selecced fiber sources
indigenous microfora, and inhibiting the prolifera-
Jaqy jo wsjoqeau pue uosaip oaiA u! pue wunjnsou! lesay aop kq
tion of pathogenic microbes.104,105
supplemented diers,AnsmSci73:1099-1109,1995.
*Total 24hour shor-chain fay acid producion mmol/g ofsubstrae
organic marter).
SCFAs may have upon intestinal bacterial populations
is an important consideration because bacterial and
fed a diet containing nonfermentable fber.98,99 These
pathogen overgrowth is frequently seen as either the pri-
changes appeat to be due to a greater ratio of mucosal
surface atea to colonic mass and therefore are indicative
tinal disease
pp.
 455-457). An important function
of indigenous bacterial populations in the intestine
The production of SCFAs from dietary fber in the
is to help prevent overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria,
gastrointestinal tract has several other beneficial effects.
SCFAs affect gut motility by increasing peristaltic con-
Bacteria exert this effect by their patterns of SCFA pro-
tractions in the distal portion of the small intestine
duction and through direct inhibition of the growth of
It is postulated that the cumulative results of these
Bifidobacterium and lactobacilli also aid in the digestion
fermentation
1in
and absorption of food, provide a soufce of vitamins to
the small intestine while potentiating the absorption
 the host animal, and stimulate gastrointestinal immune
of SCFAs in the large intestine. Colonic blood How
function (see pp. 467-470). Conversely proliferation of
 increases in the presence of SCFAs. 103 This may occur
harmful bacterial species causes of exacerbates intestinal
due to a relaxation of resistance arteries in the colon
disease through the production of toxins, carcinogens,
of simply in response to increased metabolic activity
or putrefactive
：substances.
Both
1 the relative abili-
of the colonocytes. Finally, the presence of SCFAs aids
ties of beneficial and pathogenic bacteria to use fber
in the prevention of diarrhea by enhancing sodium
(carbohydrates) as a substrate, as well as the amount and
absorption, maintaining normal intestinal electrolyte
pattern of SCFAs that are produced, must be considered
 and fuid balance, promoting the growth of benefcial
in the selection of a fiber source.
Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Disease
467
There is also some evidence suggesting that IBD
PREBIOTICS
6 Prebiotics ate hondigestible  food
symptoms and intestinal healing following surgery may
be positively infuenced by fermentable fiber and SCFA
infuencing the growth and activity of selective bacte-
production. The provision of specifc bowel nutrients,
iqaid iso eit'aunsaui siel au u saoos 
including SCFAs, has been shown to protect intestinal
are short-chain carbohydrates that are classifed with
tissue and promote restoration of nofmal intestinal func-
fber because they are plant derived, are not digested
tion. For example, ulcerative colitis in humans is char-
by mammalian enzymes, and are selectively fermented
acterized by diminished rates of oxidation of butyrate in
by certain intestinal microbes. Examples of prebiot-
the large intestine.108 Providing a supplemental source
ics include inulin, galactooligosaccharides, lactulose,
of butyrate to the colon has been shown to reduce the
fructooligosacchatides (FOS) and mannanoligosaccha-
rides (MOS).113 FOS and MOS are highly fermentable
A study with rats examined the effects of feeding diets
prebiotics that have been studied for inclusion in pet
with or without fermentable fiber after colonic anasto-
foods. FOS contain fructose as their primary carbohy-
moses. During healing, the fber-containing diet con-
drate unit and are found naturally in a vatiety of fruits,
ferred a trophic effect on the surgical site, improving
vegetables, and grains. Concentrated sources of FOS
both wound strength and rate of healing.
110
include soybean hulls, psyllium, chicory, and sugar beet
While some SCFA production is desirable because of
root (after pulp processing). FOS are also produced
their beneficial effects, more is not necessatily better. As
commercially through fermentation by Aspergillus niger
stated previously, fber types differ in the degree to which
(Figure 35-3).114 MOS are related prebiotics that are
they afe fermented by intestinal bacteria. Minimal fer-
comprised predominantly of mannose units and found
mentation and production of SCFAs occurs when fibers
naturally in yeast cells.
with low fermentability are fed. These include cellulose,
Although FOS and MOS both can function as pre-
 peanut hulls, methylcellulose, and locust bean gum.
biotics, the mechanism through which they affect the
Conversely, maximal production occurs when ferment-
growth of intestinal microbes differs. FOS are selec-
able fber mixtures containing pectin or guar gum are
-s   n a  a
-a aiaieiapou sie iey siaqy uosedos Ag yza Pa
mentable include beet pulp, inulin, rice bran, and gum
most Bifidobacterium,Lactobacillus, and Bacteroides
arabic. Rapid fermentation and the production of large
species utilize FOS as an energy source as well as they
shop yq jo ioenn [eusaiu aun ui svis jo siunoue
do glucose. Conversely, harmful bacteria such as Eubac-
and cats can cause the production of loose stools of
terium, Salmonella, and Clostridium species either do
 diarthea and excess gas, and may interfere with nutrient
not metabolize FOS or metabolize them less efficiently
than glucose.2,117 Providing FOS in the diet supports 
by feeding optimal amounts of moderately fermentable
the growth of health-promoting species, in particular
fiber soufces that provide optimal levels of SCFAs and
Bifidobacteriu and lacto bacilli, and limit the growth of
at the same time have a nonfermentable component to
less beneficial or pathogenic species. In contrast to FOS,
provide bulk and contribute to normal peristalsis.
MOS functions as a prebiotic by preventing harmful
gastrointestinal bacteria from attaching to the host's
intestinal wall and colonizing. Certain species of patho-
Both dogs and cats have active colonic bacteria and are
genic bacteria bind to mannose residlues on the surface
capableof fermenting dietary fber. The most important
of intestinal cells, allowing colonization and preventing
end products offberfermentation are the short-chain
excretion. The presence of MOS in the large intestine
fatty acids (SCFAs), compounds that have severai gas
competitively inhibits this attachment and promotes
the fecal excretion of pathogenic bacterial species.
cytes, promote normal peristaisis, increase blood fowto
Early studies with human subjects found that
the large intestine, aid in electrolyte and fuid balance,
the consumption of dietary FOS helped to prevent
and promote baianced intestinal microbial popuiations
infection  with  Clostridium species and  Escherichid
coli and supported the growth of Bifdobacterium
468 Canine and Feline Nutrition
1 F-Beta-fructo-
1 -Kestose
Nystose
furanosylnystose
(GF2)
(GF3)
(GF4)
glucose
glucose
glucose
fructose
fructose
fructose
fructose
fructose
fructose
A
fructose
fructose
fructose
C
Figure 35-3 Common fructooligosaccharides. A, 1-Kestose (GF2). B, Nystose (GF). C, 1F-Beta-fructofuranosylnystose (GF)
(From NAVC: New discoveries in canine gastrointestinal disease, Dayton, Ohio, 1996, The lams Com pany.)
populations.117,118 Similarly, in vitto and in vivo stud-
fecal counts of C. perfringens in this study. There is also
ies have shown that FOS and lactosuctose (a functional
some evidence that supplementation with prebiotics
ttisacchatide that is highly fermentable) effectively alter
 may positively infuence immunoglobulin production
the intestinal microbe populations in dogs and cats by
 by lactating female dogs and subsequently improve the
increasing concentrations of lactobacilli and decreasing
the concentration of C. perfringens (Figures 35-4 and
It should be noted that the microbial population
35-5).119-121g
 Supplementation with MOS has been
responses that dogs have shown to prebiotics has not been
feported to significantly decrease total aerobe numbers
consistent, and these effects appear to be infuenced by
and lactobacilli numbers in adult dogs.122 A larger study
numerous factors. A small pilot study showed that feed-
found that feeding a commercial adult maintenance
ing a high protein food that contained a poor-quality
dty dog food that included two levels of supplemental
protein source to dogs promoted the proliferation
FOS significantly decreased fecal E. coli concentrations
of Clostridium species in the large intestine, while feed-
when fed at both levels, and significantly decreased
ing the same diet with a lower proportion of protein
fecal concentrations of Bacteroides and eubacteria when
increased intestinal Bifdobacteria species.125 Most sig-
fed at the higher level.123 Including FOS also signif-
nifcantly, adding a prebiotic (inulin from chicory) to
cantly increased fecal concentrations of lactobacilli,
the food further increased beneficial species when the
when fed at the lower level. No effects were found on
lower protein food was fed, but only to a relatively small
 Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Disease 469
10
7.9
140
5.7
t
广
Control
FOS
Diet
Figure 35-4  Effect of dietary fructooligosaccharides (FOs) on the concentration of lactobacilli in the feline large intestine. *, P < .05.
(From 5parkes AH, Papasouliotis K, Sunvold G, and others: The effect of dietary supplementation with fructo-oligosaccharides on the fecal Hora of healthy cats, Apf
/ Vet Res 59:436-440, 1998.)
6.6
4.9*
Control
FOS
Diet
Figure 35-5Effect of dietary fructooligosaccharides (FOs) on the concentration of Clostridium perfringens in the feline large
intestine.*, P<.10.
(From 5parkes AH, Papasouliotis K, 5unvold G, and others: The effect of dietary suppleientation with fru
des on the fecal Hora of healthy cat5,
Arr / Vet Res 59:436-440, 1998.)
degree. Similarly, another study reported that feeding
healthy dogs a dry food containing 1% supplemental
factors may subsequently infuence an individual ani-
FOS for 3 weeks signifcantly increased the number of
Prebiotic supplementation may have a role in the
The researchers suggested that the base diet's level of fer-
mentable fber infuenced the dogs responses to FOS in
When dogs with SIBO were fed a diet containing 1%
this study. Finally, it has also been noted that the normal
FOS for 45 days, significantly fewer aerobic and facul-
pue shop suoue Aesneeip saea shop jo eonqo
tative anaerobic bacteria were found in both intestinal
470 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Auid and mucosal samples when compared with the
prebiotics heip to support bifdobacteria and lactobacili
samples of control dogs.128 Another study found that
populations while reducing bacterial pathogens, these
Beagles fed diets containing either cellulose (nonfer-
compounds can piay a mole in the management ofSiBO/
mentable fber) or a combination of beet pulp and FOS
ARD and pathogen overgrowth.
had similar fecal bacterial densities, but those fed the
FOS-containing diet had lower numbers of enterobac-
tetia and clostridia and higher numbers of lactobacilli
and stfreptococci, compated with those in dogs fed the
FIBER/PREBIOTIC
CRECOMMENDATIONS
nonfermentable fber.129 The dogs fed the FOS-
Current data suggest that appropriate levels of moder-
containing food also had increased small intestinal
ately fermentable fiber should be included in the elimi-
mucosal weight and absorptive surface area and higher
 nation diet that is typically used to treat IBD in dogs and
nutrient transport rates per unit of intestine. There is
cats (see pp. 465-467). Although highly digestible diets
also clinical evidence of beneficial effects of FOS when
that are very low in fber have traditionally been used,
 included in the diets of dogs being treated for SIBO.130
it now appears that diets formulated to manage intes-
When dogs with suspected SIBO were treated with
tinal disease should contain between 3% and 7%, but
either antibiotic therapy for 30 days or were fed an
not more than 10%, fber (on a DMB).131 A balance of
FOS-containing diet for 60 days, fecal volume and fecal
fermentable and nonfermentable fiber sources should be
-jen Sunp sdnonl qoq u! pazjeuou Aouaisisuon
ment. Dogs treated with the antibiotic showed rapid
 Both beet pulp and rice bran are moderately ferment-
improvement, but also quickly deteriorated follow-
able fbers and are appropriate for inclusion in gastro-
ing withdrawal of antibiotic therapy. Conversely, dogs
intestinal diets for dogs and cats. In addition, FOS and
fed the FOS-containing food experienced a gradual
 MOS are prebiotics that can provide SCFAs and be used
improvement in fecal consistency and volume, and nor-
to beneficially alter bacterial populations and numbers
malization of these measures was maintained by dietary
in pets with SIBO and pathogen overgrowth. The nutri-
therapy throughout the study period.
tional objective when selecting dietary fibers should be to
When SIBO or pathogen overgrowth occur, the bac-
select those that predispose to the colonization of benef-
terial populations in the small intestine can be altered
cial indigenous microfora and promote sufficient SCFA
 uueu Aq io s o sn aq ra
production for intestinal epithelial health.
diet to increase beneficial bacteria and inhibit the growth
of undesirable species. While antibiotics are often effec-
PROBIOTICS
 Probiotics are live microorganisms
tive in the treatment and management of SIBO, the risk
that, when ingested, exert beneficial health effects that
of selectively kiling the wrong populations exists, and
extend beyond their nutritional value.132 These organ-
this may result in exacerbation of SIBO. In addition,
isms are select strains of the same beneficial bacterial spe-
long-term use is usually required and may be associated
with adverse side effects. Therefore dietary treatment, if
prebiotics function to alter gastrointestinal microbiota
effective, is more appealing to most pet owners. Provid-
by providing substrate for selective microbes, probiotics
ing a food that includes a prebiotic such as FOS
may
can alter the gastrointestinal fora by supplying a direct
affect small intestinal bacterial populations in dogs with
id e si as y sq y Jn as 
 SIBO/ARD, and may provide an adjunctive therapy for
fation that includes both a probiotic and a prebiotic.
treating SIBO/ARD-associated diarrhea.
 Including a prebiotic that is a preferred substrate for
the probiotic with the probiotic product can enhance
its viability and proliferation in the host gastrointestinal
Prebiotics are nondigestible food ingredients that ben
tract. A potential synbiotic approach that may be effec-
eficially affect thehost animal by influencing the growth
tive for supporting companion animal gastrointestinal
andactivity ofbeneficialspeciesofbacteriainthelarge
health or managing intestinal disease is to feed a pet
intestine. Common exampies are fructooligosaccharides,
food that includes a prebiotic along with a complemen-
mannanoligosaccharides, inulin, and lactuiose. Because
tary probiotic supplement.
Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Disease  471
Historically, humans have consumed probiotics in
animalis, fecal concentrations of clostridial
l patho-
the form of cultured yogurt, buttermilk, sauerkraut, and
gens decreased, and the pathogen Clostridium diffcile
decreased dramatically (Figure 35-6).138 Immunological
biotic supplements that are marketed for human and for
benefits were reported in studies of a strain of Enterococ-
pet use have become commercially available. Similar to
cus faecium that increased populations of certain serum
human products, dog and cat probiotics afe available in
immunoglobulins in puppies and kittens, and enhanced
a variety of forms, including tablets and capsules, pastes,
and liquids, and can also be directly incorporated into
Probiotics may also be beneficial for the treatment or
foods.133 A wide variety of bacterial species and strains
management of pets with gastrointestinal disease. When
afe also used in probiotics. The species that is used will
 cats and kittens with chronic diarrhea were supple-
directly affect the type of benefit that the supplement
mented with a strain of E. faecium, signifcant improve-
may have, as will dosage concentration and microbial
ments were observed, fecal bifidobacteria increased, and
viability. For example, preparations that provide
too
low a concentfation or that do not adlequately survive
cats infected with
1 campylobacteria showed a teduc-
 destruction by gastric acids and digestive enzymes may
tion in microbial shedding of this enteric pathogen
not allow sufficient colonization in the gastrointestinal
when they were fed a diet containing a probiotic strain
tract to confer a health beneft.134
of L. acidophilus.142 Similar results have been reported
Gastrointestinal benefts that probiotics may pro-
in dogs. When a group of dogs with IBDs were fed a
vide to dogs and cats include the maintenance of bal-
combination of three lactobacilli species, probiotic
anced and healthy intestinal microbial populations;
supplementation positively affected the in vitro produc-
prevention of stress-induced, infectious, of antibiotic-
tion of regulatory and proinfammatory cytokines from
associated diarrhea; and possibly management of SIBO
isolated duodenal tissue.143 Other data show that young
and IBDs. Although their mechanisms of action afe hot
adult dogs supplemented with a strain of bifidobacte-
completely understood, probiotics of varying species
-uua juuy e on uonisuen sunp pue on iod e
and strains can modify intestinal pH, enhance the local
ment had better stool scores during the transition and
immune system, and inhibit the growth of intestinal
were less likely to experience loose stools or diarrhea
pathogens. Pathogen proliferation is reduced through
competition for nutrients and mucosal attachment sites
and, for some probiotics, the production of inhibitory
substances. Immune functions of probiotics include
100
a direct effect upon gut-associated lymphoid tissue
06
(GALT) as well as lesser-understood effects upon circu-
Aselir
80
lating immunoglobulins. 135
ea
70
Research studies have demonstrated that probiot-
60
ics can survive passage through the stomach and small
8
50
intestine of the dog and cat and are capable of effectively
ed
modifying the microbial environment of the large intes-
40
uol
tine. Two studies with healthy dogs and cats reported
30
that supplementation with a strain of Lactobacillus aci-
20
dopbius led to increased fecal numbers of L. acidopbilus
10
(a beneficial gut microbe), concomitantly with decreased
0
numbers of Clostridium spp. and Enterococcus spp., sug-
Baseline
Week4
Week5
Week6
Figure 35-6E
Effect of the probiotic Bijfdobacterium animalis
Fecal pH also decreased in cats fed the probiotic,
AHC7 supplemmentation on Clostridium difcile population in
which indicates a colonic environment that was con-
canine feces. *, Statistically signihcant diference from baseline,
> < .05
ducive to lactic acid bacterial species. Similarly, when
(From BjfdobacteriunT aripmalis AHC7 promotes gastrointestinal health in adult
healthy adlult dogs were fed a strain of Bifidobacterium
dogs, lars Coparry Abstract, 2009.)
472 Canine and Feline Nutrition
BOX 35-2 GENERAL DIETARY RECOM-
8
7.7
MENDATIONS FOR DOGS AND
11
CATS WITH GASTROINTESTINAL
[esoll
G
6.3
DISEASE
Highly digestible (dry-matter digestibility coefficient
greater than 90%)
3.3
3.3
Single-source, high-quality protein
2
Single-source, gluten-free carbohydrate (rice, potato,
tapioca, or corn}
German
Labrador
Reduced fat (less than 10%)
Shepherd Dogs
Retrievers
Adjusted fatty acid ratio (omega-6 to omega-3 ratio of
PlaceboB. animafis AHC7
5:1 to 10:1)
Moderate fiber content (3% to 7% total dietary fiber)
Figure 35-7Days to diarrhea resolution in Labrador Retriev-
ers and Cerman Shepherd Dogs presented to a veterinary clinic
Moderately fermenta ble fi ber (fermenta ble and
for diarrhea
 nonfermenta ble com ponents)
(From Kelley RL, Kiely B, O'Mahony B, and others: Clinical benehts of probiotic
canine-derived Bifd obacteriurr animalis strain AHC7 in dogs with acute idi-
Prebiotics and/or probiotics for control of intestinal
opathic diarrhea, Vet 7her 10[3]:121-130, 2009.)
microflora
Diet Digestibility
than were dogs that had not been supplemented.144
When the same probiotic was fed to dogs presented to a
A final considleration when selecting a diet for pets with
veterinary clinic with diarrthea, the supplemented dogs
gastrointestinal disease is digestibility. Pet foods formu-
experienced fewer number of days to resolution com-
lated for the management of gastrointestinal disease
pared with dogs that were not supplemented (Figure
should always contain high-quality ingredients and be
35-7).145 Together, these studies suggest a role for pro-
highly digestible. When nutrients are efficiently digested
biotics in the treatment and management of gastrointes
and absorbed in the proximal small intestine, the remain-
tinal disorders in dogs and cats.
der of the bowel is allowed to rest andl the delivery of
undigested nutrients to the large intestine is minimized.
This limits the risk of gaseousness and osmotic diar-
rhea in the large intestine due to malabsorption. Highly
Probiotics are live microorganisms that, when ingested,
provide benefcial heaith effects to the host animal by
digestible protein soufces are less antigenic because little
altering the gastrointestinal fora. Gastrointestinat ben
dietary protein is absorbed intact into the mucosa (see
Chapter 31, pp. 399-402). Diets that require minimal
efts to dogs and cats include the maintenance of bal-
anced and heaithy intestinal microbial populations,
digestion also feduce gastric, pancreatic, biliary, and
prevention and management ofdiarrhea, and possibly
intestinal secretions and contribute to reduced total
management of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
bacterial counts in the intestine. Gastrointestinal diets
should have digestibility coefficients of 90% or greater
and infammatory bowel disorders.
(dry-matter [DM] digestibility) (Box 35-2).
Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Disease473
References
7661 '49-oz9se rai wy yous 'sseasip noen eunsuronsa go nuauastueu Aieap aun roy seapi man  proin '1
 2. Reinhart CA, Sunvold GD: The role of diet in the treatment of gastrointestinal disease in dogs. In Proc NAVC, Orlando, Fla, 1996,
pp 23-28.
3.WilliamsDA:Malabsorption, small ntestinal bacterial overgrowth, and protein-losing enteropathy In GuilfordWG, Center SA,
Strombeck DR, and others, editors: Small animal gastroenterology, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1996, Saunders.
4. Westermarck E, Skrzypczak T, Harmonien J: Tylosin-responsive chronic diarrhea in dogs, J Vet Intern Med 19:177-186, 2005.
5. Rutgers HC, Batt RM, Kelly DF: Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis associated with bacterial overgrowth in a dog, J Am Vet Med
Asoc 192:1739-1742, 1988.
302,200/
 7. Batt RM, Barnes A, Rutgers HC, Carter SD: Relative IgA deficiency and smallintestinal bacterial overgrowth in German Shepherd
Dogs, Res Vet Sci 50:106-111, 1991.
8. Littler RM, Batt RM, Lloyd DH: Total and relative deficiency of gut mucosal lgA in German Shepherd Dogs demonstrated by
fecal analysis, Vet Rer 158:334-341, 2006.
9. German AJ, Day MJ, Ruaux CG: Comparison of direct and indirect tests for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and antibiotic-
responsive diarrhea in dogs, / Vet Intern Med 17:33-43, 2003.
10. Johnston KL: Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, Vet Clin North Am Smalf Anim Pract 29:523-551, 1999.
11. Gruffy DD, Jones TJ, Papasouliotis K, and others: The uniqueness of the feline gut and its practical implications. In Proceedings of
the gastrointestinal heath symposium: a pre-conference symposium, 1997, World Veterinary Conference, pp 31-35.
12. Williams DA: Clinical diagnosis of canine small intestinal disease. ln Reinhart GA, Carey DI, editors: Recent advances in canine
and feline nutrition, lams mutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
13. Melgarejo T, Williams DA, O'Connell NC, Setchell KDR: Serum unconjugated bile acids as a test for intestinal bacterial
overgrowth in dogs, Dig Dis Sri 45:407-414, 2000
 14. Melgarejo T, Williams DA, Setchell KD, and others: Serum total unconjugated bile acids (TUBA) in dogs with small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth, J Vet Intern Med 11:114, 1997.
15. Johnston L, Lamport A, Batt RM: Unexpected bacterial Hora in the proximal smallintestine of normal cats, Vet Rec 132:362-363,
1993.
16. Rutgers HC, Bat RM, Elwood CM, and others: Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in dogs with chronic intestinal disease,J Am
Vet Med Assoc 206:187-193, 1995.
17. Balish E, Cleven D, Brown J, and others: Nose, throat, and fecal fora of Beagle dogs housed in locked or open environments,
Appt Environ Micro 34:207, 1977.
 18. Terada A, Hara H, Kato S, and others: Efects of lactosucrose (4-beta-D-galactosylsucrose) on fecal fora and fecal putrefactive
product of cats, / Vet Med Sci 55:291-295, 1993.
19. Batt R, Rutgers H, Sancak A: Enteric bacteria: friend or foe? / Smaff Anim Pract 37:261-267, 1996.
20. Guarner F, Malagelada JR: Gut fora in health and disease, Lancet 361:512-519, 2003.
21. Macfarlane S, Macfarlane GT: Bacterial diversity in the large intestine, Ads Appt Microbiot 54:261 -289, 2004.
22. Twedt DC: Clostridium perfringens associated diarrhea in dogs. 1n Proc IIth Anx Conf Vet Intern Med Forum, 1993, pp 121-125.
 23. Scherk M: Infammatory bowel disease and pancreatitis in cats. In Proc WSAVA, 2003, pp 25-31.
24. Watson P: Pancreatitis in the dog: dealing with a spectrum of disease, In Pract 26:64-77, 2004.
25. Xenoulis PG, Suchodolski JS, Steiner JM: Chronic pancreatitis in dogs and cats, Compend Contix Educ Pract Vet 30:166-181, 2008.
26. Steiner JM, Williams DA: Feline exocrine pancreatic disorders, Vet Clin North A Small Anim Pract 29:551-575, 1999.
474Canine and Feline Nutrition
27. Newman S, Steiner J, Woosley K: Localization of pancreatic inHammation and necrosis in dogs, / Vet Intern Med 18:488-493, 2004.
28. DeCock HEV, Forman MA, Farver TB: Prevalence and histopathologic characteristics of pancreatitis in cats, Vet Pathol 44:39-49,
2007.
 29. Cook AK, Breitschwerdt EB, Levine JF: Risk factors associated with acute pancreatitis in dogs: 101 cases (1985-1990), J Am Vet
Med Aoc 203:673-679, 1993.
30. Lem KY, Fosgate CT, Norby B, Steiner JM: Associations between dietary factors and pancreatitis in dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc
233:1425-1431, 2008.
31. Weiss D], Gagne JM, Armstrong PJ: Relationship between infammatory hepatic disease and infammatory bowel disease,
pancreatitis, and nephritis in cats, JAm Vet Med Asoc 209:11141116, i996.
32. Bishop MA, Steiner JM, Moore LE: Evaluation of the cationic trypsinogen gene for potential mutations in Miniature Schnauzers
with pancreatitis, Cax / Vet Res 68:315-318, 2004.
 33. Batchelor DJ, Noble PJM, Taylor RH, and others: Prognostic factors in canine exocrine pancreatic insuffciency: prolonged
survival is likely if clinical remission is achieved, / Vet Intern Med 21:54-60, 2007.
treatrment: a review, Vet Q 26:61-75, 2004
35. Batchelor DJ, Noble PJM, Cripps P], and others: Breed associations for canine exocrine pancreatic insuffciency, J Vet Irtern Med
21:207-214, 2007.
36. Brenner K, Harkin KR, Andrews GA, Kennedy G: Juvenile pancreatic atrophy in Greyhounds: 12 cases (1995-2000), JVet Intern
Med 23:67-71, 2009.
37. Batt RM: Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 23:595-608, 1993.
38. Williams DA, Batt RM, McLean L: Bacterial overgrowth in the duodenum of dogs with exocrine pancreatic insuffciency, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 191 :201-206, 1987.
39. Steiner JM, Wilson BG, Williams DA: Development and analytical validation of a radioimmunoassay for the measurement of
eline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity in serum, Can J Vet Res 68:309-314, 2004.
40. Steiner JM, Teague SR, Williams DA: Development and analytic validation of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for the
measurement of canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity in serum, Cax / Vet Res 67:175-1 82, 2003.
41. Williams DA, Batt RM: Sensitivity and specificity of radioimmunoassay of serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity for the diagnosis
of canine exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, / Am Vet Med Asoc 192:195-201, 1988.
42. Steiner JM, Williams DA: Validation of a radioimmunoassay for feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity (fTLl) and serum cobalamin
and folate concentrations in cats with exocrine pancreatic insuffciency (EPl), J Vet Intern Med 9:193, 1995.
43. Simpson JW: Diet and large intestinal disease in dogs and cats, / Nutr 128:2717S-2722S, 1998.
44. Richter KP: Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enterocolitis in dogs, Sem Vet Med Surg Small Anim 7:134144, 1992.
45. Leib MS: Irritable bowel synd rome in dogsfact or fiction? In Proc NAVC, 2009, pp 13-16.
46. Magne ML: Pathophysiology of infammatory bowel disease, Sem Vet Med Surg Small Anim 7:1 12-116, 1992
47. Johnson SE: Canine eosinophilic gastroenterocolitis, Sem Vet Med Surg Small Anim 7:145-152, 1992
48. Breitschwerdt EB: lmmunoproliferative enteropathy of Basenjis, Sem Vet Med Surg Small Anim 7:1 53-161, 1992
49. Van Kruiningen HJ, Ryan MJ, Shindel NM: The classification of feline colitis, J Comp Pathol 93:275-294, 1983.
 50. Dimski DS: Therapy for infammatory bowel disease. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD: Kirk's current veterinary therapy XIl, Philadelphia,
1995, Saunders.
51. Tams TR: Chronic feline infammatory bowel disorders. l. Feline eosinophilic enteritis and lymphosarcoa, Compend Contin
Educ Pract Vet 8:464-471, 1986.
52. Jergens AE: Optimizing 1BD therapy in dogs and cats: evidence-based observations. In Proc AAHA Conf 2009, pp 207-210.
Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Disease 475
 53. Leib M: Treatment of chronic idiopathic large-bowel diarrhea in dogs with a highly digestible diet and soluble fber: a retrospective
review of 37 cases, J Vet Intern Med 14:27-32, 2000.
54. Brockman DJ, Washabau RJ, Drobatz KJ: Canine gastric dilation/volvulus syndrome in a veterinary critical care unit: 2965 cases
(1986-1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:460464, 1995,
55. Glickman LT, Glickman NW, Perez CM, and others: Analysis of risk factors for gastric dilatation and dilatation-volvulus in dogs,
J Am Vet Med Asoc 204: 1465-1471, 1994.
56. Bredal WT, Eggertsdottir AV, Austefjord O: Acute gastric dilatation in cats: a case series, Acta Vet Scand 37:445-451, 1996.
57. Clickman LT, Lantz GC, Schellengerg DB, and others: A prospective study of survival and recurrence following acute gastric
dilatation-volvulus syndrome in 136 dogs, / Am Vet Med Asoc 34:253-259, 1998.
58. Brourman JD, Schertel ER, Allen DA, and others: Factors associated with perioperative mortality in dogs with surgically managed
gastric dilatation-volvulus: 137 cases (1988-1993), J Am Vet Med Asoc 208:1855-1858, 1996.
59. Glickman L, Emerick T, Glickman N, and others: Radiological assessment of the relationship between thoracic conformation and
the risk of gastric dilatation-volvulus in dogs, Vet Radiot Utrasound 37:174 180, 1996.
60. Schellenberg D, Yi Q, Glickman N, and others: Infuence of thoracic conformation and genetics on the risk of gastric dilatation-
volvulus in lrish Setter dogs, J Am Anim Hos Asoc 34:64-73, 1998
61. Schaible RH, Ziech J, Glickman NW, and others: Predisposition to gastric dilatation-volvulus in relation to genetics of thoracic
monformation in lrish Setters, / Am Anim Hosp Asoc 33:379383, 1997.
62. Clickman LT, Glickman NW, Schellenberg DB, and others: Multiple risk factors for the gastric dilatation-volvulus syndrome in
dogs: a practitioner/owner case-control study, / Am Anim Hosp Asoc 33:197-204, 1997.
 64. Van Kruiningen HJ, Wojan LD, Stake PE, and others: The infuence of diet and feeding frequency on gastric function in the dog,
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:145-153, 1987.
65. Ragjavan M, Clickman N, McCabe C: Diet-related risk factors for gastric dilatation-volvulus in dogs of high-risk breeds,
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 40:192-193, 2004.
66. Burrows CF, Bright RM, Spencer CP: Infuence of dietary composition on gastric emptying and motility in dogs: potential
involvement in acute gastric dilatation, Am J Vet Res 46:2609-2612, 1985.
67. Cott B, Shelton M, DeYoung DW: Preliminary report on a GDV questionnaire, Purebred Dogs: Am Kennel Gaz 92:76-77, 1975.
68. Caywood D, Teague HD, Jackson DA: Gastric gas analysis in the canine gastric dilatation-volvulus syndrome, J Am Anim Hosp
Asoc 13:459462, 1977.
69. Rogolsky B, Van Kruiningen Hj: Short-chain fatty acids and bacterial fermentation in the normal canine stomach and in acute
gastric dilatation, / Am Anim Hosp Asoc 14:504515, 1978.
71. Fossum T: Protein-losing enteropathy, Sem Vet Med Surg Smaff Anim 4:219-225, 1989.
72. Guilford WG: Effect of diet on infammatory bowel diseases, Vet Clin Nutr 4:58-61, 1997.
73. Cummings JH, Antoine JM, Azpiroz F: Gut health and immunity, Eur J Nutr 43:1 18-173, 2004.
74. Jergens AE: Optimizing 1BD treatment in dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 29:501-521, 1999.
75. Simpson JW: Management of colonic disease in the dog, Waitham Focus 5:17-22, 1995.
76. Nelson RW, Stookey LJ, Kazacos E: Nutritional management of idiopathic chronic colitis in the dog, J Vet Intern Med 2:133-137,
'886
77. Sturgess K: Diagnosis and management of idiopathic infammatory bowel disease in dogs and cats, Ix Pract 27:293-301, 2005.
78. Batt RM, Carter MW, McLean L: Wheat-sensitive enteropathy in Irish Setter dogs: possible age-related brush border
abnormalities, Res Vet Sc? 39:80-83, 1985.
476Canine and Feline Nutrition
1990.
80. Washabau RJ, Strombeck DR, Bufington CA, and others: Evaluation of intestinal carbohydrate malabsorption in the dog by
pulmonary hydrogen gas excretion, Am / Vet Res 47: 1402-1405, 1986.
81. Reinhart GA: New concepts in managing common pet allergies. In Proc Conv Cax Vet Med Assoc, 1995, pp 9-14.
82. Reinhart GA, Sunvold CD: Practical applications of omega-3 and fermentable fber in gastrointestinal patients. In Iroceedings of
the gastrointestinal heaith symposium: a pre-conference symposium, 1997, World Veterinary Congress.
83. Vilaseca J, Salas A, Guarner F, and others: Dietary fish oil reduces progression of chronic infammatory lesions in a rat model of
granulomatous colitis, Gut 31:539-544, 1990.
 84. Rarmpton DS, Collins CE: Review article: thromboxanes in inflammatory bowel disease-pathogenic and therapeutic implications,
Aitment Pharmacot 7her 7:357-367, 1993.
85. Aslan AC, Triadaflopoulos G: Fish oil fatty acid: supplementation in active ulcerative colitis; a double blind controlled, cross-over
study, Am J Gestroenterol 87:432, 1992.
86. Hillier K, Jewel R, Forrell L, and others: Incorporation of fatty acids from fish oil and olive oil into colonic mucosal lipids and
effects upon eicosanoid synthesis in infammatory bowel disease, Gut 32:1151, 1991.
87. Stenson WF, Cort D, Rodgers J, and others: Dietary supplementation with fish oil in ulcerative colitis, Ann Intern Med 116:
609-614,1998
88. Eastwood M, Kritchevsky D: Dietary fiber: how did we get where we are? Axnu Rev Nutr 25:1-8, 2005.
 89. Reinhart CA, Moxley RA, Clemens ET: Source of dietary fber and its effects on colonic microstructure, function and
histopathology of Beagle dogs, / Nutr 24:2701S-2703S, 1994.
90. Cemens ET: Dietary fber and colonic morphology. In Carey DP Norton SA, Bolser SM, editors: Recent advances in canine and
fline nutritiona reearch,Procedings ofthe lams internationalmutrition symosium,Wilmington,Ohio,1996,OrangeFrazerPres
91. Murdoch DB: Large intestinal disease. In Thomas DA, Simpson JW, Hall EJ, editors: Manuat of canine and feline gastroenterology.
Quedgeley, Gloucester, UK, 1996, British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
92. Sunvold GD, Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, and others: Dietary fber for dogs. IV. ln vitro fermentation of selected fiber sources by
dog fecal inoculum and in vivo digestion and metabolism of fiber-supplemented diets, / Anim Sci 73:1099-1109, 1995.
93. Sunvold GD, Fahey GC Jr, Merchen NR, and others: Dietary fiber for cats: in vitro fermentation of selected fiber sources by cat
fecal inoculum and in vivo utilization of diets containing selected fber sources and their blends, J Anim Sci 73:2329-2339, 1995.
94. Sunvold CD, Titgemeyer EC, Bourquin LD, and others: Fermentability of selected fbrous substrates by cat fecal microflora,
/ Nutr 124(Suppl):2721S-2722S, 1994.
95. Bergman EN: Energy contributions of volatile fatty acids from the gastrointestinal tract in various species, Physiol Rev 70:567-590,
1990.
vitro debate, Gastroenterology 112: 1036-1040, 1997.
97.SakataT:Stimulatoryeffect of short-chain fattyacidsonepithelial cell proliferationin therat intestine:a possible explanation for
trophic effect of fermentable fibre, gut microbes and luminal trophic factors, Br J Nutr 58:95-103, 1987.
98. Hallman JE, Moxley RA, Reinhart GA, and others: Cellulose, beet pulp and pectin/gum arabic effects on canine colonic
microstructure and histopathology, Vet Clix Nutr 2:137-142, 1995.
99. Hallman JE, Reinhart GA, Wallace EA, and others: Colonic mucosal tissue energetics and electrolyte transport in dogs fed
cellulose, beet pulp or pectin/gum arabic as their primary fber source, Nutr Res 16:303-313, 1996.
100. Kripke S, Fox A, Berman J, and others: Stimulation of dietary fber and its effect on colonic growth with intracolonic infusion of
short chain fatty acids, /PEN 13:109-116, 1988.
101. Kamath PS, Hoepfner MT, Phillips SF: Short-chain fatty acids stimulate motility of the canine ileum, A J Physiol 253:
G427-G433, 1987.
Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Disease 477
102. Cherbut C: Efects of short-chain fatty acids on gastrointestinal motility In Cummins JH, Rombear JL, Sakata T, editors:
Physiological and clinical aspects of short-chain fatty acids, Cambridge, UK, 1995, Cambridge University Press.
103. Kvietys PR, Granger DN: Effect of volatile fatty acids on blood fow and oxygen uptake by the dog colon, Gastroenterology
80:962-969, 1981.
104. Roediger WEW, Rae DA: Trophic effect of short-chain fatty acids on mucosal handling of jions by the defunctioned colon,
Br J Surg 69:23-25, 1982.
105. Kerley MS, Sunvold CD: Favorably modifying gut Hora with a novel fber (FOS). In Proceedings ofthe gatrointestinal health
symposium: a pre-conference symposium, 1997, World Veterinary Congress.
106. Blomberg L, Henriksson A, Conway PL: Inhibition of adhesion of Escherichia cofi K88 to piglet ileal mucus by Lactobacilus spp,
Appl Environ Micro 59:3439, 1993.
107. Kerley MS, Sunvold GD: Physiological response to short-chain fatty acid production in the intestine. In Carey DP, Norton
SA, Bolser SM, editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutritional research, Proceedings of the Iams internationat nutrition
symposium, Wilmington, Ohio, 1996, Orange Frazer Press.
108. Chapman MAS, Grahn MF, Boyle MA, and others: Butyrate oxidation is impaired in the colonic mucosa of suffers of quiescent
ucerative colitis, Gut 35:73, 1994.
109. Scheppach WH, Sommer T, Kirchner GM, and others: Effect of butyrate enemas on the colonic mucosa in distal ulcerative colitis,
Gastroenterology 103:51-56, 1992.
110. Rolandelli RH, Koruda MJ, Settle G, and others: The effect of enteral feedings supplemented with pectin on the healing of colonic
anastomoses in the rat, Surgery 99:703, 1986.
111. Silvio J, Harmon DL, Gross KL, McLeod KR: lnfuence of fber fermentability on nutrient digestion in the dog, Nutrition 16:
289-295, 2000.
112. Howard MD, Sunvold GD, Reinhart GA, and others: Effect of fermentable fber consumption by the dog on nitrogen balance and
fecal microbial nitrogen excretion, FASEB / 10:A257, 1996.
701-714,2006.
114. Brown DH: Applications of fructooligosaccharides in human foods. In Carey DP Norton SA, Bolser SM, editors: Recent advances
in canine andfline mtritional reearch,Proceedings ofthe lams internationalntrition symosium,Wimington,Ohio,1996,Orange
Frazer Press.
115. Mitsuoka T, Hidaka H, Eida T: Effect of fructooligosaccharides on intestinal microflora, Die Nahrung 31:427-436, 1987.
116. Okazaki M, Fujikawa S, Matumoto N: Effect of xyloogliosaccharide on the growth of bifidobacteria, Bijfdobacteria Microfora
9:7786, 1990.
117. Hidaka H, Hirayaa M, Tokunaga T, and others: The effects of indigestible fructooligosaccharides on intestinal microfora and
various physiological functions on human health. ln Furda 1, editor: New devetopments in dietary fber, New York, 1 990, Plenum
Press.
118. Hidaka H, Eida T, Takizawa T, and others: Effects of fructooligosaccharides on intestinal fora and human health, Bjfidobacterid
Microfora 10:37-50, 1986.
119. Terada A, Hara H, Oishi T, and others: Efect of dietary lactosucrose on fecal Hora and fecal metabolites of dogs, Micro Ecot Health
Dis 5:87-92, 1992.
120. Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Papasouliotis K, Sparkes AH: Characterization of the intestinal Hora of the cat and its potential for
modification. In Reinhart CA, Carey DP, editors: Recent advances in canine and fetine nutrition, lams nutrition symposium
proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
121. Sparkes AH, Papasouliotis K, Sunvold C, and others: The effect of dietary supplermentation with fructo-oligosaccharides on the
fecal Hora of healthy cats, Am / Vet Res 59:436-440, 1998.
infuence immune function, ileal and total tract nutrient digestibilities, microbial populations and concentrations of protein
catabolites in the large bowel of dogs, / Nutr 132:980-989, 2002.
478Canine and Feline Nutrition
123. Unpublished study: Data on file at Procter and Gamble Pet Health and Nutrition Center, Lewisburg, Ohio, 2009.
124. Adogony V, Respondek F, Biourge V, and others: Effects of dietary FOS on immunoglobulins in colostrum and milk of bitches,
J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 91:169-174, 2007.
125. Zentek J, Marquart B, Pietrzak T, and others: Dietary effects on bifidobacteria and Clostridium perfringens in the canine intestine,
IAnim Physiol Anim Nutr 87:397-407, 2003.
126. Beynen AC, Baas JC, Hoekemiejer PE, and others: Faecal bacterial profle, nitrogen excretion and mineral absorption in healthy
dogs fed supplemental oligofructose, / Anim Physiot Anim Nutr 86:298-305, 2002
127. Willard MD, Simpson RB, Cohen ND, Clancy JS: Efects of dietary fructooligosaccharides on selected bacterial populations in
feces of dogs, Am / Vet Rer 61:820-825, 2000.
128. Willard MD, Simpson RB, Delles EK, and others: Effects of dietary supplementation of fructo-oligosaccharides on small ntestinal
bacterial overgrowth in dogs, Am / Vet Res 55:654659, 1992.
129. Buddington RK, Buddington KK, Sunvold CD: The infuence of fermentable fiber on the small intestine of the dog: intestinal
dimensions and transport of glucose and proline, Am J Vet Res 60:354 358, 1999.
130. Ruaux CG, Tetrick MA, Steniner JM, Williams DA: Fecal consistency and volume in dogs with suspected small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth receiving broad spectrum antibiotic therapy or dietary fructo-oligosaccharide supplementation. In Proc ACVIM Abst,
2004, p 151.
1997, pp 7-12.
132. Floch MH, Walker WA, Guandalini S: Recommendation for probiotic use—2008, J Chin Gastroentero! 42:S104 S108, 2008.
133. Weese JS, Arroyo L: Bacteriological evaluation of dog and cat diets that claim to contain probiotics, Cax Vet J 44:212-215, 2003.
134. Weese JS, Anderson RE: Preliminary evaluation of Lactobacilus rhamnosus strain GC, a potential probiotic in dogs, Can Vet J
43:771-774, 2002.
135. Benyacoub J, Czarnecki-Maulden GL, Cavadini C, and others: Supplementation of food with Enterococcus faecium (SF68)
stimulates immune functions in young dogs, / Nutr 133:1 158-1162, 2003.
dogs, Am / Vet Rer 65:338-343, 2004.
137. Marshall-Jones ZV, Baillon MA, Croft JM, Butterwick RE: Effects of Lactobacillhs acidophilus DSM13241 as a probiotic in healthy
adult cats, Am / Vet Res 67:1005-1012, 2006.
138. Unpublished study: Data on fle at Procter and Gamble Pet Health and Nutrition Center, Lewisburg, Ohio, 2009.
139. Veir JK, Knorr R, Cavadini C, and others: Effect of supplementation with Enterococcus faecium (SF68) on immune functions in
cats, Vet 7ber 8:229-238, 2007.
140. Czarnecki-Maulden GL, Cavadini C, Mrkvicka J: Effect of E. faecum SF68 on chronic, intractable diarrhea in adult cats. In Neste-
Iurina petcare brochure: role ofprobiotics in GI tract health, 2007,pp 13-14.
141. Czarnecki-Maulden GL, Cavadini C, Mrkvicka J: E. faecum SF68 helps minimize naturally occurring diarrhea in kittens. In Nestle-
Purina petcare brochure: rote of probiotics in GI tract heatth, 2007, pp 1415.
142. Baillon ML, Butterwick RF: The effcacy of a probiotic strain, Lactobacilus acidophiius DSM1 3241, in the recovery of cats from
dinical Campytobacter infection. ln Proc ACV!M Forum, 2003.
143. Sauter SN, Allenspach K, Gaschen F: Cytokine expression in an ex vivo culture system of duodenal samples from dogs with
chronic enteropathies: modulation by probiotic bacteria, Domest Anim Endocrinol 29:605-622, 2005.
144. Unpublished study: Data on fle at Procter and Gamble Pet Health and Nutrition Center, Lewisburg, Ohio, 2009.
145. Kelley RL, Kiely B, O'Mahony B, and others: Clinical benefits of probiotic canine-derived Bfidobacterium animalis strain AHC7
in dogs with acute idiopathic diarrhea, Vet 7her 10(3):121-130, 2009
36
Nutritional Care of Cancer Patients
Because of increased knowledge and improvements in
before clinical signs are observed.6 This underscores the
pet health cate and nutrition in recent years, many com-
importance of early nutritional intervention when treat-
panion animals are now living well into old age. As a
ing dogs and cats with cancef.
result, cancer has become a relatively common disease in
Although limited data are available, there is some
dogs and cats, occurring most frequently in pets who are
evidence that the incidence of cancer cachexia differs
older than 5 years.1,2 In addition,
because of improved
between dogs and cats. Two pilot studies examined
methods of treatment, many
with neoplastic disease
body weight and body condition status in dogs and cats
achieve full remission and
improved quality
of life and survival times. Providing dogs and cats with
optimal nutrition during the early stages of disease and
observed in cats with cancef, but was much less com-
throughout treatment and 1
remission is an important
mon in dogs.
Howevef, these fesults afe controversial
component of care. Many
cancet
patients experience
significant alterations in food intake, nutfient metabo-
can exhibit the tumof-associated
metabolic changes
lism, and energy requirements.
Research has shown
cachexia while not showing clinical
that nutritional therapy is a key component in reducing
signs.Althou
ugh not studied in dogs, the presence of
the effects of these changes.
. In fecent years, nutritional
cancer cachexia in cats was found to be a signifcant
interventions that may also control or feduce malignant
disease in pets have
attention.
Thischaptet
it is in human subjects.8 The reason that dogs may not
feviews the metabolic and physical
be as susceptible to clinically evident cachexia is not
with cancer cachexia, the nutrient and
completely understood, and may be related to the dog's
pets with cancer, and current nutritional approaches to
telatively lower 
 dietary protein needs compared with
managing these patients.
the cat, the types of cancers that have been studied, and
 species differences in disease progression.
While
e cachexia is an 
1  important  paraneoplastic
CANCER CACHEXIA
syndrome, it is not the only cause of decreased food
Cancer cachexia is a frequently observed syndrome in
intake and loss of body condition in pets with cancer.
   i n 
Tumor-bearing animals may lose weight because of the
losses in body weight and lean tissue that cannot be com-
 presence of tumors or as a result of treatment-induced
pletely accounted for by feduced food intake.3 Clinical
side effects. In some cases, such as oropharyngeal, gas-
signs of weight loss and anorexia, along with cachexia's
tric, or small-bowel tumors, the physical presence of
characteristic metabolic abnormalities, are also reported
a tumor can interfere with nutfient intake of assimi-
in dogs and cats with a wide vatiety of malignancies.4
lation. Surgical procedures, chemotherapy, and radia-
A principal underlying cause of cancer cachexia
1is
tion therapy may also negatively affect nutrient intake
tumor-induced alterations in the body's metabolism of
and metabolism. Certain chemotherapies may alter
carbohydrate, protein, and fat. Over time, these meta-
smell and taste perceptions, resulting in decreased food
bolic changes lead to anorexia, fatigue, weight loss,
intake or changes in food preferences.9,10 Anorexia,
impaired immune function, and malnutrition. Cancer
 vomiting, and diarrhea are also potential side effects of
cachexia significantly affects a patient's quality of life,
 chemotherapy and radiation therapy. All of these effects
ability to withstand chemotherapy of fadiation treat-
 must be addressed when assessing nutritional status and
ment, and survival time.5 Furthermore, the metabolic
developing a dietary management protocol for pets
changes of cachexia appear to occur in many patients
with cancer.
479
480 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Cancer cachexia is characterized by progressive losses in
energy use by the tumor. Alterations in carbohydrate
body weight and lean tissue that cannot be compietely
metabolism are dramatic and are at least partially related
accountedforbyreducedfood intake.Aprincipalunder-
to the metabolic needs of the tumor. Tumor cells prefer-
ying cause is tumorinduced aiterations in the bodys
metabolism of carbohydrate,protein,and fat. Cancer
for energy and most are incapable of obtaining signif-
cant amounts of energy from either aerobic glycolysis
ability to withstand chermotherapy or radiation treat
or fat oxidation.1214 As a result, as a tumor grows, it
ment, and survival time. in addition, pets with cancer
uses the host's supply of glucose for energy, generating
may lose weight because ofthe presence oftumors oras
large amounts of lactate, the end product of anaerobic
a result oftreatment-induced side effects.
glycolysis. The host animal's hepatocytes convert this
excess lactate to glucose via the Cori cycle, resulting in
a shift in glucose metabolism from energy-producing
Phases of Cachexia
pathways. The end result is a gain of energy by the
Three phases of cachexia have been identifed in human
 tumor and a net energy loss for the host. This alteration
subjects; it is presumed that the syndrome follows
in carbohydrate metabolism occurs as early as the pre-
a similar pattern in dogs and cats. During the frst
clinical stage of cancer cachexia. Therefore nutritional
phase, the patient does not exhibit clinical signs, but
intervention that is aimed at shifting metabolism
to
biochemical changes are evident. These include ele-
benefit the host over the tumor should begin as soon as
vated blood lactate and insulin levels (peripheral insu-
a diagnosis is made.
lin resistance) and alterations in amino acid and lipid
In addition to elevated serum lactate, other biochem
profles.1l Dogs with lymphoma have significantly
ical abnormalities that occur in response to changes in
higher serum lactate and insulin concentrations follow-
carbohydrate use in tumor-bearing animals include
 ing intravenous dextrose infusion, compared with levels
 altered serum insulin and glucagon secretion patterns,
increased rate of gluconeogenesis and glucose turn-
that are not showing clinical signs of cachexia. Clini-
cal signs develop during the second stage. The patient
ity of studies have been conducted with human cancer
begins to show anorexia, weight loss, and depression
patients or laboratory animal models, there is evidence
and has an increased risk of experiencing detrimen-
that these changes also occur in dogs (and presumably
tal side effects of cancer therapy. The third and fnal
cats). Dogs with lymphoma, a common form of cancer
stage is characterized by marked losses of body fat and
in many breeds, show altered responses to glucose tol-
protein stores, severe debilitation, weakness, and bio-
erance tests, and many develop insulin resistance.12,18
chemical evidence of negative nitrogen balance. If left
These changes occur before and after the development of
untreated, cancer cachexia can be the ultimate cause
clinical signs and continue after remission is achieved.18
of death. Indirect calorimetry studies with rats have
It is hypothesized that insulin resistance in dogs with
found that the three phases usually coincide with nor-
lymphoma is due to a post-receptor defect resulting in
 mal, increased, and decreased energy requirements,
glucose intolerance. Regardless of the underlying cause,
respectively.13
the prevalence of glucose intolerance and insulin insen-
sitivity mandate the need to limit and carefully select
the type of carbohydrate included in foods for pets with
Alterations in Carbohydrate
Metabolism
cancef.
The biochemical alterations of cancer cachexia involve
the metabolism of carbohydrate, protein, and lipids,
Tumor celis preferentially metabolize glucose for energy,
which in tufn affect basal metabolic rate. Together, this
using the host's giucose and generating large amounts of
collection of biochemical changes leads to ineficient
lactate.Ultimately, the resuitis a gain ofenergy by the
Nutritional Care of Cancer Patients 481
Activation of this pathway is responsible for the muscle
animais also have an increased incidence of insulin
wasting that is seen in a variety of disease and trauma
ins ensitivity and glucose intolerance.
states, including diabetes, hyperthyroidism, and in
response to fasting, sepsis, and burns. With cancer,
several tumor-derived factors and cytokines have been
identifed that infuence this proteolytic pathway. These
Alterations in Protein Metabolism
include proteolysis induction factor, tumor necrosis
Because both the tumor and the host have obligatory
factor-alpha, and interleukin-1-beta.
protein fequirements, negative nitrogen balance is
common in cancer patients.19 Growing tumors require
Alterations in Lipid Metabolism
amino acids for protein synthesis and will also use
host gluconeogenic amino acids for the production of
Loss of body fat accounts for the majority of the weight
glucose. Because tumors often have a high metabolic
2z'ixus iuen yim sue pue sny Aq ison
fate, this significantly affects host protein stores and
Although reduced food intake is a significant contributor
to this loss, humans and animals with cancer also experi-
The host experiences an increased rate of whole body
 ence decreased lipogenesis and increased lipolysis. This
protein turnover, characterized by a decreased rate of
metabolic shift is a fesult of decreased lipoprotein lipase
protein synthesis in skeletal muscle and an increased
activity and appears to also be infuenced by several
rate of synthesis in the liver.21,2z In human cancer
 specifc tumor-derived cytokines.29,30 The result is
patients the shift in protein synthesis from muscle to
elevated sefum concentrations of free fatty acids (FFAs),
liver is referred to as the acute-phase feactant response,
very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs), triglycerides,
and its onset is a negative prognostic factor for suf-
acetoacetate, and beta-hydroxybutyrate.31,32 In human
vival. If not corrected, this protein imbalance eventu-
 patients with cancer, altered lipid profles have been asso-
ally leads to increased loss of skeletal muscle (muscle
 ciated with immunosuppression and decreased survival
wasting), hypoalbuminemia, compromised immunity,
time.33 Similarly, dogs with untreated lymphoma had
impaired gastrointestinal function, and delayed wound
significantly elevated concentrations of serum tfiglyc-
healing.
erides, FFAs, and VLDLs when compared with healthy
Studies of human cancer patients have shown that
controls.24,34 Although serum cholesterol concentration
serum levels of the gluconeogenic amino acids ala-
increased in response to chemotherapy other lipid
nine, glutamic acid, aspartic acid, and glycine gener-
parameters did not normalize during treatment or when
ally decrease, while concentrations of the branch-chain
the dogs attained remission.
amino acids (BCAAs) (leucine, isoleucine, and valine) are
normal or increased.20,23 This shift refects the increased
proteolysis of skeletal muscle as the three BCAAs make
Changes inEnergy Reguirements
up approximately % of skeletal muscle protein. Studies
As discussed previously, tumors cbtain energy primarily
of dogs with cancer have also found changes in serum
through the anaerobic metabolism of glucose, resulting in
amino acid profles. A group of 32 dogs with a vari-
 the production of lactate. The host must then recycle this
ety of cancers had decreased serum levels of glycine,
lactate through the Cori cycle, which leadls to a net loss
glutamine, valine, cystine, and arginine and elevated
 of energy. Additional energy costs to animals with cancer
levels of isoleucine and phenylalanine, compared with
 may include cytokine-induced increases in glucose recy-
values that were reported in the group of healthy
control dogs.24,25
Therefore, at least theoretically, energy expenditure
Although the biochemical pathways are com-
in cancer patients is expected to increase. Howevef,
plex and are not completely understood, the primary
 studies using indirect calorimetry to measure energy
underlying cause of skeletal muscle protein breakdown 
 expenditure in tumor-bearing subjects have reported
in cancer patients appears to be the up-regulation of
the ubiquitin-proteasome
proteolytic pathway.26,27
increased energy expenditure in humans and animals
482 Canine and Feline Nutrition
with neoplastic disease. Conversely, others have found
energy expenditure of tumor-bearing dlogs prior to sur-
normal or reduced energy needs. These discrepancies
 gery was not significantly greater or less than that of a
afe probably a result of several factors. Because cancer
 control group of healthy dogs. In contrast to the pre-
cachexia develops in stages and biochemical alterations
viously described study of dogs with lymphoma, this
typically precede clinical signs, animals that are in the
study indicated that REE and energy needs of dogs with
preclinical stage of cachexia are expected to have normal
energy requirements. Conversely, individuals with active,
healthy dogs of the same age.
untreated cachexia may have elevated energy expenditure,
Although studies of the energy requirements of dogs
while those in the fnal stages may be hypometabolic.
with cancer are limited (no studies have been published
Additional factors that significantly affect energy needs
for cats), results thus far indicate that the energy needs
includle the type and size of tumor and the patient's phase
of cancer patients do not significantly increase, and
of treatment, severity of clinical signs, and level of activity.
Several studies using indirect calorimetry have been
addition, removal of the cancer through surgery or che-
conducted to determine whether there are significant
Asiaua isaye Aiqeiaidde oi ieadde iou saop Adeiauou
changes in resting energy expenditure (REE) in dogs
 heeds. These data do not support the standard tenet that
nu ym shop  s auo u zoyiau ym
 patients with neoplastic disease have increased energy
occurring lymphoblastic lymphoma were fed isocaloric
fequirements. Rather, it seems that the energy needs of
amounts of either a high-catbohydrate or a high-fat diet
 dogs and cats with cancer must be addressed on an indi-
before and during chemotherapy.4l The initial REE
vidual basis and may vary with the type of cancer, stage
 r q r  s  s
of the disease, and method of treatment.
significantly lower than those of healthy control dogs.
After 6 weeks of chemotherapy, REE values decreased
DIETARY MANAGEMENT OF
further in the dogs with lymphoma, even after remission
was achieved in the majority of dogs. Although there
CANCER PATIENTS
were no significant differences in mean REE between
the two diet groups, the dogs fed the high-fat diet main-
The metabolic changes associated with cancer occuf
tained slightly higher energy expenditures than those fed
before clinical signs are seen, emphasizing the impor-
the high-carbohydrate diet. An important consideration
tance of early nutritional intervention. Because many
in this study is the fact that the healthy control animals
dogs and cats with cancer have decreased food intakes, a
were slightly younger than the dogs with cancer (mean
major goal of nutritional therapy is to select a food that
is highly palatable and energy dense. The food's nutri-
this age difference may account for the lower initial
ent profle should be tailored to address the metabolic
mean REE in dogs with lymphoma. However, it would
alterations of cancer cachexia, maintain hormal body
 not account for the further decreases seen during treat-
condition, and prevent weight loss. Provision of an
ment and remission.A possible explanation for these
appropriate diet with select nutrients may reverse some
decreases may be that the dogs with lymphoma were in
of the deleterious effects of neoplastic dlisease, improve
the frst silent phase of cancer cachexia at the start of the
the pet's ability to tolerate chemotherapy or radiation
study. This was followed by a reduction in metastatically
treatment, and enhance overall quality of life. Specific
active tumor tissue in response to treatment or possibly
dietary recommendations should consider the stage
in fesponse to a decfease in host metabolism caused by a
of disease, energy needs, current and past nutritional
loss of lean body tissue. A common side effect of chemo-
status, and ability or willingness to eat.
therapy is decreased energy intake, which could lead to
a loss of lean body tissue and a decreased metabolic rate.
A second study examined the effects of surgical exci-
Diet Characteristics
sion of vatious types of tumors on energy expenditure
Current data indicate that food selected for cancer
in dogs.42 Removal of tumors did not signifcantly
 patients should take advantage of the differences in met-
affect REE, regardless of tumor type. In adldition, the
abolic needs between the host animal and the tumor.
Nutritional Care of Cancer Patients 483
The food’s caloric distribution should emphasize calories
omega-3 fatty acids also shifts prostaglandin synthesis
originating from fat and protein, rather than from car-
away from prostaglandin Ez (PGE2) and toward PGE
bohydrate, because fatty acids and amino acids are not
 Cyclooxygenase metabolites such as PGEz play a role in
the preferred fuel source for most tumors. A diet that
the progression of several forms of cancer, and blocking
contains reduced carbohydrate and elevated protein and
 their production can inhibit tumor growth.S3
fat may supply a readily available source of energy, meet
     s r si
the host's protein needs, and limit the supply of carbo-
reported clinical benefits of omega-3 fatty acid supple-
hydrate to tumor cells.28,43 Human cancer patients with
mentation. When 85 subjects with upper gastroin-
cachexia have shown improvements in body weight,
testinal cancers were fed either an omega-3 fatty acid
adipose stores, energy and nitrogen balance, and ability
 and arginine supplement or a placebo, those receiving
the supplement had improved nitrogen intake and
Similarly, dogs with lymphoma fed a high-fat diet had
balance, an increased rate of wound healing, feduced
lower mean lactate and insulin levels after remission
incidence of complications, and shortened hospitaliza
when compared with dogs fed isocaloric amounts of a
tion time when compared with patients receiving the
high-carbohydrate diet.41 A food that contains 50% to
placebo.47 While the design of this study confounded
60% of total calories from fat, 30% to 50% of calo-
fatty acid and arginine effects, the results suggest a ben-
fies from protein, and the remaining portion of calories
eft of omega-3 fatty acids for human cancer patients.
from soluble carbohydrate is recommendled for dogs
 Similar results were reported when cancer patients were
and cats with cancer.46 In addition to shifting metabo-
supplemented with omega-3 fatty acids, arginine, and
lism away from catbohydrate and toward fat, another
ribonucleic acid (RNA).54
benefit of feeding a high-fat diet to cancer patients is the
Although a limited number of clinical studies have
increased energy density and palatability of these foods.
 been conducted, current research indicates that compan-
The type of fat that is included in foods for pets with
ion animals with cancer may also benefit from omega-3
cancer is also an important consideration. In fecent
fatty acids. When dogs with lymphoma were fed a foed
years, the importance of omega-3 fatty acids for human
 supplemented with EPA, DHA, and arginine, supple-
and pet cancer patients and the effects of this class of
f  plasma lactate fesponses to
fatty acids on tumor development and metastasis have
glucose tolerance tests and increased disease-ffree inter-
been studied. (A complete review of these fatty acids
vals and survival times when compared with dogs that
and their use in pet foods is included on pp. 387-395.)
were not supplemented.55 Similar to the previous study
The antinfammatory effects of omega-3 fatty acids on
with human subjects, the design of this study prevented
multiple systems of the body suggest a role in treating
any conclusions about a singular effect of omega-3 fatty
cancer patients. There is an increasing body of evi-
acids because arginine was included in the supplement.
dence showing that omega-3 fatty acids, particularly
A subsequent study fed the same therapeutic food to
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid
 dogs that had nasal tumors and were receiving radiation
therapy.6 Dogs fed the therapeutic food had higher
serum concentrations of EPA, DHA, and arginine
and DHA helps to prevent cachexia and metastatic
when compared with serum concentrations in the con-
disease.5l There is also indirect evidence that omega-3
ttol group of dogs. Increases in serum EPA and DHA
fatty acids may be metabolically helpful in prevent-
were positively correlated with reducedl tissue concen-
ing the recurrence of cancer after remission has been
 trations of proinfammatory agents and decreased tissue
achieved.52 Although the underlying mechanism is not
 damage, and improved owner-reported performance in
 completely understood, the effect appears to be related
fesponse to radiation treatment. Effects of fatty acids
to incorporation of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids into
alone (in the absence of arginine) on canine cancer
tumor cell membranes. This alters membrane fuidity
cell lines have also been reported.57 In vitro studies
and permeability, potentially increasing tumor cell sus-
have shown that supplementation with EPA, gamma-
ceptibility to both chemotherapeutic agents and to the
linolenic, and conjugated linoleic acid inhibited prolif-
host's own immune system. Increasing cell membrane
eration of bladder, osteosarcoma, prostatic, and bladder
484 Canine and Feline Nutrition
cell lines. EPA had the most potent effect, and these
aefobic metabolism, thus pfeventing of feducing oxida
effects were enhanced when EPA was used in conjunc-
tive stress. Oxidative stress leads to cellular and deoxy-
tion with the other fatty acids. Finally, although one
ribonucleic acid (DNA) damage and the production
mechanism of action of omega-3 fatty acids that has
of infammatory mediators, and is thought to be a
been postulated is augmentation of the effects of che-
fisk factor for the development and progression of cer
motherapy of radiation treatment, a recent study found
sop ui spie Aey -eao yim uoneuaiddns se
nutrients have been studied for their effcacy in can-
with lymphoma did not significantly affect the pharmo-
cer prevention and treatment. Similar to some human
kinetics of doxorubicin.58
cancer patients, metabolic markers of oxidative stress
Pet foods formulated for cancer patients should
 have been reported to increase in dogs with lymphoma
also contain slightly higher concentrations of protein
than the levels needed for adult maintenance. Provid-
viding supplemental antioxidants may feduce clinica
ing optimal levels of high-quality protein contributes
signs associated with these metabolic changes and may
to a positive nitrogen balance in the face of potentially
 also be helpful in reducing the adlverse effects of chemo-
increased requirements during active neoplastic disease.
 therapy and raliation therapy. There is in vitro evidence
Losses of lean body tissue can occur during cancer
with cancer cells and in vivo work with laboratory ani-
cachexia and as a fesult of anofexia of decfeased food
mals suggesting that beta-carotene, lutein, and other
intake. The food should contain between 30% and
carotenoids may inhibit tumor cell growth.67.69 How-
50% of calories from protein, with the higher end of
ever, not all studies have shown a beneft, and clinical
this range appropriate for cats.59 Because tumor cells
trials, especially with dog and cat cancer patients, have
preferentially use gluconeogenic amino acids for energy,
 not been feported. In addition, one argument against
a food that is specifically enriched with certain amino
 the use of supplemental antioxidants during cancer
acids may be benefcial. For example, although arginine
tteatment is that the presence of increased antioxidants
can exert metabolic effects that are both proneoplastic
in tissues may interfere with the antitumor effects of
and antineoplastic, supplemental arginine has been
fadiation and some chemotherapies, and may coun-
shown to inhibit tumor growth and metastasis and
 teract some of the cellular benefits of omega-3 fatry
 may enhance survival time in dogs with cancer.5,60,61
acids.64,70,71 Because individual antioxidant nutrients 
A diet that contains increased BCAAs may also be
have different properties and cellular effects, controlled
beneficial. Although no studies have yet have been
clinical studies are needed to fully elucidate potential
conducted with canine or feline patients, human cancer
benefits of the vatious antioxidant nutrients for dogs
patients with cancer cachexia who feceived supple-
and cats with cancer.
mental BCAAs reported a benefit to quality of life and
 showed improvements in nitrogen balance.62 In addi-
tion, in vitro work with several types of canine cancef
Diets for pets with cancer shouid be formulated to
cells showed that supplementation with BCAA did not
account for the metabolic changes associated with
increase cancer cell proliferation, and increasing leucine
neopiastic disease. A diet that is nutrient dense, highly
appeared to inhibit cancer cell growth.63 However,
digestible, high in fat and protein, and low in carbohy
the ability of BCAAs to preserve lean body tissue in
drate is appropriate.increasing omega-3fatty acids,par-
   i r  s r 
ticularly eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic
been demonstrated. Therefore additional studies that
acid, may aiso be beneficial.
 examine the metabolic and clinical effects of including
BCAAs in diets for dogs with cancer are needed before
recommendations can be made.
Antioxidant nutrients have been identifed as hav
Calculating Energy Needs
ing potential roles in both the prevention and treatment
The energy needs of companion animals with cancer
cancer. In the body, antioxidants function to sequester
can be affected by the type of tumor and the animal's
reactive oxygen species (ROS) that are generated during
stage of disease, willingness to eat, and activity level.
Nutritional Care of Cancer Patients 485
texture, or changing the type of food that is offered.
cer patients who afe clinically ill or experiencing severe
 Metoclopramide is often given to ameliorate nausea
side effects from tfeatment. Because ill animals afe often
associated with chemotherapy, and it may stimulate
kept in thermoneutral environments, have decreased
eating. Similarly, chemical appetite stimulants such as
food intakes, and ate inactive, the formulas used to
benzodiazepine derivatives or antiserotonin agents may
be helpful in getting reluctant pets to eat. However,
dogs and cats will not usually provide accurate estimates
these drugs can have variable responses and may not be
for some cancer patients. Conversely, an animal's resting
appropriate for some cancer patients because of physi-
energy requirement (RER) refects the energy needed
ological contraindications and potential side effects.
during a resting, postabsorptive state in a thermoneutral
When a patient is unwilling or unable to consume
environment. Formulas for RER may therefore provide
food orally, a feeding tube can be used. Nasoesopha-
a better estimate of energy needs in cancer patients. An
geal tubes provide short-term feeding to patients with
additional “illness factof" can be added to this estimate
hotmal
l gastrointestinal function, but they are not
based upon the pet's degree of illness and metabolic
- o rudosa aass ym seue ig aedide
 state. For dogs, an estimate of RER can be madle using
tric disease. Other types of enteral feeding routes are
the formula RER (kilocalories [kcal]/day) = 70 × (body
esophagostomy tubes, gastrostomy tubes, and jejunos-
 tomy tubes. An esophagostomy tube delivers nutrients
lated using the formula RER (kcal/day) = 40 x (body
into the distal esophagus, a gastrostomy tube delivers
weightkg). The RER estimates may need to be adjusted
nutrients directly into the stomach, and a jejunostomy
to account for additional energy needs for the demands
of underlying disease. For dogs with cancer, a factor of
delivers nutrients to the simall intestine. All three of
1.25 to 2 has been recommended, while 1.25 to 1.5 has
these tubes require surgical placement and can be left in
been suggested for cats.
position for extended periods of time. However, while
bolus (meal) feeding can be used with nasoesophageal,
esophagostomy, and gastrostomy tubes, a constant rate
METHODS OF FEEDING
of infusion must be used with a jejunostomy tube. More
Feeding ill patients can be achieved through delivery of
complete discussions of the use, placement, and man-
nutrients enterally (into the intestinal tract) or paren-
 agement of enteral feeding tubes are beyond the scope
terally (intravenously). Enteral feeding always should
 of this chapter and can be found in other veterinary
be the delivery method of choice, provided the pet
publications.72
has a functional gastrointestinal tract. Compared with
The formula selected for tube feeding should have
 patenteral methods, enteral feeding prevents mucosal
the same characteristics as the food that would be used
atrophy and bacterial overgrowth, presents less risk to
for oral feeding. An energy- and nutrient-dense formula
the patient, and is more convenient and affordable for
 minimizes the volume that must be fed. Providing a
clients. Parenteral nutrition is only suggested when the
high proportion (50% or more) of calories as fat also
gastrointestinal tract cannot be used and when there is
 helps delay gastric emptying and prevent diarrhea. The
 an anticipated need for long-term intravenous feeding.
formula should include a partially soluble fber source
Oral feeding of a canned or dry ration should be the
that helps slow gastric emptying and supports normal
first choice for cancer patients. Many dogs and cats with
 gastrointestinal tract function.!l A formula that is too
cancer are capable of consuming, digesting, and assimi-
nutrient dense may induce vomiting or osmotic diar-
lating food but are reluctant to eat an adequate volume
rhea, especially if a large volume is administered at
of food. Decreased intake or anorexia occurs as a result
 one time. Therefore a balancing act between providing
of the metabolic or physiological effects of disease or in
adequate nutrients, calories, and Auid and preventing
response to surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy.
nausea or diarrhea is often required when tube-feeding
cancer patients. A blenderized canned cat or dog food
meals or hand-feeding, warming the food to body tem-
works well with gastrostomy tubes, while liquid com-
perature, adding warm water to enhance the aroma and
 mercial veterinary products for dogs and cats can be used
486 Canine and Feline Nutrition
with nasogastric and jejunostomy tubes. The pet's total
many clients. When it is used, a parenteral formula
daily requirements should be administered in at least
for dog and cats with cancer should contain a limited
five to eight small-bolus feedlings per day, except when
amount of dlextrose and 60% to 70% of calories as fat.
jejunostomy feeding is used. If diarrhea occurs, reduc-
Avoiding glucose- or lactate-containing solutions is espe-
tion of the rate of feeding, feeding smaller increments.,
cially important, given the metabolic changes associated
or decreasing the total amount of formula adlministered
may help the intestinal tract to adapt.
vide the host with a realily available energy source while
Parenteral nutrition is the only option for nutritional
limiting the energy available to the tumor.
support in cancer patients that cannot tolerate enteral
feeding, usually because of a nonfunctional or severely
CONCLUSION
diseased gastrointestinal tract.72,75 Regardlless of the
underlying disease being treated, parenteral nutrition is
The primary challenge when feeding cancer patients is
to provide adequate calories, essential nutrients, and
patient is expected to require support for several days and
fuids in the face of the decreased food intake and meta-
the gastrointestinal tract is expected to heal given a suff-
bolic alterations that afe often associated with neoplastic
cient period of rest. The long-term benefits of parenteral
disease. Although more clinical trials afe needed with
nutrition afe often questionable because this foute of
dogs and cats with different types of cancer, current
delivery is associated with mucosal atrophy and increased
research supports the use of foods that contain increased
medical risks such as sepsis and metabolic anomalies.
 amounts of fat and protein, redluced catbohydrate, and
Parenteral nutrition may also be cost prohibitive for
elevated levels of omega-3 fatty acids
References
 1. Patronek CJ, Waters DJ, Glickman LT: Comparative longevity of pet dogs and humans: implications for gerontology research,
J Geronto!52A:B171-B178, 1997.
 2. Waters DJ, Jeffreys AB: Critical issues in aging and cancer: implications for efective cancer prevention. In Iroc NAVC, 2006,
pp 16-21.
3. Tisdale MJ: Cancer anorexia and cachexia, Nutr 17:438-442, 2003.
4. Ogilvie GK: Paraneoplastic syndromes. In Ettinger S, Feldman E: Textbook of teterinary internal medicine, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1999,
Saunders.
5. Crow SE, Oliver J: Cancer cachexia, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 43:2004 2012, 1979.
   e  p x   sd  se   ra   a  9
381-387, 1990.
J Vet bntern Med 18:692-695, 2004.
 8. Baez JL, Michel KE, Sorenmo K, Shofer FS: A prospective investigation of the prevalence and prognostic significance of weight loss
and changes in body condition in feline cancer patients, J Feline Med 9:411-417, 2007.
9. Kokal WA: The impact of antitumor therapy on nutrition, Cancer 55:273-278, 1985.
10. Trant AS, Serin J, Douglass HO: ls taste related to anorexia in cancer patients? Am J Chin Nutr 36:45-58, 1982.
11. Ogilvie GK: lnterventional nutrition for the cancer patient, Chin Tech Small Anim Pract 13:224 231, 1998.
12. Vail DM, Ogilvie CK, Wheeler SL, and others: Alterations in carbohydrate metabolism in canine lymphoma, / Vet Intern Med
4:8-11,1990.
13. Zyliez S, Schwantje O, Wagener DJT, and others: Metabolic response to enteral food to different phases of cancer cachexia in rats,
Oncology 47:87-91, 1990.
Nutritional Care of Cancer Patients 487
14. Hansell DT, Davies JWL, Barns J, and others: The oxidation of body fuel stores in cancer patients, Arn Surg 204:637-642, 1986.
15. Burt ME, Lowry SF, Gorschboth C, and others: Metabolic alterations in a noncachectic animmal tumor system, Cancer 47:
2138-2146, 1981.
16. Norton JA, Maher M, Wesley R, and others: Glucose intolerance in sarcoma patients, Cancer 55:3022-3027, 1984.
17. Inculet Rl, Peacock JL, Gorschboth CM, Norton JA: Gluconeogenesis in the tumor-infuenced rat hepatocyte: importance of
tmor burden, lactate, insulin and glucagon, / Nat Cancer Inst 79:1039-1046, 1987.
18. Ogilvie GK, Walters LM, Salman MD, and others: Treatment of dogs with lymphoma with adriamycin and a diet high in
carbohydrate or high in fat, Am J Vet Res 8:95-104, 1994.
19. Kurzer M, Meguid MM: Cancer and protein metabolism, Surg Clin North Am 66:969-1001, 1986.
 20. Landel AM, Hammong WG, Meguid MM: Aspects of amino acid and protein metabolism in cancer-bearing states, Cancer 55:
230-237,1985.
21. Norton JA: The infuence of tumor-bearing on protein metabolism in the rat, J Surg Res 30:456 462, 1981.
22. Norton JA, Stein TP Brennan MF: Whole body protein synthesis and turnover in normal and malnourished patients with and
without known cancer, Anx Surg 194:123-128, 1981.
23. Warren RS, Jeemvanandam M, Brennan MF: Protein synthesis in the tumor-infuenced hepatocyte, Surgery 98:275-281, 1985.
u ia sot u[ raue ym sop u usogeiau uraod pue ney ur suonean saypo pue 'Ts raaaya 'a iA  aaao y7
Soc, Estes Park, Colo, 1988.
non-hematopoietic malignancies, Am J Vet Res 8:62-66, 1994.
26. Baracos VE: Regulation ofskeletal-muscle-protein turnover in cancer-assciated cachexia, Nutrtion 16:1015-1018, 2000.
 27. Laxarus DD, Destree AT, Mazzola LM, and others: A new model of cancer-cachexia: contribution of the ubiquitin-proteosome
pathway, Am / Physiot 277:E332-E341, 1999.
28. Ogilvie CK, Vail DM: Nutrition and cancer: recent developments, Vet Clin North Am Small Axim Iract 20:969-985, 1990.
29. McAndrew PF: Fat metabolism and cancer, Surg Clin North Am 66:1003-1012, 1986.
30. Davenport D]: Use of nutraceuticals in cancer therapy, Proc NAVC 20:777-780, 2006.
31. Alexopoulos CG, Blatsios B, Avgerinos A: Serum lipids and lipoprotein disorders in cancer patients, Cancer 60:3065-3070, 1987.
32. Alexander HR: Substrate alterations in a sarcoma-bearing rat model: effect of tumor growth and resection, J Surg Res 48:471-475,
1990.
33. Kern KA, Norton JA: Cancer cachexia, J Parenterat Nutr 12:286-298, 1988.
N yaaey os ou i ot u uydui ym sao ur salyord pid wnras sayo pue 'y aao ' neaugea 'a prod ye
1989
35. Del Ray A, Besedovsky H: Interleukin 1 affects glucose homeostasis, Am J Physiol 253:R794-R798, 1987.
36. Beutler B, Cerami A: Cachectic tumor necrosis factor: an endogenous mediator of shock and infammation, Immunol Res 5:
281-293, 1986.
37. Arbeit IM: Resting energy expenditure in controls and cancer patients with localized and difuse diseases, Anx Surg 199:292-298,
1984.
38. Dempsey DT, Knox LS, Mullen JL, and others: Energy expenditure in malnourished patients with colorectal cancer, Arch Surg
121:789-795, 1986
pue uauaq u soyaam pue ampuadx Aaua usr uaamg dysuoar ay H suna TAI saae Laasue 6f
malignant disease, Ann Swrg 203:240-245, 1986.
40. Ogilvie GK: Energy metabolism in diseased and critically ill dogs: new horizons, Vet Clix Nutr 4:138-142, 1997.
488Canine and Feline Nutrition
41. Ogilvie CK, Walters LM, Fettman MJ,and others: Energy expenditure in dogs wich lymphoma fed two specialized diets, Cancer
71:3146-3152, 1993.
42. Ogilvie CK, Salman MD, Fettman MJ, and others: Resting energy expenditure in dogs with nonhematopoietic malignancies
before and after excision of tumors, Am / Vet Res 57:1463-1467, 1996.
43. Rosi-Fanelli F, Cascino A, Muscaritoli M: Abnormal substrate metabolism and nutritional strategies in cancer management, JPEN
15:680-683, 1991.
44. Dempsey DT, Mullen JL: Macronutrient requirements in the malnourished cancer patient, Ann Surg 55:290-294, 1985.
46. Mauldin CE: Feeding the cancer patient. In Carey DP, Norton SA, Bolser SM, editors: Recent advances in canine and feline
nutritional research, Iroceedings ofthe lams international rmatrition symposium, Wilmington, Ohio, 1996, Orange Frazer Press.
Care Med 18:S145-S148, 1990.
48. Ramesh G, Das UN, Koratkar R, and others: Effect of essential fatty acids on tumor cells, Nutrition 8:343-347, 1992.
49. Begin ME, Elis C, Das UN, and others: Differential killing of human carcinoma cellsupplemented with n-3 and n-6
polyunsaturated fatty acids, J Natl Cancer Irst 77:2053-2057, 1986.
50. Plumb JA, Luo W, Kerr Dj: Effect of polyunsaturated fatty acids on the drug sensitivity of human tumor celines resistant to
either cisplastin or doxorubicin, Br J Cancer 67:728-733, 1993.
51. Tisdale MJ, Brennan RA, Fearon KC: Reduction of weight loss and tumor size in a cachexia model by a high fat diet, Br J Cancer
56:3943, 1987.
 52. Roush GC, Pero RW, Powell J, and others: Modulation of the cancer susceptibility measure, adenosine diphosphate ribosyl
transferase (ADPRT), by differences in n-3 and n-6 fatty acids, Nutr Cancer 16:197-207, 1991.
Prostaglandins Leukot Esent Fatty Acids 70:479-483, 2004.
54. Daly JM, Lieberman M, Goldfne J, and others: Enteral nutrition with supplemental arginine, RNA, and omega-3 fatty acids: 
prospective clinical trial, Proc Am Con Parenteral Enteral Nut JPEN 15:19S, 1991.
55. Olgilvie GK, Fettman MJ, Mallincfrodt CH, and others: Effect of fish oil, arginine, and doxorubicin chemotherapy on remission
and survival time for dogs with lymphoma, Carcer 88:19161928, 2000.
56. Anderson CR, Ogilvie CK, LaRue SM, and others: Effect of fish oil and arginine on acute effects of radiation injury in dogs with
neoplasia: a double-blind study In Proc Vet Cancer Soc, Chicago, 1997.
57. Knapp DW, Mohammet Sl, Hayek MG: Fatty acid regulation of cancer cell growth. 1n NAVC Proc, 2004, pp 22-26.
58. Selting KA, Ogilvie CK, Gustafson DL, and others: Evaluation of the effects of dietary n-3 fatty acid supplementation on the
pharmokinetics of doxorubicin in dogs with lymphoma, Am J Vet Res 67:145-151, 2006.
59. Donahue S: Nutritional support of hospitalized patients, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 19:475-495, 1989.
 60. Tachibana K, Mukai K, Hirauka I, and others: Evaluation of the effect of arginine enriched amino acid solution on tumor growth,
/PEN 9:428-434, 1985.
 61. Barbul A, Isto DA, Wasserkrug HL, and others: Arginine stimulates lymphocyte immune response in healthy human beings,
Surgery 90:244251, 1981.
caloric intake in cancer patients, J Natl Cancer Inst 88:550-552, 1996.
63. Wakshlag Jl, Kalfelz FA, Wakshlag RR, Davenport GM: The effects of branched-chain amino acids on canine neoplastic cell
proliferation and death, / Nutr 136:2007S-2010S, 2006.
64. Freeman LM: Antioxidants in cancer treatment: helpful or harmful? Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 31:154 158, 2009.
65. Szczubial M, Kankofer M, Lopuszynski W: Oxidative stress parameters in bitches with mammary gland tumours, J Vet Med Physio!
Pathol Clin Med 51:336-340, 2004.
Nutritional Care of Cancer Patients  489
66. Winter JL, Barber L, Griessmar PC: Antioxidant status and biomarkers of oxidative stress in canine lymphoma, J Vet Intern Med
23:311-316, 2009.
67. Palozza P, Serini S, Di Nicuolo F, Calviello G: Modulation of apoptotic signaling by carotenoids in cancer cells, Arch Biochem
Biophys 430:105-109, 2004.
breast cancer cells treated with carotenoids and retinoids, / Nutr 131:15741580, 2001.
69. Chew Bl, Park JS, Wong MW, Wong TS: A comparison of the anti-cancer activities of dietary beta-carotene, canthaxanthin and
astaxanthin in mice in vivo, Anticancer Res 19:1849-1853, 1999.
70. Block Kl, Koch AC, Mead MN: 1mpact of antioxidants supplementation on chemotherapeutic efficacy: a systermatic review of the
evidence from randomized controlled trials, Cancer Treat Rev 33:407418, 2007.
71. Moss RW: Do antioxidants interfere with radiation therapy for cancer? Integr Cancer Ther 6:281-293, 2007.
72. Chan DL, Freeman LM: Nutrition in critical illness, Vet Chin North Am Small Anim Pract 36:1125-1241, 2006.
73. Buffngton CAT: Enteral nutritional support, Vet Clin Nutr 3:10-13, 1996.
74. Reinhart GA, Hayek MG: Nutritional support in the critical care patient. In Iroc XXI Cong World Small Anim Vet Asoc, 1996,
pp 66-68.
7:52-64, 1993.
76. Vail DM, Ogilvie CK, Fettman MJ, and others: Exacerbation of hyperlactatemia by infusion of lactated Ringer's solution in dogs
with lymphoma, J Vet Intern Med 4:228, 1990.
37
Nutrition and Mobility
It has been reported that almost one fourth of dogs visit-
Musculoskeletal dysfunction of the appendicular
ing veterinary practices are diagnosed with musculo-
skeleton can involve one of more limbs. There can be
skeletal disorders.! Ofthese cases, 70% involved mobility
muscle, tendon, joint, or bone involvement in one or
or lameness issues of the appendicular skeleton. The
more limbs. There may be swelling, pain, weakness, of
incidence in dogs that are less than 1 year of age is about
atrophy present in muscles or tendons. Similarly, evalu-
22%, and more than 90% of these cases are thought
ation of affected joints may reveal swelling, heat, pain,
to be infuenced by nutritional factors.2 Developmental
crepitation, luxation of subluxation, and either increased
skeletal diseases are most prevalent in the large and giant
or decreased range of motion. The bone itself may be
breeds, and their onset is usually associated with periods
involved. Fractures, bony enlargement, abnormal confor-
of rapid growth. The most common of these disorders
 mation, growth disturbances, and increased or decreased
afe canine hip dysplasia (CHD), several forms of ostec-
density seen on radiographs are all indictors that a bone
chondrosis, hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HOD) (also
may be the primary source of lameness. In all cases, a
called metapbyseal osteopathy), and panosteitis. Congeni-
 thorough veterinary examination and medlical history are
tal disorders that affect mobility include medial patellar
necessary for diagnosis of musculoskeletal disease.
luxation and Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. Other causes
of lameness and impaired mobility include ruptured
cruciate, infectious arthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis.
DEVELOPMENTALSKELETAL
Finally, osteoarthritis (OA) is a common disorder in
DISORDERS
middlle-aged and older pets and eventually develops with
almost all forms of musculoskeletal disease. Free-choice
feeding of diets that are nutrient- and energy-dense of
Canine Hip Dysplasia
supplementation with certain nutrients during growth
CHD is a biomechanical disease of the coxofemoral
are important factors in the etiology of developmental
joint, characterized by incongruity between surfaces of
skeletal disease. In addition, nutritional management,
the head of the femur and the acetabulum. Over time,
along with antinfammatory and pain medication,
this subluxation causes remodeling of the joint, typi-
 plays a critical role in alleviating clinical signs and sup-
fed by shallowing of the acetabulum, fattening of the
porting joint heath in pets affected with OA.
femoral head, and development of OA. The degree of
subluxation and joint laxity determines the degree of
femoral head remodeling and development of degenera-
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
tive joint disease over the dog's lifetime (Figure 37-1).3
The musculoskeletal system is composed primarily of
Together, joint laxity (which becomes evident after
muscle, ligaments, tendons, cartilage, and bone. It pro-
2 months of age) and OA, which can become evident
vides structural support for multiple organ and meta-
as eartly as 4 months of age or be delayed for years,
bolic functions as well as locomotion, mastication, and
determine the severity of the disease in an individual.
respiration. Because the musculoskeletal system is inte-
Affected dogs range from being asymptomatic through-
grated with the cardiovascular, respiratory, neurologic,
hemolymphatic, digestive, and endocrine systems, pri-
CHD is the most frequently encountered orthopedic
mary disorders of any of these interrelated systems can
disease in veterinary medicine. It has a multifactorial eti
directly affect the musculoskeletal system. Therefore,
when evaluating any lameness issue, other body func-
 number of potential environmental factors. Although
tions and systems should also be considered.
all dogs are susceptible, breeds that have an increased
491
492 Canine and Feline Nutrition
Acetabulum
Femoral head
Joint remodeling,
leading to
osteoarthritis
Dysplastichip
showing
NormalHip
subluxation
Figure 37-1  Normal and dysplastic hips
risk of developing CHD include the Bulldog, Pug, Saint
difficulty rising from a lying or sitting position especially
Bernard, Clumber Spaniel, Boykin Spaniel, and Blood-
m n s q aa a a siaa ie
hound.5 The prevalence of CHD in some breeds may
Ae anau 'doy-auunq, on readde pue sudo no sunuun
be higher than 70%.6 Of the environmental infuences,
be pain associated with palpation of the joint on physical
diet and growth rate are believed to be most important.
examination or even a notable laxity within the joint. If
A dog's rate of growth during the period from 3 months
chronic, there may also be atrophy or muscle wasting of
to 8 months of age is critical in the development of
the pelvic and hind-limb muscles.
CHD (Figure 37-2). Dogs demonstrating a high rate
of growth and excessive weight gain during this period
have a higher frequency and more severe degenerative
Canine hip dyspiasia (CHD)is a developmental skel-
changes than do dogs growing at rates equal to or below
their breed standard.7 Additionally, excessive external
surfaces of the head of the femur and the acetabu-
muscular forces acting on the hip joint from strenuous
lum.Over time,this subluxation causes remodeling of
of excessive exercise during periods of growth may pre-
the joint and development of osteoarthritis. Large and
vent the femoral head from remaining in close contact
giant breeds are more susceptible to CHD,and risk is
with the acetabulum during development.
increased ifa dog experiences a high rate ofgrowth and
Dogs with severe hip dysplasia may show clinical signs
excessive weight gain during development.
of the disease when they are less than a year of age, but
signs more typically appeart in middle-aged dogs. Depend-
ing on the degree of CHD, obvious signs of OA may not
Osteochondrosis
be observed until the dog is middlle aged or older because
Osteochondrosis is characterized by a focal disruption
the hip joint develops more articular cartilage abnormali-
 in endochondral ossifcation, which causes impaired
ties as animals age. Clinically, dogs with hip dysplasia have
maturation of epiphyseal cartilage.8 It can occur in
Nutrition and Mobility493
140
130-lbGreatDan
120
100
80
Weight
75-lb German Shepherd
62-lb Setter
60
42-lb Bulldod
40
28-lb Human
23-b Cocker
20
 10-lb Pekinges
12
16
20
24
28
Age (in months)
Figure 37-2 Representative growth curves of several dog breeds.
both the physis and epiphysis of growth cartilage and
(particularly of calcium).,10 Breeds that demonstrate
at multiple points throughout the skeleton. In grow-
the highest incidence of this disorder include the Ber-
ing dogs, osteochondrosis of the articular epiphyseal
nese Mountain Dog, Great Dane, Labrador Retriever,
cartilage most commonly occurs in the shoulder, stife,
Golden Retriever, Newfoundlland, and Rottweiler.11,12
hock, and elbow. Clinical signs include pain, lameness,
and occasionally swelling atound the affected joint.
 One or multiple joints may be affected, and signs typi-
Hypertrophic Osteodystrophy
cally appear when dogs afe between 5 and 9 months
HOD occurs primarily in the large and giant breeds of 
of age. Subsequent to the development of osteochon-
dogs and is characterized by excessive bone deposition
drosis, acute infammatory joint disease or OA develops
and retarded bone resorption. Breeds showing a high
when the cartilage joint sufface is disrupted. A com
incidence include Great Danes, Saint Bernards, Box-
mon manifestation of osteochondrosis is osteochondri-
ers, Chesapeake Bay Retrievers, Irish Setters, German
tis dissecans. This occurs when a segment of articular
 Shepherd Dogs, and Labrador Retrievers.12 The distal
(joint) cartilage is separated from the underlying bone
ulna, radius, and tibia ate most commonly affected.
and subchondral bone is exposed
to synovial Auid.
Radiographically, an irregular, translucent zone ini-
If this piece of cartilage breaks off into the joint, it is
tially appears in the metaphysis and is separated from
Aidin pue asnou suo!, e se on panai Aiuoo
requires surgical removal. As with CHD, the etiology of
As the disease
e progresses, additional bone is depos-
osteochondrosis appears to be multifactorial. Identified
ited outside of the periosteum, and soft-tissue swell-
risk factors include age, sex, breed, rapid growth rate,
ing and subperiosteal hemorrhages develop around
and excessive weight gain, and possbly nutrient excesses
affected metaphyseal areas. Signs include acute pain and
494Canine and Feline Nutrition
swelling, lameness, intermittent pyrexia, and occasional
is difficult to identify all of the external components
anorexia. The observed swelling is due to both fbrous
involved in these disorders, nutrition and rate of growth
play an important role. A number of nutrients have
e nn so siae ad oH suoq sd
been examined, including energy, protein, vitamin C,
growing rapidly, and the initial signs are typically seen
fat, carbohydrate, and calcium. The data indicate that
when dogs are between 3 months and 6 months of age.
the most important nutritional factors in the develop-
ment of skeletal disease in dogs ate excess caloric intake
 and excessive intake of calcium during growth.
Panosteitis
Panosteitis is a common cause of lameness in young.
EXCESS
CALORIC
CINTAKE
Excess
senergy
ssop uaum pasouseip Alesidki s! pue ssop paaiq-asiel
intake during growth commonly occurs as a result of
afe between 5 and 12 months of age. Males afe more ffe-
feeding a high-quality, growth diet to a young dog on
quently affected than females, and Great Pyrenees, Ger-
a free-choice basis or feeding excess quantities of food
man Shepherd Dogs, Mastiffs, and Basset Hounds are
on a portion-controlled basis. Some owners believe that
puppies should be kept “plump" in appearance, and
eralized infammation of thelong
bones, specifically the
that a rotund puppy is a healthy puppy. However, when
humerus, radius, ulna, femur, and tibia.13 In more than
puppies are fed excessive amounts of a balanced diet,
half of the reported cases, the disorder moves from leg
 growth rate is maximized before excess weight in the
to leg, eventually affecting almost all of the long bones.
form of fat is gained. As a fesult, a growing dog that
Affected dogs show a sudden onset of moderate to severe
Je Smia aensn si nuiamaao Apus aq on sradde
lameness, with no history of injury or trauma. A defin-
a maximal rate. Studies with dogs, humans, and other
ing characteristic of panosteitis is its tendency to shift,
species have shown that the consumption of excess calo-
moving from one limb to another over a period of sev-
fies resulting in a maximal or an above-average growth
eral months or more. Because of this, panosteitis is often
rate is not compatible with optimal and healthy skeletal
   s
“growing pains" in young
dogs, as it is often seen during periods of rapid growth.
The frst study
to
demonstrate the relationship
Affected puppies may show a loss of appetite and tran-
between overnutrition, rapid growth, and developmen-
sient fever during acute episodes. Although dogs may
tal skeletal disease was conducted with growing Great
show extreme lameness and pain upon palpation of the
Danes.19 Two groups of growing puppies were fed a
affected limbs, panosteitis is a self-limiting disorder in
highly palatable, energy-dense food throughout growth.
the vast majority of dogs. Still, this disorder can be very
The frst group was
s fed free-choice, and the second
 group was fed amounts of food that were restricted to
tent lameness for up to 18 months or more.
two thirds of the intake of the first group. The dogs that
were fed free-choice grew significantly faster than did
the dogs fed restricted amounts of food, and bone tis-
Nutritional Factors Influencing
sue was significantly affected by the rapid growth rate.
Developmental Skeletal Diseases
A vartiety of skeletal abnormalities were observed in the
Most forms of developmental skeletal disease are infu-
dogs that were fed free-choice, including enlargement
auaiod aq on paraisuos are pue snaus Aa paa
of the costochondral junctions and the epiphyseal-
diseases. However, heredity cannot fully explain their
occurrence, and phenotypic expression depends upon
the carpus, and sinking of the metacarpophalangeal and
a vatiety of environmental infuences.
. For example,
metatarsophalangeal joints. These changes were associ-
although a limited number of breeds have been studied,
ated with pain and varying degrees of lameness. It was
heritability coeffcients for CHD are estimated to be
concluded that generalized overnutrition, in the form of
between 0.1 and 0.4.14-16 This means that 60% or more
excess energy, protein, calcium, and phosphorus, caused
of the factors that infuence the phenotypic expression
 i  so  i ai  
of CHD are environmental in nature. Although it
abnormal skeletal development.
Nutrition and Mobility  495
Subsequently, other studies were conducted with
male dogs of the large and giant breeds are more fre-
growing dogs of several large breeds, including Ger-
quently affectedl than ate smaller females.28 There also
man Shepherd Dogs, Golden Retrievers, and Labrador
 appears to be a correlation between increasing body size
Retrievers. In one study, a group of puppies that had
 and the occurrence of the lesions associated with oste0-
high parental frequencies of CHD were examined. The
 chondrosis.29 A comparison between the bones of large
incidence and severity of dysplasia was greater in pup-
 and small breeds of dogs during periods of rapid growth
pies that had rapid growth rates as a result of increased
shows that the bones of large breeds are relatively less
caloric intake, when compared with puppies that were
 dense than are the bones of small breeds at similar stages
fed restricted amounts of food.20 Similarly, when
 of development. Bones of large breeds have a thinner
 a group of puppies was hand-reared at a reduced rate
-uds asuap ssal e pue iies Are rel rxas
of growth, they developed a very low incidence of hip
giosa.29,30 It is possible that the bones of large dogs dur-
ing growth are not as strong as those of smaller dogs
Yoiy Aiaa e pamous aei ymoi 1auy yonu e moe o1
during the same period. This may be the basis for the
incidence of hip dysplasia.
genetic predispositions toward skeletal abnormalities
 jo dnois e yim apns eupnsuo palonuos-m y
 in the large and giant breeds. Recent evidence suggests
48 Labrador Retrievers found that dogs fed 25% less
that mechanical stress on the joints caused by excessive
food than dogs fed free-choice, starting after weaning
weight during growth and throughout life also contrib-
and continuing throughout life, had significantly less
utes to the development of OA.24
hip joint laxity at 30 weeks of age and a significantly
 In addition to weight-related mechanical stressors,
lower incidence of CHD.18,23 Of the dogs in the free-
overnutrition has direct effects that negatively infu-
Jo seaA 7 Aq H padoaaap  1 91 dno aioy
ence skeletal development. Studies with Great Danes
age, compared with 7 of the 24 dogs in the limited-
have shown that overnutrition stimulates accelerated
feeding group. OA was observed in the hips of 7 of the
skeletal growth.2 Great Dane puppies were fed a diet
24 free-choice dogs by the time they were 1 year old,
forrmulated for growth from weaning to 6 months of
while none of the limited-feeding dogs showed OA at
 age. Puppies in one group were fed free-choice (ad libi-
1 year.24 By 5 years of age, 12 of the 23 remaining
tum), and puppies in the second group were restricted
free-choice dogs (52%) and only 3 of the 23 limited-
to 70% to 80% of the amount consumed by the first
feeding dogs (13%) had radiographic signs of hip OA,
group. As in previous studies, dogs fed ad libitum
and the degree of OA was more severe in free-choice
weighed significantly more than the restricted group at
dogs than in the restricted-feeding dogs. Additional
6 months of age. Bone measurement data showed that
evaluations showed that arthritic changes to hips and
accelerated skeletal growth, in the form of increased
shoulders increased linearly (rather than bimodally)
size and volume of bone, contributed significantly to
throughout life, and these changes were more frequent,
 the increased weight. The male dogs that experienced
occurred earlier, and were more severe in dogs fed free-
overnutrition also showed an incfeased rate of bone
choice compared with dogs fed restricted amounts of
 femodeling, resulting in enlarged bones with relatively
food.25,26 Finally, the dogs fed free-choice weighed
 low densities and low resistance to the greater weight
more and had higher body condition score values duf-
 they were required to bear. It appears that if a large dog
 ing growth and throughout life; a significant and posi-
is allowed to attain its maximal growth rate by consum-
tive cofrelation was found between body weight and the
ing excess amounts of a balanced diet, the accelerated
presence and severity of OA.24
growth rate creates a rapidly growing skeleton that is
The skeletal system of dogs is most susceptible
less strong and less able to withstand the biomechanical
to physical and metabolic stressors during the frst
sttesses of the greater muscle mass and body weight that
12 months of life. It is theorized that abnormal skel-
 ate put on it. Not only do these dogs weigh more, but
etal development during periods of rapid growth results
 their bones are less able to handle the added weight. The
from overloading the growing skeleton with prema-
 end result is the development of aberrations in ossifica-
 tion, damage to developing cartilage and growth plates,
theory is supported by the fact that rapilly growing
 and premature closufe of growth plates. Most often this
496Canine and Feline Nutrition
manifests as osteochondrosis, but these changes may
also be involved in the onset of several other develop-
BOX 37-1 PRACTICAL FEEDING TIPS:
mental skeletal diseases.
FEEDING GROWING DOGS
TO DECREASE THE RISK OF
DEVELOPMENTAL SKELETAL
DISEASE
 s
factor for developmental skeletal disease in dogs. This
Select a complete and balanced dog food that has been
most commonly occurs as a resuit offeeding a high
formmulated for growth in large and giant breeds.
Feed this food throughout the first 1 to 2 years of life.
dopooossxuioi
Use a portion-controlled feeding regimen and carefully
controlled basis. The resuiting rapid growth rate is not
measure the amount of food that is fed each day.
compatible with heaithy skeletal development because
Provide an amount of food that will su pport an average
of mechanical stresses placed on developing bones and
rate of growth for a dog's breed
changes in bone growth.
Provide an amount of food that will maintain a lean
body condition throughout growth.
Feeding for Optimal Growth Rate
 Strictly monitor weight gain and body condition until the 
The final skeletal height of a dog is strongly infuenced
dog reaches maturity.
by genetics. Providing adequate, but not excessive,
Do not su pplement the diet with minerals, vitamins, or
amounts of a balanced diet enables an animal to achieve
additional foods.
its potential size but at a slower fate than if excess
food is provided. Feeding an energy-dense, nutrient-
balanced food at a level that promotes a high rate of
shown that dietary protein level is not a risk factor for
 the dlevelopment of skeletal disorders in growing dogs.31
size and can contribute to abnormal skeletal develop-
A general fecommendation is to select a food that has
ment. Conversely, feeding restficted amounts of a bal-
a moderately reduced energy content (between 3.5 and
anced food, to achieve a slower growth rate, results in
3.8 kilocalories [kcal]/gram [g] of dry food) compared
an animal of the same size, but at a later point in time.
with typical puppy foods, and between 12% and 16% fat.
Allowing the skeleton to develop slowly, and feeding
The food should contain a minimum of 22% high-
to maintain a lean body condition, eliminates the bio-
quality protein, with an optimum level of between 26%
mechanical stresses of excess weight and the changes in
and 28% (23% to 26% of calories).32 Calcium levels
bone development that are associated with rapid growth
should be between 0.8% and 1.2% (see pp. 499-500).
and overweight body conditions.
Large- and giant-breed dogs should always be fed on
The best way to attain a moderate growth rate is to
a portion-controlled basis during growth. Free-choice
strictly monitor body weight during growth and to feed
 feeding is not reco mmended because it increases the risk
to attain a lean body condition (Box 37-1; see Chapter
of ovefconsumption and is hot conducive to monitorf
28, Figure 28-2, p. 324). The chief contributor to rapid
ing daily intake and controlling rate of growth. In addi-
 growth and weight gain is dietary energy. Because fat is
tion, ad libitum feeding appears to affect several of the
much more energy dense than protein or carbohydrate,
hormonal regulatory systems of growth.33 Circulating
high-fat diets contribute significantly to excess energy
levels of insulin-like growth factor-1, thyroxine (T4),
intake. Several commercial dog foods afe specifically
and triodothyronine (T3) were found to be higher in
formulated for large-breed puppies. These foods con-
 growing dogs that were fed ad libitum when compared
d  u  e  r s u
with levels in dogs that were fed on a portion-controlled
foods and have a protein concentration that is balanced
basis. It is possible that ad libitum feeding promotes the
to maintain an appropriate protein-to-energy ratio.
metabolic processes that support fapid growth rate.
Although dietary protein was once identified as a poten-
 Portion-controlled feeding allows the owner to feed an
tial contributor to skeletal abnormalities, studies have
amount of food that maintains optimum growth rate
Nutrition and Mobility   497
and body condition and to gradually adjust the dog's
development of certain skeletal disorders. Regardless
of the good intentions, there are potential risks when 
The amount to feed can be estimated from guide-
excessively high levels of calcium are either included in
lines provided on the food’'s package and then adljusted
the diet itself or added to an adequate and balanced diet.
to attain ideal body condition (see Chapter 28, Fig
 Research has shown that normal growth in puppies
ure 28-2, p. 324). Because growing large- and giant-
can be supported by a calcium intake of 0.37% available
aui naun sains ym daas Aian aay so paaq
calcium or 0.6% total calcium.34 The Association of
requirements can change dramatically over short peri-
American Feed Control Officials’ (AAFCO's) Nutrient
ods of time. Therefore puppies should be weighed and
Profiles for dog foods sets minimum levels for calcium of
evaluated at least once every 2 weeks. Young puppies
0.8% for growth and reproduction and 0.5% for adult
should be fed three to four meals per day until they
maintenance. The profle also mandates a maximum
ate 4 months old and two meals per day thereafter.
level of 2.5% calcium in all dog foods. This maximum
A well-formulated, breed-size-specific growth
1diet
level was included 
because published data show that
should be fed throughout the dog's growth period.
excess calcium during growth may contribute to abnor-
For large and giant breeds, this corresponds to the frst
mal skeletal development and increase a dog's risk of
12 to 24 months of life, depending upon the dog's breed
skeletal disease.
and adult size.
A seties of studies wefe conducted in the 1980s t0
determine the effect of varying levels of dietary calcium
upon the occurrence of developmental skeletal disease
strictly monitor dogs'body weight during growth and
was formulated that met the fecommendations of the
to feed to attain a lean body condition. A growth food
1974 National Research Councils (NRCs) Nutrient
 
Reguirements for Dogs. Both the control group and the
selected for large- and giant-breed puppies. Feeding on α
experimental group of dogs received this foed through-
portion-controlled basis is aiso recommended because
out growth. In addition, the experimental 
group
this allows the owner tofeed an amount of food that
received calcium carbonate supplementation to achieve
maintains optimum growth rate and bodycondition
a level of 3.3% in the diet, three times the amount rec-
ommended by the NRC at that time.37,38 Dogs that
change.
were fed excessive calcium during growth developed
chronic hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia. Skel-
etal differences between the control and experimental
Excess Calcium Intake
dogs incluled a higher percentage of total bone volume,
and Skeletal Disease
tetarded bone maturation, retarded bone remodeling,
Calcium is a nutrient that is commonly supplemented
and a decreased number of osteoclasts (bone resorption
to the diets of dogs and, less commonly, to the diets of
cells) in the dogs receiving calcium supplementation.
cats. The feason most often cited for calcium supple
This group also showed a higher incidence and severity
mentation felates to its essential role in nofmal skeletal
of cartilage ifregularities associated with osteochondro-
 growth and development. Supplements such as dical-
sis at the distal and proximal humeral cartilages. Clini-
cium phosphate and bone meal are aclded to a growing
cally,
, calcium-supplemented dogs exhibited retained
 dog's diet during growth spurts or when problems such
cartilage cones, severe lateral deviation of the feet, and
as hyperextension of the carpus or sinking of the meta-
radius curvus syndrome.
carpophalangeal joints occur. Some breeders encouf-
When plasma calcium levels incfease, the hormone
uualddns Ajaunoi on siaanq Addnd iau jo le se
calcitonin is secreted from the thyroid gland. Calcitonin
their puppy's diet with calcium during
the entire first
functions to lower plasma calcium to normal levels; it
year of life as a prophylactic measure. Some believe
exerts this effect by decreasing the activity of osteoclasts,
that calcium supplementation is not only necessary for
which leads to decreased bone fesorption and slowed
proper bone development but that it also prevents the
 cartilage maturation.19,35 This is a normal hormonal
498 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 response to both eating and calcium infux, and calcito-
leading to hypophosphatemia. This study also found
nin functions along with parathyroid hormone (PTH)
that normalizing dietary calcium levels after 17 weeks
to closely regulate calcium homeostasis. However, the
of age corrected some skeletal abnormalities, but joint
 chronic elevation of calcitonin suppresses bone resorp-
changes that were consistent with osteochondrosis still
tion for an abnormal period of time, resulting in a grad-
developed in the puppies that were fed the diet contain-
ual thickening and incfeased density of cortical bone.
ing high calcium without added phosphorus.
For example, when growing Beagles were supplemented
To further examine the effects of elevated calcium
with 2.3 g of calcium per day f
for 2 months, the thy-
when a hormal calcium to phosphorus fatio is main-
toid glands of supplemented 
 dogs contained signif-
Susuenuos siap pay aiam saiddnd aue iear pauiei
three levels of calcium (0.48%, 0.8%, and 2.7%).41
C cells and decreased proportions of thyroid follicles,
Each diet contained sufficient phosphorus to provide a
when compated with those of the control dogs.39 High
consistent calcium-to-phosphorus ratio of 1.2:1.0. To
control for other factors that can affect skeletal devel-
plasia, which would suggest the occurrence of chronic
opment, the
experimental diets had reduced caloric
hypercalcitoninism in these dogs. Additionally, electron 
density and
contained
26%
protein and 14% fat.
microscopy of the thyroid C cells of dogs fed excess
calories, protein, and calcium showed that these cells
weaning, and they were fed the experimental diets for
were feleasing larger amounts of calcitonin than were
18 months. F
Even when
balanced with phosphorus,
the C cells of dogs fed restricted diets. In growing dogs,
increasing dietary calcium had a rapid and direct effect
 these changes interfere with normal bone remodeling
on the amount of mineral deposited in maturing bones.
and development. The deposition of excessive subperi-
 Bone mineral content and bone density were positively
osteal bone that results may cause the clinical signs of
 correlated with dietary calcium and phosphorus begin-
HOD and Wobbler syndrome, and the chronic effects
 ning almost immediately after weaning and continuing
of calcitonin on cartilage maturation may result in the
until the dogs were 6 months old. Six of the 15 dogs
eventual detachment of the articular cartilage that is
that were fed the highest level of calcium (2.7%) showed
seen in osteochondrosis.
clinical signs of lameness during the frst 6 months of
A more recent study again with Great Danes, fed
the study, and three of these dogs showed clinical signs
the same diets described previously plus a third experi-
of HOD. After 6 months, the bone density differences
mental diet that contained additional phosphorus 
to
seen between the high-, medium-, and low-calcium
Aq suanedde nou aram pue pausuup Alenpeis sdnais
pies in this study were fed the high calcium diets dur-
the time that the dogs were 12 months old (Table 37-1).
ing the period of most rapid growth, between 6 and
Similar to the results of Schoenmakers et al.,40 dogs
17 weeks of age. At 17 weeks, all of the puppies were
fed high amounts of calcium that were balanced with
switched to the control diet, which contained normal
calcium and phosphorus levels (1.04% and 0.82%,
respectively). Puppies fed the high calcium-only diet
TABLE 37-1 BONE MINERAL CONTENT
developed
hypercalcemia  and  hypophosphatemia
OF GREAT DANES FED THREE
that persisted throughout the experimental diet feed-
DIFFERENT LEVELS OF DIETARY
ing period. Puppies fed the food containing elevated
CALCIUM
calcium and phosphorus had normal serum calcium
Low
MODERATE
HIGH
values during this period and slightly lowered plasma
AGE
CALCIUM
CALCIUM
CALCIUM
phosphorus levels. Although both groups of puppies
(MONTHS)
(G)
(G)
(④)
that were fed excessive calcium showed skeletal distur-
2
77.55b
83.27b
110.38a
bances during the feeding period, changes were more
6
905.06b
1066.63
1201.87c
severe in puppies fed excessive calcium without phos-
12
1768.64b
1916.68ab
2072.70a
phorus. This difference was attributed to the hyper-
14
2031.21
2069.72
2132.20
calcemia and subsequent reduction in PTH secretion,
bs, Values within a ow with diferent superscrips differ (P<0.05).
Nutrition and Mobility499
phosphorus did not develop hypercalcemia. Conversely,
turnover and remodeling of the skeleton. As dogs age
dlogs fed the highest calcium diet had low total and ion-
and reach maturity, they appear to be able to adapt to
ized serum calcium values when they were between 4 and
 rd a  a s n 
 7 months of age. This decrease was not observed in dogs
is absorbed. Because young dogs have redluced ability to
fed the low- and medium-level calcium diets. It is likely
 fegulate calcium absorption and also have rapidlly devel-
that these values afe a fesult of increased deposition of
circulating calcium into developing bone, possibly in
ceptible to the adverse effects of high dietary calcium.
response to chronically increased calcitonin levels. The
The large and giant breeds of dogs are especially
normalization of bone composition between the three
susceptible to the pathological effects of excess calcium
 groups afer 6 months of age may refect the natural
 consumption, presumably because of their rapid growth
maturation of the dogs' regulatory mechanisms that
 fate, heavier weights, and larger overall size.29 However,
control calcium absorption and excretion (see below).
while studies with Great Danes have consistently shown
 The infuence that excess calcium intake has upon
a detrimental response to calcium excess, felatively few
skeletal development in growing dogs appears to be due,
10u pe 'pains uaaq ay saag iue no sie rao
at least in paft , to the inability of young dogs to regulate
all large-breed dogs that are fed foods containing high
calcium and absorption and excretion. Dietaty calcium
levels of calcium develop skeletal abnormalities.46 For
is absorbed across the intestinal epithelium through
example, studies of a large cross-breed dog called the
either active tfansport or passive diffusion. The active
 Foxhound-Boxer-Ingelheim Labrador (FBI) reported
transport mechanism is saturable, is carrier mediated, and
that FBIs fed excessive calcium during growth had lower
depends on the animal's vitamin D status. The second
 calcium retention when compared with Beagle puppies
mechanism is a honsaturable, diffusional transfer that
fed the same diet, and the FBIs showed no indications of
is directly dependent on the concentration of available
skeletal disease.47 Conversely, subclinical skeletal abnor-
calcium in the intestinal lumen. Passive diffusion is the
 malities have been reported in some smaller breeds fed
predominant pathway for calcium absorption in heo-
excess calcium during growth, such as Beagles, but not
nates and young animals.42 As an animal matures, active
in others, such as Miniature Poodles.48,49 These results
ttansport of calcium becomes more prominent and cal-
 suggest that dog breeds may differ in their degree of sus-
cium absorption becomes more tightly controlled. For
ceptibility to the detrimental effects of calcium excess
 example, puppies of weaning age absorb at least 50%
 on skeletal development. Factors that may be important
of dietary calcium, regardless of the quantity that is
include genetic infuences on a dog's structure and con-
formation, body composition, growth rate, and possibly
calcium metabolism and homeostatic mechanisms.
90%, depending on the composition of the food, the
calcium content of the diet, and the physiological state
of the animal.44
Dietary Calcium Recommendations
For example, a study with growing dogs (Great
(Large and Giant Breeds)
Danes) reported that 45% of dietary calcium was
It appears that the mechanisms of calcium homeostasis
absorbed when a hormal level of calcium was fed
that prevent puppies from absorbing excess amounts of
-ad s s'([a] u A sa a jo 1')
calcium are not fully functional prior to 6 months of
age increased to 80% when the level of calcium was
age. Therefore the safety margins for optimal calcium
decreased to 0.55%. Conversely, when the calcium level
 and phosphorus intake early in life are relatively narrow,
was increased to 3.3%, 45% of the calcium was still
especially for large- and giant-breed dogs. The food that
absorbedl. As a result, calcium balance was significantly
is fed to puppies from weaning and throughout growth
more positive in the dogs fed a high level of the mineral
should contain adequate
e but not excessive calcium
when compared with the balance in the dogs that were
A calcium level slightly lower than 1% appears to be
fed either normal or low concentrations. The mineral
beneficial for large-breed puppies. While 0.4% is to0
content of cortical and cancellous bone was greater in
low, a level of 0.8% is optimal. Because changes in
the high-calcium dogs, and there was decreased bone
 mineral composition in response to dietary calcium are
500 Canine and Feline Nutrition
present as eafly as 2 months of age, and skeletal prob-
joint location. The least severe grade (1) occurs when the
lems can be present by 5 to 6 months, the large-breed
patella slips from its normal location slightly or rarely,
growth dier should be introduced at weaning.
and the most severe grade (4) occurs when there is com-
Some breeders continue to suggest feeding an adult
plete and permanent luxation of the patella from the
maintenance rather than a commercial puppy food to
trochlear sulcus. The cause of congenital medial patel.
large- and giant-breed puppies. However, because some
lar luxation is unknown; however, it presumably has a
maintenance diets ate substantially lowet in energy den-
genetic component because it occurs more frequently in
sity than growth diets, the dog must be fed a higher vol-
certain familial lines of purebred dogs
ume of the maintenance diet to meet its energy needs.
If the calcium level in the adlult diet is similar to that
in the puppy foed (e.g, 1.1% or more), then the total
Legg-Calvé-Perthes Disease
calcium the puppy consumes when fed the maintenance
Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease (LCPD) is a disorder that
diet will actually be greater. 50 Likewise, if a growing dog
 occurs most frequently in small and miniature breeds
is fed an appropriate amount of a high-quality pet food
of dogs. The syndrome is characterized by the interrup-
formulated for growth, supplementation with calcium
tion of the blood supply to the femoral epiphysis and
is unnecessary and contraindicated. If a pet owner is 
eventual death of the osteocytes in the affected area.
feeding the pet a food that appears to contain inade-
While the body attempts to repair the lesions, portions
quate or unavailable levels of calcium, switching the dog
 of the femoral head may collapse, causing articular suf-
to a high-quality commercial diet is safer than attempt-
face incongruities and OA. Although the etiology is
ing to correct the imbalance in the poor diet through
unknown, factors such as genetics, cytotoxic factors, fat
supplementation.
embolization of the epiphyseal vessels, and decreased
epiphyseal blood fow secondary to increased intraar-
ticular pressure may contribute to the development
Foods that are fed to puppies from weaning and
ofLCPD.
throughout growth should contain adequate but not
  ro in doa a 
excessive calciur. A calcium level slightly lower thar
signs typically develop when dogs are between 4 and
11 months of age. Pain and lameness develop, along
optimal. An aduit maintenance food should not be fed
with eventual pelvic muscle atrophy. Many affected
because puppies may still be at risk of consuming too
 dogs are painful on palpation and manipulation of the
much caicium. Likewise, suppiementation with caicium
hip joint and crepitation may be noted. Radliographs are
is unnecessary and contraindicated.
the best way to confrm a diagnosis of LCPD.
Cranial Cruciate Ligament Rupture
CONGENITALAND MEDICAL
MOBILITY DISORDERS
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture is one of the most
frequently observed injuries in the dog and is also occa-
sionally seen in the cat. The ligament may be partially
Congenital Medial Patellar Luxation
 of completely ruptured. Meniscal damage may or may
Congenital medial patellar luxation is an orthopedic
 not occur with cruciate rupture. In all cases, affected
condition characterized by hypermobile patellas. It can
animals can develop degenerative joint changes within
affect dogs (both large and small breeds) and cats, and
a few weeks of the initial injury, and severe OA changes
occurs unilaterally or bilaterally. The Orthopedlic Foun-
i isanund suo mae um uas aq ue m
dation for Animals (OFA) reports an incidence rate
any dog may rupture the cruciate, this injury is com-
of more than 40% in Pomeranians and about 25% in
monly seen in middle-aged and inactive dogs that are
Cocker Spaniels. Patellar luxation is classified into four
 overweight. Active, athletic animals also can rupture the
grades, depending on the degree to which the patella
cfuciate, and usually this occurs during an athletic activ-
slips from its seat in the trochlear sulcus to a medial
ity that causes overextension of the joint. Clinical signs
Nutrition and Mobility  501
include non-weight-bearing lameness that may par-
tially resolve over time. However, OA changes develop
OSTEOARTHRITIS-
rapidly with this injury, leading to chronic lameness and
A COLLECTIVE SYNDROME
impaired mebility.
Regardless of the primary cause of lameness or altered
mobility (developmental, metabolic, genetic, or trau-
Infectious Arthritis
matic), the usual end fesult involves OA as the ani-
Infectious arthritis is an arthritic disorder that results
mal ages. OA (also called degenerative joint disease) is
from the introduction of an infectious agent to one
a chronic, progressive disease characterized by articular
of more joints. There are numerous underlying causes
cartilage destruction, thickening of subchondral bone
of infectious arthritis, but all result in the invasion of
and osteophyte formation. In some, but not all, cases,
infectious agents into one or more joint capsules. The
infammation of the synovial membrane and joint effu-
joint infammation that occurs may be mild or severe
sion develops. The incidence of OA has been estimated
and can lead to necrosis of the synovial membrane in
to be as high as 20% in dogs more than 1 year of age,
the joint and production of a fbrinopurulent exudate.
Joint motion is eventually reduced and either fbrous of
older.52,53 Clinical signs vary from mild pain, with no
bony ankylosis may be a fnal outcome of uncontrolled
changes in mobility, to severe pain and functional dis-
infectious arthritic. Clinical signs include lameness and
ability. Affected animals develop lameness, joint heat cf
pain in one of more joints, usually associated with joint
swelling, pain and stiffness following exercise, decreased
effusion or swelling. When systemic infection is present,
fange of motion, and muscle atrophy.
the animal may also show additional signs of depres-
sion, fever, anorexia, and lymphadenopathy. Chronic
Understanding the Articular
cases lead to severe OA or bony ankylosis.
Surface of Joints and OA
Development
Rheumatoid Arthritis
The skeleton is an important structural component
Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic, progressive, immune-
of the body, keeping all the organs safe and organized
as well as providing a means for the animal to move
age or senior dogs and small breeds are most often
Se ise sauoq uaamaq surot au aadoid uonsuny pu 
affected. Initially clinical signs include joint pain and
shock absorbers, protecting the surface of the bones and
effusion, shifting leg
lameness, fevef, ahofexia, and
allowing fexibility and range of motion. Cells lining the
depression. As the disease progresses, there may be crep-
joint capsule produce the synovial fuid. Synovial fuid
itation upon palpation of affected joints and increased
lubricates the articular surfaces of the joints, prevents
joint laxity. Similar to human patients, some dogs
contact of the surfaces, supplies nutrients to the cells
develop luxation or angular deformities of the areas
of the articular cartilage, and removes any waste prod-
affecting the bones. Although the etiology of rheuma
ucts produced within the joint. The presence of synovial
toid arthritis is not completely understood, it appears to
Auid within joints contributes to an almost fiction-free,
be immunologic in nature. Immunoglobulin G (IgG),
wear-resistant articulating surface that allows bones to
IgM, and IgA antibodies (rheumatoid factors) are pro-
function together without damage.
 duced and form immune complexes with altered IgG.
Proteoglycan and collagen are two extracellulat
This leads to joint infammation with intraarticular and
components, found within the articular cartilage, that
synovial membrane infltration by plasma cells, lym-
contribute to health of the joint's articulating surface. Pro-
phocytes, and polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs)
teoglycan is a large molecule composed of multiple gly.
The result is cartilage and subchondral bone destruction
cosaminoglycan (GAG) chains that include hyaluranan,
by enzymatic activity combined with natural weight-
chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, heparin sulfate,
bearing forces. The supporting structures in the joint
and keratin sulfate. Collagen is a stfuctural protein com-
then break down and the joint can luxate or subluxate.
posed of a triple helix of polypeptide alpha-chains. These
502 Canine and Feline Nutrition
two joint components wofk together; pfoteoglycans pfo-
the joint, the articular cartilage undergoes progressive
vide a high hydration capacity to the cartilage and col-
degeneration. Initially there is increased synthesis of the
lagen fibers that contribute to tensile strength.
extracellular matrix. However, the new proteoglycans
Mature articular cartilage is organized in several dis-
ate not of the same composition as those found in non-
tinct zones. Superficial or articular surface includes chon-
 r s  e e   s
OA joints contain lower levels of keratin sulfate, and the
proteoglycans. Deeper cartilage layers (i.e., closer to the
ratio of chondroitin-4-sulfate to chondroitin-6-sulfate
Aoioid aiour pue uaselos ssal jo pasoduos ae (auog
is increasedl.59,60 Proteoglycan and collagen breakdown
cans. As an animal ages, normal physiological changes
(degeneration) also occurs, as a fesult of increased activ-
include a decrease in collagen and GAG content (espe-
ity of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) and other
cially chondroitin sulfate) and a reduction in joint hydra-
tion.54,5s The size of the proteoglycans also decreases.
ponents stimulate chondrocytes and synovial cells to
These age-related changes result in less capability to with-
release arachidonic acid metabolites such as prostaglan-
stand the forces associated with normal joint function.56
din E2 (PGE2), leukotriene B4, and thromboxane, caus-
In adldition to the effects of aging, trauma and injury
 ing increased infammation of the joint capsule lining.62
[  s   d s 
Over time, chondrocyte necrosis becomes evidlent,
the synthesis of the extracellular matrix decreases,
chondral fractures, and osteochondral fractures.57 Micro-
and degradative activity continues. The joint's colla-
damage can be caused by repetitive blunt trauma to the
joint or a single traumatic impact. It is characterized by
teoglycans are removed from the extracellular matrix,
a loss of matrix components (primarily proteoglycans)
which decreases the water content of the cartilage, and
without chondrocyte damage. The chondrocytes may be
thus the fexibility and resilience of the joint becomes
capable of repairing the damage by restoring lost proteo-
compromised. Chondrocytes are gradually exposed to
glycans and matrix components, if the tfaumatic event is
 more damage and trauma from the normal mechani-
acute. If blunt trauma continues (for example, when a dog
cal stresses of walking and movement, accelerating the
auosaq Aeu sheuep suof (nuro! painjui ue uo sdunj
osteoarthritic process.61
irreversible.57 Chondral fractures occur when there is
The goal in treating mobility and lameness disorders
superficial damage to the articular surface without dam-
 is to reduce pain and infammation, prevent or slow
age to the subchondral plate. Chondrocytes in the injured
further degeneration of affected joints, and support of
area proliferate and synthesize more extracellular matrix
restore function. Surgical treatment is often the primary
protein. However, because chondrocytes cannot migrate
recommendation for some types of mobility disorder,
ffom one afea to another, complete fepair does not occur
such as cranial cruciate ligament rupture or with certain
if damage is extensive.58 Osteochondral fracture is a full-
cases of hip dysplasia. For others, medlical management
thickness dlefect, involving damage through the carti-
provides the primary or adljunctive therapy and is used
lage to the bone, leadling to severe chondrocyte loss and
to alleviate pain and decrease long-term negative effects
bone mafrow cell involvement. Because vascular tissue is
 of OA. Medical management of OA is an integrative
involved, this type of injury invokes a full infammatory
approach that includes nutritional management and
response. Fibroblasts dlifferentiate into chondrocytes in
weight control, as well as pharmacological and exercise.
an attempt to fepair the tissue, fesulting in stfucturally
activity management.
abnormal articulat cartilage.5758 Repaired tissue will have
lower proteoglycan content and altered forms of collagen.
The long-term end result is compromised joint function.
NutritionalManagement
Dogs with OA also have abnormalities with chon-
Because of potential side effects from nonsteroidal anti-
drocyte function. Normally chondrocytes produce pro-
infammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and glucocorticoids,
teoglycans, collagen, fibronectin, and other components
 many pet owners and veterinarians have been looking
to maintain joint integrity and health. When lameness,
to alternative or adjunctive methods for supporting
disease, of chronic injury disrupts the homeostasis of
joint health. Including nutrients that help to protect
Nutrition and Mobility  503
joint health in a pet's diet can lower the need for the use
increased availability of chondroitin sulfate and hyal-
of NSAIDs. Additionally certain supplements may have
uronic acid precursors. An injectable, partially synthetic
beneficial effects on pets with OA, reduce the amount
polysulfated GAG product has been approved by the
of NSAIDs heeded, and have positive effects on joint
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the use in
repair and health.63
dogs and horses suffering from noninfectious degenera-
tive joint disease. In addition, oral nutraceuticals of chon-
FATTY ACID SUPPLEMENIATION
Asdis-
droitin sulfate are available. These products may help to
cussed in other chapters, certain eicosanoids that are
reduce infammation and pain, normalize synovial fuid
produced from omega-6 fatty acids (such as PGEz,
-eai Aq seres suio! jo iea soid pue isos
leukotriene B4, leukotriene C4, and thromboxane A2)
ing degradation caused by increased activity of joint pro-
ate local proinfammatory chemical mediators. Con-
teolytic enzymes. For example, human subjects with OA
versely, eicosanoids that are produced from omega-3
in one or both knee joints showed improved mobility
fatty acids, in particular eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA),
and a reduction in clinical signs when supplemented with
are less infammatory. Eicosanoid production in tis-
sues can be altered by adljusting the fatty acids in the
diet. For example, feeding dogs foods that contained
GLUCOSAMINE
Glucosamine
ecompounds afe
increased omega-3 fatty acids and an adjusted fatio
amino sugars produced from glucose and the amino
of 5:1 to 10:1 led to increased production of omega-3
acid glutamine and are a primary component of the
(less-infammatory) eicosanoidls.64
GAGs and proteoglycans
s found in the extracellular
There is evidence in human subjects that providing
matrix of joints. As nutraceuticals, these compounds
omega-3 fatty acids in the diet can ameliorate clini-
may function to protect and fegenerate connective
cal signs of joint infammation. For example, patients
tissue and cartilage in joints affected with OA. For
with rheumatoid arthritis whose diet was supplemented
example, in vitro studies with chondrocytes feport that
with fsh oil and evening primrose oil experienced
glucosamine has a stimulatory effect on cells by increas-
teduced infammation and decreased pain medication
dosages.65-67 In dogs, there is evidence that increasing
Both glucosamine sulfate and glucosamine HCl (a salt
omega-3 fatty acids in the diet of dogs with ruptured
 of D-glucosamine) have joint activity, but most studies
cranial cruciate ligaments may beneft joint health by
have focused on glucosamine sulfate because the body
altering synovial Huid MMP levels.68 Additional studies
eventually
converts D-glucosamine into glucosamine
ate needed to examine the long-term benefits of omega-3
sulfate. F
For example, a study with Beagles feported
fatty acids for pets with OA and their potential to allow
that supplementation with a combination of glucos-
reduced dosages of antinfammatory medications.
amine, chondroitin sulfate, and ascorbate increased
biosynthetic activity in cartilage segments by 50% and
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS
As discussed previ-
dlecreased proteolytic degradation by 59%.48
Glucosamine products afe commeonly used for many
that form cross-linkages with collagen within cartilage
joint, cartilage, or disc-degenerating conditions such as
and other connective tissues. The GAGs that have fel-
hip dysplasia, spondylosis, OA, osteochondritis, and
evance to connective tissue and joints ate chondroitin-4-
other nonspecifc joint injuries or ailments. The benefits
sulfate, chondroitin-6-sulfate, keratin sulfate, dermatan
appear to be protective and restorative, which leadls to
sulfate, and nonsulfated hyaluronic acid. Hyaluronic
less discomfort and infammation, thus promoting more
acid promotes healthy synovial Auid viscosity and lubri-
mobility. Many veterinary practitioners fecommend
cates the synovial membranes in joints. Along with the
nutraceuticals with a combination of both glucosamine
other GAGs, hyaluronic acid provides elasticity, Hexibil-
and chondroitin sulfate. To date, there have not been
'suouan pue seres reinnie on ysuans asuan pue 
 any studies demonstrating safety concerns about these
The GAGs have antinfammatory effects on connective
 products. However, one study of joint effects in Beagles
tissues and act directly in the structural repair of joint
-jns uoipuou unos su oogt yim panuuaddns 
tissue. Additionally, they provide chondrocytes with
Aep iad apojuoopiy auuesosnls su oooz pue anj
504 Canine and Feline Nutrition
reported statistically significant, but clinically unimport-
120
ant, changes in hemoglobin, hematocrit, white blood cell
b
100
count, segmented neutrophils, and red blood cel count
following 30 days of supplementation.7l No changes
80
Body weight (Ib)
were noted in any bleeding or clotting parameters.
60
40
VASscore(trotting)
20
Chondroitin suljfate and glucosamine may help to
reduce infammation and pain, normalize synovialfuid
Baseline
Midpoint
Final
Values between time points with different
affected by osteoarthritis. Long-term benefts appear to
letters differ significantly P<0.05
be protective and restorative, contributing to reduced
discomfort and infammation and promoting increased
Figure 37-3 Change in body weight and Visual Analog Scale
(VAS) lanmeness ratings during weight loss in dogs.
mobility. Many veterinary practitioners recommend
(From lmpellieri JA, Tetrick MA, Muir P: Effect of weight reduction on
nutraceuticais that inciude a combination ofglucos
dinical signs of lameness in dogs with hip osteoarthritis,/ Asr Vet Med Assoc
amine and chondroitin sulfate.
216:1089-1091, 2000.)
and nutritional joint supplements afe used, as needed,
Weight Control for Mobility
to control pain and discomfort. A substantial number
Management
of owners report that their dog's mobility and comfort
Regardless of the underlying initial cause of OA, dis-
improved enough with weight loss and moderate exer-
 ease progression will be worsened in the presence of an
cise to prevent the need for a surgical intervention.77
overweight of obese condition (see Chapter 28 for a
Guidelines for weight-loss and weight-control programs
complete discussion of obesity). For example, human
for pets with OA are the same as those for other pets
subjects who are moderately or severely overweight are
and are discussed in detail in Chapter 28 (pp. 326-335).
3.5 times more likely to develop OA than those who afe
at their idleal weight. Moreover, moderate weight loss
can significantly decrease risk of OA development in
Osteoarthritis (OA) progression and symptoms are
human patients.72,73 Another study with human sub-
worsened wher pets are overweight or obese. Reducing
jects reported that weight loss led to complete relief of
body weight can delay the onset ofOA and in affected
pain in one or more joints in 90% of affected patients.74
animais helps to reduce pain, increase mobility, and
A study with dogs examined the effects on weight loss
allowdecreaseddependency on antinfammatory
in dogs with CHD. Dogs that achieved an 11% to
medications.
18% body-weight feduction were significantly less
lame when lameness scores following weight loss were
compared with scores at the start of the study period
Pharmacological Management
(Figure 37-3).75 Another study reported that dogs fed
NSAIDs or corticosteroids are ffequently included in
a restricted diet throughout life had significantly less
treatment protocols for traumatic or degenerative joint
severity of OA lesions in the shoulder as adults when
conditions. Both function by decreasing the production
 compared with dogs that were fed ad libitum.76
of proinfammatory arachidonic acid metabolites that
Because of the relationship between overweight
afe released during cellular membrane damage.78 Both
conditions and OA, some veterinary orthopedic spe-
of these drug categories directly inhibit cyclooxygenase
cialists no longer recommend total hip replacements
 enzymes that produce eicosanoids such as leukotrienes,
 in obese dogs.77 Instead overweight dogs are started on
thromboxanes, prostaglandins, and prostacyclins.79
a weight-reduction program with the goal of reducing
Of the two categories, most veterinary practitioners
today include NSAIDs as part of their treatment proto-
weight-loss program, antinfammatory medications
ue aee ae  so a a jo aaq so
Nutrition and Mobility 505
because of fewer long-term side effects when compated
be forced into an exercise program that is beyond their
with corticosteroids. Different NSAIDs block vatious
capabilities. Two aspects should be considered when
parts of the afachidonic cascade, and, as a fesult, one
determining the type of exercise program to initi-
product may work better than another for different
ate with the animal. First, the type of exercise should
 patients or different types of mobility disorders. This
be considered. Exercise that involves low-impact of
allows veterinatians to select a specific drug that may
non-weight-bearing activities is recommended for OA
work best with a particular patient. Generally, although
 patients. In humans, low-impact activities such as walk-
NSAIDs have fewer detrimental long-term effects than
ing or bicycling have been considered benefcial.81,83
corticosteroids, these drugs may still be associated with
When dealing with dogs, walking (on a leash or on a
vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, lethargy, and gastroduo-
 controlled animal treadmill) is considered a low-impact
denal ulceration.
activity, while swimming is considered an ideal non-
weight-bearing exercise. Both these activities feduce
load on OA joints while maintaining, and in some
Exercise/Activity Management
cases building, muscle mass and strength, resulting in
Historically, humans diagnosed with OA were advised
less discomfort and pressure on damaged cartilage.
aelied iou on pue Aiseul jo a Areiuapas e aail 0
Although most clients may not have access to a swim-
in physical exercise. However, with a quieter lifestyle,
ming area for their pets, there are many animal physical
muscle atrophy and overall loss of muscle mass occurs,
therapy facilities available now across the United States
which can eventually increase stress on joints. It has
that provide low-impact physical programs for animals.
been determined in humans with OA that moderate
These facilities offer a controlled, professionally super-
exercise is important for maintaining muscle strength,
vised environment where underwater treadmills or small
stamina, and range of motion within joints. Sustain-
pools are used. Dogs initially may swim for only 1 to
ing some type of active lifestyle can also allow reduced
3 minutes for 3 of mofe days a week, gradually incfeas
have demonstrated similar results.82 Today, exercise and
pet owners to understand that high-impact activities
Adeiau jo noadse juejodui ue si juauaeueu Ajane
with companion animals with OA.
-  o  s ss  sn n
Each animal's past activity history should be assessed
ing more infammation, damage, and subsequently pain
because those having an inactive lifestyle should not
(Figure 37-4).
Figure 37-4Dog exercising on an underwater treadmill
(From Millis DL: Physical therapy For dogs with joint disease. In Clirical perspectives or caine joirt disease, Proc NAVC, 2001, p 24.)
506 Canine and Feline Nutrition
 A second aspect of designing an exercise program is
Regular exercise is an important component of treat
the length of time to commit to the activity. Animals
ment for pets with osteoarthritis (OA). Recommended
with a sedentary lifestyle should initially limit exercise
activities include reguiar waiking, swimming, or water
to a short 5- to 15-minute walk, several days a week.
therapy High-impact activities such as trotting, run-
 If the owner notices their pet has more joint stiffness
ning,jumping,and climbing over rough terrains will
after starting an exercise program, the duration of each
overstress joints with OA, so these activities shouid be
session should be feduced. As the pet develops mofe
limited or avoided.
muscle mass, strength, and stamina, the duration of
each wal k or bout of exercise can be gradually increased.
Animals that already have a fully active lifestyle such as
Determining response to nutritional and pharma-
hunting, sled-racing, or agility dogs should have their 
       s 
type of exercise program changed to a low-impact activ-
lenging, because most studies rely on the pet owners
ity such as walking, but the time spent doing so may be
 perception of how well their dogs are responding.
more substantial to keep the muscle mass and stfength
A more analytical approach to determine results may
they already have.
be an option in the future. For example, a recent study
found that assessing multiple gene products from car-
E papiaoid vo yim ssop uoy saldues Asdonq soe
direct measure of existing chondrocyte metabolisn
and may be useful as a measure of cartilage health and
response to OA treatments.84
References
1. Johnson JA, Austin C, Breuer GJ: lncidence of canine appendicular musculoskeletal disorders in 16 veterinary teaching hospitals
from 1980-1989, J Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 7:56-69, 1994.
2. Richardson DC, Zentek J: Nutrition and osteochondrosis, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28:115-135, 1998.
3. Smith GK, LaFond E, Heyman SJ: Biomechanical characterization of passive laxity of the hip joint in dogs, Am J Vet Res 58:
1078-1082, 1997.
4. Richardson DC, Toll PWL: Relationship of nutrition to developmental skeletal disease in young dogs, Vt Clix Nutr 4:6-13, 1997.
5. Orthopedic Foundation for Animals (OFA): Website. http://www. offa.org. Accessed September 28, 2009.
6. Paster ER, LaFond E, Biery DN, and others: Estimates of prevalence of hip dysplasia in Golden Retrievers and Rotweilers and the
infuence of bias on published prevalence figures, J Am Vet Med Asoc 226:387-392, 2005.
7. Kasstrom H: Nutrition, weight gain and development of hip dysplasia, Acta Radiot 334(Suppl):135-179, 1975.
8. Ythehus B, Carlson CS, Ekman S: Etiology and pathogenesis of osteochondrosis, Vet Patho! 44:429-448, 2007
9. Slater MR, Scarlett JM, Kaderly RE, and others: Breed, gender, and age risk factors for canine osteochondritis dissecans, / Vet Comp
Orthop 7rawma 4:100-106, 1991.
10. Slater MR, Scarlett JM, Donoughue S, and others: Diet and exercise as potential risk factors for osteochondritis dissecans in dogs,
Am / Vet Res 53:2119-2124, 1992.
11. Coopman F, Verhoeven C, SaundersJ, and others: Prevalence ofhip dysplasia, elbow dysplasia and humeral head osteochondrosis
in dog breeds in Belgium, Vet Rec 163:654-658, 2008.
12. LaFond E, Breur GJ, Austin CC: Breed susceptibility for developmental orthopedic diseases in dogs, / Am Anim Hosp Assoc
38:467477, 2002.
Calve-Perthes disease and hypertrophic osteodystrophy, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 25:282-293, 2003.
Nutrition and Mobility  507
14. Van Hagen MAE, Ducro BJ, van de Broek J, Knol BW: lncidence, risk factors, and heritability estimates ofhind limb lameness
caused by hip dysplasia in a birth cohort of Boxers, Am J Vet Res 66:307-312, 2005.
population, J Anim Breed Gen 120:150-161, 2003.
saanay ropeget u eisedsp dryfo suis rydeaoper roy saauered oaus fo uoeusg O psa 'H uueweh f rajug 91
Berliner Munchen Tier Wochen 121:359-364, 2008.
17. Dluzniewska KA, Obtulowicz A, Koltek K: On the relationship between diet, rate of growth and skeletal deformities in school
children, Folia Med Craco 7:115-126, 1965.
18. Kealy RD, Olsson SE, Monti KL, and others: Efects of limited food consumption on the incidence of hip dysplasia in growing
dogs, J Am Vet Med Asoc 201:857-863, 1992
19. Hedhammer A, Wu F, Krook L, and others: Overnutrition and skeletal disease—an experimental study in growing Great Dane
dogs, Cornell Vet 64(Suppl 5):1-159, 1974.
20. Kasstrom H: Nutrition, weight gain and development of hip dysplasia, Acta Radiol 334(Suppl):135-179, 1975.
21. Lust G, Geary JC, Sheffy BE: Development of hip dysplasia in dogs, Am J Vet Res 34:87-91, 1973.
22. Lust G, Rendano VT, Summers BA: Canine hip dysplasia: concepts and diagnosis, J Vet Med Assor 187:638-640, 1985.
 23. Kealy RD, Lawler DF, Ballam JM, and others: Five-year longitudinal study on limited food consumption and development of
osteoarthritis in coxofemoral joints of dogs, / Am Vet Med Asoc 210:222-225, 1997.
24. Kealy RD, Lawler DF, Ballam JM: Evaluation of the effect of limited food consumption on radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis
in dogs, / Am Vet Med Asoc 217:1678-1680, 2000
25. Smith GK, Paster ER, Powers MY, and others: Lifelong diet restriction and radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis of the hip joint
in dogs, / Am Vet Med Asoc 229:690-693, 2006
26. Runge J], Biery DN, Lawler DF, and others: The effects of lifetime food restriction on the development of osteoarthritis in the
canine shoulder, Vet Surg 37:102-107, 2008.
 27. Olsson SE, Reiland S: The nature of osteochondrosis in animals, Acta Radiol Scand 358(Suppl):299-306, 1978.
 28. Trangerud C, Grondalen A, Indrebo A, and others: Alongitudinal study on growth and growth variables in dogs of four large breeds
raised in domestic environments, J Anim Sci 85:76-83, 2007.
29. Dammrich K: Relationship between nutrition and bone growth in large and giant dogs, / Nutr 121:S1 14-S121, 1991.
30. Crenshaw TD, Budde RQ, Lauten SD, and others: Nutritional efects on bone strength in the growing canine. In Reinhart GA,
Carey DP editors: Recent advances in canine and feline nutrition, lams mtrition symposium proceedings, vol 2,Wilmington,Ohio,
1998, Orange Frazer Press.
31. Nap RC, Hazewinkel HAW, Vorrhout G, and others: The infuence of the dietary protein content on growth in giant breed dogs,
JVet Comp Orthop Trauma 6:1-8, 1993.
32. Lepine AJ: Nutritional management of the large breed puppy. In Reinhart GA, Carey DR, editors: Recent advances in canine and
feline nutrition, lams nutrition symposium proceedings, vol 2, Wilmington, Ohio, 1998, Orange Frazer Press.
33. Blum JW,Zentek J,Meyer H: Unterscuchngen einer unterschiedlichen Energiveersorgung auf die Wachstumsintensitat und
Skelettentwicklung bei wachsenden Doggen, / Vet Med 39:568-574, 1992.
34. Association of American Feed Control Offcials (AAFCO): Pet food regulations. In AAFCO offcial pubication, Atlanta, 2008,
AAFCO
35. Hazewinkel HAW, Goedegebuure SA, Poulos PW, and others: Infuences of chronic calcium excess on the skeletal development of
growing Great Danes, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:377-391, 1985.
Wn ssaxa Surureauos nap e pay Aesuoys ssop Suno u supuy leaooydro Ah layumazeh vs anngaapao '9e
Vet Rathol23:594-605, 1986.
37. National Research Council (National Academy of Sciences): Nutrient requirements ofdogs, Washington, DC, 1974, National Academy
I'ress.
508 Canine and Feline Nutrition
38. National Research Council (National Academy of Sciences): Nutrient reguireents ofdogs, Washington, DC, 1985, National
Academy Press.
39. Stephens LC, Norrdin RW, Benjamin SA: Effects of calcium supplementation and sunlight exposure on growing Beagle dogs,
Am / Vet Res 466:2037-2042, 1985.
40. Schoenmakers l, Hazewinkel HAW, Voorhout G, and others: Effect of diets with different calcium and phosphorus contents on the
skeletal development and blood chemistry of growing Great Danes, Vet Rer 147:652-660, 2000.
41. Lauten SD, Cox NR, Brawner WR, and others: Infuence of dietary calcium and phosphorus content in a fixed ratio on growth anc
development in Great Danes, Am / Vet Res 63:1 036-1047, 2002.
42. Allen LH: Calcium bioavailability and absorption: a review, Am J Chin Nutr 35:783-808, 1982
43. Tryfonidou MA, Van den Broek J, van den Brom WE, Hazewinkel HAW: Intestinal calcium absorption in growing dogs is
infuenced by calcium intake and age but not by growth rate, / Nutr 132:3363-3368, 2002.
44. Hedhammer A, Krook L, Schrijver HF, and others: Calcium balance in the dog. ln Anderson RS, editor: Nutrition of the dog and
cat, Oxford, England, 1980, Pergamon Press.
45. Hazewinkel HAW, Brom WE, van den Klooster AT, and others: Calcium metabolism in Great Dane dogs fed diets with various
calcium and phosphorus levels, J Nutr 121:S99-S106, 1991.
46. Dobenecker B, Keinzle E, Koslin R, Matis U: Mal- and overnutrition in puppies with and without disorders of skeletal
development, J Anim Phys Anim Nutr 80:76-81, 1998.
47. Dobenecker B: Apparent calcium absorption in growing dogs of two different sizes, J Nutr 134:2151S-2153S, 2004.
48. Dobenecker B, Kasbeitzer N, Flinspach S, and others: Calcium-excess causes subclinical changes of bone growth in Beagles but not
in Foxhound-crossbred dogs, as measured in X-rays, J Anim Physiot Anim Nutr 90:394401, 2006.
49. Nap RC, Hazewinkel HAW, van den Brom Wl: 45Ca kinetics in growing Miniature Poodles challenged by four different dietary
levels of Ca, J Nutr 123:1826-1833, 1993
50. Kuhlman G, Boourge V: Nutrition of the large and giant breed dog with emphasis on skeletal development, Vet Clin Nutr 4:89-95,
1997.
51. Brinker WO, Piermattei DL, Flo GL: Handbook of small animal orthopedics and fracture treatment, Philadelphia, 1983, Saunders.
52. Johnston SA: Osteoarthritis: joint anatomy, physiology, and pathobiology, Vet Chin North Am Small Anim Pract 27:699-723, 1997.
53. Egenvall A, Bonnett BN, Olson P, Hadhammar S: Gender, age and breed pattern of diagnoses for veterinary care in insured dogs in
Sweden during 1996, Vet Rec 146:551-557, 2000.
54. Nakano T, Aherne FX, Thompson JR: Changes in swine knee articular cartilage during growth, Can J Anim Sci 59:167-179, 1979.
55. Venn MF: Variation of chemical composition with age in human femoral head cartilage, Anx Rheum Dis 37:168-174, 1978.
             
57. Frenkel SR, DiCesare PE: Degradation and repair of articular cartilage, Front Biosi 4:671-685, 1999.
58. Buckwalter JA, Rosenberg LC, Hunziker EB: Articular cartilage composition structure response to injury and methods of facilitating
repair. ln Articular cartitage and knee joint fiunction, Bristot-Myers/Zimmer orthopaedic symposium, New York, 1988, Raven Press,
pp 19-56.
59. Poole AR: An introduction to the pathophysiology of osteoarthritis, Front Biosci 4:662-670, 1999.
60. DijkgraafLC, De Bont LC, Boering C, Liem RS: The structure, biochemistry, and metabolism of osteoarthritis cartilage: a review
of the literature, J Oral Mexilofac Surg 53:1182-1192, 1995.
61. Malemud C], Goldberg VM: Future directions for research and treatment of osteoarthritis, Front Biosci 4:762-771, 1999.
62. Muir H: Cartilage structure and metabolism and basic changes in degenerative joint disease, Aust N ZJ Med 8:1-5, 1978.
63. Sanderson RO, Beata C, Flipo RM, and others: Systematic review of the management of canine osteoarthritis, Vet Rer 164:418-424,
2009
Nutrition and Mobility 509
64. Vaughn DM, Reinhart GA, Lauten DS, and others: Evaluation of effects of dietary n-6 to n-3 fatty acid ratios on leukotriene
B synthesis in dog skin and neutrophils, Vet Dermato! 5:163-173, 1994.
65. Belch JJF, Ansell D, Madhok R, and others: Effects of altering dietary essential fatty acids on requirements for non-steroidal anti
infammatory drugs in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a double blind placebo controlled study, Ann Rhewm Dis 47:96-104,
1988.
patients with mild rheumatoid arthritisa double blind placebo controlled study, Br J Rheumatol 32:982-989, 1993.
67. Geusens P, Wouters C, Nijs J, and others: Long-term effects of omega-3 fatty acid supplementation on active rheumatoid
arthritisa 12-month double blind, controlled study, Arthritis Rheum 37:824 829, 1994.
68. Hansen RA, Harris MA, Pulhar GE, and others: Fish oil decreases matrix metalloproteinases in knee synovia of dogs with
inHammatory joint disease, / Nutr Biochem 19:101-108, 2008.
69. Bourgeois P, Chales G, Dehais J, and others: Efficacy and tolerability of chondroitin sulfate 1200 mg/day vs chondroitin sulfate
3 x 400 mg/day vs placebo, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 6(Suppl A):25-30, 1998
70. Anderson MA: Oral chondroprotective agents. Part 1. Common compounds, Compendium 21:601-609, 1999.
71. McNamara PS, Barr SC, Erb HN: Hematological, hemostatic and biochemical effects in dogs receiving an oral chondroprotective
agent for thirty days, Am J Vet Res 57:1390-1394, 1996.
72. Felson DT, Zhang Y, Anthony JM, and others: Weight loss reduces the risk for symptomatic knee osteoarthritis in women. The
Framingham Study, Ann Intern Med 116:535-539, 1992.
73. Schrager M: Slim ming down reduces arthritis risk, Phys Sports Med 23:22, 1995.
74. McGoey BV, Beitel M, Saplys RJ: Effect of weight loss on musculoskeletal pain in the morbidly obese, J Bove Joint Surg 72-B:323,
1990.
75. lmpellizeri JA, Tetrick MA, Muir P: Effect of weight reduction on clinical signs of lameness in dogs with hip osteoarthritis, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 216:1089-1091, 2000.
76. Runge J, Beiry DN, Lawler DF, and others: The effects of lifetime food restriction on the development of osteoarthritis in the
canine shoulder, Vet Surg 37:102-107, 2008.
77. Millis DL: Physical therapy for dogs with joint disease. In Proc NAVC, 2001, pp 22-27.
78. Johnston SA, Fox SM: Mechanism of action of anti-infammatory medications used for the treatment of osteoarthritis, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 210:1486-1492, 1997.
 79. Hayek MG, Lepine AJ, Sunvold GD, Reinhart GA: Nutritional management of joint problems in dogs. In Proc Vet Orthoped Soc,
2000, pp 18-23.
80. Kovar PA, Allegrante JP, MacKenzie CR, and others: Supervised fitness walking in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee.
A randomized, controlled trial, Ann Intern Med 116:529-534, 1992.
81. Rogind H, Bibow-Neilsen B, Jensen B, and others: The effects of a physical training program on patients with osteoarthritis of the
knees, Arch Phys Med Rehabil 79: 1421-1427, 1998.
82. Otternes IC, Eskra JD, Bliven ML, and others: Exercise protects against articular cartilage degeneration in the hamster, Arthritis
Rhewm 41:2068-2076, 1998.
83. Mangione KK, McCully K, Cloviak A, and others: The effects of high-intensity and low-intensity cycle ergometry in older adults
with knee osteoarthritis, / Gerontot A Biot Sci Med Sci 54:184190, 1999.
84. Matyas JR, Huang D, Chung M, Adams ME: Regional quantification of cartilage type ll collagen and aggrecan messenger RNA in
joints with early experimental osteoarthritis, Arthritis Rheum 46: 1536-1543, 2002.
38
Nutrition and the Heart
The heart provides several basic functions in the body.
 Some of these conditions appear to have a hereditary
It provides a transport mechanism for oxygen and nutri-
component and are found more frequently in certain
ents to other organs and body systems. It also helps
breeds or lines of purebred dogs. Acquired heart disease
ttansport carbon dioxide and other metabolic wastes
is more common than congenital disease in dogs and
to excretory organs. Hormones and other enzymes afe
cats. However, companion animals rarely suffer fom
moved from one organ to another by the heart to pro-
atherosclerosis and coronary disease.2 The most com-
vidle for basic functions of the reproductive and thyroid
mon form of acquired heart disease in dogs is chronic
valvular disease. There are many dlifferent types of valvu-
lation, keeping the body at a consistent and ideal tem-
lar diseases; chronic mitral insufficiency,tficuspid insuf-
perature.
fciency, mitral stenosis, aortic insuffciency, pulmonic
There are several 1
fequirements for normal cardiac
insufficiency, and bacterial endocarditis are the most
function. First, there needs to be adaptable coronary
common forms that are diagnosed in dogs. Of these,
circulation. The vessels that supply oxygen and nutri-
chronic mitral insufficiency is the most common and
ents to the heart must be functional and capable of
is typically observed in middle- to older-age dogs. It
adapting to meet increased demands when needed.
also appears more often in certain breeds such as the
There also must be a fexible response by myocardial
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, Dachshund, Miniature
contractile cells so that when the animal needs addi-
and Toy Poodles, Chihuahuas, and many of the Tertier
tional cardiac output during stress or exercise, the cells
breeds.3 In chronic mitral insufficiency, there is retro-
of the heart can provide for a higher heart rate and
grade fow of blood from the left ventricle to the left
cardiac output. The valves of the heart must function
atrium during ventricular systole or contraction. This
normally and maintain healthy blood How. Finally,
results in reduced fow to the peripheral circulation,
normal peripheral vascular fesponse is needed 
to
 an increased backfow to the atrium, and blood volume
maintain normal blood pressure under a variety of
overload in the heart. Dogs with this heart problem
physiological states.
usually eventually develop CHF
When any of these functions is impaired, the heart
begins to undergo a state of imbalance, eventually
resulting in congestive heart failure (CHF). Clinically,
Acquired heart disease is more common than congeni
anirmals with heart disease may show signs of syncope,
tal heart disease in dogs and cats. However companion
coughing or respiratory difficulty, exercise intolerance,
and cyanosis. Additional signs include cardiac mur-
disease. Chronic mitral insuffciency is one of the most
murs, rhythm disturbances, cardiac enlargement, and/
common heart probiems in dogs and is seen in middie-
of excessively weak or strong arterial pulses.
to older-age dogs. it ocurs more often in Cavalier King
Charies Spanieis, Dachshunds, AMiniature and Toy Poo-
TYPE AND INCIDENCE
dles, Chihuahuas, and some Terrier breeds
Heart disease is one of the most commonly diagnosed
diseases of dogs in the United States and Europe.' In
Another common heart problem in dogs is dilated
dogs, heart disease can be either congenital or acquired.
cardiomyopathy (DCM). This disease typically occurs
Common congenital heart conditions include aortic
in dogs that ate midlle-aged to older; however, some
stenosis (AS), patent ductus afteriosis (PDA), ventric-
breeds have been reported to develop it early in life. For
ular septal defect (VSD), and pulmonic stenosis (PS).
example, Portuguese Water Dogs can develop DCM
511
512 Canine and Feline Nutrition
and show clinical signs of CHF as young as 2 to 3
1.6% of all cats referred to a veterinary hospital were
-aid snau e aq on seadde ose arau s'se jo suo
01 pais! sies isou yonouii zi' OH aey oi paiodai
 so rr-l e -e s u 
be at risk for this condition include domestic long- and
Wolfhoundls, Great Danes, Saint Bernards, Newfound-
short-haired cats, in purebred lines, Maine Coon cats
lands, Doberman Pinschers, and Boxers are breeds that
seem to have a heritable or familial tendency toward
the disease.13
all Dobermans and one third of Boxers afe estimated
Cats with HCM have a symmetrical or asymmetri-
to develop the disease in their lifetime.56 Although
cal hypertrophy of the left ventricular wall, papillary
they are not considered a large- or giant-breed dog.
muscles, and septum restricting the size of the left ven-
Cocker Spaniels also have a tendency to develop a form
tricular lumen. The myocardial cells are enlarged, and
of DCM that previously was considered only a feline
the left ventricular filling is impaired from reduced left
 cause of cardiomyopathy; DCM in Cocker Spaniels can
ventricular compliance. There often is a secondary left
be caused by a taurine deficiency.
atrial enlargement present. If there is atrial enlargement,
atthythmias may be more commonly detected. Cat
ized by cardiac chamber enlargement, arrhythmias, and
with HCM usually develop CHF and arterial throm-
diminished cardiac contractility. Eventually these dogs
boembolism (ATE) with ATE reportedlly developing in
show signs of CHF, if not managed properly. Clini-
up to 48% of affected cats.12,14.17 Clinically, cats with
cally, these dogs can show signs of weakness, collapse.
HCM demonstrated signs of weakness, labored breath-
lethargy, abdominal distention, tachycardia, tachypnea,
ing, lethargy, syncope, arrhythmias, and hindlimb pain
dyspnea, coughing, syncopy, weight loss, anorexia,
of paralysis if ATE was present. Cats with HCM have a
and sudden death. Two multibreed studies done on
 mean survival time of less than 2 years.14
 I re     s
being diagnosed with DCM at only 17.5% and 37.5%,
respectively, with the median survival times of only 27
The most common heart disease in catsis hypertro-
and 65 days, respectively.7,8
phic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Cats with HCM usually
develop congestive heart failure and approximately half
heart disease. However, in the late 1980s Pion et al.9
will develop arterial thromboembolism (ATE). Clini-
feported an association with DCM and taurine def-
cally,cats with HCM demonstrated signs of weakness,
ciency in cats. Fortunately, it was found that admin-
labored breathing,lethargy,syncope,arrhythmias,and
istration of taurine to cats’ diets could feverse the
hindlimb pain or paralysis if ATE was present.
myocardial changes seen.9 Since that finding was dem-
onstrated, commercial cat food manufacturers have
increased the amount of taurine in their products, and
CARDIAC CACHEXIA
there has been a dramatic reduction in the incidence of
feline DCM. Although it is possible to still see a case
Cardiac cachexia is defned as muscle wasting and
of DCM in cats fed a poor-quality homemade, veg-
weight loss that commonly occurs in humans, dogs.
etarian, or unbalanced diet, most cases of feline DCM
and cats with cardiac disease. For example, one study
are seen as a tautine-independent variant of DCM,
reported that more than 50% of dogs with DCM
of seen as end-stage hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
showed some degree of cardiac cachexia.18 Similar t0
(HCM).10
cancer cachexia, the weight loss that occurs with cardiac
Currently in cats, the most common heart disease is
cachexia includes a substantial and unusually high loss
HCM. Its incidence appears to be increasing. A recent
of lean body tissue. Although many veterinarians con-
publication reported 21% of overtly healthy cats had
sider cachexia to be an end-stage development in ani
heart murmurs, and 86% of these cats, when evalu-
ated using echocardiography, had structural cardiac
Similar to cancer cachexia, the metabolic changes may
disease, primarily HCM.!l This is in comparison to
precedle obvious physical changes. The loss of lean body
studies conducted in the 1970s and 1980s where only
mass can affect many different systems and is associated
Nutrition and the Heart 513
with shortened survival time. As muscle tissue is metab
TREAIMENTPROTOCOLS
olized, the animal experiences muscle wasting, a loss of
strength, and eventually compromised immune func-
 Medical treatment goals for cats with HCM are those
tion. For example, dogs with cardiac cachexia have
that include reducing heart rate, management of CHF
lower CD4+ lymphocytes and are at increased risk for
when present, and either treating or preventing ATE.
anemia.20
Common medications to achieve this include diltiazem,
Anorexia is a very common problem in pets with
beta-blockers, furosemide, and angiotensin-converting
CHF and contributes to the onset of cardiac cachexia.
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. To prevent or treat ATE,
sop Jo %yg 01 dn ur 1nsoo o1 pai1oda1 uaaq sey 1
aspirin, warfarin, daltepatin or enoxaparin, and clopi-
with CHF and in at least 38% of cats with cardiac
digrel are common options. Dogs with DCM are often
disease.21-23 Reduced appetite may be secondary due
prescribed medications such as ACE inhibitors, beta-
to the fatigue and respiratory dyspnea commonly
blockers, pimobendan, digoxin, antiarrhythmics, and
seen with CHF, but it can also be due to side effects
diuretics such as furosemide.
of medications or feeding a new food that may be
less palatable.24 An increase in energy requirements is
NUTRITION AND CARDIAC
also a factor that needs to be evaluated when consider-
ing the loss of lean body mass. In humans, it has been
DISEASE
documented that some may need up to a 30% increase
in overall energy requirements when diagnosed with
In addition to medical therapy, nutritional modifica-
tion is an important component of treatment protocols
due to tachycardia or tachypnea.10 Therefore dogs and
for dogs and cats with CHF. Nutritional modification
cats may also benefit from increasing the total energy
can support a good quality of life, and, in some cases,
in their diet. Metabolic alterations may also contrib-
may ameliorate some of the clinical effects of heart
ute to the loss of lean body mass. Cytokine elevation,
disease.
tumor necrosis factor, and interleukin-1 (
occur in
 In many cases, preventing or feversing anorexia is
part of nutritional treatiment. Because some medica-
can increase energy requirements, increase breakdown
tions given to heart patients can cause anorexia as a
of lean body mass, and directly cause anorexia.24 Inter-
side effect, reducing the dose or altering the number
estingly, in 68% of dogs with CHF, anorexia was a con-
of doses per day may be helpful. Food palatability is
tributing factor for owners opting to euthanize their
an important consideration. Many therapeutic foods
pets.2l Therefore controlling, or at least addressing, the
afe available in both a canned and dry form, so switch-
issue of cardiac cachexia and anorexia nutritionally is
ing between the two may be beneficial. Warming the
important to prolong survival time in dogs and cats
food in a microwave (either canned foods or wetted dry
with CHF.
foods) and offering small, frequent meals throughout
the day can also help with acceptance. Additionally,
adding small amounts of certain Havof enhancers such
Cardiaccachexiaand anorexiaarecommoninpets
as honey, yogurt, or diluted tuna juice may improve
with congestive heart failure (CHF). The resuitant loss of
acceptance of the food.
lean body mass can affect many different systems and
is associated with shortened survival time.Decreased
Specific Nutritional Modifications in
dnpu opa q upou
Managing Cardiovascular Disease
ratory dyspnea,but may aiso be due to side effects of
medications orfeeding a newfood that isless palatable.
A variety of nutritional modifications may help to slow
Therefore nutritional management of cardiac cachexia
 progression of cardiac disease and improve the quality
and anorexia is important to prolong survival time and
of life in animals with cardiovascular disease. Specific
improve the quality of life for pets with CHF
nutrients of interest include sodium, taurine, carnitine,
fatty acids, antioxidants, and protein.
514 Canine and Feline Nutrition
SODIUM
 Animals with cardiovascular disease have
administer medications.30 In fact, 92% of the dogs stud-
impaired ability to excrete sodium in the urine because
ied were fed high-sodium treats or table scraps. In another
of decreased cardiac output.26 Therefore dietary salt
study, 62% of pet owners used high-sodium human or
restriction is typically recommended as an aid to control
pet foods for pill acdministration.31 High-sodium foods
Auid accumulation. The degree of sodium restriction
 should be avoided when giving medications to all pets with
should be dependent on the stage of heart failure and is
CHD, regardlless of the stage of disease. Other "human'
directed at controlling sodium-responsive clinical signs.
tteats that should be avoided include canned fish, marga-
Restricting sodium too extensively, especially in asymp-
fine of buttel, canned vegetables, potato chips, pretzels
tomatic dogs, may lead to increased blood pressufe via
pop corn, and other salty snacks. Dog treats and snacks
an  activated renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.27
that ate specifically formulated to be low in sodium ate
Although this may not have negative long-term effects,
acceptable, but other over-the-counter pet treats should
eatly neuroendrocrine activation may not be desir-
not be fed.
able.28 Therefore a food containing maintenance levels
of sodium can be fed to pets with early-stage cardio-
vascular disease (sodium <0.40% dry matter). High-salt
The degree of sodiur restriction for pets with heart dis-
table scraps or treats should be avoided. For example, a
ease is directed toward controling sodium-responsive
study showed that dogs with cardiac disease but without
clinical signs. Foods containing maintenance leveis of
CHF were able to maintain both sodium and potassium
sodiur can be fed to pets with early-stage cardiovas-
levels when fed either a low- or a high-sodium diet.29
cular disease. High-salt table scraps or treats should
Another study feported that a low-sodium diet fed to
always be avoided. it is generally recommended to
dogs with asymptomatic cardiac disease had no benef-
reduce sodium to <030% of dry matter when clinical
cial effect on cardiac size or function but, rather, led to
signs appear As congestive heart failure becomes more
increased aldosterone concentration and heart rate.28
severe,veterinarydietsspecifcallyformulatedforheart
The stage of heart disease at which to institute sodium
patients shouid be considered.
testriction in dogs and cats is still unclear. A general rec-
ommendation is to feduce sodium to less than 0.30%
of dry matter when clinical signs appear.10 This can be
TAURINE
 Taurine is a sulfur-containing amino acid.
accomplished by feeding a pet food that is formulated
As discussed in Chapters 4 and 12 (pp. 22 and 97-100),
wuos sisnpoid asaul jo Aueu ssneaq siad ionuas oy
taurine is found in high concentrations in the myo-
slightly reduced sodium. Foods should be evaluated indi
cardium, skeletal muscle, central nervous system, and
vidually, or the pet food company should be contacted
 platelets, and is important for normal heart function.32
to ensure that an adlequate product is selected. As CHF
Although the exact mechanisms through which taurine
becomes more severe, veterinary diets specifically formu-
 affects heart function are not completely understood, tau-
lated for heart patients should be considered because these
tine modulates cellular calcium concentrations and avail-
products afe mofe festricted in sodium. It is also impor-
ability in heart muscle, directly affects contractile proteins,
tant to assess the food's palatability because low-sodium
foods may not be well accepted by pets with congestive
heart disease (CHD).
 ing free radlicals and changing cellular osmolality.36
The sodium content of treats and human foods that
Taurine is an essential amino acid for the cat, and a
may be used to administer medications is also an impor-
deficiency can cause DCM. Until the late 1980s, DCM
tant considleration. Because pets with CHD often show a
was one of the most common heart conditions diagnosed
feduced interest in food, some owhers use dog treats, hot
in cats. In 1987, an association between clinical cases of
dogs, cheese, peanut butter, or lunch meats to administer
DCM in cats and taurine levels in pet food was found; tau-
pills. All of these foods are high in sodium and so are con-
rine supplementation completely reverses the condition
traindicated. In one study, although owners reported that
(see Chapter 12, pp. 97-100 for a complete discussion).
they were awafe of the importance of sodium, they often
Commercial pet food companies that increased the
failed to consider the type of treats they were using to
concentration of taurine have further supplemented
Nutrition and the Heart 515
taurine levels in feline diets, and thus there has been a
dramatic reduction in cases of DCM in cats. Occasionally
for cardiac tissue because the heart obtains approximately
a few cases of DCM are reported in cats, but these cases
 60% of its total energy from oxidation of long-chain fatty
afe usually not a result of a taurine-deficient diet. Rathef,
 acids.51 Carnitine functions in the transport of long-
 these cases may represent a taurine-independent vatiant
chain fatty acids into cellular mitochondria, where beta-
of DCM in cats or ate associated with end-stage HCM.10
oxidation takes place.52,53 Carnitine also plays a role in
In the dog, taurine is currently classifed as a condi-
detoxifcation of the mitochondria by helping to remove
tionally essential amino acid (see Chapter 12, pp. 99-100
accumulating short- and medium-chain fatty acids.35
for a complete discussion). Dogs of some breeds that
Camitine deficiency will cause primary myocardial
Mo ay o punoy uaaq aaey oa yim pasouei ane
disease and has been reported in many species. In humans,
plasma taurine concentrations.3740 Affected
Ibfeeds
primary L-carnitine deficiency has been shown to occuf
include the American Cocker Spaniel, Golden Retriever,
as a result of genetic defects that affect the synthesis, trans-
Labrador Retriever, Saint Bernard, Newfoundland, and
 port, intestinal absorption, or excessive degradation of
English Setter. Although the underlying causes are not
carnitine.54 Secondary carnitine defciency is seen in veg-
known, it appears that some breeds (or lines) have a
etatians, infants fed formulas not supplemented with caf-
naturally occurring higher requirement for taurine of
nitine, and in patients undergoing long-term parenteral
a breed-specific metabolic abnormality that affects tau-
nutrition.54 In dogs the incidlence is not known; howevef,
rine need.41.43 Taurine defciency has also been asso-
carnitine deficiency has been recognized in a family of
ciated with lamb meal and tice diets, soybean-based
 Boxers with DCM.5S Other cases of carnitine defciency
diets, and high-fber diets (see Chapter 12, pp. 97-100
Myopathic carnitine deficiency is characterized by
results in increased colonic bacteria populations leads to
low concentration of carnitine in the myocardium;
increased taurine loss in the feces and thus an incfeased
it is estimated to occur in 17% to 60% of cases of
dietary requirement for this nutrient.44,49 Taurine is
canine DCM.35 However, it is unknown if carnitine
found naturally in animal-based proteins; so, providing
deficiency is a cause of DCM in dogs or if it is a sec-
diets that include a sufficient level of high-quality ani-
ondary effect. Myocardial cells of dogs with DCM are
mal proteins ensures adequate taurine intake.
damaged, which may lead to secondary loss of carni-
 Blood and plasma taurine levels are measured in dogs
tine from heart tissue. Conversely, onset of carnitine
with DCM; levels of blood and plasma taurine together
 deficiency prior to development of DCM was reported
more accurately refect skeletal and cardiac muscle tau-
in three dogs, which suggests that carnitine defciency
rine levels than either test alone.3S If circulating taurine
can lead to DCM.3S Although a causal relationship
is low, supplementation of taurine is warranted. Even if
has not been proven, some veterinary cardiologists
the concentration is within the normal reference range,
recommend carnitine supplementation for dogs with
supplementing taurine for dogs with DCM, especially
DCM (50 to 100 mg/kg three times daily).19 If a car-
those breeds that are predisposed to taurine defciency,
nitine defciency is suspected, supplementation may
improve survival time and quality of life.58 Similar to
taurine is 500 to 1000 milligrams (mg) given three times
taurine supplementation, clinical response to carni-
Z 01 I pue (sy) sueisoY S7 1apun ssop ies o Ae
tine supplementation may be rapid while echocardial
grams (g) given two or three times daily to larger dogs
changes may take 2 to 4 months to be evident.
(25 to 40 kg).35 Clinical improvement is often rapid,
but changes to echocardiograms may not be refected
FATTY ACIDS
Supplementation with omega-3
 polyunsaturated fatty acids may be beneficial to dogs
with CHF and cardiovascular disease. Specifcally, dogs
L-CARNITINE
L-carnitine is a vitamin-like, water-
with CHF have been shown to have plasma fatty acid
soluble molecule synthesized by the body from lysine
abnormalities, including decreased concentration of
and methionine. It is concentrated in skeletal and cardiac
eicosapentaencic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid
  i n re 5s si r 
(DHA) when compared with normal dogs.18 In a study
516 Canine and Feline Nutrition
of dogs with DCM, fish oil supplementation at a dose
cardiac patient. For example, it is important in providl-
of 25 mg/kg EPA and 18 mg/kg DHA was adlministered
ing the proper amine acids for taurine production and to
and resulted in normalization of plasma fatty acid pro-
prevent muscle wasting or loss of lean body mass. In the
fles.18 Fatty acids in the supplemented form of fish oils
1960s some authors fecommended protein festriction for
can also have antiarrhythmic effects.60-62 In humans,
dogs with CHF to prevent 
“metabolic stress" on the liver
dietary supplementation with fish oils was associated
caused by excessive dlietary protein.66 Howevet, there are
with a feduction of more than 70% of ventricular
premature contractions ccurring in a 24-hour period
and cats, and this practice may actually be detrimental to
in 44% of the patients.63 Similarly, a study of Boxers
these patients by predisposing them to a more substan-
diagnosed  with fight ventricular cardiomyopathy
tial loss in lean body mass. Because cardiac cachexia is so
reported that supplementation with fish cil significantly
common in animals with CHF, protein restriction should
tedluced arrthythmias and may be helpful in treating this
be limited to only those with concurrent and severe renal
condition in this breed.61
disease.64 In fact, when choosing a diet for heart patients,
When cardiac cachexia is present, increasing the
protein-restricted foods that are formulated for kidney
proportion of omega-3 faty acids in the food may
disease should not be used unless serum levels such as
beneficially modulate cytokine production. Reduction
blood urea nitrogen and creatinine wafrant this.
of cytokines is corfelated to improved survival time in
dogs with CHF.18 Supplementing with fish oils that are
Other Nutritional Considerations-
high in omega-3 fatty acids can decrease cytokine pro-
duction in dogs with CHF, improve cardiac cachexia,
Obesity
and in some cases help with palatability issues leading
Overweight conditions can exacerbate heart disease
 to an increase in food intake.18 Overall, acknowledging
because obesity is associated with elevated cardiac
and addressing the issue of cardiac cachexia in dogs and
output, increased plasma and extracellular fuid vol-
cats is critical in prolonging survival times and modulat-
ume, increased
lneufohumoral activation, feductions
ing the long-term effects seen with CHF.
in urinary sodium and water excretion, elevated blood
 pressure, increased heart rate, abnormal systolic and dia-
ANTIOXIDANTS
 Reactive oxygen species (ROS)
 stolic ventricular function, and exercise intolerance.67
ate a byproduct of oxygen metabolism and can be dam-
Therefore weight reduction in animals with cardiac
aging to normal tissues and cell
1 growth. Dogs with
disease may be beneficial. In fact, in one study it was
CHF experience increased oxidant “stress” as a result of
 demonstrated that weight reduction in obese dogs with
abnormal myocardial function and have a feduced con-
pulmonary disease resulted in improved pulmonary
centration of naturally occurring lipid-soluble antioxi-
function.68 Therefore a gradual weight reduction in ani-
 dants.64,6S Supplementation with vitamin C and vitamin
mals with cardiac problems may be helpful, although
E incfeases plasma concentrations of these antioxidants
consideration as to the type of diet is important. Diets
and reduces plasma F2-alpha-isoprostanes, a matker for
 geared toward adlipose tissue loss rather than protein of
oxidative stress.28 Other antioxidants such as coenzyme
amino acid loss ate needed to minimize any concuffent
Q10 have been helpful in humans with DCM. Some
or future cardiac cachexia that may occuf.
veterinary clinicians have had some apparent success
with this antioxidant, although clinical studies on dogs
CONCLUSION
have not yet been published.19 Supplementation with
im see o iyauaq aq a sioe sno
When treating dogs and cats with cardiovascular dis-
DCM and other cardiovascular conditions based on the
ease, nutritional modifcation should be considered a
information that is currently available.
 primary part of the treatment protocol. Proper nutri-
tion not only helps prolong survival time and enhance
HIGH-QUALITY PROTEIN
High-qualitypro-
the quality of life, but may help reduce the amount of
tein has been discussed in other areas of this chaptef
 certain medication needed, such as diuretics to reduce
when considering nutritional modification in treating the
the load on the heart and other organs.
Nurition and the Heart 517
References
1. Buchanan JW: Prevalance of cardiovascular disorder. In Fox PR, Sison D, Moise NS, editors: Textbook ofcanine and feline
cardiology, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999, Saunders, pp 457-470.
2. Fox PR: Pathology of the cardiovascular system. In Fox PR, editor: Canine and feline cardiology, New York, 1988, Churchill
Livingstone, pp 637-657.
3. Haggstrom J, Kvart C, Pedersen HD:Acquired valvular heart disease. In Ettinger SJ, Feldrman EC, editors: Textbook ofveterinary
internal medicine, ed 6, St Louis, 2005, Saunders.
4. Alroy J, Rush J,Freeman L, and others: lnherited infantile dilated cardiomyopathy in dogs: genetic, clinical, biochemical and
morphologic findings, Am J Med Genet 95:57-66, 2000.
5. Calvert CA, Jacobs GJ, Smith DD, and others: Association between results of ambulatory electrocardiography and development of
cardiomyopathy during long-term follow-up of Doberman Pinschers, J Am Vet Med Asoc 21 6:34-39, 2000.
6. Meurs KM, Spier AW, Wright NA, and others: Comparison of in-hospital versus 24-hour ambulatory electrocardiography for
detection of ventricular premature complexes in mature Boxers, J Am Vet Med Asoc 218:222-224, 2001
oy do uy wy edouopre p ym sp as u shoey nsouod pue ieans  uaas H uosss  woy 
33:364-368, 1997.
 8. Monnet E, Orton EC, Salam M, and others: Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy in dogs: survival and prognostic indicators, Vt
Intern Med 9:12-17, 1995.
 9. Pion PD, Kittleson MD, Rogers QR, and others: Myocardial failure in cats associated with low plasma taurine: a reversible
cardiomyopathy, Science 237:764 768, 1987.
10. Freman LM, Rush JE: Nutrition and cardiomyopathy: lesions from spontaneous animal models, Curr Heart Faiure Rep 4:84-90,
2007.
11. Cote E, Manning AM, Emerson D, and others: Assessment of the prevalence of heart murmurs in overtly healthy cats, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 225:384-388, 2004.
12. Atkins CD, Gallo AM, Kurzman ID, Cowen P: Risk factors, clinical signs, and survival in cats with a clinical diagnosis of idiopathic
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: 74 cases (1985-1989), / Am Vet Med Assoc 201:613-618, 1992.
13. Meurs KM, Sanchez X, David RM, and others: A cardiac myosin binding protein C mutation in the Maine Coon cat with famiial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, Hum Mol Genet 14:3587-3593, 2005.
 14. Rush JE, Freeman LM, Fenollosa N, Brown D]: Population and survival characteristics of cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy:
260 cases (1990-1999), J Am Vet /Med Asoc 220:202-207, 2002.
15. Kittleson MD: Feline myocardial disease. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors: Textbook ofveterinary internal medicine, ed 6,
St Louis, 2005, Saunders.
16. Kittleson MD, Meurs KM, Munro MJ, and others: Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in Main Coon cats: an animal model
of human disease, Circulation 99:3172-3180, 1999.
17. Baty CJ: Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: an update, Vet Clix Small Anim 34:1227-1234, 2004.
18. Freeman LM, Rush JE, Kehayias J, and others: Nutritional alternations and the effect of fsh oil supplementation in dogs with heart
failure, J Vet Intern Med 12:440448, 1998.
19. Freeman LM: lnterventional nutrition for cardiac disease, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 13:232-237, 1998.
 20. Freeman LM, Rush JE: Relationship between cachexia and lymphocyte subpopulations and hematologic parameters in dogs with
spontaneously-occurring congestive heart failure. In Proceedings ofthe third cachexia conference, vol 82, Rome, Italy, December 8-10,
2005.
 21. Mallery KF, Freeman LM, Harpster NK, and others: Factors contributing to the decisions for euthanasia in dogs with congestive
heart failure, J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1201-1204, 1999.
 22. Freeman LM, Rush JE, Cahalane AK, and others: Dietary patterns in dogs with cardiac disease, J Am Vet Med Asoc 223:1301-1305,
2003.
518Canine and Feline Nutrition
23. Torin DS, Freeman LM, Rush JE: Dietary patterns of cats with cardiac disease, J Am Vet Med Asoc 230:862-867, 2007
24. Freeman LM, Roubenoff R: The nutrition implications of cardiac cachexia, Nutr Rev 52:340-347, 1994.
25. Poehlman ET, Scheffers, Gottieb SS, and others: Increased resting metabolic rates in patients with congestive heart failure, Am
Intern Med 121:860-862, 1994.
26. Boegehold MA, Kotchen TA: Relative contributions of dietary Na+ and Cl- to salt-sensitive hypertension, Hypertenson 14:
579-583, 1989
  o s o o ad e  s  aaa enr  o sa  as 
system in dogs, Acte Vet Scand 37:109-118, 1996.
28. Freeman LM, Rush JE, Markwell PJ: Effects of dietary modification in dogs with early chronic valvular disease, J Vet Intern Med
20:1116-1126, 2006.
29. Pensinger R: Dietary control of sodium intake in spontaneous congestive heart failure in dogs, Vet Med 59:752-784, 1964.
30. Freeman LM, Rush JE, Cahalane AK, and others: Evaluation of dietary patterns in dogs with cardiac disease, J Am Vet Med Asoc
223:1301-1305, 2003.
31. Freeman LM, Rush JE, Cahalane AK, Markwell PJ: Dietary patterns of dogs with cardiac disease, J Nutr 132:1632S-1633S, 2002.
32. Tenaglia A, Cody R: Evidence for a taurine-deficient cardiomyopathy, Am J Cardiot 62:136-139, 1998.
33. Huxtable RJ, Chubb J, Asari J: Physiological and experimental regulation of taurine content in the heart, Fed Proc 39:2685-2690,
1980.
34. Schaffer SW, Kramer J, Chovan JP: Regulation of calcium homeostasis in the heart by taurine, Fed Proc 39:2691-2694, 1980.
35. Sanderson Sl: Taurine and carnitine in canine cardiomyopathy, Vet Clin Small Anim 36:1325-1343, 2006.
36. Huxtable R]: Physilogical actions of taurine, Physiot Rev 72: 101 -163, 1992.
37. Kramer CA, Kileson MD, Fox PR: Plasma taurine concentrations in normal dogs and in dogs with heart disease,J Vet Intern Med
9:253-258, 1995.
38. Kittleson MD, Keene B, Pion PD, and others: Results of the multicenter Spaniel trial (MUST), / Vet fntern Med 11:204 211, 1997)
39. Freeman LM, Rush JE, Brown DJ, and others: Relationship between circulating and dietary taurine concentrations in dogs with
dilated cardiomyopathy, Vet 7her 2:370-378, 2001
40. Fasceti A], Reed JR, Roger QR, and others: Taurine defciency in dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy: 12 cases (1997-2001),
J Am Vet Med Asoc 223:1137-1141, 2003.
41. Backus RC, Ko KS, Fascetti AJ: Low plasma taurine concentration in Newfoundland dogs is associated with low plasma methionine
and cysteine concentrations and low taurine synthesis, / Nutr 136:2525-2533, 2006.
42. Sanderson SL, Gross KL, Ogburn PN, and others: Efects of dietary fat and L-carnitine on plasma and whole blood taurine
concentrations and cardiac function in healthy dogs fed protein-restricted diets, Am / Vet Res 62:1616-1623, 2001.
43. Pion PD, Sanderson SL, Kittleson MD: The effectiveness of taurine and levocarnitine in dogs with heart disease, Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 28:1495-1514, 1998.
44. Delaney SJ, Kass PH, Rogers QR, Fasceti AJ: Plasma and whole blood taurine in normal dogs of varying size fed commercially
prepared food, J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 87:236-244, 2003.
45. Spitze AR, Wong DL, Rogers QR, Fascetti AJ: Taurine concentrations in animal feed ingredients; cooking infuences taurine
content, I Anim Physiot Anim Nutr 87:251-261, 2003.
deficiency and dilated cardiomyopathy, J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 87:359-372, 2003.
47. Backus RC, Cohen C, Pion PD, and others: Taurine deficiency in Newfoundlands fed commercially available complete and
balanced diets, / Am Vet Med Asoc 223:1130-1136, 2003.
48. Belanger MC, Quellet M, Queney G, and others: Taurine-deficient dilated cardiomyopathy in a family of Golden Retrievers,
J Am Anim Hosp Asoc 41:284-291, 2005.
Nutrition and the Heart 519
49. Stratton-Phelps M, Backus RB, Rogers QR, and others: Dietary rice bran decreases plasma and whole-blood taurine in cats, J Nut?
1 32:1745S-1747S, 2002.
50. Rebouche CJ, Engel AG: Kinetic compartmental analysis of carnitine metabolism in the dog, Arch Biochem Biophys 220:60-70,
1983
51. Neely JR, Morgan HA: Relationship between carbohydrate metabolism and energy balance of heart muscle, Annx Rev Physiol
36:413459, 1974.
 52. Stumpt DA, Parker WD Jr, Angelini C: Carnitine deficiency, organic acidemias, and Reye's syndrome, Neurology 35:1041-1045,
1985.
53. Gilbert EF: Carnitine defciency, Pathology 17:161-169, 1985.
54. Paulson DJ: Carnitine deficiency-induced cardiomyopathy, Mol Cell Biochem 180:33-41, 1998.
55. Keene BW: L-carnitine defciency in canine dilated cardiomyopathy. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, editors: Current veterinary therapy
XI, Philadelphia, 1992, Saunders.
56. Sanderson S, Osborne C, Ogburn I, and others: Canine cystinuria associated with carnitinuria and carnitine deficiency (abstract),
JVet Intern Med 9:212, 1995.
57. McEntee K, Clercx C, Snaps F, and others: Clinical, electrocardiographic and echocardiographic improvements after L-carnitine
supplementation in a cardiomyopathic Labrador, Canine Pract 20: 12-15, 1995.
58. Keene BW, Panciera DP, Atkins CE, and others: Myocardial L-carnitine deficiency in a family of dogs with cardiomyopathy, J Am
Vet Med Asoc 198:647-650, 1991.
59. Costa ND, Labuc RH: Case report: efficacy of oral carnitine therapy for dilated cardiomyopathy in Boxer dogs, J Nutr 124:
2687S-2692S, 1995.
60. Endres S, Ghorbani R, Kelley VE, and others: he effect of dietary suplementation withn-3 polyunsaturated faty acids on the
synthesisof interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor by mononuclear cells, N Engl J Med 320:265-271, 1989.
61. Smith CE, Freeman LM, Rush JE, and others: Omega-3 fatty acids in Boxer dogs with arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy, J Vet Intern Med 21:265-273, 2007.
62. Kang JX, Leaf A: Antiarrhythmic effects of polyunsaturated fatty acids: recent studies, Circulatiox 94: 17741780, 1996.
63. Sellmayer A, Witzgall H, Lorenz RL, and others: Effects of dietary fish oil on ventricular premature complexes, Am J Cardiol
76:974977, 1995.
64. Freeman LM, Brown DJ, Rush JE: Assessment of degree of oxidative stress and antioxidant concentrations in dogs with idiopathic
dilated cardiomyopathy, J Am Vet Med Asoc 215:644 646, 1999.
65. Freeman LM, Rush JE, Milbury PE, Blumber JB: Antioxidant status and biomarkers of oxidative stress in dogs with congestive heart
failure, / Vet Intern Med 19:537-541, 2005.
66. Pensinger RR: Nutritional management of heart disease. In Kirk RW, editor: Cuent veterinary therapy Il, Philadelphia, 1968,
Saunders, pp 229-232.
67. Alexander JK: The heart and obesity. In Hurst JW, editor: The heart, ed 6, New York, 1986, McGraw-Hill, p 1452.
68. Brinson JJ, McKiernan BC: Respiratory function in obese dogs with chronic respiratory disease and their response to treatment,
 Vet Intern Med 12:209, 1998.
Estimated Metabolizable Energy
Requirements of Adult Dogs
Weight (lB)
Welght (kg)
INACTIVE(KCAL/DAY)
ACTIVE(KCAL/DAY)
2
0.91
88.37
120.92
4
1.82
148.61
203.37
6
2.72
201.43
275.64
8
3.63
249.94
342.02
10
4.54
295.47
404.33
12
5.45
338.77
463.58
14
6.36
380.29
520.39
16
7.26
420.34
575.21
18
8.17
459.17
628.33
20
9.08
496.92
680.00
25
11.35
587.45
803.88
00
13.62
673.53
921.67
35
15.89
756.08
1034.63
40
18.16
835.72
1143.62
45
20.43
912.90
1249.24
50
22.70
987.97
1351.96
55
24.97
1061.18
1452.14
60
27.24
1132.74
1550.06
65
29.51
1202.82
1645.96
70
31.78
1271.57
1740.04
75
34.05
1339.10
1832.45
80
36.32
1405.51
1923.33
85
38.59
1470.89
2012.79
06
40.86
1535.31
2100.96
95
43.13
1598.85
2187.90
100
45.40
1661.56
2273.71
105
47.67
1723.48
2358.45
110
49.94
1784.68
2442.19
115
52.21
1845.18
2524.98
120
54.48
1905.03
2606.88
125
56.75
1964.26
2687.93
130
59.02
2022.89
2768.17
135
61.29
2080.97
2847.64
140
63.56
2138.51
2926.38
145
65.83
2195.54
3004.42
150
68.10
2252.08
3081.79
) ×0 -uab qqe spe s) ×S6 -uaauaqequ sppe Ae
521
Estimated Metabolizable Energy
Appendix 2
Requirements of Adult Cats
OVERWEIGHTADULT
WEIGHT (LB)
WEIGHT(KG)
LEANADULT(KCAL/DAY)
(KCAL/DAY)*
2
0.91
93.74
125.08
3
1.36
123.00
147.10
4
1.82
149.14
165.04
5
2.27
173.20
180.45
6
2.72
195.70
194.10
7
3.18
216.99
206.45
8
3.63
237.30
217.77
6
4.09
256.79
228.28
10
4.54
275.57
238.10
12
5.45
311.37
256.12
14
6.36
345.25
272.41
16
7.26
377.56
287.35
18
8.17
408.56
301.21
20
9.08
438.45
314.18
22
66'6
467.36
326.39
24
10.90
495.41
337.95
26
11.80
522.71
348.94
523
Standard Weights for American
Kennel Club Dog Breeds (lb)
Group 1—sporting
BREED
MALE
FEMALE
Brittany
35-40
30-40
Pointer
55-75
45-64
German Shorthaired Pointer
55-70
45-60
German Wirehaired Pointer
60-75
50-65
Chesapeake Bay Retriever
65-80
55-70
Curly-Coated Retriever
65-70
65-70
Flat-Coated Retriever
50-65
45-60
Golden Retriever
65-75
55-65
Labrador Retriever
65-80
55-70
English Setter
60-75
55-65
Gordon Setter
55-80
45-70
Irish Setter
~70
~60
American Water Spaniel
28-45
25-40
Clumber S paniel
70-85
55-70
Cocker Spaniel
25-30
20-25
English Cocker Spaniel
28-34
26-32
English Springer Spaniel
49-54
40-45
Field Spaniel
35-50
35-50
Irish Water Spaniel
55-65
45-58
Sussex Spaniel
35-45
35-45
Welsh Springer Spaniel
35-45
30-40
Vzsla
45-55
40-50
Weimaraner
60-75
55-70
Wirehaired Pointing Griffon 
55-65
09-05
Group 2—hound
BREED
MALE
FEMALE
 Afghan Hound 
~60
~50
Basenji
~24
~22
Basset Hound
65-75
50-65
Beagle, 13"
13-18
13-16
Beagle, 15*
17-22
15-20
Black and Tan Coonhound
70-85
55-70
 Bloodhound
90-110
80-100
Borzoi
75-105
06-04
Dachshund, Miniature
~10
~10
Dachshund, Standard
16-22
16-22
American Foxhound
65-75
55-65
 English Foxhound 
65-75
50-70
Greyhound
65-70
60-65
Continued
525
526 Appendix 3
Group 2—hound, cont'd
BREED
MALE
FEMALE
Harrier 
40-50
35-45
Ibizan Hound
O5~
~45
Ilrish Wolfhound 
~120
~105
Norwegian Elkhound
~55
~48
Otter Hound
75-115
65-100
Petit Basset Griffon Vendeen
40-45
40-45
 Pharach Hound
55-70
50-65
Rhodesian Ridgeback
~75
~65
ynies
50-70
45-65
Scottish Deerhound
85-110
75-95
Whippet
20-28
18-23
Group 3—working
BREED
MALE
FEMALE
Akita
70-85
65-75
 Alaskan Malamute
85-95
75-85
Bernese Mountain Dog
75-90
65-80
Boxer
55-70
09-05
Bullmastiff 
110-130
100-120
Doberman Pinscher
65-80
55-70
Giant Schnauzer
70-85
60-75
Great Dane
120-180
100-130
Great Pyrenees
100-125
85-115
Komondor
100-130
80-110
Kuvasz
100-115
70-90
Mastiff
75-190
160-180
Newfoundland
130-150
100-120
Portuguese Water Dog
42-60
35-50
Rottweiler
80-95
70-85
 Saint Bernard
130-180
120-160
Samoyed
50-65
45-60
 Siberian Husky
45-60
35-50
Standard Schnauzer
30-40
25-35
Group 4—terrier
BREED
MALE
FEMALE
Airedale Terrier
45-60
40-55
American Staffordshire Terrier
45-55
40-50
Australian Terrier
12-14
12-14
Bedlington Terrier
17-23
17-23
Border Terrier
13-15
11-14
Bull Terrier
52-62
45-55
Cairn Terrier
~14
~13
Dandie Dinmont Terrier
13-24
18-24
Fox Terrier, Smooth
17-19
15-17
Fox Terrier, Wire
17-19
15-17
Irish Terrier
~27
~25
Appendix3
527
Group 4—terrier, cont'd
BREED
MALE
FEMALE
Kerry Blue Terrier
33-40
30-38
Lakeland Terrier
~17
~17
Manchester Terrier, Standard 
12-22
12-22
Miniature Bull Terrier
15-20
15-20
Miniature Schnauzer
16-18
12-16
Norfolk Terrier
11-12
11-12
Norwich Terrier
11-12
11-12
Scottish Terrier
19-22
18-21
Sealyham Terrier
23-24
21-23
Skye Terrier
25-30
20-25
Soft-Coated Wheaten Terrier
35-40
30-35
Staffordshire Bull Terrier
28-28
24-34
Welsh Terrier
18-22
16-18
West Highland White Terrier
12-14
11-13
Group5—toy
BREED
MALE
FEMALE
Affen pinscher
7-8
7-8
Brussels Griffon
10-12
8-10
Chihuahua
2-7
2-7
English Toy Spaniel
8-14
8-14
Italian Greyhound
8-15
8-15
Japanese Chin
14-20
14-20
Maltese
4-6
4-6
Manchester Terrier
7-12
7-11
Miniature Pinscher
10-12
9-11
 Papillon
8-10
7-9
Pekingese
10-14
10-14
 Pomeranian
4-8
4-7
Toy Poodle
7-10
7-10
Pug
14-18
14-18
 Shih Tzu
12-17
10-15
Silky Terrier
8-10
8-10
Yorkshire Terrier
5-8
4-6
Group 6—nonsporting
BREED
MALE
FEMALE
Bichon Frise
9-12
9-12
Boston Terrier
15-24
15-24
Bulldog
45-55
40-50
Chinese Shar-Pei
45-55
35-45
Chow Chow
45-60
40-50
Dalmatian
50-65
45-55
Finnish Spitz
25-35
25-30
French Bulldog
20-28
20-28
Keeshond
40-50
40-50
Lhasa Apso
13-15
13-15
Poodle, Standard
50-60
45-55
Continued
528Appendix 3
Group 6—nonsporting, cont'd
BREED
MALE
FEMALE
Poodle,Miniature
17-20
15-20
Schipperke
12-18
12-16
Tibetan Spaniel
9-15
9-15
Tibetan Terrier
18-30
18-30
Group 7—herding
BREED
MALE
FEMALE
Australian Cattle Dog
35-45
35-45
Australian Shepherd
45-65
45-65
Bearded Collie
55-65
09-05
Belgian Malinois
60-70
43-55
Belgian Shee pdog
60-70
43-55
Belgian Tervuren
60-70
43-55
Bouvier des Flanders
70-90
70-90
Briard 
65-75
60-70
Collie
65-75
50-65
German Shepherd Dog
75-90
65-80
Old English Shee pdog
60-70
60-70
 Puli
29-33
29-33
Shetland Sheepdog
16-22
14-18
Welsh Corgi, Cardigan
30-38
25-34
Welsh Corgi, Pembroke
27-30
25-28
acanthosis nigricans diffuse hyperplasia of the spinous layer
cellulose an unbranched, long-chain polysaccharide that is
of the skin, with gray, brown, or black pigmentation.
a component of dietary fiber;forms the skeleton of most
accretion growth by addition of material.
plant structures and plant cells.
acrodermatitis severe skin lesions.
chondrodysplasia an inherited disease characterized by
adipocyte hyperplasia an increase in the number of fat
abnormal growth at the ends of bones.
cells, occurring normally during certain developmental
chylomicron a class of lipoproteins responsible for the
periods such as early growth and, occasionally, puberty.
transport of exogenous cholesterol and triglycerides from
adipocyte specialized cells that store large amounts of tri-
the small intestine to tissues after meals.
glyceride.
colostrum the frst product of the mammary gland follow-
alopecia che absence of hair from the skin areas where it is
ing parturition.
normally present.
coprophagy the ingestion of dung or feces.
anabolism any process by which organisms convert sub-
corn gluten meal the dried residue from corn after the
 stances into other components of the organism's chemi-
removal of the larger part of the starch and germ and the
cal architecture.
separation of the bran.
anorexia lack or loss of the appetite for food.
costochondral pertaining to a rib and its cartilage.
arrhythmia lacking a steady rhythm.
creatinine he end product of creatine metabolism, found
articular cartilage cartilage covering the articular surfaces
in muscle and blood and excreted in the urine.
 of the bones, forming a synovial joint.
crepitation dry, crackling sound like that of grating the
ascites effusion and accumulation of serous fuid in the
ends of a fractured bone.
abdominal cavity.
crystalluria excretion of crystals in the urine, in some cases
ataxia failure of muscular coordination; irregularity of mus-
producing urinary tract irritation.
cular action.
cyanosis a bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous
azotemia an excess of urea or other nitrogenous compounds
membranes as a result of excessive concentration of
in the blood.
reduced hemoglobin in the blood.
bone meal the dried, ground, and sterilized product from
cystitis inflammation of che urinary bladder.
undecomposed bones.
cystocentesis perforation or capping, as with an aspirator,
BUN blood urea nitrogen.
trocar, or needle, to remove urinary bladder contents.
byproduct secondary products in addition to the principal 
demodicosis skin disease caused by the mange mite Dermo-
product; the parts that are left after the economically
dex canis in dogs.
valuable pieces are harvested.
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) a nucleic acid that consti-
calculolytic pertaining to the destruction or decomposition
tutes the genetic material of all cellular organisms.
of a calculus.
dietary thermogenesis also called the specifc dynamic
calorie the amount of heat energy that is necessary to raise
action of food; the energy needed by the body to digest,
the temperature of 1 gram of water from 14.5° C to 15.5°
absorb, and assimilate nutrients.
C. Because the calorie is such a small unit of measure, the
duodenum the frst or proximal portion of the small intes.
kilocalorie, equal to 1000 calories, is most often used in 
tine extending from the pylorus to the jejunum.
the science of animal nutrition.
dyspnea difficult or labored respiration.
cardiomyopathy deterioration of the function of the myo.
dystocia abnormal labor or birth.
cardium (heart muscle) for any reason.
echocardiography noninvasive diagnostic procedure that
carnivorous eating or subsisting on primarily animal mate.
uses ultrasound to study the structure and function of
rial.
the heart.
 carpus the joint between the paw and the forelimb (the
eicosanoids biologically active substances that are metabo
wrist in humans).
lites of 20-carbon fatty acids; includes prostaglandins,
cation an ion carrying a positive charge owing to a
leukotrienes, prostacyclins, and thromboxanes.
deficiency of electrons; in an electrochemical cell, cations
emesis the refex act of ejecting the contents of che stomach
migrate toward the cathode.
through the mouth; vomiting.
529
530 Glossary
endocarditis infammation of the endocardium and heart
hemolytic anemia anemia as a result of intravascular frag-
valves.
mentation of red blood cells.
endogenous developing or originating within the organism
hepatic lipidosis an abnormal accumulation of fats and fat-
or arising from causes within the organism.
like substances in the liver.
energy density for a petfood,refers to the number of calo-
hepatomegaly enlargement of the liver.
ries provided by the food in a given weight or volume. In
hepatopathy disease or disorder of the liver.
the United States, it is expressed as kilocalories of metab-
homeostasis che maintenance of stability in the body's
olizable energy per kilogram or pound of diet; in Europe,
internal environment, achieved by a system of control
kilojoule per kilogram is used.
mechanisms activated by negative feedback.
Kaiaua Aiep siewiue ue uaym sinsso aueiegi Aanaua
hydrolysis the splitting of a compound into fragments by
consumption is either greater or less chan its daily
the addition of water. The hydroxyl group is incorporated
requirement, leading to changes in growth rate, body
in one fragment and the hydrogen atom in the other.
weight, and body composition.
hydroxyapatite an inorganic compound, found in the
enterohepatic pertaining to the intestine (entero) and che
matrix of bone and the teeth, that is composed of cal-
liver (hepatic).
cium, phosphorous, hydrogen, and oxygen and provides
epiphysis the expanded articular end of a long bone, devel.
rigidity.
 oped from a secondary ossification center.
hypercalcemia increased calcium concentration in the blood.
erythropoiesis the production of erythrocytes (red blood
hyperkeratosis thickening of the stratum corneum (outer
cells).
layer of skin), often associated with qualitative abnormal-
essential nutrients nutrients that cannot be synthesized by
ity of the keratin.
the body at a rate adequate to meet body needs and that
hyperlipidemia a general cerm for elevated concentrations
must be supplied in the diet.
of triglyceride and/or cholesterol in the plasma of fasted
estrus the recurrent, restricted period of sexual receptivity
animals.
in female mammals.
Knuenb jewndo ueyp janeaia e jo uonsaau! eiaeydiadky
exogenous developing or originating outside the organism.
of food.
extravasation a discharge or escape, as of blood from a ves-
hyperplasia increase in cell number.
sel into the tissues.
hypertrophy increase in cellsize.
germ as in wheat germ, the plant embryo found in seeds
hypophosphatemia decreased phosphorous concentration
and frequently separated from the bran (outer coat of a
in the blood.
seed) and starch endosperm during milling.
hypothalamus gland located in the brain that exerts con-
glomerulosclerosis fbrosis and
dscarring that result in
trol over the function of a portion of the pituitary gland.
senescence of the renal glomeruli.
Its nuclei comprise part of the mechanism that activates,
gluconeogenesis the formation of glucose from molecules
controls, and integrates the peripheral autonomic mech-
that are not carbohydrates, as from amino acids, lactate,
anisms, which include a general regulation of water bal-
and the glycerol portion of fats.
ance, body temperature, sleep, and food intake.
gluten the tough, thick, proteinaceous substance that
iatrogenic any adverse condition occurring as the result
remains when the four, wheat, or other grain is washed
of treatment, especially infections acquired during the
to remove the starch.
course of treatment.
glycosuria the excretion of an abnormal concentration of
icterus jaundice.
glucose in the urine.
idiopathic self-originated or of unknown causation.
grain the seed from cereal plants(e.g, wheat, rice, barley, oats).
inappetence lack of appetite.
Heinz bodies coccoid inclusion bodies resulting from oxi-
indole acompound that is produced by the decomposition
dative injury to and precipitation of hemoglobin, seen in
of tryptophan in the intestine; it is partly responsible for
the presence of certain abnormal hemoglobins and eryth.
the peculiar odor of the feces.
rocytes with enzyme deficiencies.
jejunum the portion of the small intestine that extends
hematocrit the ratio of the total red cell volume to the total
from the duodenum to the ileum.
blood volume.
keratin scleroprotein that is the principal constituent of
hemicellulose a heterogeneous group of branched-chain
epidermis, hair, nails, horny tissues, and the organic
polysaccharides that, together with pectin, forms the
matrix of the enamel of teeth.
matrix of plant cells within which cellulose fbers are
keratinization the development of or conversion into the
enmeshed.
structural protein keratin.
Glossary 531
kilojoule the amount of mechanical energy that is required
metabolizable energy (ME) the amount of energy that is
for a force of 1 newton to move a weight of 1 kilogram a
ultimately available to the tissues of the body after losses
distance of 1 meter. To convert kilocalories to kilojoule,
in the feces and urine have been subtracted from the
the number of kilocalories is multiplied by 4.184.
 gross energy of food.It is the value that is most often used
lactic acid an end product of glycolysis that providesenergy
to expres the energy content of pet food ingredients and
anaerobically in skeletal muscle during heavy exercise. It
commercial diets.
can be oxidized aerobically in the heart for energy pro-
metaphysis the wider part at the extremity of the shaft of a
duction or can be converted back to glucose (gluconeo-
long bone, adjacent to the epiphyseal disk. During devel-
 genesis) in the liver.
 opment it contains the growth zone and consists of spongy
leukotriene one of a group of biologically active compounds 
bone; in the adult it is continuous with the epiphysis.
formed from 20-carbon fatty acids chat function as
methemoglobinemia the presence of methemoglobin in
regulators of allergic and infammatory reactions.
the blood, resulting in cyanosis.
ligand a molecule that binds to another molecule; com-
necrosis cell and tissue death.
 monly refers to a small molecule that binds specifically to
neoplasia the progressive multiplication of cells under con-
a larger molecule.
ditions that would not elicit or would cause cessation
lipemia retinalis a milky appearance of the veins and arter.
of multiplication of normal cells; may be malignant or
ies of the retina, occurring as a result of hyperlipidemia.
benign.
lipidosis a term for several of the lysosomal storage diseases
nephrosclerosis sclerosis (invasion of connective tissue at
in which there is an abnormal accumulation of lipids in
the expense of active tissue) of the kidney.
the reticuloendothelial cells. Also called lipid storage dis-
neuropathies general term  denoting functional  distur-
eaSe.
bances and/or pathological changes in the peripheral
lipogenesis the formation offat;the transformation of non-
nervous system.
fat food materials into body fat.
nonessential nutrients nutrients that can be synthesized by
lipoid granuloma a small,nodular, delimited aggregation of
the body at a level suffcient to meet body needs; can be
lipid cells; a xanthoma.
 obtained either through de novo synthesis or from the diet.
lumen the cavity or channel within a tube or cubular organ
nutraceutical a food or naturally occurring food supple-
(e.g, the intestine).
ment thought to have a beneficial effect on human or
lymphadenopathy chronic abnormal enlargement of the
animal health.
lymph nodes (usually associated with disease).
omnivorous subsisting on both plants and animals.
meal an ingredient that has been ground or otherwise
os penis a heterotopic bone developed in the fbrous sep-
reduced in particle size.
tum between the corpora cavernosa and above the ure
meat and bone meal the same as meat meal, except that
thra, forming the skeleton of the penis.
meat and bone meal can contain a great deal more bone
osmosis the passage of pure solvent from a solution of
(raising the ash content and lowering the protein quality).
lesser to one of greater solute concentration when the
meat byproducts the nonrendered, clean parts, other
two solutions are separated by a membrane that selec-
than meat, derived from slaughtered mammals; include,
tively prevents the passage of solute molecules but is per-
but are not limited to, lungs, spleen, kidneys, brain, liver,
meable to the solvent.
blood,bone, and stomach/intestine,without their con-
ossification the process of creating bone; that is, of trans-
tents.
forming cartilage (or fibrous tissue) into bone.
meat meal the rendered product from mammal tissues
osteochondrosis a disease of the growth or ossification
exclusive of blood, hair, hoof, horn, hide trimmings,
centers of bones that begins as a degeneration or necro-
manure, stomach, and rumen contents, except in such
sis, followed by regeneration or recalcification.
Buissasoid poog u! Aiqepioneun jnsso Keu se sounoue
osteocyte a mature bone cell of adult bone that is isolated
practices.
in a lacuna of the bone substance.
meniscus the disk of cartilage that serves as a cushion
parakeratosis retention of nuclei in the cells of the stratum
between the ends of bones that meet at a joint.
corneum of the epidermis, as in psoriasis.
metabolism the sum of all the physical and chemical pro-
parturition the act or process of giving birth.
cesses by which living, organized substance is produced
pearled barley dehulled barley grain.
and maintained (anabolism); also the transformation by
periosteum a specialized connective tissue covering all
which energy is made available for the uses of the organ-
bones of the body and possessing bone-forming poten-
ism (catabolism).
tialities.
532 Glossary
 peristalsis rhythmic movements produced by the function-
pyrexia a fever or febrile condition; abnormal elevation of
ing longitudinal and circular muscle fbers of the small
body temperature.
intestine to propel food forward.
senescence the process or condition of growing old, espe.
phylogeny the evolutionary history of a group of organisms.
cially the condition resulting from the transitions and
polydipsia chronic excessive thirst.
accumulations of the deleterious aging processes.
polyphagia excessive eating.
skatole a crystalline amine with a strong characteristic odor,
polyuria che passage of a large volume of urine in a given
found in feces; produced by the decomposition of pro-
period of time.
teins in the intestine and directly from the amino acid
postprandial occurring after a meal.
tryptophan by decarboxylation.
poultry byproduct meal ground, rendered, clean parts of
stenosis narrowing or stricture of a duct or canal.
the carcasses of slaughtered poultry such as necks, feet,
struvite a urinary calculus composed of magnesium ammo-
undeveloped eggs, and intestines, exclusive of feathers
nium phosphate.
except in such amounts as might occur unavoidably in
subluxation an incomplete or partial dislocation; in the
good processing practices.
case of canine hip dysplasia, the head of the femur par-
poultry byproducts nonrendered, clean parts of carcasses
tially dislodges from the cup (acetabulum) of the pelvic
of slaughtered poultry such as heads, feet, and viscera
bone.
free from fecal content and foreign matter except in such
suppuration the formation of pus.
trace amounts as might ocur unavoidably in good pro-
syncopy sudden, usually temporary, loss of consciousness
cessing practices.
juiej (uieiq aun ui uaakxo suaiyynsui q pasnes Ajenauaa
poultry meal (also includes chicken meal if the origin is
ing.
strictly chicken) the dry rendered product from a combi-
tachycardia abnormally rapid heartbeat.
nation of clean fesh and skin, with or without che accom-
tachypnea increased rate of breathing.
panying bone, derived from the parts of whole carcasses
taurine a beta-amino acid that contains a sulfonic group
of poultry exclusive of feathers, heads,feet, and entrails.
rather than a carboxylic group and so cannot form a pep-
prepuce a covering fold of skin over the penis.
tide bond. lt is an essential amino acid for cats, but not
papond uonisod jo ssauasemeuondaiad uodaoudoid
'ssop oy
by sensory nerve terminals that give information con-
theobromine a methylxanthine contained in chocolate; has
cerning movements and position of the body.
physiological properties similar to those of caffeine.
thermogenesis the production of heat by physiological
cells lining the cardiovascular system; a physiological
processes.
antagonist of thromboxane.
thromboembolism occlusion of a blood vessel by an
prostaglandins any of agroup of components derived from
embolus that has broken away from a thrombus (clot).
unsaturated 20-carbon fatty acids, primarily arachidonic
thromboxane an extremely potent inducer of platelet
acid.
aggregation and platelet-release reactions; also a vaso-
proteoglycan group of polysaccharide-protein conjugates
present in connective tissue and cartilage; form the
urethritis infammation of the urethra.
ground substance in the extracellular matrix of connec-
urolithiasis the disease condition associated with the pres-
tive tissue and also have lubricant and support functions.
ence of urinary calculi or stones.
pruritus descriptive of any of various conditions marked by
villi multitudinous, threadlike projections that cover the
itching.
surface of the mucosa of the small intestine and serve a5
purulent consisting of or containing pus.
the sites of absorption (by active transport and diffusion)
pylorus the distal opening of che stomach surrounded by a
of fuids and nutrients.
strong band of circular muscle through which the stom
vulva the region of the external genital organs of the female
ach contents are emptied into the duodenum.
xanthoma a tumor composed of lipid-laden foam cells.
pyoderma any purulent skin disease.
A
Ad libitum, 194
Aging
 Abdominal surgery, 455-456
Adult animals, digestion processes,
effects, 502
Absorption, 45
209-210
lean body (muscle) mass, percentage
initiation, 45b
Adult cats
(decline), 266
Acanthosis nigricans, 110
acidifying diets, 369
normalcy, 263-264
Acetate, abundance, 14
energy requirements calculation, 69b
phenomena, theories, 261
Acetic acid, fber fermentation end product,
maintenance, 239
process, 261
465-466
protein necessity, 89b
senescence, contrast,261
Achlorhydria, 455-456
vascular changes, 266-267
Acid-base balance
estimated energy requirements,
Alanine, structure, 22f
reestablishment, 369
calculation, 66b
 Alaskan Malamutes, zinc-responsive
regulation
food
disorders, 300
compromise, 424
formulation, 239
 Alaskan sled dogs
plasma protein, usage, 21
intake, monitoring, 239
endurance test, 250
Acidic urine, production, 365
maintenance,239
muscle glycogen levels, 247
Acidified urine, effect, 369
protein, necessty, 89b
Albumin, 41
Acidifying diet, consumption, 369
vitamin E requirement, 384
Algae, omega-3 fatty acids synthesis, 387
Acidosis, cause, 369
Adulthood
Alkaline phosphatase, 41
Acid sprays, usage (increase), 447
overfeeding, 314-315
Allantoin, conversion, 305
Active renal disease, absence, 411
portion-controlled feeding, 336
Allergic dermatitis (atopic dermatitis),
Active vitamin D, 30f, 38
Adult maintenance food
treatment, 384
function,31
feeding, recommendation,500
Allergic dermatosis, causes, 399
kidney production, 38
formulation, comparison, 444-445
Allergic pruritis, control, 395
Acute disease, management, 462
Adult male Labrador Retriever, zinc
Allergy-causing ingredients, 152
Acute gastrointestinal disease, nutritional
deficiency, 386f
Allometric equation, usage (consideration),
management, 462
Adult pets, sedentary lifestyles, 81
66
Acute infammatory joint disease, 492-493
Adverse food reactions
Allopurinol, administration, 306
Acute pancreatitis, 302
dermatological sign, 398
Alpha, term (denotation), 22
medical emergency, 457-458
dermatoses percentage, 396
Alpha-amino acids, presence, 22
treatment, 457
diagnosis, 402b
Alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), 81-82, 84
 Adaptive thermogenesis, 59-60
gastrointestinal signs, 398
consideration, 386
Additives, 155-159
long-term nutritional management,
conversion, 19, 228
presence, 158-159
402b
requirement,19
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 33
onset, 396
establishment, absence, 84-85
phosphate bonds, 37-38
sensitivities, development,402
structure,18f
synthesis, uncoupling, 321
Adverse weather conditions, 256
synthesis, 83
Adipocyte hyperplasia, occurrence,
Aerobic bacteria, proliferation, 439-440
Alpha-tocopherol, 31
314-315
Aerophagia, 460
biological function, 156-157
Adipocyte-induced infammatory responses,
African wild cat (Felis libyca), evolution,
component, 230
327
444
study, 255-256
Adipocytes, production, 321
Age, periodontal disease (relationship), 437
Alternative pet foods, 150
Adipose storage areas, obesity (accumula-
Age-associated physiological changes,
Altricial, term (usage), 209
tion), 313
263-267
Aluminum carbonate, usage, 420
Adipose tissue
metabolic effects, 263-264
Aluminum hydroxide, usage, 420
fatty acids, location, 431
Age increase, impact, 316
American CH Skylark's Rowdy River-
reactive peroxides, accumulation, 279
Age-related changes, 262b-263b
dancer, 222f
Page numbers followed by f, t, or b indicate fgures, tables, or boxes, respectively.
533
534Index
Amino acids, 21
Antioxidants (Continued)
Atherosclerosis, rarity, 289
composition, 91b
presence,increase,484
Athletic conditioning, 249b
dietary protein supply, 22-23
usage,158t
Atopic dermatitis (allergic dermatitis)
dipeptide chain, linkage, 22f
Antioxidant vitamins, beneft, 423-424
consideration,390-391
GE level, 22-23
Aortic insuffciency, 511
dietary fatty acids, relationship, 390-391
hydroxylation, ascorbic acid (usage), 35
Aortic stenosis (AS), 511
treatment,384
older pet requirements, 268-270
Apolipoprotein C-1l (apo C-1), 302
 Atopic disease
protein unit, 21
Appendicular skeleton,musculoskeletal
management, 395b
 Aminopeptidase, 41
dysfunction, 491
prevention/treatment, 391
Amundsen, Roald, 243
Appetite
Atopy, 399
Amylase, release, 49
impact, 319
pruritis characterization, 391
Amylose, proportion (impact), 349
internal control systems, aberrations, 63
severity, 394395
 Anagen phase, 287
Arachidonic acid (AA), 83-84
signs,392
Anemia
concentration,increase, 464
Atwater factors, 5-6, 6t
protein deficiency sign, 418-419
LCPUFA, 82-83
function,6
reduction, 413
precursor, 18-19
Avid-albumin, 283
result, 41
production, 82
Avidin, 33-34
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
linolenic acid, impact, 84b
biotin, inclusion, 283
inhibitors, 513
serum levels, differences, 270
trypsin inhibitor, comparison, 284
Animal BMR, neutering (impact), 317
structure,18f
Azotemia, 414
Animal fat
synthesis,19
control,348
addition,282
Arachidonic cascade (blockage), NSAIDs
exacerbation, 423
term, usage, 154
(usage), 504-505
presence, 409-410
 Animal protein sources, manufacturer
Arginine, 95-96
usage, 149
deficiency, 96b
B
Animal-related factors, 178-179,
clinical signs, 95
Bacterial endocarditis, 511
181-182
metabolic basis, 95-96
Bacterial fermentation, 14
impact, 181
metabolic effects, 484
Bacterial fora, qualitative changes, 456
Animal-source proteins, 149-150 
necessity, absence, 95
Bacterial populations, alteration, 470
inclusion,150
serum levels, decrease, 481
Bacteroides (anaerobe), 50
ingredients, quality (impact), 150b
suboptimal levels, 215
Baking chocolate, 285
Animal tissues, nicotinamide supply, 101
supplementation,483
Barking, excess, 194
Anorexia, 42
synthesis, 96t
Barley, pet food inclusion, 153
problems, 195, 513
Arsenic (trace element), 43
Basal metabolic rate (BMR), 59
Anorexic hormones, actions, 62-63
Arterial thromboembolism (ATE), 512
deceleration, 263-264
Antibiotic-responsive diarrhea (ARD),
Articular cartilage, organization, 502
decrease, 264
455-456
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C), 27, 34-35
elevation, 327
occurrence,455
body requirement, 35
impact, 59-61, 480
Antibody responses, delay, 266
monosaccharide sugars, relationship,
reduction, 316
Antigenicity, increase,402
3435
RFMR, correlation, 59
Antigravity muscles, 244
production, 35
B-complex vitamins, 32-35
Antinfammatory medications, 463
role,290-291
Beagles
Antimicrobial agent, addition, 443
supplementation,291
 bitches, voluntary food intake, 317
Antioxidant nutrients, 270-271
Ascorbyl palmitate, 157
digestive effciency, study, 265
cognitive dysfunction syndrome, 271
As-fed (AF)
lean body massfat, change, 269f
irpact, 229-231
basis, 144
nutrient utilization/metabolism,
role,255-256
conversion, 145b
265-266
identification, 484
term, usage, 132
study, 256
Antioxidants
Aspergillus niger, fermentation, 467
Bedlington Terriers
action,156f
Association of American Feed Control
copper toxicosis locus, DNA marker
activity, 157
Offcials (AAFCO)
identifcation, 299
combination, 271
ME calculation, 6
inheritance mode, 298-299
FDA defnition, 156
milk replacer test guidelines, 215
inherited copper-storage disease, 299
impact,516
Nutrient Profles, 131, 347
 Beef, proportions, 278t
ingredients, categorization, 156-157
recommendations, 92
Beef liver, 281-282
level, consideration, 200
regulations, 134, 177
Beet fiber, FOS (combination), 351-352
Index 535
Beet pulp, usage, 421-422
Bloat, 459
Body fat (Continued)
Behavior, changes, 267
impact, 459
estimation,322
Behavioral problems, occurrence, 267
Blood
loss, 481
Bernese Mountain Dog, zinc deficiency, 114f
ammonia values, reduction, 423
Body protein
Beta-amyloid deposits/plaques, formation, 267
calcium level, 38-39
fux, 23b
Beta-blockers, 513
reduction, calcitonin function
function, 21
Beta-carotene
(impact), 38-39
presence, 21
 carotenoid plant pigment, 230
cholesterol, presence, 350
reserves, losses (minimization), 270
onversion, 29f
coagulation, calcium (impact), 37
status (measurement), nitrogen balance
supplementation, impact, 271
ghrelin, release, 62
tests (usage), 21
Beta-galactosidase, 77
pua snousonruuousnouseou
structural component, 21b
Beta-hydroxybutyrate, increase, 348
products, accumulation, 414
Body weight (BW)
Beta-oxidation, 335
phosphorus concentration, rmonitoring,
change, 504f
Beta-tocopherol, 156-157
420
endocrine disorders, impact, 318
Bifdobacterium animalis (probiotic),
taurine levels, measurement, 515
skin, proportion, 381
impact, 471f
urea concentrations, 421
zinc dosage, 385-386
Bifdobacteriwm spp.
Blood bicarbonate concentration, decrease,
Bone
benefit, 466
369
calcium, impact, 37
presence,50
Blood glucose
 demineralization, prevention, 420
Bile, importance, 49-50
concentrations, 252f
deposition, excess, 290-291
Bile acid concentrations, increase, 432
levels, increase (absence), 348
mineral content, dietary calcium
Bioavailability, importance, 193
plasma fuctuations, 153
(impact),498t
Biochemical pathways, complexity, 481
postprandial Huctuations, impact, 351
resorption, retardation, 290-291
Bioelectrical impedance analysis (BlA), 322
Bloodstream
 Bony ankylosis, 501
Biological value (BV), 23b
FFA presence, 301
Bran, removal, 153
measurement, 24-25
glucose delivery rate, deceleration, 347
Branch-chain amino acids (BCAAs)
Biotin, 33-34, 155
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
concentration, 481
avidin, relationship, 283
elevation, development, 410
increase, 484
carboxyation reactions, requirement,
fermentable fiber, feeding (impact), 422f
Breath malodor, 439
33-34
increase, 432
Breeders, feeding tube preferences, 217
defciencies, 28t, 283
level, comparison, 418
Breeding
signs, 283
screening test, 411b
animals, selection, 199
excesses/dietary sources, 28t
values, decrease, 422
sire/dam condition, 199
sulfur component, 40
Blunt trauma, continuation, 502
Breeds, differences, 269
Biscuits, usage, 444 447
Body
Brewer's yeast, feeding, 285
Bitches
ascorbic acid requirement, 35
Brush border, 49
breeding,199
composition
Bulldog, lifespan (decrease), 262
environment,213
analysis,333-334
Bull Terriers, growth (stunting), 299-300
feeding guidelines, 203t
genetic infuence, 318
Bunny-hop, appearance, 492
metabolic effets/changes, 263-264
Butter, medium-chain fatty acids/SCFAs
feeding management, 200-202
conditions assessment, 240f
(presence), 17
nutritional needs, 202f
Gs sampuadxa Aaraua
Butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA), 157
weight gain pattern, 201f
energy needs, 59
Butylated hyd roxytoluene (BHT), 157
jdeal weight, 200-201
homeostatic mechanisms,39
Butyrate, abundance, 14
ltter size, impact, 204
jodine requirement, 42
Butyric acid, fber fermentation end
nutritional considerations, 204
mineral functions, 37
product, 465-466
puerperal tetany/eclampsia, occurrence,
water function, 9-10
B-vitamin coenzymes, 37-38
113
Body condition scores, 324f-325f
Byproduct
weight loss, 205
impact, 240f
meal, term (usage), 150
whelping, 202
 Body condition scoring (BCS)
term, usage, 149
Bladder
involvement, 323
cell lines, 483-484
limitations, 323
C
inhibition, conjugated linolenic acid
system, usage, 323
Cachexia
(impact), 483-484
values, increase, 495
paraneoplastic syndrome, 479
macroscopic concretions, 359
Body fat
phases, 480
Bland diet, usage, 462
discoloration, 279
identification, 480
536 Index
Cafeteria diets, 63
Caloric density (Continued)
Cancer prevention/treatment, effcacy, 484
long-term exposure, 319
decrease, 349-350
Canine colon, fiber source (effects), 15t
Calcitonin, 38
differences, confusion (solution), 145
Canine colonic lipid/eicosanoid produc-
calcium homeostasis control, 205-206
importance, 366
tion, alteration, 464465
functions, 38-39
moderation, 368
Canine hip dysplasia (CHD), 491-492
Calcitriol (active vitamin D), 38
pet food level, 7
characterization, 492b
production, inability, 414
statement inclusion, AAFCO regula-
development, risk, 491-492
Calcitrol, 30-31
tions, 183
genetic component, 491-492
Calcium carbonate, 155
Caloric distribution, 7
observation, 491492
Calcium (macromineral), 37-40, 111-113,
comparisons, 145-146
parental frequencies, 495
228
recommendation,146f
Canine milk replacers, availability, 214215
uondrosqe
usage, 7-8
Canned diet, energy digestibility, 366
coefficients, decline, 112
Caloric expenditure, measurement,
Canned pet foods, TVP usage, 133
vitamin D, impact, 31
250
Capillary hypertension, 413
availability, phosphorus availability
Caloric intake
Carbohydrate-containing supplement,
(difference), 112
decrease, 266
feeding, 251-252
circulation, 37
excess, inmpact, 494496
Carbohydrates, 13
controlled studies, 113
impact, 353-354
classification,13
defciencies, 38t, 112-113
measurement, 250
colonic fermentation, increase, 181
elevation, 498-499
reduction,318b
content, estimation,8
excesses/dietary sources, 38t
Caloric restriction
dietary requirement, 75-76
homeostasis
dietary management, 328-331
 digestive end products, 45t
control, 205-206
guideline, 328
fermenting, 462
mechanisms, functionality, 499-500
institution,331-332
fber, component, 77-78
puerperal tetany/eclampsia, impact,
level, recommendation,328-330
fnal digestion, 49
113
severity, risks, 330-331
impact,333-334
impact,228
Calorie(s), 4
loading, 245
intake, excess, 497-499
dilution, 334
metabolism, 34, 75
impact,499
estimation, 8-9
alterations, 480-481
metabolism, 224225
Canadian CH Skylark's Rowdy River-
occurrence,480
metabolism/homeostatic mechanisms, 37
dancer, 222f
thiamin, importance, 280
vitamin D, importance, 108
Cancer cachexia, 479-482
protein replacement, 348
regulation, 39f, 497-498
biochemical alterations, 480
sources,152-153
structural integrity, 37
characterization, 480b
digestion, 463
supplementation, necessity, 228b
energy requirements, changes, 481-482
structure, 13f
wrinary concentrations, 372-373
incidence, differences, 479
supplementation, 250, 252
Calcium oxalate
indirect calorimetry, usage, 482
usage, 32
composition, 359
lipid metabolism, alterations, 481
Carbonic anhydrase, 41
formation, 369
metabolic alterations, 482
Carboxylation reactions, 33-34
urolithiasis, 371-373
paraneoplastic syndrome, 479
Carboxymethylcellulose (CMC), 352
dissolution, imposbility, 372
phases, 480
Carboxypeptidase, 41, 49
 prevention, dietary management,
 protein metabolism, alterations, 481
Cardiac cachexia, 512-513
373b
Cancer patients
definition, 512-513
uroliths, commonness, 360
canned/dry ration, oral feeding, 485
presence, 516
Calcium pantothenate, 155
dietary management, 482-485
Cardiac disease, 513-516
Calcium phosphate, 374
diet characteristics, 482-484
Cardiac function, requirements, 511
deposition, prevention, 420
energy needs, calculation, 484485
Cardiac sphincter, occlusion, 459
presence,374
enteral feeding, 485
Cardiovascular disease
Calculolytic diet, usage, 372
fat, inclusion, 483
antioxidants, impact, 516
Caloric claims, inclusion (AAFCO allow-
feeding methods, 485-486
development, obesity (impact), 313-314
ance), 144
feeding tube, usage, 485
fatty acids, mpact,515516
Caloric content statement, 135-136
food, caloric distribution, 482483
high-quality protein, usage, 516
presentation, separation, 136
nutritional care, 479
L-carnitine, usage, 515
Caloric density, 3
parenteral nutrition, 486
 management, nutritional modifcations,
basis, 165
pet food formulation, 484
513-516
consideration, 132
tube feeding, formula selection, 485-486
sodium
Index 537
Cardiovascular disease (Continued)
Cats (Continued)
Cats (Continued)
excretion problem, 514
 cereal-based dog foods, feeding, 99b
regimens, 191-193
usage, 514
chocolate, feeding, 284-285
shedules, adaptation, 196b
taurine, impact, 514515
chronic renal failure, 409
feline lipoprotein lipase defciency,
Cardiovascular system, changes, 266-267
diagnosis, basis, 410
dlinical disease, 303
Carnitine
dietary protein modifcation, 418-419
fiber sources, fermentation index, 466t
deficiency, 515
 IRIS diagnostic guidelines, 410
fish feeding, 277-280
synthesis, 432
dairy products, feeding, 282
food preferences/palatability
Carotenoids, 28
deforming cervical spondylosis, 280-282
(assessment), 178
conversion,28-29
signs, 281b
food selection, primacy/novelty effet,
Carp, thiamin destruction, 279-280
delta-6-desaturase activity, 82
179
Carry-through, 157
dentition, 438f
gastrointestinal system,47f
Cartilage surface, damage, 223-224
diabetes mellitus (DM)
growth
Cat diets
carbohydrate content, 348-349
energy intake, self-regulation,33
dry matter usage, 3
development, risk factors, 344b
energy needs, 226
formulas, 5-6
dietary management, 349b
energy requirements, calculation,227t
liver supplermentation, 282
diet characteristics, 349b
feeding advice, 234b
 metabolic adaptations, 57
differences, 343-344
feeding management, 233
Cat food
fat, intake, 348
period, 221
AAFCO Nutrient Profles, 85, 93-94
foods, selection, 347b
HCM,512
AAFCO regulations, 135
genetic component, evidence, 344
health problerns, ethoxyquin (impact),
acidic urine, production, 365
dietary fat requirement, 81, 85
288289
amount, calculation, 67t
dietary fber, indirect digestion, 14
homozygous LPL deficiency, 302-303
animal origin, digestion, 180
dietary ingredients reaction, 397b
household pets, 239b
boluses, swallowing, 45
dietary protein usage, ability, 23
human foods feeding, 277-285
evaluation, 184-185
dietary taurine requirement, defning
laboratory values, age-related changes,
protein, 148-149
(diffculty), 98-99
263b
election, considerations,193
diet-responsive urinary conditions, 374
large intestine, function, 52
Cat milk
diets
lifespans, 261-262
calcium concentrations, 211
protein, minimum, 93t
liver, enzyme activity, 76
lipid concentration, 210
restrictions, 304
liver feeding, 280-282
nutrient composition, 210t
digestibility effciency, increase, 182
liverforgan meat diet, 280
Cats
low-carbohydrate diet, ingestion, 94
advanced renal failure, clinical signs,
differences, 182
low-fat diet, feeding, 304
409-410
study, 181
LPL deficiency, 301
adverse food reactions
dry commercial food, feeding study, 367
low-fat diet, feeding,304
causes, 396t
EFAs
production, 303
signs,398t
functions, 83-84
suspicion,303
arginine deficiency, 96b
requirement, estimates (difficulty),85
maintenance water needs, estimation, 70
sensitivity, metabolic basis, 95-96
eggs, feeding, 283-284
mammary secretions,210
atopic disease, fatty acid supplementa-
energy needs,256
mature body weight, 68-69
tion response, 393-394
energy requirerments, 68b
ME,60
birth weight, increase, 221
calculation, 69b
meat feeding, 277
body conditions, assessment, 241f, 325f
determination, 66-70
 metabolic adaptations, 77b
body weight, comparison, 328
factors, 196
 microbial populations, 50
breeds, body weights, 323t
increase, 69-70
milk products, feeding, 282
calcium levels, AAFCO Nutrient Profles
essential amino acids, 22b
new food perception, 178b
recommendation, 111
evolution, 34
nonessential amino acids, 22b
calcium oxalate urolithiasis, 371-373
excess body fat, assessment method,
normal aging, 263b
dietary management, 372-373
322-323
nutrition, essential amino acids, 95-101
dietary risk factors, 372b
fat level, requirement, 85
nutritional idiosyncrasies, 57
risk factors, 371372
fats, feeding, 282-283
list, 58b
alcium oxalate uroliths, location, 371
fatty acid requirements, 85
result, 57
cancer cachexia, incidence (differences), 479
fecal characteristics, 52
nutritional needs, 57b
carbohydrate metabolism, 76-77
feeding
obesity
carnivorous feeding pattern, 47
amount, determination, 196-197
assessment methods, 322-323
538 Index
Cats (Continued)
Cats (Continued)
Chlorhexidine acetate, usage, 448
evaluation diffculty, 314
struvite composition, 361-362
Chlorhexidine gluconate, usage, 448
health problems, 314b
vaccination studies,230-231
Chloride (macromineral), 37, 43
low-fat, low-fber diet,feeding,
vitamin A toxicosis, 280-282
jons, 43
333-334
vitamin D, dietary sources, 31
Chocolate
management, feeding advice, 336b
water consumption, differences, 366
feeding, 284-285
percentage,313b
water intake, ensuring, 70
liquor, 285
oils, feeding,282-283
water requirement, 70
Cholecalciferol (vitamin Ds), 29-30
overconsumption, 195
weight loss
Cholecystokinin (CCK), 62
overweight conditions
energy needs, calculation,330b
release, 62
dermatoses, relationship, 314
energy requirements,329t-330t
impact,98-99
development, 315
goal, 331b
Cholesterol
prevention, 336
Cell-mediated response, 28-29
esters, formation, 49
pansteatitis, signs, 279b
 Cell-membrane fatty acids, oxidation 
precursor, 18-19
phosphorus levels, AAFCO Nutrient
prevention,31
transport, 301
Profles recommendation, 111
Cell membranes
Choline, 34
phylogenic tree,58f
DHA, presence, 84
deficiencies/excesss/dietary sources, 28t
poultry feeding, 277
protection, selenium (usage), 42
food sources, 34
protein
Cellular growth, decrease, 34
methyl unit donor, 34
defciency, 101
Cellular insulin receptors, down-regulation,
synthesis,34
excess, 101-102
353
Choline chloride, 155
intake, control, 419b
Cellular turnover, 305
Chondral fratures, occurrence, 502
ME level, 22-23
Cellulose, 350, 467
Chondrocytes, 502
protein-catabolizing enzymes, downregu-
Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM)
necrosis, 502
lation inability, 94
drug claims, 136-137
Chondroitin-4-sulfate, 503
protein requirements, 92
regulatory discretion, 137
Chondroitin-6-sulfate, 503
determination, response criteria, 89
Central nervous system (CNS)
Chondroitin sulfate, 266, 501-502
increase, 95b
functioning, 32
presence,40
level, 9495
glucose, importance, 15
synthesis, 15
SAA methionine, importance, 96
Cephalic phase, 60
Chondroprotective agents, 159-160
SAA need, increase, 96-97
Ceramides, 83
Chromium, 42-43
seborrhea, types, 383
Cereal, necessity, 365
deficiency, 352-353
starch, energy source,77
Cereal-based dog foods, feding, 9b
impact, 352-353
sterile struvite urolithiasis, 362
Cereal grains, 165
importance,352
struvite crystals (formation), urine pH
pet food inclusion, 152
organic complex component, 42-43
(importance), 364
Ceroid, 279
supplementation
struvite urolithiasis, 361-369
Cervical line lesions, 440
impact, 353
dietary risk factors, 363b
Cervical spondylosis, diagnosis, 281-282
study, 353
risk factors, 362
Cervical vertebrae, muscular insertions,
Chronic feline pancreatitis, 457
struvite uroliths, formation, 362b
280-281
Chronic hypercalcemia, 497
table scraps, 277
Cetylpyridinium chloride, effectiveness,
Chronic idiopathic large bowel diarrhea
taste receptors, 47
448
(CILBD), 458
taurine
Chemical score, 23b
treatment, 459
metabolism, 97f
Chewing, opportunities, 442-444
Chronic kidney disease, dietary manage-
requirement, 22, 97-99
Chewing materials, provision, 445
ment (feeding advice), 424b
synthesis,97-98, 97f
Chewing toys, provision, 444
Chronic pancreatitis, 457
thiamin defciency, rarity, 280
Chews, consumption, 444
cases, classifcation, 457458
tryptophan/niacin conversion, inability,
Chicken
Chronic renal disease, management
100-101
 byproduct meal, term (usage), 149
(prescription diets), 424
type 11 DM, 345
definition, 149-150
Chronic renal failure, 265, 409
urolithiasis
meal
amino acid requirements, 418
clinical signs, 361b
production,150
clinical signs, 410b
dietary management, 359
term, usage, 149
 description/clinical signs, 409-411
studies, 359-360
Chlorhexidine
diagnosis, 417
uroliths
effectiveness, 441-442
basis, 410
location, 360-361
usage, 443
dietary fber,impact, 421423
Index 539
Chronic renal failure (Continued)
Cold-induced thermogenesis, 256
Complex carbohydrates
dietary lipids, impact, 415-416
Colitis, classfication, 458
breakdown, 45
dietary management, 417-425
Collagen, 35
presence, 350b
efficacy, clinical studies, 424425
extracellular component, 501-502
proportion,350
goals, 412, 417b
Colonic bacteria
Concanavalin A (Con A), response, 271
dietary protein modifcation, 418-419
activity, 467b
Conditioning level, 248b
dietary therapy, goal, 420, 420b
increase, 515
Congenital medial patellar luxation, 500
fat, impact,419-420
Colonic fermentation, increase, 181
characterization, 500
fatty acid supplementation, impact, 416
Colonic lamina propria/submucosa, access,
Congenital mobility disorders, 500-501
high-protein diet, feeding, 412
462
Congestive heart failure (CHF), 511
hyperlipidemia, relationship,419
Colonic leukotriene B4 (LTB4), reduction,
antioxidants, impact, 516
nutrients, impact, 416-417
464
cardiac disease, 513-516
phosphorus, impact, 414415, 420
Colonic mucosa eicosapentaenoic acid,
clinical signs, 511-512
progression
impact, 464
development, 511
deceleration, 416-417
Colon (large intestine), 51-52
fatty acids, impact,515516
diet, role, 412-417
L-carnitine, usage, 515
dietary protein, impact, 414b
Colon weights, increase, 465-466
nutrition, 513-516
protein, impact, 412413
Colony forming units (CFUs), 50
result, 511
progressive nature, 411-417
Colostrum
Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA), 19
protein
immunoglobulins, provision, 210b
weight loss impact, study, 332
jmpact, 412-414, 417419
immunological benefts, 210
Conjunctivitis, 42
requirements,418
Commercial dog foods, vitamin D3
Consumable bones, development, 445
Chunk-in-loaf wet pet food combination,
(presence), 225
Cooking chocolate, 285
165
Commercial hydrolyzed-protein food,
Cooperative hunting, replacement, 47
Chunks in gravy wet pet food, 165
399-401
Copper, 41, 113-114
Chunks wet pet food, 165
Commercial limited-ingredient food,
concentration, 41
Chylomicrons
399-400
deficiencies, 38t, 41
apo C-ll component, 302
 Commercially produced canine/feline milk
impact, 288
dearance, 304
replacers, availabiity, 214215
excesses/dietary sources, 38t
Chyme, 48-49
Commercial milk replacers, orphan
irportance, 298
delivery, 49
preference, 215
metabolism/functions, 41
Chymotrypsin, 49
Commercial pet food
requirement,113-114
Cis configurations, 17
differences, 182-183
sources, 41
Cis isomers, hydrogen bond placement, 17
label, 136b
toxicosis (hepatic copper-storage disease),
Clostridiua bacteria, presence, 461
organic nutrients, digestibilities, 181
298-299
Clostridimdifcile,decrease,471
safety, concern, 155
DNA marker identification, 299
Closure, term (usage), 209-210
Companion animals
Copper-storage disease, 298-299
Clotting factors (Vll/1X/X), 32
clinical disease, occurrence, 297
treatment, 299
Coat color
energy needs, irmpact, 484-485
Coprophagy (stool eating), 194
hange, 287
excess protein, metabolism ability,
commonness, 290
Coat color development, understanding,
101-102
nutrient defciency, impact, 290
287
fats, importance, 20
Cori cycle, 481-482
Cobalamin (vitamin B2), 34, 155
feeding, 284
Corn
cobalt component, 34
fea/mite infestation control, 285
gluten meal, usage, 150-151
defciencies/excesses/dietary sources, 28t
hyperlipidemia, health problems,
NRC standard value, 141-142
malabsorption, 297-298
301-302
protein, presence, 147
Cobalt,42
obesity
Corneal lipid depositions, 301-302
deficienciesfexcesses/dietary sources,38t
diagnosis, 322
Corn gluten meal, DM digestibility!
vitamin Bz component, 42
risk factors, 316b
nitrogen utilization, 365
Cobalt carbonate, 155
pet foods, digestibility, 183b
Coronary artery dilatator, 284
Cocker Spaniels, idiopathic seborrhea, 383
renal disase progresson,phosphrs
Corticosteroids, usage, 504
Coconut oil, medium-chain fatty acidsf
(impact),415b
Cost per serving, determination, 183t
SCFAs (presence), 17
Complete and balanced, 177
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture,
Cod liver oil, 282
label claim, usage, 135, 137
500-501
Cognitive dysfunction syndrome (CDS),
nutrition claim, usage, 134
observation, commonness, 500-501
267
phrase, usage, 177
Criteria of Willemse, 391
540Index
Crude fat, 180
Decarboxylation, 32
Diabetes mellitus (DM), 343
term, usage, 132
Deconjugated bile acids, elevation, 456
caloric intake, impact, 353-354
Crude fber, term (usage), 132
Defecations, frequency (increase), 398
carbohydrate, impact, 348-350
Crude protein, term (usage), 132
Deforming cervical spondylosis, 108,
chromium, impact, 352-353
Crystalline amino acids, usage, 93
280-282
classifcation, 344-346
Crystalluria, 359
development, 280-281
clinical signs, 346
Cupric chloride, 41
initial clinical signs, 281
observation, 346
Cushing's syndrome (hyperadrenocorticism)
signs, 281b
commercial product type,importance,
impact, 318-319
 Degenerative joint conditions, NSAIDs!
347
Cutaneous adverse food reactions, 396-402
corticosteroids (usage), 504
concurrent illnesses, presence (diagnosis),
dinical signs, 398
Degenerative joint disease (osteoarthritis),
348
commercial hydrolyzed protein diet,
501
development, risk factors, 343
usage, 400-401
 Delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) skin 
diet, consistency/type, 347
 commercial limited-ingredient food,
test, 389
dietary fber
usage, 400
Delta-5-desaturase, 82
impact, 350-352
description/incidence, 396-397
Delta-6-desaturase, 82, 270
role, 350
diagnosis, 399-402
activity, 82
dietary treatment, 346-354
elimination diet, feeding, 401
Delta-tocopherol, stability, 156-157
differences, 343-344
etiology, 397-398
Demodicosis, 110
disorder, 347-348
homemade diet, usage, 399-400
De novo ornithine,synthesis, 95-96
endocrine disorder, 343
long-term management, 402
De novo taurine, synthesis, 100
energy-containing nutrients, usage,
original diet, rechallenge, 401
Dental care products, 448
347-350
provocation test, 401—402
Dental diets, usage, 444-447
fat, impact, 348
term, usage, 396
Dental disease
foods, selection, 347b
treatment, 399-402
development, diet (role), 441447
forms, 346t
Cutaneous disorders, vitamin A therapy,
food type, impact, 442
genetic component, 343
384b
home maintenance care, 447-449
evidence, 344
Cyclosporine, systemic administration,
prevention, 447-449
health complications, 346
383
rawhide chew materials, usage,
heterogeneous syndrome, 344
Cysteine, 40, 96-97
442443
illnesses, presence, 348
Cystine, 40
Dental health/diet, 437
incidence, 343-344
serum levels, decrease, 481
incidence/description, 437-441
increase, 343
Cystine urolithiasis, 375
Dental health problems, types, 437
meals, timing, 354
Cytokines
Dental health supplement, 445
nutrient composition, 347
elevation, 513
Dental problems, 272
 Koenbape jeuoamu
release, 391
Dentition, absence, 444
physical changes, 346
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
protein, impact, 348
D
market, identification, 299
risk factors, 343-344
D-activated animal sterol, 155
measurement, 268-269
Dairy products, usage (avoidance), 282
phosphorus component, 37-38
weight reduction, importance, 353-354,
Dalmatians
polymerases, metalloenzymes/cofactor,
354b
allopurinol, administration, 306
384-385
Diabetic dogs, absolute insulin deficiency,
 males/females, urethras (anatomical
synthesis, 15, 297
344-345
differences), 306
thymidine component, 34
Diarrhea
purine metabolism, 305-306
Dermatoses
episodes, development, 455-456
alteration,305-306
overweight conditions, relationship, 314
resolution,472f
wrate/allantoin excretion, 305b
response,zinc supplementation, 385
Dicalcium phosphate, 41
urate urolithiasis, commonness, 306
Desaturate enzymes, activity (decrease), 270
Diet
uric acid
Desquamating skin lesions, development,
caloric density, 91
production, 305
114
decrease, 334
reabsorption, inability, 305
Developmental skeletal diseases
moderation, 368
urinary tract, urate concentration, 306
caloric intake, excess (impac), 494496
carbohydrate content, 348-349
Dam
causes,223-224
comparison,145
condition, 199
decrease, feeding advice, 496b
composition, 462-472
feeding, 205
nutritional factors, 494 496
digestibility, 472
milk production, 205
Developmental skeletal disorders, 491-500
considerations, 231
Index 541
Diet (Continued)
Dietary omega-3 fatty acids
Digestion, 45
energy measurement, 4-6
effectiveness, clinical studies, 394
hormonal control, 50
energy percentage conversion, 7t
impact, 388-390
initiation,45b
feline tooth resorption, relationship,447
studies, 464
process, 45
metabolizable energy, 4-5
Dietary omega-6 fatty acids
water, importance, 9-10
modification, 394-395
dietary omega-3 fatty acids, ratio, 395
Digestive effciency, study, 265
nutritional adequacy, 347
impact, 464f465f
Diglycerides, hydrolyzation, 45, 50
protein
effectiveness, clinical studies, 394
 Dihomo-gamma-linolenic metabolism, 
level, 332
impact, 388-390
abnormality, 392
provision, importance, 249
omega-3 fatty acid, ratio (impact), 389f
 Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
weight percentage calculation, 7t
Dietary protein
development, 98, 515
Dietary calcium
functions, 22-23
impact, 511-512
excess, 224
impact, 382, 414b
myocardial disease, 512
recommendations, 499-500
intake, reduction, 94
taurine depletion/development, 100
restriction, 372-373
levels, variation, 75-76
taurine-independent variant, 512
Dietary carbohydrate
long-term restriction, 413
usage, 512
energy source, 15-16
modifcation, 418-419
Diltiazem, 513
utilization, 77-78
needs, increase, 249b
Dimethyl sulfide, breath impact, 439
Dietary chloride deficiency, 43
requirement, 89
Dipeptides, hydrolyzation, 50
Dietary components, antigenicity, 397
factors, 94-95
Direct calorimetry, usage, 4
Dietary energy, partitioning, 5f
restriction, goal, 418
Disaccharides, 13
Dietary fat, 332
stimulation, 397
conversion, 49
compounds, 17
usage ability, 23
 Discoid lupus erythematosus, 110
EFA source, 19
Dietary sodium, impact, 416-417
Disodium guanyate, 46-47
energy source, 81b
Dietary sulfur, provision, 40
Dispensable amino acids, 22
impact, 348
 Dietary Supplemental Health and Educa-
Distal esophagus, nutrient delivery, 485
intake, excess, 282
tion Act (DSHEA), 159
dl-alpha-lipoic acid, 271
requirements, 84-85
Dietary supplementation, calcium mainte-
Doberman Pinschers, zinc-responsive
source, 255
nance, 206
disorders,300
Dietary fatty acids
Dietary supplements, omega-3/omega-6
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 84,
atopic dermatitis, relationship, 390391
fatty acid supplementation, 394b
228-229
impact, 82
Dietary taurine, necessity, 100
ALA conversion, 19
levels, modifcation, 394
Dietary thermogenesis (specific dynamic
concentrations
 Dietary fiber (nonstarch polysaccharide),
effect of food) (meal-induced thermo-
decrease, 515-516
14
genesis), 4, 60
increase, 464
amount, differences, 349
Dietary thermogenic response, increase, 333
conversion, ineffciency, 228-229
definition, 465
Dietary vitamin D, level (requirement),
effects, 228-229
effects, 350-351
108-109
essential fatty acid, 229b
mechanism, 421
Diet-induced zinc deficiency, 385b
impact, 228-229
impact, 350-352, 421-423
Diet-responsive urinary conditions, 374
LCPUFA, 82
increase, 352b
Diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, 300
presence, 84, 304
levels, optimum, 334
Digested particles, absorption efficiency
source,154
role, 350
(increase), 49
Docosapentaenoic acid (DPA), 82
Dietary FOS
Digestibiity, 180-183, 231
Dog breeds
consumption, 467-468
coefficients, 6t, 142
body weights, 322t
irpact, 469f
NRC recommendations, 6
conformation, differences, 221
Dietary hypersensitivity, diagnosis, 399,
data, collection, 6
genetic selection,222-223
401
determination, 142-143
growth curves, 493f
Dietary ingredients, canine/feline reactions,
impact, 143b
weight gain rate, 223f
397b
representation,180b
 Dog food
Dietary iron, supply, 40-41
Digestible carbohydrates
AAFCO regulations, requirements,
Dietary lipids, impact, 415416
ingredients,152
135
Dietary management, 328-335
protein-sparing effect, 15-16
amount, calculation, 67t
Dietary metablizable energy,proten
Digestible coefficient, 5-6
animal origin, digestion, 180
intake (relationship), 146t
Digestible energy (DE), 4
boluses, swallowing, 45
Dietary modification, energy deficit, 326
measurement, 5, 143-144
caloric distributions, examples, 321f
542 Index
Dog food (Continued)
Dogs (Continued)
Dogs (Continued)
choice, 64
desquamating skin lesions, development,
fats
CMC, inclusion, 352
114
feeding, 282-283
double-blind study, 394395
diabetes mellitus (DM)
provision, 245-248
nutrient content, 164t
carbohydrate content, 348-349
fatty acid requirements, 8485
preferences/palatability (assessment), 178
development, risk factors, 343, 344b
fecal characteristics, 52
protein, 148-149
dietary management, 349b
pet food digestibility coefficients,
slection
diet characteristics, 349b
impact, 143t
considerations, 193
differences, 343-344
feeding
primacy/novelty effect,179
fat intake,348
amount, determination, 196-197
Dog milk
foods, selection, 347b
management, 231-233
calcium concentration, 211
long-term complications, 346
practices, sujtability, 253
nutrient composition, 210t
dietary fat requirement, 81, 8485
regimens, 191-192
nutrient pattern, difference, 210
dietary fiber
schedules, adaptation, 196b
Dogs
fermentation, 14t
fber sources,fermentation index,466t
advanced renal failure, clinical signs,
indirect digestion, 14
fish feeding, 277-280
409-410
dietary ingredients reaction, 397b
free-choice feeding, kennel setting,194
adverse food reactions
dietaryproenage, abit 3
gastric lipase, secretion, 48
causes, 396t
diet-induced zinc defciency, 385b
gastrointestinal system,46f
signs,398t
diets
gestation, quantity (determination), 197t
ancestry, 192
dry matter usage, 3
GFR, change, 416f
atopic disease
formulas,5-6
glucose, metabolic requirement, 75
fatty acid supplementation response,
GLA supplementation, 392
glycogen depletion, 247
393-394
protein, minimum levels, 93t
glycogen replenishment, cause (determi-
management, 395b
restriction,304
nation), 247-248
birth weight, increase, 221
digestibility
growth
body conditions, assessment, 240f, 324f
data, collection, 6
energy requirements, calculation, 227t
body weight, comparison, 328
effciency, increase, 182
feeding advice, 234b, 496b
calcium
measurement, study, 181
feeding management, 231-233
levels, AAFCO Nutrient Profles
digestive capability
free-choice feeding,233
recommendation, 111
differences, 182
period, 221
supplermentation, problems, 497
study, 181
portion-controlled feeding, 233
calcium oxalate urolithiasis, 373-374
dry food, guaranteed analysis, 8
rates, differences, 221
dietary management, 374
dry matter
hair coat color, factors, 287
risk factors, 373-374
consumption, 70
health problems, ethoxyquin (impact),
caloric intake, increase, 255
LA minimum requirement, 395
288289
caloric restriction, guideline, 328
EFAs, functions, 83-84
hip dysplasia, clinical signs, 492
cancer cachexia, incidence (difference),
eggs,feeding, 283-284
household pets, 239b
479
endurance performance, 243
human foods feeding, 277-285
anned/semimoist pet food, preference,
endurance training, protein needs, 248
1BD, 458
64b
energy expenditures, 249f
induced renal failure, 412
carbohydrates, provision, 245-248
energy needs, 256
insulin defciency, 344-345
cardiovascular disease (development),
increase, 68
laboratory values, age-related changes,
obesity (impact), 313-314
physical work/environmental
262b
carotenoids, conversion, 28-29
stresses, impact, 68
large intestine,function,52
chocolate
energy provision, 245-248
lifespans, 261-262
enjoyment,285
energy requirements, 68b
difference, 262
feeding, 284-285
determination, 66-70
maximum, 262
chronic renal failure, 409
factors, 196
liver feeding, 280-282
diagnosis, basis, 410
formulation, 66
lysine, dietary requirement, 96
IRIS diagnostic guidelines, 410
essential amino acids, 22b
maintenance
colon, fber source (effects), 15t
estimated energy requirements, calcula-
quantity, determination, 197t
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture, obser-
tion, 66b
water needs, estimation, 70
vation (commonness),500-501
evolution, 34
mammary secretions, 210
dairy products, feeding, 282
evolutionary history, 290
meat feeding, 277
dentition, 438f
excess body fat, assessment, 322-323
ME requirement, allometric equation, 66
Index 543
Dogs (Continued)
Dogs (Continued)
Dried solidifed blood (DSB), 374
microbial populations, 50
struvite urolithiasis, 370-371
Drinking water, 10
milk products, feeding, 282
infection, relationship, 370b
Dry diet, wet diet (relationship), 442
moderate growth rate, feeding, 232
sweet food preference, 48b
Dry dog food
needs, 247
table scraps, 277
convenience, 164
new food perception, 178b
taste receptors, 47
diet, 7-8
nonessential armino acids, 22b
taurine
extrusion/expansion process, cereal
normal aging, 263b
requirement, 99-100
(necessity), 365
NRC recommendations,6
status, dietary factors (importance),
guaranteed analysis, 8
nutrients, intestinal absorption, 297-298
99-100
nutrient composition, 278t
nutrition, essential amino acids, 95-101
theobromine toxicity
nutrient content, 164t
nutritional needs, 57b
impact, 284
Dry matter (DM)
obesity
symptoms,284
amount, daily caloric requirement, 144
assessment methods, 322-323
thiamin deficiency, rarity, 280
digestibility, 365
evaluation diffculty, 314
treadmill exercise, 505f
coefficients, 180
health problems, 314b
type I diabetes mellitus, study, 351
dog consumption, 70
incidence, 318
urate urolithiasis, treatment, 306
increase, 163
management, feeding advice, 336b
urolithiasis
ingestion, 81
percentage, 313b
clinical signs, 361b
nitrogen utilization, 365
oils, feeding, 282-283
dietary management, 359,370-371
weight, carbohydrate percentage, 13
osteoarthritis, 502
uroliths
Dry-matter basis (DMB), 132, 164
overconsumption, 195
location, 360-361
beef, proportions, 278t
overweight body condition, avoidance,
types, 375
caloric densities, 239
232
vaccination studies, 230-231
calorie content, 166-167
overweight conditions
vitamin C supplementation, 35
conversion, 145b
Se suawdoaaa
vitamin D, dietary sources, 31
ingredients list, requirement, 133
prevention,336
water intake, ensuring, 70
level, 183
phosphorus levels, AAFCO Nutrient
water requirement, 70
nutrient data, conversion, 144
Profles recommendation, 111
weight loss,328
phosphorus, presence, 228
phylogenic tree, 58f
energy requirements, 329t-330t
Dry pet foods, 163-165
portion-controlled basis, 253
goals, 331b
disadvantage, 164-165
poultry feeding, 277
program, energy needs (calculation),
ingredients, 164
protein
330b
wet pet foods, contrast, 442
availability, digestibilities (impact), 143b
wolf, relationship, 191
Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)
deficiency, 101
Domesticated dogs/cats,life stage
body composition analysis, 333-334
excess, 101-102
extension, 261
usage, 322-323
intake, control, 419b
Domestication, byproduct, 261-262
Duodenum
ME level, 22-23
Domestic cats (Felis catus)
needs, increase, 248
carnivorous characteristics, comparison,
CCK release, 62
requirements,92
365
Dysplastic hips, 492f
requirerments determination, response
dentition, absence, 444
criteria, 89
descendancy, 192-193
E
protein needs, study, 248
domestic cats, differences, 191
Early-age neutering, usage (adoption), 317
pulmonary disease (development),
eating, slowness, 193b
Eating
obesity (impact), 313-314
home living, 193
rapidity, 191b
racing training, 249-250
mature body weight, 68-69
rate, decrease, 192b
red coat, occurrence, 286-288
phylogeny/evolutionary relationship,
Eccentrocytosis, 286
regional coat-color change, cause, 287-288
examination, 59
Eclampsia, occurrence,113
renal disease, diet protein level, 418
urolithiasis, 362-363
Eggs
reproductive success, 75
Domestic dogs
biotin source, 33-34
SAA methionine, importance, 96
average lifespan, 262b
cooking,284b
seborrhea, types, 383
domestic cats, differences, 191
proteins, usage, 283
skin disorders, 110
eating, rapidity, 191
Egg white
social environment, 65b
phylogeny/evolutionary relationship,
injury, 283
social facilitation, 192
examination, 57
trypsin inhibitor, 284
sports, 254-256
social facilitation, 191-192
Egg white trypsin inhibitor, 283-284
544Index
Eicosanoids
Energy (Continued)
Epithelial cells SCFA energy source, 14-15
precursors, 387-388
fat provision, 19b
Epithelial tissue (maintenance/formation),
production, dietary omega-6/omega-3
deficit, 326
vitamin A (importance), 27
fatty acids (impact), 388-390
exercise, impact, 328b
Ergocalciferol (vitamin D2), 29-30
types,83
imbalance, 9
Escherichia coli,370
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 84
occurrence,9
Esophagostomy tube, nutrient delivery, 485
ALA conversion, 19
measurement, 46
Esophagus, 48
concentrations
obtaining, 3
Essential amino acid index (EAAl), 23b
decrease, 515-516
older pet requirements, 268
measurement, 24
increase, 464
overconsumption, 9
Essential amino acids, 22b
infammation, reduction, 503
requirements
supply,22
LCPUFA, 82
changes, 481-482
Essential fatty acids (EFAs), 3
presence, 304
prediction, allometric equations
deficiency, 86b
serum levels, 270
(usage), 67
commercially prepared foods, impact,
source, 154
surplus, problerms, 9
98
Eicosatrienoic acid, concentration
 Energy balance, 59
occurrence, 386
{increase), 464
dietary fber, impact, 15-16
rarity, 85-86
18-carbon EFAs, synthesis, 83
Energy-containing molecules, conversion, 3
signs, 387
 Elderly companion animals, feding advice,
 Energy-containing nutrients, levels, 8
diet modifcation, 394-395
272b
Energy-dense diet, consumption, 62
doses/ratios, 395-396
Energy density, 3, 6-9, 91b, 231
fat source, 81-83
Electrolytes, 43
consideration, 183, 231
functions, 83-84
balance, consideration, 250
definition, 7b
increase, 83b
requirements,250
determination, guaranteed analysis
need, 81
Elimination diet, 399
(usage), 8t
nutritional value, loss, 31
feeding, 401
 information, expression (AAFCO
polyunsaturated characteristic, 19
protein/carbohydrate sources, 399, 401b
requirement), 8
precursor, 18-19
types,399
reference, 6-7
skin disease, relationship, 386-396
Emulsifiers, importance, 159
Energy expenditure, 59-61
source, 19
Endochondral ossification, 492-493
BMR component, 60-61
status, physiological stress, 82-83
Endocrine disorders, impact, 318-319
component(s), 59-60, 59b
topical application, 383
Endocrine imbalances, 63
factors,60t
Essential nutrients, 3
 Endogenous vitamin C, animal produc-
exercise, impact, 61b
Ethoxyquin, 157
tion,35
factors, 60-61
concentrations, limitation, 289
Endotoxemia, 455-456
Energy intake, 61-65
impact,288-289
Endurance
factors, 61b, 65
maximum level, reduction, 158
competitions, work type, 243-244
impact, 7
preservative, role, 288-289
exercise, glycogen repletion, 250-252
inadequacy, 9
safety, study, 289
physiology, 243-244
Energy needs
study, 158
taining, protein needs
calculation, 484-485
Etretinate, effcacy, 383
increase, 248
increase, 68, 253
Eubacteria(anaerobe), 50
study, 248
reductions, aging (impact), 268b
Evening primrose oil, fsh oil
work, caloric requirement, 249-250
Energy-yielding nutrients, usage, 3
(combination), 393
Endurance dogs
Enrobing,163
Excess body fat, assessment, 322-323
dietary fat, importance, 252-253
Enteral feeding, 485
Excess calcium intake, 497499
fat (metabolic fuel), 246-247
Enterococcusfaecium,population increase,
impact, 499
feeding/diets, 252-253
471
Excess weight, physical effects, 314
sprint-racing dogs, contrast, 254b
Enterocytes, 50-51
Exercise
total energy requirement, 249
Enterokinase, impact, 49
energy deficit,326
Endurance performance, 243-253
Environmental conditions, water losses
inadequacy, impact, 316
enhancement, 244-245
(increase),253
intensity, 253-254
feeding advice, 248b
Enzymes, necessity, 21b
increase, 244b
water/electrolyte requirements, 250
Eosinophilic colitis, 458
level, changes, 61
Energy, 3
Epidermal lipids, changes, 381-382
tolerance, increase, 327
calculation methods, 5-6
Epidermal water barrier (maintenance),
Exercise-induced hyponatremia, occur-
cncentration,19
linoleic acid (importance), 85
rence,250
Index 545
Exercising dogs, nutritional needs
Fatty acids(Continued)
Feline idiopathic cystitis, 374
(understanding), 254255
eicosanoid precursors, 387-388
Feline idiopathic hepatic lipidosis, 431b
Exocrine pancreatic insuffciency (EPl),
mobilization/delivery, 253-254
Feline lipoprotein lipase defciency,
455-458
radical, formation, 155-156
302-303
clinical signs, 458b
ratio
clinical disease, 303
diagnosis, 457-458
absence, 395
Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD),
clinical signs/history, usage, 458
adjustment, 390
314, 359
long-term management, 458
requirements, 8485
development, risk, 136-137, 360
occurrence, 457
supplementation, 392-394, 503
uroliths, relationship (absence), 374
 Exogenous insulin administration, 346
doses, absence, 395
Feline milk replacers, availability, 214215
Experimentally induced struvite urolithi-
 omega-6 fatty acids, administration
Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions
asis, 364
(avoidance), 419420
(FORLs)
Extracellular fuid, ionized sodium
types, 18f
categorization, 441
(presence), 43
Fecal bifidobacteria, increase, 471-472
commonness, 441b
Extruder, 163
Fecal characteristics, pet food digestibility
diagnosis, 437
Extrusion process, development, 163
coeffcients (impact), 143t
diet, relationship, 447
Fecal consistency, improvement, 469-470
incidence, 440-441
F
Fecal nitrogen excretion, impact, 422
lesions, 440-441
Facultative anaerobic bacteria, proliferation,
Fecal water, impact, 10
systemic acidosis, impact, 447
439-440
Feces
theories, explanation, 440-441
Family method of substantiation, 134135
gross energy (GE) content, determination, 5
Feline tooth resorption, diet(relationship),
Fasting blood glucose level, decrease, 353
nitrogen, presence, 89
447
Fasting-induced FHL, protection, 433
Feed-choice feeding, 194-195
Feline urine, struvite crystal formation,
Fast-twitch fbers (type lla/lb fbers), 244
involvement, 194
364
Fat, 17
Feeding
Feline uroliths, mineral types, 374
accumulation, 313
advice,200b
Female cats, feeding regimen, 204
caloric distribution, 320
amount, determination, 196-197
Female dogs, energy needs (increase), 68
ontent, increase, 20b
behavior, 191-193
Females, EFA status, 199
defciencies, 85-86
 reproductive status, direct efect, 317
Femoral head, Aattening, 491
commercially prepared foods, impact,
cost, 184
Fermentable fiber
98
decisions, 193-194
blend, feeding (clinical response), 423
digestive end products, 45t
external factor, 319
sources, blend (usage), 423
EFA source, 81-83
guidelines, 135
Fermentive gas, production, 461
energy concentration, 19
management, 204-205, 231-233
Ferrous sulfate heptahydrate, 41
provision,19b
methods, 216-217, 366-367
Fiber
energy source, 81
practices, 277
carbohydrate component, 77-78
excesses,85-86
regimens, 335
content, 153
food inclusion,270
tirming/process, 194-196
fermentation, 465
fuel,importance, 244b
trials, direct determination, 5
end products, 465-466
function, 17-18
Feline central retinal degeneration (FCRD),
impact,334-335
impact, 348
86
sources, 153
low-intensity usage, 244b
Feline hepatic lipidosis (FHL), 431
fermentation index, 466t
metabolic fuel, 246247
acquired disorder, 431
Fibrinopurulent exudate, production,
metabolic function, 18-19
clinical signs, 432
501
metabolism, 10
inclusion, 432
Fibroblasts, differentiation, 502
requirements, 81
commonness, 431
Fish
sources, 154
development, 432-433
meats, 165
structural functions, 18-19
diagnosis, 432
oil, evening primrose oil (combination),
Fat cell hyperplasia, 232
incidence/cause, 431-432
393
Fat free mass (FFM), water amount, 322
metabolic cause, 432433
pansteatitis,relationship, 279
Fat-soluble vitamins, 27, 107-111
nursing care, owner assistance, 433
f-series leukotrienes, 388
group, 27b
predisposition, 433
Flavin adenine dinucleotide, 32-33
levels, recommendation, 108t
recovery, therapeutic diet (determina-
Flavin mononucleotide, 32-33
 Fatty acids
tion), 433
Flaxseed, omega-3 fatty acid alpha-linolenic
carbon-chain length, variation, 17
treatment,432-434
acid source, 154
composition, 17
period, monitoring, 433-434
Flea-bite dermatitis, 396,399
546 Index
Fleas
Foods(Continued)
Gastric delaying, delay, 348
infestation, control, 285
proteins, immunological sensitization
Gastric dilatation, history, 194195
repellants
(risk), 463
Gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV),
 brewer's yeast/thiamin, usage, 285
PUFAs, presence, 31
459461
garlic/onions, usage, 286
selection, 347b
causal factors, 461
Fluorine (trace element), 43
 specific dynamic action, 4
cause, diet composition/type (impact),
Flyball events, 254255
specifc dynamic effect, 60
461
Folic acid (folacin), 34, 155
texture, importance, 444445
characteristics, 459
activity, 34
urine-acidifying properties, 371-372
genetics, impact, 460
deficiencies/excesses/dietary sources,
water, presence,10
multifactorial etiology, 460
28t
4-series leukotrienes, 388
occurrence, food type (correlation), 461
Follicular plugging, 383
Foxhound-Boxed-lngelheim (FBl) Labra-
prevention, advice, 461
Food bars, development, 445
dor, calcium excess(impact),499
recovery, 459
Food intake, 61-65
Free-choice feeding, 165-166, 194195
risk
alterations, 319-321
adaptation, problems, 195
factors, identification, 460
external controls, 63-65
convenience, 195
increase, 459
stimuli, 63
recommendation, avoidance, 233
nutritional factors, 460
internal controls, 61-63
Free cholesterol, esterification, 49
treatment, 459-460
 internal signals, 319
Free fatty acids (FFAs), 157
Gastric distention, occurrence, 62
meal frequency, impact, 320
 bloodstream presence, 301
Gastric emptying
regulation,319
concentrations, 245
delay, 352
reproductive status, direct effect, 317
hydrolyzation, 45, 50
rate, 48-49
Foods
supply, 244
Gastric health, meal frequency (impact),
acceptance test (one-pan test), 178
Free radicals, scavenging, 229-230
460
adverse reactions, 396
Fructooligosaccharides (FOS), 350
Gastric lipase, secretion, 48
allergy, drop-out rate, 399-400
beet fber, combination, 351-352
Gastric motility, dietary fat (impact), 348
antigens, 397
consumption, 467—468
Gastrin,38-39
immune-mediated response, 462
fermentation, 50
Gastrointestinal bacteria, intestinal wall
alcium content
FOS-continuing diet, feeding, 469-470
attachment (prevention), 467-468
decrease, 112b
function, 467
Gastrointestinal disease
variation, 39-40
prebiotic example, 467
composition,455
caloric distribution, 482-483
sources, 467
dietary recommendations, 472b
caloric value, measurement, 4
structure,468f
 nutritional management, 455
dhoice, social learning (impact), 64-65
usage, 421-422
nutritional responsiveness, 455-461
components, properties, 179-180
Fructose (fruit sugar) (simple sugar), 13, 45
Gastrointestinal microbiota, alteration, 470
daily requirement, calculation, 9b
structure,13f
Castrointestinal system
energy content, 347-348
Functional ingredients, 159-160
cats, 47f
energy density, 6-7, 332
acceptance,159-160
changes, 265
knowledge, 8
inclusion, 159, 160b
dogs, 46f
gastric secretions, mixture, 48-49
Furosemide, 513
Gastrointestinal tract
gross energy (CE) content,
Fusobacteria (anaerobe), 50
antigenicity, increase,402
determination,5
bacterial growth, dietary fber (impact),
hypersensitivity diagnosis, phases,
G
421
3996
Gadolinium diethylenetriamine pentaacetic
changes, 265
ingredients, metabolizable energy, 45
acid (Gd-DTPA), 410-411
enzymes, digestion,180
intolerance, 396
Galactooligosaccharides, prebiotic example,
epithelial cells
labels, reading (confusion), 8
467
energy needs, 465-466
metabolizable energy (ME),
Galactose (simple sugar), 13, 45
SCFA energy source, 1415
measurement, 5b
structure,13f
immune-mediated responses, 462
palatabiity, 319
Gamma-linolenic acid (GLA)
muscular walls, contractions, 45
assessrment, 178
antinfammatory effects, 392
Gel-forming fibers (viscous fbers), 350
passage control, pyloric sphincter
metabolites, production, 392f
Genes, regulation, 261-262
(impact),48-49
presence,387
Genetic predisposition (breed), impact, 318
preference tests (two-pan tests), 178
provision, 392
Geriatric cats
preferences, assessment, 178
synthesis, 19
eating habits, particularity, 272
properties, 180
Garlic (Allium ativum), feeding, 286
studies, 265
Index 547
Geriatric dogs
Glucosamine, 503-504
Glycosylated hemoglobin (GHb) concen-
dietary protein requirement, 269-270
products, usage, 503-504
trations, usage, 354
eating habits, particularity, 272
Glucosamine HCl, joint activity, 503
Gourmet-type wet cat foods, 166
Geriatrics, 261
Glucosamine sulfate,joint activity, 503
Grain-source proteins, 150-152
behavior changes, collection, 267
Glucose (simple sugar), 45
Grain sources, 152
German Shepherd Dogs, diarrhea resolu-
absorption, 76-77
Granulomatous colitis, 458
tion, 472f
deceleration, 352
Great Danes
Gestation
chains, 13-14 
bone mineral content,498t
feeding advice, 200b
intolerance, 313
dietary calcium
feeding management, 200-204
metabolic importance, 76b
feeding, 498t
later stages, 202b
metabolic requirement, 75
study, 499
supplementation,205-206
metabolism, 482483
overnutrition/growth/developmental
Ghrelin (growth hormone releasing factor)
 metabolism, chromium
skeletal disease,relationship,494
peptide, 320-321
importance,352
phosphorus, addition, 498
release, 62
supplementation, irpact,353
Giant-breed dogs, 222-225
polymer, provision, 252
ad libitum/limit-fed feeding, 222-223
calcium excess, pathological effects, 499
presence,13
feeding, 224
dietary calcium recommendations,
recycling, cytokine-induced increases,
zinc-responsive disorders, 300
499-500
481482
Greyhounds
portion-controlled basis, 496-497
response,349
feeding, 254
skeletal development/nutritional recom-
structure,13f
high-speed running, 244b
mendations, protein/energy/calcium
tolerance factor, 4243, 352
races, 253
(jmpact), 226t
tolerance improvement, 327, 353-354
Gross energy (GE), 4
Giant Schnauzers, inherited vitamin B2
tolerance tests, 483-484
approxirmation, 19
malabsorption, 297
transport, increase, 250-251
content, determination,5
Gingivae, infammation, 437
turnover, rate (increase), 480
ME, contrast, 144
Gingival infammation, odontoclastic
Clucuronic acid, synthesis, 15
values, readjustment, 6
resorptive lesions (relationship), 437
Glutamine
Growing dogs, skeletal disease preven-
Gingivitis (gum infammation)
serum levels, decrease, 481
tion (vitamin C supplementation),
consideration, 440b
structure, 22f
290-291
 development, 440
Clutathione peroxidase
Growing pains, 494
reduction, 444
formation, 42
Growing pets, feeding, 231
occurrence, 443
selenium component, 110
Growth, 221
periodontal disease, relationship, 439-440
Gluten, protein mixture, 152
antioxidant nutrients, impact, 229-231
term, usage, 439
Gluten-induced enteropathy, 152
calcium, impact, 228
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR), 410
Clycemic control, 351
docosahexaenoic acid, impact, 228-229
dhange, 416f
Clycemic response, variations, 349
energy, 226
decline, 410-412
Glycerol
needs, 226
occurrence, 420
conversion, 45
feeding management, 231-233
deterioration, 418
hydrolyzation, 50
immune function,impact,229-231
levels, increase, 412,416
Glycine
nutrient needs, 226-231
measurement, 410411
serum levels, decrease, 481
patterns, 221-226
stability, enhancement, 414 415
structure,22f
period, 221
values
Glycogen
phosphorus, impact, 228
increase, 414415
loading, 244-245, 250
portion-controlled feeding, 233
stability, 422
procedure,245
protein,impact, 227-228
Glomerular hypertension, reduction, 411412
plant fiber, difference, 14
rate
therapies, 415
repletion,250-252
moderation, 496
Glomerular hypertrophy, modifcation, 413
enhancement, 251-252
optimum, feeding (usage), 496497
Glomerulus, 409
rate,250-251
Growth hormone releasing factor,
Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), 62
 sau kddns
320-321
Glucocortoids
Glycoproteins, 34
Guaranteed analysis example, 147
administration, 343-344
Glycosaminoglycan (GAG), 503
Guaranteed analysis panel, 131-132
impact, 301
chains, composition, 501-502
examination, 132
side effects, 502-503
number, decrease, 266
Gum arabic, usage, 421-422
Gluconeogenesis, rate (increase), 480
source, 159-160
Gumming, 157-158
548Index
Gums
High-fber reducing diets, 333t
Hyperlipidemia
care, 272
Highly fermentable fber sources, 15b
causes, 289
infammation (gingivitis), consideration,
High-quality pet foods, nutrient content!
chronic renal disease, relationship, 419
440b
energy density, 141b
degree, impact, 415
Gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), 471
High-quality proteins, 23
dietary treatment, 290
usage, 516
health problems, 301-302
H
Hip dysplasia, clinical signs, 492
high-fat pet foods, impact, 289-290
Hair coat color, impact, 287
Hip joint laxity, longitudinal study,
hyperlipoproteinemia, comparison,
Hair color, change, 287
495
300-301
Hair growth, anagen phase, 287
rarity, 289
Hair shafts, depigmentation, 381-382
Histocytic colitis, 458
Hyperphosphatemia, 420
Halitosis (oral malodor), 439
Home dental care, effectiveness, 448
Hyperpigmentation, 300
Haplotypes, discovery, 299
Homemade diets, 399-400
Hyperplastic obesity, 232
Healthy skin promotion, claims, 136-137
feeding, 319
characteristic, 314-315
Heart, nutrition (relationship), 511
usage, advantage, 399-400
importance, 336
Heart disease
Homemade milk replacers, formulation,
Hypertension, diagnosis, 423
overweight conditions, impact, 516
215
Hypertriglyceridemia, 301-302
sodium restriction, institution, 514
Human athletes
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 512
Heart-related disease, 266-267
dietary modifcation, 254
commonness, 512
Heat-treated egg white, 284
working dogs, contrast, 245
treatment protocols, 513
Heat treatment, 153b
Human cancer patients, studies, 481
Hypertrophic obesity, characteristic,
denaturation, 284
Human food
314-315
impact, 397
digestibility coeffcient, 6t
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HOD), 491,
vitamin loss, 163-164
sodium content,514
493494
Hemicelluloses, 350
Human scurvy, canine HOD (contrast),
clinical signs, 497-499
Hemoglobin
291
development, 290-291
iron, recycling, 41
Humoral immune responses, 28-29
occurrence,493-494
presence,40
Hunger
scurvy, contrast, 291
production, reduction,413
internal controls, 320-321
therapeutic treatment, 291
Heparin
systems, aberrations, 63
Hyperuricosuria, 305
administration, 303
sensation, hormones (impact), 62
Hypervitaminosis D, cause, 109-110
synthesis, 15
Hunting dogs, energy (increase), 255
Hypoalbuminemia
Hepatic copper-storage disease (copper
Hyaluranan, 501-502
development, 413
toxicosis), 298-299
Hydrochloric acid (HCI)
protein defciency sign, 418-419
Hepatic gluconeogenesis, 348
formation, 43
Hypoallergenic pet food ingredient, 152
Hepatic lipidosis, development, 333-334,
secretion,48
Hypokalemia (potassium deficiency), 423,
348
neurological/hormonal stimuli, impor-
455456
risk, 328, 332-333
tance, 48
Hypophosphatemia,497
Hepatoencephalopathy, clinical signs, 433
Hydrogen sulfde, breath impact, 439
Hypothyroidism, 318
Herbivorous animals, SCFA energy deriva-
Hydrolyzed protein
clinical signs, 318
tion, 14
diets, limitations, 400-401
Herring, thiamin destruction, 279-280
efficacy, 400
Hexametaphosphate (HMP), HMP-
Hydroxyapatite, 37-38
ldiopathic colitis, 463
coated biscuit supplementation (dental
Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid, 388
Idiopathic cystitis, 374
effects), 445446
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syn-
Idiopathic lymphangiectasia, 462
High-carbohydrate diets, 345
drome), impact, 318-319
Iditarod, popularity, 243
High-carbohydrate low-fat control diet,
Hypercalcemia
IF-cobalamin, receptor, 297-298
350-351
development, absence, 498-499
lleal brake, 62
High-carbohydrate reducing diets, 333t
risk factor, 372
lleal-cecal junction, 50
High-density lipoproteins (HDLs), choles-
Hypercalciuria, 373-374
lleocecal valve, 51-52
terol transport, 301
Hypercholeste rolemia
Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome (l-GS), 297
High-fat diets, 63
development, 348
Immune cell population, beta-carotene
High-fat pet foods, impact, 289-290
rarity, 301-302
supplementation (impact), 271
 High-fiber diet
Hyperfltration, adaptive changes, 413
lmmune function
eficacy, examination, 352
Hyperfiltration theory, 411-412
impact, 229-231
gycemic control, 351
Hyperglycemia, occurrence, 354
nutrition, importance, 229-230
Index 549
Immune-mediated adverse food reactions,
Ingredient list (Continued)
Intestinal disease (Continued)
397
general information,133
impact, 467470
Immune-mediated reactions, 396
importance,132-133
recommendations, 470
Immune system
inclusion, 133b
probiotics, impact, 470-472
hanges, 266
Ingredients, addition/deletion (promotion),
protein
dysfunction, 42
139
inclusion, consideration,463b
lmmunocompetence, 270
Inheritance, sex-linked mode, 298-299
source, 462463
Immunoglobulin A (lgA), 501
Inherited canine copper-storage disease,
treatment,466
lmmunoglobulin E (lgE)
298-299
Intestinal eicosanoids, changes, 464
lgE-mediated immediate-type/delayed
Inherited chondrodysplastic dwarfism, 300
lntestinal eicosapentaenoic acid, impact,
hypersensitivities, 391
Inherited copper-storage disease, 299
464
receptors, presence,397
 Inherited vitamin Bz malabsorption, 297
Intestinal healing, 467
response (reduction), soy protein 
Inherited zinc malabsorption (Siberian
 Intestinal lactase activity, decline, 282
(impact),397
Huskies), 300f
Intestinal lumen, environment, 40-41
Immunoglobulin E (lgE)-mediated type-1
lnitial insulin response, delay, 353
Intestinal microbes, SCFA production, 456
hypersensitivity, 390
Inner mitochondrial membrane, beta-
Intestinal microbial population, change,
Immunoglobulin E (lgE)-sensitized mast 
oxidation, 335
456457
cells, 391
lnorganic sulfates, presence, 40
lntestinal obstruction, 455-456
Immunoglobulin G (lgG), 501
lnsoluble fibers, 14
Intestinal phosphate-binding agents, usage,
Immunoglobulin M (lgM), 501
inclusion,351
420
Immunopolysaccharides, synthesis, 15
lnsulin
lntrinsic factors (1Fs), 34
Immunoproliferative enteropathy, 458-459
administration, 354
compound presence, 297
Immunosuppressant drugs, impact, 301
internal control signal, 62
lnulin, 467
 Inactive trypsinogen conversion, enteroki-
resistance, 344
prebiotic example, 467
nase (usage), 49
development, 480
In vitro T-cell, concanavalin A response,
Inactive vitamin D, 30-31
increase, 480
271
Inborn favor preferences, 179
occurrence, 345
lodine, 42
 lnfection-induced struvite
response, delay, 353
body requirement, 42
commonness, 370
satiety/eating cessation signals, 62
deficienciesfexcesses/dietarysources,38t
sterile-induced struvite, contrast, 370
secretion, 345
lodine-based radiographic contrast, usage,
urolithiasis, 362
Insulin-dependent animals, feeding
410-411
prevention, 371
schedule, 354
lohexol, usage, 410-411
Infection-induced struvite uroliths, 362
 lnsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
lonized calcium, roles, 113
dissolution, 368
(1DDM) (type 1 diabetes), 344-345
lonized sodium, presence, 43 
lnfectious arthritis, 501
lnsulin-like growth factor-1 (1GF-1)
lron (macromineral), 37, 40-41
cause, 501
circulating levels, increase, 496-497
deficiencies, 38t, 41
clinical signs, 501
plasma concentrations, 317
dietary deficiency, 41
Infammation
Insulin-secretory responses, abnormality,
dietary iron, supply, 4041
FORL, relationship, 441
353-354
excesses/dietary sources, 38t
reduction, glucosamine (usage), 504b
Integument, changes, 264-265
presence,40
Infammatory bowel disorder (1BD),
lnternal control systems, aberrations, 63
sources, 41
458459
International Renal lnterest Society (IRIS),
transportation,41
food protein sensitization risk, increase,
diagnostic guidelines, 410
lsoleucine
463
lntestinal Bifdobacteria species,increase,
concentration,481
genetic basis, 458-459
468469
levels, elevation, 481
management, 471
lntestinal cells, SCFA source, 334
lsotretinoin, effcacy, 383
multifactorial disorder, 458-459
lntestinal disease
symptoms, impact, 467
carbohydrates, impact, 463
J
treatment,459
dietary fber, impact, 465-467
Jejunum
lnfammatory disease, management,
dietary management, 461-472
394
fat, level/type (impact), 463-465
CCK release, 62
Ingredient list, 132-134
fiber recommendations, 470
Joint health support, claim, 159
components,134b
long-term management, diet composj-
Joint mouse, 492-493
inclusion, 133
tion, 462-472
Joints
confusion, 134
management, 462
articular surface, understanding,
deceptiveness, 133
prebiotics
501-502
550 Index
Joints (Continued)
Labrador Retrievers
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease (LCPD), 491,
hydration, reduction, 502
diarrhea resolution, 472f
500
injury, types, 502
endurance training, 245-246
development, 500
laxity, evidence, 491
hip joint laxity, longitudinal study, 495
occurrence, 500
problems, development, 266
study, 256
Leptin
stress, 505
Lactating queens/bitches, nutrient-dense
cytokine production, 321
diet, 204205
sensitivity, reduction, 327
K
Lactation, 199
Leucine, concentration, 481
Keratinization, abnormality, 381-382
energy-demanding stages, 68
Leukotriene B4 (LTB4)
Keratin sulfate, 501-502
feeding advice, 200b
conversion,83
levels, 502
feeding management, 204-205 
presence,388
Kibbles
stress, degree, 204
Leukotriene Bs (LTBs), presence, 388
consumption, 444
supplementation, 205-206
Leukotrienes, 18-19
size/shape, 445b
Lacteal, 50-51
Lifespan factors, consideration, 264
irmportance, 444445
Lactic dehydrogenase, 41
Life stages, energy requirements, 67t
texture, 445b
Lactose, presence, 282
Lignin, 350
Kidneys
Lactulose, prebiotic example, 467
Limited-antigen foods, 400, 463
blood fow, 409
Lameness, 281
Limiting amino acid, 24
excretory capacity, reduction, 418
cause, panosteitis (impact), 494
Linoleic acid (LA), 81-83
fltration inability, 410-411
decrease, 159
 conjugated linoleic acid (CLA), 19
function
disorders, treatment (goal), 502
form, 332
decline, 102, 414
Large-breed dogs, 222-225
gamma-linolenic acid (CLA), 19
loss, 413
calcium excess, pathological effects, 499
iraportance, 85
 nitrogenous end products, excretion
dietary calcium recommendations,
level, 382
ability (reduction), 421
499-500
structure,18f
reserve capacity, 409b
factors, 225
synthesis,83
waste product excretion inability,
growth diets, 228
Lipid-containing ceramides, involvement,
410411
growth potential, 225b
391
water product elimination, 9-10
nutrients,224
Lipid-lowering drugs, approval, 304
Kilojoule, 4
overfeeding, 222-223
Lipid metabolism, disorders, 300-305
Kittens
portion-controlled basis, 496497
Lipid peroxides, glutathione peroxidase
aromatic amino acids, dietary levels
skeletal development/nutritional recom-
deactivation, 42
(insuffciency), 288
mendations, protein/energy/calcium
Lipids, 17
development, 211-212
(impact), 226t
contents,267
dietary protein,ngestion,9293
Large intestine (colon), 51-52
membranes, PUFAs (presence), 31
feeding amount, 215-216
contents, ileocecal valve entry, 51-52
metabolism, alterations, 481
gastrointestinal tracts, suitability, 22
function,52
peroxidation, 155-156
growth, protein requirement,
microfora, 50
Lipopolysaccharide-stimulated (LPS) skin 
227-228
Late-life deterioration, gene regulation,
biopsy, 389
home placement, 231
261-262
Lipoprotein lipase (LPL)
neonatal period, 209
Latent autoimmune diabetes of adults
activity, 302
semisolid food, provision, 213
(LADA), 344-345
deficiency, 301
shivering refex, absence, 212
Lauric acid, structure, 18f
suspicion, 303
solid food
L-carnitine, 515
diagnosis, 303
interest,205
impact, 335
 inherited defciency, 302-303
introduction, 213b
Lead product, 134-135
impact, 303b
 supplemental food, introduction,
Lean adult cats, energy requirements calcu-
Lipoproteins
212-213
lation, 69b
electrophoretic separation, 303
vaccination programs, 230
Lean body mass
excess, 300-301
Kjeldahl method, 89
decrease, occurrence, 268
function, 17
K values, NRC guidelines, 66
DEXA measurement, 322
metabolism, 301-302
Ioss, protein defciency sign, 418-419,
plasma concentrations, quantification,
L
513
303
 Laboratory analysis, 141
Leave it command, 192
Liver
Laboratory values, age-related changes,
Lecithin (phosphatidylcholine), 34
enzymes
262b-263b
Leco Nitrogen Protein Analyzer, 89
elevation, 299
Index 551
Liver (Continued)
Lymphoma,remisson,482
Meat-based protein, soy protein
LCPUFA production, 82
Lysine, 96
(comparison), 382
iron/protein/copper source, 280
requirement, increase, 96
Meat products, 165
necrosis, 299
structure,22f
Meaty favors, 4647
supplementation,282
Mechanical digestion, occurrence, 49
24-dihydroxycholecalciferol, conversion,
M
Medial patellar luxation, 491
224-225
Macrocytic anemia, 297
Medical mobility disorders, 500-501
Liver-associated enzymes
Macrominerals, 37
Medium-breed puppies, protein (presence),
monitoring,433-434
Macroscopic concretions, 359
227-228
rum activities,increase,432
 Magnesium ammonium phosphate (stru-
Medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs), 17
Loaf wet pet foods, 165
vite),composition, 359
Melanocytes, secretion, 287
Long bones, length/thickness (decrease),
Magnesium (macromineral), 37, 40, 113
Menadione dimethylpyrimidinol, 155
280-281
 body amount, 40
Metabolic acidosis
Long-chain n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
deficiencies/excesses/dietary sources, 38t
occurrence, 417
(LCPUFAs), importance, 228
food sources, 40
treatment, 424
Long-chain n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids
increase, 363
Metabolic efficiency, 320
(LCPUFAs), importance, 228
intake,362-363
Metabolic rates, comparison, 317
Long-chain omega-3 fatty acids, 386
level, 364365
Metabolic water, definition, 10
incorporation,483
presence,113
Metabolism, tumor-induced alterations,
Long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids
Magnesium oxide-containing diet, 364
479
(LCPUFAs), 81-82
Maillard products
Metabolizable energy (ME), 4
importance, 83
digestion resistance, 96
allometric equation, 66
levels, excess, 86
production,98-99
analysis, preference, 144
necessity, 82-83
 Maintenance energy requirement (MER),
 availability, percentage, 4
physiological importance, 82
328
calculation, 5f
precursor, 83
calculation, 333
AAFCO recommendation, 6
production, 82
Maintenance food, impact, 368
modifed Atwater factors, usage, 6
source, 154
 Mammary gland development, occurrence,
calories, 395
Long-distance sled races, dogs (training),
202
percentage, 321f
249-250
 Mandibular premolars/molars, FORL
content, 183
Long-term management, 462-472
(impact),440-441
determination, 143-144
Long-term nutritional management, 402b
Mandibular teeth, chewing toys (impact),
dietary fat, impact, 81
 Long-term preventive dental care, advice,
443-444
dietary thermogenesis, relationship, 60
449b
 Manganese, 42
direct determination, 45
Low-density lipoproteins (LDLs)
deficiencies/excesses/dietary sources, 38t
estimation method, 5
cholesterol transport, 301
function, 42
example,5f
decrease, 350
Manganese oxide, 155
GE, contrast, 144
Lower urinary tract disease, initial clinical
Manganese sulfate, 155
measurement, 5
signs, 361
Mannanoligosaccharides (MOS)
AAFCO recommendations, 135
Low-fat, low-fiber diet, restriction,
fermentation, 467
nutrients, percentage, 147b
333-334
function, 467
percentage, 254
Low-fat normal-fiber diets, feeding
impact,50
requirement, calculation, 433
(efficacy), 333
Manufacturer reputation, 184
value, 4
Low-fat reducing diets, 333t
Marine fsh oils, omega-3 fatty acids
changes, 5
Low-oligosaccharide soy, digestion, 151
(presence), 304
Metallothioneins, 41
Low-quality pet foods, palatability
Marketing strategies, 137
Metaphyseal osteopathy, 491
(decrease), 180
Mastication, requirement, 442
Methionine, 40, 96-97
Lutein, 28-29
Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP), 502
importance, 97
carotenoid plant pigments, 230
Maxillary teeth, chewing toys (impact),
Methylcellulose, 467
Lymphadenopathy, 501
443-444
Methyl donors, 34
Lymphangiectasia, 463-464
Meal feeding, involvement, 195 
Methy mercaptan, breath impact, 439
Lymphocytes, synovial membrane
Meal-induced thermogenesis, 60
Methyl-transfer agent, 34
infltration, 501
Meals
Methylxantine, 284
Lyrmphocytic-plasmacytic colitis, 458
frequency, impact, 320
Metoclopramide, administration, 485
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis, 455—456
social setting($), 64, 319-320
Micelles, 4950
IBD form, 458
timing, 64, 354
components, 51
552 Index
Microbial fora, presence, 439
Monosaccharide sugars, vitamin C
Natural, term (confusion), 156157
Microbial population, prebiotic response,
(relationship),34-35
Natural-derived antioxidants, 156-157
468-469
Monosodium glutamate, 4647, 155
formulations, availability, 157
Microcrystalline polyphosphate coatings,
Monotony effect, 179
Natural-derived ingredients, antioxidant
incorporation (effcacy),446
Monounsaturated fatty acids, structure, 18f
activity, 157
Microcytic anemia, 41
Morbidity, cause, 266267
Natural milk, composition, 209-211
Microminerals (trace elements), 37, 43
Morphometric techniques, usage, 322-323
Nausea, amelioration, 485
Microvilli, 50-51
Motility, reduction, 455-456
 Neck lesions, 440
Milk
Mouth, 45-48
 Neonatal puppies/kittens, nutritional care, 
alpha-linolenic acid, conversion, 228
food, passage, 48
209
calories, adequacy, 212
functions, 45-46
Neonates, digestion processes, 209-210
composition, 209-211
microbial fora, presence, 439
Nephrons, 409
enrichment, LCPUFAs (usage), 211
role, importance, 46-47
Nerve impulse transmission, calcium (role),
fatty acid profle, 211
size, periodontal disease risk factor,
37
intake, volume, 212
437438
 Net energy (NE), calculation, 4
nutrient composition, 210t
Mouth feel, 178
Net protein utilization (NPU), 23b
comparison,214t
Mucilages, 350
limitation, 25
production, occurrence, 202
Mucosal hypertrophy, 465-466
measurement, 2425
protein, presence, 210-211
Mucus, secretion, 48
Neurological tissues, cell membranes (DHA
 Milk replacers
Muscle meats, 165
presence), 84
availability, 214-215
Muscles
Neuropathy, 455-456
formulation,215
action (regulation), protein (usage), 21
Neutering, impact, 317
testing, AAFCO guidelines, 215
contraction, calcium (impact),37
Newborns
volume, 216t
glycogen concentrations, 246f, 251f
activities, 211
Milo (sorghum), pet food inclusion, 153
glycogen repletion, rate, 250-251
dogs/cats, intestinal closure, 209-210
Minerals, 37
triglyceride, usage (increase), 247-248
eating activity, 211
bioavailability, variation, 154
types, 244
gastrointestinal tracts, suitability, 212
content, estimation, 147
wasting, 266
defcienciesfexcesses/dietary sources,38t
occurrence, 512-513
caloric needs, 216
functions, 37
Musculoskeletal dysfunction, 491
millk alpha-linolenic acid, conversion,
ingredients, contribution, 155
Musculoskeletal system
228
inorganic elements, 37
changes, 266
skin, percentage, 381
requirements,107
composition, 491
sleeping activity, 211
serum concentration, 372
Myocardium, taurine
New food, cat/dog perception, 178b
Miniature Schnauzers
concentrations, 514
New tissues, growth support, 228b
hyperlipidemia, 301
necessity, 98
N-glycine, administration, 269
documentation, 302, 302b
Myopathic carnitine deficiency, characterj
Niacin (nicotinic acid), 33
presence,302
zation, 515
deficiencies/excesses/dietary sources, 28t
primary hyperlipidemia, cause, 302
ribofavin, association,33
Minnesota Urolith Center, data analysis,
N
synthesis,100f
370
n-3 fatty acids
tryptophan conversion, feline inability,
Mites, infestation (control), 285
deficiency signs, 85
100-101
Mitochondrial cofactors, 271
docosahexaenoic acid, 199
Nickel (trace element), 43
Mitral stenosis, 511
n-3 LCPUFA
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD),
Mobility
production,83
33
disorders, 500-501
requirement, absence, 82-83
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phos-
management, weight control, 504
n-6 LCPUFA, requirement (absence), 82-83
phate (NADP), 33
nutrition, relationship, 491
 Nasoesophageal tubes, short-term feeding,
Nicotinamide supply, 101
treatment, goal, 502
485
Nitrogen
Moderately fermentable fiber sources, 15b
National Research Council (NRC)
equilibrium, 90
Modifed Atwater factors, 6, 6t
digestibility coefcient recommenda-
excretion
usage, 8
tions, 6
fermentable fber, impact, 421-422,
Molybdenum (trace element), 43
equations, usage, 69
421f
Monoglycerides, hydrolyzation, 45, 50
K value guidelines, 66
repartitioning, efficacy, 422
Monosaccharides (simple sugars), 13
nitrogen use recommendations, 93-94
fermentable fber, feeding (impact),422f
hydrolyzation, 50
Nutrient Reguirements, 281
zero balance, 89-90
Index 553
 Nitrogen balance
Nutrients (Continued)
Obesity (Continued)
data, NRC recommendations, 93-94
role, 381f
health risks, 313-314
states, 90t
utilization, Beagle study, 265-266
impact,63,313-314
tests, measurement usage, 21
Nutrition
L-carnitine, impact, 35
Nitrogen-free extract (NFE), 141, 180
considerations, 491
malnutrition form, 313
Nitrogenous end products, accumulation,
definition, 3b
management, feeding advice,36b
414, 417418
heart, relationship, 511
metabolic aberrations, 313
Nonessential amino acids, formation, 15
importance, 229-230
neutering, impact, 316-318
Nonessential arnino acids (dispensable
mobility,relationship, 491
nutritional considerations, 516
amino acids), 22b
myths, 277
pet owner education/commitment,
supply,22
Nutritional adequacy, 134135
326-327
Nonfermentable fiber (insoluble fiber)
calculation method, 134
preventive factors,336b
function,77-78
claim, 134
protein, impact,332-333
increase, 334-335
impact, 347
risk factors, 315-321
sources, 15b
label claims, interpretation, 135b
treatment,313,326-335
Non-immune-mediated reactions, 396
 Nutritional intervention, type, 271
short-term goal, 326
 Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
Nutritionally responsive dermatoses, 381
success, 326
(NIDDM), 345
 Nutritionally responsive gastrointestinal
type 1l diabetes, relationship, 353
Nonshivering thermogenesis, 59-60
diseases, 455-461
 Odontoclastic resorptive lesions, gingival
Nonspecifc acute diarrhea, 459
Nutritional metabolism, inherited
infammation (relationship),437
term, usage, 459
disorders, 298t
Old age, result, 267
Nonstarch polysaccharides, 14
 Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism,
Old cats
Nonsteroidal antinfammatory drugs
112-113
behavioral problems, occurrence, 267
(NSAIDs)
occurrence,282
body composition, 264t
side effects, 502-503
Nystose, structure, 468f
s&op PIO
usage, 504
 behavioral problems, occurrence, 267
Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever,
0
body composition, 264t
222f
Oats, pet food presence, 153
Older adult cats, energy requirements
Novelty effect, 179
Obesity
calculation, 69b
observation, 179
age, increase (impact), 316
Older dogs, immunocompetence
occurrence, 179
assessment method,322-323
(measures), 271
Nuclease, 49
caloric requirement, examples, 331
 Nutrient content
caloric restriction
amino acids, 268-270
calculation, 141-142
dietary management, 328-331
antioxidant nutrients, 270-271
problems, 141-142
severity, risks, 330-331
care, 271-272
data, absence, 141-142
cancer, relationship, 314
chronic disease state, 272
determination methods, 141-144
carbohydrate, impact, 333-334
cognitive dysfunction syndrome, 271
expression, 144147
causative factors, 336b
energy, 268
importance,193
definition, 313-314
fat, 270
information, 141b, 143
development, 313
feeding management, 271-272
laboratory analysis, 141
stages,315
fre-choice regimen, continuation,
reference, 141
diagnosis, 322-326
272
Nutrient data, conversion, 144
dietary fat, impact, 332
immunocompetence, 270
Nutrient-dense diet, feeding, 204205
documentation,343-344
metabolic rate/energy needs, 264
Nutrients, Gt
endocrine disorders, impact, 318-319
nutrient considerations, 268-271
AF/DMB conversion, 145b
environmental factors, 318
protein, 268-270
calories, estimation, 8-9
exercise, inadequacy (impact), 316
requirements, increase, 270b
composition, 347
exogenous factors,315-316
renal disease, occurrence, 266
considerations, 268-271
external factors, 320
Olfctory acuity, reduction, 255
density, 7, 144145
feeding regimen, 335
Omega-3 fatty acid
usage, 7-8
fber, impact, 334-335
amount, impact, 389
digestion, 49-50
food intake, alterations (impact),
antinfammatory benefts, 464
intestinal absorption, 297-298
319-321
plasma concentrations, 390
metabolism, inherited disorders, 297
 genetic predisposition (breed),impact,
source, 159-160
older pet considerations, 268-271
318
supplementation, 394b, 483
percentage, 147b
health problems, 314b
supply, 199
554Index
Omega-3 fatty acid (Continued)
Orphans
Oxalate, urinary concentrations
synthesis,387
environment, maintenance,213-214
(reduction),372-373
therapeutic role, 387
feeding
Oxidative DNA, reduction, 423424
Omega-3 fatty acid alpha-linolenic acid,
content, 214-215
Oxidative metabolic activity, rate, 267
154
methods, 216-217
Oxidative stress, 484
Omega-3 fatty acid-derived eicosanoids,
tubes, breeder preference, 217
Oxygen free radicals, effects/damage, 267
potency, 415
food dermand/tolerance, increase, 217
Omega-3 series fatty acid, metabolism,
fresh formula, usage, 217
P
388f
gruel, usage, 217
Palatability, 177-180
Omega-6 derived eicosanoids, 415
milk replacer nutritional source, 215
assessment, 178
Omega-6 fatty acids
nutritional care, 213-217
decrease, 180
consideration, 386
weighing, regularity, 217
defnition, 178
impact, 389
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals
diet importance, 319
omega-3 fatty acid ratio, impact, 464f
(OFA), patelar luxation report, 500
food properties, impact, 179-180
sources, 387
Osteoarthritis (OA), 491
importance, 64
supplementation,394b
activity management, 505-506
subjective measure, 137-138
661%jddns
collective syndrome, 501-506
 Palmitoleic acid, structure, 18f
therapeutic role, 387
degree, severity, 495
Pancreas
Omega-6 series fatty acids, metabolism,
development, 491
amyloid deposition, increase,346
388f
articular surface, understanding,
protease enzymes, secretion, 49
1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol, 30-31
501-502
Pancreatic acinar cells, selective atrophy,
conversion, 224225
contribution, 495
457
plasma levels, 225
exercise
 Pancreatic beta cells, immune-mediated
1F-Beta-fructofuranosylnystose, structure,
importance, 506b
destruction, 344345
468f
ranagement, 505-506
Pancreatic lipase, release, 49
1-kestose, structure, 468f
fatty acid supplementation, 503
Pancreatitis, 455-458
One-pan test (food acceptance test), 178
glucosamine, impact, 503-504
cause, 457
Onions, feeding, 286
glycosaminoglycans, impact, 503
diagnosis, clinical signs/history (usage),
Opsin,27
nutritional management, 502-504
458
Optimal growth rate, feeding, 496-497
overweight conditions, relationship, 504
occurrence, 457
Oral disinfectants, usage, 448
pharmacological management, 504-505
Panosteitis, 491, 494
Oral environment, control, 444
progression, 504b
impact, 494
Oral health foods/chews, VOHC accept-
type/incidence, 511-512
Pansteatitis (yellow fat disease), 110, 279,
ance, 446447
Osteochondral fracture, 502
384
Oral hypoglycemic drugs, impact, 346
Osteochondrosis, 491—493
cases, 279
Oral malodor (halitosis), 439, 441
characterization, 492—493
clinical signs, 279
control, cetypyridinium chloride, usage,
lesions, occurrence (relationship), 495
fish (tuna), relationship, 279
448
Osteosarcoma, 483484
treatment, 279
report,439b
Ovariohysterectomized bitches, consump-
Pantothenic acid, 33
Orexigenic hormones, 62
tion, 317
deficiencies/excesses/dietary sources, 28t
actions, 62-63
Overacidification, risks, 368-370
occurrence,33
Organic heme iron, origination, 40-41
Overconsumption, problems, 195
Parafollicular cells (C cells), production,
Organic minerals, 154
Overnutrition, persistence, 315
38-39
Organic nutrients, digestibilities, 181
Overweight animals, DM (presence),
Paraneoplastic syndrome, 479
Organ meats
347-348
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
iron sources, 41
Overweight body condition, avoidance, 232
calcium homeostasis control, 205-206
phosphorus, content, 283
Overweight cats (NRC formula),energy
chronic elevation, 420
Ornithine aminotransferase, 95-96
requirements calculation, 69b
 degradation, 414
Ornithine production, inability, 95-96
Overweight conditions
levels, elevation, 30-31
Orphan puppies/kittens
dermatoses, relationship, 314
mechanisms, 38
dhallenge, 214b
development, 314-315
release, 112-113
feeding
gradualness, 315
stimulation, 420
advice, 217b
health risks, 314b
Parenteral nutrition, 486
milk replacer volume, usage, 216t
incidence, increase, 316-317
Partial urethral obstruction, development,
nutrition, adequacy, 214
osteoarthritis, relationship, 504
361
room temperature, 214t
prevention, 336
Parturition, feeding management, 200-204
Index 555
Passive diffusion, 51
Pet food (Continued)
Pet food labels (Continued)
Patent ductus arteriosis (PDA), 511
comparison, methods, 144-145
panel, 131-132
Pathogen overgrowth, 456-457
convenience/preparation ease, 138
reading, 132b
occurrence, 469-470
cost, importance, 138
information, 136b
prebiotic supplementation, role,
digestibility, 180-183,231
terminology, 134
469470
coeffcient, 6t
terms, AAFCO regulation, 137
Peanut hulls, 467
irpact, 143t
Pets
Pectin,350
company determination, AAFCO
diabetes mellitus (DM), clinical signs,
Pepsin, formation, 48
regulations, 142
346
Peptide linkage, 22f
decrease, 180
diet
Peptide YY (PYY)
level, 180
omega-3/omega-6 fatty acids,
NPY inhibition, 62-63
energy density, 224, 231
supplementation, 392-393
release, 62
ethoxyquin concentrations, limitation,
 people foods, addition, 278b
responses, 63
289
essential nutrients, daily intake, 177-178
Percent body fat, estimation, 322
evaluation, 177
owners
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
factors, consideration, 177b
behaviors, 319-320
(PEG),432-433
factors, 184-185
habits, identification, 326-327
Performance, 243
assessment, 185
water consumption,11b
dogs, dietary protein (needs), 249b
fat content, 154
Petty, Robert, 243
dry dog food, nutrient composition,
formulation/production, 141
Phenylalanine, levels (elevation), 481
278t
 guaranteed analysis panel, 144
Phosphatidylcholine (lecithin), 34
Periodontal disease, 437
high-quality products, 141
 Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
age, relationship, 437
ingredientlist, 132-134
(PEPCK), 76
 development, 442
components, inclusion, 133
Phospholipids
dietary risk factors, identifcation,442
ingredients, 147-160
 choline component, 34
gingivitis, relationship, 439-440
list, 148b
importance,37-38
paque-induced infammatory disease,
manufacturer, reputation, 184
Phosphorus (macromineral), 37—40,
440
ME, consideration, 143-144
111113, 228
prevalence, 438b
mouth feel, 178
absorption, vitamin D (impact), 31
prevention, 441
nutrient content,141
availability, calcium availability
risk factor, 437-438
nutritional information, 147
(difference), 112
term, usage, 437
omega-3 fatty acids/omega-6 fatty acids,
calcium, 39f
 Periodontal ligaments, impact, 440
sources, 387t
deficiencies, 38t, 112-113
Periosteum
package, purchase, 182-183
excesses/dietary sources, 38t
bone deposition, 493-494
palatability, 177-180
impact, 228, 414415
sensitivity, increase, 281
availability, 239
metabolism/homeostatic mechanisms, 37
Peripheral blood neutrophils, 389
importance, 177-178
vitamin D, importance, 108
Peripheral insulin resistance, 480
processing method classification,
retention, 420
manifestation,345
167-168
supplementation, necessty, 228b
Peristalsis, impact, 455-456
PUFA level, increase, 31
Physical activity
Peristaltic contractions, 48-49
purchase, practicality, 138b
decline, 34
Peritonitis, 465
quantitative/comparative digestibility
initiation, 327
daims, AAFCO regulations, 182
sustenance, 272
acceptability, 177-178
rations, formulation, 112
Phytate, 151
additives, presence, 158-159
safety, concern, 155
presence, 4041
advertising, 137-139
selection
Pant carbohydrate, forms, 14
animal protein sources, manufacturer
factors, consideration, 194b
Mant eating, 192
usage, 149
importance, 177b
PMant fiber, starch/glycogen (difference), 14
animal-related factors, 178-179,
types, 163
Mantigrade stance, 346
181182
variety, enjoyment, 168b
Maque
antioxidants, usage, 158t
weight loss formulation, 332
accumulation,rate,448
caloric density, 7
Pet food labels, 131
development, reduction, 444
caloric distribution
claims, 136137
presence/persistence, 441
calculation, 147
consumer knowledge, 131-136
removal, 440
recommendation, 146f
feeding guidelines, 239
Pasma ammonia concentration, increase,
classifcations, 167-175
 guaranteed analysis, 131b
432
556 Index
Pasma calcium
Post-receptor defect, impact, 480
Propylene glycol, application, 383
circulation, 37
Potassium chloride, 155
Prostacyclins, 18-19
levels, increase, 497-498
Potassium citrate, addition, 372-373
Prostaglandin Ez (PGE), 415, 502
Plasma cells, synovial membrane infiltra-
Potassum defciency (hypokalemia), 43
conversion, 83
tion, 501
observation, 423
reduction, 389
Plasma CK levels, increase, 255-256
Potassium (electrolyte), 37, 43
Prostaglandins, 18-19
Plasma free fatty acids
concentrations, 250
Protease enzymes, secretion, 49
energy substrate, 247-248
intracellular Auid cation, 43
Protein, 21
increase, 433
salts, 365
absorption, impairment, 462
Plasma glucose levels increase, 251-252
Potatoes, pet food inclusion, 153
amount, digestibilities (impact), 143b
Plasma lipid concentrations
Poultry
antigenicity, 397
comparison, 303
meats, 165
body structural component, 21b
reduction/maintenance, 303-304
product, term (usage), 149
calories, proportion (increase), 333b
 Plasma protein, acid-base balance
term, usage,149
catabolites, accumulation
regulation, 21
Prebiotics
(minimization), 417
Plasma TAP, measurement, 255-256
fermentable fber action, 1415
chain
Pasma taurine levels, measurement, 515
impact, 467-470
alpha-amino acids, presence, 22
Polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs),
nondigestible food ingredients, 467
structure,22f
synovial membrane infiltration, 501
supplementation,role, 469-470
deficiency, 381-382
Polyneuropathy, development, 346
Preexercise FFA concentrations, 245
degradation, 481-482
Polyphosphates, 445-446
Preformed vitamin A, forms, 107
digestibility, 91b
inclusion, 446b
Pregnancy, 199
digestion, impairment, 462
squestration action, 445
essential nutrients,supplementation,
digestive end products, 45t
Polysaccharides, 13-14
205-206
energy, relationship, 91
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs)
Pregnant bitches, fetal growth, 200
expression, total calorie percentage, 8
ALA conversion, 19
Pregnant queens, weight gain, 202-204
fux, 23b
cncentrations, increase, 270-271
Premium pet food, 168
fractions, colonic fermentation
dietary intake, 384
brands, 168
(increase), 181
double bonds, 17
 Preprandial serum cholesterol concentra-
function, 21
fat contribution, 153
tion, decrease, 351-352
GE approximation, 19
increase, 394395
Preservatives, 155-159
grain sources, 150-151
levels, increase, 31, 110, 279
Preventive dental care, advice, 449b
impact, 227-228, 348
presence, 31
Primacy effect, 179
intake
proportion, 229-230
observation, 179
control, decision, 419b
protection, vitamin E (usage), 42
Primary acanthosis nigricans, 384
dietary metabolizable energy,
structure,18f
Primary hyperlipidemia
relationship, 146t
Poor keepers, 194-195
cause, 302
isolates, usage, 93
Porphyrin staining, 287-288
clinical signs, amelioration, 304
ME level, 22-23
Porphyromona, 439-440
diagnosis, 303
metabolisrm, alterations, 481
Portion-controlled feeding, 34, 194
dietary treatment, 303-305
minimum levels, 93t
disadvantage, 196
treatment,goal,303-304,304b
older pet requirements, 268-270
feeding method, 195-196
Primary hyperparathyroidism, 373-374
presence, 21
recommendation, 233
presence, 374
restriction, 413, 418
usage, 81, 91, 335
Probiotics
skin health, 381-382
Portion-controlled meal feeding, 195-196
gastrointestinal benefits, 471
sources,148-152
Postacute pancreatitis, 463-464
health benefits, 472b
factors, 149-150
Postexercise FFA concentrations, 245
human consumption, 471
3-dimensional structure, 397
Postnecrotic cirrhosis, impact, 299
impact, 470-472
type, inclusion (importance), 419
 Postprandial alkaline tide, 364
Progestagens, administration, 343-344
use,effciency, 268-269
occurrence, 366-367
Proinfammatory agents,tissue
Protein/calorie malnutrition (PCM), 101
 Postprandial glucose concentration,
concentrations (reduction), 483-484
Protein-containing substances, microbial
decrease, 351-352
 Proopiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons, 62-63
metabolism, 439
Postprandial glycemic curve, reduction, 352
Propagation, 155-156
Protein:DNA ratios, maximization,
 Postprandial hyperlipidemia, 301
Propionate, abundance, 14
268-269
Postprandial hypoglycemia, onset (delay),
Propionic acid, fber fermentation end
Protein effciency ratio (PER), 23b
332-333
product, 465-466
measurement,24
Index 557
Protein-losing enteropathy (PLE), 462
Puppies (Continued)
Reducing diets
Protein quality, 91b
vaccination programs, 230
protein level,332
analytical tests, 24
weaning, 67-68, 221
types,contrast,333t
determination methods, 23b
weighing frequency, 497
 Reference protein, 24
estimation, amino acid composition
Purebreed dogs, usage (study), 181
Regional coat-color change, cause, 287-288
(usage), 24
Purines, nucleic acid components, 305
 Relative supersaturation (RSS), reduction,
impact, 91
Pyloric sphincter
373
laboratory tests, availability, 25b
food passage control 48-49
Renal disease
Protein requirements, 89, 92-94
occlusion, 459
occurrence,266
determination, 89-90
Pyridoxal, 33
spontaneous progression, 412
elevation,94
Pyridoxal 5′-phosphate (coenzyme), 33
Renal disease progression
estimation, 91
Pyridoxamine, 33
alteration, mechanisms, 414
factors, 90-92
Pyridoxine hydrochloride, 155
factors, 411412
list, 91b
Pyridoxine (vitamin B), 33
phosphorus, irmpact, 414, 415b
NRC recommendation, 92
compounds,33
protein/calorie intake, impact (study), 413
response criteria, 89
deficiencies/excesses/dietary sources, 28t
vascular pressure, impact, 415
studies, 89-92
jmpact, 111
Renal functioning
variation, 90-91
decrease, 270
Protein-sparing effect, 15-16
Q
impact, 265-266
Proteinuria, minimization/prevention,
Queens
Renal mass, reduction, 424
414-415
breeding, 199
 Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism, 420
Proteoglycan, extracellular component,
environment,213
Renal weight, reduction, 102
501-502
gestation/parturition
Reproducing bitches, feeding guidelines, 203t
Provitamin A, 28
feeding management, 202-204
Reproducing females, nutritional
Provocation test, 401-402
weight gain patterns, 203f
considerations, 205b
Pruritic dermatoses, 401
litter size, impact, 204
Reproductive performance
Pruritus, 391
milk, comparison, 215-216
impairment, 42
Puerperal tetany, occurrence, 113
nutritional considerations, 204
vitamin A dependence, 27-28
Pulmonary disease (development), obesity
puerperal tetany/eclampsia, occurrence,
Reserves, term (usage), 89-90
(impact), 313-314
113
Resorptive lesions, pain, 441
Pulmonic insufciency, 511
reproductive success, taurine
Respiratory burst, 229-230
Pulmonic stenosis (PS), 511
(necessity), 98
Resting energy expenditure (REE), changes,
Pulp, solid residue, 153
weight gain, 202-204
482
Puppies
weight loss, 205
Resting energy requirement (RER),
calcium excess, feeding, 500b
Quinones, 32
484485
caloric needs, 216
compound,110
Resting fed metabolic rate (RFMR), 59
development, 211-212
BMR, correlation, 59
evaluation frequency, 497
R
 Resting metabolic rate (RMR)
feeding,9
Racing, protein needs (increase), 248
increase, 315
amount, 215-216
Racing sled dogs, caloric intake/expenditure
reproductive status, impact, 6061
gastrointestinal tracts, suitability, 212
(measurement), 250
Retinal, 27
growth
Rancidity, occurrence, 158
Retinoic acid, 27
protein requirement,227-228
Rations, formulation, 112
Retinol,27
support, calcium intake, 497
Raw fish, thiaminase (relationship),
Retorting, 165
home placement, 231
279-280
Rheumatoid arthritis, 501
milk alpha-linolenic acid, conversion,228
Rawhide chews, usage, 443-444
clinical signs, 501
neonatal period, 209
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), 229-230
Rhodopsin (visual purple), 27
protein requirements, 92
sequestration,484
Ribofavin, 32-33,155
semisolid food, provision, 213
Reactive peroxides, accumulation, 279
deficiencies/excesses/dietary sources, 28t
shivering refex, absence, 212
Red blood cells, hemoglobin (presence), 40
functions, 32-33
size, increase, 201-202
Red coat
name,32-33
pooy P!jos
cause,286-287
Ribonucleic acid (RNA)
interest, 205
occurrence, 286-288
metalloenzymes/cofactor, 384-385
introduction, 213b
problem, claims/studies,288
phosphorus component, 37-38
supplemental food, introduction,
tyrosine, role, 288
supplementation, 483
212-213
Reduced-calorie food, usage, 335
synthesis,15
558 Index
Rice grains, processing, 152
Serum cobalamin, reduction, 456
Skin
Rosmarinus offcinalis(evergreen shrub),
Serum creatinine, screening test, 411b
barrier, role, 391
157
Serum folate, elevation, 456
cross-section, 381f
Ruminants, SCFA energy derivation, 14
Serum free fatty acid concentrations,
dietary protein, impact, 382
246f
disease, EFA (relationship), 386-396
S
Serum fructosamine levels, 354
disorders, 382-383
Saffower oil, usage, 393
Serum lactate, elevation, 480
elasticity, decrease, 264-265
Salivary calcium, sequestration, 445
Serum phosphorus, decrease, 30-31
fatty acid concentrations, 382
Salivation, excess, 441
Serum PTH levels, reduction, 420
health, protein (usage), 381-382
Salt intake, increase, 115
Serum total cholesterol, decrease, 348
lesions, development, 42
Satiation (sensation), hormones (impact),
Service dogs, 254-256
self-trauma, 391
62
dietary fat source, 255
Skye Terriers, disorders, 298-299
Satiety, internal controls, 320-321
7-dehydrocholesterol
saop pals
systems (aberrations),62-63
conversion, 30f, 109b
 blood glucose concentrations,
 Saturated fatty acids
UVlight exposure, 29-30
252f
double bonds, absence, 17
Shivering refex, absence, 212
energy expenditures, 249f
structure,18f
Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), 14
muscle glycogen concentration,
Scurvy, clinical signs, 35
energy derivation, 14
251f
 Sebaceous glands, pyogranulomatous
fermentation, occurrence, 467
Slow-twitch fibers (ype I fbers), aerobic
infammation, 383
intestinal microbe production, 456
metabolism, 244
Sebaceous lipids, changes, 381-382
providing, 15b
Small-breed dogs, 225-226
Seborrhea, 382-383
source,334
Smal-breed puppies, protein (presence),
types,383
supply, 470
227-228
Secondary bacterial infections, 387
Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs)
Secondary hyperlipidemia, 301
production, 50, 77-78
(SIBO), 455-456
causes, 303
benefit,467
diagnosis, 456
Secondary staphylococcal infections,
dietary fber, usage, 466
incidence, 455-456
responsibiity,391
fber, impact, 1415
managerment, 471
Sedentary animals, consumption studies,
occurrence, 467
occurrence, 455, 470
316
result, 151
treatment, prebiotic supplementation
Selenium, 42
Siberian Huskies
(role), 469470
cell membrane protection, 42
inherited zinc malabsorption, 300f
 Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth/
deficiencies/excesses/dietary sources, 38t
study, 256
antibiotic-response diarrhea (SIBO/
excess ingestion, toxicity,42
zinc-responsive disorders, 300
ARD),455
Self-feeding, 194
Silica crystals, 375
development, 457-458
Semimoist dog food
Silicon (trace element), 43
occurrence,456b
nutrient content, 164t
Simple carbohydrates, presence, 349-350
Small intestine, 49-51
simple sugar content, 166-167
Simple protein chain, structure, 22f
bacterial populations, MOS (impact),
Semimoist pet foods, 166-167
Simple sugars, 13
50
appeal, 167
content, 166-167
bile, importance, 49-50
components, 166
 Single-carbon units
brush border, 49-51
Semimoist products, simple carbohydrates
transfer, 34
dietary protein, digestion, 462
(presence),347
transportation, 34
digestion, hormonal control, 50
Semisolid food, usage, 213
Single nephron glomerular filtration rate
microfora, 50
Senescence
(SNGFR), 411
presence,50
aging,contrast,261
Sire, condition, 199
nutrient absorption, 50-51
phenomena, theories, 261
6-carbon monosaccharides, importance,
accomplishment, 51
 Senior dogs, whole-body protein turnover
13
nutrient digestion, 49-50
rate (differences), 269
Skeletal decalcification, 184185
passive diffusion, 51
Senior dogs/cats, body composition, 264f
Skeletal development, vitamin
surface area, reduction, 463-464
 Senses, changes, 267
A dependence, 27-28
 Small-molecular-weight cytoplasmic
Serum bilirubin, increase, 432
Skeletal disease, excess calcium intake
proteins, 41
Serum chermistry, changes (measurement),
(relationship), 497-499
Snacks, 167
250
Skeletal disorders, 491-500
popularity, increase, 167
Serum cholesterol, dietary protein (impact),
Skeletal muscle protein breakdown, cause,
Social facilitation, 64, 191-192
382
481
Social learning, impact, 64-65
Index 559
Sodium
Stomach, 48-49
Symbiotic, preparation, 470
content, 514
acid production, decrease, 455456
Synovial fuid
restriction, degree,514b
antral portion, mucosal cells (location)
articular surface lubrication, 501
Sodium bicarbonate, oral administration,
48-49
MMP levels, alteration, 503
306
body reservoir, 48
Synovial membrane infltration, 501
Sodium (electrolyte), 37, 43, 114115
 corpus portion, mucosal lining, 48
Synthetic antioxidants, 156-157
oncentrations, 250
fermentive gas, production, 461
safety, concerns, 157-158
defciency, 43
food, passage, 48
 Synthetic retinoids, systemic
intake, hypertension (connection),
peristaltic movements, 4849
administration, 383
114115
Stool eating (coprophagy), 194
Systemic acidosis, impact, 447
presence,43
nutrient defciency impact, 290
Systemic metabolic acidosis, 424
pump, control, 43
Storage, vitamin loss, 163-164
occurrence,424
restriction, 416-417
Stress, impact, 268
Sodium hexametaphosphate (HMP), 445
Structural plant carbohydrates, 465
T
dental effects, 445446
Struvite activity product (SAP), 362, 365
Table scraps, 277
Solid food, introduction, 212-213
Struvite-induced feline urolithiasis,
feeding, 319, 331-332
Soluble fbers, 14
development, 184-185
selection, 277
benefit, 350
Struvite (magnesium ammonium phos-
Table sugar, 13
inclusion, 350
phate)
Tachycardia, 513
usage, 352
composition,359
Tachypnea, 513
viscosity, increase, 352
crystals, formation, 362, 364
Tartar control claims, acceptability, 136
Sorghum (milo), pet food inclusion,
urine pH, importance, 364
Taste receptor cells, location, 4647
153
formation, 362
Taurine, 97-100
Soy
prevention,368
availability, protein levelfber/heat
dassification, 152b
urine magnesium, necessity 368
processing, impact, 99
corponents, 151
urolithiasis, 361-369
beta-amino-sulfonic acid, 97
protein, digestion, 151
 natural development, 364
classification, 515
Soybean products, pet food inclusion,
prevalence,360
concentrations, 514
151
prevention, dietary management,
deficiency, 515
Soy protein
369b
de novo synthesis, 97-98
lgG response, reduction, 397
recurrence, aversion protocol, 371
feline requirement, 22
meat-based protein, comparison, 382
types, occurrence, 362
importance,514515
Special senses, changes, 267
uroliths
supplementation,432
Sphingomyelin, 34
formation, 362b
Taurocholic acid, binding, 98-99
Sprint-racing dogs
medical dissolution, 370-371
T-cell immunity, 266
endurance dogs, contrast, 254b
presence, 367-368
T-cell populations, response, 229
energy-dense diet, 254
Subgingival plaque, 440
T-cell responsiveness, reduction, 266
Sprint-racing performance, 253-254
Subluxation, degree, 491
Teeth
Stabilized rice bran, 153
Substantiation, family method, 134135
brushing
Staphylococcus, impact, 362, 370
Sucrose (table sugar), 13
absence, 443
Staphylococcus intermedius, canine urinary
Sugar beet fber, pet food inclusion,
effectiveness, 448
calculi specimens, 370
351-352
care, 272
Starch (polysaccharides), 13-14
Sulfur amino acid (SAA), 95
development, vitamin A (dependence),
energy source,77
methionine, importance, 96
27-28
enzymatic digestion, requirement, 347
Sulfur-containing amino acids, importance,
Tertiary butylhydroquinone (TBHQ), 157
inclusion, 163-164
42
Testicular atrophy, 42
pant fiber, difference, 14
Sulfur (macromineral), 37, 40
Texturized vegetable protein (TVP), 165
sources,153
 body requirement, 40
crude protein, presence, 151
types, differences, 348-349
deficiencies/excesses/dietary sources,38t
shaping, 138
Sterile-induced struvite, infection-induced
Sunfower oil-enriched diet, 390
usage,133
struvite (contrast), 370
Super-premium pet food brands, 168
Theobromine, 284
Sterile struvite urolithiasis, 362
Supplemental food, introduction, 212-213
level, controlled studies, 284285
Sterile struvite uroliths, 362
Supplemental vitamin E, impact, 271
toxicity, 47
 Steroid hormones, cholesterol precursor,
Supragingival calculus, preexistence, 443
clinical problem, 284
18-19
Sweet favors, canine preference, 285b
Thermogenesis, overconsumption (impact),
Sterol compounds, group, 29-30
Swollen fat, presence, 110
60
560 Index
Thiaminase
Treats, 167
U
raw fish, relationship, 279-280
market, Nabisco Milk Bones
Ultraviolet (UV) radiation, exposure,
treatment, 280
domination, 167
29-30
Thiamin mononitrate, 155
popularity, increase, 167
impact, 287
Thiamin (vitamin B),32
purchase, emotional benefits, 167
Uncoupling proteins (UCPs), 321
defciencies, 28t, 280
sodium content, 514
Underwater treadmill, dog usage, 505f
induction, risk, 280b
Triaditis, 457
Untrained dogs
destruction, 279-280
Triglycerides
muscle glycogen concentrations,
excesses/dietary sources, 28t
decrease, 348
246f
feeding, 285
fat importance, 17
serum free fatty acid concentrations,
importance, 280
fatty acid composition, 17
246f
sulfur component, 40
levels, elevation, 290, 300-301
Urate, concentration, 306
Thickening agents, importance, 159
structure,18f
Urate urolithiasis, treatment, 306
Thromboxane Az (TXAz), 388, 415
Triiodothyronine (T)
Urea
Thromboxanes, 18-19
circulating levels, increase, 496-497
generation,418
Thymidine, synthesis, 34
level, 318
synthesis,418
Thyroid gland, parafollicular cell
True digestibility, determination, 142-143
toxin, presence, 417-418
production, 38-39
Trypsin,49
Urea cycle
Thyroxine (T4)
Trypsin inhibitor (denaturation), heat
activity, depresson, 432
circulating levels, increase, 496-497
treatment (usage), 284
enzymes, activities, 94
level, 318
intermediate, 95-96
Time-controlled feeding, 194
conversion, 33
Urease-producing bacteria, 370
Time-controlled meal feeding, 195
metabolism, 33
presence,370b
Tin (trace element), 43
niacin conversion,feline inability,
Uremia, 455-456
Tissue growth, 228b
100-101
presence,409-410
Tissue oxygenation, adequacy, 253-254
 Tumor-associated metabolic changes, 479
Uremic crisis, experience, 423
Tocopherols, 31, 384
Tumor cells, glucose metabolism, 480b48 1b
Urethral obstruction, characterization,
components, 230
Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), 321
306
food sources, 31
Tumors, surgical excision (impact), 482
Urethral plugs, 362
Tocotrienols, 31
Tuna, pansteatitis (relationship), 279
Uric acid
Total amino acids/non-amino acid nitrogen
25-hydroxycholecalciferol
conversion, 305
ratio, usage, 5
conversion, 30-31
excretion, 306
Total antioxidant potential (TAP),
plasma levels, 108-109
Urinary calculi, mineral tpes, 375
measurement, 255-256
24,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol
Urinary PGEz, levels (decrease), 416
Total body fat, DEXA measurement, 322
concentrations,225
Urinary Stone Analysis Laboratory, data
Total daily energy requirement, 66
conversion,224225
analysis, 370
Total essential amino acid content (E/T), 23b
24-dihydroxycholecalciferol, conversion,
Urinary system, changes, 265-266
measurement, 24
224-225
Urinary tract health, support, 184-185
Total food intake (determination), energy
2-series prostaglandins, 388
Urinary uric acid, excretion, 306
intake (impact), 7
Two-pan tests (food preference tests), 178
Urine
Total GFR, reduction, 411
Type 1 collagen, 266
calcium/oxalate concentrations, factors,
Total urethral obstruction, development, 361
Type 1 hypersensitivity responses, delay,
372
Total urine volume, meal-feed cats
266
gross energy (GE) content,
(comparison), 367
Type 1 diabetes mellitus, 344-345
determination,5
Toy-breed dogs, 225-226
characterization, 346b
osmolality, values (studies), 250
Trace elements (rmicrominerals),37,43
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
RSS, reduction, 373
(IDDM), 344-345
samples, study, 372
muscle glycogen concentrations, 246f
study, 351
sediment, periodic evaluation, 368
serum free fatty acid concentrations,
Type ll diabetes mellitus, 345-346
struvite formation, 362-363
246f
development, 345
supersaturation,371-372
Transconfgurations, 17
feline occurrence, 345
volume, 365-366
Traxs double bonds, introduction, 17
genetic component,344
decrease, 365-366, 366b
Trans fatty acids, inclusion, 17
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
Urine-acidifying agents, consumption,
Transketolation reactions, 32
(NIDDM), 345
369
Traumatic joint conditions, NSAlDsf
obesity, relationship, 353
Urine-acidifying components/ingredients,
f0s (aesn) sprorasoos
Tyrosine, role, 288
presence,367
Index 561
Urine pH, 367
Veterinary Oral Health Commission
Vitamin D, 27, 29-31, 108-110
impact, 366b
(VOHC), approval award, 446-447
deficiencies, 28t, 109
importance, 364
Villi, luminal surface, 50-51
experimental induction, 109
maintenance,369b
Viscous fibers (gel-forming fibers),
signs, 109
reduction, 372
350
dietary sources, 28t, 31
struvite dissolution level, 368
Visual body condition assessment tools,
excesses, 28t
Urolithiasis
development, 323-326
irportance, 108
adult animal disease, 359
Visual purple, 27
metabolism, differences, 225
dlinical signs, 306, 361
Vitamin A, 27-29, 107-108
sterol compound group, 29-30
characteristics, 361
acetate,155
synthesis,30-31
list, 361b
beta-carotene, conversion, 29f
Vitamin Dz (ergocalciferol), 29-30
 development, genetic infuence, 360
chemical compounds, 27
Vitamin D, (cholecalciferol), 29-30
detary management, 367368, 370-371
defciencies, 28t,383
conversion, 224-225
feeding method, 366-367
excess, pathological result, 280-281
storage, 30-31
history, 366
excesses/ dietary sources, 28t
Vitamin E,27,31,110
incidence, 359-361
experimental studies, 281
active synthetic forms, 31
lower urinary tract disease, 359
importance, 27
blood concentrations, correlation, 271
onset age, relationship, 360
necessity, 382
defciencies, 28t, 110
overacidifcation, risks, 368-370
origin, 28
excesses/dietary sources, 28t
presence, rarity, 359b
physiological requirement, 107b
function, 31
risk factors, association, 359
provitamin A, 28
group, 31
studies, 359-360
toxicity, 382
impact, 271
urine volume, 365-366
rarity, 108
study, 255-256
water balance, 365-366
toxicosis,280-282
supraphysiological doses, efficacy, 384
Uroliths
treatment,282
therapy, 384
composition, 359b, 363-364
Vitamin A-responsive dermatoses,
tocopherol components, 230
FLUTD, relationship (absence), 374
382-384
Vitamin E-responsive dermatoses, 384
formation, 362, 369
Vitamin A-responsive seborrhea, response
list, 385t
rate, increase,363
(absence), 383
Vitamin K, 27, 32, 110-111
impact, 368
Vitamin B (thiamin), 32
administration, 32
surgical removal, 370, 371b
defciencies, 28t, 280
deficiencies, 28t, 110-111
induction, risk, 280b
induction, 110-111
V
excesses/dietary sources, 28t
excesses/dietary sources, 28t
Vaccination programs, initiation, 229
feeding, 285
function, 32
Valine
sulfur component, 40
quinones group, 32
concentration,481
Vitamin Bg (pyridoxine), 33
inclusion,110
serum levels, decrease, 481
compounds, 33
sources, 32, 155
Valvular diseases, 511
Vitamin Bg (pyridoxine), impact, 111
Vitamins, 27
Vanadium (trace element),43
Vitamin Bz (cobalamin), 34, 155
classification, 27
Variable-formula diets, formulation, 133
cobalt component, 34, 42
concerns, 154155
Vascular pressure, impact, 415
defciency, 297
deficiencies, 28t
VAS lamenessratings, change, 504f
malabsorption, 297-298
dietary constituents, 107
Vegetable fat, 154
clinical signs, development, 297
dietary sources, 28t
Vegetable oil, 154
diagnosis, 297
excesses, 28t
addition,282
Vitamin B-complex, 27, 32-34
ingredients, contribution, 155
Ventricular premature contraction (VPC),
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid), 27
organic molecules, 27
occurrence,515-516
antioxidants, synergistic relationship,
requirements,107
Ventricular septal defect (VSD), 511
157
synthesis, inabiity, 35b
Very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL),
body requirement, 35
Volatile sulfur compounds (VSCs)
51,301
defciencies, 28t, 35
production, 439
decrease, 348
excesses/dietary sources, 28t
reduction, 446
transport, reduction, 431
infection protection, 136-137
Voluntary activity, changes, 61
triglycerides, transport, 431
monosaccharide sugars, relationship,
Voluntary muscular activity,59-60
Veterinary dental prophylaxis, 448
34-35
energy expenditure component,
Veterinary medical foods (VMF), label
production, 35
59-60
claims, 137
supplementation, 291
Voluntary water consumption, 10
562 Index
W
Weight loss (Continued)
Working dogs (Continued)
Waste products, elimination, 9-10, 10b
program
human athletes, contrast, 245
Water, 3, 9-11, 70
calculation, 330b
nutrition/feding, goals, 255
balance, 365-366
pet weighing, 331
portion-controlled basis, 253b
daily consumption, fuid loss
protein deficiency sign, 418-419
protein level, 248-249
compensation,10
rapidity, 314
Working muscle, fats/carbohydrates (fuel),
daily drinking requirement, 70
Weight reduction
244
function, 9-10
importance,353-354,354b
intake
purpose, 333
X
diet type/composition, impact, 10-11
Weight-related mechanical stressors, 495—496
Xanthuria, 374
source,10
West Highland White Terriers, disorders,
losses
298-299
experience,10
Wet diet, dry diet (relationship), 442
Yellow fat disease (pansteatitis),110
increase, 253
Wet dog food, nutrient content, 164t
Young adult cats
requirements,250
Wet foods, fat content, 319
body composition, 262t
survivability importance, 9
Wet pet food, 165-166
energy requirements calculation, 69b
Water-soluble globules, formation, 4950
advantages, 165-166
Young adult dogs, body composition, 264f
Water-soluble vitamins, 27, 111
dry pet food, contrast, 442
Young cats, body composition, 264t
group,27b
palatability/digestibility, 165
Young dogs, body composition, 264t
importance, 111
types, 165, 166b
Weather extremes,256
Wheat grains, processing, 152
Z
Weight control, 353-354
Whelping, daily intake, 200-201
Zinc, 4142, 114
Weight excess, physical effects, 314
Whole-body protein turnover
absorption, 41
Weight loss
maintenance, 89
efficiency, increase, 42
caloric value, calculation, 330
rate, differences, 269
abundance, 114
 energy needs, calculation, 330b
Wobbler syndrome, 497-498
deficiencies, 38t, 42, 114
energy requirements, 329t-330t
Wolf
causes, 299-300
excess, 457-458
dog, relationship, 191
photographs, 114f
food
food hoarding behaviors, 192
excesses/dietary sources, 38t
protein calories, proportion (increase),
Work
function, 41
333b
caloric requirement, 249-250
malabsorption, 299-300
protein proportion, increase, 332-333
type, water losses (irmpact), 253
supplementation, 386
types, usage, 331-335
saop urr
Zinc-responsive dermatosis, 299-300,
goals, 328
controlled studies, 245-246
384386
maintenance, 335
energy
skin lesions, 385-386
monitoring, 331
needs, 255b
Zinc-responsive disorders, occurrence, 300
occurrence, 512-513
provision, 245-248