ColourReviewof
?
LEARN·REVISE·REINFORCE
Small Anima
Abdominal &
Metabolic
Disorders
Bryn Tennant
Clinicalcases
Problembased
Fullcolour
MANSON
PUBLISHING
小尾巴宠物健康中心http:/ttahc.taobao.com
Abbreviations
ACTH
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone
IHL
Idiopathic hepatic lipidosis
ADH
Antidiuretic hormone
IVU
Intravenous urogram
AIHA
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
LPE
 Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis
ALP
 Alkaline phosphatase
MCHC
Mean cell haemoglobin
ALT
Alanine aninotransaminase
concentration
APTT
Activated partial thromboplastin
MCV
 Mean corpuscular volume
time
MER
Maintenance energy requirement
AST
Aspartate transaminase
nRBC
Nucleated red blood cell
BIPS
Bariurm impregnated polyspheres
NSAID
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
CBC
Complete blood (cell) count
drug
CCV
Canine coronavirus
OSPT
One stage prothrombin time
CDV
Canine distemper virus
PCR
Polymerase chain reaction
cfu
Colony forming units
PCV
Packed cell volume (haematocrit)
CHPG
Chronic hypertrophic pyloric
PEM
 Protein-energy malnutrition
gastropathy
PLE
Protein-losing enteropathy
CNS
Central nervous system
PLN
Protein-losing nephropathy
CPV
Canine parvovirus
PNM/CD
Prolapsed nictitating
CRF
Chronic renal failure
 mermbrane/chronic diarrhoea
CSF
Cerebrospinal fluid
(syndrone)
DFM
Dark field microscopy
PPN
 Partial parenteral nutrition
DIC
Disseminated intravascular
PT
Prothrombin time
coagulation
PTH
Parathyroid hormone
ECF
Extracellular fluid
PTT
Partial thromboplastin time
ECG
Electrocardiogram
PU/PD
Polyuria/polydipsia
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
RBC
Red blood cell
assay
RIM
Rapid immunomigration
EPI
 Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
RPI
 Reticulocyte production index
FCV
Feline calicivirus
RTA
Renal tubular acidosis
FCoV
Feline coronavirus
SG
Specific gravity
FeLV
Feline leukaemia virus
SIAP
Steroid induced isoenzyme of ALP
FHV
Feline herpesvirus
SIBO
Small intestinal bacterial
FIP
Feline infectious peritonitis
overgrowth
FIV
Feline immunodeficiency virus
T3
Triodothyronine
FLUTD
Feline lower urinary tract disease
山
Thyroxine
FPV
Feline panleucopenia virus
TIBC
Total iron-binding capacity
FUS
Feline urological syndrome
TLI
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity
GFR
Glomerular filtration rate
TPN
Total parenteral nutrition
GGT
Gamma glutamyl transferase
TRH
Thyrotropin releasing hormone
HD
Growth hormone
TSH
Thyroid stimulating horrmone
GI
Gastrointestinal
UIBC
Unbound iron-binding capacity
HAC
Hyperadrenocorticism
UP:C
Urine protein:creatinine
Hb
Haemoglobin
URT
Upper respiratory tract
HGE
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
V
Virus isolation
hpf
High powered field
VLDLs
Very low density lipoproteins
JBD
Inflammatory bowel disease
VNA
Virus neutralizing antibodies
IFA
Immunofluorescent assay
WBC
White blood cell
Self-Assessment Colour Review of
Small Animal
Abdominal and
Metabolic Disorders
Bryn Tennant
BVSc, PhD, CertVR, MRCVS
Capital Diagnostics
SAC Veterinary Science Division
Penicuik, Midlothian, UK
Manson Publishing/The Veterinary Press
Acknowledgements
Illustrations 67 and 74 are reproduced with permission of Dr F. J. McEvoy; 88a and
b with permission of Mr M. E. Herrtage; and 99 with permission of Dr K. Monce.
Copyright @ 1999 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN: 1-874545-49-9
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
permission of the copyright holder or in accordance with the provisions of the
Copyright Act 1956 (as amended), or under the terms of any licence permitting
limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 33-34 Alfred Place,
London WC1E 7DP.
liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
For full details of all Manson Publishing titles, please write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringham Road, London NW11 7DL, UK.
Project management: Paul Bennett
Text editing: Peter Beynon
Design and layout: Patrick Daly and Lara Last
Colour reproduction: Tenon & Polert Colour Scanning Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed by: Grafos SA, Barcelona, Spain
Preface
- u  s s s  aa  so  a
ders are recognized and novel diagnostic approaches are reported. This book brings
together a wide variety of cases and clinical situations which relate to disorders of the
abdominal cavity in a question and answer format. These cases are presented in differ-
ent ways and relate to the highly individual approach to cases by each of the wide vari-
ety of specialist authors who have contributed to the text. The book should be useful to
all veterinary surgeons and students and provides a rich mix of material ranging from
relatively simple cases to complex and controversial subjects. It is hoped that the text
will not only serve to test the ability of the reader but also be informative.
The cases primarily draw on diseases affecting organs of the abdominal cavity,
although non-a bdominal disorders primarily relating to endocrine problems, and occa-
sional muscular, neurological and dermatological disorders, are also included. The dif-
ferent subject areas are randomly mixed throughout the book. The Broad Classification
of Cases (below) and the Index (page 191) can be used to find specific areas of interest.
Normal biochemical and haematological values are listed in the Appendix (page 189).
The results within the body of the text use SI units, but old units are included in the
Appendix along with conversion factors. The abbreviations used within the text are
listed on the inside of the front cover.
Broad Classification of Cases
Body cavities 19, 36,45,46,74,148,
156,160, 168, 174, 177,178,187,193
165, 187
Lower urinary tract 4, 10, 32, 42, 75, 106,
Cardiovascular 33, 45
113, 118, 126, 129, 133, 135, 138, 143
Endocrine 5,14,23,30,41,47,52,53,Neoplasia 1,8,21,25,54,59, 85,92,
93, 100, 107, 121, 123, 140, 142, 145,
133,146,164,172,173,180, 183
149, 157, 163
Neurology 39,70,171,177
Haematology 2, 8, 31, 69, 73, 95, 102,
Nutrition 13, 15, 34, 64, 71,101, 134,
110, 112, 124, 132, 191
186, 190, 195
Infectious disease 9,16, 18,24,38, 39,
Oesophagus 34, 68, 128, 159
40, 44, 48, 57, 62, 63, 70, 81, 82, 83,  Ophthalmology 33,142, 167
90, 98, 99, 103, 122, 124, 147, 158,  Orthopaedic 85,98,182
161,170, 176, 184, 188
Pancreas 25, 127, 152,174
Intestine 6,13,29,54,55,61,62,76,81,Prostate 35,97,106,139
88,94, 101,116,119,120,127,131,Reproduction 11,17,28,50,51,60,66,
141,147,153,161,162,166,175，
78,86,105,109, 114,176,180
186, 189, 195
Respiratory 6, 63, 170
Kidney 1,7,27,32,49,58,72,79,80,
Skin 37,186
84,87,96,104,108,111,117,122,
Stomach 3,12,15,25,68,72,91,99
137, 144, 150, 155, 173, 182, 193, 196
103, 115,119, 125,136, 164, 181,
Liver 20, 22,26,37, 46,56, 64,65,67,
183, 185, 192
71,74,77, 89,92,130,146,151,154,Toxins 102,104
3
Contributors
Diane Addie, BVMS PhD MRCVS
Carmel Mooney, MVB MPhil MRCVS
University of Glasgow Veterinary School
 Department of Small Animal Clinical
Department of Veterinary Pathology
Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK
University College Dublin
Ballsbridge, Dublin 4, Ireland
Joe Bartges, DVM
University of Georgia
Carolien Rutgers, DVM MS DipACVIM
College of Veterinary Medicine
DSAM MRCVS
Department of Small Animal Medicine
Royal Veterinary College
and Surgery
 Department of Small Animal Medicine
Athens, GA 3060L, USA
and Surgery
Hatfield, Hertfordshire AL9 7TA, UK
Gary England, BVetMed PhD DVR
Cert VA DVRep DipACT FRCVS
Andrew Sparkes, BVetMed PhD MRCVS
Royal Veterinary College
University of Bristol
Department of Small Animal Medicine
 Department of Clinical Veterinary
and Surgery
Science
Hatfield, Hertfordshire AL9 7TA, UK
Langford, Bristol BS18 7DU, UK
Sue Gregory, BVetMed PhD DVR DSAS
Bryn Tennant, BVSc PhD CertVR
MRCVS
MRCVS
 Royal Veterinary College
Capital Diagnostics
 Department of Small Animal Medicine
SAC Veterinary Science Divison
and Surgery
Penicuik, Midlothian EH26 0QE, UK
Hatfield, Hertfordshire AL9 7T, UK
Andrew Torrance, MA VetMB PhD
Ed Hall, MA VetMB PhD MRCVS
DipACVIM MRCVS
University of Bristol
Bloxham Laboratories
Department of Clinical Veterinary
Teignmouth, Devon TQ14 8AH, UK
Science
Langford, Bristol BS18 7DU, UK
Karyl Hurley, DVM
Royal Veterinary College
Department of Small Animal Medicine
and Surgery
Hatfield, Hertfordshire AL9 7TA, UK
4
1&2:Questions
1Lateral survey radiograph (1a) andventrodorsal
abdominal radiograph(1b) taken 20 minutes after
intravenous administration of contrast media to a
nine-year-old,neutered female Lhasa Apso with a
two-week history ofhaematuria.Abdominal palpa-
tion revealed a mid-abdominal mass.
i.What is your diagnosis?
i.What is the commonest type of renal neoplasm in dogs?
ii.What is the commonest type of renal neoplasm in cats?
2Examine the RBCmorphology and arrangement shown (2).
i. Comment on the findings in the film.
ii.Would these microscopic findings be evident grossly in the sample?
ii.What is the significance of these findings?
iv.Would you elect toperform a Coombs test in this case?
5
I & 2: Answers
1 i. Abdominal mass located in the area
of one of the kidneys. The contrast mate-
rial has outlined the mass, confirming it
as a kidney. Intravenous pyelography
increases the accuracy of demonstrating
suspicious abdominal masses as a kidney.
A blush in one area of the kidney may be
seen due to neovascularization associated
with the tumour. On occasions there may
be little or no uptake of contrast materi-
al. The mass was removed surgically (1c).
i. Over 85% of canine kidney tumours are epithelial and 90% are malignant. Two
thirds of renal neoplasms are carcinomas. Other tumours include transitional cell
carcinoma, adenoma, papilloma, fibroma, lymphoma, sarcoma and nephroblastoma.
im. In cats the commonest renal neoplasm is lymphosarcoma which usually affects
both kidneys. Approximately 50% of cats with renal lymphoma test positive for
FeLV and approximately 40% of cats with renal lymphoma also have CNS involve-
ment. Other cancers affecting feline kidneys include carcinoma and nephroblastoma.
2 i. The RBCs show anisocytosis and polychromasia. The clumped pattern of the
RBCs is due to agglutination. Microscopically this can usually be differentiated from
rouleaux formation which appears as stacked arrays of RBCs rather than clumps.
i. This is microscopic agglutination; the clumps are not large enough to be visible
grossly. When clumps of RBCs can be seen grossly in the sample they must be differen-
tiated from rouleaux formation by mixing one drop of blood with one drop of normal
saline on a slide. The rouleaux will disperse, while agglutination will persist.
. The microscopic agglutination implies that RBCs are bound together by antibodies
-a smous aldues sui 'ssaod asas ieooun ue sisaans pue suaduoo 1o
dence of regeneration and it is fair to assume that this is a case of autoimmune haemo-
lytic anaemia (AIHA).
iv. Where the haematological profile findings are consistent with AIHA and microag-
  a  on go ad a  d si 
RBCs using a Coombs test yields no further diagnostic information; the diagnosis of
AIHA has already been made. Coombs tests quite frequently give anomalous or unreli-
able results when performed on samples already containing agglutinated RBCs.
6
3 & 4: Questions
3 This radiograph (3a) is of a four-year-old, entire male Yorkshire Terrier who had a his-
tory of intermittent, passive regurgitation of food and water for several years. Thoracic
radiographs were taken and subsequent contrast radiography was performed (3b).
i. Describe your radiogra phic findings, and state your diagnosis.
i. What therapy do you recommend?
4  A seven-year-old, neutered female cat was presented with a history of intermittent
haematuria over the last six months which responded to treatment with antibiotics.
Clinical examination was unremarkable and the bladder was full. The cat was otherwise
well.
i. What are your differential diagnoses?
The only abnormality found on radiographic investigation is shown (4).
i. What is your diagnosis and ma nagement advice for this case?
3 & 4: Answers
3 i. A soft tissue opacity is present in the caudodorsal thorax. Differential diagnoses
include pleural or pulmonary disease, oesophageal disease or gastric herniation.
After administration of liquid barium, the contrast material outlines rugal folds of
the stomach within the thorax and a cranially displaced stomach in the abdomen
consistent with a hiatal hernia.
 auo sis axa sp ku nq rus ann ae sa iii 
mittently due to the sliding nature of the stomach into the thorax from the abdomen.
In dogs with minimal, only intermittent clinical signs, these may be best managed
medically with H,-blockers to control gastric acidity and reduce the common com-
plication of oesophagitis. Prokinetic therapies and a low-fat diet may help to increase
gastric motility and emptying. Surgical correction is required in animals with persis-
tent signs of regurgitation and oesophageal disea se.
4 i. Urinary tract infection; feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD)/feline uro-
logical syndrome (FUS); urinary tract calculi; urinary tract neoplasia; bleeding abnor-
malities; urinary tract trauma.
il. The radiographic diagnosis is a single cystic calculus. The density of the stone sug-
gests that the calculus is composed of struvite or oxalate. Provided other causes of
haematuria have been excluded and any urinary tract infection identified, the treat-
ment is surgical removal of the calculus via a cystotomy. The calculus should be
analysed using a qualitative technique so that dietary changes or other relevant diag-
nostic tests can be performed to prevent recurrence. Urinalysis should be performed
pre-operatively. In this case the calculus was composed of 100% calcium oxalate
-d u q   e r a a   s a a
phate restricted, diet and monitor the urine, checking the pH and the presence of
crystals. The possibility of an underlying hypercalcaemia was checked. The owners
of this cat were warned that despite these measures recurrence could occur.
8
5-7: Questions
5 A ten-year-old, neutered male cat
with diabetes mellitus was presented
because of insulin resistance and bi-
laterally symmetric alopecia (5).
i. What are the possible causes of in-
sulin resistance?
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis,
and why?
6a
6b
R
6 A six-year-old, neutered female Springer
Spaniel suffering from chronic diarrhoea
and weight loss suddenly develops ascites and dyspnoea. The dog has panhypopro-
teinaemia (albumin 13 g/l, globulin 12 g/l) and the ascitic fluid is a transudate. A
protein-losing enteropathy is suspected and endoscopic biopsy ultimately confirms
severe lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis (LPE) (6a). Chest radiographs reveal mini-
mal pleural effusion, insufficient to explain the degree of dyspnoea exhibited by the
patient. Although the lung parenchyma appears normal radiographically, a scinti-
graphic perfusion study is abnormal (6b); this indicates impaired pulmonary perfu-
sion, especially of the caudal tip of the right ca udal lung lobe.
i. What is the cause of the dyspnoea?
ii. How is it related to the enteropathy?
 7 A seven-year-old, neutered female Springer Spaniel is diagnosed as having renal
glomerulonephritis on a renal biopsy.
i. What are your treatment plans?
ii. What is the prognosis for dogs with glomerulonephritis?
5-7:Answers
5 i. Causes of apparent insulin resistance include infections, acromegaly, hyperthy-
roidism, exogenous glucocorticoid/progestogen administration, poor subcutaneous
absorption of long-acting insulin preparations, and hyperadrenocorticism.
i. Hyperadrenocorticism. Naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism is a disease of mid-
dle-aged to old cats. Pituitary dependent hyperadrenocorticism and functional adrenal
tumours have been described, although as in dogs the latter is less common. Cats appear
to be peculiarly susceptible to the diabetogenic effects of chronic endogenous glucocorti-
coid excess and over 90% of cases present with concurrent diabetes mellitus. Hyper-
adrenocorticism should be suspected if other appropriate clinical signs are present. These
include a pot-bellied appearance, alopecia of the trunk or ventral abdomen and, particu-
larly in this species, thin atrophic skin which is fragile and easily torn with routine han-
dling and grooming. Other clinical signs, e.g. polyuria/polydipsia and polyphagia, are
attributable to the diabetic state. Almost all affected diabetic cats are poorly regulated
with evidence of mild to severe insulin resistance.
6 i. Pulmonary thromboembolism. A scintigraphic perfusion study is performed by
injecting 9mtechnetium-labelled albumin microaggregates into the cephalic vein. The
aggregates lodge in the first capillary bed they pass through (ie. the pulmonary vascula-
ture) and are detected by a gamma camera. All normally perfused lung will be visible
scintigraphically but lack of perfusion will be indicated by a lack of scintillation. The
lack of activity in the caudal tip of the left diaphragmatic is typical of a pulmonary
thromboembolism. The absence of radiographic changes is expected and is the reason
such a diagnosis is difficult to make routinely.
il. Thromboembolism is a well recognized feature of the nephrotic syndrome, and is
believed to be associated with the urinary loss of small anticoagulant factors, especially
antithrombin Ill. Both pulmonary and renal thromboembolism are not infrequently
rarely diagnosed antemortem. The mechanism of thrombosis is presumably the same as
 for protein-losing nephropathies, and massive thrombosis may be an unexpected cause of
death in these patients. As well as prednisolone and azathioprine treatment for the LPE,
this dog was treated with heparin and low doses of aspirin, and it made a good recovery.
7 i. Remove, if possible, the inciting cause. Symptomatic and supportive therapy should
be undertaken. Immunosuppressive drugs that may be tried include cyclophosphamide,
azathioprine, corticosteroids and cyclosporin. Corticosteroids often result in worsening of
the proteinuria and cyclosporin was not effective in one study; use of these drugs is less
desirable. Drugs that decrease platelet aggregation, such as aspirin or dipyridamole, may
be of benefit. Thromboxane synthetase inhibitors may help. Angiotensin converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors may decrease the degree of proteinuria and reduce hypertension
 present in many cases. Monitor blood pressure as profound hypotension may develop
where ACE inhibitors are used. Other supportive measures include feeding a low-sodium,
low-protein diet. Beware of feding a diet too low in protein as protein malnutrition may
result due to excessive protein loss; serum albumin concentration should be monitored.
i. As a general rule the prognosis is guarded at best.
10
8 & 9: Questions
8 An aged cat presents with an unkempt
RBCs (x 10/2/)
4.7
appearance, weight loss and polydipsia.
Hb (g/l)
70
Serum globulin concentration is 81 g/l;
there are no other significant findings.
PCV (/l)
0.33
MCV (f)
70
Total thyroxine concentration is within
MCHC (g/)
220
the reference range and the feline coron-
nRBCs
0%
avirus titre is negative. The haematologi-
WBCs (× 10"/)
3.6
cal profile and a photomicrograph of the
Neutrophils (seg) (x I0°/l)
3.28
blood film (8) are shown.
Neutrophils (bands) (x 10°/)
0
i. What do you observe in the photo-
Lymphocytes (x 10°/)
0.11
micrograph?
Monocytes (x 10"/1)
0.14
i. Can you explain the findings?
Eosinophils (x 10*/1)
0.07
ii. How do you interpret this haemato-
logical profile?
iv.What would be your
next step towards a diag-
nosis?
9 Your client has four cats ranging from one to four years of age and you have tested
them for FeLV using an ELISA assay for FeLV antigen. Two cats are FeLV positive.
What advice would you give to your client?
11
8& 9: Answers
8 i. The RBCs are agglutinated, there is no evidence of polychromasia or anisocyto-
sis, and the platelet count appears adequate.
i. This is a non-regenerative anaemia with autoagglutination. The agglutination is
probably secondary to the elevated globulin concentration. Presumably there are
antibodies present with RBC specificity/cross-reactivity.
m. This is a mild non-regenerative anaemia. The sample was sent to a laboratory and
the elevated MCV is either due to RBC swelling or use of an automatic analyser cali-
brated for human RBCs rather than feline RBCs. The artefactually elevated MCV has
also erroneously elevated the PCV. There is a lymphopenia with a low-normal neu-
trophil count. The overall findings are suspicious of bone marrow suppression/dis-
ease.
iv. The findings to date are suspicious for multiple myeloma, lymphoma/leukaemia or
possibly another neoplasm. Protein electrophoresis followed by bone marrow biopsy
would be indicated. This case showed a monoclonal gamma globulin spike and had
increased plasma cells on aspiration of the bone marrow, confirming the diagnosis of
myeloma.
9 The positive cats may fit into any of the following scenarios {in descending order
of likelihood):
● They may be truly FeLV positive, 85% of whom will be dead within 3.5 years.
● The result may be a false positive. FeLV positive results derived from ELISA or
rapid immunomigration (RIM) tests should be confirmed by virus isolation (VI) or
immunofluorescent assay (IFA), especially in healthy cats.
· The cat may be in the very short period between infection and development of
immunity. In this case, retest after 12 weeks. If the cat is still FeLV positive, then it
will remain positive.
● They may be positive by ELISA or RIM and negative by VI or IFA. Discordant cats
months. Around half of discordant cats eventually become negative by both tests,
some become positive on both tests and others remain discordant almost indefinitely.
Discordant cats may be latently infected and do not appear to be infectious to other
cats unless they become positive by VI, at which time they are then infectious.
12
10 & Il: Questions
10
10 A two-year-old, neutered female Giant Schnauzer presented with urinary inconti-
nence of several months' duration. The dog leaked when recumbent and the severity
of the incontinence varied. The dog was otherwise normal. She was spayed at 11
months old after her first season and was not incontinent as a puppy.
i. How would you investigate this dog?
This radiograph was obtained (10).
il. What is your main differential diagnosis?
11 A six-year-old Labrador
stud dog unsuccessfully mated
three bitches over the last six
months. He has previously
been fertile. He has normal
libido and is not ill. His total
spermatozoal output is normal
but spermatozoal motility is 
reduced. A smear of the semen
has been stained with nigrosin
and eosin (11).
i. What is the predominant
spermatozoal abnormality?
ii. What is the significance of these changes?
. What is the likely aetiology of this condition?
iv. What is the prognosis for a return to fertility?
13
Io&Il:Answers
10 i. ● Full clinical examination with specific reference to the urinary and nervous sys-
tem.
● Urine collected by cystocentesis or catheterization for bacteriology and urinalysis.
●Blood for routine haematology and biochemistry.
● Plain radiographic (lateral and ventrodorsal) examination of the abdomen after suit-
able preparation {enemas should be given to remove faeces from the rectum).
● Intravenous urogram. Give 700 mg/kg iodine via the cephalic vein with ventrodorsal
views taken at 0 and 5 minutes and lateral views of the abdomen and caudal abdomen
taken at 10 and 15 minutes respectively. A small amount of air introduced into the blad-
der prior to injection of contrast improves visualization of the ureterovesical termina-
tions.
● Retrograde vagino-urethrogram. Allows accurate determination of the position of the
bladder neck and may confirm the presence and morphology of an ectopic ureter.
· Ultrasound examination of the bladder after residual air and contrast has been
removed and the bladder moderately filled with sterile saline. This allows identification of
ureterovesical junctions and visualization of ureteral jets from ureters entering the trigone
normally. Alternatively, direct visualization of ureteral emptying with fluoroscopy.
+Urodynamic investigation. Stressed urethral pressure profilometry is a better predictor
of continence than plain urethral pressure profilometry. Both techniques require expen-
sive equipment and are dependent upon the technique used. Urethral pressure profilome-
try can provide additional useful information.
f. In this case the history, lack of specific findings on clinical and radiographic examina-
tions, and presence of an intrapelvic bladder neck on the radiograph were highly sugges-
tive of urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence. The dog responded well to treat-
es of urinary incontinence were ruled out by the above investigation.
11 i. Nigrosin-eosin staining of semen is useful since it allows the differentiation of live
(white) from dead (pink) spermatozoa. In this slide all the spermatozoa are live and each
demonstrates a similar morphological abnormality located on the mid-piece region.
There is swelling of the proximal mid-piece. These defects may be described as proximal
cytoplasmic droplets; in this case the lesions are not completely regular in shape or size
and are more accurately termed proximal mid-piece swellings.
i. Spermatozoa with proximal mid-piece swellings frequently have poor motility, since
this region is packed with mitochondria and provides propulsive force to the tail.
Electron microscopic studies of these spermatozoa usually show axonemal and mito-
chondrial defects accounting for the poor motility, as well as other membrane defects.
     e n    
mi. The aetiology of these defects is uncertain; however, it is clear that they are primary
spermatozoa abnormalities, i.e. they occur during spermatogenesis. Proximal mid-piece
swellings are commonly found in aged infertile dogs and there is some evidence of the
condition being found with a high frequency in certain breeds.
iv. In most cases the prognosis for fertility is hopeless and hormonal therapies are unre-
warding.
14
12 & I3: Questions
12a
2
12 A five-year-old, male Mastiff (12a) presents to your emergency service retching
and collapsed, with a large tympanic abdomen, one hour after his morning meal. A
lateral abdominal radiograph is obtained (12b).
i. What is your radiographic diagnosis?
i. What medical therapy will you recommend?
ii. Is surgery indicated? If so, what preventive measures might you perform to avoid
a recurrence?
13 A six-year-old Yorkshire
13
Terrier with profuse chronic diar-
rhoea is diagnosed on intestinal
biopsy as having lymphangiectasia
(13).
i. What is intestinal lymphangiec-
tasia, and what is its cause(s)?
i. What changes might be found
on haematological and serum bio-
chemical evaluation?
ii. How is intestinal lymphangiec-
tasia treated?
15
12 & I3: Answers
12 i. The stomach is severely distended with gas, there is compartmentalization of
the gas ("double bubble'′) and the duodenum is dislocated cranially indicating the
presence of a ga stric torsion.
il. Gastric torsions are true medical emergencies and require aggressive intervention
with gastric decompression, treatment of shock with fluids, and correction of acid-
base status and cardiac dysrhythmias. An attempt should be made to pass a tube into
the stomach and, if this is unsuccessful, a trocar may be necessary to relieve acute
 gaseous distension. A large-bore intravenous catheter should be placed to allow for
rapid fluid administration and correction of blood gas and electrolyte derangements
which occur secondary to the sequestration of acids in the stomach and increased
intra-abdominal pressures. A continuous ECG is useful to assess for the presence of
and/or response to therapy for cardiac dysrhythmias.
m. Surgery is indicated as soon as the animal is sufficiently stabilized to undergo
anaesthesia. Surgical intervention has three goals; to reposition the stomach and
13 i. Dilation of the lacteals of the villi and submucosal lymphatics. Lymphatic
dilatation may be secondary to a proximal obstruction, but is more commonly idio-
pathic. It can be associated with lipogranuloma formation in the mesentery; this is
thought to be a res ponse to leakage of chyle into the tissue.
i. Lymphangiectasia is one cause of a protein-losing enteropathy with hypoalbu-
minaemia and hypoglobulinaemia occurring. Leakage of lymph into the gut lumen
results in loss of cholesterol and lymphocytes, with consequent hypocholesterolaemia
and lymphopenia.
i. Feed a severely fat-restricted diet. Medium chain triglycerides can be given as a fat
source as they are absorbed directly into the portal blood and not via the lymphatics.
Steroid administration is beneficial in some cases, either because of associated lym-
phangitis/lipogranulomas or because of an incorrect diagnosis. Lymphocytic-plasma
cytic enteritis is occasionally misdiagnosed as lymphangiectasia because of lacteal
dilatation associated with lamina propria infiltration.
16
14 & 15: Questions
14  A five-year-old,
Blood glucose concentration (mmol/)
14
neutered female cat pre-
 sented with clinical signs
of diabetes mellitus
20
des pite administration of
15 iu of a purified beef
lente insulin once daily
10
over the previous ten
months. Following the
Reference range
owner's regimen of
insulin injection and ad
6
8
10
12
16182022 24
lib feeding, two-hourly
Time (hours)
blood glucose concentra-
Insulin injection
tions were measured
over a 24 hour period (14).
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. How should the treatment be altered?
m. What other diagnostic test is useful in monitoring long-term glycaemic control?
15
15 This radiograph (15) was taken of an Irish Wolfhound presented with acute
vomiting and collapse of a few hours? duration. The dog's mucous membranes were
dark, a tachycardia was present and the abdomen was enlarged and tense. Percussion 
arrhythmia with numerous ventricular ectopics.
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. How would you consider feeding this dog postoperatively?
17
I4&I5:Answers
14 i. There is a short duration of insulin effect. Based on the glucose concentrations,
the insulin appears to have a duration of effect of approximately ten hours. The con-
nosis of Somogyi overswing (posthypoglycaemia rebound hyperglycaemia). Insulins
are categorized as short-acting {regular/semi-lente), intermediate-acting {isophane
(NPH)/lente) or long-acting (protamine zinc (PZI) ultralente). Blood glucose concen-
trations in diabetic cats are rarely controlled for longer than 12 hours after injection
of NPH or lente insulins because of rapid metabolism of the insulin. NPH and lente
insulin have an onset of activity of approximately 30 minutes; insulin concentrations
peak at approximately 90 minutes and subsequently fall to basal values at approxi-
mately eight hours. PZI and ultralente insulin preparations have a longer duration of
effect but are less potent.
i. Changing the frequency of injection, or type or dose of insulin. The animal should
be re-stabilized using either the lente insulin twice daily or substitution with a long-
acting preparation; once daily injections of a long-acting preparation may require
higher doses. Further adjustments in dose or frequency of administration should be
made based on the clinical response to therapy and serial blood glucose curves.
m. Measurement of serum fructosamine concentrations. Fructosamine is a glycated
protein whose concentration is largely dependent on the mean glucose concentration
over the preceding 1-3 weeks. Serum fructosamine concentrations are easily mea-
sured using an automated colorimetric assay available in most commercial labora-
tories. In this case, measurement of a single blood glucose concentration between two
and eight hours after insulin injection would provide a false impression of adequate
glycaemic control. Concurrent measurement of a serum fructosamine concentration
would ha ve confirmed the clinical suspicions of a poorly regulated diabetic state.
15 i. The radiograph shows a dilated torsed stomach. There is compartmentalization
of the gas and the soft tissue ^cross’ seen within the gastric silhouette is characteristic
of gastric torsion. The duodenum is displaced dorsally.
i. If the stomach wall is relatively healthy, feding through a gastrostomy tube, nasal
feeding tube or by mouth would suffice. The benefit of feeding through a gastros-
tomy tube or oesophageal tube is that the risk of redilation immediately postopera-
tively is removed. If there is extensive necrosis of the stomach wall, nil by mouth is
indicated and feeding using total parenteral nutrition (TPN) or partial parenteral
nutrition (PPN) should be instituted. PPN has the advantage that it is cheaper and
  m  n io  s ad e    
administered into the cranial vena cava. The disadvantage with PPN is that only
some of the dog's nutritional needs can be met and thus it is only suitable for short-
term use.
18
16 & I7: Questions
Antibody titre a
Antibody titre b
ccv
Pup I
1:2
1:128
Pup 2
1:4
1:256
Pup 3
1:2
1:64
CPV
Pup I
1:320
1:160
Pup 2
1:160
1:320
Pup 3
1:160
1:80
CDV
Pup 1
1:400
1:200
Pup 2
1:200
1:200
 Pup 3
1:200
1:100
(Titre a at presentation, titre b two weeks after presentation)
16 A ten-week-old litter of pups is presented with acute diarrhoea and inappetence.
The pups are bright and vomiting is not a feature. No blood or mucus is present in the
faeces. The bitch had been vaccinated against canine parvovirus (CPV) and canine dis-
temper virus (CDV) eight months previously. Faecal analysis for protozoae, worm
eggs and coccidia was negative. Faecal streptococci and non-haemolytic E. coli were
isolated from the faeces. The results of CDV, CPV and canine coronavirus (CCV)
serology in three of the affected pups at the time of presentation (a) and two weeks
later (b) are shown.
i. How would you interpret these results?
i. Could you confirm your diagnosis?
17  You are presented with a
three-year-old maiden Labra-
dor bitch that has had a sero-
 sanguinous vulval discharge
for 12 days. The owners wish
to breed from her but she has
refused to stand for the male
on the past two days.A vagi-
nal smear has been obtained
and stained with a modified
Wright-Giemsa stain (17).
i. What cell types are present in
this vaginal smear?
ii. What is the stage of the oestrous cycle?
i. Why has mating been refused?
iv. How can this problem be overcome?
19
I6&I7:Answers
16 i. The rise in antibody titres to CCV is consistent with the presence of an active
infection, whereas the antibody titres to CPV and CDV show no significant change.
The other results provide no evidence for any other infectious agent.
i. Confirmation of CCV infection is difficult. Virus isolation may be attempted on
fresh samples. However, the virus is labile in the environment and some strains do
not adapt well to cell culture systems. Electron microscopy is useful in that live CCV
does not need to be present. However, with storage the characteristic club-like pro-
jections associated with CCV are lost, making recognition of the virus difficult.
Histopathological examination of the small intestine is not helpful as there are no
characteristic changes recognized. Immunohistochemical staining for CCV antigen
would be helpful.
17 i. Small intermediate epithelial cells {clustered in the centre of the field of view), red
blood cells and numerous neutrophils. Amorphous cellular debris is also abundant.
i. In view of the large number of neutrophils it is likely that the bitch has entered
metoestrus {dioestrus). This stage of the oestrous cycle is characterized by a decrease in
the percentage of anuclear and large intermediate epithelial cells in the vaginal smear,
and an increase in cellular debris associated with sloughing of the vaginal mucosa.
Metoestrus is also associated with an influx of neutrophils in large numbers. These cells
have been excluded from the vaginal lumen during oestrus due to proliferation of the
vaginal mucosa.
mi. The onset of metoestrus is associated with a rise in plasma progesterone concentra-
tions which causes the termination of oestrus; behavioural signs of oestrus are therefore
from the onset of proestrus. However, this is not always the case and many bitches ovu-
late soon after the onset of proestrus {as early as day 5 - as in the present case), while
iv. This bitch has a relatively short proestrus but is normal. The problem is the result of a
misunderstanding of normal reproductive physiology. The optimum time of mating can-
not be calculated simply by counting the number of days from the onset of proestrus.
More accurate assessments of the optimal mating time include the evaluation of vaginal
exfoliative cytology, vaginal endoscopy and the measurement of plasma progesterone
oncentrations using an ELISA test kit. NB: Evaluate each oestrous period independently
20
18 & I9: Questions
18 An 18-month-old domestic shorthair cat is presented with
dyspnoea and inappetence. There is no history of poly-
dipsia/polyuria or of CNS signs. On thoracic auscultation lung
and heart sounds are muffled; no murmur is audible. Respira-
tory rate is 40 breaths/minute and the pulse rate 160 bpm.
Mucous membranes are unremarkable and capillary refill time
normal. Abdominal palpation shows no abnormality. No lym-
phadenopathy is present and examination of the eye is unre-
markable. A dorsoventral radiograph of the chest shows the
heart shadow to be obscured by a thoracic effusion.
i. List the possible causes of thoracic effusion in the cat, and
describe the fluid that you may obtain on thoracocentesis in
each of the examples you have listed.
Thoracocentesis produces this fluid (18).
ii. What tests will you perform on the fluid, and what are you looking for?
mi. What virological tests will you do on the blood/effusion?
iv. Suppose the blood tests you did were negative; is your diagnosis necessarily
wrong?
v. What else can you do to confirm your diagnosis?
19 Two photomicrographs of
centrifuged sediments from ab-
dominal effusions in middle-aged
cats are shown (19a,19b). They
are stained with Wright's stain.
One is from a chyloabdomen and
the other from a case of FIP.
i. Which is which, and why?
ii. How would you describe the
appearance of the macrophages in
both photomicrogra phs?
iii. How do you confirm that a
fluid is chylous?
19b
21
18 & I9: Answers
18 i. ● Thymic lymphoma: serous transudate (clear, watery), serosanguinous exudate
(blood tinged) or a chylous effusion (milky).
● FIP: exudate - (clear, yellowish), froths on shaking; may clot.
● Cardiomyopathy: transudate (clear, thin, watery).
● Pyothorax: pus, exudate (thick, yellow) foul smelling.
● Ruptured thoracic duct: chyle (milky or pink), high in triglycerides.
* Aelurostrongylus abstrusus infection: serous transudate (clear, watery).
● Diaphragmatic hernia: serous transudate (clear, watery).
ii. Cytology:
● Thymic lymphoma: tumour cells (lymphocytes) are often present.
● FIP: non-degenerate neutrophils and macrophages with a cell count of <5,0o0 cells/ml.
● Ruptured diaphragm, cardiomyopathy: low cellularity, few non-degenerate neutrophils
and macrophages.
● Aelurostrongylus abstrusus: larvae in a tracheal wash which have a characteristic S-
shaped kink in the tail.
Biochemistry:
 A si uod pt ae d ue  s>  t s< sxa and o o
be >35 g/l.
●Albumin:globulin ratio: if <0.45, FIP is very likely; if >0.8, FIP is very unlikely; if
between 0.4 and 0.8, FIP is possible.
mi. FeLV antigen: 90+ % of thymic lymphomas are FeLV-related; FIP antibody titre.
iv. No. FeLV negativity does not rule out a diagnosis of thymic lymphoma.
Occasionally, cats with effusive FIP are seronegative on standard antibody tests because
there is so much virus that it combines with all the antibody, leaving none available for
the test.
v. Needle biopsy of the tumour will confim the diagnosis of thymic lymphoma. In the case
of antibody test negative FIP, detection of feline coronavirus in the effusion is required.
19 i. 19a is the chyloabdomen. The presence of small lymphocytes and foamy (fat-
filled/active) macrophages is suggestive of fatty lymph/chyle. 19b is FIP. Note the
blue background staining of the high-protein effusion, foamy (protein-filled/active)
macrophages and neutrophils. Small lymphocytes are quite uncommon in effusions
associated with FIP.
ii. These are active foamy macrophages.
i. Biochemical analysis showing a greater triglyceride concentration in the fluid than
in serum confirms that a fluid is chylous.
22
20 & 21: Questions
20
This abdominal
20
radiograph (20) was ob
tained in a two-year-old,
female black Standard
Poodle with gradual
abdominal enlargement,
depression and anorexia.
On physical examination
the dog was thin and
jaundiced,
,and had
ascites. Rectal examina-
tion revealed melena.
Clinical pathology show-
ed a mildly regenerative
anaemia (PCV 0.25 1/), hypoproteinaemia (albumin 16 g/l, globulin 22 g/l), elevated
liver enzymes (ALP 526 u/l, ALT 4S6 u/l) and high bilirubin concentration
(102 μmol/l),.
i. What comments can you make on the radiograph?
ii. How can you explain the melena, and how should you treat it?
i. Should you biopsy the liver in this dog?
21 An Irish Setter is presented with a peri-
pheral lymphadenopathy involving the sub-
mandibular (21), prescapular, inguinal,
axillary and popliteal lymph nodes. As far
as the owner is concerned the dog is other-
wise unremarkable, bright, eating and
drinking normally. On physical examina-
tion no abnormalities other than the lym-
 phadenopathy are recognized.
i. What are the main differential diagnoses
to consider?
ii. How might you confirm the diagnosis?
ii. What serum biochemical tests might
you be interested in performing?
23
20 & 21:Answers
20 i. The radiograph shows reduced detail compatible with ascites. The liver is small,
which suggests chronic liver disease.
e  n   i  o r sd    
hypersecretion, impaired gastric mucosal blood flow and/or reduced epithelial cell
turnover. GI blood loss may explain the anaemia and hypoproteinaemia; the latter may
also be due to portal hypertension causing renal water retention and haemodilution.
Since GI bleeding may precipitate hepatic encephalopathy, treatment with H, blockers
(e.g. famotidine 0.5 mg/kg q24h) and/or sucralfate (0.5-1.0 gm q8h) is advocated.
Cimetidine is not recommended.
Dogs with severe liver disease may have coagulopathies due to decreased production
of clotting factors and/or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Reduced pro-
duction of clotting factors usually produces a subclinical coagulopathy, which may result
in bleeding after invasive medical procedures. A coagulation screen may show abnormal-
ities suggestive of DIC such as thrombocytopenia, prolonged prothrombin/thromboplas
tin times and increased fibrin degradation products. Treatment with plasma and/or
heparin may be given, but the prognosis is poor.
m. Jaundice, ascites and small liver size suggest chronic liver disease. A liver biopsy
should be taken for exact diagnosis and prognosis. It is important to distinguish between
chronic hepatitis, which is medically manageable, and cirrhosis, which is end-stage liver
disease and has a poor prognosis. Coagulation should be assessed prior to biopsy. Pre-
treatment with parenteral vitamin K1 (2 mg/kg q12h for 2 days) is recommended in case
of a subclinical coagulopathy.
21 i. Lymph node enlargement may arise as a consequence of proliferation of the nor-
(l          
or infiltration with neoplastic cells. In this case a generalized bacterial lymphadenitis
would be unlikely given the lack of signs of ill health. Reactive lymph nodes may arise
as a result of antigenic stimulation following an infectious or inflammatory disorder
and cannot be ruled out in this case. However, the commonest cause of a generalized
lymphadenopathy is lymphoma, which comprise 80% or more of cases.
ii. The diagnosis may be confirmed with a fine-needle aspirate or lymph node biopsy.
Avoid the submandibular lymph node if possible, as this node often has a reactive
appearance because it drains the oral cavity, and misdiagnosis is therefore possible.
mi. Lymphoma may involve any organ system. Thus, assessment of liver enzymes and
liver function (e.g. bile acids) and renal parameters (urea and creatinine) are indicated.
In addition, assessment of calcium, phosphate, albumin and globulin are indicated as
hypercalcaemia and hyperglobulinaemia may develop as paraneoplastic processes.
24
22-24: Questions
22 This five-month-old domestic
22
shorthair cat has a history of reduced
appetite and poor growth since it was
obtained by the owners as a kitten.
More recently the cat had intermit-
tent episodes of hyperactive behav-
iour alternating with lethargy. The
owners further report that the cat
often salivates excessively. On physi-
cal examination the cat is found to be
in poor body condition and the kid-
neys feel prominent on abdominal
palpation.
i. What do you observe in the illustra-
tion (22)?
ii. What is the differential diagnosis?
iii. How would you establish the
diagnosis?
23 A ten-year-old, neutered male cat with diabetes mellitus presented because of
insulin resistance, a pot-bellied appearance and bilaterally symmetric alopecia.
Haematology was unremarkable. Serum biochemistry showed a mild increase in cho-
lesterol, ALT and ALP. Urinalysis showed SG of 1.040 and +++ glucose on a dip-
stick.
i. What condition do you suspect?
il. What laboratory tests are most useful in confirming a diagnosis?
. What treatment options exist?
24  A free-ranging cat is presented in the autumn with scabs around the face and
right forepaw.
i. You suspect cat pox infection. How will you confirm your diagnosis?
i. You consider treating the cat symptomatically while awaiting the laboratory
results. Will you use corticosteroids?
m. What advice will you give to the owner about handling the cat?
25
22-24:Answers
22 i. Copper-coloured irises, a common but unexplained finding in cats with congenital
portosystemic shunts.
fi. Behavioural changes may result from metabolic or CNS diseases. The intermittency of
the signs is most compatible with metabolic disease, such as hepatic or uraemic
encephalopathy, hypoglycaemia, hypocalcaemia and lead intoxication. Hepatic
encephalopathy due to a congenital portosystemic shunt is the commonest cause of
intermittent neurobehavioural signs in young cats. Signs include hypersalivation, depres-
sion, behaviour changes, head pressing, apparent blindness and seizures. Renal enlarge-
    s  o   i  
portosystemic shunts, liver enzymes can be moderately increased and RBC microcytosis
may be present. Fasting serum bile acids are usually high but are occasionally normal.
Postprandial bile acids (obtained two hours after feeding) are always increased. Elevated
blood ammonia signifies hepatic encephalopathy; normal levels do not rule it out.
Radiography usually shows a small liver and occasionally large kidneys. Ultra
sonography may identify the shunting vessel. Rectal portal scintigraphy is a non-invasive
technique for detection of shunts, but since it requires radioactivity its use is limited to
referral centres. Definitive diagnosis is often based on mesenteric portography.
23 i. Hyperadrenocorticism (HAC).
ii. Leucocytosis, eosinopenia, lymphopenia and monocytosis are inconsistent findings
with HAC. Biochemical abnormalities, including hypercholesterolaemia, high ALT and,
less commonly, ALP activities, relate in part to the diabetic state. Cats do not have a spe-
cific steroid-induced ALP isoenzyme. Isosthenuric urine is rarely documented.
Adrenal function tests are indicated as basal serum cortisol concentrations are of little
diagnostic value. A combination of an exaggerated cortisol response to exogenous
ACTH administration and a lack of suppression after high-dose dexamethasone admin-
istration appear to be the most useful methods of distinguishing cases of HAC from
healthy animals or those with non-adrenal illness. False positive and false negative
results occur; they should be interpreted in the light of the clinical findings.
mi. Surgical adrenalectomy is the treatment of choice for functional adrenal tumours and
is also recommended for pituitary dependent HAC. Medical management with op'-DDD
(mitotane) or ketoconazole is unrewarding. Management with metyrapone has shown
promise in some cats but is not readily available. Cobalt-60 irradiation for visible pitu-
itary tumours has been used with partial success in a few cats but is of limited availabili-
ty and is a major expense. Insulin requirements can drop precipitously if the hypera-
drenocorticism is successfully treated.
24 i. By sending a scab in a sterile container to a laboratory for virus isolation.
fi. Corticosteroids are absolutely contraindicated in cat pox infection; they can cause the
virus to become systemic, with lethal effects.
mi. Cat pox is potentially a zoonotic infection, so the owners should be advised to take
extra careful hygienic precautions when handling the cat.
26
25 & 26: Questions
25 This eight-year-old, entire male Jack Russell
25a
Terrier presented with a two-month history of
progressive vomiting and abnormal posturing.
The owner reported that when the dog first
became ill he would eat normally and vomit per-
haps once or twice a week. However, in recent
weeks he has been vomiting more frequently, up
to three times daily. He is now inappetent and is
often seen in the stance shown (25a), with his
forelimbs and sternum touching the floor and his
back end elevated. Routine haematology reveals a
mild non-regenerative anaemia (PCV 0.32 I/l). No
abnormalities are apparent on a biochemical pro-
file or abdominal radiograph.
25b
i. What clinical conditions are associated with this
particular body posture?
ii. What diagnostic tests may help you reach a
definitive diagnosis?
ii. Describe what you see in the endoscopic view
of the fundus of the stomach in this dog (25b).
List your differential diagnoses.
26 A ten-year-old, female
26
Cairn Terrier presents
with polydipsia, polyuria,
weight gain and exercise
intolerance of four weeks
duration. The caudal edge
of the liver is palpable
beyond the costochondral
junction. Pertinent bio-
chemical abnormalities
include increased serum
liver enzyme activities
       ( 1    1)
abdominal radiograph is taken (26).
i. Describe the radiographic abnormalities.
i. Discuss a list of differential diagnoses.
ii. What further diagnostic tests might be indicated?
27
25 & 26: Answers
25 i. This body posture is referred to as the *praying mantis position' or the *position of
relief. Dogs suffering from cranial abdominal pain will assume this position which is
thought to relieve pressure in the abdomen. Causes of cranial abdominal pain include
pancreatitis, gastric inflammation, distension, ulcers, foreign bodies, neoplasia, peritoni-
tis, or, less frequently, other infectious or inflammatory diseases involving the liver, kid-
ney or GI tract.
ii. Since pancreatitis is a common cause of abdominal pain, further laboratory investiga-
prove helpful. Imaging studies such as abdominal ultrasound may allow direct visualiza-
tion of pancreatic inflammation, masses, intestinal wall thickenings or peritoneal effu-
sions. This is not always sensitive when evaluating gastric disease. Contrast radiographic
studies such as feeding barium meals may outline masses, foreign material, wall thicken-
ings or ulcers within the stomach and small intestine. Endoscopy of the upper GI tract is
highly sensitive in evaluating for gastric and small intestinal mucosal disease.
imi. There is a large, lobulated mass in the fundus of the stomach, covered superficially by
normal appearing gastric mucosa. There is no ulceration evident; however, other areas
revealed ulcerated mucosa and the dark material on the surface of this mass suggests the
presence of digested blood. Chronic blood loss and subsequent iron deficiency may
account for the low-grade, non-regenerative anaemia. The mass obliterated the body of
the fundus, obstructing the pyloric outflow tract and making resection difficult and
unlikely to be successful. Gastric neoplasias are infrequent in the dog. They may be
benign (e.g. polyps or leiomyomas), malignant (e.g. lymphosarcoma, adenocarcinoma,
leiomyosarcoma or fibrosarcoma) or, rarely, metastatic in origin. This mass was an ade-
nocarcinoma.
26 i. The liver is seen to extend caudally well beyond the costochondral junction,
with a rounded caudal edge.
i. The hepatomegaly as seen radiographically appears to be diffuse as evidenced by
the caudal displacement of abdominal contents and rounded liver margins. Hepato-
megaly may be a result of congestion, as in congestive heart failure, or infiltration
with inflammatory cells (hepatitis), neoplastic cells (lymphoma) or cellular accumula-
tion of lipid (diabetes mellitus), glycogen (hyperadrenocorticism) or excess metabo-
lites (congenital storage diseases). The history and biochemical findings in this dog
are suggestive of hyperadrenocorticism.
ii. An ultrasound examination of the liver and adrenals helps to further define the
extent and nature of the disease. With a high suspicion of hyperadrenocorticism, test-
ing of adrenal function is an appropriate next step. A fine-needle aspirate or biopsy
of the liver may aid in characterizing any suspected infiltrative diseases. In this dog a
diffuse hyperechogenic liver and the appearance of vacuolated hepatocytes on cytol-
ogy is consistent with a steroid hepatopathy and supportive of the diagnosis of
hyperadrenocorticism.
28
27 & 28: Questions
27 A seven-year-old, neutered female
Albumin (g/l)
21
Springer Spaniel presented for evalua-
ALP (u/l)
36
tion of polyuria and polydipsia.
Total protein (g/l)
43
Physical examination was unremark-
Urea (mmol/l)
6.8
able. Laboratory evaluation is shown.
Creatinine (μmol/)
80
Heartworm antigen test was negative.
Glucose (mmol/l)
5.9
Serum antibody titres for borreliosis,
Sodium (mmol/l)
148
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, ehrli-
Potassium (mmol/l)
4.6
chiosis and leptospirosis were nega-
Chloride (mmol/l)
117
tive. ANA titre 1:128. Rare LE cells
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.1
were present. Urine cytology revealed
 Phosphorus (mmol/l)
1.4
struvite crystals only. Antithrombin
PCV (I/I)
0.49
IlI was found to be 51% of normal.
WBCs (x 10°/)
8.2
i. What is your interpretation of these
Platelet (x 10°/)
313
data?
i. Would you perform a renal biopsy?
White cell differential unremarkable.
i. Describe techniques for perform-
Urinalysis:
ing renal biopsy.
Colour/turbidity
Yellow/cloudy
SG
1.014
Glucose, ketones,
bilirubin, occult blood
Negative
Protein (mg/dl)
1,604
Creatinine (mg/dl)
234
28 A four-year-old, female German
28
Shepherd Dog is presented with a large
swelling protruding from the vulval lips
(28). The bitch commenced proestrus ten
days previously and presently has a
serosanginous discharge and is attractive
to male dogs.
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
i. What is the aetiology of this condi-
tion?
i. What will happen if this condition is
untreated?
iv. What treatment options are avail-
able?
29
27 & 28: Answers
27 i. The urine SG is consistent with a polyuric state. However, it may also represent
recent ingestion of water. More significant is the 4+ proteinuria with a SG of 1.014. This
is probably a real finding because the serum albumin concentration is also low. As there
is no indication of haematuria, pyuria or bacteriuria on examination of urine sediment,
the proteinuria is probably significant and should be evaluated further. In order to deter-
mine if the proteinuria is significant the urine protein:creatinine ratio {UP:C) should be
calculated. This is technically easier to perform than quantification of 24 hour urine pro-
tein excretion. The UP:C ratio in this dog is 6.85:1 which is significantly elevated.
Significant proteinuria not associated with haematuria, pyuria or bacteriuria is usually
glomerular in origin. Causes of glomerular proteinuria may be investigated through test-
ing the immune system, evaluating for infectious diseases and renal biopsy. The moder-
ately high ANA titre is consistent with an immunological cause, e.g. systemic lupus ery-
thematosus. The low antithrombin Ill reflects loss of this compound through the leaky
glomeruli.
ii. Yes. A renal biopsy is still indicated to distinguish between glomerulonephritis and
amyloidosis.
im. There are several techniques for renal biopsy:
●A surgical biopsy may be obtained via laparotomy.
· A biopsy may be obtained percutaneously using ultrasound guidance.
● A key hole technique may be employed to obtain a biopsy of the right kidney.
28 i. Vaginal hyperplasia protruding through the vulval lips. Other differential diag-
noses include protrusion of a vaginal tumour or polyp and vaginal/uterine prolapse. The
ass supnod aun jo uoedid und isod sno auo alnsn pue au aiaa s ia
demonstrates that it originates from the vaginal wall cranial to the external urethral ori-
fice, involving the whole circumference of the vagina rather than the ventral vaginal
floor. Vaginal hyperplasia occurs almost solely during proestrus and oestrus and often
recurs cyclically.
i. Hyperplasia of the vaginal mucosa occurs in response to elevation of plasma oestro-
urethral orifice, but as the condition progresses (and often worsens) the tissue may
involve the circumference of the vagina. The increase in size causes it to protrude
through the vulval lips.
ii. In all cases the hyperplastic vaginal mucosa regresses at the onset of metoestrus when
oestrogen concentrations decrease and progesterone concentrations increase. Provided
that the tissue is not traumatized and does not desiccate, it will return to normal within a
 a    a o    re s sa 
hyperplastic tissue is not present at this time.
iv. In the majority of cases only conservative treatment is warranted and the application
of emollient creams and the prevention of self-trauma is sufficient. If the tissue is trau-
matized or the animal is required for breeding, a submucosal resection via an episiotomy
may be necessary. Surgery can be avoided by the use of artificial insemination where
allowed. Serious consideration should be given to not breeding from affected animals.
30
29 & 30: Questions
29 A six-year-old, female West
Highland White Terrier is pre-
PCV (l/I)
0.79
Platelets (x 10°/)
sented with a peracute history of
155
depression and vomiting. The
WBCs (x 109/1)
12.1
dog is hypothermic (37.3°C
Differential white cell count
Unremarkable
[99.2"F]] and haemorrhagic diar-
Total protein (g/l)
70
rhoea is found on the thermome-
Albumin (g/l)
E
ter. The results of routine blood
Globulin (g/l)
36
work are shown.
Sodium (mmol/)
155
i. What is your presumptive
Potassium (mmol/l)
4.5
diagnosis, and why?
Urea (mmol/l)
8
ii. How would you treat this ani-
Creatinine (μmol/)
105
mal?
ALT (u/l)
105
il. What is the prognosis?
ALP (u/l)
86
30
30 An eight-year-old, neutered female cat presented because of mild weight loss and
intermittent diarrhoea over the preceding four weeks (30). The only abnormality
noted was a small left cervical nodule.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What is the cause of this condition?
Thyroid hormone analyses gave the following results: total thyroxine (T4)
- 84.2 nmol/l; total triodothyronine (T3) - 0.72 nmol/l.
mi. How would you interpret these results?
iv. What other clinical signs may be seen with this condition?
31
29 & 30: Answers
29 i. Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis (HGE). This condition typically affects small dogs
{including Yorkshire, Maltese, Cairn and West Highland White Terriers, and Miniature
Schnauzers) and presents with peracute signs of haemorrhagic vomiting and diarrhoea. It
may be a clostridial enterotoxaemia and is characterized by a massive outpouring of
extracellular fluid (ECF) into the gut, resulting in severe hypovolaemic shock before signs
of intracellular dehydration (e.g. altered skin turgor) are seen. A marked increase in the
PCV is characteristic, reflecting loss of ECF fluid in excess of the loss of RBCs. Other
haematological and biochemical parameters are largely unremarkable, and any abnormal-
ities are the result of hypovolaemia. Hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia would alert one
to the differential diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism.
f. The aim of treatment is replacement of fluid loss with aggressive intravenous fluid therapy
at initial flow rates up to 90 ml/kg for the frst hour. Reduce the flow rate once the PCV falls
below 0.55 l/ to a rate necessary to keep the haematocrit at this level. A balanced electrolyte
depending on the initial severity of the illness and the patient's progress. Some dogs become
hypoproteinaemic following aggressive crystalloid fluid therapy; plasma transfusion may be
necessary. No other specific therapies have been shown to be beneficial. Prophylactic broad-
spectrum bactericidal antibiotics are given as the ulcerated intestine may act as a portal for
bacterial entry. Clavulanate-potentiated amoxycillin is usually adequate but some animals
may require intravenous cephalosporins, aminoglycosides or metronidazole. The use of cor-
ticosteroids is controversial; high doses {1-2 mg/kg i/v) of hydrocortisone or soluble dexam-
ethasone may help in shock, but there is no indication for maintenance doses.
i. Without treatment the mortality rate is high, but with appropriate therapy the high
morbidity is not associated with significant mortality. Death results from hypovolaemic
shock, possibly complicated by secondary endotoxaemia and hypoproteinaemia. The
recurrence rate is quite high, especially in the toy breeds.
30 i. Hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis).
fi. The commonest cause is benign adenomatous hyperplasia of one or both thyroid lobes
resulting in thyroid enlargement (goitre) which can usually be palpated between the lar-
ymx and the manubrium.
i. High basal serum total thyroid hormone concentrations are the biochemical hallmark
of hyperthyroidism. In this case the serum total T4 concentration is diagnostically elevat-
ed. The corresponding serum total T3 concentration is within the reference range but this
does not preclude a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism and occurs in approximately 25% of
affected cases. This phenomenon is usually seen in mildly affected cats and it is likely that
T3 would increase into the diagnostic range if the disorder was allowed to progress
untreated. T3 is secreted by the thyroid gland but up to 60% of circulating T3 is pro-
duced peripherally from monodeiodination of T4. Since T3 is more metabolically active
than T4, it is possible that autoregulation of this step plays a role in maintaining serum
total T3 concentrations within the reference range in the early stages of the disease.
iv. Excess circulating thyroid hormones cause a variety of clinical signs, the commonest of
which are weight loss despite a normal or increased appetite, polyuria/polydipsia, hyper-
activity and intermittent GI signs of vomiting and/or diarrhoea. Cardiac abnormalities
such as tachycardia and murmurs are also common.
32
31 & 32: Questions
31a
00
 31b
0
D
31 A four-year-old, female Collie pre-
RBCs (× 10/2/)
sents with sudden onset weakness, col-
1.75
lapse, pallor and tachycardia four weeks
Hb (g/l)
50
after a season. There are no other signifi-
PCV (I/)
0.17
MCV (fl)
cant physical findings except mild pyrex-
98
ia. An in-house PCV is 0.17 l/l and you
MCHC (g/)
290
nRBCs
elect for a full haematological profile. The
10%
profile yields the results shown. Photo-
Platelets (x 10°/l)
367
micrographs of the blood films are shown
WBCs (x 10°/)
36.9
(31a, 31b).
Neutrophils (seg) (x 10"/)
25.8
i. What would your film comment be?
Neutrophils (bands) (x I0°/l)
0.66
Note the morphology of the anaemia.
Lymphocytes (x 10*/)
2.9
ii. What type of anaemia is this?
Monocytes (x I0/l)
0.01
. What is the significance of the WBC
Eosinophils (x 10°/)
0.33
count?
iv. What is the significance of the nRBCs?
v. What other tests are now indicated?
32 A two-year-old, male Old English Sheepdog presented with a two-month history
of gross haematuria which had been proven on multiple urinalyses. Bacteriology pro-
duced no growth on several occasions. Urination was normal but the severity of
bleeding varied on a day-to-day basis. As far as the owner was concerned the dog
was otherwise well.
i. How would you investigate this dog?
i. If no gross lesions were found, how would you proceed?
33
31 & 32:Answers
31 i. Corrected WBC count 33.1 x 109/; nRBCs at various stages; polychromasia +;
anisocytosis +; occasional spherocytes; platelet count appears adequate. The WBC count
is normally corrected if nRBCs are greater than 10%, because counters using the Coulter
principle will count nRBCs as WBCs. The formula for correcting the WBC count is:
orrected WBC count = [100/ 100 + nRBCs)] x automated cell count.
fi. This is a macrocytic, hypochromic regenerative anaemia with spherocytosis, typical of
autoimmune haemolytic anaemia {AIHA),
mi. There is a neutrophilia with a left shift. This is nearly always present in cases of AIHA
and is often assumed to be a reflection of an inflammatory response accompanying AIHA
or due to non-specific bone marrow stimulation and possibly damage to the bone mar-
row sinusoids, resulting in the increased release of granulocytes from the marrow. In this
case it could also be due to a concurrent pyometra.
iv. Nucleated RBCs at different stages are present. This is not just due to regeneration.
The release of rubricytes as well as metarubricytes implies that there is bone marrow
 e    ss     s  
erythroblastic response may be seen, i.e. release of very early RBC and WBC precursors
into the circulation.
v. A Coombs test. The direct Coombs test in this case was positive at 1/256.
32 i. ● Routine haematology and biochemistry should be performed to assess the level of
anaemia, the presence of a regenerative response and for evidence of underlying disease.
● Urine should be collcted by cystocentesis and submitted for analysis and bacteriology.
● Ultrasound examination of the kidneys, bladder and prostate to check for anatomical
abnormalities/textural change.
● Radiographic examination, consisting of plain abdominal films, an intravenous uro-
gram (IVU), retrograde positive contrast urethrocystogram and double contrast cys-
togram, allows examination of the whole urinary tract and is complementary to ultra-
sound examination. Mild irregularity of the kidneys is frequently more obvious on an
IVU than ultrasound examination. Vermiform filling deficits suggestive of renal haemor
rhage may be seen on an IVU and this technique also allows more thorough evaluation of
the ureters.
f. No abnormalities were found on any of the investigations performed other than gross
   s    o     
bleeding from the bladder or upper urinary tract. The young age of the dog and the histo-
ry are suggestive of idiopathic renal haemorrhage. The site of the haemorrhage may be
onfirmed by catheterizing both ureters via a cystotomy during a period of gross haema-
turia. In this case there was obvious haematuria from the left ureter whilst urine from the
right ureter was grossly normal. The haemorrhage is controlled by performing a
ureteronephrectomy on the affected side. The excised kidney and ureter should undergo
pathological examination to check for the presence of lesions not detected during radi-
ographic and ultrasonographic investigations. Typically no lesions to account for the
blood loss are found in idiopathic renal haemorrhage. Other possible causes of renal
haemorhage: trauma; bleeding diseases; and neoplasia which may be benign (e.g. renal
haemangioma) or malignant (e.g renal carcinoma).
34
33 & 34: Questions
33a
33b
33  A 16-year-old, neutered female domestic shorthair cat is presented for evaluation
of acute blindness. The cat has not been eating well and seems to be drinking more
water than usual. Physical examination reveals a thin cat with pale mucous mem-
branes. There is no menace response but other cranial nerve responses appear to be
intact. The pupils are dilated and do not respond to light (33a). A fundic examina-
tion is performed (33b).
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. List three ways that systemic blood pressure can be measured.
ii. In addition to ocular changes, name three other organ systems that may be affect-
ed by systemic hypertension.
iv. Name three systemic diseases that may be associated with systemic hypertension.
v. List three classes of drugs used to treat systemic hypertension. Give an example of
each and their mechanism of action.
34  This radiograph (34)
34
is of a dog which present-
ed with acute (few hours
duration) persistent retch-
ing and vomiting and
severe depression of sever-
al hours' duration. The
dog was inappetent but
attempted to drink. Hy.
persalivation was present.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How would you treat
this case?
ii. How would you feed
this dog once its problem had been resolved?
35
33 & 34: Answers
33 i. Retinal vessels tortuosity, haemorrhage and detachment.
ii. Systemic arterial blood pressure may be measured directly by cannulating an
artery or indirectly using Doppler ultrasound or oscillometry.
i. Cardiovascular system - left ventricular hypertrophy, vascular hypertrophy; brain
-haemorrhage; kidneys - renal failure.
iv. Chronic renal failure, hyperthyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, phaeochromocy-
toma.
v. Antihypertensive agents are shown below:
Drug class
Mechanism of action
Example(s)
Angiotensin converting
Impairs ACE activity
enalapril
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor
resulting in decreased
captopril
angiotensin Ill production
lisinopril
Calcium channel
Smooth muscle relaxation
diltiazem
blocking agent
amlodipine
verapamil
Diuretic
a. Inhibits sodium chloride
a. frusemide
transport in loop of Henle
(furosemide)
b. Blocks aldosterone receptor
b. spironolactone
c. Distal nephron diuretic
c. chlorothiazide,
hydrochlorothiazide
Arterial vasodilator
Direct arteriolar dilator
hydralazine
nitroprusside
Beta-adrenergic
Decreased cardiac output,
propranolol
antagonists
heart rate and sympathetic tone
atenolol
labetalol
Alpha-adrenergic
Peripheral arteriolarvasodilation
prazosin
antagonist
34 i. The radiograph shows a large mineral density within the oesophagus, consistent
with a bony oesophageal foreign body.
i. Removal of most oesophageal foreign bodies can be achieved through the mouth
(endoscopically or fluoroscopically). If this fails, removal through a gastrostomy can be
attempted. Removal through a thoracotomy is the least preferable method as oesophageal
healing is poor. Oesophageal mucosal damage invariably develops. Oesophagitis is
painful and thus analgesics such as a narcotic analgesic or a NSAID are indicated postop-
eratively. The use of anti-inflammatory doses of prednisolone may reduce stricture forma-
ranitidine) may be helpful. Prophylactic antibacterial therapy is indicated.
mi. Nil by mouth is recommended for 7-10 days to allow the oesophagus to heal and to
reduce the risk of stricture formation. Placement of a gastrostomy feeding tube endoscop-
ically at the time of the initial anaesthetic is indicated.
36
35 & 36: Questions
35 A young male dog presented with
35
dysuria and haematuria of several
days’ duration. The prostate was pain-
ful and a prostatic wash contained
numerous degenerate and non-degen-
erate neutrophils, and gram-negative
rods. Radiographically, the prostate
was enlarged. At exploratory laparo-
tomy a prostatic abscess was found
(35).
i. How would you treat this case?
ii. If this was a case of chronic prosta-
titis, what considerations would you
take into account when planning your
antibacterial treatment?
36a
36b
36 A six-year-old, male German Shepherd Dog presents with diarrhoea and abdomi-
nal enlargement (36a). A fluid wave is detected by ballottement and clear fluid is
obtained by abdominocentesis. The fluid is a transudate (36b) and serum biochem-
istry confirms hypoalbuminaemia (13 g/l).
i. What are the characteristics of a transudate?
ii. What are the major disease processes causing hypoalbuminaemia?
iii. Briefly describe how would you distinguish between the causes of hypo
albuminaemia.
37
35 &36:Answers
35 i. The prostatic abscess should be drained. This can be achieved by either marsu-
pializing the prostate to the ventral body wall or by placing a drain through the body
         e     
abscess and held in place by inflating the bulb with water. This allowed the abscess
to be drained twice daily for seven days. Enrofloxacin was administered for four
weeks as the organism isolated was a resistant E. coli. The dog was also castrated in
order to reduce prostatic size and to limit the possibility of chronic prostatitis devel-
oping.
i. Acute prostatitis or prostatic abscesses may be treated with a wide range of
antibacterials as the blood-prostate barrier is not usually intact in acute inflamma-
tion. However, with chronic prostatitis antibiotic penetration and activity in the
prostate is limited by the acidic environment of the prostatic acini compared with the
interstitium. Therefore, basic antibiotics such as erythromycin, clindamycin and
trimethoprim become trapped in the acini resulting in high concentrations of these
antibiotics. Lipid soluble drugs, such as chloramphenicol, trimethoprim, macrolides
and fluoroquinolones, also enter the acini in high concentrations. The usual
sulphonamide components in trimethoprim-sulphonamide combinations do not enter
the prostate well. Thus, when treating chronic prostatitis, or as a follow-on antibiotic
after treatment of acute prostatitis, one of the antibiotics listed above should be used.
Castration is also recommended.
36 i. A transudate is clear and characteristically has a specific gravity of <1.017, a
total protein of <25 g/l and <1,000 cells per μl.
il. Starvation and chronic inflammatory diseases can cause mild hypoalbuminaemia,
although this is never sufficient to cause an ascitic transudate. The three major classes
of disease causing hypoalbuminaemia are: protein-losing nephropathy (PLN); liver
failure; protein-losing enteropathy (PLE).
mi. Crude separation of hepatic, renal and intestinal causes of hypoalbuminaemia can
be made by comparing the serum globulin concentrations. In general, globulin is
increased in liver disease, normal in PLNs and decreased in PLEs. Clinical signs are
often helpful, as chronic diarrhoea would be expected in a PLE. PLN is easily diag-
mosed by looking for proteinuria, with the urine protein:creatinine ratio being the
most reliable index in practice. Liver failure is assessed by bile acid concentrations. A
PLE can only be confirmed by measuring faecal loss of Slchromium radio-labelled
albumin, but this test is not applicable to practice. Measurement of the faecal excre-
tion of an endogenous protein resistant to digestion, such as o-1 protease inhibitor,
may be a useful test. Currently, after hepatic and renal disease has been ruled out, a
diagnosis of a PLE is pursued by intestinal biopsy.
38
37 & 38:Questions
37b
37 A ten-year-old, entire male
PCV (/I)
0.33
Cocker Spaniel presented for evalua-
WBCs (x 10°/)
16.2
tion of a progressive, suppurative
Neutrophils - segmented (x I0"/)
paronychia of all four feet (37a).
14.9
Soaking the feet in drying agents
Lymphocytes (x 10"/)
0.8
decreased the exudation but long-
Monocytes (x 10*/)
0.5
term antibiotic therapy had not elicit-
Platelets (x 10°/1)
262
ed an improvement. The foot pads
Urine SG
1.047
were crusted and cracked and the nail
Albumin (g/l)
21
beds were deformed. Crusting, ulcera-
Globulin (g/l)
38
tive lesions on the oral mucocuta-
Bilirubin (μmol/l)
5.7
neous junctions and scrotum, and
ALT (u/l)
470
hyperkeratosis of the nasal planum
ALP (u/l)
2,738
were present. Results of initial blood
Cholesterol (mmol/l)
10.8
work are shown.
Bile acids - fasted (umol/l)
42
i. What are the differential diagnoses
Bile acids - postprandial (μmoll)
89
for the skin lesions?
Glucose (mmoll)
7.6
ii. Could there be a connection
between the skin lesions and the bio-
chemical and ultrasonographic abnormalities (37b)?
mi. What further diagnostic tests are indicated?
iv. What are the treatment options and prognosis?
38 Your client is a cat rescuer. Euthanasia of a sick FIV-positive queen had been per-
formed recently. Now she brings in the queen's three eight-week-old kittens to be
tested for FIV antibodies.
i. Are you going to perform the test?
ii. If not, why not?
i. If so, what advice will you give?
39
37 &38:Answers
37 i. The erosive crusting of the nasal planum, oral mucocutaneous junctions, foot
pads and genitalia can occur in diseases such as pemphigus foliaceus, drug eruption,
lupus erythematosus, necrolytic migratory erythema, zinc-responsive dermatosis and
generic dog food dermatoses.
i. The skin lesions, in conjunction with the abnormal liver parameters, are sugges-
tive of a diagnosis of necrolytic migratory erythema or so-called hepatocutaneous
syndrome. The ultrasound of the liver demonstrates the patchy appearance of hypoe-
choic nodules within a hyperechoic background which is characteristic of this dis-
ease.
clinical findings so far. A definitive diagnosis may be made with characteristic skin
and liver histopathology demonstrating hyperkeratosis and intracellular oedema and
periportal vacuolar hepatopathy, respectively. In humans this syndrome is most often
associated with a glucagon-secreting pancreatic tumour. In dogs, glucagonomas have
been identified but are very rare.
iv. A majority of affected dogs have been found to have severe reductions in plasma
amino acid concentrations, and the addition of high-protein sources such as egg yolk
to the diet has produced considerable improvement in some dogs. Prednisolone has
also been shown to improve the cutaneous lesions in some dogs, but approximately
the insulin antagonistic effects of steroids may contribute to the development of ful-
minant diabetes mellitus. Unfortunately, the prognosis of affected dogs is poor to
guarded.
38i.No.
i. Eight-week-old kittens of an FIV-positive cat are likely to test FIV antibody posi-
tive because they usually still have circulating maternally derived antibodies. No true
assessment of whether or not they are infected can be made at this stage. Wait until
they are 16 weeks of age or older and then test them. Since FIV is infrequently trans-
mitted from queen to kitten, it is very likely that the kittens will test negative at this
  a  s ss  a   a   s
then you would need to find a laboratory which routinely detects the virus itself, usu-
ally by culture of WBCs or by PCR testing as it becomes more widely available.
iii. If you test the kittens now, they will probably be positive and you would advise
that they be retested after 16 weeks of age for the reasons given in ii. above. For most
cat rescuers money is short and two tests would be wasteful.
40
39 & 40: Questions
39 A fourteen-week-old, male
39
Boxer puppy presented with a
two-week history of incoordi-
nation, initially in the hind-
limbs but eventually involving
the forelimbs, which had pro-
gressed to paralysis. There was
no history of vomiting or diar-
rhoea, exposure to toxins or
rubbish eating and the dog
had only been allowed access
to the owner's garden. Two
days prior to referral the pup
alert. He was unable to stand due to a flaccid paralysis affecting all four limbs. No
voluntary movement of the limbs was possible and no spinal reflexes (e.g. patella,
withdrawal or panniculus reflexes) could be elicited. All conscious proprioceptive
reflexes were absent. Marked abdominal breathing was evident and the gag reflex
was reduced. All other cranial nerves appeared unaffected. The pup was faecally and
urinary continent and was able to feel pain. The rectal temperature was unremark-
able and cardiovascular criteria were within normal limits.
i. What diagnoses would you consider?
i. What diagnostic tests would you recommend?
. How would you treat your most likely diagnosis?
40 You perform a postmortem examination on a four-week-old faded kitten. Your
veterinary laboratory diagnoses feline herpes virus 1 (FHV-1, also called feline rhino-
tracheitis virus) as the likely ca use of fading.
i. In which two ways might you have sent the lung samples from the kitten for the
laboratory to reach this diagnosis?
ii. Your assistant suggests that you take an oropharyngeal swab into viral transport
medium from the queen to see if she is a carrier. Is this a good idea? Would you
expect her to be shedding FHV-1?
ii. If the queen is a carrier of FHV-1, will she ever be free of infection?
iv. Would vaccination help to eliminate the virus?
v. Can the queen be used again for breeding?
41
39 & 40: Answers
39 i. The neurological abnormalities (ie. generalized paralysis with loss of reflexes) are
onsistent with a lower motor neuron disorder. The disease process may be affecting the
peripheral nerves, the neuromuscular junction or the nerve cell bodies in the ventral grey
matter of the spinal cord. Hindlimbs are often affected more severely at first, although
forelimbs usually become involved with many degenerative or inflammatory neu-
ropathies. The main differential diagnosis for lower motor neuron disorders in a dog of
this age is an inflammatory infectious disorder (e.g. toxoplasmosis, neosporosis). Other
conditions which may result in similar signs were thought less likely given the acute onset
and the age of the dog. These included:
· Congenital and familial disorders of demyelination and axonal degeneration. They
would normally present in older animals with a longer clinical course and with other neu-
rological deficits.
● Polyneuropathies associated with metabolic, toxic or neoplastic disease. No history of
ingestion of toxins.
● Neuromuscular junction disorders, e.g. botulism, tick paralysis. No exposure to dead
animals or ticks.
● Inflammatory immune-mediated disorders of the central/peripheral nervous system.
Too young.
fi. Clinical biochemistry and haematological assessment are indicated. Serology for toxo-
plasmosis and neosporosis is required. CSF analysis is indicated to assess for an inflamma
tory disorder. Electromyography can also be carried out as a protozoal myositis may
accompany an encephalitis.
ii. Treatment of a protozoal encephalitis is unrewarding. Clindamycin or trimetho-
prim/sulphonamide with pyrimethamine may be helpful. Euthanasia is often required
because of respiratory paralysis before any treatment has had a chance to be effective.
tube would allow for provision of food and water.
40 i. In virus transport medium for virus isolation, or in formalin for histopathology. In
FHV-1 infection there are intranuclear inclusion bodies.
f. FHV-1 is shed from the oropharynx after a stressful event for up to three weeks. It is
lkely that by four weeks after parturition, FHV-1 shedding has ceased, therefore a nega-
tive finding would not rule out FHV-1 infection. A positive swab would show the queen
to be a FHV-1 carrier. Examination of the history would be useful. If the queen was iso-
lated with her kittens from birth, then the kittens can only have been infected by the
queen, indirect transmission via the owner being unlikely.
mi. No. Latent FHV-1 infection is lifelong; it is believed that latent FHV-1 inhabits the
trigeminal nerve ganglia
iv. Vaccination makes no difference to an already infected cat.
v. It is probably not a good idea to breed from a queen which repeatedly produces FHV-1
infected litters; FHV-1 can infect kittens as they are bom. However, if the breeder is deter-
mined to try, boost the cat with vaccine before conception so that levels of maternally
derived antibody are high. Wean the kittens at 2-3 weeks of age, isolate them from their
mother and vaccinate intranasally every three weeks until they are old enough for a par-
enteral vaccine at 8-9 weeks of age.
42
41 & 42: Questions
 Analysis
Pre-treatment
Post-treatment
Urea (mmol/l)
9.0
38.0
Creatinine (μmol/l)
611
320
Phosphate (mmol/l)
3.40
8.16
Total T4 (nmol/l)
455
30
41  The above biochemical abnormalities were obtained from a 14-year-old cat both
before and one week after commencing carbimazole therapy for hyperthyroidism
(5 mg q8h).
i. What is your interpretation of these results?
ii. Would these results be seen with other therapeutic protocols for hyperthyroidism?
42A seven and a half-year-
42a
old, entire male Cocker
Spaniel was presented with
haematuria of several months'
duration. The blood was al-
ways mixed with urine and
tended to be worst towards the
end of urination. Radiographic
and ultrasonographic investi-
gations revealed the lesions
shown (42a, 42b).
i. What is your main differen-
tial diagnosis?
i. How would you treat this
animal, and what complica-
42b
tions may occur?
43
41&42:Answers
41 i. Treatment-induced renal dysfunction. Prior to treatment the serum total thyrox-
ine concentration is markedly elevated and confirms the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism.
The serum urea and creatinine concentrations are within the reference range; mild
hyperphosphataemia has been described in hyperthyroid cats without evidence of
renal disease. The results following treatment indicate successful induction of euthy-
roidism but with a severe deterioration of renal function. An increase in serum urea
and creatinine concentrations with the development, in some cases, of overt renal dis-
ease has been associated with treatment of hyperthyroidism. This is presumably relat-
ed to a decrease in the glomerular filtration rate allowing emergence of pre-existing
renal disease.
ii. This is not a specific effect of carbimazole therapy but rather the reversal of the
hyperthyroid state; similar results are found in cats treated with radioactive iodine or
by surgical thyroidectomy.
42 i. The main differential diagnosis is polypoid cystitis; this is based upon the size,
position and number of the intravesicular masses. On ultrasound examination of the
bladder the polyps do not invade the bladder wall but appear to arise from the urothe-
lium. However, the diagnosis should be confirmed histopathologically.
i. Any underlying cause for the polypoid cystitis should be sought and treated, e.g.
calculi, urinary tract infection. Polypoid cystitis is a poorly defined condition but is
thought to occur secondary to chronic bladder irritation. Animals may show signs of
haematuria and occasionally urinary frequency, but may also be asymptomatic.
Treatment may be medical or surgical. In some cases the polyps may resolve sponta-
neously following treatment of a urinary tract infection or dissolution of urinary cal-
culi. However, in persistent cases or where cystic calculi require removal the diagnosis
is usually confirmed and the animal treated concomitantly by performing excisional
biopsies of the masses. A ventral cystotomy allows good access to the bladder lumen.
The bladder is everted and each polyp isolated by applying some mosquito forceps at
the base of the polyp. The polyp is excised and the forceps left in place for several
minutes until haemostasis is achieved. This technique absolves the use of suture mater-
ial within the bladder lumen. The main complication of the surgery is haemorrhage.
This is usually minor and self-limiting; however, if severe haemorrhage occurs during
recovery, a clot may form within the bladder lumen. This may obstruct the bladder
neck, like a ball valve, causing postoperative obstruction or dysuria. The risk of this
occurring may be reduced by encouraging frequent urination and creating a diuresis
by administering intravenous fluids.
44
43-45: Questions
43 A ten-year-old, female
tt
Labra dor Retriever presents
with a history of weight gain,
exercise intolerance and two
episodes of collapse in the past
two and a half weeks. Her
abdomen is very tense and the
caudal edges of the liver are not
palpably distinguishable from
the surrounding viscera. Per-
tinent biochemical abnormali-
ties include increased serum
liver enzyme activities (ALT
2,849 u/l, ALP 2,959 u/l). A lateral abdominal ra diograph of this dog is shown (43).
i Describe the ra diographic abnormalities.
i. Discuss a list of differential diagnoses.
mi. What further diagnostic tests might be indicated?
44 Your client has five cats ranging from 2-12 years of age. All the cats are fully
vaccinated and boosted against FeLV infection. He wants to introduce a pedigree kit-
ten, but the breeder will not let him have the kitten until he has his existing cats test-
ed for FeLV. Your client points out that his cats have been FeLV vaccinated and that
he intends to vaccinate the kitten too. He comes to you for advice: should he test all
his cats or not?
45a
45b
45  Two photomicrographs of cytology preparations made by centrifugation of a
pericardial effusion are shown (45a, 45b). They are stained with Wright's stain.
i. What is the structure in the centre of 45a?
ii. Which features of the cells in these photomicrographs indicate the presence of
old/past haemorrhage?
45
43-45: Answers
43 i. The caudal border of the liver is indistinct and extends beyond the costochon-
dral junction. The stomach and loops of small intestine are displaced caudally and
dorsally indicating a massive hepatomegaly.
i. The severity of the hepatic enlargement in this dog is more likely the result of a
liver mass, cyst, abscess or other such space occupying disease.
m. An ultrasound examination of the liver is useful to define the inner architecture of
the organ and differentiate between the presence of a solid mass and a hypoechogenic
cyst or absces. Ultrasound can also help to direct a needle or biopsy instrument to
analysis. This dog had a large, solid mass consuming the middle liver lobe.
44 Yes. All the cats should be tested as any of them could be excreting FeLV. No
FeLV vaccine is 100% effective and vaccination is not a substitute for testing in the
prevention of FeLV. The only circumstance in which your client would not need to
test would be if the cats had all been tested twice, at a 12 week interval, before vacci-
nation and had been kept in a closed environment ever since {i.e. with no access to
outdoors and other cats). If all cats test FeLV negative at the same time, it is likely
that the household is FeLV free (since in a household where FeLV is endemic, 40%
of cats are usually infected). If some test negative and others positive, the cats should
be retested as the negative cats may be in the early stages of infection and not yet
viraemic (the incubation period from infection to viraemia is around 21 days). To
avoid retesting after 12 weeks test the negative cats for virus neutralizing antibodies
(VNA). If a good titre is present (z32), then the cats are immune and there is no need
to retest them; it will be safe to mix them with positive cats. If a cat's VNA titre is
   a s  g a a    e   
be tested unless the breeder can produce evidence that every cat in the cattery has
been FeLV tested negative within the previous year.
45 i. A macrophage distended with phagocytosed RBCs.
i. There are no platelet clumps among the RBCs to indicate fresh haemorrhage. The
macrophages present here exhibit erythrophagocytosis and also contain blood break-
down pigments (dark green/black and orange), and one macrophage in 4sb contains
a bright orange haematoidin crystal.
46
46 & 47: Questions
46a
46 A two-year-old, male German Shepherd Dog developed abdominal enlargement
over four weeks and became inappetent. Abdominal radiography showed marked
loss of detail due to abdominal effusion. Abdominocentesis yielded serosanguinous
fluid (protein 27 g/l, nucleated cell count 1.2 × 109/l). Laboratory analysis revealed
mild elevation of liver enzymes (ALT 228 u/l, ALP 318 u/l). Exploratory laparotomy
revealed many tortuous vessels in the mesocolon and around the left kidney (46a).
The liver looked slightly irregular.
i. What are your differential diagnoses for the ascites?
i. What other tests could you have done before surgery to further define the prob-
lem?
ii. What are the vessels seen during surgery?
47 This 12-year-old, neutered
47
female cat presented with a
plantigrade posture and a pro-
longed history of polyuria/poly-
dipsia (47).
i. What is the most likely diagno-
sis?
ii. How would you confirm the
dia gnosis?
47
46 & 47: Answers
46 i. The main presenting problem in
46b
this dog is ascites which may be classi-
fied as a transudate, modified transudate
or exudate, based on peritoneal fluid
analysis. The fluid in this dog was a
modified transudate, which may be
caused by liver disease, portal hyperten-
sion, congestive heart failure {unlikely in
this case), posthepatic venous obstruc-
tion (e.g. vena caval disease) or neopla-
sia.
fi. Cytological examination of the ascitic fluid would have been helpful to look for the
presence of neoplastic cells. Serum bile acid determination should have been performed
in order to investigate for possible liver dysfunction. Abdominal ultrasound could have
allowed for better examination of the abdomen and would have been particularly useful
to assess liver size, hepatic parenchyma and biliary system. If bile acid determination
and/or hepatic ultrasonography had indicated liver disease, a percutaneous ultrasound-
guided liver biopsy could have been taken; this is less invasive than a laparotomy.
ii. The vessels seen at surgery are multiple extrahepatic portosystemic shunts, which
develop as a result of chronic, severe liver disease and portal hypertension. They are fre-
quently seen around the left kidney, as in this case. This is an indication to biopsy the
liver. Liver biopsy (H&cE stain) in this dog showed diffuse pericellular hepatic fibrosis and
distortion of the lobule (46b) Idiopathic hepatic fibrosis has been reported in young dogs
(German Shepherd Dogs are predisposed) with evidence of chronic hepatic failure, portal.
hypertension and hepatic encephalopathy. Symptomatic treatment has resulted in long-
term survival in a number of dogs, although generally the prognosis is guarded.
47 i. Diabetes mellitus. The plantigrade posture where the cat walks with its hocks
touching the ground is a not uncommon presenting feature of diabetes mellitus in the
cat and presumably results from a peripheral neuropathy. Such a diagnosis is sup-
ported by the history of polyuria/polydipsia.
i. By demonstrating a fasting hyperglycaemia and glucosuria. Persistence of these
findings on serial sampling is important to eliminate other possible causes of gluco
suria and hyperglycaemia, particularly stress-induced hyperglycaemia which com-
monly occurs in cats. If ketones are also present in the urine, a diagnosis of diabetes
mellitus is confirmed. Other non-specific but supportive abnormalities include hyper-
cholesterolaemia, increased activities of alanine aminotransferase {ALT) and alkaline
phosphatase {ALP), hyperbilirubinaemia and a stress leucogram with a mild non-
regenerative anaemia.
48
48-50: Questions
48 A young crossbreed dog
48
has irregular cavities in its per-
manent dentition when the
teeth emerge (48). Prior his-
tory is of acute diarrhoea as a
puppy.
i. What is the lesion, and what
is its cause?
ii. What clinical significance
does it hold?
49 This kidney (49) is from a
dog which presented with a
two-week history of polyuria/
polydipsia. Two days prior to
presentation the dog had
become depressed and anorec-
tic and had vomited. He had
not been observed to urinate in
the preceding 12 hours. The
peripheral lymph nodes and
liver were enlarged, and cra-
nial abdominal pain was
recorded. Clinical biochemistry
was performed; the abnormal
results are shown.
i. What diagnoses would you
ALT (u/l)
230
consider in this case?
ALP (u/)
790
ii.What treatment options are
Bile acids (μmol/l)
23
available to you to manage
Urea (mmol/l)
65
hypercalcaemia?
Creatinine (μmol/l)
1,240
Calcium (mmol/l)
4.9
 Phosphate (mmol/l)
1.4
50 A six-month-old, male Toy Poodle has one testicle present within the scrotum.
The other testicle is not palpable.
i. What is the likely condition from which this dog is suffering?
il. What treatment options are availa ble?
i. Is this abnormality inherited, and what advice should be given to the breeder?
49
48-50:Answers
48 i. Enamel hypoplasia. In light of the earlier history it is consistent with previous
distemper infection.
ii. Although having no significance at this time, except as a cosmetic defect, if chorea
or seizures develop in later life, distemper as a cause of ^old-dog encephalitis' must be
considered.
49 i. The biochemistry is consistent with severe renal failure. Assessment of urine SG
would have been helpful in distinguishing between acute {oliguric) and chronic
(polyuric) renal failure. However, the acute onset of the signs, the absence of any pre-
vious signs of polyuria and polydipsia, and the presence of a severe hypercalcaemia
would suggest that this was more likely to be acute renal failure secondary to hyper-
calcaemia. The gross appearance of the kidney is consistent with hypercalcaemic
nephropathy; calcinosis of the tubules is evident. The coexistence of hypercalcaemia
and a peripheral lymphadenopathy are strongly suggestive of lymphoma. The vomit-
i. Fluid therapy (0.9% saline) and frusemide should be administered to manage the
acute renal failure and to promote calcium excretion. An initial flow rate of up to
100 ml/kg/hr may be required, but beware of overhydration by weighing the patient
regularly and monitoring respiratory function and urine output. After a couple of
hours the flow rate should be reduced to 1s0 ml/kg/day. If hypercalcaemia persists,
calcium lowering drugs such as salcatonin, clodronate, etidronate or pamidronate may
be prescribed. None of these are veterinary licensed products in the UK. The use of
prednisolone as a means of lowering calcium levels should be avoided as it may induce
resistance to cytotoxic drugs which may be used in the management of lymphoma.
50 i. Cryptorchidism (hidden testicle). The testicle may be intra-abdominal, inguinal or
Cryptorchidism may be unilateral or bilateral. The term monorchidism (single testicle in
the body) is often wrongly used since this condition is extremely rare and most cases are
unilateral cryptorchids with a single abdominal testicle. The testes normally descend into
the scrotum following contraction of the gubernaculum testis by ten days after birth;
however, a diagnosis of cryptorchidism is not usually made until after 12 weeks of age.
Cases of delayed testicular descent are probably part of the cryptorchid syndrome.
f. Various combinations of gonadotrophins and reproductive steroids have been shown
to be ineffective in causing testicular descent. Regardless of their lack of effect, these
treatments are not ethical considering the likely inherited nature of the condition. The
non-scrotal testis has a high risk of neoplasia, therefore it should be removed. Removal
of the scrotal testis is necessary to prevent breeding since these dogs are usually fertile.
mi. Cryptorchidism is likely to have a genetic base, and although the mode of inheritance
is not known for all breeds, it follows the model of a sex-limited autosomal recessive
trait. This means that both female and male parents carry the gene whilst only homozy-
gous males will be cryptorchid. The affected dog should be removed from the breeding
programme, as should both parents, since whilst appearing phenotypically normal, they
are heterozygous carriers and will transmit the gene to half of their offspring.
50
51-53: Questions
51 A three-year-old bitch
51
commenced proestrus 11 days
previously. She escaped from
her owner and returned six
hours later. A vaginal smear
has been obtained and stained
with a modified Wright-
Giemsa stain (51).
i. Has a mating occurred, and
if so, is it likely to have been
fertile?
i. How reliably can mating be confirmed in the bitch?
m. What treatment options are there for an unwanted mating?
52 A two-year-old,neutered
female Basset Hound is pre-
RBCs (x 10/2/)
5.5
PCV (/)
sented with a history of several
0.39
weeks" intermittent lethargy,
Hb (g/l)
139
 anorexia and slight increase in
Platelets (x 10"/)
289
thirst. More recently the dog
WBCs (x I0/1)
11.3
has been vomiting and has
White cell differential
Unremarkable
now developed haemorrhagic
Albumin (g/l)
35
diarrhoea. The laboratory
Globulin (g/)
33
results shown were obtained.
Sodium (mmol/l)
128
i.How would you interpret
Potassium (mmol/l)
7.9
these laboratory results?
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.9
ii. How would you confirm
Urea (mmol/l)
23
your tentative diagnosis?
Creatinine (μmol/l)
256
ALT (u/l)
43
ALP (u/l)
51
Urine SG
1.025
53  A four-year-old, unilateral cryptorchid male dog is presented with bilaterally
symmetric non-pruritic alopecia, gynaecomastia and attractiveness to male dogs. You
sus pect hyperoestrogenism secondary to a testicular tumour.
i. What hormone analysis may be helpful in the diagnosis?
i. What possible haematological complications may develop with this condition?
51
51-53:Answers
51 i. The smear shows large intermediate epithelial cells, red blood cells and spermato-
zoa. The bitch is in proestrus, and as dog spermatozoa survive within the reproductive
tract of the bitch for seven days after mating, this mating could result in pregnancy.
fi. It can be difficult to confirm a mating unless directly observed. Spermatozoa can be
detected using a simple vaginal smear technique for only a short period of time after
mating. When matings have occurred more than 24 hours previously, an accurate assess-
present. Sperm that are present within the vagina often lose their tails.
 i. The simplest option is ovariohysterectomy after the end of oestrus. Alternatively, pre-
vent implantation, or wait until a positive diagnosis of pregnancy has been made before
inducing abortion or resorption. Oestradiol benzoate, given at a relatively high dose
ae ( k osie Aissod pu s ue g sp uo asop mo e ie o su po sp t um
mating is efficacious. The use of oestradiol benzoate should be considered carefully as it
causes uterine disorders and blood dyscrasias (anaemia and thrombocytopenia). This
drug is rarely used in the USA because of these adverse effects. The low-dose regime
reduces the possibility of adverse effects. Repeated low doses of the prostaglandin ana-
logue cloprostenol reduces plasma progesterone concentration and induces abortion,
especially if given later than 25 days after the luteinizing hormone surge. Prostaglandins
commonly produce adverse effects including salivation, vomiting and diarrhoea.
Prolactin antagonists (bromocriptine and cabergoline) reduce plasma concentrations of
progesterone and induce resorption or abortion. Oral cabergoline and injectable clo-
prostenol together induce pregnancy termination after day 25. This regime reduces the
adverse effects of prostaglandin therapy, increases the efficacy of prolactin antagonists,
which alone work best after day 40, and appears to be 100% effective.
52 i. Subtle chronic disease and acute GI signs are suspicious of hypoadrenocorticism;
the electrolyte values are suggestive. Azotaemia is most likely pre-renal in origin as
hyponatraemia causes hypovolaemia and poor renal perfusion. The urine is somewhat
concentrated indicating some renal tubular activity, but it is not fully concentrated
because of hyponatraemia. Mild hypercalcaemia may be seen in this disease. This dog
may be anaemic, but this will not be recognized until ECF volume is restored.
fi. By the ACTH stimulation test before life-time steroid replacement therapy is started.
 53 i. Plasma oestrogen (oestradiol) concentrations may be elevated, although in some
cases it may be within the reference range. A normal oestrogen concentration does not
preclude a diagnosis in the face of appropriate clinical signs. Serum inhibin concentra-
tions have been found to be elevated in a small number of dogs. However, this assay is
not available and has not been fully assessed.
i. Bone marrow hypoplasia and pancytopenia may develop following exposure to
increased oestrogen concentrations. Initially, granulocytopoiesis and a neutrophilic leu-
cocytosis develop. Subsequently, hypoplasia of all cell lines and pancytopenia occurs.
This is characterized haematologically by variable degrees of non-regenerative anaemia,
lymphocytosis and thrombocytopenia.
52
54 & 55:Questions
Total protein (g/l)
28
Albumin (g/l)
12
Globulin (g/)
18
ALT (u/l)
45
ALP (u/l)
300
Urea (mmol/l)
5.6
Creatinine (umol/l)
68
Glucose (mmol/l)
4.7
Sodium (mmol/l)
150
Potassium (mmol/l)
4.7
Chloride (mmol/l)
120
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.3
Phosphate (mmol/)
0.9
RBCs (x 10/2/)
4.43
Hb (g/)
69
PCV (I/I)
0.32
WBCs (x 10°/)
4.8
Neutrophils (seg) (x 10/1)
3.4
Neutrophils (bands) (x I0°/l)
0.0
54  A nine-year-old crossbreed dog pre-
Lymphocytes (x 10%/1)
1.1
sented
with
chronic
diarrhoea
Monocytes (x 10*/l)
0.2
(watery/pasty) of several months' dura-
tion. His appetite had been good but
recently he had become inappetent. Polydipsia was not present. The dog had lost 10kg
in weight (present weight 20 kg). Subjectively, the walls of the small intestine were
thicker than normal. All other abdominal organs, the peripheral lymph nodes, the
mucous membranes and thoracic auscultation were unremarkable. Clinical pathology
results are shown. The urine protein:creatinine ratio was 0.2. Plain abdominal radi-
ographs were unremarkable. A barium study was performed (54).
i. What is your interpretation of the clinical pathology?
ii. What is your interpretation of the radiograph?
i. How would you proceed with this case?
55 During the investigation of
15
55a
a cat with chronic small intesti-
nal diarrhoea, breath hydrogen
10
excretion is monitored after the
Breath
administration of xylose (3 g/kg
5
p/o as a 10% aqueous solu-
tion). The breath hydrogen pro-
OE
09
90120150180210240
file obtained is shown (55a).
Time (mins) after xylose administration
i. What does this test indicate?
ii. What is the basis for this test, and what is its clinical value?
53
54&55:Answers
54 i. Diarrhoea with weight loss in spite of a good appetite is consistent with a mal-
absorptive or maldigestive disorder. The low albumin and globulin are consistent
with protein loss, either through the intestinal tract or in the urine; a protein-losing
nephropathy (PLN), however, would be highly unlikely with the normal urine pro-
tein:creatinine ratio. Haematologically there is a mild normochromic, normocytic
anaemia, possibly an anaemia of chronic disease, or it may reflect the protein defi-
ciency.
ii. The radiograph shows multiple filling defects along the entire wall of the small
intestinal tract. This is typical of the so-called ‘apple core appearance’ and is usually
associated with alimentary lymphoma or severe inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
No other significant abnormalities are evident.
. An intestinal biopsy, obtained endoscopically or at a laparotomy, is required to
distinguish between alimentary lymphoma and severe IBD. Both carry very poor
prognoses, although IBD is potentially manageable.
55 i. Xylose malassimilation; this indicates
 Normal
55b
the presence of small intestinal disease.
f. The test works on the principle that the
only hydrogen present in exhaled breath is
derived from bacterial fermentation of car-
bohydrates in the large intestine. In a
0 Colonic bacteria
healthy starved animal, xylose {a simple
Xylose
sugar or monosaccharide) (circles in 55b)
H
 given by mouth is completely absorbed in
the small intestine so no carbohydrate is
available to the colonic bacteria (rods in
55b); the breath hydrogen concentration
Time
remains low (typically 1-2 ppm). In a cat
with malassimilation (malabsorption),
Malassimilation
some of the xylose may pass to the large
intestine where bacterial fermentation
results in hydrogen production, detected as
an increase in breath hydrogen concentra-
日
tion. In this cat, breath hydrogen concen-
Colonic bacteria
tration rises appreciably after about 90
Xylose
minutes, which would be compatible with
"H
the time taken for aqueous xylose to pass
to the colon. The test is a simple, non-inva-
sive way of demonstrating malassimilation,
Time
which usually indicates an infiltrative small
intestinal disease such as inflammatory
bowel disease, or a diffuse intestinal lymphoma.
54
56 & 57:Questions
56 This photograph (56) shows the
oral mucous membranes of a ten-
year-old, neutered female crossbreed
dog with anorexia, vomiting and
jaundice of three days' duration. Pre-
viously she had been in good health.
Her vaccinations were current. Two
weeks before she became ill she had
undergone a routine dental under
general anaesthesia and was given
trimethoprim/sulphadiazine for three
days afterwards.
Haematology revealed PCV 0.48 l/,
WBC 27.8 x 109/l and normal plate-
lets. A serum biochemical profile showed marked hyperbilirubinaemia (total bilirubin
648 μmol/l), elevated liver enzymes (ALT 1,224 u/l, ALP 1,058 w/l), hypoglycaemia
(3.0 mmol/l) and low-normal cholesterol (2.2 mmol/l). Plain abdominal radiographs
were normal.
i. What are your differential diagnoses?
ii. Would liver biopsy be indicated in this dog?
ii. How would you treat this dog?
57  A 12-week-old crossbreed pup
died 48 hours after the onset of severe
haemorrhagic diarrhoea and vomit-
ing. The pup was unvaccinated. On
postmortem examination the small
intestine was found to be congested
(57) and the small intestinal contents
were haemorrhagic.
i. What viral agents would you con-
sider as possible causes?
i. What therapeutic options would
you have considered if the pup had
survived?
mi. What steps could you take to confirm your diagnosis?
55
56&57:Answers
56 i. The dog is jaundiced. Haemolysis is unlikely since the mucous membranes still have
a pink tinge to them, and is ruled out by the normal PCV; the jaundice in this dog is there
fore of hepatic or posthepatic origin. Low glucose and cholesterol concentrations indicate
reduced hepatocellular synthesis, suggesting a hepatic cause. ALT and ALP increases are
of the same magnitude, indicative of hepatocellular injury as well as cholestasis.
il. Liver biopsy could be done to rule out other diseases and to define the prognosis; how.
ever, one should consider the possible benefits from this procedure in this case. Liver dis-
ease in this dog is likely to be acute, based on the short history, the absence of biochemi-
cal changes that might signify chronicity (such as hypoalbuminaemia) and the normal
liver size. The history of anaesthesia coupled with antibiotic administration may suggest
a hepatotoxic cause, especially since both agents are potentially hepatotoxic. In acute
toxic liver disease, biopsy has limited usefulness but it is indicated if the dog does not
readily improve on symptomatic therapy.
. Symptomatic treatment in this dog should consist of fluid therapy (to maintain liver
perfusion), glucose supplementation in the drip (to combat hypoglycaemia), broad-spec-
trum antibiotics (to prevent secondary bacterial infection resulting from reduced hepatic
reticuloendothelial system function) and vitamin B supplementation. Dietary protein
need not be restricted if there is no evidence for hepatic encephalopathy, but it should be
of high quality and highly digestible. Drugs such as ursodeoxycholic acid are not recom-
mended in acute liver disease.
57 i. Canine parvovirus (CPV) and canine distemper virus infections are the most likely
aetiological agents. Canine coronavirus infection rarely causes such clinical signs unless
complicating factors such as concomitant infections with pathogenic bacteria or proto-
s r ui sis  P ss ao s a d ae o i
f. ● Intravenous fluid therapy. If hypokalaemia or hypoglycaemia are present, the fluids
may need to be supplemented with potassium or glucose.
● Prophylactic parenteral (not oral) broad-spectrum antibacterial drugs (e.g. clavulanate-
potentiated amoxycillin) because of evidence of intestinal mucosal ulceration. Where
a bsence of haemorrhage, antibacterials are not indicated.
·When there is evidence of GI ulceration, food should be withheld until the melena
resolves (usually 24-48 hours). In the absence of GI bleeding it is not necessary to with-
hold food as long as a highly digestible diet is fed and feeding does not worsen the vomit-
ing or fluid and electrolyte losses.
● In intractable cases where fluid losses cannot be managed with intravenous fluid thera-
py, opiates may be helpful in increasing gut transit time so as to reduce faecal fluid losses.
●Metoclopramide to control vomiting.
ii. Paired serology taken two weeks apart may be useful, depending upon when the sam-
ples were taken and which agent is present. Antibody levels rise quickly following CPV
infection and moderate to high titres may already be present by the time clinical signs are
seen. Histopathological examination of intestine, bone marrow, lymph node, brain and
lung offers the best chance of making a diagnosis. Demonstration of viral antigen or
virus isolation are useful during the acute phases of infection.
56
58 & 59: Question
Pre-araesthetic
Day 7
Day 9
Day 23
Urea (mmol/)
4.3
27.8
9.6
49
Creatinine (μmol/l)
8.0
309
168
619
Sodium (mmol/)
148
147
149
144
Potassium (mmol/l)
4.5
4.2
4.3
5.2
Total CO, (mmol/)
18
17
7
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.6
2.5
2.6
2.7
Phosphorus (mmol/)
1.2
3.0
1.5
3.1
Amylase (u/l)
525
1,100
375
1,350
Urine SG
1.025
1.009
1.009
1.010
Urine protein
1+
2+
2+
+E
Urine casts
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Urine sediment
Negative
Inactive
Inactive
Inactive
58 A 14-year-old, neutered female Samoyed
58
is anaesthetized for routine dentistry and
excision of several cutaneous and subcuta-
neous masses. She has degenerative joint dis-
ease (DJD) in multiple joints and hip dyspla-
sia, and is receiving aspirin (14 mg/kg q12h).
Pre-anaesthetic blood work-up is shown.
Anaesthesia is induced with ketamine and
midazolam, and maintained with isoflurane.
Lactated Ringer's solution is administered (2.2 ml/kg/hr) during the procedure. She
recovers uneventfully. The masses are sebaceous adenomas and lipomas. Seven days
later the dog is depressed, polyuric/polydipsic and 5% dehydrated. The incisions are
healing normally. Biochemistry results are shown. After 48 hours of fluid therapy labo-
ratory evaluation is repeated (day 9 results). Fluid therapy is discontinued over the next
48 hours. The dog is eating and drinking and is released from the hospital. Two weeks
later the dog is readmitted because she has been vomiting for two days. Laboratory
evaluation is repeated (day 23 results). The owners elect for euthanasia. Necropsy
revealed glomerular amyloidosis, acute tubular necrosis (renal papillary necrosis) (58),
DJD of multiple joints and fibrosis at the surgical incision.
i. What is your interpretation of the data up to and including day 7?
i. What is oliguria? If the dog is oliguric after rehydration, what can be done to
attempt conversion to non-oliguria?
mi. What does the finding of acute tubular necrosis (ATN) imply?
iv. What pathophysiological mechanisms may have resulted in ATN?
v. What might have been done differently?
59 You have diagnosed insulinoma in a ten-year-old dog. How would you treat this
case?
57
58&59:Answers
58 i. Azotaemia with isosthenuria indicates primary renal failure. Because the blood
work-up was normal one week previously, the renal failure is probably acute in
nature.
i. Oliguria is defined as urine production <0.5 ml/kg/hr. If oliguria is present after
rehydration, there are several strategies to attempt to convert oliguria to non-oliguria
including: frusemide (2.2-17 mg/kg i/v); dopamine administered with frusemide {1-3
mg/kg/minute i/v); mannitol (0.5-1 g/kg of a 10-20% solution as a slow bolus i/v);
cols may be alternated with lactated Ringer's solution.
ii. Acute renal failure, probably as a result of acute tubular necrosis.
iv. Acute tubular necrosis (renal papillary necrosis) may result from a toxic or
ischaemic event to the renal tubules. Although NSAIDs are not nephrotoxic when
used at appropriate dosages, their use may contribute to the development of acute
renal failure when other risk factors are present. NSAIDs may potentiate the risk for
acute tubular necrosis during periods of hypotension or hypovolaemia. Other risk
factors include age, fever, volume depletion, pre-existing renal disease, liver disease,
hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, nephrotoxins, other causes of reduced renal perfu-
sion and sepsis. These risk factors are additive in effect.
v. In retrospect the dog was proteinuric {1+ protein with a SG of 1.025). Urine had
been saved from the pre-anaesthetic examination and the urine protein:creatinine
ratio was S:1. Pending additional work-up, dentistry and mass excisional surgery
may have been delayed. More aggressive fluid therapy during anaesthesia and post-
operatively may have been undertaken. Lastly, alternative analgesics may have been
administered and NSAIDs could have been discontinued for a couple of weeks prior
to the anaesthetic episode.
59 Surgical removal is the treatment of choice for single masses. Where metastasis
has occurred, debulking is recommended as this makes medical management easier.
To reduce the frequency and severity of clinical signs and to avoid acute hypogly-
caemic crises, frequent feeding of a diet high in protein, fat and complex carbohy-
drates is recommended. Simple sugars, honey, syrup and chocolate should be avoid-
ed. Exercise should be limited to short walks. Prednisolone can be used once dietary
therapy fails, as it antagonizes the effects of insulin, thereby indirectly increasing
blood glucose, and promotes hepatic glycogenolysis, thereby directly increasing blood
gucose. Marked weight gain is common in treated animals. Diazoxide inhibits
insulin secretion, stimulates hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, and inhibits
tissue use of glucose. The net result is to increase blood glucose concentrations.
Diazoxide does not inhibit insulin synthesis and it is not cytotoxic.
58
60 & 61: Questions
60 A one-year-old, female German
60
Shorthaired Pointer has had clinical
signs of oestrus and male attractiveness
for 45 days. The bitch is clinically well.
Examination of a vaginal smear shows
the presence of 7s% anuclear cells and
an absence of neutrophils. An ultra-
sound examination of the ovaries has
been performed and an image obtained
of the left ovary (60).
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. How common is this condition, and
what are the differential diagnoses?
i. How might this condition be treated?
iv. What is the likely chance of recur-
rence, and the significance for fertility?
61 A four-year-old Siamese
6
cat is presented with an 18-
month history of intermittent
vomiting, which usually occurs
 several hours after feeding.
The vomitus generally contains
partially digested food.
i. What are your differential
diagnoses?
Per-oral gastroscopy and
duodenoscopy reveal a mass
protruding into the proximal
small intestine. Exploratory
laparotomy and enterotomy
reveal a pedunculated mass
(61).
i. What is the probable diag-
nosis in this cat, and what is the prognosis?
59
60&6l:Answers
60 i. The ultrasound image shows an enlarged ovary with multiple anechoic structures
of varying shape and size present throughout the stroma. This appearance is consistent
with follicular cysts. Follicular cysts produce oestrogen and are usually associated with
clinical signs of persistent oestrus.In some bitches the persistent elevation of oestrogen
thrombocytopenia. This ovary can be distinguished from a normal oestrus ovary because
the latter generally has a smaller number of follicles of similar size. Follicles normally
increase in size and ovulate when they reach approximately 1 1 mm in diameter.
fi. True follicular cysts are rare in the bitch. Cysts associated with the ovary are com-
mon, but these are usually present within the ovarian bursa and are not endocrinologi-
cally active and therefore produce no clinical signs. Differential diagnoses of oestrogen-
producing follicular cysts are those bitches with a long proestrus and/or oestrus and
bitches with split oestrus syndrome. The former may not ovulate until as late as 30 days
after the onset of proestrus and the latter generally have an absence of oestrous signs
before a return at some future time; in both cases the ovaries are ultrasonographically
normal. Some ovarian tumours may produce oestrogen and produce clinical signs of per-
sistent oestrus. These bitches are usually systemically unwell and have ascites.
mi. It may be possible to induce either ovulation or luteinization of follicular cysts by the
administration of human chorionic gonadotrophin. If successful, the bitch enters
metoestrus and has a normal interoestrous interval of approximately seven months. If
this treatment is not successful, exogenous progestogens may be used to suppress the fol-
licles and cause a resolution of the clinical signs. In some cases, oestrus and ovulation
follow shortly after progestogen withdrawal, whilst in others the interoestrous interval is
delayed for up to four months.
iv. After successful therapy or, occasionally, spontaneous regression, bitches frequently
return to normal cyclicity with no reduction in fertility.
61 i. Vomiting of partially digested food several hours after feeding suggests a gastric
outflow obstruction. Pyloric dysfunction would probably be the most likely diagno-
sis in this individual as it is recognized as a particular problem in Siamese cats. In this
breed it is sometimes seen in association with megaoesophagus, and appears to be a
functional abnormality rather than true pyloric stenosis. Other differential diagnoses
would include true pyloric stenosis, primary or secondary gastric motility disorders,
inflammatory bowel disease, chronic gastritis fe.g. secondary to Ollulanus tricuspis
infection), gastric or duodenal neoplasia, and gastric or duodenal polyps.
i. The pedunculated nature of this mass is typical of a benign duodenal polyp.
although histological examination would be required to rule out neoplasia. Benign
adenomatous duodenal polyps are an uncommon problem but several cases have
been reported in cats. A longitudinal enterotomy incision through the antemesenteric
border of the duodenum to expose the mass allows excision of the polyp at its base in
the duodenal mucosa. Excision is curative, with no recurrences reported. Although
typically located in the proximal duodenum, some of the adenomatous masses appear
to represent ectopic gastric tissue, whereas others are composed of duodenal tissue.
In addition to duodenal polyps, ileal polyps have also been reported in Siamese cats.
60
62 & 63: Questions
62 A 16-week-old, unvacci-
62a
nated male Rottweiler puppy is
presented with a two-day his-
tory of anorexia, lethargy and
vomiting, and a one-day histo-
ry of collapse and haemorrhag-
ic diarrhoea (62a). On physical
examination the rectal temper-
ature is 37.5°C (98.6°F) and
the heart rate is 165 bpm; the
puppy is assessed as 10% de-
hydrated, based on skin tur-
gor. Despite intensive fluid
therapy and supportive care the puppy dies within 12 hours. At postmortem examina-
tion the intestines are haemorrhagic with diffuse erosions. You strongly suspect canine
parvovirus (CPV) infection.
i. List at least four other major differential diagnoses.
ii. Describe how you would confirm the diagnosis of CPV infection.
63 A six-month-old, unvaccinated crossbreed dog is presented with acute onset
haemorrhagic diarrhoea, vomiting, dyspnoea and a mucopurulent nasal discharge.
Auscultation of the chest reveals harsh crackles and an overall increase in lung
sounds. Auscultation of the heart is unremarkable. Abdominal pain is present.
 Mucous membranes are pale and the dog is depressed. A thoracic radiograph is taken
(63).
i. How would you interpret this radiograph?
i. What viral disorder would you consider most likely in this dog?
mi. How might you confirm your diagnosis?
61
62&63:Answers
62 i. Viral enteritides {CPV*, dis
62b
temper, infectious canine hepatitis);
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
(HGE)*; garbage enteritis*; hypoa-
drenocorticism*; acute bacterial
enteritis (salmonellosis*, shigel-
losis, campylobacteriosis); intesti-
nal obstruction {intussusception*,
foreign body, strangulated hernia);
poisoning {anticoagulants); para-
sitism (Ancylostoma). (*Diagnoses of major importance.)
i. The age and vaccinal status of this dog would raise suspicions of an infectious dis-
ease, and history of contact with other affected dogs would be an important clue.
The clinical signs and characteristic time course of ^dull the first day, vomiting on the
second, diarrhoea on the third and dead or better on the fourth’ are suggestive of
CPV infection. Pyrexia is expected after initial CPV infection but this puppy was in
extremis and hypothermic when presented, probably secondary to endotoxic shock.
Hypovolaemic shock and hypothermia may also be seen with hypoadrenocorticism
or with HGE. Other signs such as bradycardia, ill thrift and weight loss might be
expected with hypoadrenocorticism. With HGE a markedly raised haematocrit
(>0.65 l/l) but normal skin turgor in the face of massive loss of extracellular fluid into
the intestine is characteristic. With CPV infection the haematocrit may be slightly ele-
vated and a leucopenia may be present. If necessary, perform radiography and ultra-
sound examination. Bacteriology is indicated to rule out salmonellosis. Antemortem
diagnosis of CPV infection can be confirmed by serology or identification of viral
antigen in faeces by ELISA or haemagglutinin assay. Paired serology is impossible in
this case, but peak antibody titre is reached rapidly and, although death occurred
early, some serological response is likely to be evident. Virus isolation may be
attempted on intestinal contents. The postmortem appearance (62b) (enlarged mesen-
teric lymph nodes, a granular serosal surface and a denuded mucosal surface with
floccules of mucosal debris and often little blood) is not immediately suggestive of
intestinal infection, but histology (epithelial sloughing, villous necrosis and crypt
dilation) is sufficient to confirm the diagnosis.
63 i. The radiograph shows a mixed bronchial and alveolar pattern in all lung lobes.
Air bronchograms and alveolar consolidation are evident. Extrapulmonary tissues are
unremarkable. The radiogra phic diagnosis is of a bronchopneumonia.
ii. Canine distemper virus (CDV) infection.
i. CDV infection is difficult to confirm. The organism is difficult to isolate.
Cytoplasmic inclusion bodies in epithelial cells from the cornea or bladder wall
would be suggestive of CDV. A rising antibody titre on paired serum samples taken
three weeks apart would also indicate an active CDV infection.
62
64 & 65: Questions
64a
64b
64 A four-year-old, neutered male, indoor domestic shorthair cat became inappetent
soon after the owners moved in to a new home and obtained a puppy. The cat initially
weighed 7.6 kg but within two weeks had lost 1.3 kg. On physical examination he
was quiet, in fair body condition and markedly jaundiced (64a). The rounded, caudal
edge of the liver could be palpated beyond the costochondral junction. Pertinent labo-
ratory findings included: PCV 0.42 l/l, ALP 522 u/l, ALT 168 u/l, GGT 2 u/l, total
bilirubin 145 μmol/l and fasting bile acids 123 μmol/l. A liver biopsy was obtained
(64b).
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. What are some of the predisposing factors of this condition for which this cat
should be evaluated?
ii. What are the important factors in the treatment of this condition?
65 A ten-year-old, neutered male cat pre-
65
sented with acute onset collapse, very pale
mucous membranes and abdominal dis-
tension. Physical examination revealed an
enlarged liver. Thoracic auscultation and
peripheral lymph nodes were unremark-
able. On abdominal paracentesis, blood
was obtained which failed to clot on
standing. Abdominal radiography demon-
strated a large liver. Ultrasonography
revealed numerous small hypoechoic
areas within the liver parenchyma. Haematology confirmed severe anaemia. Platelet
numbers were adequate and a coagulation screen was normal. Clinical biochemistry
showed mild increases in ALT and ALP. The liver contained multiple haemorrhagic
areas below the capsule (65). Some had ruptured causing the haemoabdomen. At post-
mortem examination the lesions noted in the liver were not found elsewhere in the cat.
i. What are your main differential diagnoses for haemoabdomen prior to performing
any diagnostic work-up?
i. What is your presumptive diagnosis pending histopathology?
63
64&65:Answers
64 i. The appearance of vacuolated hepatocytes in conjunction with the history of
anorexia and weight loss support a diagnosis of hepatic lipidosis. The laboratory
findings of a moderately elevated serum ALP activity in conjunction with a normal
serum GGT activity can also be a clue, for this serum liver enzyme pattern is a char-
acteristic finding in affected cats. An Oil-Red-O stain for lipids would confirm that
the non-stained material within the hepatocytes is indeed lipid.
-Auapun sauoue on arepuos si sisopidil sueday 'saseo jo %os alanewxoudde ul t
ing disease process. The most common concurrent and/or causative diseases include
diabetes mellitus, cholangiohepatitis, pancreatitis, renal disease, hyperthyroidism,
days or longer. Idiopathic hepatic lipidosis (IHL) is a diagnosis of exclusion when no
other underlying disease can be identified. Therefore, a thorough laboratory analysis
including viral titres and endocrine function tests, as well as diagnostic imaging stud-
ies, are needed to rule out a primary disease process. Common denominating factors
in animals that develop IHL seem to be a sedentary lifestyle, obesity and subsequent
anorexia in association with an environmental stress such as changing home, or the
introduction of a new, unfamiliar animal as in this cat's history.
mi. Adequate protein-calorie nutrition is the cornerstone of therapy for the treatment
of hepatic lipidosis. Although the underlying pathogenesis of hepatic lipidosis
remains unknown, it appears that in times of excess ketogenesis, such as starvation,
the feline liver lacks the ability to mobilize the excessively accumulating lipids, the
hepatocytes become inundated with fat vacuoles, and a vicious cycle of anorexia and
worsening liver function ensues. Since it is difficult to get these animals to eat an ade-
quate amount of calories, and force feeding is rarely successful, the placement of a
gastric feeding tube and the feeding of a moderate- to high-protein diet has improved
the survival rate of cats affected with IHL significantly. The addition of essential
amino acids such as carnitine, arginine and taurine have been advocated to assist in
the mobilization of lipids from hepatocytes and the recovery of normal liver function.
65 i. Coagulopathies; neoplasia - haemangiosarcoma, vascular tumour; thrombosis;
torsion - spleen, stomach; trauma; tumour eroding a vessel; vascular anomaly. In the
cat all of these, with the exception of tra uma, are rare.
ii. The appearance of the liver was consistent with peliosis hepatis. The diagnosis was
confirmed on histopathology. This term is used to designate focal, blood-filled spaces
in the liver. It resembles telangiectasis. The cause of the lesions is unknown. They
may be present as asymptomatic lesions, but if they are extensive and rupture, severe
blood loss results.
64
66-68: Questions
66 An eight-month-old, female Cocker
66
Spaniel is presented because of a pro-
gressive enlargement of the clitoris
which now protrudes from the vulval
orifice (66). Examination shows that the
vulva is small and somewhat cranially
positioned. Palpation of the clitoris
demonstrates that it has a central bone.
i. What is the likely diagnosis?
i. What is the aetiology of this condi-
tion?
i. What are the treatment options?
67 A six-year-old, male Dober-
man Pinscher is evaluated for
lethargy and decreased appetite
of two weeks’ duration.An
enlarged liver is palpated and
an ultrasonogram is subse-
quently obtained (67).
i. What are the differential
diagnoses for hepatomegaly?
ii. What abnormality do you
see on this hepatic ultrasono-
gram?
ii. How would you proceed
from here?
68 A young dog presented with a long-
68
term history of intermittent vomiting,
regurgitation and hypersalivation. The
vomiting occurred at variable times after
eating. The dog was well grown, bright
and keen to eat. Diarrhoea was not a fea-
ture. Occasional coughing was reported.
A chest radiograph was taken after ad-
ministration of barium (68).
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. What further diagnostic tests would
you recommend?
ii. What treatment would you recom-
mend for your likely diagnosis?
65
66-68:Answers
66 i. This bitch is an intersex. The time of onset of the clinical signs corresponds with
the onset of puberty and it is likely that there is androgen production by gonadal testicu-
lar tissue. Androgens (predominantly testosterone) cause clitoral enlargement and devel-
opment of an os clitoris. Frequently there is excessive licking of the vulva due to low-
grade vestibulitis.
i. Intersex animals may be classified according to the following three abnormalities:
●Abnormalities of chromosomal sex - sex chromosome aneuploids, chimeras or
mosaics. These phenotypic females with underdeveloped genitalia develop changes in the
clitoris at puberty. The recognition of abnormalities of chromosomal sex requires the
construction of a karyotype.
● Abnormalities of gonadal sex - chromosomal and gonadal sex do not agree. These are
  e  ro  si ae  s -s po a
the X chromosome or an autosome. Of the three categories of this condition, only one
        aa e  s
maphrodites with ovotestes, oviducts and external female genitalia.
●Abnormalities of phenotypic sex - females which have ovaries and XX chromosomes
(female pseudohermaphrodites). These are masculinized due to exposure to exogenous
or endogenous androgens in utero.
m. The majority of intersex animals are infertile and surgical neutering is the preferred
method of treatment. Following removal of the gonads, the os clitoris may become
smaller as the animal grows and the clinical signs resolve. Clitoridectomy is mostly
unnecessary but after puberty the clitoris may be large and require surgical removal.
67 i. Hepatomegaly may be due to infiltrative liver disease (neoplasia, amyloidosis),
excessive storage (lipidosis, glycogen), severe congestion, diffuse inflammation {in the
dog only with acute inflammation; in the cat with both acute and chronic inflamma-
tion), nodular hyperplasia or work hypertrophy.
fi. The liver looks congested with markedly distended portal vein branches, suggesting
congestive heart failure or posthepatic venous obstruction.
i. Evaluate the cardiovascular system. Doberman Pinschers are prone to cardiomyopa-
thy; myocardial fractional shortening may be evaluated via echocardiography.
Angiographic contrast studies may be needed to assess posthepatic venous obstruction.
68 i. The radiograph shows reflux of barium into the oesophagus, an appearance typi-
cal of a disorder of the oesophageal hiatus, i.e. a hiatal hernia.
f. Fluoroscopy may demonstrate the presence of a sliding hiatal hernia. Direct abdomi-
nal pressure or manually obstructing the upper airway improves the likelihood of
demonstrating an intermittent problem. Endoscopy may reveal oesophagitis supporting
a diagnosis of gastro-oesophageal reflux. View the lower oesophageal sphincter from the
gastric side; gastric insufflation may cause cranial displacement of the cardia.
mi. Cimetidine or ranitidine to block acid production. Sucralfate is useful as a mucosal
protectant. Metoclopramide or cisapride increases the tone of the gastro-oesophageal
junction and promotes gastric emptying. If there is upper airway disease or obesity, this
should be corrected. Severe cases require surgery.
66
69 & 70: Questions
RBCs (× 10/2/)
2.61
Hb (g/l)
35
00
PCV (I/)
0.18
MCV (fl)
68
MCHC (g/l)
200
nRBCs
7%
Platelets (x 10°/)
1,320
WBCs (x 10"/l)
QQ
26.8
Neutrophils (seg) (x 10°/1)
16.3
Neutrophils (bands) (x I0°/l)
4.56
69 A middle-aged Collie-cross presents
Lymphocytes (x 10°/1)
1.61
with pallor and reduced exercise toler-
Monocytes (x 10*/l)
2.14
ance. The haematological findings and a
Eosinophils (x I07/)
0.27
photomicrograph (69) of the blood film
are shown.
i. What is your comment on the film? Note the RBC and platelet morphology.
i. How would you interpret the haematological findings?
mi. What further questions might you ask the owner?
iv. How would you confirm your suspicions?
70 An 11-month-old,unvaccinated
Border Collie presented with acute
onset epileptiform fits of one-half to
two minutes" duration (70). Between
fits the dog was quadriparetic but
otherwise bright. Cranial nerve exam-
ination showed sluggish pupillary
light reflexes; otherwise no abnormal-
ities were noted. His rectal tempera-
ture was 39.5°C (103.1°F). He had
been treated for acute upper respira-
tory tract infection, vomiting and haemorrhagic diarrhoea two months previously,
which had resolved after two weeks. There were no previous reports of neurological
signs. The dog was not a scavenger and had not knowingly been exposed to toxic
materials.
i. What diagnoses would you consider?
i. What diagnostic plan would you recommend, and what abnormalities might you
expect to find for the different diagnoses you have considered?
67
69 & 70: Answers
69 i. The film confirms the platelet count (normally in the dog 8-29 platelets per
x100 oil immersion field). Platelet anisocytosis, polychromasia ++, RBC anisocytosis
- and hypochromia ++ are noted.
ii. This is a marked hypochromic and normocytic anaemia. The polychromasia sug-
gests strong regeneration and despite this the MCV is not increased. There is a
thrombocytosis, a neutrophilia with a left shift and a monocytosis. The WBC counts
would be consistent with inflammation or infection, but are more likely to reflect
non-specific bone marrow stimulation associated with regenerative activity. Both
thrombocytosis and hypochromic anaemia are typically present in iron deficiency.
The commonest cause of iron deficiency in adult dogs is chronic GI haemorrhage
from tumours, inflammatory bowel disease or hookworm parasitism. This profile
probably reflects a regenerative response to blood loss in the face of chronic iron
deficiency.
mi. Establish the worming history and whether dark faeces or melena had been seen.
iv. Confirmation of iron deficiency requires an iron profile. Measurement of serum
ferritin might also be useful.
70 i. ● Canine distemper virus {CDV) infection is likely given the previous history.
CDV may also cause dermatological changes (hyperkeratosis). Different CDV strains
show differing pathogenicities and organ tropisms, with some only causing clinical
disease in one or two organ systems. The development of neurological signs associat-
ed with CDV is often delayed in onset.
· Inherited or acquired epilepsy.
· A form of inflammatory meningoencephalitis.
· Toxicity, e.g. lead, organophosphates. Lead poisoning may cause GI signs,
although the time interval between the development of GI signs and CNS signs in this
case would be unusual.
i. ● Haematology may reflect the presence of an inflammatory disorder. Basophilic
stippling of RBCs would be indicative of lead poisoning. Acute CDV infection may
cause a leucopenia, although it would be highly unlikely that this would still be in
evidence two months after the initial infection. Haematology was unremarkable in
this case.
● Clinical biochemistry may be helpful if a toxicity is suspected. Assessment of renal
and hepatic parameters is indicated as well as blood lead levels. In this dog the bio-
chemistry was unremarkable.
· CSF analysis. The CSF contained 35 g/l protein, a CDV antibody titre of 1:1600
{titre in serum was 1:400) and a WBC count of 2.5 x 109/l, comprising 50% non-
degenerate neutrophils, 40% lymphocytes and 10% macrophages. The high CDV
antibody titre in CSF compared to plasma would suggest active CDV infection in the
CNS. The increased protein content and WBC count are consistent with an inflam-
matory disorder.
68
71 & 72: Questions
 71 A four-year-old, male crossbreed dog presented for inappetence, weight loss and
Occasional vomiting of several weeks? duration. Clinical pathology revealed hyper-
globulinaemia (52 g/l), hypoalbuminaemia (19 g/l) and elevated liver enzymes (ALT
800 u/l, ALP 950 u/l). Urinalysis showed a SG of 1.024, trace protein and 2+ biliru-
bin. Fasting serum bile acids were 140 μmol/l. Abdominal radiography revealed
reduced liver size. A liver biopsy showed severe chronic hepatitis with marked peri-
portal accumulation of mononuclear inflammatory cells which were invading the
hepatic lobule and infiltrating the hepatic parenchyma.
How might you treat this case?
72 A two-year-old, neutered female Cocker
PCV (I/)
0.24
Spaniel has been polyuric, polydipsic, vomiting
and inappetent for several weeks. Routine labo-
Reticulocytes (%)
0.2
ratory investigations revealed the abnormalities
Urea (mmol/l)
54.2
shown. A left lateral radiograph of the abdo-
Creatinine (μmol/)
389
men is obtained (72),
Phosphorus (mmol/)
9.44
i. Describe your ra diogra phic findings.
i. What is your diagnosis?
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.35
m. What can be done med-
ically to help relieve the
signs of gastritis?
69
71&72:Answers
 71 Slowing the progression of disease, managing the metabolic consequences and pro-
viding an optimum environment for hepatic regeneration. Initial treatment:
● Corticosteroids (2 mg/kg/day, gradually tapering) modulate the inflammatory and
fibrotic response in chronic hepatitis. They have the disadvantage of being catabolic,
contraindicating their use in animals with hepatic encephalopathy, while high doses may
cause a reversible hepatopathy. They are particularly indicated in this patient because of
the severity of inflammation. Tapering doses and long-term alternate day treatment are
preferred. Follow-up biopsies may be required to assess the efficacy of treatment, since
biochemical re-evaluation is hampered by steroid-induced enzyme induction {especially
ALP). Treatment response to glucocorticoids may be suspected based on improvement of
clinical signs, serum ALT activity and liver function tests. For patients that fail to
respond to corticosteroid therapy alone, prednisolone may be combined at a reduced
dose with azathioprine (1-2 mg/kg daily or every other day).
● Ursodeoxycholic acid (10-15 mg/kg q24h). A hydrophilic bile acid which protects
hepatocytes by displacing toxic hydrophobic bile acids, but also has choleretic and
immunomodulatory properties. It should be used in conjunction with other measures
aimed at controlling the pathogenesis of the disease.
· A high-quality protein diet with micronutrient supplementation. Frequent feeding of a
diet providing adequate calories (carbohydrates and lipids), protein and micronutrients
(1.25-1.5 x MER) should be fed, since patients are often catabolic and in negative nitro-
gen balance. Frequent feeding of small meals reduces fasting hypoglycaemia and increas-
es protein tolerance. Protein should be of high quality and digestibility in order to mini-
mize nitrogenous waste production. Excessive restriction of dietary protein may be
harmful by worsening hypoalbuminaemia. Fat is a good source of energy and restriction
of dietary fat is only indicated in dogs with severe cholestasis and steatorrhoea.
Maintenance requirements for water soluble B-complex vitamins should be doubled
since these frequently become deficient in liver disease, but supplementation with other
vitamins should be done with caution. Zinc supplementation (zinc sulphate 2 mg/kg/day
or zinc gluconate 3 mg/kg/day) is recommended.
72 i. The gastric mucosa is more diffusely radiopaque with prominent, well-defined
rugal folds representing probable soft tissue mineralization.
i. The long-standing clinical signs, azotaemia and non-regenerative anaemia indicate
that this dog is in chronic renal failure. Many animals with renal failure experience vom-
iting and inappetence due to the retention of gastrin, resultant gastric hyperacidity and
the influence of uraemic toxins. In this dog the mineralization seen in the gastric wall is
likely a result of persistent, severe elevations in serum phosphorus concentrations which
complex with calcium and may precipitate in soft tissues, such as the stomach and kid-
neys, and exacerbate the clinical signs of uraemia. The diagnosis is chronic renal failure
with a calcified, uraemic gastropathy.
mi. The soft tissue mineralization is irreversible, but the variables that can be manipulat-
ed include decreasing serum phosphate concentrations with a diet low in phosphorus,
administering phosphate binders with meals, and controlling gastric acidity with hista-
mine blockers and other gastric protectant medications.
70
73-75: Questions
Middle-aged
Aged Labrador  Reference range
Cocker Spaniel
Serum iron (Sl) (ml/dl)
50
50
84-233
Unbound iron binding
capacity (UIBC) (ul/dl)
350
150
142-393
Total iron binding
capacity (TIBC) (ul/dl)
400
200
284-572
Saturation (%)
12.5
25
20-59
73  Interpret the iron profiles above obtained from two dogs with chronic anaemia.
One has iron deficiency anaemia and the other anaemia of chronic disease associated
with an inflammatory disorder. Which is which?
74 This ultrasonogram (74) is of a 12-
74
year-old, male German Shepherd Dog
 presented with sudden onset lethargy and
collapse. He is recumbent and has pale
mucous membranes and a rapid thready
pulse (160 bpm). The abdomen feels
slightly fluctuant. Abdominal radiographs
show some peritoneal fluid and paracen-
tesis yields a small amount of blood.
i. What are your differential diagnoses?
i. What could be the reason for per-
forming abdominal ultrasonography?
ii. What abnormality do you see on this hepatic ultrasonogram?
75  You perform a retrograde
urethrogram (75) as part of
the work-up of a male dog
with haematuria.
i. Describe how you would
perform such a procedure?
ii. What is your interpretation
of this radiogra ph?
i. What are the main features
that you would be looking for
when assessing retrograde ure-
thrograms?
71
73-75:Answers
73 The values of significance are SI, TIBC and percentage saturation. UIBC is a
direct measurement used to calculate TIBC (TIBC = SI + UIBC). Iron deficiency is
characterized by low serum iron, low saturation and normal TIBC. Anaemia of
chronic disease has normal to low serum iron, low TIBC and normal to low satura-
tion. The low TIBC in inflammation is due to altered hepatic synthesis of plasma pro-
teins which results in reduced transferrin and albumin synthesis, and increased syn-
thesis of acute phase proteins such as haptoglobin, ceruloplasmin and fibrinogen.
The middle-aged Cocker Spaniel is iron deficient and the aged Labrador has anaemia
of chronic disease. Clearly, measuring serum iron alone would not discriminate
between these causes of non-regenerative anaemia.
74 i. The dog has a haemoabdomen and appears to be in haemorrhagic shock.
Causes of haemoabdomen include a ruptured neoplasm (especially haemangiosarco-
ma), traumatic rupture and coagulopathy. In the absence of trauma and with no evi-
dence for a bleeding problem, splenic haemangiosarcoma is a major differential in
this breed.
i. Radiography does not necessarily demonstrate small intra-abdominal lesions, and
this may be especially difficult if there is free abdominal fluid. Abdominal ultrasonog-
raphy is a more sensitive technique to look for parenchymatous lesions.
m. The ultrasonogram shows abdominal fluid (blood) surrounding the liver and a
large hyperechoic and cavitating lesion within the liver, suggestive of neoplasia. No
other abdominal abnormalities were found. The owners elected for euthanasia. At
cause of the abdominal haemorrhage.
75 i. Prior to the procedure the colon and rectum should be emptied of all faecal materi-
al, using an oral laxative administered for the previous two days or an enema adminis-
tered the afternoon and morning prior to anaesthesia. Retrograde urethrography, plain
radiography and negative contrast cystography should be carried out first. For retro
grade urethrography a urinary catheter (the largest that will pass comfortably) is inserted
to just beyond the os penis. The prepuce is lightly clamped around the catheter to reduce
any back flow of contrast material onto the table, and contrast material is administered
through the catheter to fill the urethra. For a 30 kg dog, approximately 25 ml of a
water-soluble contrast agent is injected and the film exposed as the last 5 ml is adminis-
tered. When positioning the dog, be sure that the whole of the urethra is included; lateral
recumbency is required. Before injection the bladder should contain some air.
f. This radiograph is unremarkable.
i. The main features which would be considered abnormal are narrowing/obstruction
to contrast flow along the urethra, the presence of filling defects in the contrast column,
roughening of the urethral mucosa, and leakage of contrast material into the prostate. It
is normal for the urethra to be slightly narrowed as it passes around the ischial arch and
for the intrapelvic urethra to be wider.
72
76 & 77: Questions
76a
76b
76 A two-year-old Jack Russell Terrier presented
with a history of chronic intermittent vomiting
and diarrhoea of 18 months duration. Vomiting
occurred from one to several hours after eating
and was predominantly food. The diarrhoea was
of variable consistency (water to pasty). Neither
blood nor mucus was present in the diarrhoea.
The bitch had never gained weight and was thin.
Her appetite was normal and she was bright, alert
and responsive. A slight increase in the frequency
of defecation was reported when diarrhoea was
evident. A non-painful linear soft tissue mass
(3 cm x 4 cm) was palpable in the cranial ab-
domen. All other body systems appeared normal.
i. What are your main differential diagnoses?
Abdominal radiographs were taken (76a-76c).
i. What is your interpretation of these radiographs?
mi. What is the cause of the condition you have identified?
77 A three-year-old, female Bedlington
77a
Terrier presented for intermittent vomiting
of two months’ duration. The dog would
vomit two to three times a week and the
vomiting did not follow any pattern.
Recently the dog had started to lose some
weight. Physical examination revealed an
alert dog in fair body condition (77a). A
serum biochemical profile revealed only
moderately elevated liver enzymes (ALT 315 u/l, ALP 287 w/l).
i. What are your differential diagnoses?
i. What is the significance of your laboratory findings?
i. How would you proceed from here?
73
76 &77:Answers
76 i. The nature of the diarrhoea {absence of blood and mucus) and absence of weight
gain would suggest small intestinal disease. Vomiting suggests gastric or intestinal dis-
ease. The major differential diagnoses considered were IBD, SIBO, chronic partial
intestinal obstruction, chronic intussusception and dietary intolerance. The non-painful,
sausage-shaped soft tissue mass was most consistent with intussusception.
f. Plain radiography shows a well-defined soft tissue mass in the cranial abdomen. The
barium study shows a dilated large intestine in the cranial abdomen immediately caudal
to the stomach. The caecum contains a soft tissue mass with barium evident between this
mass and the caecal mucosa and also present as a thin streak passing down the centre of
the mass; this barium is in the lumen of the intussuscepted ileum. The appearance of the
intestine is similar to that of a clock spring, in this case an ileocolic intussusception.
m. Intussusceptions are thought to result from underlying disease which damages the
wall of the intestine and locally inhibits normal propulsive and segmental motility. As a
tracts over it and envelops it. They may develop as a sequela to parasitism, viral infec-
tion, linear foreign bodies, intestinal tumours or adhesions.
77 i. Causes of chronic vomiting outside the
77b
GI tract should be considered first
(pyometra, liver disease, renal failure, hypo-
adrenocorticism, ketoacidotic dia betes melli
tus, pancreatitis, peritonitis, drugs and toxins,
CNS disease). These can be ruled out by
history taking, physical examination and labo-
ratory tests. Thereafter, possible gastric and/or
intestinal causes of vomiting should be consid-
ered.
i. Elevated liver enzymes in this dog suggest liver disease, but it is important to rermember
 that liver enzyme elevations may be transient and may occur secondary to diseases outside
the liver. Due to its central place in the metabolism the liver frequently becomes involved
in disease elsewhere (the innocent bystander' phenomenon). However, the degree of ALT
elevation is more than would be expected, and in a Bedlington Terrier it should alert the
dinician to the possibility of copper hepatotoxicosis. This disease is common in the breed,
and in early stages may only manifest itself by elevations in serum ALT.
mi. Measure serum bile acid concentrations and if these are increased, liver imaging and
biopsy should be considered. If serum bile acids are normal, liver enzymes should be
repeated after three and six weeks. If enzymes remain elevated, biopsy is indicated. Plain
histology showed mild focal hepatitis, whereas the rhodanine stain for copper was
strongly positive. The photomicrograph (77b) (rhodanine stain, x25 original magnifica-
addo sauososa papeor-rddo suuasaudau sanua suuis-ep auu smous (uon
overload can be confirmed via quantitative analysis. Treatment with de-coppering agents
(such as D-penicillamine at 15 mg/kg q12h) is indicated in this dog. Treatment usually
has to be given for months to years. Repeat liver biopsies should be performed to assess
the efficacy of de-coppering.
74
78 & 79: Questions
78
78 A three-year-old, female Collie-cross had a routine ovariohysterectomy at 18
 months of age. Since that time she has had clinical signs of oestrus approximately
every seven months and has been attractive to male dogs. Presently she has a red-
tinged vulval discharge. A vaginal smear has been obtained and stained with a modi-
fied Wright-Giemsa stain (78).
i. What are the features of the vaginal smear, and what is the likely diagnosis?
i. What techniques could be used to confirm this diagnosis?
i. What are the differential diagnoses for this condition?
iv. How should the condition be treated?
79 An aged cat presented with an acute
Potassium (mmol/)
onset muscle weakness and ventroflexion
2.8
of the neck. The cat was reported to have
Sodium (mmol/l)
145
been polyuric and polydipsic for several
Chloride (mmoll)
120
Urea (mmol/l)
weeks. There was no indication of
17.9
depression or inappetence. Serum bio-
Creatinine (umol/l)
240
ALT (ufl)
chemistry findings are shown. Urine SG
70
was 1.014.
ALP (u/l)
80
Glucose (mmol/l)
i. How would you interpret these find-
10.6
ings?
il. What clinical/metabolic features may result from the hypokalaemia?
mi. How would you treat the electrolyte abnormality?
75
78&79:Answers
78 i. Both large and small intermediate epithelial cells and some erythrocytes are pre-
sent within the smear. These changes are associated with an elevation in plasma
oestrogen concentration, and the likely diagnosis is that of ovarian remnant syn-
drome. The presence of erythrocytes indicates that some uterine tissue remains and
makes the diagnosis simpler.
i. Collection of a vaginal smear when the bitch has clinical signs of oestrus provides
a simple and rapid method of diagnosis. It is also possible to measure peripheral
plasma progesterone concentrations two weeks after the signs of oestrus have disap-
within the ovarian remnant. Investigative techniques include diagnostic laparoscopy
orlaparotomy.
. The differential diagnoses for recurrent vulval discharge in an ovariohysterec-
tomized bitch include vaginitis (which may be related to changes in local immunity
associated with removal of the ovaries), certain bacterial or viral infections (although
these are very rare as primary causes), chemical irritation (e.g. urine), mechanical irri-
tation (foreign bodies), vaginal or urethral neoplasia, stump pyometra and diseases of
the urinary tract. Differential diagnoses for attractiveness to males includes vaginitis
and anal gland disease.
iv. Surgical removal of the ovarian remnant will be curative. Frequently the remnant is
associated with the right ovarian pedicle, and surgery is best performed during or
shortly after oestrus when the ovarian tissue reaches its maximum size.
79 i. There is a severe hypokalaemia and mild renal dysfunction. Elevated urea and
creatinine in the face of a relatively dilute urine is consistent with primary renal fail-
ure. This may develop as a consequence of the hypokalaemia or, more likely, result in
hypokalaemia through potassium loss in urine.
ii. Forelimb hypermetria, broad-based hindlimb stance and apparent muscle pain on
palpation may also be seen. Smooth and cardiac muscle may be affected resulting in
gastric atony, paralytic ileus, reduced cardiac output and cardiac arrhythmias.
Metabolic and renal effects include an attenuated response to glucose loading, meta
bolic acidosis and polyuria/polydipsia (ADH resistance). Hypokalaemia may initiate,
perpetuate and exacerbate pre-existing renal disease.
m. Potassium supplementation is required for all hypokalaemic cats even if clinical
signs are not apparent. Potassium chloride is used for intravenous fluid supplementa-
Intra venous fluids containing glucose or bicarbonate should be avoided as these can
cause hypokalaemia. Overzealous fluid administration can exacerbate hypokalaemia
because of volume expansion, dilution and accelerated urinary potassium loss.
Pota ssium gluconate is preferred for oral supplementation.
76
80 & 81: Questions
80 A three-year-old, male 22.5 kg
Albumin (g/l)
25
English Bulldog was evaluated for a
ALP (u/l)
268
five-day history of anorexia and
ALT (u/l)
43
depression. He had vomited on one
Total protein (g/l)
66
occasion five days previously. Rectal
Urea (mmol/l)
6.8
temperature was 40.1°C (104.2°F).
Creatinine (μmol/l)
97
During abdominal palpation, pain
Glucose (mmol/)
4.3
was consistently exhibited. The clini-
Sodium (mmol/)
139
cal pathology results obtained are
Potassium (mmol/l)
3.8
shown. Urine cytology revealed many
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.3
red blood cells, 100-110 white blood
Phosphorus (mmol/l)
1.6
cells/hpf, 2-5 granular casts/hpf, many
PCV (/)
0.41
bacteria (rods) and plentiful amor-
WBCs (× 10°/)
32.5
phous crystals.
Neutrophils (seg) (x 10°/1)
i. What is your diagnosis?
27.3
i. What diagnostic test would you
Neutrophils (bands) (x 10"/)
1.95
carry out next?
Lymphocytes (x 10*/l)
1.3
i. What are the most common organ-
Monocytes (x I0/1)
1.95
isms associated with bacterial urinary
Platelets (x 10°/1)
122
tract infections in dogs?
Toxic neutrophils present.
iv. Is radiography of any value?
Urinalysis:
Colour
Yellow
Turbidity
Cloudy
SG
1.025
pH
6.5
Glucose, ketones, bilirubin
Negative
Protein (qualitative)
|+
81  A four-month-old kitten is
81
presented with persistent diar-
rhoea and poor growth. The
result of faecal analysis is
shown (81).
i. Identify this parasite.
i. How would you manage
this case?
77
80 & 81: Answers
80a
80b
80 i. Pyelonephritis - unilateral with acute sepsis. An active sediment {numerous RBCs,
WBCs and casts) is present on urinalysis and an inflammatory process is indicated by the
neutrophilia.
f. Urine culture and sensitivity for aerobic bacteria. The urine sample must be obtained
by cystocentesis.
i.Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus spp, Streptococus spp, Klebsiella spp., Proteus spp.
iv. Excretory urography may be helpful. This relies on excretion of an intravenous con-
trast material. Any impairment of renal function will reduce the amount of contrast
material in the kidney. Urography will tend to rule out other renal abnormalities such as 
filling defects and renomegaly. Excretory urography was performed in this dog (80a,
 80b) and it showed a unilateral reduction in glomerular filtration rate.
81 i. An oocyst of Isospora felis.
il. Infection with Isospora is extremely common, particularly in kittens. Although
Isospora can be a primary pathogen, in the majority of cases a self-limiting infection
Occurs in the absence of any clinical signs. A heavy infection may occur, in association
with overcrowding, poor hygiene and stress, and may result in diarrhoea, vomiting.
weight loss or poor growth. Where Isospora is identified, it is important to search for
other causes of the clinical signs (Salmonella, Campylobacter, Giardia, intussusception,
etc.) as the coccidia may be an incidental finding. If numerous oocysts are found in the
faeces, and no other cause for the clinical signs is apparent, treatment is recommended
with trimethoprim/sulphadiazine (30 mg/kg daily) or furazolidone (8 mg/kg daily), both
given for 7-10 days.
78
82 & 83: Questions
82a
82b
82 A two-year-old, female domestic shorthair cat
belonged to a cattery which housed over 15 animals
in separate enclosures. They were frequently rotated
so that cats were in close contact with one another.
This cat was inappetent and lethargic over several days. No other cat was currently
ill. This cat had anisocoria with normal pupillary light reactions in the left eye (82a).
The right pupil was widely dilated and non-responsive to light. Aqueous flare was
present in the right anterior chamber and intraocular pressures were low consistent
with uveitis. Chorioretinitis lesions were present on fundic exa mination. The
abdomen was mildly distended with a doughy feel on palpation. Abdominocentesis
yielded a thick, viscous yellow fluid (82b). On analysis the fluid was relatively acellu-
lar, containing <100 non-degenerate neutrophils, and it had a protein content of
52 g/l. Pertinent laboratory findings included a fasted serum bile acid concentration
of 200 μmol/l and a hyperglobulinaemia of 63 g/l with a serum total protein concen-
tration of 92 g/l.
i. What is your presumptive diagnosis?
i. What further tests could help you make a definitive diagnosis?
i. What recommendations can you make for the owner of this cattery?
83 A ten-week-old unvaccinated dog, one of a litter of six, died following an acute ill-
ness of two days" duration. The pup presented with acute onset depression, vomiting
and severe haemorrhagic diarrhoea. The dam was unvaccinated. Piperazine had been
prescribed for the pups two weeks previously.
i. What infectious agents would you consider as possible causes of the pup's death?
ii. What advice would you give the breeder?
79
82&83:Answers
82 i. In a young, ill cat with anterior uveitis, chorioretinitis, hyperglobulinaemia and
a non-septic, viscous, abdominal exudate as depicted in the picture, feline infectious
peritonitis {FIP) should be high on your list of differential diagnoses. Other possible
causes for the presence of abdominal fluid could include portal hypertension, heart
failure and cholangiohepatitis, but these disorders are not usually accompanied by
ocular lesions, and such high concentrations of protein in the abdominal fluid with a
low cell count is very suspicious of an FIP infection.
i. Although a coronavirus titre can indicate exposure to the virus that causes FIP,
other less virulent coronaviruses may also result in a positive titre. For this reason, this
increased. Animals that are severely ill with active FIP infections may indeed have neg-
ative coronavirus titres since the antibodies produced are rapidly bound to the large
number of circulating virus particles. This cat had a negative coronavirus titre. The
finding of increased gamma immunoglobulins on electrophoresis of the abdominal
fluid can also be supportive of a diagnosis of FIP, but the definitive diagnosis is based
upon histopathological lesions of perivascular inflammation in affected tissues. On
exploratory laparotomy a diffuse, fibrinous debris covered the surface of the liver and
other viscera. Histopathology of the liver parenchyma revealed a severe, perivascular
granulomatousinflammation consistent with FIP
ii. Eliminating FIP infection from a cattery can be extremely difficult and frustrating.
It is unknown which animals may have been infected with the virus, so it should be
assumed that they have all been exposed and the cattery should be kept closed both to
the addition of new animals and to the movement of animals to homes with other cats
outside of the cattery. The incubation period of FIP infection may be weeks to months
or even years. Due to the difficulty in interpreting coronavirus titres, it is neither nec-
  a e   s  i s  e o  
the virus become resistant to infection and do not become ill. However, a small per-
centage will become clinically ill with FIP viral-induced disease, and these cats should
be quarantined. Treatment of FIP is generally ineffective, and when supportive care
fails, euthanasia of ill cats is indicated.
83 i. Canine parvovirus (CPV), canine coronavirus (CCV), salmonellosis, Clostridium
perfringens or C. difficile, Campylobacter jejuni, canine distemper virus (CDV).
ii. Submit the pup for a full postmortem examination. Submit rectal swabs (for CPV,
CCV and bacterial isolation) and blood (for CPV, CCV and CDV serology) from the
other pups. Paired serology can be performed on a second sample taken two weeks
later. Vaccinate those pups with a low CPV or CDV antibody titre with a live attenu-
ated CPV or CDV vaccine. Move the pups to an uncontaminated area and use hypo
chlorite to disinfect the infected environment.
80
84 & 85:Questions
84 A 16-year-old, neutered female
Urea (mmol/l)
27
domestic shorthair cat presents with
Creatinine (μmol/l)
309
acute onset generalized muscle weakness
Sodium (mmol/l)
145
and an inability to lift its head. Although
Potassium (mmol/l)
2.5
the cat has no history of medical prob-
Total COz (mmol/l)
8
lems, the owners report that she has been
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.6
losing weight, is polydipsic (drinking out
Phosphorus (mmol/l)
2.1
of sinks and bathtubs) and appears to be
polyuric. The cat is fed a dry diet and
there has been no dietary change. Serum biochemistry is performed.
i. What is the likely diagnosis given the cat's age and clinical presentation?
ii. What other diagnostic tests would you perform?
道i. What would be your initial treatment?
iv. What is the prognosis for the generalized muscle weakness?
85a
85b
85  A ten-year-old German Shepherd Dog presented
with an acute onset stiff gait and reluctance to move.
The forelimbs were warm, swollen and painful to dig-
ital pressure over the bones. The joints were unremarkable. No pain could be elicited
 On manipulation of the shoulder, elbow, carpi or metacarpal joints. The owner com-
mented that the dog's abdomen was enlarging and on palpation a large solid mass
was found. There were no clinical signs referable to the abdominal or thoracic cavity
and thoracic auscultation was unremarkable. Radiography of the forelimb and the
abdominal cavity was performed (85a, 85b).
i. What is your interpretation of the radiographs?
ii. What would you recommend to your client?
81
84&85:Answers
84 i. The likely cause of the muscle weakness is the hypokalaemia. The polyuria and
polydipsia, and raised urea and creatinine values, are consistent with renal failure (prob-
ably chronic in nature), which is a cause of hypokalaemia.
f. Further diagnostic tests should include abdominal radiography to evaluate the entire
urinary tract {including renal size), complete urinalysis to investigate the possibility of
renal infection, and haematological assessment to determine the presence of anaemia
which may develop secondarily to chronic disease or anaemia.
mi. Oral administration of potassium is the safest and preferred route for potassium sup-
plementation as parenteral administration is more likely to result in hyperkalaemia.
Parenteral potassium supplementation is reserved for patients that require emergency
reversal of hypokalaemia or for patients that cannot or will not accept oral therapy.
Potassium gluconate is the salt of choice in cats (2-6 mmol/cat q24h) depending upon
the size of the cat and the severity of the hypokalaemia. Potassium citrate is also suitable.
Potassium chloride may be administered parenterally at a maintenance dose of
13-20 mmol/ of fluids or, if the cat is hypokalaemic, 2040 mmol/l of fluids. Do not
administer potassium salts at a rate greater than 0.5 mmol/kg/hr.
iv. The prognosis for the generalized muscle weakness is good. It normally resolves with-
in five days of replacement therapy. The prognosis for chronic renal failure is guarded.
85 i. The abdominal radiograph shows a large soft tissue mass in the ventral mid-
abdominal region. Small intestinal tissues are displaced dorsally and caudally suggesting
that the mass is originating in the cranioventral area of the abdomen and is most likely
to be of liver or splenic origin. The diaphragmatic liver lobe is visible cranial to the mass,
but neither the caudal liver lobes nor the spleen are visible. The radiographic diagnosis is
of neoplasia.
The limb radiograph shows soft tissue swelling and regular periosteal proliferation
extending along the length of the radius and ulna. No other bony changes are evident.
The radiographic diagnosis is secondary hypertrophic osteopathy (Marie's disease). This
is most often associated with thoracic masses, but may develop in association with
abdominal masses (neoplasia or infection).
i. The limb changes are not life-threatening and may resolve to some extent if the mass
is removed. Analgesics are indicated. Further diagnostics should be aimed at determining
if the mass is benign or malignant. Thoracic radiography is indicated in the first instance
to assess for pulmonary metastases. Ultrasonography may be helpful in determining its
origin. If this is unavailable, administration of a small amount of barium may be helpful
in indicating the position of the stomach, which again may provide some clue as to
whether the mass is spleen or liver. Ultimately though, an exploratory laparotomy is
required to assess whether removal is feasible or not. In this case the neoplasm was a
haemangiosarcoma and euthanasia was performed.
82
86 & 87:Questions
86
86 A six-year-old, entire bitch has a white mucoid vulval discharge which com-
menced four weeks after mating. Otherwise she is clinically normal. An ultrasound
examination of the caudal abdomen has been performed from the ventral midline
(86).
i. What are the ultrasonographic findings, and what is the likely diagnosis?
i. How might this condition be treated surgically?
mi. How might this condition be treated medically?
iv. What is the likely subsequent fertility?
87 You examine a five-year-old,
Urea (mmol/l)
23
male Miniature Schnauzer for vomit-
ing of two days? duration. Results of
Creatinine (μmol/l)
186
Sodium (mmol/l)
147
laboratory evaluation are shown.
Potassium (mmol/l)
4.9
i. What is your interpretation of the
Total CO2 (mmoll)
17
azotaemia: pre-renal, renal or post-
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.5
renal?
Phosphorus (mmol/l)
ii. What is your diagnosis?
1.6
Serum amylase (u/l)
7,200
ii. What are granular casts, and
Urine SG
1.047
what is their significance?
 Urine protein
Negative
Urine casts
 Moderate granular
83
86& 87:Answers
86 i. The image shows a large anechoic bladder close to the abdominal wall. Dorsal
to the bladder {ventral in this image) there are three almost circular discrete fluid-
filled structures with a diameter of between 2.0 and 2.5 cm. These structures are dif-
ferent sections of the uterus and it would appear that the uterus is enlarged and fluid
filled. A definitive diagnosis cannot be made from an image taken in one plane, and a
second image at 90° to the first is required. The most likely diagnoses are pyometra
and pregnancy, both of which occur at the same time of the oestrous cycle. This case
is a pyometra and can be distinguished from a pregnancy by the absence of fetal tis-
sue and membranes. By imaging in a second plane it was demonstrated that the fluid-
filled zones were confluent rather than discrete as found during pregnancy. It is com-
mon for bitches to have a mucoid vulval discharge during pregnancy, and often they
may have a reduced appetite at the time of implantation.
i. The treatment of choice for bitches with pyometra remains ovariohysterectomy
combined with appropriate fluid and antimicrobial therapy. Attempts have been made
to drain the uterine fluid using a catheter placed via the cervix. However, this tech-
nique is difficult to perform, therefore surgically introduced drains placed transcervi-
cally via a hysterotomy have been advocated by some workers. These are used to flush
the uterus after surgery. Variable success rates have been described following this sur-
m. Medical treatment may be attempted in all cases of pyometra, although this is
more appropriate in cases of open cervix pyometra; most regimes use uterine ecbolic
agents that may cause uterine rupture if the cervix is closed. Low doses of prosta-
gandin administered twice daily for up to one week may be successful, although
 side-effects of prostaglandin therapy (including restlessness, pacing, hypersalivation,
tachypnoea, vomiting, diarrhoea, pyrexia, abdominal pain) are common. Prosta-
agents and intravenous fluid administration. Prostaglandins are useful since as well
 as promoting uterine contraction they cause lysis of the corpora lutea and a reduction
in plasma progesterone concentrations.
iv. Medical treatment using prostaglandins has achieved success rates of up to 80%
with approximately 2s% of animals eventually producing litters. However, long-
term complications including anoestrus, recurrence of pyometra, failure to conceive
and abortion are not uncommon.
87 i. Pre-renal azotaemia because the urine SG is appropriately concentrated with
azotaemla.
ii. Pancreatitis with pre-renal azotaemia due to dehydration.
imi. Casts are cylindrical-shaped structures composed of mucoprotein and occa sionally
cells and cellular debris. Granular casts represent epithelial casts that have disinte-
grated. Epithelial, fatty, granular and waxy casts are usually associated with degener-
ation or necrosis of tubular epithelial cells.
84
88 & 89: Questions
88 These ultrasound images are of
88a
the abdomen of an 18-week-old
German Shepherd Dog with an acute
history of lethargy, vomiting and
haemorrhagic diarrhoea (88a, 88b).
A double-layered tubular structure is
visible.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What would you expect to be able
to palpate within the abdomen?
ii. How would you confirm the diag-
nosis?
88b
iv. How would you treat this dog
and prevent recurrence?
89
PCV (I/)
0.47
Hb (g/l)
88
WBCs (x 10/)
26.5
Neutrophils: bands (x 10*/l)
3.6
Neutrophils: segmented (x I07/l) 18.9
Lymphocytes (x I0°/l)
0.8
Monocytes (x 10°/1)
3.2
Albumin (g/)
309
Globulin (g/l)
38
Bilirubin (μmol/)
8
ALT (u/l)
1,469
89 An 11-year-old, male Miniature
ALP (u/l)
2,740
Poodle became inappetent and vomited
Cholesterol (mmol/l)
10.8
intermittently for one month. Weight loss
Amylase (u/l)
366
and jaundice had developed recently. The
laboratory data are shown. Abdominal
radiographs were unremarkable. Exploratory laparotomy was performed.
i. What was the reason for performing surgery in this patient?
ii. What comments would you make on the surgical picture (89)?
ii. How would you proceed at surgery?
85
88&89:Answers
 88 i. The ultrasound image is characteristic of an intussusception.
il. A cylindrical/sausage-shaped, doughy mass in the mid-abdomen. Faecal material
might have a similar feel but should deform with gentle pressure.
mi. Plain and barium contrast radiographs might be helpful in identifying an intussuscep-
tion. A *coiled-spring' appearance seen on barium enema can also be helpful. Ileocolic
intussusception may protrude through the anus. It can be distinguished from a rectal
prolapse by the ability to pass a probe (such as a thermometer) through the anus along-
side the intussusceptum. In this case the results of abdominal palpation and ultrasound
iv. Surgical reduction of the intussusception is attempted at laparotomy, but often the
 presence of adhesions and bowel necrosis necessitates intestinal resection and end-to-end
anastomosis. Postoperatively, feeding of liquid/soft food is reinstituted early in the recov
ery phase. Prolonged withholding of food is likely to delay healing and increase the risk of
ileus, delaying restoration of normal intestinal peristalsis. Enteroplication, by suturing
89 i. Jaundice in this dog is hepatic or posthepatic. Haematology shows a neutrophilia
with marked left shift (indicative of an inflammatory, possibly infectious process), lym-
phopenia and monocytosis. Hyperglobulinaemia suggests chronic antigenic stimulation.
The dog is hyperbilirubinaemic, which looks predominantly cholestatic (very high ALP),
although there is obvious hepatocellular involvement (high ALT). Cholesterol is high,
and in a dog with cholestatic jaundice this may point towards extrahepatic biliary
obstruction; other differentials are hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorti-
cism, nephrotic syndrome and hyperlipidaemia. Amylase is normal, which makes pan-
creatitis as a cause of bile duct compression less likely, although it does not rule it out.
The overall impression is of a dog with cholestatic jaundice that may have an inflamma-
tory component; possible causes would be cholangiohepatitis, cholelithiasis and neopla-
sia. Ultrasound would have been useful to distinguish between intrahepatic or extrahep-
atic obstruction. If the biliary tree was normal on ultrasonography, percutaneous liver
biopsy might have been performed. In this case, ultrasound was not available and the
chronic and progressive nature of signs and the possibility of extrahepatic biliary
obstruction led to the decision to explore the liver and bile ducts surgically.
i. The gallbladder looks thickened and moderately distended, suggestive of cholecystitis
and partial obstruction.
mi. An attempt should be made to express the gallbladder to see if the bile duct is patent,
and to inspect the area surrounding the bile duct for signs of external compression. Bile
should be aspirated for culture, and liver biopsies should be obtained for histopathology
and culture. In this case, calculi were palpated in the gallbladder and removed via a chole-
cystotomy. Choleliths are often radiolucent and do not show up on routine radiographs.
It is important to culture choleliths as well as bile. In this dog, Escherichia coli was cul-
tured from bile and choleliths, and liver biopsies showed suppurative cholangiohepatitis.
86
90 & 91: Questions
90 A two-year-old, neutered male
90
domestic shorthair cat has recently been
introduced to a household with seven
other cats. Within a few days of acquir-
ing the cat the owner noticed persistent,
liquid diarrhoea, although the cat ap-
peared bright and was eating well. The
cat has not improved following starva-
tion for 48 hours and introduction of a
simple, commercial (chicken and rice
based) diet for two weeks, and is present-
ed for further investigation. The cat is
shown (90).
i. What are your differential diagnoses
for this cat?
. What, if any, further investigations
would you suggest?
ii. What advice/prognosis would you
give to the owner?
91 A three-year-old crossbreed dog is presented with a history of chronic vomiting
of several months? duration and slight weight loss. The vomitus comprises digested
food and occurs at variable times after eating ranging from one to several hours. The
dog has a good appetite. Serum biochemistry and haematology were unremarkable.
An abdominal radiograph was taken (91)
i. What is your interpretation of the radiograph?
i. What are your main differential diagnoses?
ii. What other diagnostic tests might you consider performing?
87
90 & 91: Answers
90 i. The cat is displaying bilateral protrusion of the third eyelids. The most likely
diagnosis in this individual would be the 'prolapsed nictitating membrane/chronic
diarrhoea? (PNM/CD) syndrome or Haws syndrome. Other differential diagnoses
would include infection with bacterial or parasitic intestinal pathogens {e.g.
Salmonella, Campylobacter, Giardia), inflammatory bowel disease, dietary hypersen-
sitivity or intolerance, intestinal neoplasia and partial intestinal obstruction.
i. If clinical signs are fully compatible with PNM/CD, further investigations may not
be indicated, although screening of faecal samples for bacterial pathogens and para-
sites is sensible.
i. Most cats affected with PNM/CD remain bright and continue to eat well, and
generally there is little or no weight loss despite persistent and often severe small
intestinal diarrhoea. The PNM/CD syndrome has been recognized as a clinical entity
strongly supports an infectious, contagious aetiology (probably viral in origin); a
torovirus has been suggested, although this has yet to be proven. In view of the con-
tagious nature of the disease, there is a high probability that some, or all, of the other
cats in the household will develop the same clinical signs. Provided the cats remain
otherwise healthy, and the diarrhoea does not cause a problem to the owner, there is
no necessity to treat affected individuals. If treatment is undertaken, antibiotics
should be avoided as there is no rationale for their use in this disease. A simple, high-
ly digestible diet may be advised, and can be combined with a faecal bulking agent
(e.g. Peridale Granules or Isogel) and/or a motility modifier such as loperamide. In
many cases medical intervention makes little difference to the severity of the diar-
rhoea. Although signs may be protracted, affected cats will eventually recover with-
out developing any apparent long-term consequences.
91 i. The abdominal radiograph shows the stomach to be distended. The pylorus is
displaced ventrocaudally. The stomach contains small mineral densities which repre-
sent previously ingested material retained in the stomach. This ^gravel’ sign and the
presence of gastric dilatation, taken with the clinical signs, is strongly suggestive of a
gastric outflow problem or gastric hypomotility.
ii. The main differential causes of this dog's problem are intraluminal masses and/or
foreign bodies, mucosal or mural proliferative disorders fe.g. gastric antral mucosal
hypertrophy, hypertrophic gastritis, pyloric hypertrophy) or compression of the out-
flow tract by masses or organs outside the stomach or malposition of the stomach.
ii. A barium study may be helpful in documenting impaired gastric outflow.
Endoscopy is required to determine the cause of any obstruction. Mucosal biopsies
should be taken even if the gross appearance is normal.
88
92 & 93: Questions
92a
92b
92 A two-year-old, male cat presented with a three-week history of slowly progres-
sive jaundice and lethargy, with a recent onset of vomiting in the last two days. On
physical examination the cat was alert and responsive with bright yellow mucous
membranes (92a), a rough, unkempt hair coat and palpable hepatomegaly. Pertinent
laboratory findings on haematological and biochemical profiles included: PCV
0.19 1/l, reticulocyte count 0.3%, ALP 233 u/l, ALT 308 w/l, urea 12 mmol/l, creati-
nine 212 μmol/l, total bilirubin 123 μmol/l and fasting serum bile acids 89 μmol/l. A
fine-needle aspirate of the liver parenchyma was obtained (92b).
i. Based on the cytology of the aspirate, what is your diagnosis?
il. What other test(s) should be performed?
mi. What is the prognosis, and what are the options for treatment?
93 Which of these statements about hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) are true and
which are false?
i. Most cases of HAC present acutely with signs such as vomiting, diarrhoea and
seizures.
i. Urinary tract infections are very unusual in dogs with HAC.
i. Alopecia is expected in all cases of HAC.
iv. Calcification of bronchial walls may be seen radiographically in animals with
HAC.
v. Testicular atrophy is common in male dogs with HAC.
89
92&93:Answers
92 i. The cells seen on the fine-needle aspirate cytology are a homogeneous popula-
tion of large, immature lymphoid cells with a low nuclear to cytoplasm ratio consis-
tent with hepatic lymphoma. The arrow is indicating an enlarged, basophilic lym-
phoblastic cell with malignant characteristics. Multicentric lymphoma in cats can
affect one or more organ systems including liver, renal, ocular, spleen and/or deep
and superficial lymph nodes. The presence of azotaemia and polydipsia may reflect
renal lymphomatous infiltration as well.
ii. Approximately 70% of cats with multicentric lymphoma test positive for FeLV.
 FeLV infection may be responsible for the non-regenerative anaemia due to the sup-
pressive effects of the virus on the bone marrow. Other helpful diagnostic tests to
stage the disease, and determine the extent of organ involvement, might include a
renal and bone marrow aspirate and a thoracic radiograph.
. Lymphoma is a systemic disease and chemotherapy is the preferred treatment
modality. Surgical reduction of tumour mass and/or radiotherapy have been shown
to be effective in reducing a large, focal tumour burden, but systemic chemothera peu-
tic treatment is also usually required. The goal of treatment with chemotherapy is to
esta blish a good, normal quality of life, with minimal side-effects, for six months to
one year or more. Several different chemotherapy protocols have proven to be effec-
tive; these commonly include drugs such as prednisolone, vincristine, doxorubicin,
methotrexate and L-asparaginase. Lymphoma is not a curable disease; important
considerations for deciding upon an appropriate treatment regime include time and
financial constraints, and the disposition of the patient.
93 i. False. HAC is a chronic, slowly progressive disorder.
i. False. Urinary tract infections are commonly found in animals with HAC.
mi. False. Alopecia is recognized in most but not all cases of HAC.
iv.True.
v.True.
90
94 & 95: Questions
94b
94 A seven-year-old, male Dobermann has chronic diarrhoea with weight loss. He
vomits bile and/or fresh blood intermittently and there is evidence of melena on rectal
examination. An eosinophilia (5.4 x 109/l) is noted. Gastroscopy reveals numerous 
paint brush haemorrhages, seen here in the pyloric antrum (94a), and evidence that
ae pue renaai si esonu aui wuaonp aui ul 'sseia suea uaaq seq aop au
and haemorrhages easily (94b); a normal duodenal papilla is also visible in this pic-
ture. Histological examination of multiple pinch biopsies confirms a diagnosis of
eosinophilic ga stroenteritis.
i. Could this diagnosis have been reached without GI biopsies and, if not, why not?
i. How would you treat this animal?
95 Differentiating non-regenerative from regenerative anaemia is often of crucial
importance in the medical investigation of a case. The morphological features of
regeneration are macrocytosis (increased MCV), hypochromia, polychromasia and
the presence of nRBCs.
i. Which of these is the most relia ble indicator of regeneration?
i. Which of these is most susceptible to simple artefact?
mi. How can the adequacy of a regenerative response be established objectively?
91
94& 95:Answers
94 i. Chronic intermittent vomiting, diarrhoea and weight loss are suggestive of inflam-
matory bowel disease. GI haemorrhage is commonly seen with eosinophilic infiltrates,
and the peripheral eosinophilia is consistent with eosinophilic enteritis. However, eosino-
philia is not a consistent finding in eosinophilic gastroenteritis and is not diagnostic. Para-
sitism, especially in heartworm-endemic areas, is a more common cause of eosinophilia. A
definitive diagnosis of eosinophilic gastroenteritis must be made with a biopsy before
rational therapy can be prescribed. Luminal parasites, including Giardia, could be the
causative agent, and visceral larva migrans has also been suggested as a potential cause.
i. Treatment with fenbendazole (50 mg/kg p/o q24h for 3 days) to eliminate parasites
should be initiated prior to immunosuppressive therapy. The eosinophilic mucosal infil-
trate may represent a manifestation of a dietary sensitivity and an exclusion diet trial is
also indicated. A novel diet containing single protein and carbohydrate sources which the
patient is not currently eating are fed as the sole dietary intake. Chicken, catfish, venison,
mutton or fish, with rice or potato, are found in some of the available commercial prod-
ucts, although home-cooked diets may be preferred. The trial period is usually three
weeks, although if there is partial improvement the trial should be extended for up to ten
weeks. Failure to improve with an exclusion diet suggests idiopathic inflammatory bowel
disease, and treatment is with immunosuppressive drugs - prednisolone (1-2 mg/kg p/0
q12h for 24 weeks then tapered off over several months assuming an initial positive
response). Failure to respond or development of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism indicate
a need for more potent immunosuppressive drugs, e.g azathioprine.
95 i. Polychromasia nearly always indicates regeneration. Subjectively, the amount of
polychromasia reflects the adequacy of regeneration. Nucleated RBCs can be present in
non-regenerative anaemias involving bone marrow damage. Hypochromia is a feature of
iron deficiency anaemias as well as regenerative anaemia. Macrocytes observed in a blood
flm are quite reliable indicators of regeneration, but the index of cell size, the MCV, is an
inaccurate reflection of the degree of macrocytosis.
fi. The MCV cannot be relied upon as an indicator of regeneration. Erythrocyte swelling
occurs rapidly in blood samples that are not refrigerated and will occur to an unpre-
dictable degree in samples sent for analysis. The MCV is a calculated parameter which is
affected by the calibration of automated analysers. Most analysers are produced for
human use but they measure the MCV of canine RBCs reliably. However, due to the
small size of feline RBCs, they must be recalibrated. If laboratories analyse a variety of
samples, recalibration may not be a practical consideration and consequently feline
MCVs may be erroneous.
i. A reticulocyte count should be performed on blood samples stained with the vital stain
methylene blue. Reticulocyte numbers may be interpreted as the actual value, or a reticu-
locyte production index ( RPI) may be calculated.
RPI = (% reticulocytes x patient PCV/normal PCV)/correction factor
Normal PCV values: dog 0.45 l/; cat 0.35 l/l.
Correction factors: PCV 0.2S-0.3S = 1; PCV 0.20-25 = 1.5; PCV 0.15-20 = 2;
PCV <0.15 = 2.5.
RPI values >2 suggest adequate regeneration.
92
96 & 97: Questions
96a
96b
96 A seven-year-old, neutered male Dachshund
is presented for evaluation of back pain of less
than one day's duration. The previous night he
jumped off a chair and has appeared to be in
pain since then. Physical examination reveals a
tense abdomen and you are able to elicit pain
upon palpation of the thoracolumbar region.
However, there are no conscious proprioceptive deficits and myotactic reflexes are
normal. Thoracolumbar spinal radiography (96a) and excretory urography (96b) is
performed.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. What is your initial treatment?
97 An eight-year-old, male
9.7
West Highland White Ter-
rier has mild faecal tenesmus
and haemospermia. Rectal
examination shows that the
prostate gland is enlarged
but not painful. The dog is
required for breeding. An
ultrasound examination of
the caudal abdomen has
been performed from the
ventral midline (97).
i. What are the ultrasono-
 graphic findings, and what is the likely diagnosis?
ii. How can this condition be managed medically?
ii. What effect will medical management ha ve on subsequent fertility?
93
9%6&97:Answers
96 i. Right ureterolith with ureteral obstruction and mild hydronephrosis. The left kid
ney is structurally normal. Uroliths are present in the bladder. The irregular shape and
radiodense appearance is consistent with calcium oxalate. Struvite is also radiodense,
but ammonium urate and cystine are only marginally radiodense or are radiolucent.
i. Because there is ureteral obstruction but the right kidney is functional, the
weterolith should be removed and the right kidney saved if at all possible. The
ureterolith was retropulsed into the right renal pelvis and a pyelotomy performed.
The dog also had a urocystolith which was removed through a cystotomy.
97 i. The anechoic urinary bladder is present on the left of the ultrasound image.
The prostate gland is enlarged bilaterally and the linear anechoic urethra can be seen
between the two lobes. The prostatic parenchyma is fairly homogeneous in appear-
u e  i a  an i a n e si ae  
shape and has a smooth outline. A one centimetre diameter fluid-filled structure can
be identified within the lower lobe. Ultrasonographically the features are of
prostatomegaly with a small isolated intraprostatic cyst which are characteristic of
benign prostatic hyperplasia. Prostatitis and neoplasia generally produce marked
changes in the parenchymal echotexture and the outline of the gland.
ii. Benign prostatic hyperplasia is stimulated by dihydrotestosterone which is irre-
Castration is a relatively simple procedure that removes the source of testosterone
and is therefore a suitable treatment. However, in animals that are required for
breeding the suppression of testosterone secretion using exogenous progestogens or
oestrogens may be temporarily efficacious. These agents should be used with care
since both will have a negative feedback effect upon the hypothalamic-pituitary axis,
resulting in suppression of spermatogenesis. Additionally, oestrogens may cause pro-
static metaplasia. Finasteride is a specific S-alpha-reductase inhibitor which prevents
the conversion of testosterone into dihydrotestosterone. Use of this agent produces a
dramatic reduction in the size of the prostate gland and resolution of the clinical
signs. It reduces the ejaculate volume, although total sperm output and spermatozoal
morphology are unaffected.
ii. Low doses of progestogens may be used infrequently without producing a reduc-
tion in fertility. However, repeated administration of high doses causes a reduction in
spermatozoal morphology, motility and spermatozoal output, and a subsequent
decline in fertility. Despite the marked changes in semen volume produced by finas-
teride, fertility is maintained for treatments of up to three months duration.
94
98 & 99: Questions
98 A five-year-old Retriever presented
98
with acute onset right hindlimb lameness
(7/10 lame). A warm and painful soft tis-
sue swelling was present over the dorsal
aspect of the pelvis, extending down the
thigh. The dog was pyrexic, depressed
and anorectic. Radiographs were taken
of the swollen area (98). Cytological
examination of a fine-needle aspirate
from the area showed numerous degener-
ate and non-degenerate neutrophils, and
necrotic cells of unidentifiable morpholo-
gy. A Gram stain of the aspirate demon-
strated many short, fat gram-positive
rods with few oval subterminal spores.
Chains of bacteria were present.
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. How might you confirm your diagno-
sis?
ii. What treatment would you recom-
mend?
iv. What other disorders may other
species of this bacteria cause?
99 This is an endoscopic view
of the pyloric antrum of a
three-year-old Cocker Spaniel,
recently released from quaran-
tine, who has been violently
retching and vomiting three
times daily for three weeks (99).
i. Can you spot the cause of this
dog's problems?
ii. What is the therapy?
95
98&99:Answers
lateral to the pelvis. The cytology is consistent with inflammation and necrosis. The bac-
teria on the Gram stain were identified morphologically as a Clostridium spp., possibly
f. Histopathology may be helpful. Bacteriology is essential. C. perfringens is an anaero-
bic organism and precautions must be taken to ensure that the bacteria does not die
before plating out, i.e. samples should be exposed to air for the minimum time possible.
ii. Clostridial organisms are very sensitive to penicillins and to metronidazole.
Treatment with intravenous antibiotics is indicated. The abscessated area should be sur-
gically explored and necrotic tissue removed. The area may be cleansed with dilute
hydrogen peroxide which, as it degrades, releases oxygen, thereby killing the bacterium.
iv. Clostridial organisms may be associated with a variety of diseases:
● C. perfringens is often isolated from faecal samples and is considered a normal enteric
commensal. On occasions it is thought that C. difficile and C. perfringens may be
responsible for severe haemorrhagic diarrhoea, or colitis.
●Enterotoxaemia due to clostridia is rare in dogs and cats, but may occur as an exten-
sion of a C. perfringens enteric infection.
● Infection with neurotropic clostridia, e.g. C. tetani and C. botulimum, do occur, with
tetanus being more common. These organisms are non-invasive and cause disease
through their production of neurotoxins.
● Histotoxic clostridial infections are very rare but should be considered in any case
where there is extensive soft tissue necrosis/damage. They most often develop following
trauma where bruising and soft tissue damage has resulted in tissues becoming hypoxic,
thereby allowing dormant spores to grow.
99 i. A single, white gastric nematode is visible to the lower right of the pyloric sphincter.
The remaining gastric mucosa in this area appears grossly normal. This worm was identi-
fied as belonging to the genus Physaloptera. Although infrequent, dogs and cats may
serve as natural hosts for Physaloptera and acquire infection via ingesting cockroaches,
crickets or beetles which serve as intermediate hosts. Once mature, the parasites reside in
the mucosa of the proximal GI tract, creating inflammatory lesions and vomiting.
i. Routine deworming is important in any pet, and the findings in this dog underscore
the need for ruling out the simple options prior to embarking on expensive diagnostics.
Pyrantel (5 mg/kg p/o repeated in 7 days) or fenbendazole (50 mg/kg p/o q24h for 3 con-
secutive days repeated in 3 weeks) should rid the dog of this parasite.
96
1o0 & I0l: Questions
100
100 This radiograph (100) was taken from a 12-month-old dog of small stature.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. What hormonal abnormality is associated with this condition?
I0la
Iolb
101 An eight-year-old, female Golden Retriever is presented for repeated episodes of
vomiting bile, and watery diarrhoea. Episodes have been occurring for over a year,
initially only every three to four weeks, but recently they have become more frequent
and more severe. In addition, the appetite has decreased, weight loss has occurred
 ro a     s o a soia uma 
tology, serum biochemistry, urinalysis, faecal parasitology and bacteriology and
abdominal radiography is unhelpful. Serum folate is normal but cobalamin (24 ng/l)
is markedly decreased. Endoscopy is performed and the intestinal mucosa is very
irregular and friable (10la). Duodenal juice culture is normal (<10^ cfu/ml). Histo-
villi and infiltration of the lamina propria with lymphocytes and plasma cells ( 101b).
i. What is the diagnosis in this case?
i. What is the treatment?
97
1o0&1ol:Answers
100 i. Epiphyseal dysgenesis. There is delayed closure of the physes which have an
irregular moth-eaten appearance classical of epiphyseal dysgenesis.
ii. Congenital hypothyroidism. Delayed or stunted growth with epiphyseal dysgenesis
are the hallmarks of congenital hypothyroidism. Other clinical signs which may be
seen are similar to those exhibited in adult-onset hypothyroidism. Goitre may also be
a feature depending on the underlying ca use of the hypothyroidism.
101 i. The history is typical of IBD, a collective term for various histological descrip-
tions of intestinal mucosal inflammation. In this case the condition would be lympho-
cytic-plasmacytic enteritis (LPE) because of the predominant cell type present. This is 
the commonest form of IBD in dogs and is usually idiopathic, although it may develop
in response to luminal antigens (bacteria or food). Despite the reduction in serum
cobalamin, which might indicate SIBO, quantitative duodenal juice culture did not
confirm the diagnosis; the reduction in cobalamin is most likely the result of inflam-
matory infiltration of the ileum where cobalamin is absorbed.
i. Antibiotics are not usually indicated in LPE, although they are frequently given as
idiopathic LPE is routinely treated with immunosuppressive drugs, and secondary
SIBO may exist. Metronidazole {10-20 mg/kg p/o q8-12h) is sometimes used not only
for its antibacterial action but because it also modulates cell-mediated immune
responses. The immunosuppressive drug of first choice is prednisolone (1-2 mg/kg p/0
q12h for up to 4 weeks) until signs are controlled. The dosage is reduced over several
months until all medication is stopped or the minimum controlling dose is identified:
 5-10 mg q48h would be acceptable. If prednisolone alone does not provide control or
if severe iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism develops, immunosuppression can be
enhanced with azathioprine {2 mg/kg p/o q24h for 1-2 weeks, reducing to alternate
day therapy with the prednisolone). Azathioprine has potentially disastrous side-
effects (e.g. bone marrow suppression) and is not safe without histological evidence of
LPE. A positive response to an exclusion diet would suggest a dietary sensitivity. A
novel diet containing single protein and carbohydrate sources is fed as the sole dietary
intake for three weeks. Chicken, catfish, venison, mutton or fish, with rice or potato,
are preferred. If there is improvement, the trial should be extended for up to ten
weeks. A strict exclusion diet will only be beneficial if the changes are a manifestation
of a dietary sensitivity, but feeding any hypoallergenic diet (i.e. easily digested and low
antigenic diversity) may be helpful whenever digestive capacity is impaired. As cobal
amin malabsorption is present, parenteral administration (250-500 μg/dog monthly)
is indicated. General vitamin-mineral supplementation may be worthwhile.
98
102 & I03: Questions
102 A young farm dog presents with
pallor and tachypnoea. The farmer
WBCs (x 10/l)
23.2
reports having put down some rat baits
PCV (I/)
0.21
three days earlier. He thinks it is unlikely
Granulocytes (x 10°/)
17.4 (75%)
that the dog had access to them. The in-
Lymphocytes/
house haematological profile and a pho-
monocytes (x 10/l)
5.8 (25%)
tomicrograph of the blood smear (102)
are shown.
i. Is the anaemia regenerative
102
or non-regenerative?
The dog urinates grossly
blood-stained urine in the
surgery and you send off a
sodium citrate sample for
urgent measurement of the
coagulation times. You treat
the dog with vitamin K1. The
prothrombin time (PT)is 30
seconds and the activated par-
tial thromboplastin time
(APTT) is 2S seconds.
O
ii.Is vitamin K1 likely to be
the correct therapeutic agent in this case? If the answer is yes, why?
ii. What other critical information should be obtained from the farmer?
103 This squash preparation
03
was made from a gastric mucos-
 al biopsy taken from a chroni-
cally vomiting dog (103).
i. What is the white arrow indi-
cating?
ii. What significance might this
have in this dog?
iii. Assuming no other signifi-
cant lesions or causes of the
vomiting are found, how should
this dog be treated?
99
102&103:Answers
102 i. This is a regenerative anaemia showing polychromasia, anisocytosis, nRBCs
and a mildly low platelet count.
il. Most cases of anticoagulant toxicosis begin to show intensified bleeding symptoms
three days after ingestion. At this time the PT will be markedly prolonged due to the
short half-life of factor VII and the APTT will be mildly to moderately prolonged due
to the longer half-lives of factors IX and X. This profile would therefore be typical of
anticoagulant toxicosis of three days' duration, and vitamin K1 would be the thera-
peutic agent of choice.
ii. It is very important to establish which anticoagulant rodenticide was present in
the bait. In this case the farmer reported that it was difacinone. This is a second gen-
eration rodenticide with a long half-life and will require vitamin K1 therapy for a
period of at least one month. Had the anticoagulant been warfarin, the anticipated
duration of therapy would be one week.
103 i. Two parallel, long, thin spiral organisms within the background matrix of cellu
lar debris. These spirochaetes within the stomach are most commonly Helicobacter
enzyme urease and surrounding themselves with a protective alkaline layer.
i. In humans the presence of Helicobacter infections is strongly correlated with chronic
gastritis, gastric and duodenal ulcers, and gastric neoplasia such as carcinoma and lym-
phoma. In veterinary medicine, Helicobacter spp. have been isolated from both normal
dogs and cats and in diseased animals; however, there is no increased prevalence in
either population. At this time, many studies are in progress to investigate the role of
these organisms in canine and feline gastric disease, but there is no evidence to suggest
that Helicobacter infection is an important factor in the development of gastritis or gas-
tric ulcers in dogs and cats.
. If no underlying organic disease is found on investigation, dietary management
should perhaps be attempted initially to rule out dietary intolerances or food hypersen-
sitivities. The decision to treat for Helicobacter infection should reflect the degree of
inflammation seen on mucosal histopathology in response to the presence of the organ-
isms; the success of this therapy should be determined by the improvement in histologi-
cal lesions and eradication of the organism. Triple therapy with amoxycillin (10 mg/kg
p/o q8h), metronidazole (4 mg/kg p/o q8h) and bismuth subcitrate (1-2 mg/kg p/o q8h)
  o  oi a   s s th   aq 
omeprazole (2 mg/kg q24h) has been thought to be effective as well.
100
104 & I05: Questions
104a
104 A kidney from a three-year-old, male Labrador that died of acute renal failure is
shown (104a ).
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. What test(s) can be used to confirm this diagnosis?
ii. If the dog had been examined within eight hours of ingestion of the toxin, what
drugs may have been used as treatment?
105 A five-year-old, male Labrador is present-
105
ed with sudden onset pain and swelling of the
left scrotum of 12 hours" duration. The swelling
extends from the external inguinal ring to the
ventral scrotum, and the scrotal skin has been
severely self-traumatized.A unilateral castration
was performed (105).
i. What are the features of the removed tissue,
and what is the likely diagnosis?
ii. What differential diagnoses are there for this
condition?
ii. How may the condition be accurately diag-
nosed?
iv. What treatment options are available?
101
104&105:Answers
104 i. Ethylene glycol toxicity
04b
resulting in acute renal failure.
The grit is calcium oxalate
crystals that are obstructing
the renal tubules. The crystals
are shown in 104b.
ii. The diagnosis can be sup-
 ported by finding a high anion
 gap metabolic acidosis, pres-
ence of calcium oxalate crys-
tals in urine sediment, azo-
taemia with inappropriately
low urine SG (renal failure),
hypocalcaemia and hypoglycaemia. The definitive diagnosis may be made by measuring
ethylene glycol concentrations in blood.
m. In addition to supportive care and gastric lavage with activated charcoal, preventing
metabolism of ethylene glycol by hepatic alcohol dehydrogenase should be attempted.
The most effective inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase activity is 4-methylpyrazole {4-
MP) which does not cause CNS depression. The recommended dose is 20 mg/kg i/v of a
5% solution initially followed by 15 mg/kg i/v at 12 and 24 hours and 5 mg/kg i/v at 36
hours. Ethanol has a higher affinity for alcohol dehydrogenase than does ethylene glycol
and this may be used to compete for the enzyme; CNS depression is common with
ethanol (5.5 ml/kg i/v of 20% ethanol q4h for 5 treatments, and then q6h on 4 more
occasions).
105 i. There is marked swelling and haemorrhage of the spermatic cord, ductus defer-
ens and epididymis. There has been rotation of the spermatic cord and testis around
torsion of the spermatic cord, although it is sometimes referred to as testicular torsion.
i. The aetiology of torsion of the spermatic cord is unknown, although it may be
related to rupture of the scrotal ligament. Conditions that produce similar clinical
findings are severe bacterial epididymitis and orchitis (rare in countries in which
Brucella canis is absent), testicular and scrotal trauma, strangulation of an inguinal
hernia and possibly infected or necrotic testicular tumours falthough these do not
present with sudden onset pain and swelling).
mi. Torsion can be diagnosed most easily on the basis of the clinical signs. Palpation
demonstrates the focus of the pain and that the swelling is within the spermatic cord.
The lesion is usually unilateral. Scrotal ultrasonography may be useful when there is
severe scrotal swelling and may allow the differentiation of torsion from a strangulat-
ed hernia.
iv. Prompt surgical removal of the affected testis is essential. Delay in treatment may
cause irreversible changes within the adjacent testis due to a rise in temperature.
Untreated animals rapidly become systemica lly unwell.
102
106--108: Questions
106a
106b
106 A four-year-old Dobermann presented with
Albumin (g/l)
31
gross haematuria and difficulty in urinating of
Globulin (g/l)
59
four days’ duration. The dog was depressed and
Urea (mmol/l)
23.3
inappetent. Rectal examination was unremark-
Creatinine (μmol/l)
250
able; the prostate was not palpable. Radiography
ALP (u/l)
950
of the lower urinary tract was performed (106a,
RBCs (× 10/2/1)
106b). Clinical biochemistry and haematology
4.7
Hb (g/)
12.6
values are shown.
PCV (I/I)
0.34
i. How would you interpret the radiographs?
MCV (f)
ii. What is your interpretation of the blood
82
WBCs (x 10"/)
33.2
results?
i. What is your diagnosis?
Neut (seg) (x 10"/)
22.2
Neut (bands) (x 10"/)
7.3
Lymphocytes (x 10°/)
3.0
Monocytes (x 10"/)
0.7
107 Which of these statements about hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) are true and
which are false?
i. The low urine SG seen in animals with HAC develops because cortisol antagonizes
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) action and blocks ADH release.
mi. Struvite urolithiasis is common in animals with HAC.
iv. Ketoconazole can be used medically to manage dogs with HAC.
v. Cortisol levels in animals with a pituitary-dependent HAC do not change following
administration of ACTH.
108 List the congenital or familial renal diseases associated with the following
breeds:
Abyssinian cat; Basenji; Beagle; Bulldog; Cairn Terrier; German Shepherd Dog;
Himalayan cat; Irish Wolfhound; Lhasa Apso and Shih Tzu; Norwegian Elkhound;
Soft-coated Wheaten Terrier.
103
106-I08: Answers
106 i. The plain radiograph shows an enlarged prostate and a small bladder. There
is no indication of any bony reaction on the vertebrae or pelvis. No sublumbar lym-
phadenopathy is present and the abdominal organs are normally placed. The lower
urinary tract contrast study shows smooth curvilinear filling defects within the blad-
der. The normal ureters are outlined as a consequence of the earlier administration of
intravenous contrast material. A urethral catheter is seen. The filling defects are con-
sistent with blood clots.
i. There is a marked neutrophilia with a left shift consistent with an inflammatory
response, and a mild anaemia which may be due to blood loss. There is a moderate
elevation in urea and creatinine consistent with pre-renal azotaemia, primary renal
failure or postrenal renal failure. The elevated ALP is consistent with cholestasis,
which may reflect the presence of an intrahepatic lesion or extrahepatic inflamma-
tion. The elevated globulin reflects the inflammatory process.
mi. Given the prostatomegaly and the degree of dysuria, a prostatic disorder was con-
sidered, probably prostatitis or prostatic abscessation.
107 i. True.
i. True.
ii. False. Calcium oxalate uroliths are more likely to develop because cortisol pro-
motes calcium excretion.
iv. True.
v. False. Cortisol levels should rise dramatically following ACTH administration in
animals with pituitary-dependent HAC because adrenal hyperplasia is present. Dogs
with adrenal tumours may not show a dramatic rise in cortisol.
108
Breed
Diseases
Abyssinian cat
Amyloidosis
Basenji
Fanconi-like syndrome
Beagle
Unilateral renal agenesis, renal dysplasia,
polycystic kidneys
Bulldog
Renal dysplasia
Cairn Terrier
Polycystic kidneys
German Shepherd Dog
Renal cystadenocarcinoma
Himalayan cat
Unilateral renal agenesis, polycystic kidney disease
Irish Wolfhound
Renal dysplasia
Lhasa Apso and Shih Tzu
Renal dysplasia
Norwegian Elkhound
Tubulo-interstitial nephropathy, Fanconi-like syndrome,
renal glycosuria
Soft-coated Wheaten Terrier
 Renal dysplasia
104
109 & 110: Questions
109 A five-year-old Labrador was
601
mated five weeks previously. One
week ago an ultrasound examination
demonstrated eight conceptuses; this
week seven conceptuses were present.
At laparotomy a small conceptus was
present between two normal sized
swellings (109).
i. What condition is this bitch suffer-
ing from, and what is the aetiology of
the condition?
i. What medication might be useful
in this case?
. Which infective agents can cause resorption and abortion in bitches?
110 A middle-aged German Shep-
herd Dog presents with a two-week
history of progressive lethargy, inap-
petence and depression. Physical
examination is unremarkable except
for palpa ble hepatosplenomegaly and
a mild pyrexia. Haematology, serum
biochemistry and urinalysis are per-
formed. While examining the tail of
the blood film you come across the
nucleated cell in the centre of this
illustration (110).
i. Identify the cell.
RBCs (x 10/2/)
3.09
il. What is its significance?
Hb (g/l)
78
The full haematological profile is
PCV (/)
0.26
shown.
MCV (fl)
85
ii. How would you interpret these
MCHC (g/l)
300
nRBCs
0
findings?
WBCs (x 10"/)
11.1
iv. What is the diagnosis?
Neutrophils (x 10"/l)
0.56
Lymphocytes (x 10"/)
5.33
Monocytes (x 10"/)
4.11
Eosinophils (x 10/)
0
Basophils (x 10°/)
0
Others (x 10"/)
1.11
Comment: lymphoblasts I0%; atypical mono-
cytes +++; platelets appear low in the film.
105
109&1l0:Answers
109 i. The bitch has a single isolated resorption. This condition is common in bitches
and between five and ten percent of pregnancies suffer isolated resorption without
interference with the remaining conceptuses. Bitches are not normally ill and show no
clinical signs during the resorption. The condition is not associated with infectious
agents and is probably due to competition for uterine space or the failure of an abnor-
mal conceptus. Isolated embryonic resorption can be most reliably diagnosed using
real-time B-mode ultrasound where the common features are reduced volume and
changes in echogenicity of the embryonic fluid, loss of the heart beat and subsequently
the embryonic mass, collapse of the conceptual sac with thickening and inward
bulging of the uterine wall, and reduced size in comparison with adjacent conceptuses.
ii. The condition does not require treatment. Many clinicians wrongly attribute embry-
progesterone concentrations in these bitches demonstrates that values are within the
normal range. Progesterone or progestagen supplementation is not warranted and may
prevent or delay parturition {resulting in oversized or dead fetuses respectively) and
cause masculinization of female pups and cryptorchidism in male pups.
m. Embryonic resorption and fetal abortion may have many causes including fetal
defects, abnormal maternal environment, infectious agents and trauma. Infectious
agents are a relatively rare cause of resorption in the bitch. Brucella canis can cause
early embryonic death or abortion late in pregnancy followed by a vaginal discharge
(this agent is not present in the UK). Other specific infectious causes of abortion
include canine distemper virus, canine herpesvirus and Toxoplasma gondi infection.
In each case the bitch is usually systemically ill and has a vaginal discharge. Fetal
death can be confirmed using real-time ultrasonography; loss of fetal fluid and
absence of heart beats are noted.
110 i. A lymphoblast. Note the four prominent variably sized nucleoli and the low
nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio.
i. The presence of this cell in the peripheral circulation is abnormal. It is highly sug-
gestive of a lymphoid malignancy.
m. This is pancytopenia. Normal cell lines are all suppressed with a particularly low
neutrophil count. This implies bone marrow disease. The presence of greater than 2%
iv. Stage V malignant lymphoma.
106
I11 & Il2: Questions
111 This cat presented be-
cause of extreme muscle weak-
ness, forelimb hypermetria,
broad-based hindlimb stance,
apparent muscle pain on pal-
pation and ventroflexion of
the neck (111).
i. Which electrolyte abnormal-
ity is most likely to be respon-
sible?
i. What underlying disease is
most likely to result in the above?
ii. In which breed does this disturbance have an inherited predisposition?
112 A poorly grown, five-year-old Golden
RBCs (× 10/2/)
4.42
Retriever presents with ascites and severe
Hb (g/l)
40
depression. There is a marked elevation of
PCV (I/I)
ALT and fasting bile acids, a moderate ele-
0.17
MCV (fl)
vation of SAP and low urea and albumin.
38
MCHC (g/)
The ascitic fluid is a transudate. The haema-
240
nRBCs
tological profile is shown. A photomicro-
0%
WBCs (x 10%/l)
17.9
graph taken from the blood smear is shown
(112).
Neutrophils (seg) (x I0°/)
14.3
i. Comment on the RBC morphology.
Neutrophils (bands) (x 10"/1)
2.33
ii. How would you interpret this haematol-
Lymphocytes (x 10°/1)
0.36
ogy profile?
Monocytes (x I0°/)
0.54
m. What diagnosis can be strongly suspected
Eosinophils (x I0/1)
0.36
based on the combination of haematology
and biochemistry results?
107
1l1&Il2:Answers
111 i. Hypokalaemia. Clinical signs of hypokalaemia usually become apparent once
serum potassium concentrations fall below 3 mmol/. The most characteristic feature in
this cat is ventroflexion of the neck. This clinical picture has often been confused with thi-
amine deficiency. Elevations in serum creatine kinase concentrations are common.
f. Chronic renal failure. Potassium concentrations are closely regulated and depend on
dietary intake and renal excretion. Disturbances in either can result in hypokalaemia, with
chronic renal failure being the most common cause. Potassium loss in the face of renal
disease appears to be a peculiar phenomenon of cats. Hypokalaemia can also result from
a disturbance in the transcellular shift of potassium, such that total body stores are
umchanged; it occurs in metabolic acidosis and following insulin administration.
. Burmese. Episodic hypokalaemia has been recognized in related Burmese kittens.
Clinical signs appear around 3-4 months of age, are of variable severity and are transient
but recurrent in nature. Several weeks may elapse between episodes. The signs are pre-
cipitated by stress or exercise and are thought to be due to a sudden shift of potassium
from the extracellular to the intracellular compartment.
112 i. The RBCs are markedly microcytic and hypochromic.
ii. This is a severe anaemia which is highly microcytic and hypochromic. There is also
a neutrophilia with a left shift suggesting an infectious or inflammatory process.
There is a lymphopenia.
m. The combination of severe hypoalbuminaemia, low urea, markedly elevated fast-
ing bile acids and liver enzyme elevations, with a microcytic, hypochromic anaemia,
defect causing the anaemia is a poorly understood abnormality of iron metabolism
associated with severe hepatic insufficiency. Portosystemic shunts do not often pre-
sent with ascites because portal pressure is not usually elevated. This case was a long-
standing shunt and the abdominal transudate was probably due to the hypoalbu-
minaemia (11 g/l) and perhaps a mild elevation in portal pressure.
108
113&1l4:Answers
113 i. Plain radiography alone is often not helpful. Large radiopaque calculi may be
seen; smaller calculi and radiolucent ones will be missed. Soft tissue causes of haema-
turia, e.g. polyps and neoplasia, will not be recognized in this radiogra ph.
f. The cytology supports the diagnosis of an inflammatory disorder. Calcium oxalate
crystals are commonly seen in urine samples. Their presence should alert you to the pos-
sibility of urolithiasis. Significantly, the bacteria isolated was Escherichia coli.
mi. Calcium oxalate uroliths comprise 27% of all feline uroliths.
iv. Antibiotic therapy is required to manage E. coli infection. Existing uroliths should be
removed surgically; dietary dissolution is not possible. To prevent recurrence a diet con-
taining reduced concentrations of protein, calcium and sodium that does not promote an
acid urine is required. Avoid increased intakes of vitamins C and D. If there is a hyper-
calcaemia, this should addressed. Potassium citrate may be used to alkalinize urine, thus
retarding crystallization of calcium salts, although it predisposes to struvite urolithiasis.
114 i. After oestrus, plasma progesterone concentrations rise and as a consequence,
mammary size increases in pregnant and non-pregnant bitches. Corpora lutea produce
au semi uud-uou ue Aud ui a jo spouad ruis ioy auoso
end of the luteal phase progesterone concentrations fall. At this time prolactin is released
from the pituitary gland. This is a luteotropic agent secreted by all bitches that stimulates
milk production and some behavioural changes. Mammary development and the secre-
tion of milk should be expected in pregnant and non-pregnant bitches.
ii. Non-pregnant bitches that have mammary swelling and lactation may also have
behavioural changes including anorexia, nest making, nursing of inanimate objects and
aggression. The hormonal changes that produce these signs occur in all non-pregnant
bitches, therefore all non-pregnant bitches can be considered to be pseudopregnant
(although the extent to which they demonstrate behavioural changes varies from one
individual to the next). In most cases the clinical signs and behavioural changes do not
warrant treatment; in some cases the signs may be excessive or may not be tolerated by
the owner. In mild cases the administration of diuretic and sedative agents may be use-
ful. If further treatment is necessary, pregnancy and pyometra must be eliminated as dif-
Progestogens, androgens, oestrogens and combinations of these may be used for treat-
ment. Long treatment periods may be required for complete remission, and it is fre-
quently necessary to use reducing dose regimes to prevent recurrence. The use of
dopamine agonists (bromocriptine, cabergoline), which produce a rapid and prolonged
inhibition of prolactin secretion, may be used in persistent cases.
mi. There is no relationship between the occurrence of pseudopregnancy and infertility or
the subsequent development of cystic endometrial hyperplasia and pyometra.
110
115 & 1l6: Questions
15b
L15c
115d
5@
115 Match the letter
Region
Endoscopic views
in the diagram with
the appropriate region
Duodenum
Lesser curvature; angularis (l15a)
and endoscopic view
Lesser curvature
Fundus with rugal folds (ll5b)
that it represents {a
Cardia
Pyloric antrum (115c)
Pyloric antrum 
view is not included
Cardia; scope is retroflexed (115d)
for the greater curva-
Greater curvature
ture of the stomach or
Fundus
duodenum).
116 A nine-month-old, female German
116
Shepherd Dog has suffered intermittent
diarrhoea since weaning and has become
 stunted (116). She has a ravenous appe-
tite and is coprophagic. The most likely
diagnosis is idiopathic small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth (SIBO).
What tests are available for making a
diagnosis of SIBO, and what problems
are associated with them?
111
115&1l6:Answers
115 A -Cardia (115d)
B - Pyloric antrum (115c).
C - Duodenum; no matching picture.
D - Lesser curvature (115a).
E- Fundus ( 11sb).
F - Greater curvature; no matching picture.
116  A diagnosis of idiopathic SIBO is made after ruling out underlying disease.
Haematology, biochemistry and urinalysis are used to rule out systemic disease. A
faecal examination for parasites such as Giardia and a serum TLI for exocrine pan-
creatic insufficiency should also be performed. Faecal culture does NOT reflect bacte-
rial numbers in the small intestine but is used to rule out Campylobacter or chronic
salmonellosis. Imaging for an anatomical defect (mass, obstruction, etc.) is indicated.
Specific tests include:
● Culture of duodenal juice. The gold standard for the diagnosis of SIBO is quantita-
tive aerobic and anaerobic culture of duodenal juice. Collection by endoscopy
requires specialized equipment and it is not always easy to get liquid for culture; inac-
curate results will be caused by dilution with gastric, biliary and pancreatic secre-
tions, and accurate quantitative culture requires immediate access to an anaerobic
chamber. This test is limited to academic institutions. The cut-offs for normal values
are controversial. Total numbers of bacteria >10′/ml, or >10"/ml anaerobes, are con-
sidered diagnostic, but similar numbers may be found in asymptomatic dogs.
● Breath hydrogen. Measurement of breath hydrogen excretion is used as an indica-
tor of SIBO, as hydrogen exhaled in the breath comes from intestinal bacterial fer-
mentation. SIBO may be indicated by a raised resting breath hydrogen or by an early
peak following oral administration of carbohydrate {e.g. xylose, lactulose). Similar
intestinal transit with increased colonic fermentation. The interpretation of results
remains controversial
● Folate and cobalamin. Small intestinal bacteria synthesize folate which is absorbed
but bind cobalamin making it unavailable for absorption. Finding a raised serum
folate and decreased cobalamin is suggestive of SIBO. Although quite specific, this
result has a sensitivity of only 5%. The sensitivity of either just a raised folate Or
decreased cobalamin {S1% and 24% respectively) is better but their specificities
(79% and 87%) are much poorer. Thus SIBO cannot be diagnosed or ruled out
based on folate and cobalamin alone.
● Antibiotic responsiveness. A consistent, positive response to antibiotics is sugges-
tive but not diagnostic of SIBO; neither can it differentiate between idiopathic and
secondary SIBO. In addition, a response to metronidazole may reflect its effect on
Giardia or cell-mediated immunity rather than its antibacterial action.
112
117 & 118: Questions
117 A six-year-old,
17a
neutered male cat pre-
sented with an enlarged
abdomen. On physical
examination the ab-
domen could be ballot-
ted. There was the sug-
gestion that the fluid
was contained within
defined areas; however,
individual fluid-filled
structures could not be
palpated. The cat was
depressed but otherwise
unremarkable. Plain
C
abdominal radiography
(117a) and intravenous urography (117b) were performed. Serum biochemical values
were: urea 16 mmol/l, creatinine 200 mmol/l. Urine SG was 1.014. All other routine
parameters were normal. Paracentesis of the mass on the right was performed and a
clear fluid was obtained. The fluid had the appearance of a modified transudate (few
mononuclear and polymorphonuclear cells, low in protein).
i. Describe the radiographs.
i. What is your interpretation of the clinical pathology results?
i. What is your diagnosis?
118 A ten-year-old, entire male Lhasa
118a
Apso was reported by the owner to be
dribbling urine from the penis for one
week. The owner was unsure if the dog
had been urinating normally. A urethral
catheter could not be passed when trying
to obtain a urine sample. A plain radio-
graph was taken of the abdomen (118a).
i. What can you see on the film?
ii. How would you manage this dog?
113
117&1l8:Answers
117 i. The plain radiograph shows two large, discrete, oval homogeneous soft tissue
masses overlying the renal areas. These masses have well-defined smooth borders.
Following intravenous administration of a contrast agent, small kidneys are visible
within the soft tissue masses.
i. The clinical pathology is consistent with mild primary renal failure. Although the
urea and creatinine values are consistent with both primary renal failure and pre-
renal azotaemia, the inappropriately dilute urine is indicative of a primary renal
problem. Transudates result from increased capillary pressure, increased interstitial
fluid pressure, a decrease in plasma oncotic pressure and an increase in interstitial
oncotic pressure. In this case the fluid-filled structures are in a perirenal position and
would therefore be consistent with a localized fluid production/resorption disorder.
The fluid is not consistent with an infectious/inflammatory problem.
l. An exploratory laparotomy revealed two fluid-filled sacs enclosing both kidneys.
The diagnosis was perinephric pseudocysts. These are rare abnormalities. The fluid,
which may be urine, blood, lymph or transudate, collects in the space between the
renal capsule and the renal reflection of the peritoneum. Potential causes include
trauma, surgery, neoplasia, venous congestion and hypertension. Affected cats are
usually old and have concomitant renal disease. In this case no cause was determined.
Renal function returned to normal once the fluid was removed.
118 i. The film shows multiple small
118b
radiodensities occluding the distal ure-
thra caudal to the os penis, but the
bladder is not particularly distended.
This is compatible with partial urethral
obstruction with calculi. Their radi-
ographic density suggests the calculi are
most likely to be struvite or oxalate.
The stomach contains a large amount
of ingesta.
ii. The dog should be starved. The size
of the bladder should be reassessed
from a radiograph or by careful palpa-
tion and, if necessary, emptied by cystocentesis. Urine samples for bacteriology and
urinalysis should be obtained, preferably by cystocentesis. As the dog is partially
obstructed it is unlikely to be azotaemic and hyperkalaemic but routine haematology
and biochemistry should be performed. With minimal delay, attempts should be
made under general anaesthesia to return the calculi to the bladder by retrograde
hydropropulsion (118b). Positive contrast urethrography and double contrast cystog-
raphy should be considered to check for other lesions within the bladder and urethra
which might have predisposed to calculi formation and obstruction. Once all the cal-
culi are within the bladder a cystotomy should be performed, care being taken to
remove all the calculi. The calculi should be submitted for qualitative analysis so that
constructive advice can be given for the dog's future management.
114
119-121: Questions
Column A
Column B
i. Cholecystokinin
 a. Hormone synthesized and secreted in the gastric
i. Motilin 
antrum to initiate release of gastric acid.
ii. Gastrin
b. Stimulates contraction of the gallbladder.
iv. Pepsin
c. Released in response to acidic chyme entering the
v. HCI
intestine and stimulates pancreatic secretion of
vi. Secretin
bicarbonate.
d. Released from parietal cells in response to gastrin.
e. The primary proteolytic enzyme in gastric juice.
f. Initiates interdigestive intestinal motility, the effect
of which is mimicked by low-dose erythromycin
therapy (0.5-1.0 mg/kg p/o q8h).
119 Match the GI substance in column A to its appropriate description in column B.
120 A 13-year-old, neutered male foreign short-
120
hair cat is presented for intermittent vomiting and
weight loss of five months' duration. The vomitus
usually contains malodorous food, and the timing
of the vomiting bears no relationship to feeding.
The owner also reports occasional bouts of diar-
rhoea, dullness and intermittent swelling of the
abdomen. An abdominal radiograph was taken
17 hours after the administration of ten large and
30 small barium impregnated polyspheres (BIPS)
(120).
i. What does the radiograph show?
ii. What are the possible causes/prognosis for this
cat's signs?
121 You obtain a blood sample from an eight-year-old, male crossbreed dog. The
serum obtained from the sample was white due to lipaemia.
i. What is hyperlipaemia?
i. Which two lipids are involved in normal body meta bolism?
m. Which lipid is responsible for lipaemia?
iv. What conditions might you associate with hyperlipaemia?
115
119-121:Answers
119 i. - b.
拉.-f.
逆.-a.
iv.-e.
v.-d.
vi. -c.
120 i. The BIPS are all collected in a grossly dilated loop of small intestine. This
demonstrates severe, partial small intestinal obstruction.
ii. The major causes for small intestinal obstruction would be a foreign body, intus-
susception, inflammatory polyp or neoplasia. In view of the cat's age and the dura-
tion of clinical signs, intestinal neoplasia would be the most likely cause. At
just distal to the dilated loop, which was accompanied by mesenteric lymphade-
nomegaly and multiple small white nodules throughout the mesentery over the pari-
etal peritoneal surface. These findings are typical of small intestinal adenocarcinoma,
which was confirmed by histological examination of the affected tissue.
Adenocarcinoma is the most common intestinal tumour in cats, and these tumours
often grow relatively slowly resulting in a chronic history. By the time the disease is
diagnosed, local and or distant metastases are common, as in this case, necessitating
euthanasia. If an early diagnosis is made, and a solitary tumour identified, radical
surgical resection may be curative. Chemotherapy or radiotherapy is considered to
have little or no benefit.
121 i. Hyperlipaemia represents a disturbance of lipid transport due to either
increased synthesis or decreased degradation of circulating lipoproteins.
ii. Triglycerides and cholesterol.
mi. Lipids are insoluble in plasma and thus they are transported in combination with
protein as lipoproteins. Chylomicron and very low density lipoproteins contain main-
ly triglycerides. They are large and refract light and are thus responsible for the
appearance of lipaemic plasma. Low density lipoproteins and high density lipopro-
teins transport predominantly cholesterol. They are small and do not refract light and
thus hypercholesterolaemia never causes pla sma to appear lipaemic.
iv. Idiopathic hyperlipidaemia; idiopathic hypercholesterolaemia; postprandial hyper-
lipidaemia; diabetes mellitus; hyperadrenocorticism; hypothyroidism; protein-losing
nephropathy.
116
122 & 123:Questions
122 These kidneys are from a three-
week-old Boxer puppy that died
了
(122). All four of its littermates died
as well. Prior to death they developed
diarrhoea, which was yellow-green,
showed distended abdomens and
were crying.
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. What spirochaete has been associ-
ated with renal failure in dogs?
iii. What is the treatment for this
infection?
iv. What viral organisms may be asso-
ciated with renal failure in cats?
123 This nine-year-old, entire female Cavalier
123
King Charles Spaniel (123) presented with a
history of snoring, exercise intolerance and col-
lapse. Collapsing episodes occurred at exercise
and were characterized by flaccid muscles. The
bitch recovered from the periods of collapse
over one minute. She had previously been diag-
nosed as suffering from epilepsy and had been
treated with phenobarbitone. This had resulted
in marked depression. On presentation the
bitch was overweight, tachycardic and had
widening of the interdental spaces. Under a
general anaesthetic an exuberance of oropha-
ryngeal tissues and an overlong soft palate were
present. Radiography demonstrated a mild car-
diomegaly, hepatomegaly and renomegaly.
Blood biochemistry is shown. Urine SG was
1.015 and urinalysis was otherwise unremark-
able.
i. What condition(s) might you suspect?
ALT (u/)
120
ii. How might you pursue the diagnosis?
ALP (u/l)
520
m. What are the causes of this condition, and
Bile acids (μmol/l)
4.9
how might you treat them?
Glucose (mmol/l)
10.2
Urea (mmol/l)
13
Creatinine (μmol/l)
200
117
122&I23:Answers
122 i. Canine herpesvirus infection.
i.Leptospira.
m. The treatment for leptospiraemia may include use of procaine penicillin {20,000
w/kg i/m or s/c q12h for 14 days or until no azotaemia), tetracycline (5-10 mg/kg i/v
q12h) or chloramphenicol (50 mg/kg i/v q8h). The treatment to eliminate the carrier
state may include use of dihydrostreptomycin (10-15 mg/kg i/m q12h for 14 days) or
doxycycline (5 mg/kg p/o as a loading dose, then 2.5 mg/kg q12h p/o for 2 weeks,
then 2.5 mg/kg p/o q24h for 2 weeks).
iv. Feline infectious peritonitis, feline immunodeficiency virus.
123 i. The physical findings of an increase in organ size, overgrowth of soft tissues
and increased bone growth (causing widening of the interdental spaces) is suggestive
of acromegaly {excess growth hormone production). Biochemically there is a mild
hyperglycaemia, mild renal failure (possibly pre-renal in origin) and evidence of a
mild hepatopathy (hepatocellular damage and cholestasis), results which are also
consistent with acromegaly.
i. The diagnosis may be confirmed by assessing growth hormone (GH) production
using a xylazine stimulation test. A ratio of GH post-stimulation:basal GH of >3.4 is
consistent with acromegaly. In this bitch the ratio was 45.2. Demonstration of elevated
plasma insulin growth factor may be used as an indicator of elevated plasma GH levels.
ii. Growth hormone overproduction has been associated with high progestagen con-
centrations, e.g. during dioestrus or as a result of treatment with progestagens such
as medroxyprogesterone acetate. In some cases this results in insulin-resistant dia-
betes mellitus, with or without signs of acromegaly. Removal of the source of the
progestagen, e.g. ovariohysterectomy, is indicated. Alternatively, it may develop as a
consequence of a GH-producing pituitary tumour. This bitch failed to improve after
Ovariohysterectomy and thus a pituitary lesion was suspected, for which no treatment
is currently available. CT/MRI scanning may be helpful in demonstrating a pituitary
ma ss.
118
124 & I25: Questions
242
124b
124 A three-year-old Siamese cat presents
RBCs (× 10°/)
3.05
with an unkempt appearance, weight loss,
Hb (g/l)
49
inappetence, depression and pyrexia. The
PCV (I/)
0.21
owner reports that the signs developed
MCV (fl)
67
over a 2-3 week period. The nucleated
MCHC (g/l)
240
cells in the centre of 124a are observed in
nRBCs
7%
the tail of the blood film. 124b is taken
WBCs (× 10"/)
from the body of the film.
12.8
i Identify the nucleated cells in 124a.
Neutrophils (seg) (x 10°/1)
8.3
i. What is their significance?
Neutrophils (bands) (x 10°/l)
0.24
i. Comment on the RBC morphology in
Lymphocytes (x I0°/1)
1.4
124b.
Monocytes (x I0°/1)
1.71
iv. What is the significance of this mor-
Eosinophils (× 10°/1)
0.13
phology?
Others (x 10°/l)
0.13
The haematological profile is shown.
v. What diagnostic test is indicated?
Comment: blasts I%; nRBCs at various
 stages; platelets appear low in the film.
125 A 16-week-old, male mixed breed
125a
terrier presented with a three-week his-
tory of vomiting and weight loss. He had
a ravenous appetite but was unable to
retain food and occasionally water with-
out vomiting immediately after feeding.
An abdominal radiograph is shown
(125a).
i. What is your diagnosis?
il. How will you approach this problem?
119
124&I25:Answers
124 i. The four cells at the centre of the figure are erythroid precursors; there are
three prorubricytes sandwiching a polychromatic rubricyte.
i. The presence of nRBCs in the circulation is always abnormal. The presence of ear-
lier erythroid precursors than metarubricytes {i.e. rubricytes, prorubricytes or rubri-
blasts) is usually due to bone marrow disease/damage, although these can sometimes
be seen when there is marked extramedullary haematopoiesis, splenic dysfunction or
splenectomy.
ii. Apart from the presence of nRBCs, the red cell morphology is normal, i.e. no
anisocytosis or polychromasia.
iv. The lack of polychromasia and the presence of nRBCs confirms that this is not a
regenerative response but is an abnormality of erythrocyte maturation and release
into the peripheral circulation.
v. This macrocytic non-regenerative anaemia and thrombocytopenia, with occasional
blast cells and large numbers of nRBCs at various stages of maturation in the circula-
tion, is typical of FeLV-associated bone marrow disease. Assessment for FeLV anti-
 gen is indicated. It was positive in this case.
125 i. A suction cup-shaped foreign body is
125b
seen in the pyloric region of the stomach. On
questioning, the owner stated that her son
had been missing an “arrow-head' from his
toy set for several weeks.
il. It is unlikely that a foreign body of this size
will pass through the pylorus and/or intestine
without causing further problems. Options
for removal include retrieval via endoscopy or
by surgical gastrostomy. The less invasive
method of endoscopy was chosen with a view
to pursuing surgery if the object proved to0
large or was not amenable to endoscopic
removal. The endoscopic appearance of the
object completely obstructing the pylorus is
shown (125b). The object was circled with
basket retrieval forceps and easily retracted through the oral cavity.
120
126 & 127: Questions
126 A six-month-old, male
126
Great Dane presented with a
history of recurrent urinary
tract infections despite sev-
eral courses of antibiotics.
The urine persistently had a
foul smell and the owner
had noticed fluid with the
appearance of urine leaking
from the dog's anus after
 micturition. Clinical exam-
ination was unremarkable.
i. List the diagnostic investi-
gations you would perform
on this dog.
This radiograph (126) was obtained.
ii. What is your diagnosis?
道i. How would you treat the dog?
127 A two-year-old, male German
127a
Shepherd Dog had chronic diarrhoea
and profound weight loss (from 45 kg
to 36 kg in six weeks) despite a raven-
ous appetite (127a). Excessive borbo-
rygmi and flatus were noted and the
dog was coprophagic. Serum folate
was increased (13.5 μg/l) and cobal-
amin decreased (35 ng/l), and a pre-
sumptive diagnosis of small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) was
made. Treatment with oxytetracycline
resulted in better stool consistency but
no weight gain. Routine haematology had initially shown an absolute eosinophil
count of 1.5 x 109/l and, on the assumption that this was an indicator of eosinophilic
enteritis, the dog was then started on immunosuppressive doses of prednisolone. The
diarrhoea worsened and despite increasing the dosage of prednisolone the weight fell
rapidly to 23 kg.
Why did treatment fail in this dog, and what test would have given the correct diag-
nosis?
121
126&I27:Answers
126 i. ● Haematology and biochemistry.
· Urine bacteriology and urinalysis.
● Observe urination and possibly collect fluid passed from anus for analysis.
● Positive contrast retrograde urethrocystogram and double contrast cystogram.
● Ultrasound examination of the kidneys, bladder and prostate. This allows determina-
tion of changes affecting the upper urinary tract and prostate which may be the result of
chronic urinary tract infection.
f. The history is suggestive of a congenital urethrorectal fistula and associated urinary
tract infection. The presence and the position of a urethrorectal fistula is confirmed in
the ra diograph (126).
mi. Surgical closure of the fistula. In this dog the fistula was positioned within the pelvic
canal and a sagittal pubic osteotomy was used to reach the fistula. Congenital fistulas
are usually well-defined tubes; in this case the fistula was isolated and ligated at each end
before being sectioned. Once the fistula has been closed the urinary tract infection
should be treated using an antibiotic based on culture and sensitivity. It is important that
an adequate dose of the drug is given for long enough to eradicate the infection.
Following antibiotic treatment, repeat urine cultures should be performed to ensure that
the infection has been eradicated. In this case the dog was treated with a three-week
course of enrofloxacin; urine culture one week after the course finished produced no
bacterial growth. Following surgery the dog was continent.
127 The clinical signs of chronic diar-
27b
rhoea, weight loss, ravenous appetite
and coprophagia are consistent with
SIBO or exocrine pancreatic insuffi-
ciency {EPI). A trypsin-like immunore-
activity (TLI) test should have been
performed before primary intestinal
disease was assumed. Although SIBO is
a frequent complication of EPl, serum
folate and cobalamin abnormalities are
commonly seen in EPI and are not nec-
essarily indicative of SIBO, as normal
pancreatic secretions are involved in the absorption of cobalamin in particular. The TLI
in this dog {0.3 μg/l) was diagnostic for EPl, and the borborygmi, flatus, watery diar-
rhoea and partial response to antibiotics were suggestive of secondary SIBO. This would
be expected to worsen when steroids are administered.
While inflammatory changes in the intestinal mucosa can be seen in EPl, eosinophilia
is a very unreliable marker of eosinophilic enteritis, and in the German Shepherd Dog
this degree of eosinophilia is considered by some to be normal for the breed. This case
highlights the dangers of giving corticosteroids without biopsy proof of inflammatory
bowel disease. The dog was weaned off all steroids and given pancreatic enzyme replace-
ment and oxytetracycline. Within six weeks it had gained 9 kg and ultimately returned
to 42 kg body weight (127b),
122
128 & I29: Questions
128A two-year-old dog
28
presents with a four-week
history of vomiting undi-
 gested food and water min-
utes to hours after eating,
and hypersalivation. He is
thin, keen to eat and has
halitosis. Diarrhoea and
exercise intolerance are not
reported. Serum biochem-
istry and haematology are
unremarkable. Barium sul-
phate is administered and
this radiograph obtained
(128).
i. What abnormalities do you recognize?
i. What diagnosis would you make?
mi. What other diagnostic tests might you consider?
iv. How would you manage this case?
129 An 11-year-old, female
129a
neutered Golden Retriever
presented with acute uri-
nary tract obstruction.
Clinical examination was
unremarkable apart from
the presence of a full blad-
der and a pea-sized urethral
mass palpated on rectal and
vaginal examination.
i. What are your differential
diagnoses?
After emptying the blad-
der, plain abdominal and
positive contrast vagino-urethrogram (129a) radiographic examinations were per-
formed.
ii. How would you further investigate this dog?
123
128&I29:Answers
128 i. The radiograph shows a dilated oesophagus. The dilation extends throughout the
length of the oesophagus.
f. Megaoesophagus.
fi. The cause of the generalized megaoesophagus was not determined. Endoscopic exam-
ination of the oesophagus, stomach and duodenum only served to confirm the presence
of the megaoesophagus; no obstructive lesions were seen. Fluoroscopically, the oesopha-
gus was noted to be very hypomotile.
iv. The prognosis is poor. Management is aimed at feeding from an elevated or upright
u yau pooy (pazipinbil hou) pos y "youis aui oui pooy jo saessd pie oi uouisod
energy is fed so as to maximize energy intake.
129 i. The main differential diagnoses
29b
are: urethral neoplasia; urethral calcu
lus; granulomatous urethritis; bladder
neoplasia; vaginal neoplasia obstruct
ing the external urethral orifice or com-
pressing the urethra intrapelvically.
f. Investigations which should be per-
formed on this dog are:
● Obtain urine samples by cystocente-
sis for bacteriology and urinalysis prior
to catheterization.
· Routine haematology and biochem-
istry to check the animals general health and presence of azotaemia and hyperkalaemia.
· The contrast radiograph shows the urethral contrast column abruptly narrowing
within the pelvis at a site which corresponded with the palpable mass. Further radi-
ographic investigations would include a double contrast cystogram and thoracic films to
check for metastatic spread in cases of suspected neoplasia.
● Ultrasound examination of the caudal abdomen is a useful technique for examining
the bladder for the presence of masses as well as checking the sublumbar lymph nodes
for enlargement and the liver for focal lesions suggestive of metastases, although in this
case no abnormalities were seen. It may be used to obtain guided catheter biopsies from
some bladder lesions.
●Biopsy of any masses/irregularities in the urethral lumen. In the absence of a cystoscope
allowing direct biopsy, lesions within the urethra are most easily sampled using a catheter
biopsy technique. In some cases, such as this (129b), an excisional biopsy was possible
124
130 & I31: Questions
Cat I
Cat 2
Cat 3
ALP (u/)
350
28
510
ALT (u/l)
236
164
461
GGT (u/l)
2
13
130 Match the serum liver enzyme activities with the description of the animal they
changes or the lack thereof. For each cat there is a corresponding best matching set of
values.
a. Eight-year-old, female Persian with a distended abdomen, hyperglobulinaemia and
hepatomegaly. Abdominocentesis yields a viscous, proteinaceous exudate. Corona-
virus titre is 1:3200.
b. Three-year-old, male, previously obese domestic longhair cat which is anorexic,
has lost 1.5 kg body weight in three weeks and is clinically jaundiced. Hepatic biopsy
reveals severe vacuolation of hepatocytes.
c. Fifteen-year-old, male domestic shorthair cat with weight loss, unkempt dry hair
coat, polyphagia, tachycardia and a palpable thyroid nodule.
131 This 18-month-old, female Minia-
13a
ture Pinscher was referred with a six
month history of chronic intermittent
diarrhoea with occasional fresh blood
(131a). There had been no weight loss.
Signs had started shortly after elective
ovariohysterectomy. As they had im-
proved every time antibiotics had been
given, the referring veterinary surgeon
had made a tentative diagnosis of idio-
pathic small intestinal bacterial over-
growth (SIBO). On physical examination
the dog was slightly depressed and inter-
mittently performed stretching motions
as if there was some abdominal discom-
fort. Physical examination and vital
signs were normal, and routine haematology, serum biochemistry and serum folate
and cobalamin were unremarkable.
i. Why is a diagnosis of idiopathic SIBO not justified in this case?
ii. How would you attempt to reach a definitive diagnosis?
125
130&I3l:Answers
130 Cat 1 - b. This history is typical of a cat with hepatic lipidosis and this would
be supported by the finding of vacuolated hepatocytes and seemingly disparate
results of serum liver enzyme activity. Although choices a. and c. would also be possi-
ble, an increased serum ALP concentration in conjunction with a normal serum GGT
concentration is a common laboratory finding in cats with hepatic lipidosis.
Cat 2 - c. This cat has signs of feline hyperthyroidism which should be investigated
with a basal serum thyroxine concentration. Hyperthyroidism commonly results in
mild elevations of serum liver enzyme activities, specifically ALT. This biochemical
abnormality usually resolves upon successful treatment.
Cat 3 - a. This cat may be infected with FIP and a liver biopsy would be necessary to
confirm this suspicion. The increase in all three liver enzyme activities reflects an
active disease process affecting the liver, which can occur with FIP infections.
131 i. The repeated response to antibiotics by this dog is consistent with SIBO {or
perhaps infection with a specific pathogen such as Campylobacter), but SIBO is only
definitively diagnosed by quantitative culture of duodenal juice. Furthermore, idio-
pathic SIBO is a diagnosis usually made in young, large breed dogs, especially
German Shepherd Dogs, after underlying disease has been ruled out. In SIBO, signs
of chronic intermittent diarrhoea may occur with or without weight loss, and whilst
passage of fresh blood is not common, it can occur if bacterial metabolites cause a
secondary colitis. The normal folate and cobalamin in this case do not rule out SIBO
as the classical changes of increased folate and decreased cobalamin are only seen in
the minority of cases. The stretching signs are indicative of intra-abdominal inflam-
mation and/or adhesions and would not be expected in idiopathic SIBO. Any over-
growth in this case is likely to be secondary to an underlying cause, e.g. mucosal dis-
ease, partial intestinal obstruction or exocrine pancreatic insufficiency {EPI).
i. The lack of weight loss would make EPI very unlikely; serum TLI was normal.
Plain radiographs were not helpful, but contrast studies and ultrasound examination
might have been useful. Upper and
lower GI endoscopy was performed.
The stomach and duodenum were
131b
normal, but a haemorrhagic mass was
observed in the proximal colon and
the normal ileocolic valve was not
found. A chronic ileocolic intussus-
ception was identified at laparotomy
and resected (131b). The previous
antibiotic-responsive diarrhoea is pre-
sumed to have been due to both local-
ized disease and SIBO proximal to the
partial obstruction.
126
132-134: Questions
132 The haematological profile shown
RBCs (x 10/2/)
2.71
was obtained from an overweight, aged
Hb (g/l)
66
male Dobermann with a grade 3/6 mur-
PCV (I/)
0.22
mur over the left heart base, petechiation
MCV (fl)
82
and ecchymoses on the gums, conjunctiva
MCHC (g/)
300
and ear pinnae, mild pyrexia, left hind-
nRBCs
6%
limb lameness, testicular asymmetry,
Platelets (× 10°/)
lethargy, pallor and reduced appetite.
WBCs (× 10"/)
3.2
i. How would you interpret this profile?
i. What would be your next diagnostic
Neutrophils (seg) (x 10°/)
2.2
step?
Neutrophils (bands) (x 10"/)
0.16
Lymphocytes (× I0/1)
0.64
Monocytes (x 10*/l)
0.2
Comment: platelets very low in the
133 An eight-year-old, male
33
West Highland White Terrier
presented with a three-week
history of dysuria and haema-
turia. Ultrasound examination
of the bladder revealed this
lesion (133).
i. What can you see, and what
is your differential diagnosis?
i. How would you confirm
your diagnosis?
134 A nine-year-old domestic shorthair cat presents with a history of depression,
weight loss (2.3 kg compared to its normal body weight of 4.4 kg) and inappetence
of three weeks? duration. Vomiting and diarrhoea are not present. Rectal temperature
is unremarkable. An abdominal mass is present and an exploratory laparotomy was
scheduled to investigate the case further.
i. Are you concerned with this cat's nutritional status? If yes, why; if no, why not?
ii. How would you manage the cat nutritionally pre- and postoperatively?
127
I32-134:Answers
132 i. This is a pancytopenia, i.e. neutropenia, lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia and
poorly regenerative anaemia, indicative of bone marrow disease. The thrombocytopenia
is very severe and explains the presence of petechiae and ecchymoses. There is a risk of
spontaneous GI or CNS haemorrhage. The presence of nRBCs probably reflects bone
marrow dysfunction rather than a coordinated regenerative response, as there are dis-
proportionately large numbers of nRBCs compared to the amount of polychromasia.
i. A bone marrow biopsy is indicated but the thrombocytopenia does constitute a sig-
nificant risk for this procedure. Biopsy might be considered after a fresh blood or
platelet-rich plasma transfusion. There is a much less invasive way of achieving a diag-
nosis in this case. The key is the presence of testicular asymmetry. The serum oestradiol
concentration was markedly elevated at 320 pmol/l. From this it can be assumed that
testicular asymmetry is due to the presence of a testicular tumour, probably a Sertoli cell
tumour. The haematological findings are typical of long-standing oestrogen toxicosis.
133 i. A hyperechoic mass can be seen arising from the bladder wall and projecting into
the bladder lumen. The margin of the mass is irregular and it involves and disrupts the
normal layers of the bladder wall. The most likely differential diagnosis is a bladder wall
neoplasm, e.g. transitional cell carcinoma, or a rhabdomyosarcoma. In this case a transi-
tional cell carcinoma was considered most likely due to the involvement of the trigone,
the dog's age and the irregular marginated appearance of the mass.
fi. The diagnosis should be confirmed histopathologically. Bladder masses may be biop-
sied using a catheter suction technique under ultrasound guidance. In this case a catheter
was placed in the bladder and, by applying pressure to the caudal abdominal wall, the
bladder wall could be pushed against the catheter. When the mass was in contact with
the catheter, negative pressure was applied with a syringe and small amounts of tissue
obtained by suction. Blind catheter suction is unreliable but in this case would probably
have been possible due to the large size of the tumour. Cytological examination of urine 
sediment may reveal neoplastic transitional cells which have exfoliated from the mass.
Tissue may also be obtained directly during surgery or, in female dogs, by cystoscopy. In
this case the diagnosis of transitional carcinoma was confirmed.
134 i. This cat's main problem aside from the mass is severe protein-energy malnutri-
tion (PEM). Traumatized patients, which includes those undergoing surgery, have
increased requirements for energy and protein as a consequence of an increase in the
metabolic rate that accompanies inflammation/stress. Mobilization of body tissue
results, although feeding prior to the traumatic event and ensuring adequate nutrition
postoperatively will ameliorate the effects of the PEM. If untreated, PEM may result in
poor wound healing, organ failure, immunoincompetence and sepsis.
f. This cat's plane of nutrition needs to be improved prior to surgery. It is not necessary
to attain its optimal weight, only to ensure that the cat is on a rising plane of nutrition
and is receiving adequate nutrition. An energy dense diet containing easily digestible
high-quality nutrients should be fed until the metabolic consequences of the trauma have
resolved. A nasogastric tube was placed one week pre-operatively and a high-energy,
high-protein tubable diet administered. At laparotomy a gastrostomy tube was placed
and the cat fed through this until it was able to consume sufficient food voluntarily.
128
135 & 136: Questions
35a
135b
135c
135 A two-year-old, entire
female Border Terrier present-
ed with chronic low-grade,
dribbling incontinence since a
pup. The dribbling varies little
from day to day. The bitch
urinates normally from the
vulva, there have been no episodes of urinary tract infection and the bitch has had two
normal seasons. The dog has received no medical treatment for the incontinence.
i. What are your three main differential diagnoses?
 Radiographic investigations were performed and an intra venous urogram and retro-
grade vagino-urethrogram obtained (135a-135c).
i. What is your diagnosis?
mi. What treatment would you advise?
            
Irish Setter. The dog had a history of acute vomiting 24 hours prior to being pre-
sented in a collapsed state. A transfusion of fresh whole blood was administered
prior to endoscopic examination of the stomach. An ulcerated lesion was seen. A
biopsy was reported as inflammation or reactive hyperplasia rather than neoplasia.
The dog was receiving phenylbutazone for a chronic osteoarthritic disorder.
i. What treatment will you prescribe for this dog?
i. What further follow-up would you recommend?
129
135&I36:Answers
135 i. Ectopic ureter; urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence; congenital anatomi-
cal urogenital tract a bnormality.
ii. A left ectopic ureter. The left ureter is moderately dilated along its length and termin-
ates as a very small opening in the caudal vagina, dorsal to the external urethral orifice.
There is a large ureterocele immediately dorsal to the bladder neck/proximal urethra.
The bladder contains contrast medium and there is no evidence of a second ectopic
ureter on the retrograde vagino-urethrogram. The right ureter was confirmed to enter
the bladder normally on ultrasound exa mination. The bladder neck is intra-abdominal.
imi. Surgical reimplantation of the ureter into the bladder. In view of the ureterocele the
tunnelling technique was considered the most appropriate method of reimplantation.
As the dog only has one ectopic ureter and no evidence clinically or radiographically of
urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence, a good prognosis for complete continence
was given. This dog did not have a urinary tract infection. In the event of a urinary
gical treatment is performed.
136 i. Treatment of gastric ulceration requires identification and removal, if possible,
of the underlying disorder. In this dog the use of phenylbutazone was discontinued.
Fluids, including whole blood as needed, should be given to maintain fluid balance and
restore gastric mucosal blood flow. Antibiotics may be indicated as mucosal disruption
may serve as a site for bacterial translocation and sepsis. Secondary therapy includes
 decreasing gastric acidity and restoring normal gastric protective mechanisms such as
replenishing the gastric mucous barrier and blood flow. H2-receptor antagonists e.g.
q24h), reduce acid production by blocking the histamine receptor of the parietal cell.
Omeprazole {1-2 mg/kg p/o q24h) inhibits the proton pump and is a potent deterrent
to gastric acid production. Oral antacids are unnecessary since the above medications
 e   n d    a a 
(1 gm/30 kg p/o q8h) bind to denuded proteins at the site of ulceration and form a pro-
tective barrier. Prostaglandins and their synthetic analogues such as misoprostol
(3-5 μg/kg p/o q8h) speed the rate of gastric healing, reduce gastric acid secretion and
help prevent further ulcerations.
i. To ensure that the lesion is healing appropriately prior
to discontinuing the ga stric protectant medications, the
dog's stool should be closely observed for the presence of
melena. Clinical signs such as vomiting and inappetence
should resolve. A second endoscopic examination is per-
 i  a s  a r a n 
underlying neoplastic disease has not been missed.
Endoscopic examination four weeks later revealed a
reduced, much less inflamed area of resolving hyperplas-
tic tissue (136).
130
137: Question
137 A 16-year-old, neutered male
Day I
Day 2 Day5
domestic shorthair cat presents with
Albumin (g/l)
39
29
a four-day history of anorexia. Body
ALP (u/)
16
6
weight is 3 kg. The cat is depressed
(/n) 17
67
46
and approximately 7% dehydrated.
Total protein (g/l)
84
59
The kidneys are small. Vaccinations
Urea (mmol/l)
45
26
27
are up to date. Serum biochermistry,
Creatinine (μmol/l)
663
336
327
haematology and urinalysis are per-
Glucose (mmol/)
6.8
7.3
7.0
formed on day 1. Urine cytology is
Sodium (mmol/l)
162
151
150
Potassium (mmol/l)
5.0
4.1
4.5
unremarkable.
Chloride (mmol/l)
131
125
120
i What is your assessment of these
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.8
2.4
2.5
results on day 1?
Phosphorus (mmol/l)
3.2
1.6
1.5
i. Describe your fluid treatment
Total CO2(mEq/l)
6.0
14
16
plan?
Anion gap (mEq/l)
31
16
18
Following fluid therapy urine out-
PCV (I/l)
0.32
put was estimated to be 11 ml/hr.
WBCs (x 10/)
9.0
Fluid rate was therefore increased to
White cell differential: unremarkable
11 ml/hr and urine output moni-
Urinalysis:
tored overnight. The cat's body-
Colour/turbidity
Yellow/clear
weight increased from 3 kg to 3.2
SG
1.011
kg (an increase of approximately
pH
6.0
Glucose, ketones, bilirubin Negative
7%). On day 2 the cat was brighter
Occult blood
Negative
and voluntarily drank water. Serum
Protein - qualitative
Negative
biochemistry was repeated on day 2
and abdominal radio-
graphy and ultrasono-
378
37b
graphy were per-
formed (137a-137c).
iii. What is your
assessment?
iv. What is your treat-
ment plan?
Over the next 24
hours, intravenous
fluid therapy was gradually
decreased and then discontinued.
The cat was eating and drinking
well and maintained a body weight
of 3.2 kg. His laboratory evalua-
tion at discharge (day S) is shown.
v. What is your assessment?
vi. What is your follow-up plan?
131
137: Answer
137 i. The presence of isosthenuria with azotaemia is most consistent with renal fail-
ure. Because the kidneys are palpably small and the PCV is low normal in the presence
of dehydration, chronic renal failure with an acute decompensation is most likely.
i. When formulating fluid treatment plans you must decide on the type of fluid (bal-
anced electrolyte solution for rehydration, e.g. lactated Ringer's solution); the route
of fluid administration fintravenous); and the rate of administration. The rate and
amount of fluid is determined by three factors:
● Rehydration: volume required = % body weight loss x body weight (kg) = 7% x
3 kg = 210 ml. Rehydrate over 8 hours, therefore 26.25 ml/hr.
● Maintenance requirements = 2.2 ml/kg/hr = 2.2 x 3 = 6.6 ml/hr.
● Ongoing losses = amount lost via vomiting, diarrhoea, etc. = 0 ml/hr.
Therefore, administer approximately 33 ml/hr of lactated Ringer's solution i/v for
eight hours, then reduce to maintenance (7 ml/hr). After a couple of hours of main-
palpating the bladder or weighing absorbent pads used to line the floor of the cage
(weight of urine soaked pad minus weight of pad [approximately 20 g] = g[ml] of
urine voided).
m. Because the cat is still azotaemic following rehydration and fluid therapy, in addi-
[euau au 'punoseun pue sydesopeu uo shaupiy aul jo aoueieadde lews aui oi uo
failure is likely to be chronic in nature.
iv. Fluid therapy could be slowly discontinued with continued monitoring of the azo-
taemia.
v. The degree of azotaemia is probably stable and approximately what it was prior to
the episode of acute renal failure. Therefore, the cat probably had an episode of acute
renal failure in addition to his chronic renal failure.
vi. Follow-up plans should include periodic monitoring of clinical findings and lab-
oratory work to evaluate the development of dehydration, malnutrition, electrolyte
imbalances (hypokalaemia), metabolic acidosis and neuroendocrine imbalances
(hypoproliferative anaemia, hyperphosphataemia, systemic hypertension) which may
alter the course of the renal failure. Furthermore, efforts should be made to minimize
exposure to other renal insults such as nephrotoxins and hypoperfusion.
132
138 & I39: Questions
138 These bladder stones (138)
138
were removed via cystotomy
from a 16-month-old, female
Yorkshire Terrier with chronic
intermittent dysuria and haema-
turia. Abdominal radiographs
had not shown evidence for cal-
culi but uroliths were discovered
during ovariohysterectomy. The
dog was small for its age and
took a long time to recover from
anaesthesia. Stone analysis revealed that they were composed of ammonium urate.
i. What is the significance of urate urolithiasis in this dog?
i. What tests would you do to confirm your diagnosis?
ii. How can you prevent recurrence of urate urolithiasis in this patient?
139 A 12-year-old, entire male Labrador presented with a two-day history of
dysuria following a recent bout of vomiting and diarrhoea. The owner reported that
the dog was lethargic and anorexic. Clinical examination revealed the dog to be
pyrexic with a rectal temperature of 40.3°C (104.5°F).
i. What are your three most likely differential diagnoses?
ii. How would you investigate this dog further?
ii. What features do you recognize in the ultrasound image of the prostate (139)?
133
138&I39:Answers
138 i. Urate uroliths are found rarely in non-Dalmatian dogs, except in dogs with con-
genital portosystemic shunts. In these dogs, reduced liver function leads to decreased
hepatic conversion of uric acid to allantoin and ammonia to urea. Urolithiasis is some-
times the main or only presenting sign. Urate stones tend to be radiolucent and are only
seen on contrast radiography or ultrasonography. The history of stunted growth and
slow anaesthetic recovery (suggestive of impaired hepatic metabolism) might also point
towards a possible congenital portosystemic shunt.
i. The next step should be to look for underlying liver disease and/or portosystemic
shunting. It is advisable to wait at least two weeks after surgery before blood testing in
serum bile acids should be determined and, if possible, blood ammonia concentration.
Urinalysis and culture should be undertaken to rule out urinary tract infection, which
may exacerbate urolithiasis. Hepatic ultrasonography can identify a portosystemic
shunt but requires an experienced ultrasonographer.
mi. Surgical ligation of a congenital portosystemic shunt will help to prevent recurrence
of urate lithiasis. Existing stones usually have to be removed surgically.
139 i. Prostatic abscess; acute prostatitis; urinary tract infection.
i. ● Prostatic palpation to assess for enlargement, asymmetry, pain and fluctuant
swelling. In this case the prostate was intra-abdominal and not palpable per rectum. An
apple-sized mass could be palpated in the caudal abdomen.
●Routine haematology and biochemistry.
● Urinalysis and bacteriology.
· Plain radiograph of the abdomen to check prostate size, and look for evidence of
localized or generalized peritonitis and other a bdominal disease.
● Ultrasound examination of the prostate provides useful information on the size and
texture of the prostate as well as revealing cysts or abscess cavities. It allows ultra-
sound-guided aspiration of any cystic lesions seen.
● Contrast studies of the lower urinary tract (retrograde urethrocystogram and double
contrast cystogram) allow full examination of the urethra and should reveal communi-
cations between prostatic cystic lesions and the urethra. This information is important
when considering the most appropriate surgical management.
●If treated surgically, biopsies should always be taken from the wall of prostatic cysts
and abscesses as occasionally they occur in conjunction with neoplasia.
ii. A cystic lesion is arising from the prostate. Aspiration of the lesion produced pus
and a diagnosis of prostatic abscess was confirmed. Ultrasound-guided aspiration of
prostatic abscesses is an area of controversy with some clinicians advising against the
procedure in case pus leakage results in peritonitis. However, the author has found no
such complications. Samples obtained should be submitted for bacteriology and cy-
tology.
134
140 & I4l: Questions
Calcium (mmol/)
Phosphate (mmol/l)
Parathyroid hormone
(PTH) (pmol/)
4.2
0.6
30
B
2.7
4.8
24
c
4.1
0.43
2.3
D
3.2
1.3
3.5
E
1.7
2.1
25
F
4.9
3.8
140 Match each of the six sets of results above with the appropriate diagnosis/clini-
cal description. Some result sets may apply to more than one diagnosis, therefore
choose what you see as the best fit.
i. A seven-year-old dog with chronic PU/PD of several months’ duration, anorexia,
weight loss, drowsiness, urine SG 1.014, blood urea 34 mmol/l, creatinine 400 μmol/l
and ananaemia (PCV 0.22l/l).
i. A four-year-old male dog with a small pea-like mass in the region of the anal
glands and a sublumbar lymphadenopathy on abdominal radiography.
ii.A thirteen-year-old dog with PU/PD of a few weeks" duration, inappetence,
weight loss, urine SG 1.011, blood urea 20 mmol/l, creatinine 200 μmol/l.
iv. An adult dog with acute onset depression, weakness and anorexia. Exposure to
cholecalciferol rodenticides was a possibility. Biochemistry results were urea
60 mmol/l, creatinine 900 mmol/l. Urine SG was 1.025.
v. A three-year-old Retriever with a chronic history of intermittent vomiting and
diarrhoea and occasional weakness and exercise intolerance. On physical examina-
tion a mild bradycardia is present. Urea 18 mmol/l, creatinine 200 μmol/l, potassium
5.9 mmol/l, sodium 138 mmol/l.
vi. A six-month-old crossbreed dog with acute right hindlimb lameness. Radiography
shows the bone cortices to be thin and a pathological fracture in the right tibia. The
dog was fed exclusively an all-meat diet.
141 A six-month-old, male German Shepherd
141
Dog with chronic diarrhoea has grossly (141) and
microscopically normal intestine on endoscopic
biopsy. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
(SIBO) is confirmed by quantitative culture of
duodenal juice (1.2 x 10* cfu/ml).
How would you treat idiopathic SIBO?
135
140 & I4l:Answers
140 i. B. The history is typical of chronic renal failure. In such cases serum calcium
may be low, normal or high, but phosphate is usually elevated. With the development
of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism, PTH is also increased.
i. C. Apocrine carcinomas of the anal glands often produce a PTH-related protein
which acts like PTH to promote hypercalcaemia and hypophosphataemia. Unlike pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism, the PTH concentrations are low. These tumours often
metastasize to sublumbar lymph nodes.
i. A. Primary hyperparathyroidism can present with various signs ranging from
vague signs of inappetence and mild PU/PD to severe renal failure or coma. Dis-
tinguishing primary hypoparathyroidism from chronic renal failure can be difficult.
However, as a general but not exclusive rule, serum phosphate values are low with
primary hypoparathyroidism but high with chronic renal failure. The other clinical
pathological features can be identical, although hypercalcaemia is an unusual finding
in chronic renal failure.
iv. F. Cholecalciferol rodenticides cause severe hypercalcaemia and hyperphos
phataemia which can result in acute renal failure. The main differential diagnoses are
hypoadrenocorticism and chronic renal failure {CRF). However, the low PTH would
rule out CRF and the hypercalcaemia associated with hypoadrenocorticism is usually
Only mild.
v. D. The vague clinical signs and the serum biochemistry would be consistent with
hypoadrenocorticism. Mild hypercalcaemia and hyperphosphataemia may be recog-
nized. Serum PTH would be expected to be normal or slightly low.
vi. E. The history is typical of secondary nutritional hyperparathyroidism. In such
with consumption of a meat only diet. Calcium and phosphate may be normal or low.
141 Provided there is no underlying cause, treatment is based on long-term, broad-
spectrum antibiotic administration. Oxytetracycline (10-20 mg/kg p/o q8h) is pre-
ferred, based on relative cost and likelihood of success, but other antibiotics such as
metronidazole (10-20 mg/kg p/o q8h), amoxycillin (10 mg/kg p/o q8h) or tylosin (10
mg/kg p/o q8h) can be tried. At least four weeks medication is given assuming a posi-
tive initial response. Immediate relapse on cessation of antibiotics may occur in some
cases and, assuming no treatable underlying cause can be found, continuous anti
biotics may be required for control. Empirically, it may be possible to reduce anti-
biotic dosage frequency to twice daily or even once daily and maintain control. A
highly digestible low-fat diet is a useful adjunct to antibiotic therapy, and indeed may
be the only treatment needed in mild cases. Addition of novel carbohydrates {fructo-
be effective. Similarly, probiotics are unlikely to be helpful. In many cases, serum
cobalamin is markedly reduced and parenteral administration of cobalamin
{250-500 μg s/c monthly) may be beneficial.
136
142 & 143: Questions
142 A nine-year-old, male crossbreed
142
presented with depression, lethargy
and loss of appetite of two days" dura-
tion. The dog had been drinking
excessively for some months, although
this had not worried the owner, and
he had a good appetite until recently.
Bilateral cataracts (142) had devel-
oped over the preceding two months.
The retina could not be visualized.
There was no evidence of glaucoma or
of any problem with the anterior
chamber. On abdominal palpation the
liver was palpably enlarged and the
dog was S% dehydrated. Clinical bio-
Sodium (mmol/l)
145
chemistry values are shown.
i. What is your interpretation of the
Potassium (mmol/l)
5.9
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.2
clinical biochemistry, and what are
Glucose (mmol/l)
28.9
your main differential diagnoses?
Beta-hydroxybutyrate (mmol/l)
2.1
il. Are further tests in order, or would
Urea (mmol/)
you treat the patient?
Creatinine (μmol/l)
100
Phosphate (mmol/l)
1.5
(/n) 17
60
ALP (u/l)
800
SAP (%)
65
Bile acids (μmol/l)
12
Cholesterol (mmol/l)
10.1
Total protein (g/l)
65
Albumin (g/l)
30
143 A dog is diagnosed as having a ureterolith with ureteral obstruction and mild
hydronephrosis. Urinalysis revealed: pH 6.5; SG 1.04S; dipstick negative for biliru-
bin, glucose and ketones; protein 2+; and occult blood 2+. Cytological examination
of the sediment of a centrifuged urine sample revealed 50-100 RBCs/hpf,
1-5 WBCs/hpf and no bacteria or crystals.
i. What is the likely composition of the urolith?
i. How does this urolith form?
mi. What is the long-term preventive treatment?
137
142&I43:Answers
142 i. There are marked increases in blood glucose, ketones, ALP and SIAP. The ele-
vated blood glucose is consistent with diabetes mellitus. Ketosis develops as a conse-
quence of cellular starvation and in small animals is most commonly seen in insulin
deficient animals. The elevated ALP is indicative of a mild hepatopathy {cholestasis,
hepatocellular damage). However, the normal ALT would suggest that there is no
ongoing hepatocellular damage and there is no evidence of hepatic dysfunction (nor-
mal bile acids). Cholestasis may be seen in animals with diabetes mellitus due to
hepatic lipid deposition. The increase in SIAP is consistent with induction of ALP
production by corticosteroids. Although this may raise the suspicion of hyperadreno-
corticism {HAC), it is not a specific feature for this disease, with other causes of
hepatic disease (including diabetes mellitus) also resulting in elevated blood levels of
this isoenzyme. Hypercholesterolaemia is a feature of deranged fat metabolism and is
associated with several conditions including diabetes mellitus, HAC and hypothy-
roidism. Hyperkalaemia is a feature of diabetes mellitus, particularly if ketoacidosis
is present. The history, physical findings and clinical pathology are most consistent
with diabetes mellitus, although HAC should also be considered.
i. The findings so far are sufficient to make the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. As
artefactual results may be seen and given that treatment for diabetes mellitus may
cause hypoglycaemia, documentation of a persistent hyperglycaemia is indicated in
most cases. In this case, prompt treatment of the ketoacidosis and diabetes mellitus is
warranted. Assessment of serum insulin can be made, but is rarely useful as there is
little else that will result in such a marked hyperglycaemia.
143 i. Calcium oxalate. Approximately 95 % of nephroliths are composed of calci-
um-containing salts. Middle-aged and older, male small breed dogs are at risk for the
development of calcium oxalate uroliths. The acidic urine favours calcium oxalate,
ammonium urate and cystine urolith formation, whereas struvite forms in neutral to
alkaline urine.
i. They may form secondary to hypercalcaemia or hypercalciuresis. The latter is
associated with intestinal hyperabsorption of calcium or renal tubular leak of cal-
cium. Other potential mechanisms include hypocitric aciduria, hyperabsorption of
calcium from bone and hyperoxaluria.
m. An alkalinizing diet restricted in protein, calcium and sodium was recommended.
Inducing diuresis is beneficial; many protein restricted diets induce a diuresis because
of medullary washout. Dietary magnesium and phosphorus should neither be restrict-
ed nor present in excessive quantities. Avoiding foods and supplements containing
vitamins C and D are beneficial because vitamin C is a precursor for oxalic acid and
acidification and vitamin D promotes intestinal calcium absorption and renal excre-
tion. If the above measures are unsuccessful, supplemental vitamin B6 may be of
benefit, or treatment with hydrochlorothiazide which may lower urinary calcium
 e  i arq du a s a s 
citrate forms a soluble complex with calcium making it unavailable for precipitation
with oxalic acid.
138
144 & 145: Questions
144b
144 An 18-month-old,female Fox
144c
Terrier suffered pyrexia, depression,
lethargy, vomiting and abdominal pain
several days after ovariohysterectomy.
Ten days following surgery the dog
started to leak urine from the vulva and
an acquired ectopic ureter was suspect-
ed. The dog could urinate normally and
urine bacteriology confirmed a urinary
tract infection. An intravenous urogram
and ultrasound examination of the kid-
neys were performed and an acquired
left ectopic ureter confirmed (144a-144c).
i. Describe the changes seen.
i. What is the most likely disease process affecting the left kidney?
145 Which of these statements about hypoadrenocorticism are true and which are false?
i Hypoadrenocorticism is primarily a disease of older female dogs (average 11 years).
i. Aldosterone is the deficient hormone responsible for the electrolyte changes.
mi. Polyuria and polydipsia often develops in animals with hypoadrenocorticism beca use
of a water diuresis due to renal tubular epithelial cell dysfunction.
iv. Eosinopenia and lymphocytosis occur in 80% of animals with hypoadrenocorticism.
v. Hypoglycaemia is occasionally seen in affected animals.
139
144 & 145: Answers
144 i. Different phases of an intravenous urogram are shown in 144a and 144b. In
the nephrogram phase (144a) the left kidney is small and has an irregular margin
compared to the right kidney. On the pyelogram (144b) the left ureter is distended
but there is no evidence of gross dilation of the renal pelvis. There is a lucent area
overlying the left kidney on both films which is gas within the descending colon. The
ultrasound image of the left kidney {144c) reveals loss of the normal internal renal
architecture and dilation of the renal pelvis and left ureter. This also confirms that
the left kidney is small and irregular.
ii. The most likely disease process affecting the left kidney is pyelonephritis and
obstructive nephropathy. The left ectopic ureter now opens into the vagina as well as
communicating with the bladder, allowing infection to ascend the dilated ureter.
Although the ureter is now patent, the history, clinical signs and radiographic find-
ings all suggest that the left ureter was totally obstructed from the time of surgery
until the urinary incontinence began.
145 i. False. Hypoadrenocorticism is characteristically a disorder of middle-aged
(mean age 4-4.5 years) female dogs.
ii.True.
ii. False. Polyuria and polydipsia develop in animals with hypoadrenocorticism due
to a solute diuresis. The lack of aldosterone results in reduced absorption of sodium
and chloride and water, and the hyponatraemia results in a loss of the medullary
concentrating gradient.
iv. False. Eosinopenia and lymphocytosis are only recognized in 10% of animals with
hypoadrenocorticism.
v.True.
140
146 & I47: Questions
146a
146b
146 An eight and a half-year-old, female Labrador Retriever presents for evaluation
of lethargy, intermittent weakness and collapse of two weeks' duration. Her abdomen
has become progressively distended and she groans when she lays down as if in dis-
comfort (146a). Her plasma liver enzyme activities are increased (ALT 2,849 u/l, ALP
2,959 u/l) and her blood glucose is low (2.3 mmol/l). On physical examination her
abdomen is taut and a large firm mass is palpable in the cranial abdomen.
Radiographically the normal caudal border of the liver is indistinct and extends
beyond the costochondral junction. The stomach and loops of small intestine are dis-
placed caudally and dorsally indicating a massive hepatomegaly. Abdominal
exploratory surgery is performed and the left lateral lobe of the liver is found to be
consumed with an irregular mass (146b). The remainder of the liver parenchyma is
normal in appearance; no other masses are observed in the abdomen. Thoracic radio-
 graphs show no evidence of metastatic disease.
i. What are your differential diagnoses for the liver mass?
il. What are the possible reasons for the episodes of collapse?
i. Can you explain the laboratory finding of hypogl ycaemia?
147 i. Identify the parasite
47
in this faecal smear (147)
from a puppy with chronic
diarrhoea.
ii. In what other form is this
2
parasite sometimes seen?
imi. What drugs are available
for its treatment?
141
146&I47:Answers
146 i. Given the size of this tumour and the absence of other masses, this is a pri
mary tumour of liver origin. Liver tumours may be benign or malignant, and
histopathology is necessary to distinguish between the two cell types. Benign hepato-
cellular adenomas or haemangiomas may cause abdominal discomfort and distension
due to expansion of the mass and crowding of other viscera. They may recur locally
if not excised totally, whereas complete removal of the tumour may be curative.
However, malignant hepatocellular carcinomas or haemangiosarcomas may not have
visible metastases at the time of diagnosis, but micrometastatic disease is likely and
recurrence or spread into the hepatic lymph nodes, lung or peritoneum is common.
The prognosis for malignant liver tumours is poor.
ii. Collapse may have occurred due to cardiovascular, metabolic or neuromuscular dis-
ease. Cardiac dysrhythmias are a frequent occurrence in animals with tumours such as
haemangiosarcomas, and syncopal episodes occur due to insufficient cerebral oxygena-
tion. However, recovery from these episodes is usually rapid and complete. Metastatic
brain disease cannot be ruled out as a possible cause of neurological disease and col-
lapse, but the signs would more likely be progressive and one might expect to see more
pronounced, persistent neurological dysfunction. Myasthenia gravis is a paraneoplastic
disorder affecting the neuromuscular junction and may cause intermittent weakness.
Hypoglycaemia may result in weakness and even coma and seizure activity if blood glu-
cose concentrations are severely decreased. Another cause for collapse in this dog
would be an intermittent intra-abdominal bleed from a rupture of the tumour, and
acute hypotension. This hypothesis is supported by the presence of anaemia, abdominal
distension, the presence of blood in the abdomen and the need for several days to
recover while blood is being reabsorbed by the peritoneum.
. Hypoglycaemia is a reported abnormality in some animals with both benign and
malignant liver tumours, and can result in clinical signs of lethargy and collapse. The
pathogenesis of decreased blood glucose concentrations is not completely clear, but
may occur due to the tumour's increased uptake and utilization of glucose or the
tumour itself may produce hormones with insulin-like activity.
147 i. A Giardia oocyst. These are best seen in zinc sulphate flotations, but multiple
samples may have to be examined as excretion is intermittent.
ii. Occasionally, motile trophozoites are seen in very fresh smears, but they are easier
to find in duodenal juice collected endoscopically.
i. Giardia has been treated historically with quinacrine or metronidazole. Quinacrine
is not readily available and has an unpleasant taste, and so is rarely used. High doses
of metronidazole {30 mg/kg p/o q12h for 5 days) can eliminate Giardia but this is
close to the neurotoxic dose. In addition, metronidazole-resistant Giardia have been
reported. Successful treatment with furazolidone has been reported, but its use is not
licensed for small animals. Albendazole (25 mg/kg p/o q12h for 5 days) and fenbenda-
zole (50 mg/kg p/o q24h for 3 days) are effective. They are safe and easy to adminis-
ter, and have the distinct advantage of eliminating metazoan parasites as well.
142
148: Question
148a
48b
48f
148h
148 Cytology preparations (stained with Wright's stain) made by centrifugation of
pleural and peritoneal effusions are shown (148a-148h).
148a and 148b - 11-year-old, female cat with pleural effusion.
148c and 148d - middle-aged Cocker Spaniel with pleural effusion.
148e and 148f - aged, female cat with ascites.
148g and 148h - middle-aged Lurcher with ascites.
Which photomicrographs show neoplastic effusions? On what grounds do you
base the diagnosis of neoplasia and which types of neoplasms are represented?
Identify the large single cells in the centre of 148c and 148g.
143
148: Answer
148 ● 148a, 148b: The cat had an intrathoracic adenocarcinoma. Note the acinar clus-
tering of the pleomorphic neoplastic cells. Some of the cells are distended with secretion.
· 148c, 148d: The large cell just to the left of centre in 148c is a very large and
bizarre mitotic figure. This dog also had a carcinoma. The features which differenti-
ate this from a non-neoplastic effusion are more subtle. They include the presence of
atypical mitotic figures and the degree of pleomorphism of the cells. In 148d a trinu-
cleate cell, a mitotic figure and four other pleomorphic cells with anisokaryosis are
present.
● 148e, 148f: This cat had an intra-abdominal carcinoma. Note the neoplastic clus-
ter in 148f. This cluster shows anisokaryosis, nuclear moulding and a mitotic figure.
● 148g. 148h: The large cell in the centre of 148g is a binucleate mesothelial cell.
Note the eosinophilic corona around the periphery. This effusion developed secon-
darily to restrictive pericarditis. The large basophilic cells present in this effusion are
reactive mesothelial cells and macrophages.
144
149-15 1: Questions
149b
149 This eight-year-old, neutered female dog (149a) presented with a four-month
history of lethargy, bilaterally symmetric non-pruritic alopecia and a rat-tail (149b).
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
il. Is there an age or breed predisposition for this condition?
ii. How would you confirm a diagnosis?
iv. What is the recommended treatment?
150 A five-year-old, neutered
female domestic shorthair cat has
Urea (mmol/l)
27
Creatinine (μmol/l)
221
been vomiting for six days. Re-
Sodium (mmol/)
136
sults of laboratory evaluation are
Potassium (mmol/l)
7.1
shown.
Total CO (mmol/)
14
i. What is your interpretation of
Calcium (mmol/l)
3.1
the azotaemia (pre-renal, renal,
Phosphorus (mmoll)
2.1
postrenal), and what diagnosis
Serum amylase (u/l)
1,200
would you consider?
Urine SG
1.017
ii. What is the mechanism for
Urine protein
Negative
hypercalcaemia in this disease?
Urine casts
Few, granular
151 True or false?
i The serum half-life of feline ALP activity is one-eighth of canine ALP or six hours.
i. ALP production and release in cats is not induced by corticosteroids and anti-convul-
sant therapy as in dogs.
. The presence of bilirubin in feline urine is always abnormal and precedes hyperbiliru-
binaemia.
iv. Increased serum GGT activity parallels ALP activity in the cat, as it is associated with
impaired biliary flow and has a bone isoenzyme.
v. The liver is responsible for producing all of the feline coagulation factors, therefore
cats with severe liver failure are prone to bleeding tendencies.
145
149-151:Answers
149 i. Hypothyroidism. Many endocrine diseases result in a non-pruritic alopecia
roidism. Lethargy is also a relatively common sign of hypothyroidism. Primary
hypothyroidism due to lymphocytic thyroiditis or follicular atrophy is the most likely
cause in an adult dog.
i. There appears to be a predisposition for middle-aged to older large breeds, par-
ticularly neutered females.
mi. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) test/combined total T4 and endogenous
TSH. Hypercholesterolaemia, mild normochromic normocytic anaemia and a low
serum total T4 concentration support a diagnosis of hypothyroidism but can also
occur in a variety of other diseases. Confirmation of a diagnosis has relied on demon-
strating minimal or no increase in serum total T4 concentrations after administration
of TSH or thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH). Assaying endogenous canine TSH
obviates the need for TSH stimulation. In primary hypothyroidism, circulating TSH
concentrations are high in the face of a low total T4 concentration.
iv. Sodium levothyroxine normalizes both circulating T4 and T3 concentrations. The
initial dose is 20-22 mg/kg p/o q12-24h with further dose adjustments based on
clinical response and post-pill testing.
150 i. Azotaemia with inappropriately dilute urine is consistent with renal azo-
taemia. However, the Na:K ratio is 19:1 which is consistent with hypoadrenocorti-
cism. Hypoadrenocorticism often results in azotaemia with dilute urine and may be
mistaken for primary renal failure. An ACTH stimulation test revealed non-
detectable plasma cortisol concentrations before and after intramuscular administra-
tion of ACTH. Therefore, hypoadrenocorticism was the diagnosis.
ii. Hypercalcaemia occurs in approximately one third of cases with hypoadrenocorti-
cism and is most likely to result from excessive renal tubular absorption of calcium.
151 i. True.
i. True.
.True.
iv. False. GGT does not have a bone isoenzyme, but the serum GGT elevation typi-
cally does parallel the rise in ALP activity in most hepatic diseases except in feline
hepatic lipidosis.
v. False. The liver does produce most of the coagulation factors, but not all of them.
Those factors that do not rely on synthesis by the liver include factor Vlll, von
Willebrand's factor, which is produced by endothelial cells, and calcium. It is true
that cats are prone to bleeding tendencies in states of liver failure due to the lack of
production of essential coagulation factors by the liver.
146
152 & 153:Questions
152
Sodium (mmol/)
142
Potassium (mmol/l)
3.9
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.6
Glucose (mmol/)
6.9
Urea (mmol/l)
16.5
Creatinine (μmol/l)
220
Phosphate (mmol/l)
1.7
ALT (u/l)
60
ALP (u/l)
300
Bile acids (μmol/l)
10
Bilirubin μmol/l)
15.8
Amylase (u/l)
152 A four-year-old, neutered male domestic
1,900
shorthair cat presented with episodic vomiting
Lipase (u/l)
300
Total protein (g/l)
75
(bilious material and food) and depression for
the past few months. The bouts of vomiting
Albumin (g/l)
30
Globulin (g/l)
45
were becoming more frequent. Appetite was
normal other than when the cat was showing
TLI (μg/l)
120
signs. Drinking was unremarkable. No diar-
rhoea was recognized. The cat resented abdominal palpation, although whether this
was due to pain was unclear. No other physical abnormalities were noted. The clini-
cal pathology results are shown. Abdominal radiography was performed (152).
Haematology showed a mild neutrophilia with a left shift. Red cell parameters were
unremarkable.
i. What is your interpretation of the clinical pathology results, and what other tests
might you request?
il. What is your interpretation of the radiograph?
. What treatment would you recommend?
153 An eight-year-old Springer
Spaniel is presented with constipation
of several months’ duration. Consti-
pated faeces were palpable on rectal
examination. Physical examination
was otherwise unremarkable. A bari-
um enema was given and this radi-
ograph was obtained (153).
i. What is your interpretation of the
radiograph?
i. What are the causes of this condi-
tion?
i. What treatment would you suggest?
147
152&I53:Answers
152 i. The elevated TLI is consistent with a diagnosis of pancreatic damage, e.g. pan-
creatitis. Elevated amylase and lipase concentrations may also be expected with pan-
creatic damage, although they are often normal, and are elevated with other condi-
tions, most notably renal failure (pre-renal or renal). The elevated ALP and normal
ALT are consistent with cholestasis/hepatocyte swelling rather than ongoing hepato-
cellular damage, which may reflect a primary hepatopathy. However, pancreatitis can
cause bile duct obstruction or hepatotoxic effects which could account for the abnor-
mal liver parameters. There is no indication of hepatic dysfunction, although hyper-
bilirubinaemia is occasionally recognized with pancreatitis. The raised urea and creati-
nine are consistent with primary renal failure and pre-renal azotaemia. Assessment of
urine SG is required to differentiate between these conditions. Hypocalcaemia is not
present in this cat and, although a reported anomaly in pancreatitis cases, it is very
rarely seen and is not specific for pancreatitis. Hyperglycaemia may be a feature of
pancreatitis and reflects islet cell dysfunction. In the cat, hypoglycaemia appears to be
a commoner finding in cases of chronic pancreatitis. The neutrophilia is consistent
with pancreatitis, although in many cases haematology may be unremarkable.
i. The abdominal radiograph was unremarkable. In acute severe pancreatitis, loss of
definition in the cranial abdomen may be appreciated due to a localized peritonitis. In
cases of chronic pancreatitis, plain radiography is usually unhelpful.
. Treatment is aimed at reducing pancreatic secretions. This can be achieved by
starving the animal for a couple of days and provision of intravenous fluids. Subse-
quently, a low-fat, highly digestible diet is recommended.
153 i. The colon is markedly dilated along its entire length. The colonic walls are
smooth but there does appear to be a narrowing of the colon at the pelvic inlet. This
would be consistent with stricture formation, but may also be seen when the colon has
not been adequately filled with barium, or if there is a peristaltic wave passing down
the colon. After administration of more barium this narrowed area disappeared, sug-
gesting that it was artefactual rather than due to a stricture.
i. Megacolon is diffuse dilation of the colon with ineffective motility. It may occur
(hypokalaemia or hypothyroidism) obstructions which prevent defecation for pro-
longed periods. In this case no underlying disorder was found.
i. Treatment is often unsuccessful. High-fibre diets which bulk up faeces may be use-
ful where there is some residual motor function. An increase in colonic volume is more
likely to stimulate peristalsis than an empty colon. In some cases, highly digestible
low-fibre diets, which produce little residue, are more helpful. Laxatives such as liquid
medical thera py fails, subtotal colectomy is the only remaining option.
148
154 & 155:Questions
154 This liver biopsy
(154, Masson trichrome
stain, x42 original magnifi-
 cation) was obtained surgi-
cally in a six-year-old,
female crossbreed dog pre-
sented with decreased
appetite, weight loss and
occasional vomiting of six
weeks’ duration. Clinical
pathology revealed hyper-
globulinaemia (47 g/l),
hypoalbuminaemia (22 g/l)
and elevated liver enzymes
(ALT 918 u/l, ALP 645 u/l). Urinalysis showed a SG of 1.026, trace protein and 2+
bilirubin. Fasting serum bile acids were 225 μmol/l. Abdominal radiography revealed
reduced liver size.
i. What are your comments on the liver biopsy.
ii. Does the liver biopsy explain the clinical signs and laboratory abnormalities?
155 Laboratory evaluation of a
seven-year-old, male Australian
Albumin (g/l)
32
ALP (u/)
Shepherd Dog with a two-month
50
history of polyuria and poly-
ALT (u/l)
40
dipsia is shown. Urine cytology
Total protein (g/l)
72
revealed moderate numbers of
Urea (mmol/l)
8.9
Creatinine (μmol/l)
62
struvite crystals only.
i. What is your interpretation of
Glucose (mmol/l)
5.6
the laboratory evaluation?
Sodium (mmol/l)
150
ii. What is your diagnosis?
Potassium (mmol/l)
3.8
Chloride (mmol/l)
132
mi. Contrast the different types of
Calcium (mmol/)
2.6
this syndrome?
Phosphorus (mmol/l)
1.7
Total CO: (mEq/l)
7
Anion gap (mEq/)
22
Urinalysis:
SG
1.011
pH
7.5
Glucose, ketones, bilirubin,
occult blood, protein
Negative
149
154 & 155: Answers
154 i. The biopsy shows severe chronic hepatitis, characterized by marked periportal
accumulation of mononuclear inflammatory cells which are invading the hepatic lob-
ule and infiltrating the hepatic parenchyma. The severity and invasive nature of the
infiltrate is similar to that seen in human chronic active hepatitis, which has an
autoimmune aetiology.
il. Yes. Clinical signs of liver disease are often vague and non-specific, as in this case,
and laboratory analysis is therefore essential. In this dog it showed marked liver
enzyme elevation indicative of hepatocellular damage {ALT) and cholestasis (ALP).
Low serum albumin may be due to reduced production by a chronically diseased
liver, since there is no evidence for albumin loss via the kidneys or gut. Hyper-
globulinaemia is common in acquired liver disease and reflects reduced Kupffer cell
function, induction of acute phase proteins and development of autoantibodies. High
fasting serum bile acid concentrations confirm the presence of a hepatic problem and
are an indication to perform liver biopsy.
155 i. The presence of hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis (elevated chloride, low
total COz and a normal anion gap) implies loss of bicarbonate from the body.
Because the urine pH is inappropriately alkaline with the metabolic acidosis, the loss
of bicarbonate is probably occurring in the urine.
i. These laboratory findings are most consistent with renal tubular acidosis (RTA).
the distal nephron. Type II RTA (proximal RTA) results from an impaired reabsorp-
 a i i i a  r d a  soi o o uo
aldosterone deficiency or resistance resulting in decreased hydrogen ion secretion by
the distal nephron and in hyperkalaemia which impairs ammonium ion production
and excretion.
1.50
156 & 157: Questions
56a
156b
156 This three-month-old, entire female Flat Coated Retriever presented with a
gradual onset of abdominal distension, dark, tarry stools and progressive lethargy
over the past month. On physical examination she was thin, with a markedly dis.
tended abdomen and fluid wave on ballottement. Her mucous membranes were pale
(156a) and she was depressed and reluctant to walk. Abdominal exploratory surgery
revealed a small liver with a mass of large, tortuous vessels visible (156b). A por-
tovenogram demonstrated an enlarged vessel with a palpable thrill. This was thought
to be an anomalous connection between the hepatic vein and the portal vein.
i. Can you explain the pathophysiology of the ascitic fluid formation and anaemia
based on the imaging studies?
i. What is the prognosis, and what therapy can be offered?
157 A ten-year-old, entire male Boxer
(157) is presented with polyuria and
polydipsia of several months' duration.
The dog is nocturic. The dog drinks in
excess of 150 ml/kg/day and will
attempt to drink water out of sinks
and the toilet at any opportunity. He is
in a lean body condition, but has a
good appetite and is not losing weight.
No other abnormalities are reported
and physical examination is unremark
able. You suspect diabetes insipidus.
i. How might you proceed to confirm
your diagnosis?
ii. How would you treat diabetes insipidus?
151
156&I57:Answers
156 i. The finding of an intrahepatic arteriovenous anastomosis is compatible with
the presence of portal hypertension and the formation of ascites due to increased
hydrostatic pressure and leakage of hepatic lymph into the peritoneal space. GI
bleeding, evidenced by the melenic stools, and resultant anaemia are often the result
of gastroduodenal ulcerations, which may occur with portal hypertension, and
coagulopathies due to decreased factor production by the liver.
i. The prognosis for this congenital defect is, unfortunately, very poor. Palliative
therapy with fresh whole blood, gastric protectants and diuretics may help to
improve the immediate distress, but is unlikely to have any long-lasting benefits.
157 i. A full serum biochemistry screen is indicated initially to rule out other causes
of PU/PD (such as renal disease, hepatic disease, electrolyte disorders, etc.) prior to
performing a water deprivation test. Urinalysis is required to check urine SG {dilute
urine would be expected with diabetes insipidus). Urine sediment should be inactive
with a trace to no proteinuria. Haematology is usually normal in dogs with diabetes
insipidus.
A water deprivation test is indicated if no other metabolic cause for the clinical
signs is evident. The modified water deprivation test is indicated. This involves an
abrupt deprivation of water followed by assessing response to vasopressin. Following
water deprivation, urine SG and body weight are assessed every two hours until the
urine concentrates or 5% of body weight is lost. If there is a failure to concentrate
urine, DDAVP {desmopressin acetate) {2 μg i/v) is administered and urine SG moni-
tored hourly for up to four hours when the urine should have concentrated. A failure
to respond to water deprivation but a response to DDAVP is consistent with central
diabetes insipidus. A failure to respond to DDAVP is consistent with a form of
nephrogenic dia betes insipidus.
Misdiagnoses may occur if medullary washout is present. This could be ruled out
prior to the water deprivation test by slightly restricting water intake and adding salt
to the food for five days prior to testing.
i. Diabetes insipidus is treated by replacing antidiuretic hormone {ADH). This is
achieved by administering DDAVP {a synthetic analogue of ADH). The intranasal
preparation should be used for long-term use. It may be administered by placing
drops into the nose or onto the conjunctivae. It is not essential to treat provided a
dog has free access to water.
152
158 & I59: Questions
158 This dark field micro-
158
scopy photomicrograph (158)
was taken of urine obtained
from a four-year-old, unvac-
cinated male Boxer who was
pyrexic, anorexic and began
vomiting three days prior to
presentation after swimming in 
a stagnant farm pond. On clin-
ical examination the dog was
jaundiced, mildly dehydrated
and depressed. Haematological
findings included a neutrophil-
ia (21.3 × 109/l) with a mild left shift (3.2 x 109/l band cells), and a thrombocytopenia
(8.7 x 109/1).
i. Can you identify the shape of the organism demonstrated by this technique?
i. When would this particular test be indicated?
mi. If this test was not available, how else could you arrive at this diagnosis?
iv. Would appropriate vaccination prophylactics have protected this dog from disease?
159a
159 An adult, small breed dog presented with vague signs of apparent pain after eat-
ing, occasionally accompanied by retching and regurgitation immediately after eat-
ing. The dog was keen to eat and at all other times was normal. He exercised wel
and was active. A thoracic radiograph was taken after administration of barium
(159a).
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. What is the cause of the problem?
mi. How would you treat this condition?
153
158&I59:Answers
158 i. The organisms viewed are spiral in shape and are Leptospira spp.
i. Dark field microscopy (DFM) is a technique used for rapid identification of lep-
tospires within urine of infected dogs. As leptospires are not readily isolated, DFM pro-
vides a rapid means of diagnosis in animals that are suspected of being infected based on
signs of acute renal or hepatic failure in an endemic area.
mi. Culture of Leptospira organisms requires special growth media and they commonly
prove difficult to isolate. Antibody titres are commonly used to demonstrate infection.
Since Leptospira bacterins are a part of most routine vaccination protocols, most ani-
mals will have a low baseline antibody titre. Paired serum antibody concentrations will
demonstrate increasing titres and, hence, active disease. Serum titres should be evaluated
in the acute stage upon presentation; a convalescent titre is obtained 2-4 weeks later and
this should show a four-fold rise in titres in actively infected animals.
iv. Routine vaccinations contain the two main serovars of Leptospira, L. canicola and L.
icterobaemorrbagiae. Immunization is effective in reducing the severity and prevalence
of infection, but does not prevent the carrier state. There is little to no crossover in
immunity with different serovars such as L. pomona or L. grippotyphosa, which can
also result in clinical renal and hepatic failure in infected animals. Animals in endemic
areas should receive frequent vaccinations.
159 i. The radiograph shows
159b
a barium-filled outpouching
from the oesophagus and dil-
atation cranial to the lesion.
The diagnosis is an oesopha-
geal diverticulum.
i. Acquired oesophageal
diverticula are classified as
pulsion or traction forms. The
former result from increased
intraluminal pressure or from herniation of mucosa through a disruption in the muscu-
lar layer of the oesophageal wall. They do not contain layers of muscle wall and most
   o  o     
secondarily to perioesophageal inflammation in which all layers of the oesophageal wal
are pulled away from the lumen to form an evagination.
A developmental redundancy of oesophageal tissue seen at the thoracic inlet may be
present in young animals, particularly brachycephalic breeds. This pouch reduces in size
as the neck is extended and tends to disappear as the dog matures.
fi. Surgical excision (1s9b). The owners of this dog elected for euthanasia.
1.54
160 & I61: Questions
160 This mesenteric portogram
160
(160) was obtained in a one-
year-old, male Cairn Terrier
with a history of intermittent
diarrhoea and vomiting, inap-
petence and failure to gain
weight. More recently the
owners had noticed aimless
wandering and disorientation
following feeding. Physical
examination revealed a thin,
depressed dog. The most no-
table finding in blood tests was
markedly elevated serum bile acid concentrations (pre-prandial 336 μmol/l, postprandial
521 μmol/l). Abdominal radiography showed a small liver.
i Why and how is mesenteric portography performed?
i. What is your diagnosis?
mi. Does this explain the clinical signs?
iv. What is the treatment of choice for this dog?
16la
[6[b
161 A two-year-old, male West Highland White Terrier has a six-month history of
intermittent vomiting and diarrhoea (161a). When afflicted with GI signs the dog fre-
quently eats grass. Recently the dog has become very lethargic when exercised and
Occasionally coughs. Haematological examination reveals an eosinophilia (6.3 x 109/l)
and basophilia (0.9 x109/l). There is no murmur but chest radiographs show signifi-
cant right heart enlargement and a patchy bronchointerstitial pattern in the lung
(161b). Barium impregnated polyspheres (BIPS) are still present in the stomach eight
hours after administration, and follow-up radiographs show delayed gastric emptying.
Faecal examination reveals the presence of Giardia oocysts and some larvae.
i. What parasites might this dog have?
ii. How did the dog acquire the infections?
ii. How would you treat them?
155
160 & I6l:Answers
160 i. Mesenteric portography is performed to document the presence and location of a
portosystemic vascular anomaly. A loop of jejunum is isolated through a small ventral
midline laparotomy. An over-the-needle catheter is inserted and secured in place, and a
water-soluble contrast medium (e.g. Urografin 370 or Omnipaque 350) (1 ml/kg body
weight) is injected as a bolus. A single lateral radiograph is taken as the final millilitre of
contrast medium is injected, and another injection is made in order to obtain a ven-
trodorsal view. Congenital portosystemic shunts may also be demonstrated ultrasono-
graphically, but portography is often still performed to confirm the location and deter-
mine the potential for surgery.
fi. The portogram shows a single extrahepatic portosystemic shunt.
 fi. Yes. The vague multisystem clinical signs are typical of what can be seen in dogs with
 a o    a e   d  
gain weight, clinical findings can be highly variable. Neurological signs resulting from
hepatic encephalopathy occur commonly and may be prominent following ingestion of a
high-protein meal. Signs typically wax and wane. Routine laboratory evaluation can be
unremarkable but may reveal erythrocyte microcytosis, variable liver enzyme elevation,
low blood urea, hypocholesterolaemia and/or hypoglycaemia. The most important find-
ing is marked increase in serum bile acid concentrations {especially postprandial). Blood
ammonia concentration may be increased, but due to problems in obtaining a reliable
assay this is less commonly measured in practice. Liver size is often reduced, since the
liver atrophies due to the lack of hepatotrophic factors present in portal blood.
iv. Partial or total ligation of the aberrant vessel. Extrahepatic shunts are more accessible
for ligation than intrahepatic shunts, but improved surgical technique has led to a
greater success rate for the ligation of intrahepatic shunts as well. Shunt surgery requires
experience and expertise, and is best carried out in a referral situation. Most animals
improve markedly after surgery. Medical management of hepatic encephalopathy, using
lactulose, oral antibiotics and a low-protein diet, is essential before surgery and should
161 i. The dog does have Giardia infection which is probably responsible for the GI
signs, but the intense eosinophilia and basophilia is not typical of simple giardiasis. The
presence of larvae in the faeces, in association with coughing, is consistent with Oslerus
osleri (Filaroides osleri) or Angiostrongyhus vasorum infection. The mild right heart fail-
ure, radiographic pulmonary changes and characteristic larval morphology are consis-
tent with angiostrongylosis.
fi. The long history of GI signs suggests that the dog's original problem was the Giardid
infection. Delayed gastric emptying is probably associated with intestinal inflammation.
Giardia oocysts are usually acquired by ingestion of faecally contaminated water. The
consequent GI disease caused the dog to eat grass and, in doing so, it inadvertently ate
the molluscs that are the intermediate host of Argiostrongylus.
i. Both Giardia and Angiostrongylus can be treated with fenbendazole.
1.56
162 & I63: Questions
162 A six-year-old crossbreed
[62
dog is presented for profuse
vomiting and depression four
days after having ripped a car-
pet to shreds. A string found
wrapped around the base of
the tongue extended down the
oesophagus. Endoscopically a
piece of carpet was seen to be
attached to the string and
other string was seen to pass
through the pylorus. The
string around the tongue in
this dog was cut and a large
mat of carpet retrieved via a
gastrotomy (162). The strings passing down the small intestine were also pulled out
through the stomach. The dog ma de a full recovery.
What potential complications occur in animals that have a linear foreign body,
and how are such complications managed?
163 A two-year-old male Labrador is presented collapsed with pale mucous mem-
branes, bradycardia, inappetence for 24 hours and anuria for 12 hours. He has a his-
tory of vague lethargy, intermittent vomiting and diarrhoea. You suspect hypoad-
renocorticism and take blood samples to make the diagnosis. Complete the table
below with the values of the parameters you might expect if this dog has hypoad-
renocorticism.
Result
(Normal)
ALT (u/l)
(<80)
ALP (u/l)
(001>)
Bile acids (μmol/l)
(<15)
Glucose (mmol/l)
(3.55.5)
Urea (mmol/l)
(<9)
Creatinine (μmol/)
(<110)
Calcium (mmol/)
(2-3)
Phosphate (mmol/l)
(0.92.3)
Sodium (mmoll)
(140-153)
Potassium (mmol/)
(3.85.3)
Basal cortisol (nmol/l)
(<260)
Post-ACTH cortisol (nmol/l)
(<660)
157
162&I63:Answers
162 · Vomiting and dehydration, which must be managed by intravenous fluid
therapy. Antiemetics such as metoclopramide are contraindicated if there is intestinal
obstruction, as they increase the impaction of the foreign body and may cause a per-
foration to develop.
● Removal of a long string may require multiple enterotomies. However, a technique
of attaching the string to a rubber catheter through a proximal enterotomy and then
milking’ the catheter along the intestine out through the anus has been described.
● Perforation of the intestine frequently occurs at numerous sites as the string acts as
a cheese wire' cutting through the intestinal wall where it bunches. Careful examina-
tion of the whole length of the intestine and repair of every hole is mandatory. If per-
foration has occurred, abdominal lavage with copious volumes of sterile saline and
aggressive antibiotic therapy (such as intravenous clavulanate-potentiated amoxy-
cillin and metronidazole or gentamicin) are indicated. Drainage is required in severe
cases of peritoneal contamination and septic peritonitis; closed drains fe.g. Penrose
drains) are ineffective in the peritoneal cavity and open peritoneal drainage is
required.
163 Elevations in urea, creatinine and potassium concentrations, and a low sodium
concentration would be expected. Hypocalcaemia and hypoglycaemia are variable
features. ALT, ALP, bile acids and phosphate would be expected to be normal. A low
basal cortisol value which fails to rise significantly following administration of
ACTH is required to make the diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism. The values
obtained in this dog were:
Result
(Normal)
ALT (u/l)
06
(<80)
ALP (u/l)
120
(<100)
Bile acids (μmol/l)
4.8
(<15)
Glucose (mmol/l)
4.2
(3.5-5.5)
Urea (mmol/l)
67
(<9)
Creatinine (μmol/)
1,200
(011>)
Calcium (mmol/l)
1.8
(2-3)
Phosphate (mmol/l)
1.0
(0.9-2.3)
Sodium (mmol/)
122
(140-153)
Potassium (mmol/l)
7.1
(3.85.3)
Basal cortisol (nmol/l)
<12.5
(<260)
Post-ACTH cortisol (nmol/l)
<12.5
(<660)
1.58
164-166: Questions
164 A 12-year-old, neutered male, 28 kg Irish
164
Setter began vomiting 24 hours prior to present-
ing in a collapsed state. The owners describe the
vomitus as bile-coloured with flecks of coffee
ground-type material present. On physical exami-
nation the dog was pale, depressed, tachycardic
(150 bpm) and had weak peripheral pulses. PCV
was 0.17 l/l with no regenerative response appar-
ent. A transfusion of fresh whole blood was
administered and an endoscopic examination of
the stomach was performed (164).
i. Describe what you see, and give a list of differ-
ential dia gnoses.
ii. How will you proceed to reach a definitive
diagnosis?
165 A photomicrograph of a
cytology preparation from the
centrifuged sediment of a pleural
effusion from a young adult cat
(165). It is stained with Wright's
stain.
What is the diagnosis?
166 An Irish Setter with chronic
66
intermittent diarrhoea and weight
loss is diagnosed as having gluten-
sensitive enteropathy (166)
i. What is gluten?
ii. How can this dog be treated?
ii. Is the Irish Setter the only
breed that can suffer from gluten
sensitivity?
159
164-166: Answers
164 i. There is a raised, rounded lesion adjacent to the cardia which appears to be sup-
ported by a stalk of tissue and has a central mucosal defect or ulcer. This ulcer is likely to
be responsible for the vomiting, rapid blood loss and collapsed state of the dog on admis-
sion. The anaemia is likely to be non-regenerative because of the rapidity of the blood loss
and lack of time for the bone marrow to respond. Causes of gastric ulceration include:
administration of drugs such as NSAIDs or steroids which alter the mucous barrier and
gastric blood flow; repeated exposure to allergens or toxins; severe systemic illness and
resulting hyperacidity such as liver and renal failure; neurological disease; or gastric
ischaemia associated with trauma, shock or hypoadrenocorticism, primary neoplastic dis-
ease or paraneoplastic disorders such as mast cell degranulation or hypergastrinaemia due
to a gastrinoma. Pertinent to this dog's history was the administration of phenylbutazone
(200 mg every other day) for the past four weeks for treatment of arthritis.
fi. This dog was apparently healthy prior to the acute onset of vomiting, but subclinical
systemic disorders should be ruled out by performing a complete biochemical profile,
blood count and urinalysis. Serum gastrin assays may help rule out gastrin-producing
pancreatic tumours which may be small and otherwise not visible on routine imaging
studies. Other than the anaemia, all other laboratory parameters were normal for this
dog. Barium contrast studies may demonstrate ulcers but may not reveal subtle mucosal
lesions. Endoscopic examination allows visualization of the ulcer and enables mucosal
biopsies to be obtained to differentiate an inflammatory lesion from neoplasia. Care must
be taken not to disturb the central area of the lesion when obtaining biopsies as this may
induce further bleeding. Histopathology was consistent with inflammation or reactive
hyperplasia rather than neoplasia.
165 Intrathoracic malignant lymphoma. This is quite a pleomorphic population of
lymphoblasts and lymphocytes. Unlike lymph node aspirates, in which the presence
of lymphoblasts in modest numbers is a normal finding, the appearance of lym-
phoblasts in an effusion is nearly always diagnostic of malignant lymphoma.
166 i. Gluten is the alcohol-soluble protein found in wheat and related cereals,
namely barley, rye and oats.
il. Gluten-sensitive enteropathy can be successfully managed by feeding a gluten-free
diet. Rice and maize {corn) are gluten free and are suitable cereal sources that can be
fed; wheat, barley, rye and oats should be avoided. Mashed potato is an alternative
source of starch. Gluten sensitivity has been definitively demonstrated in Irish Setters
      aa e  s  
However, such strict criteria are unlikely to be applied in the practice setting.
m. Although it has yet to be proven beyond doubt in other breeds, it would be sur-
prising if no other dog breeds were susceptible. Indeed, gluten sensitivity is already
suspected in Soft-coated Wheaten Terriers and Samoyeds.
160
167-169:Questions
167 A photomicrograph of an
aspirate from a retrobulbar mass
isshown (167).Itis stainedwith
Wright's stain.
i.Describe the cytological ap-
pearance of the aspirate.
ii.What is the diagnosis?
168 This hepaticultrasonogram
(168) was obtained in a 12-year-
oldcat with a two-month his-
tory of intermittent anorexia,
vomiting and jaundice.The cat
responded transiently to fluid
therapy and antibiotics, but the
signs would recur. The cat was
MissingImage
mildly jaundiced and in moder-
ate body condition.Abdominal
radiographs showed mild hepa-
tomegaly.Haematology was
normal.Serum biochemistry
revealed hyperbilirubinaemia
(35μmol/l), elevated liver en-
zymes (ALT 345 u/l,ALP 765u/l) and hypercholesterolaemia(11.2mmol/l).
i.What are your differential diagnoses?
ii.What doyou see on the hepatic ultrasound picture?
ii.How would you proceed to obtain a definitive diagnosis?
169A four-year-old Dobermann is presentedwithweightgain,bilaterally symmetri-
cal non-pruritic alopecia,lethargy and inappetence.You suspect hypothyroidism.
i.What clinical biochemistry/haematology features might you expect in routine tests,
and why do they develop?
ii.How wouldyou confirm the diagnosis?
ili.What are the causes of hypothyroidism?
161
167-169:Answers
167 i. This is a good example of degenerate neutrophils with both extracellular and
intracellular bacteria which are a mixture of rods, cocci and chains of rods.
i. Retrobulbar abscess.
168 i. The cat has hepatobiliary jaundice, with both cholestatic and hepatocellular
involvement. Liver enzymes in the cat have a short half-life, and this degree of enzyme
elevation is very significant. The high cholesterol concentration could indicate extrahep-
atic bile duct obstruction, but this finding is not as helpful in the cat as in the dog since
 in the cat many conditions tend to be accompanied by hypercholesterolaemia. Similarly,
most liver diseases in the cat result in hepatomegaly. Considerations in this cat would be:
cholangiohepatitis, extrahepatic bile duct obstruction, neoplasia, hepatic lipidosis, FIP
(less likely) and other miscellaneous causes (such as hepatic amyloidosis).
fi. Ultrasonography shows marked dilation of the bile duct (BD), almost to the diameter
of the portal vein (PV). Caudal of the liver, a lucent mass (?) is observed in the area of
the pancreas. Therefore, this cat has extrahepatic bile duct obstruction possibly due to a
pancreatic lesion.
m. Extrahepatic bile duct obstruction is an indication for exploratory laparotomy. Bile
duct obstruction in the cat is often due to neoplasia (especially pancreatic adenocar-
cinoma) compressing the common bile duct, as was the case in this cat. Other causes
include bile duct compression by pancreatitis, sludged bile associated with the cholan-
giohepatitis complex, choleliths or bile duct strictures. Surgical intervention may involve
a cholecystotomy and bile cultures in case of choleliths, or more radical biliary diversion
procedures in case of strictures or neoplasia. Pancreatic neoplasia is usually inoperable.
169 i. Serum cholesterol is raised in 66-75% of hypothyroid dogs due to decreased
lipoprotein lipolysis and a reduction of low density lipoprotein receptors. These alter-
ations result in an increase in very low density and low density lipoproteins, i.e. hyper-
triglyceridaemia and hypercholesterolaemia. Where a myopathy has developed, an
increase in creatine kinase activity may be seen. Other routine biochemical assays are
unremarkable. Haematologically a mild non-regenerative, normochromic, normocytic
anaemia may develop in 25-40% of affected dogs due to reduced RBC production
fi. Assessment of total plasma thyroxine levels may be useful. However, non-thyroidal
illness will secondarily reduce plasma T4 levels. Free T4 may be assayed as an alternative
as this is less susceptible to artefactual lowering. Measurement of canine thyroid stimu
lating hormone (TSH) in conjunction with assessment of thyroxine is more helpful as a
disease a normal TSH value would be expected. Thyroid stimulation tests are useful,
although rarely used because of the limited availability of pharmaceutical grade TSH
and variable responses to thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH).
i. Primary hypothyroidism, the commoner form, develops due to lymphocytic thyroid-
itis or thyroid atrophy. Congenital hypothyroidism (thyroid agenesis, dysgenesis or
dyshormonogenesis) is uncommon. Central hypothyroidism usually results from adeno-
hypophyseal or hypothalamic neoplasia. Central congenital hypothyroidism, most often
hypophyseal compression by a cystic Rathke's pouch, is rare.
162
170-I72: Questions
170 A kitten you vaccinated two days previously
170
has returned with upper respiratory tract (URT)
signs. The owner says your vaccine made the cat
sick; he is angry and is threatening to sue both you
and the vaccine manufacturer. On examination
you find that the kitten's tongue is ulcerated (170).
i. What do you think caused the clinical signs?
ii. How are you going to prove it?
m. What explanations could account for the clini-
cal signs appearing so shortly after vaccination?
iv. Which of the explanations is most likely?
v. Have you been professionally negligent?
171 A 13-year-old, neutered male Dachshund presented with acute onset seizures
(1-2 minutes’ duration), particularly at exercise and often immediately prior to a
feed. Between fits the dog was normal. The dog was fed twice a day and had a good
appetite. No other historical features were reported by the owner. Physically the dog
was overweight; no other abnormalities were evident. Blood glucose was 2.4 mmol/l,
calcium 2.5 mmol/l, sodium 147 mmol/l, potassium 4.6 mmol/l, urea 4.8 mmol/l,
creatinine 990 μmoll, ALP 500 u/l, ALT 200 u/l, bile acids 1.5S μmol/l. Haematology
was unremarka ble.
i. What diagnosis would you consider to be most likely?
i. What further diagnostic tests would you perform?
172b
172 Two photomicrographs of an aspirate from a rapidly growing, 2 cm diameter,
solid subcutaneous mass from the caudal lumbar area of a 12-year-old cat are shown
(172a, 172b).
i. Describe the cytological findings in 172a.
ii. What is the structure in the centre of 172b?
ii. Is this a malignant neoplasm?
163
170-172:Answers
170 i. Feline calicivirus infection (FCV) (though feline poxvirus (cowpox virus) can, occa-
sionally, also cause oral ulceration).
i. Take a swab from the oropharynx into viral transport medium and send it to a labora-
tory for virus isolation. Unlike feline herpesvirus, FCV is shed continually, but most cats
spontaneously recover and eliminate the virus.
im.(a) The cat was incubating a FCV infection already; the period from infection with
FCV to development of clinical signs is 2-10 days; or {b) the vaccine was aerosolized, caus
ing URT infection by the vaccine virus; or (c) the vaccine virus had not been attenuated
properly.
iv. I is most likely that the cat was already incubating FCV infection at the time of vacci-
nation. Vaccine manufacturers have careful quality control to ensure that vaccinal viruses
do not cause severe clinical signs: suspected breakdowns should be reported to the manu-
facturer. To demonstrate that vaccinal virus did not cause the clinical signs, the FCV iso-
lated from the cats can be compared, by plaque-typing and cross-neutralization testing,
with the isolate used in the vaccine.
v. Only if you did not give the cat a thorough clinical examination, including temperature
and oral mucosa checks, before administering the vaccine. Aerosolizing the vaccine is acci-
dental rather than negligent.
171 i. The hypoglycaemia could account for the seizures. The observation that the fits
Occur prior to feeding or at exercise when the blood glucose is lowest is an important fac-
tor. Idiopathic epilepsy is more likely to occur at rest than at exercise. The normal calcium
provides no evidence of hypocalcaemia. Other metabolic causes which can probably be
eliminated include hepatic encephalopathy, as the dog is normal between fits and the bile
acids are unremarkable. Hypoglycaemia in this older animal is most likely due to an insuli-
Creatic tumours, growth hormone deficiency and cortisol deficiency. Although end-stage
hepatic failure is unlikely in this dog, the ALP and ALT are elevated. This may reflect a
benign subclinical hepatopathy or tumour metastasis to the liver.
ii. Documentation of elevated plasma insulin and low blood glucose taken at the same time
may demonstrate the mass and it can be used to assess the liver for metastases.
172 i. The aspirate contains blood and a highly pleomorphic population of round to
spindyloid cells. The neoplastic features present are anisokaryosis, variable numbers of
nuclei per cell, varia ble size of nuclei within a multinucleate cell, mitotic figures, variable
cytoplasmic basophilia, variable numbers and size of nucleoli, and nuclear moulding.
ii. An extraordinary, enormous mitotic figure.
ii. There are numerous criteria for malignancy in these photomicrographs. Cytological
classification of neoplasms as malignant must always be very cautious because some
benign neoplasms have numerous cytological criteria for malignancy and some malig-
nant neoplasms appear cytologically benign. Malignancy really reflects the behaviour
of a tumour rather than its appearance per se. This neoplasm has malignant potential.
164
173 & 174: Questions
173 While performing a post-mortem
173
examination on a cat which had a his-
tory of weight loss and intermittent
anorexia and dullness, you find this
lesion in the kidney (173).
i. What are the two most likely diag-
noses of the lesion?
ii. How are you going to confirm the
diagnosis?
mi. What will you advise about testing
the client's other two cats in each of
the two conditions?
174 Match the serum biochemistry results below with the description of the animal
they most likely represent, and give a short explanation of the pathogenesis for these
changes or the lack thereof. For each dog there is a corresponding best matching set
of values such that all choices will be used when properly matched. Choose carefully,
since some animals may match two or more of the choices provided.
Dog I
Dog 2
Dog 3
Dog 4
Dog 5
ALP (u/l)
402
274
1,248
2,480
200
ALT (u/l)
45
68
145
1,200
586
Bile acids (mmol/l)
-fasted
6
28
38
41
107
postprandial
12
162
49
64
136
a. Six-month-old, male Yorkshire Terrier with a portosystemic shunt, on antibiotic and
lactulose therapy, and currently behaving normally.
b. Twelve-year-old, neutered female Cocker Spaniel displaying polydipsia, polyuria,
polyphagia, weight gain and abdominal distension.
c. Six-year-old, entire female Golden Retriever with acute vomiting and diarrhoea,
abdominal pain and elevated plasma lipase and amylase concentrations.
d Three-month-old, entire female Labrador; clinically normal
e. Nine-year-old, neutered male Maltese Terrier with hepatic cirrhosis and stable clinical
signs.
165
173&I74:Answers
173 i. Renal lymphoma or FIP pyogranuloma. The first may be FeLV or FIV related.
il. Histopathology.
mi. If histopathology confirms the presence of lymphoma, test the remaining two cats for
FeLV and FIV for the following reasons: 85% of FeLV positive cats are dead within 3.5
years, so FeLV infection will seriously affect the cat's life expectancy; cats should not be
introduced where there are FeLV or FIV infected cats; FeLV and FIV are immunosup-
pressive. Owners need to be alerted to the possibility that infections can be more serious
in FeLV and FIV infected cats than in normal cats, so that they can seek veterinary
attention earlier.
If FIP is confirmed, discuss with the owner the possibility of testing for FCoV anti-
bodies. Since FCoV is very contagious, you would expect the two in-contact cats to be
seropositive, therefore testing is not worthwhile except for obtaining an antibody titre
for comparison with a second test 3-6 months later. If the immunofluorescent antibody
titres have fallen to less than 10, it is safe to introduce a new cat. Some 90% of seroposi-
tive cats do not develop FIP.
174 Dog 1 - d. Alkaline phosphatase has three major isoenzymes; liver, bone and cor-
ticosteroid-induced. Young growing puppies normally have a mildly increased serum
ALP activity due an increase in the bone isoenzyme.
Dog 2 - a. Animals with portosystemic shunts commonly have normal liver enzyme
activities unless they have other encephalopathic or sepsis-induced liver enzyme activ-
ity. Classically these dogs have a normal to mildly increased fasted bile acid concentra-
Dog 3 - b. This is a classic description of a dog with hyperadrenocorticism. The
greater increase in ALP than ALT enzymatic activities is due to the corticosteroid-
induced isoenzyme, and a normal to mildly increased ALT concentration is likely from
hepatocellular leakage and glycogen storage in steroid hepatopathies. Mild increases
in serum bile acid concentrations may occur.
Dog 4 - c. Pancreatitis should be a high consideration in this animal and these liver
enzyme activities would support that diagnosis. Cholestasis resulting from a pancreati-
tis results in increased ALP production and, depending on the severity of inflamma-
tion, the ALT activity will increase as well but typically to a lesser extent.
Dog 5 - e. Animals with chronic, quiescent hepatic cirrhosis may have normal to mild
increases in liver enzyme activities despite decreased hepatic function, as evidenced by
moderate elevations in both fasted and postprandial bile acids.
166
175 & I76: Questions
175a
175b
175 A ten-year-old Weimaraner is anorexic and has profuse diarrhoea and severe
  o     e  s 
acid concentrations have led to the tentative diagnosis of a protein-losing enteropathy
(PLE). Endoscopically the duodenum is poorly distensible with pale, smooth and
thickened mucosa (175b).
i. What diseases can cause a PLE?
i. Which is most likely in this case?
jii. How would you make a diagnosis and treat this dog?
176 Your client breeds Ragdoll cats and has a recurrent problem every year with
fading kittens. All the cats in the household are vaccinated against FPV, FCV, FHV
 and FeLV and boosters are up to date. All the cats are routinely tested negative for
FIV, FeLV, FCoV antibodies and Chlamydia. One morning your client presents you
with one dead three-week-old kitten which died suddenly overnight, and a nine-
week-old kitten from another litter which was perfectly all right yesterday but is pre-
sented today collapsed, with a subnormal temperature, dehydrated and close to
death.
i. The owner does not want euthanasia of the nine-week-old kitten. How are you
going to treat it?
i. What is your tentative diagnosis?
i. How will you confirm your diagnosis?
iv. Why are littermates of affected kittens clinically healthy at present?
v. How will you protect the littermates?
vi. What advice will you give the Ragdoll breeder to prevent recurrence of this prob-
lem?
167
175 &I76:Answers
175 i. IBD; lymphocytic-plasmacytic
175c
enteritis {LPE); eosinophilic enteritis;
granulomatous enteritis; lymphangiecta-
sia; intestinal lymphosarcoma.
i. The age and anorexia are typical of
intestinal lymphosarcoma but severe IBD
could also be the cause. The appearance
of the duodenum is typical of cellular
infiltration of the mucosa, but the ap-
pearance is not diagnostic of any specific
disease.
im. Intestinal biopsy. Endoscopic biopsies can be too superficial or too distant from
the primary lesion to give an accurate diagnosis. In addition, LPE can coexist with
lymphosarcoma. Multiple endoscopic biopsies are more likely to give an accurate
S  se       i s
taken from several levels of the intestine are indicated to show malignant lympho
cytes within the mucosa and infiltrating the submucosa and muscular layers (175c).
Intestinal lymphosarcoma is poorly responsive to combination chemotherapy;
patients are often severely malnourished because of the associated malabsorption and
are less tolerant of chemotherapy. Thus the prognosis is guarded to grave.
176 i. Treat the kitten symptomatically with intravenous fluids and a heat pad.
il. Feline parvovirus (FPV) (feline panleucopenia virus or feline infectious enteritis).
mi. Take large intestinal contents from the three-week-old kitten and faeces or rectal
swabs from the living kitten to check for FPV. As FPV can pass through a cat or kit-
ten in under 48 hours, other confirmatory tests are needed in case the result is nega-
tive. Submit duodenum, jejunum and ileum for histopathology. Take blood from the
- sa ao as  r Po an un sie ae  n 
lowing natural exposure are much higher than in vaccinated cats.
iv. Some littermates will be protected by maternally derived antibody. The amount
any kitten receives depends on the queen's antibody titre and how well the kitten
sucked. Many kittens survive FPV infection and may not become clinically ill, but
stress such as rehoming or intercurrent intestinal infection can push a kitten into
clinical disease. This can manifest as sudden death.
v. Remove them to a clean household before their maternally derived antibody
wanes. To calculate their approximate titre, take the queen's titre and halve it for
every two weeksof thekitten's life
vi. The best advice is to stop breeding kittens for a year. This will allow the amount
of virus in the premises to decrease. FPV can survive for up to a year in the environ-
ment. There is no carrier state. Viral propagation depends on susceptible animals
being introduced; therefore, by stopping introducing susceptible new kittens and cats
or only introducing fully vaccinated cats, virus can be eliminated from an environ-
ment. Parvocidal disinfectants will help to reduce virus load, but virus will still be
present in furnishings and carpet which cannot be disinfected.
168
177 & I78: Questions
177 This one-year-old, female
177a
 Deerhound has been experiencing
behavioural abnormalities where
she intermittently appears blind,
will stand and stare, or will press
her head against a wall (177a)
On physical exa mination she was
in poor body condition, severely
depressed, barely responsive and
semi-comatose (177b))
i. What underlying disease states
lead to hepatic encephalopathy?
i. What concurrent clinical and
biochemical abnormalities con-
177b
tribute to hepatic encephalopa-
thy?
ii. How are you going to treat
the current clinical signs?
178 True or false?
i. Hepatic AST is released later and typically represents a consequence of more severe
injury than do increa ses in serum ALT activity.
i. With acute, severe hepatic disease, an increase in ALP precedes hyperbiliru-
binaemia followed by bilirubinuria.
mi. Hypercholesterolaemia occurs in liver failure due to the increased production of
very low density lipoproteins (VLDLs).
iv. Since the liver is responsible for producing the majority of coagulation factors,
normal screening tests such as prothrombin times (PT) and activated partial throm-
boplastin times (APTT) are used as sensitive indicators of normal liver function.
v. Coagulopathies due to obstructive jaundice and relative vitamin K deficiency lead
to the decreased production of factors Il, Vll, IX and X and results in prolonged
bleeding times. The administration of parenteral vitamin K may improve the PT and
partial thromboplastin time (PTT) by greater than 30% within 24 hours.
169
177 &I78:Answers
177 i. Hepatic encephalopathy refers to a spectrum of neurological disorders associated
with advanced liver disease. In young dogs such as this one, a congenital portocaval
shunt should always be suspected, particularly considering that Deerhounds are predis-
posed to intrahepatic shunting. Acquired liver diseases such as acute hepatic failure of
any origin, or chronic cirrhotic or fibrotic livers with secondary portosystemic shunting,
can result in hepatic encephalopathy in animals of any age.
fi. Dehydration, azotaemia, alkalaemia and hypokalaemia. Therapy should be aimed at
their correction. Secondary infections and constipation can lead to increased bacterial
production of ammonia and GI bleeding may provide a high-protein substrate for am-
monia production.
ii. The definitive treatment is surgical ligation of the shunting vessel; however,
encephalopathic patients must first be managed medically:
● In acutely encephalopathic patients demonstrating signs of seizures, amaurosis and
potentially coma, early intervention is needed to prevent or treat cytotoxic cerebral oede-
ma and increased intracranial pressure. Management includes fluid therapy, enhanced
Oxygenation and intravenous mannitol.
●In the clinically disoriented, lethargic but otherwise stable shunt patient, a low-protein
diet should be fed and antibiotic therapy with ampicillin or metronidazole should be
instituted directed at decreasing the urease-producing gram-negative organisms and their
production of ammonia. Lactulose is a synthetic sugar which acidifies the colonic con-
tents, converting the freely diffusable ammonia to non-diffusable ammonium ions which
become trapped within the colon and excreted in the faeces. Other benefits of lactulose
therapy include a reduction in the enteric flora and the induction of an osmotic catharsis.
If the patient is constipated, lactulose can be diluted in water and given as an enema. The
use of prednisolone should be avoided as it contributes to protein catabolism. Gastric
protectants such as sucralfate and ranitidine may be necessary in animals with liver dis-
ease, portal hypertension and GI bleeding.
178 i. True.
ii. False. Bilirubinuria precedes hyperbilirubinaemia.
m. False. Cholesterol is synthesized in the liver from dietary and endogenous sources
of lipids, and in liver failure, serum cholesterol concentrations are usually low.
iv. False. Coagulation factors may be reduced by 25-30% of normal function due to
decreased production by the liver before these screening tests detect deficiencies.
Therefore, although they are important in determining the consequences of liver fail-
ure, they are not very sensitive tests of liver function.
v.True.
170
179 & I80: Questions
179 Match each of the six sets of results below with the appropriate diag-
nosis/clinical description? Some result sets may apply to more than one diagnosis,
therefore choose what you see as the best fit.
Calcium
Phosphate
Parathyroid hormone -
(1/owu)
(mmol/l)
(PTH) (pmol/l)
A
1.2
3.6
B
1.7
0.9
4.2
c
1.8
5.7
29
D
1.8
1.2
20
E
1.2
4.2
12
F
1.1
1.2
10
i. Ten-year-old dog presented with acute onset grand mal seizure. Prior to the fit the
dog had been stiff and inappetent for a few days.
il. Lactating bitch presented following a seizure. She whelped four weeks previously
and is feeding eight pups.
m. Dog presented with weight loss. Laboratory results: urea 6.7 mmol/l, creatinine
100 μmol/l, albumin 15 g/l, globulin 35 g/l, cholesterol 10.2 mmol/l, urine
protein:creatinine ratio 5.8. You suspect a protein-losing nephropathy.
iv. Two-year-old dog presented several hours after the ingestion of antifreeze contain-
ing ethylene glycol. The dog is depressed, acidotic and hyperkalaemic.
v. Nine-year-old dog presented with chronic PU/PD of several months' duration,
anorexia, weight loss, vomiting, urine SG 1.014, blood urea 34 mmol/l, creatinine 
400 μmol/l.
vi. Nine-month-old crossbreed dog presented with a pathological fracture of the right
tibia. The dog was fed exclusively an all-meat diet.
180 This lateral abdominal
180
radiograph (180) is of a four-
year-old, unilateral cryptorchid
male dog exhibiting bilaterally
symmetrical non-pruritic alope-
cia, gynaecomastia and attrac-
tiveness to male dogs.
i. What is your radiographic
interpretation?
i. What is the likely diagnosis?
iii. What other clinical signs
might you expect?
171
179 & I80: Answers
179 i. A. This dog had primary hypoparathyroidism. The clinical signs can be very
vague. The finding of a low calcium, low PTH but high phosphate value is very sugges-
tive of primary hypoparathyroidism.
i. F. Marked hypocalcaemia may develop in lactating bitches resulting in seizures.
Phosphate and PTH values are usually unremarkable, although PTH may be elevated.
ii. B. The description is consistent with a protein-losing nephropathy. Hypo-
albuminaemia may result in a mild hypocalcaemia as calcium is protein bound. Plasma
ionized calcium would be normal.
iv. E. Ethylene glycol will cause severe hyperphosphataemia and a concomitant fall in
calcium following acute ingestion. Subsequently, calcium chelation by metabolites of
ethylene glycol also results in hypocalcaemia. Severe renal damage, acidosis and hyper-
kalaemia are also seen. The PTH should be normal following acute intoxication, but
possibly raised once renal failure results.
v. C. The history is typical of chronic renal failure. In such cases, serum calcium may be
low, normal or high, but phosphate is usually elevated. With the development of renal
secondary hyperparathyroidism, PTH is also increased.
vi. D. The history is typical of secondary nutritional hyperparathyroidism. In such cases
consumption of a meat only diet. Calcium and phosphate may be normal or low.
180 i. A round soft tissue mass is seen in the mid-abdominal region. Displacement of
the intestines ventrally suggests that this mass may be of retroperitoneal origin.
i. Testicular tumour, most likely a Sertoli-cell tumour. This diagnosis is supported by
the finding of a large intra-abdominal mass in this cryptorchid dog, beca use retained
testicles are at greatest risk for the development of tumours, particularly Sertoli-cell
tumours. The dog is exhibiting typical clinical signs of the male feminizing syndrome
as a result of either increased production of oestrogens by testicular tumour cells,
increased conversion of testosterone and androstenedione to oestrogens by testicular
tissue or peripheral tissues, or an abnormality in the balance of the sex hormones as a
result of decreased androgen production in the face of normal oestrogen production.
In dogs this syndrome is most commonly associated with Sertoli-cell tumours.
m. Other possible clinical signs include anaemia, hyperpigmentation, a pendulous
penile sheath and standing in a female posture to urinate.
172
181 & 182: Questions
[81a
181b
181 Lateral view abdominal radi-
Dogl
Dog 2
ographs of two dogs are shown
(181a - dog 1; 181b - dog 2). The
Total protein (g/l)
51
62
serum biochemical results for these
Globulin (g/l)
29
32
two dogs are shown.
Albumin (g/l)
21
30
i. Describe the radiographic abnor-
Total bilirubin (μmol/l)
183.4
3.6
ma lities common to both dogs.
Urea (mmoll)
3.2
5.5
i. What are the differential diag-
ALT (u/l)
2,255
54
noses of these findings?
ALP (u/)
873
145
m. Are further diagnostic tests indi-
Cholesterol (mmol/l)
2.33
6.9
cated, and if yes, which ones?
Bile acids (μmol/)
67.6
8
182 A five-month-old,
182a
182b
male Dalmatian is pre-
sented because of diffi-
culty chewing food. He
had been purchased at
three months of age and
had always drunk large
quantities of water. The
confirmation of his head
had always been differ-
ent from his littermates
(182a). Radiographs of
the skull were obtained
(182b).
i. What is your diagno-
sis?
ii. How can this condition be treated?
ii. What is the prognosis?
173
181 & I82: Answers
181 i. The normal radiographic position of the liver is just caudal to the diaphragm
with its caudal edges bordering upon the stomach, the right kidney and the proximal
duodenum. The caudoventral tip of the liver is normally blunted and lies just caudal to
the costochondral cartilages. The stomach is typically angled with the fundus or ventral
most region directed caudally. This can vary amongst breeds, particularly in deep chest-
ed dogs. In both lateral views the caudal most tip of the liver does not reach the costo-
chondral junction and the angle of the stomach is such that the fundus is directed crani-
ally indicating possible microhepatica. A ventrodorsal view would also be indicated to
confirm the cranial position of the stomach and other abdominal viscera.
i. Microhepatica is associated with congenital portosystemic shunts, hepatic cirrho-
sis, hepatic fibrosis or potentially severe hypotension. In rare instances an otherwise
normal liver may appear small due to a partial intrathoracic location as in animals
with pleuroperitoneal or pericardioperitoneal diaphragmatic hernias.
m. The signalment, history and clinical signs are very important in assessing the
patient's clinical picture, interpreting the results and directing future diagnostics.
Dog 1 is a six-year-old, male crossbreed which has been anorexic, lethargic and
vomiting for two weeks and has biochemical parameters indicative of hepatic dam-
age. Further investigation such as liver function tests, postprandial bile acids and a
hepatic biopsy is warranted.
 s ad  a  a '-ra ue i  o
anaemia. Her biochemical profile is normal and her signs are not consistent with
hepatic disease; the size of her liver may be normal for her size and breed. Therefore,
a liver biopsy would not be indicated at this time.
182 i. Fibrous osteodystrophy, probably secondary to chronic renal failure.
i. Reduce serum phosphorus concentration utilizing dietary restriction and possibly
oral intestinal phosphate binding drugs, which include aluminium hydroxide,
carbonate and oxide (30-90 mg/kg/day), or calcium acetate (60-90 mg/kg q24h),
carbonate and citrate (90-150 mg/kg q24h). Use calcium-containing phosphorus-
binding agents with caution if administering vitamin D concurrently. Vitamin D
administration in conjunction with proportional reduction in phosphate intake has
been shown to limit the development of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism and its
associated skeletal abnormalities, although hypercalcaemia may develop. Calcitrol
(1.5-3.5 ng/kg p/o q24h on an empty stomach) is the recommended form of vitamin
D supplementation as it does not require renal activation. Monitor serum calcium,
phosphate and creatinine concentrations regularly.
iii.Poor.
174
183 & 184: Questions
183a
183b
183  An eight-year-old Labrador has a
2E81
two-week history of erythematous skin
and mucous membranes (183a, 183b)
and marked pruritus. One day prior to
presentation the dog begins to vomit. He
is depressed and has a painful swollen
abdomen. Radiographs reveal free intra-
peritoneal gas and a moderate abdominal
effusion. Abdominocentesis produces a
bile stained exudate containing neutro-
phils and engulfed bacteria. Exploratory laparotomy finds a perforating ulcer in the
proximal duodenum (183c).
i. What is the significance of free intraperitoneal gas?
ii. What are the causes of GI perforation in dogs?
i. Which of these is the most likely cause in this dog?
iv. What medical treatment is available for the treatment of gastroduodenal ulcers
before perforation occurs?
184 An unvaccinated eight-month-old Dobermann is presented with acute onset
 depression, tachypnoea, tachycardia, jaundice and vomiting. You suspect leptospiro-
sis.
i. How would you confirm the diagnosis?
i. What therapy would you recommend?
m. What are the commonest leptospiral serovars to affect dogs?
iv. How common is leptospirosis in cats?
175
183&I84:Answers
183 i. Assuming the body wall has not been breached (e.g. a laparotomy has not been
performed, no gun-shot wound, etc.), free intraperitoneal gas is indicative of a rupture
of an intra-abdominal viscus and is an indication for exploratory laparotomy. Small
volumes of gas are easiest to visualize between the liver and root of the diaphragm.
il. A number of factors such as uraemia, endotoxaemia, hypovolaemia/ischaemia and
steroid administration predispose to erosions/ulceration. Drugs, inflammation or neo-
plasia can cause damage directly, and any damage is potentiated by secretion of
excess gastric acid. In order of likelihood, the causes of gastroduodenal perforation in
dogs are:
●NSAID administration.
● Local neoplasia (e.g. gastric carcinoma).
● Liver disease.
· Foreign body.
● External tra uma (either directly damaging the gut or interrupting the blood supply).
●Mast cell tumour.
● Gastrinoma/a pudoma (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome).
. The history of pruritus and skin erythema are suggestive of a mast cell tumour.
The tumour releases histamine, which not only affects skin but also stimulates exces-
tion/perforation. This dog had systemic mastocytosis - large numbers of mast cells in
the peripheral blood. Systemic mastocytosis, as in this case, is generally unresponsive
to treatment and therefore euthanasia was carried out.
iv. Ulcer prevention is important in dogs receiving prednisolone in the treatment of
local mast cell tumours, as the steroid delays epithelial turnover and predisposes to
ulceration. Reducing acid secretion by histamine antagonists such as cimetidine, raniti-
dine or famotidine is indicated. Proton pump inhibitors (e.g. omeprazole) are more
effective at inhibiting acid secretion. Any erosions can be protected by administration
Of sucralfate which binds to damaged tissue and prevents further acid-induced damage.
184 i. Urine/blood culture/examination for leptospires. The organism is labile and sa m-
ples must be processed rapidly. Examination of a fresh wet preparation of urine under
dark field microscopy may demonstrate the presence of the organism. The organism is
difficult to culture. Serological assessment of paired samples at 0, 2 and occasionally 4
weeks should show a fourfold rise in titre following acute infection. Serum biochem-
istry is indicated to assess for hepatic/renal disease and haematology is useful in demon-
strating whether a haemolytic process is present.
ii. Fluid therapy {lactated Ringer's solution or 0.9% saline) to maintain renal function
as acute renal failure may develop. Penicillin/streptomycin or tetracycline for control-
ling and eliminating leptospires. Isolate from other dogs and prevent human infection
as the organism is a zoonotic.
ii. The organisms which infect animals are serovars of Leptospira interrogans. The best
recognized serovars are L. icterohaemorrhagiae, L. canicola and L. grippotyphosa.
iv. Cats have an inherent resistance to leptospires and rarely develop leptospirosis.
176
185 & 186: Questions
85
185 A six-year-old, neutered male Cocker Spaniel presents for intermittent abdomi
nal distension associated with pain, lethargy and inappetence. The owner reports that
the abdomen will distend acutely after feeding and remain so for several hours. An
abdominal radiograph was taken during an episode of bloating (185).
i. What are your radiographic findings?
il. What predisposing factors may result in gastric distension?
道i. What therapy would you recommend?
186a
186b
186 A two-year-old West Highland White Terrier has chronic diarrhoea, weight loss
(186a) and interdigital dermatitis (186b).
i. Name two diseases that may be associated with both GI signs and pedal pruritus.
i. How would you treat them?
177
185 & I86: Answers
185 i. There is severe gaseous dilatation of the stomach and small intestines. The
axis of the stomach is displaced caudally with the antrum at the level of the Sth lum-
bar vertebra. The orientation of the stomach does not indicate volvulus and there are
no apparent obstructing lesions. Faeces are visible in the descending colon but the
rest of the intestine appears empty.
i. Gastric distension may result from delayed gastric emptying, increased gaseous pro-
duction or aerophagia. Delayed gastric motility may be a result of nervous inhibition
by stress, trauma or pain. Metabolic disorders such as hypokalaemia, acidosis,
uraemia or hepatic encephalopathy may cause gastric retention. Drug therapy with
anticholinergics or narcotic analgesics will delay gastric emptying. Chronic obstruc-
tion may lead to distension and hypomotility of the stomach. Inflammatory lesions,
such as gastritis, ulcers or infections with Helicobacter spp. or parvovirus, affect gas-
tric motility adversely. Idiopathic dela yed gastric emptying is a diagnosis of exclusion.
mi. Rule out the above underlying predisposing factors and correct any abnormalities
found. If no organic disease is identified, feed small amounts of a semi-liquid, low-
protein, low-fat diet at frequent intervals to allow rapid emptying. If diet alone is
inadequate, drug therapies to increase gastric motility may be utilized. Meto-
clopramide (0.2-0.5 mg/kg q8h) increases the amplitude and frequency of antral con-
tractions, inhibits relaxation of the fundus and thereby promotes gastric emptying.
Erythromycin at ineffective antimicrobial doses (0.5-1.0 mg/kg q8h) most closely
mimics the stimulatory effect of the GI hormone motilin, and cisapride
{0.1-0.5 mg/kg q8-12h) promotes gastric emptying through activation of neuronal
nel hygiene; larvae gain access between the toes, causing an interdigital dermatitis
and a parasitic enteritis.
● Food allergy. Concurrent pedal pruritus and diarrhoea have been reported as man-
ifestations of suspected food allergy. Pruritus and secondary lesions of self-trauma,
particularly affecting the feet and ears but with no specific pattern of distribution, are
the most commonly seen dermatological manifestations of food allergy. However,
other causes of pruritus, such as fleas and atopy, are much more common.
ii. Fenbendazole and nitroscanate are effective in eliminating Uncinaria stenocephala.
Repeat treatment at three week intervals may be necessary to eliminate new adult
worms as the larvae emerge from their tissue migration. Improved kennel hygiene is
also required to prevent reinfection. Food allergy is treated by feeding novel dietary
protein sources.
178
187 & I88: Questions
187 This ultrasound picture
187
(187) was obtained in a two-
year-old, neutered female
Persian shorthair cat with a his-
tory of variable appetite, weight
loss and progressive abdominal
enlargement of three months'
duration. On physical examina-
tion the cat was thin and had
marked ascites. Haematology
was unremarkable. A serum bio-
chemical profile was normal
apart from hyperglobulinaemia
(globulin 46 g/l, albumin 32 g/l)
            P 
minocentesis yielded light-yellow clear fluid with total protein 42 g/l and nucleated
cell count 0.5 x 109/l; cytology revealed a mixture of lymphocytes, neutrophils,
macrophages and occasional erythrocytes.
i. Classify the abdominal fluid. What are your differential diagnoses?
i. How does the ultrasonogram relate to the clinicopathological findings?
ii. What further tests would you perform to obtain a diagnosis?
188 The feline coronavirus (FCoV) antibody titres of a household of cats in your
care are shown below:
Jan 95
Apr 95
Jul 95
Oct 95
Feb 96
Apr 96
Jul 96
A
320
20
20
20
0
0
0
B
20
20
20
20
10
10
0
c
320
80
160
160
160
40
20
D
640
160
>1280
1280
1280
640
640
80
40
80
80
80
80
80
320
80
80
40
20
10
0
G
160
80
320
320
320
20
0
i. What clinical signs would have alerted you to the presence of FCoV in this house-
hold, so that testing was initiated?
i. Queen G was pregnant in July 95. What advice will you have given to the owner
to prevent the kittens becoming infected with FCoV?
m. These cats are obviously eliminating FCoV infection (their antibody titres are
falling to zero). What might the owner have done to aid the elimination of FCoV
from his cats?
179
187 &I88:Answers
187 i. The fluid is a modified transudate but with a high protein content approach-
either lymphocytic cholangiohepatitis or FIP. Ascites is a common feature of severe
chronic liver disease in the dog but not in the cat, possibly because cats with liver dis-
ease rarely develop portal hypertension. An exception is the high-protein ascites
which specifically occurs in cats with lymphocytic cholangitis. Its aetiology is unclear.
i. The ultrasonogram shows abdominal fluid accumulation and a small irregular
liver with attached fibrin strands. Small liver size is suggestive of cirrhosis rather than
FIP. Cirrhosis is rare in the cat but may occur as the end stage of cholangiohepatitis.
Serum biochemistry in this patient shows few abnormalities indicative of liver dis-
ease, but this is not uncommon in biochemically quiescent liver diseases such as cir-
rhosis. Marked hyperglobulinaemia may be seen in both cholangiohepatitis and FIP.
Fasting serum bile acids are only mildly increased in this patient, illustrating the need
for a two-hour postprandial sample to further assess liver function. Postprandial bile
acid concentrations are typically markedly abnormal in animals with cirrhosis.
. Liver biopsy is necessary for definitive diagnosis and prognosis. Wedge biopsy
may be safer because of the risk of severe coagulopathies in end-stage liver disease,
due to either disseminated intravascular coagulation and/or decreased production of
clotting factors. This cat had biliary cirrhosis.
188 i. ● Feline infectious peritonitis. FIP occurs most frequently in kittens which
have been sold out of a household, since stress may precipitate the development of
the disease.
● Diarrhoea or uneven litter size in kittens and/or transient or chronic diarrhoea in
the adult cats.
i. Kittens are protected from FCoV infection by maternally derived antibody until
they are S-6 weeks old. Kittens should be kept with their queens in isolation from
other cats from birth. At S-6 weeks of age they should be weaned and isolated from
all other litters and cats, including their mother, until they are sold. They should be
tested for FCoV antibodies at over ten weeks of age; before ten weeks, not all infect-
ed kittens ha ve seroconverted.
fi. Seronegative cats should be separated from seropositive cats to prevent their reinfec
tion. It also helps if cats are kept individually or in stable groups of up to two to three.
180
189 & 190: Questions
189a
189b
189c
P681
189 Abdominal masses are found in or associated with the intestine in three eight-
year-old German Shepherd Dogs. In no dog is there macroscopic evidence of metasta-
tic spread. What is the likely diagnosis in each case?
a. An incidental finding at postmortem examination of a dog with no GI signs that
died of dilated cardiomyopathy. The mass appears encapsulated and is arising from
the serosal surface of the ileum (189a).
b. A cylindrical mass within the wall of the mid-jejunum of a dog with intermittent
vomiting, diarrhoea, melena and poor appetite. There is also evidence of a microcytic
anaemia. On cut surface the mass is infiltrating the whole wall and the luminal sur-
face is ulcerated (189b).
c. A cylindrical mass within the wall of the mid-jejunum of a dog with chronic inter-
mittent vomiting (189c). Areas of haemorrhage are visible on the serosal surface and
there are some adhesions to other bowel loops (189d). Blood-filled spaces are ob-
vious on cut surface.
190 Which of these statements about diabetes mellitus are true and which are false?
i. Obesity causes an irreversible insulin resistance.
i. Dia betes mellitus is more likely to develop during dioestrus in the bitch than at any
other part of the reproductive cycle.
i. Protamine zinc insulin has a duration of activity of 12 hours in dogs.
iv. When treating a dog with diabetic ketoacidosis, soluble insulin should be adminis-
tered intramuscularly hourly.
v. Low-fibre diets are recommended for animals with diabetes mellitus.
181
189 & I90: Answers
189 In all three dogs the gross appearance and associated signs are suggestive of cer-
tain diagnoses, but potentially they could be associated with either a benign or malig
nant process. Thus biopsy would be needed to reach a definitive diagnosis in each case.
a. Leiomyoma. The lack of clinical signs associated with this mass, and its muscular
attachment, make a leiomyoma most likely. These benign tumours arise from the
intestinal smooth muscle and can form isolated masses. More typically they arise within
the intestinal wall, where they may cause a partial or complete obstruction and, if their
luminal surface ulcerates, signs of melena and anaemia may develop. Leiomyosarcomas
are very rare and are unlikely to have such a circumscribed appearance.
b. Adenocarcinoma. Rectal adenocarcinomas are more common in dogs than small
intestinal carcinomas, in contrast to the relative incidence in cats. Small intestinal
adenocarcinomas may cause vomiting and diarrhoea because of partial or complete
obstruction. If the mucosa is ulcerated, overt melena can be seen, but if bleeding is
more subtle and prolonged, a microcytic iron-deficiency anaemia can develop. An iso-
lated intestinal lymphoma would be the most likely differential diagnosis in this case,
but occasionally granulomas or transmural inflammation (perhaps associated with a
foreign body) have a similar appearance.
c. Intestinal haematoma. The gross appearance on cut surface was suggestive of
haemangiosarcoma, although the intestine is an unusual place for metastatic spread and
a primary splenic mass was not present. Histological examination revealed no evidence
of a malignancy. The final diagnosis was a submucosal haematoma. Intestinal
haematomas are very rarely reported in the veterinary literature and their cause is
unknown. External abdominal trauma or temporary luminal obstruction with a foreign
body that eventually passes, but causes intestinal wall damage, seem most likely. This
dog showed no further signs after resection of the affected loop of bowel.
190 i. False. Obesity impairs glucose tolerance by down-regulating insulin receptors,
which impairs receptor binding affinity for insulin and causes postreceptor defects.
These effects are reversible if the obesity is managed.
i.True.
i. False. Protamine zinc insulin has a duration of activity in most dogs of 24 hours.
iv. True.
v. False. High-fibre diets are recommended as they result in a reduction of the post-
prandial hyperglycaemia.
182
191 & I92: Questions
191
An aged, overweight female
WBCs (x10"/)
46
Labrador presents two months after a
PCV (I/)
0.29
season with a one-week history of occa-
sional vomiting, lethargy, inappetence
Platelets (x 10°/)
95
and, in the owner's opinion, being 'mild-
Granulocytes (x I0"/l)
41.9
ly off colour'. Physical examination is
Lymphocytes/monocytes (xI0°/)
4.14
unremarkable and abdominal palpation
impossible. Your X-ray machine has
insufficient penetration for a diagnostic
abdominal radiograph so you decide to
take a sample for a haematological pro-
file because you are concerned about the 
possibility of pyometra. Your in-house
haematology analyser gives the results
shown.
i. How would you interpret these
results?
ii. Why is morphological examination of
a blood film necessary for further man-
agement of this case?
You elect to examine a blood film (191).
ii. Identify the white blood cells present.
iv. What is their significance?
v. Can you identify any features suggesting neutrophil toxicity?
vi. Why is the presence or absence of toxicity important?
192 A seven-year-old, entire male Shih Tzu pre-
192
sented for evaluation of severe weight loss and
chronic, progressive, vomiting occurring 1-3
times daily over the past 12 months. A barium
series revealed delayed gastric emptying and
retention of food in the stomach 24 hours after a
meal. The endoscopic appearance of this dog's
pyloric outflow tract is shown (192).
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. What treatment will you recommend?
183
191&I92:Answers
191 i. The WBC count is markedly elevated. However, most in-house analysers
based on QBC principles cannot measure WBC counts greater than 30 x 109/l with
accuracy, so the value recorded in this dog could be anything above 30. The leucocy-
tosis is due to elevated granulocytes, but their stage of maturity is unknown and thus
could be a leukaemoid response (granulocyte response to an infectious stimulus) or a
granulocytic leukaemia. The PCV suggests a mild degree of anaemia which could be
regenerative or non-regenerative. The platelet count appears reduced, but platelet
clumping, a common finding in canine and feline blood samples, can cause erroneous
counts on all automated analysers; the count should be checked by film examination.
The lymphocyte/monocyte count is unremarkable but could be masking a monocyto-
sis or the presence of atypical lymphocytes, lymphoblasts or monocytes.
ii. For the reasons outlined above it would be inadvisable to make a tentative diagno-
sis of pyometra and elect for surgery based on this information alone.
ii. There are two bands, two metamyelocytes and a neutrophil
iv. These immature forms suggest a marked left shift consistent with a response to
infection or sepsis. These cells could also be seen in a chronic granulocytic leukaemia.
v. Toxic change is a subtle finding in canine and feline neutrophils. It is manifest as a
rather foamy cytoplasm with scattered light granulation and the presence of Dohle
bodies (round basophilic intracytoplasmic bodies). The magnification of this film
(x60) is probably insufficient to rule out toxic changes with confidence.
vi. Toxic changes would be strongly suggestive of an infectious process in this case
and would provide some basis for the discrimination between granulocytic leukaemia
and a leukaemoid response.
192 i. The appearance of enlarged mucosal folds that surround and obstruct the
pyloric canal is consistent with chronic hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy {CHPG).
Mucosal biopsies should be obtained to distinguish this disease from similarly
is typically seen in older small breed dogs. The aetiology is unknown, but the condi-
tion is thought to result from chronic excessive hormonal trophic stimulation.
ii. In mild cases of CHPG, medical management with small, frequent, highly
digestible moist meals may be palliative. Additionally, histamine blockers to control
gastric acidity and prokinetic drugs to increase gastric motility may be beneficial in
the unobstructed dog. However, when the pylorus is obstructed, as in this dog, surgi-
cal treatment is necessary to remove the excess tissue and normalize gastric emptying.
Surgical procedures include mucosal resection, various forms of pyloroplasty, and
gastroduodenostomy depending on the severity of the lesions.
184
193 & I94: Questions
193 This five-year-old, neutered
193a
female domestic shorthair cat (193a)
presented with lethargy, weight loss
and intermittent vomiting of one
months' duration. The cat had shown
similar signs during the past year but
these had resolved spontaneously
within a week. This time signs had
persisted and become more severe.
Haematology was normal. A serum
biochemical profile revealed hyper-
gobulinaemia (globulin 56 g/l, albu-
min 30 g/l), hyperbilirubinaemia
(69 μmol/l) and elevated liver en-
zymes (ALT 308 u/l, ALP 806 u/l).
Abdominal radiographs showed mild
hepatomegaly and ultrasonography
revealed a diffuse mottled pattern
with normal bile ducts.
i. What are your differential diagnoses?
ii. How would you come as non-invasively as possible to a definitive diagnosis?
ili. How would you treat this cat?
194 You examine an 11-year-old,
Urea (mmol/l)
74
neutered male Beagle for vomiting of
Creatinine (μmol/)
1,432
four days" duration. Results of labora-
Sodium (mmol/l)
143
tory evaluation are shown.
Potassium (mmol/l)
3.5
i. What is your interpretation of the azo-
Total COz (mmol/l)
taemia: pre-renal, renal or postrenal?
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.3
i. What is the explanation for the hyper-
Phosphorus (mmoll)
3.9
amylasaemia?
Serum amylase (u/l)
2,400
Urine SG
1.010
Urine protein
Negative
Urine casts
Negative
185
I93 &I94:Answers
193 i. Icteric primary liver diseases in the cat include the cholangiohepatitis complex,
infectious disorders {including FIP), cholelithiasis, hepatobiliary neoplasia, toxic and
drug-induced hepatopathies, and idiopathic hepatic lipidosis. Cholangiohepatitis com-
plex occurs most commonly and often has vague intermittent signs, as in this cat. Cats
with idiopathic lipidosis are totally anorexic, which is not the case here. FIP-associated
liver disease is usually a terminal event and the animal will appear iller. Cholelithiasis
and neoplasia were not identified on imaging. Several systemic infections and metabolic
illnesses, such as sepsis, diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, myeloproliferative disorders
and hypoxia, may lead to secondary hepatic involvement and abnormal liver tests. They
are less likely in this case, based on history and laboratory tests. Hyperthyroidism may
cause elevated liver enzymes but rarely causes ja undice.
fi. Retinal examination may show a chorioretinitis, which may be found with FeLV or
FIP. The cat should be tested for FeLV and FIV, and Toxoplasma serology considered.
Fine-needle aspiration for cytology may be useful since the liver is diffusely enlarged; it is
of most value in lymphosarcoma and hepatic lipidosis. Distinguishing between hepatocel-
lular and obstructive biliary tract disease via ultrasonography helps to decide whether to
biopsy the liver percutaneously, which is least traumatic, or whether to proceed with
exploratory laparotomy and surgical biopsy, which can allow for possible surgical correc-
tion of an obstruction. Percutaneous biopsy under ultrasonographic guidance is preferred
in this case. Biopsies should be submitted for histopathology and cultured aerobically
is to be done blindly. Since cats with icteric liver disease often have significant cholestasis
and vitamin K malabsorption, it is advisable to pretreat with vitamin K1 (5 mg/cat s/c or
 i/m q12h) prior to biopsy.
 mi. Supportive treatment with intravenous fluids and vitamin B supplementation is indi-
cated pending biopsy results. Ursodeoxycholic acid (15 mg/kg q24h) has hepatoprotec-
tive and choleretic effects. It is important to maintain nutrition and, if the cat is not eat-
ing, hand feeding or provision of nutritional support via nasal feeding or PEG tubes
should be considered. Biopsy in this cat
showed portal lymphocytic infiltrates consis-
193b.
tent with lymphocytic cholangiohepatitis
(193b). The cat was treated with prednisolone
(2 mg/kg p/o q12h), which was gradually
tapered off over two months, and ursodeoxy-
cholic acid (15 mg/kg q24h). He responded
well initially but relapsed when therapy was
discontinued, and is maintained on 5 mg
prednisolone daily.
194 i. Primary renal failure. Azotaemia is present with inappropriately dilute urine {isos-
thenuria).
 ii. Serum amylase and lipase activities are often increased with primary renal failure
because they are excreted renally. With a decrease in glomerular filtration rate, amylase
and lipase are retained.
186
195 & I96: Questions
195 A four-year-old, neutered female
195
domestic shorthair cat is seen for persistent
diarrhoea of four months’ duration and
intermittent vomiting. The appetite has not
changed markedly but there has been
notable weight loss. Defecation occurs once
or twice daily and the diarrhoea varies in
consistency from watery to semi-formed.
Occasionally, mucus is present and an asso-
ciated dyschezia. Abdominal palpation
reveals subjectively thickened intestinal
loops; the gross appearance of per-oral duo-
denoscopy is shown (195).
i. How would you characterize the diar-
rhoea?
i. What changes can be seen on duodenoscopy, and what differentials would you
consider?
Pinch biopsies from the duodenal mucosa reveal a heavy infiltrate of lymphocytes
and plasmacytes in the submucosa, with no evidence of neoplasia.
i. What is your diagnosis?
iv. How would you manage this case?
196 An ultrasound image of the left kidney of a
196
12-year-old, neutered male Tonkinese cat with a
history of chronic intermittent vomiting (196).
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. In a normal glomerulus, above what size are
molecules not filtered? In addition to size, what
other factors influence glomerular filtration of a
compound?
ii. List five functions of a nephron.
iv. A 10 kg dog was evaluated for renal failure.
What laboratory methods may be used to evalu-
ate the dog's glomerular filtration rate (GFR)?
The following values were obtained during a
24 hour urine collection:
Volume of urine = 500 ml.
 Urine creatinine concentration of the mixed 24 hour sample = 144 mg/dl.
Serum creatinine concentration at midpoint of collection = 1.5 mg/dl.
v. What is the GFR using endogenous creatinine clearance?
187
195 & I96: Answers
195 i. The diarrhoea has features of small and large intestinal disease. Small intesti-
nal disease is indicated by the presence of weight loss, the normal frequency of defe-
             s
indicated by the dyschezia and the mucus present in the faeces. The indications are
that there is a disease process affecting both large and small intestine.
i. Duodenoscopy shows a loss of the normal 'velvety' appearance to the small intesti-
nal mucosa and areas of marked erythema and haemorrhage. The major differential
diagnoses in this case would be inflammatory bowel disease {IBD), neoplasia and
duodenal ulceration.
. The histological description is characteristic of lymphocytic-plasmacytic IBD, the
commonest form of IBD seen in cats. Clinical signs vary but usually involve one or
more of vomiting, weight loss, diarrhoea and colitis. Causes of IBD include infectious
Or parasitic agents, or dietary hypersensitivity, and these should be excluded prior to
initiating symptomatic therapy. In many cases no cause is determined and the term
idiopathic IBD is used.
iv. If dietary hypersensitivity is suspected, feeding a restricted diet {single novel pro-
tein source such as venison) is recommended, but a good response to dietary modifi-
cation alone is uncommon in cats. Control is usually attempted with immunosup-
pressive doses of prednisolone (1-3 mg/kg p/o q12h initially) but response to therapy
is variable. Where improvement is seen, the dose of steroid is tapered gradually,
switching to alternate day dosage if possible. If the response is poor, additional
immunosuppressive drugs may have to be added to the regime, e.g. azathioprine
(0.5 mg/kg p/o q48h). Metronidazole is sometimes used in addition to prednisolone
therapy. Although there is little rationale for its use as an antibiotic, as feline IBD is
some immune-modulating effects, and may be beneficial for this reason.
196 i. Ultrasonographically, the kidney appears normal.
i. 68,000 daltons. Other factors include size, charge, blood pressure, blood volume
and colloidal osmotic pressure.
ii. Filtration, secretion, absorption, hormone production, hormone degradation.
iv. Blood urea concentration; serum creatinine concentration; endogenous creatinine
clearance; exogenous creatinine clearance; 14C inulin clearance; 3H-tetraethylam-
monium clearance; 12SI-iothalamate; 99mTechnetium-diethylenetriaminopenta-acetic
acid (DTPA).
v. GFR = clearance (ml/kg/min) = Ux x V/Px x time of collection x weight;
where Ux = the concentration of analyte X in a timed urine sample and Px = the con-
centration of analyte X in serum or plasma at the midpoint of the timed collection.
In this case GFR = urine creatinine x volume serum creatinine x time x weight =
(144 mg/dl x 500 ml)/1.5 mg/dl x 1,440 minutes x 10 kg = 3.33 ml/min/kg.
(Reference range = 2-5 ml/min/kg)
188
Normal reference laboratory values for dogs and cats and Conversion Factors for
converting SI Units to Old Units
Haematology
SI Units
SI Units
Con.
Old Units
Old Units
(8op)
(eat)
factor (dog)
(cat)
PCV
0.370.55 1/l
0.270.5 1/1
100
37-55 %
27-50 %
Hb
120-180 g/l
90-170 g/l
0.1
IP/8 81Z1
IP; L16
RBCs
5.08.5 × 1012/1
5.510 × 1012/1
5.0-8.5 × 10%/μl
5.5-10 × 10/μl
MCV
60-77 fl
40-55 f
1
60-77 mm3
4055 mm3
MCHC
310-340 g/1
310-340 g/l
0.1
% -1E
%t-1E
Reticulocytes
<1%
<1%
<1%
<一%
Reticulocytes
20-80 × 10°/
20-60 × 10′/
1
g01 × 08-02
20-60 × 103/μl 
Platelets
150400 × 10%
150400 × 10′/l
150-400 × 10²/l
150-400 × 10²/l
nRBCs
0%
0%
%0
%
WBCs
6-15 × 10°/l
4-15 × 10%/1
1
6-15 × 103/pl
4-15 × 103/μl
Neutrophils (bands) 0-0.3 × 109/1
<0.3 × 10%/
g01 × E'0-0
<0.3 × 103/μl
Neutrophils (seg)
3-11.5 × 10%/1
2.5-12.5 × 10%/
3-11.5 × 103/μl
2.5-12.5 × 103/μl
Lymphocytes
1.04.8 × 10°/
1.5-7 × 10/l
1.04.8 × 103/μl
1.5-7 × 103/μl
Monocytes
<1.3 × 10°/l
<0.85× 10°/l
<1.3 × 103/μl
<0.85 × 10²/μl
Eosinophils
<1.3 × 10%/l
<1.5 × 10°/l
<1.3 × 103/μl
<1.5 × 103/μl
Basophils
Rare
Rare
Rare
Rare
Haemostatic values
Dog
Cat
Prothrombin time (PT) (seconds)
7-12
7-12
Partial thromboplastin tinme (PTT) (seconds)
12-15
12-22
Urinalysis
Dog
Cat
Specific gravity
0/01-1001
1.001-1.080
pH
5.5-7.5
5.5-7.5
Sediment
leucocytes/hpf
0-5
0-5
erythrocytes/hpf
0-5
0-5
casts/hpf
Bilirubin
0-trace
Glucose/ketones
Protein (mg/dl)
^30
。
<20
Protein semiquantitative
0-trace/l +
 0-trace/l+
Protein:creatinine ratio
-normal
<0.2
<0.6
questionable
0.2-1.0
0.6-1.0
-abnormal
0l<
>1.0
189
Appendix (continued)
uuu snudesyuu sudee  u
Old Units (cat)
I 01-
117-140 mEq/l
0.45-1.36 mg/dl
400-1. 650 u/l 
0.54-7.2 μg/dl
IP/8 g91-
IP/BW
145-153 mEq/1
8.4-25.2 mg/dl
2.0-3.0 g/dl
9-21 mEq/l
13-25 mEq/l
13.4-38 μg/1
 5.5-7.8 g/dl
IP/Bu 18-1'6
In 05-
μg/ml
0-250 u/l
17-49 μg/1
100
226
92
63-
(Bop) sHun PIO
99-115 mEq/l
0.23-1.2 mg/dl
8.4-19.6 mg/dl
8-19 mEq/l 
17-27 mEq/l
1/8u 005-517
IP/Br6-6'0
7.2-24 μg/dl
3.58.5 μg/1
140-153mE
45-149 ng/dl
In 05-/
n00-0
535 μg/l
Con.factor
113
11/00
'0
64.9
0
3
2.8
(e) sun is
2.12.6 mmol/l
1. 9-3.9 mmol/l 
145-1 56 mmol/l 
15-200 nmol/1 
/owrl 0z1-0
4001.650 
<| mmol/l
/lown
lowd -0
o 6
I/n 05-
20-30 g/l
 0-0
1. 12.3 r
-
2
(Bop) sun s
99-1 15 mmol/l 
3.2-6.5 mmol/l
owu 
-5.3 mmol/l
40-153 mmol/l
17-27 mmol/l
ou
/oww 618
-5.5 mmol/l
 2-13 pmol/l
13-52 nmol/l
0.7-2.3 nmol/l
<|mmol/l
o
I/n 05-/
 00-0
001-0
25-260
2
2
Serum chemistry
rbondioxide - (TCO2)
Betahydroxybutyrate
Parathyroid hormone
Triodochyronine (T3)
POst-ACTH
Thyroxin(T4)
Cholesterol
Tocal protein
Anion gap
acids
reatinine
Phosphate
Potassium
Albumin
Amylase
Icium
loride
Globulin
basal
Lipase
Sodium
Jrea
ALT
Bile
16
190
Numbers refer to question and
feline pox virus 24, 176
answer numbers, not page numbers
fibrous osteodystrophy 182
food allergy 186
acromegaly 123
alopecia, endocrine 5
gas gangrene 98
anaemia8,31,69,73,95,102,110,112
gastric foreign body 125
132
gastric neoplasia 25
anal glands, apocrine carcinoma 140
gastric torsion/dilatation 12, 15, 91,185
Angiostrongyius 161
gastroenteritis, bacterial 62, 83, 131
arteriovenous anastomosis, intrahepatic
gastroenteritis, viral 16, 57,62,83
156
gastrointestinal tract, endocrinology 119
gastrointestinalulceration 136,164,183
barium impregnated polyspheres 120, 161
Giardia 147,161
blindness, acute 33
glomerular filtration rate 196
blood cells, morphology 2, 8, 31, 69, 95,
glomerulonephritis 7
102,110,112,124,191
gluten-sensitive enteropathy 166
breath hydrogen, profile 55
bronchopneumonia 63
haemangiosarcoma 74
haematuria 1,4,32,35,42,75,80,106,
calcium oxalate 96,104,107,113,143
133
anine distemper virus 48, 63, 70
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis 29
canine herpesvirus infection 122
Haws syndrome 90
cholangiohepatitis complex 193
Helicobacter 103
cholecystitis 89
hepatic cirrhosis 20, 174, 187
choleliths 89
hepatic encephalopathy 177
chyloabdomen 19
hepatic lipidosis 64, 130, 151
Costridium perfringens 98
hepatic neoplasia 146
copper hepatotoxicosis 77
hepatitis, chronic 20,46,71,112,151,154
ryptorchidism 50,180
hepatobiliary jaundice 56,89,168,193
cystitis 42,113
hepatocutaneous syndrome 37
cytology, effusions 18, 19,45, 148, 165
hepatomegaly 26, 43, 67
cytology, masses 167, 172
hiatal hernia 3,68
cytology, vaginal 17, 51,78
hyperadrenocorticism 5, 23, 26, 93, 107,
174
diabetes insipidus 157
hypercalcaemia 49,140,150
diabetes mellitus 5,14, 23, 47,142, 190
hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis 155
hypercholesterolaemia 121, 178
mamel hypoplasia 48
hyperlipaemia 121
endoscopy, gastric 115
hyperoestrogenism 53, 132, 180
epiphyseal dysgenesis 100
hyperparathyroidism 140,179
ethylene glycol toxicity 104,179
hypertension 33,46,156
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency 127
hyperthyroidism 30, 41,130
hypertrophic osteopathy 85
fading kittens 40, 176
hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy 192
feline calicivirus 170
hypoadrenocorticism 52,140,145,150,
feline coronavirus 173, 188
163
feline herpes virus 40
hypoalbuminaemia 6, 36
feline immunodefciency virus 38, 173
hypocalcaemia 140, 179
feline infectious peritonitis 19, 82, 173, 188
hypoglycaemia 171
feline leukaemia virus 9,44, 92,124,173
hypokalaemia 79, 84, 111
feline parvovirus 176
hypoparathyroidism 179
191
Index
hypothyroidism 100, 149, 169
portosystemic shunt 22,46,112,138,160,
177
immune mediated haemolytic anaemia 2,
pregnancy termination 51
31
prolapsed nictitating membrane/chronic
inflammatory bowel disease 6,54, 55, 94,
diarrhoea syndrome 90
101,195
prostatic hyperplasia, benign 97
insulinoma 59, 171
prostatitis 35,106,139
insulin resistance 5, 23
protein-energy malnutrition 134
intersex 66
protein-losing enteropathy 6, 13, 36, 54,
intestinal haematoma 189
175
intestinal neoplasia 120, 175, 189
protein-losing nephropathy 27, 36, 179
intestinal obstruction 120, 162
pseudopregnancy 114
intestinal polyp 61
pulmonary thromboembolism 6
intussusception 76, 88, 131
pyelonephritis 80, 144
iron deficiency 69, 73
pyometra 86, 191
Isospora felis 81
regurgitation 3,68,128
Leptospira 122,158,184
renal disease, congenital/familial 108
liver, clinical pathology 130, 151, 154,
renal failure, acute 49, 58, 87, 104
174,178
renal failure,chronic 33,41,72,79,84,
liver failure 20
111,137,140,179,182,194
liver tumour 146
renal haemorrhage, idiopathic 32
lymphangiectasia 13
renal tubular acidosis 155
ymphoma 8,21, 54,92,110,165,173
resorption,embryonic 109
retrobulbar abscess 167
Marie's disease 85
retrograde urethrography 75, 129
mast cell tumour 183
rodenticide toxicity 102, 140
megacolon 153
megaoesophagus 128
small intestinal bacterial overgrowth 116,
microhepatica 181
127,131,141
mitotic figure 148, 172
spermatic cord torsion 105
myeloma8
spermatozoal abnormalities 11
systemic lupus erythematosus 27
necrolytic migratory erythema 37
Neospora caninum 39
testicular tumour 53,132, 180
nephropathy, obstructive 144
mbular necrosis, acute 58
oesophageal diverticulum 159
Uncinaria stenocepbala 186
oesophageal foreign body 34
ureter, ectopic 135, 144
oestrous cycle 17,28, 51
 urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence
ovarian follicular cysts 60
10, 155
 ovarian remnant syndrome 78
urethrorectalfistula 126
urinary incontinence 10,118
pancreatitis 25,87,152,174
urinary tract, calculi 4, 96,113, 118, 138,
peliosis hepatis 65
143
perinephric pseudocysts 117
urinary tract neoplasia 1, 129, 133, 173
peritoneal effusion 19, 20,36,46, 74, 148,
187
vaginal hyperplasia 28
Physaloptera99
pleural effusion 18, 148
xylose malassimilation 55
192