The Complete Textbook of
Veterinary
Nursing
Victoria Aspinall
Edited by
BUTTERWORTH
HEINEMANN
ELSEVIER
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
For Elsevier:
Commissioning Editor: Mary Seager
Development Editor: Rebecca Nelemans
Project Manager: Andrew Palfreyman
Designer: Andrew Chapman
Illustrations Manager: Bruce Hogarth
Illustrators: Debbie Maizels
Samantha Elmhurst
Richard Morris
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary
Nursing
Edited by Victoria Aspinall, BVSc MRCVS
Director, Abbeydale Vetlink Veterinary Training, Gloucester, UK
BUTTERWORTH
HEINEMANN
ELSEVIER
         
BUTTERWORTHI
 HEINEMANN
ELSEVIER
@ 2006, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
No part of this publicatior may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or trarsmitted in ary fom or by ary mearis, electroric,
copying in thie Urited Kinigdom issued by the Copyright Licerising Agericy, 90 Totterihiam Court Road, Loridor W1T 4LP. Permissioris may
e-mail: healthpermissioris@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request or-lirie via the Elsevier homepage (http://www.elsevier.com), by
selecting 'Customer Support' arid ther 'Obtairing Permissiors"
First published 2006
ISBN 10: 0 7506 8847 5
ISBN 13: 978 0 7506 8847 5
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
tice, treatmerit arid drug therapy may become recessary or appropriate. Readers are advised to check the most current informatior provided
(i) or1 procedures featured or (ii) by the mariufacturer of each product to be admiristered, to verify the recommerided dose or fommula, thie
appropriate safety precautioris.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the publisher nor the author assumes any liability for any injury and/or damage.
The Publishier
The
 Printed in Spain
policy is :o Usθ
paper manulaclured
from sustainable foresls
Contents
Contributors
vii
Preface
ix
Acknowledgements
X
1
1
2
The equine industry - Anne Rogers
19
3
Legislation and the veterinary nurse - Suzanne May
33
4
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology - Sue Dallas
49
5
Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species - Victoria Aspinall
109
6
Equine anatomy and physiology - Catherine Phillips
133
7
Animal housing - Trish Scorer
145
8
Stable design and management - Trish Scorer
163
9
Animal grooming - Juliet Whattey
177
10
Canine and feline nutrition - Alison Jones
191
11
Clinical nutrition - Alison Jones
213
12
Equine nutrition － Corinna Pippard
225
13
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat - Jane Williams
243
14
Equine behaviour and handling - Nicola Ackerman
267
15
Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species - Sharon Reid
283
16
Introduction to genetics － Dorothy Stables
301
17
Practical animal breeding - Dorothy Stables and Gareth Lawler
319
18
 The essentials of patient care - Jessica Maughan
337
19
Fundamental pharmacology - Sally Bowden
361
20
First aid - Wendy Miller Smith
393
21
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases - Helen Dingle and Amanda Rock
413
22
Common medical conditions of the body systems - Paula Hotston Moore
435
23
 Principles of surgical nursing - Julie Ouston
467
24
Theatre practice - Emma Brooks
507
25
High-dependency nursing - Claire Cave
533
26
Dentistry - Cecilia Gorrel
555
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia - Michaet Stevenson
577
28
Equine anaesthesia - Anja Watker
611
29
Parasitology - Maggie Fisher
633
30
Microbiology - Helen Moreton
665
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids － Lorraine Allan
681
Contents
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging -Suzanne Easton
717
33
Management and care of exotic species - Beverley Shingleton and Sarah Cottingham
751
34
Management and care of injured wildlife - Louise Brockbank
811
Appendix 1 - Essential Calculations - Pip Millard
845
Appendix 2 -Normal Values
855
Index
859
vi
Contents
Contributors
Nicola Ackerman BSc(Hons) Cert SAN VN
Suzanne May VN 
Head Nurse, The Veteririary Hospital, Colwill Road, Plymouth,
RCVS Extermal Verifier, Belgravia House, 62-64 Horseferry Road,
Devon, UK
London UK
Lorraine Allan BVSc, MRCVS PGCE
Pip Millard VN
Serior Lecturer ard Course Leader for BSc (Horis) Veteririary
Practice Marager, Woodlards Veterinary Clinic, Salisbury Avenue,
Nursirig arid Clirnical Veteriniary Nursirg, Myerscough College,
Warden Hill, Chelterihiam, Glos UK.
Bilsborrow, Preston, Larics, UK
Wendy Miller-Smith Cert Ed VN, CMS
Victoria Aspinall BVSc MRCVS
Veteririary Corsultant, Closes Croft, Kirkcowan, Newton Stewart,
Director, Abbeydale Vetlink Veterirary Trainirng Ltd, 20 Glevum
Wigtowrishire, UK
Way, Abbeydale, Gloucester, UK
Helen Moreton BSc, PhD 
Sally Bowden BSc (Hons), CertEdVN
 Senior Lecturer and Course Marager for MSc Applied
Director, 2 by 2 Trairning Ltd, Austeris, Broad Oak, Brede, East
Equire Scierice, Royal Agriculture College, Cirencester, Glos,
Sussex, UK
UK
Louise Brockbank
Julie Ouston MA, Vet MB, MRCVS 
Mariager, Gloucestershire Wildlife Rescue, Hartpury, Gloucester, UK
 Director, MYF Trairirg Ltd, Hippodrome House, Statior Road,
Emma Brooks VN
Aldershiot, Harits, UK
Head Nurse, The Coppins, Hope Manor Farm House, Cuts Heath,
Catherine Phillips Cert Ed VN, EVN
Milbury Heath, Thombury, Glos, UK.
Lecturer in Veterinary Nursing, Hartpury Collge, Hartpury.
Clare Cave VN
Gloucester, UK
Cave Referrals, Saridwell, 7 Hector's Storie, Woolavirgtor, Somerset,
 Corinna Pippard BSc(Hons), PhD
UK
Registrar, Hartpury College, Hartpury, Gloucester, UK
Sarah Cottingham BSc, VN, PG, DipCAB
Sharon Reid VN, D32, D33
Lecturer in Veterirary Nursing, Plumptor College, Ditchling Rd,
Sernior Veteririary Nurse, University of Glasgow Small Animal
Plumptor, Nr Lewes, Sussex, UK
Cliric, Bearsder Road, Bearsder, Glasgow, UK
Sue Dallas Cert Ed VN
Amanda Rock BVSc, MRCVS 
Lecturer in Veterirary Nursing ard Arimal Care, Walford ard North
Part time Lecturer in Veterirary Nursing, Duchy College,
Shropshire College, Oswestry, Shropshire, UK
Rosewarre, Cambourre, Corrwall, UK
Helen Dingle Cert Ed VN
Anne Rogers BSc(Hons)
Curriculum Area Marager, Veterinary Nursing Duchy College,
Freelarice Lecturer irn Arimal ard Equine Science, Adria, Blackpost
Rosewarre, Cambourre, Corriwall, UK
Lare, Totres, Devon, UK
Suzanne Easton MScRadiography (Imaging) PGCE
Trish Scorer VN
Lecturer, Uriversity of the West of Erglarid, Bristol, UK
Iriterral Verifier for Abbeydale Vetlink Veterirary Trairing Ltd,
Maggie Fisher BVetMed, CBiol, MIBiol, DipEVPA MRQA, MRCVS
20 Glevum Way, Abbeydale, Gloucester UK
Conisultant in Veterinary Parasitology, Shernacre Cottage, Lower
Beverley Shingleton Cert Ed VN
Howsell Road, Malverm, Wores, UK
Lecturer in Arimal Maragement, Plumptorn College, Ditchling Rd,
Andi Godfrey BSc(Hons)
Plumptor, Nr Lewes, Sussex, UK
Freelarice Writer, S2 Hereford Road, London W2 UK
Dorothy Stables MSc, BA(Hons), MTD, DN, RM, RN
Cecilia Gorrel BSc, MA, VetMB, DDS, MRCVS, Hon FAVD, DiplEVDC
Fomer Lecturer in Applied Biology, St Bartholomew's College of
Veteririary Deritistry anid Oral Surgery Referrals, 17 Bumt House
Nursing and Midwifery, City University, Lordon, UK
Lare, Pilley, Nr Lymirnitor, Hanits, UK.
Michael Stevenson BVM&S BSc(Hons) MRCVS
Paula Hotson Moore Cert Ed VN
Aspirall, Auld and Steversor, 20 Glevum Way, Abbeydale 
Iriternal Verifier, Uriversity of Bristol, Largford House, Largford,
Gloucester, UK
Bristol, UK
Anja Walker BSc, BVSc, MRCVS
Alison Jones BVet Med, MRCVS
Westem Counties Equine Cliric, Culmstock, Nr Cullumton,
Priricipal, "Vets or1 the Park', Lymdale, Moorend Grove, Chelteriham,
Devon, UK
Glos, UK
Juliet Whatley CertEd VN
Gareth Lawler BSc(Hons), PGCE
Lecturer in Veterinary Nursinig, Hartpury College, Hartpury,
Lecturer in Arimal Care, Pericoed College, Bridgend, Wales, UK
Gloucester, UK
Jessica Maughan BSc, VN
Jane Williams Cert Ed VN
Woodlards Veterirary Cliric, Salisbury Averue, Warder Hill,
 Director of Veterirary Nursing, University College Dublin, Dublin,
Chelterham, Glos, UK
Rep of Ireland
Contributors 
vii
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Preface
The role of the veterinary nurse has changed enormously in the past few
whose skills range from those of surgical assistant, anaesthetist, laboratory
technician, dental hygienist, nutritionist and behaviour counsellor to those
of a compassionate caretaker who is able to minister to the needs of a
variety of animal species and still find time to address the concerns of their
owners. They play a vital part in modern veterinary practice and without
them most practices would grind to a halt.
When I was asked to plan and edit The Complete Textbook of Veterinary
Nursing I was determined to produce a text that would be useful not only to
student veterinary nurses but also to those nurses with diplomas and degrees
and to anyone else who is interested in the veterinary care of animals. In
short, I wanted to produce a book that could be used for the whole of a
nurse's working life, not just during training. Using the RCVS VN syllabus as
a foundation, I have tried to include all the subjects that make up a nurse's
duties and then to expand the information so that it is both informative
and also encourages the reader to widen his/her knowledge horizons.
Nowadays we are presented with a wide range of species, so any book
describing itself as 'complete' must aim to cover all the animals that may be
husbandry, behaviour and handling, nutrition and anaesthesia, and in
to all species, the authors have included examples to cover the different
animals.
Most of the contributors to this book are either directly involved in
veterinary practice or are veterinary nurse educators with a wide range of
 n   p   e  ne   
and I am deeply grateful for their dedication to this book.
Victoria Aspinall
September 2005
Preface ix
Acknowledgements
         s  ss
18 months so to make up for my neglect I would like to dedicate this book
  r s       
       s   
Jo yi nudde  m dn nd pe pou aay e m jo
concentration! I also owe a great deal to all the students I have taught both
past and present, because they have taught me such a lot.
I would also like to thank the team at Elsevier, particularly Mary Seager,
 Rebecca Nelemans and Andrew Palfreyman, who are always on hand to
answer questions or boost my confidence when I need it. Finally, my thanks
go to all the contributors who, despite being busy with their own careers,
have managed to find time to write such detailed and well-researched
chapters.
xAcknowledgements
1
Human-animal interaction - the
place of the companion animal
in society
Andi Godfrey
Key Points
● The domestication of dogs and cats was a natural
● Civilized society is based on the fundamental principle
 progression from man's need for help with guarding.
that where animals are used to accommodate human
hunting and the herding of livestock and the animal's
needs, their welfare is of paramount im portance
need for shelter and protection from predators
● Responsible pet ownership is designed to produce an animal
 The possession of a companion animal can have a
that is healthy and well trained and causes no problems
beneficial effect on health, child development and
to the society and the environment in which it lives
helping elderly people to cope with retirement and loss
● Pet abuse is an increasingly common problem and may
of a spouse
lead to abuse of family members
● Companion animals are widely used to provide therapy in
 Euthanasia is a diffcult decision and an emotionally
prisons, schools, hospitals and hospices
testing time for the client. It is at this time that the
● Nowadays dogs play an essential role in sport and in the
veterinary nurse plays a vital role in supporting both the
service of man
veterinary surgeon and the client
Introduction
 benefits of pet ownership have been proved scientifically.
While human-animal interaction does not yet rate highly on
the student veterinary nurse's syllabus, it is a subject that is
Interaction between domestic animals and humans has
invaluable to those working in practice and in other areas of
existed throughout history but it is only within the past
veterinary medicine. This knowledge will enable veterinary
30 years that we have begun to understand the importance of
nurses to understand the specific needs of each patient as well
the human-animal bond and how it can influence our
as the owner and, consequently, will help to improve the
society. Research in this field is still in its infancy but many
relationship between the practice and the client.
Domestication - how
progressed, animals became more adapted to man's purpose
did the wild animal
through genetic selection.
become a pet?
Pets have only been referred to as 'companion animals' within
the past three decades and it would be reasonable to assume
that this new terminology reflects the changing role of domes-
Some people believe the nurturing instinct of the early
tic animals in modern society. Over 50% of households within
hunter-gatherers caused them to take the orphans of their
the UK now own pets and the vast majority of these animals
prey back to the women to be nursed and, as a result, some
are kept as companions (Robinson 1995); however, the true
animals became tame. Others consider that it was a natural
reason for introducing the expression 'companion animal’ is
progression from animals being domesticated for utilitarian
the belief that the term ‘pet’ is demeaning (Tannenbaum
purposes. Whichever way it came about, it is certain that man
1995). The concern for political correctness demonstrates our
and beast formed a symbiotic relationship. Man had the
sd pn ssasns aq se spemon ap 
advantage of using animals for transport, security, hunting
have sensitivities similar to our own. This belief is a far cry
and keeping down rodent populations, while animals had an
from the view of the philosopher Descartes (1596-1650), who
decreed that animals had no capacity for reason and therefore 
them with shelter and protection against predators. As time
could not feel (Dolan 1999).
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
The concept of keeping animals as companions is not new.
Historically, cats appear to have suffered less at the hands of
There is proof in surviving epitaphs that the ancient Greeks
man. Their only function in society was to control the rodent
and Romans were avid pet owners and that they revered their
population; thus, no genetic modification was required.
pets for their ability to reciprocate affection and provide
Differences in cat species tend to relate to the country from
amusement and companionship. Unlike many other soci-
which they come. For example, British short-hair cats are
eties, pet owners were from every type of social background
stockier and have thicker coats, whereas those from warmer
rather than being confined to the elite (Bodson 2000).
countries, such as the Siamese, tend to be more slender with
Ancient Egyptian murals depict the enthusiasm that
long legs and thin tails. This complies with the Darwinian
 Pharaohs and other high-ranking offcials had for keeping
theory of natural selection that species become adapted to
dogs, cats and other wild creatures as objects of affection (Css
their environment. It was not until the 19th century that cats
1988). In fact, it was thought that the domestic cat originated
were differentiated into breeds and, following the first cat
in Egypt, but archaeologists have since discovered the bones
show held at the Crystal Palace in 1871, standards of excel-
of a cat in Cyprus that are over 90o0 years old and all the evi-
lence were introduced (Thorne 1992).
dence points to it having been a pet (Muir 2004).
The advances that have been made in veterinary medicine,
  d     a  
the increase in the number of pet insurers, the growth in the
early as the 12th century and by the 18th century it was not
 pet food industry and the demand for animal behaviourists,
unknown for puppies to be suckled by human ‘wet nurses'
      
and, as adult dogs, to be attended by their own retinue of
greatly humans value their pets in the present day (Blacker
palace eunuchs (Robinson 1995). This attitude towards dogs
2004). Domestic animals still have a variety of roles
was not upheld by the rest of the Chinese population, who
(Table 1.1) but the modern world dictates a greater need for
were more likely to use dogs for guarding, hunting and as a
animals to be kept solely as companions. The contributory
food source.
factors to this requirement are the breakdown of the family
unit, a more stressful lifestyle and the fact that more people
 In the Western world, during the Middle Ages, animals were
live alone. For many years pet owners have eulogized the
considered to be totally utilitarian and any sentiment shown
virtues of their animals but it is only recently that scientists
towards them was frowned upon. During the 16th and 17th
have been able to prove that companion animals are
century, companion animals were cited as evidence of witch-
 beneficial to human health and wellbeing.
craft. The animals that were thought to be kept as 'familiars'
during this period were frequently owned by elderly women
who were socially deprived, thus suggesting that in reality
these pets were kept for companionship (Robinson 1995)
The indications are that dogs gradually worked their way into
Table 1.1 Reasons for pet-keeping, related to species
the affections of humans as a result of their working rela-
Reason
Species
 n   s n  'o  s s
bred as pets until relatively modern times. During the 18th
Decoration
 Exotic bids, tropical fish, goldfish, koi carp
century, the custom of keeping animals as companions was
 Breeding and
Dogs, cats, horses, budgerigars - most pet
recognised in the Western world, but this practice was
confined to wealthy citizens who could afford to keep non-
showing
species may be involved
working animals and were prepared to ignore the common
Hobby
All pet species
view that showing affection towards animals was both unnat-
Child's 'toy
Ponies, small rodents, rabbits, guinea pigs,
ural and immoral. Pet-keeping became fashionable in the
 goldfish, terTapins
Victorian period as a means of getting in touch with the
natural world; however, there was little regard for animal
Adult's 'toy"
Horses, dogs, cats, rats, rabbits
welfare at this time and the development of new breeds, for
Sport
 Dogs, horses, pigeons
example, is a visible demonstration of man's dominion over
nature (Webster 1994, Robinson 1995). Some dogs such as
Status symbols
Rare and expensive breeds of cat and dog.
pugs and King Charles spaniels were bred to elicit the ‘cute
exotic reptiles, tarantulas
D peadde on aueadde oudopaed e aatu pue ,asuodsa
Companionship
Dogs, cats, horses, parrots, budgerigars,
people's innate parental instinct (Serpell 2003); others were
rabbits and other small rodents
bred simply to achieve a look that was fashionable. In both
cases, intensive breeding has resulted in a loss of fitness in the
Helpers
Working and service dogs
species and in 1994 Bonner reported that genetic disease in
Money-makers
 Dogs, cats and exotic species
pedigree dogs was affecting approximately 142 breeds out of
(illegally or legally)
the 170 that were registered with the UK Kennel Club.
2
 Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
Beneficial effects of
at the Royal College of Nursing Conference (Frith 2004)
showed that women recovering from breast cancer were
keeping
g companion
significantly better at managing their disease if they owned a
pet and felt less disfigured following surgery. The psycholog-
ical benefits of animals to humans are that they are aestheti-
animals
cally pleasing, they instigate a nurturing instinct in man and
respond readily to human affection, all of which help to
The effect on human health
reduce stress and promote feelings of self-worth.
It is now recognised that animals can induce physiological
It is a popular misconception among non-pet-owners that
benefits in humans. When people become upset or anxious
 people who keep pets are socially and emotionally inept, but 
the body responds with the flight or fight' mechanism. This
studies have revealed that the majority of pet owners are
activates the sympathetic nervous system, increases blood
normal people whose social skills are enhanced by keeping
pressure, heart and respiratory rate and induces hormonal
animals. The observation that animals facilitate communica-
changes. The theory that the presence of a friendly animal
tion with strangers (Hunt et al 1992) is a point that can be
has a positive effect on cardiovascular response has been
endorsed by anyone who has walked a dog in a park in
examined in a number of ways. One research project meas-
London, a city renowned for its unfriendliness (Fig. 1.1). In
ured the blood pressure and heart rate of children while they
most cases, it is the common interest of pet ownership that
rested and then while they read aloud both with and without
will trigger interaction, but evidence that a pet can
a friendly dog present (Friedman 1995). The results showed
significantly reduce anxiety suggests that this might inspire
that the presence of the dog had a significant effect on low.
 pet owners with the confidence to socialize more freely.
ering blood pressure. Similar research conducted on college
students revealed that a dog had a considerable influence on
Scientific research has established that pet owners not only
reducing heart rate (Friedman 1995). One of the problems
have fewer minor health problems and visit doctors less but
that arises in research on pets and cardiac response is that not
they also have a higher rate of survival following coronary
all individuals feel the same level of comfort from animals
heart disease. The most obvious health benefit to dog owners
because of either their background or previous experience,
is that they are motivated to take regular exercise out of duty
    so o p as sinns m p
to their pet. However, the benefits of pets to human health
more stressed because they have to control their pet in a lab-
are not just limited to dogs and at a nursing conference held
oratory situation.
in May 2004 (Frith 2004), cats, ferrets and parrots were
pnsisai axe on isironouasd e Aq isanbai e un papni
Despite the early criticism of research in this field, many
  s  d   s
more health authorities are promoting the use of animals in
      s ss
the treatment of the sick and convalescent patient (Delta
Fig 1.1 Pets encourage their owners to interact sociatly with other humans
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
Society 1996) and it can be concluded that the health benefits
of animals to humans are now widely recognised.
The effect on child development
Veterinary nurses can ensure that pet ownership is a
beneficial experience for children by educating the parents
about the needs of a chosen pet, suggesting suitable preven-
tative treatments and encouraging families to take part in
puppy and kitten classes. Veterinary nurses should have the
capacity to be informative about the stages at which children
are able to take on certain responsibilities of pet ownership
and should advise parents of the dangers of leaving a young
child with a pet unsupervised. The veterinary nurse may
Fig 1.2 Regutar interaction with a pet helps a chiid to develop
awareness of the needs of others
sometimes be required to give advice to parents on how to
help their child cope with pet bereavement.
Statistics show that the percentage of households with pets is
s d  sad n  p aq  sd 
significantly higher in families with children from the age of
education for their children without causing them too much
6-15 years (Bonas et al 2000). Cats and dogs are often con-
embarrassment, but pets can be educational in other life expe-
sidered as family members and will instigate more social
riences too. Often children experience bereavement for the first
interaction within the home. The number of family house-
time through the loss of a pet and, so long as the child is
holds with pets may also be synonymous with the number of
allowed to work through the grieving process, this can provide
families in which both parents work and, in this case, an
a balanced approach to coping with the deaths of close relatives
animal can provide company for children and a feeling of
or friends that may occur in the future. A greater sense of nature
security when they are alone in the house.
can be learned through owning companion animals, and chil-
dren will have a better understanding of welfare that can be
It has been observed that most pet-owning adults have had
 applied to all animals and not just pets.
companion animals as children and it would be safe to
assume that this has been the case for most veterinary nurses.
The benefits to children derived from pet ownership are
encourages the development of social and emotional skills
entirely dependent on the responsibility of the parent and
and may enhance cognitive and learning powers in children
negative learning can result from the parent being unwilling
(Poresky & Hendrix 1988). By helping to care for a pet a child
or unable to supervise the welfare of the animal. A child
can acquire nurturing skills and, when praised by an adult for
might learn to fear certain species either through a bad expe-
performing a task well, will build up self-esteem. However, it
rience of their own or through experiencing a parent's fear of
is important that a child is supervised in the care of pets and
an animal. Fear, deferred anger or the imitation of adults may
is never given a task beyond the capabilities of its age. Fogle
lead to the abuse of animals and it is the role of people in the
(1983) suggests that 10 years is the minimum age that a child
veterinary profession and those working in animal welfare to
can be expected to fully take care of an animal. One of the
educate families in responsible pet ownership.
many benefits that a pet can give a child is unconditional
love, particularly when the child is upset, in disfavour with
 parents or having problems at school. Often the child is able
Children and bereavement
  n n a   n sd nn   
communicate with another person. Unfortunately, a pet can
only give affection in return and therefore should only be
considered as part of a support network (Endenburg & Baarda
of pet loss but generally it is believed that withholding infor-
1995). Through regular interaction with a pet, a child will
mation or an untruthful explanation of the pet's sudden dis-
develop an awareness of the pet's needs and, while this may
appearance will cause confusion and anger and may lead to
be criticized for being of an anthropomorphic nature, it has
serious mental health problems (McNicholas & Collis 1995,
been noted that children who own pets have a greater
Stewart 1999). When a pet is seriously ill, the child should be
empathy for the emotional and physiological needs of fellow
made aware of what is happening and be prepared for its
human beings (Fig. 1.2). It is believed that pets can influence
imminent death. Sometimes a child will want to be present at
cognitive development because they are willing and patient
euthanasia but this will be at the discretion of the veterinary
listeners and are attractive verbal stimuli.
surgeon and the parents; however, a child should be encour-
 4   Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
aged to see the pet after it has died to show that it is at peace
fracture (Hart 1995). It has been said that pets encourage
and will not return. Euphemisms such as 'put to sleep' should
 social interaction with other humans but this is not necessar-
be avoided as this may lead to misconception and allow the
 ily exclusive to pet ownership. Simply being an animal lover
child to believe that their pet will wake up. Children's reac-
 can help to forge relationships with other enthusiasts. An
  n    r     
 investigation carried out in old people's homes discovered
they should be encouraged to talk about their feelings and
that pet visitation greatly improved social discourse among
share their grief. Allowing children to perform or take part in
the residents and elicited bonding with the volunteers who
some kind of ritual such as burial, a memorial service or
 had brought the animals. Surprisingly, the animals were not
helping to make a decision about the ashes is also beneficial.
 the main focus of attention but their presence appeared to
  a  n     
 encourage the residents to share personal information about
 death will help children take a balanced approach to future
      nd  d 
losses and will increase their trust in their parents and other
ment (Hart 1995).
adults who have been involved.
People who do not like animals will gain nothing from their
presence, but there are many other practical reasons why the
Benefits to elderly people
elderly do not keep pets. Some elderly fear abandoning a pet 
through illness or death or are concerned about not being
The positive effects that pets have on human health can be
able to cope with the loss of yet another pet. Others worry
applied to all age groups but perhaps the greatest benefit that
about the extra work a pet can create and a lack of financial
companion animals bring to the elderly is their ability to help
resources. Residential homes in particular often do not allow
them cope with loss. Loss refers not only to the death of close
relatives or friends but also to the loss of a job following
the needs of the elderly and the benefits of companion
retirement and the loss of children once they have left home.
animals and many homes allow therapeutic visits from vol-
The bereavement of a spouse can include the loss of a
unteers with friendly pets. An organisation, the Cinnamon
confidante and possible social isolation, thus compounding
Trust, was formed to assist the elderly in looking after their
the effect of prolonged stress. Investigations into the effects
 pets in their own homes. The aim is to preserve the relation-
of bereavement on the elderly have shown that pet owners
suffered significantly less depression than those without pets
help to care for the animal through a network of volunteers.
(Hart 1995). Job loss and the lack of having someone to
For example, a volunteer may walk the dog of an owner who
nurture are factors known to cause low self-esteem and pets
is housebound. Foster homes will take care of an animal
can play a vital role in fulfilling the need to nurture and
whose owner faces a spell in hospital and the owner is kept
giving reassurance of self-worth (Enders-Slegers 2000).
in touch with their pet through visits, photographs or letters.
Elderly people become lonely and depressed when a pet dies
A dog will encourage its owner to take regular exercise, which
 o a  d  e a i  a 
is of great value to cardiovascular health, and now research
Cinnamon Trust sanctuaries, a very special new bond can be
has revealed that exercise plays a major role in avoiding hip
formed.
clean them. A small town in Germany, Bethel-Bielefeldt, wit-
The therapeutic
nessed the opening of a residential centre for epileptics in
1867 in which animals were an integral part of the treatment.
effect of companion
This home was still in existence in the 1970s, by which time
it had expanded to accommodate 50o0 physically and men-
animals
tally handicapped patients and the animals included pets,
horses, farm animals and a safari park. During the First and
the Second World Wars, the therapeutic effert dogs had on
The idea that animals can be of therapeutic value to man
servicemen who had been injured, shell-shocked or trauma-
dates back through history. In the 18th century a tea mer-
tized was recognised in some hospitals. In Norway, Erling
chant named William Tuke, who had been appalled by the
Stordahl and his wife Anna opened a rehabilitation centre in
treatment of mentally ill patients in asylums, founded an
1966 where the disabled were able to take part in sport and
physiotherapy programmes and dogs and horses were an
caring for rabbits and chickens. Florence Nightingale in 1859
     n   
advocated chronically ill patients keeping pets, particularly
been particularly aware of the benefits, as he was blind
birds, and, if well enough, being encouraged to feed and
himself.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing  5
Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
The true founder of pet facilitated therapy, as we know it
skills and to become more specialized. Pets as therapy or pet-
today, was Boris Levinson, an American child psychologist.
He discovered, apparently by accident through his own pet
egories, animal-assisted therapy (AAT) and animal-assisted
dog, Jingles, that children who were emotionally disturbed
activity (AAA). The difference between these two areas can
and withdrawn would respond favourably to the presence of
best be described in the form of a flow chart (Fig. 1.3).
a dog when previously they had been hostile and uncommu-
nicative. His reasoning was that companion animals could
act as catalysts by stimulating playful and non-threatening
Companion animals in prisons
social contact and providing a neutral vehicle for expressing
worries and concerns. Levinson made a plea for others to
When animals were experimentally introduced into a
explore the efficacy of pet therapy and, although he was met
maximum-security mental institution in Ohio, the organizers
with reluctance in some quarters, many of his theories were
were amazed at the results. There was a much lower incidence
supported by subsequent research.
of violence and suicides in wards that had pets than in those
that did not; also the need for tranquillizing drugs was far less
By the 1980s the use of pets in therapy had become much
(CSS 1988). The pets used in this experiment were mostly
more sophisticated and therapists had begun to develop their
birds, fish and small rodents. The effect that these animals
Fig 1.3 The different branches of facilitated pet therapy and its
PET THERAPY OR PET-FACILITATED THERAPY
benefits to humans
Animal-assisted therapy (ATT)
Animal-assisted activities (AAA)
 Specialized expertise required
Speciallytrained professionals or 
volunteers required
Results are observable and
measurable
BENEFITS
?
Motivates
Enhances
Increases
Decreases
quality
desirable
undesirable
of life
behaviour
behaviour
Teaches
Educates
Promotes
new skills
lecreational 
activity
6
Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
have in reducing stress has since been recognised as passive
formed an organisation called PRO Dogs (Public Relations
animal-assisted activity. The activity of birds and fish, their
Organization for Dogs). She was determined to promote their
colours and the sounds they create have been found to have
 benefits to society and to encourage responsible dog owner-
a calming influence and are now used to great effect in many
 ship. Her recognition of the positive health effects that dogs
veterinary, dental and medical surgery waiting rooms. Since
could have on the sick and elderly led to the founding of PAT
 Dogs (PRO dogs Active Therapy) in 1983, an organisation
related schemes have been devised, giving prisoners an
that arranged for volunteers to take their dogs to visit hospi-
opportunity to take a more active role in caring for animals,
tals and residential homes. Today there are over 4500 PAT
thus enabling them to learn new skills. A programme initi-
ated at a women's prison in Washington has taught prisoners
temperament, health, and signs of external or internal para-
 sites. The benefit that the visiting pets bring to the elderly has
 dogs used are frequently strays provided by the local humane
been discussed and there is much anecdotal as well as
centre. Once the prisoners have become accomplished dog
scientific evidence to back the theory. The most frequent
trainers, they work with a disabled person to find out exactly
success stories relate to people who were suffering severe
what their specific needs are and train the dogs accord-
depression and were non-communicative and withdrawn
ingly (Css 1988). Clearly, this is a programme that benefits
until striking up a relationship with a PAT dog. Early research
everyone.
into the effects of pet-facilitated therapy on the elderly had
some surprising results. The investigators found that the
increase in social activity and interaction between the resi-
Companion animals in schools
dents that was initiated by the animal's arrival was short-
lived, but the effects on the morale of the staff were consid-
In discussing pets as therapy, one tends to relate to the
erably greater than the effects on the old people (Css 1988).
health-giving aspects alone, but pets have also been found to
have a therapeutic effect in education. Researchers in Austria
Hospitals and hospices can be daunting places for most
discovered that the presence of a dog in a primary school
 people and animals of various species are frequently used for
class helped disruptive children to concentrate more on their
the calming influence they can have on the patients.
lessons and to become less boisterous and attention seeking
Children, in particular, are often terrified of the treatment
(Le Fevre 2004). A wide range of animals, including dogs,
they have to endure and an animal can be a welcome dis-
ponies and even pigs, have been introduced into schools for
traction. Le Fevre (2004) cites the case of a young girl suffer-
children with autism and severe learning difficulties. As well
ing from chronic rheumatoid arthritis who was terrified of
as being educational in terms of learning about body parts
the injections that she needed to have to combat the disease.
and nature, these animals have brought many psychological
The treatment, which should have been over in seconds,
benefits by improving self-esteem, teaching nurturance and
could take up to a traumatic 45 min to administer until the
inducing a more empathic attitude towards other peoples'
 introduction of a brown poodle, whose presence allayed the
needs.
child's fears.
Most recently, dogs have been found to be useful in the treat-
ment of people suffering from acquired immunodeficiency
Companion animals in hospitals,
 q  ad  a p e (sa) a
hospices and old people's homes
only source of unconditional love and acceptance for these
 patients and will provide the fun and physical contact that is
In 1976, freelance journalist and magistrate Lesley Scott-
otherwise missing from their lives (Delta Society 1996,
Ordish became aware of a growing hostility towards dogs and
Society for Companion Animal Studies 2000).
Uses of companion
problem or complaint that would be of little consequence to
the average companion dog can be devastating for a service
animals
dog and its owner.
Dogs have played an integral part in the lives of humans ever
In order to do their job effectively, it is essential that dogs
since they became a part of the human community.
serving a vital role in the community be kept in the peak of
s 'nq hn pue pn on pasn kids aam Ka k
 condition. Veterinary nurses should be aware that any minor
 the needs of humans have changed, so the specific traits of
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
certain breeds have been developed to accommodate them.
aiding in mountain rescue. The Newfoundland, a breed that
support the military, the police and rescue services, and they
rescue teams.
 are used as service dogs.
Service dogs
Dogs in sport
Dogs will never be made redundant as their natural ability
The dog's ability to hunt is instinctive but, when the use of
and willingness to serve man can so easily be modified to new
guns replaced the more primitive means of hunting, new
tasks. Perhaps one of the most valuable assets to humans are
skills
s were required such as setting and retrieving.
the service dogs. This is the official term, originating in the
Development of breeds for these abilities originated on the
USA, to describe dogs that are used specifically to aid people
Iberian peninsula and soon spread to Europe and North
with disabilities. The first service dogs were trained to lead
America, where hunting was popular with the masses (Fogle
the blind during the First World War. Guide dogs must be
1995). Dogs bred for their speed such as lurchers, greyhounds
highly trainable, as well as having good strength, stamina
and whippets are commonly used for racing and there is evi-
and a specific temperament; thus they tend to be limited to
dence of hare coursing dating back 1800 years to the Roman
certain breeds such as Labrador retrievers and German shep-
period (Fogle 1995). The artificial hare was introduced in the
herds (Fig. 1.4); however, it was soon recognised that dogs
late 19th century but its success was not heralded until the
could be used for people with other types of disabilities.
introduction of a circular track, which made the race results
Hearing dogs, seizure alert dogs and assistance dogs have
less predictable than racing dogs on the straight. Dog racing
since been introduced and any size or breed of dog can be
is still popular in the modern day but the animal's sporting
used, including mixed breeds. This has been good news not
life is relatively short, leading to the problem of surplus dogs
 only for the disabled person but also for the number of dogs
that may be euthanased, abandoned or, if they are lucky.
rehomed. Fighting and baiting has appealed to the baser
instinct of man through the centuries and is associated with
the powerful breeds possessing strong jaws such as the mastiff
and the bulldog. In spite of these cruel sports being illegal in
most countries, it is known that illegitimate dogfights still
take place and are a recognised problem in the UK. Another
popular sport that has since been banned is ratting, in which
dogs were placed into enclosed pits with rats. Terriers were
favoured for their skills in this area and it is thought that the
development of the short-legged varieties, such as the
Yorkshire terrier, was because their owners found them more
convenient to transport (Fogle 1995). The herding instinct of
certain breeds has been useful in agriculture for centuries, but
more recently, sheep dog trials have been developed as a sport
and are enjoyed by those who take part and by many of the
viewing public. Dog agility has also become popular with
both professional dog trainers and amateurs alike.
Dogs in the service of man
At one time, draught dogs were used in Europe to pull loads
such as milk carts and to turn spits and waterwheels;
although European draught dogs are no longer used for their
original purpose, huskies still pull loads in the Arctic regions.
For many years the dog's highly developed sense of smell has
beenn used effectively to seek out the gourmet delicacy truffles
and now this skill has been adapted for use by the military.
the police and Customs and Excise to sniff out illicit sub-
 d q s s ods o soa 's
search for the victims of earthquakes and avalanches and
Fig 1.4 A German shepherd guide dog at work
8
Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
that might otherwise have joined the statistics of unwanted
tinue the animal's training and to look after its needs in terms
animals. While the main task of the service dog is to replace
of grooming and nurturing. Many disabled receivers of
     n e sd  s i 
service dogs have found that their social life has improved
provide yet another important function by restoring the self-
because of the fact that a dog breaks down the communica-
esteem of their handicapped owners. The disabled owner is
tion barriers that often exist between disabled and able-
given an objective in life through being encouraged to con
bodied persons
Ethics and welfare
Rights can be separated into three different categories:
natural rights, moral rights and legal rights. An animal's
natural rights apply to what it needs to survive; therefore, in
Many of the major issues concerned with animal ethics and
a domestic situation, it is the duty of humans to supply those
welfare come under the jurisdiction of the veterinary
needs in order for the animal to thrive. The moral rights of an
surgeon; however, it is useful for veterinary nurses to know
animal are harder to define since animals do not have morals.
the motive for any decisions that are made and to understand
A predator would not refrain from hunting purely because it
the reasoning behind them.
felt it had a moral obligation towards its prey. Morals are a
human concept that has developed through the ability of
Cases of cruelty and neglect are often born out of ignorance
humans to reason. Some people would insist that animals
rather than intentional abuse and veterinary nurses can play
have a moral claim on those who use them (Tannenbaum
a very special role in improving the welfare of animals and
1995). It may be argued that animals have no legal right, as
the general public by educating their clients in responsible
one animal cannot sue another. Law is man-made, but the
pet ownership.
suffer because it cannot speak for itself, and legislation has
therefore been drawn up to protect them (Dolan 1999).
Ethics
Even if it can be established that an animal has rights, equal
In order to be conversant with animal welfare it is necessary
to a human's rights or not, the ethical treatment of animals
to have a basic knowledge of ethics. The subject of ethics is
is controlled by humans' principles. The problem with ethics
considered daunting because it can be highly complex, vari-
is that not everyone has the same set of moral values; thus, a
able and open to controversy but, for the purpose of this text,
compromise has to be reached.
it will be kept as simple as possible.
Ethics are a set of moral principles and the foundation of
ethics in animal welfare is whether animals have rights.
What is welfare?
People's attitude towards animals has changed considerably
over time. Many of the early philosophers were influenced
Animals have been fashioned to accommodate human needs
by Christian beliefs. Descartes (1596-1650) was quoted as
over the centuries and as a consequence are totally depend-
saying, I think, therefore I am' and claimed that animals had
ent upon humans for their welfare. Fraser and Broom (1990)
no feelings and were merely machines. Kant (1724-1804) rec-
defined welfare as ‘the state of an animal as it attempts to
ognised that both man and beast were motivated by desire
cope with its environment' but a better definition is that of
but considered that animals had no self-will and therefore
Webster (1994), who wrote, 'the welfare of an animal is
were of no value. He conceded that any duty carried out
determined by its capacity to avoid suffering and sustain
towards an animal should be as an indirect duty to man.
fitness'.
Others, such as Voltaire (1694-1778) and Hume (1711-1776),
were opposed to Christian tradition and argued that because
Since the 1960s there has been a much greater awareness of
animals react to outside stimuli in the same way as man then
animal welfare that has resulted in better conditions for farm
osau pue sno ssassod isn ra
animals, companion animals and laboratory animals. In 1965
the Brambell Committee instituted a set of minimal stan-
Modern society is more in accordance with the beliefs of
dards for farm animals in intensive husbandry systems.
Voltaire and Hume and it is generally agreed that animals do
Originally these standards, known as the Five Freedoms, were
suffer and therefore have rights - but how far should these
very basic, but in 1993 they were redefined by the Farm
rights extend?
Animal Welfare Council and now include:
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 
Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
● Freedom from thirst, hunger and malnutrition - by
 part of the Protection of Animals Act is what constitutes unnec-
 providing fresh water that is readily available and a
essary suffering and why an animal should suffer at all. By
suitable diet to sustain full fitness
taking the example of neutering, an animal may suffer at the
 time of treatment and yet it could be saved from greater poten-
● Freedom from discomfort - by providing a suitable
tial suffering in the future; therefore, this suffering may be
environment that is clean and dry, has shelter and a
justified. However, if an animal's tail is docked or its dew claws
comfortable resting area
are removed because this is aesthetically pleasing to humans,
then this could be considered to be unnecessary suffering.
adequate veterinary attention to ensure freedom from
suffering
Pain and distress in animals
● Freedom to express normal behaviour - by providing
Suffering is defined as the state of enduring pain, misery or
suitable space, interspecific reaction and environmental
loss. While pain is an unpleasant sensory experience it is a
enrichment
very necessary means to survival. Pain teaches an animal to
avoid potentially harmful stimuli and to recognise them in
● Freedom from fear and distress - by ensuring that con-
the future. Pain also inhibits any action that might delay the
ditions that might cause mental suffering are avoided.
healing process.
The five freedoms were intended as guidelines to improve the
Scientists have established that animals possess a similar
husbandry of farm animals but these standards can equally
neuroanatomy to man but whether they feel pain with the
be applied to any animal that is reliant on man for its welfare.
same degree of intensity is a matter of speculation, since
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
response to pain is both physical and emotional and the
(RSPCA) has been quick to promote these standards in its
emotional response cannot be measured directly (Flecknell
campaigns and, in 2002, the RSPCA called upon the govern-
2000). However, it can be assumed that an animal does feel
ment to introduce a 'duty of care' based on the freedoms so
pain and indication of this is shown in the changes of be-
that anyone in charge of an animal has a legal obligation to
comply with these standards.
Table 1.2 Range of possible responses to pain
While the five freedoms form a good moral basis for improv-
 Behavioural response
Physiological response
ing animal welfare, they are not flawless. For example, neu-
tering a pet dog or cat causes a certain amount of stress and
Vocalization - squealing, crying
Fluctuations in body
pain for a short time and the animal will be deprived of its
out, grunting, growling, hissing,
temperature
normal behaviour, and yet such an action is beneficial to the
tooth-grinding, groaning
animal's welfare in a domestic situation. In this case, by not
 Decreased appetite or anorexia
Weight loss and dehydration
giving the animal its natural rights, it may be saved from fatal
Change in facial expression
diseases such as pyometra and feline leukaemia virus or the
Positive response to analgesics
Change in personality - become
Positive response to
welfare and the spread of disease. It is important when con-
docile, aggressive, depressed,
anti-inflammatory drugs
sidering animal rights to look at the big picture' and to make
anxious, isolated or fearful
sure that any action taken will not be to the detriment of
Altered posture - crouching,
human welfare or the environment. When animal rights
hunched up, abdomen tucked up,
activists released mink from a fur farm in Hampshire in 1998,
head down, recumbent
they had not thought of the devastating damage that the
mink would cause to the indigenous wildlife and the harm
Restlessness - frequent change
they would do to small pets.
of position, constant pacing
 Protective response - guarding
The Protection of Animals Act 1911 protects certain animals
the painful area, contact aversion,
limping, restrictive movements
cause the animal pain or unnecessary suffering. Sins of com-
mission include acts of physical and mental abuse. Sins of
Self-mutilation - licking, biting Of
omission are actions that are not carried out, in other words
scratching the area
 neglect. In 2002 the RSPCA reported that 89% of the cruelty
Decreased activity - sleeping a
cases prosecuted under this act were as a result of neglect (UK
great deal
Pets 2002). As Webster (1994) points out, the questionable
10
)Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
haviour, physiological changes and response to analgesia
The controversial aspect of experimenting on animals is that
described in Table 1.2.
it may cause them pain, suffering or lasting harm, something
of which scientists are well aware, and the reduction in the
We know that animals show changes in behaviour when suf-
number of animals used in research over the past three
fering from physical discomfort but how does one know when
decades reflects their concern. In 1973, 5.5 million animals
an animal is suffering mental stress? Animals living in a
were used for experimentation but by 2003 this number had
been reduced to 2.79 million. While the latter figure still may
give up completely. Psychologists describe this behaviour as
appear to be vast, it can be put into perspective by further sta-
learned helplessness'. Other animals in a similar situation will
tistics issued by the Research Defence Society - in July 1994,
develop abnormal behaviour patterns known as stereotypies. A
3.24 million animals were used in research in the UK but
stereotypy is defined as a repetitive, invariant action that serves
693.2 million were killed for food (Dolan 1999).
no obvious purpose. This type of obsessive behaviour can be
observed in animals kept in old-fashioned zoos and in intensive
Further disadvantages of using animals in research include:
farming programmes, but it is not exclusive to these animals
and is also frequently seen in companion animals.
● Gnotobiotic or germ-free animals are expensive to
 produce and maintain
Horses are particularly prone to stereotypies, which may
include weaving, wind sucking, head bobbing, crib biting and
● Laboratory animals are deprived of their freedom
pawing. In the wild, horses are highly sociable animals that
remain in herds and spend over 50% of the day grazing. A
● Species that are phylogenetically close to humans will
horse that is kept in a stable is being deprived of its normal
not necessarily react in the same way to the same
 oral activity and mental stimulation. Not all horses develop
stimuli
stereotypies, as much depends on environmental and genetic
influences; however, those that suffer chronic stress through
● There is a risk to human health through bites scratches
being prevented from performing a natural activity will learn
and allergies
to redirect their behaviour.
● There is a risk of severe mental trauma to staff who
Many species of smaller companion animal may also develop
have to kill and dispose of these animals.
   s  s  s  s
over-grooming and self-mutilation. Dogs that are lacking in
In 1831, the great physiologist, Marshall Hall published his
'principles for animal experimentation' in which he pre.
whereas cats can express their frustration through fabric
scribed that no experiment should be carried out without a
chewing or a condition known as feline hyperaesthesia that
definite objective, that no experiment should be needlessly
causes twitching and rippling of the skin. Stereotypies are seen
repeated and any experiment performed should be con-
in small caged animals such as the parrot that plucks its own
ducted with the least possible suffering. In 1959, W. Russell
feathers or a rodent that performs repetitive back-flips or gnaws
and R. Birch developed these axioms by introducing a con-
at the bars of the cage. While the performance of stereotypies is
cept known as 'the three Rs' that aimed to reduce the number
believed to help an animal cope with its environment (Koene
of animals used, to refine techniques and produce more
1996), they are suggestive of poor welfare and can be damaging
humane methods of experimentation and to replace the use
to an animal's health. Once a stereotypy has developed it is
of animals with non-sentient material such as computers or
extremely difficult to retract, so prevention by providing envi-
cell cultures. These principles are still in use today and, in
ronmental enrichment is the optimum treatment.
conjunction with the Animals Scientific Procedures Act 1986,
conditions for research animals have greatly improved
(Dolan 1999, Webster 1994).
Animals in research
Under the Animals Scientific Procedures Act 1986 every
The fitness of man has benefitted greatly from the use of
research project involving animals requires a licence. In order
animals in medical research, through the development of
to gain the licence, a cost and benefit analysis must be con-
vaccines, antibiotics, hip replacements, organ transplants
ducted to show that the potential results are vital enough to
and genetic engineering; perhaps two of the greatest discov-
warrant the use of animals. The authorities must be con-
eries being those of insulin and the polio vaccine. While the
vinced that the experiments cannot be carried out using non-
advantages of this research to mankind are widely recognised,
animal methods and that the minimum number of animals
many of the advances that have been made are profoundly
will be used. Dogs, cats and primates are only used if it is clear
relevant to veterinary medicine and therefore animals are
 also beneficiaries.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
11
Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
licence indicating that they have sufficient skill, training and
Most authorities, including animal welfare organisations, ac-
experience. Each research institution must have suitable
cept that animal research is necessary for scientific advance.
animal housing and veterinary facilities on site and must be
ment at present, but the animals' welfare must always be the
issued with a certificate of designation. Once the licence has
chief consideration. In 2004, the government doubled its 
beenn granted, vets and doctors who are employed by the
funding for the welfare of laboratory animals with the estab-
Home Office monitor the research conditions. Inspections
lishment of a national centre for research into developing
take place at least 12 times a year and usually there is no
more humane techniques and producing alternatives to
advance warning (RDs 2004)
animal experimentation.
Vaccination
Respons
pet
    p  n    
owner
which cats and dogs can succumb are relatively rare is
entirely due to vaccination programmes. Unfortunately
many pet owners do not realise this and do not understand
Responsible pet ownership is not just taking care of an
animal's welfare, it is also being responsible to the society and
that immunity can only be maintained through booster vac.
environment in which the pet will live, making it more tol
cinations. It is the job of veterinary staff to educate their
erable for non-animal-lovers. The guidance that can be given
   a    s i s
ing free health checks and sending booster reminders.
to clients by veterinary nurses will enhance the bond
Particular care should be taken in ensuring that pets entering
between owners and their pets.
boarding establishments and breeding bitches and queens are
up to date with their vaccinations.
Treatment against worms and
fleas
Neutering
The topic most likely to enrage non-animal-lovers and
responsible pet owners alike is the amount of pollution
 One entire female cat can be responsible for 20 000 offspring
caused by dog faeces. It has been estimated that approxi-
over 5 years (Jevring & Catanzaro 1999), based on the princi-
mately 1 0oo oo0 kg of canine faeces is deposited in the UK
ple that each female has two litters of six kittens a year
n  so n s s  
ing, it has been well publicized that faecal waste from dogs
dated with unwanted companion animals and neutering is
and cats can spread disease. Clients must be advised that
regular treatment against the roundworms Toxocara canis
neutering is the prevention of hormone-related diseases such
and Toxocara cafi and the common tapeworms Dipylidium
as pyometra, mammary tumours and testicular tumours. Cats
caninum and Taenia hydatigena is the only way of ensuring
 sn a  p   so p
that their pet will remain healthy and will not be a threat to
although it is not always the antidote for aggression in dogs,
public health. They should also be encouraged to pick up
it can help to modify other unwanted sex-related behaviour.
their pet's faeces and to dispose of it in the bins provided,
Cats and dogs are less likely to wander in search of females in
or in their own dustbin, to maintain a safe and pleasant
oestrus, thus preventing straying and road-traffic accidents.
environment.
Cats in particular are prone to fighting when entire, and neu.
tering will prevent the spread of diseases such as feline virus
Many pet owners live under the happy illusion that their pet
leukaemia. There are many myths about neutering born
is immune to fleas and it is not until there is a severe infesta-
through people's tendency to anthropomorphize, but these
tion or their pet has developed a flea-bite allergy that they
are largely unfounded. For example, there is no evidence that
will make an appearance at the surgery. Veterinary nurses
a female needs to have puppies or kittens and neutering will
should take every opportunity to encourage their clients
not affect a male's personality other than to calm an excited
to treat their pets regularly against fleas, explaining that
animal or reduce aggression. There may be coat changes
it is a year-round problem and can be instrumental in
in some bitches, but the tendency for any animal to put on
causing infection with Dipylidium caninum in both cats and
weight after ovariohysterectomy or castration can easily be
ssop
controlled by diet.
12
2 Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
There are differences in opinion as to when neutering should
Training and control
take place. Both the British Small Animal Veterinary Association
and the British Veterinary Association endorse the neutering of
Owning a dog should be a pleasurable experience and this
animals pre-puberty, suggesting that the operation is easier and
 can only be achieved through a comprehensive training pro-
less traumatic at this stage. It will also prevent unwanted litters,
gramme. All dogs should be taught the basic commands such
which is a valuable consideration for welfare organisations that
as heel, sit, down, stay and leave, as this will not only make
rehome puppies and kittens. Many veterinarians prefer to delay
 a  di l q  os   
the procedure until the animal is closer to sexual maturity and,
dog's own safety. Dog training helps to prevent behaviour
in the case of females, after its first oestrus. However, it is gen-
problems and encourages a dog to bond with its owner. The
erally believed that late castration will have little impact in
best way to train is through positive techniques, rewarding
modifying aggressive male behaviour.
the correct response with treats or attention. Many experi-
enced owners like to train the dog themselves but veterinary
staff should be ready to advise all dog owners of suitable
Socialization
training classes in the area. Trainers and training clubs should
be well vetted before recommendation.
The most crucial socialization period for kittens is thought to be
between 2 and 7 weeks of age and the more kittens are handled
An animal that is out of control can be a danger to itself, to
at this stage, the better they will relate to humans (Robinson
the general public and to the environment. Even in 1951 it
1992). In 1965 Fuller and Scott isolated puppies from humans
-e peou u panoa anam siop ooo s/ ieun panodan sem
between the ages of 4 weeks and 12 weeks and as a result these
dents and, as a result, there were 3000 human casualties and
puppies were fearful of humans and were virtually impossible to
23 deaths (CSS 1988). Under the Road Traffic Act 1972, it is
train (Nott 1992). It is recognised that primary social relation-
an offence to have, cause or permit a dog to be off the
ships are formed between the ages of 4 and 8 weeks and there.
lead on a designated road; however, this law appears to be
fore puppies from 4 weeks should be introduced to novel sti-
diffcult to enforce. Loose dogs are not only a problem on
muli during this time and it is essential that socialization should
the road but they can endanger wildlife and farm stock.
 continue to be reinforced as the puppy matures into adulthood.
It is an offence under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981
for a dog to be off the lead in a large field or enclosure con-
Veterinary practices can play a vital role in a puppy's early stage
taining sheep and the farmer is within his rights to kill a dog
of development by introducing puppy parties for new owners.
that he considers is worrying livestock. Stray dogs can be par-
These parties allow puppies to be socialized with other people
tially to blame but too often it is poorly controlled family
and animals and to be exposed to new experiences within a
pets.
controlled environment. Most importantly, from the veterinary
staff's point of view, they will learn to be relaxed in a clinical
Feral dogs and cats have had a considerable impact on the
environment. Clients can be shown the value of grooming to
wildlife population and may be partly responsible for the
maintain the condition of their pets' coats and to establish a
extinction of some species (CCs 1988), but it is not only wan-
bond with their pet. Puppy classes provide the ideal environ-
dering dogs and cats that affect the ecology. Pet rabbits
released into the wild have destroyed the habitat of burrow
tion, vaccination, treatment against parasites, dental care and
nesting seabirds such as puffins. Colonies of parakeets are
how to examine their pets for early signs of disease. A popular
almost commonplace in parts of London and the south-east
misconception is that puppies cannot be trained until the age
and terrapins were commonly released into waters in the UK
of 6 months. While a puppy cannot learn a complicated task, it
following the fad for 'ninja turtles'. It is unlikely that the ter-
 is beneficial to teach a puppy basic training using reward. Basic
rapins would survive long enough to have a severe impact on
 training can be introduced at these gatherings like a party game
British wildlife and no one is yet sure whether the parakeets
and something that is fun for both the owner and the pet. Also
are causing damage; however, the disappearance of the red
veterinary nurses can use these times to discuss animal behav-
squirrel following the introduction of the grey squirrel into
iour with their clients and to help them recognise the way in
Great Britain shows how a non-indigenous species can upset
which animals communicate.
the ecology.
Pet abuse
abuse or organized fighting. It is a subject that has been over-
    n  h 'q d   
involved, incidents of violence towards pets may lead to
Pet abuse may be defined as causing an animal deliberate suf
abuse of other family members. Physical abuse towards pets
fering either by physical violence, mental torture, sexual
is not only disturbing and antisocial, it is illegal and it can
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
13
Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
have a severe effect on child development, whether through
are in suitable accommodation and can ensure their own
d  a  r a  s
safety (Anon 2004).
Research in America has shown that violent criminals fre.
quently have a history of serious pet abuse from childhood
(Flynn 2000, Anon 2004).
Signs of pet abuse
Cases of non-accidental injury (NAl) of animals are not
It has been questioned whether cases of pet abuse would ever
reported for the following reasons:
 be presented at surgery but more than 48% of practitioners
who took part in a recent survey acknowledged NAI (Munro
● NAI is not recognised
& Thrusfield 2001, Nicol 2003). It is not always easy to recog-
nise NAls but there are some very distinct characteristics that
indicate abuse. Often the types of injuries are similar to those
cases as it might compromise the safety of the
 described in cases of child abuse such as finger tip bruising.
victims
lash marks and cigarette burns. Broken ribs appear to be a
regular feature of abuse in animals and suspicion is aroused
● Veterinary surgeons fear breaching client confidential-
particularly when the history is inconsistent with the type
ity and the subsequent legal action
 and extent of the injury. Other features include retinal and
scleral haemorrhage, subdural haematomas and buccal
 d n  r s  o
trauma. Repetitive injury has been cited as an important indi-
cator of NAl. A broken femur may not arouse suspicion on
● Abused family members are frightened of initiating
the first occasion but when an animal is presented with the
further abuse of themselves, their children or
same injury two or more times then it can be fairly certain
pets
that the injury was not accidental. Multiple occurrences of
the same injury but to different animals within a household
● Victims of abuse are fearful of losing the pets that have
should be a cause of concern too.
become their emotional support (Nicol 2003, Anon
2004).
Inconsistency between history and injury was frequently men-
d s  ( s  o n 
that children had dropped their animals, the pet had lain too
What can be done?
close to a fire or the pet had fallen and, as one veterinary
surgeon remarked, cats do not fall downstairs. Another respon-
At present is seems unlikely that a law will be introduced to
dent described how the injuries of a cat were consistent with
those that might be sustained in a road-traffic accident but
during a further consultation the respondent discovered that
reasonable solution would be the formation of a coordinating
the cat was not allowed outside. The history can be considered
body to which details of cases could be reported. This infor-
mation may corroborate reports from the police and social
services and investigations could then be made (Nicol
The behaviour of both pet and owner are often indicative of
2003).
foul play. The pet may be excessively fearful or submissive in
the presence of its owner or it may appear to be dull and
Steps have beenn made to protect the victims of pet abuse in
depressed. The owner may show embarrassment and be reluc-
the form of a support group known as Paws for Kids. This
 n aa  ais a ro os e a n n
group provides foster care for the pets of women and children
aggressive on being questioned. Some clients will name
who have been moved to 'safe houses'. It enables owners to
the perpetrator and a few will admit to causing harm to the
remain responsible for their pets and to be reunited once they
 pet themselves.
Euthanasia
    s     so 
often aimed at the veterinary surgeons who have to perform
this stressful duty or at the clients who have to face this
Euthanasia is a time when veterinary nurses can be of the
difficult decision. This section describes the role that veteri
 nary nurses play before, during and after the euthanasia.
14
4Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
It is easy to become blase when euthanasia is performed on
● Injury or disease resulting in permanent loss of bodily
such a regular basis; however, many veterinary surgeons and
functions
nurses describe how, even after many years in practice, they
still feel upset when it is time to euthanase a companion
● Old age when physical health affects the 'quality of
animal, especially if they are particularly fond of the client or
life'
the pet. Imagine how much worse some clients must feel
when they make the decision to 'kill' the very animal that
● Old age when physical health appears fairly good but
they have nurtured, sometimes over many years. This pet
 the animal is displaying mental deterioration
may have supported them through major life changes such as
divorce, death of a close relation, retirement or adult children
● The animal is aggressive to the point of being a danger
leaving home. Euthanasia is the last and most selfless act that
to other people or pets
a person can do for their animal. The majority of pet owners
suffer acute grief and anguish when the time comes to end
● The pet has a serious disease that could be passed to
the life of a pet; however, there are the odd few that appear
man (Fogle 1981, Stewart 1999).
  o  s g '   n 
and the veterinary nurse must be prepared for anything and
When making a recommendation for a pet's life to be pro-
remain completely non-judgemental.
longed or terminated, the veterinary surgeon has to take
many things into consideration, of which the most impor-
When pets' conditions become untreatable, veterinary sur-
tant is the welfare of the pet (Table 1.3). It is also necessary to
geons may advise the clients that euthanasia might be an
assess the owner's ability to cope with a sick pet physically.
option. It is very important that owners fully comprehend
mentally and financially, and other family members should
how ill a pet is before deciding on euthanasia and there must
also be taken into consideration.
be no cause for them to believe that they have been forced
into a decision that they later regret (Stewart 1999).
While euthanasia can be a merciful release, there are other
Veterinary surgeons will have explained the reason for their
less justifiable reasons why clients make this decision. These
recommendation and will have carefully described the proce
include:
dure to the clients but sometimes, when people are distressed,
information is difficult to assimilate. Veterinary nurses may
e id e pdp s  rn a o
be required to clarify what has been said and to give reassur-
ance to the clients.
● Owners cannot cope financially
● Owners are moving to a place that does not allow pets
Reasons for euthanasia and
other considerations
● Impulse buy or unwanted gift
There are many justifiable reasons for pet euthanasia. These
● Lack of previous experience with pets
include:
● Changes in the domestic situation such as divorce,
●Severe injury
arrival of a baby or family bereavement
● Terminal illness that has progressed to the point where
● Family disputes over the animal (Fogle 1981, Stewart
palliative treatment has little or no effect
1999).
Table 1.3 Welfare factors to be taken into consideration when recommending euthanasia
Physical factors
Mental factors
Quality of life
 Pain - is the animal in pain and can the
 Does the animal have the will to live?
No longer eating or drinking
pain be controlled?
Lack of mobility - can the animal move
 Interest in life - does the animal want to go
Loss of control of urination and defaecation
around with or without help?
for walks or mix with people or others of its
species?
Breathing - is the animal able to breathe
Depressed, over anxious or suffers separation
Number of 'bad' days exceeds the number
without difficulty?
Aaxue
sAep poob, jo
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
15
Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
 In these cases every effort should be made to persuade the
prefer to leave immediately and, where possible, should be
client to take other options and, if they do not comply, the
shown an alternative exit.
veterinary surgeon may refuse to carry out euthanasia.
 Unless the client is a complete stranger to the practice or has
a reputation for non-payment of bills, the charge should be
The procedure for euthanasia
deferred until a more suitable time. Once the client has left
the surgery, the staff should continue to treat the patient's
Whether euthanasia takes place at the client's home or in the
body with dignity and respect.
surgery, the owner must be treated with sensitivity at all
times. Ideally, the way in which the client wishes to dispose
of the body will have been discussed at a time when the
Bereavement
owner is not feeling emotionally confused, and it is good
A pet owner often suffers a similar grieving process to some-
local services and costs on display in the waiting room at all
one who is mourning for another human being. The charac-
times. When euthanasia is requested at the surgery, the
teristic stages of grief include:
appointment should be made when the practice is likely to be
at its quietest. Neither the client nor the pet should be kept
● Shock - a feeling of numbness and disbelief
s    s   o   
to both parties. Every member of staff should be informed
● Disorganisation - the bereaved person may find
when euthanasia is taking place so that they might act
difficulty doing the simplest task
appropriately.
● Denial - expecting the deceased to return
The room where euthanasia is taking place should be spot-
less, making sure that clean towels and blankets are provided,
● Depression - usually when the loss becomes reality
also a chair for the owner and a box of tissues. Many people
like to stay with their pet during euthanasia but others prefer
● Guilt - both real and imagined, e.g. the feeling of
to leave the room, but either way, the client's wishes should
having been neglectful or having had angry thoughts
be respected. If the owner does wish to stay with the pet the
and feelings towards the deceased when alive
veterinary surgeon will explain to them exactly what to
expect. The nurse will be asked to restrain the animal but the
●Anxiety
owner should be encouraged to cradle its head and to stroke
and talk to it throughout the procedure. Sometimes a nervous
●Anger
pet will need to be restrained with a muzzle and this should
be done as gently and tactfully as possible and it may be ner.
● Resolution and acceptance when emotions lessen
essary to tranquillize a very stressed patient. It is essential that
the veterinary surgeon and veterinary nurse remain calm
● Re-integration - acceptance that life carries on,
a h ss pe iad a o a  Aos d
name. In potentially difficult cases, such as animals with poor
occasions (Gross 1999).
blood pressure, the veterinary surgeon may chose options
other than an intravenous injection into the cephalic vein. In
The most common emotions associated with loss witnessed
this case, the reason should be fully explained to the client.
in the veterinary surgery are guilt and anger and, in both
cases, the staff must offer reassurance and show tolerance.
When the animal has been pronounced dead, it should be
made to look comfortable and at peace. Restraints or
Most people work their way through the grieving process by
catheters should be removed; a clean absorbent pad should
talking to friends. Others will find it difficult to share their
be put beneath the pet and a blanket placed over the body
 o p  r      
leaving the head exposed. Any syringes and bottles should be
pet. Most clients appreciate a condolence card sent from the
disposed of as soon as possible. The owners who have stayed
surgery as a show of sympathy, and this may help them to
may wish to spend some time alone with their pet or they
justify their feelings. A few people who have formed a high
may want the veterinary surgeon or veterinary nurse to
degree of attachment to their pet may suffer pathological
remain with them. Owners who have not been present
grief and it may be necessary for a staff member to suggest
should be offered the opportunity to view the pet's body, and
other family members or friends should be given this option
counsellor such as SCAS (Society for Companion Animal
too. Some owners may be very shaken and it may help to
Studies) Blue Cross Befrienders Service or local recommended
offer them a cup of tea before travelling home; others may
groups or individuals.
16
5Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
Bibliography
Fogle B 1981 Attachment - euthanasia - grieving. In: Fogle B
(ed.) Interrelations between people and pets. Charles C Thomas,
Anon 2004 Paws for kids: breaking cycles of violence. Veterinary
Springfeld, IL, p 331-343
Nursing 19: 12-13
Fraser A F, Broom, D M 1990 Farm animal behaviour and welfare,
Blacker T 2004 A nation in the grip of animal madness. The
3rd edn. Bailliere Tindall, London
Independent 26 February: 33
Friedman E 1995 The role of pets in enhancing human well
Bodson L 20o0 Motivations for pet keeping in ancient Greece
being: physiological effects. In: Robinson I (ed.) The
and Rome: a preliminary survey. In: Podberscek A L, Paul E S,
Waltham book of human animal interaction: benefits and
Serpell J A (eds) Companion animals and us: exploring the
responsibilities of pet ownership. Elsevier Science, Oxford,
relafionships between people and pets. Cambridge University Press,
33-5.3
Cambridge, p 27-41
Frith M 2004 Royal College of Nursing Conference in Harrogate.
Pets on prescription could help patients heal, says psychologist.
family relationships. In: Podberscek A L, Paul E S, Serpell J A (eds)
The Independent 11 May: 17
Companion animats and us: exploring fhe relationships be
Gross R D 1999 Psychology. The science of mind and behaviour,
p 209-2.36
2nd edn. Hodder & Stoughton, London
Bonner J 1994 It's α dog's life. New Scientist 5 November,
Hart L A 199s The role of pets in enhancing human well being:
p 34-36
effects for older people. In: Robinson I (ed.) The Waltham book of
human animal interaction: benefits and responsibilifies of pet
CSS 1988 Companion Animats in Society. Report of a Working
ownership.Elsevier Science, Oxford, p 19-31
Party Council for Science and Society. Oxford University Press
Oxford
Hugh-jones M E, Hubbert W T, Hagstad 1995 Zoonoses.
Recognition, conirol and prevention. Iowa State University Press,
Delta Society 1996 Healthy reasons to have a pet. Available on
Ames, IA
line at: http://deltasociety.org/dsc020.him
Hunt S j, Hart L A, Gomulkiewicz 1992 The role of small animals
Dolan K 1999 Ethics and animal science.Blackwell Science,
in social interactions befween strangers. Journal of Sociat
Oxford
Psychology132:245-256
Endenburg N, Baarda, B 1995 The role of pets enhancing human
Jevring C, Catanzaro T 1999 Healthcare of the well pet.
well being: effects on child development. In: Robinson I (ed.)
W B Saunders, London
The Waltham book ofhuman animal interaction:benefits and
responsibilities of pet ownership. Elsevier Science, Oxford,
Koene P 1996 Stress and emotions in animats. Available
p 7-17
online at:http://www.noldus.com/applications/zoology/
koene.himt
Enders-Slegers M J 2ooo The meaning of companion animats:
qualitative analysis of the life histories of elderty cat and dog
Le Fevre M 2004 How animats help us feel more human.
Owners. In: Podberscek A L, Paul E S, Serpell I A (eds) Companion
Companions (PDSA Best Friends) 28: 34-37
pets. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, p 237-256
McNicholas J, Collis G M 1995 The end of a relationship: coping
with pet loss. In: Robinson I (ed.) The Waltham book of human
Flecknell P 1999 Pain -assessment, alleviation and avoidance in
laboratory animals. Anzccart News 12(4): 1-6
Elsevier Science, Oxford, p 127-143
Muir H 2004 Ancient remains could be oldest pet cat. New
violence towards animats. Family Relafions 49: 87-101
Scientist.com. Available on line at: http:/www.newscientist.com/
news/news.jsp?id=ns99994867
Fogle B 1995 The encyclopaedia of the dog. Dorling Kindersley
London
Munro H M C, Thnusfield M V 2001 'Battered pets' Feahures fhaf
raise suspicion of non-accidental injury. Joumal of Small Animat
Fogle B 1983 Pets and their people. Collins Harvill, London
Practice 42:218-226
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
Nicol D 2003 Pet abuse -a darker side. Parkvets Veterinary Group
Thomson K S 1996 The rise and fall of the British bulldog.
Sidcup, Kent. Available on line at: http://www.parkvets.com/
American Scientist 220-223. In: Serpell J A 2003 Anthropo-
petsandvets-petabuse.himt
morphism and anthropomorphic selection - beyond the ‘cute
response'.Society and Animats 11: 83-100
Nott H M R 1992Behavioural development of the dog.In:Thorne
C (ed.) The Waltham book of dog and cat behaviour. Butterworth
Thorne C 1992 Evolution and domestication. In: Thorne C (ed.)
Heinemann, Oxford, p 65-78
The Waltham book of dog and cat behaviour. Butterworth
Heinemann, Oxford, p 1-30
Poresky R H, Hendrix C 1988 Developmental benefits of pets for
young children. Paper presented at the Delta Society 7th Annuat
UK Pets 2002 Latest pet indusiry news. RSPCA extends feedom
Conference. Delta Society, Bellevue, WA
brand. UKPets.co.uk. Available on line at: http://www.ukpets.co.uk/
?section=Home&sub=News&method=fetch&item=331
RDS 2004 1986 Animals Act. RDS, London.Available on line at:
http://www.rds-
Urquhart G M, Armour ↓, Duncan JL et al 1996 Veterinary para
online.org.uk/pages/page.asp?i_ToolbarID=4&i_PageID=47
sitology, 2nd edn.Blackwell Science, Oxford
Robinson I 1995 Associations between man and animats. In:
Webster J 1994 Animal welfare. A cool eye towards Eden.
Robinson I (ed.) The Waltham book of human animal interaction:
Blackwell Science, Oxford
benefits and responsibilities of pet ownership. Elsevier Science,
Oxford, p 1-6
Recommended reading
Robinson I 1992 Behavioural development of the cat. In: Thorne C
(ed.) The Waltham book of dog and cat behaviour. Butterworth
Jevring C, Catanzaro T 1999 Healthcare of the well pet.
Heinemann, Oxford, p 53-64
W B Saunders, London
Society for Companion Animal Shudies 2000 Dogs as fransitionat
A useful guide on pet healthcare offering sound advice on how vet-
objects in the treatment of patients with drug dependency. SCAS
erinary nurses can educate clients to be responsible pet owners
journal/journal_fransitional.htm
Stewart M F 1999 Companion animal death. A practical and com-
prehensive guide for veterinary practice. Butterworth Heinemann,
Serpell J A 2o03 Anthropomorphism and anthropomorphic
Oxford
selection - beyond the ‘cute response'. Society and Animals 11:
8.3-100
bereavement, dealing with the issues that occur regularly in
Stewart M F 1999 Companion animal death. A practical and com-
veterinary practice
prehensive guide for veterinary practice.Butterworth Heinemann,
Oxford
Webster J 1994 Animal welfare. A cool eye towards Eden.
Blackwell Science, Oxford
Tannenbaum J 1995 Veterinary ethics, animal welfare, client rela
tions, competition and collegiality, 2nd edn. C V Mosby, St Louis, MO
A very readable book covering every aspect of animal welfare
18 Human-animal interaction - the place of the companion animal in society
2
The equine industry
Anne Rogers
Key Points
● The horse was domesticated around 6000 years ago and
● The sports horse industry includes many disciplines, e.g.
through the centuries its uses have varied from a source
dressage, eventing and show jumping
of food to war or work horse and most recently to sport
● Each sport is run by numerous organisations and is
horse and much valued companion animal
associated with particular breeds of horse
● The largest sector of the equine industry is the racing
● Many different types of business have evolved to satisfy
sector, which as a sport is second only to football in
the horse-owning market, e.g. farriers, vets, feed
popularity
merchants, equine equipment and clothing
● Racing. divided into flat racing and steeplechasing. is
controlled by many governing bodies
Introduction
as the horse. The equine industry today is large and diverse,
 sq  n     sn 
organisations affiliated to it. That it is a growing industry is
There are few animals that command such passion, respect
beyond dispute and as such its relevance to today's veterinary
and dedication or who play such a versatile role in our society
nurse should also be apparent.
Historical
reasons. First, they were buried with the remains of two dogs
and some clay figurines and second, and most significantly,
perspective
there were also enclosed two carved pieces of antler with
holes driven through them, reminiscent of the cheek pieces
found in later digs. Correlating with the assumption that
Look back at our struggle for freedom,
these were cheek pieces used to fasten some sort of 'bit' in
Trace our present day's strength to its source
place was the evidence of the bevelling effect upon the stal-
And youll find that man's pathway to glory
lion's teeth, similar to the wear pattern of other bit-bearing
Is strewn with the bones of a horse.
horses and unlike the normal wear of a non-bit-bearing feral
Anon.
horse. This is likely to be one of the earliest examples of
domestication and would give cause to question the assump-
It could be argued that the horse has aided us in more ways
tion that horses were first used to pull carts or chariots.
than any other domestic or wild animal in history. It has pro-
vided a food source or a means of catching a food source and
Times have changed and with them the use and value of the
an ally and friend in times of both war and peace. That it has
equine species and its related industries in the UK. In the
survived as one of only a very small number of domesticated
14th century a war-horse was considered such a valuable
animals from a potential source of thousands is not so much
a feat of human will but more due to the unique equine char-
of a worker. Conversely, around 325 000 horses were killed
acteristics that have evolved through time, enabling the
during the Boer War and we can assume that they were a rel-
horse to fit into our world with such compliance. As far back
atively cheap commodity at that time. The cost of buying and
as Egyptian times the horse was being successfully domesti
keeping horses today similarly shows a wide variation,
reflecting the many uses and importance of the horse.
 proving impossibly difficult.
Probably the greatest factor to affect the equine population of
D pe aq on rde unnap jo so is
the UK in the last century was that of the decline in the agri-
years ago in the steppe region of Dereivka, now more com-
cultural equine population from around 962 000 in 1921 to
monly known as the Ukraine. While the archeological evi-
about 3757 in 1979. The sharpest fall was after the Second
dence suggests that the horses would have been stalked rather
World War. By 1951 Britain was the only country in the world
than raised for their meat, the bones of a ritually killed stal-
with more tractors than horses. However, despite the relent-
lion were also found. These bones were important for two
less mechanization and loss of our agricultural horses we
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
19
2
The equine industry
have seen an enormous increase in the equine population in
Table 2.1 Grouping of horses and riders between
the last few decades; this is due to increased wealth and a cor-
leisure and professional status
responding increase in horse ownership and equine-related
sporting activities. Surveys of the mid 1990s produced an
Professional horses and riders
Leisure horses and riders
estimated equine population of around 560 000.
 Professional horse ownership
Horse ownership
Most equine sports have evolved to take advantage of the
Breeding
Breeding
horse's unique physical and athletic capabilities. Horse racing
Affliated competition
 Unaffiliated competition
in particular makes full advantage of these qualities and the
vast amounts of money involved in this sport have enabled
 Horse and rider training
Riding schools
much research to be carried out. The majority of this has
Olympic disciplines
Trail riding and trekking centres
either been duplicated or adapted from research carried out
Horse racing
on human athletes.
Farming diversification (including
tourism)
With research comes increased knowledge and a greater capa-
Horse shows
Hunting
bility to effect change and rectify problems. Virtually all our
equine medical knowledge to date is a result of the research
Police and army
of the last 1o0 years, most within the last two and a half
decades.
This expansion in medical capability and the corresponding
country. Alongside the upward trend in conventional medi
rise in income of horse owners has resulted in the growth of
cine there has been an enormous increase in alternative ther-
specialist equine veterinary practices up and down the
apies and practitioners.
The egu
Tne
 industr
consider what should be the main issues to be addressed
when formulating a strategic plan for the next 10 years.
In mapping the industry it was found that horses and
 o s - s on o id  
The many businesses that make up the equine industry form
professionals and those who mainly ride for leisure
a multi-billion-pound economy. However, problems arise
(Table 2 1). In reality the division is not as simple as this
because the industry and its related organisations are frag-
table might suggest and it does not take into account any
  a  o s an a m 
cross-over or the group of semi-professional horse-owners
forward with the power and foresight necessary to optimize
and riders.
the profitability of all sectors. This fragmentation also means
that, unlike many other industries, there is very little in the
In addition to the sector that includes horses and owners we
way of statistics on which to formulate business strategies for
need to consider the many linked businesses and associa-
 the industry as a whole. Many of the statistics that do appear
tions, which are listed below:
in the public forum are of dubious reliability, outdated or
relate only to a particular sector of the market.
Professional/paraprofessionals - veterinarians, farriers,
saddlers, etc.
In recent years the government has recognised the impor-
tance of the horse industry and appointed a Minister for the
● Trade - retailers of clothing, stables, equipment, feed,
Horse (currently, Alan Michael is the third person to hold the
transport, etc.
post). In addition to this appointment, a report was commis-
sioned by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural
● Land-based business - racecourses, livery yards,
Affairs (DEFRA) and the British Horse Industry Confeder-
etc.
ation, along with the National Assembly for Wales and the
Scottish Executive, the results of which were produced by the
● Financial services - consultants, insurance companies,
Henley Centre in March 2004. The main aim of the report
etc.
was to form a “baseline' for the industry by mapping it in
terms of economic expenditure and then to investigate and
● Media - books, magazines, television and radio
20  The equine industry
● Associations - including all breed associations, riding
● Owners/riders spend around E150 million on buying
clubs, etc.
 horses, 1200 million on the upkeep of horses, 500
million on lessons and f350 million on clothing and
● Training and education - college-run courses, work-
other purchases
based learning, correspondence learning, etc.
2
● There are some 250 000 equine-related jobs.
● Event organisation - sponsorships, public relations
services, event management teams, etc.
Further data resulting from the Henley Trust indicated that
23% of the population have an interest in the horse industry
It is the complexity of the industry and the ease with which
and 11% have a direct interest.
data can be double-entered that makes many of the statistics
available less than robust. Key findings from a recent survey
Interestingly, the research also showed that, although numbers of
undertaken by the British Equine Trade Association resulted
thiose adults interested in equine activities varied from region to
in the following estimates:
region (half a million in East Anglia to 2 million in the South
'0 0 pg u o 7o) non o non o pue sg
● The equine population in the UK is around 965 0o0, of
million in Wales), the actual variation in terms of percentage of
which 65 000 are professionally owned
thie regional/national population is much less variable; 21-26%
regionally and 21-23% nationally. Similarly, there was little vari-
● Around 2.4 million people ride in the UK each
ation in the numbers of men and women interested in horse
year
related activities (2% variation) or, with the exception of the
15-17-year-old sector, in the age of those interested (from 11%
● About half of these ride at least once a week
for 18-24-year-olds to 19% for 35-44-year-olds and the 0ver-65s).
Horse-related
● Racing and breeding provide around 60 000 jobs
industries
● The betting industry supports a further 40 000 jobs
● In 2002/03 around f7.5 billion was bet on off-course
When considering the main organisations involved with the
licensed betting offices and f100 million bet with the
horse industry in this country today it is important to remind
Tote on-course
ourselves that these deal mainly with those either profession-
ally or semi-professionally involved and do not necessarily
● The 59 racecourses in Britain in 2002 held 1158 meet-
include the leisure rider or spectator.
ings with 7691 races and 83 651 runners.
The racing industry can be subdivided into three main groups
according to the type of race:
The racing industry
● Flat racing
The largest and most professional sector of the industry is
that covering the racing of horses.
●Hurdles
● Steeplechasing.
Figures published by the Jockey Club show that:
● Some 5.5 million people went racing in 2002
To this we can also add the amateur sport of point-to-pointing.
 In all these sports only thoroughbreds whose parents are regis-
● Horseracing is second only to football as the most
tered in the General Stud Book are able to compete. The only
 popular televised sport on terrestrial channels
   1g    d po 
Flat racing
● There are over 9500 active racehorse owners and
Flat racing involves the racing of young thoroughbreds over
approximately 14 000 horses in training.
relatively short distances and, as its name suggests, is on the
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing  21
2
The equine industry
flat only with no jumping required. Races vary from around
around 3 or 4 years old are introduced to racing over hurdles
 5 to 20 furlongs (a furlong being one-eighth of a mile, or
first, since the fences are smaller and the distances shorter. If
200 m).
the horse's mental and physical attributes allow, the trainer
may then transfer the horse from hurdles to racing over
The breeding season for thoroughbreds in the northern hemi
steeplechase fences.
sphere runs from February to July and the gestation period is
11 months. Since thoroughbred horses are considered to have
In hurdle races horses are raced over medium distances over
their official birthdays on 1st January (unlike all other horses,
angled hurdles, which are designed to be easily knocked
 n  s   in   
without causing injury.
foalings as close to 1st January as possible in order that their
 youngstock are as mature as possible when they begin racing.
Steeplechasing is said to have originated from a race where a
  s     no 
This is especially important in the sport of flat racing, when
church steeple to another (point to point) over natural
horses are raced from 2 years old. In flat racing, youngsters
country. It was not until the 19th century that steeplechasing
are prepared for the yearling sales and are then likely to
became what we know today with enclosed courses and pro-
Bm  n (     
fessionally trained horses.
of that year before being entered for a few races in the
summer of their second year. They will then be raced over the
In steeplechases the fences are solid in structure and much
longer distances and, if good enough, entered for the 'big' flat
larger in size than hurdles. They are made in a way which
races in the summer of their third year. The main flat races
allows them to be jumped at speed by the use of clear ground
include the 2000 Guineas for colts and the 1000 Guineas for
lines and a sloping structure. Steeplechases take place over
fillies (both over one mile), the one and a half mile Derby (for
distances of up to four and a half miles. The most famous
colts) and Oaks (for fillies) and the one and three-quarter mile
steeplechase in the UK is the Grand National, held at Aintree
St Leger, which is open to both colts and fillies.
near Liverpool.
Horses rarely perform successfully over distances different
Point-to-pointing originates from the same roots as steeple-
from those at which their parents were successful; thus, each
chasing. Gradually, because of growing professionalism in the
horse's 'distance' is often genetically predetermined. In rela-
sport, the amateur riders and their hunters became excluded
tion to conformation, those horses that compete over the
and attempts were made to rectify this by holding races for
shorter sprint distances are likely to be of a compact and pow-
proper hunters and their riders, from which professional
erful build, especially in the hindquarters, whereas those able
jockeys and racehorses were barred. Local hunts proved suc-
to stay over distances of 12 furlongs or more are usually much
cessful in organising these events and continue to do so
leaner and rangier.
today. Early records show that the Worcestershire Hunt held
meetings from 1836 and in 1913 the Master of Hounds Point-
While flat horses can stay in training until they are 10 years
to-Point Association created a set of rules, which at that time
old, most stop racing soon after their third or fourth year and
included lady riders, who often raced side-saddle. For a short
go to stud.
time the sport was overseen by a Joint Advisory Committee,
which comprised three members of the National Hunt
Hurdles and steeplechasing
Committee and three representatives of the Master of
Foxhounds' Association. From 1935, however, point-to-
Some thoroughbreds mature more slowly than the average
pointing fell completely under the jurisdiction of the
flat horse and are bred to jump over fences and over much
National Hunt Committee. At the end of the 1960s the
greater distances.
National Hunt Committee merged into the Jockey Club and
it is this organisation that deals with the rules and regulations
Many horses begin their jumping careers in races known as
of the sport today.
bumpers'. Bumpers are flat races that take place over
extended distances in order to prepare the horse for the
Hunts still play a major role in the sport. All horses must
greater length of race involved. Those that do not mature as
 aa pe p Add q  q a on A
quickly as the flat horses, or are not fast enough to be suc-
receipt of a certificate to that effect signed by the Master of
cessful on the flat are often brought in to race over hurdles. If
this occurs, horses then enter a period of training known as
 o  o     
       a 
a Riders' Qualification Certificate, issued by the Jockey Club
jumping, often by the use of low poles without a rider, and
but obtained from the Hunt Secretary, stating that the rider is
are schooled until such time as they gain confidence and are
a Master, Member, Subscriber, Farmer or spouse/child of such,
ready to race over fences. Again traditionally horses of
or has paid at least one day's 'cap' to the hunt. In addition,
22
2The equine industry
the jockey must have paid the required premium in order to
races or owning racehorses, but also of other customers and
receive cover from the Point-to-Point Riders Insurance
associated parties as well. Alongside this it aims to promote
scheme. The actual task of organising and manning the event
horseracing as a competitive and attractive sport and betting
invariably falls heavily upon members of the local affiliated
medium, provide highest welfare standards for horses and
hunt.
provide the best possible training and working conditions for
2
those employed within the industry.
Controlling bodies of the British racing
The BHB is supported by many other organisations, the most
industry
important of which is probably the Jockey Club.
There are many bodies involved in this so only the main ones
The Jockey Club, founded in 1752, plays the role of regu-
will be discussed here. There are numerous other organisa-
tions linked to these, which represent various interested
of Racing and by dealing with all registration and licensing of
parties such as owners, stable lads, injured jockeys, forensic
trainers, jockeys, stable staff, owners, etc. In addition, it is
laboratories and breeders.
responsible for the setting and enforcement of baseline stan-
dards for British racecourse, veterinary and medical staff.
The British Horseracing Board (BHB) was founded in
Although involved with various interested parties its, three
1993, thus allowing the Jockey Club to continue in its more
key roles are to ensure the welfare of the horse, the safety of
traditional role of racing regulator. The BHB acts as the gov-
the rider and the integrity of the sport in terms of the inter-
erning authority for racing and works closely alongside other
ests of the betting public.
related organisations such as the British Thoroughbred
Breeding Industry and the Horserace Betting Levy Board.
In essence, the Jockey Club aims to maintain the integrity of
the racing industry both on and off the racetrack and to
The BHB's responsibilities include:
ensure that it is run as fairly and as safely as possible. It does
not control the betting industry, which is controlled by law.
● Organization of the fixture list
The Jockey Club also has its own security department, which
● Race planning (including race programmes and
carries out around 90 investigations each year on behalf of
employing handicappers)
the Licensing Committee and the Disciplinary Department.
In 1999, out of a potential 70 000 runners (in over 7000 races)
● Central marketing and promotion of racing
there were only 29 cases found of horses not running on their
merits. Recent initiatives, for instance better training of stew-
● Encouraging and fostering the breeding of bloodstock
ards and stiffer penalties, have seen this figure drop even
further.
● Developing and maintaining programmes of training
and education
In addition to this the Jockey Club owns a separately
managed company known as the Jockey Club Estates. The
● Improving racing's financial position
Jockey Club Estates manages some 4500 acres of land in
Newmarket and the surrounding area plus many other resi-
● The collection and control of funds required for the
dential and commercial properties. All profits generated by
administration of racing, including those dictated by the
Jockey Club Estates are used to improve the facilities under
Jockey Club for the protection of the sport's integrity
racing and the ability to contribute to future successes.
● Strategic planning and policy for racing
The British Horseracing Education and Standards
● Representation of racing industry to the government
Irust (BHEST) oversees the provision and maintenance of
suitable education and standards in the fields of horseracing.
● Liaison with the betting industry
breeding and farriery. One of its key roles is acting as the
awarding body for the National Vocational Qualifications
● Representation of British racing overseas (having
(NVQ). Its aims are 'to raise standards in the racing and
membership of the Executive Council of the
thoroughbred breeding industries through education and
 International Federation of Horseracing Authorities).
qualifications'.
The BHB lists 18 aims for their organisation, all of which
BHEsT's 5-year strategy incorporates the continuance of
strive to increase participation not only of those attending
operating as an awarding body of qualification in the thor-
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
23
2
The equine industry
oughbred breeding and associated industries in line with
the Barb, Barbary, Arabian, Hobby and Galloway. The names
   o  i 
changed with each change of ownership and because of the
identification and provision of qualifications where deemed
incorrect usage of terms such as ‘Arabian', 'Barb', etc., the
necessary through consultation; to monitor training provi-
exact breeding of the thoroughbred's forebears cannot accu-
sion in the racing and breeding industries in order to main-
rately be described. However, we do know that in the period
tain the highest possible standards; to operate as a quality
of approximately 1675-1725 a number of eastern stallions
employer and encourage best practice; and, finally, to bring
were brought to England and crossed with native mares of
the sport to new, young audiences via the medium of the
mixed pedigree. Of these stallions, three are now recognised
National Curriculum.
to be the forefathers of today's thoroughbred - the Byerley
 Turk, the Darley Arabian and the Godolphin Arabian.
With regard to the last objective, the racing industry, unlike
 other equine-related industries, has recognised that an oppor-
In 1791 the preliminary version of the General Shud Book
tunity exists to use the sport to provide an exciting education
appeared as An Introduction to a General Stud Book. This was
programme. Opportunities range from visits to racecourses
followed in 1808 by the first volume of the General Shud Book.
on both racing and non-race days, through visits to trainers'
yards to school visits and teacher-development days. This
scheme, which started in 2000, has grown and now aims to
The sports horse industry
cater for upward of 8000 children per year.
Equine sport other than racing involves many varied disci
Weatherbys Group Ltd, commonly known as Weatherbys.
plines, all of which are carried out at various levels ranging
is contracted by the BHB to undertake all their administrative
from the occasional rider competing in unaffiliated com-
services. It is most well known for the production of the
petition to top-level professional riders and horses competing
General Shud Book; however, it also provides a variety of
at national and international level. The wide variety
of
other services such as banking, financial services and
insurance.
represent the interests of the sports and the breeds of sport
horses.
The Horserace Betting Levy Board (HBLB) is legally
responsible for the collection and distribution of monies col-
The British Equestrian Federation (BEF) is affiliated to
lected from the levy funds as generated by off-course betting
the Federation Equestre Internationale (FEl) and represents
agencies and the Tote. In 2002/03 the HBLB received some
the sports of show jumping, eventing, dressage, horse driving
f87 million from both the Tote and off-course bookmakers.
trials, endurance riding, vaulting and reining. Originally
This money is then aimed at raising standards within the horse
formed in 1972 in order to coordinate the actions of the
racing industry by improvement of horseracing, improve
British Horse Society and the British Show Jumping Asso-
ment of breeds of horses and advancement of veterinary
ciation, the BEF now looks after its 12 member bodies and the
science and education.
165 0o0 competitive and recreational riders that form those
memberships.
The Retraining of Racehorses (RoR), founded in 2000
in response to publirc demand to show continued improve-
The 12 members consist of the aforementioned disciplines,
ment in welfare, has grown in strength and now boasts three
along with the British Horse Society and the Pony Club,
charitable centres - the Thoroughbred Rehabilitation Centre
which look after the interests of the recreational and
in Lancashire, Moorcroft Racehorse Welfare Centre in West
young rider respectively. Added to this are four new
Sussex, and Greatwood Retired Racehorses in Wiltshire, all of
members, accepted in 2002: the Association of British Riding
which retrain and rehome retired racehorses, launching them
Schools, the British Equestrian Trade Association, the British
into a second career in areas other than (although not exclud-
Reining Horse Association and the Scottish Equestrian
ing) hunting, which has been the traditional retirement
Association.
home for many racehorses in the past.
 At an international level the BEF works with the FEl on policy
Breed associated with the racing industry: the
formation and the coordination of the UK calendar of events.
thoroughbred The modern thoroughbred was influenced
 In addition they work together carrying out disciplinary pro-
by more than a little royal intervention. King Henry VIII
cedures, doping controls and the training of international
began the process in the 16th century, establishing the 'royal
judges, stewards, vets anid course designers.
paddocks' at Hampton Court. This trend continued as horse
racing and breeding increased in popularity and was further
On a national level the BEF works to represent its members
nurtured under the influence of Elizabeth I, James I, Charles
with a strong united voice to many other organisations, e.g.
I and Charles I1. Breed influences at this time incorporated
the British Olympic Association, the Sports Aid Foundation
24
4The equine industry
and the Worshipful Company of Saddlers. The BEF, along
winner is the fastest horse to cover the course with the lowest
with the Thoroughbred Breeders Association and the BHB,
number of faults.
form the British Horse Industry Confederation (BHIC), which
       
interests of the equestrian industry/community to the gov-
Breed associated with show jumping: the 'warmblood'
2
ernment. The chief executive of The British Horse Society
While there is no particular 'type' of horse predisposed to
represents the BEF at the Rural Affairs Forum.
show jumping, the old-fashioned crosses of Irish Draught or
As the only organisation recognised by Britain's Sports Coun-
by the 'warmbloods'. In both dressage and show jumping the
cil as representative of equestrian sport in the UK, the BEF is
vast majority of horses found competing come from what is
also the only organisation able to claim government funding.
commonly known as warmblood stock. The term 'warm-
Similarly lottery funding can also be accessed via the BEF.
blood' encompasses many breeds such as the Hanoverian,
the Dutch and Swedish warmblood, the Oldenburg, the
Trakehner, the Selle Frangais and so forth. Many of these
Show jumping
breeds originate from driving and riding horses found in
Germany, Holland and other parts of Europe. They are ideally
The British Show Jumping Association (BSJA) - its
suited to the sports of dressage and show jumping as they
mission is to ‘improve and maintain the standards of show
are large, quality animals that are extremely powerful and
jumping, while encouraging members of all standards and at
capable of great feats of athletic strength.
all levels to enjoy fair competition over safe and attractive
courses.
Dressage
The Enclosure Acts of the 18th and 19th centuries were perhaps
responsible for the first instances of horses being ridden over
British Dressage (BD) administers and represents affiliated
fences and thus the realization that the horse was capable of
dressage in the UK. The organisation's aims are to improve
this. A show jumping class was held at Olympia at the first
the standard of riding. training and horsemanship through
international horse show held in England. As with most equine
the regulation, promotion and fostering of dressage.
sports at that time, the participants were from military schools.
Later, civilians were able to participate but problems arose in
Pure dressage has grown in popularity in recent years and at
that judging was very subjective and points were awarded
the highest level is an exacting test of the horse's mobility.
according to diverse criteria such as severity of fence and style
in terms of flexion and elevation, strength and obedience.
rather than whether the obstacle was cleared or not.
Horses are required to complete a set series of movements,
Competitions might also go on for numerous rounds. Because
each of which can be awarded a maximum of 10 marks.
of these discrepancies the British Show Jumping Association
was formed in 1923, 2 years after the formation of the FEl.
Breeds associated with dressage: the warmbloods,
Today the BSJA formulates and upholds the rules and codes
of practice by which all affiliated competitions abide.
Anglo-Arab (i.e. Arab x thoroughbred)
Although all competitions run by the BSJA are affiliated they
This sector is dominated by the warmblood breeds, such as
are designed to encourage participation by a range of riders,
the Hanoverian, Oldenburg, Holstein and Dutch warmblood,
from those who may want to compete at local shows on odd
though occasionally Anglo-Arabs have also been successful.
weekends to those who compete at top level in international
competitions. Statistics produced by the association show
Eventing
that there are 15 318 registered members and 17 965 regis-
tered horses and ponies, which compete at 2062 shows held
British Eventing runs competitions at an affiliated level.
in Britain for a total prize money of f3 212 161.
Show jumping involves horse and rider jumping a course of
and show jumping and includes an additional phase known
coloured fences in an enclosed ring. There are many varia
as cross-country (or more correctly, the speed and endurance
tions and levels involved; however, in its simplest format,
phase). Most events are run over the course of 1 day, known
horses are required to jump the fences and those that have
as one-day-events, beginning with dressage, followed by
either jumped a clear round {i.e. not knocked any fences
show jumping and cross-country. Cross country involves the
down) or have the lowest number of faults in the absence of
 horse galloping over a distance of around 1-4 miles (depend-
a clear round are then required to jump a second round,
 ing on level), jumping a number of 'natural' solid fences and
usually over a shortened course and against the clock. The
 obstacles that cannot be knocked down.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
25
2
The equine industry
Three-day-events occur at the top level and 'advanced' horses
These include Australia, New Zealand, Spain, Argentina, the
would aim to complete two 3-day events in a year, one in the
USA and the UK. The Hurlingham Polo Association
spring season and one in the autumn season. Three-day.
 governs the sport in the UK.
events take a similar form to 1-day-events but have a stricter
format, in that dressage is always followed by the cross-
In the 1860s polo was commonly known as 'hockey on horse-
country phase on the second day and show jumping on the
back' and the first English polo club was formed in 1872 by
final day. The format is as follows:
Captain Francis 'Tip' Herbert in Monmouthshire. There are
now 40 clubs and associations in the UK and Ireland, the
● Day 1 - dressage. As with pure dressage the aim is to
most well known of which are Cowdray Park, Cirencester
show the horse's agility, strength and suppleness. The
Park, Guards and the Royal County of Berkshire.
difficulty in eventing is that event horses are as fit as
racehorses and much harder to control in the tense
n s    si   a 
atmosphere of a competition and the knowledge that
a game as possible. Riders are rated from -2 to 10 (10 being
cross-country is coming up.
the highest), with handicaps determined not only by goal-
scoring ability but also on factors such as range of strokes,
● Day 2 - speed and endurance phase. This encom
 speed of play and game sense.
passes four phases:
The polo field measures 270x180 m (roughly the size of three
● Phase A - roads and tracks, which involves the
football pitches) and the game involves two teams of four,
completion of a set course that has to be undertaken
whose aim is to score as many goals as possible. A game of
within a certain time and is usually completed at a
polo lasts from four to eight chukkas (usually four for low-
brisk trot or slow canter to avoid penalties.
goal matches and eight in world-class matches). A chukka
lasts 7 min and puts huge physical demands on the ponies,
● Phase B - the steeplechase, during which the horse
 so riders change ponies between chukkas.
Recently, in a bid to reduce the number of falls on
Breeds associated with polo: usually part or pure
the cross-country course the steeplechase has been
thoroughbred or of Criollo descent
omitted from some events. However, this would
appear to have led to other complications and is cur
While there is no particular breed involved in polo, the
rently the subject of much debate within the sport.
majority are of Argentinean Criollo descent or are part or
pure thoroughbred. The ability to accelerate to speeds of up
● Phase C - a second roads and tracks.
to 30 miles an hour and then to stop and turn quickly mean
that one of the polo pony's greatest attributes is that of excep
● Phase D - the cross-country course, which is
tional temperament. For this reason, pure thoroughbreds and
designed to test the horse's courage and stamina.
ex-racehorses rarely make good polo ponies because of their
temperament and because of the fact that being trained to
● Day 3 - show jumping. This tests the suppleness,
run flat out in a straight line is not conducive to the respon-
fitness, and obedience of the horse following the major
 od onod a po pa Anno p ssn
 pe pd sp srd an po sa
should also be noted that, although known as 'ponies', polo
 phase. Unlike other show jumping competitions, the
ponies usually stand around 14.3-15.3 hh and thus are tech-
horse is only required to jump one round and,
nically horses. Generally, ponies are short-backed and
although penalties can be gained for going over the
compact in conformation to facilitate quick acceleration and
optimum time, it is not against the clock.
flexibility. Also, the physical nature of the game and the likeli-
hood of collision during the ‘riding off' of one rider by
For all phases penalties are given and the winner is the horse
another mean that a wide chest and hindquarters are more
and rider that have achieved the lowest number of penalty
desirable than a narrow weedy type
points.
Other sports
Polo
Other sports include:
The sport of polo is reputedly one of the oldest equestrian
sports. It is described in a Persian manuscript dating back to
600 Bc and it records a game between the Turcomans and the
Team chasing and hunter trials
 Persians. While polo is played in around 77 countries, there
 In both these sports the horse and rider must complete a
are only a few that can field a team of high-goal players.
course of cross-country fences with as few penalties as
26
 The equine industry
possible. As with eventing, the competitors must negotiate a
 was formed in 1947 and has some 5000 members and, along
course of natural-looking but solid, immovable objects. In
 with the Hackney Breed Society, offers support and training
junior or novice classes there may be a certain area of the
 to those who simply enjoy the old fashioned pleasures of
course that is timed but in many of the more senior courses
 driving. The BDs offers training, tests and exams and also
and in team chasing the entire course is completed ‘against
promotes rights of way and driving access. Many members of
2
the clock'. In team chasing four riders compete upon the
both the BDS and the Hackney Breed Society compete in
course at the same time. In both, the winner is the individ-
showing classes with their turnouts at a local or national
ual, or team, to complete the course with the least faults in
level.
the fastest time.
Included in this sector are the trade driving turnouts, which
Breed  associated  with  team chasing and hunter
encompass anything from lightweight turnouts to the large
saai don ie paaynoo pang 1ed no and 1nq Xue :se
teams of four or more Shire horses often employed by
of competition.
breweries.
The British Harness Racing Club involves both trotters
Endurance
and pacers (terms that denote whether or not the horse
Until 2oo0 endurance competitions were run by two organis-
trots in diagonally or laterally paired leg movements,
ing bodies, the British Endurance Riding Association and the
respectively).
Endurance Horse and Pony Society. These two amalgamated
to form Endurance GB. In this sport riders and horses are
Breeds associated with carriage driving: some warm-
required to compete over various terrains and distances.
bloods (often the Gelderlander), the Cleveland bay, the
Competitors are graded according to length of race and time
Hackney and some native pony breeds. In the case of harness
taken to complete the course. Horses are very carefully mon-
racing - American standardbreds (similar to our own thor-
itored throughout the race.
oughbred) and various ‘trotters’ (French, Metis (Russian
breed), Swedish, German and Italian).
Breed associated with endurance: the Arab is the
favoured horse and is also frequently seen in the show ring as
In the 17th century breeders crossed ‘Chapman’ horses
it is considered by many to be the most beautiful breed of
(named after the term given to traveling salesmen at that
horse. It is depicted in art from as long ago as 2000-3000 BC
time) with Andalusian and Barb stallions to produce quality
and is possibly the oldest and purest of breeds. Arabs have
coach horses. Bred mainly in the Cleveland area and always
 n   n h    
bay in colour, they acquired the name of Cleveland bay. Later
modern breeds. They are characterized by their 'dished' face,
they were crossed with the thoroughbred to form the faster,
high arching neck and head carriage, and short back. Its
lighter form of the Cleveland bay known as the Yorkshire
ability to succeed in endurance racing is enhanced by the
coach horse. The Cleveland bay stud book began in 1886 but
fact that it has evolved to survive in harsh desert environ-
was closed in 1936 when the breed all but vanished. Queen
ments, is usually very sound and is able to live on minimal
Elizabeth II herself has done much to renew interest in the
rations.
breed and HRH Prince Philip has his own team of Cleveland
bays, which he has driven in international competitions.
When crossed with thoroughbreds they can also make excel-
Carriage driving
lent hunters and competition horses.
Competitors take part in horse driving trials in which they
    sn e  s  
test and a cross-country course. However, instead of the show
stepping, extravagant action. Originating in the late 17th and
jumping phase, competitors are required to drive as quickly
early 18th centuries, it is a descendant of the good trotting
as possible through a course of bollards with small balls bal
horses of the time, i.e. the Yorkshire trotter and the Norfolk
anced on them that will fall off when knocked, resulting in
roadster. In the latter half of the 18th century the Hackney
 pony appeared, influenced by the inclusion of pony breeds,
British Horse Driving Trials group, and competitors can
not least of which was the native Fell pony.
compete using either teams (four horses), tandems (two
horses, one behind the other), pairs (two horses side by side)
In harness racing the trotters and the American standardbred
or singles.
are largely derived from the crossing of the thoroughbred
with the Norfolk trotter (from which our modern-day
Other driving organisations include the British Driving
Hackney breed is derived), and some local influence, for
Society (BDS), the Hackney Breed Society and the
example the Morgan in the USA or the Anglo-Norman in
British Harness Racing Club. The British Driving Society
France.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
27
2
The equine industry
create a competition for the more recreational rider. It
Showing
involves mounted orienteering and horsemanship tests that
This encompasses classes for all the popular breeds and types,
assess the horse and rider's ability to complete a course of
including the native pony breeds, hunter and working hunter
hazards.
classes and 'coloured' classes. Each type or breed has its own
breed society and may, in addition, belong to other registers
such as the Sports Horse Breeding GB group, the British
Related industries and
Show Hack, Cob and Riding Horse Society or the
British Show Pony Society.
associations
 Breeds and types associated with showing: the native
The British Horse Society
ponies, hunters, cobs, hacks, Arabs, palominos, coloureds
and various others.
The British Horse Society (BHS) began in 1947 and, as the
various sporting disciplines broke away, it began to focus on
The native breeds of the UK are envied all over the world and
the everyday rider and enthusiast. The BHS has a member-
have had an important influence in the breeding of many of
ship of some 56 000 and focuses on five main areas: access,
our sport horses. The ideal event horse is often said to be
training and education, safety, welfare and breeding, and
recreational riding. Access and the maintenance of rights of
of 'cleverness'!) Native ponies provide both young and adult
way has been a major issue for the BHS and many volunteers
 alike with a reliable and hardy riding pony. Breeds come from
ensure that these issues remain a focus for the society. The
various parts of the UK and Ireland and each has its own
safety department offers a riding- and road-safety test and
breed society and merits. Native pony breeds include:
monitors the occurrence of equine-related accidents within
the UK. In addition to paid staff, many volunteers are used to
● Dartmoor
liaise with breed societies and deal with welfare issues. The
BHS runs extensive training programmes with internationally
●Exmoor
recognised qualifications.
● Connemara
The recreational side of the organisation deals with the
inspection and approval of riding schools in the UK and
● Shetland
also promotes and runs various hunter trials and ‘Le Trec
competitions.
●Welsh Mountain
Under the umbrella of the BHS are the BHS Riding Clubs.
● New Forest
Although independent, they are all run to a fairly similar
format and around 400 of these are affliated to the BHS.
● Dales
Riding clubs not only encourage good horsemanship and
husbandry skills but also often involve a great deal of fun and
● Fell
social activity.
●Highland
The Pony Club
●Welsh cob.
Originally founded in 1928 under the ‘Institute of the Horse',
the Pony Club is a worldwide organisation for young riders
New sports
40 000 members, whose aim is to promote riding and horse
The Pony Club is very influential in the creation and mainte
care skills. The organisation's ability to promote enjoyment
nance of many sports for young riders. The most well known
and appreciation of horses and ponies, self discipline, sports-
are the mounted games, which involve many varied
manship and good citizenship among its members is also
 gymkhana races. In addition to these, newer sports have been
widely recognised. Meetings, known as 'rallies', are held reg
added, which include horse-ball, tetrathlon, polocross,
ularly and, each summer, camps are held to which riders
jumpcross, vaulting and in 2004 the introduction of pony
bring their ponies for a week of fun and learning. As with the
racing.
 BHS there are a series of horsemanship tests (ranging from 'D'
to ‘A) to test riding ability and knowledge. There are also
Another new addition to the sporting catalogue is ‘Le Tree'
numerous competitions, including jumping, eventing, dres
This sport has been promoted by the British Horse Society to
sage, gymkhana games (known as the Prince Philip Cup),
28  The equine industry
polo and polocross and tetrathlon (consisting of running.
an organisation committed to helping member riding schools
shooting, swimming and riding). All of these lead to national
achieve and maintain high standards in terms of running a
championships via a series of regional competitions. Many of
safe and profitable business.
today's competitive riders began their careers in the Pony Club.
There are also numerous horse charities including The
2
There is also a European sector, the Euro Pony Club, which
International League for the Protection of Horses, The Blue
has over half a million riders and is formed from a federation
Cross, The Barnsby Home of Rest for Horses, The Donkey
of Pony Clubs throughout Europe.
Sanctuary, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals, various racehorse rehabilitation centres and Riding
for the Disabled Association (RDA). The RDA is run by
Other organisations
  a s  sd p s s
In addition to these main organisations we can add the
disabled riders the opportunity to gain instruction in either
Association of British Riding Schools (ABRS) which is
driving or riding throughout the UK.
The service sector
This section of the industry includes all those professionals
Overseeing many of these businesses is the British Equestrian
and businesses who make a living from supplying horse
Trade Association (BETA), which was formed in 1979 and has
owners and enthusiasts with services such as health care,
proved useful for its 600 or so members. Examples of its
food, bedding and equipment. These range from those who
achievements include its intervention in European law result-
 are in direct contact with horses and their owners, e.g. farri
 ing in the ability of saddlers to sell wormers to the public and
ers, specialist equine veterinary establishments and saddlers,
the exemption of tax charges on anything other than the
to those less directly linked but whose clients are largely
profit made on horse sales by dealers. Anyone involved in the
equine-based, e.g. insurers, publishers, racecourse caterers,
equine industry also benefits from the purchase of the British
feed and bedding merchants.
Equesirian Directory, produced annually by BETA.
Future developments
ent equine species, e.g. the fusion of a donkey donor cell to a
horse oocyte, and the opportunity to improve the standard of
British sport horses by cloning from proved competition
Cloning
winners long after the individual has been castrated. Cloning
might also provide an opportunity to research the effects of
 At the end of 2004 the first successful cloning of a pet for
environmental factors, e.g. behaviour, training or nutrition,
commercial gain was revealed by an American company.
on genetically identical animals.
'Fluffy', a cat, cost his owner thousands of dollars to produce
and it would seem that there are many other interested
Despite these advantages, there is still much concern and, in
 clients who are willing to pay in excess of f500 per year to
some cases, outright abhorrence surrounding the cloning
 have tissue from their cat or dog preserved for future cloning.
debate. In an area such as racing where it might be thought
that there would be huge advantage in using cloning tech-
The advantages to the equine world of cloning would be the
niques, opinion is vehemently against it. Only horses that are
ability to reproduce carbon copies of successful competition
naturally conceived are allowed to race under Jockey Club
horses. Professor Twink Allen, whose application to clone
rules. Will Lambe, communications executive for the BHB,
horses was rejected by the government, intended to clone
stated that 'there is no prospect of the rules of racing chang-
successful competition horses such as show jumpers, who are
ing to allow a cloned horse to race ... at the BHB we see the
usually gelded and thus unavailable for studwork. His aim
preservation of the sport as vital and cloning is certainly not
was to overcome the problem of combining stud work with
 in the best interests of racing.
competition work by producing one horse for each task.
Professor Allen has stated that the two main benefits of
Further, when we consider that the process of cloning is still
cloning are the ability to study the effects of crossing differ-
very much an experimental procedure and that many
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
29
2
The equine industry
embryos either do not survive or, if they do, develop and
and consolidation. Continuing affluence and corresponding
 suffer from tumours, organ deficiencies and premature death,
disposable income in society can only be good news for the
we can begin to see the rationale behind the Home Office's
industry. Cooperation and the consequent cohesion of all
reluctance to grant a licence for this procedure. However,
interested parties will be paramount to its success in the
difficulties encountered in the UK regarding animal research
future.
are not always experienced in other countries and it would
seem likely that continued research into cloning and other
Bibliography
areas will proceed unchallenged in those countries.
Briggs A 1983 A social history of England. Weidenfeld & Nicotson,
London
Cooperation between
organisations?
British Equestrian Trade Association 1999 National equestrian
survey. Produce Shudies Research, Newbury
In terms of the general future of the equine industry things
look more positive, in that the problem of fragmentation is at
British Market Research Bureau (BMRB International) 2003 Target
least now recognised and there is a genuine wish among the
Group Index.
various sectors to join in a common, cohesive aim. The
Henley Report addresses the problems encountered within
         
the industry and offers suggestions for future development
Available on line at: www.defra.gov.uk/rural/horses
under the following categories:
Draper J 2000 Horse breeds of the world. Anness Publishing,
● The wider promotion of the British horse industry
London
both nationally and internationally
Hall S 1999 This millennium in retrospect. In: Rossdale P D,
● The promotion of British thoroughbreds and the
Greet T R C, Harris P A et al (eds) Guardians of the horse: past,
development and promotion of a British sport horse
Romney Publications, London
● The development of 'joined up' thinking and practice
 in the promotion of leisure riding and sporting
Rossdale P 1999 Vignettes of a veterinary life with horses. In:
excellence
Rossdale P D, Greet T R C, Harris P A et al (eds) Guardians of the
horse: past, present and future. British Equine Veterinary
● The promotion of UK-based horse tourism
Association & Romney Publications, London
● The continued improvement of off-road riding
Webbon P 1999 The changing role of the horse in society.
opportunities.
In: Rossdale P D, Greet T R C, Harris P A et al (eds) Guardians of
the horse: past, present and future. British Equine Veterinary
Other areas not seen as essential but deemed by some to be of
Association &Romney Publications,London
key importance are:
● An industry-wide review of 'the status of the horse'
Recommended reading
● The promotion of equine welfare
Bacon R (ed.) 2002 Equine business guide. Warwickshire College..
● Ongoing assessment of the impact of European Union
Warwick
legislation on the British equine industry.
Contains lots of usefiul informafion and current data helpful fo
As may now be seen, the equine industry in this country is an
nunning a business
extremely complex and diverse ‘animal', whose power in
terms of economic growth is as yet largely untapped. While
British Equestrian Directory 200s The Briish equestrian directory.
some sectors, such as the racing industry, seem to be very
Equestrian Management Consultants, Bramham Yorkshire. Avail.
successful in marketing and directing their business organisa-
able from BETA
tion, many others are far from efficient.
A comprehensive directory giving contact details for all equestrian
With guidance and determination it is hoped that the equine
businesses, associated businesses, charities, breed societies and
industry may look forward to a period of enormous growth
chubs and associations, etc.
30  The equine industry
Budiansky S 1997 The nature of horses; their evolution, intelli-
Rossdale P D, Greet T R C, Harris P A et al (eds) 1999 Guardians
gence and behaviour. Phoenix, London
of the horse: past, present and future. British Equine Veterinary
Association & Romney Publications, London
A very interesting read covering history, evolution, physiology and
behaviour of the horse
An excellent read for the veterinary nursing student as it gives Q
2
Kidd J1984 The better horse.Breeding and iraining for equestrian
nursing, depicting the changes that have occured in areas such as
sports. Arum Press, London
radiography, embryo transfer and so forth
Provides a good discussion of various sports and the types, breeds
Virtually all breed societies now have their own websites, which
and conformation appropriate for those sports
can be accessed for more details regarding breed specifics.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
31
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
3
Leqislation and the veterinary
nurse
Suzanne May
Key Points
● Health and safety legislation is concerned with providing
● Animal welfare legislation is aimed at both maintaining
a safe working environment for both employees and
animal health and protecting the people working with
employers
animals
● It comprises many different acts of parliament, each of
● There are numerous pieces of animal welfare legislation,
which deals with a different aspect, e.g. frst aid, manual
many of which concern dogs
handling and substances that may be hazardous to health
It is essential that all personnel working in a veterinary
● The use of radiation to produce radiographs is of particular
practice are familiar with the legal side of their work
concern to those working in veterinary practice and is
controlled by the Ionizing Radiation Regulations 1999
 introduction to
finally obtaining the Queen's signature to make it law. It is
eqislation
then placed in the Statute Book as an act of Parliament.
Regulations detail the implications of laws. Further regulations
Legislation in the UK refers to both acts of Parliament and
can be added to laws as necessary with the approval of
regulations.
Parliament.
A law or staiute is created by Parliament. The process involves
Where animal welfare is concerned, welfare codes are also
a draft of legislation called a bill being first presented and
required to have parliamentary approval. If the provisions of
debated within the House of Commons and the House of
the code are not complied with, it is not an offence. However,
Lords. It then goes before a parliamentary committee before
this could be used in evidence if prosecution followed.
Veterinary 
Surgeons
● The medical or surgical treatment of animals
Act 1966
● The performance of surgical operations on animals.
This act of Parliament controls the work of both veterinary
The Act prohibits anyone other than a veterinary surgeon
surgeons and veterinary nurses.
registered with the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons
(RCVS) from practising veterinary surgery. There are,
 Definition of veterinary surgery: The Act defines this as
however, a number of exceptions to this rule, some concern-
'the art and science of veterinary surgery and medicine, and
   n  s  
without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, shall be
taken to include:
Schedule 3 of the Act allows anyone to give first aid
in an emergency for the purpose of preserving life and
● The diagnosis of diseases in, and injuries to animals
relieving suffering. The owner of an animal or a member
including tests performed on animals for diagnostic
of the owner's household or employee of the owner may
purposes
also give it minor medical treatment. There are several
exceptions to this general rule, mainly relating to farm
● The giving of advice based upon such diagnosis
animals.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing:
33
3
Legislation and the veterinary nurse
Veterinary nurses, like anyone else, may give first aid and
Amendment to paragraphs 6 & 7 of Schedule 3 to the
look after animals in a way that does not involve acts of veter-
Veterinary Surgeons Act 1966, as amended by the
inary surgery. There are further provisions for qualified listed
Veterinary Surgeons Act 1966 (Schedule 3 Amend-
veterinary nurses under Schedule 3 of the Act.
 ,      m
within the Act as one whose name is entered on to the list of
Schedule 3 of the Veterinary Surgeons Act 1966
veterinary nurses maintained by the RCVs. It also makes pro.
details that qualified listed veterinary nurses can administer
visions for the training of student veterinary nurses, allowing
medical treatment and perform minor surgery (not involving
them to perform Schedule 3 procedures as detailed above, but
entry into a body cavity) under the direction of the veterinary
surgeon that is providing care for that animal (cat, dog or
registered veterinary surgeon, or veterinary nurse under
exotic species but NOT equine species, unless a certificate in
veterinary instruction where surgery is concerned. The
equine nursing is also held). The veterinary surgeon must be
definition of a student veterinary nurse is one who ‘has been
satisfied that the nurse is competent to carry out their
enrolled under the RCVs bylaws for the purposes of training
instructions as he is ultimately responsible and accountable
as a veterinary nurse and who is employed at an approved
for their actions.
 training practice'.
Occupational health
Health and Safety at Work Act
What is health and safety all
1974
about?
This applies to all businesses, however big or small, and to
Health and safety laws are in place to assist in the provision
those who are self-employed. It includes:
of a satisfactory, safe working environment; preventing
 people from being injured or harmed at work by taking the
● Employers
right precautions and knowing what action to take when
things go wrong.
● Employees
The Health and Safety Executive and  Local
● Visitors/members of the public.
Authority  Environmental Health  Officers are the
parties responsible for monitoring health and safety. An
The act sets out specific responsibilities and duties of both
inspector can visit any practice at any time to ensure that all
employers and employees, and indicates that the ultimate
relevant legislation is being complied with. Their job is to
responsibility rests with the senior partner(s) of the practice.
enforce accordingly. There are two types of enforcement
notices:
Employers should provide:
● An improvement notice identifies a situation that
● A written Health and Safety policy if there are more
needs to be corrected and sets a specific date by when
than five employees; this will include details of the
this should be done
practice safety officer and accident reporting
procedures and should be updated as necessary
● A prohibition notice is used to halt an activity that
the inspector believes could cause serious personal
● Adequate supervision of inexperienced staff and
injury. This notice takes effect as soon as it is
training of staff in applicable areas
issued.
● A safe working environment:
Both types of notice can be appealed against through the
Employment Tribunal.
● Premises kept in a good state of repair with safe
 access and exits in times of emergency
The main acts of Parliament that affect occupational health
within veterinary practices are as follows.
● Safety and maintenance of equipment
34   Legislation and the veterinary nurse
● The handling, storage and transportation of items
Table 3.1 Example of a risk assessment
Activity
Radiography
● The provision of protective clothing
Location
Radiography room
● Adequate toilet and washing facilities and separate
Potential hazards
 Primary beam
areas for rest and refreshment
(the actual things
Secondary radiation (scatter)
that are likely to
Animal (if conscious
●Induction training
cause harm)
●Appropriate first-aid facilities.
Risk (the likelihood 
Consider:
of the potential
Protective clothing
As an employee you should:
hazard causing harm)  Protective screening
Persons inside the controlled area
● Take reasonable care of the health and safety of
Any manual restraint of animal
yourself and others, including members of the public,
Any protective restraint of animal, e.g. muzzle
while in the workplace
Possibility of machine malfunction -
continuous emission of X-rays
● Respect safety rules and report potential hazards to
Who is at risk?
Any persons remaining within the controlled
supervisors
 Is anyone more at
are most at risk. Those at more risk (but
risk than others?
should not be participating anyway) are those
● Cooperate with the employer so far as it is necessary to
who are pregnant, under 18 years old or have
q o in a spn tuaa no np A aa
been advised by their GP not to undertake
performed or complied with
radiography
●Not interfere, recklessly or intentionally, with anything
Control measures
Authorized personnel only
provided in the interests of health and safety and
Personal dosimeters
welfare
Protective clothing/screens
Extension enabling radiographer to be out of
● Keep tetanus boosters and other relevant vaccinations
controlled area when exposure taken
up to date.
Training required
Health and safety training for radiography
Those involved must have read and understood
the local rules and system of work
Management of Health and
Emergency action
 Shut off power to X-ray machine from fuse
box
Safety at Work Regulations
Inform Radiation Protection Supervisor
1999
and Radiation Protection Advisor and arrange
for service of machine immediately.
These regulations follow on from the Health and Safety at
Work Act 1974, redefining and reinforcing the requirements
Control of Substances Hazardous
of the Act to include the following of all activities:
to Health Regulations 2002
● Planning
The Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations
● Organization
2002 (COSHH) were introduced specifically to cover the
management of risks associated with hazardous substances.
● Control
This includes all pharmaceutical products and chemicals used
in veterinary practice. Regulations are continually being
●Monitoring
-nsa1 666l au patepdn aeu suonens1 zo0z au patepdn
lations. Changes include additional definition of terms and
● Review.
more clarification on the steps involved in risk assessment.
The best way to do this is to ensure that a thorough risk
COSHH requires employers to make assessments of all the
assessment has been carried out. An example risk assessment
potential hazards and risks that could occur within the work-
can be seen in Table 3.1.
place and provide adequate control measures.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
35
?
Legislation and the veterinary nurse
● Hazard - has the potential to cause harm
Employees should be familiar with the common hazard
warning symbols illustrated in Figure 3.1 and the precautions
● Risk - likely to cause harm.
that should be taken when handling a substance that carries
such a symbol, e.g. eye goggles, apron, gloves, mask (Box 3.1).
Assessments should be reviewed regularly and records must
be kept. According to COSHH all persons within the work-
place should know what safety precautions to take.
Manual Handling Regulations
Hazards should be thought of in relation to:
1992
● The nature of the hazard
 This act expands on the general provisions of the Health and
 Safety at Work Act 1974. The requirements and applications
● Route of exposure
of these regulations are clearly outlined in their booklet -
Manual Handling, Guidance on Regulations.
● First aid required
General provisions outlined include:
● Preventative measures
● Avoid hazardous manual handing operations so far as
● Those members of staff at greater risk
 is reasonably practicable
 Correct recording of any exposure.
● Assess any hazardous manual handling operations that
cannot be avoided
● Reduce the risk of injury so far as is reasonably
practicable.
The regulations do not set out any guidelines for weight
HARMFUL
IRRITANT
CORROSIVE
TOXIC
limits, etc. It is expected that each individual task will be
Fig. 3.1 Some common hazard warning signs
 assessed according to:
 The task
Box 3.1 Rules for working with
● The load (an animal being carried may suddenly move,
chemicals
which makes it different from carrying a box)
Never eat, drink or smoke
● The working environment (moving around objects,
 Ensure area is adequately ventilated
slippery floors, etc.)
● Use the necessary protective clothing
●The individual's capabilities (these vary with age,
 Ensure the chemical is appropriate for use
pregnancy, etc.)
● Keep the chemicals in their original containers with the
label intact and legible
The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) guide for manual
· Use the correct concentration
lifting and the main elements of good lifting technique can
● Read the label and the product COSHH sheet
 be found in Figures 3.2 and 3.3.
Store appropriately according to manufacturers instruc-
tions - out of direct sunlight, away from animals and
children - in a locked cupboard if necessary
Do not mix
The Health and Safety (First
● Dispose of chemical according to manufacturers'
Aid) Regulations 1981
guidelines
● Wash hands after use
 This requires employers to provide adequate and appropriate
● Deal with accidental spillage immediately and report as
equipment, facilities and personnel to enable first aid to
be given to employees if they are injured or become ill at
necessary
work.
36
 Legislation and the veterinary nurse
Fig.3.2 Health & Safety Executive guidance
for manuat lifting (Crown copyright materiat,
10 kg
5 kg
with permission of the Controller of HMSO
and the Queen's Printer for Scottand)
3 kg
7 kg
Shoulder height
Shoulder height
20 kg
10 kg
7 kg
13 kg
Elbow height
Elbow height
25 kg
15 kg
10 kg
16 kg
C
Knuckle height
Knuckle height
 20 kg
10 kg
7kg
13 kg
Mid-lower leg height
Mid-lower leg height
10kg
5kg
3 kg
7 kg
Women
Men
1
2
3
5
6
 Check suitable clothing 
Place feet apart.
Firmm grip --
 Back straight. Lift 
With clear visibility
Set load down at
and assess load.
 Bend knees.
dose to body.
smoothly to knee level
move forward
waist level or to knee
Heaviest side to body.
 Straight back.
and then waist level.
without twisting.
level and then floor.
Fig. 3.3 The main elements of a good lifting technique. 1. Decide on how to grasp animatl to lift it. 2. Place feet apart - bend knees, keeping
back straight. 3. Hold animat firmty, close to body. 4. Keeping back straight, lift smoothty first to knee levet and then to waist level. 5. With clear
visibitity, move forwards without twisting. 6. Set animat down on tabte or to knee levet and then floor
What is the difference between an
appointed person and a first aider?
The minimum first-aid provision in any workplace is:
ment to take charge when someone is injured or ill. This
● A suitably stocked first-aid box
includes calling an ambulance if required. Appointed persons
are also responsible for keeping the first-aid box stocked and
● An appointed person to take charge of first-aid
recording any treatments given.
arrangements.
A frst aider is someone who has undergone an HSE approved
Requirements increase with the size of the workforce and the
training course in first aid at work and holds a certificate to
type of work being done; for example, a qualified first aider
prove this. Training should be repeated every 3 years to
may be required.
ensure that the certificate is kept valid.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
37
3
Legislation and the veterinary nurse
The First Aid at Work: Approved
Box 3.2 Accidents that should be
Code of Practice and Guidelines
reported under RIDDOR
1997
Examples of major accidents
These state that staff must know who the first-aid officer
is and where the first-aid box is kept. First-aid boxes
· A fracture of the skull, spine or pelvis
should be clearly marked with a white cross on a green
· A fracture of the long bone of a limb
background.
● Amputation of a hand or foot
● Loss of sight of an eye
All accidents that occur within the workplace must be
● Any other accident which results in an injured person
recorded in an Accident Book approved by the HSE.
being admitted into hospital as an inpatient for more
than 24 hours, unless only detained for observation
Details of what should be recorded in the Accident
Book:
Examples of dangerous occurrences
● Full name, address and occupation of individual who
● Explosion from a gas cylinder or sterilizer
had the accident
● Uncontrolled release of substance, (including gases,
vapours and X-rays)
● The signature of the person who is filling in the
● Any escape of substances that might result in problems
Accident Book and the date of the occurrence
 due to inhalation or lack of oxygen
 Any unintentional ignition or explosion
● When and where the accident took place
● Details of occurrence and record of injuries.
Environmental Protection Act
Indicate whether the incident needs to be reported to the HSE
1990
under RIDDOR (see below).
This relates to the disposal of waste from domestic and indus
trial establishments. Waste falls into one of three categories:
●Household
Reporting of Iniuries, Diseases
● Industrial, including clinical waste
and Dangerous Occurrence
Regulations 1995 (RIDD0R)
O Commercial.
The Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous
The disposal of clinical waste has further restrictions imposed
Occurrence Regulations 1995 (RIDDOR) legislate for the
by:
reporting of certain serious events directly to the HSE. These
can be broadly divided into:
● The Control of Pollution (Amendment) Act 1974
● Major or fatal accidents
● The Special Waste Regulations (as Amended) 1996.
● Any accident or illness resulting in absence from work
Clinical waste is defined as waste that contains animal tissue,
for more than 3 days because of an incident at work
body fluids, excretions, drugs or any product that may be
hazardous to health.
● Dangerous occurrences and near-misses.
This must be placed in approved colour-coded yellow plastic
Examples of each are given in Box 3.2.
bags marked CLINICAL WASTE FOR INCINERATION ONLY.
The name of the practice should be clearly stated on the
Major or fatal accidents must be reported as soon as possible
outside.
by telephone, followed by written confirmation within 7 days
using a special form - Form 2508. The employer must ensure
Note: Animal faeces from non-veterinary establishments, e.g.
that RIDDOR is enforced.
boarding kennels, may be incinerated or disposed of in a
38   Legislation and the veterinary nurse
septic tank. If a septic tank is used it should be separate from
Basic safety (Box 3.3)
any other and designated for the disposal of animal excreta.
It should be emptied twice a year.
● Always switch off at the mains before connecting.
 disconnecting or investigating any electrical appliance
Sharps are defined as a special category of clinical waste to
include sharp items such as scalpel blades, needles and sharp
● Never touch electrical equipment with wet hands
surgical instruments.
● Always follow the manufacturers' instructions
Special waste is defined as part of clinical waste that includes
containers of pharmaceutical products.
s n na   od o
immediately.
Special waste and sharps must be placed in a yellow sharps
container, which is sealed when full.
Portable appliance testing
Cadavers: Animal tissue should technically be classified as
Portable appliance testing (PAT) comes under these regula-
clinical waste. However, this would create a problem for those
tions. Appliances that have been tested will often have a label
wishing to take their pet home for burial. Interpretation of
attached to the cable detailing the date and who tested it. The
the law in this area gives guidelines stating that, unless the
frequency of testing is dependent on the type of equipment
animal presented a hazard to health while alive, it can be
and is usually somewhere between every 6 months and every
classed as non-clinical commercial waste, so allowing owners
2 years.
to take their pet home. Where the animal did pose an infec.
tion risk, it should be dealt with by the veterinary surgeon as
clinical waste.
Electrical circuits and circuit breakers
When clinical waste containers and bags are full they must be
Every electrical circuit should have a fuse in it, which is a
sealed and collected by a contractor that is licensed to trans-
simple safety device. A fuse is simply a thin wire through
port and dispose of clinical waste. Disposal is by high tem-
which the current of electricity flows. If a fault occurs in the
perature incineration.
circuit it usually causes an increase in the electrical current.
This results in the wire melting, which breaks the circuit.
It is very important to use the correct fuse within a circuit
(Fig. 3.4). If a fuse that is used in a circuit has too low a value
the fuse will constantly 'blow'. However, if a fuse is used with
Electricity at Work Regulations
too high a value a fault may result in the risk of fire or elec-
1989
trocution.
This governs safety procedures that should always be
employed when dealing with electrical equipment.
Earth wire .
Terminal screw
Green/yellow
Neutral wire
Blue
Cartridge fuse
Box 3.3 Basic electrical safety
(formerly black)
Live wire
Remember:
Brown
● Electricity and water do not mix
O
(formerly red)
● Loose connections and exposed wires may short-circuit
 Cable grip should anchor
the cable covering (sheath)
and cause fre
not the intemal wires
 Always use the correct fuse for the appliance
Cable cover (sheath)
· Do not overload sockets
· When investigating or repairing electrical circuits
 Terminals tight 
SWITCH OFF THE POWER FIRST
Correctly wired
Minimum bare wire
● When using extension leads always unwind them fully,
 Fuse in use
Cable (lead/flex)
 as this prevents overheating.
Fig. 3.4 How to wire a plug
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing:
39
Legislation and the veterinary nurse
A circuit breaker is a device used to protect against short-cir-
n a so  e a si a
cuits and is found on the main fuse board. These electromag-
for and that no-one re-enters the building until the
netic devices switch off the current if a fault occurs. A trip
 all-clear is given by the Fire Department
 switch or RCD (residual current device) can be plugged into a
 socket to give added protection for a portable appliance.
● Local fire rules describing what to do in the event of a
fire should be displayed within different areas within
Circuit breakers are reset by either pressing a button or by
the building
 switching them back on.
● Fire exits should be well labelled and well lit and not
blocked with rubbish, etc., as should fire assembly points
Fire Precautions Act 1971 and
● There should be adequate fire-fighting equipment and
the Fire Precautions (workplace)
 staff must know the location of the equipment
(amendment) Regulation 1999
● Fire doors should be kept shut at all times
This Act ensures that adequate precautions are taken to avoid
or combat fire. It includes the following provisions:
● Care should be taken with the handling and storage of
flammable and explosive materials.
● All staff should be instructed on the use of the fire
alarm and made aware of the type of alarm signal, i.e.
 Further to this, the 1999 amendment specifies a requirement:
what it sounds like
● For competent assistance to deal with general fire
● On discovering a fire the alarm should be raised and
safety risks
the fire brigade alerted immediately. A specified
a a se paue aa pnous is jo rq
● To provide employees with information on fire
and it is this person's responsibility to ensure that the
provision
 Standard dry powder
AFFF (Aqueous
vapourizing liquid 
 Carbon dioxide
or multi-purpose
Foam 
 flm-forming foam)
Water
dry powder
(jncluding halon)
(multi-purpose)
(C02)
 For liquid and 
 For wood, paper, textile 
 For liquid and 
electrical fires
For liquid fires
 and solid material fires 
electrical fires
DO NOT USE
DO NOT USE
DO NOT USE
DO NOT USE
on metal fires
on electrical
on liquid, elctrical
on metal fires 
or metal fires
Or metal fires
Fig. 3.5 Use of fire extinguishers (redrawn with permission from Heath and Safety Executive 2004 Fire safety: an employer's guide. Stationery
Office, London]
40
 Legislation and the veterinary nurse
● For the cooperation of all staff in matters of fire
provision.
Fire extinguishers
These are now all red, with a coloured strip indicating the
contents and usage. There should also be a label mounted on
3
the wall above the extinguisher, showing in green the fires
that can safely be extinguished with that particular fire extin-
guisher and in red those that cannot (Fig. 3.5).
Ionizing Radiation Regulations
1999
3
Damage from radiation is cumulative, i.e. exposure to tiny
amounts of radiation over a period of time can be just as
serious as one exposure for a length of time.
In addition to damaging cell structure, genes of reproductive
cells can also be harmed, causing gene mutation. The effects
1  Tube head
of this may not be immediately obvious and may take a long
 2 Primary beam 
while to emerge.
 3 Scatter radiation
Fig. 3.6 The hazards of radiation (redrawn from Lane D, Cooper B
Harmful effects of radiation:
2003 Veterinary nursing, 3rd edn. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford)
● Inflammation
      1  
● Blood disorders
produced: Guidance Notes for the Protection of Persons against
Ionizing Radiations arising from Veterinary Use. It is bright
● Death of tissue
yellow in colour and should be situated close to the X-ray
machine, where possible in practice.
● Death or mutation of developing foetus
All practices should have written local radiation rules and a
● Damage to gonads
system of work, a copy of which should be displayed in the des-
ignated X-ray room. This should include a list of all personnel
●Infertility
within the practice who are authorized to undertake radiography.
● The production of tumours.
Local radiation rules state the necessary precautions to
be taken when doing radiography for that particular
The main beam that is produced when making an exposure is
practice. The system of work also describes the use of the
called the primary beam (see Ch. 32). This represents the
practice X-ray machine and what to do in an emergency.
biggest hazard to personnel. No part of the operator's body
should ever be placed in the primary beam.
The main principles associated with radiation protection are:
Secondary radiation or scatter is produced when particles of
● Radiography should only be undertaken if there is
energy from the primary beam hit a surface (such as tissue or
definite clinical justification for the use of the procedure
 inanimate objects) and cause the production of lower-energy
particles. These lower energy particles ‘bounce' of the surface
● Exposure of personnel should be kept to a minimum
at random and, like X-rays, travel in straight lines (Fig. 3.6).
● There must be personal monitoring of staff involved
Everyone who is involved with radiography must be
with radiation to ensure that dose limits are not
protected from its dangers.
exceeded.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
41
3
Legislation and the veterinary nurse
Under the legislation practices must appoint:
 All staff should be aware of what to do in an emergency, i.e.
if the machine jams while emitting X-rays. This usually
● A Radiation Protection Supervisor (RPS) - A
involves knowing where to shut down power without having
listed veterinary nurse or veterinary surgeon employed
to re-enter the controlled area. Any fault must be reported to
in the practice whose responsibility it is to ensure that
the RPA.
radiography is carried out safely and in accordance
with local rules and the associated system of work
Staff involved with radiography
· A Radiation Protection Advisor (RPA) - A suitably
qualified person not employed by the practice who is
Persons 16-18 years of age have restrictions on radiography
responsible for periodically visiting the practice and
work. There is a smaller dose limit for them, although if possi-
inspecting/giving advice regarding aspects of radiation
ble they should not be allowed in the controlled area as their
 protection. They must either:
bodies are still developing and are at a slightly greater risk.
● Hold a Diploma in Veterinary Radiography (DVR) or
Personal monitoring
● Be qualified in appropriate radiation physics with an
interest in veterinary radiography.
Designated persons (a list of whom will be displayed in the
local rules) should all have a dosemeter that they wear while
Controlled area
at work. The dosemeter should only be worn by its designated
wearer. There should be no swapping and sharing.
A specified room should be identified for small-animal radi-
Dosemeters should be worn on the trunk beneath any lead
ography. It should have sufficiently thick walls and no part of
apron.
the controlled area should extend beyond it (brick walls are
adequate; thin walls may be reinforced with barium plaster or
Different types of dosemeter are available. Commonly used
lead ply).
types include:
● Film badge (blue holder)
to remain in it during exposure to stand at least 2 metres from
the primary beam. If this is not possible, a protective lead screen
     n 
must be provided. Unshielded doors and windows may be
acceptable if the work load is low and the room is large enough.
They should not leave the building, nor be placed in direct
Special recommendations are made for flooring in rare cases
sunlight or next to any other sources of radiation, e.g. a com-
where there is an occupied area below the radiography room.
      oa d
Protection Board (NRPB) and are periodically exchanged,
Technically, the controlled area is the area around the
when the old dosemeters are sent back for reading. A print-
out of all readings is sent to the practice so staff can see if they
exceeds a given limit. This usually 2 m, as laid down in the
have registered any exposure. Records of these printouts must
regulations.
S h   r    i s
The controlled area must be clearly labelled and a red
warning light should be displayed (usually by the entrance to
Persons who should not take part in
the controlled area) when radiography is taking place,
radiography
warning others not to enter.
● Persons under 16 years of age
In addition, all X-ray machines should have lights visible
from the control panel indicating:
● Pregnant women
● When the machine is switched on and being supplied
● Those advised by their GP not to.
by electricity
Protective clothing
● When exposure is taking place.
It is important to realise that any protective clothing protects
Once radiographic examination has been completed the
against secondary radiation and not the primary beam.
 machine should be disconnected from the electricity supply.
Clothing available can include:
42   Legislation and the veterinary nurse
● Aprons
X-ray book
●Gloves
Every practice should have a record of exposures taken.
Columns may be detailed as shown in Figure 3.7. This is used
● Sleeves
to keep an accurate record of exposures and also enables staff
to see which exposures have produced good radiographs,
● Thyroid guards.
helping to reduce the number of unnecessary radiographs.
They are made of plastic or rubber that is impregnated with
lead. Aprons may be single- or double-sided (double-sided
Manual restraint while taking X-rays
giving better protection). They should be long enough to
reach mid-thigh level. The aprons should be worn by any
● Should only be done when there is just cause, e.g. if
persons remaining in the controlled area while an exposure is
the patient is a severe anaesthetic or sedation risk
taken, even if standing behind a lead screen. Gloves and
sleeves are worn when manual restraint of an animal is nec-
● Details of any persons manually restraining during
essary. Even when wearing these the hands should not be
X-rays should be recorded in the X-ray book so their
placed in the primary beam.
exposure can be monitored.
Protective clothing must be checked regularly for signs of
wear and tear. Visual inspection is usually enough but, where
Processing chemicals
further investigation is needed, X-raying the clothing may be
necessary. Aprons should never be folded; they should be
Chemicals can be supplied as powders, liquid concentrates or
hung up to prevent cracking of the lead.
ready-to-use liquids. All chemicals should be handled with
care in a well-ventilated room. Gloves, goggles and face mask
Maximum permissible dose
should be worn.
The maximum permissible dose (MPD) is the amount of
Waste chemicals should be placed in the original container
radiation that can be received by the body or a specific part
and collected by an authorized person. Local hospitals and
of it without causing harm. This is currently 50 mSv.
laboratories may provide this service.
Date
Owner
Animal
Breed
Wt
Consc
Vieur
plate
Grid
Exposure
Comments
Initials
Details
Name
(kg)
Or GA
Y/N
VD
Wa
7.6.01
Jones
sam
GSD
37
GA
Large
85x 5
poob-s
Hips
SKM
Fig. 3.7 Example of records kept in a radiography book
Animal welfare
● Maintain animal health, including legislation about
the housing, transport and licensing of animals
(Table 3.3)
Animal welfare legislation aims to:
● Balance the ethics and morality of animal use with the
● Ensure provisions for the public's health and safety in
 financial and practical considerations of a working
matters relating to animals (Table 3.2)
environment.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
43
3
Leqislation and the veterinary nurse
Table 3.2 Summary of laws that protect the public
Animal Health Act 1981 and
This Act gives government ministers powers to make orders to prevent and control the introduction and spread
quarantine regulations
of zoonotic disease and assist in the eradication of diseases carried by animals in the UK. The orders and
regulations covered include the following:
● The Rabies (Control) Order 1974, now incorporated into the Animal Health Act
● Quarantine for imports and exports
●Points of entry into Britain
● Transport method and conditions
● Seizure of animals and their disposal (dogs and wildlife)
●Disinfection of places and vehicles.
The Pet Travel Scheme (PETS)
PETS, introduced in 2oo1, allows dogs and cats coming from EU countries, certain other European countries and
rabies-free islands to enter the UK without having to undergo quarantine provided they can be shown to meet
the necessary criteria regarding vaccination and identification. Requirements:
● Microchipped with electronic chip
●Vaccinated against rabies using an inactivated vaccine
●Treated for exotic diseases not present in the UK
● Blood-tested at an approved laboratory to prove effcacy of vaccine
●Has an offcial health certificate
●24-48 h before re-entry into UK the dog or cat must be treated against ticks and tapeworm
● Pre-entry checks carried out by train operators, ferry companies and airlines
● Random spot checks on animals arriving in the UK by the Department of the Environment, Farming and Rural
Affairs (DEFRA) and offcial carriers.
Dangerous Dogs Act 1991,
Applies to the following breeds of dog:
1997
●American pit bull terrier
●Japanese tosa
ouuabie obon ●
●Fila braziliera.
The Act states that the rules for ownership of a dangerous named breed of dog are as follows:
●Notifying the police of ownership
● Obtaining a certificate of exemption from the police, which is issued when the dog has been neutered and
identified with a microchip or other permanent method
●The dog is covered by third-party liability insurance
● In public places, the dog is always muzzled and on a lead
●The dog is always in the company of a person over 16 years of age
● It is an offence to sell, exchange or abandon the dog
● It is an offence to breed from these dogs.
Any dog dangerously out of control and a risk to the general public comes under the remit of this Act. Where
such a dog has caused injury, the owner may be subject to prosecution and an unlimited fine
Guard Dogs Act 1975
Governs the safe use and control of dogs that guard property or sites. This must be done in a way that does not
put the general public at risk. A notice must be displayed to inform the public that a dog is in use and the dog
must only be off the lead if accompanied by a handler
Animals Act 1971
This Act covers liability for damage that has been caused by animals, including damage, death and injury caused
to people, property and livestock. The owner of a dangerous animal must take precautions to ensure that it has
no opportunity to inflict damage as defined by this law. If a dog kills or harms farm animals, farmers are
entitled to protect the stock in their care. If, for example, a dog is found injuring sheep, the farmer may kill the
dog but must report the incident to the police
Dog Fouling of Land Act 1996 Local authorities and councils use this Act to prevent dogs fouling where there is public acces to property or
pavements, but allowing the exemption of guide dogs for the blind
44 Legislation and the veterinary nurse
Table 3.3 Current animal welfare legislation
Animal Boarding
buimomou aul 'ape ot lapio u Aruoyane jeool laut Aq pasuaoy aq zsnu sauanies io sjauuay buspieog
Establishment Act 1963
conditions apply:
● Records kept of animal arrivals and departures and details of owners
● Provision of suitable accommodation
● Adequate and appropriate supplies of food and water
●Exercise facilities available
●Animals protected from disease and risk of fire.
In order to ensure that the conditions of the licence are met, the local authority can at any time instruct
3
inspection by an authorized officer or veterinary surgeon. Licences are renewed annually
Breeding of Dogs Act 1973
The law was altered in 1991, allowing authorized offcers or veterinary surgeons to enter premises with a
uawusqisa bupaaq, wuan aul paniuwo uaaq sey 7ov Ei6t auz lapun aouao ue fadsns Aau j yueliem 
refers to any premises where more than two bitches are kept for the purpose of breeding animals for selling. The
1973 Act prohibits:
● Obstruction of inspection by authorized personnel
●Breeding dogs for sale without a licence from the local authority
●If disqualified under other Acts of Parliament, holding a licence for the breeding of dogs.
Pet Animals Act 1951, 1983
 Prohibits the keeping of a pet shop without a licence. A licence is granted after inspection of the premises by
an approved veterinary surgeon authorized by the local authonity. An amendment in 1983 now makes it illegal to
sell pets in public places. A licence is granted if the following conditions are met:
●Proper care
● Suitable accommodation
●Housed in the correct conditions with reference to heating, lighting, etc.
● Provided with appropriate food
● Observed and checked at suitable intervals during the day
●Sold only after weaning and after a suitable age has been reached
● Prevention of spread of disease
● Emergency and fire precautions for the premises are in place and operational.
Protection of Animals Acts
This series of Acts forms the main statutory control on cruelty to animals by humans. These Acts are used when
1911, 1988
bringing prosecutions related to animal welfare cases. The Act makes it an offence to cause unnecessary
suffering to any domestic or captive animal either deliberately or by omission (neglect). The Act lists offences
such as:
●Inflicting physical cruelty by beating, kicking, etc.
●Inflicting mental cruelty by teasing or terrifying
aeudoidde pe lanem io pooy apioid on buey Aq uoeaodsuen buunp buuans Aiessanauun buisnen ●
intervals
● Performing surgery or operations without anaesthetic
●Poisoning without reason.
Protection of Animals
It is illegal for any operation to be conducted on an animal that will cause pain unless under anaesthetic
(Anaesthetics) Acts 1954,
(local or general). There are, however, several exceptions to this Act:
1982
●Does not apply to birds, fish or reptiles
● In emergency first-aid situations
●Under permitted Home-Office-licensed procedures
● Minor painless operations carried out by a veterinary surgeon or a listed veterinary nurse.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
45
3
Leqislation and the veterinary nurse
Table 3.3 Current animal welfare legislation—Cont'd
Welfare of Animals during
This order is designed to protect all animals during transport by road, rail, sea and air. From 1997, a standard
Transport 1973, 1994
set of regulations covering EU countries on journey times, hauliers' journey plans and routes amended the
(Amendment) Order 1995
original order. The regulations cover:
● Loading and unloading of animals
●Housing and containers for transit
●Access to food and water
● Specified number of animals contained together for transit.
Abandonment of Animals
This Act applies to the abandonment of an animal in circumstances likely to cause it unnecessary suffering,
Act 1960 Dangerous Wild
au ui s/at pue sot aun ui asu e buimonoy panpun sm io sul Aauad io Aueiodua iaaym
Animals Act 1976
numbers of members of the public keeping animals more associated with zoos and wildlife parks. There was
cause for concern over their standard of living and also about the danger posed to the general public.
premises in which these animals are kept. If the inspection is approved a licence may be issued by the local
authority.
S!7s! ayz uo pewue Aue pue au Aue 7e sjeuue jo isl ayz abueyo ot lamod au7 sey areas jo Aezaioas al
classifed as a 'dangerous wild animal: The Act states that anyone keeping these listed animals must:
●Pay a fee to the local authority for the issue of the licence
●Take out liability insurance
●Provide suitable accommodation
●Be over 18 years of age.
 Performing Animals
This Act was introduced following public concern over the treatment of animals in circuses. As a result, the local
(Regulation) Act 1925
authority must be informed of anyone who trains animals for exhibition to the public or exhibits a performing
oaa zeyi ot palaisibal ag isnu uosiad yons Aue pue 'abieyo jo aaly st ll j uaaa 'ongnd ayl ot jeiue
The exceptions to this rule are when animals are trained for sporting purposes, military or police work and
display.
Zoo Licensing Act 1981
The term 'zoo' refers to the exhibiting of wild animals to the public for educational purposes. It applies to
animal collections that are open to the public for 7 days or more in any year.
This Act was passed after the dramatic increase of zoos and wildlife/safari parks in the 1960s. It is intended to
protect the zoo animals and the general public by ensuring that measures to safeguard standards of care, the
welfare of the animals and the safety of the public are in place.
The zoo must obtain a licence from the local authority, which is renewed initially after 4 years and then every
6 years.
The Wildlife and Countryside
These Acts replace several existing laws and regulations and cover the protection and conservation of wild
Acts 1981, 1985
 animals and their habitats. Land, sea and airborne species of wild animals are protected. The minister can add
Or remove species on this list, which may not legally be injured, killed or taken from the wild.
The Act protects habitat from humans and species in captivity which, if released into the wild, would seriously
affect many other species.
:suonshoid anoqe ayl woiy lapiou auz adwaxa ysum paueib aq u saouaoy ov a4z uiyin
●Relating to the protection of farming or forestry interests
● Relating to the conservation, reintroduction, photographing and identification of wildlife.
Convention of Intermational
This is an international agreement in place to protect the world's endangered species. This is done through
Trade in Endangered Species
control of their export and import on a worldwide scale. Animals within this agreement fall into one of two
of Wild Flora and Fauna
categories:
(CITES) 1973
●Those that are threatened with extinction
●Those likely to become so threatened.
46   Legislation and the veterinary nurse
Animal welfare legislation
HSE Books 2004 Fire safety: an employer's guide. The Stationery
Office, London
Animal Welfare Bill
Hughes P, Ferrett E 2003 Introduction to health and safety at work.
At this time (September 2004), the government has just
Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford
published a draft Animal Welfare Bill that will pull together and
update a number of existing laws governing the welfare of
Lane D, Cooper B 2003 Veterinary nursing,3rd edn.Butterworth
domestic and captive animals, ranging from the Protection of
Heinemann, Oxford
Animals Act 1922 to the Breeding and Sale of Dogs (Welfare)
Act 1999. The objective is to remove any current loopholes,
Moore M, Simpson G 1999 Manual of veterinary nursing. British
3
and redefine certain offences, e.g. cruelty, in order to leave
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Gloucester
less room for argument about what constitutes an offence.
The Veterinary Record Volume 155, Number 4 July 24, 2004,
Under this new proposal:
British Veterinary Association
● A keeper of an animal will commit an offence if they
Websites
do not take reasonable steps to ensure the animal's
welfare and meet its needs in an appropriate manner -
DEFRA: www.defra.co.uk
suitable environmental conditions are outlined
Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons: www.rcvs.org.uk/vet-
● Steps could be taken to prevent unnecessary suffering
nurses/schedule-three.htm
before it occurs, rather than only to act after the fact
Recommended reading
● If a veterinary surgeon certifies that an animal is
suffering or not being cared for, the authorities can
Lane D, Cooper B 2003 Veterinary nursing 3rd edn. Butterworth
take possession of the animal for up to 8 days pending
Heinemann, Oxford
the start of proceedings for an offence under the bill.
Detailed discussion about the legal responsibilities of a veterinary
Additional provisions may also include a ban on mutila-
nurse within a practice environment
tions - such as the docking of tails on dogs (subject to limited
exceptions, e.g. welfare reasons).
Hotston-Moore A, Simpson G 1999 Manual of advanced veteri-
nary nursing. British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
Gloucester
Bibliography
Moore M, Simpson G 1999 Manual of veterinary nursing. Brifish
Dallas S 2002 Animal biology and care.Blackwell Science, Oxford
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Gloucester
Hotston-Moore A, Simpson G 1999 Manual of advanced veteri-
Both manuals provide added information about animal welfare
nary nursing. British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
law and the responsibilities of a veterinary nurse
Gloucester
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing  47
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
4
Canine and feline anatomy and
physiology
Sue Dallas
Key Points
● The cell is the basic unit of the body. All cells contain a
● The systems of the body comprise a set of organs, each
 nucleus, cell membrane and cytoplasm. They also possess
of which has a function that contributes to the overall
other features that are specific to their type and
function of the system
function
● Anatomy is the study of the structure of the organs;
● Cells form the four basic tissues, which are arranged into
physiology is the study of how the organs function
organs, which form the body systems
Introduction
tion of how disease and injury affect normal function and
how in turn treatment can be designed to alleviate the symp-
Knowledge of anatomy and physiology in the dog and cat is
toms. This chapter is not written as an all-inclusive descrip-
        
   s a  d p  jo 
nursing and care. From this knowledge evolves an apprecia-
the important and most relevant facts.
Cells and basic
● Erythrocytes (red blood cells) - their shape is
designed to hold the red pigment haemoglobin to
tissues
convey oxygen around the body; they are one of the
few cells in the body that has no nucleus
The cell is the functional unit of all tissues and each cell has
● Nerve cells, or neurons - have slender arm-like
the ability to perform all the essential life functions. Within
processes that will transmit electrical impulses through
the various tissues of the body, the constituent cells show a
the nervous system to reach the whole body
wide range of adaptations to perform a particular functional
specialization. All cells conform to a basic structure (Box 4.1).
● Muscle - capable of contracting to bring about body
movement.
The diversity of cells
Cells
Cells are not identical and their shape and contents show
variation according to their function, but wherever they are
 All cells have the following features in common:
found in the body they have the same basic features. Some
examples of different cells are:
● Nucleus - to control all the functions of the cell
● Epithelial cells - found lining the surface of the
● Cytoplasm - a jelly-like material that contains all the
body, the body cavities and the organs within it
structures and chemicals that make the cell function
● Glandular cells - responsible for producing some
● Cell membrane - encloses the cytoplasm and
kind of secretion, e.g. mucus to lubricate the tissues
controls the internal environment of the cell.
● Osteoblasts - produce bone tissue
(See also Ch. 16.)
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing.
49
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
compounds into simpler ones; they also destroy worn
Box 4.1 Structure of the body
 out organelles within the cell
The body is made up of :
● Golgi body or complex - a system of flattened tubes
● Cells which make up
in which lysozymes are stored.
 Tissues which make up
 Organs which make up
Nucleus
· Systems which have a specific
Function to perform in the living body!
A nucleus is found in the living cells of all organisms. The
nucleus of a cell contains rod-shaped objects called chromo-
somes. These are only visible when a cell is about to divide
Cell membrane
into two during mitosis and meiosis (see Chapter on
Introduction to Genetics). Chromosomes contain a complex
The cell membrane is 0.ooo01 mm thick and forms the outer
chemical called deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). DNA controls the
boundary of the cell. It is here that all exchanges take place
development of the features that an organism inherits from
between the cell and its surrounding environment. In a
its parents. In other words it contains the chemical ‘instruc-
manner that is not yet fully understood this membrane
tions' for making an organism.
allows certain chemicals to pass in and out of the cell but pre-
vents the passage of others - the cell membrane is said to be
selectively permeable.
Basic tissue types
Cytoplasm
Muscular tissue
The term cytoplasm refers to all the living parts of a cell
except the nucleus and is a jelly like material containing a
Brings about movement.
large number of important substances, many of which are
concerned with metabolism. It contains:
● Skeletal (voluntary, striated) - causes movement of
the skeleton, e.g. locomotion
● Organelles - the free-living structures within the cell
other than the nucleus
● Smooth (involuntary, non-striated or visceral)
concerned with movement within organs and blood
● Mitochondria - one of the most important
vessels, e.g. vasoconstriction, peristalsis
 organelles in which the chemical reactions of
respiration take place; energy is released for cellular
● Cardiac - concerned with the contraction of the
function
heart.
● Rough endoplasmic reticulum - lined by ribosomes
produced in the nucleus; protein is synthesized here
Epithelial tissue
 and the cell may transport it for use in the manufacture
of digestive enzymes and hormones
 Forms a protective layer both inside and on the surface of the
body, e.g. skin, glands and linings of the various body
● Smooth endoplasmic reticulum - not lined by
systems. Its function is to protect and, depending on its loca-
ribosomes but is concerned with the synthesis and
 tion and density, to allow absorption. Epithelial tissue may be
transport of lipids (fats) and steroids of body origin
simple or compound (Fig. 4.1).
● Ribosomes - granules rich in ribonucleic acid that are
The many and varied functions of epithelium mean that it
sites of protein synthesis
takes many different forms.
● Centrosome - lies near the nucleus and is made up of
a. Simple
two centrioles; it is important during cell division and
the formation of the cilia and flagella, which are
The layer of cells is one cell thick:
slender projecting hairs needed by some cells
● Squamous - cells are flat and plate-like. Found where
● Lysosomes - dark, round bodies containing enzymes
absorption is required, e.g. blood vessel walls and
(lysozymes) responsible for splitting complex chemical
lining the renal nephrons
50
0Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
in the respiratory tract (ciliated), lining the gut with a
covering of microvilli, and in secretory glands of the
Free surface
digestive and endocrine systems.
Cytoplasm 
b. Compound
Nuicleus
More than one layer of cells.
Basement membrane
Simple cuboidal
● Stratified - the first layers of cell are cuboidal,
becoming flatter as they are moved towards the surface
of the tissue, e.g. in skin
 Simple squamous
● Transitional - modified, stratified, containing a
combination of shapes; found where ability to stretch
is required, e.g. urinary bladder
● Glandular - consisting of either individual goblet
cells or a mass of secretory cells forming a gland; there
are two types:
Simple columnar
● Endocrine - ductless, secrete hormones directly into
Cilia
the blood stream, e.g. thyroid gland
Ciliated cell
● Exocrine - have ducts and secrete on to an epithelial
surface, e.g. sweat glands.
Ciliated 
Connective tissue
MuCuS
Supports and connects tissues and acts as a transport system
to move essential materials, e.g. nutrients around the body.
Examples of this tissue are:
Mucus-secreting
cell
Glandular
Loose connective tissue (also called areolar tissue)
Contains a loose network of collagen fibres and surrounds
organs providing support and flexibility, e.g. under skin,
around blood vessels. Aripose tissue is similar to areolar
tissue but has an increased proportion of fat cells, which
provide an energy reserve and insulation.
Formative layer
f cells at base
Dense connective tissue
Has a large proportion of collagen fibres, which provide great
strength; e.g. tendons, which connect muscle to bone, and
Stratified
ligaments, which connect bone to bone.
Fig. 4.1 Types of epithelial tissue
● Cuboidal - cells are cube-shaped with a central
spherical nucleus. Found in glands and ducts
Blood
Transports essential nutrients, gases, waste products, hor-
● Columnar - tall and rectangular; the layer of cells
  ' o  o n n s  s
 may contain mucus-secreting goblet cells or may be
many cell types, e.g. erythrocytes, neutrophils, suspended in
ciliated, i.e. covered in a fine covering of hairs. Found
a liquid matrix called plasma.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
51
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
● Fibrocartilage - stronger than hyaline cartilage and
Cartilage
the matrix contains more collagen fibres, e.g. sur-
A mixture of collagen and elastic fibres provides shape, pro-
rounds the articular surface of some bones, e.g. in the
vides protection for organs and allows movement. It is a
hip joint and the shoulder joint; also found in the
dense, clear, blue/white material that is tough and can be
stifle as pads of cartilage called menisci; intervertebral
elastic or rigid. Found mainly in joints, it has no blood vessels
discs within the vertebral column
but is covered by a membrane called the perichondrium from
which it receives its blood supply. The cells of cartilage are
●Elastic - has a hyaline matrix and many elastic fibres
called chondrocytes.
that gives it elastic properties, e.g. in the ear pinna; in
the epiglottis
There are three types of cartilage:
● Hyaline - chondrocytes lie within a hyaline matrix
Bone
with collagen fibres running through, e.g. forms articu-
Provides support for the body and a means of attachment for
lar surfaces of joint; C-shaped rings that keep the
skeletal muscles. It consists of cells embedded in a compara-
trachea open for air passage into the lungs
tively hard matrix or ground substance. The cells are arranged
as cylinders in layers known as haversian systems, which give
bone its strength (Fig. 4.2). Bone is made of three types of
cell:
● Osteoblasts - responsible for the secretion of material
which, when mineralized, will become bone.
 Articular cartilage
Osteoblasts become trapped in the forming bone and
 are then called osteocytes
● Osteoclasts - responsible for reabsorbing materials
Haversian canal
and for the remodelling of bone.
Nutrient arteriole
Long bones, e.g. femur, humerus, are made up of two types of
 bone material:
Compact bone
● Compact bone - forming the dense walls of the bone
shaft
● Cancellous or spongy bone - forming the central
Lacunae containing
10g poddns Suid pue Ae Aepa
Periosteum
osteocytes
haemopoietic tissue.
The medullary cavity of most bones contains red marrow,
which is responsible for the production of platelets and red
and white blood cells. The yellow, rather fatty-looking mate-
rial sometimes found in the medullary cavities is inactive
bone marrow. The outer surface of bone is covered with a
Marrow cavity
layer of dense fibrous connective tissue called the periosteum
into which are inserted tendons and ligaments for the attach-
ment of muscles. The inner surface of bone is covered by a
delicate connective-tissue layer called the endosteum. Both the
periosteum and endosteum contain osteoclasts, which assist
 in the remodelling and repair of bone if it becomes damaged.
Metaphyseal artery
 Region of epiphyseal
Haemopoietic tissue
 pate (metaphysis)
Found within spleen, lymph nodes, liver and bone marrow.
Responsible for the formation of blood cells and adipose tissue -
Fig. 4.2 Structure of compact bone
similar to areolar but fat cells fill the space between the colla-
52
2 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
gen and elastin fibres. Used for food reserve, support (eye)
 Total body weight
and insulation (skin) assists with phagocytosis of foreign
materials.
60% water
 40% solids
Nervous tissue
Conducts electrical or nerve impulses to and from the central
nervous system by means of neurons. Each neuron consists of
a cell body, many dendrons, which conduct impulses towards
Extracellular fluid (ECF)
Intracellular fluid (ICF)
the cell body, and a single axon, which conducts impulses
(fuid surounding the cells)
(flid within the cells)
away from the cell body. Neurons are supported by neuroglial
 20% body weight 
40% body weight
cells, which are a form of connective tissue (see Nervous
system, below).
hterstitial fluid 
Plasma
Transcellular fluid
(between the cells)
(in the blood)
(actively secreted in 
Body
fluids
15%
5%
small quantities)
1%
Fig. 4.3 Distribution of body fluids into compartments
Thirst
Osmoreceptors
 Reduced renal blood flow
Fig. 4.4 Physiotogicat reactions that regulate
the votume of extracetfutar fluid
Control centre within the
 Specialied sensors in the
 Results in a fall in 
hypothalamus of the brain.
Walls of the carotid artery
blood pressure
Activity is stimulated by a
 and aorta within the hindbrain.
 decrease in ECF volume 
 Stimulated by an increase in the
 osmotic concentration of ECF
Stimulates the release of
 the enzyme renin by the
 gomeruli in the kidney 
个
 Assists in the conversion of
angiotensinogen in the plasma
 to angiotensin
Release of antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
 from the posterior pituitary gland 
Causes the blood capilaries to constrict 
工
 thus raising blood pressure
Animal drinks
hcreases the resorption of water 
 from the glomerular filtrate as it passes 
 Angiotensin also stimulates secretion
 through the kidney nephrons 
 of the hormone aldosterone
 from the adrenal cortex
 Sodium is resorbed from
 the glomerular fitrate and
water reabsorbed by osmosis 
Volume of ECF is restored 
Volume of ECF is restored
Volume of ECF is restored 
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
53
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
ments' (Fig. 4.3), which are delicately balanced. The total
Within the body, fluid moves between compartments and
volume of body fluids is affected by:
this movement depends on the osmotic concentration
within each compartment. Water crosses most cell mem-
● Input, i.e. by drinking and eating
a o i so p sioo o sd e  s
the osmotic concentration between the cells and their sur-
● Output, i.e. major losses include:
roundings. The osmotic concentration of plasma is vital in
controlling fluid movement, and the kidneys and thirst regu-
●Respiration - within exhaled gases
late the osmotic concentration of both extracellular and
intracellular fluid by affecting water taken into the body and
●Skin - sweating
excreted in urine (Box 4.2).
● Gastrointestinal - faeces
Electrolytes
● Kidneys - urine.
An elecirolyte is a substance that, when dissolved in water,
breaks up into ions or charged particles, e.g. sodium chloride,
The proportion of body fluids varies between individuals:
NaCl, becomes Na+ and Cl- when dissolved in water.
● Fat animals - lower percentage of fluid, as fat displaces
There are two types of ion:
water within the cells
● Cations are positively charged ions, e.g. sodium,
 s  o d  - s   o
potassium, calcium, magnesium
solid elements of the body are underdeveloped.
● Anions are negatively charged ions, e.g. chloride,
The daily fluid loss in terms of body weight is calculated as:
bicarbonate, sulphate, phosphate.
● 20 ml/kg body weight/day - respiration and sweating
The body fluids contain electrolytes as follows:
● 10-20 ml/kg body weight/day - faeces
● The main cation found within intracellular fuid
● 20 ml/kg body weight/day - urine.
quantities, while the main anion is phosphate with
chloride and bicarbonate in smaller quantities.
The total loss of fluid from the body is estimated to be
 Intracellular fluid also contains protein.
50-60 ml/kg body weight/day.
● The main cation found within extracellular fluid
The losses from the respiratory tract and the skin cannot be
is sodium, with potassium, calcium and magnesium
regulated and are described as insensible or inevitable water
found in smaller quantities, while the main anion is
loss. Losses from the kidney are linked to thirst and osmo-
chloride, with smaller quantities of phosphate. Plasma
regulatory mechanisms involved in the maintenance of extra-
contains plasma proteins, e.g. prothrombin,
cellular fluid volume (Fig. 4.4).
fibrinogen, albumin and globulin, but these are not
present in other forms of extracellular fluid because
the molecules are too large to escape through the
capillary walls under normal conditions.
Box 4.2 Movement of fluid
Knowledge of which electrolytes are found within each of the
Osmosis
 - the movement of water through a semi-
fluid compartments enables the veterinary surgeon to decide
permeable membrane from an area of low concentration to
an area of high concentration. The cell membrane is said to
ferent disease conditions.
be semipermeable, permitting the passage of some sub-
stances but not of others. Osmosis will continue through it
until the concentration is equal on either side. The pressure
Body cavities
that must be applied to prevent this movement is called the
osmotic pressure or potential.
The body is divided into three main cavities:
Diffusion - the movement of substances from an area of
high concentration to one of low concentration. The sub-
● Thoracic cavity - lies within the chest; its
stances are passing down a diffusion gradient.
boundaries are:
 54   Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
● Cranial - the thoracic inlet or aperture formed by
connective tissue is composed of yellow elastic and white
the first thoracic vertebrae, the first pair of ribs and
fibrous tissue and provides support to the delicate membrane.
the manubrium at the cranial end of the sternum,
The layer covers all the organs within the cavity and is named
through which the trachea and oesophagus pass
according to the cavity.
● Caudal - the diaphragm
● Thoracic cavity - the serous membrane is called the
pleura and forms the pleural cavity, which is divided
● Dorsal - the thoracic vertebrae and muscles
into right and left by a double layer of pleura known
as the mediastinum. The space between the two layers
● Ventral - the sternum
contains the heart and other structures (Fig. 4.5). The
pleura covering the lungs is the pulmonary or visceral
● Lateral - the ribs and intercostal muscles
pleura. The remaining pleura is the parietat pleura.
Where the parietal pleura covers the ribs it is called the
● Abdominal cavity - its boundaries are:
costal pleura and where it covers the diaphragm it is
called the diaphragmatic pleura.
● Cranial - the diaphragm
● Abdominal cavity - here the serous membrane is
● Caudal - the pelvic opening
called the perifoneum and forms the peritoneal cavity.
The visceral peritoneum closely covers the abdominal
● Dorsal - the lumbar vertebrae and part of the
organs, forming suspensory folds or mesenteries that
diaphragm
connect the intestines to the dorsal abdominal wall
(Fig. 4.6). Each mesentery is named according to the
●Lateral and ventral - the abdominal muscles
organ it suspends; for example, the mesoduodenum
suspends the duodenum. The lining of the abdominal
● Pelvic cavity - often described as a separate cavity
wall is the parietal peritoneum.
but there is no physical barrier between it and the
abdominal cavity; its boundaries are:
● Pelvic cavity - the peritoneum continues into the
pelvic cavity and covers the cranial surfaces of the
● Cranial - the pelvic inlet
organs within the cavity, e.g. bladder and uterus. The
remainder of the cavity is filled with organs, muscles
● Caudal - the pelvic outlet
and connective tissue and is not lined by a serous
membrane.
● Dorsal - the pelvic girdle: the pubis, ileum and
ischium
● Lateral - the muscles or ligaments attached around
Mediastinal pleura
the pelvic girdle.
Mediastinum
The pericardium, not one of the major cavities of the
Trachea
body, contains the heart. It consists of a double layer of
Costal parietal
membrane and lies within the mediastinum in the thoracic
Right and left
pleura
principal bronchi
cavity.
Visceral
(pulmonary)
Collapsed lung
 pleura
The cranial cavity is another small cavity, formed by the
Surface
bones of the cranium, and contains the brain.
of lung
Mediastinum
Expanded
Right and 
lung
Cavity linings
left pleural 
cavities
All cavities are lined with serous endothelium or serous mem-
brane, which secretes a small amount of serous fluid that acts
as a lubricating layer between two tissue surfaces. The cavity
DiaphragmaticMediastinalDiaphragm
within the serous membrane is a serous cavity. Serous mem
parietal pleura
pleura
Fig. 4.5 Longitudinat section through the thorax showing the
branes are composed of a simple squamous surface epithe-
lium and a connective tissue groundwork or stroma. This
arrangement of the pleura
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
55
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Dorsal
Fig. 4.6 Sagittal section through the
Great mesentery
abdominat cavity to show the arrangement of
Lymph nodes Pancreas
Transverse
mesocolon
the peritoneum
Coronary
ligament-
Descending
Lesser
colon
omentum
Uterus
Diaphragm
Bladder
Liver-
Symphysis
of pubis 
Cranial
Caudal
Transverse
Greater
 Omental
Stomach
colon
omentum bursa
Ventral
Locomotor sys
tem
● Endochondral - bone formed within a preformed
cartilaginous model.
The function of the locomotor system is to bring about move
The function of the skeletal system is to:
ment of the animal. It consists of two major systems:
● Support the body
● The skeletal system - made up of the skeleton and
the joints
●Provide leverage for muscle contraction, which brings
 about movement
● The muscular system - made of the muscles
attached to the skeleton.
● Protect the organs, e.g. heart, lungs, brain
The skeletal system
● Maintain calcium and phosphorus levels in the body.
The skeleton is divided into three parts:
There are over 200 bones in the skeleton, many of which are
shown in Figure 4.7. For more detailed descriptions of the
● Axial skeleton - the skull, vertebral column, ribs and
skeleton you are advised to look at a more specialized
sternum.
anatomy book (see Recommended Reading).
● Appendicular skeleton - the fore and hind limbs
Joints
● Splanchnic skeleton - bones that develop in soft
tissues, e.g. the os penis
Joints are places where two or more bones meet. There are
 several methods of joint classification:
The skeletal system consists of bone and cartilage whose
function is to provide support for the body and a rigid but
Degree of movement
all-moving framework (see Basic Tissues).
● Synarthrosis - joint that is immovable, e.g. joints of
Bone growth or ossification
the skull, known as sutures
 Bone develops within the embryo in two ways:
● Amphiarthrosis - joint that shares some of the
characteristics of the synarthroses and diarthroses and
● Intramembranous - bone formed directly from
has limited movement, e.g. between the vertebrae of
fibrous tissue, e.g. flat bones of the skull
the spine
56
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
C1 (atlas)
C2 (axis)
T1 (frst thoracic vertebra)
L1 (first lumbar vertebra)
Sacrum
Cd1 (fist coccygeal vertebra)
C7 (last cervical vertebra)
Os coxae (pelvis)
eindeos
Cranial end of sternum
(manubrium)
Humerus
Olecranon (point of elbow)
Femur
Patella
Caudal end
(xiphoid) of 
Tibia
sernum
Una
Fibula
Calcaneus (point of hock)
Carpal bones
Tarsal bones
Proximal, middle 
Metacarpal bones
and distal phalanges
Metatarsal bones
Fig. 4.7 The skeleton of the dog
● Diarthrosis - joint in which there is a great deal of 
● Syntosis - joint that becomes fused with bone as
 movement; these are usually related to the limbs, e.g.
 the animal ages, e.g. pubic symphysis, sutures of the
synovial joints (Fig. 4.8)
skull.
Periosteum
Structure
Bone
Joint
Joint  Fibrous layer of
● Fibrous - connected by dense fibrous connective
cavity capsule
 joint capsule 
tissue that allows very little movement, e.g. sutures of
Ligament
the skull
● Cartilaginous - connected by cartilage and found
where the right and left sides of the body join, e.g.
Articular
cartlages
mandibular symphysis and pubic symphysis
Ligament
● Synovial - allow plenty of movement (Fig. 4.8);
 Subsynovial  Synovial
 synovial joints have several anatomical features:
 tissue membrane
Bone
● Hyaline cartilage forms the articular surfaces at bone
Meniscus -not
ends
 present in all joints 
● The surfaces of the joint are linked by a dense,
Fig. 4.8 Structure of a synovial joint
fibrous, connective-tissue joint capsule
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
57
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
● The capsule is lined by a synovial membrane, which
The skeletal muscles attached to a bone are formed from
secretes synovial fluid
parallel muscle fibres held together in small bundles or
fascicles by connective tissue. These are collected into
● The joint cavity is filled with synovial fluid, which
larger groups, also enclosed in connective tissue, and
acts as a lubricant and a 'shock absorber'.
ultimately form the muscle, which is surrounded by yet
more connective tissue, commonly called the muscle sheath
A i  ards pn aq  s 
(Fig. 4.9). When muscles lie close to one another, the
contain two articular surfaces, e.g. the shoulder joint
sheaths may thicken to form what is called an intermuscular
formed by the glenoid cavity of the scapula and the
sephum.
head of the humerus. Compound joints have more
than two articular surfaces, e.g. the elbow formed by
All the connective tissue within and around the muscle
the distal end of the humerus, the proximal ends of
merges into the connective tissue of the periosteum of the
the ulna and radius.
bone to which the muscle is attached, forming a tendon
(Fig. 4.10) or a fibrous sheet called an aponeurosis. Apo-
Type of movement
neuroses are seen attached to the abdominal muscles and
● Pivot (radius/ulna or atlas/axis)
within the diaphragm.
● Ball and socket (femur/acetabulum)
Each skeletal muscle consists of a thick central part, the belly,
tapering at each end to form a head that inserts via a tendon
● Hinge (humerus/radius and ulna)
on to a bone (Fig. 4.10). When the muscle contracts it pulls
the bones closer together.
●Plane or gliding (between carpals/tarsals)
Muscle action is defined in the following terms:
● Saddle (between phalanges)
● Flexion - the angle between the bones is reduced
● Condylar (stifle).
● Extension - the angle between the bones is increased
strain and their stability is improved by:
● Abduction - the whole limb moves away from the
midline of the body
● Surrounding muscle and tendons
● Adduction - the whole limb moves towards the
● Ligaments, which link one bone to another
midline of the body
● Good bone conformation, particularly at the articular
● Protraction - the whole limb moves cranially
surfaces, which ensures that the weight is supported by
the correct part of the bone - poor conformation leads
● Retraction - the whole limb moves caudally
to lameness and arthritis.
● Supination - the under-surface of the paw is turned
downwards
The muscular system
● Pronation - the under-surface of the paw is turned
The main tissue of the muscular system is striated or skeletal
upwards.
muscle, i.e. that which is attached to the bones of the skele-
ton. Its contraction is controlled voluntarily.
There are many different skeletal muscles within the body.
with varying shapes and actions that influence the name by
which they are known. For example, the superficial digitat
Skeletal muscle structure
flexor lies superficially on the lower limb and flexes the digits;
iriceps has three heads; biceps femoris has two heads and is
Muscle tissue consists of cells that are long, thin and thread.
attached to the femur. The key to learning the action of each
like and are referred to as muscle fibres. They vary in size
muscle is to know at which point on the skeleton each inserts
from about 1 mm to 5 cm in length. Under the microscope
and then imagine how the relevant bones move in relation to
the fibres of striated muscle appear striped, which gives them
each other. (For more detail about the muscles look in the
their name. This is due to the microscopic appearance of the
Recommended Reading list for more specialized anatomy
two contractile proteins actin and myosin.
books.)
 58   Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Skeletal muscle
Epimysium -
 Perimysium
Endomysium
Tendon
Fascicle
Fascia
Arteriole.
venule
Nerve
Bone
Muscle fibre
VeinArtery
Nerve
VenuleArteriole
Perimysium
Muscle fibre showing
Myofibril.
Endomysium
striations
Sarcolemma
Nucleus
Myofibril
Sarcolemma
Sarcoplasma
T-tubules
Nerve
Endomysium
Triad
Mitochondrion
Nucleus
of fascicle
Sarcolemma
Triad
Sarcoreticulum
Myofibril -
Sarcomere
Cne sarcomere (Z line to Z line)
m
mmmm
M line
Hzone
 Z line Titin  Thin flament Thick filament 
Myosin
Tropomyosin  Actin  Z line
Iband
Aband
I band
Fig. 4.9 Microscopic structure of skeletat muscle
Nervous system
the body to respond to events within its environment and
survive.
The nervous system provides the quickest means of com-
The functions of the nervous system are to receive informa-
munication and coordination of all body systems and enables
tion from both the internal and external environment, to
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
59
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Bone
● Autonomic nervous system - sympathetic and
parasympathetic branches.
Muscle origin
Nervous tissue
The nervous system consists of nervous tissue which con-
nects to all parts of the body. The main cell is the neuron
Muscle belly
(Fig. 4.1l) and nervous tissue consists of thousands of long,
thin nerve fibres supported by various types of glial cell.
 Connective tissue
'Nerves', identified grossly as flattened white strands, are
between muscle fibres -
made up of many nerve fibres.
Neuron
Muscle insertion-
All neurons have the same basic structure:
Bone
● A cell body containing the nucleus
Fig. 4.10 Gross structure of a sketetat muscle
● An axon, which carries the nerve impulse away from
integrate and analyse this information and to bring about the
the cell body
appropriate response.
Components of a coordinated nerve pathway are:
Cytoplasm: contains
neurotubules, Nissl bodies,
Axon
mitochondria, etc.
hillock
Axon
Axoplasm
Axolemma
● Stimulus - any change inside or outside the body
that provokes a change in behaviour; it could be sight,
 pain, touch, change in blood pressure or pH
● Receptors - specialized cells which detect stimuli:
Cell membrane
some receptors are housed by the special sense organs,
e.g. ear, eye, nose; others are found within blood
Nucleus
vessel walls, joints or muscles, e.g. stretch receptors,
osmoreceptors
Cell body
(centron)
● Coordinators - the brain and spinal cord (central
nervous system, CNS) receive information in the form
of nerve impulses from the receptors, coordinate the
information and initiate the response
Dendrite
Dendron
● Effectors - muscles and glands produce a response,
e.g. contraction or secretion, and are controlled by the
Direction of
CNS.
nerve impulse
The nervous system is divided into:
Node of Ranvier
● Central nervous system - the brain and spinal cord
Myelin sheath
● Peripheral nervous system (PNS), which is composed of
all nerves given off by the CNS:
● Cranial nerves
Schwann cell
Nucleus of
Neurilemma
Terminal
 Synaptic
Schwann cell 
dendrite
 terminal
● Spinal nerves
Fig. 4.11 A neuron
60
 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Dendrites
Dendror
Dendrites
Dendrites
Dendron-
Dendron 
Cell body
Axon
Axon-
Cell body -
 Cell body
Dendrites 
Cell body-
forming a 
Direction
Axon-
Direction
fat fan
Synaptic
of nerve
of nerve
Collateral
 Direction
endings
 impulses
impulses
of nerve 
Axon
 Synaptic
 impulses
Direction
 Synaptic
endings-
of nerve
endings
impulses
Collatera
 Bipolar neuron 
Pseudo-unipolar neuron
Multipolar neuron 
Multipolar neuron
 e.g. retinal cell 
e.g. sensory neuron
 e.g. motor neuron
e.g. Purkinje cell
Fig. 4.12 Types of neuron
● One or more dendrons or dendrites, which branch
Nerve impulses pass along nerve fibres in one direction only
extensively like tiny trees and carry nerve impulses
are named accordingly:
towards the cell body.
● Sensory neurons - conduct impulses from receptors
There are several shapes of neuron (Fig. 4.12) and this
 such as those in the eyes, ears and stretch receptors in
depends on their function:
the muscles and carry them towards the CNS
● Multipolar neuron - found as motor neurons n the
● Motor neurons - conduct impulses away from the
spinal cord; Purkinje fibres in the heart are specialized
CNS towards effector organs, e.g. muscles and
multipolar neurons
glands.
● Bipolar neuron - found in the retina of the eye
Nerves that supply the visceral organs, i.e. those of the respi-
ratory, digestive, urinary and reproductive systems and the
● Pseudo-unipolar neuron - found as sensory nerves,
heart are known as visceral nerves. They may be visceral
e.g. in the olfactory mucosa in the nose.
sensory or visceral motor nerves.
The majority of the axons leaving the neurons are enveloped
Nerves that supply all other organs, e.g. skin, joints, skeletal
by specialized Schwann cells, which provide both structural
muscles, are known as somatic nerves. They may be somatic
and metabolic support and secrete a lipoprotein material
sensory or somatic motor nerves.
known as myelin (Fig. 4.1l). Large-diameter fibres are
wrapped by a variable number of concentric layers of the
Schwann cell plasma membrane, forming the so-called ryelin
sheath. These nerve fibres are said to be rtyelinated. Non myeli-
Glial or neuroglial tissue
nated fibres are found within the cornea of the eye and within
the grey matter of the CNS.
These are the support cells for the neurons and their
processes. They are collectively known as neuroglia and there
The myelin sheath increases the rate of electrical conduction
 are four types:
along the axon, by allowing the impulse to jump between
gaps within the myelin, called the nodes of Ranvier. At this
● Astrocytes - numerous star shaped cells thought to
 point the axon is exposed to the external environment. The
provide mechanical and metabolic support for
jumping from node to node is known as saltatory conduction
neurons; covering the capillaries in the brain, these
and greatly enhances the conduction speed of axons.
help to form the blood-brain barrier
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
61
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
● oligodendrocytes - similar to the Schwann cell
 Direction of 
Neurotubule
of peripheral nervous tissue and responsible for
nerve impulse
 myelination and holding nerve fibres together
Mitochondrion
● Microglia - small phagocytic cells that are thought
 Symaptic vesicles
containing
WWW
to be the CNS representatives of the
neurotransmitter -
Presynaptic
macrophage/monocyte defence system
福
neuron
福
● Ependymal - a simple epithelium that lines the
cerebral ventricles of the brain and central canal of the
8
福
福
spinal cord.
Receptor
福
福
福
Sodium channel
 Synaptic
Nerve impulses
cleft
Presynaptic
Neurotransmitter
membrane
Nerve impulses can be considered to be a form of electrical
 Postsynaptic
impulse resulting from a chain reaction in the form of a wave
neuron
of rearrangements of sodium and potassium ions across the
Postsynaptic
cell membrane. The nerve fibre must recover before it can
membrane
conduct another impulse. This recovery period, known as the
Fig. 4.13 A synapse
 refractory period, lasts for only a few thousandths of a second.
Reflex action
 Impulses passing along a nerve fibre eventually reach the end
of it, where they encounter a microscopir gap called a synapse
The simplest arrangement of neurons is seen in the reflex arc
(Fig. 4.13) lying between the tip of one fibre and the begin-
(Fig. 4.14). A reflex action is behaviour in which a stimulus
ning of the next. Transmission of the impulse across the
results in a response that does not have to be learned and that
 gap is dependent upon the presence of a chemical or neuro-
occurs very quickly without conscious thought, e.g. with-
transmitter, e.g. acetylcholine (most common), adrenaline
drawal from a painful stimulus. Stimulation of pain receptors
(epinephrine) or serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine).  The
in the skin fires off impulses in sensory neurons that pass
chemical is released from vesicles in the axon terminal to
through the spinal cord along spinal nerves. They enter the
activate (excite or inhibit) other impulses in the dendrites of
spinal cord via a separate dorsal root (containing the sensory
the connecting neuron. The neurotransmitters mediate their
nerve fibres) and leave via a ventral root (containing motor
effects by interacting with specific receptors in the opposing
nerve fibres). The grey matter of the cord contains the nerve
plasma membrane. Nerve fibres terminate on muscle fibres at
cells and bodies of the motor nerve cells whose axons run out
 a motor endplate or a neuromuscular junction.
into the ventral roots. Nerve impulses are conveyed to the
Axon of
Cellbody of
Fig. 4.14 Components of a reflex arc
intermmediate neuron
sensory neuron
Dorsal root of
spinal nerve
Grey matter
of spinal cord
Dorsal root
 ganglion
Axon of sensory
White matter
neuron
 of spinal cord
Receptors
(e.g.sensory
Central canal
 cells in skin)
Spinal
 Spinal cord 
nerve
Axon of
Ventralroot
Effector
motor neuron of spinal nerve
(muscle)
62
2 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
appropriate muscle by motor nerves and the muscle contracts
● Temporal lobe - contains the centres for awareness
and moves the limb away from the cause of the pain.
and correlation of auditory stimuli
● Occipital lobe - forms the posterior extremity of
Central nervous system
each cerebral hemisphere; it involves visual perception
and visual memory with a role in eye movements.
The CNS is the control area of the nervous system comprising
the brain, located in the cranium, and the spinal cord, lying
On the ventral surface of the fore brain is the optic chiasma,
within the spinal cavity of the vertebral column. Both are
protected by the skeletal system. It is composed entirely of
with the eye, and the piuitary gland, part of the endocrine
neurons and neuroglia arranged as white matter and grey
system. Dorsal to the pituitary gland and lying within the
matter.
brain tissue is the hypothalamus, which is the coordinating
centre of the endocrine system. At the anterior point of the
Brain
cerebral hemispheres are the olfactory bulbs. These paired
structures lie close to the nasal chambers and are concerned
The brain is subdivided into three regions.
with the sense of smell.
The thalamus at the base of the cerebral hemispheres acts
Forebrain - telencephalon and diencephalon
as a relay station for sensory impulses. The epithalamus holds
Consists of the right and left cerebral hemispheres connected in
the pineal body, which is involved in the regulation of gonad
the midline by a band of tissue known as the corpus callosum
hormones. Cranial nerves I (olfactory nerve) and I1 (optic
(Fig. 4.15). The cerebral hemispheres are concerned with con-
nerve) are attached to the fore brain. Running through the
scious thought. The outer layer of grey matter is known as the
centre of the fore brain are the lateral veniricles - part of the
cerebral cortex and is divided into lobes whose names cor-
ventricular system, which contains cerebrospinal fluid (CsF).
respond to the skull bone nearest to the lobe:
Damage to tissue in the forebrain can cause personality
change.
● Frontal lobe - the most anterior of all the lobes, is
the centre of voluntary movement; it is often referred
to as the motor area, containing areas for control of
Midbrain - mesencephalon
 gross, fine and complicated muscle movements
Consists of a tube through which runs part of the ventricular
system known as the cerebral aqueduct, carrying the CSF. It
● Parietal lobe - collects, recognises and organises
contains centres for control of muscle, sight and hearing and
sensations of pain, temperature, touch, position and
is involved in the positioning of the body to maintain
movement
balance. Cranial nerves Ill (oculomotor nerve), and IV
(trochlear nerve) are attached to the mid brain. Damage to
tissue in the midbrain results in coma
Interventricular
Corpus
Corpora
Median section
foramen
callosum
quadrigemina
of cerebellum
Hindbrain - metencephalon and myelencephalon
Consists of the cerebellum, which has a ridged surface resem-
bling a small cauliflower and is composed of two hemispheres
joined in the midline (Fig. 4.15). Each hemisphere controls
and coordinates balance and movement. Ventral to the cere-
bellum is the medulla oblongata, which passes through the
foramen magnum of the skull and becomes the spinal cord.
It contains centres that control respiration, heart rate and
blood pressure. Linking the cerebrum, cerebellum and the
medulla oblongata is the pons, which forms a crossover tract
Thalamus
of white matter involved in the control of respiration. Within
the hindbrain is the fourth veniricle, which is continuous
Pituitary gland
with the cerebral aqueduct and the central canal within
the spinal cord. Cranial nerves V (trigeminal nerve), VI
Cerebral
Cerebral
Pons
Fourth
Medulla
(abducens nerve) and Xll (hypoglossal nerve) are located on
peduncle
onpenbe
ventricle
oblongata
the ventral surface. Damage to the hindbrain results in rapid
Fig. 4.15 Median section of canine brain
death.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
63
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Protection of the central nervous system
If an animal is to survive the CNS must be protected from
 mechanical and chemical damage.
● Cranium-the bones of the skull form a hard outer
-Forebrain
covering to the brain.
Lateral
ventricle .
● Vertebral column protects the spinal cord.
Third
ventricle
● Meninges - three layers of membrane composed of
white, fibrous connective tissue envelope the entire
d pe podns Sd s
 Cerebral 
Midbrain
aqueduct-
●Dura mater - the outermost layer is tough, fibrous
and lines the cranium; in the vertebral canal there is
Fourth 
an epidural space between it and the periosteum of
ventricle
the vertebrae
-Hindbrain
● Arachnoid mater - named for its web-like appearance.
More delicate and cushions the CNS and facilitates
diffusion of oxygen and nutrients into the nervous
Fig. 4.16 Ventricular system of the brain
tissue beneath. CSF runs in the subarachnoid space
below this layer.
absorber during movement, provide an antibacterial
●Pia mater - the innermost layer. Delicate, very
effect and transport nutrients and waste materials from
vascular supplying blood to the CNS tissues and
the nervous tissue.
closely follows the contour of the brain surface.
● 4. Cerebrospinal fuid consists of a watery,
Spinal cord
transparent fluid, similar to plasma with less protein,
which flows within the ventricular system of the brain,
The spinal cord is composed of nerve fibres running in organ-
the central canal of the spinal cord and subarachnoid
ised tracts. Its structure is similar over its entire length and
spaces (Fig. 4.16). It is secreted by networks of
the tissue is divided in outer white matter surrounding the
capillaries referred to as choroid plexuses located within
central grey matter. It is covered by the meninges and bathed
each ventricle. The function of CsF is to act as a shock
in CsF, which also flows in the central canal (Fig. 4.17).
Caudal
Fig. 4.17 Transverse section through the
spinat cord of the dog
Dorsal root
ganglion
Dorsal
 Spinal cord
root-
Dorsal
branch
Direction
of impulse,
 Spinal
Ramus
nerve-
communicans
ventral
Sympathetic
branch
White
Central
Sympathetic
ventral root
Grey
trunk -
trunk ganglion
matter
canal
matter
Cranial
64
4 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
In transverse section the grey matter has a characteristic
The peripheral nervous system
butterfly shape. The ventral horns are more prominent and
contain the cell bodies of the large motor neurons. The dorsal
The peripheral nervous system links the CNS to the organs of
horns contain the cell bodies of smaller sensory neurons.
the body and consists of:
relayed to the brain via afferent neurons. Smaller lateral
horns, containing the cell bodies of preganglia and sympa-
Olfactory bulb
e rqn adn a u pae are 'snu snaa r
thoracic regions. This corresponds to the level of sympathetic
outlow from the cord. More grey matter is required in the
cervical and lumbar regions because of the greater activity of
both sensory and motor innervation of the limbs. This in
turn increases the diameter of the spinal cord in these areas.
Optic chiasma
Pituitary gland
The white maffer contains a greater proportion of myelin and
 Cranial
consists of ascending tracts of sensory fibres and descending
nerves
Cerebral
motor tracts that increase in volume, especially in the sacral
IV
peduncle
V
to cervical regions, as more and more fibres pass up towards
the brain.
Pons
V/I
VI
The cord runs from medulla oblongata to the lumbar region
IX
X
terminating at the sixth or seventh lumbar vertebrae as the
 Pyramid
XI
cauda equina or 'horse's tail'. Pairs of spinal nerves leave the
XIl
cord throughout its length via intervertebral spaces, linking
the brain to all the organs of the body.
Fig. 4.18 Ventrat view of brain showing craniat nerves
Table 4.1 Cranial nerves
Cranial
Name
Nerve type
Function
nerve
number
I
Olfactory
Sensory
Smell
II
Optic
Sensory
Vision, pupil light response
III
Oculomotor
Motor + parasympathetic
Eye movement, pupil constriction, focus 
IV
Trochlear
Motor
Eye movement
V
Trigeminal
Mixed
Muscle for mastication, upper and lower jaws, face
VI
Abducens
Motor
Eye movement
VII
Facial
Mixed (motor) + parasympathetic
Salivation, facial expression, taste, ears, head
VIII
Auditory/vestibulocochlear
Sensory
Hearing, balance
IX
Glossopharyngeal
Mixed + parasympathetic
Taste, laryngeal muscles, swallowing, salivation
X
Vagus
Mixed (motor) + parasympathetic
Vocalization, swallowing, gastrointestinal tract,
thoracic organs, abdominal organs
XI
Accessory
Motor
Head and shoulder movement, vocalization,
swallowing
XII
Hypoglossal
Motor
Tongue movement, swallowing, vocalization
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
65
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Cranial nerves
of the internal body organs by means of both sympathetic
 and parasympathetic innervation.
Cranial nerves are given off by the brain and leave the
Cranium via foramina in the bones (Fig. 4.18). Most supply
Sympathetic system
structures on the head and are relatively short. They may
The nerves for this system are located in the thoracolumbar
carry sensory or motor nerve fibres or a mixture of the two.
areas of the spinal cord, i.e. T1 to L4 or L5. Short pregan-
These nerves have specific names and are always referred to
glionic fibres synapse within a series of ganglia on each side
by Roman numerals (Table 4.1).
of the vertebral column forming a nodular cord (looking like
a string of beads) known as the sympathetic chain. Long
postganglionic fibres then travel to their intended organs
using the routes of blood vessels. The function of the sympa
Spinal nerves
thetic system is to prepare the body for stressful or hazardous
Spinal nerves are given off by the spinal cord. They contain
situations (the fight, flight or frolic reflex) and relies on nora-
both sensory and motor fibres and are, therefore, mixed
drenaline (norepinephrine) as a transmitter at the synapses
nerves. They supply all the musculoskeletal system and are
within the system (Table 4.2).
numbered according to the number of the vertebra in front
of their point of exit from the cord. The exception is in the
Parasympathetic system
cervical region, where the first nerve leaves the cord before the
This originates in the brain stem, sending impulses via the
first vertebra - there are eight cervical nerves in total.
oculomotor (Ill), facial (VIl), glossopharyngeal (IX) and vagus
(X) cranial nerves and via the sacral nerves S1 and S2. The
The spinal nerves on each side of the cord are divided into
ganglia are embedded in the wall of the effector organ, thus
two roots:
requiring long preganglionic and short postganglionic nerve
fibres. The function of the system is the opposite of the sym-
● The dorsal root carries sensory fibres into the cord
 pathetic system and relies on the use of acetylcholine at all
and the cell bodies of the nerves are contained in the
the synapses (Table 4.2).
dorsal root ganglion (Fig. 4.17)
● The ventral root carries motor fibres away from the
Table 4.2 Comparison between the functions of the
cord and their cell bodies are within the grey matter of
sympathetic and parasympathetic systems
the cord.
Sympathetic system
Parasympathetic system
The nerve supply to the limbs is:
Neurotransmitter chemical -
Neurotransmitter chemical -
noradrenaline (epinephrine)
acetylcholine
● Fore limb - spinal nerves Cervical 6 (C6) to Thoracic
Prepares body for fight, flight
Assists in the day-to-day function
2 (T2; radial nerve from brachial plexus)
or frolic, e.g. iris of eye dilates
 of the body
● Hind limb - spinal nerves Lumbar 4 (L6) to Sacral 2
Inhibits salivation and slows
Stimulates salivation and gut
(S2; sciatic nerve from lumbar-sacral plexus).
gut movement
movement
Increases heart rate
Decreases heart rate back to
Autonomic nervous system
The autonomic nervous system consists of spinal nerves that
Increases respiratory rate
Decreases respiratory rate
supply motor fibres to the viscera and may be described as the
Dilates the bronchi and
Lachrymal secretions restart
visceral motor system. It is considered to be self-governing: it
bronchioles
is not under conscious control but will assist in the regulation
Special senses
respond to a stimulus or change in the environment. These
specific neural receptors are a part of the special sense organs,
The special senses, i.e. sight, hearing and balance, smell and
e.g. eye or ear, which enhance and refine the reception of
incoming stimuli before it is passed on the CNS.
66
5  Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Sensory receptors are found all over the body and can be
 lium, passing it to receptor cells. Nerve impulses travel along
 divided up into:
the olfactory nerve (cranial nerve I) and reach the olfactory
bulbs in the forebrain. The sense of smell and taste are linked,
● Proprioceptors - lie within muscle and joints and
with smell being by far the more sensitive of the two.
are used to detect the body's spatial position in the
environment; also linked to the ear for balance
Taste
● Exteroceptors - involved in the response to stimuli
collected by the special sense organs
 Taste buds are located in the epithelium of the papillae of the
tongue and scattered in other parts of the tongue, palate,
● Interoceptors - respond to changes in the internal
pharynx and epiglottis. The taste bud is comprised of gusta-
environment of the body, e.g. pH or blood pressure, and
 tory and support cells, both having long microvilli extending 
stimulate homeostatic mechanisms, e.g. respiration,
into the taste pore. Both cell types have receptor function,
vasodilation.
passing stimuli to the facial (Vll), glossopharyngeal (IX) and
vagus (X) nerves and then to the brain.
Smell
There are four basic tastes - sweet, salt, sour and bitter. All
The receptors for the sense of smell are located in the olfac-
other tastes are combinations of these four, with a sense of
tory epithelium covering the turbinate bones in the nasal
 smell enhancing the effect of soluble substances in contact
cavity. In the dog and cat the olfactory tissue is extensive and
with taste areas.
is an essential function for survival in the wild.
The olfactory receptor cells are true bipolar neurons containing
Sight
a single dendritic process extending from the cell body to the
tissue surface and terminating as a small swelling giving rise to
 as  e si hu 'is jo  a si aa a
a number of long, modifed cilia. The cilia receive information
of photoreception that involves the conversion of different
from smell chemicals dissolved in the mucus over the epithe.
wavelengths of light into nerve impulses.
Pigmented
layer of 
Ganglion cells
Bipolar cells
ight-sensitive cells
retina
Choroid
C
Incoming light
Nerve fibres
Amacrine cellLight passes
Horizontal  Cone Impulses
Rod
leading to
through retina 
cell
sent towards
optic nerve 
optic nerve
Fig. 4.19 Section through the retina showing the rods and cones
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
67
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
The eye
vein from the choroid, which together form a blind spot in
which there are no rods and cones.
Perception of light
 Images are perceived by photoreceptor cells which are located
Light passes through the overlying retinal layers to the pho-
in the inner layer of the eye, the retina.
toreceptor cells, where an inverted image is produced. The
light that misses the receptor cells on its way through the
 These cells are modified dendrites of two types of nerve cell
retina is reflected back to the retinal layers by the tapetum
(Fig. 4.19):
lucidum. The bipolar receptor cells then transmit the
image through the optic nerve to the cerebral cortex of the
● Rods - receptive to light of differing intensity seen in
brain.
black and white image and used in night vision; 
located outside the fovea in the more peripheral parts
of the retina
Structure
The remaining structures of the eye (Fig. 4.20) support the
● Cones - receptive to different colours, enabling a
retina and assist the focus of light rays on to the retina.
in the fovea to give high levels of visual accuracy.
The eyeball comprises three layers:
The fapehum lucidum lies over the retina of the dog and cat,
● Sclera - the tough outermost layer of dense
within the uvea. It is a reflective layer, enhancing light enter-
 connective tissue, divided into the cornea and the sclera
          
levels by reflecting it back to the retina.
● Uvea - the vascular pigmented layer, divided into the
choroid, tapetum lucidum, suspensory ligament,
The retina contains many sensory and connector neurons
ciliary body and iris
and processes. At an area in the back of the retina there is an
optic disc where the nerve fibres from the eye meet to form the
● Retina - the innermost layer, which contains the
optic nerve (ll). The optic nerve is joined by an artery and
photoreceptor cells.
Ocular
Cornea
 Pupil
Lens Iris
CiliaInferior
Fig. 4.20 Cross-section through the eye
conjunctiva
palpebra
Anterior chamber
Palpebral 
venous plexus
 conjunctiva
of sclera
 Posterior chamber
 Ciliary body
Medial rectus
Suspensory
muscle .
ligament 
Lateral 
rectus
Vitreous body
muscle
Hyaloid canal .
Retina.
Choroid.
Tapetum lucidum
in choroid layer
Sclera -
Sheath of
Optic nerve
Retinal artery
optic nerve
and vein
68
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
The eye (Fig. 4.20) is situated within the orbit of the skull
Hearing and balance
and is cushioned in fat and connective tissue. Attached to
the eyeball are the optic nerve (ll), ocular musculature,
Hearing is the detection of sound waves or vibrations in the
other nerves and its blood supply. The eye is protected
air. These sound waves have differing frequencies and are
by the eyelids, covered by a thin, highly folded skin exter-
detected by the ear and interpreted by the brain as differences
nally and by smooth conjunctival epithelium on the inner
in pitch.
surface. The upper and lower eyelids are hairy and meet at the
medial canthus close to the nose and the lateral canthus
nearer to the ear. The fhird eyelid or nictitating membrane
The ear
comes from the medial canthus and is hairless. In the dog
and cat this eyelid is stiffened with a T-shaped piece of
The ear provides two sensory functions:
cartilage.
● Balance
The conjunctiva lines the eyelids and lines the surface of the
sclera. The fold in the conjunctiva between the layer lining
● Hearing.
the eyelids and the layer lining the sclera is the fornix. The
conjunctival mucous secretions contribute to the protection
The ear can be divided into:
of the exposed surface of the eye.
● External ear - concerned with reception of sound
Lachrymal glands are responsible for the secretion of tears
and it is distributed over the eye surface by the eyelids,
● Middle ear - involved with transmission and
collecting near the medial canthus to drain via the naso-
amplification of incoming sound waves
lacrimal duct into the nasal cavity. The meibomian glands
lie under the lashes of the upper and lower eyelids. They
● Internal ear - containing specific sensory receptors
are a specialized sebaceous gland attached to the hair
for both movement and sound.
follicle of each eyelash and open directly on to the edge
of the eyelid, producing oily tears. These tears float on
the surface of the watery tear film and help prevent
The external ear
evaporation.
Receives and funnels sound waves to the ear drum or fym-
panic membrane. The external auditory meaius or ear canal is
The front of the eye is protected by a thick, transparent cornea
lined by hairy skin containing sebaceous glands and modified
behind which lies the ris, which is continuous with the
apocrine sweat glands that secrete a waxy material called
ciliary body and contains circular and radial muscles.
cerumen. The shape of the ear canal and the pinna or ear flap
Contraction of these muscles alters the size of the apertuire
are maintained by elastic cartilage. The ear canal consists of a
or pupil and controls the amount of light falling on to the
vertical and then a horizontal section.
retina.
The transparent lens is located directly behind the iris of
The middle ear
the eye, supported by the suspensory ligament and attached to
 The middle ear is an air-filled cavity located within the tym-
the ciliary body, which encircles the lens. The lens focuses
panic bulla of the temporal bone and separated from the
light rays on to the retina.
external ear by the tympanic membrane. The eustachian ube
links it to the pharynx and equalizes the air pressure on either
The anterior and posterior chambers of the eye are formed by
sides of the tympanic membrane. Sound waves reaching the
the iris extending in front of the lens from the ciliary body
tympanic membrane are converted into mechanical vibra-
(Fig. 4.20). Both the chambers contain a watery fluid, the
tions, which are then amplified by a system of levers made up
aqueous humour, secreted into the posterior chamber by the
of three small bones called ossicles. These are the malleus,
 p o pnd a n  pu oq 
nearest to the tympanic membrane, incus and stapes - next to
the canal of Schlemm in the anterior chamber. The aqueous
the oval window, below which is a membrane called the
humour is a source of nutrients for the lens and the cornea,
round window (Fig. 4.21).
which are non-vascular. It also acts as a non-refractive optical
medium, maintaining the shape of the cornea by the result-
The ossicles articulate with each other via synovial joints
ing intraocular pressure. The posterior compartment contains
and ligaments. The muscle linking the tympanic membrane
a gelatinous mass called the vitreous body or humour, which
and stapes reduces excessive sound vibrations that might
otherwise damage the middle and inner ear. The oval win-
the lens and retina.
dow is covered by the base of the stapes to assist transmitted
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
69
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Fig. 4.21 The structure of the ear
Pinna
Semicircular
canals
Malleus
Incus
Stapes
Tympanic
membrane
Cochlea
Extemal
 Eustachian 
Tympanic
auditory meatus
tube
membrane 
Cochlea
vibrations. The round window permits vibrations passed to
the detection of movement. The vestibule also contains the
the sensory receptors for sound to be dispersed.
uiricle and the saccule, whose walls contain a specialized area
of sensory receptor cells known as a macula. Axon fibres pass
The inner ear
from the macula into the vestibulocochlear nerve (Vl1),
The inner ear consists of an interconnected fluid-filled mem-
serving as part of the sensory input for balance.
branous labyrinth located within a bony labyrinth within the
temporal bone. This is shaped specifically to house the mem-
Close to one end of each semi-circular canal is a dilated area
branous labyrinth.
called the ampulla. In each ampulla there is a ridge called a
sensory crista containing sensory receptors (hair cells), which
 e yd s o   ps a o a
move back and forth influenced by the movement of the
membranous labyrinth is filled with endotymph (Fig. 4.21).
endolymph in the canals. The hair cells send nerve impulses
along the vestibulocochlear nerve to the brain to record
The membranous labyrinth consists of:
movement of the head in all directions.
● the vestibular apparatus
The cochlea
● the cochlea.
The cochlea takes a spiral form similar to a snail shell, with a
canal divided into channels within which is the organ of Corti.
This contains receptor hair cells, which convert vibrations
The vestibular apparatus
The vestibule gives rise to three semicircular canals which lie
information. The resulting nerve impulses are carried by
in vertical, horizontal and transverse directions at right
the vestibulocochlear nerve to the brain, where they are
angles to each other. They are concerned with balance and
interpreted as sound.
70
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Endocrine system
Some endocrine glands form organs, e.g. pituitary, thyroid,
parathyroid, adrenal, while others are associated with exo-
crine glands, e.g. pancreas. Some are a part of complex
The endocrine glands are the sites of synthesis and secretion
 organs, e.g. kidney, testis and ovary (Table 4.3).
of substances called hormones. The hormones are dissemi-
nated throughout the body by the blood and act on specific
Some of the more significant endocrine glands include:
target organs. Hormones coordinate and integrate the func
tions of all the body systems, in conjunction with the
nervous system. Both systems provide a means of communi-
cation within the body and both involve the transmission of
Adrenal gland
a message, triggered by a stimulus to produce a response. The
difference between the two systems concerns the nature of
Can be considered to be two separate glands comprising:
the message - in the endocrine system the message takes the
form of a chemical substance conveyed through the blood
system while in the nervous system it is a rapid nerve
The medulla
impulse.
Produces the hormones noradrenaline (norepinephrine) and
Endocrine glands are ductless and are composed of secretory
cells of epithelial origin supported by connective tissue that
identical to those produced by the stimulation of the sym-
is rich in blood and lymphatic capillaries. The secretory cells
pathetic nervous system, i.e. they raise heart rate and systolic
discharge hormones into the interstitial spaces, from which
blood pressure and cause peripheral vasoconstriction.
they are rapidly absorbed into the circulatory system.
Noradrenaline is the more potent hypertensive agent.
Table 4.3 The endocrine glands and their hormones
Gland
Hormone
Action
Thyroid
Thyroxin
Increases metabolic rate
Calcitonin
Regulates calcium levels
Parathyroid
Parathormone
Regulates calcium and phosphorus levels
Adrenal cortex
Glucocorticoids
 Protein and carbohydrate metabolism and anti-inflammatory
Mineralocorticoids
Stress resistance, potassium and sodium levels
Gonadocorticoids
Male/female sex hormones
Adrenal medulla
Adrenaline (epinephrine)
Sympathetic nervous system
Noradrenaline (norepinephrine)
Sympathetic nervous system
Pituitary
Growth hormone
Stimulates growth
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
Stimulates thyroid gland activity
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)
Stimulates adrenal cortex
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
Stimulates growth of ovarian follicle
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Ovulation and development of the corpus luteum
Interstitial cell-stimulating hormone (ICSH)
Stimulates interstitial cells of the testis
Prolactin
Stimulates formation of milk
Oxytocin
Milk let down'; uterine contraction in parturition
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
Reabsorption of water from renal collecting ducts
Pancreas
Insulin
Decreases blood glucose
Glucagon
Increases blood glucose
Somatostatin 
Smoothes out blood glucose fluctuations
Ovary
Oestrogen
Female sex characteristics and oestrus behaviour
Progesterone
 Prepares uterus and uterine horns; maintains the pregnancy
Testes
Testosterone
Male sex characteristics; spermatogenesis
 Pineal
Melatonin
Coordinating circadian and diurnal rhythms
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
71
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Adrenaline also decreases gut motility and increases:
Thyroid gland
● Cardiac output
The thyroid gland lies as paired bilateral glands below the
● Glycogen breakdown in liver and muscle
larynx near to the upper trachea. It produces:
● Fatty acid release
● Triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4),
● Skeletal muscle tone.
together known as thyroid hormone and based on
iodine. They are vital for growth and the regulation of
The action of adrenaline and noradrenaline is short-lived as
the metabolism. Secretion of these hormones is regu-
they are rapidly inactivated. Both are regarded as 'emergency
lated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TsH), secreted
hormones' and the adrenal medulla is not essential to life.
by the anterior pituitary (Table 4.3).
The cortex
● Thyrocalcitonin or calcitonin regulates blood
Surrounds the medulla and consists of three concentric
calcium levels in conjunction with parathyroid
layers, each of which secretes different groups of steroid
hormone. Calcitonin lowers blood calcium levels by
hormones belonging to two groups:
inhibiting the rate of decalcification of bone by osteo-
clasts and by stimulating bone growth or osteoblast
● Corticosteroids - these are essential for life. Individual
activity.
corticosteroids vary in their ability to produce the full
glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid effects (Table 4.3).
In the dog and the cat the two most important
corticosteroids are cortisol (also known as
hydrocortisone), which has mainly glucocorticoid
effects, and aldosterone, which has primarily
mineralocorticoid effects.
Pancreas
● Adrenal sex hormones, i.e. androgens, oestrogens
The pancreas is a mixed gland lying within the loop of
 and probably progestogens. These are produced in 
the duodenum (see Digestive system, below). Hormones are
small quantities.
secreted by discrete areas of endocrine tissue known as the
islets of Langerhans. There are three types of cell, each secret-
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) controls the forma-
 ing a different hormone:
tion of cortisol and androgens but has little effect on the
formation of aldosterone, which is controlled by the
● α cells secrete glucagon, which increases blood
renin-angiotensin pathway in the kidney. ACTH production
in turn is regulated by corticotrophin-releasing factor (CRF)
the liver by a process of glycogenolysis
produced by the hypothalamus.
● β cells secrete msulin, which reduces blood glucose
The formation of CRF is regulated by:
levels by enabling glucose to pass into the cells where
it is used as a vital source of energy; excess glucose is
● Diurnal rhythm
 stored as glycogen in the liver by a process of
glycogenesis
● Negative feedback effect of cortisol on the hypothalamus
● 8 cells secrete somatostatin, which smooths out the
● Stress/excitement.
daily fluctuations in blood glucose levels.
Cardiovascular
system
● The heart
● The circulatory system
● Blood
 The lymphatic system.
72
2 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Blood
Composition
Blood is a highly specialized connective tissue consisting of
Blood is a connective tissue that circulates around the body
several types of cell suspended in a fluid medium called
in a continuous system of blood vessels. It makes up about
plasma.
7% of the body weight and has a pH of 7.35-7.45. Plasma
makes up about 60% of the volume and the cells and other
Blood performs a wide range of functions
materials in transit make up the remaining 40%.
Plasma
1. Transportation
Plasma is an aqueous solution containing a variety of dis-
Blood is responsible for carrying the following vital com-
solved substances, e.g. oxygen, hormones, nutrients, which
ponents around the body:
are transported from one part of the body to another and
constantly exchanged with the interstitial fluid of the tissues.
● Oxygen - carried by haemoglobin in the red blood
cells
Plasma consists of:
● Carbon dioxide - formed by the tissues and carried
● Water/fluid
 in solution in the plasma to the lungs
● Electrolytes, e.g. sodium, chloride, potassium
● Nutrients - products of digestion carried from the
small intestine to the liver and other tissues
● Plasma proteins, e.g. albumin, globulin, fibrinogen,
prothrombin
● Waste products - resulting from metabolism and
transported to the point of excretion, e.g. kidney and
● Nutrients, e.g. amino acids, fatty acids, glucose
liver
● Gases, e.g. oxygen, carbon dioxide
● Hormones and enzymes - carried to their target
organs.
● Waste products, e.g. urea, creatinine
● Hormones, e.g. adrenaline, insulin, thyroxin, oestrogens
2. Homoeostasis
● Enzymes, e.g. alanine aminotransferase (ALT), amylase,
lipase
Homoeostasis is regulation of the systems responsible for
maintaining the internal equilibrium of the body.
● Antibodies - (see Ch. 21).
● Defence against disease - white blood cells and
Plasma proteins
  n  d s
 Plasma proteins are large molecules in the blood, which exert
 a colloidal osmotic pressure within the circulation to help
● Body temperature - blood conducts heat around
regulate the exchange of fluid between the plasma and the
the body to where it is needed
extracellular fluid. The main plasma proteins are:
● Acid-base balance - presence of buffers in the blood
● Albumin - binds with plasma calcium, which is
maintain pH at approximately 7.4
 required for clotting and bone formation and
restructuring; it maintains blood pressure by keeping
● Osmotic concentration and volume of body
fluid within the plasma by osmosis - its large
fuids - presence of plasma proteins and electrolytes
molecular size means that under normal circumstances
controls fluid flow between compartments and
it cannot pass between the endothelial cells of the
maintains blood volume and pressure
blood capillaries
● Blood clotting - cascade mechanism controls
● Globulin - binds with thyroxine and bilirubin, iron,
blood loss from injuries and prevents entry of
cholesterol and vitamins A, D and K, and is involved
infection.
in defence against infection; maintains blood pressure
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
73
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
● Fibrinogen and prothrombin - are both involved
Erythropoiesis - the production of erythrocytes - takes
in the clotting mechanism. Fibrinogen is converted to
about 1 week and is controlled by the hormone erythro-
fibrin and used in the formation of a clot. The remain-
poietin, secreted by the kidney and regulated by the amount
ing fluid seen at the site of an injury is serum. Serum
of oxygen reaching the tissues. Haemoglobin is synthesized
is thus plasma without fibrinogen/fibrin.
from iron, folic acid and vitamin B,2. Immature erythrocytes
are known as reticulocytes and their presence in the blood is
an indication of red cell regeneration - a significant factor in
Blood cells
 some types of anaemia. Cat erythrocytes live for 58-68 days
while those of the dog live for 107-120 days.
Haemopoiesis is the process by which mature blood cells
develop from precursor or stem cells. Produrction takes place
b. white blood cells - leucocytes
in the liver and spleen of the embryo and the bone marrow,
mainly of the pelvis, ribs, long bones and lymph nodes in the
These are fewer in number and can be divided into two
neonate and adult animal. The exception is the lymphocyte,
groups:
which is formed in lymphoid tissues in the lymph nodes and
the spleen.
● Granulocytes - have granular cytoplasm and a
 multilobed nucleus Also known as polymorphonuclear
Erythrocytes and platelets function entirely within blood
leucocytes (Fig. 4.22). They are:
vessels, while the leukocytes are able to function outside the
blood vessels in the interstitial tissue space. They are found in
● Neutrophils - phagocytic cells (cell eaters), which
circulating blood only in transit between their various sites of
increase rapidly as juvenile or band cells in acute
activity.
infections
● Eosinophils - involved in the inflammatory reaction
a. Red blood cells - erythrocytes
to tissue damage and in allergies; the granules,
Produced in the red or active bone marrow. They are non-
which are released from the cytoplasm deactivating
nucleated biconcave discs filled with the protein haemoglo-
 histamine and heparin, take up acid dye and stain 
bin and are about 7 μm in diameter - those of the cat are
red
slightly smaller than those of the dog (Fig. 4.22). Their main
function is to carry oxygen, as oxyhaemoglobin, from the
● Basophils - granules produce heparin and histamine,
lungs to the tissues.
take up alkaline dyes and stain blue.
● Agranulocytes - have a clear cytoplasm:
●Lymphocytes - round nucleus that almost fills
the cells (Fig. 4.22); they support the immune
 system and are classified as B lymphocytes and
T lymphocytes
Red blood cells
Platelets
● Monocytes - are the largest of the white cells and
(erythrocytes)
(thrombocytes)
their function is phagocytosis. They have a
horseshoe-shaped nucleus and are highly motile
cells, migrating into connective tissues where they
are termed histiocytes or macrophages.
 Small
lymphocyte
Macrophages play an important role in the immune
 defence system. Monocytes appear to have little
Eosinophil
Large
function in circulating blood. Seen in chronic
 ymphocyte
conditions, assisting in the removal of debris arising
from normal turnover of cells within the tissues.
 Basophil
Neutrophil
Monocyte 
c. Thrombocytes or platelets
Granular leucocytes
Non-granular leucocytes
Small, non-nucleated cells formed in the bone marrow by
White blood cells (leucocytes)
break-up of huge megakaryocyte cells. They participate in
Fig. 4.22 Blood cells
 blood clotting in two main ways:
74
4 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
● They clump together to plug small defects in the walls
The heart wall consists of three layers:
of small blood vessels
● Endocardium - a smooth inner membrane involved
● In the presence of damaged vessel, they release a sub-
in the formation of valves, continuous with the
stance called serotonin that reduces blood flow by
endothelium of the blood vessels
constriction of the area.
● Myocardium - the cardiac muscle layer; the left
The heart
ventricle muscle is three times thicker than the right;
 blood supply to this muscle is through the coronary
 The heart is a muscular pump located in the thorax and held
vessels
within the mediastinum, slightly to the left of the midline
and covered in the pericardium. This is a fbrous sac enclos-
● Epicardium or serous pericardium - the outer layer
ing the heart, consisting of two layers of serous membrane
of the heart covering the muscle wall; it produces
between which is the small pericardial cavity.
serous fluid, which lies within the pericardial cavity
and lubricates the movements of the heart.
The heart is a hollow, muscular, cone-shaped organ, which is
divided into four chambers (Fig. 4.23). Its function is to
pump blood around the circulatory system. It size varies
depending on the size of animal and it lies between the third
Heart valves
and sixth rib. The right side of the heart receives deoxy-
genated blood from the systemic veins and the left side of the
These ensure that flow of blood through the heart goes
heart receives oxygenated blood from the lungs via the pul-
in one direction only (Fig. 4.23). There are two sets of
monary circulation.
valves:
Brachiocephalic artery
Fig. 4.23 Structure of the heart
 From body
To body
Left subclavian artery
 Cranial vena cava 
- Aortic arch
Aorta
To lungs
 Right pulmonary artery
Azygos vein
sbunl Ol
Leftpulmonaryartery
From body
From lungs
Right auricle -
Left pulmonary veins
(covers atrium)
From lungs
From lungs
Pulmonary valve.
Left atrium
Caudal venacava
Right atrioventricular
valve
From body
Right atrium 
To body
Right ventricle
Aorta
Left atrioventricular valve 
Chordae tendinae
 Papillary muscle 
Oxygenated
Left ventricle 
blood flow
Deoxygenated
blood flow
ventricular septum Aortic valve
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
75
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
● Atrioventricular node (AV node) - lies at the top
Left side
of the interventricular septum
● Left atrioventricular valve, also known as the
bicuspid or mitral valve, lying between the left atrium
● Bundle of His - specialized cells within the
and ventricle; has two cusps or flaps
interventricular septum
● Aortic valve, which lies at the base of the aorta;
● Purkinje fibres - specialized cells within the walls of
known as a semilunar valve and has three cusps.
the ventricles.
Nerve impulses, initiated by the SA node, travel across the
Right side
atrial walls and stimulate the AV node. They then continue
● Right atrioventricular valve also known as the
down the bundle of His to the Purkinje fibres at the apex of
tricuspid valve, lying between the right atrium and
the ventricles. As a result of this electrical wave the atria con-
ventricle. Has three cusps.
tract (airial systole) forcing blood into the ventricles. The atria
relax (airial diastole) and the ventricles then contract (veniric-
● Pulmonary valve lies at the base of the pulmonary
uar systole) and blood is forced upwards, closing the AV
artery. Known as a semilunar valve and has three
valves but opening the aortic and pulmonary valves and
cusps.
moving blood from the ventricles into the systemic and pul-
monary circulations. The ventricles then relax (veniricular
Each cusp of the right and left atrioventricular valves has
diastole) and the semilunar valves close.
several tendinous attachments from their margin to the pap-
illary muscles on the ventricular surface of the heart. These
In order to meet the changing demands of the body the heart
are called chordae tendineae and they prevent the valves
rate must be able to alter. This is done by nerves of the auto-
everting as blood is forced out during the strong ventricular
nomic nervous system, which act on the SA node - the sym-
contractions.
pathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system increases
the heart rate, while the parasympathetic branch (the vagus 
nerve) slows the heart rate.
Nervous control of the heart
Cardiac muscle has an inherent ability to contract at a set rate
Pulse rate
and contraction is coordinated by a conduction system
(Fig. 4.24), which consists of:
The pulse is produced by the heart pumping blood into the
aorta, increasing and decreasing the expansion of the arterial
● Sinoatrial node (SA node) - situated in the wall of
vessel wall with each heart beat. The pulse is measured by pal-
the right atrium, this initiates each heart beat and is
pation of a superficial vessel as it passes over a bone. The
known as the pacemaker
 pulse quality, i.e. its rate, rhythm and character, is a reflection 
Sinoatrial node
 Intemodal
Atrioventricular
Sinoatrial
Impulses spread
Atria
Atrioventricular
Impulses travel down
(pacemaker)
pathways
node
node fires
across atria
contract
node fires
 conducting fibres 
Bundle
Atrium 
of His
ventricle
Bundle
Ventricles contract
branches
Interventricular
 Purkinje 
septum
fibres
Heart at rest 
Atrial contraction
 Ventricular contraction 
Fig. 4.24 Conduction system of the heart
76
 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Fig. 4.25 Major btood vessets in the body
Right common carotid 
Left common carotid
Right axilary
Left axillary
Right brachial
Left brachial
Right subclavian
Left subclavian
Aorta
Pulmonary
Brachiocephalic
Diaphragm
Coeliac
Cranial mesenteric
Caudal mesenteric
Left renal
Right ovarian 
Left testicular
Left extemal iliac
 Left intemal iiac 
Left femoral
Caudal
Circulatory system
of the function of the heart. Normal sites for measuring the
peripheral pulse in the dog and cat are the femoral, brachial,
This comprises a continuous series of vessels that transport
lingual and coccygeal arteries.
the blood pumped by the heart around the body (Fig. 4.25).
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
77
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Blood vessels
Formation of lymph takes place at the arterial end of blood
capillaries, where the hydrostatic pressure exceeds the col-
● Arteries - carry blood away from the heart; except for
loidal osmotic pressure exerted by plasma proteins. Fluids
the pulmonary artery, they carry oxygenated blood
and electrolytes pass out of the blood capillaries into the
extracellular spaces with some plasma proteins, which leak
● Veins - carry blood back to the heart; except for the
through the endothelial wall. At the venous end of the blood
pulmonary vein, they carry deoxygenated blood
capillaries the pressure relationships are reversed and fluid is
drawn back into the blood vascular system. In this way about
● Capillaries -thin-walled vessels that link arteries to
 veins and carry either oxygenated or deoxygenated
with the extracellular tissue fluid.
blood.
The rate of tissue fluid formation at the arterial end of capil.
Table 4.4 compares the characteristics of the different blood
laries generally exceeds the reuptake of fluid at the venous
vessels.
end, leaving quantities in the interstitial spaces. The excess
fluid becomes known as lymph once it drains into the system
of lymph capillaries, which converge to form progressively
larger-diameter lymphatic veins or vessels. Movement of
Lymphatic system
lymph along the vessels relies on the surrounding tissues
squeezing the fluid past non-return valves in the walls.
The lymphatic and circulatory systems are closely linked.
Lymph, which is excess interstitial fluid, is carried from the
Along the route of the larger lymphatic vessels are lymph nodes,
tissues back to the circulation via a system of lymphatic
in which cells of the immune system and antibodies join the
vessels and ducts. The functions of the lymphatic system are:
 general circulation. Lymphatic capillaries differ from blood cap-
illaries by their greater permeability, their thin endothelial cell
cytoplasm and the absence of a basement membrane.
● To transport fatty acid molecules as chyle
Lymph enters the venous circulation at the level of the heart
via a single duct on each side of the body:
● To act as a filter for lymph
● The right lymphatic duct and the tracheal duct,
● To return excess tissue fluid or lymph to the
which drain the right fore limb and right side of the
circulation.
head and neck
Table 4.4 Characteristics of the different types of blood vessel
Artery
Vein
Capillary
Transport blood away from the heart
Transport blood towards the heart
Link arteries to veins, and are site of
exchange between blood and tissues
Tunica externa - outer fbrous layer
Tunica media layer is thinner, with less muscle 
Consist of a single layer of squamous
and few elastic fibres
endothelium (epithelium)
Tunica media
 - middle layer of muscle and
elastic fibre
Tunica intima - inner layer of endothelium
 No semilunar valves
Semilunar valves at intervals along the length
 No semilunar valves
to prevent any back-flow of blood
Blood pressure high and with pulse that
Blood pressure low and no pulse
Blood pressure gradually falls as blood flows
reflects the heart beat
through the capillary bed. No pulse
Blood flow fapid
Blood flow slow
Blood flow slowing
Low blood volume
Increasing blood volume
High blood volume
Smaller arteries are known as arterioles
Smaller veins are known as venules
Main artery of the body is the aorta
Main vein of the body is the caudal vena cava
78
3Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
● The cisterna chyli in the abdominal cavity becomes
the thoracic duct in the thoracic cavity and drains
Afferent
the whole of the rest of the body.
Medulla
lymph vessel
valve
Capsule
Lacteals
Trabecula
         
Germinal
finger-like villi of the small intestine. They are responsible for
centre
the collection of digested fat molecules from the small intes-
Cortical 
Medullary
tines and, as a milky fluid known as chyle, they are poured
sinus
sinus
into the cisterna chyli.
Medullary cords
Lymph nodes
Reticular fibres
Lymph nodes are small kidney-bean-shaped organs lying
Hilus
Artery
along the route of the regional lymphatic vessels whose func-
Efferent lymph vessel -
tion is to filter lymph fluids of bacteria or other particle
-Vein
     d   
Cortico-medullar
produce and store the T and B lymphocytes. Lymph passes
boundary
through one or more nodes before re-entering the circulation.
 Lymph flow
A lymph node is an encapsulated mass of lymphoid tissue
Fig. 4.26 Structure of a tymph node
supported by dense connective tissue trabeculae, between
which are channels containing the lymph (Fig. 4.26). Each
Other sites where lymphoid tissue is found are:
node is supplied by many afferent lymphatic vessels and
drained by a single efferent vessel, which leaves at the hilus
● Spleen - located in the left cranial abdomen; it is
of the node.
 e o q ao e e o ho  sr 
blood reservoir
As lymph nodes are responsible for draining lymph from
o ss  a n  q a n  
● Tonsils - three pairs located within the pharyngeal
that area. Some nodes are superficial and can be palpated,
area and referred to as the palatine, lingual and
particularly if they become enlarged or diseased (Fig. 4.27).
pharyngeal tonsils
Parotid lymph node
-Retropharyngeal
Fig. 4.27 Lateral view of a dog showing the
ymph nodes
position of patpable tymph nodes
Tracheal duct
Thoracic duct
Cisterna chyli
Submandibular
ymph node
Mesenteric lymph nodes
 Prescapular
 ymph node
Popliteal lymph node 
Axillary lymph node 
Bronchial
 Superficial
lymph
inguinal
nodes
 lymph nodes
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
79
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
● Thymus - located in the anterior part of the thoracic
● An interface for the passive exchange of gases between
cavity; its role is vital to the developing immune
 the atmosphere and the blood - the pulmonary
system in young animals.
membrane.
The respiratory tract comprises:
Respiratory
I system
● Nasal cavity
● Pharynx
Respiration describes two different but interrelated processes:
● Trachea
● Cellular respiration - the process in which cells
derive energy from the breakdown of organic
● Bronchi, bronchioles and alveolar ducts
molecules in the presence of oxygen
●Lungs.
● Mechanical respiration - the process by which
 oxygen required for cellular respiration is absorbed
from the atmosphere into the blood vascular system,
Nasal cavity
and the process of by which carbon dioxide produced
by the cells during metabolism is excreted into the
The entrance to the cavity is via the nostrils or nares and the
atmosphere.
exit is via the opening to the pharynx. The nasal cavity is
divided into left and right chambers, separated by a septum,
It is mechanical respiration that occurs in the respiratory
and filled by the coiled turbinate bones. These are covered
system. The system has two functional components:
with mucous membrane, which enables the air to be mois-
tened and warmed prior to entry into the lower tract. Leading
● A conducting system, or the respiratory tract, for
from each chamber are the air-filled frontal and maxillary
the transport of inspired and expired gases between
sinuses, which are lined with ciliated epithelium to filter out
the atmosphere and the circulatory system
dust and other foreign matter.
Frontal sinus
Fig.4.28 Longitudinal section through the
Nasal cavity-
head of a dog to show the upper respiratory
Turbinates-
tract
 Hard palate
Pharynx
Tongue
Soft palate
Epiglottis 
Larynx
Trachea
Cesophagus
80
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Pharynx
 During normal breathing the larynx lies in its resting position
with the epiglottis lying above the soft palate, making a con-
Divided by the soft palate into the nasopharynx and the
tinuous opening for the air to passage through and the glottis
oropharynx. It has five openings into it, i.e. from the nasal
 is open. During swallowing the epiglottis lies over the glottis,
chambers, the mouth, the Eustachian tube from the middle
closing it and preventing the passage of food down the
ear, the oesophagus and the larynx. It acts as a crossover
trachea.
point between the digestive and respiratory tracts (Fig. 4.28).
Trachea
Larynx
The trachea is a non-collapsible tube extending from the
A hollow box-like structure consisting of cartilage, muscle,
larynx through the thoracic inlet to the point of division into
fibrous tissue and ciliated mucous membranes, its function
the leff and right bronchi. It is made up of a series of incom-
is to:
plete C-shaped rings of hyaline cartilage separated by fibrous
connective tissue and smooth muscle, and lined with ciliated
● Connect the upper and lower respiratory tracts
  n  si   n    
which enables the oesophagus lying close to it, to expand
● Provide the means of vocalization
without hindrance when a bolus of food passes through.
● Control the flow of inspired gases during breathing
Bronchi, bronchioles and alveolar ducts
● Prevent the entry of solid particles into the trachea.
The bronchi are similar in structure but the cartilage rings are
The larynx consists of a collection of cartilages, the most
complete. Each bronchus enters the lung tissue at the root of
cranial of which is the epiglotfis, which closes the gloffis or the
the lung and continues to divide into smaller and smaller
opening of the larynx. Inside the larynx, paired vocal folds
bronchi and bronchioles. Eventually the cartilage within the
form a narrow passageway for air flow. Movement of the car-
walls disappears altogether. The divisions continue until the
tilages controls the size of the glottis and regulates the flow of
smallest branches become the alveolar ducts and finally blind-
air through it.
Fig. 4.29 Division of the fungs into fobes by deep fissures
Left
Right
Apical lobe
Cardiac lobe
Accessory lobe
Diaphragmatic lobe
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
81
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
ending alveoli. The arrangement of smaller and smaller air
increasing the pressure of the air in the lungs. Air is
 passages is referred to as the bronchial tree.
forced up the trachea and out of the body.
The lining epithelium of the tract is a ciliated mucous mem-
brane. The cilia and the mucus trap particles and pass them
up to the pharynx where they are either coughed out or swal
Control of respiration
lowed. Deeper into the bronchial tree the alveolar ducts and
alveoli are lined by a simple squamous epithelium known as
Respiratory centres in the pons and medulla oblongata of the
the pulmonary membrane - it is across this that gaseous
hindbrain control:
exchange takes place.
● Inspiration via the inspiratory centre
sbun7
● Expiration via the pneumotaxic and apneustic
centres
The right and left lungs are essentially spongy organs that lie
in the thorax on either side of the mediastinum (Fig. 4.29).
● Hering-Breuer reflex - prevention of overinflation
They are divided into lobes as shown in Table 4.5 - the right
 a  s   s a 
side is larger than the left.
walls that provide information to the hindbrain
The lung tissue is covered by the pulmonary pleura and
● Blood pH - stimulates chemoreceptors in the aortic and
enclosed within the pleural cavity, in which there is nothing
carotid artery walls and within the medulla oblongata;
but a vacuum and a little serous fluid. These are essential to
these provide information on carbon dioxide and
provide smooth movement between the lungs and thoracic
 oxygen levels in the blood and stimulate respiration to
wall and to bring about inflation of the lungs.
restore the correct pH by expiring the carbon dioxide.
The mechanics of breathing
Respiratory terminology
Lung tissue contains no muscle so it cannot expand on its
own. It is, however, very elastic and will return to its col-
● External respiration - transfer of gases between the
lapsed state when there is nothing to expand it.
external environment and the circulation
● During inspiration, the cavity volume increases by
● Internal or tissue respiration - transfer of oxygen
   a   n
from the blood to cells and carbon dioxide from cells
muscular partition separating the thoracic and
to blood
abdominal cavities) and the lifting of the ribs by
contraction of the external intercostal muscles. The
● Tidal volume - the amount of air breathed in and
lungs increase in size as they are sucked outwards by
out in one respiration
the vacuum in the pleural cavity. The pressure in the
lungs reduces and air passes from the outside down
● Residual volume - the air left in the lungs following
into the lungs, which fill the pleural cavity
 a forced exhalation
● On expiration the diaphragm relaxes and returns to
● Functional residual volume or capacity - the
its domed position, the ribs return to their natuiral
amount of air left in the lungs after normal exhalation
position decreasing the volume of the cavity and
● Total lung capacity - the total amount of air in the
lungs
Table 4.5 Structure of the lungs
● Vital capacity - the greatest volume of air that can
Left side
Right side
be made to pass out of lungs following forced
Cranial or apical lobe
Cranial or apical lobe
exhalation
Cardiac or middle lobe
Cardiac or middle lobe
Diaphragmatic or caudal lobe
● Anatomical dead space - the volume of air in the
Diaphragmatic or caudal lobe
Accessory lobe
trachea, bronchi and bronchioles that never reaches
the alveoli.
82
2Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Digestive system
covered with mucous membrane, parts of which are
set out in thickened ridges on its surface
The digestive or gastrointestinal tract is a muscular tube lined
● Ventrally the tongue and sublingual muscles, which
by a mucous membrane which runs from the mouth to the
anchor the tongue, enabling it to assist with
anus. It comprises a variety of structures reflecting the many
prehension, swallowing of food and water, grooming
functions of the system which work together to bring about
and licking
the digestion of food in order to provide a source of energy to
the body tissues (Fig. 4.30).
● Cranially the lips and teeth.
Salivary glands
Oral cavity
Paired primary salivary glands include:
Forms the beginning of the tract and consisting of the
tongue, teeth, cheeks and lips. Its boundaries are:
●Zygomatic or dorsal buccal
● Laterally the cheeks and teeth (Fig. 4.31); the cheeks
●Sublingual
 hold a pad of fat, the buccal pad, which during eating
 prevent the cheeks from being bitten
●Mandibular.
● Dorsally the palate, which is divided into the hard and
Minor glands also secrete saliva and include labial, lingual,
 soft palates - the hard palate is a bony structure
palatine glands. These glands all have ducts which pass saliva
Fig. 4.30 Laterat view of the digestive system of the dog
Pharynx
Stomach  Pancreas  Duodenum
Transverse colon
Descending colon
Teeth
Tongue
Rectum
Anal canal
Cesophagus
Caecum
Ascending colon
Diaphragm Liver
Gall
Jejunum
bladderand ileum
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
83
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Fig. 4.31 Skull of dog and cat to show the
Dog
dentition
volars
Premolars
canines
Dental formula: (13 C1 PM4 M2) x2 = 42
31
43
Cat
Incisors
Canines
Dental formula: (13 C 1 PM 3 M1) x2 = 30
31
27
directly into the mouth when stimulated by smell, sight or
Oesophagus
thought of food. Saliva is used for moistening food in the
mouth and for the formation of a bolus which is swallowed
A hollow muscular tube which is capable of considerable
and passes down the oesophagus.
distension during passage of a food bolus. It has a good
supply of nerves, blood vessels and mucous glands that
 lubricate the inner lining during the passage of food material
Pharynx
by peristalsis. It extends from the pharynx through the
Divided into the nasopharynx and oropharynx by the soft
thorax and diaphragm via the oesophageal hiatus to the
palate (see also Respiratory system, above; Fig. 4.32). The
stomach.
pharynx is a short muscular tube that acts as a crossover
between the digestive and respiratory tracts and serves as a
Stomach
common passageway for air and for food. When food enters
the pharynx all other openings including the larynx are
Lies within the abdomen on the left hand side of the cavity.
blocked in order to direct the food to the oesophagus. The
 It is divided into sections:
tongue presses against the hard palate to close the oral cavity
and the food bolus passes through the pharynx. The larynx,
● Cardia - poorly defined ring of muscle at the junction
attached to the hyoid apparatus, then moves backwards, and
with the oesophagus; called the cardiac sphincter and
the epiglottis falls forward, leaving the larynx open again
controls the entry of food
when swallowing or deglutition is complete. The bolus of
food enters the oesophagus and moves downwards by peri-
● Fundus - major area of glands, which secrete gastric
stalsis into the stomach.
juices and some protective mucus
84
4 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Fig. 4.32 Function of the pharynx during (a) swallowing and
(b) breathing
Hard palate
Eustachian tube
Nasal cavity
Soft palate
Oral cavity
Epiglottis
Oesophagus
B
Larynx and trachea
Hard palate
Eustachian tube
Nasal cavity
Soft palate
 Oral cavity
 Epiglottis
Cesophagus
B
Larynx and trachea
● Body - or corpus, which is a continuation of the
The function of the stomach is to store and mix food with the
fundus
gastric digestive enzymes. This process takes about 2 h requir-
ing the muscular contractions of the stomach wall and
● Pylorus - a narrowing of the body in which mucus
results in the formation of chyme, which passes into the
and the hormone gastrin are secreted. It joins the
duodenum.
duodenum at its narrowest point as the pyloric
sphincter and controls the passage of liquid chyme
Gastric secretions are stimulated by the hormone gasirin,
which is squirted into the duodenum.
ssd p o asd a o as u paas si s
through the cardiac sphincter. They consist of:
The stomach is composed of an inner mucous membrane
supported on a submucosal layer and known as the gastric
● Goblet cells in the fundus and body of the stomach
mucosa. It is arranged in numerous folds or rugae, which
line the gastric pits and secrete mucus, which
become flattened when the stomach is distended with food.
 lubricates the passage of food and protects against
Gasiric pits or glands within the gastric mucosa produce
autodigestion
hydrochloric acid, mucus and the enzyme pepsin. The lining
of the stomach is protected from autodigestion by a thick
● Parietal or oxyntic cells are distributed in the gastric
surface covering of mucus. The middle layers of the stomach
pits of the fundus of the stomach and secrete
consist of smooth muscle, which is responsible for the
hydrochloric acid; this protects the gastrointestinal
mixing of food. The outermost layer is a layer of mesentery or
 tract from harmful bacteria by creating an
visceral peritoneum forming the omenum, which suspends
environment in which they cannot survive and
the stomach form the dorsal body wall.
denatures protein prior to its digestion
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
85
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
● Chief cells secrete pepsinogen and are clustered at
completed and the digested food products are absorbed.
the base of the gastric pits; pepsinogen is converted
Effective absorption depends on a large surface area
into the active enzyme pepsin, in the presence of
and this is achieved by the development of finger-like
hydrochloric acid and this digests protein.
villi within the intestinal mucosa. These are covered by
a layer of epithelium within which lie the digestive glands
Small intestine
(Fig. 4.33).
Receives acidic chyme from the stomach via the pyloric
The small intestine is divided into three parts:
sphincter (Fig. 4.30). Here the process of digestion is
Mesentery by which gut is
Gland in submucosa
Columnar
Fig. 4.33 Cross-section through
 suspended in body cavity -
(Brunner's glands)
epithelium
the small intestine showing its
Gland at base of vili
structure
Tubular gland
(crypt of Lieberkihn)
Goblet cells
secrete mucus
Vill
umen
Brush border
Outer
of microvilli 
Mucosa
covering
Thin layer
Submucosa
Circular
 Longitudinal
of muscle 
(connective tissue)
muscle
muscle
Villi
Epithelial
lining of villus
Mucosa
Thin layer 
Capillary
 of muscle
plexus
Submucosa
Circular
muscle layer
Lacteal -
 Longitudinal
muscle layer
 Crypt of 
Arteriole-
Lieberkihn 
Venule
Brunner's
Lymph
gland
vessel-
Longitudinal
musde in villus 
86
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Duodenum
Gall bladder
Lies on the right side of the abdomen and within its U shape
Lies within the lobes of the liver and stores bile produced by
lies the pancreas. It is held in position by part of the visceral
the liver. Bile containing bile salts is needed for the break-
peritoneum known as the mesoduodenum. The duodenal
down or emulsification of fats prior to its digestion and is
mucosa has characteristic villi, and Brunner's glands which
added to the ingesta via the common bile duct in the
open between the villi. The presence of chyme in the
duodenum.
duodenum stimulates the Brunner's glands to secrete a
mixture of enzymes known as succus entericus. There are
ducts opening into the duodenum from the pancreas and
Digestion
the bile duct.
Food eaten by an animal consists of a mixture of protein, car-
 on arn on are s po as in pe apo
absorbed into the blood stream and must undergo the process
Jejunum and ileum
of enzymic digestion (Boxes 4.3-4.5). A cocktail of digestive
enzymes are secreted by the gastric pits, glands within the
It is difficult to distinguish between these two parts, which
duodenum, jejunum and ileum, the pancreas and the gall
form a long mobile tube with no fixed position within the
 bladder. Enzymes are proteins that act as catalysts to increase
abdominal cavity. It is suspended by the mesojejunum
the speed of a chemical reaction. Each enzyme is specifically
and the mesoileum. The lining epithelium contains villi
adapted to act on a particular substrate - for example, lipases
at the base of which are digestive glands known as the
act on lipids; proteases, e.g. pepsin, act on proteins. The result
Crypts of Lieberkuhn. The ileum terminates at the ileocaecal
of the digestive process is the production of small molecules,
junction.
which can be absorbed into the blood stream and carried to
the tissues and the liver where they are used for the metabo-
lism of the body.
Pancreas
Box 4.3 Protein digestion
Lies within the U of the duodenum and is a mixed gland, i.e.
● Protein in food as polypeptide chains
has exocrine and endocrine parts. It is an elongated gland,
 Pepsinogen in gastric juices is converted to pepsin
highly lobulated and covered by a loose connective tissue
capsule.
· Pepsin + protein = peptides
● Enterokinase within succus entericus from Brunner's
● Endocrine tissue - consists of the islets of
glands activates trypsinogen in pancreatic juices to
Langerhans, which secrete several hormones including
form trypsin
insulin (see Endocrine system, above)
● Trypsin converts chymotrypsinogen to chymotrypsin
● Chymotrypsin and other proteases act on peptides and
● Exocrine tissue - consists of closely packed secretory
 produce ... amino acids
cells forming the major part of the gland. Pancreatic
juices drain into a highly branched duct system and
then into the main pancreatic duct which joins the
common bile duct to drain into the duodenum. The
Box 4.4 Carbohydrate digestion
secretions are alkaline, because of a high content of
· Carbohydrates present in food as polysaccharides
bicarbonate ions, which helps to neutralize the acidic
chyme. They are also rich in enzymes which digest
· Carbohydrate digestion begins in the small intestine
proteins, carbohydrates and fats. Many are in an
Enzymes are present in succus entericus, intestinal and
inactive form preventing autodigestion of the pancreas
pancreatic juices
· Amylase + starch = maltose
can function.
Maltose + maltase = glucose
The secretion of pancreatic juices occurs in response to the
 Sucrose + sucrase = glucose and fructose
sight, smell and taste of food. In addition food entering the
Lactose + lactase = glucose and galactose
duodenum as chyme stimulates secretion via the gastroin-
Sucrose and maltose are disaccharides
testinal hormones cholecystokinin and secretin from the
· Glucose and fructose are monosaccharides
duodenal mucosa.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
87
4
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
 ssd  oa  s  
Box 4.5 Fat digestion
quantities of lipid.
·Fat is present in the diet as triglycerides
The liver is composed of numerous lobules, each of which is
●  Fat is emulsified by bile salts within the duodenum
a hexagonal cylinder in shape. Each lobule is filled with liver
 Bile salts activate the lipase enzymes
cells arranged in rows radiating from the centre towards the
● Fats + lipase = fatty acids and glycerol
periphery. Running alongside each lobule are branches of the
·  Fatty acids and glycerol are monoglycerides
hepatic artery, hepatic portal vein and bile duct.
 Monoglycerides become coated in protein to form
The hepatic artery and hepatic portal vein may be referred to
chylomicrons
as the interlobular blood vessels since they are located between
adjacent lobules. In the centre of each lobule is a branch of
the hepatic vein, referred to as the ceniral or iniralobular vein.
Absorption
The vessels are connected with the central vein by a system
of capillary like sinusoids that run parallel to, and come into
The main site for absorption is within the small intestine.
close contact with, the chains of lower cells. The sinusoids are
surrounded by fine channels called canaliculi. These connect
· Amino acids resulting from protein digestion and
up with the bile ducts at the edge of the lobule. The hepato-
monosaccharides and disaccharides from carbohydrate
cytes are located close to both sinusoids and canaliculi.
digestion pass through the walls of the villi into the
blood capillaries and are carried by the hepatic portal
Blood reaches each lobule via the interlobular vessels, flowing
vein to the liver, where they are used for metabolism
along the sinusoids towards the central vein. The liver cells
take up from the blood what they require and shed products
● Fatty acids and glycerol resulting from fat digestion are
into it. The only exception is bile, which is secreted not into
converted into chylomicrons by the addition of a
the sinusoids but into the canaliculi to flow into the bile
protein coat. These are absorbed through the walls of
duct.
the villi into the lacteals and are carried as a milky
liquid known as chyle to the cisterna chyli (see
Functions of the liver include:
Lymphatic system, above) before entering the
circulation via the heart.
● Bile production - synthesized by liver hepatocytes.
Contains bile salts and the pigment bilirubin, reduced
from the green pigment biliverdin, which results from
Metabolism
erythrocyte breakdown. Stored in the gall bladder until
food enters the stomach and duodenum. This stimulates
Although metabolism also takes place in many tissues, the
contraction of the gall bladder and the bile is squirted
most significant organ is the liver.
along the common bile duct into the duodenum
The liver
● Carbohydrate metabolism - occurs when glucose
molecules arrive in the liver via the hepatic portal
The liver is the largest organ in the body, occupying approx-
imately 3-4% of total body weight in an average dog or cat
are stored in the liver. When energy is required by the
It lies just behind the diaphragm, cranial to the duodenum
body, glycogen is broken down to release glucose by a
and the right kidney, resting against the stomach. It is
process known as glycogenolysis
attached to the abdomen wall by a fold of fibrous tissue and
fat called the falciform ligament.
● Fat metabolism - lipids are synthesized to produce
cholesterol and fatty acids used to produce energy or
Approximately 75% of the liver's blood supply comes from
stored around the body in adipose tissue
the hepatic portal system, which delivers blood from the
small intestine carrying the products of digestion. The
● Protein metabolism - needed for the following
remaining 25% of the blood supply comes from the hepatic
purposes:
artery, which delivers oxygenated blood. The hepatic vein
carries waste materials, including carbon dioxide, away.
● Use in cells
The liver is thought to perform several hundred functions, all
● Polymerized to make plasma proteins, e.g. albumin,
carried out by one type of cell - the hepatocyte. Hepatocytes
globulin, fibrinogen and prothrombin
88
3 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
● As an energy source
Caecum
A blind-ended sac through which food residue is forced by
● Deaminated to form urea and eliminated by the
peristalsis (Fig. 4.30). The lining changes from villi to a glan-
kidney
dular form. The function of the caecum is not significant in
carnivores (see Ch. 5).
● Heat production - from synthesis, deamination and
transporting of products through the liver, combined
with its blood supply the liver produces and then
Colon
distributes heat around the body, especially to
Divided into three sections, ascending, transverse and
peripheral sites
descending, all attached to the dorsal body wall by the meso-
colon. The main function is the absorption of water from the
● Hormone elimination - after their functions have
ingesta and the pushing forward of the increasingly solid
been performed, some are modified chemically, some
faeces to the rectum prior to defaecation.
are eliminated by the kidney, others expelled in the
bile via the intestinal tract
The mucosa of the colon is lined by goblet cells, which
secrete mucus to aid the passage of the faecal mass, and cells,
● Haematinic principle - assisting in the quality
which absorb water. The thickened mucosa is folded in
of the blood cell production by increasing the
appearance when not distended with faecal material. Com-
haemoglobin level in cells by use of iron, B vitamins
mensal bacteria within the colon further degrade food
residues, but the colon walls are protected from damage by
● Storing blood - using the expansion and contraction
 the presence of numerous leukocytes and cells of the immune
ability of the liver veins, the total blood volume in the
system.
circulation can be altered as required by the body
● Detoxification - of nitrogenous waste from cell
Rectum
metabolism prior to excretion.
A short dilated part. Its function is to store the semi-solid
faeces prior to defaecation. The mucosa is lined by increased
Large intestine
numbers of goblet cells. It terminates in the anal canal and
internal and external anal sphincters, which control the
The indigestible liquid residue from the small intestine passes
passage of faeces to the outside. Lying within the anal sphinc-
through the ileocaecal junction joining the ileum and the
ters are a pair of modified cutaneous glands - the anal sacs
caecum into the large intestine. The large intestine is divided
which produce a smelly secretion used to coat the faeces as a
into three parts:
form of territorial marking.
Urinary system
● Secretion of the hormone erythropoietin, which
initiates formation of new red blood cells in response
The urinary system is primarily responsible for maintaining
to low blood oxygen levels
the balance of water and electrolytes within the body fluids,
i.e. homoeostasis. The kidney provides the route by which
● Activation of vitamin D after its synthesis within the
excess water and electrolytes are eliminated as urine, which is
skin
then stored within the bladder before being excreted.
● Storage of urine within the bladder prior to
The functions of the urinary system are:
micturition.
● Excretion of nitrogenous waste products, e.g. urea and
The urinary tract consists of:
creatinine
● Kidneys - a pair
● Regulation of the volume and chemical constituents of
the body fluids - osmoregulation
● Ureters - a pair
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 
89
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
● Bladder
under the influence of renin. The high pressure forces the
plasma through the perforated walls of the glomeruli into the
● Urethra.
tubules for modification. Blood is then returned via the renal
vein directly to the caudal vena cava. Both the renal artery
and vein are positioned in a depression on the medial side of
the kidney called the hilus.
The kidney
The substance of the kidney is contained within a tough,
fibrous capsule and is divided into two layers:
The two kidneys are located in the dorsolumbar region of the
abdominal cavity, one on each side of the midline. The left
● Cortex - outer layer containing the major part of each
kidney is slightly caudal to the right kidney and both are
kidney nephron, including the glomeruli
retroperitoneal, i.e. lie beneath the parietal peritoneum
(Fig. 4.34). Urine is produced by the kidneys and conducted
● Medulla - the inner area arranged in pyramid-shaped
to the bladder by the ureters to be stored, prior to micturition
units separated by extensions of cortical tissue. Each
via the urethra.
 pyramid is formed by several collecting ducts, which
discharge urine into the renal papillae. The calyx,
Each kidney is supplied with blood by a renal artery, which
into which the papillae link, forms the larger renal
arises from the aorta. The total blood volume of the body cir-
pelvis to conduct urine to the bladder via the
culates through the kidneys continuously and each kidney
ureter.
receives 20% of cardiac output at any one time. Renal blood
pressure is high, as the glomeruli consist of a capillary bed
The functional unit of the kidney is called a nephron
between arterioles (not between arterioles and venules as in
(Fig. 4.35). Each nephron consists of:
other sites) and the efferent arterioles are able to constrict
● The glomerular or Bowman's capsule - consists of
a double layer of flattened cells connecting with a
 perforated basement membrane forming a hollow,
distended, cup-shaped structure
Right adrenal
Left adrenal
gland-
● The glomerulus - a tightly coiled network of
gland
capillaries that is closely applied to the basement
membrane of the glomerular capsule. It is here that
Right kidney.
Caudal trunk of
ultrafiltration takes place, in which plasma is forced
Right renal
the caudal phrenic
 artery and vein
and cranial abdominal
from the glomerular capillaries into the glomerular
Vena cava-
 artery and vein 
space. The filter action of the glomerulus holds back
Left renal
artery and vein
molecules the size of the plasma proteins or larger. It
Left kidney
also retains substances bound to these proteins, e.g.
Ovary-
hormones and calcium. Any product smaller and freely
Aorta
dissolved in plasma will appear in the ultrafiltrate or
primitive urine, e.g. sugars, amino acids, small proteins
such as myoglobin and haemoglobin, drugs, toxins
Uterine horn
 and electrolytes. The ultrafiltrate then passes into the
next section of the renal tubule
Left ureter 
● The highly convoluted renal tubule extends from
Descending
the glomerular capsule to the connection with the
Uterus -
colon
collecting duct. The duct is lined by a single layer of
epithelial cells. The function of the tubule is to
selectively reabsorb water, electrolytes and other
molecules from the glomerular filtrate. The renal
tubule has three physiological areas:
Urinary bladder
(flipped fonward)
1. The proximal convoluted tubule is the longest
section, in which 75% of water and electrolytes are
Fig. 4.34 Ventrodorsat view of the urrnary tract
reabsorbed from the filtrate
90
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Branch of 
Fig. 4.35 A renat nephron
renal vein
Branch of
renal artery
Afferent
arteriole
Distal convoluted
ubule
arteriole
Gomerulus
Pressure
fltration -
Glomerular
capsule-
 Proximal convoluted
tibule
CORTEX
Flow of filtration
MEDULLA
Collecting duct
Blood flow
Urine passes to tip of kidney pyramid
Descending limb 
Ascending limb
Blood capillary
network
2. The loop of Henle descends from cortex into the
medulla and is in close association with wide
capillary loops arising from the efferent arterioles.
Box 4.6 Physiology of filtration
The loop is impermeable to water but electrolytes
(sodium and chloride) and some urea are
● Proximal tubule function is to reabsorb about two-thirds
reabsorbed and recycled in the local capillaries
of the primitive urine, along with the useful substances
like sodium and water (Fig. 4.36).
(vasa recta), causing high concentrations in the
surrounding medullary tissues. This leads to a high
● The loop of Henle acts if blood plasma is too concen-
 osmotic pressure in the extracellular fluid, which is
trated and the body needs to retain water in order to
the main function of this area. The outcome is
dilute the fluid. It is here that the fnal concentration
fine control of sodium, chloride and water
or dilution of urine is decided.
reabsorption
● Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) acts in response to the
osmotic gradient provided by the concentrated interstitial
 3. The distal convoluted tubule is a shorter section
fluid surrounding the collecting ducts in the medulla.
of the tubule and less convoluted. Here sodium
● The distal tubule is where the fnal urinary loss of
electrolytes are reabsorbed along with the secretion
sodium takes place. If the body is sodium-deficient, the
of hydrogen or potassium. This is controlled by the
hormone aldosterone will regulate a further urinary loss
release of the hormone aldosterone from the cortex
of sodium in favour of the body.
of the adrenal gland
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
91
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Blood containing urea
 Blood cells, protein and less plasma 
Fig. 4.36 Diagrammatic representation of
nephron function
Glomerulus
 Blood fitered under pressure
 Glomerular capsule
Tissue fluid (fitrate)
 Allfod (including glucose and most salts)
Proximal convoluted tubule
Active frarsporf
 80% water
Osmosis
Loop of Henle
Water conservation
More salts (e.g. Nat, as needed)
More water
Distal convoluted tubule
Adjusts blood pH
Hydrogen
H+
ions
Collecting duct
More water (as needed)
Urine (1.5 litres/day)
Blood - lacking
 2-4% solution of urea
urea, some water
and some salts
and some salts
The terminal section of the distal tubule drains the urine into
the collecting ducts situated in the medulla. The collecting
ducts are not permeable to water except in the presence of
Ureter
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion from the posterior
Flap valve - prevents reflux
pituitary gland. Water is then drawn out by the high osmotic
pressure of the medullary extracellular fluid and returned to
the blood circulation by the vasa recta capillaries. Urine, now
Bladder
formed, drains from the collecting ducts to the renal pelvis at
the hilus, leaving the kidney via the ureter to the bladder
(B0x 4.6).
Fig. 4.37 Site of entry of the ureters into the bladder
The ureter
The two ureters are thin tubes, one leading from each renal
pelvis to the bladder. They are lined with mucous membrane
and have three layers of smooth muscle in their wall
The bladder
required for peristalsis to move the urine along. The lumen is
lined by transitional epithelium that is folded when relaxed
The bladder is a vesicle or sac used for the temporary storage
and dilates during the passage of urine.
of urine (Fig. 4.34). It is a pear-shaped sac with three layers of
smooth muscle in its walls, which contract during micturi-
The ureters enter the bladder on the dorsal aspect between
tion. The lining of transitional epithelium resembles that of
the neck of the bladder and the urethral opening in an area
the ureters. When empty the bladder lies on the pelvic cavity
called the irigone. Urine is prevented from re-entering the
floor and the lining epithelium is folded; when full it may
ureter if the bladder is full by a flap-valve within each ureter
expand as far forward as the umbilicus within the ventral
that compresses against the bladder wall (Fig. 4.37).
abdomen.
92
2 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Micturition or bladder emptying occurs when stretch recep-
Urine production
tors in the bladder wall monitor the degree of filling and relay
the message to the spinal cord via the pelvic nerve. Nerve
Normal urine contains the following:
impulses from the spinal cord are sent to the internal bladder
sphincter at the neck of the bladder, which is made of
● 96% water and 4% solids
smooth muscle and allows urine to pass down the urethra.
Emptying is a reflex action but voluntary control involving
●Electrolytes
the external bladder sphincter, which is made of striated
 muscle, can be learned using reward training.
● Urea
The urethra
● Specific gravity:
The urethra carries urine from the bladder to the outside. It is
● Dog - 1.016-1.060
a tubular canal lined with transitional epithelium. There is a
difference between the urethra of the male and of the female
● Cat - 1.020-1.040
animal.
· pH:
Female urethra
●Dog 7.5
● Shorter than in the male
●Cat 6.5
● Serves only the urinary system
● Other metabolic waste:
● Exterior opening embedded in the vaginal wall and
called the urinary meatus
● Creatinine
Male urethra
● Phosphate
● Longer and narrower than in the female
● Sulphate.
●Divided into three sections:
The rate of urine production varies with ambient tem-
 perature, water intake and disease processes.
● Prostatic - surrounded by prostate gland, ducts from
 prostate open into it
Factors affecting urine composition, other than disease,
include:
●Membranous - narrowest part of the urethra, passing
along pelvic floor
● Species - see variation in specific gravity
● Cavernous - lies within the penis
● Diet - affects pH values
● Urethral opening is called the urinary meatus
● Fluid intake - affects specific gravity concentration
● Serves both urinary and reproductive systems.
● Exercise - influences fluid loss from body
NB. In the tomcat, the urethra is short, the opening lies
● Medication - some drugs are excreted unchanged in
within the perineum and is directed caudally.
the urine.
Reproductive
e svstem
later stages of embryonic development they migrate caudally
through the abdominal cavity, taking their blood supply with
The male tract
them, and pass out through the inguinal canal to lie in the
scrotum. This is complete by the age of 12 weeks - if the testis
Testis
fails to descend the animal is described as being a cryptorchid.
The scroum consists of thin, pigmented skin supplied with
The testes are paired, oval in shape and develop embryoni-
sweat glands and is divided into two cavities surrounded by a
cally within the abdomen close to the kidneys (Fig. 4.38). At
double fold of peritoneum, the internal and external tunica
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
93
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Fig. 4.38 Male reproductive system of the
dog and cats
Deferent duct 
Prostate gland
Bladder
Urethra
 Epididymus
Testis
 Scrotum
Penis
Prostate gland
Bulbourethral
gland
Urethra
Epididymus
Testis
Penis
vaginalis (Fig. 4.39). In mammals the testes are held outside
The seminiferous tubules eventually join to form the epi-
the body because the normal internal body temperature is
didymis, which runs on the dorsolateral border of the testis
too high for sperm development. The blood vessels, nerves
and leads into the deferent duct or vas deferens. This then
and ducts supplying the testes run from abdomen to scrotum
in the spermafic cord. The cremaster muscle surrounds the
the area of the prostate gland. Sperm formed in the semi-
spermatic cord and controls the position of the scrotum in
niferous tubules mature during their passage into the
relation to the body.
epididymis, where they are stored within the cauda epi-
didymis before being propelled along the deferent duct
The testicular tissue is divided into numerous conical com-
during ejaculation.
partments, each containing a coiled mass of seminiferous
ubules and interstitial cells or cells of Leydig, which secrete the
The prosfafe gland surrounds the junction of the deferent
male hormone testosterone (Table 4.3). The seminiferous
ducts with the urethra close to the neck of the bladder and
tubules are lined by two types of cell:
secretes prostatic fluid. This is alkaline, in order to protect
      ssd  d 
● Spermatogenic cells to produce sperm
and helps to increase the volume of sperm in order to
wash it into the female tract. Bulbourethral glands found
● Sertoli cells, which provide support, nutrients and 
only in the cat contribute to the action of the prostate
 protection for the developing sperm.
gland.
94
4 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Spermatic cord
(deferent duct, 
blood vessels
and nerves)
Blood and lymph
 Skin of the scrotum
vessels and nerves
Deferent 
duct
Epididymus
Deferent
duct
 Parietal layer of 
 tunica vaginalis 
Viscerallayer of
A  tunica vaginalis 
B
Fig. 4.39 The testis within the scrotum (a) testis enclosed within the internat and externat tunica vaginalis (b) testicular structure
Each sperm (Fig. 4.40) consists of the following:
Penis
● Head - this carries genetic material in a large nucleus,
The penis consists of the urethra surrounded by layers of
which is rich in DNA and accounts for more than half
cavernous erectile tissue to enable its entry into the female
the dry weight of the head; the nucleus is surmounted
vagina during coitus. Embedded within the erectile tissue
by a thin acrosome cap, which contains the enzymes
close to the tip is the os penis. This is a tunnel-shaped bone
necessary for penetrating the outer membrane of the
ovum
that in the dog lies dorsal to the urethra and in the tomcat
lies ventral to it. Its function is to aid the entry of the penis
● Neck and midpiece - within the midpiece, the axial
into the female tract before erection is fully complete.
core is surrounded by densely packed mitochondria
rich in respiratory enzymes; this section is concerned
The tissues of the penis are protected by a covering of hairy
with releasing energy for driving the sperm
skin known as the prepuce, which is well supplied with lubri
cating glands. In the dog this is suspended from the ventral
● Tail - a modified flagellum, which, by lashing from
 abdomen and in the tomcat is much shorter, as the opening
side to side, propels the sperm along the female tract
to the urethra and the scrotum lie in the perineum ventral to
towards the ovum.
the anus. The tip of the tomcat's penis is covered in barbs,
which play a part in the induction of ovulation during coitus.
The female tract
Spermatozoon structure
Ovary
Spermatozoa or sperm are formed within the seminiferous
 The ovaries are paired organs found in the dorsal abdomen
tubules of the testes by a process of spermatogenesis. This is
caudal to the kidneys at the level of the third and fourth
influenced by the hormone festosterone, secreted by the cells
lumbar vertebrae (Fig. 4.41). Each is a small, round structure
of Leydig. Cell division occurs by meiosis and the nucleus of
consisting of a central medulla and an outer cortex of con-
each sperm contains the haploid number of chromosomes
nective tissue surrounded by a layer of epithelial cells con-
(see Ch. 16)
tinuous with the peritoneum known as the mesovarium.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
95
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Acrosome contains a lytic agent
whichdissolveseggmembrane
Oviduct -
Ureters-
during fertilisation 
Infundibulum
Ovary and
Corpus
oviduct
Ovary
luteum 
inthe
ovarian
bursa
Head-
Nucleus rich in DNA
Urinary
bladder
Uterine horn
Neck-
Centriole
Body of uterus
Middlepiece-
Axial filament
runs through
Cervix-
middlepiece
and tail
Mitochondria
Urethral orifice -
Vagina
Clitoris
Centrioles
Tail-
Vulva
Fig. 4.41 Dorsat view of the female reproductive tract of the dog
and cat
Axial filament
Uterine tube
Tail sheath
The uterine tube, oviduct or fallopian tube is a narrow tube
running from the trumpet-like infundibulum, which encloses
End piece
The axial filament
contains an array
the ovary, to the uterine horn. The edges of the infundibulum
are fringed with fmbriae, which aid in the capture of the
cilia and flagella as
seen in this transverse
newly released ova. The tube is convoluted, lined with cili-
section of the tail
ated epithelium and suspended by the mesosalpinx, which is
Fig. 4.40 Structure of a spermatozoon
continuous with the mesovarium. Its function is to convey
the ova to the uterus. Fertilization takes place within the
This forms a pouch known as the ovarian bursa, which
uterine tube.
 masks the ovary and contains an opening into the peritoneal
cavity.
Uterus
Within the ovarian connective tissue are many primary folli-
cles, each of which can develop into a mature or graafian folli-
The non-pregnant uterus lies in the pelvic and abdominal
cle. Each mature follicle contains a small amount of fluid and an
cavities; when pregnant the weight of the fetuses pulls the
ovum. The bitch and the queen are litter-bearing (multiparous)
uterus down into the abdominal cavity.
species, so they release several ova at the same time.
The uterus is a Y-shaped, hollow, muscular organ composed
During ovulation, the follicle ruptures on the surface
of two uterine horns, which unite, forming the small body or
of the ovary, releasing the ovum, which passes down the
fundus. The inner layer of epithelial and glandular tissue is
uterine tube. After ovulation there may be some bleeding
 called the endometrium and this thickens during pregnancy to
into the ruptured follicle. This is resorbed and replaced
receive the placenta. The endometrium is surrounded by
by a corpus luteum, which releases progesterone to maintain
layers of smooth muscle that form the myomeirium. It is sus-
the pregnancy. In the bitch the corpus luteum remains
o  a a m re a  pad
even in the non-pregnant animal for several weeks and
broad ligament, which forms the outermost layer. This shape
the resulting high levels of progesterone may cause a false
of the uterus, with two long horns, is designed to accommo-
pregnancy.
date litters of young.
96
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
The uterus has a dual blood supply:
between the labia is a knob of erectile tissue known as the
clitoris.
● An ovarian artery arises from either side of the aorta
just caudal to the kidney to supply each ovary and the
Mammary glands
uterine horn
 s ss p i  s 
● Each ovarian artery anastomoses with a uterine artery,
glandular tissue is surrounded by connective tissue and fat
which runs down the side of the uterine body and
(Fig. 4.42). The secretion - milk - is produced by secretory
cervix and supplies the more caudal parts of the tract.
epithelial cells and drains into gland sinuses and then into
teat sinuses. These narrow into teat canals and links to the
The function of the uterus is to contain the embryos/fetuses
outside via the teat orifices.
during pregnancy and provide nourishment for them to
develop to full term.
In the bitch and the queen mammary glands lie in two
parallel rows along the ventral abdomen. The bitch has five
Cervix, vagina and vulva
pairs and the queen has four pairs.
The cervix lies between the uterus and the vagina and is a
Mammary glands enlarge during pregnancy and start to pro.
duce milk a few days before parturition. Their development is
in the healthy animal during oestrus, mating and parturition.
controlled by the following hormones:
The vagina is a hollow muscular organ that extends from the
cervix to the external genitalia. It is capable of great dilation
● Oestrogen - cause initial development at puberty
and is lined by stratified epithelial cells. These cells change
throughout the oestrus cycle under the influence of oestro.
● Progesterone - enlargement during pregnancy
gen and progesterone.
● Prolactin - formation of milk during last third of
pregnancy
The vagina continues into the vestibule, a short passage that
 -   p dn on a rs s
● Oxytocin - causes contraction of smooth muscle
urethra enters in the floor of the tract and marks the change
around the glands and squeezes milk out of teats 
from vagina to vestibule. It contains vestibular glands, which
known as milk 'let down'.
lubricate the caudal genital tract. The muscles in the wall of
the vestibule constrict around the dog's penis and aid the 'tie'
during coitus.
The oestrous cycle
The oestrous cycle is the regular cycle of events that occurs in
The vuiva forms the external opening of the tract, guarded
the ovary and the reproductive tract of the postpubertal non-
by a pair of vertical labia. These contain striated muscle
pregnant female.
      s   s
vulva sealed. It is the vulval labia that become visibly
Reproductive function is under the control of gonadotrophins
engorged with blood when the bitch is in season. Lying
produced by the anterior pituitary gland (Table 4.6).
(Gonadotrophins are hormones that stimulate the gonads, i.e.
ovary or testis.) The release of gonadotrophins is controlled by
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GRH), which is produced
Section through
secretary tissue
in the hypothalamus and transported down the pituitary blood
portal system. The hypothalamus is sensitive to both internal
and environmental stimuli such as heat, light and particularly
the length of daylight available. It may also be stimulated
through pheromones, by the presence of other bitches and by
the male animal. The oestrous cycle is controlled by a complex
Teat sinus 
interplay between these stimuli, the hypothalamus and the
reproductive tract.
Teat canal
Teat orifice
The oestrous cycle occurs in distinct phases during which
events take place within the ovary, the reproductive tract and
Fig. 4.42 Section through a mammary gland
in the female animal's behaviour. (For further details see
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
6
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Ch. 17.) Table 4.7 shows the details of the oestrous cycle of
number) and are immature and incapable of being fertilized.
the bitch and the queen.
   n       m
Fertilization
Mature spermatozoa (sperm) pass from the seminiferous
The ova released at ovulation are propelled down the uterine
tubules of the testes into the epididymis where they undergo
tubes by the ciliated epithelium and the peristaltic action of the
a maturation period within the cauda epididymis. During
muscles lining the tube walls. At the time of ovulation the ova
ejaculation they are propelled up the ductus deferens into the
contain the haploid number of chromosomes (half the normal
urethra, through the penis and into the female tract. The
Table 4.6 Interaction between gonadotrophins and sex hormones
Follicle stimulating
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Luteotrophic factors
hormone (FSH)
Site of action by hormone
Developing follicle 
Mature follicle and corpus luteum
1. Corpus luteum
2. Mammary glands 
Effect of hormone
1. Follicular growth
1. Ovulation and formation of the
1. Progesterone secretion
2. Secretion of oestrogen
corpus luteum
maintained
 2. Secretion of progesterone
 2. Stimulates mammary gland
enlargement
Action/effect on the pituitary
Oestrogen secretion exerts
 Progesterone exerts negative
gland
negative feedback and prevents
feedback on the hypothalamus
further secretion of FSH but
and prevents further release of GRH
positive feedback stimulates
GRH
secretion of LH
Table 4.7 Phases of the oestrous cycles of the bitch and the queen
The bitch
The queen
Notes: Spontaneous ovulator. Monoestrous. Age at puberty - approx.
Sl uoseas buipaaig - snoiisaoAjod Aeuoseas 'lozejnao paonpul isanon
6 months but breed-dependent
between January and September. Age at puberty - approx. 5 months
but depends on month of birth
Phase
Length
Signs
Phase
Length
Signs
Pro-oestrus
9 days
Enlarged vulva, bloodstained
Oestrus
4-10 days
No external signs. Very
vaginal discharge. Flirty.
affectionate, rubs against
excitable behaviour. Will not 
objects, rolls over, lordosis,
allow mating
toud 'calling'
Oestrus
Approx. 9 days.
Vaginal discharge becomes
Dioestrus
Up to 14 days
Behaviour returns to normal
 Ovulation occurs
straw-coloured. Vulva even more
on Day 10 of the
enlarged. Excitable, flirty, stands
complete cycle
to allow mating
Metoestrus I
Appr0x. 20 days
Vulva shrinks, discharge dries up,
Anoestrus
Up to 4 months.
Normal behaviour
behaviour returms to normal
Occurs only in the
non-breeding season.
Metoestrus II Approx. 70 days
Behaviour and appearance is
normal
Anoestrus
Variable - 3-9 months Behaviour and appearance is
98
 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
sperm, containing the haploid number of chromosomes, use
Pregnancy
their tails to swim from the vagina through the cervix into
the uterus. They then enter the uterine tubes where fertiliza-
After fertilization the zygote moves down the uterine tube
tion takes place. Sperm are able to survive within the female
and by the time it reaches the uterine horns it has already
tract for up to 7 days waiting for mature ova to be available.
divided several times. At the 16-32 cell stage the structure is
called a morula and is a solid mass of cells resembling a black-
 Fertilization occurs when a single sperm penetrates an ovum
berry. Following a long journey down the tube during which
and the nuclei coalesce (Fig. 4.43).
the ball of cells floats free in the lumen of the tube it devel-
ops a fluid-filled cavity and is known as a blastocyst. By about
Each ovum released from the ovary is protected by a double
the 19th day the blastocysts space themselves evenly along
layer of cells - an inner layer of glycoprotein, the zona pelucida
the uterine horns and implantafion begins (Fig. 4.44). In order
and the outer layer of cells, the corona radiata. Sperm come into
to create equal numbers within each uterine horn, one or
contact with the ova by random movement. When the head of
 more blastocysts may cross the body of the uterus to implant
a sperm hits the zona pellucida, the acrosome, the tip of the
in the opposite horn - this is known as iransuterine migration.
sperm head bursts open, releasing an enzyme that softens the
connecting tissue membrane of the ovum. The sperm is then
During the oestrous cycle the uterus prepares to receive the
able to penetrate into the cytoplasm of the ovum. Further sper-
fertilized ova. In the follicular phase of the cycle there is
      d  
growth both of the myometrium and endometrium and an
change known as the fertiliza-tion reaction which causes thick-
increase in the blood supply of the uterus. The endometrium
ening of the surface of the ovum.
thickens, new blood vessels grow and glandular structures
hypertrophy. In the luteal phase of the cycle these changes
After penetrating the ovum the sperm tail is discarded. The
continue and the endometrium becomes secretory. When the
head and mid section are drawn through the cytoplasm
blastocysts reach the uterine horns they are bathed in the
toward the nucleus. The nuclear membrane breaks down,
uterine secretions, which provide nutrients and create the
forming a spindle along which the chromosomes of the
correct environment for survival.
sperm and ovum arrange themselves as in mitosis (see
Ch. 16). Fertilization of the ovum by the sperm results in a
Embryonic development
zygote (Box 4.7). The diploid number of chromosomes is
restored and the fertilized ovum or zygote is ready for its first
The cells of the blastocyst become organised to form on one
mitotic division (Fig. 4.43). As further divisions take place the
side of the cyst the inner cell mass and on the other side a
zygote continues to move down the uterine tube towards the
thinner layer known as the frophoblast. The inner cell mass
uterine horns.
becomes the embryo and divides into three germ cell layers
each of which has a specific role (Box 4.8).
Female nucleus-
Male nucleus
The inner cell mass curves around to become C-shaped,
Sperm
Zona pellucida
enclosing the endoderm and mesoderm, which form the
becomes
impermeable
internal organs. Table 4.8 shows the stages and timing of
to other sperm
 puppy development. Kittens develop in a similar way but are
usually slightly in advance of puppies.
Sperm tail left
outside ovum
Formation of the extra-embryonic
membranes
The trophoblast consists of the peripheral cells of the blasto-
cyst and is eventually responsible for attachment to the
uterine wall, i.e. implantation (Fig. 4.44). It develops small
finger-like outgrowths that project into the surrounding
tissue of the uterine wall, contributing to the placenta and
    s  
nutrients across the villi.
There are four extra-embryonic membranes that surround the
developing embryo. They protect the embryo and provide a
Fig. 4.43 Fertilization of the ovum
means of attachment to the uterine wall (Fig. 4.45).
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
99
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
3. The trophoblast and mesoderm expand and push up
Box 4.7 Reproduction
around the embryo, forming a fluid-filled cavity - the
Gamete - male (spermatozoa) and female (ova) germ
amniotic cavity. This is entirely separate from the
cells - each are formed by meiosis and contain the haploid
other cavities and it is the surrounding membrane or
number of chromosomes.
amnion in which the fetus is delivered.
 Zygote - the fertilized ovum which contains the diploid
4. Around the outer surface of the amnion creating a
number of chromosomes. Undergoes cell division by mitosis.
Embryo - the stage of development in which the major
double layer is the chorion, which is now in contact
organs are forming. Up to about 35 days
with the uterine endometrium. Projections called
Fetus - the stage from which the development of the
chorionic villi grow out from its surface to connect
major internal organs is complete. From 35 to 63 days.
with the maternal tissues as the placenta. Both
 Conceptus - the embryo or fetus, the extra embryonic
amnion and chorion consist of ectoderm and
membranes and the placenta.
mesoderm.
 Neonate - the new born animal
. - until the animal is
about 1 week old.
5. From the caudal end of the primitive embryonic gut
endodermal cells multiply and form a diverticulum
known as the allantois, which lies beside the yolk
sac. This collects urine from the fetal kidneys via a
1. Cells from the endoderm multiply and line the
tube or urachus that connects to the fetal bladder.
trophoblast, forming the yolk sac. This shrinks away
During development the allantois increases in size,
sometime before birth.
pushing between the amnion and the chorion,
eventually surrounding the embryo. The inner layer
2. Between the yolk sac and the trophoblast, mesodermal
fuses with the amnion, forming the allantoamnion,
cells divide into two layers forming a cavity - the outer
which contains lubricant fluids to assist movement
layer lies close to the trophoblast and forms the
towards the birth canal during parturition. The outer
chorion, and the inner layer lies close to the
layer forms the chorioallantois with the chorionic
yolk sac.
 s  m, an s o   
Eight-cell 
Morula ta solid
Fig. 4.44 Development
stage
mass of cells)
and implantation of the
embryo
Blastocyst
Two-cell stage
S
Y
Fertlised egg cell
Jterus
Secondary oocyte
Ovulation
-Ovary
Corpus luteum -
100
 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
during parturition as the fetus moves toward the birth
Box 4.8 Germ cell layers of the embryo
canal.
● Endoderm - the innermost layer forming the epithelium
which lines the viscera.
Development of the placenta
● Mesoderm - the middle layer forming the voluntary
 The placenta is the organ which is responsible for providing
muscle systems and viscera
nourishment of the developing embryo and fetus. Villus
· Ectoderm - the outer layer forming the skin, nervous
 structures develop from the chorioallantois and contain cap-
system and sensory structures
illary loops derived from the umbilical artery (Fig. 4.46). They
burrow into the endometrium of the uterus and project into
the maternal blood spaces, which receive blood from the
Table 4.8 The stages of puppy development
Stage of development
Time (post-fertilization)
Event
Pre-implantation
96 hours
Fertilized ovum divides into two cells
20 hours
Four cells
144 hours
Eight cells
192 hours
Ball of cells becomes a morula
8-9 days
 Morula passes down uterine tube and then into
uterine horn
Embryonic development
15 days
Blastocyst forms and floats free in the uterus
17-18 days
Placenta begins to develop
20-21 days
Embryos of less than 13 mm in diameter begin to
implant at equal distances within the walls of the
uterine horns. Central nervous system is forming
21-28 days
 Brain and spinal cord are developing. Embryo curls
around into the fetal position' All body organs, limb
 buds, head, eyes and face are forming
28 days
Embryo is about 25 mm in diameter and oval in
shape
29-30 days
Eyelids are closed and eyes begin to develop
beneath them. Male and female external
characteristics are forming
Fetal development
35-44 days
Organogenesis is complete by 35 days. Body is about
100 mm long. Body hair and coloured markings are
developing
45-55 days
Calcification of the skeleton is complete and will
show up on a radiograph. Fetus grows rapidly
57 days
Further rapid growth. Fetus is about 150 mm long.
Hair covering is complete; pads developed
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
101
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
A
-Inner cell mass
uterine artery. Only a thin endothelial layer separates the
-Endoderm
fetal and maternal systems and here nutrients and oxygen are
able to pass into the fetus and waste gases and nitrogenous
Trophoblast
waste pass from the fetus into the maternal circulation.
The placenta forms a thickened band around the conceptus
and is described as being a zonary placenta (Fig. 4.47) At the
B
 Inner cell mass
Mesodermdevelops
into the uterine endothelium caused during implantation.
and splits into two layers
These are referred to as the marginal haematoma. During par-
Endoderm
turition the broken-down blood in these haematomas colours
Trophoblast
 the parturient discharges. It is normal to see a green discharge
in the bitch and a brown discharge in the queen - any other
colour should be a cause for concern.
C
The placenta produces small amounts of oestrogen and proges-
Inner cell mass
terone, which act together to prevent further ovulation and
oestrous cycles during pregnancy. Their effects are responsible
for more vascular development of the uterine endometrium
Chorion
Yolk
 and glandular secretions. The uterine muscle relaxes and size
 increase becomes possible during the pregnancy.
-- Villi
Changes during pregnancy
-Amnion
The gestation period may be defined as the time between
Primitive gut
mating and parturition. The time is always expressed as a
range as there is great individual variation and the timing of
Allantois
fertilization is difficult to determine.
- Chorion
Cavity between
● Bitch 59-72 days - average 63 days or 9 weeks. Smaller
mesodermal layers
breeds whelp earlier than larger breeds.
Yolk sac
Villi
● Queen 61-70 days - average 63 days or 9 weeks.
Siamese and Persians will often go to 70 days.
E
Villi
Changes during pregnancy include:
 Amniotic cavity
● Enlargement of abdomen
Chorio allantois
● Mammary gland enlargement
Yolk sac
● Enlargement of the teats
Allantoic cavity
● Vulva remains enlarged and elastic throughout
pregnancy
Fig. 4.45 Stages in the development of the extra embryonic mem-
branes (a) Cells of the endoderm multipty and tine the trophobtast
● Clear mucoid vaginal discharge may be seen.
(b) Mesodermat cells divide into two layers forming a cavity
Relaxation and loosening of the ligaments in and around the
between them (c) The trophoderm and mesoderm expand and push
pelvic girdle area occurs a few days before actual birth.
up around the inner celf mass or embryo (d) The amniotic cavity is
formed; the yotk sac begins to shrink and the allantois develops
Alterations in abdominal configuration accompany such lig
from the primitive hindgut (e) The allantois fills with waste
ament relaxation. The abdomen, which earlier shows a uni-
form bulge develops a 'hollow' in the flank area. This change
products and extends around the embryo. Placentat viffi form
is clearly visible both in profile and from above and is fre-
around the outer surface and aid imptantation
quently referred to as a 'pear shaped' abdomen.
102
2Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Chorionic villus
● First stage - uterine contractions begin and cervix
dilates
Chorion-
Vein
● Second stage - delivery of the fetuses
● Third stage - expulsion of the membranes and
Umbillical
Artery
placenta or after-birth.
vein
 It may be referred to as whelping in the bitch and kittening
in the queen. Other species also have colloquial names for
Vein
parturition, e.g. calving in cows, foaling in horses and lambing
in sheep.
 Umbillical
 artery
)Artery
Maternal blood
Hormonal changes
space
Parturition is the expulsion of the fetus and its membranes
Placenta
 Uterine wall
from the uterus. It involves interaction between the hor-
monal and nervous system control mechanisms. It is thought
Oxygenated blood
to be initiated by the fetuses within the uterus. As they grow
Deoxygenated blood
larger they outgrow the available space, which results in dis-
Fig. 4.46 Arrangement of btood capiltaries within the ptacenta
tress and the secretion of cortisol from the fetal adrenal
glands. Cortisol causes the corpus luteum within the ovary to
degenerate and the levels of progesterone secreted by it
throughout pregnancy to fal. At the same time oestrogen
levels begin to rise and the uterine muscles, which were
Parturition
relaxed under the influence of progesterone, regain their
ability to contract and are described as being 'sensitized'.
Parturition occurs in three stages:
By this time the dam may feel ready to give birth, will be sen-
sitive to external stimuli such as darkness or privacy and will
A
search for somewhere to have her young. The presence of the
external stimuli will stimulate the hypothalamus and the
Extra embryonic
pituitary gland secretes two hormones:
membranes
● Prolactin - from the anterior pituitary gland stimu-
lates the formation of milk from the mammary glands
Marginal 
haematoma
● Oxytocin - from the posterior pituitary gland acts
 on the sensitized uterine muscle and initiates strong
Zonary placenta
contractions, which result in expulsion of the fetuses.
B
It also causes the milk to be released from the
 mammary glands when the neonates begin to suckle.
Marginal haematoma 
Chorioallantois
A hormone produced by the placenta called relaxin causes
relaxation and opening of the cervix and also primes the
Amnion
myometrium of the uterus to respond to oxytocin.
Prostaglandins are produced by the uterine tissue and help to
Umbilical cord
 supplement uterine contractions.
 Zonary placenta
Fig. 4.47 The zonary placenta of the dog and cat (a) Conceptus,
Signs of imminent parturition
showing zonary placenta (b) Section through the conceptus. 1,
Marginat haematoma; 2, Chonioatfantois; 3, Amnion; 4, Umbiticat
Subtle signs that indicate that parturition will soon occur
cord; 5, Zonary ptacenta
may be seen for a few days before the event.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
103
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
● Changes to the external sex organs, e.g. vulval lips
Second stage
   s   
 Increased uterine contractions propel the fetus through the
● Slight vaginal discharge may be seen as the cervix
cervix into the vagina. Once the fetus is in the birth canal
begins to dilate
abdominal contractions help to increase the propulsive force.
The fetus must rotate to meet the centre of the cervix and the
● Temperature may drop by a few degrees 6-18 h before
surrounding bags of fluid lubricate the passage of the fetus
parturition
(Fig. 4.48).
● Some bitches may go off their food
The young of litter-bearing or multiparous animals, e.g. cat
and dog, are born in longihudinat presentation, i.e. with the
 s  d d r  s  o
long axis of the puppy parallel to the long axis of the bitch.
prepare a nest.
 They may be born in anterior presentation, i.e. head and fore
limbs first or in posterior presentation, i.e. hind limbs first -
These behaviour patterns vary between individuals and some
        
bitches show no signs at all (see Ch. 17). Most queens will
cause dystocia or difficult birth (Fig. 4.49). A breech birth
search for somewhere to give birth, and this is usually in
is abnormal and occurs when the rump of the puppy is
private where they can remain undisturbed; however, some
presented with the hind limb pointing cranially.
queens seem to need human company.
After the birth of each puppy the bitch will break the amni-
otic sac over the head and lick the puppy to stimulate respi-
ration. She will also break the umbilical cord to separate it
from the placenta. A healthy puppy will then make its way
First stage
around to the teats and begin to suckle.
Mild uterine contractions start sweeping over the uterus and
The tzime between the onset of straining and birth varies
gradually bring about dilation of the cervix. This stage may
d e a  n a -  oe-oi o
last for up to 48 h but is very variable.
Third stage
The dam may show evidence of mild physical discomfort, e.g.
restlessness, agitation, panting, licking the vulva. Strings of
Delivery of the fetus is usually followed by expulsion of the
mucus may hang from the vulva and the first ‘water bag' or
placenta within about 30 min. During this stage the uterus
chorioallantois may rupture within the vagina. Milk may be
involutes or contracts and a green/brown discharge is passed
present in the mammary glands. The fetus becomes active
and moves from the curled fetal position to the extended
away by the bitch.
position ready for birth and the immature cardiac and res-
piratory systems become ready to take over from the placen-
In reality, in multiparous animals the second stage often alter-
tal exchanges that occur in utero. The contractions push the
nates with the third stage so the placenta may follow the deliv-
first fetus up against the cervix as it starts to dilate. Once the
ery of the puppy and then another puppy and placenta may
cervix is fully dilated the second stage begins.
follow.
The integument
The skin forms an unbroken layer over the body and is con-
tinuous with the mucous membranes of the mouth, nose and
genital openings. It is the largest organ of the body and has a
The integument refers to the outer covering of the body and
number of vital roles.
includes the skin, hair, claws and footpads.
Structure
The skin
Some features of skin vary depending on the area of the body
but the basic structure is always the same. It is tough, stretch-
The coat of a dog or cat is often its most striking feature but
able and of varying thickness, e.g. thickest where it is most
 it is the skin beneath which is the more complex structure.
exposed such as the footpads of the dog. It is also thicker over
104
 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
4
B
Fig. 4.48 Position of puppy during normal
Large bowel
 Large bowel
birth (a) Anterior presentation (b) Posterior
Kidney
(compressed)
Kidney
(compressed)
presentation
Hind limbs 
entering birth canal
Dilated vagina
Perineal
bulge
Bony pelvic
Bony pelvic
floor
floor
-Urinary bladder
Urinary bladder
compressed
compressed
 Umbillical
cord
Mammary tissue
A
B
C
Large bowel
Large bowel
Large bowel
Kidney
(compressed)
Kidney
(compressed)
Kidney
Presenting
(compressed)
Fore limbs entering
Buttocks and tail
shoulder
 birth canal
 entering birth canal
Dilated vagina
Dilated vagina
Dilated vagina
Bony pelvic 
Bony pelvic
 Bony pelvic 
floor
floor
floor
Urinary bladder 
Urinary bladder
 Urinary bladder 
Head deflected
ompressed
Head, neck
compressed
compressed
downwards
 and fore limb
deflected-
Fig. 4.49 Incorrect presentation (a) Downward flexion of the head (b) Sideways deviation of the head (c) Breech presentation
the dorsal and lateral surfaces of the body but at its thinnest
the surface. Keratin, a fibrous protein develops and
 over the ear flap, thorax, ventral surface of the abdomen and
 gives a hardened texture to the cells. In areas of hard
inner surface of the legs.
wear a clear layer forms due to the loss of the cell
nuclei, and the tightly packed cell structure
The skin (Fig. 4.50) is composed of three main layers:
4. Stratum corneum - flat, cornified cells, overlapping
Epidermis
each other as dry scales. If these scales remain intact,
Layer of non-vascular stratified epithelium of varying thick-
this top layer prevents the entry of harmful materials.
ness. The epidermis is made of four layers of cells:
 Keratinization is completed here and gives the
modified epidermal structures, e.g. hooves, beaks and
1. Stratum basale or germinativum - lowest layer in
hair their strength. Dead cells from this layer are
which cells divide rapidly by mitosis. Melanocytes
continuously sloughed off as dandruff or scurf and
(pigment cells) are found in this layer and are
      s m  pa
responsible for skin colour
Dermis or corium
2. Stratum spinosum - one to two cells thick but
Made up of dense, fibrous, elastic connective tissue, which con-
thicker in areas of wear, e.g. footpads
tains blood vessels and nerves. Bundles of smooth muscle called
the arrectores pilorum (singular arector pili) are attached to hair
3. Stratum granulosum - cells contain granules in the
follicles and when contracted cause hairs to become erect. The
cytoplasm and begin to die as they gradually move to
effect of this action increases the animal's ability to keep warm
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
105
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
in cold weather and, if used in the ' fight or flight' reaction when
● Protects against damage from water loss, mechanical
the animal raises its hackles along the back and neck, increases
trauma and ultraviolet light
the animal's apparent size. This layer also contains sebaceous
glands, sweat glands, sensory nerves and blood capillaries.
● Prevents absorption of toxic or harmful substances.
Hypodermis or subcutaneous layer
Production
Contains connective tissue and adipose tissue, allowing the skin
● Vitamin D, required for the absorption of calcium from
 to move over deeper structures without tearing or damage.
the intestines, is synthesized from dihydrocholesterol
 in sebum by the action of ultraviolet light
● Sebum from sebaceous glands forms a water-repellent
Function
layer over the skin and helps control bacterial
The many functions of skin include:
growth
● Sweat, which assists in the removal of some waste
Protection
products
● Acts as a barrier between the internal structures and
the external environment
● Pheromones, produced in special scent glands, are
used for communication with other animals for
●Prevents entry of microorganisms
reproductive or territorial purposes
● Protects underlying structures from injury
● Milk, released from the mammary glands.
Fig. 4.50 The structure of the skin
Stratum corneum - keratinasion complete
 Stratum lucidum - loss of nuclei
Stratum granulosum - cells start to flatten
 Stratum germinativum - with melanocytes between cells
Hair shaft
Epidermis
Sensory nerve
 Arrector pili muscle 
Sebaceous gland
Dermis
Sweat gland
Motor nerve
Adipose tissue
Vein-
Artery
Hypodermis
(subcutaneous layer)
106
 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Sensation
territorial marking. These sacs are intermittently
Sense organ with receptor nerves throughout the skin's
emptied by the passage of faeces.
surface needed to perceive touch, temperature, pressure and
pain.
● Mammary glands - their function is to produce
milk. They are the characteristic feature of mammals
and are present in both male and female animals.
Storage
 Fat as adipose tissue is an energy store and acts as an insula-
Modified epidermal structures
tion layer to help maintain the body temperature in cold
weather.
Hairs
Thermoregulation
These develop from pegs of epidermal cells, which project
● Heat loss - dilation of surface blood vessel walls and
downwards into the dermis and form a hair follicle. A small
sweating from the skin glands assists in the loss of water
area at the base invaginates and fills with a knot of blood
and salts that evaporate and cool the skin surface
capillaries, forming the hair papilla. The cells divide to
produce the keratinized hair shaft, which pushes up
● Heat gain - constriction of surface blood vessel walls
through the centre of the follicle and on to the centre. Each
follicle develops an arrector pili muscle and a sebaceous
conserves heat in the body
gland.
● Insulation - adipose tissue under the skin insulates the
body. Erection of hairs traps a layer of warm air
There are three main types of hair:
● Guard hairs - longer and coarser than the other
Communication
hairs; prevent water soaking into the coat and protect
 against mechanica1 damage
and used for communication with other animals of the
same species. The production of pheromones is used
● Wool hairs - softer and wavier than other hairs;
 lie close to the body surface forming an insulating
mainly for reproductive purposes.
layer
●Visual communication or camouflage involving coat
 colour or pattern.
● Sinus hairs (includes the whiskers) - Long coarse
hairs that protrude beyond the outline of the body.
● Response to threat or attack, the animal will raise its
The base of each hair is in contact with a blood-filled
'hackles' in order to appear larger.
sinus with a good nerve supply. Movement of the hair
'tweaks' the nerve fibres and a nerve impulse is sent to
Skin glands
the brain, where it is interpreted.
Claws
Glands in the skin produce a variety of secretions:
 Beak shaped and formed as two sheets of epidermis, which
● Sebaceous glands surrounding hair follicles
form the claw walls. The sole between them and facing the
secrete sebum. Its function is to form a thin, oily,
ground surface is a soft, flaky horn. At the base is a fold of
water-repellent layer over the skin surface. It gives the
skin called the claw fold. In the centre of the claw between
coat hair a shiny appearance and helps to prevent
the last bone of the toe and the horn of the claw, is the
bacterial growth on the skin surface.
dermis, which contains blood capillaries and nerve fibres -
often referred to as the 'quick'
● Sweat glands or sudoriferous glands will either
 open into the hair follicle or to the skin surface. Sweat
The functions of a claw include:
evaporates and causes cooling of the body and also
contains some waste from the body.
● Assisting in locomotion by providing grip
● Anal glands or anal sacs - lie on either side of the
● Used for obtaining food
anal sphincter. Their secretion has an unpleasant
smell and is thought to be used as a pheromone for
● Fighting, especially in cats.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
107
Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
Each of the five digits of the foot has a claw. The first
McBride D 1996 Learning veterinary terminotogy.C V Mosby,
digit or dew claw is small and bears no weight so the
St Louis, MO
claw is not worn down and may cause problems with over-
growth. Cats' claws are narrower than those of dogs and are
Tighe M, Brown M 1998 Mosby's comprehensive review for veteri-
usually retracted into the claw fold by ligaments. The claws
nary technicians. C V Mosby, St Louis, MO
can be quickly unsheathed by muscular action when
required.
Recommended reading
Footpads
Aspinall V 2005 Essentials of veterinary anatomy and physiology.
Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford
These are the weight-bearing surface of the animal's foot. The
footpad is hairless and covered in specialized epidermis that
Quick reference guide to all the important facts - useful for
is thick, roughened and normally pigmented. Sweat glands
revision.
are present in the dermis and beneath this is the toe or digital
cushion, made of fatty or adipose tissue with a good blood
Aspinall V, O'Reily M 2003 Introduction to veterinary anatomy
supply. The pads are oval, or heart-shaped depending on their
and physiotogy. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford
location in the dog and are more rounded in the cat. The
a d d a  d d 
walking and act as shock absorbers when running or
the correct depth of knowledge for student veterinary nurses.
 jumping.
Bowden S 2003 Anatomy and physiology workbook. Butterworth
Bibliography
Heinemann, Oxford
Allen W E 1992 Fertility and obstetrics in the dog. Blackwell
The fun way to revise anatomy and physiology! Provides a series of
Scientific Publications, Oxford
games and exercises to test your knowledge.
Tartaglia L, Waugh A 2002 Veterinary physiotogy and applied
and physiology. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford.
anatomy. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford
Lane D R,Cooper B 2003 Veterinary nursing, 3rd edn.Butterworth
Provides in depth coverage of the subject at a more advanced level.
Heinemann, Oxford
Recommended for those who wish to take the subject further.
108
3 Canine and feline anatomy and physiology
5
Comparative anatomy and
physiology of the exotic species
Victoria Aspinall
Key Points
● The rabbit is a warm-blooded mammal that is subjected
● The anatomy of the bird is unlike that of any other group
to constant predation by many carnivorous species. Much
of animals and the metabolic and physical demands of
 of its anatomy and physiology is adapted to sensing
flight are shown in almost every system of the body.
 danger and making a rapid escape.
● Reptiles are cold-blooded animals that breed on land.
● Rodents make up 40% of all mammalian species but only
There are approximately 6500 species and they share
a few species are commonly kept as captive pets.
 many anatomical features, but they also exhibit 
● The digestive system of the small captive rodent is the
individual species variation that reflects their habitat
most likely to cause clinical problems. These problems are
and lifestyle.
usually linked to the fact that rodent teeth grow constantly
● Fish are vertebrates that show numerous anatomical and
n
and incorrect dietary care can lead to malocclusion.
physiological adaptations to life in water. The most
● The domestic ferret is a true carnivore and shares many
obvious is the ability to breathe by means of gills.
anatomical features with the domestic cat.
Introduction
within the practice it is necessary to have some knowledge of
It is no longer rare to be presented in the surgery with an
their individual anatomy and physiology. This chapter will
animal that is classed as an exotic species, i.e. one that is
take the basic plan of the mammal as exemplified by dogs
neither a cat nor a dog. In order to understand their care
and cats and highlight the differences.
Small mammals
50 different breeds, which vary in colour and size. The head
 is rounded, with protuberant eyes set laterally, providing a
wide field of monocular vision that enables the individual to
The rabbit
detect predators. The ears are long and black-tipped and can
sada aau pnos dn ynd on radap pao aa
Rabbits are warm-blooded mammals and members of the
about 12% of the body surface and are extremely vascular,
class Lagomorpha, which also includes the hare and a guinea-
making them a useful means of thermoregulation. The lips
pig-like creature known as the pika. The feature that distin-
are soft and the upper lip is divided by a deep philtrum,
 guishes them from members of the rodent family is that they
which allows the rabbit to nibble grass very short.
possess two pairs of upper incisor teeth while the class
Rodentia has only one pair. In the wild rabbits are subject to
The skin of the rabbit is well supplied with scent glands par-
constant predation by carnivorous species and much of their
ticularly under the chin, around the anus and in the inguinal
anatomy and physiology is adapted to sensing danger and
region. The rabbit is strongly territorial and the development
making a rapid escape.
of these glands which are affected by the reproductive hor
mones reflects the degree of sexual activity. As the female
 rabbit matures she develops a large flap of skin or the dewlap
Morphology
under her chin from which fur is pulled to line the nest prior
to giving birth.
The wild rabbit is covered in brown ticked fur, which
camouflages it. The average rabbit weighs about 2.5 kg but
The forelimbs are relatively short and used for digging while
selective breeding has led to the development of at least
the hind limbs are long and powerful. They provide the main
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
109
Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
force needed for the hopping motion that is a characteristic
Diqestive svstem
of the rabbit. There are no footpads and the undersurface of
the foot is covered in coarse fur. There are five toes on each
The rabbit is a herbivore and thrives on coarse plant material
forepaw and four on each hind paw, each of which ends in a
with a high fibre content. The oral cavity is long and narrow
sharp claw. The tail is short and fluffy and its white underside
and the tongue is fleshy. The teeth are all open-rooted, which
“flashes' as the animal runs, acting as a warning to other
enables them to grow continuously throughout life. Dental
members of the group.
problems are the most common reason for visiting the vet
erinary surgery. The dental formula is shown in Table 5.1.
The incisor teeth are chisel-shaped for nibbling food, while
Musculoskeletal system
the premolars and molars are flatter and ridged for grinding
fibrous grass and hay. There are no canine teeth (Fig. 5.2). The
The skeleton represents only 7-8% of the body weight and
gap between the incisors and the premolars is known as the
         s 
diastema.
the cat, whose skeleton occupies 12-14% of the body weight.
Incorrect or clumsy handling of the animal may cause frac-
The digestive tract is long compared to that of the dog and
tured limbs or spine. In addition, older rabbits, those that are
cat as plant material is relatively difficult to digest. The
overweight or those not given sufficient exercise may develop
stomach is simple and thin-walled and acts as a reservoir for
osteoporosis or thinning of the cortex.
food and ingested faeces. Both the cardiac and pyloric
sphincters are well developed and rabbits are unable to
Apart from obvious differences in conformation (Fig. 5.1) the
vomit, making starvation prior to anaesthesia unnecessary.
skeleton is largely similar to that of the cat. The number of
The duodenum, jejunum and ileum are long, with a small
vertebrae in the vertebral column is C7, T12-13, L7, S4, Cd16.
lumen. The ileum terminates at the caecum in a rounded
Triangular scapula
Suprahamate
process 
Fused radius
Short fibula
and ulna -
fused to tibia
Fig. 5.1 Skeleton of the rabbit
110
Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
Table 5.1 Dental formulae of the commonly kept small mammals
Species
Latin name
Dental formula
Rabbit
Oryctotagus cunicutus
[I 2/1 C 0/0 PM 3/2 M 3/3 ] × 2 = 28
Mouse
Mus muscuus
[I 1/1 C 0/0 PM 0/0 M 3/3] × 2 = 16
Rat
Rattus norvegicus
[I 1/1 C 0/0 PM 0/0 M 3/3] × 2 = 16
Syrian or golden hamster
Mesocricetus auratus
91 = z × [≤/ W 0/0 Wd 0/0  t/t 1]
Gerbil
Meriones unguicufatus
[I 1/1 C 0/0 PM 0/0 M 3/3] × 2 = 16
Chipmunk
Tamias sibiricus
[I 1/1 C 0/0 PM 0/0 M 3/3] × 2 = 16
Guinea pig
Cavia porcellus
0 = × [2/  / wd 0/0  t/ 1]
Chinchilla
Chinchilla tanigera
[I 1/1 C 0/0 PM 1/1 M 3/3] × 2 = 20
Ferret
Mustela putorius furo
 = x [z/  /  / / 1]
After swallowing, the food undergoes monogastric digestion
Dental fommula: (12 C0 PM 3 M3)x 2 = 28
Maxilary cheek teeth
within the stomach in a similar way to that seen in the dog
and cat. The ingesta passes into the small intestine and then
3 premolars 2-3 molars
into the caecum. When it enters the colon, muscular con-
tractions separate the fibrous from the non-fibrous com-
ponents. The fibrous material travels on down the digestive
tract and is passed out as hard pellets within about 4 h of
eating. The remaining softer and more fluid material passes
back into the caecum where it undergoes fermentation by
colonies of microbes that are able to produce the enzyme cel-
lulase for the breakdown of the cellulose plant cell walls. At
Diastema
 intervals the now digested material is squeezed into the colon
by peristalsis and leaves the anus as softer pellets or cae-
1st maxillary
 snd e -  a   e  s
incisor
as coprophagia or caecotrophy. These are produced within
2nd incisor
Mandibular
 2 premolars 3 molars 
3-8 h of ingestion of the original food material, often at night
(peg tooth)
incisor
and, are covered in mucus, which protects them from the
Mandibular cheek teeth
stomach acid. Food ingested by the rabbit passes through the
Fig. 5.2 Normat dentition of the rabbit
digestive tract twice in 24 h and in this way nutrients pro-
duced by microbial fermentation are made available to the
rabbit. Although fibre has very little nutritional value it is an
essential component of a rabbit's diet to wear the teeth down
structure known as the sacculus rotundus or the ileo
and to stimulate peristalsis and digestive function.
caecal tonsil (Fig. 5.3) inside which is a network of lymphoid
follicles.
Urinary system
The caecum is the largest organ in the abdominal cavity.
The kidneys are unipapillate in contrast to the multipapillate
occupying most of the right side. It is thin-walled, sacculated
kidneys of the dog and cat. The structure of the kidney varies
and coils in on itself, ending in a vermiform appendix, which
with the species of rabbit and its associated environment.
also contains lymphoid material. The colon is also sacculated
Desert-living rabbits have large kidneys with an extremely
and leads into the rectum.
well developed ability to concentrate urine, and thus con-
serve water, while those of alpine rabbits are small and
Digestion
produce more dilute urine.
The rabbit is a herbivorous, monogastric hindgut fermenter.
The urine of the rabbit is the main method of calcium excre-
Plant material is masticated within the oral cavity with the
tion and the urine, depending on the intake of calcium in the
aid of the flattened surfaces of the molars and premolars.
diet, is often thick and creamy because of its high calcium
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
111
Comparative anatomv and phvsioloqv of the exotic species
Fig. 5.3 Digestive system of the rabbit
Oesophagus
Stomach
Pancreas
Duodenum
Jejunum and ileum
Appendix
Sacculus rotundus
Colon
(transition of ileum
into caecum)
Anal glands
Rectum
carbonate content. The colour also varies from white to
Female or doe
yellow or even red. These changes are normal and are due to
The bicornuate uterine tract has evolved to produce large
certain pigments excreted by the kidney.
litters of young and consists of two long uterine horns, each
of which enters the vagina via its own cervix. There is no
uterine body. The mesometrium that suspends the tract
within the peritoneal cavity contains abundant amounts of
Reproductive system
fat and is a major fat storage area.
Male or buck
The doe is an induced ovulator and does not have a well
The almost hairless scrotum contains two testes and lies
defined oestrous cycle. Periods of sexual receptivity occur in
 Cranial to the penis. This position is unlike that of any other 
domestic rabbits at 4-6-day intervals. Ovulation takes place
placental mammal, where the scrotum lies caudal to the
within 10 h of coitus. (For further details of reproduction see
penis. The testes descend at about 12 weeks of age and the
Table 5.2.) The doe has four or five pairs of nipples. The
inguinal canal remains open. There is no os penis. The buck
young are altricial, i.e. blind, deaf and bald, and entirely
has no nipples.
dependent on their mother until they are weaned.
112
 Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
Table 5.2 Biological data relating to rabbits and small mammals
Chinchilla
Gerbil
Guinea pig
Golden hamster Mouse
Rat
Rabbit
Life span (years)
10-12
3-4
4-8
2-3
2-3
3-4
5-12
Adult weig ht
400-600 g
50-60 g
750-1000 g
80-120 g
20-40 g
400-800 g
1-8 kg
Body temperature (°℃)
38-39
37.4-39
38.6
36.2-37.5
37.5
38.0
38.3-39.4
Respiratory rate (breaths/min)
40-80
90-140
90-150
70-80
100-250
70-150
35-60
Pulse rate (beats/min)
100-150
250-500
130-190
280-412
500-600
260-450
130-325
Oestrus cycle (days)
41;seasonally
4-6
15-17
4
4-5
4-5
No regular
polyoestrous
cycle; induced
ovulator
 Age at puberty
8 months
10 weeks
M 8-10 weeks;
6-10 weeks
6-7 weeks
8-10 weeks
4-6 months
F 4-5 weeks
Gestation period (days)
111
24-26
63
16
19-21
20-22
28-32
Development of young at birth
Precocial
 Altricial
Precocial
Altricial
Altricial
Altricial
Altricial
Weaning age
6-8 weeks
24-27 days
2-3 weeks
3-4 weeks
3-4 weeks
3-4 weeks
4-6 weeks
Type of diet
Herbivorous;
Omnivorous;
Herbivorous;
Omnivorous;
Omnivorous;
Omnivorous;
Herbivorous;
coprophagic
coprophagic.
 need vitamin C 
coprophagic
coprophagic
coprophagic
coprophagic
Natural behaviour
Nocturnal;
Nocturnal;
Diurnal; social
Nocturnal;
Nocturnal;
Nocturnal;
Crepuscular;
social
monogamous
solitary
social
social
social
Source: Adapted from Aspinall v 2003 Clinical procedures in veterinary nursing. Butterworth-Heinemann, Edinburgh
fully furred with their eyes open and capable of eating
Small rodents
solid food within the first 24 h of life.
Members of the order Rodentia - the rodents - make up 40%
The rodents are warm-blooded mammals and as such they
of all mammals but only a few species are kept as pets. Those
have many similarities with the dog and cat. However the
that are kept in captivity include mice, rats, gerbils, hamsters,
most notable difference is in the anatomy of the digestive
chipmunks, guinea pigs and chinchillas. Their common char-
system, which has evolved to deal with a range of diets.
acteristic is that they have incisor teeth with a persistent pulp
cavity, i.e. the cavity remains open, unlike the pulp cavity of
Digestive system
the incisors of the cat and dog, which shrinks once the tooth
is fully developed. As a result the teeth continue to grow and
Omnivores, e.g. mouse, rat, gerbil, hamster and
the animal must gnaw on hard food, wood or stone to keep
the incisors at a normal length.
chipmunk
These species eat a wide variety of different foodstuffs, includ-
Rodents can be subdivided into three groups. These are:
ing leaves, seeds, roots, fruit, insects such as crickets and
locusts, cheese, hard-boiled egg and cooked meat. Their den-
● The myomorphs - the mouse like rodents. They are
tition consists of one pair of chisel-shaped incisors designed
all omnivores and include rats, mice, gerbils and
to gnaw and bite the food and flattened premolars and
hamsters. The young are altricial
 molars or cheek teeth for grinding and breaking up the plant
 material. Dental formulae are shown in Table 5.1. The inci-
● The sciuromorphs - the squirrel-like rodents. They
sors retain an open pulp cavity and grow throughout life,
are all omnivores and include the chipmunks. The
while the cheek teeth stop growing once they have reached
young are altricial
full size. The gap in the jaw between the incisors and the
cheek teeth is known as the diastema. Malocclusion or
● The histricomorphs - relates to their reproductive
difficulty in closing or bringing the teeth together caused by
 patterns. They are all herbivores and include guinea
 abnormal growth is the most common problem seen in pet
pigs and chinchillas. The young are precocial, i.e. born
rodents.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
113
Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
Both the hamster and the chipmunk have cheek pouches,
which are diverticula from the oral cavity lined with mucous
membrane and used to carry food long distances back to the
food storage chambers within their nest complexes. The
pouches can become impacted, particularly in newly weaned
animals.
Oesophagus
The stomach is simple and digestion within it is monogastric.
In the rat, mouse and gerbil the lining epithelium is mostly
non-glandular. Lying between the oesophagus and the
Liver
cardiac region is a ridge that prevents regurgitation and
Gall bladder
makes vomiting impossible. The intestine is relatively longer
Bile duct
than that seen in the carnivorous dog and cat but shorter
than that seen in the herbivores. As plant material makes up
Pancreas
 Stomach
only part of the diet there is no organ specifically adapted for
Duodenum
microbial fermentation and breakdown of cellulose; however,
Pancreatic duct
Transverse
the hamster has a distinct forestomach which is adapted for
colon
this purpose. The rat has no gall bladder but it is present in
the other omnivores.
All omnivores show a degree of caecotrophy or coprophagia
and the faecal pellets are thought to contain a significant
Caecum
 Small intestine
amount of vitamin B produced by the microbial flora living
Mesentery
in the colon.
Ascending colon
Descending colon
 Rectum
Herbivores, e.g. guinea pig and chinchilla
These species live mainly on the leafy parts of plants and in
the guinea pig in particular it is essential that it receives fresh
green food daily. The liver of the guinea pig is unable to
manufacture vitamin C and if deprived of green food con-
taining the vitamin it will begin to show symptoms and will
eventually die.
Fig. 5.4 Digestive system of the guinea pig
The dentition consists of chisel-shaped incisor teeth and
flattened premolars and molars, all of which retain an open
The ferret
pulp cavity so grow throughout the animal's life. The dental
formulae are shown in Table 5.1. As with the other species,
The domestic ferret is a member of the family Mustelidae and
malocclusion is a common problem. The stomach is simple
is therefore related to other members of the family such as
and lined with a glandular epithelium, and digestion is
the polecat, weasel, stoat and badger. These species are noted
monogastric. The small intestine is moderately long and lies
for their pungent smell, which comes from sebaceous glands
mainly on the right of the side of the peritoneal cavity
distributed within the skin and also the anal glands. They are
The much longer large intestine fills the left and central parts
carnivorous mammals and as such show many similarities to
of the cavity. The most significant part of the large intestine
the cat. Working ferrets are used to kill rats and rabbits but
is the caecum, which is large and thin-walled and has
they are also becoming popular as domestic pets.
many lateral pouches created by bands of smooth muscle
in the walls (Fig. 5.4). Inside the caecum are large numbers
Morphology
of microorganisms, which are responsible for the fermenta-
tion and breakdown of cellulose within the plant cell
The tubular body is long and very flexible and is designed to
walls. They also contribute extra nutrients such as vitamin B
go down holes in pursuit of prey. The neck is long and mus-
to the digested food mixture. Both guinea pigs and
cular with a similar diameter to that of the rest of the body.
chinchillas exhibit caecotrophy. Animals deprived of the
The head is small, with small ears set on the crown of the
        
head and eyes that point forwards. These provide binocular
malnutrition.
three-dimensional vision, which enables the ferret to locate
114
 Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
its prey accurately. Their eyesight is poor and is adapted to
large and may be visible when the mouth is closed. The pre-
the low light levels found within tunnels.
molars and molars are similar to those of the cat. The third
upper premolars are the largest of the cheek teeth and are
The legs of the ferret are short and are used mainly for
known as the carnassials. The dental formula is shown in
digging. Ferrets are excellent climbers and if the surface is
Table 5.1.
rough enough to grip they may reach great heights. There are
five toes on each foot, each ending in a non-retractable claw.
As in all carnivores the digestive tract is quite short as meat is
The skin is thick to provide protection from bites and the fur
easily digested and therefore takes less time. The stomach is
is very dense. The natural colour is cream, with black guard
simple and small but capable of enormous distension with
hairs, black feet and tail and a black mask on the face. This is
food. The small and large intestines follow a similar pattern
the colour of the closely related polecat and in the ferret is
to that seen in the cat. There is no caecum or ileocaecal valve.
described as 'fitch'. Other colours that may also occur natu-
 The ferret has a six-lobed liver, a gall bladder and a pancreas
rally include albino, sandy or cinnamon.
that has two parts, which open into the duodenum close to
the pylorus.
Musculoskeletal system
The pattern of the skeleton is similar to that of the cat
(Fig. 5.5). The spine is extremely flexible and allows the ferret
Reproductive system
to bend at an angle of at least 180o The arrangement of the
vertebral column is C7, T15, L5-6, S3, Cd 18. The thoracic
Male or hob
inlet is small and may quite easily be blocked by an abnormal
The two testes lie externally within the scrotum and once the
n
 mass, which will interfere with breathing and swallowing.
testes have descended the inguinal ring closes. During the
breeding season the testes become noticeably enlarged as
Digestive system
 s      s
lying within the caudal section of the penis and dorsal to the
The ferret is a true carnivore and this is reflected in its denti-
urethra (Fig. 5.5). The opening of the prepuce is on the
tion and the anatomy of the digestive tract. The teeth are
ventral abdomen in a similar position to that of the dog. The
extremely sharp and are adapted for killing prey and tearing
male ferret has teats. Further reproductive details are shown
flesh off the bone. The incisors are prominent; the canines are
in Table 5.3.
Cervical 
vertebrae
Thoracic vertebrae
Lumbar vertebrae
Skull
Sacrum
Coccygeal vertebrae
 Scapula 
Humerus
Radius-
Stemum
Patella 
Femur-
UIna
Tibia-
Fibula-
Hock Jshaped os penis 
Fig. 5.5 Skeleton of the ferret
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
115
L
Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
Table 5.3
 Biological data relating to the ferret
Parameter
Measurement
Comment
Life span 
 5-11 years
Adult weig ht
Jill: 600-900 g
Weight fluctuates with the time of year - heavier in the winter
Hob: 1-2 kg
Body temperature
37.8-40℃
Rises to 40°℃ when excited
Respiratory rate
30-40 breaths/min
Pulse rate
200-400 beats/min
Oestrous cycle
 Seasonally polyoestrous.
Season starts in March and continues until September. Female remains in oestrus
Induced ovulator
until mated. Ovulation occurs 30-40 h after mating
Age at puberty
Jill: 7-10 months
 Puberty occurs in the spring after birth, so age varies
Hob: 5-14 months
Gestation period
38-44 days
Young are altricial. May be eaten by the jill if disturbed
Litter size
2-6
Weaning age
6-8 weeks
Diet
Carnivorous
Require 30% protein, 30% fat. Can be fed on tinned or dry cat food
Source: Adapted from Aspinall V 2003 Clinical procedures in veterinary nursing. Butterworth-Heinemann, Edinburgh
Table 5.4 Commonly kept species of cage and aviary birds
Order
Species
Common name
Psittaciformes - noted for their bright plumage and
Psittacus erithacus
 African grey parrot
ability to mimic sounds
Amazona species
Amazon parrots
Ara species
Macaws
Ectectus species
Eclectus parrots
Nymphicus hotlandicus
Cockatiel
Metopsittacus undulatus
Budgerigar
Trichoglossus species
Lories and lorikeets
Cacatua sutphurea sutphurea
Lesser sulphur crested cockatoo
Passeriformes - so-called perching birds; contains over
Serinus canaria
Canary
half the living species of bird
Poephita quattata
Zebra finch
Chtoebia goutdiae
Gouldian finch
Gracuta retigiosa
Mynah bird
Columbiformes
Cotumbia livia
saAop pue suoabid
Coturnix species
Quail
Female or jill
and becomes enlarged during the oestrous cycle. The jill is
The bicornuate uterus consists of two long uterine horns
seasonally polyoestrous and an induced ovulator. Coitus may
with no uterine body. This adaptation is essential to pro-
last for 1-3 h and can be a violent procedure. Ovulation
duce the litters of 8-10 young commonly seen in the
takes place within 30-40 h of coitus. The young, known
ferret. The small slit-like vulva lies ventral to the anus
as kits, are altricial. (For further details see Table 5.3.)
116
 Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
teton
The skeleton of the bird (Fig. 5.6) is adapted to support
Birds are members of the Class Aves and as such have an
both walking and flying and has many specialized fea-
outer covering of feathers. There are about 8500 species of
tures, which result in a strong but light framework. These
  a s   e  ia 
include:
as cage and aviary birds; examples of these are shown in
Table 5.4.
● A reduction in the total number of bones
Most species of bird are able to fly although there are some
● Fusion of some joints to form strengthening plates of
species, e.g. penguin, ostrich, kiwi, which remain land-
bone
bound. The ability to fly has contributed to their great eco-
logical success and they are distributed within most habitats
● A reduction in the density of bone - many bones have
 in the world. Their anatomy and physiology is very different 
 a thin cortex which is strengthened by the addition of
to that seen in the mammal and adaptations to the metabol-
 a network of bony struts
ically demanding ability to fly are shown in almost every
body system and affect such factors as metabolism, body
● Loss of the internal components - many bones are
weight, stability and wind resistance.
hollow and filled with air sacs.
Fig. 5.6 Sketeton of a hawk
Alula (first digit)
 Major metacarpal
Orbit-
Second digit 
Upper
Third digit 
mandible
Lower
mandible
Radius
Cervical-
Ulna
vertebrae
Humerus
Scapula
Furcula
Thoracic
Coracoid
vertebrae
Sternum-
Synsacrum
Uncinate process
Complete rib 
Femur-
Tibiotarsus
Tarsometatarsus
Pygostyle
Pubis Ischium Coccygeal vertebrae
xnlH
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
117
Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
Axial skeleton
● The vertebral column is divided into the different
regions as in other animals; however, there are fewer
vertebrae in the central regions and more in the
● The skull shows many adaptations, which contribute
 cervical and coccygeal regions, which allows greater 
to the overall reduction in weight. A lightweight beak
flexibility. The neck may contain as many as 25
covers the mandible and replaces the teeth. The upper
vertebrae, depending on the species. Birds have 12
beak articulates with the rest of the skull by means of
caudal or coccygeal vertebrae, the first few of which
the craniofacial hinge, which increases the mobility of
are mobile to enable movement of the tail and the
the beak during feeding. The lower beak hinges on the
remaining ones are fused to form the pygostyle, which
quadrate bone, which enables the beak to open wide
carries the tail feathers. The thoracic, lumbar and
and makes dislocation of the beak very unlikely. The
sacral vertebrae are fused to form a rigid frame to
large eyes are housed within a pair of thin-walled
support the rib cage and the legs.
orbits. Each orbit is surrounded by a ring of bony
 plates, known as the sclerotic ring, which protects and
● The sternum is extended into a large concave keel,
 supports the structure of the eyeball.
which provides an increased surface area for the
Fig. 5.7 Bird in fight showing the structure
of the wing. Thrust provided by outer
pnmanes; fift by inner primaries and
secondaries
Primary
wing
-Phalanges
feathers-
Radius
Feather
Ulna
shaft -
Humerus
Scapula
Contour
feathers
Coracoid
Secondarywing
Clavicle
feathers
Keel (stemum)
Ribs
118
 Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
attachment of the flight muscles. Flightless birds do
Wing muscles
not have a keel.
The most prominent are the pectorals, which are large and
superficial and responsible for the powerful down beat of the
Appendicular skeleton
and are responsible for the up beat of the wing. Both pairs
● The pectoral girdle is formed from three pairs of
originate on the keel, with the pectoral inserting on the
bones - the coracoids, scapulae and clavicles. On each
underside of the humerus and the supracoracoid inserting on
side the glenoid cavity is formed by the junction of
n       d 
the coracoid and the scapula and the humerus of the
fliers these muscles make up about 25% of the body weight
upper wing inserts into this cavity, forming the
and in the pigeon they make up 40% of body weight.
shoulder joint. The pair of clavicles, often referred to
 as the wishbone, keep the shoulders separated.
Leg muscles
● The wings (Fig. 5.7) attach to the body at the
Most of the muscles lie high up the leg or on the body itself
shoulder joint, which allows rotation in several planes.
and they control movements by means of long tendons that
The bones of the wing are reduced to the humerus, a
run down the leg. Extensor tendons run down the front of
separate radius and ulna, fused carpal and metacarpal
the tibiotarsus and the tarsometatarsus while the flexor
bones and two digits. Digit 3 is fused to the metacarpal
tendons run down the back of the leg. The digital flexor
bones and is the main digit. It carries the primary
tendon runs in a groove at the top of the tarsometatarsus and
feathers. Digit 1 forms the alula or bastard wing and
supplies each of the digits. As the bird bends its leg to perch
carries a few feathers for controlling takeoff and
the tendon is pulled taut and the toes flex and tighten the
landing. The shape of the wing, which varies with the
hold on the branch. This is the perching reflex and is the
species and affects the type and speed of flight, is
reason why birds can sleep on a branch without falling off.
slightly curved from front to back, forming an aerofoil
shape that creates lift as the bird flaps its wings.
Integument
● The pelvic girdle is formed by three pairs of bones 
the ilium, ischium and pubis - which join to form the
The integument of the bird consists of skin and its derivatives
joint into which the femur of the leg inserts. The distal
the claws, beak and feathers. The structure of the skin and its
ends of the three bones are not fused, leaving the
associated glands is similar to that of the dog and cat and the
 d  a  d sd a p h 
claws and the beak are made of a tough horn that grows
eggs out of the body cavity.
throughout the bird's life. However, it is the feathers that are
the distinctive characteristic of the bird family.
● The upper leg is formed by a short, wide femur
which ends at the stifle joint. This is directed forward
 Feathers derive from epidermal cells in a similar way to the
so that the lower leg is under the bird's centre of
hairs of mammals. They are made of keratin and have several
gravity. The middle of the leg consists of a fused tibia
functions. They:
and fibula known as the tibiotarsus, which ends at the
hock joint, consisting of a single fused tarsometatarsus.
● Form a waterproof covering that protects the thin skin
Most species of bird possess four toes with three
from physical and chemical damage
pointing forwards and one pointing back. However,
the members of the parrot family and the woodpeckers
● Create a smooth outer covering to the wing that
have two toes pointing forwards and two pointing
cannot be penetrated by air, enabling the downward
backwards. Owls and ospreys have a fourth toe that is
force of the wing to bring about lift
opposable and can face backwards or forwards, which
enables them to use their feet to pick up their prey.
● Provide insulation of the body
● Provide camouflage
Muscular system
● Are involved in communication between birds of the
same species.
The average bird has between 175 and 200 muscles, many of
which are placed on the ventral surface of the body close to
All feathers have a similar structure, consisting of a central
the centre of gravity
shaft or rachis that is filled with blood capillaries during
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
¥119
Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
Rachis
Barb
Barbule
Fig. 5.8 (a) Feather structure and (b) types of feather: 1,
primary and contour; 2, Down; 3, Filoptume
Hooklet
vane
Rachis
Calamus
Primary and
Down
 Filoplume
 contour feather 
B
1
2
3
growth but later becomes hollow (Fig. 5.8). The shaft gives off 
 body. They are shorter and more flexible than the
the flattened vane, which consists of barbs and interlocking
flight feathers and the lowest part closest to the body
barbules that hook together to produce a wind-resistant
may be fluffier
surface. It is essential that the feathers are kept in good con-
dition and a healthy bird will constantly preen itself and
● Down - lie close to the body underneath the contour
apply sebum obtained from the preen gland at the base of the
feathers, forming an insulating layer
tail to the feathers. This helps to ‘zip up' the barbules and
makes the feathers waterproof.
● Filoplume - also lie close to the body. Designed to
break up and form feather dust, which absorbs dirt and
There are four main types of feather (Fig. 5.8):
 moisture, helping to keep the bird clean. Both down
and filoplume feathers are barbless so they look fluffy
●Flight - long rigid feathers attached to the wing and
(Fig. 5.8).
tail. The primaries are attached to digit 3 and to the fused
metacarpals bones. The major thrust of the down beat is
Respiratory system
provided by the outer primaries. The shorter secondaries
are attached to the ulna and, in combination with the
The metabolic rate and the energy level of the bird are high
inner primaries, provide lift during flight 
a non pue usxo iog puu you e se Apoq an os
removal of carbon dioxide. To satisfy this, the respiratory
● Contour - cover the rest of the wing and may be
1 oq sa piq a se usxo Aidns on pandepe si aisss
known as coverts. They create a smooth cover over the
speed and at high altitudes.
120
 Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
There are three main differences between the respiratory
the sternum where it enlarges to form the syrinx. This con-
system of the bird and that of the mammal:
tains muscles, air sars and vibrating membranes and is the
'voice box' of the bird. The enormous variation in birdsong
● There is no diaphragm dividing the body cavity into
depends upon the number of muscles within the syrinx,
thorax and abdomen
which is dependent on the species. Just distal to the syrinx
the trachea bifurcates into two bronchi, which pass along the
● The lungs are more rigid and do not expand as they fill
ventral side of each lung, ending in the posterior air sacs.
with air
Within the lung tissue the bronchi lose their cartilaginous
rings and are known as mesobronchi. These give rise to four
● Air sacs extend from the lung tissue and fill every
to six ventrobronchi which further divide to form para-
spare space within the body cavity and in the
bronchi. The parabronchi are connected to air capillaries,
medullary cavity of bones such as the femur and
which are surrounded by pulmonary blood capillaries, and it
humerus.
is here that gaseous exchange takes place. Gaseous exchange
is a similar process to that seen in mammals.
Respiratory tract
Leading from the various bronchi are thin-walled air sacs.
These are covered in minute capillaries and account for 80%
Air enters the body via the nostrils and the beak and passes
of the respiratory volume. Most birds have nine pairs of air
into the glottis on the floor of the oral cavity. Air entering via
sacs (Fig. 5.9), which fill the spaces within the body cavity
the nostrils passes from the nasal chambers into the oral
and penetrate into the insides of many bones. They are not
cavity via a cleft in the hard palate known as the choana. The
involved in gaseous exchange but act as a reservoir for air and
glottis is surrounded by a complex larynx, which controls the
have a bellows-like effect that helps to push the air back
 passage of air down the trachea but plays no part in the pro-
through the lungs. They also reduce the weight of the skele-
duction of sound.
ton, so aiding flight and the buoyancy of water birds.
The trachea consisting of cartilaginous rings linked by muscle
The lungs containing the different bronchi are bright red,
and connective tissue runs down the neck to a point above
vascular and quite rigid and are attached to the thoracic
Trachea
Cervical air sac
hterclavicular
Syrinx
air sac 
 Intercavicular air sac
 Cervical air sac
Trachea
Air sac in humerus
Syrinx
Lung
Lung-
 Anterior thoracic air sac
Posterior thoracic sac
Anterior thoracic air sac
 Abdominal air sac
Posterior thoracic sac
A
B
Abdominal air sac
Fig. 5.9 Respiratory system of a bird
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
　121
5
Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
vertebrae and ribs in the dorsal part of the body cavity. The
Oesophagus and crop
volume of the lungs is only 2% of the total body volume.
Food passes down the muscular oesophagus on the right side
of the neck into a diverticulum known as the crop. This lies
Respiration
outside the body cavity and is mainly used for food storage.
Its size varies according to the species - granivorous birds
Air flows through the lungs and air sacs via the following
have large, bilobular crops while species such as the insecti-
route:
vores and the owls have no crop. Some species, particularly
members of the pigeon family, secrete ‘crop milk' from the
1. The bird inspires by muscular expansion of the body
lining to feed their young. This is rich in proteins and fat and
cavity, which reduces the pressure within the
is stimulated by the hormone prolactin.
respiratory tract and air is drawn in; most of the air is
drawn into the posterior air sacs where it is warmed
and moistened
Stomach
2. The bird expires and the air is pushed from the
This is divided into two parts:
 posterior air sacs into the lung tissue where gaseous
exchange takes place
● Proventriculus - lined by an epithelium, which
secretes mucus, hydrochloric acid and pepsin; here
3. The bird inspires again and the air moves out of the
food is stored, mixed with these digestive juices and
lungs into the anterior air sacs
protein digestion begins
4. The bird expires again and the air leaves the anterior
● Gizzard - the walls are lined with bands of muscle
air sacs and exits the body via the trachea.
that contract and expand to grind up the harder
components of the diet such as seeds, bones and
In order to make use of one ‘unit' of air the bird has two
scales; in addition, many birds actively ingest small
inspirations and two expirations. Fresh air follows a one-way
stones or grit to help with the physical breakdown of
path and does not get mixed with the air containing carbon
food in the gizzard.
dioxide. This allows almost all the oxygen within the inspired
atmospheric air (21%) to reach the capillaries and it is
thought that the respiratory system of the bird is about 10
Small intestine
times more efficient than that of the mammal.
Consists of a duodenum, jejunum and ileum that are not
clearly delineated. The duodenum is the major site of diges
Digestive system
tion and absorption. The pancreas is relatively large and lies
in the loop of the duodenum, pouring its secretions into the
The digestive system is very efficient and enables the energy
lumen of the duodenum via three ducts. The liver is bilobed;
in food to be used rapidly to satisfy the high metabolic rate
the right lobe is usually larger than the left.
of the bird.
The basic plan of the digestive tract is similar to that in other
Large intestine
groups of animal but there are certain modifications.
Consists of a pair of blind-ending caeca, which lie at the junc-
tion of the small and large intestines. Their function seems to be
Oral cavity
associated with the bacterial fermentation of cellulose and the
reabsorption of water, and their presence varies with the diet of
A lightweight beak replaces the lips and teeth. Its shape varies
the species. The rest of the large intestine, whose main role is
with the species and is adapted to the type of diet. In most
concerned with water and mineral reabsorption, is the relatively
species the tongue is not very mobile but in members of the
short length between the small intestine and the cloaca.
parrot family it is large and fleshy and is used to move food
which secrete saliva consisting of mucus and a starch-
digesting enzyme. Those species eating dry food such as seeds
This is the common exit from the body shared by the
have many glands while those eating a wetter diet such as
digestive, urinary and reproductive systems. It is divided into
fish have very few.
three parts:
122
 Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
● Coprodenum - anterior part, which receives faeces
Sperm is transferred into the female vagina either by means
from the intestine
of the grooved erectile penis attached to the wall of the cloaca
in species such as geese, ducks, storks and flamingos or, as in
● Urodeum - middle part, which collects the discharge
most other species, by the male and female simply bringing
from the kidney and the reproductive system
their cloacae close together.
● Proctodeum - posterior part, which collects and
stores the discharges from all three systems. It is closed
Female
by a muscular anus, which controls the passage of
"bird droppings' or mutes and, in the case of the hen
The tract consists of a pair of ovaries and oviducts, which lead
bird, the passage of eggs out of the body.
to the cloaca. In most species the right side is rudimentary
and in the non-breeding season the left ovary may be quite
In the wall of the cloaca is an area of lymphoid tissue known
small. The ovum is released by the ovary and begins to pass
as the bursa of Fabricius.
down the tubular oviduct, which is divided into several dif-
ferent parts:
Urinary system
● Infundibulum - funnel-shaped opening, which
engulfs the ovum, preventing it falling into the body
The function of the urinary system, which consists of a pair of
cavity; fertilization takes place here and the first layer
kidneys and a pair of ureters but no bladder, is the same as that
of albumen is added
in the mammal. However, birds excrete nitrogenous waste in the
form of uric acid and urates rather than the familiar mammalian
● Magnum - glandular part, which adds the remaining
urea. The waste materials are suspended in urinary water rather
albumen
than being dissolved and the resulting semi-solid urine leaves
the kidneys via the ureters. It enters the urodeum of the cloaca
● Isthmus - walls are lined by layers of thick circular
and then passes by retroperistalsis into the large intestine, where
  s  n n e 
more water is reabsorbed. The resulting mutes consist of white
urates, greeny-brown faeces surrounded by clear urine.
● Uterus or shell gland - walls are lined by thick
layers of longitudinal muscle lined with goblet cells;
Birds, like reptiles, possess a renal portal system. This consists
the egg spends as much as 15 h in this part while the
of a valve at the junction of the common iliac vein with the
shell and any pigmentation is added
renal portal vein that enters the kidney. The valve consists of
 d  ss  sdo  ds r 
● Vagina - mucus is secreted to aid egg laying and
nervous stimulation - when it is closed blood flows into the
 sperm from the male may also be stored for several
kidney and when it is open blood bypasses the kidney and
days.
flows into the caudal vena cava. This may be of significance
when administering medication by injection to the caudal
The female bird lays her eggs in a clutch and then begins
part of the body - the drug may be excreted by the kidneys
incubation. The number within the clutch and the number of
without reaching the cranial parts of the body.
    ss   s a d s
lay one egg per day while others, such as ducks and geese, lay
  n s an  a  o a
Reproductive svstem
warm and damp - the average temperature is 35?C. The bird
will also turn the eggs at regular intervals using her feet. This
Male
prevents the embryo from sticking to the side of the shell,
which may impair the development of the chick. Incubation
The two bean-shaped testes lie within the body cavity and are
times vary with the species. Smaller birds have short incuba-
connected to the urodeum of the cloaca by the vas deferens. In
tion times: for example, many passerines hatch their eggs
 many species the left testis is much larger then the right and in
within 14-21 days, while larger birds, e.g. hawks have an
the non-breeding season both may be relatively small. The
incubation time of around 30 days. The young may be
anatomy and physiology of the system is similar to that of
described as being:
mammals except that the seminal fluid needed to wash the
sperm along the tract is produced by the testes rather than by
● Nidicolous, i.e. they are featherless and blind
accessory glands. At the distal end of each vas deferens is a
and dependent on the parent birds until fledged; for
seminal vesicle, which acts as a storage organ for the sperm
example young pigeons (known as squabs) robins and
prior to their use.
sparrows
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
123
5
Comparative anatomv and phvsioloqv of the exotic species
● Nidifugous, i.e. they are covered in down feathers,
their skin in several pieces, many of which may then be
eat adult food and are capable of surviving away from
eaten. The integument of the chelonians is modified into a
their mother; for example ducklings, goslings and
tough outer shell.
chicks.
Cardiovascular system
tiles
All reptiles have a heart that comprises two atria and one ven-
tricle. This is functionally divided into three subchambers
Reptiles are members of the Class Reptilia and as such are
and receives blood from both atria. Reptiles also possess a
cold-blooded vertebrates that breed on land. They are
renal portal system that is similar to that seen in the bird.
dependent on the external environment to raise their inter-
Blood from the hind legs and tail may drain directly into the
nal body temperature and increase their metabolic rate. To do
kidneys, so any drug injected into the hind end may be
this they alter their behaviour patterns and will seek out
excreted via the kidneys without circulating around the fore
warm spots or flatten themselves on the ground in order to
end.
increase the surface area exposed to the sun.
There are about 6500 species, which can be classified into
Respiratory system
four separate orders:
 Reptiles use oxygen taken from atmospheric air. They possess
● Rhynchocephalia - includes the tuatara, which is
lungs but they do not have a diaphragm so the body cavity is
not divided into two. Gaseous exchange takes place in the
same way that it does in the mammal.
● Crocodilia - crocodiles and alligators - rarely kept as
pets
Digestive tract
● Squamata - further divided into suborder Sauria
(lizards), suborder Serpentes (snakes) and suborder
The anatomy of the digestive tract varies with the species and
Amphisbaenia, members of which are not kept in
with the type of diet on which the animal depends. Many
captivity
species possess a specialized olfactory organ in the roof of the
oral cavity that is known as Jacobsen's organ. This is used in
● Chelonia - shelled reptiles, which includes the tor-
 toises, terrapins and turtles.
by flicking in and out of the mouth and is then drawn across
the organ. Information is then conveyed to the brain via
All the orders of reptiles have a common evolutionary
branches of the olfactory nerve. In all species the tract ends
pathway so they share many anatomical features. For the pur-
in a cloaca. As in the bird this is divided into the coprodeum
poses of this book the common features will be described and
to collect faeces, the urodeum to collect urinary waste and
followed by the notable characteristics of each group.
the proctodeum, which is the final collecting chamber before
elimination of the combined waste.
General anatomy
Urinary system
Skeletal system
The paired kidneys do not have loops of Henle, which means
Reptiles are vertebrates and have an internal skeleton that in
that the excreted urine is very dilute. Snakes do not possess a
most cases follows a similar pattern to that of the mammal.
bladder but this is present in lizards and chelonians.
Integument
Reproductive system
Reptilian skin is covered in thick, keratinized protective
scales. They grow by moulting or shedding this covering of
All reptiles lay eggs, i.e. they are oviparous, and the yolk
scales in a process known as ecdysis. The underlying new skin
within the egg provides nourishment for the developing
is soft and enables the body to expand rapidly until the
embryo. Some species of reptile are ovoviviparous, which
replacement scales harden. Snakes usually shed their skin in
 h n  a    n rd  h s
 one piece, wriggling backwards out of it, while lizards shed
egg is retained within the oviduct and hatches to release the
124
 Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
young. Nutrition is still supplied to the young via the yolk
 r snads a pn p ha  hn   a
and not via a placenta, as happens in mammals.
to shed their tail as a defence against predators. This process,
known as autotomy, means that once the tail has been shed
it continues to squirm, diverting the predator's attention
Lizards
while the lizard escapes.
 Most lizards (Fig. 5.10) have four legs, which are attached to
The skin is thick and scaly and its texture varies according to
the body at right angles and allow the body to be raised off
the species. Some lizards, such as the skinks, have scales that
Fig. 5.10 Internal anatomy of the male lizard
Parathyroids
Trachea 
Right lung 
Left lung
Thyroid
 Left trium
Right atrium
Ventricle
Stomach
Liver
Pancreas
 Gall bladder
 Adrenal glands
Testes
 Spleen
-Small
intestine
Ductusdeferens
Colon
Kidney -
Bladder
Cloacal vent
Hemipenis sac
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
125
Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
fit tightly together, creating a smooth outline, while others
orous, carnivorous or omnivorous depending on the
are covered in much thicker and more protective scales.
species. The stomach is simple (Fig. 5.10) and in herbi-
Species such as the chameleons have cells known as chro-
vorous species the caecum is enlarged to facilitate plant
matophores within the skin that are able to alter the colour
digestion.
of the skin and thus camouflage the lizard. The gecko family
 has layers of overlapping scales on the underside of their feet
which enable them to grip on to apparently smooth surfaces
Urinogenital system
such as glass.
Males possess paired copulatory organs known as hemipenes,
each of which lies invaginated within the base of the tail pos-
Digestive system
terior to the cloaca. Only one hemipenis is used during
 mating, when it is erected by filling with blood and inserted
Most species have teeth that are fused to the sides of the
into the cloaca of the female. Females have a pair of ovaries,
mandible and are shed and replaced at intervals. The shape of
which produce the ova, which are transported out of the
the tongue varies with the species and is used in conjunction
body via the paired oviducts and the cloaca. Most species of
with Jacobsen's organ. The diet may be herbivorous, insectiv-
lizard have a bladder.
Fig. 5.11 Internal anatomy of the
snake
Trachea
Thyroid-
Heart-
Right lung 
Artery
ent
Left lung
Cloaca
Liver
Sperm duct
Oesophagus
Ureter
Left kidney
 Stomach
Smallintestine
Left testis
Spleen
Right kidney
Gall bladder-
Pancreas
Right testis
126
 Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
Snakes
Tortoises, terrapins and turtles
Snakes have long bodies that taper into their tails, the start of
        
which is in the area of the vent. They have no legs, although 
presence of a horny outer shell, encompasses the land-
some species such as the boas and the pythons possess ves-
living tortoises, the fresh-water terrapins and the marine
tigial pelvic limbs, which are manifested as spurs on the
turtles. In the USA they are all referred to as turtles. Tortoises
external surface. The skeleton consists of as many as 400
have limbs that enable them to walk on land while terra-
similar-shaped vertebrae, each one giving off a pair of ribs.
pins and turtles have limbs that are primarily adapted for
There is no sternum so the ribs are not joined in the midline.
swimming.
Integument
The shell forms a box to protect the internal organs and con-
sists of a domed upper part, known as the carapace, and a
This is covered in scales, which vary in shape according to the
flattened ventral part, known as the plastron. The shell devel-
 area of the body. The ventral scales are larger and thicker
ops from keratinized epidermal cells, forming a series of
while those in the dorsal and lateral parts are much smaller.
horny plates or scutes (Fig. 5.12), which are named according
The scales on the ventral surface project outwards and, as the
to their most adjacent organ. Growth is not brought about by
muscles of the body wall contract and expand, the scales
shedding of the horny epidermis, as it is in other reptiles, but
exert pressure on the surface and pull the snake forwards with
occurs by the deposition of epidermal cells around the
an undulating movement. The eyelids of the snake are trans
   s      
parent and fused together to form the spectacle. During
counted to assess the age of the animal.
ecdysis when the outer layer of scales lifts off and is dis-
carded, the spectacle also lifts off the surface of the eye and
comes away as part of the shed skin.
Skeletal system
This follows the pattern of all vertebrates except that the pec-
Respiratory system
toral and pelvic girdles are within the rib cage and are
directed vertically to support the shell (Fig. 5.12). The verte-
 In order to fit inside the long, thin body, the left lung of most
bral column, comprising ten vertebrae, forms the undersur-
snakes is reduced or absent (Fig. 5.1l). Gaseous exchange
face of the carapace.
takes place in the anterior part of the right lung; the remain-
der is avascular and acts as an air sac and a reservoir of air,
e p sod  p   
Respiratory system
The lungs lie in the dorsal part of the body cavity and aid
buoyancy in aquatic species. As the shell is rigid the body is
Digestive system
unable to expand during respiration. This is brought about by
movements of the head and limbs, which move in and out,
All snakes are carnivorous. There are six rows of teeth, which
changing the internal pressure of the body cavity, thus
are fused to the mandibles and replaced continuously. Some
drawing air in or pushing it out.
species have modified fangs connected to poison glands
above the oral cavity and used to inject venom into the prey.
The forked tongue is used to ‘taste' the environment and
Digestive system
is used in conjunction with Jacobsen's organ. The stomach is
elongated and the intestines are relatively short. The organs are
All chelonians possess a horny beak instead of teeth. The
arranged in an elongated fashion to fit into the thin body
tongue is large and fleshy. The oesophagus lies on the left side
(Fig. 5.11).
of the neck, entering a simple stomach that lies across the
body cavity (Fig. 5.12).
Urinogenital system
Urinogenital system
Male snakes have hemipenes, which are folded into the base
 A pair of kidneys produce relatively unconcentrated urine,
of the tail. During mating the hemipenis evaginates and is
   s n r    n 
inserted into the cloaca of the female. The females of slender
bladder. Males have a single large penis, which is able to
species have only one ovary and oviduct.
 protrude from the floor of the cloaca.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
127
Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
Nuchal
Cranial end
Intergular (if present)-
Gular
vertebrals(5)
M3
Humeral
Axillary
 Pleurals (4)
Pectoral
Marginal 
Marginals (12)
V5
6
Inframarginal
Abdominal
Supra-marginals
(if present)
(9, if present) 
Inguinal 
M8
Femoral
M9
Anal
V10
Caudal end
M11
M12
 Caudal end
Metacarpals
Phalanges
hertebra
Pelvis
Carpals
Tibia
Pyorus
Fibula
Femur
Cesophagus
Cranium
Stomach
Lower jaw
 Scapula-
Humerus
Una -
Radius-
Tarsals
Metatarsals
Phalanges
Projected position
Acromial process
Coracoid process
of kidneys
(superior view)
Scapula
 Projected position
of kidney
(lateral view)
Acromial
Coracoid
process
process
llium
Fig. 5.12 Anatomy of the tortoise
S        
Fish
which can be divided into two main groups:
● Cartilaginous fish - comprising the rays and sharks
Fish are cold blooded vertebrates that are adapted to live in
● Bony fish - comprising all other species. These can be
water, from which they extract the oxygen needed for their
further subdivided into:
128
 Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
● Lower teleosts, e.g. carp and salmon
● Caudal fin or tail - shape indicates the swimming
pattern
● Higher teleosts, e.g. perch and mackerel.
● Dorsal fin - set vertically along the back
Although these bony fish show an enormous range of exter-
nal shapes and sizes, they all have a similar basic anatomy.
● Anal fin - on the underside close to the tail. In
some species this is adapted to form the
External anatomy
gonopodium, which assists in internal fertilization of
the female
Most species of fish have a typical fusiform shape that enables
them to pass through the water with a minimum of energy
● A pair of pectoral fins - set on either side just
expenditure. Most fish are covered in flexible, overlapping
behind the head
plates known as scales. Each scale is formed by and is embed-
ded within the dermis, with the free edge covered in a thin
● A pair of pelvic fins - set just below and behind the
layer of epidermis. The scales are covered in a layer of mucus
pectoral fins.
called the glycocalyx, which reduces frictional drag as the fish
swims and also has a fungicidal and bactericidal action. The
Fish have the range of special senses seen in mammals but in
scales contain pigment cells that give the fish its colour and
addition they have a lateral line system. This is used to detect
 many species are able to change their colour to blend into the
vibrations in the water caused by the presence of other fish,
background.
which might be prey or predators. It consists of a series of
shallow channels running over the surface of the body along
The fish is able to swim, manoeuvre and maintain its balance
the lateral midline. Along the line, arranged at intervals, are
in the water by the presence of flexible fins, which consist of
groups of hair cells embedded within a cup or cupula.
eg 'si snoun no Auoq Aq paodns us jo qam e
Vibrations cause movement of the hairs, which stimulate
fin is attached to muscle, enabling the fin to make rapid
nerve impulses, which reach the brain and the appropriate
precise movements. Most fish have seven fins. These are the:
nerve impulse is initiated.
Dorsal fin
 Spiny fin rays 
Gilcover
Gill cover
Soft fin rays
uoddns
Brain case
Fin ray support
Upper jaw
Lower jaw 
Pectoral fin 
Rib
hertebra
Soft fin rays
-Soft finrays
Caudal fin
 Anal spine
 Anal fin
Pectoral girdle
Pelvic girdle 
(fin support)
(uoddns u)
Pelvic spine 
Pelvic fin
Fig. 5.13 Skeletal structure of a fish
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
129
Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
Internal anatomy
mouthful of air and is mainly seen in shallow water
species
Musculoskeletal system
Higher teleosts - the swim bladder is said to be
Although the skeleton (Fig. 5.13) appears to be completely
physoclistous. There is no connection between the
different from that of the mammal, it has similar compo-
swim bladder and the foregut and depending on the
nents. The pectoral and pelvic girdles comprise the remnants
species it is either filled during larval development,
of the pentadactyl limb (five digits) seen in mammals, birds
when there may be a temporary connection, or it
and reptiles and provide a key to the evolutionary pathway of
may be filled by specialized cells forming a gas gland
the fish. The muscles of the body are arranged in blocks or
within the sac. The secreted gas is mainly carbon
myomeres attached on either side of the axial skeleton. They
 dioxide and it is kept in the bladder by an 
enable the body to flex laterally, providing the propulsive
impermeable lining.
force to move forward. The number of vertebrae varies with
the species. The ribs in the thoracic region articulate with the
In addition to its function as a buoyancy aid the swim
vertebrae and support the walls of the body cavity.
bladder acts as resonator for sound, giving the fish a more
 acute sense of hearing than is provided by its inner ear.
In order to maintain buoyancy in the water most bony fish
possess a swim bladder, which lies just below the vertebral
Cardiovascular system
column within the body cavity. The specific gravity of the
fish is greater than that of the surrounding water so it sinks if
The heart is a long, folded organ consisting of a single atrium
it stops swimming. This is overcome by altering the volume
 and a single ventricle. The circulation is described as being
of gas within the swim bladder and the fish is able to rise or
single because blood passes once through the heart in a com-
fall according to its needs. The structure of the swim bladder
plete circuit. This is compared to the double circulation of
depends on the species of fish:
the mammal. Oxygenated blood leaves the ventricle and is
pumped to the tissues, where it gives up its oxygen. The
● Lower teleosts - the swim bladder is said to be
blood picks up carbon dioxide from the tissues and is carried
physostomous and is a diverticulum of the foregut
to the gills, where it is excreted into the water. At the same
linked by a pneumatic duct. The swim bladder is
time the blood picks up oxygen and is carried to the atrium
refilled by the fish rising to the surface and taking a
of the heart.
Afferent artery
Efferent artery
Gill skeleton 
Water flow
Gill arch
Water flow
Buccal
Gill raker
cavity
 Gill arch 
Gil flaiments 
 Operculum
Waterflow
Water flow
Water flow
Opercular
cavity
Water flow
Water flow
Opercular
cavity
Gill slit
Gill filament
Secondary lamellae
Mouth
(primary lamella)
Buccal cavity  Gill arch  Gilfilaments 
Waterflow
Fig. 5.14 The gill system of the fish
130
Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
● Internal - the male introduces the sperm into the
Respiratory system
female. She retains the fertilized eggs in her body until
Fish breathe using a system of gills (Fig. 5.14). Each gill con-
they hatch to produce live young
sists of a bony gill arch supporting the gill filaments.
Projecting from these are delicate secondary filaments or
● External - the female lays her eggs in the water and
lamellae, which contain the blood vessels through which
the male adds his sperm or milt in a process known as
gaseous exchange occurs. On each side of the pharynx are
   d  s    s
five lateral gill slits through which water drawn in through
ns aq an ar sia a anrd are s
the mouth passes. The entrance to each gill slit is 'guarded
or deposited in a nest or in the mud on the river bed.
by stiff projections known as gill rakers, which act as a
screen to filter out food particles which could damage the
eggs in the mouth. This is often done by the male and
delicate gills. On the external surface of the head the gills
once the young are hatched they may continue to use
are covered by cartilaginous protective flaps or opercula
the mouth as a refuge from predators.
(sing. operculum). Water is drawn in through the mouth by
constant opening and closing, forced into the pharynx, over
Bibliography
the gills and out through the opercula. Because of the dif-
ference in concentration between the gases in the blood
AspinallV, O'Reilly M 2003 Iniroduction to veterinary anatomy
and the water, oxygen dissolved in the water diffuses into
and physiology. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford
the blood and carbon dioxide in the blood is released into the
water.
Beynon P (ed.) 1996 Manuat of psittacine birds. British Small
Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
Digestive system
Beynon P H, Lawton M P C, Cooper J E 1992 Manual of reptiles,
British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
This varies according to the diet of the species. Predatory
species have teeth on the front and the roof of the mouth and
Bowden C, Masters I (eds) 2001 Pre-veterinary nursing textbook.
they may also have throat teeth just in front of the oesopha.
Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford
gus. These are mainly used to hold the prey and position it
ready for swallowing head first. Some species have teeth for
Butcher R L (ed.) 2001 Manual of ornamental fish. British Small
biting; others have teeth to rasp food from rocks; while others
Animal Veterinary Association, Gloucester
have no teeth at all. Ingested food travels down the oesopha-
gus into a tube-like stomach and then into an intestine of
Cotville T, Bassett J M 2002 Clinical anatomy and physiology for
uniform diameter. The length depends on the type of diet,
veterinary technicians.Mosby, St Louis, MO
herbivorous species having the longest intestine. Faeces are
evacuated from the body via the rectum and anus.
Cooper J E 2002 Birds of prey - heatth and disease. Blackwell
Scientific Publications, Oxford
Urinary system
Cooper B, Lane D R (eds) 1999 Veterinary nursing, 2nd edn.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
The kidneys lie below the vertebral column and in some
species may sit like a saddle over the swim bladder. They have
Dyce K M, Sack W O, Wensing C JG 1996 Textbook ofveterinary
several functions, e.g. haemopoiesis, excretion, osmoregula-
anatomy, 2nd edn. W B Saunders, Philadelphia
tion and secretion of hormones. Nitrogenous waste is
excreted in the form of ammonia, which is extremely toxic
Flecknell P (ed.) 2000 Manual of rabbit medicine and surgery.
 a  n       si 
British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Quedgeley
ronment where it can flow away. The main site for excretion
is the gills, not the kidneys as occurs in mammals
Harvey Pough F, Heiser I B, McFarland W N 1993 Vertebrate life,
3rd edn. Macmillan, Basingstoke
Hillyer E V, Quesenberry K E 1997 Ferrets, rabbits and
Reproductive system
rodents - clinical medicine and surgery. W B Saunders,
Among the huge number of fish species there are examples of
Philadelphia, PA
a range of reproductive patterns, including parthenogenesis
and hermaphroditism. However, the majority of teleosts have
King A S, McClelland J1984 Birds - their structure and function.
separate sexes. Fertilization may be:
Bailliere Tindall, London
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
131
5
Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
Laber-Laird K, Swindle M M, Flecknell P (eds) 1996 Handbook of
Recommended reading
rodent and rabbit medicine. Pergamon, Oxford
Aspinall V, O'Reilly M 2003 Introduction to veterinary anatomy
McArthur S 1996 Veterinary management of tortoises and hurtles.
and physiology. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford
Blackwell Science, Oxford
This book provides three chapters on exotic animal anatomy and
Mader D R 1996 Reptile medicine and surgery. W B Saunders,
physiotogy.
Philadelphia, PA
Colville T, Bassert / M 2002 Clinical anatomy and physiology for
Meredith A, Redrobe S (eds) 2002 Manual of exotic pets, 4th edn.
veterinary technicians. Mosby, London
BritishSmall AnimalVeterinary Association,Quedgeley
Very detailed coverage of the anatomy of the bird
Okerman L 1994 Diseases of domestic rabbits. Blackwell
Scientific, Oxford
Cooper B, Lane D R (eds) 2003 Veterinary nursing, 3rd edn.
Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford
Phillips W D, Chilton T J 1989 A-level biology. Oxford University
Press, Oxford
The chapter on exotic species links brief details on anatomy and
physiotogy to their care and management.
Roberts R J (ed.) 2001 Fish pathology, 3rd edn. W B Saunders,
Philadelphia, PA
Hillyer E V, Quesenberry K E 1997 Ferrets, rabbits and
rodents - clinical medicine and surgery. W B Saunders,
Shurkie P D (ed.) 1976 Avian physiology. Springer Verlag, New York
Philadelphia, PA
Warren Dean M 1995 Small animal care and management.
Each section begins with detailed descriptions of the relevant
Delmar, New York
anatomy and physiology.
132
 Comparative anatomy and physiology of the exotic species
Equine anatomy and physiology
Cathenine Phillips
Key Points
● All species of horse belong to the Class Mammalia and as
●Horses are adapted to eating relatively poor-quality
such they have much in common with other mammals,
roughage over long periods of the day and this is
e.g. respiratory system, urinary system, structure of the
reflected in the anatomy and physiology of their
integument, etc.
digestive tract.
● The horse has evolved the ability to run fast for long
distances and this is reflected in the anatomy and
physiology of its skeleton and muscular system.
 The horse has evolved from a small animal into the creature
Introduction
that we know today with a specialized digestive tract to allow
the consumption of grass and grains and a single-digit elon-
gated limb which enables the horse to make a rapid escape
 In Chapter 4 we looked at the anatomy and physiology of the
from predators. Knowledge and understanding of these
dog and cat, which, as they are all mammals, show many
complex anatomical and physiological structures are essential
similarities to those of the horse so in this chapter we will
to allow us to plan the management and nursing of this
only look at the systems in which there are differences.
species.
The skeletal system
● The mandible (the lower jaw)
The skeleton (Fig. 6.1) can be divided into two main sections:
● The maxilla, incisive and palatine bones (the upper
 jaw, hard palate and base of the nasal cavity)
● The axial skeleton - made up of the skull, spine,
ribcage and pelvis
● The nasal bone (constructing the nasal cavity)
● The appendicular skeleton - made up of the bones of
● The frontal bone (forming the rostral section of the
the limbs.
cranium)
The skeleton is a framework of hard structures creating
● The supraorbital process (supporting and protecting
 a pd pe ods m e  p a
the eye)
tissues, facilitate movement and allow locomotion.
● The temporal bone (containing and protecting the
middle ear)
The axial skeleton
● The occipital bone (forming the back of the skull)
The skull
● The hyoid bones (constitutes the apparatus that
The skull is constructed of a large number of bones joined by
supports the guttural pouches, pharynx, larynx and
fibrous joints or sutures that allow little movement between
base of the tongue).
them (Fig. 6.2). The main function of the skull is to protect
the brain, inner ear, parts of the eye and nasal passages.
The nasal septum divides the nasal cavity into two nasal
The major part of this structure comprises the following
chambers and a bony, membranous septum divides the max-
bones:
illary sinus into rostral and caudal compartments. The maxil-
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 133
Equine anatomy and physiology
Cervical vertebrae
Thoracic vertebrae
Lumbar vertebrae
Sacrum
Skull
Coccygeal vertebrae
Scapula
Femur
Humerus 
Fibula
Ulna
Tibia
Radius
Sternum
Rib
Pelvis Patella
Tarsal bone
Carpus
 Accessory carpal bone 
Metacarpus
Metatarsal
Proximal phalanx (P1)
Proximal sesamoid
P1
Middle phalanx (P2)
P2
Distal phalanx (P3)
Distal sesamoid
P3
Fig. 6.1 Skeleton of the horse
lary sinus communicates with the nasal cavity through an
crowns that allow the teeth to continually grow for some
opening into the middle nasal meatus.
years, ensuring a long working life. As the horse chews, the
occlusal surfaces are worn down by about 2-3 mm a year. The
extent of wear and the appearance of the occlusal surface of
Teeth
the tooth can be used to identify the approximate age of the
Dental formula:
horse (Fig. 6.4).
Deciduous teeth
1- {1²/,PM²/)× 2 = 24
Permanent teeth - (I²/, C/, PM²/, or 4/, M²/) × 2
Canine teeth may not be present or may be vestigial in the
= 40 or 42
mare. The wolf tooth is a small upper premolar that is often
 The roots of premolar teeth 4 and molar 1 extend into the
extracted to prevent interference with the bit during training.
rostral maxillary sinus and the last two cheek teeth, i.e.
molars 2 and 3, communicate with the floor of the caudal
maxillary sinus. If these teeth suffer injury or infection, then
The vertebral column
infection of the sinus may also occur.
The vertebral column (Fig. 6.1) is made up of groups of ver-
The horse has hypsodontic teeth, i.e. they do not have a
tebra as seen in the dog and cat. The function of the vertebra
surface covering of enamel and they are all of the same height
 is to house the spinal cord, support the skull and thorax and
(Fig. 6.3). This creates an abrasive surface necessary for the
provides attachment for the pelvis and insertion of many of
grinding up of plant material and includes vast reserve
the muscles.
134
Equine anatomy and physiology
Fig. 6.2 The equine skull. a. Lateral view
Coronoid process
b. Dorsat view
ZygomaticZygomatic
arch
process
Parietal bone
Temporal bone 
Infraorbital foramen
 Nuchal 
Incisive bone
Nasal bone
crest
Lacrimal
Orbit
Maxilla
Occipital
condyle
Ramus
Temporomandibular joint 
Molars
Premolars
Incisors
Tush
Mental foramen
Mandible
Zygomatic
Orbit
Zygomatic
End of 
Facial crest
bone
arch
facial crest -
Nasomaxilry notch.
Maxilla
Occipital bone
 Frontal 
 Superior
Nasal
bone 
Parietal
 muchal 
Incisive
bone
bone
line
foramen
Lachrimal
bone
Parietal
crest
Body of
Nasal process
 Interparietal bone 
incisive bone -
of incisive bone
Infraorbital
Squamous
foramen
 Supraorbital foramen
B
temporal bone
Central cement 
There are five different types of vertebra making up the
Enamel
column as follows:
External cement-
Cement
 Infundibulum -
● Cervical vertebrae - seven bones, the first two being
Cup
Cement-
the atlas and axis
Dentine
Dentine
3years of age-
● Thoracic vertebrae - 18 bones
Secondary
5 years of age
dentine
6 years of age
● Lumbar vertebrae - six bones, occasionally five or
 Pulp cavity
9 years of age
 seven are found in some Arabs
Enamel spot
16 years of age
Dental star
● Sacral vertebrae - five bones, fused to form a triangular
(pulp cavity)
sacrum
Dental star
● Coccygeal vertebrae - 15-20 (average 18 bones),
(pulp cavity)
sometimes called caudal vertebra
Fig. 6.3 (a) Longitudinat section through an incisor tooth
(b) Cross-sections indicating the appearance of the occlusat surface
The vertebral formula may be quoted as follows: C, Tis Lg S
as the tooth wears down
Cas-20
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
135
Equine anatomy and physiology
The appendicular skeleton
M3
This comprises the limbs which have been adapted to allow
M2-
great leverage for the application of speed, and the bony
M1-
girdles which attach them to the body.
IV
P4
P3
P2
P1-
 Scapular carilage
Diastema
Scapular
Tuberosity of scapular spine 
C1-
 Scapular spine
13
Di3
12
12
Supraglenoid tubercle
Genoid cavity-
11
11
Head of humerus
Upper jaw
Lower jaw
Humerus-
Deltoid tuberosity
Fig. 6.4Teeth in the jaw of a 4/2zyear-old horse
Clecranon fossa
Olecranon
Ulna
Condyle
The ribs
Tubercle for lateral
Radius-
collateraligament
The horse has 18 pairs of ribs - the first eight pairs are
--Interosseous space
described as being frue as they articulate directly with the
sternum and the remaining ribs are faise or asternal as they
Lateral styloid process
articulate with the rib in front to form the costal arch.
 Accessory carpal
Proximal and distal row
Proximal phalanx
of carpal bones
The sternum
-Cannonbone
Middle phalanx-
The sternum forming the ventral surface of the thorax is
Splint bone
comprised of seven sternebrae. The first sternebra is called the
Distal phalanx
Proximal sesamoid bones
manubrium and the terminal segment is called the xiphoid
process or xiphisternum.
Fig. 6.5 Forelimb of the horse
B
Radius
 Radius
Intermediate carpal bone .
htermediate carpal bone
-Radial carpal bone
 Accessory carpal bone
-Unar carpal bone
 Ulnar carpal bone
Ill carpal bone
I metacarpal
Il carpal bone 
bone 
(canon)
IV carpal bone
IV carpal bone
Fig. 6.6 Left carpus of the horse
(a) Laterat view (b) Dorsat view
Ill metacarpal
IV metacarpal
Il metacarpal bone
IV metacarpal bone
bone
bone
(medial splint)
(lateral splint)
136
 Equine anatomy and physiology
The forelimb
Sacral tuber
Coxal tuber
This is attached to the trunk by means of the scapula
(Fig. 6.1), which in turn is attached by strong muscles.
Hip bone
The forelimb (Fig. 6.5) comprises the following bones
Head of femur
running, from proximal to distal:
Ischial tuber
● The scapula (shoulder blade)
Femur
Patella-
● The humerus
Femoral condyle
● The ulna and radius
Fibula
● The proximal row of carpal bones (medial to lateral) -
Tibia
radial carpal bone, intermediate carpal bone, ulnar
carpal bone, accessory carpal bone (Fig. 6.6)
 Calcaneous
Central tarsal
Taluls
● The distal row of carpal bones (medial to lateral) - first
carpal bone (may be absent) second carpal bone, third
Fourth tarsal
carpal bone, fourth carpal bone
Third tarsal
 Metatarsal Iv (lateral splint bone)
● The metacarpal bones (medial to lateral) - second
Metatarsal lI(cannon bone)
metacarpal bone, third metacarpal bone, fourth
metacarpal bone. The second and fourth metacarpal
bones are also called medial and lateral splint bones
Proximal sesamoid bones
respectively
Proximal, middle and distal
phalanges
● The medial and lateral proximal sesamoid bones
Fig. 6.7 Hind timb of the horse
● Proximal phalanx (P1, long pastern)
● The tibia and fibula
●Middle phalanx (P2, short pastern)
● The calcaneus
● Distal sesamoid bone (navicular bone)
● The talus
● Distal phalanx (P3, pedal bone).
● The central tarsal bone
The hind limb
● The first and second tarsal bones - fused
This is attached to the body by means of the pelvic girdle,
which is made up of three fused bones:
● The third tarsal bone
● Ilium
● The fourth tarsal bone
● Ischium
● The second metatarsal bone - also known as the
medial splint bone
● Pubis.
● The third metatarsal bone
The hindlimb (Fig. 6.7) comprises the following bones
running from proximal to distal:
● The fourth metatarsal bone - also known as the lateral
 splint bone
● The femur
● The medial and lateral proximal sesamoid bones -
● The patella
found on the plantar surface
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
137
Equine anatomy and physiology
A
Metacarpal l-
Perioplic corium
Proximal
sesamoid bone
 Coronary corium 
Superficial digital
flexor tedon
Laminar corium
Extensor tendon
 Sesamoidian
ligaments
 Solar corium 
Deep digital 
P2
fexor tedon
Perioplic sulcus
Hoof wall-
Distal sesamoid
Corium of the frog
P3
(navicular bone)
 Coronary sulcus
White line
 Digital cusion 
 Frog stay
 Stratum medium
of the hoof wall-
Fig. 6.8 Laterat view of the distat part of the forelimb
Epidermal laminae
● Proximal phalanx (P1, long pastern)
-Intemal surface of the sole
● Middle phalanx (P2, short pastern)
Toe
● Distal sesamoidean bone (navicular bone)
Waterline
White line
● Distal phalanx (P3, pedal bone)
 Point of frog 
Quarters-
The foot
Frog
Sole
The equine foot has a bony base that consists of the distal
Bars
half of the middle phalanx (short pastern) the complete distal
Heel-
phalanx (pedal bone) and the distal sesamoid (navicular
-Seat of corn
bone) (Fig. 6.8). Several important soft-tissue structures are
(angle of heel)
also housed within the foot, including the digital cushion
Cleft
Buttress of heel
and the navicular bursa. Covering this is a highly vascular
of frog
Commissures
modified dermis called the corium which is named according
to the insensitive structures that it underlies, i.e. perioplic
Bulbs
Fig. 6.9 The hoof. (a) Dissected view of the relationships of the
corium, corium of the frog, corium of the sole, etc. (Fig. 6.9).
hoof to the underlying regions of the corium. (b) Weight-bearing
The hoof is the insensitive cornified layer of epidermis that
surface
covers the distal end of the digit. The insensitive structures of
the hoof include the periople, wall, bars, laminae, sole and
Joints of the fore and hind
frog. These are all produced by the germinative layer of the
epidermis, which lies close to the corium of the same name,
limbs
which is well supplied with blood capillaries and nerve fibres
The joints of the limbs are extremely important if the horse
(Fig. 6.9).
is going to be able to move fast. Table 6.1 summarizes the
 anatomy of the major joints of both limbs.
The muscular system
The suspensory apparatus
The suspensory apparatus consists of a collection of liga-
The muscular system brings about movement of the horse.
ments connected with the proximal sesamoid bones in both
Muscles are often found in pairs, working together with
the fore and hind limb, as follows:
opposite actions, e.g. flexion and extension, which creates
coordinated movement and balance (Table 6.2).
● Suspensory ligament
138
Equine anatomy and physiology
Table 6.1 Joints of the fore and hind limbs of the horse
Fore limb
Hind limb
Shoulder joint
Consists of the glenoid cavity of the
scapula and head of the humerus
Elbow joint
Consists of the condyles of the humerus,
adius and ulna
Carpal joints (knee)
1. Radiocarpal joint - radius and proximal
row of carpal bones
2. Midcarpal joint - proximal and distal row
of carpal bones
3. Carpometacarpal joint - distal row carpal
 bones and metacarpal bones 2-4
Metacarpophalangeal joint (fetlock)
Metacarpal bone II or metatarsal bone II,
of metatarsophalangeal joint 
proximal phalanx P1, medial and lateral proximal
sesamoid bones
Proximal interphalangeal joint (pastern)
Proximal phalanx P1 and middle phalanx P2
Distal interphalangeal joint (coffin)
Middle phalanx P2, distal phalanx P3 and
distal sesamoid bone (navicular)
Hip joint
Ilium, pubis, ischium all combine to form
the acetabulum, head of femur.
Stifle joint
1. Femorotibial joint - femur and the medial
and lateral condyles of the tibia
2. Femoropatellar joint - femoral trochlea
with the patella
Tarsal joint (hock; Fig. 6.10)
1. Tarsocrural joint - cochlea of tibia with
trochlea of talus
2. Proximal intertarsal joint - talus and
calcaneus with central and fourth tarsal
bones
3. Distal intertarsal joint - central tarsal
with I-III tarsals
4. Tarsometatarsal joint - I-IV tarsals with
Tibia
II-IV metatarsals
Calcanean tuber
(point of hock)
Lateral malleolus
Medial malleolus
Talus with trochlea
Calcaneus
Central tarsal bone
Third tarsal bone
 Fourth tarsal bone 
Third metatarsal
Fourth metatarsal
(cannon) bone
(ateral splint) bone
Fig. 6.10 Dorsal view of the left hock
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
139
6
Equine anatomy and physiology
 Table 6.2 Important muscles, ligaments and tendons of the equine muscular system
Muscle/ligament/tendon
Origin
Insertion
Action
Rhomboideus
Nuchal ligament
Medial scapula
Lifts head and pulls scapula forward and up
Brachiocephalicus
Cranial cervical vertebra
Shoulder to humerus
Protraction of limb, extend shoulder,
bending of head and neck
Stermocephalicus
Sternum
Mandible
Moves the head and neck
Splenius
Base of skull
Beginning of trapezius muscle 
Lifts head and bends neck
Trapezius
 Occipital bone and vertebra 
 Spine of the scapula
Pulls shoulder forward and backward in
C7-T10
addition to upward movement
Latissimus dorsi
Lower thoracic and lumbar
Caudal humerus
 Flexes the shoulder and retracts the forelimb
vertebra
Longissimus dorsi
 Ilium, sacrum and thoracic
Cervical spine 4-7, lumbar
 Raises and supports head lateroflexion and
spine
and thoracic vertebra, ribs
extension of the back
Nuchal ligament
Skull
Cranial thoracic spine
Aids muscles of the neck support the head
Deltoid
Scapula
Proximal humerus
Flex and abduct shoulder
Supraspinatus
Below the trapezius
Point of the shoulder
 Maintains shoulder extension
Pectoral
Sternum and ribs 1-4
 Humerus and scapula
 Protract, retract and adduct limb
Triceps brachi
 Scapula and humerus
Olecranon
Extends the elbow
Biceps brachi
Distal scapula
Radius
Flexes the elbow
Extensor carpi radialis
Humerus
Metacarpals
Extend carpus and flex elbow
Flexor carpi radialis
Humerus
 Metacarpal III
 Flex carpus and extend elbow
Common digital extensor tendon
 Distal humerus
P1-P3
 Extension of P1-P3, carpus and flexion of
elbow
Lateral digital extensor tendon
Lateral aspect of the elbow
P1
Extension P1-P3 and carpus
(forelimb)
Superficial digital flexor
 Medial humerus and 
 Distal P1 and proximal P2
 Flexion of P1-P3 and carpus, extension of
tendon (forelimb)
 posterior radius
the elbow
Deep digital flexor tendon
 Medial humerus and 
Palmar aspect of P3
 Flexion of P1-P3 and carpus and extension
(forelimb)
olecranon
of the elbow
Long digital extensor tendon
 Distal femur
 Dorsal proximal aspects
 Extension of distal P1-P3 and flexion of
of P1-P3
hock
Lateral digital extensor 
Lateral stifle and proximal
Long extensor tendon mid
 Extension of distal limb and flexion of hock
tendon (hindlimb)
tibia
metacarpal II
Superficial digital flexor
 Distal femur
Tuber calcis, proximal and 
Flexion of distal limb and extension of hock
tendon (hindlimb)
distal P2
Deep digital flexor tendon
 Proximal tibia
 Palmar aspect P3
Flexion of distal limb and extension of hock
(hindlimb)
Intercostal muscles
Between ribs
Between ribs
Aids breathing
External and internal
Ribs
Pelvic bones
Supports internal organs and aids breathing
abdominal oblique
Superficial gluteal
Tuber coxae
Proximal femur
 Hip flexion 
140
Equine anatomy and physiology
Table 6.2 Important muscles, ligaments and tendons of the equine muscular system-Cont'd.
Muscle/ligament/tendon
Origin
Insertion
Action
Biceps femoris 
Sacroiliac ligament, and
Distal femur, patella, tibia
Extension of hip, stifle and hock
tuber ischii
crest and tuber calcis
Semitendinosus
Tuber ischii and tail base
Proximal tibia
Extends hip and hock
 Semimem branosus
Tuber ischii and sacrosciatic
Distal femur
Extend hip and adduct limb
ligament
Gastrocnemius
 Caudal femur
Point of hock
Maintains hip extension
 Peroneus tertius
Femur
Metatarsal III
Flexion of hock when stifle in flexion
Achilles tendon
Distal gastrocnemius
Point of the hock
See Gastrocnemius
Radial check ligament 
 Distal radius
Proximal superficial flexor
See Superficial digital flexor tendon 
tendon 
Carpal check ligament
Distal carpus
Proximal deep digital flexor
See Deep digital flexor tendon
tendon 
Tarsal check ligament 
Distal tarsus
Proximal deep digital flexor
See Deep digital flexor tendon
tendon 
Suspensory ligament
Proximal palmar metacarpus
 Dorsal extensor tendon at the
Suspend and support fetlock joint
level of distal P2
● Intersesamoidean ligament
sedde Ains aun jo ped suog ose sneedde Aiosuadsns
(Fig. 6.11).
● Collateral sesamoidean ligament
●Distal sesamoidean ligaments.
The stay apparatus
This apparatus acts to suspend and support the fetlock joints
The stay apparatus consists of an arrangement of muscles,
and prevent overextension and collapsing of the limb. The
tendons and ligaments in both the fore and hind limbs that
Femur-
Superficial digital 
Patella
fexor tendon
 Superficial digital
Stifle
Patella
flexor tendon
ligaments 
joint 
Tibia
Deep digital
flexor tendon
Hock
Peroneus
joint
 Suspensory ligament 
Fig. 6.11 Diagram to show the stay apparatus and the suspensory apparatus of the hind timb. There is α simitar mechanism in the forelimb
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
141
Equine anatomy and physiology
allows the horse to stand and sleep while using minimum
the distal femur, lock the limb in a secure position, prevent-
muscular effort (Fig. 6.1l). The apparatus locks the joints in
ing flexing of the distal limb and stifle.
position so that they can bear the weight of the body for long
periods. The flexor tendons allow extension to a certain
igestive
 tract
point, in combination with the check ligament to take the
he
work of standing upright away from the muscles. The sus
The physiology of the digestive tract and the process of diges
effort. In the hind limb the peroneus tertius, flexor tendons
tion are covered in more detail in Chapter 12. In this section
and medial patellar ligament, which hooks over the end of
we will consider the anatomy of the tract. The parts of the
Fig. 6.12 Left lateral view of the equine digestive
Diaphragm
1 Stomach Kidney Small
Rectum
colon
Cesophagus
Trachea
Lungs
Heart.
Liver
Spleen
Large
Small
colon intestine
Table 6.3 Size and function of the parts of the equine digestive tract
Structure
Approximate length or capacity
Function
Oesophagus
1.5 m
Passage of food from mouth to stomach at approximately 35-40 cm per second
Stomach
18 1
Mixing of food with acids, enzymes and mucus; protein digestion
Small intestine
22 m, 64 l
Absorption of nutrients, breakdown of non fibrous material and addition of
 pancreatic juices and bile
Caecum
1 m, 30 l
Microbial fibre breakdown into fatty acids and absorption of water
Large colon
3.5 m
Continuation of microbial breakdown of fibre, absorption of water and nutrients
Small colon
2.5 m
Absorption of water and nutrients
Rectum
0.5 m
Transfer of faeces through anus as excreta
142
 Equine anatomy and physiology
tract are the same as those of the dog and cat (Fig. 6.12,
nasopharynx to the middle ear. Several large and vital blood
Table 6.3).
vessels, e.g. internal carotid artery, and cranial nerves, e.g.
lined with mucous membrane and mucus drains from them
Oral cavity
into the pharynx - the normal downwards position of the
head during grazing promotes drainage.
The mouth is small but the cavity itself is very deep and is
bounded by soft, flexible and sensitive lips. It is formed by the
The pharynx is divided into the upper nasopharynx and
maxilla, incisive and mandibular bones and the hard palate,
lower oropharynx by the soft palate. The walls of the oro-
which is broad and ridged, forms the roof of the mouth. The
pharynx contain diffuse areas of lymphoid tissue. The func-
soff palate continues from the hard palate and is exceptionally
tion of the pharynx, which acts as a cross over point between
long - at rest it hangs down in front of the epiglottis, making
the digestive and respiratory systems is similar to that of the
mouth breathing diffcult and normal vomiting imposible.
cat and the dog. During swallowing the back of the tongue
The tongue is long and broadens out towards its apex. Its upper
raises and pushes the food material against the hard palate
surface is covered in delicate papillae, which give it a velvety
while the laryngeal entrance to the respiratory tract is
texture. Taste buds are distributed over the tongue and soft
covered with the epiglottis. The movement of these struc-
palate but their gustatory function is less efficient than those of
tures creates pressure within the pharynx and the food
the dog and cat. Teeth have beenn covered within the skeletal
is forced into the oesophagus. Peristalsis pushes the food
system.
material towards the stomach.
Pharynx
Oesophagus
The pharynx lies entirely within the skull. Part of the roof
The oesophagus is located close to the trachea on the ventral
and the lateral walls are enveloped by the guthural pouches,
surface of the neck and slightly to the left of the trachea. The
which are found only in the horse. They are large caudoven-
 structure passes through the mediastinum and oesophageal
tral diverticula of the auditory tube that connect the
hiatus into the stomach.
Ascending mesocolon 
Pelvic flexure
Left dorsal colon
-Cranial mesenteric artery
Left ventral flexure
Transverse colon
Descending (small) colon
Ascending duodenum
 Right dorsal colon 
Rectun
Dorsal diaphragmatic flexure
Ventral diaphragmatic flexure -
lleum
Descending duodenum
Right ventral colon 
 Stomach
Jejunum
Fig. 6.13 Diagrammatic representation of the equine digestive tract
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
143
6
Equine anatomy and physiology
Stomach
small abdominal cavity of the horse it is folded many times
and this predisposes to various types of obstruction and dis-
The stomach is a small, J-shaped organ and food enters from
placement, which lead to the group of conditions known as
the oesophagus via the cardiac sphincter. The oesophageal
colic. The caecum is a blind-ending, comma-shaped organ
region of the stomach is similar to the oesophagus in that it
that extends from the right side of the pelvic inlet to the
does not contain secretory glands. The cardiac and pyloric
abdominal cavity floor just behind the xiphoid cartilage of
gland regions contain digestive and mucus glands to initiate
the sternum (Fig. 6.13). It has a capacity of about 30 1. It
the process of protein digestion. The exit of the stomach is
leads into the ascending colon at the caecocolic orifice. The
via the pyloric sphincter, which controls the flow of stomach
colon is divided into the ascending and transverse colon,
contents into the small intestine.
which are often referred to as the large colon because of their
diameter, and then the descending colon, which is long and
arranged in coils and often referred to as the small colon. The
Small intestine
descending colon terminates at the rectum.
The small intestine (Fig. 6.12) is a 22-m-long tube divided
Bibliography
into three regions:
Coumbe K 2001 The equine veterinary nursing manual. Blackwell
● Duodenum
Science, Oxford
● Jejunum
Dyce K M, Sack W O, Wensing C J G 2002 Texibook of veterinary
anatomy and physiotogy, 3rd edn. W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA
● lleum.
Frandson R D, Spurgeon T L 1992 Anatomy and physiology of
The bile and pancreatic ducts empty into the duodenum
farm animats, 5th edn. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, PA
close to the pyloric sphincter. The ileum is the terminal
section of the small intestine, joining with the caecum of the
Budras K-D, Sack W O, Rock S et al,2003 Anatomy of the Horse,
large intestine at the ileocaecal junction.
4th edn. Schlitersche, Hanover
Sisson S, Grossman J D 1969 Anatomy of the domestic animals,
Large intestine
4th edn.W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA
The horse has the largest and most complex large intestine of
 all domestic animals (Fig. 6.13). It has an enormous capacity
Recommended reading
and consists of:
Dyce K M, Sack W O, Wensing C JG 2002 Textbook of veterinary
● Caecum
anatomy and physiotogy, 3rd edn.W B Saunders, Philadelphia,
PA
● Colonl
Provides an excellent detailed section on the horse.
● Rectum.
Sisson S, Grossman J D 1969 Anatomy of the domestic animats
The walls of the caecum and colon are characteristically sac-
4th edn. W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA
culated by the presence of bands of muscle and elastic fibres.
In order that the large intestine can fit into the relatively
Oldfashioned butvery detailedtext andphotographs.
144
 Equine anatomy and physiology
7
Animal housing
Trish Scorer
Key Points
● All species of companion animal are likely to require some
● Disinfection plays a vital role in controlling the spread of
form of housing at some time in their lives. whatever the
disease but the choice of disinfectant depends on such
species, the design of the accommodation must mimic as
factors as the active ingredient, the causative organism,
closely as possible the animal's natural habitat.
the area in which it is used and the safety of the patient
● The design of kennels and catteries must take into
and personnel using it.
account construction materials, ventilation, lighting.
● Waste materials generated by a veterinary practice must
 heating and bedding.
be disposed of according to the regulations laid down in
● Prevention of the spread of disease is of paramount
the Environmental Protection Act 1990 and the Special
importance within any animal accommodation facility
Waste Regulations 1996.
and this is mainly brought about by meticulous cleaning
and attention to detail.
Introduction
● Rescue, e.g. animal shelters, Royal Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA)
Despite the fact that in this country most dogs and cats are
● Veterinary practice.
given the freedom of their owner's house and garden there
will be times when some form of cage or kennel is required.
Within a veterinary practice you will see many different
The smaller and more exotic species of companion animal,
patients that require individual attention and accommoda-
e.g. rabbits, mice, snakes or birds, are usually kept caged all
tion. These can be categorized as:
the time and details of their accommodation is included in
Chapter 33.
● Day patients - patients awaiting minor treatment
and/or routine surgery that can go home the same day
There are many different types of animal care business that
may provide accommodation for animals, but whatever the
● Overnight hospitalization - these patients will
situation, the kennelling or caging must be suited to the
  p  n 
individual animal and the circumstances in which it is being
medication or treatment throughout the night.
housed. Some examples of the housing in which dogs might
Personnel must be on hand to do this. Medication
be kept include:
and emergency equipment should be close at hand
● Privately owned kennels (requiring no licence)
· Recovery from theatre - these kennels will be
situated so that constant monitoring can be
● Privately owned licensed breeding kennels (e.g. more
maintained
than two breeding bitches)
● Isolation - these are separate from the main
● Boarding (kennels/cattery/exotics)
kennelling area with their own supply of bedding.
feeding and watering equipment, medication and a
●Whelping/puppy
nurse to maintain barrier nursing. Kennels may be
enclosed with their ventilation and, if necessary, can
● Quarantine
convert to an oxygen tent
●Racing
● Noisy and aggressive patients may be housed
away from the main kennels to avoid distressing other
● Training (police, army, customs, security, guide/hearing
patients. However, these patients still require constant
dogs and dogs for the disabled)
monitoring
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
Animal housing
● Intensive care unit - as with postoperative
Within a practice there are usually two or three different sizes
 kennelling this will have constant monitoring.
 of kennel, which are then appropriately adapted to meet the
preferably with its own nursing team. Kennels may be
requirements of the individual. As the patient does not spend
enclosed with their own ventilation and, if necessary,
very long in the kennel its specific needs are less important
can be converted to an oxygen tent.
providing it is secure, warm and correctly fed and watered.
Construction
● Building regulations will require adequate
 damp-proofing, insulation, ventilation and fire
animal housing
regulations. Fire regulations include a fireproof
covering on walls and ceilings, fire doors and covering
 any wooden framework with a fire retardant.
Consider the following aspects:
Security
Siting
Security must be a priority for the animal, its owner and staff
Whether the housing for the animal is indoor or outdoor
members. The animal must feel safe from predators and per-
there are many points to take into consideration:
sonnel must feel confident that the animal cannot escape.
Ensure that the individual cages or kennels are secure with
● Site the housing away from wind and rain. If indoors
locking doors and that the enclosing building has some
avoid draughts from doors and windows
means of retaining the animal should it escape, e.g. double
doors, windows covered in mesh.
● Ensure that the accommodation receives adequate
lighting. Consider the use of natural light, avoiding
sun scorch and provide shade if necessary
Care facilities
● Consider whether the site should be close to other
Site the accommodation close to service areas, such as food
rd e o as sads ard e u pi se
stores and preparation areas. A room for washing feeding
equipment and bedding should be nearby, as well as facilities
e.g. do not put a cat near to a mouse or a bird
to store and dry bedding. For dogs a grooming and bathing
● Site the accommodation to blend in with its
area is advisable. In a hospital the accommodation must be
close to treatment rooms and operating theatres. The layout
of the entire building must be efficient to use; for example,
might be offended.
try to reduce long journeys between rooms that are regularly
used together.
● Use natural topography to enhance the look of the
housing, e.g. trees, shrubs and natural construction
materials
Construction materials
● Site the accommodation on level, secure, stable ground
The materials used depend upon the species or the animal's
● Consider whether soundproofing is required. This can
individual requirements (Table 7.1). The design of cage or
be done internally by insulating the main building
enclosure will also influence the choice of construction
with acoustic tiles, double glazing and double doors
materials and examples of the different types are shown in
and also externally by earth banks and walls built
Table 7.2.
around the housing. Tree belts can also insulate the
The ideal materials should have the following properties:
sound
● If building commercial accommodation, consider
● Cost effective - balance the cost against the quality
whether there are adequate amenities such as water,
electricity, sewerage (mains or tank) and road access
● Hygienic and easily cleaned
● Ensure that all licensing, building and planning
● Good quality - last a long time while maintaining
regulations are met
effectiveness and looks
146
5 Animal housing
Table 7.1 Common materials used in the construction of animal housing
Material
Uses
Comments
Cavity brickwork (brick or breeze
External and structural walls
Secure and insulating. Pervious but can be painted with waterproof
blocks)
 paint
Sealed concrete
Floors, walkways and pathways
Impervious, therefore easy to clean. Drainage can be included by
the use of pipes or a fall to guttering. Rodent-proof and
escape-proof
Galvanized metal
Ready made partitions, walls,
Strong, secure but expensive. Heavy
doors and windows
Aluminium sheeting
Walls, partitions and doors
aisuadxaul Aqeuoseal pue ynoows 'ueajo on Ase3
Stainless steel
Walls, partitions and doors
Easy to clean, smooth. May be expensive
Toughened plastic/fibreglass
Walls, partitions and doors
Easy to clean, smooth and inexpensive. May be chewed and
scratched
Glass
Walls, partitions, windows and doors
Easy to clean, smooth and inexpensive. Transparent, allowing light
to enter and the animal to see out. Can be double-glazed to
increase insulating properties
Laminated plastic
Walls and partitions
Transparent, allowing light to enter and the animal to see out. Can
be chewed and scratched
Wood
Walls, partitions and framework
Inexpensive but rots and can be chewed by the animal. Not
escape-proof. Not easy to disinfect and can harbour infection. Risk
of splinters and a fire hazard
Wire mesh
Partitions
Often used with a wooden framework. Must use an appropriate-size
mesh for the animal, e.g. dogs require less than 2.5 cm? to avoid
the risk of trapping paws
Asphalt and vinyl flooring
 Floors and moulded into walls
Used to cover concrete flooring to waterproof and give non-slip
flooring
Tiles
Walls and floors
Washable and waterproof (ensure tile grout is waterproof)
● Safe for both the animal and the handler
● Warm and insulating to maintain temperatures
 required by the animal
● Easily maintained - requiring few/no repairs to main-
tain function
● Easy to construct
● Eco-friendly - use recycled materials or materials from
● Easily available.
a reputable source
Kennel services
Ventilation
of bacteria and reduce the transmission of airborne infection.
Good ventilation will remove exhaled gases and fumes from
Ventilation is one of the most important factors when design-
excreta, ammonia and methane, leaving the air clean and
 on nd si 1  p no  K s
odourless. The optimum air changes per hour are 6-12,
draughts at ground level, which will chill animals, but a
n        
through flow of air must be maintained to prevent a build-up
conditions.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
147
Animal housing
Table 7.2 Examples of different types of animal housing
Type of housing
 Species of animal
Comments
Run-access kennel
7e pue 6o0
Can buy ready made sections and erect yourself. There is an internal
sleeping section and external run for exercise. Commonly used by private
owners. Cannot control heating and ventilation easily. Not easy to control
aggressive or lively dogs. Observation is difficult if animal is inside
Corridor kennels
Dog and cat
Allows many kennels to be built side-by-side within one building. Internal
kennels are located down each side of the building with a walkway down
the middle. Runs on the outside of the building are connected to the inside
10f paau aut ploae on wansAs Aannd e Aq pauado aq ueo yolym 'yozey e Aq
entry into the kennel
Parasol kennels
Dog and cat
Similar to the corridor kennels but built in a circular building instead of a
rectangular one. More expensive to build but the main advantage is that all
the animals can be observed from one position
H-block kennels
Dog and cat
This is used only when housing a large number of animals. Four kennel
2 bulaq H, a47 jo 1eq ss01o a47 'H, ue w1oy 07 la4zaboz pabue11e ale syoonq
preparation area
Single room kennel
Dog, cat and rabbit
Commonly used in a hospital environment where the patient does not
require a run as it is a short-term stay. Modern kennelling is made from
stainless steel as it is easy to maintain and disinfect. Steel bars or
toughened glass at the front of the cage allow easy observation. Various
sizes are available to include walk in and stackable kennels
Hutch/morant cage
Rabbits, guinea pigs and ferrets
Usually wire mesh with a wooden framework. Can be outside all year or
moved inside in cold weather
Metal cage with bars
Small rodents
Often has a plastic bottom for comfort for the animal and ease of cleaning
Rotastak cage/gerbilarium
 Small rodents especially mice and
Made out of plastic with metal bars. Multilevel.
hamsters
Aquarium
Fish, some reptiles and
Made out of toughened glass or plastic with a lid on top. Accessories
amphibians 
include substrate, water, lighting and flter
Vivarium/terrarium
Reptiles, amphibians, arthropods
sauossaaoy 'dot uo p e yhm 2sed 1o 5seh pauay6not jo 7no apew
sosmou pue
include heating, lighting and shaded area
Aviary
Birds
Can be internal cages or external areas for many birds. Outside aviaries
have a covered/internal area for shelter
There are two type of ventilation:
in the centre of the roof or ceiling. As the extractor
fan works it pulls air up and out of the building.
● Passive ventilation - achieved by opening and
This air is then replaced by air drawn in through
closing windows, doors and vents. The disadvantages
the side vents, maintaining the cycle of clean
of passive ventilation are that it is difficult to control
air
the flow of air and it may cause draughts. It offers anl
escape route to patients
● Air-conditioning system - clean air is actively
'pushed' into the building by the air conditioning
● Active ventilation - or mechanical ventilation,
unit and another unit pulls out the stale air, thus
which is usually achieved by either an extractor fan
maintaining a cycle of clean air. In hot weather
and vents or an air conditioning system:
the unit cools the air and in cold weather it heats
it, maintaining a constant set temperature.
● Exiractor fan and vents - vents are placed into the
This is the more expensive of the two active
walls of the building and an extractor fan is placed
systems.
148
Animal housing
● To provide the correct environment for the animal
Lighting and electrical
● For maintenance of buildings and equipment; heating
equipment
will prevent water pipes freezing and subsequently
There are several reasons why it is essential to provide light-
bursting as well as controlling condensation within the
ing within the accommodation, whether it is natural, i.e. sun-
building
light, or artificial:
● Some equipment, especially electrical items will not
● Procedures such as treatments and medications can be
work in cold, damp environments
carried out safely and effectively. Poor lighting will cast
shadows, which will make daily activities difficult
● A warm environment helps to dry accommodation
 and other areas after cleaning, e.g. after floors have
● Observation of the animal is easier with good lighting;
been mopped
it avoids the need to disturb the animal in order to be
able to see it properly
● Staff will appreciate working in a warm environment.
● An animal that has adequate lighting in its house will
 Table 7.3 Environmental temperatures for dogs
be able to gain optimum mental stimulation from its
 and cats
environment
Type of animal
Environmental temperature
● Remember that it is necessary to reduce the animal's
Adult dogs
Run area 7-26°℃
lighting to allow for resting and sleeping periods. The
Sleeping area should not fall below 10°℃
animal's sleeping area should not have dirert light
entering into it.
Adult cats
Whole area should not fall below 10°℃
Whelping area
18-21℃
Natural lighting in normal periods of day and night, i.e. the
photoperiod, is recommended to allow the animal to express
Puppies
Week 1: 26-29°℃
Week 2: 21-26°℃
its normal behaviour. However, care should be taken that sun-
light does not cause overheating in warmer weather. In short
Week 3 up to weaning: 209℃
winter days and where natural lighting is sparse, supplement
Hospital and isolation
18-21℃
with artificial lighting, such as fluorescent strip lights with a
areas
diffuser. This provides good coverage of light to most areas,
without shadows. Individual bulkhead lights can be posi-
tioned in the kennels for extra light. Never use hanging light
bulbs, as the animal could reach and chew them. They also
Care should be taken when assessing the temperature within
hang in the way when cleaning out the accommodation,
a building and/or within individual accommodation. Rarely
posing a risk of electrocution. Switches to the lights should be
will the temperature be the same throughout the area.
placed outside the accommodation and covered with a water-
Remember that warm air rises and there may be several
 proof safety cover. All cabling inside and outside requires a
degrees difference between a floor kennel and one placed
waterproof covering. Circuit breakers should be used on all
       s  
electrical equipment to ‘trip' out the power should it be
and it is important to consider this, especially with overnight
 damaged in any way. All plugs should have the appropriate-
patients in hospital. There is a risk of temperature variations
sized fuse inside them.
if heating is controlled by a timer switch.
Temperature changes will occur with draughts from doors
and windows and it is advisable to have double doors to
avoid this. Cavity wall and roof insulation will prevent excess
Heating
heat escaping from main buildings.
 Providing the correct temperature appropriate for the species
and condition of the animal is paramount to its welbeing.
Types of heating
Temperature and humidity should replicate its natural envi-
ronment as much as possible. A range of temperatures
The ideal method of heating should be easy to install, simple
for individual species can be found in Table 7.3. Heating is
and economical to run and safe for the operator and the
essential:
animal. There are two types of heating available:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
Animal housing
● Central heating heats the entire building and the
Bedding
animal accommodation within it; it is controlled
by a thermostat that regulates and keeps the
There is a wide range of pet bedding available (Table 7.5).
temperature set
The choice depends on the species of animal, the size and
weight and the reason for providing bedding, i.e. is it healthy,
● Local heating is provided to an individual animal or
recumbent, aged or orthopaedic? Bedding is used to provide:
area.
● Comfort and warmth to the animal by insulating it
The advantage of using both types is that the environmental
temperature remains constant and those animals requiring
● Somewhere to sleep
extra heat, e.g. exotics or sick animals, can be housed in the
same area. Table 7.4 shows the advantages and disadvantages
● A soft place to rest that will prevent the animal
of both types.
developing decubitus ulcers (bed sores) from lying on
bony prominences
Table 7.4 Advantages and disadvantages of different types of heating
Advantages
Disadvantages
Central heating
Gas, oil and electric boilers
Common, often already installed in existing
 Often warm and cold spots in the room depending on
buildings. Easy to operate and maintain
the placement of the radiators. Open pipes are diffcult
to clean and will harbour dirt
Gas, oil and electric underfloor
Heat in close contact with the animal and
 Expensive to install and costly to repair
heating
therefore warm and comforting
Fan-assisted heating
Rapid heating in the area. Inexpensive
 Often warm and cold spots in the room depending on
the placement of the fan. Noisy to operate
Air-conditioning units
Highly effective at maintaining a constant
Expensive to install and run. Suitable for large
temperature. Often incorporated into the
establishments
ventilation system. Can blow hot and cold air.
Easy to operate
Local heating
 Infrared dull emitter lamp
Mobile, soothing and able to be regulated by
Requires a power point nearby. Risk of fire and injury to
adjusting the height of the lamp. Can be
the animal if able to reach it
thermostatically controlled 
 Electrical heat pad
Direct contact with the animal. Constant heat
Animal may chew it, resulting in electrocution
Portable radiant heater
 Portable instant heat
Can be knocked over and cable chewed. Requires
constant monitoring
 Electric fan heater
Instant heat
Risk of hyperthermia if the animal is unable to move
away from the heat. Noisy
Hot water bottle
Cheap and instant heat
Animal may chew or it may burst. will cool down so
requires monitoring
Chemical heat pads
Instant heat
Animal may chew or it may burst. Will cool down so
requires monitoring
'Hot hands' water-filled plastic
 Cheap and instant heat. Good for small animals
Animal may chew or it may burst. will cool down so
gloves
requires monitoring
150
Animal housing
Table 7.5 Common types of bedding
Type of bedding
Disposable/reusable
Advantages
Disadvantages
Acrylic bedding, e.g. Vetbed
Reusable
Absorbable, warm, soft, durable,
Reasonably expensive. Can be chewed
washable and some can be autoclaved
Blankets and towels
Reusable
Warm, soft and washable. May be
Can harbour mites if not washed at high
donated by owners
temperature. Expensive to buy
Covered foam pads/foam
Reusable
Washable cover and foam. Provides
Can be chewed. Large foam pads can be
chips or wedges
support and warmth, especially to
difficult to wash 
orthopaedic/recumbent cases
Newspaper
 Disposable and
 Cheap and readily available. Often 
Hard to lie on and the animal may chew it.
recyclable
used underneath a blanket to absorb
The printing ink will stain the animal,
fluid. Provides some warmth
especially if it becomes wet
Incontinence sheets
Disposable
Often used on top or underneath a
Hard to lie on and the animal may chew it.
blanket to absorb fluid. Useful for 
Expensive for disposable bedding
incontinent patients. Provides some
warmth
Shredded paper
 Disposable and
Provides more warmth as bulkier than
Can be eaten. Paper may stick to wounds
recyclable
unshredded paper. Animals can burrow
 and require soaking off
into it and arrange it as they would
like
Bean bags
Reusable
Can be arranged by the animal.
Only the washable cover can be cleaned.
 Moulds to body shape. Insulating and
Bean bag may harbour infection. Chewable
Wa Tm
Straw/hay
 Disposable and 
Warm and absorbable. Reasonably
Dusty, prickly and may harbour mites, lice
recyclable
cheap
and bacteria. May be a source of Aspergilfus
spores, which can cause respiratory disease.
Do not use if the patient has a wound, as it
will stick
Woodchips and woodwool
Disposable and
Warm and absorbable. Reasonably
Can cause allergic reactions. Do not use if
recyclable
cheap
the patient has a wound, as it will stick to it
Sawdust
 Disposable and
Warm and absorbable. Reasonably
Dusty and may harbour mites, lice and
recyclable
cheap. Good for some rodents and
bacteria. Do not use if the patient
exotics. Allows for burrowing
has a wound, as it will stick to it
Pre-sterilized peat
 Disposable and 
Warm and absorbable. Good for some
Expensive. Do not use if the patient has a
recyclable
rodents and exotics. Reduces the
wound, as it will stick to it
ammonia emitted in excreta and
therefore reduces smell
 t     d   
● Soft and comfortable
animal injuring itself as moves around
● Large enough for the size of the animal when fully
The properties of the ideal bedding material are as follows:
stretched out
● Insulating to make the most of the animal's own body
● Good absorbency and drainage to wick away any body
heat
fluids
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
151
Animal housing
● Non-toxic to the animal
Specific cattery requirements
● Easily cleaned, disinfected and dried or disposed of
As shown in Table 7.2 there is a variety of cat housing avail-
and recycled
able that allows the cat to be kept inside or outside as long as
the accommodation suits the environmental conditions.
● Easy to store
Temperature details are shown in Table 7.3 and will depend
upon the condition and reasons for housing. Cat housing
● Cheap.
differs from the dog housing in that cats are able to, and
should be encouraged to climb. There is also a greater risk of
respiratory infection when cats are housed in close proximity
Specific kennel requirements
to each other and allowance must therefore be made for this.
          
As shown in Table 7.2 there are a wide variety of kennels
open run and the next and all the accommodation, both
available to house dogs, whether it is a single kennel to house
sleeping and exercising areas, must be covered. In indoor cat-
a dog in your own home or a commercial establishment.
teries it is vital that good ventilation is installed to remove
Dogs can be kept inside or outside as long as the accommo.
stale air and prevent cross-contamination. Transparent pan-
dation suits the environmental conditions. Temperature
elling can be used instead of wire mesh to prevent cross-con-
details are shown in Table 7.3 and depend upon the condi-
tamination of air. Each individual cattery unit (Table 7.7)
tion of the animal and the reason for kennelling. Whatever
requires the following:
the specific details each kennel requires the following:
● A sleeping and exercising area
● A sleeping and exercising area (Table 7.6)
● A toilet area, preferably with a litter tray
● A toilet area or a regular opportunity to go to the toilet
● Heating to the required temperature
● Heating to the required temperature in the sleeping
area
● Lighting and ventilation
●Lighting
● A raised bed, preferably removable, lined with
appropriate bedding material
● A raised bed, preferably removable to clean, and
appropriate bedding material
● A water bowl filled with clean water at all times
automatic drinkers are available
● A water bowl full of clean water at all times -
automatic drinkers are available
● Scratching post and toys to play with
● Ventilation, either in the kennel or main building
● An escape-proof window and sill that the cat can climb
up to and look out of. (This is recommended by the
● Feeding equipment
Model Licence Conditions and Guidance for Cat
Boarding Establishments.)
● Mental stimulation, e.g. toys to play with.
Table 7.7 Guidelines for individual kennel sizes as
Table 7.6 Guidelines for individual kennel sizes
recommended by the Model Licence Conditions and
as recommended by the Chartered Institute of
Guidance for Cat Boarding Establishments
Environmental Health
Number
Height of
Exercise
Sleeping
Size of dog
Height of
Exercise area
Sleeping area
of cats
unit (m)
area (m?)
area (m?)
kennel (m)
(m²)
(m²)
1
1.8
1.7
0.85
Up to 60 cm at
1.85
2.46
1.9
2
1.8
2.23
1.5
shoulder
Up to 4
1.8
2.79
1.85
Over 60 cm at
1.85
3.35
1.9
shoulder
*The raised bed for sleeping must be at least 91 cm above floor level and no
more than 106 cm deep.
152
Animal housing
Methods of disease
Cleaning and disinfection of
accommodation and the
control
environment
 In the environment of a kennels, cattery or a veterinary prac-
It is important to understand the terminology associated with
tice it is essential that procedures are instigated to control the
cleaning and disinfection and the following list defines the
spread of pathogens so reducing the risk of a disease out-
break. This must be done on a daily basis and involve both
ment:
sick and healthy animals. Disease can spread easily but an
understanding of the factors that increase the risk of infec.
● Disease - A process that detrimentally interferes with
tion will help to prevent its spread (Table 7.8).
the functioning of an organism. Diseases may be
infectious or non-infectious
Table 7.8 Factors affecting the spread of disease
Method of disease control
Reasons
Prevention 
Avoiding direct contact between
Where there are a lot of animals housed in the
Do not allow animals to have contact with each
animals
same environment the pathogenic population
other. Sick and/or infectious animals should not be
will increase. Allowing animals to mix with
housed with healthy ones
each other freely increases the risk of disease
transmission
Reduce the number of animals
Dust, spores, bacteria, viruses, humidity and
Good ventilation is vital to ensure that the air is
sharing the same air space
noxious gases build up in the environment
ayt jo ino suabouied sauieo pue ysaly Apueisuon
around the animal. If there are several animals
accommodation. Good ventilation will reduce the
sharing the same air space then this will
risk of draughts and provide an appropriate
increase the risk of disease being spread to
atmosphere and constant temperature
the others by indirect contact
Maintaining good hygiene
Accommodation that has a build-up of faeces
Regular cleaning and disinfection will reduce the
and urine not only makes the animal
risk of infection as well as inmproving the wellbeing
uncomfortable, but increases the risk of
of the animal
infection building up by harbouring bacteria,
spores and viruses
Early diagnosis and effective
If the animal becomes unwell it is vital that this
 Observing for signs of ill health should be carried
treatment of sick animals
is noticed as soon as possible to reduce the risk
out regularly through daily health checks that
of the illness being transferred to others
include the animal's appearance, faeces, appetite
and temperature. Infected animals should be
isolated immediately
Avoiding animals sharing the
This increases the risk of infection being
Ideally the animal should have the same housing
same kennel, feeding, watering
transferred by direct contact
every day, as well as its own feeding and grooming
and grooming equipment
equipment. Should the need arrive to move the
animal and/or use other equipment then this should
be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected
Routine health checks
Animals new to the housing may be harbouring
Preventative medicine is the use of veterinary
a disease and not yet showing any clinical
treatment and environmental conditions to reduce
signs. They should be isolated and given a full
and control the build-up of disease. This includes
health check
environmental conditions as well as the use of
vaccinations, worming programmes, health
certificates, quarantine and passports
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
153
Animal housing
● Microorganism - A living organism too small to be
● Regular cleaning removes pathogens and therefore
seen with the naked eye
reduces the risk of infecting the patient
● Pathogen - A microorganism capable of causing disease
● The animals are more comfortable living in a clean
and dry environment and are less likely to become
● Antiseptic - A chemical that will inhibit/destroy
cold, dirty and susceptible to disease
pathogens without damaging animal cells. Used on the
skin and for cleaning wounds
● The environment looks and smells nice, which will
benefit the patients and staff and create a good
● Disinfectant - A chemical that will inhibit/destroy
impression for clients
pathogens but not bacterial spores. As disinfectants
may damage skin cells they are used mainly in the
The key areas to clean and disinfect are:
environment, e.g. floors, kennel walls
● Animal's cage or kennel
● Sterilization - A method of killing microorganisms
such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, protozoa and prions,
● Surrounding areas, e.g. corridors, room in which cage
 including bacterial spores. There are various methods
is kept
of sterilization:
● Preparation areas
● Cold chemical solutions - also known as sterilants
● Examination rooms
● Ethylene oxide gas
● Treatment rooms
●Radiation
● Personal hygiene.
● Heat - either under pressure, e.g. autoclave, or dry
heat, e.g. hot air oven
● Detergent - A cleaning agent
The principles of cleaning
● Surfactant - A chemical that reduces/breaks surface
Cleaning and disinfection is achieved by both physical activ.
tension, allowing the detergent to reach the pathogen.
ity and the use of chemicals. There are general guidelines
Detergents normally contain a surfactant
          
equipment or accommodation. These are:
● -cide - Used as a suffix indicates that the chemical
will kill a particular type of organism, e.g. a bactericide
● All equipment must be washed and disinfected daily -
will kill bacteria and a tuberculocide will kill
more often if the patient is infectious.
tuberculosis
● Wherever possible the animal should be removed from
● -stat - Used as a suffix indicates that the chemical will
the accommodation to avoid the risk of inhaling the
inhibit the growth of a particular type of organism,
cleaning fluids and of injury caused by cleaning
e.g. fungistat or coccidiostat.
equipment. It is also easier to clean an empty kennel
and avoids the problem of the animal escaping!
The importance of cleaning
● Always wash equipment with a detergent before the
using a disinfectant to remove organic material. Ensure
One of the most important factors of managing animal
that the detergent is thoroughly rinsed off before
accommodation is to provide a clean and hygienic environ-
disinfection as this may inhibit the action of the
ment in which the patients live and the staff work. This is
disinfectant.
achieved by regular cleaning and disinfection of both the
accommodation and the equipment. The reasons for this are:
● All work surfaces, floors and equipment must be
cleaned and disinfected.
● Organic matter such as urine, faeces and hair can
harbour endoparasites, ectoparasites, bacteria and
● The use of disposable gloves and an apron is advised
viruses, which can multiply and infect other patients
for both safety and hygiene.
154
4Animal housing
● A high standard of personal hygiene is essential. Wash
● Hand brushes to scrub surfaces. Plastic brushes are
hands before and after handling any animal.
easier to disinfect after use than ones with wooden
handles
● Prepare the animal's food in a room which is separate
from where the cleaning equipment and waste is
● A vacuum cleaner to clear floors of any dust and
stored.
 hair prior to cleaning. The advantage over using a floor
brush is that dust is not spread around. Waste from
●Always use a disinfectant that is recommended for the
the vacuum cleaner should be disposed of as clinical
type of material to be cleaned.
waste
● Always follow the manufacturer's instructions when
● A floor brush/dustpan for cleaning up dust and
using any cleaning products.
hair prior to cleaning
● Cloths for cleaning surfaces and equipment should
Cleaning equipment
be used once and then thrown away. If this is
uneconomical then they should be washed and
All cleaning equipment and disinfectants should be stored
disinfected after use and dried.
in a separate area. After each use all equipment should be
cleaned, disinfected, rinsed and dried. There are various
pieces of equipment that can be used for cleaning and disin-
fecting. These are:
Cleaning a kennel unit
● Mop and bucket - ideally this should be a double
The procedure for cleaning and disinfecting a kennel unit is
bucket to hold the disinfectant and water in one side
summarized in Table 7.9. This procedure can be adapted to
 and clean water in the other to rinse off the mop
suit the individual animal.
Table 7.9 Procedure for cleaning and disinfecting a kennel
Step
Procedure
Equipment
1
Move animal into run/secure holding area. Ensure that no other animal has used it. This
Slip lead or collar and lead. Cat box
 must be cleaned after use
2
Remove bedding, toys and feeding equipment. Disposable bedding should be put in
Disposable gloves
'paup pue (uezoajuisip areudoidde ue ul) paysem s! busppaq layzo (ansem jeou
Other equipment requires cleaning and disinfecting before replacement
Remove soiling (faeces, urine, vomit, saliva and other body discharges)
Disposable gloves. Shovel, scraper
4
Hose out hair/debris. A vacuum cleaner or dustpan and brush can also be used before
Pressure hose and/or steam cleaner.
hosing
Vacuum cleaner or dustpan and brush
5
 Scrub with warm water and detergent. Some detergents contain a disinfectant; therefore
Scrubbing brush or cloth. Spray bottle or
only one product is used to clean and disinfect
bucket
6
Rinse with water
Hose or bucket
7
Apply disinfectant of an appropriate type for the walls, floor and equipment being
Disposable gloves, cloth, brush or spray
cleaned and the suspected pathogen being targeted
bottle
8
Allow appropriate contact time for disinfectant to work
9
Rinse thoroughly with water
Hose or bucket
10
Dry
Squeegee or cloth
11
Leave to air-dry for as long as possible
12
Replace bedding
13
Return animal, checking that the patient is clean
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
155
Animal housing
most types of disinfectants on both microorganisms and
Box 7.1 The ideal disinfectant
organic matter.
The ideal disinfectant should have the following proper-
Bacteria can be divided into either 'Gram-positive' or 'Gram-
ties:
● Will destroy the intended microorganisms
negative' groups depending on the structure of the cell wall
and its reaction to Gram stain. Knowing which group the
● Will decontaminate organic matter
bacteria fall into can assist in the choice of disinfectant.
 Effective in clean and dirty situations
Gram-positive bacteria are more sensitive and, therefore, more
●Works quickly, i.e. contact time is short for the disinfectant to
easily destroyed, while Gram-negative bacteria are quite
be effective
resistant. Bacterial spores are the most resistant and specific
disinfectants are required to destroy them. Some prions, i.e.
●Effective in both hot and cold water
abnormal forms of a cell protein that are capable of replica-
-Aua ay7 ul adoad 1ayno 'lozeado ay7 ioy ajes pue lxoz-uon ●
tion and causing infection, can resist sterilization by normal
ronment and the patients
methods and therefore require longer sterilization times,
●  Non-corrosive to surfaces
 preferably by autoclave.
 Does not stain surfaces
Peasant to work with, i.e. no noxious gases
Factors affecting the efficacy of
●Economical
disinfectants
Stable, e.g. non-explosive when stored
● Will not denature if stored for a long time.
As with all chemical products it is important to read the
manufacturer's instructions to get the optimum effectiveness
and efficiency from the disinfectant used. However, as a guide
When selecting a chemical for cleaning (Box 7.1) it is impor-
the following may help improve the effectiveness of the
 tant to consider the following points:
pro duct:
● The intended surface to be cleaned, i.e. is it for use on
● Reduce the level of contamination by organic matter
a patient or for the environment?
by cleaning the area prior to disinfection. This allows
the disinfectant to reach its target without reducing its
● What microorganism is to be targeted? Ensure that the
concentration
product chosen will be effective against the intended
 microorganism. Broad-spectrum disinfectants that act
● Warm water may increase the disinfectant's
on a range of microorganisms are available for general
effectiveness on the microorganism. Refer to the
cleaning
instructions for the optimum temperature of the
water
● Will the product damage the surface for which it is
intended? When disinfecting rubber and plastic, care
●Always use the recommended concentration of water
should be taken, as some disinfectants will corrode the
to disinfectant. Using too high a concentration may be
material. Always follow the manufacturer's recom-
harmful to the operator, patient and/or environment.
mended contact time
 Too low a concentration of disinfectant may be
ineffective
● Safety for the user and other staff and patients: is the
product non-toxic and non-irritant?
● Use a large volume of disinfectant solution to reduce
the level of contamination
● The pH of the water may alter the effectiveness of the
Susceptibility of microbes to
disinfectant
disinfectants and sterilization
● Disinfectants may become denatured if left in storage
There are various methods of testing the efficacy of a dis-
onios e ou dn apeu si 1onpoid au 1 uoi oon 101
infectant against different organisms and materials. The
it should be used as soon as possible
Rideal-Walker test compares the action of phenol-based
products on microorganisms while the Chick-Martin test
● Some disinfectants are inactivated by the presence
compares the action of phenols on organic matter. The most
 of soap, organic matter and cork/rubber 
useful test is the Kelsey-Sykes test, which tests the action of
surfaces.
156
5Animal housing
Disinfectant groups
Aldehydes
There are many different groups of disinfectant available and
Aldehydes are divided into two groups: formaldehydes and
many have a detergent built in to them. Most modern dis-
gluteraldehydes.
infectants can be used on a variety of materials without harm,
 but it is vital to read the instructions and performance data to
Formaldehydes
ensure correct storage, dilution and use.
● Used in environment only
The main groups of disinfectant are:
● Uses include solution for histopathological specimens
and sterilization for vaccines. Kills microorganisms
● Alcohols
without altering their antigenic properties, thus
stimulating antibody production without causing
●Aldehydes
disease
●Biguanides
● Effective on spores but, because it is highly irritant to
many things, its use as a disinfectant is limited
● Halogens
● Works by 'fixing' cell proteins, rendering them useless
● Peroxides
● Examples are Parvocide and Formula H
● Phenols
● Formalin is 37% formaldehyde gas in water but for the
● Quaternary ammonium compounds (QACs).
sake of calculations it is used as 100%
● Histopathological specimens are stored in a 10% buffered
formalin solution and for a 1 cm x 1 cm × 1 cm
Alcohols
specimen at least 10 ml of solutionn must be used
● Used for skin disinfection and cold sterilization
● Like alcohol, formaldehyde easily evaporates.
● Effective on bacteria but not spores or viruses
Gluteraldehydes
● Alcohol works by coagulating bacterial cell proteins so
● Used in the environment only
that they cannot function
● Used for cold sterilization, i.e. for instruments/
● Examples are ethyl alcohol, isopropyl alcohol, IMS
equipment that cannot be autoclaved
(methylated spirit), surgical spirit
● It is effective on bacteria, viruses and, if left long
●Alcohol is an organic compound, i.e. it is
enough, spores
carbon-based
● Work by protein inactivation
● Absolute alcohol has all water removed; however, in
 practice alcohol is usually used as a 70% solution
● An example is Cidex
● Alcohol is volatile: it evaporates and, therefore, if it is
● Gluteraldehydes are more modern than formaldehydes
left in an open container it will loses its effectiveness
and are less irritant to tissue.
quickly
Biguanides
● Once introduced, contamination will quickly spread
through the alcohol and if used on a site will spread
The form of biguanide that we use in practice is chlor-
even further
hexidine:
● Commonly used as a swab for injection sites as it
● Used for skin cleaning and scrubbing up surgical sites
removes lipids from the skin surface. If it is used
repeatedly, it will be necessary to apply a skin lotion,
● Effective on Gram-positive bacteria and fungi, not
as the site will become sore.
spores or viruses
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
157
Animal housing
● Examples of chlorhexidine are Hibiscrub and Hibitane
● Iodophores are iodine bound to organic molecules.
These act as carriers and as such are less toxic than
● Biguanides have a low toxicity but are easily
iodine. However, they are more easily inactivated by
organic material
scrubbing up, ensure that the area is free from both
● Will stain, but not as permanently as iodine.
● Cotton wool left to soak in a solution of chlorhexidine
and water will become inactive as the day progresses -
Chlorine
always use a fresh solution on each patient.
 Used as calcium hypochlorite:
Halogens
● Used in the environment only - in water supplies,
Halogens are oxidizing agents that react with protein mole-
 sewage and as a general disinfectant in dairies and
cules in the cell, resulting in the exchange of oxygen and
 animal housing facilities
 inactivation of the cell processes.
● Effective on all pathogens, including bacterial spores
Halogens are divided into:
● It is highly irritant to tissue, corrosive to metals and
● Iodine (inorganic)
often toxic, so its use is limited
● Iodophore (organic)
● Examples of chlorine halogens are Domestos, Milton
and Chloros.
● Chlorine
     s, a s o
● Fluorine and bromine.
 material and sunlight.
Iodines
Bromine and fluorine
● Used as a skin cleaner and surgical preparation
Both of these are too toxic for medical or veterinary use.
● Effective on bacteria, fungi, protozoa and some viruses
but not bacterial spores
Peroxides
● Used in the environment and on skin
● Examples of iodines are Pevidine and Betadine
● Effective on bacteria, especially anaerobes
● Inorganic and difficult to dissolve in water so is
dissolved in sodium or potassium as iodide. This is
●Oxidizing agents
used as a 2% solution for topical use. It can also be
used dissolved in alcohol as a tincture
● Examples are hydrogen peroxide, potassium
permanganate, zinc peroxide and Virkon.
● Stains the surface brown and may also be a tissue
irritant if too big an area is covered.
● Can be used in a number of ways, e.g. as a flush for
abscesses (3% solution), to cauterize bleeding or, in the
case of Virkon, as an environmental disinfectant.
Iodophors
● Used as a skin and surgical preparation
Phenols
● If formulated with a detergent, can also be used on
● Also known as carbolic acid
equipment, walls and floors
● An old-fashioned type of disinfectant
● Iodophors are effective on bacteria, fungi, protozoa
and some viruses but not bacterial spores
● Toxic to cats
● An example is Wescodyne
● Work by denaturing the cell protein.
158
3Animal housing
The phenol group is divided into:
Quaternary ammonium compounds
● a. Black/white and clear
● Used in the environment and on the skin.
● Used in the environment only
● Effective on Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria and, to some extent, bacterial spores, fungi
● Effective on bacteria, tuberculosis (acid-fast) group
and viruses
of bacteria, viruses and fungi
● QACs are a type of catatonic detergent that kill
● Examples of these are Jeyes fluid and Izal
pathogens by dissolving lipid in the cell walls and
membranes
● Cheap, strong-smelling and absorbed by rubber and
plastic.
● Examples are Trigene, Vetaclean, Savlon and
Zephiran
●2. Chloroxylenols (chlorinated)
● A fairly new group of disinfectants and popular in
● Used in the environment and on the skin
medicine as they are non-toxic
● Effective on Gram-positive bacteria
● Odourless, colourless (unless added for identification)
● An example is Dettol
water, organic matter and soap
● Less irritant than the black/white/clear phenols but
● Cotton wool left to soak in a solution of QAC
more easily inactivated by hard water and organic
 and water will become inactive as the day
matter.
 progresses - always use a fresh solution on each
patient.
●3. Hexachlorophane
● Used in soaps and detergents
● Effective on Gram-positive bacteria.
Disposal of waste
products, swabs or dressings, or syringes, needles or other
sharp instruments, being waste which unless rendered safe
may prove hazardous to any person coming into contact with
There are many different types of waste, which must be dis-
it'. This includes waste from medical, nursing, dental, phar-
posed of correctly. They can be classed as:
maceutical, teaching, research and veterinary practices.
● Household - includes waste from our day-to-day
The Environmental Protection Act 1990 states that 'all estab-
living in privately owned homes. The refuse is picked
lishments are responsible for their own waste' but this was
up and disposed of by the local council
amended in 1992 to include ‘a duty of care for controlled
waste'. This means that the responsibility for disposing of
● Commercial - includes general office waste. Some of
waste created by a business lies with the employer or self-
this may be recycled but often, because of the data
employed person, which includes ensuring that waste dis-
contained within it, is shredded and incinerated
posed of by an outside company, e.g. collectors of clinical
waste from a veterinary practice, is disposed of legally and
● Industrial - includes waste from veterinary practices,
safely. Should the outside company be found to be negligent
e.g. clinical waste.
according to law then the people who employ that company
are also liable for prosecution.
The legal definition of clinical waste is given in the
Within the veterinary practice there must be a waste storage
sists wholly or partly of human or animal tissue, blood or
area separate from any other area, which must be secure both
other bodily fluids, excretions, drugs or other pharmaceutical
against humans and vermin, with access only to authorized
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 159
Animal housing
personnel. Within the area the waste is stored in appropriate
Table 7.10 Types of clinical waste
receptacles ready for disposal and collection by the desig-
Group
Examples of clinical waste
nated company and vehicle.
A
Blood, tissue, carcasses, soiled dressings, swabs and other
  d s  s   
soiled waste not included in groups B-C, e.g. infectious
commercial disposal companies who collect waste. These are:
disease cases
Discarded syringe needles, broken glass and other
● UN-type approved containers - must have ‘UN-
contaminated disposable sharp instruments or items
type 3291' number stamped upon the outside, with
the words 'Clinical waste for incineration only'. The
C
Microbiological cultures and potentially infected waste
container must be yellow and must have a UN testing
from laboratories
number on it, which denotes that the container has
D
 Drugs or other pharmaceutical products
been tested for strength and durability. These are the
only approved containers for disposal of clinical waste.
E
Items used to dispose of urine, faeces and other bodily
Different vessels include:
secretions/excretions that are not included in group A
● Hard plastic one-way bins suitable for cadavers, body
parts, tissues, swabs and anything that contains an
infectious and cannot be distinguished from other similar
amount of fluid. They are designed to prevent
 non-clinical wastes'. This usually requires documentary proof
leakage and are available in a variety of sizes
of treatment.
appropriate to the waste being stored
●Yellow sacks for 'dry clinical waste'
Special waste
● Sharps containers to dispose of needles, glass and
anything else that could pierce through a sack
This waste is controlled by the Special Waste Regulations 1996.
Waste in this group requires specific consignment notes from
● Other colour coded plastic sacks - supplied to
the disposal company for it to be moved from the veterinary
practice. The following items are classed as special waste:
for the disposal of cadavers. These sacks are not
UN-approved. Different-coloured sacks denote the
● Prescription-only medicines (POMs)
company's own method of identifying what type of
body is enclosed, e.g. animals for private cremation or
● High-risk clinical waste, defined as 'containing
burial (often blue in colour), standard cremation (often
microorganisms that can cause severe human or
yellow) and cadavers that are not to be disposed of
animal disease, with a high risk of spreading, with no
(usually red).
effective treatment available'.
All containers are collected and incinerated at a temperature
exceeding 1100°C.
Cadavers
Waste found in veterinary practice can be divided into the
The Department of the Environment advises that the cadaver
following groups:
remains the property of the owner after its death so veteri-
nary practices have no legal obligation to dispose of the body.
 Exceptions to this are animals with a notifiable disease, e.g.
Clinical waste
anthrax, and strays that are unclaimed by an owner.
Clinical waste is categorized by the Health Services Advisory
Should the owners request that the veterinary practice
Committee in Safe Disposal of Clinical Waste into five
dispose of the body, several options are available for its dis.
groups, as described in Table 7.10.
 posal. These are:
● Local authority collection
Treated waste
● Commercial company collection offering a
Producers of waste that has been treated, commonly by auto-
standard/mass cremation
claving, and who do not want to deal with it as clinical waste
under environmental legislation, need to be able to demon-
● Commercial company collection that offers
strate to the Environmental Agency that it is 'safe and non-
private/individual cremation and burial.
160
Animal housing
Chemical waste
Bibliography
This group includes:
Dallas S, Simpson G 1999 Manual of veterinary care. British
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
● Radiography processing chemicals - These are
usually collected by a commercial disposal company
Lane D R, Cooper B 1999 Veterinary Nursing, 2nd edn.
with a licence to dispose of them
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
● Laboratory waste, e.g. staining chemicals (small 
Recommended reading
amounts of diluted stains can safely be flushed into
the sewage system) - These are usually collected by a
Dallas S, Simpson G 1999 Manual of veterinary care. British
commercial disposal company with a licence to
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
dispose of them
This book is written at an appropriate level for veterinary nurses.
● Controlled drugs - These are signed over to a Home
Office inspector or other authorized official, who will 
Lane D R, Cooper B 1999 Veterinary Nursing, 2nd edn.
collect and dispose of them
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
● Prescription-only medicines (see Special waste,
Lane D R, Cooper B 2003 Veterinary Nursing, 3rd edn.
above)
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Both editions provide detailed coverage of issues concerning the
management of dogs and cats in kennets.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
　161
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Stable design and management
Tnish Scorer
Key Points
● Many factors must be considered when designing a stable
●A quarantine or isolation box should be available and if
 or a stable yard but the most important is the health and
 an infectious disease is diagnosed the isolation protocol
welfare of the horse.
should be instigated immediately to prevent spread to
● The size of each stable must be appropriate to the height
other horses on the yard.
of the horse.
● Disease can be controlled on a daily basis by effcient
There are many different types of horse bedding material.
cleaning and disinfection.
all of which have features in common, but their
differences mean that the fnal choice of bedding should
be based on the horse's current state of health.
Introduction
The basic requirements of a horse are to:
● Feel secure and comfortable in their environment
Whether designing a single stable or a stable block there are
many different factors that must be taken into account. The
● Be protected from injury and disease
most important is to ensure the horse's health and welfare
but you must also consider the location, size and the safety of
● Live in the correct environment, e.g. temperature and
the owner and horse. You may also need to find out whether
humidity
-q ae noe j issd sid no Aidde on pau no
ing on a new site or converting an existing building into
● Be given appropriate food and water
stable accommodation. The horse's basic needs can be
satisfied by careful consideration of the design and the use of
● Have the opportunity to express normal behaviour
materials before building begins.
 through mental stimulation and companionship
● Be allowed to take optimum exercise.
Stable design
topography is important and you should take note of the
following:
 There are four main types of stable design:
● Road access - must be suitable for horseboxes and
lorries
● Stalls
● Parking space for horseboxes and cars with adequate
●Looseboxes
allowance for turning
● Barns
● If the stables are to accommodate competition horses
then the site must be central to the courses and
● Barn and loosebox combination
convenient to major roads
Site considerations
● If the stables are to become a business enterprise, e.g.
veterinary surgery, riding stables or livery, then there
Choosing the correct location is vital not only for the sake of
 must be a suitable population in the area to support 
the horses but also from a business point of view. Local
this
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
8
Stable design and management
● There must be sufficient areas for exercise, whether it
Large stable yards may include:
 is local bridleways, quiet country lanes, gallops for
racehorses and/or indoor and outdoor schooling areas
● Veterinary operating theatre
● Soil type is a factor to consider both for the stable and
● Stalls
exercise areas. The ideal soil is free-draining loam.
 m n  e hs 's o ax e si s
● Wash area for tack and equipment
water to drain away, reducing poaching from horses
hooves in wet weather. Wet areas provide the correct
●Wash area for horses
environment for bacteria to breed and increase the risk
of foot problems
● Drying room
● The site must be firm and level. Steep slopes must be
● Office
avoided, especially around corners as horses my slip
 and injure themselves. Care must be taken if building
● Toilets/changing room
 at the base of a hill that rainwater does not cause
flooding. Banks of soil can be built to offer protection
●Staff room
from wind and sound
●Stores
● The stables should face south to prevent cold north
winds from entering the buildings and to make the
● Undercover parking for lorries
 most of the sunshine in the day
● Fire points
● Care should be taken that any trees surrounding the
area are non-toxic and unlikely to fall on to the
● Isolation box
building. However, they can art as a windbreak to
the stable if in the correct position, as well as
● Foaling unit
● Stallion stabling/covering yard
● Finally, there should be access to electricity and a
water supply.
· Forge.
Yard layout
All facilities need to be within easy reach of each other but
there should be enough space between blocks of buildings to
When building a stable it is important to realise that there
allow escape should there be a fire. If stable blocks are to face
are other buildings and areas to consider. The layout of the
each other then there should be at least 20 m between them.
 completed yard must be both safe and efficient.
The tack room and feed room should be within easy reach of
the stables but it is advisable, if the yard has regular visitors,
Requirements of a stable yard:
that the tark room is away from the main entrance to avoid
 opportunistic thefts.
● Stables/loose boxes
Hay and straw storage poses a fire risk and, while it is handy
● Tack room
to have it close by, there should be a fire break between the
buildings. Rodent control must be a consideration because
● Feed room
they are pests and can spread disease. The muck heap also
 poses a risk of fire and this should be away from the public
●Hay storage
eye but easily accessible from the boxes. The surface of the
muck heap should be firm and easy to keep clean and it
●Bedding storage
should be positioned away from buildings as it will attract
flies. To stop the muck heap from smelling, regular disposal
●Muck heap
of waste should take place. Waste from non-infectious
animals can be spread on the land but infectious waste
● Water points
should be burned. Water should be available at several points
around the yard to avoid carrying heavy buckets long dis-
●Parking area.
tances and to make sure it is close by in the event of a fire.
164
Stable design and management
The yard should be level and covered in a non-slip and easy-
● Kickboards made of wood are used to line the stable
to-clean surface. Surrounding fencing should be secure and
 and provide insulation and prevent the horses kicking
safe, with a lockable gateway. Wooden rail fencing is ideal.
through into the next stable. The height should be
Riding surfaces should be cleaned, raked and levelled regu-
120 cm, starting at the base of the wall.
larly, with dusty surfaces dampened down to avoid dust
inhalation by humans and horses.
● Rubber paint can be applied to brick walls to provide
a tough waterproof surface that is easy to keep clean.
If an office is used it should be sited at the main entrance to
greet any visitors and escort them into the correct area of the
yard. This avoids people wandering into other parts of the
Floors and drainage
yard, preventing undue stress to the animals and reducing
the risk of infection being spread.
Floors are usually made of concrete as it is hard-wearing and
relatively cheap. When laying the concrete it is important to
'tamp' or roughen up the surface to prevent the horse from
Stable size
 slipping. It is a good idea to lay a strip of concrete outside the
stable to allow for standing room and avoid poaching of soil
The size of the stable will depend on the size of the pony or
by the doorway. Bricks can be used as an alternative to con-
horse for which it is intended. It is important to balance the
crete as a floor material, but this tends to be more expensive
comfort of the horse and the efficient use of space. Table 8.1
and labour-intensive. Brick floors are often found in long-
indicates the appropriate stable size for horse size.
standing stables. Other floor materials that can be used are
rammed chalk and porous tarmac on a bed of stones.
Walls
Whichever floor material is used you must consider drainage.
This may be a slope in the floor leading to a drainage hole
Walls should be at least 240 cm to the eaves of the roof to
at the base of the wall or the use of ‘porcupipes', which
allow for maximum headroom. A hole must be included at
 are holes embedded in the floor leading into a system of pipes
the base of each wall to allow for drainage.
that carry the fluid away. If the floor slopes to a drainage
hole it is important to ensure that the hole is not placed
Walls may be constructed from many different types of mate.
where the horse may stand in it. It also needs to be easily
rial:
accessed for regular cleaning to avoid a build up of waste
leading to flooding and an increased risk of infection. Covers
● Wood - commonly used and can be purchased in
on drains should be cleared daily, and if the horse has an
sections and erected by the owner. Relatively cheap
infectious condition this should be done more often. In an
but the wood must be treated for external use. Wood
B s as e  o os ia n xo 
may be chewed by vermin and horses. It will not stand
than that of the main yard and be disposed of as clinical
up to kicks as well as brickwork and may rot in places
waste.
8
if damp. Wood is also a fire hazard
● Brick - more expensive, especially if the whole wall is
Roofing
e dn pimq on si uondo sadeau y 'a po paiono
brick base to prevent vermin and damp and put
A pitched roof is ideal for stables as it allows space for air
wooden sections on top. Breeze blocks are the cheapest
movement and head room for the horse. Rain water will run
type of brick available
off into drain pipes, preventing a build-up of water on the
Table 8.1 Stable size
Size of horse
Stable width (cm)
Stable depth (cm)
Door width (cm)
Bottom/top door height (cm)
Up to 14.2 h.h.
300
300
120
Dependent on pony height
14.2-16 h.h.
360
360
120
120/90
Over 16 h.h.
420
420
120
120/90
Foaling
480
480
120
120/90
* h.h - hands high.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
165
8
Stable design and management
Table 8.2 Types of roofing material
Type of roofing material
Advantages
Disadvantages
Felt
Attractive and inexpensive
Poor insulating properties. Expands and
contracts with the temperature, leading to cracks
and leaks. Not fire proof
Slate
Fire proof and good insulating properties
Expensive. Can crack and fall off
Tiles
Fire proof and good insulating properties
Expensive
Corrugated plastic sheets
Inexpensive and light
 Poor insulating properties. Noisy when it rains
Corrugated iron sheets
Inexpensive
Poor insulating properties. Noisy when it rains
surface. The roof should overhang the front of the stables by
Roofing material must have good thermal properties to avoid
approximately 90-100 cm to allow room for the horse to
rapid temperature changes within the stable. Good insulating
put its head over the door without getting wet. Air vents
 properties are important to reduce condensation and humid-
can be installed to allow further air movement when
ity, providing a dry environment and a lower risk of infec-
necessary.
tion. Table 8.2 shows some of the common materials used.
Table 8.3 Types of bedding material
Type of bedding material
Comments
Advantages
Disadvantages
Straw
Barley straw may be eaten so
Good insulating properties. Inexpensive
 Dusty and therefore can
wheat straw is more commonly
and easy to buy. Good absorbency and
increase the risk of COPD.
used but may be more dusty than
easily disposed of and recycled
Can harbour spores
barley straw. Available in small
or large bales
Shavings
Used as an alternative to straw.
Absorbent and dust-free. Reasonably
More expensive than straw.
Buy in bales
warm
More difficult to dispose of
waste. will compost down in
time
Sawdust
Used as an altermative to straw.
Absorbent and reasonably warm
More expensive than straw.
Buy in bales
More difficult to dispose of
waste. Will compost down in
time. Dustier than shavings
Paper
Can buy in bales of can use old
Absorbent and dust-free. Reasonably
 More expensive than straw.
newspapers and shred yourself
warm
More difficult to dispose of
waste. Will compost down in
time
ssow d
Used as an alternative to straw.
Dust free. Easily recycled. Reasonably
More expensive than straw.
Buy in bales. Manage as shavings
warm
Can soften the feet.
 Environmental issues
Hemp
Used as an alternative to straw.
 Dust- and mould-free. Warm
Expensive and can be eaten
Buy in bales. Manage as shavings
Rubber matting
Various makes available. Often
Cheap to run after initial cost.
Initial cost is expensive.
using recycled rubber. Top surface
Easily managed. Good drainage and
Little warmth if used alone
is anti-slip and lower surface has
supports the horse's feet. Can be used
drainage channels. Buy as mats
in conjunction with above materials to
provide warmth
166
 Stable design and management
Ventilation
●Readily available
Ventilation is important to avoid draughts at ground level,
● Easily disposed.
which will chill animals, but maintain a through flow of
air to prevent a build-up of bacteria and reduce the trans-
mission of airborne infection. The most common airborne
infections are respiratory diseases such as influenza and
rhinopneumonitis.
Bedding requirements for
special cases
 There are two type of ventilation:
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
● Passive ventilation - can be achieved by keeping the
top door of the stable open to allow air to pass
(COPD)
     x   d  
allow the air to pass out and fresh air is then drawn in
Cause
through the door, maintaining a cycle. The heat from
A chronic respiratory condition caused by the horse develop
the horse rises upwards and further encourages this
ing a sensitivity to dust antigens in the environment. It is
cycle. This is called the stack effect. Windows should
seen commonly in stabled horses and is linked to the mould
be located on the same side as the door to prevent
in hay and straw. It is also seenn when the horse is outside at
through draughts but provide light. They should be
 grass and is sensitive to pollen.
hinged at the bottom and open outwards, with wire
mesh covering or iron bars to prevent the horse from
putting its head through. The glass should be wired
Symptoms
safety glass. Louvred boards can be placed high up in
The horse will develop a cough, which will increase with
the walls for added air movement. These are angled
exercise and stabling. Mucus is brought up but there is no
boards that overlap one another, allowing air to pass
raised temperature. Eventually the horse will begin to have
through the gaps without causing a draught
difficulty in breathing and to wheeze as the airways in the
lungs narrow.
● Active ventilation - mechanically pulls air into
and/or out of the stable, usually by the use of an
extractor fan or air-conditioning system.
Stabling reguirements
The most important aspect of treating COPD is to remove the
cause of the problem, i.e. dust, mould and/or pollen usually
Bedding
found in the hay and straw. The more moisture that is con-
tained in the bedding the more likely it is to become mouldy.
Bedding is used to provide warmth and comfort to the horse
 Straw should be substituted for hardwood shavings, paper,
8
It should prevent jarring of the feet while it is stabled. A bank
peat or rubber matting. The ideal combination is to have
of bedding should be built up around the edge of the stable
rubber matting on the floor with a bank of absorbent bedding
 to prevent draughts and provide comfort to the horse should
on top. Droppings should be removed daily rather than deep-
it want to lie down. Table 8.3 shows some of the common
 littered, to prevent a build-up of dust and mould.
 materials used. The ideal bedding material should have are
the following properties:
The horse should not be fed hay, even if it has been soaked in
water. Instead, a diet of complete cubes should be fed. The
●Warm
   o   o i n a s  s
straw storage. The stable should be dusted regularly without
● Absorbent
the horse inside and this should also be done for any other
stabled horses within the same air space.
● Soft
● Easily managed
Lame horses
● Non toxic
There are many conditions that give rise to lameness and
several of these can be alleviated by stable conditions as well
● Dust/damp free
as the correct medical treatment.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 
8
Stable design and management
Laminitis
This is inflammation of the laminae of the foot. In the major.
This may be natural or artificial. Natural lighting is achieved by
ity of cases it occurs in overweight ponies and horses kept on
windows, skylights and leaving the top part of the door open
lush grass. The feet receive an inadequate supply of blood and
and is best for the horse. However, it is also important to ensure
this in turn damages the blood vessels, causing inflammation
that the staff and owners are able to see adequately at all times
and pain.
so some form of artificial lighting must be available.
Treatment - remove the horse from the cause, i.e. the grass,
The most common form of artificial lighting is a fluorescent
and stable on a restricted diet of hay and water. The stabled
strip light attached to the eaves of the roof. When position-
horse requires bedding that is soft on its painful feet but not
ing the lights it is important to ensure that all parts of the
edible. Rubber matting combined with shavings, paper or
stable are lit and that no shadows are cast and to achieve this
 peat is ideal. The horse should be encouraged to lie down, by
it may be necessary to have several lights. Hanging light
providing a deep bed.
bulbs are not advised as the horse may be able to reach them.
Light switches should be placed outside the stable and
covered with a waterproof safety cover. All cabling inside and
Mud fever
outside the stable must have a waterproof covering. Circuit
Caused by damp conditions, particularly muddy and wet
breakers should be used on all electrical equipment to 'trip'
fields. The skin becomes soft and sore from the damp and
out the power should it be damaged in any way. All plugs
infection sets in.
must have the appropriate size of fuse inside them.
Treatment - remove the horse from the damp conditions
and stable in order to allow the scabs to dry up and heal.
Heating
Bedding should allow the horse's legs to stay dry so it is
q lm 1 hd 0n    1 n n
Healthy horses can tolerate a wide range of temperatures as
Faeces and damp patches should be removed immediately.
long as the air remains dry and draught-free. However, for
sick or injured and neonatal foals the temperature may play
an important part in their condition. Methods of supplying
Thrush
supplementary heat are described in Table 8.4.
Results from the accumulation of degenerative material in
the cleft of the frog. It can be caused by damp, dirty stable
Table 8.4 Types of heating
conditions or by standing in damp fields.
Type of heating
Comments
Treatment - the foot must remain clean and dry so bedding
Rugs and bandages
A variety of rugs are available for both indoor
must have good absorption and be regularly mucked out.
and outdoor use. The thickness and insulating
properties will vary with type. Ensure that the
rug is the correct size for the horse and that
Wounds and orthopaedic patients
all fastenings are safe and secure. Bandages
must be securely fitted
For horses that are recovering from orthopaedic surgery or
have wounds the bedding must be deep, dust-free, non-slip
Duvets
Commonly put on under a stable rug to add
and provide support, comfort and warmth. Peat is recom-
extra warmth. Ensure that the duvet cannot
 mended for this, ideally with rubber matting underneath for 
slip off 
extra support and insulation. Good ventilation is important
Central heating
Expensive but effective. Ensure that heating
to ensure that the air circulating around the wound is fresh.
units are out of the horse's reach
Electric fans
Can be noisy and create dust. Ensure that fans
Colic
are a safe distance away from the horse and
out of its reach. Cabling must be insulated
Whatever the cause of the colic the horse is usually stabled
and out of reach
following treatment and it is vital that the horse does not eat
Infrared heat lamps
Can be small, portable lamps, which must be
its bedding, which might cause the condition to recur. Use
4im asioy aul wony Aeme aoueisp ajes 2
shavings, peat or paper in a deep bed in case of violent
cabling insulated and out of reach, or larger
rolling. Make sure that there are no sharp protrusions from
lamps installed into the ceiling of the stable
fittings or buckets that might injure the horse.
168
Stable design and management
quick release knot, are a good alternative and can be
weighed to assess the amount of hay eaten. It is not
Care should be taken to ensure that all fittings are secure and
recommended that hay is put on the floor of the stable
placed in an area that is convenient to you but safe for the
as it will mix with the horse's bedding, however in the
horse, e.g. no sharp projections. Consider the following
case of horses on a restricted diet, e.g. laminitis, it may
fittings when designing the stable:
be a way of prolonging feed time and preventing
boredom by encouraging foraging.
● Hooks on the top and bottom of the stable doors to
hold them open.
● In a hospital stable or isolation unit it is advisable
to install hooks for suspending fluid bags for
● Bolts on both doors - one on the top door and two on
intravenous administration and other medications.
the lower door. A kick bolt is advised for the lower bolt
 Ideally, an overhead rope and pulley system is used.
 for ease of opening and closing.
This allows the fluids to be raised and lowered as
necessary. A spiral giving-set extension allows the
● The lower door should have a metal strip along the
horse to move freely around the stable.
horizontal part to prevent the horse from chewing the
wood. If chewing is a problem, strips can be put on all
● Outside the stable door there should be a waterproof
sides of the frame.
board to record the horse's details. This can be
replicated in the office to record the whole of the yard.
● Tying rings should be placed at the front of the stable
Numbering the stable boxes helps in identification.
at the horse's eye level. Two rings can be placed on
either side if cross tying is used, which may be useful
when complete stable rest is recommended, e.g.
Fittings to assist with stable vices
orthopaedics, fractured pelvis and persistent box
walkers.
(See Ch. 14.)
● An automatic water bowl provides a constant supply
Weaving
of fresh water. Ensure that it is checked and cleaned
regularly. The disadvantage with this system is that
Weaving is usually a sign of boredom or anxiety. The horse
you cannot tell how much the horse is drinking. If this
will habitually rock from side to side in the stable doorway in
is an issue then the use of a bucket, without handles,
anticipation of food or exercise. This may result in painful
secured in a tyre is a good alternative. Horses will drink
front feet and excessive wear on the shoes. If the horse is
prone to weaving it may help if it is stabled away from others
the individual's requirements and environmental
but with a constant companion nearby. Avoid a situation in
factors. Water in buckets should be changed three
times a day as the water will absorb ammonia from the
horse's bedding. Water pipes should be lagged and in
8
winter check that the water has not frozen.
● Feeding troughs and mangers may be concrete,
wooden or plastic. Whatever material is used it is
important that the surface is smooth and broad
enough for the size of horse. Ensure that they are
placed high enough for the horse to feed comfortably
and to avoid kicking the manger. Containers must be
cleaned out regularly to prevent infection. Location of
the manger may vary depending on the condition of
the horse, e.g. a horse with sinusitis may find respite
from feeding on the ground, as this allows for drainage
from the sinuses.
Fig. 8.1 Front of stable. Note the weaving bars, the bofts on the
top and bottom of the door and the kick boft at the bottom. The
 hod si hu iq pp aq e so Ae o
they are not so high up that the horse has to raise its
stabte has its own number for identification, an individuat head
head unnaturally. There is also a risk of grass seeds
collar for the patient and a removable manger that can be given to
getting into the horse's eyes. Hay nets, tied with a
the horse without the need to enter the stabte.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 
169
8
Stable design and management
which the occupants of adjacent stables are continually
stimulation. Ensure that there is enough light entering the
changing. Weaving bars are available to prevent this but the
stable for the horse to be stimulated.
horse may continue to weave behind the bars (Fig 8.1).
Windsucking
Crib biting
Windsucking often follows crib biting and the horse starts to
Crib biting is often the result of a bored horse. The horse
swallow air as it bites. This then leads on to habitual swal-
starts to chew at its stable surroundings and then this
lowing of air without the need for a surface on which to
becomes a habit. Crib biting can be alleviated by covering all
chew. A leather crib strap may be placed around the horse's
chewable surfaces with metal strips and by preventing the
neck so that the muscles used to swallow are restricted. As
 saiana i ie snsa aq paoq suonaq  aso
with crib biting, try to ensure that the horse is stimulated by
optimum exercise and providing toys or a companion as
toys and companions.
The foaling
box
temperature remains around 20°C. Alternatively, use rugs and
leg bandages to insulate the patient. The environmental tem
A foaling box must be larger than a normal stable and should
perature and the body temperature of the foal must be mon.
be at least 480 cm square. As the mare may get up and down
itored closely. The stable should have close-circuit television
many times while foaling it is important to ensure that she is
to allow observation of the mare without disturbing her. If
unable to become cast and that there are no sharp projections
this is not available then the mare should be watched dis-
or equipment in the way. If the mare is normal and healthy
creetly from the door every 20 min. A store room for medical
then the bedding is usually clean straw made up into a deep
provisions, extra rugs and feed is advised, as is the use of a
bed. Provisions may be needed for extra heat if the foal is sick
telephone in case veterinary assistance is needed. Should the
or weak; however, in a well-constructed stable with plenty of
foal require help feeding it is advisable to separate the mother
bedding there should be no need for extra heat. Should the
with the use of a pole into one side of the stable to allow the
foal require supplementary heat then it is advisable that the
 foal to feed without being kicked away.
Quarantine and
faeces, urine, saliva and other discharges. Some of
these pathogens can live on inanimate objects or
isolation
fomites such as feeding and grooming equipment.
o sh aee aa ps are sod s
vectors.
At times it may be necessary to separate or segregate the horse
from other horses to prevent the transfer of infectious
disease. The animal may be showing signs of a disease, in
which case it should be isolated or it may be suspected of car-
Isolation box design
rying a disease but not showing clinical signs of it in which
case it will need to be put into quarantine. Quarantine sta-
Considering the factors outlined above the isolation box
bling is often used for horses entering the yard from another
should be placed downwind of any other stables to avoid the
yard or even from abroad.
risk of infection being spread via the air. It should be
detached and preferably at least 50 m from any other stables
When designing an isolation stable it is important to elimi-
to avoid the horses sharing the same air space. There should
be separate provision for medicines, tack, food storage and
one animal to another. These are:
feeding equipment and these should not be shared with any
other stable or horses. The isolation box should have its own
● Direct contact - from horses touching each other
washing and disinfecting facilities. Drainage from the stable
should run into its own collection tank and this should be
● Indirect contact - where there is no direct contact
disposed of as clinical waste. There should be signs to warn
between horses but the pathogen is spread via the
staff and clients of the risks and to outline the strict isolation
procedures.
170
Stable design and management
Isolation protocol
● Medication and equipment must be kept within the
isolation unit and used only by the nurse or vet in
● As soon as the horse is suspected of having an
charge of the patient
infectious condition it should be isolated
● The isolation box should have its own set of
● The isolation box should have its own nurse or groom
mucking out equipment that is used solely for
to care for the patient
that stable. Disinfection must take place after each
use
● The nurse or groom should wear protective clothing.
such as overalls, washable boots and disposable gloves
● Soiled bedding from the stable must have its own
and hat, which are disinfected or disposed of in clini-
 muck heap and/or be burned
cal waste after use. Under no circumstances must these
items of clothing be worn outside the isolation box
● The length of the isolation period will depend on
the individual disease, its life cycle and how it is
● A shoe dip containing disinfectant should be placed
spread.
just outside the box
Table 8.5 Methods by which disease may be spread in a stable yard
Factors that increase the
Reasons
Prevention
risk of infection
Contact with other horses
Where there are many horses within a stable
Reduce the amount of contact between horses.
environment the pathogenic population will increase.
Where possible, separate groups of horses should be
stabled together, e.g. pregnant mares should be kept
the risk of disease transmission
separate from barren mares and mares and foals
should be kept separate from adult animals
Horses sharing the same
 Dust, spores, bacteria, viruses, humidity and noxious
Good ventilation is vital to ensure that the air is
air space
gases build up in the environment around the stabled
constantly fresh and carries pathogens out of the
horse. If there are several stables sharing the same air
stable. Good ventilation will reduce the risk of
space then this will increase the risk of disease being
draughts and provide a dry atmosphere and constant
spread to the other horses by indirect contact
temperature
Dirty stable conditions
A stable that has a build-up of faeces and urine not
Regular mucking out and disinfection significantly
 only makes the horse uncomfortable but increases the
reduces the number of pathogens as well as creating
risk of infection building up by harbouring bacteria,
a dry environment for the horse. The correct bedding
8
spores and viruses
will provide a cushion for the horse's feet and also
encourage it to lie down
Sick animals mixing
If a horse becomes unwell it is vital that this is
Early and effective treatment of infected animals is
with healthy animals
noticed as soon as possible to reduce the risk of
essential. Recognizing the signs of ill health should
cross-infection
be carried out regularly through daily health checks
that include the horse's appearance, faeces, appetite
and temperature. Infected horses should be isolated 
Horses sharing stables,
This increases the risk of infection being transferred by
The horse should have the same stable every day
equipment and tack
direct and indirect contact
and its own tack and equipment. Should the horse
need to be moved then the stable and all equipment
must be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected
Poor preventative
Horses entering a yard may be harbouring a disease and
Preventative medicine is the use of veterinary
medicine
not yet showing any clinical signs. These horses should
treatment and monitoring environmental conditions
be isolated and given a health check for diseases such
to reduce and control the build-up of disease. This
as respiratory problems and ringworm. Blood tests and
includes the use of vaccinations, worming
swabs can be taken and faeces tested for worms
 programmes, health certifcates, quarantine and
passports
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
¥171
8
Stable design and management
Methods of disease
Mucking out the stable
Basic principles
control
bedding:
In a stable yard it is imperative that methods are instigated to
control the spread of pathogens and therefore reduce the risk
● Wherever possible the horse should be removed from
of disease. These must be implemented on a daily basis and
the stable to avoid the risk of it inhaling the dust and
carried out with both sick and healthy animals. Disease can
injuring itself on the cleaning equipment.
spread easily but understanding the factors that increase the
risk of infection will help us to understand how we can
● If it is not possible to remove the horse from the stable
manage and prevent it. Table 8.5 shows these risks.
then tie the animal, using a head collar and rope, to a
piece of string attached to a metal ring at the side of
the stable. Ensure that the horse does not stand on a
bare floor, as this could be slippery. Where necessary,
Cleaning the stables and the
scatter some clean bedding underneath its feet.
environment
● Remove all feed and water buckets as mucking out
disturbs dust and pathogens.
One of the most important factors in managing a stable is to
provide a clean and hygienic environment for the horse and
● Do not leave cleaning equipment within reach of the
staff to live and work in. This is achieved by regular mucking
horse, i.e. neither inside nor outside the stable nor in
out and cleaning and disinfection of the stable and equip-
the stable doorway. It may cause injury to the horse
ment. The reasons for this are:
and groom, as well as the risk of transferring infection
from dirty equipment.
● Removes pathogens and therefore reduces the risk of
infection to the horse
● Safety footwear is advised to avoid injury from forks,
rakes and shovels and the horse's hooves.
● Horse is more comfortable living in a clean and dry
environment and is less likely to become cold and
● The use of gloves is advised for both safety and
susceptible to disease
hygiene.
● Horse is tempted to lie down, which reduces the risk of
● All cleaning equipment must be cleaned and
injury
disinfected after use and in between individual horses,
especially if they are sick or injured. Equipment must
● The environment looks and smells nice; this will
be made of a material that is easy to clean.
 benefit horses and staff and create a good impression
to clients.
Cleaning equipment
When cleaning and disinfecting the key areas to concentrate
The equipment for mucking out must be appropriate to
on are:
the type of bedding. The following equipment may be
● The stable
needed:
● Mucking out equipment
● Fork - required to pick up bedding and droppings; a
three- or four-pronged fork is easiest for mucking out a
● Feeding and watering equipment
straw bed, while a multipronged fork, with smaller
 gaps, is advisable for shavings, paper and peat
● Horses' tack, e.g. head collars and ropes, saddles and
bridles
● Yard brush - it is advisable to have a separate brush
for each stable and also for cleaning the area outside
● Rugs and blankets
the stable block
● Grooming equipment.
● Shovel - used with the brush to tidy up
172
2 Stable design and management
● wheelbarrow or muck cart - required to transport
● Replace buckets and equipment once they have been
the waste for disposal
cleaned and disinfected.
● Water supply for filling buckets and using with hoses
● Check that no soiled straw has fallen into mangers or
and power washers
troughs and clean as necessary.
● Buckets, hose and a power washer - for washing and
● Sweep up outside the stable doorway.
disinfecting all surfaces
● Empty the soiled straw on to the muck heap, ensuring
● Hand brushes and disposable cloths - for washing
that the muck is placed squarely and compacted down
and disinfecting surfaces.
to maintain a neat shape.
● Each week remove all straw and disinfect the walls and
floor.
Mucking out
A straw bed for a healthy horse
A shavings, paper or peat bed for a healthy horse
● Starting at the door, using a three- or four-pronged
● Starting at the doorway, remove all droppings. This
fork, pick up the straw. Using a shaking action the
m q r  d     
droppings will fall to the floor and the clean straw will
rubber gloves and picking them up by hand. The latter
be left on the fork.
 method is less wasteful of clean bedding.
● Throw the clean straw on the fork against a side of the
● Once all visible droppings have been removed, pick up
stable. Choose the cleanest and driest side before you
start.
 wall. Choose the cleanest and driest side before you
start.
● Work from the stable door around to the designated
wall piling up the clean straw.
● After each forkful any wet patches and remaining
droppings will fall to the base of the bank. Remove
● Periodically collect up the soiled bedding and transport
these into your wheelbarrow or muck cart.
it from the stable into a wheel barrow or muck cart. It
is important to ensure that all droppings and soiled
● All bedding must be turned in this way, including the
straw are removed and that care is taken not to allow
banks at the sides of the stable.
 it to mix back in with the clean bedding.
● Sweep the floor of the stable.
● All bedding must be turned in this way, including the
8
banks of straw at the sides of the stable.
● If time allows, leave the bedding on one side to allow
the floor to dry.
● Sweep the floor of the stable.
● Replace the bedding from the sides of the stable.
● If time allows, leave the bedding on one side to allow
Replace the soiled bedding with clean material.
the floor to dry.
Approximately 1-2 bales a week should be used,
depending on the individual animal.
● Replace the bedding from the sides of the stable,
shaking as you do. Replace the soiled straw with clean;
● Build up the banks at the side of the stable as with
usually half to one conventional bale a day is enough
straw.
depending on the individual animal.
● The rest of the stable bed should be at least 15 cm
● Build up the banks at the side by throwing the straw
deep.
up against the wall and then patting it down with the
back of the fork. Continue to do this until the bank
● Replace buckets and equipment once they have been
stands at least 30 cm higher than the rest of the bed.
cleaned and disinfected.
● The rest of the stable bed should be at least 23-30 cm
● Check that no soiled bedding has fallen into mangers
deep.
 or troughs and clean as necessary.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
173
8
Stable design and management
● Sweep up outside the stable doorway.
● Lay the bed as for straw or shavings.
● Empty the soiled bedding on to the muck heap.
● Soiled bedding is not removed on a daily basis and
clean bedding is laid on top of the existing bed.
● Each week remove all bedding and disinfect the walls
and floor.
● Periodically the bed is completely removed. This can
be weekly, monthly or at the end of the winter season.
Deep litter system
Semi-deep litter system
Most types of bedding can be used in this way. The advan-
tages of this method are that it is labour-saving and uses less
This is a variation on the deep litter system.
bedding. The bed and banks become solid, providing a
firm base for the horse. The disadvantages are that the bed
● Lay the bed as for straw or shavings.
asq au adoid nog pane pou j suoed mnoqieu un
can become wet, leading to foot problems and the horses can
● Droppings are removed daily and clean bedding is laid
become dirty. It may be necessary to use a tractor to muck out
on top of the existing bed. The banks of the stable are
at the end of the season.
left and become quite solid.
Table 8.6 Types of material requiring cleaning and disinfection
Material
Examples of equipment
Comments
Rubber/plastic
Feed and water buckets
Ensure that all organic matter is removed from surfaces
 Grooming equipment
before disinfecting, i.e. hair taken out of brushes and
Floor mats
faeces removed from wheel barrow wheels. Where there is a
Yard brushes
combination of wood and plastic, e.g. grooming brushes then it
 Shaving forks
is important to consider both materials when choosing a
Wheelbarrow wheels
disinfectant
Wood
Stable walls
When disinfecting the stable walls ensure that all dust has been
Stable ledges/window frames
Temoved prior to disinfecting. Allow suffcient time for the wood
Grooming brushes (with rubber bristles)
to dry before replacing the horse in the stable
Yard brush handles
Fork handles
Metal
Buckles on leather/synthetic tack
Where there is a combination of materials then it is important
Stirrups
to consider both when choosing a disinfectant. If metal shows
Bits 
any sign of rust then it should be replaced
Yard brush and fork handles
Wheelbarrow/muck cart
Stable fittings, e.g. tie rings, door hooks
Leather
Head collars
Undo all buckles on the tack and take apart completely.
Bridles
 Following cleaning and disinfecting use a suitable treatment on
Saddles
the leather
Fabric (synthetic and
Rugs and blankets
The frequency of cleaning and disinfecting rugs and blankets 
natural)
Ropes
will depend on how long the horse is wearing it. It is not
Head collars
economical to wash rugs every day
Brick/concrete
Stable walls
The use of a power washer/steam cleaner is advised for
Stable floors
optimum cleaning
Areas outside of stable
Glass
Windows
Care must be taken when cleaning not to break the glass
Lights
174
Stable design and management
● Periodically, the bed is completely removed. This can
Bibliography
be weekly, monthly or at the end of the winter season.
Cave M 1996 The course companion for BHS Stages I & Il. I A
Cleaning stable equipment
Allen, London
q  p si nda p  p 
Cave M 1996 The course companion for BHS Stages IHI & IV. J A
physical activity and the use of chemicals. As disinfectants
Allen, London
are inactivated by organic matter, all hair, faeces and other
soiling should be removed. As a general guide, the following
French J 1990 The BHSAI course companion. J A Allen, London
rules apply to cleaning equipment:
Hayes M H 2002 Veterinary notes for horse owners, 18th edn.
● Equipment used every day should be washed and
Ebury, London
 disinfected daily and more often if the patient is
infectious
Brown J H, Powell-Smith V, Pilliner S 1994 Horse and stable man-
agement. Blackwell Science, Oxford
● Equipment used less frequently should be cleaned after
use
Recommended reading
● A high standard of personal hygiene is essential - wash
hands regularly, wear protective clothing, tie hair back
Cave M 1996 The course companion for BHS Stages I & Il.J A
and do not eat within the yard area
Allen, London
● Always wash equipment with a detergent before using
Cave M 1996 The course companion for BHS Stages Ill & IV. J A
a disinfectant, to remove organic material; ensure that
Allen, London
the detergent is thoroughly rinsed off before disinfection
as this may inhibit the action of the disinfectant
French J 1990 The BHSAl course companion. J A Allen, London
● Always use a disinfectant that is recommended for the
All these books contain useful information on various equine topics
type of material to be cleaned (Table 8.6)
course.
● Always use the correct concentration of disinfectant to
      o   - 
Hayes M H 2002 Veterinary notes for horse owners, 18th edn.
the horse, material and environment; using a weak
Ebury,London
      n
● Leave the disinfectant on the equipment for the
to both horse owners and equine veterinary nurses.
recommended contact time
8
Brown J H, Powell-Smith V, Pilliner S 1994 Horse and stable man-
● Rinse the disinfectant off thoroughly and allow to dry
agement. Blackwell Science, Oxford
before use.
A book that offers advice on setting up and running a commercial
equine business.
Antiseptics and disinfectants
The selection of antiseptics and disinfectants for use in horses
is similar to those used in dogs and cats - see Chapter 7.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  175
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Animal grooming
Juliet Whatley
Key Points
● Health and safety of the handler and animal should be
● It is good practice to undertake a health check while
 observed at all times.
 grooming.
● Preparation of the grooming area and equipment must be
● Always report any fndings to a veterinary surgeon or
undertaken prior to starting the grooming process.
head nurse.
● The correct equipment must be used to suit the species
● Clean all equipment thoroughly between animals to
 of animal, its coat and skin type.
 prevent cross infection.
Introduction
Dogs, cats and horses require daily grooming and this must
niques and information to groom their patients while they
not be neglected even when they are hospitalized. The aim of
   n o o lm i - p  
this chapter is provide veterinary nurses with the basic tech-
cated cuts used in a grooming parlour or in a stables.
Dogs and cats
gland problems and decubitus ulcers may all be
 noticed during the process. In addition, grooming will
Originally, dog grooming was undertaken by the aristocracy
help blood circulation and skin tone.
as a ‘fashion statement’ or a status symbol but it is not
recorded when the different clips originated. Techniques for
the basic grooming of a dog are similar for each breed, but
Grooming equipment
certain techniques are required for the different coat types.
Short-haired cats are rarely groomed regularly but long-
The slicker brush
haired cats may be presented in the surgery to be dematted,
which often requires a general anaesthetic and drastic
The slicker brush is used to remove dead hair from the coat
clipping of the hair.
of medium- and long-haired dogs (Figs 9.1, 9.2). When using
this, brush the hair following its natural fall. Care must be
Reasons for grooming
taken not to cause 'brush burns' on the animal. These will
occur over bony areas where there is little muscle cover, such
● Appearance - when returning an animal to its owner
as the elbows, chest, hocks and legs, so avoid grooming these
it is important that it looks as well groomed as possible
areas with a slicker brush.
to create a professional, caring impression. Animals
returned with blood on their coat or matted hair will
Combs
not suggest to the owner that the animal has had the
best possible care
A range of combs are used for different purposes (Fig. 9.3).
  p s   m p si rds  
● Contact - if an animal is hospitalized for some time
be taken not to cut the animal's skin with its sharp blades.
daily grooming sessions will enable the nurse to build
This comb cuts through a mat without destroying the coat
a rapport with the animal and help its psychological
and must be kept in good condition and the blades kept
recovery
sharpened.
● Health - while grooming a patient a health check can
Combs come in a variety of sizes, with different tooth
simultaneously be carried out. Skin conditions, e.g.
spacing. The density of hair will dictate the size used - wide.
eczema, signs of any lesions, e.g. lipoma or warts, anal
toothed and long-toothed combs are used on thick coats and
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 177
Animal grooming
Scissors
A range of scissors are available for use in cutting and trim-
ming a dog's coat (Fig. 9.4). Care should always be taken
when using them to avoid cuts or nicks and the groomer
must always concentrate when using scissors. If cutting out a
mat, a comb is placed into the mat and then the scissors cut
against the comb. Single-edged thinning scissors are much
 more effective for removing the hair.
Curries
Fig 9.1 The sticker brush
Curries are used on smooth-haired animals, e.g. pointers or
 greyhounds, to remove dust and loose hair and make the coat
shine (Fig. 9.5).
Fig 9.2 Using the sticker brush
Fig 9.4 Grooming scissors. Left to right: double-edged thinning
scissors - for thinning hair and blending in the coat; corbon steet
straight-cutting scissors; Fitipino heavy-duty scissors - used on
feathers' for straight cuts; two pairs of different-sized curved
scissors for cutting hair around the feet
Fig 9.3 Grooming combs. Left to right: mat splitter, fine-toothed
comb, coarse-toothed comb
narrow-toothed and short-toothed combs are used on
short-haired breeds. Never pull at the hair when using a
comb.
Fig 9.5 Rubber curries
178
 Animal grooming
Nail clippers
Clippers
When clipping nails ensure that the leg is held securely and
There are many different types of clipper (Fig. 9.8) on the
avoid pinching the toes together, as this often causes the
market; however, those with detachable blades are recom-
animal to withdraw its paw (Figs 9.6, 9.7). Avoid cutting into
 mended as they are easy to clean and disinfect. When using
the ‘quick' of the nail. This is the vascular supply to the
         i i s
growing nail and it appears pink in white nail but is difficult
the surface you are clipping. When clipping hair for cosmetic
to see in dark claws. If it is cut it will cause pain to the animal
purposes keep to the grain of the hair to achieve a smoother
and the nail will bleed profusely.
finish (Fig. 9.9). Never dig the clipper into the skin. Care must
be taken to avoid the clippers overheating, which could result
in burning the animal or burning out the clipper motor.
 Clippers are used with a snap-on comb that attaches to the
clipper blade and enables the user to cut a uniform length of
hair, reducing the need for scissoring. They prevent large
areas of hair from being removed accidentally and creating
an untidy effect that would be unpopular with the owner!
Clipper blades are made in various sizes, each with a different
 use or for different coats types. Oster, the most common type,
are available as follows:
No. 40 Surgical blade
No. 30 Extra short blade
Fig 9.6 Noil ctippers. Left to right: nail scissors, guillotine clipper,
 No. 10 Close blade - for sensitive areas
heavy duty pliers-type nail clipper
No. 4   Long blade for thick coats
No. 7/8 Narrow, special-purpose blade.
In order to ensure that the clippers are working to their
maximum effect and to make sure that they do not harm the
 skin of the animal, the clippers must be regularly maintained:
● Use clipper spray to lubricate, cool and disinfect the
blades
● Have a number of blades available so that they can be
changed regularly, preventing one from becoming too
hot with constant use
● It is vital to clean and disinfect blades between animals
to prevent any cross-contamination
Fig 9.7 Clipping a dog's naits
Fig 9.8 Basic animat ctippers
Fig 9.9 Snap-on combs for animat clippers
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 179
Animal grooming
● Blades should be sent regularly for sharpening - a
they are most noticeable in gundog breeds, e.g.
labradors, retrievers and spaniels.
the hair.
● Wool hairs - thinner, softer and wavier than the
Coat types
other hairs, they lie close to the skin, forming an
insulating undercoat. Some breeds, e.g. husky types,
One of the factors which distinguish the different breeds of
have both a dense overcoat and a dense undercoat,
both dogs and cats is their coat type and this must be taken
which allows them to survive in freezing temperatures,
into account when starting to groom them (Tables 9.1, 9.2).
while other breeds, e.g. dobermans and weimaraners,
If a more uncommon breed of dog or cat with a more spe-
have no undercoat at all, which means that they
cialized type of coat is presented then an experienced dog
tolerate low temperatures very badly. When bathing
groomer should be contacted.
and grooming these breeds this factor must be taken
into consideration. Individuals with a thick coat can
          
easily overheat if subjected to a hair dryer or left in a
tions in the coat depending on the breed:
warm room for a time; conversely, those breeds with a
thinner coat should not be left to sit around for a long
● Guard hairs - thicker, longer and stiffer than the
time with wet hair.
other hairs, they form the outermost layer. They grow
in obvious tracts over the body and give the coat its
● Sinus hairs - these are the whiskers and their
smooth outer appearance. Their function is to make
associated hairs, e.g. those around the eyes, nose and
water run off the coat instead of penetrating it and
mouth. They are much coarser than any other hair
and are adapted to sense movement and contact
around the body. Sinus hairs are not usually a problem
Table 9.1 Examples of coat types in different breeds
when grooming an animal.
of dog
Coat type
Hair length
Breed examples
Factors influencing hair growth
Smooth
Short and fine
Boxer
Pointer
The rate of hair growth is affected by the following:
Long and dense
Labrador
Corgi
● Seasonal changes - the coat produced in the winter
when the temperature is low is thicker and woollier,
Double
 Medium-long
Collie
 Old English sheepdog
whereas in the summer when the temperature is
higher the coat is thinner and shinier - described as
Wire
Short
Dachshund
being medullated - and helps to reflect the sun off the
Long
Schnauzer
coat. Moulting or shedding normally occurs at the
Silky
Short
Pekinese
change of season
Long
Afghan
● Environmental temperature - expressed as
Woolly/curly
Poodle
seasonal changes but the warmth of centrally heated
Bedlington
 houses may bring about constant moulting
● Health - an animal in poor health may have a
Table 9.2 Examples of coat types in different breeds
staring, greasy coat
of cat
● Diet - animals on a poor diet have sparse coarse coats
Coat type
 Breed
and may even lose their hair
Short
 British short-haired
● Hormone level - during oestrus the presence of
Long
 Persian
oestrogen reduces the rate of growth but progesterone
Curly
Cornish rex
causes the hair to grow for longer. After parturition
hair may be shed in greater quantities than normal
Wire
American wire-haired
Hairless
Sphinx
● Neutering and old age - both appear to stimulate a
coarser coat
180
Animal grooming
● Plucking - stimulates new coat growth and is used in
taken to avoid placing your face near the animal's face when
the grooming of terrier breeds.
lifting it in case it bites.
Basic grooming
Before bathing the animal:
1. Adequate restraint is essential. A firm and gentle
1. Place a rubber mat in the bath to avoid the animal
approach works well. Most dogs will respond to basic
slipping
commands, e.g. sit and stay - use them, using the
dog's name first. Cats are more difficult and an
2. Ensure that the bath drains well to prevent the animal
 assistant is required to restrain them.
standing in dirty water
 2. A sedative may be required if the animal is vicious or
3. Test the water temperature to ensure it is not too hot
very nervous, or a muzzle can be applied.
4. Ensure the coat is brushed out well, removing any
3. Place the animal on a table of the correct height to
dead hair - mats will become tighter when wet and
avoid the handler having to bend over the animal,
drying shrinks them, making them even tighter, and
causing back strain.
makes shampoo hard to remove from the coat
4. Begin grooming on the rear legs. You will be able to
 5. Always undertake any clipping prior to bathing unless
gauge the animal's reaction to grooming and be well
the animal arrives at the surgery wet from the rain
away from the mouth should it try to bite.
6. Prepare all bathing equipment before collecting the
 5. Proceed by brushing out the coat using the brush with
animal from its kennel:
the grain of the hair. Avoid brushing against the
animal's skin.
● Select the correct shampoo and conditioner (if
required)
6. Dematting - some commercial dematting sprays and
the use of a demat comb may make the job easier.
● Sponge
  an q ss a   e io 
to force the clippers through the coat - using short
● Two towels
gentle strokes may work better. Avoid using scissors, as
it is easy to cut the skin. If scissors are used, where
7. Some people like to plug the ears with cotton wool to
possible place a comb under the mat and cut against
prevent water entering the outer ear canal
the top side of the comb.
8. Empty anal glands if necessary or if asked.
7. Run a comb through the coat to ensure all mats and
knots have been removed.
Bathing:
8. With long-haired breeds the hair around the feet
collects dirt and other matter and may mat. Clip the
1. Ensure that the animal is secure while in the bath - if
hair out using curved scissors. At this stage, areas
it jumps out it may escape or injure itself
between the toes and pads can be checked for redness
and swelling, which must be reported to the veterinary
2. Having checked the water temperature wet the coat
surgeon.
thoroughly using a plastic jug, starting at the rear
end and working forwards, leaving the head until last
9. Check nails and anal glands.
3. Apply shampoo and lather in well
Bathing a dog
4. Work into the coat ensuring you reach the skin;
you may need to add more water to ensure a good
A bath at waist height saves excessive bending of the
lather
handler's back. Remember when lifting an animal to follow
safe lifting techniques, i.e. bend your knees and keep a
 5. Remember to shampoo the stomach, elbows,
straight back. If the dog is medium to large (springer spaniel
between the toes, inside the flap of the pinna and
    n h     ( 
the genitalia
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
181
Animal grooming
6. If some areas are very dirty, e.g. the legs, a brush may
Drying:
be used, but be gentle
1. Rub well with a towel - make sure you have a good
7. Rinse thoroughly with clean water until all the
supply of towels ready before you start the bath
shampoo is removed - the water should run clear
2. Check the temperature of the hair dryer - the skin
8. When rinsing the head remember to ensure that the
may be burned if the dryer is too hot, used in one area
head is held up and rinse to the back of the head so
for too long or used too close to the skin
no soap goes into the animal's eyes
3. For long-haired breeds use a slicker brush and brush
9. Cover the ear canal with your thumb to prevent
the hair in all directions, ensuring the hair is dried to
entry of water
the roots and skin
10. Squeeze out excess water with your hands
4. Brush through the coat
11. Wrap the animal in a towel and remove from the
 5. The animal should not be allowed out of the surgery
bath.
until it is fully dried, especially in cold weather.
The horse
kept in a sturdy box that can be used for standing on while
grooming very tall horses. Always check if assistance is likely
to be necessary; for example, the horse may not tolerate
Most horses are groomed every day while they are at home so
being tied up or may be temperamental.
they are quite used to the experience. Daily grooming while
it is hospitalized will both reassure the horse and enable the
nurse in charge to get to know the animal and assess its con-
Grooming kit
 dition and rate of progress.
Dandy brush
Has hard bristles used for removing mud and sweat from the
Reasons for grooming
coat (Fig. 9.10). It should not be used on horses that are
clipped, have a very thin coat or are sensitive. This brush
· Appearance - an owner may come in to visit his/her
should not be used on the head and care must be taken when
hospitalized horse and a clean, well-groomed animal
brushing over bony points.
will create the impression of professional care.
Grooming removes grease, dust and dead skin, helps
keep the pores open and aids blood circulation
● Contact - daily grooming helps develop a rapport
between the nurse and the animal
● Health - daily attention while grooming enables the
nurse to undertake a general health check and get to
know the horse's 'moods'. Any changes in its stance
and general demeanour should be reported to the
veterinary surgeon. In addition, checks for heat, sores
or swelling can be undertaken. Bandages may be
checked at the same time.
The grooming process
Fig 9.10 Grooming equipment. Top row, left to right: Body brush,
dandy brush, water brush. Bottom row, teft to right: Metat curry
All equipment should be prepared before entering the stable
comb, plastic curry comb, rubber curry/massager (can be used on
and a list of contents should be checked, as tools such as hoof
picks can easily be lost in the bed. The grooming kit may be
the horse's body)
182
2Animal grooming
Body brush
Much softer than the dandy brush and may be used on most
horses for brushing out the mane and tail (Fig. 9.10). The
bristles may vary in density and thickness. It may be used on
the more sensitive areas without causing any problem.
Curry comb
May be made of metal or plastic (Fig. 9.10). All types are used
in conjunction with a body brush. After brushing the coat
with the body brush it is then drawn across the curry comb
to remove the hair and dirt collected on the brush. The curry
comb should be regularly tapped on the floor to remove any
dirt that has accumulated in it. The rubber curry can also be
used in a circular movement to remove any loose hair and
Fig 9.11 More grooming equipment
stimulate the skin. The metal curry must never be used
Mane comb
directly on the coat.
May be made from metal or plastic (Fig. 9.11). When comb-
ing the mane care should be taken not to split or break the
Sponges
hair, which may result from pulling at tufts of mane. It is
Used for cleaning the eyes, nostrils, genitalia and udder
better to use combs with a wide tooth margin.
(Fig. 9.11). It must be remembered that different sponges
should be kept for each specific area to prevent cross-
infection from one area to another. Particular care must be
Wash brush
taken not to use the same sponge on both eyes if one eye has
May be used while bathing the horse to aid removal of mud
 an infection.
and debris from the coat (Fig. 9.11). If used on the skin and
Fig 19.12 The quick-release knot
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 183
Animal grooming
hair, care must be taken not to rub mud and gravel into the
the horse pulls back it will break the string, preventing injury
 skin and cause injury. This brush is more commonly used for 
to itself. Wearing gloves and a hard hat while handling horses
washing the hooves.
 is essential to prevent any harm to the handler. A methodical
approach should be adopted when grooming to ensure that
all areas have been covered. Before discharging the horse a
Hoof pick
full groom is advisable and using hoof oil will provide the
May be made from metal or plastic (Fig. 9.11). The end must
finishing touch.
be blunt to prevent damage to the sole of the foot.
If a horse is clipped or very thin-coated it may be rugged up to
keep it warm. When grooming a rugged horse it is preferable to
Stable rubber
'quarter' the horse, as opposed to totally removing the rugs.
This soft cloth can be wiped over the horse at the end of the
Quartering involves folding back the front part of the rug, thus
grooming to give the final polish.
keeping the quarters warm and grooming the face, neck, shoul-
ders and front part of the body (Fig. 9.13). The rugs are then
replaced and fastened at the front, the back half of the rug is
Grooming procedure
then folded over the shoulders to enable grooming of the hind
quarters of the horse (Fig. 9.14). When grooming the horse the
 Individual grooming kits should be used for each patient and
handler should always stand by the side of the horse to prevent
thoroughly cleaned and disinfected once the patient has
being kicked from behind or being struck by the front legs.
been discharged. This will prevent the spread of diseases such
as ringworm.
Geldings and stallions may need their sheaths washed, as
greasy dirt naturally occurs inside the sheath. Gloves should
On entering the stable to groom the horse, always secure the
always be worn by the handler and lukewarm water used. It
horse using a head collar, tying the rope to a piece of string
is advisable to have assistance when undertaking this pro-
with a quick release knot (Fig. 9.12). This will ensure that if
cedure as many horses may become restless.
Fig 9.13 The rugged-up horse - grooming the forequarters
184
 Animal grooming
Bathing the horse
It may be necessary to bath a horse to remove ectoparasites
such as lice, to clean wounds or simply because the animal is
covered in sweat or mud after being out in the fields or after
exercise.
The area chosen for bathing the horse should have a non-slip
 surface and good drainage.
1. Prepare all equipment before bringing the horse out of
the stable; this should include a nylon headcollar,
buckets of warm water, sponges, horse shampoo, sweat
scraper and towels
2. Secure the horse safely using a quick-release knot or
use an assistant to restrain the horse
3. Wash and dry the head first, with the horse untied to
avoid injury
4. Wet the coat thoroughly - on warm days a hosepipe
may be used gently and with care
5. Apply shampoo and massage it into the coat, ensuring
that it reaches the skin; special attention will be
needed for the mane and tail
6. Rinse the mane, tail and coat thoroughly
Fig 9.14 The rugged-up horse - grooming the hindquarters
 7. Using a sweat scraper, remove the excess water then
towel off
Grooming machines
 8. The horse may be walked round, rugged up or placed
under heat lamps to dry
Many light modern grooming machines are now available
but care must be taken when using these for the first time as
 9. The application of stable bandages to the legs may aid
they may 'spook' the horse. They have a dust bag attached
the drying process.
that collects the dirt and hair and they should be fitted with
a circuit breaker: if this is not evident do not use the machine.
 Machines should only be used every 3-4 days as the skin may
Clip
become sore or tender.
9
Horses are usually clipped between October and February
depending on the work they are undertaking or the weather
conditions. The amount of coat removed is affected by the
 breed of horse and the weather conditions. Clipping is advis-
Box 9.1 Points to remember
able once the horse starts shedding its coat.
 Have all equipment ready before entering the stable
● Be methodical in your approach to grooming
Reasons for clipping
Never stand in front of or directly behind a horse
● It reduces sweating during hard work in cold weather
● Never kneel when grooming legs or belly
and therefore the loss of condition
Wear steel-toecapped boots
Keep safety a top priority for the handler and the horse
● It is easier to keep the coat clean without the full
winter coat
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
185
Animal grooming
● The horse will dry quicker and is therefore less likely
to become chilled
● Appearance.
There are many different clips in common usage and they are
fully explained in most good horse manuals.
Clipping for surgical requirements
The veterinary nurse in equine practice will be required to
clip a horse ready for surgery and this must be undertaken in
the preparation area (see Dog grooming, above, for use and
care of the clippers). A coarse blade may be used to remove
the majority of the hair from the wound or incision site, then
go over the same site with a no. 40 Oster blade. Always ensure
that hair is removed for approximately 15 cm on either side
of the incision to ensure that there is no contamination of
the site by hairs falling into the wound. Always check the
exact clipping area with the veterinary surgeon before you
start.
Foot care
The importance of the horse's foot has long been recognised
and the old adage 'no foot, no horse' still remains true today.
Good foot care is essential. Poor shoeing and poor foot care
Fig 9.15 Picking out the hoof
can lead to lameness.
Cleaning the hooves and feet
When checking a horse's hooves the following points should
Picking out the feet is done using a hoof pick (Fig. 9.11). Let
be considered:
the horse know where you are and start at the front by
running your hand down the leg from the shoulder to the
● The horse should be standing square, bearing equal
pastern. Gently lean against the horse; this will encourage it
weight on all four feet; the front pair of hooves
should be symmetrical, as should the hind pair of
 Bulbs of the hoof 
hooves
● Any cracks in the hoof wall should be noted
● Check the coronary band for bruising or damage
Frog
● On the solar surface (underside of the hoof) a clean
frog, a firm sole and clean clefts should be visible
Sole
● If the shoe has recently been removed, the hoof
should be examined for signs of corns
White line
 junction of wall and sole)
● Check the length of hooves. Hoof growth will vary
depending on season, age, condition and nutrient 
Ground surface of
intake. The hooves of young horses and foals grow
the wall of the hoof
faster - up to 12 mm per month.
Fig 9.16 Ground surface of the right fore hoof
186
Animal grooming
to pick up its foot (Fig. 9.15). Repeat with the hind limbs,
Elementary farriery
running your hand down from the hip to the pastern. When
 releasing the hoof, place it back on the ground - do not let it
An unshod horse should have its hooves trimmed every
drop. As you use the hoof pick, ensure that the movement is
 8-12 weeks. Youngsters need constant monitoring, in some
from the bulb of the hoof towards the point of the hoof, pre-
cases every 2-3 weeks, to ensure that the balance of the foot
venting damage to the frog. Attention is required around the
and lower leg is maintained while they are growing. Horses
central and lateral clefts to ensure that all debris is removed.
should be restrained by a handler while their feet are being
Hooves should be cleaned out twice daily (Fig. 9.16).
examined or when they are being shod. The area should
be clean, dry and level so that the veterinary surgeon or
Ammonia produced by decomposing manure will soften the
farrier can identify and correct any imbalances that may be
horn of the hoof and horses that are stabled on dirty bedding
present.
for long periods may develop thrush, which is identified by a
foul smell with a moist black discharge. This must be reported
immediately to the veterinary surgeon.
Preparation of the foot for radiography
● Pick out hooves thoroughly
● Use a wire brush to ensure that any mud and debris is
 removed - some stones will be radio-opaque and
appear on the radiograph
● If necessary the hooves may be washed and dried
thoroughly
● Pack the sulcus of the frog (Fig. 9.16) and the clefts
with a dense material, e.g. Play-Doh or Plasticine, to
remove any air pockets, which will appear as dark
shadows on the radiograph.
B
Fig 9.17 Front and hind concave shoes, the fore shoe with one toe
dip and the hind shoe with two quarter clips
Fig 9.18 Shoes for a draught horse: (a) fore and (b) hind shoe
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 187
Animal grooming
Fig 9.19 Remedial shoes. Top teft: Heart bar; Top right: Egg-bar;
Bottom: Straight bar
Types of shoe
● One of the most commonly used horseshoes used
today is the fiullered concave shoe (Fig. 9.17). These
shoes are attached to the hoof using a varying number
of clenches, three to four being the most common,
and possess 0-2 clips positioned at the toe or the
quarters
● Horseshoes for draught animals are usually heavier and
have a larger weight-bearing surface (Fig. 9.18)
● Racing plates are light horse shoes used on race horses
Fig 9.20 Rasp, nait puller and buffer
and made from aluminium - check for wear and raised
clenches
● Nail pullers - for removing nails (Fig. 9.20)
● Remedial bar shoes - on the advice of a veterinary
● Hoof clippers - used to remove the outer wall of the
farrier. The shoes shown in Figure 9.19 increase the
hoof (Fig. 9.21)
ground-bearing surface of the foot. They give support 
to the heel and/or the frog area and are used for a
● Hoof knives - Toeing and loop knives are the two
variety of conditions including collapsed heels or
main types of knife used (Fig. 9.22). They must be
horses with long, sloping pasterns. Care should be
kept sharp at all times - a blunt knife will not cut
taken as these shoes can cause some horses to land
accurately. During the summer, when the feet are hard,
heel first. If this occurs these shoes should be
the knives will need sharpening several times a day.
removed.
When not in use the knives must be kept in a leather
rd n   a  An td n ld 
Farrier tools
the blade being damaged by other tools
These consist of:
● Rasps - the coarse rasp is used to remove the main
● Buffers - used to raise the clenches prior to removing
amount of hoof material and the fine rasp is used for
a shoe (Fig. 9.20); this is necessary to prevent excess
“finishing off'. The wider the rasp the better the finish
breakage or damage to the outer wall of the hoof
(Fig. 9. 21)
188
3Animal grooming
Fig 9.22 Hoof knives (right and teft) and hoof tester (centre)
Recommended reading
Geeson E 2003 Ultimate grooming. Ringpress Books,Lydney,
Fig 9.21 Hoof clippers
Gloucestershire
Describes the different techniques used for the different coat type.
●Hoof testers - used to identifying sensitive areas on
A variety of breeds are included.Further details of the art of strip-
the hoof (Fig. 9.22).
ping a coat.
Ruiz S 1987 Grooming your dog. Salamander Books, London
Bibliography
Clear illustrations showing how each piece of equipment is used. A
9
wide variety of breeds is shown.
Cooper B, Lane D R (eds) 2003 Veterinary nursing, 3rd edn.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
British Horse Society 1991 Care of the horse.Kenilworth Press,
Kenilworth, Warwickshire
Geeson E 2003 Ultimate grooming. Ringpress Books, Lydney,
Gloucestershire
Well laid-out text. Easy to read with bulleted main points.
Addresses faults in shoeing.
Brown J H,Pilliner S,Davies Z 1994 Horse and stable manage-
ment. Blackwell Publishing.
Webber T 1994 Threshold pichure guides no.18:Feet and shoes.
Kenilworth Press, Kenilworth, Warwickshire
Ruiz S 1987 Grooming your dog. Salamander Books, London
Clear illustrations of the anatomy of the horse's hoof. Addresses
British Horse Society 1991 Care of the horse. Kenilworth Press,
variations in the shape of the hoof. Brief summary of shoeing
Kenilworth, Warwickshire
faults.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 189
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
10
Canine and feline nutrition
Alison Jones
Key Points
● Nutrients are divided into six classes - protein, fat,
● Pet food for dogs and cats is available as home-made
carbohydrates, minerals, vitamins and water - and these
 diets and commercial diets, which in turn are available as
essential nutrients must be present in the correct
canned, semi-moist and dry foods.
 proportions if an animal is to remain healthy.
● The nutritional demands of the different life stages of an
● Each of the food classes has a specific function within
 animal, e.g. puppy/kittenhood, pregnancy and old age,
the metabolic processes of the body.
must be satisfied by specifically designed diets.
● Animals have a basic energy requirement, which satisfies
the energy used in sleep, and a maintenance energy
requirement, which satisfies the energy used in moderate
activity.
Introduction
surgeon in practice, I am constantly amazed and bewildered
 at the menus given by breeders to new puppy owners. These
all too frequently consist of complex home-made recipes,
The correct diet is vital in maintaining health and in the
usually based on large amounts of fresh meat, goat's milk and
management of disease. Understanding nutrition and its role
a vast array of mineral supplements. These diets are often
in both health and disease is an important skill for all
very unbalanced and could easily result in skeletal and other
qualified veterinary nurses and your advice will frequently be
growth abnormalities.
sought by your clients.
Domesticated dogs have little opportunity to select their own
Traditionally the breeder, neighbours, friends, relatives, the
diet so it is important to realise that they are solely depend-
pet shop owner and even the local supermarket have been a
ent upon their owners to provide all the nourishment they
source of advice on feeding. Recently there has been a great
need. Pet cats are less reliant on their owners' dietary selec-
increase in public awareness about the relationship between
tion as they are able, through hunting, to supplement their
diet and disease, thanks to media interest and to marketing
diet.
tactics by major manufacturing companies. Few people will
not have heard about the alleged health benefits of 'high
This chapter will explain the principal components of
fibre', 'low fat' and 'low cholesterol' diets.
healthy nutrition to allow you to recommend a balanced diet
which avoids both nutritional excess and deficiency. It will
Breeders have always actively debated the 'best way' to feed
look at the practical feeding of dogs and cats of all ages, while
dogs and cats. Most owners are aware of the importance of
giving you an insight into the key nutritional differences
good bone development and the role of nutrition in achiev-
between dogs and cats as well as the different types of pet
ing optimal skeletal characteristics. However, as a veterinary
food available commercially.
Essential nutrition
 A nutrient is any food component that helps support life. Any
nutrient required by the animal that cannot be synthesized in
the body is called an essential ruirient. It must be present in the
Dogs have a common ancestry with, and are still often
diet. If any essential nutrient is missing or present in too low a
classified as, carnivores, although from a nutritional point of
level then the diet as a whole is inadequate.
view they are actually omnivores. This means that dogs can
obtain all the essential nutrients that they need from dietary
Nutrients are divided into six basic classes:
sources consisting of either animal or plant material. As far as
we know, dogs can survive on food derived solely from
● Protein
plants. The same is not true for domesticated cats, which are
still obligate carnivores (see Ch. 4).
 Fat
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
191
10
Canine and feline nutrition
● Carbohydrate
  ad a  se s  sns  
protein or carbohydrate. Water has no energy value and so a
●Minerals
diet with a high moisture content will contain a low energy
density and therefore fewer calories. It is important that
●Vitamins
energy intake is carefully controlled to allow the animal to
reach and maintain optimum body condition. Excess energy
●Water.
can lead to obesity and growth abnormalities. Inadequate
energy intake leads to poor growth and weight loss. Both con-
Water
ditions are potentially damaging to health and should be
   a pa
Water is the most important nutrient of all. Animals can lose
almost all their fat and half their protein and still survive. A
 e s s  r s n  s
15% loss of body water would mean death. Good-quality
 is excessively palatable when overeating may occur. In a bal-
water should always be available except when an animal is
anced diet when an animal has consumed the amount of diet
persistently vomiting, when temporarily withholding oral
B  e s   s a s  
fluid intake may be advised. Water intake increases with
nutrients should also have been met. If the energy density of
habit, with increased salt intake and with anything that
the diet is low, nutrient deficiencies may occur since the
increases water losses - bleeding, diarrhoea, polyuria, lacta-
animal will stop eating when the gut is full but before all the
tion, increased body temperature, etc. The amount of water
nutritional requirements have been met. The diet is said to be
animals should consume per day in millilitres is roughly
bulk-limited. Examples of bulk-limited diets are:
equivalent to their daily energy intake in kilocalories.
Energy
● Weight loss in lactating bitches fed on a maintenance
not a growth diet
 In addition to providing specific nutrients, food also provides
energy. The energy content of the diet is derived solely from
● Some weight-control foods are bulk-limited for the
the fats, proteins and carbohydrates, and the proportion of
energy-producing nutrients but not for the non-
these energy-producing nutrients in the diet will determine
energy-producing nutrients - this is deliberate to
(p Aiaa a se on paai osie) s aa sh!
achieve weight loss.
All living cells require energy, and the more active they are
Energy requirements  vary from individual to individual
the more energy they use. Individual animals have unique
according to an animal's:
energy needs, which can vary, even between members of the
same breed, age, sex and activity level. Breeders will recognise
·Age
the scenario in which some littermates develop differently,
one tending towards obesity, another on the lean side, even
● Breed
when they are fed exactly the same amount of food. If your
clients are feeding a commercially prepared food, you should
● Sex
be aware that the feeding guide recommended by the manu-
facturer is also based on average energy needs, and therefore
●Activity level
you may need to increase or decrease the amount you rec
ommend to meet the individual pet's requirements. In some
● Reproductive status
countries (such as those within the European Union) legisla-
tion may not allow the energy content to appear on the label
● Environment
of a prepared pet food; however, reputable manufacturing
companies can and will provide this information upon
● Health status.
request.
This should be borne in mind when advising your clients on
When considering different foods it is important to compare
the most appropriate diet for the pet and when calculating
the metabolizable energy (ME) which is the amount of energy
the daily feeding amount.
in the food that is available to a pet. Some companies will
provide you with figures for the gross energy, which is not as
Owners may think that protein is the source of energy needed
useful because some of that energy (sometimes a substantial
for exercise and performance but this is not true. Protein is a
amount) will not be digested, absorbed and utilized.
192
 Canine and feline nutrition
energy theoretically available from it is lost in meal-induced
Table 10.2 Daily energy requirements for cats
heat. Meal-induced heat is the metabolic heat 'wasted' in the
and dogs
digestion, absorption and utilization of the protein. Fat and
carbohydrates are better sources of energy for performance.
One full day's work
1.5 × MER
Gestation post 3 weeks
1.3 × MER 
For obese or obesity-prone dogs a low energy intake is indi-
Peak lactation
 2-4 ×MER
cated, and there are now specially prepared diets that have a
Birth to 3 months
2.0 × MER
very low energy density; those that are most effective have a
Sub-freezing temperatures
1.7 × MER
high fibre content.
Tropical heat
2.5 × MER
Resting
Energy requirements
0.8×MER
Obesity
0.6×MER
 The basal energy requirement (BER) is the amount of energy
Geriatric
0.6 ×MER
         
moneutral environment.
In sickness the energy requirement varies considerably. Pets
are often less active, sleep more and lie in a warm environ.
The maintenance energy requirement (MER) is the amount of
ment. The BER is therefore lower. However, if the animal has
energy required by a moderately active animal in its daily
suffered from trauma, surgery or sepsis, the BER rises sharply.
search for and utilization of food (Table 10.1). It does not
The precise rise will depend upon the illness factor involved.
 include the energy required for growth, repair, pregnancy,
In pregnancy, lactation, growth and the control of obesity.
lactation or work.
the energy needs vary (Table 10.2).
● MER in dogs is approximately 2 x BER
The gross energy of nutrients (Table 10.3) varies but only a
 proportion of these nutrients are actually digested by the
● MER in cats is approximately 1.4 x BER.
animal. The figures must therefore be adjusted to provide
accurate values of the metabolizable energy obtained from
Most of the energy used by the body is given off as heat
the nutrient. The figures shown in Table 10.4 allow for
through radiation and convection from body surface. Energy
digestibility. If a diet is highly digestible the energy content is
s rs  s o n p i a
Table 10.3 Gross energy content of nutrients
have a larger surface area related to body weight and there-
fore have greater heat loss and so a greater BER. Surface area
Nutrient
kcal/g
can be determined from conversion tables using the animal's
body weight but this can be complex and time-consuming.
Protein
5.64
Fat
9.40
In order to determine BER without the need to convert body
Carbohydrate
4.15
weight to surface area, a simpler equation has been formu-
lated, which seems to be accurate.
Table 10.4 ME content of nutrients
BER = 30 x wt in kg + 70
Nutrient
kcal/g
MER = 2 (30 × wt in kg + 70) for dogs over 2 kg
Protein
3.5
MER = 1.4 (30 × wt in kg + 70) for cats over 2kg
Fat
8.7
Carbohydrate
3.5
If very small animal (under 2 kg) use 70 (wt in kg).
Table 10.5 Nutrient content of a typical diet
Table 10.1 Daily maintenance energy requirements
Nutrient
Amount
kcal/g
kcal/100g
Weight in kg
 Energy in kcal/kg
(%)
nutrient
diet
Dogs
Protein
22
X 3.5
77.0
3
110
Fat
9
X 8.7
78.3
6
85
Fibre
0
0
10
75
Water
10
0
0
>25
65
Ash
5
0
0
Cats
Carbohydrate
51
× 3.5
178.5
2.5 to 5.5
65 to 70
Total
333.8
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
193
10
Canine and feline nutrition
higher; if a diet is poorly digestible because of lower-quality
● Tryptophan
ingredients, the energy content is lower.
● Threonine
The only way to accurately determine the nutrient content of
a diet (Table 10.5) is by laboratory analysis. Many manufac-
● Isoleucine
turers give some information on the label. This is called the
guaranteed analysis. This tells you that the diet contains at
● Methionine
     x  s   x 
The true value could be much higher or much lower.
●Histidine
If the guaranteed analysis is used to calculate the energy
● Arginine
density of a food, a more accurate figure can be obtained by
multiplying the calculated amount by 1.2 for canned diets
● Leucine
and 1.1 for dry diets.
● Lysine.
The carbohydrate content may not be stated on the label but
 can be calculated by subtracting the total amount of all other
The 1lth amino acid that is essential for cats only is called
nutrients from 100.
taurine. Inadequate taurine in the diet of cats can cause
irreversible blindness and heart problems. Plant proteins do
The water content may not be given for all dry diets. Assume
not contain taurine. The only source of taurine is animal
a figure of 10% if none is stated.
 protein, providing evidence that the cat is an obligate
carnivore.
This diet therefore contains 333.8 kcal/100g of food, i.e.
3.338 kcal/g.
Proteins are essential components of all living cells, in which
they have several functions including regulation of metabo.
Using the above information, the energy provided by each
lism, a structural role in cell walls and muscle fibres. They are
 nutrient can be calculated as a percentage of the total energy:
an important requirement for tissue growth and repair.
Proteins may also be used as a source of energy in the diet.
Percentage protein calories
= 77/333.8 × 100
Animals cannot synthesize new amino acids so they require a
= 21%
  o o ss  td n  d 
Percentage fat calories
= 78.3/333.8 × 100
an inability to produce new tissue.
= 21.3%
Percentage carbohydrate calories
= 178.5/333.8 × 100
The quality of a protein varies with the number and amount
= 48.6%
of essential amino acids it contains. The quality of a protein
is referred to as its biological value. This will depend on how:
Protein
●Acceptable
Proteins are complex molecules composed of chains of amino
acids. There are only 23 amino acids and all animals need all
● Digestible
23 of them. These 23 amino acids can be arranged in any
combination, giving an almost infinite variety of naturally
●Utilizable
occurring proteins, each with its own characteristic proper-
ties, e.g. hair, skin, muscle, hormones, antibodies. Many
the protein is. For example, leather is not edible and so has
amino acids can be synthesized within the animal's body and
0% acceptability and therefore 0% biological value; chicken is
so do not have to be provided in the diet.
edible, is 80% digestible and is 70% utilizable - the biological
value is 87%.
However, there are some that cannot be synthesized and so
must be included in the diet. These are termed the essential
Dietary protein in excess of the animal's requirements cannot
amino acids. There are 10 amino acids essential in the diets
be laid down as muscle but is broken down in the liver by
of dogs and 1l amino acids essential in the diets of cats.
deamination and the amino part is converted to urea, which
These are:
is excreted by the kidneys. The acid part of the amino acid is
converted to glycogen or fat and is stored. Excess dietary
● Phenylalanine
protein can therefore be damaging to animals with liver and
kidney problems - control of dietary protein is prudent in the
●Valine
ageing pet.
194
 Canine and feline nutrition
Protein deficiency can result from insufficient dietary protein
not in cats and so it must be present in the diet of the cat.
or from a deficiency of a particular amino acid. Signs of
Arachidonir acid is only found in fats of animal origin.
protein deficiency include:
Linolenic acid is synthesized from linoleic acid by both dogs
and cats. Therefore neither species requires linolenic acid in
● Poor growth or weight loss
dietary fat.
● Dull hair coat
Fatty acids are needed as constituents of cell membranes, for
the synthesis of prostaglandins and in controlling water loss
●Muscle wasting
through the skin. Essential fatty acid deficiency may result in
impaired reproductive performance, impaired wound heal-
● Increased susceptibility to disease
ing, a dry coat and scaly skin. This can predispose the skin to
bacterial infection and eczema 'hot spots'. Essential fatty acid
● Oedema
deficiency occurs most commonly in dogs receiving low fat
dry dog foods containing beef tallow or dry food that has
● Death.
been stored too long, especially under warm or humid con-
ditions. Fatty acids become rancid due to the oxidation of
their double bonds. Once rancid they lose their nutritional
Fat
 sdn   s  o s 
humidity. Oxidation of fats is prevented by the inclusion
Dietary fat may be referred to as oils, lipids or fats and
of substances called antioxidants such as vitamin E and
consists of mainly triglycerides, which are composed of one
ethoxyquin.
molecule of glycerol and three molecules of fatty acids.
The specific fatty acids present determine the physical and
Excess dietary fat can lead to pansteatitis or ‘yellow fat
nutritional characteristics of the fat.
disease'. Signs include cutaneous pain, anorexia, pyrexia and
nodular fat deposits within the skin. This can occur in cats
Fats are required in the diet:
         
involves correction of the diet and vitamin E therapy. Excess
● To provide energy
dietary fat may also lead to obesity, a serious condition that
●To aid absorption of the fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K)
heart disease, increased risk of joint disease and skin disor-
ders. More than 50% of British pets are considered to be over-
● To enhance palatability
weight and so educating clients as to the dangers of obesity
and helping them choose the most appropriate diet for their
● As a source of essential fatty acids.
pet are valuable skills for all veterinary nurses to learn
Inadequate dietary fat may lead to fatty-acid deficiency and
/or energy deficiency. Fats containing a high percentage of
Carbohydrates
unsaturated fatty acids are liquid at room temperature and
     a    
There are three main groups of carbohydrates:
fatty acids are solid at room temperature and are called fats.
● Monosaccharides - glucose, fructose
Just as some amino acids cannot be synthesized by the body
and must be provided in the diet, some fatty acids are also
● Disaccharides - maltose, sucrose, lactose
termed ‘essential. The three essential fatty acids are:
● Polysaccharides - starch, glycogen and fibre.
● Linoleic acid
Carbohydrates provide the body with energy and may be
● Linolenic acid
converted to body fat. All animals have a metabolic require
ment for glucose but, provided the diet contains sufficient
● Arachidonic acid.
glucose precursors (amino acids and glycerol), most animals
can synthesize enough glucose to meet their metabolic needs
Linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid required in the diet of all
without dietary carbohydrate. However, sugars and cooked
animals. It is common in vegetable oil and makes up 15-25%
 starches are an economical and easily digested energy source.
of poultry and pork fat but only 5% of beef tallow.
0n puodsau ou op sheo inq sop on Aneed asi sns
Arachidonic acid is synthesized from linoleic acid in dogs but
the taste of sugar.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
195
10
Canine and feline nutrition
The value of certain carbohydrates is limited by the animal's
There are seven macrominerals. These are:
ability to digest them. Digestion of disaccharides such as su-
crose and lactose is controlled by the activity of the intestinal
● Calcium
enzymes, i.e. disaccharidases sucrase and lactase. The activity of
lactase decreases with age and so an excessive consumption
● Phosphorus
 of lactose-containing produrcts in older animals can lead to
diarrhoea.
● Magnesium
● Sodium
Dietary fibre
● Potassium
 Dietary fibre, or roughage, consists of a group of indigestible
 polysaccharides such as cellulose, lignin and pectin. They are
● Chloride
the main constituents of plant cell walls and are relatively
indigestible within the gut of dogs and cats. In these species
● Sulphur.
the role of fibre in the diet is to provide bulk to the faeces,
regularizing bowel movements and helping to prevent con-
 Calcium and phosphorus are the major minerals involved in
stipation and diarrhoea. Fibre also has therapeutic uses in the
maintaining structural rigidity as components of the bones and
treatment of fibre-responsive diseases. Since fibre is largely
teeth. The level of calcium and phosphorus in the blood is con
indigestible it decreases the energy content of the diet and so
trolled by a complex series of reactions involving parathyroid
has a role in the correction and prevention of obesity
hormone, calcitonin and vitamin D. It is the absolute concen-
trations of these minerals that are of most importance, but the
ratio of calcium to phosphorus is also significant. The correct
Minerals
ratio for growth is 1:1. Imbalance in this ratio with either in
excess leads to skeletal deformities. Meat meals are a rich source
The term mineral is used to denote all inorganic elements in
of calcium because of their bone content but most cereals are
a food. Minerals are sometimes referred to on pet food labels
low in calcium. Calcium deficiency occurs most commonly in
as ash.
( o    sd     sa
and in lactating bitches it can cause eclampsia. Calcium excess
More than 18 minerals are believed to be essential for mam-
occurs when high-calcium diets are fed, especially to large-breed
mals. They are divided into macrominerais, which are needed
puppies. It most commonly occurs when calcium supplemen-
in larger amounts, and race elements, which are required in
 tation is given in addition to a growth type diet. Many skeletal
smaller amounts. Electrolytes are minerals in their salt form
abnormalities have been attributed in part to excess calcium,
and are found in body tissues and fluids.
including osteochondritis dissecans (OCD), canine hip dys-
plasia (CHD), and wobbler syndrome.
Minerals have many varied functions in the body. They are
required for the maintenance of:
Magnesium is required for the normal function of heart and
skeletal muscle. Foodstuffs containing bone, grains and fibre
● Skeletal structure (especially calcium, phosphorus and
are rich in magnesium. Magnesium deficiency can cause mus-
magnesium)
cular weakness but is very unlikely to be due to a lack of
magnesium in the diet. Very high intakes of magnesium have
●Acid-base and fluid balance (especially potassium,
    e   
sodium and chloride)
(FLUTD) and the formation of struvite crystalluria.
● Cellular function
Sodium and chloride are the major electrolytes in the body
water. They are needed for acid-base balance and for the reg-
● Nerve conduction (especially potassium and magnesium)
ulation of the concentration of the body fluids. Chloride is a
component of bile and hydrochloric acid. Fish, eggs, whey
● Muscle contraction (especially magnesium and
and poultry meal are rich in both sodium and chloride. A
calcium).
deficiency of these minerals can arise from excessive fluid
loss, such as occurs in vomiting and diarrhoea. Signs include
The absorption of different minerals is often linked, so that
exhaustion, inability to control water balance, dry skin and
an excess intake of one mineral can lead to a deficiency of
hair loss. An excess will cause a greater than normal fluid
another. This is important since supplementation of one
intake and may predispose animals to hypertension and
mineral can cause deficiency of another.
therefore heart and kidney problems.
196
Canine and feline nutrition
Potassium is plentiful within cells and has an important
● Iodine is a major constituent of thyroid hormones,
role in maintaining both acid-base and osmotic balance.
which are required for thermoregulation, reproduction,
Potassium is also needed to facilitate the transfer of nerve
growth and metabolism. An animal's iodine requirement
impulses and muscle contractility. Potassium is present in a
is influenced by its physiological state and diet. Lactating
wide variety of foods, including soya, rice bran, grains and
animals have a greater need for dietary iodine since
wheat bran. A deficiency of potassium is termed hypo.
about 10% of intake is excreted in the milk. Fish, eggs
kalaemia and will cause anorexia, lethargy and muscle weak-
and poultry byproducts are rich sources of iodine.
ness. An excess of potassium is rare but may occur when
 potassium excretion is impaired; it leads to bradycardia.
● Selenium is an important constituent of the body's
antioxidant protective system, in which it functions in
There are at least 11 trace elements; the most important are
combination with vitamin E. Selenium deficiency will
as follows.
ruminants but has not been reported in dogs and cats.
● Iron is an essential component of haemoglobin, the 
 oxygen-carrying pigment of the blood, and myoglobin,
the oxygen-carrying pigment found within muscle.
Vitamins
Most meat ingredients are high in iron and primary
dietary deficiency is rare. It may arise as a consequence
In order to be classified as a vitamin a substance must have
of chronic blood loss and cause anaemia and fatigue,
five basic characteristics:
or occur in young puppies and kittens if milk is fed for
too long a period, as milk has a low iron content.
● It must be an organic compound different from fat,
protein and carbohydrate
● Copper is needed for the formation of red blood cells
and in the normal pigmentation of the skin and hair.
● It must be a component of the diet
Most meat ingredients, especially ruminant livers,
contain plentiful copper. Copper deficiency may occur
● It must be essential in minute amounts
when zinc and iron excess arise and causes poor
reproductive performance, early foetal loss and hair
● Its absence must cause a deficiency syndrome
 s   a    sg
cats with normal metabolisms and occurs mainly in
● It must not be synthesized in sufficient quantities to
Bedlington terriers, West Highland white terriers and
support normal physiological function.
Doberman pinschers - these breeds are all prone to an
inherited metabolic defect that causes liver cirrhosis.
Not all vitamins are essential for all species. For example, guinea
pigs and primates must have a dietary source of vitamin C,
● Zinc is required by all animals for maintaining a
whereas other species can synthesize it themselves.
healthy skin and coat. Very high calcium diets can
increase the animal's need for zinc. Zinc is relatively
non-toxic and signs of dietary excess are rarely
whether they are soluble in fat or water:
encountered in animals consuming normal
commercial pet food but have been reported as a result
● Water-soluble - B complex and C
of pica, following the consumption of large numbers
of pennies. Signs of zinc deficiency have been reported
● Fat-soluble - A, D, E, K.
in dogs fed cereal-based foods because of the presence
of phytates that bind the zinc and prevent its
Vitamins assist in regulating energy metabolism and are
absorption. The most common presentation of zinc
involved in many biochemical reactions. Most vitamins
deficiency is poor skin, hyperkeratosis and a sparse
cannot be synthesized in the body and so must be present in
hair coat.
the diet. Since the water-soluble vitamins are readily lost via
the urine and are poorly stored in the body, a daily supply
● Manganese is of little practical relevance in the
must be available. Fat-soluble vitamins are more readily
dietary management of cats and dogs but is an
stored and so a daily intake is not so important. However,
essential component in the diet of all birds.
toxicity arising from excessive intake is much more common.
Manganese is required for the activation of many
enzymes and is thus involved in a wide variety of
   n n     
important metabolic processes. Fibre sources and fish
acid) in dogs and cats, since they can synthesize all they
meal are rich in manganese.
require from glucose.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
197
10
Canine and feline nutrition
Many factors influence an animal's individual requirement for
vitamins. During growth and reprodurtion animals are making
Fat-soluble vitamins
new tissues and so require higher levels of all nutrients, includ-
Vitamin A
ing vitamins. Various disease conditions also affect vitamin
status through a reduced intake, e.g. following prolonged
Vitamin A, also called retinol, is the most nutritionally
anorexia, or due to increased losses or decreased production,
important vitamin. It is required for normal vision and for
e.g. reduced synthesis of vitamin D during renal failure.
healthy coat, skin, mucous membranes and teeth. Naturally
rich sources of vitamin A include fish oil, liver, egg and dairy
All commercial pet foods contain added vitamins both from
products. Plants do not contain active vitamin A but instead
synthetic and natural sources. It is therefore unnecessary and
are rich in provitamins called carotenoids.
indeed contraindicated to supplement the diet of healthy dogs
 and cats with additional multipurpose vitamin formulations.
Deficiencies are uncommon but cats require a source of pre
formed vitamin A, which is only found in animal tissue, and
thus theoretically could become deficient if fed a vegetarian
Water-soluble vitamins
diet. Vitamin A toxicity is fairly common in cats receiving a
diet high in liver or following oversupplementation with cod
Vitamin B complex
liver oil, since these foodstuffs contain abundant amounts of
This includes thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, biotin, folic acid
preformed vitamin A. Clinical signs of vitamin A toxicity
and cyanocobalamin. The water-soluble B-vitamins are gen-
include liver damage and painful bone disease, especially of
erally considered to be non-toxic. Since commercial pet foods
the cervical vertebrae and long bones of the forelimb.
contain plentiful supplies of B vitamins, deficiency states in
pets fed such foods are very unlikely.
Vitamin D
Deficiencies can occur as a result of overconsumption of
Vitamin D is required for the intestinal absorption of calcium
certain foods that contain specific antivitamins. For example,
and for the mobilization and bone deposition of both calcium
avidin in egg white binds biotin, thiaminases in raw fish can
and phosphorus. It can be absorbed from the diet in the small
lead to thiamin deficiency in cats. Water-soluble vitamin
 intestine and also can be synthesized in the skin following
deficiencies can also be demonstrated in pets fed unusual
exposure to sunlight. Marine fish and fish oils are the richest
home-prepared diets. Dogs fed exclusively on cereals such as
natural sources of vitamin D and can potentially be a source of
toxicity. Vitamin D deficiency is very rare but can cause rickets
(termed pellagra), which presents as dermatitis, diarrhoea,
 in young animals and severe bone disorders in adults. Toxicity
dementia and death.
can occur due to oversupplementation and causes hypercal-
caemia, soft-tissue calcification and ultimately death.
Vitamin C
Vitamin C is not technically a vitamin for healthy dogs and cats
Vitamin E
because all that is required can be synthesized by the animal.
Vitamin E is an important antioxidant and the requirement
Vitamin C mainly functions in the body as an antioxidant and
for vitamin E increases with the dietary levels of polyunsatu-
free radical scavenger and is needed for the synthesis of colla-
rated fatty acids (PUFA). Vitamin E is only synthesized by
gen. It was postulated that huge doses of vitamin C could be
plants and the richest natural sources are vegetable oils, seeds
beneficial in preventing hip dysplasia but this has not been
and cereal grains. The clinical manifestations of vitamin E
proved. Recent research has focused on the use of supplemen-
 deficiency vary markedly between species. In dogs the main
 tal vitamin C in the prevention of some types of cancer.
clinical signs are degenerative skeletal disease with muscular
weakness and gestational failure. In cats deficiency can arise
when diets that are high in PUFA, such as oily fish, are fed.
L-carnitine
The clinical signs associated with vitamin E toxicity in cats
This is a vitamin-like substance found in red meat and dairy
include the occurrence of painful subcutaneous nodules,
products. It is needed in the metabolism of fat to produce
termed steatitis, as well as myocarditis and myositis.
energy. Although L-carnitine can be synthesized by both the
liver and kidneys, certain animals may benefit from addi-
Vitamin K
programmes using a calorie controlled diet food. It has been
Vitamin K regulates the formation of several blood-clotting
shown that a higher level of dietary L-carnitine can improve
factors and can be found in green leafy vegetables. The daily
the rate of weight loss and can help to preserve lean body
requirement for both dogs and cats is easily met in the
tissue during the weight-reduction phase.
healthy animal by synthesis from bacteria and so a deficiency
198
 Canine and feline nutrition
is unlikely. However, the poison warfarin is a potent vitamin
● In normal animals all the L-carnitine needed can be
 K antagonist and causes haemorrhage.
 synthesized in the liver and so animals do not rely on
a dietary source of this vitamin
● Dogs and cats that are overweight and put on a
Neutraceuticals
lower-calorie diet have a higher requirement for
L-carnitine, since they are using up more fat
Neutraceuticals are substances that are required for normal
body structure and function and when given orally in a
 s s  so haao  s r, 0
purified form improve the health and wellbeing of the
 supplemented with L-carnitine.
animal.
The most common neutraceuticals in relation to pet food are:
Glucosamine and chondroitin sulphate
●L-carnitine
Glucosamine and chondroitin sulphate are called chondropro-
tectives. This means they help maintain the health of
● Glucosamine
cartilage.
● Chondroitin sulphate.
● Chondroprotectives are produced naturally by the
t an o sss se ro saio ia siad se 'na pog
increases, this production decreases
L-carnitine
● The addition of extra glucosamine and chondroitin
L-carnitine is a water-soluble-vitamin-like substance found
sulphate has been shown to help maintain joint
 naturally in red meat and dairy products:
mobility and health
● Most prepared pet foods are low in natural L-carnitine
● Large-breed dogs by their very size have greater stresses
because they do not contain much red meat
on their joints.
● L-carnitine is needed in the body to help in the
● The addition of extra chondroprotectives in the diet of
 oxidation of body fat to form energy
 large-breed dogs may be beneficial.
Types of pet food
 clients to feed their dogs and cats the same amount of the
same food every day.
Home-made diets
Some owners like to feed home-cooked diets to their pets.
Commercial diets
Most home-made diets are unbalanced and they are not
recommended. The main problems encountered with home-
Commercially available diets have undergone extensive
made diets for pets are that they are:
 research by vets and nutritionists at the pet food companies.
They provide the best balance of nutrients combined with
● Often very high in calories and can encourage over-
 convenience and excellent value. There are three main types
eating and weight gain
 of dog and cat foods available: canned foods, dry foods and
semi-moist foods.
● Usually unbalanced and so do not provide the best
nutrition
Canned foods
● Often high in salt and may be addictive
Most canned foods are complete foods, i.e. they can be fed on
their own with just water to drink and the dog or cat will be
● Not consistent and so can cause upset stomachs and
getting everything they need. Canned foods contain about
diarrhoea.
  ,  a sn    a 
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  199
10
Canine and feline nutrition
label). Canned foods come in many different flavours. Many
● The pet produces smaller firmer faeces, as the food is
cat owners like to give their cats a different taste each day.
more digestible; this makes toilet training easier and
although this has been shown to increase the chances of the
less messy
cat getting fat.
● The high-quality ingredients often lead to improved
Some canned foods are complementary foods, i.e. they must be
skin condition
fed with something else (usually mixer biscuits) to give a
proper diet and it is not recommended to feed just the
● They are complete and so no extra supplements are
canned food. It should be clearly stated on the packet or can
needed
if the food is complete or complementary.
● They are always made to the same consistent recipe;
this is called fixed formulation and reduces the
Dry foods
likelihood of gut upsets
Most dry foods are complete; some are complementary. Dry
foods contain about 10% water, although legally the label
● They tend to be lower in potentially harmful nutrients
does not have to state the water content if it is less than 14%.
such as salt
● They are available in different life stages to suit both
Semi-moist foods
the pet's age and its lifestyle.
These foods are usually complete and contain about 25%
moisture. They are usually sealed in foil pouches or small
plastic bags to retain their freshness. One pouch is often
equivalent to one can of food. Semi-moist foods tend to be
Treats
preserved using sugars and so should be avoided in all pets
with diabetes.
d a  i 1iad 1  S  n  st d i
is receiving a complete balanced diet then this is not neces-
sary. However, provided that the total number of calories
Premium foods
eaten each day in treats is no more than 10% of the pet's daily
  s s   se  
intake, they can be safely fed. It is best to get owners to
been developed by veterinary surgeons and specialist nutri-
reduce the daily feeding amount by about 10% to compen-
tionists. They are usually available in both canned and dry
sate for the additional calories from the treats.
forms. Premium foods contain higher-quality ingredients
than regular pet foods and this makes them much more
Some treats, such as rawhide chews, are very poorly digestible
digestible. Premium foods may at first glance seem more
and so provide very few calories. These can be fed more freely
expensive than economy brands, but they have several
 but it is good advice to stop people giving treats at family
advantages:
mealtimes, as this can lead to begging. Most new puppy
owners will use treats as a reward when they are training their
● They are fed in smaller amounts so the cost compares
 puppies - the main meal should be reduced to compensate
favourably with other foods
for this.
Feeding puppies and
too. In the first few days the kibble can be soaked to allow
smaller puppies to chew them more easily, but very soon
kittens
puppies willlearn to accept dry kibble.If a commercial balanced
food is chosen then no supplements should be needed and in
fact adding other nutrients will only cause dietary imbalances.
Puppies
The musculoskeletal system changes constantly throughout
 Puppies should be weaned at 3-4 weeks of age. Many puppies
life but these changes are most rapid during the first few
will start to eat solid food before this, by exploring their sur-
months of life. The exact point of maturity varies between
roundings and coming into contact with their mother's food.
breeds but is usually between 12 and 18 months of life. The
If the mother is fed a good-quality balanced growth food
skeletal system is most susceptible to physical and metabolic
during the latter stages of pregnancy and throughout lacta
insult during the first 12 months because metabolic activity
tion, then this is a suitable weaning ration for the puppies
is heightened during this time. If damage occurs at this
200
 Canine and feline nutrition
stage of development the structural soundness of the
The intake of too much calcium is more common than the
adult dog can be affected, leading to lameness or growth
intake of too little. This is because of the tendency of owners
defects.
to overfeed and to supplement the diet with additional min-
erals and vitamins in the form of powders, tablets and cap-
Optimum growth, including skeletal development, is
sules, as well as by adding high-calcium foods, e.g. milk,
dependent upon a combination of good genetics, the correct
bonemeal, treats and titbits, to the growth ration. This high
environment and balanced nutrition. Breeders put consider.
intake of calcium has the effect of inhibiting the natural
able effort into selecting the best breeding animals to maxi-
remodelling process of bone that has to occur during devel-
mize genetic potential, avoiding those with overt conforma-
opment in response to changing stresses on the skeleton. The
tional defects. The environmental influences include litter
consequences of this overnutrition are proportionately
size, and thus space available within the womb for develop
greater in puppies that grow more rapidly, i.e. the larger
ment, activity level in the first few weeks of life and housing
breeds, and this explains why the majority of the develop-
conditions. Rearing puppies on a non-slippery floor can help
 mental skeletal conditions are diagnosed in breeds weighing
reduce stress damage to developing joints, including the hips.
25 kg or more when adult.
Nutrition is certainly one of the most important factors in
 New puppy owners have to digest a huge amount of infor-
optimal growth and many scientific studies have shown that
mation during their first few visits to the surgery. This infor-
development can be adversely affected by both under- and
mation includes vaccination policies, worming regimes, flea
overnutrition. With the advent of modern commercial pet
treatments, neutering, insurance, training as well as the
food, nutrient deficiency as a cause of developmental skeletal
correct way to feed their new family member. When speaking
disease has virtually beenn eliminated. Today we see far more
to new puppy owners it is very useful to use diagrams, graphs
cases where the plane of nutrition has been too high because
and charts to help illustrate the different growth rates in the
of overfeeding or oversupplementation. The main nutritional
   a     n
risk factors for puppies are:
have their puppies weighed and their growth rate checked. By
offering puppy growth checks every 2 weeks for the first 6
● Obesity in smaller breeds, due to ann excessive intake of
months of life, you can offer a valuable preventative health
energy
care service.
● Skeletal disease in larger breeds, due to a combination
To assess a growth food for optimum development in grow-
of excessive energy intake and high intake of specific
 ing puppies we must consider a number of factors.
nutrients.
About one-third of all dogs fall into the category of “large
Energy content
breed'. These puppies will weigh more than 25 kg when adult
and, as the group includes some of the nation's favourite
Growing puppies need twice as much dietary energy on a per-
breeds, they will be very frequent visitors to your clinics.
kilogram basis as adults. This need is greatest just after birth
and then decreases as the dog grows and matures. Excessive
Excessive nutrient intake has been shown to be a factor in the
dietary energy may support a growth rate that is too fast for
main  developmental  skeletal  disorders  of  larger-breed
proper skeletal development, which results in increased fre-
puppies, including hip dysplasia, osteochondrosis, wobbler
quency of skeletal disorders in large and giant breeds. Because
syndrome, un-united anconeal process and panosteitis. The
fat has twice the calorific density of protein or carbohydrate,
key nutritional influences on skeletal development are the:
dietary fat is the primary contributor to excess energy intake.
  a P  h a sx s  o
● Energy content of the food
energy in excess of the puppy's needs will be stored as fat and
hence predispose to juvenile obesity. Puppies that are allowed
● Feeding method employed
to get fat will increase the number of fat cells they have
(called fat cell hyperplasia) and are then predisposed to
● Specific nutrient content, including calcium,
obesity for the rest of their lives.
phosphorus, protein, vitamin D and vitamin A.
Body condition scoring (BCS) evaluates body fat stores and
Most dog owners are aware that puppies need relatively more
therefore confirms if the energy intake is suitable (Fig 10.1).
Maintaining a proper BCs during growth not only avoids
in relation to their body weight, but many do not realise that
juvenile obesity but also helps control excessive growth rates
too much of any one of these nutrients can be harmful.
and is a valuable practical step you can take to improve the
When it comes to nutrition, more is not better!
long-term health of your clients' puppies. Limiting food
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
201
10
Canine and feline nutrition
Calcium content
 It is the absolute level of calcium and the calcium:phospho-
rus (Ca:P) ratio that influences skeletal development. One
study showed that young giant-breed puppies fed a food con-
taining excess calcium (3.3% dry matter basis, DMB) with a
phosphorus level that was either normal (0.9% DMB) or high
(3.3% DMB to maintain the correct Ca:P ratio) had a
significantly increased  incidence of developmental bone
disease. So we cannot just increase the phosphorus to make
up for the fact that the calcium is too high.
It was postulated that switching from a growth to an adult food
earlier than normally advised might help protect puppies from
excess calcium intake, since the adult food would contain a
lower level of calcium and should therefore lead to a reduced
calcium intake. However, the puppy must consume a greater
volume of the lower-energy adult food in order to meet its
higher calorie needs. This means that ultimately the puppy
consumes a greater amount of calcium when eating the adult
food. This reinforces the fact that puppies are not small versions
of adult dogs: they have unique nutritional needs that can only
be satisfied by feeding a balanced growth food.
 n  ss  n s n
will further increase calcium intake. Two level teaspoons of a
Fig. 10.1 Estimation of body condition score
typical calcium supplement added to a growth food for a 15-
week-old, 15 kg puppy would more than double the daily
intake (while avoiding deficiencies) to maintain lean body
calcium intake. This would take the total calcium intake to a
condition will not impede a dog's ultimate genetic potential.
level much higher than has been shown to significantly
It will reduce food intake, faecal output and obesity and also
increase the risk of developmental skeletal disease.
lessen the risk of skeletal disease.
Studies demonstrate the safety and adequacy of 1.1% calcium
(DMB) in the food. The Association of American Feed Control
Officials (AAFCO) minimum recommended level of calcium
Protein content
is 1% DMB and this should be with no supplementation,
especially for at-risk puppies.
the developing skeleton. However, any protein in excess of
Other nutrients
what is needed for growth may be converted to energy and so
may increase growth rate. Protein deficiency has been shown
● Vitamin C has been recommended in the prevention
to be harmful. The minimum adequate level of dietary
and treatment of several skeletal diseases. However, the
 protein will depend upon the protein's:
relationship between vitamin C and disorders such as
OCD and CHD has not been proved. Vitamin C
● Digestibility
(L-ascorbic acid) is required for the biosynthesis of
collagen, a major component of ligaments and bones.
● Amino-acid profile
However, a study found that feeding puppies growth
diets totally devoid of vitamin C caused no skeletal
● Ratio of essential amino acids
problems and did not affect growth. There are no
known requirements for dietary Vitamin C in the dog.
●Bioavailability.
● Vitamin D metabolites regulate calcium
A growth food should contain at least 22% protein (on a dry
metabolism and therefore the skeletal development
matter basis) of high biological value. Once the puppy
of growing animals. These metabolites aid in the
reaches maturity, this level may be reduced.
absorption of calcium and phosphorus from the gut,
202
 Canine and feline nutrition
increase bone cell activity, influence endochondral
body condition. Food-limited feeding involves giving a
ossification and alter calcium excretion via the kidney.
 measured amount of food based on calculated energy
Unlike other omnivores, the dog seems to be dependent
requirements. This will have been done by the manu-
on a dietary source of vitamin D as well as that
facturer and is indicated by the feeding guide. Clinical
produced endogenously by the action of ultraviolet
monitoring of growth and adjustment of feeding
light on the skin. Commercial pet foods contain ample
amount are critical. Large- and giant-breed dogs grow
vitamin D, making vitamin D deficiency (rickets) very
rapidly and thus have steep growth curves. Their
rare. Excess vitamin D can cause hypercalcaemia,
intake should be monitored closely and will have to be
hyperphosphataemia, anorexia, polydipsia, polyuria,
adjusted more frequently than for dogs of smaller
vomiting, muscle weakness, soft tissue mineralization
breeds. These 'at risk' breeds should be weighed,
and lameness. Vitamin D supplementation should be
evaluated and have their feeding amount adjusted
avoided in growing dogs since it may disturb normal
every 2 weeks. This is still an uncommon approach to
skeletal development because of increased calcium
feeding many puppies but a trained veterinary nurse
and phosphorus absorption.
can, through education and support, explain the
benefits of this method to their clients.
● The trace minerals copper and zinc are involved in
normal skeletal development. In dogs, bone copper
Regardless of a food's nutrient profile and how it is fed, the ulti-
levels are not influenced by dietary supplementation.
Long-term studies of the effects of dietary zinc on canine
 d    ao a d  p 
growth have shown no significant clinical influence on
nutritional risk factors that can affect skeletal development is to
skeletal development. So, even though these minerals
assess body condition and adjust the amount fed to ensure lean,
are required for normal skeletal development, their exact
healthy growth. The ideal BCs of a growing puppy is repre-
role in the dog has yet to be determined.
sented by a score of 3 (Fig 10.1). The ribs are palpable with a
thin layer of fat between the skin and the bone. The bony
prominences are easily felt, with a slight amount of overlying
Feeding techniques
fat. Animals over 6 months of age should have a pronounced
There are three basic methods for feeding growing puppies:
abdominal tuck when viewed from the side and a well-propor-
tioned lumbar waist when viewed from above.
● Free-choice feeding is an effortless way to feed
growing puppies. Frequent trips to the always-full food
Nutritional management alone will not completely control
bowl may help to limit boredom. Timid or unthrifty
developmental diseases. However, skeletal diseases can be
animals have less competition when eating, as they
influenced during growth by feeding technique and nutrient
can choose to feed at quieter times. However,
profile. Dietary deficiencies are of minimal concern now that
free-choice feeding has been shown to encourage
overeating, which increases the risk of developmental
for young, growing dogs. The potential harm is in overnutri-
bone diseases. Therefore free-choice feeding methods
tion from excess consumption and oversupplementation.
n  s ,  r  a
have reached skeletal maturity (12-18 months of age,
or at least 80% of their adult weight and height).
Kittens
● Time-limited feeding can be used for most breeds.
Growth problems in kittens resulting from unsuitable nutri-
The food is only available for a set period two or three
tion are very rare. Veterinary surgeons will sometimes see
times daily, leading to a reduced intake in most breeds.
kittens with growth problems that have been fed on very
This slightly reduced intake results in slower growth
       s 
rates but does not diminish the adult size achieved.
made diets, especially 'all meat' diets and diets high in liver.
Close attention should still be paid to the total
amount of food consumed, since certain individuals
All-meat diets are very high in phosphorus and very low in
二
(very greedy feeders) are still able to consume large
calcium. This mineral imbalance can upset the development of
amounts of food during this limited time period. If
the skeleton and cause very thin, weak bones. The kittens may
this method is chosen, it is recommended to allow
develop bone fractures after very minimal trauma, e.g. being
three 5-10 minute feeding periods for the first month
dropped. Alteration of the diet to a more suitable balanced
after weaning, reducing to two per day after that.
 growth food can reverse the problem if caught early enough.
● Food-limited feeding is the method of choice for
Diets that are very high in liver are also very high in vitamin
feeding puppies to maintain optimum growth rate and
A. An excessive intake of vitamin A can cause abnormal bone
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
203
10
Canine and feline nutrition
 n  s n n   n 
less smell, again aiding litter training - since many cat
spine or joints. This condition is very painful and difficult to
owners keep the litter tray in the kitchen, any advice
reverse even after the feeding is corrected.
you can give to help reduce unpleasant smells will be
appreciated
      s   
quality, complete, balanced kitten food. Supplementation
● The product should contain an increased level of
with vitamin or mineral tablets and powders is unnecessary
 protein, since more protein is needed during growth
and could be harmful. Home-prepared diets for kittens are
often unbalanced, containing very high levels of fat, protein
● The product should be high in energy (fat), since this
and salt. They are best avoided.
means that the kitten can consume all the calories
needed in a smaller amount of food - remember, a
The following points should be taken into consideration
kitten's stomach is very small and so large volume
when recommending a growth food for kittens:
foods should be avoided
● The product chosen should be complete and balanced
● The product should produce naturally acidic urine;
for growth. All-purpose foods that claim to be suitable
this has been shown to help reduce the incidence of
for pregnant and lactating queens, kittens, adult cats
bladder problems in cats. The natural urine pH for cats
and senior cats should be avoided, since these different
is 6.2-6.4
life-stages have differing nutritional requirements
● Milk should be avoided. Kittens do not need cow's
● A fixed-formula product will reduce the incidence of
milk and in fact lack the enzyme needed to digest the
gut upsets, including diarrhoea; this will make litter
milk sugar (lactose). Giving milk to a kitten can cause
training the kitten much easier
diarrhoea and will also upset the balance of the diet,
since the milk also contains protein, fat and calcium.
● A highly digestible product (made from high-quality
Kittens should be provided with an ample supply of
ingredients) will result in smaller, firmer stools with
fresh, clean drinking water.
considered for breeding. This is an important point, since
1
often poor nutritional status prior to mating is only noticed
once the puppies are born. Breeding from overweight bitches
Talnc
should be avoided since it has been shown that these dogs are
at a greater risk of insufficient milk production as well as
.actation
having an increased risk of difficulties giving birth. Breeding
from thin animals should not be encouraged either as the
strains of pregnancy and lactation can cause health problems
The aims of a good feeding programme during pregnancy and
for the already weak dog or cat. Bitches tend to have a
lactation are to reduce the number of matings needed to
reduced appetite around the time they are in oestrus and it is
achieve pregnancy, i.e. to maximize conception rate and
advisable to feed small frequent meals at this time or even to
n  sd  p s l  an 
withhold food for the time immediately before and after
per litter. Good nutrition is also needed to maximize the growth
mating.
rate of the newly born puppies and kittens and to ensure a
healthy immune system in the early days of life (see Ch. 17).
The pregnant and lactating bitch
Many of your clients seeking advice will be breeding from
their pet dogs for the first time. These inexperienced hobby
Gestation in the bitch lasts on average for 63 days and is typ-
breeders will benefit from time spent giving sound nutritional
ically divided into three 21-day 'trimesters'. Adequately fed
advice and help with product selection. Serious breeders often
bitches will gain about 15-25% additional body weight
hold very strong opinions regarding feeding programmes for
between mating and whelping. After whelping the bitch
breeding dogs and raising puppies and so it may be a chal-
should weigh no more about 5-10% more than the pre-breed-
lenge to alter their preconceptions.
          n
development of the mammary tissue. In the first 40 days of
As a general rule, only healthy adult dogs and cats in a good
pregnancy the foetuses only gain about 5% of their final birth
nutritional state, i.e. neither too fat nor too thin, should be
weight. This means that during the first two-thirds of preg-
204
 Canine and feline nutrition
just in the last 3 weeks. Food intake often decreases just prior
to whelping and many bitches become totally anorexic. This
may be a sign that whelping is imminent.
weight
100-
birth
Protein intake in pregnancy
50
ntage
 Just as the energy requirement of the pregnant bitch increases
ce
with the developing foetuses, so does the protein require-
a
ment (Table 10.6). Foods for dogs in late gestation should
101520253035404550556065
contain increased levels of protein and reduced levels of fibre.
This can be achieved by switching to a ration formulated
Days
for growth. A food containing 20-25% crude protein on a
dry-matter basis has been recommended. Protein deficiency
Fig. 10.2 Increase in weight of foetat puppies with time during
during pregnancy may decrease the birthweight of the
 gestation
 puppies and decrease their ability to survive.
nancy the energy requirements of the pregnant bitch are no
different from those of the non-pregnant bitch. However,
Carbohydrate intake in pregnancy
after day 40 the weight of the foetuses increases dramatically
and energy intake should increase correspondingly during
Studies have shown that feeding a carbohydrate-free diet to
week 5 to reach a peak between weeks 6 and 8 (Fig 10.2).
 pregnant bitches dramatically decreases the rate of survival of
the puppies, as well as causing weight loss in the bitch. This
Energy intake in pregnancy
is because the developing foetus obtains more than 50% of its
 energy from glucose. Bitches should have at least 20% of the
This reaches about 30% above adult maintenance for bitches
      d a
with small litters but may reach as high as 60% above
many commercial canned dog foods contain almost no car-
maintenance if the litter size is large (Table 10.6). It may be
bohydrate. Inexperienced owners may choose to feed these
physically difficult for the bitch to eat sufficient calories in
foods, since their labels often indicate they are suitable for
the final days, since the abdomen will be filled with the large
growth, pregnancy and lactation.
uterus containing the puppies. This means it is vital to slowly
change the diet for a pregnant bitch so that by the last third
of pregnancy, i.e. the last 3 weeks, she is eating a growth
Calcium and phosphorus intake in
ration. It is important to remember that large-breed puppy
pregnancy
foods are not suitable for pregnant and lactating bitches since
they are restricted in both fat (energy) and calcium. These
 In the last 35 days of pregnancy the requirement for calcium
two nutrients are needed in higher amounts in the pregnant
and phosphorus increase by 60%. This is because the skele-
bitch, regardless of breed size. Giant breeds may sometimes
tons of the puppies are developing and need calcium and
need a higher-energy food throughout pregnancy and not
phosphorus to form properly. Excessive intake of calcium at
this time can, however, be detrimental since it can upset the
Table 10.6 Target nutritional profile for pregnancy
delicate balance that controls calcium and phosphorus levels.
 It is recommended that the calcium intake during pregnancy
and lactation
is between 0.75% and 1.5% on a dry-matter basis.
Nutrient
Recommended level
First 6 weeks
Last 3 weeks of pregnancy
of pregnancy
and during lactation *
Lactation
Energy (kcal/g)
3.5-4.5
4-5
Optimum milk production depends on several key factors,
Protein (%)
22-32
25-35
including:
Fat (%)
10-25
> 18
Carbohydrate (%)
> 23
> 23
● Breeding from a bitch in good physical condition
Phosphorus (%)
0.6-1.3
0.7-1.3
Calcium (%)
0.75-1.5
1.0-1.7
● Good nutrition during pregnancy
* Large-breed bitches may need this type of diet throughout pregnancy and
lactation
● Good nutrition during lactation.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
205
10
Canine and feline nutrition
During lactation the nutritional requirements are directly
The dietary recommendation for pregnant and lactating
related to the amount of milk the bitch has to produce, which
bitches is:
in turn depends on the number of puppies in the litter (Table
10.6). Lactation puts the bitch under tremendous nutritional
● Complete adult food for the first 6 weeks of pregnancy
strain, more so than at any other stage of her life. The bitch
 must produce a huge amount of milk, since her puppies have
● Complete puppy food for the final 3 weeks of
to double their birthweight in the first 9 days of life. A
pregnancy and throughout lactation
German shepherd bitch with six puppies can produce up to
2 1 of milk per day. At peak lactation the bitch produces milk
● Complete puppy food may be required by giant-breed
at a rate similar to that of a dairy cow. Bitch's milk is very
 bitches, e.g. Great Danes, during the entire pregnancy
rich, containing more than twice the fat and protein of cow's
and lactation
milk. This very nutrient-dense milk is needed to support such
rapid growth rate in the puppies.
juuard ot pay aq iou pinous spoog paaq-asiei Addnd o
or lactating bitches since they are too low in both
 s a a  pad a sn r
energy and calcium.
remind owners of lactating bitches to provide clean, fresh
drinking water at all times - a 35 kg bitch at peak lactation
may need up to 6 1 of water per day.
Feeding adult dogs
Overeating results in the extra calories being converted to fat
and then the fat is laid down in the body tissues. These extra
and
 cats
calories can be from treats and titbits given by the owner or
simply by giving too much of the pet's usual food. The way
in which the pet is fed also has an influence on whether or
Obesity-prone dogs and cats
 not it gains weight. It has been shown that regular flavour
rotation can increase the risk of obesity in cats. Pets that are
Obesity is the most common nutritional disease in the
fed on an 'ad lib' basis are also at a greater risk of weight gain.
Western world in both pets and their owners. A staggering
50% of dogs and cats in the UK are considered to be above
Other factors that increase the risk of a pet becoming over-
their ideal weight. This means that every other dog and cat
weight include:
owner you speak to in your practice will have a pet that
might benefit from a weight-management product. When
● Breed - certain pure-bred dogs seem to be more
discussing weight control it should be remembered that
prone to becoming overweight than crossbreed dogs
many owners might feel guilty that their pet has become
(Box 10.1); however, pedigree cats are less likely to
overweight. You are as much counselling them as giving
 develop obesity than crossbreed 'moggie' cats
nutritional advice for their pet.
Age - older dogs tend to be less active and, if their
True obesity, where the pet is more than 15% over the ideal
feeding level is maintained, they will gain weight
body weight, is considered to be a clinical condition and
requires careful weight reduction under the guidance of a vet-
erinary surgeon. This is important, since severe obesity can con-
Box 10.1 Dog breeds that are commonly
tribute to many other clinical conditions that would require
prone to obesity
veterinary attention. Also, in a few rare cases the weight gain
may be due not to the accumulation of fat but to pregnancy.
 Labrador retriever
fluid retention, the growth of a tumour or other serious health
● Cairn terrier
 problems, which are best dealt with by a veterinary surgeon.
· Cocker spaniel
Shetland sheepdog
The causes and risks of
·Beagle
excessive weight gain
●King Charles spaniel
Basset hound
The cause of weight gain is essentially very simple -a pet is
given more calories to eat on a daily basis than it requires.
Long-haired dachshund
206
 Canine and feline nutrition
● Sex - neutered dogs and cats require fewer calories
record it. Unfortunately, very few actually do. You should
than entire animals so to prevent weight gain the
encourage all your clients to keep a regular check on their
energy intake for both dogs and cat should be reduced
d       a si h  ia a
by about 15% after neutering: 'light' products should
weight-check service.
be fed to all neutered pets
Once you have determined the pet's weight, you can then
● Lifestyle - pets with inactive owners often become
assess the degree of obesity. Breed weight charts are available
overweight as a result of physical inactivity; many cats
that show the ideal weight ranges for all the popular breeds
are kept indoors, never going out, and so may gain
of both dog and cat. Sometimes, despite being within the
weight, especially if fed on an 'ad lib' basis
ideal breed range, you may feel that the pet is in fact over-
weight. This is due to individual variation in shape and size.
● Body condition during growth - it has been
Other methods should then be used to determine if a weight
shown that puppies and kittens that are allowed to
 management product is required. These include:
become overweight during growth are always more
prone to becoming overweight adults. This is because,
● Feeling along the pet's ribs - you should be able to feel
when an immature animal overeats, the additional
(but not see) the ribs with light fingertip pressure; if
calories not only cause an increase in the size of the fat
you cannot feel the ribs then they are covered by a
cells but also an increase in their number - fat cell
layer of fat and the pet is overweight
hyperplasia. This means that the pet now has more fat
cells that when it was born, resulting in a greater risk
· Looking down on the pet from above - dogs should
of becoming overweight.
have a definite waist (an hourglass shape) when
viewed from above. If, instead, the dog resembles a
You may also find that clients seeking nutritional advice for
coffee table, then there is too much fat laid down over
overweight pets have a similar problem themselves. This
the lumbar region
requires tactful handling and careful choice of words. It is
best to avoid the word 'obese', since many people find this
● Cats often lay down excess fat in their inguinal region
(between the back legs) rather than over their backs;
call the pet 'heavy' or 'over the ideal body weight' instead.
than walks
Excessive deposition of body fat is damaging to both the
quality and length of the pet's life. Overweight dogs and
● You may notice that the dog's collar has recently been
cats are at a greater risk of developing many conditions
let out a notch or two. This is often a telltale sign of
(B0x 10.2).
weighit gain
To determine how overweight a dog or cat actually is requires
● Keep a regular record of the pet's waist or chest
careful observation or questioning of the owner. Ideally, all
measurement - this is especially useful if a calorie-
pet owners should know what their pet's ideal weight is and
be encouraged to weigh their pets at least every month and
owner to check their pet's progress.
Box 10. 2 Common disorders in
Feeding regime
overweight dogs and cats
 Once you have convinced a client that their pet requires a
●Heart disease
weight-management product, you will need to explain the
●High blood pressure
key features of an ideal ‘low-calorie' pet food. Essentially, the
● Constipation
concept is very simple: providing fewer calories on a daily
●Joint disease
basis than the pet requires leads to utilization of the stored
body fat to provide the additional energy needed, and conse-
Diabetes
quently weight loss.
●Liver disease (cats)
Breathing problems
         s 
 Exercise intolerance
weight will often ask you if simply feeding less of the pet's
usual food will produce the desired weight loss. This
Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD)
 approach is usually unsuccessful because:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
207
10
Canine and feline nutrition
● Most commercial pet foods contain high levels of fat;
● Fibre - research scientists have proved the value of
fat is very easily digested and so high fat foods tend to
fibre as a replacement for fat in reduced-calorie pet
support weight retention, even if fewer calories are fed
foods. Fibre provides bulk and so a satisfying feeling
of fullness, while contributing few calories (since the
● The pet will be getting a much lower volume of food
fibre remains within the gut and is not digested or
than it has beenn used to, which often leads to it
absorbed). Fibre has an added benefit in that its
seeking out food or begging; many owners will give up
presence within the gut limits the absorption of other
if they think their pet is suffering hunger
nutrients, including protein, fat and carbohydrate. The
concept of high-fibre weight-loss diets for people too is
● Remember, if you feed half the usual amount of food
well known and so many customers will understand
then not only is the pet getting half the calories but
this principle.
also half the protein, vitamins and minerals too; this
may lead to deficiencies if a reduced amount is fed for
Many pet foods claim to be higher in fibre and lower in calories.
a long period of time.
It should be noted that, to achieve weight loss or adequate pre-
vention of weight gain, the fibre levels need to be significantly
Pet food manufacturers decrease the calorie content of a pet
higher than is usual in commercial pet foods. Most commercial
food by reducing the fat content of the food. The fat needs to
pet foods contain around 1-2% crude fibre. It should be noted
be replaced by another, less energy-dense nutrient (remember
that adult dogs and cats that simply need to lose weight should
that fat provides more than twice the calories per gram than
not be fed a low-protein food. They still have the same protein
either protein or carbohydrate). There is much debate among
requirement as other adult dogs and cats. It is simply their
pet food manufacturers as to the best method of reducing the
energy (fat) intake that needs to be controlled.
energy content of the food. There are several different
methods widely used. The fat can be replaced with:
Recent research has shown the benefit of supplement-
ing lower-calorie foods with the vitamin-like substance
● Air - used to fill out the kibble of food and so make
L-carnitine. The key features of an ideal controlled calorie
the volume of food appear larger. The owner thinks
food are shown in Table 10.7.
that a large meal is given and that the pet will not
therefore feel hungry. However, this air is quickly
Table 10.7 Nutrient profile of the ideal
removed once the food is eaten and so does not
controlled-calorie pet food
 maintain a feeling of fullness. Many dogs on this type
of reduced calorie food show signs of hunger and
Nutrient
Level
begin begging
Energy
Reduced
Fat
Reduced
● Water - has a similar short-acting effect to fll the pet
Fibre
Increased
up and make the meal size appear larger; again the gut
 Protein
As adult maintenance
quickly absorbs the water and so little satiety is
L-carnitine
Supplemented
achieved
Box 10.3 Common disorders in older
dogs and cats
and
· Cancer
●Heart disease
You will often be asked for dietary advice regarding the
Kidney disease
optimum nutrition of the seemingly healthy older dog and
●Liver disease
cat. If at any stage you feel that the pet may have an illness,
● Constipation
it is best to suggest that the client consults the veterinary
●Joint disease
surgeon, rather than attempting to make a feeding recom-
●Obesity
mendation.
●  Impaired hearing
 Impaired vision 
Senior individuals represent a significant, and increasing.
proportion of both the canine and feline populations.
 Dental disease
Improvements in health care and nutrition have extended
 Behavioural changes
208
 Canine and feline nutrition
the average lifespan for pets, as they have for humans.
a veterinary surgeon for a gradual weight-reduction pro-
 on Aq paumo she pue sop e po p-auo Aiexdy
 gramme. If the dog is just a little overweight you may recom-
clients will fall into the senior life stage, which is more than 
 mend a reduced-calorie food until optimum body weight is
7 years of age. These individuals are at a much greater risk of
achieved and then switch to a senior food.
developing many disorders (Box 10.3) but, with appropriate
dietary management and veterinary health care, the onset of
such disorders can be delayed or even prevented. Most pet
Nutritional need
owners pay particular attention to quality as well as quantity
of life for their pets and all you can do to help them in this
It is important to remember that we can not make a single
will be much appreciated.
to carefully monitor food intake in very old dogs, since in
very old people it is known that low food intake increases the
Feeding the healthy older dog
risk of vitamin and mineral deficiencies. Feeding an clder dog
smaller meals more frequently increases nutrient utilization
We have increasing evidence that small-breed dogs live
and may improve food intake.
significantly longer than large- and giant-breed dogs. One
the age of 17 years or more. We can consider a dog as being
Canned or dry?
older around the age it reaches half its life expectancy. A
change of diet would thus be considered around the age of 5
Most dogs in the UK are fed a combination of canned and dry
s nog see / poe pue sop paan-nu pue -srp 1o
   s o  (   oo
dogs.
older dogs should have softer foods, but this can add to the
problem of dental disease. Because of the increased incidence
of dental disease in older dogs a complete dry food is
Nutritional assessment
recommended, together with regular home care, e.g. tooth-
brushing. If the dog is used to a canned-only diet, gradual
 In view of the wide variation of the older dog population,
introduction of the dry product can usually be achieved by
 nutritional management should be tailored to the individual
 using it as if it were a mixer and slowly reducing the amount
dog. A good evaluation of the animal must be obtained to
of canned food offered.
rule out possible risk factors such as obesity, malnutrition and
underlying or hidden diseases. The nutritional status of a dog
can be evaluated through a dietary history and assessment of
Fixed formulation
body condition. This is best done by the veterinary surgeon,
but a few simple questions regarding the type of food cur-
The incidence of gut upsets increases with age, since dogs
rently being fed will help you in choosing the most suitable
become more susceptible to changes in nutrient intake. A
product for the pet.
fixed-formula food can help reduce the occurrence of gut
upsets including vomiting, diarrhoea and loose stools.
A good diet history should include:
● Brand name of the food
Protein requirements
● Quantity fed
Numerous factors may affect the percentage of protein
required in the diet; for example, protein digestibility, amino
● Information about the giving of treats and titbits,
acid profile, caloric density of the food and health status of
including home-made foods.
the dog have to be considered. The protein requirements of
elderly dogs are controversial, and the same debate goes on in
Body condition scoring (Fig 10.l) can be very useful in
humans.
certain individuals that, although within the breed standard
for weight, are actually overweight because of their particular
body conformation. Many of your clients will try to tell you
be broken down and removed from the body. Animals cannot
that their dog is 'big-boned'! If you run your hand down the
store this extra protein for later use. The process of breaking
side of the chest and cannot feel the ribs or if, when viewed
down this extra protein occurs in the liver, and urea is pro-
from above, the dog does not have an obvious waist, then the
duced. Urea is toxic and must be removed from the body via
dog is overweight. Any pet that is obese, i.e. more than 15%
B     s     
over the optimum weight for the breed, should be referred to
      d n sq  h as
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  209
10
Canine and feline nutrition
Table 10.8 Recommended levels of key nutrients for
diet can help to correct this, so a higher-fibre diet (3-7% DM)
healthy senior dogs
may be preferred in older dogs.
Nutrient
Recommended amount (%DMB)
Calcium and phosphorus
Protein
18-20
Fat
10-20
Fibre
3-7
older people is not common in dogs. Most fractures in dogs
are due to trauma and are not age-related. Many people think
Calcium
0.6
Phosphorus
0.5
that, because older people are recommended to take addi
So dium
tional calcium to help prevent thinning of the bones, the
0.2-0.35
same must be true for dogs. In fact there is no special need for
extra calcium or vitamin D, in older dogs provided a bal-
by reducing the amount of protein the dog has to deal with
anced diet is fed. However, because of possibly decreased
each day. This does not mean that older dogs should be fed a
kidney function and the high chance of kidney disease, older
low-protein diet, just one containing controlled levels of
 dogs should be fed a food containing a low level of phospho-
high-quality protein.
rus (around 0.5%; Table 10.8).
Protein is also a source of the mineral phosphorus. It has been
discovered that, in dogs with kidney disease, a reduced intake
Sodium
of phosphorus can help slow down the rate at which kidney
function gets worse. Therefore, a controlled protein intake
A dog's requirement for sodium is not well understood. It is
is beneficial. A diet containing 18-20% protein (DMB) of
widely assumed that animals fed a generous (often excessive)
good quality and digestibility will provide sufficient protein
dietary sodium intake can be regarded as having a 'normal
(Table 10.8).
intake'. When switched to a low-sodium diet, healthy dogs
are able to maintain normal blood sodium levels by decreas
ing faecal and urinary sodium losses accordingly. There is no
Fat
 nutritional need for the levels of sodium found in some pet
foods today, and the reasons for using salt in canine diets are
Fat improves palatability, enhances the absorption of fat-
badly founded, i.e. it is added as a cheap palatability
soluble vitamins and provides essential fatty acids. A relatively
enhancer and not to serve any true nutritional need.
middle-aged dogs. Later in life, however, old dogs show a ten-
The incidence of heart disease is relatively high in older dogs.
dency to lose weight. A good balance should be maintained
Hypertension in dogs may be more common than would be
between prevention of obesity and providing enough calories.
As a general guide, the diet for an older dog should contain a
ssd ona  a so ass  p s
minimum of 10% (DMB) fat, with a maximum of 20% DMB.
and heart disease may benefit from a food with a controlled
sodium content. An older dog should not receive more than
Recently, the question of the essentialness of omega-3 fatty
0.2-0.35% sodium DMB.
acids in dogs has received more attention. Omega-3 fatty
acids have proven beneficial effects, affecting the body's
immune response. The absolute fat content and also the
Vitamin requirements
   0  o   0- 0 9-
obtain adequate levels in the tissues. The debate about the
Dogs receiving a complete and balanced commercial pet food
best level of these fatty acids continues and currently we have
are unlikely to become deficient in any vitamin. Home-made
no proven ‘best' level. However, the diet for a heaithy older
diets may be low in vitamins if not supplemented. Since
dog should contain a high level of essential fatty acids to help
many older dogs drink more water (because of poor kidney
improve and maintain good skin and coat condition.
function) they will lose more of the water-soluble vitamins in
their urine. The diet for a healthy older dog should therefore
be supplemented with B vitamins.
Fibre
Constipation is probably the most common digestive abnor
zinc
mality seen in older dogs. This may be partly due to a reduc.
tion in the amount of exercise given to older dogs, since
Zinc is an essential part of many substances in the body and
exercise stimulates the gut. Increasing the fibre content of the
zinc supplementation has been associated with enhanced
210
 Canine and feline nutrition
immune response. One study showed that levels of zinc and
than a dog's because cats must also use some of this protein
   o s    s   hs 
 for the production of energy. As cats get older this conversion
indicate a decrease in the availability of zinc or an increase in
 of protein to energy becomes much less efficient and often
losses, resulting in higher nutritional needs. Low levels of 
 leads to weight loss and muscle wastage. It is not possible to
zinc have been shown to affect the condition of the skin and
 reduce the protein intake for healthy older cats to the same
coat as well as the body's ability to fight infection and heal
degree as we can with dogs. A diet containing 30-40%
wounds. Additional zinc is therefore beneficial in the food for
 protein (DMB) of good quality and digestibility will provide
all ageing dogs.
sufficient protein.
Water
Fibre
Many older dogs need to drink more because of kidney or
Constipation is very common in older cats because of a
liver disease. A plentiful supply of fresh, clean drinking water
reduction in general activity with increasing age. Older dogs
should always be available. This is especially important in the
can have their activity level increased with relative ease by
summer and during long car journeys.
the owner taking the dog for more frequent walks. However,
it is very difficult to persuade an older cat to exercise more. A
higher fibre level can help to reduce the risk of constipation
Feeding the healthy older cat
developing. Fibre also binds with calcium to reduce the
absorption of this mineral. This is beneficial in older cats,
A change of diet should be considered around the age of 7 for
which are at a greater risk of developing calcium oxalate
all breeds of cat. As with older dogs, we must treat each older
bladder disease.
      i   
score are also useful aids to determine the cat's current phys-
ical condition.
Calcium and phosphorus
In contrast to the situation in older dogs, obesity is much less
Calcium intake should be controlled to help reduce the
common in older cats. Many older cats, in fact, go thin. This
occurrence of bladder problems caused by calcium oxalate
is because cats are less well able to digest their food as they
crystals and stones. A reduced intake of phosphorus is also
age. A highly digestible diet is therefore recommended and
very important in the diet of older cats because of the very
this can be achieved by feeding a diet with high-quality
high incidence of kidney disease. For older cats, a food with
ingredients.
relatively low levels of phosphorus (around 0.7%) and correct
calcium to phosphorus ratio is recommended.
Canned or dry?
Feline lower urinary tract disease
Most cats in the UK are fed canned cat food. Many of your
  n    o    ss
   n     
 dry food because of dental disease, which is very common in
 tion, pain on attempting to pass urine and blood in the urine
old cats - many old cats have no teeth left at all. Surprisingly.
(cystitis). All cats may be affected but it is more common in
cats tolerate dry food very well, even when they have no
overweight, inactive cats, especially those living indoors
teeth left, and many older cats prefer dry food. Some com-
completely. FLUTD has many causes but the formation of irri-
mercial senior cat foods have been developed with a softer
tant crystals and stones in the bladder is one major cause.
kibble to make chewing easier.
Cats under the age of 7 are more at risk from developing
FLUTD due to struvite crystals (magnesium ammonium phos-
Another benefit of dry food is that, because of the higher
phate). These crystals form best in alkaline urine and so
calorie content, smaller meals are needed. This is of benefit to
all foods for cats under the age of 7 years should be designed
older cats who do not like to eat very large meals.
acidic urine (pH 6.2-6.4). However, the incidence of struvite
bladder disease decreases with increasing age. Cats over
Protein requirements
the age of 7 years are at a greater risk of FLUTD due to
calcium oxalate crystals and stones. These oxalate
Unlike dogs, cats are obligate carnivores. This means that
crystals form better in more acidic urine and so senior
  d  n n as  n 
 cat foods should be designed to produce less acidic urine
(pH 6.4-6.6).
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
211
10
Canine and feline nutrition
Water
Recommended reading
Many older cats need to drink more because of the likelihood
Agar S 2001 Small animal nutrition. Butterworth-Heinemann,
of kidney or liver disease. A plentiful supply of fresh, clean 
Oxford
drinking water should always be available. Since many older
cats spend long periods of time asleep, often upstairs, it can
Text written especially for veterinary nurses and covers all aspects
be useful to suggest that your clients provide at least one
of the syllabus as well as providing information for work in
practice.
Burger I (ed.) 1993 The Waltham book of companion animal
nutrition. Pergamon Press, Oxford
Bibliography
Deats with the needs of companion animals in depth.
Hand M S, Thatcher C D, Remillard R L, Roudebush P 2000
Small animal clinical nutrition, 4fh edn. Mark Moris Institute,
Cooper B, Lane D R 2003 Veterinary nursing 3rd edn. Butterworth-
Topeka, KA
Heinemann, Oxford
One chapter designed to cover the normal nutritional requirements
of a range of companion animats.
212
 Canine and feline nutrition
11
Clinical nutrition
Alison Jones
Key Points
● Certain disease conditions change the animal's nutrient
● The diet for each of these disease conditions must still
requirement and are described as nutrient-sensitive
provide the correct balance of the essential nutrients.
diseases.
● Part of the treatment of these diseases involves dietary
 management or clinical nutrition.
Introduction
Clinical nutrition is an area in which veterinary nurses are
 becoming more involved and a thorough understanding of
Many disease conditions may result in an alteration in the
how diet can influence the patient's recovery is invaluable in
patient's nutrient requirement and they are described as
modern veterinary practices.
nutrient-sensitive diseases. Their treatment may be facilitated
by dietary management - known as clinical nutrition and
Dietary management is important in the following
this has gained increasing importance in recent years.
conditions:
Gastrointestinal
Bloat
disease
This acute-onset condition of the stomach is often fatal. It is
also called gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV). It commonly
affects large, deep-chested breeds, especially: great Dane,
There are many different types of gastrointestinal disease
weimaraner, St Bernard, Gordon setter, Irish setter, standard
  n     s  n 
poodle.
intestinal tract is primarily affected. They include:
The cause is unknown but risk factors include:
● Increasing age - dogs over 7 are twice as likely to succumb
Gastritis
●Obesity
 The term gastritis refers to inflammation of the stomach.
Dogs vomit readily as a protective mechanism due to their
● Body conformation, e.g. a narrow, deep chest in Irish
 natural scavenging nature. If they eat spoiled or rancid food
setters and a narrow, deep abdomen in great Danes
they are able to vomit and so prevent illness. Conversely, cats
are naturally hunters and will kill and eat fresh food. They are
● Diet has been implicated, especially high-cereal diets
therefore much less likely to eat spoiled food and so vomiting
is a much more unusual occurrence in the cat.
● Stress
Gastritis patients should have a short period of gut rest, with
● Aerophagia, i.e. swallowing air during eating
or without parenteral fluids, depending on the frequency and
severity of the vomiting. When enteral feeding recommences
● Lax gastric ligaments - large-volume, bulky, cereal-
the chosen diet should be bland, low fat and highly
based diets may predispose to this
digestible, i.e. low in fibre. Low-fat foods are recommended
because high-fat diets delay gastric emptying and so remain
● Overdrinking - may stretch the stomach ligaments
for longer in the stomach increasing the chances of the
● Postprandial exercise, i.e. exercise just after eating.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
213
11
Clinical nutrition
Dilatation precedes volvulus (twisting of the stomach).
Colitis
Following dilatation the stomach wall and muscle undergo
potentially irreversible damage due to lack of blood supply
Colitis means inflammation of the large intestine and the
Treatment of GDV involves immediate decompression and
most common clinical signs are watery diarrhoea, often con-
shock therapy. This situation is a fnue veterinary emergency.
taining blood and mucus (jelly), with excessive straining and
 often a dramatic increase in the number of motions passed
It is controversial as to whether diet affects the incidence of
each day. The affected animal may be constantly trying to
recurrence. Most experts recommend feeding a meat-based,
pass faeces, only achieving a small amount of blood-stained
canned, highly digestible diet at least three times daily.
mucus. Animals with colitis often benefit from diets contain-
Avoidance of postprandial exercise and competitive feeding
ing an increased amount of fibre. Some cases of colitis have
may also help reduce aerophagia. At-risk dogs should not be
    o p e p   
competitively fed, as this may increase the ingestion of air.
trial with a single novel protein source is recommended in
Very greedy dogs should have a large stone placed in the
cases that fail to respond to higher fibre levels alone.
feeding dish to slow down the feeding rate and some people
also advocate soaking dry food prior to feeding.
Constipation
Enteritis
 Animals are said to be constipated when too slow a passage of
faeces through the large bowel causes diffculty in passing
Enteritis means inflammation of the small intestine and the
hard, dry stools. This may be more common in older dogs
most common clinical sign is diarrhoea. Gut rest is the classic
and cats partly due to decreased physical activity. Since fibre
treatment for diarrhoea, i.e. a short (24-48-h) period of star-
increases the rate of passage of stools through the large intes
vation, during which fluids are given either orally or intra
tine, diets that contain higher levels of fibre have proven
venously, is followed by small, low-fat, highly digestible
beneficial in constipation. Many senior pet foods contain a
meals. As the diarrhoea improves the animal can be slowly
higher level of insoluble fibre in an attempt to help prevent
put back on to the normal diet (over a 5-7-day period).
constipation.
1
cise should be undertaken with caution, especially if the pet
has joint or heart disease.
Obesity is the most common form of malnutrition in pet
The aim of dietary management for obesity is to produce safe,
animals and occurs when there is an increase in body weight
effective weight loss, at the same time maintaining healthy
that is 15% over the optimum weight for the animal's breed,
levels of protein, vitamins and minerals. Many commercial
age and sex. Recent surveys suggest that as many as 40% of
low-calorie foods are available but the best effects are
dogs and 15% of cats may be clinically obese and most
achieved using balanced high-fibre, low-fat foods. The fibre
owners are totally unaware of their pet's problem
 provides bulk, which improves satiety while at the same time
reducing the energy density of the food and in some way
The diagnosis of obesity is simple, requiring no specialist equip.
 controlling the absorption of the other energy-containing
ment. To diagnose obesity simply weigh the pet and compare
nutrients.
with breed average, then palpate the area over the ribs - you
should be able to feel ribs but not see them. The presence of fat
It is important that owners are made aware that a planned
pads over the hips and tail and a pendulous abdomen (espe-
weight-loss programme is not a crash diet and that gradual
cially in cats) are also common signs of obesity.
weight-loss is safer and more effective. A large dog should
 lose no more than 3% of its body weight per week and a cat
It is important to remember, when embarking on a weight
no more than 2% each week. To achieve safe weight loss you
reduction programme for a pet, that you are treating the
should aim to provide 60% of the metabolizable energy
owner as well as the pet. You should always consider a
requirement (MER) needed to maintain optimum body
planned exercise programme as well, but any increase in exer-
weight in dogs and 70% of MER in cats.
214
 Clinical nutrition
● Zinc
Skin 
disease
● Copper.
1017
Irrespective of the nutritional cause of the disease, the skin
aller
usually only responds to nutritional imbalance in a limited
number of ways. Skin changes that often indicate nutritional
abnormality include:
To achieve a healthy-looking coat requires good overall
health and nutrition throughout the year. A period of poor
● A sparse, dry, dull, brittle coat with hairs that epilate
skin and hair condition may take several weeks or months to
easily
completely recover. For hair to regrow after shaving may take
3-4 months in a short-haired dog and up to 18 months in a
● Slow hair growth or regrowth following clipping
long-haired breed.
● Abnormal scale (seborrhoea sicca)
The skin and coat can influence nutrient requirements. Hair
length, thickness and density affect temperature regulation in
● Loss of hair, crusting and erythema
cold environments. The hair cycle is influenced by general
health status, genetics, seasons, temperature, hormones and
● Decubitus ulcers
nutrition as well as poorly understood intrinsic factors. Hair
does not grow continuously, but in cycles. Each cycle consists
● Poor wound healing
of a growing period (anagen). During which the follicle is
actively producing hair, and a resting period (telogen). During
● Loss of normal hair colour.
telogen, hair is retained in the follicle as dead hair, which is
subsequently lost. Hair growth is maximal in summer and
In healthy pets eating high-quality commercial pet foods,
minimal in winter, when up to 90% may be telogen. Illness,
deficiencies of protein, fat, carbohydrate, vitamins and min-
malnutrition and stress from reproduction may shorten
erals causing skin disease are very rare. However, nutritional
anagen considerably and force many hair follicles to enter
deficiencies may be noted when animals have been anorexic
into telogen at the same time. Since telogen hair is shed
for a period of time. Concurrent disease may reduce the
easily, malnutrition can result in a visible thinning of the hair
ability of the animal to digest, absorb or metabolize nutrients.
coat and cause a dull, lustreless hair coat through nutrient
Animals fed home-made diets are more likely to develop
deficiency.
nutritionally related skin and coat disease, since many of
these diets are not balanced.
The skin and coat account for about 30-35% of the daily
protein requirements of the healthy adult small-breed dog
Nutritional imbalance may occur when owners overfeed a
with a long coat. Nutrition is important in achieving and
single food type. This is most commonly seen in cats fed on
maintaining good skin and coat condition. Important nutri-
a liver-only diet, which contains very high levels of vitamin
ents include:
A. Imbalances may also occur from the improper use of
mineral supplementation. This can cause skin disease when
the oversupplementation of one nutrient affects the levels of
   n     
coat health. This is most commonly seen where over supple-
●Energy
 mentation of calcium gives rise to zinc deficiency.
 Fat
Genetic factors may mean that the animal is unable to absorb
         
● Fatty acids
e.g. zinc deficiency in Alaskan malamutes.
●Vitamin A
The common clinical signs of skin and coat disease are:
●Vitamin B
● Pruritus
●Vitamin D
● Seborrhoea
●Vitamin E
● Alopecia
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
11
Clinical nutrition
●Hyperkeratosis
An elimination diet trial, for up to 10 weeks, is considered the
only certain method of confirming food allergy and without
● Pyoderma
it food allergy may remain undiagnosed. However, diet trials
can present difficulties and they have been eliminated by the
● Otitis externa
use of protein hydrolysate technology. Major food allergens
are proteins with molecular weights between 10 oo0 and
● Slow hair regrowth after clipping.
70 000 daltons. Hydrolysate technology uses digestive
Animals with non-specific skin disorders should be fed a
(peptides and amino acids), reducing their antigenicity up to
high-quality, complete, balanced diet containing adequate
66 times. Hydrolysed protein components have an average
levels of fat and essential fatty acids plus good-quality, highly
molecular weight less than 6000 daltons; too small to trigger
digestible protein.
an immune reaction.
Food-allergic skin disease
Essential fatty acid deficiency
In rare cases the animal may actually be allergic to the protein
within the diet. This is true food allergy, but the term food
The epidermis depends on a supply of essential fatty acids
 a   s d   n  
(EFAs) derived either directly from the diet or via synthesis in
their pet had to a particular food as an 'allergic' reaction when
the liver and transported to the skin in the blood. EFAs have
it may have just been food intolerance. A true food allergy must
a structural function in the lipoproteins of cell membranes.
involve the pet's immune system and takes many months or
One of the most important functions of EFAs in the skin is to
even years to develop. A dog or cat that reacts to a new food the
provide an essential barrier to prevent the loss of water and
first time it is exposed to it probably has food intolerance.
other nutrients through the epidermis. Linoleic acid must be
provided in the diet of dogs and linoleic and arachidonic
Food allergy or hypersensitivity is an immunological
 acids in the diet of cats.
response to one or more dietary proteins. It is considered the
third most common skin hypersensitivity disease in dogs and
Clinically, EFA deficiency can occur in animals fed low-fat dry
the second most common in cats, accounting for up to 5% of
or semi-moist commercial foods, or patients fed special low-
all canine dermatoses and 6% of feline. The prevalence and
fat therapeutic diets. Inexpensive or poorly stored foods and
       
those with inadequate antioxidants are more likely to cause
 an EFA deficiency.
younger animals.
Signs are predominantly associated with the skin and/or
Skin changes have been described in dogs and cats with EFA
gastrointestinal tract. A high proportion of food allergies
deficiency. Skin abnormalities include:
produce skin signs, primarily non-seasonal pruritus; the other
skin signs mostly result from self-trauma. Cutaneous signs of
● Scaliness (seborrhoea sicca)
food allergy include:
● Matting of hair
● Pruritus, generalized or localized - including pedal,
perineal and facial areas
● Loss of skin elasticity
● Otitis externa
● Alopecia
● Miliary dermatitis in cats
● Dry, dull coat
● Crusting/scaling
●Hyperkeratosis
● Secondary pyoderma.
● Interdigital exudation
Studies have shown that in more than 65% of all the reported
● Otitis externa
cases dogs were allergic to one of three main foods, i.e. beef,
dairy products or wheat (or, more accurately, wheat gluten).
● Lack of hair regrowth
Similar studies in cats have found that more than 80% of
reported cases could be attributed to beef, dairy products or fish.
● Extensive hair loss.
216
 Clinical nutrition
 Fatty acid deficiency is rapidly reversible if the diet is supple-
usually healthy within 6-8 weeks. Cats with EFA deficiency
mented with EFAs. Although the deficiency may take up to
must be given pork or poultry fat as well as vegetable
6 months to develop, clinical signs often start to resolve
oils, since arachidonic acid is only found in fat of animal
within a few days of EFA supplementation and the skin is
origin.
Diabetes mellitus
Fat
 Dogs and cats with diabetes have abnormal fat metabolism.
(See also Ch. 22) The diet chosen for the diabetic patient
Many diabetic pets have increased serum levels of cholesterol
should:
and concurrent pancreatitis is a common finding. High-fat
diets cause insulin resistance and decrease the number of
● Be balanced to support long-term maintenance
insulin receptors. Therefore, high-fat diets should be avoided
in dogs and cats with diabetes mellitus.
● Help achieve and maintain normal serum glucose
levels - this is important since it has been shown that
The supplementation of the diet with omega-3 fatty acids is
good glycaemic control is important in preventing
controversial. In human diabetics there is conflicting evidence
that these are beneficial. Omega-3 fatty acid supplementation
associated with uncontrolled diabetes
has been shown to reduce the incidence of atherosclerosis,
but not without other complications to glycaemic control.
● Decrease postprandial glucose peaks
Since the risk of vascular damage is less in pets than in
humans, the inclusion of omega-3 fatty acids does not seem
● Achieve as normal as possible metabolism of
to be desirable. The fat content of the diet should be
carbohydrates, fats and proteins
restricted to less than 20% on a DMB.
● Normalize body weight
Soluble carbohydrate
● Be suitable for the senior life stage, since most cases of
diabetes in dogs and cats are diagnosed in pets over
The composition and quantity of dietary carbohydrates for the
the age of 7 years.
management of diabetes mellitus in humans is controversial.
This has also been an area of recent research in small-animal
The key nutritional factors in diabetes are energy, protein, fat
clinical nutrition but as yet absolute recommendations have
and carbohydrate, both soluble and insoluble.
not been made.
Diabetic cats should not be fed diets containing fructose.
Protein
Fructose is often found in commercial semi-moist foods, as a
humectant and as high-fructose corn syrup. Cats do not metab-
The chosen diet should contain sufficient protein to ensure
 olize fructose, causing fructose intolerance, polyuria and poten-
normal development and maintenance of body functions
tial renal damage. Some nutritionists believe that high carbo-
Diabetic dogs and cats have increased urinary losses of amino
hydrate diets may be partly responsible for the onset of diabetes
acids and this should be remembered when considering the
mellitus in cats. As a rule, soluble carbohydrates should make
optimum protein intake for the diabetic patient. A balance
up no more than 30% of the total dietary carbohydrate level.
must be achieved between providing sufficient protein to
meet daily needs and replace urinary losses whilst preventing
an excess intake that may enhance renal damage or con-
Insoluble carbohydrate
tribute to increased insulin secretion.
Dietary fibre is one of the most important nutrients to consider
in the management of diabetes mellitus in both dogs and cats.
15-25% on a dry matter basis (DMB) and more than 28%
DMB for cats. Recent advances in the management of feline
diabetes have involved feeding high-protein (50% DMB),
Food type
low-carbohydrate foods. These have been shown to increase
tissue sensitivity to insulin and reduce cholesterol, leading to
The physical presentation of the diet for dogs and cats with
improved glycaemic control.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
217
Clinical nutrition
shown that soft, moist foods (those marketed as individual
glycol). These diets are unsuitable for diabetic pets and
meal-sized portions, usually in foil packets) have a hyper
should be avoided. Providing the nutritional profile of
glycaemic effect compared to dry foods because they contain
the chosen food is within the desirable range, there is no
increased levels of simple carbohydrates (sugars) and
advantage or disadvantage in using either canned or dry
the ingredients used as humectants (such as propylene
foods.
Dental disease
tartar (dental calculus) and also gives rise to halitosis (oral mal-
 odour). Tartar formation, by providing a rough surface encour-
ages further plaque deposition. The toxins from the bacteria in
Dental disease is the most common disease affecting pet dogs
plaque, aided by the irritation caused by tartar, result in gin-
and cats. It is so widespread that it could be thought of as an
givitis (sore, red, inflamed gums that bleed). This is the begin-
epidemic. Pet owners can easily identify the signs associated
ning of periodontal disease and if this disease progresses
with dental disease, especially bad breath, but often do not
periodontitis results, in which the supporing structure of the
link these signs with dental disease.
tooth (the periodontal ligament) is damaged and ultimately
destroyed, leading to loosening, and finally loss, of the teeth.
Prevention of dental disease is an important step in helping
to keep pet dogs and cats healthy, since the presence of dental
The best way to keep teeth and gums healthy is to encourage
disease has been linked with an increased incidence of sys-
your clients to brush their pets' teeth daily. However, despite
temic diseases, including heart disease, kidney disease and
awareness that tooth-brushing is how we keep our own teeth
respiratory disorders.
clean, most pets never have their teeth brushed. This may be
due to the temperament of the pet or simply due to lack of
Dental disease begins with the accumulation of an invisible
time or motivation on the part of the owner.
substance, called pellicle, on the surface of the tooth. Pellicle
forms within a few minutes of tooth brushing and is formed
Life-stage diets are now available that help to avoid the occur-
from proteins found within saliva (Fig 11.1).
rence or recurrence of periodontal disease, by wiping away
accumulated plaque and tartar when the pet animal chews.
The natural development of pellicle encourages the deposi-
These foods are designed to allow a tooth to penetrate each
tion of plaque, which in turn becomes mineralized to form
piece of food (kibble) before the kibble splits. The fbres in
the kibble are non-randomly aligned to clean the surface
Pellicle
of the tooth as they come into contact with it; the fibres wipe
the accumulation of plaque, stain and tartar from the tooth's
surface. By reducing plaque accumulation, these dental foods
 Cral malodour
Plague
Tartar
may help to control bad breath.
Gingivitis
 Dogs and cats with severe periodontal disease require appro-
+
 priate veterinary treatment to control bacterial spread and
promote healing (see also Ch. 26). The advanced nature of
 Periodontitis
Bacteraemia
the condition, with severe inflammation and pain, means
that they cannot chew effectively on affected teeth. Attempts
at chewing might force food particles into exposed tooth
Cral pain 
sockets, causing bleeding and local irritation. If a pet has had
Dysfunction
Tooth loss
extensive treatment for severe periodontal disease the veteri
nary surgeon and the client will need to monitor the healing
Fig. 11.1 Significance of the devetopment of pellicle on the signs of
and postoperative oral pain to determine when the feeding of
periodontat disease. (Adapted from Hill's Pet Nutrition).
 an appropriate dental food can begin.
veterinary practice team. Many owners already have some
Cancer
 personal experience of cancer and they may approach cancer
in their pets with some preconceived ideas, especially with
regard to the use of chemotherapy. They may need consider-
Few diseases evoke as much emotion as cancer. A diagnosis of
able support and assistance during the initial weeks following
cancer is traumatic for both the owner and sometimes the
the diagnosis.
218
 Clinical nutrition
Common forms of cancer in dogs include mammary cancer,
the loss of body fat stores the ideal food should be high in fat.
ovarian cancer, lymphoma, skin tumours (certain breeds such as
Dietary fat should compose 25-40% of the food's dry matter.
boxers are more prone to these types of cancer) and tumours of
the spleen (haemangiosarcoma or haemangioma). Lymphoma
(also called lymphosarcoma) is a cancer of the lymphatic system.
Omega-3 fatty acids
In the most common form of lymphoma you may notice that
the dog's lymph nodes become enlarged and can be easily felt.
Dietary levels should be in excess of 5% of the food's dry
 matter and research has shown that a food high in omega-3
Cancer cachexia may occur in dogs with seemingly good nutri-
fatty acids is beneficial to the cancer patient by:
tional intake because the composition of the food is inappro.
priate for the canine cancer patient. Patients with cancer are
● Inhibiting tumour growth and cancer spread
forced to compete with the tumour for glucose and amino
acids, which are used for energy. The dog must therefore rely on
● Reducing cachexia by decreasing protein breakdown
fat as a source of calories since the tumour has a limited ability
to use this energy source. The following nutrients have been
● Enhancing immune function
found to be vital in the management of cancer.
● Reducing radiation damage to healthy cells
Carbohydrate
Protein
Dogs do not have an essential requirement for carbohydrate
in the diet. However, most dogs have a remarkable ability
Normal dogs use protein and amino acids to build muscles
    o    a 
and organ tissue and to maintain immune status. In the dog
by pet food manufacturers as a primary source of dietary
with cancer the tumour is competing for these same amino
energy.
acids. The ideal food for the canine cancer patient should
therefore be higher in protein than a normal adult mainte-
Dogs with cancer develop high levels of insulin and lactate,
nance food. This is a very unusual profle for a canine senior
as the tumour uses glucose and produces lactate. High-
food (many canine cancer patients will be in the senior stage
carbohydrate foods should be avoided in dogs with cancer
of life), which would normally be controlled in protein
   s n  n  
content. Dietary levels should be between 30% and 45% of
lactataemia. Carbohydrates should comprise less than 25% of
the food's dry matter.
the food's dry matter.
Arginine
Fat
Arginine has been found to be essential in dogs with malig-
Dogs use fat as a source of energy and to aid in the absorption
nant tumours and high levels improve both immune func-
of the fat-soluble vitamins. Canine cancer patients must rely
tion and anabolism. Dietary levels should be in excess of 2%
on fat as a source of calories, so to facilitate this and to reduce
of the food's dry matter.
Chronic renal failure
Clinical signs of renal failure include:
In renal failure the kidney is unable to excrete metabolites at
● Polyuria/polydipsia
normal plasma levels under normal fluid loading or to retain
electrolytes when the intake is normal. Chronic renal failure
●Weight loss
(CRF) is a progressive deterioration of renal function that
1
occurs throughout an animal's lifetime as part of the normal
● Inappetance
ageing process. In the majority of adult dogs and cats, some
degree of renal disease exists.
● Uraemia/azotaemia
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
219
11
Clinical nutrition
● Ulceration of oral/gastric mucosa
Renal failure causes imbalances in minerals and electrolytes
that can make the animal feel unwell:
● Vomiting
● Hypokalaemia is common in cats with CRF. This
● Dehydration
causes muscle weakness, inappetance, anaemia and
lethargy. Dietary supplementation is best but clinical
● Unkempt appearance.
cases can be treated with oral potassium gluconate and
then maintained on a diet with adequate levels of
The main problem facing the clinician is that changes do not
potassium.
occur in the blood of affected animals until 75% of nephrons
have ceased functioning, i.e. the animal has lost the equiva-
● Hyperphosphataemia can occur in CRF as a result
lent of one whole kidney and half of the other and these
of decreased ability of the damaged kidney to excrete
nephrons can never be repaired.
phosphorus and reduced renal production of active
vitamin D. This high circulating level of phosphorus
Early diagnosis of kidney disease can be made by considering
stimulates the parathyroid glands to increase secretion
urine specific gravity, daily water intake and urine chemistry.
of parathyroid hormone (PTH) leading to the
The animal with early renal problems will lose the ability to
development of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
produce the most concentrated urine when about 66% of
Excess levels of PTH have a deleterious effect on bone
 nephrons have ceased functioning. This stage is termed renal
metabolism and result in pain and osteomalacia
insufficiency and it is now that dietary intervention should
   ( g  'a , )
begin rather than leave it until the animal is uraemic and in
phosphorus levels is best attempted by dietary
renat failure.
restriction of intake; however, some cases may benefit
from oral phosphate binders if dietary restriction alone
The aim of dietary management in renal disease is to amelio-
fails to correct hyperphosphataemia within 2-4 weeks.
rate clinical signs and slow down progression of the disease.
Intestinal phosphate binders can be administered with
Correct diet for an animal with renal compromise is critical.
food at a dose rate of 60 mg/kg/day increasing to
The animal still needs a nutritionally balanced diet that pro-
150 mg/kg/day if tolerated.
vides all the nutrients required for maintenance. However, it
has been shown that, by reducing the daily intake of phos
 The ideal nutrient profle for the management of renal failure
phorus, renal deterioration can be slowed down. Moderate
is:
protein restriction can help to reduce the clinical signs caused
by uraemia but adequate protein must be included in the diet
● Controlled protein
to prevent the breakdown of lean body mass to provide
essential amino acids. It is best if the protein source for
● Controlled sodium to help prevent hypertension
animals with chronic renal failure is of very high biological
value.
● Controlled phosphorus
Dietary management is the cornerstone of the management
●Buffered
of CRF in both the dog and the cat. However, other medical
therapies can be beneficial to the overall wellbeing of the pet.
●High fat.
 There is a vast array of supportive therapy for the liver patient
Liver disease
in order to optimize regeneration, however, nutritional
support is the cornerstone of therapy. A fine balance must be
 a    so    i  
to allow regeneration, without overwhelming the metabolic
an enormous capacity to regenerate so liver disease is not
capacity of the diseased liver, which may lead to the accu-
 often diagnosed until the later stages of the disease process.
mulation of toxic metabolites. The key objectives of dietary
 In recent years significant new information has emerged con-
management are to:
cerning the metabolic changes that occur in patients with
liver disease. These studies have also found that the correct
● Maintain homeostasis
nutrition is a vital step in helping to reverse these metabolic
changes and facilitate recovery.
● Correct electrolyte disturbances
220
 Clinical nutrition
● Avoid accumulation of toxic byproducts
lead to glucose intolerance. This can be avoided by providing
sufficient calories in the form of fat.
● Support liver repair and regeneration
Fat
● Support storage and synthesis within the liver
This is the most energy-dense nutrient, providing over twice
● Prevent or reduce encephalopathy
as many calories per gram as either carbohydrate or protein.
Providing calories from fat will support protein synthesis and
● Improve the overall nutritional status of the animal.
the diet, an important fact in the liver patient, where inap-
The key nutrients of concern for the dog and cat with liver
petance is very common. Fat also provides fatty acids, the
disease are as follows:
major fuel for the liver, heart and skeletal muscles. The intes-
tinal assimilation of fat is not compromised in dogs and cats
with liver disease unless there is severe extrahepatic biliary
Protein
obstruction, which is rare. This means there is no need to
routinely restrict dietary fat in the liver patient; in fact studies
Hyperammonaemia is a common finding in dogs and cats
have shown a correlation between high-fat diets and
with liver disease because of the development of portosys-
 increased survival in dogs with hepatic insufficiency.
temic shunts and the impaired activity of the urea cycle. This
is the key metabolic abnormality that leads to hepatic
L-carnitine
     a   
The final step in the synthesis of L-carnitine occurs in the
severe classic central nervous system disturbances. Finding
liver and consequently it may be deficient in cases of liver
the correct level of protein in the diet for the liver patient
disease. This deficiency may lead to the accumulation of free
presents a nutritional dilemma. A balance must be found
fatty acids in the cytoplasm and failure of the mitochondria,
between reducing the level of protein to control hepatic
with impairment of the citric acid cycle, fatty acid oxidation
 d      
and the urea cycle. This combines to cause an increase in
protein to allow for adequate production of plasma proteins
blood ammonia levels. By supplementing the diet with addi-
and for hepatic regeneration and repair.
tional L-carnitine this deficiency is avoided and thus the fatty
acids provided from the dietary fat can be utilized as an
The current recommendation is to provide a moderate level of
energy source. Additional L-carnitine also decreases the risk of
high-quality protein containing a low level of aromatic amino
hepatic lipidosis, which is of particular concern in cats.
acids. This will allow regeneration but limit the development of
metabolic neurotoxins. Arginine is an essential amino acid for
Soluble fibre
both dogs and cats. It is needed for the synthesis of protein and
amino acids and is essential in the optimal function of the urea
This is fermented in the gastrointestinal tract to produce
short-chain fatty acids, which provide an alternative energy
been found to be beneficial by reducing blood ammonia levels
source for enterocytes, stimulate intestinal motility and
and improving nitrogen balance.
encourage bacterial proliferation and epithelial cell growth.
These all combine to result in a significant reduction in the
production and absorption of ammonia, which helps to
 reduce the degree of hepatic encephalopathy.
Energy
 Patients with liver disease have decreased glycogen stores and
Copper and zinc
develop insulin resistance through increased glucagon levels.
These metabolic abnormalities lead to the early onset of glu-
Copper toxicosis is a well recognised syndrome in Bedlington
coneogenesis. This protein catabolism can be reduced by pro
terriers, West Highland white terriers, dobermans and Skye
viding frequent small meals and by ensuring that sufficient
terriers. However, copper accumulates in the liver of all
calories are provided in the form of carbohydrate and fat.
breeds in most forms of hepatobiliary disease, especially
when a degree of cholestasis is present. The ideal diet for liver
    n    
Carbohydrate
decreases the intestinal uptake of copper and may also have a
local protective effect against copper toxicity. Adequate zinc
A very high carbohydrate intake must be avoided because
also helps to limit hepatic encephalopathy and may have an
insulin resistance commonly occurs in liver disease and can
antifibrotic effect.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
221
11
Clinical nutrition
disease or burns, further protein losses will be occurring.
Critical care of an
2-3 times depending upon the severity of the disease.
anorexic patient
Animals will need extra protein as a source of calories and to
support wound healing, maintain the immune system and
Anorexia is defined as a loss of appetite. It is important to
reverse the hypermetabolic processes. When feeding a critically
differentiate between an animal that is unable to prehend,
  in  dns o  os no hd x no 
masticate and swallow food from an animal that is anorexic
protein/100 kcal for the dog and at least 6 g protein/
because of secondary systemic disease. Many conditions
100 kcal for the cat. The total amount of both protein and calo-
cause a patient to become anorexic. These include:
ries needed will vary with the severity of the illness, e.g. a
-an aa  x  p m  n e m 
● Alteration in taste or smell, due to profuse nasal
ment (BER), while immediately post-surgery the additional
discharge, old age, etc.
calorie needs will only be around 1.25 × BER (see Ch. 10).
● Pain due to ulcers or foreign bodies, e.g. bones, needles
Animals with severe fluid loss may require supplemental
water-soluble vitamins, especially B vitamins.
● Systemic disease, e.g. renal failure
Some patients will refuse to eat voluntarily or may be to0
● Trauma, e.g. head injury, jaw fracture
severely ill or injured to accept oral feeding. The enteral route
is still preferred, since it is the most efficient and allows nutri
● Gastrointestinal tract dysfunction, e.g. intestinal
tion of the enterocytes. Failure to supply the enterocytes with
obstruction, tumour
their preferred fuel (glutamine) can result in defects in the
intestinal mucosa and bacterial translocation from the gut
● Neoplasia.
into the blood stream. If a patient refuses voluntary nutri
tion, tube feeding should be considered. Many different types
 When treating an anorexic patient consideration should be
of feeding tube are available (see Ch. 25), including:
given to fluid and electrolyte balance as well as the calorie
and protein content of the food. Water is the most important
● Naso-oesophageal tubes - simple to place and
nutrient, since two-thirds of an animal's lean body mass con-
tolerated in most animals, although problems may
sists of water and a 15% loss of body water would be fatal. An
arise if an animal sneezes or gags the tube out
 n       s a 
and by water produced from energy metabolism in the body.
● Pharyngostomy tubes - may also be associated with
but severe water loss may occur through vomiting, diarrhoea,
 gagging and local infection, but in most patients they
salivation and burns. During periods of reduced water intake
are well tolerated
or increased water loss the kidneys attempt to conserve body
 a     d  m
● Gastrostomy tubes - becoming more popular and
exceeds water intake, dehydration occurs. All dehydrated crit-
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes may
ical care patients should have their fluid deficit measured and
be placed using an endoscope. There is also a piece of
replaced as a matter of urgency via intravenous fluid therapy
equipment called an ELD applicator that allows a
(see Chs 23, 25).
gastrostomy tube to be placed without the need for an
endoscope. The main advantage of a tube placed
As well as fluid therapy, additional nutritional support is indi-
directly into the stomach is that it can be left in situ
cated if there has been recent weight loss of more than 10%
for considerably longer periods and that it allows the
or a history of anorexia for more than 3-5 days. The food
use of larger quantities of food. When feeding through
chosen for the critical patient should be high in both protein
a tube, care should be taken not to exceed the
and fat. As a general rule, if the gut works, then use it. This
maximum stomach capacity for the patient. This is
means that, apart from those patients with severe acute vom-
90 ml/kg/feed for an adult dog and 45 ml/kg/feed for a
iting, acute pancreatitis or post-surgery removal of a foreign
cat.
body oral feeding is recommended and desirable.
The diet used for tube feeding should be balanced, easily
Protein makes up 15-20% of body weight. Initially an
digested, easily assimilated and easily utilized. It should be in
a form that does not block the tube. Powders that have to be
glycogen. After the first 4 days of food deprivation, muscle
mixed with water are best avoided, especially if very small-
protein is catabolized. If this anorexic animal has malignant
bore tubes are used.
222
 Clinical nutrition
Canine urolithiasis
especially the dalmatian and Yorkshire terrier. Dogs with
liver disease are also more prone to the development of
ammonium urate bladder crystals and stones.
Common forms of canine bladder stones and crystals
include:
● Cystine - tend to form in acidic urine. Most
individuals affected with cystine urolithiasis are
● Struvite - composed of magnesium ammonium
male bulldogs. It is assumed that they form as a
phosphate (also known as triple phosphate). These
consequence of a genetic defect in kidney function.
 crystals and stones are common in puppies, bitches
and any dog with bacterial infection in the urine. Most
Dietary control is vitally important in the management of
cases of bladder stones and crystals in puppies are due
canine urolithiasis. Dietary management is useful both in the
to struvite formation. Bacterial infection is present in
short-term treatment and in the long-term prevention of
95% of all cases and causes an increase in urinary pH,
recurrence of the problem.
i.e. above 6.5 (alkaline), facilitating the formation of
struvite. One of the most important factors in
Struvite can be dissolved using a combination of drugs, includ-
preventing struvite crystals and stones is maintaining
ing antibiotics if a bacterial infection is present, and diet. This
a normal, i.e. acidic, urine with a pH of 6.2-6.4. This
is achieved by reducing the intake of the 'building blocks' of the
can be achieved by dietary management.
stone. Struvite stones are composed of magnesium, ammonium
and phosphate. Dissolution diets should therefore contain a
● Calcium oxalate - tend to form in more acidic
controlled level of the minerals magnesium and phosphorus,
urine. They are more common in male dogs over the
plus an increased level of sodium. This increased sodium level
age of 8 years and in certain breeds, especially the
encourages the dog to drink more water and produce a greater
Lhasa apso, shih tzu and Yorkshire terrier. Calcium
volume of urine, and so flushes the bladder out more fre-
oxalate stones are more likely to also occur within the
quently. The special dietary formulation also causes the forma-
kidney. Dogs that consume high amounts of oxalate in
tion of acidic urine, with a pH of about 6.0. At this level the
their diets, e.g. vegetables, tea, nuts and chocolate, are
formation of further struvite crystals is inhibited and those
at a greater risk of developing these stones. One of the
already present dissolve in the urine.
most important factors in preventing their occurrence
is reducing the calcium content of the urine and
Disease caused by calcium oxalate uroliths can only be
maintaining slightly alkaline urine. This means that
treated surgically, as these stones do not dissolve once
the dog's urine should have a pH in the range 7.1-7.7,
formed. To prevent recurrence, provide a diet that contains a
which can be achieved by dietary management.
' as sn po so a, a jo paa pao
plus one that produces more alkaline urine. The diet should
● Ammonium urate - tend to form in more acidic
contain controlled levels of both calcium and oxalate and
urine. They are more common in certain breeds of dog.
produce a urinary pH of 7.1-7.7.
Feline lower urinary
Dietary control is vitally important in the management of
FLUTD, especially in those cases caused by urolithiasis (most
tract disease
commonly struvite and calcium oxalate in the cat) and is
useful both in the short-term treatment of FLUTD and in the
long term to prevent recurrence of the problem.
Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD) is not a single
disease but a group of conditions, many of which cause
Struvite can be dissolved using a combination of drugs,
inflammation of the lower urinary tract. The most common
including antibiotics if a bacterial infection is present, and
presenting signs of FLUTD are:
dietary management. This is achieved by reducing the cat's
intake of the 'building blocks' of the stone. Since struvite
● Difficulty passing urine - dysuria
phate a diet that contains a controlled level of the minerals
● Altered frequency of urination
magnesium and phosphorus, plus an increased level of
sodium (as salt) should be fed. This increased sodium level
● Incontinence
 e ad  na     a s
volume of urine, and so flushes the bladder out more fre-
● Haematuria.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
223
11
Clinical nutrition
formation of acidic urine, with a pH of about 6.0. At this level
Recommended reading
the formation of further struvite crystals is inhibited and
 those present dissolve into the urine.
Agar S 2001 Small animal nutrition. Butterworth-Heinemann,
Oxford
Dietary management is also important in the prevention of
recurrence of FLUTD. In cases of struvite urolithiasis the diet
Written especially for veterinary nurses and covers all aspects of
should contain a controlled level of the ‘building blocks' of
the syllabus as well as providing information for work in practice.
the stone plus it should produce a naturally acidic urine
(pH 6.2-6.4). This prevention of recurrence food should not
Hand M S, Thatcher C D, Remillard R L, Roudebush P 2o00 Small
be high in sodium, as long-term high intake of salt may be
animal clinicat nutrition, 4th edn. Mark Morris Instihute, Topeka,
detrimental to health. Since obesity is a major predisposing
KA
factor in the development of FLUTD, calorie intake should be
controlled in all overweight cats.
Very detailed coverage of the subject. Good reference text.
In cases of calcium oxalate urolithiasis, feed a diet containing
Kelly N, Wills J 1996 Manual of companion animal nuirition and
controlled levels of both calcium and oxalate that produces a
feeding. British Small Animat Veterinary Association, Chettenham
urinary pH of 6.6-6.9. This helps to inhibit the formation of
calcium oxalate crystals. A dietary source of soluble fibre is
Good reference book that covers all aspects of nutrition in health
also helpful, since the fibre will bind with calcium in the gut
and disease. Includes feeding of small pets and exotic species.
to further reduce the amount of renally excreted calcium
Every effort should be made to ensure that cats affected with
Markwell P J1992 Apptied clinical nutrition of the dog and cat.
FLUTD drink more water. Reducing the urine specific gravity
Waltham, Melton Mowbray
will reduce the chance of recurrence.
Exceltent coverage of clinical nutrition.
References
Hand M S, Thatcher C D, Remillard R L, Roudebush P 2000 Small
animal clinical nutrition, 4th edn.Mark Moris Institute, Topeka,
KA
224   Clinical nutrition
12
Equine nutrition
2
Corinna Pippard
Key Points
● The anatomy and physiology of the equine digestive
● All food must be stored in such a way as to prevent
system is designed to deal with poor-quality food that is
 deterioration and supplied to the horse using appropriate
eaten throughout the day and digested slowly.
equipment.
● A healthy horse must be provided with a similar range of
essential nutrients to any other mammal, but the relative
 proportions of each depend on the type of horse and the 
'work it is undertaking.
Introduction
grevyi, the zebras. The origin of Equus caballus, the domestic
horse, is something of a mystery, since it does not occur in
the wild. The nearest relative of E. caballus, E. przewaiskii, has
The genus Equus has evolved to roam large areas in search of
one extra pair of chromosomes, 33 pairs compared with the
its main food ingredient, grass. As a prey species, it has to be
 32 pairs of the domestic horse.
constantly aware of its surroundings and ready to flee instan-
taneously. As a result, the digestive system has evolved to deal
With domestication, many horses have to cope with being
with a poor-quality diet eaten over a long period of time and
confined for large periods of time and fed three or four meals
undergoing a slow but constant digestive process.
a day, a situation that is good for neither the mental or phys-
ical health of the horse. The original purpose and design
There are generally considered to be six species within the
of the digestive system should always be considered when
genus Equus, and a number of subspecies: Equus przewalski,
feeding horses and care should be taken to try and ensure
the wild horse; Equus asinus, the African ass; Equus hermionus,
that a feeding system as close to nature as possible is
the Asian ass; and Equus burchelli, Equus zebra and Equus
chosen.
Digestive system
Precaecal digestion
In this, the first part of the horse's digestive system, physical
(See also Ch. 6.)
and chemical digestion take place as they would in humans,
cats or dogs. Food is ingested and ground by the teeth before
The digestive system of the horse can be divided into two
being swallowed and entering the stomach, where enzymatic
parts:
digestion starts. Enzymatic digestion, followed by absorption,
continues in the small intestine.
● The foregut - comprises the mouth, cesophagus,
stomach and small intestine; function is similar
Mouth
to these parts of the digestive system of other
monogastric animals, e.g. dog and cat
Teeth
● The hindgut - comprises the caecum, colon and
Adult dentition in the horse consists of a total of 40-44 teeth
rectum; the caecum and colon fulfil a function
in the male (stallion or gelding) and 36-40 teeth in the mare.
analogous to the reticulo-rumen in ruminants,
All horses have three upper and lower incisors on each side of
providing a region where extensive microbial
the jaw, three upper and lower premolars, and three upper and
fermentation of food can take place.
lower molars. In the male, and occasionally the female, canine
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 2
225
12
Equine nutrition
Fig. 12.1 (a) Dentition of a 4-year-ofd male horse
(b) The same horse, showing the ridges on the teeth that
enable a rough surface to be apptied to the food
Emerging canines
 Premolars and molars
Incisors-corner
incisors are deciduous
teeth, soon to be shed
A
 Premolars and molars
Incisors
Canines
B
teeth known as fushes are found and many horses have extra
rough profile. They may develop sharp edges, which must be
premolar teeth, known as wolf teeth, which are frequently
removed for efficient mastication of food.
removed to aid placing of the bit. There is a large gap between
incisor and premolar teeth known as the diastema, which aids
The eruption of the deciduous and permanent teeth and the
 the separation of newly ingested and partly masticated food
pattern of wear may be used as a means of determining the
(Fig. 12.1a).
age of a horse; however, as the horse gets older this becomes
less accurate.
Foals are normally born without teeth, and the central inci-
sors erupt during the first week of life, followed, at about
4-6 weeks and 6-9 months, by the lateral and corner
Tongue
incisors respectively; premolar teeth also erupt at this
The tongue of the horse feels very soft, because of the pres-
time. Deciduous teeth are replaced by permanent teeth
ence of shorter and softer fliform papillae than in other
in the same order between the ages of about 2.5 and
animals. Fungiform, foliate and circumvallate papillae are
4.5 years.
also present. Taste buds are present, and the horse can detect
sweet, sour, bitter and salt flavours.
All the permanent teeth in the horse are constantly erupting
and the grinding surface is made up of ridges of enamel and
dentine (Fig. 12.1b). Since enamel wears more slowly than
Lips
dentine and the horse subjects its food to a shearing and
Lips are prehensile and very sensitive and are used by the
grinding movement, the surfaces of the teeth maintain a
horse to aid food selection and prevent the ingestion of
226
 Equine nutrition
2
potentially harmful material. A horse is capable of selecting
Small intestine
individual ingredients out of a coarse mix or eating the last
blades of grass from around a poisonous plant without touch-
The small intestine is responsible, as in other animals, for
ing it.
the majority of enzymatic digestion of food and its sub-
sequent absorption. In the horse the tract is long (about 16 m)
and accounts for around 75% of the length of the gastro-
Salivary glands
intestinal tract, but only 27% of its volume. As in other ani-
Horses secrete a large quantity of saliva (10-15 1 per day), the
mals, it is divided into three parts the duodenum, jejunum and
 main purpose of which is to lubricate food. A small amount
ileum, and the ileum ends at the ileocaecal junction
of salivary amylase is secreted but is probably of little impor-
(Fig. 12.2).
tance. Bicarbonate is also secreted, which has some buffering
capacity.
 Digesta moves rapidly along the small intestine but, despite
this, under normal circumstances digestion and absorption of
soluble material are usually complete by the time it reaches
Oesophagus
the ileocaecal junction.
A muscular tube, similar to that found in other domestic
animals, the oesophagus passes down the left side of the
Large intestine
neck. The passage of food and water may easily be observed.
It is in the large intestine or hindgut that fibre digestion takes
 place, undergoing a microbial fermentation similar to that
Stomach
seen in ruminants and rabbits. The main areas involved in
this process are the caecum and colon (Fig. 12.2). The size and
The stomach of the horse is simple and digestion is mono-
complexity of the hindgut in the horse are what makes its
gastric as in the dog and cat. The stomach is small (7-14 1)
digestive system so different from that of other monogastric
compared with the size of the animal and accounts for only
animals; the hindgut accounts for around 65% of the volume
about 7.5% of the total digestive tract. Living in natural cir-
of the digestive tract.
cumstances the horse would normally graze for a large pro-
leave the stomach, with little actual digestion occurring apart
Caecum
from the initial breakdown of protein. The horse is unable to
The caecum is a large (25-35 1), blind-ending sac about 0.8 m
regurgitate food. In the stabled horse the stomach fills rapidly
long, running forwards along the base of the abdomen, and
when a concentrate meal is fed, and then acts as a storage
food entering from the ileum starts to undergo microbial fer-
organ, enabling food to enter the small intestine in small
mentation. The digesta contains around 90% water but by
quantities for maximum digestion. The buffering capacity of
the time defaecation occurs the water content has fallen to
the saliva may enable a limited amount of fermentation to
take place in the first part of the stomach.
in the caecum.
Fig. 12.2 Gastrointestinat tract of the
 Stomach
horse
Small
colon
Caecum
Small
Intestine
Large
colon
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
227
12
Equine nutrition
Colon
day and night, maintaining a constant throughput of
The colon in the horse can be divided into two parts: the
material through the gastrointestinal tract.
large colon, mainly concerned with the digestion of fibre,
and the small colon, where further water re-absorption takes
place. Both are about 3-3.5 m long. However, parts of the
Microbial activity in the hindgut
large colon are up to 50 cm in diameter, while the small colon
is only about 7.5 cm in diameter.
Unlike many other monogastric species, the horse is capable
of living on a diet solely composed of fibrous roughage
The large colon houses a considerable number of micro-
and a large population of microorganisms is housed in the
organisms, similar to the rumen in cattle and the caecum and
enlarged hindgut. These microorganisms consist of about
colon of rabbits. It runs from the ileocaecal junction forwards
0.5-5 × 109 bacteria per gram of contents and 0.5-1.5 x 10s
towards the sternum - the right veniral colon, where it makes
protozoa. Fungi are also present, but in much smaller
a turn - sternal flexure, back towards the pelvis - leff veniral
numbers.
colon, then a sharp turn - the pelvic flexure, forwards again
towards the diaphragm - leff dorsal colon, and then backwards
Microbial enzymes are capable of breaking the β-1,4 linkages
again - diaphragmatic flexure and night dorsal colon. Finally, the
found in cellulose, unlike mammalian enzymes, and produce
large colon makes another turn and crosses from one side to
end-products of volatile fatty acids (largely acetic, propionic
the other - transverse colon - before becoming the small colon.
and butyric acids) and lactic acid, which can be absorbed
An important point to note, and a potential problem area, is
directly from the hindgut. Other products of microbial fer-
the pelvic flexure, where the colon narrows from a diameter
of about 25 cm to around 2 cm while undergoing a 180° turn.
a number of vitamins.
In the grass-fed horse this serves to slow down the passage of
food, allowing ample time for microbial digestion; however,
The microorganisms in the hindgut are very specific to the
in the stabled horse fed a much drier diet and unable to
type of food eaten by the horse and also to the pattern of
move around freely, it can sometimes be the site of an
 meals eaten when the horse is fed concentrates. Changing
impaction.
the diet suddenly can result in the death of large numbers of
microorganisms that were digesting the old foodstuff and an
The small colon is approximately the same length as the
insufficient number capable of digesting the new foodstuff.
large colon but of a smaller diameter (Fig. 12.2). Microbial fer-
Such changes in diet can result in impaction, colic, laminitis
mentation does not stop here; however, it is of less impor-
 and swollen legs.
tance and the main function of the small colon is to slow the
passage of digesta and reabsorb water to enable relatively dry
Unlike some other hindgut fermenters, such as the rabbit, the
faeces to be voided.
horse does not normally practice coprophagia, although foals
may be observed eating the faeces of adult horses, usually
their mother's. This may be done in an attempt to populate
Rectum and anus
the hindgut with suitable microorganisms. As they do not
generally eat their own faeces, horses probably make little use
The rectum acts as a storage area for faeces, as in other
of the amino acids synthesized by their microorganisms,
mammals. Horses will defaecate frequently throughout the
although some may be absorbed.
Dietary management
tating mare. For the horse at grass much of or the entire water
requirement may be obtained from its food. Although it is
usually advocated that water should be available at all times,
Essential nutrients
it is likely that, under wild conditions, horses only drink at
dawn and dusk, thus increasing the distance that can be trav.
The basic nutrients required by the horse are the same as for
elled in search of food during the intervening time. However,
most other domestic animals. However, the form in which
unless all food is fed damp it is advisable to make sure that
they are offered differs.
water is regularly available. All water supplies should be clean
and easy to reach. Dehydration in the horse will reduce per-
Water
formance, since the horse relies extensively on sweating as a
cooling method and severe dehydration (loss of 10-12%
An adult horse will drink about 25 1 of water a day, more in
 bodyweight) can be fatal. Donkeys are much more resistant
hot weather, after strenuous exercise or in the case of a lac-
to water deprivation than horses.
228
 Equine nutrition
2
Energy
Lack of fibre in the diet is detrimental to the horse's health,
both physical and mental. Various physical problems result
Energy can be obtained from carbohydrate, fat or protein. In
from the lack of activity in the gastrointestinal tract, and
the horse, the largest proportion normally comes from car-
boredom, with the possible development of stereotypic
bohydrate. Energy deficiency in the diet will result in a thin
behaviour, may also occur in the stabled horse fed too little
 lm a  o ia n d 
fibre.
either an unmanageable horse or one that is overweight,
which can lead to a variety of other problems.
Fat
Carbohydrate
Despite the fact that fat is present in relatively small quanti-
ties in the horse's natural diet, it is very well digested and uti-
The majority of the natural diet of the horse consists of car-
lized. Since fat contains about 2.3 times the GE (39 MJ/kg) of
bohydrate and this can be divided into soluble and insoluble
a similar weight of carbohydrate, it is an excellent energy
carbohydrate. Unlike many monogastric animals, the horse
 source, especially where bulk intake or heat production must
has evolved to make good use of insoluble carbohydrate by
be restricted, e.g. in the endurance horse. The metabolism of
utilizing microbial action in the hindgut. The gross energy
fat also releases a considerable quantity of water, which the
(GE) content of carbohydrates is about 17.5 MJ/kg.
horse can utilize.
Soluble carbohydrate
Protein
Soluble carbohydrate consists of sugars and starches. Grass,
especially young grass, contains large amounts of sugars
Like most animals, the horse has a requirement for amino
which are readily digested in the small intestine and will
acids, rather than protein, and ten of these amino acids are 
produce abundant energy quickly. Starch is found less in the
believed to be essential (arginine, histidine, isoleucine, leu-
natural diet but is a major component of commercial con-
cine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, trypto-
centrate diets. It must always be remembered that the horse
does not digest starch particularly effectively, although some
balance of these amino acids such that the horse can build its
starches are more easily digested than others with cooked
        
starches being the most readily digested. Any soluble carbo-
acids.
hydrates undigested in the small intestine will enter the large
intestine where they may upset the balance of the microbial
Protein cannot be stored in the body and any excess will be
 population and cause serious problems.
broken down in the liver. The carbon skeletons are then used
for energy (protein contains about 24 MJ/kg GE), and the
Insoluble carbohydrate
mental to horses since the deamination process requires
Like the ruminants, the horse is capable of digesting a large
energy and gives rise to considerable heat production. The
proportion of the fibre in its diet. The structural parts of
urea produced requires water for its excretion, thus increasing
plants are made up of a variety of celluloses, hemicelluloses,
water requirements, and in the case of the stabled horse
lignins and other materials. None of these are digestible by
the urea breaks down to ammonia in the bedding and con-
mammalian enzymes but, with the exception of lignin, can
taminates the stable air (see also Ch. 8).
be digested by microorganisms. In the hindgut, these are
broken down to volatile fatty acids and lactic acid, which are
Protein deficiency gives rise to reduced protein and amino
used by the horse for energy and produce a large amount of
acids in the blood, resulting in reduced tissue synthesis. This
 gas, which is either absorbed into the bloodstream or released
is obviously of greatest importance in growing or reproducing
via the anus. Unlike the digestion of soluble sugars, the
animals but will also limit performance in the working
process is a slow one and also produces a considerable
animal.
amount of heat.
Since the horse relies only partly on glucose absorbed from
Vitamins
-od ase e so pe aa non inn jss 
portion of its energy from volatile fatty acids, the glucose
Under normal conditions, the horse requires very few actual
concentration of a horse's blood is lower than that seen in
vitamins in its diet as it is capable of synthesizing most of
other monogastric animals. The only volatile fatty acid that
them itself. Vitamin A can be formed from β-carotene,
can be metabolized to glucose is propionic acid.
which is abundant in grass. Vitamin A, along with vitamin D,
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing  229
12
Equine nutrition
is stored in the liver and a horse kept at grass during the
of bulk is unlikely to suffer from any deficiencies of these.
summer can synthesize enough of both vitamins to avoid any
Vitamin C can be formed by the horse from glucose.
deficiency during the winter. Vitamin D can be formed by
the action of sunlight on the skin in a similar fashion to that
seen in other animals. Vitamin E is found in many plants
Minerals
and, although not so readily stored, is rarely deficient in the
horse's diet. Vitamin K is formed in the large intestine as in
The minerals required by the horse are similar to those required
other mammals.
by other mammals, and are divided into macrominerals and
microminerals, or trace elements. Since horses are often
Of the water-soluble vitamins, most of the B complex are
 involved in heavy work that results in considerable sweating.
formed by the microbes in the hindgut and a horse fed plenty
electrolyte needs may be greatly increased at these times.
Common foodstuffs
maximum and use the stored fat to carry it through the
winter when there is little high-quality grass around. Foals are
born in the late spring and early summer, allowing the mares
Roughage
to make best use of available foodstuffs at the end of preg-
nancy and during early lactation.
Grass
Domesticated horses, expected to perform throughout the
Grass is the most natural form of food for horses and the
year, will need their diets supplemented during the winter
foodstuff around which the gastrointestinal tract has evolved.
months to avoid the loss of too much weight. They are also
   s   n p 
Grass has a natural cycle of growth according to the seasons
 counterparts would have been and thus cannot rove in search
and as a result its feeding value varies. Growth starts in the
of better pasture. Conversely, many animals, especially 'good
spring when the ground warms up sufficiently and at this
doers' such as native ponies, need to have their intake
time the grass is low in dry matter but what dry matter there
restricted in the spring and summer to prevent them becom
is is high in sugars and proteins. As the season progresses
ing overweight and possibly developing other problems such
growth rate increases, as does dry matter and fibre content,
as laminitis.
and, as a result, protein and sugar levels fall. During a very
dry summer, and in the autumn as the soil cools, growth
All pastures for horses should be securely fenced, have a good
slows down and may cease altogether and what grass is avail-
water supply and be free of toxic weeds, especially ragwort.
able is very high in fibre and low in protein and sugar. Left to
Many garden plants are toxic to horses and if a field borders
its own devices, a horse will put on weight over the spring
a garden it is best double-fenced (this will also keep the
and summer when grass growth and quality are at their
owners of the garden happy).
Table 12.1 Approximate nutrient contents of some roughages
Roughage
Dry matter
Crude protein
Fibre (g/kgDM)
Soluble carbohydrate
(6x/6)
(g/kgDM)
(g/kgDM)
Grass
180-300
80-170
130-270
5-460
A2H
850-880
45-110
300-380
20-50
500-650
80-100
50-90
Silage
200-350
100-190
230-340
10-100
Lucerne
230-240
170-220
240-300
60-80
Swedes
120
108
100
590
Carrots
115-130
100
95
Sugar beet pulp (molassed)
876
90-120
130
300
 Sugar beet pulp (unmolassed)
900
100
175-200
80
Oat straw
860
394
Barley straw
860
30-40
390-410
Roughages vary widely in their nutrient contents; these figures are a guide only.
9/kgDM, grams per kilogram of dry matter.
230
 Equine nutrition
2
Conserved grass
ally leafier and may have a higher nutritional value than late-
Cut seeds hay, which is sometimes little better than straw.
Since it is necessary to continue feeding throughout the
winter despite the poor quality of grass, a number of methods
Hay is generally relatively cheap, small bales are easy to
of conserving excess spring and summer growth for feed-
ing throughout the colder months have been developed.
field) and it is easy to store in a watertight barn. Large bales,
Table 12.1 shows the nutrient contents of some forms of
although otherwise satisfactory, require mechanical assis-
roughage that may be fed as replacements for grass.
tance to move them.
Hay can be fed off the floor, in a rack or in a net. Many horses
Hay
prefer to eat off the floor, as this is a natural position for
Hay is the commonest form of conserved grass fed to horses.
them; however, this can lead to wastage, as some hay is tram-
Like the grass from which it is made, hay varies in quality
pled on. Nets and racks both raise the hay off the ground.
according to the time of cutting and the care spent making it.
Generally, nets are better, and can be filled in the barn and
    s      s  
carried to the horse with little loss. A net with small holes will
made because of inevitable losses occurring during the
slow down the rate of consumption, which may be advanta-
process of haymaking (Table 12.1). The majority of hay used
 geous for the stabled horse.
for horses is cured in the field and thus cannot be made until
day-length is sufficiently long and the weather sufficiently
One major disadvantage of hay is its potential dustiness and
settled for the drying process to be carried out without fear of
rain. As a result, much hay is made late in the season, when
should never be fed to horses, as the mould spores can be
the grass is well past its best. The increased volume available
dangerous to both the horse and its owner. Low dust levels
  n     s    o s
can be dealt with by damping the hay, either by steaming it
achieve more bales per hectare.
in a bin or by immersing it briefly in water. Long soaking
washes out nutrients and is not recommended. The quality of
Hay can also be barn-dried and here the weather ceases to be
hay decreases during storage and hay should not be kept
a major factor, allowing hay to be cut much earlier. However,
from year to year.
the cost of drying and the reduced quantity mean that the
cost is prohibitive for most horse owners, although the result-
Haylage/silage
ing hay is generally of very high quality
The popularity of haylage and silage for feeding to horses has
g ( og )  si  yo to s p a
greatly increased in the last few years. Neither is as depend-
during the process of hay making there is some loss of protein
ent as hay on the weather for its satisfactory conservation,
and sugar and a corresponding increase in the amount of
although better products will be made in good weather.
fibre. Vitamin D increases, because of the action of sunlight
on the cut grass, but carotene decreases dramatically.
 a 'ss  do e    si a
cereals grown especially for cutting), packing it into a clamp
Contrary to popular opinion, the quality of hay cannot be
or wrapping large bales in polythene and leaving it to
assessed by its smell and appearance and analysis is needed.
ferment in an anaerobic environment. Once the fermenta-
A good overall guess can be made if the source is known,
together with the time of cutting, length of drying, weather
vided no air is allowed in. The dry matter content of silage is
conditions, etc., but these are no substitute for chemical
relatively low, although it is very variable and generally a
analysis.
 n          
  s  s      
Two types of hay are generally available to the horse owner:
with great care, avoiding soil contamination, which can lead
to detrimental fermentation and possible toxicity. The use of
cut from permanent pasture. Seeds hay tends to contain
additives is generally not recommended.
fewer species of grass, sometimes only one, and few other
plants; meadow hay will contain whatever was growing at the
Little loss need take place during the process of silage making
time, often a wide variety of grasses and broad-leaved plants,
so the conserved product will have the same feeding value as
           
the grass from which it was made provided the process was
better for horses, but meadow hay has more variety and if hay
carried out well.
forms the main bulk of an animal's diet throughout the
winter it is more likely to fulfil nutritional requirements than
Haylage combines the qualities of hay and silage and is
hay made from a single grass species. Meadow hay is gener-
made by allowing the cut grass to dry to a certain extent and
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
231
12
Equine nutrition
then packing it into polythene, where a limited fermentation
 taining roughage. They are therefore succulent and a useful
takes place. The resulting product combines the characteris-
addition to the diet of the stabled horse.
 n        n s
than silage but lower than hay. There will be small losses of
Sugar beet pulp is also available in dried form, both molassed
protein and sugar, with an increase in fibre, but these are
and unmolassed, and after soaking makes a palatable addi
much less than in hay.
tion to the diet as well as supplying a useful amount of energy
and roughage. Since it absorbs three or four times its own
Both haylage and silage deteriorate on contact with air so,
weight in water, the amount to be fed should be weighed out
unless they can be obtained in small bales, are not really
before soaking!
satisfactory for the one-horse owner. The bales, because of
their water content, are much heavier than hay bales and will
 probably require mechanical handling.
Straw
Despite some problems, both silage and haylage are suitable
Straw can be fed to horses. Wheat straw is best avoided, since
feeds for horses and do not have the dust and mould problems
it is very hard, although many horses bedded on wheat straw
associated with hay. Silage, because of its high water content, is
will happily eat it. Both barley and oat straw are suitable, and
may be particularly useful for adding bulk to the diet of
          
animals that would otherwise get too fat. Some straw, fed at
ideal roughage food for the performance horse.
night to the stabled horse along with its hay and concentrate
feeds, will keep it occupied once the higher-quality foods
When fed by weight, more haylage or silage is needed than hay
have been consumed.
because a larger proportion of the weight is water, and it will
usually be possible to cut down on concentrates because of the
higher energy content. The horse owner should not be misled
Concentrates
into feeding less because of the higher energy content - this
may result in diarrhoea due to a reduced fibre intake.
When a horse is expected to perform more than the lightest
provides sufficient energy, since the horse is restricted in the
Legumes
amount of food that can be consumed. In order to overcome
this, concentrate foodstuffs in the form of a variety of grain-
Legumes are plants that fix nitrogen by means of bacteria
based diets are fed. Grains, although containing a higher
located in nodules in their roots. As a result they contain
energy level than grass and other roughage, contain poor-
quality protein and thus if they are added to the diet it is
clover are frequently found in pasture and they have the
usually necessary to add an extra protein source as well.
capacity to increase the overall feeding value of that pasture,
Concentrate foodstuffs can be given either in the form of
in terms both of its protein and mineral levels and the length
straights (single foodstuffs) or compounds (mixtures of two
of time the pasture is of high quality, since the nutrient
or more foodstuffs).
content of legumes falls more slowly during the growing
season than that of grasses.
Straights
Lucerne (also known as alfalfa) is a legume often used in
horse feeds, both as a source of roughage and to increase the
Any single foodstuff such as oats, lucerne or soya beans can
protein content of the diet. In many countries lucerne is fed
be classed as a straight foodstuff. The addition of grain to the
as hay; however, in the UK it is usually fed either as chaff or
ration increases the starch content and care needs to be taken
as pellets. Feeding lucerne will increase the protein content of
that the capacity of the horse's small intestine to digest and
the diet and also the calcium content, since it has a very high
absorb starch is not exceeded. Excess starch reaching the large
proportion of calcium to phosphorus. Lucerne also has a
intestine is likely to give rise to rapid fermentation with a
higher energy level than grass so, if fed dried by weight, it
subsequent lowering of pH and possible serious results
should be possible to decrease the concentrate intake.
Grains tend to be low in protein and have a poor balance of
amino acids, being generally short of lysine and one or more
Roots
other essential amino acids. They also tend to have a poor
calcium:phosphorus ratio, which can lead to bone disorders.
Roots may also be fed to horses - mangolds, swedes, turnips,
carrots and sugar beet, for example, are all suitable. Roots
These deficiencies in grain can be counteracted by adding
contain a high proportion of water and sugar as well as con
other straight foodstuffs. For example, lucerne has an excel-
232
 Equine nutrition
2
Table 12.2 Approximate nutrient contents of some straight foodstuffs
Foodstuff
Energy (DE)
Crude protein
Fibre
Ca (g/kgDM)
(M]/kgDM)
(g/kgDM)
(g/kgDM)
Qats
10.9-13.4
100-140
100-125
0.5-1.1
Barley
12.8-15.4
100-130
50-65
0.5-0.6
Maize
14.2-16.1
90-105
24-25
0.2-0.5
Linseed
11.5-18.5
220-380
66-100
2.3-4.3
Soyabean meal
13.3-14.7
500-540
40-70
3.0-4.0
Sunflower meal
9.5-11.7
280-490
130-320
2.9-4.5
Field beans
13.1
275
75-80
1.0
Dried lucerne
9.2-10.0
156-220
240-290
11.3-15.1
DE, digestible energy; g/kg DM, grams per kilogram of dry matter; MJ/kgDM, megajules per kilogram of dry matter.
lent calcium:phosphorus ratio, and contains a high level
highest energy content of all the cereals and should be fed
of good-quality protein. As it is a roughage, much of it is
with caution to all but the hardest-working horses.
digested in the hindgut, which makes it an excellent food-
stuff. Another good protein source is soya bean, which has
Compounds
the best level of lysine of any of the vegetable protein sources
generally fed to horses.
Feeding a horse on straight foodstuffs is possible but these
days the majority of horses are fed on compounds produced
Table 12.2 shows the nutrient contents of some straight
by animal feed companies. Although this is more expensive
foodstuffs.
than feeding straights, compounds are usually more satisfac-
 aso po sad le hs o paid ae aa asaq 
 pony and are nutritionally balanced, taking the onus off the
Oats
owner to get the balance correct. They are available as cubes
In the UK, oats have been the traditional foodstuff for horses
and mixes. Both consist of a range of grains with protein
and of all the cereal grains they are still probably the best for
sources and usually some vitamin and mineral additives.
this purpose. Oats have a higher fibre content than other
Their palatability is usually high, not least because molasses
cereals, which, while lowering the energy content, also
is used in their manufacture. Table 12.3 shows the nutrient
improves the texture of the grain in the stomach and aids
contents of some typical types of compound foodstuff.
digestion. Naked oats without the husk are also available.
They have considerably higher energy levels than other oats
and should be fed with great care. Oats are normally fed
Cubes
crushed, since, if a horse does not chew its food properly and
The cubes fed to horses vary slightly in size but are usually
the husk is not damaged, the oat grain can pass through the
fairly small, with a diameter of about 5-6 mm. The ingredients
gastrointestinal tract undigested. However, whole oats can be
fed to a horse that chews its food properly.
Table 12.3 Approximate nutrient contents for
different types of compound foodstuff
Barley
Foodstuff
Energy
Crude
Fibre
Barley may be fed in the form of extruded rings. It can also be
(MJ/kgDM)
protein
(g/gkDM)
fed as a grain but it is best rolled, as it is very hard. Barley has
(g/kgDM)
a higher energy content than oats and is also more dense, so
care must be taken to feed by weight not by volume.
Maintenance and
8.5-10.5
85-105
135-200
Extruded barley is lighter and the cooking process makes the
light work
starch more digestible, so it is probably preferable to the
Hard work
11.5-13.0
120-140
60-140
uncooked grain.
Showing
10.0-12.5
100-150
95-190
Stud
11.5-12.0
140-160
65-100
Maize
Fibre replacer
8.0-8.5
100
200
Maize is fed extensively to horses in America and the UK. It
is usually in a flaked form, although other forms are available,
g/kgDM, grams per kilogram of dry matter; MJ/kgDM, megajoules per kilogram
and the cooking process improves digestibility. Maize has the
of dry matter.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
233
12
Equine nutrition
used are generally the same as in coarse mixes but are ground
in liquid form and poured on to a feed to encourage a shy
up, mixed with molasses and forced through a die before
feeder. Most compound foodstuffs contain quite a high pro
being bagged up and sold. Although it is not possible to see
portion of molasses, e.g. to bind cubes together and to reduce
the individual ingredients, if bought from a reputable firm
the dust in coarse mixes.
there should be no reason to doubt them.
Herbs
Coarse mixes
Herbs are a popular addition to both human and equine
Many owners prefer coarse mixes, largely because they look
 diets. A large number of herbal supplements are produced to
 s ha s  nsd o si hn  d 
suit a variety of situations, e.g. oestrus problems, skin condi-
into making them. One possible disadvantage lies in the ability
tions and stiff joints. In its natural state the horse would have
access to a wide variety of plants and would seek out for itself
at leaving certain ingredients, thus unbalancing the ration.
those required.
Vitamin and mineral supplements
Additives
A large number of vitamin and mineral supplements
Where a reputable brand of compound is fed at the level rec
are produced for the equine industry. For many horses
ommended by the manufacturer it is not generally necessary
these are a waste of money, but some situations require
to give the horse any additives. Many horses, however, are
them.
given less than the stipulated amount or have a particular
problem, such as poor hoof quality; these horses may benefit
Prohibited substances
from certain additions to their diets. All additives should be
fed with care: unnecessary additives are at best expensive and
As with human athletes, equine athletes are subject to restric
at worst toxic.
tions regarding diet and supplementation. Foodstuffs produced
for the competition horse should be sold with a guarantee that
Molasses
they contain no prohibited substances. The owner must also
make sure that the horse does not consume any of these sub
 pim pas as ss an po pdq e si ssso
stances in the form of titbits, the pasture, or topically applied
the animal foodstuffs industry. For horses it can be obtained
substances.
Nutritional
can be substituted for hay, since a certain amount of
roughage must always be fed and thus there is a limit on
reguirements
 potential energy intake.
The nutritional requirements of the individual horse depend
Maintenance
on a number of factors, e.g. age, workload, health. Although
some horses are kept at maintenance levels, many are kept
Maintenance requirements are considered to be the amount
 d        
required by an animal to maintain its current weight and
Requirements have generally been split into a requirement
condition, with the addition of an allowance for essential
for maintenance and an additional amount that can be con-
movement such as foraging. Maintenance requirements
sidered as production, in the form of either growth or work.
allow the body to function, without any additional activity.
Whatever activity the horse is required for, it must be borne
in mind that there is a physical restriction on intake, gener-
Working
ally believed to be around 2-2.5% of bodyweight. In practical
terms a horse of around 15.2 h.h. (155 cm) weighing 500 kg
Many horses are kept for work, which can vary from light
cann eat about 10-12.5 kg of dry matter a day, or the equiva-
hacking at weekends to the strenuous demands made by
           
 3-day eventing or endurance riding. Depending on the level
sufficient for maintenance and, for a 'good doer' fed good
of work required, the energy requirements are considered to
hay, even this amount may be too much. For the horse in
be maintenance plus an additional fraction of maintenance
hard work there is a limit to the amount of concentrates that
energy. NRC (1989) considers that a horse in:
234
 Equine nutrition
2
● Light work, e.g. gentle hacking, requires 1.25 x
Because the digestive system of a horse is designed for a poor-
 maintenance energy
quality roughage ration, it does not take kindly to a high intake
of concentrate foods with a consequent lowering of roughage
● Medium work, e.g. show jumping, requires 1.50 x
intake. Stabled horses may suffer from a number of physical
maintenance energy
and mental problems that are partly due to the nature of their
feeding, and it should be possible to alleviate these with more
● Hard work, e.g. eventing or endurance riding.
d   n d   o
requires 2 × maintenance energy.
arises with the horse in hard work, which has a high energy
requirement that cannot be met unless a large proportion of the
         
 roughage part of the diet is replaced by concentrates. This is
medium/heavy work, and the condition of the horse in ques-
further exacerbated by many horses in hard work being shy
tion must always be carefully monitored and feeding adjusted
feeders, possibly because of the high-concentrate nature of the
accordingly. Little extra protein is required for work and any
diet. Energy levels can be satisfactorily increased by the addi-
extra is normally supplied by the increased rations fed
tion of oil to the diet, but care must be taken that sufficient
without any further additions.
 protein is also fed, since oil contains none.
Horses in strenuous work (Fig. 12.3) sweat copiously and the
fluid and electrolytes lost must be replaced if the horse is not
Reproduction
to suffer from dehydration. There are a number of ways of
doing this; probably the most satisfactory is to administer an
Reproduction or breeding is not an unnatural process for the
electrolyte paste via a syringe into the horse's mouth and
horse and in fact the working situation is far more unnatural.
then allow access to fresh water. Because the fluid lost in
Thus feeding the breeding horse should be easier than feed-
sweat is isotonic with blood, many horses will not feel
ing the working horse. Problems arise when an exceptionally
significant thirst in spite of the water loss and will refuse to
high growth rate is required of foals, to prepare them either
drink unless the electrolytes are first replaced.
for the show ring or for sale.
Fig. 12.3 Horse in work - eventing
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  2
235
12
Eguine nutrition
 protein. Feed manufacturers produce special diets for preg-
Stallions
nant and lactating mares, usually with a protein level of
Stallions during the covering season need a good all-round
about 16% (160 g/kg). These diets, combined with g0od hay,
diet and their general condition and temperament should
should be ideal, although if a mare is foaling late in the
always be considered. Many stallions today are also used for
season a good grass paddock should supply all her needs.
work, especially for competition, where their natural pres-
During the last month of pregnancy (Fig. 12.4), when the
ence gives them an edge over other horses, and these will
fetus is taking up a considerable amount of space in the
normally be fed as any other working horse. For the stallion
abdomen, some mares will decrease their intake and may
covering large numbers of mares, some increase in nutritional
- m  s p o   
content of the diet is required and the condition and mental
mally be the case.
attitude of the stallion should be a good indication of how
much extra to give.
Lactating mares
Pregnant mares
Like heavily pregnant mares, lactating mares have a high
requirement for protein but energy needs are also greatly
Pregnancy in the mare lasts for 11 months and for the first
increased. A good stud diet should be fed unless ample high-
8 of these the developing fetus is relatively small and makes
quality pasture is available.
few demands on the mare. A good all-round diet is
recommended, and many mares continue to work during this
Mares vary in their ability to produce milk. Some provide
period of their pregnancy.
 large quantities and sometimes lose their own condition in
order to do so; others will produce less and use the extra food
During the last 3 months the fetus grows very fast and the
to build up their own fat stores. Figure 12.5 shows a 13-year-
mare will need some extra energy and quite a lot of extra
old mare with her first foal, both doing well on summer grass
236
Equine nutrition
2
Fig. 12.5 Lactating mare with healthy foat at foot
alone, an indicator of the feeding quality of grass at this time
be fed to them alongside the concentrates. It is very impor-
of year!
tant at this stage not to overfeed, since a variety of limb
abnormalities can occur if this is the case. Foals do, however,
have a considerably greater requirement than adults for both
energy and protein in order to sustain growth, which can be
Youngstock
at a rate in excess of 1 kg per day in the first months.
Most foals will start to investigate solid food within 1 week of
birth. For a mare at grass, no extra feeding of the foal should
As the young horse grows its requirement for high levels
be necessary at this stage. Where a mare is fed a compound
of protein fall, as does its need for higher levels of con-
food the foal will usually start to nibble it.
centrate food. By the age of 3 years its diet will be the same
as that of an adult horse. Most young horses are left to them-
In the young foal, the hindgut is relatively small and un-
selves during the spring and summer and fed extra food
developed. As the foal starts to eat more solid food, especially
 during the autumn and winter when grass growth is
roughage, the hindgut develops to cope with the new
insufficient.
demands placed on it.
Many foals are weaned at 6 months old and it is important
that by this time the foal has a good intake of solid food to
Sickness and convalescence
compensate for the loss of its mother's milk. Creep feeding is
often carried out, in which food is placed in such a way that
The horse on box rest does not have to move around in order
the foal can reach it but the mare cannot. Generally, foals
to seek food and its energy requirements are therefore less
that have been creep-fed suffer less stress during weaning.
than maintenance. Hay alone will generally suffice for these
since the gastrointestinal tract is accustomed to this type of
horses but some supplementation may be necessary if the hay
food. Although foals have a higher need for concentrate
is not of good quality or the horse is under a particular stress,
foods than adult horses, good-quality roughage must always
e.g. from surgery (Fig. 12.6).
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing237
12
Equine nutrition
Fig. 12.6 A candidate for box rest!
Donkeys and exotic equids
only to camels in their ability to do this. Little is known
Donkeys and zebras originated in the tropics. They are there-
about the requirements of zebras and until further research
fore not well suited to the British climate and may have nutri-
tional requirements as yet unknown. It is often believed that
treat them like horses at maintenance, remembering that a
donkeys digest fibre better than horses but this is not proven.
tropical diet, consisting as it does of tropical plants, may
Donkeys do conserve water better than horses and are able to
contain different constituents from those manufactured in
withstand water deprivation for much longer, coming second
Practical feeding
inspected regularly. It is worth bearing in mind that
the ground around a trough usually gets very cut up,
especially in wet weather, so having it too close to a
Water
gate is inadvisable.
It is generally recommended that water is available at all
● In the stable, water can be provided by self-filling
times, and there are a number of ways in which it may be
drinkers. There is some evidence that horses drink
provided:
less from self-filling drinkers and many people dislike
them, since it is harder to tell how much a horse is
● In the field, a self-filling trough is ideal. It should
consuming. The saving of labour is considerable,
be situated away from trees and where it can be
however, and the water is always fresh.
238
Equine nutrition
2
● Buckets allow the horse's consumption to be meas-
as oats, or as a compound from a feed company made up of
 pe s s a e  a i '
a number of different ingredients.
absorb ammonia from the atmosphere. It is also liable
to be kicked over or occasionally used as a foot bath.
Most horses today are fed manufactured compounds, either
When a horse is stabled overnight and fed dry hay, it
cubes or coarse mixes, which have the advantage of being
will usually drink the contents of two 15 1 buckets.
nutritionally balanced for the different types of horse. For
example, a low-energy cube can be obtained for a child's
pony and a power mix for an event horse. Compounds are
Roughage
also produced for elderly horses, breeding animals, young-
stock and invalid horses.
The digestive system of the horse is designed to cope with a
diet consisting of large quantities of low-quality roughage
and all diets must be based on roughage. This can be difficult
Frequency and timing of feeding
to achieve if the horse is performing hard work and has a
greatly increased requirement for energy, since intake is
When feeding a horse, remember that in nature it eats for
limited and, as concentrate foods increase, so the roughage
about 16 h a day and as far as possible this should be mim-
portion of the diet must necessarily decrease. This effect can
icked in the stable. It is rarely possible to give a horse con-
be reduced by increasing the quality of the roughage fed, and
stant access to food but a good supply of roughage should
generally at least one-third of the diet should be roughage.
keep it occupied for some time. Concentrate feeds are usually
given separately (although some feed companies are develop-
Hay is the traditional conserved roughage feed for horses but
ing complete feeds) and, unfortunately, are rarely given more
recent years have seen a considerable increase in the use of
often than two or three times a day, because of the owner's
other commitments. An ideal feeding regime would probably
Other roughage suitable for feeding to horses includes barley
enable the horse to be fed a complete ration at hourly inter-
or oat straw for horses needing lower energy levels; silage or
vals throughout the day and night; however, without the
lucerne (alfalfa) for those needing higher energy levels; and
development of sophisticated automatic feeding this is
roots, of which dried sugar beet pulp is the commonest and
unlikely to be possible!
most convenient.
Roughage can be fed in a number of different physical forms:
Stabled horses
● Long - e.g. hay, straw, and haylage; often in a net,
The stabled horse is usually fed a concentrate food three
which has the added advantage of keeping the horse
times a day and hay two or three times daily depending on
occupied
the working schedule, etc. It is possible with horses at main.
tenance or in low work to give large amounts of forage, pos.
● Chaff - e.g. lucerne, hay and straw, chopped up into
sibly including oat or barley straw, thus occupying them for
short lengths and mixed with the concentrate ration;
long periods of time. Horses in more strenuous work need
feeding chaff helps to slow down the rate at which
more concentrate food, with a consequent reduction in
concentrates are eaten and leads to better digestion,
roughage - this can lead to boredom and the development of
both through the slowing down the process and by
stereotypical behaviour.
making the food less dense in the stomach and so
more readily available for enzyme activity
Horses at grass
● Pellets or shreds - e.g. sugar beet pulp; must be
soaked before use and absorbs up to four times its own
Horses kept at grass are under the most natural conditions for
volume of water. It should never be fed before this
the domesticated animal. The pasture should be well fenced
water has been absorbed, otherwise it will swell within
and free from toxic plants, although a variety of plants other
the horse's stomach and, as the horse is unable to
than grass are beneficial to the horse's health. Horses have a
regurgitate its food, this could in extreme circum-
tendency to graze some areas of a paddock very closely and
stances lead to rupture of the stomach.
leave other areas rough and untouched. They will tend to
defaecate in the rough areas. Since horses are naturally herd
Concentrates
animals it is best to keep them in consistent groups if at
all possible - introduction of new animals to a group will
Concentrates are fed as a concentrated source of energy and
cause some transitory disruption as the pecking order is re-
can either be in the form of straight, single foodstuffs, such
established to accommodate the newcomer.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
239
12
Equine nutrition
Combined system
in as required. As long as the bags remain airtight there
should be no loss of quality; the same is true of silage bought
This system allows for the animals to be at grass for part of
 in big bales.
the day or night and stabled for the rest of the time. During
periods of stabling horses are fed a roughage and concentrate
Concentrate foodstuffs and sugar beet pulp are usually pur-
ration suitable to their work and physiological condition but
chased in sacks. They should be bought in as required, as the
the quality and quantity of grass available to them should be
contents deteriorate with time. The purchase of a few weeks'
 taken into account and the ration varied accordingly.
supply at a time is generally satisfactory.
All foodstuffs should be stored at a low and uniform temper
Food preparation
ature, with low humidity, good ventilation and a dry envi-
ronment. Metal bins are generally advised for concentrates as
Purchase and storage
these prevent access by vermin, which not only eat the food
but contaminate it with their urine and faeces. The food
Many foodstuffs deteriorate when stored. In particular the
should not be stored in direct sunlight as this can destroy
 labile, readily oxidized pigments, unsaturated fats and fat-
some vitamins. If possible, rodents, birds and insects should
soluble substances are destroyed. Fat-soluble vitamins are all
be kept out. Opinion varies as to whether cats should be
reduced during storage, as are unsaturated fatty acids, and
allowed in the food store - they will keep down vermin but
rancidity of fats reduces acceptance. The synthetic forms of
may themselves cause some damage.
vitamins A and E are more stable than their natural forms but
Alteration to normal feeding
resistant to breakdown during storage, but riboflavin will be
patterns
mitted antioxidants added to them to guard against various
forms of deterioration but these will not stop all forms of
Hospitalized or box rest
deterioration for ever. Acceptability of all foods is reduced on
deterioration.
   a n a n  n si 
rest that such circumstances are foreign to the horse's natural
s suxon anpond Ke pue asos Sup mo Ke jng
habitat. The inability to move around freely can in itself be
well as causing decay and lack of acceptability, and nutri-
detrimental to the digestive system, as movement aids the
tional value will decline. Insects also cause deterioration and
expulsion of the considerable quantities of gases produced in
 may carry fungal spores - some of these insects are visible to
the hindgut (Fig. 12.6).
the naked eye while others are not. Rodent infestation leads
to food loss and their droppings are dangerous to both man
Provided that good-quality hay is available it may be best to
 and animals.
cut out concentrate foods altogether. The requirement for
energy is obviously diminished to below a normal mainte-
Hay and straw are frequently bought off the field and stored
nance level and some horses will actually refuse concentrates
throughout the winter to be used as required. This system is
if they are offered. If the hay is not of sufficient quality to
      n   
feed alone, a diet specially produced for the invalid horse
cooled down after making. Hay stored too early will heat in
should be used. This will have a low energy level but still
the stack, with a subsequent loss of nutrients. Both hay and
contain adequate quantities of vitamins and minerals, etc.
straw can be obtained either in small or large bales. Large
Succulent foodstuffs such as roots, apples or cut grass will be
bales require mechanical handling, so unless they can be
much appreciated by the horse on box rest.
delivered direct to the barn small bales will be easier to deal
with. Hay should not be fed before it has cooled down, since
 In some cases it may be necessary to provide specific supple.
fermentation continues. Last year's hay should not be fed as
ments such as B vitamins (B, may be given by injection). If
hay deteriorates gradually with time and by the following
year will have little feeding value left. Hay must be stored in
nutrition may be necessary.
a dry place with plenty of air circulation, ideally in the dark
to reduce the loss of carotene from the bales. Storing on
pallets will prevent upwards seepage of damp, which can
Overweight or obesity
render the lowest layer of bales unusable.
Many horses are overfed and this can put a strain on the
Haylage, which is purchased in sealed bags, can either be
limbs, especially in young animals. Manufacturers' recom-
bought in early in the season and used as required, or bought
mendations tend to err on the side of overfeeding and it
240
 Equine nutrition
2
should be remembered that feed companies, as well as pro-
consumption of long roughages difficult. There are now
viding foodstuffs, are in the business of making money! The
many substitutes on the market and it should be possible to
showing world is notorious for its liking for overweight
feed the rather toothless old horse without too much of a
horses.
problem!
One common problem is an overestimation of the amount of
Should a horse be suffering from starvation, food should be
work a horse is doing. NRC (1989) considers that light work
dn Supimq Aenpeia ‘isig ie sauenb leus u paonpon
  d     s
the amounts given as the digestive system becomes more
hacking and equitation; medium work consists of ranch work,
active.
roping, cutting, barrel racing and jumping; heavy work includes
horses in race training. The recommendation is to increase
the energy content of the daily ration by 1.25, 1.50 and
Bibliography
2.00 times the maintenance requirement as appropriate. The
horse doing a few hours hacking a week can probably be con-
Bishop R 2003 The horse nuirition bible. David & Charles,
sidered to be at little more than maintenance, especially if
Newton Abbot
stabled and not requiring any energy for foraging food in a
field. Horses cannot be considered to be in medium or hard
Bone JF 1988 Animal anatomy and physiology, 3rd edn. Prentice
   sn    n  
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, Nf
such as regular hunting, endurance work or 3-day eventing.
    p         
Frame|2oo0 Improved grassland management.Farming Press,
rations below what appears to be recommended. If the horse
Tonbridge, Kent
starts to lose weight, additional food can then be given
Frape D 1998 Equine nutrition and feeding, 2nd edn. Blackwell
The overweight horse should never be starved, as this will
Science, Oxford
disrupt the digestive system and may cause problems such as
hyperlipidaemia. Rather they should be fed a restricted diet in
Kerrigan R H 1994 Practical horse nutrition, 3rd edn. R H Kerrigan,
such a manner that it takes them as long as possible to eat it.
Maifland, NSW
McDonald P, Edwards R A, Greenhaigh J F D, Morgan C A Animal
nutrition, 6th edn. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, Nf
Underweight or too thin
Underfeeding is most likely to occur during the winter when
National Research Council 1989 Nurient requirements of horses,
animals live out, or in the case of older horses, whose diges-
Sth edn. National Academy Press, Washington, DC
tion is not as efficient as that of younger horses. The thick
winter coat of horses overwintered outside can hide lack of
Pagan J D (ed.) 1998 Advances in equine nutirition. Nottingham
      a 
UniversityPress,Nottingham
during the late autumn and winter, what grass there is will
be very fibrous and contain little energy or protein. Horses
Pagan J D, Geor R J 2oo1 Advances in equine nuirition Hl.
and ponies neglected during these months with little or no
Nottingham University Press, Nottingham
supplementary feeding are likely to be underweight.
Older horses do not generally digest their food as efficiently
Recommended reading
as younger ones and as they get older may require extra food,
especially protein. Horses, like people, vary widely in the age
Frape D 2004 Equine nutrition and feeding, 3rd edn. Blackwell
that they are considered old and some animals in their twen-
Science,Oxford
ties may appear younger than those in their teens. Like dogs.
larger animals tend to age faster and ponies living well into
This is the best all-round book on equine nutrition currently avail.
their thirties are common. Another problem encountered
able, fairty expensive but worth the cost for anyone involved in
with the older horse can be loss of teeth, which will make the
equine nutrition.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
241
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
13
Behaviour and handling of the
dog and cat
Jane Williams
Key Points
 A thorough understanding of the behaviour of animals is
● Cats are solitary animals with a social structure and
essential for the safety of anyone working with them.
are thought to have descended from the African wild
The dog is thought to have evolved from several
cat.
members of the family Canidae but shows most similarity
● Both dogs and cats communicate with others of their
to the wolf.
species by means of visual, olfactory and vocal behaviour
● Both the wolf and the dog are pack animals formed by
patterns and anyone owning and working with them must
strong social bonds and a dominance hierarchy.
learn to understand the visual signals in particular.
● In the human household the owmer of the dog must
● Handling and restraint of an animal requires knowledge
 become the leader of the pack if behavioural problems
and confidence, which can only be gained by practice.
are not to develop.
Introduction
 behaviour and body language of your patients. This chapter
aims to explore the history of the domestication of the
canine and feline species and how this relates to their behav-
Handling dogs and cats is an integral component of the
iour. The concept of behavioural therapy is introduced and
veterinary nurse's role. To ensure safety in the working envi-
includes discussion of potential approaches to common prob-
      ls   
 lems encountered in these species in veterinary practice.
Introduction to
animal behaviour
Evolution can lead to:
● Minor modifications in a population
The theory of evolution was first introduced by Charles
Darwin in the 19th century. Darwin had travelled the world
● Speciation leading to larger changes, resulting in a new
for 5 years as a naturalist on HMS Beagle and during this time
species.
he formulated his hypothesis or theory of 'natural selection'.
Darwin had no conception of genes but realised from his own
Darwin's theory of evolution is the single most important
observations that traits were inherited by the offspring from
conceptual framework for developing hypotheses about the
their parents.
ultimate forces that shape the traits of organisms. These orig-
inal ideas have been integrated into the science of genetics
and have also influenced the science of behaviour. Further
Basic principles of natural
studies found that behavioural traits can evolve just like
selection
anatomical and physiological traits. We use the knowledge of
evolution to formulate hypotheses and to design experiments
s sassd saads n dod e po s 
to prove the adaptive significance of behaviour.
phenotypic traits or ‘adaptations' that may or may not equip
them to survive. 'Selection' is perhaps a misleading word to
Behaviour patterns can be classifed into two categories:
categorize the process as it implies that animals choose the
path to evolve. In reality, animals displaying phenotypic
● Innate behaviour
traits that lead to an increased survival rate will mate and pass
on that trait to their offspring.
● Learned behaviour.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 2
243
13
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
Table 13.1 Learned behaviour
Innate behaviour
Type of learned behaviour 
 Description
These behaviour patterns are part of the animal when it is
born and are passed from one generation to the next. There
Habituation
Animals are subjected to repetitive
are three categories of innate or latent behaviour:
stimuli (which initially may have been
frightening) and they gradually
● Orientation - involves involuntary movement of an
decrease and cease their response
animal in response to environmental stimuli
Classical conditioning
Learning by association; repeated
exposure to stimulus with positive
●Reflexes - involuntary, short-lived, stereotypic
reward to establish a response
responses to a given stimulus
Trial and error
An animal's own spontaneous
● Instincts - patterns of inherited, pre-set, stereotypic
behaviour is instrumental in obtaining
behavioural responses.
a reward which can progress to
learming by association and linking
the reward with a stimulus
Learned behaviour
Exploratory behaviour
Animals explore areas when there is
These are behaviour patterns that have been learned from the
not a direct need or reward, i.e.
dam, father or family group and through interaction with the
absence of reinforcement, to gain
environment. Animals with relatively long lifespans learn the
information for a later date
majority of the behaviour that enables them to survive. There
are several categories of learned behaviour (Table 13.1):
Observational behaviour
Observation of parents, family group
 and copying behaviour patterns
● Habituation
Insight
Learning based on information
previously learned by other
● Classical conditioning
behavioural activities; akin to
problem-solving
● Trial and error
Imprinting/bonding 
 Early and rapid form of learning,
● Exploratory behaviour
where animals associate and identify
themselves with another animal,
● Observational behaviour
usually their parent. Filial imprinting
occurs within first 8-12 h; sexual
●Insight
imprinting takes several weeks to
adulthood
● Imprinting/bonding.
Canine behaviour
Darwin theorized that the wolf, coyote and jackal were the
ancestors of the domestic dog. Konrad Lorenz theorized that
some domestic dogs were evolved from the wolf but that the
Evolution and domestication
majority evolved from the golden jackal. Today, it is generally
considered that the domestir dog has multiple ancestors,
The domestic dog Canis familiaris is a carnivore and as such
which themselves have a common ancestry. There is also doc-
is a predator. The link between humans and dogs is thought
umented evidence that domestic dogs have successfully bred
to have arisen from a predatory link between the species, i.e
with wolves, jackals and coyotes, and this is possible as all the
  ss      
species have a virtually identical number of chromosomes.
cats evolved from the viverravines and miacines present in
Evidence suggesting that the wolf is the main ancestor of the
the Eocene period about 50 million years ago (see Ch. 16).
 domestic dog is shown in the complex social groups and hier-
The dog is a member of the family Canidae, which includes
 archical order observed in both wolves and dogs.
such species as the wolves, jackals, coyote and foxes. As car-
nivores, they evolved a social structure related to the size of
Approximately 40 000 years ago. Ice Age humans and wolves
their prey, i.e. solitary species hunt smaller prey than social
would have been competing for the same large-animal prey.
species, which hunt in groups and can take larger prey.
Humans provided warmth from their cooking fires, and around
244
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
the fires scraps of animal meat, bones and hides would prove a
● Many reflex responses present:
strong draw to a hungry wolf. It is surmised that wolves learned
that there was food available near to humans and humans
● Extensor dominance
learned that the presence of wolves alerted them to the presence
of other predators. The relationship evolved as humans took
● Rooting reflex
3
wolf puppies from the den and 'cultivated' them. The pups
would be selected from the more timid animals, who had estab-
● Defecation/urination
lished a scavenging relationship with people. It is thought that
because of the strong social order evident in wolf hierarchy, if a
● Sleep and feed
human could become established as the dominant 'pack' mem-
ber the wolf pups would remain 'tame'. In time the 'tame' wolf
● Vocalization skills vary between breeds.
pups would have undergone selective breeding by mating the
more adaptable and quieter individuals to develop traits that
were desired
2. Transitional period
● 2-3 weeks old
The domestic dog dates to 12 000 years ago and from 10 000
years there is archaeological evidence that the partnership
● Period of rapid development
was firmly cemented. The original role of dogs in human
society included guarding, protecting crops and herds, scav
enging and herding, and selected individuals would have
● Starting to gain independence from the dam
been bred to accentuate advantageous traits for the ecological
niche. Domestication has disconnected the biology of modern
● Development of the neurological system and the sense
organs
breeds from environmental selection pressures and allowed
"forced' evolution to occur, which has resulted in the vast
● Eyes and ears open, which results in the pup
afray of breeds we have in the modern world (see also Ch. 1).
beginning to respond to stimuli
Behavioural development
● Locomotor skills begin as the pups learn to crawl, then
walk, then lope.
It is often debated whether behaviour in dogs is the result of
upbringing or is genetically based, i.e. 'nurture' or 'nature'.
Certain behavioural traits must be genetic or we would not
3. Social period
have specialized groups, such as pointers or border collies
(Fig. 13.1). However, it is now apparent that the behaviour of
● 3-10 weeks (4-8-week period is the most vital for
an animal is a combination of genetics and its environment.
social development)
 It is widely recognised that there are five phases of develop-
● This phase corresponds to maturation of the spinal
ment of canine behaviour. These are as follows.
cord and central nervous system, providing the
necessary neurological skills to enable interaction
1. Neonatal period
with the environment
● First 2 weeks of life
● Play is initiated and the early manifestations of adult
behaviour are observed, e.g. biting, barking, sexual
● Completely dependent upon mother
behaviour, dominance, submission.
Fig. 13.1 Breed-specific behaviour
patterns (a) Border collie exhibiting
eye statking (b) Pointer pointing
A
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
245
13
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
4. Juvenile period
● From 10 weeks until sexual maturity
● This phase is breed-dependent - the smaller breeds
mature most quickly
● Basic behaviour patterns remain but undergo
improvement as the pup's motor skils mature
● Puppies ‘learn' the relevance of behaviour patterns
● Up to 4 months animals learn quickly but after this
period behaviour patterns already learned appear to
interfere with new behaviour patterns and the rate of
Fig. 13.2 Wotf cubs beginning to show dominance during ptay
learning slows down
● Puppies are still immature, with a short attention span
humans in general, with those of one particular sex or with
strangers. In domesticated canines, homing of litters usually
● Pups raised in an external environment will explore
occurs at 8 weeks of age, although some behaviourists advo-
the outside of the den from 12 weeks of age - this
cate rehoming puppies slightly earlier to take advantage of
the increased learning capacity as regards the environment
 should be less stressful
that occurs during the critical period.
● Males begin the adult male urination pattern as they
use olfactory marking to establish their own territory.
Play
5. Adulthood
The dog's desire to play has often been cited as the reason
that humans domesticated them. It is thought that in play
● Puberty and sexual maturity are reached
animals develop communication skills through ‘safe-learn-
ing' because play gestuires indicate that the behaviour dis-
● Animals are still continuing to learn about their
played is not real and is no social threat. Wolves and jackals
environment
have been observed at play during early developmental stages
akin to those of their domestic cousins. It has been hypothe-
● Different breeds will show different rates of learning
sized that social species of animal have an innate need for
 and different behaviour patterns.
play and that problems such as tail chasing observed in soli-
tary individuals could possibly be self-directed play in the
Environmental influence on behaviour
absence of a play-partner.
Animals learn from the moment of their birth and will copy
behaviour patterns from the dam; for example, if she exhibits
Behaviour patterns
fear of humans they will too. The principle of the hierarchy
 s si ( d,  e r  )
Wolves, the purported ancestor of domestic dogs, are pack
within the litter during the social phase of development, and
animals with a strong social order or hierarchy. This is usually
the primary social relationships are formed. Play develops
related to the ages of individual members and the inherent
essential social skills to enable an individual to integrate suc
dominance hierarchy among the male and female members
cessfully into the social order. In wolf litters, dominant pups
of the group. There is a dominant alpha pair, who will nor-
will become the dominant adults in the pack; in the domes-
mally be the only pairing to produce young, while the rest
tic dog it is more complicated and varies with breed.
will assist in care and defence of the youngsters. The pack
Behaviourists have concluded that dominance shown in early
participates in group hunting, with coordinated hunting
 p on n n  ss  si 
behaviour patterns, and pack size is relative to the size of the
often be copied behaviour (Fig. 13.2). However, if no social
 prey available. For example, if mainly deer are hunted the
contact occurs during the critical period between 3 and 8
packs will consist of approximately seven members. If a terri-
ag i i i pug sdnd ie paaiaso uaa seu hl siaaa
 m hou saop yd a Ans po rd e  A
primary social relationships. This includes relationships with
but individuals may leave to establish their own breeding
246
5 Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
colonies. Hierarchy within the pack is maintained through
● Submissive postures include keeping the body low
social contact and exists in both the male and female ranks.
and in extreme cases lying on the back and presenting
the inguinal region, often in conjunction with
In some areas of the world where there are stray or feral dog
urination, extreme tail wagging, nuzzling, licking, ears
populations, it has been observed that the dogs form social
a, se umo u e mous pue padoop pe yq
3
submissive smile' (Fig. 13.3b); animals in pain or that
food available. Within these small social units an unprovoked
are fearful often take a submissive position but care
hierarchy has been documented, supporting the theory that
 must be shown as they can still display aggression
the wolf is the domestic dog's ancestor and identifying dogs
as pack animals.
● Fear submission is exhibited by the dog crouching
low with its ears back, its tail held downwards and
avoiding eye contact; the dog is uncertain whether
to be friendly or to bite and is consequently
Communicative behaviour
unpredictable (Fig. 13.3c).
Domestic dog populations show many of their wild relatives'
social behaviour patterns, although selective breeding by
Olfaction
man has had an influence. Methods of communication are
A solitary life within a household rather than in a pack may
similar to those seen in the wolf and tend to be via smell,
have resulted in domestic dogs relying more on olfaction
facial expression and body posture, sound and physical
than visual communication. Olfaction or the interpretation
contact.
of scents is an important communication tool, as scent
remains in the environment, providing a long-lasting territo
rial marker and means of communication with other individ-
Body posture
uals of the same species.
This is an important means of communication and it is vital
that anyone dealing with a dog understands what the dog is
The most frequently used olfactory sources are as follows:
'saying':
● Faeces - used to mark the territory of a wolf pack; the
● Dominant postures include standing tall with the
frequency of defaecation increases if alien faecal matter
tail held high, the ears erect and making direct eye
is encountered within the territory. Domestic dogs tend
contact (Fig. 13.3a). In extreme cases the dog may
to defecate with increased frequency when off the lead
snarl and raise the fur along its back - the hackles.
Beware of this!
have interfered with inherent communication methods.
C
B
凸
 Over to expose the genitats (c) Fear submission - ears back against the head, tait held downwards, crouching position, avoids eye contact
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
247
13
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
● Urine - this is the bane of many dog owners' lives!
Urine marking is a common behavioural problem
observed in entire male dogs. Cocking the leg or raised
leg urination (RLU) is displayed by the majority of
male animals. Subordinate individuals can be late
starters but there is an increased frequency in
dominant individuals. The volume of urine passed can
determine if the act is for elimination or for scent
marking. Male dogs will often show the raised leg
display without actually urinating, suggesting a
communication role. Many males and some females
will scratch and kick their back legs after urination or
 defaecation, which is thought to spread scent. Another
theory is that it is to leave scent from the sebaceous
glands or interdigital glands in the feet, or it could also
it be a visual means of communication.
Fig. 13.4 Woives detect each other's status by sniffing the anat
 scents - this is atso seen in the domestic dog
In wolves, double marking of male on female urine
cements pair formation and improves courtship
success, and this is another behaviour that can be
the same sequence of behaviour or a 'fixed action' behaviour
observed in their domestic cousins. Overmarking is
pattern, e.g. in the park dogs will:
common practice in packs but not in lone animals,
suggesting territory marking. Raised leg display is
● Inspect head and anal region
often repeated after urination and is thought to affirm
dominance.
● Females tend to approach the head and males the
bottom
Urine is also an important medium for communicating
the readiness of a bitch to mate and the frequency of
● Both try to reduce inspection by clamping.
urination increases during the oestrus period.
● Anal glands - present in all species of Canidae.
Vocalization
Analysis of the glandular secretions shows differences
This method is useful as a means of long-distance com-
between groups and individuals. The glandular
munication and in circumstances where visibility may be
secretions are secreted on to the faeces as they pass
impaired, e.g. in dense cover or darkness. It also allows an
through the anal sphincter.
individual's location to be identified. This behaviour is more
common in the domestic dog than its ancestors and a broad
● Other glandular secretions - these are used by all
repertoire of sounds has developed. Wolves howl when
species of Canidae. Glands in the facial, tail, perineum
seeking company or trying to contact or recall the pack after
and anal regions secrete social odours. There are two
hunting. Dogs have developed numerous sounds, e.g. a growl
types of gland - the sebaceous glands, which produce
can be defensive, a warning or a threat, and this may be the
oily secretions and the sudoriferous or sweat glands,
result of selective breeding.
which produce watery secretions and are used more
commonly in social communication.
Reproductive behaviour
The anal region in wolves is used for postural communica-
tion - the wolf will sniff the base of another's tail (Fig. 13.4)
Domestic dogs are capable of mating at any time during the
The dominant wolf will present the anus to a subordinate
year, while their wild relatives only produce sperm within a
individual and then it will check the other animal's anus. In
breeding season. The bitch (in domestic and wild species) is
very subordinate animals the anal region will be withdrawn,
seasonally monoestrous. During the oestrus period the bitch
i.e. the tail clamped to prevent examination, and if both
displays visual signs of her season, including a swollen vulva,
members are of the same rank each will present the anus for
and gives off olfactory signals via vaginal discharge and
examination and check the other member's. This is more
increased frequency of urination. Bitches may develop a pref-
commonly seen in male animals but females do exhibit the
Bd    d  d e 
behaviour during oestrus. Domestic dogs exhibit a similar
animals with whom they are already familiar. Mating behav
behaviour between unfamiliar individuals and always follow
iour includes precopulatory play, including sniffing, snout
248
 Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
the wolf bitch will leave the pack and look for an abandoned
hole to form her den. It is advisable to provide the bitch with
a whelping box prior to her due date to allow her to acclima-
tize before the first stages of labour commence.
?
Care-soliciting behaviour
In the wolf, care-soliciting behaviour is particularly seen
when the pack return from the hunt to the pups within the
den. The pups lick around the lips of their dam, trying to
place their tongue in her mouth, which stimulates a reflex
regurgitation of the food in her stomach, which is then eaten
by the pups. The domestic dog may also do this to its owner
on his or her return to the house. Wolves will lift a paw when
asking for affection or mutual grooming and this is often
accompanied by a high pitched whining noise (Fig. 13.6).
The domestic dog will also lift a paw in a similar situation
with the owner and this is often converted into an apparently
Fig. 13.5 Snout grabbing is part of precopulatory play
learned 'trick' for the amusement of others.
grabbing (Fig. 13.5), nipping and chasing, all particularly
seen in inexperienced pairings. This is followed by explor-
Developing social behaviour
   ' a    s 
resultant tie, which is unique to the canine family.
Social behaviour is practised and established during play.
Behaviourists believe that dominance hierarchies in the wolf
are established by 8 weeks of age then retained into adult-
hood. However, research within the domestic dog population
Maternal behaviour
has demonstrated fluidity within the hierarchal structure of
When near to term the bitch will be restless and may roam.
 o s  n    
She may tear up bedding to create a nest and some otherwise
ships are not fixed until adult life.
affectionate animals can become aloof. She will try and find
a secluded area to nest, mirroring the wild situation in which
How do humans fit into this hierarchy? The hypothesis is
that humans are simply regarded by the domestic dog as
other dogs and if there is no social contact between a dog and
a human during the critical period (3-8 weeks) the dog will
demonstrate a fear response to the presence of a human for
the rest of its life.
Properly socialized dogs use adaptations of dog behaviour to
communicate with people; for example, a raised paw is
 indicative of a dog requesting play behaviour from another
dog. Puppies in new homes only experience anxiety when
o jou pue do unnq n Ame umo n uo 
leaving their ‘pack' or litter. Domestication may have
increased the dog's dependence upon humans, as humans
have selected animals with an increased capacity to be
trained. Dogs regard humans as an extension of their social
order or pack and expect them to provide:
● Leadership
●Security
Fig. 13.6 A wolf cub using the paw-raising and licking behaviour to
 soticit affection
● Food
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
249
13
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
● Controlled exercise
Prevention:
● Defined sleep areas and patterns
●Suitable playthings
● Praise leading to social reward.
●Consistency
Canine behavioural problems
● Supervision
All the behaviour patterns described so far act to reinforce the
● Remote training.
human dominance within the ‘pack' and problems only
occur when canine individuals challenge the status quo.
Many behavioural problems have been identified and cate-
Pulling on the lead
gorized in the domestic dog and recently increased public
●Diagnosis via observation/history
awareness of these problems has led to the increased popu-
larity of behavioural therapists and counselling for 'neurotic'
● Prognosis good with owner compliance
pets. Perhaps we should question whether we humans should
not be the species to undergo this counselling as these behav-
● Management - obedience classes, many techniques
iour patterns occur as a direct result of our influence!
available
The following problems do not form an exhaustive list and
●Prevention - also obedience classes and consistency.
 many patients may exhibit multiple manifestations of one or
more of these behaviour patterns.
Excessive barking
● Problem can be reinforced by reward, e.g. bark → want
Antisocial or unruly behaviour
to play → owner plays with dog
Jumping up at people
● Dog barks → wants to play → owner ignores
● Reasons - greeting, play, idiopathic
dog!
● Diagnosis via observation
● Diagnosis via history
● Prognosis is good with owner compliance
● Vocalization may be categorized into:
● Prevention - basic obedience training.
●Territorial/protective/alerting
● Conflict/anxiety-induced
Stealing, raiding rubbish, jumping on furniture
● All different but similar problems
● Stereotypic compulsive
●Reasons - inquisitive, investigative, self-gratifying
● Attention-getting
(food), unaware of disobedience
● Play/social
●Diagnosis - history
● Separation/distress-induced
● Prognosis good with owner compliance
Prevention:
● Management:
● Do not reward barking
● Teach desired behaviour
● Socialization
● Use positive reward, e.g. own toys
●Basic training
● Prevent access to problem areas
● Interruption techniques, e.g. shake noisy can, water
● Bitter sprays, etc.
sprays.
250
 Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
Canine hyperactivity/unruliness
● Submission
● True condition - hyperkinesis or attention deficit
disorder ADD(H) - is very rare in canines
● Fear
● Most have high energy levels or have been
● Separation anxiety
3
inadvertently rewarded for play behaviour patterns
● Excitement
● Younger animals are classically worse
● Normal puppies will show elimination patterns as
● Categories include:
follows:
●Unruliness
● O-3 weeks of age - elimination is stimulated by the
licking of the bitch
●Nipping
     -   s  
● Jumping
● 5 weeks of age - chooses areas to eliminate
● Destruction
● 9 weeks of age - establishes specific eliminations
· Digging
areas
●Barking
● Prevention:
● Diagnosis via history/drug introduction
● Manipulate the above pattern
● Prognosis - if ADD(H), very good with therapy; if not,
● Keep home clean
prognosis is guarded - must have consistency and
owner compliance
● Avoid prolonged confinement
● Management:
● Take out regularly
●Training
● Only use negative reinforcement methods if actually
see or catch in the act
● Owner compliance/retraining
●Positive reinforcement/counterconditioning
● Genetic predisposition considered
● Identify the underlying cause?
● Good candidates for behavioural therapy.
● Diagnostic methods should include physical
examination and laboratory profle and urinalysis -
many animals that suffer from the problem are
Elimination problems
deficient in salts, etc.
Inappropriate elimination
● Prognosis is good with owner compliance
● In the adult this may be due to:
● Management:
● Communication
● Regulation of feeding schedules
● Social status
● Isolate areas of defaecation/urination
● Individual identity
● Introduction to appropriate area/positive
● Social rank
reward
● Underlying disease
● Place food/water in sites used
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
251
13
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
● Identify the culprit in multipet households
● Provide appropriate marking area, e.g. a stake in the
garden, and use positive rewards
● Use odour-neutralizer
● Don't put new objects at 'pee-level' until familiar to
● Crate training.
dog
Submissive urination
Separation anxiety
●Related to social status
● Increased anxiety/activity or depression when owner
● Common in young females/pups
leaves
● Happens in response to dominance by another
● Onset often associated with change in owner
individual
behaviour patterns
● Prognosis in young animals is good; in older animals
● Multiple behavioural problem
where the behaviour is established it is reduced
● Need owner compliance to resolve
● Management:
● Can be associated with owner behaviour patterns, e.g.
● Rule out medical problems/physical problems
picking up car keys, putting on a coat
● Compliance from owner and all people who have
● Also exhibited in new situations, e.g. new relationships
contact with animal required to reduce dominant
with partners or new baby
behaviour
● Can become a huge problem
● Avoid physical punishment
● Increased incidence in geriatric animals
● Counterconditioning - use behaviour not compatible
with urination, e.g. giving a titbit as a greeting
● Treatment is desensitization, enrichment of
 environment, initial confinement and possibly drug
● Prevention - difficult: reduce scolding or dominant
therapy.
behaviour
Food guarding
Excitement urination
● Idiosyncratic onset
● Similar to previous but no other submissive signs
● Inappropriate training
● Reduce vigour of greetings
● Social order imbalance
●Counterconditioning
● Resolve via counterconditioning.
Marking
Coprophagia
n      s n  
● Quite common problem in dogs
● Frequency increased by presence of other dogs or in
 areas frequented by other dogs
● Adjust diet
● Castration is recommended and has a 50% success
● Clean up quickly!
rate
● Counterconditioning
● Confinement
● Lab test as many have an underlying imbalance of
● Remove urine and smell
salts, etc.
252
 Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
● Predatory aggression
Fears/phobias
 Phobias can be managed using:
● Pain-induced aggression
● Habituation
● Play aggression
3
● Flooding
● Maternal aggression
● Systematic desensitization
●Redirected aggression
● Counter conditioning
● Intraspecies aggression
● Shaping and positive reinforcement.
● Pathophysiological aggression
Common fears include: people, babies, children, elderly,
● Idiopathic aggression
uniforms, men, women, disabled individuals, noise, cars,
etc.
● Learned aggression.
Canine aggression
Stereotypic and compulsive disorders
This is the most common behavioural problem referred
● Redirected behaviour - the animal is motivated
for behavioural counselling because of the potential risks
   s  n d 
involved. Aggression is not a very specific term and could
but, if interrupted from this target, will dirert the
be better defined in this case as threatening or harmful
behaviour towards another target.
behaviour.
● Displacement/confict behaviour - the animal is
Factors in determining extent of problem:
motivated to perform two behaviour patterns that
conflict, e.g. both greeting and fear, or yawning and
● Type of aggression
grooming in stressful situations. Displacement
behaviour is a way of defusing a potentially harmful
● Age of onset
situation. For example, two cats may be about to
attack each other, then one or both will start to groom
● Duration of problem
themselves and the tension or pent-up energy is
redirected.
● Intensity of problem
● Neurotic behaviour - the animal is highly
● Degree of danger to people/pets
motivated to perform a behaviour but has insufficient
 outlets to release or de-arouse the compulsion, e.g.
● Ability for owner compliance with rehabilitation
tail biting, chasing, vacuum activity, instinctive
programme
 behaviour performed without a stimulus, e.g. sucking.
licking.
● Can an immediate step/s be taken to reduce risk of
injury?
● Stereotypies - unvarying, repetitive or constant
behaviour patterns that have no obvious outcome and
● Medical factors and whether they can be treated or
may be due to physiological or neurological causes.
not.
Thought to generate natural endorphins that enable
the animal to survive a stressful or boring situation,
Other manifestations of aggression:
e.g. in long-term kennelled dogs.
● Possessive aggression
● Compulsive behaviour patterns - repeated
exposure to displacement behaviour can lead to this
● Fear aggression
behaviour becoming established and compulsive. The
pet loses the ability to control it, e.g. repetitive tail
●Territorial aggression
chasing and excessive grooming.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
253
13
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
1, Neonatal period
Feline behaviour
Birth-2 weeks:
The domestic cat Felis cahus is thought to have descended
● Eat/sleep
from Felis silvesiris silvesiris - the European wild cat - or
Felis silvesiris libyca - the African wild cat. The main evi-
● Dependent on mother.
dence points to the African wild cat as the main ancestor
because attempts to mate domestic cats with European wild
2. Transitional period
cats have produced infertile offspring that are virtually
untameable.
2-3 weeks:
● Begin to gain independence.
Domestication
Domestication was first achieved by the ancient Egyptians in
3. Socialization period
approximately 3000 Bc. There is evidence of cats wearing
collars on hieroglyphics dating from 2600 Bc and from
3-9/10 weeks - some behaviourists believe up to 14 weeks:
1600 Bc there are many paintings, effigies and archaeological
evidence of domestication having been successful. Although
● Increase in social play
mainly speculative, the theory is that because Egypt was based
● Not as vital as comparative period in dogs
upon an agricultural economy there was a large vermin
population feeding on the stored crops. This would have
attracted wild cats and, like the domestic dog, a mutually
● Human contact during this period is important for cats
advantageous relationship may have developed. Natural
 to accept it in later life.
selection of the wild felid population would have led to cats
becoming gradually more amenable to human contact and
4. Juvenile period:
this, combined with human influence via selective breeding
for temperament but not for breed type, led to the domestic
● Sexual maturity reached
cat.
● Breed-dependent
Development of breeds
● Behaviour patterns show no significant difference
The main role for cats was as rodent controllers, a role that
● Motor skills develop further and are enhanced
had already evolved naturally as they are excellent rodent
hunters and killers. There was therefore no need to breed
S     
selectively for aptitude, leaving only selection for tempera-
ment to make the breed more amenable to humans. Different
Special senses
breeds developed in relation to geographical location and
climate. For example, the British breeds are stockier, with
Thermoregulation is partially developed at 3 weeks but fully
dense coats, while Asian breeds have a slender frame and
developed by 7 weeks.
thinner coats. Until recently there were only basic genetic dif-
ferences amongst the breeds but recently, since humans have
Olfaction is partially developed at birth but fully by 3 weeks
begun to engineer different breed types and coat colours for
and hearing partially at birth but fully at 4 weeks. Vocal-
the pet market, there has been a dramatic increase in the gene
ization is limited and sight does not begin to develop until
pool, e.g. development of the Bengal cat by cross-breeding
the 3rd or 4th week.
with African wild cats.
Motor skills
Behavioural development
 Flexor dominance is apparent until adolescence, when it is
replaced by extensor dominance, i.e. the ability to land on all
The cat has a less structured behavioural development pat-
four feet. Motor control is fully developed at 1l weeks and
tern than the dog. The same stages are apparent but are less
prior to this kittens display both rooting and suckling
developed:
reflexes. Social play is seen primarily until weaning, when
254
 Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
essential killing techniques. In feral populations mothers will
Feline behaviour patterns
introduce prey from 4 weeks of age, progressing from dead to
 hm   an 's  n i
Cats are described as being solitary animals with an organised
prey in front of her young, allowing the behaviour to be
social structure that may be due to genetic factors and envi-
?
learned until eventually they can kill unassisted. Predatory
ronmental influence. They are extremely territorial and live
behaviour is instinctive in cats and, regardless of whether
in a variety of situations. For behavioural studies they are
they have encountered rodents or not, they will show preda-
classified as shown in Table 13.2.
tory behaviour from 6 months of age. Other hunting skills are
evidently learned, as cats living in populations that catch fish
Feline territories are divided into two areas: a 'core area'
will learn this skill but cats who have not encountered fish by
and a 'home range'. An individual cat will defend the core
6 months will not be able to do so.
area against intruders while the home area is a shared
resource that can incorporate a number of cats’ hunting
grounds. Cat populations vary from single individuals to
groups and the size of their area depends on food avail-
Play
ability and distribution. Generally there will be a smaller
cat population in territories where food is sourced via
 In cats' play activities are present but not in the same way as
hunting and an increased population in areas where
dogs, for whom play appears to have a purely fun element.
scavenging complements the prey available. It is theorized
Cat play is a safe way to practise the essential skills required
   o d      
to hunt and to hone social skills. There are three types of
groups.
play:
Generally it has been observed that two broad types of social
● Locomotory - can be social or solitary in nature and
structure exist in feline populations and they are dependent
 involves running, rolling, jumping and climbing
upon food supplies:
● Object - focuses upon an object, e.g. ball, dead
● Solitary cats:
mouse; may be solitary or social in nature
● Ranges overlap
●Social - includes wrestling, rolling, biting, fighting.
etc., and can occur with co-specifics, e.g. a human
● Female ranges will be overlapped by larger male
hand that responds as another kitten would.
ranges
Vocalization often occurs during play and early social
play is rough, but this decreases as the concept of pain
● Thought to be food-dependent
is learnt. Behaviour is modifed to remove the final
attack sequence and the kittens will run and then
● Male territories are bigger than females - need more
abort, jumping away and with their back curved at
food
speed. From 8 weeks of age stalking and ‘hiding' is
displayed. Play can occur with adult cats but the
● Female social groups - occur where there is
frequency is reduced. This behaviour is primarily
sufficient food to sustain all
observed between kittens.
●Males are usually loosely attached to group
● Comprise adult females and their kittens
Table 13.2 Categories of cat defined by their habitat
Cat type
Habitat
● Cooperative kitten rearing/nursing
Pet cat
Living with humans; humans provide
● Structure is maintained by antagonism - strange
all food 
females are ousted and progeny are recruited (akin
Feral cat
 Not associated with a human
to lion behaviour).
household; obtain food via hunting,
scavenging or donation by humans
Pet cats are often forced to live in a group, which is usually
Farm cat
Living on farm; some food from
well tolerated. They still have territories and ranges and those
humans/some hunting
of the male cat are often ten times larger than those of the
female.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
255
13
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
Communicative behaviour
Cats use many methods of communication several of which
are able to transmit information over the long distances of
the home range.
Visual
This relies mainly on body posture and facial expression:
● Body posture - a relaxed cat will walk around with
its tail down but when greeting other cats or humans
to whom it is friendly it will approach with its tail
raised (Fig. 13.7). An aggressive cat will hold its tail
close to its body while a frightened cat will arch its
back and raise its tail. The hairs along the back and
covering the tail will be erected to make the animal
look larger and more formidable.
● Facial expression - the cat has a larger range of
口
facial expressions than the dog (Fig. 13.8) and they
Fig. 13.8 Range of facial expressions used by the domestic cat
rely on the position of the ears and whiskers and the
 pupil size. A relaxed cat carries its ears upright and its
(a) Retaxed (b) Atert (c) Aggressive (d) Frightened (e) Conflict
between fear and aggression
whiskers on the side and the pupils of the eyes are
moderately dilated. When alert the pupils dilate and
dilated while a cat in conflict will alternate the ear
the whiskers are tensed; an aggressive cat has erect
position between flattened and turned backwards.
ears turned back, and the pupils are constricted; if
frightened the ears are held flat against the head,
Clawing and scratching - cats will scratch trees, fence
whiskers held stiffly out to the side and pupils are
 posts and furniture and this may have two functions.
Fig. 13.7 Body postures used by the
domestic cat (a) Relaxed posture
(b) Greeting posture (c) Aggression
(d) Fear (e) Conflict - the cat is
frightened, but may attack if cornered
E
D
：
256
 Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
Firstly it is a visual sign of territorial ownership and
Social interactions
the scratches may be tainted with the odour of sweat
glands present around the foot pads of the cat. It is a
Normal meeting behaviour begins with cats nose to nose
 n   on    g 
with no touching. Then the head and neck are extended,
claw condition.
with the body slightly crouched to enable a quick retreat. The
?
cat will attempt to sniff along the neck of the other to the
flank and on to the anus while preventing the other cat from
Vocalization
examining its own anal region. If a cat is either submissive or
Sounds range from miaows, which change according to their
dominant, this ritual breaks down. If dominant, the cat will
demands - some owners claim that their cats talk to them -
persist until one desists or an attack is provoked. Cats also
to loud, carrying yowls, particularly those associated with the
respond to 'model cats in the same way and humans can
queen in season. Purring, usually associated with content-
trigger the greeting behaviour by using an outstretched finger
ment, may also be a sign of low-grade pain. Cats also use
to substitute for the nose. In social colonies individuals
growling and snarling to accompany their threatening body
indulge in a great deal of social contact, and aggression is
posture and facial expression.
rarely seen except between strange females and young males.
Olfactory signs
Behavioural problems
The skin has many small glands, particularly on the cheeks,
which deposit secretions when the cat rubs itself against
Most humans describe their relationship with their cats as
objects in the environment, other cats or its owner. The olfac-
 being 'ideal' but the cat-human bond may be affected by the
tory signals declare ownership of their territory. Cats also
numbers of cats and humans in the household. There are
mark their territories using urine, which is sprayed backwards
overlaps between feline behavioural problems and canine
by the ventrally directed penis at the height of the next
behavioural problems and many of the same principles of
cat's nose. Urine also plays a role in reproduction, with
correction can be applied.
       
known as flehmen when they smell the urine of a queen in
Vocalization
oestrus. Faeces is another significant territorial marker.
Housed cats with an established territory will bury their
● More common in Siamese but can occur in any breed
faeces within the territory but may leave it on the surface at
the boundaries - feral cats and wild cats, e.g. lions, do not
● Genetic predisposition
bury their faeces.
● Cry/howl:
Reproductive behaviour:
● Resources
 Females or queens are seasonally polyoestrous and the begin-
● Attention
ning of the breeding season is determined by day length.
Toms show increased activity during spring months that then
● Social contact
declines as the daylight hours decrease. A queen in oestrus
will roll, rub herself over objects, yowl loudly, known as
● Food
'calling', and exhibit lordosis, i.e. crouching low with her
backside raised and her tail to one side, all of which tell the
● Cats are naturally nocturnal, so this is often worse at
male that she is sexually receptive.
night
● Prognosis good in all but the Siamese (where the
 behaviour is innate) if the source of problem is
Maternal behaviour:
identified and rectified.
Queens make use of an improvised nest and many prefer
solitude, while others crave attention. Infanticide may be
Management:
stimulated by disturbing the queen during kittening or
during early neonatal life and may also be carried out by male
● Identify owner's response to noise and remove
cats (mirror of lion behaviour) and in feral colonies.
reinforcement
Communal denning and nursing among related females has
been observed.
● Identify stimulus and remove or limit it
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
257
13
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
● Use remote punishment (water gun/ultrasonic alarm)
Multicat households complicate the matter and identification
of the individual concerned is often difficult.
● Provide all cat's needs:
Prognosis is dependent upon:
O Toys, food, etc.
●Cause
● Time to play with cat
● Duration
● Possibly a second cat
● Frequency of incidents
● Drug therapy to adjust cat's sleeping pattern
● Number areas soiled
Prevention - lots of TLC and stimulation.
● Number of different surfaces soiled
● Number of cats
Feline inappropriate elimination
● House soiling is the most common behavioural
●Ability to control arousing stimuli
problem
● Temperament
● May be inappropriate urination/defaecation or
spraying.
● Litterbox training or lack of it
 Spraying is marking behaviour, placing urine on to a vertical
● Owner commitment
object, while urination is a natural and necessary function. In
households with one cat there is 25% incidence but in a mul.
● Ability of vet to diagnose and treat problems
ticat household there is 1o0% incidence! Intact males and
accordingly.
females in oestrus are the most common culprits. Identify
whether the problem is due to lack of or poor litterbox train-
ing or due to spraying.
Spraying
● Neutering recommended
Litterbox training
● Simple
● 5% of females and 10% of males continue to spray
 after neutering
● Acceptable litter - avoid strong-smelling types and
identify preferences
● Normal communicatory behaviour
● Choose suitable location
● New objects will increase frequency.
● Confine until litterbox use is established
Influencing factors include:
       o
● Hormones
● Have to establish is cat spraying or urinating?
● Temperament
Diagnosis:
● Population density (house/neighbourhood)
●History
● Indirect signalling (scent on clothes)
● Lab profile
● Changes in environment
● Urine analysis
●Moving
● Additional diagnostic test - X-rays, ultrasound, etc.
● New owner schedule
258
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
● Less time for cat
● Communicatory behaviour
● Inappropriate punishment.
● Social behaviour
● Need to try and identify cause
3
Inappropriate elimination, i.e. on horizontal rather
than vertical surfaces
Management:
● Medical cause must be ruled out
● Give scratching post - may be a long process of trial
● Litter aversions
and error to find a suitable one that the cat likes
● Inappropriate litterbox position
● Locate near sleeping/play areas
● Constant supervision and negative reinforcement
Destructive chewing
● Or confinement and scratching post - positive
● Cat chews/sucks objects
reinforcement of scratching post usage
● Cat chews plants if no access to grass
● Deter from other potential problem areas:
● Kittens - exploratory behaviour
● Loose curtains
● Fabric chewing can become compulsive behaviour
●Double-sided tape
● Genetic predisposition - Siamese/Burmese; wool
● Aversive scents
appears to be material of choice
●Humane booby traps
Management:
● Make it into an outdoor cat.
● Move objects
● Give cat play areas to increase simulation
Aggression
● Try a change of diet
● Second most common problem
● Environmental punishment:
● Varying degrees
●Bitter spray
● Need to rule out medical condition
● Water and cayenne pepper
● Try and obtain a video of cat during outburst plus
 detailed history to aid diagnosis.
● Eucalyptus oil
Take note of:
● Citrus
● Type of aggressive behaviour
● Balloons
● Age of onset
●Hairdryer
● Duration of problem
● Drug therapy.
● Degree of intensity of problem
Scratching objects
● Danger presents to people/pets
● Used to pull exterior layers off claws to keep them in
good condition
● Medical problems
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
259
13
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
● Family commitment
 Petti ng-induced aggression:
● Can you eliminate immediate risk?
● Often seek attention, then flip out when they get
it!
Use desensitization, counterconditioning to stimuli that
arouse behaviour.
Territorial aggression:
Play aggression
● Often seen in multicat households to which a new
● Normal in kittens/adolescents
individual has been introduced
● Need to control if causing a problem
● Or where cats live in close proximity, e.g. housing
estates
● Give toys, negative reinforcement, etc.
● Difficult to resolve, but neutering should help.
Predatory aggression:
● Problem if directed at family or pets.
and
Initial approach and restraint
It is advisable to talk to the owner prior to handling and to
use the owner as much as possible. They know their animal
It is essential that the veterinary nurse knows how to assess
Table 13.3 Restraint techniques in dogs
asa 0n seo pue sop jo aenei Apoq an hardain pu
that a safe approach can be made. In turn, your own body
Method of restraint
Procedure
language, the tone and pitch of your voice and your self-
Muzzling
Ensure that the correct size of muzzle
assurance can influence how an animal reacts to you.
is selected and that the straps are
Generally a reassuring but firm voice with a low tone will put
 adjusted to fit the dog
animals at ease. Never put yourself in a situation where you
Approach from the side or from behind
feel uncomfortable - it is always preferable to request assis-
the patient
tance from a more experienced member of staff than to injure
Hold the scruff securely behind the
yourself or your patient.
 ears; an assistant may be required to
achieve this
Animals require handling to allow:
Pass the muzzle over the dog's nose,
pass the straps behind the head and
● Grooming/bathing
fasten; tighten to required length
Applying a tape muzzle
Select an appropriate length of
● Examination of an injury, for vaccination or when ill
non-conforming bandage to ft around
the muzzle and the head of the dog
● Administration of first aid
bupA moe pue
Form a loop with a square knot
●Administration of drugs
Use an assistant to restrain the dog
Approach from the side and place the
●Health checks.
loop of the bandage over the dog's
nose with the knot at the top
Tighten and cross the free ends under
Dogs
the lower jaw of the dog, then pass
back under the ears
All dogs are potentially aggressive so it is unwise to make
Tie the ends in a quick release bow
assumptions about their nature - look back to the section on
around the back of the head
canine body language.
260
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
and their presence should reassure the dog. Owners can be
● Chemical restraint:
particularly useful to fit muzzles without causing stress to
their pets (Table 13.3). Aggressive behaviour can be the result
● Pharmaceutical restraint includes acetylpromazine,
of a dominance problem, possessiveness over their owner or
 metedomidine, torbugesic and diazepam and should
their kennel, fear or pain, maternal behaviour, environmen-
?
tal factors, e.g. other barking dogs, same-sex aggression or a
pathophysiological factor such as that the dog was bred to
All restraint equipment should be fitted correctly and to
fight.
avoid discomfort to the animal. Take care to avoid rubbing
the eyes or excessive tightening, and never leave a muzzled
Animals that are overtly protective of people or kennels
animal unattended. Never muzzle an animal that is dysp-
should be examined in the absence of their owner; often the
noeic or suffering from emesis.
be reduced by leaving a form of restraint on the animal to
allow ease of handling. Record cards should always be clearly
Lifting
marked with a warning for other staff members that animals
may be aggressive:
● Perform a quick survey to ascertain if any injuries - if
there are, avoid them
● Approach the dog in a quiet but confident manner,
using the dog's name for reassurance.
● Grasp the animal around the front and hind legs,
 pressing it into your own body to prevent struggling
● Lower yourself to the animal's level while maintaining
your own safety.
● Lift with your knees bent and your back straight
● Offer your hand for the dog to smell, using a sideways
● For animals over 20 kg it is a Health and Safety
movement so as not to alarm the animal.
requirement that another member of staff assists
● Avoid handling animals in confined spaces, as this can
● Smaller animals can be tucked under one arm to
 lead to anxiety and aggression if the dog perceives
support the thorax, with your body used to support
itself to be trapped.
the hind limbs
In situations where the animal cannot be handled safely then
● Larger dogs will require two people to lift - the first
the use of restraint equipment or drug therapy can be an
should support the front of the dog while restraining
invaluable tool.
the head in an arm lock and the second supports the
hind quarters and the abdomen (Fig. 13.9)
 All dogs should have a lead and collar fitted while handling
occurs. Additional control can be obtained by using the
following:
● Check chain
●Slip lead
●Halti
●Muzzle:
●Wire or Baskerville muzzle
● Nylon or Mikki muzzle
● Tape muzzle
●Box muzzle
● Dog catcher
Fig. 13.9 Correct method of liffing a dog over 20 kg
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 
261
13
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
● Always ensure that the head is safely positioned away
● The animal's body should gently roll down on to the
from your face to prevent biting.
 table, where it is restrained by applying downwards
pressure to the limbs and using the elbows and
Restraint for examination - standing
forearms hold down the head and body.
 Use a non-slip examination table in an area that is escape-
Lateral recumbency examinations may also be performed on
   od    
the examination room floor, in which case you should lower
ment and examination equipment is close to hand:
yourself to the floor and support the body against your chest,
restraining in a similar way.
● Lift the animal on to the examination table
● Restrain by standing to one side of the animal, placing
the nearside hand around the animal's neck, and hold
Venepuncture
the head in a secure lock
Cephalic vein
● The other arm is used to hold the animal's abdomen
This is the most common site for both intravenous injections
against your body or to apply downward pressure
and for the collection of blood samples. The cephalic vein
on the dorsal neck region to prevent backwards
runs down the dorsal aspect of the lower forelimb:
movement.
● Restrain the dog in a sitting position; in active patients
This is a suitable position for administration of subcutaneous
another assistant may be required to secure the rump,
injections into the scruff or intramuscular injections.
preventing backwards movement
Restraint for examination - lateral
● Stand behind the animal and use the corresponding
recumbency
arm to the foreleg being sampled to raise and extend
the leg
 Use a non-slip examination table in an area that is escape-
proof. Ensure that all potentially necessary restraint equip
● Cup the elbow in the palm of your hand, bringing the
ment and examination equipment is close to hand:
thumb across the crook of the elbow to apply gentle
downwards pressure
● Stand beside the animal as it stands on the table
(Fig. 13.10)
● Rotate the hand slightly outwards and maintain the
 pressure while the veterinary surgeon inserts the
● Place your arms across the back of the animal and
needle
 grasp the off side front and rear legs at the level of the
tibia and radius
● If an intravenous injection is being given, the pressure
can be released as the fluid is injected; if blood is being
● Gently pull the legs upwards and away from you,
collected, maintain the pressure while the blood flows
using your chest to support the animal's body
into the syringe
Fig. 13.10 Restraining a dog on its side
262
Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
● As the needle is withdrawn, apply pressure to the
● Towels
 nard  s  a e ns 
 taneous haemorrhage.
+ Cat graspers.
Restraint for examination
?
Jugular vein
This is a less common site but is useful for the collection of
 As cats are small animals one person can usually safely
larger samples. The jugular vein runs down either side of the
restrain a cat for examination. This can be achieved by
neck in the jugular furrow:
placing one hand over the animal's thorax and scruff, with
the hand securing the head and neck, while the other arm
● Restrain the patient in a sitting position or in sternal
supports the rear of the cat and holds the body into the
recumbency using an assistant to secure the rump
handler's chest. If more secure restraint is required, hold
the cat to your body using one arm while your hand holds
● Hold the head upright extending the neck; it may be
the animal's forelegs, securing them between your fingers
necessary to apply a tape muzzle in some dogs
to prevent scratching. The other arm and hand is used to
restrain the animal's head by placing the thumb upon the
● Prevent the front legs from being raised by placing
caudal skull region, the fore finger on the bridge of the nose
your free hand across them
and the remaining three fingers under the chin to keep the
mouth shut.
● The veterinary surgeon applies pressure to the base of
the jugular furrow to raise the vein and collect a
This position can be used for the administration of sub-
sample.
utaneous injections into the scruff or intramuscular
injections into the quadriceps femoris muscle of the hind
Cats
limb.
In general cats respond better to light handling and as little
restraint as is practically possible. - look back at the section
Lifting
 on feline body language.
There are very few cats that weigh over 20 kg so one person
One problem that can be encountered in cats within the vet-
can safely lift them! Place one hand over the animal's thorax
erinary practice is removing them from their kennels. Often,
to support the sternum and use the other arm to support the
cats are housed with or near other animals, especially dog.
abdomen by placing it around the side of the cat and holding
which can cause stress or fear, resulting in aggression when
the animal into your chest.
the veterinary nurse attempts to remove the cat from its
kennel. In this situation a towel can be used to cover the cat's
head and body, then the cat can be scooped gently out. In
Venepuncture
extreme cases a cat grasper can be effective. Another method
Cephalic vein
is to use a crush cage by placing it against the kennel entrance
with the wire door removed, effectively trapping the cat
A very similar method is used to that in the dog (Fig. 13.11):
between the kennel and the crush cage. A towel over the cage
will make it more welcoming to the cat and hopefully they
● The cat is restrained in sternal recumbency or in a
will enter it; if not then gentle persuasion can be employed.
sitting position
Once the cat is in the cage, quickly replace the wire door and
secure the animal.
● Hold the scruff with one hand
A variety of specialist restraint equipment is available for cat
● Use the other arm to hold the body close to your side
restraint, including:
and using your hand extend the forelimb towards the
veterinary surgeon
● Cat muzzles
● Support the forelimb in the palm of your hand,
● Cat bags
placing your thumb across the crook of the cat's
elbow
●Crush cages
● Apply gentle pressure with your thumb to raise the
● Chemical restraint
vein and rotate your hand slightly outwards
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
263
13
Behaviour and handlinq of the doq and cat
in extension with the hand grasping the mouth shut
 at the base of the jaws
B. The handler, seated, holds the cat in dorsal
recumbency, often enclosed in a towel. The head is
extended with one hand while the other keeps the
body secure (Fig. 13.12)
C. While both methods can be successful it should be
noted that often just raising the cat's head with
minimal restraint applied is the most successful of all.
Bibliography
Aspinall V 2003 Clinical procedures in veterinary nursing.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Fig. 13.11 Restraint for venepuncture using the cephalic vein in
the cat
Beaver BV 1980 Feline behaviour: a guide for veterinarians.W B
Saunders, Philadelphia, PA
Beaver BV1994The veterinarians encyclopaedia of animal
● Maintain the pressure while the veterinary surgeon
behaviour. Iowa State Press, lowa
inserts the needle into the vein.
Beryus J M 1992 Beastly behaviours. Addison-Westey, Reading.
Jugular vein
MA
There are a number of methods used for jugular vein sam-
pling in cats:
Drickamer L C, Vessey S H, Meikle D 1996 Animal behaviour, 4th
edn. W C Brown, Dubuque, IA
A. Hold the animal close to the handler's body using one
arm to lightly restrain the thorax and grasp the
Houpt K A 1998 Domestic animal behavior for veterinarians and
forelegs in the fingers. The other arm holds the head
animal scientists, 3rd edn. Manson, London
Landsberg G, Hunthauseb W, Ackerman L 1999 Handbook of
behavioural probtems of thedog and cat.Butterworth-Heinemann,
Oxford
Pearce J M 1997 Animal learning and cognition, 2nd edn.
Psychotogy Press, Hove, West Sussex
Robinson I 1995 Waltham book of human-animal interaction.
Pergamon Press, Oxford
Thorne C 1999 Waltham book of dog and cat behaviour.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Toates F M 1980 Animal behaviour.John Wiley, Chichester,
West Sussex
Recommended reading
Aspinall V 2o03 Clinical procedures in veterinary nursing.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Fig. 13.12 Restraint for venepuncture using the jugutar vein in the
cat
Chapter 1 provides all details of cat and dog handling.
264
 Behaviour and handling of the dog and cat
Beaver B V 1980 Feline behaviour: Q guide for veterinarians.
Thorne C 1999 Waltham book of dog and cat behaviour.
W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Detailed description of cat behaviour.
Excellent comprehensive coverage of the subject.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
265
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
14
Eguine behaviour and handling
Nicola Ackerman
Key Points
● The wild horse is a sociable animal that lives in herds on
provision of correct travel clothing for the horse and
open plains and most of its behaviour patterns are based
adherence to the guidelines for welfare of the horse
on the need to survive, eat, reproduce and socialize with
during the journey will all help to lower the stress
others of its own species.
levels.
● It is important for your own safety when handling a
● Effective training of horses, particularly foals and young
horse in any situation that you understand the biology
stock, makes use of several different methods and is
 and the basic behaviour of the animal so that you can
based on the horse's natural behaviour and the way in
predict what it may do next.
which it learns.
● Transportation of horses may be unavoidable but can be
distressing for the horse. Correct design of the vehicle,
Introduction
behaviour patterns have evolved to aid their survival, mainly
by rapid flight from a predator. They have also evolved to
The horse has evolved from the small, forest-dwelling
survive on a relatively poor-quality diet that is eaten over a
Eohippus into the incomparable athlete that is today's domes.
long period. During the process of domestication the modern
tic horse Equus caballus. Wild horses are herbivorous prey
horse has proved to be extremely adaptable but when observ-
animals that naturally live in herds on open plains. In these
ing their behaviour the link back to the wild horse must not
surroundings there is nowhere to hide and many of their
be forgotten.
Equine behaviour
rapid changes in light intensity, e.g. going from bright out-
doors to dark indoors, which explains why some horses may
be reluctant to go into or falter when entering a dark stable.
The horse possesses instincts or innate behaviour patterns
that revolve around four basic needs:
The eyes of a horse lie on either side of the head high up
above the mouth. This position means that the horse can
● Self preservation and survival
graze while still keeping a look out for predators and the view
from each provides a monocular panoramic view. The area in
● Food and water
front of the head where the two monocular areas overlap,
providing binocular vision in which depth can be judged, is
● Reproduction
small (Fig. 14.1). This is why a horse may refuse a fence when
pue isn!pe oi au pe jou seu 1! - dun! on Aideus paun
● Socialization and the company of others of the same
gauge the distance to the jump. Horses will nearly always
species.
turn towards a movement in order to judge distance.
Self preservation and survival
Another adaptation is that the horse is able to sleep while
standing, allowing a quick response to approaching pre-
The horse has evolved over many centuries into what we now
dators. Horses only lie down to sleep when in a relaxed, safe
accept as the modern horse. As a prey species the horse has
developed its use of eyesight and its “flight or fight' instinct
the limbs enables the main limb joints to lock and support
and it is important to remember these characteristics when
the weight of the body. The system of muscles and ligaments
approaching the horse and to appreciate why sudden move.
 is mainly based on the suspensory ligament running down
ments in and out of the blind spot may precipitate a strong
the plantar aspect of the large metacarpal. This ligament divides
reaction. The horse's eyesight is not developed to cope with
into two branches inserted into the proximal sesamoid bones.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 267
14
Equine behaviour and handling
Fig. 14.1 The feld of vision
Reproduction
of the horse
The reproductive urge is the most fundamental of all
instincts. Horses have short and seasonal reproductive
periods that occur in the spring and early summer. In the
natural environment a stallion will have to compete for his
harem of mares and spend time interacting with them,
although the mare will initiate many of these interactions.
The stallion will decide who is in oestrus and will ‘court'
these mares for a long time during this period. This behaviour
 is somewhat lost under managed breeding programmes. The
horse has lost its choice of partner and may be inexperienced
in communication with others.
The most frequent behavioural problems experienced are low
libido. This is characterized by a lack of sexual interest and
arousal when the stallion is presented to a mare in oestrus. A
Supplementing the suspensory ligament is the superficial and
detailed examination of the stallion should be performed.
deep flexor tendon (see Ch. 6).
 Pain is a common cause of low libido and can become a neg-
ative reinforcement if repeatedly required to mount while in
The horse will adapt its body language in order to warn off
pain; for example, musculoskeletal pain, especially back pain.
  d   e   
Low libido can also be due to low levels of hormones such as
horse's field, e.g. a dog or human, can result in the horse
testosterone. Stallions that have been kept stabled have been
turning its hindquarters as a threat or even charging with its
reported to have lower testosterone levels than those who
head down at the object. Horses that do not want to be
run with their own harem. When all other differential diag
caught when out in a field can exhibit very distinctive body
noses have been ruled out, the use of hormonal pharmaco-
language expressing their feelings.
logical agents can be used; for example, human chorionic
gonadotrophin (hCG) can be used initially, administered
Food and water
         
circulating testosterone levels, treatment may be with
The horse digests its food through hindgut fermentation in
 gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH).
the caecum by means of colonies of symbiotic microorgan-
isms (see Ch. 12). The horse is designed to eat low-grade
Excessive libido also occurs in a very small proportion of stal-
forage - hay and grasses - at a constant rate. Horses do not
lions and is physically dangerous to both handlers and mares.
posses a gall bladder as there is no need for the storage of bile
Most cases result from poor handling and stallion manage
As horses are designed to graze for a large proportion of the
ment. Evidence has shown that this behaviour may also be
day, if they is stabled and fed a concentrated diet they
inherited. Other reproductive abnormalities such as ejacula
become bored and stereotypical behaviour, e.g. weaving and
tory failure can also cause behavioural problems. Frustration
crib-biting, may develop.
can lead to aggressive behaviour towards mare and handlers.
 Poor semen collection technique may result in a bad experi-
ence for the stallion and may affect future behaviour.
Geldings may also exhibit sexual behaviour, although not as
dramatic as in stallions. Testosterone is not always necessary
for male sexual behaviour in animals - castrated dogs may
still show sexual behaviour. These behaviours continue in the
castrated male as their brains are thought to be 'masculinized'
before birth. Geldings may herd 'their mares' away from
either other geldings or humans. Aggression can also be
shown either towards other geldings or towards humans,
    d     
both stallions and geldings (at a lower rate). Most owners do
not normally notice this behaviour as it is associated with rest
and sleep periods and therefore occurs in the early hours of
Fig. 14.2 Horses competing for food while out in the field.
the morning. This behaviour does not normally cause a
268
3 Fquine behaviour and handling
problem but when a horse is shod he may be stimulated by
their temperament than mares and stallions because
the smell of previously shod mares on the farrier's clothing.
fluctuating hormone levels play a part in behaviour.
The health and management of the horse will also
affect its behaviour.
Socialization and the company
Communicative behaviour
of other horses
Olfactory signals
sau ul punoie anou pue aineu Aq snonesana ane sasioh
Social contact with other horses is very important and, when
Olfactory communication is the only means of communica-
isolated, horses are susceptible to stress, symptoms of which
tion that horses have that is capable of lasting beyond the
can present as stereotypical behaviour or vices. The need for
immediate moment. Smell plays a significant role within the
company is so great that it can mould the animal's personal-
social context of the horse and it helps to identify individu-
ity and behaviour. Treatment of these vices is to attempt to
als, their degree of dominance and the location of other
modify the environment, returning it to a natural state.
 potential rivals.
Grooming is an important part of social interaction. When a
The odour arising from defaecation is important in olfactory
horse is groomed the groom is essentially asking the horse to
communication. Stallions will defaecate on existing faecal piles
in order to leave distinct olfactory messages for other stallions.
 s op sop ao an h 'n n osd a an aq
Mares and geldings tend to first smell the faeces of others and
is better to offer an alternative medium, e.g. coconut matting.
then defaecate nearby, producing an enlarged area of faeces in
rather than punish it.
the field. Most horses will not graze in this area, and particularly
lush green areas may be seen in an otherwise well-grazed field.
One theory of this behaviour is that it keeps grazing zones free
Extrinsic factors
from contamination by intestinal parasites and that there is also
a slight reduction in the number of flies away from the faeces.
All these factors are instinctive or intrinsic factors that
influence behaviour. There are, however, other extrinsic
Stallions also use smell in order to detect when a mare is in
influences on behaviour and temperament that are environ-
oestrus. The horse possesses anl odour-sensitive organ known
mental and are out of the horse's control. Most extrinsic
as Jacobson's organ in the roof of the mouth. This consists of
factors experienced by the modern horse are man-made:
two parallel ducts that open into the mouth just behind the
upper incisors, passing through the hard palate and commu-
● Breed or type - a hot-blooded horse, e.g. a
nicating with the nasal passage. The ducts are lined with spe-
thoroughbred, has different characteristics from a cold-
cialized olfactory cells that sample the air and pass the infor-
blooded horse, e.g. a draught horse. A thoroughbred is
mation on to the brain. The horse draws the smell-filled air
more likely to become excited at the prospect of speed,
through the nose and mouth over the organ and this action
which may be a genetic influence due to the metabolic
is characterized by the upper lip curling while the mouth is
processes associated with the transfer of energy into
open (Fig. 14.3). As the air moves into the ducts the tongue
movement. This is a generalization, and each animal
presses against the hard palate, sealing off the duct openings
should be considered as an individual - some hot-
and trapping the sampled air. This behaviour is called the
blooded horses can be extremely laid back!
with it. Pheromones also play a large role in communication
· Experience and learning - the memory of good or
 and our understanding of their role is increasing.
bad experiences will affect the horse dramatically.
Whether the intelligence of the horse influences the
Vocalization
behaviour is questionable. Learning by exposure is
essential to training, and horses have shown that they
Horses have a limited vocal range in comparison to other
will respond to this form of training. This type of
mammals as they have evolved on open landscapes where they
learning often complements instinctive behaviour.
are rarely out of sight of each other. Vocalization can be used for
a number of different reasons, e.g. a foal trying to find its dam,
● Gender - whether this affects the behaviour and
a horse warning others of impending danger. The horse's ear
learning ability of the horse is debatable. It has been
pinna is highly mobile in order to locate the source of a sound,
shown that the sex of a horse doesn't affect its
although horses are not as accurate at pinpointing the sound as
s   n an   
dogs, which is an important difference between the behaviour
does. Geldings are reputed to be more consistent in
'sads Aroepaid e pue sapads Aaid e jo
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
269
14
Equine behaviour and handling
Fig. 14.3 Horse showing the flehmen response
Tactile communication
system's longest nerve, i.e. vagus X. Stimulation of this nerve
 Mutual grooming provides a means of maintaining the social
has shown to decrease the heart rate and relax the recipient
structure of the herd. Friendship bonds are firmly formed
(Fig. 14.4).
through grooming. These friendship bonds tend to form
between horses of a similar age and social rank. Preferred
grooming sites are concentrated near the autonomic nervous
Visual communication
In order to understand what the horse is 'saying' to us it is
important to know and recognise normal behaviour. The
horse can express its feelings through eye position, nostrils
and ear position. Neighing and snorting also have a wider
range of expression than is generally thought. The ears of the
horse can show alertness, willingness, unwillingness or even
menace. Other means of expression include the mouth (e.g.
baring of teeth), the fore feet (e.g. stamping, pawing), the
hind feet and carriage of the tail.
Stereotypical behaviour
Stereotypical behaviour is classed as behaviour that has been
modified because of stress in the animal. It may also be
described as a series of repetitive actions for no obvious
Fig. 14.4 Preferred grooming sites during mutuat grooming.
reason. Stress may result from a number of different causes,
270
Equine behaviour and handling
e.g. change in routine, being stabled with loss of social
3. Weaving
contact, in fact anything that upsets the natural balance of
the horse. It is difficult to establish whether some horses of a
Weaving is a common sign of boredom or anxiety and can
be exacerbated by stress. During weaving the weight is
behaviour than others. However, as certain bloodlines are
transferred from one fore leg to the other and the head and
subjected to different management regimes, this could be the
neck sway from side to side. This process can cause undue
causal factor.
wear and tear on the joints and tendons of the limbs and
excessive wear on the shoes. Horses that weave are also more
likely to show ‘impulse’ aggression to passers by over the
1. Crib-biting
stable door, which may reflect the frustration that these
animals are experiencing. It is important, however, to rule
Crib-biting or wood-chewing may be associated with being
 out other conditions such as forelimb lameness and neck
fed an unbalanced diet - most commonly diets low in fibre,
pain.
e.g. highly concentrated pelleted foods. Boredom is also a
factor and this vice tends to be highly infectious and will be
Methods of treatment include turning the horse out to
copied by other horses. Pasture-kept horses will normally
pasture, providing a more stimulating environment by siting
chew or consume trees, fences and shrubs in order to increase
the stable in an area in which activity is taking place or by the
the fibre content of their diet. Treatment for this vice is to
use of V-shaped grill on the stable door that stops the side-
increase the fibre content of the diet by increasing the quan-
 n s a s  an n s s
    s         
increasing visual  stimulation  weaving  is significantly
increases the time taken to consume the food and may help
reduced. This factor was more successful when the horse was
the problem. Other precautions such as removing wooden
given the opportunity to interact with or view neighbouring
edges are not always possible, but providing toys or com-
horses.
panions may also help.
2. Cribbing
4. Self-mutilation
This occurs when the horse grasps an object, usually the
stable door or fence, with the incisor teeth and sucks in air
 Self-mutilation usually affects young stallions. It is thought
through its mouth. Cribbing, also called wind-sucking or
that this behaviour occurs more in stallions than in mares as
aerophagia is traditionally cited as a cause of recurrent
they groom themselves more often. Self mutilation is usually
colic and cribbers will also show excessive wear on the
initiated by a stressful event such as moving to a different
incisors. Some horses do not need to grasp anything and
yard or major changes within a breeding or exercise pro-
are able to swallow air just by flexing the neck. If the habit
gramme. Most self-mutilating horses bite a specific area of
is severe, hypertrophy of the ventral muscles (sternocephali-
their bodies, often the forelimbs, the pectoral area, stifle,
cus, omohyoideus and sternothyroideus) of the neck can
flanks or thighs. Some horses will grunt, stall walk and stare
occur.
at the specific area prior to the act of self-mutilation. Other
presenting signs include licking, alopecia and leukotrichia in 
This behaviour is a common form of self-stimulation that
one localized area.
triggers the release of endorphins, natural opioids produced
within the body, which helps reinforce the causal behaviour.
It is important to rule out all other potential causes, e.g.
Other signs may include increased intake of water, weight
seizures, skin complaints or abdominal pain. A number of
loss, poor appetite and gastric ulceration. Treatment includes
    d  r
increasing the horse's fibre intake, use of a cribbing strap.
mally high levels of opium-like compounds such as
prevention of boredom and increasing the time turned out to
encephalins and endorphins, which are released in response
 sn  s o   n a  s
to stressful stimuli. These compounds have an effect of
 documented, but the efficacy of these surgical techniques has
    n      
not been published. Surgical treatments include neurectomy
make the receptors more sensitive to its presence. The stress
of the glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve Xl) and surgical
of being stabled, changes in daily routine, etc., tend to acti-
resection of the ventral neck muscles. There are also reports
vate the stereotypical motor patterns, which in turn stimu-
that in some horses where surgery was successful initially the
lates the release of endorphins, which further stimulates the
behaviour has been relearned. The presence of scars on the
stereotypical behaviour. Endorphins also have an analgesic
         
effect, which may enable the horse to mutilate itself without
horses.
feeling pain.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
271
14
Equine behaviour and handling
Aggression
sciously trains the horse to believe that all the initial warning
signals are unnecessary, and eventually the horse attacks
Aggression has different evolutionary functions in the horse,
without apparent warning. It is therefore vital that anyone
which include maintaining and establishing social hierarchy
handling horses in any way learns to read and understand
within the herd, and in some circumstances aggression can
their visual and vocal signals.
be a normal behaviour pattern, e.g. maternal aggression.
Horses would rather avoid aggression than attack without
In most cases abnormal aggression is due to hormonal
warning and their signals escalate gradually, ranging from
imbalances, often caused by hypertrophy of an endo-
crine organ. The prognosis for these abnormal aggression
themselves at risk if they ignore the initial, more subtle visual
patterns can be good if the initiating cause can be
signals. Such situations often escalate, as the human uncon
removed.
Assessment of pain
can also become depressed, lose interest in their sur-
roundings, hang their heads low and lose their
appetite
Pain is an aversive stimulus and may be an indicator of some
thing that could decrease the chances of survival in the wild.
● Measurement of clinical parameters such as
The horse will quickly learn to avoid anything that has been
temperature pulse and respiration
a cause of pain in the past, e.g. a horse with back pain may
become saddle-shy even though the original pain has sub-
● Measurement of humoral factors such as
sided long ago. Both pain and fear can produce similar behav.
epinephrine (adrenaline), norepinephrine
ioural responses and elicit physiological and behavioural
(noradrenaline), cortisol and endorphins in the blood
responses that are aimed at either minimizing or avoiding the
 can give an indication of the level of pain.
specific conditions that produced them. It is therefore impor-
tant when diagnosing behavioural problems to determine
The use of a pain scoring system may help to assess the
whether the response is due primarily to a painful stimulus or
level of pain objectively. For example, a normal horse has
a conditioned fear response.
a score of O; a horse that is grinding its teeth has a score
of 3; a horse that is rolling on the ground has a score of
It is vital that the veterinary nurse is able to recognise and
5 - the higher the score the more need there is for analgesia.
assess the signs of pain in the horse. This is achieved by:
Such a method is non-quantitative and relies on the same
person assessing the level of pain that they feel the animal is
● Observing body language - a horse in pain,
experiencing - different people may have different pain cri-
depending on severity of the pain, may be restless
teria. It also depends on how experienced the observer is in
sweating, kick, stamp or bite at certain body areas, kick
deterting the subtler behavioural changes in that particular
bedding around, grind their teeth and be vocal. Horses
animal.
Handling
g and
closer you are, the less the force of any movement or kick.
Make sure you know what you are going to do, have the
restraint
nok j diau asueio pue pueq on Apean puadnba poano
think you may need it.
The key to handling horses is to be able to anticipate through
their body language and facial expression what they are likely
Approach and catching
to do. They are strong animals whose behaviour can some-
times be violent and unpredictable and an awareness of their
● Approach from slightly to one side of the head,
natural behaviour will help to prevent accidents. The handler
remembering that a horse is unable to see either
should always wear stout boots, preferably with steel toecaps
directly in front or directly behind itself
and in some cases it may be necessary to wear a safety helmet
to protect the head. The majority of horses will behave better
● Speak to it gently using a low tone as you get near
if handled with firmness and kindness and a horse will always
be able to detect if you lack confidence. Always stand close to
● Place your hand on the lower neck or shoulder and
the horse near to its head and away from the hind legs - the
 put a rope around the neck
272
2 Equine behaviour and handling
S    n a    o
Leading
caught and allow you to put a headcollar or halter on
them
● Horses are traditionally led from the left or near side
q   dan o n os n ing
● If a horse is difficult to catch it should wear a
sides - use of the right or off side may be necessary
headcollar in the field
when walking on the road towards oncoming traffic
● Most horses can be caught by offering them a bribe
· Hold the lead rope close to the horse's head and the
in the form of food, e.g. an apple or Polo mint,
remaining rope loosely in the other hand - never wind
but keep it hidden until you have caught the
it around your hand in case the horse suddenly pulls
4
horse
away
● There are many suggestions for catching difficult
● Difficult or unpredictable horses should wear a bridle
horses and the handler will soon invent methods
with the reins taken over the head, which provides
suited to their own individual horse.
extra control
● When you are ready to move give the command 'walk
Tying up
on', take a step forward and the horse should follow
All horses should be trained at an early age to stand quietly
● If the horse does not move tap it on the side with a
while tied up:
small stick held in your hand
● Select a suitable ring, post or rail - this should be
● Do not tug at it or stare it in the face
firmly attached and should not be part of anything
that will bang, rattle or fall over if the horse pulls
● If the horse refuses to move ask someone to go behind
away
with a broom or long whip to urge the horse forward -
they should of course stay out of range of a kick
● Always use a quick release knot (Fig. 14.5). A piece of
string can also be incorporated into the lead rope to
· If 'trotting up' to show a horse's paces or for the
allow easy breaking or untying if the horse falls over or
investigation of lameness, lead the horse away from
pulls backwards. This will prevent head injuries but
the observer in a straight line for about 25 m. Turn the
horse around away from the handler, to reduce the risk
escape
of being trodden on, and walk past the observer.
Repeat at a trot
●Never leave the horse unattended.
● The lead rope should be held in an open hand to allow
free movement of the head but you must be ready to
grasp the rope if the horse plays up
● When you are ready to stop, give the command 'halt' or
'stand' and stop walking - the horse should then stop
● Young foals should be trained to these commands
from an early age.
Picking up the feet
A horse should be trained to allow its feet to be picked up for
daily cleaning, regular inspection and shoeing:
● To lift a fore foot, stand facing the tail and run the
hand closest to the body down over the elbow, back of
Fig. 14.5 A quick release knot.
knee and tendons until you reach the fetlock
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
273
14
Equine behaviour and handling
● Move your hand over the anterior part of the cannon
 bone to the medial part of the fetlock
● Tug at the fetlock using the command 'up' and the
horse will lift its foot up
● Foals should be trained early to get used to this
 procedure. Obliging horses will soon learn to lift their
feet ready for you once they know what is required.
Examination of the mouth
This may be necessary for examination of the teeth, for treat-
ments such as tooth rasping and for determining a horse's age:
● Steady the nose with one hand and insert the other,
palm downwards, into the diastema (space between
the corner incisors and the first premolars)
Fig. 14.6 Lifting a hind foot
● Grasp the tongue and gently pull it out sideways so
that it is out of the way
● Tug at the fetlock giving the command ‘up
● In this position an oral medicine can be given; for
tooth rasping it may be necessary to use a gag, which
● As the horse lifts its foot up, catch the toe of the hoof
keeps the mouth open and leaves the hands free.
and support it with your other hand
Use of the twitch
● The horse should be encouraged to stand square,
otherwise it may lean on you
Additional restraint may be needed for some individuals, par-
ticularly if you need to carry out treatment or examination
● Do not allow the horse to snatch its foot away, as it
on a frightened or injured animal. In most cases a twitch pro-
may stamp it down on your toe
vides sufficient restraint. This consists of a short pole with a
loop of 6-7 mm thick rope at the end:
● To lift a hind foot (Fig. 14.6) run the same hand over
the horse's back down the rump and back leg to the
● Using your finger and thumb, grasp the horse's upper
point of the hock
lip and draw it through the loop of the twitch
Fig. 14.7 Application of a twitch
274
Equine behaviour and handling
● Twist it up firmly, having removed your hand and
It was originally thought that the twitch provided a certain
maintain the position for several minutes until
degree of pain that distracted the horse's attention from what
instructed to release it (Fig. 14.7)
was being done to it. However, research now shows that
       sa p 
● Leave the twitch in place for a minimum amount of
analgesic/anaesthetic effect and the horse appears sedated
time and never for longer than 5 min
after a few minutes - enough time for minor procedures to be
performed.
● Never apply to the ears, as permanent damage can be
inflicted.
Transportation of
good ventilation. Horses should not to be tied up with their
heads in an abnormally high position, as this can lead to
horses
commensal bacteria spreading to the lower respiratory tract.
Transportation can cause distress, leading to a loss of condi-
welfare of the horse during transportation. There are several
tion and even metabolic upset. Correct preparation of the
factors that should be taken into consideration to reduce
animal prior to transportation is vital and can reduce stress
stress while travelling:
levels. In the UK the Horserace Betting Levy Board issue
guidelines on the transportation of horses. There are three
● The number of animals being transported in one
legislative orders that govern the transportation:
vehicle
● The Horse (Sea Transport) Order 1952 (amended in
● Provision of food and water
1958)
● Ambient temperature
● Transit of Animals (Road and Rail) Order 1975
(amended in 1979 and 1988)
● Ventilation
● The Welfare of Animal Transit Order 1997; Transport
● Degree of movement, which is determined by the
of Horses came into force July 1998.
 length of rope on the head collar; the horse must be
able to balance itself without undue effort and have
These orders set out details of dimensions of transport vehi-
enough room to urinate and defaecate
cles, lengths of time in transport, rest periods and which
animals can and cannot be transported, e.g. ill, unfit or preg.
● The presence of a stable mate or other companion
S        
portation of pregnant mares should be avoided during the
● Habituation to travelling.
20-45-day stage of gestation as during this stage there is a
transfer from the yolk sac to chorioallantoic placentation and
Horses are sensitive to movement underfoot and are aware of
the risk of abortion increases.
the stability of the ground beneath them. This may help to
explain why some horses are reluctant to cross bridges or tra-
When transporting horses over long distances it is important
verse ramps, which may lead to an unwillingness to load for
to seek veterinary advice and to have the horse's health
travelling. This may reflect genuine apprehension, stubborn-
checked prior to movement. Horses with respiratory disease
pq snd e  ssa   o a si se o s
should not be transported if possible. Clinical examination
experience, e.g. travelling too fast, poor balance or falling off
with the emphasis on subclinical respiratory problems should
the ramp during loading or unloading. If the horse is difficult
be done prior to lengthy trips. Horses transported in close
to load it is important that plenty of time and patience is
proximity with little ventilation and dusty hay all predispose
given to the procedure.
to respiratory problems such as 'shipping fever'; the name
given to respiratory disease linked to transportation. This
Travel by
 road
manifests itself as depression and inappetence with the pres-
ence of a soft cough, shallow frequent respiration and a
The method of transportation can have an effect on the horse:
febrile response. Appropriate treatment can be effective but
the condition may be life-threatening. The condition may be
● Type of vehicle - horseboxes, i.e. those with an
prevented by the use of dust- and mould-extracted hay and
integral cab, tend to be better ventilated and have
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
275
14
Equine behaviour and handling
more head and body room than trailers. They also
and nitrogen dioxide may disrupt the epithelial barrier
provide a smoother journey than a trailer. Some
between capillaries and alveoli in the lungs, which
horses prefer travelling facing backwards rather than
increases their permeability to bacteria. Also an altered
forwards, or standing crosswise (diagonally), as
rate of pulmonary aerosol clearance after travelling
happens in a horsebox. Horses should not travel back-
increases the bacterial numbers in the lower
wards in a trailer unless the correct modifications have
respiratory tract.
taken place.
Travel by air
● Ramps - the incline of the ramp into the vehicle
should be no greater than 25? and should provide
sn pue uo ao suq si ne Aq uoeod
secure footing.
either an enclosed‘air stable' or an open-stall system. There
are strict regulations concerning air travel. The ratio of per-
● Journey times - can vary from an hour to a few days.
sonnel to horses should be one groom to every three horses
The usual practice is for the horse to rest overnight in
but this is not always possible because of the number of seats
     i   ss
available on some aircraft. Most bloodstock shipping agencies
neys create long periods when the horse is
arrange for an equine clinician to travel on long-haul flights.
standing in one position. This can create muscle
Air travel is expensive so few horses are transported in this
fatigue and associated myositis.
way. When travelling by air the horse should wear the same
 protective clothing as when travelling by road.
● Ventilation - poor ventilation can have a detrimental
effect on the health of the horse. Exhaust fumes and
fumes from excreta can affect the respiratory system,
Clothing for travel
as can mouldy hay. It is advised that dust and mould
particles are removed from hay prior to travelling.
The choice of travel clothing depends on the time of year and
Exhaust fumes such as ammonia, carbon monoxide
the weather on the day of travel, and no matter what the
276
Equine behaviour and handling
length of journey the protective clothing must always be of
box or trailer is steep, parking on a slope or in a loading bay
the same standard (Fig. 14.8). Protective leg bandages should
can reduce the angle and benefit the horse. If support is
always be worn. They may be either stable bandages with
required straw bales can be used unless a modified ambulance
plenty of gamgee padding or specially designed travelling
is available.
boots, which must fit correctly and be non-slip. If the band-
ages do not cover or protect the knees and hocks, additional
 All fractures should be immobilized and supported prior to
hock and knee boots must be worn. Over-reach boots can also
transportation. If the horse has a fractured forelimb, travelling
add extra protection. A poll guard should also be worn to
the horse backwards reduces the risk of it inadvertently putting
protect the head. The low headroom of the trailer or horse
weight on the fractured limb if the vehicle stops suddenly. If a
box puts a head-shy or nervous horse at risk of injury. A tail
hind limb is fractured face the horse forwards. The head and
bandage and tail guard will help protect the soft tissue in the
neck should be left free to move and act as a counterbalance.
tail and stops unsightly rubbing. It should be remembered
There is great debate on the use of painkillers before moving
that the horse will cool more quickly if it is moving and in a
and transporting horses that have fractures and there is a belief
draughty environment and the horse that sweats while being
that pain relief should not be given in order to discourage the
transported may be anxious rather than hot. A combination
 horse from bearing weight on the fractured limb. A means of
 of a sweat sheet and a warmer rug may be necessary.
communication within the vehicle is important so that the
handler can inform the driver of any problems. If an injured
it - one with hands around the neck and thorax and the other
Transportation of sick or injured
with hands around the abdomen and hindquarters. The mare
horses
should be allowed to remain close by.
Sick and injured horses should not be transported unless
Sedation for travelling should be avoided in all animals
 n s ao e s  ss a  a p
because the sedative creates problems with balance and ther-
 transported it is still vital to provide protective clothing while it
moregulation, and when sedated the horse may over-react to
is travelling. Secondary injuries to any part of the body can be
certain stimuli, causing panic.
detrimental to the horse - if there is already an injury to one
leg, a secondary injury to one of the supporting limbs may be
disastrous. Additional stress to the animal should be prevented
Use of equine ambulances
and care should be taken not to unbalance the horse.
Equine ambulances attend most equine events and have been
In some cases transportation is unavoidable, e.g. disorders
such as exertional rhabdomyolysis (tying up) require that the
might happen there. The low ramp entrance is long to reduce
horse is not made to walk any distance at all as this exacer
the angle of incline into the ambulance. Internal partitions
bates the condition, the degree of pain and muscle damage.
are easily positioned and moved around to allow access to
different areas of the horse. Support can be provided from
The transport should always be taken to the location of the
 slings, and winches are available to drag unconscious patients
horse; not the horse to the vehicle. If the ramp of the horse-
into the ambulance.
Training the
e horse
● Observation - the horse watches another horse
performing a particular behaviour pattern and then
Horses are extremely adaptable and their learning capability
 repeats the pattern when given the opportunity
encourages approaches to training that work with, rather
than against, their natural behavioural traits. Horses learn by
● Association - the horse connects a response with a
four different methods and each training regime uses one or
particular stimulus.
 more of these. They are:
Training methods
● Habituation - the horse becomes used to a stimulus
and overcomes its initial response, e.g. fear
The methods used to train horses can be related to their
natural behaviour patterns and can be divided into:
● Sensitization - the horse may be conditioned to
respond to a stimulus by previous training using
● Classical or respondent conditioning - another
another stimulus
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
277
14
Equine behaviour and handling
was originally identified by Pavlov. An unconditioned
● Operant counter-conditioning - there are many
stimulus produces a reflex type of response, e.g.
names for operant counter-conditioning. These include
salivation in response to the smell of food. If a neutral
counter-commanding, response substitution and com-
stimulus is then paired with the original stimulus - for
peting response training. It uses a conditioned
example, Pavlov rang a bell when he fed his dogs -
response such as 'lie down' in the dog, to control the
eventually the use of the neutral stimulus will produce
undesired behaviour. For example, a dog with a history
the response and the response is said to have been
of attacking other dogs is told to lie down until the
conditioned
other dog has passed. A good example of this in the
horse is a method of dealing with horses that barge
● Operant or instrumental conditioning - best
when leaving the stable or horsebox. Standing the
 described as trial-and-error learning, using negative or
horse in a neutral environment while being tied up
positive reinforcement to 'reward' the behaviour that
is then reinforced with food. The handler uses a
was performed. For example, the horse hears the
keyword, e.g. 'stand' and the horse will soon learn
sound of food being shaken in a bucket, it approaches
to associate this word with the behaviour - this
and receives the food as reward. A negative
behaviour is a conditioned response of standing still.
which the stimulus is removed. For example, pressure
from the bit increases the probability of a behaviour
Habituation
recurring, e.g. the horse working on the bit.
Unfortunately, punishment is widely overused, and
Habituation is another aspect of learning and is seen in most
there is a danger that the horse might associate the
animals. A great deal is known about socialization and habit-
punishment, usually the whip, with the wrong aspect
uation of puppies and horses learn in the same way. Habit-
of the situation. A prime example of this is when a
uation occurs when the stimulus response is repeated with no
horse refuses a jump and the rider then uses the whip.
reward until the response no longer occurs and is important
Some horses may then become anxious about the
because an animal that reacts to every stimulus in its envi
situation and start rushing at the fences.
The animal learns that there is no resulting action from the
Once the goal has been reached it is important that the learn-
stimulus and learns to ignore it.
ing is reinforced through occasional exposure to what were
previously problem elements so that the learning is not for-
s  a n os sss   
exposing the horse to a new experience it is important that
of a lower level than that achieved in the previous session,
the trainer acts as calmly as possible and takes very little
then worked up to the more complex stimuli and beyond if
notice of what caused the response as this may reinforce the
necessary.
initial reaction. For example, if a horse shies at an imaginary
object, ignore this behaviour; punishment of the shying will
only focus the horse's attention on the incorrect response,
thus reinforcing it.
Counter-conditioning
Counter conditioning is the process whereby an animal is
Desensitization
trained to respond in a way that is incompatible with the
response that is to be eliminated, when presented with a
This method is used to help overcome phobias and other
problem-evoking stimulus:
anxiety-based problems and is commonly used alongside
counter-conditioning. It is used to raise the threshold at
● Classical or respondent counter-conditioning -
which an animal responds to a given object or stimulus. The
this uses an unconditioned response as the desired
horse should be shielded from the natural stimuli while the
behaviour. For example, this could be the sound of a
desensitization process is going on. It is important when
whistle being blown before getting its food. The sound
beginning this technique that the horse is relaxed and it is
now predicts eating its favourite food. Once the
then gradually introduced to representations of the feared
response has become established the sound can be
response, e.g. if the horse is frightened of clippers use a
used to gain the animal's attention when a potential
recording of the clippers. The recording is then played at
problem is approaching, e.g. a dog in the yard. The
increasing volume until the horse slowly becomes desensi-
behaviour that the horse normally performs, i.e. eating
tized to the stimulus. Progression on to each stage should not
its food, is an unconditioned response, as the horse
occur until full desensitization for each step has taken place.
would do this naturally.
Once this has been achieved the clippers can then be intro-
278
Equine behaviour and handling
duced nearby while the horse is given food (positive rein-
handler. The rubbing down of the foal is also a method of
forcement) and then progression can be made until you are
desensitization, i.e. it makes the foal less sensitive to the act.
able to clip the animal. This method is time-consuming but
Touching and handling of the animal's ears, nose, mouth,
beneficial.
feet, tail and other body parts will aid in desensitization and
habitulization. Other activities can include placing electric
clippers on the foal and rubbing the foal with crackling
Training foals
 plastic. The foal can also be desensitized to loud noises, police
whistles, loud music and gunfire. When performing imprint
The most important time for learning is as a neonate. The
training it is impossible to overdo a stimulus, but it can be
correct procedures at the right time will produce dramatic
underdone. Most foals will habituate to 30-50 stimuli so use
T
results. The neonatal foal will be able to stand up and then
more than is necessary, e.g. if desensitizing the foal to having
learn to follow its mother a couple of hours after parturition
's ooi-os n d pu joo a dn yid dn pid poo s
-- the following response. It is thought that the foal is born
with a capacity for automatic limb control, a characteristic
When imprint training foals it is important to conduct all
possessed by all four-limbed animals, enabling them to
activities from both sides of the foal, as horses can become
balance and move in a coordinated fashion within hours of
one-sided. There are many thoughts as to why this may
birth.
occur, one being that most foals suckle from one side of the
dam, showing a left- or right-sided preference; another is
Coprophagy, i.e. ingestion of faeces, is common in foals and
 that like human infants the foals are simply born one way or
this behaviour enables the foal to acquire the hindgut bacte.
the other.
ria needed for fermentation of cellulose (see Ch. 12). It is also
thought that this behaviour imprints on the foal the smell
and taste of various plants in the faeces of its dam so that it
Training aids
learns to recognise what can be eaten and what cannot. Foals
do not exhibit normal adult grazing behaviour until 6 weeks
There are many commonly used training aids - bits, reins,
of age, but do exhibit play or exploratory grazing, in which
head collars, lunge reins, cavessons, etc. - and it is important
 they learn to select suitable grazing material through trial and
to select the appropriate type for the job in hand.
error.
Bits
Imprint training
There are several types of bit available and when choosing
 Imprinting is an adaptive form of learning and occurs very
one it is important to remember that it must be:
early on in a foal's life. It is especially important in prey
species as newborn animals do not have time to learn
● Of the correct size in length and thickness
through associative learning who their mother is before they
have to be able to run with the herd. The process of imprint-
● Properly fitted
ing creates a mental template that helps the foal to form an
image of what a horse should look like and helps to create a
● In good condition
special bond between the foal and its dam. It is thought that
this might explain why some stallions in adult life tend to
● As mild as possible while still allowing the rider good
 prefer mares of a particular colour.
communication and control
Imprint training gives a singular opportunity to make han-
● Permitted within the level or discipline at which you
dling easier, reduce injuries and enhance later training. It
are competing.
  s  iod n  s
mare is stabled for foaling. It also helps if the brood mare has
Bits can be placed into ‘families':
a good temperament, to allow the handler to start the
imprint training.
● Snaffle - considered to be one of the mildest bits but
 there are several different types and some can be very
Once the umbilical cord has been broken the foal should be
severe. A simple jointed snaffle has the action of
rubbed down. This process has a habituating effect on the
flexing the poll and lower jaw and encourages the
foal. Once the mare has returned to her feet, allow her to
horse to raise its head. The bit acts on the tongue, on
smell and clean the foal with the handler present, enabling
the outside of the bars of the mouth and on the lips
the foal to simultaneously bond with the mare and the
or the corners of the mouth. The snaffle produces a
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
279
14
Equine behaviour and handling
Types of bit
cheek pieces that create the required leverage. The
Hackamore can be a useful means of regaining
confidence in a horse that has suffered mouth injuries
or biting problems in the past; however, it is severe and
can cause a great deal of damage in the wrong hands.
Loose-ring Bradoon
Pelham
All bits work as a negative reinforcement. Application of pres
sure on the horse's mouth from the rider makes the horse
give way, relaxing the jaw. Acknowledgement from the rider
by instantly relaxing the rein as soon as the horse responds is
the reward. Other training aids, such as martingales, that
have direct or indirect contact with the bit work as the same
Egg-but snaffle
Kimblewick
negative reinforcement. With indirect contact, e.g. a running
martingale, pressure is applied to the reins at a different angle
from that of the rider's hands. Thus, when the horse raises its
 head, pressure is applied by the martingale. When the horse
then lowers its head in response the pressure stops, which
acts as a negative reinforcement.
Hackamore
Reins
Double brindle (Weymouth)
The reins are a direct means of contact with the horse. If the
rider is tense, this is directly transferred to the horse via the bit.
Fig. 14.9 Types of bit
Rubber-covered reins are not advisable for schooling or dressage
 as they 'deaden' the feel and vibration to and from the horse.
nutcracker action on the tongue. The use of rings or
keys can help stimulate saliva production, which may
Head collars
help to relax the jaw.
The head collar is one of the most common ways of restrain-
● Double bridle - combines a snaffle (Bradoon) with a
ing the horse. The head collar should fit well and be made of
curb bit (Weymouth) and chain (Fig. 14.9) and, in
substantial materials. The use of head collars with tightening
order to fit both bits into the mouth, both are finer
throat lashes or nosebands can increase control of the horse.
and lighter than usual. The effect of the combination
The lead rein is also a point of communication with the horse
of bits is to add the action of the Weymouth, which
and the horse will be able to detect if the handler is tense.
has a lever action on the lower jaw. This leverage is
dependent on the length of the cheeks of the bit and
the curb chain. The curb bit should not be used
Lungeing and long-reining
without the Bradoon, since the constant pressure on
the lower jaw will numb the mouth.
Work from the ground includes lungeing and long-reining
 and these training methods can be beneficial in the following
● Pelham - a single bit used with a curb chain (Fig. 14.9).
situations:
The bit is a combination of the curb and Bradoon in one
mouthpiece. Two reins should be used so that the rider
● In the initial stages of training/breaking a young horse
can facilitate the curb or snaffle action when required.
Pelhams usually have an unjointed mouthpiece, which
● When the rider is injured and unable to ride
some horses prefer. It is commonplace to use leather
rounders so that only one rein may be used. This can be
● When the horse cannot wear its normal tack, e.g. if it
an advantage for young riders but may act as a source of
has a girth gall or a sore mouth
confusion to the horse.
● In order to assess a problem that can be more easily
● Bitless bridle or Hackamore - this bridle acts by
 seen from the ground, e.g. lameness
exerting pressure on the nose and poll, which is
achieved by the use of a single rein attached to long
● To help improve the horse's obedience to the voice.
280
0 Equine behaviour and handling
Fig. 14.10 Lungeing has many benefits inctuding the assessment of tameness
When lungeing the horse, the handler is positioned in the
Harris P A, Gomarsall G M, Davidson H P B, Green R E 1999
centre of the circle slightly behind the level of the horse's
Proceedings of the BEVA speciatist days on behaviour and nutri-
shoulder (Fig. 14.10). This helps to encourage the horse to
tion. BEVA, London
move forward. The lungeing cavesson should be worn with
adequate padding to the noseband, providing protection to
Hastie S & Sharples J 1999 Horselopaedia. Ringpress Books,
the delicate turbinate bones of the nose. Training aids can
Cheltenham
be used when lungeing, e.g. side reins, which provide an
even pressure on the bit to encourage the horse to work on
Higgins A J, Wright I M 1995 The equine manual. W B Saunders,
the bit.
Philadelphia, PA
Long reining provides an alternative to lungeing and pro-
Hodgson D R, Rose R J 1994 The athletic horse. W B Saunders,
vides training for horses in the initial stages of breaking a
Philadelphia, PA
horse to harness. Instead of a single rein, two reins are used
and the handler is positioned behind the horse. The pressure
Smythe R H, Goody P C, Gray P 1993 Horse siruchure and move-
of the reins against the side of the horse encourages the horse
ment. J A Allen, London
to move forwards.
Vetstream Equis CD-ROM. Vetstream Lid, Cambridge
Bibliography
Recommended reading
Anderson R S, Edney A T B 1991 Practical animal handling.
Pergamon Press, Oxford
McGreevy P 2004 Equine behaviour. A guide for veterinarians and
equine scientists. Elsevier, Oxford
Budiansky S 1997 The nature of horses: their evotution, intelli-
gence and behaviour. Weidenfeld& Nichotson, London
Comprehensive guide to the behaviour of the horse.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
281
14
Equine behaviour and handling
Walrond S 1989 Breaking a horse to harness: a step-by-step guide.
Williams M 1995Horsepsychotogy.JA Allen,London
JA Allen, London
Interesting subject that helps you to understand why horses behave
Easy to follow instructions for breaking a horse.
as they do.
282
2 Equine behaviour and handling
15
Restraint, handling and
administration of medicines to
exotic species
Sharon Reid
Key Points
● The exotic species commonly kept as companion animals
● It is often important to determine the sex of an animal,
do not appreciate excessive human contact or being
e.g. to prevent or to encourage reproduction, prevent
handled and in many cases this may be a distressing
fighting. increase the value of the animal or simply to
experience that may affect their health. Handling
 give the animal an appropriate name. There are different
should be avoided unless it is strictly
methods of sex determination that vary according to the
necessary.
species in question.
● For the welfare of the animal and the safety of the
● An exotic animal under veterinary treatment is likely to
 handler it is important that anyone dealing with these
need medicine. There are many routes of administration
S
species is aware of the correct methods of handling and
and the most appropriate methods depend on the species
restraint.
in care.
Introduction
needs of these species vary widely and are certainly different
from most of the patients in the kennels. It is therefore
In many practices it is no longer rare to be presented with an
important for the welfare of the animal and your own safety
exotic animal requiring some form of veterinary care and
that you understand a little about their biology (see Ch. 5),
nursing. The word 'exotic' may be taken to mean any animal
how they should be handled and how to give them the med-
that is 'out of the ordinary' and neither a cat nor a dog. The
icines prescribed by the veterinary surgeon.
Small mammals
dyspnoea. Always observe the patient quietly before
handling and if you are in any doubt it is best not to
Before handling any small mammal you must consider
 handle it. Any excessive or rough handling could be
whether it is really necessary to handle the animal and, if you
fatal
must do it, whether it is safe to do so. Ask yourself the fol-
lowing questions:
● Is there any reason to suspect metabolic bone disease?
Has the animal got any fractures or a past history of
● Do you know how to handle this animal safely
 having had one? Are their any signs of poor growth;
without doing harm to yourself or to the patient?
what is the animal being fed; is the diet lacking in
calcium or vitamin D? This mainly occurs in young
● Is the animal a well-handled, friendly pet or an
animals - often rabbits and sometimes guinea
aggressive one? Some ferrets can bite severely;
pigs.
chipmunks are fast and can harm themselves and you
as they try to make a run for freedom
 Once you have decided that the animal must be handled you
must consider the method of restraint - manual restraint is
● Is the animal debilitated in any way and is there any
preferable but chemical restraint is occasionally necessary.
 indication of respiratory distress? For example, in rats
Before removing any animal from its cage select a room that
a nasal discharge may be shown by the presence of
contains few objects behind which the animal can hide
dried discharge on the forearms; rabbits with
if it escapes and ensure that all doors and windows are
pneumonia may have a nasal discharge and
closed.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing:
283
15
Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
Rats and mice
(Fig. 15.1). Once it is on the table you should grasp the
scruff at the back of the neck firmly between the
Rats and mice only have one means of defence and that is
thumb and forefinger. You now have the mouse
their teeth. Most of them are easily handled and not very
 securely restrained for examination or for
aggressive but they can give nasty nips if handled roughly or
administration of any medication.
incorrectly:
● Rats tend not to bite unless roughly handled. The
● Mice tend to bite if worried, stressed or handled by an
 1 id Aq si  a e d id 0 m ns
unfamiliar person. The best way of handling a mouse
around the middle with one hand just behind the
 is to grasp it firmly by the base of the tail, lift it up
front legs and putting the other hand underneath its
carefully and then place it on to a non-slip table
bottom to support its weight (Fig. 15.2). If you have an
Fig. 15.1 Restraining α mouse
Fig. 15.2 Restraining a rat.
284
 Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
unfriendly or aggressive rat then the safest way to
Male
handle it is in much the same way as the mouse.
Female
Grasp it by the base of the tail, lift it on to a non-slip
table and then scruff it by the back of the neck with
Urogenital
 your thumb and forefinger.
A very important point to remember is that you should never
grasp any mouse or rat by the end of the tail as the skin will
slough off and cause severe damage, resulting in amputation
of the tail.
Male
Female
Sexing
The most common method of sexing all small mammals is by
Penis
measuring the anogenital distance, i.e. the distance between
Urethral
the anus and the tip of the penis in the male and between the
orifice
anus and the vulva in the female (Fig. 15.3). There may also
Anus
be other methods (Table 15.1).
5
Hamsters
Hamsters only have one means of defence and that is their
teeth - they can give a very nasty nip.
Fig. 15.3 Generat method of sexing smatl rodents.
   s   n    
smaller Russian and Chinese dwarf hamsters, who are known
for having short tempers. These animals are nocturnal and do
then firmly but gently grasp the scruff between your thumb
 a  p  dn a aa on  an o
 and forefinger, lift the animal up and support it underneath
especially by a stranger. For minor examinations or to move a
with your other hand and place it on a non-slip table for
friendly hamster, simply cup your hands around the animal
examination.
and lift it up. For a more detailed examination or for an aggres.
sive hamster firmly scruff it at the back of the neck, ensuring
Never pick up a gerbil by the tail as it will slough the skin very
that you grasp a lot of scruff between your thumb and
easily, leaving only the vertebrae showing - known as a
forefinger - if you do not take enough scruff the hamster will
degloving injury. This will never re-grow and would have to
still be able to turn around and bite you. Make sure the scruff is
be amputated.
they are prone to prolapse if roughly handled. If you have an
extremely aggressive hamster that you just cannot get a hold of
Chipmunks
then scoop it up into a clear plastir box, which will enable you
to see if there is anything obviously wrong. If a more detailed
Chipmunks are very highly strung, fast-moving creatures that
examination is required then a gaseous anaesthetic via an
can leap extremely high to escape, so great care must be taken
induction chamber may be necessary.
when handling them. Unless the chipmunk is corrertly
handled you are likely to be bitten. If you are lucky you may
be able to grasp the scruff between the thumb and forefinger.
Gerbils
If really well handled you may be able to cup a chipmunk in
both hands and lift it out of the cage and then gently scruff
Gerbils are fairly docile animals, easy to handle if socialized
it. If the chipmunk is in a large enclosure then the best way
well and will only bite if frightened or stressed by rough han-
to catch it is by using a fine net. This is the safest way and will
 dling. They move fast and are very good jumpers - if they get
allow you to transfer it to a towel or restrain it on a non-slip
worried they will escape by jumping away. To transport a
table for examination. If manual restraint is not possible,
gerbil from one place to another, cup them in both hands
gaseous anaesthesia via an induction chamber may be neces-
underneath their bodies and gently lift them up. If a detailed
sary. This is sometimes better for your safety and for that of
examination is required or you have an aggressive animal
your patient.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
285
15
Restraint, handlinq and administration of medicines to exotic species
Table 15.1 Methods of sexing small mammals
Species
Method of sexing
Rat
Examine the anogenital distance - it is longer in the male than in the female. Testes are large and obvious in adult males. Teats
present only in the female
Mice
Examine the anogenital distance - it is longer in the male than in the female. Testes are large and obvious in adult males. Teats
present only in the female
Hamster
Examine the anogenital distance - it is longer in the male than in the female. Large testes in the adult male make the hind end 
cone-shaped; in the female the hind end is rounded. Adult males have a pigmented scent gland on the point of each hip. Teats
present only in the female
Gerbil
jezuan ay7 uo puej6 quass 2 aney sajew znpv ajeway a4z ul ueut ajgu ayt u labuop s! 7! - aoueasp 1ezuaboue ayl aujuex3
abdomen. Teats present only in the female
Chipmunk
 Examine the anogenital distance - it is longer in the male than in the female. Testes are retracted during the non-breeding
season and descend into the scrotum and enlarge at the start of the breeding season in February/March. Penis is visible and
points caudally. Teats present only in the female
Guinea pig
Anogenital distance is less easy to measure. Gentle pressure placed on either side of the prepuce of the male will cause the penis
to elongate. Testes are large. Female has a Y-shaped genital opening and a pale-coloured clitoris. Both sexes have a pair of
 elongated teats in the inguinal region
Chinchilla
Female has a large urinary papilla, which you may mistake for the male's penis. She also has separate exits to the urinary and
reproductive tracts, unlike most other small mammals. The male's penis resembles the female's urinary papilla, although it is larger
and tends to point cranially. Pressure applied on either side of the prepuce may cause it to elongate. Both males and females
have teats - one inguinal pair and two pairs of lateral thoracic teats
Rabbit
Apply pressure on either side of the anal area to pop out the vulva or penis. The vulva is round, has a small slit in the middle
and tends to point cranially. The penis is more cone-shaped and tends to point caudally. Adult males have large, obvious testes
Ferret
The male has a very obvious prepuce on the ventral abdomen and large testes in the scrotum unless he has been castrated. The
female has a vulval opening situated ventral to the anus
It is very important to remember that you should never
can make them very frightened, especially as they will
approach a small mammal from above. To the animal your
already be worried by the strange environment. Always try to
hands are like a bird of prey swooping down on them, which
approach them from the side and at a low level.
Fig. 15.4 Restraining a guinea pig.
286
 Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
Guinea pigs
Guinea pigs are very sensitive creatures and do not like being
away from their natural surroundings or from their compan-
ions. To reduce their stress it is helpful to dim the light and
reduce the noise. To aid in their capture it is less stressful to
catch them in a small box rather than chasing them around
a large enclosure. The easiest method of restraint is to gently
grasp them from behind under the front legs with one hand
and the other hand support the weight of the animal
(Fig. 15.4). It is very important to support the guinea pig's
weight as it has a rather large abdomen and a slender spine
 and surrounding bones and if there is not enough support
spinal damage can occur.
Chinchillas
Fig. 15.5 Carrying a rabbit with the head tucked under your arm
Chinchillas are very timid and sensitive creatures that rarely
fourth finger under the front legs then with your other hand
bite. They are also easily stressed so dimming the lights and
support the body. You should also remember that they have
reducing the noise is helpful when handling them. You must
 powerful back legs so you should always make sure you have
be very careful not to scruff or roughly handle, them as a con-
a good grip of them.
dition known as fur slip can occur in which clumps of fur fall
out around the area being held, leaving a bald patch, which
takes a few weeks to re grow. If a chinchilla is very stressed it
Rabbits
will stand on its back legs and squirt urine at you - they have
a very good aim! The best and safest way to handle a chin-
Most domestic rabbits are very easy to handle and rarely
chilla is by quickly and gently picking it up, putting one
cause injuries unless stressed or roughly handled. They are
hand around the body just under the front legs and the other
capable of using their teeth and claws, with which they can
hand to support the body weight. For young chinchilas,
inflict deep scratches, and their back legs, which are very
which are more wriggly than well-handled adults, it is some-
powerful. Some rabbits can be aggressive, especially males
times easier to restrain them by using your fore and middle
around the breeding season in the spring. Reducing the light
finger around either side of the head and your thumb and
and noise can help to reduce stress.
Fig. 15.6 Restraining α rabbit
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 287
15
Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
To handle a friendly rabbit it is best to pick them up by placing
one hand under the thorax and using the first three fingers
gently grip the front legs by placing one finger either side and
one in the middle. Using your other hand you support the
rabbit's weight. If you need to move the rabbit from one place
to another you can support the rabbit on one arm and place the
rabbit's head under your arm (Fig. 15.5). With the other hand
gently hold the scruff and place your arm along on its back.
Being in the dark under your arm or even covered in a towel or
blanket will calm the animal. Ensure that you have a good grip,
as a sudden noise can spook the rabbit and it may try and
escape. To restrain an aggressive rabbit you should grasp it
firmly by the scruff and gently lift it up and then with your
other hand you should support its weight (Fig. 15.6). You
should quickly move it onto a non-slip table, as it may struggle.
Never pick a rabbit up by the ears.
For examination it is sometimes useful to reduce the stress of
  p  n d     
Fig. 15.7 Restraining a rabbit using a towel
head sticking out (Fig. 15.7). It is important to remember that
a struggling anxious rabbit may harm you and also harm
itself. Rabbits have very powerful back legs and if not prop-
 h s     a  s
erly restrained they can kick out and twist to get away, which
claws and teeth as sharp as those of a cat.
can fracture or dislocate their spines. Another thing to
remember is that severe stress can cause a cardiac arrest.
The easiest way to handle tame ferrets is to hold them from
 behind with one hand around the body under the front legs
and support the body's weight with the other hand. The best
Ferrets
way to restrain more aggressive ferrets is to firmly grasp the
 scruff behind the neck and pull them upwards. Then with the
Some well-handled pet ferrets can be very friendly but others
 other hand support the body by putting it around the pelvic
can be aggressive and fast, especially if not handled regularly.
area. It is sometimes useful to wear gauntlets for handling
Working ferrets used for rabbit hunting and ratting are often
very aggressive ferrets.
Birds
● Does the bird require oral or injectable medication or
could this be given in food or drinking water?
Before handling any type of bird you must consider whether
To perform a physical examination or to administer treat-
it is really necessary. Birds do not appreciate being handled in
ment the bird will have to be restrained in some way. Before
non pin eu sanoads aos pue op sie pe ssop je aem a
catching a bird always make sure all windows and doors are
if handled incorrectly. Ask yourself the following:
 closed and that there is a warning sign on the door in case
someone enters the room, allowing the bird to escape. There
● Is the bird a well-handled pet or is it a wild bird of
is nothing worse than having to tell an owner that you have
prey or water fowl?
lost their pet.
● Do you know how to handle this bird safely without
Small caged birds, e.g. canaries,
causing harm to you or the bird?
budgerigars and finches
● Does the bird have any signs of respiratory distress
that could be made much worse by restraint?
These small birds cannot do much harm but they do have
sharp little beaks and sharp claws, which you will need to
● Do you really need to handle the bird or can you just
avoid when examining them. Small birds may become
 look at it through the cage to make decisions about its
stressed even if they are used to handling; to reduce this, dim
condition and its treatment?
the lights and reduce the noise. If the bird comes in its own
288
 Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
cage with all its toys, remove them before trying to capture
the bird - there is nothing worse than trying to avoid obsta-
cles while chasing it around the cage.
To catch the bird, use a small facecloth or something similar to
provide a greater surface area than your hand. It is also a pro-
tective layer between you and the bird to prevent you from
being bitten. Once you have captured the bird hold it very
gently. Birds have no diaphragm and they rely on the outward
movement of their ribcage for inspiration. If you grip too tight
it can be fatal, especially if they are suffering from a respiratory
wrapped loosely in a cloth with its head out, placing your
thumb under its beak to prevent it pecking you. It may help to
allow the bird to grip your little finger as these are perching
Fig. 15.9 Catching a small parrot with the aid of a towet
birds and this may make them feel more secure. Unwrap small
parts at a time for examination (Fig. 15.8).
dimming the light and reducing the noise will reduce this.
Large caged birds, e.g.
Remove any toys or accessories from the cage to allow easier
and less stressful capture. The use of a towel or small blanket
cockatiels, cockatoos and
will enable you to catch the larger birds, remembering not to
hold them too tightly, as this can be fatal (Fig. 15.9).
parrots
The larger caged birds have powerful hooked beaks and can
As these birds are potentially more dangerous than the
give a very nasty bite. They can become distressed, so
smaller birds you must ensure that you grasp the bird care-
fully and quickly from the back. Once you have the bird out
of the cage, restrain the head as this is the part that can cause
you most damage. Wrap the bird gently in the towel with
your thumb and forefinger positioned under the lower beak.
This will enable you to push the beak upwards to prevent the
bird from biting you. Once you have the bird in this position,
ensure that the wings are securely restrained in the towel. If
the bird is able to struggle and flap its wings there is a risk of
 it breaking its wings or damaging its plumage.
 Once adequately restrained, unwrap parts of the body one at
a time for examination. Handling aggressive parrots and
cockatoos may require extra protection - leather gauntlets
come in very handy. However, it is often difficult to feel
much through them so you must be careful not to squeeze
the bird too tightly. Once you have the bird restrained satis-
factorily, remove the gloves to prevent any harm to the bird.
Birds of prey
Birds of prey can be broadly divided into the nocturnal
species, i.e. owls, and the diurnal species, e.g. falcons, hawks
and eagles. These birds have extremely sharp talons and pow.
erful beaks, both of which can be very dangerous when han-
 dling them. The method of handling differs with each type.
Diurnal species, e.g. falcons
Most handled falcons will come in wearing a leather cap or
Fig. 15.8 Restraining a budgerigar
hood, which fits over the bird's head (Fig. 15.10) covering the
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 289
15
Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
above the elbow as otherwise the bird will attempt to
climb up towards your shoulder, which can be painful.
● If the bird has no leg straps or hood and is not well-
handled then you must take a different approach. Dim
the lights and reduce the noise before you start. Some
birds may be trained to perch on your hand and you
may be able to encourage it to do this. If not you will
have to grasp the bird from behind with a thick towel
or blanket. Always make sure you know where the
bird's head is. You must then grasp the bird over the
shoulder area facing towards you and place your
thumbs under its beak to push it up out of the way.
You can then place a hood on the bird's head if you
have one. It is best to put the bird on your gauntleted
arm, as gripping on to something makes them feel
more secure.
When examining these birds it is sometimes necessary to
hold their feet out of the way as they may try to grasp one
foot, with the other causing puncture wounds and leading to
serious infections (Fig. 15.11). This method really requires
two people - one to hold the bird from behind, restraining
the wings and body, and one holding the legs from behind
and away from the examiner.
Fig. 15.10 A fatcon wearing α hood and jesses - note the handter's
teather gaunttets
bird's eyes but leaving its beak exposed. This calms the bird
and helps to reduce stress. These birds also have a very good
sense of hearing, so reducing the noise in the room reduces
the stress. Most falcons will also be presented wearing leather
straps or jesses around their ankles, which enable them to be
restrained while on their owner's arm (Fig. 15.10). When
restraining these birds, wear a leather gauntlet because it is
If the bird has been transported in a box there are several
ways to remove it:
● Ask the owner to remove the bird from the box, as it
will respond to them better
● If you are removing the bird yourself, place your
gauntleted hand into the box beside the perch if it has
one or beside the bird, grasp the leather straps with
your thumb and forefinger and encourage the bird to
step on to the glove. You must keep hold of the strap
at all times. You can now remove the bird from the
box and put the hood on if it is not already on. You
Fig. 15.11 A gofden eagle with its talons wrapped in a towel to
should now be able to examine the bird safely. You
 must make sure that you always keep your arm up
 prevent damage to the handter
290
 Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
It is very important not to damage any flight or tail feathers,
similar to that used for smaller birds. Restrain the head
as without these the bird will be unable to fly and the feath.
first, making sure that you support the neck, which may be
ers will not be replaced until the next moult - usually in the
difficult as they have long strong necks. The use of a
autumn.
swan hook or something similar may be useful. This is
a pole with a smooth round hook that enables you to
hook the neck of the swan or goose under the beak and
Nocturnal species - owls
gently pull it towards you to a point from which you can
grasp its neck. Two people may be needed to restrain the
The overall technique is much the same but, as they are noc-
bigger birds - one to control the head and one to control
turnal, dimming the lights and wearing a hood has no real
the large, powerful wings. Swan bags are available for
effect. Reducing noise will help reduce the stress. Owls have
restraining swans.
sharp talons but their beaks are not as large as those of
falcons; however, they can still inflict a serious bite.
 If any type of bird breaks free and tries to escape, dim the
lights (unless it's an owl) and ensure that all exits are covered
Sex determination
to prevent anyone from opening a door:
Sexing birds can be difficult and there are several ways in
● Larger birds - throw a towel or blanket over it and
which it can be done:
wrap the bird up
15
● Very small birds - use a soft net, a small cloth or a
 de s a - sdo txa o
light towel.
different from that of the female. Males tend to
have much more colourful feathers; for example, in
Always remember to be as gentle as possible and avoid
the mallard duck the male is a wonderful green
restricting the bird's breathing whatever its size.
colour and the female is a plain brown. In most
budgies the adult male has a blue cere over the beak
and the female has a brown one. Male cockatiels
have bright orange cheek patches and have a solid
Waterfowl
colour underneath their tails. Females have paler
orange cheek patches and horizontal dark stripes
Most waterfowl are wild but you may encounter a few 'tame'
under their tails. Most female birds of prey are
 ones that are kept on ponds in farms or parks. Most waterfowl
slightly larger than the males and are less
are rarely handled.
coloured
● Examination of the pelvis - requires experience.
Small waterfowl, e.g. various species of
The pelvic bones of the female are wider than
duck
those of the male to allow eggs to pass
through
Restraining these birds is fairly easy as they are moderately
small and have blunt-ended beaks. Grasp the duck from
● Endoscopic examination of the gonads - the
behind by the neck, ensuring that your thumb is securing the
gonads, i.e. ovary and testis, of the bird are internal
back of the neck while your other fingers are gently curled
(see Ch. 5). Under a general anaesthetic a rigid
around the front of its neck. Make sure that you support the
endoscope is passed through a small incision into the
neck, as there is a weak area at the atlantooccipital joint.
  e  a    o
Control the wings as soon as you can by wrapping the bird in
the sex. This can be a dangerous and invasive
a towel and then tucking it under your arm, holding it close
procedure.
to your body. This position allows you to carry the bird safely.
Examine one side at a time, keeping the other side restrained
● DNA sexing - used for parrots and cockatoos,
in the towel.
 as in many species it is impossible to determine
the sex externally. A blood sample or pulp from a
Large waterfowl, e.g. geese and swans
freshly plucked feather is collected and sent to
a laboratory where the DNA from the tissue is
These species have large, powerful wings and can also be
used to examine the chromosomes of the
quite vicious with their beaks. The method of restraint is
bird.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
291
15
Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
● Larger lizards have teeth and claws and some of them
have long powerful tails, which they use like a whip
 and which can be very painful. Some species, e.g. the
green iguana, can be very aggressive: they have sharp
Before handling any reptile you must ask yourself whether it
claws, a long tail and sharp teeth, which can all cause
is necessary to handle this reptile, whether it is safe to do so
damage. Male iguanas are more aggressive to women
and whether you know what to do. Consider the following
 during certain phases of the menstrual cycle because
they can detect human female pheromones, which are
● Is the reptile a well-handled pet or is it aggressive, 0r
similar to the ones secreted by female iguanas during
even poisonous? For example, rock pythons, Tokay
the breeding season.
geckos and some green iguanas are aggressive; adders,
cobras and Gila monsters are poisonous. If you are
Even if you are very experienced handling any species of
working with reptiles it is important to be able to
lizard can be difficult:
recognise the poisonous species
● Tiny lizards - e.g. anoles or some geckos - are not
● Do you know how to handle this animal safely to
recommended for handling as they are very fast and
prevent harm to you or your patient?
very delicate; it is easier to place them in a clear plastic
box and examine them by observation
● Is the animal in any kind of respiratory distress? Is the
animal mouth-breathing or is there mucus around
● Small lizards - e.g. leopard gecko. Grasp them from
the mouth, which may indicate that there is a
behind around the shoulder area with the thumb and
problem?
forefinger and the other three fingers around the body
If the lizard is larger than your hand, gently support
● Is the reptile very delicate? Some of the members of
the back legs with your other hand to prevent them
the gecko family are very small and fragile and if
from wriggling
stressed or handled roughly can shed their tails. Some
of them are so small that handling is really not
● Large lizards - e.g. green iguana. Restrain by
advised.
 grasping the lizard from behind the shoulders. With
your thumb and forefinger control one leg and
● Is the animal suffering from metabolic bone disease?
use the middle and fourth finger to control the other
Many lizards have this as a result of incorrect
leg. Using the other hand grasp around the pelvic
husbandry and if you are in any doubt, assume that
girdle from behind and use your thumb and
they do have problems. Their bones can be very fragile
forefinger to control one leg and your middle and
and fracture easily, so care must be taken when
fourth finger to control the other leg. Avoid holding
handling them.
the lizard too tight, as if it wriggles this can cause
spinal damage. If you have to move the animal,
If the reptile must be examined or treated then some form of
wrap it in a towel with its legs lying down by its
restraint will be necessary.
sides. Then restrain the head and tuck the body
and tail under your arm to prevent damage from the
Reptiles can be divided into:
tail.
● Lizards
The vasovagal reflex is useful for putting any lizard into a
 nn jo s  s p     no 
●Snakes
procedures such as radiography. This is done by putting firm
but gentle digital pressure on both eyeballs, which stimulates
● Tortoises and terrapins.
the parasympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous
system, resulting in a drop in heart rate, respiratory rate and
blood pressure. This effect can last for 1-2 min if everything
Lizards
is quiet. The only problem is that any sudden noise
will wake the lizard up and it will run off the table
 The risk involved in handling lizards varies according to their
and escape. A useful tip is using two cotton wool balls
species:
and placing them over the eyelids, bandaging them firmly
but gently in place. This is used instead of your fingers
● Smal lizards use their teeth for defence and can give a
and keeps a constant pressure over the eyes for a prolonged
nasty nip if stressed or roughly handled
effect.
292
 Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
Another means of restraint for radiography is to bandage the
teeth and the larger snakes can give a nasty bite. The teeth are
front legs of the lizard gently along the body and the back
curved and embed themselves in your skin - if you pull away
legs along the tail. This enables you to get a clear image and
you are likely to pull a large piece of skin off your finger or
keeps your patient still without you having to restrain it. This
thumb! The best way to remove the teeth from your skin is
sny q no qn Ae iadsns noe j aop aq ou pnous
by using a wooden spatula or credit card and pushing it
between your skin and the teeth. Do not put the snake's head
When restraining lizards it is very important not to grasp
under water to make it let go - snakes can hold their breath
them by the tail as they can shed their tails a process known
for a very long time because they have air sacs at the end of
    s o o m sd ao  
their lungs that act as reservoirs. Some of the larger boas and
distressed or roughly handled. In most cases the tail will grow
pythons kill by constriction, and this may be a potential
back but it will never look as good as the original and there
danger to the handler.
are some species of lizard whose tail will not grow back, so
you must be careful. Iguanas will not re-grow their tails after
Pick up a snake from behind, supporting its whole body. Snakes
the age of 3-4 years.
do not have very good eyesight and if you approach a snake
quickly from the front you will frighten it and even the best-
Sexing lizards
natured snake may bite. To restrain the snake for examination,
use your last three fingers to grasp the snake gently around the
This is reasonably easy to do in a sexually mature adult but
top of the neck just below the head. Place your thumb and
cannot easily be done in a younger reptile. Look for evidence
forefinger on either side of the head. If the snake is potentially
of pores in the inguinal area of the lizard (Fig. 15.12):
aggressive, place a finger on the top of the head (Fig. 15.13).
Use your other hand to support the rest of the body.
S
● Male - obvious pores, i.e. anal, pre-anal and femoral
pores, that vary according to the species. In some
To examine the mouth, place your thumb and forefinger on
species there may also be hemipenal bulges below the
either side of the snake's head, allowing you to open its
entrance to the cloaca. For example, the green iguana
mouth using a wooden spatula. Care must be taken when
has femoral pores and hemipenal bulges; the leopard
controlling snakes' heads, as they have a weak point at the
atlantooccipital joint that can easily be dislocated if roughly
are often slightly larger and have more body
handled.
appendages, e.g. the male chameleon has hons
If the snake is longer than four feet make sure that there are
● Female - very faint pores but no hemipenal bulges.
two people to handle it. Most snakes that are not poisonous
are constrictors and they could squeeze a limb or even
Snakes
asphyxiate you. If you have an aggressive snake that you are
unable to pick up, you can use a snake hook, which is a
Most snakes are fairly docile if regularly handled but there are
smooth metal hook. Approach the snake from the side or
some species that are naturally aggressive, e.g. the rock
 behind and press the head gently to the ground, allowing you
 python and anaconda. Their main means of defence are their
to grasp the snake carefully by the back of the head.
Fig. 15.12 Sexual differentiation in the
Preanal pores
fzard. A and C are mate, B and D are female
Cloacal vent
Cloacal vent
Femoral pores
Cloacal vent
D
Cloacal vent
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
293
15
Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
female. If you do not have a probe you can use a
Jackson's urinary cat catheter (always remove the
metal insert). In the male the probe will go down a
distance of about 8-16 subcaudal scales and in the
female it will only go down about 2-5 sub caudal
scales. Make sure that you lubricate the probe well
before use and that you do not push the probe to0
hard, as you can perforate the vaginal sac.
Tortoises and terrapins
Most tortoises are harmless but some of the terrapins and
turtles can be aggressive and give a nasty nip with their sharp
beak, e.g. snapping turtles, soft-shelled turtles and even red-
eared terrapins. Terrapins also have sharp claws.
Fig. 15.13 Restraining the head of a snake.
 Restraint is usually fairly easy and is achieved by holding the
shell on either side just behind the front legs, which prevents
Sexing snakes
the head and claws from causing damage. If a more detailed
examination is required the animal is likely to withdraw its
It is not easy to determine the sex of snake and there are
head and legs into its shell. In some of the smaller species of
several ways to do it:
 mediterranean tortoise you may be able to pull the head and
legs out gently. In larger species, especially the leopard tor-
● In very young snakes you can sometimes pop out the
toise, it is virtually impossible to get the head and legs to
 hemipenis by applying gentle pressure from the tail to
come out if the tortoise does not want to do it. Sedation may
the cloaca. In a male the hemipenis should pop out but
be necessary for a proper examination. If the animal is one of
 not in the female. This method requires experience.
the more aggressive species, e.g. the snapping and soft-
shelled turtles, holding any part of the shell is likely to result
● Measure the tail length by counting the scales between
in you being bitten because these species have very long
the cloaca and the end of the tail. In a male the dis-
necks and they can reach right round to the back of their
tance from the cloaca to the tip of the tail is greater
shell. You may be able to get them to snap at a piece of wood
than in a female.
or cloth and then grasp the head, which is the dangerous
part.
● Use of a snake-sexing probe - this is the most accurate
method (Fig. 15.14). Lift the cloacal scale and insert
Note. You must wash your hands after handling reptiles, as
the small, round-ended probe down inside the tail into
they can carry zoonotic salmonella, which occur naturally in
the hemipenis of the male or the vaginal sac of the
their gut flora but are found all over the reptile's body.
Sexing
Sexing tortoises and terrapins is quite easy (Fig. 15.15):
● Males - have a longer tail, which is wider at the base,
 and the cloaca is further away from the plastron
●Females - have a short tail and the cloaca is closer to
the plastron
● Some species of male terrapin, e.g. red-eared terrapin,
have longer front claws than are seen in the female
● In some species of tortoise, e.g. leopard tortoise, the
male has a concave plastron and the female has a flat
Fig. 15.14 Use of a probe to determine the sex of a snake
plastron.
294
 Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
双风
Fig. 15.15 Determining the sex of a tortoise
a: mate, b: femate.
A
B
Administration of
prevent it from wriggling and keep the head and oesophagus
in a straight line to allow the tube to pass down easily. The
medication
animal may become distressed by this procedure and it
should only be used for feeding and medication - not just for
medication. The use of naso-oesophageal or gastric tubes can
The available routes and methods of administration of med-
 be used in the larger animals like guinea pigs, chinchillas,
ication to most animals are as follows:
rabbits and ferrets but rats and mice are too small.
● Oral dosing
Intramuscular injection
● Intramuscular injection
This route is not often used as the muscles of most small
mammals are so small. Use the quadriceps femoris muscle in
● Subcutaneous injection
the hind leg or the muscle over the spine. Use 25-gauge
 needles or an even smaller gauge.
● Intravenous injection
● Intraperitoneal injection
Subcutaneous injection
The scruff area is the most useful but the skin over the lateral
● Intraosseous injection - used for the introduction of
thorax can be used in the larger animals. The use a 25-gauge
fluids into the medullary cavity of the bone.
needle is recommended. Use this route with care in
chinchillas because if it causes pain it may cause fur slip.
Small mammals
Oral
Intraperitoneal injection
This method is used most often in small animals as medica
Used for administering fluids, not medication, and is a rela-
tion can be given by this route at home by the owners, reduc-
tively easy procedure. Place the animal in dorsal recumbency
ing the stress to the animal. Medication for small animals
with the head tilting downwards to help the abdominal con-
mainly comes in a liquid form, which makes it easier to
tents to move cranially, leaving the area where you are inject-
administer. Most small mammals will take the medication if
ing clear of organs. Select the lower right quadrant of the
you syringe it into the side of the mouth slowly. If the med-
ventral abdomen. Insert the needle and withdraw the plunger
ication has a particularly nasty taste, mix it into some baby
first to ensure you have not punctured any organs, then com-
food and syringe it down. Rodents are able to close off the
 plete the injection. The best size of needle is a 23-25-gauge
back of the mouth with the cheek folds, which may make
5/8" needle.
oral administration difficult but is quite normal, as it allows
them to gnaw at wood without ingesting it.
Intravenous injection
If oral administration is difficult, a feeding tube or straight
Only satisfactorily used in rabbits, as the other species are too
crop tube can be used. Keep the patient firmly scruffed to
small.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
295
15
Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
● The lateral tail vein of rats and mice can sometimes
difficult to locate and the procedure is not tolerated
 be used, warming the tail first and applying local
well, especially if a catheter is to be left in place
anaesthetic cream to help dilate the vein - use a
25-27-gauge 5/8" needle
● Cephalic and saphenous veins may be used in the
rabbit and the lateral ear vein can also be used. The
● The cephalic and saphenous veins may be used in
use of a 25-27-gauge needle or butterfly catheter is
guinea pigs, chinchillas and ferrets but they are quite
best for administration.
Fig. 15.16 Use of a crop tube
296
Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
Intraosseous injection
● Inguinal skin fold cranial to each leg - useful in small
birds
This site is used for the administration of fluids rather than
medication. It cannot be done in the small rodents as they
● Axillary area under each wing
have very fine bones with a small medullary cavity and there
is no needle safe enough for the procedure.
● Dorsal inner wing area - not the best site to use
In some larger rats, chinchillas, guinea pigs, rabbits, etc., the best
A 23-25-gauge 5/8" needle is best.
site is the proximal femur in the fossa between the hip joint and
the greater trochanter. The area must be surgically prepared as
Intravenous injection
the needle would track bacteria straight into the medullary
cavity, resulting in severe osteomyelitis. A 20-21-gauge needle
Mainly used for blood sampling and the administration of
or a spinal needle is screwed into the bone. Apply antibiotic
fluids:
cream around the needle to prevent infection. Cap the needle
● This is not easily done in smaller birds - use the right
heavy sedation or a general anaesthetic. The procedure should
jugular vein and a 23-25-gauge 5/8" needle
never be attempted if there is any sign of metabolic bone
 disease. A radiograph should be taken after the needle is placed
● In larger birds the basilic (or brachial) vein, which runs
to ensure that it is in the correct position.
along the ventral part of the wing just caudal to the
 humerus, can be used but it ruptures easily, causing
15
large haematomata (Fig. 15.17)
Birds
● The ulnar vein, which runs along the ventral part of
the wing just caudal to the ulnar bone, can sometimes
be used but is very narrow and mobile. This vein can
This route is a useful method for administering medication as
only be used in the larger raptors and waterfowl and it
many drugs can be added to food or drinking water for self-
also ruptures easily
medication. It is an easy and less stressful method but you
cannot be sure how much of the medication the bird has
● In larger geese and swans use the medial metatarsal
actually ingested.
vein on the leg.
A more accurate method is to use a crop tube (Fig. 15.16).
Larger birds tend to tolerate repeated injections fairly well but
Restrain the bird, maintaining its head tilted upwards to
 many small birds will not and the use of a catheter is recom-
keep the head and oesophagus straight. Using a feeding tube
mended. Sedation or a general anaesthetic may be required
or straight crop tube, carefully introduce it into the oeso-
for this procedure: 23-, 25- or 27-gauge 5/8" needles or butterfly
 o as a o is do a n o  s
catheters are best for this procedure.
neck.
Medication may be given by simply syringing the medication
straight into the mouth but the bird may choke. If the bird
who may not feel able to use the crop tubing method.
Intramuscular injection
This is probably the easiest and quickest method of adminis-
tration of medication. Select the pectoral muscle in the breast
area. Restrain the bird and inject into the ventral part of the
muscle using a 23-25-gauge 5/8" needle. This route is rela-
tively painless and as it is quick it reduces the stress of han-
dling to the bird.
Subcutaneous injection
Fig. 15.17 Site for intravenous injection in larger birds: the basilic
Several sites may be used:
vein runs caudat to the humerus
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
297
15
Restraint, handlinq and administration of medicines to exotic species
Intraperitoneal injection
Reptiles
This route should never be used in birds as their body cavity
is full of air sacs, which are a vital part of the respiratory
Oral
system. If a needle is introduced it may rupture the air sacs.
This is a good route to use as the glottis is clearly visible and
can be avoided. It lies at the front of the oral cavity in snakes
Intraosseous injection
(Fig. 15.19) and at the base of the tongue in lizards, tortoises
and terrapins. Some reptiles will tolerate medication by direct
Only used for the administration of fluids and can be per-
syringing into the mouth but there is a risk of inhalation and
formed in both small and larger birds. In small birds the best
it is also inaccurate.
 site is the proximal tibiotarsal bone below the stifle joint; in
the larger birds the distal and proximal ulna can also be used
The most efficient method makes use of a feeding tube or a
(Fig. 15.18). The procedure is painful and the use of sedation
straight crop tube and with practice can be carried out by
or a general anaesthetir is advised.
owners at home and is well tolerated by most reptiles. If pro-
longed medication and feeding is required then the place-
The area must be surgically prepared before the needle is
ment of a pharyngostomy tube is advised as this will reduce
screwed in place to prevent osteomyelitis. After the needle is
the stress of repeated tubing.
placed apply an antibiotic cream around the site before bandag-
ing the needle in place. For the smaller birds use a 25-27.
To locate the stomach you should always measure the tube
gauge needle or spinal needle and for larger birds a 20-23-
against the outside of the body before placing it to ensure
gauge needle or spinal needle. It is useful to radiograph the 
you really are in the stomach, preventing regurgitation. In
site to ensure that the needle is in the correct position.
snakes the stomach is located about one-third of the way
down the body; in lizards the stomach is located about half
way down the body; in tortoises and terrapins you measure
from the nose to the line where the pectoral and abdominal
scutes meet (see Ch. 5). Mark the position of the mouth on
the tube using a biro - this is the point that the tube will
reach when the end is in the stomach. Open the mouth with
a wooden spatula. Introduce the a well-lubricated tube up
towards the roof of the mouth and down the oesophagus,
avoiding the glottis. Advance the tube until your marked
point.
Fig. 15.18 Falcon with an intraosseous catheter placed in the uina
Fig. 15.19 Orat cavity of the snake showing the position of the
ofthe wing
glottis
298
 Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
Intramuscular injection
● Tortoises and terrapins - this is not the easiest
route as it is difficult to reach an area cranial to the
Fairly well tolerated and easy to do:
hind limbs. The bladder lies in this area and can be
punc tured very easily.
● Snakes - inject into the caudal third of the snake,
using the muscles that run parallel to the spine
The injection site should be cleaned before injection is per-
formed. Inject under the scales not through them. The
● Lizards, tortoises and terrapins - inject into the
      s  
proximal part of the forearm. The hind limbs can also
ensure you have not punctured an organ. Use a 23-25-gauge
be used but be aware of the renal portal system.
needle.
Tortoises and terrapins may withdraw their limbs into
their shells so you may have to use the pectoral
Intravenous injection
muscles at the junction of the neck/forelimb with the
body.
This route is more difficult than the others as you cannot
easily 'raise' the vein or see it through the thick skin:
Use a 23-25-gauge 5/8" needle. Always clean the skin before
injecting as reptiles have very dirty skin. Always inject under
● Snakes - use the ventral tail vein. Insert the needle in
the scales, never through them.
the midline about one-third of the tail length from the
cloaca at a 75? angle. Advance it slowly until you hit
the vertebrae. Pull out slightly while drawing back on
Subcutaneous injection
medication. The palatine vein runs along the roof of
An easy route to use but may be less well tolerated with some
the mouth may be used in larger snakes when they are
drugs, as they can be painful:
anaesthetized
● Snakes - use the first third of the body in the lateral
● Lizards - use the ventral tail vein. Insert the needle at
dorsal area
a 75° angle about one-third of the way down the tail
from the cloaca to ensure you avoid the male
● Lizards - use the lateral thoracic area. There is a risk
hemipenes in the caudal third of the body. Advance
of the skin around the injection site becoming
the needle until you hit the vertebrae. Pull out the
darkened - especially common in the chameleon
needle out while drawing on the plunger. When you
family. The owner should be advised of this
get blood back, stop and inject the medication. You
 n s p o sd s  pn a s
● Tortoises and terrapins - use the area cranial to the
able to spontaneously shed their tails - this may occur
forelimbs and hind limbs. Strong tortoises tend to pull
if they are injected on a regular basis
their legs, in making it very hard to inject. The use of a
23-25-gauge 5/8" needle is recommended. The area
● Tortoises and terrapins - two routes are used:
must be cleaned and you must inject under the scales,
not through them.
● Jugular vein - this is the recommended route. Extend
the head, tilt the body away and pull the neck
towards you. Raise the vein on the right side by
Intracoelomic injection
applying pressure at the base of the neck. The vein
runs from the eardrum down the neck and can
Reptiles do not have a diaphragm and the entire body cavity
sometimes be seen when it is raised
is known as the coelom. The intracoelomic route is mainly
used for fluid administration:
● Dorsal fail vein - more difficult. The vein lies
midline on the dorsal aspect of the tail. Insert the
● Snakes - enter the body cavity within an area on the
needle at a 90° angle and advance it until you hit
lateral part of the body just dorsal to the ventral scales,
the vertebrae. Gently pull back while drawing back
cranial to the cloaca in the caudal third of the body
on the plunger. When blood comes back into the
syringe, stop and administer the medication. Use a
● Lizards - place the lizard in dorsal recumbency with
23-25-gauge 1" needle.
the head tilted downwards to encourage the organs to
move cranially away from the injection site. Select a
Ensure that the area is cleaned well and go under the scales
site in the lower right quadrant of the body cavity
not through them.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
299
15
Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
 If you suspect that the reptile may be suffering from a meta-
Intraosseous injection
bolic bone disease you should never use this route and to
This route is mainly used for fluid administration. This route
check this you should always radiograph the animal prior to
is impossible in snakes as they do not have any legs:
this procedure.
● Lizards - use the proximal femur, distal femur and
the proximal tibia. As this procedure is painful, the use
Bibliography
of sedation or a general anaesthetic is required. The
area must be cleaned well, as the needle could
Anderson R S,Edney A T D (eds) 1991 Practical animal handling.
introduce an infection straight into the bone and
Pergamon Press, Oxford
cause osteomyelitis. Use a 23-25-gauge needle or
spinal needle depending on the size of the lizard. The
Aspinall V 2003 Clinical procedures in veterinary nursing.
proximal femur is entered at the fossa between the hip
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
joint and the greater trochanter. This is not an easy
route to use as it is at a difficult angle. The distal femur
Cooper B, Lane D R 2003 Veterinary nursing, 3rd edn.
is a bit easier to access as you enter at the stifle joint
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
but it does restrict the movement of the leg. The
proximal tibia is really only used in the larger lizards
Hotston Moore A (ed.) 1999 Manual of advanced veterinary
and is entered at the tibial crest
nursing. British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
● Tortoises and terrapins - there are two main sites:
● The area at which the plastron and carapace meet
Recommended reading
 just cranial to the hind legs - this is easily accessed
but can be very tough, especially in older tortoises.
Aspinall V 2003 Clinical procedures in veterinary nursing.
A 21-23-gauge spinal needle is screwed into the
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
shell, ensuring that it is kept parallel to the side of
the shell
Step-by-step guide to handling the more common species of exotic
pet.
● The proximal tibia - this is accessed via the tibial
crest.
Hotston Moore A (ed.) 1999 Manual of advanced veterinary
nursing. British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
 After the needle has been capped, apply an antiseptic cream
around the site to help prevent an infection. A radiograph
Detailed chapter describes all aspects of exotic animal care, includ
should be taken of the area to ensure it is in the correct place.
ing nutrition, anaesthesia and patient care.
300
 Restraint, handling and administration of medicines to exotic species
16
Introduction to qenetics
Dorothy Stables
Key Points
● Every living cell contains a set of chromosomes in the
● DNA molecules consist of a double helix made up of two
nucleus - a cell containing the normal two sets of
complementary chains of nucleotides composed of 
chromosomes is called diploid. Gametes (ovum or sperm)
phosphoric acid, deoxyribose and four nitrogenous bases,
have only one of each chromosome pair present and are
two purines - adenine and guanine - and two
haploid.
pyrimidines - thymine and cytosine.
● There are two mechanisms necessary for cell division,
● The full complement of DNA is called the genome. The 
mitosis or the division of somatic cells and meiosis, the
genetic makeup inherited by an individual animal is called
production of gametes. During meiosis the chromosome
the genotype. The outward appearance of an animal or the
complement is halved.
 phenotype, results from gene-environment interactions.
● Genes are arranged in a specific order, each in the same
● Congenital defects are present at birth. Not all congenital
defects are inherited and may occur because of
Alleles are alternative versions of genes at a locus.
 genetic/chromosomal abnormalities, the action of 
 If an animal has two alleles alike at a locus, it is
environmental teratogens, multifactorial disorders 
homozygous. If the alleles differ, the animal is
caused by the interaction of environment and genes or
heterozygous.
idiopathic defects with no known cause.
Introduction
 diseases. As genes are involved in cell division and in the
manufacturing of antibodies, some immune disorders and
Genes are special molecules within cell nuclei that spell out
cancers have a genetic basis. The actions of genes may also be
the blueprint for the development, structure, function and
influenced by environmental features, leading to disorders 
maintenance of living organisms, e.g. the control of hair
such as hip dysplasia in dogs. It is important to understand a
colour. However, like words in a book, genes can sometimes
little of basic cell physiology to understand both normal and
be 'spelled' wrongly, leading to abnormal development or to
abnormal gene function.
Characteristics of
lipids and carbohydrates, and the organelles. The cell mem-
brane or plasma membrane encloses the cellular contents and
mammalian cells
maintains the boundary between the cytoplasm and the
extracellular environment. This chapter is concerned with
the functions of the cell nucleus.
Cells are the basic structural and functional units of living
organisms and are membrane bound units filled with an
 aqueous solution of chemicals and organelles (Fig. 16.1). Cells
    s s a xa i
The nucleus
expel waste products. Their structure and functions are gov-
erned by genetic information. Cells create copies of them
The nucleus is the largest structure of the cell and is its
selves. Tissues consist of different cell types functioning har-
control centre. Most cells have only one nucleus, although
moniously. Tissues aggregate to form organs and systems.
skeletal muscle cells are multinucleated. Nuclei contain large
quantities of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), made up of genes.
Several other structures are essential to the normal func.
Cellular organisation
tioning of the nucleus, such as the nucleoli where ribosomal
subunits are synthesized. DNA is found in a thread-like mass
A typical cell includes a single nucleus, cytoplasm and a cellu-
known as chromatin. Prior to cellular reproduction chromatin
lar boundary known as the plasma membrane. The nucleus
shortens and coils into rod-like bodies, forming recognis-
contains the genetic material and the cytoplasm is composed
able chromosomes, the number of which varies between
mainly of cytosol containing water, electrolytes, proteins,
species.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 301
16
Introduction to genetics
Fig. 16.1 Diagram of the uftrastructure of a
Peroxisome
cell
Freeribosomes
Mitochondrion
Rough
endoplasmic reticulum 
Nucleolus
Chromatin 
 Endocytotic invagination
Nuclear membrane
Smooth
Centriole 
endoplasmic reticulum 
Lysosome
Microfilament
Microtubule 
Golgi region-
Cytoplasmic membrane
Chromosomes
continued, the centromere would have split and each chro-
 matid would have become a separate chromosome in a new
When dividing cells are observed under a light microscope,
cell.
the chromosomes are clearly visible. During cell division the
chromosomes become condensed and each appears as two
A photograph is taken and the chromosomes are cut out and
rod-like structures called chromatids joined by a constricted
afranged in a standard fashion and then photographed again
area called the ceniromere. If the DNA of a single cell was
to produce a karyotype (Fig. 16.2). Chromosomes are usually
stretched out it would be several metres long yet the total
referred to as pairs and the total number is called the 2n
length of the condensed chromosomes of an average cell
number, where n is the number of pairs. Chromosomes are
placed end to end is less than 0.5 mm!
identified by their size, light and dark banding patterns and 
position of the centromere.
 In somatic (body) cells chromosomes are arranged in pairs.
One chromosome of each pair originates with the maternal
A chromosome is divided by its centromere into short and
ovum and the other with the paternal sperm. A cell contain-
long arms. The short arm is referred to as 'p' and the long arm
ing two sets of chromosomes is called diploid. Gametes (sex
 as 'q'. Chromosomes can be classified by the position of their
cells) are haploid, i.e. there is only one of each pair. In all but
centromeres. If located centrally the chromosome is metacen-
one of the pairs the chromosomes are identical and these
iric, if intermediate it is submetaceniric and if found at one end
pairs are called autosomes. The pairs that are alike are called
the chromosome is acroceniric. It is common to use the term
homologues. The other pair is the sex chromosomes, two X chro.
metacentric to cover metacentric and sub-metacentric
mosomes in females and an X and a Y chromosome in males.
(Nicholas 2003), as shown in Table 16.1.
Identifying chromosomes
Cell division - mitosis and
Circulating lymphocytes from peripheral blood are com-
meiosis
monly used to study chromosomes. The cell samples are
encouraged to divide. The process is stopped during mitosis
There are two mechanisms necessary for cell division.
(see below) by adding colchicine. The two chromatids have
Somatic cells must be able to replicate themselves with
been formed from one chromosome and, if cell division had
minimal mistakes. During mitosis each daughter cell receives
302
 Introduction to genetics
(a)
Table 16.1 Karyotypes of some domestic species
(adapted from Nicholas 2003)
Species
Total
Metacentric
 Acrocentric
(diploid 2n)
pairs
pairs
Cat, Fefis catus
88
16
2
Dog, Canis familiaris
78
0
39
Goat, Capra hircus
60
0
29
Sheep, Ovis aries
54
3
23
Cattle, Bos taurus
60
0
29
Horse, Equus cabatfus
64
13
18
Rabbit, Oryctotagus
44
19
2
cunicufus
[b)
 natural cell division is halted, for example, in exposure to a
2
large dose of ionizing radiation, the animal is likely to die
within a few days because of rapid cell destruction.
Replication of DNA
2
In order to produce a pair of genetically identical daughter
cells, nuclear DNA must be precisely replicated and the repli-
cated chromosomes separated into two identical cells. At the
same time most cells double their mass and duplicate all their
2
cytoplasmic organelles. Cells must not enter mitosis or
meiosis until the chromosomes have been replicated, other-
wise they may lack a particular chromosome, which may give
rise to cancer at a later stage.
2
3
X 热
韩
2
Beginning
of cycle
 Cell enlarges and 
Cell divides
Fig. 16.2 The chromosomes of a mate cat
 new proteins are
[Mitosis] 
synthesized
 Cell prepares 
to divide
a copy of all the chromosomes. However, something special
Cell
is required in sexual reproduction, where mother and father
rests
must contribute one of each pair of chromosomes to their
offspring. During meiosis only one of each pair of chromo-
somes enters each gamete (sperm or ovum).
Restriction point: cell
Multicellular species replace cells damaged by wear and tear
 Cell replicates 
decides whether to
or lost during programmed cell death (apoptosis) by the cycle
its DNA
commit itself to the
 of somatic cell division. Where ill health, trauma or surgery
complete cycle
occurs, loss and replacement of cells will increase. Where
Fig. 16.3 The cell cycle
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
303
16
Introduction to genetics
The duration of the cell cycle (Fig. 16.3) varies greatly
Mitosis
from one cell type to another but always consists of three
distinct phases, interphase, mitosis and cytokinesis. The
During mitosis (Fig. 16.4) the nuclear membrane breaks
standard cell cycle is fairly long, extending to 12 h or more.
down and the nuclear contents condense, forming visible
In most cells the mitotic phase takes about 1 h, a small
chromosomes. The stages of mitosis are prophase, metaphase,
fraction of the total cell cycle time. The time between
anaphase and telophase:
 a d  si x n  d  
which itself consists of three distinctive phases, G1 (gap1),
● During prophase, the cell's microtubules establish
S (synthesis) and G2 (gap2). During G1 phase the cell
the mitotic spindle, which will eventually separate the
becomes committed to DNA replication, which occurs
chromosomes
 nd on sieade ased z huanbasans a 'ased s s-inp 
 a safety gap, allowing DNA replication to be complete before 
● In metaphase the duplicated chromosomes align on the
mitosis.
 mitotic spindle, in preparation for segregation (Fig. 16.4)
304
 Introduction to genetics
● During anaphase the chromosomes move to the pole
Meiosis
of the spindle, where they decondense and establish
new nuclei
During meiosis (diminution), the chromosome comple-
ment is halved. Meiosis involves two nuclear divisions rather
● During telophase the cell is pinched and gradually
then one. A mature haploid gamete produced by the divi-
divided by a process known as cytokinesis, the critical
sions of a diploid cell during meiosis must contain half the
point of mitosis that terminates the cell cycle.
original number of chromosomes. Only one chromosome
from each homologous pair is present, ensuring that either
All phases of the cell cycle are variable in length but the
the maternal or the paternal copy of each gene but not
 greatest variation occurs in the G1 phase. If cells in Glare
both is present. The homologues recognise each other and
not committed to DNA replication, they can enter a resting
become physically paired prior to lining up on the mitotic
state known as the G0 phase for days, weeks or years before
spindle.
 resuming proliferation.
Metaphase l
Chiasma
 Prophase I
Primary oocyte
Primary spermatocyte
Anaphase I
Telophase I
Secondary oocyte
Secondary spermatocyte
 Metaphase Il
Anaphase Il
Large egg and polar bodies
Spermatids of equal size
Fig. 16.5 Stages of meiosis
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
305
16
Introduction to genetics
Meiosis consists of two stages (Fig. 16.5):
but only one functional ovum because of the loss of a
set of chromosomes in meiosis 1 into a dark body
● Meiosis 1 begins with each chromosome duplicating
called the first polar body and the loss again in meiosis
itself, giving rise to two identical chromatids joined at
2 of one set of chromosomes into a second polar body.
the centromere. The duplicated homologous pairs
The union of a sperm and ovum at fertilization results
form a structure containing four chromatids. This close
 in a zygote with the normal diploid number of
chromosomes
are exchanged for corresponding fragments of
homologous paternal chromatids. Next, the two
centromeres are pulled to opposite sides of the cell, a
process called dysjunction. The cell now divides into
Feline and canine chromosomes
two new cells, one containing a recombined maternal
chromosome and one containing a recombined
Genes are arranged in a specific order, each in the same place
paternal chromosome.
or locus on the chromosomes, in every species such as the
domestic cat (Felis caius). This ensures that any male cat can
● In meiosis 2 two chromatids in each new cell are
mate successfully with any female cat and is the defining
formed and move apart and these cells divide into
feature of a species. Cats have 19 pairs of chromosomes car-
two, each containing one chromatid or new
rying their genes. All domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) have
chromosome. The result is four haploid spermatozoa
39 pairs of chromosomes (Table 16.1).
Overview of modern
Mendel's laws
genetics
Three main principles developed from Mendel's work:
● The law of uniformity - When two homozygotes
Over the last decade there have beenn major developments in
with different alleles are crossed, all the offspring of
the science of genetics. In 1865 a monk called Gregor Mendel
the F1 generation are identical and heterozygous.
 Characteristics do not blend and can reappear in
studied varieties of pea that differed in a single characteristic,
subsequent generations
such as tall and short plants or wrinkled and smooth seeds.
He found that one of two characteristics, for example, tall
● The law of segregation - Each individual possesses
plants, seemed to dominate the next generation, the first
two genes for a particular characteristic, only one of
filial (F1) generation, and these were called dominant factors.
which can be passed on in the ovum or sperm to the
 next generation
The opposite characteristic - e.g. short plants - disappeared,
only to reappear in the second or F2 generation. These were
● The law of independent assortment - Members
called recessive factors. Mendel proposed that each pair of
 of different gene pairs segregate to offspring
characteristics was controlled by a pair of factors, one arising
independently of one another. This third law is not
from each parent plant.
strictly true because, if two genes are situated closely
together on the same chromosome, they may be linked
These factors were called genes by a Danish botanist,
and inherited together during meiosis.
Johannsen. Pure-bred pea plants were homozygous, inheriting
two identical genes from their parents. The Fl generation
Mendel's findings were ignored until 1900, when thread-like
that resulted from the breeding of a tall plant with a short
structures were seen in cell nuclei. These were the chromosomes
plant were all tall plants. However, they inherited two differ-
and in 1903 two people independently proposed that they
ent genes from their parents and were heterozygous. The alter-
carried the hereditary factors known as genes. However, it was
native versions of genes are called allelormorphs, usually short
only in 1952 that DNA was identified as the universal genetic
ened to alleles.
material. In 1953 the structure of DNA was discovered by James
306
 Introduction to genetics
Box 16.1 Useful definitions
Phosphate
Sugar
Base
Base
Sugar
Phosphate
● Chromosome - thread-like mass of DNA found within
A
==O==
the nucleus of the cell
T
G
-O-
● Gene - unit of inheritance; genes consist of short
pieces of DNA which, when joined together in a
G
sequence, make up specific chromosomes
-O-
1G
● Locus - the position of a gene on a chromosome
C二
G
● Allele - a gene on the same locus of a pair of
A
homologous chromosomes
+ Homologous chromosomes - identicalin size and
shape
A
● Homozygous genes - identical genes on the same locus
 of a pair of chromosomes
 Heterozygous genes - non identical genes on the same
C二
locus of a pair of chromosomes
c2
-二G
C二
二G
· Phenotype - outward or visible appearance of the
Cc--G
55-55
animal; may be affected by the environment
T(:CA
TE:C A 
16
● Genotype - the genetic makeup of an animal
A-..T
A )... T
T e-CA.
T e-A.
D. Watson and Francis H. C. Crick. Without Rosalind Franklin,
who developed the skills of X-ray crystallography, their discov-
T:C A 
TE-C A 
ery might not have occurred. The correct number of 46 human
c
LG
c--
-二G
chromosomes was identified in 1956 (Jorde et al 2003).
AI
A1
Composition of DNA
Te=
TE-CA
G
Q
G
C
The double helix
DNA molecules consist of a double helix made up of two com-
New
PIO
PO
New
plementary chains of nucleotides. These are composed of
Fig. 16.6 The replication of DNA, showing the unwinding of the
several simple chemical compounds bound together  in a
doubte helix and the formation of new strands with complementary
 regular pattern. The building blocks of each molecule are phos-
base pairs
 phoric acid, a pentose sugar called deoxyribose, and four
nitrogenous bases, two purines - adenine and guanine, and two
pyrimidines -
 thymine and cytosine, identified by the single
letters A, G, T and C. A second form of nucleic acid is riborucleic
which may act as hormones, receptors, structural and regula-
acid (RNA). In RNA thymine is replaced by uracil (U).
tory proteins. The alternative alleles of any gene are present
at a specific locus on each of a pair of chromosomes. If both
Two sugar-phosphate strands wind around each other and
parents contribute an identical allele for a locus, the individ-
the base pairs are stacked between these strands, pointing
ual is homozygous. If the two alleles differ, the individual is
inwards to the centre of the double helix. The two strands
heterozygous.
a o ed ane p sa ansoddo u 
other. A purine always pairs with a pyrimidine and the pairs
Discrete single genes form about 25% of the DNA and are sep-
stack one above the other. The complementary chains are
arated from each other by long runs of inactive, repetitive
held together by hydrogen bonds, which are easily broken, a
DNA sequences. It is not known why there is so much redun-
feature necessary for DNA replication (Fig. 16.6).
dant DNA and it may have a function as yet unknown.
Genes
The role of the environment
The full complement of DNA is called the genome. DNA is
Genes act in response to environmental changes. These may
arranged in segments called genes. Genes code for proteins,
be internal, such as a response to fluctuations in hormone
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
307
16
Introduction to genetics
level, or external, such as the response to a meal. The full com-
Reading the genetic code
plement of genes inherited by an individual animal is called the
genotype. The outward appearance of an animal, i.e. physical,
Making a functional protein from a stretch of DNA involves
biochemical and physiological nature, is known as the pheno-
two processes, franscription and franslation.
type and results from gene/environment interactions.
Transcription
From DNA to RNA to protein
In a gene only one of the two DNA strands forming the helix
acts as a template for a polypeptide. It must be copied by mes
Proteins are the working components of the cell. DNA stores
senger RNA (mRNA) before it can be read. This is called tran-
the information. RNA carries out instructions encoded in
scription (Fig. 16.7). Every base in the single-stranded mRNA
DNA and synthesizes the proteins involved in cellular
is complementary to the DNA but uracil replaces thymine.
function.
Translation
   i i   
The genetic code
ribosomes for franslation into a specific protein (Fig. 16.7). In
the cytoplasm a particular amino acid is bound to its transfer
Twenty different amino acids are found in proteins, so it
   hI a  e     
became obvious to Watson and Crick that, as there were only
with others to form a polypeptide chain to build the protein.
four bases - ATGC - more than one base must be necessary to
specify a particular amino acid. Even two bases wouldn't be
enough, as 4? gives only 16 possibilities. However, 43 bases
Mutations
give 64 possibilities, more than enough to code for the 20
amino acids. A group of three nucleotides called a triplet codon
Genes usually produce their product faithfully but occasion-
spells out each amino acid and the sequence of amino acids
ally a mutation or alteration in the genetic material in a cell
shapes a particular protein. There are also codons at the ends
arises either naturally or because of the effects of environ-
of genes that signify 'start' and 'stop' so that a correct version
mental challenges called mutagens. These include radiation,
of a protein is made.
chemical or physical stressors. Mutations can be minor changes
in DNA or macromutations involving alterations of large
amounts of a chromosome. Mutations often result in harmful
or lethal defects. A few examples include:
Coding strand
DNA
● Point mutations of a single base cause amino acid
KGTATATGGACCIIG
substitutions resulting in faulty protein products,
which may cause functional defects
ATATACCTGAAC
RNA polymerase
Template strand
● Nonsense mutations involve the creation of a stop
mRNA
5
Transcription
codon in the middle of a gene; the broken gene does
not code for a protein product
Nuclear
membrane
● In frameshift mutations additions or deletions of a
mRNA leaves nucleus via a 
nucleotide alter the reading frame of the DNA to the
 pore in the nuclear membrane 
left or right so that triplet codons do not code for
 Ribosome
amino acids.
3'mRNA
CUGUAUAUGGACUUG
AUA
UAC
Patterns of mendelian
IRNA
tRNA
inheritance
Translation
Me
Leu.
There are four basic types of single-gene mendelian inheri-
Peptide chain
tance - autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked
Fig. 16.7 Synthesis of potypeptides in a eukaryote by means of
dominant and X-linked recessive. Recessive X-linked disorders
transcription and transtation
are rare and will not be discussed.
308
 Introduction to genetics
Dominant genes
● The effect does not miss a generation
● Only one copy is needed to affect the phenotype and
● Every affected offspring with that particular phenotype
manifests its effects in heterozygotes
has at least one affected parent
Box 16.2 Inheritance of coat colours in
Punnett square 2
Labrador dogs
 Paternal genes
The working of single genes can be illustrated by the
inheritance of coat colour in Labrador dogs. Coat colour in
B
h
mammals is brought about by the presence of pigment
granules called melanins in a protein framework. Two
varieties of melanin are converted from the amino acid
P
BB
Bb
tyrosine. One is called eumelanin and gives rise to dark
black
black
coat colour and the other is phaeomelanin, which produces
light colour - various shades of yellow from pale to red
(Nicholas 2003).
Labradors come in three basic colours - black, chocolate
genes
Bb
bb
and yellow. Chocolates can vary from light to dark in
black
16
brown
colour. Two alleles of the same gene are responsible for
the black and chocolate colours. Black is dominant and is
represented by the upper case letter B and chocolate is
recessive to black and is represented by the lower case
letter b. Therefore a dog with a black coat (phenotype)
The yellow colour is brought about by a second recessive
may be genetically either homozygous BB or heterozygous
gene, E, which functions to mask the dark colour by pro-
Bb. If a dog and bitch are both homozygous all their
ducing phaeomelanin instead of eumelanin. If the animal
 puppies will be black BB, as shown in the frst Punnett
is homozygous for the dominant allele, i.e. EE or
square below.
heterozygous Ee, there is no effect on the basic coat
colour. Eumelanin will be produced and the coat colour
Punnett square 1
will be black or brown. If the animal is homozygous for
Paternal genes
the recessive version ee, phaeomelanin will be produced
and the coat colour will be yellow as shown in Punnett
square 3. For simplicity of cell numbers in the Punnett
B
B
square both dog and bitch are shown as homozygous BB.
Punnett square 3
BB
BB
 Paternal genes
black
black
BBE
BBe
Matermal genes 
BB
BB
black 
black
 Matermal 
BBE
BBEE
BBEe
genes
black
black
If a dog and bitch are both heterozygous Bb, three of
their puppies will be black and only one chocolate, as
BBe
BBee
BBee
shown in Punnett square 2. One of the black puppies will
 black
yellow
be homozygous BB, two will be heterozygous Bb. The
chocolate puppy will be homozygous for the recessive
 gene bb.
16
Introduction to genetics
● Where one parent is affected, offspring have a one in
Inactivation of the
two chance of being affected
X chromosome in females
● Normal offspring of an affected parent only produce
 normal offspring.
In females only one X chromosome is functional in each cell
and the other is inactivated in the early embryo. This phe-
Recessive genes
nomenon is called tyonization (Box 16.3) (Valla et al 1999).
● A recessive allele only affects the phenotype in
homozygotes
Box 16.3 Inactivation of the
X chromosome
● Animals with one copy of the allele are carriers
In females one or other of the X chromosomes is randomly
● The progeny of two carriers will have a one in four
inactivated in cells early in embryonic life. Half the cells of
chance of having affected or normal and a one in two
a female will contain one activated X chromosome and half
chance of carrying the disorder
the other. All daughter cells of a particular cell line contain
the same inactivated X chromosome. This effect is called
● Matings between a homozygous affected animal and a
fyonization, after its discoverer, Dr Mary Lyon. Each female
 normal homozygous animal produce normal offspring
is a mosaic of half paternal and half maternal X chromo-
somes.
● The effect may be skip generations until two carriers
reproduce.
The tortoiseshell cat
 In cats the orange gene (O) is responsible for the colour
of the ginger cat. It is carried on the X chromosome. The O
Dominant x-linked genes
gene eliminates all black or brown pigment from the hairs.
A tortoiseshell cat is a female heterozygote Oo. In any cell
● The X chromosome carries a large number of genes
only one X chromosome functions. Two cell lines develop at
 involved in development and function
random - one with O producing hair with orange pigment
and the other with o, allowing normal pigment to colour the
● Males only have one X chromosome and are
hair with whatever the animal has inherited (Fig. 16.8)
hermizygous for X chromosome genes
● If there is an abnormal X chromosome gene, males
will be affected by an X linked disorder
● Females are usually heterozygous for the X chromosome
 and will not be affected because of the opposing
normal allele. They will be asymptomatic carriers.
Mitochondrial DNA
● Each mitochondrion has their own circular
double-stranded DNA called mitochondrial DNA
(mDNA) inherited only from mothers because sperm
Fig. 16.8 A tortoiseshelf silver Somati cat showing patches of red
mitochondria rarely enter the ovum and do not
and btack on a silver base
contribute to the embryo
● mDNA codes for genes that are important in cellular
respiration
Congenital defects
● mDNA disorders affect males and females but are
transmitted only through their mothers. The disorders
Congenital defects are present at birth. Some may be visible
 combine muscular and neurological features, affecting
or they may be hidden, such as changes in protein molecules,
cells with high energy needs.
e.g. haemoglobin. Not all congenital defects are inherited.
310
 Introduction to genetics
Some result from environmental influences on the embryo.
animals means that most of these disorders have been found
Congenital defects may occur because of the following
        
factors:
recessive disorders until affected offspring have been born
● Genetic/chromosomal abnormalities may cause
from two apparently normal parents.
    n  sn
Dominantly inherited diseases are easier to control than
systems. Some disorders may involve the interactions
recessive diseases as they may have been identified in one of
d s  e a a  s  n
the parents. However, if dominant diseases show their effects
after the onset of breeding age, some affected offspring will
● Teratogens reach the fetus by crossing the placenta
be born (Padgett & Duffendack 2004).
and cause DNA mutations. During organogenesis, the
embryo is vulnerable to developmental disruption.
  e n  s p s
feline panleukopenia virus, drugs such as griseofulvin
Chromosomal defects
and radiation
Occasionally, whole chromosomes may be involved but such
● Multifactorial disorders are caused by the
defects often result in stillbirth or spontaneous abortion.
interaction of environment and genes, e.g. canine hip
Numerical or structural changes may affect the autosomes or
dysplasia
sex chromosomes.
16
● Idiopathic defects have no known cause; at present
they are the largest group.
Numerical chromosomal defects
Many of these numerical defects arise during failure of
Genetic defects
dysjunction, when sister chromatids fail to separate. This
may result in too many or too few chromosomes:
Slight differences in a protein brought about by a genetic
mutation may cause devastating metabolic diseases such as
● Polyploidy means the presence of multiples of the
 phosphofructokinase deficiency in cocker and springer spaniels.
haploid number of chromosomes, i.e. three or more
However, not all diseases are due to alterations in metabolic
pathways. Some proteins have cellular structural roles while
● Triploidy is the presence of three copies of each
others control embryological development. Many feline and
chromosome
canine disorders have their similarities to human diseases.
Dogs share 85% of their genetic code with humans and over
● Monosomy is when one of a chromosome pair is
half their genetic disorders mirror a human genetic disease
missing
(Guynup 2000), e.g. severe combined immunodeficiency
disease (SCID) in basset hounds and Welsh corgis. The boy in
● Trisomy is the presence of an extra chromosome.
the bubble mentioned in a song by Paul Simon suffered from
Trisomy of the sex chromosomes is quite common and
this disorder.
XXX females (triple X) or XXY males occur. This can
lead to the unusual occurrence of a male tortoiseshell
Incidence
cat with the genotype 18xxY (eighteen pairs + X and
Y and an extra X)
 Research has identifed over 200 inherited genetic defects in
the cat. Many also afflict humans, including muscular dys.
● Mosaicism results when the zygote develops into
trophy, polycystic kidney disease and retinal degeneration
an individual with two genotypes or cell lines. The
(Budiansky 2002). Many genetic diseases have been identified
condition arises as a result of non-dysjunction during
in the dog and Donald Patterson, professor of medical genet
early mitosis.
ics at Pennsylvania University, runs a 'canine genetic disease
information system'. By 2000, over 370 genetic diseases had
been recorded in 200 dog breeds and up to 10 new diseases
Structural chromosomal defects
((g dnano) ren ea ppe saq aram
Pollution or radiation may induce breaks in chromosomes,
Most inherited diseases are due to recessive genes (Ruvinsky
resulting in macromutations. Two of these, inversion and
& Sampson 2001). The loss of genetic diversity in pure-bred
translocation, may be transmitted from parent to offspring.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
311
16
Introduction to genetics
● Translocation is the transfer of a piece of one
● Duplication is where a section of a chromosome is
chromosome to another non-homologous chromosome.
repeated; this is less harmful as there is no loss of
If the translocation is balanced, the normal complement
chromosome material
of chromosomal material is received. There will be
no abnormality. If the translocation results in extra
● Inversion occurs if a segment of a chromosome
chromosomal material, abnormality will occur
breaks free and becomes reattached in the reverse
position.
● Deletion is the loss of part of a chromosome
Application to
Clinical screening
practice
Although single-gene disorders give rise to serious problems
such as inherited eye disorders in dogs and polycystic kidney
 disease in cats, they may not prevent animals from reproduc-
The genome projects
ing. Some disorders, especially dominant gene disorders such
as feline polycystic kidney disease, can be identified by clini
Over the last few decades identification of genes though the
cal examination and any affected animal prevented from
use of molecular genetics using DNA/RNA-based technologies
 breeding. The simplest way is to neuter them and sell them as
has given rise to a new science of genomics or the study of
pets.
the genome. Fragments of known DNA can be used as a probe
to identify genes on the chromosomes (Nicholas 2003). The
Recessive disorders are more difficult to control as carriers of
technology has led to disease-causing gene discovery, genetic
-xa o   no  a  e g o a
engineering, paternity testing and criminal identification
ination. The parents of an affected animal should be pre
(Padgett & Duffendack 2004).
- J Asa sme ou si rm e q  p
ferent people own the father and mother! Schemes for the
The Human Genome Project, completed in 2002, involved
detection and prevention of some disorders are available.
mapping all the human genes to their chromosomes. Work
has proceeded on various animal genomes, including feline
and canine. Obtaining samples of DNA for study requires
Pedigree analysis
only a blood or saliva sample. Recent developments have
greatly increased the speed at which DNA can be sequenced.
 Breeders of pedigree animals are expected to keep meticulous
pedigrees containing at least four generations. Studying the
 Researchers at Cornell University began sequencing the dog
 pedigree can help to estimate the probability that a prospec.
genome in 1990. Professor Stephen J. O'Brien began to study
tive parent may be homozygous for a particular gene. There
the genetics of the house cat in the 1970s. A low-resolution
is also a retrospective use of pedigrees. When an animal has
genetic map for the domestic cat has now been published by
been born with a genetic disease, closely related parents who
Professor O'Brien's group in the USA. Once an inherited trait
may be carriers can be identifed and test matings may be
has been identified to a specific location a DNA test can be
carried out. Specific symbols are used to make interpretation
created for it. However, the ethics of using the new technolo-
of pedigrees universal (Fig. 16.9).
S () -    n  
cusses the problems clearly.
Test matings
These are time-consuming and may be expensive but allow
Diagnosis of disorders
the breeder to identify the source of an abnormal allele. The
concept will be discussed more fully in Chapter 17.
Although molecular genetics has provided sophisticated tests
for identifying disorders there are other, more traditional
ways of identifying risks for breeding animals and selecting
Biochemical screening
against an inherited single gene problem. These are clinical
screening, pedigree analysis and test matings. The technical
Some diseases are caused by the lack of a specific protein that
methods include biochemical screening and DNA markers
acts as a catalyst or an enzyme in a metabolic process. If the
(Nicholas 2003).
disease process leaves a biochemical marker in blood or other
312
2 Introduction to genetics
(a)
Male
Female
(b)
Normal
Number of animals
2
of sex indicated
 Affected
 Proband
18
Dead
Heterozygous at
autosomal locus
Heterozygous at
X-linked locus
4
18
 Sex unspecified
91
 Abortion or stillbirth,
sex unspecified
Mating
readily obtainable tissue, a biochemical screening test can be
these fragments can be isolated and cloned (making multiple
developed. Sometimes the heterozygote carrier of the gene
identical copies). If a fragment is inserted into a suitable
has reduced manufacture of the particular protein and can be
vector, such as the small circular DNA found in some bacte-
identified by the test.
ria called plasmids, the resulting DNA is called recombinant
DNA (rDNA).
DNA technologies
Cloning can produce many copies of a particular fragment to
use in gene sequencing. Another use for cloning is the man-
DNA technologies are being increasingly used to identify
ufacture of a genomic library. If the DNA from a cell is cloned,
genes associated with defects. The techniques include the use
the result is a genomic library, which could contain most of
of restriction enzymes, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
the DNA for that species. These libraries are then used to track
Southern blotting. Nicholas (2003) gives a good account of
down specific genes, including those causing inherited
these techniques in Chapter 2 of his book.
disease.
Polymerase chain reaction
Restriction enzymes
PCR, developed in 1985, is widely used in the detection of
 In 1970 scientists discovered that bacteria produce enzymes
particular genes. PCR rapidly produces more than a million
S n a        
copies of DNA. The original DNA can be from a cell or from
These enzymes restrict viruses from damaging the bacterium,
 s   '     
hence the name restriction enzymes. They cut the foreign
ber Jurassic Park and the insect in amber?), a single sperm or
DNA at specific sites and into pieces of varying lengths and
a hair follicle.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
313
16
Introduction to genetics
into single strands), separated by size and blotted on to
Southern blotting
either a nitrocellulose or nylon membrane. The membrane
The technique is named after the man, Ed Southern, who
is baked in an oven to fix the DNA and then bathed in
developed it in 1975. In PCR the fragments of DNA are sepa-
a solution containing labelled (with a substance that
 a     a  
fluoresces), denatured DNA probes. The strands will com-
their length, the fragments will travel different distances
bine with any complementary strand in the solution. The
through a gel when an electric current is passed through it.
unattached probes are washed off, leaving the matched
The fragments are denatured (the double helix is separated
DNA.
Hip dysplasia is a major congenital canine health problem.
Examples
0]
schemes
Large pedigree dogs such as labradors are more prone to it but
smaller dogs and mongrels may also suffer. There is abnormal
for screening
 tor
formation of the 'ball and socket' hip joint. Normally the
specific defects
ball, which is the head of the femur, fits snugly into the
1n
socket. Dogs with a genetic disposition are born with normal
hips but as the dog grows the structure of the joint becomes
dogs and cats
deformed so that the head does not fit into the socket and the
 joint does not rotate smoothly. The dog becomes lame, may
be unwilling to run around and may have difficulty climbing
Kennel Club and British
stairs. It may walk with a waddle. The ultimate result is arthri
Veterinary Association
tis and a painful, crippling disease.
In the UK the Kennel Club (KC), together with the British
Many factors work together to cause this disease. The dog
Veterinary Association (BVA), currently have three screening
must be genetically at risk, but environmental factors, espe-
schemes for inherited conditions. These are hip dysplasia,
cially nutrition and exercise, bring about the symptoms.
elbow dysplasia and inherited eye conditions.
There may be excess calcium in puppy food, obesity and
high-protein and high-calorie diets. Incorrect levels of exer-
cise (too much or too little) also produce symptoms but the
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy
continued breeding of dogs with hip dysplasia is a major con-
tributor.
retinal atrophy (PRA) most forms are inherited as an autoso.
Total elimination of the disease may be unrealistic but selec-
mal recessive trait (Dekomien & Epplen 2003). The genetic
tive breeding of dogs with good hips can reduce the inci-
  s   s  s 
dence. The BVA and the KC run a scheme to test for hip dys-
test diffcult. Homozygous animals develop degeneration of
plasia, which helps the breeder to choose good breeding
the peripheral retina, leading to night blindness and loss of
stock. Radiographs from dogs more than 1 year old are sub-
visual fields. Typically the disease progresses to complete
mitted to ensure that skeletal maturity is sufficient. An
blindness. However, genetic testing is available under the eye
overall hip score based on examination of specific sites for
scheme for the Irish setter. The BVA also maintain a list of
malformation in both joints is calculated. A list of breed
some breeds the with approximate age at which the deterio-
mean scores (BMS) is published and breeders are recom-
 ration can be diagnosed by ophthalmoscope.
mended to ensure that their breeding stock has scores well
below the BMS for their breed of dog.
Canine hip dysplasia - a multifactorial
problem
Elbow dysplasia
Unfortunately, some serious disorders are not caused by a
Elbow dysplasia is a degenerative polygenic inherited disease
single gene or even a combination of genetic effects (poly-
of the elbow joint. The causes diagnosis and management are
genir). There may be an environmental factor predisposing
similar to hip dysplasia. The Orthopaedic Foundation for
animals to a disease, i.e. the disease is multifactorial. One of
Animals maintains an elbow registry and elbows can be graded
these diseases is canine hip dysplasia. Others include
from normal through grades 1, 2 and 3 as the severity of the
epilepsy, autoimmune diseases, heart disease and some forms
radiographic appearance increases. Three main disorders may
of cancer.
 occur singly or in combination:
314
 Introduction to genetics
● Fragmented medial coronoid process
● Osteochondritis of the medial humeral condyle
● Ununited anconeal process.
Elbow dysplasia occurs mainly in larger dogs and is breed.
related. The incidence ranges from 0% in Border collies to
47.8% in chow chows. Male dogs are more likely to be
affected than females and in 20-35% of cases both elbows are
affected. Affected dogs should probably be removed from the
breeding programme, although the severity of symptoms is
only loosely related to the radiographic signs.
The Feline Advisory Bureau
Fig. 16.10 Cross-section of a severely affected kidney showing
Cysts throughout. Reproduced with permission of the Fetine Advisory
-s e   (   h 
Bureau
ing programme for the autosomal dominant problem - poly.
cystic kidney disorder (PKD).
looking for the presence of cysts. This is best done when
16
the cat is more than 10 months old. An FAB-approved
certificate is issued stating the result of the scan for that cat.
Feline polycystic kidney disorder
This enables breeders to make informed decisions about
 In PKD a large number of fluid-filled cysts form within the
which cats to use for future breeding. Tim Gruffydd-Jones
kidneys (Feline Advisory Bureau 2004). The cysts are present
believes that the disorder could be eradicated quickly if all
from birth but increase in size until they damage the sur-
breeders were responsible about testing their cats (personal
rounding kidney tissue and cause kidney failure (Fig. 16.10).
con versation).
The cat will eventually die, despite supportive treatment. The
disease is peculiar to Persian cats and any breed of cat where
 Persian genes have been included, such as the Tiffany.
Feline blood grouping
The problem has become widespread in these breeds because
the disease is an unfortunate combination of an autosomal
Incompatible blood groups between the stud tomcat and the
dominant gene, so that only one parent needs to be affected
queen can lead to the devastating loss of whole litters of
by PKD and one in two of any offspring will be affected, and
kittens. This problem can be solved by screening the prospec-
a condition whose symptoms may not be obvious until the
tive parents' blood and avoiding the mating of incompatible
age of 7 or 8, by which time the cat may have produced
animals. One scheme for the identification of feline blood
several litters of kittens, 50% of whom would be affected.
Aq mos Jo sa a ie pna si s  n
Dr Diane Addie, who also maintains a register of blood-typed
The Feline Advisory Bureau has developed a PKD screening
stud toms and queens (Addie 2004). This problem will be
scheme that relies on ultrasonography of the kidneys,
discussed further in Chapter 17.
Future trends in
inserted into a different mother. This form of cloning has
biotechnology
been widespread in livestock breeding (Nicholas 2003).
Cloning by transferring the nucleus of a somatic cell into an
unfertilized ovum was introduced in the 1980s, culminating
Cloning of animals
in the birth of Dolly the sheep in February 1997. Since then
many animals have been cloned in this way but the technol-
Genetically identical animals are produced naturally every
ogy has major problems:
tical twins, triplets, etc. From the 1970s embryos have been
● The success rate is very low - only 1-2% of cloned
split in the laboratory and each of the resulting embryos
embryos survive
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  315
16
Introduction to genetics
● Many die soon after birth
Tisbury, Wiltshire. Available on line at: http://www.fabcats.org/
pkd.htmt
● Survivors suffer from abnormalities, including
Guynup S 2000 Genetic testing for dogs. Genome News Network,
Rockville, MD.Available on line at: http://www.genomenewsnet-
If the technique can be perfected, gene replacement will
work.org/arficles/07_00/genetic_testing_dogs.shtml
be more effective, replacement organs and tissues could be
grown and it could be used in the conservation of rare
Jorde L, Carey I, Bamshad M J, White R 2003 Medical genetics,
species.
3rd edn. Mosby, St Louis, MO
Mueller R F, Young I D 2001 Emery's elements of medical genetics,
Transgenesis
11th edn.Churchill Livingstone,Edinburgh
Transgenesis involves the insertion of genes from one species
Meyers-Wallen V N 2003 Ethics and genetic selection in purebred
to another, e.g. a human gene into a pig. As the genetic code
dogs. Reproduction in Domestic Animals 38(1): 73-76
is universal the transferred gene will work in its new envi-
ronment. The new animal is described as ransgenic. The first
Nicholas F W 2003 Introduction fo veterinary genetics, 2nd edn.
Blackwell, Oxford
hormone in 1985. The technique is mainly used in disease
Padgett G A, Duffendack J C 2004 Canine molecular diseases.
research. Another use is in the production of human polypep
Compendium: Continuing Education 22: 480-489. Available
tides for use in pharmaceuticals. Financial and ethical con
on line at: http://www.med.umich.edu/hg/RESEARCH/FACULTY/
siderations may limit the use of this technique.
Brewer/compendium.htm
Ruvinsky A, Sampson J 2001 The genetics of the dog. Kennel Club,
Gene therapy
London
Therapeutic uses of recombinant DNA techniques include gene
Vella C M, Shelton L M, McGonagle I1, Stanglein T W 1999
therapy or 'the replacement of a deficient gene product or cor
Robinson's genetics for cat breeders and veterinarians, 4th edn.
rection of an abnormal gene' (Mueller & Young 2001). When
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
the gene enters the new cell it may change the way the cell
works or the chemicals that the cell secretes. The identification
Recommended reading
of many abnormal genes and their products has led to possibil.
ities of treatments for some important diseases, both human
Jorde L, Carey I, Bamshad M J, White R 2003 Medical genetics,
and animal. It overcomes the major problem of transplanta-
3rd edn. Mosby, Sf Louis, MO
tion, as genes work within the cell and are not affected by
immune rejection. However, it is unlikely to be of use in animal
This textbook on medical genetics presents its subject matter
clearty and isillustrated by good diagrams. Although it is aimed at
abnormal animals by carrier detection.
those interested in human genetics, the basic science is presented
in a sensible progression to maximize understanding.
Bibliography
Nicholas F W 2003 Introduction to veterinary genetics, 2nd edn.
AddieD 2004What are feline blood groups?Available on line at:
Blackwell, Oxford
http://www.dr-addie.com
This is an excellent textbook on veterinary genetics. The detailed
Budiansky S 2002 Happening cats.Available online at:
http:/www.smithsonianmag.si.edu.smithsonian/issues02/sept02/
from the basic sciences to application to future developments.
phenomenas.himt
Vella C M, Shelton L M, McGonagle J J, Stanglein T W 1999
Dekomien G, Epplen J T 2003 Evaluation of the canine RPE65
Robinson's genetics for cat breeders and veterinarians, 4th edn.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Molecular Vision 9: 601-605
This is a long established textbook on genetics aimed at cat breed-
FelineAdvisoryBureau 2004Information Sheet Number32
ers and vets. Although the subject is dealt with in depth, as it is
Potycystic kidney disease (PKD) in cats. Feline Advisory Bureau
written with breeders as well as professionats in mind, it is easily
316
 Introduction to genetics
understood. It begins with reproduction and development then
This paper is included to encourage the shudent to find data about
moves on to genetics.
specific disorders in more depth than most books will provide.
In particular, the important topic of the hip dysplasia scheme is
Wood J L, Lakhani K H,Rogers K 2002 Heritability and epidemi-
presented.
ology of canine hip-dysplasia score and its components in Labrador
retrievers in the United Kingdom. Preventive Veterinary Medicine
55:95-108
16
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 317
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
17
Practical animal breeding
Dorothy Stables and Gareth Lawler
Key Points
● Pedigree animals are the result of selective breeding.
● Parturition takes place in three stages and knowledge of
Inbreeding. line breeding and outbreeding are strategies
these will ensure the delivery of healthy offspring.
used by breeders to select for traits such as hair colour.
● In some cases the dam may need assistance or the
body type and behaviour.
neonate may need extra care in order to survive.
● Breeding stock, i.e. the stud male and the breeding bitch or
● Colostrum ingested within the frst 24 h of life provides
queen, must be selected with care using criteria based on
protective antibodies for the neonate.
health, temperament and adherence to the breed standard.
● All kittens and puppies must be treated for roundworms
● The mating process usually takes place on the stud male's
and vaccinated.
territory and must be carefully monitored to avoid injury
● All pedigree animals should be registered with the
to either individual.
 appropriate organisation.
● The dam must be cared for during pregnancy and
 consideration must be given to nutrition, exercise,
vaccination and preventative worming treatment.
Introduction
authors, Dorothy Stables and Gareth Lawlor, are both experi-
 The aim of this chapter is to provide an insight into breeding
enced breeders and in the following two sections they
pedigree animals from a breeder's point of view. The two
explain how they produce healthy kittens and puppies.
Breeding pedigree
landed in the Caribbean Sea. Clouds of dust cut out the light
from the sun. The small, warm-blooded mammals could
cats
so most survived. By 45 million years ago all the major groups
Dorothy Stables
of mammals alive today had evolved. True cats are found in the
fossil records from about 25 million years ago.
About 200 million years ago, mammals arose. They coexisted
with the huge dinosaurs and were small, warm-blooded,
 Feline domestication may have begun in Egypt (see also
covered in fur and fed their babies with milk but probably
Ch. 1). The African wild cat began to live around the grain
also laid eggs. By 65 million years ago there were many
stores, catching small rodents. Gradually the tamer amongst
species but suddenly all the dinosaurs disappeared, as did the
them allowed humans to play with their kittens.
majority of birds and fishes. Something cataclysmic hap-
Domestication leads to selective breeding for favoured fea-
 pened, possibly the arrival of an immense asteroid that
tures such as hair colour and length.
Selective breeding
sive. When two cats both carrying the mutated gene mate a
 new characteristic appears.
Pedigree animals are the result of selective breeding, where
Breeding strategies
specific favourable traits are chosen to be perpetuated by the
 breeder. In the latter half of the 19th century people started
'The good and bad points of the individual cats (or dogs)
to breed specific types of cat and over the last century about
should be assessed and weighed against each other before
30 recognised breeds have been developed (Fig. 17.1).
mating' (Vella et al 1999):
Alterations in features occur because natural mutations are
already present in wild cats. Generally, one of the two alleles
● Inbreeding is the mating of closely related
for a characteristic such as coat colour mutates but is reces-
 individuals such as father and daughter or siblings.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
319
17
Practical animal breeding
Two inheritable feline characteristics, coat colour and behav.
iour, are briefly discussed to show why an understanding of
 genetics is important for cat breeders.
Coat colour
Pigment production
Genes in the melanocytes at the base of the hair follicles
 influence the production of hair pigments. As discussed in
 Chapter 16, aumelanin is a black pigment and phaeomelanin pro-
duces a yellowish ground colour. The dominant gene that con-
 tols the colour deposition known as agouti, which is a hair that
is black at the tip and yellow at the base, produces agouti protein
A. Its recessive partner, which codes for non-agouti, is desig-
nated a. When the amount of agouti protein within the
Fig. 17.1 Two short-haired breeds; α Usuat Abyssinian neuter male
melanocytes reaches a certain level, production of eumelanin
uddting a red point Siamese male kitten
stops and that of phaeomelanin begins.
How closely these animals are related can be calculated
 All cats have a second system of pigmentation superimposing
using the mathematical concept of the inbreeding
a pattern of dark markings on the agouti coat. Some areas of
coefficient, which can be defined as 'the probability
skin have a poor response to agouti protein. There the hairs
that the two genes present at a locus in an individual
are coloured from base to tip by eumelanin and are black.
are identical by descent'
Alternating bands of agouti and black produce the tabby
pattern. In cats who are homozygous for the recessive muta-
● Line breeding is the mating of animals with shared
tion called non-agouti, a defective agouti protein is produced
ancestors but not as closely related as in inbreeding.
 that does not affect eumelanin production. The phenotype of
The word 'line' is probably related to the term 'blood
these cats is the self black cat.
line'.
Coat colour genes
Both strategies are used by breeders to select for desired traits,
but a risk with mating related animals is that they may both
The three basic colours, black, chocolate and cinnamon, can
carry a harmful recessive gene and this would be expressed in
be modified by the presence of other genes:
the homozygous individual - a condition known as inbreed-
ing depression. Advances in genetics should help breeders to
● The dominant inhibitor gene (f) suppresses the
identify and eliminate many harmful genes over the next few
amount of pigment fed into the hair, resulting in the
years:
 presence of white hairs with coloured tips
● Outbreeding or the mating of two unrelated individ
● The recessive dilute gene (dd) causes pigment granules
uals is a method of reducing inbreeding depression.
to be enlarged and deposited unevenly along the hair:
Crossbreeds, mongrels or simply 'moggies', are the
the hair may be very lightly pigmented
extreme form of outbreeding. However, Vella et al
(1999) quote Joan Miller, then vice president of the
● The sex-linked orange (O) gene causes the production
Winn Feline Foundation as saying that 'In the majority
of phaeomelanin, resulting in a male ginger cat or
of breeds it is now impossible to find two cats
female tortoiseshell.
unrelated to each other because every pedigree is based
 on a few early founding cats'
Behaviour
Behaviour is partly instinctive (inherited) and partly learned.
● Gene linkage is another problem associated with
However, instinctive behaviour is fine-tuned by learning.
selecting closely related animals and is a situation
Fogle (1991) believes that we can attribute human mental
where a desired trait may carry with it an
characteristics to cats because their brains are wired up like
abnormality - if the two genes lie close together on a
ours. Cats learn quickly and anticipate events such as feeding.
chromosome they may be inherited together; for
My cat Filly remembers that she is fed separately from the
example, blue eyes are often associated with white coat
other cats. She doesn't run into the kitchen with the rest, but
colour and deafness.
goes to where her food is served.
320
0 Practical animal breeding
Buying a breeding queen
Before buying a breeding queen, consider the following:
● Is the home suitable for rearing kittens? Ornaments
scattered around a house may not survive a healthy
litter of kittens and trailing wires may be dangerous
● Is the expense prohibitive?
● It is better to buy a kitten rather than an older queen
so that there is time to develop a bond before the first
litter of kittens comes along. The potential queen
should be visited in her home and her siblings and
mother should be observed for type and behaviour. If
the stud is owned by the breeder he should also be
looked at. The pedigrees of the animal should be
checked to exclude potential problems
● Is there a suitable stud cat in the vicinity? Some of the
rarer breeds of cat may be scattered around the
 country, requiring a lengthy journey with a howling
queen!
● Although all kittens will have had a health check
when they were vaccinated, new owners may wish
their own vet to examine the kitten before purchasing
Fig. 17.2 Mistrat, a red silver male Somali kitten aged 8 weeks
● The new owner should receive a receipt of purchase,
playing with an unseen human
a four-generation pedigree, a certificate of kitten
registration and transfer of ownership with a suitable
body such as the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy
Learning requires input from parents, litter mates and
(GCCF), certificate of vaccination and advice on caring
humans (Turner & Bateson 2oo0). Socialization is the
for the kitten.
breeder's responsibility. There is a sensitive period from
2 to 7 weeks when kittens need handling for at least 40 min
The stud cat
a day if they are to interact with humans. Petting, playing
with and talking to them (Fig. 17.2) is more important than
Most breeders will not sell a stud tom to someone until they
feeding for their social development (Karsh 1983). Behaviour
have been breeding for 4 or 5 years and own two or three
must be considered when choosing a kitten for breeding or
queens. During that time they will have had experience of how
showing.
other people manage their stud cat. He will need his own quar-
ters (Fig. 17.3) near to the house because of urine spraying. They
will need to be airy in summer and heated in winter, with a run
attached so that he can exercise. The owner should be able to
sit in with the stud and play with him.
Breeding practices
If he is to have visiting queens there should be suitable quar.
ters where the queen can be kept near to him but can be sep-
Rice (1997) suggests that professional cat breeders take cat
arated if the need arrives. He should be introduced to his stud
breeding seriously, with ‘carefully planned agendas and
quarters at about 16 weeks old so that by the time he matures
well-defined motives'. They may wish to develop a par-
he is happy and familiar with his own territory. A stud tom
ticular breed to enhance certain desirable features such as
should be chosen with as much care as a breeding queen. His
coat colour or head shape, or they may wish to breed for
pedigree should be studied and discussed so that any rela-
showing.
tionships between the queens and the stud are recognised.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  321
17
Practical animal breeding
the papillae or spines covering the glans penis may stimulate
a rise in LH levels.
The stud cat
A tom shows signs of sexual activity at about 7-8 months of
age and may mate with a receptive queen. From about
10 months old a stud is capable of fathering kittens but this
does not mean he is ready to work. The owner must allow
time for him to mature.
Boy meets girl
It is usual to take the queen to the stud's home for mating.
Fig. 17.3 Typicat stud quarters
Some males prefer their own territory, as it gives them
stud cat carefully. She may be left in her carrying basket to see
The mating process
how the two cats react. The journey may affect the queen and
it may be 24 h before she returns to being receptive. A
 maiden queen should be taken to an experienced tom and a
The queen
young tom should be allowed a mature, experienced queen
for his first mating. If all seems well they should be allowed
 Sexual maturity in a queen occurs between 5 and 12 months.
to have physical contact with each other. She may show her
However, she may not be physically or psychologically ready
willingness by calling, rolling and flirting.
to have kittens and should be at least 1 year old before mating
(Rice 1997). She could be allowed a breeding life of about
The tom will respond by making a low, throaty noise. He
5 years during which she should have no more than two
        s
litters every 18 months.
moment, runs in and grabs the queen by the neck. He has to
be quick as she may attack him. The queen responds to the
Queens show few obvious physical signs of the oestrous cycle
neck grasp as a kitten does, by remaining still while he
or being ‘in heat'. Some develop pinkness and a slight
mounts her (Morris 1996). With a few thrusts, he deposits his
swelling of the tissue around their vaginal orifice. However,
semen before withdrawing his penis. At this point the queen
their behaviour can be quite dramatic, with vocalization
 often screams loudly and turns to attack him. Each act of cop-
(calling) and posturing. Owners have taken a queen to the vet
ulation takes only about 10 s.
because she was crying so loudly they thought she was in
 pain! Because a queen may be ready to mate without showing
Experienced studs have their escape route planned and will
signs, no entire female should be allowed to go outside. The
only let go when they can safely run. Both cats now settle
local tomcats from miles around will know she is ready!
 down apart and vigorously wash their genital regions. Cats
will mate several times in a day. Matings rarely require
Oestrus often begins with the queen rolling around on the
human intervention but it is wise to be nearby. Occasionally
floor and purring. She then shows lordosis, which involves
a tom may be too rough or a queen attack too harshly and the
lowering her chest, lifting up her bottom and placing her tail
cats may need to be separated for a while.
to one side while treading with her back legs. Oestrus can
last from 3-10 days but is shortened if the queen is mated.
During oestrus the female will allow the male to mount and
Aftercare of the queen
copulate.
After mating the queen may continue to call for a few days,
Cats are induced ovulators, which maximizes the chance of fer-
so other entire males should not have access to her. Then her
tilization. Copulation releases luteinizing hormone (LH),
appetite, reduced during calling, and behaviour will return
which stimulates ovulation. The level of LH increases with
to normal. Her neck should be examined for tooth marks
each copulation so that fertilization and pregnancy are more
and any damage should be treated. Puncture wounds ex-
likely to occur. Breeders allow mating over 3 days. As the
tending through the skin should always be examined by a
 penis is withdrawn from the queen's vagina the scratching of
veterinarian.
322
2Practical animal breeding
Pregnancy
The average length of pregnancy in the domestic cat is
63 days or 9 weeks, but a range of 58-70 days is accepted.
Earlier than this the kittens may not be viable and later size
problems may occur, requiring urgent intervention. There
is no accepted blood or urine test available for diagnosing
feline pregnancy. A vet may be able to palpate the fetuses at
15-20 days of gestation, but this is dangerous if done by in-
experienced people as too much pressure may cause the loss
of the kittens. Ultrasound imaging can be used from 15 days.
Breeders become experts in diagnosing pregnancy. At 21 days
the queen's nipples become more vascular and turn a rosy
pink. Later the nipples grow larger and a discrete area of hair
loss occurs around them, often aided by the queen plucking
hairs. By 35 days there should be a noticeable increase in
abdominal girth and by 49 days the individual kittens may be
observed and felt to move.
A queen who fails to conceive may call again any time
between 28 days and towards the end of the anticipated
pregnancy. Some develop a phantom pregnancy (pseudocye-
sis), during which their abdomens increase in girth and they
二
do not return to oestrus. Rice (1997) believes this usually
follows attempts to stimulate the vagina, produce ovulation
 and end oestrus artificially.
Fig. 17.4 A commercially-made kittening box
Care of the pregnant queen
5 weeks. It should be enclosed, with an opening big enough
Nutrition
for the mother to go in and out but high enough to keep the
kittens confined. Bedding should be smooth and flat at first
As pregnancy progresses beyond the second week the queen
so that the kittens cannot find their way beneath the layers.
requires more calories. Her daily calorie intake should
A piece of synthetic fleere (Vetbed) over which a piece of
increase by 70% and her body weight will steadily increase
sheeting can be placed is ideal. Material such as towels and
due to the rapid growth of the fetuses and the storage of fat
blankets with loops should be avoided, as they may trap the
for lactation (Rice 1997). This can be achieved by increasing
kittens' claws and damage their feet.
the number of times a day she is fed from two to four and by
giving her free access to whatever dried food she enjoys.
Parturition
Nesting behaviour
As pregnancy progresses the queen seeks out a secluded place
Cats usually give birth without human interference and
in which to have her kittens. She can be provided with two
queens who have been given too much attention during
or three alternative places, which she will inspect and
delivery have been known to abandon their kittens (Rice
rearrange. If this is not done she will choose her own place,
1997). However, breeding for different body shapes has
which could well be the sofa! A cardboard box that can be dis-
increased birth problems in the modern Siamese cat and the
posed of after the event makes an excellent nest. There are
 Persian cat (Feline Advisory Bureau 2004a).
commercial boxes available (Fig. 17.4) but a queen may not
like them! Any box should be large enough to allow her to
A breeder should be ready to give assistance if necessary.
stretch out and accommodate mother and kittens for at least
Equipment likely to be needed includes:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 323
17
Practical animal breeding
● Haemostat forceps, dental floss and blunt-ended
is shortened to about 5 min or less for subsequent kittens.
scissors for dealing with the umbilical cords
Once the kitten is born the mother clears the membranes
from its nose and mouth, chews and separates the umbilical
● An antiseptic solution in a shallow dish for sterilizing
cord and eats the placenta.
the instruments
Following the birth of the first kitten there is usually a short
● Warm, disposable cloths for receiving the kittens
delay of 10 min to 1 h before the birth of the next kitten. This
gives the mother time to clean the first kitten and for it to
● Cotton swabs
find a nipple and commence suckling. Occasionally labour is
interrupted for a time and the mother rests happily with the
● A 2 ml syringe without needle for neonatal
kittens already born.
resuscitation
● Bags for disposing of bloodstained articles.
Assisted delivery
This is usually only necessary during the late second stage
Signs of parturition
where a kitten has partially emerged but progress does not
continue. Most queens will deliver themselves if time is
  rd a   n d n s a
 om s  mo  a pop se pmoe
the queen's rectal temperature every 8 h for a day or two
small but progressed in labour very well until the time came
before the expected date of delivery (EDD). There will be a
drop from the normal 38.5°℃ to 37°C about 12 h before
no obvious progress. I was about to call my vet when she sud-
labour begins. Behavioural signs are also good indicators and
denly leapt out of her box and wedged herself upright in the
include reduced appetite, restlessness, pacing, making fre-
angle of a corner in a 'defaecating position'. Two minutes
quent visits to the nesting place, licking the genitalia and
later the first kitten popped out bottom first and the other
discomfort. My queens come for me when they are in early
three kittens followed quickly.
labour and insist on taking me to the delivery place. One
 young queen likes to get into a sleeping basket and cuddle up
Normally, if the kitten is halfway out, gentle traction should
to her mother, an old neutered female.
be attempted. A dry cloth should be wrapped around the
kitten and, taking care to avoid compressing internal organs,
During the first stage of labour uterine contractions dilate
traction should be applied to complete the delivery. The
the cervix and move the kittens towards the body of the
direction of traction is important. It should follow the shape
uterus. There is usually a clear, odourless discharge of mucus,
of the feline birth canal downwards towards the mother's feet
which may become tinged with blood just before delivery.
and backwards away from her body.
Cats, though uncomfortable, rarely cry out but, in the
presence of their owners, may purr loudly. It is diffcult
to pinpoint the onset of the first stage but it probably
Resuscitating a kitten
isn't necessary as long as the cat is not distressed. Normal
progress is more important than length of time (Rice
Newborn kittens soon establish regular respirations. If a
1997).
kitten continues gasping or if bubbles of fluid are coming
down its nose and out of its mouth, help is needed. The
The second stage is the delivery of the kittens and the
mouth and nostrils should be wiped and a syringe can be
third stage, which usually follows immediately for each
used as a mucus extractor. A vigorous drying with a warm
kitten, is the delivery of placenta and membranes. If the
towel may stimulate respiration.
queen has been walking about she will now lie down in her
kittening box. The uterine contractions become stronger and
If the kitten is still in difficulty, some suggest holding the
she will actively push. A bubble of amniotic fluid may appear
kitten belly down wrapped in a cloth so it is not slippery.
With its head away from you, swing the kitten in an arc from
amniotic fluid escapes. It is not normal to see quantities of
your waist to near the floor. This manoeuvre creates a cen-
fresh blood.
trifugal force that extrudes fluid from its lungs and trachea.
After two swings, massage its chest. If there is still no
Kittens may be born head first or tail and hind legs first but
response, hold its mouth open and blow very gently into its
as long as progress is made it does not matter. This stage may
mouth from a distance of several inches (remember how
take up to 1 h for the first kitten and the length is best related
 small its lungs are). If after half an hour there is no response,
to progress and frequency of contractions rather than time. It
stop the procedure.
324
Practical animal breeding
Completion of parturition
Ensure that all the placentas are delivered and that there is no
heavy bleeding. The kittens should be warm, dry and vigor-
 ous and have found a nipple to suckle (Fig. 17.5). Following
the birth the queen will clean herself and may even take a
little food and water. She may not pass urine for 24 h and
will then pass a large quantity. She should resume normal
defaecation at the same time.
Fig. 17.5 Motly, a chocolate Somati, feeding her newborn kittens
Caring for the family
homes. Her mammary glands should be inspected frequently
for signs of sore nipples or mastitis and her milk will gradu-
ally reduce as the kittens eat more.
The kittens should only be handled to ensure that their con-
dition is satisfactory. The family should be given a peaceful
Most queens spend 90% of their time with their kittens
and quiet environment to ensure that the queen accepts and
during the first 2 weeks (Rice 1997). She will lick their uro-
cares for them (Fig. 17.6). After 3 days a confident queen will
genital area to ensure that they pass urine and faeces and
allow handling of her kittens.
consume their excretions until they are weaned. If the queen
is disturbed or if the bedding becomes soiled she may move
The queen's milk provides all necessary nutrients. Colostrum
her kittens.
provides all the antibodies the kittens need. The hair from
around the nipples could be trimmed before birth if the
queen has long hair. The first 6 weeks put a great strain on the
Neonatal examination
queen's nutritional status: she may lose 25% of her body
weight and will need extra food. Once the kittens begin to eat
Each kitten should be carefully examined for any abnormal-
solid food the queen's food intake will decrease, although she
ity such as extra digits or cleft palate. The sex and weight
will continue to suckle them until they go to their new
of each kitten are recorded. If the litter are all the same
colour some breeders identify them early by marking up a
specific claw with nail polish. A spot of the same colour
or notification of which toe is coloured is made in their
records.
Ongoing development
Development proceeds in a craniocaudal manner, with
control of the head, forelegs and hind legs developing in that
order. Eyes should open between days 8 and 10 and cords
usually fall off between the 3rd and 6th day. By 3 weeks the
kittens wobble unsteadily around the inside of their box and
a few days later they climb out and begin to explore. Spe-
cialized kitten food can now be fed to them. The aim is to
wean them by about 6 weeks. As soon as the kittens begin to
eat solid food they should be provided with a litter tray. They
Fig. 17.6 Scampy, a tortoiseshelf Somali queen, and her sex-linked
will play in this at first, digging holes. Shortly afterwards they
kittens - a red male, a cream male and two tortie females
will use it for its intended purpose.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing325
17
Practical animal breeding
Hand-rearing kittens
It is essential to find a good home for the kittens and most
breeders wish to meet the prospective purchasers before a sale
There are times when the mother is incapable of feeding her
is agreed. Some will deliver the kitten to its new home as a
kittens or has so many she can't cope. The young kittens
final check on suitability. The breeder must provide the pur-
 aq on aa lm   p  ' da aa 
chaser with:
every 2 h day and night for 3 weeks. It is important to obtain
special kitten milk, as cow's milk is not suitable. It is possible
● A four-generation signed pedigree
to buy miniature bottles and teats but an eye dropper can be
equally useful. Care must be taken to avoid inhalation of
● The vaccination certificate
milk, which could lead to pneumonia and death. As much
care should be taken over sterilizing the feeding equipment as
● A certificate of transfer of ownership
would be used for a human baby, as infection is a great killer
of young animals. If the queen is not caring for the kittens at
● A receipt of payment.
all, their anal and vulval regions must be stimulated gently
with damp, warm cotton wool to enable them to urinate and
Also recommended are:
defaecate.
● An advice sheet on caring for their kitten
Vaccination
● Insurance to cover the first 6 weeks following transfer
Cats are subject to some dangerous pathogenic organisms
● Contact readily provided to discuss problems.
and may become seriously ill or die, so all kittens should be
vaccinated. In the UK the first vaccinations are given at
Showing cats
9 weeks, followed by a repeated dose at 12 weeks. Typically a
kitten is vaccinated against feline panleukopenia (feline
infectious enteritis), feline respiratory viruses (cat flu) and
leukaemia (FAB 2004). Show cats may also be vaccinated
The first major cat show in the world was held at the Crystal
against Chlamydia.
Palace on 23 July 1871, organised by Harrison Weir. The
shows are run by the official bodies such as the GCCF and
certificates and titles are awarded. Kittens can be shown from
Registering and selling kittens
14 weeks and queens can be shown 12 weeks after they have
given birth. Any cat that attends a show is 'vetted in' and
All pedigree kittens have to be registered with a formal organis
may be excluded from the show if it appears ill, is pregnant,
ation if they are to be sold as pedigree cats, used in a breed.
has dirty ears, fleas or other parasites or has a skin lesion of
ing programme or shown. In the UK the Governing Council
any kind. If a cat is taken ill during the show there is a duty
of the Cat Fancy (GCCF) is the main organisation. Details of
vet to see to it and a room is set aside as a hospital. Cat breed-
the kittens' parents and grandparents, their sex, colour and
ing is challenging, exciting and rewarding as long as the
birth date are recorded.
breeder follows the rules.
Breeding pedigree
acteristics. Modern-day breeds are basically a standardization of
sbop
desirable traits of some of the older breeds, especially character-
istics that have been useful over great periods of time. It is, or at
least should be, the aim of dog breeders today to attempt to per-
Gareth Lawler
petuate those traits while simultaneously paying great heed to
the maintenance of a friendly disposition, a characteristic so
essential for a family pet.
Selective breeding
Breeding strategies
morphological diversity and variation in size seldom seen in
other species is a direct consequence of years of selective breed-
For definitions of inbreeding and line breeding return to the
ing by man to create purebreds with individual traits and char-
 section on cat breeding.
326
 Practical animal breeding
The brood bitch
The most valuable asset for anyone striving to breed good
stock is a good brood bitch. The aim is to produce puppies
that are sound both mentally and physically and there is
more to breeding dogs than just producing pretty-looking
specimens. Consider the following factors:
● Health - avoid a bitch that has a history of ill health
● Temperament and disposition - until the puppies
go to their new homes, the pups continually learn
from and even mimic the mother. Do not even consider
a bitch as a breeding prospect if she panics easily
● Freedom from hereditary diseases - there is
increasing awareness of breed-specific hereditary traits
Fig. 17.7 Never compromise on your choice of stud dog. This dog
and many breeds now require certain health checks
was the UK's top winning English springer spaniet at the time
before breeding. By the time a breeder reaches this
stage, he/she should be fully aware of the problems the
respective breed may have and which tests are required
maturity differs between breeds and some breed clubs have
prior to breeding
introduced ‘codes of ethics' pertaining to the minimum age
for breeding from your bitch. It is essential that she is allowed
● Breed standard - as well as exhibiting special traits
to mature both physically and mentally so that she will have
of the lines concerned, she should descend from very
the confidence to cope with her own litter.
any significant degree from the breed standard
The bitch should be kept in the peak of condition, during her
pregnancy and also prior to mating. She should be up-to-date
● Inheritability - the ability of the bitch to pass on
with her vaccinations before mating, and she must also have
desirable features to her offspring.
been wormed regularly.
No expense should be spared in the acquisition of a suitable
Some stud dog owners require all visiting bitches to be
bitch for breeding, as she will prove her worth time and time
again. The brood bitch is the key to the immediate future
tions before they will use their dog. The veterinary surgeon
because she has much more influence on her puppies than
will prescribe appropriate medication to clear any infection
just her contribution to their genetic make-up. You should
prior to mating, as long as the bitch is swabbed as early as
never be tempted to breed from an immature bitch. Age of
 possible during her season.
The stud dog
teristics, as he may depart from the breed standard as he
matures. Some hereditary conditions, e.g. hip dysplasia and
progressive retinal atrophy, are not always obvious until the
In a similar way to the brood bitch, whatever the breed
dog is well into middle or old age. The older a dog is, and the
quality or even pedigree, the stud dog should satisfy some
more bitches he has covered, the smaller the chance of him
basic criteria before he is deemed suitable to pass his genes to
producing an 'affected' puppy if he hasn't already done so.
the next generations. He must be sexually mature, entire and
in good health, both physically and mentally, and, ideally, he
The choice of stud dog should result from exhaustive research
should be mature in growth and development. It is unwise to
and breeders should be aware that no dog is suitable for every
use a young male before he has developed his adult charac-
bitch - such a dog has still to be born (Fig. 17.7)!
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing327
17
Practical animal breeding
The mating game
 conception and pregnancy, even when all eventualities have
 seemingly been covered, can never be guaranteed!
S         
The actual mechanics of mating are another potential
although some bitches, particularly in the larger breeds, cycle
 s      s  
every 8-10 months. It is not uncommon for some bitches to
a 'tie' results, while others take rather longer. Some bitches
go as long as 12 months between seasons. The period of
will develop an exceptionally strong liking for a particular
oestrus or ‘heat' usually lasts about 3 weeks, and the most
male, so strong that all other males may be rejected.
notable sign is vaginal bleeding. Bitches vary as to the stage
Very often males will mount and dismount the bitch
of the heat when they start to bleed, many starting almost at
for a period of time before thrusting forward and pene-
day 1 and others not until the end of the first week. Vaginal
trating the bitch. If the dog seems to be in position, and
swelling is another sign of oestrus.
yet fail to get a mating, there is a possibility that the
bitch has a stricture, something that will need veterinary
The optimum time to mate should be at the time the bitch
intervention.
ovulates. Bitches are spontaneous ovulators and textbooks
indicate that the bitch ovulates on day 10 of the cycle;
Once penetration occurs, there should follow a stage where
however, this can be variable and may be difficult to assess in
the male lies on the female's back, and after a short time he
some bitches. It is a fact that some bitches will ovulate
will try and lift one leg over the bitch to stand rear to rear in
as early as day 3 or as late as day 23. There are several tests
a classic 'tie' position. It is thought by some that the purpose
available now to determine the exact time of ovulation
of the 'tie' is to prolong the mating time, as the ejaculate in a
and thus the optimum time for mating. These involve moni-
dog is dispensed in three fractions, but it would probably be
    p    pa 
rather more truthful to admit that nobody really knows why
has had a history of unsuccessful matings, it is advisable to
they do it - we just accept the fact that they do! The 'tie' posi-
seek veterinary advice and have, if necessary, daily or bi-daily
tion can last from just a few minutes to over 1 h, and it is
blood samples taken to determine an accurate ovulation
important to understand that it is a mutual action by the dog
time. There is also an ovulation detector available on the
and the bitch, with the swelling of the bulb at the end of a
market that detects changes in the electrical conductivity
dog's penis coinciding with constriction of the vaginal
of the lining of the uterus. This method, although avail-
muscles of the bitch. It is still possible to get puppies pro-
able to everyone with only an initial cost in purchase of
duced in the absence of a 'tie' but most breeders feel more
the equipment, has received a mixed reception in the dog
comfortable if a 'tie' has occurred. It is also worth noting that
world, some breeders proclaiming exceptional results, while
some dogs of certain breeds, e.g. West Highland white terri
others have had no improvement in their results at all.
ers, are well known for not 'tying' and yet are still able to
It is as well to remember that, whatever the chosen method,
produce normal litters.
Pregnancy
Ultrasound is an accurate way to determine whether a bitch is
pregnant but, although it is possible to see the puppies from
about 3 weeks, partial reabsorption of the litter may occur and
 Pregnancy lasts for about 63 days on average but the length
pom non yano non se sanddnd Auu se jas pou Aeu non
of gestation depends not only on the bitch and when she was
mated but also on the breed - some breeds have a tendency
for a longer - or shorter - gestation period. Fifty-seven to
Antenatal care
68 days is considered a normal range. It is possible to determine
pregnancy from as early as 28 days by careful palpation of the
The bitch should be treated as normal for the first 6 weeks.
abdomen. At this stage, golf-ball-like structures can sometimes
After this time the amount of food should be gradually
be felt. From 35 days, these structures will become less palpable
increased so she is having about 1l/2 times as much as normal
as their weight pulls them down into the abdomen and
by the time of whelping. It is also advisable to split the food
after this time it may not be possible for another 2-3 weeks to
into several smaller meals throughout the day.
determine whether the bitch is pregnant.
During pregnancy or prior to mating the bitch should be
The growth rate of the foetus is very slow for the first 6 weeks,
given a booster vaccination. This will raise the levels of
but after this stage should become increasingly rapid. This
maternal antibodies that she will pass to her puppies in the
should enable the owner to tell if the bitch is pregnant, but
colostrum or first milk. She should also be treated for round-
again it has been known for bitches not to 'show' until a week
worms to prevent the transmission of roundworm larvae
before they are due, when they seem to 'blow up' overnight.
across the placenta into the developing foetuses.
328
3 Practical animal breeding
Table 17.1 The development of the puppies during
the new smells. Traditionally, the whelping box was wooden,
with rails inside, about 10 cm above the base, so that the
pregnancy
bitch was not able to 'crush' the puppies against the side. The
Weeks of
Developmental stage
 more modern whelping boxes are made of upvC, for hygiene
gestation
purposes, or even disposable cardboard whelping boxes.
1
Fertilization occurs; two-cell embryos are in the
oviduct; the embryo is fairly resistant to external
which obviates the necessity for rails and provides soft,
interference in development
cushioned sides.
2
Embryo increases from four cells to 64 cells. Embryo
enters the uterus
Early
lans
3
Embryo becomes implanted in the uterus on day 19
Many bitches will display nesting behaviour in the days
4
Development of eyes and spinal cord; faces take
leading up to the birth. Signs will include scratching up of the
shape; foetuses grow from 5-10 mm to 14-15 mm.
bedding and an attempt at burrowing. They may also become
 Organogenesis begins - foetuses are most susceptible
very restless and be rather 'clingy' to one or more people. A
to developing defects. Days 26-32 are the best to
sudden drop in rectal temperature within 24 h of birth may
palpate for puppies
be a sign that the birth is imminent. Minor fluctuations
Development of toes, whisker buds and claws. Fetuses
in temperature are quite normal but when the temperature
look like dogs and the sex can be determined. Eyes
suddenly drops from about 39C to around 37°C you may
are closed. Foetuses grow from 18 mm to 30 mm.
be sure that whelping is about to start. The majority of
Organogenesis complete. Puppies are now resistant to
bitches may prefer to give birth at night and veterinary sur-
external interference in development
 geons are usually resigned to the possibilities of a midnight
call-out!
Development of skin pigment. Foetal heartbeat can be
heard with a stethoscope
Parturition in the bitch, as in other mammals is split into
7
Growth and development continues
three distinct stages of labour:
8
Detection of foetal movement when bitch is at rest.
Puppies may be safely born at 8 weeks
Stage 1
9
Growth continues until parturition at around 63 days
 The cervix starts to dilate. During this time it is quite normal
for the bitch to refuse food, become restless, start to pant and
It is essential that the bitch is given gentle exercise right up
even vomit. You may also see external signs of very weak con-
until the time of whelping so that she can retain the muscle
tractions. This stage can last from 1 h to more than 1 day and
tone necessary for a straightforward birth. From about 6 weeks
it is often difficult to be certain when it started.
onwards, our bitches have raspberry leaf supplement morning
and night, and from week 8 they receive Caulophyllum thalic.
iroides twice daily. Both of these supplements are claimed to
Stage 2
promote a more straightforward whelping as the Caulophyllum
acts as a homeopathic oxytocin. Table 17.1 shows the develop-
The cervix dilates fully, contractions become more obvious
ad p Adnd a jo ss p
 and the stage ends with the delivery of the puppy. As the urge
to push becomes stronger the bitch's straining is very notice-
able. It is quite normal for the bitch to shiver at this time.
Parturition or
Before the first pup is born there is very often a greenish-black
discharge or lochia, which results from the placenta separat-
ing from the uterus. It is important that the timing of this dis.
charge is noted, as in an uncomplicated whelping the first
pup should be born within the next 2 h. Puppies may be born
Preparation
in anterior presentation, i.e. with the nose and front paws
first, or in posterior presentation, i.e. with tail and hind feet
About 1 week before the whelping is expected, it is important
first - either is quite normal (see Ch. 4). In the uterus each
that the bitch is moved to her whelping quarters. She should
pup is surrounded by two sacs - the outer one, the allanto-
be allowed time to become used to her whelping box and sur-
chorion, tends to rupture as the pup enters the birth canal.
roundings, giving her time to adjust to the new routine and
The second sac, the amnion, may or may not rupture during
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing329
17
Practical animal breeding
birth. If it does not the bitch will break the sac to release the
puppy, enabling it to begin breathing. She will also bite the
are the most common causes of dystocia. A bitch that is
not in the best physical condition, through lack of exercise
to breathe and to dry off.
and corresponding poor muscle tone or through being over-
weight, may also result in prolonged labour due to inertia.
The breeder may need to intervene at this stage to open the
sac so the pup can start to breath normally. If the breeder
Inertia can be divided into:
needs to break the umbilical cord it is essential that the cord
is not cut too short and that it is torn with the fingernails
● Primary inertia - can result when the uterus is so
rather than cut with a sharp blade, as this will cause haemor-
full of puppies and therefore so distended that there is
rhaging. The puppy must be rubbed quite vigorously with a
little chance of strong contractions starting. Conversely,
towel, which will mimic the bitch's licking actions.
, a q p a o  n 
Sometimes a maiden bitch is reluctant to start licking the
 puppy syndrome', when there is so little distension of
pups - I have found a good method is to put some butter on
the uterine muscle that there is no apparent stimulus
the pups to encourage the mother to lick them.
to initiate contractions. It is imperative that bitches are
kept fit and with good muscle tone, as an unfit bitch is
The bitch will normally suckle pups between births. This is
 more likely to develop primary inertia.
something I always allow as the nursing will stimulate the
release of oxytocin increasing milk let-down and causing
● Secondary inertia - may develop after the bitch has
further contractions of the uterus.
given birth to some of the puppies but contractions
then stop. The bitch appears to be too tired to carry on
and contractions stop. The veterinary surgeon may
Stage 3
give an oxytocin injection, which should stimulate
further contractions. In some cases it may be necessary
The foetal membranes and placenta are passed. As the bitch
to give the bitch intravenous calcium as well as giving
is a litter-bearing animal, stages 2 and 3 very often alternate.
her oxytocin.
There is a difference of opinion as to whether a bitch should
be allowed to eat the placentas but I am of the firm belief that
Assisted delivery
we should only interfere when necessary. In other words, if
she chooses to do so, I have no objection, after all, in the
Assisted delivery may be necessary when a puppy is lodged in
wild, there would be no-one there to remove them!
the birth canal during delivery. The use of gloved fingers is
the most reliable and safe way to pull a puppy through the
birth canal. It should be noted, however, that in the smaller
Timing
breeds this is very difficult and potentially dangerous. If it
should it be needed it is better to enlist the services of a vet-
There is no definite timescale between the second and third
erinary surgeon. Under no circumstances should the breeder
of the previous one, and yet it is not unknown for a bitch to
do great harm to the puppy and the bitch.
go several hours between puppies. The main criterion is
whether or not the process is progressing and it is important
 In larger breeds when assisted delivery is needed it is important
to observe the bitch during this time. Although there is no
to locate the puppy by firm but gentle palpation of the lower
 need for alarm if there are extended periods between pups, it
abdomen. Once the puppy has been located, the breeder should
is very dangerous to allow the bitch to have continual con-
tractions for a prolonged period without producing a pup.
back up the vagina (Fig. 17.8). Insertion of a clean lubricated
This is the time to request veterinary assistance. Sometimes a
finger into the vulva then allows the breeder to ascertain
car journey to the vets will stimulate another birth and it is
 m      ad   
pups than when they left home!
When the presentation position of the puppy is known, it is
possible, after the removal of any obstruction, to gently ease
the puppy down the birth canal (Fig. 17.9). It is imperative
Dystocia
that the puppy is pulled gently in unison with the bitch's
contractions. It should be noted that a breech birth is not
A prolonged or difficult whelping, referred to as dystocia, is
when a puppy comes hind feet first - this is normal posterior
presentation - but when the puppy is presented tail first with
 overlarge puppy, a puppy in the incorrect position or a small
the hind legs curved underneath it (see Ch. 4).
330  Practical animal breeding
'Never give up' is a phrase that has no greater relevance than
when in this situation, and even after a couple of minutes
when you may feel all is lost it is not unusual for a puppy to
a o rede  Adnd a am e rn a  
gasping but usually this will cease after a short period. It has
sa As e ine dn ai on sapa r o 
period of massage, to put the puppy to one side - possibly on
a cold floor - only to find that the puppy seems to revive a
short while after. Whether it is the shock of the cold sur-
roundings that initiates the breathing is unknown but as
useful as a textbook is, nature does, from time to time, throw
up these little oddities!
Fig. 17.8 Applying gentfe pressure to the abdomen to prevent the
idax aq isn ii aioises suenq si Addnd au a
puppy stipping back
warm, either with the bitch or in a box warmed by dry towels
placed over a lukewarm hot water bottle or heat pad -
hypothermia is a killer!
Completion of parturition
The bitch will usually indicate when she has finished whelp-
ing and will appear to be more settled with her litter
(Fig. 17.10). At this stage, I always give the bitch a thorough
examination and palpate her abdomen to be sure there are no
more pups inside. Do not be too alarmed if you can feel a
hard lump inside, as very often this will be the uterus, which
has yet to involute to its former state.
Fig. 17.9 Gentfe pulfing by the hindlegs or head - onty possibte in
Once a puppy is born it will crawl around to find a teat and
α farge breed
then begin to suckle. This may happen while others in the
litter are still being born, or the breeder may remove the
Resuscitating a puppy
puppies to a warm box and return them to the bitch when
parturition is over. It is vital that the puppies receive the first
 The most common cause of death in newly delivered puppies
milk or colostrum within the first 24 h of life. Colostrum is
is hypoxia (low oxygen levels). It is essential when resuscitat-
rich in maternal antibodies, which will provide protection
ing a puppy that you complete the following steps:
against disease for about the first 12 weeks (see Ch. 21).
 After whelping is complete the bitch will need to go out to go
freed of any membranes, fluid and meconium (a
to the toilet, although you may find you have to put a lead
 puppy's first faeces)
on her to get her to leave the pups for the first few times. She
● Excess fluid should be swabbed from the mouth and
will be tired and thirsty and probably hungry too. For her first
 meal she should be offered something appetizing but not too
opening of the throat using a lint-free swab or the
corner of a towel
heavy, e.g. cooked chicken and boiled rice and a drink of
some beaten eggs and milk with added glucose. She should
● If fluid still remains it should be expelled by gently
be allowed to rest at this point and apart from keeping an eye
swinging the puppy in a downward path headfirst
 on the proceedings there should be as little interference as
while supporting its head and body securely in a
possible.
towel. Be careful with this procedure as there have
been cases of cervical dislocation
For a few days after whelping, there will be a vaginal dis-
● Be careful with this procedure as there have been cases
charge known as the lochia, which is greenish-black to start
of cervical dislocation
with changing to a watery red/brown discharge as the days go
by. It is important to check the bitch's teats for signs of
● If breathing does not begin, it may be necessary to
inflammation or mastitis. If you are in any way concerned
 massage the face and chest of the puppy.
about this, veterinary advice should be sought immediately.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing  331
17
Practical animal breeding
Fig. 17.10 (a) Newty whelped pups on α
Vetbed. (b) Lying contentedly with mum
Care of the newborn
By the time they reach 10 days old their sen-sory systems
are developing rapidly and they are able to withstand
temperatures of as low as 15.5°C, although this is not
Examination of the puppies
recommended.
As soon as the puppy is breathing normally and is clean it
Unless there are obvious problems, keep interference with the
should be carefully examined and you should check for any
bitch and her litter to a minimum but keep a close eye on the
obvious defects, e.g. cleft palate, umbilical hernia, absence of
family at the same time. At this age, up until about 3 weeks,
an anus. If an abnormality is found you should inform the
the bitch should be able to supply all the puppies' needs and
veterinary surgeon and the puppy may be euthanased,
as long as she is quite settled I tend to leave her do the job
depending upon the significance of the problem. In some
that nature intended. The one time I do interfere is when the
 congenital conditions there is virtually no hope of the puppy
bitch returns to the puppies after going outside to relieve
surviving, and it is irresponsible to prolong the inevitable.
herself. I tend to lie the bitch on her side and place the
puppies where they can get on to the teats This is because
It is very important that the temperature in the whelping
quarters is kept constant at about 23.8?C for the first few
bitch, an act of clumsiness at this stage can lead to the bitch
days, as puppies cannot regulate their own body temperature.
unin tentionally squashing a puppy.
332
Practical animal breeding
Puppy development
The bitch will normally lick the area under the tail
to stimulate the puppy to urinate and defaecate. In her
The development of the puppies is very rapid and, compared
absence, you will need to clean this area with damp
to humans, the growth rate is exceptionally high. This gives
cotton wool or tissues after each feed to ensure regular
us some indication of the nutritional demands of the pup-
toileting.
pies. In the early stages, the nutritional requirements of the
bitch to be able to sustain the constant demand by the suck.
 Diarrhoea is a common problem in hand-reared puppies and
ling litter is therefore also very high (see Ch. 10).
can lead to rapid dehydration and death. It is often caused by
poor hygiene, so all equipment used when dealing with the
It is quite usual for the puppies to be constantly 'twitching'
 puppies must be kept rigorously cleaned. Feed the affected pup.
especially when they are sleeping. This is known as 'activated
pies with milk diluted with cooled boiled water, but if the
sleep' and is thought to be the external symptoms of the full
diarrhoea does not reduce within 24 h or the puppy shows
development of the nervous system. Puppies are born deaf
 other signs of illness, consult your veterinary surgeon as soon as
and blind, and these senses, among others, are fully devel-
possible.
oped within the first 2 weeks of the puppy's life. Puppies are
expected to open their eyes on the 10th day, although I have
All puppies should be:
yet to have a litter that does! Generally I find the 14th day a
better guide but have had them as late as 20 days before the
● Wormed against roundworms from 2 weeks of age at
eyes are open. However, it is also quite common in some
fortnightly intervals until 12 weeks of age. They
breeds for the eyes to be open as early as the 7th or 8th day.
should then continue to be treated every month until
they are 6 months old. The dosage depends on their
Hand-rearing puppies
weight. Timing may vary according to your veterinary
surgeon's practice protocols
If the bitch produces no milk and is unable to feed her own
 puppies or if she dies then it may be necessary to hand-rear
● Vaccinated at 8 weeks of age with a second vaccination
them. There are special formulas available for feeding
 given at around 12 weeks - timing varies according to
 puppies, which have their own guides as to how much to
which vaccine is used. Some breeds in some areas
feed. This depends on the age of the puppies, e.g. puppies
require extra parvovirus injections and some litters
             
need earlier vaccinations if they have not received the
 pups can go up to 6 h between feeds. Various bottle and teat
important colostrum. Contact your veterinarian for
designs are available, depending on the size or age of the
 advice on the appropriate vaccination programme for
puppies, and these must be sterilized between uses.
your puppies.
Reaistering
1 and
The KC have a code of ethics and each person who registers
selling puppies
puppies with them must undertake to abide by this general
code. It covers the general daily care of dogs in registered
ownership, the responsibilities of the owner of a bitch who is
If you are the breeder of a pedigree litter, you will undoubt-
going to be bred from, and the responsibility that the breeder
edly want to register the puppies with the Kennel Club (KC).
has to new puppy owners.
Showing dogs
dog were judged together. At later dog shows the dogs were
The first recorded dog show was held in 1859 and since that
 Today's championship dog shows are organised into many
time, showing has become the most popular canine hobby in
more groups, i.e. hounds, terriers, gundogs, toy dogs, utility
the country. Nowadays dog shows are held almost every
weekend and have become large social as well as competitive
developed throughout the history of the dog. In this way
events. All dog shows are licensed by the KC and held under
 dogs are judged against dogs of similar characteristics before
their rules and regulations. At early dog shows all breeds of
the best dogs of each group are judged. Finally, the best of
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing333
17
Practical animal breeding
each group compete against each other for the position of
Karsh E 1983 The effects of early handling on the development of
overall Best in Show.
social bonds between cats and people. In: Katchere A, Beck A (eds)
New perspectives on our lives with companion animats. University
If you want to compete:
of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, PA
● Your dog must be registered with the KC on the Breed
Moris D 1996 Cat worid, α feline encyclopaedia. Ebury Press)
Register
London
● Your dog must be at least 6 months old
Rice D 1997 The complete book of cat breeding. Barron's
Educafional Series, New York
●You will need to train your dog to stand still while a
stranger (the judge) examines him. Then he must be
Turner D C, Bateson P 2000 The domestic cat - the biology of its
able move at a steady trot so that his movement canl
behaviour, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
be assessed
Abrantes R 1997 Dog language. Wakan Tanka, Naperville, IL
● When your dog is ready you will need to find out
when and where shows are taking place
Caddy I 1995 Cocker spaniels today. Ringpress Books, Cheltenham
● You must have trimmed or tidied up your dog as
Coppinger R, Coppinger L 2001 Dogs - a new understanding of
appropriate for the breed
canine origin, behaviour and evolution. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, IL
● You must bath your dog - if appropriate for the breed.
Craige PV 1997 Bon to win, breed to succeed. Doral Publishing,
Common sense tips for dog
Sun City, AZ
showing
Hamar H. 1974 Dogs and how to breed them. John Gifford, London
● If you want to show your dog, arrange to take your
Fogte B 1990 The dog's mind. Macmillan, Basingstoke
dog or bitch back to see their breeder and ask him/her
for an honest opinion of its show potential before you
Evans J M, White K 2002 The book of the bitch. Ringpress Books,
invest time and money in entering shows
Cheltenham
● Spend some time at shows watching how things are
Gwynne-jones O 1983 The popular guide to puppy rearing.
organised and how experienced exhibitors behave
Popular Dogs, London
● Don't be afraid to ask for help and advice - the
Hollings P 1996 The essential Weimaraner. Ringpress Books,
advantage of being a novice is that you can ask for
Cheltenham
help without feeling foolish - remember everyone
there was once a novice
Muirhead C 1996 The complete English springer spaniel. Ringpress
Books, Cheltenham
● Do prepare your dog in advance, e.g. English springer
and cocker spaniels will need trimming if they are not
Roberts J 1987 The Irish setter. Popular Dogs, London
to look out of place and even border collies need their
feet tidied up - the show is not the place to start
Robinson R 1982 Genetics for dog breeders.Pergamon Press,
preparing your dog.
Oxford.
Bibliography
Serpell J 1995 The domestic dog - its evolution, behaviour and
Feline Advisory Bureau 2004a Sheet 23 - Parhurition and its prob-
lems. Available on line at: http://web.ukonline.co.uk/fab/is23.himl
Turner T (ed.) 1990 Veterinary notes for dog owners. Popular
Dogs, London
Feline Advisory Bureau 2004a Sheet 6 - Feline vaccines. Available
on line at: http://web.ukonline.co.uk/fab/is23.himt
Vella C M, Shelton L M, McGonagle IJ, Stanglein T W 1999
Fogle B 1991 The cat's mind. Pelham Books, London
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
334    Practical animal breeding
humans.It is well written and helps towards an understanding of
Recommended reading
the nahure of pets and patients.
Feline Advisory Bureau 2004 Sheet 6 - Feline vaccines. Available
on line at: http://web.ukonline.co.uk/fab/is23.himl
Cooper B, Lane D R 2003 Veterinary nursing, 3rd edn.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
The Feline Advisory Bureau publish about 50 fact sheets accessi-
ble via their web site. They are well written and cover many feline
Long detailed chapter covering reproduction in dogs and cats.
disorders. This particular sheet outlines the nature and regime of
vaccinations for cats.
Harmar H 1974 Dogs and how to breed them. John Gifford,
London
Rice D 1997 The complete book of cat breeding. Barron's
Educational Series, New York
Usefiul guide to practical dog breeding.
This book on cat breeding is excellent. Although written for the lay
Evans J M, White K 2002 The book of the bitch. Ringpress Books,
person it is worth while reading so that the professional is aware
Cheltenham
of the knowledge base needed by the conscientious breeder to
ensure the welfare of the animats. It is very well illustrated.
Covers all aspects of dog breeding.
Turner D C, Bateson P 2000 The domestic cat - the biology of its
Allen W E 1992 Fertility and obstetrics in the dog. Blackwell
behaviour, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Scientific, Oxford
This is an excellent book about the biotogicat nature of feline
Covers all the scientific points associated with reproduction. Easy
access bullet points fhroughout.
7
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 335
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
18
The essentials of patient care
Jessica Maughan
Key Points
● While providing nursing care to an animal it is important
some cases to survive. These essential activities, e.g.
to consider the whole patient rather then focusing on a
 feeding. drinking and elimination, must be provided for
particular disease or injury.
within a hospital environment if the patient is to
● On admission all hospitalized patients should be given a
recover.
 detailed clinical assessment in order to design an
● Certain types of hospitalized patient, such as recumbent
effective nursing strategy based on the individual needs
or geriatric animals, require specific forms of nursing
of the patient.
care.
● All animals perform certain daily activities that are
essential to maintain a comfortable existence and, in
Introduction
aims to describe all the aspects of nursing care required in
The type of nursing care given to a patient depends on the
dealing with hospitalized patients and will provide guidance
condition being treated and it is important to distinguish
on assessing the individual needs of patients and implement-
between the needs of different types of patient. This chapter
ing effective nursing care.
ssessi
Subjective observation relies on the premise that one nurse
will be assigned to a specific patient, as interpretation will
batient
differ from one person to the next. The assigned person will
become familiar with the patient's behaviour and demeanour
8
and any changes are easily identified.
The veterinary nurse is usually the person who spends the
most time with each patient and so his/her observations are
Objective assessment relies on the accurate use of equipment,
very important in assessing the condition of a patient and the
e.g. ability to use a digital thermometer or to auscultate the
 progress of treatment.
patient's thorax using a stethoscope.
When monitoring the condition the SOAP method may be
In order to assess accurately and record the progress of a
used to ensure completeness. SOAP stands for subjective,
    n   n  n n
 objective, assessment and planning:
various clinical parameters, e.g. pulse rate, respiratory rate, in
healthy patients so that any abnormalities may be identified
● Subjective - Personal assessment of immeasurable
(Table 18.1). This is also true of behaviour, as in many cases
observations, e.g. patient's behaviour, demeanour, posture
this is the first observation made of a patient's condition or
response to treatment.
● Objective - Factual assessment of measurable
 observations, e.g. temperature, pulse and respiration
Vital signs
(TPR)
The vital signs initially assessed in a hospitalized patient are
● Assessment - A comparative exercise to assess the
temperature, pulse, capillary refill time and respiration. How-
progress of the patient; may include both subjective
ever, a general assessment should be made of the whole
and objective observations
patient, to include eyes, nose, ears, anus, vulva or penis and
Coat condition. Lymph node enlargement and sensory status,
● Planning - Outlines the plan for each patient for
e.g. presence of nystagmus, ataxia and anisocoria, should be
that day, whether it is a specific treatment protocol or
assessed and findings should be recorded on to a hospital
 procedure to be carried out.
sheet for each patient.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing337
18
The essentials of patient care
Table 18.1 Normal clinical parameters in the dog
and cat
Parameter
Dog
Cat
Temperature (°℃)
38.3-38.7
38.0-38.5
Pulse (beats/min)
60-180
110-180
Respiration (breaths/min)
10-30
20-30
Mucus membrane colour
Salmon pink
Salmon pink
Capillary refill time (s)
 2.5
 2.5
Urine production (ml/kg/24 h)
20
20
Fluid intake (ml/kg/24 h)
50-60
50-60
Faeces production (ml/kg/24 h)
10-20
10-20
Acid-base balance (pH)
7.27-7.43
7.25-7.33
Temperature
Fig. 18.1 Correct method of auscuttation of a dog's heart
Core body temperature is a useful guide to the health status
of a patient. A patient may have a high temperature (pyrexia)
if infection or sepsis is present or in cases of heat stroke. A
The pulse may be palpated in several areas of an animal's
subnormal temperature may be recorded in patients who
body. In an anaesthetized animal the lingual pulse may be
have undergone extensive surgery under general anaesthesia
used. In conscious animals the most commonly used sites are
or in cases of hypothermia.
the femoral pulse (medial femur; Fig. 18.2a), digital pulse
(palmar aspect of carpus; Fig. 18.2b) and the tarsal pulse
A digital or mercury thermometer is used to take a patient's
(medial aspect, mid tarsus; Fig18.2c).
temperature. Digital thermometers tend to be tolerated
slightly better by the patient as the inserted end is slightly
A pulse oximeter may be used to assess pulse rate and the
narrower than that of a mercury thermometer. If using a
 Oxygen saturation of the blood. This small machine contains
mercury thermometer it is important to ensure that the
a pair of sensors that may be attached to a membrane or piece
mercury is shaken down to the base before use. The ther-
of skin such as the interdigital folds, pinna of ear. The tongue
 mometer is then inserted into the anus, using a lubricating
may be used in anaesthetized or comatose patients. The
gel such as KY jelly, and left in situ for 1 min. The ther-
measurement relies on a degree of peripheral circulation in
mometer should be gently twisted as it is inserted and held at
order for the sensors to obtain a reading and is of no use in
a slight angle so as not to record the temperature of any
patients with severe circulatory failure.
faeces within the rectum.
If a mercury thermometer is broken then the Health and
Capillary refill time and mucous
Safety supervisor should be consulted straight away, as
membrane colour
mercury is a hazardous substance. It is also important to
verify the unit of measurement when recording a tempera-
May be used as a measurement of blood volume and circula-
ture. Mercury thermometers record temperatures in both
tory status. Capillary refill time is taken by blanching the
degrees Fahrenheit and degrees Celsius whereas digital ther-
 mo    e no d  m  s
mometers tend to use one or the other.
the gum takes to return to normal colour again. Mucous
membrane colour is an observational measurement in which
the gums or sclera may be used (Fig. 18.3). Pale mucous
Pulse
membranes may be observed in patients suffering from shock
because of the redirection of blood to the body's vital organs.
This is a basic measurement of heart rate using a stethoscope
The capillary refill time would also be increased due to the
to auscultate the thorax. This may be done by placing the
reduction of blood volume in peripheral vessels.
stethoscope over the lateral aspect of the thorax, just behind
and level with the bottom of the scapula (Fig. 18.1). Any
irregularities in the heartbeat such as sinus arrhythmias or
Respiration
heart murmurs may also be picked up at this point. Palpation
of peripheral pulses gives some indication as to the state of a
o  sss   d n  d
 patient's peripheral circulation.
and auscultation of the thorax. Auscultation of the thorax is
338
 The essentials of patient care
Fig. 18.2 Commonty used sites for palpation of peripheral pulses
(o) Femorat puise (b) Digitat pulse (c) Tarsat putse
18
and laboured breathing. Stridor is used to describe breathing
associated with a shrill, harsh sound heard during inspira-
tions such as laryngeal obstruction. Cheyne-Stokes respiration
二
used to listen to a patient's lung to detect chest sounds; for
example, in the case of a chylothorax the presence of fluid in
the chest cavity may be heard. Respiratory rate is calculated
by observing and timing the number of times a patient takes
a breath over 1 min.
It is important to note the pattern of respiration when
 observing patients. Dyspnoea is the term given to difficult
Fig. 18.3 Healthy pink mucous membranes in α canine patient
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
339
18
The essentials of patient care
is a term given to a particular pattern of breathing
suddenly changes to small shallow breaths or complete
that usually heralds the onset of death. There is usually a
termination of breathing, the pattern of which occurs
short period of very deep, convulsive breathing which
periodically.
Kennelling
   p ho so hn  o e jo 1  o
be closely monitored.
hospitalized
patients
The size of kennel should be relative to the size of the patient
 and it should be able to fully stretch out. This is particularly
 Depending on the layout and design of a kennel area (see also
relevant with recumbent and geriatric patients.
Ch. 7) cats and small patients such as rabbits, guinea pigs, rats
and birds should be housed separately from dogs. Serious
Placement of equipment within the kennel is also impor-
thought should be given to the patient's condition and the
tant. A feline patient may be hesitant to eat if its food bowl
effect of the external environment around them. For example,
is directly next to the litter tray. A geriatric patient with
a dyspnoeic feline patient should not be placed in the kennel
spondylosis or a patient with megaoesophagus may
above a barking dog. A recumbent patient should not be
 o ps q soq sm p o nn  n
hidden away in a kennel on its own but accommodated next
ground.
Essential activities
● Mobilization or moving around
The needs of a patient encompass all the daily essential activ-
ities which a patient performs in order to maintain a com-
●Grooming
fortable existence and in many cases survive (A Jefferies,
unpublished work, 2002). These include:
● Communication.
● Elimination, i.e. urination, defaecation, vomiting,
In providing nursing care it is important to consider the
coughing
whole patient rather than focus primarily on a particular
disease or injury. By recognising the ability each patient has
● Food intake - maintaining nutritional status
to carry out these essential activities an effective nursing
strategy may then be planned. Knowledge also plays an
● Fluid intake - maintaining hydration status
important role in the understanding of an injury or disease
and the setting of realistic goals when reviewing patient
● Controlling body temperature
recovery.
Elimination
● Dehydration
Urination
● Bladder rupture.
Conditions that may cause abnormal urine production
Useful terminology
include:
● Oliguria - Reduction in daily production of urine
● Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD)
● Anuria - Complete cessation of urine production
●Diabetes mellitus
● Stranguria - Passing of urine is painful and
● Renal disease/failure
uncomfortable
340
The essentials of patient care
● Dysuria - Passing of urine is difficult and
The skin over the area of insertion should be aseptically pre.
uncomfortable
pared; the fur clipped and the skin scrubbed with chlorhexi-
dine solution. Sterile gloves should be worn and all equip-
● Poikuria - Irregular passage of urine
ment used must be sterile. The needle is inserted at a 45°
angle to the patient's flank. The urine is then aspirated via the
● Polyuria - Passing larger volumes of urine than
syringe and placed straight into a sterile plain universal pot,
normal.
identified with the patient's name. As the needle is with-
drawn pressure is placed over the site for 10 s to seal the point
of insertion.
Assessing urine production
The advantages of using this method are that the urine
This may be significant in conditions such as acute renal
sample collected is relatively non-contaminated, useful for
failure or a ruptured bladder.
  s a  e 'ss i  o
method of urine collection on patients that are unwilling or
Note should be made on the hospitalization sheet of when a
unable to pass urine normally, e.g. anaesthetized patient. The
patient has passed urine, together with volume and appear-
procedure is also relatively quick and simple and is usually
ance of the urine and with a description of its passage, e.g.
well tolerated. Disadvantages include patient non-compli-
whether it was difficult or painful.
ance, although sedation maybe an option. There is also a risk
of peritonitis, through poor technique, resulting in fluid
With cats a litter tray may be placed in their cage, which
leakage from the bladder into the abdomen.
also aids the collection of urine, particularly if it is empty
of litter. However, stressed cats can deliberately not urinate
and cease to pass urine for long periods of time, so
b. Natural urination - litter tray/midstream sample
manual palpation to check bladder size is sometimes neces-
With regard to feline patients there are many commercial
sary. Dogs should be taken outside to urinate regularly
brands of litter substrate, e.g. Katkor, that may be placed in
throughout the day as many will be reluctant to urinate in
the tray to encourage urination but will not absorb the urine
their kennel. Grass is an ideal substrate to encourage urina
allowing it to be collected from the tray via a syringe. The
tion and a wall or fence is very helpful when encouraging
litter may then be disposed of or resterilized. Ideally the litter 
male dogs.
tray itself should be sterilized, using ethylene oxide steriliza-
tion to minimize contamination of the sample.
18
The advantage of this method is that collection is quick,
Methods of urine collection
stress-free and non-intrusive. Disadvantages include poor
a. Cystocentesis (cysto- = bladder; -centesis =
patient compliance and an increased risk of contamination
from passage through the prepuce/vulva and from the
puncture and aspiration)
patient's coat, paws and collection tray affecting the accuracy
Equipment required for this procedure includes:
of the results obtained. The litter substrate itself can be quite
expensive and only a minimal amount of urine may be
● Sterile universal plain container (white lid)
passed at any one time.
● 23 g needle - use as small a gauge needle as possible
Collection of a canine urine sample requires a collection
 and a 10 ml sterile syringe
vessel such as a kidney dish or a sterile plain container. The
sample should be collected midstream, which is easier with
● Sterile gloves
male dogs. The advantages and disadvantages are similar to
those of feline patients. Patient co-operation is essential and
● Chlorhexidine scrub.
gloves should be worn by the collector. Only a minimal
amount of urine may be passed at any one time, which may
The procedure is carried out by a veterinary surgeon and is
be insufficient to carry out a full urinalysis.
only usually carried out if the bladder is full, allowing the vet-
erinary surgeon to identify its position. A sterile needle is
inserted into the bladder via the patient's flank and correct
c. Manual palpation
Gentle pressure is applied on either side of the abdomen in
Sterility should be maintained throughout to avoid introduc-
the region of the bladder. This method may be used on anaes-
ing bacteria into the bladder and to obtain as sterile a sample
thetized patients or those that are unwilling to urinate for no
as possible.
known medical reason. It must not be used if bladder/urethra
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  341
18
The essentials of patient care
patency is not known or a blockage is suspected, as excessive
with legs hanging over the end of a table and in male dogs,
force may easily rupture the bladder. A full bladder is required
lateral recumbency. A catheter may be placed in conscious
to carry out the procedure and patient compliance is neces-
 dogs and bitches, in which case they may be standing.
sary, although it is generally well tolerated.
In females a speculum may be used to expand the vaginal
opening giving a better view of the urethral orifice.
d. Urinary catheterization
Lubrication of the catheter tip aids easy passage into the
Not a commonly used method of urine collection as sedation
urethra and reduces the risk of epithelial damage to the ure-
or a full general anaesthetic is usually required for placement
thral tract during passage of the catheter. Depending on the
of the catheter to avoid damaging the urethra. It can be used
type of catheter and its function it may be sutured to the
in conjunction with contrast studies and indwelling catheter-
 patient or the balloon inflated (Foley catheter) to keep it in
ization of hospitalized patients and its many uses include:
place. A collection bag may be attached to an indwelling
catheter to maintain kennel hygiene, measure the amount of
● Obtaining a non-contaminated urine sample for bacte-
urine production and reduce the risk of introducing infection
riology culture and sensitivity
via the catheter (Fig. 18.4).
● Removing urethral blockages by hydropropulsion
Maintenance of indwelling catheters
● Allowing repeated bladder emptying via an indwelling
catheter
● Keep the area around the catheter clean from faeces
and urine unless a collection bag is used.
● Instilling contrast media and drugs into the urinary
tract
● For prolonged use it may be necessary to change the
catheter. Commonly used materials are silicone or
● Preventing urine scalding in recumbent animals
Teflon which cause minimal mucosal irritation making
them useful for long-term use.
● Emptying the bladder in anaesthetized animals prior
to surgery.
● In some cases prophylactic antibiotics may be
administered to reduce the risk of ascending infection.
Insertion of a urinary catheter should be as aseptic as possible
 This is especially important in post-surgical and
to prevent introduction of contaminants into the bladder. A
hospitalized patients where indwelling catheterization
sterile catheter should be used and sterile gloves worn. This
is expected. Frequent monitoring is required to check
au reaa e Aa ino pan aq  anod
that the catheter is not blocked and in some cases
daily flushing with sterile water may be necessary.
 The anaesthetized patient should be placed in an appropriate
position. In male cats this is usually in dorsal or lateral
● The use of a collection bag is advantageous as it creates
recumbency, female cats and bitches in sternal recumbency
a closed system reducing the risk of ascending infection
B 
Fig. 18.4 Placement of a Jackson cat catheter into a mate feline patient (o) Inserting the catheter (b) Catheter sutured in to be maintained as
an indwelling catheter
342
 The essentials of patient care
globin or myoglobin present. A strong brown/yellow colour
indicates the presence of bile pigments (Bloxham 1999).
Simple urinalysis tests carried out on urine include measure-
ment of specific gravity using a refractometer. Clinistix
(Bayer) may also be used to check pH, presence of blood,
ketones, protein and bilirubin within the urine sample.
Centrifuging the urine can also determine the presence of
sediment and microscopy using Leishman's staining tech-
nique can be used to identify the presence of specific crystals,
casts or bacteria (see also Ch. 31).
Defaecation
Useful terminology
● Diarrhoea - The rapid expulsion of soft, non-formed
material from the rectum
● Constipation - Impaction of hard, dry faeces within
the large intestine or rectum, which is difficult or may
 become impossible for the animal to pass
● Tenesmus - Painful, ineffectual straining to pass
faeces, seen in cases of constipation
● Dyschezia - Difficult and painful passage of faeces
● Melaena - Production of dark, tarry faeces ± mucus:
evidence of blood loss in the upper gastrointestinal
18
tract
Fig. 18.5 A home-made closed urine coflection system
● Haematochezia - Production of fresh, bright red
blood in the faeces: evidence of blood loss in the lower
through an open catheter. The amount of urine pro-
gastrointestinal tract
duced may also be monitored. Used intravenous fluid
bags complete with giving set make ideal collection
● Coprophagia - When an animal eats its own
bags. Care must be taken that the bag is not increasing
 faeces - usually a vice in a dog.
resistance to flow, especially in smaller patients, and
that the urine is flowing freely. The urine may also
● Steatorrhoea - Passage of large volumes of pale, fatty
be inspected to monitor for signs of trauma from
faeces, usually associated with exocrine pancreatic
placement of the catheter. Figure 18.5 shows a
insufficiency (EPI).
home-made urine collection system using a giving set
and used intravenous fluid bag into which urine flows
Diarrhoea
with the aid of gravity.
May occur in EPl, dietary intolerance/allergy, bacterial infec-
tion due to Salmonella, Campylobacter, etc., parasitic infection,
Assessment of urine
viral disease due to Parvovirus, etc., malabsorption, colitis.
Note the volume of urine voided and its appearance. Normal
Diarrhoea can be acute or chronic and can originate in either
urine should be clear and have a slightly yellow colour.
         
Cloudy or very turbid urine indicates presence of sediment
with vomiting, anorexia and water and electrolyte losses, par-
such as white or red blood cells, calculi and casts. Dark
ticularly potassium, which, if not replaced rapidly can be life-
red/brown colour urine indicates a large amount of haemo-
threatening. Other associated signs can include depression
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 343
18
The essentials of patient care
 and lethargy, abdominal pain, polyphagia (especially in EPI),
Constipation can result in the patient becoming very restless
anorexia and dyschezia. The presence of any of these clinical
and depressed. Opportunities should be given to canine
signs must be noted on the hospitalization sheet when mon-
patients to walk outside as movement and exercise aid the
itoring the patient, as well as colour, consistency, odour,
passage of faeces and the patient may be more willing to
amount and frequency of any diarrhoea passed. If you are
defaecate away from the kennel.
unsure, a sample should be kept for the veterinary surgeon to
examine. History and hospitalization sheets are important in
Physical trauma, such as a fractured pelvis, will prevent defae.
determining the origin and cause of the diarrhoea.
cation from occurring, resulting in the faeces within the
rectum consolidating and becoming hard and impacted. Oral
medication may be administered in the form of lactulose, a
Nursing considerations
natural laxative, to help loosen the faeces, resulting in a rela
 Plenty of opportunity should be given for canine patients to
 ns p o un aa Im a e aeap on apsno o
 in cases where there is pain around the perianal region, such
their kennels. This is especially beneficial in paralysed recum
as after anal gland removal.
bent patients, as appropriate support, movement and exercise
will encourage normal bowel movement and faecal passage.
Enemas
Maintenance of basic kennel hygiene is important when
 In some cases where the impaction of faeces is particularly
dealing with these patients. The bedding used should be
severe an enema may be given. This involves the introduc.
washable, or disposable in cases of infectious disease, and
tion of a solution into the rectum to help break up the faeces
incontinence sheets are very useful in these cases. Newspaper
and facilitate the passage of faeces from the rectum. Enemas
and towels are also useful bedding materials. Thick blankets
may also be given preoperatively if surgery is concentrated
and synthetic fleece (Vetbed) should be avoided as they
around the perianal area or involves entering the lower gas
increase the wash load and can harbour bacteria and viruses
trointestinal tract. Patients undergoing abdominal radiogra
within the thick fbres. Long-haired patients benefit from
phy may also be given an enema to allow clear visualization
having their perianal area clipped to prevent the accumula-
of the caudal abdomen or to introduce contrast agents for
tion of faeces in the surrounding hair, keeping the area clean
lower gastrointestinal contrast studies.
and hygienic.
Materials used for enemas include liquid paraffin or warm
Barrier nursing may be indicated if an infectious disease such
saline solution. Phosphate enemas or glycerine used in
as Parvovirus is present and all materials in contact with the
human enemas should not be used in cats as they are toxic;
  s    s  s
 soapy enemas should also be avoided as they are an irritant
posed of.
(Fig. 18.6).
 Intravenous fluid therapy is commonly administered in
Administration of an enema - most patients will need to
patients with diarrhoea because of associated losses of water
be sedated or under general anaesthesia in order to carry out
and electrolytes, especially potassium and bicarbonate.
the procedure as it is quite uncomfortable and a relaxed anal
Hartmann's solution (lactated Ringer's) is usually indicated to
replace any losses. Further potassium supplementation may
be required in severe cases.
The nurse will also play a role in the dietary requirements of
these patients. Some cases may require nil per os. Others may
benefit from a short-term diet of bland, easily digestible food,
low in fat and high in good-quality proteins such as chicken
and highly digestible carbohydrates such as rice (McCune
1999). For patients with a dietary intolerance or allergy, the
veterinary surgeon will usually recommend a low-sensitivity
diet that the patient may have to eat for the rest of its life.
Constipation
May occur in cases of dehydration, neurological disease/
trauma, enlarged prostate, inactivity and obesity, and mega
colon.
Fig. 18.6 Equipment required for administration of an enema
344
 The essentials of patient care
sphincter tone is preferable. The veterinary surgeon will
Bedding should be easily washable or disposable, as with diar-
usually ensure that there is no physical blockage, such as a
rhoeic patients. Barrier nursing should be applied in cases
foreign body or enlarged prostate, preventing the normal
passage of faeces before carrying out an enema.
Nauseous patients are usually depressed and may intermittently
The warm solution is introduced into the rectum using a
lick their lips. If indicated, they should be offered food but
Higginson syringe, with one end placed in the solution and
avoid leaving it in the kennel for a long period as this may make
the other end inside the rectum (Fig. 18.6). Water is then
the patient more uncomfortable and increase food aversion.
pumped by squeezing the bulb in the middle of the syringe.
which allows the solution to travel one way only into the
will be given parentally. Oral fluids should be maintained
rectum. The impacted faeces is hydrated and broken down by
unless directed by the veterinary surgeon. White and light
the pressure from the continual introduction of water into
foods, e.g. chicken and rice, should be introduced gradually.
the rectum.
little and often for the first 3-4 days. Normal food can then be
 gradually introduced over a period of weeks.
Vomiting
Coughing
Conditions that can cause a patient to vomit include: gastri-
tis/gastroenteritis; megaoesophagus; viral infection, e.g. par-
Coughing is an expulsive mechanism transmitted by the vagus
vovirus or feline infectious enteritis; gastric dilation and
nerve to the thoracic muscles to expel mucus or foreign bodies
volvulus (GDV); poisons/toxins; ketoacidosis as seen in dia-
Conditions that can induce a coughing reflex include bronchi-
betes mellitus; pyometra; bacterial infection, e.g. Salmonella;
tis/tracheitis/laryngitis, kennel cough or infectious rhinotra-
pancreatitis.
cheitis, left-sided congestive heart failure, pneumonia, foreign
body, laryngeal spasm (in cats following endotracheal tube
extubation), malformation, e.g. an overlong soft palate.
Useful terminology
Nursing considerations
● Vomiting - An autonomic reflex in which the contents
of the stomach are actively ejected via the mouth
Instigate barrier nursing to isolate infectious patients such as
those with kennel cough. In most cases these are nursed at
● Regurgitation - Passage of undigested food from the
home but a patient may be admitted from a boarding
18
oesophagus out of the mouth
kennels. Offer warm, palatable food as in some cases the
patient may be anorexic.
● Haematemesis - Blood present in vomit; may be
similar in appearance to coffee grounds or red and
fresh
antitussives or cough suppressants (e.g. butorphanol),
● Emetic - An agent that induces vomiting, e.g.
apomorphine, soda crystals.
Nursing considerations
Intravenous fluid therapy is usually indicated because of the
loss of water and electrolytes, e.g. hydrogen and potassium
ions. Fluids containing sodium chloride or Ringer's solution
are indicated as the replacement fluid of choice. Anti-emetics
such as metoclopramide, which inhibits the vomiting reflex
and increases gastric contractions, may be prescribed by the
veterinary surgeon and administered to nauseous and vomit-
ing patients.
Frequency, quantity and appearance of vomitus should be
noted and recorded. Fresh or haemolyzed blood with the
appearance of dark coffee granules or bile, a yellow colour,
Fig. 18.7 Coupage being administered to a recumbent patient
may be present.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 
345
18
The essentials of patient care
antimuscarinic or secretory inhibitors (e.g. atropine) and
loosen up secretions and encourage a more productive cough
(Fig. 18.7). Cupped hands should be used to tap frmly on the
be prescribed. Coupage and nebulization may be used to help
chest wall, starting caudally and working forward.
Maintaining
metabolism, resulting in an increase in the risk of drug toxi-
city. The altered metabolism will also result in an increase in
nutritional status
adipose tissue and muscle loss as increased demand for pro-
a o ie a a so a  no ae n  s
starvation in comparison to cats, who may take up to 6 weeks
Conditions that may affect the nutritional status of the
to recover completely (Agar 2000).
patient may be due to:
It is vital to ensure that patients are provided with the key
● Anorexia - e.g. cat flu due to calici/herpesvirus;
nutrients needed for tissue repair and to maintain adequate
patients with cervical spine damage or fractured jaw;
immune function. Depending on the needs of the individual
hospitalized or postsurgical patients in pain; highly
patient different forms of assisted feeding will be instigated
stressed patients, usually cats; geriatric patients often
 s n   n    
have impaired taste bud renewal; olfactory impair.
received. There are two main routes used for feeding:
ment; oncology patients following radiation treatment
● Enteral - administration of food or medicines using
● Gastrointestinal compromise - e.g.
the gastrointestinal tract
malabsorption/maldigestion syndromes (e.g. EPI
following gastrointestinal surgery, megaoesophagus).
● Parenteral - administration of food and medicines
by a route other than that of the gastrointestinal tract,
Useful terminology
e.g. by intravenous injection
● Inappetence - Partial reduction in appetite
● Enteral feeding.
● Anorexia - Loss of desire for food before calorific
Choice of food
requirements have been met
Fats and proteins are absorbed much more easily than carbo.
● Starvation - Long-term deprival of food, resulting in
hydrates. The epithelial cells lining the gut of anorexic or
the appearance of associated physical effects such as
starved patients can be very fragile so provision of an easily
reduction in fat/muscle mass, loss of skin turgor,
absorbable diet will reduce the risk of diarrhoea. Fat also
lethargy and weakness and hypothermia
yields twice the calories of carbohydrates and protein so a
high-fat diet containing proteins of high biological value is
● Pica - Cravings for unusual items of food, licking and
ideal for most hospitalized patients. Proteins and fats further
eating at foreign objects; usually seen in animals with
complement one another as non-protein calories are required
nutritional deficiencies
to oxidize the amino acids during protein catabolism.
Contraindications would include patients with EPl or other
● Coprophagia - Ingestion of an animal's own faeces;
gastrointestinal problems, which would require a specialized
usually a vice in dogs or cats.
diet low in fat, or renally compromised patients, which cer-
tainly would not benefit from a high-protein diet. A diet rich
A compromised nutritional intake for whatever reason
in arginine (an essential amino acid of the dog and cat) and
can seriously affect all body systems which is exacerbated in
omega-3 fatty acids is also beneficial, as it is thought to have
 situations where the animal is also immunocompromised.
immunopreservative effects, particularly useful with cancer
patients (Agar, 2000; see also Ch. 10).
A reduction in all nutrients, particularly protein, can result in
reduced heart muscle mass and function, compromised pul-
Methods of feeding
monary and immune function and increased catabolism of
Hand-feeding
patients this also results in reduced tissue repair and synthesis
reducing the chance of effective wound healing and recovery.
When faced with the challenge of encouraging an inappetant
p anane p sidas jo y pas  ose si a
patient to eat the key is to select highly palatable foods. In
346
 The essentials of patient care
 on  sd     sn sd 
each feed as they can be dislodged through coughing. This
which can be warmed to increase palatability and is often
    as no   d  a a 
popular with patients with a reduced sense of smell, such as cats
 beforehand and watching for any signs of coughing, which
with 'cat flu'. Feeding the same diet that they are given at home
may suggest that the tube is lying in the trachea. A less
may also help. Cats in particular tend to be very texture-sensi-
tive and will prefer what they have been fed before.
ml syringe to the end of the feeding tube, drawing back the
 plunger and releasing so that a vacuum is felt. This confirms
Hand-feeding can work very well and should be attempted
that the tube is lying in the oesophagus. The feeding tubes
with all inappetant patients if they are amenable. Spending
must be flushed before and after each feed to prevent block-
time with cats and effectively ‘playing' with their food
ages. Fizzy drinks have beenn used, but can cause nausea and
usually encourages eating. Care should be taken to avoid
vomiting in patients. Cranberry juice works just as well, with
force, however, as this may lead to food aspiration and may
few unwanted side effects.
even increase food aversion.
In most cases feeding tubes are used in conjunction with
accessories such as stockinettes, abdominal bandages and
Syringe feeding
buster collars to help keep them in place (Fig. 18.8). They
may require regular changing or altering and should be
 n sd   pde  a si s
closely monitored for any signs of discomfort caused to the
boluses may be given to amenable patients. Ensure that the
patient. The site of entry of a feeding tube should be treated
patient is sitting upright and that the syringe is positioned at
 as a surgical wound and will require daily cleaning and dress
a 90° angle to the jaw. The patient can then take the liquid
ing to prevent any infection.
over the top of the tongue as it is slowly trickled into the
mouth, reducing the risk of aspiration. Only liquid foods may
  a ho pos a pn oa s aq  a
recumbent patients as there is an increased risk of aspiration.
Administration of food through the tube
Complete liquid foods, e.g. ready prepared liquids such as
This method of feeding is not as successful in feline patients
Reanimyl, Fortol and Liquivite, are ideal to administer
and can be a stressful experience for both nurse and patient.
through the feeding tubes. They are slightly more expensive
but are more suitable for use in smaller-bore feeding tubes
(Fig. 18.9). Non-prepared products, e.g. A/D Diet (Hills) and
Appetite stimulants
Convalescence Support (Waltham's), require mixing with
18
water beforehand but are too viscous, even when mixed with
 Drugs may be administered under the direction of the veteri-
water, to use with small-bore tubes. Ready-prepared products
nary surgeon to stimulate appetite, e.g. diazepam given intra-
have a short shelf-life once they are opened. Any liquid food
  s  a o    s n 
should be warmed to body temperature before administering
action and may be used for short term only. Cyproheptadine
 to prevent vomiting. Avoid the use of a microwave, as this
(Periactin), an antihistamine drug, may also be used in cats to
 can cause uneven heating.
stimulate appetite and may be used for up to 1 week (R Giles,
unpublished work, 2002).
When calculating the volume of food to be given it is neces-
- ld are a sn  mo o m o is
itre of food. This information may be found on the label or
Tube feeding
in a produrt catalogue and depends on the species and
weight of the patient and the length of time the feeding tube
There are various types of feeding tube available and the
has been placed. The food should have a high calorific
choice depends on which area of the gastrointestinal tract is
density as the volume of food administered will be restricted.
compromised (Table 18.2). In patients undergoing gastroin-
The stomach capacity of a cat is 45 ml/kg and of a dog
testinal surgery the veterinary surgeon will decide which
90 ml/kg.
method of feeding will be necessary post surgery and implan-
tation of the feeding tube will usually be done while the
Feeding requirements will need to be calculated for each indi-
animal is still under general anaesthesia.
vidual patient. Some cases, e.g. trauma, surgery or neoplasia,
may require increased energy. Box 18.1 shows how to calcu-
late the basic energy requirement (BER) of individual
Maintenance of the feeding tube
patients, depending on their bodyweight. Disease factors may
 si hi s sd n sos  
be added to this to increase the daily energy need to help
essary to check that the tube is still in the oesophagus before
healing and recuperation.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
347
18
The essentials of patient care
Table 18.2 Types of feeding tube
Type of tube
Location of placement
Contraindications
Advantages
Disadvantages
Nasogastric tube
Tube inserted into nostril and
 Nasal, oral or pharyngeal disease Usually well tolerated 
Can be irritating to eyes and
 passed through pharynx to lie
Vomiting or regurgitation
Does not require
nose
in oesophagus. Tube ends in 
Lateral recumbency
 general anaesthetic to
Patient usually requires an
caudal oesophagus rather than
 Oesophageal disease
place tube
Elizabethan collar to keep the
directly into stomach to
Stomach disease
Long-term use 3-7 days
tube in place
prevent gastric reflux
After surgery on the upper
Allows most of
gastrointestinal tract
gastrointestinal tract
to be used
Need to check before
each feed that tube is
 still in the oesophagus
Pharyngostomy
Surgical hole made over area
 Pharyngeal/oesophageal
Usually well tolerated
Associated complications:
of pharynx and tube passed 
disease/dysfunction 
Allows most of
● Dysautonomia syndrome
through hole, via the pharynx
Vomiting patients
gastrointestinal tract to
(neurological disease) -
into the oesophagus.
be used
pharynx/larynx very
Alternatively a surgical wound
Useful when there is
sensitive
may be made directly into the
trauma to oral or nasal
● High chance of infection
desophagus
cavity
due to associated surgical
wound
 Requires general anaesthetic
for placement
Wound care maintenance and
 materials required
Gastrostomy
Placement of feeding tube
Gastric/lower gastrointestinal
Can be used long term
Requires general anaesthetic
usually carried out surgically
tract disease/dysfunction
and kept in place
for placement
via endoscopy using a
Vomiting patients
indefinitely
Minimum placement time
percutaneous endoscopic 
Lateral recumbency
Relatively easy to use
7 days to allow scar tissue to
gastrostomy (PEG)
and maintain and in
form around the tube
mushroom-tipped tube
some cases patients
 Ischemia may occur within
can be sent home
the tissue at the exit point if
 Used in patients with
the mushroom tip of the 
leine 7eio 'jeabeydosa0
feeding tube is in contact
Of swallowing disease/
with the abdominal wall
dysfunction
Surgical wound - risk of
infection
Wound care maintenance
Cannot be used for first 24 h
to enable a primary seal to
form
Jejunostomy tube Tube placed directly into the
Patients with lower
Useful in patients with
Risk of dislodgement by
small intestine via a surgical
 gastrointestinal tract disease/
upper gastrointestinal
reverse peristalsis into
hole, to bypass the upper
dysfunction
disease/dysfunction,
stomach
gastrointestinal tract
e.g. following gastric
Can only feed small volumes
surgery
of food because of small 
capacity of jejunum
Requires general anaesthetic
for placement
Surgical wound into
contaminated area - risk of
infection
Wound care maintenance
348
The essentials of patient care
Box 18.1 Calculation of basic energy
requirements for a range of situations
 Basic energy requirements (BER) = metabolizable
kilocalories (kcal) over a 24-h period
< 2 kg bodyweight BER = 70 × (bodyweight kg)0.75
> 2 kg bodyweight BER = (30 x bodyweight kg) + 70
Disease factor may be added to the BER:
Hospitalization
BER x 1.3
18
Major trauma
BER X 1.6
Neoplasia
BER x 1.6
 Severe infection
BER X 1.8
Major burns
BER x 2.0
Fig. 18.9 Examples of some foods that may be used through
BER × disease factor = amount (kcal) in 24 h
feeding tubes
Volume of food in millilitres (ml) or grams (g) may be
calculated by dividing the number of kcal/ml or kcal/g of
food by the number of kcal to be fed in 24 h
Table 18.3 Daily feeding regimes
Day 1
1/3 basic energy requirement mixed ratio
1:2 with water to make up volume given (ml)
It is not a good idea to feed the full quota of food straight
Frequency of feeding  3-4 times daily
away as this will shock the gastrointestinal system and diar-
Day 2
2/3 basic energy requirement mixed ratio
rhoea may result, especially if the patient has been anorexic.
2:1 with water to make up volume given (ml)
By gradually increasing the amount of food over a period of
Frequency of feeding  4-5 times daily
days, the gastrointestinal system will adapt to the new form
 of feeding. Table 18.3 shows examples of feeding regimes.
Day 3
 Feed basic energy requirement (ml) with
additional water* as necessary
Frequency of feeding  6-8 times daily
Parenteral feeding
Nutrients are administered into the patient's blood stream
50 ml/kg/24 h - water provided by food = water intake (ml)
via a central venous catheter placed in the jugular vein. The
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
349
18
The essentials of patient care
technique is particularly useful in patients who are unable to
trolytes and trace minerals and a fresh mixture is prepared
take in nutrients through their gastrointestinal system. It is a
aseptically on a daily basis (Fig. 18.9). This is attached to the
technique rarely used in practice because of the high cost of
the specialized intravenous infusion fluid and equipment and
at a very slow rate. Constant monitoring is required to check
the nursing care involved.
for any evidence of precipitate formation in the intravenous
infusion and for signs of phlebitis in the jugular vein. Strict
The intravenous infusion comprises a mixture of amino
catheter management should be adhered to, as there is an
acids, dextrose, lipid emulsion, water-soluble vitamins, elec-
increased risk of sepsis (Hurley & Michel 1999).
Fluid intake
healthy patient the skin should resume its normal
form almost immediately but in cases of dehydration
Conditions that may cause abnormal hydration status and
there will be less elasticity within the skin and it will
fluid redistribution include starvation, acute renal failure,
take longer to resume a normal position. This
diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, toxic shock, pleural effu-
assessment is objective and depends on the age,
sion, haemorrhage and septicaemia.
condition and amount of subcutaneous fat
· A packed cell volume (PcV) may be carried out if a
Assessing hvdration status
blood sample is available (see also Ch. 31). This test is
normally used to measure the amount of red blood
There are various measurements and observations used to deter-
cells in a given volume of blood but the figure
mine a patient's hydration status (Table 18.4), which include:
obtained can also be indicative of hydration status.
The normal PCV for a cat or dog is 32-45%. A higher
● Capillary refill time (CRT) - the gum is blanched
 PCV (> 45%) would indicate dehydration, as the top
and time taken for gum to return to normal colour is
layer of the plasma sample, the fluid component of the
recorded; in a dehydrated patient this may take a
blood, is reduced so that the relative proportion of red
longer than a healthy CRT
blood cells is greater. When assessing dehydration the
rule is that a 1% increase in PCV is equivalent to a
● Dry mucous membranes are indicative of a
water loss of 10 ml/kg.
dehydrated patient and can also be assessed while
carrying out the above measurement
● Observing eye position within the socket
Maintaining fluid intake
retraction of the eye back into its socket indicates that
the patient is dehydrated
Subcutaneous and intraperitoneal fluid
administration
● Dermal elasticity - this may be carried out by
 gently pinching or tenting the patient's skin. In a
Administering warmed sterile isotonic fluids subcutaneously
can be particularly useful in patients where intravenous
 Table 18.4 Clinical signs associated with dehydration
access would be difficult, e.g. in neonates or in patients where
oral administration would be difficult. Absorption of fluids
Water deficit Associated clinical signs
using this method is very slow and should be avoided in
(%)
severely dehydrated animals. Small boluses should only be
0-5
Concentrated urine, polydipsia, no clear clinical signs
administered at any one time and different areas of skin
should be used each time.
5-7
Reduction in dermal elasticity (tenting), slightly
sunken eyes, dry mucous membranes, increased
Warmed sterile hypotonic or isotonic fluids may also be
capillary refill time, rapid weak pulse
administered directly into the peritoneal cavity. Because of
7-10
 Tented skin remains in place, sunken eyes, anuria,
the high absorptive capacity of the peritoneum it is a more
extremities, depression, weak pulse
efficient way of administering fluids than the subcutaneous
10-12
Progression into shock phase, comatose, death usually
route. This method must be carried out in a strictly aseptic
inevitable
manner to avoid introducing infection into the peritoneal
cavity.
350
The essentials of patient care
Intraosseous fluid administration
This method allows administration of fluids into the
medullary cavity of a long bone, e.g. the proximal femur or
tibia in cats or dogs. It is especially useful in neonates and
trauma patients where venous access is fragile or com-
promised. Absorption of fluids from this route is as rapid as
the intravenous route. Placement requires skill and can be
painful. Local anaesthetic should always be used in conscious
animals. Maintenance of an intraosseous catheter should
follow the same strict aseptic technique as intravenous
catheter management.
Intravenous fluid administration
Access is gained using an intravenous catheter. Sterile
Fig. 18.10 Equipment required for intravenous catheter placement
warmed fluids are administered into the vein, commonly the
cephalic or saphenous vein. This method is the most rapid
and effective way of introducing fluids into a severely dehy.
● Hands should be washed prior to checking all
drated patient and can be used for continual fluid adminis-
 catheters and giving sets. All catheter checks should
tration.
 be done prior to carrying out further checks such as
TPR
Intravenous catheters
● Any sign of patient interference should be dealt with
There are various types of intravenous catheter available con-
immediately; Elizabethan collars may be used to
structed from different materials such as Teflon, polyurethane
 prevent this, along with close monitoring
and silicone (Fig. 18.10). The time a catheter may be left in
the vein depends on the patient, the catheter material and
● Ideally catheters should be flushed with sterile heparin
the standard of catheter care. Silicone catheters are less likely
saline at every check, to assess patency and prevent
to cause a reaction within the vein than polyurethane
thrombus formation; checks should, ideally, be carried
18
catheters, whereas Teflon catheters have a more rigid struc-
out three times a day to ensure there are no
ture and are more likely to cause thrombophlebitis (E.
complications
Opperman, unpublished work, 2002). Indwelling catheters
should not be kept in place for more than 48 h.
● It is good practice to note, either on the catheter
bandage or in the hospital notes, the date each
catheter was placed - this is especially important if
Maintenance of intravenous catheters
there is a change of nursing shift
● The catheter should be enclosed within a
semiocclusive dressing to protect the site of insertion
● If any medication is introduced directly into the
from physical damage and prevent introdurtion of
catheter or into the fluid bag, this should be done in
sepsis into the blood vessel via the catheter
a sterile manner. A fresh sterile needle should be
placed on the syringe in between collecting the
● The catheter site and surrounding area should be kept
medication from the bottle and placing intravenously
as clean and dry as possible to reduce the risk of sepsis
(Table 18.5).
Controlling
body
temperature
infection - 
 pyrexia, underdeveloped thermoregulatory
Problems in controlling body temperature may be seen in
system in neonates, compromised thermoregulatory system
the following conditions: hypothermia, hyperthermia,
in geriatrics, postanaesthesia - recovery phase, recumbent
heat stroke, severe dehydration and/or starvation, systemic
patients, laryngeal paralysis patients.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 351
18
The essentials of patient care
Tuble 18.5 Possible complications resulting from intravenous catheter placement
Causal agent
Clinical signs
Treatment required
Thrombophlebitis
Inflammation of a vein usually
Swelling of surrunding area, redness,
Remove catheter immediately and seek
associated with thrombus formation
heat and pain
alternative access. Vein should not be
used again 
Air embolism
Sudden obstruction of a blood vessel
Temporary paralysis, dyspnoea. Can be
Catheter should be removed
due to the introduction of air into the 
fatal if it occurs in the heart or lungs
immediately, the catheter insertion
lumen of a blood vessel. An embolism
site sealed and symptomatic treatment
may also be caused by a blood clot or
carried out as necessary
piece of tissue
Thrombus formation Formation of a blood clot due to 
Engorgement of vein and swelling of
Administer heparinized saline into the 
flow of blood being impeded, e.g. by
associated area (limb), may lead to
vein to break down clot. Catheter site
the presence of a catheter within the
temporary paralysis, dyspnoe or death
should be sealed and symptomatic
lumen of the vein, which may lead to
from formation of embolism
treatment carried out as necessary
an embolism
Septicaemia/
Introduction of microorganisms into
Swelling, redness, pain and discharge
Remove catheter immediately, flush 
bacteraemia
the vein through poor catheter
from catheter site and surrounding area
catheter site with chlorhexidine
placement and management
leading to systemic infection
solution and systemic antibiotics and
Symptomatic treatment administered
as necessary
Nursing considerations
● Underfloor heating - some practice kennels have
As part of the nursing care there may be cases, such as those
underfloor heating, which provides controlled,
outlined in which the patient is unable to fully thermoregu-
continuous warmth directly underneath the patient
late its body temperature. It is therefore necessary to alter or
adapt external temperature or conditions to maintain as
Heat pads - various commercial heat pads may be
normal a temperature as possible.
warmed in the microwave for a specified length of
time and placed under the patient's bedding. They
It is important to note, in patients with a subnormal body
lose their heat eventually and will need rewarming
temperature, that conserving what heat they already have is
Latex gloves may also be used by filling them with
insufficient and a direct source of heat is required:
hot water, knotting them closed and placing them
within the patient's bedding. Care must be taken not
● Heat lamps - care must be taken not to hang the
to place heat pads or gloves directly in contact with
lamp too near to the patient. This form of heating is
the patient
best suited to small patients such as neonates, as the
warmth from the lamp is focused in quite a small
Space blankets may be used to conserve heat, and
area. Larger lamps may be used for larger, walk-in
bubble wrap is often used especially in neonates, to
kennels
wrap up limbs and torso.
Mobilization
Nursing considerations
Conditions that can compromise mobility include: neuro-
logical disease, spinal trauma, skeletal limb trauma, ligament
Depending on the degree of immobility various methods of
and tendon trauma in limbs, e.g. cruciate ligament damage
support may be implemented to allow the patient to carry
and vestibular disease.
out normal activities as much as possible:
352
 The essentials of patient care
Fig. 18.11 Method of supporting α patient using a towel sting
Fig. 18.12 Two methods of patient transport: α stretcher for targer
canine patients and a basket for fetine patients
● In cases of hind limb paralysis or paresis, a long towel
limbs as much as possible to improve limb circulation
may be placed under the patient's caudal abdomen
and prevent muscle atrophy
and held like a sling to give support to the hind limbs,
enabling the patient to walk and toilet (Fig. 18.11). In
● Care must be taken when supporting large patients
male dogs it is important not to occlude the penis
 and more than one member of the nursing staff may
with the towel. Specialist sling harnesses are available,
be required! It is important to use the correct physical
which do the same job as the towel but are easier to
posture when moving patients, keeping the back
handle
straight and taking the weight on bent knees. Do not
 'd e   di  y n e a
● Crossed towels may be placed under the chest to
matter how busy everyone else is!
support tetra/quadriplegics
● Cats may be transported in baskets. This is especially
● Small patients such as cats and small dogs may be
important when moving them within the practice, to
carried but it may be beneficial for them to use their
prevent escape (Fig. 18.12).
Grooming
patient that the kennel door opening is not always associated
with something unpleasant happening. It can help to relax
patients, providing mental stimulation, and improve their
Conditions that can compromise a patient's ability to groom
        e ss
include: recumbency, cervical injury, cat flu (calici/herpes
do it for themselves.
virus due to ulcerated tongue), feeding tube placement (usually
requires the use of Elizabethan collar), geriatrics with con-
From a health point of view it allows the nurse to assess the
ditions such as spondylosis or arthritis, orphaned neonates.
of problems such as lump formation or reduction in body
condition associated with weight loss. The presence of
ectoparasitic infection may also be established. Removing
Principles of grooming
dead hair and debris from the coat reduces mat formation
hospitalized patients
and skin irritation while promoting new hair growth.
Discharge should also be removed from the eyes and nose to
Grooming is one of the basic activities of general nursing care
 prevent infection arising.
that can be beneficial to the patient in many ways.
Depending on the temperament and condition of patients it
allows the nurse to spend time with them, allowing a bond
to the owner when a patient is discharged as its appearance
to be formed. It will also reassure the particularly stressed
portrays the care it has received (see also Ch. 9).
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 353
18
The essentials of patient care
Communication
Effective communication with animal patients can be a
rather difficult and misunderstood area and this may be a par-
ticular problem when the animal is in pain. Commonly rec.
Recumbent patients
ognised signs of pain in animals can be displayed in obvious
behaviour patterns such as vocalization and aggression and
 Recumbent patients require a demanding amount of inten-
in some cases there are specific signs associated with certain
sive care, often for a long period of time. Recumbency is asso-
diseases; for example, patients with anterior abdominal pain
ciated with a number of complications, so an effective
as seen in cases of pancreatitis and portosystemic shunt,
nursing strategy must be designed to deal with these prob-
often adopt a noticeable 'prayer' position.
lems before they arise, reducing the chances of secondary
complications and improving the chances of a successful
 Behavioural signs of pain and discomfort include:
recovery.
● Restlessness and pacing
Conditions that may cause a patient to become recumbent
include neurological disease, spinal trauma, spinal disease
● Frequent posture changes
(Wobblers syndrome), fractures, spinal tumours, poisoning
inducing a semi-conscious or comatose state.
● Paying attention to the site of pain
● Panting and tachypnoea
Nursing considerations
● Depression
In many cases the patient may be semi- or fully dependent on
the nurse to fulfl a number of essential activities, so you
● Appearing lethargic/comatose
should consider the following:
● Inappetence
● Mobility will be severely compromised. Depending
on the condition and size of the animal it may be
● Attempting to hide away/curl up tightly
possible to aid mobility by using a towel or specialist
support harness. Walking around will help improve
● Hiding away the affected body part
circulation to the joints and prevent muscle atrophy,
as well as improve the mental wellbeing of the patient
●Attention-seeking.
● Normal feeding and fuid intake - intravenous
There are also many clinical signs that will indicate a level
fluid therapy will be instigated in most patients to
of pain. These include:
provide maintenance fluid support. Water should be
s  oe  e  g  isi ie p
● Tachycardia/bradycardia
into the mouth to moisten the lips and mucous
membranes. Some cases will require assisted feeding
● Abnormal body temperature
through PEG, pharyngostomy or nasogastric tubes
while others may be able to feed normally from a
● Dehydration due to anorexia and lack of drinking
Yq-mol e aq pmous uai poog jo a au imog
(reduced fibre), highly digestible diet to reduce faecal
● Abnormal faeces - due to anorexia or gut stasis
 matter and allow easy digestion. Energy expenditure is
reduced so fewer calories are required
● Loss of weight
 Constipation may be a complication and an enema
● Twitching or convulsions
or laxative may be beneficial if faeces have not been
passed for more than 3 days. Enabling the patient to
● Abnormal urine/faecal voiding and appearance.
go outside will help to encourage natural defecation,
as many patients will be unwilling to do so in
 In most cases it is necessary to assess both the behaviour pat-
recumbency
a     s  n  
together with its clinical history to obtain a full picture and a
● The patient's bladder function should be regularly
more accurate interpretation.
354
The essentials of patient care
present. Many patients will also be unwilling to
urinate in recumbency, so supportive mobility to
encourage natural urination should be carried out if
possible. Gentle pressure on either side of the bladder
U J Auo gnq uonun aemoua on pasn aq ose Aeu
blockage is not suspected
● Cystitis is another common problem because of
reduced water intake, reduced mobility and urine
retention. An indwelling urinary catheter may be
placed in patients that are difficult to mobilize or are
incontinent. A used drip bag may be placed on the end
of the catheter to provide a closed urine collection
system, preventing urine scalding and reducing the
risk of ascending infection. The amount of urine
produced may also be measured on a daily basis
Fig. 18.13 Use of a doughnut bandage to pad bony prominences in
● Self-grooming may be difficult in many of these
a recumbent patient
patients. Grooming the patient will allow the nurse to
spend some time with it as well as improving its
physical and mental wellbeing. Some patients with
vated without being directly in contact with anything, thus
Pd a   a  s 
minimizing further abrasion while allowing the air to circu-
 or prepuce area to maintain cleanliness.
late. This bandage will require to be secured to the area using
adhesive tape.
Potential complications
Management of decubital ulcers include clipping the area,
The successful recovery of these patients depends not only on
bathing in dilute chlorhexidine solution and applying a
specialized equipment and resources but on being able to
soothing barrier cream such as Dermisol. Antibiotics may also
 be prescribed by the veterinary surgeon to prevent secondary
nursing care to reduce the risk of them occurring.
skin infections.
18
Urine scalding is caused by repetitive soiling of the skin by
Skin problems
urine. Fur or hair provides little protection and all areas
In recumbent patients common primary skin problems
a p e i a d a s
include decubital ulcers (pressure sores) and urine scalding.
reapplying a water-repellent barrier cream such as Vaseline,
the urine is prevented from coming into contact with the
Decubital ulcers are primarily caused by a combination of
hair and skin. Placing a well-fitting indwelling urinary
pressure from the weight of the animal, moisture from sweat,
       o  
and friction caused by movement between the animal and
unable to come into contact with the skin.
the bedding. These can be difficult to treat once established
and common sites tend to be over bony prominences such as
the elbows, tarsus/carpus, shoulders and hips. Thin-skinned
Hypostatic pneumonia
animals such as greyhounds and lurchers are particularly sus-
ceptible.
This can be a complication in laterally recumbent patients,
especially those that are geriatric or seriously ill. Pooling of
The occurrence of decubital ulcers may be reduced by pro
blood and fluids can occur in the lower lung, i.e. the lung
viding padded, clean, dry bedding and turning the patient
closest to the floor, and provides an ideal medium for the
growth of bacterial microorganisms. This then reduces the
in contact with the bedding. Waterproof mattresses are ideal
viability of the lung, resulting in the development of pneu-
as bedding and duvets may also be used. Towels and blankets
monia. Clinical signs include coughing, tachypnoea and a
are certainly not ideal. Synthetic fleece or Vetbed is useful for
rapid shallow breathing pattern.
a contact layer, as it is soft and highly absorbent. Padded
bandages may also be applied to risk areas but care should
Preventative treatment includes turning the patient every
be taken that this does not put pressure on to other areas.
4 h (Fig. 18.14), if not contraindicated, preventing the
Figure 18.13 shows how a doughnut bandage may be used to
lower lung from becoming non-viable. The patient can also
pad bony prominences in recumbent patients. The area is ele-
be repositioned into sternal recumbency, allowing both lungs
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 355
18
The essentials of patient care
Fig. 18.14 Furning 0 recumbent patient
to inflate fully. Coupage may also be carried out to aid
expulsion of secretions.
Muscle atrophy and joint adhesion formation
Muscle atrophy may be a potential complication through
reduced limb use and can lead to joint adhesions and muscle
spasms, which can be painful and cause permanent damage.
Fig. 18.15 A shoutder joint extended (a) and the shoutder joint
Physical therapy under instruction from the veterinary
flexed (b) in a recumbent patient as part of a passive physiotherapy
surgeon, in the form of controlled passive limb movement
routine
and voluntary exercise, can help to reduce the risks of these
complications occurring. Passive limb movement involves
the nurse gently extending and flexing the joints in the
Psychological needs
limbs. Care should be taken not to overstretch the muscles
 In most cases the patient will be physically unwell, in pain or
and checks must be made to ensure that all limbs are fully
discomfort and it may become depressed. Bonding with the
functional and amenable to such activity (Fig. 18.15).
patient is important so that changes in behaviour or improve-
Hydrotherapy may be of benefit, as the water provides much
 ments or decline in its condition may be recognised quickly.
of the support for the patient.
Ideally, these patients should be kennelled in busy areas
where they can observe people and other animals. Visits from
Massage has also been shown to increase circulation in
 d n         
immobile limbs, as well as increasing fluid exchange, flushing
clothing can be left in the kennel with the patient it will
toxins out of the tissues via the pulmonary and lymphatic
 pro vide additional reassurance.
drainage system and reducing the presence of oedematous
fluid formation. Massage can prevent fibrous adhesions
occurring between connective tissue in the limbs and provide
Neonatal and juvenile patients
mental relaxation for the patient. In spinal cases, massage
with spinal disease and trauma (A. Sutton, unpublished
have been abandoned or orphaned at birth. Their care can be
work, 2002).
very time-consuming but also extremely rewarding. The type
356
 The essentials of patient care
and intensity of care varies greatly over a relatively small
the following 7 days and then 20C until the animal is about
age range. A patient of 6 weeks and under will require a
 6 weeks of age. Hot water bottles and microwave heat pads
greater amount of care compared to that required by a 10- or
can be used within the bedding to provide warmth. Heat
11-week-old patient, which will be more independent and
lamps can be used carefully at the recommended distance.
able to carry out most essential activities by itself. Consider
the following factors:
Communication and behaviour
Feeding and fluid intake
Neonatal and juvenile patients require a stimulating environ-
ment but they should also have a quiet area for sleep. They
From birth to 7 days healthy neonates will require feeding
should be housed in an area of activity unless incubating a
approximately every 2 h. This will then increase to every
contagious disease, in which case they should be isolated.
3-4 h up to 5 weeks old. At this stage weaning should be
The kennel should be secure and free from draughts.
actively encouraged by offering semi-solid, highly palatable,
high-caloric-density food and allowing the patient to lap.
Toys and bedding from home should be provided to allow
Bottle-fed neonates can find this transition difficult and a
 play and make them feel a little more secure and happy in a
syringe may be used initially.
strange environment. An alarm clock placed under the
bedding of orphaned neonates to simulate the heartbeat of
Neonates born by caesarean section should be reunited with
the mother provides comfort and contentment.
their mother as soon as possible to enable them to suckle.
This is important as they require the colostrum, rich in
Unfortunately, long periods of hospitalization during the
maternally derived antibodies, which may only be absorbed
prime socialization period between 8 and 14 weeks of age can
effectively by their gastrointestinal system within the first
have an effect on behavioural development, with resultant
24 h of life.
undesirable behaviour patterns emerging in these patients.
This can be seen in puppies with canine parvovirus that have
Once fully weaned the young animal will benefit from fre.
to be isolated for long periods of time, which restricts normal
   n d    
developmental interaction with other dogs and people
Close checks on weight gain should be made on a daily basis.
(Hobbs, unpublished work 2004). Hand-reared kittens can
also become difficult to handle when they becomes adults
because of their lack of discipline and teaching from the
small quantities to very young patients. The intraosseous
mother cat during kittenhood (Hewitt, unpublished work
18
s  pid a on sn aq ose  nn
2004).
Intravenous access can be difficult in these patients as the
veins are fragile and small.
Nursing considerations
Elimination
Neonatal and juvenile patients have an undeveloped
Up to about the age of 4 weeks stimulation is required to
        
induce the neonate to defaecate or urinate. A damp piece of
This is even more significant in sick neonates and juveniles,
cotton wool may be used to rub the prepuce or vulva and
perianal area after each feeding. Juvenile patients may be par-
and levels of maternally derived antibody levels are waning,
tially, fully or not toilet-trained at all so an initial assessment
which usually occurs around 8-12 weeks of age. All feeding
will need to be made as to what stage the patient is at so that
bowls and litter trays should be disinfected and sterilized.
it can be nursed accordingly.
Barrier nursing should be implemented in the case of a con-
tagious disease.
There are very few veterinary drugs licensed for use in
Temperature regulation
neonates and juveniles because of their potential toxicity and
A combination of an underdeveloped thermoregulatory
low therapeutic index. It is therefore very important to obtain
system, minimal subcutaneous fat deposits and a high body
an accurate weight on which to base correct drug dosages.
surface area to volume ratio increases the potential risk of
juveniles, e.g. cleft palate, umbilical and inguinal hernias,
ture for the first 7 days should be 29°C, decreasing to 26°C for
heart problems such as patent ductus arteriosus, and over- or
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
357
18
The essentials of patient care
undershot jaw. Most may be obvious and diagnosed in the
as a result of mental ageing and the onset of senility. These
early stages but other complications, such as heart defects,
patients may benefit from disposable padded incontinence
sheets over their bedding.
Geriatric patients
Nursing considerations
Geriatric patients usually require intensive nursing because
When preparing a kennel for a geriatric patient, well-padded
their ability to recover from disease or surgery will be
bedding is essential, especially if the animal is suffering from
d s po  m d p 
joint disease. This will provide support and comfort and
There may also be some sensory deprivation in the form of
prevent further joint stiffness and the development of decu-
blindness or deafness, which may make the elderly patient
bital ulcers.
disorientated and anxious.
Water should be available at all times, unless it is contraindi-
Common conditions in these patients include cancer, cardiac
cated and intravenous fluid therapy has been put in place.
disease, cataracts, hepatic and renal disease, pulmonary
These patients are less able to deal with water deprivation,
disease, osteoarthritis, spondylosis, degenerative joint disease
compared to younger patients, and it may result in severe
and dental disease. Consider the following factors:
renal compromise.
Drug toxicity can occur because a reduction in renal and
Feeding and fluid intake
hepatic function makes metabolism of the drugs less efficient
and overdosing can become a significant risk. Accurate body
 A significant proportion of hospitalized geriatric patients will
weights should be taken to enable accurate dosage calcula-
be suffering with one or more conditions so the history is a
tions to be made.
significant factor when formulating a nursing plan. Part of
the treatment will be achieved through effective dietary man-
 sn sd    s 
agement. Common examples include elderly dogs with heart
disorientated. They should be approached gently and
disease or old cats with renal or hepatic disease (see Ch. 11).
attempts should be made to attract their attention before
 Obesity may also be a problem, particularly in geriatric dogs,
entering the kennel and touching them, as they may bite if
who usually take less exercise but their owners continue
 n    s n n   
feeding the same amount and type of food the patient was
home or visits from the owner may make them feel happier.
fed when it was 2 years old. The energy requirements of a
However, some patients may find the departure of the owner
senior dog are approximately 20% less than its younger coun.
too upsetting and stressful and this should be taken into con-
terpart (McCune 1999). In some cases, owners in fact increase
sideration when planning the individual nursing care of
the food as a loving gesture! The resultant problems include
these patients.
the onset of joint disease such as arthritis, which, although a
common condition in geriatrics, may be exacerbated by extra
weight and strain on the joints. In general, a reduced-calorie,
Bibliography
highly digestible and palatable diet with individual adapta-
tions for particular conditions is recommended for these
Agar S 2001 Small animal nutrition. Butterworth-Heinemann,
patients. Palatability is an important factor in feeding geri-
pofxo
atric patients because of the reduction in olfactory senses and
impaired renewal of the taste buds. There is also a commer-
Blood D C, Studdert V P 1999 Comprehensive veterinary dictionary.
cial diet specifically designed to reduce the amount of free
W B Saunders, London
radicals in the brain, claiming to reduce the behaviour pat-
terns associated with geriatric senility.
Bloxham P A 1999 Laboratory diagnostic aids. In: Lane D,
Cooper B Veterinary nursing, 2nd edn. Butterworth Heinemann,
pofxo
Elimination
Hurtey K, Michel K 1999 Manual of feline and canine emergency
 Reduced bladder or anal sphincter tone is a common condi-
Critical care.British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
tion associated with ageing and patients should be offered
Cheltenham
 more frequent opportunities to defaecate and urinate outside,
as many will be reluctant to do so in their kennels.
McCune S 1999 Nutrition. In:Lane D, Cooper B 2003 Veterinary
Defaecating indoors in the kennel or on the bedding can be
nursing, 3rd edn. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford
358
 The essentials of patient care
McCune S 2000 Small animal nutrition.Butterworth Heinemann,
Park F S 1999 Reproduction and care of the neonate. In: Moore M
Oxford.
(ed.) 1999 Manual ofveterinary nursing.BritishSmall Animal
Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
Simpson G 1994 Practical veterinary nursing. British Small
Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
Informative section on nursing geriatric, neonatal and recumbent
 patients. Also a very good practical section on basic physiotherapy
Williams L 1992 Care of the paraplegic patient. Veterinary
and massage.
Practice Nurse 4: 17-20
Simpson G (ed.) 1996 Practical veterinary nursing. Brifish Small
Recommended reading
Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
Agar S 2001 Small animal nutrition. Butterworth-Heinemann,
Oxford
bitch, tom cat and queen.
An easy-to-read and informative book covering all aspects of small
Van der Heiden C A 1999 Management of kennets and catteries.
animal nutrition. Good as a quick reference guide.
In: Lane D, Cooper B 2003 Veterinary nursing, 3rd edn. Butter-
worth Heinemann, Oxford, Ch. 5
Chandler S 1999 General nursing. In: Lane D, Cooper B Veterinary
nursing, 2nd edn. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford, Ch. 16
Useful section on grooming, including coat management and broad
range of useful equipment disptayed.
Useful text and photographs on urinary catheterization,types of
catheters used and their management.
18
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 359
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
19
Fundamental Pharmacology
Sally Bowden
Key Points
 When a drug is administered to the body it moves
● Drugs and other chemicals in the body may interact with
through the tissues to its designated site of action - this
each other, resulting in unpredictable and sometimes
is the study of pharmacokinetics.
adverse reactions.
● The speed at which a drug reaches its site of action is
● The production of drugs by pharmaceutical companies,
determined by the route of administration.
the dispensing of drugs by veterinary surgeons to their
 The body metabolizes drugs, mainly in the liver, during
clients and the subsequent disposal of the surplus drug
which process the drug is converted into a form that can
are subject to many pieces of legislation. These are all
be excreted.
designed to protect the patient, the owner giving the
drug, the general public and the environment.
Different types of drug have differing effects, which are
determined by their formulation and determine their
therapeutic use.
Introduction
describes any substance that, when administered, has a
specific effect on the body.
This chapter aims to provide veterinary nurses with a broad,
basic understanding of various aspects of pharmacology. It
encompasses a range of subjects, from general pharmacoki-
The origins of drugs
netics and pharmacodynamics, through the classification of
pe suuu jo shnadse pennd on 'snp pasn Aoo
Drugs have been used for religious, recreational and medici-
dispensing medication.
nal purposes throughout the course of history. Alcohol and
opium are among the earliest examples of drugs. Other plant-
derived drugs such as tobacco, strychnine, digitalis and
What is pharmacology?
atropine, to name but a few, have also been used for several
hundred years. More recently, around the beginning of the
Pharmacology is the study of the properties of drugs and their
19th century, scientists discovered methods of modifying
effects on living organisms. It is derived from the Greek word
natural substances, or synthesizing drugs, to provide safer
9
pharmakon, meaning 'drug', and the suffix -logy, meaning
and more effective treatments. Drugs from animal and
'study of'. Clinical pharmacology, or pharmacotherapeutics,
mineral sources began to be used. In the modern age, geneti-
is concerned with the effects of drugs in treating disease. The
cally engineered drugs are the latest pharmacological devel-
term 'drug' may be defined in various ways but, put simply.
opment in a burgeoning pharmaceutical industry.
Pharmacokinetics
Drug absorption
The route of administration, the disease status of the patient and
The word pharmacokinetics literally means 'drug movement'.
 a  do    a no  a
It pertains to what happens to a drug when it enters the body.
i.e. what the body does to the drug. This section traces drug
Route of administration and its effect on
movement through the body and examines how it gets in,
absorption
where it goes, what happens to it along the way and how it
leaves. Pharmacokinetic processes are often categorized into
There are many routes of drug administration, but the most
four main areas - absorption, distribution, metabolism and
commonly used ones in veterinary medicine are the oral, sub-
elimination.
cutaneous, intramuscular and intravenous routes. Generally,
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing  361
19
Fundamental pharmacology
in order for a drug to reach its site of action and have an
prevent the destruction of the drug in the highly acidic envi-
effect, it must enter the systemic blood circulation. The
ronment of the stomach.
exceptions to this are drugs that act locally, i.e. in the area
they are applied. An example of a locally acting drug that
Once absorbed across the intestinal wall, orally administered
does not need to enter the circulation in order to reach its site
drug enters the hepatic portal circulation and is routed
of action is lidocaine hydrochloride.
directly to the liver. One of the roles of the liver is to remove
potentially toxic substances before they reach the systemic
The amount of drug that reaches the circulation intact (i.e.
blood circulation and drugs may be partially or completely
unaltered) determines the drug's bioavailability. For example, if
broken down because of this mechanism. This is known as
the entire administered dose reaches the circulation intact, that
the first-pass effect. The first-pass effect is one reason that
drug has 100% bioavailability. This is also known as a bioavail-
some drugs cannot be administered orally, or that the dose
rate of an oral preparation when compared with a parenteral
tion - drugs given by this route have a bioavailability of 1 as the
preparation of the same drug is much higher. Because of the
drug enters the bloodstream directly and there is no absorption
need for dissolution, time taken to reach the site of absorp-
 phase. Drugs given by all other routes of administration are said
tion and the first-pass effect, orally administered drugs tend
to have a bioavailability of less than 1, as less than 100% of the
to have a comparatively low bioavailability.
dose will reach the circulation intact.
Other factors also affect the rate of absorption:
Bioavailability is affected by the rate at which the drug is
absorbed and also the ease of absorption. Generally, the
Tissue perfusion
better the blood supply to an area, the quicker the rate of
absorption (Fig. 19.1). Drugs administered intramuscularly
Tissue perfusion directly affects the rate of absorption; for
are usually absorbed quickly. Of the commonly used par-
example, a drug injected into an active, well-perfused muscle
enteral routes of administration, subcutaneously adminis-
will be absorbed more quickly than one injected into an inac-
tered drugs have the lowest bioavailability because the skin is
tive muscle, which will have a poorer blood supply.
 a less vascular part of the body.
Vasoconstriction or vasodilation will cause reduced or
enhanced blood flow to an area so, when injecting subcuta-
Orally administered drugs travel through the gastrointestinal
neously, exposing the patient to cold or hot environmental
tract and most are absorbed in the small intestine. Solid oral
temperatures will affect the absorption rate. Disease condi-
preparations, including tablets, capsules and granules undergo
tions affecting perfusion have the same effect.
a process of dissolving known as dissoution prior to being
absorbed. Liquid preparations do not need to undergo dissolu-
tion and so are usually absorbed more quickly than the solid
Drug formulation
 oral preparations. Some drugs are formulated as a ‘sustained
The drug formulation can also have an effect on absorption.
release' preparation, where dissolution and subsequent absorp-
Drugs that dissolve more easily in water are termed
ton is slowed down. Note that this is not the same as an
hydrophilic, which literally means 'water-loving'. Drugs that
'enteric-coated' tablet, which has a protective coating to
dissolve more easily in fat are termed lipophilic or 'fat-loving'.
Drugs administered intravenously or intramuscularly enter
the extracellular fluid and, in the case of the intramuscular
Intravenous route
route, must diffuse through it to reach the circulation.
Intramuscular route
Therefore, hydrophilic drugs are more readily absorbed via
 Subcutaneous or oral route
these routes. Drugs administered via other routes, e.g. orally
or subcutaneously, must diffuse through cell membranes in
 Plasma drug concentration
order to reach the circulation. As cell membranes are mostly
 Therapeutic range
made up of phospholipids, lipophilic drugs are able to diffuse
through them more readily.
While most drugs are formulated to facilitate absorption,
there are some drugs deliberately designed to provide a 'slow-
release’ or 'depot' formulation. An example of this is nan-
drolone laurate, which is lipophilic and so not easily diffused
into the interstitial fluid surrounding muscle fibres. Some
drugs are formulated for slow absorption because they exert
Fig. 19.1 Plasma concentrations foffowing intravenous, intramuscu-
their effect where the drug is introduced. A prime example of
tar and subcutaneous injections (Redrawn from Bill 1997)
this is piperazine, which is hydrophilic and therefore is not
362
2Fundamental Pharmacology
easily absorbed from the gut, as it must cross the cell mem-
Drugs that must reach the brain to have an effect, e.g. general
branes of the intestinal wall. This means that sufficient con-
anaesthetics, must be sufficiently lipophilic to be able to cross
centration remains in the gastrointestinal tract for the drug to
the blood-brain barrier. The placental barrier is not as efficient
be effective at this site. The pH of the drug and of the envi-
at preventing drugs passing into the fetal circulation and so
ronment can affect absorption because it can affect the drugs
caution should be exercised when treating pregnant animals.
hydrophilic or lipophilic tendency.
Tissue perfusion in the target organ or organs will also affect dis-
tribution. Well perfused organs will receive the drug quickly.
Drug distribution
After a time, drug will also distribute into the poorly perfused
areas and drug concentration levels will drop in the blood
The movement of drug from the systemic circulation into the
plasma. Because distribution of drug occurs along a concentra-
body tissues is known as distribution. Most drugs must reach
tion gradient, this can cause drug to leave the well perfused
a specific area or target tissue in order to have their desired
organs and re-enter the circulation, then move into a less well
effect, known as the therapeutic effect.
perfused area until equilibrium is reached. This is called redisiri-
bution. An example of this is the anaesthetic thiopental, which
When a drug enters the systemic circulation, drug molecules
is lipophilic and redistributes to the adipose tissues, causing the
attach themselves to a certain site on plasma proteins
animal to regain consciousness (Fig. 19.2). Reduced blood flow
(notably to albumin). This is called protein binding. Once
  aq    p  no   o
attached, the drug molecule is inactive, i.e. unable to move
consideration when monitoring the effects of drug therapy.
into the body tissues. In order for a drug to be active, it must
become unbound or 'free' - in other words, detach itself from
Administration of
the plasma protein. The amount of bound drug in the circu-
IV anesthetic
Minimum
lation is always the same as the amount of unbound drug in
↑
moncentration
for surgical
the circulation, so, as free drug molecules move into the body
-aaesthesia
tissues, more bound drug molecules are released to maintain
this balance. Likewise, the amount of unbound drug in the
circulation and the amount of drug in the tissues will always
equalize along a concentration gradient.
Fat compartment
Blood
Brain
Factors affecting drug distribution
oompartment
Some drugs bind more strongly to plasma proteins than
B
others - these are termed highly protein-bound. The more
highly protein-bound a drug is the less free drug is available
to distribute into the body tissues. This means that it is often
     p ss  a  s
9
bound in order for them to have a therapeutic effect. Disease
d d pna      s
levels, e.g. hypoalbuminaemia due to liver failure, can mean
Fat compartment
Blood
Brain
that a higher than normal amount of free drug is available for
 compartment 
distribution and this can result in toxicity.
C
Some drugs bind to the same site on plasma proteins. If admin-
istered together, this can result in the less highly bound drug
lacking binding sites and, again, a higher than normal amount
being available as free drug for distribution, so toxicity can
occur. For this reason, some drugs, e.g. methotrexate and
phenylbutazone, must not be administered together.
Fat compartment
Blood
Brain
 compartment 
Natural barriers to the circulation exist in the body. These are
Fig. 19.2 Redistribution of an anaesthetic drug from the brain to
the blood-brain, placental and testicular barriers. They are
other tissues (a) The drug moves quickly from the btood to the
present to protect these areas of the body from dangerous
brain, causing anaesthesia (b) The brain concentration of
toxins in the blood circulation. The capillary walls in the brain
anaesthetc then drops untit it is too fow to maintain anaesthesia
have a different structure from others, which means that only
(c) When the animat begins to awaken (Redrawn from Biff 1997)
highly lipophilic drugs are able to cross into the brain tissue.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
363
19
Fundamental pharmacology
Drug metabolism
available at any one time. If two or more drugs are adminis-
tered that use the same enzyme system, this can cause a delay
The body will metabolize or biotransform drugs as it would
in drug metabolism, resulting in drug toxicity if the dose of
attempt to do with any foreign substance in the circulation.
the drugs involved is not reduced.
The resultant product of metabolism is known as a metabolite.
This mainly occurs in the liver, although sometimes other
Some drugs cause the inhibition of certain enzymes, which
organs, including the lung and the kidney, are involved.
could result in the metabolism of that drug, or another drug.
being slowed. Inadequate liver function can also have an
Biotransformation does not simply mean that the body turns
effect of drug metabolism, as production of the necessary
potentially harmful substances into less harmful ones - it is the
enzymes may be impaired. This could be due to disease but it
 s   e o      s
should be borne in mind that neonatal and geriatric animals
readily excreted by the body. In some cases, the metabolite can
 may also have reduced liver function.
be more active in the body than the original drug molecule. This
can be an advantage if it is not possible to give the active form
of the drug in the first place, and is known as giving a prodnug:
Species variation
for example, the corticosteroid prednisone is metabolized into
Species variation must also be taken into account when con-
prednisolone. Alternatively, the metabolite can be as active as
sidering drug metabolism. Most notably, cats do not possess
the original drug, or even more toxic than the original drug.
the ability to conjugate certain drugs and so elimination from
the body is slowed. This increases the likelihood of toxicity
The metabolic process
in this species from drugs that are well tolerated in other
species.
As elimination of drugs from the body occurs via body fluids
     s   s s
Drug elimination
excreted. There are two phases of drug metabolism:
Drugs are eliminated from the body via a number of routes.
● Phase I metabolism - enzymes act on the drug to
The two main routes of elimination are in the urine via the
transform it; the processes that occur are hydrolysis
kidney and in the faeces via the liver (in bile). Other routes of
reduction and/or oxidation
elimination include the breath, saliva, sebum and milk. The
rate at which a volume of fluid can be completely cleared
● Phase II metabolism - the metabolite is joined with
of drug is called the drug clearance rate and is measured in
another molecule to make it more hydrophilic. This is
1/h. The rate at which a drug is eliminated from the body
known as conjugation.
is called the elimination rate and is measured in mg/h. Rapid
clearance occurs when the elimination rate is high.
Most drugs undergo both metabolic phases but some only
undergo phase I1.
40
 40 μg/ml
Factors affecting drug metabolism
[61 u]
Metabolic systems
A key metabolic system found in the liver is known as the mixed
function oxidase system. The enzyme involved, cytochrome
P450, is induced by the presence of one or more of the drugs it
20-
 20 μg/ml (40=2 = 20)
metabolizes. This means that consistent exposure to drugs
bnp
metabolized by P450 will increase the rate of metabolism and
result in ever-increasing doses being required to have a thera
peutic effect. An example of this is the drug phenobarbital, used
10-
 10 μg/ml(20=2 = 10)
for controlling epileptic seizures. Other drugs affected by P450
5-
 5μg/ml (10=2 = 5)
would also be metabolized more quickly, so the dose rate of
these would also have to be increased.
2.5-
0-
6
8
10
12
Drug interaction
Time (in hours)
Other enzyme systems are not induced by the presence of the
Fig. 19.3 Decrease in plasma concentrations of a drug with a half
drugs they metabolize, resulting in a fixed amount of enzyme
life of 2 h (Redrawn from Bill 1997)
364
4 Fundamental Pharmacology
Elimination half-life and the therapeutic
narrow therapeutic range are those that cause toxicity with
even the smallest overdose, such as digoxin. Therapeutic
range
range can be measured by using the calculation below and
The elimination half-life of a drug is the amount of time
this is termed the fherapeutic index. The greater this figure, the
 required for concentration of a drug in the blood to decrease
safer the drug:
by 50% by metabolism and elimination. It is not as easy as
saying that the same length of time again will equal total
Toxic dose
Therapeutic index =
Effective dose
clearance, as the elimination rate does not continue at the
same pace, although it is usually constant. For example, if a
drug had a blood concentration of 40 μg/l and after 2 h
When drug therapy is initially instigated, peak and trough
blood concentration was 20 μg/l, that drug's half-life is
blood concentrations are low. After approximately five half-
2 h. In a further 2 h, the blood concentration would be
lives the rate of administration is equal to the rate of elimi-
10 μg/l; in another 2 h it would be 5 μg/l and so on. The
nation and so the peak and trough levels increase and remain
symbol for elimination half-life is T/2β (Fig. 19.3).
more constant. This is known as the steady state (Fig. 19.4).
When monitoring drug concentrations in the blood, it is
Elimination half-life is important because it can be used to
important that the steady state has been reached to ensure that
determine when repeat doses of a drug are required in order
peak and trough blood plasma concentrations are within the
to maintain the drug concentration in the blood at a
therapeutic range. Thus, knowing the elimination half-life of a
B         
drug is important. A common example is monitoring blood
distribution to the tissues for there to be a therapeutic effect.
concentrations of phenobarbital. As this drug has an elimina-
Giving repeat doses too frequently will result in drug levels
tion half-life of 2 days, the steady state is not reached until day
climbing too high, causing toxicity. Leaving too long a time
10. Measuring blood plasma concentration prior to day 10 of
interval between repeat doses means that the blood concen-
treatment would give an inaccurately low measurement.
tration levels will drop too low to have a therapeutic effect in
the tissues. Maintaining optimal amounts of drug concentra-
Some drugs with very long half-lives will not reach the steady
tion in the blood so that neither toxicity nor ineffectiveness
state, and therefore are not fully effective, for many days. To
is created is known as keeping the levels within the therapeu
combat this problem a higher than normal amount of drug is
fic range or margin. Some drugs have a wide therapeutic
given initially, which is known as a loading dose.
range - this means that a large overdose would have to be
administered before toxicity occurred. An example of a drug
Drugs licensed for use in food animals have a withdrawal
with a wide therapeutic range is ampicillin. Drugs with a
period, which is the clearance time calculated using the elim-
ination half-life of the drug. Withdrawal periods are usually
present on drug labels and state the period of time after the
Steady-state peak concentration
last dose of each drug that the animal or its produce cannot
be used for human consumption. Withdrawal periods
prevent drug residues entering the human food chain.
9
Factors affecting drug elimination
↑ Steady-state trough concentration
Renal elimination
←
 Renal elimination, in which a drug is carried to the kidney by
bnp
the blood and excreted via the urine, is dictated by the
glomerular filtration rate (GFR), among other factors. Con-
Plas
ditions causing reduced blood flow to the kidney, e.g. hypo-
tension and hypovolaemia, will decrease elimination rate,
which could result in toxicity. Geriatric animals often have a
Maintenance dose
administered
degree of renal compromise and the dose rates of renally
Hepatic elimination
5 times drug's half life 
In hepatic elimination a drug is secreted into the bile in the
Time
liver. It is then emptied into the gastrointestinal tract and
Fig. 19.4 Steady state concentration (Redrawn from Bill 1997)
excreted in the faecal matter. Disease conditions affecting
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing  365
19
Fundamental pharmacology
liver function can decrease the elimination rate via this route
in addition to affecting metabolism. Some drugs are lipo-
philic after emptying into the gastrointestinal tract - this
 Drug A molecules
Drug B molecules
means that they may be reabsorbed through the gut wall and
into the hepatic circulation, then return to the systemic cir-
culation, where they can exert an additional therapeutic
Cell membrane
effect. This is known as enterohepatic circulation.
Drug Breceptor
Drug A receptor
Pharmacodynamics
Effect 1 
Effect 2
The word pharmacodynamic literally means 'drug action'. It
pertains to what effect a drug has on the body, i.e. what the
Fig. 19.6 Drug molecules have specific shapes that allow them to
drug does to the body. This section traces drug movement
combine with specific receptors on the celf membrane surface
through the body and examines how drugs exert their effects.
(Redrawn from Bill 1997)
The basic principle of drug therapy is to maintain concentra.
tions within the therapeutic range. The higher the dose, the
greater the pharmacological effect - too small a dose and the
Agonist and antagonist effects
concentrations will be subtherapeutic; too great a dose and
the concentrations may cause toxicity. The lowest level at
Receptors normally interact with natural substances called
which concentrations are therapeutic is termed the minimum
endogenous ligands, e.g. neurotransmitters and hormones
effective conceniration (MEC). The highest therapeutic level is
that have an effect on the cell. When a drug is present in the
usually the same concentration at which toxicity could occur.
body tissue it combines with the receptors into which it 'fits';
This is sometimes termed the maximum safe concentration
in other words, the molecular shape of the drug is similar to
(MSC) or minimum foxic concenirafion (MTC) (Fig. 19.5).
certain endogenous ligands and therefore compatible with its
receptors (Fig. 19.6). Combining with the receptor causes a
change in the activity of the cell - this is how the drug actu-
Receptor-mediated
ally exerts an effect. The effect it has may be to stimulate the
pharmacodynamics
cell in a similar way to the endogenous ligand - this is known
as an agonist effect. Conversely, it may combine with the
The main mechanism of drug action is via receptor sites,
receptor site and 'block' the endogenous ligand but produce
which are specific protein molecules on a cell membrane.
no effect itself - this is known as an antagonist effect.
There are several different receptors, differentiated by their
molecular structure or shape. Cells do not have all receptor
types - different cells have a different range and number.
tor site. The effect of this is to block the endogenous ligand
 but not necessarily produce a particularly strong effect itself.
This is known as partial agonism. There are drugs that have an
agonist effect at some receptor sites and an antagonist effect
Toxic concentrations
at others - these are known as agonist/antagonist drugs.
ncentration (μg drug/ml)
>MSC/MTC
Affinity and competitiveness
 Therapeutic range of concentrations
tor sites and when present in sufficient quantity they 'win'
the competition with the endogenous ligand for the receptor
Drug con
>MEC
site. As soon as the concentration diminishes the endogenous
ligand ‘wins' the competition and the drug comes off the
 Subtherapeutic concentrations
receptor site. In other words, competitive drugs have
reversible effects. There are some drugs that do not come off
of the receptor site once they have combined with it - these
Time (hours)
are termed non-competitive or irreversible. Their effects do not
Fig. 19.5 Therapeutic range of plasma drug concentrations
 diminish until the drug actually breaks down. An example of
(Redrawn from Bill 1997)
a non-competitive, irreversible drug is suxamethonium.
366
Fundamental Pharmacology
Continual and prolonged exposure to antagonist drugs can
cause the number of receptor sites to increase - this is known
as upregulation. The result is that, if the drug is suddenly with-
Cell membrane
drawn, the endogenous ligand that was being blocked by the
antagonist suddenly has an excessive number of binding sites
Drug receptor
 and its effect is enhanced. This is the reason why some drugs,
e.g. beta-blockers, must be withdrawn slowly after a course of
treatment.
Effect on cell
 No intrinsic activity
(no effect)
Specificity, potency and efficacy
Fig. 19.7 Agonist and antagonist drug reactions (Redrawn from
Drug specificity or selectivity relates to the ability of a drug
Bill 1997)
to act on a small number of receptors. Generally, it is desir-
able to have a highly selerctive drug as it is possible to target
For a drug to combine with a receptor site, it must be
and treat the affected tissue or organ without affecting recep-
attracted to that receptor. This attraction is known as affinity.
tor sites in other parts of the body, which could cause side
Drugs with a strong affinity for the receptor site are usually
effects.
highly effective and produce a good therapeutic response.
However, they may remain on that site for a long time and
Potency refers to the amount of drug that has to be present to
  s     rd  
 produce a therapeutic effect. Effcacy refers to the ability of the
weak affinity for a receptor site tend to have a weaker thera-
drug to produce the therapeutic effect. It is easy to confuse these
peutic response as they leave the receptor site more quickly.
two terms, but they do have different applications. Potency
However, these drugs are less likely to cause toxicity.
would be used to compare two drugs of the same type; for
example, the one required in a smaller amount is more potent.
When more than one drug is administered that 'fits' the same
 sad sna no sp om ardon on pan si 
receptor site, they may compete (Fig. 19.7). The drug with
produce a similar response, i.e. the drug that produces the more
greater affinity for the site, or that is present in greater
satisfactory response is more efficacious.
amounts, will ‘win'. This could mean that the drug with
weaker affinity or that is present in smaller amounts does not
exert a therapeutir effect and is the reason why some combi
Non-receptor-mediated
nations of drugs, e.g. morphine and buprenorphine, cannot
oharmacodynamics
be administered. This mechanism is sometimes used to
control the effects of drugs; for example, atipamezole is used
Not all drugs exert their effects via receptors. There are several
to antagonize the effects of medetomidine.
other pharmacodynamic mechanisms. Antimicrobial dnugs exert
9
Downregulation and upregulation
unfortunately, sometimes on the commensal microorganisms
too. Chelating agents act by combining with metals to create less-
Continual and prolonged exposure to agonist drugs can cause
harmful substances. An example is EDTA, given for lead poi
the number of receptor sites to decrease - this is known as
soning. Some drugs work by chemical action, e.g. antacids such
downregulation. The result of this is that there is a decrease in
 as aluminium hydroxide. Some drugs work by physical action,
therapeutic response. This is one reason why drug therapy
e.g. charcoal, used in poisoning cases to adsorb toxins, or man-
should not be continued unnecessarily.
nitol, used as an osmotic diuretic.
Drug interactions
These occurrences are known as nteractions. Drug interac-
and adverse
tions can occur outside the body, after administration or at
any stage in the pharmacokinetic process.
reactions
Most drugs, if administered correctly, will have a predictable
effect on most patients. However, on occasion, drugs will not
Drugs or other chemicals can combine so that one has an
have the usual effect. This may be because of the drug, its
effect on the other or so that they each affect one another.
administration or because of the patient. When a drug has a
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing367
19
Fundamental pharmacology
harmful effect on the body it is known as an adverse reaction.
Interactions can occur before the drug has entered the body.
This is not the same as a side effect, which is a predictable but
Sometimes, a drug can react with the carrier substance it is
unwanted effect of normal drug administration, usually
combined with in order to create the formulation, known as
related to its actions in parts of the body other than the area
the excipient, or even the packaging. Drug manufacturers
being treated.
must be very careful to ensure that any changes to the excip
ient or packaging do not cause an interaction. On the phar-
macy shelf, drugs exposed to inappropriate light levels, mois-
Drug interactions
ture levels or temperatuire extremes can alter in their effect.
Using a combination of many drugs to treat a patient is
Some drugs interact with certain foods to cause an unwanted
known as potypharmacy. As the possibility that a drug inter-
effect. For example, oxytetracycline should never be given
action will occur increases with the number of drugs admin-
with milk or cheese as it binds to calcium and will not be
istered to a patient at any one time, polypharmacy should be
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Drugs can also inter-
undertaken with extreme care.
act with other drugs even if they are of different types and
have been administered via different routes.
The use of interactions to treat patients
Sometimes, a known drug interaction is deliberately
Adverse reactions
employed as it has therapeutic value. A well-known example
of this is giving oral drugs with certain types of food to
Adverse reactions may be the result of a number of factors.
enhance absorption, e.g giving griseofulvin tablets with corn
The dose given to the patient may be inappropriate, either
oil or cheese. Two drugs with a different action can be given
because it has been miscalculated or because the patient's
together to increase the therapeutic response - this is known
MTC level is reduced because of concurrent drug treatment or
as synergism (Table 19.1). If the response is the same as the
disease. Other drug reactions are not dose-dependent - these
sum of the two individual drugs, the effect is known as sum-
are known as idiosyncratic reactions. Idiosyncratic reactions are
mation. However, in some cases, the response is greater than
far less common but are more dangerous as they are unpre-
the sum of the two individual drugs. This effect is known as
dictable and do not tend to be proportional to the dose.
 potentiation. Another therapeutic interaction is when the rate
Adverse reactions are often classified according to their sus.
of metabolism or excretion from the body is altered to
pected cause (Table 19.2).
prolong the therapeutic effect, or conversely to increase clear-
ance rate.
Patients prone to adverse reactions
Unwanted drug interactions
In common with drug interactions, the possibility that an
adverse drug reaction will occur increases with the number of
Drug interactions often have an unwanted effert. This may
be to inhibit the effect of the drug (antagonism) or to cause
Table 19.2 Classification of adverse reactions
toxicity due to potentiation or alteration in the rate of metab-
olism or excretion.
Reaction
Description
Details
type
Table 19.1 Definitions of drug interaction
A
Augmented - enhanced
 Predictable, dose-dependent,
terminology
drug effect
common, low mortality
 Bizarre - allergic reactions
Unpredictable, not
Definition
Numerical
A
dose-related, high mortality
explanation
1+1= 2
C
Chronic - due to
e.g. iatrogenic Cushing's
Summation - response is equal to the
continuous therapy
disease from long-term
combined responses of the individual drugs
 prednisolone therapy
Synergism - response is greater than the combined 
1+1= 3
D
Delayed - occurring a
e.g. teratogenicity of
responses of the individual drug
long time after treatment
 griseofulvin, carcinomas
Potentiation - one ineffective drug enhances the
0+1=2
effect of another drug
E
End of treatment -
e.g. seizure after phenytoin
occurring on withdrawal
withdrawal; adrenocortical
Antagonism - one drug inhibits the effects of
1+1=0
of therapy
insufficiency after
another drug
prednisolone therapy
368
Fundamental Pharmacology
Toxicity can be acute, i.e. when symptoms develop quickly
Box 19.1 Reducing drug interactions
after exposure and are severe. Chronic foxicity can result from
and reactions - the implications for
repeated exposure of small amounts of a toxin over a long
period of time. A common example of chronic toxicity occurs
nursing practice
with prolonged prednisolone therapy.
Nurses should...
 Be familiar with common interactions and reactions to the
drugs frequently used in the practice
The effect of toxins on the body
 Instigate appropriate patient observation and monitoring
Systems to ensure early detection of a reaction
Most chemicals introduced to the body have some sort of
● Report suspected drug reactions to the veterinary surgeon
 physiological effect - this is the basis on which therapeutic
im mediately
drugs work. However, toxins tend to have an extreme effect
Store drugs according to the manufacturer's instructions
on the body, resulting in an unwanted alteration in function
that can be life-threatening.
Ensure that stock is rotated correctly
Monitor the environmental temperature in the pharmacy
All organs in the body are susceptible to toxins. However,
 Vary parenteral administration sites for different drugs
because of their role in drug metabolism and excretion, the
 Consider staggering oral dosing intervals for different drugs
liver and kidney are most at risk from damage. The mecha-
 Ensure that suspected drug reactions are reported to the
nisms of action vary but include interfering with cellular
function, alteration or destruction of vital enzymes, or com-
veterinary Medicines Directorate
peting for receptor sites, preventing the endogenous ligand
Prepare drugs for administration immediately prior to use and
from binding. Drug interactions can cause toxicity in this
not in advance, e.g. the night before
way, increasing the plasma concentration levels of the drug
ul shnup xiu pou op - bnip yoea ioy zuawdinba aieiedas asn 
with less affinity for the binding site.
the same syringe
 Ensure the case notes clearly indicate any history of a drug
As there are many factors to take into consideration, the
reaction
effect of an individual toxin on the body is only predict-
● Advise owners to keep a note of any prior drug reaction or
able to a certain extent. These factors are outlined in
have a collar disc engraved with the necessary information in
Table 19.3.
case of straying or illness on holiday
Treatment protocols
drugs administered to a patient at any one time, so polyphar
macy should be undertaken with extreme care (Box 19.1).
(For further details see Ch. 20.)
Patients who are underweight, and therefore have less
adipose tissue for drug distribution, are more prone to type A
 Similar methods of treatment can be grouped together to give
9
reactions, as are hypoproteinaemic animals, which have less
an overview of the management of poisoning cases:
plasma protein for the drug to bind to in the circulation.
 Dose rates for such patients should be reduced accordingly.
Table 19.3 Factors affecting the toxicity of
a substance
Toxicology
Substance-related factors
Animal-related factors
 Time between exposure to toxin and
Species
treatment of toxicity
Age
Toxicology is the study of the harmful effects of chemicals.
Formulation of drug or substance
Genetic individuality
Any substance that has a harmful effect on the body is known
Action of drug or substance
Disease status
as a poison or toxin. We often think of poisons as substances
Dose or amount animal has been
that have been accidentally ingested or absorbed by an
exposed to
animal, e.g. slug bait. However, toxicity can also be caused
Route of administration, metabolism
by therapeutic substances, i.e. a drug used to treat one or
and excretion
more conditions in animals, if the dose rate is too high,
Quality and age of drug (if applicable)
the animal's response to the drug is not usual or a drug
Concurrent treatment 
interaction has occurred.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
369
19
Fundamental pharmacology
● Prevention of absorption - washing, clipping, emesis,
● Increase clearance by inducing diuresis, dialysis
adsorbents
● Palliative and symptomatic treatment ABC - life
●Prevent action by using chelator/antidotes
support.
Drua
formulations
improve compliance. Many medicines indicated for long-
term use are now offered in palatable or easy-to-give formu-
ano
commnor
used
lations (Table 19.4).
pecltc
What else is in a medicine apart from the
conditions
:bnp
All formulations are made up using the correct amount of
 Once a condition has been diagnosed, the veterinary surgeon
 drug, plus certain additives used for various reasons. As most
must decide the type of treatment necessary. This involves
drugs are divided into very small quantities, another sub-
three stages:
stance is added to render the drug visible and easier to
handle; this is called the excipient. Tablets also contain a
1. The type of drug must be prescribed
binder, which is a substance that holds them together until
they are administered. However, once ingested, they must be
2. The formulation to be administered must be selected
able to dissolve in the gastrointestinal tract, so tablets often
contain a substance such as starch, which aids disintegration.
3. The dose rate must be decided.
Think about the colourful array of drugs on the pharmacy
shelf - most drugs also contain colouring and some sort of
It is essential for veterinary nurses to have a sound under
preservative. Drug manufacturers must be very careful to
standing of the various categories of drugs available, their
ensure that all of these substances are inert, i.e. have no phar
mode of action and common side effects, in order to manage
macological action. However, sometimes a substance is com-
patients and support owners effectively. It is also vitally
bined with a drug to enhance its effect - this is known as an
important that nurses can calculate drug dosages accurately
adjuvant.
in order to safely interpret the veterinary surgeon's instruc-
tions (see Appendix 1).
to protect the tablet prior to use, or disguise a bitter taste to
There are so many drugs on the market that a comprehensive
ease administration. Coatings are also used on some tablets to
knowledge of all of them is not realistic. With experience,
delay disintegration until they have passed through the
nurses tend to develop a good understanding of the com-
stomach. This may be because the contents will irritate the
monly used medications, but must always refer to the veteri-
gastric mucosa, or because gastric acid would destroy the
nary surgeon, senior nursing staff or the drug data sheet
drug. These medicines are called enteric-coated. Drugs are
if they are unsure of anything relating to a patient's
 sometimes given in capsule form; the capsule is usually made
medication.
of gelatin.
Drug formulations
Drug types
There are several factors to take into account when consider-
There are hundreds of drugs available to treat animals in the
ing in which formulation a drug is to be used. Drug manu-
 UK. The list below is not exhaustive but describes drug groups
facturers must calculate what a drug can actually achieve - for
that are commonly used in modern veterinary practice. The
example, some drugs would be ineffective if given orally
 drugs have been categorized into groups depending on their
because of the first-pass effect; others may be inactivated by
action.
the additives needed for certain forms of medication. The
administer certain formulations to some species than others
Anaesthetics
- e.g. oral tablets for hamsters! In recent years drug manu-
facturers have become more aware of the need to increase the
Anaesthetics are drugs that induce loss of sensation in all or
ease of administration, especially for owners, in order to
part of the body.
370
0Fundamental Pharmacology
Table 19.4 Drug formulations and nursing considerations
Formulation
Variations and routes of
Description
Nursing considerations
administration
Tablets
Non-palatable oral tablets
Powdered, compressed discs.
Never crush or split an enteric-coated tablet, as this
May be coated. Many different
will expose the drug prematurely. If tablets are split,
shape, size and colour combinations
0 uoeisiuupe ot ioud sabpa dieus Aue jo punoi
prevent scratching the patient's mouth or throat and
wear protective equipment to prevent absorption,
 inhalation or ingestion of the drug when handling.
Palatable oral tablets
Flavoured, shaped tablets
Ensure these are stored carefully to prevent patients
helping themselves!
Capsules
Hard capsules for oral
Made up of two halves containing the
In some cases, it is possible to open or puncture the
administration
 drug in a powder or granule form.
capsule and give the contents on food, or mixed
Many different colours and sizes
with water as a paste. Check the drug data sheet to
ensure that this is not contraindicated and wear
protective equipment to prevent absorption,
inhalation or ingestion of the drug when opening
the capsule
Soft capsules for oral
Sealed pouches containing liquid
administration
Sustained-release capsules
Hard gelatin capsules containing
Never open or puncture a sustained-release capsule
for oral administration
individual granules of drug
as this will affect the absorption of the drug.
(see section on
 Sustained-release preparations licensed for humans
Pharmacokinetics for
only do not always have the same effect because of
further detail)
differences in transit time. There is more likelihood
 of the drug not reaching therapeutic levels in the
bloodstream and in some cases more likelihood of
toxicity
Solutions
For parenteral injection
Available in single- or multi-dose vials
Many drugs are unstable in solution so they need to
be reconstituted from a powder immediately prior to
use. Care must be taken when undertaking this task
to use the correct volume of liquid and to adopt an
aseptic technique. Never keep reconstituted
solutions longer than the recommended time
9
Linctus (syrup) for oral
Drug dissolved in a sugar solution
There are few veterinary-licensed products of this
administration
nature in the UK
Elixir for oral administration Drug dissolved in an alcohol solution
Never dilute elixirs with water as the alcohol and
water will not mix together
Suspensions
For parenteral injection
Available in single- or multi-dose vials
Must be shaken thoroughly before use to ensure that
of bottles
the particles are fully and evenly distributed 
throughout the liquid
For oral administration
Suspensions must never be given intravenously as
they contain solid particles
Long-acting
 For parenteral injection
Either the drug or the carrier contents
Sometimes referred to as LA, depot or repository
solutions or 
are not readily absorbed from the
injections. Suspensions must never be given
suspensions (see
injection site
intravenously as they contain solid particles
Pharmacokinetics
for further detail)
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
371
19
Fundamental pharmacology
Table 19.4 Drug formulations and nursing considerations-Cont'd.
Formulation
Variations and routes of
Description
Nursing considerations
 administration
Creams
For topical administration
Water and oil emulsion base
Designed to liquefy at body temperature
Qintments
 For topical administration
Oil base
Ensure gloves are worn when handling as absorption
Gels
 For topical administration
Alcohol base
through the skin is possible with many drugs
Some patients may need Elizabethan collar or similar
to prevent them licking the medication
Pastes
For oral administration
Usually available in a pre-filled dosing
If dosing several animals with the same syringe,
syringe
disinfect the outside of the syringe to avoid
cross-infection. Clients may need careful instruction
on how to set the dial to the correct dose
Powders and
For topical administration
Often available in single-dose sachets
Now infrequently seen - many lost their product
granules
licences because of operator health and safety
concerns, as inhalation and absorption of the
products during administration is difficult to avoid
For oral administration
Ensure that the correct dose is administered and 
ingested within a short time period or therapeutic
levels may not be reached
Aerosol sprays
For topical administration
Pressurized or non-pressurized
Ensure that correct protective equipment is used to
multidose bottles
 prevent inhalation or absorption of airborne drug
 particles. Use in a well ventilated area
For administration via
Liquids administered via a nebulizer
Ensure a quiet and calm environment to reduce
 inhalation
stress levels when administering medication via
 nebulization
Shampoos
For topical administration
Usually presented in plastic bottles
Clients may need careful instruction on the safe use
of these products and must also be made aware of
the difference between medicated shampoos and
cleansing or cosmetic shampoos
Drops
For oral administration
Usually solutions of suspensions
Some oral drops need to be reconstituted prior to
 presented with a precalibrated dosing
use (see notes under solutions). Some drops require
syringe or dropper bottle
refrigeration once opened and/or reconstituted
For administration to the
Unusual method of administration with
May be used to administer desmopressin. The most
mucous membranes
limited applications
common site is the conjunctival sac. Ketamine is
also absorbed easily across the mucous membranes
(see section below and Ch. 27)
For topical administration
Usually single-dose vials contained
An increasingly common method of administering
in a multipack for sale to clients
antiparasitic agents. Most commonly used to treat
ectoparasites, but some products also treat
endoparasites
For administration to the
Dropper bottles containing aqueous
Often have a short use-by date once opened - some
eyes of ears
solution
need refrigeration. Bottles should not be shared
 between patients because of the risk of
cross-contamination
Patches
For transdermal
Unusual method of administration with
 May be used to administer fentanyl or glyceryl
administration
limited applications. Gel impregnated 
trinitrate
with the drug is placed on skin.
 Protective cover may be placed on top
Enemas
For rectal administration
Unusual method of administration with
May be used to administer diazepam to control
limited applications
seizures
372
 Fundamental Pharmacology
● General anaesthetics involve the central nervous
Antacids
system (CNS) and cause unconsciousness. Commonly
used injectable general anaesthetics are barbiturates,
These are agents used to reduce acidity in the stomach, in
such as thiopental, and the non-barbiturate drug
order to prevent, manage or reverse damage to the intestinal
propofol. Commonly used inhalational general
tract. There are two types of antacids:
anaesthetics include halothane and isoflurane (see
Ch. 27)
● Non-systemic antacids - work locally in the
stomach to raise the pH of gastric juices. The most
● Dissociative anaesthetics derive their name from
commonly used products contain aluminium
human patients describing a feeling of being separated
hydroxide and magnesium carbonate. Because of the
from their body. These also affect the CNS but do not
alteration of pH in the stomach these products can
cause muscle relaxation and loss of reflexes to the
affect the dissolution and absorption of other drugs
same extent as general anaesthetics. Ketamine is a
such as corticosteroids, tetracyclines, acepromazine
dissociative anaesthetic
and digoxin. Allow a 2-3-h interval between doses.
Increasingly, the drug sucralfate is being used when
● Local anaesthetics cause loss of sensation around
ulcers are present, as this drug forms a protective
the site of administration. The most commonly used
barrier over their surface. Sucralfate should not be
local anaesthetic is lidocaine.
given in combination with other antacids or meals, as
it needs the acid environment of the stomach to exert
Analgesics
its effect
Analgesics are drugs that prevent or relieve pain without loss
● Systemic antacids - there are several types and they
of sensation. There are two main types of analgesic:
act in a number of different ways. All aim to reduce
gastric acid secretion. The most common example is
● Narcotic analgesics - are so-called because they
cimetidine, which is an H,-receptor antagonist. These
tend to cause narcosis (sleepiness). They are
drugs block the effect of histamine in the stomach,
opium-related agents and are sometimes called opioid
which is to increase gastric acid production. (Do not
analgesics. Narcotic analgesics, e.g. morphine and
confuse with antihistamines,
pethidine, exert their analgesic effect primarily by
H,-receptor antagonists, which are used to treat
occupying the endogenous opioid receptor sites in the
allergies.) Other systemic antacids affect more than
brain. They also occupy receptor sites elsewhere in the
gastric acid production - the prostaglandin
body, which can cause side effects. Buprenorphine is
misoprostol also increases mucus production and
also a narcotic analgesic, although it is a partial agonist
increases blood flow to the gastric area, thus
rather than a pure agonist like most others. Narcotic
promoting healing.
analgesics can be combined with a sedative to produce
a state of semiconsciousness and drowsiness known as
9
neuroleptanaigesia. Buprenorphine combined with
Antiarrhythmics
acepromazine is a commonly given neuroleptanalgesic
combination
These are agents used to treat arrhythmia an abnormality in
the rhythm of the heart. There are many types and causes of
● Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
arrhythmia and the choice of drug of depends on the
(NSAIDs) - work in a different way from narcotic
diagnosis:
analgesics. Instead of affecting the CNS, they have a
pharmacological action at the site of the pain. Most
● Beta-blockers - work by blocking stimulation of the
β, receptors in the heart, which decreases the heart
(COX). Two types of COX have beenn discovered to date
rate and strength of contraction (drugs that cause the
known as COX1 and COx2. COX1 mainly plays a role
latter are also known as negative inotropes). A
in the normal functioning of a wide variety of body
commonly used example is propranolol. Because of
tissues, including the kidneys, stomach and intestine.
upregulation, animals treated with beta-blockers may
COX2 mainly plays a role in the inflammatory process.
need increasing doses to maintain the therapeutic
NSAIDs that are not selective for COX2 (e.g. aspirin,
effect. For the same reason, treatment should not
phenylbutazone) can induce certain side effects,
 suddenly cease: the sudden availability of β, receptors
including gastric ulceration and diarrhoea.
to endogenous β, stimulators (such as adrenaline
COX2-selective NSAIDs (e.g. meloxicam) are thought
(epinephrine)) could have a serious effect on the
to be safer and have less effect on other body tissues.
patient.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
373
19
Fundamental pharmacology
● Calcium channel blockers - reduce the rate of
Antidiarrhoeals
impulse generation and conduction across the heart.
Examples are amlodipine, verapamil and diltiazem.
These are drugs that combat diarrhoea. Diarrhoea is a
The latter is also used to treat hypertrophic
symptom caused by an underlying condition or toxic sub-
cardiomyopathy in cats
stance and the drug of choice will depend on the cause of
the diarrhoea. There are four main types of antidiarrhoeal
● Sodium channel blockers - these are drugs with
:snup
local anaesthetic action, which act to reduce
contractions from occurring outside of the normal
● Adsorbent/protectants - these adsorb bacterial
heartbeat. An example is lidocaine, which must be
enterotoxins that cause hypersecretion of intestinal
fluid and prevent them from contacting the intestinal
lining. Examples include charcoal and bismuth. Some
is available for use as a local anaesthetic is not suitable
formulations, e.g. kaolin and pectin, also coat the gut
to treat arrhythmias and using it for this purpose could
wall, although this formulation has questionable
be life-threatening for the patient.
efficacy
● Intestinal motility modifers - opioid drugs
Anticonvulsants
increase segmentation (mixing) movements and
decrease peristaltic movements of the gut. Low doses
These are drugs used to prevent or control convulsions. The
of oral codeine, morphine combined with kaolin and
most commonly used drug for this purpose is the barbiturate
diphenoxylate are all used to slow the passage of
phenobarbital, which stabilizes the brain cells, making them
intestinal contents
less likely to begin abnormal activity, and also tends to lessen
the severity of convulsions if they do occur. It is sometimes
● Anti-inflammatory drugs - these are most
used in conjunction with potassium bromide to reduce the
commonly used for treating the chronic diarrhoea
dosage required.
caused by inflammatory bowel disease. The
antimicrobial drug sulfasalazine is used as it is not
Phenobarbital is metabolized by the mixed function oxidase
well absorbed through the gut wall and has an
system, so animals on long-term treatment develop tolerance
anti-inflammatory effect on the colon. Sometimes,
and may need increasing doses in order to achieve the same
corticosteroid therapy is instigated.
therapeutic effect. Periodic testing of blood plasma levels will
provide the necessary information to increase the dose safely
It should be remembered that a diarrhoeic patient may not
Phenobarbital acts too slowly to be used in emergency situ-
absorb any orally administered drugs to the same extent as a
ations, when diazepam may be used intravenously. Diazepam
healthy patient, so parenteral routes of administering drugs
can also be administered rectally, which is a useful route for
may be preferential. Some antidiarrhoeal agents, particularly
owners to use if the animal convulses at home.
the adsorbents and protectants may also affect the constitu-
tion and absorption rate of other drugs, so should be given at
2-3-h intervals.
Antidepressants
 Relatively new to veterinary pharmacology, three main types
Antiemetics
of antidepressant are used - tricyclic antidepressants, selec-
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SsRis) and monoamine
 These are agents used to prevent or decrease vomiting. Vomit-
ixo no uoo sapn ue Aq pasn ods e si si
of neurotransmitter chemicals, e.g. serotonin, at the synapses.
substance. Three examples of antiemetic drugs are meto-
Clomipramine, nicergoline and L-deprenyl are examples of
clopramide, acepromazine and cisapride. Metoclopramide
each type respectively.
works by affecting the vomiting centre in the brain. It causes
an increase in oesophageal and gastric muscle tone, relaxes
Separation-related problems, anxiety, stereotypies and geri-
the pyloric sphincter and increases intestinal motility. Ace
atric cognitive dysfunction are sometimes treated with anti-
promazine, part of the phenothiazine family, is sometimes
depressants. With these problems and other behaviour-
used to control motion sickness as it reduces the amount of
 related conditions, accurate diagnosis and a holistic approach,
histamine, a powerful emetic, produced by vestibular stimu-
e.g. educating clients, altering routines and modifying animal
lation. Cisapride is sometimes used to treat vomiting caused
and human behaviour, are usually needed for satisfactory
results.
tone and peristalsis.
374
4 Fundamental Pharmacology
Antihistamines
pathogen, defined by the suffix -static. They are further
defined by the type of microorganism they affect - this may
Histamine is a substance present in large quantities in the
be bacteria, viruses, fungi or protozoa. So, for example, a sub-
gastrointestinal, lung and skin tissue and plays a role in the
stance that inhibits the growth of bacteria is called bacterio-
immune response. In humans, this response is triggered by
static. A substance that destroys fungi is called fungicidal, etc.
certain antigens, e.g. pollen, to cause allergic symptoms and
Some drugs have a -static effect at a certain dosage, which
in extreme cases, anaphylaxis. In contrast, histamine does
becomes -cidal at a higher dosage. Table 19.5 describes the
not appear play a major role in many of the allergies seen in
way in which antimicrobial drugs work.
animals, with the exception of certain feline and equine res-
piratory conditions. In these cases antihistamine drugs may
Acquired resistance to antimicrobial drugs is an increasing
be used to combat the bronchoconstriction caused by hista-
problem, brought about by changes or mutations to the DNA
mine in the lungs. These drugs work by antagonizing the H,
of the microorganism in question. This allows the microor-
receptors in the smooth muscle of the bronchioles. So-called
ganism to survive in the presence of a drug designed to
'first-generation' antihistamines such as chlorpheniramine
destroy it. Inappropriate use of antimicrobial agents may
and cyproheptadine are sometimes used effectively, although
exacerbate this problem. Table 19.6 identifes key points to
they may cause sedation as a side effect. The so-called
consider when using such products to reduce the problem of
'second-generation' antihistamines, such as astemizole and
acquired resistance to a minimum.
terfenadine, are more expensive and some have been linked
to heart problems but they do not have a sedative side effect.
Antineoplastics
These are drugs used to treat neoplastic or cancerous tissue.
Antimicrobials
Most of them are cytotoxic meaning that they kill cells. The
term 'chemotherapy' is often reserved for this type of treat-
These are drugs that destroy, or facilitate the destruction of,
ment, although this term literally means ‘drug therapy’ so
microorganisms. The term antibiotic is sometimes used
 could be used to describe any type of drug therapy. The aim
instead, although this is not strictly correct terminology as an
of an antineoplastic agent is for it to be selectively toxic
antibiotic refers to a substance produced by one microorgan-
towards the neoplastic cells while sparing the normal healthy
ism that afferts another and most modern antimicrobials are
cells. It is the property of accelerated reproduction of neo-
synthetically produced.
plastic cells that allows this to happen. Unfortunately, other
healthy cells in the body that tend to divide fairly rapidly, e.g.
Antimicrobials are broadly divided into two categories
hairs can also be affected by the agent which is why these
those that destroy the target pathogen, defined by the suffix
types of drugs have so many side effects, e.g. suppression of
cidal, and those that inhibit the growth of the target
bone marrow cells.
Table 19.5 Mode of action of antimicrobials
9
Mode of action
Description
Example
Inhibition of cell-wall synthesis
Prevent bacterial cell wall forming correctly
Penicillins, e.g. ampicillin, amoxicillin
Cephalosporins, e.g. cefalexin
Terbinafine
Disruption of microbial cell
 Change membrane permeability and so affect
Polymyxin-B
mem brane
transport in and out of microorganism
Inhibition of protein synthesis
Affect either protein synthesis in the ribosomes
Tetracyclines, e.g. oxytetracycline, doxycycline
or in the nucleus, preventing effective replication
Aminoglycosides, e.g. gentamicin, neomycin,
of the microorganism
strepto mycin
Metronidazole
Erythro mycin
Quinolones, e.g. enrofloxacin
Interference with metabolic
Many microorganisms must manufacture folic acid
Trimethoprim, sulphonamides, e.g. sulfadiazine
processes
in order to replicate - they cannot obtain it from
food sources as animals can. These agents either
interfere with or inhibit folic acid production
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
375
19
Fundamental pharmacology
Table 19.6 Actions to be taken to reduce the risk of antimicrobial resistance
Key area
Nursing implications
Always try to identify the pathogen in
Nurses may be involved in undertaking sample cultures and/or sensitivity testing. Ensure this is
order to select the most appropriate drug
accurately carried out and interpreted
to treat
Avoid broad-spectrum drugs where possible
 Monitor the volume of broad-spectrum antimicrobial drug used - report excessive use to relevant
person or authority
Select the lowest optimal dose
Ensure adequate availability of suitable literature to access recommended doses - keep drug data
sheets within easy reach. Calculate drug dosages carefully
Select route carefully, ensuring that an
Ensure adequate availability of suitable literature to access recommended routes
adequate dose can reach the affected site
Do not use antimicrobial drugs
Discourage clients from retaining unused medication to use on another occasion or for another
unnecessarily
animal - consider an 'easy disposal' system in the practice to encourage them to return unused
medicine
Limit the use of new products
Consider the stock of drugs in the pharmacy carefully and select new products on the basis of need
Always complete the prescribed course
Ensure clients are fully aware that they should always treat the patient at the prescribed dose,
of treatment
route and time and should always complete a course of treatment even if the symptoms have gone
Religiously observe drug withdrawal times
Ensure adequate literature is available in order to advise clients accurately
in food-producing animals
Veterinary nurses must be aware that accidental ingestion
out of the host's body alive. Some drugs are both vermicidal
absorption or inhalation of cytotoxic drugs can seriously
and vermifugal. Piperazine citrate, fenbendazole, febantel,
affect their health. Local health and safety rules for dispens-
praziquantel and  levamisole are  all commonly used
ing and administering this type of medication must be
anthelmintics.
observed at all times and clients must be made fully aware of
the dangers of these drugs (Table 19.7). Vincristine,
It is important to understand the lifecycle of the parasites
cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin are all examples of anti-
being treated, as most anthelmintics act mainly in the gut
neoplastic agents.
lumen and may not treat migrating larvae or eggs elsewhere
in the body.
Antiparasitics
Antiprotozoals are often antimicrobials, e.g. sulfadimidine,
although fenbendazole, an anthelmintic, has also been
These are drugs used to treat infection by parasites. There are
 proved to be effective against the protozoa Giardia spp.
several categories, which are divided according to their
action.
Ectoparasiticides
Endoparasiticides
Agents that treat external parasites. May be acaricidal, i.e. act
Agents that treat internal parasites. Divided into anthelmintics -
against acarids such as mites and ticks, or insecticidal, i.e. act
agents that treat helminths (roundworms, tapeworms and
against insects such as fleas, or have both properties. In the
flukes) and antiprotozoals - agents that act against protozoa
past, organophosphorus products such as dichlorvos and
Anthelmintics can be further divided into antinematocides
      
as insecticides but, more recently, products such as fipronil
worms) and antitrematocides (act against flukes). Not all drugs
and imidacloprid have become the treatments of choice
will kill every parasite in a group but, conversely, some drugs
because of their relative safety compared with the former and
have action against more than one group of helminths and
efficacy compared with the latter. Products that interfere with
are termed broad-specirum anthetmintics. Anthelmintics may
insect growth and development have become popular as a
act as either a vermicide, which kills the parasites, or a vermi-
useful adjunct to insecticides to treat fleas in dogs and cats.
fuge, which paralyses the parasite, which may then be passed
Examples include S-methoprene and lufenuron.
376
5Fundamental Pharmacology
Table 19.7 Methods of reducing the risk of
can have cardiovascular effects, which may prove deleterious
contamination when using cytotoxic drugs
to animals with pre-existing cardiovascular or respiratory
disease.
Action
Method of reducing the risk
Preparing, dispensing
Always wear gloves, apron and mask when
 and administering
preparing these products for use,
Astringents and keratolytics
administering or dispensing. It may also
be necessary to wear eye shields if
These agents are usually available as medicated shampoos,
lotions or drops. Astringent products, such as zinc oxide,
handling liquids or powdery tablets
 harden and protect the skin by causing proteins to precipitate
Never cut or break tablets, unless the
dose rate makes it necessary. Do not
on its surface. Keratolytics such as benzoyl peroxide enhance
 desquamation and are therefore used to reduce scaling on the
expect the client to do this at home. Clear
away spillages carefully
skin surface.
Keep a separate 'cytotoxic kit' in the
pharmacy, for use with these products, s0
all personal protective equipment is 
Bronchodilators
readily available - replenish after each
These are agents that cause the smooth muscle of the termi-
use as gloves, masks and apron should be
single-use only
nal bronchioles to relax, thus counteracting broncho-
Provide clients with a verbal and written
constriction and narrowing of the airway diameter. Two
main types of bronchodilator are used in veterinary
explanation of the dangers of their pet's
medication and how to reduce the risks to
medicine:
them
● Beta-agonists - stimulate β receptors. There are two
Nursing a patient
Remember that body fluids, vomit and
types of β receptor - β, and β. The former are found
faeces will sometimes be contaminated 
elsewhere in the body, including in the heart, so
with the cytotoxic drug. The patient
non-selective beta-agonists may have unwanted side
should urinate and defaecate in an area
effects, such as arrhythmias and tachycardia. β2
that is easily cleanable. Avoid urine
receptors are found in the smooth muscle of the
splashes on to clothing. Ensure that the
bronchioles. Their stimulation causes bronchodilation.
client understands the dangers of this
The more β,-selective agonists such as terbutaline
route of contamination
minimize cardiac side effects and are usually preferred
Disposal
Clear away all empty packaging and excess
over the non-selective drugs such as adrenaline
drug carefully and dispose of it according
(epinephrine)
to health and safety guidelines. Encourage
clients to return any empty packaging of
● Methylxanthines - work on the smooth muscle cells
9
unused drug to the surgery for correct
by interfering with their chemical composition,
disposal
discouraging bronchoconstriction. They are not
selective, so can cause a range of stimulatory side
effects as they affect many other cells in the body.
Antitussives, mucolytics, expectorants,
Examples include theophylline. As methylxanthines
decongestants
 are metabolized by the mixed function oxidase system,
the dose may need to be increased in patients
Antihussives are used to suppress coughing. In veterinary med-
concurrently being treated with other drugs
icine, these are centrally acting, i.e. act on the 'cough centre'
metabolized by the same system.
in the brain. Examples include butorphanol and codeine
Locally acting antitussives work by soothing the mucous
membrane in the respiratory tract - they are not appropriate
Central nervous system stimulants
for use in veterinary medicine, as animals will not suck
lozenges or gargle liquids as human patients will. Mucolytics
These agents are commonly used to reverse the action of a
and expectorants, e.g. bromhexine and eucalyptus oil, break
sedative or anaesthetic, or to stimulate respiration in a
down and thin out respiratory mucus. Decongestants, such as
 patient. Two of the most commonly used CNS stimulants are
phenylephrine, act by causing vasoconstriction and a subse-
atipamezole, an o,-agonist, and doxapram, a drug that works
primarily in the medulla oblongata to stimulate respiration.
nasal mucous membranes. Care should be taken as this drug
The methylxanthine drugs are also CNS stimulants.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
377
19
Fundamental pharmacology
Corticosteroids
Table 19.8 Side effects of glucocorticoids
Side effect
Nursing considerations
Corticosteroids are hormones that are naturally produced by
the adrenal cortex. They are divided into two main groups
Inhibition of fibroblasts
Ensure that records of animals on
depending on the main action they exert: mineralocorticoids
can cause delayed healing
corticosteroid therapy are clearly
mainly affect the mineral balance of the body and glucocorti-
marked to prevent this fact being
coids mainly exert an anti-inflammatory effect on the body as
missed. Clients may need advice on
well as affecting glucose metabolism. The mineralocorticoid
temporary cessation of corticosteroid
fludrocortisone is used in animals to treat Addison's disease,
therapy prior to surgery
which is atrophy of the adrenal cortex, resulting in hypo-
 Immunosuppression due
Advise clients of patient's increased
adrenocorticism.
to inhibition of T-cells and 
risk of infection. Take extra care not
immune responses
to expose hospitalized patients to 
 q    e    o
infection
into three groups depending on their duration of action:
Increase of gastric acid and 
Advise clients never to give
● Short-acting, e.g. hydrocortisone, which is
decrease of gastric mucus
concurrent NSAID therapy. Do not
commonly found in topical formulations; these have a
production
give premedication on admission to
12-h duration of action
hospital if it contains an NSAID
Catabolic effects - protein 
Ensure adequate bedding for patients
● Intermediate-acting, e.g. prednisolone - commonly
breakdown
with thin skin and haircoat. Those
given as an oral medication; these have a 12-36-h
with muscle atrophy may need
duration of action
physical support if standing for long
periods. Do not use corticosteroid
● Long-acting, e.g. dexamethasone - duration of action
 preparations on ulcerated tissue, e.g.
more than 48 h.
corneal ulcers
Glucocorticoids are mainly used for their anti-inflammatory
Prolonged continuous use may
 Observe patients closely for
actions. They affect many of the body's cells and so, although
cause hyperadrenocorticism 
 symptoms of these iatrogenic
they are useful for a variety of inflammatory diseases,
iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome 
diseases. Ensure that clients
they also produce a wide variety of side effects. Table 19.8
Of diabetes mellitus
understand that a higher dose of
describes some of these side effects and the nursing consider-
corticosteroid every other day is
ations that arise from them.
safer than a lower dose of daily
therapy, so they do not revert to the
latter without consultation with the
veterinary surgeon
Diuretics
Exogenous sources of
Ensure that clients taper doses at
These are agents that promote water loss by increasing urine
corticosteroid suppress the 
the end of treatment to prevent
production. They are usually used to reduce fluid retention
endogenous release from
hypoadrenocorticism
caused by congestive heart failure, but are also indicated for
the adrenal cortex
certain respiratory diseases and acute renal failure. There are
several types of diuretic, which are classified according to
Polyphagia, polydipsia and
Advise clients of these potential side
their action:
polyuria
effects and how to manage them to
 prevent obesity and inappropriate
● Loop diuretics, e.g. furosemide - act on the loop of
eliminatior
Henle to prevent the reabsorption of sodium, so that
water remains in the urine by osmosis. Sodium is later
exchanged for potassium; thus long-term use of loop
 diuretics can result in hypokalaemia
pressure within the renal tubule, thus drawing water
into the urine from the plasma and increasing its
● Potassium-sparing diuretics, e.g. spironolactone -
volume. It is used to reduce cerebral pressure after
work by antagonizing the action of aldosterone. As the
head trauma and to increase elimination of a toxin
name suggests, they do not cause potassium loss
from the body
● Osmotic diuretics, e.g. mannitol - a sugar-based
● Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, e.g.
substance that works by increasing the osmotic
acetazolamide - are used to treat glaucoma
378
3Fundamental Pharmacology
● Thiazide diuretics, e.g. chlorothiazide, are
weight and muscle condition. A commonly used
infrequently used as they are less potent than the loop
example is the testosterone derivative nandrolone, but
diuretics yet can still cause hypokalaemia. They can be
some progestogens and oestrogens also fall into this
used to treat nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
category.
Hormones
Laxatives
Endogenous hormones are substances produced by endocrine
glands that reach their site of action via the bloodstream.
These are agents used to facilitate defaecation. There are three
Exogenous hormones (natural or synthetic in origin) are
main types of laxative:
sometimes used to test for or treat disease of the endocrine
gland that has caused an imbalance of one or more of the
● Bulk laxative - these increase the bulk of faeces by
endogenous hormones. In addition to the use of corticos
retaining or drawing water into the gut lumen.
teroids, several other hormones are used for therapeutic
 Indigestible fibre such as bran or isphagula husk and
reasonis:
hypertonic substances such as phosphate salts are
commonly used
● Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) and
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TsH) are both
● Lubricant laxatives - these products, e.g. liquid
anterior pituitary hormones. They are used
paraffin and glycerine, may be useful to facilitate the
diagnostically to measure the response of the adrenal
passage of faeces following pelvic trauma
cortex and thyroid gland respectively
● Stimulant laxative - these products tend to have a
● Desmopressin - this is a synthetic version of the
stronger effect than other laxatives and can be irritant,
posterior pituitary hormone antidiuretic hormone
so should be used with care. They work by increasing
(ADH) and is used to treat central diabetes insipidus
local gut motility, e.g. dantron.
● Insulin - there are various types of insulin derived
from various sources and available to treat diabetes
'Natural' supplements
mellitus. Each type has a different duration of action,
allowing regimes to be tailored to individual patients
Increasingly, clients are showing a preference for products
depending on their blood glucose responses
that they perceive to be 'natural', such as fish oils, garlic and
chondroitin. Some of these products are proving extremely
● Oestrogens - used in some species to induce oestrus,
useful as a treatment or adjunct to certain conditions.
this group of hormones also includes
However, clients should be advised to exercise caution as the
diethylstilboestrol, which is sometimes used to treat
fact that they do not fall within the definition of veterinary
misalliance and urinary incontinence
medicines and may be freely available does not necessarily
9
mean that they cannot cause harm if incorrectly adminis-
● Progestogens - this group of drugs are
tered. It is not unusual for a client to use the same product
 progesterone-like in their activity. They can be used to
(and dose!) that they take themselves - remember that not all
suppress oestrus but should be used with caution as
products safe for use in humans are equally safe for animals.
they predispose entire females to uterine disease
In addition, instrurct the client of the correct methods of
handling these products as they may be easily absorbed,
● Levothyroxine (thyroxine) - also known as T, this
ingested or inhaled. This is particularly true of essential oils,
synthetic product replaces the naturally occurring
which can have serious effects if incorrectly handled and
thyroxine normally produced by the thyroid gland but
administered.
lacking in cases of hypothyroidism. The drug
methimazole, used to treat hyperthyroidism, works by
blocking the ability of the thyroid gland to produce
Parasympathomimetics and
natural thyroxine
parasympatholytics
● Anabolic steroids - this term relates to a group of
These are agents that mimic the effects and inhibit the effects
drugs that promotes increased mass of body tissues.
of the parasympathetic nervous system respectively. An
They are most frequently used in convalescing.
example of a parasympathomimetic is the miotic (pupil
 geriatric or chronically ill patients. In food-producing
constricting) drug, pilocarpine. An example of a para-
animals they have been used to increase the animal's
sympatholytic drug is atropine.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
379
19
Fundamental pharmacology
Sympathomimetics and sympatholytics
taining microorganisms that are similar to the pathogen, or
the pathogen may have been manipulated to render it safe
These are agents that mimic the effects and block the effects of
   s   o   
the sympathetic nervous system respectively. They are also
response but does not cause the disease.
      s   o
conditions where sympathetic stimulation is excessive or inad
Killed or dead vaccines contain inactivated pathogen - these
equate and causes problems. Examples of sympathomimetic
tend to be less effective than live vaccines and may contain
drugs are those used to stimulate the β, receptors in the heart,
an adjuvant to enhance their effect. Some inactivated vac-
to increase its rate and contraction (known as positive inofropes).
cines contain purified versions of toxins produced by the
 This group includes isoprenaline and pimobendan. An example
pathogen in question, in order to stimulate immunity to that
of sympatholytic drugs is the β-blockers.
toxin. These products are called foxoids.
In certain circumstances, it may be necessary to give immediate
protection against a disease rather than waiting for the animal's
Tranquillizers and sedatives
own immune system to respond to a vaccine. This type of
This encompasses a range of drugs that have some effect on
 passive immunity is achieved by administering antibodies to an
the animal's awareness or perception of its surroundings
     d    
There are several terms used in relation to this group of drugs
the same species). These antibodies are known as antitoxins and
that may appear confusing as some are interchangeable.
they are administered in fluid known as antiserum. Although
Many drugs of this type can produce a variety of effects
passive immunity is immediate, it does not last long.
depending on the dose given.
Tranquillizers or afaractics tend to reduce anxiety (have an
Vasodilators
anxiolytic effect) and produce a mentally relaxed state.
Drugs that produce a more profound drowsiness are termed
Certain conditions, e.g. congestive heart failure, cause vaso-
sedatives. Potent sedatives that induce sleep or reduced
constriction or a decrease in the diameter of blood vessels.
consciousness are termed hypnotics or narcotics.
This increases the resistance of blood flowing through the
vessels and increases strain on the heart. Vasodilators increase
Neuroleptic drugs produce a state of mental detachment.
the diameter of blood vessels, thus decreasing resistance and
making it easier for the heart to pump blood around. These
thiazine, acepromazine, benzodiazepines such as diazepam
drugs exert their action by relaxing vascular smooth muscle --
and midazolam and o-agonists such as medetomidine and
some on arterial vessels, e.g. hydralazine, some on venous
xylazine.
vessels, e.g. glyceryl trinitrate, and some on both, e.g. the
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor enalapril.
This group of drugs is commonly used in animals with
Urinary pH modifiers and antiseptics
cardiac disease as it blocks the formation of angiotensin II, a
potent vasoconstrictor. Other commonly used ACE inhibitors
The pH of urine can cause or precipitate certain conditions,
include benazepril and ramipril. Vasodilators can cause
most notably urolithiasis. The use of agents that modify
hypotension or low blood pressure, so ataxia and syncope
urinary pH is often indicated in the treatment of such con
may be seen, especially when treatment begins.
ditions and to prevent recurrence. Modern veterinary practice
makes full use of diets that have been formulated to maintain
a certain pH but it is also possible to achieve this using drugs.
Vitamins and minerals
Urine acidification can be achieved using ascorbic acid
(vitamin C) and alkalinization can be achieved using sodium
Nutritional science is so well advanced today that dietary
bicarbonate. Excessive use of these products can cause meta-
bolic disturbances. The use of a urinary antiseptic, such as
Careless addition of vitamin and/or mineral supplements to
the diet could cause dangerous imbalances or excesses.
with recurrent urinary tract infections.
However, there remains a role for certain vitamins and min-
 erals in the veterinary pharmacy:
● Exotic animals, e.g. reptiles in particular, may
Vaccines, toxoids, antitoxins and antisera
require certain supplements in order to maintain their
A vaccine is a substance given to stimulate active immunity
health. It is possible to buy proprietary powders and
against a known disease or diseases. They may be live, con-
liquids in suitable combinations
380
0Fundamental Pharmacology
● Calcium gluconate should always be available as it
Dosage calculations
is necessary to administer this mineral quickly in cases
of hypocalcaemia, e.g. in eclampsia or damaged
Veterinary professionals must be able to calculate drug
parathyroid glands
dosages correctly. Inaccurate calculations could lead to
under- or overdosage of medication, with disastrous conse-
● Potassium chloride supplementation may be
quences. Most drug calculations are based on one or more
necessary for patients receiving treatment for
commonly used formulae. Once the concept of these formu
dehydration and anorexia and those on loop diuretics
lae has been mastered, drug calculations are relatively
straightforward. It is, however, important to recognise your
● Vitamin K (phytomenadione) is used as an antidote
own limitations and if in doubt, calculations should be
for warfarin poisoning.
checked by an experienced person (see Appendix 1).
Changes in veterinary
Licensing,
pharmaceutical legislation
prescribing and
For some years, there has been a drive towards producing a
dispensing
uniform approach to drug legislation for all European Union
(EU) Member States. In addition to this, there have been two
medication
reports published which have investigated the supply of vet.
erinary medicines and have had an impact on recent legisla-
tive changes.
Introduction to veterinary
     , 
pharmaceutical legislation
Surgeons of Prescription Only Medicines' (The Marsh Report)
was published in May 2001. Amongst its recommendations
There are two main pieces of legislation governing the use
were the reclassification of drugs into different prescribing
of drugs in veterinary practice. These are The Veterinary Medi-
categories and the suggestion that more outlets should be
cines Regulations 2005 and The Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (with
allowed to supply prescription-only medicines (POMs). The
associated Regulations). The Suppty of Relevant Medicinal Pro-
     o   n
ducts Order 2005 also specifies some legal aspects of prescrib-
Supply Within the United Kingdom of Prescription-only
9
ing and supplying veterinary medicines. Table 19.9 describes
Medicines', published by The Competition Commission in
these pieces of legislation and which area is covered by vet-
April 2003 which also recommended that veterinary practices
erinary pharmaceutical practice. Other significant legislation
should provide clearer drug pricing information and offer all
includes:
clients the choice of a prescription should they wish to pur-
chase their medication elsewhere. These recommendations
●The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, The
were incorporated into The Veterinary Medicines Regulations
Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations
2005, The Supply of Relevant Medicinal Products Order 2005 and
(amended 1999) and The Conirol of Substances Hazardous
The RCVS Guide fo Professional Conduct, which came into
to Health Regulations 1999 (COSHH), which relate to
effect in October 2005 and November 2005 respectively.
safe storage, transporting and handling of medicines
●The Conirol of Pollution Act (1974), The Conirolled Waste
Licensing of veterinary drugs in
Regulations (1992) and The Environmental Protection Act
(1990), which relate to safe disposal of medicines.
the UK
The RCVS Guide to Professional Conduct also specifies some
Veterinary medicines must only be administered to an animal
requirements with which veterinary surgeons must comply
if they have a product 'licence', called a marketing authoriza-
Failure to do so could result in disciplinary action being
tion or MA, for the treatment of that particular species and
taken.
condition. These regulations apply to both food-producing
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
381
19
Fundamental pharmacology
Table 19.9 Legislation covering the use of veterinary medicines
Legislation
Function
Areas covered
The Veterinary Medicines Regutations 2005
● Superseded The Medicines Act 1968
Issue and review of Marketing Authorisations (MAS)
in October 2005 in relation to all
to manufacturers
veterinary medicinal products
● Governs the licensing, prescribing,
Exemptions for the requirement for medicines used
supply and labelling of veterinary
to hold a MA (e.g. small animal exemption scheme)
medicinal products in the UK
●Brings UK legislation in line with
Use of unauthorised (unlicensed') products (the
other European Union Member States
prescribing cascade)
Provisions for wholesale supply of veterinary
medicinal products
Provisions for retail supply of veterinary medicinal
products, including prescribing classes and issue of
prescriptions
Advertising of veterinary medicinal products.
Restricts the advertising of POM-V, POM-VPS and
NFA-VPS products
The Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (Inctuding
● Controls the production, supply,
Place CDs into one of five schedules (which are
The Misuse of Drugs Regulations 2001 and
possession and storage of dangerous
different from the drug prescribing classes)
The Misuse of Drugs (Safe Custody)
sbnp
Regutations 1973)
●Deals with Controlled Drugs (CDs),
a special category of POM-V medicines
Relate to the storage of CDs. States that a locked
●Refers to 'classes' of drug, i.e. class A,
car is not considered an acceptable place to store
class B, Class C. These classes are not
CDs
referred to in veterinary medicine
● Also promotes education and research
into drug dependency and addiction
The Suppty of Retevant Medicinat
● Implements recommendations from
Prevents veterinary surgeons charging for a
Products 0rder 2005
the Competition Commission
prescription, although costs can be recovered (see
section entitled, “Writing Prescriptions)
The RCVS Guide to Professionat Conduct
● Implements recommendations from the
 Stipulates that prescriptions must be available to
Competition Commission
clients without charge and that a transparent
pricing structure is necessary, including itemized 
invoices, information about charges for further
examination of the animal and waiting room
displays showing the availability of prescriptions,
costs involved and prices of the ten most frequently
prescribed drugs
and non food-producing animals. There are exceptions which
the product's safety, quality and efficacy. MAs are issued for a
are discussed in the next section.
period of 5 years, after which time the granting of the MA is
reviewed. In certain situations, provisional MAs are issued.
 Obtaining a MA requires the undertaking of a series of phar-
This would be in circumstances where a new disease was dis-
macological and toxicological tests and clinical trials. The
covered or the existing treatment was no longer effective or
drug manufacturer must be able to prove by scientific means
available.
382
2Fundamental Pharmacology
Table 19.10 Drug categories under the Veterinary Medicines Regulations 2005
Abbreviation
Category name
Prescribing and supply restrictions
Notes
POM-V
 Prescription-only
To be prescribed only by a veterinary surgeon
 Another veterinary surgeon or pharmacist may
medicine - veterinarian 
following diagnosis for an animal under
dispense the medicine against a prescription but
his/her care *
only from registered premises.* Advertising is
 restricted to veterinary surgeons, pharmacists and
professional keepers of animals (e.g. farmers) and
currently does not include veterinary nurses (VNs)
POM-VPS
Prescription-only
To be prescribed only by a veterinary surgeon,
Relates to livestock. Mainly antiparasiticides.
medicine - veterinarian,
 pharmacist or SQP. The animal need not be
Advertising is restricted to veterinary surgeons,
pharmacist, suitably
under his/her care *
pharmacists, professional keepers of animals and
qualified person ** (SQP)
other veterinary professionals, including VNs.
Another veterinary surgeon, pharmacist or SQP
may dispense the product against a prescription *
 but only from registered premises
NFA-VPS
Non-food animal -
To be supplied only by a veterinary surgeon,
Relates to companion animals, including horses,
veterinarian, pharmacist, pharmacist or SQP*
who are registered in theit passport as not
SQP
intended for human consumption. Mainly
antiparasitic products. Can only be supplied from
registered premises
AVM-GSL
Authorised veterinary
May be supplied by any retailer
Veterinary medicines deemed to extremely safe.
medicine - general
Includes some shampoos and other products with
sales list
very small amounts of active ingredient
*Those prescribing or supplying veterinary medicines must provide advice on safe administration and warnings or contraindications. They must also be satisfied
that the person supplied is competent to use the product safely and intends to use it for its authorised purpose.
**A suitably qualified person (SQP) is one deemed to have successfully undergone a course of training that has been approved as encompassing specified criteria.
Currently, this does not automatically include the RCvs veterinary nursing syllabus
Manufacturers wishing to obtain a MA can apply through
non food-producing) and the importance of receiving regular
9
one of three routes:
veterinary attention to prevent harm and/or suffering to the
animal concerned. The prescribing categories are detailed in
● Centralized - via the European Medicines Agency. MA
the Table 19.10.
would be valid in all EU member states
Controlled drugs
● National - via the Veterinary Medicines Directorate.
MA would be valid in the UK only
Drugs that have the potential for abuse are placed in a sub-
category of POM-Vs, known as controlled drugs (CD). There
● Decentralized - known as 'mutual recognition', the
are five schedules of CDs, which have controls that decrease
holder of a MA in another EU member state can apply
in their stringency. Table 19.11 shows the five schedules,
for identical MAs in one or more other member states.
their requirements and gives some examples of CDs that may
 be used in veterinary practice.
Prescribing veterinary drugs
There are some substances, e.g. ketamine, which have a poten-
When a MA is obtained the drug will be placed into one of
tial for abuse but are not subject to CD regulations. The RCVS
four main categories, which have varying restrictions placed
recommends that such drugs should be stored in secure
 on the product with regard to who may supply it. Which cat-
receptacles. In the case of ketamine, however, there is cur-
egory they fall into will be determined by the potential of the
rently an amendment order being proposed in parliament
drug to cause harm, the type of animal (food-producing vs.
that will, if passed make it a CD.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 383
19
Fundamental pharmacology
Table 19.11 Classification, restrictions and examples of controlled drugs
Schedule
Requisition
Storage
Dispensing
Nature of drugs
Examples
restrictions
restrictions
restrictions
included
S1
Veterinary surgeons are not generally
Highly addictive
Cannabis
authorized to possess S1 drugs - the
substances with
LSD
only exception is for research purposes,
no therapeutic
Raw opium
when a special licence must be
indication in 
obtained
veterinary practice
S2
Can only be obtained with a written
 Most must be stored
Each time a drug is
Substances with
Morphine
requisition signed by the veterinary
in a locked receptacle
administered and 
 significant potential 
Methadone
surgeon. All requisitions must be
that can only be
dispensed, a record
for abuse, but have
Fentanyl
entered into a bound register
 opened by a
must be made in a
a therapeutic
Pethidine
(commercially available). Entries must
veterinary surgeon
bound drug register.
indication in
be written in indelible ink and made
 Of person authorized
S2 recording
veterinary practice,
in chronological ordet, with a separate
by them to do so
requirements are as
e.g. some opiate
section for each drug. Mistakes should
stated in 'supply
analgesics
not be written over - a marginal note
restrictions: The register
should be made, dated and signed
must be kept for a
minimum of 2 years.
S2 drugs used in the
practice cannot be
destroyed, except in the
presence of a person
authorised by the
Secretary of State.
S2 drugs returned to
the practice by clients
for disposal are also
subject to specific
requirements
S3
Can only be obtained with a written
shnp ES I50W
Administration and
Barbiturates and
Buprenorphine
requisition signed by the veterinary
commonly used in 
 dispensing does not
opioid analgesics
 Phenobarbital
surgeon. All requisitions must be entered  veterinary practice are 
have to be recorded in
with less potential
 Pentobarbital
into a bound register (commercially
not subject to special
a drug register
for abuse
 Pentazocine
available). Entries must be written in
storage requirements,
indelible ink and made in chronological
although buprenorphine 
order. Mistakes should not be written
must be kept in a locked
over - a marginal note should be made,
receptacle
dated and signed
54
 No special requisition requirements
No special storage
No dispensing
Anabolic substances
Diazepam
requirements
restrictions
and benzodiazepines
Nandrolone
S5
No special requisition requirements,
No special storage
No dispensing
Preparations
Kaolin and
although invoices of purchase should
requirements
restrictions
containing less than
morphine
be kept for 2 years
a stated volume of
Codeine cough
substance, e.g. less
linctus
than 0.2% morphine
The prescribing 'cascade' (Fig 19.8)
condition; this probably happens most frequently in the
There are occasions when the veterinary surgeon is faced with
treatment of exotic animals. The Veterinary Medicines
a diseased patient for whom no product exists that is autho.
Regulations 2oo5 allows for such circumstances by setting out
rised in the European Union (EU) to treat that species and
the rules of the prescribing ‘cascade' Table 19.12. Use of
384
Fundamental Pharmacology
Table 19.13 Legal and recommended guidelines for
 Always prescribe a veterinary medicine that has obtained a MA
for that species and condition in the UK
prescription writing
Legal Rec'd POM POM CD
In ink or other indelible format
X
X
X
 Where such a product does not exist, select a product that is authorised
Name and address of prescriber
X
X
X
Iin the same species (known as 'off -label ' use)
(may be letter headed paper)
Name and address of client or
X
X
X
keeper
If no such product exists, select a product authorised for human use or a veterinary
Premises where animal(s) is/are
medicine authorised for use in another EU member state 
X
X
X
kept if different from owners
address
Species, identification and number 
X
X
X
If no such product exists, it is acceptable to use a product prepared
 of animal (if applicable)
products such as these are known as 'special order products 
Date
X
X
X
Fig. 19.8 The prescribing cascade (MA - Marketing Authority)
Name(s) and amount(s) of drug
X
X
X
 Dosage and administration
X
X
X
unauthorised medicines for food producing animals have
instructions
food animals can be used and minimum withdrawal periods
Any necessary warnings
X
X
X
apply.
Withdrawal period if relevant
X
X
It is a criminal offence for a veterinary surgeon to prescribe an
Prescribet's signature and
X
X
X
unauthorised product where one that is authorised in the EU
 professional qualifications
for that species and condition exists (subject to exemptions,
Number of times the prescription
X
X
X
e.g. small animal exemption scheme). The Veterinary
is to be repeated if more than
once
Table 19.12 Abbreviations commonly used in
Written in veterinary surgeons own
X
dispensing and prescri ption writing
handwriting
(except
pheno-
Abbreviation
Meaning
barbitol)
ad lib.
Take freely
Form of drug to be dispensed
X
X
9
b.i.d.
Bis in diem - take twice a day
 Every morning
Amount to be prescribed written 
X
X
0.m.
in words and figures
0.n.
Every night
The wording, For animal treatment
 After meals
X
X
X
p.c.
only
p.0.
Per os - by mouth
Decimal points to have a figure in
 As required
X
X
X
p.f.n.
front of them, e.g. 0.5 instead of .5
q.i.d.
Quattuor in diem - take four times a day
Every 4 h
Names of drugs should be written
9.4h
X
X
X
in English without abbreviation
t.i.d.
Tres in diem - take three times a day
tbs
Tablespoon
Directions should be written in
X
X
X
English without abbreviation (except
tsp
Teaspoon
the standard Latin abbreviations)
ub 10 6
Gram
Quantities of less than 1 g to be
X
X
X
CC
Cubic centimetre
written in milligrams
mg
Milligram
Millilitres to be used instead of
Millilitre
X
X
X
ml
cubic centimetres
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
385
19
Fundamental pharmacology
Medicines Directorate (2005) has indicated that, whilst the
prescription, but only from registered premises (Table 19.10).
consequences of use of unlicensed medicines is a matter for
According to The Supply of Relevant Medicinal Products Order
the courts, issue of an unauthorised veterinary medicine
outside the allowances of the cascade is unlikely to be pun-
prescription, although the costs can be recovered in the con-
ishable if the medicine was either prescribed because the
sultation or other fees. However, it is important to remember
authorised medicine would be impossible for the owner to
that clients not receiving a prescription must not be charged
administer, e.g. due to being elderly or infirm, or if it was to
for one and also, there should be no discrepancy between
use a medicine commonly kept in the owners home to imme-
those issued with a prescription and those not issued with
diately relieve suffering, e.g. use of aspirin. However, the cost
prescription with regard to costs of other services (in other
of the authorised medicine to the practice is unlikely to be
words, one cannot simply increase the consultation fee for
defensible and it would need substantial proof that the owner
one or both groups of people). It is acceptable, however, to
was unable to afford the authorised product.
charge for consideration of drug choice, administration
advice, etc.
d s aasd   s  
ducts to animals under his/her direct personal responsibility
Prescriptions for POM-V and POM-VPS products have specific
 and to avoid causing unacceptable suffering to that animal.
legal requirements. Prescriptions for CDs have additional
If such products are to be used, the veterinary surgeon should
requirements over and above those for other POMs. In addi-
inform the owner and, ideally, obtain written consent. Records
 tion, there are some recommendations regarding prescription
must be kept for a minimum of 5 years, which must
writing, which it would be good practice to take into account.
include:
Table 19.13 demonstrates legal and recommended guide
lines for prescription writing. Prescriptions for POM pro.
● Date of examination of the animal
ducts should not be dispensed any more than 6 months from
the date of issue. Prescriptions for CD products should not
● Name and address of the owner
be dispensed any more than 3 weeks from the date of issue.
● Identification and number of animals treated
● Diagnosis
Dispensing veterinary drugs
● Trade name of the product if there is one
Dispensing procedure
● Batch number if there is one
 In many veterinary practices, the veterinary nurse plays a key
role in dispensing medicines to clients. It is important that
● Name and quantity of active substance
this procedure is carried out accurately and carefully, in order
to avoid mistakes by both the nurse and the client. According
● Dose administered
to The Veterinary Medicines Regulations and COSHH regula
● Duration of treatment
must be satisfied that the owner is competent to administer
the medicine and has a duty of care to ensure that the owner
● Withdrawal period if applicable.
using the product knows how to do so safely.
There are also specific labelling requirements if the medicine
Each practice should have a standard operating procedure,
is to be dispensed for a client to administer at home.
designed to minimize the number of errors, maximize client
and animal safety, and comply with legislative requirements.
Ideally, this should incorporate a mechanism whereby dis.
pensed medication can be double-checked, either by a second
Writing prescriptions
person or by a computer. Clients not only need to fully
understand how to dose the patient, but they also need to be
A prescription may be needed to obtain a supply of drugs, or 
given sufficient information regarding contraindications,
may be made out in order that owners can obtain medication
 adverse reactions, storage, handling and safe disposal of med
elsewhere. A prescription may be oral or written, but it must
icines. They should receive written instructions regarding
be written if the medication is to be obtained elsewhere. The
these issues to reinforce the advice given at the time of dis-
Veterinary Medicines Regulations 2005 allow another veterinary
pensing. Table 19.14 below identifies the routes by which
surgeon, pharmacist or SQP to dispense against a veterinary
386
5 Fundamental Pharmacology
Table 19.14 Health and Safety recommendations for safe handling of medication
Route of contamination
Method of prevention
Note
Via skin
Always wear gloves when handling drugs
2 on Aiane io AiiilisuasiadAy oeiousoipl aaey aldoad auos
specific drug, eg. penicillin allergy. However, even if this is not
the case, it should be remembered that some drugs are very
effective at entering the body via the transdermal route. Some
may have an accumulative effect, so constant contact with the
drug over a long period of time may cause problems
Via mucous membrane or
Wear goggles and a mask. Dispense in a
This particularly applies to powders, but could also happen
by inhalation
draft-free room, but ventilate the area
with very dry tablets that tend to accumulate loose powder
thoroughly after use. Wear gloves and wash
in the bottom of the container
hands thoroughly after use. Do not rub face
Or eyes
Open wounds
Cover open wounds with an appropriate
More likely to occur when dispensing liquids or semi-solid
waterproof dressing
medication such as cream
Ingestion
Do not eat or drink in the dispensary.
Drug residue could be left on another object, then transferred
Do not wipe face with hands. Keep work
to another part of the building, e.g. the rest room, where it
surfaces tidy and do not dispense medication
could come into contact with food
on top of books, records or other equipment
Accidental injection
Observe strict rules relating to use of needle
It is unlikely that large quantities of drug could be accidentally
guards and swift disposal of sharps
injected, but residues in the needle, or trauma from the sharp
point could cause a nasty reaction or injury
Medicine
Suitable container
Exceptions/additional rules
Note
Loose-supplied medications,
Supply in child-proof container.
Discretion may be exercised in the use
The RPSGB recommends that a
e.g. tablets, liquids
Oral liquids should be dispensed of child-proof containers - aged and
notice is displayed in the waiting
in a non-fluted container
infirm clients may need an easy-to-open
room, indicating that medication
container. Also, there may not be a
will be dispensed in child-proof
suitable child-proof container available
 containers, but plain containers are
for certain preparations, e.g. liquids
available on request
9
Blister-packed preparations
Paper board cartons, wallets,
 Paper envelopes should not be used as
Removing medication from its
and sachets
Of paper envelopes
the sole container
 blister-pack is not advisable as
it may damage the medication, or
expose it to environmental
conditions that affect the
medication
Medicines for external
Fluted bottles
According to the RPSGB, this should be
It may not always be possible to
application
carried out so that medication is not
dispense large volumes and
inadvertently ingested by a visually
pre-packaged eye and ear
impaired person
preparations (already in plastic
bottles) in fluted containers
Creams, ointments,
In the original container if
Most creams and ointments are packaged
 If repackaging, care must be taken
powders and granules
suitable, or in wide mouth
for individual use. There are few powders
not to contaminate the medication,
containers made from glass of
on the market - again, most do not need 
 expose it unnecessarily to air or
plastic
repackaging
moisture or absorb/inhale the
medication
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
387
19
Fundamental pharmacology
contaminated (see also sections on handling and use of cyto-
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain (RSPGB) issue
toxic drugs and on pharmacy management).
guidelines for suitable containers. Table 19.15 outlines their
recommendations.
When dispensing, ensure that the client is confident to admin-
ister the medication and has fully understood the instructions.
In some cases, a practical demonstration may be advisable,
Labelling medication
asking them to repeat the procedure after the demonstration
Clients must be made fully aware of any restrictions regarding
According to The Veterinary Medicines Regulations 2005, labels
the medication, e.g. only give with food, do not crush, give at a
may be amended in accordance with a prescription, provided
separate time to other medications, etc.
the product is still being used legally within the confines of
UK legislation. There is currently no other restriction regard-
 Occasionally, it may be necessary to send medication by post.
 ing labelling a product in a veterinary practice, i.e. when it is
This is acceptable, provided that the medication is not haz.
dispensed to a client, although this position is likely to be
ardous to the public, e.g. corrosive to the touch, has all warn-
reviewed in the near future.
ings and contraindications along with it and has been pack-
aged safely to minimize the risk of leakage. The medication
However, it is good practice to ensure that all medication is
should be in the manufacturer's original packaging or in a
labelled clearly and BVA guidance regarding this subject is a
child-proof container and sent via a traceable route, e.g.
good source of information. Table 19.16 below incorporates
Royal Mail Special Delivery Service.
this guidance.
Dispensing containers
Safe disposal of medicines
According to The Veterinary Medicines Regulations 2005, any
specific packaging instructions supplied by the MA holder on
Clients should be discouraged from keeping medication
the data sheet must be adhered to by the dispensing pre-
indefinitely and made aware that any surplus or unused
mises. If there are no specific instructions, The Royal
medication should be disposed of carefully to avoid risk to
Table 19.16 Requirements for labelling medication
Item
Recommended method/information
Type of printing or writing
Must be indelibly and legibly printed or written. Mechanicaly printed lettering is ideal. Pencil and
to use
non-water resistant ink are not acceptable
Expiry date
The label should not obscure the expiry date
Instructions on the product
Every effort should be made not to obscure product information
packaging
Manufacturer supplied
ag is sasn aut reun aers sooz suogbay sauiaw Aiouaa aui) iuago at on uo passed ag pous asae
 product information sheets,
informed of administration method/s, risks, warnings and contraindications so omitting the leaflet could be
inserts and leaflets
illegal if no other information is given)
Recommended information
● Name and address of owner/keeper
● Name and address of veterinary surgeon
● Date of dispensing
● The wording 'For animal treatment only and “keep out of the reach of children' or similar
● The wording for external use only' where relevant
● The withdrawal period, where relevant (even if it is nil) for food-producing animals
● Animal name
Drug name
● Drug strength and quantity
●Dose
● Special precautions
● Initials of person dispensing
388
3Fundamental Pharmacology
themselves, other people, animals or the environment. The
should be supplied with an appropriate bin or clinical waste
ideal system is to request that they return unused medication
bag which can be returned at suitable intervals.
to the veterinary practice and some product data sheets
will stipulate this. Returned medication should not be re-
Returned Schedule 2 CDs are subject to very specific disposal
dispensed as appropriate storage conditions in the client's
requirements, although it is not necessary to report and
home cannot be guaranteed. Clients who will generate sharps
 record this as it is with Schedule 2 CDs administered within
and other hazardous waste, e.g. owners of diabetic animals
the practice.
Table 19.17 Considerations in designing and running a pharmacy
Area/issue
 Suggested action
 Environmental 
Purchase a thermometer and hygrometer to monitor the environmental temperature and humidity. Additional heating or a
conditions
dehumidifer may be necessary. Windows are a security risk and not desirable in a pharmacy, but if present they should be
shuttered if possible. Heavy blinds could be used as an alternative, to reduce excessive heat, draughts and light entering the
pharmacy. Ensure that light-sensitive drugs are kept in dark containers and stored in a light-proof receptacle. Review the
ventilation system to ensure that minimal dust and particles enter
Shelving
Check that there is adequate shelving to hold all stock. Cluttered shelves are difficult to keep clean and may interfere with
stock rotation, as well as making it hard to locate drugs. Install additional shelving if needed or reduce the volume of stock
kept
ale Aoewieyd ayz 4zm panjonul jauuosiad me zeyz ainsu3 dlaus Aewieyd ayt uo lapio peoaqeydie ui adax aq pinous s6nio yozs jo uoisod
familiar with the system so they can locate drugs easily. Heavy items should not be stored on very high or low shelves.
Controlled drugs must be stored according to legislative requirements
Stock rotation
 Ensure that stock is appropriately rotated. Aim to have only one bottle or packet of drug open at a time - writing 'OPEN' on 
the pack currently in use can help. Ensure that there is an effective system for recording batch numbers of stock once
opened. Despite effective rotation, packaging often gets dusty and it is important to vacuum and clean regularly to avoid
spoilage of stock. Monitor stock usage - drugs tend to fall in and out of favour', so the types and amounts of each type will
change as time goes by. Avoid stocking duplicate products, i.e. the same drug made by two different manufacturers. Annual
audit is a legal requirement
Dispensing
 Ensure that an adequate supply of PPE is within easy reach of those dispensing drugs. It is advisable to assemble a 'cytotoxic
kit' especially for dispensing these drugs. Ensure that suitable waste bins are within easy reach. Ensure that clients are
asaun Aueduoooe on suonsun uaum Aiddns on Aessanau aq Aeu in Aod aoid iad se 3dd yim paddns
 Never allow food or drink into the pharmacy. Remove unnecessary equipment and literature. Ensure that hand washing
9
Prevention of
contamination
facilities, First Aid kit and eye washing facilities are easily accessible. Ensure that staff clean the outside of drug containers
(including swabbing the tops of multidose vials) as necessary
Prevention of
Stock should not be kept where the general public can gain access to it. Ensure that pharmacy desks or serving hatches are
theft
staffed at all times when the surgery is open. CD receptacles should be out of sight of the public and kept locked at all
times. Ensure that clients pay for their treatment prior to collecting it from the pharmacy
Minimizing
Ensure that adequate literature is available to enable staff to check dosages, etc., e.g. Veterinary Data Sheet Compendium
dispensing errors from the National Office of Animal Health, Smal Animat Formutary from the British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
Clearly differentiate between drugs of similar names and strengths, e.g. by placing them in different-coloured outer
receptacles, especially if the manufacturer's packaging is similar. Ensure that staff dispensing medication are adequately
eut yeis zeun isanbay uoepau pasuadsip buysauo-agnop, jo wass e anpoiun 'pasadns Aessanau jt pue pauien
the labels of dispensed drugs, so that errors may be traced. This is not to apportion blame but to enable any problems to be
identifed and rectified. Encourage staff to be open and honest about mistakes - remember that this may prevent the death
of a patient
Minimizing
Produce client handouts about drug administration - these may be generic or specific to certain drugs, e.g. cytotoxic drugs or
administration
eTTOTS
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
389
19
Fundamental pharmacology
Pharmacy
Key considerations for effective
pharmacy management
management
 It is unlikely that a veterinary nurse will be able to design a
As in many areas of a veterinary practice there are a multitude
pharmacy from scratch and quite frequently, they must
 of health and safety risks inherent in the veterinary phar
'make do' with the basic environment and position of the
macy. Thorough assessment, evaluation and reduction of
pharmacy. It is, however, still possible to undertake a full
these risks is important. Apart from the health and safety
review of the pharmacy and make changes in order to
considerations, there are other aspects of pharmacy manage
 improve this area of the practice. Table 19.17 illustrates some
ment to consider, minimizing drug error, wastage of stock
(and therefore money) and providing an efficient service to
and practice.
the client.
Client compliance
improving the wellbeing of patients. The following lists some
suggestions as to how a dedicated veterinary nurse can
What is client compliance?
achieve this:
Client compliance is the extent to which the actions of the
● Nurse consultations for patients diagnosed with
owner coincide with the instructions of the veterinary team
long-term conditions
with regard to the care of an animal. It can be used to
describe any aspect of treatment but is most commonly
referred to when discussing drug therapy and the likelihood
Table 19.18 Factors affecting client compliance
that the owner will give prescribed medication correctly.
Factors
Description
Some human-centred nursing texts dislike the use of the
Patient characteristics
The patient's temperament and
word 'compliance', as it implies that people are being ordered
lifestyle - animals who are aggressive
to do as they are told, rather than following a course of treat-
Of spend time away from the house
ment that has been negotiated and agreed. The terms ' adher-
may be less likely to receive regular
ence' and 'concordance' are preferred.
treatment
Treatment regime
The complexity of the treatment
regime - frequent dosing intervals and
The importance of client
polypharmacy may reduce compliance
compliance
Disease nature
There is evidence from human studies
that prophylactic treatment regimes
Studies in human medicine show that patient non-compli-
and treatment regimes for chronic or
ance is a major cause of ineffective treatment. Recently, some
terminal patients may be less likely to
studies have been undertaken in the veterinary field and it
be administered as instructed
appears that the situation there may be similar. Ensuring
client compliance will improve the health and welfare of
Client characteristics
Aged clients or those who have
the patient and the veterinary professional should facilitate
disabilities or illnesses may be less
this. Table 19.18 provides the details of factors that affect
likely to comply with treatment
compliance.
regimes
Relationship with the
A good relationship with the
The nurse's role in improving
veterinary team
veterinary team will enhance the
possibility that the client will return
compliance
for asstance if they encounter
difficulty in adhering to a treatment
The veterinary nurse is ideally placed within the team to play
regime
a major role in increasing compliance and, in doing so,
390
0Fundamental Pharmacology
● Demonstrate how to give medication and encourage
Wanamaker B 2004 Applied pharmacology for the veterinary
the owner to repeat the dosing technique while in the
technician, 3rd edn. W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA
practice
Recommended reading
● Offer medication aids such as reminders and pill
givers
C V Mosby, St Louis, MO
● Use written instructions and take advantage of
commercially produced literature and videos
An excellent general pharmacology book. Particularly good for
pharmacokinetics and drug types. However, as it is a US publica-
● Assure clients that they can return to check progress or
tion, some drugs are different and the legislation is not applicable.
discuss treatment at any time
Compendium of Data Sheets for Veterinary Products. National
● Consider a system of allocating a named nurse to each
Office of Animal Health, Enfield
chronically ill patient to encourage confidence
Contains data sheets for all licensed medicinal products used on
● Check that repeat prescriptions are being ordered at
the UK.
the correct time intervals
Galbraith A et al 1999 Fundamentats of pharmacology, 2nd edn.
● Ask clients if they are able to manage the treatment
Addison-Wesley Longman, Hartow
programme easily when they call for a repeat
prescription
A human pharmacology book, which gives some useful informa-
fion regarding legislation, and may be useful to obtain a nursing
perspective on fhe management of patients on cerfain medications.
Bibliography
Bill R 1997 Pharmacology for veterinary technicians, 2nd edn.
C V Mosby, St Louis, MO
Available on line at: http://www.vmd.gov.uk/ird/irdfinal.pdf
Bishop Y 2000 BVA code of practice on medicines. BVA
Usefiul website fo access fhe Marsh reporf.
Publicafions, London
Rock A 2006 Veterinary pharmacology: a practical guide for nurses
and technicians. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
National Offce of Animal Health, Enfeld
Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons Guide to Professional Conduct
9
United Kingdom of prescription-only medicines. Available on line
Tennant B 2002 BSAVA small animal formulary, 4fh edn. Brifish
at:http://www.competition-commission.org.uk/inquiries/completed
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
2003/veterinary/
Excellent guide to the dnugs in common use in UK small animal
Galbraith A et al 1999 Fundamentats of pharmacology, 2nd edn.
practice, including side effects, contraindications and dose rates.
Addison-Wesley Longman, Harlow
Veterinary Medicines Directorate Website http://www.rmd.gov.uk
Marsh J (chairman) 2001 Report of the independent review of
dispensing by veterinary surgeons of prescription onty medicines.
Usefiul website containing guidance notes for many areas of veteri-
Availabteonlineat:http://www.vmd.gov.uk/ird/irdfinai.pdf
nary medicines legislation
RCVS Guide to Professional Conduct
Wanamaker B 2004 Applied pharmacology for the veterinary tech-
nician, 3rd edn. W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA
Tennant B 2002 BSAVA small animal formulary, 4th edn. Brifish
Small AnimalVeterinaryAssociation, Cheltenham
A good book for general information about all aspects of
pharmacology.
Veterinary Medicines Directorate 20os Guidance notes on the
Veterinary Medicines Regulations 2oos. Available online at:
http://www.rmd.gov.uk
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  391
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
20
First aid
Wendy Miller Smith
Key Points
● Anyone may carry out frst aid provided that it is aimed
● There are several types of fracture and the frst action
at preserving life, preventing suffering and preventing
should be to provide support by means of the appropriate
the deterioration of the animal's condition.
 splint or a Robert Jones bandage.
● The patient must be assessed in the order of ABC 
● The sensory organs may be damaged in a variety of ways
 airway, bleeding and circulation.
and as they are vital to the welbeing of the animal it is
● Common frst aid situations include dealing with wounds,
important that their function is restored as soon as
burns and scalds, insect stings and poisoning.
possible.
● Shock, in which the tissues suffer from inadequate
● Damage to the major organs may result in death but if
perfusion, is a common sequela to many frst aid
the rules of frst aid are applied the life of the patient
emergencies and is often the cause of death.
may be saved.
Introduction
● Circulation - check to see that the blood is circulating
around the body
First aid is the critical first action carried out when a patient
● Contact the veterinary surgeon as soon as you
suffers an incident. What occurs at this stage will have an
can.
effect on the animal's treatment and subsequent recovery and
it is vital that any actions are carried out with care and preci-
sion. It is essential that any first aid is carried out not only
rapidly but also with some consideration as to what the
outcome is likely to be. The first important action is 'Don't
Panic!'
emero
one
Under the Veterinary Surgeons Act 1966 (see Chapter on
cal
 Legislation and the Veterinary Nurse) anyone may perform
first aid to an animal provided that it is:
As a veterinary nurse it will be your role to carry out first aid
● To preserve life
in the surgery until the veterinary surgeon arrives and also,
very importantly, if the first contact is made by telephone to
● To prevent suffering
explain clearly to the owner what they should do to help the
animal before they arrive at the surgery. This must be done
● To prevent the deterioration of the patient's
calmly and as quickly as possible while at the same time
2
condition.
 determining the level of the emergency.
There are five rules one must remember when dealing with
In order to do this you must:
First Aid - remember ABC:
● Listen - pay full attention to the caller
● Keep calm - ensure it is safe to approach the patient -
you will be no good to the animal if you are also hurt
● Be patient - the caller may be distressed and
by the surroundings or situation
panicking.
● Airway - ensure that the patient has a clear airway so
● Ask the caller's name, address and telephone number
 that oxygen can pass into the respiratory system
as soon as possible in case they are cut off. Check
whether they are the owner or ringing on behalf of the
● Bleeding - control any haemorrhage
owner
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 393
20
First aid
● Ask the species and name of the animal in question. If
accordingly. This must be done calmly and patiently, ensur.
you do not know the animal ask for other details such
ing that they understand your advice and why it is necessary.
 as sex, breed and age
First aid situations can be broken down into two categories
● Get a brief history of the current situation.
(Table 20.1):
Write everything down, as you may forget it ‘in the heat of
● Life threatening - these need immediate action by
the moment' and you will later have to tell the veterinary
the caller and the animal must be brought to the
surgeon. Once you have this information you can decide on
surgery straight away for treatment
the degree of severity of the problem and advise the owner
● Minor emergencies - in which the animal needs
immediate treatment at the surgery but its life is not in
Table 20.1 Examples of some types of emergency
danger.
Life threatening
Immediate attention
If you are aware of the imminent arrival of a first-aid case, get
 Serious haemorrhage
Conscious collapse
ready to receive it:
Severe burns
Dyspnoea
 Poisoning
Fracture and dislocations
● Prepare a kennel in a suitable location
Unconsciousness
Gaping wounds
● Make sure that any equipment needed to maintain the
Prolapsed eye
Dystocia (birthing problems)
 airway, including a readily accessible oxygen supply, is
Road traffic accident
Convulsions
ready and working
Gastric dilation and torsion
Less severe haemorrhage
● Prepare bandaging material to control haemorrhage.
Handling
and
Assessinc
restraint
Always remember that an animal in pain may be aggressive!
Respiratory competence
Care must be taken to ensure that no further damage and dis-
Once the animal is in your care you must first assess its ability
tress is caused to the patient and that the handler is not
to breathe. Initially this is be done by observation, which can
injured while attending to it. It is important to talk to the
be achieved very quickly.
animal, approach it calmly and then restrain it in a suitable
manner; for example, for cats and small dogs use cages or
baskets, for larger dogs attach a lead or loop it around the
Questions to ask yourself:
 s a na pe adesa ion hi e os y
cages and baskets must be escape-proof and provide ventila-
● Is the patient breathing? Watch for chest
tion for the patient. A muzzle may be necessary for some dogs
movements or nose/mouth movements. Put your ear
and a soft muzzle made from a bandage is often the best in
to the nose and mouth and listen. Place your hand
these situations (see also Ch. 13).
lightly on the chest and feel the movements
Large dogs may be difficult to move and ideally this should
● Is the breathing laboured? This could indicate a
be achieved by using a rigid stretcher such as a board, which
blockage to the airway and it is vital that you act
will support the animal. If there is no such object at hand
quickly to remove or alleviate the blockage. Care must
a makeshift stretcher can be created using a blanket or
 be taken at all times in removing a visible blockage in
large towel placed under the dog and lifted by the corners
a conscious animal, as removing it may cause further
by two or more people. This does not provide the best
injury or injury to the first aider. If the animal is
support for the animal but it is more likely to be readily
recumbent it may be possible to alleviate the blockage
available.
by extending the neck
394
 First aid
● Is the breathing shallow? This might indicate that
 possible to press an artery against a bone and reduce
 the animal is in shock or pain
the blood flow to a wound. It is often easier to use
pressure points in small animals than in larger ones.
● Is the animal conscious? If the animal is aware of
Three arteries are generally used:
its surroundings, it is less likely to be a life-threatening
situation and you may have time to tend to other
● Brachial artery - lies on the medial side of the
injuries. However, always monitor respiration in case
humerus and the pulse can be felt at the distal end
of any change.
of the humerus. By applying pressure, blood flow to
the lower fore limb is significantly reduced
Haemorrhage
● Femoral artery - found on the medial aspect of the
Any blood loss can result in a serious outcome and should be
femur. Pressure applied here will affect the blood
treated as an emergency (Table 20.2). In first aid the methods
flow to the lower hind limb
used to stop haemorrhage include:
● Direct pressure - pressure is applied directly to the
haemorrhage site to aid the natural clotting process.
This is done either by pressing with clean fingers,
aepueq e Susn Aq io 'ainssaid pensp iaip se umou
 or dressing. The latter has the advantage of releasing
the first aider's hands to further attend to the patient.
If the wound is very large or there are several wounds,
Coccygeal vertebra
digital pressure will not be suitable.
You should ensure that the material you use as a
bandage or dressing is not fluffy, as this will adhere to
the wound. The material should also be clean so that
the wound is not contaminated. If the bleeding
persists and goes through the original dressing.
Coccygeal artery
another can be placed on top. In this way the clots
that have started to form are not disturbed or
destroyed
Pressure point
● Indirect pressure - the use of pressure points
Fig. 20.1 Site of the pressure point on the ventral aspect of the
around the body. These occur in places where it is
tait
Table 20.2 Comparison between the methods of controlling haemorrhage
Method
Risks
Advantages
Disadvantages
Direct digital pressure 
What is under the wound? E.g. foreign
Quick, effective, no other equipment
It is only a temporary treatment
body or fracture?
required
and haemorrhage may start again
20
Can be applied around the foreign
once the pressure is released
body
Pressure bandage
Is there a protruding object or
Easy to apply
Some areas of the body are
anything that you may push further
Can be left in place
difficult to bandage
into the wound by applying the dressing?
Indirect pressure
Locating the pressure point may be
Equipment always available, e.g. fngers.
 Response is not immediate
diffcult
Can reduce the pain for the animal
Temporary treatment
Tourniquet
Cuts of the circulation to the limb and
Quick and easy; no special equipment
Blood supply is cut off and
tissues will start to die if left too long
required
tissues are damaged
It should never be in place for more
than 15 min
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
395
20
First aid
● Coccygeal artery - found on the ventral aspect of the
● Tourniquet - the aim is to fix the tourniquet or tie a
tail (Fig. 20.1).
strip of soft material above the wound on the limb and
gradually tighten it until the haemorrhage is
controlled (Fig. 20.2). Tourniquets are commercially
available in many forms, although they can be
constructed from bandages or thick elastic. They
should only be used for short periods of time as their
use not only reduces the haemorrhage but also affects
the circulation to all the tissues below it. For this
reason the tourniquet must be in place for no more
Limb.
than 15 min and once removed should not be replaced
for at least 1 min, allowing the blood to recirculate
within the affected area. On no account should a
tourniquet be covered with a dressing and at all times
it should be constantly under observation.
Fig. 20.2 Method of placing and tightening a tourniquet
Wounds
Treatment of open wounds
First, stop the haemorrhage using one of the methods already
'pasop pue uado - sdnois omi otul papiap aq uen spunom
described. If you are in the surgery the following steps must
now be followed:
Open wounds
1. Remove any dressings. Although the wound may start
bleeding again it is vital that this is done in order to
An open wound is one where the skin surface is broken. They
examine the wound and investigate the degree of
include the following types:
damage
● Incised wounds - have clean edges and are caused
2. Remove any obvious foreign bodies as long as their
by sharp implements such as glass or a knife. They
removal will not cause more damage. Any protruding
generally heal quickly and result in very little scar
foreign bodies should be shortened so that a dressing
formation
 d  n ne aq 
damage if the patient knocks the area
● Lacerated wounds - have irregular edges and are
often caused by fights or road-traffic accidents.
3. Clip the hair around the wound. Avoid contamination
Healing is generally slow and scars are often
 of the wound site by using saline on the hair. This
formed
helps clipping and reduces the chance of it getting in
the wound
● Punctured wounds - have small visible sites of
entry but can travel deep into the underlying tissues
4. Clean the wound, working from the wound outwards
and are often caused by objects such as nails, stakes,
gunshot or cat bites. The depth of puncture wounds
5. Apply a non-adhesive dressing
may track bacteria and debris deep into the body. For
healing to occur successfully the wound must heal
6. Apply a bandage.
from the bottom upwards and this can take a long
time
Closed wounds
● Abrasion - often described as a graze or a scrub. In
Here there is no break in the skin surface but the underlying
these cases the skin surface is not broken and,
tissues are damaged. They include the following types:
although they are not deep wounds abrasions are
generally very painful because of the exposure of nerve
● Haematoma (pl. haematomata) - a pocket of
endings. They often occur in road-traffic accidents,
connective tissue under the skin that fills with blood.
when the body may have been dragged.
Common sites are in the ear pinna, due to excessive
396
 First aid
shaking of the head, and at injection sites. Gradually
be achieved by practice. A loose bandage will not be of any
the clots contract and the wound becomes hard. The
therapeutic advantage and will quickly fall off, while if
first-aid action in these cases is to dress the area firmly
it is too tight either the underlying tissues will become
as soon as possible to reduce further haemorrhage into
damaged or the animal will try to remove it and cause further
the pocket
complications.
● Contusion, or bruise - Contusions are caused by a
blow to the skin surface that damages the underlying
Bandaging rules
capillaries, causing them to rupture and allow blood to
leak from the vessels. The skin becomes warm to the
1. Before you start:
touch and discoloration gradually follows because of
the breakdown of the haemoglobin pigment
● Wash your hands
● Injuries to internal organs - these must be treated
● Make sure you have all the equipment ready close
in specific ways, depending on the organ injured, and
 at hand
will be discussed later.
2. Remove all soiled bandages and dispose of them in
the clinical waste bin
Treatment of closed wounds
3. If bandaging a lower limb always include the foot
Apply cold compresses to reduce the blood flow to the
damaged capillaries, causing them to constrict. Dressing and
4. If including the foot, place cotton wool padding
bandaging the area will provide support for the wound and
between the toes for comfort and to absorb sweat
 protect the nerve endings, which should make the patient
(Fig. 20.3)
more comfortable.
 5. Keep the bandage rolled up while using it as this
helps to maintain tension
Bandaging techniques
6. Only unroll a small amount at a time - to achieve an
Completing a well-placed bandage that will neither come off
nor cause the circulation to be cut off is an art that can only
7. Always overlap the bandage
Box 20.1 Why are bandages important?
8. When bandaging limbs or tails work from the distal
 Bandages have a number of roles which include:
end upwards to prevent blood from 'pocketing' at the
end
Support
For fractures, dislocations, sprains,
strains, healing wounds. This support
9. Secure the ends with tape - do not use safety pins,
will help to:
● Reduce pain levels and swelling
which may be swallowed by the patient
● Assist in movement
10. Always include the joint below and above when
● Give additional support to internal
immobilizing a fracture
20
fxation of fractures
 Protection
 From infection or other contaminates
11. The finished result should be neat and serve the
From self mutilation
 purpose for which it is designed.
Holds dressings in place
Pressure
 To arrest haemorrhage
 To reduce swelling
Burns and sca
Immobilization
To restrict the movement of joints or
soft-tissue injuries
 A burn is an injury caused by any of the following:
To reduces pain levels
To provide comfort
To reduce a dislocation
● Dry heat such as fire or contact with a hot surface
Security
To protect intravenous cannulae
●Electricity
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing397
20
First aid
Fig.20.3 Basic bandaging technique
● Excessive cold, including cryosurgery
 2. Warm the patient - it is important to maintain the
animal's body temperature so that it does not become
● Corrosive chemicals
hypothermic
A scald is an injury that has been caused by moist heat such as:
3. Dress the wound - these dressings prevent further
fluid loss from the site. They should be sterile and
● Boiling water
non-adherent. They should also be covered with
warm saline swabs to keep the site moist and
●Hot tar
cool
● Hot oil.
4. Replace fluid loss by intravenous infusions
 5. Provide analgesia
Classification
6. Treat for shock.
These wounds are classified according to:
● Depth of injury
Electrical burns
● Superficial burns are those that infltrate no deeper
These should be treated in the same way as other burns and
than the skin surface
scalds. It is vital that you do not touch the animal
until the electricity supply has been disconnected.
● Deep burns are those that penetrate though the skin
Use a wooden implement such as a broom handle to move
into the tissues below
the patient away from the source.
● Size of area affected - This is an estimation of the
amount of the patient's body that has been afferted by
the burn or scald, e.g. if one side of a patient's body is
Chemical burns
affected this is estimated as a 40% burn.
If the identity of the chemical is unknown, wash the site
thoroughly with water or saline to remove the chemical. This
Treatment of burns and scalds
should be done wearing suitable protective clothing. If the
chemical is known to be alkaline, then prepare an acidic solu
1. Cool the area - this should be done with running
tion to neutralize the chemical, e.g. mix vinegar with water
water or saline, which reduces the heat in the tissues
and use it to remove the chemical from the coat; if it is acidic
and reduces the pain and damage to the cells
 prepare an alkaline solution of bicarbonate of soda and water.
398
 First aid
Complications of burns and
● Dyspnoea - patients that have been exposed to house
spieos
fires become dyspnoeic because of smoke inhalation
into the respiratory tract. The outcome is often seen as
● Shock - this may severe and in some cases may lead
pneumonia or bronchitis, which occurs 2-3 days after
to death. It is caused by:
the event
●Tissue damage
● Infection - occurs because the moist conditions
 attract bacteria. Delays in wound healing will
●Fluid loss
result
● Pain
● Poisoning - may occur in chemical burns because
the patient has licked the chemical from its
● Infection after the injury
coat.
Insect stings
Treatment of insect stings
In the UK wasps and bees cause the most common insect
● Bee stings - are acid, so bathe the area in dilute
stings. These are generally not severe unless they occur in
bicarbonate of soda
areas where swelling causes problems, e.g. in the pharyngeal
area causing the animal to become dyspnoeic. Some patients
● Wasp stings - are alkaline, so bathe the area in dilute
may have allergic reactions to stings, causing collapse.
vinegar.
Poisons
In poisoning cases it is vital that an accurate history is taken
Poisoning is said to have occurred when a poison or toxin
to ascertain the following facts:
enters the patient's body either by the enteral or oral route or
via the skin and is in sufficient quantity to cause a harmful
● When did the animal take the poison? Different
effect. Potential poisons include many chemicals, drugs and
poisons will act within a variety of timescales - some
plants found within and around the home, e.g. ethylene
will act instantly; others may take several hours to
glycol or antifreeze, which may cause irreversible kidney
have an effect. The time will also influence the
damage even if the animal has only consumed a small
treatment - if the poison was ingested more than
amount.
4 h previously it will already have been absorbed into
the bloodstream and inducing the animal to vomit
Other poisons include:
will not reduce the effect
20
● Pesticides, e.g. slug bait (metaldehyde), rat bait
● What poison was eaten? Encourage the owner to bring
(warfarin and its derivatives)
the packet, label or data sheet with them when they
visit the surgery. Knowing the name of the poison will
●Fungicides
affect the type of treatment
●Household chemicals, e.g. bleach, white spirit
● How much of the poison was eaten? A small quantity
of chocolate may have no effect on a dog but a large
● Plants, e.g. daffodil bulbs, poinsettia, rhododendron,
bar may be very toxic; however, only a small amount
yew
of slug bait could be fatal
● Medicines, e.g. aspirin - poisonous to cats, although it
● Did it definitely eat the poison? A panicking owner
can be given to other animals in small doses -
may assume that a broken packet means that the
phenobarbital, diazepam.
material has been eaten
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 399
20
First aid
● What are the species, breed and age of the animal?
a. Induce vomiting by the use of emetics, e.g. two
 Different poisons affect different species in different
teaspoons of mustard in a cup of warm water or one
 ways, e.g. phenolic compounds and aspirin are toxic to
or two pea-sized crystals of washing soda placed on
cats; young animals may be more affected than older
the back of the tongue - both can be administered
animals
by the owner. A veterinary surgeon may use
x o (/s / 1o) adod
● What symptoms (if any) is the animal exhibiting?
(3.0 mg/kg im). Never use salt solution, as salt in
These vary according to the poison but may include:
excess may also cause poisoning.
●Vomiting
 Do not induce vomiting if:
● Diarrhoea
● The poison is known to be corrosive, e.g.
creosote, petrol - the tissues of the mouth and
● Depression
oesophagus will be burned both on the way
 down and when the poison is regurgitated
●Unconsciousness
● The patient is unconscious or having a fit
● Convulsions
● The poison was ingested more than 4 h ago -
● Muscle tremors
absorption may already have taken place.
● Abdominal pain
If the owner is unable to induce vomiting they must
bring the animal into the surgery as soon as possible:
● Excessive salivation
b. Use gastric lavage to wash the ingesta from the
● Panting.
stomach. This must be done under the direct
supervision of the veterinary surgeon. The patient
The owner should be encouraged to bring the animal to the
should be anaesthetized or unconscious and warm
surgery in order that treatment can be instigated as soon as
water or saline is introduced into the stomach via a
possible.
stomach tube. The stomach is washed out several
times until the draining solution is clean. Replace
with absorbent charcoal granules to remove any
Treatment of poisoning
remaining ingesta
1. Prevent further exposure to the poison by removing
c. If the poison is corrosive the passage of the ingesta
the source or by removing the patient. In the case of
can be hurried through the tract by the use of a
inhaled poisons such as smoke or carbon monoxide
saline purge - this is not recommended if the
take the patient into the fresh air or administer
patient is shocked or the digestive tract is inflamed
oxygen. If the coat is contaminated it should be
washed to prevent the patient grooming or licking
d. If the poison is irritant then the digestive tract may
itself. An Elizabethan collar may be also used to limit
be soothed by the use of a demulcent, which coats
access to the chemical. Make sure that in future the
the lining of the stomach, e.g. raw egg beaten with
'pogdno e u Aeme panoi ndax s uosiod
 a little milk and sugar.
2. Identify the poison and administer the antidote is one
5. If the coat or skin is contaminated then it should be
exists; for example, the effect of warfarin poisoning
washed as soon as possible. This is a problem in cats,
may be limited by administering vitamin K. In the
as they hate being bathed and many poisons are toxic
majority of cases there is no antidote.
to cats. If necessary they should be anaesthetized for
the procedure. Keep under observation during recovery
 3. Contact the Veterinary Poisons Information Service -
and take steps that the heat source used to dry the coat
this service provides 24-h information on the
does not burn them:
treatment of poisons and possible antidotes.
● Liquid oily compounds, e.g. creosote or sump oil
4. Prevent absorption of the poison by the stomach and
- wash the coat in Swarfega, cooking oil or liquid
small intestine:
paraffin. Rinse thoroughly until all smell has gone
400
First aid
● Non-oily compounds, e.g. disinfectants - wash in
Collection of samples
warm water. The use of detergents will increase the
absorption of the disinfectant by the skin
 Samples discharged from the body such as vomit, faeces and
urine are often the only real indicators of what poison has been
● Solid oily compounds, e.g. tar. Clip affected areas
ingested. The colour may be abnormal, as many domestic poi-
of hair. Massage vegetable oil, butter or liquid
sons contain bright colourants. If the veterinary surgeon is
paraffin into the area to soften the tar and wash
unsure as to which poison is involved, samples can be sent
thoroughly. Bandaging the area for 15 min after
away for analysis and should be labelled clearly with the fol-
applying the butter will encourage the heat of the
lowing details:
body to soften the tar.
1. Name and address of the owner
Many poisons are corrosive or carcinogenic and
precautions must be taken for the health and safety
 2. Animal's details, including species, name, sex and age.
of the handler. Always wear gloves and protective
clothing.
3. Time and date of collection
4. What the sample contains.
Shock
genic shock:
Shock may be explained as the state that results from inade-
quate perfusion of the tissues, which affects the supply of
● Neurogenic shock - occurs due to neurogenic
 oxygen and nutrients to the tissues and the removal of waste
trauma, usually to the central nervous system, which
products formed by the tissues. If the state of shock contin-
results in vasodilation
ues, the tissues are damaged and the patient may die. Patients
that require first aid are likely to be suffering from some
● Anaphylactic shock - occurs when the body has an
degree of shock. This is a potentially life-threatening con-
allergic reaction to an antigen to which the patient has
dition, which can progress unless action is taken.
become sensitized
● Endotoxic shock, also called septic shock - occurs
Hypovolaemic shock
when bacteria or their toxins are present in the
circulation.
The most common type of shock in this situation is hypo-
volaemic shock, which is the result of reduced circulating
Cardioqenic shock
blood volume in the body. It may be due to:
Develops if heart function is impaired to such an extent that
●Haemorrhage
cardiac output is reduced. Hypotension is present but circu-
lating blood volume remains normal. This type of shock is
● Loss of tissue fluid
not commonly seen in animals.
20
● Loss of body water.
The body responds to hypovolaemic shock by vasoconstric-
Clinical signs
tion, so that blood pressure rises and blood is redistributed to
the vital organs, such as the brain.
Clinical signs of shock include:
● Pale/dry mucous membranes
Vasculogenic shock
● Slow capillary refill time
The blood vessels (usually veins) dilate, blood pools in the
tissues and blood pressure falls. In this type of shock the
● Weak, rapid pulse
blood volume is not decreased but the distribution of blood
around the tissues is abnormal.
● Cold extremities
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
¥401
20
First aid
● Increased heart rate
5. Check any dressings that are already in place for signs
of continuing haemorrhage and for any self-inflicted
● Rapid, shallow respiration
damage
● Subnormal temperature
6. Observe the patient constantly, as the condition
of a patient in shock can deteriorate quickly.
●Poor skin turgor
Monitor the following parameters at 5-10-min
intervals:
● Decreased urine output
●Pulse
● Reduced level of consciousness
●Respiration
●Collapse
● Capillary refill time
O Convulsions.
● Mucosal colour
Treatment
● Papillary reflex
1. It is vital that the haemorrhage is controlled as soon as
possible
● Palpebral reflexes
2. Warm the animal using towels and blankets. Direct
● State of consciousness.
heat must not be applied as this will dilate the
peripheral blood vessels, taking the blood away from
Notes of these observations should be placed on the
the organs, where it is needed most
hospital chart for reference
3. Make the animal comfortable in a safe environment -
7. Provide 'TLC' to the patient by stroking and
reduce the lighting and keep noise to a minimum
talking to it. This will make it feel more comfortable
and confident. Remember that the animal has
4. Prepare the equipment for intravenous fluids to be
been through a traumatirc experience and is now in
administered. The choice of fluid depends on the type
unfamiliar surroundings.
of shock (see Ch. 23)
Table 20.3 Comparison between the signs of
nconsciousness and
unconsciousness and death
ose
Signs of unconsciousness
Signs of death
Heart beat is present but may
No heart beat
 Unconsciousness is often misinterpreted as death. When an
be slow
animal is unconscious the brain is affected in such a way that
Respiration present
No respiration
the animal is unaware of its surroundings or external stimuli
Muscles are flaccid
 Muscles are rigid
such as sound or touch (Table 20.3). A good stimulus to use
Body temperature is stable
 Body temperature gradually falls
to assess the state of unconsciousness is to call the patient's
name.
Cormea is moist
Cornea is dry and the pupil is
fixed and dilated
Unconsciousness is measured in depths:
Pupillary light response is 
Mucous membranes become
present but may be sluggish
cyanotic
● Stupor - the patient can attempt to be aware of its
Fits may occur
Bladder and anal control may be
surroundings, but with some difficulty
lost at the moment of death
Bladder control may be lost
Rigor mortis sets in after a few
● Coma - all body functions are present but the patient
hours
cannot be roused.
402
First aid
Treatment
Alternatively, if you are not in the surgery, mouth-to-nose
resuscitation can be achieved in the following manner:
1. If possible, establish the cause of the unconsciousness
1. Place the patient on its side and extend the neck
approaching the patient
2. Pull the tongue forward
 2. Check that the airway is patent. Loosen a tight collar
and examine the oral cavity to establish if there is any
3. Take hold of the nose firmly and hold one hand under
obstruction. Pull the tongue forward and extend the
the jaw to seal the mouth
neck
4. Blow into the nose, making sure you remove your
3. Observe the patient for evidence of a heart beat and
 mouth when you inhale, thus avoiding taking in any
respiratory movements. If these are not obvious, place
saliva or mucus from the patient
your hand at the base of the patient's chest and feel
the chest movements; if the patient is small it may be
5. The blowing action must be done gently so as not to
better to use two fingers
overinflate the lungs, as the patient will have a smaller
lung capacity than a human.
4. Check the colour of the mucous membranes. If you are
in the surgery, provide oxygen if necessary
Cardiac massage
 5. Keep the patient warm but do not use direct heat (see
If it is not possible to detect a heartbeat it may be possible to
Shock, above)
stimulate the heart by manually compressing the ribcage. If
this is necessary the patient will also need to be supplied with
6. Make the animal comfortable
oxygen by either of the methods above. When both the heart
and the respiration have stopped, this is referred to as
7. Monitor and record temperature, pulse, and respiration
cardiopulmonary arrest:
every 5-10 min.
1. Place the patient in lateral recumbency, extending the
Resuscitation of a patient
neck and forelimbs forwards.
Artificial respiration
2. For small individuals, place your hand ventrally
around the chest with the finger tips on one side and
If respiratory movements appear to be absent, the patient
thumb on the other side of the chest wall just behind
should be intubated and the cuff of the tube should be
thumb and fingers together. This should be repeated
inflated, which will ensure that the airway remains patent,
about 120 times per minute
that fluids cannot be inhaled and that the oxygen supplied is
going straight into the lungs.
 3. For larger patients this method may be more difficult
so use the heel of the hand with your other hand on
Once intubated, the patient should be given oxygen via a
the top to apply pressure over the region of the heart
closed anaesthetic circuit (see Ch. 27). Gentle pressure should
be applied to the rebreathing bag. If there is no anaesthetic
4. While massaging the heart stop at regular intervals
machine available, the lungs can be inflated by gently
(every 20-30 s) and observe whether or not the heart
blowing down the tube.
has started to beat on its own again.
psl
● Brain damage caused by disease or trauma
●Poisoning
Epilepsy is evidenced by the patient having ann epileptic fit,
which is caused by waves of disorganised electrical activity
● Viral or bacterial infections
within the brain. The sight of their animal having a fit can be
very distressing for owners. There are many causes of fits but
● Metabolic disease, such as chronic liver or kidney failure
very often they are idiopathic, i.e. there is no known cause.
Specific causes include:
● Cerebral anoxia, e.g. due to anaesthetic accidents.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
403
20
First aid
Clinical signs
be distressed and may be panicking and you must remain
calm and patient. Very little can be done to the animal
Clinical signs of fitting can be divided into three phases:
while it is having a fit. However, the following should be
recommended:
1. Pre-ictal phase - the patient maybe come
● Ensure that only one person is left with the patient
 an apparent awareness that all is not well
● Do not touch the patient
2. Ictal phase - the patient becomes recumbent -
usually laterally. The body is tense, with the limbs
● Remove any objects that could fall on to the animal
extended and sometimes the patient will 'paddle'. Eyes
and cause further harm
are fixed and staring. Drooling and frothing at the
 mouth can be seen. Bladder and rectal control may be
● Reduce the light and noise levels
lost. The patient is unaware of its surroundings
● Once the fit has subsided, allow the patient to
3. Postictal phase - the patient is usually dazed,
rest
 dss a h nsxa aa on sade pe Apns
long periods after the event.
● Make a note of how long the fit lasted, what the
The timescale varies with the individual but the average time
stimulated the fit.
for a single fit is about 5 min. In some cases, the animal may
have one fit after another - a condition known as status
When the fit has subsided the owner should arrange for the
epilepticus.
veterinary surgeon to check the animal. If the fit persists, the
veterinary surgeon will ask the owner to bring the animal
Telephone advice
into the surgery so that treatment can be started as soon as
possible.
The most common situation will be that the owner of the
animal will telephone the surgery for advice. The owner will
Fractures
● Spiral - the fracture line spirals around the shaft -
commonly associated with the humerus.
Fractures are breaks in the bone and are named according to
the type of damage that has occurred (Fig. 20.4). A fracture
may be:
Clinical signs
● Simple - the bone is broken cleanly into two pieces
● Pain at the site - this may not occur until the animal
moves the affected part of the body
● Compound - a skin wound leads to the fracture site
and the risk of infection is high
● Swelling - due to the bruising of the surrounding soft
tissues
● Complicated - organs and vital structures such as
major blood vessels and nerves are damaged around
● Deformity - the limb is often held at an abnormal
the fracture site
angle. This may be less obvious in fractured bones that
are deep within muscles, such as the pelvis or spinal
● Multiple - there is more than one fracture site with a
vertebrae
distance between them
● Loss of function - may be complete or partial
● Comminuted - the bone is shattered and there are
splintered fragments
● Crepitus - the grating sound of broken bone moving
against other bones
● Greenstick - an incomplete break usually seen in the
bones of young animals
● Unnatural mobility.
404
First aid
Skin surface
Fracture site 
Fig. 20.4 Types of
 3. Control the haemorrhage, ensuring that pressure is not
fracture
placed on the fracture site.
Supporting the fractured limb
Support methods include splints and the use of the Robert
 Simple fracture
Jones bandage. Both these methods require a degree of skill
otherwise they may be more of a hindrance to healing than
the something designed to help it.
Cpen wound leading
 to fracture site
Splints
Many splints may be adapted from household objects such as
 broom handles, lolly sticks, rolled up newspapers or maga-
zines. Others are manufactured specifically for the job and are
Compound fracture
made of wood, metal, plastic or resin/plaster and air bags.
Application of a splint:
1. Ensure that any wounds are covered with a suitable
dressing
2. Apply a layer of protective padding, e.g. soft bandage or
 Comminuted fracture
 cotton wool. This should be thick enough to prevent the
splint pressing on the skin and causing damage
3. Select the most suitable splint for the limb and fracture
site
4. Place the splint on the limb so that the joints above
Transverse fracture
and below the site of the fracture are included. This
may mean that the splint has to be bent to conform to
the angle of the joints
 5. Bandage the splint in place
6. Apply further padding to the limb
Greenstick fracture
7. Finally, apply an outer support bandage to hold the
 padding in place, prevent self-inflicted damage to the
area and provide a degree of waterproofing (Fig. 20.5a).
20
Robert Jones bandage
This dressing is commonly used in first aid but does require a
degree of expertise in order to work effectively (Fig. 20.5b).
Spiral fracture 
 The bandage creates a rigid dressing that provides support to
Treatment
the limb, and involves the use of large quantities of padding.
1. Do not handle the fracture site, as this will cause pain
1. Ensure that any wounds are covered with a suitable
and discomfort, with the added risk of more damage to
dressing
the bones or organs in the region of the fracture
 2. Place cotton wool padding between the toes, making
2. Provide support to the area using a dressing and
sure that these pieces are not too large or they will
bandage to prevent further damage. This support must
cause discomfort. This prevents the toes rubbing and
include the joints above and below the fracture
helps to absorb any sweat
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
20
First aid
3. Take two strips of zinc oxide tape and place them on
opposite sides of the limb, avoiding the wound site.
They should extend several centimetres further than
Binding sticky plaster
the toes
4. Wrap the roll of cotton wool or padding evenly
 Splint strip
around the limb and including the joints above and
below the fracture. Apply a number of layers until the
limb is fully supported
Cotton wool -
 5. Apply the conforming bandage over the padding
working from the toes upwards - the toes should still
Support bandage 
be able to be seen. While doing this, tension should
be applied to compress the padding layer
B
White open
6. Take the zinc oxide strips that are protruding from
Adhesive
weave bandage
rollerbandage
under the padding and twist them so they can be
stuck upwards on the dressing (Fig. 20.5b). These
'stirrups' will prevent the dressing from slipping
Limb
down the limb.
7. Apply a protective outer layer of adhesive bandage,
working upwards from the toe
8. Test the tension of the dressing by flicking it with
your fingers - a hollow sound like that of a ripe
melon should be heard
Cotton
1 inch adhesive
tape
wool
9. Check the toes, making sure you can see them in case
the dressing is too tight. In this case they will become
cold because of the lack of blood flow
Fig. 20.5 Supporting a fracture (o) Placing a splint (b) Robert
Jones bandage
10. If the patient is exercised outdoors, this limb must be
covered with a plastic bag or old drip bag to protect
the bandage. A commercial sock or boot may be used.
First aid f
for
ne
● Blepharospasm - scrunching up the eye to avoid the
light.
sensory organs
Eyeball injuries
The eye
 Care must be taken to avoid touching the cornea, as this may
cause ulceration:
The eye may be injured either on the eyeball itself or on the
eyelid but the clinical signs are generally similar and include:
● The cornea may be injured by:
● Conjunctivitis - reddening and inflammation of the
● Peneirating wounds - during fights or road traffic
sclera and conjunctiva. The patient will rub the eye
accidents. These cause a loss of aqueous humour
with a forepaw or on the floor or furniture and may
and subsequent intraocular pressure, and the cornea
cause further damage
 may take on a shrunken, wrinkled appearance. It is
vital that the eye is disturbed as little as possible
● Epiphora - increased tear production
● Non-penetrating wounds, e.g. ulcers, which may have
● Photophobia - avoiding bright light by closing the
been caused by foreign bodies, such as thorns or
eye or burying the head
claw scratches
406
 First aid
· Prolapse of the eyeball - the eye becomes
an examination very difficult. They may also cause
 dislodged from the socket and is exposed. This may
trauma to the eyeball by scratching it.
result from fighting and is more likely in breeds with
more protruding eyeballs, e.g. pekineses. In this state
Foreign bodies may be treated in a number of ways
the eyeball is unprotected and may dry out, causing
depending on their size. If they are large enough to be
the cornea to ulcerate, and damage to the optic nerve
removed, take care not to cause any further damage.
may also result
However, removal should not be undertaken if the
cornea is penetrated. If the foreign body is small it can
Treatment
be flushed out with warmed saline.
● Although it is vital that the eye is replaced as soon
● Wounds - due to trauma such as fights and road
as possible, this must not be attempted by anyone
traffic accidents or as a result of self-trauma.
other than a veterinary surgeon
Wounds should be cleaned to remove any
● Lubricate the eye using false tears or contact lens
contaminants by flushing with warmed saline.
fluid. If neither of these is available, boiled and
cooled water can be used
● An inflammatory reaction - causes oedema to the
conjunctiva which can be seen as the conjunctiva
● Prevent self trauma
bulging over the eyelid - chemosis.
● Direct trauma to the eyeball causing haemorrhage
The pain caused by all eyelid injuries can be reduced by
within the eye
applying ice packs to the eye, but take care to ensure that the
ice is covered in a soft, non-abrasive material to reduce the
● Fractures to the skull - can cause the eye to be
possibility of damage to the cornea.
bruised, which is often seen as a red blister on the
sclera, or the eye may protrude slightly from the socket
as a result of haemorrhage in the soft tissues behind
 the eyeball - retrobulbar haemorrhage.
The ear
External injuries
General treatment
General treatment of eyeball injuries includes the following:
The most common injuries to the ear are those to the ear
B s  s 's      d
● Flush with saline to clean the area
self-trauma resulting in aural haematomata or blood blisters.
● Place a sterile gauze swab over the eye and attach
Clinical signs
 loosely in position with adhesive tape
● Haemorrhage - the pinna can bleed profusely.
which can be very alarming to the owner
Elizabethan collar
● Shaking of the head - leads to wide distribution of
● Place the patient in a darkened area to help with
blood droplets
photophobia
● Self-trauma - rubbing and scratching at the ear
● Keep warm
● Swelling - formation of a haematoma within the
● Monitor for any changes or signs of shock.
tissue of the pinna.
Eyelid injuries
Treatment
The eyelid may be injured by:
 o pd anssd e Aide - ao a dos 1
wound. The owner can use a folded handkerchief or a
● Foreign bodies - the most common are grass seeds,
sticking plaster. In the surgery the pinna can be held
which become lodged either under the eyelids or
back over the head with a bandage - care must be
beneath the third eyelid. They cause excruciating pain
taken not to wrap the bandage too tightly under the
and the patient will keep the eye tightly shut, making
head as this will cause asphyxia
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
407
20
First aid
 2. Treat insect stings according to their cause (see Insect
4. Observe the patient. Watch out for signs of dyspnoea
stings, above)
and vomiting, which may be caused by swallowing
blood. Concussion may be seen in cases where a
3. Pain may be reduced by the use of ice packs held
serious blow or other trauma has occurred.
against the ear pinna
veterinary surgeon.
The mouth
Internal injuries
The mouth is often injured, as animals use it for investigating
Foreign bodies such as grass seeds are the most common cause
and in searching for food. Injuries include:
of inner ear problems. Grass seeds are most often seen in the
summer and are able to travel down the ear canal and become
● Foreign bodies - these are a common problem,
lodged deep in the ear, causing severe irritation and pain. A
e.g. sticks caught in the back of the throat, fish hooks,
general anaesthetic is required to locate the foreign body and
various 'chews', bones wedged across the hard
remove it without causing further damage; owners should be
palate
discouraged from trying to remove the object themselves.
● Fractures - following direct blows, as seen in road
traffic accidents
The nose
● Insect stings - most often on the lips but sometimes
As the nose is part of the respiratory tract any injury may
inside the mouth.
restrict the oxygen supply to the body and could be fatal. Any
Clinical signs
Injuries to the nose may result in epistaxis, or a nose-bleed
 p aq  p   p   
● Pain and swelling of the afferted area
● Trauma, e.g. a direct blow. Check for crepitus around
● Pawing or rubbing at the face
the nose indicating a possible fracture
● Salivation and drooling
● Presence of a foreign body, e.g. grass seed or
blades of grass - also cause persistent sneezing and
● Dysphagia - difficulty in eating - the animal may
rubbing the nose on the ground or with the paw
go to the food and sniff it but walk away leaving
it uneaten or the food may drop out of the
● Infection - due to bacterial, viral or fungal infections
mouth.
● Tumours in the nasal cavity - if these are very large
the patient may show mouth breathing or snoring
Treatment
respiration.
1. Foreign bodies must be removed quickly in order to
reduce the distress caused to the animal. However,
Treatment
retrieval in a conscious animal is not always a safe
1. If the nose is injured, avoid muzzling the animal as
option! These cases should be brought to the surgery
this may cause further complications
as soon as possible and anaesthetized so that the
foreign body can be removed
2. Cold compresses can be applied to the nose to alleviate
haemorrhage. Pressure placed on the nose should be
2. Fractures are difficult to treat using first aid and should
gentle, as it may make the situation worse and
be treated under a general anaesthetic. Bandaging the
compromise the respiratory tract
jaws together to provide support could compromise
the respiratory tract
3. Place the patient in a quiet, darkened kennel - this will
reduce the stress to the animal, allowing the heart rate
3. Insect stings are treated as appropriate (see Insect
and blood pressure to return to normal
stings, above).
408
First aid
e.
possible if the oesophagus is occluded, but avoid
forcing the tube down as you may rupture the
to the ma
tans
oesophagus
● Gas pressure may be also relieved by introducing a
Some of the organs of the body are so essential to life that if
suitably sized trocar and cannula into the stomach via
they are seriously injured the death of the animal is almost
the left dorsal abdominal wall. This should not be
inevitable. However, if first-aid procedures are followed cor-
rectly the animal's chances of survival are significantly
who will take steps to avoid puncturing the spleen. If
increased.
the stomach has twisted, the spleen may be lying in an
abnormal position
Gastric dilation and volvulus
● The patient should be treated for shock
This is very serious, life-threatening condition that often affects
Ruptured diaphragm
deep-chested breeds, e.g. great danes and greyhounds. The
cause is not always known but the condition can sometimes be
This condition is seen more often in cats than in dogs and is
   o   s   
generally caused by a road traffic accident. The animal may
stomach fills with gas formed by fermentation of the food,
becomes unstable within the abdomen, and twists. The base of
 due to the pressure within the thoracic cavity at the time of
the oesophagus and the cardiac sphincter are occluded by the
the accident. The abdominal organs are able to move into the
twist so the gas cannot escape. Fermentation continues to occur
thoracic cavity, causing dyspnoea or, in extreme cases, total
and the problem becomes worse. Eventually the animal will go
lung collapse.
into shock and the condition may be fatal within a few hours.
Clinical signs
Clinical signs
● If the tear is small, problems may not be seen at all
● Distension of the stomach, which feels hard to the
and the animal may adapt to live a normal life
touch and sounds hollow when tapped
● If the abdominal organs move into the thorax, the
● Signs of discomfort and restlessness - the dog
animal will show varying degrees of dyspnoea. In some
may belch to relieve gas build-up
   n    s s
is excited or during exercise
a aq uodn passard si ude a - eoudsia o
 distended stomach and the size of the thoracic cavity
● Some affected animals will prefer to sit upright so that
is reduced
the abdominal organs fall downwards away from the
area of the diaphragm, making breathing easier
● Collapse due to the respiratory distress
● Severely affected cases may breathe show orthopnoea -
● Shock - the stomach pushes on the caudal vena cava
breathing with the mouth open.
and portal veins, slowing the blood flow to the heart
20
and reducing circulating blood volume
Treatment
This condition must be seen by a veterinary surgeon and
surgery is required to repair the diaphragm. However, it is
Treatment
d s sn aa d  ais n n
This is a genuine emergency and the animal must be seen by
and this may take several days:
the veterinary surgeon as soon as possible:
● Place the animal in a warm, quiet kennel. It should be
● The operating theatre, suitable anaesthetic and surgical
moved and stressed as little as possible
equipment should be prepared
● The gas pressure in the stomach must be relieved by
be useful in severely affected cases to place the animal
attempting to pass a stomach tube. This may not be
in an oxygen tent
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
409
20
First aid
● Allow the animal to adopt a position in which it is
Clinical signs
comfortable
● The animal will show signs of pain and will stand in a
● Observe the animal monitoring respiration and pulse
'hang dog' position, with its head down and back
closely
arched
●Withhold food in preparation for surgery.
● A urine sample may show haematuria
● Oliguria - reduced volume of urine.
Splenic injuries
Treatment
The spleen is a blood-filled organ that is capable of profuse
haemorrhage and in many cases this leads to a rapid death.
Place the patient in a warm, dark kennel and treat for shock
Damage to the spleen may be caused by:
 before the veterinary surgeon diagnoses the extent of the
damage.
● Trauma, e.g. due to road traffic accidents
● Tumours - often undetected until the late stages, when
Bladder iniuries
the patient may suddenly collapse as a result of
internal haemorrhage
The bladder may be ruptured, bruised or displaced by severe
trauma such as a road traffic accident. The animal may
● Torsion of the spleen - becomes twisted, causing
also suffer from cystic calculi or bladder stones, which may
congestion and swelling.
either irritate the mucosal lining of the bladder or cause a
blockage of the urethra. If a blockage is not detected there
is a risk that backflow of urine up the urethra will cause
Clinical signs
kidney damage or that the bladder will rupture. In any case
of bladder injury, a urine sample should be collected for
● Sudden collapse
analysis.
● Rapid respiratory rate
Clinical signs
● Pale mucus membranes and weak pulse
● Anuria - lack of urine being passed may indicate a
● If there is torsion the abdomen will be swollen, hard
ruptured bladder or a blockage
and extremely painful.
● Haematuria - blood in the urine may indicate
infection or irritation of the bladder wall
Treatment
● Dysuria - difficulty or straining to pass urine may
 In cases where the spleen has ruptured very little can be done
indicate a partial blockage
and the animal is likely to die of internal bleeding. If the
animal is able to be treated then treat as for shock. Give
● Oliguria - small amounts of urine passed at intervals.
intravenous blood transfusion or colloids to replace the loss
of blood
Treatment
● Closely monitor the production of urine
Kidney injury
● Collect a sample of urine for analysis
The kidney has a large blood supply and if damaged by a road
● Prepare equipment for catheterization - may need to
traffic accident or a kick may be ruptured, which results in
be used in cases of a blocked urethra
extensive loss of blood into the abdomen and subsequent
death. If the trauma is less severe, the kidney may be bruised
● Prepare radiography equipment for visualization of the
and the animal may recover because the second kidney
bladder and kidneys. May also need to use contrast
should be able to maintain kidney function.
media.
410
 First aid
Bibliography
Clear, no fuss text ideal to remind you of those key areas for
revision.
Aspinall V 2003 Clinical procedures in veterinary nursing.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
BVNA First Aid Revision Booklet 2004British Veterinary Nursing
Association, Harlow
Bowden C, Masters J 2003 Textbook of veterinary medicat nursing.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Ideal key facts needed for examination revision.
Dallas S 2000 Animal biotogy and care.Blackwell, Oxford
Dallas S 2000 Animal biology and care. Blackwell, Oxford
Lane D R, Cooper B 2003 Veterinary nursing, 3rd edn.
Clear and concise with excellent pictures to demonstrate facts.
Butterworth-Heinemann,Oxford
Lane D R, Cooper B 2003 Veterinary nursing, 3rd edn.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Recommended reading
Contains the basic knowledge for any veterinary nurse.
Bowden C, Masters J 2003 Pre veterinary nursing textbook.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
20
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  411
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
21
Prevention of the spread of
infectious diseases
Helen Dingle and Amanda Rock
Key Points
 Infectious diseases are caused by pathogenic
● Once a pathogen enters the body. the immune system
 microorganisms, including bacteria, viruses, fungi and
 initiates a series of responses aimed at overcoming the
protozoa.
pathogen and preventing the development of clinical
 Pathogens are able to leave the body via any of the
sig ns.
normal orifices and within any of the body secretions.
● Immunity can be divided into innate factors, which
● To cause infection, a pathogen must be transmitted by a
produce the same response to every type of 'attack, and
 method that ensures that it reaches the susceptible
acquired factors, which produce a specific response to
the individual pathogen.
animal as quickly as possible or ensures its survival in
the environment before it enters the animal.
● Vaccination is based on the acquired immune response
● Methods used to control the spread of disease are mainly
and results in lifelong immunity to a disease without
aimed at preventing transmission of the pathogen.
suffering the symptoms of the disease.
Introduction
dealing with infection, it is important to understand how the
pathogen leaves the infected animal, how it transfers and
how it enters the susceptible animal or new host. Each
An infectious disease is one that is caused by the invasion of
pathogen has its own pattern, evolved to achieve optimum
harmful microorganisms or pathogens, which will establish
pathogen survival and virulence. Through training and expe-
and grow in the body tissues. The pathogens are then trans-
rience, the nurse will play an important role in the survival of
mitted between individuals and the disease spreads. When
the animal and elimination of the disease.
Spread of infectious
living cell, ensuring their survival and making them difficult
to eliminate. There are three basic shapes that are recognised:
diseases
● Bacilli (cylindrical or rod-shaped), e.g. Salmonella spp.
Causal agents
● Cocci (spherical), e.g. Streptococcus spp.
Microorganisms are living creatures seen only with the aid of
● Spirochaetes (spiral), e.g. Leptospira spp.
a microscope or macroscopically when grown in colonies.
They come in many forms and have varying forms of trans
They are further divided into groups depending on whether
mission and effects on the body. Not all microorganisms are
or not they stain with Gram stain (see Ch. 31). For example:
pathogenic, i.e. capable of causing disease; some are normal
inhabitants of the living body and live in harmony with the
● Gram-negative Salmonella spp. live within the
2
host without causing disease (see Ch. 30 for further details).
intestines
Pathogenic microorganisms are categorized as follows:
● Gram-positive streptococci cause respiratory disease
Bacteria
● Gram-variable Leptospira canicola causes leptospirosis.
Bacteria are single-celled organisms that range in size from
Most bacteria reproduce most effectively at body temperature
0.5 μm to 5 μm in length. They can replicate outside the
 but are not always pathogenic. They may be:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 413
21
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
● Commensals - live on or in the animal and do not
good nursing. Examples of viruses include canine adenovirus
normally cause disease
(CAV-1), which causes canine infectious hepatitis, and feline
parvovirus, which causes feline infectious enteritis.
● Facultative pathogen - become pathogenic within
immunosuppressed animals
Chlamydias and rickettsias
● Obligate pathogens - will always cause disease.
This group have characteristics of both bacteria and viruses and
In addition:
cause such diseases as psittacosis in birds, chlamydiosis in cats
and Q fever in a range of mammals, including humans.
● Saprophytic bacteria will only replicate on dead
tissue and are responsible for the decay of dead
animals and plants
Parasites
● Symbionts or mutualistic bacteria are organisms
Parasites are defined as eukaryotic organisms that live off
that both provide a benefit to the host and derive a
 another organism to the advantage of the parasite. They may
benefit for themselves - this process is known as
be:
symbiosis or muhualism.
● Ectoparasites - living on the outside of the body.
Viruses
They may cause discomfort and sometimes they act as
vectors of disease, e.g. Ctenocephalides spp. and
Viruses are extremely small, simple structures incapable of
Trichodectes canis transmit the tapeworm Dipylidium
replicating outside the body cell. They are obligate intracellu-
caninum; Ctenocephalides felis transmits
lar parasites and are sometimes classified as non-living.
Haemobarfonella, the causal agent of feline infectious
Viruses vary in their stability and, with the exception of
anaemia; ticks carry Borrelia burgdorferi, which causes
poxvirus, parvovirus and rotavirus, they do not survive well
Lyme disease
outside the host. They are difficult to treat once established,
as they are protected within the host cells and the chosen
● Endoparasites - living inside the body. Any
methods of treatment are prophylactics, vaccination and
 detrimental effects on the animal's health will depend
Ocular discharge
Fig 21.1 Methods by
which pathogens teave
the infected animat
Nasal discharge
Oral secretions
Vomitus
Blood
Milk
Skin
Semen 
veneral contact
Urine
Faeces
= Dead animals
414
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
on the species. Some may also be zoonotic, i.e. they
Box 21.1 Useful definitions
can be transmitted from the animal to humans; for
● Infectious disease - a disease caused by
example, Toxocara canis, the roundworm of the dog.
microorganisms that can be spread between individuals.
 may cause visceral larva migrans and Echinococcus
granulosis, a dog tapeworm, causes hydatidosis in
● Non-infectious disease - a disease that is not caused
humans (see Ch. 29).
by microorganisms but is usually due to a disturbance
in the normal metabolism of the animal, e.g. diabetes
mellitus, neoplasia, poisoning.
Protozoa
● Contagious disease - a disease that is able to spread
 from one animal to another via direct or indirect contact.
Protozoa are single-celled organisms causing varying levels of
● Direct contact - physical contact between animals.
 disease within animals depending on the species. Some may
 Skin surfaces of animals will come together during licking.
also be zoonotic, e.g. Toxoplasma gondii, found in cats, may
grooming. sleeping. fghting and, in rare circumstances,
cause cysts within body tissues and abortion and birth defects
 coitus. Microorganisms transmitted via this route need to
in humans. Certain species of Coccidia live within the intes-
live in or on an animal to survive. Pathogens spread in
 od aq  q od p s no s
this way are frequently fragile and easily destroyed.
intensively managed animals, causing coccidiosis, which may
● Indirect contact - no physical contact between animals.
be fatal.
Transmission occurs when the animal contaminates the
environment with body fluids, e.g. urine or faeces. The
Table 21.1 Methods by which pathogens can leave
microorganism is transported on fomites or by vectors and
can survive in the environment for varying periods
the body
depending on the species.
Part of the body
Secretion
Examples of disease
● Fomite - a contaminated, inanimate (non living)
Eyes
Ocular discharge
object, e.g. feeding bowls or litter trays.
Cat flu
Chlamydia
● Vector - an animate object that carries the
 Myxomatosis
microorganisms. These can be further grouped into:
Nose
 Serous nasal discharge
Cat flu
· Biological vector - acts as intermediate host in the
Kennel cough
lifecycle of some microorganisms or parasites. Some
Distemper
of the organism's development occurs within the
intermediate host before it is eaten by the
Mouth
 Oral discharge: saliva
Rabies
fnal/definitive host. For example, the cat flea is the
Vomit
Feline leukaemia virus
vector for the larval form of the dog and cat
Feline immunodeficiency
tapeworm Dipylidium caninum.
virus
+ Non-biological vector/mechanical vector - these
 Salmonella
play no role in development of the microorganism or
Ear
XEM
Otodectes cynotis
parasite and simply transfer the disease from one
animal to another. There are two types:
Skin
Ectoparasites
Ctenocephatides felis
Linognathus setosus
● Transport host - will carry the infection to
Trichodectes canis
another animal without becoming affected by it
at all. They maintain the viability of the
Mammary glands 
Milk
Toxocara canis
microorganism; for example, the cat flea
Feline leukaemia virus
transports the virus that causes feline
Circulatory system
Blood
Haemobartonella felis
panleukopenia and the rickettsia Haemobartonella
felis, which causes feline infectious anaemia.
Gastrointestinal
Faeces
Foxocara spp.
● Paratenic host - must be eaten by the fnal host
tract
Toxoptasma gondii
2
Salmonella spp
to continue the lifecycle and spread the
infection. The microorganism lives within the
Campylobacter spp.
paratenic host's tissue but there is no further
Urinary
Urine
Leptospira canicota
development; for example, cats eating raw lamb 
 Canine infectious
from individuals infected with the protozoon
hepatitis
Toxoplasma gondi will then become infected.
Reproductive
Vaginal discharge
Bruceffa canis
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
415
21
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
Fungi
● Saliva - may carry rhabdovirus, causing rabies, or
feline leukaemia virus
Most fungi are non-pathogenic but some are able to invade
healthy tissues and cause disease. They can be divided into
● Blood - may transmit feline immunodeficiency virus
yeasts, e.g. Malassezia pachydermatis, a common cause of skin
or Haemobartonella felis
disease in dogs, and dermatophytes, e.g. Microsporum canis,
which is a cause of ringworm in many species.
● Oral - a common route for the ingestion of
pathogens that affect the digestive tract, e.g.
roundworms, Toxoplasma gondi, Salmonella spp.,
Routes of transmission
Cryptosporidium spp.
In order to cause disease a pathogen must leave the host
animal, be transmitted between the host and the susceptible
● Venereal - occurs during coitus, e.g. Brucella canis
animal and then enter the susceptible animal. Pathogens
and transmissible venereal tumours.
are able to leave the host through any of the body orifices
(Fig. 21.1) and within any of the body secretions - the choice
● Carriers - some diseases may be transmitted by
depends on the species of pathogen (Table 21.1).
carriers. These are animals that secrete the pathogen at
intervals and are a risk to contact animals. They may
When the pathogen has left the body it must be transmitted
be classed as:
to a susceptible animal. This may be almost instant, e.g.
● Corvalescent carriers, i.e. animals that have recovered
droplets transmitted by sneezing or coughing, or may take
many weeks or even years, e.g. eggs of Toxocara canis may
from the disease, e.g. cat flu, canine infectious
sns e Aq pansai aq 0 Apeai sieak z 0 dn 1og ssi ui aapains
hepatitis, but secrete the pathogen, particularly
ceptible dog. The following list shows the methods of trans
when they are stressed
 mission used by different groups of pathogens.
● Healthy cariers, i.e. animals that have apparently
● Direct contact - the host animal touches the
  a q   sas an p n
susceptible animal, e.g. during grooming, licking, etc.,
Healthy carriers, e.g. of ringworm, are a particular
and the pathogen is transferred from one to the
risk, as there is no history of having had the disease.
other. Commonly occurs in the transmission of
Once the pathogen has entered the susceptible animal it
ectoparasites
must establish itself and replicate within the tissues. The
● Indirect contact - the host and the susceptible
most common site is the lymph nodes local to the point of
entry. When sufficient numbers of pathogens have been pro
requires a means of transport and a means of survival
duced they are carried around the body by the blood or the
often protection from drying out. The following are
I sd   n     
examples of indirect contact:
develop. The time lag between the entry of the pathogen into
the body and the development of symptoms is known as the
● Aerosol droplets - pathogens that cause respiratory
incubation period. The length of the incubation period varies
diseases survive within the water droplets coughed
according to the type of infection.
or sneezed into the environment. The contaminated
atmospheric air is inhaled and the pathogen will
 reach the nasal chambers and the pharynx
Disease control
● Topical (inoculation) - via bites or scratches. The skin is
The transmission of microorganisms can be minimized with
penetrated allowing the pathogen to enter the body
the use of prophylactics, good nursing care and client edu
systems, e.g. Staphylococcus spp.; the hookworm
Uncinaria stenocephala is able to burrow through the
practice:
footpads of the dog; feline leukaemia virus is spread
 by bites and scratches during cat fights
Treatment
● Faeces - contains many pathogenic organisms, e.g.
worm eggs and viruses such as parvovirus
Rapid diagnosis followed by rapid effective treatment will
prevent the spread of infectious disease to susceptible ani
● Vomit - may carry parvovirus, salmonella or
mals. In some cases euthanasia may be used as a means of
distemper virus
prevention of spread.
416
 Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
● Pine oil disinfectants have no activity against the
Hygiene
major microorganisms and should never be used,
Hygiene, involving cleaning, disinfection, sterilization and
especially if fungi are present.
personnel hygiene, is vital if the spread of disease is to be
prevented within a veterinary practice. All urine, faeces,
blood and discharges should be removed and incinerated,
Isolation and quarantine
as microorganisms will be present in large numbers. The
soiled animal should be clipped, cleaned and dried on admis.
Animals suspected of having an infectious disease should
sion, prior to surgery and before it is returned to its owner.
be isolated to prevent kennel mates acquiring the disease
All surgical equipment must be sterilized between each
as a nosocomial infection, i.e. an infection acquired during
use:
hospitalization.
● Cleaning - reduces the number of pathogens and
Two techniques are used to nurse the infectious patient:
 m no a a q  s 
detergents
● Isolation - segregation of infected patients to reduce
transmission of disease to susceptible animals
● Disinfection -- kills all pathogens with the exception
  a   sd p s
● Quarantine - isolation of animals that may be
incubating an infectious disease. This is sometimes
● Sterilization - kills all pathogens and bacterial
compulsory, as in quarantine for rabies. Animals
spores by the use of heat, ethylene oxide gas or
o   o m  n n
radiation.
also be quarantined, and the period of time will be
dependent on species and the incubation period of the
suspected disease.
Disinfectants
When controlling microorganisms within the hospital envi-
An isolation area should be set up within the practice. If
ronment it is essential to clean and disinfect correctly to
possible, this should have a separate entry door from the
prevent the transmission of pathogens between animals (see
outside and services such as water, waste disposal and ventila-
Ch. 7). Antiseptics are disinfectants designed for use on skin
tion should be separate from those of the main practice. In
and are used for scrubbing up prior to surgery and for
reality, the isolation area is often a cage within an area not used
preparation of the surgical site. Removal of organic matter,
by other animals. Basic nursing protocols should be applied to
e.g. faeces, blood, dust and hair, will ensure that disinfectant
all patients housed in the isolation area and strict clothing
agents are not inactivated before they reach the micro
changes and hygiene regimes should be rigorously followed (see
crganisms. Most disinfectants are used at a lower strength
Ch. 18).
for routine use and higher concentrations for specific
disease-causing conditions, but it is important to read the
Barrier nursing
manufacturer's instructions. Each disinfectant will have
different properties and may be classified as either bac-
This is a set of special nursing requirements that mean that
tericidal, i.e. it will destroy the microorganisms, or as bacte-
an effective 'barrier' is created preventing the transmission of
riostatic, i.e. it will inhibit their replication for a period of
time.
● Keep the animal in strict isolation
As a guide:
● Use the same kennel, if possible, for the duration of
● Most disinfectants are effective against Gram-positive
the stay
bacteria, as they are easily destroyed
● Clean and treat the patient after all others
2
● Gram-negative bacteria are more resistant, as are
bacterial spores. The aldehyde and halogen groups are
● Keep separate equipment, e.g. cleaning and feeding
most effective against them
equipment, for each patient
● Halogens (hypochlorites) are used for viral infections
● Disinfect all animal areas after use
● Fungi should be eradicated with a designated fungicide
● Use disposable gloves, apron and foot baths if
to ensure elimination of fungal spores
necessary.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
¥417
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
Parasiticides
Routine eradication of parasites will prevent their transmis-
emaciation and failure to thrive, and improve the animal's
sion to other animals, reduce the effects, such as anaemia,
immune system. It will also minimize the chances of the
Table 21.2 Zoonotic diseases
Zoonosis
Causal agent
Body system
 Clinical symptoms
Incidence/prevalence
Transmitted
Symptoms
affected
within
found in
humans
Campylobacter
Campylobacter jejuniGastrointestinal
Tenesmus
Dogs
Faeces
Fever
tact
diarrhoea:
Higher in puppies
 Poorly sanitized 
Abdominal pain
●Mucoid
Less commonly affects
kennels
Diarrhoea
Watery
adult cats but kittens
 Asymptomatic
●Bloody
up to 6 months of age
caTriers
● Bile streaks
Occasional fever
Anorexia
 Intermittent vomiting
Cat scratch
Pasteurella
n/a
(none, as Pasteurefla
Cats
Bites
Inflammation at
fever
is a commensal
Scratches
scratch/bite
bacterium - unless
wound
im munosuppressed)
Cellulitis
Occasional fever
Regional
lymphadenopathy
Cheyletiellosis
Cheyletietla spp.
 Skin/exocrine
 Pruritus
Animals within shelters I
 Hair and dander
 Pruritus
Scaling
Boarding and grooming
Urticarial weals
establishments
on trunk and
arms
Chlamydiosis
Chtamydia psittaci
Ophthalmic
 Unilateral
Adult cats
Ocular discharge
Mild
Respiratory
 conjunctivitis leading
Kittens between 2 and
conjunctivitis
GI tract
to bilateral
6 months of age
Reproductive
Nasal discharge
Birds
tact
Cryptosporidiosis  Cryptosporidium spp  Gastrointestinal
 Diarrhoea
Dogs (esp. > 6 months
Faeces
Vomiting
(a6e jo
Diarrhoea
Cats
Headache
Abdominal pain
Hydatidosis
Echinococcus spp
Gastrointestinal Malnutrition
Dogs fed on raw meat
Faeces
Abdominal pain
tract
Jaundice
Chest pain
Cough
Leptospirosis
Leptospira canicola
 Primarily:
Pyrexia
Unvaccinated dogs
Urine
Fever
Leptospira hardjo
● Renal
Jaundice
Rarely found in cats
 Contaminated 
Vomiting
● Hepatobiliary
Vomiting
bedding
Headache
Can also affect:
 Diarrhoea
Muscle ache
●Nervous
Jaundice
●Respiratory
Nephritis
● Cardiovascular
● Reproductive
● Ophthalmic
418
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
Table 21.2 Zoonotic diseases-Cont'd.
Zoonosis
Causal agent
Body system
Clinical symptoms
Incidence/prevalence
Transmitted
Symptoms
affected
within
found in
humans
Rabies
Rhabdovirus
Nervous system
 Change in attitude
Dogs
Saliva
Fever
Salivary glands
and behaviour
Bats
Anxiety
depending on dumb
Foxes
Headaches
or furious
Dysphagia
 Mandibular and 
Hydrophobia
laryngeal paralysis
Convulsions
Dropped jaw
Death
Hypersalivation 
Fever
Ringworm
Microsporum canis
Skin/exocrine
Alopecia
Dogs
Skin and dander Dermatitis
Crusty lesions
Cats - especially long
Alopecia
Erythema
haired breeds
Erythema
Hyperpigmentation
Ring-shaped 
Pruritus
crusty lesions
Roundworm
Foxocara canis
Gastrointestinal
 Abdominal distension Dogs, especially
Faeces
Can cause
tract
Cachexia
puppies
 containing L2
blindness
Coughing
larvae
(temporary or
Diarrhoea
 permanent) in
young children
Salmo nellosis
Gram-negative
Gastrointestinal
Vomiting and
Dogs - young, pregnant
Faeces
Watery diarrhoea
bacteria
tract
diarrhoea
Cats normally have a
Densely
Dehydration
Systemic disruption 
high resistance but
populated areas 
 Abdominal pain
Organ infarction
stressed, hospitalized
 Pig ear treats
Fever
Anorexia
cats
Exposure to
Malaise
carnier animals
Exposure to faw
meat
Sarcoptic mange Sarcoptes scabiei
Skin/exocrine
 Pruritus
sboa
 Skin lesions
Intense pruritus
Scaly lesions
Red lesions at
Alopecia
site of
contamination of
between fingers,
under breasts
 or in groin
region
Toxo plasmosis
Toxoptasma gondii
Reproductive
Normally
Cats
Faeces
Fever
 asymptomatic
 Infected hair
Headache
Lymph-
adenopathy
Cough, although
2
symptoms often 
ignored
 Pregnant
women:
Fetal changes,
abortion
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
419
21
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
 owner developing a parasitic zoonotic infection, e.g. visceral
The main defence against zoonoses are education and basic
larva migrans.
but rigorous hygiene routines. The veterinary practice must
devise its own rules and ensure that all staff are aware of
Vaccination
them. Care must be taken when handling infected animals
and their secretions. General guidelines to protect against
Vaccines are given to stimulate antibody production, so pre-
contracting a zoonotic disease include:
venting a specific disease. Hyperimmune serum contains
ready-made antibodies and can be given to the animal where
● Owner education - make sure that they are aware that
there is a high and immediate risk of contracting a disease
such diseases exist
The level of immunity must be kept up by the use of regular
booster vaccinations.
● Wear protective aprons, gloves and, in some cases, eye
 protection when dealing with infected patients
Balanced diet
● All faecal and urinary samples for testing should be
An animal receiving the correct nutrients will develop a
treated with care and disposed of correctly without
healthy immune response, which will enable the body to
contaminating personnel
fight any disease with which it comes into contact.
● Always wash hands with chlorhexidine or
Client education
 Clients must be educated as to what is required when looking
● Change infected clothing immediately after dealing
after an animal. This should include vaccination, parasite
with the animals
control and basic hygiene, all of which will help in the
control of disease.
● Keep kennel runs, gardens and children's sandpits free
from faeces.
Zoonoses
Infectious diseases
A zoonosis is the term used to describe any disease transfer-
able from animal to human, its opposite being an anthro-
The dog
ponosis, which is a disease transferable from human to
animal; for example, gorillas may be infected by human
 measles. An increasing number of households now own a pet,
Canine parvovirus
n       n 
risk of contracting a zoonotic disease. Unsuspecting owners
Aetiology: Canine parvovirus 2 (CAV-2).
may show moderate to severe illness, which may, on occasion,
be fatal. Some examples of zoonotic diseases are shown in
Very infectious disease. Virus mutated from feline parvovirus
Table 21.2. They include:
or panleukopenia in the 1970s. The virus is shed in the faeces
during the incubation period and is very stable, surviving
● Leptospirosis - Weil's disease
within the environment for over 6 months. Barrier nursing
and correct use of virucidal disinfectants are essential in con
● Cheyletiella spp. - mange
trolling nosocomial infections within the hospital. The most
critical stage of the disease for the animal is the first 3-4 days.
● Sarcoptes scabiei - scabies/mange
Transmission: via direct or indirect contact with faeces
● Ringworm
Incubation period: 4-7 days
● Toxocara canis - roundworm
Pathogenesis: Virus can only replicate in rapidly dividing
● Toxoplasmosis
cells such as lymph nodes, bone marrow, epithelial linings of
lung, liver and intestines, which makes this disease very
●Salmonellosis
common in young, developing puppies. Rottweilers, German
● Chlamydia psittaci - psittacosis.
this disease.
420
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
Clinical signs: Depression, vomiting, anorexia. Vomiting
Treatment: Good nursing care and symptomatic treatment
follows 48 h after the onset of profuse, watery, haemorrhagic
fluid therapy, antibiotics, antiemetics, anticonvulsants,
diarrhoea. Loss of body fluids leads to dehydration, which is
antitussives. Euthanasia may be considered in some cases.
the most common cause of death in these patients.
Prevention: Vaccination.
Diagnosis: History, clinical signs leading to enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing for CAV-2 antigen dur-
Canine leptospirosis
ing early stages of infection, as this is when the virus will be
shed.
Aetiology: Bacteria - Leptospira canicola (affects the kidney)
and Leptospira icterohaermorrhagiae (affects the liver).
Treatment: Isolation and barrier nursing. Rehydration and
maintenance fluids to replace the fluid deficit. Antibiotics to
A zoonotic bacterial disease contracted from contaminated
treat secondary infections.
water, especially stagnant woodland pools where rats drink
and bathe.
Prevention: Vaccination of dam before mating and puppy
from 8 weeks of age. In high-risk areas the dam can be given
Iransmission: Direct or indirect contact with contaminated
a killed vaccine during gestation and puppies can receive
water or urine. Can also be spread via transplacental and
antiserum or start early vaccination at 6 weeks of age, fol-
venereal infection.
lowed by the usual primary vaccine course. Puppies who
survive the disease will develop very good immunity, which
Incubation period: Up to 7 days.
may last a number of years.
Pathogenesis: Bacteria penetrate broken skin and mucous
membranes and replicate in the liver and kidney, causing
Canine distemper
hepatitis, acute renal failure and intravascular coagulation.
Leptospira can be excreted in the animal's urine for months or
Aetiology: Canine distemper virus - a morbillivirus related
years after recovery.
to rinderpest and measles.
Clinical signs: Pyrexia, vomiting, shock, interstitial nephri
A multisystemic viral disease that can become chronic, affect-
ing the dog several years after infection. The virus is labile
and environmental factors.
and is easily destroyed by sunlight, heating and drying. Poor
hygiene is normally to blame for disease outbreak.
Diagnosis: Blood samples show elevated urea and creatinine
and elevated liver enzymes alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
Transmission: Via aerosol droplets and ingestion.
and alkaline phosphatase (ALKP).
Incubation period: 7-21 days
Treatment: Rehydration fluids, to include plasma or blood
to correct the intravascular coagulation. Antibiotics,
Pathogenesis: The virus replicates in the tonsils and lymph
antiemetics and dietary management to assist with liver and
nodes, causing a viraemia. The next stage depends on the
kidney function.
animal's immune response. In animals with poor immunity,
further replication occurs within the epithelial cells of the
Prevention: Vaccination, especially in high-risk animals -
respiratory and gastrointestinal cells. The skin can also
working or outdoor dogs. Good hygiene procedures to
become affected, leading to the ‘hard pad' syndrome. In
animals with more established immunity, mild signs may be
observed but in each the virus will affect the nervous system.
Infectious canine hepatitis
Clinical signs: Pyrexia, nasal discharge, coughing, vomit-
2
ing, diarrhoea, chorea (twitching) and hyperkeratosis of the
Aetiology: Canine adenovirus (CAV-1).
pads. Fifty per cent of patients will be subclinical cases. Chronic
signs include encephalitis and rheumatoid arthritis.
Also known as Rubarth's disease.
Diagnosis: Blood samples show red and white blood cell
Transmission: Direct or indirect contact with faeces, urine,
inclusions and lymphopenia. Lymph nodes will harbour the
saliva and fomites.
virus and are normally viewed during post-mortem examina
tion.
Incubation period: 5-9 days.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
421
21
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
  s    n s 
Lyme disease
tonsils and lymph nodes via the thoracic duct. Viraemia results
and further replication occurs within the vascular endothelium,
Aetiology: Borrelia burgdorferi - a bacterium.
causing pericardial effusions, hepatitis and vasculitis.
Transmission: Via the tick Ixodes dammini.
Clinical signs: Anorexia, pyrexia, vomiting, diarrhoea,
hepatomegaly, conjunctivitis, photophobia, petechiae and
Incubation period: Not known, as the bacteria may lie
jaundice. Death can occur within 24 h.
dormant for several months.
Diagnosis: blood samples show increased liver enzymes,
Clinical signs: Lameness, pyrexia, lethargy, lymphadeno-
ALKP, ALT and bile salts.
pathy, cardiac arrhythmias.
Ireatment: Supportive therapies - fluids, antibiotics for sec-
Diagnosis: Blood tests.
ondary infections, anti-emetics, good nursing care.
Treatment: Removal of any ticks. Antibiotics and support
Prevention: Vaccination. Live CAV-2 vaccine is used to
Ive therapies.
protect against CAV-1 and CAV-2. Live CAV-1 will cause mild
symptoms and 'blue eye'.
Prevention: Regular treatment with a recognised ecto-
parasiticide, especially before visiting wooded areas that the
Kennel cough
tick may inhabit.
Aetiology: Numerous pathogens can be responsible, includ-
ing Bordetella bronchiseptica, parainfluenza (pi) virus 2, CAV-2,
The dog and cat
Rabies
Also known as canine infectious tracheobronchitis or canine
contagious respiratory disease (CCRD).
Aetiology: Rhabdovirus belonging to the genus Lyssavirus.
Transmission: Aerosol droplets, via direct or indirect
This notifiable zoonotic disease affecting all warm-blooded
contact. This is a common disease found where several
animals has been eradicated in the UK because of our strict
animals share the same air space, e.g. boarding kennels and
quarantine regulations.
hunt kennels
Transmission: Saliva within bite wounds.
Incubation period: 5-7 days.
Incubation period: Variable between 1 and 6 months
Pathogenesis: Organisms replicate within the upper respira-
depends on the area bitten and its proximity to the central
tory tract (parainfluenza virus is unable to replicate in
nervous system, the immune status of the animal and the
macrophages). Secondary infection attacks the damaged tra-
strain of the virus.
cheal epithelium. Ciliostasis can occur, due to toxins that are
produced in response to a Bordetella infection.
Pathogenesis: Replication of virus in the injured muscle
tissue before it enters the peripheral nervous system and
Clinical signs: Dry, hacking cough, with or without a ter-
central nervous system. Antibodies can attack the virus while
minal retch, which is precipitated by exercise, excitement or
in the muscle tissue but once the virus has entered the
palpation of the trachea. Animals are not normally pyrexic
nervous system nothing can be done.
unless a secondary infection is evident. A mucopurulent
nasal and ocular discharge and bronchopneumonia can result
Clinical signs: There are two forms - furious and dumb
from serious infection.
changes are seen within the animal before specific clinical
       s 
signs develop. Some cases may be atypical:
limited value.
● Furious form: Hyperexcitability, interspersed with
Treatment: Antibiotics, antitussives, restricted exercise, rest.
periods of calm, pica, biting and 'snapping' - often at
Most animals recover well and quickly.
imaginary objects, ataxia, progressive facial paralysis,
drooling, dysphagia, frothing of saliva. Death normally
Prevention: Vaccination - parenteral and intranasal
occurs after convulsions
422
 Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
● Dumb form: Animals are timid, often affectionate, and
Also referred to as cat flu or feline influenza. Once recovered,
have a generalized paresis leading to paralysis and
cats can become carriers and reinfect themselves and other
ataxia. Death normally results from paralysis of the
cats, especially at times of stress.
respiratory muscles.
Iransmission: Aerosol droplets via the oral, nasal and con.
Diagnosis: Clinical history. Histopathological examination
junctival route. Can be direct or indirect contact.
of the brain following death.
Incubation period: 2-12 days.
Treatment: None. Supportive therapies are not used
because of the zoonotic potential and disease prognosis.
Pathogenesis: The virus will replicate in the tissues of entry
All practices have local rules that cover procedures should a
into the body, e.g. mouth and nares.
suspected case enter the surgery.
Clinical signs: These are slightly different depending on the
Prevention: Animals in the UK are not routinely vaccinated
causal virus:
 ss an s an  a  s sn ns
Pets Scheme (PETS)
● FC V - sneezing, oral ulceration, chronic stomatitis,
pyrexia and occasional intermittent lameness
● FHV - symptoms are more severe - sneezing, pyrexia,
Salmonellosis
conjunctivitis, keratitis, corneal ulceration, anorexia,
Aetiology: Satmonella fyphimurium - a bacterium
depression.
This zoonotic disease is caused by a facultative bacteria living
Secondary infections can cause damage to intranasal struc-
within the intestines of the animal.
tures and chronic illness.
Transmission: Raw, uncooked meat. Immunosuppressed
Treatment: Antibiotics, fluid therapy and good nursing to
animals may precipitate their own illness.
include ensuring that the animal's airways are patent.
d q o spo soo  ' on  a 
Incubation period: Impossible to specify, as the bacteria
ment of a naso-oesophageal tube if anorexic. It is important to
have permanent residency within the gut.
remember that cats will not eat if they cannot smell the food.
Clinical signs: Depending on the severity - acute or chronic
Prevention: Annual vaccination. Owners should ensure that
gastroenteritis, drooling saliva, pyrexia, abdominal pain,
the boarding cattery they use has strict procedures for vaccina
slight icterus, breeding problems.
tion and isolation. Sneezing cats should be isolated immedi
ately or discharged if there is no secondary infection evident
Diagnosis: Faecal or saliva sampling to isolate high numbers
of the microorganism.
Chlamydiosis
Treatment: Isolate and barrier-nurse. Rehydration and
Aetiology: Chlamydia psittaci
maintenance fluids. Rest and allow the animal to recover to
encourage its own immunity to develop. Antibiotics are not
Also called feline pneumonitis. This disease is potentially
normally used as they can destroy healthy bacteria living
zoonotic and the persistent conjunctivitis often gets over
within the gut.
looked.
Prevention: Reduce the use of unnecessary antibiotics.
Transmission: Direct contact with ocular discharges.
Ensure that all food offered to animals is fresh and cooked.
Incubation period: 3-10 days.
2
The cat
Pathogenesis: The virus replicates within the point of
entry, the eyes and mouth.
Feline upper respiratory tract disease
Clinical signs: Unilateral conjunctivitis which can progress
(FURTD)
to bilateral. Mild rhinitis.
Aetiology: Feline calicivirus (FCV) and feline herpes virus
(FHV).
Diagnosis: Conjunctival scrapes/swabs.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
423
21
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
Treatment: topical and systemic antibiotics - to be given
Clinical signs: Sudden onset of weakness, lethargy and
over a period of weeks. All in-contact cats need to be treated
anorexia. Pale mucous membranes with associated tachy
to control further outbreaks. Chlamydia is sensitive to
cardia, tachypnoea and splenomegaly.
disinfectants, so kennels must be thoroughly cleaned.
Diagnosis: Examination of a blood smear - blood to be col-
Prevention: Vaccination of animals in contact with
lected within an EDTA coagulant as this wil free the parasite
Chlamydia carriers.
from the red blood cells.
Treatment: Antibiotics and steroids.
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
Aetiology: Feline coronavirus (FeCoV).
Prevention: Unknown.
This disease predominantly affects young cats, causing the
body cavities to fill up with effusions
Feline leukaemia virus (FeLV)
Transmission: Intrauterine.
Aetiology: A retrovirus.
Incubation period: Variable.
Most common in younger cats in multicat households, where
direct contact occurs during social grooming.
Pathogenesis: Virus replicates within the lymph nodes of
the gut, then transfers to endothelial layers of the body, to
Transmission: Vertically - via the placenta to the kittens;
include pleura, peritoneum, meninges and the kidneys, eyes
horizontally - in milk or saliva via bites and scratches.
and blood vessels.
Incubation period: Unknown.
Clinical signs: There are two forms:
Pathogenesis: Virus replicates in the oropharynx and
● Effusive (wet) - this is the acute form of the disease:
signs include ascites, pleural effusions, dyspnoea,
recover but in others the virus will further replicate in the
pyrexia, weight loss, jaundice
lymph nodes and bone marrow. Some cats have a latent
infection; others will be persistently viraemic and continue to
● Non-effiusive (dry) - the more chronic form of the
shed the virus in their saliva.
disease: weight loss, neurological signs, ocular lesions,
hepatomegaly.
Clinical signs: Many remain asymptomatic for years before
showing immunosuppressive signs and related disease condi-
Diagnosis: Serology, haematology and biochemistry.
tions. Reproductive problems such as resorption, abortion or
analysis of ascitic/pleural fluid.
stillbirth can be apparent before diagnosis.
Treatment: None, although steroids may be used in the
Diagnosis: ELISA tests detect the p27 protein.
short term. Symptomatic nursing by the owner is beneficial.
Treatment: There is no known cure. As infected cats shed
Prevention: Isolate breeding queens before kittening.
the virus they are a continual threat to others and euthanasia
may be the best option.
Feline infectious anaemia (FIA)
Prevention: Vaccination is available.
Aetiology: Haemobartonella felis, now known as Mycoplasma
haemofelis - a chlamydia.
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
Transmission: Ctenocephalides felis, the cat flea, ingests blood
Aetiology: A retrovirus.
as it bites. It then passes on the organism as its next bite.
This disease is common in free-roaming, older male cats, with
Incubation period: Unknown.
the highest incidence at the age of 5-9 years.
Pathogenesis: Severe anaemia can occur in immuno.
Transmission: Via bite wounds.
suppressed or debilitated animals. Parasitized red blood cells
Incubation period: A few weeks to a few months.
424  Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
Pathogenesis: The virus replicates at the site of the
The rabbit
bite wound, causing viraemia which cannot be eliminated
from the body. A permanent infection remains, leading to a
Respiratory disease
further depletion of T lymphocytes and resultant immuno-
deficiency.
Aetiology: The most common bacterial cause is Pasteurella
multocida: however, other organisms such as Staphylococcus
Clinical signs:
aureus, Enterobacter sp. and Pseudomonas aeruginosa are not
uncommon pathogens cultured from the respiratory tract.
●Primary infection - pyrexia, neurological signs, weight
Bordetella bronchisepfica has also been isolated from some
loss, lymphadenopathy, lymphopenia, increased risk of
severe cases.
neoplasia
          
● Secondary infection - chronic stomatitis, upper
of discharge matted on the medial aspect of the forepaws
respiratory tract infections, skin changes,
where the rabbit has rubbed it nose with its paws. Infection
diarrhoea.
significantly compromising the lung capacity.
Diagnosis: ELISA tests can detect the viral antibodies,
although early infections may not be very reliable.
Transmission: Both direct and indirect contact. Rabbits
develop little effective immunity following infection and
Treatment: Nothing is effective, although low-dose steroids
many are asymptomatic carriers, which perpetuates the infec-
may be beneficial for a short time.
tion in the community.
Prevention: Control breeding of infective cats by neutering.
Pathogenesis: After initial replication in the upper res-
Keeping cats housed indoors will significantly reduce the risk.
-s pos on s   a ' A
There is no vaccine available.
tures such as the nasolacrimal ducts or the middle ear. The
tracheitis, splenomegaly and subcutaneous haemorrhages.
Pneumonia is a secondary and complicating factor, which
Toxoplasmosis
causes pleuritis, pyometra and pericardial petechiae.
Aetiology: Toxoplasma gondii - a protozoon.
Clinical signs: Upper respiratory tract infection is usually
characterized by a serous exudate from the eyes and nose,
Transmission: Infected cat faeces containing sporulated
which later becomes a mucopurulent discharge. Infection
oocysts, which are ingested by a variety of intermediate hosts,
may manifest as any of the following: rhinitis (snuffles),
e.g. cattle, horses, sheep, mice and humans. Within the inter-
pneumonia, otitis media, conjunctivitis, abscesses, genital
mediate host the parasite settles mainly in the musculature
infections or septicaemia.
and causes few if any symptoms. If cats are fed raw meat from
an infected animal, the disease is transmitted.
Diagnosis: Culture a sample of discharge taken from at least
2 cm into the nasal cavity. The retracted swab can be used in
Incubation period: 2-5 weeks.
an indirect fluorescent antibody test or plated into a culture
medium. There is an ELISA test for detecting antibodies
Pathogenesis: The end host for T. gondii is the cat, where it
against Pasteurella multocida. When culturing abscesses, the
is found within the small intestine.
capsule wall should be sampled rather than the contents,
which are often sterile.
Clinical signs: Normally asymptomatic, although mild
cases of diarrhoea, lethargy, jaundice may show if cysts are
Treatment: Therapeutic agents must be carefully consid-
present.
ered, as severe dysbiosis and life-threatening enteritis can
2
occur if the wrong antibiotic is chosen. Safe antibiotics
Diagnosis: Blood test to detect antibodies.
include the fluoroquinolones, enrofloxacin, chloramphenicol
or trimethoprim/sulfadiazine (Tribrissen) given orally once
Treatment: Antibiotics.
daily for 10-14 days. Penicillin must only be administered
         
Prevention: Cook meat before feeding. clean litter trays
effective blood levels. Pasteurellosis is considered an essen-
regularly before the faeces reach the infective stage. There is
tially incurable infection, so the aim is to alleviate clinical
no vaccine available.
signs. In cases where there is improvement, therapy may be
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 425
21
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
indicated for several months. A useful adjunct to systemic
VHD is an acute, highly contagious infection first described
therapy is the use of nebulization. Antibiotics, a mucolytic
in 1984.
agent, a bronchodilator and saline to moisten the turbinates
can all be combined for this therapy. The nebulization is usually
Transmission: Aerosol transmission seems to be important,
well tolerated through a mask over the rabbit's nose.
although all secretions and excretions are sources of infec.
tion. Mechanical transmission by fomites, rodents and other
Prevention: Isolation of new rabbits until testing has been
vermin, rabbit byproducts and humans are all implicated in
performed. Detection and culling of carriers. Rabbits with
spread of the disease. Insects do not seem to be important
exudative rhinitis should be isolated from others.
vectors.
Myxomatosis
Pathogenesis: Replication is rapid, the incubation period
being only 24-72 h, and animals are found dead but in good
Aetiology: A pox virus.
condition. Gross lesions are subtle and generally restricted to
        n 
Myxomatosis is a fatal disease of all breeds of domestic rabbits
congestion of the lungs and trachea, which may be filled with
and the European wild rabbit.
froth. Haemorrhage in the thymus is common and there is
congestion of the liver, spleen and kidneys. Histologically
Transmission: Biting by mosquitoes, biting flies and fleas,
there is a massive, focal, coagulative hepatic necrosis.
and by direct contact.
Clinical signs: In protracted cases, dyspnoea, congestion
Pathogenesis: The virus replicates and does its damage in
of the eyelids, orthopnoea, abdominal respiration and tachy.
the dermis, and lesions are seen in the mucous membranes
cardia are seen. Before death there is violent cage activity,
as well as fibrotic nodule formation over the nose, ears and
with rapid turns and flips that resemble convulsions or
forefeet. There are few other characteristic lesions found
 mania. Some cases show a blood-tinged nasal discharge.
at necropsy, although the spleen is occasionally enlarged
and is almost always devoid of lymphocytes when examined
Diagnosis: The peracute course of the disease is the most
histologically.
important feature. Symptoms of respiratory distress, high
       
Clinical signs: Conjunctivitis develops, rapidly becomes
antibody techniques and immunostaining techniques can be
more marked and is accompanied by a milky ocular dis-
used to identify the viral antigen. Liver, spleen and lung are
charge. The animal is listless and anorexic and the tempera-
the specimens of choice as they contain a high number of
ture reaches over 42oC. In acute outbreaks some animals
virus particles.
die within 48 h. Those that survive become progressively
depressed and develop a rough coat. The eyelids, lips, ears
Treatment: The disease is always fatal and death often
and coat become oedematous and the vulva and scrotum
occurs before a diagnosis is made.
 p s s p d r 
becomes laboured. Death occurs within 1-2 weeks of the
Prevention: There is a vaccine for use in countries where
appearance of clinical signs.
the disease is already widespread and eradication efforts are
    s  a  
Diagnosis: The clinical appearance and the high mortality
rabbits entering from countries where VHD is present. There
are of diagnostic significance. Large, eosinophilic, cytoplas-
mic inclusion bodies in the conjunctival epithelial cells are
young rabbits, which may be due to passive immunity acquired
also helpful.
from ingesting colostral antibodies against the apathogenic
strain of lapine parvovirus.
Treatment: Supportive therapy is often tried but, as the
disease is invariably fatal, euthanasia is recommended.
Prevention: An attenuated vaccine is available. This should
The horse
be given every 6 months if the virus is endemic.
Equine herpesvirus
Viral haemorrhagic disease (VHD)
 s     
EHV-1 is associated with respiratory disease and abortion.
Aetiology: A parvovirus thought to be related to porcine
EHV-2 does not seem to cause disease. EHV-3 causes genital
parvovirus.
426
 Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
These viruses are endemic worldwide. They result in abortion
Treatment: One week of complete rest for every day of ele-
and respiratory disease, resulting in a significant financial loss
vated temperature. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories and
to breeders, and are a major cause of loss of performance in
antibiotics to prevent secondary infection.
racehorses.
Prevention: Inactivated vaccines. Safe live attenuated vac-
Transmission: The virus is easily spread through respiratory
cines are difficult to manufacture as the virus is capable of
tract secretions and morbidity can be 100%. Fetuses aborted
rapid mutation.
are heavily contaminated with virus and serve as a source of
infection to other in-contact horses.
Equine viral arteritis
Pathogenesis: After respiratory infection with virus, it
Aetiology: A coronavirus-like viral agent that causes
travels transplacentally in pregnant mares by migrating
international concern because of its abortigenic potential.
leukocytes within which it can establish latent infection.
Transmission: The virus is spread through respiratory and
Clinical signs: Respiratory disease is characterized by a
venereal routes and through indirect contact with fomites.
transient elevation of temperature to 40C, inappetence,
Aborted fetuses are heavily contaminated with virus.
nasal discharge, pharyngitis, depression and sometimes limb
oedema.
Pathogenesis: There is a predilection for the arterial walls,
so the main lesions seen are necrotizing arteritis.
Diagnosis: Serological diagnosis can be made on the basis
of a rising antibody titre (i.e. a fourfold rise in antibody
Clinical signs: Variable range and most infections are sub-
clinical. Fever, depression, inappetence, limb oedema, stiff-
made on post-mortem examination of the fetus and on virus
ness in gait, inflammation of the conjunctiva (pink eye) and
isolation.
ocular and nasal discharges.
Treatment: Symptomatic treatment, including antibiotics
Diagnosis: Virus isolation and /or serology.
to prevent secondary bacterial infection. Minimizing stress is
also important.
Treatment: Supportive therapy and rest. Most horses make
a speedy and uneventful recovery.
Prevention: Both killed and live attenuated EHV-1 vaccines
are available. There is also a vaccine containing inactivated
Prevention: Restriction of movement of horses from
EHV-4.
infected premises and, where permissible, by vaccination
with a modified live vaccine.
Equine influenza
Tetanus
Aetiology: Viruses of the orthomyxovirus group. They are
subject to constant change, known as antigenic drift.
Aetiology: Closiridium fetani -- a bacterium.
Transmission: Droplet infection and inhalation. The short
Transmission: Abundant in equine faeces and occurs
incubation period of 1-5 days and the persistent coughing
in the gut of other herbivores and in the soil. The organism
that releases large amounts of virus into the air contributes to
is anaerobic and is only able to multiply in damaged
the rapid spread of the disease.
tissue where necrosis and lowered oxygen tension
combine.
Pathogenesis: The virus infects the ciliated respiratory
epithelial cells, which lose their cilia and become oedema-
Pathogenesis: A toxin is released by the organism within
tous. The impaired clearance mechanism results in suscepti-
deep wounds, which enters the local motor and sensory
bility to secondary infection.
nerves. Free toxin may enter the capillaries and lymphatic
2
channels.
Clinical signs: Elevation in temperature to 41°C followed
by a deep cough. Serous nasal discharge, which soon becomes
Clinical signs: Incubation period varies from 1 to 3 weeks.
    d 
Inability to retract the nictitating membrane and spasms in
nodes. Occasionally there is oedema of the legs and scrotum.
the facial muscles. The ears are pricked; there is stiffness,
trembling, difficulty in eating and chewing. Muscular
Diagnosis: Isolation of the virus from nasopharyngeal swabs
responses become exaggerated. Sweating is profuse and
or serological examination.
the heart rate is elevated. The mortality rate is about
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 427
21
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
80%; death occurs within 1 week of the start of clinical
 sor T cells, which reduce B-cell activity, reducing the possibil-
signs.
ity of an autoimmune response.
Diagnosis: Based on clinical signs. The bacteria can be
Lymphoid organs, e.g. spleen and thymus gland, are responsi-
readily grown in the laboratory.
ble for filtering bacteria and other foreign substances into the
lymph nodes and for producing lymphocytes to combat infec
Treatment: Large doses of antitoxin prevent the toxin from
tion. The thymus gland, in the neck, contains macrophages and
damaging further nervous tissue.
immature and mature T lymphocytes. The spleen, found in the
cranial abdomen, acts as a defensive filter for blood and as a site
Prevention: Immunoprophylaxis is essential in horses
of B- and T-cell function. Other areas of lymphoid tissue, such
as the risk of tetanus following injury is so great. Vac-
as the palatine, pharyngeal and lingual tonsils, are permanent
cination with tetanus toxoid, regular boosters and
sites of lymphocyte aggregation, meeting and fighting microor-
the use of antitoxin when a horse is wounded are all
ganisms that enter via the oral or nasal route.
essential.
Lymph nodes are found at portal sites throughout the body
and act as a defensive filter for lymph and a site of B- and T-
cell function. The cortex of each node is densely packed
Immuni
with B lymphocytes, the medulla consists of lymphocytes
and plasma cells and the paracortex (junction of cortex and
medulla) contains T cells.
Also called functional or protective immunity, this describes
security against a particular pathogen, which makes the
animal non-susceptible to certain specific diseases. It involves
Types of immunity
the introduction of a foreign body or antigen into the body;
the body responds by enabling the lymphocytes (white blood
There are two types of immunity:
cells) to produce specific antibodies or immunoglobulins to
fight against that antigen.
● Innate immunity
Lymphocytes are the key constituients of the immune system:
●Acquired immunity.
they can produce antibodies against millions of invading
foreign agents. All microorganisms carry on their surface or
Innate immunity
secrete large protein molecules (the antigens), which initiate
the immune response. B lymphocytes, cells originating in the
Innate immunity is hereditary and congenital, i.e. present at
bone marrow, have proteins on their surface that bind to the
birth. Animals are automatically immune to certain diseases
antigens. Binding, in turn, stimulates the B lymphocytes to
that affect some species but not others. For example, myxo-
mature into plasma cells and secrete antibodies, which are
matosis affects rabbits but not dogs or cats, while foot and
then released into the blood circulation in response to the
mouth disease only affects cloven-hoofed animals. There are
enemy invasion. These mature cells develop a memory of
many non-specific factors that affect the ability of the animal
that particular invader and, when the antigen re-enters the
to resist invasion by pathogens. The response of these factors
body later in the animal's life, it will be recognised by the
is always the same no matter what the injury or type of
memory cells, specific antibodies will be produced and the
 pathogen. They include the following:
antigen will be attacked and eliminated before clinical symp-
toms are observed. This is humoral-mediated immunity.
● Genetic factors - may be due to the animal's species,
Immature lymphocytes within the bone marrow are not com-
breed or strain
petent to carry out their immune functions.
● Physical barriers - external or mechanical defence of
In addition, cells of another type, T lymphocytes, may bind
the body
to the antigen surface and assist with the immune response.
T lymphocytes, which mature within the thymus gland, have
● The inflammatory response.
proteins on their surface called T-cell receptors, which bind
directly to the antigen. They are responsible for cell-mediated
immunity. There are three types of T cell involved: the cyto-
The physical barrier
toxic or killer T cells, which bind to and destroy other cells
Providing they are not damaged and the animal is healthy.
displaying antigens on their surface; the helper T cells, which
the following will create an external and internal barrier to
assist B cells to stimulate antibody production; and suppres-
prevent ' invasion' of the body.
428
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
● Skin - the largest organ in the body provides
by specific antigens. For example, canine parvovirus anti-
 protection as the external covering of the body. The
bodies will be produced by the lymphocytes in response to
sebaceous glands produce sebum, which creates an
infection with canine parvovirus. It can be further classified
as follows:
bacteria while creating an environment for the survival
of normal commensal bacteria. Sweat glands release
sweat, which contains lysozymes with antibacterial
Natural active immunity
properties
 In this case, antibodies are produced in the body by lympho
● Mucous membranes - produce secretions, which
 cytes in response to the animal actually having had, and sur-
wash away any foreign material. The conjunctiva keeps
vived, the disease. This type of immunity is more pertinent to
itself clear by producing tears, the respiratory tract
viral disease conditions than to bacterial or protozoal infec-
produces mucus and saliva contains more lysozymes
tions and the antibodies produced following eradication of a
pathogen give lifelong protection.
● Hairs - microscopic hairs or cilia are found as part of
epithelial tissues in selected areas of the body, in
particular within the respiratory system. They are
Artificial active immunity
found in association with mucus-producing glands and
This involves the introduction of an inactivated form of the
are collectively termed 'ciliated mucous epithelia'.
disease into the animal's body to encourage the lymphocytes
Their function is to trap bacteria or foreign particles
to produce specific immunoglobulins but without actually
within the mucus and the hairs then sweep them away
causing clinical symptoms. This is the basis of vaccination: a
from susceptible organs
vaccine is an inactive form of a disease.
● Secretions - in addition to the above, semen contains
Artificial passive immunity
antibacterial proteins and zinc; the vagina maintains
an acidic environment that inhibits bacterial growth;
The animal acts as the recipient for antibodies via antiserum
and stomach acids provide an inhospitable
or hyperimmune serum, which have been already been pro-
environment for any pathogen that is swallowed.
duced within a donor animal. The transfer of this protection
is vital for animals with a poor or undeveloped immune
system. It gives them instant protection against diseases that
they may be susceptible to because they are too young to
Inflammatory response
form their own antibodies or because they have had no pre-
'uoui q io spunom Aq s'a 'paseup si Apog au um
vious exposure in the form of the disease or through vacci-
        
nation. This form of immunity lasts for only a few days
connective tissue. Histamine causes vasodilation of blood
because the antibodies themselves are foreign protein and are
capillaries, increasing the blood supply to the area, and the
broken down by the body's defence system.
area becomes reddened. It also changes the permeability of
blood capillaries so that plasma proteins and tissue fluid leak
out into the surrounding tissues, which then become
Natural passive immunity
swollen. Chemical mediators are transported by the tissue
Neonatal animals have an inherent ability to respond
fluid to the site and attract white blood cells, in particular the
n si assn  nq se as  
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs), which are able to
slower and weaker than in an older animal that has been
phagocytose dead and damaged tissue and bacteria to fight
exposed to many pathogens during its life. This means that a
the infection. The inflammatory response is essential in the
neonate is at risk of contracting a disease until it develops the
elimination of the initiating factor but it can lead to chronic
ability to produce its own antibodies. Maternally derived
problems if not controlled.
 antibodies, supplied to the neonate in the colostrum or first
milk, provide protection for the first 8-12 weeks of life.
2
Neonates must consume the first milk within hours of birth,
Acquired immunity
as at this stage there is an absence of digestive enzymes and
the large antibody protein molecules will be able to pass
This form of immunity is acquired by the animal con-
undigested through the intestinal wall into the blood stream.
tinuously throughout its life. It is also referred to as specific
A small percentage of maternal antibodies also reach the fetus
immunity, as it has a definite role to play in combating
via the placenta. The dam can only supply the level of pro-
specific infectious diseases. Acquired immunity involves the
tection that she has accumulated over her life via regular vac-
development of specific antibodies in response to attack
cination and disease exposure. Her reaction to antigen
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
429
21
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
identification and antibody formation rely on a healthy
immune system and vaccination prior to coitus or during early
antigen. In kits to detect antigens, antibodies specific for the
gestation. Any neonate deficient in colostrum will be suscepti
antigen are bound to the wall of the test well, wand or mem-
ble to illness until its own immune system has developed.
brane. The blood, serum or plasma sample is then added and
any antigen present will bind to the antibody present.
Washing of the test kit removes any unbound antibody. A
Immune response time
second enzyme-labelled antibody is added, followed by a
second washing. To finish, a substrate is added to develop a
The first time that an animal encounters a specific pathogen,
specific colour if the antigen is present.
antibodies will be produced within 7-10 days - known as the
primary response. By this time the animal may already have
 At present there are commercial tests kits available to recog-
developed symptoms; however, if the animal meets the
nise the p27 protein found in FeLV and to test for antibodies
antigen later in its life the immune system, having retained
in FIV cases. Fewer steps within the kits reduce the likelihood
the memory of the first response, is able to produce the anti
of human error and for further accuracy most tests contain a
bodies within 24 h, long before symptoms develop. This sec-
 positive and negative control. These kits are of most use in
ondary response is greater than the primary response
cats showing suspected clinical symptoms, animals that have
and is the principle behind the idea of regular booster
been in contact with a suspected case and as a precaution
vaccinations.
prior to breeding.
Vaccination
Diagnostic use of antibodies
ELISA tests
 Young animals have an insatiable curiosity and as they inves-
tigate the world around them will come into contact with
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is based on the
infectious diseases. The purpose of vaccination is to provide
ability to produce monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies to a
immunity to the susceptible animal by introducing a dis-
Table 21.3 Vaccines available for the prevention of infectious diseases in the dog, cat, rabbit and horse
Species
Infectious disease
Form available
Route
Dog
Distemper
L or ML
Subcutaneous
Hepatitis
L (CAV-2)
Subcutaneous
Parvovirus
L or ML
 Subcutaneous
Leptospirosis
K
Subcutaneous
 Parainfluenza virus
L or ML
Subcutaneous
Bordetella bronchiseptica
L
Nasal
Rabies
Subcutaneous
个
Tetanus
K
Subcutaneous
 Feline infectious enteritis
L ML or K
Subcutaneous
Feline influenza
ML or K
Subcutaneous
Feline leukaemia
L (non-replicable) K or subunit
Subcutaneous
Feline Chtamydia virus
K
Subcutaneous
Rabies
K
Subcutaneous
Tetanus
K
Subcutaneous
Rabbit
Viral haemorrhagic disease
Subcutaneous
个
 Myxomatosis
L
Subcutaneous
Horse
Influenza
Subcutaneous
Herpes virus
 Inactivated EHV-1
Subcutaneous
Rotavirus
K
Subcutaneous
Tetanus toxoid 
K
Subcutaneous
Rabies
K
Subcutaneous
Data taken from Mueller P 2004 Henston companion animal & equine veterinary vade mecum, 22nd edn. Henston, Peterborough
K, killed; L, live; Ml, modified live.
430
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
rupted and harmless version of the pathogen into the body to
Box 21.2 Vaccine terminology
stimulate the defence system to produce an immune response
● Vaccine - a preparation containing a small inactivated
in the absence of clinical disease. Although it has not been
quantity of an organism that would normally cause
proved that vaccination will completely protect the animal, it
disease.
will protect the animal from expressing all clinical symptoms
when naturally exposed to the disease. Vaccines are available
● Toxoid - a chemically or heat-treated toxin that has a
against most of the common infectious diseases of compan-
reduced pathogenicity but is still able to stimulate the
ion animals and horses (Table 21.3).
production of antibodies.
● Hyperimmune serum/antiserum - serum containing
Types of vaccine
antibodies to a particular disease. The antibodies are
extracted from an animal that has produced high
There are two types of vaccine used within current veterinary
quantities as a result of vaccination. Used when an
practice and they both have advantages and disadvantages
animal is in contact with the disease and requires
(Table 21.4):
instant protection, e.g. in a canine parvovirus
outbreak.
● Live attenuated (modified) vaccine- contains live
● Autogenous vaccine - a vaccine made from the
 organisms that have been attenuated by culturing the
animal's own cells. A sample is taken and prepared by a
pathogen in controlled conditions, e.g. canine
laboratory before being injected back into the donor
parvovirus, feline infectious enteritis. These stimulate a
animal. Used in cases of skin infection where traditional
good immune response but have the risk of causing
therapies have not been successful.
the disease
· Adjuvant - a substance that is added to an inactivated
vaccine to increase its efficacy and prolong its
● Killed (inactivated) vaccine- contains dead
action.
organisms killed by ultraviolet, heat or sublethal
● Attenuation - the virulence of an organism can be
chemicals such as formalin, e.g. leptospirosis. As the
reduced (attenuated) to a point where it is able to
dead organisms can not replicate within the body.
replicate but is no longer pathogenic.
several doses are required to produce sufficient
antibody levels
 Subunit vaccine - contains only a component of the
microorganism, which is enough to produce an immune
Vaccine management
response but cannot cause the disease, e.g. Felv
vaccine.
provide protection to the vulnerable young animal whose
immune system is underdeveloped. The first vaccination is
given as the maternally derived antibody levels begin to fall,
Table 21.4 Comparison between live and
and antibodies will be formed within 7-10 days. A second
dose is given 2-3 weeks later, stimulating the production
killed vaccines
of yet more antibodies with a quicker response time of
Modiffed live (attenuated)
Killed (inactivated)
12-24 h. This initial course provides antibodies for several
months and should be reinforced 1 year later with a 'booster'
One dose required
Two doses required
juasad on aineg n pannboe au dn-do, o auona
Allows controlled virus replication
No viral activity
the animal for the initial booster may result in a two-dose
Low antigen numbers required
 High antigen numbers
vaccine programme comparable to the primary course. In
Adjuvant not used
Adjuvant used - a reaction may
addition, the animal can gain natural active immunity
when exposed to disease, creating further antibodies and
be noted
protection.
Mild clinical signs may be
Killed so no risk of clinical signs
observed
2
The vaccines are administered by the following routes:
Contraindicated in
Safe in immunocompromised
im munocompromised animals
animals
● Subcutaneous route - this is the most common
Contraindications in pregnant
 Safe to use in pregnant animals
route and is given in the scruff. The site of injection
animals - may affect the fetus
needs to be varied to prevent skin irritation if this
Gives rapid and long-lasting
Shorter protection
route is to be used for a course of injections. Sterile
protection
equipment will be required but the use of a spirit swab
 is not advised, as it may precipitate a vaccine reaction
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
21
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
● Nasal route - drops placed into the external nares via
● Vaccine has passed the expiry date
 a modified syringe create local antibody and cell-
mediated immunity for respiratory diseases such as
● Vaccine was not stored correctly
Bordetella bronchiseptica, a causative agent for kennel
cough
● Incorrect administration route
● Oral route - available for some European vaccines,
● Use of antibiotics or corticosteroids at the same time
e.g. rabies vaccine used in wild foxes.
● Incorrect timing of primary vaccine course
Vaccines will only be effective if they are stored in a refriger-
ator at 2-4°C and remain cold. Warmth will kill the micro-
● Failure to boost the vaccine
organisms within a live vaccine. Stock control should be
observed and those with the shortest expiry date should be
●Animals may have a poor immune system
used first. The veterinary surgeon or nurse should understand
how to reconstitute vaccines and know which vaccines can
● Excessive use of alcohol or skin disinfectant on the
be mixed to reduce the number of injections to be given. The
skinn.
veterinary nurse can prepare the vaccination certificate but
the veterinary surgeon is responsible for the document and
Adverse reactions
must check all details and sign to authenticate it.
When introducing any foreign substance into the body there
is a risk of an allergic reaction. Owners should be made aware
Failures in vaccination
of possible effects and asked to report to the veterinary sur-
  a K sds so n a j o
Vaccines may be ineffective for various reasons and owners
lethargy to severe shock and may include:
must be aware that the veterinary surgeon may refuse to vac.
  s    p  
● Swelling of injection site
are suspected. Newly acquired puppies should not be brought
to the surgery until they have had time to settle, as stress will
● Urticaria
have a negative effect on the immune system, causing
vaccine failure. Older animals presented for vaccination
●Vomiting
without a current vaccine certificate will, depending on age
and health, be given a full booster vaccination to ensure that
● Diarrhoea
the animal is truly protected against all infectious diseases
(Table 21.3).
● Depression
Primary vaccine courses should be administered when the
● Ataxia
 passive immunity received from the mother has decreased, as
●Shivering
neonate's ability to respond to a vaccine. Delaying vaccina-
tion until MDA wanes may result in some puppies or kittens
● Collapse.
becoming infected and suffering the disease. Animals suffer-
ing systemic disease will suffer from immunosuppression and
Corticosteroids may be given as treatment and, if there are
protective antibodies will not be produced in response to the
signs of shock, supportive therapy must be administered. The
antigen. A risk of clinical disease within patients suffering
reaction should be recorded on the animal's treatment card
from FeLV and FIV has resulted in an abandoned vaccine
and a different type of vaccine should be used for the next
schedule.
dose.
Other causes of vaccine failure include:
Bibliography
● Animal has been exposed to the disease shortly after
vaccinating - before the body has produced sufficient
Bowden C, Master I 2003 Textbook of veterinary medical nursing.
antibodies
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
● Animal was actually incubating the disease at the time
Cooper B, Lane DR 1999 Veterinary nursing 2nd edn. Butterworth-
of vaccination
Heinemann. Oxford.
432
Prevention of the spread of infectious diseases
Davol P A 2o02 Vaccines, infectious diseases and fhe canine
Pratt P W 1998 Principles and practice of veterinary technology.
immune system. Available on line at : http://www.labbies.com/
C V Mosby, St Louis, MO
immun.him
Tilley L P, Smith F W K 2004 The 5-minute veterinary consult:
Fraser C M 1991 The Merck veterinary manual, 7th edn. Merck &
canine and feline, version 3. (Available as CD-ROM). Lippincott
Co., Inc., Whitehouse Station, Nf
Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, PA
      1    
Tindall,London
Recommended reading
Kelleher S 2003 Respiratory disease in the rabbit. In: British Small
Animal Veterinary Association Congress 2003 Scientific proceed-
Bowden C, Master I 2003 Textbook of veterinary medical nursing.
ings. Brifish Small Animal Veterinary Association, Birmingham
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Lightfoot T L 2002 Hyaluronidase: therapeutic applications
Entire book dedicated to the subject designed for veterinary nurses
including egg-yolk disease. In: Proceedings of the Association of
and those taking more advanced courses
Avian Veterinarians. 17-21
Ramsey I, Tennant B 2oo1 Manual of canine and feline infectious
Mackean D, Jones B 1985 Human and sociat biology. John
diseases.British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Quedgeley,
Murray, London
Gloucestershire
Mueller P 2004Henston companion animal& equineveterinary
Written for the veterinary surgeon but information is comprehen-
vade mecum,22nd edn.Henston,Peterborough
siveand approachable.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
433
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
22
Common medical conditions of
the body systems
Paula Hotston Moore
Key Points
● Medical conditions described in this chapter are defned
● Diagnosis may be confrmed by using the appropriate
as those that result from an abnormality or malfunction
tests and diagnostic procedures, which include:
within one of the body systems and are neither
laboratory tests, e.g. blood biochemistry, urinalysis;
infectious nor generally require surgery to correct
radiography: ultrasonography: endoscopy.
them.
● Confirmation of the diagnosis will lead to the formulation
● A detailed history of the patient followed by a thorough
of a treatment plan.
 clinical examination will elicit a list of potential causes
● Many conditions do not have a specific treatment and the
of the clinical signs, i.e. a differential diagnosis.
 patient is treated symptomatically.
Introduction
surgery to correct them. Many of these conditions elicit a dif-
ferential diagnosis which is a list of potential causes of the
The common medical conditions covered in this chapter may
condition. A veterinary surgeon will work through each con-
be described as those which result from an upset within one
dition on the list and undertake various diagnostic tests
of the body systems and are neither infectious nor require
which will eventually confirm the diagnosis.
Respiratory system
2. The use of suction will remove secretions such as
haemorrhage or excess saliva
Acute respiratory distress
 3. Intubation will maintain an open and clear airway in
Acute respiratory distress is a true respiratory emergency and
the unconscious patient
has many possible causes and they include:
4. Placement of a tracheotomy tube is a semi-permanent
●Airway obstruction (Fig. 22.1), e.g. by a foreign body
solution to maintain a patent airway
such as a ball
5. Oxygen therapy will ensure that air reaching the alveoli
● Trauma, e.g. road traffic accident
is rich in oxygen and thus aid oxygen exchange.
● Laryngeal paralysis
Oxygen may be administered in several ways - select the
method that is readily available and is most easily tolerated
● Poisoning
by the patient:
● Neoplasia
● A commercial oxygen cage is the ideal way to
administer oxygen as this provides an enclosed
● Overdose of anaesthetic
environment that prevents the oxygen leaking away.
Cage fronts can be purchased that can be fitted on to
● Pneumonia.
the front of an existing cage when oxygen therapy is
required. As it is transparent, the oxygen cage allows
Treatment
observation of the patient and prevents the animal
2
from feeling enclosed. An oxygen tube is fed into the
1. A patent airway must be maintained in order that air
cage via a hole in the cage front. This type of cage is
can pass through the trachea to the lungs
not available in all practices
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing435
22
Common medical conditions of the body systems
● Nasal prongs deliver oxygen to the patient and cause
minimal stress
●Respiratory stimulants such as doxapram
hydrochloride may be given to patients that do not
have respiratory obstruction
● Bronchodilators may also help in cases of acute
respiratory distress.
Coughing
A cough is defined as 'a reflex action causing sudden expulsion
Fig. 22.1 Bulldog exhibiting respiratory obstruction caused by
of air from the respiratory tract'. Coughing is a common clini
cal sign that occurs in several medical conditions and it is
stenotic nares
 important to determine whether the cough is dry and hacking
or whether the cough is moist and productive because this will
● A Hall's anaesthetic mask is placed on or near the
determine the differential diagnosis. Animals do not often
patient's nose and mouth to allow it to inspire
expectorate but usually swallow the material instead. A com-
oxygen-rich air (Fig. 22.2)
prehensive history from the client together with a thorough
clinical examination will ascertain the type of cough. Box 22.1
● An oxygen tent can be made from a large plastic bag,
shows some of the points that must be considered.
with the patient placed inside and an oxygen tube
leading into it. A clear plastic bag allows the patient to
Coughing may be caused by:
see out and helps to prevent the animal from struggling.
If only a coloured or black plastic bag is available, then
● Heart failure - in left-sided congestive heart failure
cut a hole in the bag and reseal it with cling film to
Aq pasin yno iso e m ysrd  sed a
provide a 'viewing hole' for both observer and patient.
 pulmonary oedema. Thoracic radiographs will show
Some animals, but not all, will tolerate this technique
the severity of pulmonary congestion and help to
decide the treatment regime. Thoracic radiographs
● An alternative is to place an Elizabethan collar on the
should be taken with the patient in right lateral
 patient and cover the front with cling film. An oxygen
recumbency if possible. Alternatively, a dorsoventral
tube is placed through the neck opening of the collar.
thoracic radiograph will still be diagnostic and will
This creates an almost enclosed area in which to
also be more comfortable for the patient if severe
deliver oxygen therapy
coughing or respiratory distress is present. During
Box 22.1 Points to consider when
taking the history of a coughing animal
● Breed of animal (some breeds are predisposed to certain
conditions)
· Age of animal
Presence of exercise intolerance
Length of time the cough been present
 Type of cough - dry/hacking or moist and productive
History of any trauma
Presence of any other medical conditions
● Exposure to possible infections
● In contact animals showing similar clinical signs
Fig. 22.2 Oxygen being administered via a mask
● Time of day when cough occurs or is worse
436
 Common medical conditions of the body systems
radiography it is vital to cause a minimum of stress to
● Lungworm infection - i.e. Aelurosirongylus absinusus
the respiratory-challenged patient. It may be advisable
in the cat and Angiosirongylus vasorum in the dog. The
to sedate the patient rather than administering a
larvae are coughed up and swallowed and are then
general anaesthetic and allowing the animal to adopt a
 passed out in faeces. Oslerus osleri is another canine
lungworm, which will also cause coughing in some
respiratory distress
infestations, although a number of animals show no
clinical signs. Faecal tests are performed to diagnose
● Upper airway obstruction - may be due to
parasitic infection (see Ch. 31)
laryngeal paralysis or an inhaled foreign body.
Laryngeal paralysis is paralysis of the vocal folds,
● Respiratory neoplasia - confirm by the use of
usually bilateral, and is often a degenerative condition
radiography
of the older dog. Laryngeal paralysis responds well to a
surgical procedure known as a laryngeal tieback
● Inhalation of a foreign body - patient will show
severe distress
● Viral or bacterial infection - for example, kennel
cough causes a dry hacking cough
● Tuberculosis.
· Feline asthma
Nursing care
● Tracheal collapse - most commonly a condition of
● Allowing the patient to adopt a natural position in
toy and small breeds of dog. The tracheal rings
which it feels comfortable and does not struggle, often
collapse inwards and cause coughing on exercise, often
sternal recumbency, will let it breathe calmly and
accompanied by dyspnoea. Manual palpation of the
efficiently between episodes of coughing
trachea in the neck and the use of radiographs and
endoscopy will confirm the diagnosis (Fig. 22.3). Most
●Antitussives, e.g. butorphanol, suppress coughing and
cases are managed medically by treatment of
are useful if coughing is causing distress but must only
underlying causes, e.g. bronchitis
be used in patients where suppressing the cough will
not cause further harm. Alternative drugs are other
+ Allergies
opiates, such as codeine or theophylline
● Aspiration pneumonia - may be linked to forced
● Nebulization is an effective way of hydrating the patient's
 feeding or feeding neonates
respiratory tract and will increase the effectiveness of
coupage (see Ch. 18). A commercially available nebulizer
● Bronchitis
is used to deliver sterile water to the patient via a mask or
with the patient restrained in a cage
● Pulmonary oedema
● Environmental factors should be examined and
adjusted if necessary. Dusty or fluffy bedding material
111600
such as straw or old-type blankets must be exchanged
SEX:
AGE:
D. O. BIRTH:
for bedding materials that do not separate into
 particles. A dusty or damp atmosphere will worsen a
cough: the living conditions of the animal must be
thoroughly investigated
● Owners should be advised that animals are susceptible
to passive smoking, so a smoke-free home
environment is essential.
Dyspnoea
 Dyspnoea is defined as “laboured or difficult breathing'. This
implies that oxygen supply is insuffcient to meet the de-
2
COMMENT:
mands of the body. Dyspnoea can be seen on close observa-
tion of the animal or by auscultation of the thorax. It may be
Fig. 22.3 Tracheat collapse shown on endoscopy
caused by:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 437
22
Common medical conditions of the body systems
 og e Aq a 'so   o
the pleural cavity and prevents the lungs from fully
will not allow sufficient air to pass into the trachea,
expanding.
causing the patient to become dyspnoeic
Nursing care
● Laryngeal paralysis - this will present as inspiratory
 dyspnoea as the paralysed vocal folds obstruct the
● Keeping the animal free from distress and anxiety will
 passage of air into the trachea
avoid making the dyspnoea worse
● Tracheal collapse
● Confine the animal to a small space where it can adopt
a comfortable position and not become agitated or
● Feline asthma
move excessively
● Pulmonary oedema
● Avoid handling the patient unless it is absolutely
necessary, to avoid a possible struggle
● Pulmonary neoplasia
● Oxygen therapy, as described above, may be helpful
● Pneumonia
● Monitor and record the patient's vital signs, e.g.
● Brachycephalic upper airway syndrome -
temperature, pulse and respiration.
commonly affected brachycephalic breeds include the
English bulldog, pug, Pekinese and cavalier King
Charles spaniel. The condition presents as dyspnoea
Epistaxis
due to problems such as an extended soft palate,
stenotic nares and laryngeal deformities. These
Epistaxis is defined as 'haemorrhage originating from the nose',
conditions interfere with the inflow and outflow of air
i.e. a nosebleed (Fig. 22.4). The original source of the blood is
into the upper respiratory system
not necessarily the nose but may be some other part of the res
       s
● Heart failure
'eune 1o eiseidoau Xpoq usiaioj e Aq pasnen aq Aeuu six
● Smoke inhalation following a house fire causes
Causes of epistaxis include:
dyspnoea because there is little or no oxygen in the
inhaled air during the fire. The smoke also irritates the
● Direct trauma, e.g. road traffic accident
respiratory system, causing inflammation and the
release of inflammatory fluid into the alveoli. Fluid in
● Nasal neoplasia - often unilateral. Confirm diagnosis
the alveolar spaces prevents air entering the alveoli
by radiography of the affected area
and interferes with gaseous exchange.
● Poisoning, e.g. from chemicals such as paraquat or
chlorates (weed killers), paracetamol and carbon
monoxide (exhaust fumes/poorly ventilated gas fires or
boilers). Ingestion of paracetamol and chlorates causes
haemoglobin to change into methaemoglobin, which
is unable to transport oxygen around the body and
leads to dyspnoea. In cases of carbon monoxide
poisoning, the haemoglobin combines with the carbon
monoxide rather than with the oxygen, resulting in a
much lower oxygen content of blood.
● Pain - caused by compression of the thorax, e.g.
during gastric dilation and volvulus. The abdominal
contents press on the diaphragm and restrict the
 expansion of the thoracic cavity
● Thoracic wall injury, e.g. diaphragmatic hernia or
invasive foreign body - leads to dyspnoea, as air enters
Fig. 22.4 Dog with epistaxis
438
 Common medical conditions of the body systems
● Foreign body, e.g. grass seeds, blades of grass, etc. -
Nursing care
will cause trauma to the nasal lining
● The administration of a fungicide via indwelling nasal
● Ulceration of nasal epithelium - may be due to
catheters is often performed at a referral centre
fungal infection caused by Aspergillus sp. or diseases
affecting the mucocutaneous function. A long-term
● Monitor the vital signs regularly
condition such as cat flu may also cause ulceration of
the nasal epithelium
● Prevent patient interference with the nasal catheters,
e.g. use an Elizabethan collar
● Blood clotting problems - haemophilia is the most
common in small animals
● Clean the nostrils to maintain patient comfort
● Severe skull fractures - rare but may cause
● Tempt the patient to eat with warmed food or by hand
epistaxis.
feeding
Nursing care
● Coupage is used to loosen mucus in the lungs, which
is then coughed up by the animal. Percussion of the
● Where dyspnoea accompanies epistaxis, treatment
chest is ideally performed with the animal in sternal
must be given for dyspnoea
recumbency or in a standing position. Cupped hands
are placed on either sides of the lateral thorax, starting
● If a foreign body is visible then it should be removed.
 at the diaphragm. Maintaining cupped hands and
In some more difficult cases it may be better to remove
loose wrists, the hands move along the length of the
it when the animal is sedated or anaesthetized
thorax progressing cranially, percussing the chest
along its length. Coupage should be performed for
● A cold compress applied to the nose will alleviate pain
10 min three to four times a day. It is typically well
and aid haemorrhage
tolerated by the patient. Using nebulization prior to
coupage may help loosen dehydrated mucus.
● Topical vasoconstrictor drugs may be squirted into the
nose to prevent haemorrhage.
Table 22.1 Conditions affecting the pleural cavity
Condition
Definition
Pneumothorax
Discharges
Presence of air in the pleural cavity
Pyothorax
Accumulation of pus in the pleural cavity
Haemothorax
 Accumulation of blood in the pleural cavity
 a are s  an na s
Chylothorax (Fig. 22.5)
 Accumulation of chyle in the pleural cavity
in origin. Serous discharges are clear in colour and often due
to a viral infection. Mucopurulent discharges are thicker in
Hydrothorax
Accumulation of serous fluid in the pleural
consistency and often yellow or green in colour. These are
cavity
often a result of a secondary bacterial infection following an
initial viral infection.
Fungal infections
The most frequent fungal infection of the respiratory system
is due to Aspergillus fumiganus, which invades the nasal
mucosa. It is more common in long-nosed or doliocephalic
breeds of dog and very rare in cats. Clinical signs are a
mucopurulent nasal discharge, which may become blood-
stained, sneezing and pain. Diagnosis is confirmed by radio-
graphy, nasal culture, rhinoscopy and nasal biopsies. Surgical
2
treatment is usually successful, using indwelling catheters
placed in the frontal sinuses and then flushing the nasal
chambers with fungicides, e.g. clotrimazole.
Fig. 22.5 Dog with chylothorax prepared for fluid drainage
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
439
22
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Pleural disorders
 j aas an uodn sudap 'pe eaousp jo suiss
These are summarized in Table 22.1.
case, asphyxiation and unconsciousness leading to death
(Table 22.2).
Pneumothorax frequently occurs as a result of trauma, e.g.
a road traffic accident, gunshot wound, bites to the chest wall
Diagnosis may be confirmed by the use of radiography
(Fig. 22.6). The removal of the air or fluid from the thoracic
Table 22.2 Types of pneumothorax
cavity by thoracocentesis is essential in both the diagnosis
 and treatment of these conditions.
Type of pneumothorax
Definition
Open pneumothorax
An opening into the thoracic cavity is
present, e.g. from a penetrating
wound. Air enters the thoracic cavity,
thus destroying the negative pressure
within the pleural cavity, leading to
lung collapse
Closed pneumothorax
Lung tissue is torn or crushed, e.g.
by a fractured rib, allowing air to
escape into the pleural space and
destroying the normal vacuum. The
lungs are then unable to expand in
the normal way and the animal
becomes dyspnoeic
Tension pneumothorax
A type of closed pneumothorax in 
which the air pressure in the pleural
space increases every time the animal
breathes in, resulting in progressive
lung collapse
Fig. 22.6 Pneumothorax - lateral radiograph of a dog
Urinary
● Pyelonephritis - infection of the renal pelvis,
em
usually due to an ascending bacterial infection from
the lower urinary tract
Renal disease
● Interstitial nephritis - affects the tissue between
Renal disease is only noticed clinically when 75% of the renal
the nephrons but clinical signs are similar to those of
tubules are functionally impaired. Until this happens the
 any type of nephritis. Associated with blood-borne
kidney is able to compensate and function normally, so by
infections, e.g. leptospirosis, canine adenovirus
the time clinical signs are evident the condition is already
severe. All parts of the kidney work together, so, if any part is
● Urinary calculi - the formation of calculi or 'stones'
diseased, kidney function as a whole will be affected.
within the bladder
Causes of renal disease include:
● Urinary obstruction - if the calculi move along the
urinary tract they may cause obstruction
● Poisoning, e.g. mercury, ethylene glycol,
sulphonamide
● Neoplasia
● Nephritis - to any inflammatory condition of the
●Trauma.
kidney
Acute renal failure
● Glomerulonephritis - often immune-mediated,
affecting the renal glomerulus and thus renal
May be due to severe dehydration, circulatory failure, poi-
filtration
soning, urinary tract obstruction or trauma. The patient
440
 Common medical conditions of the body systems
shows signs of acute abdominal pain, anorexia, pyrexia, vom-
Table 22.3 Common types of urolith
iting and oliguria, which may become polyuria at a later
Type of urolith
Found in acidic/
Notes
alkaline urine
of the underlying cause, e.g. poisoning, obstruction, is essen-
tial. Correction of dehydration status by intravenous fluids is
Struvite/triple
Alkaline
 Often an incidental finding
required, together with supportive therapies such as antibi-
phosphate
in dogs and cats. More
otics and nursing care.
common in bitches than male
 dogs. Bacterial infection
 often present in dogs. Most
common in cats
Calcium
Alkaline
Less common in dogs and
Chronic renal failure
carbonate
cats but common in
herbivores, e.g. rabbits
May be due to congenital problems, interstitial nephritis,
glomerular nephritis, pyelonephritis or long-term urinary
Uric acid
Acidic
Common in dalmatians
obstruction. Usually seen in older animals, where onset is
Ammonium urate/ Acidic
Common in dalmatians. In
gradual and the condition may not be diagnosed until the
Ammonium acid
other breeds often
kidney fails to compensate. Presents as polydipsia and
urate
accompanies liver failure.
polyuria, anorexia and weight loss, anaemia, gingivitis, oral
Often poorly radiopaque so
ulceration, halitosis and hypertension. Treat symptomatically
not always identifed on 
but, once the condition is established, very little can be done.
plain radiographs
Calcium oxalate
Acidic
Sometimes an incidental
fnding in dog and cat urine
Cystine
Acidic
Less common urolith, almost
Urinary obstruction
always found in male dogs
Commonly caused by 'stones' (calculi or uroliths; Fig. 22.7).
The formation of calculi, or urolithiasis, is complicated but is
considered to be due to high concentrations of salts in the
The presence of urinary calculi may or may not cause clinical
body. In dogs and cats 50% of uroliths are struvite, composed
signs. Where clinical signs do occur, the patient will show
of magnesium ammonium phosphate salts known as triple
varying signs of local pain and discomfort, haematuria, urinary
phosphate. Other calculi may be made of oxalate, urate, uric
tenesmus, dysuria or possibly anuria or urinary incontinence.
acid or cystine (Table 22.3).
Urinary calculi may obstruct the urethra, often at the ischial
 arch in male dogs, or they may cause irritation of the lining
of the bladder.
 A diagnosis is reached from interpretation of the clinical signs
and the inability to pass a urinary catheter and it is confirmed
by the use of radiography, particularly the use of contrast
media (see Ch. 32).
Surgical removal of the calculi is often necessary, followed by
prophylactic measures to avoid recurrence, e.g. control of
urinary infection, increasing water intake, dietary changes
and using urinary acidifiers. Encouraging the patient to pass
urine frequently discourages re-formation of calculi. Renal
function must also be checked in such cases by performing
routine biochemistry. Chemical analysis of the removed
urinary uroliths will help in the treatment and prevention of
recurrence. Urinary acidifiers, such as methionine or ammo-
nium chloride, are either added to the patient's food or
2
administered orally. Some diets used in the treatment of
uroliths contain urinary regulators, so care must be taken not
Fig. 22.7 Bladder stones from a cat
to 'double-dose' the patient.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
441
22
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Other urinary problems
Urinary incontinence
Neoplasia
This is the involuntary passage of urine. Diagnosis is made
from an extensive client history, radiography and urinary
Uncommon. Surgical removal of the tumour is possible but
catheterization. Causes include:
this condition offers a poor prognosis. Diagnosis is made by
radiography.
● Congenital anatomical malformation, e.g. ectopic
ureter (Fig. 22.8) - can be corrected surgically
Trauma
● Neoplasia
Trauma, e.g. a road traffic accident or a kick, may cause
●Hormonal - in spayed bitches; treat with oestrogens
haematuria, anuria and the patient may show signs of acute
renal failure. Diagnosis is made by radiography and para-
● Displacement of the bladder, e.g. after a road traffic
centesis - removal of fluid from the abdomen. A ruptured
accident
bladder will require surgical repair. Milder trauma will
resolve with medical management, e.g. fluid therapy and
● Prostate disease
supportive treatment.
● Neurological disorders, e.g. spinal trauma or disease
●Senility
Cystitis
This is caused by a urinary tract infection, which is often
● Psychological, e.g. excitement or fear.
ascending. It is more common in females than males because
of the anatomy of the opening of the tract in relation to the
anus - often caused by faecal contamination. An infection is
Urinary catheterization
more likely if a urinary obstruction is present or where
Urinary catheterization is performed for many reasons
smaller amounts of urine more frequently, often showing
(see also Ch. 18).
signs of tenesmus and haematuria. Treat with antibiotics
following a urinary bacterial culture and sensitivity test
An aseptic technique must be used to place the urinary
catheter to avoid introducing infection into the bladder. The
 use of antibiotics in a patient with a urinary catheter in place
is controversial. There is more likelihood of a urinary tract
infection following catheterization if the patient is immuno-
suppressed, if recurrent catheterization is necessary or if there
is already trauma to the urinary tract. To avoid damaging the
urethra the catheter should always be introduced with care
and not forced into the urethra. In cases of urolithiasis and
sediment in the urethra the catheter will not pass easily and
an alternative means of treatment must be sought. If the
catheter becomes blocked, flushing with sterile water or
 sterile saline may clear the blockage.
Urinary catheters are purchased pre-sterilized (Table 22.4).
Ideally, they should be used once and then discarded - a new
catheter for each animal. Catheters should be stored flat and
not allowed to curl, since this will hinder catheter placement.
All urinary catheters must be lubricated and checked prior to
use, maintaining the sterility of the catheter. The stylet, if
present, is checked for ease of movement and the balloon in
the Foley catheter is inflated prior to use to check for holes
and then deflated for insertion. Where indwelling urinary
Fig. 22.8 Radiograph showing an ectopic ureter in a dog
buster collar is commonly used.
442
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Table 22.4 Types of urinary catheter
Types of urinary catheter
Dog/cat
Comments
Jackson cat catheter
7e3
 Can be used as an indwelling catheter
Commonly used in male cats but can
Has a Luer fitting
also be used in female cats
Available in two sizes: 3 and 4 FG
Has a stylet to aid insertion
Plastic plain urethral catheter
Dogs, bitches and female cats
Longer than the Jackson cat catheter
Has no stylet
Available in variety of diameters and lengths
Has a Luer fitting
Can be used as an indwelling catheter
Foley catheter
Bitches
Can be used as an indwelling catheter
Available in a variety of diameter and lengths
Catheter does not come with a stylet but a separate stylet is
often necessary to aid insertion
Does not have a Luer fitting so a connector is required to
attach the catheter to the urinary drainage system
When used as an indwelling catheter the balloon is inflated with
sterile water or sterile saline. The amount of fluid required to
inflate the balloon is stated on the end of the catheter
Care must be taken with lubricants and latex rubber - KY jelly is
the lubricant of choice
Tieman's catheter
Bitches
Not used as an indwelling catheter as impossible to suture in
place effectively
Curved tip aids insertion 
Has a Luer fitting
Has no stylet
Metal catheter
Bitches
Now considered outdated. Difficult to use as made of inflexible
material. Other catheters have now superseded this type
Cystocentesis
it firmly. A sterile needle with attached syringe is inserted
In some cases cystocentesis may be used as an alternative
through the abdominal wall into the bladder and urine is
method of draining the bladder. An area of hair on the
withdrawn. This procedure can be performed in a conscious
ventral abdomen, over the site of the bladder, is clipped and
animal in either lateral recumbency or in a standing position.
surgically prepared. Locate the bladder by palpation and hold
Cystocentesis is well tolerated in most patients.
diovascular
Congenital heart disease
em
Congenital heart lesions represent about 5% of canine cardiac
disease (Detweiler & Patterson 1965). They are commonly diag-
 nosed when the heart is auscultated during the check-up prior
Heart disease
to the first vaccination consultation. Table 22.5 describes the
range of conditions and their treatment.
Heart disease may be:
● Congenital - present at birth but usually detected at
Acquired heart disease
2
the time of first vaccination
     s
● Acquired - may develop as the animal ages.
canine cardiac diseases (Detweiler & Patterson 1965).
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
443
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Table 22.5 Congenital heart conditions
Congenital condition
 Clinical signs
Diagnosis
Comments
Treatment
Pulmonic stenosis
 Exercise intolerance
Radiography
This is a narrowing of the pulmonary
 Surgical correction
Syncope
semilunar valve
Will lead to right sided congestive
heart failure
Aortic stenosis
Syncope
Radiography
This is a narrowing of the aortic
Surgical correction
 Exercise intolerance
semilunar valve
Patent ductus
Stunted growth
Radiography
 Persistence of a small vessel which
 Surgical ligation
arteriosus (PDA)
Sudden death
links the aorta to the pulmonary
 Exercise intolerance
artery - normally closes over at birth.
Coughing
Seen in young animals, commonly
Dyspnoea
detected at vaccination consultation 
inwnu 1eH
Breed predisposition - German
shepherd dogs, Irish setters and
Crossbreeds
Ventricular septal
Exercise intolerance
Radiography
Commonly known as 'hole in the
Requires heart bypass - not
defect (VSD)
Signs of congestive heart failure
heart' - this is a hole in the
 generally available in the
interventricular septum
UK
Mitral or tricuspid
Heart murmur
Clinical
A common congenital condition 
 Requires heart bypass - not
valve dysplasia
 examination
 generally available in the
UK
Tetralogy of Fallot
Heart murmur
Clinical
A combination of ventricular septal
Surgery possible but not
 Exercise intolerance
 examination 
defect, pulmonary stenosis, a
often performed
Weight loss
displaced aorta and hypertrophy of
Very guarded prognosis
Cyanosis
the right ventricular wall
Persistent right aortic
 Usually no cardiac signs are
Radiography
Causes oesophageal constriction
Surgical ligation
arch/vascular ring
present
 anomaly
Regurgitation 
 Oesophageal diverticulum
cranial to the stricture
Possibly aspiration pneumonia
Table 22.6 describes the range of conditions and their
a gradual onset over a period of time. Numerous diseases or
treatment.
conditions affecting the heart lead to heart failure. The heart
is able to compensate for any defects so many heart condi-
tions go unnoticed until the condition severely affects cardiac
hmia
output.
The term arrhythmia indicates an abnormality in the normal
The heart may compensate in the following ways:
rhythm of the heart. Table 22.7 describes types of arrhythmia
and their treatment.
● Peripheral vasoconstriction - increases circulating
blood volume
Heart failure
● Tachycardia - increases cardiac output
Heart failure is defined as 'an inability of the heart to provide
● Enlargement of the heart chambers
sufficient output to maintain the blood circulation'. Heart
failure is either acute with a sudden onset or chronic having
●Myocardial hypertrophy
444
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Table 22.6 Acquired heart disease
Acquired condition 
 Clinical signs
Diagnosis
Comments
 Treatment
Endocardiosis
Left-sided heart failure leading 
Clinical
Valvular disease
No specific treatment
to congestive heart failure
examination 
Valves leak when closed
 Management of heart failure
Heart murmur
Client history
 Common in small breeds of dog
Mitral valve commonly affected
and occasionally the tricuspid
valve
Endocarditis
Weight loss
Electrocardiography
An uncommon disease
Antibiotics
Anorexia
(ECG)
Associated with a bacterial
 Supportive therapy, e.g.
Lethargy
 Clinical examination 
infection present elsewhere in
rest, warmth, TLC
Inflammation of other body
Haematology
the body and having spread to
Guarded prognosis
parts, e.g. lameness, joint pain
the heart valves
Pyrexia
Bounding pulse
Myocarditis
Pyrexia
Clinical examination 
Very rare
No specific treatment but
Infection of heart muscle
treat underlying cause
antibiotics and
corticosteroids
Pericardial disease
Ascites
Auscultation
Leads to right sided heart failure Aspiration of fluid
Muffled heart sounds
Clinical examination
Usually accompanied by
Radiography
pericardial effusion
Bradycardia
Incidental fnding on clinical
Auscultation
Usually defined as a heart rate
Treat the underlying disease
examination while investigating
ECG
< 60 beats per minute
underlying medical disease,
e.g. Addison's disease
Tachycardia
 Incidental finding on clinical
Auscultation
Usually defined as a heart rate
Treat the underlying disease
examination while investigating
of ≥ 150-200 beats per minute
underlying medical disease,
Commonly found in congestive
e.g. feline hyperthyroidism
heart failure
Or adrenal neoplasia
Remember that environmental
and physical factors, e.g. fear,
pain, excitement, can cause 
tachycardia
Arrhythmias
Vary from none through
ECG
A deviation from the normal
Medical therapy, e.g.
 Syncope to sudden death
heart rhythm
lidocaine
● Decreased renal perfusion, leading to:
●Obesity
● Aldosterone release and an increase in plasma volume
● Sudden excessive exercise or activity
● Angiotensin release, peripheral vasoconstriction and
thus hypertension.
●Excessive environmental temperature, leading to
hyperthermia
Many factors can affect the ability of the heart to com-
 pensate, including:
●Pregnancy
2
● Myocardial disease
● Respiratory disease
● Heart valve disease
● Shock
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
445
22
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Table 22.7 Types of arrhythmia
Type of arrhythmia
Diagnosis
Comments
 Treatments
Sinus arrhythmia
Auscultation
Commonly found in normal dogs. Related to
None required
breathing: heart quickens on inspiration and
slows on expiration
Premature beats/missed or
Auscultation
Caused by ventricles beating prematurely
Medical drug therapy, e.g.
dro pped beats
Electrocardiography
propranolol
(ECG)
Atrial fibrillation or flutter'
Auscultation
A random variation in heart rhythm
Medical drug therapy. e.g.
(ueay snonzjnun)
ECG
More common in large and giant breeds
propranolol
In dogs, may develop as part of congestive
heart failure
 Often accompanies cardiomyopathy
Heart block
Auscultation
Conducting system of heart fails, producing
Surgical implantation of a
ECG
slower and less forceful contractions
pacemaker
Varies in severity, most important is 
third-degree block, resulting in severe
bradycardia
●Haemorrhage
● Tricuspid dysplasia
Anaemia:
● Endocardiosis
Heart failure can affect one particular side of the heart and is
●Congestive cardiomyopathy
then referred to as right-sided heart failure or left-sided heart
failure:
● Pericardial effusions
● Left-sided heart failure - may be caused by:
● Neoplasia
● Aortic stenosis
● Myocarditis
● Mitral valve dysplasia
● Following long-term left-sided heart failure.
● Endocardiosis
The clinical signs include pooling of blood in the
veins leading to oedema, hepatomegaly,
● Cardiomyopathy
splenomegaly, ascites, muffled heart sounds and dys-
rhythmias.
● Obstruction of aorta
Congestive heart failure occurs when both the left and the
● Dysrhythmias.
right sides of the heart fail simultaneously. This can often
happen following a one-sided heart failure.
The clinical signs include pulmonary oedema and
 congestion, tachypnoea, dyspnoea, coughing lethargy,
tachycardia and pulmonary rales. All signs will become
worse with exercise and in severe cases exercise must be
 limited to avoid precipitating cardiac arrest and death.
Treatment
● Right-sided heart failure - may be caused by:
The main treatment of heart failure is by using drugs and
Table 22.8 shows the four main groups of drug that are
● Pulmonic stenosis
commonly used.
446
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Table 22.8 Drugs used in the treatment of heart failure
Drugs used in the treatment
Effect of drug
Example of drug
of heart failure
Glycosides
Affect heart muscles, cause stronger contractions
Digitalis
Vasodilators/ACE inhibitors
Increases the diameter of blood vessels, thus increasing the vascular space. ACE
Prazosin, enalapril
inhibitors are especially useful in the treatment of congestive heart failure. They
work by blocking angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), which reduces fluid
retention and thus blood pressure
Diuretics
Increase urine output, thus removing excess fluid in ascites and oedema
Furosemide (Frusemide)
Xanthine derivatives
Act on heart muscle to strengthen contractions
Theophylline
In addition to drugs, the following may also be used:
● Exercise - should be regular and not excessive.
 Patients must maintain a constant exercise regime in
● Diuresis - in heart failure, fluid is retained and
terms of both frequency and amount. It is important
accumulates in the body tissues because the heart is
to avoid sudden bouts of exercise, as this will put an
unable to pump effectively. This results in pooling of
unexpected overload on the heart. Owners must be
fluid in the tissue spaces leading to oedema, ascites
and pulmonary congestion (Fig. 22.9). Diuretic drugs
their dog for longer walks than on week days.
are used to overcome fluid retention (Table 22.8)
● Dietary management - this plays an important
Cardiac arrest
role in the longer-term management. Sodium is the
main cation of extracellular fluid and leads to the
A ‘heart attack' is a failure in cardiac output and is uncommon
retention of fluid, which increases blood volume and
in dogs and cats. It results mainly from a sudden increase in
increases the workload of the already failing heart. A
demand, such as sudden exercise, excitement or an underlying
low-sodium diet will reduce fluid retention and assist
deterioration of an existing medical disease or condition.
in treating heart failure. Many proprietary diets have a
high sodium content, so a specific cardiac diet with a
Signs of cardiac arrest include:
low sodium content must be fed
● No heart beat
● Weight control - obesity puts unnecessary overload
on the heart. If obese, the patient must lose weight
● No peripheral pulse/weak or absence of main pulse
and then maintain a constant weight
● Cyanotic mucus membranes
● Dilated pupils
● Respiratory arrest or apnoea
● Prolonged capillary refill time.
Treatment
This is an emergency and first-aid rules apply (see Ch. 21).
These include:
● Establish a patent airway, e.g. using an endotracheal
tube, tracheotomy; extend the neck to lengthen airway
22
● Breathe for the animal - artificial respiration via
endotracheal tube or tracheotomy tube or directly into
Fig. 22.9 Draining ascitic fluid from a dog
the animal's mouth and nose
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
22
Common medical conditions of the body systems
●Cardiac massage
Radiography
● Administration of cardiostimulant drugs
 Radiography is used to diagnose changes to heart size, heart
chamber enlargement, congenital abnormalities, pleural effu-
● Electrical stimulation to restart the heart.
sions and dilated blood vessels. A plain radiograph is taken
initially, centring over the heart, which is level with the
caudal border of the scapula. A dorsoventral view will
define the outline of the heart. A lateral view will enable an
Methods of diagnosis of heart
approximate measurement of the heart within the thoracic
disease
cavity to be made. The normal size of the heart should span
2.5-3.5 rib spaces; on a dorsoventral radiograph the heart
Auscultation
should fill less than three-quarters of the depth of the thorax.
Auscultation of the thorax using a stethoscope will iden-
Introduction of an iodine-based contrast agent such as
tify heart sounds, the heart rate and its rhythm. The
Conray 420 intravenously to perform an angiogram will
optimum area for auscultation is between the third and
assist in diagnosing congenital cardiac defects. Fluoroscopy
sixth ribs on the mid-ventral thoracic wall usually on the left
with angiography is used to diagnose congenital cardiac
side:
defects and pleural effusions. (Fluoroscopy converts X-rays
into light, multiplies the intensity of the light and then con-
● Heart sounds will be muffled if hydrothorax or
verts it to photoelectrons. A 'moving X-ray' is then seen.)
neoplasia is present
● The area for satisfactory auscultation will be displaced
Ultrasound
in cases of cardiac neoplasia
 Commonly referred to as echocardiography, this uses ultrasonic
● The rate and rhythm of the heart should be noted, as
sound waves to produce an image. As the image is in ‘real
changes to this may indicate heart disease
time' it can be used to visualize the heart as it beats. Doppler
ultrasound or ultrasound in M mode is used to examine the
● A heart murmur is a vibration due to the turbulence of
movement of blood through the chambers of the heart.
blood flow through the cavity of the heart. Heart
murmurs are usually systolic and diastolic murmurs are
uncommon. Heart murmurs are graded according to
Electrocardiography
their intensity (Table 22.9)
Electrocardiography (ECG) is the technique of recording the
● Other chest sounds are also heard on auscultation, e.g.
electrical activity of the heart and is used to investigate the
respiratory noise, the presence of fluid.
heart rate and rhythm. Electrodes are attached to the forelimbs,
a hind limb and the thoracic wall and lead to an amplifier and
recording apparatus. To ensure good electrode contact with the
skin, the hair should be clipped and surgical spirit applied to
Table 22.9 Gradation of heart murmurs
the area prior to connecting the electrodes. The patient's coat
must be dry and an insulated table will aid contact.
Heart murmur
Definition
 Faint heart murmur that is not immediately heard
Electrical signals received by the machine are converted to trac-
Grade 1
on auscultation
ings on a screen or a paper strip and provide a permanent
record. This ECG trace is then compared to that of a normal
Grade 2
Faint heart murmur heard within a few seconds
animal and a used to make a diagnosis. It must be remembered
that an animal that is dying of heart failure will still have an
Grade 3
Murmur heard immediately and widespread
 ECG reading - an ECG does not measure cardiac output.
Grade 4
A loud heart murmur that is heard with the
stethoscope not quite in full contact with the
chest wall
Laboratory tests
Grade 5
Very loud murmur that is heard with the
stethoscope slightly withdrawn from the chest
There are no specific laboratory tests used in the diagnosis of
 heart disease but some of the general tests will aid diagnosis
wall
(Table 22.10).
448
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Table 22.10 Laboratory tests that may aid the
haemangiosarcoma, haemorrhagic gastroenteritis or
warfarin poisoning
diagnosis of cardiac disease
Laboratory test
Abnormality may indicate heart
● Chronic haemorrhage - gradual but extensive loss
disease
of red blood cells which may internal or external, e.g.
Leukocytosis
 haematuria, epistaxis, heavy ectoparasite or
Congestive heart failure
endoparasite burden, gastrointestinal bleeding
Neutrophilia
Endocarditis
Urea
 Congestive heart failure
● Haemolysis - excessive destruction of red blood cells,
High liver enzyme levels
 Congestive and right-sided heart 
e.g. autoimmune haemolytic anaemia, Haemobartonella
failure
infection
Low globulin (and other
Heart failure
plasma proteins)
● Non-regenerative anaemia - insuffcient
High muscle enzymes
production of replacement red blood cells, e.g. bone
Myocardial disease
 marrow hypoplasia, renal disease.
Laboratory tests
Haemopc
These are used to help confirm the diagnosis and to assess the
degree of anaemia (see Ch. 31):
Anaemia
● Packed cell volume - measures the percentage of
Anaemia is a condition in which there is an abnormally low
red blood cells within the blood. Take into
number of circulating red blood cells, which affects the
consideration the normal parameters for the species
 oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood. Anaemia is a clinical
and the time between onset of the condition and
sign of an underlying disease rather than a disease itself.
measurement of the PCV
● Blood smear - examination of a smear will help to
Clinical signs
determine whether the anaemia is regenerative or
non-regenerative:
These are all related to the lack of oxygen reaching the tissues
and include:
● Regenerafive - presence of reticulocytes (immature
red blood cells) are produced to compensate for
●Lethargy
those being lost
● Exercise intolerance
● Non-regenerative - little of no evidence of
 reticulocytes and there will be insufficient new red
● Pale mucous membranes
blood cells to compensate for the loss. Associated
with bone marrow problems, chronic inflammation
● Possible heart murmur
and renal disease.
● Tachycardia
Treatment
● Tachypnoea
Treatment of anaemia should be aimed at the specific cause
● Reduced packed cell volume (PCV).
lowing are used:
● Corticosteroids - to reduce inflammatory processes
Causes
 Anaemia may be caused by:
● Vitamin K, - involved in the formation of clotting
factors in the liver
2
● Acute haemorrhage - sudden and excessive loss of
red blood cells which may be internal or external, e.g.
● Good-quality, high-protein diet - provides the
trauma, surgery, rupture of an organ, clotting disorder,
nutrients for the formation of body tissues
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
22
Common medical conditions of the body systems
● Dietary supplements, e.g. vitamin B and iron
● Intravenous fluid therapy - blood transfusion or 
colloids where acute haemorrhage is present
● Stress free environment and cage rest.
Lymphoma
Lymphoma is a neoplastic condition of the lymphocytes
and is also known as lymphosarcoma. It is a relatively
common disease in both dogs and cats. In cats lymphoma
is associated with feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) infec-
Fig. 22.10 Alimentary tymphoma
tion; however, in dogs, lymphoma is a spontaneous con-
dition. The most common form of the disease involves
Blood clotting and bleeding
the infiltration of various organs (Table 22.11). Clinical
signs relate to the system involved but may include
disorders
enlargement of the affected organ, e.g. lymphadenopathy
or enlargement of the lymph nodes. In some cases the
● Rodenticide poisoning - most commonly due to
affected organ may fail, e.g. renal failure. Some lymph-
warfarin and related agents, which cause a disruption
omas secret a parathormone-like hormone, which induces
in blood clotting. Warfarin poisoning is more
hypocalcaemia.
common in dogs. Treat with vitamin K, and supportive
therapy
Diagnosis of lymphoma is confirmed by taking a biopsy of
the affected tissue. Some cases respond well to chemotherapy.
● Thrombocytopenia - this is a low platelet count
e.g. thymic and multicentric lymphoma. It is very unusual
due to an autoimmune destruction of platelets
for cases of lymphoma to recover.
marrow suppression. Suppression of the bone marrow
is caused by lymphoma or oestrogen toxicity, e.g.
during the oestrus period in ferrets, Sertoli cell tumour
Leukaemia
and excessive oestrogen therapy
Leukaemia is a special form of lymphoma in which there is
● Von willebrand's disease - this is an inherited
an abnormally high number of white blood cells, in particu-
bleeding disorder affecting both males and females.
lar lymphocytes, in the peripheral circulation. This is a result
The affected animal lacks the von Willebrand factor,
of bone marrow neoplasia. Leukaemia is rare in dogs and cats
which is an essential part of normal haemostasis. Some
and may present as a chronic or acute condition. Chronic
cases show spontaneous haemorrhage, while others
lymphocytic leukaemia responds reasonably well to chemo-
have only abnormal bleeding following trauma or
therapy but the acute form has a poor prognosis. Leukaemia
surgery. Treat by the administration of a blood
is diagnosed by haematology and confirmed by bone marrow
transfusion and supportive care. There is a breed
biopsy.
disposition to von Willebrand's disease - dobermans
are commonly affected
● Haemophilia - this is a deficiency of factor Vll or
Table 22.11 Types of lymphoma
factor IX in the clotting cascade. It is a sex-linked
Affected organ
Type of lymphoma
inherited disease seen in males and carried by the
Lymph nodes
Multi centric lymphoma
X chromosome. It is rare for females to be affected but
they can carry the disease and pass it to their
Gastrointestinal tract
Alimentary lymphoma (Fig. 22.10)
offspring. Unless the animal suffers trauma or requires
Thymus
Thymic lymphoma
surgery, haemophilia is unlikely to be identified
Kidneys
Renal lymphoma
until routine neutering is performed. Commonly
Skin
affected breeds are German shepherd dogs and
Mycosis fungoides
dobermans.
450
 Common medical conditions of the body systems
Tests for clotting and bleeding disorders
● Activated clotting time (ACT) - measured by
collecting blood into an ACT tube, keeping at body
Diagnosis is by:
temperature and after 60 s examining for clot
formation. A clot should form within 90 s. A longer
● Buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT) - a
time than this indicates the possibility of a clotting
reliable method of measuring platelet number and
disorder. Further clotting tests can be performed by
function. A commercially available kit is used to
commercial laboratories
make a small incision in the lip and the lost blood is
then blotted with filter paper. The time is measured
● Measurement of platelet numbers by routine
from making the incision to when bleeding stops.
haematology tests
 The normal buccal mucosal bleeding time for a dog
is 1.7-4.2 min; in the cat normal bleeding time is
● The von willebrand antigen test examines the
1.4-2.4 min. A longer than normal buccal mucosal
 genetic status of suspected individuals.
bleeding time indicates von Willebrand's disease, low
platelet numbers or other disorders of platelet function
Nervous sys
Clinical signs
The convulsion is divided into three parts:
Epilepsy
● Pre-ictal phase - the period of time just prior to the
Epilepsy is a disorder in which an irritable focus within the
fit starting. Animals may be restless, anxious (described
brain causes disorganised electrical activity resulting in con-
as an ‘aura'), be asleep or appear normal with no
vulsions or fits and a sudden loss of consciousness. It is a con-
noticeable signs
dition affecting dogs, rather than cats. Convulsions are
violent and uncoordinated contraction of muscles that occur
● Ictal phase - the animal collapses, falls on to its side,
when the animal has lost consciousness. The animal has
loses consciousness and moves its legs in a 'paddling'
motion. Often the animal will involuntarily urinate
activity, which raises the body temperature.
and defecate and may chomp its jaws. Convulsions are
very distressing for the owners to witness
Epilepsy is more common in some breeds, e.g. poodles,
German shepherds, cavalier King Charles spaniels. The cause
● Postictal phase - the time immediately following
is often unknown, i.e. idiopathic, but may be due to:
the convulsion, when the animal may appear dazed or
disorientated, gradually returning to its normal
● Neoplasia of the brain
 demeanour. The animal may appear to be exhausted
and will sleep for several hours.
● Meningitis
Status epilepticus is a series of repeated convulsions
●Hyperthermia
without the animal regaining consciousness, and is life-
threatening. Petit mal is a short minor convulsion where
● Bacterial infection
slight muscle tremor is noticed but a full convulsion does not
take place.
● Viral infection
A convulsion is often witnessed by the owner and, since it
●Poisoning
only lasts for a few minutes, is rarely seen by veterinary staff.
The animal will appear perfectly normal on later clinical
● Renal disease
examination. It is important that a thorough and detailed
history is taken from the owner and the person who saw the
● Hypoglycaemia
convulsion in order to be able to both determine the timing
of the convulsion and its likely cause. In order to determine
2
● Hypocalcaemia
the exact cause of epilepsy, a number of tests may be per-
formed, e.g. haematology, biochemistry, magnetic resonance
● Hydrocephalus.
imaging scan, urinalysis and cerebrospinal fluid tap.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
451
22
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Table 22.12 Neurological tests performed during a
Box 22.2 Advice to owners during
clinical examination
convulsions
Body part
Examination
Make a note of the time convulsions begin
Consciousness
Fully conscious
● Monitor the animal and observe exactly what happens
Depressed
during the convulsion 
Stuporous
● Remove any harmful objects from the animal's reach
Comatose
● Maintain a darkened, quiet environment
Posture
Presence of a head tilt
Do not move or handle the animal during convulsions
Position of the head in relation to rest of
· Reassure the animal once convulsions cease
the body
● Make an appointment at the veterinary surgery for a
Wheelbarrow reaction - hold animal's hind
clinical examination once convulsions have ceased
limbs and abdomen so all the weight is
supported on the front limbs, 'walk the
animal forwards and backwards using a
wheelbarrow motion - the normal animal
Treatment
is able to perform this
If it is known, removal of the underlying cause will prevent
Spine
Visually examine the position of the spine
further attacks. In cases of idiopathic epilepsy, long-term anti-
for lordosis, scoliosis or kyphosis
convulsive drug therapy is recommended. The animal will
Spinal reflexes:
require a maintenance dose of an anticonvulsant, e.g. phe-
● Patellar or quadriceps myotactic reflex,
nobarbitone. Oral anticonvulsants are not used during a
tested with a hammer
convulsion but intravenous or rectal anticonvulsants may be
● Flexor reflexes - skin between the toes
administered.
is pinched, normal reflex is to withdraw
the foot
Ataxia
Limbs
Increased or decreased muscle tone
Limbs held in extension 
 Ataxia is defined as an irregular or unsteady gait caused by inco-
Normal stance or wide gait
 Presence of knuckling over of feet
ordination of the muscles. Causes of ataxia include muscle
weakness, depression of the central nervous system, disease of
(proprioception)
the vestibular (balance) centre and spinal disease. A detailed
Proprioceptive positioning reaction - flex
clinical history will aid diagnosis. A detailed neurological exam-
animal's foot until dorsal aspect is in
ination must be carried out to determine the severity of ataxia
contact with the floor - normal reaction is
and the presence of accompanying clinical signs.
to replace foot correctly on floor
Aternatively, place animal's foot on a
piece of paper and withdraw the paper
laterally in a sudden movement - normal
Neurological examination
reaction is to regain normal stance
The patient will require a full neurological examination to
 Movement (examine
Presence of any involuntary movements
assist in the diagnosis. Table 22.12 shows the neurological
standing still and
Note the animal's gait
tests performed during a clinical examination.
during movement)
 Presence of muscular spasms
Presence of muscular tremors
Paral
Skin
Panniculus reflex is tested by bilaterally
 pinching skin on flanks with a pair of
forceps - normal reaction is a bilateral
Paralysis is the loss of voluntary muscle control resulting in
either a partial or complete loss of movement in the affected
twitching of the panniculus muscle under
the skin
body part (Fig. 22.11). Paralysis is due to nerve damage
and is commonly a result of trauma to the brain or spinal
Anus
Anal reflex is tested by stroking ring of
  ta a  e p se a  hu 
anus with a solid object - winking of the
paralysis:
anus should be seen
● Paraplegia - paralysis of both hind limbs
452
Common medical conditions of the body systems
urine scalding and maintains constant bladder
drainage
● Soiled bedding must be changed immediately and any
long hair around the perineum must be clipped to aid
the passage of faeces and keep the anal area clean
● Monitoring of urine and faecal output is important
and should be recorded on the hospital chart
● Soft bedding will alleviate decubitus ulcers on pressure
 points; for example, a plastic-covered deep foam
mattress with a Vetbed covering will provide comfort
and cushioning
● Turning the patient every 2-4 h will prevent
hypostatic pneumonia
● Provide support to position the animal in lateral or
 sternal recumbency, e.g. foam wedges and sand bags
Fig. 22.11 A paratysed dog
● Grooming the animal maintains patient interest and
keeps the coat clean and free from matts
● Tetraplegia or quadriplegia - paralysis of all four
limbs
● Ensure food and water is within the patient's reach.
 Use hand feeding if necessary and syringe water into
● Hemiplegia - paralysis of one side of the body
the mouth if the patient is unable to move the head
and neck. Tube feeding will provide adequate nutrition
Paresis is defined as muscular weakness and is often
in cases when the patient is unable to consume
described as partial or incomplete paralysis.
sufficient food (see Chapter on Essentials of Patient
Care)
A detailed neurological examination is performed to deter-
mine the extent of paresis or paralysis. The underlying cause
         
must be treated or removed to gain long-term treatment.
 its body temperature because it is unable to move
 around. Monitoring and recording patient vital signs,
including temperature, is important. Avoid
Nursing care
hyperthermia by the use of fans
● Patients with paralysis are unable to walk unaided,
● Physiotherapy of the limbs and the use of coupage are
 urinate and defaecate, and must be walking-assisted by
required to stimulate the patient and aid healing of
the use of a long towel (see Ch. 18). In cases where the
affected tissue.
animal is unable to support any of its weight an
indwelling urinary catheter and collection bag avoids
Endocrine system
Diabetes mellitus
2
This is a disease caused by the degeneration of the beta cells
There are several endocrine diseases that affect both dogs and
within the islets of Langerhans of the pancreas, which fail to
cats. Table 22.13 shows their cause and effects
secret the hormone insulin (Table 22.13). Insulin lowers the
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 453
Common medical conditions of the body systems
blood glucose levels by enabling glucose to pass through the
Clinical signs
cell membranes into the cells, where it is used as source of
energy and any excess glucose is stored in the liver as glyco-
Initially the patient is bright and shows polyuria, polydipsia
 gen. Lack of insulin leads to hyperglycaemia, or raised blood
 and polyphagia. As the condition advances the patient may
glucose levels, and the clinical signs of diabetes mellitus are a
show anorexia, weakness, lethargy, vomiting and diarrhoea;
result of this. There are two types of diabetes mellitus:
some may develop cataracts. If left untreated, the body begins
to utilize protein and fat as an energy source, resulting in meta.
● Insulin-resistant diabetes - most commonly seen
bolic acidosis and a build-up of ketones - ketoacidosis. This is
in cats. Insulin is secreted but the tissues fail to
 an emergency and the patient will show signs of depression
respond
leading to inappetence, vomiting and later coma. Insulin and 
intravenous fluid therapy are administered. Blood glucose levels
● Insulin-dependent diabetes - most common in
are monitored hourly. Once ketoacidosis is reversed the patient
dogs. Insulin is not produced by the pancreas
then receives the usual treatment for diabetes mellitus.
Table 22.13 Endocrine disorders
Endocrine disease
Comments
Clinical signs
 Diagnostic tests
Treatment
Diabetes insipidus (DI)
May be due to:
Pronounced polydipsia
Urinalysis - low 
Central diabetes insipidus -
1) Pituitary gland fails to produce
and polyuria
specific gravity
administer synthetic ADH,
ADH (central diabetes insipidus)
Production of very
Water deprivation test
e.g. desmopressin in the
due to a pituitary tumour or trauma
dilute urine
Slightly high PCV
form of nasal or eye drops
2) Failure of kidneys to respond to
 Nephrogenic diabetes
ADH (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus)
insipidus - guarded
prognosis, drug therapy
may reduce urine output
but no long-term effective
treatment is available
Hyperadrenocorticalism 
Common in dogs, rare in cats
Polyphagia
ACTH stimulation test
If due to adrenal tumour-
(Cushing's disease)
Excessive levels of cortisol are
 Polydipsia
showing high post-
adrenalectomy (usually
 produced from the adrenal glands
 Polyuria
stimulation cortisol
 only one adrenal gland is
due to either:
Bilateral alopecia on
levels
affected so one remains
1) An adrenal gland tumour or
lateral flanks
Dexamethasone
intact)
2) A pituitary gland tumouf - most
Muscle wastage
suppression test
If due to pituitary tumour -
common type
-causes excess of
'Pot-bellied appearance
Increased blood 
drug therapy, e.g. oral
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH),
 Possible change in
alkaline phosphatase
mitotane or trilostane,
which stimulates adrenals to produce
coat colour
(ALP)
suppresses adrenal
excess amounts of cortisol
Calcinosis cutis (calcium
Uttrasound to identify
function, maintenance dose
deposits in the skin)
adrenal gland
for long-term use once
enlargement
condition is under control
NB Health and safety
note - gloves must be
worn when handling
mitotane
Hypothyroidism
Rare in cats
 Cold and clammy skin
Thyroxine (T)
Oral thyroxin drug
(Fig. 22.12)
Common in dogs aged 6-10 years
Lethargy
Thyroid stimulating
medication, long-term
Usually associated with autoimmune
Weight gain
hormone (TSH) test
medication required
disease or thyroid gland atrophy
Poor appetite
Raised liver enzymes
NB Regular monitoring of
Muscle weakness
High cholesterol levels
 thyroid hormone levels is
 Bilateral alopecia of
necessary
flanks
Loss of temporal facial
muscle to give a 'drawn'
facial expression
454
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Table 22.13 Endocrine disorders-Cont'd.
Endocrine disease
Comments
Clinical signs
Diagnostic tests
Treatment
Hyperthyroidism
Very rare in dogs
Restlessness
Thyroidectomy of affected
Commonly seen in cats aged
Aggression
Clinical examination:
gland (preferred treatment)
>10 years
Polyphagia
enlarged thyroid gland
Radiotherapy using
Most are due to benign thyroid
Tachycardia
is palpable
iodine-131
tumours causing excess production
Weight loss
Carbimazole drug therapy
of thyroid hormone
Diarrhoea
 but difficult to stabilize in
NB Most common endocrine disease
Poor coat
long-term management
in cats
Poor skin
NB Frequently, during
 Mass palpable in thyroid
surgical intervention, the
gland (goitre)
parathyroid glands are
damaged or removed
inadvertently. This causes 
hypocalcaemia and the
animal may show signs of
muscle tremors and
convulsions. Clinical signs
indicate hypocalcaemia.
Immediate treatment is
necessary - calcium and
vitamin D supplementation
is essential. During the 
immediate postoperative
period following
thyroidectomy the patient
is monitored for signs of
low blood calcium levels.
Calcium supplementation is
 sometimes only required
for a few weeks
postoperatively if the
parathyroid glands are still
intact and only disturbed
during surgery
Diabetes mellitus (DM) Commonly affects middle-aged entire 
Polydipsia
High blood glucose
Establish a strict daily
bitches
Polyuria
levels
routine:
Also affects cats
Polyphagia
1) Using urine dipstick,
Due to a carbohydrate metabolism
Obesity
measure glucose in early
problem
As the condition
morning free-flow urine
 Blood sugar levels increase as cells
WoTsens:
sample
do not take up glucose due to an
Anorexia
2) Follow a strict high-fibre
insulin shortage.
Vomiting
diet; exact amounts at
 Glucose remains in the circulation
Diarrhoea
same time each day
 and is eventually excreted in urine.
 Dehydration
3) Daily injections of
NB In the normal animal, insulin is
Lethargy
insulin - either once a day
 sereted by beta cells in the pancreas
Or twice daily
when blood glucose naturally rises,
4) Neuter entire females to
e.g. following a meal. Insulin lowers
maintain hormone stability
the blood glucose level by increasing
 5) Treat underlying medical
the uptake of glucose into the cells
conditions/diseases
2
and by storing glucose
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
455
2.2
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Tuble 22.13 Endocrine disorders-Cont'd.
Endocrine disease
Comments
Clinical signs
Diagnostic tests
Treatment
Hypoadrenocorticism
 Affects mainly dogs
Vomiting
Low blood sodium and
 Oral hormone
(Addison's disease)
Caused by atrophy of the adrenal
Diarthoea
high blood potassium 
replacement - synthetic
cortex, resulting in decreased
Anorexia
levels
mineralocorticoids, e.g.
amounts of cortisol and
Lethargy
ACTH stimulation test
Florinef, and
mineralocorticoid production and
Collapse
(showing low cortisol
glucocorticoids, e.g.
a severe sodium and potassium
 Signs of dehydration 
levels that do not rise
 prednisolone
imbalance
Bradycardia
following administration
 Often an autoimmune disease
NB clinical signs are
of ACTH)
often intermittent
Insulinoma
A tumour of the beta cells in the
Signs of hypoglycaemia
Low blood glucose
Surgical intervention to
Islets of Langerhans of the pancreas
Collapse
levels
remove the insulinoma
that produce insulin.
Convulsions
Ultrasound to identify
although the tumour is
An excess of insulin is produced
insulinoma
highly likely to metastasise
 S0 successful treatment is
 not possible. Drug therapy,
e.g. diazoxide or
 prednisolone will manage
the clinical signs but not 
provide a permanent 
solution
● Soluble insulin - given intravenously or
intramuscularly. Has a rapid effect but does not last for
long. This form is given in a hyperglycaemic
emergency
● Lente insulin (slow release) - given subcutaneously.
Activity is slowed down by the addition of zinc and by
varying the size of the zinc-insulin crystals. Some
forms may last for 24 h and this is the type used for
most diabetic animals.
Treatment requires the owner to administer daily insulin
injections balanced by a rigid regime of regular amounts of
exercise and a constant amount of food given at the same
time every day. Table 22.14 provides the details of the man-
Fig. 22.12 Dog with hypothyroidism
agement of the condition.
Blood glucose curves - are used to assist in the initial
Laboratory tests
stabilization of the patient. Regular blood glucose levels
are plotted at hourly intervals on a graph. From these results it
These are used to confirm the diagnosis. Urinalysis will show
is possible to recognise peaks and troughs in the blood glucose
the presence of glucose in the urine and in advanced cases
levels. The times of the animal's diet and exercise are also
may also show ketonuria. Blood tests will show a raised
plotted on the graph and will help to indicate any reason as to
fasting blood glucose level.
why the patient is not stabilizing on the treatment.
Treatment
Hypoglycaemia
The standard treatment is to provide insulin in the form of
Defined as an abnormally low blood glucose level, this is a com-
regular injections. There are two main forms of insulin:
mon complication of the management of diabetes mellitus.
456
 Common medical conditions of the body systems
Table 22.14 Management of diabetes mellitus
Treatment
Details
Monitoring of urine sample
 Collection of a free-flow early morning urine sample. Measure glucose level using a urine dipstick that shows both
for presence of glucose
glucose and ketone levels. Calculate the dose of insulin required according to the level of glucose present in the
urine
Diet
Food must be given in relation to insulin administration; see below under injection of insulin for details. A
high-fibre diet allows weight control, slows gastric emptying, slows glucose absorption from the small intestine
and prolongs the time during which glucose is absorbed
The same diet must be fed at the same time each day to maintain the stability of this condition. No titbits are
fed
Administration of insulin
The daily levels of glucose found in the urine determine the amount of insulin required. The insulin bottle is
agitated to suspend the contents, an insulin syringe is used to withdraw the correct amount of insulin and is
injected subcutaneously
Insulin is either administered once or twice daily:
● If administering insulin once daily then one-third of the food is given with insulin and two-thirds of the food is
given 8 h later
● If administering twice-daily insulin the food is divided into two equal meals, each meal given with the dose of
insulin
 Insulin must be administered at the same time/times each day
Exercise
The same level of exercise at the same time each day and for the same amount of time. A change to the animal's
exercise regime will increase the uptake of glucose and upset the stability of the animal's condition
glucose solution; if unconscious the veterinary surgeon will
administer intravenous glucose saline.
Cushing's disease
This is also called hyperadrenocorticalism and results from
excessive levels of adrenal corticosteroids (Table 22.13).
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone stimulation
test
This is used to aid the diagnosis of Cushing's disease
(Fig. 22.14) or of Addison's disease, which is hypoadrenocor-
ticalism. Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) is normally
Fig. 22.13 Insulinoma in a dog
secreted by the pituitary gland to stimulate the secretion of
cortisol from the adrenal cortex. A blood sample is taken and
The most likely cause of hypoglycaemia is an overdose of
cortisol levels are measured. A synthetic ACTH, e.g.
insulin, either by injecting too much or because the animal
Synathacon, is then administered intravenously and blood
has not eaten and the insulin has no glucose on which to act.
cortisol levels are measured again within 60-90 min of the
An insulinoma (tumour of the pancreas) will also cause
injection.
hypoglycaemia (Fig. 22.13).
Clinical signs - present within 8 h of insulin injection; the
Dexamethasone suppression test
animal may shake and appear weak, lethargic and ataxic, and
may collapse and go into a coma
A high- or low-dose dexamethasone test is used to aid diag-
2
nosis of Cushing's disease. A blood sample is taken and corti-
Treatment - if the animal is conscious it should be offered
sol levels are measured.  Intravenous dexamethasone is
sugary food, e.g. honey, chocolate, sweet biscuits, sugar or
administered and blood cortisol levels are measured at 3 and
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 457
22
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Water deprivation test
This is used to confirm the diagnosis of diabetes
insipidus:
● The bladder is drained by catheterization and the SG
of the urine is measured
● The animal's weight is recorded. Calculate 5% of the
body weight
● Place the animal in a cage and withhold food and
water
Fig. 22.14 Dog with Cushing's disease
● Collect a urine sample every 1-2 h - catheterization is
oftenn necessary. Measure the SG and weigh the
8 h following injection. In the normal animal, dexametha-
animal
sone suppresses adrenal function and an absence of cortisol is
found in blood following administration of dexamethasone
● Repeat until 5% of bodyweight is lost. At this point a
In the animal with suspected Cushing's disease, a low-dose
 normal animal will have concentrated its urine and SG
dexamethasone test will show incomplete suppression of cor-
should exceed 1.030. Animals with diabetes insipidus
tisol production. A high-dose dexamethasone suppression
are unable to concentrate the urine and the SG will
remain the same.
dependent Cushing's disease.
The water deprivation test must not be used in patients that
display signs of dehydration or in cases where alternative
Diabetes insipidus
fully. Should the patient show any signs of dehydration
This results from the failure in production of antidiuretic
during the test, it must be abandoned immediately. Con-
hormone (ADH) from the posterior pituitary gland or a
failure of the kidneys to respond to ADH. The clinical signs
tion test is vital as it is potentially harmful if managed
are polyuria, polydipsia and the production of urine with a
inappropriately.
low specific gravity (SG) (Table 22.13).
Digestive system
Regurgitation
Regurgitation is defined as the return of undigested material
from the stomach via the mouth
The animal will show no abdominal effort in regurgitating
and it occurs shortly after eating. It is vital that owners are
 able to distinguish whether their animal is vomiting or regur-
gitating. Causes include:
●Megaoesophagus (Fig. 22.15)
● Vascular ring anomaly/persistent right aortic arch
● Oesophageal stricture
Fig. 22.15 Radiograph of a dog with megaoesophagus
458
 Common medical conditions of the body systems
● Oesophageal foreign body
● Oesophagitis.
Vomiting or emesis
Vomiting is defined as the violent expulsion of stomach con-
tents via the mouth. Forceful abdominal contractions are
required to eject the vomitus and it occurs several hours after
eating. The vomit may be partly digested food from the intes-
tines, bile or water. Severe cases of vomiting will lead to dehy-
dration and a loss of electrolytes. Causes include:
● Gastritis
● Distension of the stomach following intestinal
obstruction
● Gastric ulceration
● Gastric neoplasia
● Gastric foreign body
● Gastric dilatation
● Infection
● Systemic disease.
Blood tests may be used to monitor electrolyte levels and
dehydration. Radiography will identify an obstruction or
foreign body. Endoscopy will identify gastritis and gastric
ulceration.
Fig. 22.16 A rottweiter with emaciation caused by protonged
diarrhoea
Treatment
Removal of the underlying cause of vomiting is essential.
Intravenous fluid therapy is used to treat dehydration.
● Colitis
Surgery is necessary to remove foreign bodies and repair
gastric dilatation. Withholding food will allow the gastroin-
 Enteritis
testinal tract time to recover from episodes of vomiting.
Medical management of gastritis and ulceration may be
● Bacterial infection
needed.
●Viral infection
Diarrhoea
● Heavy intestinal parasite burden
Diarrhoea is defined as abnormally frequent emptying of the
● Stress
bowel, usually producing soft and watery faeces. Fluid and
2
electrolytes are lost in diarrhoea resulting in dehydration and
● Secondary to systemic disease
leading to metabolic acidosis (Fig. 22.16). Causes, some of
which may be life-threatening, include:
● Neoplasia of the gastrointestinal tract
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 459
22
Common medical conditions of the body systems
● Dietary hypersensitivity
Constipation
● Sudden dietary change
Constipation is the failure to pass faeces in either the
normal amount or frequency. Constipation is more common
● Intestinal foreign body
in elderly patients that have reduced exercise. Causes
include:
● Malabsorption conditions
● Dehydration - producing excessively dry faeces
● Inflammatory bowel disease.
● Low-residue diet
A full clinical examination and client history will determine
whether the diarrhoea is due to a problem in the gastro-
● Neoplasia of the intestinal tract
intestinal system or whether a systemic disease, e.g. Addison's
or pancreatic disease, is present. Some patients with diar-
● Foreign body in the intestinal tract
 ai e so a e e a rde 
non-responsive. Less severe cases respond well to simple
● Prostatic disease - obstructing the rectum
dietary management while more severe cases require aggres-
sive fluid therapy and supportive treatment. It is useful to
● Pelvic fracture
determine whether the diarrhoea is from the large or small
intestine (Table 22.15).
● Spinal paralysis.
Diagnosis of the cause of the diarrhoea is based on a range of
Constipation is often presented as faecal tenesmus, i.e. strain-
tests including radiography, haematology, faecal tests, ultra-
 ing, and the animal will feel pain on defaecation and will not
 sound, biopsies and endoscopy.
be able to empty the rectum fully because of hard, impacted
faeces. This is treated with an enema (see Ch. 18). Surgical
removal of an obstruction such as a foreign body or neopla-
Management
sia will relieve constipation. Prevention of constipation
● Identify and treat the underlying disease
 includes feeding a high-fibre diet and encouraging the animal
to take regular exercise and to defaecate at regular times
● Fluid therapy to correct fluid, electrolyte loss and
during the day.
metabolic acidosis
● Antibiotics if bacterial infection present
Pancreatitis
● Parasiticides if parasite burden present
Pancreatitis is defined as inflammation of the pancreas. It
● Surgery to remove neoplasia or an obstruction
occurs in dogs and occasionally in cats. Table 22.16 describes
the types of pancreatitis and their treatment.
● Dietary tests to establish hypersensitivity
● Dietary management
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
● Drug therapy, e.g. in cases of chronic diarrhoea.
 Exocrine pancreatic insuffciency (EPl) is a result of the pan-
creas producing insufficient amounts of pancreatic enzymes,
Table 22.15 Comparison between small intestinal
which means that the animal is unable to digest fat. EPI often
and large intestinal diarrhoea
occurs in dogs of 1-2 years of age, commonly German shep-
Small intestinal diarrhoea
Large intestinal diarrhoea
herd dogs. Affected animals initially develop well but then
lose weight, have a ravenous appetite and produce pale,
Large volume of diarrhoea
Small volume of diarrhoea
rancid faeces, with possible diarrhoea, and are coprophagic.
Very soft/liquid faeces
Soft faeces; fresh blood or mucus
Diagnosis is based on a serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity
may be present
test (TLI). Treatment depends on the provision of pancreatic
Diarthoea passed less
Diarrhoea passed more frequently:
enzymes, usually given orally. Dietary management is also
fequently: 3-5 times daily
 8-12 times daily
important and the dog should be given a low-fat but easily
digestible diet.
460
 Common medical conditions of the body systems
Table 22.16 Types of pancreatitis
Type
Clinical signs/diagnosis
Cause
Treatment
Acute pancreatitis
Interstitial pancreatitis - more
Vomiting, lethargy, abdominal
Often unknown, possibly due
Withhold food for 72 h and then
 common in middle-aged
pain, melaena, haematemesis,
to high-fat diet, viral infection,
introduce low-fat diet, fluid therapy.
bitches
high blood sugar
e.g. parvovirus, corticosteroid 
antibiotics, analgesia
therapy, inherited, Foxoptasma
gondi infection in cats
Haemorrhagic - more common
As above but more severe
As above
As above
in male dogs
 Chronic pancreatitis
May occur following episode
Signs associated with diabetes
Idiopathic, biliary obstruction
Treatment of clinical signs, fluid
 of acute pancreatitis (dogs),
mellitus, on palpation the
therapy, dietary management (low-fat
low-grade constant
pancreas feels hard
diet), analgesia
inflammation of pancreas
accompanying acute
interstitial pancreatitis (cats)
Liver disease
 is used to determine size and position, ultrasound, biopsy to
 confirm a diagnosis and exploratory laparotomy. Manage-
The liver has a huge capacity for regeneration and a substan-
 ment of liver disease involves the use of supportive therapy
tial loss of hepatic tissue is present before any clinical signs of
until a definitive diagnosis is made.
liver disease are seen. Clinical signs of liver disease are often
non-specific because the liver is affected by many other meta.
bolic diseases. Causes include:
Splenic disease
● Infectious canine hepatitis
An enlarged spleen is usually palpable on clinical examina-
 s      nn  
● Leptospirosis
   n    
spleen. Causes of splenic disease include:
●Poisons
● Neoplasia, e.g. lymphoma or haemangiosarcoma
● Drug overdose
● Viral or bacterial infection
● Hepatic trauma, e.g. following road traffc accident
● Splenic torsion
● Primary neoplasia of liver or bile ducts (less common
than secondary neoplasia)
●Idiopathic
● Bile duct obstruction
● Anaemia.
● Secondary neoplasia
 Radiography and ultrasound are used to confirm the diag-
nosis. Surgical intervention, i.e. splenectomy, is often the
● Storage diseases/enzyme deficiencies, e.g. copper 
preferred treatment.
toxicosis in Bedlington terriers
● Secondary to cardiac disease, diabetes mellitus,
Jaundice
hyperadrenocorticalism, hypothyroidism.
Jaundice also known as icterus, is defined as staining of
2
Confirmation of liver disease is by blood biochemistry tests,
the tissues by bilirubin, which is produced in the liver as a
e.g. ALT, serum alkaline phosphatase (SAP), bilirubin, plasma
result of haemoglobin breakdown. Diagnosis is confirmed by
proteins, haematology (see Ch. 31). Radiography of the liver
measuring plasma bilirubin, routine haematology, analysis of
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
461
22
Common medical conditions of the body systems
blood liver enzymes and the presence of pale faeces. Jaundice
is treated by identifying and treating the underlying cause,
which includes:
● Obstruction of the bile duct, e.g. gallstones
Caudal 
vena cava
● Haemolysis {jaundice often occurs when the liver is
overloaded with bilirubin)
Hepatic artery
● Blood transfusion reaction
 Stomach 
● Leptospirosis
 Spleen
Liver
 Small intestine
Colon
● Leishmaniasis
Pancreas
● Haemobartonellosis
 Portal vein
●Babesiasis
Hepatic artery
● Hepatic jaundice - accompanies liver disease.
Portosystemic shunt
Live
This is a vascular abnormality where the hepatic portal vein
empties directly into the caudal vena cava, thus bypassing
the liver (Fig. 22.17). A portosystemic shunt may be either
congenital (most common) or acquired. Diagnosis is con-
ultrasound. Typically, affected animals have a small liver.
Portal vein
Treatment is by surgical correction.
Fig. 22.17 (a) The normal portat circutation (b) The abnormal
portat circutation seen in cases of portosystemic shunt
Reproductive system
secreted by the corpus luteum. This is a normal part of the
Female
oestrous cycle but only a small percentage of bitches develop
symptoms. Those that show signs in one oestrous cycle are
Many of the problems associated with the female reproduc-
likely to show them during subsequent cycles.
tive tract are treated surgically; however, some, such as
pyometra, may be managed medically to stabilize the bitch
Clinical signs include maternal behaviour, e.g. nursing soft
before an ovariohysterectomy is performed (see Ch. 23).
toys or slippers, nest-making, aggression to anyone who tries
to remove the toy, mammary development and lactation.
Some bitches may be more seriously ill, with vomiting and
False pregnancy (pseudocyesis or
loss of appetite.
pseudopregnancy)
Before treatment is instigated, check that the bitch is not
This condition is commonly associated with the bitch,
really pregnant. Hormones to suppress lactation can be given,
although it may occur in the queen as a result of a sterile
e.g. oestradiol benzoate or methyl testosterone over several
days and in a reducing dose. A bitch that has repeated false
to oestrus.
 pregnancies should be spayed during anoestrus. The idea that
a bitch should be allowed to have a litter in order to get the
False pregnancy may occur about 40-60 days after oestrus
hormonal cycle to return to normal is largely an old wives'
and is linked with high levels of circulating progesterone
tale.
462
 Common medical conditions of the body systems
Male
tumours is difficult and rarely justified, as the tumour metas-
tasizes readily. Radiotherapy may relieve the symptoms for a
Prostatic disease
time.
Enlargement or hypertrophy of the prostate gland is associ-
ated with older dogs and results from hormonal stimulation.
Sertoli cell tumour
The gland pushes upwards, causing pressure on the rectum
and consequent faecal tenesmus. The gland may become
This tumour of the Sertoli cells, which line the seminiferous
infected by ascending infection from the urethra, which runs
tubules within the testis and secrete oestrogen, is usually
through the centre of the gland. The patient may show signs
associated with a retained testis. Clinical signs often seen in
of cystitis and, in severe cases, pyrexia, anorexia and weight
dogs over 6 years old include bilateral symmetrical alopecia
loss. Cysts and neoplasia may also develop inside the prostate
over the flanks, enlargement of the mammary tissue and
gland. Diagnosis is confirmed by rectal palpation, radiogra
onset of attractiveness to male dogs. The unaffected testis
phy and the use of ultrasound.
may be atrophied. Diagnosis is based on clinical signs, and
Treatment usually includes castration, which will reduce the
size of the gland. Chemical castration by the use of delmadi-
Treatment is by removal of the affected testis. Retained testis
none acetate may give an indication as to whether surgical
or cryptorchism is an inherited characteristic and an affected
castration will produce a permanent response. If infection is
animal should be castrated to prevent the risk of developing
present it should respond to antibiotics. Surgical removal of
a Sertoli cell tumour in later life.
Neoplasia
Side effects from cytotoxic drugs are common and include
vomiting, diarrhoea and anorexia but these may decline with
ao e s a a   o a pd
Neoplasia or the development of a tumour or cancer is an
uncontrolled proliferation of a single type of cell. Neoplasia
can affect most tissues of the body but the behaviour of the
  n m no s  o no sd p
method, degree and site of spread (metastasis) depends on
the cell type. Tumours can be classed as:
● Benign - grows slowly and do not often spread to
other sites. Their size may cause symptoms by pressing
on adjacent organs
● Malignant - locally invasive and metastasizes to
other organs by means of the blood or lymphatic
systems. This type is more likely to cause clinical signs.
Chemotherapy, giving cytotoxic drugs, is used in the treat-
ment of neoplasia in both cats and dogs (Fig. 22.18). These
highly potent drugs either destroy rapidly dividing neoplastic
cells or inhibit their growth. They have a very narrow dose
range so that the drug kills the neoplastic cells but causes
minimal damage to surrounding body cells (Table 22.17). The
calculation of the dose rate is based on the patient's surface
area rather than body weight. This is because the blood
supply to the liver and kidneys is related to body surface area
rather than body weight.
Cytotoxic drugs are excreted via the liver and kidneys and
2
must be used with extreme care in animals with compro-
mised renal or liver function, since their excretion may be
impaired and toxicity could occur.
Fig. 22.18 Splenic tymphoma
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing463
22
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Table 22.17 Drugs used in chemotherapy
Box 22.3 Precautions to be taken to
Drug name
Comments
ensure safe handling of cytotoxic drugs
Cyclophosphamide
Used in treatment of lymphoma in dogs and
cats. Available in tablet and injectable forms
● Tablets must not be broken or crushed
● Disposable gloves must be worn when handling tablets
Vincristine
Widely used in cats and dogs for treatment of
leukaemias and lymphomas. Administered via
● Cytotoxic drugs must be dispensed in childproof
intravenous route. Sometimes given in
containers
combination with other drugs. Perivascular
● Cytotoxic drugs must be labelled with name of the drug
injection causes sloughing, as drug is very
and warnings regarding safe handling of the drug by
irritant 
owners
Doxorubicin and
Administered intravenously. Used in dogs for
● Keep all cytotoxic drugs out of children's reach
epirubicin
treatment of lymphoma
● Wash hands after handling
Cisplatin and
Administered intravenously. Used in dogs for
● Wear gloves when administering tablets to patient
carboplatin
treatment of sarcoma, e.g. osteosarcoma
●Dispose of drugs by incineration
following limb amputation
● Cytotoxic drugs must not be handled by pregnant
womenl
will together decide on the best course of treatment and
● Wear protective personal equipment, e.g. gloves, long
which clinical signs are to be tolerated in each individual
sleeved gown, face mask, when reconstituting drugs
patient.
Have eye-wash station and water available when
reconstituting the drugs
Cytotoxic drugs are irritant and carcinogenic and extreme
● Do not inhale cytotoxic powders, e.g. when
  s s    n    a
reconstituting drug
nary practice. Local rules must be displayed in the practice
● Employ a good technique when handling cytotoxic
area where cytotoxic drugs are used and all personnel must be
drugs, e.g. care with pressure in vial of drug
made aware of the dangers (Box 22.3). Personnel are at risk
● Label all cytotoxic drugs when in syringes
during all stages of the procedure, i.e. when dispensing the
drugs, reconstituting (when injectable forms are in powder
● Transport with care
form and require mixing with a fluid) and administering
· Administer via an intravenous catheter rather than a
them, when disposing of them and when caring for the
needle
patient following its treatment with cytotoxic drugs.
● Restrain patient adequately for administration of drug
● Avoid skin contact with urine/faeces/vomit from
patients undergoing cytotoxic drug therapy. since
Bibliography
excreta will contain the drug
Bowden C, Masters J 2003 Textbook ofveterinary medical nursing.
● All soiled bedding from treated animals must be
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
incinerated as it will be contaminated with cytotoxic drug
· Dispose of used needles and syringes in the clinical waste
Concise Veterinary Dictionary 1988 Oxford University Press,
● Wash hard surfaces, e.g. floors, table tops, with plenty
Oxford
of water following contact with patients after
administration of cytoxic drugs
Darke P G G 1986 Notes on intemal canine medicine. John
Wright, Bristot
Simpson J W, Else R W 1991 Digestive disease in the dog & cat.
Detweiler D K, Patterson D F 1965 The prevalence and types of
Blackwell Scientific, Oxford
cardiovascular disease in dogs. Annats of the New York Academy
of Sciences 127: 491
Recommended reading
Dobson J M, Gorman N T 1993 Cancer chemotherapy in small
animal practice. Blackwell Scientific, Oxford
Bowden C, Masters I 2003 Textbook of veterinary medical nursing.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Lane D R,Cooper B 2003 Veterinary nursing,3rd edn.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Entire book devoted fo all aspects of medical freaiment.
464
Common medical conditions of the body systems
Dobson J M, Gorman N T 1993 Cancer chemotherapy in small
Lane D R, Cooper B 2003 Veterinary nursing, 3rd edn.
animal practice.Blackwell Scientific, Oxford
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Provides detail of cancer freaiment in animals.
nursing.
Hotston Moore A, Simpson G 1999 Manual of advanced
Moore M, Simpson G 1999 Manual of veterinary nursing. British
Cheltenham
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
More detailed information suitable for diptoma and degree
rurses.
nursing.
2
The Complete Texthbook of Veterinary Nursing 465
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
23
Principles of surgical nursing
Julie Ouston
Key Points
● Shock is a condition in which the circulatory system is
● The quantity and rate at which the fluid is administered
impaired, which can result in tissue death and if
depend on the degree of dehydration, which can be
untreated may ultimately cause the death of the
 assessed by the clinical history and examination and by
patient.
measuring the packed cell volume.
● There are many causes of shock and it is vital that the
● Careful cleaning and debriding of wounds is essential to
veterinary nurse learns to recognise the signs so that
help the healing process.
treatment, consisting of fluid therapy. warmth and in
● Wound dressings should be chosen carefully to match the
some cases corticosteroids, can be started as soon as
type of wound and the stage of healing.
possible.
● There are many different types of fracture but they all
● Fluid replacement therapy is one of the most important
show similar symptoms of pain and swelling at the site
means of treating a variety of conditions and the aim is
 and loss of function.
to replace fluid loss with as close a substitute as
● The method of repairing a fracture depends on its type
possible so that the patient returns to a normal fluid
and location.
balance.
Shock
● Neurogenic shock is similar in that there is
inappropriate vasodilation - in this instance it is
caused by parasympathetic impulses from the brain
No matter how simple or complicated an animal's condition,
one of the most important things veterinary clinical staff
● Cardiogenic shock is due to a failure in the heart's
must do is to ensure that the patient is protected from or
ability to maintain the circulation.
treated for shock. Untreated shock can rapidly lead to an
animal's death so it is important that all nurses are able to
In animals, hypovolaemic and endotoxic shock are seen quite
recognise the early signs and know how to manage cases
commonly but cardiogenic shock is very rare.
where shock is a potential risk (see also Ch. 20).
Shock is defined as a clinical syndrome in which the cir-
culation progressively deteriorates and ultimately results in
Clinical signs
vital organs being deprived of a good blood flow, leading to
widespread irreversible organ failure.
Since shock is a syndrome affecting the circulation it results
 in distinctive clinical signs no matter what the cause. The
clinical signs are:
How does it develop?
●Pale mucous membranes
Shock can develop in a number of ways:
● Increased capillary refill time (CRT)
● Hypovolaemic shock results from a fall in the
● Tachycardia
circulating blood volume - either through blood loss
or some form of dehydration
●Weak, thready pulse
● Endotoxic shock is caused by the release of
● Oliguria, progressing to anuria
endotoxins from Gram-negative bacteria, which leads
to vasodilation and consequently a fall in blood
● Gradual lack of consciousness
 pressure and reduction in blood flow around the
body
● Hypothermia
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 467
23
Principles of surgical nursing
● In later stages petechial haemorrhages may develop on
Drugs may also be used, e.g. high doses of corticosteroids.
the gums or other mucous membranes as a result of
These act to stabilize cell membranes and prevent cells on the
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). The
borderline of survival from dying. However, steroids are only
blood flow at this point becomes so sluggish that it
fully effective if they are given early, if they are given at a
starts to clot and platelets and clotting factors are used
high enough dose rate and, most importantly, if the animal
up. The small defects that always occur in blood
is already receiving intravenous fluids
vessels cannot be sealed quickly and tiny pinpoint
 haemorrhages or petechiae start to develop.
Patient monitoring
Management of shock
Patients suffering from shock must be monitored carefully
They may deteriorate quickly so initially these animals
Since an animal in shock, by definition, has poor circulation,
should be checked every 5 min. Temperature, pulse and res
the most important treatment is to provide intravenous fluid
piration should all be assessed, as well as capillary refill time
therapy. The type of fluid used varies depending on the initial
and mucous membrane colour. Urine output is also very
cause but the provision of fluid is what makes the difference
xde snd si p u n - juo
between life or death for the severely shocked patient.
1ml/kg/h it can be considered to be oliguric and there
is still a danger that the kidneys have been damaged
In addition to fluids body heat must be conserved, so warm
irreversibly. Catheterization of the bladder is recommended
the fluid prior to administration and keep the animal warm
and a collection bag should be used to allow accurate
with Vetbed or blankets to prevent further heat loss.
measurement of urine output (see also Ch. 18).
Urinary
Bitch catheters
catheterization
Tieman's catheter
 Some vets use Tieman's catheter, although this is not spe-
cially designed for bitches. It is similar to the dog catheter but
Urinary catheters
has a curved bit of rigid plastic on the tip, which makes it
easier to insert into the urethral opening in the bitch. These
Catheters are available in a variety of types and size. Most are
are human catheters and have several disadvantages:
 made of nylon and polyvinyl chloride (PvC) and are supplied
in sterile packs of two polythene packets. All are measured
● They are very long
using the French gauge unit, where 1 FG is 1/3 mm. The sizes
refer to the external diameter of the catheter - thus a 3 FG
● There are no small sizes available
catheter has an external diameter of 1 mm (Fig. 23.1).
● There is an increased risk of damage to the urethra and
Male dog catheters
 bladder because of the rigid tip.
These are made of nylon and have a rounded tip, behind
which are the two drainage holes or eyes.
Foley catheters
These are made of soft latex rubber and incorporate a balloon
The end of the catheter that remains outside the animal is
just behind the eyes. This is similar to the cuff of an endotra-
fitted with a Luer mount to which a syringe or three-way tap
cheal tube and, once the catheter has been inserted into the
can be attached.
bladder, the balloon is inflated, usually with water, to prevent
the catheter from coming out of the bladder.
Foley catheters are used as both temporary and indwelling
catheters in the bitch as they are soft and cause relatively
little trauma. However, because they are soft, a wire stylet or
metal probe is inserted into the tip in order to place the
catheter. This is removed once the catheter is in place.
Fig. 23.1 Urinary catheters: From top - dog catheter, Tieman's
Neither Foley catheters nor Tieman's catheters have Luer
catheter, Fotey catheter, Jackson cat catheter
mounts - an adapter has to be fitted.
468
3 Principles of surgical nursing
23
Cat catheters
● Nasal speculum - this has two flat blades that can be
separated by pressing the handles together. A small
Jackson cat catheters
light source can be attached to one blade (Fig. 23.2).
These were initially developed to deal with cats with urethral
obstruction caused by urinary calculi (Fig. 23.1). The
● Rectal speculum - this is conical, with either a segment
catheter's features include:
 removed from the wall or a removable sliding panel,
which allows the urethral opening to be seen
● It has a wire stylet to stiffen it and help to unblock
(Fig. 23.3).
cats with urethral calculi
Specula are also available to fit on to auriscopes. These are
● Behind the Luer mount is a circular collar or flange
 similar to the ear speculum, except that a segment is missing
with small holes to enable it to be sutured to the
from the wall.
prepuce
● It is only 11 cm long so that its tip is just inside the
Care of catheters
bladder when the collar is sutured in position
Most catheters are designed as single-use items and are
● The eyes are closer to the tip of the catheter to prevent 
therefore purchased pre-sterilized and disposed of after
them becoming blocked by urethral crystals.
use. However, a few checks should be made prior to their
use:
Specula
● Check basic cleanliness - there should be no obvious
These are devices used to help catheterization, particularly in
contamination
the bitch. They enable the urethral opening to be visualized
by parting the vaginal walls. A number of different patterns
● Check for any signs of damage, e.g. splits or
and designs are available:
protruding fragments
● Check for signs of kinking.
Any damaged catheters should be discarded. To ensure that
catheters are not damaged they should be stored flat and
straight within their packets and out of sunlight. Avoid
 placing any weight on them.
Technique for catheterization
General points:
Fig. 23.2 Nasat specufum
● The animal must be well restrained - sedation or
even a general anaesthetic may be required in some
cases
● Local analgesic gel may be needed to desensitize the
vagina or penis
● Good light is necessary
● Wear sterile disposable gloves to protect the catheter
from contamination and protect yourself from urine
contamination
 Sliding panel which is removed once
● Use a sterile technique - do not allow the catheter to
the speculum is in place
touch anything non-sterile. Ideally, it should be 'fed'
Fig. 23.3 Rectat specutum
out of the packet in which it has been sterilized
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
469
23
Principles of surgical nursing
● Remove any discharge from the prepuce or vagina
Bitch
using a mild disinfectant (rinse well if urine is being
The bitch may be catheterized standing or in dorsal or sternal
collected for bacterial examination)
recumbency, depending on preference:
●Avoid lubricant if possible - it may not be sterile. If it
1. If the animal is standing the assistant should restrain
 is necessary, use a water-soluble lubricant rather than
the dog and hold the tail out of the way. The
petroleum jelly (Vaseline), since this causes latex to
speculum should be introduced vertically up through
perish
the vulval lips and then turned to run horizontally.
● Have a kidney dish and universal container handy to
2. On the floor of the vestibule are two small
collect the urine
 indentations - the nearer one is the blind-ending
 clitoral fossa, the further one is the urethral opening
● Do not use force
set on the urethral papilla. The catheter tip should be
 carefully introduced through the urethral papilla
● Once urine appears do not feed any more catheter into
the bladder, as it may cause the catheter to kink or
3. If the bitch is restrained on her back, then the hind
even knot itself.
legs should be drawn forwards until the catheter is
in place in the urethra. The legs should be drawn
forwards and the catheter slid into the bladder using a
no-touch technique, as for the dog.
Male dog
Tomcat
1. The dog should be restrained either standing or in
This is normally performed under a general anaesthetic, as
lateral recumbency. Cut the tip off the packet
there is a risk of damaging the narrow urethra:
containing the catheter and feed out about
8-10 cm
1. The animal should be restrained in right lateral
 recumbency with the hind legs drawn forwards
2. Ask an assistant to hold this
2. The prepuce is retracted with the left hand to expose
3. Reflect the prepuce with the right hand and grasp the
the tip of the penis and the catheter can be introduced
root of the penis with the left hand until the tip of the
as for the male dog.
penis appears. The prepuce can then be reached with
the fingers of the left hand and held. Any discharge
should be removed
Queen
1. The cat should be restrained in right lateral
4. Introduce the catheter into the tip of the penis,
recumbency as for the tomcat
holding the packet. Gently slide this back and
gradually slide the catheter into the urethra
 2. The vulval lips should be cleaned and pulled up gently
towards the anus
5. Never force the catheter - if it gets stuck, try gentle
rotation and mild pressure
3. The tip of the catheter is introduced along the vaginal
floor and into the urethral opening.
6. Once urine starts to flow, hold the catheter
steady to prevent it slipping back out of the
Note For all the above descriptions, left-handed people
bladder.
should replace 'right' with ‘left' and vice versa.
Fluid therapy
Water in and out
The body takes in water in food and water and it is also
To appreciate fluid therapy and its uses it is important to
 Created in many chemical reactions taking place within the
remind yourself of the fluid situation in the healthy animal
tissues, e.g. the breakdown of glucose to release energy:
(see also Chapter on Canine and Feline Anatomy and
Physiology).
Glucose → CO, + H,0 + Energy
470
0Principles of surgical nursing
23
Water (HO) produced in chemical reactions is referred to as
plasma and affect the movement of the fluid through the
metabolic water and usually makes up about 10% of an
fluid compartments:
animal's fluid requirements. The remainder of the animal's
fluid need is met through eating and drinking. The propor-
●Isotonic - the fluid has the same osmotic pressure as
tion of water acquired from each varies considerably with the
that of plasma
type of food being fed.
● Hypotonic - the fluid has a lower osmotic pressure
Normal water loss occurs in a number of ways, including
than that of plasma
urine, faeces, sweat and respiration. In addition, animals
suffering from disease lose fluid by vomiting, haemorrhage.
● Hypertonic - the fluid has a higher osmotic pressure
burns or diarrhoea.
than that of plasma.
Estimations of normal fluid losses are usually as follows:
Most fluid therapy involves the use of isotonic fluids
● Urine - 20 ml/kg/24 h
Dehydration
● Faeces - Up to 20 ml/kg/24 h
Dehydration may result from any situation in which an
● Respiration - 20 ml/kg/24 h
animal's fluid output exceeds the input. While urine con-
centration can be altered to conserve water in difficult
● Sweat - Usually considered to be negligible
conditions, faecal losses and respiratory losses cannot be
controlled, so there is always a minimum rate of fluid
● Total 1oss - 50-60 ml/kg/24 h
loss that must be balanced. Dehydration results in hypo-
volaemia and rapidly leads to severe shock, so any situation
in which fluid balance is compromised is potentially life-
Fluid in the body
threatening.
Fluid is found in a number of different compartments within
Fluid deficits can be divided into primary fluid deficits or
the body and its composition is different depending on its
mixed deficits:
location. Figure 23.4 shows the major fluid compartments
and the important electrolytes found in each:
● Primary water deficits - an animal loses water
but not electrolytes, e.g. an animal shut in a hot
The function of the body fluids is the maintenance of home
car suffering from heat stroke; an unconscious
ostasis and this relies on the body fluids remaining in the
animal
correct volumes within the fluid compartments, their elec-
trolyte balance and osmotic pressure being normal and their
● Mixed deficits - an animal loses water and
pH remaining around 7.4. If any of these factors changes the
electrolytes, e.g. an animal suffering from diarrhoea
animal will begin to show clinical signs and some form of
is likely to have lost bicarbonate, sodium and
treatment must be instigated.
potassium; an animal with acute vomiting will
 initially lose sodium, chloride and hydrogen
 It is useful to understand three terms used in fluid therapy
ions.
that describe a fluid in relation to the osmotic pressure of
Assessing dehydration
There are three main ways in which dehydration can be
assessed:
Clinical examination
This is the simplest method. Table 23.1 indicates the loss in
terms of the percentage of an animal's body weight and the
clinical signs linked with the degree of dehydration.
Fig. 23.4 Distribution of fluid within the body
These figures can be used as follows:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
471
23
Principles of surgical nursing
Table 23.1 Clinical assessment of dehydration
Example
Degree of dehydration as
Clinical signs
% of bodyweight
A 4 kg cat has been shut in a shed for 2 days. It has had
no history of renal problems and during this time it passed
4
Not detectable
faeces once
5-6
Dry mouth
Consider each of the normal losses in turn and consider
 Subtle loss of skin elasticity
 what has been happening to the cat over the course of
the 2 days
7-8
 Definite loss of skin elasticity
Increased capillary refill time
 Respiration: It has been breathing the whole time and
Cold extremities
has consequently lost fluid as water vapour
Sunken eyes
We have to allow the full 20 ml/kg/day
i.e. signs of early shock
= 20 × 4 × 2
= 160 ml
10-11
Cold legs and mouth
Weak, recumbent
Unnation:
There is no history of renal disease, so the 
Tented skin stays in place
cat should have been able to concentrate its
urine
12
Moribund, severe shock
Probably over the 2 days it would have
14
Death
passed 1 normal day's worth
= 20 × 4 x 1
Clinical history
= 80 ml
Faeces:
We have been told that the cat has passed
This method is most applicable for the animal that has not
been eating or drinking.
faeces once, so allow 1 day's worth
= 20 × 4 × 1
We can also consider cases where there are pathological
= 80 ml
deficits. These are a little more difficult to estimate but
There have been no other reported fluid losses, so the
provide a start point for deciding how much replacement
total deficit = 320 ml.
fluid to administer.
allowances for losses. However, each decision may be valid
  a      ss 
and since we monitor our patients carefully we shall be able
4 ml/kg/vomit. Diarrhoeic losses can either be judged in a
to make the appropriate revisions to the fluid treatment as
similar way or can be considered as a multiple of normal faecal
time goes on.
losses.
Packed cell volume
Example
As an animal becomes dehydrated, the amount of plasma is
A 5 kg cat appears to be 8% dehydrated.
reduced and the packed cell volume (PCV) gradually increases
In order to calculate its fluid deficit, frst calculate the
(see also Ch. 31).
weight lost:
= 8 ÷ 100 x 5
= 0.4 kg
Example
However, 1 l of water weighs exactly 1 kg. so a cat that
A 20 kg dog has been unwell for 1 day and has vomited
has lost 0.4 kg has lost 0.4 l of water. This can be con-
 5 times and passed diarrhoea twice. It has not eaten or
verted into mililitres by multiplying the litres by 1000:
 drunk anything since the previous day.
=0.4 x 1000
= 400 ml
As above we need to consider each of the possible areas of
loss separately:
Thus the cat in this example has lost 400 ml of fluid.
Respiration: 1 day's loss
= 20 x 20 x 1
= 400 ml
As you can see from the examples above, for both the clinical
Urination:
1 day's loss
examination and history techniques, there is some subjectivity.
= 20 x 20 x 1
Each of us might make a different judgement about the
= 400 ml
animal's clinical state or decide to make slightly different
472
2 Principles of surgical nursing
Example-
-Cont'd.
Example
Faeces:
Here we need to consider the additional loss
The PCv from an 8 kg dog has gone up from 42% to 47%
due to diarrhoea, say twice normal
due to dehydration.
= 20 × 20 × 1 × ２
Its fluid defcit is therefore
= 800 ml
(ml/kg) (kg) (% increase)
Vomiting:
 Five episodes of vomiting at, on average,
10 ×8×5
2 ml/kg/vomit
= 2 × 20 × 5
= 400 ml
= 200 ml
Therefore, the total deficit for this dog can be estimated as
method but, if used in conjunction with clinical examination
= 1800 ml
or history techniques, it can be helpful.
Note If there has been recent blood loss, this method cannot
An estimate of fluid loss can therefore be made based on how
be used as blood cells have been lost as well as fluid and the
high the PCV is compared with normal. The allowance used
PCV will be lower than normal.
is 10 ml/kg/% increase.
Fluid replacement therapy
We are not usually in the fortunate position of knowing
each animal's normal PCV and often we need to esti-
Having established that our patient is dehydrated, or in
 mate a normal value. For cats this is usually taken as 35%
danger of becoming dehydrated, it is now time to consider
and for dogs 45%. This estimation decreases the accuracy of this
replacing the fluid loss.
Table 23.2 Routes for administration of fluid therapy
Route of administration
Advantages
Disadvantages
Oral (per os, p.0.)
Simple and cheap
Absorption is slow
Painless
Limited range of suitable fluids
Safe as the intestine selectively absorbs the fluid and
No use if the animal is vomiting or gastrointestinal
electrolytes needed and excess is excreted
tract is obstructed
Can be done at home
Time-consuming
Subcutaneous (s.c.)
Simple
Slow absorption, especially if the animal is
dehydrated and circulation is poor
Can only give small volumes at a time
Painful
Risk of infection
Intraperitoneal (i.p.)
Not too difficult
Poor absorption in dehydration or shock
Larger area over which to absorb fluid compared with
Risk of puncturing an abdominal organ 
s.c. fluids.
Strict asepsis necessary
Intravenous (i.v.)
Fluid can be given rapidly
Strict asepsis needed, or risk of thrombophlebitis
Good for animals with circulatory collapse
and septicaemia
Wide range of fluids can be used
 Constant monitoring needed to prevent
Only way in which hypertonic solutions can be given
overhydration
Specialized equipment needed
Cold fluids may lead to hypothermia
Intraosseous (i/o)
 Useful means of giving fluid in animals in which a vein
Specialized equipment required
cannot be catheterized, e.g. small exotic species
 Needle placed directly into the bone, so cannot be
Can be followed by intravenous fluids once circulation is
left in place once animal starts to recover
improved
Aseptic technique required or risk of infection,
e.g. osteomyelitis
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
23
Principles of surgical nursing
a  s ps  d e on  a  s
a specific blood cell type. Plasma can be collected and
has advantages and disadvantages (Table 23.2).
within the fluid and this too can cause reactions in
Oral fluid therapy is the safest method, since the intestines
some patients. Plasma is therefore less commonly used
selectively absorb what the animal actually needs and there is
less danger of overinfusion, which can be life-threatening if
● Oxyglobin is a relatively new commercial product
not identified and treated quickly.
that contains large molecules of Oxyglobin, which act
 in a similar way to haemoglobin molecules, i.e.
In practice the main method used for supplying fluids to
combine with oxygen or carbon dioxide. This is not
patients is via an intravenous drip. For surgical cases this is
antigenic and therefore does not require cross
often helpful, since it can be continued both prior to and
matching prior to use. It is very expensive but does
during any operation when normally animals would not be
provide a useful alternative to whole blood if the
able to take any oral fluids. Postoperatively, animals are often
problem the animal is suffering from is lack of
anorexic for a short time and this technique ensures that they
oxygenn-carrying capacity.
do not continue to lose fluids.
Colloids or plasma expanders
Choice of veins
Colloids contain large molecules of inert substances that are too
● Cephalic vein - runs down the dorsal aspect of the
big to diffuse through the capillary walls into the interstitial
lower forelimb and is the most commonly used
spaces and so remain within the circulation. The molecules
exert an osmotic effect, which also helps maintain the circula
● Lateral saphenous vein - runs over the lateral
tion by drawing water into the capillaries. Colloids do not
aspect of the hock and may be used if both cephalic
remain in the circulation indefinitely - the molecules are grad-
          g
from the blood stream, other fluids will have been given and
● Jugular vein - less commonly used but can be very
circulatory balance should have improved considerably.
useful in patients that are critically dehydrated as it is
a large vein that allows higher flow rates. It also
Different colloids are available in different countries. In the
should be used if central venous pressure (CVP) is to
UK the main colloids contain gelatines and the two brands
be measured. CVP provides a useful method of
available are Hemaccel and Gelofusin.
determining the effectiveness of the fluid therapy.
The situations in which colloids should be used rather than
Choice of fluid
crystalloids are:
There are a number of fluids available for intravenous (or
● Severe shock
intraosseous) infusion and these fall into three classes:
● Haemorrhage where PCV is less than 20% but not so
● Blood, plasma and Oxyglobin
severe as to require whole blood or Oxyglobin
● Colloids or plasma expanders
● Plasma protein levels of less than 35 g/l, leading to
oedema and ascites
●Crystalloids.
● Severe dehydration.
The aim of fluid therapy is to replace the type of fluid lost
with as close a substitute as possible.
Crystalloids
Crystalloid solutions are simply water containing dissolved
glucose and/or electrolytes. There are a range of solutions
Blood, plasma and Oxyglobin
available designed to meet a variety of requirements
● Whole blood can be used in cases of severe
(Table 23.3).
haemorrhage or in cases where specific blood factors
are missing. Ideally, blood should be cross-matched as
Most crystalloids are isotonic and therefore will not affect
there is a risk of a blood transfusion reaction
fluid movement into or out of cells. The water is able to move
developing
freely between the different fluid compartments so when
giving a crystalloid it is important to appreciate that it does
● Plasma is useful for less serious blood losses or where
not stay within the circulation but spreads out between all
the missing blood factor is a plasma factor rather than
the different areas of the body
474
4 Principles of surgical nursing
8
Choice of giving sets
A giving set is the piece of equipment used to deliver the fluid
into the circulation. The choice of giving set depends on the
individual case:
● A standard giving set usually delivers 15 or
 20 drops/ml and is used for larger patients being given
crystalloids or colloids
Fig. 23.5 Burette suitable for small-animat fluid therapy
● A paediatric giving set is better for use in small
patients. This often incorporates a burette so that the
total amount of fluid the patient receives is limited
● Flowline balloon infusers may be used for very
(Fig. 23.5)
small patients, such as exotics, where only a few
millilitres of fluid is required. These deliver fluid at a
● A blood administration set has a filter
rate specified on the flow-line that links the balloon
incorporated into the chamber to prevent any small
and the catheter, and may be bandaged to the patient
clots entering the circulation. This type of giving set
during the period of fluid therapy.
should also be used for plasma or serum
Administration of intravenous
fluid
Table 23.3 Crystalloids and their uses
Crystalloid
Contents
Uses
Comments
Setting up the drip
Hartmann's
Na, K, Ca, Cl,
Diarrhoea
Lactate is
 1. Select the equipment required
solution
lactate
Prolonged 
 converted into
anorexia
bicarbonate
2. Wear sterile gloves if possible
Pyometra
PPE JOu 0p 8N 
Prolonged
bicarbonate － will
3. Check all equipment is in date and undamaged
vomiting
 precipitate out
4. Warm the fluid to blood temperature
0.9% sodium
Na, Cl
Vomiting
chloride
5. Open the sterile packet containing the fluids and
twist off the sterile plastic cover to the giving set
5% glucose
Glucose
Hyperthermia
5% qlucose is
Water
equivalent to
port
deprivation
isotonic water
6. Place bag in a position ready for the giving set to
Hypoglycaemia
be positioned (can be on a bench or on a drip
0.18% sodium Na, Cl,
Maintenance
Potassium
stand)
chloride +
dextrose
fluid
 supplementation 
4% dextrose
Occasionally
will be needed for
7. Open the sterile packet containing the drip line
primary water
long-term
deficits
maintenance
8. Extend the drip line, taking care to ensure that the
Ringer's
two ends do not come into contact with anything,
Na, Cl, Ca, K
Pyometra
 This is the same
Severe
and cherk that there are no kinks
 solution
as Hartmann's
vomiting
without the
lactate;
9. Turn off the controller
bicarbonate should
10. Remove the protective cover from the spiked end
therefore not be
and carefully introduce this end of the giving set
added to this
into the port using a twisting motion and then
either
hang the bag on to the drip stand
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
475
23
Principles of surgical nursing
11. Give the chamber a gentle squeeze to fil it about
2. Make a small incision in the skin over the point of
one-third to half full
entry for the catheter (may not always be
necessary)
12. Gently open the flow controller and allow fluid
 ps pe mons e ie has s a qno
3. Push the tip of the catheter through the hole in the
skin at an angle of approximately 45°
13. Try not to lose any fluid but make sure there are no
bubbles within the line
4. Watch for blood in the ‘flashback' chamber of the
catheter
14. Make sure that the cap is on the end of the line
and hook this up over the drip stand ready to be
5. Once blood appears, withdraw needle a few
used.
catheter
Preparation of the patient
6. Slide the catheter off the needle and into the vein
The skin must be prepared as for surgery to avoid the risk of
7. Withdraw the needle
thrombophlebitis. The fur should be clipped and the skin pre-
pared, using some type of antiseptic solution. Some practices
8. Secure the catheter with tape
prefer to use just chlorhexidine or povidone-iodine solutions
whereas others use surgical spirit. Either method is appropri-
 9. Flush with heparin saline to ensure that it is in
ate so long as care is taken to ensure that the skin is as clean
place
as possible.
10. Connect the giving set to the end of the catheter
and start administration of fluids
Catheterization of the vein
11. Bandage the tubing in place and pack with swabs
 td m pda a  a n o, 
for comfort.
introduction of infection.
Calculating the drip rate
Equipment
Once the fluid deficit has been calculated the drip rate can be
For catheterization of the cephalic vein most veterinary sur
determined. There are different ideas as to how much of a
geons use over the needle catheters but for jugular vein
given deficit should be replaced over a period of time and it
catheterization longer catheters are needed. It is important
is also important that ongoing losses are taken into consider-
that whichever vessel is chosen for the delivery of fluid the
ation. Fluid rates should therefore be reviewed regularly
largest possible catheter is used to reduce the chance of
based on the patient's clinical condition.
blockage.
Monitoring the patient
In addition to the catheter other equipment needed includes
tape to secure the catheter in place, a bung or three-way tap
 Patients being given intravenous or intraosseous fluid therapy
if the giving set is not to be connected immediately and
must be monitored carefully. It is obviously important that the
bandaging material to protect the site and hold the tubing in
fluid is delivered at the rate asked for by the veterinary surgeon,
place. On larger patients some people prefer to use either the
but it is also important to continually assess the patient to
end of a hypodermic needle or a scalpel blade to make a small
ensure that it is making the desired improvement.
nick in the skin to ease the access of the catheter. A syringe
containing 1 ml of heparin saline is also useful to check
Critical care cases may need to be checked as frequently as an
patency and ensure that clots do not form within the
anaesthetic case, with temperature, pulse and respiration
catheter.
being recorded every 5 min. As the case becomes less critical,
observations should still be made at regular intervals, with
Procedure for administration of fluids via the
 particular reference to the fluids.
cephalic vein
 A fluid chart is helpful so that all parameters can be recorded.
1. Prepare the site aseptically and ask an assistant to
This includes fluid input and rate of administration, temper-
restrain the animal and raise the vein
ature, pulse and respiration and any urine output. Urine
476
5 Principles of surgical nursing
2
● Colloids remain within the circulation, so
Example
overinfusion results in circulatory overload. The heart
An animal requires 1800 ml over 24 h. Using a
standard giving set, which delivers 20 drops/ml, the drip
the veins leading back to the heart become congested.
rate can be calculated as follows:
Eventually the blood dams back into the capillaries
and the pressure causes fluid to leak into the
1800 ml to be given in 24 h
interstitial spaces. This will be seen as oedema of the
= 1800 ÷ 24 ml to be given in 1 h
tissues or ascites in the abdomen
= 75 ml/h
or
● Crystalloids may build up of fluid in all parts of the
body and the tissues become 'waterlogged'. This
= 75 ÷ 60 = 1.25 ml/min
includes the brain, and the animal may appear to be
Now convert the number of millilitres into drops. The
more 'spaced out' and unresponsive to normal stimuli.
giving set delivers 20 drops/ml, so the number of drops
 If the lungs are affected, the patient's breathing may
 per minute is calculated as follows:
become compromised, and ultimately fluid within the
= 1.25 x 20 drops/ml
lungs will prevent adequate oxygenation of the blood
= 25 drops/min
and the animal will die.
To calculate how many seconds it takes for each drop to
fall, simply divide 60 by this number.
= 60 ÷ 25
= 2.4 5
Therefore in this case, the drip rate is 1 drop every
Wounds and wound
2.4 S.
management
output should be quantified - the patient should be catheter-
ized and the catheter connected to a urine collection bag.
Classification
These are graduated so it is possible to get an estimate of the
quantity of urine passed over a given time period. Remember
A wound can be defined as an injury in which there is a
that, if fluid therapy is successful, the kidneys should produce
forcible break in the continuity of the soft tissues. This
a minimum of 1 ml/kg of urine per hour.
includes both open wounds, in which the skin or mucous
membrane surface is broken, and closed wounds, in which the
CVP also provides a means of assessing the hydration state of
damage is below the surface.
a patient. Normally CVP should be between 3 and 7 cmH,O,
but in severely dehydrated patients it may be considerably
Wounds are divided into different groups based on their
below this. CVP can only be measured if a jugular catheter is
cause and the resulting type of damage (Table 23.4). Wounds
placed in such a way that the end of the catheter is close to
may also be categorized on the basis of the degree of
the right atrium of the heart.
contamination (Table 23.5).
As many practices do not use this technique it is very impor-
Operating order is always dictated by the cleanliness of the
tant that other regular clinical checks are made on patients,
surgery. Clean surgery should be carried out first, followed by
assessing temperature, pulse, respiration, capillary refill time,
clean-contaminated conditions.  Contaminated surgery
colour of the mucous membranes, skin turgor and general
should be carried out last.
demeanour.
Dirty procedures should not be carried out in theatre but in
another area of the practice.
Overinfusion
 It is possible to overinfuse patients, particularly small dogs,
cats and exotics, and to avoid this burettes or Flowline
systems should be used.
Wound healing
Signs of overinfusion vary depending on the type of fluid
being used:
Wound healing occurs in three phases:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
477
23
Principles of surgical nursing
Table 23.4 Wound classification
Wound type
Possible cause
Type of damage
Incised
Sharp knife/scalpel
 Clean cut with little damage to surrounding tissues
Glass
Wound edges usually gape and bleed freely
Tin
Puncture
Nail
 Small external wound but may be deep
Thorn
Little obvious sign on the surface
Fish hooks
Infection is a potential problem as bacteria or foreign material are carried deep into the
Teeth (especially cats)
tissues
Lacerated
Dog fight
sanssi neioyadns pue uys auz ot abewep alqeiapisuos yzm punom iejnbal abie7
Road accident
The severity varies with the size and depth of the wound and the degree of damage to
Barbed wire
other tissues, such as muscles, nerves and blood vessels
Infection is common and necrosis of the edges of the wound is likely
Abrasion 
Friction
The epidermis is removed to expose the dermis. These are not full-thickness wounds and,
although they are painful, are not usually serious
Avulsion
Dog fights
An avulsion wound occurs where there is forcible separation of a tissue from its
Degloving
Road traffic accidents
attachments
Degloving injuries occur in a similar way or through damage to the blood supply such that
an area of tissue dies and sloughs away over a period of time
These are often heavily contaminated with dirt and bacteria
Shear
Road traffic accidents
These occur in the same way as degloving injuries, although as well as the removal of skin
there is damage to the underlying bones and/or joints
 These are heavily contaminated and are often very serious
Contusion
 Blunt trauma
Blood vessels rupture under the skin
The blood seeps into the tissues and eventually clots
Breakdown of the red blood cells and haemoglobin results in the discoloration of the skin
that appears as the contusion heals
Haemato ma
Blunt trauma
Greater blood loss occurs than with a contusion and a pocket of blood develops under the
Excessive head-shaking
skin
The blood eventually clots and scar tissue is generated, which contracts with time
Most usually associated with the ear, where the scar contraction can lead to a 'cauliflower ear
1. Haemorrhage, inflammation and
3. Scar formation
primary wound contraction
During epidermal growth new collagen is laid down. This is
Primary haemorrhage occurs at the time of injury. This then
continually remodelled up to 2 years after the original incident.
clots and forms a scab, which protects the wound from exter-
Once the wound cavity is filled the wound undergoes second-
nal contamination. Inflammation follows, encouraging white
ary wound contraction and the size of the scar is reduced.
blood cells to the site. In the first few hours there is primary
wound contraction as fibroblasts contract and the size of the
Open wounds can take weeks or even months to heal, depend-
wound decreases.
ing on the severity of the initial injury. These wounds are
described as healing by second intention. Wounds that are closed
surgically with good apposition of the skin edges heal by first
2. Granulation
intention. This process is usually far quicker, as very little granu-
After 12 h, epithelial proliferation starts. New cells are pro-
lation tissue forms and the skin edges simply join together.
duced and slide over the surface of the wound. This occurs at
a rate of up to 2 mm per day if the wound is kept moist. After
Inflammation
 36 h, fibroblasts and new capillaries are produced, forming
granulation tissue. This is usually bright red and firm but is
Inflammation is ‘the reaction of normal tissue to injury and
quite easily damaged.
is part of the body's natural defence mechanisms'. When cells
478
3 Principles of surgical nursing
Table 23.5 Wounds classified by degree
● Necrosis - sloughing of dead tissues
of contamination
● Gangrene - tissue death due to the loss of local blood
Wound type
Description
supply, with or without bacterial invasion.
Clean
There is no break in sterility
An incision is made into a tissue that has
The aim of treatment and management is to get all wounds
 been surgically prepared and no contaminated
to either resolve or heal and to avoid or reduce the risk of the
body systems are entered
other possible outcomes.
Clean-contaminated 
 A contaminated area (such as the
gastrointestinal, urogenital or respiratory
Factors affecting wound healing
tract) is entered but there is no spillage Or
spread of contamination
Wound healing is a delicate process and many factors can
Clean-contaminated wounds also include
delay the rate of healing. These include:
fresh, open wounds after careful lavage and
debridement
● Movement
Contaminated
Wounds in which there is either spillage from
a contaminated area or severe inflammation,
● Infection
but without infection
Fresh, open wounds are also included in this
● Tension -- e.g. sutures placed too tightly will produce
category
cell death
Dirty
Wounds in which there is leakage from a
● Interference with blood supply - e.g. bandages that are
pus-flled organ or there is pus or infection
too tight, or heavily contused wounds
present within the wound
Dirty wounds also include traumatic wounds
● Persistent irritation and self-trauma
with devitalized tissue or those containing
foreign bodies
● Tumour cells invading a wound
● Presence of foreign material.
are damaged, chemical mediators such as histamine and
prostaglandins are released and these stimulate the inflam-
These are all factors that relate specifically to the wound but
matory response. There is dilation of local vessels, and white
there are also some general factors that will also influence the
blood cells and proteins are attracted to the site. This is all
way in which wounds heal:
needed to start the healing process. Administration of anti-
inflammatory drugs will reduce healing in the early phases,
● Age - youngsters will heal faster than older animals
so generally should not be used. However, protracted inflam-
 mation may cause problems and this is where the use of drugs
● Region of the body
such as the corticosteroids or non-steroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drugs (NSAIDs) might be indicated.
● Malnutrition or specific deficiency of vitamins A, B
and C
● Corticosteroids can decrease wound healing; anabolic
Possible outcomes of
steroids and the use of antibiotic creams/ointments
inflammation and wound healing
can increase the rate of wound healing
● Resolution - a decrease in redness, swelling and pain
● Other concurrent diseases.
● Healing - repair or regeneration
Management of wounds
● Suppuration - formation of an abscess
Wound management can be summarized as follows:
· Degeneration of damaged cells
1. First clean the wound thoroughly and remove any
● Mineralization and the deposition of calcium
devitalized tissue
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
23
Principles of surgical nursing
2. The wound should then be repaired surgically or left as
case where there is a large skin deficit, and such wounds will
an open wound
 a   a p a as an
3. Dressings should be applied as indicated by the type of
Bandages can help to:
wound
● Protect a wound from bacterial contamination
4. Follow-up checks should be carried out.
● Provide comfort
Cleaning and debridement
● Support an area with a wound and reduce movement
Wounds should be cleaned carefully using dilute disinfec-
of the skin edges
tants or saline. A heavily contaminated wound should be
flushed thoroughly using warmed saline. A large syringe and
● Reduce the development of swelling and oedema
needle can be used to provide greater pressure where there is
ingrained dirt. If the wound edges are damaged, the edge of
● Absorb any exudates
the wound should be debrided surgically before repair or
dressing of the wound is undertaken.
● Provide a cosmetic appearance for the owner.
Whenever bandages are used it is very important that clients
Wound closure
are given clear instructions about when they should return to
Wounds usually heal more quickly if they can be closed sur-
o e sis ae noqe pe dn ya e ron ss a
gically, so this is done wherever possible. Wounds can be
indicate a problem.
closed using a number of methods:
A bandage should consist of three layers:
● Suturing - commonly used and generally well
tolerated. However, most patients require general
● Primary or contact layer -this touches the wound
anaesthesia for both restraint and analgesia
and must be sterile
● Staples - can be very quick and carried out in the
● Secondary or intermediate layer - padding.
conscious patient
usually added for comfort or absorption
● Tissue arhesive - glues are available suitable for skin
● Tertiary or protective layer - applied over the other
closure.
layers to hold them in place, prevent interference and
minimize contamination from the environment.
Wound closure can be carried out at different stages depend-
ing on the type of wound and the degree of contamination:
There are several types of skin dressing available for the man
agement of open wounds (Table 23.6). The dressing materials
● Primary closure: the wound is closed immediately
after presentation once cleaned and debrided
of contamination or necrosis.
● Delayed primary closure: this is carried out
Drains
3-5 days after the initial injury. The delay allows
removal of contamination or any exudate that would
In some wound cases drains can be very valuable. A drain is
a device that allows fluid or air to pass from a wound or body
has not yet started to form
cavity to the surface. Several situations may benefit from the
use of a drain, including the management of contaminated
● Secondary closure: this is similar to delayed primary
wounds, deep abscesses, and in seromas to prevent the accu
closure, except that it has taken longer to remove any
mulation of fluid in the dead space in surgical wounds. While
infection and therefore some granulation tissue has
seromas do not usually cause serious problems they are
started to form.
unsightly and may delay the wound-healing process.
Dressings and bandages
 Drains can be described as either active or passive:
Not all wounds are amenable to closure and some wounds are
● Passive drains - rely on pressure and gravity to allow
best left to heal by second intention. This is particularly the
the fluid to drain. In order to be effective they should
480
0 Principles of surgical nursing
Table 23.6 Dressing materials
be placed so that the opening is in a dependent
Dressing type
position, i.e. below the level of the area from which
Use
the fluid is to be drained. The most common drain is a
Adherent contact layer
soft flexible latex rubber tube known as the Penrose
Dry-to-dry dressing
Dry swabs are directly applied to the
drain. Fluid follows the external surface of the drain.
wound so that debris and necrotic
This type of drain should be left in place until such
tissue adheres to the swabs and is
time as fluid production is minimal and the risk of
pulled away when the dressing is
dead space development has been removed.
changed. This is an effective but
painful way of debriding wounds
Other types of passive drain that are occasionally used
Wet-to-dry dressing
Sterile swabs soaked in Hartmann's
are corrugated drains, tube drains and sump drains.
solution are placed close to the wound.
The dressing dries out and, when
● Active drains - require some source of suction to
removed, takes with it any exudate and
work. Suction devices include small compressible
debris. These dressings should be
plastic containers, syringes or evacuated blood tubes.
changed every 24 h and are usually
For continuous, low-level suction these must be
less painful than the dry-to-dry
permanently attached to a drainage tube and bandaged
dressings
in place. Alternatively, intermittent suction can be used,
e.g. a syringe used in conjunction with a three-way
 Non-adherent contact layer
tap to ensure that air does not flow back into the area.
Gauze impregnated with
Little used nowadays. The petroleum
Tube drains are usually used in these situations.
 petroleum jelly
jelly inhibits epithelialization 
 Perforated film dressing,
Usually used for surgical wounds with
While in situ, any drain should be checked regularly to
little exudate. Provides a clean, dry
ensure that it is still in place and to assess the healing process.
e.g. Melolin
environment for wound healing
There should be no odour associated with the drain and the
Foam dressing, e.g.
wound should appear clean, without excessive inflammation.
Very good for absorbing fluid from
Allevyn
Any fluid emerging should be almost clear, or possibly
wounds where there is likely to be
slightly blood-tinged, but not purulent.
heavy exudate
Hydrogels, e.g. IntraSite
Hydrogels are commonly used in
Animals should not be allowed to interfere with drains.
Biodres
practice and have the advantage of
Active drains are usually covered with bandage but passive
reducing bacterial contamination of
drains need to be left open to function. An Elizabethan collar
wounds, as well as providing an
may be needed to prevent the patient worrying at the end of
excellent moist environment that
the drain.
promotes wound healing and natural
debridement
When drains are removed, it is usually quite a simple matter
Hydrocolloids, e.g.
Initially these are impermeable to water
of cutting the sutures that hold the drain in place and then
Tagesorb, Granuflex
and help to rehydrate wounds and
withdrawing the tube. Check that the drain is intact and that
encourage debridement. Later, the
no material has been left behind. This could act as a foreign
structure becomes more gelatinous and
body and induce a marked tissue reaction.
fluid is able to escape from the wound
site
Thoracic drains are more specialized and require the use of a
Alginates, e.g. Kaltostat,
These are derived from seaweed and are
fenestrated tube drain and a trocar. Insertion is carried out
AlgiSite
usually presented as a soft, woven
either under general anaesthesia, e.g. at the time of chest
dressing. They react with sodium ions
surgery, or under local anaesthesia. A skin incision is made
and a gel is formed that holds a
between the ninth and 12th ribs and a subcutaneous tunnel
considerable amount of fluid and
made through to the level of the seventh or eighth intercostal
ensures excellent moist wound-healing
 spaces. The drain is pushed through the intercostal muscles at
conditions.
this site. Once in place the tube must be sealed to prevent air
 These are used in situations with very
 entering the thorax. This procedure must be carried out under
Semi-permeable film
aseptic conditions. Mechanical suction can then be per-
dressing, e.g. OpSite,
little exudate since there is minimal
formed as necessary. Suction should always be applied via a
Tegaderm, Bioclusive
absorption by these dressings. However,
they do provide a good moist
one-way valve such as a Heimlich valve or water trap, which
also prevents excessive suction being applied. Alternatively, a
wound-healing environment
syringe can be used, either attached directly to the chest
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
481
23
Principles of surgical nursing
drain or via a three-way tap. With any thoracic drain it is
Postoperative care is essential in these cases and careful band-
essential that air is not allowed to enter the thoracic cavity as
aging is required. The bandage should have a non-adherent
the drain is checked or the suction device is attached.
dressing in contact with the graft, covered by cotton wool
      d   
prevent movement at the site. The graft should be checked
Reconstructive surgical techniques
every 24-48 h and each time the dressing is changed great
care should be taken to avoid disturbing the graft.
Where there is extensive tissue loss, standard surgical closures
may not be possible but the site may still be amenable to sur-
gical techniques to replace the missing tissue. These include
Wound complications
skin grafts and skin flaps.
Wound dehiscence
If the skin of an animal is tented it is possible to see that there
is considerable slack in some areas of the body while the skin
Wound dehiscence is defined as the breakdown of a surgical
is quite tight in other areas. This means that it is possible to
wound. There are a number of reasons why this might occur:
remove flaps of skin from one of the 'slack' areas and still
close the remaining hole. With skin grafts, the skin is usually
● Insufficient debridement - such that the wound edges
totally removed from the donor area. However, with skin
start to become necrotic
flaps, the skin is usually left partially attached to the original
site so that its blood supply is maintained. The flap is then
● Poor local blood supply
rotated or slid in order to cover the recipient site:
● Suture reaction - in some cases sutures act as a focus
● Skin flaps are becoming more widely used as these
for a reaction
conserve the natural blood supply to the tissue. There
  si ssd s n  
● Movement of wound edges.
position of major vessels, and careful planning is
needed to ensure that the best site is used to get the
 In all cases the signs include redness, swelling, discharge,
desired result
separation of the wound edges, irritation and the animal
 may start to appear unwell.
● Skin grafts can be defined as full or partial thickness,
depending on the depth of skin taken. Full-thickness
To manage these cases, the underlying problem must first be
grafts include the epidermis and dermis, whereas
split-thickness grafts only include part of the dermis.
the wound should be cleaned and debrided again. Where pos
These are more fragile than full-thickness grafts but
sible surgical closure should still be carried out but occasion
tend to take more easily. However, hair growth is poor
ally it is necessary to keep the wound open and treat it as an
and they are more difficult to collect, and because of
open wound.
this split-thickness grafts are less commonly used in
small animal practice.
Skin grafts can also be described according to the amount
Wound infection
of tissue used. Sheet grafts are designed to fully cover the
deficit, whereas pinch grafts, punch grafts or strip grafts are
Wound infection is a major concern when dealing with any
 designed to break up the deficit and provide a start point for
type of wound. f the wound has been lavaged thoroughly and
epithelialization.
debrided fully the chances of infection are minimal. However,
animals with reduced immune function are more at risk.
As well as careful collection of the graft, the recipient site also
needs to be well prepared. The site should be free of contam-
If a wound becomes infected then the animal may show sys-
ination and a good layer of well vascularized granulation
temic changes, becoming anorexic, lethargic and pyrexic.
tissue should be present so that the graft has a good chance
The wound site will also show changes - the area will be red,
of ‘taking'. Alternatively, fresh surgical wounds or clean
n      o  
wounds that have been thoroughly debrided can be suitable
discharge.
sites. The grafts are then placed in situ. Sheet grafts are
usually carefully sutured in place, whereas small pinch or
Treatment is similar to that for wound dehiscence and the
punch grafts are simply embedded into the granulation
wound must be cleaned thoroughly and debrided again. If
tissue.
possible, it should then be managed as an open wound, as
482
2 Principles of surgical nursing
sutures may act as a focus for any residual infection. Swabs
subcutaneous tissue, or the skin is particularly loose or
should also be taken and cultured so that appropriate antibi-
mobile, creating an empty or 'dead space'. In most cases sero-
otics can be used.
s d   sd  o o 
Seroma formation
However, they may delay wound healing and are particularly
worrying where skin grafts or flaps have been carried out.
This is the accumulation of serous fluid under the skin. It
Most cases, however, do not actually require treatment as the
usually forms where the surgery has involved the removal of
fluid will be reabsorbed gradually over time.
if the pus enters the blood stream - the animal will develop
pyaemia and toxaemia.
conditions
Treatment of abscesses always involves the same basic prin-
ciples no matter where the abscess is located:
In general practice much of our time is spent dealing with
animals requiring surgery. The cases range from relatively
● Establish drainage - superficial abscesses can be
routine elective procedures to emergency life-saving opera-
lanced and flushed with saline, Hartmann's solution or
tions. In all cases nursing staff carry out a vital role, ensuring
weak disinfectant solutions. Hydrogen peroxide should
that the animals are given the necessary care and support and
not be used as this is extremely tissue-toxic. Hydrogels
also helping owners to understand both the surgery and the
 may be used to pack the abscess site. Deep abscesses
aftercare needed.
require surgery and drains are usually required in order
to allow sufficient ongoing drainage
● Maintain drainage - superficial wounds should be
General cutaneous conditions
kept open through regular bathing and flushing with
Abscess
mild solutions. Deeper abscesses also require flushing
via the drain
An abscess is a localized collection of pus. Pus is tissue debris,
dead and degenerating neutrophils and is usually cream or
● Treat with appropriate antibiotics - only of
 green in colour. An abscess usually contains pyogenic (pus-
benefit if drainage has been established. Without
forming) organisms, but may be sterile. The wall of the
drainage the abscess will reduce in size but it is
abscess is lined with granulation and fibrous tissue. Note that
unlikely that all the bacteria within it will be killed,
abscesses can be found in any tissue, e.g. skin, muscle, bone,
and once antibiotics are stopped it is likely to recur.
organs and brain.
In most cases the protocol described above will allow the
Most abscesses will give rise to the signs of pain, local
 abscess to settle down but, if there is insufficient drainage or
swelling and reduced function of the area. In time, the
if there is any foreign material within the abscess cavity, then
abscess is likely to come to a head and may rupture on to a
further treatment will be needed.
surface. For subcutaneous abscesses this usually helps,
because the pressure is reduced and drainage is established.
There are some occasions where the type or location of the
Deep abscesses are more of a problem as, if these rupture, the
abscess makes it more amenable to complete surgical exci-
pus will leak into the abdominal cavity and peritonitis may
sion. Providing this is done without spillage it can result in
develop, which can be life-threatening. It can also be serious
complete removal of the problem. However, dead space will
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
483
23
Principles of surgical nursing
be created so drains are often placed to prevent the accumu-
carried deep into the tissues and there is marked tissue
lation of any serum within the operation site. Excision is
reaction to both the foreign body and the infection.
often the treatment of choice in rabbits even for superficial
Treatment involves careful surgical exploration of the
abscesses as the prognosis is considerably better than when
 site and removal of the foreign body.
using local drainage.
● Anal furunculosis - a deep pyoderma leading to
Ulcers
 many sinus tracts forming within the tissues. It can be
very debilitating and painful and a number of treatment
An ulcer is defined as the loss of the epithelial surface of a
options are available, including radical surgical excision
tissue, usually skin or mucous membrane, leaving a raw area,
of the affected tissue, cryosurgery or the use of newer
which is often slow to heal. Examples include oral ulceration,
immunosuppressive drugs such as the cyclosporins.
pressure sores (decubitus ulcers) and corneal ulcers.
Hernias and ruptures
ing the surface clean and dressing the wound if possible. This
will avoid further aggravation of the ulcer. Any secondary
These are similar, since in both cases abdominal contents
infection should be treated with antibiotics.
come to rest in an abnormal position through an opening in
the muscular wall. The difference between them is that in a
hernia, the opening in the abdominal wall is natural - such
as the umbilicus or inguinal ring. In a rupture there is a tear
Fistula
in the muscle wall that allows the abdominal contents to
This is a channel that passes from one mucous membrane to
migrate through.
a second mucous membrane or the skin, i.e. it passes from
one epithelial surface to another. The fistula itself is also lined
In all cases the contents of the hernia/ruptuire should be
with epithelium. In general, these should be repaired sur-
replaced in their normal position. This is sometimes quite
S    m     
simple and can be done through gentle manipulation. Such
of the individual fistula:
hernias are described as reducible. However, the condition is
likely to recur, so surgery is usually needed to close or reduce
● Anal sac fistula - an opening forms between the
the size of the opening. With ruptures adhesions may develop
anal sac and the external skin, usually as a result of
between the contents of the rupture and the wall, and they
chronic infection. This will probably require surgical
may then be irreducible.
excision of the anal sacs and the overlying skin
In some cases the blood flow to the contents becomes com
● Rectovaginal fistula - usually a congenital
promised. Initially the venous flow is affected, as the vessels
are relatively thin-walled and more easily compressed, and
rectum and the vagina lying ventral to it. This is
blood is able to enter the area but not to leave it. Very quickly
uncommon but may be corrected surgically. The
the tissues become engorged and then even the arterial
condition is also likely to be inherited and affected
vessels are affected. The hernia is then said to be strangulated
animals should not be bred from
and the tissue trapped in the sac will very quickly become
devitalized. These cases are emergencies and require emer
● Oronasal fistula - may occur after extraction of the
gency surgery to prevent the animal's condition deteriorat-
canine teeth, which have extremely long roots, which
ing. The surgery for each type of hernia is different in each
leave a channel between the oral and nasal chambers.
case (Table 23.7).
The hole should be closed surgically or food will lodge
in the site, which may lead to chronic nasal infection.
Diaphragmatic rupture
Sinus
Although often referred to as a hernia, this is usually a
This is an opening or canal running from deeper tissues to
rupture caused by trauma forcing the diaphragm to tear. This
the skin or mucous membrane. It is not lined with epithelium
allows abdominal contents to move through into the thorax
and is blind-ending. It is often associated with infection:
and compromises respiratory function.
  ss s -    o
Affected patients need careful handling to prevent the situ-
 problems in animals by penetrating the skin and
ation deteriorating, and treatment of shock is the primary
tracking through the subcutaneous tissues. Bacteria are
concern. Surgery should be attempted only after the animal
484
4 Principles of surgical nursing
Table 23.7 Hernias - causes and treatments
air the animal takes in with each breath is increased and
 oxygenation is improved.
Type of
Description
Treatment and prognosis
hernia/rupture
Postoperatively as much trapped air as possible is withdrawn
Umbilical hernia Protrusion of
Surgical repair of the linea
from the thoracic cavity to encourage the lungs to re-expand
abdominal contents
alba
before the animal is allowed to recover, and the patient must
through an enlarged
 Rarely any complications
 be monitored closely to ensure that respiratory function is
umbilical opening
adequate. It may still be necessary to place the patient in an
oxygen rich environment during the recovery phase.
Inguinal hernia 
Abdominal contents
 Surgery to draw abdominal
migrate through the
contents back into the
inguinal canal to the
abdomen and to reduce the
size of the hole in the
Tumours
groin region
More common in
abdominal muscle layers
 bitches and rabbits
The words tumour and neoplasia refer to any abnormal new
Can be serious if tissues
growth occurring in the body. These growths are either
have become devitalized,
benign, with no tendency to spread, or malignant, which
particularly if the bladder
infiltrate extensively into local tissues and can spread
is involved
throughout the body.
Perineal hernia 
 Muscle layers around 
Muscle reconstruction of 
the anal sphincter
the perineal area is
Benign growths
gradually break down
possible
 and allow the rectal
Castration is also
Usually these have well developed capsules and remain in the
wall to stretch and
recommended, since the
one site. They include:
form a diverticulum
condition is
This results in
hormone-related
● Lipoma - adipose tissue tumour
constipation and 
Prognosis remains guarded
impaction
because of possible
● Fibroma - superficial tumour of the skin and
Most common in
long-term difficulty in
occasionally the mouth
intact male dogs
passing faeces
There is a risk of the other
● Adenoma - benign tumour of glandular tissue, e.g.
side developing the same
anal adenoma, adenoma of the thyroid gland
condition - particularly if
the dog is left intact
● Papilloma - 'warty' growths found on the skin and
occasionally in the bladder arising from epithelial
tissues
has been stabilized. During this time the animal should be
encouraged to remain in sternal recumbency with its head
● Melanoma - tumour of the melanocytes in the skin;
and thorax propped up such that they are higher than the
although named as if they are benign, such tumours
abdomen. This allows the abdominal contents to slide back
are usually malignant.
towards the abdomen under gravity rather than migrating
forward into the thorax. These patients should not be given
Malignant growths
anything to eat - food encourages stomach contractions and
this may also work the stomach cranially. Strict rest is essen-
Poorly differentiated tumours with indistinct edges. They
tial as any activity increases the oxygen demand by the
tend to spread both into local tissues and systemically. They
tissues. Additional oxygen can be helpful, providing this can
include:
be given without causing the animal any stress.
● Carcinoma - produced from epithelium. Examples
During surgery, the animal is usually placed in dorsal recum-
include squamous cell carcinoma (often seen affecting
 bency and the approach is via a cranial laparotomy incision.
the ear tips of white cats) and mammary tumours,
As the thoracic cavity is approached, the lungs tend to col-
which are usually adenocarcinomas, i.e. affecting
lapse, so there must be strict attention to the patient's respi-
glandular epithelium
ration. Respiratory augmentation is often used to assist the
animal. This can be achieved by gently squeezing the respira-
● Sarcoma - produced from mesodermal (connective)
tory reservoir bag on the circuit at the same time as the
tissues. Examples include osteosarcoma and
animal's own respiratory movements. Thus the amount of
fbrosarcoma
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
485
23
Principles of surgical nursing
● Malignant melanoma also comes into this category
include thyroid adenomas, insulinomas, pituitary gland
Strictly this should be called melanocarcinoma and
tumours and adrenal gland tumours.
therefore fits with other epithelial cell tumours.
Tumours affecting non-glandular tissues can also secrete
Malignant tumours often show ulceration, local infiltration
substances that may behave like hormones: for example,
and metastasis, i.e. they spread to sites distant from the orig-
lymphomas and bone tumours can produce a substance
inal tumour site.
that behaves like parathyroid hormone and causes hyper-
calcaemia; insulin-like hormones are produced by some
Carcinomas tend to spread to local lymph nodes via the lym-
tumours, leading to hyperglycaemia.
phatic system, whereas sarcomas tend to spread via the blood
stream and lodge in tissues where the blood passes through
capillary networks, such as the lungs.
Haematological complications
Haematological tumours - involve the lymphoid and
These may also develop as a result of invasion of bone
myeloid tissues and can be solid or circulating. Examples
 marrow by the tumour or changes in production of blood
include lymphosarcoma (solid) and leukaemia (circulating).
cells, platelets and clotting factors.
Common sites for tumours
Causes of tumours
Tumours can occur at any site in the body and in all species.
There is considerable amount of research into why and
The risk of developing some type of tumour increases as an
how tumours develop and, although not all the answers are
animal gets older, since cellular repair mechanisms become
known, the following are thought to contribute:
less effective with age.
● Mutations - random events leading to uncontrolled
proliferation of mutated cells
Complications of tumours
● Viruses - including feline leukaemia virus and
Tumours cause a number of problems within the body. Local
papillomaviruses
effects include pain and ulceration leading to secondary
infection. The physical presence of the tumour can also cause
● Carcinogens - chemicals that induce mutations in
problems such as restriction of movement or prevention of
the DNA such as those released through smoking,
the normal flow of ingesta through the intestines
solvents such as benzene and even such apparently
 quantities has been implicated in causing cancer.
Metastases
Tumour diagnosis
These are secondary tumours that usually develop as small
clumps of cells break away from the primary tumour and
Diagnose is usually confirmed by means of a sample of tissue,
enter the circulation. When they encounter a mesh-like filter
which is examined histologically to determine both the cell
  n s    n s a s s
type and the degree of malignancy. The results will give an indi
structure within lymph nodes they are caught and start to
cation of the prognosis and the most appropriate treatment.
multiply or metastasize at that site.
Metastases can occur in almost any site but the lymph nodes
Wedge biopsy
lungs, liver and spleen are the most common. All metastases
will produce loss of function at the affected site, which adds
This is the best method as it provides cells from the centre
to the problems that may be developing at the primary site.
and the edge of the tumour. The sample should then be fixed
The clinical signs will depend on the area affected.
in formol-saline.
Hormone production
Tru-Cut needle biopsy
  o do  s 
 A specialized needle is used to take tiny samples from
affect the body's metabolism. Common endocrine tumours
 parenchymal tissues (Fig. 23.6). The needle has a small notch
486
5 Principles of surgical nursing
3
Exfoliative cytology
Cells taken from the surface of the tumour are collected and
analysed. This method is only used if other diagnostic tech-
niques are not possible, as it is the least reliable. It can
be carried out in several different ways, depending on the
accessibility of the tumour:
● Tissue scraping - a scalpel blade is used to collect cells
from the surface of a mass
● Exudate is collected and then examined
Fig. 23.6 Simplified diagram of a Tru-Cut needle
● Sterile saline is flushed over the surface of the suspect
tissue and then collected. Any cellular matter is then
examined. Flushes can be used to examine the nasal
cavity, bronchi and trachea and prostate gland.
cut out of its barrel and a cover that is slid down so that a
If tumour cells are found then the technique is diagnostic; if
small quantity of tissue is caught between the notch and the
none are identified it might simply mean that the tumour
cover. This can then be fixed and examined histologically
cells were not collected.
A Tru-Cut needle can be used to obtain tissue from organs
such as the liver and kidney. Biopsy of the kidney can even
Treatment
be performed percutaneously. However, it is not as good as
the wedge biopsy, as you only get a small sliver of tissue for
Surgery
analysis and could miss the area where the cancerous cells are
This is generally the treatment of choice as, by complete
located.
removal of the tumour, the animal may be cured of that par-
ticular cancer. Operations should be carried out as soon as
possible to decrease the risk of further growth of the tumour
and to minimize the risk of metastasis.
Needle aspirate
This technique is commonly used for lymphomas and may
Wide excisions should be used to ensure that all the tumour
also be used to differentiate between abscesses and other
cells are removed, but different tumours require different
cutaneous swellings.
margins (Table 23.8).
Method:
In some cases it is not possible to remove the tumour com-
pletely and debulking surgery may be performed. This is indi-
1. Introduce a 1" 23 G needle connected to a 10 ml
cated if it will either improve the animal's quality of life
syringe into the mass
or reduce the amount of tumour sufficiently for follow-
up treatments using radiation or chemotherapy to be more
2. Suck back sharply four or five times
successful.
3. Withdraw
Radiation therapy
4. Disconnect - and draw back plunger
Radiation damages rapidly dividing cells and can cause chro-
mosomal damage, thereby preventing them from dividing
5. Reconnect - and blow out the cells on to a slide
Table 23.8 Excision margins for different tumours
6. Make a smear from the cells, stain and examine under
the microscope.
Tumour type
Recommended margin
Squamous cell carcinoma 
1 cm
This allows examination of some of the cells from within
Mast cell tumouf
2-3 cm
the mass and may give sufficient information to start
Osteosarcoma
Limb amputation (or radical resection
treatment. However, in other cases it may prove non-
of the bone)
diagnostic.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
487
23
Principles of surgical nursing
Chemotherapy
further. This is usually the reason why we avoid exposure to
radiation during radiography. However, since tumour cells
This is the treatment of tumours using cytotoxic drugs and is
are dividing uncontrollably, they are often more sensitive to
most commonly used for tumours that have spread systemic-
the effects of radiation than other cells.
ally or those affecting the bone marrow or lymphatic system.
Radiation can be applied from an external source such as
There are a number of different drugs available for use as
   )    
chemotherapeutic agents and different protocols involving
implanted source such as radioactive iodine or iridium wires
combinations of these products have been developed for
(brachytherapy).
different types of cancer (Table 23.9).
If an external source is used, it is usual for a dose to be given
These are obviously very potent drugs and care is required
weekly for 4-5 weeks. On each occasion the beam is posi-
whenever they are handled. Gloves are essential and hands
tioned slightly differently to minimize damage to unaffected
 e    a  s 
tissues.
 iso ai aa on si p an  'snod asn
should always be given through a catheter to ensure accurate
The technique is most commonly used for oral and nasal
delivery. However, it is not just during the administration of
tumours that are not amenable to surgical resection. The
the products that care is needed, as body waste may also
prognosis is, however, still guarded and many tumours recur
contain traces of the drugs so gloves and protective aprons
6-9 months after treatment. Side effects, such as erythema of
should be worn when handling faeces or urine from treated
exposed skin and mucous membranes, alopecia, skin thick-
animals and owners should be advised accordingly.
ening and abnormal hair coloration, may also occur. Owners
must therefore be given careful advice before embarking on
a treatment programme so that they are fully aware of the
Cryotherapy
possible outcomes.
This is the controlled destruction of tissues by freezing and it
works because water expands as it freezes. The cytoplasm of
  a s p m d s s
disrupts the cell membrane, killing the cell.
Table 23.9 Cytotoxic drugs used to treat tumours
 Drug name
Tumours treated
Route of
It is obviously important that only the abnormal cells are
administration
frozen and they may be difficult to identify. Nevertheless,
the technique has been used successfully to manage some
Vincristine (Oncovin)
Lymphoma
Intravenous
tumours, such as oral squamous cell carcinomas, which
Transmissible
are difficult to excise. It has also been used for super-
venereal tumouf
ficial growths, including anal adenomas and sarcoids in
Cyclophosphamide
Lymphoma
Oral
horses.
(Endoxana)
Leukaemia
Intravenous
Mammary tumours
 There are two main cryogens in use - nitrous oxide and liquid
 nitrogen - which are usually delivered in one of two ways:
Doxorubicin (Adriamycin)
Lymphoma
Slow intravenous
Adenocarcinoma
infusion with
● The probe technique uses a metal conductor in contact
Osteosarcoma
0.9% saline
Urogenital tumours
with the cryogen, which is then placed against the
tumour until a ball of frozen cells is produced. This
Cis-platinum (Cisplatin)
Osteosarcoma
Intravenous
must include the whole of the growth. Gaseous nitrous
Some carcinomas
Toxic in cats
oxide freezes at -50°C and liquid nitrogen freezes at
Urogenital tumours
-150°℃ using a probe
Carboplatin (Paraplatin)
Osteosarcoma
Slow intravenous
Some carcinomas
infusion with
  e   si   a o
 Urogenital tumours
0.9% saline
 q       ss
difficult to ensure that just the tumour is affected.
Cytosine arabinoside
Leukaemia
Intravenous
Liquid nitrogen freezes at -196°C using a spray.
(Cytarabine)
Lymphoma
Chlorambucil (Leukeran)
 Chronic leukaemia
Oral
In both methods it is usual for more than one freeze-
Lymphoma
thaw cycle to be needed to ensure the destruction of all the
abnormal cells.
488
 Principles of surgical nursing
Postoperatively, the killed cells slough away to leave an open
It is important that the area is kept clean while it heals and
Aisun seade Aeuu s uoenn Aq si ie pnom
 some antibiotic cover will be required to prevent secondary
initially but the final result is usually quite good, although
infection.
there may be some depigmentation and hair loss in the area.
Surqical
Operative procedures
During the operation the veterinary nurse should provide
procedures
111
reglor
assistance to the surgeon. This may mean that the nurse
scrubs up and works alongside the surgeon, passing instru-
of the body
ments, swabbing the site and cutting sutures as indicated.
Alternatively, the nurse may remain non-sterile but be re-
sponsible for opening sterile packs for the surgeon, or moni-
The veterinary nurse has a number of very important roles to
toring the condition of the patient.
play in the management of surgical cases. This includes pre-
 operative, intraoperative and postoperative care.
Postoperative procedures
Preoperative procedures
The operation site should be gently cleaned before the animal
On admission the necessary paperwork for the animal should
starts to come round from the anaesthetic, and any dressings
have been completed fully and the client should have been
should be applied at this time. The patient should then be
made aware of what will happen during the surgery. Checks
should be made as to when the animal last ate or drunk to
piration and return of the laryngeal reflexes. Patients should
ensure it is ready for an anaesthetic.
also be kept warm and the operation site should be checked
regularly prior to discharge.
The animal should then be weighed and any premedication
is drawn up ready for administration. This can be then given
Nurses may also be involved at discharge and it is important
under veterinary direction. Analgesics are often given pre-
d a no e  i nd e s s ae h
operatively as evidence has shown that their effectiveness is
cedures that have taken place. For example, if an animal has
greater when given before a painful stimulus rather than
had dental treatment, the nurse must know whether extrac-
afterwards. The theatre should be prepared ready for the pro-
tions were required and, if so, how many and which teeth
cedure and all the appropriate instruments should be made
required removal.
ready.
The nurse must advise the client about postoperative care
When the premedication is fully effective anaesthesia should
for the animal, including details about any medication that
be induced (see Ch. 27). This should be done in the prep-
needs to be given, when and what to feed, any special
aen dn pad aa ua pinous iee a pe ee ue
instructions relating to the operation, when to make the next
to be taken through into theatre. The final skin preparation
appointment at the surgery and what possible problems to
should be applied once the patient is in theatre.
watch for.
Signs
Ear
 The ear pinna is swollen and on palpation the swelling is
fluid-filled and warm to the touch. If there is otitis or a
foreign body within the ear canal the animal may resent
Aural haematoma
examination of the ear, so care should be taken to ensure that
no one is bitten.
Cause
Aural haematomata usually develop on the ear pinna as a
result of self-trauma secondary to either an ear infection or a
Treatment
foreign body within the ear canal. More rarely it can be due
The ear should be examined carefully to determine the
 to direct trauma. It is most commonly seen in dogs.
primary cause. This often needs to be carried out under
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
23
Principles of surgical nursing
 general anaesthesia. If there is evidence of infection the ear
clipped and prepared for surgery. One of the most common
canal should be cleaned thoroughly using saline and the tym-
reasons for wound breakdown postoperatively is infection, so
panic membrane checked prior to using any other solutions
 n    s      i
If the tympanic membrane is damaged, then disinfectants or
 any otitis prior to the surgery.
otolytic solutions should be avoided since these will cause
problems within the middle ear.
Procedure
-   p pad pe pdd aa pous ed a
The lateral wall of the vertical ear canal is resected and
sion is made on the inside of the ear to allow the blood to drain.
reflected such that when the operation is complete the
Compression is then applied across the pinna to prevent the
medial wall of the vertical canal is exposed, as is the entrance
dead-space between the skin and cartilage from refilling with
to the horizontal canal.
blood. This is usually achieved by using a number of sutures. To
prevent the suture cutting into the tissue, something is usually
used to help spread the compression. Some veterinary surgeons
Postoperative care
use commercial products, whereas others improvise using mate.
This is a painful procedure so analgesirs are needed as well as
rials such as X-ray film, pieces of drip tubing or buttons to do
antibiotics. An Elizabethan collar is used to prevent the
this. Whichever is used, consideration should be given to the
animal trying to scratch or rub the affected ear.
animal's recovery as, if the materials used are too heavy, they
will cause the animal discomfort and its attempts to scratch or
There is often a considerable discharge from the ear due to
shake the ear may make things worse.
underlying infection so it is important that the operation site
is kept clean in the postoperative period. Not all patients will
 In some cases, if the aural haematoma is very small, it may be
tolerate this so it may be necessary for the dog to come back
 n a n   n  n n s
to the surgery for sedation, enabling the ear to be cleaned and
tion of long-acting steroids to reduce the inflammation and
checked.
the likelihood of further bleeding under the skin. This
method, while less invasive, does not always work and may
Sutures should remain in place until the wound edges have
need to be followed with surgical treatment.
obviously healed - this may take longer than most other sur.
gical wounds and to avoid the need for suture removal some
surgeons prefer to use absorbable sutures.
Postoperative care
These cases require analgesia and antibiotics and will often
need an Elizabethan collar to prevent self-trauma. It is usual
Aural ablation
to leave the sutures in place for slightly longer than a normal
surgical wound just to make sure that the haematoma does
If the infection or tumours within the ear are very severe then
not immediately re-form.
a complete aural ablation may be necessary, in which the hor-
izontal and vertical canals of the ear are excised. After this
operation, the cosmetic result is actually better than after the
lateral wall resection, since the skin is closed beneath the ear
Lateral wall resection (Zepps procedure)
and a small hole is left that leads directly to the tympanic
This procedure is used in some cases of chronic ear infection
membrane.
in which the vertical canal has become chronically inflamed
 and narrowed. In this situation it is important that owners do
not believe that this will provide a miracle cure for their
Preoperative preparation
animal - usually it just makes treatment of the underlying
 This is almost identical to the preparation required for the
condition easier and allows air to circulate in the ear canal.
lateral wall resection.
Another indication for this surgery is an animal with polyps
or a tumour affecting just the vertical canal. It is more com-
monly carried out in dogs than cats, particularly animals with
Procedure
floppy’ ears where air circulation is reduced and infection
An incision is made overlying the vertical canal and the skin
more likely, e.g. labradors and spaniels.
edges are reflected to expose the cartilage of the vertical
canal. The canal is then carefully dissected away from the
underlying tissues right down to the tympanic bulla.
 Preoperative preparation
The ear canal should be cleaned thoroughly and the area
 In some cases a bulla osteotomy may also be needed. This
ventral to the external opening of the ear canal should be
involves opening the tympanic bulla in order to release any
490
0 Principles of surgical nursing
23
infection from within the middle ear. This does result in deaf-
ness in the affected ear but in most cases requiring this type
Postoperative care
of surgery the animal is already unable to hear on that side.
This is the same as for the lateral wall resection.
Surgery
The eye should be replaced as soon as possible, which
 usually requires general anaesthesia. It may require a lateral
Prolapse of the eyeball
     n   
open the eyelids sufficiently to allow the eye to be replaced.
This is an emergency and is one of the few situations where
To prevent immediate recurrence, the eyelids are often
an animal must be brought down to the surgery as soon as pos-
sutured together for a short while to allow the bruised
sible. It usually afferts the brachycephalic breeds of dog such
and swollen conjunctiva to heal and the eye to settle
as pugs and pekes but can also affect other species such as
back into its normal position. If it is not replaced quickly,
 hamsters and guinea pigs, which also have protruding eyes.
the eye may become permanently damaged and the ani-
mal may lose its sight. If this occurs enucleation may be
necessary.
Cause
The prolapse has usually been caused by some type of
trauma, e.g. road traffic accidents, in which case it may be
Postoperative care
accompanied by severe trauma to other parts of the body, and
 An Elizabethan collar may be needed for a few days postop-
       o   
eratively to prevent the animal from rubbing the eye.
in the case of exotic species.
However, once the eye has been in place for a few days it
should be safe to remove the sutures and collar.
Signs
 People often imagine that a prolapsed eye will be hanging
Corneal damage
from the socket but in reality this is not often the case unless
there has been severe head trauma. The eye may simply
The most common type of corneal damage seen in general
 appear more bulbous than usual and the conjunctiva is more
practice is a corneal ulcer.
 apparent and quite congested.
Signs
First aid treatment
The eye is very painful and the animal usually holds the
 The most important action is to prevent the eye from drying
eyelids closed - described as blepharospasm. There is increased
out. Saline, ophthalmic ointment or even a water-soluble
flow of lacrimal fluid due to the pain and irritation and this
jelly should be used to prevent this. The animal should also
results in tear overflow or epiphora. Depending on the initial
be stopped from traumatizing the eye further by applying an
cause of the ulcer there may also be infection present, leading
Elizabethan collar.
to a purulent ocular discharge.
Any signs of shock should be assessed and treated as
described earlier in this chapter.
Treatment
The eye should be examined carefully to see if the cause of
the ulceration is still present. Small pieces of debris or
Preparation
bedding materials may be caught behind the third eyelid,
There may be relatively little time for extensive preoperative
which may have caused considerable damage to the corneal
preparation but the surface of the eye should be irrigated
surface. Local anaesthetic drops such as amethocaine may be
thoroughly with sterile saline or false tear solutions prior to
needed to aid the examination. Medical treatments are often
replacement. If a canthotomy is likely, the fur around the eye
tried first and antibiotic ointments may be sufficient in some
should be clipped carefully and the area should be prepared
cases. The lack of direct blood supply to the cornea does
using dilute povidone-iodine solution (0.1%). The surface of
mean, however, that the healing process is very slow com-
the cornea should be protected with water-soluble jelly,
pared with that of other tissues. To provide additional pro-
which can then be rinsed off, taking with it any hair that
tection for the cornea, corneal bandages, similar to contact
 might otherwise have become stuck to the surface of the eye.
lenses, can be used.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
491
23
Principles of surgical nursing
Surgery
Preparation
 In other cases the surgical approach is preferred. The simplest
Before surgery, owners are often very concerned about the
surgery is the third eyelid flap, known as a farsorrhaphy.
procedure and the likely postoperative appearance of their
In this procedure the third eyelid is sutured in the closed
animal. It may be helpful if the practice has some photo-
position so that it does not move across the surface of
 graphs of animals who have undergone enucleation so that
the ulcer and irritate it further. Prior to this being carried out,
worried owners can see that the cosmetic effect in small
it may be necessary to actually excoriate the surface of
animals is often not as bad as they had feared. The animals
the ulcer to stimulate healing. This can either be done
themselves tolerate enucleation very well!
using caustic chemicals such as phenol, or a scalpel blade.
This may seem to be the exact opposite of what is required,
The skin around the eyelids should be clipped and prepared
but often stimulates healing in an area that had become quite
using a dilute povidone-iodine solution as described previ
dormant.
ously.
More refined surgery involves the use of conjunctival flaps.
Pedicles of conjunctiva are sutured to the cornea to cover the
Surgery
ulcer. Rather like the use of skin flaps, these still have their
vascular supply intact to allow nutrients to reach the ulcer-
If the eye itself is the only problem the eyeball is removed,
ated site more easily. After a few weeks the flap is freed from
but the muscles can be left in place so that the skin does not
its origin and trimmed to leave just a small area covering the
fall so far back into the socket. If, ho wever, enucleation is due
defect. With time this remodels and becomes less obvious.
to a retrobulbar tumour or chronic abscess in that region,
more tissues will need to be removed. It is possible for pros
 inq ae us a p on ps a on sas
Postoperative care
are not commonly used in general practice. The eye is care-
The most important thing is that the animal itself does not
fully dissected from the surrounding tissues, the third eyelid
is removed and a strip of tissue is removed from the edge of
further, and it may be necessary for the animal to be fitted
each eyelid so that these can be sutured together.
with an Elizabethan collar. Antibiotic ointments are contin-
ued even while the third eyelid flaps or conjunctival flaps are
in place. The sutures holding third eyelid flaps are usually
removed after 2-3 weeks (depending on the severity of the
Postoperative care
ulcer) and the ulcer is checked carefully.
Some veterinary surgeons bandage the site, which helps to
prevent seroma formation within the orbit and is perhaps is
helpful for the owners in the initial postoperative period.
Enucleation
This can be removed after 2-3 days and the wound can then
      a d o 'd i 
This is indicated if the eye is too damaged to save, which may
Elizabethan collar may be used.
be due to any of the following conditions:
Systemic antibiotics are necessary for a few days postopera-
● Gross trauma
tively but should only be continued for any length of time in
cases where there was gross infection within the orbit area
● Panophthalmitis (massive inflammation of the whole
 a     si   
eye)
perioperative period, as in most cases the removal of the
damaged eye provides sufficient pain relief.
● Neoplasia - of the eye or behind the eye (retrobulbar)
● Untreatable glaucoma, which has led to blindness in
Cataracts
the affected eye
A cataract is an increase in the opacity of the lens and in a
● Irreducible prolapse or recurrent prolapse
 true cataract is due to deposition of material within either the
capsule, the cortex or the nucleus of the lens. The changes
● Microphthalmos (small eye) and phthisis bulbi
seen in the eyes of old dogs with increased lens opacity are
(atrophy of the eye), both of which lead to chronic
not true cataracts. The lens is continually growing and
orbit infections
 s n ssi e ss a i os   ssn
to pass through. This is called senile nuclear sclerosis and is a
● Retrobulbar abscess.
natural ageing change.
492
2 Principles of surgical nursing
Surgery
Signs
True cortical or capsular cataracts can be removed using sur-
Entropion leads to excess tear production and epiphora. The
gical techniques by eye specialists. This most commonly
animal shows signs of pain and blepharospasm. Conjunc-
involves the use of phacoemulsification techniques, which
tivitis is usually present and without treatment corneal ulcers
break up the cataract deposits. However, in some cases len-
are a common consequence. Ectropion may also lead to con-
tectomy (removal of the lens) is required.
junctivitis, as bacteria can easily gain access to the eye
through the exposed area of conjunctiva.
For nuclear sclerosis, the only treatment available is lentec-
tomy. The animal will have some vision restored, in that light
will reach the retina again, but it will have lost the ability to
focus. As the majority of older animals have already learned
to cope with the reduced vision due to the sclerosis, surgery
Treatment
is rarely carried out in these cases.
Treatment for both conditions involves surgery of the
eyelids. Small slivers of skin are removed to turn the eyelid
Entropion and ectropion
out, or take up the slack of an oversized eyelid (Figs 23.7,
23.8).
These are conditions of the eyelids. In entropion the eyelid
rolls inwards, causing the eyelashes to irritate the cornea. In
It is essential that an assessment of the amount of tissue
ectropion the eyelid bags open, exposing the conjunctiva.
to be removed is made while the animal is conscious and
before the animal has had any premedication - the use of
Orcasionally, entropion and ectropion are found in the same
acepromazine will make even a good eye appear like an
eye. This is particularly the case in animals with so-called
ectropion!
diamond eyes, such as the St Bernard.
Distichiasis and ectopic cilia
These are extra eyelashes. Ectopic cilia are just one or two
abnormally positioned eyelashes, whereas distichiasis
involves a whole row of extra eyelashes inside the normal
lashes.
Signs
Fig. 23.7 V-Y plasty for ectropion management
The clinical signs are very similar to entropion. Animals
present with epiphora, conjunctivitis, blepharospasm and
corneal ulcers.
Treatment
The extra eyelashes can be dealt with in a number of
ways, of which the simplest is simply to pluck them. How-
ever, this only provides a temporary solution, since they
will regrow. Electrolysis can also be used, which gives
longer lasting results but is also not necessarily per-
manent. Surgery can be used to remove the roots of the
lashes but this is very delicate surgery and requires specialized
ophthalmic instruments. Cryotherapy is another alternative.
 Neither of these methods is commonly used in general
Fig.23.8 Crescent-shaped stiver removat for entropion
practice.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 493
23
Principles of surgical nursing
Gastrointestinal tract
animal on a bland, easily digestible diet and gradually rein-
troduce its normal food over a period of days. Antibiotics are
often used for a few days after surgery, though not all sur-
Gastrotomy
geons agree with this procedure. Analgesics should be used to
The surgical technique involving the opening up of the
tial and any signs of vomiting, depression or pyrexia should
stomach may be used as treatment for the following condi-
be noted and the veterinary surgeon informed.
tions.
Gastric dilation and torsion (gastric
Foreign bodies
dilation and volvulus, GDV)
These are very common and very varied in type. Throughout
This condition can be seen in any dog, but most commonly
your time in practice you will undoubtedly see a number of
affects deep-chested breeds, e.g. greyhounds, pointers and
items removed from the gastrointestinal tract of animals and
German shepherds. The classic history for these cases is that
will certainly gain experience in dealing with this type of
the animal has been fed, often on dry foods, and then exer-
case.
cised. The dog becomes depressed and may start to salivate or
attempt to vomit. Gradually the abdomen becomes distended
and the animal may 'flank watch' as it tries to determine why
Signs
it is feeling so uncomfortable. As time progresses the abdom
These vary depending on the type of foreign body. Sharp
inal swelling becomes more obvious and the mucous mem-
foreign bodies produce recurrent vomiting, often with blood,
branes become a deep purple colour.
described as haematemesis; whereas others produce no
     q  h  s s
being investigated for something else.
Pathogenesis
Initially the stomach dilates due to an accumulation of gas or
fluid. The dilation may progress to torsion if the stomach
Diagnosis
Sdos s  sos n o   s
The most common method of confirming a diagnosis is radi-
and duodenum become twisted preventing ingesta leaving
ography (see Ch. 32). Plain studies will be sufficient for some
the stomach in either direction. The stomach continues to
-npei aienoi on papaau a Aeu sans iseoo inq sad
distend, which puts pressure on the hepatic portal vein and
cent objects such as plastic bags or pairs of tights.
caudal vena cava and decreases venous return. This leads to
hypovolaemic shock as blood is not returned to the heart and
is not available to be re-oxygenated and delivered to the
Surgery
tissues. Without rapid treatment, this condition is fatal. In
s p  e an nn shd s
addition, the blood supply to the stomach is also compro.
for removal of the object.
mised, leading to necrosis of the stomach wall. Toxins are
able to leak into the blood stream, which leads to endotox-
If the problem has been present for some while, considera-
aemia.
tion will need to be given to the hydration status of the
patient and it may be necessary to provide preoperative intra-
venous fluids to rehydrate the animal before giving it a
Management
 general anaesthetic.
● Gastric decompression - The first thing to do is to
attempt to pass a stomach tube to relieve the pressure
 During the procedure it is important to minimize the risk of
in the stomach. The tube should be measured against
spillage of gastric contents into the abdomen; large swabs
the animal in order to determine the correct length
may be needed to pack off the stomach from the abdomen as
and then gently passed through the oropharynx. If it
it is exteriorized. If gastric contents do leak into the peri-
will enter the stomach, then the stomach contents can
toneal cavity, it should be lavaged with copious amounts of
be evacuated and the stomach can be flushed with
warmed, sterile saline.
warm saline (gasiric lavage).
If the twist in the oesophagus makes it impossible to
Postoperative care
pass the tube, then the best way to relieve the pressure
It is usual for animals to be given nil by mouth, providing
is to introduce a 16 FG needle into the left flank wall
intravenous fluids for the first 24-48 h. Then restart the
just behind the ribs. This will pierce the stomach and
494
4 Principles of surgical nursing
23
allow pent-up gas to escape. It should not be
Foreign bodies
undertaken lightly and the advice of a veterinary
surgeon should always be sought before this method is
The clinical signs seen with intestinal foreign bodies vary but
used. The stomach tube may then be passed and
in most cases the animals vomit and become depressed and
 gastric lavage performed
anorexic, leading to dehydration and shock.
● Treat shock - These patients are in hypovolaemic
To treat these cases an enterotomy is usually carried out.
shock so once the pressure in the stomach is relieved
An incision is made in the wall of the intestine, the object is
intravenous fluids will be needed to restore the
removed and the incision is closed immediately. Omentum or
circulating blood pressure
mesentery may be sutured over the point of entry to reduce the
risk of leakage. If, however, the intestine is badly damaged, an
● Surgery - In cases where dilation is the main
enterectomy may be carried out. The damaged portion is
symptom, passing the stomach tube may be sufficient
removed and the two cut ends of the intestine are sutured
treatment, after which the animal should be
together. This is referred to as an end-to-end anastomosis.
monitored. However, cases also involving a torsion will
require surgery to relieve the torsion and reposition
Intussusception
which the stomach is sutured to the abdominal wall to
prevent recurrence. In some cases, when the stomach
This describes the telescoping of a piece of intestine inside
rotates, the spleen is taken with it and a splenectomy
itself. It is most often seen in young animals, especially if
may be needed, especially if the spleen has been
they have had diarrhoea, as the peristaltic contractions are
caught in the twist for any length of time.
exaggerated compared with usual movements.
Clinically, the animals are subdued, with a depressed
Postoperative care
appetite. They may try to vomit or may pass small amounts
This is similar to that for other gastrotomy cases. Intravenous
of diarrhoea and on examination the intussusception may be
palpable within the abdomen.
of days before gradually reintroducing foods.
   n    
extent of the problem. In mild cases, it may be possible for
the first 48 h, as toxins trapped in the blood supply of the
the intussusception to be reduced by simply teasing the intes-
stomach are released into the circulation as the stomach is
tine apart. However, if the blood supply has been severely
untwisted. It is possible for animals apparently doing well
compromised, an enterectomy will be needed.
after surgery to suddenly relapse and die from endotoxic
shock, so the prognosis should still be considered guarded. To
reduce the risk of damage due to endotoxins, drugs such as
Rectum and anus
Stegantox can be used.
 rn p aq  se iee pe on a o s 
Long-term management of these patients involves looking at
number of reasons, including perineal hernias as well as those
their normal feeding and exercise regimes. Studies have
detailed here:
found that patients have a reduced risk of dilation and
torsion if they are fed at least twice a day rather than once a
 day. Owners should also exercise their animals before feeding
Neoplasia and polyps
rather than the other way round.
Growths within the colon are quite common and may cause
problems with defaecation. The owners may simply notice
Enterotomy and enterectomy
that the animal is having difficulty passing faeces (dyschezia),
or is straining more than usual (tenesmus). There may also be
● Enterotomy - a surgical technique involving the
fresh blood on the faeces.
opening up of the intestine
To investigate problems in the terminal alimentary canal,
● Enterectomy - the removal of a length of intestine.
plain radiographs and contrast studies are often used. Digital
palpation of the rectum can also be useful and in many cases
These techniques may be used as treatment in the following
endoscopy is used to visualize the internal wall of the colon
conditions:
and rectum.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
1495
23
Principles of surgical nursing
Some tumours and polyps are amenable to surgery and
are also needed to reduce the risk of further infection and the
simple excision may be possible. Other cases require more
patient must be closely monitored to ensure that it is able to
radical surgery, in which the terminal part of the colon and
 defaecate normally. More recently, the immunosuppressive
rectum is removed. In all cases, postoperative care involves
drug cyclosporin has been found to be useful.
ensuring that the animal is able to pass faeces relatively com-
fortably, so the use of mild laxatives or hydrophilic com-
pounds such as Peridale granules given orally may assist in
Impaction and infection of the anal sacs
keeping the faeces soft. Antibiotics are usually given.
Impaction of the anal sacs is common, leading to anal irrita-
tion seen as bottom-rubbing, 'scooting' and biting at the rear
Furunculosis
sion. However, if impaction becomes frequent or abscesses
This is a painful condition. A deep pyoderma develops in the
develop, the sacs should be removed by surgical excision.
perianal tissues and is characterized by the formation of deep
sinus tracts. It is most often seen in German shepherd dogs,
especially those with a low tail carriage.
Treatment
 Prior to surgery the anal area must be prepared. The anal sacs
should be evacuated fully and then flushed or cleaned using
Signs
saline or very dilute Savlon solution. The perianal area should
These animals are in considerable pain and consequently
be clipped up and prepared for surgery. Before the final prepa-
show dyschezia, faecal tenesmus and anal irritation.
ration, the sacs may be filled with anal sac gel or wax to aid
their location and removal, while some surgeons simply use
a probe in the duct to help locate the sac. To prevent faecal
Treatment
contamination of the operation site, some veterinary sur-
A number of different treatments have been tried, including
geons use a purse string suture around the anus, or a cotton
surgery in which the sinus tracts are fully debrided, leaving
wool plug. If this method is used it should be noted, so that
open wounds that are left to heal by second intention. It may
it can be removed at the end of the operation.
be combined with the use of cryotherapy to remove tissue
that was not easy to remove with a scalpel.
Postoperative care
Keep the area clean and ensure that the animal is able to pass
Postoperative care
faeces. Antibiotic cover is needed. Note that in some cases
The wounds should be kept clean by gentle washing of the
there is temporary faecal incontinence due to bruising of the
area with warmed saline or Hartmann's solution. Antibiotics
anal sphincter tissues but this should settle down with time.
Reproductive tract
The timing of the surgery in the bitch is quite important and
they can either be spayed prior to their first oestrus or during
anoestrus - usually 2-4 months after the bitch has been in
The most common elective surgery carried out in practice is the
season or 6-8 weeks after giving birth. The queen during the
neutering of pets. This surgery, while considered 'routine', is not
breeding season comes into oestrus every 3 weeks and it may
risk free and it is always worth reminding owners of this when
be difficult to find a time when she is not in season. As a
discussing the procedure. However, if appropriate care is taken
result, a veterinary surgeon will usually perform the opera-
the risks are small and we should encourage owners to be
tion at any time after the onset of sexual maturity at around
responsible and not breed animals indiscriminately.
5 months of age.
Surgery
Ovariohysterectomy (spay)
 In the bitch, surgery is usually carried out via a midline linea
In most cases animals are spayed is in order to control
alba incision, whereas in the queen it is more usually done
oestrous cycles and to prevent unwanted litters. In addition,
through a sublumbar incision in the left flank. In both cases
an ovariohysterectomy may be carried out to prevent an
the ovaries, uterine horns and uterine body are removed
(Fig. 23.9). During the procedure it is common for the animal
 to manage an animal that has recurrent false pregnancies.
to breathe more erratically as the surgeon exteriorizes the
496
 Principles of surgical nursing
Hysterotomy (caesarean section)
There are a number of reasons why a caesarean section may
be needed in a pregnant animal. These include:
● Primary or secondary uterine inertia
● Fetal oversize or a fetal monster
● Fetal malpresentation that cannot be reduced
● Obstructions of the birth canal such as pelvic
 deformities or vaginal polyps
● Neglected dystocias, especially if the fetal fluids have
Fig. 23.9 Exterionized ovary and uterine horn during a bitch spay
 already been lost or a fetus has already died
ovary, but this usually settles down once the vessels
● Elective reasons, particularly if the animal has had a
have been ligated and the ovary has been freed from its
history of problems previously, or is a breed that is
attachments
prone to dystocia.
In all cases the aim of the surgery is to remove the young
from the uterus to ensure that as many as possible survive,
Postoperative care
while also keeping the reproductive tract intact.
The animal should be kept quiet for the first couple of days
and, in the case of a bitch, restricted to lead exercise only
until the sutures are removed. Cats should be kept indoors
Preparation
until the wound has started to heal properly. If there is
Both the dam and her neonates must be considered, ensuring
any interference with the sutures or any seepage from the
that suitable facilities are available to support all their needs.
wound, the animal should be brought back to the surgery for
Additional nursing staff may be helpful, particularly if a
a check.
number of young are predicted and may require resuscita-
tion. Towels should be at the ready and somewhere warm
ready for the young to recover in - an incubator or a box con-
taining a covered hot water bottle may be suitable.
Complications
These include the risk of haemorrhage from either the
 ovarian or uterine vessels. Internal haemorrhage may be rec-
Surgery
ognised by pallor of the mucous membranes, rapid heart rate,
The anaesthetic regime should be chosen so that it has
increased respiratory rate and lethargy, possibly combined
minimum effect on the respiration and cardiovascular func-
with abdominal swelling or leakage from the operation site.
tion of the neonates. Rapidly acting agents such as propofol
These animals should be checked carefully by a veterinary
(Rapinovet) are usually used without any premedicant. Once
surgeon, as it may be necessary to reoperate in some cases.
the neonates are removed they should be stimulated to
In others the use of a compression bandage to increase
breathe by rubbing vigorously with a towel and clearing any
back-pressure may be sufficient.
mucus from the oral cavity. Doxapram (Dopram) may neces-
 n hn sn  n  s n 
   n   
tant to breathe.
urinary incontinence. This can usually be managed with the
use of phenylpropanolamine (Propalin). In others the coat
may change in texture and become coarser. This seems
Postoperative care
to be particularly true for certain breeds such as cocker
As soon as the dam has recovered from the anaesthetic, the
spaniels and retrievers. Obesity is also considered to be a
young should be placed with her and watched closely to
problem but most spayed bitches do not need as much food
ensure that they are allowed to feed. It is essential that they
as previously, so owners should be advised to monitor their
receive the colostrum needed to provide them with both
  p      a s
energy and antibodies. The dam may be reluctant to take the
at each meal.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 497
23
Principles of surgical nursing
look after them. In very rare instances the young require
● Rabbits - have particularly large inguinal rings and
hand-rearing or fostering because of maternal rejection.
are able to retract their testes (often seen when
clipping up the site in preparation for surgery).
However, this also means that when the testes are
Orchidectomy (castration)
removed, there is a greater chance of inguinal hernias,
Castration involves the surgical removal of both testes and
so many veterinary surgeons reduce the size of the
ligation of the deferent duct on each side. It is often a more
inguinal ring or take other measures to reduce the risk
straightforward procedure than spaying, as the testes are
more accessible. However, retained testes should be removed
and these can prove more difficult to find within the abdom-
Castration can be carried out using either a closed or an open
inal cavity. Some owners think that castration in animals is
technique. In closed castrations, the tunica vaginalis is not cut
simply a vasectomy, in which the deferent duct is ligated and
to expose the testes: the testes and covering are dissected
transected but the testes are left in place. This should be
away from the overlying skin and the whole spermatic cord
clarified with the owner before the surgery is carried out.
is ligated and transected. Open castrations allow visualization
of the individual testicular vessels and these may then be
The indications for castration are varied. It may be to prevent
ligated separately from the deferent duct. In both methods
breeding or roaming, or to prevent male behaviour traits such
the tunica vaginalis is cut during the surgery. This tissue is
as spraying in tomcats, or aggression. It will also prevent the
simply an extension of the peritoneum, meaning that the
development of testicular tumours (particularly important
procedure actually involves entry into a body cavity and
if the testes are retained) and reduce the risk of prostate
should not be carried out by anyone other than a veterinary
problems and anal adenomas.
surgeon.
Surgery
The procedure is slightly different in different species:
Postoperative care
The animal should be monitored for signs of haemor-
● Dogs - the incision is usually made just in front of the
hage or swelling at the operation site. Dogs should be
scrotum and the testes are each removed through this
discouraged from licking, as this can cause complications,
incision before it is closed
and it may be necessary to use an Elizabethan collar to
prevent this. Since cats do not have any external sutures
● Cat - incisions are made through each scrotal sac to
they may not need to return to the surgery, but most
reach the testis on each side and these are usually left
other species will require suture removal after about
open
10 days.
Urinary tract
Bladder
● Cystotomy - opening up the bladder through the
wall.
Surgery on the bladder is quite common, for example to
remove calculi or bladder tumours or to repair a ruptured
bladder (Figs 23.10-23.12). Animals with calculi or tumours
may not be particularly ill but may have shown signs of
urinary tenesmus or haematuria that alerted their owners to
the problem. Animals with ruptured bladders are more likely
to have been involved in some kind of trauma and, unless the
bladder is repaired quickly, the animal will rapidly become
uraemic as the urea is reabsorbed via the peritoneum from
the urine within the peritoneal cavity. It also will develop
Fig. 23.10 Exteniorizing the btadder and packing it off from the
peritonitis unless the abdomen is lavaged thoroughly and
abdomen
498
3Principles of surgical nursing
levels were high prior to surgery then intravenous fluids may
also be needed to induce diuresis and flush out the urea.
Urethra
● Urethrotomy - the temporary opening of the
urethra
● Urethrostomy - creation of a permanent opening in
the urethra.
The most common surgical condition involving the urethra
is urethral obstruction. This is seen predominantly in the
male animal, where the urethra is much narrower than in the
Fig. 23.11 Carefut removat of urinary catcuti from the btadder
female. Signs of obstruction include urinary tenesmus,
haematuria, lethargy and abdominal discomfort.
Treatment
Collection of urine by means of a needle placed through the
abdominal and bladder walls (cystocentesis) is often carried
out first to relieve the pressure on the bladder and make the
animal more comfortable. This allows time to get ready for
other procedures.
The next step is to carefully catheterize the urethra and
then flush it using saline or Walpole's solution. Placing the
catheter will dislodge some of the calculi causing the obstruc-
tion and flushing may alleviate the immediate problem.
Walpole's solution is very acidic and also helps to dissolve
some types of calculi. Note that this procedure may be quite
painful for the animal, so sedation or a general anaesthetic
may be necessary.
Fig. 23.12 A few of the calculi removed
If this has been successful, the animal is usually hospitalized
and started on dietary management before returning home.
quickly. Left untreated both uraemia and peritonitis can be
 a        i
fatal.
 may be necessary to perform a cystotomy.
Surgery
Surgery
The bladder is usually approached via a ventral midline inci-
If the condition recurs or the blockage cannot be removed, a
sion and should then be exteriorized and packed off from the
rest of the abdomen with swabs to minimize the risk of con-
tamination (Fig. 23.10). If there is any spillage of urine or the
removing the obstruction and closing the wound. However,
bladder has already ruptured the abdomen should be flushed
postoperative strictures are quite common, so this procedure
thoroughly with warmed saline.
is not done very frequently and it is more usual for surgeons
to decide to leave a permanent opening or urethrostomy.
Postoperative care
In the dog, obstruction usually occurs at the base of the os
The animal should be monitored carefully. It is essential that
penis, so a low penile urethrostomy is usually adequate. The
the patient is able to urinate normally. Trauma cases may
incision is made just in front of the scrotum in this pro-
need catheterization initially, but no case should be sent
cedure. In the cat and occasionally in the dog the obstruction
home without having passed urine normally. If blood urea
is higher and a high urethrostomy is needed where the inci-
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 499
23
Principles of surgical nursing
sion is made in the perineal area. In the cat the penis is
Elizabethan collar may be needed to prevent interference
usually amputated at the same time.
with the wound, particularly as the animal may feel urine
dribbling from the site and wish to clean the area. It will take
some training, particularly in dogs, for them to get used to
the fact that urine emerges from a different site and owners
Postoperative care
may need to use petroleum jelly around the area to prevent
Most cases are hospitalized for several days after surgery to
urine scald and keep the area clean.
allow close monitoring, since it is essential that the animal is
able to pass urine freely. An indwelling catheter is usually
With cats, shredded paper should be used instead of cat litter
placed during the early stages. This allows urine to be passed
in the litter tray to avoid this becoming stuck to the surgical
easily and also ensures that the operation site does not con-
wound and causing discomfort.
tract down too much, preventing the urethrostomy site from
 p  n n     s
Any calculi removed should be sent for analysis, so that
given fluids or encouraged to drink in order to diurese the
appropriate dietary management can be introduced to
patient and prevent the recurrence of any calculi. An
prevent recurrence.
Pneumothorax
This is the presence of air within the pleural cavity.
Tracheotomy
A pneumothorax may be due to a number of causes, includ-
This is the creation of a temporary opening in the wall of the
edep pdn og 'a Kalins smoog no enn s!
n apanid uiaa ue se pana aq eu s eae
Whatever the cause the aim of treatment is to encourage rein-
enable the animal to breathe and if necessary can be carried
flation of the lung on the affected side so that full aeration of
out under local anaesthetic.
the lungs can take place again.
If the pneumothorax is small it may be managed conserva
Technique
tively. Air is gradually reabsorbed from the pleural cavity and
1. The animal is restrained on its back with its neck
the lung should eventually reinflate. This takes time and the
 extended over a sandbag.
animal's colour and respiratory function should be moni-
tored closely during its recovery.
2. A small incision is made in the ventral midline of the
neck between two tracheal rings. The best area is
In more serious cases, it may be necessary for the air to be
between the 5th and 6th tracheal ring since this is
removed. This can be done with the patient conscious if it is
away from both the larynx and the thoracic inlet so
suffering severe respiratory problems but it is preferable for
there is least risk of the tracheotomy site being
the animal to be under general anaesthesia particularly
obstructed through normal neck movements.
if a drain is to be placed. Air can be removed in one of two
ways:
3. Under the skin are paired longitudinal neck muscles
that must be separated so that a cut can be made
● Needle and three-way tap attached to a syringe
between the tracheal rings (about one-third of the way
- this is the simplest technique and the air is removed
round the trachea) and a tracheotomy tube inserted.
by suction. The needle cannot be left in place and the
technique is usually used when it is likely that the
4. The tube should then be secured in place.
 procedure will only be carried out once
● Place a chest drain - between the ribs, usually at
the level of the seventh or eighth intercostal space.
Care of the tracheotomy
The drain should actually emerge from the skin further
The tube must be cleaned at least every 3 h as it quickly
caudally reducing the risk of air leakage around the
becomes blocked with mucus. The best types of tubes have a
 drain. The drain should be connected to a three-way
separate inner sleeve that can be removed for cleaning.
 n n a si e n s aa  e no dy
Animals with tracheotomy tubes are critical care patients and
into the thoracic cavity. Air is removed by continuous
should be monitored around the clock.
or intermittent suction.
500
0Principles of surgical nursing
23
in lateral recumbency. The incision is made through an inter-
oxygen. For small patients, oxygen can be pumped into
costal space and the ribs are then retracted using a self-retain-
incubators to provide an oxygen-rich environment, or a
ing retractor. In some referral centres ‘'sternal splits' are
kennel may be adapted using plastic sheeting over the front.
carried out. For this procedure, the animal is positioned in
Other methods of oxygen administration include via a mask,
dorsal recumbency and access to the thorax is via a midline
though many patients do not tolerate this well, or via a nasal
incision through the middle of the sternum. With this tech.
catheter. Close monitoring will be essential to check that
nique the sternum must be repaired postoperatively using
the animal's colour, temperature, pulse and respiration all
stainless steel wires, whereas with the other method no bones
gradually return to normal as the lung regains its function.
are actually cut or damaged. Splitting the sternum provides
 better access to the thoracic cavity for major surgery.
Thoracotomy
After completion, the thoracic cavity must be properly sealed
and any air or fluid in the chest drawn off. This can either be
This is entry into the chest via the thoracic wall.
done using a chest drain attached to a three-way tap and
syringe, or other suction device. Postoperative monitoring is
This may be required for several reasons, e.g. an oesophageal
essential, checking temperature, pulse, respiration and colour
foreign body, repair of a cardiac condition such as patent
regularly. Analgesics will also be needed as well as appropriate
ductus arteriosus or persistent right aortic arch, or even lung
antibiotic treatment depending on the type of procedure
surgery. Thoracotomy is usually performed with the animal
performed.
Fractures
● Antibiotics and analgesics should be given in
accordance with the veterinary surgeon's instructions.
Types of fracture
ns p p a s r a an 
treatment given should the fracture be treated.
 Fractures can be classified in a number of different ways
(Table 23.10).
The aim of first aid management of fractures is to minimize
the movement of the fracture fragments so the bone should
be handled as little as possible. In unconscious patients it
Clinical signs of fractures
either support bandages or splints. However, most conscious
In most cases the clinical signs of a fracture are similar. The
patients protect fracture sites by holding them in the way
animal shows signs of pain, there may be swelling or defor-
that hurts least. Attempting to bandage these might make the
mity at the site and on palpation there may also be crepitus
situation worse particularly if the animal struggles.
(grating of the fracture fragments against each other). As a
result, the animal will not be able to use the affected area
normally.
Fracture repair
There are three basic principles that are generally followed in
First-aid treatment
fracture repair:
It is rare that fractures are a priority in first-aid management,
● Reduce the fracture - i.e. bring the fragments back
therefore basic checks should cover the whole animal and
together
ensure that there is nothing life-threatening that requires
attention before the fracture itself is treated (see Ch. 20).
● Align the fragments - ensure that the contours of the
bones fit
The following protocol should always be carried out:
● Immobilize the fragments.
● Check the animal's ABC - Airway, Breathing and
Circulation
However, there are different approaches to individual
cases and the type and location of the fracture can make
● Control any haemorrhage and treat shock with
a significant difference as to which method of repair or
intravenous fluids, oxygen and warmth
treatment is chosen.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  501
23
Principles of surgical nursing
Table 23.10 Fracture types
Method of classification
Type of fracture
Description
 Direction and location of the
Transverse
The fracture is at right angles to the long axis of the bone
fracture line
Longitudinal
The fracture is parallel to the long axis of the bone
Oblique
The fracture is diagonal to the long axis of the bone
Spiral
The fracture line spirals around the long axis of the bone
Extent of fracture damage
Complete
The bone is completely broken into two or more fragments
 Incomplete (greenstick)
The cortex is broken, but the periosteum remains intact on one side of the
bone
Fissure
There is a crack in the cortex, but no displacement of any fragments
Extent of soft-tissue damage
Closed
There is no wound over the surface of the fractured bone
Open
There is a wound over the fracture site, such that the fracture is open to the
environment
Complicated
There is damage to other important tissues as well as the bone, such as nerves
Of major blood vessels
Number of fracture lines
Comminuted
There is one fracture site, but more than two fragments are produced
Multiple
There is more than one fracture site and several fragments are produced
Position of the bone fragments
Depressed
The fracture fragments are pushed inwards to reduce the size of a cavity
Over-niding
The two fracture fragments slide over each other to result in shortening of the
area
Impacted 
The two fracture fragments are driven into each other to result in shortening of
the area
Distracted
The two fracture fragments are pulled apart by muscle activity
Position of the fracture
Avulsion
A fracture at the site of insertion of a tendon
 Physeal
A fracture through a growth plate
Condylar
A fracture in which a condyle of a bone is separated from the rest of the bone
Intercondylar
A Y shaped fracture which involves two condyles being separated and fractured
Stability of the fracture
Stable
There is little tendency of the fracture fragments to move relative to each other
Unstable
The fracture fragments are quite free to move relative to each other
Note that in all cases the patient is likely to take reduced exer-
being relatively easy to apply and do not run the risk
cise so it is important that its diet is considered. The healing
of introducing infection into the fracture. However, they
process requires the provision of a good-quality diet but
are only suitable for a limited number of fractures, i.e.
enforced inactivity reduces the energy requirement.
only fractures that are stable and distal to the elbow or
stifle.
Conservative treatment
There are a number of different materials available for cast-
ing. The traditional material, plaster of Paris, has now been
This is the simplest option in which no actual surgery or
superseded, since this was messy, irritant, radiopaque and
fixation is carried out. The animal is confined so that move
took a long time to reach full weight-bearing strength. Newer
ment of the affected area is restricted and bone healing will
materials, often based on potyurethane resin on some type of
take place. This can be used for stable fractures where there is
bandage, are activated by immersion in warm or hot water,
unlikely to be movement of the fracture fragments, e.g. some
set within approximately 10 min and are fully weight-
pelvic fractures, scapular fractures and impacted fractures.
bearing after about 30 min. They are also radiolucent so
follow-up radiography can be carried out without actually
removing the cast. There are some disadvantages though
External fixation
they are more expensive than plaster of Paris and some are
irritant, so it is essential that the patient has a protective
Available methods include casts and splints. They provide a
 bandage layer under the cast and that gloves are worn during
cheap method of fracture repair and have the advantage of
 its application.
502
2 Principles of surgical nursing
23
Aftercare of casts and splints is also important. Casts must not
Types of orthopaedic implant
be allowed to get wet and must be regularly checked for sores.
Cotton wool underneath casts may bunch up into hard
There are a number of different types of implant that can be
used to repair fractures:
do this and dries more easily should the animal start to sweat
 d a  d a   
interfering with the cast and kept on minimal exercise.
Screws
There is a danger that the cast may loosen as the muscle atro-
These can be used as the sole method for fracture repair or
phies through disuse, so regular check-ups must be made.
can be used in conjunction with other techniques such as
Sometimes casts need to be replaced during the time the frac-
plates or wires. Used alone, they can be placed using a lag
ture is healing and sedation or anaesthesia will be required to
screw technique providing compression across the fracture
replace them. As a result this treatment method can be more
site. It is usually wise to also use some kind of splint or exter-
expensive than was originally thought. 'Fracture disease' can
nal support in these cases.
occur in which tissues, including the bone, become weaker
rather than stronger as a result of prolonged immobilization.
  as  s  r  s
However, used appropriately on the right kinds of fractures
casts and splints can work very well.
● Traditional self-tapping screw
A slight variation on the use of normal splints is the exfension
● ASIF/AO cortical screw
splint. This device ensures that when the animal bears weight
the limb is supported in extension and there is no tendency
● ASIF/AO cancellous screw (ASIF - Association for the
for the fractured bone to collapse under the animal's weight.
Study of Internal Fixation).
These are not commonly used.
As the screw's name suggests, the traditional screw cuts its
own path into the bone as it is inserted but the ASIF screws
require that a tap is used prior to its insertion into the bone
Internal fixation
to precut the thread for the screw. This improves the holding
 power compared with the traditional screw.
A wider range of fractures can be treated using internal
fixation techniques and as the fixation is stable normal activ-
ity can resume more quickly. The fixation device cannot be
touched by the animal, so interference should be minimal.
Intramedullary pins
 Aftercare is also reduced providing that the surgery has been
These are metal rods inserted into the medullary cavity of a
performed well.
bone to immobilize a fracture. Providing that it is the right
type of fracture and the pin fits snugly in the medullary
There are some potential problems:
cavity, a pin can be very effective. A pin will cause problems
if it is loose or used incorrectly.
● In most cases open reduction is required which
increases the risk of infection and soft-tissue damage,
   d      s
particularly if the surgeon is inexperienced
(Table 23.11).
● The cost is higher and greater skill is required to
perform the procedures well
Orthopaedic wire
● It is possible that the implants may move after they
This is made of braided or monofilament stainless steel.
are positioned
Monofilament wire is more usually used as it is easier to
tighten. It is used around frac ture fragments and tightened in
● The animal may develop a reaction leading to
order to bring them closer together.
hygroma formation (a fluid-filled 'blister' over the
implant).
In most cases internal fixation provides good bone healing
Bone plates
and can provide the equivalent of primary wound healing in
Bone plates are available in a number of different designs.
soft tissues.
Traditional plates are used with self-tapping screws. The two
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 503
23
Principles of surgical nursing
Table 23.11 0rthopaedic pins
This is available in several sizes and the holes are angled such
that tightening the screws can lead to compression across the
Type of pin
Description
fracture site.
Steinmann pin (Fig. 23.13)
May have a trocat point on one or
both ends
Kirschner drill wire (also
Smaller versions of the Steinmann
Postoperative care
referred to as K-wires;
pin with pointed ends
Fig. 23.13)
The operation site should be checked regularly for any signs
of swelling or discharge. Analgesics are usually needed in the
Kintscher nail
Diamond, V-shaped or clover-leaf in 
initial postoperative period but as the animal starts to recover
cross-section and available in
these should no longer be required. Strict rest is essential for
different diameters. One end of the
the first few weeks - this includes in the garden and house,
nail is pointed for introduction; the
and stairs should certainly be out of bounds! Exercise can be
other has a slot to engage an
gradually increased under the veterinary surgeon's direction
extractor hook
as the patient improves. Generally, fractures take between 4
Rush pin (Fig. 23.13)
The Rush pin has a pointed 
and 6 weeks to heal depending on the factors listed below.
'sledge-runner tip at one end and a
hook at the other. These are often
used in pairs for physeal fractures,
External fixator
since they do not interfere with the
growth of the long bone
(Kirschner-Ehmer device)
The external fixator is useful in a number of situations where
other methods of fracture fixation are not appropriate, e.g.
open or infected fractures, since the pins can be placed away
from the actual fracture site so that there is no implant device
actually at the wound site. Access to the fracture site is
Fig. 23.13 Top to bottom: Rush pin, Kirschner wire, Steinmann pin
also good and for infected sites this can aid treatment and
reco very.
The device can also be used in cases of comminuted or unsta-
ble fractures, since the external bars of the fixator are able to
take the animal's weight and hold the fracture fragments
apart, preventing them from collapsing inwards. The fracture
heals in the same way as a wound with tissue loss, i.e. by
second intention. External fixation may also be used on a
range of species. Avian fractures on both limbs and wings
have been successfully managed this way and it also lends
itself to use in other regions of the body such as pelvic frac-
tures or mandibular fractures. In all cases it is essential that
the surgeon has an accurate knowledge of the anatomy of the
area so that the pins are not impinging on any vital struc-
tures. With care this repair method can be very successful.
The appearance of the device can be quite of-putting to start
with but usually, with help from the practice, owners will
Fig. 23.14 Left to right: Traditional screw, Venabtes plate, Sherman
appreciate the way in which the device works. There may be
plate, ASIF corticat screw, Dynamic compression plates
some discharge from the pin sites and these should be
checked regularly to ensure that they are not becoming
infected. Rods and clamps should be covered with protective
most commonly used are the Sherman plate and the Venables
bandage material to prevent any trauma from the metal,
plate (Fig. 23.14).
either to the animal or the owner.
The best available plates are the ASIF/AO plates. The main
Once bone healing is complete, the rods and pins are all
plate in this system is the dynamic compression plate or DCP.
removed under general anaesthesia. The pin entry wounds
504
4 Principles of surgical nursing
23
 are left to heal by second intention and usually heal very
have quite serious effects on the animal depending on
quickly.
the site of the fracture
● Delayed union - the bone fails to heal within the
Fracture healing
expected normal time. This is usually due to the
presence of a gap at the fracture site that takes longer
Fracture healing, like wound healing, is affected by a number
to bridge. Occasionally the fracture does not heal at all
of different factors. This includes factors specific to the injury,
producing a non-union
such as the stability of the fracture, the proximity of the frag-
ment, the type of fracture and its location and blood supply.
● Non-union - the bone fragments fail to heal properly.
More general factors relating to the overall health of the
 In some cases a fibrous connection may develop
animal, such as its age and species, also have an effect. Many
 between the bones but in others there is no healing at
of the exotic species, including birds, heal more quickly
all
than cats and dogs, although with reptiles healing may take
considerably longer.
● Osteomyelitis - inflammation of the bone and bone
marrow. It is usually the result of infection introduced
 at the time of surgery. It may be an uncontrolled
Complications of fracture healing
virulent infection, or it may be more localized and
controlled.
Unfortunately, not all fractures heal smoothly and it is
 important to be aware of the potential problems, so that the
risks can be minimized:
Treatment of osteomyelitis
● Fracture disease - the bone weakens as the repair
First establish local drainage and remove any foreign materi
 device takes the weight. Gradually muscle atrophy.
als, including any implants or sutures. This may mean that
osteoporosis, joint stiffness and tissue adhesions
-     n s  r  
 develop. It may even result in a non-union 
native one. External fixators have been used with success in
some of these cases. Antibiotics should be given systemically
● Malunion - healing takes place but the alignment of
for 4-6 weeks based on culture and sensitivity tests on the
the bones is altered from normal. Functionally this can
bacteria found at the site.
Luxations and
First-aid treatment
subluxations
This follows the same basic pattern as for fractures as it is rare
that a luxation is life-threatening:
● Luxation or dislocation - the persistent
1. Check A, B, C
displacement of bones forming a joint
 2. Treat shock and control haemorrhage
● Subluxation or partial dislocation - the bones
are disturbed from their normal position but remain in
3. In most cases, movement of the dislocated joint should
contact.
be minimized to prevent further damage and pain.
Luxations can be divided into two types:
Treatment
● Acquired luxations - caused by trauma. Hip and
elbow joints are most commonly affected but the
 The use of general anaesthesia is recommended for analgesia
phalanges and the hocks may also be damaged
and because it relaxes the muscles which eases replacement.
 In many cases radiography is essential to confirm the diag-
● Congenital luxations - due to anatomical
nosis, to ensure that there are no fractures and to make sure
abnormalities present from birth.
that the bones are replaced accurately.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  505
23
Principles of surgical nursing
Many luxations can be reduced in a closed fashion, i.e. by
Bibliography
manipulating the bones back into position. This is best done
as soon as possible after the trauma, since blood clots
Bowden C, Masters J (eds) 2003 Textbook of veterinary medical
and muscle contraction can lead to difficulties in replacing
nursing. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
luxations left for some time.
Aspinall V 2003 Clinical procedures in veterinary nursing.
If after relocation the joint is still very unstable, an open
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
reduction is needed and surgical measures are needed to
stabilize the joint, e.g. in luxation of the carpus where the
Brinker P, Brinker F 1997 Handbook of small animal orthopedics
collateral ligaments are disrupted.
and fracture treatment, 3rd edn. W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA
Congenital dislocations are not uncommon and replace-
Cooper B, Lane D R (eds) 2003 Veterinary nursing, 3rd edn.
ment of the bones is not usually sufficient. Surgical inter-
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
vention is required to correct or modify the anatomical
deformity. Patellar luxations can be repaired using one
Fowler D, Williams J M (eds) 1999 Manual of canine and feline
or more techniques depending on the severity of the ana-
wound management and reconsinuction. British Small Animat
tomical deformity. The simplest method is to perform
Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
a capsular overlap, where the joint capsule overlying the
patella is tightened. A trochleaplasty involves deepening the
trochlear groove in the femur and is carried out in cases of
technicians. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
patellar luxation, i.e. where the patella easily slips out of the
groove. In some cases, the distortion of the limb is such that
Houlton J E F, Taylor P M 1987 Trauma management in the dog
the tibial crest migrates medially, in which case a tibial crest
and cat. fohn Wright, Bristol
transplant may be needed in addition to the other repair
techniques.
Tracey D 2003 Surgical nursing, 3rd edn. Mosby, St Louis, MO
Recommended reading
Postoperative care
Hotston Moore P 2004 Fluid therapy for veterinary nurses and
Avoid forces that could produce a recurrence of the
technicians. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
luxation; for example, with hip luxations it may be
necessary to use an Ehmer sling (figure-of-eight ban
This handy-sized book explains clearty the rationale for fluid
dage) to prevent use of the limb for 5-7 days. This should
therapy and the techniques used in practice.
be followed by rest for 3-4 weeks, in the same way as for a
fracture.
Tracey D 2003 Surgical nursing, 3rd edn.Mosby, St Louis, MO
This provides an excellent overview of all aspects of surgical
mursing, with review questions at the end of each chapter.
Possible complications
Fowler D, Williams J M (eds) 1999 Manual of canine and feline
Recurrence is the main complication and this is true
wound management and reconstruction. British Small Animal
especially of luxations reduced by closed techniques. A
Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
recurrent luxation will require surgery to provide ade-
quate stability, e.g. hip luxations may require surgery to
This is an excellent text for anyone wishing to develop their know
the hip involving the creation of a synthetic round
ligament.
techniques and reconsiructive flaps.
506
5 Principles of surgical nursing
24
Theatre practice
Emma Brooks
Key Points
 Correct design and layout of the surgical unit is essential
● An understanding of the design, use and care of the
to provide an environment that is conducive to both
standard surgical instruments is essential.
effective surgical treatment and care of the patient
● The veterinary nurse should be able to understand how to
and in which high standards of asepsis can be
prepare a patient for surgery, the basic principles behind
maintained.
the surgical procedure to be performed and the aftercare
of the patient.
 In getting ready for surgical procedures the role of the
veterinary nurse includes preparation of the operating
● Every veterinary practice should develop a strictly
theatre, instruments and other equipment and of the 
ad hered to, rigid routine for the maintenance of asepsis
 surgical gowns, gloves and drapes. It may also include
 at all stages of surgery. This includes disinfection and
acting as scrubbed or a circulating nurse, both of which
sterilization of anything that comes into contact with
have their own specifc role in the procedure.
the surgical site.
Introduction
ment. Whatever type of surgical suite you have there are basic
rules that must be followed. This chapter will cover the prepa-
The care and maintenance of the theatre suite, instruments
ration of the operating suite and the patient, care and main-
and equipment is very important for the smooth running of
tenance of instruments and equipment. It will also cover pre-
any surgical procedure performed in the operating environ-
The surgical unit
Operating theatre
It is unlikely that the layout and design of the surgical
Many practices only have one operating theatre, which is
unit is the responsibility of the veterinary nurse. However,
used for all surgery. Some, usually the larger hospitals, have
it is important to have an idea of suitable requirements and
several theatres, which are used for particular types of
features of a theatre suite, so that the best can be made of
surgery, e.g. orthopaedic surgery, general surgery, dirty
existing facilities. In an ideal world a surgical unit should
surgery, e.g. dental work. The size of the theatre will depend
consist of:
on the use for which it was intended. If it is predominately
for orthopaedic work then it should be fairly large to
● Operating theatre
accommodate the amount of equipment needed. If the
theatre is too small, working conditions are compromised
● Anaesthetic preparation area
and it becomes difficult to maintain asepsis. Overall,
the theatre has to be large enough to accommodate the
● An area for washing and sterilizing equipment
patient and table, the anaesthetic equipment, the surgical
instruments and trolley, any other equipment and the
● Sterile equipment store
surgical team.
● Scrub area
There are several other requirements that are desirable, if not
essential:
● Changing rooms
● The theatre should be an end room, not a
· Recovery room.
thoroughfare to other rooms
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 507
24
Theatre practice
● It should be easily cleaned. The walls and floors should
Anaesthetic preparation area
be made of impervious material. Walls and ceilings
should be painted with a light, waterproof paint and
This should be a separate area where induction and pre-
corners and edges of walls should be coved for ease of
operative procedures take place. It should lead directly to
cleaning. Drains should be avoided if possible
the theatre. The clippers and vacuum cleaner to remove hair
should be positioned near the preparation table. It is sensible
● There should be as little shelving and furniture as
to have an anaesthetic emergency box within this area.
possible, as it will harbour dust
● Good lighting is essential. If possible, natural light
should be used. Avoid clear glass windows to the
Area for washing and sterilizing
outside, as they cause distraction. They must not open,
equipment
as this will threaten asepsis. Any light fittings should
be flush with the ceiling and walls. There should be an
This should be a specific room where dirty equipment and
overhead theatre light
instruments are washed and sterilized. It should be close to
the theatre but away from the sterile store area. It should
● There should be an adequate supply of waterproof
contain a washing machine for drapes and gowns only, a
electric sockets recessed into the wall
tumble dryer, sterilization equipment and an ultrasonic
cleaner.
● An ambient temperature of 15-20°C should be
maintained, as anaesthetized animals cannot regulate
their body temperature. Panel heaters are ideal, but
expensive. Fan heaters should be avoided as they cause
Sterile store area
air and dust to move and risk breaking asepsis
Sterile packs should be stored in a closed cupboard near to the
● Air conditioning and ventilation is necessary under the
theatre. This room should be large enough to lay out instru-
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COsHH)
ment trolleys before surgery. It should have an entrance
regulations
directly into the theatre.
● There must be:
● A scavenging system for waste anaesthetic gases
Scrub area
● An air supply for power tools. This should be
This should be a separate scrub area within the theatre
 piped in from cylinders outside the theatre.
suite but not in the theatre. It should lead into the sterile
Anaesthetic gases should also be delivered in the
store area, then the theatre. Swing doors should separate the
same way
rooms.
● An X-ray viewer flush to the wall
● A clock to monitor the anaesthetic and time of
Changing rooms
surgery
These should be situated at the entrance to the theatre. A line
● A dry wipe board for recording details such as
marked on the floor should delineate the sterile area of this
number of swabs used, suture materials used, blood
room. Theatre footwear should be kept at the entrance to the
loss, etc.
theatre beyond the line. A one-way traffic system should be
in place to maintain asepsis.
● There should be double swing doors that are kept
closed
● The operating table should be adjustable to suit
Recovery room
 the height of the surgeon and the position of the
patient
 This should be close to the theatre in case of an emergency. It
should be quiet, warm and contain emergency equipment,
● All equipment should be able to be cleaned easily.
e.g. oxygen, crash box, etc.
508
 Theatre practice
Theatre maintenance
● At the end of each day - floors should be cleaned
with a vacuum cleaner to remove debris. They should
be washed with disinfectant solution. All waste should
Routine cleaning of the theatre suite is essential if asepsis is
be removed and disposed of correctly. All surfaces,
to be kept at a high standard:
including the scrub sink, should be washed with a
4
disinfectant solution
● Daily damp dusting - at the start of each day, all
furniture, surfaces and equipment must be damp
● Weekly cleaning - once a week a thorough clean
dusted with a dilute disinfectant. Dry dusting is
should be performed. All equipment should be
pointless, as it just moves the dust around the room
 removed and walls and floors should be scrubbed. Any
excess solution should be removed and then the
● Between operative procedures - the theatre suite
surfaces should be allowed to dry, not rinsed off. This
should be cleaned as soon as the patient is removed
ensures a longer residual activity time for the
from the operating theatre and before the next one
disinfectant.
arrives. All dirty instruments should be removed for
cleaning and re-sterilization. All surfaces should be
All cleaning equipment for the theatre should be kept sepa-
wiped over with a suitable disinfectant. The floor
rate from other cleaning equipment and should be rinsed and
should be cleaned if necessary, and then the
dried after each use. Where possible, mop heads should be
instruments and equipment can be prepared for the
laundered each day. Any cleaning equipment must be stored
next patient
away from the sterile store area.
Preparation
 for
4. Put out skin preparation materials ready for the
patient
surgery
5. Lay out the instrument trolley, adding any spare
instruments, drapes, sutures and swabs that may be
Operating list
required (Box 24.1).
This should be planned so that 'clean' surgery is done first,
i.e. abdominal or orthopaedic surgery, followed by 'dirty'
surgery - pyometritis, oral and anal surgery.
Surgical attire
Theatre clothing should be worn in the theatre. This usually
Preparation of diathermy
consists of a two-piece scrub suit. A clean scrub suit should be
equipment
worn every day.
 -       
and bipolar. If monopolar diathermy is to be used, the patient
Box 24.1 Laying out the instrument
s e n d d   aa a, a r
trolley
position between the patient and the table. Contact gel is
 applied to the plate. For bipolar diathermy there is no contact
1. Make sure that the trolley is clean.
plate.
2. Cover the base of the trolley with a sterile.
water-resistant layer to help prevent a bacterial strike
if the trolley becomes wet.
Preparation of other equipment
3. On top of this put a double layer of sterile linen drapes.
1. Check and turn on the anaesthetic equipment
4. Lay out the instruments in a logical order - usually
from left to right in the order that they will be used.
 2. Connect the scavenging systems and anaesthetic
5. Sterile extras may be added such as suture materials
circuit
and swabs.
6. Place a sterile cover over the top of the trolley until it
3. Lay out scrub solutions, brushes, towel, gowns and
is ready for use.
gloves for the surgical team
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 509
24
Theatre practice
● Footwear - antistatic footwear, e.g. white clogs or 
wellingtons, is essential to prevent explosions caused
by sparks when inflammable anaesthetic gases are
used. They should be cleaned frequently and only
worn in theatre
● Headgear - a theatre cap should be worn; these are
usually made of cloth or paper
● Facemasks - these are used to filter expired air from
the nose and mouth; they are only effective for a short
time and should be changed between operations.
Scrubbing-up procedure
As it is not possible to sterilize skin, the aim of scrubbing
up is to destroy as many microorganisms as possible
Fig. 24.1 An unscrubbed nurse ties the ties of the sterite surgicaf
before putting on a sterile gown and gloves. There are many
gown
different scrub routines. Your practice should adopt a tried
and tested routine and adhere to it (Box 24.2).
gown available - those that tie at the back and those that
Gowning procedure
wrap around and tie at the side:
 The aim of a surgical gown is to provide a barrier preventing
1. Take the sterile gown from the pack and hold at the
the transmission of microorganisms. There are two types of
shoulders, allowing it to fall open
2. Place a hand into each sleeve. Do not try to adjust the
gown or pull over your shoulders, as this can lead to
Box 24.2 Scrub routine
contamination. An unscrubbed assistant will pull the
gown over the shoulders by only touching the inside
1. Remove watch and jewellery
of the gown, and tie the ties at the back (Fig. 24.1)
2. Ensure fnger nails are short and nail varnish is
removed
3. Hands stay inside the sleeves and the waist ties are
3. Regulate the hot and cold taps
picked up and held out to the sides. The unscrubbed
4. Wash hands with soap and clean under nails with a nail
assistant takes the ties and secures them at the back.
pick
The back of the gown is now unsterile.
5. Once hands are washed, wash arms to elbows. Keep
hands higher than elbows so that the water runs down
Gloving procedure
the unscrubbed arms.
6. Rinse to remove all soap and lather by allowing water
Gloves are worn as a barrier between the surgeon's hands
to flow down hands and off elbows.
and the tissues of the patient. They should fit snugly but
7. Using a sterile scrubbing brush and surgical scrub, scrub
not too tightly. Sterile gloves should be worn for all surgical
palms, wrist and the four surfaces of each fnger.
procedures.
(Remember to scrub under nails and knuckles.). Scrub
arms last. Use a circular motion and scrub for five
There are three methods for gloving up - closed, open and
minutes by the clock. It is not recommended to scrub
plunge methods.
the backs of your hands and arms, as this can lead to
excoriation which predisposes to infection
8. Discard brush and rinse well, once again allowing the
Closed method
water to flow over hands and down arms.
1. Hands stay inside the gown sleeves. This minimizes
9. Dry hands and arms using a sterile towel. Use a
 contamination. The glove packet is opened and turned
different part for each hand and arm. work from your
 so that the fingers are pointing at the body. (The right
wrist to your elbow.
glove will be on the left and vice versa)
510
 Theatre practice
2. Pick up glove at the rim of the cuff of the glove.
3. Turn hand over so that the glove is on the palm
surface with fingers pointing at the body.
4
 4. Pick rim up with opposite hand and pull over finger
and the dorsal surface of wrist
5. The glove is pulled on as the fingers are pushed
forwards.
Open method (Fig. 24.2)
1. The hands are out of the gown's sleeves in this
technique. With the left hand, pick up the right glove
by holding the inner surface of the turned down cuff
2. Pull on to right hand. Do not unfold the cuff
3. Repeat steps 1 and 2 for left hand
4. Put gloved finger under cuff of opposite hand and pull
on firmly
5. The rim of the glove is hooked over the thumb while
the cuff of the gown is adjusted, then the cuff of the
glove is pulled over the cuff of the gown using the
 opposite hand. Repeat for other hand.
Plunge method
A sterile glove is held open by a scrubbed assistant and the
hand is inserted into the glove. This method is not used
often, as there is a high risk of contamination.
Fig. 24.2 Open method of gloving procedure
Role of the theatre
theatre. It is essential to know what and where the
 instruments are on the trolley at the start and during
nurse
surgery
● Swabs, needles and sutures should be counted at the
In veterinary practice the nurse may take one of two roles
 beginning and at the end before the incision is closed
within the theatre - either a scrubbed nurse or a circulating
nurse.
● The surgeon must be watched to anticipate his/her
needs
Scrubbed nurse
● Pass instruments so that they are ready to use and not
upside down. They should be put back on the trolley
This is an important role and an understanding of the
in the same place so that you know where they are. Do
surgery to be performed is essential so that the needs of the
not leave instruments at the operation site in case they
veterinary surgeon can be anticipated:
fall on the floor or into the surgical site
● The instrument trolley should be prepared just before
● Instruments should be wiped over with a dry swab
it is needed, i.e. just before the patient arrives in
 before replacing them on the trolley
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  511
24
Theatre practice
● Only one swab at a time should be given. There should
● Help prepare the instrument trolley for surgery
 be a constant check on the number of swabs
● Tie surgical gowns
● Swabs should be firmly applied to bleeding, without
wiping, as this can destroy any clot formation
● Position the patient on the operating table
● Handle tissues, especially viscera, carefully to avoid
● Prepare the surgical site
unnecessary trauma
● Connect apparatus, e.g. suction, diathermy, etc.
● You may have to irrigate tissues with warm saline to
prevent desiccation, especially during long operations
● Open packs of swabs, suture material, etc.
● At the end check that all instruments, needles and
● Count swabs with the scrub nurse
swabs are on the trolley. Dispose of needles and blades
in a sharps container.
● Be in theatre when surgery is in progress
● Assist anaesthetist
Circulating nurse
● Prepare postoperative dressings
The circulating nurse is there to assist with all non-sterile
procedures:
· Clear theatre at the end of surgery.
Health and Safety
produced sharps containers. When full they must be
sealed, labelled as clinical waste and removed by a
within the theatre
licensed contractor, who will incinerate them
· Clinical and pathological waste - it is a
The COSHH regulations are designed to ensure safety at work,
requirement of COSHH that all clinical pathological
including in the operating theatre (see Ch. 3):
waste is separated from ordinary refuse with
colour-coded bags:
● Equipment - it is very important that all nursing
staff are told how to use and maintain new equipment.
● Clinical waste - anything contaminated by blood or
All equipment should be serviced regularly and tested
bodily fluids. Yellow bags. When full, seal and label
for electrical safety
with biohazard tape
● Pollution from gas - all staff should be aware of the
● Pathological waste - all tissues. Red bags. When full,
 danger associated with inhaling anaesthetic gases. A
seal and label with biohazard tape
scavenging system must be fitted and used
● Chemicals - if chemicals are used, protective
● Disposal of needles/sharp instruments - all blades,
clothing must be worn, e.g. mask, gloves,
needles, stylets, etc., must be disposed of in commercially
apron.
Instrumentation
scissors and needle holders. It is hard and resistant to wear
but very costly. Instruments with tungsten carbide added are
Good-quality instruments are very expensive but they will
usually indicated by gold handles. Instruments made from
last for years if properly looked after. Stainless steel is the best
chromium-plated carbon steel are the most common in
choice as it combines high resistance to corrosion with great
veterinary practice as they are cheaper than stainless
strength. Tungsten carbide is sometimes added to the tips of
steel. However, they will rust, pit and blister in contact with
 stainless steel instruments if used for cutting or gripping, e.g.
chemicals and saline, and tend to blunt more quickly.
512
 Theatre practice
Maintenance of instruments
dipped in the solution for a short time, then removed and
dried. There is no need to rinse.
Instruments should always be handled carefully. Do not drop
on to trolleys and into sinks. Any sharp edges should be cared
for. New instruments are supplied without lubrication so you
Specialized-instrument care
should wash, dry and lubricate them before use
Compressed-air machines
Cleaning instruments after use
These machines must never be immersed in water. All detach-
COSHH states that protective clothing and gloves should be
able parts should be cleaned in the normal way. Instruments
worn if dealing with surgical instruments:
should be detached from the air hose and then wiped with
disinfectant. Pay attention to triggers and couplings. Rinse
1. Sharp items, i.e. blades and needles, should be
without immersing. The air hose can be cleaned in the same
removed from the trolley first
way. Lubricate after drying with the manufacturer's recom-
mended lubricant before packaging for sterilization.
2. Delicate instruments should be separated and cleaned
separately
Motorized equipment
3. Instruments should be cleaned as soon as possible after
uo up u aus pue poonq yuaad on ians
Care of these machines is very similar to that of compressed.
and causing corrosion
air machines. The manufacturer's instructions should always
 be followed, as they can seize up after repeated autoclaving.
4. Open all the joints and soak in cold water or a
chemical cleaning solution designed for instruments
Dental instruments
5. Clean under warm running water with a scrubbing
brush. Pay attention to ratchets, joints and serrations.
Dental instruments must be maintained to a high degree if
Abrasive agents should not be used as they will
good dental work is to be performed (see Ch. 26). There are
damage the surface of the instrument. Ordinary soap
two types of dental instrument:
causes an insoluble alkali film on the surface, trapping
bacteria and protecting them from sterilization
● Hand held - these include scalers, picks, luxators and
curettes. They have delicate tips and should be washed
6. After washing, rinse and dry carefully.
and dried carefully. These instruments will then
require sharpening with an Arkanas stone and oil.
Ultrasonic cleaners
Autoclaving can then be carried out in the normal
 manner, remembering to protect the delicate points
Bench-top cleaners are suitable for use in veterinary prac-
and tips
tice. They are effective at removing debris in areas inaccessi-
ble to brushes, e.g. box joints. Ultrasonic cleaners work
● Mechanical - these include ultrasonic scalers and
by producing sinusoidal energy waves at a high frequency.
polishers. Always follow the manufacturer's
After an initial soaking in cold water, place the instruments
instructions for each piece of equipment.
 in the wire basket of the cleaner with their joints open.
The unit is then filled with water and ultrasonic cleaning
solution and the basket is placed in the solution. The lid
Surgical instruments
is closed and the cleaner is switched on. Usually, 15 min
is sufficient. When finished removed the basket and rinse
There are many different types of instrument available
       
(Fig. 24.3). It is not necessary to know every single one, but a
 n  sn e  s n d a s
broad knowledge of the more common ones is essential
corrosion.
(Table 24.1).
Lubrication
Orthopaedic instruments
This should be done on a regular basis, especially if using an
ultrasonic cleaner. There are several antimicrobial water
Common types are described in Table 24.2. Other instru-
soluble lubricants available. The instruments are usually
ments may be needed, depending on the technique and the
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
513
Theatre practice
Scissors
Needle holders
 Mayo straight
Gillies
Olsen Hegar
Mezenbaum
McPhails 
Carless
Forceps
Mayo-Hegar
Toothed dissecting forceps
Towel clips
Backhaus
Rat-footed dissecting forceps
 Allistisue forceps
Grays crossaction
Fig. 24.3 A range of surgicat instruments
514
Theatre practice
Artery Forceps
 Self retaining retractors
24
 Spencer wells 
Gelpis
Halstead mosguitc
Handheld retractors
Travers
Hohmann 
Langenbeck 
Finochietto
Czerny
Balfour 
Fig. 24.3—Cont'd.
surgeon. These include Steinmann pins, orthopaedic wire, bone
outer layers will cover the instrument trolley when
plates, screws and external fixator apparatus (see Ch. 23).
 unwrapped. Ideally, a metal or plastic tray is lined with a
linen sheet and the instruments are then laid out in a specific
order (usually the order of use). Swabs, drapes, etc., are then
 added. A water-resistant drape is laid over the top followed by
Packing surgical kits
two layers of linen sheet. The pack is then wrapped and
Instruments are often packed together with swabs, drapes,
secured with Bowie Dick tape. It must be labelled and dated
  os da  si  a a ' 
before sterilization.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
515
2.4
Theatre practice
Table 24.1 General surgical instruments (see also Fig. 24.3)
Name
Type
Use
Comment
Scalpel
Divide tissues with
Size 3 handle used for small animal surgery. Use 10, 11, 12 and 15
minimal trauma
blade
Size 4 handle for large animal work. Use 20, 21, or 22 blade
A small (beaver) handle is available with a very small blade. Good
for ophthalmic work
Dissecting forceps
 Plain
Holding tissue.
Hold like a pencil
(thumb forceps)
Rat-toothed
 Plain ends hold
delicate tissue
Rat-toothed hold dense
tissue
ScissoTs
Mayo dissecting
Routine surgery
Hold with ring finger and thumb inserted into ring of the scissors
 Metzenbaum 
Delicate surgery
Index finger is placed on shaft to guide scissors
Carless
Suture cutting
Paynes
Removing sutures
Haemostatic artery
Spencer-Wells
 Clamping blood vessels
Many different lengths and shapes. Most have transverse striations
forceps
 Dunhill 
to stop bleeding
to help hold tissue. Mosquito forceps are the smallest and are used
Criles
for fine blood vessels. Hold as for scissors
Cairns
Kelly
Halstead/mosquito
Towel clips
Backhaus
Attach drapes to
Gray's cross-action
patients and instruments 
to operating site
Needle holders
Gillies
Hold suture needles
Gillies - have scissor action for cutting suture ends. No ratchet so
Olsen-Hegar
 during suturing and knot 
must hold needle tightly
Mayo-Hegar
tying
 Olsen-Hegar - have cutting edge and ratchet to hold needle
McPhail's
securely. Very easy to cut suture material
Mayo-Hegar - like long-handled artery forceps. Have ratchet but no
cutting edge
McPhail's - usually have copper or tungsten carbide insert in tip.
Have spring ratchet so that squeezing jaws together opens holder
and releases needle
Retractors
Hand-held:
Expose operating field
 Can be hand-held or self-retaining
Langenbeck
Gelpi, West's and Travers for muscle or joints
Senn
Gusset and Balfour for abdominal surgery
Czerny
Finochietto for thoracic surgery
Self-retaining:
Gelpi
West's
Travers
Gusset
Balfour
Finochietto
Instrument sets
These collections of specific instruments are made up to suit
Others have standard sets that are used for all operations but
the technique and the needs of the individual practice. Some
have extra instruments that can be added depending on the
516
 Theatre practice
Table 24.2 0rthopaedic instruments (see also Fig. 24.4)
Name
Use
Comment
Osteotome
Cutting and shaping bone
Tapered on both sides
Chisel
Cutting and shaping bone
Tapered on one side only
Gouge
Cutting and shaping bone
 U-shaped edge to remove larger pieces of
bone or cartilage
Curette
Scoop surface of dense tissue to remove loose or degenerate tissue
 The cup has a sharp cutting edge. Available
in many sizes
 Periosteal elevators
Lift periosteum and soft tissue from bone surface
 Many sizes available
Bone-holding forceps
 Grip bone fragments while reducing or aligning fractures
Bone cutters
Cutting large pieces of bone
Bone rasps
Remove sharp edges following arthroplasty
Bone rongeurs
Cutting small pieces of dense tissue, bone or cartilage
Drills
Hand drills are used around delicate structures where minimal drilling
Battery drills are slower and more
is required. Most surgery will require the use of a battery or air drill
cumbersome but less expensive than air
drills
Saws and burrs
May be driven by air or electricity. Take care when connecting.
Do not switch on until all the couplings are assembled
Wire forceps
Used to apply cerclage wire and when stabilizing bones with wire
Various types available
Gigli wire and handles
Saw through bone with cheese wire effect
Table 24.3 Suggested contents of different types of surgical kit
Type of kit
Contents
Type of kit
Contents
General surgical kit
Scalpel handle no. 3
 Abdominal kit
General kit 
Dissecting forceps (plain and rat-toothed)
Self retaining retractors
Scissors (Mayo and Metzenbaum)
Long-handled artery forceps x6
Artery forceps x8
Long dissecting forceps ×2
Allis tissue forceps ×2
Bowel clamps X4
Retractors (Gelpi and Langenbeck)
 Thoracic kit
General kit + Periosteal elevator
Backhaus towel clips X4
Rib cutters
 Needle holders
Rib retractors
Suture scissorS
Long-handled artery forceps x6
Long dissecting forceps ×2
Lobectomy clamps
General eye kit 
Eyelid speculum
General kit + Periosteal elevator
Small scalpel handle (beaver)
Osteotome
 Fine dissecting forceps
 Orthopaedic kit
Chisel
Fine scissors
Mallet
Corneal scissors
Curette
Capsular forceps
Hohmann retractor X2
 Irrigating cannula
Rongeurs
Vectis
Bone-cutting forceps
Iris repository
 Castroviejo needle holders
procedure. It is important that each standard kit con-
check at the end of the procedure that all instruments
tains the same number and type of instruments so
are present. Guidelines for types of kit are shown in
that the surgical team know what is there and can
Table 24.3.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
517
Theatre practice
Bone cutting forceps
Rongeurs
Periosteal elevators
Csteotome
Chisel
Curette
Fig. 24.4 Orthopaedic instruments
● Length of healing time, i.e. how long the suture
Sutures
material must remain effective within the tissue.
There are two categories of suture material - non-absorbable
Suture materials
and absorbable. Each category can be subdivided into:
 The choice of suture materials used within the veterinary
● Natural or synthetic
 practice depends on:
● Monofilament or multifilament
● Personal preference
● Coated or uncoated.
● Type of tissue to be repaired
Tables 24.4 and 24.5 describe the most commonly used
● Risk of contamination
 suture materials and their properties.
518
Theatre practice
Table 24.4 Non-absorbable suture materials
Suture
 Trade name
Mono or
Synthetic or
Coated 
Knot security
 Duration
Comments
 material
multifilament 
jeneu
 Polyamide
Ethilon
Monofilament
Synthetic
No
Fair
 Permanent
Causes minimal tissue
(nylon)
(Ethicon)
reaction and has little
tissue drag
Polybulester
Novofil (Davis &
 Monofilament 
Synthetic
No
Fair
 Permanent
Similar to polyamide with
Geck)
 similar properties
Polypropylene
Prolene (Ethicon) Monofilament
Synthetic
No
Fair - can
Permanent
Very inert. Produces
produce bulky
minimal tissue reaction
knots that
Very strong but very
untie easily
 springy. Little tissue drag
Braided silk 
Mersilk (Ethicon)  Multifilament 
Natural
Wax coat Excellent
 May eventually
Good handling properties,
fragment and 
but high tissue reactivity
break down
 Do not use in infected
sites
Braided
 Supramid or
Multifilament
Synthetic
Encased
Good
Outer sheath
Better handling than
polyamide
Nuralon (Ethicon)
in outer
can be broken
monofilament polyamide
sheath
Can be used in skin but
not as a buried suture
Surgical
Available as
Synthetic
No
Excellent,
 Permanent 
Not commonly used now,
stainless
monofilament
 although knots
but is useful in bones or
steel wire
 or multiflament 
 are difficult 
tendon. Diffcult to handle
to untie
Alternatives to sutures
dependent on the type of wound to be sutured, the type of
tissue and the characteristics of the needle.
Today there are an increasing number of alternatives to suture
 materials. These include staples, glue, and adhesive tape:
The needle shape may be:
● Staples - there are several different types of metal
● Curved - the entire length of the needle is curved
staple available. The most common type is skin staples
into an arc. Various degrees of curvature are available:
but specialized staples are available for intestinal
half circle is most common
anastomoses and ligation. Staples are usually packed in
a gun-type applicator
● Half-curved - the sharp end of needle is curved but
the eye end is straight
● Tissue glue - used for skin closure. It is designed for
rapid healing and is most commonly used on small
● Straight - the entire needle is straight.
superficial wounds
 The cross-sectional design may vary according to the tissue
● Adhesive tape - mainly used in human skin closure.
that is being sutured (Table 24.6).
They do not adhere well to animal skin and are
therefore not widely used in veterinary medicine.
Common suture patterns
Suture needles
As qualified veterinary nurses are legally allowed to perform
minor acts of surgery, including suturing, it is important that
There are several types of suture needle and they are available
you are familiar with basic suturing techniques (Fig. 24.5).
with the suture material swaged on to them or with eyes
However, remember always to seek practical instruction from
through which the suture material is threaded. Choice is
a veterinary surgeon beforehand.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
519
2.4
Theatre practice
Table 24.5 Absorbable suture materials
Suture
apel
Mono or
Synthetic
Coated 
Duration of
Absorption
 Comments and uses
material
name
multifilament 
jeneu jo
strength
Polyglactin 910 Vicryl
Multiflament
Synthetic
Yes - calcium
Retains 50% of
Absorbed by
 Dyed or undyed
(Ethicon)
stearate
tensile strength
60-90 days by
Low tissue reactivity
pue sAep  7e
hydrolysis
Uses: in subcuticular
20% at 21 days
layer, muscle, eyes and
hollow viscera
Polyglactin 910 Vicryl
Multifilament
Synthetic
Yes -calcium
Retains only 50%
Absorption
Although the same
Rapide
stearate
 of tensile strength
complete by
as Vicryl it is
(Ethicon)
at 5 days. Provides
about 42 days
 manufactured to make
wound support for
Absorbed by
it loose tensile
10 days
hydrolysis
strength and be fully
absorbed much faster
Polydioxanone
PDS II
Monofilament
Synthetic
No
Retains 70% tensile
Only minimal
Good for infected sites
(Ethicon)
strength at 14 days
 absorption by
as monoflament
and 14% at 56 days 90 days. Absorbed
Very strong but springy
by 180 days, by
 Minimal tissue reaction
hydrolysis
Uses: in subcuticular
muscle, sometimes eyes 
Polyglycolic
Dexon
Multifilament
Synthetic
Can be
Retains 20% at
Complete
Similar to polyglactin
acid
(Davis &
coated with
14 days
absorption by
but has considerable
Geck)
polysamer
100-120 days
tissue drag. Uses: as
Absorbed by
for polyglactin
hydrolysis
Polyglecaprone
Monocryl
Monofilament
Synthetic
No
Retains about 60%
Complete
Less springy than other
25
(Ethicon)
at 7 days, 30% at
absorption
monofilament
14 days
between 90 and
absorbables with
Wound support
120 days
minimal tissue drag
maintained for
Absorbed by
Available dyed or
20 days
hydrolysis
undyed
Polyglyconate
Maxon
Monofilament
Synthetic
No
Retains 70% at
Complete
Similar to
(Davis &
14 days
absorption by
 polydioxanone but easy
Geck)
60 days
to handle
Absorbed by
Uses: similar to
hydrolysis
polydioxanone 
Chromic catgut
Essentially
Natural
Coated with
Retains tensile
 Absorbed by
Always causes a
monofilament
(made from
chromium
strength for
enzymatic
moderate inflammatory
purified
salts
approximately
degradation and 
response
animal
28 days
phagocytosis
intestines)
Plain catgut
Essentially
Natural
No
Retains tensile
Absorbed by
Also causes a moderate
monofilament
(made from
strength for
enzymatic
inflammatory response
purified
approximately
pue uoepebap
and rapidly loses
animal
14 days
phagocytosis
tensile strength
intestines)
520
 Theatre practice
Table 24.6 Cross-sectional design of suture needles
Cross-sectional design
Features
Uses
Triangular in cross-section with apex on inside of curve
Skin and other dense tissue
 Point and sides of needle have cutting edges, which are very sharp
24
Reverse cutting
Triangular in cross-section with apex on outside of curve
Skin and other dense tissue
 Point and sides of needle have cutting edges, which are very sharp
Round-bodied
Round in cross-section 
Delicate tissues, e.g. fat, viscera
No sharp edges
Taper point
Becomes round-bodied as needle widens
Dense tissues other than skin, e.g. fascia,
Similar to cutting needle at tip
thick walled viscera, mucus membranes
Surgical knots
● The loop - the part of suture material within the
A surgical knot has three components:
 opposed or ligated tissue
Sutre patterns
Simple interrupted
Horizontal matress
Cruciate matress
Vertical matress
Simple continuous
Ford interlocking
Fig. 24.5 Common suture patterns
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
521
24
Theatre practice
● The knot - made from a number of throws
Continuous sutures
● The ears - the cut end of the suture that prevents the
A continuous line of sutures is placed and only knotted and
knot from being untied.
cut at the beginning and end of the suture line (Fig. 24.5).
The advantages are the ease of application and removal and
Knots can be hand-tied or instrument-tied. The basic surgical
the fact that less suture material is used. The main disadvan-
knot is a reef knot or square knot. A surgeon's knot has
tage is that slippage of the knot at either end of the suture
an initial double throw not a single throw. This reduces the
line will cause the entire suture line to break down.
risk of the first throw loosening while the second throw is
being placed. Hand tying will help prevent loosening and
Various patterns of sutures may be used depending on the
slippage of the first throw, as tension can be placed on both
site and the purpose of the suture line. They are shown in
ends of the suture. It is, however, very wasteful of suture
Figure 24.5, and include:
material.
● Simple interrupted
The knots of skin sutures should be pulled to one side of the
incision. The suture loop should be loose. Sutures that are
● Simple continuous
placed tightly will compromise the vascular supply and delay
healing. It will also cause irritation and cause the patient to
● Ford interlocking
interfere with the wound.
● Interrupted vertical mattress
● Interrupted horizontal mattress
Interrupted sutures
● Cruciate mattress.
Each suture is tied individually and cut distal to the knot
(Fig. 24.5). The main advantage of interrupted sutures is the
Sutures should be placed at least 5 mm from the wound edge
ability to maintain strength and tissue apposition if one part
and placed squarely across the wound. Rat-toothed forceps
of the suture line fails. The disadvantages are the amount of
should be used to handle the skin and the wound edges
suture material required and the length of time it takes to
should be apposed or slightly everted, with no gaping or
place the sutures.
overlapping.
Patient care
● Ideally, the patient should be bathed before surgery to
minimize contamination of the surgical site
Preoperative care
● The patient should have been given the opportunity to
urinate and defaecate before surgery; in some cases an
 On admission all relevant details about the patient should be
enema may be required
recorded:
● The patient should be weighed and any
● The reason for admission must be checked
 medication given, e.g. antibiotics, analgesia and
premedication.
● Ensure that the owner understands what is to be done
● Check that the patient is in good general health or
that the symptoms have not changed since last seen
Preparation of the patient for a
● Make sure a contact number is taken and the general
surgical procedure
anaesthetic consent form is signed
Some form of pre-medication or sedation is given intra-
● Check the patient has been starved - usually food is
muscularly or subcutaneously 15-30 min before the induc-
withheld for 12 h prior to surgery to prevent
tion of anaesthesia. Antibiotics and analgesics are usually
regurgitation under anaesthesia
given at the same time.
522
 Theatre practice
Clipping
Draping the surgical site
This is necessary for most surgical procedures. It can be done
This is done to maintain asepsis by preventing contamina-
before or under general anaesthesia. A large area around the
tion of the surgical site by hair and the immediate environ-
surgical site should be clipped. It should be neat, as this is
ment. Drapes should be large enough to cover the entire
4
usually what the owner notices. Before starting, ensure that
patient, leaving only the surgical site exposed.
the clipper blades are in good working order, as nicks in the
skin will cause irritation and excessive licking postopera-
tively. All clipping should be done away from the theatre to
 Plain drapes
minimize contamination.
Four rectangular drapes are used to create a window for the
surgical site (Fig. 24.6). The first drape is placed between the
Skin preparation
surgeon and the nearest side of the patient. The second drape
is placed on the opposite side of the patient. The remaining
As it is not possible to remove all bacteria from the skin, the
two drapes are placed at each end of the patient. They are
aim is to significantly reduce the number of organisms
 then secured with towel clips.
without damaging the skin itself. Antiseptic and detergent
 pn n s s e  pa ae sdd
scrub preparations such as chlorhexidine or povidone-iodine
are ideal. There are various methods of skin preparation; the
one outlined below is commonly used:
1. Wear surgical gloves to prevent contamination of the
 patient's skin by the nurse's hands
2. Use lint-free swabs to wash the site with surgical scrub
and a little water. Begin at the operating site and work
out to the edges of the clipped area. At the edge of the
clipped area discard the swab and use a new one.
Continue until the skin is clean, i.e. no discoloration
on swab
 3. A small amount of alcohol solution can be sprayed
over the site to remove any remaining detergent. Do
not use on mucous membranes or open wounds
4. Move patient to theatre and position for surgery.
The site will be contaminated now, so clean once
ssistantssid
gain in the same fashion but using sterile swabs and
gloves
5. The final-stage scrub is done by the surgical team, with
an antiseptic solution using sterile swabs on sterile
 Rampley sponge-holding forceps.
Incision point 
Preparation of eyes and mucous
membranes
Most skin preparations are irritating to the eye and mucous
B
Surgeon's side
membranes. Dilute solutions of povidone-iodine (0.1%) can
be used to irrigate the eye and oral cavity. Alcohol solutions
Fig. 24.6 Draping the patient (a) Plain drapes placed on the
must not be used. The skin around the eye is very thin and
patient ready for surgery (b) Order of ptacing plain drapes on the
sensitive, so minimal clipping is required.
patient
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 523
24
Theatre practice
Fenestrated drapes
● The endotracheal tube should be removed just before
These achieve the same effert as plain drapes but the
the cough reflex returns and the patient must be
'window' is already formed within a single drape. The drape
watched closely to ensure that an adequate airway is
must be large enough to cover the entire patient. Such drapes
maintained. The colour of the mucus membranes and
are commonly used for cat and bitch spays.
the presence or absence of respiratory noise are good
indicators of effective ventilation
Adhesive drapes
● Body temperature should be monitored and maintained
These are sterile, clear, adhesive plastic sheets. They are
placed over the entire site. Standard drapes are then placed
● The heart and pulse rate should also be monitored and
over the top in the usual fashion. An incision is made
any changes noted
through the adhesive material.
● Dressings should be done before the patient regains
consciousness. Any purse-string sutures and swabs
Draping limbs
should be removed
There are many ways to drape a limb. Most commonly the
● The patient should be placed in a warm, comfortable
 se yns aod nrdn e o pan pe paeq si q namon
and quiet recovery kennel
drip stand - this keeps the limb out of the way while a sterile
drape is placed on the table top underneath. A sterile drape is
● Turn the patient regularly if it is unable to do this for
then secured to the limb and the tie is released to lower the
itself
limb on to the drape on the table top. The surgical site is then
draped in the usual manner.
● Administer any analgesic drugs prescribed by the
veterinary surgeon (Table 24.7). If you observe any signs
of pain, inform the veterinary surgeon (see Ch. 27)
Intraoperative care
● When fully recovered allow the patient to urinate and
You must always remember that underneath the drapes is a
defaecate
live patient. Towel clips must be positioned to avoid delicate
structures. Hypothermia is common, particularly in small
● Provide food and water if appropriate for the case,
animals, and heat loss must be prevented. Use heat pads, hot
especially to very old or young patients.
water bottles, insulating wrap (bubble wrap) and warmed
intravenous and irrigating fluids
Intubation
The patient should be carefully positioned on the table to
avoid any postoperative complications.
The advantages of intubation are:
If required, prepare yourself for surgery by scrubbing.
● It provides a secure airway and protects it from saliva
gowning and gloving as described earlier to perform the
and other secretions such as water during dental
duties of the scrub nurse.
procedures
Table 24.7 Analgesic drugs used intraoperatively
Controlling haemorrhage
and postoperatively
Haemorrhage can be controlled by using swabs, instruments
Chemical name
Trade name
(e.g. Spencer Wells or Halstead mosquito artery forceps,
Fig. 24.3), ligatures or diathermy. If using swabs, blot the
Carprofen
Rimadyl
Im Sim se 's Sudim on pasoddo se ene Suqa
Meloxicam
Metacam
disrupt any clot formation.
Morphine
 Buprenorphine
Vetergesic
Postoperative care
Pethidine
Fentanyl
● The patient should not be left unattended until
Butorphanol
Torbugesic
 conscious and sitting up
524
Theatre practice
● It allows intermittent positive pressure ventilation
4. If using a laryngoscope, hold the tongue with your
(IPPV) (see Ch. 27)
thumb and forefinger and hold the laryngoscope with
the same hand. Use the blade of the laryngoscope to
● It reduces anatomical dead space
push the tongue down, not the epiglottis, enabling the
larynx to be viewed
24
● It allows the maintenance of anaesthesia and provides
a means of supplying oxygen (see Ch. 27)
5. To prevent the occurrence of laryngeal spasm, spray
the larynx with local anaesthetic to desensitize it. Wait
● It reduces pollution from waste anaesthetic gases
60-90 s
Disadvantages include:
6. Insert a correct-sized lubricated tube into the mouth
and between the laryngeal folds during inspiration
● The endotracheal tube may kink during positioning
The laryngeal folds can be seen moving in and out as
the cat breathes.
● Overinflation of the cuff may occlude the tube and
cause damage to the trachea
Removing the endotracheal tube
● A tube that is too small may increase the resistance to
(extubation)
breathing
In dogs the tube should be removed when the swallowing/
● Traumatic laryngitis may develop as a result of poor
gag reflex returns; in cats it should be removed before the
technique or oversized tubes - particularly in cats.
reflex returns. Leave the cuff inflated until removal. On
removal, deflate the cuff and carefully pull the tube out in a
downward direction to avoid damage to the trachea and
Method of intubation
larynx.
Dogs
1. Place the anaesthetized patient in lateral recumbency
Immediate/short-term
2. The assistant holds the head up, supporting the base of
postoperative complications
the neck with the left hand and holding the maxilla
and nose with the right hand
Haemorrhage
3. Gently ease the tongue out of the mouth and pull it
down to lower the mandible. This enables the larynx
to be viewed
cated. Usually, the patient will have to be re-anaesthetized
   p  d d  a n
4. Using a correct-sized lubricated tube, insert it into the
instruments and ligatures. Prepare warm intravenous fluids.
mouth towards the soft palate
 5. Insert the tube over the epiglottis and between the
Laryngospasm
vocal folds.
Keep the endotracheal tube in place if you have not already
removed it. Steroid treatment may help or, in severe cases, a
Cats
tracheotomy may have to be performed (see Ch. 23)
 1. Place the anaesthetized patient in lateral recumbency
2. The assistant holds the head up, supporting the base of
Shock
the neck with the left hand and holding the maxilla
and nose with the right hand. Keep fingers out of the
Monitor all vital parameters, i.e. heart and pulse rate, mucous
mouth
membrane colour, capillary refill time and respiration rate.
Prepare warm intravenous fluids. Keep the patient warm
 3. Gently ease the tongue out of the mouth and pull it
using blankets or bubble wrap. Do not apply direct heat using
down to lower the mandible. This enables the larynx
heat pads. Administer antidote to the anaesthetic agent, if
to be viewed
appropriate (see Ch. 23).
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  525
24
Theatre practice
Hypothermia
 Administer antidote to the anaesthetic agent, if appropriate.
Keep the patient warm using blankets, bubble wrap and heat
(1on
mats. Maintain room temperature between 21 and 23°C.
Monitor rectal temperature every 10 min. Give warmed intra-
Principles of sterilization
venous fluids
Vomiting
Box 24.3 Definitions of common terms
Stay with the patient at all times. Hold the head and neck
 Sepsis - presence of pathogens in the blood or tissues,
down, or hang over the side of the table with the body raised
i.e. infection
so that the head and neck are in a downwards position. Keep
Asepsis - freedom from infection
in this position until the patient regains consciousness.
Administer any anti-emetic drugs that the veterinary surgeon
● Antisepsis - prevention of sepsis by destruction of 
has prescribed.
pathogens
● Sterilization - destruction of all microorganisms,
including bacterial spores
Disinfection - destruction of all microorganisms except
Long-term postoperative
bacterial spores
complications
Disinfectant - a chemical agent that destroys
microorganisms
These are listed in Table 24.8
Table 24.8 Complications associated with the postoperative period
Complication
Signs
Treatment
Shock
Tachycardia
Monitor all vital parameters including heart and
Weak rapid pulse
pulse rate, mucous membrane colour, capillary refll
 Pale or cyanotic mucus membranes
time, respiration rate and pattern - measure every
 Slow capillary refill times
 5 min
Cold extremities
 Prepare and give warmed intravenous fluids 
Shallow breathing
Keep the patient warm with blankets and bubble
Tachypnoea
wrap, but not direct heat. Administer any antidote
to the anaesthetic agent
Decubitus ulcers
Bed sores on bony prominences
Clean and dry the areas with skin disinfectant. Use
 Possible ulceration and bleeding
extra padding and bedding. Turn the patient
Patient may show signs of restlessness and pain
frequently
Coughing
Harsh coughing
Always differentiate the cough from kennel cough
Grunting noises
Give any drugs prescribed by the veterinary surgeon
Wheezing
Feed soft mushy food. Hand-feed if necessary
Patient is restless and agitated
Patient refuses to eat when offered food
Hypostatic pneumonia
Shallow rapid respiration
Monitor all vital parameters, including heart and
Signs of restlessness and discomfort
pulse rate, mucous membrane colour, capillary refll
Pale or cyanotic mucus membranes
time and respiration rate and pattern - measure
Slow capillary refill time
every 5 min
Turn the patient every 2 h
 Position the patient in sternal recumbency using
foam wedges or bedding
526
Theatre practice
The saying ‘Prevention is better than cure' is very true.
Sterilization
Infection of clean surgical wounds is a concern across the
world. Antibiotics should not be relied upon as a means of
All instruments and equipment must be sterilized before use.
protection against infection because of poor aseptic tech-
There are several methods of sterilization available and the
nique. Every veterinary organisation should have a routine
choice, which must be both safe and economical, depends
4
that is adhered to, from correct theatre attire and scrubbing
on:
up techniques to the cleaning of instruments and the practice
en vironment.
● Amount and type of equipment to be sterilized
● Cost
Spread of infection
● Available space within the practice.
Contamination usually comes from four sources - the oper-
 There are two types of sterilization, cold sterilization and heat
ating theatre and environment, the equipment used, the
sterilization.
 personnel and the patient:
● Operating theatre and its environment - many
Cold sterilization
microorganisms are airborne. Any movement within
the theatre will cause them to disperse. Good
Ethylene oxide
ventilation is necessary, as hot humid conditions are
 This is a highly penetrating and effective method of steriliza-
also a threat to asepsis. Cleaner procedures should be
tion but it is toxic, irritant to tissues and a flammable gas.
done first, as organisms from the contaminated site
COSHH regulations may make it impractical to use within a
will remain in the air. The operating room should be
veterinary surgery. Ethylene oxide works by inactivating the
easily cleaned and contain little furniture
DNA of cells and stops cell reproduction. It is effective against
vegetative bacteria, fungi, viruses and spores. Several factors
● Equipment - all equipment, e.g. instruments, must
influence the ability of ethylene oxide to destroy microor-
be sterile and a new set must be used for each
ganisms, including temperature, pressure concentration,
operation
humidity and time of exposure.
● Personnel - the more people there are in the theatre
An ethylene oxide sterilizer is a plastic container fitted with a
the greater the risk of infection. Correct theatre
ventilation system to prevent gas from entering the work-
clothing should be worn, those in the surgical team
place. It must be used in a clean, well-ventilated area away
must prepare their hands aseptically and sterile gowns
from any work areas. The temperature of the room must be at
and gloves should be worn
least 20C during the cycle. Items are placed in a polythene
liner bag with a gas ampoule and the bag is sealed with a
● Patient - the patient is the greatest source of
metal twist tie and placed in the sterilizing unit. The top of
contamination. Microorganisms are either:
the vial is snapped from outside the liner bag to release the
 gas. The sterilizer door is then closed and locked, the ven-
● Endogenous - within the body of the patient or
tilator is turned on and the items are left to sterilize. This
is usually done overnight, as it is a 12-h process. At the end
● Exogenous - outside the body on the skin and coat
of the period a pump is switched on to ventilate the con-
 of the patient.
tainer and the door may be opened 2 h later. Items must
be left for a further 24 h to allow the ethylene oxide to
Wounds may be classified as either clean, clean contami-
dissipate.
nated, contaminated or dirty and a wound does not neces.
sarily have to be obviously infected for microorganisms to be
Suitable items to be sterilized include anything that might be
present. There are also other factors, such as the virulence of
damaged by heat, e.g. fibreoptic equipment (endoscopes),
the organism, the resistance of the patient and the duration
 plastic catheters, anaesthetic tubing, plastic syringes, optical
of the surgery. The infection rate doubles for every hour of
equipment, high-speed drills, burrs and battery-operated
surgery and surgical technique can also increase the risk of
drills. Most things can be sterilized but the limiting factors
contamination, especially if there is excessive trauma and
are the size of the container, the duration of the cycle and
damage to the vascular supply. Impaired host resistance, the
the toxicity. Equipment containing polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
can not be sterilized in this way, as PVC may react with the
contribute to wound contamination.
ethylene oxide gas.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  527
24
Theatre practice
All materials must be clean and dry. The presence of protein
is below 140°C then it will not destroy spores in less than
and grease slows sterilization and reduces its effectiveness.
4-5 h.
 Bungs, caps and stylets must be removed to allow the gas to
penetrate freely. Items can be packaged, as ethylene oxide
Hot air ovens are usually small and economical to run. The
penetrates more easily than steam, but do not use nylon film
oven is heated by electrical elements. The door is usually
bags. To monitor the effectiveness of the process, indicator
fitted with a device to prevent opening before it is cool.
tape can be used that has yellow stripes that turn red;
Any items sterilized must have a long cooling period before
however, this does not guarantee sterility as the stripes
they can be used. It is important not to overload the oven, to
change colour after only a short exposure to the gas.
allow the free flow of air.
Chemical indicators placed in the centre of the pack will
change colour when exposed for the correct length of time.
Spore strip tests and Browne's tubes can be used to test the
Spore strips can be added to the load. These can later be
sterility in the oven.
added to a culture medium and incubated for 72 h. They are
useful for checking the efficiency of the system but they are
Items that can be sterilized by this method include glass
not an indicator of sterility.
syringes, cutting instruments, ophthalmic drill bits, powder
and oils that cannot be sterilized with moisture. Fabric, rubber
and plastic cannot be sterilized by hot air as they are destroyed
Formaldehyde
by the high temperatures.
This is used in a similar way to ethylene oxide, but COSHH
regulations now restrict its use.
Hot air ovens are not recommended, for health and safety
reasons.
Chemical solutions
These are not very effective sterilants and are really only a
Steam under pressure - autoclave
means of disinfection. Some manufacturers guarantee sterili-
This is a common and efficient method of sterilization. Instru-
zation if immersed for a long time - usually 24 h. This
ments, drapes, gowns, swabs, most rubber products, glassware
and some plastic can be sterilized in this way. However, fibre-
 any other means, e.g. endoscopic equipment.
optics, lenses and plastics are usually heat-sensitive and are
thus easily damaged.
Glutaraldehyde
There are three types of autoclave:
Widely used but very irritant, so items must be washed with
sterile water just before use. Gloves and masks should be
● Vertical pressure cooker - this is the simplest of
worn. Glutaraldehyde is supplied as an acid solution that is
autoclaves. It works by boiling water in a closed
activated by the addition of powder at the time of use.
container. There is an air vent at the top that is closed
after the air is evacuated from the container, and the
pressure is then allowed to build up to 15 psi. The
Chlorhexidine-based solutions
biggest disadvantage of this system is that the air vent
 Can only be used as disinfectants as chlorhexidine has poor
is at the top, so some air may remain trapped
activity against spores, fungi and viruses.
underneath the steam; the temperature in that area is
lower and sterility cannot therefore be guaranteed. It is
also manually operated, so there is room for human
Irradiation
error.
Gamma irradiation can only be used in a controlled environ.
ment. Prepackaged items such as needles and syringes are
· Horizontal/vertical downward displacement
sterilized in this way.
autoclave - this is a larger and completely automatic
autoclave. It uses an electrically operated boiler that is
also a source of steam. The air outlet is at the bottom,
Heat sterilization
so the air is driven out more effectively by downward
displacement. Usually there is a choice of programmes
Dry heat - hot air oven
with varying temperatures. This autoclave is designed
Dry heat will kill microorganisms by oxidative destruction of
for sterilization of loose instruments rather than packs,
the bacterial protoplasm. Microorganisms are more resistant
as the drying cycle is insufficient. Damp packs will
to this method than if heated with moisture, so higher tem-
allow microorganisms to penetrate the pack during the
peratures are required - about 150-180*C. If the temperature
storage period.
528
 Theatre practice
● Vacuum-assisted autoclaves - this autoclave works
for each different time/pressure/temperature cycle or a
on the same principle as the other two, but there is a
false result may occur
high-power vacuum pump to evacuate the air from the
chamber at the beginning of the cycle. Steam
● Browne's tubes - these change colour when the
correct temperature, pressure and time have been
A second vacuum cycle takes the moisture out after
reached. They are small glass tubes partly filled with an
sterilization and dries the load. There is a choice of
cycles with different temperatures and pressures. It is
length of time. It is essential that the correct tube is
is fully automatic, with fail-safe mechanisms.
used for the selected cycle
● Bowie Dick tape - this is usually used to seal an
Use of the autoclave
impregnated with a chemical strip that turns dark
Autoclaves differ but the principle remains the same. Water
brown when a temperature of 121°C has been reached.
boils at 1ooC and converts into steam and the temperature
The tape is limited in value, as it does not ensure that
of the water therefore remains the same however long the
the temperature has been maintained for the set time
water is heated.
 ded p ss a a - san ade o
Many bacteria and bacterial spores are resistant to high tem-
with dried spores. The paper is placed in a load and on
peratures no matter how long they are exposed; however, if
completion of sterilization it is placed in the culture
the pressure is increased the temperature of the steam rises
medium provided and incubated at room temperature
and the bacteria and spores will be killed. It is the increased
for 72 h. If sterilization is effective there will be no
temperature, not the increased pressure, that destroys the
growth. These tests are more accurate than chemical
microorganisms, and the higher the temperature the shorter
indicator strips but the delay in results is a major
the time needed for sterilization.
disadvantage.
The central sterilizing chamber of the autoclave is sur-
● Thermocouples - these are electrical leads with
rounded by a jacket of steam. When the pressure in the jacket
is raised, steam enters the chamber, displacing the air down-
parts of the sterilization chamber with the leads passed
wards. When all the air is evacuated, the vents close and
out of an aperture to a recording device. The
steam continues to enter the chamber until the desired pres
temperature of the chamber is constantly checked and
sure is reached. The steam condenses on the colder surfaces
recorded throughout the cycle.
of the contents of the chamber, producing heat, which pene.
trates to the innermost layers of the pack - it is the moisture
that increases the penetrability of the heat. After a certain
Packing supplies for
time the steam is evacuated and the temperature and pressure
drop to normal.
sterilization
Effective sterilization relies on loading the packs correctly.
There are many packing materials and containers available all
There must be adequate space to allow the steam to circulate
with advantages and disadvantages (Table 24.9). Your choice
freely. You must not overload the autoclave or block the inlet
will depend on several factors:
and exhaust valves. Instruments must be free of grease and
protein material to allow effective penetration of the steam.
● Size of autoclave
The autoclave itself should be regularly serviced by a qualified
engineer to comply with health and safety regulations and to
● Packing material must be resistant to damage
ensure that effective sterilization takes place.
● Steam or gas must be able to penetrate wrapping for
sterilization to occur and must easily exhaust when
Monitoring sterilization
sterilization is complete
● Chemical indicator strips - these change colour
● Microorganisms must not be able to penetrate from
when the correct temperature, pressure and time have
the outside of the wrapping
been reached. The strips should be placed inside the
  s   n hi si h 
● Cost
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
529
24
Theatre practice
Table 24.9 Advantages and disadvantages of packing materials used for sterilization of surgical equipment
Advantages
Disadvantages
Nylon film (usually sealed with
Variety of sizes available
Becomes brittle after repeated use and develops tiny holes,
Bowie Dick tape)
Re-usable
leading to contamination
Difficult to remove sterile item without contaminating it on
the edges of the bag
Seal and peel pack
Variety of sizes available
Paper backing tears easily
Can be used with ethylene oxide of
autoclave
Risk of contamination is small
Paper
Elastic and conforming
Water-repellent therefore ideal as an outer layer
Textiles (usually linen)
Conforming
Permeable to moisture
Strong
Re-usable
Metal drums
Last for years
Expensive
Use for instruments, gowns and drapes
 Contamination risk every time lid is opened
Boxes/cartons
Inexpensive 
Can only use in autoclave
Re-usable
● Time taken to reach sterility
incorporated into the instrument pack or packaged alone.
They can be sterilized in boxes, bags or drums.
● Personal preference.
Urinary catheters
Equipment care and sterilization
These are designed for single use but can usually be re-steril
Gowns and drapes
ized once - a Foley catheter cannot be reused. After use,
urinary catheters should be washed, dried and packed in the
Wash, dry and inspect for damage. They should be folded cor.
appropriate size of bag without coiling. They can be sterilized
rectly (Figs 24.7, 24.8) to achieve flat packs and to allow
in an autoclave but some brands can be damaged by heat.
penetration during sterilization. The outside of the gown
Ethylene oxide can be used successfully for all types of
should be on the inside so that the surgeon can put it on in
catheter but it is essential that they are aired for the required
an aseptic fashion. Drapes should be folded in a concertina
amount of time before use.
fashion to allow free flow of steam during sterilization.
Both gowns and drapes can be sterilized with ethylene oxide
Syringes
but it is very uneconomical because the sterilizer is small and
the cycle is long. Autoclave sterilization is much quicker and
Plastic syringes are designed to be disposable and it is rarely
more efficient. A hot air oven cannot be used as it will burn
economical to re-sterilize them. However, it is possible to reuse
the material. Gowns and drapes can be sterilized in drums,
30 ml or 50 ml syringes, which should be washed, dried, disas
boxes, bags or packs. Hand towels can be placed with the
sembled and packed individually ready for sterilization. Some
gowns and drapes in the instrument pack.
brands can be autoclaved, but most will be damaged by the
heat. Ethylene oxide can be used successfully. Glass syringes can
be sterilized in a hot air oven, autoclave or ethylene oxide.
Swabs
These can be bought pre-sterilized, but this is expensive. Non-
Liquids
sterile swabs are packed into bundles of five or ten - the
number of swabs is not important as long as it is consistent
These are usually bought pre-sterilized but some of the more
and all the staff are aware of the number. Swabs may be
sophisticated autoclaves have a cycle for sterilizing liquids.
530
 Theatre practice
24
Fig. 24.8 Foiding surgical drapes (o) Concertina the ctoth
widthways (b)Then concertina tengthways to achieve a flat pack
The risk of breakage is high and it is far more economical to
 buy fluids commercially prepared.
Power tools
Air drills, saws and mechanical burrs can be autoclaved, but
follow the manufacturer's instructions. Autoclaving can cause
motors to jam. Ethylene oxide can be used for all air-driven
tools. Battery drills usually have a plastic casing that melts in
the autoclave, but they can also be sterilized by ethylene
oxide. Alternatively, an un-sterile drill can be placed in a
sterile sleeve with a sterile chuck attached.
C
Storaqe after sterilization
Fig. 24.7 Fotding a gown (a) The gown is faid out flat and the
sides are fotded into the middte (b) Then concertina it tengthways
There should be a separate dry, dust-free, well ventilated area
(c) to achieve a ftat pack
in the surgical unit for storing sterile packs. A closed cup-
board is ideal. Handle the packs as little as possible to mini-
mize damage, and pack loosely on the shelves so that the
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
531
24
Theatre practice
bags are not damaged. The length of time that sterile packs
Moore M (ed.) 1999 Manual of veterinary nursing. British Small
can be stored is debatable and all packs should carry the date
Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
of sterilization. A sealed pack should remain sterile for a lim-
itless period but it can become contaminated by handling.
Recommended reading
damage to the pack or moisture and it is recommended that
 packs are re-packed and sterilized every 6-8 weeks.
Aspinall V 2003 Clinical procedures in veterinary nursing.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Bibliography
All tasks performed in thepreparation of the surgical environment
Aspinall V 2003 Clinical procedures in veterinary nursing.
are described in a step-by-step format with explanations as to why
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
you do it.
College of Animal Welfare 2000 Veterinary surgical instnuments -
Moore M (ed.) 1999 Manual of veterinary nursing. British Small
an illustrated guide. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
Cooper B, Lane D R 2003 Veterinary nursing. Butterworth-
Heinemann,Oxford.
practice.
532
 Theatre practice
25
High-dependency nursing
Claire Cave
Key Points
 A high-dependency unit (HDU) may be a dedicated
● Many of the procedures carried out in the HDU are similar
department or a small room set aside for the care of
to those performed on any patient but the difference is
critically ill patients, but both require expensive, highly
that the equipment and the drugs used are more
253
technical equipment and dedicated nurses to ensure a
 specialized and the veterinary nursing team will only
high standard of care.
work within the HDU and provide hands-on 24 h
● Patient observation and monitoring are essential and this
 cover - each case may be allocated its own particular
will be needed around the clock if the patient is to
nurse.
survive.
● Much of the expense of setting up an HDU comes from
the wide range of monitoring equipment.
Introduction
the veterinary nurse and his/her ability to observe and care
for the animal is still the major contributing factor to a quick
Nursing the critical care patient within a high-dependency
recovery and prolonged survival time. Never forget that the
unit (HDU) requires a detailed understanding of the complex
animal needs home comforts, comfortable bedding, a stimu-
techniques that must be carried out if the patient is to
lating environment (unless contraindicated) and huge
survive. Many of these techniques are rarely seen within the
amounts of 'TLC'. Relationships that develop between the
day-to-day workings of a veterinary practice. However, it is
nurse, patient and owner can be rewarding and satisfying and
still important to remember that, for all the highly skilled
the sense of achievement at seeing one of your patients going
home can be immense.
● The unit may be located either away from all noise
and activity so that disturbance is reduced or, if the
dency
have it in a position that staff regularly walk past -
mnit
patients are observed more closely and there are plenty
 of people on hand in the event of an emergency
It is not always possible in a veterinary practice to have a
● It should be possible to darken the room to reduce
designated room just for high-dependency cases, but an
stimulation for seizuring patients and promote normal
appropriate level of care can still be implemented. Space
sleep patterns
limitations may result in shorter equipment lists.
● Room temperature must be able to be regulated, e.g.
The following points may be helpful when setting up a unit:
with air conditioning; fans are a cheaper but less
effective alternative
● Although not essential, it is preferable to have a
separate cat and dog ward
● A sink and disinfectant should be available for hand
washing
● The HDU should be light, airy and quiet. HDU
patients require quiet and rest and this will not be
● There must be facilities for equipment storage.
achieved if they are next to a busy dog ward,
Consumables should be stored in cupboards to reduce
particularly if they are cats
 the build up of dust and for effective cleaning
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 533
25
High-dependency nursing
● Cleaning protocols should be carried out daily, weekly
can develop between owners and patients and the
 and monthly. Cleaning equipment must be used
nurse.
exclusively in the HDU
The crash trolley must be checked regularly to ensure that drugs
● Emergency equipment should be labelled, readily
are in date, and that such things as the cuffs on endotracheal
available and in a consistent location to ensure that all
tubes are working. ECGs and defibrillators should be kept fully
staff can find it
charged and surgical packs should be sterilized regularly.
●Protocols for all treatment procedures should be
available to ensure consistency
Record-
● It is preferable to have nurses who are dedicated to the
All observations must be recorded in a legible and accessible
HDU to ensure continuity of care and rapid
form. A daily summary sheet should be on each cage door
recognition of deterioration. Owners also appreciate
recording patient and owner details, a problem list, a drug list
consistent care. A strong and rewarding relationship
and administration times, a monitoring list and times, and
resuscitation orders. Resuscitation orders should have been
discussed with the owner and recorded, e.g. Do Not
Box 25.1 Equipping the
Resuscitate or, if measures are to be carried out, to what level
high-dependency unit
(closed or open chest). HDU patients may also need records
of other aspects of their care, including fluid therapy, nutri-
(Equipment in bold type should be considered essential)
tion, and care of chest drains or tracheotomy tubes.
Consumables   
 Syringes:
Insulin syringes. 1 mt, 2 mt,
5 ml, 10 ml, 20 or 30 ml, 50 ml
Needles:
25 FG. 23 FG. 21 FG. 20 FG.
lonl
11
18 FG. 16 FG. 14 FG
Intravenous
Peripheral vein - 16 FG. 18 FG.
and
nser
catheters:
20 FG. 22 FG. 24 FG
 Central vein - peel-away, Seldinger,
or through the needle
Basic monitoring of temperature, pulse, and respiratory
Intraosseous needles
rates (TPR) is essential in the HDU as it is for any other
 patient, although there are many types of extra monitoring
 Intravenous bungs. T connectors 
 Giving sets, paediatric burette sets, blood
equipment that can also be used.
giving sets, extension sets 
Chest drains
Fluid therapy
Temperature
  Syringe drivers, infusion pumps
Heparinized saline
Metabolic rate is closely linked to temperature regulation and
Bedding
Large Vetbeds. blankets, thick foam mattresses
this is especially true in shock patients or those that are
Bair huggers, heated waterbeds
anaesthetized or comatose. Hypothermia may affect the
Dressings
 Routine dressings
mechanics of respiration, cardiac function and the patient's
Antibiotic impregnated dressings
coagulation state.
Monitoring
PCV tubes. glucometer, urine dipsticks.
refractometer
Body temperature is usually taken rectally using either a
equipment
 Practice facilities for measuring electrolytes
mercury or digital thermometer. However, in poorly perfused
 and serum biochemistry
animals, the rectal temperature may not truly reflect the core
 Blood gas analyser
temperature. Thermometers should be placed carefully
Electrocardiograph
against the mucosa to avoid measuring faecal temperature.
Pulse oximeter
Core temperature can also be taken aurally (currently an
 Blood pressure monitoring (invasive or
 ds      nd 
non-invasive)
unconscious patients.
 Miscellaneous Thermometer, stethoscope, clippers, scissors
Clock (with second hand)
In a critical care patient pyrexia or hyperthermia may
indicate:
Surgical scrub and spirit, sterile gloves
Defibrillator
● Pain
534
4 High-dependency nursing
● Infection
● Sepsis
● Convulsion activity.
There are a variety of ways to cool an animal down but, in a
critically ill animal, some methods may not be suitable. For
example, fluids can be administered at room temperature, but
not chilled; a crushed ice enema may work in extreme situa-
25
tions where temperatures are approaching 41-42?C. Total
body cooling is best accomplished by immersing the body in
cool but not cold water; if the water is too cold, peripheral
vasoconstriction may occur, which slows the heat loss
process.
Fig. 25.1 Patpating the dorsat pedat putse in a dog
Hypothermia may indicate:
● Shock
● Hypovolaemia/circulatory collapse
● Moribund patient.
   m   n h   1
quickly as possible. When the temperature starts to dip below
36°C, the patient must be actively warmed from the core.
Administering fluids at a temperature of no more than 40°℃
intravenously may help. Fluids can be warmed in warm water
 dp an no d  q no os o nod
through a bowl of warm water as the fluids are being admin-
istered.
Fig. 25.2 Patpating the digitat putse in a dog
The bladder may also be used to administer fluids - a urinary
catheter is placed aseptically into the bladder and boluses of
cally ill animal is in hypovolaemic shock, the peripheral
sterile saline no warmer than 38-40*C can then be adminis-
 pulses will be the first to be affected. In these situations, pal-
tered. Optimal effect will be seen if the fluid is left in place for
pating and reading the peripheral pulses can be a good indi-
at least 30 min, removed and another bolus administered.
cator of circulatory state or response to any fluid therapy that
You can see temperature increases of up to a degree at a time
 may have been initiated.
with this method.
A slow pulse rate may indicate:
In a patient that is in hypovolaemic shock, direct heat is con-
traindicated, because vasodilation will occur, encouraging
● Hypothermia/low body temperature
blood flow to non-essential parts of the circulatory system
such as cutaneous vessels. The body does not consider these
● Circulatory failure
to be important in times of circulatory crisis.
● Hyperkalaemia.
A rapid pulse rate may indicate:
Pulse rate
● Pain
The pulse can be felt at any place where an artery runs close
● Pyrexia
to the surface of the body and is commonly felt at the
femoral artery in the dog and cat (Figs 25.1, 25.2). If a criti-
●Sepsis
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing535
25
High-dependency nursing
●Disease process
Hypokinetic pulse/weak pulse is found in:
● Shock
● Hypovolaemic shock
● Ventricular tachycardia
● Dehydration
● Cardiac tamponade
Sinus arrhythmia
● Left-sided heart failure.
This occurs in relation to the respiratory pattern of the
animal. During inspiration the pulse rate will increase, and
Respiratory rate
during expiration it will decease. This is a normal sequence of
events.
When assessing respiration it is important to count the rate,
assess the pattern and depth and note any sounds associated
with each breath:
Pulse deficit
● Paradoxical respiration - normally the chest wall
This occurs when the pulse rate is slower or absent in rela-
expands during inspiration and returns to normal
tion to the corresponding heart sound. This indicates that,
during expiration. Paradoxical respiration is usually
although the heart is pumping the blood through the cham
 seen when there is a flail chest present and happens
bers it is not able to pump it around the rest of the circulatory
because of a change in the intrapleural pressure,
system. It is a good idea to get into the habit of palpating a
usually as a result of trauma. We see the fractured
pulse at the same time as listening to the heart rate with a
segment moving inward during inspiration and
stethoscope.
outwards during expiration.
● Abdominal respiration - occurs when the animal
 uses its abdominal muscles to try and improve
respiration and is a sign of respiratory distress. (Other
Pulse volume
signs of respiratory distress are listed below under
Oxygen therapy.)
Pulse volume should be part of the assessment of the pulse
and it is essential that you recognise what the normal volume
● Respiratory sounds - these are made during
of a pulse should feel like. The pulse wave should be felt over
inspiration or expiration. A normal animal will breathe
three fingers.
almost silently, so any sound may be abnormal and
Pulse volume is also called pulse quality:
Table 25.1 Classification of respiratory sounds
● An abnormally strong pulse can be described as hyper-
Respiratory sound
Description
kinetic, bounding or a water-hammer pulse and can some-
Breath sounds 
The normal airway and lung sounds that are
times only be felt across one finger width
audible during normal respiration
Stertor
Noise generated from the nasal passages
● An abnormally weak pulse is called a hypokinetic puise
Stridor
High-pitched inspiratory sound generated
and almost flutters across your fingers.
from turbulent airflow in the extrathoracic
airways
Hyperkinetic pulse/bounding pulse is found in:
Rhonchus
Low-pitched, continuous inspiratory or
●Anaemia
expiratory sound associated with rapid airflow
through the larger airways
● Fever
Wheeze
High-pitched, continuous inspiratory of
expiratory sound associated with narrowing of
● Sepsis
the airways
Crackle (coarse 0r
High-pitched, discontinuous inspiratory sound
● Cardiac disease
fine)
associated with reopening of airways that
closed during expiration
● Hyperthyroidism.
536
5 High-dependency nursing
should be classifed (Table 25.1) and reported to the
Capillary refill time
veterinary surgeon.
Using a finger put a little pressure on to the mucous mem-
Mucous membranes
branes of the gum. This reduces the capillary blood flow and
causes blanching of the mucous membranes. Lift up your
Whenever basic monitoring is carried out, it is important to
finger and the capillaries will refill. In a normal animal, cap-
also check the mucous membranes. Check the colour, feel or
illary refill time (CRT) should be no more than 1-1.5 s. If it is
texture of the membranes and the capillary refill time.
slower than this it could be an indicator of heart failure,
hypovolaemic shock or severe vasoconstriction. Sometimes,
  an e no snno sq ou ien sde a i
25
Colour
extremely rapid. This may be due to severe vasoconstriction,
    e    n 
Cyanosis
applied, there is nowhere for the blood to flow to, so no
This is generally recognised as a 'bluish' tone but the colour can
blanching occurs.
is caused by excessive amounts of desaturated haemoglobin in
the capillary blood. In cases where the mucous membranes are
Monitoring equipment
pigmented it will be necessary to look at other, non-pigmented,
areas, e.g. vagina or prepuce. There may also be a difference in
Equipment used in the HDU includes direct and indirect arte.
the appearance of the mucous membranes under natural or
rial blood pressure measurement, electrocardiograms, capno-
artificial light, especially under fluorescent lights
graphs for the monitoring of carbon dioxide and oxygen-
monitoring equipment such as pulse oximeters (see also
If the animal is found with cyanosed mucous membranes,
Ch. 27). The measurement of central venous pressure can also
supply with oxygen before calling the veterinary surgeon.
be invaluable in the HDU.
A multichannel monitor incorporates all the following pieces
Hyperaemic (injected)
of equipment in one big bedside monitor, which makes life
Membranes are a deep brick red and look “injected'. This
easier if space is limited (Fig. 25.3).
polycythaemia.
Central venous pressure
In hyperthermia, it occurs because of the massive vasodila-
tion needed for heat loss so there is a huge amount of blood
Central venous pressure (CVP) is an essential part of moni
present at places such as the peripheral membranes. In a
toring the effects of fluid therapy in critical patients. It is
septic patient, there is pooling of blood due to the loss of vas-
sometimes necessary to challenge animals with fluid boluses
cular tone, giving a dark, brick-coloured appearance.
and, in patients that may have cardiac disease, it is important
to know how the heart responds.
Icteric (jaundiced)
This occurs when there is a build up of bilirubin in the
plasma and tissues (hyperbilirubinaemia) which causes a
yellow discoloration of the skin, mucous membranes and also
the sclera of the eye.
Pale
Varies from a pale pink to grey/white. It may indicate that the
animal has a low packed cell volume (PCV) or that the animal
has circulatory shut down.
Texture
When the mucous membranes are touched, they should feel
slightly moist. If they are dry or sticky to the touch, this could
be an indicator of dehydration - described as 'tacky'.
Fig. 25.3 A critically ilf dog connected to a bedside monitor
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 
537
25
High-dependency nursing
Method
toring is regularly used within the HDU for animals that are
A jugular catheter is placed into the jugular vein. The tip of the
in shock, have renal or cardiac failure, or may be suffering
catheter should ideally reach the right atrium but often it is
from diseases such as hyperthyroidism or hyperadrenocorti-
positioned at the junction of the right atrium and the cranial
cism, where blood pressure may deviate from normal levels.
vena cava. The measurement that is obtained still reflects
Direct measurement is the most accurate way of monitoring
change within the right atrium and so it is a reliable estimate:
 npsn e) adna pads a assard pon
monitor) is required, together with the placement of an arte
● The catheter is attached to a three-way tap via some
rial catheter, making it costly. (For more detail see Ch. 27.)
extension tubing
Electrocardiography
● An intravenous giving set and a bag of fluids are attached
 e p d a-a a po apis aiodo a o
 The electrocardiograph (ECG) records the electrical potential
 of the heart muscle and is an invaluable piece of equipment
The zero of the manometer measure must be level with
to have in the HDU. Its uses range from determining arrest
the sternum (approximate level of right atrium)
rhythm during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) to mon-
● The manometer must be filled with fluid from the bag
There is usually an audible sound linked to each heartbeat,
(always make sure that the whole system is filled with
and this can be very useful if the nurse is looking after several
fluids before the tap is turned on to the catheter) and
animals at once. A change in tone or speed will automatically
will reach an equal pressure to the right atrium when
alert you to a change in the patient's condition.
the tap is turned on to the catheter. If correctly set up,
the meniscus in the manometer will rise and fall with
Capnography
each breath that is taken
This is used to record end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration.
● When not in use the tap can be turned off to the
 It is commonly used in the anaesthetized patient but can be
manometer and on to the fluids
used for animals that are being mechanically ventilated
within the HDU. A detector is placed between the endotra-
●When a measurement is required, the tap is turned off
cheal tube and the anaesthetic machine and connected via
 to the fluids and on between the catheter and the
tubing to the monitor.
manometer. A measurement can then be read from the
manometer measure
Oxygen therapy
● A series of three readings should be taken initially to
ensure consistency and accuracy. A reading is taken in
centimetres of water (cmH,O):
 Oxygen therapy should be implemented at the very first signs
 of hypoxia. If an animal in the HDU is showing signs of res-
The normal range for CVP is 0-10 cmH,O but the optimal
piratory distress (Fig. 25.4), oxygen should be given and the
range is 3-8 cmH,O:
● A low CVP is usually the result of hypovolaemia: a
series of low readings would indicate that fluid rates
could safely be increased
● A high CVP might indicate a volume overload or
right-sided heart failure. If there is no other evidence
to support this, the patency of the catheter should be
checked. An occluded jugular catheter will give
  o  s   is
of the catheter will be necessary.
Blood pressure monitoring
Fig. 25.4 A 4-month-otd puppy showing classic signs of respiratory
Blood pressure can be measured directly and indirectly using
distress. Note the extended neck, abducted etbows and open-mouth
invasive or non-invasive methods and blood pressure moni-
breathing
538
3 High-dependency nursing
veterinary surgeon should be called straight away. Oxygen
In the methods of oxygen delivery listed in Table 25.2 it is
delivery via a mask, an oxygen cage or 'flow by', i.e. a gas tube
only possible to reach an adequate FiO, by using appropriate
that opens close to the patient's nose, would be the preferred
levels of oxygen.
methods of delivery in the first instance.
Signs of respiratory distress include:
Oxygen toxicity
● Abdominal effort
Oxygen toxicity arises when too much oxygen is given. This
situation can arise if a FiO, of 0.6 is sustained for longer than
●Cyanosis
24 h, but if a patient already has lung disease it may occur
25
at an earlier stage with a lower FiO,. Toxicity occurs when the
● Open-mouth breathing
mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial metabolism of oxygen
is saturated and clearance is limited. There will then be an
● Flared nostrils
accumulation of toxic oxygen intermediates.
● Abducted elbows
 During normal metabolism, oxygen radicals are produced
 s         s
● Extended neck
mechanisms. However, in a state of hyperoxia these defence
mechanisms are overwhelmed and toxicity occurs. The lungs
●Anxiety
are particularly sensitive and signs of pulmonary damage
will be the most obvious. This is a rare occurrence in prac-
●Tachypnoea
tice but should be noted as a side effect of excess oxygen
supplementation.
● Respiratory noise
● Irregular chest wall movement.
Oxygen delivery
Oxygen is one of the most commonly used drugs in the HDU.
There are various methods of delivering oxygen to the patient
Supplementation of oxygen increases the oxygen content
and they all have their advantages and disadvantages. When
 of the blood, increases the partial pressure of oxygen in the
deciding which method to use the most important factor
capillary system and improves tissue perfusion.
is patient tolerance, Fio, achievement and the equipment
available.
When oxygen therapy begins, ensure that as high a fraction
of inspired oxygen (FiO,) as possible is delivered:
Flow-by oxygen
● In room air FiO, is 21% or 0.21
This is mainly used in an emergency situation. It causes
● In a patient intubated with a cuffed endotracheal tube
little interference and stress while enabling the clinician to
on 100% oxygen, the FiO, would be 100% or 1.
Table 25.2 Fraction of inspired oxygen (Fi02)
 achieved by the different methods of delivering
oxygen
Delivery method
Fio.
0, flow rate (l/min)
Flow-by
0.24-0.45
6-8
Face mask
0.35-0.55
6-10
Nasal catheter
0.30-0.50
1-6
abe ua6Axo
0.40-0.50
 Oxygen collar
0.30-0.40
0.2-0.5
Ventilation
0.21-1.00
10-15
Intratracheal catheter
0.40-0.60
50 ml/kg/min
method. Note the lack of distress with this method.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing539
25
High-dependency nursing
stabilize the patient. The oxygen line is placed 1-3 cm away
from the animal's nose and mouth and oxygen is adminis-
tered at a rate of 5-8 1/min (Fig. 25.5).
 Disadvantages of this method are that it requires an assistant
to be present at all times. It also requires a high flow rate of
oxygen, which is wasteful, and some patients can be dis-
tressed by the sound and the rapid airflow of the oxygen,
which may cause them to avoid it.
Face mask
This is a quick method of delivering oxygen to a patient in an
emergency situation. A mask is placed over the mouth and
nose of the cat or dog and oxygen is administered at a rate of
3-10 1/min. A transparent mask seems to causes less distress
to animals and makes it possible to observe the colour of the
oral mucous membranes without removing the mask
the mask if it is poorly fitting and little or no removal of
carbon dioxide.
Fig. 25.6 A dog with nasal prongs placed for oxygen therapy
Nasal catheter
Oxygen cage
with relatively low gas flow. The patient can also be examined
This is a non-invasive method providing a sealed and
without disturbance of the oxygen flow.
  d     s
causes very little stress to the animal and is well tolerated.
Measure a 5-10 French gauge catheter (usually a nasal feeding
The newer models enable the control of humidity, tempera-
tube) from the nostril to the medial canthus of the eye and
ture and FiO, and there is adequate removal of carbon
mark accordingly. A small amount of local anaesthetic gel/
dioxide. The patient can be observed at all times and there are
cream can be applied to the end of the catheter and also to the
 ports for intravenous lines and monitoring leads.
external nares that is to be used. Carefully introduce the
catheter in a ventromedial fashion up the nasal chamber until
Disadvantages include the fact that the patient is completely
the mark is reached. Fix the catheter on to the skin at the nares
isolated from staff, it is expensive and a high flow rate is
using glue, suture or staple. A second attachment can be made
needed to enrich the cage adequately. There is also a danger
on the top of the head. Connect the catheter to a source of
of the patient decompensating whenever the cage door is
humidified oxygen using an adaptor. It may be necessary to fit
opened and the oxygen-rich environment is lost. It takes a
an Elizabethan collar to prevent patient interference.
large amount of oxygen to resume adequate oxygen levels,
which can be expensive and wasteful. The temperature
As the oxygen is going directly into the nasal passages it must
within the cage must also be closely observed and adjusted
be used with a humidifier. Humidification should be carried
accordingly.
out using sterile saline at room temperature, which should be
changed daily if long-term use is expected.
Oxygen collar
If using a unilateral catheter the site should be changed every
48 h to reduce the risk of damage to the mucosa. It is also pos-
This is very effective way of delivering oxygen in an emer-
sible to buy nasal prongs made of very soft silicone, which
gency situation or for temporary use.
originate from human oxygen therapy (Fig. 25.6).
An Elizabethan collar is placed on the patient and clear cello-
Disadvantages of this method include poor patient tolerance,
phane is then used to cover two-thirds of the front and is
jet damage to the mucosa and increased expense.
taped to the sides. The opening acts as a vent for removal
540
0 High-dependency nursing
of carbon dioxide and any excess oxygen. The size of the
Blood may be collected from the femoral artery or the dorsal
opening will determine the oxygen percentage. The tempera-
 metatarsal artery into a heparinized syringe, and it is then
ture of the patient and the temperature and humidity within
 analysed by the appropriate machine. The results should be
the collar must be monitored. Oxygen can dry the mucous
relayed to the veterinary surgeon, who will make an
membranes and it is necessary to lubricate the eyes with
 informed decision on the need for further oxygen therapy.
B () a s s  e 
Viscotears (Novartis Ophthalmics).
As a general rule:
Disadvantages include poor patient tolerance in some
● PaO, < 70 mmHg and/r PaCO, > 45 mmHg = need for
instances, hyperthermia, O, leakage and high humidity.
supplemental oxygen
253
Intratracheal catheter
● PaO2 <60 mmHg and/or PaCO2 > 50 mmHg =
respiratory failure and need for ventilatory support.
This method works by bypassing the anatomical dead space,
i.e. the nasal chambers, pharynx, larynx and trachea and
During oxygen therapy the PaO, should be five times the
allows continuous oxygen delivery at low flow rates. These
FiO2, e.g. FiO, of 40% = PaO, of 200 mmHg. If it is less than
catheters are placed between the fourth and fifth cartilagi-
this, there could be a problem with gas exchange and the
nous rings following full surgical preparation. A hole is made
veterinary surgeon should be informed at once.
that is slightly larger than the catheter to be used. Select a
large-bore, long, soft, preferably silicone catheter - it is
A blood gas analyser is a vital piece of equipment in a busy
preferable to fenestrate the end before application, which
HDU, but they are expensive and not all critically ill animals
reduces the risk of jet damage. Place the needle of the
will tolerate samples being taken frequently. For this reason it
catheter between the two cartilaginous rings in dogs and
can be preferable to place an arterial catheter.
through the cricothyroid ligament in cats and small dogs.
Feed the catheter through to the level of the fifth intercostal
Pulse oximetry
space. Withdraw the needle and, if appropriate, cover it with
a needle guard and secure it to the animal's neck with a
This is a simple non-invasive method for monitoring oxygen
bandage. Connect the end of the catheter to a humidified
saturation (SaO,). It works by calculating the saturation of
oxygen source. This is a cheaper method of delivering oxygen
haemoglobin using the principle of spectrophotometry, i.e.
as low flow rates are used. It is generally well tolerated by
an oxygenated haemoglobin molecule (oxyhaemoglobin)
patients and allows easy access by the clinician or nurse.
and a reduced or deoxygenated haemoglobin molecule
(deoxyhaemoglobin) absorb different lights at different rates.
Disadvantages include a risk of the catheter kinking at the
The pulse oximeter shines red light and infrared light
site of insertion, subcutaneous emphysema, jet damage to the
through an arterial bed and the microprocessor computes the
airways, tracheitis, bronchospasm, infection at the insertion
difference (see also Ch. 27). If the SaO, falls to 93% or less, it
site and possible airway obstruction.
 signals the need for oxygen therapy.
Some animals may need sedating to carry out this procedure.
This is a less expensive piece of equipment than many others
and the probes are well tolerated by the patient. How-
 s e o   sm no  a 
Monitoring oxygen therapy
 blood gas analysis, should be noted in relation to the clinical
observations.
Simple observation of the patient may determine how well
n o s  xo n d  
Humidification
ment include decrease in respiratory effort and rate, an
improved mucous membrane colour and reduced anxiety
  s     s  
and stress. Cats will vocalize less.
must be humidified because the animal's own methods of
warming and moistening the oxygen, i.e. within the nasal
There are also pieces of equipment that indicate whether the
chambers, have been bypassed. Commercial bubble humidifiers
oxygen therapy is sufficient.
(Fig. 25.7) are relatively cheap, but it is also possible to make one:
Blood gas analysis
1. Take two lengths of piping
 Blood gas analysis will measure the amount of oxygen (PaO2)
2. Take a plastic bottle, sterilize it and half fill it with
and carbon dioxide (PaCO,) in the arterial blood.
sterile saline
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
541
25
High-dependency nursing
Fig. 25.7 A commercially available bubbte humidifier
Fig. 25.8 A tong catheter has been placed in the saphenous vein of
α dog using the Setdinger technique. The catheter has been secured
With tape and tissue gtue, and sutures are being used to secure it
3. Attach one length of tubing to the oxygen source. This
further
should be long enough to go through the top of the
bottle and into the saline
access for fluid therapy, drug administration or
4. Attach the other tube to the animal - it should be out
 peripheral parenteral nutrition (PPN; Fig. 25.8)
of the saline at all times.
● Medial saphenous vein - useful in cats and an
excellent site to place a longer catheter for larger
volumes of fluid and drug administration. It is not the
Intravenous access
best site for administration of PPN as it is not visible
without disturbing the cat and it is more likely to
become soiled. It is possible to reach the caudal vena
Intravenous access is required for fluid therapy, drug admin-
cava via this vein if the catheter is long enough, to
istration, blood sampling, monitoring, i.e. central venous
facilitate the delivery of hypertonic solutions such as
pressure, and in some cases nutrition. Equipment, i.e. needles
50% glucose, and for a very rough estimation of
and catheters, must be carefully placed and be maintained
central venous pressure
and monitored to a high standard to prevent catheter infec-
tion and/or thrombophlebitis. There are various types of
● Jugular vein - this is a large vein that can take
catheter and familiarity with them will ensure that they are
longer, large-bore catheters. The jugular vein is the
used in the appropriate situation.
only vein where an accurate measurement can be
taken of CVP. The catheter must be long enough so
Intravenous catheters are usually classified by their method
that the tip reaches the junction of the cranial vena
of application (see also Ch. 23). Specialist catheters used par-
cava and the right atrium. (The theory behind this is
ticularly in the critical care patient include jugular catheters,
discussed later.) Central lines can also be placed in
double/triple-lumen catheters and intraosseous catheters.
 dogs and cats for frequent blood sampling, e.g. fof
The most appropriate sites (see also Ch. 13) are:
glucose curves, total parenteral nutrition (TPN), drug
administration and fluid therapy
● Cephalic vein - this is the most common site in the
dog and cat, as it is the most accessible. The catheter
● Marginal ear vein - may be used in long-eared
should be placed as low as possible if you can foresee
breeds such as basset hounds and in rabbits.
multiple catheter placements - you can then go
further up the foreleg if necessary
There are a variety of techniques for introducing central lines
including through-the-needle, peel away sheath and the
● Lateral saphenous vein - this site on the lateral
Seldinger technique. Central lines that are placed into the
hind leg can take an over-the-needle catheter or a
jugular vein must be placed using an aseptic technique and
longer central catheter in dogs and cats. The central
must be checked regularly for signs of infection. If a patient
catheter is most commonly placed using the Seldinger
has multiple catheters they should be labelled to avoid any
 or Peel-Away (Cook UK) technique and gives easy
confusion as to the purpose of the line.
542
2  High-dependency nursing
Placement of central lines
1. The clipped area is surgically scrubbed
Before beginning the task, ensure that all equipment is ready
2. A stab incision is made into the skin over the
 d a d  d no a n  
proposed entry site, using a no. 11 scalpel blade
d a d aa s  rin an sao  a
of insertion will be somewhere between the thoracic inlet
3. Introduce the percutaneous entry needle into the
and the angle of the jaw, depending on the length of the
vessel until blood flows
catheter and the size of the patient.
4. Introduce the guide wire down through the needle
Central lines may be single-, double-, triple- or quadruple-
and advance it into the vessel, ensuring that the
125
lumen, which is of great assistance when numerous fluids or
length of wire advanced is longer than the needle
 drugs are needed. Multilumen catheters have separate entry
and exit ports, so there is no need to worry about drug or
5. Leaving the wire in place, remove the needle. A
fluid incompatibility. (Note When walking these animals
sterile swab should be placed over the hole with
around, a lead or harness should be placed around the shoul-
 pressure to prevent haematoma formation
ders rather using than a choke collar around the site of the
jugular catheter. This decreases the risk of disturbing the
6. Pass the dilator over the wire and into the vessel to
catheter and prevents discomfort around the insertion site.)
enlarge the entry hole
Complications of this procedure include infection, throm-
boembolism and haemorrhage.
7. Withdraw the dilator and advance the catheter over
the wire. You will need to use a twisting motion in
Equipment required:
some cases
● Clippers
8. Remove the guide wire
● Items for surgical scrub
 9. Flush the catheter with sterile heparin saline and cap
it with a bung or T-connector
● Drape
10. Suture the catheter in place in such a way that it
● Surgical gloves
cannot kink. Superglue or tissue glue can be used for
extra security
● Blade
11. Some people place triple antibiotic cream at the site
● Central line kit containing - hypodermic needle, guide
of insertion. Another option is to cover the site with
wire, dilator, polyurethane intravenous catheter
sterile transparent dressing for easy observation with
minimal disturbance
● Sterile swabs
12. Dress the neck in an appropriate fashion.
● T-connector
It is advisable to have a T-connector attached to the end of
● Injection cap/bung
the catheter, which ensures that there is minimal contact
with the actual catheter and that dressings can remain in
● Antibiotic dressing or ointment - may be needed
 place while drugs are introduced.
● Suture material and tissue/superglue for stabilizing
Sheathed needle technique
● Dressings.
This is technique involves the use of a Peel-Away sheathed
needle system. The list of equipment is similar to that for the
 Seldinger tec hnique with the addition of a Peel-Away catheter
Percutaneous vascular catheterization -
kit (Cook UK).
Seldinger technique (1953)
Method
Method
1. The insertion site is surgically scrubbed
Local anaesthetic cream can be topically applied before
surgical preparation:
2. A stab incision is made into the skin using a no.11 blade
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
543
25
High-dependency nursing
 3. Place the sheathed needle distally into the vessel and
● Dorsal metatarsal artery - the most common site
advance slightly
in the dog and cat. It runs along the mediodorsal
aspect of the hind foot. Strict asepsis must be
4. Remove the needle from the sheath and discard. A
maintained while introducing the catheter
finger should be placed over the end of the sheath to
minimize the risk of air embolization
● Femoral artery - this is far more mobile and the
veterinary surgeon may need to use a hand to steady
5. Introduce the catheter through the sheath and into
the artery before attempting catheterization of the
the vessel. The catheter should then be advanced
vessel. This artery should be avoided in animals with a
further into the vein
 coagulopathy because significant haemorrhage can
occur if the catheter becomes dislodged.
6. Remove the sheath by pulling outwards and upwards
on the two small knobs at either side of the sheath
Complications include infection, thrombosis and haemorrhage.
7. Flush the catheter with heparinized saline, then cap it
Equipment required:
and secure to the neck of the animal with sutures or
superglue/tissue glue
● Clippers
8. Dress the area as in the Seldinger technique.
● Surgical scrub and spirit
● Surgical gloves
Through-the-needle technique
● Suitable catheter (arterial catheter or a 20-22-g
This technique uses equipment that leaves the needle (in a
 3-cm-long over-the-needle catheter)
protective case) attached to the animal.
● T-connector and bung
Method
● Sterile heparin saline
1. The area of insertion is clipped and aseptically
prepared
● No.11 blade or 21-g needle
2. Introduce the needle in a distal direction into the vein
● Tape
and, once blood is seen at the hub of the needle
advance it further to ensure adequate placement
● Dressing material.
3. Advance the catheter through the needle into the vein
Method
until the hub of the catheter reaches the hub of the
needle
 Local anaesthetic cream or gel may applied to the site of the
artery before you start to place the catheter, to minimize
4. The needle can now be withdrawn from the vein and
arterial spasm during catheterization:
clipped into the protective case
 1. The site of insertion should be clipped and surgically
5. Flush the catheter with heparinized saline and attach a
scrubbed
bung or T-connector
2. If necessary, make a small nick in the skin with a
6. Cover the site of insertion with a clear, sterile dressing
needle or a blade
 and dress the neck appropriately.
 3. Gently palpate the pulse in the artery and feel the
course of the artery
Arterial catheterization
4. Introduce the needle in a firm, stabbing manner and
advance it until blood appears in the hub
In some critical cases, it may be necessary to place an arterial
catheter, e.g. for blood pressure monitoring or for frequent
5. Advance the catheter off the needle and into the
blood gas analysis. Sites include:
lumen of the artery
544High-dependency nursing
6. Secure the catheter using tape
● The trochanteric fossa of the proximal femur
7. Remove the needle and attach the catheter to a bung
● The flat medial aspect of the proximal tibia (at a site
or T-connector
that is distal to the tibial tuberosity and the proximal
tibial growth plate).
8. Flush the catheter using heparinized saline.
The last two sites are the most common in dogs and cats. (For
The catheter site must be bandaged securely to avoid knocks
sites in exotic species see Ch. 15.)
or self-trauma. If a patient with an arterial catheter manages
to bite through the connections it could suffer severe blood
25
loss, so close observation must be undertaken at all times.
Method
If the catheter is to be left in for regular monitoring, it
1. Clip and aseptically scrub the area of insertion
should be flushed with sterile heparinized saline every
30-60 min.
 2. Inject a small amount of local anaesthetic agent into
the skin and periosteum
When removing the catheter from the artery, place pressure
over the site for at least 5 min to minimize the risk of a
3. While an assistant stabilizes the limb, make a small
haematoma formation.
stab incision
4. Insert the needle in a distal direction. Use a firm and
Intraosseous catheterization
rotating action until the needle enters the cortex. If it
is fully engaged in the cortex, the whole leg will move
In some critical care patients it may not be possible to place
with the needle when it is rocked from side to side
an intravenous catheter so an alternative is to administer
fluids or drugs via an intraosseous catheter into the cavity of
5. Remove the stylet and flush the needle with sterile
a bone. Commercial intraosseous needles are available but it
heparinized saline
is possible to use a spinal or hypodermic needle in an emer-
gency situation. An over-the-needle intravenous catheter can
6. Attach a T-connector or a fluid infusion set and secure
be used in young animals because of the relative softness of
the needle hub. Commercially available needles have a
their bones (Fig. 25.9).
 butterfly on the top for suturing to the skin. A bandage
s p s exa n ne a 
Sites for placement include:
Aspiration of bone marrow will confirm correct positioning.
● The cranial aspect of the diaphysis of the ulna
as will the use of radiography. The needle should be flushed
every 4-6 h when not in use and should be removed
● The cranial aspect of the greater tubercle of the
72 h after placement. The same bone can be used again at a
humerus
different site but you must wait at least 36 h before introduc-
ing another needle.
The absorption of drugs through an intraosseous needle
is similar to the absorption if placed centrally. Fluid
rates should not exceed 11 ml/min infusing manually and
24 ml/min if using a pressurized infusion pump. Complica-
tions include infection, growth plate damage, fat embolism
and leakage of fluid into the tissues if placement is incorrect.
Maintenance of catheters
All catheters should be introduced in an aseptic manner, but
 particularly in an HDU patient. Sterile gloves should be worn
when introducing catheters into a vein, and gloves should be
Fig. 25.9 A 6-month-otd kitten with an intraosseous needle in
worn when checking catheters or when attending to connec-
posifon.
tions with drug administration or blood sampling.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
545
25
High-dependency nursing
Peripheral and central lines should be checked tho-
● Drip rates should be checked more often than every
roughly every 4 h and glanced at whenever you are
4 h but, while checking the catheter, it is a good idea
passing:
to also check the rate of fluid infusion on the pump or
in the drip chamber
● The dressing should be checked for cleanliness and
dryness. You should check that the bandage has not
● Check all connections. If there is an extension set or a
become too tight (especially around the neck) and that
T-connector attached, you need to make sure that the
there are no signs of self-trauma. Any wet dressings
patient has not managed to chew through or ingest
s oos se pande ao mau e pe paaon aq pnos
any of the catches.
the catheter site has been checked
During your other regular checks you must monitor the tem-
● The catheter site should be checked without
 perature and general demeanour of the patient. If there is unex-
 touching the actual point of insertion. You are looking
plained pyrexia, catheter sites should be checked and if there is
for movement of the catheter, discharge or pus,
any doubt the catheter should be removed. If the catheter
leakage of fluid around the site and any signs of
is removed aseptically, it can be sent away for culture and
inflammation
 sensitivity.
● You should look above the catheter site to check for
It has beenn suggested that catheters should be removed and
signs of extravascular leakage and phlebitis. Phlebitis is
replaced every 72 h. However, studies have shown that, unless
the inflammation of a vessel caused by infection and
the catheter is showing clinical signs of causing throm-
will manifest itself with redness and swelling. If the
bophlebitis, it is not necessary to remove it. It is far better to
skin is palpated around and above the site of insertion
place it properly and maintain it for the longest possible time,
it will feel hot. The vein itself, when palpated under
 particularly in HDU patients, when veins may be at a premium.
the skin, will feel very hard and the patient may show
signs of distress and pain
Arterial catheters need similar checks but should not be used
for drug or fluid administration, which minimizes the risk of
● The catheter should be flushed every 4 h with
 infection. These catheters are used for monitoring purposes
heparinized saline (1 unit heparin/ml 0.9% saline) to
only so usually stay in for hours rather than days. They will
check the patency of the catheter. This may not be
need flushing every 30-60 min and the patient must be kept
 necessary if there is a continuous intravenous drip
under close observation to avoid the risk of exsanguination
running
during catheter dislodgement.
Hypertonic saline
Fluid
Hypertonic saline causes a rapid expansion of plasma
volume, by an immediate shift of water into plasma from the
interstitium. The effect is transient because the ions of the
sodium and chloride will rapidly redistribute, like any other
patient
crystalloid, and isotonic fluids may need to be administered
 later. Indications for hypertonic crystalloids include haemor-
rhagic shock, traumatic shock, septic shock, gastric dilation
There are several types of fluid that are essential to
and volvulus and severe burns.
have on the shelf if you are dealing with critical patients -
crystalloids, colloids and oxygen carrying fluids (see also
Some clinicians consider that hypertonic saline may be par
Ch. 23).
ticularly useful in patients that have suffered brain or lung
trauma. Hypertonic saline may limit oedema in these organs
compared to an isotonic solution, but there is limited evi-
dence to support this (DiBartola 1992).
Crystalloids
Any saline solution that is more than 0.9% NaCl is hyper-
Crystalloids can be hypertonic, isotonic or hypotonic.
tonic; the most usual formulation used is 7.2%.
The most frequently used fluid is isotonic but, in an HDU,
some clinicians may choose to use a hypertonir solution to
 It is extremely important that it is administered very slowly,
resuscitate a shocked animal.
at a rate not exceeding 1 ml/kg/min, to avoid bradycardia.
546
5 High-dependency nursing
Usual doses are 2-8 ml/kg in total. Rapid administration of
Leuconostoc in media containing sucrose. There are two types
hypertonic fluid is contraindicated in dehydrated and cardiac
of dextran - 40 and 70. The average molecular weight of
 an  a a   s 
dextran 40 is 40 000 and of dextran 70 is 70 000. The half-life
never subcutaneously.
of dextran 40 is 2.5 h, and of dextran 70 is 25 h.
A total dose of 4-7 ml/kg (dogs) and 2-4 ml/kg (cats) can be
Indications for dextran  7o:  Rapid intravascular
given over 2-5 min and will have a similar effect to giving a
volume replacement; hypotensive resuscitation; ongoing
dog or cat 60-90 ml/kg of isotonic fluid.
haemorrhage.
Artificial colloids
23
Monitoring
Within the vascular system of a healthy, normovolaemic
animal there are naturally occurring colloids in the form of
Artificial or synthetic colloids are the most efficient fluids for
plasma proteins such as albumin. They are responsible fo1
expanding intravascular volume but, because they are able to
maintaining vascular volume because of their ability to stay
stay in the intravascular space for long periods of time, it is
within the capillary system and maintain fluid within the cir-
essential that patients are closely observed and monitored for
culation by osmosis. During times of fluid disturbance and/or
volume overload.
disease, these proteins may be depleted in numbers and so
colloid osmotic pressure (COP) must be maintained arti
ficially. A loss of COP will result in tissue oedema and low
Dose rates of colloids
circulating volume because it is no longer possible for fluid to
be kept within the vascular system.
A general dose for the administration of colloids is
20 ml/kg/24 h. This rate will differ dramatically depending
The three most commonly used artificial colloids in vet-
on the clinician, the breed of animal and the reason for
administration.
dextrans. The basis of their use over crystalloids is their
ability to stay in the intravascular space for longer and so
help to maintain intravascular volume.
Oxygen-carrying fluids
Gelatines
Oxyglobin
These are produced from cattle-bone gelatin. Solutions used
Oxyglobin (haemoglobin glutamer-200 (bovine)) is poly.
in the UK are Haemaocel and Gelofusine. The average molecu
merized purified haemoglobin in a modified lactated Ringer's
lar weight is 30 000 and the half-life is 2.5 h.
fluid. It is licensed for single use in dogs but has not been
Indications: Rapid intravascular volume replacement;
licensed for use in cats. It is used as an alternative to blood
hypotensive resuscitation; ongoing haemorrhage.
transfusion for a variety of conditions, including haemolytic
anaemia, traumatic blood loss, hypovolaemia and other
Hydroxyethyl starches
conditions that result in poor tissue perfusion.
These are made from a waxy species of maize or sorghum.
An Oxyglobin molecule is 1/1000th the size of a red blood
The most commonly used starches are pentastarch (average
corpuscle and is able to circulate freely in the plasma,
molecular weight 264 000) and hetastarch (average molecular
 enabling it to perfuse tissue that may not be reached by red
weight 450 000). The half-life is about 2.5 h for pentastarch
blood cells.
and 25 h for hetastarch.
Indications for hetastarch: Rapid intravascular volume
Oxyglobin as volume overload and pulmonary oedema can
replacement; hypotensive resuscitation; ongoing haemor-
develop if the rate or dose is excessive. Mucous membranes
rhage; small volume resuscitation; systemic inflammatory
may appear jaundiced in colour during administration
response syndrome (SIRs); hypoproteinaemia.
because of the colour of Oxyglobin, but this is a relatively
common finding and is not a cause for alarm (Fig. 25.10).
Dextrans
Oxyglobin must be used within 24 h of the outer wrapper
Dextrans are produced by the enzyme dextran sucrase during
 p aadn o  ia aa pos pe pado 
the growth of various strains of bacteria of the genus
the refrigerator. It must never be frozen and should be
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  547
25
High-dependency nursing
Table 25.3 Suggested rates of administration
for Oxyglobin
Euvolaemic
Hypovolaemic
(ml/kg/h)
(ml/kg/h)
Dogs
3-10
Cats (not licensed)
0.5
1-2
Blood
A large proportion of patients who pass through the HDU
Fig. 25.10 A dog receiving Oxygtobin. Note the extremely dark
will eventually receive whole blood or a blood component as
cotour of the fluid.
a transfusion. In the UK there are restrictions regarding the
use and storage of whole animal blood and blood compo-
nents. Table 25.4 summarizes the uses of blood components.
warmed gently if removed from a fridge. It can be adminis-
tered via a normal giving set.
Blood types
●Feline - A, B, AB
Dose rates
● Canine -DEA 1.1, 1.2,3,4, 5,6, 7,8.
Table 25.3 shows suggested rates of administration but
they should only be used as guideline. Total doses should
Blood type cards for use in practice use are available for A, B
not exceed 30 ml/kg/24 h (dogs), although enough should be
and AB feline types, but are only available for identifying
given to maintain haemoglobin levels of at least 6 g/dl.
DEA 1.1-positive dogs.
Table 25.4 Indications for the use of different blood components
Blood component
Indications
Shelf life
Fresh whole blood (FWB)
Acute massive blood loss
< 8 h after collection
Coagulopathy with blood loss
Thrombocytopenia with blood loss
Majority of disseminated intravascular coagulation cases
Hypovolaemic shock
Stored whole blood (SWB)
Anaemias
Up to 35 days when ACD or CPD used
Hypovolaemic shock
Refrigerate at 1-6°℃
Packed red cells (PRCs)
Normovolaemic anaemia
Up to 35 days
Refrigerate at 1-6°℃
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP)
Coagulation disorders
12 months at -18°C or below
Hypoalbuminaemia
Anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity
Frozen plasma (FP)
Coagulation disorders
5 years at -20°C or below
Hypoalbuminaemia
Platelet concentrate
 Thrombocytopaenia
5 days at 22℃
Thrombocytopathy
Cryoprecipitate (Cryo)
Haemophilia
12 months at -18°℃ or below
Von Willebrand's disease
Hypofi brinogenaemia
ACD, acid citrate dextrose; CPD, citrate phosphate dextrose adenine.
548
High-dependency nursing
Whole blood
from the plasma, cryoprecipitate (Cryo) can be frozen at -18°℃
This is known as fresh whole blood (FWB) for up to 8 h
or colder and stored for 12 months from the original blood
following collection from the donor. It contains red blood
donation date. It contains fibrinogen, fibronectin, factor VII:C
cells, white blood cells, platelets, plasma proteins and coagu
and a concentrated amount of von Willebrand factor.
lation factors. Once the whole blood has been taken it should
be given to a patient, separated into components or stored in
a refrigerator at 1-6°C within 6 h. After 24 h of storage at this
Blood transfusions
temperature, platelet function is lost and the concentration
of coagulation factors decreases.
blood or blood components must be carefully monitored
125
Whole blood becomes stored whole blood (SWB) after
throughout the transfusion process. It is advisable to take the
8 h and can be kept in the refrigerator for 4 weeks if a suitable
animal out to urinate and defaecate and for TPR to be taken
anticoagulant such as acid citrate dextrose (ACD) or citrate
as a baseline before the transfusion commences. TPR should
phosphate dextrose adenine (CPD) has been used.
be taken every 10-15 min to begin with and continued
throughout the transfusion. If there is no evidence of a
When administering blood to a patient it should be warmed
reaction, TPR can be decreased to once an hour and then
           
further reduced if the animal is still showing no signs of
than 37?C. Never use a microwave, as this will 'cook' the cells
distress.
and cause haemolysis and bacterial proliferation.
 Clinical signs of a transfusion reaction include:
Packed red cells
●Vomiting
Whole blood can be centrifuged and the plasma removed,
leaving the red blood cells. Because the haematocrit will be
● Muscle tremors and weakness
around 70-80%, it is necessary to add sterile saline in order to
decrease the viscosity. Packed red cells (PRCs) will have the
● Tachycardia
same oxygen-carrying capacity as whole blood but with less
volume.
● Tachypnoea
● Pyrexia
Fresh frozen plasma and stored frozen plasma
● Vocalization
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) contains plasma, albumin and all
coagulation factors. If taken and frozen within 8 h of col-
● Urticaria
lection it is stable for 12 months at a temperature of -18°C.
After 12 months, it should be relabelled stored frozen plasma
which could indicate that the patient is suffering from:
(SFP) and can then be kept for 4 years. These two products
are virtually identical in their function but in SFP some of
● Haemolysis
the coagulation factors will not be stable. Platelets are not
functional in either product.
● Bacterial contamination
●Anaphylaxis
Platelet concentrate
Platelets can be separated from whole blood within 8 h of
● Circulatory overload
donation. The whole blood must not be cooled below the
temperature of 2o*C and once harvested, the platelet con-
● Too rapid administration
centrate must not be frozen or refrigerated. Platelets do not
retain function or viability if kept below room temperature,
● Hypercalcaemia due to anticoagulant overdose.
 po e h m sp g non id aq o 
concentrate.
If any of the clinical signs develop the transfusion should be
 stopped and the veterinary surgeon should be informed.
Cryoprecipitate
Blood products should be given through a filtered giving
This is the cold, insoluble part of plasma that is left when FFP
has been thawed slowly at 1-6°C. Once it has been collected
(see Ch. 23). The filter reduces the risk of microagglutinates
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  549
25
High-dependency nursing
travelling into the circulation, especially if the blood has
● A rate of 20 ml/kg/h can be used in animals with acute
beenn stored.
 blood loss or hypovolaemia
It is possible for the animal to have a delayed transfusion
● It is often a good idea to start at a rate of 2 ml/kg/h
sn ann si si pn (so   sp  o
for the first 15-30 min so that any reactions are
by an immune response to an antigen of a different blood
identified early on. Some veterinary surgeons may
group to which the animal was previously sensitized.
choose to administer antihistamines before starting the
transfusion, but this could mask early signs of
Dose rates
reaction.
● The dose rate depends on the animal's condition but a
rate of 5-10 ml/kg/h is most commonly used
Analgesia
Epidural catheterization
See also Chapters 19 and 27.
Epidural analgesia usually uses single doses of opioids or local
anaesthesia or a combination of both. The most commonly
The usual signs of pain include vocalization, increased heart
used drugs are morphine and bupivacaine; these can be
and respiratory rate, abnormal posture, inappetence, aggres.
administered as single doses or as a continuous rate infusion
sion, depression, restlessness, trembling, facial expressions,
through a specialist epidural catheter.
anxiety, insomnia and temperament change. However, in an
already debilitated or recumbent animal the signs may not be
as obvious. If the following signs are observed with no other
Contraindications and complications
apparent reason, pain should be assumed and the appropriate
analgesic agent should be given:
There are numerous contraindications; these include
coagulopathies, bacteraemia, severe systemic infection,
● Increase in heart or respiratory rate
thoracolumbar neurological deficits, lumbosacral fractures or
dislocations and an inexperienced operator.
● Increase in blood pressure
Complications can arise, such as infection, spinal damage
● Increase in temperature
and site haemorrhage.
● Inability to rest or sleep
Indications for use include peritonitis, severe pancreatitis,
trauma (caudal) and animals undergoing caudal surgery. An
●Trembling
epidural catheter should not be placed unless sterility and
appropriate maintenance of the catheter can be ensured.
● Inappetence.
Maintenance of the catheter includes regular checks for
possible migration, patient interference and cleanliness.
In general, if the condition or procedure is known or as-
sumed to cause pain, then appropriate analgesia should be
prescribed.
Nutritional support
Before analgesics are administered every effort should be
made to ensure that the patient's other needs are being
When simple starvation occurs in healthy animals, metabolic
tended to. Some apparent signs of pain can also indicate the
adaptions ensure that energy expenditure is decreased.
need for urination, defaecation or comfort. The animal may
m s si a  p an a s
be thirsty, stressed or anxious and these needs must be met
will ultimately prolong survival. However, during stress
before pharmacological comforts are given
starvation, these mechanisms are not triggered and the
animal undergoes a state of hypermetabolism. If animals
 Drugs used in the HDU are similar to the analgesics described
cannot or will not eat, they rapidly deteriorate into a state of
in Chapter 27, and the opioids are probably the most com-
malnutrition.
monly used group. Techniques used within the HDU include
continuous rate infusion and analgesia via an epidural
Providing the correct nutritional support to the critical
catheter.
patient will improve immune function, wound repair and
550
 High-dependency nursing
Table 25.5 Types of tube used for enteral feeding
Tube type and use
Location
Duration of
Comments
Contraindications
placement
Naso-oesophageal
 Distal oesophagus via the
Short term, <7 days S
 Simple and non-invasive
Long-term nutritional
Short-term nutrition
nose
to place
support
where upper
Reasonably well tolerated
Trauma or disease to head
Inexpensive
neck, nasal cavity.
functioning normally
Can be maintained at home 
oesophagus
Comatose and recumbent
25
patients
 Abnormal gag reflex
Vomiting; functional or
 mechanical gastrointestinal
obstruction
Oesophagostomy
Distal oesophagus via
Short and long term 
 Well tolerated
 Oesophageal disorder
Facial trauma, injury or
surgical placement into the
(months)
Wide bore, so more
Vomiting
disease involving the
cranial oesophagus through
selection of diets
Comatose or recumbent
mouth and pharynx
the skin 
Can be maintained at home
patients
 Following oesophageal
surgery
Gastrostomy/PEG tube
The stomach via surgical
Mid to long term
Well tolerated
 Primary gastric disease
Injuries or surgery to oral
laparotomy or endoscopically
(months to years)
 More invasive procedure
(ulceration or neoplasia)
cavity, larynx, pharynx 0f
through the ventrolateral
to place
 Intractable vomiting
oesophagus
abdominal wall (left side)
Can be maintained at home
Peritonitis
Wide bore, so more
selection of diets
Enterostomy
The small intestine via
Long term (weeks to
Well tolerated
 Patients must be stable
(duodenostomy or
surgical laparotomy through
months) but term 
Invasive procedure
enough for anaesthesia
jejunostomy)
the abdominal wall or
limited because of
Not possible to maintain
Alabins pue
When stomach or duodenum 
endoscopically via gastric
need for
at home
Dysfunction of the small
must be bypassed
tube and through the pylorus
hospitalization
Very narrow bore
intestine
 Pancreatic disease Of
surgery
 Biliary system disease
PEG, percutaneous endoscopically placed gastrostomy.
expected duration of assisted feeding, the food type to be
 and prolong survival.
used, and sometimes cost.
Enteral t
Other methods include force-feeding and drug-induced stim-
tee
ulation such as diazepam and cyproheptadine hydroc hloride.
Whenever possible, it is preferable to use a method that
However, in patients that may already be depressed and
makes use of the gastrointestinal tract, i.e. using the enteral
stressed, force-feeding may prove detrimental and drug inter-
route. It is very important to maintain the health of the intes-
vention rarely encourages the animal to ingest enough to
tinal mucosa and the function of peristalsis within the gas-
reach its basal energy requirement (see Ch. 10 & 11).
trointestinal tract to prevent destruction of the lining and
malabsorption of food.
Parenteral feeding
There are several different types of feeding tube available that
deliver food to the gastrointestinal tract when the patient is
This method is used when the gastrointestinal tract cannot be
unable to ingest food normally (Table 25.5). The choice of
used or it is better that it is rested. Parenteral nutrition can be
tube will depend on the disease process or injury, the
administered in two ways:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
551
25
High-dependency nursing
● Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) - nutrition
used. However, the solution must be more dilute, i.e.
given via a central vein, e.g. the jugular
< 800 mosmol/l, so fewer calories and proteins are provided per
unit volume. The patient must also be observed for volume
● Peripheral parenteral nutrition (PPN) -
overload if fluids are being administered at the same time.
nutrition given via a peripheral vein, e.g. the
saphenous.
Solutions used for parenteral nutrition
Indications include complete mechanical intestinal obstruc-
tion, ileus or hypomobility, intractable vomiting or diar-
The three basic components to any parenteral nutrition solu
 tion are lipids, amino acids and dextrose:
logical deficits, which increase the risk of aspiration, and
those with acute pancreatitis or hepatitis. Patients that have
● Amino acid solutions contain all the essential amino
had massive small bowel resection and those that are severely
acids for dogs and cats (with the exception of taurine).
malnourished with a non-functional gastrointestinal tract
They help to maintain nitrogen balance and can
also benefit from TPN. It is beyond the scope of this section
replenish lean tissue in cachectic animals. Solutions
to fully discuss parenteral nutrition and so the following is a
are available in concentrations of 3-15%
brief overview.
● Lipid emulsions provide a source of fatty acids and fat
calories and are available in 10% and 20% emulsions
Venous access
● Dextrose provides carbohydrates and is available in
Parenteral nutrition can be administered centrally (TPN) or
concentrations of 5-70%.
peripherally (PPN; Fig. 25.11). The catheter must be placed
in strict aseptic conditions and must be dedicated to the
Vitamin B complex solutions and potassium phosphate must
purpose, because the nutrient-rich solution is an excellent
also be added. Calcium and magnesium sulphate can also be
bacteria medium. Once the catheter has been placed and
included.
the line has been connected, there should be minimal
disconnection of lines.
The various products should be added in a particular order to
 prevent precipitation occurring and this order can be remem-
The final osmolarity of the solution dictates whether to use a
bered by working alphabetically - amino acids, dextrose and
lipid solution. The solution must be made up under aseptic
will increase the risk of thrombophlebitis, so if the osmolar
ity of the solution is in excess of 800-900 mosmol/l, the
bought or evacuated glass bottles can be used (Fig. 25.12).
cranial vena cava must be used. The cranial vena cava has a
The solution must be changed every 24 h, although enough
high flow rate and can therefore tolerate such solutions.
solution for 2-4 days can be made up and stored in the
If it is contraindicated or not possible to place a jugular
fridge.
line, a peripheral vein (usually the saphenous) can be
Fig. 25.12 Totat parenteral nutrition sotution being made up for
Fig. 25.11 A totat parenterat nutrition sotution connected to the
the next 24-h period. Note the aseptic conditions under which this
dog and being infused via an infusion pump
is done
552
2 High-dependency nursing
Box 25.2 Equipping the crash trolley
The crash kit may be kept on a purpose built trolley or kept in something as simple as a fishing tackle box. It must be kept in
a consistent place at all times to avoid confusion in an emergency. Items should be clearly labelled and restocked at the
beginning of each day or after use. The kit should contain:
Pharmaceutical
●Starches (hetastarch)
Atropine
● Haemoglobin-based oxygen carrying solution, e.g.
● Adrenaline (epinephrine)
Oxyglobin
· 2% lignocaine (without adrenaline)
Miscellaneous
● Sodium bicarbonate
● Syringes - full selection
●Glucose
● Hypodermic needles - full selection
● Calcium chloride or gluconate
· Clippers
● Dexamethasone
● Surgical scrub and spirit
● Mannitol
● Various tapes and bandages
● Potassium chloride
● Surgical gloves -range of sizes
Airway access
Surgical kit
● Endotracheal tubes - wide selection
● Scalpel blades
● Laryngoscope and blades
· Stethoscope
● Tracheotomy tubes - wide selection
● Suction equipment
● Gauze tie
● Gelif defbrillator present
● Sterile lubricating jelly
● External and internal paddles for defibrillator
Intravenous access
● Spare leads for electrocardiograph
● Intravenous catheters - full selection
+
Stopwatch
● Giving sets
● Thermometer
If available, the following items should also be on the
● Butterfly catheters - wide selection
crash trolley or kept close to hand:
Intraosseous needles
● Electrocardiograph
Fluid therapy
● Dinamap blood pressure monitor
● Crystalloids - lactated Ringer's solution, 0.9% saline,
● Pulse oximeter
5% dextrose
●Defbrillator
Colloids (Haemaoccel or Gelofusine)
Complications of the procedure include sepsis, thrombo-
Monitoring the patient on total parenteral
phlebitis, electrolyte disturbances, hyperlipidaemia, hyper-
glycaemia and azotaemia. The most common complication is
nutrition
thrombophlebitis and the most severe is sepsis. The risk of
The patient on TPN must be kept under close 24-h observa
both of these complications can be decreased by correct
tion. This is not only to ensure line patency, but also to
placement of the catheter and strict maintenance and obser-
ensure that any complications are noted at an early stage. A
vation in the following days. Frequent assessment of blood
complete haematological and biochemical blood analysis
will also ensure that metabolic disturbances are noted at an
should be carried out before TPN commences and at weekly
early stage and corrected accordingly.
intervals. Further assessments should include daily checks of
 plasma proteins, blood and urine glucose concentrations, and
Bibliography
regular TPR. Some clinicians also include daily checks on
electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine and calcium.
Battaglia A M 2o01 Pain assessment and treatment. In:
Battaglia A M (ed.) Small animal emergency and critical care: Q
Hydration status, body weight, attitude/demeanour and
manual for the veterinary technician. W B Saunders, Philadelphia,
 respiratory rate should be noted frequently.
PA, pp 108-123
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
553
25
High-dependency nursing
DiBartola S D 1992 Introduction to fluid therapy. In: DiBartola
Kirk C A 1992 Nutritional management of metabolic stress.
S D (ed.) Fluid therapy in small animal practice. W B Saunders,
In: Kirk C A (ed.) Enteral nuirition: its importance in recovery.
Philadetphia,PA,pp.321-340
Harmon Smith, Kansas City, KA, pp 7-14
Hansenn B 2000 Epidural anaigesia. In: Bonagura J D (ed.)
Matthews K A, Brooks M J, Vallient A E 1996. A prospective
Kirk's current veterinary therapy Xill: Small animal practice.
study of intravenous cathetercontamination.fournal ofVeterinary
W B Saunders, Philadelphia,PA, pp 126-131
Emergency and Critical Care 6: 33-43
Harrel K A, Kristensen A T 1995 Canine fransfusion reactions
Rudloff E, Kirby R 2000 Colloids: current recommendations.
and their management. Veterinary Clinics of North America:
In:Bonagura J D (ed.) Kirk's current veterinary therapy XIll:
Small Animal Practice 25: 1333-1361
Small animat practice. W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA,
pp 131-135
Harty Womack B 2003 Providing nutritional support to criticat
care patients.Veterinary Technician, June: 376-387
Hohenhaus A E 2ooo Blood banking and fransfusion medicine.
Recommended reading
In: Ettinger S J, Feldman C E (eds) Textbook of veterinary internat
medicine, 5th edn. W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA, pp 348-356
Kirby R, Rudloff E 2000 Fluid and electrolyte therapy. In: Ettinger
S J, Feldman C E (eds) Textbook of veterinary internal medicine,
Kirby R, Rudloff E 2000 Fluid therapy, elecirolytes, and acid-base
5th edn. W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA, pp 338-339
conirol. In: Ettinger S J, Feldman C E (eds) Textbook of veterinary
internat medicine, 5th edn. W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA,
Excellent coverage of blood transfusion medicine and fluid therapy.
pp325-347
Also provides a comprehensive table on colloid administration.
554High-dependency mursing
26
Dentistry
Cecilia Gorrel
Key Points
● The veterinary nurse is an essential part of the primary
● All oral examinations and treatments should be recorded
dental care team and must be prepared to be both dental
and the use of specific dental charts is recommended.
 nurse and hygienist.
● Professional periodontal therapy performed by the
● Primary care dentistry requires the use of a range of
veterinary nurse includes supragingival and closed
 specialized instruments, which should be clean and
 subgingival scaling and root planing.
 preferably sterilized for each patient.
● Home care carried out by the owner and based on
● Oral examination and all dental procedures require
regular tooth brushing is the most effective way to main-
26
 general anaesthesia and close attention must be given to
tain oral hygiene. The veterinary nurse can play a major
preventing debris from entering the larynx and trachea
part in educating and training the owner in these
and to monitoring the patient during the procedure and
techniques.
duringrecovery.
Introduction
3 to the Veterinary Surgeons Act 1966, as amended by the
In human dentistry the team that supplies primary oral care
Veterinary Surgeons Act 1966 (Schedule 3 Amendment) Order
consists of the dentist, the dental nurse, the dental hygienist
2002, SI 2002/1479, with effect from 10 June 2002.
and the dental technician. Each of these individuals has a
clearly defined role, i.e. the dentist is responsible for oral
Veterinary oral care should be structured similarly to human
diagnosis and treatment; the dental nurse assists the dentist
oral care - i.e. the veterinary surgeon is responsible for diag-
in these duties; the dental hygienist performs dental hygiene
nosis and treatment; the veterinary nurse assists the vet-
instruction and treatment as requested by the dentist; and
erinary surgeon in these duties, and also performs dental
the dental technician manufactures appliances as requested
hygiene instruction and treatment as requested by the vet-
by the dentist. In addition to this primary care team, there are
erinary surgeon. In other words, the veterinary nurse takes
specialists in the various dental disciplines (periodontics,
on the duties of both ‘dental nurse' and 'dental hygienist'.
orthodontics, endodontics, oral surgery, prosthodontics,
The nurse can only perform these duties if specifically
etc.). The specialists provide treatment that is outside the
requested to do so by the veterinary surgeon and then only
scope of the general dental practitioner.
under their direct supervision. Moreover, the veterinary
surgeon is accountable for the adequacy of any procedures
The veterinary primary oral care team is not as easy to define.
performed by the veterinary nurse. In other words, the
Despite the fact that oral conditions are common in our
veterinary surgeon is ultimately responsible.
domestic pets, education in veterinary dentistry and oral
surgery is not a big part of the undergraduate veterinary cur-
In addition to the veterinary surgeon in general practice,
riculum. Consequently, many veterinary surgeons are not
  s   s    n
comfortable with diagnosing oral conditions or with per-
tistry. They provide treatment that is outside the scope of the
forming dental and oral surgery procedures. Moreover, den-
general dental practitioner, e.g. complicated extractions and
tistry is often not considered ‘important' and is often dele-
other surgical procedures, endodontics, prosthodontics, etc.
gated to nurses, who have even less knowledge of the disci
pline. In fact, oral health and disease is often not covered at
The veterinary nurse is an essential member of an effective
all in the nursing training programmes. This is an unfortu-
oral care team. The trained veterinary nurse should be able to
nate situation and does not benefit the oral health and
carry out the following procedures:
general welfare of our domestic pets. There is today an urgent
need to provide education in dentistry and oral surgery for
● Care for and maintain instrumentation and equipment
veterinary surgeons as well as for nurses. Moreover, the legal
role of the veterinary nurse in the dental care team needs to
● Perform an oral examination
be clearly defined. In the UK, veterinary nurses may do the
things specified in paragraphs 6 (applies to listed veterinary
● Record findings on a dental chart
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
555
26
Dentistry
● Take dental radiographs
● Perform routine professional periodontal therapy
● Perform oral/dental hygiene instruction.
Instrumentation and
equipment for
primary
care
dentistry
Fig. 26.1 Instrumentation for oral examination. From left to
Primary care dentistry includes, but is not limited to:
night: curved dentat exptorer, a periodontat probe and a dentat
● Oral examination and recording of findings
mrror.
● Periodontal therapy
●Evaluate furcation lesions
●Extraction
● Evaluate extent of tooth mobility.
● Minor oral surgery.
The dental explorer, a sharp-ended instrument, is used to:
Clean and preferably sterilized instruments should be avail.
● Determine the presence of caries
able for each patient. Ideally, several pre-packed kits contain-
ing the required instruments for the different procedures, e.g.
● Explore other enamel and dentin defects, e.g. fracture,
examination, periodontal therapy and extraction, should be
resorptive lesions.
available.
The explorer is also useful for tactile examination of the sub-
Power equipment requires regular maintenance (daily and
gingival tooth surfaces. Subgingival calculus and resorptive
weekly) in the practice and regular servicing by the supplier.
 sxa pa a s  pi a  si
Checklists should be drawn up for these chores. Maintenance
either straight or curved. They are also either single-ended or
and servicing requirements need to be decided with the
double-ended, usually combined with a periodontal probe,
supplier.
i.e. one end is an explorer and the other end is a periodontal
probe.
A dental mirror is a vital, but traditionally rarely used, tool
Instrumentation for oral
in veterinary dentistry. It allows the operator to visualize
examination
palatal/lingual surfaces while maintaining posture. The
dental mirror can also be used to reflect light on to areas of
The details of how to perform an oral examination are
 interest and to retract and protect soft tissue.
covered later in this chapter. The instrumentation required is
shown in Figure 26.1.
The periodontal probe is a rounded, narrow or flat, blunt
Equipment and instrumentation
ended, graduated instrument. Its blunt end can be inserted
into the gingival sulcus without causing trauma. The peri-
for professional periodontal
odontal probe is used to:
therapy
● Measure periodontal probing depth
Professional periodontal therapy includes scaling, root
planing and crown polishing. The procedure is detailed later
● Determine degree of gingival inflammation
in this chapter.
556
5Fundamental Pharmacology
Scaling describes the process whereby dental deposits, i.e.
plaque, but mainly calculus, are removed from the supra- and
subgingival surfaces of the teeth. Scaling may be performed
using a combination of mechanical (powered) instruments,
e.g. ultrasonir or sonic scalers, and hand instruments, i.e.
scalers and curettes. Hand instruments should be used to
remove large, bulky supragingival deposits before going on to
powered scalers. Hand instruments are also required to
remove subgingival dental deposits.
Hand scaling instruments
Scalers and curettes are used to remove dental deposits from
 the tooth surfaces. Each has a handle, a shank and a working
26
        
Fig. 26.3 A selection of curettes is required for periodontat therapy
their cutting edges. The working end refers to that part of the
instrument that is used to carry out the function of the
instrument. The working end of a sharpened instrument is
● Scalers - are used for the supragingival removal of
called the blade. It is made up of the following components:
calculus. As a scaler has a sharp, pointed tip it should
 only be used supragingivally. If a scaler is used
● Face
subgingivally, the pointed tip will lacerate the gingival
margin. A scaler should generally be pulled away from
● Lateral surfaces
the gingiva towards the tip of the crown or the
occlusal surface
● Back
● Curettes - are used for the subgingival removal of
● Cutting edge(s)
dental deposits and for root planing. They can also be
 s o i    
The cutting edge is the line where the face and a lateral
curette, namely universal and area-specific, e.g. Gracey.
surface meet to form a sharp cutting edge. A blade designed
The working end of a curette is more slender than that
with a pointed tip is called a scaler. A blade that ends with a
of a scaler and the back and tip are rounded to
rounded toe is classified as a curette. Figure 26.2 demonstrates
minimize gingival trauma. A selection of curettes
the differences between a scaler and a curette:
(Fig. 26.3) is required for periodontal therapy. A
Supragingival Scaler
Handle
Supragingival Curette
Shank
vorking tip
C
Fig. 26.2 Scater and curette design. Each has a handle, a shank and a working tip. The working tip of a scaler is more robust than that of a
Curette. Also, the working tip of the scater is pointed, white the curette has a rounded tip. A scater is thus designed for supragingivat work, white
a curette can be used both supra- and subgingivatlly
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing557
26
Dentistry
separate scaler is not strictly required, as curettes can
plaque-retentive. Scaled teeth must be polished using either
be used both above and below the gingiva while
prophy paste in a prophy cup or in a brush in a slow-speed
scalers are limited to supragingival use.
contra-angle handpiece, or by means of air polishing (particle
blasting):
Mechanical scaling instruments
● Prophy paste in a cup or brush in a slow-speed
contra-angle handpiece - the speed of rotation of the
Mechanical scalers enable fast and easy removal of calculus.
cup or brush can be regulated. To minimize the amount
However, they have a great potential for iatrogenic damage
of heat generated, the prophy cup or brush should not
(d dd asi a   e ao)
rotate faster than 1o00 revolutions per minute. Each
if used incorrectly. There are three types of mechanical scaler:
patient should receive a new polishing cup or brush.
Prophy paste is available in bulk containers and
● Sonic scalers are driven by compressed air, so they
 individual patient tubs. The latter are inexpensive and
require a compressed-air-driven dental unit for
should be used to prevent contamination and iatrogenic
operation. The tip oscillates at a sonic frequency. Sonic
transmission of pathogens
scalers are generally less effective than ultrasonic scalers
but generate less heat and are thus less likely to cause
● Air polishing (particle blasting) - this technique,
iatrogenic injuries and safer to use. Depending upon the
based on the sandblasting principle, is used to polish
design of the tip of the scaler, these instruments may be
the supragingival parts of the teeth. The particles used,
used for supra- and subgingival scaling. An insert with a
e.g. bicarbonate of soda, will polish the tooth surface
thin pointed tip, sometimes called a perio, sickle or
without causing damage to the enamel, if used
universal insert, is recommended
properly. It is essential to protect the soft tissues,
i.e. gingivae and oral mucosa, during air polishing.
● Ultrasonic scalers are commonly used in veterinary
A simple way of protecting the soft tissues is to cover
practice. The tip oscillates at ultrasonic frequencies.
them with a piece of gauze.
They are driven by a micromotor rather than
 compressed air. The tip vibration is generated either by
a magnetostrictive mechanism or a piezoelectric
Instrumentation and equipment
mechanism in the handpiece. The ultrasonic
oscillation of the tip causes cavitation of the coolant,
for extraction
which aids in the disruption of the calculus on the
tooth surface. Ultrasonic scalers are generally designed
Tooth extraction requires hand instruments and power
for supragingival use, but tips designed for subgingival
equipment.
scaling are available. A thin, pointed insert is
recommended for supragingival use. Inserts specifically
designed for subgingival use are recommended for
Hand instruments
 subgingival scaling
Hand instruments required for tooth extraction include luxa-
● Rotary scalers are best avoided but are included here
tors, elevators, periosteal elevators, possibly extraction
for completeness. In this system, roto pro burs are
 ps e  i is s e p sa
inserted in the high-speed handpiece of a
forceps, suturing instruments and suturing material.
compressed-air-driven unit. They are so-called
'non-cutting' burs, which when applied to calculus
Luxators and elevators
cause it to disintegrate while the coolant flushes the
debris away. In humans, the use of these burs to scale
Luxators and elevators are used to cut or break down the peri-
teeth is associated with significant postoperative pain.
odontal ligament, which holds the tooth in the alveolus. A
They are thus no longer used for scaling. In addition
selection of dental luxators and elevators of varying sizes is
to postoperative pain, roto pro burs can cause
s a og   e h o 'g  a
extensive damage to tooth enamel. Their use in
of root can be selected.
veterinary dentistry is not recommended.
Periosteal elevator
Polishing units
A periosteal elevator (Fig. 26.5) is required for open or surgical
Polishing removes plaque and restores the scaled tooth
extractions to expose the alveolar bone by raising a muco-
surfaces to smoothness. A polished tooth surface is less
periosteal flap.
558
Dentistry
Fig. 26.4 Luxators and elevators. The three instruments with
Fig. 26.6 Minor surgical kit for tooth extraction. A suture kit with
26
cotoured handles are Svensk fuxators. The remaining instruments are
small ophthatmic instruments and two periosteat elevators (the Fine
elevators.
P24GSP and the Howard P9H).
Power equipment
o pue Asp od on pannbai si nadna rmo
surgery. Regular maintenance is essential to avoid problems
with equipment failure.
Micromotor unit
A micromotor unit can be used for polishing teeth as
well as for sectioning teeth, when the micromotor should be
Fig. 26.5 Periosteat elevators. From top to bottom: Fine P24GSP,
set at maximum speed. Micromotor units do not generally
the Howard P9H and the Molt P9 (ceramic handle).
include water-cooling of the bur and an external source, e.g.
an assistant applying coolant continuously to the tissues, is
required to prevent thermal damage to teeth and alveolar
Extraction forceps
bone.
Although forceps can be used to aid ligament breakdown by
rotational force on the tooth, it is easy to snap the crown off
by using excessive force. Dental forceps are not essential but
Compressed-air-driven unit
if they are to be used, a selection of sizes, to fit the root
The basic compressed-air-driven unit consists of a high-speed
anatomy of the tooth being extracted, is required.
outlet, which accepts a high-speed handpiece, a slow-speed
outlet, which accepts a slow-speed handpiece, and a com-
bination air/water syringe. The high-speed outlet is fitted
Scalpel blade
with water cooling. The slow-speed outlet may be fitted with
The use of a scalpel blade to free the gingival attachment to the
water cooling but often this feature is absent. Some com
tooth is recommended for both closed and open extraction
pressed-air-driven units have suction (Fig. 26.7). This is a real
technique. A size 15 or 11 blade, used in the handle, is ideal.
bonus.
Suture kit and suture material
Burs
A suture kit with small ophthalmic instruments should
Dental burs are made of a variety of materials, including
be available (Fig. 26.6). Monofilament, absorbable suture
stainless steel, tungsten carbide steel and 'diamond'. There is
 material should be used in the oral cavity.
a wide selection of burs available to fit both the slow- and the
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 559
26
Dentistry
 may be safer for the inexperienced user. Blunted burs should
be discarded.
Care and maintenance of
instrumentation and equipment
The care and maintenance of dental equipment and instru-
mentation is the responsibility of the veterinary nurse.
Sharpening of hand instruments
  m        s
with minimal trauma to the gingival tissues. Scalers and
curettes, luxators and elevators all require regular sharpening.
The basic goals of sharpening are to conserve a sharp cutting
Fig. 26.7 A compressed-air-driven unit. This unit (IM3, Veterinary
edge and to preserve the original shape of the instrument.
Instrumentation Itd) has two high-speed outfets, one stow-speed
Sharpening is usually performed after cleaning and prior to ster
outtet, a curing light, three-way syringe and suction.
ilization. Heat sterilization will result in blunting so a clean
sharpening stone should be available for sharpening during the
procedure. Alternatively, sharpening can be performed after
cleaning and sterilization. Dental instrument sharpening kits,
i.e. stones and oil with instructions, are available through vet-
high-speed handpiere (Fig. 26.8). The high-speed handpiece
erinary wholesalers. Attending a course to learn how to sharpen
will only accept friction grip burs, while a slow-speed hand
instruments is strongly recommended.
piece may accept either friction grip or latc h key burs. A selec
tion of round, pear-shaped, tapered fissure and straight fssure
burs will be required for sectioning of teeth and removal of
Cleaning and sterilization of hand
alveolar bone. 'Diamond' burs abrade rather than cut and
instruments
Each patient should receive a clean and preferably sterile
set of hand instruments. They are cleaned and sterilized
by chemicals or heat in the same fashion as other surgical
instruments.
Care and maintenance of power
equipment
    s o a i
manufacturer and/or supplier of power equipment must
supply you with detailed information of how to care for and
maintain the unit you have purchased. An annual service
contract should be part of the purchase agreement. There are
similarities and differences in the care and maintenance of
different units and you need to check with your supplier
exactly how your unit should be looked after. The following
 is a general guideline.
Fig. 26.8 A selection of tungsten-carbide burs. From the left:
round, pear-shaped and tapered fissure high-speed handpiece burs.
Cleaning and sterilizing the ultrasonic scaler
Round and crosscutting straight fissure burs for the stow-speed hand-
The body of the ultrasonic scaler should not be cleaned in an
piece are shown on the right.
ultrasonic bath. Instead, it can be cleaned using a cotton
560
Dentistry
swab soaked in alcohol. Following cleaning, the handpiece
Table 26.1 General maintenance of
should be sterilized (autoclave at 134°C at 2 bar (200 kPa) for
compressed-air-driven units
20 min). The procedure is as follows:
Operation
Daily
Weekly
Annually
1. Separate the handpiece from the cord and remove the
Drain air receiver
scaler tip
Drain filter/regulator
2. Put the handpiece in the sterilizable cloth or bag if
Check oil level
required
Change oil
 Change air intake filter
3. Take the handpiece out of the autoclave as soon at the
Change line flter
sterilization is complete
Check electrical connections
4. Carefully dry the electrical contacts and the cord
and all pipe fittings
connector before use.
26
Cleaning and sterilizing handpieces
Cautions:
Handpieces need to be lubricated before and after steriliza-
tion or the bearings will fail.
● Never autoclave handpiece with a bur in place
 After removing the bur, a brush is used to remove foreign par-
● Never operate handpiece without a bur inserted
ticles from the handpiece. It is then wiped clean with a moist
cloth. For the high-speed handpiece, a fine wire is provided
● Do not forget 'before and after sterilization' lubrication
for cleaning the water spray hole. Instructions should come
procedures
with each unit as to how to dismantle handpieces.
● Dry heat sterilization is not allowed under any
Lubricate the handpiece. This can be achieved by inserting
circumstances.
two or three drops of oil lubricant via a lubricant nozzle into
the air supply tube. If a spray lubricant is used, it should be
activated for 3 s. Operate the handpiece with a bur installed
for 15-20 s. Remove bur from handpiece and disconnect the
General maintenance
handpiece from the unit. The handpiece is now ready for
Table 26.1 indicates general maintenance, which must be
autoclaving. Follow manufacturer's directions. After auto-
carried out by the user. The high-speed handpiece requires
claving is complete, and the handpiece has returned to
clean air, and water that accumulates in the compressor must
room temperature, it needs to be lubricated again prior to
be removed daily. Refer to the handbook for details of how to
use.
empty the compressor.
Anaesthesia for
Airway security
dental procedures
During dental surgery, the airway must be secured by endo-
tracheal intubation to prevent aspiration pneumonia, which
may occur if debris such as irrigation fluid and blood from
General considerations
the oral cavity enters unprotected airways.
 Oral examination and all oral/dental procedures require gen-
Endotracheal tubes
eral anaesthesia. The procedures are often lengthy and close
Endotracheal tubes must be checked for defective cuffs and
anaesthesia for the patient undergoing dental or oral surgery
obstructed lumens before use. Any defective tubes should be
are as follows:
discarded. Lightweight circuits are recommended.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
26
Dentistry
To reduce apparatus dead space and the risk of endobronchial
Suction
intubation, the tubing should be cut to fit the patient from
mid neck to the level of the incisor teeth. Excessively long
It is recommended to have suction available to protect
tubes that protrude from the oral cavity are prone to kinking.
the airways from saliva, irrigation fluids and other debris if
which may lead to pulmonary oedema as the patient inspires
required. In addition, blood loss can also be estimated by
against an obstructed airway. The use of guarded endotra
measuring the volume of blood in the suction jar.
cheal tubes should be considered for patients at high risk of
tube kinking. Moreover, excessively long tubes are difficult to
secure to the jaw with gauze bandage, which increases the
Hypothermia
risk of accidental extubation. Knots should be tied around
the adaptor and not around the endotracheal tube itself. The
Hypothermia is a complication of lengthy anaesthesia and
cuff should be carefully inflated to a point where there
the use of cool irrigation fluids. Body temperature should be
is no air leaking around it. Be careful not to inflate the cuff
monitored regularly, e.g. every 20-30 min, and the develop-
excessively, as this can cause tracheal injury. The status of
ns a ad aa   ro n
the endotracheal tube and integrity of the cuff should be
external heat by blankets and warmed intravenous and irri-
  e    s
gation fluids. Patients should be insulated with towels or
the animal's position during surgery or while taking radio-
bubble pack to prevent thermal injuries due to ‘hot spots',
graphs and this may cause tube displacement and/or
which may occur with electrical heating mats. Circulating
kinking.
warm water mats may be safer.
Hyperthermia
Pharyngeal packing
Hyperthermia can occasionally occur in large, heavy-coated
Pharyngeal packing should be used for greater airway secu-
dogs connected to rebreathing circuits for long periods.
rity. Commonly used pharyngeal packs include surgical
By monitoring body temperature every 20-30 min, the
swabs, sponges and gauze bandage. A simple way to pack the
development of hyperthermia can be identified and active
pharynx is to insert a length of damp gauze bandage around
cooling by fans, cooling pads, etc., can be initiated before
the endotracheal tube, with the free end left visible for easy
damage occurs to vital organs.
          
impedes venous return and results in swelling of the tongue.
Packs will become saturated with liquid during procedures
Haemorrhage
and will then no longer offer adequate protection and should
be replaced as required. It is imperative to remove any
Periodontal and other dental treatment rarely results in ex
packing prior to extubation.
tensive haemorrhage unless the patient has an underlying
disorder, e.g. coagulopathy, septicaemia.
Eye protection
A full haematological examination and clotting profle should
-d n ad  n d d a
cedure, e.g. major oral surgery such as a maxillectomy. The
ing a lubricant eye ointment as required during the
patient should also be cross-matched with a healthy donor
procedure.
prior to any such procedure. An alternative to cross-matching
is autologous transfusion.
Mouth gags
During the procedure, blood loss should be estimated either
by weighing blood-soaked swabs or by measuring the amount
Mouth gags should be used with caution. Keeping the jaws
of blood collected in a suction jar. As a rough guide a satu-
wide open for prolonged periods may result in neuro-
rated 3 x 3 inch swab contains 7 ml of blood and a saturated
praxia and inability to close the jaws (Robins 1976).
4 x 4 inch swab contains 10 ml of blood.
The condition is self-limiting but may take several weeks
to resolve. Mouth gags should be released and the jaws
closed every 10-15 min. Keeping a record of how
Patient monitoring
long the mouth gag has been in place ensures that the
jaws are not inadvertently kept wide open for more than
All patients should be monitored continuously. Careful mon-
15 min.
itoring should enable the detection of problems before they
562
Dentistry
become severe, so that they can be treated appropriately and
 pack removed and the cuff of the endotracheal tube deflated
crises can be avoided. Continuous anaesthetic monitoring is
 before recovery is allowed to proceed. Use of the three-way
associated with reduced mortality (Dyson et al 1998). It is
 sn   a o (s a 
impossible to both monitor anaesthesia and perform the pro-
 for removing debris from the tongue and gums. A dry swab
cedure. Moreover, with some procedures a surgical assistant is
can be used to remove any large blood clots. Ensure that there
required. The surgical assistant needs to be a different person
is no debris in the oropharynx before removing the pharyn-
from the one monitoring the anaesthesia.
geal pack and deflating the cuff of the endotracheal tube. The
coat around the mouth and head should be cleaned and dried
Routine anaesthetic monitoring includes:
using a towel or hairdryer. The endotracheal tube is usually
not removed until the animal has a swallowing reflex.
● Inspecting respiratory function
Anaesthetic recovery should be monitored closely and
● Assessing the colour of the mucous membranes
recorded. It should always occur in a warm environment.
Animals that have had surgical procedures using flap tech-
● Checking capillary refill time
niques and suturing, e.g. open or surgical extractions or
2
oronasal fistula repair, must be prevented from pawing at
● Listening to the sound of breathing
their mouths or rubbing their faces. In some animals, an
 d s n  s a  o a
● Palpating the peripheral pulse.
resulted in blood in the nasal cavity, e.g. oronasal fistula
repair, it is wise to recover these patients in sternal recum-
All findings should be recorded on an anaesthetic chart at
bency with the head placed lower than the rest of the body
regular intervals, e.g. every 5 or 10 min, for the duration of
anaesthesia. Also record current oxygen, nitrous oxide (if
these patients on recovery.
used) and volatile agent level at each check. Any changes in
the anaesthetic regimen, e.g. altering flow rate or concen-
tration of volatile agent, should be recorded on the chart.
Immediate postoperative care
This basic monitoring can be augmented with mechanical
Optimal immediate postoperative management involves
aids, which give additional information and allow a more
appropriate analgesia and nursing. Sound nursing measures
precise picture of the patient's status. This allows closer
also have a profound impact on reducing the level of post-
control over the course of the anaesthetic. The disadvantage
operative discomfort and pain. Giving the animal attention
of mechanical monitoring devices is that they in turn must
at regular intervals helps reduce the distress associated with
be monitored to ensure that the information they are giving
pain and the unfamiliar environment, otherwise a cycle of
is accurate. Unexpected readings should be verified by exam
pain/distress/sleeplessness can develop.
ination of the patient before they are acted on, i.e. monitor
the patient, not the equipment.
The provision of a comfortable bed in a warm, but not too
hot, environment is beneficial. Food and water should be
offered as early as possible in the postoperative period. Pain
Anaesthetic recovery
and inflammation increase the basic metabolic rate and a
Anaesthesia should be lightened towards the end of the pro.
Offering food as early as possible not only speeds recovery
cedure. The oral cavity must be cleaned out, the pharyngeal
but can also have a soothing effect.
Oral examination and
Conscious examination
recording
Oral examination of a conscious animal is limited to visual
inspection and some digital palpation. Gentle technique is
Oral examination in a conscious animal will only give limited
essential. Examination involves assessing not only the oral
information. Definitive oral examination can only be per-
cavity but also palpation of:
formed under general anaesthesia. All detected abnormalities
should be recorded. It saves time if one person performs the
● Face - facial bones and zygomatic arch
examination and another individual takes the notes and
enters the findings on the dental record.
● Temporomandibular joint
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing  563
26
Dentistry
● Salivary glands - mandibular/sublingual; the parotids
1. Gingivitis and gingival index
are usually only palpable if enlarged
2. Periodontal probing depth (PPD)
● Lymph nodes - mandibular, cervical chain
3. Gingival recession
● Having looked at the entire face, the mouth is first
examined by gently holding the jaws closed and
4. Furcation involvement
retracting the lips (do not pull on the fur to retract
lips) to look at the soft tissues and buccal aspects of
5. Mobility
the teeth. This is the optimal time to evaluate
occlusion.
6. Periodontal (clinical) attachment level.
After evaluating the occlusion the animal is encouraged to
In animals with large accumulations of dental deposits
open its mouth. One method of achieving this in the dog is
(plaque and calculus) on the teeth, it may be necessary to
to place a thumb and finger on the margin of the alveolar
bone caudal to the canine teeth of the upper and lower jaw
on one side and with gentle pressure encouraging the animal
The purpose of the meticulous periodontal examination is to:
to open its jaws. Another method, useful for both dogs and
cats, is to approach the animal from the side, place one hand
● Identify the presence of periodontal disease, i.e.
over the muzzle and press the lips gently into the oral cavity
gingivitis and periodontitis
while tilting the head slightly upwards. A finger from the
other hand is placed on the lower incisors and gentle pressure
● Differentiate between gingivitis - inflammation of the
is exerted. Do not use the fur under the mandible to try to
gingiva - and periodontitis - inflammation of the
pull the jaw down. Most animals allow at least a cursory
periodontal tissues, resulting in loss of attachment and
inspection of the oral cavity once the jaws have been opened.
eventually tooth loss
The mucous membranes of the oral cavity should be exam-
ined as well as the teeth. Apart from colour and texture of the
● Identify the precise location of disease processes
mucous membranes, look for evidence of a potential bleeding
problem, e.g. petechiation, purpura, ecchymoses. In addition,
● Assess the extent of tissue destruction where there is
look for vesicle formation, ulceration, which could indicate
periodontitis.
a vesiculo-bullous disorder, e.g. pemphigus, pemphigoid.
Obvious pathology, e.g. tooth fracture, gingival recession,
Periodontal probing depth, gingival recession, furcation involve-
advanced furcation exposure relating to the teeth, can be
ment and mobility quantify the tissue destruction in peri
identified. Assess the oropharynx (soft palate, palatoglossal
odontitis. Radiography to visualize the extent and type of alveo
arch, tonsillary crypts, tonsils and fauces) if possible. It is
ar bone destruction is mandatory if clinical evidence of peri
    sd d  n on 
odontitis is found. In many cases, measuring or calculating the
endotracheal intubation prior to inducing anaesthesia
 periodontal or clinical attachment level (PAL/CAL) is also useful.
Examination under general
1. Gingivitis and gingival index
anaesthesia
The presence and degree of gingivitis (Fig. 26.9) is assessed
based on a combination of redness and swelling, as well as pres-
The oropharynx should be examined prior to endotracheal
ence or absence of bleeding on gentle probing of the gingival
intubation. Normal anatomical features of the oral cavity
sulcus. Various indices can be used to give a numerical value to
should be identified and inspected. Refreshing your memory
the degree of gingival inflammation present. In the clinical sit-
on these features from an anatomy textbook is highly recom
uation, a simple bleeding index is the most useful. Using this
malities can be identified.
sulcus at several locations around the whole circumference of
each tooth; and the tooth is given a score of 0 if there is no
The periodontium of each tooth needs to be assessed. Exam-
 bleeding and a score of 1 if the probing elicits bleeding.
ination of the periodontium is not routinely performed in
veterinary practice. It is essential to perform a thorough
2. Periodontal probing depth
periodontal examination in order to identify disease and
plan treatment. The following indices and criteria should be
The depth of the sulcus can be assessed by gently inserting a
evaluated for each tooth:
graduated periodontal probe until resistance is encountered
564
Dentistry
Fig.26.11 Gingival hyperplasia
26
Fig. 26.9 Gingivitis is inflammation of the gingiva, which manifests
as reddening, swelling and often bleeding of the gingivat margin
at the base of the sulcus. The depth from the free gingival
margin to the base of the sulcus is measured in millimetres at
several locations around the whole circumference of the
tooth (Fig. 26.10). The probe is moved gently horizontally,
walking along the floor of the sulcus. The gingival sulcus is
1-3 mm deep in the dog and 0.5-1 mm in the cat.
Measurements in excess of these values usually indicate the
presence of periodontitis: the periodontal ligament has been
destroyed and alveolar bone resorbed, thus allowing the
probe to be inserted to a greater depth. The term used to
describe this situation is periodontal pocketing. All sites with
periodontal pocketing should be accurately recorded.
Fig. 26.12 Gingival recession is measured from the cemento-enamel
Gingival inflammation resulting in swelling or hyperplasia of
junction to the free gingivat margin using a periodontat probe. In
the free gingiva (Fig. 26.1l) will, of course, also result in
this photograph of the upper incisors, the right second incisor has α
sulcus depths in excess of normal values. In these situations,
normat gingivat contour, while the right first incisor and the left first
the term pseudo-pocketing is used, as the periodontal ligament
and second incisor all have gingivat recession of varying degrees
and bone are intact, i.e. there is no evidence of periodontitis
and the increase in PPD is due to swelling or hyperplasia of
the gingiva.
3. Gingival recession
Gingival recession is also measured using a periodontal
probe (Fig. 26.12). It is the distance (in millimetres) from
the cemento-enamel junction to the free gingival margin.
At sites with gingival recession, PPD may be within
normal values despite loss of alveolar bone due to peri-
odontitis.
4. Furcation involvement
 Furcation involvement refers to the situation where the bone
between the roots of multirooted teeth is destroyed by peri-
odontitis (Fig. 26.13). The furcation sites of multirooted teeth
should be examined with a periodontal probe. The grading of
Fig. 26.10 Periodontat probing depth
furcation involvement is listed in Table 26.2.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 565
26
Dentistry
6. Periodontal/clinical attachment level
Periodontal probing depth is not necessarily correlated with
severity of attachment loss. As already mentioned, gingival
-od   d      s
pocket if there is no attachment loss, while gingival recession
may result in the absence of a pocket but also minimal
remaining attachment. Periodontal attachment level records
the distance from the cemento-enamel junction or from a
fixed point on the tooth to the base or apical extension of
the pathological pocket. It is thus a more accurate assess
ment of tissue loss in periodontitis. PAL is either directly
 measured with a periodontal probe or it is calculated, e.g.
PPD + gingival recession.
Fig. 26.13 Furcation invotvement. The feft maxillary second and
third premolars have grade 2 furcation involvement and the fourth
 premolar has α grade 1 tesion
Recording findings
The information resulting from the examination and any
treatment performed must be recorded. A basic dental record
Table 26.2 Grading of furcation involvement
consists of written notes and a completed dental chart.
Additional diagnostic tests and radiographs are included as
Grade 0
 No furcation involvement
indicated.
Grade 1
The furcation can be felt with the probe but horizontal
tissue destruction is less than one-third of the horizontal
A dental chart is a diagrammatic representation of the denti-
width of the furcation
tion, where information (findings and treatment) can be
Grade 2
It is possible to explore the furcation but the probe
entered in a pictorial and/or notational form. A dental chart
cannot be passed through it from buccal to
needs to be supplemented by clinical notes, radiographs, etc.,
palatal/lingual. Horizontal tissue destruction is more than
to make a complete dental record.
one-third of the horizontal width of the furcation
A copy of dog and cat dental record sheets used in our prac-
Grade 3
The probe can be passed through the furcation from
tice is depicted in Figure 26.14. The front is used to record
buccal to palatal/lingual
clinical findings and the back is used to enter diagnosis, draw
 d   n d  e 
nurse who performs the clinical examination completes the
front page. The veterinary surgeon checks the clinical
5. Tooth mobility
findings and interprets any radiographs taken, and then fills
The extent of tooth mobility should be assessed using a suit-
in the back page of the chart.
able instrument, e.g. the blunt end of the handle of a dental
mirror or probe. It should not be assessed using fingers
directly, since the yield of the soft tissues of the fingers will
Radiogr
1
mask the extent of tooth mobility. The grading of mobility is
listed in Table 26.3.
Radiography is a vital tool in veterinary dentistry. Patho-
logical radiographic changes are usually discrete and there-
fore clarity and detail are essential. For a dental radiograph
to be diagnostic, it should be an accurate representation
Table 26.3 Grading of tooth mobility
of the size and shape of the tooth without superimposition
Grade 0
No mobility
of adjacent structures. Intraoral radiographic techniques are
therefore required; a parallel technique for the mandibular
Grade 1
 Horizontal movement of 1 mm or less
premolars and molars, and a bisecting angle technique
Grade 2
Horizontal movement of more than 1 mm *
for all other teeth. (For intraoral radiographic techniques
Grade 3
Vertical as well as horizontal movement is possible
see Ch. 32.) Attending a practical course is strongly recom-
mended. while a trained nurse can take radiographs, the
*Note that multirooted teeth are scored more severely and a horizontal mobil-
interpretation of the films is the duty of the veterinary
ity in excess of 1 mm is usually considered a Grade 3 even in the absence of
vertical movement.
surgeon.
566
Dentistry
DENTAL RECORD: DOG
Client:
Date:.
Animal:
Clinician:
Comp no:
Student:
OCCLUSAL EVALUATION
EXTRAORAL FINDINGS
ORAL SOFT TISSUES
OTHER RELEVANT FEATURES
PLAQUE
RP/M
RI/MLI/M
LP/M
hcisor occlusion:.
Canine occlusion....
 Premolar alignment:.
Distal P/M occlusion.....
CALCULUS
Head symmetry:.
RP/M
RI/MLI/M
LP/M
hdividual teeth:.
Cther:.
Furcation
Furcation
Gingivitle
Gingivitle
Mobility
Mobility
RIGHT
M3
M2
M1
P4
P3
P2
P1
C
13
12111112
13
C
P1
P2
P3
P4
M1
M2
M3
LEFT
Y1
M
V
988866
AM
Buccal
Buccal
aspect
1
aspect
 Palatel 
 Palatel
aspect
aspect
The
Occlusel:
Occlusel:
e Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
buccal
buccal
 palatel
 palatel
Occlusel:
Occlusel:
lingual
lingual
buccal
buccal
Lingual 
Lingual
aspect
t
aspect
Buccal
Buccal
aspect
aspect
RIGHT
M3
M2
M1 
P4
P3
P2
P1
C
131211111213
CP1
P2
P3
P4
M1
M2
M3
LEFT
Mobilty
Mobility
Gingivitle
 Gingivitle
567
Furcation
Furcation
Fig. 26.14A Cat and dog dentat records.
26
ORAL PROBLEM LIST
THERAPEUTIC PLAN
568
ntistry
Dentistry
PERIODONTICS
ORAL SURGERY (Note sites on graph - X) 
Sonic scaling
Ultrasonic scaling
 Simple extraction(s):
 Subgingival curetage
 Periodontal debridement 
 Surgical extraction(s): .
Pumice-polishing
Air-polishing
Incisional biopsy
Excisional biopsy
Periodontal surgery.
 Cthericomments 
OTHER DENTAL PROCEDURES
COMPLICATIONS/COMMENTS
RIGHT
M3
M2
M1
P4
P3
P2
P3
P4
M1
M2
M3
LEFT
KKI
Buccal
M
98866
M
Buccal
aspect
aspect
Buccal
Buccal
aspect
7
aspect
RIGHTM3
M2
M1 
P4
F3
P2
131211111213
P1
2
P3
P4
M1
M2
M3
LEFT
Fig 26.14A Cont'd.
DENTAL RECORD: CAT
Client:
Date:...
 Animal:
Clinician:
Comp no:..
 Student:.
CCCLUSAL EVALUATION
EXTRAORAL FINDINGS
ORAL SOFT TISSUES
OTHER RELEVANT FEATURES
PLAQUE
RP/M
RVMLI/M
LP/M
Incisor occlusion:.
Canine occlusion:.
Premolar alignment:.
Distal P/M occlusion...
CALCULUS
Head symmetry..
RP/MRVMLI/MLP/M
 Individual teth:.
Cther...
F.O.R.L.
FO.R.L.
 Furcation
Furcation
 Gingivitle
Gingivitle
Mobility
Mobility
RIGHT
M1
P4
P3
P2
C
13
12
1
11
12
13
C
P2
P3
P4
M1 
LEFT
Buccal
Buccal
aspect
7
aspect
 Palatel
7
0
0
0
D
Palatel
aspect
aspect
The
Occlusel:
Occlusel:
buccal
O
G
O
G
buccal
Complete
palatel
 palatel
Occlusel:
Occlusel:
lingual
G
D
G
lingual
buccal
buccal 
Textbook of
 Lingual 
L
Lingual
aspect
aspect
7
Buccal 
fVeterinary
Buccal
aspect
W
aspect
了
RIGHT
M1
P4
P3
C
13
12
1
1
12
3
C
P3
P4
M1 
LEFT
Nursing
Mobility
Mobility
 Gingivitle
 Gingivitle
Furcation
 Furcation
F.O.R.L.
FO.R.L.
569
Fig 26.14B Contd.
26
ORAL PROBLEM LIST
THERAPEUTIC PLAN
570
ntistry
Dentistry
PERIODONTICS
CRAL SURGERY (Note sites on graph- X)
 Sonic scaling
Uitrasonic scaling
 Simple extraction(s): 
Subgingival curettage
Periodontal debridement
 Surgical extraction(s): .
 Pumice-polishing
Air-polishing
Incisional biopsy
 Excisional biopsy
 Periodontal surgery.
Other/comments
OTHER DENTAL PROCEDURES
COMPLICATIONS/COMMENTS
RIGHT
M1
P4
C
13
13
C
P2
P3
P4
M1
LEFT
m
M
Buccal
Buccal
aspect
2
aspect
Buccal
W
Buccal
aspect
W
aspect
RIGHT
M1
P4
P3
2
P3
P4
M1
LEFT
Fig 26.14B Cont'd.
Periodontal therapy
The management of periodontal disease is aimed at con-
trolling the cause of the inflammation, i.e. dental plaque.
Conservative or cause-related periodontal therapy consists of
removal of plaque and calculus, and any other remedial pro
cedures required, under general anaesthesia, in combination
with daily maintenance of oral hygiene. In other words, the
treatment of periodontal disease has two components:
● Professional periodontal therapy
● Maintenance of oral hygiene.
Fig. 26.15 Clinically heatthy gingivae. This is the term used to
 Professional periodontal therapy is performed under general
describe gingiva that shows no ctinicat evidence of infammation.
anaesthesia and includes:
St ubou poabuh ai butpaang to bunams huappat ou st arat
firmty adapted to the tooth surface
● Supra- and subgingival scaling
● Root planing
dental deposits, mainly calculus {which is not removed by
tooth-brushing). Once the teeth have been cleaned it remains
●Tooth crown polishing
up to the owner to remove the plaque that reaccumulates on
a daily basis.
● Subgingival lavage.
is often called home care. Its effectiveness depends on the
Periodontitis
 motivation and technical ability of the owner and the coop-
eration of the animal. If no home care is instituted, then
Untreated gingivitis may progress to periodontitis. Periodon-
plaque will rapidly reform after a professional periodontal
titis is irreversible. It is important to remember that periodon-
therapy procedure and the disease will progress. Before any
titis is a site-specific disease, i.e. it may affect one or more
treatment is instituted, the owner must be made aware that
sites of one or several teeth (Fig. 26.16). The aim of treatment
home care is the most essential component in both prevent-
is to prevent development of new lesions at other sites and to
ing and treating periodontal disease. Whenever possible, it is
prevent further tissue destruction at sites that are already
affected.
sional periodontal therapy is performed. The veterinary nurse
Professional periodontal therapy removes dental deposits
home care.
above and below the gingival margin. It then rests with the
 owner to ensure that plaque does not reaccumulate. Meticul-
The aim of treatment differs whether the patient has gingivi-
ous supragingival plaque control, by means of daily tooth
tis only or if there is also periodontitis.
brushing and adjunctive antiseptics when indicated, will pre-
vent migration of the plaque below the gingival margin. If
the subgingival tooth surfaces are kept clean, the sulcular
Gingivitis
epithelium will reattach
Gingivitis is by definition reversible (Fig. 26.9). Removal or
adequate reduction of plaque will restore inflamed gingivae
to health. Once clinically healthy gingivae have been achieved
these can be maintained by daily removal or reduction of the
Professional periodontal therapy
is to restore the inflamed tissues to clinical health and then
Professional periodontal therapy must be performed under
 to maintain clinically healthy gingivae, thus preventing
 general anaesthesia. To master the technical skills required
periodontitis (Fig. 26.15). The purpose of the professional
for dentistry and oral surgery, attending practical courses is
   s  n  
recommended.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  571
26
Dentistry
Fig. 26.17 Removing gross supragingival dental deposits with
extraction forceps. Avoid traumatizing the gingivat margin with the
forceps
2. Remove residual supragingival dental deposits with
sharp hand instruments, either a sickle-shaped scaler
or a curette, as shown in Figure 26.18
3. A mechanical scaler, either ultrasonic or sonic, is then
used to remove residual dental deposits (Fig. 26.19).
Fig. 26.16 Periodontitis. It is important to remember that peri-
Mechanical scalers generate heat and have the potential to
odontitis is a site-specific disease. Depicted is a fower first molar
cause iatrogenic damage if not used properly. Overheating a
with periodontitis (destruction of periodontat figament, bone foss
tooth will cause desiccation of the dentine and consequent
and gingivat recession) affecting the buccat surface of the distat
 damage to the underlying pulp tissue. Pulp damage may be a
root. The rest of the tooth shows no evidence of periodontitis
reversible pulpitis but it can become severe enough to cause
(normat PPD and no gingivat recession)
pulp necrosis, which would necessitate extraction or
endodontic treatment of the affected tooth.
An ultrasonic or sonic scaler should be used by gently
stroking the tooth with the side of the tip and with continu-
Supragingival scaling
ous movement over the tooth surface. A plentiful supply of
water is essential to cool the oscillating tip and flush away
Supragingival scaling is the removal of plaque and calculus
debris. Using the tip of the instrument or applying excessive
above the gingival margin. It can be performed using hand
pressure will cause gouging of the tooth surface as well as
instruments alone or a combination of hand instruments and
generating excessive heat. As ann arbitrary rule, it is suggested
mechanical scalers.
that no more than 15 s of continuous scaling should be per-
formed on any one tooth. If the tooth is not clean in that
The recommended procedure is as follows:
period of time, then return to it after scaling a few other
teeth. This will allow the original tooth time to cool down.
1. Remove gross dental deposits - plaque-covered
calculus - using rongeurs, extraction forceps or
Both sonic and ultrasonic scalers should be used with an
calculus-removing forceps (Fig. 26.17)
insert that has a thin, pointed tip, sometimes called a perio,
572
Dentistry
26
scater
duces a smooth root surface that is less likely to accumulate
plaque and more likely to permit epithelial reattachment.
Excessive root planing may damage the root surface (expose
root dentine to the periodontal ligament) and predispose to
further periodontal destruction. So, while a clean and smooth
root surface should be obtained; overzealous root planing
Fig. 26.18 Removing residuat dental deposits with hand instru-
should be avoided.
 ments. Here a universat scater is being used to remove catcutus
Scaling and planing are achieved simultaneously using a
curette. The procedure can be performed using either a closed
sickle or universal insert. An insert with a large (wide) tip is
(without raising an access flap) or open (raising an access flap)
not recommended. A fine tip will remove dental deposits
technique. An open technique is recommended for pockets
more accurately, with less likelihood of damage to the tooth
deeper than 4 mm as it is difficult even for a skilled operator
enamel.
to ensure that all subgingival deposits have been removed
without raising a gingival flap for direct access and visualiza-
tion. However, an open technique is only indicated in pa-
Subgingival scaling and root planing
tients with proven sufficient home care, i.e. it is not first-line
treatment. The open technique is not a routine hygiene
Subgingival scaling is the removal of plaque, calculus and
procedure. It is classifed as periodontal surgery and should
other debris from the tooth surface below the gingival
 d      d 
margin, i.e. within the gingival sulcus or periodontal pocket.
veterinary dentistry.
There is no need to perform extensive subgingival scaling if
there is no calculus below the gingival margin. However, the
Ultrasonic and sonic scalers are designed for supragingival
presence of subgingival deposits should always be investi-
 work. Once inserted into the gingival sulcus or pathological
gated with a dental explorer and if any are identified they
pocket, the water will no longer reach to cool the tip. The
should be removed.
result is thermal damage of both hard and soft tissues. Quick
subgingival excursions are permissible only if the gingiva is
Root planing is the removal of the superficial layer of toxin-
oedematous, or held mechanically out of the way to allow
laden cementum from the root surfaces. Root planing pro-
the water to reach the tip. Scalers with specially designed
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 573
26
Dentistry
Fig. 26.20 Procedure for closed subgingival debridement. (a) The
curette is inserted to the bottom of the gingivat sufcus or pocket.
(b) The cutting edges of the curette are engaged by turning the
handle of the instrument, against the root surface and putled out of
the sutcus or pocket in this position. The instrument is worked in
this way around the whole circumference of the tooth, using
overfapping strokes. Mainty verticat, but atso obtique and horizontat
strokes are used.
working tips where the water exits at the very end are safer to
use under the gingival margin, but the removal of established
subgingival deposits can only be adequately performed with
meticulous use of sharp curettes.
The procedure for closed subgingival debridement is shown
in Figure 26.20. It is often a lengthy procedure. It must be
Fig. 26.21 Footh crown potishing with a prophylaxis cup in a stow-
emphasized that removing subgingival plaque, calculus and
speed handpiece
debris as well as the superficial layer of toxin-laden cemen-
tum and restoring the root surfaces to smoothness is a most
important step. Removing only the supragingival debris at
applied to the tooth surface, using light force. If a rubber cup
a periodontitis site does not have any therapeutic benefit.
is used, the force should be just enough to cause the cup to
It will not prevent disease progression, as the cause of the
flare out on the tooth surface. The prophylaxis cup is kept
disease - subgingival plaque - is still present.
moving over the entire tooth surface for a few seconds per
tooth. The flared edge of the prophylaxis cup can be used to
Polishing
polish slightly subgingivally, taking care to avoid causing any
further gingival damage. It is useful to check that all tooth
Scaling, even when done correctly, will cause minor scratches
surfaces are clean by using a plaque-disclosing solution after
of the tooth. A rough surface will facilitate plaque retention.
polishing. Any residual plaque is thus visualized and can be
Polishing smoothes this roughness and helps remove any
removed with further polishing.
remaining plaque and stained pellicle.
Sulcular lavage
Polishing is performed by applying a mildly abrasive pro-
phylaxis paste to the tooth surface with a prophylaxis cup/
Sulcular lavage involves gently flushing the gingival sulcus
and pathological pockets with saline or dilute chlorhexidine
(Fig. 26.21). The handpiece should be running at less than
to remove any free-floating debris. This step is particularly
1000 rpm to avoid generating excessive heat by friction. The
amount of heat that can easily result from incorrect polishing
debris may occlude the orifice of the pocket and lead to the
can cause severe pulpal pathology. A surplus of paste is
formation of a lateral periodontal abscess.
574
Dentistry
Maintenance
oral
life as possible. Adult cats are generally less amenable to the
introduction of tooth-brushing than adult dogs, but with
care
patience and persistence, many will accept some degree of
home care. In contrast, kittens often accept tooth-brushing
more readily than puppies.
The benefit of any professional periodontal therapy is short-
lived unless maintained by effective home care. In fact, if no
home care is instituted after professional periodontal therapy,
then plaque will rapidly reform and disease will progress. It
Bibliography
has been shown that 3 months after periodontal therapy, gin-
Ad oi d  as ln ti are sos 
Dyson D H, Maxie M G, Schnurr D 1998 Morbidity and mortality
if no home care is instituted (Gorrel & Bierer 1999).
associated with anaesthetic management in small animal veteri-
nary practice in Ontario. fournal of the American Animal Hospitat
The cause (dental plaque) and effects (discomfort, pain,
Association 34: 461-471
chronic focus of infection, loss of teeth and possibility of sys-
26
temic complications) of periodontal disease must be thor-
Gorrel C, Bierer T 1999 Long term effects of a dental hygiene chew
oughly explained to the pet owner. The owner must be made
on the periodontal heatth of dogs. Journat of Veterinary Dentistry
aware that home care is the most essential component in
16: 109-113
both preventing and treating periodontal disease. The
responsibility of maintaining oral hygiene, i.e. keeping
Gorrel C, Rawlings I M 1996 The role of tooth brushing and diet
plaque accumulation to a level compatible with periodontal
in the maintenance of periodontal health in dogs. Journal of
health rests with the owner of the pet. Once instituted, home
Veterinary Dentistry 13: 139-143
care regimens need continuous monitoring and reinforce.
ment.
Lindhe J, Hamp S-E, Loe H 1975 Plaque induced periodontal
disease in Beagle dogs. A 4 year clinicat, roentgenographical and
The veterinary nurse can play a vital role in educating clients,
histometrical shudy. Joumal of Periodontal Research 10: 243-255
checking compliance and reinforcing the need for home care.
 It is strongly recommended that the trained veterinary nurse
Robins G N 1976 Dropped jaw - mandibular neurapraxia in the
takes on the responsibility of educating and training pet
dog. Journal of Small Animal Practice 17: 753
-d n s   a sdo d o so
tive care clinics.
Tromp IA, van Rijn L J, Jansen J 1986 Experimentat gingivitis and
frequency of tooth-brushing in the Beagle dog model. Clinical
Tooth brushing is known to be the single most effec
findings. Journal of Clinical Periodontology 13: 190-194
tive means of removing plaque - studies have shown
S       
(Tromp et al 1986) and naturally occurring gingivitis (Gorrel
& Rawlings 1996), daily tooth-brushing is effective in return-
ing the gingivae to health. In a 4-year study using the beagle
Recommended reading
dog (Lindhe et al 1975) it was shown that with no oral
hygiene plaque accumulated rapidly along the gingival
Gorrel C 2004 Veterinary dentistry for the general practitioner.
margin, with gingivitis developing within a few weeks. Dogs
W B Saunders, Edinburgh
that were fed an identical diet under identical conditions but
were subjected to daily tooth-brushing developed no clinical
Gorrel C, Derbyshire S 2005 Veterinary dentistry for the nurse and
signs of gingivitis. In the group that were not receiving daily
technician. Butterworth-Heinemann, Edinburgh
tooth-brushing, gingivitis progressed to periodontitis in most
individuals.
Hotmsirom S E 1999 Veterinary dentisiry for the technician and
office staff, W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA
Tooth brushing is the gold standard for plaque
control - every effort should be made to get every pet owner
AspinallV2003 Clinicalproceduresinveterinarynursing.
to commit to brushing their pet's teeth on a daily basis. The
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
success of tooth-brushing depends on pet cooperation and
owner motivation and technical ability. Tooth-brushing
Within fhe chapter on Surgical Nursing Procedures fhere is a
should be introduced gradually and as early in the animal's
step-by-step guide to scaling and polishing teeth.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  575
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
27
Principles of anaesthesia
and analqesia
Michael Stevenson
Key Points
● A pre-anaesthetic assessment should be made of all
● Anaesthesia is most commonly maintained by volatile
patients and should consist of an accurate history. a
liquids, which evaporate at room temperature to form a
 physical examination and a blood test.
 gas that is inhaled.
● Premedication is administered to achieve a smooth
● Inhalation agents are administered to the patient by a
induction and to enable the patient to be handled more
range of anaesthetic circuits selected according to the
easily.
properties of the drug and the characteristics of the
● Anaesthesia can be seen to consist of two stages -
individual patient.
induction and maintenance.
● All stages of an anaesthetic must be rigorously
● Induction is usually achieved by the administration of
monitored to minimize the risks of anaesthesia and
increase the patient's chances of recovery.
injectable agents by the intravenous or intramuscular
routes.
Introduction
Anaesthesia may be used for two main reasons:
● To perform a surgical procedure
Anaesthesia is described as the reversible production of insensi-
bility to pain. Pain is the conscious perception of a noxious stim-
● To restrain the patient for a diagnostic procedure
ulus. These definitions allow us to subdivide anaesthesia into:
All anaesthesia carries with it a considerable risk to the
● Hypnosis - reversible unconsciousness: the sleep
patient, so prior to the procedure a cost-benefit assessment
induced by anaesthetic drugs
should be carried out by veterinary staff and this should be
discussed with the client before inducing the anaesthetic. In
● Analgesia - the reduction or abolition of the
a recent study, anaesthetic death rates were 1 in 2055 for
perception of pain
dogs and 1 in 736 in cats. In humans, the anaesthetir death
  1      1 i 
● Muscle relaxation - flaccid paralysis of the skeletal
improves, these rates should drop.
muscles, which facilitates surgery and which tends to
increase with dose of the anaesthetic agent. This is
The veterinary nurse's role in the anaesthetic process is vital.
drug-specific: e.g. ketamine causes no relaxation.
The nurse will assess the animal preoperatively, administer
Neuromuscular blocking agents that cause complete
 any premedication, assist with induction and intubation and
muscular relaxation are not anaesthetic agents, as they
monitor the patient for the duration of the anaesthetic.
do not affect consciousness.
Recovery is usually entirely the responsibility of the nurse, so
a deep and firm understanding of the techniques, the drugs
The anaesthetist's aim is to achieve all the above without
used and the consequences of anaesthesia is essential. In
endangering the patient or the personnel administering the
order to understand this most technically demanding area
anaesthetic. The current methods available achieve this by
of nursing, the nurse must have a good understanding of
careful choice of a variety of drugs in order to reduce the side
anatomy, physiology and the pathological conditions that
effects of each.
can influence anaesthesia.
Pre-anaesthetic
the factors likely to affect the anaesthetic. Animals can be
loosely divided into four risk groups:
assessment
● Normal healthy animals for routine
procedures, e.g. neutering - most likely to be
This is usually performed by the veterinary surgeon prior to
admitted by a nurse and may not be seen by a vet. A
admission for a procedure but the nurse should be aware of
full pre-anaesthetic examination should be carried out
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
and should include a detailed history and a physical
Owner preparation
examination. The nurse should watch out for any
conditions requiring further investigation; for
The owner should be asked to starve the patient for 12 h prior
example, polydipsia may require blood tests and urine
to admission in order to ensure an empty stomach.
samples
This will reduce the risk of reflux of stomach contents into
the mouth and possible aspiration into the lungs, which can
● Healthy animals admitted for diagnostic
cause respiratory obstruction or even pneumonia. Starvation
procedures - these may be quite well but have an
may be undesirable in some cases; for example, neonates may
underlying medical condition, e.g. metabolic or
become hypoglycaemic if starved.
cardiovascular disease. The vet will take this into
consideration when preparing the anaesthetic
Also check with the owner that:
● Sick animals - these have an increased anaesthetic
● They know why the animal is coming in and the
risk and require increased care, increased supportive
associated risks of the anaesthetic
therapy and increased preparation, e.g. blood tests
electrocardiogram (ECG), urine sample
● A consent form has been signed
● Emergency cases - there is often little time for a full
● Contact details been left with the practice.
pre-anaesthetic assessment but maximum support and
monitoring are essential.
Physical examination
The following factors are significant:
Taking the history
● Temperature - 38.5°C. If pyrexia is present the
The following are significant factors:
animal may be toxaemic, the cardiovascular system
may be compromised and oxygen consumption will be
● Age - neonates and geriatrics may require different
raised. Hypothermia reduces anaesthetic drug
anaesthetic drugs from adult animals as they have
requirements
different metabolisms
● Pulse rate - 80-120 in dogs and 120-180 in cats.
● Weight - every animal should be weighed to enable
Check quality - weak pulse may indicate cardiac
doses of anaesthetic agents and fluid therapy
problems or hypovolaemia. Does pulse rate correspond
requirement to be calculated accurately. If an animal is
to heart rate?
underweight for its breed it may indicate metabolic
problems, e.g. hyperthyroidism. Obesity may increase
● Respiratory rate - 8-12 bpm. Tachypnoea, e.g. more
the anaesthetic risk by reducing respiratory capacity
than 20-30 bpm may be due to reduced lung volume,
e.g. pleural fluid or thoracic mass; anaemia; pulmonary
● Sex - male animals tend to be more aggressive and
cedema; chronic pulmonary disease; or pain. These
have a lower percentage of body fat. Female animals
may result in reduced oxygen transportation and
may have sex-related conditions, e.g. pyometritis
uptake of volatile anaesthetic gas
● Breed - this is particularly significant in dogs, with
● Colour of mucous membranes - may be:
their huge range of shapes and sizes. For example,
boxers have an increased susceptibility to
acetylpromazine; greyhounds/sighthounds are prone
to poor redistribution of thiobarbiturates;
● Red - polycythaemia: too many red blood cells
brachycephalic breeds are adapted to chronic hypoxia
and inspiratory stridor
● Purple - cyanosis: reduced oxygen tension in blood
● Previous medical problems - may be on
● Dirty pink - toxaemia
medication, e.g. non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), which affect renal blood flow and clotting;
● Ecchymotic haemorrhages - clotting disorder,
cardiovascular drugs; insulin - patient may require
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
glucose saline drip; polydipsia may indicate many
underlying medical conditions.
● Grey - circulatory collapse.
578 Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
● Heart auscultation - check the rate and rhythm
● Creatinine - raised in cases of severe renal disease or
and listen for murmurs, which may indicate valvular
dehydration
disease. If the heart rate and the pulse rate are
different, this indicates an electrical problem with the
● Glucose - raised in diabetes mellitus and in 'stressed'
heart and a pre-anaesthetic ECG is required
cats but reduced in insulinomas, some liver tumours
and starved neonates.
● Lung auscultation - rasping, wheezing or crackling
sounds may indicate pulmonary disease or oedema;
● Total protein - raised values may be due to
hyporesonance may indicate fluid build up in chest
dehydration or high globulin levels; reduced in protein
cavity or solid masses; hyperresonance may indicate
losing diseases or severe liver disease.
pneumothorax
● Hydration status - check for skin turgor and texture
of mucous membranes. Any pre-existing dehydration
Biochemical tests can be helpful but three other tests should
should be corrected prior to anaesthesia
be performed to provide a guide to diagnosis along with the
clinical signs:
● Mentation - evidence of normal central nervous
system (CNS) function. Reduced CNS function can
dramatically alter the anaesthetic requirements and
● Packed cell volume (PCV) - raised levels indicate
may be due to brain tumours, hypothyroidism,
dehydration; lowered levels indicate anaemia.
reduced brain perfusion or toxaemia. Increased
2
mentation may be due to hyperthyroidism, aggression
● Urine specific gravity - using a refractometer. This
or panic and will increase requirements.
will show if an animal is drinking excessively, well
before renal disease is indicated by raised creatinine
A happy, active and calm dog is a better anaesthetic risk than
 levels. If an animal with renal insufficiency undergoes
either a dull, lethargic one or a nervous one.
prolonged hypotension due to an anaesthetic this may
 precipitate renal failure
Pre-anaesthetic blood tests
● Urinalysis by dipstick examination - covers a
range of parameters that will reinforce the other test
d   s   s  si  s
results.
ical examination then further tests should be carried out. It is
very common to offer a standard pre-anaesthetic blood test,
which consists of six biochemical tests:
● Alanine amino transferase (ALT) - raised values
indicate acute hepatic cell damage
Summary
● Alkaline phosphatase (ALKP) - raised values
 A full history has been taken and the patient has had a phy-
indicate biliary stasis but can also indicate intestinal or
sical examination. Food and water have been withheld prior
bone disease or raised steroid levels in the body
to admission. A consent form has been completed and the
 owner's contact details have been taken. Appropriate pre-
● Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) - raised in cases of
anaesthetic tests have been performed and the animal has
advanced renal disease, dehydration, high protein
been admitted to a warm, calm environment. Now the anaes-
meals or intestinal haemorrhage
thetic process can begin.
Premedication
(epinephrine). A fractious cat scruffed and held flat on a table
for intravenous induction will be tachycardic, probably
The use of premedicant drugs can be reduced by a calm, reas-
hypoxic and have high levels of circulating adrenaline
suring environment. A happy, relaxed dog given reassurance
leading to the risk of cardiac arrhythmias and possible cardiac
by a caring veterinary nurse will gladly present its cephalic
arrest when a bolus of a cardiodepressant induction agent
vein for catheterization without a large release of adrenaline
hits its myocardium.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  579
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
The aim of premedication is to:
Table 27.2 Effects of acetylpromazine
Advantages
Disadvantages
● Calm the animal allowing for a smooth induction
using a small dose of induction agent
Synergizes with opiates
Hypotension due to vasodilation -
Anti-arrhythmic in sensitized
can cause severe problems in
● Enable easy handling of the animal by the veterinary
myocardium
hypovolaemic or hypotensive
staff.
Anti-emetic
animals leading to cardiovascular
Anti-histamine (useful in
collapse
The drugs used may continue to exert an effert during and
mast cell tumout surgery)
Unpredictable - stimulated animals
after anaesthesia, resulting in a calm induction and mainte-
Spasmolytic
can fight against its effects
nance period, reduced levels of anaesthetic agents, an
Long acting which smoothes
Long lasting - day cases may be
uneventful recovery and intra- and postoperative analgesia.
recovery
still sedated when sent home
No one drug is able to achieve all these things, so mixtures of
Hypothermia - reduces
different drugs are used.
thermoregulation and cutaneous
vasodilation
Chemical restraint using sedatives rarely comes without side
Breed sensitivity - boxers are very
effects and it is a commonly held misconception that using a
sensitive to the effects
sedative to perform a minor procedure holds fewer risks than
a using a general anaesthetic. During the latter you have
intravenous access, a direct supply of 100% oxygen, the
Sedatives
ability to intubate and also close veterinary nurse monitor-
ing. By contrast, when a sedative is given, the animal is often
These drugs calm the animal, improve induction and recov.
left in its kennel while the drugs take effect and monitoring
ery and reduce the quantity of anaesthetic agent required.
is, at best, intermittent. During this period it may experience
They include the phenothiazines, butyrophenones, benzodi-
cardiovascular collapse, dyspnoea, regurgitation, etc. Thus a
azepines and alpha-2 agonists.
premedicant sedative should really be regarded as the initial
phase of the anaesthetic monitoring period and maximum
Phenothiazines
care should be taken.
 Anxiolytic sedatives. This group includes acetylpromazine,
Each premedication must be tailored to the individual animal
chlorpromazine, promethazine and methotrimeprazine.
and based not only on body mass but also on the variables pre-
viously discussed. Routine premedication tends to follow indi
● Acetylpromazine (AcP) - the most common. It is a
vidual practice protocols and is often reserved for routine surgi-
yellow solution at a concentration of 2 mg/ml for
cal cases. Table 27.1 suggests some useful drug combinations.
small animal use. It can be given subcutaneously (s.c.),
intramuscularly (i.m.) or intravenously (i.v.) in order of
Drugs used for premedication are sedatives and analgesics.
increasing speed of action. Its effects are shown in
The ideal combination should have few side effects, be pre-
Table 27.2.
dictable, fast acting and safe and be easy to administer, i.e.
Efficacy:
work well if given subcutaneously.
● 65% are sedated
Table 27.1 Standard neuroleptanalgesic doses
● 30% are very sedated
Drug
Canine dose rate
Feline dose rate
● 5% are not sedated or may be stimulated.
Acetylpromazine plus
0.03-0.05 mg/kg
0.03-0.05 mg/kg ACP
buprenorphine
ACP plus 0.01 mg/kg
plus 0.01 mg/kg
 ACP is safe to use in normal animals because increasing the
buprenorphine
buprenorphine
dose increases the duration of the effect rather than increas
Acetylpromazine plus
0.03-0.05 mg/kg
0.03-0.05 mg/kg ACP
ing the effect; in high doses it produces a cataleptic state.
 pethidine
ACP plus 2-4 mg/kg
plus 2 mg/kg
pethidine
pethidine
Butyrophenones
Acetylpromazine plus
0.03 mg/kg ACP
0.03 mg/kg ACP plus
morphine
plus 0.3 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg morphine
Similar to phenothiazines. The one most frequently used in
morphine
practice is fluanisone as part of a commercial mixture with
ACP, acetylpromazine.
fentanyl.
580
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Table 27.3 Effects of alpha-2 agonists
Benzodiazepines
Body system
Effect
The main benzodiazepines used are diazepam and midazo-
lam. This class of drug is widely used and abused in human
Central nervous system
Profound sedation dependent on dose
practice but its use is increasing in small animal anaesthesia.
Excellent visceral analgesia
 Moderate somatic analgesia
Benzodiazepines are anxiolytic, hypnotic, muscle-relaxant and
Cardiovascular system
 Profound bradycardia and
anticonvulsant. In healthy animals they cause little sedation
bradyarrhythmias
but reduce inhibitions, which makes the animal less easy to
Very reduced respiratory rate
control! In sick animals the sedative effect is much greater and
Peripheral vasoconstriction, which causes
the cardiovascular side effects are minimal, providing safe pre-
initial hypertension, followed by
medication or sedation even in severely compromised animals.
peripheral vasodilation with marked
They are useful in reducing the dose of anaesthetic required.
hypotension and hypothermia
There is a specific antagonist, flumazenil, which may be used
Gastrointestinal system 
 Initial emesis
  r r s    a  p i r
Intestinal relaxation
Uterus
Ecbolic, may cause abortion
● Diazepam - available in two preparations - an
oil-based form given i.v. or i.m., which may cause
Kidney
Inhibition of ADH causes diuresis
some phlebitis and pain on injection, and a milky
Hyperglycaemia may also cause glycosuria
white emulsion given i.v. only, which is less irritant
2
● Midazolam - water-soluble, given by i.v. or i.m
injection. This is more potent than diazepam but lasts
reverse the sedation, recovery occurs in 5-10 min after i.m
half as long.
injection and day cases can be returned to their owners
 straight away. However, although the animal appears awake
Alpha-2 agonists
and ambulant the cardiovascular effects are still present and
sedation may reoccur. The owner should be warned and
These drugs - xylazine, medetomidine - have had a huge
advised that the animal should be kept warm and under
impact on veterinary anaesthesia because of their predictabil-
observation. (Note The bradycardia seen with alpha-2 ago-
ity and reversibility. They act on the alpha-2 noradrenaline
nists should not be reversed with atropine. This will increase
(norepinephrine) and adrenaline (epinephrine) receptors cen-
the initial hypertension, potentially causing ocular or CNS
trally and peripherally and have many effects (Table 27.3).
damage.)
They are very powerful sedatives, capable of producing states
very close to general anaesthesia. As premedicants they reduce
the amount of induction and maintenance agents required.
Ics
They can be given s.c., i.m., i.v. and orally.
These are used in a premedicant combination to synergize with
There is a specific antagonist - atipamezole. One of the
the sedatives, increase the depth of sedation and provide a base
main benefits of alpha-2 agonists is that you can easily
line of intraoperative analgesia. Premedication with a sedative
Table 27.4 Drug groups used for pre-emptive and balanced analgesia
Sites at which pain stimuli act and the response
Drugs used to reduce pain
Site of action
produced
Cerebral cortex - conscious perception of pain leads
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs/glucocorticoids
Peripherally (some central
to vocalization, aggression, etc.
Local anaesthetics
effects)
Peripherally
Hypothalamus - induces fear, flight response, i.e.
Benzodiazepines
Spinal cord
Taised heart rate, raised blood pressure, etc.
Alpha-2 agonists
Spinal cord/central nervous
system
Medulla - raised heart rate, blood pressure and
Opioids
Spinal cord/central nervous
Tespiratory rate
system
Spinal cord - withdrawal reflex
 General anaesthetics
Central nervous system
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
 combined with an opioid is termed neuroleptanalgesia. The
Blocking the pain impulses at several sites using different
degree of sedation achieved is much greater than with either a
 drugs is termed balanced analgesia. Using these drugs prior to
sedative or opioid alone. Ideally, the mixture should be com-
the noxious stimulus being applied is termed pre-emptive
bined with a preoperative dose of an NSAID if the animal is a
anaigesia and this method is believed to increase the
suitable candidate for this class of drug.
 analgesic's efficacy.
Analgesics and their provision will be covered in this section
as well as their use for premedication. Veterinary nurses
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs/glucocorticoids
as they are the ones who will be monitoring the anaesthetic
and postanaesthetic period and will be the primary assessor
These reduce peripheral inflammation and some also have
of pain in their patients.
CNS effects. Inflammation of a tissue results in vasodilation,
oedema and heat at the site, which are due to the release
Pain is a protective reflex, as it is part of the ‘fight or flight'
of cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase. NSAIDs block cyclo-
reflex. Pain is the conscious perception of a noxious stimulus,
oxygenase and glucocorticoids block cyclooxygenase and
S0 upper CNS function is involved. Pain is also subjective, so
lipoxygenase. If these drugs are given preoperatively before
   h        
inflammation develops they have a much greater effect.
able to another. Animals cannot understand why they are in
Commonly used NSAIDs include carprofen, meloxicam,
pain and do not have the capacity to understand that the
tepoxalin, tolfenamic acid, aspirin and phenylbutazone
pain will go away, so adequate provision of analgesia in
(Table 27.5).
animals is important at a physiological and emotional level.
Side effects of NSAIDs can be a problem in some animals so
Nociception is perhaps just as important to the anaesthetist.
care should always be taken. In the kidney they block prosta-
 This is the unconscious perception of pain by receptors classed
glandin production and compromise renal blood flow so in
as nociceptors, e.g. chemoreceptors and baroreceptors. Their
patients with hypotension they can cause renal ischaemia.
stimulation may result in reflex activity such as altered blood
This can be more of a problem in animals with pre existing or
pressure, increased respiratory rate, increased heart rate and
subclinical renal disease.
withdrawal of part of the body from a painful stimulus
which may ultimately change the physiology of the patient
NSAIDs, especially the older formulations, may also cause
(Table 27.4). Thus the prevention of pain and nociception are
gastrointestinal ulceration and increase the clotting time.
 extremely important prior to, during and after an anaesthetic
Most remain active for some time and provide adequate
and analgesia can be provided by acting at one or more of
analgesia once the patient has gone home. This can be pro-
these sites.
longed by continued administration of tablets by the owner.
Table 27.5 Dose rates of commonly used NSAIDs
Drug
Canine dose
Feline dose
Comments
Aspirin
10-20 mg/kg p.0. t.i.d.
10 mg/kg p.0. e.0.d.
Gastric irritant
Prolonged metabolism in cats
Carprofen (Rimadyl)
2-4 mg/kg s.c., i.v., p.o. b.i.d.
2 mg/kg s.c. s.i.d.
Less renal and gastric
toxicity, chronic use in dogs
Flunixin (Finadyne)
1 mg/kg s.c p.o. s.i.d.
1 mg/kg s.c. sid
Renal and gastric toxicity
 Powerful analgesic and
anti-endotoxin effect
Ketoprofen (Ketofen)
1-2 mg/kg s.c. p.o. b.i.d.
1-2 mg/kg s.c. p.o. b.i.d.
Renal and gastric toxicity
Meloxicam (Metacam)
0.2 mg/kg s.c. i.v. p.0. s.i.d.
0.2 mg/kg s.c. p.o. s.i.d.
Fewer gastric and renal
problems, chronic use
possible
Paracetamol
25-30 mg/kg p.o. q.i.d.
Less gastric irritation 
Phenylbutazone
10 mg/kg p.o. b.i.d.
Gastric irritation
Tepoxalin
10 mg/kg p.0. s.i.d.
Tolfenamic acid
4 mg/kg s.c., i.m., p.o.
4 mg/kg s.c., p.0.
Not preoperatively
582
 Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Corticosteroids
of onset and depth of effect as lignocaine but much
longer-acting - up to 8 h. It is well tolerated by the
These are not normally used perioperatively for analgesia as
tissues ± adrenaline (epinephrine) but accidental
they reduce the rate of healing. However, they are still useful
intravenous injection will cause cardiac arrest, as it is
in controlling oedema and inflammation in respiratory tract
severely myocardiotoxic
surgery and, more controversially, in spinal surgery.
● Cinchocaine - very powerful, only low doses are
required. It is severely myocardiotoxic and is now
Local anaesthetics
mostly used in combination with quinalbarbitone for
intravenous euthanasia.
These are underused in small animal surgery despite their
widespread use and efficacy in large animals. They are
Clinical use of local anaesthesia
problems where general anaesthesia would be dangerous.
● Topical - superficial desensitization of an area:
Drugs used as local anaesthetics are weak acids that act on the
nerve fibres and prevent them from transmitting impulses to
● Local anaesthetic cream applied to the skin prior to
the CNS. The pain fibres in a nerve are more sensitive than
catheter placement
the rest of the fibres to these drugs, so local analgesia is theo
retically possible without causing complete loss of motor
● Proxymetacaine drops - used in ophthalmology to
function. In reality, all the nerve fibres tend to be blocked
2
allow minor corneal procedures
and a degree of loss of function of the anaesthetized area
● Laryngeal sprays - applied to the larynxes of cats to
these drugs because local acidosis reduces their availability to
enable intubation without reflex spasm
the tissues.
● Inirapleural - bupivacaine can be instilled over the
Local anaesthetic drugs include:
pleural surfaces to reduce postoperative pain after
thoracotomy
● Lignocaine - the most widely used drug. It comes as
a gel, topical cream, aerosol, sterile injectable solution
● Intradermal - injection with a fine needle to create
and a solution with preservative ± adrenaline
a desensitized weal in the skin, allowing placement of
(epinephrine). This is added to cause local
large-bore catheters, needles, etc.
vasoconstriction, which keeps the anaesthetic at the
site and prolongs its actions. Care must be exercised in
● Local infiltration of tissues, e.g. skin or muscle.
using such solutions in poorly vascularized areas where
Use a fine-bore needle for the initial injection, which
ischaemia could result. Lignocaine has a rapid onset of
about 5 min and lasts 50-90 min without adrenaline
pass through the site to minimize further injection
or 80 min with adrenaline. One per cent and
pain. An incision line can be produced by this
 2% solutions are available and there may be some local
method but local anaesthetic alone can cause
tissue reaction and stinging on infiltration; however,
vasodilation and increased haemorrhage at the site. If
they spread well in the tissues. If accidentally given
adrenaline-augmented solutions are used,
intravenously, lignocaine can cause cardiac arrest or
vasoconstriction at the site can delay healing
syncope. The toxic threshold of 10 mg/kg is easily
reached in cats so 2 ml of a 2% solution is the
● Field block - e.g. on the chest wall or flank. Here the
maximum dose in a 4 kg cat:
pattern of innervation allows infiltration of local
anaesthetic far away from the site of surgery so
● Procaine - an old fashioned drug but still available
analgesia is complete but wound healing is not
combined with adrenaline (epinephrine). Slower onset
compromised
and shorter-acting
● Ring block - e.g. around a distal limb or digit.
● Amethocaine - used topically as 1% solution for
Three-hundred and sixty degree injections desensitize
desensitizing the cornea for ophthalmic procedures
the distal area but ischaemia could be a problem
● Bupivacaine - four times as potent as lignocaine.
● Intrasynovial - only used to help identify painful
Available as 0.5% and 2% solutions with a similar rate
bursae or joints in lame animals.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
583
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Regional nerve block
● Spinal anaesthesia - rarely used and involves
A small dose of local anaesthetic is administered around a
introduction of drug doses of half those used for
 nerve - described as being perineural, so desensitizing the
epidural injection between L5 and L6 into the
whole area it supplies. This is a greatly underused and very
cerebrospinal fluid surrounding the spinal cord.
effective technique but requires a detailed knowledge of
nerve anatomy:
Opioids
● Intercostal block. - the intercostal nerves lie caudal
These are the most widely used group of analgesic drugs. They
to each rib next to the artery and vein. 0.5 ml of
were originally derived from opium - the dried latex from
lignocaine will desensitize each nerve and three or four
unripe Himalayan poppy seed heads (Papaver somniferum). As
nerve blocks will provide excellent analgesia for a
the plant's name suggests, they also cause a variable degree of
thoracotomy site. This makes postoperative recovery
sedation. Opiates are now synthetically manufactured but the
essentially pain-free and a great deal safer because
term opioids will be used here to cover both natural and syn-
deeper respiration will ensure better oxygenation
thetic forms. They all act by receptor mediation and there are
four main receptor types in the brain and spinal cord - mu and
● Inferior alveolar nerve - perineural lignocaine
kappa receptors, which are the main ones targeted by the
injected where the nerve exits the mental foramen will
clinically used opioids, and sigma and delta receptors.
desensitize the rostral mandible, e.g. for fracture
fixation or tumour resection
As opioids are subject to recreational abuse by humans the
use of opioids is controlled by the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971
● Optical block - infiltration of the palpebral branch
and the drugs are grouped into Schedules CD 1, 2 and 3. Only
of the facial nerve and auriculotemporal nerve
schedule 2 and 3 drugs are used in veterinary medicine
desensitizes the orbital fissure, i.e. the orbit,
(see Ch. 19).
conjunctiva, eyelids and eyebrows.
 Opioid drugs have many useful effects and many disadvantages
depending on the individual drug. They may cause profound
Intravenous regional anaesthesia
analgesia and variable sedation, with little effect on the cardio-
This is used for surgery on distal limbs. The arterial and
vascular system. They will synergize with anaesthetic drugs,
venous blood supply is occluded by a tourniquet, preferably
lowering the requirement of the latter, and also induce a sense
of euphoria and wellbeing in the patient. However, other forms
limb, and lignocaine is injected intravenously. This provides
of the drug may cause dysphoria and anxiety. They may also
excellent anaesthesia in 10-15 min and lasts as long as the
tourniquet remains in place, so operative times of up to
 trointestinal effects such as constipation and vomiting, and in
45 min are easily achieved.
some cases respiratory depression. It should be emphasized that
not all these side effects are caused by all opioids; they are
dependent on the individual form of the drug and the action of
Spinal and epidural block
the receptors that are stimulated by it.
● Epidural - commonly used in large-animal
anaesthesia as it is technically easy and is useful for
Administration
perineal, anal, tail and pelvic limb surgery. The site
Opioids can be administered in many ways (Table 27.6). The
 must be prepared aseptically and a spinal needle
 drug dose depends on the degree of pain present and a lower
should be introduced between vertebrae L7 and S1.
Table 27.6 Administration of opioids
The drug is injected into the epidural space between
the dura mater and the periosteum of the spinal canal
Route
Comments
to block the nerves as they leave the spinal cord
Choice of drug depends on what effect is needed: e.g.
Intravenous
Not pethidine
local anaesthetics produce excellent analgesia and
Intramuscular
 Pethidine stings
paralysis of muscles; opiates provide analgesia alone.
Subcutaneous
Variable uptake
Dose and volume will determine how far cranially
Oral
Metabolism affects efficacy
these effects occur. For prolonged analgesia, catheters
Sublingual
Technically difficult in animals
Vasodilation and consequent hypotension may occur
Rectal
 Suppositories
 in some tissues, so intravenous fluid therapy is
Epidural
Sterility required
required. To avoid respiratory paralysis the maximum
Transdermal
Fentanyl patches
dose is 1 ml/5 kg of 0.5% bupivacaine or 2% lignocaine.
584
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
dose can be used as part of premedication to achieve pre-
will reduce subsequent doses required to keep the animal
emptive analgesia. In severe pain much higher doses can be
pain-free. Higher doses will be required if pain is already
used without unwanted side effects, so if a patient has been
present.
given a standard dose but still appears to be in pain then
incrementally higher doses may be given until the pain is
Naloxone is a specific opioid antagonist that reverses the
controlled.
effects of mu-binding opioids, so can be used in cases of over-
dose. It has a short action, so repeat doses may be required.
Examples of opioid drugs and their specific uses are shown in
Table  27.7.  Premedicating  with opioids before  surgery  will
Anticholinergics
reduce the quantity of drugs required to induce and maintain
anaesthesia and will reduce the levels of pain intra- and
In the past, anticholinergic drugs have been given as part of
postoperatively. Opioids given prior to a painful stimulus
the premedication but there is little general indication for
Table 27.7 Examples of opioids used in veterinary practice
Drug name/action/schedule
Dose rate and route of administration
Comments
Morphine/mu agonist/2
0.1-0.4 mg/kg s.c., i.m., i.v., epidural, rectal
Not licensed in cats and dogs. Very powerful and
predictable. Lasts for 3-4 h. Sedative effect except in
high doses in cats, where it may cause excitement. Slower
27
elimination in cats because of lack of liver glucuronidation
Pethidine/mu agonist/2
2-4 mg/kg i.m., not i.v. as it causes histamine 
Lasts for 2 h. Ten per cent of the strength of morphine. Has
release
vagolytic effects. Can be used to provide additional
analgesia to supplement that provided by drugs that are
mixed agonists. Excellent for gastrointestinal surgery and
pancreatitis
Papaveretum/mu agonist/2
0.1-0.4 mg/kg i.m.
Not licensed for cats and dogs. Less potent than morphine.
Lasts for 2 h. Excellent sedative, especially if
combined with acetylpromazine
Methadone/mu agonist/2
0.1-0.4 mg/kg i.m. 0r i.v.
Moderate analgesia. Less sedation and more dysphoria
Fentanyl/mu agonist/2
1-10mcg/kg i.v.
Rapid onset. 50 times as potent as morphine. Lasts for
20-30 min, s0 used during an operation. Can cause
respiratory depression so IPPV may be needed. Combined
with fluanisone as a neuroleptic anaesthetic.
Alfentanil/mu agonist/2
10-25 mcg/kg i.v. and by infusion, as it is
Not licensed in cats and dogs. 12 times as potent as
rapidly mtebolized
morphine. Very rapid effect. Apnoea may occur with clinical
dose - use in combination with an anticholinergic drug.
Used as part of balanced induction in high-risk patients
Etorphine/mu agonist/2
No longer licensed. Extremely potent and long-lasting.
Marked respiratory depression. Dangerous to handle.
Specific reversal agent - diprenorphine
Buprenorphine/partial agonist/3 3-10 mcg/kg i.m. i.v. s.c.
Takes 45 min to have an effect. Lasts for 6-8 h in
dogs and 12 h in cats. Useful for postoperative pain.
Can be used to reverse respiratory depression caused by
overdose of mu agonists without abolishing analgesia
Butorphanol/partial agonist/3
0.05-0.3 mg/kg i.m. i.v.
Very poor analgesia somatically; moderate visceral
 analgesia. Excellent antitussive - good for bronchoscopy.
Excellent sedation in combination with alpha 2 agonists.
Should not be used as sole means of analgesia.
 Pure agonist - affects only one type of receptor. Partial agonist - affects both mu and kappa receptors, being either an agonist or an antagonist at mu and an
agonist at kappa receptors. Dose rate is critical - if the maximum dose is given and the patient is still in pain, increasing the dose further may reduce the
analgesic effect
IPPV, intermittent partial pressure ventilation
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
585
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
them now. Atropine was used to dry the secretions stimulated
Summary
by the use of ether as an inhaled anaesthetic, as it is a res-
piratory irritant. As modern anaesthetic gases do not cause
Premedication aims to ease the induction of anaesthesia,
such irritation there is no need for atropine, and in fact it can
and pue pabau sp oasaee jo uenh a anpan
jeopardize the anaesthetic by stimulating tachycardia during
pre-emptive baseline analgesia. A combination of ACP, an
a period of hypoxia prior to intubation. It is still a valuable
 opioid and a NSAID is ideal in healthy animals. Other drugs
 drug where indicated and is best kept for specific purposes,
may be specifically indicated for premedication, e.g. anti-
e.g. reversal of severe bradycardia.
biotics, histamine blockers in mast-cell tumour surgery.
Anaesthesia
Anaesthesia can be considered to take place in two stages:
● Maintenance - process by which a state of
● Induction - administration of drugs that bring about
unconsciousness is continued until such time as the
a state of unconsciousness
patient is allowed to regain consciousness.
1
  n p s   n n  
anaesthetic drugs
reached the CNS unconsciousness occurs. As the drug con-
centration drops in the systemic circulation so the drug is
redistributed away from the CNS allowing consciousness to
In small animal practice most anaesthesia is induced by
resume.
tion agents. However, injectable agents can also be used to
Systemic drug concentration depends on redistribution of the
maintain anaesthesia, either alone if their length of activity is
drug to less-well-perfused tissues, e.g. muscle and fat, and then
adequate or by infusing them intravenously at set rates. If
metabolism of the drug by the liver, kidneys and other organs.
this technique is used for safety reasons, an airway must be
Duration of action of the induction agent depends on individ-
maintained and oxygen must be supplied. Most induction
ual drug properties and on individual animal characteristics,
e.g. thin, poorly muscled animals, have less tissue so redistribu-
response, but some can be given intramuscularly.
tion is slower, prolonging unconsciousness. Metabolic prob
lems, e.g. liver or renal disease, will also reduce metabolism of
the drugs, so increasing the duration of drug action.
Intravenous injection
Placing an indwelling intravenous catheter into the cephalic
Drug types
vein prior to induction is cheap and technically easy. The site
should be aseptically prepared and an ‘over the needle'
Barbiturates
catheter should be secured with adhesive tape. A suitable
S de Aem-ar o'a ' on paee aq pinus hod s
Examples include thiopentone, methohexitone, pentobarbi-
allows for safer induction and for administration of other
tone, phenobarbitone. These drugs all cause unconsciousness
drugs during the anaesthetic. If an anaesthetic emergency
and muscle relaxation but provide very little analgesia. They
occurs it could mean the difference between life and death
cause a degree of dose-related cardiorespiratory depression
 Indwelling catheters should be changed on the third day after
and, as they are strongly alkaline sodium salts, they are very
placement to prevent ascending thrombophlebitis.
 irritant to the tissues if not administered intravenously.
Mode of action
Thiopental sodium
The most commonly used and most predictable induction
These drugs act directly on the CNS, which receives at least
agent in Britain. It is made up by reconstituting a sulphur
25% of cardiac output so as the drug is injected, the CNS is
 9 p 99 1 0 0 s   1
586
 Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Only 2.5% or less concentrated solution should be used in
tion can cause pain. It does not contain a preservative, so
small animals because of the severe tissue necrosis associated
once a vial is opened it should be used that day. Propofol pro-
with perivascular injection of 5% solutions. If a perivascular
duces rapid dose-dependent induction of anaesthesia but
injection does occur, copious amounts of sterile saline or
apnoea is a common problem unless it is administered very
2% lignocaine should be infused into the affected tissues:
slowly. Occasionally, muscle activity and twitching is seen
upon induction, but this generally resolves once gaseous
● Dose rate: 5-20 mg/kg (average 10 mg/kg) given i.v.
maintenance is stabilized.
High doses should be avoided because the drug is only
slowly metabolized by the body, resulting in prolonged
● Dose rate:
recovery. The induction dose and the risk of
cardiovascular depression can be substantially reduced
● Induction - 4-6 mg/kg i.v. for dogs after
by combining induction with intravenous diazepam
premedication; 6-8 mg/kg i.v. for cats after
premedication
● Contraindications: Thiopental may cause
hypotension, reduced cardiac output and transient
● Maintenance - can be used in dogs because it is not
respiratory depression. It binds to proteins, so care
cumulative: dose 0.3-0.5 mg/kg/min but provides
should be taken in hypoalbuminaemic animals. It
no analgesia
redistributes rapidly to the muscles and fat and is
● Contraindications: in dogs, propofol is rapidly
hours in the body. Care should be exercised in cases of
metabolized in the liver and lung so recovery is rapid.
renal disease, cardiovascular disease and liver disease.
27
However, the cat liver is not capable of detoxifying
Use in pregnancy is not advised as it will cause
  n rs    o  
respiratory depression in the neonates.
thiopental. It is the drug of choice for use in dogs with
liver disease but it is contraindicated in cats with liver
Special breed sensitivity has been reported in sight
disease. It is a potent venodilator and can cause
hounds - greyhounds, Afghan hounds, whippets, borzois,
profound hypotension. It binds strongly to proteins, so
and salukis - where it causes prolonged recovery.
care must be taken in cases of hypoalbumnaemia, in
renal disease and in geriatric patients.
Methohexital
Propofol has a rapid rate of clearance in dogs so often the
This is an ultra-short-acting barbiturate prepared from dry
early part of the anaesthetic is more unstable than with
powder before use. Causes apnoea on induction lasting about
thiopental. The depth of anaesthesia must be closely moni-
a minute so intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV)
tored for the first 10 min because the dog may suddenly seem
may initially be required. It is rapidly redistributed and
to become very light as the effects of the propofol are lost and
metabolized. Recovery is rapid and may be violent, so pre-
at that time an insufficient level of anaesthetic gas may have
medication with ACP and an opioid is desirable:
been inhaled.
● Dose rate: 4-6 mg/kg as a 1% solution given i.v.
Steroid anaesthetics
Pentobarbital
Saffan is the only steroid anaesthetic in use in veterinary
This drug is associated with relatively slow induction and
medicine and is a mixture of alphaxalone and alphadolone in
recovery. It is mainly used for controlling status epilepticus,
a castor-oil-derivative base. This oil causes severed histamine
as is phenobarbital solution:
release in dogs and is not used in this species. It is useful in
cats but it is very common to see so-called 'saffan reactions',
● Dose rate: 25-30 mg/kg i.v. No longer available as a
which involve pinnal and pedal oedema and erythema. In
sterile solution so now used only for euthanasia
rarer cases this can extend to laryngeal and pulmonary
oedema. Premedication seems to make little difference to the
Phenol anaesthetics
development of these reactions:
The only phenol anaesthetic in veterinary use is pro-
● Dose rate: 3-6 mg/kg i.v. or i.m. - i.v. is more
pofol. It is insoluble in water so is dissolved in an egg-
predictable.
phosphatidyl-soyabean oil emulsion, which produces its
characteristic white milky appearance. It is non-irritant to
Despite its frequent side effects, saffan's safety margin or
tissues but intravenous injection of a room temperature solu-
therapeutic index is extremely high as it causes only mild
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
587
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
cardiovascular and respiratory depression. It contains no
preservative, so must be used on the day of opening.
Alpha-2 agonist plus ketamine
A commonly used combination, especially in cats, where
Dissociative anaesthetics
the intramuscular route is useful in fractious patients. This
can provide light chemical restraint up to full general
Ketamine
anaesthesia depending on the dose. For example, ketamine
 Ketamine is widely used in veterinary medicine. It produces
5 mg/kg + medetomidine 0.05 mg/kg i.m. provides adequate
a unique state of anaesthesia in which unconsciousness is
anaesthesia for minor procedures. Ketamine 5-10 mg/kg +
achieved while airway reflexes and some cranial nerve reflexes
medetomidine 0.05-0.08 mg/kg + buprenorphine 0.01 mg/kg
are intact, the eyes remain open and pupils dilate. Salivation
provides adequate anaesthesia for routine neutering.
occurs and skeletal muscle tone is maintained but changes to
the cardiovascular system are minimal and blood pressure is
Note Dissociative anaesthetics are widely abused by humans
maintained. Ketamine has moderate analgesir properties and a
so they should be kept in a locked drugs cabinet.
high therapeutic index. It may be given intravenously or intra-
muscularly but, as it is acidic, it stings on intramuscular injec-
tion. It is usually combined with a sedative with good muscle-
relaxant properties, e.g. a benzodiazepine or an alpha-2 agonist:
Induction of critically ill
● Dose rate: wide range as it is never used by itself so
dose rate depends on the other components
animals
● Duration: anaesthesia lasts 20-40 min but effects
 Induction of anaesthesia in critically ill animals can pre-
 may be seen for up to 10 h
cipitate catastrophic cardiovascular  depression  because
they are often physiologically on a ‘knife edge' and even a
● Contraindications: Ketamine is excreted via the
minor alteration in cardiac output or oxygenation can
kidneys so should not be used in cats with renal
prove fatal. The induction period must be rapid, stress-
disease. Dogs metabolize it in the liver, so it should
free, cause minimal physiological changes and be fol-
not be used in liver disease. It raises intracranial
lowed by intubation and a supply of 100% oxygen.
 pressure and should not be used in head trauma.
 Preoxygenation and fluid therapy are essential and all
 parameters must be closely monitored. The use of a benzo-
Diazepam plus ketamine
diazepine with a powerful opioid and minimal dose of an
This combination is excellent for providing 5-10 min of
induction agent such as ketamine or propofol is recom-
light general anaesthesia in cardiovascularly compromised
mended., e.g. diazepam 0.2 mg/kg + fentanyl 0.05 mg/kg
patients.
2-3 mg/kg propofol i.v.
Inhalational agents
Carrier gases
Oxygen - 0,
These are volatile liquids, i.e. they evaporate easily at room
temperature to form a gas that is inhaled. They can be used
 Oxygen is essential for normal aerobic metabolism. It makes
 to induce, or more commonly to maintain, anaesthesia. They
 yo unuuu e 1e pasn si nq ne naqdsoue jo oz dn
are carried into the body via the respiratory tract by a carrier
in anaesthesia. The normal PaO, in dogs is 85-105 mmHg;
gas, which is usually oxygen ± nitrous oxide. The chemicals
the normal PaO, in cats is 100-115 mmHg. Oxygen is sup-
dissolve in the blood and cross the blood-brain barrier to
plied in black cylinders with a white collar.
affect the CNS, causing unconsciousness. Halothane and
 isoflurane are the principle volatile agents used in animals
The haemoglobin in red blood cells is usually about 95% sat
but sevoflurane and desflurane may also be seen in practice.
urated when breathing room air. This should rise to 100% on
Diethyl ether, chloroform and methoxyflurane no longer
inspiration of enriched oxygen, assuming that there is no
 have a role in modern veterinary practice.
 cardiovascular or respiratory depression. Only a small change
588
 Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
in haemoglobin saturation is possible but, as O, is a very
gauge will always read full until most of the liquid is gone (be
soluble gas, total oxygen saturation of whole blood can
careful!). It is insoluble in blood, so it rapidly enters and
increase and the PaO, can reach 500 mmHg. A rule of thumb
 leaves the blood stream, which can be beneficial in inducing
is that the PaO, should be five times the inspired concentra-
anaesthesia because it increases the rate of uptake of the
tion. If it is not, there may be a perfusion ventilation
volatile agent. It also diffuses into gas-filled areas of the body.
problem.
e.g. gas-dilated intestine, so should not be used in cases of
gastric tympany, intestinal obstruction or pneumothorax.
Respiration is normally controlled by the carbon dioxide (CO2)
Once anaesthesia is terminated there can be a sudden release
concentration in the arterial blood, which is normally
of large quantities of N,O into the alveoli, reducing the
30-40 mmHg. If the concentration rises the chemoreceptors in
alveolar oxygen concentration and causing diffusion
the brain and vascular system stimulate increased respiration.
hypoxia. To avoid this, oxygen should be supplied at 100%
However if PaO, drops to 60 mmHg - hypoxaemia - it becomes
for 10-15 min following cessation of N,O.
the driving force for respiration independent of the PaCO2-
Hypoxaemia or low blood oxygen is an extremely serious sit-
 The main use of N,O in veterinary practice is as a carrier gas
uation, as it can cause irreparable brain damage, cardiac
but it also has marked analgesic properties and is useful in
arrhythmias and arrest, and kidney damage. If an animal's
reducing the amount of volatile agent needed. For example,
PaO, drops to about 85 mmHg it should be ventilated and if it
N,O at 66% will reduce halothane requirements by 25%. It is
 reaches 60 mmHg it should be treated as an emergency.
not metabolized and helps to support cardiac output, respira-
tory rate and blood pressure. It can be used in all circuits but
Hypoxaemia may be due to:
care must be taken in low-flow rebreathing systems, where it
can build up so reducing oxygen tension. N,O is not absorbed
2
● Poor O2 uptake, e.g. lung disease - tumours, infections,
by charcoal canisters so active scavenging is essential.
pulmonary oedema - or cardiac disease - lung
perfusion problems. In lateral recumbency more blood
Note Prolonged exposure of theatre staff to N,O can lead to
perfuses the lower lung and more gas enters the
bone marrow toxicity because of vitamin B12 oxidation, and
uppermost lung, causing a ventilation-perfusion
it is also an abortifacient.
mismatch. This not only reduces oxygen uptake but
also reduces uptake of the volatile agent, so altering
Mode of action of the volatile
the depth of anaesthesia. Thus prolonged anaesthesia
in one position is not recommended
agents
● Hypoventilation - very common in anaesthesia
S        
because of the respiratory depressant effects of the
temperature to form a gas. The solubility of a gas in blood
drugs.
determines the rate at which changes in anaesthesia occur. If
a gas is very soluble then large amounts will dissolve so
In cases of hypoxaemia, increasing the oxygen supply to the
changes will occur slowly, e.g. methoxyflurane; if a gas is
animal may not be adequate to correct the problem and
insoluble then rapid uptake and elimination from the blood
actively ventilating the patient is often even more important.
occurs and changes take place rapidly, e.g. sevoflurane. The
 Even in a normal stable anaesthetic where the animal appears
technical term for this effect is the blood/gas solubility
to be breathing satisfactorily, the anaesthetist should period-
coeficient - the smaller the coefficient the faster the changes
ically 'sigh' the patient's lungs, i.e. provide a supramaximal
tidal excursion to fully expand the alveoli, which will may be
Table 27.8 Blood/gas solubility coefficient for
undergoing progressive atelectasis i.e. collapse.
common volatile anaesthetic agents
Note Oxygen toxicity is often mentioned but is seldom
Agent
Coefficient
important. A dog would need to be on 100% O, for 3 days
 s   n   i   t 
Desflurane
0.42
using oxygen in pressurized containers.
Nitrous oxide
0.47
Sevoflurane
0.6
Isoflurane
1.39
Nitrous oxide - N,0
Enflurane
1.8
Nitrous oxide is odourless, non-irritant and non-flammable
Halothane
2.4
but will support combustion. It is available in blue cylinders
Methoxyflurane
12
as a liquid at 40 atm pressure, which means that a pressure
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  589
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Table 27.9 Minimum alveolar concentration for
Halothane
Widely used since the 1950s. It is non-irritant and non-explo-
common volatile agents
sive but as it is a chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) it causes environ-
Volatile agent
Minimum alveolar
Potency
mental pollution. It is decomposed by ultraviolet light so
concentration (%)
must be stored in dark glass bottles. It contains thymol as a
Methoxyflurane
0.23
Most potent
preservative, which can build up in the vaporizer, affecting its
function.
Halothane
0.8
Isoflurane
1.3
Induction is achieved at concentrations of 2-4% and is rela-
Sevoflurane
2
tively fast; maintenance is achieved at 0.8-2%. Halothane is
Enflurane
2.2
 60 times as soluble in fat as in other body tissues, so uptake
Desflurane
by the CNS in relation to uptake by the blood is 2.5:1. Total
6.8
body clearance of halothane can take a long time as it is
Nitrous oxide
188-220
Least potent
slowly released from the fat and up to 25% of it is then
metabolized by the liver. Some breakdown products are
slightly toxic:
occur (Table 27.8). As changes occur more quickly with insol-
uble agents overdosing and underdosing may happen easily
● Contraindications: halothane-associated hepatitis
so careful monitoring is required.
can occur in humans after repeated exposure to the
 gas, so careful scavenging is important. Malignant
The potency of these drugs also varies, and is measured as the
hyperthermia is a genetically based disease seen in
alveolar concentration of the drug that will anaesthetize 50% of
pigs, dogs, cats and humans. It can be triggered by
a certain type of animal. This is expressed as the minimum alve-
halothane exposure and is fatal but extremely rare.
olar concentration (MAC) and varies for each drug and for
Analgesia is poor even when deeply anaesthetized and
          
muscle relaxation is moderate. Halothane reduces
(Table 27.9). MAC is also altered by the type of premedication
cardiac output and predisposes the heart to
given, the induction agent and the carrier gas used.
arrhythmias by sensitizing the myocardium to
adrenaline (epinephrine) and by causing hypercapnia
When an animal inhales volatile gas it is initially all ab
secondary to mild respiratory depression. Postoperative
sorbed by the body so the induction phase requires a higher
shivering is common even in normothermic animals,
inspired percentage of gas. As the body reaches saturation the
which can cause increased oxygen demand during
percentage of gas required drops as more gas starts to be
recovery, when oxygen tension may be low
exhaled by the animal. The maintenance phase is reached
when only the proportion exhaled has to be replaced by the
incoming gas.
Enflurane
Enflurane has similar properties to halothane. It is also a CFC
and is widely used in humans but seldom in animals. It is
Volatile agents
rapid in onset and recovery and causes a dose-dependent
reduction in cardiac output but less hypotension than
 Examples of these include the following.
halothane. Muscle relaxation is good. Very little is metabo-
lized. Induction is achieved at concentrations of 4-6% and
maintenance at 1-3%.
Diethyl ether
Still available and may be seen in practice but it is very
old-fashioned and cannot be recommended. It is extremely
Methoxyflurane
flammable, irritant to respiratory mucosae and causes slow
This is a non-explosive halogenated ether. It is extremely
recovery because of its high fat solubility. It causes good
potent but not very volatile so 3% is the maximum concen-
muscle relaxation and is analgesir. It is heavier than air so its
tration achievable at room temperature. Methoxyflurane is
fumes gather on the floor, where static electricity can cause
very soluble in blood so induction and recovery are very slow.
explosions.
It provides excellent muscle relaxation and analgesia, which
can last up to 24 h, making it useful in orthopaedics.
It is a cardiorespiratory depressant and is extensively me-
Chloroform
tabolized, releasing fluoride and oxalate ions, which can
Chloroform is occasionally used but it is very toxic and dan-
damage the kidneys. Induction at concentrations of
gerous to administer.
1.5-2.5%; maintenance at 0.2-1.25%
590
 Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Isoflurane
Isoflurane is a halogenated ether with an unpleasant smell
Incoming
Mixture of fresh carrier
Control dial
carrier gas
and volatile loaded gas
and is slightly irritant to respiratory mucosae. It is non-explo-
 sive, very potent and has a low blood gas solubility so induc-
tion, changes in depth and recovery are very rapid even
after prolonged anaesthesia. Very little is metabolized so it is
non-toxic. Induction at 2-3%; maintenance at 1.5-2.5%:
● Contraindications: heart rate is maintained but
Volatile saturated gas
there is a dose-dependent hypotension due to
vasodilation. It is not arrhythmogenic. Muscle
relaxation is good but respiratory depression is more
volatile agent
marked so supplementary ventilation may be required.
Viewing port
A
Sevoflurane
This is a modern anaesthetic that, because of its insolubility
produces a rapid induction and recovery and is widely used
for day-case anaesthesia in humans. It has similar cardiores-
piratory effects to isoflurane. It reacts with soda lime so
cannot be used in rebreathing circuits, and is expensive to
O
27
use.
SOFLURANE
Desflurane
Desflurane is a halogenated ether that is very insoluble in
 blood and causes some airway irritation. Its cardiorespiratory
effects are similar to isoflurane. It requires a special vaporizer,
which is heated and pressurized to achieve the high concen.
trations for its MAC. Its main advantage is its extremely rapid
induction and recovery times.
Vaporization
All volatile liquid anaesthetic agents must evaporate to form
gas, which must be delivered in accurate doses to the animal.
Fig. 27.1 Plenum vaporizer. (a) Schematic diagram. (b) Vaporizer
This is achieved by the use of a calibrated vaporizer
attached to anaesthetic machine
(Fig. 27.1). There are many types available but only the more
modern models are accurate at all times and under all con-
less liquid is vaporized, but modern vaporizers have a tem-
ditions of use. Temperature, gas flow rate, back pressure,
perature-controlled valve to increase the flow into the
volume of liquid in the chamber, etc., can all affect accuracy.
chamber. Vaporizers are very heavy because they are made of
so the concentration of inspired gas may not be what is indi-
copper to allow for a fast transfer of heat from the room air to
cated on the machine.
the chamber. Modern vaporizers, e.g. Fluotec 3 and 4, can be
relied on to be accurate down to 500-1000 ml/min flow rates.
The most common vaporizer design, as seen in the Fluotec or
Isotec, involves a vaporizing chamber and a bypass channel.
The gas inflow divides into two streams and most gas passes
Anaesthetic circuits
straight through the machine and into the animal. The
smaller flow passes through the chamber containing the
volatile liquid, which becomes saturated and is introduced
Anaesthetic circuits can be divided into two categories:
back into the main gas flow, giving a set concentration.
●Rebreathing
Both high and low flow rates can cause problems in accuracy.
High flow rates cause cooling of the liquid, so progressively
●Non-rebreathing.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Rebreathing circuits
Types of rebreathing circuit
These circuits allow for a proportion of the expired gases to
The circle system
be reinhaled. The fresh inhaled gas mixture contains only
This is the most common type seen in practice but is the most
carrier gas plus volatile liquid anaesthetic evaporated into a
complex. It relies on a one-way valve system to direct the gas
gas. The exhaled gas contains carrier gas, volatile gas, carbon
flow and can malfunction. These circuits are bulky and
dioxide, water vapour and heat. If this can be reinhaled, less
carrier gas and volatile gas is required and heat and moisture
are conserved. To avoid a build-up of exhaled carbon dioxide
a soda lime scrubbing system is used.
Soda lime is a granular compound consisting of 80%
sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and 18% calcium hydroxide
Waste gas
 Corugated hose to
(CaOH). The remainder consists of silicates and a pH indica-
 One way valve
 prevent kinking 
tor. It is an alkaline, irritant reactive material and care must
Fresh
be exercised when handling it. Different companies make dif-
carrier gas
ferent colours of soda lime and the colour changes as the
and volatile
reactivity of the compound runs out. It is therefore important
to know which colour indicates fresh and which exhausted
soda lime. Using exhausted soda lime, i.e. saturated with
carbon dioxide, would be disastrous for the animal, as it will
no longer absorb carbon dioxide. As the soda lime reacts with
carbon dioxide in the exhaled gases, the soft, soapy soda lime
Expired gas
is replaced by hard brittle carbonates and heat is produced,
Soda lime canister
which can help in preventing hypothermia.
Soda lime dust is particularly dangerous; if inhaled by staff or
through the circuit by the animal it can cause respiratory tract
damage and bronchiolitis. When full, a soda lime canister
only contains 50% granules; the remaining 50% is the space
between the granules. There should be enough space to
accommodate at least twice the animal's tidal volume to
To
One way valve
allow for efficient absorption. If the canister is insufficiently
patient
filled a gap will develop between the soda lime and the
canister wall and a process known as 'channelling' will occur.
Here the exhaled gases pass through the canister without
having mingled with the soda lime, resulting in a build up of
carbon dioxide in the system, which leads to hypercapnia and
 raised carbon dioxide levels in the breath.
Reservoir bag - 3 - 6 × tidal volume
Nitrous oxide can be used in rebreathing circuits but, as
 Oxygen is used by the patient and carbon dioxide is removed
by the soda lime, nitrous oxide can build up. Thus, in low-
flow use, 50% is the maximum amount that can be used
without using an inspired gas analyser. In higher-flow use, i.e.
over 30 ml/kg/min, the influx of fresh gas will prevent a
build-up.
When an animal is freshly anaesthetized it breathes out all
the nitrogen dissolved in its blood. This is called denitro-
genation and can be a problem in rebreathing circuits. The
nitrogen may build up in the rebreathing circuit if there is a
low inflowing rate of fresh gas. To avoid this, when the
animal is first connected to a rebreathing circuit a high
 inflow rate of fresh gas, e.g. 100 ml/kg/min, is used for the
first 10 min.
Fig. 27.2 The circle system
592
 Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Chanelling possible 
by soda lime (Fig. 27.3). The 'scrubbed' gas is then rebreathed
as soda lime settles
along with the fresh gas inflow. As the fresh gas inflow pipe
is close to the patient, concentration of volatile gas can be
Expiratory valve  scavenge
measured accurately.
The disadvantages of the circuit are mainly due to the posi-
10
oatient
tion and design of the canister. As it lies close to the endo-
 tracheal tube, its weight may predispose to extubation as the
Mesh fiter-
animal is moved around. Soda lime dust may be inhaled
Reservoir bag
more easily and the soda lime in the canister tends to settle,
leaving a channelling gap at the top. The soda lime tends to
Soda lime cannister
become exhausted at the patient end of the canister first so
Fresh gas inflow
that the dead space in the circuit increases as time passes and
Fig. 27.3 The to-and-fro system (Water's canister)
more carbon dioxide is rebreathed. IPPV is difficult because of
the positioning of the expiratory valve.
expensive but carbon dioxide management is very good
Advantages of the circle and to and fro systems are shown in
because of a clever canister design (Fig. 27.2). The canister is
Table 27.10.
distant from the patient so dust and breathing resistance is
reduced and IppV can be administered if necessary. The
circuit cannot be used in animals under 10 kg unless it is
2
Non-rebreathing circuits
specifically designed for paediatric use.
Non-rebreathing circuits rely on the flushing out of the
exhaled volatile gas and carbon dioxide produced within the
To and fro system
circuit by the fresh gas inflow. The circuits are less economi-
In the to and fro system (Fig. 27.3). the patient breathes in
cal in their use of carrier gas and anaesthetic agent. The flow
fresh gas from the inlet pipe and exhales it into the closely
rate required varies from circuit to circuit and heat and mois-
positioned Waters canister, where carbon dioxide is removed
ture are not conserved. Although these circuits can be used in
animals of very low body weight they may lead to loss of heat
 jo s un d e a  m ' p
that are already prone to hypothermia and dehydration.
Table 27.10 Advantages and disadvantages of the
 Non-rebreathing circuits are all simple and relatively cheap,
circle and to-and-fro systems
they are easily sterilized, they allow accurate control of
inspired gases and soda lime is not required.
Advantages
Disadvantages
Circle system
High gas efficiency
Complex, so
Examples of non-rebreathing circuits are as follows.
Constant dead space
malfunctions more
Low resistance
likely
Cumbersome but
Ayre's I piece
Reduced risk bronchiolitis
IPPV possible
distant to patient
The original Ayre's T piece does not have a reservoir bag so it
Expensive
is unlikely to be used in practice as it wastes anaesthetic gases.
10 kg and over
The Jackson-Rees modification includes a reservoir bag added
Difficult to clean
to the expiratory tubing (Fig. 27.4). This is the circuit of
Difficult to sterilize
choice for all animals under 10 kg. It has very low resistance
and IPpV is easily achieved. Nitrous oxide can be safely used.
To-and-fro
High gas efficiency
Heavy and too close to
Flow rates are shown in Table 27.11. The range of flow rates
system
Good heat conservation
the patient
depends on body size, metabolic rate, respiratory disease, etc.
Low resistance
No IPPV
 Denitrogenation is quick
Increasing dead space
As the waste gases vent from the open end of the reservoir
Simple
with time
bag, scavenging can be a problem. In some cases attach-
Good control of gas
Channelling
ments can twist and occlude gas flow, so some T pieces have
concentration
Bronchiolitis
S pue  a ara isnl pp aa Aoxa 
Easy to clean and sterilize
Hyperthermia may
to the scavenging unit is attached to it (Fig. 27.5). This has
OCCUT
a greater resistance to expiration and is used in 5-10 kg
IPPV, intermittent positive pressure ventilation
animals.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
593
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Reservoir bag
Table 27.11 Flow rates for non-rebreathing circuits
Corrugated tubing
Type of circuit
Flow rate
To
scavenge
Jackson-Rees modified
2.5-3.5 (average 3) × minute volume =
Ayre's T piece
flow rate in l/min, e.g.
for a 5 kg animal - 3 × 300 ml × 5 kg =
4.5 l/min
for a 10 kg animal - 3 × 250 ml × 10 kg =
7.5 l/min
Fresh gas inflow
Bain
2.5-3.5 (average 3) × minute volume
Magill
0.8-1 × minute volume
Lack
1-1.5 × minute volume
 Parallel
Lack 1-1.5 × minute volume
The Bain is useful in patients of 10-20 kg. Flow rates are
shown in Table 27.11. It is good for administering IPPV. The
tubing should be checked before use to ensure that the inner
Fig. 27.4 Jackson-Rees modified Ayre's I piece
tube has not become disconnected.
A modified Bain circuit can be used but as it does not use
coaxial tubing the incoming gas is not warmed by the expired
gases (Fig. 27.7). However, resistance is reduced by having a
larger diameter of expiratory tube.
Fresh gas inflow
Expiratory valve > scavenge
 Norman mask 
Expiratory valve scavenge
elbow system
Inflow gas
To patient
Expired gas
-Reservoir bag
Fig. 27.5 Modified Ayre's I piece with variation in the scavenging
Reservoirbag
valve, which provides greater assistance with expiration and can
therefore be used in animats of 5-10 kg
Bain circuit
This circuit is similar to the T piece but uses coaxial tubing
(Fig. 27.6). The coaxial system involves placing one part of
the tubing within another so that heat from exhaled gases
can be transferred to the incoming fresh gas. Scavenging is
achieved by attaching tubing to the expiratory valve; expired
 gases are then conducted along the outer tubing and out
through the valve. The reduced diameter of the expiratory
tubing and the expiratory valve creates a higher resistance
than a T piece.
Fig. 27.6 The Bain circuit
594
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Inflow gas
Expiratory valve to
scavenge system 
Fresh ,
To
gas
patient
To patient
Expiratory valve
Inspiration - Fresh gas
 tavels down to the animal
Scavenge
Reservoir bag
Fig. 27.7 The modifed Bain circuit
Start of expiration - Dead
 space gas travels back up the
Magill circuit
The Magill circuit is very simple and takes the animal's
anatomical dead space into account, reducing the fresh gas
s an su s as pp a (s  sha
27
composition as the inflow gas so it can be used again without
causing carbon dioxide build-up. The circuit is cheap, simple
 to clean and sterilize and can be used in animals over 10 kg.
Flow rates are shown in Table 27.11. If IPPV is used, the flow
rate should be increased to 1.5 × minute volume. However, a
Magill circuit is not ideal for IPpV because of the position of
Late expiration - Incoming
the expiratory valve.
 fresh gas pressure causes 
exhaled gases to vent to
scavenge
Lack circuit
This is essentially a coaxial Magill circuit (Fig. 27.9). The
inflow gas comes down the exterior tubing and the expired
gases leaves through the interior pipe and out of the expira-
tory valve. There is a risk that the inner tube may become dis-
connected but there is no easy way to check for this before
 Re-inspiration - Dead space
gas flushes out tubing and re
enters animal followed by 
fresh gas
Fig. 27.8 Movement of gas within the Magill circuit
Expired gas through inner tube
Fresh gas
inflow
To patient
use. IPPV is easier than in the Magill circuit. Flow rates are
shown in Table 27.11.
Reservoir bag
The parallel Lack circuit is a non-coaxial system that was
designed to make maintenance and inner tube safety better
(Fig. 27.10). It has a lower resistance, so paediatric versions
can be used on animals of 5 kg upwards. It has the same flow
Fig. 27.9 The Lack circuit
 rate as a Lack circuit but does not warm incoming gas.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
595
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Expiratory valve
Table 27.12 Endotracheal intubation
Scavenge
Advantages
Disadvantages
MN
Airway protection
Increased resistance to breathing
 Direct connection to incoming
Iatrogenic damage to larynx or
 To patient
gases
trachea
Cuffed tube protects
Kinking. Blockage may cause
inhalation of oral material
respiratory obstruction
Fresh gas
Cuffed tube prevents
 Endobronchial or intra oesophageal
inflow
breathing round the tube
intubation possible
and anaesthetic gas escaping
into the theatre environment
IPPV possible
Reduced mechanical dead space
IPPV, intermittent positive pressure ventilation
Fig. 27.10 The parallet Lack crcuit
lungs. Anaesthesia removes the protective reflexes of the
pharynx and larynx that normally keep the airway function-
ing so, ideally, all animals should be intubated, using an
The Humphrey ADE breathing
endotracheal tube that connects the anaesthetic circuit
system
directly to the respiratory tract. This prevents gas leaving via
the animal's mouth and prevents the inhalation of foreign
This recent innovation is a system that has a switchable soda
material, e.g. regurgitated stomach contents. Table 27.12
lime canister so it can be used either as a rebreathing or a
shows the advantages and disadvantages of intubation.
non-rebreathing system.
Tube types and selection
Management of the
The Magill tube is the typical red rubber tube seen in most
patient's airway
practices. it may also be made from PVC (Fig. 27.11). The
distal end is bevelled to allow easier separation of the ary-
tenoid cartilages. The cuff is also at the distal end and is
During gaseous anaesthesia the patient must have a steady
inflated via a pilot tube and balloon system. The cuff seals the
supply of carrier gas and anaesthetic agent delivered to its
 gap between the tube and the tracheal mucosa, providing an 
airtight seal. This prevents inhalation of debris and the
animal breathing around the tube, but if overinflated it can
Box 27.1 Definitions of respiratory
measurements
● Tidal volume - volume of gas inspired at each breath.
15-20 ml/kg. Higher values in smaller animals.
● Respiratory rate - number of breaths per minute.
Usually 10-15 breaths per minute.
● Minute volume - tidal volume X respiratory rate.
Approximately 200-300 ml/kg/min.
● Dead space - area where gaseous exchange does not
take place. May be anatomical, i.e. trachea, bronchi and
bronchioles, or mechanical, i.e. endotracheal tube and 
exhausted area of soda lime in canister.
● Airway resistance - resistance to the flow of gas
through the airway. Depends on the viscosity of the gas
and the diameter and length of the circuit tubing.
Fig. 27.11 Red rubber and PVC endotracheat tubes
596
 Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Table 27.13 Endotracheal tube type comparison
scapula. The tube is passed between the arytenoids. In cats
 the arytenoids should be anaesthetized with a lignocaine spray
Rubber
PVC
to avoid laryngospasm. The tube should not protrude beyond
Stiff - easier to intubate
Softer
the tip of the nose, to reduce mechanical dead space. It
Poor resistance to kinking
Moulds itself to the local
should be secured to the maxilla or mandible using a length
anatomy at body temperature
of soft bandage to prevent accidental extubation during pa-
Thick walls
Can be armoured
tient manipulation. The animal should be connected to the
Vapour from respiration may
circuit and 100% oxygen supplied until you can see that the
animal is breathing satisfactorily. The cuff should be inflated.
help to indicate that tube is in
the trachea
Anaesthetic masks
cause damage to the tracheal rings and mucosa and may also
These may seem old-fashioned and are often overlooked but
occlude the main lumen of the tube.
they can be extremely useful in certain circumstances. There
are two main types - malleable black rubber or a clear plastic
The size printed on the tube relates to the internal diameter
cone with a black rubber seal.
and this affects the resistance to breathing. For example, a
thick-walled rubber tube used in a small cat would result in
A mask can be used to:
the cat having to generate a huge negative pressure to ensure
● Provide oxygen pre- and postoperatively
2
adequate respiration. Anaesthetics tend to reduce respiratory
effort, so hypoventilation is a risk. Some tubes have armoured
walls - wires embedded in the plastic - and these are use-
● Provide oxygen intraoperatively in short procedures
ful where kinking may occur, e.g. head surgery, cisternal
when ketamine has been used to provide anaesthesia
puncture positioning (Table 27.13).
● Allow for gaseous induction, e.g. in neonates or when
inducing intravenously using a very low dose of drug
Intubation
in severely compromised patients
Veterinary nurses should be proficient at intubating any
● Provide maintenance in short procedures.
animal. Establishing an airway in an emergency could save a
life (see Ch.24).
The disadvantages of masks are that IPPv is almost impossi-
ble, there is an increased mechanical dead space and gas flow
Before use, make the following checks of the endotracheal
 sd       r s
tube:
means that the risk of atmospheric pollution is also high.
1. Correct size - have at least three different sizes
available in case of unexpected narrowness of the
The anaesthetic machine
trachea or intrapharyngeal obstructions
Anaesthetic machines come in a wide variety of shapes and
2. Check patency - blow through it before use to remove
sizes with varying degrees of complexity; however, the basic
any dried mucus or blood from previous patients
concept is the same (Fig. 27.12). Carrier gas is passed through
the machine via a calibrated flowmeter to the vaporizer. The
3. Check cleanliness - no debris should be left on the
anaesthetic mixture is then passed to an outlet port, to which
tube as it may enter the lungs. Ensure that any
        s
cleaning agents have been thoroughly rinsed off, as
circuit from the supply to the outlet, which is used to provide
  n  s   s
oxygen in an emergency.
4. Check that the cuff and balloon are functioning
Gas supply
5. Ensure adequate lubrication to avoid mucosal trauma.
         
       s 
  s    ss s  
suppressed by the induction agent. Select a tube of the correct
can be stored and used locally. The cylinders are made of
diameter and of a length that reaches to the level of the
molybdenum steel and are colour-coded to help identify the
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing  597
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Oxygen
Plenum
fowmeter
 Back bar 
vaporizer
Fresh gas
Pressure gauge
Regulator.
Pillar valve 
Oxygen cylinder
Fig. 27.12 A basic anaesthetic machine
 Table 27.14 Compressed gases used in anaesthesia
system, where hoses from the anaesthetic machine plug into
gas-supplying wall sockets. These systems are more expensive
Cylinder
Shoulder of cylinder
Gas
Black
White
Oxygen
 plied in large cylinders is cheaper per unit volume.
Grey
Black and white
Air
Grey
Pressurized gas cylinders are potentially very dangerous.
Grey
Carbon dioxide
Accidental damage to a cylinder can result in explosion of
Blue
Blue
 Nitrous oxide
compressed gas. In cases of fire, oxygen and nitrous oxide will
both intensify the flames.
contents (Table 27.14). They all have pillar valves, which
Cylinders should be stored upright, held against a solid wall
should be rotated anticlockwise to allow the gas out. These
by chains or metal hoops in a dedicated safe area, in a quiet
pillar valves connect to the anaesthetic machine or on to
part of the practice where access is only available to trained
connector hosing. There is a pattern of holes in the pillar
staff. Most of the larger anaesthetic machines will have valve
valve that interconnect with a set of pins in the valve seat.
blocks for two cylinders each of oxygen and nitrous oxide.
This ensures that only the gas assigned to that port will fit. In
This allows for immediate access to a reserve cylinder when
a case where a large cylinder is used that does not connect
 one runs out. To avoid an accidental shortfall in gas supply.
directly on to the anaesthetic machine, the hose connector is
place tags marked ‘in use' and ‘in reserve' around the necks
also designed to accept only the valve of a particular gas.
of the cylinders and make sure that the system is used by all
staff.
Cylinder size ranges from AA to J (Table 27.15). The E-sized
cylinder with 680 1 of oxygen at 1 atmosphere contains
When a cylinder is replaced, the plastic seal should be
enough oxygen to supply a 20 kg dog for 3 h. G-sized cylin-
removed and the pillar valve examined for damage or debris.
ders tend to be used as part of the supply for a piped gas
Some gas should be vented to blow any dust away from the
orifice. The sealing O ring on the valve block should be
 checked for debris or damage.
Table 27.15 Commonly used sizes and volumes of
 oxygen cylinders
If the supplying cylinder is being changed, the animal should
Size
Volume (litres)
be disconnected from the circuit and left to breath room air
for a short period. The nearly empty cylinder valve should be
E
680
shut and the new cylinder turned on.
F
1340
G
3400
The animal is then reconnected. Leaving the original cylin-
6800
der's valve open can result in cylinder-to-cylinder transfer
C
and adiabatic heating which could prove dangerous. Some
598
 Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
 ssa nd o ap Ada a u hl aa pous ses
moisture, which can cause rust inside the cylinder.
The pressure gauge and regulator
The pressure gauge allows the anaesthetist to know how
much gas remains in the cylinder and may be part of the
anaesthetic machine or attached to a connecting hose. The
gauge is usually a curved tube that straightens out at high
 pressures, known as a Bourdon gauge.
When assessing the fullness of cylinders of most gases, you can
assume that if the pressure reading is half then the cylinder is
half full. However, measurement of the amount of nitrous oxide
in a cylinder is difficult to assess because it exists as a liquid
under pressure. To calculate the volume of gas in a nitrous oxide
cylinder you need to weigh it and apply this formula:
Full weight of cylinder (kg) - empty cylinder (kg ) × 534
= volume of gas
27
Fig. 27.14 A bobbin-type oxygen flowmeter
Once the gas enters the anaesthetic machine it encounters
a pressure reduction valve or regulator (Fig. 27.13), which
reduces the cylinder pressure to a working pressure of
 generally about 4 atmospheres.
The flow meter
The flow meter (Fig. 27.14) controls the supply of gas enter-
ing the vaporizer and circuit. There are two main types, the
 bobbin and the ball bearing, which are suspended by the gas
flow within a tapering glass tube calibrated in litres per
minute - one for each gas. Readings are taken from the top of
the floating bobbin or the equator of the ball-bearing system.
The flow meters are attached to a structure called the back bar
to which the vaporizer is also attached. The vaporizer may be
directly connected into the circuit tubing or it may attach to
a specially designed manifold, e.g. Selectatec. This allows for
a variety of type 3 and 4 Tecs, and hence anaesthetic gases, to
Fig. 27.13 Piltar valve, regutator and pressure valve.
be used on the same anaesthetic machine. At the end of the
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 599
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
back bar is the common gas outlet, to which the circuit
inhalation of waste gases by theatre staff has been linked to
attaches.
headaches, irritability, bone marrow toxicity, hepatopathies,
infertility, abortions and teratogenesis; so adequate scavenging
of volatile gases and nitrous oxide is mandatory (Table 27.16).
Safety devices
Scavenging can be provided in three ways:
The number of these depends on the design of the machine:
● Active - the method of choice. The waste gas pipe
● Oxygen failure warning device - the 'bosun's
 a q d re e  ss an so
whistle'. As the oxygen pressure fails a valve opens,
suction system removes them from the building and
allowing gas to escape through a whistle. In some
out into the open air. The air gap is designed to
machines where nitrous oxide is in use the gas enters
prevent the suction system from removing gas from
the whistle if oxygen pressure falls
the anaesthetic circuit
● Nitrous oxide cut-out - if the oxygen runs out,
● Semipassive - waste gases pass down a wide-bore
some machines will cause the nitrous oxide supply to
tube to a ventilation system, which expels the gas to
be cut off, which stops the animal breathing 100%
the outside air
nitrous oxide, which would result in hypoxia.
● Passive - waste gas passes down a wide-bore tube and
● Over pressure valve - any blockage to gas flow
into a canister that contains activated charcoal and
beyond the common gas outlet will cause an alarm to
reacts with hydrocarbon volatile gases, e.g. halothane,
sound and the gas to escape out of the valve
ether. These canisters do not remove nitrous oxide.
They must be weighed frequently to determine when
● Oxygen flush or purge valve - takes oxygen
they have become saturated and inactive.
directly from the regulator, bypassing the flowmeters
and vaporizers. It provides oxygen in emergencies and
Theatre pollution monitoring should be carried out routinely
can be used to flush the circuitry out at the end of the
and the following steps should be taken to reduce pollution:
anaesthetic process
● Fill the vaporizer in a well-ventilated room
● Check valves - these prevent backflow of gas from
full cylinders to empty ones.
● Clean up spillages of volatile agents immediately and
increase room ventilation
Waste gas management
● Flush the anaesthetic system with oxygen at the end of
use
Once the anaesthetic and carrier gases have passed back out
of the animal, they must be safely removed from the working
● Allow recovery of animals in a well-ventilated room as
environment by a process known as scavenging. Health
they can continue to excrete volatile agents for many
and Safety legislation specifically relating to anaesthesia is
hours, especially in the case of halothane
incorporated in a set of recommendations known as the
Anaesthetic Agents: Controlling Exposure under the Control
● Use a cuffed endotracheal tube to prevent the escape
of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 1994. Chronic
of anaesthetic mixtures
● Avoid induction by mask or anaesthetic chambers.
Table 27.16 Current maximum exposure per
8-hour period 
Anaesthetic gas
Maximum exposure (parts per million)
Nitrous oxide
100
anaes
Halothane
10
Enflurane
50
Isoflurane
50
400
Once anaesthetized, the patient's critical parameters must be
Ether
continually assessed by the anaesthetist and in small animal
600
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
practice this tends to be entirely the responsibility of the
1. Voluntary excitement, fear, apprehension, disorienta-
nurse. The nurse must know the normal values of these
tionn
 sp no soa An dn yrd on spo  sad
2. Start of unconsciousness until respiration stabilizes
there is now an increasing use of anaesthetic monitoring
equipment a well trained and alert nurse is still the best way
3. Surgical anaesthesia - subdivided into four planes
of monitoring and controlling an anaesthetic. Anaesthesia
is all about the correct balance between unconsciousness,
4. Overdose, including respiratory paralysis and pale
analgesia and physiological stability.
mucous membranes.
Monitoring should begin once the premedication has been
This is not directly relevant to veterinary anaesthesia but the
given and it should cease once the animal is fit to be sent
phases can be recognised in animal patients.
home.
Stages 1 and 2 are often not observed because of the rapid
The following parameters must be measured:
smooth induction achieved with intravenous agents.
● Central nervous system depression - depth of
In stage 3 - surgical anaesthesia - the four planes refer to
anaesthesia
increasing depth with reducing neurological signs and
increasing cardiovascular depression. If the anaesthetic
● Cardiovascular function - heart rate, pulse rate and
reaches overdose there is severe cardiovascular depression
quality, mucous membrane colour, respiratory depth
and no neurological reflexes, leading to death. Recovery
2
and effectiveness
involves the reverse of the three stages.
● Body temperature
CNS depression is mostly monitored by cranial nerve reflexes.
although the withdrawal reflex (toe web pinch) is still useful.
● The following parameters should be measured if
possible:
Cranial nerve reflexes
● Blood pressure
● Palpebral reflex - touch the medial canthus of the
eye to stimulate a blink. This is present in light planes
● ECG
of anaesthesia. It can be reduced by repetition. It
should be very sluggish or absent for adequate surgical
● Exhaled carbon dioxide
anaesthesia
● Urine output
● Corneal reflex - not very useful. It may be present
even in very deep anaesthesia and its absence is best
● Fluid-acid-base balance
used to ascertain brain death
● Loss of blood during surgery.
● Eye position - as the depth of unconsciousness
increases the eye moves to a ventromedial position
and then returns to a central position. This can prove
confusing because the eye may be central if the animal
Central nervous system
is too light or too deep, but in the latter case there will
depression
be no palpebral reflex. In ketamine anaesthesia the eye
may remain central at all times
The depth of anaesthesia required depends on the procedure
being undertaken; for example, a dog anaesthetized for
radiography only needs to be immobilized and have ade-
will dilate but should still be responsive to light. This
quate muscle relaxation as there will be no noxious stimuli
e audoe i'a 'pasn sinp Aq paouanu aq osie u
applied to it, while a fracture fixation will require a deeper
ketamine
plane of unconsciousness, excellent muscle relaxation and
analgesia.
● Jaw tone - in the initial phases of anaesthesia there is
strong jaw tone and the animal will often make
Descriptions of the depth of anaesthesia are classically related
masticatory movements. These should be absent in
to the four stages of anaesthesia noted in human anaesthesia:
surgical anaesthesia
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
601
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
· Pharyngeal/laryngeal reflexes - should be absent.
Table 27.17 Normal clinical parameters used to
Ketamine anaesthesia preserves these reflexes
monitor anaesthesia
● Lacrimation - present in light anaesthesia but absent
Cinical parameter
Dog
Cat
in deeper planes. Ocular lubricants should be used to
Body temperature (°C)
38.3-38.7
38.0-38.5
protect the cornea during prolonged procedures
 Pulse or heart rate (bpm)
70-120
120-180
● Salivation - can be excessive in light planes or as a
Respiratory rate (bpm)
10-30
20-30
result of using ketamine.
Capillary refill time (s)
1-2
1-2
Mean arterial blood
60-120
60-120
In the rest of the body muscle tone should be abolished and
pressure (mmHg)
pinching the web of the toe should not evoke a withdrawal
Central venous pressure
3-7.5
3-7.5
reflex.
(mmH,0)
Normal pH of blood
7.31-7.41
7.24-7.40
The surgical planes of anaesthesia should be exhibited by:
Oxygen saturation (%)
99
99
● Poor or absent palpebral reflex
Pa0, - room air (mmHg)
85-105
100-115
100% 0, (mmHg)
500
500
● Ventromedial or slightly rising eye position
PaCO2 (mmHg)
29-42
29-42
End tidal CO2 (mmHg)
35-54
32-35
● No jaw tone
Urinary output (ml/kg/h)
1-2
1-2
● No pedal skin pinch withdrawal
● No muscle tone
● Precordial auscultation - this allows good
assessment of rate and rhythm but draping or
● Constricted pupil.
operative positioning may preclude its use
● Oesophageal auscultation - using an oesophageal
stethoscope. This can be good for non-oral surgery as
Cardiovascular parameters
the nurse can remain remote from the animal.
Positioning is critical and there is an increased risk of
Increasing the amount of gaseous anaesthetic to achieve sur-
oesophageal stricture.
gical anaesthesia can cause detrimental effects on the physi
ology of the heart and lungs. The depth of anaesthesia must
be moderated by considerations for cardiovascular function.
Heart rhythm
The anaesthetic agent is not the only influence on this
system, as surgical stimulation, haemorrhage, etc., also alter
This should be regular or showing sinus arrhythmia, i.e.
its function.
accelerating on expiration and decelerating on inspiration.
If an irregular heart rhythm is detected, an ECG should be
Technology has produced many aids to cardiovascular moni-
 performed immediately.
toring. However, the nurse must not rely on these and must
continue to make the following basic checks:
Pulse
Heart rate
 Pulse is described as the difference between systolic and dias-
Rate depends on species, physical state, disease state, breed,
tolic arterial pressure. It is generated by left ventricular con-
size, level of fitness, etc. Examples of normal values are the
traction combined with elastic recoil of the arterial system.
 01 -  n ' 6 1-01 - 1
o pa aa ps e pd e po dd pa
large, fit dog - 70-120 bpm (Table 27.17).
every 5 min to ascertain pulse rate and quality. Pulse rate
should be the same as heart rate. Any discrepancy indicates
Monitoring the heart rate can be done using a stethoscope in
cardiac electrical problems, so an ECG should be carried out.
three simple ways:
Pulse quality is a subjective assessment and can only be
learned with time but it gives a general indication of cardiac
● Palpation of the apex beat
output and therefore tissue perfusion. If the patient is suffer-
602
 Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
ing from hypotension then peripheral pulses are likely to be
Table 27.18 Mucous membrane monitoring
absent or weak; if the pulse is hyperdynamir then it is
Mucous membrane colour
Condition
described as bounding; if there is only a small difference
between systolic and diastolic pressures, i.e. poor cardiac
Pink
Good perfusion and oxygenation
function, it is described as being thready. Normal values are
Brick red
Hypercapnia
shown in Table 27.17.
White
Anaemia, vasoconstriction,
hypotension
Blue/purple
Hypoxia - difficult to assess if 
Mucous membrane colour and capillary
anaemic
refill time
Yellow
Jaundice
This is easy to assess in animals with non-pigmented gums
Congested brown/red
Toxaemia
and is useful in assessing tissue perfusion and oxygenation
Grey
No cardiac output
(Table 27.18). Capillary refill time is an indicator of perfusion
but it can be misleading - dead animals may still have a refill
Monitor
animals haemoglobin saturation may be 100% but overall
Oxygen carriage may be significantly reduced. This will not be
revealed by pulse oximetry.
2
The pulse oximeter is at its most useful during recovery, when
Most practices will now have some form of anaesthetic mon-
the patient has been taken off the oxygen and monitoring
itoring equipment. The most common is the pulse oximeter,
intensity has often been reduced. Any hypoxia when the
but real-time ECGs, capnographs and arterial blood pressure
animal is physiologically stressed by recovery may result in
monitors may be available.
myocardial arrhythmias and cardiac arrest.
The most common reason for alteration in reading is artefac-
Pulse oximeters
tual. Probes may be placed on the tongue, lip, pinna, vulval
labia, prepuce and toe web. As the probe compresses the skin
it reduces its perfusion, so reducing pulses detected and local
       e 
oxygenation. The more expensive oesophageal probes do not
the arterial oxygen saturation of haemoglobin by comparing
suffer from this problem.
the absorption of red and infrared light through the epithe
lium. They then give a read out of oxygen saturation in the
 i ose a aad e se pasxa 'o's) s
masn Aiaa aq uen asnd riaaa ie daag, arapne uy 'aei asnd
in alerting any change of pulse rate between standard manual
Electrocardiography
counts. They should not be solely relied upon because, if the
So, does fall when the animal is already breathing oxygen-
Electrocardiography records the electrical activity of the heart
enriched gas, then this means other parameters are probably
muscle, but this may not reflect the mechanical activity of
already badly deranged, e.g poor cardiac output, hypercap-
the heart. Electromechanical dissociation is a condition,
nia, etc.
often seen during cardiac arrest, where the electrical trace is
normal but there is no cardiac contraction. ECGs are prima-
If So, falls to 90% it means that Po2 is only 60 mmHg;: if Sa02
rily for the detection of dysrhythmias, which could affect
falls to 75% then there is inadequate ventilation and reme
cardiac performance or lead to cardiac arrest. Any critically ill
a od   x n o  i  p
animal should have leads attached prior to induction and for
lated animal will have 95% saturation, so 75% shows the
the duration of the anaesthetic.
presence of severe cardiovascular compromise. The poor ven-
tilation indicated will also mean that carbon dioxide levels
Arrhythmias may be caused by many things, e.g. cate-
will have built up, which should have stimulated increased
cholamines, anaesthetic agents, hypoxia, hypercapnia, elec-
ventilation. The absence of respiratory drive indicates that
trolyte disturbances, myocardial disease or myocardial
CNS depression is too great, so anaesthesia should be light-
trauma. Some arrhythmias are important and should be acted
ened. The hypercapnia may also lead to tachycardia or tachy-
upon, e.g. runs of ventricular premature complexes; others
dysrhythmia, so worsening the cardiac output. In anaemic
have little significance, e.g. sinus arrhythmia.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
603
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Blood pressure
and still effective in hypotensive patients, but is
rather clumsy to use.
Blood pressure is an extremely useful parameter to monitor
but is underused due to the technical difficulty of measuring
If hypotension is detected then remedial measures should be
it accurately in small animals. The importance of having ade-
taken:
quate blood pressure is obvious because pressure determines
tissue perfusion. If it is inadequate then the tissues become
●Reduce the depth of anaesthesia
hypoxic, hypercapnic and acidotic, which leads to cellular
failure. If the mean arterial pressure drops below 60 mmHg.
● Administer fluid therapy - rapid infusions of
then certain pathological signs may be apparent post
crystalloid or colloid fluids
operatively, e.g. blindness in cats, renal failure.
● Cardiac stimulation - in severe cases drugs such as
A rise in blood pressure may be due to anaesthetic drugs; for
dobutamine may be required.
example, alpha-2 agonists cause initial hypertension due to
massive peripheral vasoconstriction, or to pain because of
inadequate analgesia causing catecholamine release. A fall in
Central venous pressure
blood pressure may be due to reduced cardiac output because
of myocardial depression or to inadequate circulating blood
Central venous pressure (CVP) measures the blood pressure in
volume, i.e. lack of blood or widespread vasodilation
the intrathoracic cranial vena cava and represents the ade
quacy of circulating blood volume. Each animal may have a
There are two methods of measurement:
slightly different CVP, so actual values are not as important as
the trend, i.e. pressure changes. For example, if CVP starts
● Direct - this is achieved by placement of an
 as 5-10 cm HO but later drops, this may indicate hypo
indwelling catheter in a peripheral artery, e.g. dorsal
volaemia. Measurement of CVP also enables the response to
metatarsal artery. This is connected directly to either a
pressure transducer, which gives a reading for systolic,
introducing a catheter via the jugular vein and passing it
diastolic and mean arterial pressure, or an aneroid
down into the vena cava. This is connected to a manometer
manometer, which only displays mean arterial
or to a fluid bag, where the distance between the catheter tip
pressure. This technique is easy to perform but it is
and the fluid level equals the CVP.
  d s o n- p ns
It is extremely useful in critical cases
Body temperature
● Indirect
Anaesthesia disrupts the body's ability to thermoregulate. It
● Oscillometric sphygmomanomeiry - relies on arterial
depresses CNS reflexes to temperature changes and the body's
occlusion by a cuff that is inflated above systolic
ability to initiate action to increase heat production by shiv
pressure to occlude the artery. The cuff is then
ering and muscular movement. Core body temperature may
slowly deflated until either the cuff detects systolic
drop markedly (hypothermia) and very small animals, meta
pulsations or Korotkoff sounds are auscultated by
bolically compromised animals and those with poor or wet
the operator. The cuff is then further deflated until
coats are particularly at risk (Table 27.19).
the pulsation or Korotkoff sounds decrease which
gives diastolic pressure. Automatic monitoring
The effects of hypothermia are:
machine, e.g. Dinamap, Kritikon, can be programmed
to repeatedly cycle these inflations and produce a
● Reduced CNS activity, thus increasing depth of
read-out of systolic, diastolic and mean pressure and
anaesthesia - hypothermic animals need less
pulse rate. The disadvantage of these machines is
anaesthetic agent
      n 
in large dogs, where a wide cuff can be applied to a
● Reduced cardiac output
distal limb, but in small dogs and cats where only a
narrow cuff can be used the readings are less
● Increased chance of arrhythmias
accurate, especially if the animal is hypotensive
● Increased blood viscosity.
● Doppler flow detection - a cuff is used to occlude
arterial flow and the pulsations are detected by a
As none of these are desirable, efforts should be made to
Doppler ultrasound probe. This is a cheap method
maintain normothermia.
604
 Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Table 27.19 Causes of heat loss during anaesthesia
Adequate respiratory rate is not an indication of adequate res-
piration. Respiratory rate monitors are of very little use
Cause of heat loss
Method of reducing heat loss
because a respiratory rate of 10-12 breaths per minute is rec-
Large body surface to body
Be aware of the problem. Minimize
ognised as normal but if the depth of respiration is insuffi-
weight ratio.
hair clipping. Wrap body in 'bubble
         
Problem in small animals
wrap' or 'space blankets'
assessment of depth of respiration can be made by watching
Evaporation from fluids on
Avoid excessive wetting of skin and
the effect of chest movements on the reservoir bag. Shallow
surface of animal
use of surgical spirit to sterilize
breathing may lead to poor gas exchange and insufficient
surgical site
uptake of volatile agent, so destabilizing the anaesthetic.
Non-rebreathing circuits
Limit anaesthetic time. Use heat
with high oxygen flow
exchange circuits
Mechanical respiration monitors
 Open body cavities expose
Limit exposure of viscera to the air.
serosal surfaces to room aif
Warm intravenous fluids
Capnographs
Conduction of body heat from
 Avoid use of stainless steel table
These are excellent for monitoring the adequacy of ventila-
cold surface of operating
tops. Use insulated or heated
tion. The probe is connected between the endotracheal tube
table
surface
and the anaesthetic circuit and they measure the respiratory
Radiation - direct heat
Warm room temperature - even to
rate and carbon dioxide levels per breath. This gives accurate
exchange between patient's
the point of discomfort for staff
information on the efficiency of gas exchange. High carbon
body and room environment
dioxide levels may indicate hypercapnia or acidosis, which
leads to increased expiration of carbon dioxide. More
2
advanced machines may also have monitors for inspired and
expired oxygen content and levels of volatile agents. The
Core temperature is measured with an oesophageal ther.
final carbon dioxide content of tidal air (end-tidal CO2)
mometer; peripheral temperature is measured by a rectal ther-
approximates to PcO2-
mometer. Measurement of core temperature is the more sig-
nificant because in shocked animals with peripheral shut-
Blood gas analysis
down the rectal temperature may be very low yet the core
This is widely used in human and equine anaesthesia but it is
temperature remains adequate.
rarely seen in small animal practice due to the cost. Blood
o os ae id e    ae s
Upon recovery from anaesthesia the animal should be kept in
PO, and pH, base excess, HCO, K, Na and other electrolytes
a warm environment and kept well insulated, e.g. 'bubble
can all be accurately assessed. Thus adequacy of ventilation,
wrapped', but it should not be wrapped up in blankets. Their
adequacy of oxygen supply, and respiratory or metabolic
acid-base imbalances can be detected and corrected.
d       
on the thoracic wall will exacerbate this, leading to hypoxia.
hypercapnia and their sequelae.
Urinary
output
Hypotension can reduce renal blood supply and renal function
Respiration
so reducing urine production. In severe hypotension, hypoxia
of renal tubular cells can cause renal failure. Catheterizing a
The entire body needs to be well oxygenated during anaes-
bladder is cheap and easy. If the catheter is attached to a col-
thesia and this is usually easily achieved by providing an
lecting bag then the volume of urine produced per unit time
oxygen-enriched carrier gas for the volatile anaesthetic agent.
o i h  sh/ I  s aq ous iI asss aq 
However, adequate respiration must also ensure adequate
then fluid therapy is required. If blood tests indicate acute renal
carbon dioxide removal and normal blood pH.
failure then furosemide or mannitol may be required.
Muscle relaxation
smooth muscle or cardiac muscle. They do not affect the CNS
so have no effect on the level of consciousness; the anaes-
thetist must therefore still ensure that adequate hypnosis and
In veterinary practice the muscle-relaxant properties of the
analgesia is present before surgery begins. Assessing the level
anaesthetic agents provide adequate relaxation for most pro-
of unconsciousness is much harder under the influence of
cedures. Specific muscle-relaxant drugs cause complete neuro-
muscle relaxants because the normal signs used to assess
muscular blockage in skeletal muscle but have no effect on
it, i.e. movement, vocalization, eye position and the cranial
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
605
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analqesia
nerve reflexes, are abolished. In addition, because the muscles
of respiration are paralysed, IPpV must be instituted.
anticholinesterases, which block the breakdown of acetyl
choline, increasing its concentration at the neuromuscular
    s o  
end plate and out-competing the relaxant drug. Too much
acetyl choline can cause side effects, so antimuscarinic
● Depolarizing agents (succinyl
agents, e.g. neostigmine or edrophonium plus atropine or
choline/suxamethonium) - similar to
glycopyrrolate, are given at the same time.
acetylcholine and bind to the postsynaptic receptors
This lasts for 3-5 min in cats and 20 min in dogs. It
The action of neuromuscular blocking agents is monitored by
cannot be reversed and is only really used clinically to
stimulating a peripheral nerve with a small electrical stimula-
aid intubation in cats. It can cause muscle pain
tor. The number and degree of muscle twitches are used to
assess the depth of blockade.
its use cannot be recommended
Muscle relaxation is used in the following cases:
● Non-depolarizing agents - more widely used as they
are reversible and can be topped up. There are many
available and they act by competing with acetylcholine
● Thoracic procedures, e.g. thoracotomies, diaphragm
to block the postsynaptic receptors (Table 27.20). They
repairs - IPpV can be accurately controlled
do not cause hyperkalaemia or muscle pain.
● Oesophageal foreign bodies can cause marked spasm of
Table 27.20 Muscle relaxants
the surrounding muscles and neuromuscular
Drug
Duration
Comments
relaxation may aid their removal without recourse to
surgery
Pancuronium
Lasts 40 min
 Some hypertension and 
tachycardia
● Surgery requiring total immobility of the patient, e.g.
Vecuronium
Lasts 30 min
Better cardiovascular stability
ophthalmic or neurological procedures
Breakdown is not dependent
on liver function
● Orthopaedic procedures or laparotomies in large
Atracurium
Lasts 40 min
Histamine release possible
muscular dogs to increase access to the operative
site.
Intermittent positive
the number of chest excursions while keeping the patient on
100% oxygen will allow the carbon dioxide levels to rise
pressure ventilation
again and stimulate a normal respiratory pattern.
 Note It is good practice in spontaneously ventilating animals
IPPV is the act of ventilating a patient by squeezing the reser
periodically to generate a supramaximal tidal excursion
voir bag at regular intervals and its use may be indicated
(sighing) to re-expand the lungs, which will spontaneously
 during thoracic surgery, diaphragmatic surgery or in cases of
collapse with time. It also allows assessment of lung com-
poor spontaneous ventilation. IPpV can be achieved in small
pliance; for example, increased resistance will occur if pneumo-
animals by mechanical or manual compression of the bag
thorax is present.
without recourse to neuromuscular blockade.
1i os ssand jeu e jou si sni shuaned e otu se so
 In most practices Ippv involves the nurse squeezing the reser-
does have some negative physiological effects:
voir bag within a suitable circuit, e.g. T piece, Bain or circle
system, causing a normal or slightly supranormal chest excur-
● Reduced venous return - normally negative
sion. This is carried out 10-12 times per minute and in most
intrathoracic pressure aids the flow of blood back to
cases will provide adequate oxygenation, removal of carbon
the heart. In IPpV there is positive intrathoracic
 dioxide and provision of anaesthetic gas. There is a slight risk
 pressure, which reduces venous return and cardiac
output
deeper anaesthesia than is required, so the concentration dial
on the vaporizer may need to be set slightly lower than for
● Carbon dioxide tension is altered, with consequent
spontaneous ventilation. At the end of anaesthesia, reducing
pH imbalance.
606
 Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
Mechanical ventilators
Inadequate IPPV results in hypercapnia, respiratory acido-
sis, arrhythmias, increased intracranial pressure, increased
These perform IPpV mechanically, avoiding the need for the
tissue perfusion and increased haemorrhage at the operation
nurse to squeeze the bag at regular intervals, and there are a
site.
great many on the market. Some rely on dividing the fresh
gas inflow into breaths, while others essentially squeeze a
reservoir bag with a predetermined volume of gas. They can
Excessive IPPV results in hypocapnia, hypotension,
be set to administer the gas at a safe pressure, i.e. less than
reduced tissue perfusion, especially in the CNS, and loss of
20 cmH,O, to avoid pulmonary barotrauma. Manual IPPV
the stimulus to breathe.
relies on experience to avoid trauma.
Anaesthet
● Hypothermia
emergencies
● Toxaemia
● Drug overdose
When the patient is anaesthetized it has no protective mech-
anisms and is entirely dependent on the anaesthetist to
●Hyperkalaemia
provide adequate cardiorespiratory function. Problems may
arise within the patient or in the delivery of the anaesthetic
● Acidosis.
2
ing situations.
Signs of cardiac arrest
The most frequent time for emergencies to occur is during
recovery, when hypotension, lack of a protected airway, shiv-
● Absence of heart sounds and pulse
ering to rewarm and relapsing into unconsciousness are all
common. Most problems involve:
● Mucous membranes grey or very pale in colour
● Cardiovascular compromise
●Absence of haemorrhage
● Respiratory compromise
● Gasping ventilation or apnoea
● Thermoregulatory compromise
● Eye position centralizes
● Delayed recovery to full consciousness.
● Dilated pupils
● Absence of cranial nerve reflexes.
Cardiac arrest
Treatment
If the heart stops beating the circulation fails and the main
organs will start dying within 3 min. An effective circulation
 An emergency protocol should be established in the practice
must be restored within 1-2 min to avoid brain damage. If resus-
so that everyone knows what role they should play (see also
citation takes longer than this the future ability of the animal to
Ch. 20). A fully equipped and regularly maintained emer-
function properly will be reduced by brain damage.
gency kit should be close to hand and cardiopulmonary
resuscitation should be started, following the ABCDEF rule:
Cardiac arrest is usually the result of several factors but if only
a single cause is present the chances of a successful resuscita-
tion are greater. Causative factors include:
A Airway
Ensure it is patent. Clear the throat and intubate.
● Hypoxia
B Breathing
● Hypercapnia
Supply 100% oxygen and commence supramaximal chest
● Arrhythmias
excursions every 5 s
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
607
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
C Circulation
drugs - adrenaline (epinephrine) and atropine. Adminis-
Support circulation by either:
tration of these drugs may be made more difficult by the
collapse of the patient's circulation.
● External thoracic massage - compress the chest wall in
an area immediately caudodorsal to the heart in
s  l a a   s a
Routes of administration:
dogs or cats
● Peripheral vein - drugs may not reach the heart in
● Direct compression of the exposed heart through a thora-
sufficient concentration
cotomy incision. This is a much more effective method
of providing circulation and it allows you to see the
● Jugular vein - intravenous injection is easy and
myocardium for the administration of intracardiac
more effective, especially if a long intravenous catheter
drugs and diagnosis of fibrillation or asystole
can be introduced
The hind limbs should be raised above the level of the heart
● Intratracheal - the drug must be diluted in saline at
to improve venous return and the abdomen should be com-
twice the normal dose and is injected via a urinary
pressed with a tight dressing.
catheter passed down the trachea. Forced inflation of
the lungs aids absorption
If the treatment is having an effect, a pulse should be palpa-
ble, the pupils should constrict and mucous-membrane
● Intracardiac injection - this can be dangerous and
colour should improve.
the heart must be surgically exposed first. If not, the
 drug could be injected into the myocardium, causing
aq po ae ruoo e io 'ep aqeda
D Drugs
lacerated. However, it does place the drug where it is
A wide variety of drugs may be required, which depend on
needed, so can be very effective.
the patient's requirements (Table 27.21). It is unlikely that in
a serious situation a diagnosis will be made of the cause
If the heart re-establishes a rhythm, the follow-up drug and
of cardiac arrest so resuscitation depends on two principal
treatment regime can be very complex and time-consuming.
Table 27.21 Drugs for cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Drug
Indication
Dose
Route
Adrenaline (epinephrine)
Asystole, bradycardia, myocardial depression
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Intravenous
Anaphylaxis
0.2-0.4 mg/kg
Intrathoracic
Atropine
Asystole, sinus bradycardia
0.02-0.04 mg/kg
Intravenous
0.4 mg/kg
Intrathoracic
Calcium gluconate
Myocardial depression, hyperkalaemia, hypocalcaemia
10 mg/kg
Intravenous
Dobutamine
Myocardial failure
Dog 2-20 μg/kg/min
Intravenous
Cat 4 μg/kg/min
Intravenous
Dexa methasone
Blood pressure support, reduction of cerebral oedema
2 mg/kg
Intravenous
Furosemide
Cerebral oedema, pulmonary oedema, acute renal failure
Dog 2-4 mg/kg
 Intravenous
Cat 1-2 mg/kg
Lignocaine
Ventricular tachycardia,
Dog 2-4 mg/kg
 Intravenous bolus 
Ventricular fibrillation
Cat 0.5-1 mg/kg
Mannitol
Cerebral oedema, acute renal failure
1-2 g/kg
Intravenous
Methyl prednisolone
Cerebral oedema
30 mg/kg q12 h
Intravenous
sodium succinate
Naloxone
Opioid reversal
0.04-1 mg/kg
Intravenous
Sodium bicarbonate
Electromechanical dissociation, acidosis
0.5-1 mEq/kg
Intravenous
608
 Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
These animals can be very ill for a considerable time period
Apnoea and hypoventilation
and will certainly require 24-h care in the early stages.
● Apnoea is the cessation of breathing
E Electrical defibrillation
● Hypoventilation is a reduction in the amount of air
The use of an electric current to convert ventricular fibrilla.
entering the pulmonary alveoli.
tion into sinus rhythm. It will not work for asystolic hearts.
The defibrillator can be applied externally via gel-coated
Both result in hypoxia and hypercapnia, which rapidly result
paddles at 1-5 J/kg. It can also be used internally after a
         
thoracotomy at 0.1-0.5 J/kg, with saline-soaked swabs
concurrently with cardiac arrest.
covering the heart.
Causes
F Follow-up
● CNS depression:
● Ventilation - continue on 100% oxygen until a
normal respiratory pattern is established. Capnography
● Properties of the anaesthetic agent or overdose, e.g.
is useful to detect acidosis due to anaerobic
 propofol given as a bolus causes apnoea
metabolism or hypocapnia due to excessive
mechanical ventilation
● Raised intracranial pressure
2
 an s p e a - an  o
● Hypothermia
support blood pressure and improve perfusion which
helps to correct metabolic acidosis. Take care in cases
● Thoracic-wall dysfunction:
with cerebral cedema as this may exacerbate it
● Pneumothorax
● Cardiac function - positive inotropes may be
required, e.g. dobutamine infusion, to support cardiac
● Mechanical restriction - heavy blankets, tight
 output and blood pressure
bandages
● Renal function - monitor urine output - should be
● Pain after thoracic surgery
over 1 ml/kg/h
● Pulmonary disease:
● CNS support - hypoxic damage to the CNS tends to
cause cerebral oedema, which may cause pressure to
● Oedema
build up in the skull in a self-perpetuating manner. It
should be treated aggressively. Reperfusion of the
● Diaphragmatic hernia
damaged areas leads to a worsening of the situation.
Corticosteroids may help reduce cedema and may
● Intrapulmonary haemorrhage
reduce the effects of free radicals liberated during
reperfusion. The head should be positioned
● Tachypnoea:
slightly elevated and hyperventilation will reduce
cerebral blood flow, so reducing intracranial
● Panting under anaesthesia so the inspired gas does
pressure
 not reach the alveoli
● Body temperature - patients tend to be
● Inadequate anaesthesia
hypothermic so need rewarming slowly. This should be
very slow in cases of cerebral oedema because a return
● Pyrexia.
to normothermia may increase the damage.
Signs of apnoea
 No respiratory movements, cyanosis of mucous membranes.
Respiratory emergencies
These can be broadly divided in to apnoea and respiratory
Treatment
obstruction.
● Check airway is patent and intubate if necessary
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
609
27
Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
● IPPV with 100% oxygen every 5-10 s, ensuring good
mouth or apply suction to the pharynx. If soft tissues
chest excursions. Failure to cause chest wall movement
are obstructing the larynx, extend the head and neck
needs investigation and might be due to
and pull the tongue forwards.
pneumothorax or thoracic effusion
If severe obstruction continues then reintubate or, if this is
● Assess level of unconsciousness and alter accordingly
impossible, perform a tracheotomy.
 an a se 'a  a  sda o
Bibliography
● Doxapram 1-2 mg/kg i.v. or sublingually is the most
Abrams-Ogg A 2000 Practical blood transfusion. In: Day M J,
 e a  nn  hs ods 
Mackin A, Litlewood J D (eds) BSAVA manual of canine and
violent recovery from anaesthesia.
feline haematology and transfusion medicine. British Small
Animal Veterinary Association, Quedgeley, Gloucestershire,
Respiratory obstruction
pp 26.3-303
This could occur at any time from premedication to recovery.
Broadbelt D 2003 Anaesthesia: perioperative fatalities. Veterinary
It is most frequently seen postoperatively when the semicon-
Review 86: 28-29
scious animal has to support its own airway, and may
Hall L W, Clarke K W, Trim C M 2001 Veterinary anaesthesia
e.g. brachycephalic breeds or after pharyngeal/laryngeal
10th edn. W B Saunders, London
surgery.
Short C E 1987 Principles and practice of veterinary anaesthesia.
Obstruction may be due to: soft-tissue obstruction of the
Williams & Wilkins,Baltimore
larynx, such as by the soft palate or tongue; foreign bodies
such as regurgitated vomit, tooth fragments, blood or mucus;
Tennant B 2005 Small animal formulary, 5th edn. Brifish Small
laryngeal spasm; oedema; or bronchospasm.
Animal Veterinary Association, Quedgeley, Gloucestershire
Intra-anaesthetic obstruction should not occur but poor
Welsh E 2003 Anaesthesia for veterinary nurses. Blackwell,
Oxford
mucus build-up in the endotracheal tube and closure of the
expiratory valve resulting in overdistension of the reservoir
bag.
Recommended reading
Aspinall V 2003 Clinical procedures in veterinary nursing.
Signs of obstruction
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
● Intraoperatively
y - extreme respiratory movements
with no movement of the reservoir bag. leading to
Dedicated chapter describes the practical aspects of setting up
 cessation of respiratory movement and bradycardia
circuits and monitoring the anaesthetic in small animal
practice.
● Pre- or postoperatively - dyspncea, snoring
sounds, increased respiratory eforts, gasping, cyanosis.
Cooper B, Lane D R (eds) 2003 Veterinary nursing, 3rd edn.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Treatment
● Intraoperatively - disconnect from the circuit; if no
gas movement, extubate and reintubate with a fresh
Welsh E 2003 Anaesthesia for veterinary nurses.Blackwell
endotracheal tube. Ventilate with 100% oxygen
Oxford
● Pre- or postoperatively - if vomiting or
Entire book devoted to the subject of anaesthesia and written for
regurgitating, place head downwards and lavage
veterinary nurses rather than veterinary surgeons.
610
 Principles of anaesthesia and analgesia
28
Equine anaesthesia
Anja Walker
Key Points
● The basic procedures performed in equine anaesthesia are
● General anaesthesia is normally maintained by the use of
very similar to those described for small animal
rebreathing circuits, i.e. circle and to-and-fro, because
anaesthesia.
the use of non-rebreathing circuits would be
● The major differences result from the fact that the horse
impracticable and costly in such a large animal.
is much larger and is capable of causing more damage to
● Local anaesthesia is a useful technique in the horse,
itself and to those around it during induction and
allowing 'standing' surgery to be performed and thus
recovery.
avoiding the problems associated with general
● Equine anaesthesia may routinely be carried out in a feld
anaesthesia. It is also used for the diagnosis of
 and the choice of drugs and equipment must be suited to
lameness.
those conditions, which may be very different from those
in an equine theatre.
Introduction
operating area, calm handling of large or diffcult animals
and a concomitant increase in safety for both patient and
Anaesthesia in equids incorporates general anaesthesia,
attendants. Modern sedative drugs available for use in equine
standing sedation and local anaesthetic techniques and is
practice, often combined with local anaesthetic techniques,
28
carried out to perform painful or difficult procedures, to posi-
allow many procedures to be performed standing that might
tion the animal in dorsal or lateral recumbency, as a method
previously have required a general anaesthetic, e.g. cheek
of restraint for fractious or un-handled animals and as a diag-
tooth removal. Local anaesthesia, e.g. perineural and intra-
nostic tool. General anaesthesia or standing chemical
articular anaesthesia (nerve or joint 'blocks'), has a major role
restraint of horses allows maintenance of a clean or sterile
to play in diagnosis, particularly of lameness.
Preoperative care
careful instructions to remove food at least 12 h before
surgery and to ensure that the horse is stabled on an unpalat-
Client instructions for
able bed. Water should not be removed until approximately
1 h prior to surgery, or when the premedicant is adminis-
presentation for animal for
tered. On admission to the clinic (and increasingly in cases of
anaesthesia
field anaesthesia), it is essential that the client be asked to
sign an anaesthetic consent. This is to safeguard the practice
Clients should be aware of the procedure to be performed when
in a legal situation and gives the veterinary nurse the op-
  n n  n  
portunity to inform the client of the risks of anaesthesia
Anaesthetics, either field- or clinic-based, should not be booked
and to answer or redirect any questions or concerns before
 in at short notice, so that all parties can be adequately prepared.
anaesthesia is performed.
The owner may or may not be asked to have the horse's shoes
removed before admission for general anaesthesia. It is prefer-
Patient assessment and
able for elective procedures to admit the horse to the clinic
the night before a general anaesthetic, to minimize the
recording of animal details
stresses associated with travelling and immediate introduc-
tion to a new environment. If the horse must be kept at home
Pre-anaesthetic records and assessment of patients for elective
the night before the anaesthetic, the owner should be given
procedures should at least consist of the following:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
28
Equine anaesthesia
● Patient name, age, sex, breed and colour (basic
Classes of risk according to
markings should be recorded if several similar animals
are present in the hospital at the same time)
physical status
● Owner name, address and telephone number,
Statistics show that routine general anaesthesia in horses
including number for contact during or after
        s
surgery
animals. This increased risk is related to their large size and
temperament as well as to their anatomy. Awareness and
● Record of any drug allergies known, tetanus vaccination
careful assessment of these risks and the laying down of
status, feed requirements and any other relevant history;
routine protocols to be carried out before, during and after all
record what equipment is left with the horse
 general anaesthetics are therefore of great importance.
● Quotes for the surgery may or may not be recorded in
The Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Equine Fatalities
writing on the admission form
(CEPEF) study (Johnston et al 2001) identified risk factors in
equine anaesthesia and found that animals could be catego-
● Anaesthetic consent forms should contain a written
rized according to several factors. Emergency colic surgery
statement of the risks of anaesthesia and must be read,
carries the highest risk of intra- or perioperative death, with
understood and signed. If a responsible party cannot
  s sn  d  s    s
attend, the form may be completed over the phone
  o   n o   
and faxed for signing
tions, such as dorsal recumbency, surgery performed out of
normal work hours and anaesthesia administered without
● Record a full pre-anaesthetic clinical examination,
premedication, all carry a higher risk of perioperative death.
including temperature, heart rate and rhythm,
The study concluded that the rate of perioperative death in
respiratory rate and auscultation of lung sounds,
equine anaesthesia is 1 in every 100.
mucous membrane colour and capillary refill
time
Pre-anaesthetic assessment of risk for each individual should
include the clinical parameters summarized above, as well as a
● Weight measured as accurately as possible, using
careful evaluation of the type, age, reason for anaesthesia and
calibrated scales or a weigh tape
physiological condition, e.g. pregnant, shocked, exhausted or
a        
● Any previously obtained relevant laboratory
 preparing the animal for and performing general anaesthesia.
results. (At present, routine pre-anaesthetic blood
sampling is only occasionally performed in equine
practice.)
Factors determining choice of
In addition to the above, especially in the case of emergency
anaesthetic agent
procedures, further information such as history of circum
stances leading up to surgery and other diagnostic procedures
Drug choice in equine anaesthesia is usually determined by
used, e.g. joint or peritoneal fluid analysis, packed cell
the following:
volume and total protein or radiographs should be included
in the records of the case.
● Type and duration of operation - these have a
bearing on drug choice; for example, muscle relaxants
may be avoided in orthopaedic and short-duration
Box 28.1 Checklist for equine
surgery, as ataxia during recovery would increase the
risk of injury
anaesthesia
● Type and condition of patient - pre-anaesthetic
● Owner is aware of procedure being performed
protocol may alter in a fractious or un-handled animal
· Shoes to be removed
to improve induction conditions for the animal and
● Horse to be admitted the night before elective
the handlers. Drugs may be altered in anaesthetizing a
procedures
horse in a state of hypovolaemic shock in order to
● If not being admitted, then starve overnight at home
minimize the depressive effects of anaesthesia
but allow water
● Normal facilities used for surgery - surgery
● Owner must sign anaesthetic consent form
routinely performed in an operating theatre on a table
612
 Equine anaesthesia
will usually have gaseous methods of anaesthetic
as the anaesthetist becomes familiar with the reactions
maintenance, whereas, for field anaesthesia and
of a variety of patients to a known drug protocol
anaesthesia performed on a cushioned floor,
total intravenous anaesthesia may be more
● Cost - this is a factor in most establishments and may
practical
restrict, for example, the acquisition of more than one
vaporizer, restricting use of more than one type of
● Anaesthetist familiarity - frequent use of certain
volatile agent. Newer generations of anaesthetic gases
drug combinations will improve anaesthetic technique
are usually more expensive than the older drugs.
Premedication
medication protocols for their physiologically beneficial
effects, e.g. analgesia and myocardial protection.
Premedication is the use of a drug or combination of drugs
given prior to or concurrently with administration of the
drugs to induce general anaesthesia (Table 28.1). Pre-
Preparation of drugs
medication is used, as in other species, to create a relaxed and
sleepy patient and in order to reduce stress and anxiety
The dosage of anaesthetic and premedicant drugs should be
during the anaesthetic procedure for both the patient and its
calculated as accurately as possible by accurate assessment of
attendants. Lack of anxiety lowers the risk of complications
the weight of the animal. Once the premedication and anaes-
that may occur as a result of adrenaline (epinephrine) release,
thetic protocol have been decided upon, dosages of the
e.g. cardiac arrhythmia. Judicious choice of drug combina-
required drugs should be calculated and the drugs should be
tions given prior to anaesthesia can allow a 50-75% reduc-
prepared and clearly labelled for use during premedication
tion of the dosage of anaesthetic agents required to both
and induction of anaesthesia. Drugs should be ready for use
28
induce and maintain anaesthesia, helping to minimize the
         
depressant effects that these drugs have on circulatory and
administration, in drip bags or bottles with the required
respiratory functions. In the horse, the use of premedication
giving set available, or in a suitable presentation for other
often aids or enables the control of unhandled, fractious
 routes of administration. Diazepam should not be drawn into
or temperamental animals. Drugs may be included in pre-
 plastic syringes until immediately prior to injection.
Analgesia
and, by reducing the stimulus of pain, improve the quality of
recovery.
Analgesia is a state of insensitivity to pain even though the
Pain can be recognised in horses in many forms:
subject is fully conscious. It involves the abolition of pain
alone while normal sensation is maintained; anaesthesia
● Subdued attitude
removes both pain and normal sensation and, in the case of
general anaesthesia, removes consciousness.
● Loss of appetite
● Increased (or decreased) respiratory rate and effort
The importance and benefits of
analgesia
● Increased (or decreased) pulse rate
Analgesia in the equine patient is important not only on
● Alteration in pupil diameter
humane grounds to reduce suffering, but also to reduce the
undesirable effects of pain, e.g. violent rolling and self-
●‘Flehmen' or curling of the upper lip
trauma associated with colic or overload strain on a limb
when resting the contralateral limb. Control of pain may
●Teeth-grinding
improve temperament and aid handling. Perioperative pain
control can reduce the amount of anaesthetic agent required
● Reluctance to move or 'guarding' of painful area
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
08
Equine anaesthesia
● Limb-resting and lameness
●Rolling
● Recumbency
●Flank-watching
● Posturing to urinate without passing urine
● Objection to palpation of painful area.
Table 28.1 Drugs used in premedication
Group
Drug
Classification
Form
Route/effect
Pharmacology
Alpha-2 agonists
Romifidine
POM-V
Injection, 10 mg/ml
i.v., quick predictable action
Combination with opioids
(sedatives)
Maximum effect 5 min after
increases depth and reliability
injection i.m., slow onset,
of sedation
Detomidine
POM-V
Injection, 10 mg/ml
less reliable, higher doses
 Side effect of hyperglycaemia
required
and polyuria; possible
Detomidine can be given by
hypotension
Xylazine
POM-V
Injection, 20 mg/ml
 sublingual route in extreme
 Sedative potency: detomidine
 0f 100 mg/ml
cases; very slow onset of
> romifi dine > xylazine
action
Analgesic potency: detomidine
> xylazine > romifidine
All are muscle relaxants
Romifidine produces least
 ataxia and is a common
premedication
Horses can still kick!
Sedivet (romifidine) has a
6-day meat withdrawal
Xylazine and detomidine not
for use in horses for human
consumption
 Phenothiazines
Acepromazine
POM-V
Injection, 10 mg/ml 
i.v. or i.m. most reliable route
 Mild-moderate sedation with
(neuroleptics)
Paste, various
 Oral, more reliable than
no analgesic properties
concentrations 
tablets
Good anxiolytic (useful for
Slow onset of action
shoeing, travelling.
Tablets, 10 mg or
 Oral, unpredictable sedation 
premedication)
25 mg
Slow onset
Given i.v., peak effect is in 
about 5 min, duration of
action 4-24 h
Orally, onset takes
approximately 1 h, duration
of action 4-24 h
Contraindicated in hypotensive
animals
Not for use in breeding
 stallions/pregnant mares
Not for use in horses intended 
for human consumption
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam
POM-V
Injection 5 mg/ml
Slow i.v. (do not give alone
Highly effective anxiolytics,
(sedative)
Human drug not 
in 2 ml
to adult horses)
low toxicity, short duration of
licensed for
Tablets 2 mg,
action
veterinary use
5 mg or 10 mg
Useful for control of seizures in
foals and pre-myelography
 Possible excitation in normal
healthy animals if given i.v.
614
 Equine anaesthesia
Table 28.1 Drugs used in premedication—-Cont'd.
Group
Drug
Classification
Form
Route/effect
Pharmacology
 Ataxia and panic in conscious
horses due to muscle relaxing
effect
Not for use in horses intended 
for human consumption
Opioids (opioid
Butorphanol
POM-V
Injection, 10 mg/ml
i.v.
Extremely potent analgesia (far
analgesics)
Morphine
CD (S2)
Injection, 10 mg/ml
i.m., i.v., epidural or
greater than NSAIDs)
bnip uewnH 
01 60 mg/ml, vials
intra-articular
Deepens and prolongs sedation
Pethidine
CD (S2)
Injection 
i.m.
 when used in combination with
alpha-2 agonists
Morphine may cause
excitement and box walking in 
pain-free horses
Torbugesic (butorphanol) has a
meat withdrawal of 0 days
Pethidine is not for use in
horses intended for human
consum ption 
Sedative-hypnotic  Chloral hydrate  POM-V
Crystalline powder
i.v. 0f oral
No longer in wide use
May be useful to sedate
untouchable horses by adding
to water (nasty taste)
28
be useful to monitor blood oxygen without the facility for pos-
nr
itive pressure ventilation.
anaes
Anaesthetic monitoring is most effective when a routine is
established to reduce the likelihood that any areas are over-
looked. Equipment that should be checked prior to an opera-
Anaesthetic drugs (Table 28.2) have a depressive effect on the
tion includes:
cardiac and respiratory functions of the patient. This depressive
effect can be life-threatening if careful and ongoing assessment
● Oxygen cylinders
of these functions is not performed and the appropriate actions
taken. Anaesthetic monitoring should be continuous and
● Adequate supplies of anaesthetic drugs required
should be carried out by one dedicated anaesthetist throughout
a procedure. Monitoring methods will depend on the condi-
● Leak check on endotracheal tube cuff
tions in which anaesthesia is being carried out - field conditions
 do not lend themselves to use of electrical monitors, which may
●Mouth gag
take some time to set up and may prolong anaesthetic time for
limited benefits. Whether in field or theatre conditions, the
● Soda lime
primary tool of anaesthesia should be observation by the anaes-
thetist and electrical equipment should only be used to
● Mats, etr., to position horse on floor or table
  d      s
anaesthetic record charts but this again should not be done at
● Anaesthetic machine, including vaporizer fluid level
the expense of careful patient monitoring. Familiarity with
monitors should be gained through training during low-risk
● Electrical monitor check
procedures. It can be argued that it is only useful to monitor
things that you have the ability to alter. For example, it may not
● Fill in patient information on anaesthetic chart.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
615
28
Eguine anaesthesia
Table 28.2 The main pharmacological properties of each of the commonly used analgesics
Group
Drug
Classification
Form
Route 
 Pharmacology (peculiar to individual
(shnp
Non-steroidal
 Phenylbutazone POM-V
Powder (1 g sachets)
Oral
Very commonly used because of low cost
anti-inflammatory
(Equipalazone)
Paste (1 g per unit/6 g per tube)
and convenient preparation
drugs (NSAIDs)
Injectable solution (200 mg/ml)
i.v.
Very irritant if injected outside the vein
Greater analgesia achieved by the
intravenous route
 Flunixin
POM-V
Powder (250 mg sachets)
Oral
The only commonly used NSAID licensed for
(Finadyne)
Paste (500 mg tube)
use in horses intended for human
Injectable solution (50 mg/ml)
i.v.
consumption 
Meat withdrawal is 7 days from the last
dose given
Ketoprofen
POM-V
Injectable solution (10 mg/ml)
i.v.
(Ketofen)
Carprofen
POM-V
 Injectable solution (50 mg/ml)
i.v.
The least damaging to gastrointestinal
(Rimadyl)
Granules (210 mg sachets)
Oral
mucosa and hence the drug of choice for
use in foals if the use of NSAIDs is
unavoidable
 Aspirin
GSL
Tablets (various formulations)
Oral
Not licensed for use in horses
Occasionally indicated for treatment of
thromboembolic disorders
Meclofenamic
POM-V
Oral granules (500 mg sachets)
Oral
acid (Arquel)
Pharmacology pertaining to all of above
Effective in the relief of pain and swelling
Act by inhibiting cyclo-oxygenase (Cox), which acts to generate inflammatory mediators
Highly bound to plasma protein; acute inflammation causes exudates rich in plasma protein, thus
carrying high levels of the drug to the site
Adverse side effects include gastrointestinal ulceration and nephrotoxicity
Foals are particularly prone to gastric ulceration and NSAIDs should be avoided in the very young
(see carprofen, above)
Use of anti-inflammatory drugs is prohibited in competition, including racing: stop use at least
8 days prior to a race or competition
With the exception of flunixin, the use of NSAIDs is prohibited in horses intended for human
consumption
Opioid analgesics, see Table 28.1.
Monitoring equipment - uses
and limitations
Box 28.2 Patient monitoring routine
Short routine procedures undertaken in a field or clinic envi-
· Clinical examination of horse at rest in the stable
ronment are often monitored purely by observation, pulse
● Observation of response to pre-medication
palpation and use of a stethoscope (Table 28.3). All equine
● Check vital signs after induction before lifting or
clinics undertaking surgery in a theatre on a regular basis
positioning
should have, as a minimum, facilities for electrocardiography
 Intra-operative monitoring using manual checks and
and blood pressure monitoring.
monitors as appropriate
· Periodic intra-operative checks on equipment
Stethoscope
● Manual monitoring should continue after the horse is
 Essential to auscultate heart and lungs, very portable, famil-
placed in recovery and observation at a distance
 iar piece of monitoring equipment. There is a limitation in
maintained until it stands up
auscultation of the heart in the unconscious horse as it can
616
 Equine anaesthesia
Table 28.3 Signs of anaesthetic depth for inhalation anaesthesia
Light Anaesthesia
Medium anaesthesia
Deep anaesthesia
Anaesthetic overdose
Eye central (or caudal)
Eye medially rotated
Eye central
Eye central
Pupil moderate dilated
Pupil dilation slight
 Pupil dilated
Pupil very dilated
Nystagmus brisk
Nystagmus slow/absent
No nystagmus
No nystagmus
Brisk palpebral reflex
Sluggish palpebral reflex
No palpebral reflex
No palpebral reflex
Brisk corneal reflex
Sluggish corneal reflex
Cornea very slow/absent
No corneal reflex
Eye wide open 
Eye closing
Eye open
Eye wide open
Lacrimation ++
Lacrimation +
Lacrimation -
Dry eye
Head and limb movement
Muscle relaxation (tendon of
Total muscle relaxation *
Muscles flaccid *
possible (tension in tendon
m. sternocephalicus relaxes) *
of m. sternocephalicus) *
Breath-holding or rapid
Regular breathing pattern
Reduced respiration rate, often
Cheyne-Stokes breathing or gasps
breathing
irregular
Anal reflex +++
Anal reflex ++
Anal reflex ±
Anal reflex -
High blood pressure
Low blood pressure
Very low blood pressure
Mucous membranes pink,
Mucous membranes pink,
 Mucous membranes pale/blue,
 Mucous membranes grey/blue
CRT < 2 s
CRT < 2 s
CRT ↑
 Pulse easily palpable
Pulse good to moderate
Weak pulse
Pulse not palpable
CRT, capillary refill time.
28
fall away from the body wall, leading to a false diagnosis of
values are an important guide to depth of anaesthesia, i.e.
cardiac arrest.
higher for ‘light' planes of anaesthesia and lower as the
sion, which is important in the horse because of the associa-
Electrocardiography
tion of poor perfusion of muscles with postoperative
myopathies. Mean arterial blood pressure should be main-
Electrocardiography (ECG) monitors show the heart rate and
tained above 65 mmHg to decrease the risk of myopathy.
the pattern of activity in the heart. They are easily and
Desirable mean arterial blood pressure in anaesthetized
quickly applied and provide easily visible, reassuring moni-
horses is 65-85 mmHg.
toring of cardiac activity. Heart rate is displayed on the screen
and an alarm will sound on most machines if this drops. The
The main limitation of direct blood pressure monitoring is
displayed heart rate should be periodically checked manually.
that some skill must be learned in the placement of arterial
because, as monitors are adapted for human use, they occa-
 catheters and use of the machine. Indirect methods involving
sionally count more than one beat for each 'PQRS' complex. It
pneumatic cuffs applied around the leg or tail are available
but are unreliable in horses.
tion. ECG in the horse is limited to giving information on rate
and rhythm. Other electrical equipment and physical move-
ment or vibration, e.g. by clippers, affect the monitor display.
Respiration monitors
Monitoring of respiratory rate, depth, rhythm and pattern
Blood pressure
is extremely important but is best achieved by observation of
the chest wall movement, excursion of the bag and sound of
the valves during respiration. Breathing should be rhythmical
i.e. arterial catheter placement. Arteries used for this pro-
and deep, with a normal rate of 6-10 breaths per minute in
cedure are the facial, transverse facial and dorsal metatarsal
the horse. Shallow breathing may lead to poor lung ven-
arteries (Fig. 28.1). The blood pressure monitor is often com-
tilation; mucous membrane colour and capillary refill time
bined with the ECG monitor. A direct blood pressure trace
should be monitored to check this. Respiratory monitors are
will give information on cardiac output, and blood pressure
usually limited to measuring rate of respiration and do not
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
28
Eguine anaesthesia
Capnograph
indicate tidal volume or lung perfusion. The expense of
acquiring a machine is unlikely to be justified.
Monitors are very useful and relatively inexpensive; they
measure the CO, in expired air (PaCO,). Elevated PaCO, can
Pulse oximeters
be addressed by increasing ventilation by compression of the
re-breathing bag manually with the pressure relief valve
Non-invasive monitoring of the haemoglobin oxygen satura-
closed. Capnometry may be more useful in showing trends in
tion of the blood (SaO,) can be achieved by a clip attached to
PaCO, than in giving absolute values.
the tongue or the nasal septum. These machines usually
measure pulse rate as well as oxygen saturation and will bleep
with each heartbeat. Pulse oximeters may be useful in field
Blood gas machines
conditions because they are easily portable, quickly con-
nected and the audible pulse signal may be useful.
These are expensive pieces of equipment that require the
ability to take arterial blood samples for immediate analysis
sn p sd d ne rood si aax s
in order to obtain accurate results. Correct sample handling
to indicate when a problem has occurred. Correcting low
is vital if accurate results are to be obtained. A blood gas
oxygen haemoglobin saturation in the horse, without means
machine will measure PaCO, PaO, and pH, which are of
of positive pressure ventilation, is extremely difficult, and
  d     
the value of these monitors without the availability of an
being anaesthetized and acid-base monitoring becomes
artificial ventilator is doubtful.
increasingly important, e.g. colic surgery (see Ch. 27).
Induction
General anaesthesia
Anaesthesia should be induced in an environment that is
safe for both the horse and handlers and one that is quiet
General anaesthesia can be considered to take place in two
and conducive to relaxation on the part of the patient. Field
stages:
anaesthesia is a good and fenced, clean fields are common
place to perform anaesthesia outside an operating theatre.
● Induction - in which the animal becomes
Account must be taken of the temperament and 'handle-ability
unconscious
of the patient and frightened or un-handled patients should be
sedated prior to being taken into an open space. It may be nec.
● Maintenance - in which the animal is administered
essary to compromise, and a hay barn with a clean, soft floor
a continuous level of anaesthetic drug in order to keep
and bales to protect the horse from colliding with hard or sharp
it in a state of unconsciousness.
 obstacles may mean not losing the patient.
618
 Equine anaesthesia
Induction boxes designed for equine anaesthesia should have
2. 'Gate' technique
padded floor and walls and, if possible, should not have any
corners, e.g. hexagonal in shape. Doors should have padding
A padded gate is hung on one wall of the induction box and
that is thick enough to ensure that they are flush with the
is used to restrain the horse against the parallel wall. One
walls on either side. Viewing hatches are desirable but mirrors
handler holds the head and another handler holds a rope
placed so that the horse can be observed during recovery also
that closes the gate by running through a ring on the parallel
work quite well. Boxes should be large enough to induce a
wall in front of the horse, thereby controlling the fall and
large horse safely but small enough to prevent the patient
preventing the horse from moving forward. The alternative
Kaaona Sunp paads Aue dn Supinq wo
to this uses several handlers to replace the gate to push the
horse against the wall as anaesthesia is induced; the effec-
Techniques for induction vary between practices. For all
tiveness of this method is greatly improved if the handlers
techniques an adequate number of trained personnel should
refrain from pushing against the horse until it starts to lose
be available to avoid mishaps and to deal with unexpected
consciousnes. If this does not happen the horse is likely to
reactions on the part of the horse.
push against the handlers and increase the risk of injuring
somebody or falling awkwardly.
1. 'Free-fall induction
3. Tilting operating table
The horse is positioned with the hindquarters in a corner and
a handler on either side of the head to encourage the horse to
The table is tilted to a vertical position and the sedated horse
drop its head and sink to the ground. This method does not
is restrained with straps against it, with a handler controlling
 nd pds  d p s  
the head. As consciousness is lost the straps take the weight
the induction area.
of the horse and the table is rotated into the horizontal posi-
tion, the horse now being in lateral recumbency. Lifting may
the horse. Recovery may involve transfer to a recovery box or
28
Box 28.3 Suggested checklist for field
 a reversal of the induction procedure.
anaesthesia, e.g. castration
· Oxygen cylinder with tubing or demand valve
● Choice of two suitable (different) sized endotracheal
Facilities required for
tubes
anaesthesia
● Pulse oximeter (if available)
Clippers
Field anaesthesia
● Scrub bowl, cotton wool and scrub solutions
Facilities required are as for induction but the area becomes
● Spare buckets for rubbish and for retaining the
the operating site and positioning of the horse is facilitated
emasculators
by using bales, sandbags or similar.
Surgical/stitch kit
Equipment needed is similar to that for a theatre environ-
Emasculators
ment with some obvious changes. Intravenous catheteriza-
● Short-stay venous catheter, three-way tap and suture
tion is desirable to allow easy ‘top-up' of the anaesthetic
material to suture catheter in place
-  n td a  n a  si
● Needles and syringes, scalpel blades
gency is advisable. This includes a suitable endotracheal tube
● Sterile swabs
with an inflatable cuff and an oxygen supply with a demand
Local anaesthetic, analgesics, antibiotics, tetanus
valve or suitable tubing, and drugs to treat cardiac arrest. A
antitoxin
pulse oximeter may be useful if available, as it is the most
easily carried and quickly attached (non-invasive) piece of
Sedative/premedicant drugs, e.g. romifidine
monitoring equipment.
· Induction drugs, e.g. ketamine and diazepam
● Maintenance drugs, e.g. sufficient ketamine for multiple
Theatre anaesthesia
top-ups or triple drip
●Adrenaline (epinephrine)
Anaesthesia in an induction box can be carried out as in the
field, if it is to be carried out without lifting the horse, for
Atropine
short uncomplicated procedures. It is preferable to have
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing  619
28
Equine anaesthesia
facilities for gaseous maintenance as the anaesthetic machine
can potentially cause excitement and induction quality is
 doubles up as a means of ventilating the animal in an emer.
greatly improved by combination with a benzodiazepine. Keta-
gency situation.
mine (2 mg/kg) and diazepam (0.01-0.2 mg/kg) can be com-
bined in the same syringe (diazepam reacts with plastic and
 For normal theatre anaesthesia, a machine for gaseous main-
should be drawn up immediately before administration); the
tenance is necessary. A variety of sizes of endotracheal (ET)
combination is given as an intravenous bolus 5 min after the
tubes should be available. Mouth gags and K-Y jelly to aid
alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonist has been given. There may be a
intubation, syringes to inflate ET tube cuffs, etc., should be
moment of ataxia before the horse sinks smoothly into sternal
available; a suitable scavenging system for the safe removal of
and then lateral recumbency, the horse should not be handled
waste gases from the area must be used. Spare oxygen canis-
and no noise made until full relaxation is achieved, which may
ters should be easily accessible if required during an anaes-
take up to 30 s. Voluntary eye movement and brisk reflexes
thetic.
thetic depth difficult. Ketamine gives minimal depression of
Various table designs are available, including tables that sink
cardiac and respiratory functions and is a good analgesic.
into the induction box floor to conventional tables in an
 Incremental top-up doses of ketamine can be used to prolong
operating area separate from induction, onto which the horse
anaesthesia without significantly prolonging recovery time.
must be lifted. An electronic or manual hoist is usually nec
essary for lifting and positioning and if so it is necessary to
Thiopentone with glyceryl guaiacolate
have either a generator or a manual backup hoist, in case of
ether (GGE)
power failure. Hobbles used for lifting must be suitable for the
hoist used and frequently checked for wear and tear.
This combination is usually used, as with ketamine and
diazepam, after alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonist sedation. GGE is
Positioning of the horse and adequate padding are vital in
given by rapid intravenous bolus to effect (50-100 mg/kg). As
a theatre, especially as the duration of the anaesthetic
the horse becomes ataxic, GGE infusion is stopped and
increases. Postoperative myopathies are distressing when a
thiopentone (5-6 mg/kg) is given also by intravenous bolus.
procedure has otherwise gone well. Horses may be positioned
The horse should be adequately restrained to avoid panic as
on purpose-made inflatable cushions or large foam rubber
ataxia develops. GGE should never be given without an anaes
mats with waterproof covering. The induction box floor may
thetic agent as inhumane conscious paralysis will result. Thio.
be too hard for longer procedures and a cushion should be
placed under the horse if surgery is to be carried out in that
always be administered via a catheter at the lowest practical
area. Attention must be paid to ensuring that there are no
concentration - in larger horses a 10% solution is required to
pressure points, particularly on the dependent muscles. In
make the dose required a practical volume. Thiopentone pro-
lateral recumbency, supports must be available to raise the
duces transient depression of respiration and blood pressure
legs slightly, so that upper and lower limbs are parallel with
and has no analgesic properties. Anaesthesia can be prolonged
the ground, in order to reduce the pressure on the lower
for short periods with thiopentone and GGE top-ups but, at
muscles and maximize venous return of blood from the
higher total doses, this will prolong recovery and increase
limbs. Secure props or suspension from overhead supports 
ataxia. Ketamine can be used to prolong anaesthesia induced
can achieve this.
with GGE and thiopentone.
Facility to measure ECG and blood pressure should be avail-
Triple drip
able and acquisition of equipment in addition to this may
depend on practice finances. A 'crash' box should be avail-
This is a method of anaesthetic maintenance that is useful in
able. All personnel should be trained so that, in the case of an
a field situation but can also be used in a theatre in place of
emergency, reaction can be quick.
gaseous methods. Anaesthesia is induced with an alpha-2
adrenoceptor agonist/ketamine/diazepam protocol; GGE
induction should be avoided to reduce the risk of GGE over.
Intravenous induction agents
dose. Triple drip can be made with xylazine or detomidine
The most commonly used intravenous anaesthetic com-
ing the chance of GGE overdose), ketamine and GGE:
binations are as follows:
e.g. 1 g ketamine
Ketamine and diazepam
10 mg detomidine or 500 mg xylazine
This combination is usually used after suitable sedation with
 an alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonist (Table 28.1). Ketamine alone
added to 500 ml ready-made 10% solution of GGE.
620
 Equine anaesthesia
Infusion is usually at a rate of about 1 ml/kg/h. This method
bophlebitis. This risk is even greater when treating an animal
should not be used for procedures longer than 90-120 min
in a state of septicaemia.
as the accumulated dose of GGE and ketamine will increase
the risk of a prolonged and ataxic recovery. Intubation and
Health and Safety issues
oxygen supplementation is recommended for procedures
lasting more than 20-30 min.
Accidental self-administration of injectable drugs used for
premedication and induction is dangerous, and can occur by
Placement of intravenous
absorption through skin and mucous membranes:
catheters
● Spills on to skin during drawing-up and administration
should immediately be washed off with large amounts
Intravenous catheterization of the horse is usually via the
of water
jugular vein. Cephalic and lateral thoracic veins can be used
in cases where one or both jugular veins are occluded.
● Contamination of the atmosphere by volatile agents
Whether the catheter is placed with or against the direction
 occurs during vaporizer filling and use. Vaporizers
of blood flow depends on the preference of the personnel
should be filled with purpose-made attachments and
involved. If large volumes of fluid are to be infused it is
 outside the operating area when possible
preferable to place the catheter with the blood flow; care
must be taken as this position increases the possibility of air
● Circuits should be regularly checked for leaks and
being drawn through the catheter and even a very small
scavenging systems should be used
quantity of air in the circulation can cause a horse to collapse.
Choice of catheter size depends on the size of the patient and
● Emptying of the rebreathing bag should be done
the catheter's intended use.
     s  
pressure release valve, rather than by detachment of
Catheters for anaesthetic induction are usually designed
the bag from the cylinder
for ‘short stay' and should be removed after recovery
28
(Table 28.4). Catheters for use over several days are ‘long-stay
● Toxic effects on theatre personnel at the levels
and designed to be less irritant and more compliant to the
encountered during normal veterinary use have not
lumen of the vessel, reducing the risk of thrombus formation
been proved but COSHH and Health and Safety
within the vein. Preparation of the skin for ‘long-stay
Executive regulations relating to the substances should
catheters is important and the site should be sterile to avoid
 be adhered to. Advice should be sought during
the introduction of infection and the development of throm-
pregnancy.
Table 28.4 Insertion of 'short-stay' and long-stay' catheters
Short-stay
Long-stay
Clip area over vein and clean skin
uys ayl pue Arnuans poob ainsua ol paddo sl ulaA lano 2aie abie7
prepared as for surgery
A subcutaneous 'bleb' of local anaesthetic is injected and a
Local anaesthetic is injected as for short-stay but skin incision is not
small skin incision is made to reduce skin drag when inserting
normally made - improving the seal of the skin around the catheter and
the catheter
reducing the risk of infection
The vein is raised by applying digital pressure and the catheter
The vein is raised as for short-stay and the catheter is inserted in a fully
is inserted with clean hands, taking normal intravenous injection
sterile manner using sterile gloving. The catheter should be primed with
precautions
heparin saline before insertion
Pacement with or against blood flow
 Placement with blood flow
A three-way tap or injection cap is applied to the hub of the
A short length of purpose-made extension tubing with a valve or injection
catheter and a small amount of heparin saline is injected to
port is attached to the hub. All subsequent handling should be clean or
prevent clotting
preferably sterile
The catheter and port are sutured in place by a pre-placed skin
The catheter is sutured in place as appropriate for its design
suture, or skin glue can be used
Short-stay catheters are normally over-the-needle design and
Long-stay catheters can be over-the-needle or Seldinger type, placed over a
less than 15 cm in length
guide wire. They are longer and softer than short-stay catheters
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
621
28
Equine anaesthesia
Storage
consumption before an anaesthetic is administered. If it is
possible that the horse may enter the human food chain,
Anaesthetic drugs should be stored as other prescription-only
products should be chosen that are licensed for use in food-
medicines in a suitable, preferably locked, drug store.
producing animals (consult the Department for Environ-
Controlled drugs, e.g. pethidine and morphine, should be
ment, Food and Rural Affairs or the Veterinary Medicines
kept in a separate, locked cupboard or safe and all records of
Directorate for lists of licensed products). Drugs and their
purchase and dispensing should be written in a bound book.
withdrawal periods should be recorded on the passports of
Compressed gas cylinders should be kept away from extremes
animals that may enter the human food chain. Use of
of temperature or open flames and should be held where they
 any product 'off-licence' should be carefully considered and
cannot fall over or be damaged.
should be justifiable on the ‘cascade' system (see Ch. 19).
Consequences of the use of drugs in this way are, first, that
       
Withdrawal periods
any adverse reaction and, second, that in the event of
an adverse reaction, a successful legal prosecution might be
Horses are considered to be a food-producing animal' under
mounted against the practitioner. The owner's informed con-
European legislation and should now have a signed passport
sent should be obtained in cases where it is necessary to go
declaration to say that the horse will not be used for human
off-licence'.
Maintenance of
Inhalation of anaesthetic agents
anaesthesia
The volatile anaesthetic agents most commonly used in
equine anaesthesia are halothane and isoflurane. In general
equine practices, halothane is still more cost-effective for
In the horse, general anaesthesia may be maintained either
routine elective procedures but many practices also have the
by the inhalation of gases, or of liquids with sufficient vapour
facility to use isoflurane in foals and compromised adults, e.g.
pressure to produce a gas, or by total intravenous anaesthesia,
colic and caesarean operations.
i.e. both induction and maintenance produced by intra-
    s  ' 
Anaesthetic gases used are oxygen and nitrous oxide; carbon
systems are shown in Table 28.5.
dioxide is rarely used in equine anaesthesia and nitrous oxide
 Table 28.5 Advantages and disadvantages of inhalational and total intravenous anaesthesia
Advantages
Disadvantages
Inhalational anaesthesia
Effective, controllable and normally predictable maintenance
High cost of initial set-up
of anaesthesia
Varying degrees of cardiovascular and respiratory depression
Low running costs
Required gases are potentially flammable/explosive
Concurrent oxygen delivery
Possible risk to personnel as a result of exposure to volatile agents
Activity does not rely on metabolism by the body
Duration of anaesthesia can be safely increased within a
certain range
 The airway patency is maintained
 Total intravenous anaesthesia
Minimal equipment required, convenient for feld conditions
Drugs required are expensive
 Endotracheal intubation may not be required
Drugs have a cumulative effect and rely on clearance by the animals
No reliance on respiratory function to deepen anaesthesia
metabolism. This may lead to prolonged recovery
No flammable or explosive gases or cylinders are required
Depth of anaesthesia can be easily increased but not decreased
Causes respiratory depression and oxygen may be needed
622
 Equine anaesthesia
is less widely used in equine than in small animal practice. For
out of the tube. Care must be taken in inflation of the cuff, as
moderate case loads oxygen is usually obtained in 'G'-sized
overinflation can cause damage to the tracheal lining and can
      n   
compress the tube, causing increased resistance or complete
machines have the facility for two cylinders to be attached at a
obstruction; underinflation leads to leakage of gases and
time (see Ch. 27). Larger hospitals may have banks of large gas
uncontrolled anaesthesia.
cylinders (O, and N,O) stored outside the building and piped
 into the operating theatre via colour-coded pipes to which the
anaesthetic machine can be attached.
Facemasks
The properties of these volatile agents and gases have been
Gas induction via a facemask is restricted to use in foals and
described in Chapter 27.
the mask should be adequate to fit over the muzzle to form a
seal around the nose without obstructing the nostrils. The
advantages of this method are that it removes the need for
Anaesthetic equipment
repeated injections as well as reducing the number of anaes-
thetic drugs and their potential side effects, which is espe-
Once the animal is unconscious gaseous agents are adminis-
cially pertinent in the anaesthesia of sick foals. Disadvantages
tered via ET tubes, nasotracheal intubation and facemasks
are that strong and healthy foals may struggle to resist the
attached to the appropriate type of anaesthetic circuit.
pungent smell of the gas and become stressed, and a tran-
sition has to be made to endotracheal intubation once
induction has been achieved. The stress can be reduced by
gradually increasing the volatile agent content of inspired
Endotracheal intubation
gas.
A range of sizes of ET tubes is required:
● 12-16 mm diameter tube is suitable for a
Anaesthetic circuits
thoroughbred foal (or smaller for a pony foal)
28
Circle and to-and-fro circuits are almost exclusively used
● 24-30 mm diameter for a 500 kg adult
in equine anaesthesia (Figs 28.2, 28.3). These are both
rebreathing systems, i.e. the expired gas is reused after being
● 34 mm or larger for adult heavy horse breeds.
passed through soda lime to remove CO2. Non-rebreathing
systems, where the expired gases are pushed out of the circuit
The tube should be long enough to reach the middle to lower
by providing a high flow of replacement gases to displace
third of the cervical trachea.
them, would be impractical and costly in large animal anaes-
thesia. The rebreathing circuit has advantages in its conser-
Endotracheal intubation is used to maintain the airway and,
vation of the warmth and humidity of the expired air, as well
by inflation of the cuff, to deliver a controlled mixture of
 as its low gas-flow requirements, low volatile agent usage and
 gases to the lungs. Control of the airway is essential in anaes-
hence low waste/pollution.
thetic emergencies so that oxygen supply can be artificially
maintained. Intubation is usually via the mouth and a gag is
inserted between the upper and lower incisors to aid inser-
8
tion and to prevent the horse from biting on to the tube. In
cases when mouth surgery is to be carried out, the tube may
be inserted into the trachea via the nose. Nasotracheal intu-
?
bation is achieved by the use of a smaller diameter ET tube
(2)
1
than that used for tubing via the mouth; for example, a
③
20 mm diameter tube would be suitable for the average thor-
oughbred. Intubation of the airway increases its resistance
Gas flow
by reducing its diameter and, in the case of nasotracheal
 Capacity of approx 30 litres
intubation, this increase is exacerbated by the use of a small
for an adult horse
①
tube.
1  ET tube to patient
4 Expired gas flow
7 Soda lime canister
Once intubation has been achieved, correct placement can be
2 "Y connector
5 Scavenge
8 Fresh gas supply
checked by connecting to the anaesthetic machine and
 3  Tubing atachment
6 Rebreathing bag
9 Inspired gas flow
squeezing the rebreathing bag to check that the chest rises,
rather than compressing the chest to check for breath coming
Fig 28.2 Large animat crcte rebreathing crcuit
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
623
28
Eguine anaesthesia
Capacity of approx 30 litres
fresh gas inflow is situated near the ET tube and the air is
for an adult horse
exhaled through the canister containing soda lime into the
③
rebreathing bag and inhaled in the opposite direction via the
same path; hence 'to-and-fro'. Care must be taken to avoid
1
4
soda lime dust being inhaled. The advantages are that the
system is simple and relatively portable for use in field con-
ditions if necessary.
Foal anaesthesia
Gas flow
The major consideration in choosing a circuit for foal anaes-
1  Attachment to ET
 4  Water's canister
thesia is the resistance of the circuit. The immature chest
2 Fresh gas inlet 
containing sodalime
cavity of a foal is not able to generate sufficient pressure to
3 Expiratory valve
5 Rebreathing bag
 overcome a circuit with high resistance. The most convenient
attached to scavenge
system available for foals up to approximately 100 kg is an
Fig 28.3 Large animat to-and-fro circuit or Water's canister
adult human circle, with a rebreathing bag of approximately
6 1 capacity (Fig. 28.4). Magill or Lack circuits can be used for
The disadvantages of such systems are the initial expense,
gaseous induction in foals as they allow greater control than
high resistance to breathing, size and relatively slow changes
induction with a circle system (see Ch. 27).
that are possible in levels of anaesthesia. Rebreathing circuits
rely on soda lime to remove CO,from the circulating gas and
 Premedication in very young and debilitated foals should be
this must be checked regularly and changed as soon as it
avoided where possible; the foal has an immature hepatic
becomes exhausted. Soda lime is manufactured with a colour
 detoxifying system, rendering it less able to cope with drugs
indicator; some change from pink to white and some from
than adults. If necessary, small foals can be restrained with
white to lilac when exhausted. (Make sure you know which
diazepam; older healthy foals tolerate the use of alpha-2
you are using and never mix them.) Active soda lime will
adrenoceptor agonists such as xylazine quite well.
become hot during use, another check that can be performed.
Soda lime status should be checked immediately after use, as
When anaesthetizing foals it is important to keep them with
it will regenerate its active colour to some extent when not in
the dam until the foal is unconscious. Sedation of the mare
use, but will not become active again.
  ss    p   n 
animals. Romifidine is a good sedative in this case as the mare
Rebreathing circuits can be used as ‘open', “low-flow' and
will be minimally ataxic when led back to the stable once the
'closed' systems:
foal is fully anaesthetized. The mare can be returned before or
after the foal is standing, depending on the system employed.
● Low-fow system - most easily operated and requires
The presence of the mare will stimulate the foal to stand but
the flow of oxygen to slightly exceed the requirements
of the horse, allowing the excess gas to escape via the
 pressure release valve, which is left partly open
● Open system - one in which the pressure relief valve
is left fully open, which would greatly reduce the
efficiency of the circuit
● Closed system - one in which the gas flow replaces,
without exceeding, the anaesthetic and oxygen used
by the horse. The closed system is the most efficient
but is more difficult to operate than a low-flow.
Nitrous oxide (N2O) should not be used in rebreathing
circuits in horses as it is used at a different rate from oxygen
and may result in the gas mixture becoming relatively low in
oxygen.
The to-and-fro system must be attached close to the horse to
reduce the amount of dead space from the extra tubing. The
Fig. 28.4 Foat maintained on an adult human circte system
624
 Equine anaesthesia
care must be taken to prevent the mare from stepping on it. The
Ventilators are available for use in equine anaesthesia and
foal should be allowed to suckle up to and straight after anaes-
they are becoming more frequently used. Ideally, blood
thesia. Because of their small size, foals are at risk of hypother-
gases, especially CO2, should be monitored during IPPV
mia during anaesthesia and steps should be taken from the
to enable ‘fine-tuning' of the tidal volume and ventilation
outset to preserve body heat and to warm the foal if necessary.
rate according to the requirements of the patient. Most
Use of artificial ventilators
tion during anaesthesia. Cases in which IPPV may be used
include those in which the respiratory rate falls below
Intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPpV) in its sim-
4 breaths per minute, in which case the horse may be inspir-
plest form can be achieved by compression of the rebreathing
ing inadequate volatile agent to maintain a level plane of
bag having closed the pressure relief valve. This is a cumber-
anaesthesia, and cases where abdominal distension restricts
some procedure and is usually restricted to emergencies or for
normal respiration. IPpV is always required for intrathoracic
short periods.
surgery.
Recovery from
anaesthesia
An ideal recovery involves the horse remaining calmly in
28
lateral and then sternal recumbency until the effects of the
anaesthetic drugs have worn off and it can stand without
ataxia. Recovery time should be as short as possible within
those limits.
The horse is placed in left lateral recumbency in the recovery
box when possible. Turning a horse over that has been in a
right lateral position during surgery will allow reperfusion of
the dependent muscles but results in atelectasis (partial col.
lapse) of the newly dependent lung lobes. This can result in
respiratory embarrassment, as the lung lobes that have been
Fig. 28.5 Horse recovering from anaesthesia in a recovery box
 dependent during surgery will already be in a state of atelec-
tasis, which will not resolve quickly enough to allow ade.
quate ventilation. Extubation can be carried out before the
Recovery boxes should be designed to achieve a good, safe
swallow reflex returns if the airway is clear. If a nasotracheal
recovery (Fig. 28.5). The box should be of a size that allows
tube is to be placed for the full recovery, these tubes should
free movement but is too small for the recovering patient to
gather speed. The walls and floor should be padded without
nose. (Wrapping adhesive bandage around the nasal end
protruding edges and the floor should provide good grip.
to form a 'ball' is quite effective.) In some cases the horse
even when wet. It should be possible to dim the lights and
can recover with the ET tube left in the mouth but this
keep the area quiet while a horse is recovering.
carries the inherent risk that the horse will obstruct its own
airway by biting the tube, and a secure, safe mouth gag is
Assistance during recovery may be required for foals to pre-
needed.
vent injury and for adults in some cases of orthopaedic sur-
gery. Assistance during recovery should only be given to
Horses can be sedated for recovery if they are likely to stand
adults by experienced teams and preferably with a method of
too quickly because of their temperament, pain or distended
restraint, such as ropes attached to the headcollar and tail
bladder. Analgesia, bladder catheterization, etc., and then
running through rings on the wall to provide a secure anchor.
sedation, e.g. xylazine 0.1 mg/kg intravenously, can
Slings are poorly tolerated unless the horse has previously
be used.
become acclimatized to them.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 625
28
Equine anaesthesia
● Foreign material in the airway, e.g. blood - if it is
Complications and
suspected that blood or gastric reflux may enter the
airway, leave the ET tube in position with the cuff
emergencies
inflated until the patient is able to swallow to clear the
airway
Equipment and drugs required
● Oedema of the nasal passages when the head has
for emergency resuscitation
been in a position that is lower than the body during
anaesthesia - leave a suitable design of nasotracheal
The larger pieces of equipment used for routine anaesthesia
 tube in place for the duration of recovery
are also used for resuscitation and are therefore readily
to hand in an emergency. A 'crash box' containing a selection
● Dislocation of the soft palate - stimulate the
 of needles, including spinal needles for cardiac injection,
larynx to make the horse swallow or pass an ET tube
syringes, fluid giving sets, intravenous cannulas and a stetho-
gently to open the airway
scope should be kept together with the drugs listed
below.
● Laryngeal spasm - place a tracheotomy tube in a
laryngotomy wound prior to recovery and leave in
Equipment required:
place overnight after surgery.
● Endotracheal tube to maintain airway
Complete airway obstruction during anaesthesia is shown by
the presence of chest and abdominal movements without
● Tracheotomy/laryngotomy tube
excursion of the rebreathing bag. Partial airway obstruction is
often audible, as air will be forced through a narrowed airway,
● Means for IPPV - anaesthetic
e.g. snoring when the nasal passages are narrowed by oedema
circuit/ventilator/(Hudson) demand valve
of the nasal lining. Signs of hypoxia (inadequate oxygen
supply to tissues) or anoxia (total lack of oxygen supply)
● Drugs for emergency resuscitation should be drawn up
include grey or blue mucous membrane colour and reduced
into capped syringes and labelled with the name of the
blood O2 and elevated blood CO2 observed if blood gas
analysis or capnography are available.
Drugs required:
Emergency treatment
●Adrenaline (epinephrine)
● Aim is to restore oxygen supply to the tissues
●Atropine
● Establish cause of obstruction and remove or correct it
● Lignocaine
if possible. If this is not possible, regain airway patency
by passing a naso- or endotracheal tube or in the
● Doxapram.
● Ventilate manually, making sure no further anaesthetic
gas is given
Respiratory obstruction
● Monitor pulse and mucous membrane colour to check
Causes include:
efficacy of ventilation.
● Kinking of the ET tube - do not over-flex the neck;
check the tube inside and outside the mouth where it
Respiratory arrest
may be prone to kinking during movement
This is the cessation of breathing that results in apnoea.
● Overinflation of the cuff leading to compression
This frequently occurs transiently during induction, espe-
of the tube or inflation of the cuff over the end of the
cially after placement of the ET tube. More serious causes of
tube - become familiar with the amount of air usually
apnoea include respiratory obstruction, excessive resistance
required to inflate the cuff and measure this by using a
in the breathing circuit, central nervous depression during
normal syringe
anaesthetic overdose, and cardiac arrest.
626
 Equine anaesthesia
        
● Atropine intravenously (1.6 ml per 100 kg of
mulation of the larynx or other reflexes, or a sharp compres-
0.6 mg/ml solution = 0.01 mg/kg)
sion of the chest wall. These methods, as well as surgical
stimulation, may also be effective during anaesthesia. If
● Repeat adrenaline (0.5 ml per 100 kg)
breathing still does not begin, e.g. because of drug effects
or other of central nervous depression, then IPpV should
● For ventricular fibrillation use lignocaine (2.5 ml
be initiated and should continue until spontaneous breath-
per 100 kg of 20 mg/1 = 0.5 mg/kg).
ing resumes. Doxapram (0.5-1 mg/kg) may be used in
severe circumstances but relies on an effective circulation
to work.
Normal mucous membrane colour and a palpable pulse show
that the circulation is returning to normal.
Cardiac arrest and
cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Other anaesthetic complications
Cardiac arrest usually results from the occurrence of several
factors simultaneously, e.g. halothane overdose, hypoxia and
hypercapnia (elevated blood CO). Vagal stimulation during
● Hypoxaemia - inadequate oxygenation of blood: due
head and neck surgery may cause cardiac arrest in horses with
to reduced ventilation, reduced oxygen content of
very little warning.
inspired air or low cardiac output (effectively reduces
circulation)
Clinical signs include loss of palpable peripheral pulse, loss of
heart sounds (may also occur without cardiac arrest) and very
● Hypercapnia - excess of CO, in blood: due to
pale mucous membranes.
reduced ventilation or circulation
28
● Hypotension - blood pressure below expected
Emergency treatment
normal: due to deepening of anaesthetic plane, loss of
circulating volume, dilation of peripheral vasculature
 Cardiopulmonary respiration in the horse consists of the fol-
 or reduced cardiac output
lowing steps:
● Cardiac arrhythmias - loss of normal heart
● Airway - ensure it is clear; intubate if necessary
rhythm: occur as a result of drug administration.
Arrhythmias that have a significant effect on
● Breathing - initiate IPPV or manual compression of
circulation are rare
 re-breathing bag - use pure O if possible
● Musculoskeletal injury - usually long-bone
● Circulation - cardiac massage is difficult in the
fractures and head trauma: usually occur during
horse. If possible, place horse on a hard surface and
unaided recovery as a result of attempts to stand
give a sharp blow to the precordial chest region to
before the drugs' effects have worn off or as a result of
attempt to stimulate heart contraction. If this fails,
previous injury or pain
attempt external massage by exerting strong force over
the chest with the knees or foot (about 30
● Postanaesthetic myopathy - muscle damage as a
compressions per minute). If all else fails, surgical
result of failure of blood supply to the muscle during
exposure of the heart and internal massage can be
anaesthesia: caused by poor positioning, lying on firm
performed
surfaces, prolonged anaesthesia, prolonged periods of
hypotension
● Drug treatment should only be initiated when
cardiac massage results in blood flow. IPpV and cardiac
● Postanaesthetic neuropathy - nerve damage as a
massage should be continued:
result of trauma, pressure, stretching and failure of
blood supply: caused by pressure of headcollar on
●Adrenaline (epinephrine) given intravenously
facial nerve during induction, stretching of limbs for
(0.3 ml per 100 kg) - if this is not possible, give
the duration of surgery, e.g. positioning for
directly into left ventricle of heart or into bronchial
arthroscopy, or focal pressure causing blood flow to
tree via ET tube
be occluded.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
627
28
Equine anaesthesia
This technique is rarely used in horses and in large
Local anaesthesia
animal practice is mainly restricted to bovine digit
surgery
Local anaesthetic is used to desensitize a restricted area to
● Epidural anaesthesia is achieved by injection of
allow painful surgical procedures or paradoxically to abolish
local anaesthetic around a specific part of the spinal
existing pain to prove its existence, e.g. lameness. Local
cord, blocking conduction in the spinal nerves of that
anaesthetic techniques usually aim to abolish pain and sen-
area and sometimes the spinal cord itself. The
sation, leaving motor functions intact, but occasionally are
  s s a  pds si
directed at motor nerves to abolish movement as in the
 desensitized. A caudal block is the most commonly
used in horses to allow surgery in the perineal region,
examination. Local anaesthesia can be combined with seda
e.g. to replace a rectal prolapse and prevent further
tion to allow surgery to be performed ‘standing' or it can
straining. More cranial blocks carry the risk of
be used during general anaesthesia to reduce pain and the
desensitizing the hind limbs and inducing collapse.
amount of maintenance drugs required.
Xylazine and xylazine/local anaesthetic combinations
are useful in the horse to provide anaesthesia without
 ataxia.
Types of local anaesthesia
Topical anaesthesia
Intrathecal (intrasynovial) anaesthesia
Topical anaesthesia can be achieved using creams designed
 Intrathecal (intrasynovial) anaesthesia is used in equine prac-
for skin absorption. For example, creams containing ligno-
tice and, like perineural anaesthesia, is primarily for lameness
caine are available for treatment of minor but painful skin
diagnosis. Local anaesthetirc is injected directly into joints
abrasions; local anaesthetic eye drops, e.g. amethocaine, are
and tendon sheaths and produces anaesthesia of a known,
used to desensitize the cornea to aid examination or minor
specific structure. A positive result is a good indication for
surgery. Absorption through intact skin is slow and the use of
medication or further investigation of the sheath or joint.
topical anaesthesia prior to injection has limited use.
Application
Regional anaesthesia
Topical anaesthesia:
Regional anaesthesia involves desensitization of a specified
area and includes several methods of administration:
● Place appropriate preparation on a dressing directly
on to the skin for 1 h
● Perineural infiltration of local anaesthetic, i.e.
infusion around a nerve whose precise position is
● Apply appropriate drops on to cornea or into
known. This effectively prevents the transmission of
conjunctival sac
impulses from beyond that point back to the brain and
renders the structures supplied by that nerve
● Perineural infiltration and infltration into a wide area:
insensitive. This is the principle used in lameness
diagnosis
● Clipping hair is optional
● Infltration of local anaesthetic into a wide
●Skin should be cleaned with spirit swab or
area, often of skin, blocks the nerves that supply the
chlorhexidine wash according to the level of dirt
area which is then desensitized. This technique is
commonly used in suturing wounds
● Smallest possible needle is used to minimize patient
reaction
● Intravenous anaesthesia is useful for the
desensitization of the distal limb. As the technique
● Agent is injected into target site
requires the occlusion of blood flow from the area, a
tourniquet is applied proximal to the area to be
● Intrasynovial and epidural anaesthesia:
'blocked' and local anaesthetic is injected distally into
a prominent vein. This produces good anaesthesia in
● Strict aseptic technique must be employed, i.e. clip
the area below the tourniquet while it is in position.
hair, scrub, sterile gloving
628
 Equine anaesthesia
● Place an intradermal skin bleb of local anaesthetic
nerve trunks and have a quicker speed of onset of activity
(Table 28.6). Other factors affecting speed of onset include
● A suitable drug, volume and needle size is chosen
the accuracy of the injection and the concentration rather
than the volume of agent used. Duration of action is affected
● Adequate restraint of the horse will be necessary,
by the volume and type of drug chosen and whether a vaso-
e.g. sedation or twitch
constrictor, i.e. adrenaline (epinephrine), has been combined
in the preparation. Vasoconstriction slows the diffusion of
● Inject local anaesthetic through the bleb.
drug out of the target area by reducing blood flow. Prep-
arations containing adrenaline should be confined to peri-
Drugs used for local anaesthesia
neural and infusion techniques. Care must be taken to avoid
significant systemic uptake.
Local anaesthetic drugs are variably lipid-soluble; those that
have good lipid solubility diffuse quickly through tissues and
Table 28.6 Local anaesthetics used in equine practice
Local anaesthetic drug
Applications
Speed of onset
Duration of action
Lignocaine (Lignol)
Topical
< 5 min
30-40 min (doubled by adding
Infiltration
adrenaline (epinephrine))
 Perineural
Epidural (without adrenaline 
(epinephrine))
Prilocaine (Citanest)
 Infusion 
 5-15 min
Approx. 1 h
 Perineural
Intrasynovial
28
 Epidural
 Intravenous 
Mepivacaine (Intra-Epicaine)
Infusion
10-20 min
Up to 2 h
 Perineural
 Intrasynovial
 Epidural
Bupivacaine (Marcaine)
Infiltration
15-20 min
Up to 8 h
 Perineural
Intrasynovial
Amethocaine
Mucous membrane (topical)
< 1 min
10-15 min
Corneal (topical)
Proxymetacaine (Ophthaine)
Corneal (topical)
< 1 min
15 min
nane
destruction
humanely and in the best interests of the animal. The British
Equine Veterinary Association (BEVA) has issued guidelines
for the decisions involved in the destruction of horses, with
particular regard to insurance implications.
Indications for euthanasia
Current methods
Euthanasia is usually carried out on grounds of welfare. This
can range from severe inoperable injury resulting in
The handling of the euthanasia of a horse is very important
intractable pain to ill or elderly animals that no longer have
throughout the practice and lack of sympathy or failure to act
a 'good quality of life'. Euthanasia should be performed
correctly can cost clients (see Ch. 1). Consent must be
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 629
28
Equine anaesthesia
obtained from the owner or keeper of the horse to be
euthanased. If the animal is insured, then permission should
Pentobarbitone
be sought from the insurance company, if it is humanely pos-
● Pentobarbitone is preloaded into as many 50 ml
sible to delay destruction of the animal. A euthanasia consent
syringes as required (dose 200 mg/kg)
form should be signed prior to humane destruction of an
animal and a description of the animal should be kept if nec.
● A 14 FG intravenous catheter is placed
perform a post-mortem examination and the whole carcass or
● Sedative may be used if required, usually an alpha-2
the relevant part should be retained. It may be a good idea, if
agonist at full sedative dose
appropriate, to ask if the owner would like the shoes returned
or a piece of mane or tail saved.
● The assistant restrains the horse, being aware that
 sudden or violent movements may occur
Methods available for the humane destruction of horses are
as follows:
● The full volume of pentobarbitone is injected as
quickly as possible
Gun
● Collapse should occur 35-40 s and death 1.5-2.5 min
after injection; gasping may occur.
This is usually a single-shot 0.32 calibre free-bullet humane
killer (weapons smaller than 0.31 calibre are not suitable and
destruction of horses outside an abattoir situation, as death is
Disposal of the carcase
the majority of horse owners).
Disposal of the animal should preferably be arranged prior to
Sedation is often used and assistance is required in the han-
euthanasia and the preferred method of disposal discussed
ding of the horse. It is vital that nurses/assistants are aware
with the owner. Even though this may be difficult at the time,
of people around the area. All humans and other animals
it may have a bearing on the method of euthanasia.
should be removed from the area if possible, or at the
Common routes of disposal are:
least they should stand behind the person using the gun -
including the assistant, even if they continue to hold the
● Cremation/incineration:
animal.
● Expensive
Injection
● Method of euthanasia unimportant
This uses a high dose of pentobarbitone or Somnulose.
● Ashes can often be returned if requested
Controlled drugs - lock up and record use!
 e q s   s s o
kennel or abattoir:
Somnulose (cinchocaine and quinalbarbitone)
● Depends on personal wishes or opinions and may
● Preload correct dose (10 ml per 100 kg) into a single
be distasteful to many horse owners
syfinige
● Less expensive than incineration
● A 14 FG intravenous catheter is placed
● Horse cannot be euthanased with Somnulose or
● The assistant restrains the horse, pulling its head down
 pentobarbitone
to encourage the horse to sink backwards
● Carcase used for human consumption:
● The full amount of Somnulose is injected over about
15 s
● May retrieve 'meat' value of the animal, which gives
some financial return
● Collapse will occur 35-45 s after the start of injection,
death within 2 min.
● Animal must be euthanased by gun
630
 Equine anaesthesia
● Animal must not contain residues of any controlled
Johnston G M, Eastment J K, Wood J L N, Taylor P M 2002 The
drugs or substances and all medication must have
Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Equine Fatalities (CEPEF):
 been recorded in the passport under the passport
mortatity results of phases 1 and 2. Veterinary Anaesthesia and
scheme
Anaigesia 29: 159-170
●Horse will have to be transported alive to a
Knottenbelt D C (ed.) 1997 Formulary of equine medicine.
registered abattoir.
Liverpool University Press, Liverpool
Taylor P M, Clarke K W 1999 Handbook of equine anaesthesia.
W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA
Bibliography
Recommended reading
Bishop Y (ed.) 1996 The veterinary formulary, 3rd edn. Royat
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain/Pharmaceutical Press,
Taylor P M, Clarke K W 1999 Handbook of equine anaesthesia.
London
W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA
Hall L W, Clarke K W, Trim C M 2001 Veterinary anaesthesia,
This book is written for veterinary surgeons but provides useful
10th edn. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
information for theveterinary nurse.
28
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 631
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
29
Parasitology
Maggie Fisher
Key Points
● Parasites can be divided into the ectoparasites and the
● An understanding of the life cycle is the key to treatment
endoparasites.
and control of the parasite.
● Most ectoparasites are arthropods belonging either to the
● The effect of a parasite on the host animal may be
insects or to the arachnid group but certain species of
insignificant and treatment is only necessary to prevent
fungi are also ectoparasites.
an increase in parasite numbers in the host or in the
 Endoparasites of companion animals or horses fall into
environment and to prevent the spread of zoonotic
four main groups - the nematodes or roundworms,
disease.
cestodes or tapeworms, trematodes or flukes and
● There are many antiparasitic drugs each with their own
protozoa.
specific mode of action. Some may act against several
● Each species of parasite has its own life cycle, which is
parasite groups, which necessitates giving only a single
its means of survival and spread between host animals.
treatment to the patient.
Definitions
● Final host - only occurs in a life cycle involving
more than one host. It refers to the host in which
 sexual reproduction of the parasite occurs, e.g.
● Parasite - a eukaryotic organism that lives off
Echinococcus granulosus - this tapeworm occurs in dogs
another (the host) to the advantage of the parasite
but the hydatid cyst, the immature stage, occurs in
sheep, which are the intermediate hosts. These
● Endoparasite - a parasite that lives inside the host,
include:
e.g. a roundworm
● Paratenic hosts - act as host for a parasite but little or
● Ectoparasite - a parasite that lives on or in the skin
no development of the parasite occurs within them;
29
of the host, e.g. a flea
for example, infective Toxocara canis eggs eaten by a
mouse hatch and the larva migrates into the
● Permanent parasite - a parasite that lives for its
mouse's tissue (the paratenic host), where it remains
entire life cycle on the host, e.g. a louse
without further development until the mouse is
eaten by a dog
● Temporary parasite - a parasite that lives for only
part of its life on a host, e.g. a flea - the adult stage is
● Transport host - simply carries the parasite from one
entirely parasitic but the immature stages live in the
host to another
environment. A mosquito is still more temporary
only the adult females are parasitic as they take a
● Vector - is an arthropod responsible for the
blood meal from a human or animal
transmission of a parasite among vertebrate hosts. The
arthropod may act as an intermediate host, a paratenic
● Zoonoses - animal infections that can infect
host or a transport host
humans
● Prepatent period - the time between the ingestion
● Host specificity - refers to the range of hosts that a
 of the infective stage, e.g. egg, and the production of
particular parasite can utilize; for example, lice are very
eggs by the adults. A parasitic infection is said to be
host-specific as each species will only infect one
 patent when eggs are found in the faeces
specific host. Thus Damalinia equi, the horse louse, will
not infect dogs and Linognathus setosus, the sucking
● Direct life cycle (refers to nematodes) - a life
louse of dogs, will only survive on dogs. In contrast
cycle which does not involve an intermediate host.
Ctenocephalides felis, the cat flea, has been recorded
Larvae may be dirertly transmitted from host to
living surccessfully on cats, dogs, rabbits, ferrets, sheep,
 host or be free-living in the environment, e.g.
goats and calves
pasture
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
633
29
Parasitology
● Indirect life cycle - a life cycle in which the larval
Most ectoparasitic arthropods belong either to the insect
stages pass through an intermediate host.
group, i.e. lice, fleas, mosquitoes, sand flies and Culicoides or
the acari, a sub-group of the arachnids, i.e. mites and ticks.
 on asoo se nsoa  a sodoe 
Nomenclature of parasites
 mammalian endoskeleton) and reproduce by laying eggs. The
immature stages may be similar to the adult but smaller, e.g.
It is normal to refer to a parasite by its genus and then species
lice or mites, or may be maggot-like and change to the adult
name, e.g. the canine worm, Toxocara canis: the genus is
form, e.g. flies and fleas during pupation.
Toxocara and the species canis. After the first use the genus
name can be abbreviated to its initial, in this case becoming
T. canis.
Insects
Lice
Ectoparasites
Lice are small, wingless, permanently parasitic inserts. They are
dorsoventrally flattened and possess claws for clasping hairs or
 saads   ana p siso are a si
Ectoparasites include the arthropod species and certain
louse. However, rather than focusing on identifying the species,
species of fungus.
it is usually more important to identify whether lice are present
and whether they are sucking or biting lice. 'Sucking' or 'biting'
refers to the method of feeding: biting lice have mouthparts
adapted to chewing the surface of the skin and sucking lice
have narrow mouthparts for piercing skin and sucking blood. A
heavy burden of the latter can result in anaemia. Cats have just
one species of louse, the biting louse Felicola subrosirahus
(Fig. 29.1). Dogs in temperate climates have one species of
biting louse, Trichodectes canis (Fig. 29.2), and one species of
sucking louse, Linognathus setosus (Fig. 29.3). In horses,
Haematopinus asini is the sucking louse and Damalinia equi, also
known as Wemeckiella equi, is the biting louse.
Life cycle: Female lice lay their eggs or nits on the host
Fig. 29.1 Felicota subrostratus, the biting fouse of the cat. Aduft
attached to hairs (Fig. 29.4) and these can give lousy animals a
is 1-1.5 mm in tength
 speckled appearance, depending on their hair colour. Immature
lice emerge from the eggs and progress through a series of
moults to become adults. The entire life cycle takes about
4-6 weeks.
Fig. 29.2 Trichodectes canis, a biting fouse of dogs. Adult
Fig. 29.3 Linognathus setosus, the sucking fouse of dogs. Adult
is 1-2 mm in length
is approx. 2 mm in tength
634
Parasitology
Fleas
Fleas (Fig. 29.5) are wingless, laterally flattened, dark brown
 insects capable of moving rapidly through a coat or jumping
with their specialized legs. Their mouthparts are adapted for
piercing skin and sucking blood. The details of the head, such
as the presence of combs, are often characteristic of the species
of flea and can be used for identification. One species,
Ctenocephalides felis, more commonly referred to as C. felis or
the cat flea, is the predominant species on cats and dogs in the
UK and may also be found on ferrets and rabbits. The dog flea,
Ctenocephalides canis, is more host-specific, is found on some
dogs in the UK and is the most common flea on dogs in Ireland.
Other species of fleas parasitize small mammals and birds.
Fig. 29.4 Louse egg or nit on a hair shaft. Egg approx. 0.7 mm
Life cycle: Adult C. felis emerge from their pupal case in the
tong
environment and begin to seek a host. Once they have found
a suitable host they begin to feed within 5 min. Female fleas
Animals with clinical lousiness or pediculosis will rub and
begin to lay eggs approximately 24-48 h after they begin to
scratch themselves. A heavy burden may cause debility, par-
feed. The eggs (Fig. 29.6) are smooth and fall off into the
ticularly if sucking lice are present. Infection is most common
in young, old or debilitated animals. Infection is seen rela-
tively rarely in cats and dogs in the UK but more often in
winter when they are stabled, with louse populations dimin-
ishing during the summer at pasture.
Infected animals can be treated with a suitable insecticide.
Few insecticides penetrate the eggs, so unless a residual
insecticide such as fipronil or selamectin is used a repeat
29
the first.
Fig. 29.6 Cat fea eggs are smooth and are laid by the adult
femate on the host but drop off into the environment. Egg is
approx. 0.5 mm in tength
Fig. 29.5 Laterat view of an aduft 'cat' fea, Ctenocephalides felis.
Fig.29.7Flea tarvae go through two moutts before pupating.
Adutt measures 1-2.5 mm in tength
Larvae measure approx. 0.5 cm
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
635
29
Parasitology
provoke the development of an allergic response in some
individuals. In cats and dogs this often manifests as a pruritic
dermatitis or ‘flea allergic dermatitis'. Fleas can transmit
diseases and also act as the intermediate host for the tape-
worm Dipylidium caninum. C. felis is zoonotic and will bite,
although not live on, humans. Control of an existing prob-
lem can be achieved by treatment of affected dogs or cats
with an insecticide that is active for just a few hours, or with
sustained activity. Depending on the severity of the infesta-
tion, elimination may be accelerated by concomitant treat-
   n     n
cide or by insect development inhibitors that prevent matu-
ration of eggs and larvae (Table 29.1). Fleas can be prevented
by prophylactic use of insecticide or larval development
Fig. 29.8 Pupae are covered in sticky cocoons, which become
inhibitors.
coated in debns from the environment
Flies
environment, typically in the area where the animal rests. In
ideal conditions the eggs hatch after about 2 days, although
Some fly larvae are facultative parasites, i.e. they can, but do not
development is slower in cool conditions (Dryden & Rust
have to, infest living animals, while some others are obligate
1994). Eggs and larvae require warmth and humidity to
parasites that cannot complete their life cycle without an
remain alive and develop - dry conditions and heat over
animal host. Any animal can develop fly strike and the condi-
about 35°C will kill them. Maggot-like larvae (Fig. 29.7)
tion is seen occasionally in dogs and cats and more frequently
hatched from the eggs undergo two moults before pupating.
 in rabbits and sheep, particularly during the summer months.
The pupal case is sticky, so typically becomes camouflaged
with environmental debris (Fig. 29.8). The life cycle can be
Life cycle: Adult flies lay their eggs in moist conditions to
completed in about 12 days in ideal conditions. Other species
which they have been attracted by odours, such as those of
of flea, such as the bird flea Ceratophyllus gallinae, are nest-
faeces. The larvae hatch rapidly and begin to feed on the
dwelling fleas, where the adults remain in the environment
surface of the animal and invade deeper tissues as they grow
except when they find a host to feed.
and moult (Fig. 29.9). Once fully developed the larva drops
to the ground and pupates. Proteolytic enzymes secreted on
Fleas suck blood and a moderately heavy burden can cause
to the animal to assist in tissue breakdown together with
severe anaemia, particularly in small animals such as kittens.
the breakdown products, have toxic effects on the host, which
As fleas feed, saliva is injected, which contains antigens that
can rapidly become depressed and anorexic.
Table 29.1 Flea control agents
Chemical group
Examples
Mode of action
Application to
Organochlorides
Lindane 
Acts on the neuromuscular junction
Animal (broadly phased out now)
Organo phosphates
Fenthion
Acts on the neuromuscular junction
Animal (broadly phased out now)
Carbamates
Carbaryl
Acts on the neuromuscular junction
Animal, particularly collars
Phenylpyrazole
Fipronil
 Neurotransmitter inhibition
Animal
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids
Natural pyrethrin
Acts on the nervous system
Animal and environmental
Permethrin
formulations available (NB. cats
 Deltamethrin
are susceptible to pyrethroid
toxicity)
Macrocyclic lactones
Selamectin
Neurotransmitter inhibition
Animal
(insect growth regulators)
Lufenuron
Chitin synthesis inhibitor (prevents
Animal, orally or by injection
 development of immature stages)
Methoprene
Juvenile hormone and analogues
Animal or the environment
Pyriproxyfen
(prevents development of immature stages)
636
Parasitology
Fig. 29.11 Culicoides are also known as 'no-see-ums' because of
their very small size (Courtesy of John McGarry, @ Liverpoot School
of Tropicat Medicine).Flies measure 1-4 mm
busboup ubag spo66ou ay uayt pidot ypoy sh6a Ay 6'6z b
the skin, which is often penetrated by the time the infestation is
noticed (Courtesy of Steve Warren). Each maggot measures approx.
0.9 mm
8
Fig. 29.12 Sweet itch' is caused by Culicoides bites activating an
Fig. 29.10 Horses are worried in the summer by a number of
inflammatory atlergic response that is very pruritic, so the affected
species of fies that feed off eye secretions, etc. (Courtesy of John
horse rubs affected areas, primarily the mane and tait (Courtesy of
McGarry)
Mark Craig)
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
637
29
Parasitology
Careful husbandry is important during the summer months
Mites
to prevent a build-up of faeces on the animal or, in the case
of rabbits, in its pen so that flies are not attracted by the
Mites can be roughly grouped into surface dwellers (Table 29.2),
smell. Careful observation is needed so that if fly strike does
which have long legs, and subsurface dwellers, which typi-
occur it can be dealt with rapidly. Development of larvae on
cally have short, stumpy legs. The entire life cycle of most
rabbits can be prevented by application of the larval growth
parasitic mites occurs on the host, with transfer from host to
inhibitor cyromazine. When an animal becomes fly-blown
host occurring through close contact or occasionally by
the wound must be cleaned and the larvae removed.
acquisition of mites from the environment, since some mites
Prognosis is good if the infection is caught early but reduces
can survive in the environment for some time in some of
as the larvae burrow deeper into tissues and enter body cavi-
their stages. Other species of mites are temporary parasites,
ties. Supportive nursing and adjunctive therapy may also be
e.g. Dermaryssus gallinae, opportunistic parasites or, in the
necessary.
case of Trombicula autumnalis parasites, parasites during their
larval stage only. Treatment of mite infections involves using
Various species of flies bite horses and feed off secretions
an appropriate acaricide on single or repeated occasions.
around horses' eyes (Fig. 29.10). The flies can transmit infec-
Symptoms of mite infection are collectively referred to as
tions, including Habronema spp. Horses may become hyper-
mange.
sensitive to fly bites, and hypersensitivity to the small biting
midge Culicoides spp. (Fig. 29.11) can result in a severe pnu-
ritic dermatitis, known as sweer itch, during the summer
Surface mites
months. The tail, head and mane are often the most affected
● Otodectes cynotis, the ear mite - normally inhabits
areas (Fig. 29.12). Horses can be protected from flies and
the external ear canal, although it is occasionally
midges in a number of ways, including keeping them indoors
found elsewhere on the host. Cats, dogs and,
and using proprietary insect repellents or head nets. Female
occasionally, ferrets can be infected. The mites have
 mosquitoes and sandflies are temporary parasites, requiring a
bell-shaped suckers on the end of unjointed stalks or
blood meal prior to egg laying. Mosquitoes are the vectors of
 pedicels (Fig. 29.13). The mites are off-white and can
heartworm caused by Diroflaria immitis and sandflies are
be clearly seen against the brown of ear wax when
responsible for the transmission of Leishmania spp.
magnified with an aurascope. The entire life cycle
occurs on the host and begins with the female mite
Jo ason o rs sde sas a 'sa s
ACARI
adult mites and the life cycle is completed in about 3
weeks. Transfer from animal to animal probably occurs
Ticks and mites appear as a single sac without the definition
through close contact. Some animals tolerate the
of head, thorax and abdomen that is seen in the insects. The
presence of ear mites without apparent discomfort,
mouthparts protrude anteriorly and nymphal and adult
although the external ear canal may produce excessive
stages possess four pairs of legs.
wax, that appears like brown coffee grounds. Others,
Table 29.2 Summary of mite species
Mite species
Host species
Cat
Dog
Horse
Other pets
Surface mites
Otodectes cynotis
Yes
Yes
Ferrets
Chorioptes equi
Yes
Psoroptes spp.
Psoroptes equi
Psoroptes cuniculi in rabbits
Cheyletiella spp.
Yes
Yes
Rabbits
一
Trombicula autumnalis
Yes
Yes
Yes
Subsurface mites
 Sarcoptes scabiei and
Sarcoptes scabiei
Sarcoptes scabiei
Sarcoptes scabiei
 Sarcoptes spp. can infect rabbits and
related species
rarely
var.canis
 rarely in the UK 
hamsters
Notoedres cati
Wotoedres spp. in rats
Frixacarus caviae in guinea pigs
Demodex spp.
Yes, rarely
Yes
Yes, rarely
Hamsters
638
Parasitology
● Psoroptes cunicul (Fig. 29.14) - has trumpet-shaped
suckers on the end of jointed pedicels or stalks and
causes 'ear canker' in rabbits
● Psoroptes equi, - identical in appearance to
P cuniculi and causes an itchy dermatitis in
horses
● Cheyletiella spp. - are parasites of cats, dogs and
rabbits, each host having its own species, although the
individual species may not be entirely host-specific.
 The mites are large (about 0.5 mm in length) so can
just about be seen with the naked eye. They possess
large claws on their palps and comb-like appendages
on the ends of their legs (Fig. 29.15). They typically
Fig. 29.13 The ear mite Otodectes cynotis can be recognised by the
cause a scurfy dermatitis, sometimes with erythema,
unjointed statks or pedicels with suckers on the end that occur on
 and the condition is often referred to as 'walking
the front two pairs of tegs in afl developmentat stages. Aduft mite
dandruff'. There is evidence that mites are capable
approx. 300 μm
of surviving for some days in the environment, so
cleaning of the environment is recommended,
particularly dogs, will show pruritus and
alongside acaricidal treatment of affected
inflammation. Affected animals can be treated with an
animals
acaricidal product applied down the ear canal, or with
a systemic product such as selamectin (Curtis 2004)
● Trombicula or Neotrombicula autumnalis larvae
(Fig. 29.16) parasitize animals for a short time in high
● Chorioptes equi - similar in appearance to O. cynotis
summer. The mites are hairy and bright orange and
but has cup-shaped suckers on the end of unjointed
can be seen as small orange spots formed by a cluster
pedicels. It is found on the surface of horses' skin,
of larvae. Once they have fed, the larvae drop off into
 particularly on the feathered lower legs of heavy
the environment and complete their life cycle. The
horses
larvae can cause pruritus and dermatitis.
29
Fig. 29.14 Psoroptes spp. mites can be identified by the suckers on
Fig. 29.15 Cheyletiella spp. mites are farge surface mites with fong
the end of jointed statks or pedicels at the ends of the front pair
legs. They have a characteristic waist, farge patps at the anterior
of tegs. Aduft femate is approx. 750 μm
end each carrying a heavy claw and 'combs' on the ends of their tegs
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing639
29
Parasitology
Immature mites hatch from the eggs, develop, then
move to create burrows of their own. The infection
typically begins in the pinna, elbow or hock area causing
an erythematous, alopecic dermatitis that is extremely
pruritic. Untreated, crusting lesions develop that can
spread to cover much of the animal. A similar parasite of
cats is Notoedres cati, which has a dorsal anus and
concentric rings on its dorsum. It does not occur in the
UK but is found in several European countries, as well as
in other warmer parts of the world. Infection by
Notoedres sp. also occurs in rats, where it can be
associated with dermatitis. Trixacanus caviae is the
 burrowing mite that commonly occurs in guinea pigs
and is similar in appearance to Sarcoptes scabiei.
Fig. 29.16 The farvae of Neotrombicuta or Trombicula autumnalis
mites are hairy and have six fegs. Measures approx. 200 μm
Subsurface mites
● Sarcoptes scabiei (Fig. 29.17) - a parasite of foxes
 and dogs and occasionally horses, cats and rabbits.
There appear to be different strains, referred to as, for 
example, Sarcoptes scabiei var. canis, relating to the host
 species. The mite has pegs and spines on its dorsal
surface. Female mites burrow into the stratum
corneum of the skin and lay eggs within the burrows.
Fig. 29.18 Demodex spp. mites are often described as cigar-shaped.
The tegs are arranged in pairs at the front of the body. Measures
opprox. 0.2 mm
Fig. 29.17 Sarcoptes spp. mites are rotund with short legs. The
Fig. 29.19 Ixodes spp are the ticks commonly found alfl over the
back is covered in pegs and spines and the anus is terminal.
UK. Aff Ixodes spp. ticks have a groove that runs anterior to the
Measures approx. 360 μm
anus. Female engorged tick measures approx. 1 cm
640
Parasitology
●Demodex spp. (Fig. 29.18) - cigar-shaped and believed
from the host. Larval ticks may be only about 1 mm in
to be normal inhabitants of hair follicles in many
length, while fully fed female ticks can reach up to 1 cm.
species. Occasionally in dogs and rarely in cats, host
Most ticks parasitizing dogs, cats, horses and other pets are
 immunosuppression or immunomodulation allows the
'hard' ticks and possess a scuium or shield on their dorsal
population of Demodex spp. to expand, and this is
surface (Figs 29.19, 29.20). In the female this covers just the
associated with local or widespread areas of alopecia.
anterior portion but male ticks are entirely covered by the
The local form may be non-pruritic and may self-
scutum. There are a number of species of tick but relatively
resolve but the generalized form is more severe and is
few that infest dogs and cats in the UK (Table 29.3).
very unlikely to clear without treatment. Affected dogs
can be in considerable pain and secondary bacterial
Life cycle: All ticks spend part of their life cycle in the envi-
infection is not uncommon. Treatment should be
ronment, as females lay their eggs on the ground in a suitably
carried out with a suitable acaricide, but a cure may
moist location before dying. Once hatched, larval ticks have
not be achieved, particularly when it is not possible to
to locate a host, attach and feed. Once they have fed for a few
identify or treat the underlying condition. Some
days, depending on the species, they may remain on the
animals improve with treatment but relapses require
same host to develop to the nymphal stage or may drop
repeated treatment.
off to continue their development in the environment.
Most ticks on cats or dogs drop off after both the larval
and nymphal stages and, as they thus have to find a separate
Ticks
host to feed on at each stage, they are known as 'three-
host' ticks.
Ticks look similar to mites but are the only parasites to
 possess a hypostome, part of the specialized mouthparts de-
As ticks suck blood, a heavy infection can cause anaemia but
veloped for piercing skin, attaching and removing blood
this occurs rarely in dogs and cats, and ticks are generally
 most important in these species as vectors of diseases, includ-
ing Lyme disease and babesiosis. Ticks can also transmit
infections to humans, although the source of the ticks is not
normally directly from pets, rather they are derived from
wildlife reservoirs. Since the introduction of the PETS travel
scheme (www.defra.gov.uk), ticks have become important as
a source of non-endemic diseases such as Babesia canis.
 d s p so po  n osdo
29
their entry in the UK has been introduced, but this does not
protect pets during their stay in Europe or elsewhere. It is
therefore necessary to advise pet owners on the need for
adequate tick control throughout their stay. The risk of
tick infections can be reduced by avoiding tick-infested areas
such as woodland, especially during spring, summer and
autumn when ticks are most active. Whenever possible, pets
should be checked daily and any ticks removed using, for
Fig. 29.20 Rhipicephatus sanguineus is the predominant tick
example, a proprietary tick-removal device. Alternatively,
species in southern Europe and is an important disease vector. Here
Or additionally, ticks can be repelled using pyrethroid-
a mate and femate are shown side by side; both are quite ptain and
based products and pets can be protected by using a suitable
brown, hence its other name, the brown dog tick: Size varies from
acaricide.
1 to 12 mm
Table 29.3 Common tick species of dogs and cats in Europe
Tick species
Approximate geographical location
Main infections transmitted
Ixodes ricinus
Throughout Europe, including the UK
Lyme disease, tick-borne encephalitis (northern Europe)
Ixodes hexagonus
Throughout Europe, including the UK
May be involved in disease transmission but role less
well defined than that of I. ricinus
Dermacentor reticutatus
Mainland Europe from Germany south
Babesia canis
Rhipicephatus sanguineus
Mainland Europe from southern France south (i.e.
Babesia canis,Ehrfichia canis, Hepatozoon canis
the Mediterranean area)
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
641
Parasitology
Fungi
Ringworm
dds unos no dds uoudoi Aa pasne si oms
Fungi exist as unicellular yeasts or multi-nuclear mycelia
Spores are introduced on to abraded skin and then a
(Fig. 29.21) and most are non-parasitic. Several species of
mycelium begins to develop in hair or keratinized skin.
fungi are parasitic - dermatophytes or ring-worm-causing
Classically, an area of alopecia develops, which gradually
species and the yeasts Candida albicans and Malassezia spp. in
becomes larger in diameter, with infection disappearing as a
particular.
result of the inflammatory response in the centre, which
heals as the infection spreads outwards. Some infections
show signs of inflammation or pruritus while others do not
(Fig. 29.22). Some species, e.g. Microsporum canis infection in
cats, have adapted so well to the host that infection can
remain inapparent. The simplest way to diagnose infection in
cats and dogs is to expose suspect lesions to ultraviolet light,
 Septate hypha 
as about 50% of Microsporum canis lesions fluoresce under a
Vacuole
Nucleus
Wood's lamp. However, where fluorescence does not occur it
is necessary to collect hair and/or superficial skin samples
and examine them directly or submit them for culturing.
Samples for direct examination can be placed on a micro-
hacuole
scope slide, covered with water or Q-ink (which will prefer-
Aseptate hypha 
entially stain fungal elements) and a coverslip and then
Nucleus
examined for fungal hyphae or arthrospores (Fig. 29.23). The
classic medium for dermatophyte culture is Sabouraud's agar
but, as dermatophytes can be slow-growing, several media
designed to show a rapid colour change in the presence of a
dermatophyte have been developed, e.g. dermatophyte test
medium (Quinn et al 1994).
Candida aibicans
B
Candida albicans is a normal commensal yeast but occasion-
Fig. 29.21 Fungi appear as (o) mycelia or (b) yeast-tike organisms
ally overgrows on mucus membranes or even on skin, usually
in young or immunocompromised animals. Smears from
affected areas show numerous yeasts that must be differenti-
ated from Malassezia sp. organisms.
Fig. 29.22 Ringworm fesions may vary from a smalf area of atope-
cia to a severe thickened and pruritic fesion. Here fesions on the
Fig. 29.23 Arthrospore formation (arrowed) in or on hairs that
nose of a horse are caused by Microsporum gypseum (Courtesy of
occurs with ringworm infection can be used diagnostically
Mark Craig)
(Courtesy of Mark Craig)
642
Parasitology
Malassezia
Malassezia spp. (Fig. 29.24) can be found on normal skin but
the population may grow on some animals to cause an itchy.
red dermatitis. The skin may appear greasy and the animal
may smell rancid. Swabs or Sellotape strip samples can be col-
lected, stained with Diff-Quik or equivalent and examined for
Malassezia sp. organisms. Infection occurs more commonly
in dogs than cats, and infection occurs more commonly in
some breeds of dog, such as the basset hound and West
Highland white terrier. Shampooing with a treatment effec-
tive against Malassezia spp. usually controls the condition
(Scott et al 2001). (For further detail see Ch. 31.)
Nematode-related dermatitis
In horses, Habronema spp. and Draschia megastoma are
stomach worms that are transmitted by flies. Flies deposit
Fig. 29.24 Malassezia organisms are bottle-shaped yeasts, some
infective larvae as they feed on secretions or wounds. If the
of which may appear to be budding. This stide was stained with
larvae are close to the mouth they will be ingested by the
methylene btue. Each organism measures 3- μm in fength
horse and thus complete the life cycle. Elsewhere the larvae
burrow into the skin and cause moist, weeping lesions that
Some people like to add a little liquid paraffin to the scalpel
are slow to heal and are known as 'summer sores'. The larvae
blade so that the material attaches to the blade. Alternatively.
or microfilariae of another nematode, Onchocerca cervicalis,
Demodex sp. can sometimes be collected by plucking hairs, since
can gather in the skin and may be associated with patches of
the mites can be found around the hair roots. Collected mate-
dermatitis with alopecia and scaling, which may be itchy.
rial is placed on to a microscope slide and more liquid paraffin,
or a 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution, is added (but
the two should not be mixed). Liquid paraffin allows any mites
Diagnosis of ectoparasite
to remain alive, so movement may be seen, while potassium
infection
hydroxide preparations can be left or heated and this assists in
removing keratin, making mites more readily visible. However,
Specimen collection and examination
KOH solution will kill the mites, so movement will not be seen.
29
The preparation should be covered with a coverslip and exam-
Surface parasites can be examined by placing coat brushings
ined systematically. Alternatively, biopsy samples can be col-
into a suitable container and examining with the aid of a
lected for histology, which is particularly useful where the par-
asites are found deep in the skin.
present do not hop away at this stage! Burrowing mites can
be collected from scrapings taken from the edge of lesions.
(For further detail see Ch. 31.)
B
Nerve
Cesophagus
A
ring
Rectum
Intestine
Dorsal nerve
Cuticle
Excretory
Anus
Buccal
pore
Ovary
Nerve' cords
cavity
 Intestine
Excretory canal
Uterus
Ovary
Anus
Muscle
Uterus
Vulva
Egg in uterus
Hypodermis
Supporting
Ventralnerve
ray
Bursa
Testis
Spicule
Cloaca
Fig. 29.25 Nematodes. (a) Cross-section through a typicat nematode. (b) Longitudinat sections
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
643
29
Parasitology
Endoparasi
featureless except that some species have features at their ante-
A
rior and posterior ends (Fig. 29.25). The main intestinal nema-
todes found in dogs, cats and horses are shown in
The endoparasites that affect companion animals and horses
Table 29.4. Treatments for endoparasites are shown in
 in the UK are divided into four main groups:
Tables 29.5-29.7. More information can be obtained about each
of the treatments by referring to the Noah Compendium of Data
● Nematodes - thread-like roundworms
Sheets for Animal Medicines Annuat. This provides a listing of
anthelmintics and ectoparasiticides for each host species.
● Cestodes - flattened tapeworms
● Trematodes - flukes or flat worms - rarely affect
Ascarids
companion animals
The ascarids are found in the small intestine and are the
● Protozoa - single-celled organisms.
largest roundworms found in dogs, cats and horses.
Nematodes
Toxocara canis
Adult female Toxocara canis can measure up to 20  cm
Nematodes are commonly referred to as roundworms, as they
in length (Fig. 29.26), are off-white and possess cuticular
are round in cross-section. Typically, they are cylindrical and
enlargements at their anterior end known as cervical alae.
Table 29.4 Major intestinal nematodes of dogs, cats and horses
Nematode group
Species
1e3
Dog
Horse
Ascarids
Toxocara cati
Toxocara canis
Parascaris equorum
Toxascaris feonina
Toxascaris feonina
Hookworms
Ancylostoma tubaeforme
Ancylostoma caninum
Uncinaria stenocephata
Uncinaria stenocephata
Whipworms
Trichuris vutpis
Strongyles
Cyathostomes
Large strongyles
Pinworms
Oxyuris equi
Table 29.5 The spectrum of activity offered by different canine antiparasitic products
Product
Spectrum of activity
Protozoa
Cestodes
Nematodes
Insects
Acari
Piperazine
Pyrantel
Dichlorophen 
Benzimidazoles
Nitroscanate
Praziquantel
Pyrantel, febantel and praziquantel
Pyrantel and febantel
Selamectin
 Lufenuron and milbemycin
 Milbemycin and praziquantel
This table is based on the data sheet claims for the products and is reproduced with permission from Fisher M 2003 A wider view of worms. Veterinary Review
86: 22-23.
**Giardia spp. only
644
Parasitology
Table 29.6 The spectrum of activity offered by different feline antiparasitic products
Product
Spectrum of activity
Protozoa
Cestodes
Nematodes
Insects
Acari
Piperazine
Dichlorophen 
Benzimidazoles
Praziquantel
Pyrantel and praziquantel
Selamectin
Milbemycin and praziquantel
aay Aeuaa som jo mata iapim  eo w iausiy woy uoissad yim panpoidan s pue snpoid aun ioy swii iaaus eiep au uo pseq st algel si
86: 22-23.
** Giardia 5pp. only
Table 29.7 The spectrum of activity offered by different equine antiparasitic products
Product
Spectrum of activity
Protozoa
Cestodes
Nematodes
Insects
Acari
Mebendazole
Fenbendazole
Pyrantel
 Ivermectin and praziquantel
Moxidectin
Ivermectin 
Praziquantel
*At double the normal dose-rate
This table is based on the data sheet claims for the products
** Bots only
29
 q s  e s   'd 
but this may be reduced by desiccation or exposure to ultra-
violet light. Dogs become infected when they ingest eggs
from the environment or eat prey that have themselves eaten
eggs and are carrying infective larvae in their tissues.
Depending on the route of infection (Fig. 29.27) the larvae
migrate through the liver and lungs or remain in the intes-
tine to develop into adult worms. Larvae that have migrated
may return to the intestine or migrate into tissues, where
they remain as somatic larvae. In a bitch, some somatic larvae
are reactivated when pregnancy occurs and they migrate
across the placenta to the pups from about the 42nd day of
pregnancy or, particularly when infection has occurred late in
pregnancy, across the mammary gland to infect pups in milk.
Fig. 29.26 Aduft Toxocara canis are stout, off-white or pinkish
worms when fresh (these are preserved specimens)
As a result, pups can carry a large number of egg-laying
worms from about 3 weeks of age. When a pup has had a
heavy infection the worms are expelled as the pup grows
 ssd  sa     s 
 older and subsequent infection will tend to result in somatic
faeces and embryonate in the environment. This occurs in
larvae and not intestinal infections. However, the factors that
approximately 11 days in optimal conditions and more slowly
 in cooler weather (Lloyd 1993). The eggs are protected by a
not clearly understood and it is estimated that about 10% of
thick outer shell and can survive in the environment for
adult dogs carry infection.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
645
Parasitology
Adult Toxocara in the
Larvae migrate in pups 
 from intestine through
intestine of a pup
(or in the 10% 
liver and lungs. Coughed
of adult dogs
up and swallowed. Mature
 with an intestinal
 to adult worms in the
 infectionj.
 small intestine.
Eggs passed
in the faeces
 Pups infected by
 eating paratenic host.
No migration occurs 
 and the worms
Infective eggs
 Pups infected with
develop in the
Larvae migrate from
containing second stage
 third stage larvae in milk.
intestine.
intestine through liver
larvae after 11 days
 No migration in the pup
and lungs. Coughed up
b 2 weeks.
 and the worms
 and swallowed.
In good condition,
develop in the 
Mature to adult worms
 on the ground.
intestine.
 in the small intestine.
Pup infected by
eating infective eggs.
Pups infected
 prenatally.
Eggs may be eaten
Eggs may be eaten
by paratenic host.
 by adult dog.
 Eggs may be eaten
Larvae migrate from
 Ingested larvae migrates
by human.
resting sites after 
 from intestine through
about the 42nd day
 tb body to resting 
of pregnancy.
site in muscle, etc.
Fig. 29.27 Life cycle of Toxocara canis
A small number of intestinal worms are well tolerated by
It is very difficult to prevent dogs acquiring infection from
dogs, as are developing worms or somatic larvae. However, a
the environment when they walk in public places such as
 heavy burden of migrating larvae in a pup can cause pneu-
 parks. Control depends on the prevention of egg output by
monia as the worms pass through the lungs. Adult worms
appropriate anthelmintic treatment of the dog. Treatments
interfere with absorption of nutrients and a heavy burden
are focused on preweaned pups and their dams, as bitches
 can cause a pup to be cachectic, with an intestine distended
can carry patent infections while they are lactating. Weaned
by worms. Intestinal worms may cause acute emergencies
-u aedoidde ie paan aq ua ueo ssop inpe pue sdind
such as intestinal obstruction or intussusception.
vals. Dogs should be prevented from defaecating in children's
 play areas and faeces should be picked up.
Zoonotic infection: Humans can be infected by accidentally
ingesting embryonated eggs from the environment. Clinical
signs are seen most commonly in children, although a larger
Toxocara cati
proportion of the population is seropositive, indicating expo-
Toxocara cati are similar in appearance to T. canis but if they
sure without showing clinical signs. There are two classical
 are examined under a stereo microscope it may be seen that
disease entities: ocular larva migrans (OLM), associated with
the cuticular enlargements at the anterior end are like arrow-
larval migration within the eye, and visceral larva migrans
heads. The life cycle of T. cafi is similar to that of T. canis
(VLM), associated with mass larval migration through, for
except that there is no prenatal migration of larvae across the
example, the liver. There are also less obvious forms of infection
placenta so kittens first acquire infection from the queen in
associated, for example, with asthma-like symptoms.
         
646
Parasitology
 Adult T. cati in
the small intestine
of a kitten 
Prepatent period of 8
weeks after egg
 Eggs passed
infection.
 in the 
Shorter period after
faeces
 infection via milk
 or paratenic host.
Coughed up
and swallowed
No migration
Larvae leave
occurs and worms
Kiten or cat may be 
 intestine and 
Embryonated egg 
develop in the
infected by eating
migrate through 
the liver and 
containing developed
intestine
paratenic host
larva in the environment
lungs
↑
 Kiten or cat may be
Infective egg may
infected by eating
Kitten or cat may be
 egg containing
infected by third stage
be ingested by a
larva from the
 larvae in the milk
paratenic host
environment
(transmammary
infection)
Infective larvae eaten
29
 by an adult queen 
leave the intestine
 and migrate to resting
 sites in muscle tissue, etc.
Fig. 29.28 Life cycte of Toxocara cati
6 weeks old when they begin passing T. cati eggs in their
Toxascaris teonina
faeces.
Toxascaris leonina can infect both dogs and cats and has a life
cycle similar to T. canis, but animals are only infected by
A small number of worms will be well tolerated by a cat, but
ingesting eggs or paratenic hosts. Dogs and cats do not
a large number may interfere with intestinal function. A large
acquire a patent infection until they are about 3 months of
number of larvae following a hepatotracheal migration may
age or older, because the prepatent period is about 8 weeks in
cause pneumonia or even death of young kittens. In the past,
dogs and 13 in cats. Infection is normally well-tolerated
 T. cati has not been regarded as as much a zoonotic risk as
without clinical signs and, like the other ascarids in dogs and
T. canis; however, there is increasing evidence that T. cati and
cats. T leonina is regarded as a potential zoonosis.
T. canis should be regarded as equally important zoonoses
(Fisher 2003). Cats may acquire infection through ingest
a   h   s  n
Parascaris equorum
infected paratenir hosts such as mice. Control is normally
Parascaris equorum is the ascarid found in the small intestine
based on anthelmintic treatment, as prevention of infection
of horses. It is a very large worm, with adults measuring up to
is almost impossible unless the animals are maintained in
40 cm long.
specialized environments. As cats may carry patent infection
 at any age, anthelmintic treatment should be repeated at
Life cycle: Foals acquire infection from embryonated eggs in
regular intervals.
their environment. Once ingested the inferctive larvae hatch
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
647
29
Parasitology
from the eggs and penetrate the intestinal wall to undergo a
Uncinaria stenocephala
hepatotracheal
migration
before
being
coughed
Uncinaria stenocephala is also known as the 'northern hook
up and swallowed, thereby returning to the small intestine,
worm' and is the hookworm that occurs endemically in dogs in
where they mature to adult worms and begin egg-laying
the UK. It has a typically large buccal capsule with two cutting
approximately 10-12 weeks after infection. Egg output by
plates at the entrance. Dogs are infected when they ingest infec-
adult worms is high, so massive environmental contamina-
tive larvae from the environment and the prepatent period is
tion with eggs can occur. The eggs are sticky and thickly
about 3 weeks. The larvae can penetrate skin but in doing so
coated, so tend to remain in the horse's environment for
 only cause a local dermatitis, unlike other hookworm species
extended periods, acting as a source of reinfection for the foal
where larvae are capable both of penetrating skin and migrat-
or a source of infection for foals in subsequent seasons.
ing through the animal to culminate in an intestinal infection.
 Infection is most likely to occur in dogs in kennels such as grey-
As they become older, horses become more recalcitrant to
hound or hunt kennels. Dogs carrying a heavy infection may
infection, so patent infections are common in foals and year-
have diarrhoea and there will be some intestinal protein loss.
lings but unusual in older horses. A few worms are well-toler-
Cats may also carry infection, although they appear to be rarely
ated but a heavy infection can cause signs of pneumonia as
infected in the UK.
the larvae migrate through the lungs and a large number of
adult worms can cause intestinal obstruction. Control is
based on prevention of egg shedding by anthelmintic treat-
Ancylostoma caninum
ment and avoiding exposure of foals and yearlings to heavily
Ancylostoma caninum is endemic in continental Europe and
contaminated environments.
has been recorded sporadically in the UK. The buccal capsule
has two pairs each of three teeth at the entrance (Fig. 29.29).
The larvae in the environment prefer a higher temperature to
Hookworms
U. stenocephala larvae and so flourish best in warmer climates
Hookworms are so-called because the buccal capsule or
than the UK. It may be possible for infection to become estab-
mouth of the worm is set at an angle to the body of the
lished in the UK, either in a sheltered kennel environment or
worm, giving a slightly hooked appearance like a crochet
in southern England, and the infection may be imported in
hook. There are many species of hookworm that parasitize
dogs that have lived in Europe. Dogs are infected by larval
the small intestine in a wide range of host species. All have a
penetration through the skin or by ingesting infective larvae
direct life cycle, with eggs passed into the environment,
(Fig. 29.30). Some larvae fail to develop into adult worms in
where they develop into infective larvae. Three species that
the intestine, instead remaining as larvae in tissues. Some of
infect cats or dogs will be considered in more detail: Uncinaria
these larvae can transfer from the dam to pups in milk. In
stenocephala,Ancylostoma caninum and Ancylostoma tubae
large numbers, milk-acquired larvae can cause the death of
forme. In each case the adult worm measures about 1.5 cm.
pups by 10 days of age, before the infection has had time to
become patent. A low level of intestinal infection is well tol-
erated but the worms are voracious blood suckers, grasping
the intestinal mucosa with their mouths and slashing with
the teeth in their buccal capsule, so a heavy infection results
in substantial blood loss and subsequent anaemia. Not all the
 blood is eaten by the worms and large amounts can pass in
the faeces, appearing as bloody mucus or blackened blood,
which is termed melaena. Over a long term, a smaller number
of worms can cause anaemia due to chronic blood loss.
Penetrating A. caninum can cause dermatitis in dogs and
humans and A. caninum has caused eosinophilic enteritis in
humans.
Ancylostoma tubaeforme
Ancylostoma fubaeforme is a hookworm of cats. It has a buccal
capsule with two pairs of three teeth at the entrance to the
mouth. It does not appear to be prevalent in the UK but has
been reported in cats in mainland Europe and so may be
Fig. 29.29 Head end of Ancylostoma caninum. Like other hook-
imported in cats entering the UK. A. fubaeforme is a blood
worms it has a farge buccat capsule. A. caninum has two pairs each
sucker and can cause anaemia with either a heavy infection
of three teeth
or a smaller chronic infection.
648
Parasitology
Prepatent period
about 3 weeks
 Develop to adult worms
Eggs passed
in intestines
in the faeces 
 Immature larvae that remain
in tissues, migrate to mammary 
Larvae develop
 glands and infect pups via
within egg
the milk
Eaten by dog or
First stage larvae
larvae penetrate
liberated from the 
dog's skin
 egg shells 
29
Develop to infective
third stage larvae in
the environment 
Fig. 29.30 Life cycte of Ancylostoma caninum
Whipworms
Trichuris vulpis
These are known as whipworms, as their anterior end is long
and narrow like the lash of a whip and the posterior end
broad like a whip handle (Fig. 29.31). The adult worms are
found in the large intestine, where the anterior end is buried
in the mucosa and the posterior end is free in the lumen.
They are found occasionally in the UK, particularly in dogs in
kennels. Infections are most likely in southern England,
where the climate is most favourable for the development of
the infective stages in the environment. Once passed in faeces,
the eggs embryonate in the environment, with the larvae
remaining within the shell once developed (Fig. 29.32). The
Fig. 29.31 Trichunis vuipis, the whipworm next to a 1p coin to
larvae are thus protected from environmental conditions and
illustrate size
can remain viable for up to 1 year in favourable conditions.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
649
00
Parasitology
The larvae bury themselves in
Eggs are passed in the
 the duodenal mucosa for 10
 faeces of infected dogs.
days then emerge and move to
 First stage larva
the large intestine and develop
 develop in the egg within
into adult worms. Prepatent 
 a fortnight.
 period is about 112 days.
Dogs are infected when
The larvae are protected
 they eat eggs containing
by the egg shell so
larvae. The larvae hatch in
can survive in the
 the small intestine after 
environment for
 about 24 hours.
 months.
Fig. 29.32 Life cycte of Trichuris vulpis
Strongyles
Cyathostomes
This means that substantial infection can accumulate in the
Horses have a large number of species of nematodes that
kennel or surroundings of infected dogs. A low-level infection
is well tolerated but a heavy infection can result in diarrhoea
inhabit the large intestine, many of which are about 1 cm
and metabolic disturbance if untreated. Established infec-
long (Fig. 29.33). There are more than 40 different species but
tions can be treated using a suitable anthelmintic and there
they are grouped together as the cyathostomes, also known as
the 'small strongyles' or trichonemes. The life cycle is direct,
after repeat infections can be prevented by moving the ani-
mals to uncontaminated surroundings and/or regular anthel-
mintic treatment. Repeat faecal sampling to monitor the
success of any control programme is suggested.
Strongyloides species
Infection with Strongyloides spp. is typically seen in young
animals. The worms are tiny and hair-like, characterized by
an oesophagus that is approximately one-third of the length
of the entire worm. Strongyloides westeri is an important infec-
tion in young foals from about 2 weeks of age. Larvae pass
from the mare in the milk and develop in the foal's small
intestine with a prepatent period of 8-14 days. Infection can
be supplemented with larvae ingested directly from the envi-
ronment and a heavy infection can cause diarrhoea. As foals
become older, patent infections and associated clinical signs
Fig. 29.33 The cyathostomes or small strongyles are smatt worms
become less common. Occasionally dogs show diarrhoea
that can be present in enormous numbers in the forge intestine of a
associated with Strongyloides spp. infection.
horse (Courtesy of Meriat Animat Heaith)
650
Parasitology
with horses acquiring infection by ingesting third-stage larvae
death of the area of intestine supplied by that artery. The
off pasture. The young larvae burrow into the wall of the large
adult worms cause small ulcers as they feed on the large intes-
intestine, where they may remain in a state of suspended devel-
tinal mucosa. Control is based on pasture management and
opment or hypobiosis for extended periods, or develop and
anthelmintic treatment as described for the cyathostomes.
emerge after a short period to develop into adults within the
lumen of the intestine. The adults are found close to the wall of
the intestine, where they feed on the superficial layers of the
are passed in faeces and develop on pasture.
Low levels of infection are well tolerated but contamination
can build up substantially on pasture and a heavy infection,
especially in foals or yearlings, can cause poor condition,
anaemia and diarrhoea. An acute syndrome may be seen in
spring when thousands of hypobiotic larvae leave the mucosa
simultaneously to continue their development. Many may be
passed in the faeces and appear as a red layer on the surface
of dung. Affected animals show profuse diarrhoea, weight
loss and sometimes colic and death. Control depends on
reducing the access of horses to larvae on pasture by measures
such as avoiding heavily contaminated pasture and dung col-
Fig. 26.34 Head of Strongytus vulgaris
lection, together with anthelmintic treatment. Although it
monitoring of egg-counts, normally control is a mixture of
Large strongyles
Three species of nematode occur in the large intestine but
have a migratory life cycle and are larger than the small
strongyles so are known as the large strongyles to differenti-
29
ate them. The species are Strongylus vulgaris, Strongylus equinus
and Sirongylus edentafus and the features of each species are
shown in Table 29.8 and Figures 29.34-29.36. Infection, par-
ticularly with S. vulgaris larvae, can cause severe clinical signs.
-      n   s
siderable pathology, including clot formation and infarction
Fig. 29.35 Head of Strongylus equinus
caused by blockage of a branch of the artery and subsequent
Table 29.8 Summary of the large strongyles of horses
Species
Prepatent period
Migratory route of larvae
Adult
Adult
(months)
appearance
length (cm)
Strongytus vulgaris
6-7
 Migration up the cranial mesenteric artery
Two rounded teeth
1.5-2.5
and branches and back to the intestine where
at the base of the
they form nodules in the intestinal wall
buccal capsule
Strongylus equinus
8-9
Form nodules in the deep layers of the
Three teeth, one
2.5-5.0
intestine and then migrate through the liver
with two points, at
before returning to the intestine
the base of the
buccal capsule
Strongyfus edentatus
10-12
Migrate through the liver into the peritoneum
No teeth in buccal
2.5-4.5
where they develop into L5 before returning
capsule
to the intestine
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
29
Parasitology
few days of birth. Ingested larvae are swallowed and
migrate from the intestine to the lungs, where they
ascend the respiratory tree and grow to adults at the
base of the trachea. The presence of the worm causes a
granulomatous lesion to grow around it, so that the
worms become completely enclosed. These nodules
may be well tolerated but can be associated with
exercise intolerance and coughing, particularly in dogs
 at exercise
● Crenosoma vulpis is known as the fox lungworm as
it is endemic in the fox population. Slugs or snails act
Fig. 29.36 Head of Strongylus edentatus
as intermediate hosts so dogs become infected by
eating an infected slug or snail. A heavy infection may
be associated with coughing or exercise intolerance
●Capillaria aerophila has a similar appearance to
Triodontophorus spp.
T. vulpis, but are smaller and are found embedded in
Triodontophorus spp. are a third group of strongyle nematodes
the bronchial wall.
that inhabit the large intestine of the horse. They are differ
entiated primarily by their feeding habit. They feed as a large
Most lungworm infections can be diagnosed by finding
group, causing the formation of deep ulcers that may
larvae in the faeces using the Baermann technique or in
measure several centimetres in diameter.
bronchoalveolar fluid. The exception is C. aerophila, which pro-
n idaxa 'ssa sida  o ress ou are pen sia sa
Pinworms
 polar plugs are smaller and the outer surface is rough. O. osteri
 nodules can sometimes be seen as radio-opaque densities in the
Oxyuris equi
trachea. Adult C. vulpis may be found in bronchoalveolar fluid,
Oxyuris equi is the pinworm of horses, so called because
where they appear like pieces of white thread:
the worms look like carpet tacks. The females measure up to
10 cm but the male worms measure only about 1 cm. The
● Aleurostrogylus abstrusus is the main lungworm in
worms inhabit the large intestine but unusually the female
cats. This has an indirect life cycle with a slug or snail
worms leave the intestine to lay their eggs on the perineum
 as intermediate host. Cats may be infected by eating
around the anus of the horse. Larvae develop in the egg and
slugs or snails or possibly small mammals that art as
horses are reinfected by ingesting eggs containing fully de-
paratenic hosts. Infection may be well tolerated but
veloped larvae. The prepatent period is 5 months. The acti-
some cats show respiratory signs, including coughing.
vity of the female worms on the perineum and the presence
Cats can also be infected with C. aerophila
of the eggs can cause severe irritation, seen as rubbing and
alopecia over the tail head. Infection can be diagnosed by
● Dictyocaulus arnfieldi is the lung nematode that
 placing a piece of sticky tape across the perineum around the
occurs in the horse. The life cycle is direct, with larvae
anus and examining it microscopically for eggs. Control is
passed in the faeces and developing to third-stage
based on anthelmintic treatment, which can be supple-
larvae on pasture. Ingested infective larvae leave the
intestine and migrate to the lungs, where the slender
to remove eggs.
adult worms are found in the smaller bronchi. The
 prepatent period is about 2 months and the female
Lungworms
adult worms lay eggs that have often hatched by the
  s  n d    s
A number of species of nematode inhabit the lungs and upper
symptomless, while infection in horses can be
respiratory tract. In the dog, Oslerus osleri is found around the
associated with chronic coughing, sometimes in the
area of the tracheal bifurcation, adult Crenosoma vulpis and
absence of a patent infection.
Capillaria aerophila are found in the bronchi and Filaroides
hirthi occur in the alveoli:
Heartworms
● Oslerus osleri has a direct life cycle, with first-stage
There are two nematodes that inhabit the pulmonary artery
larvae passed directly from dog to dog in saliva. An
and the right side of the heart in the dog - Angiostrongylus
infected bitch may pass larvae to her pups within a
vasorum and Dirofilaria immitis.
652
2Parasitology
● Angiostrongylus vasorum occurs in both dogs and
(Fig. 29.38). Female worms are long and slender,
foxes in the UK. The first reports in dogs about a
measuring up to 30 cm in length. Instead of eggs they
decade ago were limited to Cornwall, South Wales and
lay larvae, known as microfilariae, which travel in the
the south-east of England but it has now been reported
blood. Infection is transmitted by mosquitoes, which
in England at least as far north as Manchester and
imbibe microfilariae as they feed on blood. The larvae
north Wales. The adult worms measure only about
develop to third stage in the mosquito and once mature
2 cm in length, very different from the 30 cm of
they leave to infect another final host as the mosquito
female D. immitis, so there is little problem in
feeds. At first, the larvae develop in the area where they
differentiating the two species. Dogs are infected when
first penetrated the skin, later entering the circulation
they ingest infected slugs or snails and the larvae leave
and travelling to the heart. The prepatent period for
 the intestine and migrate to the pulmonary artery
heartworm in dogs is about 6-7 months. Cats can also
(Fig. 29.37). Female worms lay eggs that are swept into
 be infected but they are not such a good host: the
the lung circulation. These hatch and the larvae
 prepatent period is extended to about 8 months and
migrate into the alveoli and are eventually coughed
many infections never produce microfilariae.
 up, swallowed and passed in faeces. A wide range of
A few heartworms in a dog may be well tolerated
clinical signs may be seen with some, such as clotting
 but a substantial burden can partially obstruct the
disorders, being related to the presence of worms in
pulmonary artery, causing right-sided heart failure.
the circulatory system and others caused by
 In addition, dead worms may be swept into the
pulmonary damage. Infection can be diagnosed by
 lungs, where they form a focus for inflammatory
finding the characteristic larvae in the faeces or in
reactions. Clinical signs associated with infection
bronchoalveolar fluid
can be graded as mild, moderate and severe. A dog
with severe disease might show low exercise
● Dirofilaria immitis, the true heartworm, does not
tolerance, marked coughing, weight loss and ascites.
 occur in the UK unless a pet already carrying
Occasionally a large number of worms move
heartworm is imported. At present the northern
suddenly from the pulmonary artery into the right
extremity of the area endemic for heartworm is the
side of the heart, causing an acute condition known
south of Switzerland, although the endemic area does
as caval syndrome. Infected cats show more diverse
appear to be spreading. The adult worms are found in
signs, which include vomiting and even sudden
the right side of the heart and the pulmonary artery
death.
29
 The pre-patent period is
between 33-35 days and
omce present, the worms will
remain in the dog for several
 years unless removed by
anthelmintic.
Dogs are infected when ingesting
 sugs or snails carrying larvae.
The larvae leave the intestine and
migrate to mesenteric lymph
nodes before completing their
migration to the pulmonary
artery or right side of the heart.
As they reach maturity, female
worms lay egg that pass into
the lung vasculature, where they
develop into first stage larvae
that hatch then pass into alveoli
before being coughed up and 
swallowed by host.
Fig. 29.37 Life cycte of Angiostrongytus vasorum
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
29
Parasitology
q    q  sm 
anthelmintic treatment but both methods can pose
risks to the dog or cat. It is recommended that dogs or
cats travelling to an area where heartworm is endemic
are treated prophylactically with a macrocyclic lactone
throughout the season of mosquito activity. These
treatments are administered at monthly or 6-monthly
intervals and are highly effective against third- and
fourth-stage heartworm larvae, which are killed before
they begin to migrate towards the heart.
Cestodes
Cestodes are flat tapeworms composed of a head or scolex and
a chain or strobila of clearly defined segments or proglottids
(Fig. 29.39). The adult tapeworm is found in the intestine
attached to the intestinal wall by the scolex, which often
bears hooks and suckers to assist in making a secure attach-
ment. The segments are produced in a neck region behind
the scolex and contain both male and female reproductive
 tracts, so a single tapeworm can reproduce without need of
other tapeworms. As a segment becomes older, signified by its
being pushed towards the end of the worm by the younger
segments, the eggs inside it develop, until it is almost
nothing more than a bag of eggs. Ultimately the attachment
to the segment behind breaks down and the segment moves
down the intestine with the other intestinal contents to pass
through the rectum and into the environment. Segments
have a primitive nervous system and are capable of some
movement, so may make their own way out of the anus. In
the environment the segment is broken down and the eggs
are released.
Fig. 29.38 Heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis) in situ in an infected
 All tapeworms have an intermediate stage of development
dog (Courtesy of John McGarry)
called the metacestode, the appearance of which varies with
A
B
Scolex
Neck
Testes
Uterus
Genital 
pore
Ovary
Viteline
glands
Fig. 29.39 Cestode (a) Anterior end (b) Mature segment or proglottid
654
Parasitology
tapeworm species. Normally the metacestode is found in a
host of a different species from the final host in which the
adult tapeworm occurs. The final host is infected when it eats
the intermediate host carrying the metacestode. For example,
the flea carries the immature cysticercoid stage of Dipylidium
caninum and dogs and cats are infected when they eat an
infected flea. Drugs with cestocidal action are shown in
Tables 29.5-29.7.
Anoplocephala perfotiata
Anoplocephala perfoliata and its relation Anoplocephala magna
a punoe puno Anid suomad Ads 'enbs omi ae
ileocaecal junction of a horse's intestine. The intermediate
host is the oribatid mite, which can occur in large numbers
on pasture. Horses are infected when they ingest the mites
Fig. 29.40 Dipylidium caninum. May measure up to 50 cm fong
with grass. Large numbers of tapeworms are associated with
an increased incidence of colic. Control is based on the use of
mediate hosts, and they are listed in Table 29.9. Without
anthelmintics with cestocidal action.
detailed inspection of the shape of the hooks, all Taenia tape-
worms look the same (Fig. 29.41), although there is some
Dipytidium caninum
variation in length.
Dipylidium caninum is a tapeworm that occurs in dogs and
cats (Fig. 29.40). It is delicate in appearance compared to
Taenia spp., the other type of large tapeworm found in dogs
and cats in the UK. The intermediate hosts are fleas or biting
a e isa an m paa ae sie io shop pe a
louse or flea. The tapeworm causes little harm to the animal
unless present in very high numbers, apart from anal irrita-
tion associated with segments crawling out of the anus.
Occasionally, humans are infected with adult tapeworms.
Control depends on anthelmintic treatment, together with
flea or louse control to prevent reinfection.
29
Taenia species
Cats are normally infected with just one Taenia species,
Taenia faeniaeformis. The metacestode stage occurs in rodents
Fig. 29.41 Head of Taenia sp. tapeworm
A number of species occur in dogs, with a variety of inter-
Table 29.9 Taenia species of tapeworms found in the dog
Species
Final host
Approximate prepatent
Intermediate host
Intermediate stage 
period (weeks)
metacestode
Taenia pisiformis
xoJ pue bo0
6-8
Rabbit
Cysticercus pisiformis
Abdomen or liver
Taenia hydatigena
Dog and fox
7-10
Cattle, sheep
Cysticercus tenuicoflis
 Abdomen or liver
Taenia multiceps
Dog
4-6
Sheep, cattle,
Coenurus cerebratis
 Brain and spinal cord
Taenia ovis
xoJ pue bo0
6-8
 Sheep and goat
Cysticercus ovis
Muscle
Taenia seriatis
Dog
Rabbit
Coenurus seriatis
Connective tissue
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
655
29
Parasitology
The presence of tapeworms is well tolerated by the host, apart
 Iceland has done so and New Zealand and Tasmania are in a
from possibly some anal irritation caused by the presence of
transition period before being declared free. There are two
segments. Often, however, clinical signs of the metacestode
areas of infection in the UK; Wales, particularly the Powys
are more severe - sheep with Coenurus cerebralis cysts in the
area, and the Hebrides. An eradication programme was con-
brain develop nervous signs known as ‘gid', and affected
muscle may be devalued as meat. It is therefore important to
totally successful, as a proportion of lambs carried the
control Taenia tapeworms because of their impact on the
metacestode stage in the 1990s after the eradication scheme
intermediate hosts. The eggs of Taenia spp. may be seen on
had been scaled down to an educational programme.
faecal egg examination, but this is not a very sensitive tech-
nique for detection of cestode eggs. Alternatively, segments
Infection by this cestode is an important zoonosis. If humans
may be seen in faeces or on an animal's coat. It is also possi-
eat the eggs passed by a dog or fox then a hydatid cyst may
ble to assess whether a pet is likely to acquire a Taenia sp.
develop in the person's liver, lungs or rarely elsewhere. The
infection. For example, if a cat lives entirely indoors, eats
cyst can grow to 10 cm or more in diameter and causes pain
tinned food and the environment is mouse-free, it is not pos-
e  s   a s  
sible for the cat to become infected with T. faeniaeformis.
treatment. Control depends on regular treatment of dogs in
Where there is evidence of tapeworm infection, or a likeli
endemic areas with effective cestocides and preventing dogs
hood of the animal acquiring infection, the dog or cat can be
from having access to sheep carcases or uncooked offal. There
treated with an appropriate cestocide. It may be possible to
is a separate strain, which may indeed represent a separate
prevent further infection by, for example, preventing access
species, Echinococcus equinus, that has a dog-to-horse life
to raw meat, but in some cases where an animal hunts it can
cycle. It is not believed to be zoonotic.
be very difficult to prevent re-exposure.
Echinococcus muttitocularis
Echinococcus granulosus
Like E. granulosus, Echinococcus multilocularis is a very small
Echinococcus granulosus (Fig. 29.42) is a minute tapeworm
 s   s    
found in the small intestine of dogs and foxes and is so small
half the length of the worm compared to E. granulosus.
that a dog may carry hundreds or even thousands of worms
E. multilocularis does not occur in the UK but the infection is
without any external sign of infection. Each worm measures
endemic throughout a large part of mainland Europe from
about 5 mm and consists of only about four segments. The
eastern France to Germany in the north and across to Poland
terminal, gravid segment measures about half the length of
in the east. The southern boundary is the southern borders of
the worm. The normal intermediate hosts are sheep, although
Switzerland and Austria.
the hydatid cyst, the metacestode stage, can develop in cattle
Infection is widespread across the world and only a few coun-
Foxes are the main hosts but dogs and, to a lesser extent, cats
tries have managed to eliminate the disease completely
can act as final hosts, the normal intermediate host being
small rodents. In the intermediate host a cystic structure
develops that contains many protoscolices, each of which is
  n  s   s  
parts can break off and metastasize, particularly in aberrant
final hosts such as humans. As E. multilocularis is an impor-
tant zoonosis, it was the reason for the introduction of
i.e. praziquantel, prior to entry into the UK under the PETS
scheme.
 If humans ingest eggs, an alveolar cyst may develop in the
liver and, as in rodents, it has an invasive nature and if
untreated will lead to the death of the individual. Treatment
is sometimes difficult in advanced cases but consists of
 so n     
cats is based on regular anthelmintic treatment. Pet owners
should be warned prior to travelling about the risk of their
pet acquiring infection. As the prepatent period is approxi
mately 1 month, if they are away for longer than this and the
Fig. 29.42 Echinococcus granutosus. Entire topeworm measures
animal becomes infected it could begin passing segments
about 6mm
prior to the cestode treatment on return.
656
Parasitology
Trematodes
Protozoa
Trematodes are the flukes, flat worms that parasitize a
The protozoa are small, unicellular organisms, some of which
number of organs including the intestine, bile ducts, blood
 are parasites of animals. A major group are the coccidian para-
and lungs of domestic animals. In the UK we are familiar with
sites, which produce oocysts as a result of sexual reproduction.
the liver fluke, Fasciola hepatica, which is normally a parasite
of sheep and cattle. Horses can be infected but clinical signs
associated with infection are rare. Animals on wet ground
The coccidian protozoa
with standing water are at risk, as these are often suitable
locations for the intermediate host, a tiny snail called Lymnea
Isospora species
iuncahuia. Eggs passed in the faeces of infected animals
   p sid  sd  n  s
develop in the environment and the first stage, the miracid-
dogs and cats, but only some, such as Isospora felis in cats and
ium, infects snails. Eventually, after two more developmental
Isospora canis in dogs, are considered pathogenic. The parasite
stages, cercariae leave the snail and encyst as metacercariae on
goes through a complex series of reproductive stages in the
grass, ready to infect a new mammalian host when they are
dog or cat that terminate in sexual reproduction and the pro-
ingested.
duction of oocysts, which are passed in faeces. This is similar
to that seen in Eimeria spp. (Fig. 29.43). Isospora spp. infection
There are a number of fluke species that occur in cats and
may be well tolerated or may result in diarrhoea, particularly
dogs but none are endemic in the UK pet population.
in puppies and kittens. The life cycle is direct and hosts are
Schizont formed.
 Invade cells of the
intestinal wall.
The merozoites are
 Each schizont contains
liberated and invade
Sporozoites
 many merozoites.
 new cells.
29
liberated in the 
 intestine.
Q5
Asexual
Merozoites give rise to
division
macrogametocytes and
(schizogeny).
 to microgametocytes
Host eats
composed of many
sporulated
 microgametes.
OOcyst.
 Cocyst sporulates in
about three days in the
One microgamete
environment. Once
fertilises one
 sporulated it contains
macrogametocyte
Sexual
four sporocysts, each
 to form a zygote.
reproduction 
with two sporozoites.
ao
(gametogeny).
Unsponulated oocyst 
Zygote develops
 into an 
passsed in the faeces.
 insporulated oocyst.
Fig. 29.43 Life cycle of an Eimeria spp. coccidium
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
657
Parasitology
infected when they ingest sporulated oocysts from the envi-
infects dogs and sheep. The dog is normally little affected by the
ronment. Control depends on hygiene, particularly in be-
presence of the intestinal stages but the stages in the sheep
tween litters of pups or kittens, as oocysts are robust and will
 occur in muscle tissue and cann cause severe illness and even
survive in the environment for long periods.
death (Rommel 1985). Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis is a
severe nervous disease of horses that is currently the focus of a
Horses and rabbits may be infected with Eimeria spp.
 great deal of research in the USA.
(Fig. 29.43) and infection may result in diarrhoea. One
 species of Eimeria in rabbits affects the liver rather than the
Toxoplasma gondii
intestine.
Toxoplasma gondii has a complex life cycle consisting of
 asexual and sexual reproductive components (Fig. 29.44). The
Some coccidian parasites have a more complex life cycle, with
 main host is the cat and both stages can occur in the cat, but
the final host infected by eating an infected intermediate host.
the asexual reproductive stage can also take place in many
These include the agent of equine protozoal myeloencephalitis.
 other mammals.
Sarcocystis neurona and other Sarcocystis species. The Sarcocystis
 species each have a two-host life cycle and typically for any par-
   d      s
ticular species both hosts are defined, e.g. Sarcocystis tenella
 oocysts in faeces. Normally, following infection, sexual repro-
 Cat infected by
Cocysts passed in
 eating intermediate
 large numbers in 
host.
 the faeces.
 Sexual reproduction
 in the cat's
intestines.
 Bradyzoites.
Cat infected by
Cocysts become infective 
eating sporulated 
je. sporulated after
oocyst.
 about 3 days.
Other host (sheep, man, dog,
 mouse, etc) infected by
Tachyzoites.
eating sporulated oocyst.
 Asexual reproduction
 Occurs in the tissues
of non-cat host.
Other animals may be
infected by eating meat
 mntaining bradyzoites.
Fig. 29.44 Life cycle of Toxoptasma gondii
658
Parasitology
duction takes place, with the production of oocysts without
antiprotozoals and is most successful when commenced early
clinical signs. Oocyst production continues for a period of
in the infection.
days and then ceases and thereafter cats are believed not to
become reinfected. Other mammals become infected when
they ingest sporulated oocysts from a cat's faeces. In these
Cryptosporidium spp.
hosts replication takes place in tissues, initially rapidly divid-
Cryptosporidium spp. are small intestinal protozoan parasites
ing tachyzoites are formed and then, under the influence
that have a direct life cycle with oocysts passed in faeces. The
of host immunity, slower-dividing bradyzoite cysts. Like
 host range includes a wide variety of mammalian species and
other mammals, humans can become inferted. Immuno-
genetic research is currently engaged in clarifying species
compromised people and fetuses are most at risk of develop.
relationships. Both dogs and cats can be infected and some
ing severe disease. A proportion of the adult population are
individuals continue to be subclinical carriers after an initial
seropositive, i.e. show evidence of infection, but remain
infection. Diarrhoea associated with infection is most com-
healthy. In immunocompromised individuals, including
 monly seen in puppies and kittens. The infection may be
those whose immunity is suppressed during transplant
zoonotic, so care should be taken to avoid transmission to
surgery, the tissue cysts can multiply rapidly. Infection during
humans, where diarrhoea may be severe particularly in the
pregnancy may result in abortion, an affected baby or an
immunocompromised.
infected baby who does not show any clinical signs but may
develop them later in life.
 Steps to avoid human infection include:
Giardia spp.
 Giardia spp. are flagellate protozoa that infect the small intes-
● Wear gloves while gardening and wash hands
tine of many mammalian species, causing diarrhoea and
 thoroughly prior to eating
increased frequency of defaecation. Following infection some
animals may remain as carriers and may act as a source of
● Cover children's sandpits to prevent cats from using
infection for others. Dogs and cats can both acquire infec-
them as litter trays
tion, particularly puppies and kittens. The stage in the intes.
tine, the trophozoite, multiplies by binary fission and envi-
● Wear gloves when cleaning the cat's litter tray and
ronmentally resistant cysts are passed in faeces. The infection
clean it out daily
may be zoonotic, so care should be taken to ensure that
humans are not exposed to infection. Infected dogs may be
● Wash fruit and vegetables prior to eating
treated with fenbendazole. There is a vaccine available in the
29
USA but it is not currently available in the UK.
● Chop meat separately from vegetables and wash hands
after handling raw meat
Babesia spp.
● Avoid undercooked meat and unpasteurized milk and
cheese.
Babesia spp. are parasites of red blood cells and the presence
of the parasite in red blood cells causes breakdown of the
The baby charity Tommys (www.tommys.org) provides
cells. Infected animals show bouts of fever and then anaemia,
advice, including leaflets about human infection and how to
which can be followed by death in some cases. Infection is
avoid it.
Si  d d o   
Neospora caninum
have been reports of dogs returning from Europe with
Neospora caninum was first identified about 30 years ago. It is
closely related to T. gondii and shows similar tissue cysts asso
normally with imidocarb, is essential. Pet owners planning to
ciated with asexual reproduction, and sexual reproduction in
take their animals on holiday should be informed of the risks
the intestine of dogs that results in oocyst production. Cattle
associated with tick infestation and how to avoid them.A
are the intermediate host and infection can cycle within the
babesiosis vaccine is available in some southern European
cattle population without passing through dogs, causing
countries. Cats can be infected with Babesia spp. but the main
abortion when fetuses are affected. Occasionally, the tissue
species infecting cats occur in Africa and the East but not in
stages cause clinical signs in dogs, usually of an ascending
the Mediterranean. Cats appear to tolerate infection well
paralysis and paresis, together with muscle wasting. Infection
until the anaemia becomes very severe, and then they die
rapidly. Babesia equi occurs in southern Europe and infects
Infection in dogs can be treated with a combination of
horses.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
659
29
Parasitology
Leishmania spp.
adult fly emerges in the summer to complete the life cycle. In
Leishmania spp. are intracellular parasites of macrophages and
the horse they cause some pathology and in addition, the pres-
the infection is endemic in many of the tropical and subtropi-
ence of the flies causes disturbance or even panic in horses. The
cal areas of the world, including the Mediterranean. Infection
 eggs are visible as small white dots on hairs and these can be cut
in southern Europe is transmitted by the sandfly, Phlebotormus
spp. Dogs are the main species infected and clinical signs may
occur 5 years after infection. Initial signs vary, but may consist
of a skin wound that doesn't heal. Infected macrophages prolif-
erate in a variety of different organs and clinical signs are
related to the organ systems affected. Not every dog that
acquires infection will develop disease but a proportion will do
so. Presence of infection may be detected using antibody (IFAT)
tests or polymerase chain reaction tests (PCR).
Dogs act as a reservoir for human infection, as leishmaniosis is
an important zoonosis. The Mediterranean infection, normally
referred to as L. infanhum, is not as pathogenic in humans as
some of the other species; nonetheless, the disease can be severe
  so  s n   
treated but a parasitic cure is rarely achieved and so prolonged
treatment may be necessary. Repellents may be helpful in pre-
venting sandflies biting dogs and cats in endemic areas, but
total prevention may be difficult to achieve. People considering
adopting dogs from the Mediterranean area should be aware
that the dog may already be infected. Frequency of infection in
cats appears to be far less than in dogs.
Arthropods
Bots
Gasirophilus spp. flies are active in the summer and lay their
40-50μm
eggs on the hairs of horses. Horses ingest the eggs as they groom
and the larvae or bots develop in the stomach or proximal small
intestine, depending on the species. The bots are attached to
the mucosa (Fig. 29.45) but the following spring when fully
developed they pass into the environment and pupate. The
100 μm
C
Fig. 29.45 The farvae of Gastrophitus sp. or bots attached to the
Fig. 29.46 Horse nematode eggs (a) Strongyle egg (b) Strongyloides
stomach wall of a horse
Sp. egg (c) Parascanis equorum (All courtesy of John McGary)
660
Parasitology
off to prevent ingestion. Horses can also be treated with an aver-
Collection of samples
mectin or other macrocyclic lactones, such as moxidectin to
Faeces
eliminate bots.
Faecal samples should be collected from the animal's rectum
or fresh off a cage floor. Old faecal samples from a kennel
Diagnosis of endoparasite
floor may be contaminated with free-living nematodes, which
infection
can confuse identification.
Endoparasite infection can be identified by examination of
Blood
faeces or blood. In many cases the parasite produces eggs
Blood samples should be collected into ethylenediamine-
with certain identifiable characteristics which are shown in
tetraacetic acid (EDTA) as a anticoagulant for microscopic or
Figures 29.46-29.48.
PCR examination.
85μm
90μm
29
B
70-90 μm
C
1
Fig. 29.47 Dog nematode eggs and protozoa cyst (a) Toxocara canis egg (egg of Toxocara cati appears simitar) (b) Toxocara teonina egg
(Courtesy of John McGarry) (c) Trichuris vutpis egg. Note the prominent ptugs at both ends (d) Giardia sp. trophozoite in faeces
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
661
29
Parasitology
some water on a microscope slide to form an
emulsion. The mixture is covered with a cover
slip and examined systematically under a
microscope
● Two methods, based on the use of fluid of a particular
I  n s aq sa aas o 
debris, which sinks, are described below. Both use
saturated sodium chloride solution as the flotation
fluid. The density of 1.0 can be increased to >1.5 using
saturated zinc sulphate, which will float both
nematode and the heavier trematode eggs.
Alternatively, trematode eggs can be sedimented by
spinning them down in a centrifuge.
Modified McMaster (quantitative method)
● Place 3 g of faeces in 42 ml water in a beaker or jar,
add several glass beads and shake to break up the
Fig 29.47 (e) Cryptosporidium sp. oocyst which stains red with
faecal matter. Cat faeces are notoriously difficult to
break up and using lukewarm water and leaving for
acid-fast stain
a few hours in the water will help
Laboratory analysis - examination of
● Pour the mixture through a tea strainer and catch
faeces for parasite eggs
the fluid in a bowl
The majority of endoparasites produce eggs or larvae which
● Discard the debris in the tea strainer
pass out in the host's faeces and there are a variety of tech.
 niques that can be used to examine the faeces:
● Fill a 15 ml test tube with the filtrate and centrifuge
for 5 min at 1500 rpm
● Where eggs are abundant, e.g. in ascarid infection, a
small piece of faecal material can simply be added to
● Discard the supernatant
60μm
50 μm
B
Fig. 29.48 Cat nematode eggs (a) Capillaria sp. egg (b) Isospora felis oocyst - this is the fargest oocyst that occurs in cats. Aiso visible is an
egg from Ancylostoma tubaeforme
662
Parasitology
● Add a small amount of saturated salt solution
● Place the slide on to the microscope stage and
(NaCl) to the tube and mix to suspend the pellet
examine under x40 magnification
from the bottom of the tube. Fill the tube to the
15 ml mark and mix again
● Work methodically, examining each section of the
coverslip systematically
● Remove an aliquot with a pipette and use this to fill
one side of a McMaster chamber; repeat to fill the
● Count all eggs (if different types of egg are present
second side of the McMaster slide
then each should be counted separately) and the
number counted equals the number of eggs per
● Dry any excess water off the McMaster slide. Place
gram of faeces.
on to a microscope stage and examine under
x40 magnification
Baermann technique for detection of larvae in faeces
● Focus on the grid etched on to the upper surface
 of the slide and work methodically, examining
Equipment: a funnel, a metal clamp stand, a short piece of
each section of the grid systematically. Any eggs
rubber tube, a clip, two strong wires, some muslin, a cen-
will be in focus at the same time as the grid lines,
trifuge tube, a slide and coverslip, and Lugol's iodine:
as will round, black circles, which are air
bubbles
● Place the rubber tubing on to the end of the funnel
and clamp the funnel into the stand. Place the clip
rd a a po sd i  s he so 
across the end of the rubber tubing so that it forms a
then each should be counted separately) found on
watertight seal
one side of the slide. Repeat the count on the other
side of the slide, add the totals together and
● Fill the funnel with lukewarm water up to about 1 cm
 1ad sa jo 1aq a a o os Aq kidn
of the rim
of faeces
● Take a piece of muslin measuring about 15 cm? and
Faecal flotation (semi-quantitative method)
thread the two wires through two sides. Place the
muslin into the top of the funnel so that the wires are
● Place 3 g of faeces in 42 ml water in a beaker or jar,
lying across the top of the funnel
add several glass beads and shake to break up the
faecal matter. Cat faeces are notoriously difficult to
● Place about 10 g of faeces gently on to the muslin,
break up and using lukewarm water and leaving for
ensuring that it is well covered with water
a few hours in the water will help
● Leave the apparatus overnight and in the morning
● Pour the mixture through a tea strainer and catch
draw off a centrifuge tube full of fluid from the bottom
the fluid in a bowl
 ssoe d a dn  sde an go
rubber tube
● Discard the debris in the tea strainer
● Allow the tube to stand for about 4 h or centrifuge at
● Fill a 15 ml test tube with the filtrate and centrifuge
1500 rpm for 1 min
for 5 min at 1500 rpm
● Remove the supernatant and place the sediment on a
● Discard the supernatant
microscope slide with a coverslip on the top. A drop of
Lugol's iodine can be added, which kills the larvae and
 o ( ns ps o n ns  p o
 n n ss  n   o
tube and mix to resuspend the pellet from the
which can help to highlight features.
bottom of the tube. Fill the tube totally and place a
coverslip on to the top of the tube - it should be
 held in place by the fluid beneath it
Laboratory analysis - examination of
poojq
● Place into a centrifuge and spin at 1500 rpm for
2 min. Gently remove the tube from the centrifuge,
A conventional blood smear can be prepared and stained
pick off the coverslip with a vertical action and
with Giemsa to examine for blood parasites such as Babesia
place on to a microscope slide
spp. or Leishmania spp.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 663
29
Parasitology
Heartworm microfilariae can be identified in blood using the
Websites
Knott's test:
Acarus - The University of Bristol's dedicated laboratory for the
● The process requires 1 ml blood and any excess blood
PCR-detection of arthropod-bome infectious diseases in companion
should be conserved so that, if necessary, a sample can
animats: www.bris.ac.uk/acarus/welcome.him
be sent to an expert for identification of microfilariae
Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs: DACTARI -
● Add 1 ml of blood (heparinized or EDTA) to 9 ml 2%
Dog and Cat Travel And Risk Information: www.defra.gov.uk/
formaldehyde solution in a centrifuge tube. Mix
animalh/diseases/veterinary/dactari/
thoroughly
TestAPet - Veterinary Parasitology Diagnostics: www.testapet.com
● Centrifuge the tube at 1500 rpm for 5 min. Discard the
supernatant
● Place the sediment on to a microscope slide, add a
Recommended reading
drop of methylene blue and mix well
Jacobs D E 1986 A colour aflas of equine parasites. Gower
● Place a coverslip over the preparation and examine
Medicat, London
systematically.
Provides numerous illustrations of the appearance and life cycles of
Bibliography
an extensive range of horse parasites.
Curtis C F 2004 Current trends in the treatment of Sarcoptes,
Macpherson C N L, Meslin F X, Wandeler A I 2000
Cheyletiella and Otodectes mite infestations in cats and dogs.
Dogs, zoonoses and public health. CABl Publishing,
Veterinary Dermatology 15: 108-114
Waltingford
Dryden M W, Rust M K 1994 The cat flea, biology,ecology and
Focuses on dog diseases from the perspective of the risk of human
control. Veterinary Parasitology 52 1-19
disease.
Fisher M 2003 Toxocara cati: an underestimated zoonosis. Trends
Noah Compendium of Data Sheets for Animal Medicines Annual.
in Parasitology 19: 167-170
National Office of Animal Health, London
Lloyd S 1993 Toxocara canis: the dog. In: Lewis JW, Maizets R M
Provides data sheets of individual parasiticides.
(eds) Toxocara and toxocariasis, clinicat, epidemiological and
molecular perspectives. British Society for Parasitology with the
Trotz-Williams L, Gradoni L 2003 Disease risks for the travelling
Institute of Biology, London
pet: leishmaniasis. In Practice 25: 190-197
Quinn P J, Carter M E, Markey B K, Carter G R 1994 Clinical vet-
One of an In Practice series examining theinfections that may
erinary microbiology. Wolfe, London
enter the UK under PETs. The others in the series are atso worth
looking out for.
Rommel M 1985 Sarcocystosis of domestic animals and humans.
In Practice 7: 158-160
Urquhart G M,Armour ↓,Duncan JL et al 1996 Veterinary
parasitology, 2nd edn. Blackwell Science, Oxford
Scott D W, Hillier W H, Griffin C E 2001 Muller and Kirk's small
animal dermatology, 6th edn. W B Saunders, Philadelphia, PA
A good basic textbook on parasitology covering all species.
664 Parasitology
30
Microbiology
Helen Moreton
Key Points
● Microorganisms are too small to be seen with the
● Bacterial replication occurs asexually by binary fission
naked eye and include bacteria, viruses, fungi, algae
and by conjugation, which allows new characteristics to
and protozoa. The majority of microorganisms are
develop as a result of the transfer of genetic material.
non-pathogenic and are essential for life, e.g. in the
● Bacteria can be grown in the laboratory in order to
breakdown and decay of dead matter.
identify them but the culture must be provided with the
● Before the symptoms of a disease develop a pathogenic
correct balance of nutrients, water, pH, temperature and
organism must invade the host, establish itself in
gaseous environment.
the tissues and overcome the host's defence
● Viruses are minute obligate intracellular parasites that
mechanisms.
can only be seen using an electron microscope.
● Bacteria vary in size and shape and are able to survive
● Each virus particle or virion consists of either RNA or
away from the host, provided that they do not dry out or
DNA surrounded by a protein coat. Some viruses also
enco unter extremes of temperature.
have an envelope around the outside.
● They may be visualized using a light microscope but it is
● Viral replication occurs inside the host cell and depends
easier to distinguish between different species if
on the virus's ability to instruct the cell to start
biological stains, e.g. Gram's stain, are used to highlight
producing virus particles. The new virions burst out of
their morphological features.
the cell, invade other cells and clinical signs develop.
Introduction
they have no cellular structure, although they have a wide
variety of shapes (Table 30.1).
Microbiology is the study of organisms, and other bio-
 s  n m on   ' n 
Microscopes
the naked eye, deriving its name from the Greek words mikros
('small), bios (life’) and logos ('science'). The organisms
A light or optical microscope can magnify up to approximately
are smaller than 1 mm in diameter and are mostly unicelluiar,
1500 times without losing resolution (image loses clarity),
i.e. consisting of only one cell, which carries out all the
which means that objects smaller than 0.2 μm cannot be seen
functions necessary for life. A few, such as some fungi, are
in clear detail. As suggested by the name, electron micro-
30
multicellular.
scopes use an electron beam, which achieves much higher
magnification and resolution than light microscopes and
Microorganisms include:
distinguishes objects as small as 0.2 nm (250 000 × magnifica-
tion) (Table 30.2).
● Bacteria - including the very small forms Rickettsia,
Chlamydia and Mycoplasma spp.
Over 10 0o0 species of bacteria are known, most being less
than 10 μm in diameter, while virus particles, virions, range
● Viruses
between 10 nm and 400 nm in diameter (Fig. 30.2).
● Fungi - covered in Chapters 29 and 31
Visualization of living bacteria is difficult using bright-field
optical microscopy, as they are transparent and often colour-
● Algae - no pathogenic forms affecting animals
less. Contrast-enhancing optical systems can help to eluci-
date the morphological characteristics of cells (shape,
● Protozoa - covered in Chapter 29.
flagellae, etc.), but in order to learn more about their proper-
ties bacteria must be differentiated into specific groups for
 Microorganisms vary in size from the relatively large proto-
identification purposes. This can be done by the use of bio-
zoa to viruses that can only be seen with an electron micro-
logical stains, selective culture media and biochemical
scope (Figs 30.1, 30.2). Viruses range in size from about
tests, for example. Staining procedures involve applying
10-400 nm and differ from other microorganisms in that
dyes to bacterial smears, which are air-dried and heat-fixed.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 665
30
Microbiology
Some nerve and muscle cells
 Plant and 
Most bacteria
Viruses
Molecules
animal cells 
1m
0.1 m
1 cm
1 mm
100μm
10μm
1 μm
100nm
10nm
1 nm
0.1 nm
Electronmicroscope
Light microscope
Naked eye
Fig. 30.1 Retative sizes of various types of structure
Spirochaete 3000 nm length
E.coli 2400 nm length Bacillus
Toxoplasma-protozoan
parasite 3000 nm diameter
 Staphyloccus 1000 nm
diameter Coccus
virus particle
110 nm diameter
White blood cell
 6000 nm diameter
Fig. 30.2 Sizes of common types of pathogenic organism in relation to each other and to a white blood celf
666
Microbiology
Table 30.1 Comparison between the characteristics of mammal cells and those of microorganisms
Characteristic
 Mammals
Bacteria
Viruses
Fungi
Protozoa
Algae
Size
10-100 μm
0.5-<10 μm
200-300 nm
Yeasts 3.8 μm
10-200 μm
0.5-20 μm
Cell aTangement   Multicellular 
Unicellular
 Non-cellular
Uni- or multicellular
 Unicellular
Uni- or multicellular
Cell wall
None
Mainly
None
Mainly chitin
None
Mainly cellulose
peptidoglycan
Nucleus
Membrane
No true
Absent
Membrane-bound
 Membrane-bound 
 Membrane-bound
bound nucleus
membrane-bound 
nucleus
nucleus
nucleus
nucleus
Nucleic acids
DNA and RNA
DNA and RNA
DNA or RNA
DNA and RNA
DNA and RNA
DNA and RNA
Reproduction 
Cells in tissues
Asexual - binary
Replicate only
Asexual and sexual
Asexual and
jenxas pue jenxasy
asexual; new
fission
within living cell
by spores, budding in
sexual
 individuals
yeast
sexual
Nutrition
Heterotrophic
Mainly
 Obligate parasites
Heterotrophic, can
Heterotrophic,
Autotrophic
heterotrophic, can
be saprophytic or
can be
be saprophytic,
parasitic
saprophytic or
parasitic, a few
parasitic
autotrophic
Motility
Some cells are
 Some are motile
 Non-motile
Non-motile except
Motile
Some are
motile, whole
for certain spore
motile
individual
forms
motile
Toxin production 
None
 Some form
Some form toxins 
Some form toxins
 Some form toxins
toxins
Table 30.2 Units of measurement of microorganisms
● Saprophytes - feed on dead material. None are
1 millimetre (mm) = 10-3 metre (m) = 1/1000 m
pathogenic
1 micrometre (μm) = 10-6 m
= 1/1 000 000 m
● Parasites - feed on a living organism, which is
1 nanometre (nm) = 10-9 m
= 1/1 000 000 000 m
30
referred to as the host.
There are three types of parasite:
Gram stain to divide then into positive or negative depends
on the thickness of the cell wall and also shows cell shape,
● Pathogens - disease-causing organisms
 and typical morphology of groups of cells.
● Commensals - live in or on the host but cause no
harm and derive no benefit, e.g. Staphylococcus
Microorganisms
intermedius, which lives on the skin. May become
pathogenic if the balance between the host and the
Microorganisms can be classified according to their method
organism is upset
 of nutrition:
● Mutualistic or symbiotic organisms - live in or
● Autotrophs - manufacture their own food, often by
on the host and both provide a benefit for the host
photosynthesis with the aid of chlorophyll
 and derive a benefit for themselves, e.g. microbial
flora which colonize the caecum of the horse and
● Heterotrophs - obtain their food from the
rabbit, breaking down plant food material for digestion
 environment. Most microorganisms are this type. They
from which the microorganisms gain a source of
may be:
energy.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
667
30
Microbiology
When a microorganism invades a host and starts to multiply.
damage because they interfere with the normal cell me-
it establishes an infection. If the host is susceptible to the
tabolism and many leave the host cell by rupture of the cell
infection then disease results.
membrane. Once they have entered the tissues of the host,
some microorganisms are localized and remain at the site of
In order to cause disease, a pathogen must:
entry; for example, Staphylococcus intermedius, which causes
skin disease, generally attacks in this way. Others spread
● Gain entry into the host
through the body (systemic spread), usually via the lym
phatic system and blood circulation. Once they have invaded
● Establish itself and multiply in the host tissue
the host, some microorganisms can grow and multiply in any
tissues of the body but many are more selective and localize
● Overcome the normal host body defences for
in a particular tissue or organ. If these more demanding
a time
organisms do not reach the particular cells in which they
can live, they will not produce disease. Viruses in particular
● Damage the host in some way.
often have an affinity for a specific tissue or organ, which is
known as fissue frophism. A virus is only able to attach to
      s 
cells that carry a compatible receptor; for example, influenza
poisonous substances called toxins that disrupt specific phys-
viruses can only attach to ciliated epithelial cells in the
iological processes in the host while others invade tissue cells
respiratory tract.
and damage or destroy them. Viruses, for example, cause cell
Definitions
Table 30.3 Routes of infection
Source of infection
Susceptible organ
First line of defence
Infection is the invasion and multiplication of microorgan-
system
isms in body tissues and may lead to cellular damage.
Contaminated food
Digestive
Damage may result from competitive metabolism, intracellu-
Lysozymes in saliva,
and water
lar replication, the presence of toxins or by the action of the
stomach acid and
 body's defence mechanisms, such as inflammation and anti-
enzymes
body-antigen responses.
Droplet infection
Respiratory
Mucus, cilia,
macrophages
 An infectious disease is one caused by, or capable of being
 Sexual transmission
Reproductive and
Mucus, acidic, urine
communicated by the process of infection. If the disease is
urinary
fLow
capable of being transmitted from one animal to another it is
Direct contact
Skin
Acid, salty, oily skin.
described as being contagious or transmissible.
Rapid healing process
Vector organisms
Injected straight
Bypasses the first line
to blood
of defence
invasion, i.e. one that results in disease, depends on the
 pathogen avoiding the body's first lines of defence (Table 30.3).
Bacteria
Classification and naming of
● Spherical cells are called cocci (singular: coccus).
bacteria
Some cocci exist singly while others remain
 together in pairs after cell division and are called
Bacteria are referred to by describing their basic shapes
diplococci. Those that remain attached to form
(Fig. 30.3):
chains are called streptococci and if they divide
 randomly and form irregular grape-like clusters they
● Cylindrical or rod-shaped cells are called bacill
are called staphylococci
(singular: bacillus)
● Spiral or helical cells are called spirilla (singular:
● Some bacilli are curved and these are known as
spirillum) if they have a rigid cell wall or
vibrios
spirochaetes if the cell wall is flexible
668
Microbiology
a cell wall like other Gram-negative bacteria (Fig. 30.4) but both
(a) Bacilli
of these organisms must live inside other cells, i.e. they are
obligate intracellular organisms. They are still considerably
(c) Diplococci
bigger than viruses, which are also obligate intracellular
parasites.
The cell wall and its significance in drug
(e) Staphyloco
therapy
(b) Vibrios
Like plant cells, most bacteria have a cell wall, but this has a
different biochemical structure from the polysaccharide (cel-
lulose) cell wall of plants, being made mainly of a substance 
(d) Streptococci
called peptidoglycan (sometimes called murein). It maintains
cell shape and prevents the cell from bursting. Cell walls vary in
(f) Spirochaete
thickness and in composition and it is these differences which
 are a key aid to initial identification using Gram's stain.
Fig. 30.3 Shapes of bacteria
The cell wall:
Bacterial cell structure
● Resembles a football, i.e. it is elastic but rigid
Bacteria vary in size, e.g. rickettsias, mycoplasmas and
● Contains several amino acids not found in the
chlamydias, which are considerably smaller than a typical
proteins of plants and animals so chemotherapeutic
bacterium (Table 30.4). Both rickettsia and chlamydia possess
 Plasmid -
Table 30.4 Comparative characteristics of bacteria
and viruses
Ribosomes
Bacteria
Viruses
Typical
Rickettsia/
Capsule and
Mycoplasma
slime layer-
bacterium 
Chlamydia
Mesosome
Size
<5-10μm
0.8-2 μm
±0.5 μm
10-400 nm
Intracellular
+
+
Cell wall-
parasite
Cell wall
30
Plasma
Bacterial
mem brane 
chromosome
Cytoplasm 
Binary fission
Filterable
+
through
Storage granule
bacteriological
Cell membrane
filters
 Possess both
DNA and RNA
 ATP-generating +
士
metabolism 
Ribosomes
Sensitive to
antibiotics
Flagellum
Sensitive to
Fig. 30.4 Structure of a bacteriat cel, using Escherichia cofi as an
interferon
example
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
669
30
Microbiology
agents can be directed specifically against them
Table 30.6 Bacterial diseases of horses
without harming the host cell wall.
Disease
Bacterium
Tissue affected
Comment
The peptidoglycan of Gram-negative cells has the same fun-
Strangles
Streptococcus
Upper respiratory
damental structure as that of Gram-positive cells but only
equi
70217
     n   on  
Contagious
Taytorella
Reproductive
Notifiable
protein bridges, which anchor it. There are other biochemical
equine
equigenitalis
tract
differences in the outer layers of the two types of bacteria.
metritis
Summer
Rhodococcus
Lungs
Foals most
Chemicals that target these differences in cell structure, bio-
 pneumonia 
equi
susceptible
chemical composition and metabolism between bacterial and
plant or animal cells are frequently used as therapy against
Lyme disease
Borrelia
Systemic, joints
Vector-borne
burgdorferi
bacterial pathogens. A common example of this is the antibi-
tick
otic penicillin, which disrupts the synthesis of new bacterial
cell walls during binary fission and hence bursts or lyses the
pathogen. Any antibacterial drug that affects the cell wall will
example, Haemobartonella felis causes infectious feline
be particularly suited to use against Gram-positive organisms.
 anaemia. Another rickettsial infection is caused by
 Ehrlichia spp. A particularly pathogenic species is
Ehrlichia canis, endemic in much of France and the
Bacterial diseases
Mediterranean basin.
Examples of diseases in dogs and horses are shown in
Generally, the identification of Rickettsia and Chlamydia is
Tables 30.5 and 30.6.
more difficult and thus more specialized than that of most
bacteria. Diagnosis of infection may be based on demonstra-
Groups of very small bacteria are responsible for a number of
tion of the organisms themselves or on the demonstration of
 diseases in animals, including:
increased titres of antibodies in paired serum samples. The
rickettsiae are smaller than most bacteria and are barely
● Chlamydia - various strains of Chlamydia psitaci are
visible under the ordinary light microscope. They can only be
the cause of psittacosis in psittacine birds (parrots,
cultivated in tissue culture or in the yolk sac of embryonated
parakeets) and mammals. Psittacosis is a zoonotic
eggs. Typically, they are rod-shaped:
infection that humans can acquire by inhaling
Chlamydia in the airborne dust or cage contents of
● Mycoplasma - tiny bacteria-like organisms. Unlike
infected birds. Feline pneumonitis is caused by
other bacteria they do not possess a cell wall
Chlamydia psittaci and the organism may be the cause
Mycoplasma species have been implicated in
of conjunctivitis in the cat. They are transmitted by
complicating respiratory tract infections in a number
inhalation of infectious dust and droplets and by
of species, notably calves and horses (especially young
ingestion. There is also evidence to suggest that vector-
racehorses in training). They include Mycoplasma felis,
borne infection may occur
a cause of chronic conjunctivitis in cats. Mycoplasma
will grow on agar-based media but, as the bacteria are
● Rickettsia - transmitted by vectors such as the tick,
so fragile, isolation and identification are specialized
louse, flea and mite from an infected individual; for
skills.
Table 30.5 Bacterial diseases of dogs
Bacterium
Disease caused
Gram stain
Shape
Aerobic
Satmonella spp.
Diarrhoea, etc.
Negative
Rod/bacillus
Yes
Campylobacter spp.
Diarrhoea, etc.
Negative
Curved rods
Yes (but prefer less
oxygen than in air)
Bordetella bronchiseptica
Kennel cough
Negative
Short rods/bacilli
Yes
Leptospira spp.
Leptospirosis
Negative
Helically coiled
Yes
(spirochaete)
Staphylococcus spp.
 Pyoderma
Positive
Cocci
Yes
Clostridium tetani
Tetanus
Positive
Long rods (bacilli)
No
670
Microbiology
Pathogenicity
Toxigenicity
Pathogenicity is the ability of an organism to enter the
Toxins are poisonous substances that have a damaging effect
 si uod y ss asn pue aseas dn as po
on the cells of the host. The effects of the toxin are not only
organism capable of causing disease.
felt in the affected cells and tissues but elsewhere in the body
as the toxin is transported through the tissues.
A virulent pathogen readily sets up infection and produces
severe symptoms. Virulence may vary between different
Two types of toxin are recognised:
strains of the same bacterium. Disease is the result of the vir-
ulence of the pathogen versus the resistance (defence mecha-
● Exotoxins are proteins produced mainly by
nisms) of the host. In some diseases, symptoms occur because
Gram-positive bacteria during their metabolism. They
of an overreaction of the host's own defence mechanisms.
are released into the surrounding environment as they
This can lead to cell damage or an allergic reaction.
 are produced. This may be into the circulatory system
and tissues of the host or, as in food poisoning, into
Some pathogens will almost always cause serious disease,
food that is then ingested. Microbial toxins include
while others are less pathogenic and cause milder illnesses.
many of the most potent poisons known to man and
Many produce toxic enzymes to assist in the process of inva-
may prove lethal even in small quantities. Some
sion and tissue destruction; for example, the enzyme
examples include those toxins produced by the genus
hyaluronidase helps the pathogen to penetrate the tissues of
Closiridium, which includes Closiridium fetani, which
the host by breaking down the 'tissue cement' that holds the
causes tetanus, and Clostridium botulinum, which
cells together. Another enzyme, lecithinase, lyses or disinte-
causes botulism. The body responds to the presence of
grates tissue cells, especially red blood cells.
exotoxins by producing antibodies called antitoxins
that neutralize the toxins, rendering them harmless
Virulence is determined by factors such as:
As they are proteins, exotoxins are destroyed by heat
and some chemicals. Chemicals such as formaldehyde
● The ability of the parasite to invade particular cells
are used to treat toxins so that they lose their toxicity
and tissues and cause damage, i.e. its
but not their ability to elicit an immune response.
invasiveness
These treated toxins are called toxoids and if they are
injected into the body they will stimulate the
·● Its ability to secrete toxins that disrupt physiological
production of antitoxins. For example, tetanus toxoid
processes in the body, i.e. its toxigenicity.
is used to provide immunity to tetanus
● Endotoxins are part of the cell wall of certain
Invasiveness
Gram-negative bacteria and are released only when the
cells die and disintegrate. In Gram-negative cells the
● May be assisted by enzymes (which are also toxins)
30
secreted by the bacteria, e.g. collagenase secreted by
replaced by lipopolysaccharides, which comprise up to
Clostridium; coagulase secreted by Staphylococcus
40% of the surface structure and act as the major
qureus; hyaluronidase and protease secreted by
somatic antigen of these bacteria. Compared with
Streptococcus
exotoxins, they are less toxic, cannot be used to form
toxoids and are able to withstand heat. Blood-borne
● Most bacteria get into the body tissues but some get
endotoxins are responsible for a range of non-specific
inside the cells as well, which may assist them in
reactions in the body such as fever. They also make the
avoiding the immune mechanisms of the host. For
walls of blood capillaries more permeable, causing
example, Salmonella species are facultative intracellular
blood to leak into the intercellular spaces, sometimes
parasites, i.e. they live between the cells but may also
resulting in a serious drop in blood pressure, a
get inside them; Rickettsia are obligate intracellular
condition commonly called endotoxic shock. They are
 parasites, i.e. they have to live inside the cells
also responsible for the change in capillary blood flow
in equine hooves that leads to laminitis.
● Some bacteria, e.g. Bacillus anthracis, have capsules that
are antiphagocytic
Toxins are not made exclusively by bacteria. The saprophytic
fungus, Aspergillus flavus, produces a toxin called aflatoxin.
● Some, e.g. Escherichia coli, adhere to the host cells by
 The fungus grows in warm, humid conditions and contami-
means of rod-like pili, which prevent them from being
nates a variety of agricultural products such as peanuts,
swept away by body fluids.
cereals, rice and beans. Aflatoxin has been implicated in the
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
671
30
Microbiology
deaths of many farm animals that have been fed on mouldy
hay, corn or on peanut meal.
1. Bacterial cell 
Spore formation
To survive unfavourable conditions, such as when the supply
of nutrients is inadequate, some species of bacteria produce
spores or sporulate. These dormant forms are also called
2. Chromosome replicates
endospores. Spore formation is most common in the genus
Clostridium, which contains the causative agents of tetanus
and botulism, and in Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of
anthrax. These diseases are zoonotic, most commonly affect-
ing domestic and farm animals. Species susceptibility to each
varies; for example, dogs only infrequently suffer from
tetanus, while horses are very susceptible and require routine
3. Septum forms and produces a forespore
vaccination, as do humans.
It is important to note that spore formation is not a method of
reproduction: one vegetative bacterial cell produces a single
spore, which, after germination, is again just one
vegetative cell (Fig. 30.5). The spore develops within the cell
and under the microscope appears as a bright, round or oval
4. Spore coat forms around chromosome
 structure. Many spore-forming bacteria are inhabitants of the
soil but spores can exist almost everywhere, including in dust.
They are extremely resistant structures that can remain viable
for many years. Cattle have died from anthrax contracted by
contact with spores that have remained in soil after the death
of an animal there decades before. Spores can survive extremes
of heat, pH, desiccation, ultraviolet radiation and exposure to
 5. Further layers thicken the spore coat
toxic chemicals such as some disinfectants. The reason why
 n posn a o si jsisa os ae soss
resistance is thought to be due to the fact that a dehydration
process occurs during spore formation, which expels most of
the water from the spore.
6. Spore is released by rupture of parent cel
The fact that spores are so hard to destroy is the principal
reason for the various sterilization procedures that are carried
out in veterinary practice. Common techniques employed to
Fig. 30.5 Sporutation
kill spores include the use of moist heat under pressure and
dry heat for at least 2 h (see Ch. 24).
Bacterial replication
Given appropriate conditions, growth is exponential, i.e. one
bacterium produces two, then two produce four, then eight,
Bacteria reproduce or replicate asexually by simply dividing
potentially reaching many millions within 24 h.
into two identical daughter cells, a proces known as binary
fission (Fig. 30.6). If their environment is suitable, bacteria
To enable cell replication, the chromosome, i.e. the genetic
can grow and reproduce rapidly. The time interval between
material, is copied first to form two identical chromosomes. As
successive divisions is called the generafion fime. Even under
the parent cell enlarges, the chromosomes separate and the cell
optimum conditions the generation time varies:
membrane grows inwards at the centre of the cell. At the same
time, new cell wall material grows inwards to form the septum
● Escherichia coli - 20 min
and this divides the cell into two daughter cells. In some
species, e.g. streptococci and staphylococci, the daughter cells
●Mycobacterium fhuberculosis, which causes tuberculosis -
remain attached to each other to form the characteristic chains
approximately 18 h.
or clusters. In most species the new bacterial cells separate.
672
Microbiology
1. Cell prepares to divide
 2. Chromosome replicates
Donor
 Recipient 
1. Sex pilus from donor
 pulls cells together
 3. Septum begins to form
 2. Adjacent cell membranes fuse
to fom a channel
4. Cytoplasm divides around each chromosome
 3. The plasmid replicates and
 the strand passes through 
the channel into the recipient
5. Two identical daughter cells are formed
 4.The two cells separate.The
recipient can now become a
 donor as it contains the plasmid 
6.
Donor
Recipient
30
Fig. 30.7 Conjugation
Fig. 30.6 Bacteriat replication by binary fission
which some species can acquire resistance from a similar
Conjugation
 species. Enterobacteria such as E. coli and Satmonella spp. are
Conjugation (Fig. 30.7) is rare among Gram-positive bacteria
thought to transfer resistance between serotypes in this
but common among those that are Gram-negative. It is some-
way.
q oa xas po ad ad e se ppi sa
this is misleading because, unlike sexual reproduction in other
The process of conjugation involves the passage of DNA from
organisms, it does not involve the fusion of two gametes to
one bacterial cell, the donor, to another, the recipient, while
form a single cell. Frequently, plasmid DNA is transferred from
the two cells are in physical contact. The cells are pulled
the donor to the recipient but sometimes part of the donor cell
together by the sex pilus, which is formed by the donor cell.
chromosome, or even the whole chromosome, is transferred.
Once contact has been made, the pilus retracts so that the
Conjugation is important because the recipient acquires new
surfaces of the donor and recipient are very close to each
characteristics. For example, one plasmid, the R plasmid, carries
other. The cell membranes fuse, forming a channel between
genes for resistance to antibiotirs, and is the mechanism by
the two cells to enable transfer to take place.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
673
30
Microbiology
● Enriched - used for bacteria that need extra
Bacterial cultivation in the
nutrients, e.g. blood agar used to detect haemolysis,
laboratory
chocolate agar (heated blood), serum, egg
It may be necessary to cultivate bacteria in the laboratory
● Selective - these will inhibit the growth of some
from a sample collected from a patient, e.g. faecal or skin
bacteria while selecting for others, e.g. deoxycholate
swab, in order to identify the cause of an infection or to
citrate is used for growing Salmonella spp:
perform an antibiotic sensitivity test. Unlike viruses, bacteria
McConkey's bile lactose agar contains bile salts that
are not dependent on the presence of host cells and can be
encourage the growth of enteric species such as
cultured using artificial media. The culture medium must
 E. coli; Sabouraud's medium is used for growing
provide the correct balance of:
ringworm fungi
●Water
● Biochemical - used to distinguish between species of
bacteria by detecting how they react biochemically.
● Essential nutrients - vary according to the needs of the
e.g. with different types of sugar or urea.
individual species
To produce a bacterial culture:
● Correct pH - most mammalian pathogens require a pH
of about 7.4
1. Label the Petri dish with the client's name, the case
dn Suxju pioae on apoo qei ahedoidde ue 1o aqunu
● Correct temperature - the optimum temperature for
the samples
most pathogens is body temperature, i.e. 37oC-40
and they are described as being normothermic
2. Heat a platinum loop in the flame of a Bunsen burner
to sterilize it. Cool the loop in the air for few seconds.
● Correct gaseous environment - bacteria may be
If it is too hot it will kill the bacterial cells, resulting in
classified according to their gaseous requirements:
no growth
●Obligate or strict aerobes - must have oxygen for
3. Dip the loop into the sample
growth
4. Pick up the Petri dish containing the agar with the
● Obligate anaerobes - will only grow in the absence of
agar uppermost and smear the material on the loop
oxygen
over a small area to create a well or inoculum
(Fig. 30.8)
● Facultative anaerobes - may grow both in the
presence or absence of oxygen
5. Heat the loop in the flame and allow it to cool. Make
three or four short streaks from the well, all in the
● Microaerophiles - will only grow if the percentage
same direction (Fig. 30.8). Be careful not to tear the
of oxygen is lower than that of atmospheric air.
agar
Culture media consist of two basic types:
6. Continue to spread the sample over the agar
● Liquid broths - particularly used for bacteria that
will grow in fluid
1.
2.
3.
Well' or initial inoculum
Bacterial growthi pattern
● Solid or jelly-like nutrient solutions - based on
Five stages of'streaking'
agar, which is derived from seaweed. Agar can be
tb dilute initial inoculum 
purchased ready prepared in flat-lidded Petri dishes or
can be reconstituted in the lab. The agar provides no
nutrients for the bacteria and these are added
according to the needs of the species being cultivated.
Solid media can be classified as follows:
Single colony
● Simple or basal - provide all that is needed for basic
Platinum loop
Test area' to check
growth. Simple media are used for nutritionally
loop is not too hot
undemanding species, e.g. E. coli
Fig. 30.8 Technique for the inocutation of an agar plate
674
Microbiology
7. Place the lid on the Petri dish and put it into an
To further identify a species of bacteria a smear is made on a
incubator at 37°C for 18-24 h
glass microscope slide, stained with Gram's stain or methyl-
ene blue and examined under the microscope.
 8. Remove the plate and examine for bacterial growth.
If there is no growth reincubate for a further
To identify the appropriate antibiotic with which to treat a
18-24 h.
patient it is often quicker and more effective to carry out an
antibiotic sensitivity test. In this, discs impregnated with a
Colonies of bacteria appear as rounded lumps, which are
range of antibiotics are placed on an agar plate that has been
often raised and are distributed along the streak lines.
smeared with a colony selected from the original culture. The
Colonies of different species of bacteria may show individual
 plate is incubated for 18-24 h and the zones in which bacterial
characteristics, which will be helpful in their identification.
 growth has been inhibited by the antibiotic are noted.
irus
Viruses are subject to debate over whether they really are
living organisms as they are incapable of reproduction
without a host cell - described as obligate intracellular para-
sites. A virus particle or virion is little more than a package
containing instructions for the recreation of further virus par-
ticles. Each virus particle is composed of two parts:
Fig. 30.9 Components of a virion (a) Central core of nucleic acid
● Nucleic acid - either RNA or DNA (never both),
(b) Surrounding protein coat (c) Some viruses have an outer envelope
forming a central core
● A protein coat - the capsid (Fig. 30.9).
● Complex
Together, these two parts form the nucleocapsid. For some
● Composite - some bacteriophages.
viruses, this is all that comprises an individual virus particle.
Some viruses have an additional envelope around the out-
Various shapes of virus nucleocapsid have been identified and
side, often formed of the host cell membrane. Each of the
are illustrated in Figure 30.10:
helical or icosahedral shapes of the nucleocapsid could be
enveloped or non-enveloped (Fig. 30.10), giving four possible
●Helical
basic shapes for viruses. In fact, there are no animal viruses
30
(only plant viruses) that are helical and non-enveloped, so cat
● Icosahedral
or dog viruses can be grouped by and large into the other
C
R
Helical naked
Helical enveloped 
Icoshedral naked
Icosohedral enveloped
Fig. 30.10 Iypes of virat structure (a) Heticat naked (b) Hetical enveloped (c) Icosohedrat naked (d) Icosohedral enveloped
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 675
30
Microbiology
three types. Viruses have beenn classified together on the basis
Alternatively, the host cell is stimulated to engulf the virus
of structural similarities; for example, the group of viruses
particle of a non-enveloped virus and take it into the cell.
causing true human flu make up the influenza viruses and
Once inside the cell, the virus is able to switch the cell's
horse flu is caused by equine influenza virus. Cat flu, unlike
normal metabolism to replication of the virus.
equine and human flu, is caused by two viruses, neither of
which is an influenza virus.
Once a host animal has been infected with a small number of
virus particles, there is a time lag before symptoms are seen;
Viruses are usually both host- and tissue-specific, so that each
this is the incubation period. During this time, the virus
influenza virus is specific to the host species - an owner is not
reaches the cells with which it has an affinity and initially
at risk of catching flu from their horse. There is concern at
infects only a small number of cells to increase the number of
present over avian flu ('bird flu'), as it seems to be able to
virus particles. Clinical signs are seen once large numbers of
transfer to humans that are in very close contact with
virus particles infect a large number of cells.
infected poultry. Humans cannot at the moment transmit it
Sa n u jo isd a nq 'su no o
There are two types of virus, differing in the period of latency
with the human influenza virus in an infected human to
of the infection:
produce a transmissible disease is of great concern because of
the huge potential for a fatal pandemic (global epidemic), as
● Replication in the cell may happen immediately, so
 happened in the 20th century.
the cell begins to produce the constituents of new
virus particles within hours of infection
Viral replication
● Retroviral genetic material may join with the host
cell's own nucleic acid for an extended period before
Replication of pathogenic viruses takes place inside the host
making any changes to cell metabolism, as in the case
cell, unlike pathogenic bacteria, where reproduction usually
of feline influenza virus (FIv), and human
takes place outside the host's cells (Fig. 30.1l). Enveloped
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Infection may not
viruses attach to a cell with a suitable receptor, and then the
 be apparent for many years after initial disease
virus envelope merges with the host cell membrane.
challenge.
1. The virus attaches to the receptor sites on
 2 The virus enters thie host cell and the protein coat
 the host cell membrane and fuses with it 
 (capsid) breaks down to release the viral nucleic acid 
 3. The viral nucleic acid replicates (either in the host 
cell cytoplasm or nucleus) and directs the host cell
5. They leave the host celleither by budding
metabolism to make new virus material
4. The new viruses are assembled
 through or rupture of the cell membrane 
Fig. 30.11 The process of reptication in an enveloped virus
676
Microbiology
New virus particles are then assembled and released from the
Viral transmission
cell. Depending on the virus, this may leave the host cell
intact or may cause its rupture and destruction.
Viruses are transmitted from host to host either:
Table 30.7 Some canine viral diseases
Name of virus
Disease caused
 Nucleic acid type
Shape of nucleocapsid 
Enveloped
Parvovirus
Parvovirus
DNA
Icosahedral
No
Canine adenovirus 1 (CAV-1)
 Infectious canine hepatitis
DNA
Icosahedral
No
Canine adenovirus 2 (CAV-2)
 Infectious canine
DNA
Icosahedral
No
tracheobronchitis
Canine distemper virus
Distemper
RNA
Helical
Yes
Canine parainfluenza virus
 Part of kennel cough
RNA
Helical
Yes
syndrome
Rabies virus
Rabies
RNA
Helical
Yes
Table 30.8 Some feline viral diseases
Name of virus
Disease caused
 Nucleic acid type
Shape of nucleocapsid
Enveloped
Feline parvovirus
 Feline infectious enteritis
DNA
Icosahedral
No
(panleukopenia)
Feline herpesvirus
Feline rhinotracheitis (cat flu)
DNA
Icosahedral
Yes
Feline calicivirus
RNA
Icosahedral
No
 Feline coronavirus
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
RNA
Helical
Yes
Feline leukaemia virus
Retrovirus causing feline leukaemia
RNA
Icosahedral
Yes
 Feline immunodeficiency
Retrovirus
RNA
Icosahedral
Yes
virus
Rabies virus
Rabies
RNA
Helical
Yes
30
Table 30.9 Some equine viral diseases
Name/type of virus
 Site of infection
Disease caused
Nucleic acid type
Shape of nucleocapsid  Enveloped
Adenovirus
Gastrointestinal tract
'Scours'
DNA
Icosahedral
No
Respiratory tract
Cold/snotty nose
Rotavirus
Gastrointestinal tract
'Scours'
RNA
Icosahedral
No
Bovine papilloma virus
Skin
Sarcoids
DNA
Icosahedral
No
Arterivirus
Reproductive tract
Equine viral arteritis 
RNA
Icosahedral
Yes
Lentivirus
Respiratory
Equine infectious
RNA
Helical
Yes
anaemia
Influenza
Respiratory
 Equine flu
RNA
Helical
Yes
Equine herpes virus
Several, depending on
Coital exanthema
DNA
Icosahedral
Yes
type
Rhinopneumonitis
Herpes paralysis 
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
677
30
Microbiology
● Directly, e.g. by a cat licking feline calicivirus in nasal
sneezing virus particles from one host into the air breathed in
secretions off the face of another cat
by another host. This is ideal for influenza virus, as these
enveloped viruses are not very robust so do not survive for
● Indirectly, e.g. by a dog picking up virus particles from
extended periods in the environment. An ability to survive in
the floor of an inadequately cleaned kennel that has
the environment for longer periods is beneficial for canine
been occupied by a dog with parvovirus infection.
parvovirus. The virus must be licked up and ingested by
another dog for infection of the gastrointestinal tract to occur
Different viruses have adapted their means of transmission
(see Ch. 21).
according to their structure, which affects their ability to
survive in the environment and their location in the host. So,
Examples of viral diseases in the dog, cat and horse are listed
   i s i   
in Tables 30.7-30.9.
Common disease
factors for the disease associated with the population
studied, e.g. the increased risk of heart disease if
terminology
overweight
● Epidemic (epizootic more specifically refers to an
Terms relating to disease organisms once they are within an
animal disease) - a pronounced increase in the level of
animal are:
infection. Recent examples of epidemics include FMD
 in the UK, parvovirus infection in dogs after its first
● Bacteraemia - the temporary presence of bacteria in
appearance, and mumps during 2o05 in the
the blood, usually precedes infections such as arthritis,
unvaccinated 16-24-year-old cohort of students in
meningitis, etc., without showing clinical signs
the UK
● Viraemia - viruses in the blood, either free, or
● Endemic (enzootic refers to animal disease) - a
 associated with cells
situation in which a particular disease is present at a
low level in a country or area, e.g. myxomatosis in
● Toxaemia - a condition that can arise from the
wild rabbits in the UK. FMD is not endemic in the UK,
presence of bacterial toxins in the blood, or from
but is in parts of sub-Saharan Africa and South
metabolic disturbances
America
● Septicaemia - the presence of multiplying
● Pandemic - an epidemic which occurs all over the
 pathogens, such as bacteria and their toxins, in the
world
blood leading to systemic disease
● Zoonosis - a disease which can pass from animals to
● Pyaemia - multiple abscesses formed from secondary
man, e.g. leptospirosis in dogs, cattle and rat; psittacosis
foci of infection related to septicaemia, resulting in pus
in birds; ringworm in many animal species. Sensible
in the blood.
 routine hygiene precautions and awareness of the
existence of such diseases will help to prevent them
Terms relating to disease patterns within a population of
animals or man include:
● Anthroponosis - a disease which can be passed from
man to animals, e.g. it is possible for gorillas and
● Epidemiology - the study of relationships of various
chimpanzees to become infected by measles.
factors determining the frequency and distribution of
diseases in a community. In veterinary science it is
how the specific causes of localized outbreaks of
Bibliography
infection and other diseases are determined. It is used
to monitor the number of cases of disease and to
monitor the effectiveness of a control policy as was
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
shown by the 2001 outbreak of foot and mouth (FMD)
disease in the UK. It can also predict the likelihood of
     
occurrence of disease/accident by elucidating the risk
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
678
3Microbiology
Jawetz E, Melnick J L, Adelberg E A 1991 Medical microbiology,
Provides information about the practical aspects of bacteriology.
18th edn. Prentice Hall, Canada
Ikram M, Hill E 1991 Microbiology for veterinary technicians.
Recommended reading
American Veterinary Publication, Santa Barbara, CA
Aspinall V 2003 Clinical procedures in veterinary nursing.
Usefut book which provides information at the right level.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
30
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 679
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
Lorraine Allan
Key Points
● Laboratory tests are an invaluable aid to making an
● The veterinary nurse must know how to collect and
 accurate diagnosis, assessing the severity of the
preserve the samples and if necessary to dispatch them
condition and its response to treatment.
to a distant laboratory.
● Health and safety in the laboratory must be observed at
● All laboratory tests must be performed correctly following
all times.
a rigid protocol so that the results are both accurate and
● A wide range of equipment is used in the lab and the
comparable to other tests of the same type.
veterinary nurse must understand how and when it is
● Accurate records must be kept and passed on to the
'pauiepuiew Auadoid si ll tey aunsua isnu pue pasn 
appropriate veterinary surgeon.
● A variety of body tissues and fluids can be sampled to
 provide an insight into the current health status of the
patient.
Introduction
· As an aid to making an accurate diagnosis -
Although a considerable amount of information can
be gained from taking a detailed history and from
The majority of veterinary practices in the UK today are
 performing a clinical examination, it might still not
equipped with an 'in house' practice laboratory where a variety
be possible to make a precise diagnosis. Further
of procedures are undertaken, the range and complexity being
investigative procedures, including laboratory tests,
dependent on various factors, including the equipment avail.
may help clarify the situation enabling a definitive
able, the expertise of the staff, time and financial constraints.
diagnosis to be made
However, some procedures are not within the scope of the
average practice and commercial laboratories are used for these
● To assess the severity of a condition - This could
more sophisticated tests. The increased utilization of clinical
influence the choice of treatment and the subsequent
pathology examinations has resulted in veterinary nurses
recovery of the patient, e.g. monitoring blood glucose
becoming more involved in laboratory procedures. Their role
levels in patients suffering from diabetes mellitus
may encompass taking the samples, performing the tests,
recording the results and sending off samples to a commercial
● To assess response to treatment - On occasion it
laboratory. Further an increased awareness of the significance of
 can be diffcult to determine if an animal is responding
the results is expected, which can impact on the nursing care
to treatment solely from its clinical condition. A
provided to the patient.
valuable insight into the patient's progress can be
obtained from laboratory tests, e.g. monitoring blood
(More detailed information on parasitology and micro
parameters in anaemia
biology has been provided in Chapters 29 and 30.)
3
● To adjust treatment regimes - Monitoring drug
Laboratory diagnostic aids are an invaluable tool to the
 levels can allow adjustment of therapeutic drug doses,
veterinary surgeon in four main ways:
e.g. the levels of barbiturate in the treatment of epilepsy.
Health and Safety in
Common hazards in the
the laboratory
laboratory
A laboratory is potentially a dangerous place with many
In common with the rest of a veterinary practice, the labora-
hazards, i.e. something with the potential to cause harm.
tory is subject to legislation that attempts to make the work-
The Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH)
 place as safe an environment as possible (Table 31.1).
Regulations set out to identify hazards and to develop safe
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 681
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
Table 31.1 Laboratory Health and Safety legislation
● Eye contaminants
Legislation
Key points
● Zoonoses
Health and Safety at Work
 Applies to all businesses. Sets out
Act 1974
specific duties of employer and
● Fire.
employee to ensure a safe working
environment. Provides protection
Hazard warning signs give clear indications of potential haz
against risks in the workplace and
 ards in a variety of situations including the laboratory.
ensures that all equipment and
substances used are handled, stored
To ensure a safe working environment in the laboratory a
and transported safely
code of conduct must be followed that encompasses both the
The Control of Substances
The main legislation covering the
local Health and Safety rules and the COsHH regulations:
Hazardous to Health
control of risks to staffrom exposure
to harmful substances at work.
● Ensure access is only to authorized personnel
(COSHH) Regulations 2002
Includes undertaking risk assessments,
drawing up written standard operating
● Provide adequate training and supervision of staff
procedures (SoPs), monitoring and
● Fully buttoned protective laboratory coats must be
controlling exposure to harmful
substances, and staff training
worn
Control of Pollution
The principal regulations that control
● Disposable gloves and, if necessary, eye glasses and
(Special Waste) Regulations
the correct handling, segregation,
masks must be worn when handling hazardous
1988 Collection and Disposal
 storage, transfer and disposal of
materials
of Waste Regulations 1992
products, including clinical waste and
Environmental Protection
chemicals, minimizing damage to the
● Long hair should always be tied back
Act 1992
environment and reducing risks to
staff
● Smoking, eating, drinking, chewing gum and mouth
 Describe the procedures that must
 pipetting are prohibited
Reporting of Injuries,
 Diseases and Dangerous
take place if death, serious injury 0f
Occurrences (RIDDOR)
work-related disease occurs in the
● Hands should be washed when leaving the laboratory
Regulations 1995
workplace. Such occurrences must be
using an antibacterial soap and protective coats should
reported to the Health and Safety
be removed
Executive (HSE)
● The laboratory should be kept clean, neat and tidy
First Aid at Work Act
This regulates first aid provision and
the recording of accidents
● The work surfaces must be cleaned and disinfected
after use
● Books and papers should be kept away from the work
protocols to reduce the nisks, i.e. something that is likely to
 area and any other source of contamination
cause harm, from these hazards to an absolute minimum and
thus creating a safe working environment.
● Labelled containers of suitable disinfectant solutions
 should be provided for contaminated equipment
The range of potential hazards in a practice laboratory
disinfection
include:
● Correct disposal of laboratory waste must be observed.
● Clinical material
Different types of clinical waste must be clearly
segregated. Disposal containers should be clearly
●Biological agents
marked, preferably colour-coded, to prevent mistakes
being made
● Chemicals, which may be toxic or corrosive
● 'Sharps' containers must be provided
● Sharp objects
● Hazard warning signs must be displayed as
● Toxic fumes
appropriate
682
 laboratory diagnostic aids
● Appropriate action should be taken in case of spillage
'Sharps'
and any spills should be contained and disposed of
safely. If an infectious agent is involved, thorough
This includes needles, scalpel blades, other sharp instruments 
 disinfection or sterilization may be required
and glass, which should be disposed of immediately after
use into yellow plastic containers clearly marked ‘Sharps'
● When performing bacteriological procedures, especial
These should be sealed shut when full, and incinerated.
care must be taken not to contaminate the operative
Uncontaminated broken glass can be disposed of in a glass
or the environment
disposal container. Contaminated microscope slides, cover
slips and capillary tubes should be soaked in suitable dis-
● Bunsen burners must be placed on a heat-resistant
infectant and then disposed of in the glass or sharps
mat, must not be left on a working flame in between
container.
stages of the procedure and must be turned off
immediately when they are no longer required
Special waste
● A well-stocked first-aid box must be provided and first
This is a further category of clinical waste and includes body
aid equipment, such as eyewash, must be readily
fluids, tissues and cadavers. These should be disposed of as
available and in working condition. Ideally, a member
clinical waste.
of staff should be a trained first aider
Pharmaceutical waste
● In case of accident, immediate remedial action should
be taken. Medical attention should be sought if
This includes bottles, vials and half full syringes. These
necessary. All accidents, no matter how trivial, must be
should be discarded immediately after use into special colour-
reported to a responsible member of staff and recorded
coded plastic DOOP (destruction of old pharmaceuticals) con-
in the accident book, and if of a serious nature should
tainers, which should be sealed when full.
be reported according to the RIDDOR regulations
Chemical waste
● Fire fighting equipment should be available and an
evacuation procedure displayed
There are specific legal requirements about the disposal of
waste chemicals when they are discharged into public sewers.
● A senior member of staff should be consulted if any
All chemical reagents used in the laboratory are subject to
problems are encountered.
COSHH regulations. Each chemical must be identified and
the hazards and risks associated with its use assessed includ-
Disposal of laboratory waste
 ing its disposal.
   i    p 
Industrial waste
Table 31.1 describes the specific Acts. The regulations con-
trol the correct segregation, storage, transfer and destruc.
This is non-hazardous waste and should be disposed of in
tion of waste products in the practice, including in the
black refuse bags. Any confidential paperwork should be
laboratory.
shredded prior to disposal.
Clinical waste
3
This constitutes all waste that consists wholly or partly of
Routine laboratory
animal tissues, blood, body fluids, excretions, drugs and
pharmaceuticals likely to be hazardous to health. It should
equipment
be collected and stored in yellow coloured plastic bags with
the words 'Clinical Waste' clearly written on the outside. It
 e    e  no  
Glassware
vehicle licensed specifically for the transport of clinical waste
and transferred to a licensed plant for incineration. Sam
Glassware is used to measure and hold reagents and samples
ples containing infectious agents, such as bacterial cul-
usually liquids. Borosilicate glass (Pyrex) is used as it is harder
ture plates, should be placed in special autoclave bags,
than ordinary glass and less easily broken.
 light blue or transparent bags with light blue inscriptions,
for autoclaving prior to being disposed of in the clinical
It is important that all glassware is thoroughly cleaned to
waste.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 683
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
the accuracy of the tests. New glassware should always be
● Do not site it near a window or sources of heat,
washed before use.
moisture or vibration
Cleaning glassware
● The microscope should be switched off and covered
when not in use to avoid contamination from spills
● Rubber gloves should be worn
and dust
● Contaminated glassware should be soaked in an
● The stage should be cleaned with disinfectant wipes
approved disinfectant for 24 h prior to cleaning
● The eye pieces and objective lenses should only be
● Any residues should be removed with the aid of a soft
cleaned with special lens tissue
bristle brush. The glassware should then be washed in
commercial laboratory detergent, following the
● The oil immersion lens should be cleaned after each
manufacturer's instructions, or in an ultrasonic bath
use with lens tissue to ensure that the oil does not
solidify and damage the lens
● The glassware should then be rinsed thoroughly two or
three times in distilled/deionized water to remove all
● When moving the microscope, carry it by the limb
traces of the cleaning solution, which could affect the
with one hand under the base
accuracy of results
● If glasses are normally worn, remove them to prevent
● The glassware should be allowed to drain and then
damage
dried in a drying cabinet. Bottles should not be dried
with their stoppers in place, as the water will not
● Never move the objective lens and slide towards each
evaporate
other while looking down the microscope, as this
could result in breaking the slide and damage to the
● Once dry the glassware should be stored in a cupboard
objective lens
or drawer to protect it from dust, grease and possible
damage
● Keep spare light bulbs in stock. Do not handle the
 bulb when replacing it
● The same method should be adopted to clean plastic
ware, although cooler water should be used. Organic
● Ensure that the microscope is regularly serviced.
solvents should be avoided as they could cause damage
● Microscope slides and coverslips are usually discarded,
after soaking in an approved disinfectant for 24 h,
Examination of a blood smear on a
because of their relatively low cost
microscope slide
● Pipettes can prove difficult to clean, especially if left,
● Switch on the microscope
but must be thoroughly cleaned.
● Move the stage approximately 5 cm below the
objective lenses
Microscope
● Rotate the nosepiece clockwise and click the x10
A microscope is an essential piece of equipment in any
objective lens into place
veterinary laboratory. It is advisable to use a monocular or
 e si as do s s nas a dn y o
source (Fig. 31.1); some older microscopes utilize a mirror and
as possible
external light source. Table 31.2 explains the function of the
parts of the microscope.
● Looking from the side, not down the microscope,
adjust the iris diaphragm control lever so that it at the
A microscope is an expensive precision instrument and
middle position of its range of movement, i.e.
should be treated as such:
approximately half-open. As the lens power is
● In common with all electrical equipment it should be
increased to allow more light to be directed up the
checked regularly for safety
microscope
684
 laboratory diagnostic aids
Table 31.2 Parts of the microscope
Part
Function
Stage
A flat square platform on which the specimen is placed. A hole in the centre allows light from the condenser to
illuminate the specimen. The surface of the stage is covered with chemical resistant vulcanite and can be moved up and
uauioads aul snooy ol sqouy joizuos zuawzsnfpe auy pue asieon aut Aq umop
Mechanical stage
This is attached to the stage holding the slide in place and also facilitating movement of the slide in east-west and
north-south directions with accuracy
Vernier scales
These are located on both movements of the mechanical scales at right angles to each other and allow relocation of a
particular point on the slide. Each scale consists of a main scale divided into millimetres and a Vernier plate with
10 divisions each of 0.9 mm. To read a Vernier scale, observe where the zero mark on the Vernier plate meets the main
scale. If it falls between two divisions record the lower one. In Figure 31.2 the zero is between 55 and 56, s0 55 is
ecorded. Next note which of the divisions on the Vernier plate is exactly opposite a division on the main scale. In the
example, this is the mark 5. The complete reading is recorded as 55.5. If the zero mark had been exactly opposite 55 the
reading would have been 55.o. It is essential that readings from both scales are taken and recorded
Body
 This houses the focusing mechanism for the body tube
Body tube
A hollow metal tube that contains no lenses or other optical parts. An eyepiece fits into the upper part and a nose piece
into the lower end
Eyepiece
Contains two lenses: the one closest to the eye is known as the ocular lens and the more distal one is the feld lens. Most
have a magnifying power of x10. Its purpose is to magnify the primary image formed by the objective lens. Binocular
microscopes have two eyepieces
Nosepiece
Found at the lower end of the body tube with a rotating turret that holds the objective lenses and can be rotated to click
a different objective lens into place. It should always be rotated in a clockwise direction so as to move from a lower
power to a higher power
Objective lenses
Normally four lenses, each with a different magnification, are housed in the nosepiece. Usually X4 (scanning), X10
(low-power), x40 (high dry) and x100 (oil immersion)
Condenser
Fitted below the stage and is therefore sometimes called the substage condenser. It consists of two lenses that condense
aut jo uoisod aul 'ladieys abewl ayt pue laybug 7l ayew ol uaiads ayt ol uo ainos zybi ayt woiy zuby ayi
condenser and the amount of light passing through the specimen can be adjusted. Remember that when viewed the
image will be upside down and reversed
Iris diaphragm
Adjusting the aperture of the iris diaphragm with the iris diaphragm control can regulate the amount of light that passes
through the condenser. Below the inis diaphragm there are often glass flters that can alter the wavelength of light
passing through the condenser
Limb
This connects the base with the body and supports the stage and condenser. The base houses the light source and on/off
3
·Place the slide on the mechanical stage and secure it
● Then, adjusting the fine focus, obtain the sharpest
firmly in position
 possible image. Do not use the fine focus to
excess - if you have to do this it means you are
● Position the area to be viewed over the light source
not near enough to focus with the coarse
using the mechanical stage control knobs
focus
● Looking from the side, move the stage towards the
● To view the specimen under x40, move the stage away
lens, by using both the coarse adjustment controls,
from the ×10 lens and click the x40 lens clockwise into
until it is 4 mm away
position
● Looking down the microscope, very carefully and
● Looking from the side, move the stage up
slowly move the stage away from the lens until the
towards the lens until the slide is almost touching
image comes into focus
it
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 
685
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
Eyepiece
Eyepiece tube
Binocular head-
 Binocular head securing screw
Quadruple objective turret
Objective lens
Microscope limb
Spring arm-
Focus tension collar
Mechanical stage -
Coarse focus adjustment handwheel
ris diaphragm control -
ABBE condenser focussing hancdwheel-
 Fine focus adjustment handwheel
Filter carrier
Illuminator condenser lens -
 Co-axial mechanical stage controls 
ABBE condenser
lluminator condenser housing -
Rotary brightness control
Mains ON/OFF switch
Fig. 31.1 A binocutar tight microscope
50
60
80
● Looking from the side, move the stage up towards the
」」」
x100 lens until the slide touches the lens
5
10
Fig. 31.2 The Vernier scale
● Move the stage even closer to the slide; the oil will be
seen to spread out from the lens
● Looking down the microscope, focus the slide as
● Looking down the microscope, very carefully and
 previously described. Note The slide will be much closer
slowly focus the slide
to the lens when in focus than when using the x10 lens
● When focused, the lens must be in the oil
● Next use the oil immersion lens xl00 by moving the
stage away from the lens and rotating the nosepiece so
● It is only practice that will make you proficient in the
that neither the x40 or x100 lens are in position
use of a microscope.
● Place a small drop of immersion oil on the slide
Tips
(Fig. 31.3)
● Blood and bacterial smears should be examined under
● Click the x100 lens in position
x10, x40 then x100 with oil immersion
686
 laboratory diagnostic aids
Oil immersion objective 
Modern centrifuges are very sophisticated, but all work on
Cil container
the same principle The samples are contained in special cen-
trifuge tubes and subjected to centrifugal force, which results
in the heavier constituents of the suspension settling to the
bottom of the tube while the lighter ones settle at the top.
This accelerates the process that would occur if the samples
were left to settle under the influence of gravity alone.
Centrifuges contain a rotor or centrifuge head, drive shaft
and motor enclosed in the guard bowl. Other features include
Immersion oil
Slide-
-n  n s e   ps  e
trifuges are of two types according to the type of rotor head:
● Swing-out head with specimen buckets, which
contain rubber cushions to reduce damage to the
centrifuge tubes, suspended vertically from the arms of
the rotor. As the rotor turns, the buckets swing out
into a horizontal position, falling back to the vertical
when the rotor slows down and stops. The sediment is
uniformly distributed, allowing the supernatant
(liquid) to be easily removed by a pipette
● Angle head, where the tubes are held in a fixed
position, usually 25-40° from vertical. The sediment
forms at an angle, making the sediment difficult to
remove. However, much higher centrifuge speeds can be
 achieved because of the aerodynamic shape of the rotor.
The microhaematocrit centrifuge is very specialized and is
used to measure blood packed cell volume (PCV). It utilizes cap-
illary tubes that are held horizontally on a grooved metal plate.
Care and cleaning of the centrifuge
● Never attempt to open the centrifuge until the head
Fig. 31.3 Use of the oitl immersion objective
 has completely stopped rotating
● Ensure that the samples are balanced in diametrically
● Urine sediments and faeces should be examined under
opposite buckets by weight, not volume.
x10 then x40
● If, with increasing revs the, machine develops
● Parasite slides should be first examined with the naked
excessive vibrations, stop the centrifuge and, when the
eye. If macroscopic, examine under x5 then x10. If
head has finished rotating, examine the chamber, as
3
microscopic, examine under x10 then x40.
the most likely cause is improperly balanced arms
● Follow the manufacturer's instructions to operate the
Centrifuge
centrifuge
This is an important piece of laboratory equipment and is
● Regularly clean and disinfect the centrifuge
used in many diagnostic tests, including:
● Any spillages/breakages should be carefully cleaned
● Separation of blood cells from plasma or serum
away and the chamber disinfected while wearing
disposable gloves
● Urine sedimentation
● When using a microhaematocrit centrifuge ensure that
● Faecal analysis.
the safety plate is fastened over the samples to hold
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
the capillary tubes safely in place. Regularly check the
 provide useful information regarding the blood picture of the
rubber gasket for wear and replace it if necessary
 patient.
● Ensure regular servicing and cleaning.
Electrolyte analysers
Plasma electrolyte levels provide valuable information that can
Electronic analysers
help in diagnosing diseases such as Addison's disease, monitor-
ing changes caused by dehydration and acid-base balance and
Increasing numbers of veterinary practices are using elec
also in cases of hypocalcaemia and neoplasia. Parameters com-
tronic analysers to improve the diagnosis of many condi-
monly measured include sodium, chloride, potassium, bicar-
tions. These include biochemistry, haematology, electrolyte
bonate, calcium and phosphate.
and hormone analysers, the first two being the most com-
monly found in practice laboratories.
Hormone analysers
 pansau rn are i sian aou po
Care and maintenance
thyroxine, cortisol, insulin and reproductive hormones. Most
● To avoid damage, position away from vibrations, e.g.
 are measured at commercial laboratories. Hormone measure-
produced by centrifuges, or liquids
ments are valuable in the diagnosis of endocrine disorders,
e.g. Cushing's disease and hypothyroidism. They are also
● Switch off and cover when not in use
helpful in diagnosing reproductive disorders and assessing
the stage of the reproductive cycle.
● Use in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions
Commercial test kits
● Service regularly
A number of in-house test kits are available that can be used to
● Quality control tests against known results should be
diagnose certain viral diseases, determine hormone levels in
regularly undertaken. These are in addition to the
breeding animals, investigate allergic conditions and blood
external quality control tests performed to ensure the
clotting.
accuracy and validity of all tests.
Most utilize the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
Biochemistry analysers
test. The test detects the presence of specific antigens depend-
ent on the test being undertaken. The test well is impreg-
These are used to measure the levels of various biochemical
d   n  n s   
substances in blood, e.g. glucose, total protein, blood urea
formed; the antibodies bind any viral antigens present in the
nitrogen (BUN) and plasma enzymes.
sample and a dye is activated, producing a colour change that
indicates a positive result.
Most are dry chemisry systems. The sample is placed on a series
of slides that results in a colour change reflecting the amount of
Test kits in common use in practice include:
the substance being tested. The machine reads and interprets
the colour change as the level of the substance that is present in
● FeLV ELISA test - detects viral antigens to feline
the sample. Some biochemistry analysers utilize small wells of
leukaemia in blood. A coloured spot or line indicates a
fluid rather than slides and are known as wet chemistry systers.
positive result
Whatever the system, the results are compared with the normal
reference range for each parameter measured, which gives valu-
● FIV ELISA test - detects viral antigens to feline
able information about the clinical condition of the patient,
immunosuppression virus in blood
facilitating diagnosis and monitoring. Such investigations are
also being increasingly used to check the health status of
● Parvovirus ELISA test - detects viral antigens in
patients prior to anaesthesia.
faeces. Care must be taken in interpreting the results
in dogs that have recently been vaccinated with live
Haematology analysers
 parvovirus as they can shed the virus for 5-12 days
post-vaccination, resulting in a false-positive result
These are used to automatically determine total red and white
blood cell counts, differential white blood cell counts, packed
● Premate test - an ELISA test that measures
cell volume and platelet counts, among other parameters. They
progesterone levels in serum or plasma. It is used to
688
 laboratory diagnostic aids
determine the optimum time for mating in the bitch
● Age and sex of the patient, including whether the
and utilizes the fact that blood progesterone levels rise
 patient is neutered
at ovulation. Serial blood samples are taken before
ovulation; the test shows a dark pink colour; increased
● A description of the sample(s)
 progesterone is indicated by a colour change to pink
● A clinical history and provisional diagnosis
● Allercept e-screen test - an ELISA test that detects
immunoglobin E (IgE) in blood. A serum or plasma
● Details of any medication
sample is required. A positive test suggests that an
allergic condition is likely, but further testing at a
● The tests required
commercial laboratory will be necessary to determine
the specific cause or causes of the allergic condition.
● The date the sample was taken. Histology samples
sample sites
Recording sample
● Any additional information that could help in the
 interpretation of the results, especially if the sample is
details and test
 sent to a commercial laboratory.
On receipt at the laboratory, even an internal one, the request
reports
sheet should be stapled to a laboratory reporr sheet. A serialized
laboratory reference number should be put on the form and
all apparatus, e.g. microscope slides, should be labelled
This is probably the most important part of laboratory prac-
with that number. This links the laboratory request and
tice. It is vital that the sample can be correctly linked with the
report forms with the sample, ensuring that no confusion
patient, the tests required linked with the sample and finally
arises, especially if tests are undertaken on multiple samples
the results of the tests performed linked with those requested
simultaneously.
and the sample. Provided that each stage of the process is
recorded accurately immediately upon completion, this should
On completion of the tests, the results, together with the
not be a problem.
date the results were obtained, should be entered on the report
form. This form should then be returned to the presenting vet-
Protocol
erinary surgeon. Commercial laboratories also include an inter-
pretation of the results, which may be faxed to the practice to
  d  n q si a a 
decrease the turn-around time.
suitable container it should be labelled, either with the details
of the owner's name and address and the patient's name o1
The results should be given to the veterinary surgeon concerned
with a reference number that can be computerized. This
and any other appropriate members of staff and also recorded on
identifies the sample for all time.
the patient's records immediately on receipt. Communicating
the results to the client is usually undertaken by the veterinary
A laboratory request form should then be completed, even if
surgeon but a veterinary nurse, under the direction of a veteri
the tests are to be performed 'in house'. A typical request
nary surgeon, can communicate uncomplicated results if the
form should include:
veterinary surgeon feels it is appropriate.
3
● Practice name and address. This can be omitted if
Dispatch of pathological
an ‘in-house' test is to be performed. Many commercial
laboratories provide preprinted forms that include a
material
practice reference number
In order for the test results to be accurate and meaningful it
● The name of the veterinary surgeon submitting the
is essential that the samples sent to a distant laboratory
request
should arrive in the same condition as when they were
sampled, with minimal deterioration. Correct preservation,
● Owner's name and address or reference number
clearly labelled samples, accurately completed paperwork and
correct packaging will ensure this is the case. It is vitally
● Species and breed of the patient. Its name can also be
important to clearly label the samples and ensure that the
included
 accompanying paperwork is correct.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 689
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
Samples must be preserved if any delay is expected between sam-
impossible for the laboratory staff to extricate the samples
pling and subsequent testing. If preservation is not performed
from the packaging safely!
correctly, spoilage of the sample will occur and the results
obtained will not reflect the true disease status of the animal. For
Samples are usually sent to commercial laboratories by
post, although sometimes they are sent by courier service
allow the tests to be undertaken.
or taken directly if within a reasonable distance. In general
the despatch of pathological samples is banned by the
Causes of spoilage of samples include:
Post Office; however, there are special exemptions for
 n s   h  p 
● Haemolysis of blood
ries. Very highly infectious material, such as anthrax, and
dangerous human pathogens are excluded from this
● Clotting of blood - due to absence or insufficiency
exemption.
of anticoagulant or failure to mix the blood
sufficiently with the anticoagulant
Pathological specimens pose a potential hazard to members
of the public involved in their transport so it is vitally impor-
● Contamination of the sample - bacterial or gross
tant that they are correctly packaged and correctly labelled
contamination
according to Post Office regulations. The containers should
also conform to United Nations Regulation 602. This proto
● Death of bacteria - due to using inappropriate
col should also be followed if despatched by courier or if
preservatives
taken by hand:
● Insufficient volume - this can result from
● Faeces or liquid samples, such as blood, serum, urine,
insufficient collection of the sample or leakage of the
body fluids and tissue samples should be placed in an
sample in transit
appropriate sealed primary container. This container
 must not exceed 50 ml unless Post Office approved
● Desiccation - usually of pus or faeces. This may
multispecimen packs are used
occur if too little of the sample is collected or the
sample is collected into a non-airtight container that
● Dry samples such as blood or bacterial smears should
allows evaporation, especially during hot weather.
be placed in special slide-holding containers. Coat
Plain swabs are especially susceptible
brushings and hair samples can be put into sealed
plastic bags. Skin scrapings can be sent in a sealed
● Autolysis of tissue samples - digestion of tissue by
container or on a slide in a slide holding container
its own enzymes. This may occur in portions of tissue
despatched to a laboratory, especially if the time taken
● The sample should then be wrapped in enough
to reach their destination is increased, i.e. over
absorbent material to absorb all possible leakage in
weekends or holiday periods, or if the ambient
case of damage. This also protects the sample against
temperature is increased. It may also occur if a piece of
damage in transit
tissue is too large for the fixative solution to penetrate
it completely. Post-mortem samples and cadavers
● This should then be placed in a sealed leak-proof
should be properly packed to prevent leakage and sent
plastic bag
as quickly as possible to distant laboratories to prevent
autolysis rendering the results useless
● The package must then be placed, along with the
request form, into a secondary container: either a
● Fragmentation of preserved tissues - this can
plastic clip-down container, a cylindrical lightweight
result from preserving them in containers that have a
metal container, a strong cardboard box with a
narrow neck, making their removal difficult.
full-depth lid or a two-piece polystyrene box with a
special grooved join
Equally important is that the samples are correctly packaged
to ensure they are not damaged during transit and that the
● It is recommended that this complete package is then
containers do not break or leak. The containers should be
placed and securely sealed in a padded ‘Jiffy' bag. This
leak-proof, robust, securely fastened and protected from
should be labelled on the outside with the words:
breaking by padding. It should also be ensured that the risk
PATHOLOGICAL SPECIMEN - FRAGILE WITH CARE
of contamination of the paperwork, other samples, anyone
and the name and address of the laboratory. The
  n      s  
package must show the name, address and telephone
should be minimized. However, this should not make it
number of the sender to be contacted in case of
069
 laboratory diagnostic aids
leakage, on the reverse side. A biohazard symbol can
is required then a 2 ml syringe is quite adequate for the pro-
also be included.
cedure. Scissors, a spirit swab and a suitable blood collection
bottle should be close at hand.
● First class or data post should be used, not parcel post,
if the parcel is to be delivered by the Post Office
An alternative method is to use a Vacutainer kit (Fig. 31.4). A
Vacutainer is an evacuated tube, i.e. one containing a
● Other packaging systems must be approved by the
vacuum. The small tubes have a 3 ml volume but only a 2 ml
Post Office
draw to reduce the pressure on the red blood cells. The tubes
are made of glass and are sealed at one end with a rubber
● Improperly packaged or labelled samples will not be
bung. The rest of the kit comprises a holder with a double-
 handled by the postal services.
ended needle (Fig. 31.4). One end of the needle is inserted
into the vein and the other end pierces the bung and the
When sending samples by post it is essential that they reach
blood is drawn into the Vacutainer - available as plain tubes
the laboratory as quickly as possible to reduce deterioration
or containing different anticoagulants.
of the samples. Therefore send the samples by first class post,
data post or courier. Avoid sending the samples over a
Syringes are available that have detachable barrels coated
weekend or a public holiday. Some samples deteriorate faster
with anticoagulant, negating the necessity for sample
than others, even though they have been preserved, e.g. bac-
bottles
these are sold as Monovette. Convertible
teriological samples. Also remember that deterioration will be
syringe/evacuated tubes or S-Monovette are also available.
emphasized enough how important the correct packaging
and despatch is to ensure accurate results.
Table 31.3 Venepuncture sites
Species
Vein/site
l00d
Dog and cat
Jugular - ventral aspect of the neck
Cephalic - cranial aspect of the radius
Lateral saphenous - lateral aspect of the hock
Examination of blood samples can provide an invaluable
Rabbit
Jugular
      n  
Lateral marginal ear vein - base of pinna
nosis, monitoring response to treatment and the severity
Lateral saphenous
of conditions. (see also Chapters 4, 5, 6, 13, 14 and 15).
Guinea pig
lenbnr
Lateral marginal ear vein
Collection of blood
 Intracardiac under anaesthesia
Rat/Mouse/Gerbil
Lateral tail vein
Collection of a blood sample is normally by venepuncture
Intracardiac under anaesthesia
using a syringe and needle. It is important that, before the
Hamster
 Intracardiac under anaesthesia
sample is taken, the correct equipment is assembled. The
Ferret
iejnbnr
correct gauge of needle should be selected. It should be the
Cephalic
largest gauge possible to allow the sample to be taken quickly
Caudal - ventral aspect of tail
and reduce damage to the red blood cells. The syringe
Bird
selected should be the smallest size possible, to reduce the
lenbnr
31
pressure on the red blood cells while the sample is being
 Brachial - medial aspect of the elbow
taken and hence the risk of them rupturing. If 1 ml of blood
Medial metatarsal in larger birds
 May require anaesthesia
Snakes
Jugular
Needle holder with
ventral tail vein
Evacuated glass tube
double-ended needle
Palatine - roof of the mouth
Vein
Intracardiac under anaesthesia
Lizard 
Jugular
Cephalic
ventral tail vein
Chelonians
1ejnbnr
Fig. 31.4 A Vacutainer
 Dorsal tail vein
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
¥691
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
should be removed prior to filling the sample bottle to
reduce damage to the red blood cells
7. If the sample is transferred to a sample bottle containing
Fig. 31.5 S-Monovette blood colfection system.
the bottle and filled to the 'fill line' to ensure that the
anticoagulant is diluted correctly; the bottle should then
These combine the best features of Vacutainers and
be inverted or rolled to mix the contents. Avoid violent
blood-collecting syringes and can be used in either mode
shaking as this can damage the red blood cells. If a
(Fig. 31.5)
serum sample is required there is no need to mix the
sample and there is no specified fill line
Depending on the species and volume of blood required
there are various sites available for venepuncture (see Chs 13
8. The sample must then be labelled with the date and
and 15). The largest accessible vein should always be used
some means of identification
(Table 31.3).
9. Any waste should be disposed of appropriately.
Technique
Provided the correct protocol is followed the red blood cells
1. Handling and restraint for venepuncture varies with
will not be damaged and release their haemoglobin into the
the species involved and the sampling site. Manual
plasma. This process of rupture of the red blood cells is
restrain is usually adequate for restraining dogs and
haemolysis. If haemolysis has occurred the plasma or serum
cats. However, if the patient is aggressive then a
will be pink in colour. Haemolysis will ruin all the tests used
different protocol may be require, e.g. muzzles,
in haematology except total white blood cell counts and
wrapping in a towel. If necessary, sedation or
haemoglobin levels, as the number of red blood cells will be
anaesthesia may be required, especially with exotic
diminished. The presence of free haemoglobin will also inter-
species. It is usually less stressful and safer to
fere with biochemical tests. Therefore, it is essential that
anaesthetize most birds prior to blood sampling but
haemolysis is avoided.
large birds such as swans can be blood sampled from
the metatarsal vein without causing distress. The
Tips to avoid haemolysis
application of local anaesthetic gel to the site when
● Excessive suction should be avoided when taking the
taking blood from the marginal ear vein can also make
sample
the procedure less stressful
● The blood should only pass through the needle once to
2. Once suitably restrained by an assistant, the injection
reduce the trauma to the red blood cells, so remove the
site should be clipped and swabbed with spirit to
needle before transferring the blood to the sample bottle
ensure asepsis
● Use as wide a gauge of needle as is practicable
 3. The assistant should then occlude the proximal part
of the vein, which makes the vein easier to visualize
● Ensure the skin, needle and syringe are free of water to
and also prevents the blood from returning to the
 prevent osmotic damage to the red blood cells
heart
● Do not shake the sample bottle; roll or invert it to mix
4. The needle should be inserted at a shallow angle while
the sample
tensing the skin over the site. Once in the vein the
plunger is slowly pulled back to ensure the blood is
● The sample should be examined as soon as possible
not subjected to excessive pressure, which could
 after sampling
damage the red blood cells and also to ensure the vein
does not collapse
● Store the sample at the correct temperature, cool (4°C)
 but not freezing
5. Once the required volume has been obtained the
needle is carefully removed from the vein and the
● Avoid direct sunlight.
 assistant should apply pressure on the injection site to
 prevent bleeding
● If sending the sample to an external laboratory, ensure
it is packaged correctly to protect against careless
6. The blood sample should then be transferred quickly
handling and temperature variations. Ensure it is
to the previously selected sample bottle. The needle
despatched as soon as possible.
692
 laboratory diagnostic aids
Table 31.4 Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant
Test
Bottle colour
Vacutainer colour
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA),
Routine haematology
Pink
Lilac
also known as sequestrene
Some small bottles <0.5 ml may be red
Sodium fluoride/potassium oxalate
Glucose estimation
Yellow
Grey
Lithium heparin 
Biochemistry
Orange
Green/Green orange
Sodium citrate
Coagulation profles
Purple (solid)
Black
Green (liquid)
Ammonium/potassium oxalate
Glucose estimation
Turquoise
None
No anticoagulant
Biochemistry
White
Red
glucose metabolized by the blood cells prior to the glucose
Preservation of blood
estimation, more accurately representing the glucose levels
 present at the time of sampling.
Blood can be preserved in a number of ways depending on
the investigations that are to be undertaken. These include:
Serum samples
● Preventing the blood clotting by using anticoagulants
Serum is plasma, the fluid in which the cellular components
● Leaving the blood whole and allowing it to clot then
of blood are suspended, minus the clotting factors such as
removing the serum
fibrinogen. In biochemical examination it is usually serum
that is used, although plasma can be used for most tests
● Making blood smears.
except bile acids, insulin and a number of specific serological
investigations. It is important that the difference between
 plasma and serum is appreciated.
Anticoagulants
To perform haematology, the study of the physical character-
If a blood sample is placed in a sample bottle containing an
istics and the number of cells per unit volume in blood, it is
anticoagulant, for example EDTA, and allowed to stand, the
essential that the sample is not allowed to clot. To prevent
red blood cells, being the heaviest components, will fall to
the blood from clotting the inherent clotting process found
the bottom of the sample tube. On top of these will lie the
in blood must be disabled by the addition of chemicals
white blood cells and platelets forming the 'buffy coat', and
immediately on collection of the sample. The clotting process
above this layer will be the plasma. Inversion of the bottle
is a complex process that depends on the presence of calcium
will result in resuspension of the cellular components
and a number of enzymes in addition to various clotting
(Fig. 31.6). However, if the blood sample is placed in a sample
factors.
Anticoagulants fall into two categories:
● Those that block calcium - ethylenediaminetetraacetic
31
 acid (EDTA), oxalates, citrates and fluorides
 Plasma-
Serum
● Those that interfere with the enzyme systems -
Buffy coat-
heparin and fluorides.
WBCs and
 platelets 
All the anticoagulants listed in Table 31.4 are available com-
Clotted RBCs
mercially, as ready prepared sample bottles and the majority
RBCS
with emeshed
as their equivalent Vacutainers.
WBCs and
platelets
No one anticoagulant is ideal for every test: each individual
anticoagulant has properties that make it better suited for
Anticoagulant
No anticoagulant 
some tests than others. The preference for sodium
fluoride/oxalate as the anticoagulant of choice for glucose
Fig. 31.6 The difference between blood being left to clot naturally
estimation illustrates this point. It reduces the amount of
or with an anticoagutant
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
693
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
Table 31.5 Changes in the colour of plasma/serum
Colour
Implication
Pink
Indicates haemolysis has occured within the
body or more usually through faulty collection
Milky appearance
Due to the presence of fat droplets, i.e.
lipaemia. When found in fasted animals this
suggests the existence of liver disease
Yellow
Due to the presence of bilirubin. Indicative of
severe liver damage or obstruction of the bile
ponp
Fig. 31.7 Preparation of a btood smear
tube that does not contain an anticoagulant and is left to
care and carefully packaged if being despatched to an
stand, the red blood cells will clot, enmeshing both the white
external laboratory.
blood cells and platelets and a fluid will form above the clot,
serum. In this case there will not be a distinct buffy coat and
inversion of the sample will not result in resuspension of the
 Preparation of a blood smear
sample, as the cellular components have clotted.
1. Gloves must be worn
Serum collection can involve simply collecting the sample into
     n  s 
 2. Take a grease-free microscope slide. If it has been
sample to clot, which may take up to 2 h. The serum is then
stored in alcohol, thoroughly wash it and dry with
transferred to a sterile container. Centrifuging the sample may
lint-free tissue
accelerate the process. Alternatively the sample can be placed in
special serum separation bottles. These contain a gel that, when
3. Label the slide with a chinagraph pencil to identify
the blood is introduced, allows the sample to clot but separates
the sample. This should be done on the underside to
it from the serum, which lies above the gel. This prevents
prevent the labelling from being removed during
haemolysis from interfering with subsequent testing. Separated
staining
serum can be stored for a few days at 4°C; if testing is to be
delayed longer than this, the sample can be frozen but must be
4. Place the slide on the bench, against a white
thawed at room temperature and then thoroughly mixed
background, with its long sides parallel to the edge of
before any tests are performed.
the bench
Normal canine and feline plasma and serum are clear and
 5. Draw a small sample of fresh or well mixed
almost colourless to pale yellow in colour. The presence of
EDTA-treated blood into a capillary tube
various substances in the blood can alter this colour and
provide valuable information as to the health status of the
6. The description that follows is for a right-handed
individual (Table 31.5). Lipaemia is normal in animals that
technician (Fig. 31.7). If you are left-handed the
have been fed within the previous 3 h, so blood samples
directions ‘left' and ‘right' should be reversed
should be taken from fasted animals to reduce the risk of mis.
interpretation of results. Haemolysis interferes with haemato-
7. Place a small drop of blood at the right-hand end
logical tests and lipaemia with biochemistry analysis.
of the slide about 1 cm from its edge
Blood smears
8. Take a 'spreader' in the right hand, holding the long
sides between the thumb and index finger, with the
Smearing blood on to a slide is a common method of pre-
spreading edge, which is narrower than the
serving blood to examine it for its relative cellular contents,
microscope slide, directed downwards. The spreader
any cellular abnormalities, presence of blood parasites and a
can be made by cutting the corner off a microscope
rough estimation of the number of platelets. The smear can
slide. The narrower edge to the spreader prevents the
be left to air-dry but if examination is to be delayed the smear
cells being pushed to the edge of the slide. Ensure
is best fixed by immersing it in 100% methyl alcohol for
that the spreader is not chipped nor has an irregular 
1 min; staining can then be postponed for up to 3 days.
edge, as this could affect the quality of the smear.
Dried smears are very delicate and should be handled with
Always wipe the edge of the spreader between
694
laboratory diagnostic aids
Table 31.6 Common faults in blood smears
13. It is always advisable to make at least two smears in
case one is unsatisfactory
Fault
Cause
Too thick
Too large a drop of blood
14. Remember, it takes practice to make a smear of
Too thin 
Too small a drop of blood
diagnostic quality (Table 31.6).
Spread too slowly
Transverse alternate thin
Spreading done with a jerky
Staining blood smears
and thick bands
motion, usually due to hesitation
To facilitate examination of the blood cells various stains are
Streaks throughout the
An irregular edge to the spreader
employed:
length of the smear,
Dried blood on the edge of the
especially at the tail
spreader
● Romanowsky stains, e.g. Leishman's and Giemsa's
Dust on the slide or in the blood
 stains and rapid stains such as Diff-Quik. This type of
'Spots where blood is absent 
Grease on the slide
stain can be used to:
Very natrow, thick smear
Smear made before the blood has run
along the spreading edge
● Detect changes in the size, shape and staining of
One surface of the spreader is lifted 
the cells
 during spreading
● Perform a differential white blood cell count
● Detect the presence of blood parasites such as
making smears, as dried blood will produce grooves
Mycoplasma haemofelis and Babesia spp.
in subsequent smears
● Roughly estimate the number of platelets
9. With both elbows resting on the bench, place the
spreader in contact with the slide, a little to the left
● Supra-vital stains, e.g. new methylene blue and
of the drop of blood and parallel to the short side of
brilliant cresyl blue. This type of stain can be
the slide. Hold the spreader at an angle of 20° to the
used to:
vertical. A wider angle will result in a thicker smear
while a more acute angle produces a thinner smear.
● Perform a reticulocyte count
Draw the spreader to the right until it makes contact
with the blood. Allow the blood to run along the
● Detect Heinz bodies.
whole edge of the spreader
These staining techniques are not routinely carried out in
10. Once this has occurred, immediately move the
practice.
spreader to the left-hand end of the slide in a single
rapid, smooth, firm action. The blood will be drawn
along behind the spreader. Ensure that the edge of
the spreader is in contact with the surface of the slide
Technigue for Leishman's stain
throughout. Never place the spreader to the right of
Always wear gloves as the stain is toxic by ingestion, inhala-
the drop of blood and push the blood across the
tion and skin contact:
slide, as this will damage the cells
31
1. Place the labelled slide, smear side uppermost on to a
11. The faster the spreader is moved the thinner and
staining rack over a staining bath
more even will be the resulting smear. Ideally, the red
blood cells should overlap slightly, becoming more
 2. Place sufficient concentrated Leishman's stain on the
separate at the tail. A smear that covers half to two-
slide to cover it
thirds of the slide is ideal. Usually there are three
definable parts to a smear the head, body and tail
3. Leave for 2 min
12. Allow the smear to dry slowly without heating.
4. Do not wash off the stain but add twice the stain's
keeping it horizontal. Heating will distort the cells,
volume of buffered distilled water (pH 6.8) and mix
making the smear useless. Similarly, exposing the smear
well
to water vapour while it is drying will render the smear
 of no diagnostic value as haemolysis may occur
5. Leave for 15 min
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 695
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
6. Tip the stain off the slide and wash it well, front and
2. The slide is allowed to drain after each dip
back, with buffered distilled water
3. Finally the slide is rinsed with distilled water and
7. Wipe the back of the slide, taking care not to wipe
allowed to dry.
away the label. Prop upright and allow to dry.
4. The whole procedure takes approximately 15 s
5. By varying the number of dips in the appropriate
solution, different degrees of shading and colour
Technique for Diff-Quik stain
intensity are easily obtained.
 This is a frequently used staining technique in practice,
as it is easy, quick to perform and gives excellent results,
It is important that the staining procedures are conducted
comparable with May-Grinwald-Giemsa stain.
properly, otherwise the smear may be useless, as the cells
cannot be identified with any accuracy nor any abnormalities
1. The staining set consists of three solutions: fixative
detected with any certainty. The reasons for the problems will
solution, stain solution I and stain solution I1. The
depend on the particular staining technique being used but
 blood smear is dipped in each in turn five times for a
might include incorrect timing, failure to wash the stain off
period of 1 s, i.e. 5 s in total
correctly or using stains at the incorrect concentrations.
Table 31.7 Blood cells
Cell
Diagram
Description
% Dog
1e] %
Size
Function
Erythrocyte
Biconcave disc
Dog 7.0 μm
Carriage of oxygen
Cat 4.5 μm
Lymphocyte
Round with a large round purple
12-30
20-55
8μm
Immunity
(small)
nucleus which almost fills all the
Production of
cell, with a pale blue rim of
 antibodies
cyto plasm 
Lymphocyte
Similar to small lymphocyte but
Variable,
Variable
12-14 μm
As above
(large)
more oval in shape
approximately
of the lymphocytes
8%
Monocyte
 Pleomorphic nucleus (slightly
3-10
1-4
 20 μm
 Chronic phagocyte
indented oval to horse shoe
shaped with enlarged knob like
ends. Blue staining cytoplasm
which may contain vacuoles
Neutrophil
Irregular lobed nucleus with pale
60-70
35-75
10-12 μm
Phagocyte
bluish pink cytoplasm with difuse 
indistinct pale granules
Immature,
Nuclei horse shoe shaped and not Variable, 0-3
Variable,0-3
juvenile or
as darkly staining as mature 
band neutrophil
neutrophils
Eosino phil
 Bilobed or segmented nucleus.
2-10
2-12
12-14 μm
 Increased numbers in
 Numerous reddish pink granules 
 parasitic and allergic
that are rod-shaped in the cat,
conditions
round in the dog
Basophil
Segmented or irregular shaped
Very rare in both
0-0.1
10-12 μm
Associated with the
nucleus. Blue grey cytoplasm with
eo pue 6op
release of histamine
dark, bluish granules
uueday pue
Colours as seen when smear stained writh Romanowsky stains.
696
laboratory diagnostic aids
blood cell counts can also be performed manually using a
A
haemocytometer but, even with practice, the accuracy obtained
the blood is diluted to a known concentration using special
pipettes and the number of cells in a known volume is counted,
Fig. 31.8 Methods of performing a manual differentiat white btood
under the microscope, on the grid etched on the haemocy-
celt count (a) by the four field meander method (b) by the strip
count method
are used depending on whether a total red or white blood cell
Microscopic examination of a
count is to be undertaken. Dacie's fluid is used for a red cell
count and Turck's for a white blood cell count.
blood smear
A qualitative examination of a blood smear should always be
Blood smears should be examined under x10, x40 then x100
performed when an automated cell count is performed, as
with oil immersion (Fig. 31.3). The slide should be carefully
valuable information regarding the health status of the indi-
examined and any abnormalities noted (Table 31.7).
     o p po   p
control protocol. The red blood cells should be examined for
Blood smears can also be used for performing manual dif-
any abnormalities. The white blood cells should be checked
ferential white blood cell counts. This determines the
for a 'shift to the left' and the presence of toxic neutrophils.
relative proportions of the different types of white blood cell
Platelet clumping should also be noted.
and can give a valuable insight into the health status of the
patient. However, it is time-consuming and requires a certain
Normal values are:
degree of expertise and experience to produce accurate
results. The technique involves identifying and recording at
● Total red blood cell count
least 200 white blood cells. The selection of a suitable area to
count the cells can be problematic, as the distribution of the
●Dog - 5.5-8.5 × 1012/1
white blood cells is not uniform, with accumulation of the
white blood cells at the edges and tail of the smear and a dis-
●Cat - 5.0-10.0 × 1012/1
 proportionate number of monocytes and eosinophils, the
larger blood cells, being found. In the past the ‘Four-field
● Total white blood cell count
Meander method was used but this has been superseded with
a strip count technique where all the white blood cells lying
●Dog - 6-17 × 10°/1
in one or more longitudinal strips running the complete
length of the smear are classified (Fig. 31.8). The results are
● Cat - 5.5-19.5 x 109/1
recorded on a tally chart and, by using a simple calculation,
the percentage of each type of white blood cell is determined.
Many practices now use electronir haematology machines,
Abnormalities seen in blood smears
which if used correctly are more accurate and produce the
results in a much shorter time frame. An automated haema-
Erythrocyte abnormalities
tology analyser, a QBC (quantitative buffy coat) machine, can
These may include:
be used to assess both total and differential white blood cell
counts and also total red blood cell counts. Whole blood is
● Size
3
  s      n s
added. The sample is then spun in a microhaematocrit
● Anisocytosis - a variation in the size of the red blood
centrifuge, which separates the sample. The red blood cells
cells that is greater than would normally be expected
sink to the bottom of the tube, with the white blood cells
   s  e    d 
● Microcyte - an unusually small cell; may be
float separates the buffy coat into its constituent cell layers,
indicative of a bone marrow defect
which are then measured in a special reading machine.
Only a two-part differential count is produced, which gives a
● Macrocyfe -- a large cell; usually a juvenile cell
granulocyte count and a combined monocyte/ lymphocyte
count in addition to a red blood cell count.
● Shape
Other more sophisticated machines are available, such as
● Crenated - shrinkage of the cells giving a crinkled
Coulter counter machines and Laser cell counters, which give
 appearance; seen in old samples or if too high a
a much wider range of result parameters. Total red and white
concentration of anticoagulant has been used
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
697
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
●‘Star' or 'Bur' cells - appear to have blunt processes
· Red cell parasites:
 protruding from their surface; seen in old samples
● Mycoplasma haemofelis - the causal agent of feline
● Spherocyte - do not have the normal biconcave
infectious anaemia. Can usually be detected by
shape; seen in autoimmune disease
Romanowsky stains but more easily seen with
acridine orange stain. They are very small coccoid
+ Colour:
organisms that are found attached to the cell
membrane, either singly or in short chains. Easily
● Hypochromic - very pale in colour as a result of low
confused with stain debris. Fresh blood is best used
levels of haemoglobin
as EDTA can detach the parasites from the cell
surface
● Polychromasia - irregular areas of blue intermingled
with the normal orange-pink colour; seen in
● Babesia - several forms. Babesia canis is the
immature cells
commonest form in Europe. Transmitted by ticks.
Can be detected by Romanowsky stains. As there are
● Inclusions - these can be easily confused with stain
usually only a few organisms present, a peripheral
debris:
sample is best taken. The organism is pear-shaped
and usually occurs in pairs, with up to eight or more
● Reticulocyte - presence of dark blue inclusions when
present. Increasing in incidence in the UK because of
stained with supra-vital stains such as new
the introduction of the PETS travel scheme
methylene blue stain. Immature red blood cell, still
containing nuclear remnants; seen in increased
● Rouleaux formation is also often seen on blood
numbers in anaemia
smears. The red cells stack up behind one another,
resembling a pile of Pringles! This occurs due to
● Heinz body - round, refractile, blue granular
spreading the smear too slowly.
inclusions, again only seen when stained with a
supra-vital stain. Formed due to the precipitation of
denatured haemoglobin; common in cats. Can
sh sn n sp jo u a o ns
Leucocyte abnormalities
These include:
● Howell-Jolly body - can be seen with Romanowsky
stains as spherical blue-black granules near to the
● A 'shift to the left' describes an increase in the
periphery of the cell. Increased numbers are seen in
number of immature neutrophils and is indicative of
 regenerative anaemias and following splenectomy
an inflammatory condition
Fable 31.8 Interpretation of differential leucocyte and platelet counts
Cell
Increased numbers
Decreased numbers
Neutro phil
Neutrophilia caused by inflammation, bacterial infection, stress,
Neutropenia caused by overwhelming infections, virus
fear, excitement, canine pregnancy, regenerative anaemia, neoplasia,
infections, e.g. FIV, FeLV, poisons, toxaemia, aplastic
necrosis and corticosteroid therapy
anaemia, cytotoxic drugs
Lymphocyte
Lymphocytosis caused by stress, strong immune stimulation,
Lymphopenia caused by viraemias/toxaemias, stress,
lymphocytic leukaemia, transiently following vaccination. Young
corticosteroid therapy, Cushing's disease and chylothorax
animals have a higher count than adults
Eosinophil
Eosinophilia caused by parasitism, allergy, eosinophilic leukaemia,
Eosinopenia caused by stress, Cushing's disease and
Addison's disease, eosinophilic myositis
corticosteroid therapy
Monocyte
Monocytosis caused by acute or chronic infection/inflammation
Not significant
involving necrosis, pus, cell debris, internal haemorrhage,
haemolytic anaemia and immune-mediated disease
Platelets
Thrombocytosis caused by infections, trauma, haemorrhage,
Thrombocytopenia caused by autoimmune disease,
splenectomy and some tumours
disseminated intravascular coagulation, aplastic anaemia
and chemotherapy
698
 laboratory diagnostic aids
● Toxic neutrophils are seen in severe toxaemic
 tion and anaesthesia and late canine pregnancy. High values
conditions and are characterized by a bluish pink
are seen in dehydration, which results in a relative poly.
cytoplasm, which is often vacuolated, with dark blue
cythaemia (increase in the number of red blood cells), splenic
round or angular shaped inclusions known as Dohle
contraction, anabolic steroids, and hyperthyroidism in cats.
bodies.
The PCV is often normally elevated in athletic breeds of dog.
e.g. greyhounds, where it can normally be at the top end of
Abnormal cell counts
the range.
Various clinical conditions can cause abnormal blood cell
counts (Table 31.8):
Measurement of packed cell volume
● Leucocytosis - an increase in the number of white
The commonest procedure used in practice is the micro-
blood cells above the normal range. Possible causes
haematocrit method. This employs the use of capillary
include:
'microhaematocrit’ tubes, which are heparinized if fresh
 blood is used, to prevent clotting. Plain tubes are used with
●Presence of pathogenic organisms
anticoagulated samples.
● Neoplasia
 Using anticoagulated blood:
●Haemorrhage
1. A well mixed sample is allowed to three-quarters fill a
'haematocrit' tube by capillary action
● Steroid hormones
2. The outside of the tube is wiped clean and the unfilled
● Degenerative non-inflammatory disease
end is sealed with a special filler, e.g. Cristaseal
● Leucopenia - a decrease in the number of white
3. The tube is then placed, sealed end outwards, into a
blood cells below the normal range. Usually the
 special microhaematocrit centrifuge and spun for
elevation is limited to one type of leukocyte and can
approximately 5 min at 10 000 rpm
give a useful insight into the health status of the
patient. If all the leukocyte types are involved this is
4. The centrifuge must be balanced so a minimum of two
known as panleucopenia.
samples are spun at the same time at diametrically
opposite sides of the centrifuge
Possible causes of leukopenia are:
● Bone marrow failure
PCV% =×100
● Overwhelming infections
Glass microhaematocrit tube
● Viral diseases, e.g. feline viral panleucopenia
● Cushing's disease.
31
Packed cell volume or
Plasma
haematocrit
Packed cell volume (PCV) is the red blood cell to fluid ratio in
the blood. It is expressed as a percentage or litres per litre.
Bulffy coat
 Normal ranges are:
Packed red blood cells
●D0g 37-55% (0.37-0.55 1/1)
●Cat 24-45% (0.24-0.45 1/1).
Sealant
Haemolysis will invalidate the results, as could the use of a
Fig. 31.9 Packed cell votume
liquid anticoagulant. Low PCVs are found in anaemia, seda-
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 699
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
5. The centrifugal process results in the red blood cells
Table 31.9 Normal ranges of haematological values
concentrating at the bottom of the tube with the
Species
RBC (1012/)
WBC (109/l)
PCV (%)
Hb (g/dl)
white blood cells and platelets - forming a grey/cream
layer, the buffy coat - above them. The platelets
Dog
5.5-8.5
6-17
37-55
12-18
tend to lie at the top of the buffy coat and can be
Cat
5.0-10.0
5.5-19.5
24-45
8-15
seen as a thin, cream-coloured layer. The plasma is
found above this layer. Gross examination of the
plasma can indicate haemolysis, jaundice or lipaemia
Mean
corpuscular
haemoglobin  concentration
(Fig. 31.9)
(MCHC)- indicates the average concentration of haemoglo-
bin per red blood cell:
6. The PCV is then read off on a special
 Total haemoglobin (g/dl)
microhaematocrit reader. Different types of readers are
MCHC (g/dl) =
available but all work on a similar principle. The PCV
PCV (l/l)
is calculated by dividing the length of the column of
red blood cells (a) by the combined length of the red
The MCV and MCHC are useful in the evaluation of anaemic
blood cells, buffy coat and plasma (b) then multiplying
conditions.
by 100 to give the result as a percentage (Fig. 31.10).
The method is rapid, very accurate and relatively easy to
Blood biochemistry
perform. It also only requires a small volume of blood.
Studying the biochemical parameters of normal substances in
the blood can help in the diagnosis of many conditions
(Table 31.10). It must be borne in mind that the normal ranges
Haemoglobin estimations
of values of the various determinations will show a degree of
Haemoglobin, packed into the red blood cells, combines
reversibly with oxygen and transports it around the body. In
Blood urea nitrogen
order for the body to function properly adequate amounts of
haemoglobin are essential. Haemoglobin (Hb) levels are esti-
Urea is a nitrogenous waste product formed by the liver from
 mated by haematology analysers and are measured in grams
the breakdown of amino acids. It is carried in the plasma to
per decilitre. Normal ranges are:
the kidneys, where it is excreted in the urine.
● Dog 12-18 g/dl
There are two different measurements of urea concentra
tion, which can lead to confusion as both are expressed as
● Cat 8-15 g/d1.
 mg/100 ml. One is the quantity of urea per 100 ml, i.e. blood
urea. The other is the quantity of urea nirogen per 100 ml, i.e.
This test is not affected by haemolysis. Haemoglobin levels
BUN. It is important to be sure which is being used, as a urea
are decreased in cases of anaemia.
molecule is heavier than the two nitrogen atoms it contains.
Generally, it is the latter that is used to evaluate kidney
function.
Further information calculable
 Normal range of BUN values:
from these tests
● Dog - 3.0-9.0 mmol/1
'Corpuscular values' can be calculated from the total red
blood cell counts, PCV and haemoglobin contents, or
● Cat - 5.0-10.0 mmol/1 (some researchers give the
obtained more accurately from haematology analysers.
upper value as 15 mmol/l).
Mean corpuscular volume (Mcv) - indicates the average
Elevated BUN can be considered under three categories:
size of the red blood cells:
+ Pre-renal:
PCV (l/) x 1000
MCV (fl) =
Total red cells (1012/l)
●Fever
(fl = femtolitre: 1 fl = 10-15 1)
● Infection
700
 laboratory diagnostic aids
● Necrosis
Glucose
● Metabolic conditions
Glucose is the principal source of energy for all the cells
of the body. Other sources can be utilized by some cells but
●High-protein diet
glucose is essential for the survival of brain tissue. Blood
glucose concentrations are controlled in the main by two
● Chronic heart failure
hormones:
● Corticosteroid administration
● Insulin - produced by the beta cells of the islets of
Langerhans of the pancreas. Facilitates the passage of
● Renal - increased BUN levels are seen in renal failure
glucose into cells, converts glucose into glycogen,
but approximately 75% of the nephrons have to
which is stored in the liver, and promotes the
become non-functional before this occurs
 synthesis of protein and fats. These actions have the
effect of reducing blood glucose levels
+ Postrenal:
● Glucagon - produced by the alpha cells and has the
● Urethral obstruction
 opposite effects. Adrenaline (epinephrine) and cortisol
also influence blood glucose levels. In the dog and cat
● Ruptured bladder.
glucose is actively reabsorbed in the renal tubules, but
if the level of glucose exceeds 10-12 mmol/1 this will
● Decreased BUN can occur as a result of:
exceed the renal threshold and glucose will be excreted
in the urine, i.e. glucosuria.
● Liver failure
Normal ranges of fasting plasma glucose levels:
● Anabolic steroids
● Dog - 3.5-5.5 mmol/1
● Portosystemic shunt
● Cat - 3.5-6.5 mmol/1
● Low-protein diet.
 Elevated blood glucose levels (hyperglycaemia) may
In addition to biochemical analysers, dip-tests are also avail-
be seen in:
able. However, these are not as accurate as the biochemical
analysers.
● Diabetes mellitus
Creatinine
●Post-feeding sampling
This is a metabolite of creatine, which stores energy in
muscles. It is freely filtered by the glomeruli of the kidney and
●Stress
the clearance of creatinine from the plasma can be used to
 provide an approximation of the glomerular filtration rate.
● Cushing's disease
Like BUN, it is not a very accurate indicator of kidney func-
tion, as approximately 75% of the kidney tissue must be non.
● Administration of corticosteroids
functional before elevated levels are seen.
31
● Pancreatitis
The levels of creatinine are not influenced by a high-protein
diet.
● Administration of drugs, e.g. morphine.
Normal range of values:
 Decreased blood glucose levels (hypoglycaemia) may
be seen in:
● Dog - up to 120 μmol/1. Greyhounds and other
 sight-hounds up to 150 μmol/1
● Neoplasia, e.g. insulinoma, hepatocellular
carcinoma
● Cat - up to 180 μmol/1.
● Hepatic insufficiency
An increase in plasma concentrations of urea nitrogen or cre.
atinine, or both, is known as azofaemia.
●Hypoadrenocorticism
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
701
31
Laboratorv diagnostic aids
Plasma enzymes
●Malabsorption
Within all cells are enzymes, which are essential for intracellu-
● Starvation
lar metabolism. Normally, low levels of these enzymes are
found in the plasma but, if a cell dies or is badly damaged,
● Idiopathic in some toy breeds
increased amounts of its enzymes are detected. Cells of different
tissues contain different enzymes so it would seem feasible to be
● Insulin treatment.
able to identify the damaged cells by the enzymes found in the
plasma. Unfortunately, it is not as simple as this, as one enzyme
      n s
is seldom specific for one particular tissue, but it is usually pos-
fluoride oxalate tubes, as fluoride blocks glycolysis in the red
sible to localize the damage by looking at a number of different
blood cells ensuring that the glucose levels determined at
enzymes or, to be more precise, by investigating the isoenzymes
sampling more accurately reflects the glucose levels at the
involved, which are often specific for a particular tissue.
time of testing.
Results are not expressed as concentrations but as 'activities'.
If the biochemical analyser requires the use of heparinized
This is a measure of how fast the enzyme can convert sub-
plasma, the sample must be separated immediately to prevent
strate to product under standardized assay conditions, and is
glycolysis occurring.
measured in international units (IU). Reaction temperature
can influence the results obtained and is now commonly
Reagent strips, e.g. BM-Test 1-44, can also be used but require
standardized at 37oC, but results using different temperatures
whole blood. In general, these are less accurate at high glucose
 may still be encountered.
levels. Glucometers can also be used.
● Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), formerly serum
Many other blood biochemistry estimations can be made
glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) - in dogs and
with biochemical analysers (Table 31.10).
cats, elevated levels are predominantly specific for
Table 31.10 Common blood biochemistry estimations
Substance
Normal range*
Causes of elevated levels
Causes of depressed levels
Total serum protein
Dog 50-78 g/l
Dehydration, chronic and immune-mediated disease,
Renal disease, haemotthage,
Cat 60-82 g/l
lactation, infection and neoplasia
malnutrition, malabsorption, hepatic
and pancreatic insuffciency. Lower in
young animals because of minimal
levels of immunoglobulins
Serum albumin
Dog 22-35 g/l
Haemoconcentration secondary to dehydration
Chronic liver disease, ascites, tissue
Cat 25-39 g/l
oedema, congestive heart failure and
renal failure
Cholesterol
Dog 2.7-9.5 mmol/l
Diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism,
Maldigestion, malabsorption and severe
Cat 1.5-6.0 mmol/l
 hyperadrenocorticism, nephritic syndrome and
hepatic insufficiency
 postfeeding sampling
Total bilirubin
Dog and cat
Haemolytic anaemia, hepatic jaundice, obstruction
Not applicable
0-6.8 μmol/l
to bile flow and impaired liver function
Amylase
Dog and cat
Acute pancreatitis but not specific, therefore it is
Not applicable
400-2000 units/l
advisable to cross-reference with lipase levels
Renal failure and gastrointestinal problems
Calcium
Dog and cat
Dehydration, neoplasia, primary hyperparathyroidism,
Primary hypoparathyroidism, eclampsia,
2.20-2.90 mmol/l
hypoadrenocorticism, renal failure and
acute pancreatitis, intestinal
hypervitaminosis D
malabsorption and following bilateral
thyroidectomy
Bile acids
Dog and cat
Primary or secondary hepatic disease
Intestinal obstruction and severe
 0-15 μmol/lt
Biliary obstruction and portosystemic shunt
 malabsorption
patient with a fatty meal. A postprandial sample is then taken 2 h later and the change in the two samples is analysed.
702
 laboratory diagnostic aids
hepatocellular damage Activities of more than
● Decreased serum T, may be due to:
150-200 1U/l are of clinical significance. In very acute
conditions, e.g. acute hepatitis, levels of 5000 1U/1 are
●Hypothyroidism
not uncommon. Levels will also increase in severe
muscle damage. Mild increases in ALT are also seen in
● Hyperadrenocorticism
feline hyperthyroidism
● Chronic illness, known as sick euthyroid syndrome,
● Aspartate aminotransferase (AsT), formerly
such as renal, liver, or heart failure and diabetes
serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) - this
mellitus
enzyme is widely distributed throughout the body in
skeletal and cardiac muscle, liver and red blood cells.
●Advanced age
Elevated levels are indicative of muscle damage in dogs
and cats. Normal levels are below 100 1U/1
● Drug therapy
● Alkaline phosphatase (ALP), formerly serum
● lodine deficiency.
alkaline phosphatase (SAP) - this is one of the most
widely distributed enzymes in the body and has
Serum samples are preferred for testing as this decreases the
several isoenzymes found in bone (osteoblasts), liver
risk of fibrinogen interfering with the test. Tq is stable in
and the intestinal wall. The range of values is quite
serum for up to 8 days at room temperature and is unaffected
wide, up to 300 1U/1. It is higher in young animals
because of bone development.
  i s  n o  
undertaken at specialist laboratories. Modified human test
It is clear that a plasma enzyme activity result should not be
kits are also employed.
 considered in isolation in deciding on a diagnosis.
Dynamic thyroid function tests - A range of these tests
Hormones
are used to confirm or refute a diagnosis of thyroid dysfunc-
tion. The TSH stimulation test is used to confirm hypothy-
Thyroid
roidism in dogs. Basal Tq levels are measured, then the dog is
The thyroid produces two important hormones, thyroxine (T4)
injected with bovine TSH, and a second blood sample is taken
and tri-iodothyronine (T,). These hormones have widespread
            
physiological effects on the body, including controlling the
metabolic rate. Abnormal fluctuations in the levels of these
 o    3     s
hormones can result in the development of various clinical
e.g. those suffering from sick euthyroid syndrome, will show
signs and endocrine disorders. The secretion of these hormones
a rise in T, following the TSH injection
is controlled by thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) from the
anterior pituitary and thyrotrophin releasing hormone (TRH),
produced by the hypothalamus.
Adrenal cortex
Diagnostically Tq is used to assess thyroid function, as abnor-
malities show up more readily in this hormone.
 hormones. The most common disorders affecting the adrenal
● Normal ranges vary between laboratories but
3
 generally fall between 13 and 52 nmol/1.
renocorticism (Addison's disease). The hormone involved in
these conditions is cortisol. A basal plasma or serum cortisol
● Increased serum T, may be due to:
level is not very helpful due to other causes which can affect the
cortisol levels, e.g. stress. For this reason dynamic manipulation
●Hyperthyroidism
tests with ACTH or dexamethasone are used.
●Young age
The ACTH stimulation test is used to:
● Anti-T, antibodies
● Screen for primary and secondary Cushing's disease
●Certain drugs
● Monitor mitotane therapy
● Oestrus and pregnancy
● Diagnose primary Addison's disease.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
703
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
An initial basal cortisol level is performed followed by an
levels will be reduced. In animals with Cushing's
intravenous injection of a synthetic form of ACTH. This will
disease the dexamethasone will not be able to
stimulate the release of cortisol. A second sample is taken 2 h
suppress the release of ACTH and the cortical levels
later and the cortisol level is determined. High postinjection
will be higher
cortisol levels indicate Cushing's while low levels indicate
Addison's disease.
● High-dose dexamethasone test - a basal cortisol
level is determined but on this occasion a high dose of
Low-dose dexamethasone tests are used to screen for
dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg) is administered
Cushing's. High-dose dexamethasone tests are used to
 3 and 8 h intervals to assess the response:
Cushing's disease and those that have non-pituitary-depend-
ent Cushing's disease caused by a neoplasm in the adrenal
● Normal - both post injection samples will be below
cortex:
the basal level
● Low-dose dexamethasone test - a basal cortisol
● Pihuitary dependent - one of the post injection
level is determined. A low dose of dexamethasone
samples will be below the basal level
(0.01 mg/kg) is then administered intravenously and a
second sample is taken 8 h later to assess the animal's
● Non-pihuitary-dependent - very little suppression
response. In normal animals the release of ACTH will
and both post injection samples above the basal
be suppressed by negative feedback and the cortisol
level.
Urine
urine is the best sample to collect for lesions low in
The analysis of urine samples can give a rapid insight into the
the urethral tract, e.g. urethral plugs, uroliths and
health status of a patient. It is generally held that the normal
bacteria; however, this fraction is the most likely to be
dog will produce within the range of 20-40 ml/kg and the cat
contaminated. End stream is the best to collect for
18-25 mg/kg of urine daily:
examination for prostatic disease or for haemorrhage
or sediment that might have collected on the floor
● Polyuria - production of excess urine
of the bladder. However, the practicalities of
obtaining the last two types of sample are difficult, to
● Oliguria - reduction of the amount of urine
say the least! In the case of dogs, a well-cleaned
produced
container should be used to collect the sample, then it
should be transferred to a sterile container.
● Anuria - absence of urine production
Commercial sterile collection kits are available, e.g.
Uripet. Cats are more problematic but again
● Dysuria - difficulty in passing urine.
commercial kits are available, which involve using a
litter tray with an inert substrate from which the urine
can be obtained.
Collection and preservation of
urine samples
● Manual expression - this is convenient provided
the bladder contains sufficient urine to be isolated
Urine is potentially a hazardous substance and protective dis
manually on palpation of the abdomen. However, if
posable gloves should be worn during its collection and
strong resistance is encountered care must be taken to
analysis. Ideally, a sterile sample should be used but this can
prevent undue pressure rupturing the bladder. This is
only be obtained by catheterization.
especially true when dealing with male cats with a
potential urinary obstruction.
Collection of urine can be achieved by:
● Catheterization - involves the passage of a tube
● Free fow - a midstream overnight sample is best
aseptically into the urethra to collect urine directly
for routine urinalysis, as this is the best indicator of
from the bladder (see Ch. 18). This will provide a
the true composition of urine. The first stream of
sterile sample.
704
laboratory diagnostic aids
● Cystocentesis - involves the passage of a
Rabbit urine colour ranges from light yellow to orange
 needle through the abdominal wall and into the
and even red with brown coloration. Certain pigments
bladder.
m pson aq  p ade  e a 
haematuria.
Preservation
Odour
Ideally, examination of the urine sample should be per-
formed as soon as possible after collection, i.e. within an
Normal urine has a sourish odour. Ammonia can be
hour. If the sample is left, bacteria present in the sample will
detected in stale urine. Ammonia in freshly passed urine
cause decomposition of the urea and the production of
may be due to the presence of urease-producing bacteria,
ammonia. This, being alkaline, will elevate the pH of the
which are commonly involved in cystitis. Male animals,
sample, which in turn will facilitate the precipitation 
of
notably cats, produce very strong-smelling urine. This is
phosphates, which will interfere with subsequent testing. If
important in territorial scent marking. Animals suffering
testing is to be delayed, the sample should be refrigerated, not
from diabetes mellitus produce a sweet and fruity, pear-
frozenl.
drop-smelling urine because of the presence of ketone
bodies, e.g. acetone and acetoacetic acid. This can also be
Chemical preservatives can be used if refrigeration is not
smelt on the breath of such ketoacidotic animals.
available, including, formalin or thymol, but probably the
only one commonly used in practice is boric acid. This
will preserve and prevent the multiplication of bacteria for
Turbidity (cloudiness)
up to 4 days and will also preserve cells and urinary
casts. It is commercially available in red-capped specimen
Dog and cat urine is normally clear. However, if the urine is
containers.
allowed to stand it will become turbid because of phosphate
precipitation. Rabbit urine is normally turbid because of the
presence of calcium carbonate. Abnormal turbidity can arise
from the presence of mucus, pus and vaginal or prostatic
Physical properties of urine
secretions.
The physical properties should be observed initially.
including colour, odour, turbidity, pH and specific
pH
gravity.
This is the expression of the hydrogen ion concentration.
A pH above 7.0 is alkaline while a pH below 7.0 is acidic. False
results may occur if the sample is not kept cool and covered.
Colour
Urine pH is affected by diet: carnivorous animals have acid
urine while animals that eat a vegetarian diet have alkaline
The pigment urochrome is responsible for the colour of
urine.
normal urine. It is normally yellow and the depth of colour
indicates the concentration of the urine. There may be con-
Normal pH:
siderable variation in the depth of colour from almost colour-
less to a darkish brown. This variation depends on numerous
●Dog pH 5.2-6.8
3
factors, including concentration, diet, species, breed and
exercise regime.
●Cat pH 6.0-7.0.
Abnormal colours in dogs and cats can be due to:
Acidic urine may be due to pyrexia, acidosis, high-protein
● Presence of blood, haemoglobin or myoglobin -
diets, starvation, diabetes mellitus and muscle catabolism.
impart a red or pink colour to the urine
Alkaline urine may be due to urinary retention or infec.
● Bile pigments - colour the urine orange
tion, alkalosis, a high-vegetable-content diet or certain drugs.
● Drugs
 s 'saed hd aa p aa  Hd a
sticks or electrode pH meters, which are the most accurate
+ Food.
and reliable.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
705
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
The water is then cleaned away with a soft piece of tissue and
Specific gravity
a few drops of urine, at room temperature, are applied to the
This is the density or weight of a known volume of a fluid, i.e
prism surface. The specific gravity is then read off on the
urine compared with an equal volume of distilled water.
appropriate scale. If the reading goes off the scale, this means
 Distilled water has a specific gravity of 1.000.
that the urine is very concentrated; the sample should then
be diluted with an equal volume of distilled water and the
Normal specific gravity:
reading retaken. Multiplying the scale reading after the
 decimal point by 2 will give the correct final specific gravity
● D0g - 1.015-1.045
of the sample. Different refractometers have different scale
layouts displayed and the manufacturer's instructions should
● Cat - 1.020-1.040.
be consulted to ensure that the correct scale is read.
The specific gravity of urine varies considerably even in the
A refractometer can also be used to measure the refractive
same individual and a single measurement should not be
index of other liquids and enables the plasma protein level to
taken as conclusive.
  a oe   oads a s 
dip-stick methods but most are designed for human use and
Elevated specific gravity may be due to dehydration, acute
 are not very accurate.
renal failure, diabetes mellitus or shock.
Chemical tests
Lowered levels are seen in diabetes insipidus, chronic renal
failure or various causes of polydipsia
Many substances can interfere with the chemical testing of
urine, giving rise to erroneous results, e.g. concurrent med-
ication. It should also be borne in mind that the majority of
Measurement of specific gravity
 commercial strips are designed for measuring human param-
 An accurate measurement of specific gravity can be made by
eters. Test strips are available which test for varying numbers
the use of a refractometer (Fig. 31.10). This is an optical
of chemical substances in the urine (Table 31.1l). The
instrument that assesses the refractive index of fluids: the
BM-Test-8 can be used to test for nitrate, pH, protein,
higher the refractive index the higher the concentration of
glucose, ketone bodies, urobilinogen, bilirubin and blood in
urine, i.e. the specific gravity. This method requires only a
urine.
small volume of urine and is quick and easy to perform.
Use urine that is fresh, uncentrifuged and thoroughly mixed.
It is essential that the refractometer is initially calibrated with
The test strip must be briefly (no longer than 1 s), dipped into
distilled water before the specific gravity reading is taken. A
the sample and any excess wiped off on the rim of the con-
few drops of distilled water are placed on the face of the prism
tainer. After 60 s the colour changes should be compared with
and the cover plate is gently closed. The refractometer is held
the colour scales on the label and the results recorded.
up to the light and the scale is brought into focus by turning
Different brands of reagent strips will have different arrange-
the eyepiece. If the boundary line does not coincide with the
ments of the scales and timings, so the manufacturer's
1.000 line, adjustments are made with a small screwdriver
instructions should always be followed.
to the scale adjustment knob until the boundary line does
coincide with the 1.000 line.
To ensure that the most accurate results are obtained, the
following points should be followed:
4
Eyepiece
● Ensure the strips are in date and are stored at a
temperature not exceeding 30°C
Cover plate
(Acrylic disc)
● Close the container with the desiccant stopper
immediately after taking out a test strip
● Use only clean, well rinsed containers to collect the
urine, and preservatives should be avoided
 Scale adusting screw
Specific
Refractive
gravity
index
● Do not expose the urine sample to sunlight as this
Light
induces oxidation of bilirubin and urobilinogen,
Fig. 31.10 (a) A refractometer (b) Scate visible inside the eye-
which can lead to artificially low results for these two
piece, which must be calibrated before use
parameters
706
laboratory diagnostic aids
Table 31.11 Urinary chemical tests
Substance
Test
Normal parameters
Causes of elevated values
 Protein
Albustix
Commercial test strips in common use are
Pre-renal, e.g. haemolytic anaemia,
more sensitive to albumin and may
azotaemia, multiple myeloma and
underestimate the presence of other
congestive heart failure
proteins. These tests are not as sensitive
Renal, e.g. acute and chronic renal failure,
as those for protein in blood so a negative 
pyelonephritis and amyloidosis
result does not rule out the presence of
Post-renal, e.g. cystitis, urolithiasis,
haemoglobin or myoglobin in the urine
 prostatitis and vaginitis
20% sulphosalicylic acid test,
A trace reading for protein, which equates
which is more sensitive to
to 0.3 g/l, is of no clinical significance
 proteins other than albumen
Blood
Hemastix
Any positive result is significant other
Cystitis, associated infection of the urinary
than a bitch in pro-oestrus
tract, urolithiasis and acute nephritis
Glucose
Clinistix
The presence of glucose in urine,
Diabetes mellitus, chronic liver damage,
Clinitest not specific for
glucosuria, is always significant
Cushing's disease and hyperthyroidism
glucose but will detect any
reducing sugat, e.g. lactose, s0
always test first with Clinistix,
which is specific for glucose
Ketones
Ketostix
Any levels are significant
 Diabetes mellitus, starvation and liver
● False positives for blood and glucose can result from
● Myoglobinuria is the presence of myoglobin in the
residues of strongly oxidizing disinfectants in the
urine and is usually seen in muscle-wasting disease,
collecting container
e.g. myasthenia gravis.
● Excessive amounts of ascorbic acid can also interfere
with some of the tests, but this is unlikely to be
encountered in dogs and cats.
Microscopic examination of
Individual tests are available to detect chemical sub-
urine
stances in urine but these also have limitations on their
validity.
This provides useful information on various disease processes
that might be present.
Preparation of a wet preparation
Blood and blood pigments
1. Place 5 ml of a well mixed fresh urine sample into a
31
If dog or cat urine is coloured red it may be due to the
centrifuge tube and spin at 1500 rpm for 5 min
presence of blood, haemoglobin or myoglobin:
2. Discard the supernatant liquid, leaving the sediment
● Haematuria is the presence of whole blood in the
with a small amount of urine in the tube
urine
3. Resuspended the sediment by flicking the bottom of
● Haemoglobinuria is the presence of free
the tube
haemoglobin in the urine and may result from
 haemolytic anaemia, leptospirosis, poisoning and
4. An unstained wet preparation can be made, but
 autoimmune disease.
usually a stain is added to facilitate examination
of the sample. Stains such as 0.5% new methylene
To differentiate between the two, microscopic examination or
blue, or preferably Sedi-Stain, can be added to ease
centrifugation of the sample should be undertaken:
examination. Add 2 drops to the sample and mix well
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
707
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
5. Pipette a drop of the suspension on to a clean, labelled
 microscope slide and carefully place a coverslip on top
of the sample using a mounted needle
6. Examine the slide systematically under low power, x10
then x40. Only a small amount of light is needed so
the iris diaphragm should be partially closed
Hyaline
 Fine granular 
Leukocyte
Red blood cell 
7. To make a dry preparation, all the supernatant is
decanted and a small drop of the sediment is placed on a
microscope slide, covered by a coverslip and examined.
Various microscopic components can be identified in a
urinary sediment including the following:
Fatty
Waxy
 Mucus threads resembling casts
Epithelial cells
Fig. 31.11 Types of casts that may be found in urine
Flat, irregular squamous cells. Small numbers are normally
present
in mild inflammation of the tubules, poor circulation
Transitional cells
and pyrexia
Small, round polyhedral cells. Indicate cystitis or pyelo-
nephritis. Higher numbers are detected in catheterised
● Cellular casts - a variety of cells may be
samples, because of trauma to the urethra and bladder
incorporated into the casts:
● Erythrocytes - indicative of haemorrhage into the
Tubular epithelial cells
tubules
Small, cuboidal epithelial cells. Indicative of renal tubule
damage. Can be confused with white blood cells
●Leucocyte - indicate an inflammatory reaction
● Epithelial cells - indicate acute renal failure
Leucocytes
Usually neutrophils. The presence of large numbers is known
● Granular casts - these are hyaline casts containing
 as pyuria and suggests inflammation of the urogenital tract or
 granules that are remnants of degenerating leukocytes or
pyelonephritis
epithelial cells. The presence of large numbers of these
 casts are associated with renal failure, especially in the
dog
Red blood cells
 Large numbers are indicative of bleeding into the urogenital tract
● Waxy casts - these are more opaque and wider than
hyaline casts, with square rather than rounded ends.
They are found in chronic degenerative renal tubular
Casts
damage.
These are precipitated protein, which tend to form in the
distal convoluted tubules and collecting ducts of the
Casts being relatively large structures tend to be found
nephrons because of the acidic conditions in these regions
at the edges of the coverslip. They may be confused
(Fig. 31.1l). All the casts have a basis of protein that is
with hairs, fbres or mucus strands but these are thinner
moulded into the shape of the tubules. They are short
and longer than casts and are usually twisted strands.
cylinders, usually with one rounded and one broken end,
They are usually products of the lower urinary tract. They
although on occasion both ends may be rounded. Other
tend to dissolve in alkaline urine and easily break up on
materials may be incorporated into the basic protein matrix,
centrifugation.
resulting in different types of casts:
● Hyaline casts - clear, refractile, colourless and
Spermatozoa
cylindrical in shape. An increase in numbers is found
Commonly found in urine samples from male dogs.
708
 laboratory diagnostic aids
Bacteria, fungi and yeasts
Crystals
May be found as contaminants and their presence is
The presence of crystals can be associated with various clini-
 s n    s 
 cal conditions, e.g. urolithiasis, cystitis and haematuria, but 
leucocytes.
they can also be detected in apparently normal animals.
Table 31.12 Common urinary crystals
Appearance
Name/composition
pH of urine in which
crystals are deposited
Magnesium ammonium phosphate. Also
 Alkaline, but can occur at
known as triple phosphate or struvite
any pH
crystals. Coffin-lid-shaped
Struuite
Cystine. Large, flat hexagonal crystals
Acidic, but can occur at any
pH
Cystine
Calcium oxalate. Envelope-shaped,
Acidic, but can occur at any
31
 octahedral/pyramidal in shape
pH
Calciumoxalate
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
709
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
Table 31.12 Common urinary crystals--Cont'd.
Appearance
Name/composition
pH of urine in which
crystals are deposited
 Uric acid. Diamond or rhomboidal in
Acidic
shape
Uricacid
Ammonium urate. Thorn-apple'-shaped
Acidic
Ammoniumurate
Calcium phosphate
Alkaline, but occur at any
pH
Calcium phosphate
They are more likely to be found if freshly collected urine is
the solubility of the salts in the urine. Various conditions
allowed to stand. The presence of increased numbers of
can influence crystal production, including genetic pre-
crystals depends on the pH, concentration of the urine and
disposition, bacterial infection, diet, concurrent illnesses
710
laboratory diagnostic aids
and breed, e.g. Dalmatians excrete uric acid in their
 Occasionally, urinary crystals clump together to form calculi
urine, hence the relatively high incidence of uric acid
or stones. Calculi in the bladder are known as cystic calculi.
crystals in their urine (Table 31.12). Other less common
Those found in the urethra are known as uroliths. Chemical
crystals include silica, xanthine, bilirubin and crystals caused by
analysis of the calculi will identify the crystal and facilitate
drugs.
treatment and control of the condition, usually by adjusting
the pH of the urine.
Skin and hair
2. The sample site should be clipped, as contaminating
hair can make subsequent examination of the sample
difficult. The area should be moistened by liquid
Laboratory tests can prove invaluable in the diagnosis of
 paraffin, propylene glycol or 10% potassium hydroxide
many skin conditions. It is important, when handling
animals with skin disease, to avoid transmission of the con-
3. The skin is stretched between the thumb and
dition to humans (zoonosis) and cross-contamination of
s as e a   p 
blade until pinprick drops of blood are seen. This
worm, Cheyletiella and Sarcoptes. To reduce the risk, gloves
means that the full thickness of the epidermis has
 and aprons should be worn when handling suspect patients
been sampled, as there are no capillaries in the
and samples. The animal should be adequately restrained
epidermis and if capillary bleeding is observed then
while the samples are taken, as few people as possible should
the dermis must have been exposed. A drop of mineral
handle the patient and care should be taken to avoid contact
oil on the blade aids collection and prevents the skin
with other animals. The owner should also be made aware of
the risks and precautions that need to be taken to reduce
usually very painful
them.
4. The material should be transferred to a clean, labelled
microscope slide and a coverslip carefully applied
Sampling techniques
using a mounted needle. Prior to this, a few drops of
10% potassium hydroxide can be applied to the slide,
It is important that the correct sampling protocol is
which is then heated. This will clear the sample, i.e.
employed when investigating skin problems. These tech-
make it transparent, and facilitate subsequent
niques include:
examination. The sample should then be examined
under the microscope under low power x10 then
Skin scrapings
higher magnification if necessary. If there is to be a
delay in examination then the sample can be stored in
  si  d n n   si s
10% potassium hydroxide
formed in practice to diagnose parasitic skin conditions. It is
used to detect burrowing mites such as Sarcoptes scabei,
5. Demodex spp. require a more vigorous sampling
Notedres cati and Trixacarus caviae. Deeper scrapings will
method as they live deep within the hair follicles. The
skin is squeezed between the thumb and forefinger to
31
Malassezia yeasts (see also Chapter on Parasitology).
extrude material from the hair follicles. The area is
 as a  'sade azoo Aed n pdss
transferred to a microscope slide, as previously
Technique
described. The pustular lesions of Demodex can be
1. The area to be scraped should be selected carefully and
snd e no st an ssxa  pas a
several sites sampled. Any erythematous (reddened)
directly on to a microscope slide.
papules or scaly areas should be investigated, especially
the lateral aspect of the pinna, the elbows and the
6. When examining microscopic ectoparasites, e.g.
carpal region if Sarcoptes is suspected. Notedres is found
Sarcoptes and Demodex, remember that they are
mainly on the head of the cat, especially below the
 transparent, not solid as depicted in idealized
ears. Demodex tends in the early stages to be
diagrams. In fact they look as if they have been etched
concentrated on the head but as the infestation
on to the slide. This can cause confusion, as they may
progresses the whole body may be affected
not look like what is expected.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
¥711
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
Swabs
 Ringworm is a zoonosis, so adequate precautions should be
taken to reduce the risk of transmission of the disease to
Swabs can be taken for the pustular form of Demodex or ear
anyone handling the suspect patient and to other animals,
wax samples for evidence of Otodectes or Malassezia.
 including wearing protective clothing and gloves.
Tape impression
Presenting signs
This technique can be used to detect superficial parasites,
The major sign is alopecia with crusting and scaling. In the
surface bacteria and fungi. It is very useful for the
dog typical circular lesions are seen, which may coalesce into
identification of Cheyletiella spp. and Malassezia.
larger lesions. In the cat the fungus invades the hair follicles
and the lesions are more discrete. Sometimes only a few hairs
A strip of clear, colourless adhesive tape is placed
or a claw may be infected. The head and extremities are often
on the sample site then pulled away and transferred
the sites of the lesions.
to a microscope slide for subsequent microscopic exam-
ination.
Diagnosis
Wood's lamp
Hair brushings
This is an ultraviolet lamp that emits light of a wavelength of
This technique is used to detect surface ectoparasites.
365-366 nm. When the light is directed on to a hair or claw
affected with M. canis, ideally in a darkened room, it will emit a
The animal is placed on a white background and the coat is
characteristic yellowish green fluorescence, similar to that seen
brushed through with a fine-toothed comb to collect
 on a luminous clock dial. This is due to the presence of a
superficial debris. This can then be examined with a hand
fhuorescent metabolite produced by the fungus. However, it
lens or under the microscope for evidence of surface ecto-
must be remembered that only 60% of cases of M. canis show
parasites or their eggs.
this fluorescence, so the only significant result is a positive one.
A negative result does not mean that the animal does not have
ringworm, as it might have non-fluorescing M. canis or one of
Hair plucks
thie other species that do not fluoresce.
These can be used to identify parasitic eggs, e.g. lice,
It is important to warm up the Wood's lamp for 5-10 min
Cheyletiella, and ringworm.
before it is used, to ensure it is emitting the correct wave-
length of light and also to allow sufficient time when viewing
The hair samples should be plucked with forceps, not
an area to allow the fluorescence to develop. The examina
clipped. They are then examined under the microscope
tion should be undertaken in a darkened room to aid recog
and in the case of suspected ringworm they can also be cul.
nition of the fluorescence. The animal should be screened
tured.
thoroughly, including the nails. The eyes of the operator and
(For identification of individual parasites see Ch. 29.)
necessarily, as it can damage the eyes. Other substances, such
as cotton fibres, skin scales and petroleum jelly, can also
fluoresce and give false-positive results, but their fluorescence
Ringworm (dermatophytosis)
is bluish-white. It takes experience to be able to correctly
diagnose M. canis infections by this technique.
This is caused by a group of fungi known as dermatophytes
(see also Ch. 29). Those important in the dog and cat are:
Microscopic examination
● Microsporum canis - responsible for 70-80% of
Suspect hairs should be plucked, not clipped, from the edge of
cases in the dog and 90% of cases in cats
the lesion. If being examined under a Wood's lamp then
fluorescing hairs should be selected. The hairs should be trans-
● Microsporum gypseum - cccasionally encountered
ferred to a clean microscope slide and 10% potassium hydrox-
in dogs and cats
ide and 1-2 drops of lactophenol cotton blue stain added. A
coverslip should be applied and the sample gently heated to
● Trichophyton mentagrophytes - responsible for
clear it. The dye enhances the visibility of the spores. Some der-
 20% of cases in dogs and occasionally seen in cats.
matologists simply suspend the hair samples in mineral oil.
712
2 laboratory diagnostic aids
Microscopic examination of the arthroconidia  will confirm
the species identification. The easiest way of transferring the
Microsporum ca
arthroconidia to a microscope slide is by attaching a short length
n ns ni ssd p qs no s e po  an on adn no
surface of the fungal colony, then applying the tape sticky side
down to the surface of the slide. It can then be stained with lac-
tophenol cotton blue stain and examined under the microscope.
The arthroconidia of M. canis are thick-walled, boat-shaped and
have spines at the terminal end that may resemble a knob.
Those of T. mentagroprytes are cigar-shaped and thin-walled, and
the accompanying hyphae are spiral.
ychophyton mentagrophytes
Fig. 31.12 Fungat spores or arthroconidia atong a hair shaft
Yeasts
The most common species to affect dogs and cats are:
 The specimen is examined under low and then high power. It
can be useful to examine a normal hair for comparison.
● Malassezia spp. - can be cultured, by clipping the hair
Infected hairs appear broken and damaged. The cortex and
away from the sample site and pressing a culture plate
cuticle are irregular and have a fuzzy outline because of the
containing a malt-extract-agar-based medium on to the
presence of the branching hyphae and arthroconidia (spores).
skin for 10 s. The plates are then cultured at 32°C for
The arthroconidia of M. canis are small, bead-like and form a
3 days, when white glistening colonies will be seen and a
dense mosaic pattern on the outside (ectothrix) of the hair
 aq n s j an as sad o o
shaft. Those of T. mentagrophytes are larger and occur as sparse
chains (Fig. 31.12). Those of M. gypseum are much larger, less
● Candida albicans - this is a Gram-positive, yeast-like
numerous and in chains. Care should be taken not to confuse
fungus but is best stained with lactophenol cotton blue,
the melanin pigment found within the hair shaft with the
when it appears as oval cells showing budding. It will
fungal growth. The microscopic characteristics of the arthro-
 grow on all routine bacteriological media. On blood agar
 conidia can be used to identify the ringworm species.
 at 37°C small grey colonies appear after 2-3 days. On
Sabouraud's dextrose agar, large, cream-coloured colonies
This is probably the most reliable method of diagnosing a
 develop that have a yeasty odour.
dermatophyte infection.
Hair samples are plucked as described previously and placed
Body fluids and
 directly on to Sabouraud's dextrose agar or on to dermatophyte
test medium (DTM), which contains an indicator system to
tissues
detect dermatophyte species. In a positive culture the DTM
changes colour from yellow to red; this should occur within 3-5
days. The colonies should be checked daily. Non-pathogenic
fungi may produce false positives if the incubation period is
Various fluids and tissues can be analysed
prolonged. Samples on Sabouraud's dextrose agar should be
incubated at room temperature (25-27°C) for 10-14 days, but
Cerebrospinal fluid
3
on occasion this may take as long as 4 weeks.
Examination of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) can be very useful in
Colony characteristics:
diagnosing some neurological conditions. In the dog and cat
the normal sampling site is the cisterna magna at the articu-
● M. canis - flat, with a white, silky centre and a bright
lation between the atlas and the occipital bone. Occasionally.
yellow edge. The reverse side is yellow
the lumbosacral space is used.
● M. gypseum - flat brown, with a powdery irregular
fringe. The reverse side is yellow brown 
Technique
●I. mentagrophytes - flat, granular, tan-coloured or
1. The animal must be anaesthetized to prevent it
 heaped, white, cottony appearance. Reverse side is
moving during the procedure and placed in lateral
yellow-red.
recumbency with the neck flexed
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
713
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
Tissue samples, tumour and
2. Strict asepsis must be observed to prevent the
introduction of bacteria and contamination of the
abdominal organ biopsy
sample
A biopsy is a sample of tissue taken from a live animal
 3. The site should be prepared as for a surgical
for histopathological examination. Various techniques are
procedure
available including excision, incision, punch, needle and
endoscopic biopsies (see Ch. 23).
4. A 20-22 FG spinal needle is carefully inserted and
advanced into the subarachnoid space until a sudden
decrease in resistance is felt and CsF wells up in the
needle hub
Preservation
5. CSF is allowed to drip into an EDTA and a plain
It is important to preserve specimens, as the cells will rapidly
container. The first few drops are discarded, as they
undergo autolysis - the digestion of a tissue by its own
often contain mild blood contamination. Suction
enzymes
should not be applied. It is possible to collect
1 ml/5 kg body weight safely.
Various preservatives are available:
● 10% formalin - this is a 40% solution of
formaldehyde gas
Synovial fluid
● 10% formol saline - made by diluting formalin
This is collected by arthrocentesis from a joint to investigate
 in a saline solution. It is the solution most commonly
any joint problems, including arthritis. Depending on the
used
temperament and the degree of pain a local or general anaes-
thetic may need to be administered. Aseptic procedures
● 10% neutral buffered formalin - also a 10%
should be observed. Only a relatively small volume of fluid
solution of formalin but buffered to protect against
will be obtained and should be initially collected into a plain
changes in pH and tends to be used in anatomical
sample bottle.
 display specimens
● Alcohol - may be used but causes excessive shrinkage
and hardness.
Thoracic fluid
Formalin in its various formulations is a hazardous substance as
Normally the thoracic fluid only contains sufficient fluid to
it gives off formaldehyde, a gas that is irritant to the eyes and
lubricate the thoracic organs and the parietal pleura. Certain
mucous membranes. It is important that Health and Safety and
clinical conditions can result in accumulation of fluid, of dif
COSHH regulations are followed and protective clothing is
ferent types, in the thorax, e.g. hydrothorax, pyothorax,
used, including protective glasses, when handling these sub
haemothorax. The collection of fluid from the thorax, fhora-
stances. Ensure any procedures are carried out in a well venti
cocentesis, can help to determine the nature of the fluid and
lated room. Formalin is a strong antiseptic and disinfectant that
aid in the diagnosis. Collection is performed aseptically into
will preserve tissues by 'fixing' or hardening them.
EDTA and plain tubes.
Important facts to consider when preserving tissues are:
● It takes a long time for formalin to penetrate tissues so
Abdominal fluid
ensure the tissue samples are thin wedges
In certain clinical conditions fluid accumulates in the
● Use plenty of formalin, i.e. at least 10 times the
abdomen, i.e. ascites, and can be collected by an abdo-
volume of tissue to be fixed
minal paracentesis. Aseptic collection is usually performed
at the most dependent part of the ventral midline of
● Try and take a sample from the junction between
the abdomen in the standing animal. Some of the sam-
healthy and diseased tissue, especially with tumours
ple is transferred to an EDTA tube for cytology while the
and excision biopsies. The presence or absence of a
rest is placed in plain sample tubes for biochemistry or
capsule can help to determine if the tumour is benign
bacteriology.
or malignant, which will influence the prognosis
714
 laboratory diagnostic aids
● Use wide-necked sample bottles that allow easy
Virological samples
removal of the fixed sample
Obviously, the ideal method of virus identification is the iso.
● Label the container to identify the specimen
lation and growth of the virus in tissue culture. However, this
is time-consuming, expensive and, as the number of viruses
● Ensure that the sample bottles are robust and not
is so vast, only research institutes can offer this service. Some
easily broken, and are sealable to prevent leakage
of the common viral diseases can now be diagnosed in prac
tice by ELISA tests. These do not involve growing the virus
● Do not send whole organs but small representative
but employs the reaction between an antibody and a specific
samples
antigen to indicate the presence of the virus.
● Body fluids can be preserved by making a fixed smear
It is important when sending virological samples to ascertain
or by adding a drop of formol saline to 1 ml of
which particular type of sample the laboratory requires.
fluid. This will preserve the morphology of any cells
These may be blood, nasopharyngeal aspirates, bronchoalve-
present
olar lavage samples, swabs, faeces, body fluids, organn smears
and ocular discharges. The sample required will depend on
● Samples should not be frozen, as this damages the
the viral disease being investigated, as will the method of
cells.
sampling and despatch (see also Ch. 30).
Bibliography
Toxicological examination
Bush B M 1975 Veterinary laboratory manual.Heinemann,
Toxicological samples should be sent to a commercial labora-
London
tory for analysis. It is always advisable to ensure that the lab-
oratory is able to perform the tests that are required and the
Bush B M 1991 Interpretation of laboratory results for small
precise nature of the samples required. Usually, from live
animal clinicians. Blackwell Science, Oxford
animals these are blood, faeces, urine and vomit. Samples
from dead animals should include blood, urine, stomach and
Davidson M (ed.) 1998 Manual of small animal pathology. British
 intestinal contents, liver and kidney.
Small Animal Veterinary Association. Cheltenham
Freeman W H, Bracegirdle B 1980 An advanced atlas of histology.
Protocol
Heinemann, London
● Specimens should be collected free from contaminants,
Kerr M G 2002 Veterinary laboratory medicine, 2nd edn.Blackwell
Science, Oxford
of the contamination should be sent in a separate
container
Recommended reading
● Each sample should be placed in a separate sterile,
labelled container
Knottenbelt C M, Busby W 1999 Laboratory tests. In: Moore M,
Simpson G (eds) Manual of veterinary nursing. Briish Small
3
● Unless samples are to be examined histologically,
Animal Veterinary Association. Oxford
samples should be frozen and despatched with ice
This chapter covers a wide range of laboratory procedures in a well
● The samples should be sealed and an identical unused
illustrated and easy-to-read manner.
container should be sent to the laboratory
Papasouliotis K 2002 Atlas of canine haematology. Nova
● Preservatives should be avoided. If necessary,
Professional Media, Oxford
alcohol should be used and a sample from the same
supply should be sent, as a control, in a separate
A super litfle book that describes normat blood cell morphotogy in
container
the dog and includes many coloured photographs. It atso includes
normal ranges of values, haematological definitions and tech-
● Accurate records must be kept, as evidence may be
niques. Other tifles in the range cover feline and equine haematol-
needed for possible litigation.
ogy. They are also quite reasonably priced.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
715
31
Laboratory diagnostic aids
Pratt P W (ed.) 1992 Laboratory procedures for veterinary
A very informative book for shudents undertaking their Level 3
technicians, 2nd edn. American Veterinary Pubtications, Santa
RCVS quatification. It gives clear well illustrated information on
Barbara, CA
all aspects of the syllabus to enable shudents to be successfiul in
their examinations.
Although aimed at the American market, this is a very useful
book. It describes a wide range of laboratory procedures in a simple
Wilkinson G T 1985 A colour atlas of small animal dermatogra-
descriptive manner and is well illustrated throughout. It atso
phy. Wolfe, London
contains information on large animats, including horses.
Contains an excellent chapter on ectoparasitic conditions with
   N      ()  
brilliantcotourphotographs.
nurses, 2nd edn. Pastest, Knutsford
716
laboratory diagnostic aids
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
Suzanne Easton
Key Points
● The production of an image of an affected area of the
● The Ionising Radiation Regulations 1999 detail all the
body is a useful diagnostic tool and can be achieved by
measures that must be taken to reduce the dangers of
radiography, ultrasound, nuclear scintigraphy, computed
radiation and ensure the safety of personnel within a
tomography and magnetic resonance imaging.
veterinary practice.
● Radiography is the most common method and makes use
● The latent image formed by the passage of X-rays 
 of the fact that X-rays, which are part of the
through the patient to the flm is made into a permanent
 electromagnetic spectrum, will create a permanent image
radiographic image by the developing process. This may
on radiographic film.
be achieved by using developing and fxing chemicals
● X-rays are produced by an X-ray tube as a result of
within developing tanks or within an automatic
fast-moving electrons released from the cathode colliding
processor.
with a tungsten anode or target.
● Correct and accurate positioning of the patient will
● The exposure used to produce a diagnostic image is
produce an image from which a diagnosis can be made.
controlled by the milliamperage (mA), which affects
● Contrast media, which may be either negative (i.e. gas)
the number of electrons produced from the cathode and
or positive (i.e. barium or iodine preparations), can be
thus the quantity of the X-rays produced, and the
used to highlight soft tissues not otherwise visible on
kilovoltage (kv), which affects the speed at which the
plain radiographs.
electrons move from the cathode to the anode and thus
● Ultrasound uses high-frequency sound waves that are
the force with which they hit the anode. This affects
 sent into the body by a transducer and, when reflected
the penetrating power or quality of the X-rays
from interfaces between the tissues, are collected by the
produced.
transducer and an image forms on a computer screen. It
● The X-ray beam may be absorbed by the tissues of the
can be used to demonstrate soft tissues, which are not 
patient, pass straight through to reach the flm or be
 always clearly visible on radiographs, and is painless and
 deflected in a different direction with a loss of energy.
non-invasive.
This deflected radiation is known as scatter.
● Computed tomography and nuclear scintigraphy use
 Scattered radiation is the main danger of radiography and
radiation to create an image, which thus presents safety
can be reduced by the use of a grid, accurate collimation,
problems, while magnetic resonance imaging uses a
reducing the thickness of the tissue and reducing the
combination of a strong magnetic feld and radio waves,
voltage as much as possible.
so safety is less of an issue.
Introduction
thorough understanding of the underpinning physical prin-
ciples and the practical aspects involved in creating a useful
 diagnostic image.
There is no doubt that diagnosis is made easier by the pro-
duction of 'pictures' of the affected area within the body and
nowadays we take it for granted that we are able to do this in
several ways. Radiography has been available for many years
and is the method used by the majority of veterinary prac.
tices. In recent years, veterinary surgeons have become
32
Tes
oq on ps o a a  pdxa sn
large and small animals and it has the advantage of being
radiograp
non-invasive and much safer for personnel involved in the
process. Other less common techniques include computed
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Physics for radiography
scans. Each technique has its advantages and disadvantages,
and in order for veterinary nurses to be able to make a con-
All solids, liquids and gases are composed of elements, or
tribution to the procedure it is important that they have a
 materials that cannot be broken down into something else.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
717
23
Principles of diagnostic imaging
Anatom
Table 32.1 Details of the particles within an atom
Particle
Position
Charge
Symbol
Proton
In nucleus
Positive
+
Neutron
In nucleus
Neutral
Proton (positive)
Electron
 Orbiting nucleus
Negative
ing electrons are always negatively charged (Table 32.1). The
electrons orbit the nucleus in shellis. Each shell can hold a
Neutron (neutral)
certain number of electrons. The shell nearest the nucleus
Nucleus
will always fill first, working outwards until all the electrons
are contained in a shell. If a shell is not completely full it will
 be the outermost shell and this will be where any interactions
take place. For the atom to be stable the outermost shell
should be full. The number of electrons should be equal to
the number of protons. The number of protons is unique to
Electron (negative)
each element.
Fig. 32.1 Structure of an atom
 In radiography the electrons are used in various ways in the
 production of X-rays and play an important role in the inter-
 actions of X-rays within the body.
The details of all elements known are recorded in the periodic
Electromagnetic spectrum
table, which gives full details of every element.
X-rays are part of the electromagnetic spectrum. This is com-
Every element is made up of atoms (Fig. 32.1). These atoms
posed of energy waves. Contained within the electro-
contain a nucleus, composed of neutrons and protons, sur-
magnetic spectrum are radio waves, ultraviolet light, visible
rounded by orbiting elecirons. Protons are always positively
light and cosmic rays, as well as X-rays and gamma rays
charged; neutrons are neutral and have no charge. The orbit-
(Fig. 32.2).
Electromagnetic spectrum
10 cm
10-2 cm
104 cm
10-6 cm
109 cm
10-13 cm
1km
Wavelength
High energy
Visible
Microwave
Xray
Radio
Infrared
Ultraviolet
Gamma ray
Fig. 32.2 The electromagnetic spectrum
718
 Principles of diagnostic imaging
Every wave has a different wavelength and fequency. The
An electric charge will always move from negative to positive.
wavelength is the distance from the peak of one wave to the
Like charges will repel each other, unlike charges will attract
peak of the next. The frequency is the number of peaks
each other. If electrons are able to move easily through the
  si e ns a hd s e s
atoms or material then the material is a conductor. If the elec-
hertz (Hz). 1 Hz is equal to 1 cycle per second. X-rays have a
trons cannot move freely or easily then the material is an
short wavelength and high frequency.
insulator. All electrical charges have a potential energy and,
when released the electrons move through a material, the
When electromagnetic radiation is emitted, whether it is
energy generated can be used. This electrical potential is
from the sun or an X-ray tube, the intensity will decrease as
measured in volts (V).
the distance from the source increases. This is known as the
inverse square law. This is useful in radiation protection. The
An electric current is formed when electrons flow through a
further away from the X-ray tube you can get, the lower the
conductor. If the electrons flow in one direction, then a direct
intensity of X-rays reaching the body and causing damage
current (DC) is generated. If the electrons go in alternating
directions, then an alternating current (AC) is formed.
Electrical energy
The production of X-rays is dependent on the provision of
X-ray tube construction
 i         
duced as the electrons of an atom move from the outer shell
Tube structure
of one atom to the outer shell of the adjacent atom. This can
be done in three main ways:
The X-ray tube produces the X-rays and is composed of a
Pyrex tube surrounding the anode and cathode (Fig. 32.3)
● Friction - electrons build up as two objects are
The tube contains a vacuum to prevent unwanted interac-
rubbed together
tions during the production of the X-rays. The anode and
 cathode both have a high-tension electrical supply, providing
● Contact - if two suitable materials make contact,
the direct current necessary to generate X-rays. The Pyrex
electrons will flow
u jo dn-pmq a iuaaad on lo oq papnons si aq
and lead to prevent X-rays from passing straight out of
● Induction - this uses the electrical field of a charged
the tube. The entire structure is surrounded by a lead case,
 rd    e  m og
within which is a small window directly under the anode
object.
to allow the primary beam to exit the tube. The window
Rotating anode
Rotor
32
Glass envelope
 Filament (cathode)
Window
Target (anode)
 Focusing cup
Fig. 32.3 X-ray tube structure
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
719
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
has a small aluminium filter to remove any low-energy.
of the radiation emitted from the X-ray tube. The effective
undesirable X-rays from the primary beam, improving its
focal spot that is emitted from the tube will alter depending
quality.
on the angle of the target. This angle is usually between 70
and 20°. As the angle of the target increases, so the effective
size of the focal spot increases.
The cathode
The cathode is the negative part of the X-ray tube (Fig. 32.3)
X-ray production
The cathode is made up of the filament and focusing cup. The
filament is a very small piece of wire and is heated to produce
The production of X-rays takes place as the exposure button
electrons in a similar way to the heating filament in a toaster.
is fully depressed. In two-stage exposure buttons, the first
The filament is made of tungsten, which has a very high
stage 'preps' the machine, heating the cathode and starting
melting point. In dual-focus X-ray tubes the cathode has
the rotation of the anode; the second stage produces the X-
two filament wires. If broad focus is selected, the longer
rays, enabling the exposure to be made (Fig. 32.4). The expo-
(0.4-1.3 mm) of the two wires will be used; if fine focus is
 sure will be terminated immediately if finger pressure on the
selected the shorter (0.1-0.4 mm) wire will be selected
 button is released:
The focusing cup surrounds the filament wire. The function of
● During the first stage the filament at the cathode is
the focusing cup is to stream the electrons in a narrow band
heated and the milliamperage selected determines the
towards the anode when an exposure is made. The electrons
amount of heating. The higher the milliamperage, the
are negatively charged, as is the focusing cup. The focusing
higher the heat and the more electrons produced.
cup will repel the electrons to the centre, ensuring that they
Heating releases electrons from the surface of the
flow in a narrow band and do not spread out. This ensures
filament wire. The electrons collect in the focusing
that the electrons fall within the target of the anode and do
cup. These electrons contain electrical potential and,
not extend beyond its boundaries.
when a charge is applied, will flow from negative to
positive (i.e. cathode to anode)
The anode
● During the second stage, a potential difference is
applied between the cathode and anode, ensuring that
The anode is the positive part of the X-ray tube (Fig. 32.3).
the electrons flow to the anode. This is achieved by
The anode may be stationary or rotating, depending on
applying a kilovoltage selected when setting the
whether it remains in one place or rotates during exposure.
exposure factors. The higher the kilovoltage selected,
Stationary anodes are usually found in dental machines and
the faster the electrons will move towards the target,
smaller portable machines. In general machines the anode
resulting in higher-energy X-rays. The electrons are
rotates. This allows for the production of high-quality X-rays
accelerated from the cathode to the anode and as they
in a very short period of time, with reduced damage when
strike the target they are stopped. This sudden braking
compared to stationary anodes using similar exposure factors.
results in the electrons changing into X-rays, which
are then released from the X-ray tube through the
The anode conducts electrons away from the tube to the gen-
window.
erator, provides support for the target and removes excess
heat from the tube. The process of X-ray production results in
99% heat and 1% actual X-rays. The heat must be removed to
prevent the anode from melting.
Filament
mA applied 
Electrons produced
The target is the area that the electrons strike. In a rotating
tube this is a disc around the entire circle of the target disc.
As the target rotates, so the area that the electrons strike
Electrons accelerated
ky applied between
changes, increasing the area that the electrons can strike and
across tube
cathode and anode
increasing the lifespan of the tube. If the anode is stationary
the whole surface is the target.
Heat and X-rays
The target is made of tungsten alloy embedded in a copper
 Electrons hit target 
 produced
anode. In some tubes the target is supported on molybdenum
 or graphite to make tube rotation easier. The area actually hit
Fig. 32.4 The production of X-rays. Flow diagram from Easton
by the electrons is called the focal spot and this is the source
2000 page 44
720
0 Principles of diagnostic imaging
 If a new table or X-ray tube support is purchased and the
Exposure factors
distance has to be altered, then the mAs must be adjusted
The exposure factors selected will alter the resultant image
to allow for the change. This can be calculated using the
 dramatically. The factors that can be altered are the amperage
following equation:
(mA), time (seconds), voltage (kV) and distance.
Old mAs × (new distance2/old distance?) = new mAs.
Amperage
  e      n 
Exposure charts
cathode and changes the quantity of X-rays produced, which
affects the density or degree of blackening of the film. As the
Exposure charts should be kept wherever possible. The use
amperage increases, so the number of electrons and ulti-
 and provision of an exposure chart is outlined in the Ionising
mately the number of X-rays produced increases. If the
Radiation Regulations 1999 and by referring to it you should
amperage is inadequate the film will appear grey, even in
achieve accurate, reproducible exposures and reduce the need
areas where there is no patient to penetrate. In some very
a uas arnsodxa panooul jo asneaq ansodxa jeadai no
large animals it may be necessary to increase the amperage, to
chart may be taken from a purpose-designed book or kept in
produce enough X-rays to blacken the film, as well as the
your own preruled columns; but whichever method is used
voltage, to ensure adequate penetration.
the exposure chart should always contain the following
details:
Time
● Patient breed/size/weight
When setting exposure factors, it is essential to determine a
period of time (in seconds) over which to allow the produc-
● Projection, i.e. position
tion of X-rays to take place. In the ideal world the time
should be as short as possible. This allows limited time for
●Distance
patient movement to occur as even breathing or heart move-
 ments can produce blurring on the radiographic image:
● Voltage
 a   n s  n   
● mAs
combined to provide one exposure factor known as
the mAs. When setting the mAs, the time should be as
● Film screen combination
low as possible and the amperage should be as high as
possible, i.e. mA x time(s) = mAs.
● Grid (if used).
If there is more than one X-ray tube or grid in use, then
Voltage
 specific details should be given to avoid confusion. The expo-
The voltage alters the speed at which the electrons accelerate
sure chart should be regularly updated. Patients vary in size
across the tube and strike the target. The faster the electrons
and a 15 kg bulldog has different exposure needs from a
 n   d     n 
15 kg border collie. Consider the area of interest and the
ant X-rays. The voltage of the beam affects the conirast of the
 patient's conformation before automatically setting what has
image, i.e. the difference between black and white. If a
 been listed in the exposure chart. If barium sulphate is used
      n   a  h
for an examination, the voltage must be increased to coun-
 X-rays do not overpenetrate and cause the image to be very
teract the X-ray absorption by barium due to its high atomic
dark.
number. If this is not done, the high contrast generated will
provide a suboptimal image.
Distance
32
The focal distance of the film is the distance (usually meas.
ured in centimetres) from the target (or source of the X-rays)
Effects of radiation
to the film, and changing it has an effect on the image
created. It is usually around 1o0 cm and should remain con-
stant, as altering it between patients will cause confusion. As
Properties of X-rays
the distance increases, so the intensiry of the X-ray beam
reaching the patient decreases, resulting in underexposed
X-rays are part of the electromagnetic spectrum and have a
films. This is expressed as the irverse square law.
wide range of properties which may affect their use:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
721
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
● Direction of travel - X-rays will always travel in
● Absorption - as the X-rays pass through the patient
 straight lines, giving a true representation of the
they may be stopped or slowed down by the tissues in
patient or objects they pass through. The only time
the patient. If a tissue is very dense, e.g. bone, then
they can change direction is if they collide with an
the X-rays will be stopped - the tissue is described as
atom, which may degrade the image
being radiopaque. If a tissue is much less dense, e.g.
lung, it will not stop the X-rays and they will pass
● Ionization - X-rays can interact with tissues and
through - the tissue is described as being radiolucent.
cause ionization, which occurs when atoms become
The amount of absorption depends on the atomic
positively charged through the loss of an electron in
number of the tissue. The higher the atomic number
the outer shell. This fact is used to form the image on
the more absorption that will occur. For example, bone
the film and is the effect that causes absorption of the
 is mainly composed of calcium and has a higher
X-rays within the body. However, ionization can cause
atomic number than lung tissue, which is composed of
damage to cells, including burns and the induction of
a high proportion of air; bone absorbs more X-rays
cancer, and is the reason for the need for radiation
 an  aa sd p ss n 
protection
while lung tissue appears black (Fig. 32.5)
● Penetration - X-rays are able to pass through most
● Photographic effect - X-rays interact with the silver
types of solid matter and this is used in radiography to
halides within the X-ray film to form an image. They
form an image on a film. If the amount of matter is
also cause certain phosphors to emit light or fluoresce,
increased, the X-rays will eventually be absorbed and
the principle used in intensifying screens. Within
stopped. The denser the object the more easily the
radiographic film, the more X-rays that strike the silver
X-rays will be stopped. This property is used in
halide crystals the greater the reaction and the whiter
radiation protection
the appearance on the processed radiograph.
● Divergence - as the X-ray beam travels from the
target it will lose intensity and will also spread out,
Scattered radiation
following the inverse square law. This is used in
radiation protection to reduce the risk and should be
Scattered radiation or 'scatter is the reduction in energy of
considered when setting the focal film distance, to
the primary beam and movement of X-rays in a different
ensure consistent radiographs
direction after interaction with matter. It may have a detri-
mental effert on the resultant image as it darkens the film
causing 'fogging and is also a major factor in the need for
radiation protection. As the X-rays have lost energy they are
more likely to be absorbed than the primary beam which
 passes straight through with minimal absorption.
Sources of scattered radiation
Scatter is caused whenever X-rays interact with matter and
this increases:
● As the patient or the region under
investigation gets thicker - i.e. the thicker the 
body part the more chance there is for the X-rays to
Air
Fat
Water
Bone
Metal
interact with the electrons within the patient and
result in scatter
● If the collimator is not used effectively - The
larger the area irradiated the more chance there
 is of the X-ray photons interacting and being
scattered
● With the use of higher voltages - these produce
Fig. 32.5 Difference in absorption shown by different types of
X-rays with higher energy, which will have detrimental
tissue
effects on the image. This scattered radiation is also
722
2 Principles of diagnostic imaging
more likely to travel in a forward direction and reach
Primary beam
the film, causing fogging.
Control of scattered radiation
Scattered radiation should be minimized to increase radiation
protection and to prevent it from affecting the film and
degrading the image. This can be done in a number of
ways:
● If the thickness of a patient is very large the area
Scatter
Scatter
under examination can be compressed to reduce the
amount of tissue that the X-rays have to pass through,
reducing the chances for interaction to occur. This is
especially useful in abdominal radiography of the
larger patient. A compression band placed across the
abdomen will reduce the thickness, improving contrast
and reducing scatter
Grid
● Collimation of the primary beam will reduce the
area exposed to radiation, which improves safety,
reduces the volume of tissue exposed and reduces
scatter. Collimation will improve image quality and
contrast. It is achieved through the use of a collimator
-Lead strips
or light beam diaphragm, usually on the tube head
Interspaced
mounting. This is constructed of a box containing a
series of mirrors and a light source. The mirrors and
light allow a beam of light to be projected on to the
patient, which represents the area and position of the
Film
primary beam. The area of primary beam can be
Fig. 32.6 Function of a grid
reduced using bevelled lead leaves within the
collimator
● Reducing the voltage as much as possible, while
still achieving a diagnostic image, will also reduce
radiolucent interspace, usually aluminium or carbon
scatter.
plastic fibres (Fig. 32.6) The interspacer allows the
primary beam to pass through to the film but any
As well as reducing the amount of scattered radiation pro-
scattered radiation hitting the lead strips will be
 duced, it is also important to reduce the amount reaching the
absorbed, preventing it from reaching the film and
film and thus decreasing the image quality. This can be
causing fogging. The lead strips will also absorb some
achieved in two ways:
of the primary beam and the exposure factors must be
increased to compensate for this.
● The air gap technique - useful when imaging large
animals such as horses, as scatter will result in
The grid has a grid ratio, i.e. the ratio of the height of the lead
magnification and ‘unsharpness' of the image. The aim
strips to the distance between them. This is used to calculate
is to increase the object film distance {i.e. the distance
the grid factor, i.e. the amount by which the mAs must be
between the patient and the film), so that the scatter
increased to compensate for the effects of the grid. The grid
232
generated within the patient is not able to reach the
factor is usually between 2 and 6 and will be marked on
film and form an image
the grid.
● Grids - efficient tools in the reduction of scattered
New mAs (when using a grid)= old mAs (without a grid) ×
radiation reaching the film. They are able to remove
grid factor.
85-95% of all scattered radiation, depending on the
type used. A grid is constructed of alternating strips of
The grid must be placed between the patient and the film.
 a material able to absorb radiation, e.g. lead, and a
There are a number of different types of grid:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
723
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
● Parallel grid - this is the most common type in use
Radiation protection in practice
in veterinary practice and is usually stationary, i.e. it
does not move. It is the easiest to use and as long as
In practice radiation protection involves reducing the dose
 ns p q d  on h e si  a
used to produce the radiograph and the dose to staff. Within
will produce a good result
a practice the radiation protection supervisor (RPs) will
ensure that local rules described in the IRR are adhered to and
● Potter-Bucky grids - parallel grids are sometimes
that the regulations are implemented. They are helped by a
integrated into the X-ray table and move rapidly from
radiation protection advisor (RPA), who is from outside the
side to side with the aid of a small motor. This
practice and who will set up the local rules and ensure that
movement eliminates the very fine lines usually visible
the practice maintains a high standard of safety.
when a stationary grid is used.
Basic measures to reduce dose include suitable collimation at
all times and the use of intensifying screens, eliminating the
Radiation safety
need for high exposure factors. The dose to staff should be
Radiation can be harmful to those working with it and
Table 32.2 Methods by which the dangers of
the use of radiation to form a diagnosis should be mini-
 radiation may be reduced in practice
mised. The risk of exposure to radiation should be balanced
by the benefits of forming a diagnosis. All examinations
Method of reduction
How it works
must be clinically justified and the safety of the radio
Avoid the primary beam
The primary beam is the most intense
grapher and anyone else around should always be the first
part of the X-ray beam. If you must
priority.
stay in the room, you should be at
least 2 m away. The primary beam
should never be directed at the lead
The effects of radiation
screen within the room or at the door.
 X-rays will interact with the tissues within the human body,
Even when wearing lead gloves, hands
should never be placed in the primary
causing ionization in which the tissue molecules can be
beam
broken or damaged. This process may cause the cells to
damage each other, or the X-ray itself may damage the cells
Avoid manual restraint
Patients should not be manually
or DNA within the body. The body is capable of repairing
restrained unless there is no
the damage, but sometimes it may be so severe that repair
alternative. With the use of modern
is impossible and the cells will die. Rapidly dividing and
drugs for sedation or anaesthesia, pads
developing cells are most susceptible and most likely
and the use of positioning aids, a
to be damaged, e.g. hair, nails, the cells of young people or
diagnostic image can be produced in
developing foetuses. The most common effect of damage
most patients without the need for
 is called a stochastic effect. This can happen with any level
personnel to hold them
of radiation but the incidence increases as the level of
Lead protection
Lead aprons and thyroid shields should
 exposure increases and it results in damage and mutation to
be used whenever an individual needs
the cells.
to remain in the X-ray room. Lead
aprons will only protect effectively
against scattered radiation and the
Safety legislation
2 m rule should be remembered.
Attempts should always be made to
The use of ionizing radiation is carefully controlled in the UK
leave the room or use a lead screen to
and is laid down in guidelines governed by the lonising
hide behind rather than remaining in
Radiation Regulations 1999 (IRR; see also Ch. 3). These regu-
the room during exposure
  a os  sd   so
Restricting access
Always ensure that the doors to the
when using sources of radiation, how exposure to patients
X-ray room are closed. This will prevent
should be minimised, and the measures radiographers and
people wandering into the room,
employers should take to ensure optimal safety at all times.
disturbing the patient and potentially
The ALARP principle, i.e. ' as low as reasonably practicable', is
being exposed to radiation. By closing
the basis for these regulations and should be remembered at
the doors any scattered radiation will
 all times. If these regulations are not followed individuals
be contained within the room
may be prosecuted.
724
4 Principles of diagnostic imaging
 reduced as much as possible and there are a number of very
toring devices, in the form of either badges containing film or
easy ways this can be achieved (Table 32.2).
thermoluminescent dosimeters. These should always be worn
on the trunk of the body, under any lead protection, and
should be looked after according to the supplier's instruc-
Dosimetry
tions. They should be returned to the supplier at regular
All individuals exposed to radiation should be monitored by
intervals so that the dose received can be read and recorded.
the use of dosimeters, which measure the dose of radiation
 If an individual has received more than the maximum per-
received by the body. Every radiographic procedure will result
missible dose, it may be recommended that that person is
in a dose being received by the patient and potentially by the
taken off radiography work for a few months and changes
radiographer if they remain in the room. The staff dose
may need to be made to the practice. It is unlikely that a
should be monitored and recorded through the use of moni-
veterinary nurse will ever reach this dose level.
Recording the image
either side of the polyester base, which increases its efficiency.
resulting in a lower radiation dose to the patient. Single-sided
film has an active side and a protective, counterbalanced side
The image created by the X-rays passing through the patient
to prevent curling (Table 32.3).
and reaching the film must be able to be recorded for diag-
nostic use and stored for many years. Recording the image
requires the use of film and intensifying screens.
Care and storage of X-ray film
X-ray film should be stored for the minimum amount of time
Radiographic film
and not beyond the expiry date. Stock should be rotated so
that the oldest is used first. Ideally, small orders should be
Radiographic film is sensitive to both light and X-rays. The
 placed frequently to maintain optimal film quality.
film is used to receive X-rays that have passed through the
patient and convert them into a latent image. This is then
All films should be handled carefully and stored vertically
 converted into a visible or radiographic image during process-
to prevent pressure marks occurring. These appear as black
ing. The film is also sensitive to light, which may reach the
crescents if created during handling and black lines if created
film intentionally from the intensifying screens or uninten-
during storage.
tionally from exposure to daylight.
The room used for film storage should be well ventilated,
X-ray film is made up of a number of layers, all providing
with a temperature within the range given on the film box by
a vital role in the composition and function of the film
the manufacturers. It is not ideal to store the film in the same
(Fig. 32.7). It may be described as being either duplitised or
room as open processing chemicals or anywhere that may be
single-sided. In duplitised film the layers are duplicated on
exposed to radiation.
A Cross section through Duplitised flim
B Cross section through Single sided flim
Emulsion
 Emulsion
Subbing layer
Subbing layer
Base
Base
 Subbing layer
Subbing layer
Emulsion
Anti-halation/
non-curl
backing
Fig. 32.7 Fitm structure (a) Cross section through duplitised fim (b) Cross section through singte-sided fim
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
725
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
Table 32.3 Structure of radiographic film
Film speed
Layer
Film type
Structure and 
function
Film speed is defined as the sensitivity of the film to light or
radiation and is related to the density, i.e. degree of blackening
Base
 Single-sided 
Made of polyester
of the image. Film speed is dependent on the size of the silver
Duplitised
 Clear plastic to allow transmission
halide crystals in the emulsion and the thickness of the emul-
of light
sion. Fast films require less exposure than slow films to produce
Flexible to allow handling
the same density of film. As the film speed increases, so the
Does not react to chemicals
density of the image increases. If the same density of image is
required then it is the mAs that must be changed if the film
Subbing layer
Single-sided
Provides adhesive to attach the
speed is changed, i.e. if a faster film is used, reduce the mAs to
Duplitised
 emulsion to the base layer
produce a similar diagnostic image. However, fast films produce
Emulsion 
 Single-sided -
Composed of gelatin impregnated
an image with poorer definition, while slow films, which
one emulsion 
with silver halide crystals. Silver
require a longer exposure, produce a more highly defined
layer
halides react with X-rays and light
 image. Slower flms are used for extremity radiography, e.g. feet
 Duplitised 
to form the latent image
 carpus, to ensure that the necessary bone detail is shown.
two emulsion
Liquid gelatin is used for easy
layers on either
application, semi-solid during
Intensifying screens
side of the
processing to allow chemical
base
penetration and solid after
 Intensifying screens are designed to fluoresce, emitting light,
processing for storage
when exposed to X-rays. As the film is sensitive to both
Thin layer of gelatin that protects
X-rays and light, use of an intensifying screen allows for a
Supercoat
Single sided -
the emulsion during and after
lower X-ray exposure to be used to form a diagnostic image.
one supercoat
Duplitised -
processing
two supercoat
Intensifying screens are contained within a cassette. In cas-
settes where duplitised films are used there are two separate
layers
screens, one on either side of the cassette. In single-sided cas-
Anti curl layer Single-sided
 Duplitised flm has equal amounts 
settes there is one intensifying screen on the back of the cas
of emulsion on both sides of the
sette. The film is sandwiched between the intensifying
base that absorb liquid and swell
screens or between the intensifying screen and the front of
equally during processing s0
the cassette.
curling is not a problem
Single-sided film has an anti-curl
Construction of an intensifying screen
layer to balance the curling effects
of the swollen emulsion. This
An intensifying screen (Fig. 32.8) is made up of the following
 prevents damage to the flm
layers:
Forming the radiographic image
● Base (support layer):
The radiographic image is the visible image formed from
● Back of intensifying screen
        
reaction that starts when the film is exposed to light and/or
● Supports the intensifying screen
X-rays. The film contains silver halide crystals that are sen-
sitive to light and X-rays. In conventional film the silver
● Made of cardboard or polyester
halide is usually silver bromide. The manufacturers usually
a u siis e yads ais a pie pos e a
● Moisture-resistant
processing. Within the emulsion the silver and bromide ions
form a lattice that becomes charged as the silver loses an elec-
● Flexible
tron enabling it to bond with the bromine. During exposure the
X-rays and light will cause a reaction that makes the silver
● Does not interfere with the passage of X-rays
migrate towards the sensitivity speck and the bromine to be
through to the phosphor layer and film
released. The more silver that moves and the more bromine
that is given off, the blacker the final radiograph will appear.
+ Reflecting layer:
Areas where the X-rays or light do not reach at all will have no
reaction.
● Made of magnesium oxide or titanium dioxide
726
5 Principles of diagnostic imaging
light, while the calcium tungstate used in more old-fashioned
Base layer
types of screen will convert approximately 4% of all X-rays to
light. This conversion ensures a reduction in the exposure
Reflecting layer
needed to form a diagnostic image on the film, which in turn
reduces the dose to the patient and to the staff.
Protective coating
Fluorescent layer
Fig. 32.8 Structure of an intensifying screen
Film-screen combinations
To ensure that the light emitted from an intensifying screen
● Redirects stray light emitted from the intensifying
is utilized fully, the wavelength or colour of the light emitted
 screen to improve image quality
from the intensifying screen must match the light sensitivity
of the film. Calcium tungstate intensifying screens will emit
● Increases effectiveness of the intensifying screen
blue light, so the film must be sensitive to blue light and
these films are described as being monochromatic. Rare earth
● Fluorescent phosphor layer:
screens usually emit green light, although some types emit
blue light, and so the film used should be sensitive to both
● Active part of the intensifying screen
blue and green light. This is known as orthochromafic film. If
the film sensitivity is not matched to the light emitted by the
● Layer of tiny phosphor crystals suspended in a
screen the beneficial effects of the intensifying screen will be
binder of polyurethane
reduced.
● Phosphor crystals are either rare earth or calcium
tungstate
Intensifying screen speed
● Crystals held together and protected from moisture
The speed of an intensifying screen describes the relative
and on aans jo sad iuana aq papaau ansodxa
● Dye to absorb stray light
images of a similar density (Table 32.4). The faster the screen
the lower the exposure needed to form an image. The screen
● Protective coating:
speed is determined by the size of the phosphor grain, the
thickness of the intensifying screen layer and the presence or
● Outer layer of the intensifying screen
absence of a reflective layer.
● Protects the phosphor layer against abrasions,
moisture and staining
Single screens
● Reduces static
Single screens function in exactly the same way as double
intensifying screens but have half the intensifying factor.
●Will survive routine cleaning
pe Aqdeouu unq u asn ion padonaaap aam aau
are ideal for extremity work, where the demonstration of fine
● Extends around the back of the screen to prevent
detail is essential. It should be ensured that the light emission
curling.
from the intensifying screen matches the film sensitivity
and also that the film emulsion is in close contact with the
intensifying screen.
Luminescence
When the phosphor grain is bombarded by X-rays, fluores-
Film-screen contact
cence, i.e. the emission of light, and phosphorescence, i.e.
the afterglow, occur. Fluorescence occurs when the X-rays
If a sharp image is to be achieved there must be good contact
pass through the phosphor layer. The interaction excites the
between the film and the screen. Damaged or old cassettes
phosphor crystals and they emit ultraviolet and visible light.
may have curved screens, which will result in blurring of the
The visible light is used to form the image on the radi-
 image where there is reduced contact. This is due to the diver.
ographic film. The phosphor will emit hundreds of light
 gence in the beam between being emitted from the intensi-
photons for every X-ray photon that strikes it. Rare earth
fying screen and reaching the film. Cassettes that produce a
intensifying screens will convert 15-20% of all X-rays to
 blurred image should be checked and replaced if necessary.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
727
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
Table 32.4 Types of intensifying screen
● Foam pad under the intensifying screen to hold
the film in place and ensure film-screen contact
Intensifying screen
Speed
Uses
High-resolution 
Slow (100)
Fine detail. Needs a higher
+ Closure:
exposure. Ideal for extremity
WoTk
● Strong closing mechanism
Regular
Medium (400)
General radiography
● Usually a clip or plastic locking bar
Fast
Fast (800)
Produces a darker image for
given exposure factors
● Good closure ensures light proofing and film-screen
Allows for a reduction in
exposure time to reduce
contact.
movement problems
Care of cassettes
Care of intensifying screens
● Always treat them gently - they are expensive to
replace
Screens should be carefully cleaned on a regular basis. Dirt
will show up as bright, white specks on the processed radio-
● Do not drop them
graph because the light is blocked from reaching the film
after emission by the dirt and dust. Cotton wool should never
● Only carry a few at a time
be used to clean an intensifying screen and a preparatory
screen cleaner should be used whenever possible. The inten-
● Avoid excessive dampness and water exposure
sifying screen should not be saturated with liquid and all
cleaning movements should be gentle. The cassette should be
● Store upright to prevent bending and damage
dried thoroughly by standing it on its end before it is used
again.
● Use a numbering system to identify damaged or dirty
cassettes.
Radiographic cassettes
 Intensifying screens are contained within a protective cas-
Digital imagi
ing
sette and the film is sandwiched between the screens. The
cassette ensures that light cannot reach the film and ensures
       p
good film-screen contact at all times. Each cassette is made
practice, although currently cost is a limiting factor. Digital
up of the following parts:
imaging has a number of benefits:
+ Front:
● Digital sensors are used to form an image without the
need for radiographic film
● Uniform thickness
● Immediate image display
● Conforms to BS4304/1968
●High-quality images
● Aluminium equivalent of less than 0.2 mm
 ae aoao m pa aq a s o
● Made from plastic or carbon
exposure factors
●Lightweight
● Images may be altered to show different windows and
the windows can be varied to show, for example, just
● Low absorption of the primary beam, i.e. allows
bone, just soft tissue or both
most of it to pass through to the film inside
● Dose of radiation to patient and veterinary personnel
+ Back:
is kept to a minimum
● Similar material to the front
● Images can be e-mailed to other vets' computers for
a second opinion without the need to post bulky
● Lead strips to protect the film from back scatter
films.
728
3 Principles of diagnostic imaging
Diagnostic information is collected from the patient by using
a monitor. All images are stored on optical disk, zip disk
a charged couple device, which is placed under the patient as
or CD-ROM, which reduces storage space. If a hard copy is
a cassette would be. The device detects the X-rays as they
required, the image can be reproduced on a film laser printer
fall on to its surface and stores the pattern formed until it is
to produce a radiograph, which can then be viewed in the
placed into the reader. The data are then analysed by a com-
normal way.
puter and converted into an image, which is viewed on
Film proce
developer solution to help reduce oxidation as much
as possible
Processing cycle
● An accelerator maintains the pH of the developer. The
pH is usually 9.6-10.0, i.e. it is alkaline
After a film has been exposed, a latent image is present on the
film, but to turn this into a visible image the film must be
 Chemical fogging is reduced using a restrainer, which
processed. Regardless of whether this is done manually or by
will improve the selectivity of the developer, ensuring
an automatic processor, the cycle is the same (Fig. 32.9).
that a minimal number of unexposed silver halide
crystals are reduced
1. Developer
● As the developer is used, calcium sludge builds up.
reducing the effectiveness of the developer. To reduce
This is always the first stage:
this a sequestering agent is added
● In the developer solution there are two active
● All the chemicals are dissolved in a solvent. In this
 developing agents, hydroquinone and phenindone,
case the solvent is water, as it is readily available and
both of which reduce exposed silver bromide crystals
cheap. The water will also dissolve all the byproducts
to metallic silver, which is deposited on the film and
 of processing. The emulsion is softened by water and
appears black. Unexposed silver bromide crystals will
this allows the developer to penetrate the film surface
not be affected by the developer solution
more easily.
● The developer also contains a preservative to slow
2. Wash
oxidation and a lid should always be kept on the
Between the developer and the fixer stages excess developer
 must be removed from the film surface. In manual processing
this is done by rinsing the film in the small wash tank
between the developer and the fixer tanks. In an automatic
Water rinse to remove
processor, developer is removed by squeegee rollers.
Film exposed to
Immersion of film in 
X-rays and/orlight 
 developing solution 
 developing solution
3. Fixer
 Sensitized silver halides
32
reduced to metallic silver
This stops development and forms a permanent image on the
film. The solution converts unexposed silver bromide into
Dried film forms
Water rinse to remove
Immersion of film in 
a form that can be washed off the film. This is known as
permanent image
fixer solution
fixer solution
conversion:
Unexposed and undeveloped
 silver halides dissolved
● The fixer contains a fixing agent that will diffuse into
the emulsion and react with the unexposed silver
Fig. 32.9 Processing cycle from Easton 2002 page 73
bromide crystals that remain on the film after
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
729
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
development. The fixing agent is usually ammonium
thiosulphate, which changes the unexposed areas
of the film from a milky white colour to
ransparent
● The fixing agent is dissolved in a solvent, usually
water, which allows the chemical to pass into the film
emulsion
● An acidifier stops development. This neutralises the
alkaline developer and prevents further development
and dichroic fog
● Sodium acetate is used as a buffer to maintain the pH
to within 0.2 of the manufacturer's predetermined
levels
Fig. 32.10 An automatic processor
● Decomposition of the fixer is prevented using sodium
sulphite
Automatic processors
● Damage to the film is prevented by the addition of a
hardener to the fixer solution, which also helps it to
Automatic processors carry the film through a number of
dry efficiently
tanks using a series of rollers (Fig. 32.10). The dry-to-dry time
is usually 2-4 min, depending on the type of processor, com-
● The hardener produces insoluble compounds that
pared with a minimum of 50 min with a manual processor
form sludge on the bottom of the tank. This sludge
and drying cabinet.
formation is reduced and prevented using an
antisludging agent, usually boric acid.
The film enters the processor through a film feed system. This
 grasps the film and takes it into the developer roller through
a guide roller. The film passes through a number of rollers, all 
4. Wash
of which press the processing chemical into the emulsion,
ensuring even and adequate coverage. To eliminate the need
The processed film then passes through a wash tank. If the
  o '        
film is being manually processed, this is usually consists of
time spent in each tank is correct for the solution it contains.
running water for at least 10 min. In an automatic processor
The developer tank is usually the deepest; the wash tank is
another set of rollers takes the film through a tank of water
the shallowest and the film spends the shortest time here.
for about 10-20 s The wash prevents the continuing action of
the processing chemicals and deterioration of the image
The water used within the processor helps to maintain a con-
quality during storage.
stant temperature. If the temperature fluctuates, image
quality will be low and inconsistent. Water is also used in the
wash tank - usually cold, as warmer water will encourage the
5. Drying
growth of algae, which is not ideal. All processing chemicals
should be collected in special containers and sent to a spe-
The final stage of processing is to dry the film, allowing it to
cialist company for disposal. If this is not possible, processing
be viewed and stored. During the processing cycle the film
chemicals can be disposed of down a normal drain but
absorbs water and this makes the emulsion ‘mushy'. If the
care must be taken to ensure dilution and adherence to
emulsion were not dried this layer would be easily removed
ocal bylaws regarding drainage. The disposal of processing
and would decrease the image quality. In an automatic
chemicals is controlled by the Disposal of Poisonous Waste
processor, drying takes about 25 s and is usually preceded by
Act 1972.
squeegee rollers, which remove as much excess water as pos-
sible from the surface of the film. The film is then dried using
Care of an automatic processor
hot air at 50-60C blown on to the film. In a manual system
the film has to be hung up in a clean, dry environment and
An automatic processor should be looked after carefully. A
steps must be taken to prevent hairs or dirt coming into
cleaning regime should be implemented to ensure it is always
contact with the film.
functioning to the highest level possible.
730
0 Principles of diagnostic imaging
Replenishment
Daily care
● Pass an old film through an automatic processor
The chemicals used within a processor will become tired and
before use to pick up any debris on the rollers
less active as time progresses. To ensure that the machine is
working at optimum levels, the processing chemicals should
● Check levels of chemicals in tanks
be replaced on a regular basis. At least every 6 weeks all the
chemicals should be replaced with fresh solutions. As the
● Check operating temperature
developer and fixer work, they produce byproducts, which
will dilute the concentration of the processing chemicals over
● Remove any visible chemical deposits
time. Developer solution will also oxidize in air and this
further reduces its activity.
● Remove lid to allow circulation of air when not
in use
In an automatic processor the chemicals are replaced each
time a film enters the machine. A small amount of solution,
● Wipe any rollers above the solution levels
 depending on the film size, will be removed automatically
and replaced by fresh chemicals. Within the machine is
● Insert antifungal tablet to wash tanks at the end of
either a reservoir or a series of small bottles to store a small
the day.
reserve of chemical.
Maximum efficiency can be achieved by the use of an
automixer which mixes stores and dispenses developer and
Weekly care
fixer into the processor whenever required. This is ideal
● Repeat daily programme
where the throughput is large and is much cleaner and safer
than the use of small bottles or a reservoir in the processor
● Drain and scrub the wash tanks
itself.
● Remove top rollers and clean
● Remove wash, developer and fixer rollers and clean
Silver recovery
thoroughly with running water
During the fixing stage, metallic silver is produced and this
● Check movement on all sets of rollers by manually
can be recovered and recycled. There are a number of
turning the roller
methods of recovering the silver in fixer. If used fixer is col-
lected for disposal by a specialized firm then this process is
● Check that chemicals are being replenished by the
already in place but if the fixer is disposed of down the drain
machine's system
then a small silver recovery unit can be installed to remove
the silver before disposal. A specialist firm can then recycle
● Clean the drier rollers with a damp cloth
the silver collected. Films also contain metallic silver that can
be recycled. The process of silver recovery is not expensive
● Record all maintenance performed.
 and the collection and recycling charges are usually covered
by the value of the silver recovered.
Monthly care
· Repeat daily and weekly programme
The darkroom
● Strip entire processor to down to the basics and
With the introduction of automatic processors that function
clean all tanks and rollers with a sponge and running
 in daylight, the need for a darkroom is decreasing. However,
water
 many practices store film, load cassettes or keep the processor
in the darkroom, so when setting one up there are several
● Close drain valves
factors to be considered:
● Check movement of rollers
● The room should be easily accessible to all areas of the
practice and should be large enough to allow safe
● Replace all chemicals (unless using an automixer).
movement when the lights are switched off
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
731
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
● It should not be damp or humid, as this will affect the
Radiograr
gualitl
films, and it should have a reliable source of electricity
and running water
● Films and chemicals should not be stored in the
interpretation
 same area, as the chemicals may cause fogging of the
films. The darkroom should not be exposed to
 radiation in any way, especially if this is where film is
stored
Describing and viewing an image
● The whole room should be painted a light colour
Radiographs should always be positioned, viewed and
to reflect as much light as possible into the
described in a systematic and conventional manner. There
room
are a number of rules to remember when you are viewing a
 processed radiograph:
● The surfaces should be washable to allow easy
removal of spillages
● A radiograph should be viewed on a proper viewing
box - not against a window or strip light
● The room should be well ventilated to ensure the
comfort of staff and prevent deterioration of the film
● A lateral radiograph should always be viewed with the
quality
head to the left, the tail to the right
● A method should be in place to prevent anyone
● Ventrodorsal and dorsoventral radiographs should be
entering when the room is in use and causing possible
viewed as if you are shaking hands with them, i.e. the
light fogging of the film, e.g. a warning light on the
left of the animal is on your right.
outside, a double-door system or a lock (but make sure
the door can be opened from the outside in an
● An extremity should be viewed so that the proximal
emergency).
end of the region is at the top of the viewing box
● Correct anatomical descriptions should be used
whenever possible
Safelights
● Try to describe the image so that it could be seen in
the mind of someone who is not able to see the
A safelight is needed in the darkroom to prevent white
radiograph
light fogging the film during handling prior to pro-
cessing while still allowing the radiographer to move
● Use familiar objects to describe the appearance and
safely around the room. Safelights usually have a red
size of areas seen on the radiograph, e.g. walnut-sized,
filter but vary according to the colour sensitivity of
pea-sized, appearance of a bunch of grapes.
the film. White light is a combination of red, blue and
green light. A red filter allows only red light through,
so if the film is sensitive to blue or green light it will be
unaffected.
Assessing the radiograph
The safelight should be at least 2 m from the work surface
When assessing the quality of a processed radiograph, con-
and should have no more than a 15 watt bulb. There are two
sider the following points. If all these headings are examined
types:
will not be passed for reporting:
● Direct safelight - sometimes known as a beehive
● Correct and visible identification
safelight; directs light downwards on to work
surfaces
● Anatomical markers and legends correct and visible
● Indirect safelight - projects light upwards on to
● Area under examination shown
the ceiling; it is then reflected back down into the
room.
● Correct projection taken
732
2 Principles of diagnostic imaging
● Suitable exposure factors used for area under
examination
● Adequate contrast, density and sharpness
● Suitable collimation, accurate but not too tight
● Artefacts (lead, collar, mud, wet coat, contrast
medium)
● Anatomical variants or pathology that may need an
alteration of exposure factors
● Good overall image quality
● Need for further projections or repeat radiographs.
Latitude, density and contrast
● Latitude - describes the range of exposures that will
ensure that a diagnostic image is possible. If a film has
wide latitude there is a greater range of exposure
factors that will produce a diagnostic image. Films
with wide latitude will have a longer grey scale than
films with narrow latitude
● Density - describes the amount of blackening seen on
a radiographic film. This degree of blackening is
related to the specific gravity and the atomic number
of the subject under examination. If the subject area
has a high atomic number, e.g. the bone in the pelvis
of a large dog, then the X-rays' photons will interact
with the tissue and very few X-rays will reach the
radiographir film, creating a white image. If the area
under examination is air-filled, and thus has a low
specific gravity and atomic number, there will be less
interaction with the X-ray photons and more will
reach the film, resulting in more blackening of the film
(Table 32.5)
● Contrast - the difference in density, i.e. degree of
blackening, between two adjacent structures. If the
Table 32.5 Appearance of tissues on a radiograph
related to their specific gravity and atomic number
32
Tissue
Specific
Atomic
Appearance on
gravity
number
radiograph
Bone
High
High 
White
Water/muscle
Medium/high
High
Grey
C
Grey
Fig. 32.11 Radiographs showing different tevels of contrast
Fat
Low/medium 
Low
(a) High contrast (b) Low contrast (c) Acceptable
Air
Low
Low
Black
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
733
23
Principles of diagnostic imaging
image has lots of grey but very little black and white, it
Table 32.6 Most common film faults
is described as being a low-contrast image. If there is
Image
 Description
Reason
Solution
little grey but lots of black and white, the image is said
to be a high-contrast image (Fig. 32.11).
problem
Image is
Film is
Voltage and/or
Reduce exposure
Contrast is influenced by a number of factors:
too dark
overexposed
mAs too high
factors
Background is 
 Film has been
Eliminate light or
● Tissue specific gravity and atomic number - an
blackened as
fogged by light
radiation source
increase in atomic number and specific gravity will
well as the
 Or radiation
result in more X-ray photons being absorbed. A higher
image
voltage will ensure adequate penetration and an
 Overdevelopment Check temperature
overall increase in contrast
caused by
of processing
increased
chemicals and the
● Voltage - low voltage will produce an image with
developer
time that film
high contrast (very black and white); as the voltage
temperature 0f
 remains in
increases so the amount of contrast increases,
increased time
solution
 providing a greater range of greys and less black and
Image is
Exposed parts
The film is
Increase exposure
white
too pale
 of background
underexposed
factors
are black
as it has not
● Object shape and thickness - if an area is very
thin it will absorb fewer X-rays and will lead to an
received enough
X-rays
image with minimal contrast, e.g. in abdominal
Exposed parts
The film is
Ensure that
radiographs of very small cats. The resultant image
of the
underdeveloped
developer is fresh,
 may demonstrate a grey abdomen with no
background are
warm enough and
definition of the internal organs because of the limited
pale as well
that the film is in
contrast
solution for
enough time
● Film fogging - fogging results in an overall greyness
and a reduction in contrast and may be due to poor
Film is
Mayhave
Film is not fixed 
 Check time in fixer
film storage, incorrect processing, scattered radiation
yellow/
powdery
Of washed
and wash stages
 or exposure to light.
brown
deposits over
properly
Replace chemicals
the surface
if exhausted
Most common flm faults
Film faults occur when the different radiographic techniques
the fault(s). Good training and effective practice procedures
 or protocols are not followed. They appear for many reasons
will reduce film faults and the need for repeated radiographs
and a number of remedial actions can be taken to eliminate
and ultimately increase radiation safety (Table 32.6).
General princ
● If possible, at least two views at 90° to each other
should be taken of all extremities and other
 The following principles should be followed to ensure that
regions
the maximum benefit is gained from accurate positioning:
● Careful positioning, centring and collimation should
● All radiographs must have a clinical indication and be
always be carried out
requested by a qualified veterinary surgeon
● If positioning will compromise the patient's
● Radiation safety must be understood and adhered to at
condition then alternative methods of diagnosis
all times
should be used
● Standard projections should be performed whenever
● Identification labels should be present to prevent the
 possible to allow interpretation and diagnosis
loss of films.
734
4 Principles of diagnostic imaging
Restraint
the orientation of the patient. In equine work, the lateral aspect
of the distal extremities should be marked so that lesions can be
To prevent production of low-quality, non-diagnostic images,
orientated. The most common form of marker is a metal clip
all animals should be restrained. This can be in the form of
that slides over the edge of the cassette, or plastic tablets with
chemical restraint or through the use of pads, sandbags or ties
lead letters or markers embedded in the plastic.
Chemical restraint
All radiographs should have a permanent label of the animal's
and owner's names and the date of examination. This can be
Spine, skull, pharynx, some contrast procedures, hip exami-
achieved using lead tape or a light marker that exposes the film
nations and most fracture investigations should not be
with the details, after exposure but before processing.
carried out unless the animal is anaesthetised. If it is not pos-
sible to anaesthetise the animal then heavy sedation can
Terminology
be used, but accurate diagnostic images may be difficult to
produce. In the case of severely dyspnoeic patients, most
The term used to describe the projection describes the path
will tolerate sedation and this will ensure that a diagnostic
of the primary beam through the patient; the side struck by
radiograph with limited stress to the patient is achieved.
  d an   sn i a a 
side through which the beam exits is second. Therefore
Positioning aids
These should be available for all examinations. They should
Table 32.7 Terminology used to describe
be radiolucent so that they do not show up on the final radio-
radiographic positions
graph. Always check any new positioning aids introduced
Full
Abbreviation
 into the practice. Care should be taken when using sandbags,
 Direction of X-ray beam or
which are radio-opaque, to prevent them from obscuring any
description
description or area
of the area of interest.
Left
L
Right
R
The list of available aids below is intended as an outline and
Dorsal
 Front of lower limbs below the
individuals may have personal favourites:
carpus or tarsus or upper surface of
main trunk
● Radiolucent foam or plastic troughs for dorsoventral or
ventrodorsal projections
Ventral
V
 Underside of animal
Cranial
Cr
 Front of lower limbs above the
● A selection of radiolucent foam wedges and blocks.
carpus or tarsus
These should be in a variety of shapes and sizes
Caudal
Cd
Back of lower limbs below the carpus
 OT tarsus
● A selection of long, floppy sandbags
Rostral
R
Towards the nose
Medial
M
Towards the centre or inside of leg
● Hobbles or bandages. These can be used to tie limbs
out of the way or to hold the mouth open during
Lateral
L
Outer side of body or legs
examination of the tympanic bullae. They should not
Proximal
Pr
The end of an extremity or bone that
be used unless the animal is anaesthetised
is closest to the body
Distal
Di
The end of an extremity or bones
● Positioning blocks and film holders are essential for
that is furthest away from the body
equine examinations
PalmaT
Pa or P
Under surface of the lower forelimb
below the carpus - opposite to
● A rope head collar is used when imaging the equine
 dorsal surface
head to prevent any metal buckles from being seen.
32
Plantar
PL
 Under surface of lower hind limb
below the tarsus - opposite to dorsal
Markers and legends
surface
Oblique
0
All films should have anatomical markers that indicate the
Lesion 
LOO
An oblique projection to skyline a
limb, the recumbency or the side of the patient. Left and
 orientated
lesion
right markers should be placed so that they fall just inside
oblique
the primary beam and will form a permanent indication of
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
735
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
Cranial
Caudal
Proximal
ventral
Proximal
Distal
ista
Midline
Cranial
Caudal
Cranial
Caudal
Latera
Dorsal
Palmal
Dorsal
Plantar
Medial
Fig. 32.12 Standard radiographic terminotogy
dorsoveniral means that the beam enters through the dorsal
Exposure should be made on full inspiration to give
side and leaves the body through the ventral side (Table 32.7,
maximum inflation of the lungs.
Fig. 32.12).
Dorsoventral
The patient should be placed in sternal recumbency using a
BVA/KC hip dysplasia and elbow
trough. Use sandbags to hold the forelimbs in position and
scoring schemes
Ad au ped e yim paodns aq on paau ae peau a
beam is centred on the highest point of the scapulae, on the
For both of these schemes there are protocols available from
midline. Collimation should include the front of the shoul-
the Kennel Club, which should be followed closely to
der and the diaphragm. Exposure should be made on full
produce a diagnostic image. All animals must be over 1 year
 inspiration.
of age and should be registered with the Kennel Club. The
flms should have no identification other than the Kennel
Abdomen
Club number, the date and a left and right marker and this
should be put on the film prior to processing, preferably
Right lateral recumbency
during exposure, e.g. using lead tape.
The patient should be placed in right lateral recumbency with
the forelimbs extended and held in place by sandbags. A pad
should be placed under the sternum to reduce rotation.
Small animal positioning
Centring should be cranial to the last rib at the 1lth/12th
intercostal space, midway between the skin surfaces. Col-
Chest
limation should include the entire diaphragm and the hip.
Exposure should be made on full expiration to allow maxi-
Right lateral
 mum space for the organs in the abdominal cavity.
The patient should be placed in right lateral recumbency with
the forelimbs extended and held in place by sandbags. A pad
should be placed under the sternum to reduce rotation. The
Ventrodorsal abdomen
primary beam should be centred on the caudal border of the
The patient should be placed in dorsal recumbency in a
scapula midway between the skin surfaces. Collimation
trough if needed. The forelimbs and hind limbs should be
 should include the front of the shoulder and the diaphragm.
 held in position by sandbags or ties and the head may need
736
5 Principles of diagnostic imaging
Fig. 32.13 Positioning for ventrodorsat
abdomen 
to be supported by a pad (Fig. 32.13). The primary beam is
Centring point
centred to the 11th/12th intercostal space, or the umbilicus,
on the midline. Collimation should include the entire liver
and the top of the pelvic region. Exposure should be made on
full expiration.
Head and neck
Ventrodorsal skull
The patient is placed in dorsal recumbency and the neck is
extended. A foam pad is placed under the neck to ensure that
the hard palate is parallel to the cassette. Centre on the
 midline on a point halfway along the interpupillary line to
include the area of interest (Fig. 32.14).
Fig. 32.15 Positioning for a dorsoventral intra orat view
Dorsoventral intraoral view
This position is used to view the nasal chambers. The patient
is supported in sternal recumbency with the neck extended.
A sandbag is placed over the neck to prevent rotation. A non-
screen film is placed corner first as far as possible into the
mouth, above the endotracheal tube. The primary beam is
centred on a line midway between the external nares and a
line joining the eyes (Fig. 32.15). An anatomical marker
should be included.
32
Nasopharynx
The patient is placed in lateral recumbency. A pad supports
the skull in a true lateral position and a pad is placed under
the neck. The forelegs are pulled caudally against the wall of
the thorax to prevent the muscle mass of the shoulder from
obscuring the image. Centre on the mid-cervical area to
include the pharynx and thoracic inlet. The patient should be
Fig. 32.14 Positioning for a ventrodorsat skull
extubated prior to exposure.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
737
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
Fig. 32.16 Positioning for a mediotaterat view of a distat extremity
Distal extremities
Mediolateral
 The patient is placed with the side to be imaged nearest the
Shoulder
cassette. The opposing limb is placed and supported on the
flank (forelimbs pulled caudally, hind limbs pulled cranially).
Lateral
The limb should be parallel with the cassette; a pad may be
The animal is placed in lateral recumbency with the area
necessary to prevent rotation (Fig. 32.16). Stifles and elbows
under investigation nearest to the film. The upper limb
should be flexed. Centring is at the level of the joint or mid-
should be extended caudally and secured in position. The
shaft. Collimation should include a joint above and below
limb under examination should be extended cranially and
the long bone or a small area above and below the joint
secured in place. The neck should be extended. The primary
under investigation
beam should be centred at the level of and caudal to the
lateral tuberosity. Collimation should include the entire joint
Dorsopalmar/plantar and caudocranial, i.e. below the
and surrounding soft tissues.
level of the carpus or tarsus
The patient is placed in sternal or dorsal recumbency so that
the limb under investigation is parallel with the cassette. The
Caudocranial
opposing limb may need to be lifted to rotate the limb under
The patient is placed on its back and supported with sand-
investigation so that it is straight (Fig. 32.17). Centring is at
bags; the thorax may need to be rotated slightly. The affected
the level of the joint or mid-shaft. Collimation should
limb is drawn cranially, fully extended and secured with a tie.
include the entire bone for long bones and the joint plus a
The beam should be centred level with the acromion process
small area above and below for joints.
of the scapula.
Fig. 32.17 Positioning for (o) craniocaudat view of the distat forelimb and (b) dorsoplantar view of the distat hind fimb
738
3 Principles of diagnostic imaging
Fig. 32.18 (0) Positioning
for ventrodorsat petvis
(b) Canine patient positioned
for radiography of the pelvis
Pelvis
pine
Ventrodorsal
Lateral
The patient is placed in dorsal recumbency and supported in
 The patient should be placed in lateral recumbency. The
a trough. The forelimbs may need to be tied in an extended
spine should be supported with foam pads so that it is paral-
position (Fig. 32.18). The hind limbs are extended and
lel with the tabletop. Pads should be placed under the ster-
internally rotated so that the femurs lie parallel to each other
num and between the limbs to prevent rotation. For the
and the patellae are centred over the stifle joint. The legs
cervical spine the fore limbs should be pulled caudally.
should be supported and secured with sandbags or ties over
The beam should be centred over the area of interest. If the
the stifles and hocks as required. Centre on the midline, level
entire spine is being examined, each image should overlap
with the greater trochanters. Collimation should include the
with the ones on either side.
upper third of the femur and the wings of the ilium.
32
This extended hip position is required for the KC/BVA hip
Lateral lumbosacral junction
dysplasia scheme and radiographs will be returned if the
The patient is placed in lateral recumbency as described
animal is not straight - look at the vertebral column and
in the previous position. This position has very specific
check that the obturator foramina are of equal size.
   n  
of the femur and the cranial part of the wing of the
In patients that may have a damaged pelvis, e.g. as the result
ilium. An imaginary line should be drawn between
of a road traffic accident, the limbs should not be extended
the two and the beam centred on the midpoint of the
but should be allowed to flex into a 'frog leg' position.
line.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
739
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
the ground, and the horse should take weight on the foot
Ventrodorsal spine
(Fig. 32.19b). If laminitis is suspected, a lead strip with its top
 u pahodns uaqna jesiop u paoeid si hued a
end level with the coronary band should be placed down the
trough or with sandbags. The patient should be as straight as
midline of the hoof wall. The beam is projected horizontally.
possible. The hind legs should be extended to prevent rotation.
parallel with the floor and centred at the level of the coronary
The beam should be centred over the region of interest.
band to include the heel and toe. Collimation should include
the weight-bearing surface of the foot.
Large animal positioning
Palmaroproximal-dorsodistal oblique of the navicular
Foot
bone (Pa45°P-DDi0)
The foot is cleaned and trimmed and the frog is packed to
Dorsopalmar view of the pedal bone (DPr60°-PaDi0)
remove any gas shadows. The foot is placed on a fim-holder
The foot should be clean and trimmed with the shoes
containing the film. The foot is placed as far back as possible
removed. The frog should be packed with soap or play dough
without the horse taking a step forward. This removes the
or other similar material to remove gas shadows. The film is
fetlock from the area of interest. The X-ray beam is directed
placed in a film holder and the foot placed on top of this. The
proximal to distal 30-40°, depending on how far back the
primary beam is centred below the coronary band on the
foot is placed. The beam is centred parallel with the long axis
midline of the foot with a downward angle of 60° (see
of the horse's leg and in the middle of the groove between the
 Chapter on Equine Anatomy). Collimation should include
bulbs of the heel. Collimation should be limited to the area
the edges of the hoof wall and the toe and heel of the foot.
of the navicular bone.
Dorsopalmar view of the navicular bone
Fetlock
(DPr60°-PaDi0)
The foot should be clean and trimmed, with the shoes
Dorsopalmar
removed. The frog should be packed to remove gas shadows
The horse should stand bearing weight on all four feet. The
The film is placed in a film holder and the foot is placed on
primary beam is angled down to about 15° to the vertical to
top of this. The primary beam is centred just above the coro-
ensure that it passes through the joint space. The film is
nary band on the midline of the foot, with a downward angle
placed in a suitable container and placed behind the leg. The
of 60° (Fig. 32.19a). Collimation should be large enough to
 primary beam is centred on the fetlock joint on the midline
include all of the navicular bone.
of the leg. Collimation should include a small area above and
below the joint.
Lateromedial view of the pedal bone and navicular
bone
Lateromedial
The foot is prepared as for the dorsopalmar projection. The
The horse should stand bearing weight on all four feet. The
foot is placed on a block to ensure that it is high enough off
film in a suitable container is placed on the medial aspect of
Fig. 32.19 Radiography of the equine foot (a) Position to show the navicutar bone (b) Position for a taterat view
740
0 Principles of diagnostic imaging
the leg. The primary beam is centred on the fetlock joint on
Lateromedial
the midline of the leg. Collimation should include a small
area above and below the joint.
The horse should stand bearing weight on all four feet. The
cassette is placed on the medial aspect of the leg parallel with
Dorsolateral-palmaromedial oblique (D45°L-PaM0)
the leg. If the hock is under investigation, then a slight angu-
and dorsomedial-palmarolateral oblique
lation downwards (15° to the vertical) will improve image
quality. The X-ray beam is centred on the middle of the joint,
(D45°M-PaL0)
parallel with the film. Collimation should include a small
The horse should stand bearing weight on all four feet. The
area above and below the joint.
: a on edad p si  ed
Dorsolateral-palmaromedial oblique (D45°L-PaM0)
● For the dorsolateral-palmaromedial oblique the
and dorsomedial-palmarolateral oblique
cassette is placed midway between the medial and
 palmar surfaces of the leg
(D45°M-PaL0)
The horse should stand bearing weight on all four feet. The
● For the dorsomedial-palmarolateral oblique the
primary beam is directed perpendicular to the leg:
cassette is placed midway between the lateral and
palmar surfaces of the leg. If the horse is not
● For the dorsolateral-palmaromedial oblique the
cooperating then a palmarolateral-dorsomedial
cassette is placed midway between the medial and
oblique is a safer projection to attempt as the X-ray
palmar surfaces of the leg
tube and machine are not under the horse.
● For the dorsomedial-palmarolateral oblique the
Cannon and splint bones
cassette is placed midway between the lateral and
palmar surfaces of the leg.
Dorsopalmar
The horse should stand bearing weight on all four feet. The
The X-ray beam is centred on the middle of the joint
film is placed in a film box or holder behind the leg. The
beam is centred on the middle of the cannon bone along
the midline of the leg. Collimation should include the joints
Elbow
above and below the cannon bone.
Craniocaudal
Lateromedial
The horse should stand bearing weight on all four feet. The
 n n n       s
limb under examination is extended forwards slightly to move
cassette is placed on the medial aspect of the leg parallel with
it away from the chest wall. A cassette is placed behind the leg.
the leg. The X-ray beam is centred on the centre of the
as high as possible. A slight angulation may be needed cranially
cannon bone, parallel with the film. Collimation should
to demonstrate the entire joint. The primary beam is centred on
include the joints above and below the cannon bone.
the distal margin of the humerus. Collimation should include a
 small amount of the radius and the humerus.
Dorsolateral-palmaromedial oblique (D45°L-PaM0)
and dorsomedial-palmarolateral oblique
Lateral
(D45°M-PaLO)
The film should be placed in a bag on a drip stand. The leg
under examination should be as close to the film as possible.
The horse should stand bearing weight on all four feet. The
The horse should stand on all feet with equal weight. The
primary beam is directed perpendicular to the leg. For the
opposing fore leg is lifted and extended and held in position.
dorsolateral-palmaromedial oblique the cassette is placed
The person holding the leg should wear suitable protective
midway between the medial and palmar surfaces of the leg.
      si n   
medial aspect. Collimation should include the distal humerus
32
Hock and carpus
and proximal radius (Fig. 32.20).
Dorsopalmar
The horse should stand bearing weight on all four feet. The
Shoulder
film is placed in a film box or holder behind the leg. The
beam is centred on the middle of the joint passing along the
Lateral
midline of the leg. Collimation should include the joint and
The film should be placed in a bag on a drip stand. A grid
a small area above and below.
should be used. The leg under examination should be as close
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
¥741
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
base of the patella. Collimation should include the joint and
surrounding soft tissue but the caudal area does not need to
be included.
Caudocranial
The horse should stand bearing weight on all four feet. The
area around the stifle should be touched so that the horse is
aware of contact before a cassette is inserted. A cassette is
placed on the cranial aspect of the horse's leg and rotated up
as high as possible. The individual holding the cassette
should wear suitable lead protection and stand as far away
from the primary beam as possible. The long edge of the cas-
sette should be visible on the lateral edge of the leg. The
primary beam should be angled downwards about 10? to the
vertical so that it passes through the joint space. The beam
should be centred at the base of the patella. Collimation
should include the joint and surrounding soft tissue.
Skul.
Lateromedial skull and sinuses
A film should be placed in a bag on a drip stand. The horse
 should have a rope head collar as the buckles on a conventional
collar will show on the radiograph. The horse is walked into
position so that the side under investigation is closest to the
flm. The head is supported with a gloved hand (the nurse
Fig. 32.20 Positioning to show a fateral view of the etbow of a
horse
holding the head must wear suitable lead protection). The
 primary beam is centred at the base of the facial crest perpen-
dicular to the head and film. Collimation should include all of
to the film as possible. The horse should stand on all
the maxilla, the frontal sinuses and the first cheek tooth.
feet with equal weight. The opposing fore leg is lifted
and extended and held in position. Raising the leg will
place the trachea over the joint, which will improve the
Contrast radiography
image quality. The person holding the leg should wear suit-
able protective clothing. The primary beam is centred on
the joint on the medial aspect. Collimation should include
Types of contrast medium
the proximal humerus and the soft tissues surrounding the
joint.
Contrast media are substances that, when administered to
the body, will enhance areas where radiographic contrast is
low. In areas such as the gastrointestinal tract, the urogenital
system and the vascular system the difference in contrast
Stifle
between adjacent structures is very low and so they will
not always be distinguishable on a radiograph. The selected
Lateromedial
contrast medium has a higher atomic number than soft
The horse should stand bearing weight on all four feet. The area
tissue and will therefore prevent more of the X-rays passing
around the stifle should be touched so that the horse is aware
through the patient and reaching the film. The affected
of contact before a cassette is inserted. A cassette is placed on
area appears white on the radiograph, highlighting it or
d se  se dn po p  ss a no ais p 
increasing the contrast between it and surrounding areas.
sible. The individual holding the cassette should wear suitable
lead protection and stand as far away from the primary beam
Contrast media must:
as possible. The long edge of the cassette should be visible
on the cranial edge of the leg. The primary beam should be
● Be easy to administer and cause minimal discomfort or
perpendicular to the leg. The beam should be centred at the
distress to the patient
742
2 Principles of diagnostic imaging
● Be non-toxic
 n aos- a n  pn ad
pounds, e.g. Lipiodol. Iodine on its own is toxic but when
● Be a stable compound that will not alter when
joined to other substances can be used within the body.
introduced into the patient
The amount of iodine within a certain type of medium is
expressed in milligrams per millilitre (mg/ml); for example,
● Allow good, clear demonstration of the area of interest
Omnipaque 300 contains 300 mg of iodine per millilitre. The
composition of each type of contrast medium alters the way
● Be eliminated from the body as completely as possible
in which it reacts within the patient and to produce a diag-
in the shortest possible time
nostic image. Contrast media can be either ionic or non-
ionic. Non-ionic contrast media, e.g. Omnipaque, produce
● Not cause further damage to the patient or be
fewer reactions and are more suitable for smaller or very ill
carcinogenic
 patients and in the subarachnoid or spinal areas.
● Be cost-effective.
Reactions to iodine-based contrast media may be:
Negative contrast media
● Allergic (anaphylactic effects) - this type of
reaction varies from mild urticaria (skin rash) to full
Negative contrast uses gas that absorbs very little of the
anaphylaxis and cardiopulmonary arrest. Whenever
X-ray beam, making the area of interest appear blacker on the
iodine-based contrast media are injected the patient
film. Common gases used are:
should be anaesthetized to control the effects of a
reaction
● Air - e.g. double-contrast cystogram (bladder)
● Chemotoxic effects - as the dose is increased the
● Carbon dioxide (Co,) - e.g. barium meals
chances of a severe reaction will increase. The type of
reaction varies from patient to patient. Very sick or
● Oxygen (o,) - e.g. arthrograms (joints).
very young patients will be more susceptible than the
average otherwise healthy patient. Effects include
 n  n   o   
cerebral cedema, red blood cell damage, convulsions
 ad s  n   r n s s
and renal function impairment
be used to aid diagnosis, e.g. perforations or in surgical
emphysema.
● Osmotic effects - pain may be experienced because
of the osmolar shift of fluid within the tissues of the
Positive contrast media
body during the introduction of contrast medium,
especially when given intravenously.
Positive contrast media have a higher atomic number than
soft tissues so X-rays are absorbed and the area under investi-
gation appears white. Common contrast media include the
Double contrast
following.
This involves the use of both positive and negative contrast
media and is used to highlight the lining epithelia of hollow
Barium sulphate suspension
structures such as the bladder, stomach and rectum. The
Barium sulphate (e.g. Baritop) has an atomic number of 56 and
 organ is emptied as much as possible and a small amount of
is used for barium swallows and meals. It is used to demonstrate
the gastrointestinal tract because it does not react with the acid
need to be turned to coat the lining and air is then intro-
in the stomach. Other substances tend to 'clump' within the
duced to dilate the organ.
stomach, giving a strange appearance that may be mistaken for
32
should not be given in cases where a perforation is suspected as
Use of contrast medium
it can cause severe adhesions within the peritoneal cavity if it
escapes from the confines of the intestine.
All types of contrast medium are prescription only medicines
(POM) and should only be used for the prescribed use for the
diagnosis or treatment of the prescribed patient.
Iodine-based solutions
Iodine-based contrast media have an atomic number of
Before using any contrast medium a number of checks and
35 and include the water-soluble organic compounds, e.g.
procedures should be followed:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
743
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
● Check the date and type of contrast medium
Contrast techniques
● Check the quantity and concentration of contrast
These are listed in Table 32.8.
agent needed for the examination
● Ensure that the correct route for administration is used
Alternative imaging
and is prepared
● Make sure that the contrast medium is warm so that
technigues
the viscosity is reduced, making it easier to inject
● Make sure that there are no foreign particles within
Ultrasound
the contrast, especially if the container has been
opened previously
Diagnostic ultrasound uses sound waves to provide a diag-
● Ensure that all procedures are aseptic to prevent the
nostic image of the internal organs of a patient. The sound
introduction of infection
waves have a frequency, which is measured in hertz (Hz). The
sound waves used in ultrasound are above the range of our
● Record the type of contrast and the amount given in
hearing as they are supersonic and are usually between 1 and
the patients notes for future reference.
10 megahertz (MHz)
Methods of administration
A number of terms are used in ultrasonography:
● Orally - e.g. barium swallow, barium series or follow-
● Acoustic window - the area through which the
through
ultrasound waves will be applied. It should be as close
as possible to the area under investigation
● Rectally - e.g. barium enema
● Acoustic impedance - the degree of resistance to
● Intravenously - e.g. intravenous urography,
the passage of ultrasound waves
 mesenteric portal venography
● Acoustic interface - the junction between two
● Mechanically - e.g. sinogram, cystogram.
tissues of different acoustic impedance
Patients should be correctly prepared before administration
● Echoes - the returning ultrasound waves picked up by
and this may depend on the contrast medium being used:
the transducer and converted into the image on the
screen: the brightness of the echo is determined by the
● Starvation - may be recommended prior to a barium
acoustic impedance of the interface
meal or swallow. If the patient is to be given a general
anaesthetic starvation will be necessary
● Hyperechoic or echogenic - bright white echoes
between highly reflective interfaces, e.g. bone, gas and
● Enema - usually recommended prior to a barium
collagen
enema or prior to intravenous urography, as a full
rectum may affect the position of the ureters
● Hypoechoic or echo-poor - sparse echoes appearing
 grey representing intermediate reflection or
· General anaesthesia - for ease of administration
transmission of the ultrasound waves, e.g. soft tissue
and positioning, anaesthesia is essential for most
● Anechoic or echolucent - absence of echoes so
gastrointestinal tract
appears black, e.g. fluid.
● Plain radiographs - patients should always have
Ultrasound interactions
preliminary radiographs taken before contrast is
introduced to identify any pathology that may
The ultrasound image is formed by the reflection of the ultra-
prevent the examination from being effective. They
are also useful for comparison with the contrast
patient and tissues it becomes attenuated and the intensity of
radiographs.
the wave is reduced. The most common form of attenuation is
744  Principles of diagnostic imaging
 Table 32.8 Indications for and methods of using contrast media
Examination  Indications 
Area
Contrast
Quantity
Method of
Preliminary
 Projections and time
type
demonstrated 
 medium used
administration
radiographs
 after administration 
Barium
Regurgitation,
Oesophagus
Barium sulphate
 Dogs 5-10 ml
Oral
Lateral
Lateral thorax
swallow
retching,
Cats up to 5 ml
thorax
immediately after
dysphagia,
 administration 
suspected
foreign body
Barium meal Vomiting
Stomach and
 Barium sulphate
 Dogs 1-3 ml/kg
 Oral. May need 
Lateral and
Immediate. Four views
and follow
 small intestine
Cats 2-5 ml/kg
stomach tube
ventrodorsal
of the abdomen then 
through
abdomen
ventrodorsal and right 
lateral abdomen every
 30 min until stomach
is empty
Barium 
 Melaena,
Large bowel
 Barium sulphate,
 10 ml/kg mixed
 Foley catheter
Ventrodorsal
 Right and left lateral
enema
chronic
plus air if
with water
inserted into 
74bu pue
abdominal
diatthoea,
double-contrast
50:50
rectum - allow
lateral
radiographs plus
tenesmus
examination 
contrast to
abdomen
ventrodorsal abdomen
required
enter using the
effects of 
Intravenous
Incontinence,
Kidneys and 
Ionic contrast
1 ml/kg
Intravenously as
Right lateralImmediate. Follow up
urography
persistent,
ureters
medium (Conray
a bolus
and 
with 5 min -
haematuria,
420)
ventrodorsal
ventrodorsal
 pyelonephritis,
abdomen
abdomen; 10 min -
tauma
 lateral abdomen;
15 min - caudal
abdomen. May be
followed by a
vaginourethrogram
Male
Incontinence,
Bladder,
Ionic contrast
2 ml/kg
Foley catheter
Right lateral
 Same position as
urethrogram
dysuria,
urethra and 
medium
inserted into 
epe
 preliminary film
persistent 
prostate
(Urografin 150)
 penile urethra
abdomen
radiograph taken as
haematuria,
to include
 contrast is injected
trauma,
urethra
bladder
position 
Female
Incontinence,
Bladder,
Ionic contrast
1 ml/kg to fill
Foley catheter
Right lateral
 Same position as
urethrogram 
dysuria,
urethra and 
medium
urethra and 
inserted into
epne
 preliminary film,
persistent
vagina
(Urografin 150)
vagina
vestibule of
abdomen 
Tadiograph taken as
haematuria,
vagina and
to include
contrast is injected
trauma,
secured to
urethra
position of
 prevent leakage
bladder
using Allis
3
tissue forceps
Cystogram
Dysuria,
Bladder
Ionic contrast
10 ml/kg for
Bladder
Right lateral
 Same position as
persistent
medium
cystogram, then
catheterized and
caudal
 preliminary film
haematuria,
(Urografin 150)
fll with air until 
urine removed;
abdomen to
Radiograph taken
tauma,
Air
bladder feels
contrast and/or air include
im mediately after
position of
distended for a
introduced until
urethra
contrast and/or air is
bladder
pneumocystogram
resistance is felt
introduced
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
745
Principles of diagnostic imaging
Table 32.8 Indications for and methods of using contrast media-Cont'd.
Examination  Indications
Area
Contrast
Quantity
Method of
Preliminary
Projections and time
type
demonstrated
medium used
administration
radiographs
after administration
Myelogram
Spinal pain,
Spinal column
Non-ionic
0.3 ml/kg as
Cistermal puncture
Lateral and
Lateral radiographs of
 paraplegia,
contrast medium 
a slow bolus
Or lumbar
ventrodorsal
 entire spine
quadriplegia,
(Omnipaque 300)
puncture
of area of
Ventrodorsal of areas
ataxia, trauma
interest
 of interest
Arthrography Joint pain
 Joints, mainly
Non-ionic
1-1.5 ml
Injected directly
TwO
Two projections of
degeneration
the shoulder
contrast medium
into the joint
projections
joint
of articular
(0mnipaque 300)
space
of joint
surfaces
Sinography
Demonstrate
 Sinus tract
Ionic contrast
Until backflow
Foley catheter
TwO
Two projections of
sinus tract
or fistula
medium
of resistance
inserted into
projections
area of interest
path
(Urografin 150)
is felt
 opening of sinus
 of area of
or fistula and 
interest
secured in place
using Allis tissue
forceps
absorption. The friction caused by the vibration of the mole
cules within the tissues of the body will cause this absorption to
Electrical connector
Damping material
occur. Other causes of attenuation are scattering, reflection,
 refraction, diffraction, interference and divergence.
Piezoelectric crystal
The transducer
Matching layer
The ultrasound transducer is the hand-held probe used during
examinations and it is able to convert electrical energy to mech-
anical energy from the ultrasound beam and vice-versa (Fig.
Backing material 
32.21). The active part of the transducer is the piezoelectric
crystal, which is usually made of lead zirconate titanate. It has a
Fig. 32.21 Cross-section through a transducer
specific thickness for the best resolution possible, which varies
depending on the wavelength produced by the crystal. The cry-
stal will expand and contract along its shortest side as the elec-
trical signal applied across it alternates. This electrical signal is
● Used to demonstrate the depth of differences in
converted into an ultrasound beam. The beam passes into the
 tissues (interfaces) and their separation
patient and is reflected back from the tissues to the transducer.
The reflected echoes are detected by the transducer and con-
● Equipment is cheaper
verted back into an electrical signal to allow the formation of an
image on a monitor. Behind the crystal is a damping material,
● B-mode - brightness mode - this is the most
which improves resolution. This is supported on a backing
common:
material.
● Shown in real time; the operator moves the
transducer around and shows an image on the
Operational display
 modes
monitor as it happens
The ultrasound image may be displayed on the screen in one
● The intensity of the echo is demonstrated as a
of the following ways:
bright dot on the monitor
● A-mode - amplitude mode:
● A composite image will be shown either in a
rectangular format or sector view depending on the
 n s    n   s s
transducer
746
 Principles of diagnostic imaging
● M-mode - moving mode:
● Minimal patient preparation needed
● Used mainly for cardiac examinations
● Non-invasive procedure that gives good visualization
of the abdominal organs.
● Produces an image similar to that of an A-mode
examination but adds in a time element
However, there are a number of disadvantages:
● Being replaced by Doppler imaging and dedicated
● Cannot be used in areas containing large amounts of air
echocardiography units.
● Ultrasound does not travel well through air
Patient preparation
Bo     si    o
Careful patient preparation is essential to produce diagnostic
● Accuracy is dependent on operator experience.
images. The area under examination is clipped to remove any
hair and spirit is used to remove any excess oil or debris on
Areas suitable for examination
the skin surface. A coupling gel is placed between the skin
surface and the transducer to ensure good contact between
Ultrasound is ideal for:
the tissues and the transducer. Ultrasound waves do not
travel well through air so the gel is used to ensure that the
●Abdominal organs
transducer is always in complete contact with the skin sur-
face. The patient may need to be restrained and in some cases
● Heart
sedation may be needed; however, ultrasound is a completely
painless and non-invasive technique.
● Thyroid
Ultrasound has a number of advantages:
●Larynx
● Does not use radiation
● Tendons
● Produces real-time images
● Ligaments
● Can be used without sedation
●Soft-tissue masses.
Nuclear medicine
This technique is sometimes known as nuclear scintigraphy
A number of terms are used in nuclear medicine:
and is used mainly in the equine field for examination of the
bones and in cats for the examination of possible thyroid
● Radionuclide- an atom that disintegrates emitting
problems. Other areas of examination are possible and are
gamma radiation
used in specific cases.
● Radiopharmaceutical - a medicinal product that is
Nuclear medicine will demonstrate the function of a tissue or
used in the examination
organ and will show where a problem is but will not provide
a specific diagnosis. It involves the use of radioactively
● Half-life - the time taken for the radioactivity to
labelled drugs or radiopharmaceuticals, which are given intra
 decay to half its original value. It should be long
venously and are taken up by specific tissues depending on
enough to allow examination but not remain
their chemical nature.
unnecessarily after the examination.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
747
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
Care should be taken whenever radioisotopes are used and it
be carried to the region under examination and then emit
should be understood that all substances produced by the
radiation. This is detected using a gamma camera or scin
patient may be radioactive. Shoes should be changed before
tillation detector placed outside the patient in the region of
examination in case of patient urination and all urine should
interest.
be collected and prevented from entering the drainage
system. The patient should be isolated for at least 24 hours
after examination to ensure that radiation levels are within
Data collection
safe limits. Contact with patients should be minimal within
24 h of the examination.
The patient is placed in front of the gamma camera, which
detects any gamma radiation emitted. In a normal patient the
 gamma radiation emitted will demonstrate a normal distri-
bution and will be symmetrical. Any areas that are not sym-
Administration of the
metrical or evenly distributed with the isotope are interpreted
radioisotope
 as being abnormal.
A radioisotope is attached to the radiopharmaceutical, whose
The gamma camera sends signals via a crystal that emits light
type is determined by the body system under examination. If
and a photomultiplier tube to a computer system where
bone is to be examined then the radiopharmaceutical is
acquisition, processing and storage of the data will take place.
methylene diphosphonate and this is attached to tech-
All images will be displayed on a TV monitor and can be
netium-99m (9mTcMDP). Iodine is used for thyroid imaging.
manipulated and analysed. Printing can be performed on a
The radiopharmaceutical is given intravenously and will
conventional printer.
Computed
the patient to reach the detector (Fig. 32.22). The X-ray tube
and the detector move around the patient throughout the
tomography
examination. In modern machines this is in a spiral move.
ment. The detector then converts the X-rays into a signal that
 e  on ss sndn a a pasn aq en
This is also called CT or CAT (computer-aided tomography)
scanning and uses an X-ray tube mounted opposite a detec-
CT is ideal for demonstration of all organs within the
tor. The tube emits X-rays in a fan shape that passes through
body, especially the skeletal and central nervous systems, and
for the demonstration of tumours. It can be used in any
area to supplement the findings of a normal radiological
Image plane
examination.
Patient preparation and safety
As this examination takes time, the patient must be anaes-
thetised. A scout will be performed to provide a scan for plan-
ning and positioning. This is the most time-consuming
part of the examination. Any individual remaining in the
 ae pn de p e ra is s a  
normal radiation safety procedures and, if possible, the
 patient should be on its own in the room for the very short
time it takes to perform the scan. Monitoring can be per
formed throughout the examination so that the patient is not
Fig. 32.22 Function of a computed tomography scanner
left unattended.
748
3 Principles of diagnostic imaging
Maanetic resonance
4. The hydrogen protons of the body align with the
magnet as the patient enters the scanner. A radio
frequency pulse is applied to the patient, which makes
1ng
the protons “flip' as they absorb the energy
Magnetic resonance imaging is the most modern method of
5. After the radio pulse is turned off the protons return to
diagnostic imaging and does not use ionizing radiation. It
their original positions and emit any excess energy
was originally invented to unravel the atomic structure of
6. This energy is received by the scanner and is used to
mapping the location of the protons of the body tissues. This
n    s    
technique is ideal for demonstrating the central nervous
similar format to that of a CT scan.
system (Fig. 32.23) and the spinal column and for soft tissues
within joints; however, it is less sensitive to calcified areas
The magnet and detector surround a long tunnel, through
than CT scans.
which the anaesthetized patient moves very slowly. Scanning
times are longer than those for CT scans
Patient preparation
Bibliography
field and for this reason all collars, leads and other metallic
Ball J, Price T 1995 Chesney's radiographic imaging, 6th edn.
objects should be removed. An alternative method of diag-
Blackwell Scientific, Oxford
nostic imaging should be used for any patients with implants
or pacemakers. The scan is very noisy and takes time, so
Bushberg I, Seibert J, Leidholdt E, Boon J 1994 The essential
patients should be anaesthetized to reduce the distress
physics of medical imaging. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
s a   ls  n   a  
Philadelphia, PA
Specialized equipment is required and no metallic objects
should be taken into the scanner room.
Bushong S 1997 Radiological science for technologists, 6th edn.
Mosby, St Louis, MO
An MRI scan takes place as follows:
Fauber T 2000 Radiographic imaging and exposure. Mosby
1. The anaesthetised patient is placed on the table
St Louis, MO
2. A scout image is produced to plan the scan
Lee R (ed.) 1995 Manual of small animal diagnostic imaging.
British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
3. The patient is then placed within the magnet, which
has a strength of between 0.2 and 2 tesla (T). The
Mendenhall A, Cantwell H 1988 Equine radiographic procedures.
earth's magnetic field is 0.00006 T
Lee & Febiger, Philadelphia, PA
Recommended reading
c4
Bushong S 1997 Radiological science for technologists, 6th edn.
SE/M
Mosby, St Louis, MO
This book is everything you need to know about radiographic
physics.It covers all topics with clear and self-explanatory
diagrams, broken down into small topic areas for easy reading.
Easton S 2003 Diagnostic imaging. In: Aspinall V (ed.) Clinical
procedures in veterinary nursing. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford,
pp 227-264
This text provides a step-by-step guide to radiographic procedures.
Fig. 32.23 Magnetic resonance imaging scan of the spinat cord
behind the procedure provided.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
749
32
Principles of diagnostic imaging
Fauber T 2000 Radiographic imaging and exposure.Mosby,
Lee R (ed.) 1995 Manual of small animal diagnostic imaging.
St Louis, MO
Briftish Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham
Explains in detail exactly what happens when you alter
Although this book is aimed at radiotogy and diagnosis it provides
exposure factors and processing conditions.There are lots
of very clear diagrams and radiographs showing how exposure
be caried out. It looks at each radiographic projection in detail,
manipulation and equipment care and use can alter the
with positioning and then detailed discussion on what can be seen
image.
on the resultant radiograph.
750
0 Principles of diagnostic imaging
33
Management and care of
exotic species
Beverey Shingleton and Sarah Cottingham
Key Points
 More and more people are keeping various species of exotic
health and welfare. It is vital that the owner fully
pets, which have very different husbandry requirements
understands their husbandry requirements if they are not
from each other and from the more usual cats and dogs.
to suffer and die.
 The species of small mammal include the rodents and 
● Many species of bird are kept, in cages or in aviaries.
rabbits, which are omnivorous or herbivorous and are
They encompass several different classes of bird, each of
commonly kept in groups in cages, either indoors or
which has differing needs in terms of diet and enclosure.
outdoors. Ferrets are also popular; they are carnivorous
● It is essential that both the pet keeper and the
 and may be kept for hunting or as pets.
veterinary nurse understand all the requirements of these
● Reptiles include snakes, lizards and chelonians, i.e.
 animals so that they can live a long and healthy life, and
tortoises and terrapins. They are all cold-blooded and as
if they should be admitted to the veterinary surgery they
such are totally dependent on their environment for their
can be cared for appropriately.
● Birds - budgies, canaries, finches, parrots, quail, etc.
Introduction
Keeping exotic small mammals as pets can be just as reward-
ing as keeping dogs and cats and they can provide com-
As more and more people elect to keep exotic species as 'pets',
panionship and company in a similar way. However, when
the veterinary nurse must be aware of the animal's specific
choosing any species of exotic animal as a pet there are
needs in relation to their biology, husbandry, and general
advantages and disadvantages that need to be considered
care. Nurses need to be able to rise to the challenges these
before purchasing the animal:
animals bring and it must be highlighted that the prin-
ciples applied to nursing a sick or injured dog and cat are not
● How much time will their daily routine take?
necessarily transferable to a small rodent, reptile or bird.
● Will the animal need specialist veterinary care?
This chapter aims to provide sound practical details on how
● Will the owner need specialist knowledge to care for
to care effectively for those usual and sometimes unusual pets
 that are presented for treatment in veterinary practice.
the animal correctly?
● Is the animal suitable for children, adults and family?
The range of animals covered includes:
● How much is it going to cost to look after the animal?
● Small mammals - guinea pigs, rabbits, gerbils, mice,
 rats, hamsters and ferrets
The veterinary nurse is frequently asked to give advice on pet
selection and the advantages and disadvantages of exotic
● Reptiles - snakes, lizards, chelonian (shelled reptiles)
pet ownership are shown in Table 33.1.
Animal husbandry
Small mammals
Housing
● Correct levels of light
Housing is obviously one of the most important factors
in correct management. All small mammals have a general
● Correct temperature
requirement for the following:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
751
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.1 The advantages and disadvantages of keeping exotic pets
Pet
Advantages
Disadvantages
Small
Relatively cheap to buy animal and initial set up are also
Animal is often medically neglected due to misunderstanding/
mammals
relatively cheap. Daily management costs are low
ignorance of illnesses by owners. Many owners resent veterinary
Animals require less time for daily management, e.g.
costs as the animal was cheap to purchase
hamsters, gerbils and rats do not need walking; smaller
Animals often left in cage/enclosure without adequate
mammals do not need grooming
husbandry. As animal is in enclosure and often away from main
Small mammals are good for children to learn animal
management and responsible pet ownership
periods of time
Parent and child are able to learn to handle pet together
Children's small hands are often unable to hold animal correctly,
Children should always be supervised with animals and
leading to animal being dropped and injured. Scared pets then 
taught correct care and consideration
tend to bite in anticipation of being handled
As most small, exotic mammals are relatively short-lived, the
Situation spirals, children become nervous of handling the pet,
child has the chance to learn about grief process when the
and the pet becomes more aggressive, culminating in the animal
pet dies
not being handled and then becoming neglected
Often difficult to fnd veterinary surgery that treat exotic
mammals. Many veterinary surgeons still view small mammals as
non-treatable or'specialist'
Natural behaviour (many exotic mammals are prey species) and
husbandry needs often neglected through incorrect advice and
lack of knowledge of species requirements
Pets often inappropriately chosen for children, e.g. hamsters are
nocturnal and will be active and noisy at night, and not
appreciate being handled during daytime sleep
Reptiles
Keeping reptiles provides an unusual and stimulating
Specialist knowledge of reptiles and chelonians is needed
challenge. Wide variety available
Ignorance leads to poor husbandry and inadequate housing,
which results in disease and death
Some species of lizard and snake grow very large and have a
 poor temperament, which makes them unmanageable, leading to
abandonment or euthanasia
Hidden costs are heating, specialist feeding and lighting
requirements
10 sjuapol peap paay ot paau ayt puezsiapun zou op ajdoad awos
have live invertebrates as food in the house
As many reptiles carry zoonotic diseases, hygiene is very
important
Many small reptile species purchased for young children can live
in excess of 15 years - by then the novelty may have worn off!
Birds
Many species have been kept in captivity for hundreds of
Some psittacines, especially the parrot family, can be
years and are well established as companions. Interesting.
challenging and suffer behavioural problems if they lack
can be exhibited and readily breed in captivity
sufficient company and stimulus
Housing requirements are well documented and a range of
Many of the larger bird species are a huge monetary investment
housing is available
and security must be considered, as valuable birds are often
stolen from aviaries
Some of the housing on the market is too small and provides
inadequate space for flying
Aviaries can be expensive and need correct positioning and
adequate space
752
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.2 Housing materials that can be used for small exotic animals and preferable management of
each species
Rats
Ferrets
Guinea pigs
Hamsters
Gerbils
Mice
Rabbits
Material suitable
 Wire mesh and Wire mesh and
 Plastic and wire- Glass aquarium
 Glass aquarium
Glass aquarium
Wooden hutch
for construction
wood/metal-
wood-frame cage
topped cage
with multilevels.
with multilevels.
with multilevels.
including
of enclosure
framed cage
and wooden
Metal mesh lid.
 Metal mesh lid 
Metal mesh lid.
wooden frame
sleeping
 Plastic-based cage
Plastic based
 and wire mesh
enclosure
with metal bars
cage with metal
bars
Construction/
Not necessary
Wooden/metal
Wooden frame
Not necessary
Not necessary
Not necessary
Rest area must
material
frame with wire
and wire mesh,
be waterproof
suitable for
mesh sides.
with two
and draught-
indoor/outdoor
Chew- and
wooden sides
proof.Access
enclosure
escape-proof.
 and hiding 
to sleeping
Rest area must
area. Include
zone via a 'pop
be waterproof
a solid roof
hole' Wooden 
and draught
for predator
frame and wire
proof.
protection.
mesh, with two
Access to
Movable
wooden sides
sleeping zone
outside
and hiding
via a 'pop hole?
enclosure for
area. Include a
Concrete base for continued
solid roof for
outdoor run -
grazing.Rest
predator
easily cleaned
area must be
protection. The
and escape-proof
waterproof and
wire base of an
draught-proof
uni 10opzno
(rabbit hutch
should be dug
style is
0.5 m into the
suitable).
ground to
Access to
prevent the
 sleeping zone
rabbit
via a'pop hole'
tunnelling and
escaping
Suitable
Newspaper
Newspaper
Wood shavings
Wood shavings.
Wood shavings,
Wood shavings
Newspaper
 environment
lining with
Shredded paper
shredded paper
or shredded
lining for
substrate
wood
woodchip
or dry peat
paper
insulation and
shavings/
flooring for
(5-10 cm depth
absorption of
shredded 
 outside pen;
for burrowing).
urination,
paper
shavings can be
Provision of a
Wood shavings
covering the
used for indoor
sand bath
or hay for
surface
pen floor
substrate
covering
Rest area/
 Plastic or
Wooden boxes,
Separate rest
Shredded paper,
Shredded paper,
Shredded paper,
Hay, shredded
bedding
wooden boxes
non-chewable
area if housed 
hay or tissue
hay or tissue
hay or tissue
paper for
material
or tubes lined
plastic beds lined in a hutch. If
rabbits, e.g.
with shredded
with towels 0r
housed in pen,
Angora rabbits
paper Or
material for
cardboard or
shredded 
bedding. Can
wooden boxes
tissue
also use hay
lined with
shavings and
3
hay
TheCompleteTextbookof Veterinary Nursing
753
22
Management and care of exotic species
1.
Table 33.2 Housing materials that can be used for small exotic animals and preferable management of
each species--Cont'd.
Rats
Ferrets
 Guinea pigs
Hamsters
Gerbils
Mice
Rabbits
Feeding
Scatter
If housed
Plastic water
Water bottle and
Water bottle or
Water bottle or
Water bottle or
facilities
feeding OT
communally,
bottle, change
feeding bowls, or
bowls, feeding
bowls, feeding
bowls, feeding
food in a
more than one
water daily as
scatter feeding for
bowls, of scatter
bowls, or scatter
bowls, 0f
bowl; water
feeding and 
added vitamin
environmental
feeding for
feeding for
scatter feeding
 can be placed
 drinking station
C degrades
stimulation
environmental
environmental 
for
in a bottle
should be
when in contact
stimulation
stimulation
environmental
provided. Water
with metal
 stimulation
bottles rather
nozzle. Ceramic
than bowls
feed bowls
for hard food,
but scatter
feed is better
for mental
stimulation
Suitable
Ropes for
 Plastic drainage
Scatter hard
Fruit-tree wood
Fruit-tree wood
Fruit-tree wood
Large plastic
environmental
rats to climb,
pipes, tunnels,
food, fruit-tree
and cardboard
and cardboard
and card board 
tunnels dug
ennichment
 plastic tubing,
wooden stumps,
wood for
boxes to chew,
boxes to chew,
boxes to chew,
into the
material
non-chewable
chewing and
card board tubes
cardboard tubes
cardboard tubes
07 punoib
hammocks for
toys. Material
playing, large
for tunnels,
for tunnels,
for tunnels,
simulate
playing and
hammocks for
flower pots and
wheel for choice
wheel for choice
wheel for choice
shallow warren
sleeping in.
lying and 
drain pipes for
of exercise.
of exercise.
of exercise.
 tunnels and
 Plastic tubes
sleeping in
hiding in.
 Scatter feeding
 Multilayered
 Multilayered
provide
to climb
Various grass,
 or hiding food 
cage for interest
cage for interest
 protection,
through, boxes
herbs and 
for enrichment 
PP2 01 pUe
ppe 07 pue
mounds of soil
to chew and
weeds for
space. Scatter
space. Small
for raised view
hide in
 grazing, mental
feeding or
ropes for
points, large
stimulation and 
hiding food 
 climbing, millet
 boxes to hide
exercise
for enrichment
spays hanging
in and chew.
for enrichment.
Boxes filled
Scatter feeding
with meadow
or hiding food
sqiau pue Aeu 
for enrichment
to chew and
eat
● Space to exercise
Rabbits
● Sleeping area
Rabbits are active, energetic and often playful and would nat.
● Enclosure suitable for the individual species behaviour
urally exist in a social network, where the animals live com-
munally in underground areas known as warrens, which are
● Safety
dug out of the earth. As they are a prey species, their social
structure and behavioural repertoire is tailored toward sur-
● Adequate and appropriate environmental stimulation.
  n s     s  
 on grass and vegetation. The design of their housing should
However, each species has different behaviour patterns and
reflect their needs and allow rabbits to live as naturally as
therefore they have different housing requirements, which
possible.
should be reflected in their husbandry and environment.
 These will be discussed in more detail in the following
Over the last 10 years rabbit housing has changed dramati-
sections.
cally.
754
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.2 Housing materials that can be used for small exotic animals and preferable management of
each species-Cont'd.
Rats
 Ferrets
Guinea pigs
Hamsters
Gerbils
Mice
 Rabbits
Siting of
Place the cage
Wind-free area,
Wind free area,
Place the cage in
Place the cage
Place the cage
Wind-free area,
housing/
in a draught-
with outdoor area
awith outdoor
a safe area, not
in a safe area,
in a safe area,
with outdoor
extermal
and damp-free
having access
area having
 able to be knocked
 not able to be
not able to be
area having
enclosure
area.
to light and
 access to light
off tables or ledges. knocked off
knocked off 
access to light
Good source of
environmental
pue
Also place where
tables or ledges.
tables or ledges.
for production
natural light
stimulation
environmental
cats are unable to
Also place where
Also place where
of vitamin D
should be
stimulation.
climb on the lid.
cats are unable
cats are unable
 and interesting
available, but
The run will
Position cage for
to climb on the
to climb on
activities for
not direct
need to be
good ventilation
lid. Position
the lid. Position
mental
sunlight to
easily moved 
'syanep ou ng
cage for good
cage for good
stimulation.
cause
for continued
and out of direct
ventilation but
ventilation but
The rabbits'
hyperthermia
grazing
sunlight, but still 
no draughts,
no draughts,
need to feel
 poob e bumoe
and out of direct
 and out of direct
secure is
 source of natural
sunlight, but
sunlight, but still
 paramount to
746!1
still allowing a
poob e bumone
their welfare,
aninos pooo
 source of natural
 S0 siting in a
 of natural light 
light
safe area
where they do
not feel
vulnerable is
essential
Single or
Should be kept inSame-sex
Hamsters can be
Gerbils are
Mice are social
Rabbits should
communal
pairs or groups
couples or
aggressive so it is
 social and
and should be
be kept
housing
(collectively
groups will
advisable to keep
should be
housed in 
communally as
known as a
discourage
singly
housed in 
same-sex pairs
they are a
"business). Jills
fighting. If
same-sex pairs
Of colonies if
 social species.
should be kept
fighting does
Or colonies of
not intending
 Bucks housed
with a
occur, then
same sex if
to breed
separately
vasectomized
 neutering will
 not intending
unless
male
resolve the
to breed
castrated
problem if 
 sex-related
Size of 
50 × 30cm
1.5 m long ×
1.5 × 1.5 m ×
45 × 30 cm ×
45 × 30 cm
45 × 30 cm ×
Run - 1.5 m?
accom-
×50 cm high
0.75 m deep ×
25 cm high
25 cm high
× 25 cm high
25 cm high
for one rabbit;
modation
 is suffcient
1 m high is
for outdoor
sufficient for one 
sufficient for
sufficient for
increase by
for one rat
 suitable for 
run.
hamster
two or three
two or three
half for two
three ferrets
Hutch 30 cm
gerbils
mice
rabbits.
high, 0.2 m2
Hutch - 0.3 m?
floor area per
for one rabbit,
guinea pig
and 0.2 m? per
rabbit if
several
 Provision of
Not necessary
Provide litter
Not necessary
Not necessary
Not necessary
Not necessary
Provide litter
latrine area
trays, several for
tay if training
multihoused
a house rabbit 
 animals. Wooden
pellets can be
3
used as litter
material
TheCompleteTextbookof Veterinary Nursing
755
33
Management and care of exotic species
It is now common to house rabbits in two ways:
solid door covering the sleeping quarters (Fig. 33.1). The cage
must be draught-proof, waterproof and vermin-proof. The
● Traditional outdoor hutch and run
doors should have good safety locks that are fox-proof. The
hutch should have two areas, one for feeding and moving
● Indoors as a house rabbit.
about and a second for sleeping:
Both methods have their merits but whatever method is
● The feeding area should contain a water bottle, food
chosen it must satisfy the general requirements shown in
 and an ad lib hay supply
Table 33.2.
● The sleeping area should contain plenty of hay for
warmth and bedding material (Table 33.2).
Outdoor housing
Traditional outdoor housing usually takes the form of a
This type of housing is only recommended for overnight
wooden cage with a wire door covering half the front and a
safety and the rabbit should be free to roam during the day in
a fenced or penned area. There are a variety of pens available
(Fig. 33.2) and the design should include hiding places that
double as shelters from the rain and heat, two opaque sides
(four open sides will make the rabbit will feel vulnerable and
nervous) and plenty of tunnels sunk into the ground. Food
and water must be available at all times.
Rabbits should always be kept in groups or a minimum of a
pair, as they are social animals that have evolved to live in
colonies and will not be happy as single pets. If the owner
does not wish to breed then the group should either consist 
 of a single sex (although several bucks kept together may
fight) or the rabbits should be neutered.
House rabbits
Rabbits may be allowed to roam freely around the house and
Fig. 33.1 Iype of hutch suitabte for a rabbit. The cage is divided
fenced garden, which provides exercise and stimulation for
into the fiving quarters fined with short straw and the steeping
the rabbit. They should be provided with a low cage in which
quarters lined with softer hay
to hide and sleep and can be trained to use a litter tray. It is
important to be aware that rabbits will chew electrical wiring.
so care must be taken to prevent electrocution.
Housing rabbits within the veterinary practice
Separate accommodation should be provided for rabbits, as
they are a prey species and will suffer from stress if housed
with predator species, e.g. noisy dogs, cats and ferrets. Even
the smell of these animals, especially ferrets, can cause
immense stress to the rabbit.
Guinea pigs
Guinea pigs are easily housed in same-sex groups (Table 33.2).
The traditional rabbit hutch is acceptable for night-time
housing, as are large, purpose-built plastic and wire cages. If
using this type of enclosure outdoors a lid will be necessary
Fig. 33.2 Outdoor pen suitable for rabbits. The enclosure would
to protect animals from local cats. Any cage designed for
benefit from more hiding areas and toys to increase mentat
guinea pigs should have plenty of ventilation to reduce the
stimulation
 build-up of ammonia levels. Guinea pigs have easily damaged
756
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.3 Optimum, minimum and maximum housing temperatures for small mammals (where applicable)
Rabbits
Guinea pigs
Ferrets
Gerbils
Hamsters
Rats and mice
Optimum
Prefer cooler
18-26℃
15-21℃
15-21℃
19-23℃
15-27℃
temperature
temperatures
Minimum
4℃
18℃
Below 7°℃ a
Below 5℃
tem perature
heat lamp is
hamsters start
required
to enter hibermation
Maximum
28°℃+ may
26-30°C may
32°℃
Above 23℃ hamsters
30°C+ may cause heat
temperature
cause heatstroke
cause heat stroke
start to aestivate
stroke
wire cages (Fig. 33.3) with a solid floor but everything must
should be situated out of direct sunlight, as they are suscepti-
be easily cleaned. Litter trays should be provided in several
ble to hyperthermia (Table 33.3). Guinea pigs also need
positions throughout the enclosure for elimination.
access to an outdoor run on a daily basis for exercise and pro-
vision of fresh grass. Like rabbits, they require hiding places,
Mice, hamsters and gerbils
objects to chew, and items such as cardboard tubes to provide
environmental enrichment (Table 33.2).
Gerbils and mice naturally live in colonies so are much
happier kept in family units. However, Syrian hamsters are
Ferrets
naturally solitary and will fight to the death if kept with
another hamster. The small Chinese and Russian hamsters
Ferrets are extremely active acrobatic animals and they need
can be kept in groups, providing they are introduced when
plenty of space and exercise. They can be housed either
young, e.g. litter mates.
indoors or outdoors. The most important aspect in their
housing is to ensure that the enclosure is 'ferret proof', i.e. it
Mice, hamsters and gerbils are easily housed in aquarium tanks
is free of holes and escape proof. Ferret housing should
but there must be plenty of ventilation via a metal mesh lid
include the provision of a dark, quiet sleeping zone that can
(Fig. 33.4). This design is preferable to cages with metal bars as
be furnished with soft bedding material such as old sheets
they are able to accommodate a deep layer of substrate in which
and towels. This will allow the ferret to feel secure and
to burrow and dig. Gerbils in particular enjoy deep wood shav.
perform their natural hiding behaviour. It will also protect
ings, in which they can create a complex network of tunnels.
outdoor ferrets from extreme heat and cold. More than one
Mice are less inclined to burrow on such a large scale. Both
sleep zone is necessary for multiple-housed animals. Solid
species enjoy having multilayered enclosures with steps or
toys, tunnels and hiding places should be provided for envi-
ropes connecting the areas (Fig. 33.4).
ronmental enrichment. Ferrets can be housed in wooden/
3
Fig. 33.4 A mulfilayered aquarium type of cage suitable for a
Fig. 33.3 An outdoor ferret cage that provides fresh air,
cotony of mice. It inctudes numerous boxes fadders and tunnets for
entertainment and exercise
mentat stimufation
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
757
33
Management and care of exotic species
Mice produce pungent-smelling urine and should be
Rats
q n  ssn l s   a o p
cleaned less often; hamster cages need fully cleaning about
Rats can be kept in large wire cages that allow vertical and
once a month. All three species enjoy chewing and card-
horizontal movement. The enclosure needs to be situated in
board, small boxes and toilet roll tubes all make excel-
a dry, draught-free area with access to natural light. It is
lent shredding material and help to keep their teeth worn
important to provide plenty of items to climb on and chew
down.
(Fig. 33.5). Plastic tunnels are useful for both running
through and sleeping in. Rats enjoy comfortable bedding
Cages with different platforms and objects to supply envi-
areas where they can curl up in. The sleeping areas can be any
ronmental enrichment provide plenty of interest and exer-
solid type of box with a lid.
cise. Hamster balls are not recommended as once inside, the
animal has very little control over the action of the ball.
Hamsters will naturally want to move forward but the impact
Nutrition and feeding
of hitting other objects and the vibration produced may be
stressful to such a small prey species. Circular running wheels
Small mammals have different nutritional requirements.
are more appropriate as the animal has a choice as to whether
Table 33.4 shows a summary of appropriate nutritional
to use it and for how long. Sleeping zones are important
 requirements and feeding methods.
and wooden or non-chewable plastic houses stuffed full of
shredded paper or tissue are often used. Gerbils also enjoy
sand baths and a shallow bowl filled with sand should be
Breeding
pro vided.
Breeding small mammals is usually easy, rapid and may result
in large numbers of offspring. Most small mammals will
breed during the spring and summer and slow down or stop
when the day length shortens. This pattern of repeated
oestrus during the spring and summer is described as being
seasonally polyoesirous. Non-seasonally polyoestrous animals
will breed all year round regardless of the season (Table 33.5).
Small mammals may be either induced or spontaneous
ovulators:
● Induced ovulation - the female ovulates as a result of
the stimulation of coitus, e.g. ferret, rabbit
● Spontaneous ovulation - the female ovulates at a
fixed time during the reproductive cycle, e.g. guinea
pig, gerbil.
Most female mammals display a behaviour known as lordosis
when they are receptive to the male, i.e. the animal flattens
its back and raises the pelvis, indicating readiness to mate.
Many of the small mammals display more individual behav-
iour around breeding and gestation periods.
Rabbits
It is normal behaviour for the doe to pull hair from her
dewlap, sides and abdomen to line and soften the nest. This
behaviour normally takes place a few days or hours before
parturition. Once born, the doe only feeds her young (kits)
for about 3-5 min once a day and within this short feeding
horizontat exercise and has numerous toys and tunnels for
 'ra oq  o  n d a s an od
entertainment. The cage atso has a bedding area containing hay
kits are 'held up' in the nest for 3 weeks.
758
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.4 Nutritional requirements and feeding methods
Rabbits
Guinea pigs
 Ferrets
Hamsters
Rats
Gerbils
Mice
 Classification
Herbivore
Herbivore
Carnivore
Omnivore
Omnivore
Omnivore
Omnivore
by diet
Caecotrophs are
eaten as with rabbit
Cophrophagia
Caecotrophs excreted
DT caecotrophy
and eaten at night.
They contain high
levels of Vitamin B &
K, and twice the
protein and half the
fibre of hard faeces.
Caecotrophs are eaten
directly from the anus
many times a day
Special dietary
The digestive tract
Guinea pigs cannot
Strict carnivores In the wild
In the wild
In the wild
In the wild
needs
of the rabbit is
synthesize vitamin C
designed to eat
they will eat
they will eat
they will eat
they will eat
designed for high 
(ascorbic acid) as
their prey whole. invertebrates 
invertebrates
invertebrates
invertebrates
fibre, and low
they do not have the
 Ferrets need a
and insects.
and insects.
 and insects.
and insects.
protein, necessary
necessary enzyme
diet high in fat
Require a small  Require a small
Require a
Require a
for normal
L-gluconolactone
and protein,
proportion of 
proportion of
small
small
 peristalsis, correct
 oxidase. Fresh green
minimal fbre
animal-derived 
 animal-derived 
proportion of 
proportion of
absorption of
food must be given
and
protein, e.g.
protein, e.g.
 animal-derived animal-
vitamins and
daily. Water may be
carbohydrate
cooked chicken  cooked chicken
protein, e.g.
derived
prevention of
 supplemented with
cooked chicken protein, e.g.
dental disease.
vitamin C at a dose
cooked
Vitamin D and
of 10 mg/kg daily, or
chicken
calcium are
1 g/l water
necessary for
(change daily).
development and
Pregnant sows -
maintenance of 
30 mg/kg daily
bones and teeth
Foods to be 
Kale and spinach -
Fruits or sugary foods Sweet sugary
High-fat seeds, High-fat seeds,
avoided
may cause goitre;
foods, grains
e.g. sunflower
e.g. sunflower
 succulent fruit and
seeds, should
seeds should
vegetables, e.g.
not be fed 
not be fed 
lettuce, may cause
regularly, as
regularly as rats
diarrhoea. Sugary
may exacerbate
are prone to
foods
the onset of
obesity
osteoporosis
Diet
Ad-lib hay - high
Grass, ad-lib hay,
Dead chicks,
Can be fed a
Can be fed a
Can be fed a
Can be fed a
in fibre should be
fresh leafy vegetables, mice and rats.
commercial
commercial
commercial
commercial
the main food
 complete food in small Raw eggs.
complete food 
complete food
complete food
complete
source with a
amounts compared to  Specially
mix. Can also
mix. Can also
mix. Can also
food mix.
variety of
other food sources
prepared dry
be fed table
be fed table
be fed table 
Can also be
vegetables. Grazing
ferret food
SCraps
sCraps. Rats
SCraps
fed table
 in the garden will
may benefit
SCraps
provide much of
from small
the vegetation
pieces of cat
needed.
food
 Complementary
dried feeds can be
fed in addition
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
759
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.4 Nutritional requirements and feeding methods-Cont'd.
Rabbits
Guinea pigs
Ferrets
Hamsters 
Rats
Gerbils
Mice
Required
Recommended
Protein 18-20%;
If complete
Minimum of:
Minimum of:
Minimum of:
Minimum of:
nutritional
nutritional values
fibre 10%
dried food:
protein 16%;
protein 16%;
protein 16%;
protein 16%;
values (Adult)
for complete
fat 20%;
fat 4-5%
fat 4-5%.
fat 4-5%.
fat 4-5%
mix - fbre 16%;
protein 30-35%;
 Pregnant females Pregnant 
protein 16%
fbre 20-25%
may require
females may
protein levels
require protein
up to 20%
levels up to 20%
(Young)
Fat 20%;
protein 35%
Water/feeding
Scatter hay.
Water bottle, changed
Use heavy
Can be fed from Can be fed from Can be fed
Can be fed
methods
Grass and green
daily because of
ceramic bowls
a ceramic bowl
 a ceramic bowl
from a ceramic from a
vegetation can be
 gradual inactivation
for dry food as
of the correct
of the correct
bowl of the
ceramic bowl
grazed. Scatter dry
 of vitamin C. Food
ferrets will
height, or
height, or
correct height, 
of the correct
foods for mental
scattered for mental
 overturn lighter
 scatter fed for
scatter fed for
OT scatter fed 
height, or
stimulation.
 stimulation; grazing
bowls. Water
mental
mental
for mental
Scatter fed
Alternatively, the
area for grass/
bottle or heavy
stimulation.
stimulation.
stimulation.
for mental
food can be placed vegetation
ceramic drinking Water can be
Water can be
Water can be
stimulation.
 in a ceramic bowl.
bowls
given in a
given in a
given in a
Water can be
Use water bottles
ceramic bowl
ceramic bowl
ceramic bowl
 given in a
 or heavy ceramic
or by water
or by water
or by water
ceramic bowl
bowls
bottle
bottle
bottle
Or by water
bottle
 Table 33.5 Significant information required for breeding small mammals
Rabbits
Guinea Pigs
Ferrets
Gerbils
Mice
Rats
Hamsters
Sexual maturity
 Small breeds
(M) 3 months
6-12 months
(M) 9-18 weeks
6 weeks
4-5 weeks
(M) 8 weeks
4-5 months
(F) 2 months
(F) 9-12 weeks
(F) 6 weeks
Medium breeds
4-6 months
Large breeds
5-8 months
 Ovulation
10 h after
Spontaneous
30-40 h
coitus
 post-coitus
Gestation period 30-32 days
59-72 days
41-43 days
23-26 days
19-21 days
21-23 days
15-18 days
Litter size
4-5 kits
1-13 (2-4 is
1-18 kits,
3-8 pups
7-11 pups
6-13 pups
5-10 pups
(small breeds)
usual) pups/
average 8
8-12 kits
young
(larger breeds)
Normal birth
Varies for breed
45-115 g
6-12 g
2.5-3.5 9
1-1.5 g
4-6 g
1.5-3 g
weight
of rabbit 
Weaning age
By 28 days
21 days
6-8 weeks
21-28 days
18-21 days
21 days
19-21 days
full weaning
should have 
occufred
Guinea pigs
able to stand and, although they will start to eat solid food
Guinea pigs do not build nests to receive the young. When
within 24 h, they are unable to support themselves for 5 days,
the pups are born, they are fully furred with their eyes open,
and would normally consume milk for up to 3 weeks. Guinea
i.e. they are precocial. Within a few hours after birth they are
pig sows will also top and tail the pups post feeding.
760
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.6 Common diseases and clinical conditions of small mammals
Species
Disease
jesnej
 Symptoms
Age of animals
Treatment
Prognosis
affected
agent
 affected/incubation 
period
Hamster
Impacted
Food adhering to
Swollen cheeks
Any age
 Empty and flush
Good response
cheeks
cheeks
with water
Mice,
Viral
 Sendai virus
 Asymptomatic in
Any age
May cause death in
hamsters
pneumonia
parainfluenza type 1 
 adults
younger animals
Hamsters 
Bacterial
Pasteurella
Oculonasal discharge, Any age 
 Supportive treatment,
Good response
pneumonia
pneumotropica and
anorexia, dyspnoea
warmth，antibiotics
Streptococcus spp;
 stressful environment
can predispose
 animals to infection
Guinea pig  Mites
Trixacarus caviae - a
 Pruritus
Any age
Ivermectin (not
Good response
sarcoptic mite
licensed for rodents)
Guinea pig
Barbering/
Hair loss with no
 Loss of hair from
Any age, seen in
 Separate animals
Good response
 alopecia
obvious disease is
body with no
female guinea pigs
 often caused by
pruritus
late in pregnancy
other guinea pigs
Or self-inflicted
Rabbit
Pododermatitis Caused by pressure,
 Decubital ulcers on
Any age, larger-sized
Topical antibiotic
Good response to
and are often
 plantar surfaces of
rabbits, and those
 application and 
long-term treatment 
predisposed by
hind feet.
withless fur on
bandages changed at
 genetically reduced
Appearance of
 plantar surface 
a regular interval
amount of hair on
 superficial ulcers
the plantar surfaces.
and scabs, may
Also caused by wire
become abscess if
floored cages, poor
progress
hygiene and heavy
weight of larger
rabbits
Rabbits
Pasteurellosis
Pasteureffa muftocida Respiratory disease,
Seen in older animals
 Supportive therapy
Virtually impossible
bacterium
 sneezing or snuffles,
and those kept in
 depending on
to rid animal of
mucopurulent nasal
large colonies or
Symptoms. Antibiotics i
infection as very
discharge,
breeding rabbitories 
can be used for a
resilient. Euthanasia
conjunctivitis, skin
month, but symptoms
when symptoms
abscesses, inner ear
will return when drugs
causing distress of
infection, pyometra,
are stopped. Flush
untreatable with 
 pneumonia or
nares and nasolacrimal supportive
 septicaemia
7onp
treatment 
Rabbits
Coccidiosis
Hepatotrophic or
Diarrhoea, may cause Often seen in 
Treatment with sulfa
Good prognosis
enteric species of
fatal hepatic failure, 
younger animals,
 paonpal pue s6nup
Eimeria; vitamin E
icterus, hepatomegaly, especially weanlings
stress and increase in
may increase
and anorexia
hygiene levels
coccidiosis
Hamsters, mice, rats and ferrets
3
will wean at the appropriate time. Very little human interfer-
 Most small mammals, with the exception of the guinea pig.
 ence is necessary once parturition is complete. If the young
are born hairless, deaf, blind and completely reliant on the
are rejected, which may occur if the nest is disturbed by the
mother, i.e. they are aliricial. The mother feeds her young and
male or by human interference, then bottle-feeding and
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
761
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.6 Common diseases and clinical conditions of small mammals-Cont'd.
Species
Disease
jesnej
Symptoms
Age of animals
Treatment
Prognosis
affected
agent
affected/incubation 
 period
Rabbits
Gastric
Fur accumulation
Fur accumulation
High-fibre diets for
100% fatality if not
trichobezoars
in gut possibly due
in stomach, causing
prevention.
treated, otherwise
to excessive
blockage of the
Trichobezoars can be
good prognosis if
grooming (possibly
narrow pyloric lumen,
broken down using
diagnosed at treated 
stress-related) of
leading to gut
 proteolytic enzymes.
quickly
diet lacking in fibre
obstruction, gut
e.g. papain of
dilation and anorexia
bromelain (from health
food shops). Liquid
paraffin is also of use
Rabbits
NecrobacillosisFusobacterium
Bacteria may cause
 Not age-specific
Improve hygiene,
Good prognosis
(Schmorl's
necrophorum,
ulceration and
debride wounds, treat
disease)
associated with poor
necrosis of skin,
with topical and oral
hygiene, skin
 particularly on the
antibiotics
abrasions and dental
face, neck and
disease
plantar areas of feet,
and septicaemia
Rabbits
Fly strike
Fly eggs developing
Eggs are usually
Remove maggots,
 Prog nosis dependent
into maggots
layered around the
clean area (under
 on severity of skin
perineum area of the
sedation), antibiotics,
lesions and severity
rabbit. They then
intravenous fluid
of infection
develop into maggots
therapy, wound
and eat the skin of
management.
the animal, causing
Ivermectin
lesions
administration once
daily for 2 weeks
Ferrets
Distemper
 Distemper virus 
Mucopurulent ocular
Any age. Incubation
Can be vaccinated
100% fatal in ferrets
nasal discharge,
period is 7-9 days 
using canine vaccine -
and if it is
pue spaaa Asn 
Vaxitas D
contracted, the
facial lesions.
ferret should be
Hyperkeratosis of
euthanased
footpads. Possibly
anorexic and may be
ataxic or show signs
of nystagmus. Pyrexia
Ferrets
Ear mites
Otodectes cynotis
Black, sticky
Any age
Clean ears daily and
Good response
discharge
Ivomec injections,
 one injection repeated
in 2 weeks (not to be
used in pregnant
females). Can also use
ear drops with active
ingredient gamma BHC
Ferrets
Influenza
Ferrets are
Influenza causes
Any age of ferret
 Antibiotics may be
100% fatal in kits
susceptible to
upper respiratory
needed if secondary
several strains of
disease, with
infection is involved.
the virus
symptoms including
Often recovers without
anorexia, listlessness
the need for drugs
and nasal discharge
762
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.6 Common diseases and clinical conditions of small mammals—Cont'd.
Species
Disease
jesney
Symptoms
Age of animals
Treatment
Prognosis
affected
agent
affected/incubation
period
FerTets
Aleutian
Parvovirus. Immune-
Black, tarry faeces,
disease (AD)
mediated and may
recurrent fevers,
also cause some
weight loss, behaviour
immunodepression 
changes, e.g. increase
in aggression or
hyperaesthesia,
thyroiditis, paralysis
followed by death
Carriers may be
asymptomatic
Gerbils,
Tyzzer's
Clostridium piliforme,
Lethargy, anorexia
Weanlings are often 
 Antibiotics are largely
Usually poor
hamsters,
disease -
formerly Bacilfus
loss of weight,
affected. 10 days'
unsuccessful, but
rabbits
intra cellular
piliformis. Caused by
 piloerection
 incubation period
supportive therapy.
bacterium,
 poor sanitation of
IV fluid therapy, and 
can only be
deprivation of food
rehydration solutions
confirmed via
Of water
can be given
post mortem
Gerbils,
Wet tail
 Multifactorial,
Severe watery
Any age
Antibiotics are largely
 Usually high
hamsters
factors include
diarrhoea causing
unsuccessful, but 
mortality rate
stress, possibly
 staining around the
supportive therapy.
diet. Escherichia cofi
'Aieya] 'e 
intravenous fluid
and Campylobacter
anorexia
therapy and
spp. have both
rehydration solutions
been isolated from
 can be given
samples
Gerbis,
Salmonellosis
Satmonella enteritidis
 Moderate to severe
There is often no
Not recommended, as
High mortality rate.
guinea
and Satmonelfa
diarrhoea, staring
obvious incubation 
it is a zoonotic disease Sudden deaths in
pigs
typhimurium have
coat, dehydration 
period and patient 
and recovered patients
guinea pigs
both been isolated
and weight loss.
often dies very
often become carriers
as possible
Causes septicaemia
quickly
pathogens
 and abortion in 
guinea pigs
Gerbils,
 Neoplasia
 Spontaneous in
Tumours commonly
Over 2 years old.
 No treatment
High mortality rate
hamsters,
gerbils over 2 years
found on ovaries,
More common in
rats
old
skin (squamous cell
male hamsters 
carcinomas),
sebaceous glands,
kidney and adrenal
glands. In rats,
common tumour
sites are mammary
glands, abdomen 
and shoulders 
Gerbil
Swollen
Infection
Inflammation of
Anyage
Corticosteroids and
Good response
sebaceous
large ventral
 antibiotics; may need
3
glands
abdominal
surgery, Of
sebaceous gland
debridement in severe
 cases of infection
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
763
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.6 Common diseases and clinical conditions of small mammals-Cont'd.
Species
Disease
jesnej
Symptoms
Age of animals
Treatment
Prognosis
affected
agent
affected/incubation
period
Hamsters,
 Dental
Insufficient wear on
Malocclusion of
Any age
Regular clipping and
Good response
gerbils,
problems/
teeth caused by
teeth, problems
food that will wear
rabbits,
malocclusion
poor diet, and
possible with both
teeth down and
rats
malocclusion often
incisors and check
objects to chew
occurs as a result of
teeth. Teeth continue
bar chewing.
to grow and overlap,
Malocclusion is also
causing anorexia
the most common 
and drooling. Lastly,
inherited disease in 
in severe cases, oral
rabbits - change in
lesions and teeth
skull and jaw length
 growing into gums
Hamsters 
Constipation
Inappropriate diet,
 Swollen abdomen,
Often in hamsters of
Change diet to include Good response
often due to lack of
pain and anorexia
2 weeks old, just as
green vegetables and
moisture in food
the weaning process 
fruit; severe cases
starts
may need an enema
Common diseases and clinical
conditions
hand-rearing is possible. The exception is young ferrets who
Common diseases and clinical conditions of small mammals
are very difficult to hand rear when orphaned.
are shown in Table 33.6.
When selecting accommodation for a reptile or chelonian the
following must be considered:
The species of reptile kept as exotic pets includes various
● Natural history of the species. The nurse must know
types of lizards and snakes and the shelled reptiles or chelo-
the species' country of origin and from this must
nia, i.e. tortoises and terrapins (see also Ch. 5) (Table 33.7).
understand:
They are a diverse group of animals and the large number of
species available for sale and being presented for treatment in
● The need to house the reptile in a temperate, desert
veterinary practice means that the veterinary nurse must
 or tropical environment
 have a good understanding of their basic housing, nutritional
and breeding needs.
● The reptile's activity pattern, i.e. nocturnal,
 crepuscular or diurnal
● The reptile's requirements for a terrestrial, arboreal,
 aquatic or semi-aquatic set-up.
Reptiles are ectothermic or cold-blooded and it is important
to remember that their health and wellbeing depend entirely
● The size, shape and materials used in vivarium
on the environment in which we place them. If we get it
construction (Table 33.8)
wrong it can lead to stress, which in turn can cause immuno-
suppression, ill health and death.
● Any animal accommodation should:
Reptiles are housed in vivaria, which are available in a variety
● Be durable
of shapes, sizes and construction materials Figures 33.6
and 33.7 show different types of set-up.
●Be safe and secure
764
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.7 Common reptilian species kept as pets in the UK
Species
Country of origin
Food
Reproductive data
 Additional comments
Snakes
5e0g
Common boa
Central and South America from
Depends on the size of
Live bearers, i.e. Dvoviviparous;
Heavy-bodied species
(Boa constrictor
Mexico to northern Argentina
the snake - rodents
 20-60 in a litter. Young approx.
average 3 m but can grow
constrictor)
(mice, rats, gerbils);
35-60 cm in length
larger. Require temperature
chicks (day-old);: birds
range of 28-30°C. Provide
with a large ceramic water
 bowl, as this species likes
to soak
Pythons
 Royal python
Africa
Depends on the size of
Oviparous; lays up to 7 eggs;
Short, stocky snake that
(Python regius)
the snake - mammals,
incubation can last 40-80 days
reaches about 1.2 m in 
rabbits, birds chicks
and young measure 40 cm
length. Although usually
good-natured, can refuse
to eat for periods of time -
making it unsuitable for
the novice. If threatened
will go into a ball Vivarium
temperature range 25-30°℃
Burmese python 
Asia
As above
Oviparous; reported to lay up to
Albino or golden Burmese
(Python moturis
100 eggs (more realistically.
have bright yellow
bivittatus
~30). Incubation temperature
markings on a white back
30°℃ and can last 60-80 days.
ground. Very large snake -
Young measure 40 cm
grows up to 6-7 m. Grows
rapidly and reaches 3-4 m
in 2 years. Because of
potential size, feeding and 
space requirements, not
recommended as a pet
Reticulated
South-east Asia
As above
Similar to Burmese python
Very large snake - grows up
python (Python
to 9 m. Not best-tempered 
reticutatus)
snake and because of size
and aggressive nature not 
recommended as a pet
Colubrids
Corn snake
 North America
Depends on the size of
Oviparous: breed snake from
Many colour mutations.
(Elaphe
the snake: mammals,
2 years old. Lays 12+ eggs
Good pet for novice keeper
guttata)-rat
rabbits, birds chicks
 1 month after mating. Incubate
Good temperament, grows
snake family
at 28° C for ~60-70 days
to 1 m, easy to manage
and eats readily in
captivity
King snake
North America
As above
Oviparous: breed from 2 years
Adults can grow to 2 m but
(Lampropeltis
of age. Usually produce two
average length 1 m. Colour
getufus)
clutches in each breeding season.
usually black with yellow or
Clutch size 5-20 - subspecies
white markings. Relatively
vary. Incubate at 289C for
easy to keep in captivity.
60 days
Best kept on its own, as
3
they have cannibalistic
tendencies
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
765
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.7 Common reptilian species kept as pets in the UK-Cont'd.
Species
Country of origin
Food
Reproductive data
Additional comments
Garter snakes
Common garter
North and Central America
Earthworms, fish, small
Ovoviviparous: clutch size 10-20;
 Active snake and requires
snake
rodents, pinkies
gestation period 4-5 months
relatively large
(Thamnophis
accommodation relative to
sirtatis)
size. Temperature range
20-30°℃. Small snake:
grows to 0.5-1 m. Care
when feeding fish, as this
must be blanched for 2 min
to kill antivitamin, which
causes thiamine deficiency
Lizards
Geckos
Leopard gecko
Central Asia
Insects, (crickets,
Oviparous. Female can lay up to
Good beginner's lizard -
(Eubtepharus
hoppers, locusts)
five clutches per season. Eggs are
does wellin captivity?
macutaris)
 neonate mammals
laid in pairs in moistened sand,
friendly easy to keep.
Fat-tailed gecko
Norh-east Africa
vermiculite or peat, and have
Nocturnal temp daytime
Hemitheconyx
soft, leathery shells. Best removed 25-30°C. Male geckos are
audicinctus
and placed in an incubator.
very teritorial and will
Temperature of 27-29oC produces
fight, so best kept on their
females, 32-33°℃ will produce
own or with females at a
males. If eggs stuck together do
ratio of 1:4.
 notattempt to separate. Incubate
for 6-8 weeks
Day gecko
Also offer fruit puree
Oviparous: very similar to leopard
Lively and quick, need tall,
Phetsuma
baby food
geckos except that eggs have
well planted vivarium. Very
cepediana
hard shells
colourful. Both sexes can
be territorial and need a
large vivarium so they can
etreat to their own area
Agamas
Water dragon
Indonesia
Insects, crickets, locust,
 Oviparous: female can lay up to
Diurnal back ground temp
(Physignathus
small rodents, pinkies,
five clutches per breeding season
of 25-30°℃. Requires good
cocncinus)
some fruit and
of 10-15 eggs. Eggs laid in damp
 ultraviolet and florescent
vegetable matter
sand or vermiculite and should 
lighting. Tall vivarium, as
Uromastyx or
 Arid deserts and steppe of
Fruit and vegetable
be removed and placed in an
 arboreal. Diurnal. Need
dab lizard
north Africa, Middle East and
matter (foliage
incubator at 28-30°C. Hatch
high daytime temperature
(Uromastyx
northern parts of India
leaf-based diet),
in approx. 60 days. Hatchling
40°℃ plus in the basking
acanthinurus)
occasional insect
size 15 cm. Difficult to breed
area and background
in captivity
temperature of 25-30°℃
● Be easy to clean
accommodation is specialized, prices can be high. For the
● Have ease of access.
accommodation to last as long as possible, to ensure human
 and animal safety and to maintain hygiene standards, the
materials and the design of the vivarium must be robust,
Durability
practical and be able to withstand the required levels of heat
It is not unusual for animal accommodation to cost more
and humidity, and the possibility of destruction by the
than the creature to be housed and, as reptile and chelonian
reptile.
766
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.7 Common reptilian species kept as pets in the UK—Cont'd.
Species
Country of origin
Food
Reproductive data
 Additional comments
Chameleons
Jackson's
Africa - regions around
Winged insects,
Oviparous or ovoviviparous
Fascinating species.
chameleon
Mount Kenya
 occasional pinky,
depending on species. Can be
Arboreal and require tall 
(Chamaeleo
waxworms
difficult to breed if conditions
vivarium. Can suffer from
jacksoni)
not correct. Jackson's chameleon
 stress if housing is
Panther
Madagascar
is ovoviviparous: up to 50 young
incorrect. As most will not 
chameleon
3 cm in length born approx.
drink from water bowl.
(Chamaeleo
9 months after breeding++
foliage needs regular
pardatis)
misting. Highly territorial,
so best kept on their own
 OT one male with females,
but fghting may still 
DCCUT
seuenbi
Green iguana
Central America to northern 
Fruit + vegetable matter Oviparous: 20-40 eggs per clutch;
：Very large lizard
(Iguana iguana)
regions of South America
(foliage - leaf-based
hatch after 10-15 weeks
100-200 cm in length.
diet). Specialist dietary
Needs tall vivarium and
requirements 
males can be very
aggressive. Not ideal pet
Monitors/tegus
Tegu (Tupinambis Africa-Asia
Mammals, eggs, birds
Oviparous - limited details on
Very large, heavy-bodied
spp.)
captive breeding
lizard; can grow to 1-3 m
Monitor (Varanus
and has a dubious
spp.)
temperament. In my
opinion, not suitable as a
pet
Skinks
 Blue-tongued
Australasia
Insects, snails,
Viviparous: litter size 5-10.
Generally good-natured and
skink (Fitigua 
mammals 
Gestation period varies according
can make good pets. Males 
gigas)
to background temperature
can become aggressive
during breeding season
Chelonia
 Mediterranean tortoises
 Spur-thigh
Four subspecies that range
Variety of leafy
 Oviparous: gestation period
With the exception of
tortoise (Greek)
around Spain, Morocco, Algeria
vegetables salad crops
30 days to 3 years. Females can
Horsfield's tortoise (Testudo
(Testudo graeca)
Tunisia, Turkey, Iran, Israel
proprietary dry foods 
retain sperm. Female can be
horsfieldi), which is not
 observed digging several holes.
truly a Mediterranean
Hermann's
Two subspecies: western
Nests before finally laying 3-12
tortoise, all are protected
tortoise (Testudo
 Hermann's range from Spain
's66a
under CITES legislation and
hermanni)
through the south of France to
Depending on temperature
are classifed as Annex A.
western Italy
and species, eggs need to be
This means that they
incubated for 7-20 weeks at
require DEFRA certificates
30-34°C. Sex can be determined
in order to be bought, sold 
by temperature - higher produces
Or traded
 Marginated
Greece and its islands
females, lower produces males
3
tortoise
(Testudo
marginata)
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
767
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.7 Common reptilian species kept as pets in the UK—Cont'd.
Species
Country of origin
Food
Reproductive data
Additional comments
Horsfield's
Two subspecies: between them
tortoise (Testudo
range is Iran, Afghanistan,
horsfietdi)
Kazakhstan
East and West African terrestrial chelonia
Bell's hinge-back
Wide range in tropical and sub
Needs a diet of
Clutches of 1-3 eggs
These have a hinge across
tortoise (Kinixys
tropical Africa and occurs in
vegetables, fruit and
the rear portion of the
betliana)
savannah habitats
meat. Foods range from
carapace, which slopes
those fed to
down steeply from the
 Mediterranean tortoises
middle of the ffth
with additions of fruits
vertebra. Newly hatched
such as banana, melon
young show no sign of a
peach, grapes. Will eat
hinge. As they are a
fange of invertebrates
tropical species they do not
and dog or cat food.
hibernate -keep at
Supplement diet with
temperature of 30°℃+
vitamins and minerals
Leopard
East and West Africa
Mainly vegetarian -
Clutches of 5-30 eggs laid in
Large specimens can weigh
tortoise
 prefers green vegetables
 nests dug by female. Can take
up to 43 kg but an average
(Geochetone
to fruit 
4-18 months to hatch
is 10-15 kg. Require high
pardatis)
depending on temperature
temperatures - 30-35°℃.
Do not hibernate
 North American species
American box
Six subspecies and range from
Eat a mixture of meats
Mating occurs post-hibernation.
Will hibernate for short
turtle (tortoise)
 Mexico to Florida
and vegetable matter.
Lays clutches of 2-7 eggs.
period but must be in good
(Terrapene
Feed tinned dog cat
Eggs need high humidity
health. Like to soak in dish
carotina)
food, invertebrates,
of warm water. Size
fruits and leafy
10-12.5 cm
vegetables, plus
vitamin and mineral
 supplementation
South American tortoises
Red-footed
Tropical South America
Mixture of fruits and
Lays clutches of 5-13 eggs. Eggs
As they come from areas of
tortoise
vegetables with added
require high humidity. If ideal
high humidity they can
(Geochetone
tinned dog or cat food
 conditions maintained, hatching 
easily dehydrate so need
carbonaria)
takes about 4 months
daily bathing. Vivarium
Yellow-footed
Tropical South America
temperature 28-30°℃. Do
tortoise
not hibernate.Maturity
(Geochetone
reached at about 15 years
denticulata)
Or when animal reaches
20-30 cm in length
Indian star
Arid lands - India, Pakistan
See information for
See information for Leopard
Very attractive tortoise
tortoise
and Sni Lanka
Leopard tortoise
tortoise
with a beautifully
(Geochetone
patterned shell
etegans)
Security
lated python 'on the loose'. Vivarium locks should be used
This is a major consideration, as all animals need to be secure
and all vents and joints should be sealed and securely placed.
and safe. Some reptiles are excellent escape artists and neigh
All materials should be free of rough, sharp or jagged edges to
bours are never pleased to hear that there is a 14-foot reticu-
prevent injury to the reptile and the handler.
768
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.7 Common reptilian species kept as pets in the UK—Cont'd.
Species
Country of origin
Food
Reproductive data
Additional comments
Turtles and terrapins (American)
Red-eared
Eastern USA to Mexico
 Meat, fish, invertebrates, Captive-farmed in country of
 Aquatic but need access to
terrapin
pinkies, dried cat food,
 origin and lay up to 12 eggs
land and basking area.
(Chrysemys
some vegetable matter.
Water temperature
scripta elegans)
Vitamin and mineral
24-30°℃. Now a real
 supplements
problem in the UK, having
been released into ponds
and rivers, where they are
having an effect on native
 species. Can carry
salmonella. Grow up to
30 cm
Alligator
South-east USA
Meat, small rodents'
Lay up to 50 eggs per clutch
Very large, heavy-bodied
snapping
invertebrates, fish and
 chelonian with a dubious
turtle
 some vegetable matter.
temperament, so must be 
(Macrochetys
Requires vitamin and 
handled with care. Do not
temmincki)
mineral supplement
hibernate
Ease of cleaning
Shape and size
Materials used in the construction of the vivarium should
Reptiles come in a variety of shapes and sizes and the chosen
have a smooth surface, be impervious and be easy to clean.
accommodation should reflect their physical needs.
Many reptiles live in a hot, humid environment, which
Terrestrial or ground-dwelling species require a horizontal
makes ideal conditions for pathogens to grow and multiply.
vivarium (Fig. 33.7a); arboreal or tree-dwelling animals
 To ensure good health, the ability to clean the animal's
require a taller vivarium (Fig. 33.7b); and the burrowing
accommodation effectively is of the utmost importance.
species require a deep base to hold a depth of substrate.
Ease of access
Substrate
 It is imperative to be able to gain access to the reptile and its
environment. You should not have to be a contortionist to
Table 33.8 lists the common substrates. This is the medium
get into the animal's accommodation and the design of the
that sits in the bottom of the vivarium to absorb faeces and
vivarium and its furnishings should allow safe handling and
urine and, in the case of burrowing animals, allows them to
safe cleaning
display their natural behaviour. One would normally select a
Fig. 33.6 Schematic plan of
Guarded
Ventilation 
heat source
Grid
a typicat vivarium
UV
0
light
 Sensor 
Mater
Basking
bowl 
area
3
Hide
 Substrate
area
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
769
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.8 Substrates and materials suitable
for vivaria
58
Material for vivarium
Substrate
construction
Melamine chip board*
Peatt
Moulded plastics+
Wood chips
Glass tanks
Vermiculitet
 Marine plywood
Bark chips
Fibreglasst
Corn cobs
Plastic tanks (fauna boxes)
Repti/calci sand (for desert species)l
Small plastic tubs (hatchling 
Newspaper
snakes)
Gravel
S11
Alfalfa pellets
Wood-based cat litterst*
Sphagnum mosst
*Not ideal for species requiring high humidity. tGood for retaining moisture
and humidity. +Excellent for cleaning - can be jet-washed. If eaten, can 
cause gut impaction or get stuck in mouth, so should be avoided. YGood for
aquatic species and species requiring high humidity. Poor insulation, poor
secunity, difficult to attach fittings. lonly sand produced specifically for
reptiles should be used as others contain silica, which will dehydrate the
animal. **Only litter free from pine oils should be used.
● Provide the reptile with exercise opportunities
● Prevent boredom and behaviour problems
● Provide the reptile with security (somewhere to
hide)
●Make the vivarium visually interesting.
Hides
One of the main provisions should be a series of hides. These
make the reptile feel safe and secure, and reduce stress. As a
 guide, and to reduce stress, when a snake or lizard is in the
hide it should be able to touch three sides. Most chelonians
require some form of hide.
Branches
Textured branches that can support the weight of the reptile
Fig. 33.7 Vivana (a) Vivarium suitabte for a terrestriat snake
 are needed for climbing and basking.
(b) Large watk-in vivarium suitabte for a large arboreat lizard such
Stones
as α green iguana. Iguana iguana
Make sure that stones or large, heavy objects in the vivarium
substrate that is both comparable with the animal's natural
have a flat, smooth base to prevent them from rolling on to
habitat and aesthetically pleasing.
the reptile and causing injury.
Feeding equipment
Cage furnishings
Large, heavy ceramic bowls provide drinking water and a
 Furnishings are important as they:
bathing facility.
770
Management and care of exotic species
Basking and swimming areas
● Aquarium heaters (as used by fish keepers) - for
Aquatic and semi-aquatic species, e.g. terrapins and box tor-
 aquatic and semi-aquatic chelonia. As aquatic species
toises, need an area in which to swim and an area in which to
are very clumsy and frequently break their tank
bask - this should take up approximately one-third of
heaters, a guard should be fitted.
the tank, leaving the rest as water. There should also be a filtra-
tion system to prevent the water becoming stagnant and pol-
Most good tank heaters will be fitted with a thermostat that
 luted - if the water is not filtered it must be changed daily
allows adjustments to the temperature settings. A liquid
crystal thermometer can be placed on the outside of the tank
Plants
to monitor the ambient temperature inside the tank.
 If living, these may provide humidity and a place to hide. They
also look nice but are difficult to keep clean. Be warned - lizards
For those species that require a basking area, such as the red.
will ingest plants and, if these are made of plastic or silk, they
eared terrapin (Pseudermys scripta elegans), an incandescent
- to dn mos sou m pe ud is asn 
light or spotlight fitted with a reflector should be positioned
over an area of “land'. This should be about 23 cm above the
Vivarium conditions
basking spot and reach temperatures of at least 30-35?C. The
provision of such an area allows the chelonian to bask and
Once a suitable vivarium has been selected there are four
prevents respiratory disease and shell disorders.
main factors to consider:
Make sure that all heat and light sources are guarded, as rep-
Ventilation
tiles can suffer serious burns from sitting on lamps. Snakes
This is achieved by positioning holes at the back or sides of
have few nerve endings in their ventral scales and will not
the cage. To achieve a good through-flow of air and prevent
realise that they are roasting themselves.
draughts, vents should be placed opposite each other but at
different levels, e.g. one at the top and one at the bottom.
The vivarium set-up must allow the reptile to thermoregulate
The holes should not allow the reptile to escape and may
by moving between different temperature zones, enabling it
need to be covered in wire mesh.
to warm up or cool down as necessary (Fig. 33.8). This is
achieved by careful positioning of the heat source(s), creating
Heating
a temperahure gradient between hot and cool spots within the
 This is essential, and an understanding of reptile biology is
vivarium and allowing the reptile to control its body temper-
important. As ectotherms, reptiles rely on external heat
ature at different times of the day. The temperature gradient
sources to warm up their internal body temperature. All rep-
is regulated by the use of thermostats and thermometers.
tiles have a preferred body temperature (PBT) or preferred
optimum temperaure zone (POTZ), which relates to the
Overheating the reptile can be just as detrimental to its
optimum temperature that the species requires for its metab-
health as underheating. For the POTZ of individual species,
olism to function correctly, i.e. movement, feeding, diges-
refer to specialist books. Sick or injured reptiles will seek out
tion, enzyme activity, reproduction, etc. This temperature
must be achieved within the vivarium.
Vivarium temperatures must take into account the species of
reptile and its POTZ. Many species require hotter or cooler
temperatures depending on the time of year, so the individ-
ual species' requirements must be researched, but tempera-
ture guidelines are:
● Tropical species - 26.5-37°C
● Temperate species - 24-29.5°C.
The most common forms of heat source are:
● Ceramic and tube heaters
3
● Reflector bulbs with or without ultraviolet (UV)B content
Fig.33.8 Femate green iguana (Iguana iguana) basking under α
● Heat mats and rocks
mercury vapour heat tamp
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
771
33
Manaqement and care of exotic species
the high ranges of their POTZ to aid their immune system
Humidity
Drug absorption and utilization is influenced by the species'
This is the amount of moisture in the air. The humidity
 POTZ, so when reptiles are receiving medication or anaes-
requirements will depend on the natural habitat of the
thetics the provision of heat is essential.
species; for example, a rainforest species will require a higher
humidity than a desert species. Most species do well at a rel-
Lighting
ative humidity of 50-70%. The humidity can be increased by
There are three main types of lighting used for reptiles
q  ss hd     y ds tn
 s  n dd ss n so s d 
● Incandescent bulbs, e.g. light bulbs, coloured light bulbs
cream tub or plastic sandwich container. Correct humidity is
necessary to allow normal ecdysis (shedding of the skin).
● Ultraviolet strip lights with UVB and UVA content
Decreasing ventilation should not be used as a means of
increasing humidity, as this can lead to an increase in fungal
● Reflector bulbs (can be combined with UVA and UVB).
disease.
Lighting provides the reptile with a photoperiod, i.e. the
 When caring for a reptile within a veterinary practice it is essen.
amount of light in a normal day, and stimulates natural
tial to monitor the environment of the patient. Figure 33.9
behaviour, e.g. basking, eating, reproduction. The amount of
shows a suggested format for a hospital chart
light depends on the species’ native environment and the
time of year. For example, a tropical species will require on
average a 13-h day/1l-h night summer cycle and an
11-h day/13-h night winter cycle, each lasting 6 months.
Temperate climate species should be on a four-season cycle
that provides 15 h of daylight during the summer, 12 h
Nutrition and feeding
during the spring and autumn and 9 h during the winter.
Reptiles present a wide spectrum of nutritional challenges
A full-specirum light is one that mimics the rays produced by
because there is little information about what they eat in the
the sun and includes UV light.
wild and we can only assume, rightly or wrongly, that what
we offer the captive reptile goes some way to mimicking its
Sunlight produces UV light, which can be separated into UVA
natural diet.
which stimulates behavioural and physiological effects. and
UVB. necessary for calcium metabolism and the activation of
vitamin D. UVC is not important in reptile husbandry.
Snakes
A full-spectrum UV light is important for all diurnal, tropical,
subtropical and desert lizards and chelonia, and also for some
All snakes are carnivores and should be offered a whole prey
snakes. In an ideal situation we would allow our captive rep-
item.
tiles to bask in natural sunlight outdoors, but the majority of
captive reptiles are kept indoors in a controlled environment
Guidelines:
and we have to supply an artificial light source. For example,
Mediterranean tortoises would enjoy in excess of 14 h of sun-
● Always select a food item that is as near as possible to
shine during the summer months, reducing to 12 h in the
the animal's wild diet, e.g. offer brown mice rather
spring and autumn, while red-eared terrapins require
than white mice
a full-spectrum UV light 30 cm above the basking area for
effective calcium metabolism.
● Select prey items that the snake can swallow
UVB lights do not have an infinite lifespan and, although the
● If offering frozen foods, defrost first
white light may still be seen the UVB content is generally
exhausted within 6-9 months of use. For satisfactory vitamin
● When fhoroughly thawed, warm by sealing the food
D synthesis the UVB light needs to be on for 10-14 h a day
item in a plastic bag and then immersing the bag into
warm water - reptiles do not like eating refrigerated
The height should be measured from where the rays will
foods!
strike the animal, not from the base of the cage. The height
should be reduced for young animals to maximise UVB uti-
● Offer the dead prey head first, using feeding tongs, as
 lization. Replace UVB lights every 6 months if young growing
this will keep human smell off the food and will help
stock are kept.
to prevent the feeder from being bitten
772
 Management and care of exotic species
Animal details
Owner details
Name
Name
Species and details
Address
Sex'age
Preferred temperature zone and humidity
Diet preference
Tel no.
Date
Temp am/pm
% A印unH 
Food offered
Food eaten
Uratefaecespassed
 Signs of shedding
Hygiene
Comment signature
Bbasking
 Indicate if sprayed 
Amount (F)
Amount
 Spot clean
C cool end
Water offered (vw')
AM and PM
AM and PM
Total clean
The
AM
PM
Comment
Comment
Complete
R
C
AM
PM
W
4
TextbookofVeterinary
Nursing
773
Fig. 33.9 Suggested husbandry sheet to monitor the environment and nutrition of the reptitian patient
33
33
Management and care of exotic species
meal has been digested and faeces passed. For example,
a garter snake (Thamnophis spp.) will require feeding
every 3-7 days, depending on age and size, but a large
adult Burmese python (Python m. bivittaus ) will only
require feeding once a month
● There is no need to feed live vertebrate prey in the UK,
as most captive snakes will readily eat dead prey. It is
probable that anyone found feeding live vertebrates
could be prosecuted under the Protection of Animals
Act 1911
● When feeding raw fish to snakes such as the garter
snake, the fish must be blanched in hot water for
approximately 10 min to destroy the antivitamin
thiaminase. This will destroy the B vitamin thiamine
Fig. 33.10 Hognose snake eating a dead mouse
and cause convulsions and loss of the righting reflex.
 Do not feed a snake ...
...before an anaesthetic
... when it is shedding or moulting
... when it is in brumation (hibernation) or getting
ready for brumation.
Lizards
Lizards present more of a challenge when trying to meet their
dietary demands and their feeding habits can be classifed as:
● Carnivorous - eating whole prey items such as
rodents, birds, amphibians and other small lizards
Fig. 33.11 Various sizes of dead rodent prey used to feed snakes
(Fig. 33.11)
and carnivorous fizards
● Insectivorous - eating a range of invertebrates such
● It may be necessary to wriggle the food item slightly in
as crickets, locusts, mealworms and waxworms
front of the snake to stimulate the strike response
(Fig. 33.12)
this method is especially helpfully with reluctant
feeders or arboreal species
● Herbivorous - eating a range of plant, fruit and
vegetable matter
● To prevent accidental cannibalism, never feed snakes
 d   a  a   
● Omnivorous - eating a mixture of both vegetation
and animal matter.
● To prevent regurgitation, once the snake has accepted
 its prey item it should be left alone and not handled
Guidelines: first investigate whether the lizard is carnivorous,
for 24-48 h
herbivorous, etc. (Table 33.7).
● Snakes are opportunist feeders and do not require
Herbivores, e.g. green iguana (Iguana iguana).
feeding every day; they may have periods of fasting
uromastix (Uromastyx acanthinurus)
● Frequency of feeding will depend on the age of the
●Offer a variety of fresh, leafy vegetables, fruits, etc., to
snake and the species. As a guide, feed as much as the
 meet the lizard's needs (Table 33.7), e.g. a green iguana
snake will consume in one meal then wait until the
up to 2 years of age must be offered a diet consisting
774
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.9 Calcium to phosphorus ratio in some
commonly fed vegetables and fruit
Food item
Ratio
Broccoli leaves
3:9
Cauliflower florets
0:6
Celery stalk*
1:4
Spinach raw*
2:0
Alfalfa sprouts
0:5
Broccoli stems florets chopped
0:7
Cabbaget
2:0
Chinese cabbage (Pak choi)
2:8
Red cabbage
1:2
Carrots shredded
0:6
 Parsley chopped
3:3
Green peppers
0:2
Cucumber
1: 1.1
Lettuce romaine
0:8
Lettuce iceberg+
0:9
Tomatoes
2:0
Watercress
4.3:1
Apples
0.7:1.0
Bananas
:0
Grapes
0:7
Melon (flesh)
0.6:0.9
Strawberries
0:7
Pears
1:0
Peaches
+:0
Fig. 33.12 (a) Black crickets suitabte for insectivorous lizards; they
*Oxalates occur in spinach, cabbage, celery rhubarb, peas, beet greens. They
are more nutritious and easier for the fizard to catch (b) Locusts are
bind to calcium and trace minerals, preventing their absorption from the gut.
dvailable in various sizes; care must be taken when feeding large
Although these are high in calcium should only be offered in less frequently
focusts as the barbs on their hind fimbs can penetrate the mouth or
and in smaller amounts (once a fortnight)
diqestive tract
tCabbage cauliflower, pak choi, kale should be fed in small amounts (once a
month) as they contain goitrogens that block the production of thyroxine and
utilization of iodine. Causing hypothyroidism and goitre
of 80% green leafy matter and 20% fruit and root
Lettuce is considered not an ideal food item for many reptiles especially
vegetables; a green iguana over 2 years should be
tortoises and Iguanas because of its poor nutritional value, but it is no worse
provided with a diet consisting of 95% green leafy
or better than many vegetables and better than many fruits. The mixed bag
anlouo isaq aut Aqeqoid aie stayiewadns ul paiedaid Apeal pios se sanial
matter and 5% fruits and roots
and should be part of a varied diet.
● Always ensure all foods offered are fresh, free from
pesticides and thoroughly washed. If food is taken
vitamin D, and minerals. The frequency of
from the fridge, allow it to reach room temperature
supplementation depends on the frequency of feeding
before offering it to the lizard
but, as a general rule, calcium carbonate powder can
be added to each meal, whereas powders that contain
● Apply necessary supplement to food (Table 33.9). A
vitamin D, and other supplements should be offered
range of calcium supplements are available. It is
once/twice a week
3
possible to overdose and cause metabolic bone
problems and calcification of soft tissues when
● Supplementation of vitamin D, should not be used to
 supplementing with preparations that contain added
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
775
33
Manaqement and care of exotic species
correctly positioned UVB lighting is provided and
● Feed as many insects as the lizard will eat at once. Do
replaced at appropriate times, vitamin D3 synthesis
not add too many crickets, etr., to the vivarium as the
should be adequate and over-supplementation of
live food could actually frighten the lizard and prevent
vitamin D, will harm the lizard
it from eating.
● All food should be of an appropriate size so that the
animal can easily ingest it
Carnivores, e.g. monitor (Varanus spp.), tegu
● Take care when offering addictive foods, e.g. banana,
(Tupinambis spp.)
as this encourages selective feeding, leading to dietary
imbalance.
● The reptiles will eat a range of prey items ranging from
rodents to other small lizards, which should be offered
whole. This reduces the need to supplement unless the
Insectivores, e.g. leopard gecko (Eublepharus
animal is ill
macularius), water dragon (Physignathus cocincinus)
● Frozen foods must be prepared and offered as
These eat a range of live invertebrate foods:
described under snake nutrition
● When selecting foods make sure they are of
● Caution must be taken to prevent injury when
appropriate size for the lizard to catch and consume
offering food to large lizards, especially the monitor
family: tongs or graspers must be used (Fig. 33.13)
● Before feeding newly purchased live foods, e.g. crickets
and locusts, the following steps should be carried
● Frequency of feeding will depend on the lizard's
out:
species age and size. As a guide, smaller or growing
 lizards should be fed daily; mature or larger species
1. Place the live insects in a plastic container and offer
should be fed 2-3 times a week.
foods such as cereals, fruit, vegetables and water. To
prevent insects from drowning, offer water by
 soaking cotton wool and placing it in a small dish.
Omnivores, e.g. bearded dragon (Pogona vitticeps),
Leave for 24-48 h. This will allow the insects to re-
skink (Tiliqua gigas), plated lizard (Gerrhosaurus
hydrate and be more nutritious
spp.)
2. Once live food has been nourished it is important
to dust it with a calcium or vitamin and mineral
This group of lizards will eat a variety of animal and plant
supplement by shaking it in a pot of supplement.
matter, so previous information applies.
Many invertebrate food species offered have an
inverse calcium:phosphorus ratio. Ideally, calcium
should be offered in the diet at a higher
calcium:phosphorus ratio, otherwise calcium will be
removed from the animal's own stores, causing
metabolic bone disease and, in breeding animals,
poorly calcified eggs and dystocia. The rules for
frequency of supplementation are as for herbivore
nutrition
3. The food can then be placed in the vivarium
● One of the problems associated with dusting live prey
 is that much of the supplement can fall off the prey
before it is consumed and it is difficult to monitor
exactly how much of the supplement the lizard
ingests. A tip is to chill the live food in a refrigerator
for a few minutes. This will slow the insect down and
give the reptile an opportunity to catch the prey plus
Fig. 33.13 Mie monitor fizard eating a dead rat; note the use of
supplement!
long graspers for the safety of the handler feeding the lizard
776
 Management and care of exotic species
Feeding summary
● 'Variety is the spice of life' and the reptile should be
offered a varied and balanced diet. This is limited
for the carnivorous species, but the common boa
(Boa constrictor) will appreciate a gerbil now and
again
● Always feed dead vertebrates. It is inhumane and
illegal to feed live ones, and live rodents could actually
attack the snake or lizard, inflicting nasty wounds and
causing distress to the cage occupant
● The quality of vertebrate and invertebrate prey will
depend on its age, the way it has been fed and its
health status
Fig. 33.14 Cooks Tree Boa (Corallus caninus). Tree pythons or boas
● It is not acceptable to use wild rodents as food, as they
require daity spraying as they prefer to drink water that has accumu
may carry disease and parasites. If collecting wild
fated in their coits
invertebrates, make sure they are non-toxic and free
from pesticides
snake's head, allowing it to drink the water as it drips
off or collects in its tight coils. Their entire body
● There are a variety of commercially prepared diets on
should be sprayed daily to keep them from becoming
the market and these can make up part of but not the
too dry, which may result in dysecdysis (difficulty in
entire diet
shedding)
● Non-reptilian foods are not advised because they have
● Non-tropical arboreal species and terrestrial species
been manufactured for animals with different
should only be misted if they are getting ready to shed
nutritional needs, metabolic processes and stress
levels
● Some lizards, e.g. arboreal species such as anoles, day
geckos and some chameleons, will not drink water
● However excellent the diet provided for the reptile is,
from a bowl, preferring to take their water in the form
if the environmental conditions are incorrect and
of droplets off a leaf. Most chameleons need to be
optimum lighting, humidity and temperature not
'rained on' daily and some species need to feel the
available the lizard or snake will not be able to reach
dripping water before they will attempt to drink. There
its POTZ and its metabolic processes will be severely
are several methods:
compromised, resulting in non-digestion of food or
anorexia. Any undigested food in the gut will cause
● Mist the foliage in the vivarium using a hand-held
massive bacterial overgrowth, with potentially fatally
spray
consequences.
● Set up an elaborate misting system
Water
● Adapt a drip system so that droplets fall on a leaf or
branch - to prevent the substrate from becoming
Snakes and lizards require access to clean water at all
saturated, place a receptacle under the drip tube to
times:
collect excess water
● For snakes, the water bowl must be large enough to
● No water bowl should be so deep that the species is
allow the snake to submerge itself in the water. This
unable to climb out; small pieces of slate can be angled
also helps when the snake is shedding
in the bowl to allow small lizard a way into and out of
the water
● Tropical or arboreal snakes such as the Cooks tree boa
3
(Fig. 33.14) or green tree python (Chondrophython
● If insects are being fed, small stones should be placed
viridis) require daily misting with lukewarm water. The
in the bottom of the bowl to prevent the insects from
spray should be on fine mist and directed toward the
drowning and contaminating the water
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 
777
33
Manaqement and care of exotic species
● Water containers should be cleaned and water
● Vitamin D, - if this is deficient, calcium absorption
replenished daily, or more often if contaminated with
from the intestines is affected. If in excess, it can
faeces and urates.
cause excessive calcium uptake and calcification of
soft tissues
Tortoises
         1 -  o
5-10 min will allow the tortoise to take in water, via
Mediterranean tortoises (Fig. 33.15)
either the cloaca or the mouth. A shallow bowl of
These common species of tortoise (Table 33.7) are oppor.
water can be offered, but this is usually trampled over
and spilled. Tortoises do not have a hard palate, so are
and infertile. Their natural diet consists of a variety of plant
unable to lap. Instead, they drop their mouths below
materials - leaves, flowers and fruits.
have taken in sufficient quantities.
In captivity the basic diet should consist of low-protein, high-
fibre foods with a high mineral and vitamin content, together
with a large quantity of calcium carbonate:
Subadult or adult tortoises
Offer a range of salad, green leaf vegetables, fruits and wild
● Suitable wild plants - dandelions, sow thistle and
plants (Table 33.9). Wild plant material should provide at
clover are all favourites of the tortoise and grow widely
least 75% of the diet, with leafy vegetables and salad making
in the UK. Grass is not digested by the tortoise so has
up the remaining 25%. Fruits should be used as a treat as to0
no nutritional valve except to add bulk and fibre to
large a quantity can cause excessive dilution of dietary
the diet
protein.
● Green vegetables - e.g. cabbage, watercress, cress,
All foods offered should be fit for human consumption,
spinach, broccoli. Many cultivated vegetables are high
washed and stored in a refrigerator or, in the case of wild
in protein and low in fibre. Most tortoises readily take
 plants, freshly picked. Foods should be offered on a flat dish
salad foods such as tomatoes, cucumber and lettuce,
 or lid and should be of a size the tortoise can manage, as they
but their nutritional value is limited and they should
 prefer to bite off small pieces of food. Very large pieces of fruit
be used to enhance the palatability of the food rather
or vegetables can be difficult for the tortoise to eat. If using
than making up the entire diet. Prepacked mixed salad
proprietary foods, make sure they are soaked and soft before
leaves give the tortoise a range of different leaves and
 ps sis s e o po si  pon h 
can help the overall nutritional value (Table 33.9)
coated in calcium carbonate powder.
● Proprietary foods - dried pelleted foods are available.
Once the tortoise has had enough it will walk away to rest
 They must be soaked in water and only offered as part
and digest its food. A note should be made of the amount of
of the diet
food offered and the amount eaten. Water should be available
and a bath is the best way of providing it.
● Meat products - not recommended, as protein levels
in meat are far too high and can lead to severe
Hatchlings
metabolic and organ problems
Correct feeding of a hatchling tortoise is of paramount
● Dairy products - not recommended: if they are
importance, as poor diet can lead to conditions such as
offered the liver may be affected
lumpy shell, bone and shell deformities and obesity.
Various feeding regimes have been recommended but the
● Vitamins and minerals - in the wild diet the levels of
         
vitamins and mineral would be higher than in the diet
and to ensure that the hatchling has access to the factors
ssu si s os dn  p
involved in calcium metabolism, i.e. heat, UVB and
vitamin D:
● Calcium should be liberally sprinkled over the
diet - it is better to slightly over-supplement than
● Suggested regime - feed the tortoise for 3-4 days then
under-supplement
withhold food the next day - this allows for more
thorough digestion of the previously eaten meals and
● Vitamin A - a deficiency may lead to swollen eyes
I h a  1d s  d 
and loss of appetite, as the animal can not see its
 depend on how much the individual consumes at each
food
feed and must be reassessed regularly. Reducing the
778
 Management and care of exotic species
● Invertebrates such as locust and crickets, snails, prawns
 in their shells
● Cleansed earthworms (place worms in a tub for
12-24 h to allow soil to pass through)
●Fish - whitebait, sprats
● Plant material, such as broad-leaf watercress and
romaine lettuce, oxygenating water weed
● Calcium and multivitamin and mineral supplements
need to be given, especially to young, growing
terrapins and turtles
● Only very small quantities of the following foods
Fig. 33.15 Two subadutt tortoises eating α variety of vegetables
should be offered if at all - raw muscle meats, crab
and teafy satad
sticks, cockles, kidney and liver. These are very low in
calcium and high in phosphorus and will require
supplementation
environmental temperature is a natural way of
 controlling food consumption on fasting days
● Feed terrapins and turtles in a separate enclosure or
container to reduce water pollution
● Suggested foods - offer a range of foods, e.g. soaked
tortoise pellets, mixed salad leaves, dark leaf produce,
● Quantity and frequency of feeding depend on the size
e.g. watercress, cress, dandelion leaves, sow thistle,
and age of the terrapin. Young terrapins and turtles
clover. Feed these foods on alternate days.
will require feeding daily, whereas adults should be fed
Supplementation is very important and must be added at
every other day on a variety of foods from the list
 n    -  
above.
powders can be offered on a rotational basis, e.g.
calcium on day 1 and 2, with a vitamin and mineral
powder added on day 3
Breeding
● Water - the hatchling must be kept hydrated and
Most reptiles lay eggs and are described as oviparous. Some
should be observed drinking while being bathed in a
reptiles give birth to live young and can be described as either
shallow dish of warm water at least once or twice
ovoviviparous or viviparous:
a day for 5-10 min. Although low in nutritional value,
iceberg lettuce is a good foodstuff for
● Ovoviviparous - the egg and fetus are retained within
 providing a dietary source of water for hatchling
the oviduct and nutritional support is gained through
tortoises.
the yolk sac. Once the young are fully developed they
hatch inside the female and live young are born
Turtles and terrapins
● Viviparous - the fetuses develop in the oviduct and
gain nutritional support from a placenta.
Note Species of terrapin are semi-aquatic, while turtles are
totally aquatic. In the USA all shelled reptiles, including
Most newly hatched reptiles are miniature versions of their
tortoises, are called 'turtles'.
parents and are independent, receiving little if any maternal
care. Table 33.7 identifies the reproductive patterns of the
Terrapins and turtles range from being totally carnivorous to
individual species.
accepting some plant material in their diet. A range of foods
should be offered:
Breeding regimes
3
● Proprietary terrapin and turtle pellets
To breed reptiles successfully they must be in good health and
● Pinkies and small mice
must be given the correct, balanced diet. Most reptiles have a
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
779
33
Management and care of exotic species
breeding season and breeding usually follows a change to
monitors) range from 90 to 130 days. Incubation tempera-
their environment. For example, a change in temperature is
tures range from 26 to 32°C.
usually used to stimulate breeding but in some species it is
the humidity (rainfall) that has to be altered.
Common diseases and clinical
Brumation or hibernation
conditions
Most breeding follows a period of brumation or hibernation
There are many conditions affecting reptiles that may be
that is brought about by slowly reducing the temperature of
presented in a veterinary practice. The majority of them
the vivarium. The reptile remains at this temperature for a set
are associated with poor management and nutrition. Details
 are summarized in Table 33.10.
At the end of brumation the vivarium temperature is slowly
increased until the preferred temperature is reached.
Post-hibernation anorexia
 Before brumation a reptile must undergo a period of fasting.
If the digestive tract is full, food in the gut may rot, possibly
This is associated with the Mediterranean tortoises, because
leading to death. The fasting period is variable, e.g. snakes 2
the climate in the UK is not suitable for these species and
weeks; lizards 1 week; chelonia 2-4 weeks. During brumation
because the traditional methods of tortoise keeping are
the reptile must be constantly monitored (once to twice
flawed. The majority of the wild-caught tortoises that are still
weekly) and its weight monitored. If a dramatic weight loss is
alive in the UK are barely surviving and those that do survive
seen, i.e. more than 10%, the reptile must be taken out of
brumation. To keep the animal hydrated, water must be
available.
2800
Gestation
Gravid or pregnant reptiles need good nutrition and opti-
2500
mum temperatures for both mother and offspring to thrive
and survive. It is difficult to determine the length of gestation
Mean "weight for length"' ratio
accurately but some information is included in Table 33.7.
Most ovoviviparous or viviparous species will range from
2000-
1.5 to 6 months.
Before laying, an oviparous species will normally shed its skin
回
(ecdysis). Colubrid snakes such as the corn snake Elaphe
weight 
guthuta may lay 8-14 days after shedding, while pythons can
1500
range from 18 to 26 days after shedding.
Apog
Dangerdusly low
"weight for length" ratio
Incubation
1000-
An oviparous reptile requires a ‘nesting site'. This can be
created in a container such as an ice cream carton with a
small hole in the side, filled with moist sphagnum moss
and/or vermiculite. The provision of an area to lay the eggs is
500-
very important as inadequate provision can lead to dystocia.
A healthy, fertile reptile egg is white, dry and firm. The shell
200
varies from soft and malleable, as seen in snakes and many
100 十
90100
120140160180200220240260280
lizards, to firmer and less pliable, as seen in chelonian and
Carapace length in millimetres
crocodilia. Incubation periods and temperatures vary accord-
ing to species (Table 33.7). Most snakes and small lizard
Fig. 33.16 Growth of heatthy Mediterranean tortoises using the
species range from 45 to 70 days; larger lizards (iguanas and
Jackson ratio
780
 Management and care of exotic species
have darker shells that absorb heat more efficiently, which
 passed in the form of a creamy white paste, which is voided
 maintains the body temperature closer to its preferred range.
shortly after hibernation, usually after a bath and a long
drink of water.
If during hibernation the temperature rises, the tortoise will
stir and burn off valuable energy reserves. The byproduct of
Post-hibernation anorexia can also be the result of a more
this is urea, which is stored in the kidneys in the form of uric
gradual build-up of urates in the kidneys brought about by a
acid or urates. If this continues, by the time the tortoise fully
combination of the tortoise suffering a series of poor
awakes from hibernation its energy stores are depleted. It fails
summers and hibernation in which energy levels are slowly
to get the normal glucose boost that enables it to move, bask
being reduced and urate levels increased. A healthy adult tor-
and find food. The increase in stored urate levels depresses
toise can be expected to lose about 1% of its body weight
the appetite, resulting in an anorexic tortoise. Normally the
during each month of hibernation. A hatchling will lose
activity of basking, eating and drinking post-hibernation will
much more and, if it loses more than 10%, must be brought
rectify the energy imbalance and allow stored urates to be
out of hibernation.
Table 33.10 Common diseases and clinical conditions of reptiles
Disease
Causal agent
Signs
Treatment
Additional information
Lizards and snakes
Stomatitis
Seen in both lizards and
 Decrease in appetite,
Clean mouth with
Look at hygiene and husbandry -
(mouth rot)
snakes. Normally caused by
 pinhead haemorrhages and
povidone-iodine 2.5-5%
environmental conditions,
 poor husbandry and injury 
fluid build-up on the gum.
 solution applied daily to
overcrowding
to rostal (nasal) area due to
 If not treated the infection
affected area. Bacteriology
fghting or running against
will rapidly spread and pus
swab taken to determine
 glass front of vivarium.
will be seen. If untreated 
pathogen. If severe the
Bacteria, viruses and fungi
can lead to osteomyelitis
reptile will require an
invade site and set up an
of the jawbone
 anaesthetic and area
infection
treated. Antibiotics may be
given in severe cases
Necrotic
Seen in snakes. Usually due
 Small blisters usually appear
 Transfer reptile to a clean
If reptile very sick it will require
dermatitis
 to poor environmental
on the ventral surface that
dry vivarium with a relative
supportive therapy. Environment
(scale rot)
conditions such as:
can become infected. If left
humidity of 60-70%; change 
 must be corrected before patient
●Vivarium temperature
can become necrotic
substrate daily (newspaper
returns to it
too low
ideal). If antibiotics needed
● Poor ventilation
then will have to be given
● Too much moisture in
by injection. Wound must be
the cage
cleaned at least once of
●Ectoparasites
twice a day using
povidone-iodine or Dermisol
solution and kept as dry as
possible
Burns
Unguarded heat source hot
Signs depend on severity of
 Treatment will depend on
Healing by granulation can take a
rocks, heat pads
burn: superficial - pain,
 severity of the burn and
month to a year. Each time reptile
erythema, discoloration of
 general condition of the
sheds some improvement to the
scales or loss of scales,
reptile. Bandaging may be
wound should be seen. Scaring seen,
wrinkling of scales, blisters
necessary, using dressings 
with loss of regular scale pattern.
and exudate. Deep - present 
recommended for burns
Area round scar may shed
as massive tissue damage
patients. Fluid therapy to
incompletely and may require soaking
that may slough and require
replace lost body fluid and
and manual removal
surgical debridement
electrolytes. Antibiotics if
Ensure all heat sources are guarded
3
infection or septicaemia
 or thermostatically controlled
present. Surgery to debride
damaged tissue
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
781
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.10 Common diseases and clinical conditions of reptiles-Cont'd.
Disease
Causal agent
Signs
Treatment
Additional information
Dystocia (egg
 Obstructive - fetal-maternal; Oviparous species: seen as
Intervention should be
Oxytocin or related drugs must not
binding)
non-obstructive - poor
a caudally located mass of
considered necessary 48 h
be used if a snake has an obstructive
snakes
husbandry, poor nutrition
able to palpate in thicker-
after the cessation of the
dystocia
Lack of physical activity due
 set species (large pythons);
incomplete parturition or
to captive environment 
viviparous snakes are
oviposition (egg-laying).
more difficult as fetuses
Techniques include:
are malleable, which
● Manual manipulation -
makes them difficult to
carries many risks and is
locate. Prolonged straining
not generally advised
0T cloacal prolapse
● Hormonal stimulation using
demonstrates unsuccessful
oxytocin or similar agents
parturition. Ultrasound can
● Aspiration of contents of
be useful in identifying
egg, followed by an
the presence of fetuses
injection of oxytocin, snake
in viviparous snakes
can be left to pass the
smaller egg naturally:
caution must be taken not
to contaminate the
coelomic cavity with egg
yolk
● Surgery: once snake is
 anaesthetized gentle
manual manipulation can
be attempted. If this fails
a salpingotomy (making an
incision into the oviduct)
can be performed and
eggs/fetus can be
removed
Dystocia (egg Obstructive - fetal-maternal; Although anorexia is a
Lizards do not tolerate
Many lizards, including iguanas, can
binding)
non-obstructive - poor
common sign in the
 prolonged periods of
produce a clutch of eggs without a
lizards
husbandry, poor nutrition
reproducing lizard, the lizard
dystocia, which can cause
 male present. Good pre- and
Lack of physical activity due
that is not eating and is
death within several days.
postoperative care is essential for the
to captive environment. Lack 
displaying lethargy, cachexia,
 Prompt treatment is
survival of lizards or snakes
of suitable nesting sites
and loss of muscle and fat
necessary following
undergoing surgery
common in lizards
tissue from pelvic girdle,
diagnosis, with supportive
limbs and tail base suggests
treatment given prior to any
further investigation
surgical procedure. Oxytocin
or similar drugs can be
administered to help the
passage of the eggs.
Surgery - salpingotomy or
salpingectomy or
 ovariosalpingecto my
    q   ig
winter. During hibernation the temperature should be kept
healthy tortoises to hibernate, which can be assessed using
between 4 and 5°C - if it rises the tortoise will begin to
the Jackson ratio (Fig. 33.16). This is measured by plotting on
wakeup.
a graph the weight of the tortoise in grams against the length
of the carapace in millimetres. Any animal falling into the
When the tortoise awakes after normal hibernation, it should
'dangerously low' area should be kept warm and awake all
be offered water and glucose to drink - if necessary, this may
782
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.10 Common diseases and clinical conditions of reptiles-Cont'd.
Disease
Causal agent
Signs
Treatment
Additional information
Endoparasites  Mainly seen in wild-caught
 Some infestations go
Anthelmintic drugs usually
Suggested drugs: metronidazole for
or farmed species, but can
unnoticed until disease or
given orally once or twice a
flagellates; febendazole (Panacur) for
affect any captive snake and
loss of a reptile occurs.
yeat. Good hygiene protocols,
nematodes
lizard. Numerous and varied
Signs: eggs or oocyst are
and do not feed wild-caught
infestations, although some
 seen in faecal smears.
foods
 are self-limiting as to
Reptile appears listless.
complete their life cycle
failure to thrive, gain
 they need a intermediate
weight, dull, inappetent,
host that captivity does
weight loss. Visual signs of
 not provide. The following
the parasite in adult form
have been seen in snakes
:spiezl pue
● Protozoans, flagellates
+Coccidia
●Flukes
Cestodes
●Nematodes
Ectoparasites Mainly seen in wild-caught
Ticks - because of their size
 Ticks - manual removal
Ticks - care must be taken to
 Or farmed species, but can
relatively easy to spot, but
techniques as used to remove remove all mouthparts, as any
affect any captive snake and
 can blend in with scales;
ticks from domestic animals.
remaining parts can lead to
lizard:
tend to favour areas near
 Mites - many suggested
formation of an abscess. Mites -
●Ticks - Ixodes spp
recess of ear, skin folds of
treatments but none have
when dealing with a lizard or
●Mites - Ophionyssus
the vent (lizards), cavities
proven 100% safe for reptiles snake, hygiene is essential to
natricis (mainly seen in
 such as the nostrils or labial
 and keeper. Reptile and
prevent the spread of mites to
snakes and some lizards)
pits in some snakes. Mites -
vivarium must be isolated
 other patients. One female mite can
Both are parasitic and feed
generally smaller than ticks
and vivarium totally cleaned 
 produce 90-100 eggs in crevices in
off animal's blood
 and hide under scales. Colour
to remove all life stages of
the cage. Dichlorvos (Vapona) was
varies from tan, reddish
the mite, including egg.
recommended for use in mites but
brown to black depending on
 larvae, nymphs and adults.
has since been taken off the market.
engorgement. Common sites
 Attention should be paid to
 It is reportedly making a comeback -
include between and under
corners crevices, lips, and
ingredients may have changed.
scales, especially around the
 all furnishings. The reptile
Ivermectin and fipronil are both
eyes, under the chin, cloaca,
should not be replaced until
 alcohol-based and therefore
axillae and inguinal regions.
the vivarium has received a
flammable. Fipronil is not licensed
Other signs include the snake
total clean.
for treatment in reptiles. If treating
rubbing against furnishings
Treatment of the reptile:
the eye area with fpronil, place on a
in cage, spending much time
 Application of olive oil, the
 cotton wool bud and carefully apply
 soaking in the water bowl
entire animal has to be
to the scales around the eye. It has
all in an attempt to rid 
covered in a thin layer of
been recommended that, if spraying
themselves of the mite and
olive oil. This will suffocate
head (snakes), you should place
associated irritation. The
the mite. Caution here
 ophthalmic ointment on spectacle. As
owner may notice mites in
because the reptile becomes
the alcohol carrier in fipronil
the cage, floating in the
very slippery and diffcult to
 evaporates, it may chill the reptile,
water or crawling on to their
handle. Tepid baths - The
 so the patient should be placed in a
 skin. The mite causes the
 animal is bathed in warm 
warm, well-ventilated environment.
reptile to appear dull and
water for 30 min. This
For first application, consider
listless. In severe cases can
should kill most of the mites 
reducing dose
become depressed, anorexic
on the body but those on the
and very sick
head will escape. Ivermectin
3
can be used in small doses
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
783
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.10 Common diseases and clinical conditions of reptiles-Cont'd.
Disease
Causal agent
Signs
Treatment
Additional information
Fipronil can be used topically
Fipronil has been used successfully
on the reptile and also to
on many lizards and snakes, e.g.
treat the vivarium (but is
Burmese and royal pythons, green
not licensed). Keep sprayed
iguanas and monitor lizards, but
animal in a well-ventilated 
adverse effects have been reported
cage for 2-3 h post-spraying, and some caution should therefore
as breathing fumes can be
be exercised
extremely damaging to the
lungs. Also ensure reptile has
access post-treatment to a
high-humidity hide box to
compensate for possible
increase in cutaneous water
loss. Treatment of the
vivarium: Burn any disposable
Or easily replaceable
furnishings. Spray
non-disposable items and
vivarium with fipronil, paying
special attention to cracks
and crevices. Close vivarium
and raise temperature to
40°℃ for 3-4 h: this will help
to desiccate nymphs and
stimulate hatching of eggs.
Because of the alcohol
vapour, frequent observation 
of cage is important to
prevent fire. Before returning
reptile to vivarium it must
be ventilated (3-4 h) to
ensure all traces of alcohol
have dispersed. Repeat
treatment on animal and
vivarium three or four times
at 3-4-week intervals: this
will help to kill second- and
third-generation mites
Thiamine
 Mainly seen in fish-eating
Neurological signs such as
Treatment is administration
Fish-eating snakes should be
(vitamin B
snakes such as garter
incoordination, convulsions,
of vitamin B, by injection or
encouraged to take other foodstuffs,
deficiency)
 snakes. When these are fed
loss of the righting reflex
stomach tube. Dietary
e.g. pinkies, earthworms and
thawed frozen fish, an
correction is essential and all
 commercially prepared diets such as
 enzyme called thiaminase,
raw fish must be blanched/
'garter grub'
present in raw fish, destroys
poached before feeding
thiamine (vitamin B,) leading
(ideally taking water
to deficiency disease
temperature to 80oC for
5-10 min): this will kill the
 antivitamin thiaminase
784
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.10 Common diseases and clinical conditions of reptiles—Cont'd.
Disease
Causal agent
Signs
Treatment
 Additional information
Respiratory
●Bacterial invasion,
●Dyspnoea
Very sick animals will require
The patient should be maintained at
disease
viruses, fungi
● Abnormal elevation of
hospitalization and much
the higher end of its POTZ and
●Poor husbandry
the head
supportive therapy, such as
humidity must be kept at the
● Inadequate nutrition
● Open-mouth breathing
fluids and assistance with
animal's normal range. Parenteral
● Poor ventilation
●Wheezing
feeding. A bacteriology swab vitamin supplements (especially
● Draughts
●Nasal discharge
for culture and sensitivity
water-soluble ones) have been
●Low temperature
●Problems during sloughing
will aid in identification of
beneficial in some cases. In severe
● Endoparasites
●Debilitation
pathogen and necessary
cases prognosis is guarded and
●Rhinitis (inflammation
Severe cases
-cyanotic
treatment. Antimicrobial
aggressive therapy is recommended
of the nasal cavity)
membranes
therapy is recommended.
Treat endoparasites and any
other suspected cause. The
environment must be
re-evaluated and changes
apeu
Autotomy
Occurs as a defence
Loss of tail and, if it occurs
 In time the tail will grow
(tail loss)
 mechanism in many species
in the surgery because of
back, but it is never the
of lizard, geckos, green
poor handling, a distressed
same and is generally less
iguana, water dragons. The
owner and embarrassed
impressive. Daily bathing in
tail will keep wriggling to
staff!
povidone-iodine solution 
hold the predator's attention
will prevent infection until
while “lunch escapes: In
re-growth is established. If
captive reptiles, usually
tail is sutured back on it
caused by rough handling.
will not re-grow
 grasping the tail or stress
Dysecdysis
Dysecdysis should be
Retained flaky, dry skin
The skin must be hydrated,
This is a cycle that continues
(difficulty
considered as a sign of a
over body, limbs and digits,
s0 increase humidity in the
throug hout the reptile's life. Snakes
with
 problem not the primary
also spectacles (snakes). If
vivarium and make sure the
 shed their skin as one single piece
 sloughing or
 problem. Main causes can
 not treated, retained slough
 snake has access to a large
where as lizards, with the exception
shedding)
be attributed to poor
can cause infection or act
water bowl for soaking. The
 of geckos, shed in pieces. Frequency
environmental conditions:
 as tourniquets around small
 snake can be placed in a bag
 of shedding depends on age and
● Low temperature
limbs, tail tips and digits
(a pillowcase or duvet cover
health status. Duration of the
●Low humidity
works well) with wet towels.
 shedding process is between 7 and 
● No water bowl or bowl
The snake can rub against
14 days (snakes).
too small so the snake is
the towels and the moisture
 Signs - snakes:
 prevented from bathing
should help to soften the
● Skin lacks lustre and shine
●Insufficient cage
skin, allowing it to be shed.
● Eyes appear cloudy
furnishings, i.e. logs or
If pieces are retained, gently
● Snake will often refuse food to
rocks for rubbing to
remove them. In snakes, if
hide or sit for long periods of time
initiate shedding
the spectacle (eye caps) are
in the water bowl (best not to
●Poor nutrition
retained, leave the snake to
handle)
see if they are removed
● Very vulnerable at this stage as
during the next shed. If that
vision impaired and may strike if 
fails, the spectacle should be
handled 
softened using hypromellose 
● Dulling over is followed 3-4-day
(false tears) and gentle
period where skin and eyes appear
manipulation with a cotton 
clear
wool bud. Forceps or
● When ready to shed, snake will
tweezers should not be
move about cage rubbing its nose
3
used as they may
 against rough objects to break
permanently damage the 
skin. It will then slither out of the
delicate eye tissues.
skin
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
785
33
Management and care of exotic species
Tuble 33.10 Common diseases and clinical conditions of reptiles-Cont'd.
Disease
Causal agent
Signs
Treatment
Additional information
Before the patient is
●The shed should be in one
discharged the owner must
complete piece - check that
be made aware of the need
spectacles and tail tip are included
to improve environmental
conditions
 Chelonia
Metabolic
 Poor environmental
●Hypocalcaemia
Correct the nutritional
Can take on many forms according to
bone disease
 conditions including
●Soft shell
imbalances and 
life stage; each will be discussed
inadequate heating and
●Shell deformities
environmental factors such
separately. More detail on specifc
provision of good UVB. Diet
● Overgrown thamphotheca
as heat and access to good
 signs and problems, see separate
high in protein or high in
(beak) and nails
UVB
sections below
 phosphorus and lacking in 
● Abnormal gait and
 calcium or vitamin D3
movement
Hypocatcaemia Main cause is diet lacking in
Hatchlings - acute problem [
 Depends on the signs and
Juvenile tortoise - If excess protein
- common
calcium but also associated
● Soft spongy shell
 progression of the disease.
intake is a cause of the problem
cause of
with lack of vitamin D, high
● Edges of the mouth fail
Hatchlings - Mid cases,
then the kidney and liver may be
death in
phosphorus diets and lack of
to harden, inappetence
especially if being offered a
affected. Flattening of the shell can
UK-bred 
good-quality UVB
● If not treated, shell
high-protein diet, increase
cause respiratory problems, as
tortoises
haemotthages, lungs
calcium uptake and slow
expansion of the lungs is hindered.
collapse and death
growth (see feeding section 
 Unfortunately once the deformities
● If diet too rich in protein 
main text)
are established little can be done to
pyramidal growth of
Moderate cases (shell is only
alter this
scutes on the carapace
partially soft) or severe cases
 Juvenile tortoise - chronic 
that are still bright and abte
problem
to move - aggressive dietary
● Shell deformities rather
management necessary:
than softness
increase calcium, vitamin D3
● Overall flattened
and UvB access. Be warned:
appearance to the shell
this condition can take
● Dip in the rear of the
months to rectify
carapace
Severe cases that are
● Scutes raised and shell
debititated - will require
feels soft and spongy
injections of calcium
● Carapace can appear to0
 borogluconate and vitamin D3
small for the chelonia
as well as being kept in the
● Edge of the carapace may
correct environmental
curl dorsally
conditions. As jaw will be
● Reduced overall weight
soft, need tube feeding. If
gain and growth
 condition is very severe and
● Deformed beak and over
some of the more terminal
grown nails
 signs are present, euthanasia
●Problems with walking
should be considered
because of plastron 
deformities around the
hindlimbs
786
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.10 Common diseases and clinical conditions of reptiles-Cont'd.
Disease
Causal agent
Signs
Treatment
Additional information
● X-ray shows poor
Juvenile tortoise - Dietary
 mineralization of bone
correction and environmental
Adult imported tortoise -
factors
chronic problem:
Adult tortoise - Dietary
● Poor shell growth, shape
 and environmental
and hardness 
management
● Claws are curved or bent
 Overgrown beak will need to
rather than straight
be clipped and shaped
●Beak overgrown
Unfortunately, once
● Shell damage prolonged
deformities are established
 poor healing or may not
little can be done to alter
heal
this
● Poor locomotion - animal
tends to rub plastron
against the ground; in more
severe cases is unable to
propel itself forward
●Predispose to other disease
 because of depressed 
immune system (see text)
Hypovitaminosis Lack of dietary vitamin A.
 The main function of vitamin 
In acute cases injection of
If any eye infection does not
A
Possible problems with
A is to maintain the integrity
vitamin A weekly for 2-6
clear up with treatment,
vitamin A metabolism and
 of the skin and epithelium
weeks depending on severity.
hypovitaminosis A should be
utilization from ingested
especially that lining the 
Changes to dietary regime
considered. Care must be taken not
sources. Problem seen in 
respiratory tract and eye
include food stuffs rich in 
to overdose with vitamin A, as this
tortoises and terrapins
tissues. If deficient you may
vitamin A, such as dark leafy
 can cause further problems
see:
greens, yellow or orange
●Flaky skin
fruits and vegetables, for
● Poor wound healing and
 carnivorous species whole
 secondary infection
mice and fish, as the prey's
●Anorexia
liver will act as a good source
●Lethargy
of vitamin A. Add multivitamin
●Weight loss
supplement to the diet every
● Swollen eyelids
other day for 2 weeks, then
●Irritation around the eyes.
reduce to twice weekly for a
Solid purulent matter
month. If mild cases the
underneath the eye lids
addition of multivitamin
if not treated 
supplement on the diet every
● Respiratory problems
2-3 days may suffice, along
● Renal and liver problems
with appropriate dietary
● Chronic condition can cause
 management. If the chelonian
thickening of the skin
is anorexic and very debilitated
then tube feeding and fluid
support will be required. Eye
infections will need to, be 
treated with the appropriate
antibiotics, as will respiratory
infections
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
787
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.10 Common diseases and clinical conditions of reptiles-Cont'd.
Disease
Causal agent
Signs
Treatment
Additional information
Runny nose
Common problem in
A secondary bacterial infection
Severe cases will require
A healthy tortoise should not have
syndrome -
tortoises, with
usually intensifies the clinical
supportive therapy such as
a wet nose. Hypovitaminosis must
common
multifactorial aetiology.
signs:
fluids, supplementary heat
also be considered here. This is a
problem in
and if not treated can be
● Clear watery discharge
and lots of nursing care.
highly contagious disease and the
UK tortoises
fatal. Some of the more
from the nostrils
Assisted feeding, parenteral
patient should be isolated.
commonly identified 
●Occasionally sneezing
antibiotics, nasal drops,
Remember - chelonia do not
pathogens associated with
● If disease progresses to
vitamin A injections. It may
possess a diaphragm and are unable
this problem are:
the lungs, breathing
take up to 3-4 days before
to cough and swallow excess mucus
● Gram-negative bacteria
AlaA pue ajqipne sawonaq
 any significant improvement 
produced in the lungs. This can 
●Pseudomonas spp.
noisy
is seen
cause these types of infection to
●Citrobacter spp.
● Open mouth and laboured
progress and cause pneumonia.
●Klebsiella spp.
breathing, lethargy.
Tip - when administering nasal
● Fungal agents
depression, anorexia
drops to chelonia, use a small
●Herpes virus.
syringe and catheter or extend
Tortoises can act as latent
head, squirt drops in the mouth and
carriers, not showing signs
simultaneously let go of the head.
but able to pass on the
As the head retracts back into the
disease to others. For this
carapace it will force the fluid from
reason, mixing tortoises
the mouth down the nostrils.
from different geographical 
Terrapins seen with this disease
regions must be discouraged
may float on one side if one lung is
General health of the
more affected than the other
tortoise is a factor to be
considered: poor diet and
husbandry can lead to a
 susceptible immune system 
Infectious
Common condition seen
Early signs are often 
Mild cases - topical
Even if treatment is successful in
stomatitis
in the Mediterranean
overlooked:
applications of Betadine 
severe cases where osteomyelitis is
(mouth rot)
tortoise, especially if in 
●Reddening inside the mouth gargle and mouthwash can
seen, the problem can reoccur
poor condition
●Blistering, which
be applied once a day to the
 post-hibernation.
commonlyoccurs inside
affected area. More severe
Associated with bacterial
lower jaw under tongue
cases will require antibiotic
infection (Gram-negative,
●As problem progresses,
treatment. Swabs can be
commonly Pseudomonas
tongue becomes swollen,
taken to identify pathogen
spp.) or viruses such as
mouth flls with mucus and
and treatment. Check for
herpes virus 
 a discharge resembling
fungal invasion, e.g. Candida.
cottage cheese is seen
Severe cases - aggressive
● Osteomyelitis if infection
antibiotic treatment and 
attacks jaw bone
supportive therapy to prevent
● Inappetence
dehydration
●Death if not treated
Shell rot
This problem can be seen
Discoloration, especially
Remove all affected shell
A common cause of trauma
in all chelonia. Can be
around areas of shell damage.
untithealthy tissue is seen.
to the shell is oversexed
due to fungal or bacterial 
 Aquatic and semi-aquatic
For atleast 4-6 weeks,
males butting each other of
infection normally
shell appears paler. Dry
the area should be
males continually ramming
anaerobic gram negative.
flaking of shell or soft tissue.
scrubbed for at least
the rear end of females
 The fungus or bacteria
 Bacterial infections
5 min daily using a tooth of
it is advisable to keep sexes
gain entry as a result of
affected areas appear wet
nailbrush, with antibacterial
separate. Environmental
shell trauma. Other
and there is an obnoxious
scrub such as chlorhexidine
condition and diet must also be
contributing factors
odout, with blood and
 Of povidone-iodine
corrected before patient is
include:
purulent discharge
discharged
788
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.10 Common diseases and clinical conditions of reptiles-Cont'd.
Disease
Causal agent
Signs
Treatment
Additional information
● Poor hygiene in both
Fungal infections - appear
Swabs may need to be taken
During hospitalization, provision of
 terrestrial and aquatic
dryer and less smelly than
for culture and sensitivity
heat*, hygiene and nursing support
chelonia
bacterial infections. Infection
and antibiotic treatment
is hospitalization, provision of
●High humidity
can spread under scutes and
administered. If abscesses
heat*, essential for the recovery. If
●Low temperature
lead to a deep infection with
form, these must be flushed
untreated, septicaemia will ensue
●Lack of Uv light
much tissue damage
out and antibiotics given. It
and subsequent death. Suggested
● Inadequate diet
 should be noted that healing
antimicrobial treatments include:
●Overcrowding
may take weeks or, in
● Fungal infections - oral
● Lack of basking sites
extreme cases, years. The shell
ketaconazole (20 mg/kg/d)
 in terrapins and turtles
can be considered free from
● Bacterial infections - amikacin
disease when it is smooth,
(Amikin paediatric) 10 mg/kg
dry and free from odour and
every other day for 3 days
discharge. The animal may
be permanently scarred. The
very sick chelonian will need
supportive therapy, including
assisted feeding and fluid
therapy
Endoparasites  Large grey ascanids -
Healthy tortoise shows few
 Oral dosage of anthelmintics:
Worming should be carried out on a
Angusticaecum spp.
physical signs apart from
fenbendazole (Panacur)
regular basis, especially if groups of
Small, thread-like
seeing them passed in faeces.
50 mg/kg or oxfendazole
tortoises are kept together or kept
oxyurid-type nematodes
Faecal smear will show
(Systamex) 65 mg/kg. Two
 in small areas. Mediterranean tof
presence of eggs. Death in
doses will need to be
toises should be wormed prior to
hatchlings with large
administered via stomach
hibernation. It is advisable to keep
infestations
tube, with an interval of 
hatchlings away rom pasture
14 days between each dose.
grazed by adults, as this is a source
Or use Panacur granules Or
 of infection
 paste in food.
Ear abscess
Seen in tortoises,
Large, painful swellings over
Surgery to incise the abscess,
Husbandry and diet will need to be
 terrapins and box turtles.
ear drum (normal slightly
remove pus and flush cavity.
re-evaluated. Healthy tortoises do
Bacterial infections of the 
concave). Head tilting and
Antimicrobial therapy given
not get abscesses
middle eat gain entry via
circling
by injection. In some cases
mouth and travel along
'seeding out' of the blood 
eustachian tube. Poor
due to septicaemia manifests
husbandry, suboptimal
itself as abscesses and these
temperatures and hygiene,
will need to be treated using
especially poor water
systemic antibiotics
filtration. In aquatic
species vitamin A
deficiency. Depressed
immune system
Trauma
Trauma to the shell is
Damage to shell. Shock makes Stem haemorrhage. Treat
A damaged shell can take 1-2 years
often caused by the
the tortoise lethargic and
shock. Fluid therapy. X-rays
to heal. Chelonia that are
 chelonian being dropped
lowers blood pressure.
may be required to establish
recovering from a fractured shell
 Of manhandled by young
Haemorrhage
 - external is easy
 extent of damage. When
should not be allowed to hibernate.
children, chewed by a dog
to identify; internal more
 patient stabilized, flush
 Extensive trauma to the shell may
(especially if young or
problematic, so need to
wounds using antibacterial
never fll completely. In adult
suffering from
observe behaviour and other
scrub, remove debris.
chelonia, patches can be left in
3
hypocalcaemia) or coming 
parameters such as mucous
Antibiotics and anti-
 place indefinitely. In young animals,
in contact with the lawn
membrane colour. Internal organ inflammatory drugs prevent
to allow for growth, patches must
mower or strimmer
damage is difficult to assess.
infection and aid shock.
be removed after 6 months
The CompleteTexthook of Veterinary Nursing
789
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.10 Common diseases and clinical conditions of reptiles-Cont'd.
Disease
Causal agent
Signs
Treatment
Additional information
Lung damage quite common 
Repair lung damage and
Secondary infection should
consider other internal
be considered
injuries. Tissue fluid wil seep
from wounds for a few days.
Once this stops, shell repair
can be performed. Use resin
patches, which can be left in
place for 6-12 months
depending on health status
of tortoise prior to injury.
Very severe damage can be
repaired using orthopaedic
techniques
Penile
 The penis protrudes from
Mainly seen in juvenile
The penis can be manually
It is important not to replace a
prolapse
the cloaca for a prolonged tortoises that have become
replaced but usually this is
dirty or infected penis. If the penis 
period
sexually active and spend
only a temporary remedy
 continues to prolapse then it may
most of the day with the
The aim is to prevent the
necessitate the need for a purse
penis extruded
becoming infected. Keep the
string suture around the cloaca,
 penis clean and lubricated (KY
 which can be removed in a few
 Jelly and povidone-iodine).
days
The condition will settle down
in time. If penis suffers injury
 Or becomes infected, it is
important to treat the
infection and keep the penis
 clean and lubricated as before.
With the addition of systemic
antibiotics the penis can be
manually replaced once the
inflammation has subsided. In 
 sever infections some or all of
the organ may have to be
removed
Dystocia
 Poor environmental
Virtually impossible to detect
Injection of oxytocin (5 IU/kg)
In comparison to snakes and
conditions:
without use of a radiograph
 should see results in
lizards, chelonia respond well to
● Lack of laying sites
 but signs that may suggest
approximately 1 h. During
 oxytocin injections. Problems are
● Temperature too low
problem include:
this time the tortoise must be 
more commonly seen in tortoises
for tortoise to lay eggs
● Gestation period exceeded
kept at its POTZ. If this initial 
that are due to lay in the autumn.
●Overcrowding: tortoise
●Depression
injection fails to stimulate
A tortoise should not be allowed to
feels stressed
Anorexia
the expulsion of the eggs, it
hibernate with eggs inside her, as
● Poor diet especially
Straining
is recommended that the
this will only make matters worse
lack of calcium
● Cloacal swelling
tortoise be fed calcium
 as the eggs become larger and more
supplementation for 2 days at
calcified, making removal more
before giving a further dose a
difficult
higher rate (10 IU/kg). After
receiving oxytocin, tortoise
should be placed in a bath of
warm water - this has proved
very beneficial in helping 
tortoises expel their eggs
790
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.10 Common diseases and clinical conditions of reptiles-Cont'd.
Disease
Causal agent
Signs
Treatment
Additional information
Surgical intervention must only
be considered if:
● Above therapy has failed and
there has been a period of
calcium supplementation,
along with increased
environ mental temperature
● Eggs stuck or cracked in the
pelvis.
If surgery is to be undertaken,
a plastronotomy and celiotomy
followed by a salpingotomy
will have to be performed
Many of the problems identified in the Mediterranean tortoise are due to the fact it is not well adapted to the UK climate: tortoises are kept in suboptimal tem-
peratures and as a result suffer from immunosuppression.
*Sick chelonia will need to be hospitalized and kept at temperatures at the higher range of their POTz; this will encourage metabolism of drug therapy and stimu-
late their own metabolism.
have to be given by stomach tube (see Ch. 15). It may also be
wire mesh while the indoor area provides shelter and is nor-
mally a solid timber house with a window for light and a door
for access.
Birds
When choosing an aviary consider the following:
● Size - depends on the ground space available, the
 Birds can make interesting companions and a wide variety
species and the number of birds to be housed.
of species are commonly kept as cage or aviary birds
Overstocking should be avoided, but generally 'the
(Table 33.11).
bigger the better' - too small an aviary will make
access and cleaning difficult
buisnoH
● Shape - there are a variety of very ornate aviary
designs on the market but although these look good
Accommodation for birds kept in captivity should be
designed to allow the birds to be maintained in good health
features over the practical needs of the bird. The best
and to allow them to exhibit their natural behaviour of
advice is keep it simple - rectangular or square shapes
flying. The main types of accommodation used to house birds
work well. Choose a design that allows the bird to
 are aviaries and cages.
display its natural behaviour
The design and size depends on the numbers and species of
● Siting - check with the local planning office to see if
bird but whatever type of accommodation is selected, once
planning permission is required. For security and to
the bird is in situ it must be able to stretch out both wings
reduce stress, site the aviary away from roads and
fully in all directions. Accommodation should also allow the
public access. The aviary should be south-west-facing.
keeper to carry out general husbandry procedures, including
but whatever the position the selected site should be
monitoring, feeding, catching, cleaning, etc., with minimum
sheltered, not exposed to extremes of weather and
disturbance to the birds.
away from overhanging trees. Hedges make good
windbreaks
Aviaries
● Materials - these must be durable, safe and economic.
3
Most flight areas are made of a timber, treated with an
Aviaries are divided into indoor and outdoor sections. The
animal-safe preservative and galvanized welded mesh
outdoor area or flight usually has a timber frame covered in
of a gauge suited to the size of the bird. Birds can be
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
791
33
Manaqement and care of exotic species
Table 33.11 Commonly kept species of cage and aviary birds
Species
Origin
Captive diet
General information
Order Psittaciformes
Budgerigar
Australia
Feed a good-quality proprietary seed mixture
Can be kept on own or in groups. Males tend to be more
(Metopsittacus
(canary seed and millet). Will eat small amount
vocal. Can be aggressive toward other smaller birds, e.g.
undutatus)
of green food, watercress, chickweed, groundsel.
canaries or small finches
They need a dietary source of iodine
Peach-faced
South-west
Feed good-quality canary mix, sunflowers, safflower Keep in pairs or small groups. Can be very aggressive to
lovebird
Africa
seeds, pine nuts, daily servings of fruit and
other species. Enjoy stripping bark from branches of
(Agapornis
vegetables. Hawthorn berries
non-poisonous trees
roseicotfis)
Cockatiel
Australia
Seed mixtures - sunflower, saffron, safflower,
Good aviary or cage bird. Can talk and mimic. Lives up
(Nymphicus
white/red millet, canary and hemp seed, linseed,
to 10-25 years
hottandicus)
niger seed, wheat, groats. Fruits, apples green
vegetables lettuce, root vegetables, faw cafrot
strips. Chickweed
Rosella
Australia
Similar to cockatiel diet
Keep in pairs. Aggressive toward other birds. Very vocal.
(Platycercus
Good breeders. Need to be kept in large aviary
eximius)
African grey
Central Africa
Seed mixtures - sunflower, saffron, safflower,
One of the best-talking parrots. Intelligent and
arrot (Psittacus
white/red millet, canary seed, wheat, oats, maize,
sensitive and therefore prone to feather plucking if
erithacus)
peanuts, pine nuts, hemp. Fruits (almost any
bored. Needs lots of attention and stimulation. Loves to
non-citrus). Green vegetables. Root vegetables,
shower in spray from plant mister
aw carrot
Order Passeriformes, which includes the perching birds
Canary
Canary Islands 
Seed mixture - canary millet, rape maw, grass
Good for both cage and aviaries. Males will sing
(Canarius
 seed, hemp. Uncontaminated green stuff
especially if on own or competition from neighbour.
serinus)
Nervous bird - needs careful handling
Zebra finch
 Australia
Seed mixture - canary millet, rape maw, grass
Adaptable, hardy, sociable and easily tamed. Good for
(Taeniopygia
seed, hemp. Uncontaminated green stuff
both aviaries and cages set ups
(poephitia)
guttata)
Cut throat
Africa
Insects, mixed seeds small amounts of
Suitable for both aviary and cage. Can be kept in mixed
finch
uncontaminated green stuff. Soft foods, e.g.
aviary and good for those with limited experience
insectivorous mixtures for waxbills
 Hill mynah
India,
Chopped fruit. Insectivorous mixture. Mynah food.
Great powers of mimicry. Well-balanced diet essential
(Gracuta
south-east
Chopped meats. Large insects such as mealworms
with adequate vitamin and mineral supplementation.
religiosa)
Asia,
Need sunlight and without access have been known to
Indonesia
have seizures. Messy birds which will need perches and
floor cleaned daily. Need heated aviary as prone to chills
and respiratory problems
 Order Columbiformes - pigeons and doves
 Diamond dove
Australia
Seeds and grains according to size of bird. Chick
Lively little birds that live well in mixed aviaries or
(Geopelia
crumb. Green foods in small amounts
cages. Enjoy the sun and can be seen sunbathing
cuneata)
 Order Galliformes - domestic fowl. pheasants and quail
Chinese
pue eipul
 Small seeds. Chick crumb. Finely chopped green
Ground-dwelling species. If in cage with flight birds,
 painted quail
southern 
food. Occasional mealworm
protect water and food bowls from soiling. Do not place
(Excalfactoria
China
food and water bowls at the sides of their
chinensis)
accommodation, as they like to run along the perimeter.
Cock birds will fight
Table 33.11 Commonly kept species of cage and aviary birds-Cont'd.
Species
Origin
Captive diet
General information
Order Strigiformes - nocturnal birds of prey - the owls
European
Europe
Meat, dead rats, quail, day-old chicks, rabbit
Large but attractive bird
eagle owl
(Bubo bubo)
Barn owl
Europe
Meat, dead rats, quail, day-old chicks, rabbit
Commonly kept in captivity
(Tyto alba)
Order Falconiformes - diurnal birds of prey - hawks and falcons
Harris hawk
South to
Meat dead rats, quail, day-old chicks, fabbit
Usually kept in captivity for hunting or flying displays
(Circus spp.)
Central
America
very destructive, especially the larger parrots, e.g.
used to help birds over the winter. Some bird keepers, espe-
macaws, which will chew wooden frames and bite wire
cially those with extensive collections, utilize large brick-built
mesh. For these birds a 10-14 gauge mesh and a metal
buildings or sheds. The building is subdivided into smaller
frame work are recommended.
aviary units and each one provides the housed birds with
access to an outdoor flight. Adjoining aviaries should have
At least one-third of the aviary flight area should be covered
double wire partitions to prevent the birds from pecking their
with a roof made from clear Perspex or similar plastic roof
neighbours (Fig. 33.18).
sheeting. This will protect the birds from the elements and
contamination from wild birds.
A concrete base and brick surround make the ideal footing
for the aviary and provides ease of cleaning and prevents
rodents entering the aviary. Access should be via a double
door system or by one door opening inward - both these
methods prevent escape (Fig. 33.17).
The indoor area is usually a house made of timber and pro-
viding shelter. Supplementary heating and lighting can be
3
Fig. 33.17 Outside aviary. Note double entry doors and enrichment
for birds
Fig. 33.18 Indoor aviary showing heating and enrichment
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
793
22
Management and care of exotic species
.
Furnishings
● Toys - there are various proprietary toys available,
These are used to prevent boredom and subsequent behav.
e.g. ropes, swings, and wooden blocks. These should
ioural problems.
be used in moderation as too many can turn the aviary
or cage into an obstacle course preventing flight and
● Perches - the outside flight area should have at least two
 may over stimulate the birds so that they become
perches, one at either end, but more can be added.
depressed
Branches make the best perches as they are natural,
readily available, cheap and easily replaced when soiled.
● Baths - bathing is a natural activity and should be
Only pick branches from deciduous trees - willow and
encouraged as it stimulates the bird to preen
fruit trees are the best choice. Some woods are
and keeps its plumage clean. Maintenance of the
unsuitable, e.g. yew, laburnum, oak and rhododendron,
plumage is important for flight and for
 as they are poisonous if eaten. Make sure that the wood
conservation of body temperature. All species love
has not been recently sprayed or chemically treated and
bathing and this is also seen in wild birds. Raptors,
that all branches are scrubbed prior to use to remove
 including owls, will bathe if given the opportunity
soiling from wild birds. The perch size depends on the
and both budgies and parrots love having a
species of bird but a range of thicknesses and textures
fine mist directed from a garden hose or plant
help to exercise the feet - the perch should be of a
 sprayer on to their plumage, mimicking the
suitable size to allow the bird to grip without the toes
rains that would fall in their native rainforests.
overlapping. Inside the house, at least one perch should
Birds will actively fly into the spray and enjoying
be positioned just above the level of those in the flight.
preening themselves afterwards. The size and
This encourages the birds to roost in the most secure
depth of the bird bath must relate to the species, e.g.
part of the aviary. To prevent accidents, perches should
for small birds fill the bath with no more than
be robust and placed securely in the aviary. To prevent 
1-2 cm of water; for larger species fill with 3-4 cm of
contamination from faecal matter perches should be
water. Temperature of the water should be about
placed away from food and water bowls
40°C. Note Chicks should not be bathed as the
 down feathers of many species give little
● Food and water bowls - must be correctly positioned
protection.
for birds of all sizes to gain easy access
 Perches
Cage
toys
Food
tay
Millet
spray
Cage
door
Sanded
 paper floor
Water
Fig. 33.19 A typicat cage suitabte for smatler species of bird
794
 Management and care of exotic species
Although allowing a bird to have the freedom of the house
provides exercise and environmental enrichment, there are a
number of dangers:
● They may eat house plants or chew electrical cables,
 resulting in illness or injury
● Unsupervised birds may chew and swallow carpet and
other similar fabrics, resulting in crop and intestinal
impactions
● Free-flying birds are more vulnerable to injury from
ceiling fans, cookers, aquaria and attack by other
domestic pets
● Birds may escape through open doors and windows.
Fig. 33.20 A wooden box-type cage suitable for small species
Bird owners often have the misguided belief that their
of bird
bird would never fly away and leave them.
Cage and aviary hygiene
To prevent disease and vermin, bird accommodation must be
Cages
kept scrupulously clean:
Cages may be made from wire (Fig. 33.19) or wire and wood
● Cages - every day clean water receptacles and food
(Fig. 33.20). Remember that the bird must be able to stretch
bowls; check perches for soiling and replace or clean
out both wings fully in all directions. Cages make a good base
them using a mild detergent. Rinse, dry and place back
for birds that are allowed free range of the home and can be
in the cage. Every week, give the accommodation a
used for feeding, drinking and resting.
thorough clean
Consider the following:
● Aviaries - every day clean food and water bowls, scrub
soiled perches, rake soil or gravel substrate and sweep
● Wire cages are not suitable for nervous or timid birds as
concrete to remove debris and faecal matter. Every
they are too open and the birds feel exposed and stressed
week replace worn perches, scrub all perches, rake
 and hose gravel or sweep and hose concrete. Rake
● Box-type cages must have good ventilation and be
soil. Check wire and wooden frame for damage. At
well lit
least once or twice a year change and replace
substrate.
● Cages must be positioned away from draughts,
windows and heaters
Nutrition and feeding
● Some birds enjoy being in areas of high activity where
they receive lots of attention, while others seem to
 Good health and performance is achieved by providing a bal-
prefer more privacy and solitude
anced palatable diet that is appropriate to the species. This is
vital in the bird, as the shape of the beak is designed to cope
● A pet bird should never be kept in the kitchen as there
with a certain type of food and if the wrong food is provided
are risks from cooking fumes
the bird may be physically unable to eat it (see Ch. 15). As in
reptiles, there is little scientific analysis of the nutritional
● Perches and furnishings should be provided. The dow-
needs of caged birds. Proprietary foods have been tested 'in
elling or rigid perches often sold with cages are not
house' with little scrutiny from outside bodies and until there
suitable (see Aviaries, above)
is sufficient knowledge and research on the dietary needs
3
of companion birds it is of primary importance for all
● Food and water receptacles must be fastened securely
   
to the sides of the cage.
foodstuffs.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
795
33
Management and care of exotic species
beaphar
Bogena Beovoer
Patee pour mainates
Mynah Food
Beo-Futter
Fig. 33.22 Barn owt being fed by handter. A gauntfet is worn for
the safety of the handter
Fig. 33.21 Food prepared for a mynah bird (softbill) that contains
fruit, vegetabtes, soft bill mix, meatworms and a vitamin/minerat
supplement
When feeding caged birds, some consideration must be given
to their different feeding, social, and migratory behaviours
 and the limitations of their accommodation.
Guidelines
Birds represent a large group of varied species so for nutri-
tional purposes they can be classifed as follows:
● Hard bills - i.e. seed eaters, e.g. parrots, parakeets,
finches, doves and canaries. These eat predominantly a
mixture of seeds or seeds and nuts. The size of the seed
 or nut must be appropriate to the size of the bird -
there is no point in feeding a budgie on Brazil nuts but
a large parrot would love them. Many smaller cage
birds such as canaries and budgies are fed exclusively
on commercial diets with little variety. This is not ideal
and can have long-term effects on their longevity and
health. Suggested additions to their diet include fruit,
leafy vegetables and safe non-toxic plants, e.g.
Fig. 33.23 Casts or faecal pellets from an owt
chickweed, groundsel and dandelion
796
 Management and care of exotic species
● Soft bills - i.e. fruit and or insect eaters, e.g. mynah
● Iodine is essential in birds, especially budgerigars, for
birds, turacos, starlings. These feed on soft foods such
development and maintenance of the thyroid gland
as fruits, vegetables, proprietary soft bill mixes, insects
and meat (Fig. 33.21)
● There are a variety of bird seeds available; the type
chosen depends on the condition of the bird, e.g.
● Nectar feeders - i.e. they eat nectar and fruit, e.g.
breeding or showing
zosterops, sugarbirds, sunbirds, hummingbirds.
Artificial nectar mixtures, insects, small mealworms
● Examine seeds for quality and plumpness and make
flies, insectivorous mixture, chopped ripe fruits,
sure they are dust-free
soaked/chopped raisins. Design of the feeder must
satisfy the species; for example, hummingbirds have
● Smaller birds require ad lib feeding while larger birds
long tongues that are inserted deep into certain flowers
require feeding once a day
to reach the nectar.
  s    a  s  
● Raptors (birds of prey) - eaters of meat such as
help them stay healthy over the winter and when
dead rodents and birds, e.g. owls, hawks and eagles
coming into breeding condition
(Fig. 33.22). Depending on the species, these birds will
  s o p   
● When offering fresh food, makes sure it is fit for
rodents to rabbit, meats and quail. To keep their beaks
human consumption, fresh and washed to remove
trim and provide minerals, bones must be offered, and
traces of chemicals
skull. Raptors regurgitate to produce casts or pellets
● Millet sprays are a useful addition to the diet and can
which consist of undigested fur, feathers and bone
provide extra nutrients during moulting or to
(Fig. 33.23).
stimulate sick birds to eat
Water is an essential part of the diet, birds should nof
● Birds are messy eaters and will often take a bite out of
be allowed to go more than 2 h without access to
a piece of fruit or vegetable and then discard it before
water which is used to soak seeds in the crop and
moving on to the next food item.
enables enzymes in the proventriculus of the stomach to
work.
Practical feeding
Seeds and nuts are generally offered in bowls that are
General feeding tips
attached to the side of the aviary or cage. The positioning of
the food receptacle depends on the species being fed:
● Nuts and seeds have a high fat and protein content
and are very palatable. Overfeeding of them can lead
● Quail and ground-dwelling birds are fed on the floor of
to obesity and selective feeding. They also have low
the aviary
levels of carotene and iodine and provide little
calcium - they usually have an inverse
● Fresh foods can be placed on a platform in the cage or
calcium:phosphorus ratio
aviary (Fig. 33.21)
● Avocados have been reported to be toxic to birds
● As birds are wasteful and will often discard food on to
the floor of the aviary, hygiene is very important and
● Humming birds require vitamin D and calcium
all uneaten food must be removed daily
supplement
● Seed husks remaining on the top of the feed container
● Birds can get addicted to sunflower seeds, leading to
must be removed by blowing them away to allow the
obesity and death
birds access to the seeds underneath
● Always ensure that seed eaters have access to
● Remember not to place food bowls under perches, as
they will be contaminated by faeces
3
· Cuttlefish provides calcium and phosphorus in the diet
● Water is best offered in a gravity-fed bottle or in water
and also helps to keep the beak trim
hoppers
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
797
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.12 Breeding information for the more commonly kept species of caged bird
Species
Sexing
Clutch
Incubation period and
Additional
size
rearing period
Information
Budgerigar
Cere colour - cock blue or purple;
4-6 eggs
Incubation 18 days by female.
Easy to breed various colour
(Melopsittacus
hen brown
After rearing period, chicks 
mutations. Social birds so prefer
undutatus)
emerge from nest at 35 days
to breed in groups. Altricial
and independent by day 42
bunoA
African grey pattot
Difficult to sex but male may have
2-4 eggs
Incubation 28-29 days by
May not breed until their fourth
(Psittacus erithacus)
 darker wings; female is smaller
female. Rearing period approx.
year. After that will readily breed
84 days after hatching
and have a long reproductive life.
Males will feed young in nest.
After fledging fed by both male
 and female. Sometimes poor
parents and hand-rearing is
necessary. Altricial young
Peach-faced
Monomorphic - need to be
5 eggs
Incubation 28 days. Young
Various colour mutations. Hens
lovebirds
surgically sexed
fledge approx. 40-42 days after
carry nesting materials to line
(Agapornis
hatching
nest. Eggs white. Hatchlings fed
roseicollis)
 by male for extended period.
Altricial young
Cockatiels
Difficult to sex until frst moult at
5+ eggs
Incubation 18-21 days. Rearing
 Both parents incubate eggs.
(Nymphicus
approx. 6 months Females plumage
period to fledging is 30-35 days
Colour variations available. Breed
hotlandicus)
duller, especially facial markings,
easily in captivity. To prevent
than male. Females have barring on
breeding remove nest boxes
under surface of the tail feathers
especially over winter when
young vulnerable to cold.
Altricial young
Canary (Canarius
No clear distinction between male
s66a
Incubation period 14 days by hen. Altricial young
serinus)
 and female, although male sings
Rearing period 14 days
during breeding season
Zebra finch
Female have paler beaks and
s66a 9
Incubation period 12 days by hen. Fledglings will eat independently
(Taeniopygia
usually lack chest and flank
Rearing period - chicks start to 
14 days after leaving. Prolific
(poephitia) guttata)
markings of the male
leave nest 18 days after hatching  breeders: need to limit clutches
to three per year. Move nests and
nesting material to prevent
 continuous nest building.
Altricial young
Hill mynah 
No visible distinction between sexes 2-4 eggs,
Incubation period 14-15 days by
 Supply cockatiel or starling nest
(Gracula retigiosa)
green blue
 both parents. Fledge at 4-5 weeks, boxes all year. In breeding
with brown  independent at 8 weeks
season supply twigs leaves,
spots
straw, hay and hemp fbres as
nesting materials. Altricial young
Diamond dove
Both sexes have red eye rings but
2 eggs
Incubation period 13 days both
Good parents and care for young.
(Geopelia cuneata)
males' are thicker during breeding
 parents involved in process.
Altricial young
season. Males have more spots on
After rearing period the chicks
wings then females
may leave nest as early as
13 days post hatching
Chinese painted 
Hens brownish overall colour and
s66a 9
 Incubation period 18 days
Precocial young are virtually able
quail (Excalfactoria
lack the cocks bluish plumage
to live independently after
chinensis)
hatching providing temperature,
etc., is correct. They are not fed
by parents
NB. Incubation and rearing periods may vary.
798
 Management and care of exotic species
● Water receptacles should be small to prevent birds
  g         s 
using them as a bath.
considered:
● Make sure the cage is large enough for the birds to
Breeding
exercise, as this will improve fitness and fertility
Over the years, interest in breeding birds has grown, which
● Line the cage with plain paper or newspaper rather
has resulted in the availability of a wide variety of captive-
than sandpaper, as both are more absorbent and cost
bred species and colour variations. Breeding is a specialized
effective. Many hen birds are destructive and will often
subject and within this text only a brief outline of breeding
chew the lining paper
procedures and protocols is provided (Table 33.12).
● Nest boxes must be positioned according to the species
Depending on the species, breeding may be a straightforward
being housed, but remember to leave enough space for
procedure with the birds readily breeding and producing
the birds to move in and out of the nest. Budgerigar
healthy offspring, e.g. budgerigars, zebra finches and cock-
nest boxes are quite large and are best positioned on
atiels, or it may be more complicated and specialized, e.g.
the outside of the cage.
some of the larger parrots.
must also be considered:
requirements must be observed:
● If the birds are housed in a cage, supplementary
● You must have a male and female - this may sound
heating can be provided in the form of room heating.
or for those housed in aviaries or in large indoor
and sex must be determined surgically or via DNA
flights via tubular heaters. These heaters can be
examination (see Ch. 15)
attached to the sides of the accommodation.
Supplementary heating can help those birds who breed
● Accommodation and environment must be
during the colder months to rear their young and
conducive to breeding
sustain their own body condition, and also reduce the
risk of egg binding
 a n   a o
● As most birds tend to breed during the warmer parts of
the year and are stimulated by daylight length,
controlling the provision of artificial light may
Accommodation and environment
stimulate the birds to breed. It also provides them with
If birds are to be bred in an aviary the following must be
 o sn s  o pod s e
considered:
and general health. Lighting is best supplied by
fluorescent lights fitted with timers.
● Siting - the birds must be given privacy and a
stress-free environment. Plants in the aviary will
provide ground-dwelling birds, such as pheasants, with
Diet
hiding areas
Successful breeding and rearing of young uses a large amount
● Freedom from vermin - prevents disease and stops
of energy so the bird's diet must be of sufficient quality and
rodents destroying the eggs or killing the young
quantity. Various species of parrot and soft bills can be stim-
s  n     
● Sheltered flight area - plastic sheeting on the roof
and it has been shown to be of value in improving reproduc.
and sides provides protection for nesting birds and
fledglings
ductive performance, egg binding and reduced numbers of
offspring.
● Nest boxes should be placed in the aviary before the
birds come into breeding condition (Fig. 33.17). Boxes
3
must be available - if the aviary contains mixed
Egg laying and incubation
species, this will allow the birds to select the box most
suitable for them.
Signs that a hen is about to lay her eggs include:
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
799
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.13 Common diseases and clinical conditions of birds
Species
Causal agent
Symptoms
Diagnosis and treatment
Additional information
Ectoparasites
Scaly leg and scaly face
Cnemidocoptes spp.
Common in budgerigar.
Examine a scraping of affected
May infest cloaca. Mite lives
mite (cnemidocoptic
Appears as grey white
area. Various treatments
and feeds on bird's beak,
mange)
encrustations around the
include liquid paraffin to soften
surrounding areas and legs. It
Budgerigars, crossbills,
cere, beak, eyes, feet
scabs, then follow up with 10%
burrows and feeds off the
Passeriformes, canaries;
and legs. Seen on legs of
benzyl benzoate or 5% piperonyl1
bird, if untreated leading to
 occasionally in domestic
 CrOssbills and appears as
butoxide. Ivermectin 10 mg/ml
infection, rotting skin and
poultry
foot lesions on canaries
cattle injection
osteomyelitis. Hygiene and
and other passerines
isolation as mite rapidly
spreads. If using ivermectin 
repeat dose at 10-14 days.
Remember - this drug can
remain in the system for
prolonged periods so care not
to overdose
Red mite (greyish
Dermanyssus spp.
 Bird sits restlessly on the
As above
Mite lives in the dark crevices
agile mite )
perch, Constantly pecking
and seams of the bird's
Seen in domestic
 and scratching at itself. If
accommodation and emerges
poultry
you shine a torch into the
from its hiding place at night
cage at night you will see
to attack and suck the blood
the mite. Zoonotic - humans
of the sleeping bird. It is
can develop a rash caused
 particularly difficult to treat
by the mite
 and destroy by just
disinfecting as the mite can
live up to 5 months without
food and reproduce at a rate
of 2600 eggs per 2 months
life span
 Other ectoparasites:
·Lice
Matlophaga
Irritation, feather loss.
Antiparasitic preparations
Air sac mite mostly seen in
●Fleas
Siphonaptera
Loss of condition, bird
passerines
●Feather mites
Various species
restless
●Feather follicle mites
●Air sac mite
Sternostoma spp.
Dyspnoea, loss of voice
sneezing, gasping, death
Endoparasites
Tapeworm (cestodes)
Large number of
Thin, anorexic and
Crop tube and worm using
Tapeworms - Worm eggs
Roundworms
different species
 generally lethargic birds.
liquid medication, or place
found in an intermediate
(nematodes)
involved
Diarrhoea. Screen
drops in water. Use veterinary
host, i.e. the food they
droppings/crop smears for
prescribed anthelmintics:
ingested infects birds. The 
s66a W10M
Tapeworms -
adult worms then develop in
● Fenbendazole
the bird's intestine and eggs
● Praziquantel
are shed in the droppings.
Roundworms -
Intermediate host ingest the
●Levamisole
worm eggs and the cycle
● Fenbendazole
starts again
● Ivermectin
Roundworms - Worm eggs
are passed out in the bird's
droppings and are passed
onto other birds by
contaminating food, eggs,
adhere to feathers, and feet
800
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.13 Common diseases and clinical conditions of birds—Cont'd.
Species
Causal agent
Symptoms
Diagnosis and treatment
Additional information
Fenbendazole is toxic to
finches. Levamisole can be
toxic and deaths seen in
budgerigars, pigeons and
lovebirds
Bacterial or viral diseases
Enteric disease
Enteritis
Escherichia coli
Anorexia. Change in
Histology and culture of
Watery green droppings
All species
Campylobacter spp.
appearance to droppings
infected tissue. Antibiotics Of
suggest reduced food intake
 Change in diet
yellow-green, watery. Bird
sulphonamides. Supportive 
and excess bile secretion
listless and quiet
therapy, i.e. fluid therapy
Trichomoniasis
Trichomonas gatfinae
Sometimes acute death,
Microscopic examination to
Also called'canker' in pigeons
All species
diatthoea, inappetence,
identify parasite. Metronidazole,
and frounce' in raptors.
weight loss, lethargy
good hygiene and supportive
Infections via direct
dyspnoea
therapy
contact, generally in food
Salmonellosis
Satmonella spp.
Including:
 Antibiotics, good hygiene,
 Zoonosis causing enteric
All species
●Bloodstained droppings
supportive therapy
signs, i.e. diarrhoea and
Caused by: poor
●Slimy droppings
vomiting
hygiene, rodent
●Smelly droppings
infestation, wild birds,
● Swelling of wings or
 and poor quarantine
joints
● Passage of undigested 
food
Paralysis
 Respiratory disease
Onithosis
Chtamydia psittaci
 Affected bird may sit
Isolate affected bird.
Zoonosis causing flu-like
 Psitticosis
huddled up on perch,
Laboratory faecal and blood tests. signs, diarrhoea, shivering,
Chlamydiosis
wheezing, gasping for
Keep bird warm and supportive
pyrexia, and headaches. Never
 Mainly seen in:
breath, open beak and
therapy. Antibiotics, e.g.
share food or allow a bird to
●Psittacine birds -
exaggerated tail movements. entofloxacin; tetracyclines,
take food from your mouth.
cockatiels, lovebirds,
Respiratory signs, nasal,
chlorotetracyclines
Always wash hands after
budgerigars, parrots 
ocular discharge, ruffled
handling a bird. Disease
● Columbiformes - doves
feathers, shivering. Enteritis
passed on via droppings and
●Anseriformes - ducks,
discharges. Humans inhale
geese and swans
causative agent. Strict
hygiene protocols. Mainly
seen in imported birds of
smuggled birds not correctly
 quarantined. Most imported 
birds are routinely treated
against Chtamydia.
Chlorotetracyclines are
bacteriocidal and require
prolonged use
Avian mycoplasmosis
Mycoptasma spp.
Upper respiratory infection (
Culture of causative organism.
 Seen where groups of birds
All species
 sneezing, sinusitis,
Use various antimicrobial drugs,
kept confined and with poor
blepharitis
e.g. tylosin, enrofloxacin
ventilation
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
801
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.13 Common diseases and clinical conditions of birds-Cont'd.
Species
Causal agent
Symptoms
Diagnosis and treatment
Additional information
Newcastle's disease
Paramyxovirus
Variable: listlessness,
Virus isolation.
Highly infectious - all
(fowl pest) - notifiable
 green slimy droppings,
Histopathology
affected and in-contact
disease
neurological signs
livestock must be destroyed.
Affects all avians,
Affects egg production. Major
reason for avian quarantine.
Vaccine available for poultry
Nutritional disorders
Iodine deficiency
Iodine-deficient
Loss or change in voice,
 Iodine supplementation.
Not commonly seen because
Seen in Budgerigars
diet
respiratory problems due to
Improve diet and add iodine
of use of packaged seeds
pressure from enlarged
to drinking water
that have been supplemented.
thyroid on trachea. Bird
Iodine deficiency affects
often has difficulty breathing
thyroid hormone production,
and makes a characteristic
which then stimulates an
'click' sound. To aid respiration,
increase in thyroid
bird can be observed sitting
stimulating hormone (TSH)
with head raised. Crop dilation
from the anterior pituitary.
 as seed umable to pass into
Raised levels of TSH cause
the thyroid gland into the
hyperplasia (enlargement) of
proventriculus
the thyroid gland (goitre)
Vitamin A deficiency
Vitamin-A-deficient
 Generally ill bird, lethargic,
Change diet, with addition of
Psittacine birds that have
Common in all species
diet. Lack of fresh 
weight loss and signs of
dark green vegetables and
been fed on an all-seed diet
vegetables and fruit respiratory problems such 
carrots. Vitamin A therapy
will not readily accept fresh
in diet. Overuse of
as wheezing, dyspnoea and
fruits and vegetables, but the
sunflower seeds in
 sneezing. Nasal discharge.
owner must be persuaded to 
the diet 
Eyes appear swollen, with
persevere with this change in
signs of conjunctivitis
Calcium, phosphorus
High seed and nut
Variety of skeletal problems
Severe cases, give intravenous
Vitamin D activated by
and vitamin D deficiency diet, especially
and poor growth. Egg binding
 calcium borogluconate and
ultraviolet light on the skin
Psittacines and those
peanuts and 
 and soft shells. General signs 
intramuscular diazepam.
influences the uptake and
birds fed on an
sunflower seeds
will depend on age and
Improve diet plus calcium
usage of dietary calcium and
exclusively seed diet
duration of problem. Poor
supplementation 
phosphorus
appetite, lethargy, weakness,
poor feather growth, soft
droppings. Bird unable to
perch properly, wings held in
abnormal position; in severe
cases bird appears to have a
hunched back. Muscle spasms
and twitching. Death
Feather problems
Feather plucking
 Self-mutilation
Plumage on body is damaged
 Once established, this is very
Rule out ectoparasites by
due to boredom,
and bald areas apart from
difficult to stop. Enrich cage,
careful examination of
stress, isolation,
head. Clinical history
and bird's life. Education of 
plumage. Frequently seen in
 changes in routine,
 examination to rule out
the owner on how to deal with
parrots. Placing another bird
over-preening
other feather disorders
bird. Fitting of an Elizabethan
in the cage may seem a good
during breeding
collar to prevent mutilation.
idea but evidence has shown
season. Poor
Drug therapy
that behaviour can be passed
husbandry and
on to new occupant
nutrition, hormonal
imbalance
802
 Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.13 Common diseases and clinical conditions of birds—Cont'd.
Species
Causal agent
 Symptoms
Diagnosis and treatment
Additional information
Feather cysts
Genetic or due to
Large, bulging swellings seen
Surgical removal
The wall of the follicles can
Certain breeds of
damage to
in region of the carpus
become thickened and a
canary; other
developing feather
(wings) but can be seen in
cheesy exudates forms within
domestic species
follicle or excess
other parts of the body -
计
preening
contains the remains of the
undeveloped feather
Loss of feather
Various pathogens
Baldness
Rule out ectoparasites.
condition
and conditions that
Intense irritation
Moulting is a natural
can affect the
Damage to feathers
 occurrence and frequency
 integnity of the
depends on species and
feathers and dermis
environmental conditions.
Ectoparasites
Moulting is a stressful process
Bullying
for the bird and nutritional
Feather plucking
demands are high, s0
 Poor environmental 
increased nutrition and 
conditions, especially
supplementation must be
low humidity and
 considered. Broken feathers
nutrition 
will not normally regrow
until the next moult. It can
take 4-6 weeks for new
feathers to grow
Psittacine beak
Viral: circo virus
 Poor feather condition and
Fatal. Supportive therapy may
 Transmission of virus via 
 and feather disease
abnormal plumage. Feathers
be considered but because of
faeces, feathers and dust
Various psittacines
 appear small and club-like,
its virulence and threat to bird
species, especially
fret lines in the vane, curled
populations, any suspected 
cockatoos
feathers. Feather loss.
cases must be quarantined and
Feathers remain in blood-flled
diagnosis made rapidly
sheath. Beak also abnormal
appearance, shiny, elongated,
flaky and fault lines. Change
in feather coloration
Regurgitation
Many causes, including:
Food regurgitated. Other signs
Depending on diagnosis: fluid
Regurgitation occurs during 
All species
●Behavioural response
 depend on causative agent.
therapy and supportive care;
courtship, feeding of 
●Proventriculus
 Physical examination of the
tube feeding
nestlings and weaning. Pet
● Dilatation disease
 bird to eliminate foreign body.
birds may also adopt an
● Ingestion of foreign
Check oral cavity. Palpate crop,
object or family member and
body
abdomen and cloaca palpated.
regurgitate as a method of
●Infections, e.g.
Faecal examination,
courtship or feeding
yeast, Trichomonas,
bacteriology and blood tests to
Megabacterium
identify pathogen. Endoscopy
●Reaction to drug
to identify and remove foreign 
therapy
body
● Ingestion of toxins,
e.g. plants,
insecticides
●Neoplasm
●Parasites
● Crop stasis/necrosis
3
● Crop impaction
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
803
33
Management and care of exotic species
Table 33.13 Common diseases and clinical conditions of birds—Cont'd.
Species
Causal agent
Symptoms
Diagnosis and treatment
Additional information
Other conditions
'Going light” -
Megabacterium,
Occasionally blood in faeces,
Supportive care, specific
Seen in large collections and
megabacteriosis
Foxoptasma
chronic weight loss, lethargy.
therapy if pathogen identified.
where birds are frequently
Budgerigars,
random deaths in aviary birds,
Improve diet
taken to exhibitions
canaries, finches,
dilatation of proventriculus
cockatiels,
Egg binding
Multifactorial:
As egg laying imminent, bird
Treatment varies according to
Bird will be very distressed
All species,
● Size of egg
appears depressed, lethargic,
position of egg, but it is
and it is important to keep
particularly
●First clutch
 abdominal distension,
 important to remove the egg
patient warm and quiet and in
budgerigars and
● Calcium deficiency
unsteadiness on perch,
as soon as possible. This may
a darkened room
cockatiels
●Obesity
squatting, straining and
be via drug therapy, manual
● Poor environmental
diarrhoea. NB. Clinical signs can
 manipulation or surgery. Keep
conditions
vary depending on the site of
bird warm (30-32°℃)
● Age of bird
the egg
snoun
Articular gout
Associated with renal
Swollen painful joints. Bird
No specific treatment: only
Water consumption can be
Poultry, waterfowl,
disease or damage
exhibiting shifting lameness,
able to manage the signs, e.g.
improved by adding fruits and 
raptors and
and hanging on side of cage to
 by restricting high-protein 
vegetables in the diet.
psittacine birds,
take weight off painful joints.
foodstuffs in diet and 
 Nodules of the uric acid also
especially
Loss of condition. Diagnosis by
maintaining good state of
called tophi are creamy white
budgerigars,
the muroxide test on the
hydration. Drug therapy to
in colour. They are normally
conures and
contents taken from one of the 
 reduce uric acid production
seen on the intertarsals and
lovebirds
 joint swellings
in the liver. Surgical removal
joints of the feet. Prognosis is
 of urates deposits in the joints 
POOr
Bumble foot
Common microorganisms Septic condition of the foot
 Under a general anaesthetic,
Linked with poor hygiene and
 Poultry, birds of 
isolated:
leading to abscessation.
lance and drain the infected
perches all the same width.
prey, occasionally
● Staphylococcus aureus Microorganism gains entry via
area.Swab taken of area for
Also high incidence in heavy,
psittacine birds
●Escherichia coti
 a penetrating wound underneath culture and sensitivity will
inactive birds limited
Proteus spp.
the foot. Infection leads to
indicate appropriate antibiotics.
to one size of perch. Initial
swelling and pus-filled areas.
Foot may be bandaged and
penetrating wound can be
Infection can track as far as
bird kept on padded perches
caused by claws growing into
hock. As bird is in discomfort,
 of varying widths
foot. If left untreated, area
it can be observed resting
can become gangrenous
against sides of cage
● Spending longer periods on the nest or in the
This behaviour can alarm the novice breeder but inter-
nest box, and the cock bird will often join
vention could lead to the hen abandoning her nest. During
her
incubation the sitting bird will turn the eggs daily to
prevent the embryo from sticking to the inside of the
shell.
● Change in the amount and smell of hen's
 Incubation periods vary according to species (Table 33.12):
droppings.
● Natural incubation - eggs are incubated by either
The frequency of laying varies according to species. For
the hen alone, e.g. budgerigars or shared between
instance, finches lay every day, budgerigars and many
the hen and cock bird, e.g. cockatiels. In wading
  o  r   A d a j
birds such as coots and moor hens it is the
developing at different rates, the hen will often not
male who takes sole responsibility for
incubate her eggs until at least three eggs have been laid.
incubation.
804
 Management and care of exotic species
● Artificial incubation - eggs are incubated in a
Avian disease
specially designed avian incubator. There are various
models available and features vary but it is advisable to
Some bird diseases are extremely difficult to identify so if
purchase one that will automatically turn the eggs as
signs continue for more than 24 h a veterinary surgeon must
this is not only time saving but reduces heat loss every
be consulted (Table 33.13).
time the incubator is opened. Heat is a key factor in
successful hatching and a fluctuation of 0.5"C can
General signs of ill health in a bird include:
have quite damaging effects on the viability of the
eggs. As a guide incubation temperatures range from
●Lethargy
36.9-37.5"C with a relative humidity of 40-55%
depending on species.
● Bird's feathers ruffled and ‘puffed up"
Rearing chicks
● Sleeping with both feet on perch - especially
parrots
When first hatched chicks can be classified according to their
stage of development:
● Poor appetite
● Altricial - blind, bald and totally dependent on the
●Regurgitating food
parents, e.g. budgerigars, finches
● Loose watery or abnormally coloured droppings
● Precocial - capable of living an independent life, e.g.
quail, ducklings.
● Increased thirst
They may also be grouped according to when they leave the
● Discharge from nostrils and eyes
nest:
● Abnormal breathing - laboured, noisy, exaggerated tail
● Nidifugous - capable of leaving the nest soon after
movemenits
hatching, e.g. ducklings and goslings
● Heavy moult.
● Nidiculous - remain in the nest until they are
feathered and ready to fly, e.g. budgerigar, cockatiel,
Other more specific signs include blood in the droppings, a
parrots.
prominent breast bone indicating severe loss of weight,
gasping for breath with the beak open, uncoordinated move-
If eggs have been incubated by the parents then they will care
ments and paralysis.
for and feed the young. If they have been hatched using
artificial means then the hatchlings should be moved to a
When dealing with an ill bird you should isolate the bird
brooder and kept in a controlled environment until they are
from other birds and humans as soon as possible. The isola-
weaned and feathered. During the rearing period the accom-
tion cage should be positioned in a quiet, well-ventilated
modation and nest boxes or brooder must be kept very clean.
room and have three solid sides. There should be an infrared
If droppings and uneaten food remain, the nestlings' feet can
1 jo aiiadn e ie aen a daay on du ieau o 1
become encrusted in debris, preventing them from walking
least 32°C. If appropriate, offer food that is easily digestible
and leading to disease.
and water that is lukewarm.
identified and is allowed to continue it may lead to the death
Welfare o
Vf
of the animal. Even the close proximity of the human owner
may be a source of distress and it is important to realise that,
exotlc animals
unlike dogs and cats, many of these exotic species do not
enjoy being handled.
Pain and distress
Definitions of pain and distress include:
3
● Pain - an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience
All the exotic species that are kept as pets are capable of
associated with actual or potential tissue damage. This
feeling pain and distress and in some cases if this is not
physical phenomenon may be classified as mild,
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 
805
33
Management and care of exotic species
 moderate or substantial or depending on the duration of
● Subjective assessment - using your 'gut instinct'
 the pain may be described as being acute or chronic
where there are no measurable factors. If you would
 expect an injury or disease to cause pain in humans
● Discomfort - milder than pain and may be nothing
then it probably causes pain in other species - always
more than an inconvenience
remember postoperative pain
● Distress - often shortened to 'stress'. This is a
● Clinical assessment - certain clinical signs will
psychological phenomenon and may be associated
indicate pain, e.g. raised pulse rate or respiratory rate,
with pain. 'Stressors' include isolation (in social
raised temperature, loss of weight caused by loss of
species), maternal separation, overcrowding, noise or
appetite or dehydration. These are quantifiable, e.g.
lack of privacy.
the higher the pulse rate the greater the degree of
pain
It is often difficult to decide whether an animal is in pain or dis-
tress and veterinary nurses are commonly told that 'it must be
● Behavioural assessment - in order to assess whether
very difficult to do your job because animals cannot tell you
an animal is behaving abnormally you must first know
what is wrong'; however, animals cannot lie or exaggerate their
what is normal for that species, e.g. is it normal for a
situation, so the presented picture is the true one.
bird to sit fluffed up on its perch with its eyes shut, for
a rabbit to scream or for a mouse to sit separately from
There are three ways of assessing the situation:
the rest of its cage mates?
Table 33.14 Normal behaviour and abnormal behaviour as an indicator of pain and distress in small mammals
Rabbit
Guinea pig
Ferrets
Gerbils
Mice
Rats
Normal
Active, inquisitive,
Active, inquisitive,
Active, inquisitive,
 Active, inquisitive,
Active, inquisitive,
Active, inquisitive,
behaviour
eating/foraging
eating/foraging
sniffing ground 
eating/foraging
eating/foraging
eating/foraging
regularly.
regularly. Copraphagia
and playing.
regularly.
regularly. Interacting
regularly.
Copraphagia
performed at night.
Relaxed body
Interacting with
with cage mates
Interacting with
performed at
Normal vocalization,
posture
cage mates
cage mates
night. Body
chunter, chutt,
posture relaxed
whistles and whines.
and will often lie
 Only rodent that
stretched out
normally vocalizes
Indication
Hunched body
Hunched body posture,
High-pitched
May bite if
May bite if handled.
Quiet, reduction in
of pain/
posture, very still
very still and inactive.
scream, associated
handled. Fur often
Fur often looks
exploratory
abnormal
and inactive.
If scared or in pain,
with fear rather
looks 'staring'
'staring. Quiet
behaviour. Will often
behaviour
High-pitched
guinea pigs will emit
than pain. May
Quiet hunched
hunched body
interfere with
Scream if in
a very high-pitched
become more
body posture; if in
posture; if in 
wound/sutures if
extreme pain or
Scream. Anorexia.
aggressive if in
communal groups,
communal groups,
operation site
fear (usually only
Teeth grinding,
pain. will often
will avoid contact
will avoid contact
painful
when attacked by
 indicating pain. Will
interfere with
with other gerbils.
with other mice
predator). Anorexia.
 salivate if in oral
wound/sutures if
 Often ostracized
Teethgrinding.
discomfort. Hiding at
operation site
by colony, may be
indicating pain.
back of cage
painful
thrown out of
Will salivate if
housing area
oral discomfort.
Often more
difficult to handle.
Hiding at back of
cage.
Postoperatively.
rabbits often
interfere with
wound/sutures
806
 Management and care of exotic species
Pain and distress can be reduced by:
to be successful. Euthanasia by definition is painless and
very quick when performed competently and should not
● Correct handling - learn the recommended method
be overlooked as a possible course of action.
 and do it correctly the first time. Make sure that any
equipment you may need is available and in good
The welfare of animals should be viewed holistically, i.e. look
working order and, if you are likely to need assistance,
 at every aspect that affects the animal, from its environment
make sure that help is at hand
and diet to the type of owner, which might include age and
experience, employment, whether they smoke, whether they
● Providing a high standard of animal husbandry, i.e.
have children, where they live, etc. All these factors and
 appropriate housing, environment and diet
many more will affect the welfare of the animal and should
 be taken into account when identifying problems.
● Making changes to the environment to reduce pain,
e.g. confine a bird with a broken wing to a small cage
There are three main areas that must be constantly reviewed
so that it cannot fly
by the veterinary nurse and clients should be advised upon:
● Attending to wounds and infection as soon as possible
● Appropriate husbandry, i.e. diet, housing, environment
to minimize suffering
and their management
● Using therapeutic agents to reduce pain if appropriate,
● Appropriate psychological and behavioural needs to
e.g. analgesics and anaesthetics
avoid the development of stereotypical and other
behaviour problems
● Be prepared to use euthanasia as a means of relieving
suffering if treatment is likely to cause pain or is unlikely
● Basic health requirements of the species.
Table 33.15 Normal and abnormal behaviour as an indicator of pain in reptiles and birds
 Snakes
Lizards
Chelonia
Birds
Normal
 Hiding under furnishings or
Lively, seen basking and moving 
Active, walking with shell
 Plump and plumage in good
behaviour
curled round branch, 0f
around the accommodation.
lifted off the ground. Eating,
 condition and feathers held
basking, slowly moving round
Accepting food. Docile species
 passing urates and faecal
flat against the bird's body.
cage. Docile species accept
handled with ease. Accepts
matter. Non-aggressive,
Sits steadily on perch,
disturbance from handler when
being kept in accommodation
basking and thermoregulation.
 greets known human
cleaning and maintaining
Quickly retreats into shell if
companions. Able to carry
accommodation. Non-
threatened or approached.
out free flight. Normal
aggressive toward handler.
Strength in limbs
relaxed respiration.
Normal ecdysis. Accepting food
 Droppings appeat normal
and eating regularly. Passing
white urates and brown
normal urine and faecal matter
or black faecal matter
Abnormal
Restless and moving around
Quiet species may become more
 Failure to retract head into
Hunched or abnormal
accommodation. Agitated by
lively or lively species subdued.
shell. Limp and flaccid limbs.
appearance on perch. Sits
normal routine, i.e. feeding,
Docile species becomes,
Slow-moving. Remains under
with eyes closed. Head
handling and cleaning. Striking
aggressivere fuses food.
hot spot or hidden away. Not
under wing. Feathers ruffled
at handler. Abnormal posture
Constantly knocking into
eating. Open mouth breathing
and exaggerated breathing.
head and neck raised and mouth
vivarium doors, especially
Feather plucking, and
 gaping and exaggerated
glass. Aggression toward fellow
aggression toward familiar
breathing. Contortions and
occupants. Not actively basking
human companions
twisting of body. Constantly
of not moving away from hot
rubbing body against furnishings.
 spot. Head raised and open
Faccid and lethargic,problems
mouthed breathing. Flaccid and
shedding. Watery faecal matter
lethargic. Dark, dull colour,
especially in chameleons.
3
Iguanas males - head bobbing
and knocking tail against
doors and walls
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
807
33
Management and care of exotic species
The welfare of exotic animals is also of extreme importance
room away from other domestic animals and, if a lizard
within the veterinary practice and as most nurses and veterinary
is very stressed and banging against the front of the vivarium,
surgeons see these animals less often, inevitably we know less
a non-reflective covering can be placed over the glass
about their veterinary needs and their responses to anaesthetic
front, allowing the nurse to observe the patient without
and analgesic drugs. Their preoperative and postoperative care is
disturbing it.
often the responsibility of the nurse, who must be aware of both
normal behaviour and the significance of abnormal behaviour.
Factors that can cause distress
in reptiles
Small mammals
● Poor environmental conditions and positioning of
the animal's enclosure or vivarium (see Housing, above)
With the exception of the ferret, most small mammals show
little evidence of pain. These are all prey species so in the
● Over-handling - there is little evidence to show that
wild, if they were to show pain, they would make themselves
reptiles enjoy constant handling and if it is incorrectly
vulnerable and obvious to predators, who would then kill
carried out some species of lizards, e.g. geckos, canl carry
them. They rarely vocalize unless handled roughly, although
rabbits will scream or become actively aggressive, as would a
can suffer spinal injuries, especially in the occipital area.
cat or dog. Table 33.14 describes both normal and abnormal
Note Bruising may take several weeks to show in
behaviour patterns.
cold-blooded species and can be a cause of death
Pain should be assessed and monitored and recorded on hos
● Inadequate nutrition (see Nutrition, above)
pital sheets at regular intervals, e.g. every 2-3 h. This should
include details of:
● Overcrowding and fighting - many lizards are
territorial and males will fight to defend their territory
● Appetite - what was eaten and quantity
or to claim females. Geckos, bearded dragons and
water dragons are a few examples of lizards that are
● Urination - quantity and appearance
very territorial and must be kept either on their own
or with females. Juvenile male tortoises are
● Defaecation - appearance
constantly try and mate one another, resulting in bite
wounds to the legs and shell trauma as they constantly
● Demeanour - bright, lethargir, aggressive
ram into one another. If a male and female are kept
together the female will be constantly harassed by the
● Body position
male's amorous advances
● Pupils - dilated or constricted
● Poor husbandry and illness
● Wild-caught species not adjusting to a captive
les
environment
● Prolonged transportation.
Reptiles are very easily stressed and feel pain. The use of
opiate-based pain relief is still an area requiring research but
It may take weeks or months for the results of stress
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can and are used with
to become obvious and animals that have sustained
some level of effectiveness. Table 33.15 describes both nor-
long periods of stress will have a diminished immune
 mal and abnormal behaviour that may indicate pain in
response.
reptiles.
Birds
Hospitalized reptiles
Sick reptiles should be placed in hospital vivaria, ideally made
from fibreglass or moulded plastic with correct controlled
Table 33.15 shows both normal and abnormal behaviour in
as e u id a pos aa  e 
caged and aviary birds.
808
 Management and care of exotic species
Hospitalized birds
Divers S J Medical and surgical treatment of reptile dystocias.
In: 2ist Annual Waltham/Ohio State University Symposium (for
      n   n 
the Treatment of Animal Diseases) lecture notes. College of Vet-
level, i.e. in aviaries or on cage perches, it makes sense to
erinary Medicine Ohio State University and Waltham USA, Inc,
accommodate these birds in the veterinary surgery at high
Vernon, CA
levels, e.g. on high shelves or in hanging cages, which will
make the bird feel less threatened and reduces stress. They
Donoghue S Nutrition of companion birds and reptiles. In:
should be accommodated away from predator animals and
21st Annual Waltham/Ohio State University Symposium (for the
excessive noise and kept in subdued light.
Treatment of Animal Diseases) lechure notes. College of Veterinary
Medicine Ohio State University and Waltham USA, Inc, Vernon,
When handling a bird it will feel much happier if it can
CA
perch on your finger, but there is the risk of escape so
steps must be taken to prevent this. Restraining a bird just
Fenwick H 1995 Taking care of tortoises, their eggs and hatchlings.
around the wings causes it much stress and it will attempt to
H. Ferwick, Kingston
flap.
Mader D 1997 Approach to the anorexic reptile. In: 21st Annuat
Waltham/Ohio State University Symposium (for the Treaiment of
Animal Diseases) lechure notes. College of Veterinary Medicine
Factors that can cause stress in
Ohio State University and Waltham USA, Inc, Vernon, CA
birds
Mader D Reptile urogenital system and renat disease. In:
● Siting of cages and aviaries - some birds are gregarious
21st Annual Waltham/Ohio State University Symposium (for the
and enjoy being in a busy area and if deprived of
Treatment of Animal Diseases) lechure notes. College of Veterinary
human or other bird contact can become depressed
Medicine Ohio State University and Waltham USA, Inc, Vernon,
and display behavioural abnormalities. To others
CA
species this would cause much distress and health
problems
Mara W P 1997 Map furtles and diamondback terrapins. TFH
Publications, Havant
● Overcrowding and bullying
Pursall B 1994 The Guide to Owning a Mediterranean Tortoise
● Over breeding
TFH. Havant
● Poor nutrition
● Poor environmental hygiene
Recommended reading
● Disease and illness
Beynon P H, Cooper J (eds) 1994 Manual of exotic pets. British
Small Animal Veterinary Associafion, Cheltenham
Beynon P Lawton MPC and Cooper J 1992 BSAVA manual
of reptiles. British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
Bibliography
Cheltenham
Alderton D 1986 A petkeeper's guide to reptiles and amphibians.
Both manuats provide a wide range of information on the
Salamander, London
subject.
Alderton D1997 A bird keeper's guide to breeding birds.
Gosden C (ed.) 2004 Exotics and wildlife: a manual of veterinary
Salamander, London
Care. Butterworth Heinemann, Edinburgh
Beynon P H, Forbes N A, Lawton M P C (eds) 1996 BSAVA manual
Provides a mine of information for the veterinary nurse.
of psittacine birds. British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
Cheltenham
3
Blandford Press, Poole
Coles B H 1997 Avian medicine and surgery, 2nd edn. Blackwell
Science, Oxford
Very useful for those wishing to keep reptiles as pets.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
809
33
Management and care of exotic species
Quesenbury K E, Carpenter J W 2004 Ferrets, rabbits and
Richardson V C G 1997 Diseases of small rodents. Blackwell
rodents - clinical medicine and surgery, 2nd edn. W B Saunders,
Science, Oxford
Sf Louis, MO
Good coverage of small 'furries'.
Excellent book covering anatomy and physiology,husbandry and
clinical conditions.
810
Management and care of exotic species
34
Manaqement and care of injured
4
wildlife
Louise Brockbank
Key Points
 Wild animals are creatures that live their lives entirely
into the wild. If it is safe to do so, the animal should
separate from humans, which means that prolonged
be released to the same area from which it was
contact, as happens during hospitalization, is extremely
taken.
stressful to them.
The animal must not be kept captive for any longer than
● Any attempt to restrain and handle a wild animal will be
is necessary and care must be taken to ensure that it
seen as a threat, so they can be diffcult and sometimes
does not become too used to the presence of human
dangerous to handle.
beings, which might be dangerous when it returns to a
 Design of accommodation and diet must mimic as closely
wild existence.
as possible what the animal would naturally receive in
● Before an animal is released it must be capable of
the wild and any changes necessary to ft in with
surviving in the wild. If an animal will never be able to
 veterinary practice must be, within reason, as small as
fend for itself, euthanasia should be considered.
possible.
● All aspects of wildlife management are covered by the
● The aim of veterinary treatment and aftercare is
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981.
eventually to rehabilitate and release the animal back
Introduction
The aim of this chapter is to provide advice on the basic care
of the most common wildlife casualties based on their natural
The care of sick, injured and orphaned wildlife provides the
behaviour and habitat. It will also tell you how to deal with
         
requests for help from members of the public, including how
psnd Aeu siee jo dnon ue  a 
to recognise when an animal is in need of help and when it
within a veterinary practice. Wildlife casualties do not appre-
should be left alone. Wildlife can be difficult to handle, as
ciate the type of care and comfort given to domestic animals
they are wild creatures that live in a world where humans are
and may even suffer as a result of it. Stress to the casualty is
seen as a threat. The first thought of any carer should be how
the biggest problem facing wildlife carers and this must con-
the animal's distress can be minimized and the second should
stantly be taken into consideration.
be how soon can it be released back into the wild.
Wild mammals
firmly but kindly. One of the most important pieces of equip-
ment is a blanket or towel.
General guidelines
Never use a wire basket or transparent container for wildlife.
If a solid container is not available, then a cover should be
provided. There is nothing more likely to cause stress and
Rescue and transportation
injury to an animal than for it to be put into a container it
On being approached, a wild animal will do one of three
can see out of but from which it cannot escape.
things - it will freeze, run or, if cornered, defend itself. Before
attempting to catch any animal, assess the situation carefully.
The container should always be lined - newspaper and a
The animal should be observed for the way it is behaving and
towel or a blanket for larger casualties is ideal for providing
moving and a plan should be worked out for its capture. Any
warmth, absorbency, a place to hide and something to grip
additional help should be organised and then the approach,
on to during transportation. The container should allow
capture and confinement must be carried out swiftly and
enough room for the animal to stand and turn around. If
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 811
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
using a cardboard box it must be made secure to prevent the
● Mammals need a place to hide and their reaction once
animal from escaping. Containers with grill-type doors must be
placed in a cage or pen is to find a suitable place out of
covered to keep the animal in the dark. Badly injured individu-
sight
als or those in shock may need an immediate heat source and
Snuggle Pads are ideal for use during transportation. A well
● Bedding should be put at the back of the
wrapped hot-water bottle will suffce until the casualty is livelier.
accommodation and this is where your casualty will
stay. Unlike birds, which will flap around the cage
Admission
as it is opened, mammals will remain hidden
away.
On arrival the injured animal goes through a standard admis-
sions procedure which should include:
Heat provision should be carefully considered. Giving casual-
ties heat that they do not need means that they will have to
● Where the was animal found - once recovered the
be weaned off it before they can be released. Remember that
animal should be taken back to the place it was found
these are wild animals that live out in the cold, wet and
 unless it is inappropriate, e.g. main road
windy weather. Warm bedding is all that is required. Flexible
heat mats and microwavable heat pads should be well
● Name, address and telephone number of the finder
wrapped to provide a gentle heat, but they cannot be regu-
lated and provide a constant temperature. Bedding must be
● Behaviour at the time of rescue - may provide an
kept away from the heat source in case the casualty becomes
indication of the injury or condition, e.g. a fox
too warm and it also provides somewhere to hide. Those too
staggering around in the road suggests a road traffic
sick to cool themselves must be carefully monitored to avoid
accident. This information may reduce the need for a
overheating.
thorough examination, which will reduce the amount
of stress.
To wean an animal off heat, gradually turn the heat supply
down and then off during the day, when temperatures are
A record card or hospital chart is then completed and remains
warmer. Once this has been achieved the process should be
with the casualty throughout its stay.
repeated for night-time heating.
If the animal is in shock or particularly distressed, the carry-
ing container should be placed in a quiet place and it should
Feeding
be left for 1-2 h to calm down. There is nothing to be gained
 e no p p   d a
Wildlife species may be:
examination, so unless life-saving treatment is needed it
should be left alone to recover. If the casualty has been trans-
● Diurnal - active during the day
ported in a sensible manner it should be able to cope with the
initial examination providing it does not take too long.
● Nocturnal - active at night
It is not necessary to routinely treat for fleas and this should
● Crepuscular - active at dawn and dusk.
only be done if fleas are seen. I remember the sad case of a
hedgehog that died as a result of an over-enthusiastic
Their period of natural activity must be taken into account
pyrethrin application, which was given because it was
thought that all hedgehogs were infested with fleas. Fipronil
day cannot be expected to eat breakfast; dinner is far more
can be used safely when needed. Routine vitamin injections
appropriate. An uneaten meal given early in the morning
on admission are also unnecessary but long-term patients will
may cause concern when really the animal has been fed at
benefit from supplements to compensate for the lack of a
natural diet.
they are in captivity. One of the main problems when dealing
with wildlife is knowing what to feed - the biggest myth is to
buLsnoH
give bread and milk (Table 34.1).
Individual housing requirements will be discussed in the
sections on specific species but there are a few general
Orphaned mammals
guidelines:
Individuals in a litter of orphans must be identified in some
● Each wildlife casualty should be housed according to
way for their individual progress to be monitored, e.g. with
its needs, its natural behaviour and habitat
812
 Management and care of injured wildlife
Table 34.1 Natural diet and suitable food alternatives for captive wildlife patients
Species
pooy jeinien
Alternative food
Hedgehog
Earthworms, insects, eggs, fruit, small mammals
Tinned cat or dog food, day-old chicks, mice
Badger
Earthworms, slugs, snails, beetles, fruit
Tinned cat or dog food, day-old chicks, mice, dog biscuits
Fox
Rabbits, rodents, earthworms, edible rubbish, carrion,
Tinned cat or dog food, dog biscuits, day-old chicks, mice
birds, berries, fruit
RTA victims
Bats
Flying insects
Tinned cat food mashed, chopped mealworms and maggots
Mice
Fruit, nuts, grains, seeds 
As wild diet
Squirrels
Nuts, buds, foliage, berries, roots, butbs, sometimes
Rodent mix, apple, banana, digestive biscuits, peanuts
nestlings and small birds
Deer
Shrubs, brambles, grass, fruit, flowers, beres
Hay, root vegetables, apples, foliage from broad-leaf trees,
brambles, rose flowers and leaves, deer pellets or lamb nuts
easily recognised. The identification mark and weight should
licking around the genital area. The orphan must be warm
be recorded, together with an approximate age and details of
and comfortable before settling down to a feed - full bladders
condition (Fig. 34.1).
do not help. Use a cotton wool bud moistened with warm
water or Vaseline and gently tickle around the genital area.
It is essential that a feeding record is completed and a check
Urine will start to drip immediately but beware, as in some
kept on weight gain. Most orphaned mammals will lose weight
species it squirts out. Faeces will also be produced but not at
to begin with as they adjust to the feeding routine. The pro-
every session. The area should be dried thoroughly and
duction of urine and faeces should also be monitored in order
Vaseline applied to help prevent soreness and provide pro-
tection against moisture. If the orphan becomes sore it will be
should record any concerns or observations that other carers
necessary to bathe and dry the area thoroughly and apply
need to know. It is better if just one person rears the orphan as
Cream. Once toileting is complete the orphan should be
both the orphan and the carer become used to each other and
weighed - it is important that the routine of toilet, weigh and
the orphan will find it difficult to settle with different carers.
feed is kept up.
The orphan must be stimulated to urinate and defaecate
When feeding, use a formula milk such as Esbilac or goat's
before feeding and in the wild the mother would do this by
milk. All neonatal mammals require colostrum for the first
Species:
Date:
Patient no:
Date
Time
ID
ml taken
Turine
Faeces
Weight
Weight
Comments
Initia
gain
Fig. 34.1 Suggested format for an orphaned mammat record card
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
813
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
few days and goat's colostrum may be used a substitute if it is
Successful hand feeding depends on the age and size of the
available. Powdered formula milk should be mixed well to
orphan and the level of patience and dedication of the carer.
ensure that all the powder has dissolved. Esbilac also comes
 It is not a job to be rushed - tiny mouths need careful feeding
in a ready-made liquid form that avoids the inconsistencies
to avoid aspiration pneumonia and distress to the orphan. If
of mixing. The milk should be offered warm - goat's milk or
an orphan become unwell or develops diarrhoea the milk
a liquid formula should be poured into a jug and left to stand
feeds should be replaced by a rehydrating solution, e.g.
in a dish of very hot water to heat up; powdered formulas are
Lectade, for 24 h, then half rehydrating solution to half
best made up with boiling water and left to cool. The milk
milk until the orphan recovers and is back on to its usual
should be kept warm throughout the feed by putting the
feed.
bottle into and out of the hot water as required. Vitamin and
mineral supplements should be added to the first feed of the
Always have a soft toy available as a substitute ‘mum'
day.
 particularly for single orphans to snuggle up.
Syringes are ideal for feeding orphans: a measured amount is
given a drop at a time and if administered correctly the feeder
Hedgehogs (Erinaceus europaeus)
has total control of the flow of the milk. During feeding the
position of the orphan should be such that it can ‘paddle'
Hedgehogs are the wild mammal most commonly brought
with its forelimbs just as it would at the mother's nipple.
into a centre and seasonal changes affect the reasons and the
Hold the orphan in a towel to keep it warm, then as the feed
number of admissions (Table 34.2). Hedgehogs inhabit parks
is slowly dispensed keep an eye on the speed the milk is going
and gardens, farmland, waste ground and hedgerows, where
down the syringe, whether the orphan is swallowing and
they forage for earthworms, slugs and beetles. They will also
that there is no build-up of milk in the mouth. This sounds
take small mammals and eggs. Their eyesight is poor and they
complicated but, once mastered, the delivery of milk will
use their sense of smell to detect prey.
synchronize with the orphan's sucking and swallowing.
Hedgehogs are solitary creatures, seeking out the company of
When feeding is completed, clean and dry the orphan's face
others only for mating. Once mating has taken place the
before it is put back to bed. Any milk that is left over should
 male plays no part in the rearing of the hoglets and does not
be thrown away and the syringe both washed and sterilized
stay with the female. One litter of three to five hoglets is pro-
or thrown away. All containers used for the milk should be
duced each year, usually in June, but they can be born as early
washed and sterilized ready for the next feed. Hands must be
as May and late litters are often seen in September.
washed before and after each feed and in between different
litters or single orphans. The volume taken by each individ.
Hedgehogs are nocturnal, so activity during the day is
ual should be entered on the feeding record.
unusual and may suggest ill health. This is not always the
Table 34.2 Hazards to hedgehogs
piezeH
Symptoms
Notes
Gardens - strimmers, mowers,
Severe cuts, impaled on fork prongs, drowning, exhaustion
Hedgehog can swim, but not for long
forks and spades, ponds
Litter - plastic can or bottle rings,
Neck wounds, plastic rings around the neck, suffocation, cuts
jars/cans, glass
Poisoning
Jumpy, sensitive to slightest of sounds, stretched out and
Could be metaldehyde (slug bait) or
reluctant to curl. Dark faeces
 other garden pesticides
Bonfires
Burns, smoke inhalation
Spines will melt in intense heat and skin
and spines will slough off in time
Entangled - fruit netting/football
Cuts, ligatures, exhaustion, dehydration, starvation
Hedgehogs can push forward through
goal nets/tennis nets
netting but often get stuck and cannot
withdraw because of the way the spines
grow
Trapped - cattle grid/drain/footings Exhaustion, dehydration, starvation, cut and sore feet from
scrabbling to escape
814
 Management and care of injured wildlife
case, as nursing females may come out during this time to
feed and hoglets born late in the year may be seen feeding
 during daylight hours in an attempt to build up the necessary
fat reserves for hibernation.
The hedgehog has a unique defence mechanism in that it is
able to roll into a spiky ball, which protects it from danger. It
can remain in this position for hours.
Hibernation
Hedgehogs hibernate in winter to avoid the problem of lack
of food; it is pointless to waste valuable energy endlessly
searching for food in frozen ground. Instead, the hedgehog
Fig. 34.2 The victim of a garden strimmer.
retreats to his hibernaculum (winter nest) and goes to sleep
until conditions improve. People think that hedgehogs
hibernate from autumn through the winter until the spring.
and early winter, the finder thinking that they are too small
to survive. This is due to the increasing public awareness
perature and, when the temperature at ground level drops
about hibernation and the fact that a hedgehog needs to be a
sufficiently for a prolonged period, the hedgehog goes into
certain weight to survive the winter. Over-enthusiastic
 hibernation. In recent years this has been between January
   s    
and March. The hedgehog shuts its system down almost to a
through digging, bonfires and strimming (Fig. 34.2).
standstill, the body temperature cools, breathing and heart
rate slow. A hibernating hedgehog may only take a breath
Late litters of hoglets do not always have the time to put on
every 4 min, which enables it to conserve fat reserves. If a
sufficient fat to carry them through the winter. An acceptable
o seade na ano au si ie paasid si opa
weight for a hoglet is 450 g (1 1b) and those that are lighter
to be breathing, it should be warmed up gently and slowly in
will have to be kept until they reach the acceptable weight,
and then released. If temperatures are mild, hedgehogs can be
for short periods of activity, so if a hedgehog is spotted out
released throughout the autumn and early winter period -
and about in the middle of winter it is not necessarily in
there is little point in imprisoning a hedgehog in a cage for
difficulty. Small hedgehogs may be presented in late autumn
months on end. January is usually very cold and hedgehogs
Table 34.3 Reasons for admission of hedgehog casualties
Reason for admission
Injury/symptom
Notes
Road traffic accident
Concussion
A curled hedgehog with both back legs sticking out
Cuts/bruises
indicates a spinal fracture
Fractures: limb/pelvis/jaw/spine
Extreme weather - prolonged hot spells
Heat exhaustion, dehydration,
Hot weather causes ground to dry out so no food or water
emaciation
Extreme weather - prolonged cold spells 
5Hypothermia, thin and emaciated
These hedgehogs should be warmed up very slowly
Attacks
Wounds, factures
Most commonly by dogs
Out during the day
Lethargic, half curled out in the open,
Usually during not curling, staggering very hot or very cold
weather or late juveniles
'Pop off syndrome (orbicularis
The circular muscle used for curling
Can be pulled back down under anaesthetic
muscle prolapse)
slips up over the pelvis
Balloon syndrome' (subcutaneous
Build up of air under the skin, causing
Where a wound has drawn in air under the skin during the
emphysema)
balloon effect
action of curling and uncurling/or an injury to respiratory
System that leaks air
Orphan
Too young to leave the nest; no
May have been taken from the nest by dog or cat
parent present
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 815
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
may have to be kept in during this time but as soon as the
Before attempting to unroll the hedgehog, check if any of the
target weight is reached and the conditions in the wild are
limbs are poking out - one limb would suggest a fracture and
right, the hedgehog can be released.
two back limbs a spinal injury (Table 34.3). Pick up the
hedgehog and look at the condition of its skin and spines;
look for wounds, maggots, fly eggs and parasites (Table 34.4).
Capture and transportation
A healthy hedgehog has a rounded shape; a long hedgehog is
Hedgehogs are the easiest of wildlife mammals to catch. On
a thin hedgehog. Infection is easily detected by smell, but its
approach the hedgehog will either scuttle away or, more
 si o a ss p on  aq  ao
often, freeze and curl into a tight ball. Before picking up a
hedgehog some form of hand protection should be worn.
To unroll the hedgehog, gently jiggle it up and down with the
Gardening gloves are ideal, or a towel folded to make several
head pointing downwards. This will make it feel insecure and
layers will protect from sharp spines. Pick the hedgehog up
it should naturally start to open up and put its feet down to
carefully but firmly, put it into an appropriate container and
locate a firm surface. Allow it to put its feet on to the exami
place it securely in the vehicle so that it does not move
nation table and hold it by its back legs so that the front
around during transportation.
feet are on the table and the back feet directly above. This
will provide the opportunity to see the underside; however,
1 a mq e o pn a K s  A so
touching the hedgehog, particularly on the head or face, will
should be assumed that they will. An injured animal may not
provoke it into curling up again. This method is not foolproof
curl up and if the hedgehog has just frozen it should roll up
and some individuals will need to be anaesthetized.
as soon as it is touched. A hedgehog may also exhibit aggres-
sion by thrusting its head upwards with its spines raised
Check the following:
and making a huffing noise, which may be misdiagnosed as a
respiratory problem.
● Length of the claws - hedgehogs dig and scratch
around for their food, which keeps their claws
Examination and handling
trimmed. Long claws suggest a problem
Hedgehogs are presented as casualties for a variety of reasons
● Teeth - check for missing and worn teeth. If present
(Table 34.3) and should receive a full examination on arrival.
the hedgehog may be old or the poor condition of the
 mouth may be the reason for not feeding
Before handling a hedgehog, put on a pair of thick gloves
Before removing the hedgehog from the container, observe
Abscesses - if present these are usually found around the
it. If it is rolled into a ball this is a good sign as it is a
face and neck and may discharge from the nose and eyes
naturally defensive position; however, it makes examina-
tion difficult and access to the underside of the animal is
● Body temperature - hedgehogs that are semi-curled
impossible.
and lying on one side are very sick and/or cold. The
Table 34.4 Hedgehog parasites
Parasite
Symptoms
Treatment
Notes
Hedgehog flea
Easily visible between the spines
Use flea powder, (especially hoglets)
A very exposed habitat between
(Archaeopsylla erinacei)
or Frontline in well-ventilated
spines means this flea is unique to
situations
hedgehogs
Tick (Ixodes hexagonus)
Easily visible, usually around ears
Removal is best achieved with
In heavy infestations on a stressed
and eyes in clusters, singly all
pointed metal tweezers
hedgehog removal by hand is
over the body. Heavy infestations
unhelpful. Ivermectin is effective
will include tiny 'pip-like' larval
stages
Mites:
Sarcoptes
Spine and fur loss, crusty/flaky skin Ivermectin, or an appropriate wash
Isolate the patient
(Sarcoptes scabiei)
Demodex
Crusty around follicles, small
Appropriate wash
Isolate the patient
crusty lesions
816
5 Management and care of injured wildlife
underside of the hedgehog should be felt to see if it is
benefit from extra bedding rather than a heat pad. Use a
warm and the animal tested for dehydration. These
small blanket or piece of Vetbed. Hedgehogs must be allowed
individuals will respond once warmed up and given
to hide, so must be covered with their bedding if they are not
fluids
able to burrow into it themselves.
● Faeces - good indication of the health of the
hedgehog. A normal stool is formed and brown;
Feeding
abnormal is anything from loose, green and mucoid to
black and tar-like
Hedgehogs are nocturnal and should be fed later in the day
than diurnal species. Feed as close to dusk as you can unless
● Movement - if a leg injury is suspected it can be
 a special feeding regime is being followed. The average hedge-
difficult to assess how much the normal movement
hog should be fed approximately one-third of a standard tin
has been affected. The hedgehog will naturally curl or
 of cat or dog food per night. If the hedgehog eats all that it is
freeze, making movement observation very difficult. If
offered and appears agitated, a little more should be given
the hedgehog is put into its accommodation it may
make for a sheltered corner immediately, giving a very
being left, then reduce the amount offered.
short opportunity for observation. After this it is more
likely to freeze and not move for some time.
Most hedgehogs will eat any variety of cat or dog food that is
offered but standard ‘supermeat’ is preferable and some,
Once the examination is complete all observations should be
described as ‘cuts in gravy', can lead to loose and sloppy
recorded on the record card.
faeces and messy cages. Varieties that are cereal-based are not
this variety of food may lead to the false conclusion that
buLsnoH
there must be something wrong with the hedgehog because
it is not eating.
Taking into account the hedgehog's natural behaviour and
habitat, a hospital cage similar in size to that used to house a
If food is not eaten, check that the hedgehog is warm.
cat is adequate and will provide enough room for bedding.
Hedgehogs that are sick and on medication may have little or
food, water and an area in which to move around. The cage
no appetite, so small tempting meals should be offered on an
should be lined with layers of newspaper that are removed
ad-lib basis. The food can be warmed up to increase the smell
layer by layer as they become soiled. Bedding in the form of
and warmed milk formula or goat's milk poured over the
hand-shredded paper or a large towel should be placed in one
meaty food may also help. Strong-smelling varieties of food
of the far corners of the cage away from the door to enable
such as those containing tripe are popular and a chopped
the hedgehog to make a nest. Paper from a shredding
day-old chick mixed with the food can often do the trick.
machine is not suitable as it is too coarse and very thin. The
Those recovering from serious illness or hedgehogs that are
hedgehog will naturally move to the back of the cage once
very thin will need a 'little and often' regime and will benefit
placed inside and head for cover. As the hedgehog makes its
from warm formula or goat's milk mixed with the solid food
nest it will turn around, combing the nesting material into
to make it softer and easier to eat.
shape. Thinly shredded paper may become tangled around
the legs.
Fresh water should always be provided and placed in a corner
of the cage to minimize the risk of spillage. Food is best
It may be necessary to cover the cage door with a towel, as
offered on a saucer and the hedgehog will forage in and
the hedgehog may see this as a possible means of escape.
through the food and will push it over the sides, so the dish
Active hedgehogs may pace along the frontage and dig.
should be placed in the middle of the accommodation.
bite and scratch at the door. This is the time to review
Providing cat biscuits will break up the soft food and help to
the case: does the hedgehog need to be hospitalized further?
keep the teeth clean.
If so, alternative housing needs to be considered, as this
behaviour will lead to injury, distress and ultimately a
longer stay in hospital. One that won't settle and continually
Pacers
paces’ will need special provision. A few drops of lavender
oil dropped into the cage will help to calm an agitated patient.
These are hedgehogs that won't settle and are constantly 'on
the go', pacing the cage frontage or the entire boundary.
Heat - for cold hedgehogs or those unable to maintain their
Release is the obvious answer but is not an option if they are
own body temperature, a heat or Snuggle Pad is ideal. A
 i a i d   ixa a  o
hedgehog that does not appear to be warm or cold would
taken, as this will eventually cause the hedgehog to become
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 817
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
overweight. Transferring to larger accommodation rarely
Once examination is complete the hoglets should be housed
works as it just means an increase in the area available to
according to age and how warm they feel - older hoglets may
patrol, unless it is a run on grass, which works for a little
just need warm bedding, very young ones will need a Snuggle
while and then the hedgehog is back to pacing the boundary.
Pad or heat lamp.
In my experience a day-old chick will not only take the
hedgehog's attention away from pacing, but will take a long
Feeding
time and a lot of effort to eat and even before it is finished the
hedgehog may return to the nest and settle
This should be completed as follows (Table 34.5):
● Stimulate the hoglet to urinate and defaecate
Orphaned hoglets
● Record results on the record sheet - the faeces of
Before attempting to hand-rear orphaned hedgehogs, make
young hoglets on an all-milk diet are green and
sure they really are orphans. The female hedgehog will leave
segmented. As the hoglet is weaned they change to a
her young to find food and if a nest of hoglets is found it is
browner, more formed stool
assumed that they have been abandoned. If the hoglets seem
content and sleeping, leave them alone and return to check
●Weigh the hoglet
them later. If they appear unsettled, cold or are emitting a
high-pitched sound, indicating hunger, or the nest has
● Feed using goat's milk or Esbilac and a 1 ml syringe.
clearly been destroyed then they will have to be picked up. A
cardboard box full of warm material is adequate for trans-
Hedgehogs would naturally take colostrum for up to
portation but if the hoglets are cold they will need a heat
6 weeks in the wild, so provide it for the first month if
source, e.g. a Snuggle Pad.
possible.
On admission a general examination should also include:
Weaning
●Weigh the hoglet
 The weaning process can begin once the hoglets start to
become active. The aim is gradually to reduce the milk feed
● Cherk the skin for general condition and wounds.
and introduce solid food. Start with tinned puppy or kitten
 Check for fly eggs and maggots; concentrate on folds
food. Cover the bottom of a flat dish with food, which should
 of skin, behind the ears, in mouth, armpits and
be mixed with goat's or formula milk until the meal is sloppy.
around the genital area. Clumps of fly eggs may also
Place the hoglets around the food dish and stand back! This
be found lodged between the spines and in the softer
is a messy business to start with as the hoglets will walk on to
furry areas of the hedgehog. Removal of eggs is best
the plate and lick and bite at the food around them. If they
achieved using pointed metal tweezers, or a nit or flea
show no interest in lapping at the mixture, then milk feeds
comb for those in the fur
should be continued for a couple for days and then the
sloppy mixture can be offered again. Once the hoglets have
● Check body temperature
finished feeding they may need a sponge down.
● Test for dehydration
As the hoglets grow, gradually change the sloppy food to just
kitten or puppy food with the milk poured over it and even-
● Decide its age - this will determine the feeding regime
tually to plain tinned cat or dog food. The hoglets should be
(Table 34.5).
weaned by around 6 weeks and rehabilitation can begin.
Table 34.5 Feeding regime for young hedgehogs
Age
Weight
mount per feed
Description
Newborn
15-20 g
 0.5-1 ml at 2-hourly intervals day and night
Blind, naked and deaf. Covering of white spines
by 1 h old. Not able to curl
1 week
30-50 g
 2-3 ml at 2-3-hourly intervals from 6 am-12 midnight
Brown whiskers on the snout
2 weeks
50-80 g
 3-4 ml at 4-hourly intervals from 7 am-11 pm
Eyes open, then ears. Now able to curl
3 weeks
80-130 g
 4-7 ml at 4 hourly intervals from 7 am-11 pm
Teeth start to appear. Covering of brown hair
4 weeks
130-150 g
Start weaning
Teeth are through
818
 Management and care of injured wildlife
4
Mothers and babies
a few days. Remove layers of soiled paper carefully and keep
Occasionally a pregnant hedgehog is presented and this may
food and water topped up. Regular checks should be made to
only be discovered when newly born hoglets are discovered
listen for sounds of distressed hoglets and also to make sure
during cleaning out. This is most likely in May and June.
that they are in the nest and have not been left out in
Mothers and babies must be left alone to reduce the risk of
the cold. If there are any problems, the hoglets should be
cannibalism by the mother. Cleaning should not be done for
removed and hand-reared.
Table 34.6 Reasons for the presentation of badgers as wildlife casualties
Reason
Injury/symptom
Notes
Road traffic accident (RTA)
Concussion, cuts and bruising, fractures to 
legs/pelvis/spine/jaw
Prolonged hot and dry weather
Dehydration, emaciation, exhaustion
This weather affects the food and water supply
Territorial wounds
Wounds around the neck, ears and rump
Usually infected and often fly-blown
Aep ayz buunp ino
Out in the open, no attempt to move, lethargic,
Could have fled from an RTA or be a victim of a
staggering
territorial attack or extreme weather
Traps/snares
Injuries to limbs, neck or abdomen
Particularly from snares
Entangled - football goal nets,
Cuts, ligatures, exhaustion, dehydration
tennis nets
Orphan
Very young, out alone, no parent present
Fig. 34.3 Territorial bite wounds around the tail of a badger
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 819
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
Nursing females should be given an increased amount of food
ered, should be returned to where they were found but
and benefit from the addition of warmed goat's or formula
testing is not necessary, as the badger is taken, treated and
milk.
released back into the same area, so the situation in that area
has not been altered.
Badgers (Meles meles)
Capture and transportation
Badgers live in social groups in a network of tunnels and
chambers called a sett. They are nocturnal and if they are
Badgers are very strong animals, particularly their jaws, and
seen during the day there may be a problem. Badgers are
they should be treated with respect. They are also sensible
increasingly found in urban areas and many casualties are
creatures, avoiding confrontation unless provoked. A little
due to road traffic accidents, but there are other reasons
knowledge of natural behaviour will help to predict how a
(Table 34.6). They are often involved in territorial fighting.
 badger might react in a given situation.
where severe wounds are sustained (Fig. 34.3).
Rescue in the wild can be difficult - if your casualty has a
Badgers eat earthworms, insects, fruit, seeds, eggs, beetles and
head injury, retrieval will be easy; if it has a back or rear end
    s      
injury it will require more thought.
hedgehogs when there is competition for food.
Prepare the carrying basket in advance - a crush-type cage
The badger's sense of smell is very good, they have good
lined with a blanket is ideal. The reactions of a badger with a
hearing and their eyesight is adapted for night vision.
 s a e so q ps aa pos  p
similar object at arm's length. If there is no reaction then
One litter of young is produced annually and the cubs are
push the head down with a glove on the non-leading hand
au Kienqa 1o Aienuef ul Ansn 'ea au u Aa uog
and grasp the scruff with the non-gloved hand. Once the
average litter size is two or three.
badger is restrained it should be lifted into the basket with
the gloved hand supporting the bottom. Remove your hand
Badgers do not hibernate but may stay underground during
as quickly as possible while closing the lid tightly. Secure the
the coldest spells.
basket and cover it with a blanket to place the casualty in the
dark. Alternatively, the badger could be wrapped in a blanket
As with all other wildlife, badgers are likely to have parasites
and then placed in the carrier.
but in general these are few in number and are unlikely to be
a problem unless the animal is in poor condition, sick or
Badgers that have a rear end injury will be active at the biting
orphaned (Table 34.7).
end and the same procedure to test the reactions should be
followed - the aim of the biting stick is that the badger will
bite on it rather than the rescuer. Care must be taken, as the
Tuberculosis
badger is able to shrug its shoulders and the scruff ‘disap-
pears' leaving the rescuer nothing to grasp. If the badger is
A badger infected with tuberculosis (TB) will usually have no
able to move then the carrier (end and top opening are best)
physical signs of the disease. As there is a risk of spread to
should be placed on the ground and covered apart from the
other species, including humans, the utmost care should be
entrance hole. Badgers will naturally go for a dark hidey-hole
taken with all badger casualties and orphans. Plastic gloves
and in most cases with a little encouragement it can be lured
should be worn at all times and isolation or barrier nursing
into the basket.
for all admitted badgers should be continued right through to
release. Cubs should not be introduced to each other until
It may be necessary to use a grasper but avoid them if you
they have been tested for TB. All adult casualties, once recov-
can. Time and care must be taken to catch the badger around
one leg as well as the neck, otherwise three hands are needed,
Table 34.7 Badger parasites
one to hold the grasper, one to grasp the scruff and one to
Parasite
Treatment
Notes
support the bottom! Only when severely injured animals
were unreachable, e.g. in brambles or dense cover at the
Badger flea
Flea powder,
Treat only if infested
bottom of a ditch or a pit, have I used a grasper.
(Paracercas melis)
especially in cubs.
Fipronil
Badger louse
As for fleas
Examination and handling
(Trichodectes melis)
Ticks
Remove with pointed metal tweezers
Examination is straightforward if the badger is concussed. A
crush cage can be used to sedate it but the blanket must be
820
Management and care of injured wildlife
4
removed. A muzzle may also be used. Do not to rely on the
 can be added and the badger will also eat day-old chicks
scruff as a means of restraint, as it requires a firm grip that
 and mice. During eating the food will be 'dug out' of the
cannot be sustained for a thorough examination. Cover the 
food bowl, although this is rarely seen except in cubs, as
badger's head for as much of the examination as possible, as 
the secretive nature of the badger does not allow for an
it will help to calm it.
audience.
Examine the badger paying particular attention to the teeth.
On the first night and even for a few days the badger may
An old badger that is thin with long claws indicating that it
refuse to eat and will simply curl up and go to sleep. Unless
does little digging for food, with worn and missing teeth all 
the badger is emaciated or dehydrated, it should not be force-
mean that it is near to the end of its life and cannot be
 fed food or fluids. There are ways to persuade a badger to eat
released back to the wild. Check the neck and rump for bite
and as they have a sweet tooth, peanut butter or jam sand-
wounds, often sustained as a result of a territorial dispute
o ind aq uo (spa on no ind pu a) snad ao sim
with another badger. They are usually infected and often fly-
top of the offered meal.
blown (Fig. 34.3).
Getting the patient to eat may become a vicious circle - the
badger will not eat until it is released and it should not be
buLsnoH
released it until it has had a good meal. In the early days of
wildlife rescue, I had a badger that had been in a road acci-
Suitable accommodation in a veterinary practice is similar to
dent. He stayed a week, but did not eat. I even stuck a crust
that used for a medium-sized dog. It should be located in the
of bread with peanut butter on to the end of his nose to try
quietest area and the frontage should be covered to reduce
and tempt him. I had made the decision to release him the
the light - badgers are nocturnal and excessive light is dis.
next night and by morning he had eaten all the peanut butter
tressing to them. Line the cage with a thick layer of newspa-
crusts. Badgers are extremely stubborn!
per and place bedding, e.g. hand-shredded newspaper, hay or
blankets, at the back in one corner. There should be sufficient
For recovering sick adult badgers, Complan is a good first
for the badger to bury itself in.
food - strawberry-flavoured in particular. It may be fed by 60
 ml syringe while the badger is debilitated and then offered in
a bowl. As the badger gains strength, small meals alongside
can be destructive in a captive situation and 'trashed' accom-
 o si  a pn pod aa ous do a
modation is to be expected. By morning all the lining paper
normal adult diet.
and bedding will be in a heap in one corner with the badger
fast asleep underneath it.
Cleaning
A noisy practice is not a good place for a badger to spend
any length of time and it should be transferred to more
A hospitalized badger must be thoroughly cleaned out
appropriate facilities as soon as possible.
   p        s
deep bed and, wearing gloves, slowly remove the bedding
Heat - the best heat source for a badger is a heat lamp unless
the badger is hiding under. The badger realises he is being
the accommodation itself is heated. Heat pads with wires will
exposed, sees a pile of bedding he can hide in and scuttles
be chewed and the microwavable Snuggle Pads will not last
across to it, allowing the corner he has just left to be cleaned.
long against the claws or teeth of a badger.
Always keep an eye on the pile of the bedding in case
the badger decides to come out. There is no other casualty
that I can think of that will do this or behave in this
Feeding
way.
Use strong metal food bowls - ceramic food bowls are heavy
An alternative way is to remove the badger to a ready made.
and may be used but I have had many tossed into the air and
up cage but that involves unnecessary confrontation and
broken by the patient and plastic will be destroyed. Put a
stress to both the patient and the nurse. If the badger is
water bowl in the corner of the cage - it will be tipped over
spending the night in a crush cage that becomes soiled and
eventually but will last longer in a corner.
has to be cleaned, a clean crush cage should be prepared.
Place the cages end to end (they must be end-openers).
As badgers are nocturnal they should be fed late in the day
Remove the cover from over the cage that the badger
   s  s     s
is in and put it over the clean one. This will expose the bad-
most varieties of cat or dog food, but avoid those in gravy as
ger and it will move into the dark space of the clean
this affects the faeces - 'supermeat' is best. Dog mixer biscuit
crush cage.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 821
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
Orphaned badger cubs
A badger cub out on its own in the day indicates a problem.
Most cubs start to appear above ground at about 2 months
old and until this time they are in the sett. Younger cubs may
have come above ground if their mother has not returned.
 Once a cub this young is found in difficulty, the area should
be searched for others and for an injured adult. Sometimes
tiny cubs are found as a result of a collapsed sett or one that
has been dug out by humans (Fig. 34.4).
Handling and transportation
Even cute and cuddly looking cubs can fight and they should
be approached with care. The cub may snarl and jump and
Fig. 34.4 A badger cub
the fur will stand on end, giving the appearance of a much
bigger cub (or so it thinks). Wear thick gloves and use a
blanket for capturing cubs with attitude. A sickly cub must be
●Weigh the cub
warmed up and a Snuggle Pad is ideal for this.
●Assess the age.
Examination
 Make a thorough examination, including:
Housing
●Check the skin for parasites (Table 34.7). Badger cubs
A secure hospital cage or wire basket may be used and it
often have fleas and lice and flea powder can be used
should be realised that even an 8-week-oid badger is very
on arrival. Ticks may also be found and may be
strong. The cub should be housed in a quiet area and pro-
removed with pointed metal tweezers
vided with a soft toy as a substitute 'mum'. A Snuggle Pad or
lapio 'sqno yois 1o Sunok Aiaa 1oj paiinbai aq Aeu ped jeau
● Check the body temperature
ones may just need warm bedding, but this should be moni-
tored. As badgers take longer to wean than other mammals
● Check for dehydration - may need an oral rehydrating
larger accommodation will be required for an older cub that
fluid
is still being bottle-fed.
Table 34.8 Feeding young badgers
Age
Feed guide
Notes
Birth
Approx. 5 ml every 2-3 h
Blind, deaf and covered in fine white fur. A dark stripe
on the head is visible. Weigh approximately 120 g
2-4 weeks
Increase the amount as appropriate.
Careful monitoring is essential as the cubs vary so much
Give 3-hourly feeds from 6 am to midnight
5weeks
Increase the amount as appropriate.
Eyes open and first teeth erupt
Give 4-hourly feeds from 6 am-midnight
8-10 weeks
Offer first sloppy food, e.g. puppy food and
Can be seen outside the sett in the wild
milk, scrambled egg, Weetabix or baby cereal
around 9-10 weeks. Continue milk feeds
10-12 weeks
Reduce milk feeds, add chopped day-old chicks to
solid food meals and leave in dish of milk
12-14 weeks
Gradually reduce milk feeds to twice daily-morning
and night
15 weeks
Weaning complete
Have most of adult teeth
822
 Management and care of injured wildlife
Feeding
Tuberculosis and badger cubs
The cub must be stimulated to urinate and defaecate before
Each badger cub should be tested for TB three times during its
being fed. The faeces of badger cubs are yellow and rather like
rearing and rehabilitation. Only a cub with three negative
scrambled egg. but change to browner more solid stools as
tests can be released back into the wild. Badgers are social
the cub is weaned. The cub should then be weighed and all
animals and should not be reared singly; however, cubs from
the information should be recorded.
different litters should not be housed together until they
have been tested for TB with negative results. If cubs are
The amount of food and the feeding times will vary from
housed together before all three negative results are obtained
cub to cub - exact guides do not exist and common sense is
and then one tests positive, the lives of the whole group are
essential (Table 34.8).
in question. The first test should be carried out as soon after
admission as possible, another during the middle part of their
Feed the cub with a kitten or puppy bottle for very young
care and the last test as near to release date as possible.
cubs and a human baby bottle for older ones. Bottle-feeding
badger cubs can be difficult. Initially the cub will not suck at
the bottle but will hunch its shoulders as it grips the teat with
Foxes (Vulpes vulpes)
its teeth or clamps its mouth shut, and then it will main-
tain this position. The only way to succeed is by patience and
There are two types of fox living alongside us these days, the
it can take time. Shading the cub's eyes may help - remem-
country fox and the urban fox, and although they are the
ber, these cubs do not come above ground until at least
same species they are very different:
8 weeks old, so their world is a dark one. I have often reverted
to a syringe and carefully dripped the milk feed in this
● The country fox eats a more natural diet consisting of
way and tried the bottle again next feed. Once the bad-
small mammals, worms, beetles, fruit and rabbits
ger has taken to the bottle, feeding is much easier until
   s   m   
● The urban fox results from humans' development of
earliest.
land, trapping wildlife in small areas of 'green' and
forcing them to adapt to a new way of life. Many are
Weaning starts with soft food, e.g. tinned puppy food mixed
presented as road traffic casualties and victims of
with the milk, scrambled egg, Weetabix or a human baby
       
cereal. Badgers are slow to wean and at first the cub may not
forage in rubbish bins, pick up food dropped from bird
be ready for solid food and it should be offered again in a
tables and eat discarded take-away food, as well as
couple of days. Once the cub is eating by itself, more foods
small mammals and birds, fruit and insects.
can be added and the diet becomes a more solid one;
however, the cub will still require its bottle until around the
The fox's eye is adapted to low light levels and its sight is not
age of 3 months.
very good. The fox relies on sound and touch, in the form of
Table 34.9 Reasons for the admission of foxes as wildlife casualties
Reason for admission
Injury/symptom
Notes
Road traffic accident (RTA)
Concussion, cuts and bruising, fractures:
Less fox RTAs than other mammals
leg/spine/jaw/pelvis
Sarcoptic mange
Bald patches around rump and tail initially,
crusty skin, sores
Trap/snare
Injuries to limbs, particularly feet
Mouth should be checked as the fox will gnaw at the
snare to free itself; may even chew off a limb
Fences
General leg damage caused by hanging by one
Happens when fox tries to clear a fence and doesn't
leg and constant struggling. Sometimes
quite manage it, often hanging and struggling for
irreparable. Exhaustion
some time
Leptospirosis
Jaundice
Euthanasia
Distemper
Dribbling, sickness, diarrhoea
Euthanasia
Orphan
Alone, distressed, calling
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 823
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
sensitive hairs on its face and front limbs, to locate and catch
be remembered that it may come round quickly so a muzzle
its prey. Although foxes are mainly active at night, it is not
should be used. Covering the fox's head will help to keep it
unusual to see them out during the day, particularly in quiet
calm.
areas in the warm sunshine. Cubs are born annually in March
and litter size is four to five cubs.
Housing
Sarcoptic mange
 Foxes do not make good captive patients and they may suffer
Foxes are home to the fleas and ticks that live on other
high levels of stress, throwing themselves around and con-
animals. Adult foxes do not usually have many parasites at all
stantly scratching and biting at the wire in an attempt to
but in young cubs roundworms can be a problem and can be
escape. A kennel with a secure door and a blanket covering
treated with fenbendazole.
the front is the best short-term option, but as soon as possi-
ble the fox should be transferred to somewhere with more
The most severe problem is that of sarcoptic mange, caused
appropriate facilities.
by the mite Sarcoptes scabiei. (see also Ch. 29). The mite
burrows into the skin and multiplies rapidly, resulting in loss
The fox should be given adequate bedding to enable it to hide,
of most of the fur, which takes about 4 months. The fox loses
e.g. hay, which should be placed in one of the back corners of
weight and many die. The lesions ooze fluid, which dries to
the cage. This will help to calm the fox - an empty pen will only
form a crust that is full of mites. Mange is intensely irritant
fuel its anxiety and increase the manic search for a way out. A
and the fox will scratch and gnaw at itself, often chewing a
large cardboard box facing away from the door provides a good
limb or its tail off. As the fox moves around and curls up with
place to hide. The fox will be more active at night and the cage
other foxes, bits of crust fall off and other foxes become
will have been reorganised by the morning. Plastic dog beds are
infected. Caught early enough, the condition can be treated;
not a good idea as they will be eaten.
untreated the fox will die. Sarcoptic mange is a zoonosis, so
care must be taken when dealing with infected patients.
Heat - the only practical heat source is a heat lamp, unless it
is in heated accommodation. Any heat pad with a wire would
 be destroyed once the fox had warmed up and become more
Capture and transportation
active.
The carrying basket should be prepared in advance: a crush
cage with top and end openings is ideal. A fox with a head
injury can be lifted as described for badgers. Make sure that
Feeding
you use a biting stick to test the animal's reactions and wear
gloves to handle it. When the fox is injured but mobile there
Stainless steel food bowls are best as ceramic ones may be
is no point in chasing it for miles. The person who contacted
broken and plastic ones will be chewed beyond use. Place the
you may be able to monitor and feed the fox and so lure it
  n   s       
over. Patients should have access to water at all times and,
a humane trap can be set.
unless on a special feeding regime, food is given at the end of
the day.
 In situations where the fox is trapped, or in dense undergrowth,
 or is not able to be confined in any other way, then a grasper
Foxes eat a variety of foods, e.g. tinned cat and dog food, day-
will have to be used. It is beneficial to the casualty to loop a
old chicks, mice, rabbit and dog mixer biscuit. The fox will
front leg as well as its neck through the noose and it must never
not eat while being watched. Warming the food and pouring
u shi q sadse e po pua a uo pune snas aa
goat's or formula milk over it may persuade those foxes that
are reluctant to eat initially. A sick fox that is recovering
Once secured grasp the scruff, support the rump and put it
should be offered food ad lib - small portions to start with,
into the basket in the usual way. Cover immediately. Foxes
- a pn de s  a s
are very snappy and will bite and leap around to escape and
ing the amount of feeds to one meal in the evening.
they will not be lured into a carrier resembling a dark, safe,
hole as a badger will
Cleaning
Examination
The fox should be removed from the cage when it is being
When examining a fox it may need to be sedated, which can
cleaned and ideally it should be moved to a ready prepared
be achieved with the aid of a crush cage. If the fox is con.
cage to avoid over-handling, which causes stress. Unlike a
cussed the examination can be carried out easily but it must
badger, a fox will not tolerate its cage being cleaned around
824
 Management and care of injured wildlife
it and it will throw itself around in an attempt to escape. If
● Checking body temperature - they may need
a spare cage is not available then the fox should be put into
supplementary heat
a secure basket and covered while cleaning is carried out.
● Test for dehydration
Orphaned fox cubs
●Weigh the cub
The decision to pick up suspected orphaned fox cubs is not
easy and it must be taken carefully. A search around the area
●Assess the age
may lead to facts that will help with your decision. Consider
the following:
● If there is more than one cub, invent a means of
identifying each one.
● If a group of fox cubs are seenn without an adult the
situation should be monitored
Housing
 dns o rd s s p d g 
playing together should be left alone and checked later
The cub or cubs should be housed according to age and con-
dition. A hospital cage or large wire basket will provide suit-
● If more than one cub is present or there is a group, but
able accommodation but must be covered to provide a dark
they are calling or appear to be in distress, then
environment and should be situated in a quiet area. The very
something may well have happened to the mother and
young or those that are sick will need supplementary heating.
they will need to be rescued
Those who are cold or wet will need gentle heat initially and
then warm bedding. Older cubs will need only warm
● If the cubs are dispersed over the area rather than
bedding. Single cubs should be provided with a soft toy as a
together, are cold, lethargic or wet, in a flooded drain
substituite ‘mum'. As the cubs grow they can be moved to
 or if there are signs of a disturbance, then they should
larger accommodation and eventually to an outside run with
be picked up
a box to hide in.
● If a lone cub is found, out in the open, calling or
Feeding
dn payid aq pinous iI passansip aq o sieadde
The cubs must be stimulated to urinate and defaecate
● If a cub is found that still has its eyes closed, then it is
before being fed. Faeces of young cubs are orangey yellow and
under 2 weeks old and at that age is not able to
will turn brown as they are weaned on to solid food. Once
thermoregulate and will soon become cold and
toileting is complete each cub should be weighed and all the
eventually die, so should be rescued.
information recorded.
Feeding of very young cubs can be achieved with a 1 ml
Capture and transportation
 syringe or a puppy feeding bottle. Amounts fed will vary from
Once the orphan or orphans have been rescued they must be
cub to cub and there are no exact guides (Table 34.10).
approached and handled carefully. Cubs with their eyes closed
will offer little resistance but an older cub will be defensive and
Goat's milk or formula should be used with added colostrum
will spit and bite. Thick gloves will help but if none are avail-
for the first few days for very young cubs. I start feeding with
able a jumper, coat or car rug will do just as well. Holding the
a syringe and move on to a bottle when the cub settles into
cub by its scruff with a hand supporting its bottom is an accept-
hand feeding and starts to suck at the syringe - if the bottle
 an m  , e  d po o a
is introduced at this time the cubs take to it well. As the cub
moves them from place to place she carries them in her mouth
grows, and for older cubs, i.e. from about 2 weeks, a human
by the scruff and in this position the cub will hang still and not
baby bottle can be used. Fox cubs need to be 'burped', just as
struggle.
is done with human babies, as they are enthusiastic feeders
and can take in air. The cub's back is rubbed and gently patted
until the desired burp is achieved.
Examination
A thorough examination should be carried out, including:
When the cub becomes more active, start weaning with a
little mashed tinned puppy food mixed with the milk. If the
● Checking through the fur and skin for wounds
cub shows no interest in the food, carry on with the hand
feeding and try again a day or two later. Once the cub is
● Checking for parasites - often fox cubs have ticks
taking the sloppy food well, hand feeding can be gradually
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 825
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
Table 34.10 Feeding orphaned fox cubs
Age
Feed
Guide Notes
Birth (weighs approx. 100g)
Approx. 5 ml every 2-3 h
Blind, deaf, brown fur, tail has white tip
1 week (weighs approx. 240g)
Approx. 10 ml, every 3 h
2 weeks (weighs approx. 320g)
15-20 ml every 3-4 h from 7 am until 11 pm
Eyes open, blue at first. Ears open, unsteady
on feet
3-4 weeks
30-40 ml every 4 h 
Heat can be reduced. Weighing is more important now
Offer first solid food and start to
weaning has started
reduce the number of milk feeds
5 weeks
Dish of milk should be provided. In addition to solid
Eyes start to change to brown, nose and ears
food, offer day-old chicks
now more pointed
6 weeks
Weaning complete
Cubs in outside enclosure
reduced. Offer chopped puppy food with the milk poured
● Hares - live in scraped out hollows in the ground
over it and add day-old chicks. Eventually the milk is offered
called forms in open countryside or woodland. They
in a bowl and dishes of puppy food are placed in the cage.
are nocturnal but can be seen at dawn and dusk.
Weaning should be completed by 5-6 weeks, by which time
Young are precocial, i.e. they are capable of an
the cub will be on a diet of tinned cat or dog food, day-old
independent life almost from birth. Hares are
chicks, mice, rabbit and water. Cubs are released back into the
becoming increasingly rare because of modern
wild after a period of rehabilitation at a wildlife centre.
methods of farming.
Rabbits
(oryctolagus
Myxomatosis
cuniculus)and hares
Lebus
capensis)
Myxomatosis is a viral disease that was introduced in the
1950s to wipe out the rabbit population; it does not seem to
Rabbits and hares are similar in many ways but there are dif-
affect hares. The rabbit flea Spilopsyllus cuniculi carries the
ferences that should be taken into consideration when vet-
virus on its blood-sucking mouthparts and passes it from one
erinary care is needed (Table 34.11):
rabbit to another. A few days after becoming infected the
rabbit's eyes begin to discharge a watery substance, the
● Rabbits - live in large colonies based in a series of
eyelids swell, and swellings appear on the nose, at the base of
linked underground burrows called a warren. Their day
the ears and around the genital area. These swellings fill with
is spent underground and they are most active outside
 pus and at this stage the rabbit can neither see nor hear and
the warren at dusk. Young are altricial, i.e. they are
is often seen sitting at the roadside oblivious to its surround-
hairless and blind and are totally dependent on the
 ings. Within approximately 2 weeks of catching the virus the
mother until they are weaned
rabbit dies.
Table 34.11 Reasons for the admission of rabbits and hares as wildlife casualties
Reason
Injury/symptom
Notes
Road traffic accident
Concussion, cuts, bruising.
Mostly rabbits
Fractures, usually back legs, pelvis, spine
Victim of domestic cats
Paralysis, wounds
Mostly rabbits
Myxomatosis
Swelling on the eyes, nose, base of ears and genital area
Die within 2 weeks of catching the virus. Rabbits
only. Euthanasia
Snares
Injury to neck, abdomen, sometimes limbs
Mostly rabbits
Orphan
See Orphans below
Rabbits and hares
826
 Management and care of injured wildlife
Capture and transportation
Feeding
Capture of most rabbit and hare casualties is easy as they are
Natural food should be provided where possible, e.g. dan-
mainly road traffic casualties with severe injuries, have
delions, clover, grass and dock leaves. Commercial dried
myxomatosis, which debilitates the rabbit, or are cat vic-
rabbit mix can also be offered. Food should be left in the cage
tims - a rabbit is often brought into the house by the cat.
 at all times and the casualty left alone to eat. Always provide
Never grasp the animal by its ears alone. Throw a towel or
a source of fresh water.
similar material over it and wrap it up to prevent the rescuer
from being scratched. If a box is not available, the animal
  d no i  a  p a 
Cleaning
 boot of a car. Rabbits and hares do not generally make
any noise but a distressed animal may scream to deter a
As rabbits and hares are very nervous it is better to have a
predator.
clean, prepared cage ready for transfer. Any further examina-
tion, treatment and replacing of food should be done at the
same time.
Examination
If the rabbit or hare is concussed the examination can be
Orphans
carried out easily; however, if the injury is to the rear of the
animal then it is quite a different story. Hares are powerful
Rabbits
animals and both rabbits and hares will kick out with all
Rabbits are born underground and are blind, deaf and
four limbs and must be restrained by two pairs of hands.
without fur, so if very young ones are seen above ground
Cover the casualty's head for as much of the examination as
there is a problem. Mechanical diggers and dogs often dig up
possible:
baby rabbits and the nests are destroyed. Rabbits are weaned
at a young age and are often picked up as tiny bunnies, when
● In almost all rear end injuries an X-ray is most helpful
really they are independent and able to care for themselves.
in determining the exact problem
The mother can be pregnant again 12 h after she gives birth
and so the young rabbit kittens are weaned before the next
● Where the injuries are cat-inflicted, symptoms may be
litter is born.
 due to temporary nerve damage and after a few days
function may return to the limbs
Hares
● Those cat victims that sustain wounds should be
Baby hares or leverets are completely different and are born
treated and released as soon as possible as prolonged
fully furred with their eyes and ears open. They sit motionless
captivity causes fatal stress. Antibiotics should be
d s  a pn  aon s n 
administered quickly to combat infection
up as orphans. The mother leaves them all day, returning
m se n ss   n u   an a
● Testing for pain reflex is difficult in wildlife as, in the
injured or are wet and cold, they should be left alone.
wild, to react to pain by either noise or movement
 may alert a predator
Capture and transportation
● Concussed patients usually recover quickly and within
 l o sd e dn d s a s s
24-48 h may be released.
the handler. They will need warm bedding during transporta-
tion, particularly if they are very young rabbits, but they must
be completely covered so that they are in the dark, which will
simulate the burrow for rabbits and provide security for
Housing
leverets.
Rabbits and hares do not make good patients and should
The initial examination should include:
be housed in quiet, dark accommodation with plenty of
bedding, e.g. hay, in which to hide.
● Check for wounds - in patients that have been picked
up by dogs or cats
Heat - should only be provided in severe cases, as rabbits in
particular may suffer if kept too warm.
● Check the body temperature
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 827
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
● Check for dehydration
Before feeding it is a good idea to try to stimulate the babies
to urinate and defaecate but, as the wild mums return very
●Weigh the orphan
little to see to their youngsters, it could be that they do not
need to be stimulated as often as other orphaned mammals
●Assess the age
or that they are able to defaecate and urinate unaided. For
this reason toileting should not be overdone: if urine is pro-
● If there is more than one, invent a means of
duced immediately then stimulation should be carried on
identifying the individuals.
until the youngster is finished but if nothing appears there is
no reason to keep trying. Urine from stimulated rabbits tends
As very few orphaned leverets are presented it is difficult to
to spurt out rather than dripping like that of other orphans.
so there is little information on their age (Table 34.12). The
Feed goat's milk using a 1 ml syringe and a lot of patience,
advice on accommodation and feeding should be suitable for
particularly for rabbits; leverets are not quite as sensitive as
successful rearing of both rabbits and hares.
baby rabbits. Orphans should be fed as much as they will take
 and should not be pushed to take more - rabbits in particular
become very stressed. The first few feeds will be the most
Housing
difficult and rabbits should be expected to lose weight over
Line a cage with newspaper and a towel. Make a bed of hay
the first few days but once their feeding behaviour settles
with a towel over the top. The other end will be used for
down they will gain slowly gain weight. Once their eyes
feding. Cover the cage to ensure that it is dark and repre-
open, offer a little oat and apple baby cereal mixed with
sents the burrow. For hares the dark will help to keep them
the milk and a few days later solids can be introduced
 m         n 
(Table 34.12)
towel - they will sit in a hollow in the hay, which represents
the form. As the young animals become more active, a grass
During weaning, a piece of turf with the soil attached should
run will provide more suitable accommodation, but provide
be placed in the accommodation, allowing for nibbling and
a box in which to hide.
climbing over. Grated apple and carrot make good first foods,
as do natural greens. Green food should always be fresh. A
shallow container of goat's milk and one of water should
 si s so an n o 1q ' a o paed ag
Feeding
with other mammals as this is often where the orphans will
Both rabbit and hare mothers leave their young for long
practise their digging.
periods of time in either the burrow or the form and will only
return once a day, maybe twice for rabbits, allowing them to
Once the orphans are feeding well on the solids, a little dried
feed for a few minutes before leaving them again. As the
rabbit mix can be offered and release can be planned. Little
youngsters grow, the mother will return for shorter periods of
rehabilitation is needed for young rabbits and hares as they
time until they are weaned. This makes a feeding regime
are so 'stroppy' during the hand-rearing process that they
difficult to formulate; however, one feed at each end of the
never become tame, unless they have been over-handled.
day, dawn and dusk, seems to work.
Anyone who successfully hand-rears rabbits is to be congrat-
Table 34.12 Feeding wild rabbits
Age
Feed guide
Notes
Birth (approx.
Goat's milk - whatever they wil take - given at dawn and dusk
Blind, deaf, naked 
weight 30 g)
1 week-10 days
Goat's milk - whatever they will take - given at dawn and dusk
Eyes open around 10 days, covering
of velvety fur
2 weeks
Goat's milk - whatever they will take - given at dawn and dusk
Now mobile, grooming and digging
Add grated apple and carrot, natural greens, shallow container of goat's milk
Oat and apple baby cereal to supplement milk feeds
3 weeks
Should be nibbling on solid food; wean off the milk feed at dusk
4 weeks
Should be weaned off all milk feeds. Eating solid food, offer dried rabbit mix
828
 Management and care of injured wildlife
4
quiet the bat is given the opportunity to make its way out.
to rear and require endless patience.
Chasing it around the room with a net and swatting at it will
 increase its panic and the chance of injury.
Young rabbits that are presented with their eyes open should
be given the opportunity to go directly on to the first stage of
Should the bat be discovered at night it should be picked up
weaning, making sure that goat's milk is available in a
 using gloves or a small towel and taken outside, hung as high
shallow container. Monitor them closely as some goat's milk
as possible and left to fly when it is ready. If it is found during
feeds by syringe may be needed initially - the older the
the day then it should be housed in a small box (shoe boxes
orphan the more difficult the rearing process.
are ideal for bats), lined with kitchen roll and a face flannel
or similar material to enable it to hide. Push a pencil or
wooden kebab skewer through one side of the box and out
Bats
through the other to provide a high hanging place. The box
should have small air holes and be taped shut, as bats will
Bats are the only flying mammals in the UK. There are 14
easily crawl out of an unsecured shoebox or the smallest of
species, and some are rarer than others. The species most
holes. A bat on the ground may be encouraged to crawl into
the box.
 istrellus. Bats are nocturnal and hunt at night for insects using
echolocation. They are also one of the few British mammals
that hibernate. Bats live in a variety of places, referred to as
Examination
roosts, including the roofs of houses, and the eaves and walls,
in barns, stables and churches, under bridges and caves.
First observe the bat in the box - is it active, is there blood on
the bedding and is there anything specific that needs closer
Many people fear bats for various reasons, many of which are
examination? Wearing latex or thicker gloves the bat should
old wives' tales, but they pose no threat and should be
be picked up and supported with the thumb on its back and
  s     s 
fingers under its abdomen gently but firmly. The wings
presented for a variety of reasons (Table 34.13) the most
should be extended to check for injuries, holes and fractures,
common of which is as victims of cats.
one at a time. A bat should never be held by its wings. Check
for dehydration, starvation and general bodily condition and
record all results.
Capture and transportation
Capture of an injured bat is simple as it is likely to be on the
Housing
ground and therefore merely requires picking up. Bats that
are flying around a room, e.g. having been released by the
A shoebox as described above is sufficient for short-term
cat, should be allowed to find their own way out. Bats that are
n    s n  o
pnosai inq paueap pue panosai aq on paau jou op sui
tion. A plastic tank with a ventilated top is ideal, with a
and released. If all the lights are turned off, all windows and
 o  e  s n  n n n 
outside doors to the room are opened and the room is left
tank should be lined with kitchen roll and some sort of gauze
Table 34.13 Reasons for the admission of bats as wildlife casualties
Reason for admission
Injury/symptom
Notes
Cat victims
Wounds/ fractures/holes and tears in the wings
Usually found on the ground, if not deposited at
your feet!
Entangled, e.g. fruit netting Cuts/fractures/torn wings
Wounds caused by the struggle to escape
Fly paper
Sticky!
Use washing up liquid to remove
Out in the day
Hanging on wall or fence in broad daylight
Usually no injuries but benefit from fluids, food and
rest for 24-48 h before release
 Orphan
Small and immature, brought in by cat or found on the
Sometimes fall from roosts
puno1b
Grounded
On the ground
As a result of trauma or attack. Benefit from fluids,
food and rest for 24-48 h before release
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 829
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
suspended from under the lid to enable the bat to climb and
● Check for dehydration
hide. Cover the plastic tank to provide a dark environment.
After treatment, recovery should be completed at a rescue
● Check body temperature
centre with a suitable flight aviary.
● Weigh the bat
Heat - bats are heterotherms, i.e. they are able to control
● Identify the bat if possible (Information available from
ing it to the ambient temperature. In times of cold weather,
the Bat Conservation Trust 0171 240 0933).
rather like the hedgehog, the bat will drop its temperature
and enter a torpid state. This saves energy in times when food
Record details of the exact location in which the bat was
is difficult to find. When a cold or inactive bat is presented,
found so that it can be released in the same place.
it should be gently warmed up. A heat lamp suspended over
one end of the accommodation is preferable
Housing
 Orphan bats should be accommodated in the same way as
Feeding
adults.
 Bats eat flying insects, which they catch using echolocation.
Feeding
In captivity insects or moths may be offered; however, other
foods will be taken that are easier to obtain. For example:
It is essential that the orphaned bat is kept warm and that the
milk feed is also warm and kept at a constant temperature
● Mealworms fed on bran and then the heads cut off,
during feeding. This prevents fermentation of the milk inside
allowing the bat to suck out the soft insides.
the bat, causing problems. Use Esbilac milk formula mixed
thoroughly to dissolve it completely and offer it on a child's
● Maggots cut in half
paintbrush, which allows the bat to suck or lap the milk in
tiny quantities. Syringes are not appropriate for these
● Mashed cat food mixed with insectivorous food and a
orphans as too much milk is delivered even with the smallest
little water
drop. Care must be taken to make sure the milk is taken
quickly from the brush to prevent it from becoming cold.
● Vitamin and mineral supplements should be added.
A newborn bat can weigh as little as 5 g depending on the
A drink should be provided before food and once the bat is
species and the feeding regime should be as follows:
warm and fully hydrated it will become more active. Supply
water using a piece of clean cloth or kitchen paper. Soak it in
● Newborn bats - must be fed at 2-hourly intervals
water and squeeze it out so that it is soggy, then place it on
throughout the day and night
to a jam jar lid or similar flat container. This will enable the
bat to lick or suck at the cloth and avoids the risk of it drown.
● 1 week old - feed every 2 h between 6 am and
 ing. Food should be offered in a shallow container, e.g. a jam
midnight
jar lid.
● From 3 weeks old - feed every 3 h between 6 am and
midnight.
Orphaned bats
During weaning increase the interval between feeds. Meal
Tiny bats sometimes fall from their roosts and where it is not
worms can be used as a source of solid food by cutting off their
possible to return them, they have to be hand reared. Many
heads and allowing the young bat to suck out the soft insides.
young bats that are presented are victims of cats and their
m se papod aa pnos poo po shnoe ns pe sem
original roost is unknown.
adults and replaced regularly to avoid it drying out. A rescue
centre or local bat group should be contacted for access to a
flight aviary and rehabilitation back to the wild.
Examination
On admission a full examination should be carried out:
Deer
● Check for general condition and wounds - if the bat is
There are seven species of deer seen in Britain; the three most
thin the stomach will look indented
often presented as casualties will be dealt with in this chapter.
830
 Management and care of injured wildlife
Table 34.14 Reasons for admission of deer as wildlife casualties
Reason for admission
Injury/symptom
Notes
Road traffc accident (RTA)
Concussion
Most deer casualties presented are RTA victims
Cuts/bruising/grazes
Fractures: limbs/pelvis/spine/jaw
Trapped
No physical injuries but have become trapped in
No need to admit but may need help in fnding a
an enclosed area and in panic cannot fnd a
way out by opening a gate, or making an opening
way out
through which the deer can pass. Often, if left
alone, they will find a way out themselves
Entangled
Hanging on barbed wire/fencing, usually by a
Head should be covered immediately
limb. Severe tear wounds and fractures
Dog victims
Bite/puncture wounds
Young deer
Orphans
Sitting alone in long grass
Not necessarily orphaned
The majority of deer casualties are the result of road traffic
by a vet at the scene, e.g. by giving antibiotics, and then
accidents (Table 34.14):
released, there is nothing to be gained by adding to the
animal's distress by confining it.
● Fallow deer (Dama dama) - main times of activity are
 Ae e as aq  a iq ysp pe a
In those deer that are obviously injured the head should be
 grazing on grass or browsing in deciduous forest on
covered as soon as it is safe to do so. Sedation should be
trees and shrubs. Their colouring varies from reddish
avoided if possible, but it may be safer to sedate larger
brown with white spots to a paler brown with spots,
animals in order to clean the wounds and administer the
and even black or white. The tail is black and white
antibiotics; smaller deer may be wrapped and restrained but
and the rump has distinctive black markings. One
 struggling may make the injuries worse.
fawn is produced in June.
Injured deer that cannot be released but are not candidates
● Roe deer (Capreolus capreolus) - active at dawn and
for euthanasia on site should be wrapped and transported
dusk. They feed on shrubs and the young shoots of
with a hood over their heads, with the nose exposed for res-
trees. The coat is a deep red, which becomes a duller
piration. Many rescuers tie the legs to help restraint but this
brown in the winter, the nose is black, there is a white
is stressful to the deer and unnecessary - wrapping is prefer-
patch on the chin and the rump is cream. Young or
able. The deer should be accompanied and monitored
kids are born in May/June, often twins.
throughout the journey and care should be taken to ensure
that it does not overheat in the vehicle.
● Muntjac deer (Muntiacus reevesi) - the smallest of our
deer and an introduced species from Asia. They are
Road traffic casualties found lying beside a road are usually
active during the day and at night and are mainly
  e a    s   
browsers, feeding on shrubs and the leaves of trees.
if it is able, run for cover despite having sustained fractures or
They are sometimes seen grazing. The coat is reddish
internal injuries.
brown with white around the tail. The male has fang-
like teeth protruding from the upper jaw. One fawn is
The approach to a deer at the roadside should include a rapid
born at any time of the year.
assessment of the situation. Consider the position it is in, its
reactions, blood on the road, etc., all of which help to iden-
tify the injury. Those clearly awake and struggling are likely
to need euthanasia on the scene. Those that appear dazed
Capture and transportation
may just have received a blow to the head and be in need of
P a d a n ad o  o a ra
a quiet place to recover.
weapons in the form of antlers and sharp hooves. Muntjacs
have tusk-like teeth as additional tools for harming humans.
Road traffic accidents involving deer attract bystanders and
If a deer is able to kick, lunge, head-butt and perform other
often the police are in attendance. There are vehicles, people
acrobatics that make capture difficult, why is an attempt
and noise, all stressful to the casualty, and the rescuer must
being made to rescue it? If a deer is injured but can be treated
take charge of the situation and clear the area. Remember
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 831
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
that the stress caused by rescuing such casualties may out-
 Provide water in a heavy bowl in a corner of the accommo-
weigh the possible benefits and that whatever the decision it
dation away from the bedding - this is unlikely to be touched
must be made quickly.
in the first few days. Natural food is always better for the deer,
e.g. leaves of deciduous trees, hawthorn, brambles, ivy, and
the petals and leaves of roses can be offered. Also try hay,
Examination
apples and root vegetables, cabbage, lettuce or spring greens
and a goat mix from a farm supplier may be eaten.
Assessment and examination must take place at the scene of
the rescue and the records must be completed after the casu-
Cleaning
        
handling and it is dangerous and exhausting for the rescuers.
Cleaning should be undertaken only when necessary. Take
Recovered deer must be returned and released where they
the opportunity to do anything else that needs to be done
were found. In the case of road traffic casualties this should
that day at the same time, e.g. injections, wound dressing.
be the nearest safe place, so the exact location must be
etc. Deer are usually short-stay patients and as they are
recorded on the patient's notes.
unlikely to eat or drink initially the need for cleaning will not
arise for the first day or two.
buLsnoH
Orphaned deer
Housing deer in large practice kennels is not appropriate.
Deer may be difficult to hand-rear. They are more labour
Deer must be kept in isolation away from noise and the
intensive than any other orphaned mammal and are not in
general buzz of a veterinary practice. Using outside stables or
     s  
barns or even a strong shed is preferable. A smaller deer may
be housed in a large kennel, but it must be dark and well
 In the wild, does leave their young for long periods of time,
away from disturbance.
usually in long grass or areas of good cover, and often these
 d paid a pe pad aq on s a san
Deer will rush around a pen, running into walls, and become
doe will usually be close by but will not return to her young-
very distressed. Absolute quiet and dark is essential for the
ster while the human is present. It should be left alone and
animal to remain calm and rest. Provide a thick bed of hay
checked on later. If a deer fawn or kid is presented and cir-
and blankets for extra warmth if necessary. Be aware that on
cumstances similar to those above are reported, it should be
entering the pen the deer will attempt to escape and any
taken back immediately, and unless it is obviously sick or
cleaning, feeding or administering of treatments should be
badly injured it should be left alone. Should an young animal
done at the same time, removing the need for constant dis-
be correctly identifed as an orphan it should be transported
turbance.
 in a large box or wire basket lined with a warm blanket and
covered to keep it dark.
Heat - a warm bed of hay and blankets is usually enough for
an injured deer; however, severely debilitated patients may
A few years ago we received a roe kid that had had one ear cut
 s d sq  s  adn 
off by a tractor mower (Fig. 34.5). The wound was such that
heat lamp with a protective cover suspended above the
it had to receive veterinary treatment immediately and was
animal. Close monitoring is essential and the lamp should
taken into care. The doe was present throughout this trau-
be removed as soon as possible - I recommend that these
 matic event but the kid needed medical attention and there
are only used as a last resort because of health and safety
was no choice but to take it into our centre. Once the wounds
implications.
were healed and the kid was feeding well, it was rehabilitated
and released back where it came from, much to the delight of
the farmer. The following year we received a call from the
Feeding
farmer to say that his one-eared deer had a family. Maybe this
story will answer the critics of wildlife care and rehabilitation,
Deer patients are often distressed at being held captive and
who suggest that hand-reared animals cannot be released
are certainly not relaxed enough to enjoy a good meal.
back into the wild - they can if it is done correctly.
If they are subjected to the minimum amount of attention
and the right food is offered they may feed. Deer are
not usually in this situation for long and it is never
Examination
worth hanging on to an animal that is ready for release just
Examination of a very small deer is easier than with an adult
because it has not eaten - the usual reason for inappetence is
but it must not be assumed that the orphan is not distressed.
captivity.
 s  sn  s ' o p q  
832
 Management and care of injured wildlife
Fig. 34.5 One Ear, a roe kid who successfutly returned to the wid to breed
removed from natural surroundings and will be frightened and
Feeding
will also put up a fight. Make sure that the initial examination
is carried out as quickly as possible and that the youngster is
Feed Esbilac or a lamb milk replacer using a lamb or human
then accommodated and left to rest. No attempt should be
baby feeding bottle depending on the size of the fawn. The
made at this stage to feed it, unless it needs life-saving fluids
formula should be thoroughly mixed using boiled water
cooled to the correct temperature for feeding. Newly admit-
A general examination should include:
ted orphans are often reluctant to feed and it may take some
time. In some cases it may be necessary to stomach tube the
● Check for wounds, and fly eggs or maggots
fawn until it is ready to suck on the bottle.
● Check for dehydration
Four feeds per day are adequate for deer fawns and once they
have taken to the bottle, feed them until they have had
● Assess the age - this can be difficult unless evidence of
enough.
the umbilicus is present
Deer need to be stimulated to defaecate and urinate and this
● Check for normal/abnormal palate
is best achieved while feeding is under way. Using one hand
to hold the bottle, the other hand is used to gently stimulate
● Check the general bodily condition.
the genital area with a warm, damp cloth.
An appropriate-sized kennel or large basket should be lined
Weaning takes place gradually and from about 1 week of age
with warm blankets and the orphan should be left to rest. If
the fawn will nibble on fresh food and a tray of soil, should
supplementary heat is needed a Snuggle Pad can be used
be provided along with young shoots and leaves as described
under the blankets to provide gentle warmth.
 in feeding adults. Rose petals and leaves are a popular first
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 833
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
food and goat mix and lamb pellets, brambles and hawthorn
Approach the casualty with a pair of thick gloves and a towel.
can also be given, If the fawn is reluctant to take the solid
Drop the towel over the squirrel, scoop it up and place both
food, try offering sliced apples and carrots, cabbage, lettuce
towel and animal into a secure carrier for transportation. For
and spring greens, but once the deer is feeding well these
those that are still mobile (usually those with a back or hind
should be reduced until natural food and the dried prep-
leg injury) you may need a net. It must be remembered that
arations are all that is offered. Weaning should be complete
a squirrel's teeth are such that they may penetrate the glove,
by 10-12 weeks of age and the young deer will need time in
but the towel provides additional protection.
 an enclosure at a wildlife rehabilitation centre in preparation
for release back into the wild.
Examination
 For squirrels that show no obvious sign of injury, examina
tion of the squirrel is a four-handed job. One person should
Grey squirrels (Sciurus
restrain the squirrel and keep the head under control while
carolinensis)
the second person completes the examination safely. For
those with obvious injuries, sedation may be required for a
The grey squirrel is seen both in urban areas in parks and
detailed examination. Always try to keep the head covered to
gardens and in the country, where it often seems to be dicing
reduce stress.
with death on our roads and this is the reason most are pre-
sented as casualties (Table 34.15).
Housing
Squirrels are active by day and use their sense of smell and
 The squirrel's ability to gnaw has already been established,
and this must be considered when providing suitable accom-
They eat nuts, bark, leaves, shoots, acorns, buds and flowers
modation. Cardboard and thin plastic are not advisable; a
and nest in dreys high up in the trees. Young are born early
small wire kennel with a metal door is ideal. Line the kennel
in the spring - the average litter size is three and late litters
with newspaper and warm bedding, cover it so that the squir-
  n    n   
rel is in the dark and place it in a quiet room.
months old and are reared exclusively by the female.
Heat - a microwavable Snuggle Pad is excellent to provide
Squirrels are extremely agile and are able to scale vertical
heat for seriously sick or injured squirrels as it avoids the use
walls, poles and trees, hanging on with sharp claws
of anything with chewable wires! As soon as the squirrel
becomes more active, the heat supply should be removed and
replaced with warm bedding. Synthetic fleece such as Vetbed
is ideal.
Capture and transportation
Squirrels who have sustained head injuries are the easiest
Feeding
to capture, while those with severe injuries to the hind-
quarters are usually still very active at the biting end and
Squirrels are rodents, so for adults offer a basir diet of com
should be handled with extreme caution. Squirrels are very
mercial rodent or rat mix. Plain digestive biscuits, apple and
agile and have the kind of gnawing teeth that cause nasty
peanuts can be added. Water in a small ceramic bowl should
wounds.
 be placed in a corner of the cage to avoid spillage.
Table 34.15 Reasons for grey squirrels being admitted as wildlife casualties
Reason for admittance
Injury/symptom
Notes
Road traffc casualty
Concussion
Sometimes impaled on the front grilles of vehicles
Cuts/bruising/grazes
Fractures: pelvis/spinal/limbs/jaw
Attacks
Bite wounds
Usually young squirrels. Often by dogs or cats
Orphans
Very young squirrel, no parent present, eyes shut
Often found by a cat or dog, or lying on the ground
Stuck!
Up a telegraph pole, on the roof of a house
No rescue needed; usually been frightened up there
by a cat or dog. Will come down when safe to do so
but may not be until nightfall
834
 Management and care of injured wildlife
Cleaning
Squirrels are born naked, blind and deaf, so if very young or 
newly born ones are presented heat should be provided. To
When cleaning, remove the food and water bowls first, but
identify the orphan as a young squirrel, look for the long tail
only if it is safe to do so. Then tip the cage up on to its end
and if in doubt check the claws, which look as if they have
so the squirrel is at the bottom and the door now at the top.
 been painted with black nail varnish. Ageing is an inexact
Wearing thick gloves and armed with a towel, transfer the
squirrel to a clean, ready prepared cage. This saves over-han-
the fur forms a short but thick covering and the tail is furry
dlling of a difficult species and ensures that the ordeal is over
but not bushy.
quickly for the squirrel.
Orphaned squirrels
Feeding
Always make sure that the squirrel is an orphan before rescu-
Before being fed the squirrel should be stimulated to urinate
ing it. Because the squirrel's drey is high up in trees, it is
and defaecate and then weighed. The faeces of milk-fed squir-
difficult to return orphans to the nest, even if you knew
rels are tiny yellowy/orange pellets, which change to brown
which hole was the right one. The fact that a young squirrel
when weaned. Feed using a 1 ml syringe and goat's milk or
has been found indicates that all is not well. Other examples
Esbilac.
include young squirrels found in lofts after the parent has
been evicted, either by the homeowner or by pest control.
Once the eyes open, a little solid food can be introduced.
There are legal issues attached to some wildlife casualties and
Human baby cereal is ideal, a particular favourite is oat
none more so than squirrels (see Relevant legislation below).
and apple flavour, made up with whichever milk you are
using to feed and mixed to a sloppy consistency. Start the
feed with the usual milk, giving slightly less than usual, and
which may be the reason they are discovered in the first
then offer the cereal. I have never known a squirrel refuse it -
place. A cardboard box filled with warm bedding may be used
in fact it is important to offer the milk first otherwise the
for transportation and a prewarmed Snuggle Pad should be
squirrel will take just the cereal - the oat and apple is just too
provided for very young orphans.
nice! At this stage a broken digestive biscuit should be left in
the cage and water provided. Reducing the milk feeds can
Examination
begin when the biscuit is being eaten. Weighing is important
The orphan should be examined thoroughly, including:
to monitor the squirrel's progress. Reduce heat in the cage
to night time only for a few days and then turn it off
● Check for wounds, bite marks and grazes
completely.
● Check the body temperature
Once the squirrel is nibbling well at the biscuit, more solids
can be added, e.g. chunks of peeled apple, peanuts, sultanas
● Check for dehydration
and rat mix. It is important to provide vitamins and minerals
for those animals not receiving a natural diet, as squirrels in
● Assess the age of the squirrel
captivity can develop metabolic bone disease. Once weaned,
 n as n   n ao ors p a
● Weigh the squirrel
a wildlife rescue centre can offer.
Birds
● Litter - may wind itself around legs and beaks and if
the bird is not released it will die
Birds are admitted as casualties for a variety of reasons,
including:
● Oiledl birds - from garage waste or polluted water. Oil
 s h   a a   
● Road traffic accidents - affects owls in particular
for the bird's natural oils to return
but small birds are less commonly affected
● Damage caused by fishing line and hooks and
● Cat and dog attacks - affects mainly small birds
the lead weights attached to them - hooks may
and may cause septicaemia, puncture of the air sacs or
become fixed in the mouth or oesophagus while lead
feather damage
 poisoning may present as loss of weight, lethargy,
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 835
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
Table 34.16 Ectoparasites found on the bird
Parasite
Appearance
Treatment
Notes
Ticks
Resemble tiny pips before feeding, and
Remove with tweezers by grasping base of
Blood-sucking parasites,
 grapes after. Can be white, grey, bluish
tick near host's skin and tug sharply. Do
becoming more common and in
grey
not grab body of tick
 greater numbers on birds
Lice
Long, thin parasites easily seen on
Mite spray for birds 
Parasite that chews feathers and
feathers, particularly around the neck
skin debris. Plumage looks as if it
has been cut
Flat flies
Like a large housefly, but flat for moving
Can be removed by hand, but difficult to
Blood-sucking parasite
under feathers, with feet that grip on to
kill - should be crushed. Use mite spray
 and run along the bird's plumage
if the host is infested, but most flat flies
leave the body when disturbed
weakness, the head resting over the back or crooked,
results in the casualty escaping. If a box or carrying container
green faeces and a change in natural behaviour
is not available then the bird should remain loosely but safely
 contained in its wrap.
● Fledglings that have fallen from the nest
Larger more aggressive birds, e.g. birds of prey, can be cap-
● Small birds that have fown into windows and
tured in the same way, but extra care must be taken because
are concussed.
talons and beaks are likely to be used as weapons. Most birds,
once confined with their heads covered, will not struggle but
Birds have their own species of parasites (Table 34.16). They
the rescuer should always be prepared for the unexpected.
are not routinely treated for nematode worms unless a
problem is suspected. Good hygiene in the accommodation
Water birds will almost certainly make for the water as their
should prevent their spread and break life cycles. Gapeworm
means of escape so rescuers must place themselves between
(Syngamus frachea) is a roundworm that may be seen in star-
the water and the bird before moving in for the capture.
lings; it causes coughing or sneezing sounds that can resem-
When catching swans and geese it is important to restrain the
ble breathing difficulties. Canker, however, is more common
wings, as the blow from an adult swan's wings is suffcient to
and appears as a creamy substance growing in the mouth,
fracture human bones! Grab the neck first and then wrap the
throat and crop. Untreated, the bird will die as the throat
bird in a large towel or blanket with the head and neck
closes and it is unable to feed.
exposed to secure the wings and prevent them from flapping.
Never use a wire basket or transparent container for wild bird
Capture and transportation
casualties. If a solid container is not available then cover the
Any wild bird that is easily caught has something wrong with
basket. The bird will become distressed and may injure itself
it. Sometimes these casualties have an injury but are still very
if it can see out but cannot escape. The container should be
active, e.g. a duck with an injured leg can still fly and a
lined with newspaper and a towel or a blanket for larger casu-
pigeon with an injured wing can run!
alties. The bedding provides warmth and absorbency, a place
to hide and something to grip on to during transportation.
On approach the bird will either freeze, run or, if cornered,
defend itself. Before attempting to catch any bird in the wild,
Whatever type of container is used it should allow enough
the situation should be carefully assessed. Observe the way
room for the bird to stand and stretch out its wings. If using
that the bird is moving and behaving and work out a plan for
a cardboard box it must be made secure to prevent the casu-
its capture. The approach, capture and confinement should
alty from escaping during transportation. Containers with
be carried out swiftly and firmly.
   an d o  aa i s a 
 dark and prevent birds from pushing their beaks through the
Capture of most birds is best achieved with a towel, light
holes in their attempt to free themselves.
blanket, coat, car rug, etc. Do not chase the casualty around,
as the shock could be fatal. It is much better to lure the bird
Examination
into a corner, shed or area where there is no escape. Throw
the towel over the bird and then gently but firmly scoop it up
If the bird is in shock or distressed after transportation, it
and place it into a cardboard box or carrier for transportation.
should be left for a while in a dark quiet environment to calm
 Do not remove the towel at this stage as it almost always
down, unless it needs life-saving attention.
836
 Management and care of injured wildlife
E
Observe the bird before examination. A great deal can be
 best examined on the floor with one person restraining
learned by watching the way the bird is moving, e.g. whether
the wings while the other carries out the examination.
 it is lame, has any deformities, or wings hanging or sticking
up at an odd angle, how it is breathing, the state of its
A general examination should include checking the fol-
plumage and general behaviour. These are important obser-
lowing:
vations that can be followed up during the examination, and
mean less time handling a distressed, struggling patient.
● Feet and legs - fractures, wounds, fly eggs and
maggots, frost bite, fungal lesions
Restraint for examination can be difficult and depends on the
size of the bird:
● Wings - hanging down or sticking up
● When restraining small birds, be aware that applying
● Beak - fractures, splits, top and bottom do not meet
too much pressure to the body can cause asphyxia.
The correct method is to create a 'net' with the fingers
● Mouth - general colour, fly eggs, canker, smelly
of your hand to control the wings and allow the head
 breath - a garlicky smell in owls indicates poisoning
to poke out between the second and third fingers
(Fig. 34.6). The underside of the bird and its legs can
● Nares - discharge, blockage
be examined by turning it over and the wings can be
gently extended on each side
● Eyes - discharge, swelling, dilated pupils, unequal
 pupils, prolapse
● Larger birds, such as members of the crow family and
seagulls, have strong beaks. For examination, they may
● Crop - torn, impacted
need to have their beaks taped or ann elastic band
placed around them to prevent pecking, taking care
● Keel - sharp keel bone indicates thin bird
not to cover the nares or nostrils. One person should
hold the bird around the wings while another carries
● Cloaca - dirty, blocked, fly eggs and maggots,
out the examination.
prolapse
● Birds of prey should be held with a gloved hand on
● Plumage - should be sleek with no ruffled feathers.
either side of the bird and are more likely to strike out
Chewed or cut appearance indicates feather mites,
with their talons, which can be kept under control by
white feathers on a black bird suggest a deficiency
holding the legs between the first two fingers of one
hand. If the head is covered the bird is more likely to
● Respiration - gasping or panting, gurgling.
remain calm. Another person should then make the
laboured
examination.
● Parasites - (Table 34.14)
● Ducks and game birds are very strong and should also
be held by two hands restraining the wings. Swans are
● Skin - wounds, flaky, fly eggs or maggots, crusty and
feather loss may indicate ringworm
● Dehydration.
Patient records should include:
● Species
● Date
● Details of condition
● Name, address and telephone number of finder
● Details of the exact spot where the casualty was
Fig. 34.6 The correct way to restrain a smalf bird, in this case α
found - this is essential because when the bird recovers
young swift
it should be retuirned to the area from which it came
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 837
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
● Any useful information, e.g. it was lying on its back
needs a small branch. Incorrect perch size result in
struggling to stand up. This is important because it may
difficulties in perching and infections such as bumble
lead to a diagnosis reducing the need for examination.
foot, which occurs when the claws pierce the
underside of the foot. Perch positioning is also
There is no need to give routine flea or worm treatment
important to make best use of the space and to
unless such parasites are obvious. Routine vitamin injections
 encourage exercise as the bird hops or flies between
are also unnecessary but long-term patients will benefit from
them
supplements to compensate for the lack of a natural diet.
  o pa q is p pm a s a
● Place natural foliage in a cage to provide places to
habitats with as little interference as possible.
hide. There is a noted change in behaviour when
 greenery is present in the cage
Housing
● Do not place the cage close to domestic animals,
 Each bird should be housed according to its needs, its natural
especially cats, or in noisy areas. Some bird species are
behaviour and its habitat:
more susceptible to stress than others and may throw
themselves around when first introduced to a hospital
● Birds must have sufficient room to stretch their wings
cage. This may be helped by placing a towel over the
and be able to preen
front.
● Perching birds need the correct size of perch, e.g. a
● Many birds will make for the door as soon as it is
perch for a sparrow could be a twig while a buzzard
opened, in an attempt to escape
Table 34.17 Suggested diets for wild birds
Species
Natural food
Alternative food
Finch, sparTow
A variety of seeds, nuts, grains and berries
Seed-finch mix
Blackbird, thrush, robin, starling
Earthworms, grubs, insects, fruit, berries, snails, slugs
Mealworms, earthworms in soil, cat food mashed
with insectivorous food, fruit
Swallows, swifts, house martins
Insects caught on the wing and insect grubs
Maggots cut in half, insectivorous mix. Need 
hand-feeding
Woodpeckers
Insects
Smear food on to bark. Suet, peanut butter, cat
food mashed with insectivorous food, grated
cheese
Pigeons, doves, game bids
Grain and seeds. Insects for the game birds
Corn, chick crumb. Mealworms for the game birds
Ducks and geese
Insects, worms and grubs, aquatic plants, grain and
Chick crumb, corn, mealworms, grass
graze on grass
Swans
Aquatic plants and insects, graze on grass
Chick crumb and corn in water with grass mixed in
Crows, jackdaws, rooks, magpies,
Insects, grubs, worms, eggs, small birds, mammals,
Tinned cat or dog meat, day-old chicks, RTA
jays
seed, grain, berries, nuts, fruit, carrion
victims scraped from road, fruit, mealworms
Kestrel
Small rodents
Mice and day-old chicks
Sparrow hawk
Small birds, doves and pigeons
Mice and day-old chicks
p1ezzng
Small mammals, rabbits, worms and beetles
Rabbit with fur, mice, rats, day-old chicks
Barn and tawny owls
Small mammals, moths, beetles
Mice, rats, day-old chicks
Little owl
Mostly insects, voles, mice
Mice and day-old chicks
Gulls
At sea, freshly caught fish. Town gulls eat anything,
Tinned cat or dog food, day-old chicks, sprats
worms and grubs
floating in water
Heron
Fish, frogs
Trout or sprats in water
Coots, moorhens
Insects and larvae, worms, water weeds, grains
Mashed cat food mixed with water and
insectivorous food to form a paste. Finely
chopped sprats in water, cress in water, maggots
838
 Management and care of injured wildlife
4
● Sometimes after handling and replacing in the cage a
rather than drawings or paintings will make identification
bird may remain flat on the bottom or on its back,
much easier.
playing dead'. This may take you by surprise when
you open the cage to check! Owls, particularly chicks,
It is a myth that bread and milk is good for wildlife and in no
often sleep lying down.
way does it resemble a natural diet. Casualties that are
confined for more than a few days should receive vitamin
Heat - the need for heat should be carefully considered. If
 and mineral supplements to compensate for deficiencies in
heat is provide the bird must be weaned off it before release.
the captive diet.
These are wild birds that naturally live out in cold, wet and
windy weather. Heat boxes, brooders, incubators and heat
lamps can be regulated and are the best option but the bird
Cleaning
is unable to get away from the heat source so careful
monitoring is needed.
Accommodation should be cleaned thoroughly once a day.
Layers of newspaper should line the cage so that soiled layers
can be easily and quickly removed, preventing the build-up
Feeding
of faeces. Handling can be reduced by having clean accom-
modation ready for the bird to be moved into. Any other
The period of major activity, including feeding. in the day
tasks such as feeding or treatment should be carried out at the
varies with the species of bird. Some are diurnal, others noc-
same time to avoid unnecessary distress caused by repeated
turnal and a few are crepuscular, i.e. active mainly at dawn
disturbance. Use a towel to move birds from cage to cage.
and dusk. There will be some patients that are on a special
Food and water containers should not be placed near to or
feeding regime and will not be keeping to their natural hours
under perches as they will become soiled with faeces.
  asa r o s  s a a e go
captive.
Orphaned birds
One of the many problems is knowing what to feed and this
is made easier by correct identification of the species. This
Orphans or fledgling birds most commonly result from the
- j pn poon p mn ino p on no moe n 
death of the parent birds. In other cases, they are not so
essary find an acceptable substitute (Table 34.17).
much orphaned as ‘rescued' and taken away from their
 parents for their own good:
The shape of a bird's beak will give an idea as to the diet
of the bird even if you are unable to identify the species
● The nest may have been exposed by hedge trimming
(Fig. 34.7). A robin's beak is small and thin for eating insects;
or tree felling. If it is possible to find a suitable new
finches and sparrows have shorter, stubbier beaks for cracking
 site for the nest it is worth a try as the parents may
seeds; a blackbird's beak is longer for probing soil for earth-
continue to care for their young
        s
bird identification book - those that contain photographs
     n    s o
which are then put into use and the nestlings are
discovered
● Ducklings may become separated from their mother -
 often a single duckling is lost
● Birds may have been caught in a storm and are wet
and cold. Even though the parent is still present, the
bird needs more help than the parent can offer.
Sometimes after a night in care it is possible to put
them back in the nest
● The most common case is the fledgling caught by a
 cat. Even those uninjured and apparently well cannot
be returned unless their nest site is known. There is
also a risk of septicaemia from the cat's teeth. Some of
Fig. 34.7 A common error is to identify young wood pigeons as
these fledglings are older and can become very
hawks or vuftures!
distressed. In many cases the best course of action is to
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 839
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
retrieve the bird from the cat and, if it is active and
home that allows the fledglings to behave normally and is
protesting, lock the cat in and release the bird.
easy to clean.
All cases should be judged on an individual basis as every case
Once the fledgling becomes more active, low perches can be
is slightly different.
arranged around the nest pot and a little foliage provided. As
the feathers develop the heat can be gradually reduced until it
There are two types of fledgling:
is only provided at night and then turned off completely. As the
bird grows, move it to a nursery cage lined with paper, which
● Altricial - fledglings remain in the nest and are fed
gives more room to move around. The bird will spend more
by one or both parents. They are blind, deaf and have
time out of the nest pot and food can be introduced into the
few or no feathers or down when they hatch.
cage so that the bird can start to feed itself. Higher perches and
Examples are blackbirds, thrushes, sparrows, finches,
more foliage create a natural environment. Once the bird's tail
robins, starlings, crows, jackdaws, jays, swallows,
feathers have grown and it is feeding itself, it is time to move it
swifts, house martins, tits, pigeons, doves,
to an aviary for flight practice and muscle building prior to
woodpeckers, owls and birds of prey
release.
● Precocial - birds that hatch as active chicks, most of
Feeding
which feed themselves. Examples are ducklings, swans,
geese and pheasants. Some, e.g. moorhens and herons,
There are a variety of diets and ways of administering
are fed by the parents.
the food to the fledgling, which depend on the species
(Table 34.18)
Identification of the species of a baby bird is difficult because
there are so many species and the juvenile plumage (if they
 Suggested recipes for feeding orphaned birds:
have any) is different from that of the adult. A good bird book
with photographs of both adult and juvenile plumage is
● Baby bird mix:
essential. Most veterinary practices will be willing to provide
initial care and feeding and then usually pass the fledgling on
2 parts puppy or kitten food to 1 part insectivorous
to a wildlife centre.
mix
Housing
 Pinch of vitamin and mineral supplement
Fledglings must be kept warm until they have feathers and
 ae d eu no napoq e m papd aa por
Pinch of probiotic
'nest' in the form of a ceramic feeding bowl or similar vessel,
lined with kitchen paper. This provides a familiar, temporary
Water to mix
Table 34.18 Feeding orphaned birds
Species
Rearing food
How to feed
Finch/sparrow
Chopped white maggots and baby bird mix
Tweezers
Blackbird/thrush/robin/starling
Baby bird mix
Tweezers
Swallows/swifts/house martins/tits
Chopped white maggots, baby bird mix, moistened raw
Tweezers
minced beef
Pigeons and doves
Scrambled egg mix
Adapted 1 ml syringe
Ducklings
Rearing chick crumbs
Self-feeding
Cygnets
Rearing chick crumb, chopped grass
 Offer in water, self-feeding
Crow/jackdaw/rook/jay/magpie
Baby bird mix, cat food chunks in jelly, chopped day-old chicks
Tweezers
Chopped day-old chicks and mice
Tweezers
Buzzard
Chopped day-old chicks, mice, rats, pieces of rabbit with fur
Tweezers
Gulls
Sprats/whitebait/chopped day-old chicks/tinned cat food chunks in jelly
Tweezers
Moorhen
Finely chopped sprats covered in water, baby bird mix, soaked
insectivorous food and chick crumb, cress floating on water, live
white maggots
840
 Management and care of injured wildlife
All the ingredients should be mixed well to ensure that
there are no lumps, as little birds may choke. The
water should be added until the mixture is sloppy -
not dripping wet and not too dry. It will dry out over
time, so more water may need to be added. Baby bird
mix can be made up in large batches and stored in the
refrigerator. It must be taken out prior to feeding and
food should be offered at room temperature
● Scrambled egg mix:
Soft scrambled egg
Crumbled digestive biscuit
Fig. 34.8 Btackbird fledgting being fed using tweezers
 Pinch vitamin and mineral supplement
fledgling have got used to each other, the bird will readily
Pinch of probiotic
take food off the tweezers and swallow each time it is offered
(Fig. 34.8).
Goat's milk to mix.
Sometimes new arrivals and some more difficult cases have to
The scrambled egg should be soft and mashed finely.
be fed by forcibly opening the beak. This must be done by
Add the dry ingredients and mix together. Add the
   a p d  a s 
 goat's milk to make a sloppy consistency.
 side - the tip of the beak should never be forced open. Once
food has been placed in the mouth, the beak often flies open
This is administered using an adapted 1 ml syringe.
ready to receive more - sometimes it takes a bit longer.
The scrambled egg mix is sucked up into the syringe
Fledglings should be fed at least every 30 min from dawn
and must be pushed out again without air bubbles or
until dusk. In the wild they wake up at first light and go to
lumps. The narrow end of the syringe should be
roost at dusk and these times should be adhered to unless the
trimmed off and filed until smooth. This makes a
bird is very sick.
simple but essential tool for delivering a measured
amount of food when crop feeding fledgling pigeons
Once the birds become more active and are spending more
and doves.
time out of the nest pot, solid food can be introduced. A
small flat container of whatever they are used to should be
placed in the cage with a shallow container of water. Hand
because they are not being fed a natural diet.
feeding can be reduced as the fledglings start to feed them-
selves and an adult diet gradually introduced, decreasing the
Fledglings will not feed if they are cold - if the bird does not
baby food.
open its mouth or gape to begin with, make sure it is warm.
There are a few ways in which to encourage a fledgling to
Food and water containers should be an appropriate size so
gape:
the birds can drink but not drown and can reach the food
easily. Place the food and water containers in an area that is
● By touching the beak
easily accessible but not on one of the main ‘runways', as it
will be walked through or flapped in, resulting in the cage
● Tapping the nest pot
and the bird's plumage become soiled.
● Passing your hand over the nest, which mimics the
When first taken into captivity older fledglings are more
parent returning to the nest
reluctant to tolerate being hand-fed and they will become
distressed and throw themselves around the cage. Restraining
● Whistling may have heads popping up with the beaks
the bird gently and offering it food on tweezers may work, as
open. The whistle imitates bird song and, although it
older fledglings will often peck at whatever comes near to
sounds strange, it really does work.
them. As it tastes the food it may open its beak and allow
itself to be fed. If not, then one half of the cage should be
Once the bird is gaping, small amounts of food can be placed
covered to provide a place to hide, the food and water should
at the back of the mouth using tweezers. Once feeder and
be placed in this half and the fledgling should be left in
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 841
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
         
Small meals are offered every 2-3 h. Birds of prey will regurgi
started to feed itself.
tate a pellet that contains the indigestible fur, feathers and bone
(see also Ch. 33). As the bird grows it should be offered larger
Specific species of bird - owls and birds
pieces of food, which it will stand on and tear with its talons.
Eventually it should be given whole food. These birds must be
of prey
taken to a rescue centre for rehabilitation.
Housing
Chicks of these species hatch covered in down and need
Swallows, swifts and house martins
o  dn  e g  a   
(Fig. 34.9)
These species of bird are aerial feeders and spend their whole
lives in flight. They will not feed themselves from a dish of
The cage should be lined with layers of newspaper and a towel
food and, although swallows and house martins may take
for warmth and should contain a low perch of the correct size
advantage of a perch to sit on by the time the hand-rearing
for their feet. A mixing or pudding bowl of the appropriate size,
process is almost finished, swifts will not. A swift should be
lined with warm material, wil suit a very young bird that would
provided with something to hang on to and may use the bars
have naturally come from a nest. (Note Not all birds of prey
 of the cage, a piece of bark or even a bit of material to grip on
have nests.) It is rare for birds of this age to be brought in.
to and climb.
 Foliage should be used to create hiding places. As the youngster 
grows, reduce the heat and raise the perches. Birds that are
neither newly nor recently hatched will not need supplemen-
Precocial fledglings, e.g. swans, ducks,
tary heating unless debilitated.
geese, game birds, coots and moorhens,
s11nb
Feeding
Most birds of prey are fed on mice and day-old chicks and
Housing
larger species such as buzzards are fed on rabbit as well. It is
When these birds first hatch they should be given a heat
important that these birds are given fur, feathers and bones,
 source to replace their mother. The best kind is a heat lamp
as they need the whole animal. Vitamin and mineral supple-
or brooder, as these chicks are active and need space to run
ments are added. Food should be offered in small pieces using
around and a warm place to huddle together. If a single
tweezers. In cases where a little persuasion is needed, the beak
orphan is presented it will need a 'mum', which could be a
should be touched with the food, or it should be offered from
soft toy or a stringy mop head - these chicks hatch in broods
above. If neither method works, then the mouth will have to
and it is unnatural for them to be alone; a substitute 'mum'
be opened manually, which can be achieved by carefully
might make the difference between surviving or not.
prising open the beak at each side. Once it is open, the food
is placed at the back of the mouth and the bird should then
At one end of the cage, suspend a heat lamp over warm
swallow. This may have to be repeated a few times until the
bedding such as a towel. At the other end place the food and
bird starts to grab the food from the tweezers.
water containers. At this end there should be several layers of
newspaper that can be removed one by one to keep the cage
cleann.
This type of fledgling is more susceptible to stress and the
accommodation should be partially covered to provide an
area in which to hide. Once weaned off the heat lamp the
 youngsters can be transferred to a run on grass. Provide a box
to hide in. They must be brought inside at night and may
 need gentle heat for the first few nights or if the temperature
drops too low.
Feeding
 Some of these fledglings, e.g. gulls, may need to be fed by
hand initially. However, most will feed themselves once they
have settled in and are left in peace. Food and water should
Fig. 34.9 Owt chick disptaying its fluff!
be available from dawn until dusk.
842
 Management and care of injured wildlife
Euthanasia
becoming used to humans, which may be dangerous in the
wild. There may even be a degree of kudos involved with pos-
      Si    
sessing the animal, but the saying 'Where there is life there is
recover and be able to sustain itself in the wild is a candidate
hope' is not always the case.
for euthanasia. Very often the decision is made to keep the
animal alive because it is easier for the human being.
Where there is unlikely to be a positive outcome, where there
although it may be severely disabled or unable to behave nor-
is suffering and recovery is uncertain or the amount of time
mally, e.g. a bird that will never fly. The length of time the
in care is going to be lengthy, euthanasia is the humane
   d  a   si 
option. However, each case must be judged on its merits and
must also be considered, because it will cause immense stress
there will be some situations where a suitable permanent
and may result in a certain amount of humanization, i.e.
Relevant legislation
any wild bird that contains chicks or eggs or is being
 built, or take or destroy any egg of any wild bird'.
There are exceptions where birds have no protection or
The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (WCA) is the principal
may be taken outside the close season, or may be
source of information on wildlife legislation for anyone work-
taken by authorized persons:
ing in wildlife rescue and rehabilitation. The complete docu-
ment is available from the Stationery Office, or from their web
● Game birds have no protection under this Act apart
site www.tso.co.uk. The Act is extensive but the main points in
from during the close season, but there are rules
 respect to the animals discussed in this chapter are as follows:
governing they way they may be killed or taken.
The hunting season for pheasants is 1 October to
● A species that has protection under the Act can only
1 February; Canada goose and mallard duck -
be taken from the wild in order to give it the necessary
care it needs to be able to return it to the wild or for
to 31 January
humane destruction where appropriate. These
creatures should be cared for in a way that ensures
● Part of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 used
their return to the wild, should not be tamed and
to include Schedule 2 Part II, which listed 13 ‘pest'
should be housed appropriately
species, e.g. magpie, jay, feral pigeon, that were
● Mammals that do not have protection under the WCA
at any time. In 1993 this part of the act was
have provision to protect them against cruelty under
removed and was replaced by general licences
the Wild Mammals (Protection) Act 1996, e.g. it is an
allowing the taking of certain 'pest' species by
offence to 'cruelly kick, beat, impale, burn, drown or
authorized persons. These licences were designed to
crush any wild mammal'
protect other wild birds and agricultural interests
from damage or pollution and to protect the air,
 si l pn sads sop-o arn sis a o
safety and public health. Full details of these
offence under the WCA to release a grey squirrel back
licences and what they refer to can be obtained
into the wild or to allow it to escape, although it is
from the DEFRA website, www.defra.gov.uk/wildlife-
permitted to take it from the wild and euthanase it
      sr 
if it is sick or injured
England and similar ones can be obtained for
Scotland and Wales.
● All species of bat and their roosts are protected
● The Protection of Badgers Act 1992 protects badgers
Bibliography
and their setts
Best R, Cooper J E, Mullineaux E (eds) 2003 BSAVA manual of
● The Deer Act 1991 details how and when deer maybe
wildlife casualties. Briish Small Animal Veterinary Association,
taken
Gloucester
● Protection of birds - 'a person cannot kill, injure or
Cooper J E, Ely J T 1979 First aid care of wild birds. David &
take any wild bird, take, damage or destroy the nest of
Charles, Newton Abbot
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 843
34
Management and care of injured wildlife
Recommended reading
Provides essentiat information for dealing with all the injured
Best R, Cooper I E, Mullineaux E (eds) 2003 BSAVA manual of
wildlife that may be presented in the practice. If is wriften mainty
wildlife casualties. British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
for veterinary surgeons and therefore focuses on diagnosis and
Gloucester
treaiment, but atso covers care during recovery.
844
 Management and care of injured wildlife
Appendix 1
PP
Essential
Anaesthetic flow
calculations
rates
Pip Millard
The formula required to calculate an anaesthetic flow rate is:
This is a summary of all the calculations that may be used in
veterinary practice, including:
Bodyweight (kg) × Minute volume (ml/min)
X Circuit factor.
· Anaesthetic flow rates
● Fluid therapy flow rates
We must first calculate the minute volume of the patient and
in order to do this we need to know the patient's tidal volume
● Percentages of solutions
and respiratory rate.
●Drug dosages
· Calorific requirements
Tidal volume
● Radiographic exposures
 The amount of air which is inhaled or exhaled in each respi
Each section provides an explanation of how to approach the
ration. It is estimated at 10-15 ml/kg:
calculation, a worked example then some questions to do on
your own with the answers included at the end.
● Cats/small dogs = 15 ml/kg
●Medium/large dogs = 10 ml/kg.
Useful measurements
●1 kilogram (kg) = 2.2 1b
Minute volume
· 1 kg = 1000 grams (g)
The amount of air passing in and out of the lungs in 1
● 1 g = 1000 milligrams (mg)
minute. It is calculated by multiplying the tidal volume by
● 1 mg = 1000 micrograms (μg, mcg)
the patient's respiratory rate. If accurate figures are unavail-
able a minute volume of 2o0 ml/kg can be used. This is an
●1 litre (1) = 1000 millilitres (ml)
average minute volume, based on 10 ml/kg tidal volume and
● 1 teaspoon = 5 ml
 20 breaths per minute respiratory rate.
● 1 metre (m) = 100 centimetres (cm) = 1000 millimetres
(mm)
Circuit factor
● 1 cm =10 mm
Ayre's T-piece
2.5-3
Bain
2.5-3
Magill
1-1.5
Lack
1-1.5
Circle
10 ml/kg
To-and-fro
10 ml/kg
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing 845
Appendix 1
Percentage dehydration method
Example
 A clinical examination should enable the veterinary surgeon
What is the required anaesthetic flow rate for a 30 kg dog
with a respiratory rate of 20 breaths/minute on a Magil
 to estimate the percentage by which the patient is dehydrated.
circuit?
Bodyweight x minute volume x circuit factor
Example
30 kg x (10 ml tidal volume x 20 breaths/min)
A 20 kg dog is found to be 9% dehydrated. Calculate the
x1-1.5
total fluid deficit for this animal:
30 kg x 200 ml x 1 - 1.5
20 kg x % dehydration x 10
Answer- 6000 ml (6 l) or 9000 ml (9 l) per min
20 kg x 9% x 10
Answer - 1800 ml fluid deficit
QUESTIONS
Calculating the water deficit from the
1. Calculate the gas flow rate for a dog weighing 20 kg
history
when using a Lack system, at a respiratory rate of
 20 breaths per minute.
Maintenance is calculated at 50-60 ml/kg/24 h, made up as
2. A 30 kg dog is anaesthetised and maintained on a
follows:
Magill circuit.  Calculate the flow rate required if the
dog is breathing 20 times per minute.
Respiratory/cutaneous losses:
20 ml/kg
3. Calculate the flow rate for a 5 kg dog on an Ayre's
Faecal losses (normal faeces):
10-20 ml/kg
T-piece anaesthetic circuit breathing at a rate of
Urinary losses (normal range):
: 20 ml/kg
15 breaths per minute.
4. Calculate the flow rate required for a 35 kg dog
Further losses include:
maintained on a circle circuit, breathing 15 times
Vomit: approximately
4 ml/kg/vomit
per minute.
With an accurate history the fluid deficit can be calculated.
Fluid ther
Example
1Tn
An 8 kg dog has been anorexic for 3 days and has vomited
rates
three times daily for the last 2 days. It has not produced 
urine for 24 h. Calculate the total fluid deficit for this
animal
Giving sets
 Inevitable water losses:
 20 ml x 8 kg x 3 days
These usually have the number of drops per millilitre stated
(i.e. respiration and sweat)
= 480 ml
on the packaging so check before calculating the drip rate. A
Urinary water losses:
20 ml x 8 kg x 2 days
standard giving set will deliver approximately 15-20 drops/ml.
= 320 ml
For smaller patients, a paediatric giving set can be used,
Vomiting:
4 ml x 8 kg x 3 vomits x 2 days
which gives 60 drops/ml. This is useful in order to administer 
= 192 ml
small volumes more accurately. Automated infusion pumps
Answer
are also available, which can deliver a set amount of fluid
Total water deficit:
= 992 ml
over a given period of time.
Using the packed cell volume
Estimating fluid loss
For every 1% increase in PCV, there is a 10 ml/kg water
There are three main ways to estimate fluid loss:
deficit. In most cases, the patient's normal PCV is unlikely to
be known so the following average figures are used:
● Using percentage dehydration of the animal
● Calculating the water deficit from the patient's history
Dog: 45%
● Using the packed cell volume (PCV).
Cat: 37%.
846
5Fundamental Pharmacology
Example
Example
A 15 kg dog has a PCV of 54%. Calculate the total fluid 
 A 21 kg dog requires 1000 ml of fluid over a 6-h period at
deficit:
a rate of 5 ml/kg/h. A standard giving set is used
delivering 20 drops/ml. Calculate the flow rate:
Bodyweight (kg) x 10 ml for every 1% increase in PCV
Flow rate:
5 ml × 21 kg 
= 105 ml/h
15 kg x (54% - 45%) x 10 ml =
15 kg x 9% x 10 ml
ml/min:
105 ml + 60 min
= 1.75 ml/min
Drops/min:
1.75 ml × 20 drops = 35 drops/min
Answer - 1350 ml fluid deficit
Seconds/drop: 60 s ÷ 35 drops/min
Answer - 1 drop every 1.71 (2) s
Intravenous fluid therapy
Once fluid deficit has been calculated it must be added to
QUESTIONS
the daily maintenance fluid requirement - 50-60 ml/kg.
5. A 16 kg dog requires fluids at a rate of 10 ml/kg/h.
This will give the total amount of fluid to be replaced. Ideally,
A standard giving set is used delivering 15 drops/ml.
half of the total amount should be replaced in the first
8h.
Calculate the flow rate
6. A 3 kg cat requires a total of 60 ml of fluids at a rate of
5 ml/kg/h. A paediatric giving set is used. Calculate the
flow rate
Example
7. A 20 kg dog with a PCV of 50% requires fluid therapy to
A 20 kg dog has a fluid deficit of 1800 ml. A standard
replace fluid deficit. A standard giving set delivering
giving set delivering 20 drops/ml is used. Calculate the
20 drops/ml is used. Calculate the fluid therapy flow
fluid flow rates over 24 h:
rates over 24 h
Maintenance:
8. A 15 kg dog requires 750 ml fluid over 24 h. Using a
50 ml/24 h x 20 kg = 1000 ml/24 h
giving set that delivers 15 drops/ml, calculate the flow
rate
1000 ml ÷ 24 h
= 41.67 ml/h
Replacing deficit:
Half in frst 8 h: 1800 ml ÷ 2 = 900 ml
900 ÷ 8 h 
= 112.5 ml/h
 Total ml/h:
Maintenance + Deficit
Percentage solutions
41.67 ml + 112.5 ml/h = 154.17 ml/h
Total ml/min:
154.17 ml ÷ 60 min
= 2.57 ml/min
The percentage of a solution is expressed as the weight (w) of
Drops/min:
2.57 ml x drip factor
a drug per volume (v) of a solution:
2.57 ml x 20
 51.4 drops/min
Seconds/drop:
60 s ÷ 51.4 drops/min
1 g (w) in 100 ml (v) = 1% solution
Answer - 1 drop every 1.17 s for frst 8 h
2 g (w) in 100 ml (v) = 2% solution
Repiacing deficit:
and so on.
Last 16 h:
1800 ml ÷ 2 = 900 ml
900 ÷ 16 h = 56.25 ml/h
It is, however, more useful to express the percentage in terms
Total ml/h:
Maintenance + Deficit
of mg/ml when calculating doses:
41.67 ml + 56.25 ml
= 97.92 ml/hour
 Total ml/min:
2.5% solution = 2.5 g/100 ml
97.92 ml ÷ 60 min
= 1.63 ml/min
÷100
= 0.025 g/ml
Drops/min:
1.63 ml x 20
= 32.6 drops/min
Seconds/drop:
60 s ÷ 32.6 drops/min
convert g to mg - 1000 mg in 1 g
so to convert 0.025 g to mg multiply by 1000
Answer - 1 drop every 1.84 (2) s for remaining 16 h
= 25 mg/ml.
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
847
Appendix 1
Formulae for calculating volume,
QUESTIONS
percentage solution and weight of a drug
9. An antibiotic is supplied as a 15% suspension. If the
weight (g) × 100
dose for a dog is 10 mg/kg. calculate the volume
Volume (ml)
% solution
required for a 30 kg labrador
10. A 20 kg dog is to be given an intravenous injection of
% solution × volume (ml)
Weight (g)
a 5% solution. The dose rate of the drug is 15 mg/kg.
100
Calculate the volume of the solution to be given
11. Calculate the percentage solution achieved when
% solution
weight (g) × 100
mixing 500 mg of a drug in 100 ml sterile water
volume (ml)
12. Calculate the amount of dextrose required to produce
1 litre of a 2.5% solution
Example
Calculate the percentage solution that could be made up
with 125 mg glucose and 50 ml water, using all the
glucose and water:
Convert mg to g: 125 mg +1000 = 0.125 g
Apply formula:
weight (g) × 100
 % solution:
volume (ml)
 In order to calculate a drug dose, the following information
0.125 g x 100
is required:
50 ml
· Bodyweight of the animal in kilograms
Answer - 0.25%
● Daily dose rate - this may need to be divided through-
 out the day
· Strength of each tablet.
Example
A 44 lb dog requires injections every 8 h at a drug rate of
25 mg/kg/24 h. The injection is produced as a 5% solu-
Example
 tion. Calculate the volume of solution to be given at each
A 10 kg dog requires antibiotic tablets for 14 days. The
injection.
recommended dose is 5 mg/kg every 6 h. The tablets
(1 kg = 2.2 Ib)
 contain 200 mg antibiotic each. Calculate the number to
 Convert 44 Ib to kg:
44 ÷2.2
= 20 kg
be dispensed.
(1 g = 1000 mg)
Total dose required:
10 kg x 5 mg = 50 mg every 6 h
Convert mg to g:
25 ÷ 1000
= 0.025 g
Number of tablets
4 z/6 s'0 = 6 sz0'0 x by 0z :4 z 1ad paunbau 6nup 1e4o1
required:
50 mg ÷200 mg = 0.25 tablet (4)
 Apply formula:
  tablet every 6 h
weight g × 100
Volume:
= 10 ml
Number of tablets daily: 24 h ÷ 6 h.
= 4
5%
4 times x  tab= 1 tablet daily
Given every 8 h, i.e. three times per day:
10 ml ÷ 3
 Total number of tablets dispensed:
1 daily x 14 days.
Answer - 3.33 ml per injection
Answer - 14 tablets dispensed
848
Appendix 1
QUESTIONS
Example
13. A cat weighing 4 kg requires antibiotics by mouth
Calculate the calorific requirement of a 25 kg dog follow-
as a tablet for 5 days. The recommended dose is
ing routine surgery:
App
24 mg/kg/24 h and should ideally be divided into two
Calculate BER:
(30 × Bodyweight kg) + 70
or three equal doses throughout the day. The tablets
(30 × 25 kg)
+ 70 = 820 kcal
are available in the following strengths: 50 mg.
 100 mg and 250 mg. Calculate the strength and
Disease factor (Surgery): 1.3
number dispensed
Total kcal:
1.3 x 820 kcal
14. A 33 lb dog requires antibiotic capsules for 21 days.
Answer - 1066 kcal required
The recommended dose is 5 mg/kg every 12 h. Each
capsule is 25 mg. Calculate the number dispensed.
15. Antibiotic tablets are to be dispensed to a 4 kg cat at
QUESTIONS
a dose rate of 25 mg/kg/day. The tablets are presented
as 50 mg and should be given in divided doses.
17. Calculate the calorific requirement of a 55 kg great
Calculate the number to be given per day.
Dane that is hospitalized after parturition with a
16. A 7 kg dog requires tablets at a rate of 1.5 mg/kg
disease factor of 1.2
twice daily for 7 days. The tablets are available as
18. Calculate the calorific requirement of a 1 kg kitten
10 mg. 15 mg. 50 mg and 150 mg. Calculate the
who is recovering from severe burns
correct tablet size to dispense, the number to dispense
19. Calculate the calorific requirement of a 10 kg dog
 and the instructions for dosing.
ftted with a nasogastric tube. Then calculate the
 amount of food required if the energy density of the
food is 0.8 kcal/ml
20. Calculate the calorific requirement of a 32 kg dog.
 Using your answer, calculate the amount of food 
uirement
required if the food has an energy density of 420 kcal
per 100 g tin.
Calculating the calorific requirement of a patient involves
working out the basal energy requirement (BER) then multi
 plying this by the disease factor:
BER × Disease factor = Kilocalories required in 24 h
exposures
Basal energy requirement
For dogs over 5 kg
BER = (30 × bodyweight (kg)) + 70
There are a number of different calculations that are encoun-
For small dogs and cats BER = 60 × bodyweight (kg)
tered in radiography:
● Amperage (in milliamps, mA) and exposure time (mAs)
Disease factors
● Voltage (in kilovolts, kV)
The disease factor is the proportion of extra kilocalories (kcal)
●Film focal distance (FFD)
 required in certain stressful or disease situations:
·Grid factor.
Cage rest
1.2
mAs
 Surgery/trauma
1.3
mAs = Amperage (mA) × Time (s)
Multiple surgery/trauma
1.5
 Provided the mAs and mA are given, the exposure time in
Sepsis/neoplasia
1.7
seconds can be calculated:
Burns
2.0
Growth
2.0.
mAs ÷ mA = time (s)
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
849
Appendix 1
Example
Example
The radiographic exposure required for a dog's chest is
An exposure is found to be satisfactory for a dog's
70 kV and 50 mAs. Calculate the exposure time if the
abdomen at 60 kV, 20 mAs and a FFD of 40 cm. Calculate
machine has an output of 200 mA:
the new mAs if the FFD were increased to 80 cm:
Time (s) = mAs
÷ mA
Old mAs x New distance?
New mAs =
50 mAs + 200 mA.
Old distance
Answer - 0.25 s
20 mAs × 80 cm²
40 cm²
20 mAs × 6400 cm
kV
1600 cm
The rule when calculating voltage is:
Answer - 80 mAs
If the voltage is raised by 10 kV, then the mAs should
be halved
 If the voltage is lowered by 10 kV, then the mAs
should be doubled.
Grid factor
60 kV @ 16 mAs
70 kV @ 8 mAs
The grid factor is the amount by which the exposure (mAs)
must be increased by to compensate for the use of the grid. It
50 kV @ 32 mAs
is usually written on the grid:
are all the same!
New mAs = Old mAs x Grid factor.
Example
Example
An exposure for a dog's abdomen has been found to be
A radiograph requires an exposure of 20 mAs when taken
satisfactory at 75 kv and 40 mAs. Calculate the new mAs if
at a FFD of 90 cm without a grid. Calculate the new mAs if
the voltage were increased to 85 kv:
 a grid with a grid factor of 4 is used:
The kv has been increased by 10
Old mAs x Grid factor = 20 mAs x 4
therefore the mAs should be halved:
40 mAs ÷ 2
Answer - 80 mAs
Answer - 20 mAs
QUESTIONS
Film focal distance
21. If the mAs is 50 and the amperage is 200 mA,
The inverse square law applies when altering the FFD: *The
calculate the correct exposure time.
intensity of the beam varies inversely as the square of the dis-
tance from the source', i.e.:
22. A dog is radiographed using a FFD of 50 cm with an
mAs of 5. A decision is made to increase the FFD to 
100 cm to minimize geometric distortion. Calculate the
old mAs X new FFD2
New mAs =
new mAs.
old FFD2
 23. A radiograph requires an exposure of 30 mAs without
the use of a grid. Calculate the new mAs when a grid
is introduced with a grid factor of 3.
24. A radiograph has been taken at 60 kV and 35 mAs.
Calculate the new mAs if the voltage were changed to
50 kv.
850
Appendix 1
Answers to questions
3 kg × 5 ml 
= 15 ml/h
15 ml ÷ 60 min
= 0.25 ml/min
0.25 ml × 60 drops = 15 drops/min
Now let's see how much you have understood!
60 s ÷ 15 drops
= 1 drop every 4 s
1. Calculate the gas flow rate for a dog weighing 20 kg when
using a Lack system, at a respiratory rate of 20 breaths per
7. A 20 kg dog with a PCV of 50% requires fluid therapy
minute:
to replace fluid deficit. A standard giving set delivering
20 drops/ml is used. Calculate the fluid therapy flow rates
Bodyweight × Minute volume × Circuit factor
over 24 h:
20 kg × (10 ml x 20 breaths per minute) × 1-1.5
Bodyweight (kg) × 10 ml for every 1% increase in PCV
20 kg × 200 ml x 1-1.5
20 kg
×(50-45%) × 10 ml
= 4000 ml (4 l) or 6000 ml (6 l)
20 kg
× 5% × 10 ml = 1000 ml fluid deficit/24 h
Maintenance: 50 ml/ 24 h × 20 kg = 1000 ml
2. A 30 kg dog is anaesthetized and maintained on a Magill
circuit. Calculate the flow rate required if the dog is breathing
÷ 24 hour
1000 ml ÷ 24 h
= 41.67 ml/h
 20 times per minute:
Replacing deficit:
Half in first 8 h: 1000 ml ÷ 2 ÷ 8
= 62.5 ml/h
Bodyweight × Minute volume × Circuit factor
Total ml/h:
Maintenance + Deficit
30 kg × (10 ml × 20 breaths per minute) × 1-1.5
41.67 ml + 62.5 ml/h = 104.17 ml/h
30 kg x 200 ml x 1-1.5
Total ml/min:
104.17 ml ÷ 60 min = 1.74 ml/min
= 6000 ml (6 l) or 9000 ml (9 l)
Drops/min:
1.74 ml × Drip factor
 3. Calculate the flow rate for a 5 kg dog on an Ayre's T-piece
1.75 ml x 20
= 34.8 drops/min
anaesthetic circuit breathing at a rate of 15 breaths per
Seconds/drop: 60 s ÷ 34.8 drops
= 1 drop every 1.72 s
minute:
for first 8 h
Replacing deficit:
Bodyweight x Minute volume x Circuit factor
Last 16 h:
1000 ml ÷ 2 ÷ 16 h = 31.25 ml/h
5 kg × (15 ml × 15 breaths per minute) × 2.5-3
Total ml/h:
Maintenance + Deficit
5 kg
× 225 ml × 2.5-3
41.67 ml + 31.25 ml = 72.92 ml/h
= 2812.5 ml (2.8 l) or 3375 ml (3.4 l)
Total ml/min:
72.92 ml ÷ 60
= 1.22 ml/min
Drops/min:
1.22 ml × 20
= 24.4 drops/min
4. Calculate the flow rate required for a 35 kg dog
maintained on a circle circuit, breathing 15 times per
Seconds/drop: 60 s ÷ 24.4 drops
= 1 drop every 2.46 s
 for remaining 16 h
minute:
35 kg × 10 ml
8. A 15 kg dog requires 750 ml fluid over 24 h. Using a
= 350 ml
giving set that delivers 15 drops/ml, calculate the flow
rate:
5. A 16 kg dog requires fluids at a rate of 10 ml/kg/h. A stan-
dard giving set is used delivering 15 drops/ml. Calculate the
750 ml ÷ 24 h
= 31.25 ml/h
flow rate:
31.25 ml ÷ 60 min = 0.52 ml/min
0.52 ml × 15 drops = 7.8 drops/min
16 kg × 10 ml
= 160 ml/h
60 s ÷ 7.8 drops
= 1 drop every 7.7 s
160 ml ÷ 60 min
= 2.67 ml/min
2.67 ml × 15 drops = 40.05 drops/min
9. An antibiotic is supplied as a 15% suspension. If the dose
60 s ÷ 40.05
= 1 drop every 1.5 s
for a dog is 10 mg/kg, calculate the volume required for a
30 kg labrador:
6. A 3 kg cat requires a total of 60 ml of fluids at a rate of
5 ml/kg/h. A paediatric giving set is used. Calculate the flow
Dose = (30 kg × 10 mg) ÷ 1000 (to convert to grams)
rate:
= 0.3 g
The Complete Texthook of Veterinary Nursing
851
Appendix 1
Weight of drug (g) × 100
Twice-daily dose = 96 mg ÷ 2
= 48 mg
Volume (ml) =
% solution
= 1 × 50 mg tablet
0.3 x 100
Two tablets daily × 5 days = 10 × 50 mg tablets
dispensed
15
= 2 ml
14. A 33 1b dog requires antibiotic capsules for 21 days. The
recommended dose is 5 mg/kg every 12 h. Each capsule is
10. A 20 kg dog is to be given an intravenous injection of a
 25 mg. Calculate the number dispensed.
5% solution. The dose rate of the drug is 15 mg/kg. Calculate
the volume of the solution to be given:
Dog's weight (kg)
= 33 ÷ 2.2
= 15 kg
12-hourly dose
= 15 × 5 mg
= 75 mg
300 mg
Dose = 20 kg × 15 mg =
= 0.3 g
Number of tablets
= 75 mg ÷ 25 mg= 3 tablets
1000
3 tablets every 12 h = 6 tablets ÷ day
Weight of drug (g) × 100
6 tablets × 21 days = 126 tablets dispensed
Volume (ml) =
% solution
15. Antibiotic tablets are to be dispensed to a 4 kg cat at a
0.3 x 100
 dose rate of 25 mg/kg/day. The tablets are presented as 50 mg
5%
and should be given in divided doses. Calculate the number
= 6 ml
to be given per day:
Daily dose
= 4 kg × 25 mg
=100 mg
11. Calculate the percentage solution achieved when mixing
Number of tablets = 100 mg/50 mg = 2
500 mg of a drug in 100 ml sterile water:
1 tablet to be given twice daily
500 mg
= 0.5 g
16. A 7 kg dog requires tablets at a rate of 1.5 mg/kg twice daily
1000
for 7 days. The tablets are available as 10 mg, 15 mg, 50 mg and
Weight (g) x 100
150 mg. Calculate the correct tablet size to dispense, the
Volume (ml)
number to dispense and the instructions for dosing:
%
0.5 × 100
Twice daily dose
= 7 kg × 1.5 mg = 10.5 mg = 1 × 10
100
mg tablet
0.5%
2 tablets × 7 days = 14 tablets
14 × 10 mg tablets dispensed to be given twice daily
12. Calculate the amount of dextrose required to produce
11 of a 2.5% solution:
17. Calculate the calorific requirement of a 55 kg great Dane
that is hospitalized after parturition with a disease factor of 1.2:
Volume (ml) × solution
Weight (g)=
100
Daily requirement (kcal) = ((30 × Bodyweight (kg)) + 70)
× Disease factor
1000 x 2.5
= ((30 × 55) + 70) × 1.2
100
= 25 g
= 2064 kcal
13. A cat weighing 4 kg requires antibiotics by mouth as a
18. Calculate the calorific requirement of a 1 kg kitten who
tablet for 5 days. The recommended dose is 24 mg/kg/24 h
is recovering from severe burns:
and should, ideally, be divided into two or three equal doses
throughout the day. The tablets are available in the following
Daily requirement (kcal) = Bodyweight (kg) × 60 × disease
strengths: 50 mg, 100 mg and 250 mg. Calculate the strength
factor
and number dispensed:
= 1×60× 2
Dose/24 h
= 4 kg × 24 mg = 96 mg
= 120 kcal
852
Appendix 1
19. Calculate the calorific requirement of a 10 kg dog fitted
22. A dog is radiographed using a FFD of 50 cm with an mAs
with a nasogastric tube. Then calculate the amount of food
of 5. A decision is made to increase the FFD to 100 cm to min-
required if the energy density of the food is 0.8 kcal/ml:
imise geometric distortion. Calculate the new mAs:
Daily requirement (kcal) = (Bodyweight (kg) × 30) + 70
App
= (10 kg x 30) + 70
Old FFD2
= 370 kcal
5 × 100 cm²
5 ×10000
=5×4
Amount of food required at 0.8 kcal/ml = 370 ÷ 0.8
50 cm²
2500
=462.5 ml
= 20 mAs
20. Calculate the calorific requirement of a 32 kg dog. Using
your answer, calculate the amount of food required if the
23. A radiograph requires an exposure of 30 mAs without the
food has an energy density of 420 kcal per 100 g tin:
use of a grid. Calculate the new mAs when a grid is intro-
duced with a grid factor of 3:
Daily requirement (kcal)  = (Bodyweight (kg) × 30) + 70
= (32 kg × 30) + 70
New mAs = mAs without grid x Grid factor
= 1030 kcal
= 30 mAs × 3
Amount of food required
= 90 mAs
at 420 kcal/100 g
=1030÷420
=245 g
24.A radiograph has been taken at 60 kV and 35 mAs.
Number of tins at 100 g per tin = 245 ÷ 100 tins
 Calculate the new mAs if the voltage were changed to 50 kV:
=2.45 tins required
If the voltage is lowered by 10 kv, then the mAs should be
doubled:
21. If the mAs is 50 and the amperage is 200 mA, calculate
35 mAs x 2 = 70 mAs
the correct exposure time:
mAs
Time (s) =
mA
50 mAs
200 mA
= 0.25 s
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing 853
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Appendix 2
Normal values
(from various sources)
2
App
Dog, cat and horse
 Table A.1 Normal clinical parameters
Parameter
Dog
Cat
Horse
Body temperature (°C)
38.3-8.7
38.0-38.5
38.0-38.2
Pulse rate (beats/min)
60-180
110-180
32-44
Respiratory rate (breaths/min)
10-30
20-30
8-12
Table A.2 Normal haematological values
Parameter
Dog
Cat
Horse
Total red blood cell count (× 1012/)
5.5-8.5
5.0-10.0
7.0
Total white blood cell count (× 10°/l)
6-17
5.5-19.5
8-11
Differential white cell count (%)
Neutrophils
65-70
45-75
50-60
Eosinophils
2-5
4-12
2-5
Basophils
≤1
<1
≤1
Monocytes
5
0-4
5-6
Lymphocytes
20-25
20-25
30-40
Thrombocyte count (× 10%/l)
200-500
200-600
113-299
Packed cell volume (%)
37-55
24-45
42
Haemoglobin (g/dl)
12-18
8-15
12.5
Blood pH 
7.35-7.45
7.35-7.45
7.35-7.43
Clotting time (min)
2.5
2.5
11.5
Table A.3 Normal urine values
Parameter
Dog
Cat
Horse
pH
5.2-6.8
6.0-7.0
7.5-8.5
Specific gravity
1.015-1.045
1.020-1.040
1.008-1.040
Daily volume (ml/kg bodyweight)
20-100
10-12
20-50
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
855
Appendix 2
Table A.4 Normal values for blood biochemistry
Parameter
Dog
Cat
Horse
Total serum protein (g/l)
50-78
60-82
55-71
Serum albumin (g/l)
22-35
25-39
28-36
Cholesterol(mmol/l)
2.7-9.5
1.5-6.0
2.1-3.6
Total bilirubin (μmol/l)
0-6.8
0-6.8
11-48
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.20-2.90
2.20-2.90
2.7-3.2
 Blood urea nitrogen (mmol/l)
3.0-9.0
5.0-10.0
4.0-8.0
Creatinine (μmol/l)
Up to 120
Up to 180 
86-204
Fasting plasma glucose (mmol/l)
3.5-5.5
3.5-6.5
3.6-6.4
Small mammals
 Table A.5 Normal clinical parameters for small mammals
Parameter
Rabbit
Guinea pig
Ferret
Gerbil
Mouse
Rat
Hamster 
Weight (g)
Male
Varies
900-1200
1000-2000
46-131
20-40
267-500
87-130
according
to breed
Female
Varies
700-900
600-1000
50-55
22-63
225-325
95-130
according
to breed
Life span
7years
5-6 years
 5-11 years
24-39
12-36
26-40
18-36
(average)
months
months
months
months
Body temperature
37-39.4
37.2-39.5
37.8-40
38.2
37.1
37.7
37.6
(0。)
Pulse rate
198-330
240-310
200-300
85-160
427-697
313-493
310-471
(beats/min)
Respiratory rate
35-60
40-80
85-160
91-216
71-146
38-110
(breaths/min)
856
Appendix 2
Table A.6 Serum biochemical reference values for gerbils, hamsters, mice,
rats and guinea pigs
Value
Gerbil
Hamster
Mouse
Rat
Guinea pig
Total protein (g/dl)
4.6-14.7
5.5-7.2
59-103
5.9-7.8
4.2-6.8
Albumin (g/dl)
1.8-5.8
2.0-4.2
2.5-4.8
3.3-4.6
2.1-3.9
Globulin (g/dl)
0.8-10.0
2.5-4.9
0.6
2.2-3.5
1.7-2.6
Glucose (mg/dl)
47-137
60-160
73-183
74-163
60-125
2
Cholesterol (mg/dl)
90-141
65-148
59-103
44-138
16-43
PP
Urea nitrogen (mg/dl)
17-30
14-27
18-31
12-22
9.0-31.5
Creatinine (mg/dl)
NA
0.4-1.0
0.48-1.1
0.38-0.8
0.6-2.2
Creatine kinase (IU/l)
NA
366-776
155
111-334
NA
Aspartate aminotransferase
NA
43-134
101-214
54-192
26-68
(IU/l)
 Alanine aminotransferase
NA
22-63
44-87
52-144
25-59
(IU/L)
Alkaline phosphatase (IU/l)
NA
6-14.2
43-71
40-191
55-108
Lactate dehydrogenase (IU/l)
NA
134-360
366
225-275
NA
Total bilirubin (mg/dl)
0.8-1.6
0.24-0.72
0.3-0.8
0.23-0.48
0.0-0.9
Sodium (mEq/l)
143-147
124-147
143-164
142-150
120-152
Potassium (mEq/)
3.6-5.9
3.9-6.8
6.3-8.0
4.3-6.3
3.8-7.9
Chloride (mEq/l)
93-118
92-103
105-118
100-109
90-115
Phosphorus (mg/dl)
3.7-11.2
4.0-8.2
5.2-9.4
5.3-8.4
3.0-7.6
Calcium (mg/dl)
3.7-6.1
8.4-12.3
4.6-9.6
7.6-12.6
8.2-12.0
Magnesium (mg/dl)
NA
1.9-2.9
1.4-3.1
2.6-3.2
NA
Source: from Quesenbury K E, Carpenter J W 2004 Ferrets, rabbits and rodents-clinical medicine and surgery, 2nd edn.
W B Saunders, St Louis, MO.
Table A.7 Haematological reference values for gerbils, hamsters, mice, rats
 and guinea pigs
Parameter
Gerbil
Hamster 
Mouse
Rat
Guinea pig
Red blood cells (× 10/μl)
7.0-10.0
5-9.2
7.9-10.1
5.4-8.5
3.2-8.0
Haemoglobin (g/dl)
12.1-16.9
14.6-20
11.0-14.5
11.5-16.0
10.0-17.2
Haematocrit (%)
41-52
46-52
37-46
37-49
32-50
Platelets (× 103/μl)
400-600
300-570
600-1200
450-885
260-740
White blood cells (× 10²/μl)
4.3-21.6
5.0-10.0
5.0-13.7
4.0-10.2
5.5-17.5
Neutrophils (%)
5-34
10-42
10-40
6-17
22-48
Lymphocytes (%)
60-95
50-95
55-95
9-34
39-72
Eosinophils (%)
0-4
0-4.5
0-4
0-6
0-7
Monocytes (%)
0-3
-0
0.1-3.5
0-5
0-1
Basophils (%)
0-1
0-1
0-0.3
0-1.5
0-2.7
Total blood volume (ml/kg)
60-85
65-80
70-80
50-65
NA
Source: from Quesenbury K E, Carpenter J w 2004 Ferrets, rabbits and rodents-clinical medicine and surgery, 2nd edn.
W B Saunders, St Louis, MO.
The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing
857
Appendix 2
Table A.8 Reference ranges for serum biochemistry
Table A.9 Reference ranges for haematological values
values in the rabbit
in the rabbit
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
Serum protein
5.4-8.3 g/dl
Erythrocytes
5.1-7.9 × 106/μl
Albumin
2.4-4.6 g/dl
Haematocrit
33-50%
Globulin
1.5-2.8 g/dl
Haemoglobin
10.0-17.4 g/dl
Glucose
75-155 g/dl
 Mean corpuscular volume
57.8-66.5 μm3
 Blood urea nitrogen
13-29 mg/dl
 Mean corpuscular haemoglobin
17.1-23.5 p9
Creatinine
0.5-2.5 mg/dl
 Mean corpuscular haemoglobin
29-37%
Total bilirubin
0.0-0.7 mg/dl
 concentration
Cholesterol
10-80 mg/dl
Platelets
250-650 × 10²/μl
Total lipids
243-390 mg/dl
Leukocytes
5.2-12.5 × 10²/μl
Calcium
5.6-12.5 mg/dl
Phosphorus
Neutrophils
20-75%
4.0-6.9 mg/dl
So dium
131-155 mEq/l
Lymphocytes
30-85%
Potassium
3.6-6.9 mEq/l
Monocytes
1-4%
Chloride
92-112 mEq/l
Eosinophils
1-4 %
Bicarbonate
16-38 mEq/l
Basophils
1-7%
Amylase
166.5-314.5 U/l
Source: from Quesenbury K E, Carpenter J W 2004 Ferrets, rabbits and
Alkaline phosphatase
4-16 U/l
rodents-clinical medicine and surgery, 2nd edn. W B Saunders, St Louis, MO.
Alanine aminotransferase
48-80 U/L
Aspartate aminotransferase
14-113 U/L
Lactic dehydrogenase
34-129 U/L
Source:fromQuesenburyKE,CarpenterJW2004Ferets,rabbits and
rodents-clinical medicine and surgery, 2nd edn. W B Saunders, St Louis, MO.
Table A.10 Serum biological values in the ferrets
Parameter
Albino
Fitch
Total protein (g/dl)
5.1-7.4
5.3-7.2
Albumin (g/dl)
2.6-3.8
3.3-4.1
(np/bu) asosmg
94-207
62.5-134
Fasting glucose (mg/dl)
90-125
Blood urea nitrogen (mg/dl)
10-45
12-43
Creatinine (mg/dl)
0.4-0.9
0.2-0.6
Sodium (mmol/l)
137-162
146-160
Potassium (mmol/l)
4.5-7.7
4.3-5.3
Chloride (mmol/l)
106-125
102-121
Calcium (mg/dl)
8.0-11.8
8.6-10.5
Phosphorus (mg/dl)
4.0-9.1
5.6-8.7
Alanine aminotransferase (U/l)
82-289
78-149
Aspartate aminotransferase (U/l)
28-120
57-248
Alkaline phosphatase (U/l)
9-84
30-120
31-66
Bilirubin (mg/dl)
< 1.0
0-0.1
Cholesterol (mg/dl)
64-296
119-209
Carbon dioxide (mmol/l)
16.5-28
16-28
Source: from Quesenbury K E, Carpenter J W 2004 Ferrets, rabbits and rodents-clinical medicine and surgery, 2nd edn.
W B Saunders, St Louis, MO.
858
Appendix 2
Nofes
All eritries relate to veterirary rursing ini gereral, urless a specific animal is stated.
Page rumbers in itafics deriote figures and tables. Page rumbers in bold derote main discussioris (whiere recessary)
A
agar plate, inoculation, 674
alpha-2 agorist(s)
Abandorment of Animals Act (1960), 46
age/ageinig
horse premedication, 614, 620
ABC, 393
commor disorders, 208
ketamine ard, 588
ABCDEF rule, 607-609
rutritional requirements, 208-212
reversal, 581
abdomen imaging, 736-737
obesity risk, 206
sedatior for araesthesia, 581, 581
abdominal cavity, SS, S6
aggression
α cells, paricreas, 72
Index
abdominal fluid, 714
cats, 256,256, 259-260
altrical chicks, 805, 840
abdomiral imaging, positioring in, 736-737
dogs, 12, 253, 261
alveolar ducts, 81-82
right lateral recumbercy, 736
ferrets, 288
alveolar rierve block, inferior, 584
veritrodorsal abdomer, 736-737, 737
gerbils, 285
amethocaine, local araesthiesia, 583
abdominal organ biopsy, 714-715
hedgehogs, 816
horses, 629
abdominal respiration, 536
horses, 272
amino acids, 308
abduction, S8
patierits showinig, kerirels for, 145
absorption, 88
abrasior wound, 396
rabbits, 287-288
cats/dogs, 194
abscess, 483-484
rats, 285
horses, 229
ear, tortoises/terrapirs, 789
reptiles, 292
parenteral feeding, SS2
abuse see pet abuse; welfare
sriakes, 293
ammonium urate, canine urolithiasis, 223
acciderital self-administration of drugs, 621
agouti hair, 320
ammion, 100
Accidert Book, 38
agranulocytes, 74
amrior (cats/dogs), rupture (dogs), 329-330
acepromazire, 373
 AIDS, comparior arimals in, 7
amniotic cavity, 100
acetylpromazine (ACP), S80, S80
air embolism, 352
A-mode ultrasourid, 746
acroceritric chromosomes, 302, 303
air gap techrique, scattered radiation
amperage, X-ray exposure, 721
acrylic bedding, 151
conitrol, 723
amphiarthrosis joint, S6
actin, 58
 air polishing (particle blasting), 558
ampicillin, 365
activated clottirng time (ACT), 451
air sac mite (birds), 800
ampulla, ear, 70
active veritilation
air stable, 276
arabolic steroids, 379
animal housing (cats/dogs), 148
air supply, operating theatre, 508
anaconda, 293
stables, 167
air travel (horses), 276
araemia, 449-450
adders, 292
airway maragemert
cyathostomes, 651
Addison's disease (hypoadreriocorticism),
ariaesthiesia, 596-600
fleas, 636
456
horses, 623
infectious (cats), 424
additives
derital procedures, 561
ticks, 641
dnugs, 370
see aiso endotrachieal irtubatior1
araesthesia, 370, 373, 577-610
equine diet, 234
airway obstructior, upper, 437, 438
airway management, 596-600
adduction, S8
alanine amirotrarisferase (ALT), S79,
 araesthetic machires see araesthietic
aderioma, 485
702-703
machines
adenovinuses, 677
albumin,73
horses, 623
adhesive tape, 519
alcohiols, disirfectarts, 157
cardiac arrest during, 607-609
adipose tissue, 51
aldehydes, 157
cardiovascular parameters, 602, 602-603
adrenal cortex, 72, 703-704
Alewrostrogylus abstrusus, 652
carrier gases, 588-589
adreral glard, 71-72
Aleutiari disease (AD), 763
 ceritral riervous system depressior,
adrenaline, 71-72
alfalfa (lucerme), 232
601-602
cardiopulmorary resuscitation, 608, 608,
alfertaril, S8S
circuits, 591-596
627
alkalirie phosphiatase (ALKP), 579
 see aiso rori-rebreathing araesthetic
adreral medulla, 71-72
alkalire phosphiate (ALP), 703
circuits; rebreathing anaesthetic
adreral sex homones, 72
allantoamnion, 100
circuits
adrerocorticotrophic homore (ACTH), 72,
allantochorion (dogs), 329
crarial nerve reflex, 601-602
379
allantois, 100
critically ill animal induction, S88
stimulatior1 test, 457, 703-704
alleles, 306, 307
deathi rates, S77
adsorberits, 374
allelomorphs, 306
definition, S77
aerophagia (cribbing), 170, 271
allercept e-screer1 test, 689
denitistry, 561-563
aerosol sprays, 372
allergic resporise
depth of, 601
aflatoxin, 671-672
fleas, 636
enmergencies in, 607-610
Africar1 grey parrot, 792, 798
iodine-based solutioris, 743
endotracheal tubes, 596, 596-597, 597
agamas, 766
alopecia (small mammals), 761
flow rates, 845
Index859
Index
araesthesia (Cont/d)
araphylactic shock, 401
resistance, 375
history taking, 578
anatomical dead space, 82
risk reduction, 376
horses see equirie ariaesthesia
anatomy/physiology
aritirematocides, 376
induction, 585
cardiovascular system, 72-80
artirieoplastics, 375-376
inhalation agents, 588-591
circulatory system, 77-78
 antiparasitic products, 376
injectable, 586-588
digesti ve system, 83-89
cats, 64S
drug types, 586-588
eridocririe system, 71-72
dogs, 644
intravenous, 586
integument, 104-108
horses, 64S
mode of action, 586
locomotor system, 56-58
antiprotozoals, 376
intermittert positive pressure vertilation,
nervous system, 59-66
antiseptics, 154, 380, 417
606-607
reproductive system, 93-104
artisera, 380
intubation, 597
respiratory system, 80-82
 antisocial behaviour (dogs), 2s0-251
local see local araesthiesia
senises, 66-70
antitoxiris, 380
mairiteriarice, 585
urirary system, 89-93
 antitrematocides, 376
masks, 597
 anatomy/physiology, cats/dogs, 49-108
antitussives, 377, 437
monitoring of patient, 600-603
cells/tissue, 49-56
anuria, 340, 410
equipment, 603-605
Ancylostoma caninum, 648,649
ars
see aiso specific equipment
Ancylostoma tubaeforme,648
horse, 228
muscle relaxation, 605-606, 606
Angiostrongylus vasorum,653,63
surgery, 495-496
owner preparation, 578
Aniglo-Arab horses, 25
anxiety disorders (horses), 278-279
physical examination, 578-579
arimal-assisted activity (AAA), 6, 6-7
 aortic arch, persisterit right, 444
pre-ariaesthetic assessmerit, 577-579
animal-assisted therapy (AAT), 6, 6
aortic stenosis, 444
blood tests, 579
Arimal Boarding Establishimert Act (1963),
aortic valve, 76
premedication, 579-586, S80
45
aproea
preparation area, 508
 arimal experimentation, 11
 anaesthesia complication, 609-610
recovery, 607
Arimal Health Act (1981), 44
horses, 626
 derital procedures, S63
arimal husbandry
causes, 609
redistribution, 363
birds, 791-805
definition, 609
respiratory emergencies during, 609-610
exotic species, 751-805
signs of, 609
stages, 601
reptiles, 764-791
treatmert, 609-610
volatile agents, 590-591
small mammals, 751-764
aponeurosis, 58
 mirimum alveolar coriceritration, S90,
arimal research, 11-12
apoptosis, 303
590
animal rights, 9, 10
appetite stimularits, 347
mode of actior, 589, 589-590, 590
activists, 10
approaching horses, 272-273
potency, 590
Arimals Act (197S), 44
aquarium tarks (small mammal housing),
vaporization, 591, s91
Arimal Scientific Procedures Act (1986), 11
757, 757
Araesthetic Agent: Coritrolling Exposure
arimal testing, 11-12
aqueous humour, 69
urder the Coritrol of Substarces
Arimal Welfare Bill, 47
arachidonic acid (cats/dogs), 195
Hazardous to Health Regulatiors 1994,
animal welfare legislation, 33, 43-47, 45-46
arachmids, 638-641
600
arimal health, 43, 45-46
 arachroid mater, 64
anaesthetic machiries, 597-600, 598
 public health and safety provision, 43, 44
 areolar tissue, S1
cylinder changing, 598-599
anions, 54
arginire, dietary, 219
cylinder size, 598, 598
anode, 720
arrhythmias, 444,44S
cylinder storage, 598
Anoplocephala perfoliata,655
ariaesthesia arid, 603
flow meter, S99, 599-600
anorexia, 346
types, 446
gas supply, 597-598, 598
post-hibermiatior (tortoises), 780, 780-782,
arterial catheterization, S44-S45
pressure gauge and regulator, 599, 599
791
catheter mairteriarice, 546
safety devices, 600
antacids,373
arteries, 78, 78
waste gas mariagemerit, 600, 600
anthelmintics, 376
arteritis, equine viral, 427
anal fururculosis, 484
anthrax, 672
arterivirus (horses), 677
analgesia, 373, S50
anthroporosis, 678
arthropods, 660-661
anticholinergics, 58s-586
antiarrhythmics, 373-374
 arthrospore fomation, 642
balariced, 582
antibiotics
 articular gout (birds), 804
definition, S77
abscess drairiage, 483
artificial active immurity, 429
horses, 613, 615
prophylactic,342
artificial lighting
intraoperative/postoperative care, S24
sersitivity test, 674
cats/dogs, 149
opioids, 584, 584-585, 58S
anticholinergics, s8s-586
horses, 168
premedication, 581, 581-586
anticoagularits, blood preservatior, 693, 693
artificial passive immurity, 429
anal glands (cats/dogs), 107
articorivulsarts, 374
artificial respiration, 403
secretion for commurication (dogs), 248
antidepressarits, 374
ascanids, 644-648
anal sac(s)
antidiarrhoeals, 374
asepsis, 526-532
cats/dogs, 107
antiemetics, 374
definitions, 526
fistula, 484
antihistamines, 374
aspartate amiriotrarisferase (AST), 703
impaction/infection, 496
aniti-inflammatories, 374
Aspergillus flavus, 671
anal srniffng (dogs), 248, 248
antimicrobials, 375
Aspergilfus fumigatus，439
anaphiase, 305
mode of action, 375
assessment, pre-ariaesthietic, 577-579
860
Index
assistance dogs, 7, 8, 8-9
characteristics, 669
release of, 829
assisted delivery
classification, 668
trarsportation, 829
cats,324
cultivation, 674-675
weaning, 830
dogs, 330, 331
media, 674
 Bat Coriservation Trust, 830
Associatiori of British Riding Schools (ABRS),
techriques, 674, 674-675
bathing
29
diseases see bacterial disease
dogs, 181-182
association trairing (horses), 277
disinfection, 157-159
horses, 185
astemizole, 375
gram-rnegative, 156, 670
Bayer (Clinistix), 343
astringents, 377
gram-positive, 156, 670
bean bags, 151
astrocytes, 61
pathogericity, 671-672
bedding, 150-152
ataractics, 380
invasiveress, 671
ferrets, 753
ataxia, 452
spore fommation, 672, 672
gerbils,7S3
atelectasis, equine araesthesia recovery,
toxigericity, 671-672
horses, 187
625
replication, 672-673, 673
ideal properties, 151-152
atipamezole, 581
conjugation, 673
small mammals, 753
atom, 718,718
shapes, 669
stables, 166, 167-168
atrioventricular (AV) node, 76
urine, microscopic examination, 709
types, 151
atrioveritricular valve, 76
bacterial disease, 670
see aiso specific types
atropine, cardiopulmorary resuscitatior,
birds, 801-804
behiaviour, 243-244
608,608,627
dogs, 670
developmert in reoratal/juvenile patierits,
attention deficit disorder (ADD, dogs), 251
horses, 670
357
aural ablation, 490-491
bactericides, 154
inmate, 244
aural haematoma, 489-490
badgers, 820-823
leamed, 244,244
auriculo-palpebral rerve block (horse
capture,820
ratural selectior prirciples, 243-244
anaesthesia), 628
examination, 820-821, 822
see aiso specific animais
autism, comparior arimals and, 7
feedirig, 821, 822, 823
 benzodiazepires
autoclave (steam urider pressure), 156,
handling, 820-821, 822
premedication, 581
528-529
housing, 821
horse, 614
uses, 529
cleaning, 821
reversal, 581
see aiso sterilization
cubs, orphiared, 822
bereavemert
autoromic rervous system, 66
heat, 821
children and, 4-5
autosomes, 302
orphiared cubs, 822, 822-823
comparior animals, 16
autotomy (tail loss)
parasites, 820,820
elderly people, arimal effect or, S
lizards, 293,785
presentation causes, 819
beta-agorists, 377
srakes, 78s
territorial fighting, 819, 820
β cells, paricreas, 72
autotrophs, 667
transportation, 820, 822
beta-blockers, 373
aviar1 flu, 676
tuberculosis, 820, 823
bile production, 88
aviari mycoplasmosis, 801
weaning,823
bioavailability, 362
aviaries, 791,793, 793-794
 Baermarri techrique, larvae detection in
biochemical screering, geretics, 312-313
bathis, 794
faeces, 663
biochemistry aralysers, 688
breeding in, 799
Bairn circuit, S94, S94, S9S
bird cages, 794, 795, 795
fumishings, 794
balarice, 69-70
breeding in, 799
hygiene, 795
balariced aralgesia, 582
hygiene,795
materials, 791, 793
ball bearing flow meter, 599
bird flu (avian flu), 676
perches, 794
bandages, 480
birds
shape, 791
barbering (small mammals), 761
advartages/disadvaritages of owriership,
sitinig, 791,799, 809
barbiturates, 586-587
752
size, 791
barium sulphate susperisior, 743
anatomy/physiology, 117-124
toys, 794
barkirig, excessive, 250
digestive system, 122-123
axon, 60
barley (equine diet), 233
integument, 119-120
Ayre's T piece, 593, S94
barrier rursing, 344, 417
muscular system, 119
azotaemia, 701
basal energy requirement (BER), 347
reproductive system, 123-124
calculation, 349
respiratory system, 120, 120-122
B
cats/dogs, 193
skeletor, 117-119
Babesia, 659, 698
basilic (brachial) vein injectior (birds), 297,
urinary system, 123
Babesia canis, 641, 659, 698
297
arimal husbardry, 791-805
babesiosis, 641
basking (reptiles), 771
aviaries see aviaries
baby bird mix, 840-841
basophils, 74
behiaviour, distress/pain associated, 807
bacilli, 668
bat(s), 829-830
breeding, 798, 799, 804-805
Bacillus anthracis, 671, 672
admissior reasors, 829
accommodation/envirorment, 799
bacteraemia, 678
capture, 829
diet,799
intraverious catheterization, 352
examinatior, 829, 830
egg laying, 799, 804-805
bacteria, 413-414, 668-675
feeding, 830
iricubation, 798, 799, 804-805
categorization, 156
housing, 829-830
rearing chicks, 805
cell structure, 669-670
legislation, 843
cages see bird cages
cell wall, drug th1erapy, 669-670
orphans, 830
common species, 116
Index 861
Index
birds (Cont'd)
anatomy/physiology, 92-93
blood tests, pre-ariaesthetic, 579
diseases/clinical conditiors in, 800-804,
emptying,93
blood trarisfusioris, 549-550
805
furiction in recumbent patients, 354-355
blood urea ritroger1 (BUN), 700-701
distress in1, 807, 808-809
injuries, 410
pre-anaesthetic test, 579
envirormental stimulation, 794
surgery, 498, 498-499
blood vessels, 78, 78
feedirg, 794, 795-799
 blarkets/towel bedding, 151
Blue Cross Befrierders Service, 16
gerieral tips, 797
blastocyst, 99
B lymphocytes, 428
hard bills, 796
bleeding disorders, 450-451
B-mode ultrasourd, 746
rrectar feeders, 797
blepharospasm, 406
boarding kerirels, legislation, 45
practical, 797
blirid spot, 68
see aiso housinig
raptors (birds of prey), 796, 797
bloat, 213-214
boas, 765
soft bills, 796, 797
blood, 691-704
bobbin flow meter, 599
in flight, 118
biochiemistry, 700-704
body brush, 182, 183
flighit withir the house, darigers of, 795
estimations, 702
body cavities, 54-55
fractures, S04
cats/dogs, 51, 73-75
linings, S5
hardling, 288-292
cells, 74, 74-75, 696
body condition, obesity risk factor, 207
hospitalized, 809
see aiso blood cell court
body coniditior scoring (BCs, dogs),
housing, 791, 793-795
clotting, 450-451
201-202,202
heat,799
collectior, 691-692
ageing, feeding of, 209
light, 799
comporierits,S48, 548-549
body language (horses), 268, 268, 272
see aiso aviaries; bird cages
compositior, 73-74
body posture
injectior of, 297, 297-298
cats, 256, 256
medication administration, 297-298
groups (cats), 315
dogs, 247, 247
rutrition, 79s-799
haemoglobin estimatioris, 700
body systems, medical conditions, 435-465
pain1 in, 807, 808-809
laboratory aralysis, 663-664
body temperature, anaesthesia ard, 604-605,
restraint, 288-292,837
packed cell volume/haematocrit, 699,
60S
 sex detemination, 291
699-700
bone(s), 52
small caged, restraint/hiardling, 288-289,
preservatior1, 693-696
growth, 56
289
samples, 661
bone marrow aspiration, 545
species kept as pets, 792-793
smear see blood smear
 bore plates, orthiopaedic implarts, 503-504,
water,794,797
types/groups, 548
504
wild see birds, wild
blood-brain barrier, 363
bosun's whistle, 600
see aiso individual species/types
 blood cell court
bots, 660-661
birds, wild, 835-842
abromal, 699
Bourdor gauge, 599
admissior1 reasoris, 835-836
differential white, 697, 697
bovine papilloma vinus, 677
beak shape, identification from, 839, 839
total red, 697
Bowie Dick tape, 529
capture, 836
total white, 697
Bowman's capsule, 90
examination, 836-838, 837
blood couritertractioris, dnug half-life, 365
box rest, equire diet, 240
feeding, 838, 839, 839
blood gas aralysis
brachial artery assessment, 395
orpharis, 840, 840-842, 841
araesthesia and, 605
brachial (basilic) vein injection (birds), 297,
 owls/birds of prey, 842
equine anaesthesia, 618
297
precocial fledglings, 842
Oxygen therapy moritoring, 541
 brachycephalic upper airway symdrome, 438
housing, 838-839
 blood/gas solubility coeffcient, volatile
Bradoon bit, 280, 280
clearing, 839
anaesthetic agerits, s89, s89-590
bradycardia, 445
heat, 839
blood glucose curves, 456
brain, 63
orphans, 840
blood pressure
crarial rerves, 6s, 66
owls/birds of prey, 842, 842
direct measuremert, 604
ventricular system, 64
precocial fledglings, 842
equine anaesthesia monitoring, 617, 618
breathing
legislation affecting, 843
indirect measurement, 604
assessment, 394-395
orpharis, 839-842
moritoring, 538
mecharics, 82
parasites, 836, 836
anaesthesia and, 604
breech birth (dogs), 330
precocial fledglings, 842
blood smear, 694-696
breed, obesity risk, 206
trarisportation, 836
abrommalities, 697-699
breeding, 319-335
birds of prey, 793
cell court, 699
see aiso individual animais/species
diumal species, 289-291, 290
colour, 698
Breeding ard Sale of Dogs (Welfare) Act
feeding,793,796,797
erythrocyte,697-698
(1999), 47
hoods, 289-290,290
inclusions, 698
 Breeding of Dogs Act (1973), 4S
injured, 842
leukocyte, 698, 698-699
British Dressage (BD), 25
noctumal species, 291
red cell parasites, 698
British Driving Society (BDS), 27
restraint/hardling, 289-291, 837
anaemia, 449
British Endurance Riding Association, 27
straps/jesses, 290, 290
examiriation, 684-686
British Equestrian Federatior (BEF), 24-25
bitches, 327, 328
faults, 695
British Equestrian Trade Association (BETA),
bitless bridle, 280
microscopic examinatior, 697-699
29
bits, 279-280, 280
platelet courits, 698
British Equine Trade Association, 21
bladder
preparation, 694, 694-695
British Equine Veterinary Association (BEVA),
age-related problems (cats), 211
stairning, 695-696
629
862
Index
British Everiting, 25-26
calcium charrel blockers, 374
bats, 829
British Hamess Racing Club, 27
calcium glucorate, 381
birds, wild, 836
British Horse Driving Trials group, 27
calcium oxalate
deer, 831-832
British Horseracing Board (BHB), 23
carire urolithiasis, 223
foxes, 824,825
British Horseracing Educatiori and Stardards
feline lower urinary tract disease, 223
grey squirrels, 834
(BHEST),23-24
calorific requirements, 849
hares, 827-828
British Horse Society (BHS), 24, 28
Campylobacter, 418
hedgehogs, 816
 British Show Jumping Associatiorn (BSJA), 24,
canal of Schlemm, 69
rabbits, wild, 827-828
25
canaries, 792
carbohydrates
British Small Arimal Veterinary Associatior,
breeding, 798
carcer, 219
13
feedinig, 792
cats/dogs, 195-196
British Veterinary Association, 13, 314-315
restraint/handlirg, 288-289
 intake during pregrarcy, 205
broker ribs, abuse indication, 14
cancellous bore, 52
diabetes mellitus, 217
bromine, 158
cancer, rutritioral requiremerts, 218-219
digestion, 87
bronchi
caricer cachexia, 219
horses, 229
birds, 121
Candida aibicans, 642, 713
liver disease, 221
mammals, 81-82
canire behaviour, 244-253
metabolism, 88
xa
bronchioles, 81-82
aggression, 12, 253, 261
carbolic acid, 158-159
bronchodilators, 377
antisocial/urnuly, 2s0-251
carboric anhydrase inhibitors, 378
DL
brood bitches, 327
barking excessively, 250
carcase disposal (horses), 630-631
Browre's tubes, 529
breed-specific, 245, 24S
carcinogens, 486
bnise, 396
care-soliciting, 249, 249
carciroma, 485
brumation (reptiles), 780
commuricative, 247-248
cardia, 84
brush bums,' 177
body posture, 247, 247
cardiac arrest, 447-448
buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT), 451
olfactior1, 247-248, 248
anaesthesia complication, 607-609
buccal pad, 83
vocalization, 248
horses, 627
budgerigars, 792
compulsive disorders, 253
sigris of, 607
breeding, 798
coprophagia, 252
treatmerit, 607-609, 608
feedirig, 792
developmerit of, 24s, 245-246
cardiac arrhythmias, equine anaesthiesia
restrairit/haridlirig, 288-289, 289
displacement/cornflict, 253
complication, 627
buffer (farriery tool), 188, 188
erivirorimental influences, 246,246
cardiac massage, 403
bulbourethral glard, 94
fears/phobias, 253
cardiac muscle, 50
bulk laxatives, 379
food guarding,252
cardiogenic shock, 401, 467
bulla osteotomy, 490-491
hyperactivity, 251
cardiopulmorary arrest, 403
bumble foot, 804, 838
 jumping on fumiture, 250
cardiopulmorary resuscitatior1
bumpers, 22
jumping up at people, 250
cardiac arrest during equine gerieral
burdle of His, 76
matemal, 249
anaesthesia, 627
bupivacaire, 583, 629
matirig, 248-249, 249
dnugs for, 608, 608-609
bupreriorphine, 373, S8S
neurotic,253
cardiovascular depressior, anaesthetic
bums/scalds, 397-399
patterris, 246-249
induction, 588
classifcation, 398
play, 246
cardiovascular parameters, araesthesia, 602,
complication, 399
problems, 250-255
602-603
lizards/sriakes, 781
pulling on the lead, 250
cardiovascular system
treatment,398
redirected, 253
ariatomy/physiology, 72-80
burs, 559-560, S60
reproductive, 248-249,249
blood, 73-75
butorpharol, s8s
separation anxiety, 252
fish, 130
butyropherores, 580
social, developmerit of, 249-250
heart, 75-77
stealing/raiding rubbish, 250
medical conditiors, 443-449
C
stereotypies, 11, 253
reptiles, 124
cadaver disposal, 39, 160
caririe leptospirosis, 421
care-soliciting behaviour (dogs), 249, 249
caecotrophy (rabbits), 111
carine parairfluenza vinus, 677
L-camitine
caecum, 89
canire parvovinus, 420-421
cats/dogs, 198,199
horses, 227
canire urolithiasis, 223
liver disease, 221
rabbits, 111
canker (birds), 836
camivorous lizards, 774, 774, 776, 776, 777
calcitonin, 72
carnon bone imaging, 741
carpal bones (horses), 137
calcium
Capillaria qerophila, 652
carpus, imaginig, 741
cats, 196
capillaries, 78, 78
carriage driving, 27
ageing,211
capillary refill time (CRT), 537
carrier gases iri ariaesthiesia, 588-589
deficiency (birds), 802
ariaesthesia and, 603
cartilage, 52
dogs, 196
assessmerit, 338
castration (orchidectomy), 12, 498
ageing,210
hydratior1 status, 350
casts, 502-503
intake during pregnarcy, 205
capnography, 538, 605, 618
birds of prey, 796, 797
puppies feeding, 201, 202
Capreofus capreofus (roe deer), 831
urine, microscopic examination, 708, 708
supplemerits
capsules, 371
cat(s)
lizards, 775
 capture techriques
aratomy/physiology, 49-108
tortoises, 778
badgers, 820
Ancylostoma fubaeforme,648
Index
863
Index
cat(s) (Cont'd)
tomcat
cytoplasm, S0
antiparasitic products, 645
 catheterizatior techrique, 470
diversity, 49
behaviour/behavioural problems see feline
studcat, 321, 322,322
division, 302-306
behiaviour
see aiso cat breeding
 DNA replicatior, 303-304
 blood grouping, 315
tortoiseshell, 310,310
meiosis,302-306,30S
blood vessels, 77
Toxocara cati, 647
membrare, S0
breed developmert, 254
tube feeding, 349
mitosis, 302-306, 304
breeding see cat breeding
verepuricture, 263-264,264
rucleus, 50, 301
castration (orchidectomy), 498
cephalic vein, 263-264, 264
stnucture, 49-s0, 302
cathieters, 469
jugular vein, 264, 264
cellular casts, 708
chromosomes,306
viral disease, 677
cellular respiration, 80
classification by habitat, 25$
see aiso entries beginning feline
central heating, arimal housing, 150, 150
clirical parameters, 338
cataracts, 492-493
cenitral lire placemert, intraverous access,
coat types, 180, 180
cat breeding, 319-326
543-544
domestication, 2, 254, 319
behaviour, 320-321, 321
ceritral rervous system (CNS)
elimination problems, 258-259
coat colour, 320
anatomy, 63-65
inappropriate, 259
introductior of prospective parings, 322
depression in araesthesia, 601-602, 609
litterbox training,258
mating process, 322
protection, 64
spraying,258-259
practices, 321
stimularits,377
energy requirements, 193
queen,323
ceritral venous pressure (CVP), S37-538
environmertal temperature, 149, 149
aftercare, 322
method, 538
feeding, 191-212
mating of, 322
moritoring in araesthesia, 604
adults, 206-208
selection of, 321
ceritrifuge, 687-688
elderly, 211-212
selective, 319-325
centromere, 302
kitterns, 204
strategies, 319-321
certrosome, S0
pregriarcy/lactation, during, 204
stud cat, 321,322,322
cephalic vein
feral, 13
see oiso kitters
fluid therapy, 474, 476
gestation period, 102
catchinig horses, 272-273
veriepuricture, S42
grooming see groominig, cats/dogs
catheterization
cats, 263-264, 264
hair growth, influercial factors, 180-181
arterial, 544-545
dogs, 262-263
handling, 260, 263-264
epidural, s50
horses, 621
healthy clirical parameters, 85s-856
initraosseous, 54s, S4S
small mammals, 296
human interaction, 321, 321
intraverous, 351
Ceratophyllus gallinae, 636
infectious diseases, 423-425
complications, 352
cercaniae, 657
intestinal rematodes, 644
fluid administration, 351
cerebellum, 63
intubation, 525
mairteriarice, 351
cerebral aqueduct, 63
labour stages, 324
 percutarieous vascular (Seldiriger
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 64, 713-714
lifting, 263
technique), S43
cervix (cats/dogs), 97
resting behaviour, 323, 323
techrique, 469-470
cestodes (tapewoms), 644, 654, 654-656
rutritior, 191-212
urirary see urirary cathieterization
birds, 800-801
see aiso rutrition, cats/dogs
vein, 476
treatmerit, 12
olfaction, 254
cathieters
chiameleor1, 293, 767
parturition, 103-104, 323-325
arterial, 546
chariging rooms, operating theatre, 508
assisted delivery, 324
care, 469
check valve, 600
completion, 325, 325
indwellirig, 342-343
cheloria, 124
equipment for, 323-324
irisertion, 342, 342
breeding, 767-769
first stage, 104
mairiteriarice, 342-343, 545-546
diseases/clirical conditiors in, 786-791
homoral changes, 103
urinary, 468, 468-469
distress, behaviour associated with, 807
incorrect presenitation, 10s
cathode, 720
feedirng, 767-769
secord stage, 104
cations, 54
 pain, behaviour associated with, 807
sigris of, 103-104, 324
cat scratch fever, 418
species kept as pets, 767-769
third stage, 104
cattery
see aiso terrapir(s); tortoise(s); turtle(s)
pedigree, 319,320
 boarding, legislatior, 46
chemical bums, 398
pregriancy, 99-104, 323
requiremerits, 152
chemical indicator strips, 529
queer1
size,152,152
chemical restraint (small mammals), 283
catheterization technique, 470
see aiso housing
chemical solutions, 528
see aiso cat breeding, queer1
cauda equina (cats/dogs), 65
chiemical substarices, hardling rules, 36
restrainit, 263-264
caudal block (horses), 628
chemical waste disposal, 161, 683
for examination, 263
caval syndrome, 653
chiemosis, 407
sexual maturity, 322
cell cycle, 303, 304
chemothierapy, 463
showing of, 326
cell division, 302-306
dnugs, 464
social groups, 255
cells, 49-56
tumours, 488
solitary, 25S
body, 60
chest drairn, pneumothorax, 500-501
territories, 25s, 257
cell cycle, 303, 304
chest imaging, positioning for, 736
themoregulation, 254
cellular organization, 301
chewing, destructive (cats), 259
ticks, 641
chromosomes, 302, 303
Cheyletiella, 639, 639
864
Index
cheyletiellosis, 418
clawing, commuricatior in cats, 256-257
colloid osmotic pressure (COP), 547
Cheyrie-Stokes respiratior, 339-340
claws (cats/dogs), 107-108
colloids, 474
Chick-Martin test, 156
cleaning/disinfection, 153-156
artificial, S47
chicks, rearing, 805
accommodation, 153-156, 154
overinfusiorn, 477
chief cells, 86
areas requirirg, 154
colon, 89
children
cathieter mainiteriarce, 546
horses, 228
comparior arimal bereavement, 4-5
dentistry irstrumeritatior/equipment,
colostrum
development, comparion animals, 4
560-561
cats, 325
eutharasia, preserce at, 4-5
enivirorimerit, 153-156, 157-159
hedgehogs, 818
chinchilla(s)
equipmerit, of, 154
wild mammals, 813-814
digestive system, 114
equipment used for, 155
colubrids, 76S
restraint/hardling, 287
storage, 155
columnar cells (cats/dogs), S1
sexing,286
glassware,684
coma, 402
see aiso small mammals
importarce of, 154
combs, groomirg (cats/dogs), 177-178, 178
chipmunk(s)
instruments, S13
commands
digestive system, 113-114
kermel urit, 1ss, 1ss-156
dogs, 13
restraint/haridling, 283, 285-286
microbe susceptibility, 156
horses, 273
xa
sexinig, 286
Operating theatre, 508
commersals, 667
see aiso small mammals
principles of, 154-155
commercial test kits, 688-689
DL
Chlamydia, 414, 670
skin, 157-159
commercial waste disposal, 159
Chlamtydia psittaci, 670
stable materials requiring, 174, 175
commumication
chlamydiosis, 418
stables, 172, 174, 175
cats see feline behiaviour, commuricative
birds, 801
wourd maragemerit, 480
dogs see carire behiaviour, commuricative
cats, 423-424
Cleveland bay, 27
horses see equine behaviour,
chlorhexidire, 157-158, 528
clirical waste
commuricative
chloride, 196
defnition, 159
neonatal/juvenile patients, 357
chlorine, 158
disposal, 160, 160, 683
patierit care, 354
chlorofom, 590
legislatior, 38-39
compact bone, 52
chloroxylerols, 159
high-risk, 160
companion arimals, 1-18
chlorpheniramine, 375
types,160
berieficial effects, 3-5
chondrocytes, 52
Clinistix (Bayer), 343
bereavement, 4-S, 16
chondroitin sulphate, 199
clipper blades, 177
child developmert effects, 4
chordae terdineae, 76
clipping, 181
elderly people, benefits to, S
chorioallantois, 100-101
dog/cat groominig, 179, 179-180
euthariasia, 14-16
chorion, 100
horses, 184, 185-186
hospices, 7
chorionic villi, 100
preoperative care, 523
hospitals, 7
Chorioptes equi, 639
cloaca,122-123
humar health effects, 3, 3-4
chromatids, 302
cloning, 315-316
old people's homes, 5, 7
chromatin, 301
horses, 29-30
physiological bernefits, 3-4, 5
chromosomes, 301, 302, 303
Clostridium, 671, 672
prisoris, 6-7
cats, 306
coach horses, 27
psychological berefits of, 3
defects of, 311-312
coarse mixes, equine diet, 234
schiools, 7
defnition, 307
coat colour
 service dogs, 8, 8-9
dogs, 303,306
cat breeding, 320
service of man, 8
X, 310
inheritarce, 309
sport, use in, 8
chroric obstructive pulmorary disease
coat types (dogs), 180, 180
therapeutic effects, S-7, 6
(COPD, horses), 167
cobras, 292
uses of, 7-9
chronic renal failure (CRF), 219-220
cocci, 668
see aiso pet owrership
clirical sigrs, 219-220
coccidiosis (small mammals), 761
compressed-air-driven unit/machirie, S13,
diagriosis, 220
coccidiostat, 154
559,560
dietary maragement, 220
coccygeal artery, 396
compulsive disorders (dogs), 253
chyle, 79
cochlea, 70
computed tomography (CT), 748, 748
chylothorax, 439
cockatiels, 792
coriceritrates (horse's diet), 232-234
ciliary body, 69
breedinig, 798
compounds, 233, 233-234
cimetidine, 373
feeding, 792
feeding, 239
cinchocaine, 583
restraint/hardling,289
rutrient coritent, 233
Cinmamon Trust, S
sex determiration, 291
straights, 232-233,233
circle system, rebreathing araesthetic
cockatoos
conceptus, 100
circuits, S92, 592-593, 593
restraint/handling, 289
cories, 68
horses, 623, 623
sex detemiration, 291
 Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative
circuit breakers, 39-40
codoris, 308
Equine Fatalities (CEPEF), 612
circulatory system, 77-78
Coenurus cerebralis cysts, 656
conflict behaviour (dogs), 253
cisapnide, 374
cold sterilization, 157
corgerital defects, 310-312
classical conditioning, 244
colic (horses), 168
conjurictiva, 69
horses, 277-278
colitis, 214
conjunctivitis, 406
claw fold, 107
collapse, 402-403
corirective tissue, S1
Index865
Index
consent, equine anaesthesia, 611-612
critical care, rutritioral requirements, 222
housing, 832
coristipatiorn, 214, 343, 344-345, 460
crocodilia, 124
clearing, 832
cats, ageing, 211
crop (birds), 122
heat, 832
 recumbent patierits, 354
crop tube
orpharis, 832-834
small mammals, 764
bird use, 296, 297
trarisportation, 831-832
contour feathers, 120
small mammal use, 295
types, 831
conitrolled area, radiation, 42
cross-couritry everits, 2s, 26
wearing,833-834
controlled drug disposal, 161
cruelty see welfare
Deer Act (1991), 843
Coritrolled Waste Regulatiors (1992), 159
crush cage (cats), 263
defecation, 343-345
Coritrol of Pollutior (Amerdment) Act
cryoprecipitate, 549
stimulation in orphiars
(1974), 38
cryotherapy, tumours, 488-489
badgers, 823
Coritrol of Substarices Hazardous to Health
cryptorchid, 93
deer, 833
Regulatioris (2002), 35-36, 36
cryptosporidiosis, 418
fox cubs, 82s
contusion, 396
Cryptosporidium, 659, 662
grey squirrels, 835
corivalescerice (horses), 238
crystalloids, 474, 546-547
rabbits/hares, 828
rutritior requirements, 237
overinfusion, 477
wild mammals, 813
Corivention of Intermatioral Trade in
uses, 475
see aiso faeces
Erdangered Species of Wild Flora ard
crystals, urine, 709-710, 709-711
deferent duct, 94
Fauna (CITES) (1973), 46
Ctenocephalides canis, 635
degloving injury (gerbil), 285
convulsions, 451, 452
Ctenocephalides felis, 635, 636
dehydration, 471-474
coordinators, 60
cubes (horse's diet), 233-234
assessmerit, 350,471-472
coots, orphar1 care, 842
cuboidal cells, S1
clirical assessmert, 472
copper
Culicoides, 637, 638
clirical sigrs, 350
cats/dogs, 197,203
culture media, bacteria, 674
estimating, 846
liver disease, 221
curb bit, 280, 280
horses, 228-229
coprophagia,343,346
curettes, 557,Ss7
mixed deficits, 471
dogs, 252
curries, dog/cat grooming, 178, 178
packed cell volume, 472-473
horses, 228
curry comb, 182,183
primary water deficits, 471
foals, 279
Cushirg's disease (hyperadrerocorticalism),
thierapy see fluid thierapy
rabbits, 111
454, 457-458, 458
 deletiori geretic defects, 312
core area (cats), 255
cyarosis, mucous membrare, 537
8 cells, paricreas, 72
corium, 10s-106
cyathostomes, 6s0, 650-651
dematting, 181
horses, 138
cyclooxygenase, 582
Demodex, 640,641,643,711
comea, 69
cyproheptadire (Periactin), 347, 375
demulcent poisoring, 400
injury/damage, 406, 491-492
cystine, canine urolithiasis, 223
dendrites, 61
comeal reflex, araesthesia arid, 601
cystitis, 35s, 442
dendrons, 61
coronavinus (cats), 677
cystoceritesis, 341, 443, 705
deritrogeratior, rebreathing araesthetic
corpus callosum, 63
cystotomy, 498-499
circuits, S92
corpus luteum (cats/dogs), 96
cytokinesis, 304, 305
dental chart, 566
corticosteroids,72,373, 378
cytoplasm, 301
cats/dogs, 567-570
analgesia, 583
cytosol, 301
derital explorer, 556
vaccine adverse reactioris, 432
cytotoxic dnugs, 463, 464
derital fommulae (rabbits), 111
corticotrophir-releasing factor (CRF), 72
hardlirg precautioris, 464
derital mirror, S56
COSHH regulations, S12, 681
reducing contamination risk, 377
dental plaque, 575
coughing, 345-346, 436-437
tumours, 488
derital problems
history takirig, 436
disease, rutritional requiremerts, 217
nursing care, 437
D
rabbits, 110
postoperative complicatioris, S26
Dama dama (fallow deer), 831
small mammals, 764
Coulter counter machine, 697
Damatinia equi, 634
denitistry, 555-575
couriter-coriditioring trairing (horses), 278
dandy brush, 182, 182
araesthiesia, 561-563
coupage, 439
Darigerous Dogs Act (1991, 1997), 44
recovery, 563
cranial cavity, SS
Darigerous Wild Arimals Act (1976), 46
instrumertatior/equipment, Ss6,
crarial rerve reflex, araesthiesia, 601-602
Darwin, Charles, 243
556-561
cranial nerves, 6S, 66
day patients, 145
care/mairiteriarice, 513, 560-561
cranium, 64
death vs urcorisciousness, 402
oral examiriation/recording, 563-566
‘crash box,' equine anaesthesia, 626
debridemerit, wourd, 480
see aiso entries beginning periodontal
Crash trolley, equipment, S53
decorgestants, 377
deoxyriborucleic acid see DNA
creams, 372
decubital ulcers
Dermacentor, 659
creatinine, 701
postoperative complications, S26
dermal elasticity, hydratior1 status
pre-ariaesthietic test, 579
recumbent patienits, 355
assessmernt, 350
cremaster muscle, 94
deep litter system, mucking out, 174
Dermanyssus gallinae, 638
crematior, horse carcasses, 630
deer, 830-834
dermatitis, riematode-related, 643
Crenosoma vulpis, 652
admission reasons, 831, 832, 833
dermatophyte test medium (DTM), 713
cribbing, 170, 271
capture, 831-832
 dermatophytosis see ringworm
mib-biting, 170, 271
examination, 832-833
(dermatophytosis)
Criollo ponies, 26
feedirig, 832, 833-834
dermis (cats/dogs), 10s-106
866
Index
demisol, 355
discomfort definition, 805
brain sectioris, 63
deser1 (horses), 278-279
disease defmition, 153
breeding, 326-334
desersitization trairing (horses), 278-279
disease spread
brood bitch, 327
desflurane, S91
control, arimal housing (cats/dogs), 153,
legislation, 45, 47
desmopressin, 379
153-159
mating, 328
detergent, defimition, 154
factors affecting, 153
selective, 326
dexamethiasorie suppression test, 457-458
prevention, arimal housing, 153
strategies, 319-321, 326
dexamethiasore tests, 704
disinfectarit, 417
stud dog, 327,327
dextraris, S47
alcohols, 157
castratior (orchidectomy), 498
dextrose, pareriteral feedirg, S52
aldehydes, 157
chiromosomes, 303, 306
diabetes insipidus (DI), 454, 458
definition, 154
clinical parameters, 338
diabetes mellitus, 453-457, 45S
diguarides, 157-158
coat colour inheritance, 309
clinical signis, 454
dilution, 156
coat types, 180, 180
laboratory tests, 456
efficacy, factors affecting, 156
commands, 13
maragement, 457
halogeris, 158-159
digestive system, 83
nutritional requirements, 217-218
ideal properties, 156
distemper, 421,677
treatment, 456
quatemary ammonium compourds, 159
domestication, 2, 244-245
xa
diaphragmatic rupture, 409-410, 484-485
selection, 156
domiriarice, 246, 246,249
diarrhoea, 343-344, 459, 459-460
types, 157-159
drying,182
DL
Cryptosporidium, 659
dislocatiors, 505-506
eliminatior problems, 251-252
cyathostomes, 651
displacement behaviour (dogs), 253
excitement urination, 252
nursing corisideratiors, 344
 Disposal of Poisorous Waste Act (1972),
inappropriate, 251-252
puppies, hand-reared, 333
730
marking, 248, 252
small initestirial vs large, 460
 dissemirated intravascular coagulatior1 
submissive uriration, 252
whipwoms, 650
(DIC), 468
energy requirements, 193
diarthrosis joint, 57
dissociative anaesthetics, 588
enivirorimerital temperature, 149, 149
diastema, 110
distal extremity imaging, positioring in1,
evolution, 244-245
diazepam, 581
738
examination
ketamine and, 588
 dorsopalmar/plartar and caudocranial.
lateral recumbarcy restraint, 262, 262
Dictyocaulus anfieldi, 652
738, 738
stariding restraint, 262
diercephalon, 63
mediolateral, 738, 738
feeding, 191-212
diet, balarced, 420
distemper
adults, 206-208
dietary management
dogs, 421, 677
elderly,209-211
carine urolithiasis, 223
small mammals, 762
pregnancy/lactation, during, 204-206
diarrhoea, 344
distichiasis, 493
 puppies see puppies, feedirng
equire rutritior, 228-230
distress, 10-11
feral, 13
feline lower urirary tract disease, 223
assessmert, 806
fighiting, 8
heart failure, 447
birds, 807, 808-809
gestation, 328
diethyl ether, 590
definition, 805-806
gestation period, 102
Diff-Quik stain, 696
exotic species, 80s-808
grooming see grooming, cats/dogs
digestion, 87, 87, 88
reptiles, ir1, 807, 808
hair growth, influencial factors, 180-181
rabbits, 111
small mammals, in, 806, 808
handling,260-263
digesti ve system/tract
wildlife, injured, 811
heart auscultation, 338
absorption, 88
diuresis, heart failure, 447
heartwoms, 653
aratomy/physiology, 83-89
diuretics, 378-379
hierarchies, 249
cats/dogs, 83, 83-89
DNA, 50, 307-308
hip dysplasia, 314
ferrets, 115
double helix, 307, 307
housing, 145
fishi, 131
envirorimenital influence on, 307-308
see aiso housing: kerinel(s)
horses, 142, 142-144, 143, 225-228
genes, 307
infectious diseases, 420-422
size/functior, 142
history of, 306-307
intestinal rematodes, 644
lizards, 126
mitochordrial, 310
intubation, S2s
medical conditions, 458-462
replication,303-304,307, 307
kenmel requirements,152,152
rabbits, 110-111, 112
sexing (birds), 291
see aiso kerinel(s)
roderits, small, 113-114
techrologies, 313
lifting of, 181, 261, 261-262
srnakes, 127
(s)8op
lymph nodes, 79
tortoises/turtles/terrapins, 127
adenoviruses, 677
male catheterization, 468, 470
digital image,728-729
anatomy/physiology, 49-108
nesting behaviour, 329
digoxin, 365, 373
Ancylostoma caninum, 648
nommal parameters, 8ss-856
diguarides, 157-158
ariteriatal care, 328-329
rutritior see nutrition, cats/dogs
diplococci, 668
antiparasitic products, 644
parturitior/whelping, 103-104, 329-331
diploid cells, 302
approaching, 260-261
assisted delivery, 330, 331
Dipylidium caninum, 636, 655, 65S
assistarice, 7, 8, 89
completion, 331, 332
Dirofilaria immifis, 638, 653
bathirg, 181-182
dystocia, 330
disabled people, dogs traired to assist, 7, 8,
behaviour/behavioural problems see canine
early sigris, 329-330
8-9
behaviour
first stage, 104
dischiarge, respiratory system, 439
bitch catheterizatior, 468-469, 470
homoral charges, 103
Index867
Index
(p,uo)(s)8op
factors effectirig, 362-363
E
incorrect presertation, 10s
administration, 362-363
ear(s), 407-408
inertia, 330
adverse reactioris, 367-369, 369
abscess (tortoises/terrapirs), 789
preparation, 329
classification, 368
aratomy, 69-70, 70
second stage, 104
affnity/competitiveriess, 366-367
extemal, 69
sigris, 103-104
agorist/aritagorist effects, 366
extermal injuries, 407-408
stages, 329-330
categores of vet medicine, 383
inmer, 70
third stage, 104
clierit compliance, 390-391
initernal injuries, 408
timing, 330
factors affectinig, 390
lateral wall resectior (Zepps procedure),
paw lifting, 249,249
 dependercy, companior arimals ard, 7
490
pedigrees, genetic diseases in, 2
disperising, 386-388
middle, 69-70
pregnaricy, 99-104, 328-329
coritairers, 387, 388
rabbits, 109
racing, 8
labeling medication, 388, 388
surgery, 489-491
respiratory tract, 80
procedure, 386-388
ear caral (extemal auditory meatus), 69
restrainit, 260,260-262,262
disposal of, 388-389
ear drum (tymparic membrare), 69
season,248
distribution, 363
ear mites (small mammals), 762
service,7,8,8-9
dosage, 848
ecdysis, 780
sexual maturity, 327
calculatiors, 381
Echinococcus equinus, 656
showing of, 333-334
dowriregulation/upregulation, 367
Echinococcus ganulosus, 656, 656
skeletor, S7
eliminatior, 364-366
Echinococcus multilocularis, 656
sports, 8
factors affecting, 365-366
ectoparasites, 414, 633, 634-643
Taenia, 6SS
half-life/therapeutic rarige, 365
birds, 800
territories,248,252
fomulations, 370, 371-372
diagniosis, 643
ticks, 641
absorptior, 362-363
horses, 185
Toxocara canis, 64s-646
half-life, 36S
irisects, 634-638
Trichuris vulpis, 649-650
 Health and Safety recommerdatiors for
lizards/srakes, 783-784
Uncinaria stenocephala, 648
handling, 387
ectoparasiticides, 376
vaccinatioris, 328
initeractioris, 367-369, 369
ectopic cilia, 493-494
verepurcture, 262-263
defimitions, 368
ectopic ureter, 442
viral disease, 677
dnug metabolism, 364
ectropion, 493
walkirig, 3, 3
licerising of, 381-383
effectors, 60
see aiso entries beginning canine
metabolism, 364
egg binding see dystocia
dog agility, 8
factors affecting, 364
egg laying (birds),799, 804-805
dogfighits, 8
species variation, 364
eggs (reptiles), 780
Dog Fouling of Land Act (1996), 44
molecule shapes, 366
Eimeria,657,657
dogs, pregnancy see pregnanicy, cats/dogs
 pharmacodyramics see pharmacodynamics
ejaculatory failure (horses), 268
domesticatior, 1-2, 2
pharmacokinetics, 361-365
elastic cartilage, 52
cats, 2,254, 319
prescribing see prescribing drugs
elbow
dogs,2,244-245
residue in humar food chain, 365
dysplasia, geretic screening, 314-315
domestic fowl, 792
specificity/potency/efficacy, 367
imaging,741,742
dominance (dogs), 246,246, 249
toxicity, geriatric patients, 358
scoring systems, 736
dominant body postures (dogs), 247, 247
types, 370, 373-381
elderly people, comparion arimal berefits,
dominant X-linked genes, 310
see aiso individual types
5,7
dorkeys, nutrtion requirements, 238
veterinary legislation, 382
electrical bums, 398
 Doppler flow blood pressure detection, 604
 see aiso pharmacology
electrical circuits, 39, 39-40
Dopram (doxapram), 497
ducks
electrical defibrillation, 609
 dorsal tail vein verepuncture
 orphan care, 842
electrical eriergy, 719
(tortoises/terrapins), 299
restraint/handling, 291, 837
electrical equipmerit, kerirel services, 149
dosemeter, radiation exposure, 42
sex determinatior, 291
electrical safety, 39-40
double bridle, 280, 280
duoderum, 87
basics, 39
doughrut bardage, 355
duplication geretic defects, 312
circuit breakers, 39-40
doves, 792
dura mater, 64
electrical circuits, 39, 39-40
breeding, 798
'duty of care, 10
portable appliarice testing, 39
feedinig, 792
dyschezia, 343, 495
Electricity at Work Regulatiors (1989),
dowm feathers, 120
dysecdysis
39-40
doxapram (Dopram), 497
lizards, 78s-786
electrocardiography (ECG), S38, 603
drapes, 530, S31
sriakes, 777, 78s-786
equire araesthiesia moritoring, 617
Draschia megatoma, 643
dyspr1oea, 339, 399,437-438
heart disease, 448
draught dogs, 8
rursing care, 438
electrolyte analysers, 688
draught horse shoes, 187, 188
dystocia
electrolytes, S4
dressage, 25, 26
birds, 804
critical care, 222
dressings, wound management, 480, 481
dogs, 330
 electromagretic spectrum, radiography, 718,
drip, 475-476
lizards, 782
718-719
drops, 372
srnakes, 782
electroric aralysers, 688
dnug(s)
tortoises/terrapins, 790-791
electronic haematology machires, 697
absorption, 361-363
dysuria, 341, 410
elevators, 558, SS9
868
Index
eliminatior1
eriteritis,214
tactile, 270, 270
geriatric patients, 358
birds, 801
visual, 270
reoriatal/juvernile patients, 357
enterohepatic circulation, 366
vocalization, 269
patient care, 340-346
enterotomy, 495
cribbing, 170, 271
problems see specific animais
enitropior, 493,493
crib-biting, 170, 271
elimiratior diet tract, 216
erucleatior, 492
extririsic factors, 269
embolism, intraverous catheterizatior, 352
erivirormerital factors
food ard water associated, 268
embryo,100
coughing, 437
reproductive, 268-269
germ layers, 101
DNA influerice, 307-308
self-mutilation, 271
Envirorimental Health Officers, 34
self preservatior1 ard survival, 267-268,
emesis, 459
Ervirormerital Protection Act (1990), 38-39,
268
emetic, 345
159
socialization, 269
endemic, defmition, 678
 enzyme-lirked immuriosorbent assay
stable vices, 169-170
endocardiosis, 445
(ELISA), 430, 688
stereotypies, 11, 270-271
endocarditis, 445
eosinophils, 74
weaving, 169, 169-170, 271
endocardium, 75
ependymal, 62
windsucking, 170, 271
erdocrine system, 71-72
epicardium, 75
equine general ariaesthesia, 618-622
xa
disorders, 453-458, 454-456
epidemic, defimition, 678
artifcial ventilators, 625
glards/homones, 71
epidemiology, defimition, 678
cardiac arrest during, 627
DL
endometrium, 96
epidermis (cats/dogs), 105
circuits, 623-625
endoparasites, 414-415, 633, 644-664
epididymis, 94
circle,623,623
arthropods, 660-661
epidural ariaesthiesia, 584
to-arid-fro, 623-624, 624
birds, 800-801
horses, 628-629
complicatiors/emergencies, 626-627
cestodes, 654-656
epidural catheterization, S50
equipment, 623-625
diagn1osis, 661-664
epiglottis, 81
endotracheal intubation, 619, 620, 623
laboratory aralysis, 662-664
epilepsy, 451-452
facemasks, 623
lizards/sriakes, 783
clirical sigris, 404, 451
facilities for, 619-620
rematodes, 644-654
first aid, 403-404
field ariaesthiesia, 618, 619
see aiso riematodes
telephore advice, 404
foals, 624, 624-625
tortoises/terrapirs, 789
treatment, 452
health and safety issues, 621-622
trematodes, 657
epirephrire see adreralire
storage of ariaesthietic, 622
endoparasiticides, 376
epiphora, 406
withdrawal periods, 622
endoplasmic reticulum, S0
epistaxis, 438, 438-439
induction, 618-619
endosteum, S2
rursing care, 439
agennts,620-621
endotoxic shock, 401, 467, 671
epithelial cells, 49
'free-fall,' 619
eridotoxiris, 671-672
urine, microscopic examination, 708
'gate' techrique, 619
endotrachieal intubation
epithelial tissue, S0-S1, S1
tilting operating table, 619
advaritages/disadvaritages, S96
equine ambularce, 277
inhalatiori agerts, 622,622-623
cuff oveririflation, 626
equine ariaesthesia, 611-631
intravenous agents, 622
dertal procedures, S61-562
agent determiriatior, 612-613
intraverous catheter placemerit, 621, 621
equirne general araesthesia, 619, 620, 623
assessmert for, 611-612
lifting/positioning of horse, 620
kinking of tube, 626
corisent, 611-612
mairiteriarice, 622-625
procedure, 597
death rate, 612
recovery, 625,62$
tube removal, 525
depth indication, 617
respiratory arrest during, 626-627
tube types, 597
drug preparation, 614
respiratory obstruction during, 626
see aiso airway mariagemert
 gerieral see equire gerieral ariaesthiesia
resuscitation equipment/dnugs, 626
endotrachieal tubes, S96, 596-597, S97
local see local ariaesthesia, horses
theatre araesthesia, 619-620
endurarice evenits (horses), 26, 27
monitoring,615-618,617
equire herpes vinus, 426-427, 677
Erdurance GB, 27
equipment, 616-618
equine industry, 19-31
Erdurarce Horse and Pony Society, 27
routine, 616
associatioris, 28-29
eriemas, 344-345, 372
 owrier preparatior/irstructioris, 611
carriage driving, 27
equipmert, 344
premedication, 613, 614-615
cross-courtry, 2s, 26
eriergy, dietary
preoperative care, 611-613
current, 20, 20-21
cats/dogs, 192-194
risk classification, 612
dressage, 25, 26
bulk-limited, 192
equire aratomy/physiology, 133-144
endurarce events, 26, 27
 intake during pregnancy, 205
digestive system, 142-144
evernting, 25-26
puppy feeding, 201-202
muscular system, 138-142
future developments, 29
requiremenits, 192, 193-194
skeletal system, 133-138, 134
historical perspective, 19-20
geriatric patient requirements, 358
appendicular, 136-138
hunter trials, 26-27
horses, 229
axial, 133-134, 136
mapping, 20, 20
liver disease, 221
equire behiaviour, 267-272
organization cooperation, 30
enflurane, 590
aggression, 272
polo, 26
enteral feeding, SS1, SS1
body lariguage, 268, 268, 272
racing see horse racing
eriterectomy, 495
breed-specific, 269
service sector, 29
enteric-coated tablets, 370
commuricative, 269-270
showing.27
eriteric disease (birds), 801
olfaction, 269, 270
show jumping, 25, 26
Index869
Index
equine industry (Cont'd)
position
rieoratal/juverile patierts, 357
sports horses, 24-28
anaesthesia and, 601
 recumbent patierits, 354
team chasing, 26-27
hydratior status assessmert, 350
see aiso nutritior; individual animais/species
equine influenza, 427
preoperative care, 523
feedinig troughs, 169
equine viral arteritis, 427
rabbits, 109
feed room, 164
equipment
secretions (horses), 638
feet
dentistry, S56-561
stnucture,68, 68-69
horses, 138
sterilization, 530-531
imaging of, 740, 740
see aiso specific equipment/procedures
eyeball injuries, 406-407
Felicola subrostratus, 634
Erinaceus europaeus see hedgehog(s)
prolapse, 407, 491
Felirne Advisory Bureau, 315
erythrocytes, 49, 74, 74
eyelids
felire behaviour, 254-260
blood smear abr1omalities, 697-698
anatomy, 69
aggressior, 256, 256, 259-260
cats/dogs, 49,74, 74
injuries, 407
breeding requirements, 320-321, 321
cell court, 697
eye protection, derital procedures, S62
chewing, destructive, 259
urine, microscopic examination, 708
communicative, 256-257
erythropoiesis, 74
F
body posture, 256, 256
Eschenichia cofi, 669, 671
facial expression (cats), 256, 256
clawing/scratching, 256-257
ethics, 9-12
faecal flotation (semi-quartitative method),
facial expression, 256, 256
see aiso welfare
663
olfaction, 257
ethylene 0xide, 527-529
faecal pellets (birds of prey), 796, 797
visual, 256, 256-257
etorphine, S8s
faeces
vocalization, 257
eumelanin pigment, 320
 commurication
development of, 254-255
eustachiar tube, 69
dogs, 247
fear, 256, 256
eutharasia, 14-16
horses,269
fighting, 12
child preserice at, 4-5
coprophiagia see coprophagia
matermal, 257
comparior arimals, 14-16
disposal of, 38-39
mating,322
pain/stress relief, 807
dog, 12
pattems, 2ss, 25s-257
procedure, 16
samples, 661
play, 255
reasons for, 1s, 1s-16
aralysis, 662-663
predation, 255
wildlife, injured, 843
 see aiso defecation
problems, 257-260
eventing, 25-26
falcons, 793
reproductive, 257
excipient, 368
restraint/hiardling, 289-291, 290
scratchirng objects, 259
excitement urination (dogs), 252
fallow deer (Dama dama), 831
social interactions, 257
exercise, heart failure and, 447
Fam Arimal Welfare Council, 9-10
stereotypies, 11
exertional rhabdomyolysis, 277
farriery, 187-189
vocalization problems, 257-258, 322
exfoliative cytology, tumour diagriosis, 487
farriery tools, 188-189
felire cororavinus, 677
exocrine pancreatic insufficiericy (EPl), 460
Fasciofa hepatica, 657
feline herpes virus, 677
exotic equids, rutritior requirements, 238
fasting, reptile brumatior preparation, 780
felire hyperaesthesia, 11
exotic species
fat, dietary, 195
feline immurodeficiency vinus (FIV),
advartages/disad varitages of owrership,
caricer, 219
424-425,677
7S2
diabetes mellitus, 217
feline infectious araemia (FIA), 424
aratomy/physiology, 109-117
digestion, 88
feline infectious peritoritis (FIP), 424
animal husbardry, 751-805
dogs, ageing, 210
feline influeriza vinus (FIV), 676, 688
distress in, 805-808
horses, 229
felirie leukaemia vinus (FeLV), 424, 677, 688
medicatior admiristratior, 295-300
liver disease, 221
felire lower uririary tract disease (FLUTD),
pain, 805-808
fat metabolism, 88
211,223-224
restraint/hardling, 283-294
fatty acids
feline paravinus, 677
vitamin/mirerals, 380
absorption, 88
feline polycystic kidrey disorder, 312, 315,
welfare, 805-808
deficiericy, 216-217
31S
see aiso individual species
esseritial (cats/dogs), 195
felire upper respiratory tract disease
exotoxins, 671
fear
(FURTD), 423
expectorarts, 377
cats, 256,256
femoral artery
experimenting on animals, 11
dogs, 253
assessmerit, 395
expiration, 82
submissiori posture, 247, 247
initraverous access, 544
exploratory behaviour, 244
feather cysts, 803
fentanyl, s8s
extension, 58
feathier follicle mites, 800
feral cats, 13
extemal auditory meatus (ear caral), 69
feather mites, 800
feral dogs, 13
 extemal fixator (Kirschrer-Ehmer device),
feather plucking, 802
ferret(s)
504-505
feathers, 119-120
aggression, 288
extracellular fluid, 54
problems, 802-803
aratomy/physiology see ferret
extracellular fluid (cats/dogs), regulation, S3
structure,120
 ariatomy/physiology
extraction forceps, S59
types, 120
bedding, 753
eye(s)
feeding
breeding, 760, 761, 764
anatomy, 68-69
eriteral, 5s1, sS1
diseases/corditiors in, 762-764
first aid, 406-407
geriatric patienits, 358
distress, behaviour associated with, 806
light perception, 68
methiods, 346-350
envirorment errichment, 754
870
Index
ferret(s) (Cont'd)
emergericy call, 393-394
routes, 473
feedinig methiods, 754, 7s9-760
emergency types, 394
water in1/out, 470-471
housirng,753-7ss,757,757
flumazenil, 581
nomal values, 8s6, 858
fractures, 404-406
fluorine, 158
rutritioral requirements, 759-760
handling/restraint, 394
fly strike, 636
pair, behaviour associated with, 806
insect stings, 399
small mammals, 762
restraint/haridlirig, 283, 288
major orgaris, 409-410
foaling box, 170
sexing,286
poisons, 399-401
foals
temperature, optimum, 757
provisions, 37
ariaesthesia, 623
see aiso small mammals
serisory orgaris, 406-411
genneral, 612, 624,624-625
ferret aratomy/physiology, 114-116
shock, 401-402
recovery, 625
biological data, 116
uricorisciousness, 402-403
nisk, 612
digestive system, 115
wourids, 396-397
heating for, 168, 170
morphology, 114-115
 First Aid at Work: Approved Code of Practice
injured, trarsportation of, 277
musculoskeletal system, 11s, 115
and Guidelines (1997), 38
nutritior requiremerts, 237
reproductive system, 11s-116
first aider, 37
training,279
female/jill, 116
fishi, anatomy/physiology, 128-131
foam pad bedding, 151
xa
male/hob, 115
cardiovascular system, 130
Foley catheter, 342,468
fertilizatior, 98-99,99
digestive system, 131
food-allergic skirn disease, 216
DL
fertilizatiori reaction, 99
gill system, 130
food guarding (dogs), 252
fetlock imaging, 740-741
musculoskeletal system, 130
food-limited feeding, 203
fetus, 100
reproductive system, 131
food preparation location, 155 
fibre
respiratory system, 131
cats, 196, 211
skeletal structure, 129
622
dogs, 196, 210
urinary system, 131
foods
horses, 229
fistula, 484
canmed
liver disease, 221
Five Freedoms, 9-10
cats, 199-200, 211
fibrinogen, 74
flat racing, 21-22
dogs, 199-200,209
fibrocartilage, 52
flea(s), 635, 635-637
dry
fibroma, 485
allergic dermatitis, 636
cats, 200,211
feld araesthiesia, 618, 619
birds, 800
dogs,200,209
field rerve block, 583
conitrol agenits, 636
footpads (cats/dogs), 108
fighiting, reptiles, 808
treatment, 12
forebrain, 63
'fighit or flight' see 'flighit or fight'
flehimer1 resporse, 269, 270
foregut (horses), 225
Filaroides hirthi, 652
flexion, 58
foreign bodies
film processing, 729-732
flies, 636, 637, 638
eniterotomy, 495
automatic processors, 730, 730-731
eggs hatching,637
eyelid, 407
care of processor, 730-731
flighit feathiers, 120
gastroiritestinal tract, 494
darkroom, 731-732
'flight or fight' resporse
gastrotomy, 495
safelighits,732
cats/dogs, 106
sirius, 484
processing cycle, 729-730
horses, 267
forelimbs (horses), 136, 137
developer,729
humars, 3
joints, 139
drying, 730
pain and, 582
fork, mucking out, 172
fixer, 729-730
fuid drainage, 439
formaldehyde,157, 528
wash,729,730
fluid intake, 350-351
Fortol, 347
replenishmert, 731
geriatric patierits, 358
fourth ventricle, 63
silver recovery, 731
hydration status assessing, 350
fowl pest (Newcastle's disease), 802
filoplume feathers, 120
maintairing, 350-351
foxes, 823-826
fimbriae, 96
reonatal/juvenile patients, 357
admission reasons, 823
firiches, 792
recumbert patients, 354
capture, 824,825
breeding, 798
fluid loss estimation, 54, 846
examiriation, 824, 825
feeding,792
fluids (body), S3-54, 470
feeding,824,825-826,826
restraint/handlirg, 288-289
critical care, 222
housing, 824, 825
fmis, 129
distribution, S3
clearirg, 824-825
fire, 40-41
electrolytes, S4
heat, 824
stables, preverition of, 164
fluid loss, 54
orphaned cubs, 825-826
fire extinguishers, 40, 41
laboratory diagnostic aids, 713-716
sarcoptic marige, 824
Fire Precautions Act (1971), 40-41
movemenit, 54
transportation, 824, 825
Fire Precautions (Workplace) (ammendmert)
fuid therapy, 470-477, 546-550
weaning,825-826
Regulation (1999), 40-41
body fluid, 470
fracture disease, 503, 505
first aid, 393-411
choice of fluid, 474
fractures, 404-406, 501-505
assessirig patients, 394-397
 dehydration see dehydration
clirical sigris, 404, 501
boxes, 38
flow rates, 846
complications, S0s
bums/scalds, 397-399
givirnig sets, 475
conservative treatment, 502
collapse, 402-403
intraverous fluid, 47S-477
extemal fixatior, 502-503
emergericy, legislatior1 regarding, 33
replacemerit, 473-475
first aid, 501
Index 871
Index
fractures (Cont'd)
'gate' techrique, anaesthetic inductior1
distress, behaviour associated with, 806
healing, 505
(horses), 619
envirorment errichment, 754
horses, trarisport of, 277
geckos, 292,766
feedinig methods, 754, 7s9-760
intemal fixatior, 503-504
geese
housirig, 753-7ss, 757-758
postoperative care, 504
orphan care, 842
riommal values, 856-857
types if implant, S03-504
restraint/handing, 291, 836
rutritioral requiremerits, 7s9-760
repair, 501-502
gelatiries, 547
pain, behiaviour associated with, 806
treatmerit, 405-406, 406
geldings, sexual behaviour, 268
restraint/haridling, 285
types, 40s, 501, 502
gels, 372
sexing,286
frameshift mutatioris, 308
gerider, obesity risk factor, 207
temperature, optimum, 757
free-choice feeding, 203
gerie(s)
see aiso small mammals
'free-fall' anaesthietic inductior (horses),
definition, 307
geriatric patients, care, 358
619
DNA, 307
gemirativum, 105
fresh frozen plasma (FFP), S49
dominant, 306, 309-310, 311
gestatior
freshi whole blood (FWB), 549
domirart X-linked, 310
dogs, 328
frontal lobe, 63
heterozygous, 306, 307
reptiles, 780
fruit
linkage, 320
Giardia,659
birds, 796, 797
recessive, 306, 310, 311
Gilia morsters, 292
calcium to phosphonus ratio, 775
see aiso geretics
gill system, 130
fullered coricave shoe, 187, 188
gerieralized progressive retiral atrophy (PRA),
gingival hyperplasia, S6S
furctioral residual volume/capacity, 82
314
gingival index, 564
furdus, 84
gene therapy, 316
gingival recession, S65
furdus, uterine, 96
genetic code, 308
gingivitis, 564, S6s, 571
furgal infectioris, respiratory system, 439
genetics, 301-317
glardular cells, 49
furigi, 416, 642-643
application to practice, 312-314
glassware, 684
disinfection, 157-159
biochemical screering, 312-313
glial tissue, 61-62
food contamination, 240
chromosomal defects, 311-312
globulin (cats/dogs), 73
urine, microscopic examiration, 709
clirnical screering, 312
glomerular capsule, 90
furgistat, 154
cloning, 315-316
glomenular filtratiori rate (GFR), 365
furcation involvement, 565-566, S66
coat colour in cats, 320
glomenuli, 90
fur slip (chinchillas), 287, 295
code, 308
 glomeruloriephritis, 440
fununculosis, 496
congenital defects, 310-312
glottis, 81
defects, 311
glottis (reptiles), 298, 298
G
incidence, 311
gloving procedure, S10-511
gall bladder, 87
diagniosis of disorders, 312-314
glucagon, 72,701
game birds
 DNA see DNA
glucocorticoids, 582
hunting seasons, 843
future trerds in biotechrology, 315-316
glucosamine, 199
legislatior affecting, 843
gere therapy, 316
glucose,701
orphar1 care, 842
gerome projects, 312
pre-anaesthetic test, 579
restraint/hardling, 837
mendelian inheritance, 308-310
gluteraldehydes, 157
gamete, 100
Meridel's laws, 306-307
glycerol absorption, 88
gametes, 302
mutations,308
glycocalyx (fish), 129
gapewom (birds), 836
nutritional problems, 215-216
goblet cells, 85
garter sriakes, 766
pedigree aralysis, 312, 313
'going light' (megabacteriosis), 804
gastric decompression, 494-495
polymerase chain reaction, 313
Golgi body/complex, 50
gastric dilation, 409, 494-495
proteins, 308
 goriadotrophir-releasing homone (GRH),
gastric dilation/volvulus (GDV), 494-495
restrictior erzymes, 313
97
gastric lavage, 494
RNA see RNA
gonadotrophins, 97, 98
poisoring, 400
screerirg schemes, 314-315
Goveming Couricil of the Cat Faricy
gastric pits, 85
Southem blottirg, 314
(GCCF),326
gastric secretiors, 85-86
teminology, 307
gowring procedure, 510
gastric torsion, 494-495
test matings, 312
gowns, S31
gastric trichobezoars (small mammals), 762
trarscription, 308, 308
sterilization, 530
gastrin, 85
trarisgeriesis, 316
graafiar follicle (cats/dogs), 96
gastritis, 213
trarslation, 308, 308
gram-rnegative bacteria, 670
gastrointestiral compromise, 346
X chromosome inactivation in females,
gram-positive bacteria, 670
gastrointestinal disease
310
granular casts, urine, 708
rutritional requiremerts, 213-214
see aiso gerie(s)
grarulation, wound healing, 478
see aiso specific diseases/disorders
genome, 307,312
granules, 372
gastrointestiral tract
geriotype,307,308
grarulocytes, 74
horses, 227
gerbils
grasper
surgery, 494-496
aggression, 285
 badger capture, 820
gastropexy, 494
bedding, 753
fox capture, 824
Gastrophilus, 660, 660
breeding, 760
grass
gastrostomy tube, 222, 348
digestive system, 113-114
conserved, 231-232
gastrotomy, 494-495
diseases/conditioris in, 763-764
equine diet, 230-232
872
Index
greer1 iguarias, 292, 293,774-776
Haematopinus asini, 634
feeding,827,828-829
grey matter, 65
haematuria, 410, 707
housing, 827
grey squirrels, 834-835
Haemobartonella felis, 670, 698
cleaning, 827
admission reasons, 834
haemoglobin
orphans, 828
capture, 834
estimations, 700
orphians, 827-829
examination,834, 835
saturation with oxygen, 588-s89, 618
transportation, 827-828
feeding, 834, 835
haemoglobiruria, 707
weaning, 828
housing, 834
haemolysis, 449, 692
hawk(s),793
cleaning, 835
prevention,692
skeleton, 117
hieat, 834
haemophilia, 450
hay
legislation, 843
haemopoiesis, 74
bedding,151
orphans, 835
haemopoietic system, medical conditiors of,
horse's diet, 231
trarisportatior, 834
449-451
 chironic obstructive pulmoriary disease
grids, scattered radiation coritrol, 723,
haemopoietic tissue, S2-53
and, 167
723-724
haemorrhage, 449
purchase/storage, 240
grief
coritrol, 395, 39s, 524
racks for, 169
bereavement, 16
derital procedures, 562
storage, 164, 240
xa
euthanasia, 15
ovariohysterectomy, 497
haylage, horse's diet, 231-232
stages of, 16
postoperative complicatiors, 525
purchase/storage, 240
DL
groomirig, 177-189, 353
wound healing, 478
hazards, 36
cats/dogs, 177-182
hair
pathiological samples, 690-691
clippers, 179, 179-180
brushings, 712
waming symbols, 36
coat types, 180, 180
cats/dogs, 107-108
head collars, 280
combs, 177-178, 178
grooming see grooming
head imaging, 737, 737
curries, 178, 178
growth,215
health anid safety, 34-43, S12
equipmerit, 177-180
immurity, 429
appointed person, 37
nail clippers, 179, 179
plucks, 712
electrical safety see electrical safety
procedure, 181
samples,713
employee responsibilities, 35
reasons for, 177
ringwom (dematophytosis), 713
employer responsibilities, 34-35
scissors, 178, 178
halogeris, 158-159
first aider, 37
slicker brush, 177, 178
halothane, 590, 622
laboratory, 681-683, 682
horses see horse(s), grooming
hamsters
risk assessmerits, 35, 3S
Guard Dogs Act (197S), 44
bedding, 753
Health arid Safety at Work Act (1974), 34-35,
guard hairs, 107, 180
breedinig, 760, 761, 764
36
guide dogs, 8, 8
digestive system, 113-114
Healthi arid Safety Executive (HSE), 34
guinea pig(s)
diseases/conditions in, 761-764
marual lifting guide, 36, 37
bedding, 753
environment enrichment, 754
reporting events to, 38
breeding, 760, 760
feedirig methods, 754,759-760
Health arid Safety (First Aid) Regulatiors
digestive system, 114, 114
housing, 753-75s, 757-758
(1981), 36-37
diseases/coriditiors in, 761-764
nomal values, 856-857
hearing, 69-70
distress, behaviour associated with, 806
rutritioral requiremerits, 7s9-760
hearing dogs, 8
envirorment enrichment, 754
restraint/handling, 285
heart, 75-77
feeding methods, 754, 7S9-760
sexing,286
coniduction system, 76
housing, 753-7ss, 756-757
temperature, optimum, 757
muscle, 50
nomal values, 856-857
see aiso small mammals
nervous control, 76
nutritioral requirements, 759-760
hard-feedirg, 346-347
pulse rate, 76-77
pain, behaviour associated with, 806
handling
stnucture, 7S
restrainit/handling, 286, 287
birds, 288-292, 809
valves, 75-76
sexing, 286
cats, 260, 263-264
heart auscultatior
temperature, optimum, 757, 757
distress reduction, 807
anaesthetic examiratior, 579
see aiso small mammals
dogs, 260-263
dogs, 338
gulls, orphiar care, 842
exotic species, 283-294
heart disease, 443
gur, humare destruction of horses, 630
hedgehogs, 816-817
acquired, 443,445
horses, 272-275
congenital, 443, 444
H
kittenis, 325
diagnosis, 448
habituation, 244
lizards, 292-293
heart failure, 444-447
horses, 277,278, 279
reptiles, 292-294, 808
coughing, 436-437
Habronema, 638, 643
small mammals, 283-288
dnugs, 447
Hackamore, 280
hand-rearing
left-sided, 446
Hackrey Breed Society, 27
kittens, 326
righit-sided, 446
haematemesis, 345
puppies,333
treatmerit, 446-447
haematochezia, 343
haploid cells, 302
heart mummurs, 448, 448
haematological complicatiors, 486
hard bill birds, feeding, 796
heart rate, anaesthesia and, 602, 602
haematological values, romal rariges, 700
hares, 826-829
heart rhythm, araesthesia and, 602
haematology arialysers, 688
admission reasons, 826
heartwormms, 652-65s, 654
haematoma, 396
capture, 827-828
treatmerit, 654
Index873
Index
heating
hindgut (horses), 225
clearing, 184, 186, 186-187
animal housing (cats/dogs), 149, 149-150,
microbial activity, 228
pickirig up, 273-274, 274
150
hindlimbs (horses), 137, 137-138, 139
radiography preparation, 187
bird housing, 799
hip dysplasia
grooming,182-189
stables, 168, 168
genetic screening, 314
kit,182,182-184
types, 149-150, 150
positioning in imaging, 736
machiries for, 185
underfloor, 352
history taking for ariaesthesia, 578
procedure, 183, 184, 184, 185
vivarium, 771, 771-772
histricomorphs, 113
process, 182-185
heat lamps, 352
hock imaging, 741
quartering,184,184,185
heat pads, 352
Home Office, arimal research, 12
reasoris for, 182
hedgeh1og(s), 814-820
home rarige (cats), 255
social initeractior, 269, 270, 270
admission reasons, 815
homoeostasis, 73
handling, 272-275
aggression, 816
homologous chromosomes, 307
hooves
capture, 816
homozygous geries, 306, 307
growth,186
examinatior, 816-817
hoods (bird), 289-290, 290
pickinig 0ut, 183, 186, 186-187
feeding, 817, 818, 818
hoof clippers, 188, 189
humare destnuction, 629-631
handing, 816-817
hoof krife, 188, 189
carcase disposal, 630-631
hazards for, 814, 815, 815
hoof pick, 183, 184
eutharasia indicatiors, 629
hibemation, 81s-816
hoof testers, 189, 189
gun,630
hoglets, 814, 815, 818
hookwoms, 648
injection, 630
housing, 817
hooves, 138
methiods, 629-630
mothers ard babies, 819-820
growth,186
infectious diseases, 426-427
orphared hoglets, 818
picking out, 183, 186, 186-187
intestinal rematodes, 644
pacers, 817-818
homone(s), 71, 71, 379
lameriess, 167-168
parasites, 816, 816
analysers, 688
laminitis, 168
pregnant, 819
blood biochemistry, 703-704
large Strorigyles, 651
rolled up, 816
cats/dogs
leading.273
transportation, 816
 parturition changes, 103
lifting, 620
unrolling method, 816
sex, 98
long-reining, 280-281
weaning, 818
elimination, 89
lurigeing, 280-281, 281
Heinz body, 698
tumours, production by, 486
mouth examination, 274
hemp bedding (horses), 166
horse(s)
mud fever, 168
hepatic artery, 88
age,274
riormal values, 8ss-856
hepatic elimiration of dnugs, 366
agricultural use, 19-20
 orthopaedic patients, 168
hepatic portal vein, 88
ariaesthiesia see equire araesthiesia
pairn assessmert, 272
circulation, 462
analgesia, 613, 615
Parascaris equorum, 647-648
hepatitis, infectious (dogs), 421-422
antiparasitic products, 64S
pinwoms, 652
herbivores, digestive system, 113-114
approaching/catching,
,272-273
positiorinig in imaging, 740, 740-742, 742
herbivorous lizards, 774-776
bacterial disease, 670
restraint, 272-275
herbs, equire diet, 234
basic requirements of, 163
nugged up, 184
Herirg-Breuer reflex, 83
bathing, 185
shieath washirg, 184
hemias, 484-485
bedding, 187
shoe types, 187, 188, 188
herpes virus (cats), 677
behiaviour/behavioural problems see equine
showing,27
heterotrophs, 667
behaviour
sleeping, 267
heterozygous geres, 306, 307
charities, 29
'spooking,'185
hexachlorophane, 159
chroric obstructive pulmonary disease, 167
surgery, clipping for, 186
hibemation
clipping, 184, 185-186
tooth rasping, 274
hedgehogs, 815-816
cloninig,29-30
training,277-281
reptiles, 780
colic, 168
aids, 279-280
hierarchies
commands, 273
courter-conditioring, 278
dogs, 249
dertition, 226
desersitization, 278-279
wolves,247,249
domestication, 19
habituation, 278
high-dependency nursing, 533-554
farriery, 187-189
imprint, 279
analgesia, S50
farriery tools, 188-189
methods, 277-278
fluid therapy, 546-550
feeding, 238-241
trarisportation, 273-277
see aiso fluid therapy
combired system, 240
air travel, 276
high-dependercy urit
concentrates, 239
clothing for, 276, 276-277
design, 533-534, 534
frequency/timing, 239-240
road travel, 275-276
record-keeping, 534
horses at grass, 239
sick/injured animals, 277
initraverous access, 542-546
patter alterations, 240-241
twitch use, 274, 274-275
nutritional support, ss0-553
preparation, 240
tying up, 183, 184, 273,273
oxygen therapy, S38-542
roughage, 239
viral disease, 677
 see aiso oxygern therapy
stabled horses, 239
vision1 field, 267, 268
patient monitorinig/observation, 534-538
water,238-239
'wamblood,' 25
equipmerit, 537, 537-538
foals see foals
wourids, 168
hindbrain, 63
foot care, 186-189
see aiso entries beginning equine
874
Index
horse eggs, 661
hyperaemic (injected) mucous membrare,
describing/viewing,732
Horse (Sea Trarisport) Order (1952), 275
537
radiography see radiography
Horserace Bettirg Levy Board (HBLB), 24,
hyperaesthesia (cats), 11
recording images, 725-729
275
hypercapria, ariaesthesia ard, 603, 609
digital image, 728-729
horse racing, 21-24
horses, 627
flm,725-726
breeds associated with, 24
hyperglycaemia, 701
film-screer1 combiriatiors, 727-728
conitrolling bodies, 23-24
hyperkinesis (dogs), 251
interisifying screeris, 726-728
flat,21-22
hyperkinetic pulse/bourding pulse, 536
ultrasourd see ultrasound
hurdles, 22-23
hyperphosphataemia, 220
immersion oil, 686
steeplechasirig, 22-23, 26
hyperthermia, derital procedures ard, 562
immunity, 428-433
hospices, comparion arimals in, 7
hyperthyroidism, 45S
acquired, 429-430
hospitals, comparior arimals in, 7
hypertoric salire, 546-547
artificial active, 429
host specificity, 633
hypnosis, 577
artificial passive, 429
hot air oven sterilization, 528
hypoadrerocorticism (Addison's disease),
diagrostic use of antibodies, 430
househiold waste disposal, 159
456
inmate, 428-429
house martins, 842
hypocalcaemia (tortoises), 786-787
response time, 430
housing, 145-161
hypocapria, 606
types, 428-430
xa
care facilities, 146
hypodermis/subcutaneous layers, 106-107
vacciriation, 430,430-432
constructior, 146-147, 147
hypoglycaemia, 456-457, 701
immurocompromised patients, 659
DL
disease coritrol, 153, 153-159
hypokalaemia, 220
immuriodeficiercy vinus (cats), 424-425
see aiso cleaning/disinfectior1
hypokinetic pulse/weak pulse, 536
impacted cheeks (small mammals), 761
heating, 149
hypostatic preumonia
implaritatior, 99
security, 146
postoperative complicatiors, 526
imprinting/bonding, 244
sitinig of, 146
recumberit patierits, 355-356
trairing (horses/foals), 279
types, 148
hypostome, 641
inappetence, 346
waste disposal see waste, disposal
hypotersion, araesthesia and, 604
inbreeding, 319-320
wild mammals, 812
horses, 627
inbreeding depression, 320
see aiso individual animais/species/enctosures
hypothalamus (cats/dogs), 63, 97
incineration
human(s)
hypothermia, 535
clirical waste, 39
anaesthetic gas exposure, 600, 600
ariaesthesia ard, 604, 605
horse carcase disposal, 630
food chain, drug residues, 365
dental procedures, 562
incised wounds, 396
health effects of comparior arimals, 3,
effects of, 604
incortinerce sheets as bedding, 151
3-4
postoperative complicatioris, 526
incubation
infection
hypothyroidism, 454
bird eggs, 798, 799, 804-805
Leishmania, 660
hypoventilation
reptiles, 780
Toxoplasma gondi, 659
anaesthesia, during, 609-610
incus, 69
meat corsumption, horse carcase disposal,
causes, 609
induction boxes, 619
630-631
defnition, 609
industrial waste disposal, 159, 683
humar-amimal iriteraction, 1-18
treatmerit, 609-610
infanticide (cats), 257
humare destructior (horses) see horse(s),
hypovitamirosis A (tortoises/terrapins), 787
infection, 668
humane destruction
hypovolaemic shock, 401, 467, 535
bumis, 399
Humar Genome Project, 312
gastrotomy, 494
routes, 668
humidification, oxygen therapy, 541-542,
hypoxaemia, araesthesia and, 589
spread ir1 theatre, 526
S42
horses, 627
see aiso specific types
humidity, vivarium, 772
hypoxia
infectious araemia (cats), 424
Humphrey ADE breathirg system, S96
anaesthesia and, 609
infectious carine hepatitis, 421-422
huriter trials, 26-27
puppies, newbom, 331
infectious diseases, 413-433, 668
hurdles, 22-23
hysterotomy (caesarear section), 497-498
carriers, 416
Hurlingham Polo Association, 26
cats, 423-425
hyalire cartilage, 52
I
definitioris, 415
trachiea, 81
ictal phase, 404, 451
dogs, 420-422
hyalire casts, 708
 icteric (jaurdiced) mucous membrane, S37
horses, 426-427
hyaluronidase, 671
idiosyrcratic reactions, 368
immunity, 428-433
hydatidosis, 418
iguamnas, 292, 293, 767,774-776
rabbit, 425-426
hydratior status
ileum, 87
spread, 413-420, 414
anaesthetic examination, 579
imaging, 717-750
client education, 420
assessmerit, 350
computed tomography, 748, 748
disease coritrol, 416-420
hydrochloric acid, stomach, 85
film processing, 729-732
trarismissior1 routes, 41s, 416
hydroxyethyl starchies, 547
see aiso film processing
inferior alveolar rerve block, S84
hygierne
magrietic resoriarice, 749, 749
inflammatior, wourd healing, 478-479
aviaries, 795
nuclear medicine, 747-748
inflammatory reactiors, 429
bird cages, 795
positioning, 734-742
eyelid, 407
infectious diseases, 417
see αaiso positioning in imaging
influenza
hyperactivity, dogs, 251
radiographic quality/image initerpretation,
horses, 427, 677
hyperadrerocorticalism (Cushing's disease),
732-734
small mammals, 762
454, 457-458, 458
assessirig, 732-734
virus (cats), 676, 688
Index875
Index
infurdibulum
intracoelomic injectior (reptiles), 299
irradiation, 528
birds, 123
intrademal araesthesia, 583
isoflurane, 591, 622
cats/dogs, 96
intramedullary pirs, 503, S04
isolatior
inguinal hermia, 485
intramuscular injection
box (horses), 170
inhalatior1 ariaesthetic agenits, 588-591
birds, 297
cage (birds), 805
horses, 622, 622-623
reptiles,299
infectious diseases, 417
injections
small mammals, 295
kerirels, 145
birds, 297,297-298
intraoperative care, 524
Isospora,657-658
cat, restraint for, 263
intraosseous catheterizatior, S45, S4S
Isospora canis, 657
reptiles, 299-300
intraosseous fluid admiristration, 351
Isospora felis, 657
small mammals, 29s-297
intraosseous injection
isthmus (birds), 123
inrate behaviour, 244
birds, 298, 298
Ixodes,640
inmate immumity, 428-430
reptiles, 300
insecticide, 635
small mammals, 297
J
insectivorous lizards, 774, 77s, 776
 intraperitoreal fluid admiristration, 350
 Jacksor1 cat catheter, 469
irisects, 634-638
 intraperitorieal injection
Jackson ratio, 780, 782
birds eating, 797
birds, 298
 Jacksor-Rees modified Ayre's T piece, S93,
stirigs from,399
small mammals, 295
594
insighit, 244
intrathiecal (initrasymovial) araesthiesia, 583
 Jacobson's organ, 124, 269
inspiration, 82
horses, 628-629
jauridice, 461-462
iristirict, 244
intrathoracic cranial vera cava, blood
jaw tore, araesthesia ard, 601
instrumental conditioning (horses), 278
pressure measurement see central
jejuriostomy tube, 348
instruments, S12-S17
verious pressure (CVP)
jejurum, 87
denitistry, 556-561
intratracheal dnug admiristration,
jelly-like rutrient solutiors, 674
mairteriarice, S13
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 608
jesses, 290
sets, 515-516
intraverious access, 542-546
Jockey Club, 21, 22, 23, 29
specialized instrument care, S13
 arterial cathieterizatior, S44-545
Jockey Club Estates, 23
surgical, 513, S14-S1s, 515
cathieter mairiteriarce, 545-546
joints, S6
trolley, laying out, 509
ceritral line placemerit, S43-544
 adhesion fommation in recumbert patierits,
insulin, 72, 379,701
initraosseous cathieterization, S45, S4S
356
Lerite, 456
 intravenous agents, equine anaesthesia, 622
horse's forelimbs, 139
soluble, 456
initraverous catheter placement, equine
movemerit types, 58
insulinoma, 456, 457
general anaesthesia, 621, 621
structure,S7-58
insurarce comparies, horse humare
 intravenous fluid administration, 351,
jugular vein
destruction, 630
475-477, 847
 cardiopulmorary resuscitation drug
integument
diarrhoea, 344
administration, 608
cats/dogs, 104-108
monitoring patient, 476-477
fluid therapy, 474
reptiles, 124
overinfusion, 477
intraverous access/verepurcture, 542
snakes,127
preparatior patient, 476
cats, 264,264
initerisifyinig screeris, 726-727
setting up drip, 475-476
dogs, 263
construction, 726-727
veir1 catheterizatior, 476
horses, 621
film-screen contact, 727-728
vomiting, 345
tortoises/terrapins, 299
lumirescerice, 727
intravenous injection
jumping on fumiture (dogs), 250
screer speed, 727
birds, 297,297
 jumping up at people (dogs), 250
sinigle screeris, 727
horses, local araesthesia, 628
structure,727
reptiles, 299
K
types, 727
small mammals, 29s-296
karyotypes, 302, 303
initersive care unit, kennels in, 146
intravenous regioral araesthesia, 584
Kelsey-Sykes test, 156
intercostal rerve block, 584
intubation, 524-525
kernel(s), 147-152
intermitterit positive pressure vertilatior1
ariaesthiesia, 597
beddirg, 150-152
(IPPV)
methods, S25
types, 1S1
ariaesthesia, 606-607
removing, S25
cleaning/disinfection, 1ss, 15s-156
horses, 625
see aiso endotrachieal irtubatior
dog requirements, 152, 152
excessive, 607
intussusception, 495
electrical equipment, 149
inadequate, 607
iniversior geretic defects, 312
heating, 149, 149-150
intermuscular septum, 58
iodine, dietary
types, 149-150, 150
internal injuries, 396
cats/dogs, 197
hospitalized patierits, 340
interphase, 304
deficiency (birds), 802
hygiere, 344
intestinal motility modifers, 374
iodine-based solutions
lighting, 149
intestiral rematodes, 644
chemotoxic effects, 743
size,152,152
intestinal rephiritis, 440
coritrast radiography, 742-744
specific requirements, 152
initestine
iodines, 158
veritilatior, 147-148
large see large intestine
iodophor, 158
Kernel Club, 333
small see small iritestire
Ionizing Radiation Regulatiors (1999), 41,
 BVA/KC hip dysplasia/elbow scoring
intracardiac drug injection, 608
41-43
schiemes, 736
intracellular fluid, 54
iron, dietary (cats/dogs), 197
gerietic screermirig, 314-315
876
Index
kennel cough, 422
Lack circuit, S94, S95, S9s, S96,624
types,74，74
keratin, 105
lacrimation, anaesthesia and, 602
urine, microscopic examination, 708
keratolytics, 377
lactation
leukocytosis, 699
ketamire
cats/dogs, feedinig during, 204-206
leukoperia, 699
alpha-2 agorist ard, 588
horses, rutritior requiremerts, 236-237,
levothyroxine (thyroxine), 72, 379
ariaesthesia, 588
237
libido (horses), 268
diazepam and, 588, 620
lacteals, 79
lice, 634-635
ketoacidosis, 454
lameriess
birds, 800
kickboard, 165
diagnosis, 628
licerisinig of dnugs, 381-383
kidney(s)
horses, 167-168
lidocairie, 583, 629
aratomy/physiology, 90-92
'trotting up,'273
lifestyle, obesity risk factor, 207
disease, 440-443
laminitis (horses), 168
lifting
dnug elimination, 365
large initestire
cats, 263
dnug toxicology, 369
birds, 122
dogs, 37, 181, 261, 261-262
failure
cats/dogs, 89
Healthi ard Safety Executive guidarice, 37
acute, 440-443
horses, 144, 227-228
horses, 620
chroric, 441
larymgeal paralysis, 438
ligamenits (horses), 140-141
xa
filtration, 91
laryngeal reflex, araesthesia and, 602
lighiting
injuries, 410
laryngospasm
 animal housing (cats/dogs), 149
DL
polycystic disorder (cats), 312, 315, 31S
equine anaesthiesia complication, 626
bird housing, 799
portal system (birds), 123
postoperative complicatiors, 525
operating theatre, 508
rabbits, 111
larymx, 81
stables, 168
see aiso entries beginning renat
Laser cell counters, blood smear, 697
vivarium, 772
Kirschrer-Ehmer device (exterral fixator),
lateral ear veir veriepuricture (small
line breeding, 320
504-505
mammals), 296
Linognathus setosus, 634
kittens
lateral recumbarcy restrairt (dogs), 262
linoleic acid (cats/dogs), 195
care of, 32s, 325-326
lateral tail vein, intraverous injectior ir1 
lipaemia, 694
development, 325
rats/mice, 296
lipids, pareriteral feeding, S52
feeding, 203-204
lateral thoracic veir, intraverous catheter
lipoma, 485
hardling of, 325
placement (horses), 621
lipoxygenase, 582
hard-rearing, 326
lateral ventricle, 63
lips (horses), 226-227
neoratal examiration, 325
lateral wall resectior (Zepps procedure), 490
liquid broth's, 674
registering,326
law of independent assortmerit, 306
liquid oily compounds, 400
resuscitation, 324
law of segregatior, 306
liquids, sterilization, S30-531
selling,326
law of uriformity, 306
Liquivite, 347
socialization, 13
laxatives, 379
litterbox trairing (cats), 258
suckling,325,32S
lead, radiation protection, 42,43
litter tray, ratural uriratior, 341
vaccination, 326
leading (horses), 273
li ver
Krott's test, 664
learred behiaviour, 244, 244
anatomy/physiology, 88-89
Korotkoff sourds, 604
cats, 320-321
disease, rutritional, 220-221, 461
Tearred helplessriess,' 11
dnug toxicology, 369
L
leg(s)
functions, 88-89
laboratory
muscles (birds), 119
metabolism, 88-89
equipment, 683-689
upper (birds), 119
see aiso entries beginning hepatic
health1 arid safety, 681-683, 682
legislation, 33-47
lizards
common hazards, 681-683
pharmaceutical, 381, 382
anatomy/physiology, 12s, 125-126
tests, heart disease, 448, 449
radiation safety, 724
breeding, 766-767
waste disposal, 683
terminology defmitions, 33
diseases/clinical conditions in, 781-786
laboratory diagnostic aids, 681-716
wildlife, injured, 843
distress, behiaviour associated with, 807
blood, 691-704
see aiso healthi ard safety; welfare;
feedirig, 766-767, 774-776
body fluids/tissues, 713-716
individual Acts
camivorous, 774,774, 776, 776,777
commercial test kits, 688-689
legumes (horse's diet), 232
herbivorous, 774-776
hair, 711-713
Leishmania, 638, 660
inisectivorous, 774,77s, 776
recordirig sample/test reports, 689-691
leishmariosis, 660
omrivorous, 774, 776
 dispatch of pathiological material,
Leishimar's stairirig techrique, 343, 695-696
medicatior1 administration, 298-300
689-690
lens, eye, 69
rutritior, 774-776
protocol, 689
leritivirus (horses), 677
pain, behiaviour associated with, 807
skir, 711-713
leopard gecko, 292, 293
restraint/hardling, 292-293
spoilage of samples, 689-690
leptospirosis, 418
sexing,293,293
urine, 704-711
dogs, 421
species kept as pets, 766-767
laboratory waste disposal, 161
Lepus capensis see hares
tail shedding, 293
labour stages
'Le Trec,' 28
water, 777-778
cats, 324
leukaemia, 450
loading dose, 365
dogs, 329-330
vinus (cats), 424, 677, 688
local anaesthesia, 583-584
lacerated wourds, 396
leukocytes
epidural, 584
lachirymal glards, 69
blood smear abrormalities, 698, 698-699
field block, 583
Index877
Index
local anaesthesia (Cont'd)
mammary glards (cats/dogs), 97, 97, 107
mesentery, SS
horses, 628-629
Mariagemerit of Healthi ard Safety Work
mesometrium (cats/dogs), 96
application1, 628-629
Regulations (1999), 35, 35
mesovarium, 95
drugs, 629, 629
managers, 169
messerger RNA (mRNA), 308
intrathiecal (intrasyrovial) araesthesia,
mare comb, 183, 183
metabolic bore disease (tortoises/terrapirs),
628-629
 Manual Handling Regulations (1992), 36, 37
786
regiorial, 628
marual restraint (small mammals), 283
metabolic system, drug metabolism, 364
topical, 628
mare(s)
metabolism, 88-89
types, 628
metabolizable energy
pregnart
intradermal, 583
gerreral araesthesia risk, 612
cats/dogs rutrition, 192
intrasynovial, 583
transport of, 275
nutrient coritent, 193
intraverious regioral anaesthiesia, 584
sedatior prior to foal ariaesthiesia, 624-625
 metacarpal bores (horses), 137
local infltratiori of tissues, 583
margirial ear veir, initraverous access, 542
metacenitric chromosomes, 302, 303
 regioral rerve block, 584
marketing authorization (MA), 381-383
metacercaniae, 657
ring block, 583
martingale, 280
metacestode, 654-655
spirial block, 584
masks, equine anaesthesia, 623
metaphase, 304
topical, 583
massage, recumbent patierits, 356
metastases, 486
lochia (dogs), 329, 331
 Master of Hourds Point-to-Point Associatior,
metatarsal artery, intravenous access, 544
locus, defmition, 307
22
methiadone, S8s
long-reining, 280-281
matermal behaviour
methohexital, 587
loop diuretics, 378
cats, 257
methoxyflurarie, S90
loop of Henle, 91
dogs, 249
methylxarthires, 377
lordosis
matermally derived artibody (MDA), 432
metoclopramide, 374
cats, 322
matirig
mice
small mammals, 758
cats, 322
 anatomy/physiology, 113-114
lovebird, 792
behiaviour, 322
bedding, 753
breeding, 798
dogs, 328
breeding, 760, 761, 764
lubricarit laxatives, 379
behiaviour, 248-249, 249
digestive system, 113-114
lubrication, instruments, S13
mat splitter comb, 177
diseases/coriditioris in, 761-764
luceme (alfalfa), 232
maximum pemissible dose (MPD), radiatior 
distress, behaviour associated with, 806
lurgeing, 280-281, 281
exposure, 43
envirorment errichment, 754
lungs
maximum safe coriceritratior (MSC), 366
feedinig methods, 754, 7s9-760
anatomy, 81,82,82
meal-irduced heat (cats/dogs), 193
handling,284-285
auscultatior, 579
mean corpuscular haemoglobir 
housing, 753-75s, 757, 757-758
birds, 121-122
concentration (MCHC), 700
r1ommal values, 856-857
lurgwoms, 437, 652
mean corpuscular volume (McV), 700
rutritioral requiremerits, 759-760
luxatioris, S0s-506
meat, humar corisumptior (horses), 630
pain, behaviour associated with, 806
luxators, 5s8, ss9
mecharical respiration, 80
restrairit, 284, 284-285
Lyme disease, 422, 641
medial metatarsal vein venepuricture (birds),
sexinig, 286
Lymnea truncatula, 657
297
temperature, optimum, 7s7
lymphatic system, 78-80
mediastinum, S5
see aiso small mammals
lymph nodes, 78, 79, 79-80, 428
 medication administration
microbes, susceptibility to
lymphocytes, 74,428
birds, 297-298
cleaning/disinfection, 156
lymphoid organs, 428
exotic species, 295-300
microbial activity, equine hindgut, 228
lymphoma, 450, 450
lizards, 298-300
microbial enzymes, equire hindgut, 228
lyonization,310,310
reptiles,298,298-300
microbiology, 665-679
lysosome, 50
small mammals, 29s-297
mi croorgarisms see microorgarisms
lysozymes, S0
Mediterrarear tortoises, 767-768
microscopes, 665, 667
post-hibenmation anorexia, 780, 780-782,
pathogeric orgarisms, 666
M
791
structure, 666
macromutations, 311
medulla oblongata, 63
microglia, 62
Magill circuit, S94, S95,S9S,624
megabacteriosis (birds), 804
microhaematocrit centrifuge, 687
Magill tube, 596
megaoesophagus, 458
micromotor urit, S59
magnesium, dietary (cats/dogs), 196, 197
meibomiar gland, 69
microorgarisms, 667-668
magrietic resorarice imaginig (MRI), 749, 749
meiosis, 302-306,30S
comparison with mammal cells, 667
magnum (birds), 123
meiosis 1, 306
definition, 154, 668
mairteriarice erergy requiremerits (MER;
meiosis 2, 306
measuremert, 667
cats/dogs), 193
melaera, 343
microscope(s), 665, 667, 684-687,685
maize (horses), 233
melarioma, 485
blood smear examination, 684-686
Malassezia, 643, 643, 713
Metes meles see badgers
rinigworm examination, 712-713
malignant melanoma, 486
membrarous labyrinth, 69
Microsporum, 642
malleus, 69
mendelian inheritarce, 308-310
Microsporum canis, 642
malocclusion (small mammals), 764
Merdel's laws, 306-307
micturition, 93
malurion, S0S
meninges, 64
midazolam, 581
mammals see small mammals; wild
menitatior, S79
midbrain (mesericephalon), 63
mammals
mepivacaine, 629
midstream urire sample, 341, 704
878
Index
milk, kitten feeding, 204
mud fever (horses), 168
rieck imaging,737,737
mirierals, 380-381
Murtjac deer (Munfiacus reevesi), 831
recrobacilliosis (small mammals), 762
cats/dogs, 196
muscle(s)
recrotic dermatitis (scale rot), 781
horses, 230, 234
atrophy, recumberit patierits, 356
rectar feeders, 797
mirimum alveolar conceritratior (MAC),
horses, 140-141
needle aspirate, tumour diagrosis, 487
volatile agennts, 590, 590
relaxation
reglect, 10
mirimum effecti ve corceritratior (MEC),
ariaesthesia, 605-606, 606
see aiso welfare
366
clirnical use, 606
rematode-related dermatitis, 643
mirimum toxic coricertratior (MTC), 366
definition, 577
rematodes, 643, 644-654
Mirister for the Horse, 20
tore, ariaesthiesia arid, 602
ascarids, 644-648
Miracidium, 657
types, S0
heartworms, 652-655
misoprostol, 373
muscle sheath, S8, S9
hookwoms, 648
misting (with water; lizards/srakes), 777
muscular system, 58
intestinal, 644
Misuse of Drugs Act (1971), 381, 382, 584
birds, 119
life cycle, 633-634
mites, 638-641
horses, 138-142
lurigwoms, 652
birds, 800
musculoskeletal injury, equire araesthiesia,
pinwoms,652
lizards/sriakes, 783-784
627
strongyles, 650-652
xa
small mammals, 761
musculoskeletal system
whipwoms, 649-650
mitochondnia, 50
dogs, 58, 200-201
reoratal/juvenile patients, 356-358
DL
mitochondrial DNA (mDNA), 310
ferrets, 115, 115
rursing corisiderations, 357-358
mitosis, 302-306, 304
fish, 130
reoriate, 100
mitotic spindle, 304
rabbits, 110, 110
rieoplasia, 442, 463-464, 495-496
mitral valve dysplasia, 444
mutageris, 308
small mammals, 763
M-mode ultrasourd, 747
mutatiors
Neospora caninum, 659
mobility, recumberit patierts, 354
genetic, 308
Neotrombicula qutumnalis, 639, 640
mobilization, 352-353
tumours, 486
nephritis, 440
modifed McMaster (quartitative methods),
 mutualistic orgarisms, 667
nephron, 91, 92
662-663
muzzling (dogs), 260, 261
rerve cells see reurors
molasses (horses), 234
Mycoplasma, 670
rrerve impulses, 62-63
monitor lizards, 767
Mycoplasma felis, 670
rerve pathiways, 60
monocytes, 74
mycoplasmosis (birds), 801
riervous system, 59-66
monosomy, 311
myelin, 61
medical conditiors, 451-453
Monovette, 691, 691-692
mynah bird, 792, 798
tissue, 53, 60-62
moorhers, orphan care, 842
myocarditis, 44S
nervous tissue, S3, 60-62
morphine, 373, 585
myocardium, 75
rest boxes, aviary/cage placing, 799
mosaicism, 311
myoglobinuria, 707
resting behaviour
mosquitoes, 638
myometrium, 96
cats, 323,323
motorized equipment care, 513
myomorphs, 113
dogs, 329
motor neurors, 61
myopathy, postanaesthetic, 627
nesting sites, oviparous reptiles, 780
mourited games, 28
myosin, 58
neurogeric shock, 401, 467
mouth1
myxomatosis, 426, 826
neuroglia, 61-62
first aid, 408
neuroleptic drugs, 380
gags, derital procedures, 562
N
neurological examination, 452
horses,22s-227
nail clippers, cat/dog grooming, 179, 179
reurological tests, 452
examiration, 274
nail pullers, 188, 188
reuromuscular blockage, araesthesia,
mouth rot see stomatitis (mouth rot)
naloxone, 585
605-606
muck heap, 164
 narcotic analgesics, 373
neuroris, 49, 60, 60-61
mucking out, 172-175
nasal cavity, 80
type, 61, 61
deep litter system, 174
nasal epithelium ulceratior, 439
neuropathy, postanaesthetic, 627
equipment, 172-173
 nasal passage oedema, araesthiesia
neurotic behaviour (dogs), 253
principles, 172
complicatior (horses), 626
neurotrarsmitters, 62
semi-deep litter system, 174-175
rasal septum, 133-134
reutering, 12-13
shavinigs, 173-174
rasal speculum, 469, 469
reutraceuticals (cats/dogs), 199
straw bed, 173
nasogastric tube, 348
reutrophils, 74
mucolytics, 377
nasolacrimal duct, 69
toxic, 699
mucous membrares, 537-538
raso-oesophageal tubes, 222
 Newcastle's disease (fowl pest), 802
colour
riasotracheal intubation (horses), 623
rewspaper bedding, 1S1
ariaesthesia and, 603, 603
Natioral Hurt Committee, 22
rictitating membrare (third eyelid), 69
anaesthetic examiration, 578
 Natioral Radiation Protection Board (NRPB),
ridicolous birds, 123, 805
assessment, 338, 339, 350
42
nidifugous birds, 124, 805
hydration status, 350
natural active immunity, 429
nit, 634
deritistry examination, 564
natural barriers to drug distribution, 363
nitrous oxide (N,0)
icteric (jaundiced), S37
ratural passive immurity, 429-430
cut-out, 600
immunity,429
ratural selectior, 2, 243-244
 inhalatior anaesthetic carrier, 589
preoperative care, 523
ratural supplemerits, 379
rebreathing anaesthetic circuits, S92, 624
stomach, 85
nebulization, coughing, 437
nociception, anaesthesia arid, s81, 582
Index879
Index
nodes of Ranvier, 61
rutritional requirements
operart counter-conditioring (horses), 278
noisy patients, kerirels for, 145
cats/dogs, pregraricy, 205
operating table, tilting (horses), 619
nor-accidental injury (NAI), 14
dorkeys, 238
operatirng theatre, s07-508
nor-oily compourds, 401
horses, 234-238
mairiteriarice, 509
nor-rebreathing araesthetic circuits,
exotic,238
see aiso entries beginning theatre
593-595
lactation,236-237
operative procedures, 489
Ayre's T piece, 593, S94
mainiteriarce, 234
opioids
Bairn circuit, 594, S94, S9S
pregrarcy, 236
administration, S84, 584-585
equirie ariaesthiesia, 623
reproduction, 235
aralgesia, 373, 584, 584-585, 585
flow rates, S94
workirng, 234-235
horse premedicatior, 615
Lack circuit, S94, 595, S9S, S96
younigstock,237
reversal of, 585
Magill circuit, S94, S95, S95
nutritional status, mainitairing, 346-350
types, s8s
nonsense mutatiors, 308
feedirg methods, 346-350
 optical rierve block, 584
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory dnugs
food choice, 346, 349
optic chiasma, 63
(NSAIDs), 373
nutritioral support, 5s0-553
optic disc, 68
analgesia,582,S82
nuts (birds), 797
optic nerve, 69
dosage, S82
oral cavity
horses, 616
0
birds, 122
side effects, 582
oats (horses), 233
cats/dogs, 83
noradrenaline, 71-72
obesity, 214
horses, 143
norepinephrine, 71
cats/dogs
 oral examination/recording, 563-566
nose, first aid, 408
causes/risks, 206-207
coriscious examination, 563-564
no-see-ums,637
puppies, 201
 examiratior urder gerieral anaesthesia,
Notoedres cati, 640
geriatric patients, 358
564-566
ruclear medicire, 747-748
horses, 240-241
instrumentation, SS6, SS6
data collection, 748
ovariohysterectomy, 497
radiography, 566
 nuclear scintigraphy, 747
observational behiaviour, 244
recording firdinigs, 566
nucleocapsid, 675
observatior training (horses), 277
oral feeding, critical care, 222
nucleoli, 301
obsessive behaviour, 11
 oral hygiere
rucleus, 301
occipital lobe, 63
home care, 575
riurses
occupatioral health, 34-43
mainterarice, 571
client compliarice role, 390-391
ocular larva migraris (OLM), 646
 oral medicatior1
theatre practice, S11-S12
oesophageal auscultatior, araesthesia and,
birds, 296, 297
circulating rurse, S12
602
reptiles, 298,298
scrubbed rurse, 511-512
oesophiagus
small mammals, 295
rurturing skills, children, 4
birds, 122
orchidectomy (castratior), 12, 498
rutrierits, erergy coriterit, 193
cats/dogs, 84
orgarrelles, 50, 301, 302
nutrition
horses, 143,227
organi of Corti, 70
cats/dogs, 191-212
oestrogens, 379
Onientation, irrate behaviour, 244
essertial, 191-199
oestrous cycle (cats/dogs), 97-98, 98
omithosis (birds), 801
feeding serior dogs/cats, 208-212
oestrus
ororiasal fistula, 484
kittens, 204
cats,322
orphanis
pregnancy/lactation, 204-206, 323
dogs, 248, 328
badger cubs, 822, 822-823
puppies, 200-204
horses, 269
bats, 830
clirical, 213-224
oirtmerits, 372
birds, wild, 839-842
cancer, 218-219
old people's homes, comparior arimals in,
deer, 832-834
canine urolithiasis, 223
5,7
fox cubs, 825-826
chroric renal failure, 219-220
olfactiorn (cats), 254
grey squirrels, 835
derital disease, 217
olfactory bulb, 63
hares, 827-829
diabetes mellitus, 217-218
olfactory communication
hoglets (hedgehogs), 818
felirne lower urirary tract disease,
cats,257
rabbits, wild, 827-829
223-224
dogs, 247-248,248
wild mammals, 812-814
gastroiritestinal disease, 213-214
horses, 269, 270
Orthopaedic Fourdation for Animals, 314
liver disease, 220-221
oligoderdrocytes, 62
 orthiopaedic implarits, 503-504, S04
skin disease, 215-217
oliguria, 340, 410
extermal fixator (Kirschrer-Ehmer device),
horses, 225-241
omega-3 fatty acids
504-505
common foodstuffs, 230-234
canicer, 219
orthopaedic instruments, S13, S15, S17
dietary mariagemerit, 228-230
diabetes mellitus, 217
orthopaedic patierits (horses), 168
digestive system, 225-228
dogs, 209
orthopaedic piris, S04
practical feedinig, 238-241
omentum, 85
 orthopaedic wire, 503
requirements,234-238
omrivores, digestive system, 113-114
Oryctolagus cuniculus see rabbits, wild
 see aiso rutritional requirements
ommivorous lizards, 774, 776
 oscillometric sphygmomanometry, 604
see aiso feeding: individual animais/species
Onchocerca cervicalis, 643
Osterus osleni, 652
rutritioral assessment (dogs), 209
one-day-eveniting, 25
osmosis, 54
nutritional disorders (birds), 802
oocytes, 98
osmotic diuretics, 378
rutritioral imbalarce, 215
 operant conditioring (horses), 278
 osmotic effects, iodire-based solutioris, 743
880
Index
osmotic pressure/potertial, S4
exotic species, 80s-808
transport, 690-691
ossification, S6
horses
patient care, 337-359
osteoblasts, 49, 52
assessmert, 272
assessirig, 337-340
osteoclasts, 52
recognition in, 613, 615
body temperature, 351-352
osteocytes, S2
physiological resporse, 10
communication, 354
osteomyelitis, 505
reptiles, 807, 808
elimination, 340-346
Otodectes cynotis, 638-639, 639
resporises to, 10
coughing, 345-346
outbreeding, 320
small mammals, in, 806, 808
defecation, 343-345
ovarian bursa, 96
palatine veir veriepuricture (srakes), 299
urination, 340-343
ovaries (cats/dogs), 95-96
palpation, manual urine collection, 341-342
vomiting, 345
ovariohysterectomy (spay), 12, 496-497, 497
 palpebral reflex, araesthesia ard, 601
esseritial activities, 340
complications, 497
paricreas, 72,87
fluid intake, 350-351
over crowdirg (reptiles), 808
paricreatic juices, 87
grooming,353
over-grooming, 11
paricreatitis, 460, 461
keririeling, 340
overheating, arimal housing lighting, 149
paridemic, defimition, 678
mobilization, 352-353
Overmighit hospitalization, 145
panleukoperia, 699
nursing specific patients, 354-358
over pressure valve, 600
papaveretum, s8s
geriatric patients, 358
xa
oviparous reptiles, 779, 780
paper bedding (horses), 166, 168
neonatal/juvenile, 356-358
ovoviviparous reptiles, 779
papilloma, 485
recumberit patierits, 354-358
DL
ovum, 96
paradoxical respiration, 536
rutritioral status, 346-350
owls, 793
parainfluenza vinus (dogs), 677
theatre practice, 522-526
feedinig, 793
parakeets, 13
patierit categorizatior, 14s-146
orphans, 842
parallel Lack circuit, 59s, S96
patiert moritoring/observatior
restraint/hardling, 291
paralysis, 452-453, 453
derital procedures, 562-563
owrier preparation, anaesthesia, 578
Parascaris equorum, 647-648
high-deperidericy riursing, S34-538
horses, 611
parasites, 414, 633
paw liftirnig (dogs), 249, 249
oxyger1
badger specific, 820, 820
Paws for Kids, 14
inhalation araesthetic carrier, 588-589
birds, wild, 836, 836
peat bedding
respiratory distress, 435-436, 436
hedgehogs, 816, 816
advantages/disadvantages, 151
toxicity, 539, 589
nomericlature, 634
horses, 168
oxygeri-carryinig fluids, 547-550
see aiso ectoparasites; endoparasites
peat moss bedding (horses), 166
Oxygen failure waming device, 600
parasiticides, 418-420
‘pecking order' (dogs), 246
oxygen flush, 600
parasitology, 633-664
pectoral girdle (birds), 119
oxygen1 therapy, 538-542, 539
defmitionis, 633-634
pedigree analysis, 312, 313
delivery, S39-541
ectoparasites see ectoparasites 
pelham bit, 280, 280
face mask, 540
endoparasites see erdoparasites
pelvic cavity, SS
flow-by, 539-540
parasympathetic rervous system, 66, 66
pelvic examiration, bird sexing, 291
intratracheal catheter, S41
parasympatholytics, 379
pelvic girdle (birds), 119
nasal catheter, S40, S40
parasympathomimetics, 379
pelvis
oxyger1 cage, 540
parathyroid hormore (PTH) excess, 220
fractured, coristipatior, 344
oxyger collar, 540-541
paravinus (cats), 677
imaging, positioning in, 739, 739
fraction of inspired oxygen (Fo), S39
pareriteral feedirig, 349-350, 551-553, SS2
perile prolapse (tortoises/terrapirs), 790
humidification, S41-542, S42
monitoring, SS3
pernis (cat/dog), 95
monitoring, 541
solutioris for, 552
pentobarbital, 630
oxyglobin, 547-548, 548
verious access, S52
pepsin, 86
fluid therapy, 474
parietal lobe, 63
pepsinogen, 86
oxytetracycline, 368
parrots
perchies, 794, 838
oxytocin, 97, 103
Africari grey, 792, 798
perching birds, 792
Oxyuris equi, 652
restraint/hardlirng, 289, 289
percutaneous vascular catheterizatior, 543
sex determinatior, 291
Performing Arimals (Regulation) Act (192S),
P
particle blasting (air polishing), 558
46
pacers (hedgehiogs), 817-818
parturition see individual animais/species
Periactin (cyproheptadire), 347, 375
packed cell volume (PCV), 699, 699-700
parvovirus, 677
pericardial disease, 445
anaemia, 449
ELISA test, 688
perichondrum, 52
estimating, 846
 passive ventilatior1
perineal hemia, 485
hydration status assessmerit, 350
animal housing (cats/dogs), 148
perireural infiltratior, equire local
measuremerit, 699-700
stables, 167
ariaesthiesia, 628
pre-ariaesthietic test, 579
pastes, 372
periodonital/clinical attachmert level, 566
packed red cells (PRCs), S49
pasteurellosis (small mammals), 761
periodortal examiration, 564
pair, 10-11
patchies, 372
periodontal probe, 556
amalgesia pririciple, 582
PAT Dogs, 7
depth, 564-565, S6S
assessmerit, 272, 806
patellar luxations, 506
 peniodontal therapy, 571-574
behavioural response, 10
patenit ductus arteriosus (PDA), 444
instrumertation/equipment, 556-558
birds, 807, 808-809
pathogens, 154, 667
polishing, 574, S74
definition, 577, 805-806
 pathological samples
sulcular lavage, 574, S74
dyspnoea, 438
spoilage, 689-690
supragingival scalinig, 572-573
Index 881
Index
periodortal therapy (Cont'd)
pheasarts, 792
polishing units, 558
supraginigival scalinig/root planing, S73,
pherobarbital, 374, 587
polo, 26
S73-574
pherols, 158-159, 587
polymerase chair1 reaction, 313
periodontitis, 571, s72
 efficacy testing, 156
polymorphoruclear leukocytes (PMNs), 429
periosteal elevator, 558, SS9
pheriothiazines, 580, S80
polypharmacy, 368
periosteum, S2
horse premedication, 614
polyploidy, 311
peripheral rervous system, 65-66
pheriotype, 307, 308
polyps, 495-496
peripheral parental nutrition, S52
phenylproparolamine (Propalin), 497
polyuria, 341
peripheral pulse palpatior, 339
pheromores, 107
Pony Club, 24, 28-29
peripheral vein, cardiopulmorary
phlebitis, catheter mairitenance, 546
'porcupipes,165
resuscitation dnug admiristration, 608
phobias
portable appliarice testing (PAT), 39
peritoneal cavity, SS
dogs, 253
portosystemic shurit, 462
peritoneum, S5
horses, 278-279
positioring in imaging, 734-742
peritonitis, feline infectious, 424
phosphofnuctokinase deficiercy, 311
BVA/KC hip dysplasia, 736
persoral hygiene
phiosphiorus
elbow scoring schemes, 736
cleaninig/disirfection procedures, 155
birds, deficiency in, 802
large arimals, 740-742
reptile handling, 294
cats, 196, 211
carmon/splint bones, 741
stable mariagement, 175
dogs, 196
elbow, 741,742
pet abuse, 13-14
ageing, 210
fetlock, 740-741
action agairist, 14
pregnancy, 205
foot, 740, 740
indications, 14
photophobia, 406
hock/carpus, 741
see also welfare
physiology see specific animals
shoulder, 741-742
Pet Animals Act (1951, 1983), 4S
pia mater, 64
skull, 742
pet food, cats/dogs, 199-200
pica, 346
stifle, 742
commercial diets, 199-200
pineal body, 63
markers/legerids, 735-736
home-made diets, 199
pinna, 69
termiriology, 73s,735-736,736
low-calorie, 207-208, 208
piriwoms, 652
priniciples, 734-735
pethidire, 373,S8S
piperazirie, 362-363
restrairt, 735
petit mal seizures, 451
pituitary gland, 63
small arimals, 736-739
pet-keeping, 2, 2
placerita development (cats/dogs), 101-102
abdomer, 736-737
pet ownership, 12-13
blood capillanies, 103
chest, 736
control of pet, 13
zorary placenta, 103
distal extremities, 738
flea treatmerit, 12
placental barrier, 363
head/meck, 737
reutering, 12-13
plaque formation, 217
pelvis,739,739
socialization, 13
plasma,73-74
shoulder, 738
training, 13
drug conceritratiors, 364, 366
spine, 739
vaccinations, 12
fluid therapy, 474
postanaesthetic myopathy (horses), 627
womm treatmert, 12
samples, colour changes, 694
postaraesthetic reuropathy (horses), 627
pet shop legislation, 45
plasma erizymes, 702-703
post-hibemation anorexia (tortoises), 780,
pet therapy, 6, 6
plasma expariders, 474
780-782, 791
Pet Travel Scheme (PETS), 44
 plasma membrare, 301
postictal phiase, 404, 451
pet visitation, S
plasma proteirs, 54, 73-74
postoperative care, 524
phaeomelarin pigment, 320
plastic, 38
complications, 525-526, S26
pharitom pregriarcy (pseudocyesis), 323, 462
platelets, 74-75
dertal procedures, 563
pharmaceutical waste disposal, 683
coriceritrate, 549
procedures, 489
pharmacodynamics, 366-367
play behaviour
 posture see body posture
non receptor-mediated, 367
cats, 255
potassium (cats/dogs), 197
receptor-mediated, 366-367
dogs, 246
potassium chloride, 381
pharmacokiretics, 361-365
'playing dead' (birds), 839
potassium-sparing diuretics, 378
pharmacology, 361-391
pleura, SS
potentiation, 368
abbreviatioris, 385
pleural cavity, SS
Potter-Bucky grids, 724
additives, 370
conditioris affecting, 439
powders, 372
definition, 361
pleural disorders, 439, 440
power tools, sterilizatior, 531
history, 361
preumothiorax, 440, 440
precocial chicks, 80s, 840
 phamacodyramics see pharmacodyramics
surgery, 500-501
 orpharis, 842
phammacokinetics, 361-365
pododematitis (small mammals), 761
 precordial auscultation, araesthesia and, 602
pharmacy management, 388, 389
poikuria, 341
predation (cats), 255
toxicology see toxicology
point mutatiors, 308
preferred body temperature (PBT, reptiles),
veterirary legislatior1, 381
point-to-pointing,22-23
771
see aiso drug(s)
poisoning, 399-401
preferred optimum temperature zore (POTZ,
pharyngeal packing, dental procedures, 562
chemical bums, 399
reptiles), 771-772, 777
pharymgeal reflex, araesthiesia ard, 602
collectior of samples, 401
pregraricy
pharymgostomy tubes, 222, 348
dyspnoea, 438
cats/dogs, 99-104, 323, 328-329
phiaryrix
treatmerit, 400-401
charges, 102
cats/dogs, 81, 84, 85
poisorious reptiles, 292
developmert/implantation, 100
horses, 143
police dogs, 8
embryoric development, 99
882
Index
pregnaricy (Cont'd)
digestion, 87, 87
puppy parties, 13
 extra-embryoric membrare formatior,
dogs, 194-195
purge valve, 600
99-101, 102
ageing requiremenits, 209-210
purines, 307
feeding during, 204-206
deficiency, 195
Purkinje fibres, 76
gem cell layers, 101
excess, 194
pus, 483
placerita developmerit, 101-102
 pregnancy, intake during, 205
pyaemia, 678
false (pseudocyesis/pseudopregraricy), 323,
puppies feeding, 202
pyelonephritis, 440
462
genetics, 308
pylorus, 84
horses, rutritioral requirements, 236
horses, 229
pyrexia, 338
Toxocara canis, 64S
liver disease, 221
Pyrex tube, 719
pre-ictal phiase, 404, 451
prothrombin, 74
pyrimidines, 307
premate test, 688-689
protozoa, 415, 644, 657-660
pythons, 76s
premedication, 579-586, S80
coccidian, 657-658
horses, 613, 614-615
disinfection, 158
Q
premium foods (cats/dogs), 200
protraction, 58
quail, 792
preoperative care, 522
proximal convoluted tubule, 90
breeding, 798
dealing surgical site, S23, 523-524
proxymetacaine, 629
feeding, 792
preparation, 522-523
pseudocyesis (pseudopregnancy/false
quarititative buffy coat (QBC), blood smear,
procedures, 489
pregriarcy), 323, 462
697
prepuce (cats/dogs), 95
psittacire beak ard feather disease, 803
quarantine
prescribing drugs, 383-386
psittacosis, 670, 801
infectious diseases, 417
'cascade, 384-386, 385
Psoroptes cuniculi, 639
regulations, 44
coritrolled dnugs, 383
Psoroptes equi, 639, 639
stables, 170-172
classification/restrictiors, 384
 psychological needs, recumbent patients,
quartering, horse grooming, 184, 184, 185
legal/recommerided guideliries, 38S
356
quaternary ammonium compounds, 159
prescriptiori writing, 386
 Public Relations Organization for Dogs, 7
queen, cat breeding see cat breeding, queer1
 prescription-only medicines (POMs) disposal,
pullirng on the lead (dogs), 250
quick-release knot, 183, 184, 273, 273
160
 pulmorary disease, araesthesia ard, 609
prilocaine, 629
pulmonary membrane, 80, 82
R
primary radation beam, 41, 41
pulmorary valve, 76
rabbit(s)
prisoris, comparior arimals in, 6-7
pulse
aggressior, 287-288
procaine, 583
anaesthesia and, 602-603
anatomy/physiology, 109-112
PRO Dogs, 7
assessmernt, 338,339, S3S
biological data, 113
 PRO dogs Active Therapy, 7
deficit, 536
derital issues, 109-110, 111
progestogeris, 379
rate, 76-77, 535-536
digestive system, 110-111
programmed cell death, 303
anaesthetic examination, 578
morphology, 109-110
progressive retinal atrophy (PRA), 314
volume, 536
musculoskeletal system, 110, 110
prohibited substarces (horse diet), 234
pulse oximetry, 338, 603
reproductive system, 112
prolactin (cats/dogs), 97, 103
equine ariaesthesia, 618, 619
urinary system, 111-112
pronation, S8
oxyger therapy monitoring, 541
beddirig, 753, 756
Propalin (phenylproparolamine), 497
puncture wounds, 396
breeding, 758, 760
prophase, 304
pupil(s), 69
castration (orchidectomy), 498
prophy paste, 558
 diameter, araesthesia ard, 601
diseases/corditioris in, 761-764
propofol, 497, 587
puppies
distress, behaviour associated with, 806
prostaglaridir, 373
Ancylostoma caninum, 648
environment enrichment, 754
prostate glarid, 94
care of, 332-333
feeding methods, 754, 7S9-760
prostatic disease, 463
development of, 101, 333
house, 756
protectants, 374
during pregnancy, 329, 329
housing, 753-7Ss,754,756
Protection of Arimals Act (1911), 10, 45, 774
elimiration pattems, 251
outdoor, 756, 756
 Protection of Arimals Act (1922), 47
examination, 332-333
veteririary practice, withir, 756
 Protectior of Animals Act (1988), 4S
feeding, 200-203
infectious diseases, 425-426
 Protection of Arimals (Araesthetics) Acts
energy coniterit, 201-202
nomal values, 8s6, 858
(1954, 1982), 45
musculoskeletal growth, 200-201
nutritional requirements, 7s9-760
Protectior of Badgers Act (1992), 843
nutritioral risk factors, 201
pain, behaviour associated with, 806
protective clothing
optimum growth, 201
parturition, 758
horse isolation, 171
weaning, 200
released into wild, 13
radiation exposure, 42-43
hand-rearing, 333
restraint/hardling, 287, 287, 288
protein
nutritional demands, 333
sexing, 286
cancer, 219
registering,333
temperature, optimum, 757
cats, 194-195
resuscitatior, 331
see aiso rabbits, wild
ageing requirements, 211
selling.333
rabbits, wild, 826-829
deficiency, 195
socialization, 13
admissior1 reasons, 826
excess, 194
suckling, 330, 331, 332
capture,827-828
pregrancy requirements, 205
trairing classes, 13
feedirig, 827, 828, 828-829
critical care, 222
vaccination, 333
housing, 827, 828
diabetes mellitus, 217
woming,333
cleaning, 827
Index883
Index
rabbits, wild (Cont'd)
rasp,188, 188
reproductive system
myxomatosis, 826
rats
birds, 123-124
orpharis, 827-829
aggression, 285
cats/dogs, 93-104
transportation, 827-828
anatomy/physiology, 113-114
disorders, 462-463
weaning, 828
bedding, 753
female, 462
rabies virus, 419, 422-423, 677
breedirng, 760, 761, 764
male, 463
racing plates, 188
digestive system, 113-114
female, 95-97, 96
radiation exposure/safety, 41, 41-43,
diseases/corditiors in, 763-764
oestrous cycle, 97-98
724-725
distress, behaviour associated with, 806
ferrets, 11s-116
controlled area, 42
environment errichment, 754
fertilization, 98-99,99
dosemeter/dosimetry, 42, 725
feeding methods, 754, 759-760
fish, 131
effects of, 724
hardling, 284-285
male, 93-95
harmful effects, 41
housing, 7s3-7ss, 758, 758
spematozoon stnucture, 9s, 96
legislation, 724
nomal values, 8S6-857
pregriaricy, 99-104
maximum permissible dose (MPD), 43
rutritioral requirements, 759-760
rabbits, 112
persoral monitoring, 42
pain, behaviour associated with, 806
reptiles, 124-125
protectior1 from, 41, 724, 724-725
restraint, 284, 284-285
surgery, 496-498
clothing, 42-43
sexinig,285,286
reptiles
see aiso radiography
temperature, optimum, 757
 advantages/disadvaritages of owriership,
Radiation Protection Advisor (RPA), 42, 724
see aiso small mammals
7S2
Radiatior Protection Supervisor (RPS), 42
ratting, 8
aggression, 292
radiation therapy, tumours, 487-488
Rearimyl, 347
ariatomy/physiology, 124-128
radiographic cassettes, 728
rebreathing anaesthetic circuits, 592-593
arimal husbandry, 764-791
radiographic exposures, 849-850
circle system, S92, 592-593, 593
breedirnig, 76s-769, 779-780
radiographic film, 72s, 72s-726
equine anaesthesia, 623, 623-624, 624
regimes,779-780
care/storage,725
to arid fro system, 593, S93
brumation, 780
film speed, 726
types, 592-593
diseases/clinical conditions, 780-791,
fommirig ar image, 72s-726
receptors, 60
781-791
structure, 726
recessive geries, 306, 310, 311
distress in1, 807, 808
radiographs
recovery boxes, 62s, 62S
eggs,780
coritrast, 733-734
 recovery room, operating theatre, 508
feeding,770,772-779
factors influericing, 734
rectal speculum, 469, 469
gestation, 780
dersity, 733-734
rectovaginal fistula, 484
hibemation, 780
film faults, 734, 734
rectum
hospitalized, 808
latitude, 733-734
cats/dogs, 89
housinig, 764, 766, 768-772, 769, 770
latitude, dersity/coritrast, 733
horses, 228
see aiso vivarium
tissue appeararce, 733
surgery, 495-496
incubation, 780
radiography, 717-725
recumbenit patienits, 354-358
injectior1 of, 299-300
conitrast, 742-744
complicatioris, 35s-356
medication1 administration, 298, 298-300
double coritrast, 743
nursing corisideratioris, 354-355
rutrition, 772-779
indications/methiods, 74s-746
red blood cells see erythrocytes
pairn in1, 807, 808
regative media, 743
red cell parasites, 698
poisonous, 292
positive media, 743-744
redirected behaviour (dogs), 253
restrairt/hiandling, 292-294
uuse of, 743-744
redistribution, 363
species kept as pets, 76s-769
effects, 721-725
red mite (birds), 800
vivarium see vivarium
heart disease, 448
reflex arc,62, 62
water, 777-778
horse foot preparatior, 187
reflexes, 62-63
see aiso individual species
lizards, 292-293
inrate behiaviour, 244
Research Deferice Society, 11
marual restraint, 43
refractory period, 62
residual current device (RCD), 40
principles, 717-721
regioral ariaesthesia (horses), 628
residual volume, 82
electrical erergy, 719
regioral rierve block, 584
respiration
electromagrietic spectrum, 718,
regurgitation,345,458-459
anaesthesia and, 605
718-719
birds, 803
assessmerit, 338-340
physics, 717-718
reinis, 280
birds, 122
X-ray productior, 720, 720-721
remedial bar shoes, 188, 188
cellular, 80
X-ray tube coristruction, 719-720
reral artery, 90
control, 82
processing chemicals, 43
reral tubule, 90
extemal, 82
disposal, 161
renal vein, 90
intermal/tissue, 82
records book, 43, 43
repetitive injury, abuse indication, 14
measuremerit defimitiors, 596
risk assessmert, 35
Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and
moritors, 605, 617-618
safety, 724-725
 Darigerous Occurrerce Regulations
temirology, 82
staff imvolved with, 42
(1995), 38
respiratory arrest during anaesthiesia (horses),
see aiso radiatior1 exposure/safety
 reproductive behaviour
626-627
radioisotope administration, 748
cats,257
respiratory competerice assessment, 394-395
radiopharmaceuticals, 747
dogs, 248-249, 249
 respiratory disease
raptors see birds of prey
horses, 268-269
birds, 801-802
884
Index
respiratory disease (Cont'd)
ring nerve block, 583
sarcoptic mange, 419
lizards/sriakes, 785
ringwom (dermatophytosis), 419, 642, 642,
foxes, 824
rabbit, 425-426
712-713
sawdust bedding
respiratory distress
diagriosis, 712-713
advaritages/disadvaritages, 151
acute, 435-436, 436
signs,712
horses, 166
puppy, S38
RNA, 307, 308
scale rot (mecrotic dermatitis), 781
respiratory emergericies durirg ariaesthesia,
messeriger, 308
scalers, 557, 557
609-610
transfer, 308
supragingival scaling, 572
respiratory obstruction
road traffic acciderits (deer), 830-831
scales (fish), 129
anaesthesia, during, 610
Road Traffc Act (1972), 13
scaling, S57
horses, 626
Robert Jories bardage, 405-406, 406
harid scaling instruments, S57-558
signis of, 610
rock python, 292, 293
mecharical scalirg instruments, S58
treatment, 610
rodent aratomy/physiology, 113-114
 scalpel blade, 559
respiratory rate, S36-537
digestive system, 113-114
scaly face mite (birds), 800
anaesthetic examination, 578
roderit coritrol, 164, 254
scaly leg mite (birds), 800
respiratory sourids, classification, S36,
rodenticide poisoning, 450
scar fomation, 478
536-537
rods, 68
scatter radiation, 41, 41,722-724
xa
respiratory system
roe deer (Capreofus capreofus), 831
control,723-724
anatomy/physiology, 80-82
Romanowsky stains, 695
sources, 722-723
DL
birds, 120-122
roots, equine diet, 232
Schmorl's disease (small mammals), 762
discharges, 439
rosella, 792
schiools, comparion animals in, 7
fishi, 131
rotary scalers, 558
Schwarin cells, 61
medical corditioris, 43s-440
rotavirus (horses), 677
scissors, dog/cat grooming, 178, 178
reptiles, 124
roughiage
sciuromorphs, 113
sriakes, 127
equine diet, 230-232,239
Sciurus carofinensis see grey squirrels
tortoises/turtles/terrapins, 127
rutrient coritent, 230
sclera, 68
respiratory tract
Rouleaux fomation, 698
scrambled egg mix, 841
birds, 121-122
roundwom, 419
scratchirg (cats), 256-257, 259
disease (cats), 423
birds, 800-801
 scratchirng posts, 259
dogs, 80, 80
puppy woming, 333
screws, orthopaedic implarits, S03, S04
surgery, 500-501
treatmerit, 12
scrotum, 93
respondent corditioring (horses), 277-278
 Royal College of Veteriniary Surgeoris (RCVS),
scrub area, operating theatre, 508
restraint
33, 34
scrubbing-up procedure, 510, S10
birds, 288-292, 809, 837
Guide to Professioral Conduct, 381, 382
search and rescue dogs, 8
cats, 181, 263-264
Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain
sebaceous glarid(s)
dogs, 181, 260, 260-262
(RPSGB) medicine container
cats/dogs, 107
exotic species, 283-294
guidelines, 387
secretions, communicatior (dogs), 248
grooming (cats/dogs), 181
 Royal Society for the Preveritior of Cruelty
swellirg (small mammals), 763
horses, 272-275
to Animals (RSPCA), 10
sebum, 107
imaging, 735
nbber matting, stable use, 166
 secoridary radiation see scatter radiatior 
reptiles, 292-294
rubbish raiding (dogs), 250
secretiors, immurity, 429
small mammals, 283-288
nigs (horses), 184
security, animal housing (cats/dogs), 146
restrictiori erizymes, 313
nunny nose syndrome (tortoises), 788
sedatives, 380
resuscitation, 403
ruptures, 484-485
premedication, s80-581
cardiac arrest during araesthiesia,
horses, 61s
607-609
S
seeds (birds), 796, 797
equipment/drugs (horses), 626
Sabouraud's dextrose agar, 713
seizure alert dogs, 8
puppies, 331
saffar, 587-588
seizures,451
reticulocyte, 698
'saffari reactioris,' 587
Seldinger technique, 543
retina, 67,68
salire purge, poisorirg, 400
selerium, 197
retraction, 58
salivary glarids, 83-84
self-mutilation, 11
Retraining of Racehiorses (RoR), 24
horses, 227
horses, 271
retroviral gerietic material, 676
salivatior, araesthesia and, 602
 semi-deep litter system, mucking out,
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, 641,659
Saimoneffa,671
174-175
rhynchocephalia, 124
salmonellosis, 419, 423
semi-moist foods (cats/dogs), 200
riborucleic acid see RNA
birds, 801
seminiferous tubules, 94
nibosomes, 50
small mammals, 763
serile ruclear sclerosis, 492
ribs
saltatory conduction, 61
sersitization (horses), 277
 broken, abuse indication, 14
sandflies, 660
serisory compromise, geriatric patients, 358
horses, 136
saphenous veir
serisory crista, 70
Rickettsia, 670, 671
fluid therapy, 474
sensory reurors, 61
rickettsias, 414
intraverious access, 542, S42
senisory orgars, first aid, 406-411
Rideal-Walker test, 156
small mammals, 296
see aiso individual organs
Riders' Qualification Certificate, 22
sarcoma, 485
 separatiori arixiety (dogs), 252
Riding for the Disabled Associatior (RDA),
Sarcoptes, 711
septicaemia, 352, 678
29
Sarcoptes scabiei, 640, 640, 824
seroma fommation, 483
Index885
Index
Sertoli cell tumour, 463
cats/dogs, 104-107
pain, behaviour associated with, 807
serum samples, 693-694
epidermal structure, 107-108
restrairit/hardling, 293, 294
centrifuging, 694
structure, 104-106, 106
sexing,294,294
colour chariges, 694
disinfection, 157-159
species kept as pets, 76s-766
service dogs, 7, 8, 8-9
immunity, 429
stomach location, 298
severe combined immunodeficiercy disease
preoperative care, 523
teeth removal from skir, 293
(SCID), 311
rabbits, 109
water, 777,777-778
sevoflurane, 591
recumbent patierits, problems in, 356
 snake-sexing probe, 294
sex chromosomes,302,310
sampling techriques, 711-712
snapping turtle, 294
sex education, 4
scrapings, 711
'sneeze barrier,' 152
sex hommores (cats/dogs), 98
swabs, 712
Sruggle Pads
sexing
skir1 disease, 483-484
badgers, 822
birds, 291
rutritioral requiremerits, 21s-217
grey squirrels, 834
lizards, 293, 293
skin flaps, 482
hedgehogs, 817
small mammals, 285, 28s, 286
skini glarids, 107
wild mammal trarsportatiorn, 812
snakes, 294, 294
skirn grafts, 482
SOAP method, 337
tortoises/terrapirs, 294, 295
skiniks, 767
social behaviour
sexual dimorphism (birds), 291
skull
cats, 255
sexual reproduction, meiosis, 303
birds, 118
dogs, 249-250
shampoo,372
fracture, 407
horses, 278
dogs, 181-182
horses, 133-134
social interactior (cats), 257
sharps disposal, 39, 683
imaging, 742
socialization, 13
shaving bedding
sleeping (horses), 267
horses, 269
colic and, 168
slicker brush, cat/dog grooming, 177, 178
puppies, 13
horses, 166
slirig, 353, 353
social skills (humar), pet-keeping influerice,
mucking out, 173-174
small intestire
3
 shieathed reedle techrique, S43-544
birds, 122
 Society for Comparior Animal Studies
shieath washing (horses), 184
cats/dogs, 86, 86-87
(SCAS), 16
sheep dog trials, 8
horses, 144,227
 soda lime, rebreathing araesthetic circuits,
shell gland (birds), 123
small mammals
592,593,624
shell rot (tortoises/terrapiris), 788-789
advartages/disadvaritages of owriership,
sodium, 196, 210
shippirg fever, 275
7S2
sodium charnel blockers, 374
shock, 401-402
anatomy/physiology, 109-117
soft bill birds, feeding, 796, 797
clirical sigris, 401-402, 467-468
arimal husbardry, 751-764
soft palate dislocation, araesthesia
gastrotomy, 494
bedding, 753
complicatior (horses), 626
mariagemerit, 468
breeding, 758, 760, 760-761
soft-shelled turtle, 294
patient monitoring, 468
diseases/conditioris in, 761-764, 764
solid nutrient solutions, 674
postoperative complications, 52s, S26
distress in, 806, 808
solid oily compourds, 401
surgical rursing, 467-468
envirormental enrichment, 754
solutions, 371
treatmert, 402
feedirng, 754, 758, 759-760
somatic cells, 302
wild mammals, 812
healthy clinical values, 856-858
somatostatin,72
shoulder imaginig, 738, 741-742
housing, 751-758,753-75s
Somnulose,630
shovel, mucking out, 172
injectior1 of, 295-297
sonic scalers, Ss8, 572
showing
medication administration, 295-297
Southem blotting, 314
cats, 326
rutrition, 758,7s9-760
 space blarkets, temperature mairiteriarice,
dogs, 333-334
pairn in, 806, 808
352
horses, 27
restraint/hiardling, 283-288
 spay see ovariohysterectomy (spay)
show jumping, 25,26
sexinig, 285,28s, 286
special waste disposal, 39, 160
shredded paper bedding, 151
substrate, 753
Special Waste Regulatioris (1996), 38, 160
sickress, equine rutritior requiremerits, 237
see aiso individual species
specula, 469
sighit, 67-69
smell, 67
spemmatic cord, 94
silage, equine diet, 231
smoke inhalatior1, dyspnoea, 438
spermatozoa, 708
single puppy syrdrome, 330
smooth muscle, S0
spermatozoor1 stnucture, 95, 96
sinoatrial node, 76
sriaffle bits, 279-280, 280
Spilopsyffus cuniculi,826
sinus, 484
sriake hook, 293
spinal cord, 64, 64-65
sinus arrhythmia, S36
sriakes
spinal rerve block, 584
sirus hairs, 107, 180
aggression, 293
spinal nerves, 62, 66
skeletal muscle, S0, S9, 60
anatomy/physiology, 126 127
spirie imaging, 739, 739-740
structure, 58
bite, 293
spirilla, 668
skeletal system
breedirg, 76s-766
spirochaetes, 668
cats, S6
diseases/clirical coriditioris in, 781-786
spleer, 79
dogs, 56, 57, 201
distress, behiaviour associated with, 807
disease, 461
horses see equine anatomy/physiology
feedirng, 76s-766, 772-774, 774
injuries, 410
reptiles, 124
medication admiristratior, 298, 298-300
lymphoma, 463
tortoises/turtles/terrapirs, 127
mouth examination, 293
splerectomy, 494
skin, 711-713
nutrition, 772-774
splinit bore imaging, 741
886
Index
splints,405,406,502-503
defnitionis, 154, 526-527
suckling
sporiges,183,183
dertistry instrumentation/equipmerit,
cats/kitters, 325, 325
spongy bone, 52
560-561
dogs/puppies, 330, 331, 332
'spooking' (horses), 185
equipment care, S30-531
suction, denital procedures, S62
spore tests, S29
heat, 528-529
sudoriferous glards
sports dogs, 8
microbe susceptibility, 156
cats/dogs, 107
sprayinig
monitoring, 529
secretions, communication (dogs), 248
cats, 258-259
operatirig theatre, 508
suffering, defimition, 10
chinchillas, 287
packinig supplies for, 529-530
sugar beet pulp (horses), 232
squamata, 124
pririciples, S26-527
purchase/storage, 240
squamous cells, S0
storage after, 531-532
supination, S8
squirrels, grey see grey squirrels
stemum
The Supply of Relevart Medicinal Products
stable desigr, 163-170
birds, 118-119
Order 2005, 381, 382
bedding, 166, 167-168
horses, 136
supra-vital stains, 695
drairage, 165
steroid araesthetics, 587-588
surfactarit, defimition, 154
feed room, 164
stethioscope, equire ariaesthiesia moritoring,
surgery, defnition, 33
fittinigs, 169-170
616-617
 surgery preparation, 509-511
xa
floors, 165
stifle imaging, 742
equipment diathermy/preparation, 509
foaling box, 170
stimularit laxatives, 379
gloving procedure, S10-511
DL
hay/straw storage, 164
stimulus, definition, 60
gowming procedure, S10
heating, 168, 168
stomach, 84-86
scnubbing-up procedure, S10, S10
isolation box, 170
birds,122
 surgical attire, s09-510
lighting, 168
horses, 144, 227
surgical attire, S09-510
roofing, 165-166, 166
stomatitis (mouth rot)
surgical instrumenits, S13, S14-S1S, S15,
site corisideratioris, 163-164
lizards/sriakes, 781
S16
soil type, 164
tortoises/terrapiris, 788
surgical kits, S17
size, 16s, 165
stranguria, 340
packing, S15
tack room, 164
stratum basale, 105
toothi extractior, S59
ventilatior, 167
stratum comeum, 105
surgical kriots, 521-522
walls, 165
stratum grarulosum, 105
surgical rursing, 467-506
yard layout, 164-165
stratum spinosum, 105
conditions, 483-489
stable maragement
straw
see aiso individual conditions
clearing,172,174, 175
bedding
fluid therapy, 470-477
disease coritrol methods, 171, 172-175
 advaritages/disadvartages, 151
procedures by body region, 489
isolation, 170-172
chroric obstructive pulmorary disease,
see aiso individual regions
protocol, 171
167
shiock, 467-468
mucking out see mucking out
horses, 166, 167
tumours, 487,487
quarantine, 170-172
mucking out, 173
urinary catheterization, 468-470
stable rubber, 184
equine diet, 232,240
woumds/wourd maragement, 477-483
stable vices, 169-170
purchase, 240
surgical site
stable yard layout, 164-165
storage, 164,240
chlorhexidine use, 157-158
stallions
streptococci, 668
iodophor use, 158
nutritior requirements, 236
 stress, horse trarsportation, 275
suspensions, 371
sexual behaviour, 268
stridor, 339
susperisory apparatus (horses), 138, 141,
stapes, 69
strongyles, 650-652
142
staphylococci, 668
large, 651, 651
suspersory ligamerit, eye, 69
Staphylococcus aureus, 671
small, 650
suture kit, tooth extractior, Ss9
staples, 480, 519
Stongyles equinus, 651
sutures, 518-522
starch, 229
Strongytes vulgaris,6S1
altematives, S19
starvatior1, 346
Strongyloides, 650
continuous, 522
anaesthesia preparation, 578, 611
Strongyloides westeri, 650
interrupted, 522
status epilepticus, 404, 451
Strongyfus edentatus, 652
material, 518,S19, S20
stay apparatus (hiorses), 141-142
stnuvite, 223
reedles, 519, S21
stealing items (dogs), 250
stud cat, 321, 322,322
pattems, S19,S21
steam urder pressure see autoclave (steam
stud dog,327,327
surgical kriots, S21-522
urder pressure); sterilizatior1
student murses, 34
tooth extraction, Ss9
steatorrhoea, 343
stupor, 402
wourd maragement, 480
steeplechiasing, 22-23, 26
subcutareous fluid administration, 350
suxamethonium, 606
stereotypies, 11
 subcutareous injection
swabs
cats, 11
birds, 297
skin, 712
dogs, 11, 253
reptiles, 299
sterilization, 530
horses, 11, 270-271
small mammals, 295
swallows, 842
sterile store area, operating theatre, S08
subluxations, 50s-506
swan hook, 291
sterilization, 526-532
submetacentric chromosomes, 302
swaris
bacteria, 156
submissive body postures (dogs), 247, 247
orphan care, 842
cold, 527-528
succinyl choline, 606
restraint/hardling, 291, 836, 837
Index
887
Index
sweat glands
teratogeris, 311
thrush (horses), 168, 187
cats/dogs, 107
terferadire, 375
thymus, 80
secretiors, commurication (dogs), 248
terrapin(s)
thyrocalcitorin, 72
sweat scraper, 185
 anatomy/physiology, 127
thyroid furictior1 test, 703
sweet itch, 637, 638
breeding, 769
thyroid glard, 72
swifts, 842
feeding, 769, 779
thyroid homone, 703
swim bladder, 130
medicatior admiristration, 298-300
thyroid-stimulating homore (TSH), 379
 swimming (reptiles), 771
nutrition, 779
thyroxine (levothyroxine), 72, 379
symbiotic orgarisms, 667
release irito wild, 13
ticks, 641
sympathetic nervous system, 66, 66
restraint/handling, 294
cats/dogs, 641
sympatholytics, 380
sexing,294
lizards/srakes, 783-784
sympathomimetics, 380
species kept as pets, 769
tidal volume, 82
symarthrosis joint, 56
territorial fighting (badgers), 819, 820
Tieman's catheter, 468
syriergism, 368
territories
'tie' position (dogs), 328
symovial fluid, 714
cats, 25s,257
time, X-ray exposure, 721
symovial joint, S7, S7
dogs, markirig,248,252
time-limited feeding, 203
symtosis joint, S7
testis, 93-94
tissue, 49-56
syringes
test matings, 312
adhesive, 480, 519
feeding, 347
testosterone, 95
laboratory diagnostic aids, 713-716
sterilization, 530
tetamus (horses), 427-428
perfusion, drug absorption, 362
tetracyclires, 373
T lymphocytes, 428
T
tetralogy of Fallot, 444
to ard fro system, rebreathirig araesthietic
tabby pattem, 320
thalamus, 63
circuits, 593, 593
tablets, 371
thieatre araesthiesia, 619-620
horses, 623-624, 624
tachycardia, 445
theatre practice, 507-532
Tokay geckos, 292
tachypnoea, anaesthesia ard, 609
asepsis/sterilizatior, 526-532
tongue (horses), 226
tack room, 164
health arid safety, S12
torisils, 79
tactile commuricatior (horses), 270, 270
instrumentation, S12-517
tooth see dentistry: entries beginning dental;
Taenia,6SS,655-656
rurses role, S11-512
teeth1
Taenia taeniaeformis, 656
patient care, 522-526
topical ariaesthesia, 583
 tail loss see autotomy (tail loss)
pollution monitoring, 600
horses, 628
tape impression, 712
surgery preparation, 509-511
tortoise(s)
tapetum lucidum, 68
surgical urit, 507-508
anatomy/physiology, 127,128
tapewoms see cestodes (tapeworms)
sutures, S18-522
ar1orexia, post-hibematior, 780, 780-782,
tarsorrhaphy, 492
theatre mairiteriarce, 509
791
tartar fommation, 217
theatre recovery, keririels, 145
breedirig, 767-768
taste, 67
theory of evolution, 243
diseases/clinical conditions in, 786-791
taurine, dietary (cats), 194
therapeutic index, 365
distress, behiaviour associated with, 807
team chasing, 26-27
therapeutic range, 365
feedirig, 767-768, 778-779
teethi
thermocouples, 529
subadult/adult, 778
brushing, S75
thermoregulatior, 107
hatchilirigs, 778-779, 779
cleaning, 217
themmoregulation (cats), 254
medication administration, 298-300
crown1 polishing, 574, S74
The Welfare of Arimal Trarisit Order (1997),
nutrition, 778-779
extractior, instrumentatior/equipmert,
275
pain, behaviour associated with, 807
558-560
thiamine (vitamin B,) deficiency
restraint/hardling, 294
horses, 134, 13s, 136, 225-226
(lizards/snakes), 784
sexing, 294, 295
mobility, 566, 566
thiazide diuretics, 379
species kept as pets, 767-768
rasping (horses), 274
thiopental, 363
water,778,779
see aiso dentistry; entries beginning dental
thiopental sodium, 586-587
tortoiseshell cats, 310, 310
telencephalor, 63
third eyelid (rnictitating membrare), 69
total lurg capacity, 82
telophiase, 305
thoracic cavity, 54-5S, SS
total parenital rutrition (TPN), SS2, SS3
temperature (body), S34-535
thioracic drains, 481-482
total proteir, pre-anaesthietic test, 579
araesthetic examiration, 578
thoracic fluid, 714
tourriquet, 396, 396
assessmerit, 338
thoracic massage, 608
toxaemia, 678
controlling, 351-352
thioracic wall
Toxascaris feonina, 647-658
measurement, S34
 dysfurction, anaesthiesia arid, 609
toxicology, 369-370
monitoring, catheter mainterance, 546
injury, 438
examination, 715
nursing considerations, 352
thoracotomy, 501
factors affecting, 369
regulatior, rieoratal/juverile patients, 357
thoroughbreds, 21-22, 24, 26
toxinis, 671
temperature (envirormerital)
thiree-day-evertinig, 26
Toxocara canis, 64s, 645-646
animal housing (cats/dogs), 149
thrombocytes, 74-75
life cycle, 645-646
operating theatre, 508
thrombocytopenia, 450
zoonotic irifection, 646
temporal lobe, 63
thrombophlebitis, 352, S52
Toxocara cati, 646-647
tendors, 58
thrombus fomation, intraverious
life cycle, 647
horses, 140-141
catheterizatior, 352
toxoids, 380
teriesmus, 343, 495
through-the-needle techrique, 544
Toxoplasma gondii, 658, 658-659
888
Index
toxoplasmosis, 419
twitch use in horses, 274, 274-275
fox cubs, 82s
cats, 425
tying rings, 169
grey squirrels, 835
toys (birds), 794
tying up (horses), 183, 184, 273, 273
rabbits/hares, 828
trachea, 81
tympanic membrane, ear, 69
wild mammals, 813
birds, 121
Tyzzer's disease (small mamimals), 763
submissive (dogs), 252
collapse, 437, 437
territory marking (dogs), 248, 252
tracheotomy, 500
U
urine collectior, 341-342
trairing, 13
ulcers, 484
urine productior assessment, 341
foals, 279
ulnar vein venepuncture (birds), 297
urire, 704-711
horses see horse(s), trairing
ultrasonic cleariers, 513
assessment, 343
puppies, 13
clearing/sterilization, 560-561, S61
collectior1/preservation, 704-705
trariquilizers, 380
supragingival scaling, 572
communication (dogs), 248
traniscription, 308, 308
ultrasoric scalers, 558
microscopic examiriatior, 707-711
trarisfer RNA (tRNA), 308
ultrasound, 744, 746-747
physical properties, 70s-707
trarsgeriesis, 316
examinatiori areas, 747
 blood/blood pigments, 707
trarsitiorial cells, urine, 708
heart disease, 448
chemical tests, 706-707, 707
 Trarsit of Animals (Road and Rail) Order
initeractiors, 744,746
colour, 705
xa
(1975), 275
 operatiorial display modes, 746-747
odour, 705
trarislation, 308,308
patient preparation, 747
pH, 705
DL
trarislocation defects, 312
trarisducer, 746
specific gravity, 706, 706
trarisportation, 353, 353
umbilical hemia, 485
turbidity (cloudiniess), 705
legislation, 46
Uncinaria stenocephala, 648
production, 93
see aiso individual animais/species
urcorditional love, 4
cats/dogs, 93
trauma,442
uricorisciousriess, 402-403
rabbits, 111
tortoises/terrapirs, 789-790
assessmert, muscle relaxarits arid, 60s-606
urine scalding, recumbent patierits, 355
treated waste disposal, 160
deathi vs, 402
uririe specific gravity, pre-araesthietic test,
treats (cats/dogs), 200
urderweight (horses), 241
579
trematodes, 644, 657
urruly behaviour (dogs), 2s0-251
uririogenital system
trial and error leaming, 244
UN-type approved containers, 160
lizards, 126
Trichodectes canis, 634
urates, post-hibermatior arorexia in1
snakes, 127
trichomoniasis (birds), 801
tortoises, 781
tortoises/turtles/terrapirs, 127
Trichophyton, 642
ureter, 92,92
uromastix, feeding, 774-776
Trichuris vulpis, 649-650, 650
ectopic, 442
uterine contractiors (cats/dogs), 104
tricuspid valve dysplasia, 444
urethira
uterine tube, 96
triiodothyronine, 72
female, 93
uters
Triodontophorus, 652
male, 93
birds, 123
triple drip, equine araesthesia, 620-621
surgery, 499-500
blood supply, 97
triploidy, 311
urethirostomy, 499-500
16-96 's80p/s1e3
trisomy, 311
urethrotomy, 499-500
uvea, 68
trochleaplasty, 506
urinalysis, 343, 579
Trombicula autumnalis, 638, 639,640
uririary calculi, 440, 441, 441
V
'trotting up,' 273
removal, 499
vaccination(s), 12, 420, 430, 430-432
tnu-cut needle biopsy, tumour diagrosis,
uriniary catheterizatior, 442, 468-470
adverse reactions, 432
486-487,487
types, 443
booster, 12
tube feedinig, 347
urire collection, 342, 704
dogs, 328
administration, 347, 349
urinary catheters, 468-469
failures, 432
daily regimes, 349
sterilization, 530
kittenis, 326
mainterance, 347
urinary iricontinence, 442, 497
management, 431-432
types,348
urinary obstructior, 440, 441
reonatal/juverile patierts, 358
tuberculocide, 154
urinary output, anaesthiesia and, 605
puppies, 333
tuberculosis (badgers), 820, 823
urinary pH modifiers, 380
routes, 431-432
tubular epithelial cells, 708
uririary system
types, 431
tumours, 485-489
anatomy/physiology, 89-93
killed (inactivated), 431, 431
berign, 485
birds, 123
live atteriuated (modified), 431, 431
causes, 486
fish, 131
vaccines, 380
complications, 486
medical corditioris, 440-443
Vacutairier kit, 691, 691
diagn10sis, 486-487
rabbits, 111-112
vagina
laboratory diagriostic aids, 714-715
reptiles, 124
birds, 123
maligriarit, 485-486
uririary tract disease (cats), 211, 223-224
cats/dogs, 97
treatmerit, 487-489
urirary tract surgery, 498-500
vaporization, volatile ariaesthetic agents,
turtle(s)
urination, 340-343
591, S91
anatomy/physiology, 127
excitemerit (dogs), 252
vaporizer,599
breeding, 769
inappropriate (dogs), 251-252
vascular ring aromaly, 444
feedirig, 769,779
stimulatior (orphars)
vasculogenic shock, 401
nutrition, 779
badgers, 823
vas deferers, 94
species kept as pets, 769
deer, 833
vasodilators, 380
Index889
Index
vasovagal reflex, lizard trarice, 292
vitamin B, deficiency (lizards/srakes), 784
clirical waste, 160, 160
vector, 633
vitamin B complex (cats/dogs), 198
legislation, 38-39
vegetables
vitamin C, 198
special waste, 160
calcium to phosphonus ratio, 775
puppy feeding, 202
treated waste, 160
tortoises,778
vitamin D
gas maniagement, 600, 600
veirs, 78, 78
cats/dogs, 198
storage, 159-160
catheterizatior, 476
ageing dogs, 209
water
venepumcture, 692
puppies feeding, 202
birds, 794, 797
cats, 263-264,264
deficiency (birds), 802
cats, 192, 211
dogs, 262-263
horses, 230
dogs, 192, 211
sites, 691
supplemeritatior (lizards), 77s-776
geriatric patierits, 358
venous access, pareriteral feeding, S52
synithesis, 106
horses, 228-229, 238-239
verntilatior
vitamin D, deficiercy (tortoises), 778
water deprivatiori test, 458
animal housing (cats/dogs), 147-148
vitamin E
waterfowl restrairit/hardlirng, 291
equine general anaesthiesia, 625
cats/dogs, 198
waterproof mattresses, 355
horse transportation, 27s, 276
horses, 230
Water's carnister, 593, 593, 624
stables, 167
vitamin K, 381
waxy casts, uririe, 708
vivarium, 771
cats/dogs, 198-199
weaning
ventral tail vein venepuricture (reptiles), 299
horses, 230
badgers, 823
veritricular septal defect (VsD), 444
vitreous body/humour, 69
bats, 830
Vernier scale, 686
vivarium, 764, 766, 768-772, 769, 770
deer, 833-834
vertebral column
access, ease of, 769
foxes, 825-826
birds, 118
basking areas, 771
hares, 828
function, 64
brariches in, 770
hedgehogs, 818
horses, 134-135
clearing, ease of, 769
rabbits, wild, 828
vestibular apparatus, 70
durability, 766
Weatherbys Group Ltd, 22, 24
 The Veterinary Medicines Regulatiors 2005,
envirormerital corditiors, 771-772
weaving (horses), 169, 169-170, 271
381, 382
moritorinig shieet, 772, 773
wedge biopsy, tumour diagnosis, 486
veterinary primary oral care team, S5S
heating,771,771-772
weight maragement/control, 214
Veterinary Surgeoris Act (1966), 33-34, 393,
hides in, 770
feedirg regime cats/dogs, 207-208
S5S
humidity,772
heart failure, 447
schedule 3, 34
lighting, 772
welfare, 9-12
Amendment Order (2002), 34
plants, 771
animal research, 11-12
vibros, 668
secunity, 768
defnitior, 9-10
viraemia, 678
shiape/size, 769, 770
distress, 10-11
viral diseases, 677
stories in, 770
exotic species, 80s-808
birds, 801-804
substrates/materials, 764,769, 770
pain, 10-11
viral haemorrhagic disease (VHD, rabbit), 426
swimming areas, 771
Welfare of Arimals during Trarisport Order
viral preumoria (small mammals), 761
venitilation, 771
(1973, 1994), 46
vinion, components of, 675
viviparous reptiles, 779
Werneckiella equi, 634
virological samples, 715
vocal folds, 81
wet tail, 763
viruses, 414, 675-678
vocalization
Weymouth bit, 280, 280
disirifection, 157-159
cats, 257-258, 322
whielpirig, dogs see dog(s),
replication, 676, 676-677
dogs, 248
 parturition/whelping
structure, 675
horses, 269
whelping box, 329
transmission, 677-678
volatile anaesthetic agents see anaesthiesia,
whipworms, 649, 649-650
tumours, 486
volatile agenits
white blood cell count, 697
visceral larva migrans (VLM), 646
volatile gas, scavenging, 600
white blood cells see leukocytes
visual communication
voltage, X-ray exposure, 721
white matter, 65
cats, 256, 256-257
volvulus, 409
wildlife
horses, 270
vomiting,345,459,472
 birds see birds, wild
visual field (horses), 267, 268
induction in poisoning cases, 400
injured, 811-844
vital capacity, 82
postoperative complicatioris, 526
euthianasia, 843
vital signs, assessment, 337-340
von Willebrard's disease, 450
legislatiori affectinig, 46, 843
vitamin(s), 380-381
Vulpes vulpes see foxes
see aiso specific animais/species
cats/dogs, 197-199
V-Y plasty, ectropion maragement, 493
Wildlife anid Countryside Act (1981), 13, 46,
ageing dogs, 210
843
fat-soluble, 198-199
W
Wildlife and Courtryside Act (1985), 46
horses, 229-230, 234
'wamblood' horses, 25
wild mammals, 811-835
water-soluble, 198
wash bnush, 183, 183-184
admission, 812
vitamin A
washirg area, operatirg theatre, 508
feeding, 812, 813
cats/dogs, 198
waste
housing, 812
deficiency
colour coded plastic sacks, 38, 160
legislatior1, 843
birds, 802
disposal, 159-161
orpharis, 812-814
tortoises, 778
cadavers, 160
record cards, 812-813, 813
horses, 229-230
chemical waste, 161
rescue, 811-812
890
Index
wild mammals (Cont(d)
factors affecting, 479
photographic effect, 722
trarisportation, 811-812
horses, 168
travel directior, 722
see aiso individual animais/species
incised, 396
see aiso scatter radiatior
Wild Mammals (Protectior) Act (1996), 843
infectior, 482-483
X-ray tube coristructior, 719, 719-720
wild plarits, tortoises, 778
mariagemert see wourid maragemert
windsucking (cribbing), 170, 271
open, 396
Y
wing muscles, 119
wound management, 479-482
yard brush, 172
wings, 119
clearing/debridemert, 480
yeast ir urine, 709
wolves, behaviour, 246, 246-247, 249
closure, 480
yellow waste contairiers, 160
woodchip bedding, 151
drairis, 480-482
yolk sac, 100
see aiso shaving bedding
dressirngs/bandages, 480, 481
youngstock (horses), rutrition requiremerits,
Wood's lamp, 642, 712
recoristructive therapy, 482
237
woodwool bedding, 151
skin flaps, 482
wool hairs, 107, 180
skiri grafts, 482
Z
woming, 12
Zepps procedure, 490
puppies,333
X
zinc
wound(s), 396-397
X chromosome, 310
cats, 197
xal
baridaginig, 397,398
X-ray production, 720, 720-721
dogs, 197, 210-211
importance,397
exposure charts, 721
liver disease, 221
pul
classifcation, 477, 478
exposure factors, 721
Zoo Licerising Act (1981), 46
closed, 396-397
X-rays, 718
zoon10ses, 418-419, 420, 633, 678
complicatioris, 482-483
properties, 721-724
Echinococcus granulosus, 656
conitraction, 478
absorption, 722
Echinococcus multilocularis, 656
dehiscerice, 482
divergerce, 722
Toxocara canis, 646
eyelid, 407
ionization, 722
zygote,100
healirig, 477-478
peretration, 722
Index 891
This Page Intentionally Left Blank