Oncology
forVeterinary
Technicians
and Nurses
Editors:Antony S.Moore and Angela E. Frimberger
MWILEY-BLACKWELL
Oncology
for Veterinary Technicians
and Nurses
Editors
Antony S. Moore and Angela E. Frimberger
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
Oncology
for Veterinary Technicians
and Nurses
Oncology
for Veterinary Technicians
and Nurses
Editors
Antony S. Moore and Angela E. Frimberger
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
Edition first published 2010
? 2010 Blackwell Publishing
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell's publishing program
has been rmerged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to forrn Wiley-Blackwell.
Editoriat Ofce
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Jowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services, and for inforrmation about how
wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific
clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted
a photocopy license by CCC, a separate systerm of payments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of the
Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1276-2/2010.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
narmes and product narmes used in this book are trade names, service marks, tradermarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned
in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the
subject rmatter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a cormpetent
 professional should be sought.
Disclaimer
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and discussion
only and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specific method,
diagnosis, or treatrment by practitioners for any particular patient. The publisher and the author make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or cormpleteness of the contents of this work and
specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of fitness for a
tions, and the constant flow of inforrmation relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the
medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage
that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of furthet
information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or
Website may provide or recormmendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet
Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when
it is read. No warranty rmay be created or extended by any prormotional staterments for this work. Neither the
 publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Catatoging-in-Pubtication Data
Oncology for veterinary technicians and murses / editors, Antony S. Moore and Angela E. Frimberger.
p.; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-1276-2 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Veterinary oncology. 2. Animal health technicians. I. Moore, Antony S. I1. Frimberger, Angela E.
[DNLM: 1. Neoplasms-veterinary. 2. Animals, Domestic. 3. Neoplasms-nursing.
4. Neoplasms-therapy. SF 910.T8 O585 2010]
SF910.T8.O53 2010
636.089'6994-dc22
2009031845
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
         7    
Printed in Singapore
12010
Contents
Contributors
vili
Acknowledgments
X!
Introduction
X
Section Summary
xi
Section 1. Basics of Oncology
3
1. Introduction to Clinical Veterinary Oncology
5
2. Causes of Cancer in Pets
9
Section 2. Approaching the Cancer Patient
13
3. Diagnosis of Cancer
15
4. Staging of Cancer
25
Section 3. Treatment of Cancer
43
 5. General Principles of Veterinary Cancer Treatment
45
 6. Surgery in Veterinary Oncology
48
7. Radiation Therapy
57
8. Chemotherapy
67
6
Biotherapy and Photodynamic Therapy
85
10. Complementary and Alternative Medical (CAM) Therapies
90
Section 4. Supportive Care of Patients
95
11. Comfort, Pain Management, and Physical Rehabilitation
97
Patricia Suomala
vi Contents
12.
 Gastrointestinal and Nutritional Support
113
Patricia Suomala
13. Hematologic Support
123
14. Euthanasia and End-of-Life Patient Care
129
Section 5. Support for Pet Owners and Caregivers
133
15. Supporting the Patient's Human Family
135
Nicole Edwards
16. What About the Nurse's Emofional Experience?
148
Nicole Edwards
Section 6. Oncologic Emergencies
155
17. Hematologic Emergencies
157
Lee Garrod
18. Febrile Neutropenia
170
Lee Garrod
19. Metabolic Emergencies
175
Lee Garrod
20.
Anaphylaxis
195
Lee Garrod
21.
Extravasation Injury
202
Lee Garrod
22.
Urological Emergencies
208
Lee Garrod
23. Bone Emergencies
217
Lee Garrod
 24. Pericardial Effusion and Cardiac Tamponade
222
Lee Garrod
Section 7. Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
227
25. Lymphoma in Dogs
229
26. Lymphoma in Cats
236
27. Mast Cell Tumor in Dogs
240
 28. Soft Tissue Sarcomas in Dogs and Cats
244
29.
 Splenic Hemangiosarcoma in Dogs
248
30.
 Osteosarcoma in Dogs
252
31.
Oral Melanoma in Dogs
256
32. Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Cats
260
Contents  vii
33. Mammary Carcinoma in Dogs
264
34. Mammary Carcinoma in Cats
269
 35. Transitional Cell Carcinoma in Dogs
273
36. Pulmonary Carcinoma in Dogs
277
37. Chronic Lymphoid Leukemia in Dogs
281
Section 8. Appendices
285
1. BSA Conversion Charts
287
2. Analgesics
290
3. Antiemetics, Gastroprotectants, and Appetite Stimulants
292
4. Antibiotics
294
5. Glossary of Cancer Terms
296
6.  Chemotherapy Drug Information: Quick Reference
301
Index
306
Contributors
Nicole Edwards, BSW
Social Worker
North Coast Cancer Institute
 Port Macquarie, NSW, Australia
Lee Garrod, DACVECC
 Diplomate of the American College of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Medicine 
 President of Veterinary Critical Care Veterinary Emergency, Critical Care and Cancer
Treatment Center
 Portsmouth, NH
Patricia Suomala B.S., CVT, M.Ed., CVPM
Director of Inpatient Services
MSPCA-Angell Animal Medical Center
Boston, MA
!!!A!
Acknowledgments
The people who have contributed the most to this book are the many veterinary techni-
cians and nurses with whom we have both worked over our years in veterinary oncology.
Many thanks are also due to our colleagues at the Animal Referral Hospital—and to the
referring veterinarians who work with us through the Animal Referral Hospital and
through our consulting service—for their ongoing support and productive conversations
and for illustrations that many of them have contributed; thanks also to Jules Beatty for
input on pain assessment. We thank the many wonderful clients and their beautiful brave
 pets that we have had the privilege of working with and who have taught us so much
 about medicine and more. Finally, we wish to thank those giving us permission to use
illustrations in this book:
R. John Berg, DVM, Diplomate ACVS
Elizabeth Bertone-Johnson, ScD
Susan M. Cotter, DVM, Diplomate ACVIM (Oncology and Internal Medicine)
Anne G. Evans, DVM, Diplomate ACVD, MBA
Karl Kraus, DVM, Diplomate ACVS
 Dennis J. Meyer, DVM, Diplomate ACVIM, Diplomate ACVP
Robert J. McCarthy, DVM, Diplomate ACVS
Nicole C. Northrup, DVM, Diplomate ACVIM (Oncology)
Gregory K. Ogilvie, DVM, Diplomate ACVIM (Oncology and Internal Medicine)
Dominique G. Penninck, DVM, DVSc, Diplomate ACVR and ECVDI
Kenneth M. Rassnick, DVM, Diplomate ACVIM (Oncology)
Pam Short, BVSc
David Simpson, BVSc, MVetClinStud, FACVS (Surgery)
Gordon H. Theilen, DVM, Diplomate ACVIM (Oncology and Internal Medicine)
ix
Introduction
Although intended primarily for the nurse/technician who is working in a specialty prac-
tice, this book also offers technicians in general/family pet practice a guide to the integrated
practice of nursing the veterinary cancer patient.
 If you are reading this book, you already understand that cancer is a common and often
deadly disease in our pets. You may—or may not—also know that cancer treatment in
animals is less toxic and more compatible with a good quality of life than it is in some
human patients. It also requires you, as a veterinary technician, to become more involved
in the human-animal bond than any other subspecialty of veterinary medicine. When
working with cancer patients, you are truly a nurse, and not a technician. In fact you will 
notice that in this book, we use the terms interchangeably and encourage you to embrace
the importance of nursing in our veterinary cancer patients.
Working as part of a veterinary cancer treatment team brings immense rewards. It soon
becomes obvious that cancer is “the most treatable” of all chronic diseases, and that you,
as a focused veterinary nurse provide services that are an integral part of an interdisciplin-
 sd r jo u ynoe ie pu lm n aeo rau on noe Are
that you will build relationships with both that are deep and often long-lasting. You will
cry when many of your patients die, but they will not be tears of frustration or anger.
They will be tears shed from truly missing a patient and friend.
We hope that from the initial chapter to the end of the book we can help you achieve
and promote excellence in cancer care through your professional contributions as a vet-
erinary cancer nurse.
Antony S. Moore
Angela E. Frimberger
Section Summary
Section 1 discusses the process of cancer growth and spread and how cancer cells differ
from normal cells; these chapters also give an overview of the causes of cancer, with epi-
demiologic information from the veterinary literature about cancers in cats and dogs
Section 2 presents pretreatment care of cancer patients. This includes biopsy and cytol-
 ogy to diagnose cancer, as well as the preferred technique to obtain information for a
 given patient, tissue handling, and submission guidelines to ensure that the best and most
accurate results are obtained. These chapters also describe the testing needed to establish
the extent of cancer in a patient (staging). This is of particular relevance to veterinary
oncology nurses because they are often the ones performing the testing, and it underscores
the importance of the results in making a prognosis and ensuring the best treatment choices 
for their patients.
Section 3 broadly outlines the mainstream treatment strategies available in veterinary
practice, including a brief discussion of alternative (complementary) treatments available.
 Section 4 is the most important for nurses because supportive care for patients is the
 area where nurses make a considerable difference to a pet dog or cat with cancer. Under-
standing supportive strategies for problems such as inappetence or pain is vital in the
holistic treatment of the veterinary cancer patient.
Section 5 discusses the support that can be so important to owners when they find their
pet has been diagnosed with cancer. It also discusses the ethical concerns about treating
animals with cancer as well as pet loss and the process of euthanasia. These chapters also
Section 6 describes the potential
 emergencies that can affect a patient with cancer, due
either to their disease or to the treatment prescribed. It also outlines the interventions
needed in these patients so that a nurse can be prepared before seeing the pet. This section
is structured in a quick-reference format, with plenty of bullet lists and tables.
Section 7 considers some of the most common cancers, in the form of case-based
examples, that the veterinary nurse is likely to encounter. Included are summary informa-
tion about the disease and prognostic factors, as well as the treatment of choice, adjunctive
strategies to consider, supportive care needed, and palliative options.
 Section 8 contains reference points for nurses in the form of quick-reference charts of
important information that nurses can access in a hurry.
Xi
Oncology
for Veterinary Technicians
and Nurses
Section
Basics of Oncology
Introduction to Clinica
Veterinary Oncolog
What Is Cancer?
Cancer is the process where normal cells in the body become transformed to undergo
excessive or unrestrained growth. Cancer can occur in any bodily organ and can travel
from one part of the body to another distant part by the blood or lymph system. There
are more than 100 different types of cancer that can be grouped into one of several major
categories.
Sarcomas are cancers that begin in tissue that connects, supports, or surrounds other
tissues and organs (such as muscle, bone, and fibrous tissue). Examples include fibrosar-
coma (malignant tumor of fbrocytes), hemangiosarcoma (malignant tumor of blood
vessels), and osteosarcoma (malignant tumor of bone).
Carcinomas are cancers that originate in tissues that cover a body surface, line a body
cavity or make up an organ. Carcinomas that derive from glandular tissue are prefixed
and transitional cell carcinoma (malignant tumor of bladder or urethra lining)
Sarcomas and carcinomas together are sometimes referred to as solid tumors
Lymphomas are cancers that occur in cells that make up an important component of
ada au aq pazo are su sn soq aui ind pue ss au 
of lymphocytes forming the cancer (B-cell or T-cell) and by the grade of the lymphoma
(low-grade vs. intermediate- to high-grade lymphoma).
 Leukemias are cancers that occur in the blood-forming tissues and blood cells. Leuke-
mias can be acute (high-grade and rapidly progressive), or chronic (low-grade and often
slow to progress if treated)
 Leukemias and lymphomas both belong to the “hematopoietic tumors" or "hematopoi-
etic neoplasias."
5
6Basics of Oncology
Communicating with Owners of Pets with Cancer
Veterinary clients often find veterinary technicians and nurses more approachable and
easier to communicate with than the veterinarian, and you will find clients asking you
questions that you may not be sure how to handle. First, it is important to clarify, with
the veterinarian with whom you are working, how much direct communication you should
undertake and whether there are any topics or advice that you should specifically seek to
cover or avoid. Some veterinarians are happy to have technicians and nurses take on as
 much client communications as possible, whereas others prefer to handle communications
themselves. It is important to keep this key working relationship harmonious, so be sure
that you are in agreement with the person you are working with as to who will handle
which part of communications.
Veterinary technicians and nurses are often in a position to discuss the fears and
doubts that an owner has, even before cancer is diagnosed and characterized (usually
by biopsy). Try as they might, when pet owners hear the word "malignant," it's hard to
focus on anything but what it may mean for their pet. Common questions are: What are
the treatment options? What will work? How will having cancer affect my pet's quality
Of life?
First, it is important to explain that the answers to most of these questions hinge on the
specific diagnosis. Most cancers require more than one form of treatment to effectively
fight the disease. This can mean using as many as four different cancer therapies, includ-
ing surgery (surgical oncology), chemotherapy (medical oncology), radiation therapy
(radiation oncology), and biologic response modifiers including immunotherapy. This
requires a multidisciplined cancer care team that develops, coordinates, and monitors all
aspects of an individual pet's treatment plan. You, as a veterinary technician (or more
realistically in this setting, nurse) are critical to the successful functioning of this team.
Suggest that owners collate their pet's medical history. Particularly if owners are seeing
a specialist veterinarian for the first time, it's important for them to give a complete picture
 of the health status of their pet. If the pet has several health problems or a long history
with one, it can help the owner if you collate a history of events, recurrences, treatments,
medications, and outcomes
s associated with the condition that you have on fle; then
medical history. If you are working in a referral hospital, collect as much data as possible
from the owner, including the contact information from any veterinarian that may have
information on file. A written list can save time and ensure completeness.
Make sure all members of the cancer care team are informed. If a patient develops a
 n h s  s o sd  r  s r 
members of that pet's veterinary medical team have complete and consistent information.
Encourage owners to share the names and contact numbers of any others involved with
the pet's care and bring all records with them.
Tell the owners when and how they will receive test results. Often owners are confused
and impatient after tests have been ordered. Giving owners realistic timelines for them to
be notified of test results and letting them know how they will receive them will allay a
lot of this concern. Remember to tell them that if results do not arrive when they expect
them, they should contact their veterinarian and inquire. A dedicated oncology technician
may take on the role of contacting owners when test results are in and scheduling time
for them to discuss the results with their veterinarian.
Introduction to ClinicalVeterinary Oncology
A common question from owners is "how is my pet likely to respond to treatment for
cancer?" For cancer in dogs and cats, expected remission times and life span, or progno-
sis, is highly variable and depends on a number of factors, the most important of which
is the type of cancer as diagnosed by biopsy. Untreated pets with malignant cancer often
live 2 months or less, but this varies greatly depending on the type of tumor. With therapy,
most dogs with lymphoma or osteosarcoma (two common cancers in dogs) will live 9
months to 1 year. Therefore, a reasonable goal is a 1-year survival. Occasionally the pet
will live much longer, up to 2.5 years or more, and some will live out their normal lifespan.
Some animals are truly cured of cancer, but this depends greatly on the tumor type. Other
factors that will influence an individual pet's prognosis include
1. The stage (or extent) of the disease, which reflects the number location, and size of
major populations of tumor cells in the body.
2.
Whether the pet is feeling sick or not. In general, pets that are not feeling sick and
are diagnosed early in the course of tumor growth have a better chance of remission
with treatment. Loss of appetite is an important symptom for all cancers, particularly
if accompanied by unplanned, significant (>15%) weight loss.
3.
 Histologic grading: the specific appearance of tumor cells and their pattern of infltra-
tion in various tissues (what the pathologists reports from a biopsy specimen).
The presence of paraneoplastic syndromes (tumor-associated conditions), such as high
blood calcium (hypercalcemia).
5.
 The treatment chosen and the care given by the owner and veterinary cancer treatment
team.
 The pet's response to therapy. It is never possible to accurately predict the future for
a given individual pet. Although it may be possible to predict the likelihood of achiev-
ing remission or long-term survival, ultimately the only remission that will matter to
pet owners will be their own pet'swhether it fits in with the expected statistics or
not. In many situations the only way to know whether a particular patient will benefit
from treatment is to make an attempt.
Specialist Veterinary Care
Although a primary care veterinarian is an integral part of the cancer care for any pet,
pets with cancer may need to visit an expert in a specific area of veterinary medicine. These
veterinarians have undertaken further training and have achieved certification by various
veterinary Colleges. They are often called specialists.
Medical oncology is the general study and treatment of cancer. Medical oncologists are
trained in the prevention, detection, and medical treatment of all forms of cancer. In the
U.S. such specialists are certified by the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
(ACVIM) subspecialty of Oncology: in Europe, by the European College of Veterinary
Internal Medicine (ECVIM) subspecialty of Oncology; and in Australia by the Australian
College of Veterinary Scientists (ACVSc).
Surgical oncology is the specialty concerned with the physical removal of cancerous
tissue. Sometimes, surgery is augmented with other forms of care, such as chemotherapy
or radiation therapy. Surgical oncologists have specialty experience in treating distinct
types of cancer—from breast, bone, and lung cancer to cancers that occur within the
8Basics of Oncology
abdomen, as well as skin cancer. Surgical specialists in the U.S. are certified by the
American College of Veterinary Surgery (ACVS). Some of these specialists continue with
 Fellowships specifically in surgical oncology; there is no formal qualification for such
specially trained individuals, but they are obviously the most highly trained surgeons
performing cancer surgery.
 Radiation oncology is the specialty concerned with prescribing radiation therapy in
all its forms. In the U.S., radiation oncologists are certified by the American College of
Veterinary Radiology (ACVR), subspecialty of Radiation Oncology.
Internal medicine deals with the function of the internal organs, such as the liver, kidney,
and lungs, plus the diagnosis and treatment of associated problems. Internists often provide
the first contact for an unspecifed internal illness or problem. They may diagnose and
treat the problem themselves or work in conjunction with another specialist (such as a
medical oncologist) for more focused diagnosis and treatment. In the U.S. such specialists
are certified by the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine (ACVIM).
Emergency and critical care medicine is the specialty that deals with critical health and
accident cases, where immediate treatment can sometimes mean the difference between
life and death. In the U.S., such specialists are certified by the American College of
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care (ACVECC).
Veterinary technicians and nurses can achieve specialty qualifications also. The Academy
of Internal Medicine for Veterinary Technicians promotes interest and advanced skills in
the discipline of internal medicine. It is possible to become credentialed and recognized in
the discipline of Veterinary Oncology. Candidates fulfll 3 years of experience, continuing
education, and complete an examination. This qualification is available in the U.S.A., but
it is possible for candidates from other countries to apply and qualify. http://aimvt.com/
Causes of Cancer in Pets
Epidemiology and Cancer
One of the most common questions clients ask is, "What caused my dog or cat's cancer?"
That question is difficult to answer, but as in humans, the etiopathogenesis (cause and
 progression) of cancer in animals often involves both genetic and environmental risk
factors. Indeed, some dog and cat breeds (Bernese mountain dogs, Siamese cats) have a
high rate of cancer when compared to other breeds and are often susceptible to very spe-
cific kinds of cancers. In addition, exposure to cigarette smoke, asbestos, and other envi-
ronmental contaminants has been associated with an increased risk of developing cancer
 in pets. Therefore, the prevention of cancer is based on the identification of animals that
 si i s a e   s  e 
science that examines these genetic and environmental influences that can then be used to
reduce cancer risk.
 The identification of factors associated with an increased risk of developing cancer is in
its infancy in veterinary epidemiology and oncology. Despite this early state of develop-
ment, several important observations have been made and are summarized in the follow-
ing section. Clients should be educated that increased risk may not be equated with
causality. In other words, exposure to a risk factor may not have caused their pet's cancer;
however; such studies can still act as a guide for the concerned owner.
Causes of Cancer in Pets
Nutrition
A lifetime study of restricted daily intake of the same food was done with a total of 48
Labrador retriever dogs from seven litters that were divided into two groups: one group
10Basics of Oncology
fed normally (control) and one group fed 25% less (restricted). The median life span of
the restricted group was significantly longer. Although the overall prevalence of cancer
between groups was similar, the mean age due to cancer-related deaths was 2 years later
in the dogs that received the restricted diet. In another study, increased consumption of
green leafy vegetables and yellow-orange vegetables (squash, carrots) decreased the risk
of urinary bladder transitional cell carcinoma in genetically predisposed dogs.
 Some practical suggestions for concerned dog owners might be to restrict daily intake
from early maturity to allow their pet to maintain a thin body weight throughout life.
Although it may not apply to all dogs and all cancers, it may be prudent to supplement
their diet with leafy green or yellow-orange vegetables at least 3 times per week (as in the
above study of bladder cancer in Scottish terriers).
Cats fed canned food have an increased risk of developing oral squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC). Also, cats that eat more than 50% of their diet as canned cat food have an increased
risk of developing a thyroid adenoma. Supplementation of diet with beef or poultry seemed
to decrease the risk of hyperthyroidism in one study and could be suggested to concerned
owners of cats.
Spaying and Neutering
Spaying (ovariohysterectomy) has long been demonstrated to be a markedly effective
method of preventing mammary tumors if it is performed before the first estrus. Spaying
is moderately effective if performed before the dog is 2.5 years of age. Castration (orchi-
ectomy) reduces the risk of testicular tumors, but not prostate cancer.
However, the effect of spaying and neutering (gonadectomy) may not always be protec-
tive. A study of Rottweiler dogs was conducted to study the effect of elective gonadectomy
and the spontaneous development of appendicular bone sarcomas. In that study male and
female Rottweiler dogs that underwent gonadectomy before 1 year of age were significantly
more likely to develop bone sarcoma than dogs that were sexually intact.
Genetics
A number of clear breed predilections have been demonstrated in veterinary oncology.
German shepherd dogs have been shown to have bilateral cystadenocarcinomas and cuta-
neous fibrosarcomas. Flat-coated retrievers and Bernese mountain dogs have been shown
to have a high incidence of cancer, especially malignant histiocytosis. Scottish terriers,
especially those with exposure to herbicides have an increased risk of developing transi-
tional cell carcinomas of the bladder. Siamese cats are prone to develop mammary carci-
nomas, intestinal carcinomas, and mast cell tumors of the skin; in contrast they are at low
risk of developing thyroid adenomas and squamous cell carcinomas of the skin.
Environmental Carcinogens
In sharing their living environment with humans, pets are exposed to many of the same
environmental contaminants as their owners, including passive environmental tobacco
smoke (ETS) ("second-hand smoke"). In fact, exposure levels in animals kept indoors
continuously may be higher than those of human household members, who often spend
extended periods of time outside the home. Metabolites of nicotine have been found in
Causes of Cancer in Pets 11
the urine of cats living with smokers and are higher than levels in humans exposed to ETS
(Figure 2.1). Routes of ETS exposure in cats and dogs may be through inhalation and oral
ingestion of contaminants deposited on the fur during grooming.
 Dogs have been shown to have an increased risk of developing cancer of the respiratory
tract, especially of the lung and nasal cavity when exposed to coal and kerosene heaters
 and ETS. One veterinary study found a weak association between lung cancer and expo-
sure to tobacco in the home (odds ratio 1.6), but no dose-response relationship. The risk
for developing lung cancer rose for dogs with short or medium-length nasal cavities. In a
similar study, dogs of long-nosed breeds had an increased risk of developing nasal cancer
when exposed to ETS than did dogs of breeds with shorter noses.
Cats exposed to ETS have a higher risk of developing lymphoma. Because domestic cats
groom extensively, their alimentary tract, particularly the oral cavity, may be exposed to
toxins deposited on their fur. These may include chemicals present in applied products
such as flea powders and those present in environmental contaminants such as cigarette
smoke. The most common site for oral SCC in cats is the ventral aspect of the tongue
caudal to the lingual frenulum. Because of anatomy, this site is likely to accumulate irritant
chemicals and carcinogens. Cats wearing flea-control collars have a higher risk of develop-
ing oral SCC, and those living with a smoker have a mildly increased risk.
Mesothelioma is more common in dogs owned by people who worked in the asbestos
industry.
Lymphoma was more common in dogs that lived in an urban environment in one study.
In addition, the use of chemicals by owners, specifically the commonly used lawn care
herbicide 2,4-D, paints, asbestos or solvents, as well as radiation and electromagnetic field
exposure have been associated with increased risk for canine lymphoma.
Application of insecticides (but not in a spot-on formulation) increased the risk of
bladder cancer in Scottish terriers in another study.
 It is impossible to be able to prevent cancer in all of our pets, but some options you can
suggest to the concerned owner would be to reduce exposure to environmental carcinogens
such as pesticides, coal, or kerosene heaters, and avoid the excessive use of lawn herbicides
such as 2,4-D. For owners who are smokers, they should know there is a risk to their pets
from environmental tobacco smoke. If possible, exposure to radiation and strong electro-
magnetic fields should be minimized. These steps may be particularly important for owners
Cotinine level vs. reported cigarettes/day
=20
>20
cigarette per day
Figure 2.1. Urine cotinine (a metabolite of nicotine) was measured in urine of cats that did not live with a
smoker, lived with a smoker that smoked fewer than 20 cigaretes a day, and lived with a smoker that smoked
more than 20 cigarettes a day. The cotinine levels rose with level of exposure, and in the highest exposure group.
cotinine levels approached those of active human smokers. (Courtesy of Dr. Elizabeth Bertone)
12 Basics of Oncology
spot-on insecticides, rather than dips or sprays, which are shown to increase the risk of
this cancer).
Summary
Often a patient with cancer has none of the risk factors listed above. For owners of these
 pets, it may still be comforting to know what the risk factors are, and that their other pets
to known risk factors such as insecticides or ETS.
Further Reading
Bertone ER, Snyder LA, Moore AS. 2002. Environmental tobacco smoke and risk of malignant
lymphoma in pet cats. Am J Epidemiol 156:268-273.
Bukowski JA, Wartenberg D, Goldschmidt M. 1998. Environmental causes for sinonasal cancers in
pet dogs, and their usefulness as sentinels of indoor cancer risk. J Toxicol Environ Health A
54(7):579-591.
bone sarcoma risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 11(11):1434-1440.
Gavazza A, Presciuttini S, Barale R, et al. 2001. Association between canine malignant lymphoma.
living in industrial areas, and use of chemicals by dog owners. J Vet Intern Med 15(3):190-195.
Glickman LT, Domanski LM, Maguire TG, et al. 1983. Mesothelioma in pet dogs associated with
exposure of their owners t0 asbestos. Environ Res 32(2):30s-313.
Glickman LT, Raghavan M, Knapp DW, et al. 2004. Herbicide exposure and the risk of transitional
cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder in Scottish terriers. JAVMA 224{8):1290-1297.
Hayes HM, Tarone RE, Cantor KP. 1995. On the association between canine malignant lymphoma
and opportunity for exposure to 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid. Environ Res 70(2):119-125.
Lawler DF, Evans RH, Larson BT, et al. 2o0s. Influence of lifetime food restriction on causes, time
and predictors of mortality of dogs. JAVMA 226:22s-231.
Raghavan M, Knapp DW, Dawson MH, et al. 2004. Topical flea and tick pesticides and the risk
of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder in Scottish terriers. JAVMA 225:389-394.
 Reif JS, Bruns C, Lower KS. 1998. Cancer of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses and exposure
to environmental tobacco smoke in pet dogs. Am J Epidemiol 147(5):488-492.
Reif JS, Dunn K, Ogilvie GK, Harris CK. 1992. Passive smoking and canine lung cancer risk. Am
/Epidemiol135{3):234-239.
Reif JS, Lower KS, Ogilvie GK. 1995. Residential exposure to magnetic fields and risk of canine
lymphoma. Am / Epidemiol 141(4):352-359.
Sonnenschein EG, Glickman LT, Goldschmidt MH, McKee LJ. 1991. Body conformation, diet, and
risk of breast cancer in pet dogs: a case-control study. Am J Epidemiol 133(7):694-703.
Section
2
Approaching the Cancer Patient
Diagnosis of (
Cancei
Being able to obtain diagnostic samples and establish definitive diagnoses is crucial to
developing an effective treatment plan for a pet with cancer. Although veterinary oncology
technician-nurses may not be directly involved in making a diagnosis, they are often called
upon to handle and submit specimens from patients with cancer. Knowing how to correctly
 prepare these samples can be crucial in obtaining a reliable diagnosis, and in making a
treatment plan for the patient.
 As discussed previously, it is impossible to formulate a rational prognosis and treatment 
plan for a patient without knowing the definitive diagnosis of tumor type. This can not
be done visually or by palpation and absolutely requires pathology testing.
The two main areas of pathology important in cancer diagnostics are cytopathology and
bistopathology. Cytopathologists are specialists at examining individual cells obtained by
fine-needle aspirate or impression smear to determine the identity of a disease process.
Histopathologists examine intact tissue samples and associated architecture to determine
the underlying pathologic process. Choosing either diagnostic modality, or both, to apply in
a given pet with cancer depends on the individual case variables. Some of the advantages and
disadvantages of cytopathology compared to histopathology are summarized in Table 3.1.
The evaluation of cytological and histological samples both require specialized training
and experience to obtain reliable results. Accuracy may be further improved upon or cor-
roborated by more specialized techniques such as electron microscopy, polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and flow cytometry, which are becoming more widely available and will
become an important part of veterinary diagnostics depending on the clinical situation.
The type of sample required to perform these tests and test availability varies, and your
pathology laboratory will be able to advise you if you are asked to submit samples from
your patient.
The veterinary cancer nurse should be able to complete the submission form, including
all relevant clinical information that will ensure that the pathologist has the best chance
of making an accurate diagnosis. Most nurses should have a good understanding of the
basic terms used in a pathology report (Table 3.2).
15
Table 3.1.
Summary of the relative advantages of cytology and histopathology as diagnostic aids for pets with
cancer
Cytology
Histopathology
Can be used to screen patients for more 
Generally more accurate and more representative of the
comprehensive diagnostic tests.
tissue of concern than fine-needle aspiration cytology.
Sample collection can easily be done
Provides information on tissue architecture that cannot be
 preoperatively, often in the examination 
 obtained from cytological specimens. In some neoplasms 
room without general anaesthesia or
evaluation of tissue architecture/tissue invasion is essential
even without sedation, and is less likely
to differentiate between benign and malignant neoplasms
to result in adverse effects when
(e.g-. mammary tumors)
compared to tissue biopsy.
Less costly than surgical biopsy in both
The relatively large tissue sample provided by biopsy
sample collection and laboratory
enables further specialized testing such as histochemistry
analysis.
(special stains), immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy.
and polymerase chain reaction to be performed, if required.
 to achieve a definitive diagnosis.
Requires less sample processing than
Histopathology is generally more likely to provide a
histopathology and thus provides earlier
definitive diagnosis, although the "investment" in time,
results than histopathology.
 Client cost, and invasiveness of sample collection is greater.
Table 3.2.
Common terms found in pathology reports and their definition
Tumor
Mass or swelling that may or may not be neoplastic; however, in normal use
it generally refers to a neoplasm.
Hyperplasia
Increase in the number of cells present.
Metaplasia
Abnormal transformation of a differentiated tissue of one tissue type into
 dlifferentiated tissue of another type.
Dysplasia
Abnormal change in the microscopic characteristics of a tissue that may be a
preneoplastic condition.
Neoplasia/neoplasm
 Abnormal benign or malignant growth that is not responsive to normal
 growth control.
In situ 
Malignancy that is restricted to the superficial tissue and has not yet invaded
 below the basement membrane into underlying tissue.
Adenoma/papilloma
Benign neoplasm of epithelial origin.
Carcinoma
 Malignant neoplasm of epithelial origin.
Adenocarcinoma
Malignant neoplasm of epithelial origin that is forming gland and ducts.
Sarcoma
Malignant neoplasm of mesenchymal origin.
 Pleomorphism
Presence of multiple shapes and forms of cells and nuclei.
Anaplasia
Total loss of microscopic characteristics of differentiation.
Scirrhous response
Abundant fibroblastic proliferation with collagen formation in response to
invasive malignant tumors.
16
Diagnosis of Cancer1
17
Tumor Cytology
Cytology is relatively simple to perform, and sample collection is minimally invasive for
peripheral sites. For these reasons it can be a useful screening tool, avoiding surgical biopsy
of benign (e.g., lipoma) and inflammatory lesions and directing the veterinarian to perform
further tests on lesions that may be cancerous. In some patients, cytology may be equivo-
cal and a biopsy may be required to reach a definitive diagnosis. Cytology should be
performed with the objective of answering four questions:
1.
Is this neoplastic or not (e.g., inflammatory)?
2.
 If neoplastic, does it look benign or malignant?
3. If malignant, what type of cell is involved (epithelial (carcinoma), mesenchymal
(sarcoma) or round cell tumor?
4.
Are there characteristics that can allow a diagnosis (i.e., osteosarcoma, lymphoma,
mast cell tumor)?
In reality, the first of these four steps may be the only important one in clinical practice,
and the last three are really for a trained cytopathologist to decide. If the first step shows
it to be suggestive of neoplasia, a biopsy is indicated.
 The most common method of collecting a cytology specimen is by fine-needle aspiration
cytology. Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology can be used to screen primary lesions for
the presence of cancer, or in the staging process (see Chapter 4) to determine whether
lymph nodes or other secondary sites are involved with cancer. Fine-needle aspiration
cytology uses a fine-gauge (22 or 23) needle on a syringe, usually 5 ml, and preferably not
Luer-Lok. Slides are cleaned and laid out before the sampling is done. The needle is
attached to the syringe and directed into the lesion, and suction is applied to the syringe
several times to draw cells into the barrel of the needle. Pressure should be sufficient to
draw cells into the hub of the needle, but not so much that the sample is drawn into the
syringe, because this would usually be contaminated with blood (Figure 3.1).
Suction is then let off the syringe to allow cells to remain in the barrel of the needle and
 not be aspirated into the syringe, and the needle is withdrawn from the lesion. The needle
is then detached from the syringe, and the syringe is filled with air and then reattached.
The sample is then blown out of the needle and onto the slide by expelling air from the
syringe through the needle (Figure 3.2). Depending on the consistency of the sample, it
will usually need to be smeared on the slide using a procedure similar to making a blood
smear (Figure 3.3).
A second FNA technique is the “needle-off" collection technique. In this method, the
needle alone is introduced into the lesion and moved in and out, slightly altering the angle
each time. After 5 to 10 passes, the needle is withdrawn and attached to an air-filled
syringe. From this point, sample handling is the same as outlined above. There is no abso-
lute advantage to either method, but rather the choice should be directed by the individual
tumor and patient characteristics.
A third method of making cytology slides from a piece of tissue is by making "touch"
preparations. This is often done when a biopsy sample has been collected, and cytologic
evaluation will allow a quicker preliminary result while the histopathology is pending. By
this technique the sample is gently blotted to remove any clots or excessive blood. It is
then touched to a clean, dry glass slide to make an imprint. This is repeated for small
Figure 3.1.   This illustrates the positioning for aspiration from the mandibular lymph node of a dog with suspected
metastatic mast cell tumor. The needle is repositioned while keeping mild negative pressure sufficient to pull
material into the needle hub, but not so much that it enters the syringe where the sample may be contaminated
byblood (making interpretation more difficult).
Figure 3.2. The cytology sample is expelled onto a clean glass slide by disconnecting the needle from the
syringe, filling the syringe with air and reattaching, and then pushing the air out through the needle to "blow"
Cells onto the slide.
Figure 3.3. The sample is then gently prepared as for a blood smear, by gently placing a slide on top of the
sample and pulling them apart without downward pressure (that will rupture the cells).
18
Diagnosis of Cancer1
19
Figure 3.4. For impression smears, the sample is
d, uaui pue pooig aoai oi Aua panog
are made on the clean glass slide.
Figure 3.5. Impression smears (here stained) can
provide an excellent preparation for cytology and
may allow earlier preliminary results while waiting
 for results of histopathology.
samples until there are 4 or 5 "touch-prints" on the slide (see Figures 3.4 and 3.5). After
touch preparations are made, the tissue sample can then be placed in fixative.
Whatever method is used, slides are then dried and left unstained for submission to a
reference laboratory; if they are to be assessed in-house, they can be stained using a com-
mercially available 3-step quick stain. The staining process is as follows:
1. Once you have the slides with the cytology specimen, ensure it is completely dry. This
 can be achieved by either moving it gently through the air (don't drop it); or by running
a gentle, low-heat, hair dryer over the slide.
2.
 The dried slide is place in the fixative (solution 1), and left to fix for 1 minute.
3.
Without rinsing, transfer the slide to solution 2 (red) and “swish" the slide through
the solution for 15 swishes.
4.E
Blot the excess red solution 2 from the bottom edge of the slide, and then
5.
Without rinsing, transfer the slide to solution 3 (purple) and “swish" the slide through
the solution for 15 swishes.
6. Rinse gently under running water and air dry for microscopic evaluation.
If the staining is not intense enough (e.g., in some mast cell tumors the granules may be
difficult to see), additional "swishes" in purple can be done even if it is dried (as long as
there is no immersion oil on the slide).
Tumor Histopathology
Although it is more expensive and time-consuming to perform a biopsy and histopathol.
 rned e uo sisop au e uqo oi aem Auo aui s i sseo Au un ko
20
Approaching the Cancer Patient
Figure 3.6. The technique of obtaining a Tru-cut needle core sample
from a subcutaneous mass on a dog. (Courtesy of Dr. Gregory K.
Ogilvie)
The main types of biopsy are needle core biopsy (Tru-cut biopsy), which is done using a
large needle that cuts a core of tissue (Figure 3.6), and surgical biopsy. Surgical biopsy
may be either incisional, where a small piece of tumor tissue is removed for analysis, or
excisional, where the entire lesion is removed and submitted. Biopsy is usually performed
under general anesthesia and requires careful planning so as not to negatively impact future
definitive surgery or radiotherapy. Biopsy is safe and, despite some commonly held beliefs
 and anecdotes, it does not contribute to tumor metastasis. Metastasis is a complex biologic
process that involves multiple phenotypic alterations in cancer cells; not a simple matter
of access to the bloodstream.
It is extremely important that any samples submitted for histopathological examination
are representative of the lesion (this is the veterinarian's task) and that they are collected
and handled carefully to avoid crush artifacts (particularly of small biopsies) prior to
placing in formalin fixative. The veterinary cancer nurse can help by learning techniques
for gentle handling of needle core biopsy samples (Figure 3.7) and always picking up
smaller biopsy samples with gloved fingers, with a needle, or with rat's-tooth forceps to
avoid crushing the delicate margins. If a sample must be stored temporarily prior to placing
in fixative, it should be placed in a saline-moistened gauze pad until ready.
(Figure 3.8). The needle can be used to transfer the sample to a plastic cassette that will
hold them in place while in the fixative (Figure 3.9). This technique also makes it easier
for the pathologist to identify the samples and prevents them from clumping together.
The technician should always check how the sample needs to be fixed, and whether any
other evaluations should be done before placing the biopsy in formalin. Other fixatives
(Z-fix, ethanol) may be preferred for specimens destined for immunohistochemical “special"
Figure 3.7. A small-gauge needle is used to gently
lift the sample from the biopsy needle (maintain
sterility so the biopsy needle can be used to obtain
further samples). It can then be placed in fixative.
Some pathologists prefer the sample to be placed
in a plastic cassette or on a card to maintain the
structure of the sample.
Figure 3.8. Use a fine gauge needle to gently
remove an endoscopy sample from the biopsy cup.
Figure 3.9. The needle is used to place samples
on a plastic cassette for easy identification and
separation during fixation.
21
22Approaching the CancerPatient
stains. Also, once in formalin, cytologic examination is no longer possible due to alteration
in the appearance of the cells. In some cases, a cytological evaluation can be done with
biopsy samples to provide a quicker preliminary result while the biopsy is pending, by
making a series of “touch" cytology preparations (above under "Cytology"), but this can
be done only before fixation.
Always ensure that the volume of fixative is adequate for the biopsy sample that is
immersed in it (i.e., 10 volumes of formalin fixative to 1 volume of tissue specimen). Also
check with your lab personnel because they may be able to provide you with appropriately
sized containers. It may also improve the speed and completeness of fixation (which trans-
lates into faster more accurate results), if the specimen is sliced (like a loaf of bread) prior
to immersing it in fixative. If cytological specimens are to be submitted together with
histopathology specimens, ensure that the cytology slides are "bagged" separately to avoid
the adverse effects from formalin vapors on them.
Whaf a Veterinary Histopathologist Can Provide
The selection and success of treatment of a cancer patient is directly dependent on the
information obtained from a veterinary histopathologist. As long as there is adequate tissue
of a representative nature available for review, the histopathologist should be able to
answer such questions as the following:
1. Is it neoplastic/cancerous?
2.
What type of tumor is it?
 3. Has the tumor metastasized (depending on the tissue sampled) or is there blood vessel
and lymphatic invasion that could mean it is likely to metastasize?
4. Is the tumor likely to have been completely excised (if the entire excised tissue is
submitted)?
 5.  If the tumor is not completely excised, where are the margins closest (this may depend
on accurate marking at the time of surgery) and what margin (in mm) has been
 obtained in close resections.
6. Would additional stains or tests allow better characterization of this tumor?
Tumor Grading and Staging
The grading of tumors is perhaps one of the most important tasks of a veterinary histo-
pathologist. There is often some confusion between the term grade, which is primarily
determined by histopathology, and stage, which is primarily determined clinically (see also
Chapter 4). The biological behavior of tumors is not always predicted by the histologic
grade; however, there is a long list of tumors where grade is extremely important in pre-
dicting behavior and hence in directing treatment options. Grading is performed by either
objective or subjective evaluation of the histopathologic characteristics of cancer and is
often based on mitotic index (number of mitotic figures per 10 high-power microscope
fields (hpf), the degree of differentiation, degree of cellular or nuclear pleomorphism,
proportion of necrosis, invasiveness, stromal reaction, and inflammatory response. These
characteristics can be used to grade the tumor as a low-grade (well-differentiated, grade
Diagnosis of Cancer2
23
1), intermediate grade (moderately differentiated, grade 2), or high-grade (poorly differ-
entiated, grade 3) tumor. Grading does include some subjective criteria; therefore, varia-
complete clinical information, and the largest and best quality sample possible, can help.
Examples where grade is an important prognostic factor include mast cell tumors, soft
tissue sarcomas, melanoma, mammary gland carcinoma, synovial cell sarcoma, multi-
lobular osteochondrosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, splenic sarcomas, transitional cell
carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, pulmonary carcinoma, osteosarcoma, histiocytic
sarcomas, and lymphoma.
The histopathologist may further assist in staging the tumor by determining the size of
the tumor (measurement of the tumor specimen submitted), depth of invasion into sur-
rounding normal tissues and by identification of blood or lymphatic vessel invasion by
tumor emboli, or of metastasis to regional lymph nodes or other distant sites, such as the
lung. Like grading, staging is essential to direct therapy and to help render an accurate
prognosis.
EvaluationofTumorMargins
For surgery to be successful, complete margins of normal tissue around the tumor are
essential whether the tumor is benign or malignant. Margins should be checked in all
directions including those lateral and deep to the tumor, and this can be done only if all
resected tissue is submitted for histopathology. This process can be made more helpful to
the cancer treatment team if different colored inks or sutures are placed to guide the
having removed with adequate margins (Figures 3.10 and 3.11). A note should be made
in the patient's record as to the stain and anatomic location, for example "blue = caudal
margin; black = deep margin."
Figure 3.10. India ink, or a commercial colored
ink preparation, is used to identify edges of the
tissue surrounding a tumor where surgeons are
concerned about their ability to completely excise
the cancer. Multiple colored inks allow multiple
margins to be identified and correlatedwith
anatomic  positioning.  This  can  be  helpful  if
further surgery needs to be planned. (Courtesy of 
Dr. Robert McCarthy)
24
Approaching the Cancer Patient
Figure 3.11. This is how the pathologist views the
slide. You can see that the inked margin is clearly
visible, allowing the pathologist to evaluate
completeness of surgical excision. (Courtesy of
Dr.Robert McCarthy)
SpecialStains
Although the diagnosis of cancer still relies heavily on morphologic assessment of speci-
mens under light microscopy with routine staining (hematoxylin and eosin; H & E), in
some situations, the tumors may be too poorly differentiated to determine their cell of
origin. The use of special stains can be helpful in determining the tissue of origin, which
o   n  d q s
Immunohistochemistry is a specialized area of cancer pathology where staining antibod-
ies are directed toward specific epitopes such as intermediate filaments, secretory sub-
stances, hormones, and proteins of various types. Immunohistochemistry takes advantage
of the preservation of certain molecules that can demonstrate the cell of origin of an
otherwise undifferentiated neoplasm.
Staging of Cancer
Each tumor and patient is different. When evaluating a pet for treatment of cancer it is
important not only to obtain a definitive histologic diagnosis and, where appropriate, a
grade determined by an experienced, specially trained histopathologist (see Chapter 3),
sae l e y pso ss si  s d oi ose 
of the histopathologic features of the tumor assigned by the pathologist). Staging is a
clinical process that enables us to evaluate the pet's general health, identifying unrelated
 or secondary conditions that need to be treated or controlled before instituting appropri-
ate therapy, and to quantitate the extent of cancer involvement in the patient. The prog-
nostic information gained by doing this is important in order to make informed and
rational decisions as to the type of therapy best suited for the individual patient. Thus,
the staging process is an essential component of pretreatment care to maximize effective
treatment and minimize toxicity.
The TNM System
The exact staging system varies with different tumor types, and these are generally
established by the World Health Organization (WHO). Most staging systems for solid
(nonhematologic) tumors are based an assessment of three major components of the
malignant process:
1.The size of the primary tumor (T)
2.
The presence and extent of lymph node metastasis (N)
3.
And the presence of distant metastasis (M)
These components are further modified by the use of subscript numbers to indicate
increasing tumor size, progressive involvement of regional lymph nodes, and other modi-
fiers depending on the particular tumor.
25
26  Approaching the Cancer Patient
Although the specific staging scheme varies among tumor types, in general the process
begins with a thorough physical examination to identify any enlarged lymph nodes or
other obvious areas of cancer involvement, a complete blood count, chemistry profle,
urinalysis, thoracic radiographs (both right and left laterals plus either a ventrodorsal or
dorsoventral view), and abdominal radiographs or ultrasonography. In addition, ancillary
diagnostics such as cardiac ultrasonography, computerized tomography, magnetic reso-
nance imaging, or other more specialized tests may be required.
Staging and Health
The staging process also evaluates the general health of the patient. Cancer patients are
often geriatric and may have the potential for a number of underlying conditions that may
adversely affect their health and the potential success of therapy. Also, any neoplastic
process may result in a number of paraneoplastic conditions that affect the well-being of
the cancer patient. In addition, other unrelated but serious concerns may be identified that
may bear on the patient's overall prognosis and could affect decisions regarding treatment
options.
 In many instances, correcting or supporting underlying problems such as renal failure,
urinary tract infections, heart disease, and metabolic disturbances may significantly improve
the general health of the patient and thus improve the potential for sucessful cancer care,
as well as the patient's overall quality of life.
When complicated surgical procedures or multiple radiation therapies that require
repeated or prolonged anesthesia are planned, adequate renal and hepatic functions are vital.
The likelihood of a successful outcome for a patient treated with chemotherapy is as
dependent on drug metabolism and elimination (and drug absorption for orally adminis-
tered chemotherapy) as it is on the sensitivity of the tumor. Consequently, information
gained during staging may identify problems that will impact the type and dosage of
For example, hepatic dysfunction may lead to delayed chemotherapy elimination
(examples; vinca alkaloids, doxorubicin) and therefore to greater toxicity such as myelo-
suppression. In contrast, cyclophosphamide is activated in the liver so hepatic dysfunc-
tion may result in poor efficacy.
Similarly, renal dysfunction may worsen toxicity for some drugs that are themselves
nephrotoxic. For example, cisplatin should not be used in patients with renal azotemia.
On the other hand, carboplatin is not nephrotoxic, but reduced renal excretion of
carboplatin will exacerbate myelosuppression.
Particularly for those breeds with a predisposition to develop cardiomyopathy, treat-
ment with doxorubicin should be preceded by cardiac evaluation. Pretreatment echocar-
diography should be performed and dogs with reduction in contractility should not receive
doxorubicin. While valvular dysfunction itself is not worsened by doxorubicin and there-
fore is not necessarily a reason to withhold doxorubicin, it should be remembered that
mild changes in cardiac muscle function may exacerbate the clinical impact of valvular
disease. In these patients, echocardiography should be performed periodically through
treatment, ideally prior to each treatment. Treatment should be discontinued if contractil-
ity is below normal, and while the patient is still asymptomatic. Cardiac dysfunction due
to doxorubicin is irreversible and usually progressive. For this reason, waiting until the
Staging of Cancer 27
patient has signs of early cardiac failure before discontinuing doxorubicin is unacceptable
practice.
Reevaluation
During and after a course of treatment, restaging is sometimes required. The most common
reason for this is to assess a patients’ response to treatment. However patients may also
need to be restaged to reevaluate the extent of disease and general health at the time of
relapse or recurrence prior to restarting treatment.
Staging Tests
 The following sections summarize some common assessments used in the staging process.
Physical Examinafion
The physical examination is critical in staging any tumor, as well as establishing some
 prognostic criteria. Two of the most important pieces of information gained from the
physical examination are tumor size and location. For various tumors, these factors may
hold important prognostic significance. For almost any solid tumor, they are important
factors to consider with regard to the potential for local therapy. Physical examination is
 also an important tool for screening for other health problems (unrelated or paraneoplas-
tic) that may affect the patient's treatment or prognosis.
Physical examination is easy to perform and minimally invasive, and it provides critical
clinician to further testing that is needed (imaging, biopsy, and so forth).
A set of calipers that measure in millimeters is extremely useful. Tumor size should be
measured using calipers and the longest dimension, the greatest width, and the maximum
depth recorded at each visit (Figure 4.1). The veterinary cancer nurse can assist by making
sure that accurate measurements are included in the permanent record for the patient.
Table 4.1 is a suggested format for lymph node measurements. This can be critical to
assessing treatment response and prognosis. For example, if a dog with lymphoma has
large lymph nodes a week after chemotherapy, and the original measurements are not
recorded, does this mean it is progressing (poor prognosis, requires a change of treatment),
or that it has responded partially but not completely (much more encouraging and treat-
ment should be continued).
Compfete Blood Count
A complete blood count (CBC) is always recommended for baseline staging of any pet
with cancer, particularly if surgery or chemotherapy is planned. This is especially true for
patients at high risk for paraneoplastic syndromes or bone marrow disease. A CBC is
easy to perform and minimally invasive, and it provides critical information for planning
treatment.
28
Approaching the Cancer Patient
Figure 4.1. Calipers should be used to measure the size of tumors or
lymph nodes in at least two, perpendicular dimensions. Usually the
largest two diameters are measured. The results should be recorded in
the patient's medical record in a chart format (see Table 4.1).
Table 4.1. Example of a table used to keep lymph node measurements
 Patient Name
Date
Lymph Node
Measurements in Millimeters
Measurements in Millimeters
Mandibular
Prescapular
Axillary
Popliteal
lnguinal
Other
Hematologic evaluation is an important part of initial diagnostics and staging in cancer
patients, as well as a vital part of ongoing monitoring for patients undergoing treatment.
The cancer process may cause hematologic abnormalities either by direct involvement of
the bone marrow or via paraneoplastic effects; these may provide clues that can aid the
diagnostic process or require management themselves. Another reason to be aware of the
patient's baseline CBC results is that during cancer treatment, some of the most common
side effects of chemotherapy are hematologic.
Many cancer patients
6 have anemia detected on baseline CBC evaluations. Potential
causes can include anemia of chronic disease, blood loss, immune-mediated hemolytic
anemia, and marrow infltration by disease
Anemia of chronic disease occurs when red blood cell lifespan is shortened, compounded
by disordered iron metabolism and blunted erythropoietin response. This is usually a
low-grade, normocytic, normochromic, and nonregenerative anemia. It is not usually a
significant clinical problem and usually resolves (sometimes slowly) with tumor control.
Staging of Cancer 2
29
Acute blood loss can result in a regenerative anemia; if very recent, the anemia may
appear nonregenerative. Chronic blood loss results in a microcytic (low MCV), hypochro-
mic (low MCHC) anemia. Common sites of bleeding include splenic or hepatic tumors,
nasal tumors, and Gl tumors. Even if not involved in tumor, the Gl tract may also be a
 site of blood loss as a paraneoplastic effect in mast cell tumors and gastrinomas.
 Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia can occur as a paraneoplastic effect in a number
of cancers, particularly lymphoma. This anemia varies in severity, is usually regenerative,
and can be acute or chronic.
 Primary erythrocytosis, or polycythemia vera, is a myeloproliferative disorder of the
erythroid lines that results in an elevated red cell count and is treated as a leukemia. Sec-
ondary erythrocytosis can be seen as a rare paraneoplastic syndrome associated mostly
with renal tumors, but other tumors have also been reported to result in this condition.
Leukemias can result in increased numbers of any line of circulating cells, the most
can also occur with stage 5 lymphoma. In chronic leukemias the circulating cells may
resemble normal cells cytologically. Increased circulating numbers of white blood cells can
also occur as paraneoplastic syndromes, and it is necessary to differentiate a chronic
leukemia from a paraneoplastic syndrome.
Decreased numbers of white blood cells usually raise a suspicion of bone marrow
infiltration with cancer (myelophthisis), particularly if multiple blood cell types are
affected. Pancytopenia (reduced numbers of multiple types of blood cells) is most com-
monly caused by leukemia, but it can also occur as a paraneoplastic syndrome with
estrogen-producing tumors (Sertoli cell tumors), which may not resolve, even with removal
of the tumor.
Thrombocytopenia can occur as a result of several mechanisms, including myelophthi-
sis, immune-mediated destruction, and consumption. Thrombocytosis can occur as a rare
paraneoplastic syndrome or as part of a reactive process.
Chapter 13 presents detail on interpreting hematologic changes and hematologic sup-
Serum Biochemistry Panel
A full serum chemistry panel is always recommended for baseline staging of any pet with
therapy) are anticipated. This is even more critical for geriatric patients or those at high
risk for paraneoplastic syndromes (e.g., dogs with lymphoma). Information gained from
these evaluations can also be helpful in planning for supportive and palliative care. These
tests are easy to perform, relatively reliable, and minimally invasive. Findings that may be
relevant in evaluation of a cancer patient and treatment planning can include those dis-
cussed in the following sections.
Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT)
In dogs with ALT elevations, measurement of bile acids (see the section "Ancillary Blood
and Urine Testing" later in this chapter) is a more specific test for hepatic dysfunction,
which can affect chemotherapy drug metabolism and result in altered toxicity (see also
"Bilirubin, below).
30Approaching the Cancer Patient
 Some chemotherapeutics are hepatotoxic. Dogs with elevated ALT prior to receiving a
dose of CCNU are at increased risk of toxicity. Also, CCNU may cause elevations in serum
ALT activity prior to causing functional hepatopathy, and prompt discontinuation of the
drug when the ALT rises will resolve the problem in most dogs before it becomes a clini-
cal toxicity. Therefore, monitoring of serum ALT prior to patients receiving each dose of
CCNU is a good screening test for toxicity.
Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP)
Multiple studies have demonstrated an association between elevated serum alkaline phos-
phatase (ALP) activity at the time of diagnosis and poor survival after amputation for
osteosarcoma. In one of these, elevated serum total ALP levels were associated with a
shorter survival time of 5.5 months, versus 12.5 months for dogs with normal serum ALP.
Serum bone-ALP levels may be even more powerful in their ability to predict survival in
dogs with osteosarcoma.
Bilirubin
Monitoring the bilirubin level is important when hepatically metabolized or hepatotoxic
drugs are to be used. An elevated bilirubin levels indicate much more advanced hepatic
damage than do elevated hepatocellular enzyme (e.g., ALT) levels. Chemotherapy drugs
that are metabolized by the liver (e.g., vincristine, vinblastine, and doxorubicin) will cause
exaggerated toxicity if administered to a patient with liver dysfunction; therefore, doses
of these drugs should be reduced for patients with liver dysfunction.
Creatinine
Elevated serum creatinine, if accompanied by isosthenuria or hyposthenuria, is indicative
of renal dysfunction. When the urine specific gravity is high, an elevated creatinine level
suggests dehydration. In older cats, serum creatinine should also be interpreted in light of
serum T4 level; i.e., hyperthyroidism may mask renal insufficiency. In animals with renal
dysfunction, doses of renally excreted chemotherapy drugs (e.g., carboplatin) should be
reduced, and nephrotoxic drugs (e.g., cisplatin in dogs and doxorubicin in cats) should be
avoided altogether.
Urea
Elevated urea with a normal creatinine and urine specific gravity can occur with a high
protein diet, but in other patients it may be suggestive of GI tract hemorrhage, so this
possibility should be considered in light of the clinical history (mast cell tumor, NSAID
therapy, etc.).
Calcium
Hypercalcemia is one of the most common paraneoplastic syndromes seen in veterinary
oncology (see Chapter 19, "Metabolic Emergencies,” for emergency management of hyper-
calcemia). When it occurs it is most commonly associated with lymphoid malignancies or
anal sac adenocarcinoma but has less commonly been associated with many other cancer
types. Occasionally the PU/PD caused by hypercalcemia is the first presenting sign of one
Staging of Cancer  3
31
of these cancers. Severe hypercalcemia requires immediate management to avoid the devel-
opment of hypercalcemic nephropathy and permanent renal failure. The serum calcium
level should always be interpreted in light of the serum albumin level.
Albumin
Increased albumin concentration should prompt consideration of dehydration. Decreased
albumin can occur with various metabolic abnormalities including liver failure, renal
disease, hemorrhage, and GI tract disease (maldigestion, malabsorption). Decreased
albumin concentration can affect other tests (i.e., hypoalbuminemia artifactually decreases
the calcium level) and drug binding.
Globulin
Hyperglobulinemia may be polyclonal or monoclonal, and serum protein electrophoresis
is necessary to make this critical distinction. When polyclonal, the most likely cause is
chronic inflammation/infectious disease, although less commonly a polyclonal gammopa-
thy can be associated with cancer. When monoclonal (or biclonal) gammopathy is identi-
fied. The most common cause is plasma cell cancer (often known as multiple myeloma);
however, other malignancies and even infectious disease (e.g., Ehrlichiosis) can less com-
monly be a cause.
Glucose
Hypoglycemia is seen as a paraneoplastic syndrome with a variety of neoplasms, including
large hepatic tumors and insulinomas (see Chapter 19 for emergency management of
hypoglycemia). Abdominal ultrasonography and measurement of serum insulin level
should be considered.
Urine Evaluation
 Urinalysis is a commonly overlooked test in patients not displaying signs referable to the
urinary tract. However, it is an important part of pretreatment baseline evaluation in
cancer patients. Urinalysis allows more accurate evaluation of renal function, which can
be important in anticipating toxicity because many drugs are renally excreted. The urine
specific gravity is important in interpreting changes in urea and creatinine (see above).
Presence of proteinuria may elucidate a finding of hypoalbuminemia. However, Bence-
Jones proteinuria (light chain globulin fragments in the urine, as seen in myeloma-related
disorders) is not detectable on routine urinalysis
Secondary urinary tract infections can particularly occur in animals with urinary tract
tumors or hemorrhagic cystitis as a chemotherapy side effect, and the diagnosis of an
infection does not rule out these possibilities as an underlying cause. In addition, pets with
many types of cancer may be immunosuppressed and will have a “clinically silent" urinary
tract infection. Such an infection can worsen, and/or act as a source for sepsis if a myelo
suppressive chemotherapy drug is given. Concurrent treatment of the infection based on
culture and sensitivity will allow chemotherapy to be given while reducing the risk of life-
threatening sepsis.
32   Approaching the Cancer Patient
Lymph Node Evaluation
For many cancers, the first site of metastasis may be the draining (regional) lymph nodes.
draining the primary tumor (see Figure 4.1). For inguinal or perineal tumors, the draining
lymph nodes are evaluated by abdominal ultrasonography. Enlarged or frm nodes should
be further evaluated by fine-needle aspiration cytology, and cytology that is suspicious but
not definitive should be confirmed by surgical biopsy. For some cancers, the lymph node
metastatic rate is so high that even normal-size lymph nodes should be aspirated or biopsied.
Fine-needle aspiration of peripheral lymph nodes is easy to perform and minimally
invasive, and it provides important staging information (see Chapter 3). For intraab-
dominal nodes the process is more involved but generally not insurmountable if ultraso-
nography is available. As discussed above, cytology results are sometimes equivocal and
may require biopsy for confirmation.
Imaging
Radiography
X-rays are absorbed in the body according to the density of the material they pass through,
so materials such as bone or metal allow less energy to reach the film and the image is
white; whereas air is less dense, more energy is transmitted and the image is blacker.
 Therefore, radiographs are especially suited for disclosing changes to bone and lungs and
 s) s d p ass os sm sq   ass o
within the liver, spleen, or kidneys) are more difficult to visualize. Radiographs can be
taken safely and the necessary equipment is widely available. Sedation may be required
for appropriate positioning. Specific training is needed to obtain good quality radiographs
(technician's role) and for interpretation of the images (veterinarian's role). Appropriate
Thoracic radiographs may disclose pulmonary metastasis (Figure 4.2), and concurrent
diseases may also be found, especially in geriatric patients. Good quality three-view (both
laterals as well as ventrodorsal or dorsoventral) thoracic radiographs should be performed
for patients with any cancer that has a risk of pulmonary metastasis or intrathoracic
spread. Pulmonary metastases may be visible on one lateral view but not the other (Figures
4.3 and 4.4).
Figure 4.2.  Metastatic hemangiosarcoma in a cat;
the multiple nodular densities in the thoracic radio-
graph are typical for carcinoma and sarcoma
metastases.
Figure 4.3. A right lateral radiograph of a dog with systemic histiocytic sarcoma. The appearance was consid-
ered normal. (Courtesy of Dr. Kenneth M. Rassnick)
Figure 4.4. A left lateral radiograph of the same dog seen in Figure 4.3. Note the large caudoventral pulmonary
mass that was not visible on the other view. (Courtesy of Dr. Kenneth M. Rassnick)
33
34Approaching the Cancer Patient
Abdominal radiography may confirm a physical examination finding of probable
abdominal mass and may indicate its location; but abdominal ultrasonography provides
 information about the internal organ architecture (liver, kidneys, intestinal tract) and is
preferred.
For a musculoskeletal tumor, fine detail radiographs of the affected area may provide
information on its size and invasiveness, particularly if the tumor involves bone. However,
more than 5o% of the mineral needs to be lost before osteolysis is radiographically visible.
so plain radiographs do not definitively rule out bone damage, and CT scanning or MRI
should be considered to address this question.
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography can image the internal architecture of an organ or tumor which may
prove valuable in assessing for metastases or guiding surgery. Ultrasonography is safe,
painless, and noninvasive; however sedation, or even general anaesthesia (for guided biop-
sies), may be needed. Access is required not only to equipment, but also to the expertise
for interpretation of ultrasound imaging;, considerable expertise is required to accurately
interpret ultrasound images especially to do so reproducibly for repeat imaging in the same
patient. There is no risk of radiation exposure, but personnel must take appropriate pre-
cautions to protect themselves from repetitive strain injury.
Most intraabdominal tumors are better imaged by ultrasonography than by radiographs.
Some cancers (e.g., splenic hemangiosarcoma) are likely to metastasize to intraabdominal
sites, and for these, abdominal ultrasonography is an important part of staging and restag-
ing (Figure 4.5).
 For a mass at the periphery of lung fields or for pets with abdominal or thoracic effu-
sions, ultrasonography may be especially useful for guiding fine-needle aspiration or needle
biopsy.
Computed Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
In CT scanning an X-ray tube rotates around the patient while a computer collects the
results and from this information creates images called slices. Slices can be studied indi-
Figure 4.5. An ultrasonogram of the urinary
bladder of a dog with transitional cell carcinoma.
Multiple protrusions of the tumor are visible, and
accurate measurements can be obtained (see left
upper protrusion) that can be used to measure the
efficacy of treatment in causing tumor response
("restaging").
Staging of Cancer3
35
vidually or placed together to form a three-dimensional image of the area of the patient
being studied.
MRI scanning uses magnets and radio waves to create the images, producing images
that have much higher soft tissue detail.
Although they are painless and noninvasive, CT and MRI scanning both require
 general anesthesia to immobilize veterinary patients in the machine (which can be anxiety-
 provoking in human patients). In addition, because CT scanning uses X-rays, appropriate
measures must be taken to protect personnel from the risk of radiation exposure. Both
CT and MRI are relatively costly compared to radiography and ultrasonography; access
is required to both equipment and special expertise for interpretation of images. If radio-
therapy or extensive surgery are being considered, the surgeon or radiation oncologist that
will be performing the treatment should be consulted prior to CT or MRI to ensure that
correct views are obtained
When thoracic radiographs are equivocal for pulmonary metastasis, thoracic CT
scanning is often able to confirm or deny the presence of even small (3 mm) pulmonary
nodules.
Abdominal ultrasonography is an important part of staging for many intraabdominal
cancers, but CT scanning can provide even more objective images and measurements, and
it can be used with contrast imaging to highlight equivocal tumors or to delineate margins
around invasive tumors (Figures 4.6 and 4.7).
Figure 4.6. An abdominal radiograph of a cat
Figure 4.7.  A CT image slice from the same cat in Figure
with an injection site sarcoma over the left hip area.
4.6. The extent of the tumor and invasion around the spine
On radiographs the soft tissue density is readily
 means that surgery alone is unlikely to provide good tumor
apparent, but the margins are not. Both surgery and  control. The field for radiotherapy can now be accurately
Tadiotherapy are options for this patient, but
t  set, using the CT image. In addition, the risk of radiatior
without knowing the extent of the tumor, an accu-
toxicity to underlying organs can be assessed and hopefully
rate prognosis is difficult.
avoided.
36 Approaching the Cancer Patient
Because mineral loss must be extensive before it is radiographically visible, CT scanning
 is far more accurate for delineation of tumor extent in bone, and it should be considered
 if the tumor margins are uncertain or if radiation therapy or a challenging surgery is
being considered. This is particularly true of tumors involving the head and neck or pelvic
region. MRI is best used when soft-tissue detail is needed, such as spine, brain, or muscle.
 Naturally, using these modalities will not be able to guarantee that a tumor can be
completely eradicated by radiation or surgery; however, it will certainly improve the like-
lihood by enabling better planning of surgical approach or radiation feld, and it may
prevent a needless attempt at a treatment that can not be successful because of tumor
extent or location.
CT and MRI may be helpful in restaging of patients to assess the response to chemo-
therapy or radiotherapy, and to decide whether further therapy is indicated (Figures
4.8-4.11).
CT scans can also be used to create 3-D images that allow a surgeon to plan surgery,
and a radiation oncologist to protect normal surrounding tissues, by adjusting the dose
beam. CT scans also enable owners to more clearly visualize the tumor and conceptualize
what will happen to their pet (Figures 4.12 and 4.13).
Figure 4.8. A CT scan from a dog with a right-
 sided nasal carcinoma before radiotherapy.
Figure 4.9. A CT scan slice from the same level
on the dog seen in Figure 4.8, but 3 months after
radiotherapy. There is clearly tumor response in
this restaging scan.
Figure 4.10. A CT scan from the dog seen in Figure 4.8, at another slice level, before radiotherapy.
Sumoys Ajealo juawan jae syuow e 'usese ing 'ot't ainslg u uas se anal a!s awes ayl 'll't auna
response. Future imaging can be considered to assess the patient if there are signs that could signal tumor growth
or infection. CT scans with baseline information can help distinguish between these possibilities.
072002
Figure 4.12. A CT reconstruction of a multilobular osteochondrosarcoma (MLO) of the base of the skull. Such
an image is very powerful when explaining treatment options to an owner. (Courtesy of Dr. David Simpson)
37
38  Approaching the Cancer Patient
Figure 4.13. The same dog as seen in Figure 4.12,
from a lateral view.(Courtesy of Dr. David
Simpson)
Bone Scintigraphy
Most of the studies using bone scintigraphy (technetium scans) in dogs with bone tumors,
have been as a screen to see whether they have additional bony sites when they have been
diagnosed with an appendicular osteosarcoma. Under these circumstances, one of the
drawbacks is that bone scintigraphy may detect other lesions, such as osteoarthritis both
in bone and soft tissue sites. In one group of 66 dogs with appendicular osteosarcoma that
underwent technetium scintigraphy, none manifested other bony lesions. However in
another series of 399 dogs, in 7.8% of cases scintigraphy detected suspicious lesions that
also appeared on radiographs and were metastatic sites, but yet were not suspected clini-
cally (i.e., not causing lameness or pain). Bone scintigraphy does not have high resolution,
so the process is considered to be a two-step one, where unusual sites of bone activity
would be further imaged by radiographs or CT or MRI after radioactivity is back to
normal levels.
Ancillary Blood and Urine Testing
 In cancer patients, basic testing such as CBC, biochemistry panel, and urinalysis are a vital
component of diagnostics and the best possible management. However, these tests may
 not always give enough information for optimal patient care. In these cases, ancillary
testing may be used to determine supplementary information about individual patients.
Creatinine Clearance
Some chemotherapy agents are nephrotoxic (e.g., cisplatin and streptozotocin in dogs,
doxorubicin in cats), and some are renally cleared (e.g., carboplatin). Many of our older
oncology patients have renal insufficiency that may not be causing azotemia (renal function
must decrease by 75% before azotemia is detected). One option for older patients with
renal azotemia who require carboplatin chemotherapy is to perform an arbitrary dose
reduction (25-50%). This approach may leave some animals undertreated, with a resistant
tumor cell population, and others that still show marked myelosuppression. Even in
animals where there is no renal azotemia, there is commonly individual variability for
Staging of Cancer3
39
dosing intervals with carboplatin; some animals may take 5 or more weeks to recover to
a level where a subsequent dose can be delivered safely.
 Recent studies in cats have shown that basing carboplatin treatment on creatinine clear-
ance is able to accurately direct the dose that should be used. In that study, cats that were
normal, had suboptimal renal function, or were azotemic received widely ranging doses
based on their creatinine clearance, but they had predictable and non-life-threatening
myelosuppression. Similar strategies could be helpful in selecting carboplatin doses in dogs.
Pre- and Postprandial Bile Acid Levels
Hepatic metabolism is important in the detoxification and excretion of many commonly
used chemotherapy drugs (e.g., vincristine, vinblastine, and doxorubicin). In addition, for
drugs that have hepatotoxic potential such as lomustine (CCNU), patients with any pre-
existing hepatic disease are at greatly increased risk of toxicity. Increases in serum hepa-
tocellular enzyme levels should raise suspicion of hepatobiliary disease but are not specific,
 and other causes of such elevations may occur in both geriatric and cancer patients. In
these patients, further evaluation of the liver is warranted before chemotherapy adminis-
tration. Fasting serum bile acid is more specific (meaning positive is more likely to reflect
true disease and less likely to give false positive), but not more sensitive (no less likely to
give false negative) than serum ALP and hepatocellular enzymes levels for true hepatobi-
liary disease. An increased level of postprandial serum bile acid is more sensitive than is
an increased level of fasting bile acids. Thus, combining fasting and postprandial bile acid
levels improves both sensitivity and specificity for suspected hepatobiliary disease.
Multiple Drug Resistance and the MDR-1 Gene
The mdr pump protein is coded for by the MDR-1 gene and is present in organs and sites
such as the renal tubules, the bile ducts, and the blood brain barrier, which are important
for excreting "natural toxins." It is a pump protein that crosses the cell membrane and
cancer cells at the outset of chemotherapy but may increase after chemotherapy is insti-
tuted. Studies in both dogs and cats with lymphoma have found that if mdr is detected in
 pretreatment biopsies, the remission duration and survival times are shorter.
Some dogs have a mutation of the MDR-1 gene in their normal cells causing reduced
toxin excretion, and these dogs may have reduced drug elimination and an increased ten-
dency to toxicity. The tendency to this mutation is breed-related and is particularly well-
recognized in collies, where MDR-1 mutations lead to increased sensitivity to a number
of drugs, including ivermectin, but also many chemotherapeutics. Breeds that have been
shown to be affected in the U.S. and Europe are collie, border collie, Shetland sheepdog.
old English sheepdog, Australian shepherd, English shepherd, longhaired whippet, silken
windhound, McNab, and Waller. Affected individuals experience increased toxicity when
mdr-excreted chemotherapy drugs are used. This has been shown clinically in a recent
study, where affected dogs were significantly more likely to develop bone marrow suppres-
sion (neutropenia and thrombocytopenia) after vincristine chemotherapy than were dogs
without mutations.
A patented test for the mutated gene is commercially available and is recommended
when considering using chemotherapy to treat dogs of the breeds listed above. Dose reduc-
tions in doxorubicin, mitoxantrone, vincristine, or vinblastine (the most commonly used
drugs) are recommended to avoid excess toxicity in dogs that are found to be affected.
40Approaching the Cancer Patient
Veterinary Bladder Tumor Antigen (V-BTA) Test
This noninvasive urine test was developed for human patients and directed against a
complex found in the urine of patients with urinary bladder transitional cell carcinoma
(TCC). It has been used in humans to detect early relapse in patients treated for TCC. The
test can be run using as little as O.5 ml of urine, and it may be more accurate on centrifuged
samples.
A veterinary version of the test appears to work similarly in dogs (not yet evaluated in
cats). However various other urinary abnormalities increase the risk of a false positive
reaction. Positive tests were seen for dogs with urinary bladder, urethral, prostatic, and
the specificity (true negative) rate is similar. For dogs with any urinary tract disease (includ-
ing cancer but also other problems including simple bacterial urinary tract infection [UTI],
the specificity drops to less than 50% (meaning a high rate of false positives).
Therefore, this is not a test that can be used to detect TCC in the general population
or to differentiate TCC from simple UTI in dogs showing symptoms. On the other hand,
the high sensitivity means that the likelihood of missing a TCC (false negative) is very low.
 For this reason, the V-BTA could be used in dogs considered at high risk of developing
TCC (for example, Scottish terriers, Shetland sheepdogs) as part of their geriatric wellness
testing. A positive result would not tell you that the patient has TCC, but it would be a
reason to investigate further Most importantly, if the test was negative, the chances of
that patient having a "silent" TCC would be very low; and the owners could feel reason-
ably confident that their dog was free of cancer at that time and avoid any more invasive
or expensive testing.
Further Reading
Bailey DB, et al. 2004. Effect of glomerular filtration rate on clearance and myelotoxicity of carbo-
platin in cats with tumors. A/VR 65:1502-1507.
Bergman PJ, et al. 1996. Monoclonal antibody C219 immunohistochemistry against P-glycoprotein:
sequential analysis and predictive ability in dogs with lymphoma. JVIM 10:354-359.
Brenn SH, et al. 2008. Evaluation of P-glycoprotein expression in feline lymphoma and correlation
with clinical outcome. Vet Compar Oncol 6:201-211.
Center SA, et al. 1990. Liver function tests in the diagnosis of portosystemic vascular anomalies.
Sem Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 5:9499.
Chretin JD, et al. 2007. Reduced morbidity following prophylactic trimethoprim-sulfadiazine admin-
istration during chemotherapeutic induction: a double-blind placebo-controlled study. JVIM
21:141-148.
Garzotto CK, et al. 2000. Prognostic significance of serum alkaline phosphatase activity in canine
appendicular 0steosarcoma. JVIM 14:587-592.
Grindem CB, et al. 1994. Thrombocytopenia associated with neoplasia in dogs. JVIM 8:400-405.
Henry CJ, et al. 2003. Evaluation of a bladder tumor antigen test as a screening test for transitional
cell carcinoma of the lower urinary tract in dogs. A/VR 64:1017-1020.
Kristal O, et al. 2004. Hepatotoxicity associated with CCNU (lomustine) chemotherapy in dogs.
/VIM 18(1):75-80.
Lara-Garcia A, et al. 2008. Evaluation of a point-of-care hematology analyzer for use in dogs and
cats receiving chemotherapeutic treatment. JAVMA 232(10):1488-1495.
Staging of Cancer41
Litster A, et al. 2007. Prevalence of bacterial species in cats with clinical signs of lower urinary tract
disease: recognition of Stapbylococcus felis as a possible feline urinary tract pathogen. Vet Micro-
biol 121:182-188.
Martinez M, et al. 2008. The pharmacogenomics of P-glycoprotein and its role in veterinary medi-
cine. J Vet Pharmacol Therapeutics 31:28s-300.
Mealey KL, et al. 2008. Breed distribution of the ABCB1-1 Delta (multidrug sensitivity) polymor-
phism among dogs undergoing ABCB1 genotyping. JAVMA 233:921-924.
Moore AS, et al. 2007. Doxorubicin and Bay-129566 for the treatment of osteosarcoma in dogs: A
randomized, double blind, placebo controlled study. JVIM 21:783-790.
Webster CRL. 200s. History, clinical signs, and physical findings in hepatobiliary disease. In:
Ettinger SJ, et al., eds, Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. St Louis, Elsevier, 1422-1434.
Williams MJ, et al. 2008. Canine lymphoproliferative disease characterized by lymphocytosis: immu-
nophenotypic markers of prognosis. JV1M 22:596-601.
Section
3
Treatment of Cancer
General Principles of Veterinary
Cancer Treatment
The treatment of cancer has evolved over the last few decades to parallel treatment in
humans, with certain differences. The important difference between cancer therapy in
humans and that ofered for pet animals is in the goals of therapy. In humans, many
cancers are cured, and cancer survivors may enjoy many decades of comfortable life. For
this reason, treatment of cancer is aggressive and may be associated with side effects.
Although pet animals are very similar biologically to humans, the chance for survival of
decades is remote. Therapies are therefore directed at preserving quality of life; tumor
control, or remission, is the aim rather than cure at any cost.
Goals of Treatment
The goal of cancer treatment in human oncology is usually to cure the patient; in veterinary
medicine, palliation is a more appropriate goal, and hence the drug dosages and schedules
used are less likely to result in side effects. In palliative treatment the primary goal is to
improve quality of life, which in veterinary medicine may result in prolonged survival
because euthanasia is delayed.
Quality of life for humans depends largely on preservation of body image and essential
organ function. We may interpret our impressions of a pet's well-being in terms of our
own expectations and belief; communication between the cancer treatment team and the
owner is therefore essential. Options for treatment should never be limited by our inter
pretation of the owner's finances or preferences; rather, open and honest dialogue will
allow an owner to make an informed decision and will ultimately create a “team'
approach to chemotherapeutic treatment of the pet's cancer. The veterinary oncology nurse
is a vital part of building and maintaining that team.
The goal of veterinary cancer therapy is usually to make the pet as normal as possible
with no symptoms or outward evidence of cancer. The specific treatment plan depends
45
46Treatment of Cancer
greatly on the tumor type. However, often the treatment starts with surgery. If the surgeon
is unable to remove all the tumor cells without causing compromise to a pet's quality of
life, radiation therapy may be offered as a follow-up. If the tumor has spread to other
sites, or if the risk of spread is very high, treatment may involve the use of anticancer
chemotherapy medications.
 It is important to recognize that although cancer is a rarely curable disease, most pets
can be treated in such a way that a high quality of life is achieved following diagnosis. In
this respect, it is similar to treating heart or kidney disease, chronic diseases that also can
be fatal. Remember that one of the most important factors influencing a pet's quality of
 life and remission time is the interest and dedication of the owner and the veterinary care
team.
Response to Cancer Treatment
When trying to decide whether to continue treatment, or knowing whether treatment is
successful, objective criteria are helpful. Evaluating response to treatment can often be
done by physical examination but may require laboratory evaluations or imaging, as
described in Chapter 4. The standardized criteria for treatment response are summarized
in Table 5.1.
Describing the Outfook with Statistics
The next section defines some terms that are often used when describing the outlook
(prognosis) for a patient with cancer. These are statistical terms, and provide a guide as
to how the population of animals with the same cancer type will respond to treatment;
such numbers can never tell you how an individual patient will respond to therapy and
how long it will survive.
Table 5.1. Definitions of objective tumor remissions and responses following anticancer therapy
Tumor Response
Criteria
Complete (CR)*
Disappearance of all evidence of cancer in all sites for a defined period of 
time (e.g.. one inter-treatment interval of 3 weeks).
 Partial (PR)*
Decrease in size of all tumors by 50% or greater as measured by the sum of 
the products of two diameters for each tumor. These diameters should be
the largest tumor diameter and the diameter perpendicular to it. There
should be sustained decrease in tumor size, as defined for CR, and no new
tumors should arise.
Stable disease (SD)
Decrease of <50% or an increase of <25% in the sum of the products of the
diameters as measured for PR.
Progressive disease (PD)
Increase of 25% or more in the sum of the products of tumor diameters or
the appearance of a new tumor.
*CR + PR = Objective or Overall Response Rate.
General Principles47
2
D.
10
20
3D
4D
Survival time in months 
Figure 5.1. This Kaplan-Meier survival curve shows the progression over time of a group of dogs (see text for
details). The steps represent death of a patient, and the proportion surviving can be estimated. Dogs still alive in
the group are included as cross marks.
Kaplan-Meier Survival Curve
Kaplan-Meier survival curves are one of the most common types of statistical presentations
for data in oncology. These curves start with all (100%) of the animals alive (or in remis-
sion) and over time, as a patient dies (or comes out of remission), the curve tracks him/
 her by reducing the percentage (see Figure 5.1). The result is a series of steps.
 From this curve you can calculate the median, mean, and survival rates at any time point
(usually 1 year and 2 years after treatment starts). There are more examples of such curves
in Section 7.
Mean is the average survival time of all the patients in the population being studied.
Median is the middle value for the survival times of the population.
 An example would be a treatment for 15 dogs with stage 3, T-cell lymphoma where the
survival time is measured. The survival times in months for these dogs are: 1, 1, 2, 3, 6,
6, 7, 10, 10, 10, 12, 24, 30, 34, 42. Three of these dogs are still alive at 12, 30, and 34
months. The Kaplan-Meier survival curve is seen in Figure 5.1; the cross marks show dogs
still alive. For this population the median survival would be 10 months, but the mean
would be 13.2 months. The 1-year survival rate would be 33.3% and the 2-year survival
rate would be 26.7%. When talking to the owner of a dog with a similar disease, at a
similar clinical stage (dogs with stage 3, T-cell lymphoma), you could say that there is a
50% chance that his or her pet would live 10 months or longer, and there is a 1-in-3
chance it would live more than 1 year. That actual patient may live 1 month, or it may
live more than 3 years, but the usual survival numbers are the best information we are
able to provide.
Surgery is still the modality most likely to cure an animal of cancer if the tumor is local-
ized (not metastasized and not invading into sensitive structures). However, it is not only
with curative intent that surgery is applied to pets with cancer. Biopsy, debulking, and
palliation are achieved through surgery, and each needs to be carefully performed so as
to minimize the impact on the patient's quality of life while still achieving the appropriate
goal.
 Although veterinary technicians may not perform surgery themselves, an understanding
of the principles of surgery can allow them to become effective members of the oncology
can be as important as the surgery itself in leading to a good outcome for the patient.
Noncurative Intent Surgery
Biopsy
's Asdoq au add pe d on ui si i Asdoq p sued e huead u
remembering that anywhere that has been cut by the biopsy instrument (biopsy needle
is performed.
After biopsy, the formation of a hematoma or a seroma might spread cancer cells as it
dissects between fascial planes, which would lead to a more extensive and possibly com-
plicated definitive surgery. The veterinary nurse should be proactive in identifying swelling
after biopsy and in the careful use of dressings and bandages to reduce such complications.
Remember that a drain placed to allow fluid drainage will need to be excised with its tract
Poe oi aaq aq Ae a aoqe sioen Asdoq nog pauo se iaans agp aui ie
its use if possible.
48
Surgery49
PATHOLOGI
SECTIONS
MARGINAL
RESECTION
WIDE
EXCISION
Figure 6.1. A schematic of an invasive tumor (such as a mast cell tumor or soft tissue sarcoma) that is sending
tendrils into the surrounding tissue. With a marginal excision (pink line) the tumor will not be completely excised
uxa m ae s lnng aad a  sue au n usxa m y i l pe
of two different parallel sections (yellow) by the pathologist would result in a different perception of the complete-
ness of excision. If the pathologist sections at level (a), the result will reflect complete excision, whereas if the
pathologist sections at level (b), the result will reflect incomplete excision.
As mentioned in Chapter 3, tissues obtained at biopsy should be carefully handled and
 prepared to allow evaluation of the tissue by different procedures, such as cytology and
immunohistochemistry. The biopsy specimen should be handled with extreme care to
prevent crushing, artifact, or alteration of the orientation of the tissue specimen. Specimens
should be placed in enough preservative to allow complete fixation (a good rule is 1 part
tissue to 10 parts formalin). Using inked margins or sutures may give the pathologist
 information regarding orientation of biopsy tissue within the body.
When the intent of surgery is to remove a large portion of the tumor, or indeed to try
to cure the patient, it is important to remember that a margin (or cuff or zone) of normal
tissue will also need to be removed to ensure that the tumor and its “tentacles" (Figure
6.1) will be removed. The veterinary technician/nurse should discuss this with the surgeon
prior to clipping and preparing the site because the aim of the surgery and the type of
tumor may mean that the amount of preparation could vary.
IntracapsularSurgery
Also known as debulking or cytoreduction, intracapsular surgery will never lead to a cure
ss pue snss pu us uasad ul ao e ay ueo i q aue e io
that, if damaged, could negatively affect the patient's quality of life. Debulking will often
leave behind visible tissue at the site, but it can provide palliation when a tumor is causing
obstruction (say to the urethra, upper respiratory tract, or gastrointestinal tract) or pain
(retrobulbar tumors or spinal tumors). Debulking surgeries require adjunctive therapy if
the patient is to be cured or have a long-term remission. An example would be a dog with
a mast cell tumor of the foot where limb amputation is not possible. Debulking of the
tumor, followed by radiation teletherapy could be considered to have a high probability
of long-term control (see Figure 6.2).
50Treatment of Cancer
Marginal Surgery
By this surgical technique the tumor is removed along the pseudocapsule. The pseudocap-
sule is formed when the tumor expands, compressing the peripheral tumor cells against
the surrounding normal tissue. Grossly, the tumor appears to "shell out," but microscopic
compressed (but viable) tumor cells remain and will regrow if no further treatment is
performed. Again, radiotherapy is indicated for marginally removed tumors where
metastasis has not occurred, and cure is still a possibility with that addition (see Figure
6.3).
Curative Intent Surgery
When preparing a patient for curative intent surgery it is important to clip and prepare
the surgery site to include any biopsy needle tracts and incisions, as well as drain holes
and tracts that will need to be removed, because these could be a source of future recur-
rence. In addition, preparation of sites for skin mobilization or grafting should be consid-
ered. Ideally, lymph nodes should be removed at surgery and examined histologically for
any evidence or tumor metastases. Removal of nodes is not known to improve outcome,
but knowledge of node status can direct adjuvant therapy and influence prognosis. During
surgical clipping and preparation it is important to identify any lymph nodes that the
surgeon may want to biopsy. Node biopsy and skin grafting may also be considerations
when positioning the patient for surgery.
Wide (Excisional) Surgery
Excisional surgery removes a cuff of normal tissue along with the tumor contained within.
Ideally, the tumor is removed en bloc, and the lateral or deep margins of the tumor are
mo tii a aas) assod si a e doa aim si  ae  soxa 
 often what appears to be a wide surgery to the cancer care team may still not be adequate.
The nurse can assist in placing ink or sutures at the areas the surgeon feels least confident
about so that the pathologist can specifically section and examine those sites.
Most investigators feel a clear histologic margin of 5-10 mm (depending on the tumor
type) is adequate. It is important to remember that to achieve this, wider surgical margins
of macroscopically normal-appearing tissue need to be removed (Figure 6.4). The pub-
lished reports requiring 2-3 cm margins are clinical margins, not histologic. However, the
pathology report should always be interpreted in light of the clinical impression of the
surgery. If the surgeon's feeling is that the margins were not achieved, the best option is
a second, “scar revision" surgery to remove margins around the remaining scar. This is
true if the histopathologist does not find tumor cells at the margins, because pathologists
are limited in the amount of tissue they can examine (at sections of 4 micrometers thick);
this is why inking the margins at areas of concern is helpful. Thus, if the surgeon feels
confident but the pathologist find tumor cells at the margin, the pathology report should
take precedence; if the surgeon feels it is unlikely the excision was complete but the pathol-
ogy report does not find tumor cells at the margins, the surgeon's impression should take
precedence. On the other hand, if the deep margin includes underlying fascia or muscle
Surgery51
Figure 6.2.  The yellow line denotes the approximate  Figure 6.3.  The yellow line denotes the approximate
surgery for a debulking surgery. This surgery will not
 surgery for a marginal surgery. This surgery will not be
be curative.
curative.
that has not been penetrated, these may act as a barrier to tumor invasion, particularly
early on.
Radical Excisional Surgery
margins. The most commonly seen example is a limb amputation that could cure a mast
cell tumor or a low-grade soft tissue sarcoma and be palliative for pain from a bone cancer
such as osteosarcoma (Figure 6.5).
Such aggressive surgical procedures may be viewed as “mutilating" by some owners as
they project their interpretation of well-being onto their pets (anthropomorphism). It is
important to remember that animals often have a great quality of life with litle regard
for the cosmetic changes such surgeries cause.
Amputation
Limb amputation is probably the most commonly performed of such surgeries. Although
most pet owners initially do not like the idea of amputation, dogs (and particularly cats)
respond to the surgery extremely well. In two studies in the U.S. and in Europe, dogs
learned to walk well on three legs within a month, which exceeded most clients' expecta-
tions. All clients were happy with their decision to amputate. Pets are able to function
52
Treatment of Cancer
edeisp auma  sg a ae sp uma l g an
surgery for a wide surgery. This surgery could be cura-
Aan s! Aains s!u1 Aasins uoendue ue joj Aasins 
tive for many tumors.
likely to be curative for any nonmetastatic soft tissue
tumors at this location.
almost normally on three legs: they can go on long walks, play with family members and
other pets, swim, and go up and down stairs. Most pet owners are pleasantly surprised
to see how well their pets adjust to the surgery. The pain associated with the procedure
is minimal, and most pets are up and around the next day. Because cats and dogs have
 no concept of their appearance, amputation is not associated with emotional or psycho-
logical diffculties for them.
 For light, fit animals, amputation is extremely well-tolerated. (see Figures 6.6-6.9) Even
very heavy dogs—if they are fit, not obese, and without significant orthopedic problems-
can tolerate the procedure well. Our website has some photos and a video of dogs (includ-
ing a mastiff-cross) that have undergone amputation (www.vetoncologyconsults.com/
deciding_about_amputation), which may be helpful for some owners. (Another valuable
website for owners of amputee dogs is www.tripawds.com.) You should always look at
any website yourself before passing the address on to your clients. Finally the book
Without Regret: A Handbook for Owners of Canine Amputees, by Susan Neal, remains
an excellent resource.
Maxillectomy and Mandibulectomy
Although most pet owners are understandably initially reluctant to have an aggressive
facial surgery such as maxillectomy done for their pet, most who do are satisfied after the
procedure, from both cosmetic and functional standpoints. It is important to remember
Surgery53
Figure 6.7. This cat had a hindlimb amputation some
months prior and has returned to close-to-normal activ-
Figure 6.6. A cat just a few days after amputation.
ity levels.
Pain relief following such a surgery is mandatory, but
patients rapidly adapt. Cosmetically and mentally this
is the worst period for their owners, but as the hair
regrows concerns subside.
Figure 6.8. Dogs with three legs are able to
function at a high level as pets, and participate in
most normal activities. (Courtesy of Dr. Kenneth
M.Rassnick)
that for pets with most oral tumors, the impact on quality of life caused by the local tumor
 is the most life-threatening problem; complete resection is the best way to alleviate the
quality-of-life problems. In a telephone survey of caregivers for dogs with oral tumors,
including some treated with partial maxillectomy, satisfaction with the surgical procedure
was assessed. Overall, 85% of owners were pleased with their decision to treat their dogs,
and the longer the dog had lived, the more likely the caregiver was to be satisfied. Although
difficulty in eating was noted for 64% of dogs after maxillectomy, pain was felt to be less
 after surgery for most animals than before surgery. All clients found the cosmetic appear-
ances of their dogs acceptable after facial hair regrew (Figure 6.10). The quality of the
 pets’ lives was perceived by the owners to be most improved after rostral mandibulectomy
(100%) and least improved after partial mandibulectomy. Similar good reports came from
owners of dogs in another study.
54
Treatment of Cancer
Figure 6.9. Dogs remain positive after amputation 
and are not affected by negative body image.
(Courtesy of Dr. John Berg)
Figure 6.10. Mandibulectomy is an aggressive surgery,
but can be curative for many otherwise fatal oral tumors.
Under hot conditions, tongue "lagging" may be an obvious
change (as in this yachting dog), but it is rarely a problem.
Figure 6.11. Cats take longer to adapt to man-
dibulectomy, and continued nursing and encour-
agement is needed for many patients. It is still a
rewarding surgery and curative for cats with many
oral tumors.
A retrospective report of cats treated with mandibulectomy for oral neoplasia (all types)
showed that most (-75 %) cats were dysphagic or inappetent immediately postoperatively,
and 12% never regained the ability to eat. Despite these findings, most (>80%) of the
owners were satisfied with the outcome (Figure 6.11).
Nosectomy
A surgery that is often used to resect a nasal plane squamous cell carcinoma in cats is a
 postoperative period is sometimes challenging, cats recover well. Our personal pet under-
Surgery 5
Figure 6.12.  Nosectomy is cosmetically challeng-
ing for the owner, but once the patient's hair
regrows, the normal quality of life such patients
experience means that owners readily accept the
physical changes.
Figure 6.13. Cosmetic changes do not affect a
cat's quality of life.
went this surgery, and lived another 6 years of excellent quality life, similar to the good
outcomes seen in other patients (Figures 6.12 and 6.13).
Brain Surgery
Cats treated for meningioma can have rapid recovery from surgery, and more than half
the cats live more than 2 years. This would be considered by most owners to be a very
aggressive surgery, but the quality of life for cats after surgery is excellent (Figures 6.14
and 6.15).
Changing Instrument Packs
Because the instruments used in the resection of the cancer are potentially contaminated
by tumor cells, these have the potential to be seeded into the skin and subcutis as the
excision is closed. This has been seen for many cancer types but is most common with
bladder transitional cell carcinomas. The oncology nurse should ensure that a clean pair
of gloves and a second “closure” sterile instrument pack is available following removal of
the cancer.
56
Treatment of Cancer
Figure 6.14. A meningioma is removed with
resection of the overlying skull in this cat that had
been seizuring. (Courtesy of Dr. Karl Kraus)
Figure 6.15. The same cat as seen in Figure 6.14.
a day after surgery; the cat is bright and sociable.
(Courtesy of Dr. John Berg)
Further Reading
Aiken SW. 2003. Principles of surgery for the cancer patient. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 18:75-81.
Carberry CA, Harvey HJ. 1987. Owner satisfaction with limb amputation in dogs and cats. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 23:227-232.
Fox LE, et al. 1997. Owner satisfaction with partial mandibulectomy or maxillectomy for treatment
of oral tumors in 27 dogs. JAAHA 33:25-31.
Kessler M. 2003. Mandibulectomy and maxillectomy for treatment of bone invasive oral neoplasia
in the dog—a retrospective analysis in 31 patients. Kleinterpraxis 48:289-300.
Kirpensteijn J, et al. 1999. Adaptation of dogs to the amputation of a limb and their owner's satis-
faction with the procedure. Vet Rec 144:115-118.
Northrup NC, et al. 2006. Outcomes of cats with oral tumors treated with mandibulectomy: 42
cases. JAAHA 42:350-360.
Ogilvie GK, Moore AS. 2006. Surgical oncology: Properties, uses and patient management, In:
Ogilvie GK, Moore AS, Managing the Canine Cancer Patient: A Practical Guide to Compassion-
ate Care. Yardley, PA, Veterinary Learning Systems, 174-178.
 Szentimrey D. 1998. Principles of reconstructive surgery for the tumor patient. Clin Tech Small Anim
Pract 13:70-76.
RadiationTherapy
Radiation therapy (or radiotherapy) is effective for controlling a wide range of tumors in
pets. Radiation therapy can be used alone or in combination with other cancer therapies,
including surgery and chemotherapy. Radiation therapy is readily available to large seg-
ments of the veterinary profession through referral centers in the U.S. and in some locations
in Europe and Australia.
 Dividing cells are most sensitive to the effects of radiation. Tumor cells are controlled
 in three ways: cells damaged by ionizing radiation may be killed directly, or they may later
attempt to divide and then die. Some cells remain functional but do not divide. These cells
may be terminally differentiated, or they may be sterile.
Oxygen is critical to clinical responsiveness of tumors to radiation therapy. Between
well-oxygenated and necrotic zones in any tumor are hypoxic cells and these are resistant
to radiotherapy. Larger tumors are more likely to have abnormal blood supply and there-
fore more hypoxic cells; for this reason, radiation is most effective when treating small
tumors or residual microscopic tumor tissue after surgery.
Types of Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy can be broadly subcategorized into teletherapy, brachytherapy, and
systemic radiation therapy. With the exception of a few radiopharmaceuticals (radioiodine,
samarium), radiation therapy is a local treatment, meaning that its effect is limited to the
area it is directed to (in the same way that a radiograph images only the field of interest);
therefore, care should be taken to ensure that the animal is staged properly to delineate
the extent of the primary cancer, and that no metastases are present. Dogs with metastatic
disease may not be good candidates for an intensive course of radiation therapy. The area
to be irradiated should include margins similar to those that would be removed at wide
excisional surgery. Consultation with an oncologist is essential to determine whether a
 particular patient with a malignancy is likely to benefit from radiation therapy.
57
58  Treatment of Cancer
Teletherapy
The delivery of radiation therapy from a machine to the patient is called teletherapy or
external beam radiation therapy. External beam radiation therapy primarily is delivered
by linear accelerators, radioactive cobalt (60Co) or cesium (137Cs) source units, or ortho-
voltage radiation therapy machines. Because the source of radiation is external to the
patient, teletherapy does not make the patient radioactive. Therefore, there is no period
 of isolation or quarantine required for patients treated with teletherapy.
When describing teletherapy, the dose of radiation absorbed is the most biologically
relevant to tumor control and toxicity. The unit of measurement of radiation absorbed
dose is the Gray (Gy). A course of radiation therapy is described in terms of the total dose,
the number of fractions in which the total dose is delivered, and the time course over
which it is delivered. For example, 60 Gy, given in 3 Gy fractions, 5 days a week, for 4
weeks. Most tumors in veterinary medicine receive a total dose of 40 to 60Gy delivered
in 9 to 20 treatments over 3 to 6 weeks.
Orthovoltage Teletherapy
Orthovoltage machines produce radiation of an energy that has penetration limited to
superficial tissues (about 4cm), and the maximum dose is delivered to the skin. This means
that deep-seated tumors will not receive an adequate dose when orthovoltage is used.
In addition, tumors that are surrounding or surrounded by bone may have areas of the
tumor "protected" due to absorption of radiation dose (bone blocks the radiation, just as
X-rays are blocked from reaching a film). Orthovoltage, however, is valuable for treating
superficial soft tissue tumors such as squamous cell carcinomas, mast cell tumors, or soft
tissue sarcomas, and tumors within air-filled cavities, such as nasal tumors. Acute side
effects are seen mostly in the superficial tissues where the highest dose is delivered, and
 because bone absorbs higher radiation doses than surrounding tissues, late side effects are
more common in bone when orthovoltage, rather than megavoltage, is the source of
radiation.
Megavoltage Teletherapy
Radiation produced by megavoltage machines (cobalt-60 and linear accelerator) is not
affected by tissue density, and deeper structures can be irradiated than when using an
orthovoltage source. Maximum dose in tissues is not achieved until a depth of approxi-
mately 0.5 cm below the surface; therefore, megavoltage radiation can be “skin-sparing."
 Because megavoltage radiation is skin-sparing, irradiation of superficial tumors is achieved
by placing a layer of tissue-equivalent bolus material over the tumor that allows dosage
buildup so that the tumor is no longer “spared."
Electron Beam Teletherapy
Electron beam therapy is available using certain linear accelerators. Electrons can be given
different energies so the distance they travel varies, but then the energy reduces very
rapidly. Lower-energy electrons are very useful for superficial tumors because deeper tissue
is spared by a prompt fall in radiation dose—for example, a sarcoma on the thoracic wall
of a cat where underlying lung must be spared (Figure 7.1). One disadvantage of electron
beam therapy is the same as for orthovoltage; bone may shield underlying tissues.
RadiationTherapy59
Figure 7.1. This cat is receiving radiotherapy for
an interscapular sarcoma. The radiation must be a
dose high enough to kill the tumor cells, but the
underlying lung must be protected. An electron
beam is being used in this patient since the depth
of radiation penetration can be controlled.
Figure 7.2. Strontium-90 is a radioactive source
of brachytherapy that is very effective for treating
shallow (<3 mm) tumors, as with this squamous cell
carcinoma on the eyelid of a cat.
Brachytherapy
Radiation therapy can be administered from implanted radiation sources ("seeds" or
" straws") within or around the tumor (brachytherapy). Brachytherapy radiation has a
rapid drop-off in intensity with increasing distance from the source, and it is therefore
very effective for delivering extremely high doses very specifically to a local site, with
normal damage usually being restricted to immediate surrounding tissues. Because the
source of radiation is implanted in the patient, interstitial brachytherapy makes the patient
radioactive. Therefore, there is a period of isolation or quarantine required for patients
treated with interstitial brachytherapy, until their implants are removed.
Another form of brachytherapy uses an external radioactive strontium source applied
to the tumor for a short period of time. This technique is most useful for shallow (<3 mm)
s u pe (z'/ anai) Paa sieo e uo eoueo lo snonbs se yons 'so s
situation the patient is not radioactive after treatment.
SystemicTherapy
Radiation can be targeted to a specific tissue by use of a radionuclide with special affinity
for the tumor cells. Examples in veterinary medicine include 131 for treatment of thyroid
60
Treatment of Cancer
carcinoma and is'samarium targeted to bone for treatment of bone tumors in dogs. Because
the source of radiation is targeted to tissue within the patient, systemic radiotherapy makes
the patient radioactive. Therefore, there is a period of isolation or quarantine required for
patients treated with systemic radiotherapy, until the radioactivity is reduced to a safe level
(usually less than a week).
Treatment Goals in Radiotherapy
One of the most important decisions is whether a patient should be treated with curative
or palliative intent. This influences not only the course of treatment, but also influences
(      d     Sa
is often complicated, requiring frequent travel and multiple anesthesias. The total dose
of radiation is usually higher than that required for palliation and consequently the risk
of acute side effects is greater. Such treatment is likely to be prolonged and expensive;
however, for many tumors the chance of long-term tumor-free survival (>3 years) is high.
 In contrast, palliative radiation therapy has a short-term goal, to relieve pain or symptoms
of cancer when a specific site is causing a problem to the patient, but the rest of the cancer
is unlikely to respond to any treatment (e.g., a painful digital metastasis from a pulmonary
tumor that is not causing signs at any other site). For this reason, palliative therapy should
minimize cost, inconvenience, discomfort, and risk of side effects, and should be completed
in the shortest reasonable time. It is often given weekly for 3 to 4 weeks.
Nursing the Radiation Therapy Patient
The main reason to use radiotherapy instead of, or as an adjunct to, surgery is that the
marginal tissues do not have to be removed. Although cancer cells in the margins will
be killed, normal marginal cells will repair and survive. This approach can enable, for
example, an intracapsular excision of a soft tissue sarcoma near the orbit (rather than
surgical removal of the orbit and eye), followed by radiotherapy. However, the trade-off
for being able to perform a less aggressive surgery is that some side effects do occur to
the normal tissues in the radiation field
The dose (and therefore effectiveness) of radiation therapy is limited by the tolerance,
and ability to repair, of normal tissues surrounding the tumor to the effects of radiation
therapy. Differences in radiation response by normal tissues are determined largely by the
proliferative requirements for tissue maintenance. If the proliferative requirement is high,
these tissues are termed radiosensitive and if the proliferative requirement is low they are
termed radioresistant. For example, liver and bone undergo little or no proliferation in
steady state, but there can be a problem if there is damage that requires cellular prolif-
eration to reconstitute normal tissue, such as a bone fracture or liver damage. Tissues that
are constantly renewing, such as skin, gastrointestinal mucosa, bone marrow, glands, and
reproductive tissues are considered to be radiosensitive, and these are the tissues in which
the acute effects of radiation are most commonly seen. During radiation therapy, acutely
damaged normal tissue may be repaired through recruitment of cells from un-irradiated
adjacent areas.
Radiation Therapy
61
Most normal acutely responding tissues (except bone marrow stem cells) need to accu-
mulate a significant dose before damage is permanent, so dividing the total radiation dose
into multiple smaller dose fractions allows repair between fractions. Increasing the size of
each fraction (as with palliative radiotherapy) means the likelihood of late effects of
radiation increases.
Acute effects of radiation are common and should be expected toward the end of the
treatment course and for 1 to 2 weeks afterwards. Common acute side effects depending
on the tumor site and surrounding field irradiated include mucositis, moist epidermal
inflammation, and keratitis. The occurrence of acute effects is felt to be acceptable because
 healing is usually rapid and complete. In this regard, they are similar to the acute, short-
term neutropenia seen after many chemotherapeutics (Figures 7.3 and 7.4).
Late effects of radiation are much less common than acute effects in veterinary medicine,
with a prevalence of less than 5%. They are probably due to damage to vascular tissue
and endothelial cells. Those tissues whose functional activity does not require cell renewal,
such as muscle and nervous tissue, are more resistant to the acute side effects of radiation.
However, these tissues have vascular and connective tissue stromal cells, which may be
required to divide and thereby show damage that translates into late effects of radiation.
Unlike acute effects, late effects of radiation occur months to years after a course of
radiation therapy and are irreversible. Examples of late effects are necrosis, fbrosis, stric-
ture formation, nonhealing ulceration, CNS damage, and blindness (Figure 7.5). The
Figure 7.3. Acute moist dermatitis following radiation
Figure 7.4. The same dog as seen in Figure 7.3, but
therapy to the leg of a dog with incompletely excised
 3 months later. Note the continued hair loss, but with
soft tissue sarcoma. Barrier creams, gentle cleaning and
sparse new white hair regrowth. Pigmentation is
pain relief and antinflammatory drugs should be used
patchy, but the skin is fully healed, and the lesion is
in such patients while healing ensues.
nonpainful and tumor-free.
62
Treatment of Cancer
Figure 7.5. This dog received a very high dose of
radiation and then rubbed his back (and the field)
under the table causing an ulcer. The ulcer has still
not healed nearly 7 months after radiation therapy.
and chronic depigmentation and skin fibrosis are
also evident.
Figure 7.6. Acute moist desquamation in the
axilla of a boxer after radiation therapy. Such areas
are painful and difficult to keep dry; therefore.
nursing care is very important to allow complete
healing.
occurrence of late effects is dependent on the size of each radiation fraction dose and
somewhat on the total dose of radiation. For example, late effects are higher with so-called
hypofractionated or palliative treatment protocols such as 8 Gy per fraction given weekly
than with small doses (3 Gy) given daily. Palliative radiotherapy is acceptable in many
patients because their expected survival is shorter than the time it takes to develop late
effects of therapy.
Possible Tissues Injured and Possible Therapy
Skin
 Acute side effects of moist desquamation should be cleaned with saline soaks or mild soap
and water if severe crusting occurs; if the area is pruritic, prevent self-mutilation with an
Elizabethan collar, side bars, or bandages. Nonstick dressings/pads should be used when-
ever the area needs to be covered. Oral antibiotics should be used to reduce the risk of
secondary infections. Other possible treatments include vitamin E and hydrogen peroxide/
saline lavage, topical aloe vera gel, and hydrogels (such as Biafine) to maintain wound
surface moisture (Figure 7.6).
Radiation Therapy63
Figure 7.7.This cat was treated 2 years previously
for nasal lymphoma, and while hair growth and
healing is complete, chronic hair color changes
will be permanent and limited to the radiation field.
Additional pain relief includes nonsteroidal antinflammatories (NSAIDs) or corticoste-
roids in combination with tramadol, and the addition of codeine for nighttime pain when
combination therapy is required. Late adverse effects commonly include changes in pig-
mentation (Figure 7.7), but rarely ulceration and fibrosis, which, if extensive, can be quite
painful.
Debilitating late skin changes, which are extremely rare, can be repaired with recon-
structive techniques using well-vascularized tissue. Figures 7.8 through 7.11 illustrate the
typical course for a patient receiving teletherapy to the skin for a soft tissue sarcoma;
the important point to remember is that these patients do heal, and quality of life is
retained.
Ears
Ear canals can be treated as for skin side effects, with the addition of DMSO and/or
steroid-containing ear medications.
Eyes
The eye often is in the field of radiation therapy in dogs with nasal tumors. Pain relief is
as for skin acute effects. The lens of the eye is considered sensitive to relatively low doses
of radiation therapy, which can result in cataract formation months to years after radia-
tion therapy is complete. Although less common, retinal hemorrhages may result in blind-
it is important to monitor tear production in animals during and after therapy (Figure
7.12). For keratoconjunctivitis sicca, artificial tear preparations should be used frequently
 in addition to broad-spectrum topical antibiotics. It is important to confirm with fluoros-
cein staining that no corneal ulcers are present before prescribing steroid-containing
ophthalmic ointments.
Figure 7.8. This dog had extensive surgery to
remove a soft tissue sarcoma, but excision was still
incomplete; radiation therapy was prescribed.
Figures 7.9-7.11 show progression of the side
effects.
Figure 7.9. At the end of radiation therapy, the
acute skin changes are worsening. Skin care and
pain relief are mandatory at this stage, and the
patient must be prevented from damaging the area.
Figure 7.10. One week after completing radio-
therapy, the acute effects are subsiding, but still
present. The dog is more comfortable, but nursing
Figure 7.11. Four months after completing radia-
tion therapy, this same dog feels well enough to
 make a dubious fashion statement.
t9
Radiation Therapy 65
Figure 7.12. Acute effects of radiation to the eye
are exacerbated by suppression of tear production.
Controlling infection, treating pain, and replacing
tears are all components of allowing full healing of
the eye.
Oral Cavity and Pharynx
Radiation-induced oral mucositis may result in anorexia and secondary debilitation.
Because oral damage can be so debilitating, care should be taken to ensure that all neces-
sary dental work is completed prior to the start of radiation therapy. Because oral and
nasal damage may reduce smell and taste sensations, more palatable, warmed, aromatic
foods should be offered. Placing a gastrostomy tube before initiating radiation therapy is
recommended in any animal that does not have a good plane of nutrition and any time
that the oral cavity is to be included in the radiation therapy field (e.g., oral melanoma in
older small dogs, cats with oral SCC). Pain relief for mucositis is as for skin side effects.
 In addition to broad-spectrum antibiotics, consider adding metronidazole for anaerobic
bacteria. During treatment, owners may want to rinse their pet's mouth out with a solu-
tion of salt and water (1 teaspoon in 1 quart of water). Cool tea solutions can be used
to lavage the mouth 3 to 6 times per day, which may reduce the discomfort of the oral
cavity and freshen the breath. If the patient experiences pain when swallowing, 5 to 15 ml
of 2% lidocaine (xylocaine viscous solution) may be squirted into the mouths of dogs
several times a day. Xerostomia may be seen as an acute effect of radiotherapy, but may
less commonly become chronic, leading to dental caries. Artificial saliva preparations, such
as a mixture of sorbitol sodium, carboxymethyl cellulose, and methylparaben may be
beneficial in these patients.
Colon and Rectum
 Irritation to the colon and rectum can be manifested by bleeding, tenesmus, and pain. Pain
relief is as for skin acute effects. A low-residue diet and a stool softener may provide relief.
Steroid enemas may be beneficial in selected patients. Whenever the anus and perianal
areas are injured by radiation therapy, the area should be kept clean using soap and water
and dried thoroughly
Bone Marrow
If a significant amount of the bone marrow is included in the radiation therapy field, bone
marrow damage may occur. This may be a concern when chemotherapy is also planned;
in these patients myelosuppression may be enhanced. The most common scenarios would
66Treatment of Cancer
be following samarium systemic therapy for a dog with osteosarcoma or half-body radio-
therapy as an adjunctive to chemotherapy for lymphoma.
Further Reading
Flynn AK, Lurie DM. 2007. Canine acute radiation dermatitis, a survey of current management
practices in North America. Vet Compar Oncol S:197-207.
Moore AS, Ogilvie GK. 2006. Radiation therapy: Properties, uses and patient management, In:
Ogilvie GK, Moore AS, Managing the Canine Cancer Patient: A Practical Guide to Compassion-
ate Care. Yardley, PA, Veterinary Learning Systems, 148-166.
O
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy is the principal modality used to treat systemic cancers such as hematologic
malignancies and metastatic carcinomas or sarcomas. Many owners have preexisting ideas
regarding the toxicity of chemotherapeutic drugs, and it is important to address and allay
such concerns.
cancer, in fact they should be considered as a guide. Just as every patient is an individual,
each cancer is also individual, and the patient's metabolism and excretion of the drugs is
individual. Complete evaluation of the cancer and the patient is therefore very important
before administering the frst dose of what are potentially very toxic drugs; for more
information, see Chapters 3 and 4.
How Does Chemotherapy Work?
In general, chemotherapy drugs are most active against cells that are actively dividing
  ae s r sso  ao n a jo asd rd e u pe s
active phase of the cell cycle, only a small percentage of normal cells are actively dividing.
Normal tissues can be classified as static (nerve, bone, striated muscle), in which the
capacity for mitosis is limited; expanding (organs, glands), in which mitosis can be induced;
and renewing (hematopoietic cells, mucosa, epidermis, gametes, fetal tissues), in which
the proliferating proportion approaches that of tumor tissue. Toxicity from chemotherapy
is most common in tissues that are renewing and is usually related to the dosage of the
drug. This has implications for both the patient (toxicity and efficacy) and for the owner
 and veterinary staff's safety in handling the drugs during administration and follow-up
care.
67
68
Treatment of Cancer
Calculating a Dose of Chemotherapy
              
decreased. Although imperfect, current dosage recommendations are based on body surface
area (BSA, m?). Overall, using the BSA formula rather than body weight means that smaller
dogs get a higher dosage than larger dogs (in proporion to body weight), supposedly
compensating for more rapid drug distribution, metabolism, and excretion in smaller pets.
 If this is true, drug exposure and, by extension, efficacy and toxicity should be relatively
uniform across a species. In fact, this is not so, and for veterinary use, dosage based on
 BSA for many drugs (e.g., doxorubicin, platinum drugs) is imperfect; cats and small dogs
should be dosed at lower rates than larger dogs.
 In addition, size-independent factors such as age, breed, and disease may influence drug
distribution, metabolism, and excretion. Despite these limitations, veterinary oncologists
use a BSA conversion table as the best practical solution, and become familiar with the
Dose Intensity
The concept of dose intensity is important. Dose intensity is defined as the amount of drug
administered per unit time (mg/m2/wk). Dose intensity can therefore be increased by
increasing the dosage of a particular drug, or by shortening the time interval between drug
administrations. Dose intensity should be the highest tolerated by the animal with minimal
toxicity. For example, in dosing of myelosuppressive drugs, because there will be variation
 in individual metabolism of drugs and in the sensitivity of normal tissues, the aim should
be to deliver doses that produce a neutrophil nadir of between 1000 and 3000/μl. There
is ample evidence in both human and veterinary oncology that optimal dose intensity
improves the outcome for chemotherapy.
Chemotherapeutic Strategies in Veterinary Practice
  a  m  s s a a   is  s
decreases due to a decrease in the proportion of cells in active phases of the cell cycle,
increased loss of cells, and cell death due to poor circulation, nutrition, and hypoxia.
Larger tumors may also have a poor blood supply; thus, chemotherapy drugs may not be
delivered to cancer cells at cytotoxic levels. In addition, resistance to chemotherapy can
occur through spontaneous mutations in the tumor cell. The likelihood that mutation has
occurred is related to the number of cell divisions that have occurred, and therefore resis-
tance to chemotherapy is more likely in large tumors. In general, therefore, chemotherapy
will be most active against small tumors, either following early detection, or following a
cytoreductive ("debulking") procedure such as surgery or radiation therapy. Chemother-
apy is rarely effective or curative for large bulky tumors. The exceptions to this rule would
be vincristine treatment for canine transmissible venereal tumor, or combination chemo-
therapy for lymphoma.
Chemotherapy6
69
CombinationChemotherapy
Combination chemotherapy may overcome some of these problems by affecting different
metabolic pathways in cells that are resistant to other drugs in the combination. Although
combination chemotherapy could potentially be more toxic to normal cells, patterns of
toxicity vary between drugs, and judicious scheduling of chemotherapeutic agents so that
their toxicities do not overlap appears to improve tumor kill without compounding toxic-
- e re a I  q o s q  ss r  
pressive agent (doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide), or even on the same day in combination.
Chemotherapy Drug Resistance
Although combination chemotherapy may circumvent individual drug resistance, it does
not completely avoid the problem of cross-resistance to multiple unrelated chemotherapy
drugs. The transmembrane pump protein P-glycoprotein is present at increased levels in
some tumor cells, and both the level and prevalence increases with exposure to chemo-
therapy. This phenomenon of multiple drug resistance (mdr) occurs between anthracy-
clines (such as doxorubicin), vinca alkaloids (vincristine), and other drugs such as
actinomycin-D, paclitaxel, and etoposide. In practical terms this means that a pet with
lymphoma that is resistant to the combination of vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and
prednisone (COP), may not necessarily respond to doxorubicin treatment. To reduce the
risk of drug resistance occurring, it is important not to administer drugs at subtherapeutic
dosages; the highest dose intensity possible should be delivered. It is important not to
modify the planned dosages or schedule in anticipation of a toxicity that has not occurred.
 For example, a dog that became neutropenic after receiving doxorubicin is not at increased
risk for myelosuppression from other chemotherapeutics such as cyclophosphamide, so
their dosages should not be preemptively reduced.
Effects of the Body on Chemotherapy Drugs (Pharmacokinetics and
Pharmacodynamics)
There are four major factors that affect dosing of chemotherapeutics in dogs and cats.
These factors need to be assessed for each individual patient. Particularly because many
of our oncology patients are older, the effect of an aging body may significantly impact
the way a dose of chemotherapy is handled, and therefore the toxic effects or the efficacy
of that chemotherapy. For example:
1.
 Absorption: Orally administered cyclophosphamide may have reduced absorption
from the gastrointestinal tract in an animal with malabsorption syndrome (such as GI
lymphoma). This could lead to decreased efficacy of the drug.
2.
Distribution: Drugs affected by protein binding such as vinca alkaloids, mitoxan-
trone, and cisplatin may be affected when an animal is hypoproteinaemic; a larger
proportion of the drug may remain pharmacologically active, or may be more rapidly
cleared from the body.
70Treatment of Cancer
3.  Excretion: The concentration of drug in blood over time is a function of total clear-
ance by all eliminating organs. Bile transport disruption could reduce clearance of
vincristine or doxorubicin. Decreases in glomerular filtration rate may affect renally
excreted drugs such as carboplatin(see box).
Knowledge of Individual Variables for a Patient with Risk Factors Can Be Used to
Maximize Safety and Efficacy of Chemotherapy
Patient: An 8-year-old neutered male Doberman pinscher diagnosed with high-grade
osteosarcoma of the distal femur, 14 days after amputation. BAR, eating well, anc
ambulatory at home.
Preanesthetic testing revealed moderate azotemia and low urine specific gravity,
but he had no clinical signs referable to renal failure. The laboratory abnormalities
are stable postoperatively. How does this information affect his chemotherapy
plan?
Chemotherapy Options: The three agents that have been shown to be most active
for canine osteosarcoma are cisplatin, doxorubicin, and carboplatin. Of these, dox-
orubicin is contraindicated by the patient's breed because of the increased risk of
cardiotoxicity in breeds predisposed to dilated cardiomyopathy. Thus, the remaining
chemotherapy options are cisplatin and carboplatin, and his preexisting renal dys-
function needs to be considered:
Cisplatin is a nephrotoxin, and any dog with underlying renal disease has
enhanced sensitivity to this nephrotoxicity.
Carboplatin is not nephrotoxic, but it is renally excreted and reduced GFR can
result in increased nonrenal toxicity because of reduced clearance.
Chemotherapy scenario 1
The normal patient receiving a standard dose of a drug (bypothetically 100 units/
m?) will have standard toxicity and standard tumor effect.
Clinical example: a dog with normal renal function receiving either cisplatin or
Chemotherapy scenario 2
A patient with enhanced sensitivity to a drug's organ-specific toxicity, receiving a
standard dose of the drug (bypothetically 100 units/m?) will experience standard
tumor effect but exaggerated toxicity.
The same patient, receiving a reduced dose of the drug (i.e., 60 units/m?) will
experience standard toxicity but reduced tumor effect.
Clinical example: a dog with underlying renal disease receiving cisplatin.
If this patient receives a full dose of cisplatin, it will be effective for his cancer but
will almost certainly cause severe nephrotoxicity.
If this patient receives a reduced dose of cisplatin to avoid nephrotoxicity, it will
be ineffective against his cancer.
Conclusion: there is no safe and effective way to treat this dog with this drug.
Chemotherapy
71
Chemotherapyscenario3
A patient with reduced clearance of a drug receiving a standard dose of the drug
(hypothetically 100 units/m²) will experience enhanced tumor effect but also exag-
gerated toxicity.
The same patient, receiving a reduced dose of the drug (i.e., 60 units/m2) will
experience standard toxicity and standard tumor effect.
Clinical example: a dog with subclinical renal disease receiving carboplatin.
If this patient receives a full dose of carboplatin, he will probably have a great
tumor response, but he may experience severe myelosuppression, which could be
life-threatening in the short term.
If this patient receives a reduced dose of carboplatin, he will experience more
moderate myelosuppression and a tumor response comparable to that expected for
normal dogs receiving full dose carboplatin.
Conclusion: by considering both drug and patient factors, it is possible to calculate
 a dose adjustment to safely and effectively treat this dog with this drug.
 In fact in humans, dogs, and cats, the dose of carboplatin that most closely predicts
toxicity of carboplatin is derived from measurements of creatinine clearance (as a
surrogate for glomerular filtration rate). This is particularly useful in patients where
there is chronic renal dysfunction.
4.
 Metabolism: Hepatic dysfunction may affect reductase metabolism of doxorubicin,
thereby increasing toxicity. Cyclophosphamide requires hepatic metabolism for activa-
tion, so reduced metabolism may make efficacy (and toxicity) lower.
Timing of Chemotherapy
Adjuvant chemotherapy is used following resection of a primary tumor, where the animal
the effectiveness of adjuvant cisplatin, doxorubicin, or carboplatin in the treatment of
canine osteosarcoma. The effectiveness of adjuvant chemotherapy is greatest at the earliest
stages of growth. When a primary tumor is resected, micrometastatic foci of tumor cells
have a high growth fraction and a low number of resistant cells. As a tumor grows, the
growth fraction decreases, the cell cycle time increases, areas of poor vascular perfusion
increase, and cellular heterogeneity increases, leading to a higher level of spontaneous drug
resistance. The disadvantage of adjuvant chemotherapy is that those patients cured by
surgery alone are exposed to needless risks of toxicity. For tumors such as osteosarcoma
 and hemangiosarcoma in dogs, and mammary tumors in cats, this percentage is small, but
for animals with other tumors, the decision whether to use adjuvant chemotherapy may
be less clear.
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is used prior to localized treatment modalities such as
surgery or radiation therapy, with the objective of reducing the size of the primary tumor
and reducing the scope and side effects of other definitive treatment.
72
Treatment of Cancer
Health and Beauty Care during Chemotherapy
 During chemotherapy the pet should continue to receive heartworm preventative medica-
tion. Topical flea and tick prevention should be used rather than tablets, and dips are best
avoided. Vaccination should be delayed until at least 6 months after finishing treatment.
Minor dentistry or surgery can be done during periods when the pet's white blood cell
and platelet counts are normal.
It usually is not a good idea to change the pet's diet too dramatically during a time
when he or she is undergoing a lot of other stresses. However, we do not recommend
feeding raw meat to pets that are receiving chemotherapy, because it appears to increase
their risk of infection if the immune system becomes suppressed.
Toxicity Following Chemotherapy
Myelosuppression
 o  o s n   e    i sss
bone marrow. The most chemosensitive cells in the bone marrow are the proliferating
hematopoietic progenitors and precursors, which are starting to commit to a particular
lineage but are still immature. The more differentiated cells form a nonproliferating pool
of maturing hematopoietic cells that will be unaffected by chemotherapy and will provide
mature cells for 5-10 days. This means that the nadir (or low point) of peripheral cell
 counts occurs at this time. The time at which the nadir occurs also depends on the lifespan
of the hematopoietic cell. Neutrophils live only hours in both dogs and cats and their nadir
occurs first at 5-10 days postchemotherapy; platelets live for approximately 10 days, and
their nadir occurs 1-2 weeks after chemotherapy; erythrocytes live for 120 days in the dog
and 70 days in the cat, and although anemia may occur over a prolonged course of che-
motherapy, it is rarely clinically significant. Like the maturing cells, hematopoietic stem
cells are largely nonproliferating and so are relatively resistant to chemotherapy toxicity.
However, they are stimulated to divide by the loss of proliferating precursor cells, and
they rapidly replace the lost cells so that nadirs following chemotherapy rarely last more
than several days. This also has implications for the interval between administrations of
myelosuppressive drugs. If these drugs are given when the stem cell pool is dividing (i.e.,
soon after the previous administration), then severe prolonged myelosuppression due to
stem cell destruction may occur. The usual interval between myelosuppressive drug admin-
istrations is every 2 to 3 weeks. Some drugs (such as lomustine and carboplatin) may have
delayed or prolonged nadirs, and dosing intervals are longer for these drugs.
When administering chemotherapy, a complete blood count (CBC), including a platelet
count, should be collected at the expected neutrophil nadir, usually 1 week after admin-
istration. The absolute neutrophil count (not the percentage, or the total leukocyte count)
should be evaluated. Although many animals have a low neutrophil count without clinical
signs, a count of less than 1000/μl is sufficient reason to reduce all subsequent dosages of
that myelosuppressive drug. A dosage reduction of 25% is a good rule of thumb. In addi-
 a na na o d  pa aq ius  e 
the neutrophil count is less than 3000/μl at the time myelosuppressive chemotherapy is
Chemotherapy7
F.
due, it is best to delay administration by 1 week or until the count is more than 3000/μl.
A schematic for such decisions is included here as Figure 8.1; further information about
patient support for pets with hematologic toxicities can be found in Chapter 13, "Hema-
tologic Support," and Chapters 17 and 18, "Hematologic Emergencies" and “Febrile
Neutropenia."
Thrombocytopenia rarely causes clinical signs, however at counts of less than 50,000/μl
the risk of bleeding increases and the patient should be evaluated for petechiation, ecchy-
moses, or mucosal bleeding. Myelosuppressive chemotherapy should not be administered
if the platelet count is less than 100,000/μl. Dogs that are thrombocytopenic should not be
encouraged to perform strenuous or high-impact activities, and they are best kept at rest.
Gastrointestinal Toxicity
Although not the most common chemotherapy side effect, gastrointestinal toxicity
particularly vomiting—is probably the one that most pet owners are afraid of when con-
sidering chemotherapy. The gastrointestinal mucosa is another site of renewing tissue, and
toxicity may occur anywhere in the GI system. Clinical signs include nausea, vomiting.
inappetence, anorexia, or diarrhea. The management of these will depend on the severity
of signs. Severe hemorrhagic colitis following doxorubicin administration increases the
risk of subsequent sepsis, due to breakdown of the protective mucosal barrier to gram-
negative intestinal bacteria at a time when the animal is myelosuppressed. Antibiotics
should be administered to these animals in addition to supportive and symptomatic care
(see Chapter 12 and Appendix 3).
Cardiotoxicity
In veterinary oncology, cardiotoxicity is only clinically a problem with doxorubicin che-
motherapy. Although both cats and dogs show histologic cardiac changes, dogs are more
sensitive to clinical cardiac damage than cats are. In dogs, cardiotoxicity is a chronic
toxicity related to the lifetime cumulative dose of doxorubicin rather than the amount of
tach individual dosage. The damage is permanent and progressive. The end result resem-
bles dilated cardiomyopathy, and may progress to congestive heart failure. There is no
specific treatment other than palliation for heart failure, so prevention is vital. Although
oqe sunba sou si ii sesop aeo Aue ie nooo ueo siop ui Aixoie
180 mg/m? (in other words about six treatments at usual dosages), and doxorubicin should
not be given above this level without echocardiographic monitoring. Breeds susceptible to
dilated cardiomyopathy, particularly Dobermans, appear to be more sensitive to this tox-
icity, often developing cardiac dysfunction at doses much lower than 180 mg/m?. Doxoru-
bicin may be better avoided altogether in dogs of these breeds (see Table 8.1).
 If chemotherapy with doxorubicin is anticipated, careful physical examination of the
patient's cardiovascular system should be done, and if there is any question of abnormal-
ity, baseline cardiac ultrasonography is indicated. If ultrasonography shows any evidence
at all of ventricular dilation or reduced shortening fraction, doxorubicin is contraindicated.
 In dogs with normal cardiac contractility but with preexisting valvular disease, we would
still be concerned that the risk of worsening cardiac function is high if doxorubicin is
administered. In such dogs we recommend using an effective alternative, if one exists.
Complete blood count
Assess absolute neutrophil count per microliter (μl)
Routine check at expected nadir, no myelosuppressive
Myelosuppressive chemotherapy due
chemotherapy due
Neutrophils > 1000 / ul
Neutrophils < 1000 / ul
Neutrophils < 1000 / ul
Neutrophils
Neutrophils > 3000 / ul
1000 - 3000 / ul
No change in treatment,
continue on protocol
No change in
Delay scheduled
treatment, continue
myelosuppressive treatment
 on protocol
until neutrophils > 3000 / ul
(recheck CBC in 3 to 7 days)
Patient afebrile, normal energy
Patient febrile, lethargic or
 and appetite, no Gl signs
 inappetant, or Gl signs 
 Prophylactic antibiotics
Emergency!
Monitor at home
Reduce future dose of
Hospitalize and treat for sepsis:
responsible drug by 25%
Recheck neutrophil count after
Aggressive IV fluids and antibiotics
adjusted dose
Other supportive measures (e.g., plasma
transfusion) as clinically indicated
See Chapter 17
Figure 8.1. An algorithm for interpreting the hemogram from a dog or cat receiving chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy7
75
Table 8.1. Dog breeds considered to be predisposed to cardiomyopathy and at increased risk for chronic
cardiotoxicity from doxorubicir
 Doberman pinscher
Jaxog
 Irish wolfhound 
Great Dane
 Cocker spaniel 
 Dalmatian
Newfoundland retriever (Europe)
Airedale terrier (Europe)
English Cocker spaniel (Europe)
Urologic Toxicity
See also Chapter 22. Nephrotoxicity is the primary dose-limiting toxicity of cisplatin and
depends on both the individual and cumulative dosage. Cisplatin should not be adminis-
tered to dogs with preexisting renal disease, and it should be used with caution in dogs
with urinary tract tumors. It is important to check the serum creatinine level before each
cisplatin treatment. Cisplatin should not be administered to dogs if the serum creatinine
 is above the normal range and should never be administered to cats under any circum-
stances (it causes fatal pulmonary edema in cats). In addition, cisplatin should always be
 delivered to dogs with appropriate saline diuresis.
 Doxorubicin has been associated with a cumulative nephrotoxicity in cats and should
not be administered to cats with preexisting renal disease.
Urothelial toxicity (sterile hemorrhagic cystitis) is associated with cyclophosphamide
and ifosfamide administration. Although this toxicity is uncommon following cyclophos-
phamide administration in animals, it will occur predictably after ifosfamide treatment in
humans (and presumably pets) unless the urothelial protectant, mesna, is given concur-
rently. When chemical cystitis occurs following cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide treatment
in pets, clinical signs of stranguria, dysuria, and hematuria can be severe and prolonged
over many weeks and will be worsened by continued drug administration. This toxicity
should be distinguished from infectious cystitis by bacterial culture; however, even if bac-
teria are isolated and signs resolve with antibiotic administration, the drug should not be
administered again because infectious cystitis could have been secondary to the toxicity.
Immune-Mediated Toxicity
See also Chapter 20. Hypersensitivity reactions may occur during doxorubicin administra-
tion due to histamine release. This effect occurs only with rapid administration, and it is
not a problem if the drug is given as a slow infusion over 15 to 20 minutes. A similar,
but more severe, reaction occurs following administration of etoposide and paclitaxel due
76Treatment of Cancer
to the carrier solutions in these formulations (as opposed to the drugs themselves). Both
carriers cause massive histamine release, the effects of which are only partly prevented by
pretreatment with antihistamines and corticosteroids.
True anaphylaxis may occur following L-asparaginase administration, particularly
-   a  n       n 
asparaginase is administered intramuscularly or subcutaneously. Attachment of polyeth-
ylene glycol (PEG) conjugates to the L-asparaginase is another approach to abrogate the
immune response and extends its half-life while preserving efficacy. If anaphylaxis occurs,
treatment with corticosteroids and antihistamines plus any other necessary supportive
measures should be instituted immediately. The patient should never receive any further
L-asparaginase.
Hair and Coat Changes
Most breeds of dog, and all cats, have fur that is intermittently growing, rather than hair
that is continually growing. Usually dogs and cats will not lose their fur, but clipped areas
may be slow to grow in, and breeds that have hair that needs regular trimming (such as
poodles and many terriers) may have some thinning; breeds with feathers (golden retriev-
ers, etc.) may lose these temporarily. We have seen complete (temporary) hair loss in only
one patient in over 25 years (Figure 8.2).
Cats may lose their whiskers and occasionally have a change in hair coat color. Any
lost hair will grow back within a few months after chemotherapy is finished, although
rarely there may be a permanent color or texture change (Figures 8.3-8.5).
Figure 8.3. Fur is little affected by chemotherapy, but the
longer, continually growing hair and whiskers can be lost
Figure 8.2. Complete hair loss, as seen in this 
during chemotherapy. as in this young Himalayan cat with
schnauzer after paclitaxel, is exceedingly rare.
Iymphoma
Chemotherapy77
Figure 8.4. The same cat as in Figure &.3, 6
months after stopping chemotherapy. This cat lived 
another&years.
Figure 8.5. whiskers in this cat are regrowing
 after stopping chemotherapy.
Practical Chemotherapy
Appendix 6 contains information about availability, storage, and administration of che-
motherapy drugs commonly used in veterinary practice.
General Chemotherapy Tips
Owners should be instructed in the use of a rectal thermometer and take the pet's tem-
 perature twice a day in the period around the neutrophil nadir. A fever or any other sign
of sepsis should be treated as an emergency with prompt initiation of systemic support
using intravenous fluids and broad-spectrum antibiotics.
 If you need a complete blood count before giving a myelosuppressive agent (to make
sure the neutrophil count is above 3000/μl) and it needs to be sent to an outside labora-
tory, consider collecting it the day before and then arranging the chemotherapy appoint-
ment for a time when you know the results will be available.
 Attention to detail is critically important in chemotherapy, from weighing patients care-
fully at each visit to calculate the correct dose for that day; to listening carefully to owners
comments about how the pet has been feeling; to choosing the correct drug and calculat-
ing the dose correctly; to careful administration to avoid extravasation and hypersensitiv-
ity reaction; to prescribing and dispensing at-home medications correctly. Therefore, it is
very important to focus completely on the task.
78
Treatment of Cancer
1.
 It is necessary to clear your mind of other issues that may be happening outside of
work, elsewhere in the practice, or with other patients.
2.
 It is very important to be able to take your time. Chemotherapy appointments should
be booked with sufficient time to provide the appropriate attention without being
rushed. It is important that the team calculating, preparing, and administering che-
motherapy not be interrupted or hurried. Simply put, overbooking causes errors; and
with chemotherapy, errors can be fatal. "Squeezing in" just one more patient seems
harmless but in reality it benefits no one to schedule a complex procedure such as
chemotherapy when there really isn't sufficient time available to perform it correctly.
3.
 Having adequate time available is also important for client and patient comfort.
Clients may need time to have any concerns and questions fully addressed. Patients
 are much more relaxed and comfortable when the staff is not in a hurry, and as any
technician knows, a relaxed patient is much easier to work with than one that is
nervous.
4.
Check and double-check each calculation. Having each calculation checked by
 another team member before administering drugs is good practice.
5.
 Gentle but firm restraint is critical in chemotherapy administration. Remember, these
are patients you will be doing this procedure with repeatedly so you definitely do
not want them to develop an aversion to the treatment room, or to you! However
it is very important that the patient be well restrained during catheter placement and
chemotherapy injection to avoid extravasation injury. Maintaining a fun, friendly
demeanor with patients and being generous with treats before, during, and after
chemotherapy helps patients remember the treatment area as a happy place. Nothing
makes clients happier about their decision to pursue chemotherapy than when they
see their pet is happy and eager to enter the treatment area (Figures 8.6 and 8.7).
Figure 8.7. Some patients are best held in the nurse's
lap while examined for cardinal signs, and even for
Figure 8.6. We find most patients are more relaxed
chemotherapy. If this is chosen, a plastic-backed,
receiving chemotherapy on the floor and with pillows
 absorbent sheet should be placed to protect the holder
for comfort and gentle restraint in lateral recumbency.
. from inadvertent spills.
Chemotherapy7
6
6.  Allowing clients to be with the patient during chemotherapy is very helpful for most
patients. The PhaSeal system (see more to follow) makes this much more feasible by
increasing the safety of the administration procedure. A few patients are better
 behaved when their owners are not present, but most are more secure, happier, and
more cooperative when their owners are nearby. Many of our clients comment that
this allows them to see that the chemotherapy process is not nearly as bad as what
they had envisioned. One exception: women who are or may be pregnant should
never be allowed to stay in the room while chemotherapy is being prepared or
administered, even with the best precautions in place.
7.
 Making sure that patients are physically comfortable for chemotherapy will allow
 them to lie still during administration. Many patients, including small dogs and cats,
are more at ease being held on the floor rather than on a table. Any inconvenience
aeiadoos aou e Aq ioj dn apeu ueul arou si oou aul uo Sus u eis aui o1
 patient. Also, providing pillows for patients, clients, and staff on the floor makes
everyone more comfortable and enhances the clients′ sense that the practice is caring
and compassionate (Figure 8.8).
8.
 Place a plastic-backed pad under the limb to be used for chemotherapy administra-
tion, and use it to assemble all the equipment needed for the treatment. This includes
drugs, flush, and a pressure bandage for the venipuncture site. Extra gloves, tape,
and clippers should be handy (Figure 8.9).
9
Using the smallest possible intravenous catheter for chemotherapy has several ben-
efts. First, it is less painful for the patient, which has its own obvious beneft, but
Figure 8.9. Set-up for chemotherapy administration. All 
jeui laays juaqiosge paypeg-sseld e uo paneld ane sanip
is also placed under the patient's leg. All materials needed
should be in easy reach. At the end of treatment, the sheet
Figure 8.8. Even cats are more easily restrained
is rolled up and disposed of in the specially designated
on the floor; comfort of the pet as well as the oncol-
waste bin. When using PhaSeal, there is no risk of needle
ogy treatment staff should be considered. This cat 
 puncture, but if other systems are used, care should be
is comfortable being prepared for chemotherapy by
taken not to remove needles, nor to recap them, but place
flushing the catheter to ensure patency.
them straight in the bin.
80
Treatment of Cancer
Blood return
Continue
administration,
watch for swelling.
and confirm blood
return every 2 ml of
First stick
No resistance
6nup
peripheral
to flow, no
catheter
swelling at IV
site and no 
pain or
 Either continue
Gentle aspiration
discomfort
cautiously
prior to flush and
(check blood
administration
return every
Resistance to
0.5 ml) or
flow; but no
discontinue
 administration
swelling at IV
site and no
and restart
with alternative
pain
leg vein
 Pulse flush at
No blood return
high pressure
Discontinue
Resistance to
administration
flow; swelling
and restart
at IV site ±
with alternative
pain
leg vein
Figure 8.10. When administering intravenous chemotherapy, care should be taken to ensure catheter patency.
 as summarized in this diagram.
 also from a pragmatic point of view, they are less likely to withdraw the leg during
the puncture and less likely to be anxious when they come in for the procedure next
time. In addition, smaller catheters will cause less scarring, and this is especially
important in chemotherapy patients because they will require repeated catheteriza-
tion over time. We seldom use a catheter larger than 24 gauge for any patient.
10.
 For the same reason, we avoid blood sampling from the leg veins, and use the jugular
vein for blood samples whenever possible.
11.
 Figure 8.10 provides a decision tree for giving intravenous chemotherapy.
Safe Chemotherapy Drug Handling
Most chemotherapeutic agents are both toxic and mutagenic. Alkylating agents have been
associated with the highest risks to handlers. Organ damage and increased risk of fetal
loss have been reported in persons handling and administering chemotherapy with inad-
equate attention to personal safety.
For these reasons, precautions should be taken when handling chemotherapy drugs
during any phase of preparation, administration, and disposal of drugs or waste. Ideally
a vertical laminar flow biological safety cabinet should be used to prepare all chemo-
therapy drugs (Figure 8.11).
Chemotherapy81
When administering drugs to the patient, both parenterally and orally, latex gloves
should be worn; vinyl gloves do not ofer the same protection as latex, and special che-
motherapy administration gloves are thicker latex than surgical gloves (and so are pre-
ferred). Whether using a hood or not, protective eyewear, a respirator-mask and a
disposable gown with closed-cuff sleeves should also be worn. All these items are usually
 available through distributors of chemotherapeutic agents.
Store all chemotherapy vials in zipper-lock bags in a designated cabinet or refrigerator,
and if carrying syringes around your hospital with chemotherapy in them, also carry them
 in zipper-lock bags (Figure 8.12). During parenteral administration, Luer-Lok syringes
decrease the risk of drug leakage or spills.
Breaking of pills should be avoided. If owners are administering drugs orally at home,
gloves and waste (zipper-lock) bag should be provided (Figure 8.13).
All chemotherapy waste should be disposed of in a dedicated bin suitable for sharps
and destined for specific commercial contaminated waste disposal. Needles should never
be removed from chemotherapy syringes before disposal due to the risk of self-puncture
and exposure to chemotherapy aerosols (Figure 8.14).
Hydrophobic flters that insert into chemotherapy drug vials will pre vent aerosolization
of drugs during preparation for dosing. If a filter is not used, alcohol-moistened gauze
should be wrapped around the vial top and needle when the needle is withdrawn to protect
Figure 8.11. A vertical laminar flow hood is the
ideal and safest method to reconstitute chemother-
apy drugs, but it may be financially impractical for
many smaller practices. Closed systems such as
PhaSeal may be worth considering for staff safety.
Figure 8.12. All syringes containing chemother-
apy should be transported in zipper-locked, prefer-
ably lightproof, plastic bags. Vials of drugs should
also be stored in bags in a designated refrigerator.
82
Treatment of Cancer
Figure 8.13. Oral chemotherapy  should be
handled with gloves, and NEVER split or broken.
RIOHAZARDOUS
Figure 8.14. A designated chemotherapy waste
bin should be easily accessible.
We have been using a system that is very popular in human oncology in the U.S. and
Europe called PhaSeal. PhaSeal is a closed, double-membrane system for injectable drug
 soo an m pe e i aiads e  pas si  a rs
separated after transfer, the membranes act as tight seals, preventing leakage and drug
contact with the atmosphere. PhaSeal was tested for 1 year in the oncology unit of a
Swedish hospital: no safety cabinet was used for drug preparation, and no cytotoxic drugs
were found in the environment after 1 year. This study suggests that the use of PhaSeal
alone is sufficient to prevent environmental contamination (see Figures 8.8 and 8.9).
The major investment in protective effort should be at the level of preparing and admin-
istering drugs, where the higher levels of exposure to the drug occur and are more likely
to be chronic (the same people usually give the drugs). We strongly suggest looking at the
 PhaSeal system for administration if a laminar flow hood is not available. Protective gear
should be worn at all times during preparation and administration. To maximize the safety
afforded by using the PhaSeal system, remember the following:
1.
 Always handle the PhaSeal Injector by the white part of the Injector.
2.
Always ensure that the blue injector lock is back in place before removing the injector
from the connector or protector. If the injector is not locked you will have an open
system and increase your exposure to chemotherapy drugs.
Chemotherapy 83
3.1
 PhaSeal Injector & Connector seals are guaranteed to remain a closed system for up
to 10 needleperforations.
Wipe seals between PhaSeal product connections (i.e., Connector to Injector, Protector
to Injector, Infusion Adaptor to Injector, etc.) with alcohol swab to prevent bacterial
contamination.
We have found that the following methods are helpful when using PhaSeal with our
patients.
Intravenous Bolus Injections
The PhaSeal Connector is too bulky to easily attach directly to an intravenous catheter
without risking dislodging the catheter. We attach the PhaSeal Connector to the delivery
end of a short extension fone with a 3-way stopcock is not always necessary but can
occasionally be useful). The Connector and extension are then primed with 0.9% sodium
chloride, and then the patient end of the extension is attached directly to the intravenous
catheter when it is placed. The injection is then given from a syringe fitted with a PhaSeal
Injector that is attached to the PhaSeal Connector on the extension set. This allows a little
space for the patient to adjust the position of its leg without undue risk of dislodging the
catheter (see Figures 8.8 & 8.9).
Intravenous Infusions
After attaching a PhaSeal Infusion Adaptor to the fluid bag, a standard administration set
is connected to the blue end Infusion Adaptor. The injection port on the administration
set is removed and replaced with a PhaSeal Connector. The line is primed with fluid from
the bag. Once the intravenous catheter is placed, the patient end of the administration set
line is attached directly to the catheter and fluid infusion starts. When the infusion is
running well, the chemotherapy is injected into the running fluid line from a syringe fitted
with a PhaSeal Injector that is attached to the PhaSeal Connector on the administration
set.
Handfing Excreta from Chemotherapy Patients
The risk of chemotherapy drug exposure with handling body fluids from chemotherapy
patients is a common concern for both pet owners and veterinary oncology technicians.
Specific guidelines are hard to come by because no one knows what the real risks are, so
people err on the conservative side. Even in the U.S. the National Institute for Occupational
Health and Safety does not give specific guidelines for handling excrement from chemo-
therapy patients. The recommendation to avoid body fluid contact for 24 to 48 to 72
 hours is therefore a “best guess" as being beyond the major excretion of metabolites from
a bolus injection.
The issue of metabolites is also important because few chemotherapy drugs are excreted
unchanged; most are metabolized. For example, in the 72 hours after a dose of vincristine
to humans, approximately 12% of the drug is excreted in the urine (50% of which consists
of metabolites), and approximately 70% is excreted in the feces (40% of which consists
of metabolites). It therefore means that if a patient's companion (and dogs are gross!!) ate
84Treatment of Cancer
all the patients feces over a 72-hour period, they would ingest approximately 30% of the
original dose, of which much would be destroyed in the GI tract. If they drank all the
 urine for that time, they would add another 6% of the dose. You can see that for a dog
stepping in the urine of a patient, or an owner getting some urine on their hands one time
would expose them to a miniscule amount of the original drug, and therefore probably
poses a minimal risk. The exception to this is pregnancy, and in our opinion, pregnant
women should not handle any excreta from patients and should not be directly involved
in giving chemotherapy at all. For nonpregnant staff in the hospital, routine protection
against excreta should reduce the risk of exposure substantially.
 For drugs that are excreted in the urine (such as cyclophosphamide metabolites), the
pet should be encouraged to urinate on soil where urine will drain quickly, and any urine
in other areas should be handled and disposed of as chemotherapy. These precautions
should be followed for approximately 48 hours following administration.
Even for a drug like cisplatin where 9o% of the active drug is excreted in the urine (this
is the real hazard to kennel staff), unless aerosolization occurs, the exposure is low (and
also diluted and spread out over 24 to 72 hours). Therefore, it is very important to avoid
aerosolizing patient urine; this means that runs and cages must not be pressure-hosed.
Carboplatin has approximately 60% of drug excreted in the urine, so it is another con-
cerning drug in the hospital, but much less of an issue on the grass outside.
Doxorubicin is excreted primarily as metabolites that are far less active biologically:
50% are excreted in the bile (so feces) and 10% in the urine. Again this excretion is spread
out over the 24 to 72 hours.
By careful attention to details regarding personal safety, and a positive attitude toward
making the environment safe and efficient, chemotherapy should be stress-free for veteri-
nary technician/nurses.
Further Reading
Moore AS, Frimberger AE. 2008. Anticancer drugs and protocols—Traditional. In: Kirk RW,
Bonagura JD, eds, Current Veterinary Therapy XIV. Small Animal Practice. St. Louis, Elsevier
305-311.
Polovich M, Whitford JM, and Olsen M. 2009. Chemotherapy and Biotherapy Guidelines and
Recommendations for Practice (Third Edition). Pittsburgh, Oncology Nursing Society.
Thamm DH, Vail DM. 2008. Anticancer drugs—New drugs. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, eds,
Current Veterinary Therapy XIV. Small Animal Practice. St. Louis, Elsevier, 311-314.
Webliography
http://www.carmelpharma.com/phaseal.html (Site to learn more information about PhaSeal compo
nent systems)
Biotherapy and
Photodynamic Therapy
Biologic Response Modifiers (BRMs)
Biologic response modification is a form of cancer therapy that seeks to control the disease,
or its impact on the patient, by altering the body's responses to the cancer rather than by
attacking the tumor cells directly. BRMs may
Stop or suppress processes that allow the growth of cancer cells.
2.
 Boost the cells of the immune system, such as lymphocytes and macrophages.
3.
Make cancer cells more recognizable by the immune system.
4.
Block or reverse processes that change a normal cell into a cancer cell.
5.
Alter cancer cells to promote growth behavior like that of healthy cells.
6.
Prevent cancer cells from metastasizing.
Differentiating Agents
A treatment widely used in humans for mycosis fungoides (T-cell cutaneous lymphoma)
is vitamin A analogues {retinoids), such as isotretinoin (Accutane? [Roche]). The mecha-
 nism of action of these compounds is by inducing terminal differentiation of tumor cells,
and improvement has been reported in dogs. A newer synthetic retinoid, acitretin (Neoti-
gason or Soriatane [Roche]) has also been reported to cause responses, but with less risk
of hepatic toxicity than Accutane. We would suggest a 6-week trial before deciding that
it is not effective; also check liver enzymes every 3 weeks for the first 6 weeks.
In a similar category is linoleic acid (safflower oil), which has been shown to cause
long-term remissions, occasionally over 2 years in duration, in a small preliminary study
of dogs with mycosis fungoides. The dose is 3 ml/kg body weight PO on food once daily.
85
86  Treatment of Cancer
localized. This treatment can be used in addition to retinoids. Again, it is best to treat for
6 weeks before deciding this approach is not working, and not to delay more aggressive
therapies for dogs with more advanced lesions.
Piroxicam
Piroxicam (Feldene) is a nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug (NSAID). Traditionally
NSAIDs are used for pain relief when inflammation is the cause of the pain (for example,
in arthritis), but piroxicam has been shown to have anticancer properties in certain cancers
in dogs, and a more limited role in cats. Piroxicam is most effective on bladder tumors
(transitional cell carcinoma), squamous cell carcinoma in the skin or the mouth, mammary
(breast) cancer, and possibly melanomas. Piroxicam may also decrease inflammation and
discomfort associated with cancer or with other “aging" changes. The exact way in which
piroxicam causes cancers to shrink is not completely understood. We do know that piroxi-
cam encourages certain tumor cells to die, inhibits the growth of tumors and inhibits the
formation of blood vessels that would then feed the tumor (antiangiogenesis, see also to
follow). It may also prevent the tumor from escaping the body's immune system.
Antiangiogenesis
Cancers stimulate growth of new blood vessels that supply them with oxygen and nutri-
ents, allowing them to grow in size and spread throughout the body (metastasize). This
process is called angiogenesis. Antiangiogenic therapy cuts off these new blood vessels,
effectively starving tumors and preventing their growth and spread. At least theoretically,
cancers may be controlled with effective doses of antiangiogenic drugs even if they do not
actually shrink. The process of angiogenesis is a complex one; however, the advantage is
that a number of steps along the angiogenesis pathway can be targeted by drugs.
 Some antiangiogenic drugs may also be combined in order to strike multiple targets and
thus improve the effectiveness of the drugs. Antiangiogenic drugs may also serve as a
Antiangiogenic therapy differs from chemotherapy for cancer in several ways:
1.  New blood vessel growth is rarely critical for survival in an adult animal so interfer-
ence with the process is unlikely to cause problems. Wound healing, pregnancy, and
fetal growth are exceptions. (Thalidomide had its devastating effects by preventing
angiogenesis of limb-buds in the developing fetus)
2.
Tumor cells often mutate and become resistant to chemotherapy. Because antiangio
genic drugs target only normal endothelial cells, these cells are less likely to develop
acquired drug resistance.
3.
 All cancers rely upon blood vessels. Antiangiogenic agents are therefore effective
against a broad range of cancers.
4.
 aq   o so ixi ae  h sa e  s 
in lower doses over longer periods of time.
Antiangiogenic treatment may take weeks or even months to exhibit its full beneficial
effect, but this allows for continuous, chronic control of disease.
Biotherapy and Photodynamic Therapy
9
The only specific antiangiogenic drug currently approved in the U.s. is Avastin (bevaci-
zumab), a monoclonal antibody to vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Multiple
other drugs used for other purposes have also been found to inhibit angiogenesis. Some
examples follow:
1.
Thalidomide and related drugs: The birth defects seen in the 1950s and 1960s when
pregnant women used this drug were due to interference when limb-bud development
was underway in the fetus; this led to poor development of limbs. However, these
antiangiogenic effects have now led this group of drugs to be used with great effect
in some bone marrow cancers such as multiple myeloma in humans.
2.
Doxycycline: an antibiotic that also acts as an antiangiogenic agent.
3.
Piroxicam: an NSAID that has antiangiogenic effects; other NSAIDs may have similar
effects, but this is not yet known, and piroxicam is the only one to have been docu-
mented to be effective in animals.
4.
 Tamoxifen: an antiestrogen drug used in the treatment of breast cancer in women
also has antiangiogenic effects. In dogs the effect is proestrogenic (rather than blocking).
5.
Some chemotherapy agents (cyclophosphamide and possibly others) when given at
low daily doses (also called metronomic therapy) may inhibit angiogenesis and have
been shown to be effective at controlling soft tissue sarcomas in dogs.
n pue uo ae sioaa ais an siad u pasn aaq aeu sip asae yo au
mild, resolving soon after the drug is discontinued. Although side effects are uncommon,
a CBC and chemistry panel at baseline and every 6 weeks is recommended to monitor for
toxicities from piroxicam and/or doxycycline. The most common side effects from tamox-
 ifen are vulval swelling and discharge and false pregnancy in females, and feminization in
males, with uncommon behavioral changes seen in some dogs of both sexes.
Imiquimod Cream (Aldara)
 Imiquimod cream is used to treat certain types of superficial skin cancer (such as squamous
(m) eded r asdxa s q pasn s rnd ae o ( 
viruses. It is not known exactly how imiquimod cream works to treat cancer, but it is an
immune response modifer and may increase the activity of the body's immune system.
Imiquimod cream does not stop new cancers from arising, and the pet should still be
checked for new lesions that may appear during treatment.
Wash the areas to be treated with mild soap and water and let the area dry. Apply a
thin layer of cream to the affected area and thoroughly rub in the medication. Only use
enough medication to cover the area being treated. Wear gloves and wash hands after use.
Do not get this medication on any mucous membranes. If the medication accidentally gets
into the mouth or eyes of the patient or yourself, immediately rinse well with water; seek
inmmediate medical attention if the medication gets into your eyes.
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy using a human cytotoxic T-cell line (TALL-104) was able to induce long-
term remission in dogs with systemic histiocytosis and histiocytic sarcoma. Chemotherapy
88Treatment of Cancer
 in addition to TALL-104 was needed in one dog to achieve a complete remission; impor-
tantly, TALL cells are no longer available even in the U.S. (but it still shows up on owner's
 Internet searches).
Xenogeneic DNA vaccination with genes encoding human tyrosinase has been used to
treat dogs with advanced melanoma. Median survival was >1 year, and one dog had
complete regression of pulmonary metastases for nearly a year. At the end of February
2008, the USDA gave conditional licensure to this melanoma vaccine. It is only available
for purchase by U.s.-based veterinary oncologists, and distribution is not currently planned
to other countries for at least the next 3 years.
Tyrosine-Kinase Inhibitors
Mutation of the proto-oncogene c-kit causes independent activation of the associated
tyrosine kinase leading to development or progression of some mast cell tumors (MCTs)
in dogs and cats. Two tyrosine kinase inhibitors (imatinib and masitinib) have been used
to treat MCT, and both have resulted in modest activity that does not seem to be related
to gene mutations. However, the recent release of Palladia (toceranib) specifically for treat-
ment of MCTs in dogs implies that there may be a place for these agents in combination
therapy for some patients.
Photodynamic Therapy (PDT)
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a local cancer therapy that is based upon the interaction
of a drug, called a photosensitizer, with light and oxygen. PDT is most useful for super-
ficial localized tumors such as facial squamous cell carcinomas in cats. Photosensitizers
are activated by light of a specific wavelength, which depends on the properties of the
individual photosensitizer, and they should be inert until activated. The photosensitizer is
given either systemically or topically and is allowed time to accumulate in tumor cells.
Under anesthesia, light of the appropriate wavelength is then applied to the tumor (called
pbotoirradiation), either by a laser or by light-emitting diode (LED) arrays, and the pho-
xo rxi a i (o xo   s    
radicals.
The use of photodynamic therapy has been increasing in recent years because of
technical developments in the area of light delivery systems and new photosensitizers
that are cleared more quickly from the body and have fewer side effects. PDT has several
advantages. It is generally relatively sparing to the normal tissues surrounding the tumor;
in other words, even within the light feld the normal cells are less affected by treatment
than tumor cells are. Compared to radiotherapy, it requires fewer treatments, often only
one, but because of the normal tissue sparing it can be repeated if needed. On the other
hand it shares its major limiting factors with radiotherapy: tumor bulk and hypoxia
both greatly reduce its effectiveness. Another major limiting factor for PDT has been
the cost of appropriate photoirradiation equipment. However, where the equipment is
available PDT can be an excellent treatment option for superficial tumors in selected
patients.
Biotherapy andPhotodynamicTherapy
59
Further Reading
Bergman PJ, McKnight J, Novosad A, et al. 2003. Long-term survival of dogs with advanced malig
nant melanoma after DNA vaccination with xenogeneic human tyrosinase: a phase I trial. Clin
Cancer Res 9(4):1284-1290.
Bexfield NH, et al. 2008. Photodynamic therapy of superficial nasal planum squamous cell carcino-
mas in cats: 55 cases. J Vet Intern Med Nov-Dec;22{6):1385-1389.
Elmslie RE, Glawe P, Dow SW. 2008. Metronomic therapy with cyclophosphamide and piroxicam
effectively delays tumor recurrence in dogs with incompletely excised soft tissue sarcomas. JVIM
22:1373-1379.
Hahn KA, Oglivie G, Rusk T, et al. 2008. Masitinib is safe and effective for the treatment of canine
mast cell tumors. J Vet Intern Med 22:1301-1309.
Isotani M, Ishida N, Tominaga M, et al. 2008. Effect of tyrosine kinase inhibition by imatinib
mesylate on mast cell tumors in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 22:98s-988.
 Knapp DW, Richardson RC, Bottoms GD, et al. 1992. Phase I trial of piroxicam in 62 dogs bearing
naturally 0ccurring tumors. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 29(3):214-218.
Lucroy MD, Edwards BF, Madewell BR. 2000. Veterinary photodynamic therapy. J Am Vet Med
Assoc Jun 1;216{11):1745-1751.
Mohammed SI, Craig BA, Mutsaers AJ, et al. 2003. Effects of the cyclooxygenase inhibitor, piroxi-
cam, in combination with chemotherapy on tumor response, apoptosis, and angiogenesis in a
canine model of human invasive urinary bladder cancer. Mol Cancer Ther 2(2):183-188.
Schneider LA, Hinrichs R, Scharffetter-Kochanek K. 2008. Phototherapy and photochemothera py.
Clin Dermatol Sep-Oct;26(5):464-476.
Complementary and Alternative
Medical (CAM) Therapies
Conventional treatments are those widely accepted and practiced by the mainstream
medical community.
Many owners of pets with cancer use therapies promoted as alternatives to conventional
medical care, just as they choose to do for themselves. By definition, once a treatment
strategy has been evaluated by clinical trials and found to be effective, it ceases to be
"alternative” and enters the mainstream. For this reason, most of these remedies have little
data to support or deny their efficacy. At best, many alternative modalities are harmless
but unproven or have been studied and found worthless. At worst, they can be harmful
tither directly through toxicity or by preventing the patient from receiving potentially
effective treatments.
An even greater proportion of owners of pets with cancer use “complementary” thera-
pies at the same time as mainstream cancer treatment. Most complementary therapies are
helpful adjunctive approaches that control symptoms and enhance quality of life.
Whether you agree or disagree with this approach, the veterinary oncology nurse should
encourage discussion of CAM use in their patients, and should be knowledgeable about
the most popular remedies and where to find reliable information for themselves and for
their patients
 In humans the most widely used CAM are spiritual healing or prayer, with herbal
medicines accounting for about 10% of such treatments. A recent study used a written
survey of 254 pet owners to examine the use of complementary and alternative therapies
in dogs and cats with cancer. In that study 76% of surveyed owners reported some use
of complementary and alternative therapy; the number dropped to 65% when prayer was
excluded. Nutritional supplements were the most commonly used therapy.
Veterinarians specially trained in CAM are the best source of advice for owners inter-
ested in such strategies, although unfortunately advice is often sought from people not
trained in the specific area of veterinary CAM. Just as for physiotherapy (see Chapter 11),
only qualified individuals should be recommended.
 Traditional Chinese medicine views the body as in balance; any loss of balance between
yin and yang or interrupting the flow of Qi will result in illness including cancer.
90
CAM Therapies91
Xdenayowauo io 'denayopei Aialins on juawaldwos e sy 'ainoundnse susianai s! len s!ul 'trot auns
acupuncture may assist in pain control and reduce nausea. (Courtesy of Dr. Pamela Short)
Figure 10.2. A dog receiving acupuncture. This procedure needs to be performed by highly trained and skilled
individuals to obtain maximum benefit to the patient. (Courtesy of Dr. Pamela Short)
Examination of tongue coating or color, bodily scents, and pulse assessment may lead to
a specific diagnosis that can be treated with herbal formulas and/or acupuncture. Acu-
puncture may also reduce nausea, vomiting, and fatigue from chemotherapy and radio-
therapy, and may be a part of multimodality pain control (Figures 10.1 and 10.2).
Naturopathy relies on herbs, nutrition, and manipulation/massage, and therefore there
is crossover between naturopathy and herbal medicine. Many mainstream cancer treat-
 ments have also originally come from herbal sources, such as vincristine from the peri-
winkle plant and paclitaxel from the yew tree.
 Dietary supplements and herbal remedies rely on low doses of chemicals to have their
effect. However, health regulatory bodies have not evaluated such remedies for safety and
effectiveness, and few undergo any formal quality control. Some herbal remedies can
interact with chemotherapy drugs, increase sensitivity of skin to radiation therapy, and
interact with anesthetics. Those interactions documented in humans include feverfew,
garlic, gingko, and ginger as anticoagulants, which could be a problem if NSAIDs are also
92
Treatment of Cancer
administered as part of therapy. The risk of drug-herb interactions appears greatest in
human patients with liver or renal disease, and we presume the same for animals. Two
 popular human herbal remedies for cancer in the U.S. and Europe are Essiac, a combina-
tion of burdock, sorrel, slippery elm and turkey rhubarb; and Iscador, a mistletoe extract.
Neither has shown activity in human clinical trials. Mushroom-derived compounds have
shown some benefit in human trials, but in the only clinical trial in dogs reported, Maitake
extract had no effect when used alone to treat dogs with previously untreated lymphoma,
and median time to progression was less than 1 month.
One of the major concerns in cancer treatment is maintaining the quality of life of our
patients. It is a common misconception that herbal products cannot cause side effects. By
definition, any substance that can have desired physiologic effects is pharmacologically
active and therefore can also have unwanted side effects. Always remember that a patient
receiving herbal supplements can develop toxicity from those as well as from chemo-
therapy. When toxicity cannot be explained by the traditional therapy, other treatments
should be examined. An unwell patient should have all medications ceased (not just the
mainstream treatments). We recently observed a case of a dog receiving doxorubicin and
vincristine chemotherapy that developed severe and symptomatic liver damage. It was only
when herbal supplements were ceased that the dog recovered. That dog was receiving
five-mushroom extract, liquid herbal formula (Withania, St Mary's thistle, Marshmallow,
Astragalus, Panax ginseng, tumeric), Xue Fu Zhu Yu Tang, AntiOx Excel, Protexin,
and fish oil in addition to the conventional treatments. It is easy to see how this can be
confusing.
 Dietary antioxidants (herbal or chemical) may interfere with the efficacy of chemo-
cell killing, so antioxidants may protect normal tissue but could also protect cancer cells
       s n s   
treatment in humans have shown little to no benefit, and some have shown increased
mortality in cancer patients taking antioxidant supplements compared to those not taking
supplements. We recommend cessation of all antioxidants during chemotherapy and
radiotherapy courses for 3 days before and 4 days after each treatment.
Biologic treatments such as shark cartilage, Laetrile, oxygen, and ozone therapies;
insulin potentiation therapy; coffee enemas, and immunoaugmentation therapy are often
supported by compelling anecdotes and testimonials, but definitive clinical trials have yet
to conclusively support or deny activity. Until such time as these trials are completed, such
therapies should not be recommended as a replacement for proven therapies. Common
questions come from owners that find encouraging-sounding remedies on Internet searches.
Our personal opinion is that these are commercialized products with no proven efficacy.
The tone of the websites is very positive, and there are many testimonials, but these treat-
ments cannot be recommended to replace mainstream treatments until controlled studies
have been performed and reported.
Homeopathy describes serial dilutions to extract the vital essence of a substance, to the
point where no measurable substance exists. There is no scientific data in the veterinary
literature to support the efficacy of homeopathy, and it should not be offered as an alter-
native to standard treatment for cancer.
Nonetheless, it should be understood that owners of pets with cancer are distraught and
want to pursue any and all avenues that may benefit their pet in any way. From a medical
standpoint, the safest thing for the pet is to keep communication open about what the pet
is receiving, and open communication is best maintained in an atmosphere that conveys
CAM Therapies93
understanding and support. Emphasizing to pet owners that the primary goal of conven-
tional veterinary oncology is to maximize quality of life, and that the efficacy of possible
treatments is always weighed against any quality-of-life impact, often helps to allay pet
owners’ fears and increase their level of trust in the team.
Warning Bells
Pet owners should be wary when
1.
The treatment claims to cure all cancers.
2.
The practitioner asks them not to tell their veterinarian.
3.
The treatment is claimed to have positive results with no side effects.
4.
Clinical studies are claimed but cannot be provided.
5.
The alternative remedy is a “secret."
6.
The practitioner does not have any qualifications.
7.
 The practitioner attacks the mainstream medical establishment.
Further Reading
Bjelakovic G, Nikolova D, Gluud LL, Simonetti RG, Gluud C. 2007. Mortality in randomized trials
of antioxidant supplements for primary and secondary prevention: systematic review and meta-
analysis.JAMA 297(8):842-857.
 ae o g s e  a to   'a s
9(1):80-89.
Griessmayr PC, Gauthier M, Barber LG, et al. 2007. Mushroom-derived Maitake PETfraction as a
single agent for treatment of lymphoma in dogs. JVIM 21:1409-1412.
Lana SE, Kogan LR, Crump KA, Graham JT, Robinson NG. 2006. The use of complementary and
alternative therapies in dogs and cats with cancer. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc Sep-Oct;42(S):361-
365.
Rijnberk A, Ramey DW. 2007. The end of veterinary homeopathy. Australian Vet J 85(120):513-
516.
Section 4
Supportive Care of Patients
Comfort, Pain Management, and
Physical Rehabilitation
Patricia Suomala
Note: For the analgesics discussed in this chapter, doses can be found in Appendix 2.
The Multimodal Support Nursing Paradigm
The veterinary cancer patient's daily comfort level is of utmost importance to all involved
 in their treatment and is a key indicator of perceived quality of life for pet owners. The
veterinary cancer team should inform and educate pet owners about the disease, its course
of treatment, and the support available to them, and assist in assessment of quality of life.
When you are communicating with owners, it is important that realistic expectations and
 parameters are established so that as the veterinary cancer patient enters the final stages
of disease the team can provide the best possible care. This should include a multimodal
approach that includes pain relief, physical rehabilitation/therapy, environmental (home)
adaptive care, nutritional support, quantifying quality of life, hospice care, and bereave-
ment support. The chapters in this section will introduce the veterinary nurse and techni-
cian to the principles and practicalities of pain relief, physical rehabilitation/therapy,
nutritional/ gastrointestinal support, hematologic support, and end-of-life supportive care.
One must have some sense of how to measure and quantify well-being for each patient,
and importantly owners need to have some expectations of what they feel is a quantifiable
quality of life. Empower your clients with knowledge; they deserve to know the truth
about all aspects of their pet's cancer care. As a veterinary nurse, you should strive to be
able to assess veterinary patients for pain and comfort each time you interact with them.
Nurses have a role in all the following stages of pain management for cancer patients:
1.
Assess patient. Pain should be assessed at the same frequency and on the same sched-
ule as temperature, heart rate, respiration, and blood pressure.
97
98Supportive Care of Patients
2.
Provide nonp barmacologic comfort. Nurses are adept at "reading" patients, particu-
larly oncology nurses, who know their patients much better than those dealing with
 acute care, and they understand the emotional needs of the patients. Physical therapy
(see later in this chapter) can provide comfort, and it is often used as a way of con-
tacting patients without intrusive procedures (such as venipuncture, rectal tempera-
ture, etc.). For specific pain sites, either hot or cold compresses may provide some
comfort. Providing clean dry cages, with soft padded bedding and a comfortable
nd e     o q  o s
should be gentle and with due consideration to the patient's history of injury and
illness (Figures 11.2-11.4). For hospitalized patients, a light dimmer switch will allow
for a quieter, more settled environment.
Invasive procedures should be planned to minimize noxious stimuli (for example,
coordinating blood sampling and intravenous catheter placements). One author has
suggested that interventions that are invasive be balanced with positive, noninvasive
interaction at a ratio of 3:1 (noninvasive: invasive); this makes intuitive sense. Such
procedures are very important and, while not a substitute for analgesia, should be
 considered part of the multifaceted approach to pain relief and recommended to
owners as a prophylactic strategy for their pets
Differentiate signs of pain from other effects. This may take into account breed factors
(huskies and malamutes may vocalize even when not painful, but when stressed or
threatened) as well as anxiety levels (Figure 11.5).
4
Request and administer appropriate analgesia. Where possible, predict how painful a
procedure will be and use prophylactic control. Include assessment of underlying
factors, breed and individual factors, drug contraindications, and history.
 Monitor and treat adverse effects of analgesic drugs. One study showed that in an
ICU setting, only 64% of pain medications were delivered as prescribed, and nearly
 a quarter of patients received a decreased dose of the prescribed drug (usually opioids).
This was principally done by increasing the interval (delaying administration). The
q   is s oqe o q o e so
remember that pain has effects as well that may be worse.
6.
Communicate with clients.
7.Track controlled substances.
Figure 11.1. Soft, warm bedding is one of the
most basic comfort measures and will help to
reduce pain from any source.
Comfort, Pain Management, and Rehabilitation
6G
Figure 11.2. When recovering from anesthesia, the
patient should be in an area where it is quiet, but also
where it can be observed for worsening signs of pain.
Figure 11.3. Gentle restraint, and judicious use of
Again, the patient should be warm and comfortable.
 sedatives, allows for relatively pain-free procedures
such as radiography.
Figure 11.4. Gentle restraint for procedures such as blood
drawing should be interspersed with noninterventional
interactions (patting and feeding) to lessen anticipation
of pain.
Figure 11.5. Nervous animals out of their normal
environment  may  experience heightened pain
that can be at least partly reduced by gentle and
thoughtful nursing.
Attitudes toward Pain in Veterinary Nursing
In a study of over 500 veterinary nurses (see Table 11.1), 58% believed that the respon-
sibility for postoperative pain monitoring should be shared between the veterinary nurse
 and the veterinarian, more than 80% of the veterinary nurses agreed that a pain scale was
a useful clinical tool, and 96% of them felt their knowledge and assessment of pain could
100Supportive Care of Patients
2007)
Agreed
Disagreed
A degree of pain is required to stop the animal from being too active after
24.0
76.0
surgery.
Animals benefit from perioperative analgesic therapy.
95.0
5.0
Animals benefit from postoperative analgesic therapy.
90.0
10.0
Surgery does not usually result in sufficient pain to warrant analgesic therapy.
1.3
98.7
Animals recover beter from anaesthesia if given analgesic therapy.
91.9
8.1
A pain scale to assess a patient would be/is a useful clinical tool
80.3
19.7
 Pain could be better assessed in animals.
88.8
11.2
be improved. That same study showed that when veterinary nurses were asked to score
pain, they scored pain higher than veterinarians for all surgical procedures. In addition,
the longer a nurse was qualified the more likely he or she was to assign a higher pain score
to a procedure. More than one study has shown that the pain scores given by veterinar-
ians and by nurses for procedures involving dogs are higher than those involving cats.
One survey by a veterinary technician found that the majority of veterinarians, when
n uua Au asnoq, papnu eud ui si pee ue mou no op mo, pase
me” within the top 10 reasons on their lists. This emphasizes the importance of veterinary
nurses in the process of pain management.
Physiology of Pain
The International Association for the Study of Pain defines pain as “an unpleasant sensory
 and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage, or described
in terms of such damage." Awareness of animal pain has been delivered to the forefront
of veterinary medicine due to the support of multiple organizations within the veterinary
medical community, including The American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA), The
 International Veterinary Academy of Pain Management (IVAPM) and The Veterinary
 po ied  d a s    is pe ess
mandatory standards of care, as follows:
Mandatory Standard Pain Management:
MA23 Pain assessment is considered part of every patient evaluation regardless of
the presenting complaint.
MA24 Appropriate pain management is provided for the anticipated level and dura-
tion of pain.
 sa a   a p so d s
Comfort, Pain Management, and Rehabilitation 101
As a veterinary nurse, you need to know how to identify the different types of pain that
affect our veterinary cancer patients and methods to score and assess pain; you also must
be able to communicate your assessment to the veterinarian so that the most effective
analgesic provides comfort and control in the most appropriate delivery system.
Pain as defined by The International Veterinary Academy of Pain Management involves
a complex interaction of physiochemical responses leading to the perception of an unpleas-
ant sensation. Pain recognition involves transduction, transmission, modulation and per-
ception. Transduction is defined as the translation of noxious stimuli processed by the
 peripheral receptors and is inhibited by NSAIDs, opioids, and local anesthetics. Transmis-
sion is the communication of noxious stimuli to the spinal cord and is reduced by local
anesthetics and alpha-2 agonists. Modulation refers to the adjustment of noxious sensa-
tions by neurological tracts within spinal cord pathways and the brain stem and is influ-
enced by local anesthetics, alpha-2 agonists, opioids, NSAIDs, tricyclic antidepressants
(TCAs), serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), and NMDA receptor antagonists.
Perception refers to the interpretation of noxious stimuli in the brain, resulting in sensation
of pain; this is the part of pain that shows the most individual variation. Perception is
inhibited by general anesthetics, opioids, and alpha-2 agonists.
Pain may be classified as physiologic, which refers to the body's protective mechanism
to avoid tissue injury, or pathologic, which arises from tissue injury and inflammation
or damage to a portion of the nervous system. Pathologic pain may be further separated
into nociceptive (peripheral tissue injury), neuropathic (damage to peripheral nerves or
spinal cord), visceral (stimulation of pain receptors in the thoracic or abdominal viscera),
and somatic (injury to tissues other than viscera, such as bones, joints, muscles, and
skin). Cancer pain is associated with tumor invasion and tissue damage that causes activa-
 snn  sis q  d a i axa  s d po s
to osteosarcoma in both dogs and cats. Also, cancer treatment sometimes results in pain
(e.g., surgery, acute effects of radiation, and extravasation of certain chemotherapeutic
drugs).
Assessing Pain in Animals
It can be difficult to evaluate pain in animals because of the communication barrier. In
human medicine there are pain scales based on numerical denominators. An example of
a nonnumeric, nonverbal pain scale used in human pediatric medicine is based on facial
expression. However, even this is difficult to use in veterinary medicine because while our
patients do have some modulation of facial expression, it does not correlate with estab-
lished parameters for human pediatrics.
Behavior and measurement of physical parameters are probably the best surrogates for
the parameters we use in humans (verbal communication and facial expression). Physical
parameters include heart rate, respiratory rate, and response to physical manipulation.
Behavioral parameters include hiding, withdrawal from contact, aggression, and even self-
mutilation.
Because of the complexity of animal pain, it is helpful to develop a standard pain form
      o s     nd s
evaluating each patient based on similar physical factors and behaviors. A semiquantitative
scale for rating pain can be as simple and easily applied as “No Pain/Mild Pain/Moderate
102Supportive Care of Patients
Table 11.2. Example of a pain score system
Category
 Sign
Score
Behavior
Vocalizing
Shivering (if not hypothermic)
Change in behavior, e.g., hiding and quiet when normally
gregarious, or unusually solicitous
Restless, depressed, or irritable
Unusual posture, e.g., hunched
Reluctant to move, soils itself
Looks at, chews, or licks wound
 Bites at bandage
Responds slowly to stroking (nonaggressive pet)
Socialization—for a normally
Responds slowly to gentle physical interaction, e.g., petting
nonaggressive animal
 Does not respond to gentle physical interaction, e.g., petting
Responds with fear or aggression to gentle physical
interaction, e.g. petting
Heart rate
11-30% increase over resting
31-50% increase over resting
2
>50% increase over resting
Pain/Severe Pain." A more detailed example is given in Table 11.2. Regardless of the pain
scale being used, it is very important to communicate the details to each staff member and
ensure that evaluations are recorded in each patient's medical record.
Multimodal Pain Management
Once the pain assessment is completed it is useful for the practice to have a standardized
approach depending on the degree of pain. Table 11.3 is an example of such an approach.
medical management. Amputation is the most direct method to relieve pain, and postop-
trative pain control is much easier than control of bone pain in patients not undergoing
amputation. For owners that are not interested in amputation, or for patients in whom it
is not feasible, the following options are available. As with arthritis pain, there is great
individual variation in response to different drugs, so it's necessary to experiment for each
individual dog:
Comfort, Pain Management, and Rehabilitation
103
Table 11.3.Example of a multimodal pain management plan
 Degree of Pain 
 Pharmacologic Analgesic 
 Nonpharmacologic Therapy
Mild
+ Nonopioid (e.g., NSAID)
± Physical therapy
± Adaptive home care
+ Nutritional assessment 
Moderate
+ Nonopioid (e.g, NSAID)
+ Physical therapy
lopewell +
+ Adaptive home care
± Opioid
+ Nutritional assessment
Severe
+ Nonopioid (e.g., NSAID)
+ Physical therapy
+ Tramadol
+ Adaptive home care
+ Opioid
+ Nutritional assessment 
± Anxiolytic
 ± Nutritional support 
± Palliative procedure (e.g., radiation)
+ Nursing/hospice care
± Other (e.g., bisphosphate)
Figure 11.6. This young boxer has an osteosarcoma affecting the right
distal radius. Although amputation is the most direct and effective
method of pain control, other strategies will help improve his comfort
level until surgery can be scheduled.
1.1
Nonsteroidal antinflammatories can be helpful but usually do not control the pain
themselves. Piroxicam, carprofen, or meloxicam can be tried, but of course they cannot
There is no single best agent for all dogs and experimenting to find the best choice
for the individual dog is sometimes necessary. In one study over 75 % of osteosarcoma
samples showed COX-2 expression, although the staining was "strong" in only 10%
104Supportive Care of Patients
of these. For these latter dogs, the prognosis was worse for long-term survival. Piroxi-
cam (but not other NSAIDs to date) has been shown to have some antitumor effects
 in tumors with strong COX-2 expression and may therefore be a consideration for
therapy.
 2. Corticosteroids are not usually particularly helpful, but they can be tried; however,
they must not be combined with NSAIDs due to an increased risk of gastrointestinal
side effects.
3. Tramadol works through complex interactions between opiate, adrenergic, and sero-
tonin receptors. Because it is not a narcotic, it can be combined with NSAIDs and
opioids to reduce the effective dosage of all drugs.
 Narcotics can be combined with NSAIDs and tramadol. Whenever instituting a new
narcotic therapy, there is a possibility that sedation will occur; this usually will pass
in the first few days of treatment. We don't usually combine different narcotics with
each other, especially at home.
Codeine is often helpful, particularly for "breakthrough" pain at night, and is easy
for owners to manage and adjust at home. We recommend starting at the low end of
the dose range and working up, according to the patient's levels of pain and sedation.
The other narcotic option that is certainly convenient, although less commonly suc-
cessful (in our opinion) than codeine, is a fentanyl transdermal patch. It is quite safe
to the dog but if there are children in the house it should be avoided because of the
small but serious risk that a child might remove or find and ingest the patch. Some
people find it difficult to get the patches to stay on and get frustrated with it. If a
fentanyl patch is used it can take 24 hours for blood levels to rise, so dogs can be
given a “loading dose" of injectable fentanyl intravenously. Note that fentanyl patches
can be used in cats with a decreased surface exposure (less of the backing removed)
to modify dosages.
5.
 A single dose of radiation therapy provides some degree of pain relief in 80% of dogs
for a median duration of 4 months. It can take up to 2 weeks for pain relief to become
apparent. This option can be combined with any of the medical analgesia discussed
above. Some clinicians (including us) like to give 1 fraction and then “save” the further
fractions for when pain recurs.
A second radiation therapy option for osteosarcoma is samarium treatment. Samar-
ium is a radioactive isotope that is directed to areas of increased bone turnover. The
emitted radiation travels only a short distance, so it irradiates the tumor (where it
accumulates) and very little surrounding tissue. Because it is taken up in small amounts
by all the long bones, samarium can be myelosuppressive, at least in the short term.
Thus it cannot easily be combined with myelosuppressive chemotherapy. Samarium
is only available at specialized facilities.
6.
 Although not an analgesic, per se, for bone pain, aminobisphosphonates can be part
of a multimodality approach to pain control. Aminobisphosphonates inhibit osteoclast
activity and so can reduce and, in some cases, partially reverse osteolysis and the
resultant pain and fracture risk. Again, it can take up to 2 weeks for pain relief to
become apparent. Aminobisphosphonates are a mainstay of treatment for humans with
multiple myeloma or bone metastases. These can be combined with both analgesic
drugs and radiation therapy. Both alendronate and pamidronate have been anecdotally
reported to be safe and effective in dogs. Pamidronate is given as an in-hospital infu-
sion every 3 weeks; this option is fairly expensive. Alendronate is given daily at home,
but it must be given after a 12-hour fast and no food can be given for 30 minutes after
Comfort, Pain Management, and Rehabilitation 105
the dose. Esophageal irritation can occur particularly in patients that lie down after
taking the drug, so a drink of water immediately after, followed by a walk, is recom-
mended to prevent lodging of the tablet in the esophagus.
Pharmacologic Analgesic Therapy
In selecting pain control drugs, consider their mechanism of action, potency, duration of
efficacy, effects on the central nervous system, antinflammatory effects, toxicity, drug
interactions, and cost. Analgesics when used correctly and concurrently will result in effec-
tive pain management while using lower doses of each drug. Pharmacologic methods
a ierd se yns sp souou ym un u pasn aq ps
 adaptive home care, and palliative therapy.
Opioids
Opioids are the most powerful analgesics available with actions at peripheral, spinal and
supraspinal levels.
1. Mu receptors produce the most profound analgesia and they can cause euphoria,
respiratory depression, physical dependence, and bradycardia.
Kappa receptors trigger a lesser analgesic response; side effects can be sedation and
dysphoria.
3.
 Delta receptors modulate mu receptor activity.
4.
Sigma receptors provide little to no analgesia; they are responsible for many of the
 adverse affects associated with opioids.
Opioids may act as agonists, antagonists, partial agonists, and mixed agonist/antago-
nists. Simply put, as their names imply, agonists bind and stimulate receptors; antagonists
bind and block or inhibit receptor activity; partial agonists bind and stimulate, but with
less than full activity at certain receptor subtypes; and mixed agonists/antagonists stimulate
 some receptors while blocking others.
Table 11.4 lists some opioids used in veterinary medicine.
Nonsteroidal Antinflammatories
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) remain the core therapy for chronically
painful pets. Their principal mode of action is to block prostaglandin production by
Table 11.4. Common veterinary opioids
Opioid Agonists
Opioid Agonist/Antagonists
Fentanyl
Buprenorphine
Codeine
 Butorphanol(not considered effective in chronic pain)
Morphine
L-Methadone
106 Supportive Care of Patients
binding and inhibiting cyclooxygenase (COX). Although the result of this effect is mainly
that NSAIDS have a central analgesic action as well. Cyclooxygenase occurs in at least
two isoforms: COX-1, which mediates formation of prostaglandins responsible for GI
mucosal protection, homeostasis and renal blood flow, and COX-2, which catalyzes pro-
duction of prostaglandins that act as inflammatory mediators. In general, NSAIDs that
inhibit COX-2 more so than COX-1 are considered the drugs of choice in this class. These
are often referred to as COX2 selective agents.
Other Drugs with Analgesic Effects
Alpha2-agonists provide sedation, analgesia, muscle relaxation, and anxiolysis. Varieties
of compounds have been developed for use in humans and veterinary medicine, including
medetomidine.
 Bisphosphonates (pamidronate, alendronate, zoledronate) can be used to treat primary
bone disease and bone metastases.
Special Considerations for Cats
As studies have been performed, and doses refined, the reputation for opioids causing
mania in cats has been shown to be false. It is more common to see signs of euphoria,
such as purring, rolling, and kneading with the front paws. When used alone for pre-
medication some opioids may cause nausea, vomiting, and salivation, but this varies
depending on the drug used (see later information in this chapter). The mu receptor ago-
 s a  d s s     ss
-donq sieo u u ssa asneo oi seadde auopria fued aaaas ro as aq ueo
e d e s adg sodo  and a n se aem e s 
and it is the most popular opioid used in small animal practice outside the U.S. In studies
it produces better perioperative pain management than many other opioids in cats and is
not associated with vomiting.
Fentanyl transdermal patches (25 μg/hr) may be used in small cats (<5 kg body weight)
 by only removing half the backing before placing them on the skin. For larger cats (>5 kg)
a full 2.5 μg/hr patch may be used.
NSAIDs are also used in cats for pain management; although because cats metabolize
these differently (more slowly) than dogs, care must be taken with dosing intervals (don't
just use the dog dose). They can provide equal analgesia to some opioids, and the effect
is often longer lasting.
NonpharmacologicPain Management
At Home Adaptive Therapy
Environmental modifications may be helpful for pets with moderate to severe disease
limitations, including cancer and arthritis. The principles are similar to those for arthritic
humans. Whenever possible, animals should be moved from a cold, damp outdoor envi-
ronment to a warm, dry inside environment. A soft, well-padded bed or waterbed should
Comfort, Pain Management, and Rehabilitation 107
be provided. A circulating warm-water blanket under other blankets provides heat and
improves joint stiffness in the morning. Disabled pets have difficulty walking on smooth
surfaces, and secure footing should be provided to avoid slipping and falling. Placing
inexpensive carpeting or throw rugs throughout housing can be a tremendous help. Stair
climbing should be minimized through use of handicap ramps and keeping pets on ground
floors. Steps are easier when wider apart with a gradual rise. Portable ramps are available
to help pets in and out of vehicles. Place raised feeding and water bowls so that pets can
easily retrieve food and water. Retail pet markets and websites have many adaptive home
aids to help families keep their pets comfortable
Acupuncture
Acupuncture is the most widely studied of the complementary methods for pain control.
Reviews of acupuncture treatment in humans found that adverse effects were generally
uncommon, mild, and short-term (less than 2 weeks). More serious adverse effects are
usually due to misplacement of needles, and veterinary acupuncture is best practiced by
trained individuals. Acupuncture can be recommended as part of multimodality pain
management, but should not usually be considered as a substitute for pharmacologic
analgesia. (see also Chapter 10)
Complementary and Alternative Treatments
Nutrition, dietary supplements, herbal medicines, and even homeopathy have been recom-
mended for pain relief. No clinical trials in animals are published; such strategies, while
they may have a low risk of side effects, are not a substitute for pharmacologic interven-
tion in severely painful patients. Complementary and alternative medications are discussed
in more detail in Chapter 10.
Difficulties in Pain Management
When pain is not being effectively controlled despite best efforts, it is possible that the
cancer pain is simply too severe to be controlled by the modalities that are being used. On
the other hand, there are some things that should be checked to ensure the pain control
is being used most effectively:
1.  Carefully review all medications with the owner. This is best done with medicine bottle
 in hand. Errors are common, particularly when multiple drugs are prescribed.
2.
 Check that drugs are being given on the correct schedule and in the correct dose. Poor
compliance is common.
3.
Make sure that both the owner and the cancer care team are using the same pain scale
or definitions. Misunderstandings are common.
4.
 Review the history to ensure that distress reported is in fact pain.
5.
 Discuss the implications of pain. It is impossible to have every patient pain-free all
the time—it is practical to expect good pain control most of the time.
6.
Review and reconsider nonpharmacologic interventions.
/.
Consider reinvestigating for a new source of pain.
108Supportive Care of Patients
Veterinary Physical Rehabilitation
 Physical rehabilitation, or physical therapy, of the veterinary cancer patient should center
on the patient's quality of life and disease process. Older cancer patients can suffer from
degenerative diseases, for example, osteoarthritis; younger dogs may be top canine athletes
 prior to their diagnosis. A veterinarian should evaluate each individual patient fully before
any physical rehabilitation begins. Unless the nurse is specifically trained in physiotherapy,
it is preferable to involve a qualified physiotherapist who best understands the methods
and limitations. Veterinary physical rehabilitation is often unsuccessful in animals where
their underlying pain and disease state is not evaluated and treated appropriately. Because
the goal of rehabilitation is to provide comfort while assisting owners in letting their pet
live the best quality of life possible. With that in mind, the veterinary nurse can benefit
from the following brief introduction to physical therapy and contribute to creating a plan
for their patients.
The American Physical Therapy Association defines physical therapy as the science of
the application of biomechanics, physics, anatomy, physiology, and psychology to persons
with dysfunction, injury, pain, or physical abnormalities. Veterinary physical therapy is
defined by the American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) as the use of noninva-
sive techniques, excluding veterinary chiropractic, for the rehabilitation of injuries in
nonhuman animals.
 In the U.s., veterinary physical therapy should be performed by a licensed veterinarian;
a veterinary or animal health technician licensed, certified, or registered in veterinary
physical therapy or rehabilitation; or a licensed physical therapist educated in nonhuman
 animal anatomy and physiology.
The goal of rehabilitation is to return to predisease or preinjury function. In instances
where return to normal function is limited (e.g., after amputation of a limb for osteosar-
coma), the goal of rehabilitation would be to heal the affected limb site and rehabilitate
the patient to strengthen the remaining limbs for function. Tissues most affected by immo-
bilization are cartilage, muscle, ligament, tendon, and bone. The knowledge of how and
in what period these tissues respond to disuse and immobilization is an important concept
in physical therapy and understanding how to safely remobilize tissues after injury
and immobilization is key to successful rehabilitation and quality of life. The benefits of
rehabilitation include increased speed of recovery, positive psychological effects for the
pet and owner, improved movement, increased strength, and endurance and improved
biomechanics. For the veterinary cancer patient much of the rehabilitation will be for pain
relief, wound healing, and postsurgical situations. With working or performance dogs the
owner's goal may be to return to full performance, which may or may not be realistic
depending on the pet's individual condition.
Assessmenf of Limb Function
Limb function is evaluated using both objective and subjective joint assessments. The
quality of joint motion is subjective and involves the assessment of joint biomechanics,
crepitus, and pain during motion. The quantity of joint flexion and extension motion is
measured using a goniometer. To measure a comfortable range of motion the joint is flexed
until the first signs of discomfort and then extended. The mean of three independent
Comfort, Pain Management, and Rehabilitation 109
 measurements is used. Assessment of muscle is important in rehabilitation. Muscle mass,
strength, and injury may be assessed to help evaluate progress. Limb measurements indi-
cate limb use and muscle strength. Measurement of limb function is a valuable tool in
assessing many cancer patients. Keeping assessments of limb function and muscle strength
postsurgery and throughout disease progression can aid owners in making quality-of-life
decisions.
Rehabilitation modalities can include therapeutic exercises and stretching, aquatic
therapy, therapeutic massage and joint manipulation, the application of heat and cold,
therapeutic ultrasound, electrical stimulation, low-level lasers, magnetic fields, and extra-
corporeal shockwaves. Treatment considerations and choice of exercise vary with the
patient's stage of disease and endurance level. Veterinary oncology nurses can learn more
about the uses of each modality from a variety of sources. However, they may want to
spend some time with a trained veterinary physical therapist, CCRP (Certified Canine
Rehabilitation Practitioner) or complete training themselves.
Therapeutic Exercises (or Active Physical Therapy)
Leash Walking
Leash walking is the simplest, most convenient, and most important exercise for any pet.
sndn iad aun se payo Asea aq ueo pue iad Aue on idepe oi Asea si asiorxa st
It also has muscular and heart-health benefits for everyone involved with minimal cost.
Leash walking exercises can be performed at a variety of outdoor areas, such as sidewalks,
local parks, or recreation areas. Leash walking exercises can begin shortly after surgery if
there are no contraindications. Start with a slow walk at a pace comfortable for the pet.
If the pace is too fast, the pet may lift the painful leg to avoid bearing weight on it. Encour-
age the pet to use the affected leg by praising him or her for putting the leg on the ground.
In the beginning, the walks should last only 2-5 minutes two to three times daily. The
exercises can be more challenging by increasing the length of time of the exercise session
and increasing the speed of the walk. As the pet improves, use steeper and longer hills.
Other options for increasing the benefits of the walks include walking with the dog through
snow, sand, or tall grass.
Incline/Decline Exercise
Incline and decline exercises strengthen the muscles in a pet's legs. They are easy to do
and cause minimal impact on the pet's joints. An incline exercise involves walking up a
hill or slope. A decline exercise involves walking down a hill or slope. When a pet walks
on an incline, the back legs are exercised by moving the body forward. When the pet walks
on a decline, the back legs stretch more and more weight can be put on the front legs.
 s s  s a  s  s  e  d s 
pet improves, use steeper and longer inclines and declines. You can also make the exercises
more challenging by increasing the length of time you do the exercise and increasing the
speed of the walk.
Cavaletti
Cavaletti rails are horizontal poles spaced out on the ground. Cavaletti rails can also be
placed horizontally at a low height. Exercises using Cavaletti rails require a pet to pick
110 Supportive Care of Patients
up its legs to walk over the poles. This activity improves range of motion and increases the
length of the stride. These exercises also develop balance and coordination. Commercial
Cavaletti rails can be purchased at local sporting goods stores, from dog agility retailers,
or from online retailers. Cavaletti rails can also be made with PVC piping or a ladder placed
on the ground. Both are available at local home repair stores. Initially, place the rails or a
ladder on level ground keeping an equal distance between each rail. A comfortable starting
distance is slightly less than the normal stride length. Walk the pet over the rails at a slow
pace. As the pet improves, the rails can be placed further apart and in varying distances.
You can also raise the rails and increase to trotting over the rails as the pet improves.
Aquatic Therapy
Aquatic therapy is any exercise performed in water. This includes walking or swimming.
Aquatic therapy reduces pain and discomfort without too much stress on the dog's joints.
Exercises in water strengthen muscles, build endurance, and improve range of motion. The
main advantage is the floating effect that water exerts. When the pet is placed in water,
the water supports the body, which allows the pet to exercise with less stress on the joints
pedic surgery. It is also excellent therapy to improve joint function for dogs with arthritis.
Options include a facility dedicated to animal physical rehabilitation, or at-home substi-
 e  si   s  'e o qn o qq e s s 
choice for most cats.
Dancing
 Dancing is an active therapeutic exercise usually recommended when a pet can consistently
walk with minimal lameness. This exercise is performed by picking up the pet's front legs
and moving or “dancing" the pet forward and backward at a slow, controlled pace.
Dancing is designed to improve the use and strength of the rear limbs. The exercises also
should not be pursued if the pet seems uncomfortable or distressed by the position.
Balance Boards
A balance board is a platform that rocks. To perform this exercise, the pet's front or back
legs are placed on the board and then the board is gently rocked in a slow, controlled
fashion. Balance board exercises help improve balance and coordination. The boards also
encourage pets to use muscle groups that they may avoid using during normal walking.
such as an injured leg, to avoid pain. This forced usage helps to maintain and build muscle
mass that will help with recovery.
Physioballs and Physiorolls
Physioballs are round, inflatable balls made out of rubber or PVC. They roll in all direc-
tions. Physiorolls are peanut-shaped, inflatable, oblong balls made out of rubber or PVC.
They roll only forward and backward. Both come in a variety of sizes. Exercises on Phys-
ioballs are excellent for developing movement and coordination in all limbs by moving
the pet in all directions on the ball. The Physiorolls offer good support, which encourages
the pet to put more weight on the affected joint. The Physiorolls also offer support for
 pets with back injuries to help develop balance.
Comfort, Pain Management, and Rehabilitation 111
Passive Physical Therapy
ColdTherapy
 Cold therapy is the application of cold to reduce swelling and relieve pain. Cold therapy
 is used to reduce damage in the muscles immediately after injury or to reduce swelling
 after exercise. Cold therapy also increases range of motion during physical activity. Cold
therapy can be applied to any area on the pet's body. It is most commonly used on joints,
such as the shoulders, elbows, hips, or knees. A variety of items can be used, including
or bags of frozen vegetables. Cold therapy is applied for the first 24 to 72 hours after
injury. Cold therapy is also applied if the skin becomes warm to the touch, such as during
exercise, or if the patient shows signs of pain or swelling.
Heat Therapy
Heat therapy is the application of heat to relieve pain, reduce stiffness, and reduce muscle
spasms. It also increases muscle relaxation, blood flow, and tissue flexibility. Heat therapy
is usually administered for chronic conditions or after the initial inflammatory stage of a
muscle injury. Heat therapy is often used to improve range of motion during physical
activity. Heat therapy is also a good treatment option for the temporary relief of chronic
arthritis. Heat therapy can be applied to any location on the pet's body. It is most com-
monly used on joints, such as the shoulders, elbows, hips, or knees. The maximum tem-
perature that should be used is 45 *C (113 *F). Seal the heat pack immediately after heating.
Heat packs and wraps retain their heat for approximately 30 minutes. Place thick padding,
such as a towel, on the pet's skin and then place the heat pack on top of the padding.
This padding helps to prevent damage to the skin. Hold the pack in place with your hand.
Leave the pack in place for 15-20 minutes or until the skin is warm to the touch. Check
the skin every 5 minutes for redness. Discontinue therapy if the pet shows any sign of
discomfort. Never leave a pet unattended with any type of heat pack.
Electrical Stimulation and Therapeutic Ultrasound
Electrical stimulation (ES) is a commonly used modality in physical therapy for increasing
range of motion and muscle strengthening. ES is useful for various orthopedic and neuro-
logical issues, especially those causing acute or chronic pain and muscle atrophy.
Therapeutic ultrasound has a broad range of indications including treating diseased
joints, certain muscular disease, and pain reduction. Therapeutic ultrasound improves
elasticity of fbrous structures, increases blood flow, and improves tissue nutrition.
Further Reading
s
Bockstahler B, et al. 2004. Essential Facts of Physiotherapy in Dogs and Cats: Rehabilitation and
Pain Management. Babenhausen, Germany.
Coleman DL, Slingsby LS. 2007. Attitudes of veterinary nurses to the assessment of pain and the
use of pain scales. Vet Rec 160:541-544.
112Supportive Care of Patients
 Davidson CD, et al. 2004. Plasma fentanyl concentrations and analgesic effects during full or partial
exposure to transdermal fentanyl patches in cats. JAVMA 224:700-705.
Gunew MN, et al. 2008. Long-term safety, efficacy and palatability of oral meloxicam at 0.01-
0.03 mg/kg for treatment of osteoarthritic pain in cats. J Feline Med Surg 10:23s-241.
Hansen B. 2008. Analgesia for the critically ill dog or cat: an update. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 38:1353-1363.
            
pharmacologic therapies. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 38:1173-1186.
Lascelles BDX, et al. 200s. Guidelines for safe and effective use of NSAIDs in dogs. Vet Therapeu-
tics 6(3):237-251,
McGowan C, et al. 2007. Animal Physiotherapy, Assessment, Treatment and Rehabilitation of
Animals. Ames, IA, Blackwell Publishing.
Millis D, et al. 2004. Canine Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy. St. Louis, Saunders.
Muir W, et al. 2007. Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia, 4th ed. St. Louis, Mosby-Elsevier.
Ogilvie G, Moore A. 2006. Managing the Canine Cancer Patient, A Practical Guide to Compas-
sionate Care. Yardley, PA, Veterinary Learning Systems.
Papich MG. 2008. An update on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in small animals.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 38:1243-1266.
Pascoe PJ. 2002. Alternative methods for the control of pain. JAVMA 221:222-229.
Robertson SA. 2008. Managing pain in feline patients. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
38:1267-1290.
ment of pain—clinical pharmacology J Feline Med Surg 6:321-333.
Walsh D. 2000. Pharmacological management of cancer pain. Sem Oncol 27:45-63.
Webliography
wwu.smartpak.com (Source for some physiotherapy aids)
www.cleanrun.com (Source for adaptive home care products)
wwtw.tripawds.com (Source for some adaptive home care products especially targeted for amputees)
Gastrointestinal and
Nutritional Support
Patricia Suomala
Note: For the gastrointestinal supportive medications discussed in this chapter, doses can
be found in Appendix 3.
Many patients with cancer are feeling fairly well when they initiate treatment for their
disease; however, a subset may be unwell due to their cancer when they are diagnosed.
 For these animals, starting therapy is the most direct way to address the cancer and to
reverse the cause of their illness. However, they may still require specific supportive care
for their gastrointestinal symptoms, and since some of the treatments have the capacity to
 make such signs worse, intervention and supportive strategies are required. The oncology
nurse can make an immense contribution to patient well-being, client peace of mind, and
long-term outcomes by his or her contributions in this area.
Nutritional Guidelines
The primary indication for nutritional support in cancer patients is cancer cachexia.
 However, short-term nutritional support can also help patients with cancers involving the
gastrointestinal tract, or with treatment side effects.
 In humans with cancer, malnutrition and in particular protein-calorie malnutrition,
referred to as cancer cachexia, is common. This reduces patients' ability to fight the cancer
 and resilience to treatment, as well as depleting immune system function and reducing
quality of life. Even with aggressive nutritional interventions, it can be difficult to help
cancer patients gain muscle mass; it is well documented in humans, and more recently has
also been documented in veterinary patients with certain diseases, that although a short-
term limited weight loss may be harmless, severe malnutrition is a predictor of poor
outcome. Cancer cachexia is a complex syndrome that has not yet been fully understood.
Known factors include loss of appetite caused by the cancer, sometimes compounded by
loss of appetite caused by the treatment; direct effects of tumors that involve any portion
113
114Supportive Care of Patients
of the gastrointestinal tract; pain in some cases; aggressive glutamine uptake by tumor
cells resulting in whole-body depletion of glutamine, which requires more muscle protein
breakdown; obligate but inefficient glucose utilization by tumor cells; and other metabolic
changes that alter nutrient processing. These are believed to be primarily mediated by
cytokines, which reduce appetite, increase the metabolic rate, increase amino acid release
from muscles, and mobilize fat and protein stores. Cancer cachexia results in obvious
 s r e r do p e pe sse on s a ss 
obvious impact on quality of life, as well as shortened survival time (Figure 12.1). In one
study, cats with cancer that were below the median for body condition scoring had a
median survival time of 3.3 months compared to 16.7 months for cats above the median.
Less obvious manifestations include anemia, delayed wound healing, and reduced immune
au le pe  e am  ar sd  s rann ua s
consequences resolve.
In pets, metabolic alterations associated with cancer cachexia have been very well
clinically significant cancer cachexia in pets is relatively uncommon. In fact, more veteri-
of dogs with cancer, only 4% were felt to have cachexia (as defined by a subjective scoring
system); while nearly 30% were classified as overweight or obese.
Figure 12.1. Severe pain from an untreated osteo-
sarcoma of the right hindleg has led to severe
cancer cachexia in this Great Dane. Pain relief (see
Chapter 11) and nutritional support are vital to
improve this patient's quality of life. (Courtesy of
Dr. Gregory K. Ogilvie)
Figure 12.2. Obesity is more common than
cachexia, particularly in canine cancer patients,
and this should be taken into account when formu-
lating a nursing plan. A few extra treats contribute
to quality of life and the strength of the human-
animal bond, and a little extra weight "in case the)
get sick" is not to be discouraged. However severe
weight gain can affect the pet's quality of life.
GastrointestinalandNutritionalSupport
115
However, when cancer cachexia does occur it undoubtedly has a substantial impact on
the physical well-being and quality of life of the patient, as well as being of great concern
to pet owners. This is particularly true of cats where even a small weight loss can translate
into a large percentage of their body weight and be debilitating.
Nutritional support for cancer patients begins with assessment, and the nurse plays an
important role in history-taking and evaluation of body condition. It is important to ask
the client about the pet's appetite, regular diet, preferred foods, recent changes, any
medications and supplements, and whether he or she has lost weight; it should not be
assumed that an animal has not lost weight without knowing their starting point. Body
weight should be recorded at every visit. Remember that changes in muscle mass are not
always reflected in the body weight, especially if there is a heavy tumor burden, ascites,
or edema. Therefore, physical examination for body fat stores and evidence of muscle
wasting, as well as visual evaluation of body condition, are also important, although these
are somewhat subjective. Use of a consistent body condition scoring system is helpful. The
client's impression of the patient's body condition is also very helpful, and many clients,
although not formally trained, are keen observers and can be a very reliable source of
information about their pet's condition.
When nutritional support is needed, the first question is whether dietary intervention is
sufficient or whether a feeding tube, or even parenteral nutrition, is needed.
 Optimal dietary guidelines for patients with cancer who have a functioning gastrointes-
tinal tract have been investigated in both humans and pets with cancer. Most importantly,
the diet for all cancer patients should be highly palatable—this is critically important for
quality of life as well as for nutritional support. In general, the carbohydrate content
should be kept low, and in particular simple sugars should be avoided as these are not
well metabolized by the host, and preferentially metabolized by tumor cells. The protein/
fat balance is somewhat controversial and depends on individual factors. For most cancers
that have been studied, a diet that emphasizes fat as well as protein has been found to
be preferable. However, dogs with mammary cancer have been shown to have better
 outcomes when fed a low-fat, high-protein ration. The diet should also be complete and
balanced in micronutrients (vitamins and minerals), easily digestible, and energy dense.
The use of a commercially prepared food from a responsible company avoids major nutri-
ent imbalances. The role of glutamine supplementation is well established in dogs as well
     o        
been studied as thoroughly. Omega-3 fatty acids have also been found to be beneficial in
general for cancer patients, and supplementation (such as with fish oil capsules) is recom-
mended for dogs not receiving a food that is already rich in these. Many committed pet
owners enjoy preparing food for their pets, and this can be done safely and appropriately
by following specific recipes that are available (see Figure 12.3). In addition, for pets
undergoing chemotherapy, the diet should be reasonably consistent and stable, and any
meat and eggs should be cooked to reduce the risk of bacterial infection.
Gastrointestinal Supportive Medications
The first step in encouraging patients to eat as well as possible is to ensure that the gas-
trointestinal tract is in the best possible condition and that nausea and hyperacidity are
116Supportive Care of Patients
Ogilvie's Homemade Canine Cancer Food: A balanced homemade
formula for dogs with cancer
The following recipe will make three days worth of fod for a 12-15 kilogram dog.
Ingredients
Amount
Lean ground beef, fat drained 
454 grams (1 pound)
Rice,cooked
227 gams (1 1/3 cups)
Liver, beef 
138 gams (1/3 pound)
Vegetable oil
9
grams (4 1/2 Tbs)
Fish oil
6
grams (9x1 000-mg fish oil capsules)*
Calcium carbonate
Dicalcium phosphate***
2.9 gams (3/4 tsp)
Salt substitute (potassium chloride)
1.9 gams (1/3 tsp)
Commercial Vitamin/Mineral Tabletsfor Dogs
* Note: Owners are encouraged to feed the highest fish (or preferably docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)) oil dose 
tolerated by the dog.
Calcium carbonate is available as oyster shell calcium tablets or Tums@ tablets (0.5 g in regular Tums,
0.75 g in Tums Extra and 1.0 g in Tums Ultra).
*** Bone meal can be used in place of dicalcium phosphate.
Directions:
Cook the rice with salt substitute added to the water. Cook the ground beef and drain the fat. Cook the liver
and dice or finely chop into small pieces. Pulverize the calcium carbonate and vitamin/mineral tablets. Mix the
vegetable oil, fish oil (break open capsules) and supplements with the rice and then add the cooked ground beef
and liver. Mix well, cover and refrigerate. Feed approximately one-third of this mixture each day to a 25-30
aneiadeai Apog Alaeixodde oi paeay s! uood Aep aui j! paseaui ag ll Ageeed op punod
Caution: when using microwave, avoid "hot spots," which can burn the mouth.
Nutrient Profile (% dry matter basis):
Protein
E'5E
Fat
41.6
Carbohydrate
17.8
Calcium
0.65
Phosphorus
0.54
 Sodium
0.36
 Potassium
0.68
 Magnesium
0.05
Energy
1,989 kcal/kg as fed
Figure 12.3. This diet has been developed for canine cancer patients by Dr. Gregory Ogilvie, and is a good
diet for owners and their pets that enjoy home cooking. (Courtesy of Dr. Gregory Ogilvie)
Antiemetics
For pets undergoing chemotherapy, loss of appetite may be the first sign of nausea and
this should be considered before prescribing appetite stimulants. Proactive antiemetic use
may solve the problem of inappetence and contribute to improved quality of life. Meto-
clopramide is an inexpensive, basic prophylactic antiemetic that owners can use at home
from the start of chemotherapy or have on hand in case symptoms arise; it is effective for
most patients. For patients who still experience nausea and vomiting, more effective anti-
 emetics now available include maropitant, ondansetron, and dolasetron; butorphanol also
has antiemetic properties and is useful in certain settings. In addition to the obvious
quality-of-life benefit, effective antiemetic use also benefits the patient from a cancer man-
agement standpoint, by allowing chemotherapy to be maintained at the highest possible
dose intensity.
GastrointestinalandNutritionalSupport
117
Gastroprofectants
Some patients are at risk for gastric ulceration either from their cancer (dogs and cats with
advanced mast cell tumors may have increased levels of histamine causing gastric acid
production and ulceration) or as a side effect of treatment (NSAIDs), or even from another
-  e sr sid s  q a sd  sd as
tamine (H) receptors act to decrease gastric acid production, and hence reduce the risk
of gastric ulceration. The most commonly used are ranitidine and famotidine. Another
option to reduce gastric acid production is omeprazole; a proton pump inhibitor, which
"shuts down" parietal cell production of acid very effectively. For animals that already
have gastric ulceration, sucralfate can be used to bind with the ulcerated tissue and protect
it from further damage while healing occurs. Sucralfate may be more effective when deliv-
ered as a slurry (rather than the tablets, which are quite large for smaller patients).
Appetite Stimufants
 The use of appetite stimulants may be appropriate for short-term support of pets experi-
encing a loss of appetite caused by the disease or treatment and that is expected to be
self-limiting. However, their use should be carefully considered for the individual patient;
often a feeding tube (below) would be a more appropriate choice. Appetite stimulants that
 are useful in veterinary oncology include megestrol acetate, cyproheptadine, diazepam, and
mirtazapine. Cyproheptadine may be dosed every 12 hours or less frequently if inappetence
is mild; if given at night it may cause erratic behavior in some patients, including vocaliza-
tion and restlessness, so we suggest giving it once daily in the morning. Megestrol acetate
is an effective appetite stimulant in cats, and long-term side effects are not usually a serious
 s 's  odns -ious r 1  sed n n 
not only improves appetite but also enhances enjoyment of food. The use of anabolic
hormones is not usually rewarding, but it may be helpful in selected individual patients.
Additional Nutritional Support
Assisted Feeding
Hand-feeding or spoon-feeding a highly palatable, aromatic, and warmed diet may be
appealing to some pets and overcome mild inappetence. (Figures 12.4-12.6) Force-feeding.
on the other hand, rapidly becomes extremely stressful for both pet and owner and should
be discouraged because it reduces quality of life and risks damaging the human-animal
bond. For pets that are protein-calorie malnourished, increasing the frequency of feeding
can help increase the overall daily intake. Finally, although reduced exercise tolerance is
common in patients with cancer cachexia and these patients should not be overtaxed, some
exercise is encouraged when possible to help maintain muscle mass and stimulate appetite.
Feeding Tubes
For patients that have a functioning gut but cannot or will not maintain adequate voluntary
intake, a feeding tube must be considered. Examples are pets with oral tumors or those
118
Supportive Care of Patients
Figure 12.4. This dog lost considerable weight
due to pain from an osteosarcoma and was inap.
petent on chemotherapy after amputation. Encour-
and assisted feeding can overcome this kind of mild
 inappetance without the need for drugs.
Figure 12.5. A febrile and inappetent cat.
Figure 12.6. Hand-feeding with a highly palat-
able diet (smoked salmon in this instance) can
 overcome the mild inappetence seen in Figure
12.5.
undergoing surgery or radiotherapy of the face, or pets that have anorexia that does not
respond to appetite stimulation, but no nausea or vomiting. Although the decision to place
a feeding tube is quite daunting for many pet owners, once it is done many pet owners are
 greatly relieved to know that their pet is assured of receiving adequate nutrition without
 a struggle and find that their pets are feeling better. An added advantage of a feeding tube
 is that it eases administration of oral medications. Several different types of feeding tubes
 are used, and the relative advantages and disadvantages are summarized below.
Gastrointestinal and Nutritional Support
119
Nasoesophageal tubes are placed through the nares and into the distal esophagus (rather
than into the stomach, to avoid gastric reflux). This is the only type of feeding tube that
can be placed without anesthesia and without creating a stoma, so it a good choice in
critically ill patients that would present a high anesthetic risk or who are expected to
require nutritional support for a relatively short time. This is also the least expensive
feeding tube. The major disadvantage is that because of the small size of the tube, only a
liquid diet can be used. Risks include vomiting, esophagitis, and aspiration pneumonia.
Also, some patients are annoyed by the tube in their nose and around their eyes, and these
tubes are not a good choice for patients with severe facial or head sensitivity, such as after
extensive surgery.
Esophagostomy tubes are placed under anesthesia through a stoma created into the
esophagus in the neck. This is a relatively inexpensive type of feeding tube. It has the
advantage of being less annoying, particularly to cats, and the slightly larger tube can
accommodate feeding gruel as well as liquid. It is a less complex placement procedure and
less costly to place than a gastrostomy tube. Again, vomiting, esophagitis, and aspiration
pneumonia are risks with these tubes.
 Gastrostomy tubes are placed under anesthesia with or without endoscopy depending
on the tube, creating a stoma through the abdominal wall. This larger tube can accom-
 modate gruel as well as liquid, and can remain in place and functional for very long periods
of time. Feeding needs to be carefully managed in some patients to avoid triggering
vomiting.
 Jejunostomy tubes are the only choice for enteral nutrition in patients who have small
intestinal function, but also have frequent vomiting, no gag reflex, or no gastric function;
these tubes can even be used in some comatose patients. However, they are considerably
more complex to place and use than the other types of tubes, and they require small fre-
quent feedings or continuous slow feeding of liquid food only. The tubes can clog, and
diets need to be very carefully managed to avoid causing vomiting or diarrhea, hypergly-
cemia or hypoglycemia, or electrolyte imbalances.
Parenteral Feeding
 Enteral feeding is chosen over parenteral feeding whenever possible. Parenteral nutrition
      s     x   
Further, the cells lining the gastrointestinal tract are starved by long-term lack of direct
food intake, resulting in atrophy, loss of enzyme activity, loss of local immune function,
and loss of normal microflora, all of which further debilitate the gastrointestinal tract and
complicate the return to normal feeding. Nonetheless, there are situations where the gas
trointestinal tract is totally nonfunctional for a period of time or must be totally rested
(e.g., pancreatitis, ileus, ongoing vomiting/diarrhea). Luckily, such cases are rare, but when
they are identified, parenteral nutrition is required.
Total parental nutrition (TPN) is used to meet all of a patient's nutritional needs. TPN
is a highly specialized process and should be used only where 24-hour nursing care is
available. TPN must be given through a dedicated central venous catheter, and aseptic
procedure must be extremely strict, in both preparation of solutions and administration,
to minimize the infection risk. TPN feeding solutions include dextrose, amino acids, lipids,
vitamins and minerals, and electrolytes; the precise formulation is individualized according
to the patient's specific requirements. Fluid therapy may be needed in addition. Feeding
120Supportive Care of Patients
must be initiated and concluded gradually and done with close monitoring for hyperlip-
idemia, hyperglycemia, azotemia, and electrolyte imbalances.
A slightly less aggressive option that can be used for shorter time periods is partial
 parenteral nutrition (PPN). PPN uses amino acid solutions with electrolytes to minimize
    d        
ing is still required, and the infection risk is still higher than with intravenous fluids, so
asepsis must be strict.
Strategies for Gastrointestinal Supportive Care in Critically Ill
Cancer Patients
The principles of supportive care for unwell patients starting chemotherapy are illustrated
well by the strategies used for dogs with substage b (unwell) lymphoma (Figure 12.7). In
one study, of 40 dogs with lymphoma eating normally before diagnosis, nearly 90%
achieved complete remission; of 52 inappetent dogs, fewer than 60% achieved complete
remission. Of dogs that can achieve a complete remission, those that are inappetent at
entry have shorter overall disease control; inappetent dogs had median remission times of
 5 months compared with 12 months for dogs that were eating well. Supportive care can
improve both the remission rate and survival as well as quality of life for the patient.
Dogs with lymphoma in substage b (particularly anorexia and other gastrointestinal
signs) should be given intravenous fluid therapy (maintenance × 1.5), broad-spectrum
antibiotics (cefazolin or enrofloxacin (see Appendix 4), and gastrointestinal prophylaxis
(metoclopramide, omeprazole, and bland food diet). This supportive care should be con-
tinued for at least 4 days after chemotherapy is started and preferably for a week. Dogs
can be treated at home with oral medication as soon as they are self-supporting, and
antibiotics and prophylactic metoclopramide are continued for the first 3 weeks of the
Figure 12.7.  This very ill dog with lymphoma will benefit from fluid
therapy support and antinausea medications. Although chemotherapy
remains the treatment most likely to extend her survival, supportive
care means she is more likely to respond.
Gastrointestinal andNutritionalSupport
121
  o si a i s n   q oe  s  os
 patients appear to recover well in the first week and then deteriorate again in the second
 or third week after starting chemotherapy for lymphoma. Continuing supportive care with
antibiotics and metoclopramide during this time helps ensure that the patient does as well
as possible and that its owners don't become discouraged. It is also important to keep the
chemotherapy at the highest intensity possible while supporting the patient; however,
judicious use of chemotherapy breaks to allow recovery is also important.
Similar to dogs, cats in substage b have a worse prognosis than those that are well before
starting chemotherapy for lymphoma. Due to their small size, supportive care is even more
important in cats than in dogs. Cats may lose a large percentage of their body weight
in even as short a period as a week, and loss of more than 5% of their weight should
be considered unacceptable. Antiemetics and appetite stimulants may be appropriate
in addition to good general nursing care in order to improve nutritional status if chemo-
therapy is used; a feeding tube should be considered for patients refractory to these
interventions.
Supportive Care for Gastrointestinal Side Effects of Chemotherapy
 For animals that are not sick when beginning treatment, gastrointestinal side effects of
chemotherapy are less likely but still a possibility. Vomiting is not usually a significant
problem for most dogs and cats receiving chemotherapy; however, antiemetics given pro-
phylactically for 4 to 5 days each time doxorubicin (and for some animals, vincristine) is
given will reduce the risk of nausea. As with pain, it is easier to prevent nausea than to
ileus in cats and less commonly in dogs. Prokinetic drugs such as metoclopramide may act
to prevent or reverse this toxicity. The use of prophylactic metoclopramide is recom-
mended by some practitioners to reduce the risk of inappetence due to vincristine and also
doxorubicin (perhaps by central action to reduce nausea). In the prophylactic setting.
treatment is started at the time of chemotherapy and continued for 4 to 5 days. In addi-
tion, from the day of treatment with doxorubicin {if that drug is used), administration of
Tribrissen (trimethoprim-sulphadiazine) for 14 days markedly reduces the likelihood of
gastrointestinal toxicity (vomiting or diarrhea), hospitalization, and reduced quality of life.
The effect may be due to reduced bacterial translocation in damaged intestinal epithelial
layers.
 For any pet receiving chemotherapy, the diet should be stable, but this is especially
d e u a is e e e dxa r e i ard siad r 
  du  sd s s    a  s  s
quality of life. Although such an approach should not be discouraged in principle, con-
sideration should be given to the possibility for the patient to develop other problems such
as diarrhea, pancreatitis, or significant obesity. Prophylactic absorbents such as kaolin and
pectin are often helpful for dogs experiencing diarrhea on chemotherapy. In addition, a
bland diet should be offered, and if diarrhea persists, and causes such as parasitism in
 these often immunosuppressed patients have been eliminated, sulfasalazine or metronida-
 zole may reduce the severity. Patients experiencing severe diarrhea can become dehydrated
and may require fluid support. If diarrhea is hemorrhagic broad-spectrum antibiotics
should be given because of the risk of bacterial translocation in potentially immunosup-
pressed patients.
122 Supportive Care of Patients
Further Reading
Baez JL, et al. 2007. A prospective investigation of the prevalence and prognostic significance of
weight loss and changes in body condition in feline cancer patients. J Feline Med Surg 9:411-417.
Benchaoui HA, et al. 2007. Eficacy of maropitant for preventing vomiting associated with motion
sickness in dogs. Vet Rec 161:444-447.
Chretin JD, et al. 2007. Prophylactic trimethoprim-sulfadiazine during chemotherapy in dogs with
lymphoma and osteosarcoma: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Vet Intern Med
21{1):141-148,
Hickman MA, et al. 2008. Safety, pharmacokinetics and use of the novel NK-1 receptor antagonist
maropitant (CereniaTM) for the prevention of emesis and motion sickness in cats. J Vet Pharma-
col Therap 31{3):220-229.
Michel KE, et al. 2004. Evaluation of body condition and weight loss in dogs presented to a vet-
erinary oncology service. J Vet Intern Med 18:692-695.
Morrison-Collster KE, et al. 2004. A combination chemotherapy protocol with MOPP and CCNU
consolidation (Tufts VELCAP-SC) for the treatment of canine lymphoma. Vet Compar Oncol
1:180-190.
Ogilvie GK. 2000. Dolasetron: a new option for nausea and vomiting. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
36:481-483.
Sedlacek HS, et al. 2008. Comparative efficacy of maropitant and selected drugs in preventing emesis
 induced by centrally or peripherally acting emetogens in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 31:533-537.
Hematologic Support
Note: For the antibiotics discussed in this chapter, doses can be found in Appendix 4.
As discussed previously, the bone marrow is one of the most sensitive organs to chemo-
therapy, so hematologic side effects are common. In addition, many cancers have a direct
or indirect (paraneoplastic) effect on bone marrow function. Thus, hematologic supportive
care is often needed for our patients.
CBC Changes Associated with Cancer Treatment
 i sad   o ao      
All anticancer chemotherapy drugs have the potential to produce adverse side effects.
However, the side effects that can occur in pets are usually not as severe or as long lasting
as those that occur in humans due to the lower doses used. Most clients are pleasantly
surprised at how well their pets feel during chemotherapy. Despite the lower doses and
lower risks of toxicity, some toxicity may occur, primarily following the first time a patient
receives a chemotherapy drug and before the dose has been "individualized" for that
due to the increased risk of sepsis.
Myelosuppression is a general term applied to the toxic effects of chemotherapy on the
bone marrow. The most chemosensitive cells in the bone marrow are the proliferating
progenitors and precursors, which are starting to commit to a particular lineage but are
still immature. The more differentiated cells form a nonproliferating pool of maturing cells
 that will be unaffected by chemotherapy and will provide mature cells for a period of days.
Like the maturing cells, hematopoietic stem cells are largely nonproliferating and so
are relatively resistant to chemotherapy toxicity. However, they are stimulated to divide
by the loss of proliferating precursor cells, and they rapidly replace the lost cells so
that cytopenias following chemotherapy rarely last more than several days. This also has
implications for the interval between administrations of myelosuppressive drugs. If these
123
124Supportive Care of Patients
Table 13.1. Myelosuppressive effects of chemotherapeutic agents used in veterinary medicine
Highly Myelosuppressive
Moderately Myelosuppressive
Mi ldly Myelosuppressive
Doxorubicin
Melphalan
L-a sparaginase?
Vinblastine
Chlorambucil
Vincristinea
Cyclophosphamide
5-Fluorouracil
 Bleomycin 
Lomustine (CCNU)
Methotrexate
Corticosteroids
Actinomycin-D
 Procarbazine
Mitoxantrone
Cisplatin
 Carboplatin
More pronounced myelosuppression can occur if these two drugs are administered concurrently.
drugs are given when the stem cell pool is dividing (i.e., soon after the previous adminis-
tration), severe prolonged myelosuppression due to stem cell destruction may occur. For
this reason, the usual interval between myelosuppressive drug administrations is 2 to 3
weeks. Some drugs (such as lomustine and carboplatin) may have delayed or prolonged
 nadirs, and dosing intervals are longer for these drugs. The relative likelihood of causing
myelosuppression varies between drugs (Table 13.1) and between species.
Although myelosuppression does disrupt erythropoiesis, anemia as a direct chemo-
therapy side effect is rarely of clinical significance in veterinary oncology, because of the
relatively long lifespan of red blood cells (120 days in dogs, 70 days in cats). When it does
Occur it is usually only in long-term chemotherapy patients, and it tends to be a low-grade
anemia with a gradual onset. Acute anemia in a chemotherapy patient should prompt
consideration of blood loss or hemolysis.
Thrombocytopenia occasionally may occur as a direct chemotherapy side effect, although
usually it is not dose-limiting. Although it can follow treatment with any myelosuppressive
drug, it is most likely to be significant after treatment with carboplatin or lomustine.
Chemotherapy-related thrombocytopenia rarely causes clinical signs; however, at counts
of less than 50,0o0/μl the risk of bleeding increases and the technician/nurse should be
alert to petechiation, ecchymoses, or mucosal bleeding. Myelosuppressive chemotherapy
should generally not be administered if the platelet count is less than 100,000/μl.
Sepsis due to chemotherapy or cancer-related neutropenia is one of the more common
emergencies in veterinary cancer medicine, but it is usually preventable through judicious
monitoring and appropriate supportive care. In addition, caregivers should be educated
about the early clinical signs of neutropenia and thrombocytopenia induced by cancer
treatment so that they can assist in early detection and seek immediate treatment. The risk
of developing neutropenic sepsis is probably less than 5% in veterinary patients, but
because dogs may hide their symptoms until late in the disease, the condition of sepsis
 may be quite advanced when first recognized and requires prompt, emergency intervention.
Timely treatment can make the difference between life and death for these patients.
The most important risk factor for sepsis is the absolute neutrophil count and it is
important to attend to this rather than the total white cell count or the relative (%) neu-
 trophil count, both of which can be highly misleading.
Hematologic Support125
Knowing the myelosuppressive potential for chemotherapy drugs being administered,
and having an estimate of the time that the neutrophil (not just total white cell count)
nadir (lowest count) will occur, allows the cancer treatment team to plan monitoring blood
counts and to administer prophylactic antibiotics, if that approach is chosen. Chemo-
therapy agents vary as to how myelosuppressive they are and therefore how likely they
are to cause neutropenia and hence increase the risk of sepsis (Table 13.1).
The timing of the neutrophil nadir also varies from drug to drug. The neutrophil nadir
occurs 7 to 10 days after administration for most chemotherapeutics, and for consistency
a CBC is collected 7 days after administration. This is done to assess both the immediate
risk of sepsis, and whether the future dosage of that drug needs to be changed. The aim
is to have a segmented neutrophil count at the nadir of between 1000/μl and 3000/μl. The
nadir is usually of short duration at the doses used in veterinary medicine, recovering to
normal within 48-72 hours. Some drugs may cause a "delayed" neutrophil nadir; for
example, carboplatin may cause a nadir 2 or even 3 weeks after administration in cats
and in some dogs, and recovery to normal may be further delayed, particularly in cats. It
is important to know the expected nadir time and severity for each drug administered, in
each species, and to be familiar with factors that could cause alterations in chemotherapy
drug metabolism that could increase the risk of myelosuppression (e.g., reduced renal
clearance may exacerbate the myelosuppressive effects of carboplatin).
Prophylactic antibiotic therapy is often recommended for patients receiving myelosup
 pressive chemotherapy as a method of reducing the risk of sepsis. The costs of prophylac-
tic treatment may be weighed against the decreased risk of morbidity due to sepsis, as well
as decreased risk of hospitalization and costs associated with it. Some oncologists recom-
mend use of trimethoprim sulfa (unless contraindicated) as a prophylactic measure in any
dog receiving a myelosuppressive chemotherapy agent for the first time (until the nadir
neutrophil count is known) because this drug is relatively inexpensive, orally administered,
 and has little negative effect on gastrointestinal flora. This approach has been shown to
reduce morbidity and hospitalization in dogs treated with doxorubicin chemotherapy for
osteosarcoma or lymphoma.
 Careful reading of the hematology report, both at baseline pretreatment evaluation and
during treatment, can provide key information that will allow the cancer treatment team
to modify treatment for optimal management of each patient and direct further diagnostics
when needed. Although many anticancer chemotherapeutics have myelosuppressive poten-
tial, at the doses used in veterinary medicine most neutropenia caused by cancer treatment
can be managed, resulting in minimal impact on the patient's quality of life. It is important
to be aware of the variation in myelosuppressive potential and timing of the individual
drugs being used. Detailed education of caregivers in combination with careful monitoring
and prompt appropriate therapy when indicated will result in good outcomes for the great
majority of neutropenic chemotherapy patients.
Practical Tip
If you need a complete blood count before giving a myelosuppressive agent (to make sure
the neutrophil count is above 3000/ul) and it needs to be sent to an outside laboratory,
consider collecting it the day before and then arranging the chemotherapy appointment
for a time when you know that the results will be back.
126Supportive Care of Patients
Managing Neutropenic Patients
How to Manage Mild (Grade 1) or Moderate (Grade 2) Neutropenia
For most chemotherapy patients the neutrophil count at the expected nadir is between
normal and 1.500/μl (grade 1) or between 1500/μl and 1000/μl (grade 2). At this level the
risk of complicating illness is low, but because the time of the true nadir is not known for
an individual patient, prophylactic antibiotics should be considered. Good choices of
broad-spectrum orally administered antibiotics include trimethoprim-sulpha combinations
for most dogs, or enrofloxacin. Enrofloxacin is also a good choice in cats but orbifloxacin
appears to cause less nausea. Prior to the next dose of myelosuppressive chemotherapy,
rechecking the CBC should be considered and the next drug should not be administered
unless the neutrophil count is above 3000/pl.
 For animals experiencing mild or moderate neutropenia, the dosage of the chemotherapy
drug causing that effect does not need to be changed the next time the drug is administered
unless recovery is delayed requiring the next treatment to be postponed.
How to Manage Marked (Grade 3) Neutropenia
For some animals the myelosuppressive effects of chemotherapy may be more pronounced;
in these pets the neutrophil count may be between 1000/μl and 500/μl (grade 3) following
chemotherapy. At this level the risk of complicating illness is much higher, although most
animals still will not experience sepsis as long as they are receiving prophylactic antibiot-
ics. Antibiotics should be continued, or started in pets that are not receiving them. A full
examination of the patient should be performed, but the pet should not be hospitalized
unless parenteral care is needed because this may increase the risk for sepsis. Owners
should be instructed to check the temperature (preferably rectal) at least twice a day and
contact the veterinary clinic if it is above normal on two occasions 30 minutes apart.
Additionally, any signs of illness (lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea) should be reported
promptly, and the patient treated as an emergency. Prior to the next dose of myelosup-
pressive chemotherapy, another CBC should be collected and the next drug should not be
administered unless the neutrophil count is above 3000/μl.
 For animals experiencing moderate neutropenia, the dosage of the chemotherapy drug
causing that effect should be reduced by 25% for all subsequent doses of that drug, and
a CBC should be collected at the expected nadir after administering the reduced dose of
thatdrug.
How to Manage Severe (Grade 4) Neutropenia
 Rarely the myelosuppressive effects of chemotherapy may be marked; in these pets the
neutrophil count is below 500/μl following chemotherapy. At this level the risk of com-
plicating illness is very high, and some animals will become septic even if they are receiv-
ing prophylactic antibiotics; these are very delicate patients. A full examination of the
 patient should be performed, but, again, the pet should not be hospitalized unless there is
a fever or other signs of illness, and parenteral supportive care is needed. Owners should
Hematologic Support127
be instructed to check the temperature (preferably rectal) at least twice a day, and contact
the veterinary clinic if it is above normal on 2 occasions 30 minutes apart. Additionally,
any signs of illness (lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea) should be reported promptly
and the patient treated as an emergency. Prior to the next dose of any myelosuppressive
chemotherapy another CBC should be collected and the next drug should not be admin-
istered unless the neutrophil count is above 3000/μl.
 For animals experiencing severe (grade 4) neutropenia, the dosage of the chemotherapy
drug causing that effect should be reduced by 25 % for all subsequent doses of that drug;
a CBC should be collected at the expected nadir after administering the drug at a dose
reduction.
Triage for Potentially Septic Patients
Knowing that a patient has received a myelosuppressive chemotherapy drug, and when
the expected nadir of that drug will be, will help the oncology nurse in triaging the patient
for further intervention. If, for example, a dog that has received doxorubicin the previous
day has bloody stools, this is unlikely to be due to sepsis (too early for myelosuppression
to be seen), and more likely to be due to gastrointestinal damage from the doxorubicin
(most common 2 to 4 days after treatment). If the same signs were present in a dog that
had received doxorubicin 7 days previously, that patient is expected to be neutropenic,
and is at great risk of sepsis. However no patient can be diagnosed remotely, and the
triage procedure should be the same in both scenarios.
Assessment of the patient's hemodynamic status is mandatory; the hemodynamic
derangements of septic shock are characterized by arterial hypotension, peripheral vaso-
dilatation, hypovolemia from capillary leakage, and the development of myocardial depres-
  o   a no a sn  os 
delivery of oxygen and other nutrients to tissues, causing cellular and then organ dysfunc-
tion. Prompt intervention to restore circulation will be life saving in these patients. You
should ensure adequate hemodynamic and respiratory support; identify and ascertain the
extent of any organ dysfunction (blood work and urinalysis); and, based on that, develop
an overall treatment plan (see more in Chapters 17 and 18).
One logical step to minimize the risk for sepsis for pets with severe neutropenia is to
minimize the administration of immunosuppressive drugs, especially corticosteroids, except
when needed for treatment of the cancer. Risk for catheter-induced sepsis in hospitalized
patients can be minimized by placing a new catheter in a new site every 2 to 3 days. Strict
aseptic procedures should be used, especially with animals that are myelosuppressed. The
duration of hospitalization should be limited whenever possible to limit exposure to
antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
If sepsis is suspected, prompt antibiotic therapy (within 8 hours of presentation) is war-
ranted based on the most likely type(s) of infection (most sepsis in chemotherapy patients
is gram-negative enterobacteria); studies in animals with septic shock indicate that mortal-
ity can directly relate to time delay in antibiotics.
   (  s    
numbers and enhance neutrophil function. Human recombinant G-CSF is commercially
available; however, long-term use may induce antibody formation to the protein, which
can cause a paradoxical neutropenia. Whether these drugs improve outcome in patients
128Supportive Care of Patients
that already have neutropenia and therefore already have maximal stimulation of their
endogenous G-CSF is controversial. Most neutropenic patients recover rapidly without
G-CSF administration, and the rapid recovery observed after exogenous administration
may be due to endogenous CSFs rather than the treatment. In human patients, trials in
febrile neutropenic patients have provided conflicting results. Although neutrophil recov-
ery times are faster with CSF and antibiotic therapy, duration of hospitalization may not
be reduced except in patients receiving less myelosuppressive chemotherapy treatments.
 It is our opinion that G-CSF has a role in prevention of severe myelosuppression after
an inadvertent overdose of a myelosuppressive chemotherapy agent. In that situation,
treatment should be started within 48 hours (but not before 24 hours) of the overdose.
The use of human recombinant CSFs in febrile neutropenic patients following standard-
dose chemotherapy may benefit some animals considered to be at high risk, but routine
use adds unnecessary expense and prolonged administration should be avoided.
Further Reading
Chretin JD, et al. 2007. Prophylactic trimethoprim-sulfadiazine during chemotherapy in dogs with
lymphoma and osteosarcoma: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Vet Intern Med
21(1):141-148.
 Ravaud A, et al. 1998. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in patients with neutro-
penic fever is potent after low-risk but not after high-risk neutropenic chemotherapy regimens:
results of a randomized phase Ill trial. J Clin Oncol 16:2930-2936.
Veterinary Co-operative Oncology Group. 2004. Common terminology criteria for adverse events
(VCOG-CTCAE) following chemotherapy or biological antineoplastic therapy in dogs and cats
v1.0. Vet Comp Oncol 2:195-213.
Euthanasia and End-of-Life
Patient Care
Although being a veterinary technician/nurse can often be an uplifting experience, one of
the most challenging aspects is that many of your patients will not be cured of their cancer,
and for many of these patients euthanasia will eventually be performed. Often this will
occur after you have been working with the patient and client for a long time. Some owners
will not accept euthanasia under any circumstances, and for these pets, discussions about
hospice home care is very important to ensure that the pet is as comfortable as possible.
The best time to discuss euthanasia will vary from patient to patient and client to client,
but certainly if the caregiver brings up the subject, it should be discussed to whatever level
seems comfortable. For some clients, such a discussion can take place at the frst visit,
when treatment options are discussed.
Many owners ask how they will know "when is the right time" to euthanize their pet.
 For such owners, it is a good idea for them to make a list of the positive aspects of their
pet's life at a time before treatment has started, and before the cancer is advanced. This
 can be life-affirming and may also act as a baseline for future assessments of the impact
of the cancer and treatment on quality of life, as well as a signal that the time for eutha-
nasia is approaching.
Most clients want to be present during the euthanasia process. The ideal place for
euthanasia may be dictated by the pet's medical condition. Ideally, euthanasia may be
performed at home. This poses logistic problems and may be possible only if the pet visits
the veterinary clinic for an intravenous catheter to be placed, and a later visit to the home
scheduled by the veterinarian and nurse. A compassionate veterinary technician/nurse can
make the difference between a home euthanasia going very well and it being an unsettling
experience for the owner. Gentle but firm patient restraint when needed can help the
veterinarian focus on the process and ensure all technical procedures go well; this also
allows the owners to focus on their pet. If home euthanasia is not an option, a secluded
comfortable location should be provided. If a garden area is available, this is a good choice
for some clients; if not, try to identify a room that will allow the tearful client to exit
privately (and not walk through a waiting room full of healthy pets and their owners).
129
130Supportive Care of Patients
The client is not the only one who will be affected by euthanasia, and it is important
to acknowledge that every member of the veterinary oncology team is likely to be impacted
by the loss of a patient. Although it is a priority for the caregiver and family to say goodbye
prior to and after euthanasia, it may be important for the veterinary team as well; take
time to do this. More discussion of the emotional aspects of euthanasia can be found in
Chapters 15 and 16.
Some owners will wonder whether children should be involved in the decision to
perform euthanasia. Excluding children or making up stories (e.g., "Fudge ran away"; or
"Chippy has gone to sleep") may only lead to confusion and misinterpretation of future
events. An open and honest discussion with children is imperative. They should also be
allowed the chance to say goodbye to their pet.
other pets being allowed to see and sniff the patient after death and having “closure." It
is important to remind owners that other pets may not respond with what they interpret
as displays of grief, and they may not appear to even notice the dead companion. In such
circumstances, one has to rely on the owner's feeling that some connection has been made
between the departed pet and the live pet. For surviving pets that appear to be having
difficulty adjusting to the death of a pet, consultation with a veterinary behaviorist may
be appropriate and helpful.
Many owners might have uncertainty about what to do with their pet's remains and
it might be confusing and frightening for them to consider. The options should be
presented prior to euthanasia, and where health codes permit, the options of burial, cre-
mation with return of ashes, or general cremation (no remains returned) should be offered.
 If burial or cremation is considered, a choice of coffins or urns may be important to some
clients. Ideally, these decisions can be made in advance of euthanasia, but for some clients,
the final choice and details may not be possible until after euthanasia. Some owners
like to collect a keepsake of their pet by clipping some hair or taking paw prints or
photographs.
The Euthanasia Procedure
The following steps outline the euthanasia procedure:
1. For many clients this is the most important moment they will ever spend with you.
It is very important to give them your full attention and never rush this very sig-
nificant event. If necessary, other staff in the practice should be discreetly made aware
what is happening so that they can help to "protect" the nurse and veterinarian
involved from interruption.
2.
 Remember to maintain professional conduct during this emotional time, but
this should not suggest that sadness or tears from the veterinary staff are ever
unprofessional.
3.
 Most veterinary clinics ask their clients to sign an informed consent for euthanasia.
This should be done before the clients say their final goodbyes.
4.
Identify the preferred location, which can include the owner as well as children,
friends, and family animals if they wish to be involved. Allow some time for the
owner to be with the pet before and after euthanasia. Make sure tissues are available.
Euthanasia and Patient Care131
5. Draw up the appropriate amount of euthanasia solution (a Luer Lock syringe is
ideal because the solution can be “sticky" causing the syringe to dislodge) as well
as two saline flushes. Place the syringes out of sight when entering the room, but
keep them in an easily accessible spot for the veterinarian to reach when the time
is right.
6.  Preplace an intravenous catheter with a rubber-tipped plug. We prefer a catheter in
the back leg (the saphenous vein is ideal in dogs) because this will allow the pet to
lie in lateral recumbency or to sit upright while the caregiver can be seated near the
patient's head without obstruction. The catheter plug should be secure but visible
and accessible without the need to remove bandages.
7. Some veterinary health care teams like to premedicate with a tranquilizer; make sure
this is discussed with the owners, because they may prefer to have their pet remain
fully interactive until the last possible minute.
8.
Even when an owner has had a pet euthanatized before, it is helpful to review some
of what will happen; remember that owners are often distraught and may need
reminding.
9.
Remind owners how fast the process of euthanasia is, once the injection starts.
Reemphasize that the euthanasia solution is an anesthetic that is in very concentrated
form. Euthanasia solution will give the pet a short period of peaceful anesthesia after
   e    s    e 
patients have an anesthetic, they often cannot count backward from 10 before they
lose consciousness; this emphasizes the speed of the process.
10.
 Remind them, that after death, the pet's eyes may not close. In addition, there may
be loss of bladder and bowel control due to muscle relaxation. A blanket placed over
the lower half of the patient will prevent the owner being distracted by such an event.
Also, some animals will twitch or even take breaths (these can be “agonal" or noisy);
advise owners that this is a normal reaction as blood flow ceases. It does not mean
the patient is conscious or in pain, or distressed in any way.
 11. Before the veterinarian starts injecting, check again with the owners to see whether
they are ready.
 12. When the owner is ready, the syringes should be retrieved, but preferably kept from
direct view (the blanket over the hind quarters is good for this too). While the cath-
eter is flushed (tell the owners this is the flush) gently restrain the leg containing the
catheter. After the euthanasia is performed, allow the owner room and solitude (if
needed) to say proper goodbyes and to start the process of grieving. More informa-
tion about this can be found in Chapters 15 and 16. Some owners may not want to
be alone, but still be near their pet, and to tell you stories; this is also fine, and time
should always be set aside by the nurse for this eventuality, particularly in a busy
practice where the veterinarian may have to attend to other patients.
13.
Many veterinary clinics do not have clients paying the bill at this time but prefer
instead to mail them the charges at a later date. This is not always feasible in some
areas of the practice such as emergency; however oncology clients are usually very
well established.
If an owner decides not to be present for euthanasia, that decision should be supported
as well. It is still appropriate to offer an explanation of the process, in case the owner
changes his or her mind, and so that there is no mystery that could later prove disquieting.
Under these circumstances (when the owner is not present), the veterinary nurse may
132Supportive Care of Patients
be the person most familiar with the patient, and the nurse's compassion is even more
important.
It is rewarding to many veterinarians and nurses to contact the client later after eutha-
nasia. Cards, letters, or flowers can be sent by everyone involved and can be important
not only for the client but for closure for the entire team as well. Adding a picture of the
-o ui a po aq ose  siad poiq yo oq uaq e ro yooqds e on 
rializing your patients. There are also several veterinary nonprofit organizations that offer
memorial donation programs in which veterinarians can make donations in memory of
 deceased patients (sometimes they can specifically be directed toward cancer research, for
example), and the clients will receive an acknowledgment letter. This is often greatly
appreciated by clients.
When Euthanasia Is Not Wanted
As mentioned above, some owners do not wish their pet to be euthanatized, and the
reasons should not be questioned by the veterinary team. In such situations, the owner
should be instructed as to how to provide the most comfortable hospice care possible. The
goal of hospice care is to help pets that are dying have peace, comfort, and dignity. The
caregivers try to control pain and other symptoms so a patient can remain as alert and
comfortable as possible while surrounded by their loved ones. During this time, nutrition
and pain control are very important (see Chapters 11 and 12). Remind owners that if the
patient's condition or the owner's decision changes, so can the care that the veterinary
oncology team provides, including euthanasia.
Section
Support for Pet Owners
and Caregivers
Supporting the Patient's
Human Famil
Nicole Edwards
A diagnosis of cancer is an emotional and difficult time for pet owners. Nurses and tech-
nicians assist the owner and extended family of the pet throughout the cancer journey.
This can be confronting, demanding, and often very sad work. There is a seeming lack of
material available to veterinary technicians on the range of reactions people may have at
this time and the best ways to assist them. In order for nurses and technicians to work
therapeutically with bereaved pet owners, an understanding of grief and loss theories is
essential. The worker should also have an understanding of the ethical and moral questions
that arise in this area of work. This chapter aims to give veterinary nurses an understanding
of the issues that will affect their work, and some skills and tools for use in everyday practice.
The Impact of a Cancer Diagnosis
Cancer is a word often associated with sadness, pain, and death. Upon being told that
their pet has cancer, a family has to face a time of making difficult decisions, providing
extra care to their pet, financial burdens, and anticipation of the potential loss. The care-
 givers address these new concerns in the context of existing roles and relationships. The
relationship between the pet and its owners is likely to change, perhaps from that of com-
panion, to one of patient. The needs of the caregiver are ongoing across the continuum
of care. The nurse is in a unique and privileged position to make a difference—not only
for animals but also for those who care for them.
The Human-Animal Bond
Recognition of the importance of the human-animal connection has had a major impact
on veterinary medicine, leading to an understanding that health professionals must not
135
136Support for Pet Owners and Caregivers
Figure 15.1. Owners with animals that have cancer may be confused and sad. Their bond should be recognized
and supported by the veterinary cancer care team.
only care for animals but also be mindful of the emotions of the owner. As pet ownership
continues to increase, many animals are considered an integral part of families. Some
studies suggest that a growing number of companion animals are considered surrogate
children, and that the loss of a pet could be equivalent to the grief experienced following
 the loss of a child. Other literature questions the tendency to relate human-animal relation-
ships to human-human relationships and warns that this can pathologize and diminish the
understanding of this relationship. Veterinary workers should be aware that the bond
between animals and humans is unique and should be understood on its own terms (Figure
15.1). As workers become more experienced in the field they will come to a better under-
standing of the different forms human-animal relationships can take.
The role of a pet in a family can vary from guard dog to mice catcher to beloved com-
panion or child. The pet begins to become a member of the family at the point of selection
or entry into the home, and its role develops with time. Pets can provide unconditional
love and a barrier against loneliness and fulfll the human need to be needed.
Assuming knowledge of a pet-owner relationship based on previous experience, or
other factors such as age or social or cultural circumstances should be avoided. Just as
the animal-human bond is unique, every pet-owner bond is different. It is important to
recognize and acknowledge the role of the animal in the home in order to form a context
for intervention and to appreciate the implications of a cancer diagnosis. A 2oo0 study of
pet owners who had recently had a pet die showed that 82% of participants believed that
the degree of attachment they had for their animal was the determining factor in the
amount of grief they were experiencing (Adams et al. 2000). Taking the time to explore
the pet-owner bond with clients will be valuable when working with them on an ongoing
basis.
Supporting the Patient's Human Family137
Grief and Loss
Grief reactions are experienced in the context of all major life changes, such as divorce,
changing locations, and the death of a loved one. No expression of grief is “right" or
"wrong." There is considerable literature available on grief and loss theories. In 1970
Kubler-Ross famously identified five stages of grief: denial, anger, bargaining, depression,
 and acceptance. More recent literature redefines this somewhat by describing a number of
different phases that people may go through, often returning to a phase many times.
Herbert (1997) describes four phases of uncomplicated grieving: numbness, yearning.
disorganization and despair, and reorganization.
Generally the grieving process starts at the point of a cancer diagnosis. Initially the grief
may be related to the loss of health, guilt over not recognizing symptoms, concern over
lifestyle changes, and disbelief that a previously healthy animal has become unwell. If the
patient becomes terminal the owner begins to grieve for the impending loss and begins to
consider difficult issues such as euthanasia and pain management, telling other family
members, and preparing for the loss. After a pet's death the owner mourns the loss of
companionship. At any time through the cancer journey the owner may be experiencing
a myriad of emotions.
Some of the reactions that may be experienced by owners are
1.
 Shock. This can mean feeling emotionally numb and a refusal to believe what is hap-
pening. This is frequently a person's first reaction to upsetting news because it can
 ass a ro sid oi side osd a se sios jo q aoid e 
 the information. It is not unusual for an owner to require information to be repeated
at some stage after their initial consultation because of inability to remember what
was said at the time.
 2. Anger. People may direct anger at themselves or others. Often caregivers and health
oe  n s   a aod se e o si aq lm sd
may show signs of irritation, agitation, or even aggression. Anger is not uncommon
at any stage of the grieving process.
 3. Sadness. Extreme and overwhelming sadness is not uncommon. People can become
listless and withdrawn, and cry easily.
4. Bargaining. Many people may try to think of how they could have handled a situation
differently—for example, asking, "What if I'd taken him to be assessed sooner?" Some
 attempt to make a deal or bargain, such as, "If I pay him more attention everything
will be okay.
5. Guilt. Guilt can be an overwhelming and often irrational feeling. Many people feel
guilty after a bereavement whether or not there was anything they could have done
differently. People will question the actions and decisions they made and wonder what
would have happened if they had done something differently.
6.
 d           
people experience physical pain such as aching arms as they long to hold their pet
again.
7.
 Physical reactions. This may include changes in appetite, sleep disturbances, fatigue,
nausea, tightness in the chest, headaches, and digestive problems. It is also possible
for a bereaved person to suffer from auditory or visual hallucinations, and believe
they have seen or heard their pet after he or she has died
138Support for Pet Owners and Caregivers
8. Anxiety and depression. It is important to be aware of the difference between "normal"
grief reactions and clinical mental health disorders. It is possible for a bereaved person
to develop a depressive disorder or anxiety that requires medical and/or psychological
intervention. An existing condition may also be exacerbated. If a person is showing
reactions, referral to an appropriate health professional is suggested.
When a Pet Is Dying
A 2007 study showed that 30% of participants experienced severe grief in the months
following the death of a pet. The risk factors identified for grief were level of attachment
of the owner to the pet, euthanasia, societal attitudes toward pet death, and professional
support from the veterinary team.
How Can theNurseHelp?
The veterinary team members “must be mindful that their approach to caring for a client
whose pet has died has the potential to alleviate or aggravate grief. " Health workers should
take the time to consider what would be most helpful to them in a crisis. Kindness, com-
  ue 'an si su g 'id Aia a ae pods e pu uissd
important that the team tailor its response to suit the individual. The following sections
discuss some basic skills that the health care team can employ.
Compassion
By showing concern and a caring manner, staff can immediately convey a sense to clients
that they are in a supportive environment. A smile, a patient manner, and a kind tone of
voice will put clients at ease and increase their sense of being understood.
Validate and Normalize
The veterinary team can show by their words and manner that a client's feelings are
legitimate and understandable. Allow owners to speak about how they are feeling and
show an acceptance and understanding of these feelings. Let people know that others have
felt the same way in the past.
Encourage the Expression of Feelings
ds oi su aun moa a sn ie Ar on aidaooe pue aeun oq si iy
about the personal effects of the situation.
Address the Practical
Clients may be feeling overwhelmed by practical issues such as care for the animal, or
financial issues. It may be necessary to address these issues first before owners can consider
their emotional needs.
Supporting the Patient's Human Family139
Empower Clients to Actively Participate in Their Pet's Care
This includes enabling clients to make informed decisions. To make a difficult decision,
 people require information. It may be necessary to supply this information a number of
times. The amount of information required will vary from client to client. The nurse with
good communication skills should be able to ascertain whether a client feels well enough
informed by asking appropriate questions and listening well to the responses. Clients will
frequently ask for the nurse's opinion and will often use this to help inform their decision.
This raises a number of issues. The cancer care team members have a considerable amount
of power because they have both knowledge and experience. Therefore the opinion of the
worker is likely to be valuable to the client. However, it is possible for this power to be
advisable to give an opinion only if well informed and in accordance with the rest of
the team. The team that appears divided will cause a loss of confidence. If a client does
not take the team's advice there will still be a need for support and a good working
relationship.
Privacy
Respect clients by allowing them to speak with clinicians away from other owners and
staff. If possible an area should be set aside to allow people time on their own or, for
families, time to speak with one another privately. If an owner is distressed, attempt
to provide an alternative way out of the building rather than through the waiting area.
Have respect for the fact that people may need time alone to reflect before making any
decisions.
Don't Assume You Know What Is Needed
Many factors will influence what an individual requires. Allow the client to guide you.
What has suited one owner may not suit another.
Spend Time with the Client
Introduce clients to other staff and familiarize them with the hospital. Get to know the
animal and family and how the carers function, for example, do they make decisions as
a unit or is one person usually responsible for decision making? Refer to the pet by name.
Prepare the Client
Discuss the possible scenarios. If euthanasia is an option, describe what will happen and
what the owner may see should he or she choose to be present (see also Chapter 14).
Assess Support Needs
Most people will not ask for help or support. Owners may wish to avoid the stigma of
admitting to distress. It is helpful if the nurse is able to identify this and offer support,
even if it is not being requested.
Reinforce Existing Support Networks
Encourage clients to enlist the support of family and friends or support from others, such
as therapists or fellow members of a social club.
140Support for Pet Owners and Caregivers
Be an Advocate and Liaison
Owners may rely on the nurse to advocate for them and their pet if there are difficult
issues to consider or problems with communication.
Be a Resource and Facilitate Access to Information
Ensure that clients have verbal and written information and that they understand this
information.
Respect Spiritual Beliefs and Values
Ask owners about their beliefs. Phrases such as, "Fluffy is in heaven" can be either com-
forting or entirely inappropriate, depending upon a person's beliefs. People from diverse
cultural backgrounds may have special needs.
Do Not Make Promises You Can't Keep
Never assure an owner of an outcome. Phrases such as, "I assure you we will do everything
in our power to help” can be reassuring without making guarantees or promises about
the end result.
Support Throughout the Journey
Although some stages in the cancer journey may be more difficult, such as diagnosis,
After death, support is increasingly considered the role of the veterinarian and support
o e pus oi aiedondde aq e ii 'anod aui yo siuso aui uodn huudaa 'ns
or flowers. In any case follow-up telephone support should be a part of good practice. If
possible, the bill for services should be sent at a later date and not presented to the client
 at the time of bereavement.
Societal Affitudes
The attitude of those surrounding an owner may impact on grieving. There can be a stigma
surrounding the mourning for the loss or illness of an animal. Some people cannot under-
stand the relationship the owner has had with a pet and cannot equate the loss of a pet
with other losses. This is sometimes referred to as disenfranchised grief. By not acknowl-
edging the grief over the loss of a loved animal, those surrounding a bereaved owner are
contributing to the sense of devastation and causing the owner to feel isolated and alone.
People may be told by well-meaning friends or relatives, "It's only a dog," "Thank good-
support group in Pennsylvania catering specifically to bereaved pet owners identifies this
social stigma as one of the main reasons people attend the group—they find they have no
other venue in which they can speak about their loss. It is important that the health care
a o iodns jo zuod Auo no uu an aq Aeu Aaun se 'sun jo pnu aq a
for the grieving owner.
Supporting the Patient's Human Family141
Counseling
There are an increasing number of services providing therapy related to the loss of a pet.
As a veterinary nurse or technician it would be useful to research the details and cost of
those services in the local area. Services available will depend upon the size and population
of the area. Providing a list of these counselors’ names at the time of bereavement not
only assists people to access support but provides validation that the grief is legitimate,
whether or not they actually use the service. This should be raised sensitively; for example,
the nurse could say, “You have had a lot happen in a short time. Some of our clients have
found it helpful to have the names of people they can talk to." In larger urban areas there
may be support groups for those who have suffered the loss of a pet. Many of these support
groups are cofacilitated by a veterinary nurse and a health worker, such as a social worker
or psychologist. The veterinary nurse is often able to recognize the need for such support,
know whom to contact locally, and initiate this type of service.
Special Considerafions for Children
Children experience grief and their reactions are as varied as those of adults. Many workers
are more concerned about speaking with children about death and dying than they are
about speaking to adults. Societal attitudes have often dictated in the past that children
must be protected from bad news. Many adults will recall being told, as a child, that their
cat ran away or their dog went to live on a farm, only to realize as they grew older that
 a  p a   aa re s r    iad a
tionally damaging; children tend to be aware that something is happening but that it is
being kept from them. They then imagine the worst possible outcome. They feel unsup-
ported and betrayed when they eventually discover the truth. Parents or guardians should
be allowed to decide how to approach a pet's cancer with their children. The nurse's role
is to provide education and support during this process.
The age of the children will affect their understanding of the loss. Children up to the
age of 4 years old do not understand the permanency of death and may believe the pet is
going to return. They may exhibit some behavior changes such as clinginess or acting out
in response to the loss. Children 5-10 years old are starting to understand that death is
-d si m ioq  no n e an  e s   '
ing. Adolescents generally have a similar understanding of death as adults do, but they
may react more strongly, exhibiting signs of intense distress, social withdrawal, or mood
swings. Children can be encouraged to be a part of the dying process with their pet. With
issues such as viewing of the body and presence during procedures, the team should be
guided by the parents and the child.
Special Considerafions for Elderly Pet Owners
Elderly pet owners have reported that the loss of a pet revives memories of past bereave-
ments. It may also remind the elderly person of personal frailties and impending demise.
Elderly owners are less likely than younger people, with children in the home, to get a
new pet. For some elderly people the pet may have provided a sense of being needed. A
142Support for Pet Owners and Caregivers
-u e Ausis A siad aos se ip oi aun pue ais aos sai ose iad
nection to a deceased partner, and the loss of the pet may cause memories of the loss of
the partner to be relived.
Other Pets
When an animal is sick or dies, the other animals in the home will be affected. They may
search for the missing pet or wait for it to come back. The other pets in the home may
behave differently or go off their food. Owners need to be made aware of this and be
given some strategies to manage any behavior changes.
Memorials
Some owners may be fearful of seeing a dead body. Others may wish to spend some time
alone with their pet after it has died. Some may wish to have the veterinarian dispose of
the body and others may wish to arrange for burial or cremation personally. A funeral or
memorial of some type helps people to say goodbye to a pet, and it also allows them to
acknowledge and celebrate the pet's life. Talking through the range of options available
can be a helpful part of the grieving process. These may be varied and can include taking
photographs and locks of fur, planting a tree on the burial site, writing a poem or song.
having a plaque made, and conducting a service with family and friends. Although some
requests may seem unusual, it is the role of the veterinary staff to assist with this wherever
possible.
Communication
 The nurse-owner relationship can be quite significant over the lifetime of a pet, and par-
ticularly so at the end of life. The nurse must have an understanding of where the owner
is in the grieving process and what he or she may be experiencing. This involves having
difficult conversations about topics people usually prefer not to discuss, such as death and
dying, or euthanasia. These conversations take place at a time when people are vulnerable,
emotional, and being asked to make difficult decisions. It is therefore essential that the
veterinary oncology staff communicate well with their clients. Good communication will
lead to the provision of optimal patient care.
Owners enter a veterinary practice generally in a vulnerable or disadvantaged position.
They are concerned for their pet, unfamiliar with the surroundings, and see the staff as
experts. They may be afraid or embarrassed to ask questions. Owners may find it easier
to talk to the nurse than the veterinarian. One of the most important components of a
therapeutic nurse-owner relationship is trust. A nurse can gain the trust of an owner by
employing a consistent and caring attitude, displaying competence and confidence with
their pet, and being honest and open in all dealings. The nurse can take a collaborative
approach to problem solving with the owner. A balance between maintaining profession-
alism and avoiding taking in an "expert" role is essential.
Supporting the Patient's Human Family143
Good communication skills for nurses and technicians are important for many
reasons:
1. Communication is an essential component of good practice.
2.
 Legal and ethical requirements require accurate documentation and consultation e.g.
informed consent.
3. Owners require both information and support. This can be delivered most effectively
through good communication with the health care team.
4. The health care team is most productive when its members communicate well with
 one another. Worker stress can be decreased, and mistakes or misunderstandings are
less likely.
Improving Communications
A number of strategies can be used to help improve communications with a pet owner:
1. Reflect on your attitudes and responses. Do you have a tendency to be dismissive,
defensive, or overly familiar?
2.
 Try to put yourself in the client's shoes.
3.
 Provide information clearly. Avoid medical terms and jargon. Use clear everyday
language.
4.
5.
Write down complex information, with diagrams if necessary.
6. Check understanding regularly.
 7. Repeat and summarize. People may require information to be repeated a number of
times, and on different visits.
8. Be mindful of language and cultural barriers.
 9. Be mindful of physical barriers such as auditory or visual problems.
10. Encourage support persons to be present.
Some Usefuf Communication Skiffs
Empathy
"Empathy is the ability to accurately perceive another's emotions and communicate the
meanings of feelings to the other through verbal and nonverbal behaviors" (Arnold and
Boggs 1989). The nurse should be able to communicate an understanding of the owner's
feelings without overidentifying. Some examples of empathic responses can be seen in
Table 15.1.
Active Listening
Listening is an essential communication skill. It is important to pay attention to what an
owner is saying and to observe nonverbal cues as well. These may include pauses, lack of
eye contact, and repetition of phrases. Each person who approaches a service is unique.
A busy day can sometimes mean staff are unable to listen to each person individually. It
144Support for Pet Owners and Caregivers
Table 15.1. Examples of suboptimal and preferred responses to various client-communications situations
Owner's
Suboptimal
Why This Is
Preferred Response
Why This Is
 Statement
Response
Suboptimal 
 Preferred
"'m sick of
"We are doing
Nonempathetic
"t is difficult during this
Acknowledges
nobody telling
the best we can.
creates barriers.
time of waiting for test
feelings.
me what's
We have a
lack of trust, and
results. It sounds like you
shows
wong with
number of
dlifficulty in
are feeling a bit in the
understanding.
my dog."
patients to see
building on
dark and frustrated.
addresses
today."
relationship
Perhaps we can ask the
practical
afterward
doctor to update you on
issues
the situation as it stands at
the moment."
"'m scared
"We'll sort that
 Dismissive of
"That is a very common
Validates,
my cat will be 
 out, don't worry
fears, no real
 fear, and I can certainly
acknowled ges
in pain."
 about it."
reassurance
understand that your
fear, and
decision about treatment
 attempts to
options will be affected by
address
that. If you like, I can talk
you through what is likely
to cause the most
discomfort for your cat
 and the pain relief that we
may use."
"No one
"That's not true.
Intrusive,
"It sounds like people
 Acknowledges
knows how |
We see people
assumes
around you aren't quite
what was said.
feel about this
here with sick
knowledge,
aware of how this is
does not deny
"Sop
pets all the
denial of feeling
affecting you. Would you 
the statement
time. We
like to talk about your dog
understand how
with us, or perhaps we
you feel."
can arrange some
counseling or a support
group for you?"
is important not to make assumptions based on previous experience with a patient or what
has happened in a similar case.
Asking Open Questions
People can respond very differently to the same question, depending upon how the ques-
tion is framed. For example,
"You'd like to go ahead with the chemotherapy wouldn't
you?" requires only a yes or no response. If the question were asked thus: "What are your
 a number of responses can be elicited. The original
question would be answered,
but the owner would also have the opportunity to talk
through concerns about the treatment and ask further questions. A useful initial question
to raise the issue of emotional support might be the following: "What has been the impact
of this diagnosis on yourself and your family?
Supporting the Patient's Human Family145
Avoiding Cliches
Statements such as “"he's in a better place” or "it's only a dog/cat" should be avoided.
The Communication Network
There may be numerous health professionals giving advice to an owner. Sometimes this
information will be presented in slightly different ways. When the owner then repeats this
information to other family members, he or she may present it differently again due to a
lack of understanding, an omission of a piece of the information, or bias about the way
they are feeling. It is not uncommon for people to end up with a very different interpreta-
tion from the original information given.
When Communicafion Is Difficuff
more difficult to work with than others. Some of the obstacles to good communication
for veterinary technicians/nurses can include the following:
1.
Workload, work stress, and time constraints can be daunting
Emotionally challenging situations can be an obstacle; nurses may be afraid they will
"make things worse.
 3. Language or cultural differences can make communication challenging.
 4. Owners with unrealistic expectations or very high needs, can become overwhelming.
5. Nurses might overidentify or find that a situation triggers an emotional response in
them due to similarities in the case and the worker's own life. For example, a nurse
may find it challenging to deal with a dying cat if the nurse's own cat recently died
of the same disease.
6.
 Assumption by the worker that the owner will tell them how they are feeling may not
prove true.
7. A team environment that doesn't encourage staff to communicate with clients can
make supporting the client difficult.
Some of the barriers that may prevent owners from communicating with the cancer care
team can include the following:
1. Not wanting to be a burden
2.A belief that nothing can be done
 3. Not wanting to upset people
4. A fear of talking about dying
5. Social stigma
6. Not wanting to reveal weakness
Managing Conflict in the Nurse-Owner Relationship
There are many reasons why owners may appear challenging or diffcult in the veterinary
cancer care setting. Owners who are demanding or have high needs can often be labeled
146 Support for Pet Owners and Caregivers
as difficult. This can trigger a defensive response in workers, particularly when workload
demands are high. Unfortunately, this person may actually have very high support needs
but their manner is such that some staff may react with avoidance or intolerance. Some
challenging behaviors may include the following:
1. Rudeness, impatience, and verbal abuse
 Unrealistic demands or criticism
3.
 Unwillingness to provide appropriate care for the patient
4.
 Noncompliance with recommendations
5.
 Nondisclosure of information
6.
 Manipulating staff or playing one against the other
7.
 Refusing help when it is offered
Some strategies for dealing with conflict can include the following:
1.
 Speak calmly and respectfully. Do not raise your voice or become defensive.
2.
 Listen to the owner's concerns and try to address them in a reasonable manner.
3.
Apologize for any mistakes or misunderstandings, whether real or perceived. “Sorry,
I didn't phrase that very well" can cover any number of miscommunication issues.
4.
 Involve other staff and the owner in the development of a care plan that attempts to
meet needs appropriately.
5.
 If behavior is unacceptable, ensure that you are safe by having another staff member
 present. If you feel physically threatened or in danger, leave immediately and advise
your supervisor, and the police, if necessary.
6
 Ensure that all staff members provide a consistent message to the owner to reduce
opportunity for manipulation.
7.
 Continue to offer support in the future even when a client has been difficult.
Further Reading
 Adams CL, et al. 2000. Predictors of owner response to companion animal death in 177 clients from
14 practices in Ontario. J Am Vet Med Assoc 17(9):1303-1309
Arnold E, Boggs K. 1989.Interpersonal Relationships—Professional Communication Skills fot
Nurses. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Company.
 Dunn KL, et al. 2005. Social work with a pet loss support group in a university veterinary hospital.
Social Work in Health Care, Vol.41(2).
Gilchrist J. 2008. Thriving as a health professional. In: Hodgkinson K, Gilchrist J, eds, Psychosocial
Care of Cancer Patients—A Health Professional's Guide to What to Say and Do. Melbourne,
Ausmed Publications, 23-38.
Healey J, ed. 2005. Grief and Loss, Volume 218. Thirroul, The Spinney Press.
Herbert M. 1997. Supporting Bereaved and Dying Children and Their Parents. Melbourne, The
Australian Council for Educational Research Ltd.
Hobbs K. 2008. Supporting families and carers. In: Hodgkinson K, Gilchrist J, eds, Psychosocial
Care of Cancer Patients—A Health Professional's Guide to What to Say and Do. Melbourne,
Ausmed Publications, 149-162.
Supporting thePatient's Human Family147
Hodgkinson K. 2008. What is the psychosocial impact of cancer? In: Hodgkinson K, Gilchrist J,
eds,Psychosocial Care of Cancer Patients—A Health Professional's Guide to What to Say and
Do. Melbourne, Ausmed Publications, 1-12.
Kubler-Ross E. 1970. On Death and Dying. London, Tavistock Publications.
Lancaster T. 2008. The practicalities and challenges of providing psychosocial care. In: Hodgkinson
K, Gilchrist J, eds, Psychosocial Care of Cancer Patients—A Health Professional's Guide to What
to Say and Do. Melbourne, Ausmed Publications, 13-22.
Martin F, et al. 2004. People-Pet Partnership Program and Counselling Services, College of Veteri-
nary Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-7010.
Morley C, Fook J. 2005. The importance of pet loss and some implications for services. Mortality
10f2):1237-1243.
Turner WG. 2001. Our new children: The surrogate role of companion animals in women's lives.
The Qualitative Report, Volume 6, Number 1 March, 2001.
What about the
Nurse's
Emotional Experience?
Nicole Edwards
A veterinary technician/nurse may be the individual clients turn to for guidance, con-
solation, and reassurance before, during, or after euthanasia of a pet because of their
perception that the nurse was involved in the day-to-day care of the pet and is easier to
approach than the veterinarian. Studies have shown that the health worker who is able
to provide meaningful support and maintain good relationships actually has more job
satisfaction.
Working as Part of a Team
Nurses do not work with patients in isolation. They are part of a team consisting of vet-
erinarians, other nurses and technicians, administration staff, and other support staff. They
also liaise with a number of workers outside the practice such as pharmacists and nutri-
tionists. It is vital that every team member understands his or her role in providing care
to the patient and owner. The team must be united in focus and cohesive as a unit. In a
multidisciplinary team roles must be established and negotiated. Given the difficult nature
tion rate, low morale, and disharmony, and inevitably the patients and owners will not
receive the best care. A collaborative approach works best.
Nurses should familiarize themselves with the practice's policies and procedures. Regular
team meetings and updates should be scheduled. Collaborative professional relationships
ensure that a diversity of clinical skills are brought together to provide comprehensive
cancer care.
Nursing staff members who experience a problem within their working environment
should discuss it with their supervisor. This may involve a personality conflict or disagree-
ment with a co-worker, stress related to workload, or a philosophical issue with the
policies of the practice. The team should participate regularly in case discussion. An
148
The Nurse's Emotional Experience149
environment in which grievances can be aired should be encouraged. Team-building
exercises or even professional assistance can be useful if needed.
Conflict in a Team
This may be related to interpersonal difficulties, uncertainties about role delineation, dif-
fering opinions on managing care, or differing levels of experience and expertise within
the team. Managing confict within the team is not only the role of supervisors but of all
sun pn pas og aa si uoo o pu udo s
discussions should be held regularly. The team should meet formally to discuss cases and
issues within the practice. It is also useful for the team to communicate in less structured
ways such as having lunch together or arranging social gatherings from time to time. A
respectful atmosphere should be maintained by all. Workers should recognize common
skills and negotiate roles. Above all, problems should be addressed as they arise, and not
be allowed to develop into major concerns. If staff members are unable to come to a
resolution on their own they may need to enlist the assistance of management or a profes-
sional mediation service.
Ethical Considerations for the Nurse or Technician
The veterinary nurse will be faced with many ethical dilemmas during a career. Some of
these issues are highlighted here in order that nurses may consider their own feelings or
thoughts on these matters before facing them in daily practice.
Working in Cancer Care
For those choosing to work in the cancer care field there are a number of ethical and moral
considerations. ‘There remain a number of myths surrounding the treatment of cancer
 i e   si r e in ha s aod a 
for cancer are painful and intrusive. Any health professional wanting to work in this field
should consider personal beliefs and feelings about cancer and its treatments.
Benefits vs. Side Effects of Treatmenf
A question often arises: “Do the potential benefits to be gained from treatment outweigh
the side effects?" If nurses have a clear understanding of the treatment regime and poten-
tial side effects they will best be able to advise and support pet owners.
Cost of Treatment
Some owners cannot afford to have their animals treated. A common challenge for vet-
erinary staff is finding a level of care that can help individual animals within the financial
and time constraints of the family
150Support for Pet Owners and Caregivers
Other Barriers fo Treatment
Nurses may discover that owners have other barriers to accepting or accessing treatment:
their own ill health, lack of access to transport, or other factors, such as an unsympathetic
partner. Is it the role of the nurse to assist owners to overcome these barriers in order to
provide the best care to a pet?
Euthanasia
The procedure of euthanasia is discussed in detail in Chapter 14. Ethical considerations
with dignity, comfort, and peace, any number of issues may present themselves to the
technician/nurse at this difficult time. When is it the right time to euthanize? What if there
is a difference of opinion about this? Nurses should bear in mind that many people will
feel guilty if they decide to have their pet euthanized, and for some this will lead to com-
plicated grief reactions.
When You Disagree with a Pet Owner's Decision
One of the most difficult issues for a health professional can arise when clients do not
heed medical advice. There will be occasions when the veterinary nurse disagrees with the
care he or she is requested to provide for an animal. The nurse may, for example, feel that
in his or her clinical judgment, an animal should be euthanized, but an owner may be
   d           n 
propriate care, or insufficient attention is being paid to managing its symptoms. There are
some strategies the nurse may find useful in these situations. Discussion of concerns with
the veterinarian or supervisor is often a good starting point. It can also be useful to
approach the client with concerns in a gentle and nonconfrontational manner. Perhaps the
client is simply ill-informed or undecided about what to do. The nurse may also come to
a better understanding as to why the client is taking a specific approach. Documentation
of all concerns and discussions is essential. If the nurse feels overwhelmed by concerns and
is unable to come to a resolution, it may be in the best interests of the patient and team
if another nurse or technician is assigned to the patient. Finally, it may be helpful for
nurses to remind themselves that they will not always hold the same values as others but
that an open-minded approach is most productive.
When Owners Are in Confficf
Nurses may find themselves dealing with pet owners who are in disagreement with each
other over the care or treatment of their pet. A crisis such as a cancer diagnosis can inten-
sify existing strengths and weaknesses in human relationships. The nurse needs to avoid
taking sides and provide all parties with information and support. If necessary, it may be
advisable to suggest professional counseling in order to resolve a serious disagreement.
The Nurse's Emotional Experience151
Maintaining Professional Boundaries
There will inevitably be some patients for whom nurses may feel a particular fondness or
attachment. It is possible to act as an empathic and caring health professional and yet
maintain a respectful professional distance. Familiarization with the practice's policies
around professional boundaries and discussion with more experienced staff can help nurses
in this area. Generally, for example, it is quite appropriate to show fondness for a patient
by expressing sadness to the owner or providing comfort by way of a hug; however, it
may not be appropriate to give the owner a personal telephone number so that the nurse
may be contacted in off-duty time. Although it might be helpful to share private sadness
at the time of a death it would not be appropriate to discuss at length personal experiences
of loss and grief.
Confidentiality
Again, it is important that the nurse or technician is familiar with the practice's policy on
confidentiality. Clients have a right to privacy, and it is not appropriate to discuss a case
outside of the confines of the practice or to identify a community member as a client.
Clients may divulge sensitive information or act in a way that they would not want spoken
of to others. As an example, in the veterinary cancer care setting it is vital to know that
a client may be pregnant (see Chapter 8), even if they are not ready to share this informa-
tion with family or friends.
Documentation
Best practice dictates that accurate documentation is required in veterinary medicine.
However, a dilemma arises when, as discussed, confidential or sensitive information is
held. This information may require documentation, but it is important that all staff remem-
ber to respect the privacy of the medical record. In addition, value judgments, judgments
about the client's mental status, or notes about the client's behavior should not be recorded
unless genuinely necessary, and if so it should be done in absolutely professional terms
Complaints abouf Colleagues
As previously discussed, it is not uncommon for clients to manipulate staff or try to play
one against the other. It is possible that the nurse or technician will be the recipient of a
complaint about a colleague. Here, nurses face a dilemma. As advocates for their patients
they are required to address any complaint whether legitimate or not, but as team members
nurses offer collegial support and loyalty. This is an issue that needs to be handled with
tact and sensitivity. The nurse should be familiar with the practice's complaint handling
policy. Discuss with a trusted supervisor if this arises.
When Your Own Issues Arise
Some patients will trigger emotional responses in a worker because they will identify with
that patient or owner. The animal may look or act similarly to a beloved personal pet.
152Support for Pet Owners and Caregivers
The owner may remind the worker of a parent or friend. This can come as a surprise to
some workers who feel they are immune to such responses. If the nurse can acknowledge
this response, management of this situation will be simpler and easier.
Nurturing the Technician/Nurse
Veterinary nurses and technicians play an integral role in the cancer care team. They
nurture and support patients, pet owners, and colleagues. It is therefore essential that some
consideration be given to supporting and nurturing the nurse. Unfortunately, workers in
Self Care for the Nurse
Technicians and nurses who understand themselves are in the best position to care for
themselves. It is useful for nurses to refect on their own personality, acknowledge strengths,
and recognize limitations. A nurse should acknowledge that there will be times that this
work is difficult or upsetting. Accept that it is reasonable to be distressed or frustrated on
some occasions. When working in a demanding area such as oncology, the health profes-
sional who denies personal feelings will never be able to work as effectively as the person
who recognizes and acknowledges emotion as a part of practice.
 Some basic self-care techniques that should be incorporated into the technician/nurse's
everyday life include the following:
1. Limit alcohol, particularly if being used to dull the senses or to help forget an upset-
ting incident.
 2. Exercise regularly and maintain healthy eating habits.
 3. Have an active social life outside of work. Spend time with family and friends. Enjoy
hobbies and spending time outdoors.
4.  Maintain healthy sleeping patterns.
5.
 Spend time with healthy animals and enjoy your own pets.
6. Indulge yourself occasionally. Have a massage, go out to dinner or take a trip.
Sfress, Compassion Fafigue, and Burnouf
Stress, compassion fatigue, and burnout are words often associated with workers in caring
professions. Burnout is the result of exposure to high levels of professional and personal
stress without corresponding levels of support or resources to assist the individual to cope.
People suffering from burnout may be irritable, insensitive, unmotivated, withdrawn, or
cynical. They may feel overwhelmed by the challenges of their role but unable to address
these challenges effectively. A poor working environment and doubts about ability to cope
are usually significant contributors to burnout.
Compassion fatigue is different from burnout and is defined as the depletion of emo-
tional resources that occurs as a natural consequence of caring for others. It is possible at
any time in health workers’ careers to feel some degree of stress related to work
The Nurse's Emotional Experience153
Another term often referred to in the literature is vicarious trauma. This occurs in
workers who are exposed to highly emotion-charged situations and find that they are
reliving the events and emotion of this time in the days or months afterward. This is com-
monly found in professionals such as paramedics or emergency department workers who
are witnessing trauma frequently. However, it is possible that oncology professionals also
will be exposed to particularly distressing or traumatic events that will continue to affect
them for long periods of time. If a worker feels unable to stop thinking about an incident
or is still feeling the emotion of it intensely after the event, or if sleep or normal routine
is affected, it would be useful to seek professional assistance.
Technicians and nurses must remember it is normal to be affected emotionally when
faced with an emotional situation. Repeated exposure to grief and loss can be confronting
on many levels and a heightened sense of personal vulnerability is common. Working
within professional constraints, high workloads, and team conflict can also be profession-
ally and personally challenging.
Technicians can sometimes find it difficult to identify that they are suffering from
stress. It is most useful to be aware of the signs of burnout and compassion fatigue
before this occurs. Managers should also implement strategies to combat worker stress,
because it is a major contributor to increased sick leave, high staff turnover. and low
productivity.
 Some strategies to combat workplace stress include the following:
1.
Work on developing and nurturing a good team.
2.
 Set boundaries and know your limitations.
3.
 Develop good time management and organizational skills.
4.
Work on collegiate relationships.
5.
 Access professional development and networking opportunities whenever possible.
6.
Share resources.
7.
 Discuss problems with your supervisor and peers.
8.
 Remember the basic principles of self-care (above).
9.
Access counseling if required.
The Role of Professional Counseling
Seeing a professional counselor regularly or when the worker is feeling particularly in need
can be invaluable in helping the oncology nurse deal with the stressors of this work.
Counselors can also assist the nurse to fnd a balance between work and home life and
provide an opportunity to debrief about work issues, discuss managing diffcult situations,
and negotiate team problems. Counseling can provide a venue for workers to express
sadness and grief over the many losses with which they deal. Many oncology staff members
report that counseling is an important part of their self-care.
 In beginning a career in veterinary oncology, it is useful to remember that the technician/
nurse who approaches a pet and owner with compassion, respect, and understanding will
make a positive impact on their lives. The nurse who remains open-minded and maintains
a positive attitude will find a lot of satisfaction from working in this highly specialized
field. Confidence and expertise will increase with experience. Above all, the best caregivers
care for themselves first.
154Support for Pet Owners and Caregivers
Further Reading
Arnold E, Boggs K. 1989.Interpersonal Relationships—Professional Communication Skills for
Nurses. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Company.
 Dunn K, et al. 2005. Social work with a pet loss support group in a university veterinary hospital,
Social Work in Health Care, Vol. 41f2).
Hodgkinson K. 2008. What is the psychosocial impact of cancer? In: Hodgkinson K, Gilchrist J,
eds, Psychosocial Care of Cancer Patients—A Health Professional's Guide to What to Say and
Do. Melbourne, Ausmed Publications, 1-12.
Lancaster T. 2008. The practicalities and challenges of providing psychosocial care. In: Hodgkinson
What to Say and Do. Melbourne, Ausmed Publications, 13-22.
Martin F, et al. 2004. People-Pet Partnership Program and Counselling Services, College of Veteri-
nary Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-7010.
Section
6
Oncologic Emergencies
Hematologic Emergencies
Lee Garrod
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DlC) is a state of hypercoagulation that can occur
in cancer as well as other disease states. In this clinical syndrome, there is overstimulation
with activation of the coagulation cascade. In many types of cancer there is upregulation
of tissue factor (TF) and this results in factor Vll activation, an interaction known to
activate the coagulation cascade. What ensues is fbrin and thrombus formation (multiple
small clots are formed in the microcirculation of major organs) with subsequent consump-
tion of clotting factors and platelets. This consumption, together with fbrinolysis, which
soon follows, results in bleeding. The body is, however, unable to respond appropriately
to vascular or tissue injury because a stable clot cannot form. The hemorrhage associated
with DIC can be subclinical to profound. The hypercoagulation and thrombosis causes
organ damage from ischemia due to the impairment of blood flow and organ damage. The
diffuse thrombosis leads to the morbidity and mortality of DIC.
Malignancy itself can directly cause DIC by a number of different mechanisms, includ-
 ing expression of tissue factor, procoagulation (activation of factor X), and hyperfibri-
nolysis. In addition, many patients on chemotherapy are immunosuppressed and are at
risk of infection. Sepsis can result from immunodeficiency as a direct result of the malig-
 nancy itself or due to treatment and can progress to septic shock. These patients are at
risk of DIC.
Diagnosis
The presenting clinical signs and symptoms indicating DIC are potentially subtle, complex,
 and certainly not specific for this syndrome. Hemorrhage may be the only clinically appar-
ent symptom, and yet it is the most advanced at this stage, which is why DIC is often a
157
158 Oncologic Emergencies
fatal syndrome. An underlying cause should be identified with this syndrome and
 DIC should not be assumed to be present just because of cancer (e.g., is sepsis also a
possibility).
It is important to note there is no one test that is specific for DIC, and therefore tests
must be interpreted with the clinical picture for an individual patient and the underlying
disorder present. In suspected cases of DIC it is the trend of a test result, and not just a
single value, that is best evaluated. A normal platelet count that remains normal and does
 not start to decrease would mean DIC is extremely unlikely. The D-dimer and FDP assay,
when evaluated together, provide the most rapid and specific diagnosis of DIC. Ultraso-
nography of the liver and spleen in particular, with the use of an ultrasound machine with
high-quality tissue Doppler capability, can be very useful in diagnosing the early throm-
botic stage of DIC
Treatmenf
The treatment of DIC focuses on the priority of making the patient hemodynamically
stable. This may include intravenous crystalloid, oxygen therapy, packed red blood cell or
 fresh whole blood transfusion, plasma transfusion, and/or antiarrhythmic therapy. Then,
the underlying suspected cause of the DIC is addressed. Once a diagnosis of DIC has
been established (or even if there is a high degree of suspicion that DIC is present),
treatment should be instituted without delay. Unfortunately, there are no controlled
clinical trials in veterinary medicine evaluating the effects of different treatments in dogs
-l s a o pp m s i a oe s oad i 
tion vs. fbrinolysis and hemorrhage) at the time of presentation. Although heparin is
the most widely used anticoagulant in the management of DIC, its use remains con-
troversial because studies have not been able to conclusively demonstrate any improve-
ment in survival related to DIC. Heparin is avoided in the face of moderate to severe
thrombocytopenia.
Schistocyte
Figure 17.1. Schistocytes may be an indication of DiC, especially if supported by other findings.
Hematologic Emergencies159
Summary: DIC
Causes
Sepsis
Malignancy
 Blood transfusions
Liver failure
 Pancreatitis
+
Immune-mediated disease
+
Other causes
Clinical Features
Client complaint
+
+
Asymptomatic
O
May be undetected until severe hemorrhage occurs
Dyspnea
Pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE)
 Paralysis or limb weakness
Exercise intolerance
 Bruising or bleeding
 Mentation abnormalities
 Gastrointestinal symptoms
Collapse
Clinical findings
 Symptoms and systemic evidence of DIC are based on the underlying pathophysi-
ology of this process and may or may not include fever, hypoxia, acidosis, hypo-
tension, and proteinuria. Depending on the severity of the symptoms of DIC, the
patient may even demonstrate a clinical picture of shock.
Pulmonary dysfunction
 From dyspnea to Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS)
Hypotension
Tachycardia
Hemorrhage
 Jaundice
 Gastrointestinal symptoms
Neurologic abnormalities
 Localized intracranially
 Cardiac arrhythmia
Diagnostic Findings (Note: there is no one test that is specific for DIC and therefore tests
must be interpreted with the clinical picture for an individual patient.)
Laboratory
Thrombocytopenia
0
Normal count excludes the possibility of DIC
 Decreased fbrinogen
160 Oncologic Emergencies
 Peripheral blood smear
Schistocytes = fragmented red blood cells (Figure 17.1)
 D-dimer assay elevated
 FDP (fbrin degradation product) assay elevated
Anemia
 Mild to severe depending upon stage of DIC
APTT prolonged
PT prolonged
ATIHI (antithrombin IHI) reduced
Elevated liver values
Elevated lipase and amylase
Elevated renal values
Acidosis
Hypoxemia
Hematuria or hemoglobinuria
Bilirubinuria
 Positive blood culture
 If due to sepsis
Imaging
Radiography
 Trace pleural fissure line (if PTE)
 Pneumonia (if source for sepsis)
 0 Intrapulmonary hemorrhage
 Ultrasound
OPancreatitis
OAbscess
O Liver or splenic vascular compromise (vascular Doppler study)
Management
Fluid therapy (crystalloids ± colloids)
Oxygen therapy
Low-dose heparin (use WITH blood products)
 Identify underlying cause
Antibiotics
Specific for treatment of sepsis
 For prevention of sepsis (bacterial translocation of the gut)
 Packed red blood cells or fresh whole blood
 Fresh frozen plasma
 Control overt hemorrhage
Antiarrhythmic therapy
Further Reading
Bick RL. 1996. Disseminated intravascular coagulation: objective and clinical laboratory diagnosis,
treatment, and assessment of therapeutic response. Semin Thromb Hemost 22:69-88.
Hematofogic Emergencies 161
DeSancho MT, Rand JH. 2001. Bleeding and thrombotic complications in critically ill patients with
cancer. Crit Care Clin 17:599-622.
growth factor from malignant tissue. Blood Coagul Fibrinol 8: 73-86.
Yu JL, et al. 2004. Oncogenes as regulators of tissue factor expression in cancer: implications of
tumor angiogenesis and anti-cancer therapy. Semin Thromb Hemost 30:21-30.
Yu M, et al. 2000. Screening tests of disseminated intravascular coagulation: guidelines for rapid
and specific laboratory diagnosis. Crit Care Med 28:1777-1780.
Anemia
Anemia (meaning "without blood") is the deficiency of red blood cells (RBCs), hemo-
globin and thus tissue oxygenation. Anemia is defined as a packed cell volume (PCV)
less than 35%. A red blood cell or erythrocyte is produced by the bone marrow in
response to stimulation by erythropoietin, which is produced in the kidneys. Hemoglobin
is the oxygen-carrying molecule found within the red blood cell that transports oxygen
from the lung to the tissue. The average life span of a red blood cell is 100 to 120 days
in the dog and 70 to 78 days in the cat, much longer than the platelet (days) or neu-
trophil (hours). Anemia is the most common disorder of the blood overall. In cancer
patients, a mild anemia is not uncommon. The anemia may be due to the cancer itself,
anemia of chronic disease, immune-mediated destruction, hemorrhage, or long-term
chemotherapy.
Anemia, in general, can be regenerative or nonregenerative. Regenerative anemia can be
caused by excessive blood loss (acute or chronic hemorrhage) and excessive red blood cell
destruction or hemolysis (immune-mediated destruction, blood parasites). Nonregenerative
anemias are due to deficient red blood cell production or ineffective hematopoiesis. Causes
of nonregenerative anemia include primary bone marrow disease or suppression, renal
disease, nutritional deficiency (uncommon) and anemia of chronic disease. Anemia of
chronic disease is the most common cause in small animals. This anemia is mediated by
cytokines produced by inflammatory cells, which lead to decreases in iron availability, RBC
survival, and the marrow's ability to regenerate. Treatment of the underlying disease results
in resolution of the anemia. Primary bone marrow disease or bone marrow failure from
any cause can lead to nonregenerative anemia and even pancytopenia. With diffuse marrow
involvement, granulocytes are affected first, followed by platelets and then finally red blood
cells.
Both cancer and its treatment can interfere with the supply of red blood cells by
inhibiting production in the bone marrow. Most chemotherapy drugs can cause a degree
of myelosuppression, and anemia is typically very mild if it does occur but may cause
lethargy in the cancer patient. The most common hematologic effects from malignancy
are anemia of chronic disease followed by blood loss anemia, microangiopathic anemia
(a type of red cell destruction resulting in schistocytes in the peripheral blood com-
 monly seen with hemangiosarcoma), and immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. In one
study, cancer-related anemia, which is a common finding in dogs with lymphoma, was
associated with a significantly decreased survival time compared with dogs without
anemia.
162Oncologic Emergencies
Figure 17.2. In a severely anemic patient nasal
oxygen therapy may be indicated, in addition to
red cell transfusion. when nasal oxygen is admin-
istered, the patient should be made as comfortable
as possible to avoid unnecessary stress.
Diagnosis
The clinical signs depend on the severity of the anemia and how quickly the anemia
occurred. Patients that become anemic gradually have time to adjust to the decreased red
blood cell count; animals that become anemic very quickly, however, may die because
their bodies cannot compensate for the sudden loss in red blood cells and oxygen.
Treatment
Treatment of the anemic patient focuses on the underlying cause in mild to moderate
anemia. However, in cases where there is a life-threatening anemia, a blood transfusion
may be necessary to stabilize the patient while the underlying cause is investigated.
Summary: Anemia
Causes
 Decreased red blood cell production
 Anemia of chronic disease
 Any severe disease
Renal disease
Feline leukemia virus
Bone marrow failure
Nutrition
Neoplasia
Chemotherapy (usually mild)
Hematologic Emergencies 163
Increased red blood cell destruction (hemolysis)
Autoimmune disease
 Red blood cell parasite
 Toxin or chemical
Neoplasia
Red blood cell loss
+
 Bleeding from tumor
 Intestinal tract, spleen, liver, kidney, urinary bladder, others
Trauma or injury
Parasites (fleas, ticks, hookworms)
Coagulopathy
Clinical Features
Client complaint
 Asymptomatic (may be undetected unless moderate to se vere hemoglobin decrease)
Lethargy
Depression
Weakness
 Rapid breathing
Anorexia
Collapse
Clinical findings
Weakness
Depression
 Pale or icteric mucous membranes
Tachycardia
Heart murmur
Tachypnea
 Organomegaly
If due to a cancer process
Diagnostic Findings
Laboratory
Anemia
 Decreased hematocrit or packed cell volume
O
Normochromic, normocytic in anemia of chronic disease (ACD)
 Hypochromic, microcytic in blood loss anemia
Q
 Reduced hemoglobin
Peripheral blood smear
Poikilocytosis (abnormal-shaped red blood cells)
■
 Schistocytes with hemolysis
■
 Spherocytes with IMHA
Red blood cell parasites
 Presence of abnormal cells indicating cancer
 Reticulocyte count
O
Nonregenerative anemia = normal
Regenerative anemia = increase
164Oncologic Emergencies
Coombs test
Positive in 65 % of cases with immune-mediated destruction
Tickborne diseases titers
 Bone marrow aspirate
Biochemical profle
Urinalysis
●
 Fecal analysis
OParasites
0Hematochezia
0Melena
●Feline Leukemia (FeLV antigen) Test
Imaging
 Abdominal radiography
0 Possible neoplasm
Abdominal ultrasound
OOrgan abnormality may be apparent
Management (depends on the severity of the anemia and determining the underlying
cause)
+
Oxygen therapy (Figure 17.2)
 Identify underlying cause
Control overt hemorrhage
 Packed red blood cell transfusion or fresh whole blood
 Erythropoeisis-stimulating agents (erythropoietin)
Chemotherapy if cancer is the cause (e.g., leukemia)
Further Reading
Barger AM, Grindem CB. 2000. Hematologic abnormalities associated with cancer chemotherapy.
In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NL, eds, Schaim's Veterinary Hematology, Sth ed. Philadelphia,
Lippincott Williams and Wilkens, 676-681.
Couto CG. 1990. Management of complications of cancer chemotherapy. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 20: 1037-1053.
Giger U. 2005. Regenerative anemias caused by blood loss or hemolysis. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman
EC, eds, Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 6th ed. St. Louis, Elsevier Saunders, 1886-
1907.
Miller AG, Morley PS, Rao S, et al. 2009. Anemia associated with decreased survival time in dogs
with lymphoma. J Vet Intern Med 23:116-122.
Thrombocytopenia
Platelets or thrombocytes are produced in the bone marrow and are used to form blood
clots and prevent bleeding. They survive in circulation for an average of 8 to 12 days.
Hematofogic Emergencies 165
When the number of platelets in the circulating blood falls below a normal range the
condition is referred to as thrombocytopenia. Platelet production is specifically regulated
 by thrombopoietin, a hormone produced by the kidney and liver. Thrombopoietin defi-
ciency is rare.
Thrombocytopenia, often defined as a platelet count below 200,000/μl is a common
is a platelet count 20,000 to 200,000/μl and a severe thrombocytopenia is a platelet count
<20,000 platelets/μl.
An abnormally low platelet count can arise from one or more of four general
mechanisms:
1.I
 Decreased platelet production (bone marrow disease/suppression, bone marrow infil-
trative neoplasia, cytotoxic myelosuppression)
2. Increased platelet destruction or consumption (immune-mediated thrombocytopenia,
disseminated intravascular coagulation)
3.1
 Dilutional or distributional causes (fluid therapy or transfusion dilution, splenomegaly
with sequestration)
 4. Loss by hemorrhage (hemorrhage from tumor, clotting disorder)
Myelosuppressive drugs used in cancer chemotherapy can cause thrombocytopenia,
depending on the dose and duration of therapy. Neoplasia of the bone marrow, while not
as common as other forms of cancer in small animals, does occur and includes leukemias
(many different types), lymphoma, myeloma, and mast cell neoplasia. Dogs and cats with
bone marrow infiltration by a malignant process are more sensitive to the cytotoxic effects
of chemotherapy agents that can result in thrombocytopenia.
Another possible mechanism of thrombocytopenia could be increased levels of inhibitory
cytokines produced by or in response to the neoplasm. In one study, 10% of dogs with
cancer had thrombocytopenia for a variety of reasons, but 61% of those had no identifi-
able cause. Dogs with hemangiosarcoma, lymphoma, and melanoma were at increased
risk of developing thrombocytopenia. In another study 83% of dogs with cancer prior
to chemotherapy had one or more coagulation abnormalities, 36% of which had
thrombocytopenia.
Increased platelet destruction occurs as a result of immunologic causes, which are
classified as immune-mediated (drug-induced, cancer, or without apparent cause) and
infectious causes. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT), also referred to as idio-
pathic thrombocytopenia purpura (ITP), occurs when the body's immune system destroys
platelets. The diagnosis of immune-mediated thrombocytopenia lies in ruling out all other
causes. Drugs including heparin and sulfonamides may be a trigger for immune-mediated
platelet destruction.
There are many potential infectious causes of platelet destruction in which the reticu-
loendothelial system (spleen, liver, lymph nodes) takes the diseased cells out of circula-
tion (e.g., Rickettsia, protozoa). In viral infection thrombocytopenia can be caused
by myelosuppression (e.g., FeLV, canine distemper, rarely feline immunodeficiency
virus[FIV]].
Increased platelet consumption occurs in patients with hemorrhage (from a mass or
other coagulopathy) and in patients with disseminated intravascular coagulation. Dis-
seminated intravascular coagulation (DlC) involves extensive intravascular clotting with
166 Oncologic Emergencies
dissemination of microthrombi consuming clotting factors, including platelets. DIC is
discussed in detail earlier in this chapter.
 In cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy, a degree of temporary thrombocytopenia
may be expected and additional diagnostics may not be warranted. Therefore, knowledge
of a cancer patient's recent chemotherapy history, including the drug, dose, and when the
drug was administered, as well as the properties of the drug, is an important part of the
evaluation.
Diagnosis
Some animals with low platelets show no signs at all; others may be lethargic, anorexic,
vomiting, or have bodily bruising and small hemorrhages in their mouth or nose. In cases
of unexplained thrombocytopenia, additional diagnostics are necessary. When hemorrhage
is present—as indicated by bruising (petechiation, ecchymoses), melena, or hematuria—the
patient must be handled carefully while a full investigation of the cause of hemorrhage is
undertaken.
 Initial tests include complete blood count (CBC) with platelet count, blood chemistry,
urinalysis, ocular examination, abdominal radiographs or ultrasonography, infectious
disease titers, and coagulation profile. In evaluating the CBC, it is important that the
laboratory technician manually read a blood slide when the blood machine reports throm-
bocytopenia, because platelets are sticky by nature and can clump together, resulting in a
falsely decreased count. If the number is truly low, investigating the cause begins. Bone
marrow evaluation is essential for differentiating hypoproliferative thrombocytopenia
from increased destruction outside of the bone marrow where the megakaryocyte popula-
tion in the bone marrow is normal or increased.
Treatment
There is no specific treatment for thrombocytopenia. Rather, the treatment chosen, or
whether treatment is indicated at all, depends on the presence and severity of hemorhage.
General precautions for thrombocytopenic patients include exercise restriction, minimizing
venipuncture, avoiding intramuscular injection, and identifying and addressing underlying
problems.
Summary: Thrombocytopenia
Causes
 Decreased production
●
 Myelosuppressive chemotherapy drugs (usually temporary)
 Other drugs
●
oEstrogen
OMethimazole
 Bone marrow infltration by malignancy
 Primary bone marrow failure
1
Hematologic Emergencies167
Sepsis
Viral infections
O
 Feline leukemia virus
Feline immunodeficiency virus (rare)
Canine distemper virus
 Increased peripheral consumption or destruction
Sepsis (with or without DIC)
DIC (with or without sepsis)
Infectious
Rickettsia
O
 Fungal (histoplasmosis, disseminated Candidiasis)
O
 Protozoa (Babesia, Leishmania)
Nematode (heartworm)
Immune-mediated destruction (ITP)
Drugs
Sulfonamides
 Heparin
Altered distribution
 Massive blood or blood product transfusion
 Splenomegaly with sequestration
Hemorrhage
Tumor bleeding internally
Coagulopathy with hemorrhage secondary to tumor, liver failure, anticoagulant
rodenticide
Clinical Features
Client complaint
Bruising
Bleeding from any orifice
 Exercise intolerance or collapse
 Mentation abnormalities
：
Clinical findings
No abnormal clinical abnormalities (especially if platelets are over 50,000/μl)
Ecchymoses or petechiae (if platelet count <50,000/μl)
Bleeding (if platelet count <25,000/μl)
Epistaxis
O
 Bleeding from oral mucosa (gumline)
Excessive bleeding from venipuncture or catheter placement sites
 Retinal hemorrhages
O
Hematemesis
O
Hematochezia
Melena
Hematuria
Hematoma (PT, APTT would be abnormal)
O
Hemothorax (bleeding tumor or abnormal PT, APTT}
168Oncologic Emergencies
OHemoabdomen (bleeding tumor or abnormal PT, APTT)
0Hyphema
：
Splenomegaly
Evidence of thrombosis {results in platelet consumption)
O Early disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Diagnostic Findings
Laboratory
 Thrombocytopenia
 Peripheral blood smear evaluation confirms decreased platelet numbers
Anemia if bleeding
Coagulation screen
0 Prolonged PT, APTT, and low fbrinogen suggests DIC
 Tick panel evaluation
FeLV/FIV testing
 Bone marrow aspirate
 Increased megakaryocytes = peripheral consumption or altered distribution
 0  Decreased numbers = myelosuppression
O  Abnormal cells = bone marrow infltrative neoplasia
Imaging
Ultrasound
 0 Bleeding abdominal mass (any organ)
 Splenomegaly
0 Liver abnormality (coagulopathy)
Management (depends on the underlying cause and severity of bleeding, rather than the
platelet count itself)
 Identify and treat the underlying disease
 Handle patients very carefully
Avoid intramuscular injections
Minimize catheter and phlebotomy sticks
Stop any NSAIDs
 Delay myelosuppressive chemotherapy
Control hemorrhage where possible
 Packed red blood cells or fresh whole blood if actively bleeding
NOTE: it is NOT feasible to transfuse platelets in dogs or cats in the majority of
cases.
 If life-threatening hemorrhage into the cardiopulmonary or CNS, platelet-rich
plasma from fresh whole blood <12 hours old at room temperature only could
be administered
Epsilon aminocaproic acid (EACA) 250mg/m? intravenous or orally QID for hemo-
stasis in uncontrolled bleeding
●
 Do NOT use if DIC suspected or confirmed
●
 Do NOT use in cases of hematuria due to potential for urinary obstruction
 Chemotherapy indicated if infltrative bone marrow neoplasia
 Immunosuppressive therapy indicated if immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (ITP)
Hematologic Emergencies 169
Further Reading
Grindem CB, et al. 1994. Thrombocytopenia associated with neoplasia in dogs. J Vet Intern Med
6:400-405.
Grindem CB. 2000. Infectious and immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. In: Bonagura JD, ed,
Current Veterinary Therapy Xlll. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 438.
Madewell BR, et al. 1980. Coagulation abnormalities in dogs with neoplastic disease. Thromb
Haemost 44:35-38.
Miller MD, Lunn KF. 2007. Diagnostic use of cytologic examination of bone marrow from dogs
with thrombocytopenia: 58 cases (1994-2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc 231:1540-1544.
Ogilvie GK. 2005. Care beyond a cure: Oncologic Emergencies—Help!! WSAVA Congress, 542-
545.
Reilly MP, et al. 2006. Prothrombotic factors enhance heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and
thrombosis in vivo in a mouse model. J Thromb Haemost 4:2687-2694.
Scott MA. 2000. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, Schalm
OW, eds, Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Ames, IA, Blackwell Publishing, 478-486.
Stockham SL, Scott MA. 2002. Bone marrow and lymph nodes. In: Fundamentals of Veterinary
Clinical Pathology. Ames, IA, Blackwell Publishing, 228-252.
Sullivan PS, et al. 1992. Thrombocytopenia associated with administration of trimethoprim/
sulfadiazine in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1741-1744.
Neutropenia
myelosuppressive therapy. Neutropenia is discussed in detail in Chapters 13 ("Hemato-
logic Support") and 18 ("Febrile Neutropenia").
FebrileNeutropenia
Lee Garrod
Fever is defined as a sustained temperature in excess of 103 *F Fever associated with cancer
  n  pno r  o p q a 
induced production of cytokines), allergic reactions to a drug, or allergic reaction to blood
 o   sd   g s n  sn
result of infection until proven otherwise, because infection is a major cause of morbidity
 and mortality.
When a fever develops in a cancer patient, the individual must be thoroughly evaluated
to determine the cause. A comprehensive physical examination should be performed and
blood drawn for laboratory analysis.
Neutrophils are phagocytic white blood cells that defend the body against bacterial and
fungal infections. When the neutrophil count drops too low, the body has difficulty fight-
ing off infections. The neutrophil count is expected to drop below normal after treatment
to normal quickly. This does not usually cause a problem unless the neutrophil count is
below 1000/μul. The nadir (the lowest point the patient's cell count will reach) for neutro-
phils following a dose of myelosuppressive chemotherapy usually occurs approximately 7
days after treatment.
Neutropenic patients are immunocompromised and lack the ability to mount a full
inflammatory response to infections. They are at risk of developing bacterial and fungal
infections, with both pathogenic and opportunistic organisms, which are much more dif-
ficult to eradicate with appropriate antibiotic therapy. Therefore, fever may be addressed
differently in the patient that has a normal neutrophil count than in one with a decreased
neutrophil count.
 Sepsis can occur in immunosuppressed cancer patients when there is severe or untreated
collapse, which is often fatal as a result of the development of coagulopathy (DIC) and/
or multiple organ failure.
170
Febrile Neutropenia171
Diagnosis and Treatment
 The degree and duration of neutropenia are the most important risk factors for developing
fever after chemotherapy. Neutropenia and consequent infections usually occur approxi-
mately 1 week after a myelosuppressive chemotherapy drug is given; but for a few drugs
the neutrophil nadir (and risk of infection) may be delayed or prolonged (see Chapters 8
 and 13). If this happens, symptoms may include a fever, a poor appetite, lethargy, vomit-
a treatment. A rapid assessment of neutrophil numbers can be made from a fresh blood
smear while the automated count is pending (Figure 18.1). If the neutrophil count is low
and there is no fever, prophylactic antibiotics should be started to prevent an infection.
A patient with neutropenic fever is a true medical emergency, and timely administration
of antibiotics can potentially prevent development of sepsis and death. A neutrophil count
<100o/μl with a fever strongly suggests sepsis and mandates emergency management. It is
imperative that the patient is hospitalized to administer antibiotics parenterally in order
to rapidly attain therapeutic serum concentrations.
When a fever develops in a cancer patient, the patient must be thoroughly examined to
determine the cause and source of infection if there is one. There are some situations in
which the total white blood cell count can be normal or even high (e.g., leukemia) as a
 particular cell line is increased; but it is the absolute neutrophil count that should be paid
particular attention to. The bacteria that are most commonly associated with infections
in cancer patients arise from the dog and cat's own flora—often the gastrointestinal flora.
A comprehensive physical examination should be performed and blood and urine submit-
ted for laboratory analysis in order to identify the source of infection. Blood cultures may
be helpful in neutropenic patients because they may provide a definitive diagnosis of the
organism causing the infection and information about the sensitivity of the pathogen to
antimicrobial agents. A negative blood culture, however, may result if the patient is not
Figure 18.1. A fresh blood smear from a patient
with normal numbers of neutrophils. Note the three
neutrophils at the edges of this frame, and the
monocyte in the center. (Courtesy of Dr. Dennis
Meyer)
172Oncologic Emergencies
bacteremic at the time of the culture sample, there is insufficient blood, or the patient is
on an antibiotic; and does not rule out sepsis.
Every patient that has a fever associated with myelosuppression should have blood and
 urine collected for culture before bactericidal antibiotic therapy is instituted. However,
empirical antibiotic therapy should be commenced as soon as samples are collected, and
while culture results are pending. Final antibiotic therapy is chosen based on culture of
the offending organism from blood or urine and on identifying an antibiotic to which the
organism is sensitive.
When a patient is severely neutropenic, the use of recombinant granulocyte colony
stimulating factor (G-CSF: Neupogen) has not been found to be beneficial in cats and dogs
with sepsis, presumably because these patients have high endogenous G-CSF.
Summary: Febrile Neutropenia
Causes
Tumors in the absence of infection
 Release of cytokines by tumors that stimulate fever response
Tumor growth or spread into other tissues, including possible blockage
 Malignancy associated neutropenia or immunosuppression
+
 Chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression
 Blood component therapy reaction
Drug allergy/anaphylaxis
 IV catheter, especially if neutropenic and long duration or aseptic (i.e. not sterile)
placement
 Neutropenia
 Aseptic placement
 Catheter duration
 Urinary catheter
Neutropenia
Aseptic placement
Catheter duration
Multiple venipunctures
 Especially if neutropenic
 Prolonged hospitalization
Nosocomial infection
Clinical Features
 Client complaint
Lethargy
 Inappetence to anorexia
Diarrhea
Vomiting
 Clinical findings
Fever
Tachycardia
Dehydration
Febrile Neutropenia 173
 Decreased blood pressure
 Diarrhea possible
Abnormal lung sounds if pneumonia
 Heart murmur possible
Diagnostic Findings
Laboratory
May have low, normal, or increased white blood cell count. Attend to absolute
neutrophil count.
Thrombocytopenia possible
Evidence of dehydration
 Increased total solids
O
 Increased hematocrit
 Increased BUN
Hyperglycemia
Hypoglycemia
Metabolic acidosis
Active urine sediment
NOTE: in a neutropenic patient, pyuria may be absent.
Positive urine cultures
Positive blood culture
 Positive catheter (intravenous) culture
 Positive stool culture (if diarrhea)
 Cytology of transtracheal wash demonstrates bacteria
 Positive airway culture
ECG
Sinus tachycardia
Imaging
Radiography
 Possible pneumonia
 NOTE: may appear normal in neutropenic patient due to lack of neutrophil
infltrate
Echocardiogram
 Possible bacterial endocarditis
 Abdominal ultrasonogram
 Possible pyelonephritis or other source
Management
 Fever with normal neutrophil count, hydrated, no GI symptoms
Oral broad-spectrum antibiotic
Fever with mild to moderate neutropenia (between 3000 and 1000/μl)
：
 Restore adequate tissue perfusion if indicated by dehydration
Trimethoprim-sulfa
Fluoroquinolone
 Amoxicillin or amoxicillin clavulanate
Delay chemotherapy
174Oncologic Emergencies
s ass  i) ado s    as
Sterile IV catheter, isotonic crystalloids
Fluoroquinolone plus cephalexin or amoxicillin clavulanate
Dextrose if hypoglycemia
?
 Blood component therapy if indicated
 Delay myelosuppressive chemotherapy
Further Reading
Abrams-Ogg AG, Kruth SA. 2ooo. Infections associated with neutropenia in the dog and cat, in
Prescott JF, Baggott JD, Walker RD {eds): Antimicrobial Therapy in Veterinary Practice, 3rd ed.
Ames, IA, Blackwell Publishing, 471-489.
Couto CG. 1990. Management of complications of cancer chemotherapy. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract (4):1037-1053.
Moore AS. 2005. Practical chemotherapy. In: Etinger SJ, Feldman EC, Textbook of Veterirnary
Internal Medicine, 6th ed. St.Louis, Elsevier Saunders, 713-720.
Zemann BI, Moore AS, Rand WM, et al. 1998. A combination chemotherapy protocol (VELCAP-L)
for dogs with lymphoma. J Vet Intern Med 12:465-470.
Metabolic Emergencies
Lee Garrod
Hypercalcemia
Hypercalcemia is defined as a total serum calcium concentration greater than 12.0 mg/dl
 in dogs and greater than 11.0 mg/dl in cats or serum ionized calcium greater than 1.45 mmol/l
(dog) and 1.38 mmol/l (cat). The ionized calcium is used to measure the body's biologically
active calcium level. Calcium affects every organ system in the body and plays an impor-
tant role in intracellular and extracellular metabolism, which controls many processes,
such as nerve conduction, muscle contraction, coagulation, electrolyte and enzyme regula-
tion, and hormone release. Calcium metabolism is controlled by hormones from the entry
of calcium to the extracellular space from the bone and gastrointestinal tract to the excre-
  a  sa r  ae q   s n n os
extracellular fluid or of insufficient excretion.
 Hypercalcemia is the most common paraneoplastic syndrome in cancer patients, and in
turn, cancer is the most common cause of hypercalcemia in dogs and the second most
common cause, next to renal failure, in cats. In cats with hypercalcemia, 30% have been
found to have neoplasia; and up to 57% of dogs with hypercalcemia have been found to
have neoplasia.
The malignancies most commonly associated with hypercalcemia include lymphoma,
thymoma, anal sac gland adenocarcinoma, multiple myeloma, and pulmonary carcinoma
in dogs and lymphoma and squamous cell carcinoma in cats. These cancers can result in
hypercalcemia through one of three mechanisms: tumor production of a parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTH-rP and others), also referred to as humoral hypercalcemia
of malignancy (HHM); local bone destruction (e.g., bone metastases) that results in release
 of cytokines (osteoclast activating factors); and tumor production of vitamin D analogues.
Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy is the most common mechanism that produces
cancer-induced hypercalcemia. PTH-rP is very similar in structure to parathyroid hormone
and therefore causes the same physiologic response as parathyroid hormone. The increased
175
176Oncologic Emergencies
loss of calcium in the urine, decreased glomerular filtration rate, and increased tubular
reabsorption lead to oliguria, further increasing the calcium.
 Parathyroid adenoma (primary hyperparathyroidism) results in hypercalcemia by pro-
ducing excessive parathyroid hormone. Parathyroid hormone causes increased release of
calcium from bone by stimulation of osteoclasts, increases resorption of calcium from the
distal tubules of kidneys, and increases calcium absorption from the intestines through
activation of vitamin D.
Other causes of hypercalcemia in dogs and cats include acute and chronic renal failure,
hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease), vitamin D toxicity (vitamin D-containing rat
poison or topical ointments, or toxic plants), bone diseases associated with osteolysis,
granulomatous disease (fungal) and idiopathic (cats only).
Diagnosis
A high serum calcium level measurement should always be repeated to ensure that the
result is not a laboratory error.
The symptoms of hypercalcemia are multiple and nonspecific, but they include depres-
sion, weakness, polyuria, polydypsia, nocturia, vomiting, and anorexia. The diagnosis can
be made only by serum biochemistry. In-house serum chemistry analyzers and other instru-
mentation can measure the active (ionized) calcium or total serum calcium concentration.
Total serum calcium includes the active (ionized) calcium and the protein (primarily
 albumin) bound calcium, in addition to other nonprotein calcium complexes. In dogs,
alterations in the albumin and other plasma proteins can change this total calcium value.
A corrected serum calcium in the face of hypoalbuminemia can be estimated by calculat-
ing: Corrected calcium (mg/dl) = 3.5 - albumin (g/dl) + measured calcium (mg/dl). In cats,
there is no linear relationship between serum total calcium and serum albumin and total
protein concentrations. Whenever a calcium abnormality is suspected, ionized calcium is
the best measurement to determine whether hypercalcemia actually exists.
 Determining the cause of hypercalcemia can be diffcult. The clinical signs are similar
 in patients regardless of the underlying cause and depend on the degree of elevation of the
ionized calcium level. When faced with an elevated calcium concentration, it is important
to ensure that it is not due to lipemia or hemolysis in sampling or laboratory error. An
increase in the free ionized fraction of calcium can occur with acidosis. Cancer patients
with acidosis therefore may have an increase in clinical signs of hypercalcemia. A thorough
physical examination may detect abnormalities that may lead one to suspect a cause—for
example, enlarged peripheral lymph nodes with lymphoma or perianal mass with anal sac
carcinoma. The physical examination, however, may be unremarkable. Once an elevated
serum calcium concentration has been determined to reflect true hypercalcemia, and the
 possibility of transient hemoconcentration (as in dehydration) has been eliminated, the
patient undergoes further diagnostics.
Treatment
The severity of the hypercalcemia and presence of dehydration will typically dictate the
treatment plan for an individual patient. There are two objectives: reduce the elevated
Metabolic Emergencies177
serum calcium level and treat the underlying cause. Symptoms are usually very mild in
 patients with a total serum calcium up to 14mg/dl or ionized calcium up to 1.8 mmol/1.
Symptoms are varied but more severe when the values are greater and serious renal
damage can occur in addition to mineralization of soft tissues if the hypercalcemia is
allowed to persist. Therefore, emergency treatment must be initiated with intravenous
fluid therapy and sometimes specific drug treatment while the cause is being investigated.
Severe hypercalcemia is usually associated with clinically evident hypovolemia, and the
treatment plan must start with intravenous rehydration. Intravenous fluid diuresis with
0.9% sodium chloride (contains no calcium whereas lactated Ringer's does) helps enhance
urinary excretion and prevent nephrotoxicity. Renal failure (calcium nephropathy) occurs
if the calcium x phosphorus product exceeds 70. With fluid diuresis (two to three times
maintenance rate), the potassium level 
must
t be monitored and supplemented if it
decreases, especially in patients where there have been ongoing fluid losses or decreased
intake. It is not necessary to get the calcium to within normal limits; a substantial reduc-
tion to minimize symptoms and secondary tissue mineralization consequences is often
adequate. In cases of significant or persistent hypercalcemia, once the patient is well
hydrated, furosemide can be used to promote
calcium excretion. Prednisone, while
helpful in promoting calcium excretion as well and reducing bone and intestinal calcium
lished; this is because corticosteroids could mask lymphoma, making it diffcult to
diagnose.
Summary: Hypercalcemia
Causes
Malignant neoplasia (the following have been reported but there may be others)
 Lymphoma
Leukemia
 Anal sac apocrine gland adenocarcinoma
Thymoma
Multiple myeloma
 Mammary carcinoma
 Pancreatic carcinoma
 Squamous cell carcinoma
Nasal carcinoma
Thyroid carcinoma
 Parathyroid hyperplasia, adenoma or adenocarcinoma
+
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
Renal disease
Vitamin D toxicity
Idiopathic (cats)
Dehydration (mild hypercalcemia only)
Lab error or interference
 Lipemia
Hemolysis
178Oncologic Emergencies
Clinical Features
 Client complaint
Polyuria
Polydypsia
Nocturia
 Lethargy to weakness
Anorexia
Weight loss
Vomiting
Constipation
Diarrhea
 Clinical findings
Dehydration
 Enlarged lymph nodes 
Splenomegaly
Hepatomegaly
Anal sac mass
 Abdominal pain
Diagnostic Findings
Laboratory
Elevated total calcium
 Corrected if hypoalbuminemia in the dog
Elevated ionized calcium
Elevated renal values
 Elevated significantly if primary acute or chronic renal failure is cause
 Elevated secondarily if not primary renal failure and if the Ca x PO4 >70
Hyposthenuria
Cytology or histopathology of enlarged lymph nodes or other lesions
 Abnormal if neoplasia present
Bone marrow abnormal
 Lymphoma or leukemia
Multiple myeloma
ACTH simulation test abnormal
O
 Decreased sodium:potassium ratio = hypoadrenocorticism
Elevated PTH (parathyroid hormone)
 Parathyroid adenoma or primary hyperparathyroidism
Presence of PTH-rP (parathyroid hormone-related peptide)
Supports cancer but a negative test does not rule out cancer
Increased vitamin D
D
Normal sodium:potassium ratio and history or suspicion of vitamin D contain-
ing substance ingestion
Rat poison (calciferols)
■
Topical human ointment
■
Certain plants
Metabolic Emergencies179
ECG
 Bradycardia
 Prolonged PR interval
Short QT interval
Widened T waves
Arrhythmia
Imaging
Abdominal radiographs
0
 Spleen ± liver enlargement with some neoplasms such as lymphoma
Thoracic radiographs
Anterior mediastinal mass or lymph node enlargement with thymoma and
lymphoma
Abdominal ultrasonography
Enlarged lymph nodes with lymphoma or metastasis from other neoplasia,
other types of tumors could be identified
Thoracic ultrasonography
Ultrasonography of the parathyroid glands
Skeletal radiographs
 Lucent areas in bone with multiple myeloma
Management
 Correct dehydration and follow with diuresis using crystalloid fluids
0.9% sodium chloride (NaCl)
This alone is may be sufficient for less severe cases
 If large volumes are required, monitoring central venous pressure (CVP) is
advisable
 Potassium supplementation if serum K+ is low or decreases with aggressive
diuresis
Stimulate calciuresis
 Furosemide
01 mg/kg/hr CRI
O  After volume correction only
 Dopamine
 2 to 3μg/kg/min CRI 
Glucocorticoids
Stimulate calciuresis and impair intestinal absorption
Avoid until after confirming underlying diagnosis
 Inhibit osteoclastic bone resorption
Glucocorticoids
 Inhibit osteoclasts
¥口
 Avoid until after confirming underlying diagnosis
 Bisphosphonate therapy (e.g., pamidronate or etidronate)
 Inhibit osteoclasts
 Safe but expensive
O
Onset of action is not immediate, can take a few days
Calcitonin
 Rapid onset but very short-lived
180Oncologic Emergencies
Mithramycin
 If refractory to all other treatments
O CAUTION: hepatotoxic and nephrotoxic
Further Reading
Bergman PJ. 2001. Paraneoplastic syndromes. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwan EG, eds, Srmall Animal
Clinical Oncology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 35-53.
Elliott J, et al. 1991. Hypercalcemia in the dog: A study of 40 cases. J Small Anim Pract 32:564570.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. 2004. Hypercalcemia and primary hyperparathyroidism. In: Feldman EC.
Nelson RW, eds, Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, W.B.
Saunders, 455-496.
Ikeda K, Ogata E. 1994. Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy: Some enigmas on the clinical fea-
tures. J Cell Biochem 57:384-391.
Kruger JM, et al. 2007. Hypercalcemia and renal failure. Etiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and
treatment. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26:1417-1445.
Midkiff AM, et al. 2000. Idiopathic hypercalcemia in cats. J Vet Intern Med 14:619-626.
Nelson RW. 2003. Electrolyte imbalances. In: Nelson RW, Couto CG, eds, Small Animal Internal
Medicine, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 828-846.
Savary KCM, Vaden SL. 2000. Hypercalcemia in cats: a retrospective study of 71 cases (1991-1997).
JVet Intern Med 14:184-189.
Schenck PA, et al. 2006. Disorders of calcium: Hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia. In: DiBartola SP,
ed, Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 3rd ed., Philadelphia,
W.B. Saunders, 122-194.
Stewart AF. 2005. Hypercalcemia associated with cancer. N Engl J Med 352:373-379.
Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemia is defined as a serum blood glucose concentration of less than 70 mg/dl
decreases. Symptoms rarely occur until blood glucose is below 50 mg/dl. Glucose is the
primary energy source of all cells, especially the brain. Glucose is also critical in lipid
metabolism and the production of proteins, and it is the precursor for the synthesis of
many substances, for example, glycogen.
Clinical symptoms usually reflect the rate of decrease of the blood glucose concentration,
the underlying cause of hypoglycemia, and the chronicity of the problem.
Common causes of hypoglycemia include the following: insulin shock if the patient
received insulin, adrenal insufficiency or hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease), liver
failure, sepsis, xylitol ingestion, and neoplasia. Malignancy-associated hypoglycemia
can be caused by a number of neoplasms, both pancreatic and nonpancreatic. The
most common tumors associated with hypoglycemia are insulinoma, hepatoma, and
carcinoma.
 Insulinoma is an uncommon primary tumor of the insulin-secreting beta cells of
the pancreatic islets and is a relatively common cause of hypoglycemia in older dogs. The
Metabolic Emergencies181
majority of animals are middle age to older. Insulinoma is extremely rare in cats. The
tumor produces increased serum insulin levels, and this in turn results in profound hypo-
glycemia, especially during periods of fasting.
There have been numerous extrapancreatic tumors associated with hypoglycemia,
including hepatocellular carcinoma, leiomyosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma (liver and spleen),
diffuse metastatic melanoma, and salivary gland adenocarcinoma. These tumors do not
secrete insulin but instead are thought to cause hypoglycemia through unregulated produc-
tion of insulinlike growth factors.
Diagnosis
The majority of patients that present as an emergency with hypoglycemia have a cause
other than cancer, and this is especially true in cats. In an emergency setting, an animal
with diabetes mellitus that has received too much insulin for its blood sugar needs is the
most common presenting cause of hypoglycemia. In nondiabetic dogs presenting with
hypoglycemia, there are other considerations in addition to a possible cancer process.
 Physical exam findings are unremarkable in most patients presenting with a hypoglycemic
crisis. The history of the patient—medications, including insulin, possible ingestion of
xylitol—will certainly rule out these as potential causes. The signalment—young versus
older—may also lead to a suspicion of one disease over than another (e.g., Addison's
disease versus insulinoma).
Animals with insulin-secreting tumors of the pancreas may present with a history of
episodes of weakness, ataxia, or incoordination, or seizure activity due to episodes of
hypoglycemia. The history of symptoms is rarely acute. Neoplastic beta cells of the pan-
creas produce insulin, resulting in hyperinsulinemia. Excess insulin causes hypoglycemia,
 and this is the most consistent serum biochemical abnormality in animals with insulinoma.
 However, the serum blood glucose may actually be normal on initial presentation. If this
is the case, the patient should be fasted and a serum glucose measurement repeated. Once
the serum glucose decreases to below 60 mg/dl, a concurrent serum sample is collected to
measure the serum insulin. In a normal animal, the insulin should be suppressed in the
face of hypoglycemia. However, if it is normal or elevated, an insulinoma or insulin
hormonelike-producing tumor should be suspected.
Additional diagnostic tests are likely needed to identify an insulinoma and exclude other
causes of hypoglycemia. Insulinomas are not visible on radiographs of the abdomen, and
 pulmonary metastatic lesions are extremely rare. Ultrasonography of the pancreas can
assist in identification of a nodule or mass, although the tumors are commonly very small
(only 2 to 3 cm) at the time of diagnosis and can be difficult to detect. However, metastatic
lesions in the liver or lymph nodes may be visible. The most common metastatic sites are
the abdominal lymph nodes, liver, peripancreatic mesentery, and omentum. If ultrasonog-
raphy is unremarkable and insulinoma still suspected, computed tomography (CT) or
Treatment
 Emergency treatment for a hypoglycemic crisis is symptomatic and is the same no matter
what the underlying diagnosis. The goal is to alleviate clinical symptoms, not necessarily
182 Oncologic Emergencies
fluids until a patient is no longer critical, i.e., no longer seizuring.
Surgery is the primary treatment option for patients with hypoglycemia caused by a
tumor. The postoperative prognosis and need for adjunctive care depends on the specific
diagnosis and stage of disease; some have the potential to have fair to good outcomes.
For insulinoma, there is usually immediate and complete resolution of hypoglycemia
 immediately after surgical excision; surgery increases life expectancy over medical manage-
ment alone, but it is rarely curative and in the majority of patients hypoglycemia eventu-
ally recurs. Postoperative complications such as pancreatitis may occur, but they are
menting with glucocorticoids to counteract hyperinsulinemia, and limiting excitement and
exercise. Prednisone increases hepatic
gluconeogenesis and antagonizes the effects of
insulin on peripheral tissues {insulin
resistance};
; the effects may not be long-lasting,
however, because the liver eventually maximizes gluconeogenesis and glucose release, and
the peripheral effects of prednisone are eventually overcome. Diazoxide is an orally admin-
istered drug that can directly inhibit insulin secretion from beta cells and also stimulates
the liver to produce more glucose resulting in increased serum glucose levels.
Summary: Hypoglycemia
Causes
 Neoplasia
 Insulin producing tumor (insulinoma ) 
 Insulin hormonelike producing tumor
O
Hepatoma
 Hepatocellular carcinoma
¥口
 Leiomyosarcoma
Hemangiosarcoma
0Melanoma
0Adenocarcinoma
Drug
●
Insulin
Xylitol
 Liver Dysfunction
 Portosystemic shunt (PSS)
Cirrhosis
Acute liver failure
 Hypoadrenocorticism
Dog, rare in cat
Sepsis
Overwhelming infection
 Decreased oral intake
Uncommon to cause decrease to point of seizures
Laboratory error
Unseparated serum sits too long allowing the RBCs to metabolize glucose
Metabolic Emergencies 183
ClinicalFeatures
Client complaint
 Inappetence or anorexia
Polyphagia
Disorientation/incoordination
 Extreme lethargy and weakness
Trembling or twitching
Seizures
 Clinical findings
Muscle weakness
 Trembling or twitching
Tachycardia
Convulsions
Coma
Diagnostic Findings
Laboratory
Hypoglycemia
Hypokalemia
 May be present in anorexic animals or diabetic patients
 Elevated white blood cell count or profound neutropenia
 If overwhelming infection or sepsis
1
Bile acids abnormal
 If liver dysfunction or failure
ACTH stimulation test abnormal
 If hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
 Insulin:glucose ratio >30
 Insulin level normal or increased
01
 In the face of hypoglycemia, insulin dosing should be DECREASED in diabetic
patients
 0Rule out insulinoma or nonpancreatic tumor
Imaging
Abdominal radiographs
apparent
Abdominal ultrasonography
 Evaluate the pancreas for presence of insulinoma and the liver and abdominal
lymph nodes for local spread of the insulinoma
Insulinoma may not be detectable if very small
CT scan
May be the most sensitive imaging tool for insulinoma
Thoracic radiographs
 Extremely rare to see metastasis to lungs with insulinoma but other neoplasia
possible
184Oncologic Emergencies
Management
 Emergency treatment of hypoglycemic crisis
 Intravenous crystalloid fluids to maintain hydration
● 1 to 5 ml 50% dextrose slow intravenously over 10 minutes
Medications
●Prednisone
00.5 to 2mg/kg PO divided BID
 0  Beneficial effects may wear off quickly
●Diazoxide
口
 10 to 40mg/kg divided BID
O Adverse effect: sodium retention
OHydrochlorothiazide can be added to counteract the adverse effects secondary
to this medication
● Octreotide
Diet
●
High fat, high protein and low carbohydrates (carbohydrates cause insulin surges)
or at least complex carbohydrates if present (oatmeal, bran, brown rice)
 Frequent small meals: 3 to 6 times a day
Manage the underlying cause
 Surgery and/or chemotherapy
Further Reading
Cohen M, et al. 2003. Gastrointestinal leiomyosarcoma in 14 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 17:107-
110.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. 2004. Beta-cell neoplasia: insulinoma. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds,
Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 642-
643.
Fischer JR, et al. 2000. Glucagon constant-rate infusion: a novel strategy for the management of
hyperinsulinemic-hypoglycemic crisis in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:27-32.
Leifer CE, et al. 198s. Hypoglycemia associated with nonislet cell tumor in 13 dogs. J Arm Vet Med
Assoc 186:53-55.
Simpson KW, et al. 1995. Evaluation of the long-acting somatostatin analogue octreotide in the
management of insulinoma in three dogs. J Small Anim Pract 36:161-165.
Tobin RL, et al. 1999. Outcome of surgical versus medical treatment of dogs with beta cell neopla
sia: 39 cases (1990-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:226-230.
Hypokalemia
Normal plasma potassium [K+] is 3.5-5.0mmol/1. Symptomatic hypokalemia usually
occurs with a plasma potassium [K+] <2.5 mmol/l. Potassium is important to maintain
Metabolic Emergencies185
heart, gastrointestinal, and neuromuscular function through establishing and maintaining
resting membrane potentials. The body's potassium stores are maintained by food inges-
tion and must keep up with potassium normally lost in the urine. When intake decreases
and excretion increases, hypokalemia is the consequence. Hypomagnesemia can lead to
potassium depletion and hypokalemia because it reduces intracellular potassium movement
 and also leads to decreased renal potassium resorption in the loop of Henle and the corti-
cal collecting duct.
Hypokalemia can cause profound muscle weakness. Although cancer patients rarely
present as an emergency due to acute hypokalemia unless profoundly cachexic, it is worth
noting in this section because various severities of hypokalemia are associated with prob
lems encountered commonly in cancer patients. The presence of concurrent hypokalemia
 in these patients may exacerbate their symptoms.
Although renal failure is by far the most common cause of hypokalemia in dogs and
cats, especially through loss of potassium in urine, potassium can also be lost excessively
through the gastrointestinal tract. Therefore, decreased intake may deplete the body's
potassium stores, as seen with the anorexic patient. Anorexia can result from the cancer
itself, or secondary to chemotherapy. Vomiting and diarrhea may disrupt electrolyte
homeostasis, resulting in hypokalemia. Metabolic alkalosis secondary to vomiting will
 increase mobilization of potassium from the extracellular space to the intracellular space.
o  e o         p 
 However, adequate hydration and diuresis in patients receiving a nephrotoxic drug mini-
mizes the occurrence of the latter.
Diagnosis
The hypokalemic patient will present with symptoms of their primary disease and, depend-
ing on the degree of hypokalemia, will have mild lethargy to profound weakness. In the
author's opinion, cats will more commonly suffer the clinical consequences of hypokale-
mia. Mild hypokalemia (3.0 to 3.5 mmol/l) will rarely result in clinical symptoms. Neuro-
muscular weakness, gastrointestinal disturbance, and cardiac abnormalities can be
 prominent when the potassium is below 2.5 mmol/l. Both hypokalemia and hyperkalemia
can be arrhythmogenic. Hypokalemia predisposes the myocardium to after-depolarizations
and can result in ectopic beats. Hypokalemia can cause a metabolic alkalosis, which can
worsen potassium imbalance because alkalosis can prolong hypokalemia.
Treatment
Therapy for hypokalemia is directed at correcting the underlying cause (loss) and starting
replacement with a potassium salt (potassium chloride, potassium phosphate). Patients
with severe or acute hypokalemia are initially treated with intravenous potassium chloride
(KCl) solution in 0.9% NaCl. Patients with severe hypokalemia should be potassium
" loaded" but the rate of potassium chloride supplementation should not exceed 0.5 mEq/
kg/hr. The excessive amounts of potassium lost through the urinary and gastrointestinal
tracts, even if only mild, can worsen in patients on intravenous fluids through dilution,
and supplementation is necessary in these patients as well.
186 Oncologic Emergencies
Summary: Hypokafemia
Causes
 Decreased intake
Anorexia due to cancer
 Anorexia due to chemotherapy
Increased gastrointestinal losses
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Renal failure
Polyuric chronic renal failure
Acute tubular necrosis
Metabolic alkalosis
 Increased mobilization of [K*] into cells (vomiting)
Drugs
Diuretics
 Nephrotoxic drugs
Clinical Features
Client complaint
 Inappetence or anorexia
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Constipation
Polyuria
Extreme lethargy and weakness
 Clinical findings
+
Muscle weakness
 Dehydration
Tachycardia
Arrhythmias
Diagnostic Findings
Laboratory
Hypokalemia
 Hypomagnesemia
Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic alkalosis
●
Elevated renal values
O
 Polyuric renal failure
Acute tubular damage
ECG
Elevated P wave
Flattened T wave
 Increased R wave amplitude
Metabolic Emergencies 187
 S-T segment depression
 Prolongation of the QT interval
Management
Treat the underlying cause if possible (e.g., vomiting)
 Intravenous crystalloid fluid therapy
●
 Correct hydration
●
 Caution to monitor further potassium dilution
 Potassium supplementation
Oral potassium solution if very mild
Mild hypokalemia (serum K+ = 3.0-3.5 mmol/l): 2-3mEq KCl/kg
Moderate hypokalemia (serum K+ = 2.5-3.0 mmol/l): 3-5 mEq KCl/kg
 o   =    
●
Do not exceed 0.5 mEq/kg/hr
Further Reading
Church D. 200s. Electrolyte disorders. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds, Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 6th ed. St. Louis, Elsevier Saunders, 236-240.
Feldman EC, Ettinger SJ. 1977. Electrocardiographic changes associated with electrolyte distur-
bances. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 7:487-496.
 Phillips SL, Polzin DJ. 1998. Clinical disorders of potassium homeostasis. Hyperkalemia and hypo-
kalemia.Vet ClinNorthAmSmall AnimPract 2:S4S-S66.
Hypomagnesemia
The normal range for serum magnesium [Mg] in the dog is 1.7 to 2.4mg/dl and 1.8 to
2.5 mg/dl in the cat. Hypomagnesemia occurs when the serum ionized magnesium is less
than 1.2 mg/dl. Although only less than 1% of the body's total magnesium is in the plasma,
magnesium is an essential mineral and is a cofactor to multiple enzyme reactions in the
body, most importantly forming and using ATP. Magnesium is an important regulator of
sodium, potassium, and calcium channels. In addition, magnesium causes bronchodilation
through relaxation of bronchial smooth muscle and has many neurologic effects such as
reducing electrical excitation and blocking acetylcholine.
Diagnosis
Hypomagnesemia is included in this textbook because, in addition to hypokalemia, it can
be associated with generalized muscle weakness when mild. Hypomagnesemia causes cells
In more severe hypomagnesemia, clinical symptoms are similar to symptoms seen with
hypocalcemia (depression, ataxia, agitation, tremors, seizures). In humans, the develop-
ment of hypomagnesemia during an ICU stay is associated with a worse prognosis. If a
188Oncologic Emergencies
patient is diagnosed with hypokalemia or hypocalcemia and is not responding to treat-
 ment, it may be associated with hypomagnesemia, and thus it is important to measure this
cation.
Treatment
Life-threatening hypomagnesemia with severe clinical signs (ventricular arrhythmias) can
be treated with magnesium sulfate 50% or magnesium chloride 50% administered intra-
venously slowly. Less severe deficiencies are treated with a constant rate infusion with
magnesium sulfate 50% or magnesium chloride diluted to less than 20% in 5% dextrose
in water.
Summary: Hypomagnesemia
Causes
 Decreased intake
Anorexia due to cancer
 Anorexia due to chemotherapy
Increased gastrointestinal losses
Vomiting
Diarrhea
 Renal failure
Polyuric chronic renal failure
Acute tubular necrosis
Metabolic alkalosis
Drugs
Diuretics
 Nephrotoxic chemotherapy drugs
Cisplatin (profound)
 Doxorubicin (in cats)
Methotrexate
 Streptozotocin
Clinical Features
Client complaint
Anorexia
Nausea/vomiting
Diarrhea
Depression
 Extreme lethargy and weakness
Incoordination
●
Ataxia
Tremors
Seizures
Metabolic Emergencies 189
Clinical findings
Muscle weakness
Dehydration
Tachycardia
Arrhythmias
Ventricular arrhythmias
Tremors
Seizures
Diagnostic Findings
Laboratory
Hypomagnesemia
Hypokalemia
Hypocalcemia
Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic alkalosis
 Elevated renal values
 Polyuric renal failure
Acute tubular damage
O
ECG
Elevated P wave
Flattened T wave
 Increased R wave amplitude
 S-T segment depression
 Prolongation of the QT interval
Management
Eliminate the underlying cause if possible
 Intravenous crystalloid fuid therapy
Correct hydration
 Magnesium chloride 50% or magnesium sulfate 50% supplementation
Mg < 1.2 mg/dl
1
0.75 to 1.0 mEq/kg/day
0
Administer in dextrose in water as CRI
Further Reading
Dhupa N, Proulx J. 1998. Hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 28:587-608.
Schonwald S. 2004. Magnesium. In: Dart RC, ed, Medical Toxicology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia,
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 901-902
Soliman HM, et al. 2003. Development of ionized hypomagnesemia is associated with higher
mortality rates. Crit Care Med 31:1082-1087.
190 Oncologic Emergencies
Tumor Lysis Syndrome
Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS) involves several potentially life-threatening electrolyte meta-
bolic derangements including hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, and secondary hypocal-
cemia. TLS results from treatment-related cell lysis (apoptosis) and can occur after
chemotherapy or radiotherapy (usually after the initial treatment). This syndrome is rarely
encountered in veterinary medicine, but when it does occur it is most commonly seen
within 48 hours following initial chemotherapy of large-volume, highly chemosensitive
tumors with a high proliferation rate, such as high-grade lymphoma with a large tumor
burden or acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Therefore, an index of suspicion should be main-
tained when evaluating the patient who has undergone recent chemotherapy.
 In TLs, the massive release of intracellular tumor products and metabolites after tumor
cell death can lead to acute renal failure. The volume of products from the damaged cells
overwhelms the body's ability to eliminate them. Intracellular potassium is released from
dividing tumor cells contain an increased amount of phosphorus relative to the normal
cell (4x the amount). Phosphorus increases and can result in profound hypocalcemia as
the phosphorus binds with the calcium.
Diagnosis
The symptoms of TLS are usually nonspecific, but they range from vomiting to collapse.
The presenting symptoms may indicate dehydration only or uremia and volume overload.
Severe cases can present with seizures or weakness or collapse secondary to cardiac
arrhythmias. Hyperkalemia produces life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias. Hyperphospha-
temia is manifested as neurologic symptoms (including seizures) and arrhythmias. Once
the calcium X phosphorus product exceeds 70, nephrocalcinosis occurs, resulting in renal
failure. Other products are also released that damage the tubules of the kidneys. The renal
failure worsens in the face of hypovolemia or dehydration.
The diagnosis is made through laboratory evaluation of multiple parameters and the
recent history of starting chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Laboratory values often show
elevated renal parameters, elevated potassium, elevated phosphorus, and a decreased
calcium level. The electrocardiogram abnormalities will be the result of the severity of the
electrolyte abnormalities (especially potassium) and a severe bradycardia is evident with
significant hyperkalemia.
Treatment
TLS is a serious emergency if it occurs, not only because of the severity of the electrolyte
disturbances seen, but because of the multiple electrolyte abnormalities that occur at once.
Patients require immediate hospitalization for treatment and cardiac monitoring. Intra-
venous fuids are administered to preserve renal function, but caution must be used in the
face of cardiac abnormalities to avoid volume overload. Hyperkalemia is treated aggres-
sively with the medications outlined in Table 19.1. Similarly, hypocalcemia is treated if
the patient is symptomatic.
Metabolic Emergencies 191
Summary: Tumor Lysis Syndrome
Causes
 Neoplasia
 Lymphoma
0   Dog and cat reported
Leukemia, particular ALL (acute lymphoblastic leukemia)
 Recent chemotherapy or radiotherapy
Predisposed if preexisting renal disease
Large tumor or highly proliferative neoplasia
Clinical Features
Weakness
Vomiting
Diarrhea
 Bradycardia
Collapse
Death
Diagnostic Findings
Laboratory
 Hyperkalemia
 Hyperphosphatemia
?
 Hypocalcemia
 Elevated renal values (BUN and creatinine)
Imaging
 None indicated, although massive decrease in previously identifed tumor burden
would increase suspicion for TLS
ECG
 Bradycardia
 Diminished P wave amplitude
 Increased PR interval
Increased QRS interval
Management
Intravenous fluid therapy with 0.9% sodium chloride for diuresis
Emergency treatment of hyperkalemia if ECG abnormalities
 1 to 2 mEq /kg sodium bicarbonate IV slow, or
1 to 2 ml/kg 50% dextrose IV slow, or
 0.5 to 1 U/kg regular insulin IV WITH 2g 50% dextrose per unit insulin, or
 0.5 to 1 ml/kg of 10% calcium gluconate IV slow over 15 minutes closely monitor-
ing the electrocardiogram monitor
Table 19.1. Treatment of metabolic abnormalities
Problem
Intervention
Dosages
Comments
Hypercalcemia
Intravenous
2 to 3 times maintenance
0.9% NaCl
after rehydration 
Furosemide
1-4 mg/kg SID to TID orally
ONLY if well hydrated 
OR
 1-5 mg/kg/hr with diuresis
titrating to effect
 Prednisone
1 mg/kg/BID
Prednisone or
OR
 dexamethasone may
 0.1-0.2 mg/kg SC or IV every
interfere with accurate
 Dexamethasone
diagnosis if done before 
12hr
confirmed
Pamidronate
0.65-2.0 mg/kg intravenous
Safe
OR
OR
Effective
1.3 mg/kg in 150ml saline
Expensive
intravenously over 2 hr
Use if severe and diuresis
 Etidronate
5mg/kg daily orally
and furosemide
ineffective or severe
hypercalcemia 
Can repeat in 1-3 weeks
Calcitonin
(dog) 4.5-81U/kg SC every
Expensive
8hr
 Short-lived efficacy
OR
5 IU/kg SC every 12 hr
(cat) 4 IU/kg IM every 12 hr
 Hypoglycemia
Karo syrup
0.5-1 ml/kg orally
Only if conscious and alert
Dextrose 50% IV
1-5 ml of 50% dextrose
Avoid excess as can cause
intravenously over 
 rebound hypoglycemia
10-15min
IV crystalloids with 2.5-5%
dextrose over 24-48 hr
Prednisone
0.25-0.5 mg/kg orally every
Adverse effects may be
12hr: dose may be
uncomfortable for
increased up to 2-3 mg/kg
owners at higher doses
every 12 hr
Diazoxide
 Initial dose 5mg/kg orally
 Used in conjunction with
every 12 hr
 prednisone 
Titrate upward to 30mg/kg
every 12 hr if needed
Glucagon
 5 ng/kg/min intravenous
Reconstitute 1 mg and add 
constant rate infusion; can
to 1 liter 0.9% NaCl for
titrate up to 30ng/kg/min
a 1 μg/ml concentration
 to make the CRl rate
reasonable
Octreotide
20-40μg SC every 12hr;
Expensive
increase to every 8 hr if
Safe
needed 
May be ineffective in
many
Use as last resort
192
Table 19.1. Continued
Problem
Intervention
Dosages
Comments
 Hypokalemia 
Mild (3.0-
Oral potassium
IV solutions:
3.5 mmol/l)
 supplementation if 
 Do not exceed 0.5mEq/kg/
hydration adequate;
hour
otherwise, 2-3 mEq KCl/kg
in crystalloid fluid 
intravenously
Moderate (2.5-
3-5mEq KCl/kg in crystalloid
3.0mmol/l)
fluid intravenously
Severe (less than
5-10 mEq KCI/kg in
2.5 mmol/l)
crystalloid fluid
intra venously
 Hypoma gnesemia
Mild to moderate 
Magnesium sulfate 50%
(<1.2 mg/dl)
OR
 magnesium chloride 10% in 
 5% dextrose in water at
0.75-1.0mEq/kg/d CRl
Severe (life-
Magnesium sulfate 50%
threatening)
OR
 magnesium chloride 10% at
0.15-0.3 mEq/kg
intravenously slow over
15 min
Hyperphosphatemia
Minimize
Aluminum hydroxide 500 mg
 Phosphate binders may
 phosphate
with food every 12-24hr
 interfere with drug
intake
absorption
 Phosphorus
 binders
(aluminum 
hydroxide)
 Hyperkalemia
 Regular insulin 
0.5-1 IU/kg IV
Give WITH 2 g 50%
 dextrose per unit insulin 
Dextrose 50%
 1-2 ml/kg intravenously
Give slowly IV
intra venous
Calcium
0.5-1 ml/kg intravenously
 Do not give with
gluconate 10%
 bicarbonate; monitor
intravenous
ECG with
administration; can be 
repeated as needed
Sodium
1 -2 mEq/kg intravenously
Use if acidosis
bicarbonate
Give slowly IV
Hypocalcemia
Calcium
0.5-1.5ml/kg of 10%
 Use only if symptomatic;
gluconate 10%
 calcium gluconate
caution if severe
intravenous
OR
hyperphosphatemia
5-15 mg/kg/hr of 10%
Continuous
 calcium gluconate IV CRI
electrocardiogram
monitoring necessary
193
194Oncologic Emergencies
Further Reading
Calia CM, et al. 1996. Acute tumor lysis syndrome in a cat with lymphoma. J Vet Intern Med
10:409-411.
Couto CG. 1990. Management of complications of cancer chemotherapy. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 20:1037-1050.
 a go  g s i  a ah    
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:691-696.
Anaphylaxis
Lee Garrod
An allergic reaction can occur when the body reacts negatively to a foreign substance
(antigen) and triggers the immune system. The immune system overreacts, resulting in a
hypersensitivity or allergic reaction. Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction to a foreign
agent that affects the entire body and can be fatal. Anaphylactic reactions to some che-
motherapy drugs may occur within seconds or minutes if given intravenously.
There are 2 types of anaphylaxis: anaphylactic reaction and anaphylactoid reaction. The
clinical picture of an anaphylactic and anaphylactoid reaction does not differ.
In an anaphylactic reaction, the immune system has become sensitized to an antigen to
which it has been previously exposed (e.g., a drug), thus forming antibodies (IgE) such
that on subsequent exposure, they trigger a sudden, severe systemic allergic reaction
through the release of histamine and other vasoactive substances (leukotrienes, prostaglan-
dins, heparin) from basophils (bloodstream) and mast cells (tissue).
An anaphylactoid reaction also results in the immediate release of histamine and vaso-
active substances but does not involve an immunologic mechanism (non-IgE-mediated).
agent is not required
In both reactions,
the
esultisrespiratory
difficulty as a result of bronchoconstriction
and possibly pulmonary
potension through massive vasodilation, edema from
increased vascular permeability, shock,
and
 possibly gastrointestinal symptoms. Anaphy-
Any drug could potentially be associated
with
 an anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reac
tion. However, the most commonly used chemotherapy drugs associated with anaphylac-
toid effects are L-asparaginase and doxorubicin. L-asparaginase (a bacterial enzyme) is a
foreign protein and can result in an anaphylactic reaction. This is a significant problem in
humans (because it is usually given IV) and is uncommon in dogs (usually administered
IM or SC). However, an allergic reaction associated with facial edema and pain at the
injection site 24 hours later has been reported in dogs. Doxorubicin has infrequently been
documented to produce a nonspecific histamine release resulting in a potential increase in
195
196 Oncologic Emergencies
serum histamine levels inducing an anaphylactoid reaction manifested as hypotension and
tachycardia. There may be an increased risk of this reaction associated with the use of
generic doxorubicin.
 Other chemotherapy agents have rarely been associated with anaphylactoid reactions.
Ifosfamide has been rarely reported to cause this reaction in cats; in dogs and cats, IV
etoposide (actually the diluent vehicle polysorbate-80) and IV paclitaxel (actually the
diluent vehicle Cremophor-EL) are associated with anaphylactoid reactions severe enough
to make some authors suggest these drugs not be used in pet animals.
The route of administration affects the incidence and severity of a reaction. In order of
decreasing incidence and severity of associated reactions, they are intravenous, intramus-
cular, intracavitary, subcutaneous, intradermal, and oral. Other factors known to affect
the incidence or severity of hypersensitivity reactions include the class of the drug, the
dose, the rate of infusion, the interval between doses, the cumulative dose, the number of
previous exposures to the drug, and administration of prophylactic agents (the dosing and
timing of administration of the prophylactic agents and the thoroughness of the prevention
plan).
Diagnosis
Anaphylaxis should be assumed and the patient treated accordingly when a patient has a
known risk factor (e.g., history of exposure to a drug associated with anaphylaxis), and
is showing signs including restlessness, swollen face or legs (Figure 20.1), itchy head,
urticaria (Figure 20.2) vomiting/diarrhea, dyspnea, pallor or hypotension.
Treatment
The three important elements in the treatment of anaphylaxis are early recognition, airway
maintenance, and hemodynamic support. Anaphylaxis is generally treated with fluid
Figure 20.1.  A cat showing marked facial swell-
ing as an anaphylactoid reaction to ifosfamide
chemotherapy. (Courtesy of Dr. Kenneth Rassnick)
Anaphylaxis197
Figure 20.2. Severe urticaria on the abdominal
skin of a dog receiving etoposide. This is an ana-
phylactoid reaction to the vehicle diluent, not
the chemotherapy itself, and it can be lessened
with a slow infusion rate and premedication using
corticosteroids and antihistamines. (Courtesy of
Dr. Gregory Ogilvie)
therapy (isotonic crystalloid and colloid) to maintain perfusion and blood pressure, as well
as a combination of epinephrine, diphenhydramine (antihistamine), and a corticosteroid
of its inotropic and chronotropic effects on the heart, bronchodilation, and increased
intracellular concentrations of cyclic adenosine monophosphate, which decreases synthesis
and release of inflammatory mediators of anaphylaxis. However one study failed to show
an improvement in hemodynamics in dogs with anaphylactic shock that were given epi-
 nephrine, and it even identified further impairment of left ventricular performance. Recom-
mendations for treatment of anaphylaxis are summarized in Table 20.1.
Summary: Anaphylaxis
Causes
L-Asparaginase
 DO NOT USE IV route; IM or SQ preferred
 Pretreat with antihistamine ± corticosteroid if patient at risk
Doxorubicin
Administered by slow IV under close observation
Clinical Features
 Client complaint
Restlessness
Swelling of face or limbs
Itchy, red skin (hives)
 Polydypsia and polyuria
Diarrhea
Table 20.1. Treatment recommendations for anaphylaxis
 Discontinue the drug
immediately
Delay the absorption
if possible 
 Oxygen by mask or
flow by
Patent airway
Intubate if evidence of upper
 airway obstruction (e.g.
laryngeal edema)
Intravenous isotonic 
Shock bolus in cases of
90ml/kg/hr dogs shock
crystalloid (normal
hypotension, and then 
bolus;: 50-60 ml/kg/hr cats
saline or lactated 
reassess and repeat as
shock bolus
Ringer's solution?
necessary
Epinephrine
Less severe cases: SQ or IM at
More severe cases: 0.01 mg/
0.02 mg/kg (0.2 ml/kg of
Monitor heart rate, rhythm and
a dose of 0.01 mg/kg: repeat
kg of the 1:10,000 solution
1:10,000) can be given into the
blood pressure especially with 
 at 20min intervals as needed
given slowly IV (same as
trachea if the patient is intubated
intravenous administration due to
0.1 ml/kg of 1:10,000 1V)
and IV access cannot be
 potential development of arrhythmias
obtained 
and hypertension (at high dosages)
Intravenous colloid
Small incremental boluses of
1 ml/kg/hr may also be used
If a coagulopathy is suspected,
(Hetastarch) if
1 0ml/kg/hr in dogs and 6ml/
once the patient has been 
blood products, especially fresh
hypotension persists
kg/hr in cats
resuscitated
frozen plasma, may be
necessary: dose of 10-20ml/kg
over several hours (faster if
needed for volume resuscitation)
Glucocorticoids
 0.5-1 mg/kg Iv for
2.0mg/kg IV prednisolone
dexamethasone sodium
sodium succinate or
 phosphate OR
methylprednisolone sodium 
succinate over 20min
Antihistamine
 Diphenhydramine 0.5-1.0mg/
 Tripelennamine HCI 1 mg/
kg SLOw IV (can exacerbate
kg IM (dog, cat)
hypotension) or 1.0-2.0 mg/kg 
IM OR
H Blocker
cimetidine, ranitidine, and 
Dose varies with each of
famotidine, can be used to
the Hz blockers
 decrease gastric acid secretion
stimulated by histamine
1F HYPOTENSION
Epinephrine CRl 1 ml/kg/hr
Dopamine 5-10 μg/kg/min
PERSISTS
OR 1-1 0μg/kg/min: add 4 mg
CRI; start low, titrate
to 1000 ml normal saline
upward
(preferred over dopamine in 
anaphylaxis). Rapid effect,
seen within 15 seconds.
Decrease rate once BP
increases and HR decreases.
Slow down if HR increases
 immediately. Do NOT stop 
infusion suddenly when
 stable: wean off slowly.
1F RESPIRATORY
Terbutaline 0.01 mg/kg SC or
Isoproterenol 0.1-0.2 mg 
COMPROMISE
IM
IM dog 0.004-0.006 mg IM
PERSISTS
cat q 30min
lntense monitoring
Respiratory rate and rhythm
for 12-24hr
Heart rate and rhythm
postanaphylaxis
Blood pressure
Pulse oximetry and/or arterial 
blood gases
Urine output 
PCV and total solids
Blood glucose
 Coagulation parameters
Renal values
Electrolytes and acid base
 status
Liver values
199
200
Oncologic Emergencies
Vomiting
 Dyspnea, respiratory distress
 Seizures or collapse
Death
 Clinical findings
Urticaria (hives)and erythema
Edema (any tissue)
 Pale mucous membranes
Upper airway obstruction (laryngeal edema)
Respiratory distress—lower
Sinus tachycardia
Dysrhythmia (bradyarrhythmia or tachyarrhythmia)
Hypotension
Weak thready pulse
Vomiting
Diarrhea (may be hemorrhagic)
Collapse
Death
+
Diagnostic Findings
Laboratory
PCV increased, hemoconcentration (loss of plasma volume due to increased vas-
cular permeability)
Total solids (TS) reduced (loss of plasma volume)
Leukocytosis, neutrophilia with left shift
Eosinopenia initially followed by eosinophilia
 Increased MCV
●
Stress hyperglycemia
Increased clotting times (PT, APTT)
Increased creatine kinase (CK)
Increased aspartate aminotransferase (AST}
Increased alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
：
Increased creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
●
Low pH (acidosis)
 Increased anion gap
Evidence of DIC (decreased platelets, decreased fbrinogen, increased FDPs, and
D-dimer)
ECG
Sinus tachycardia
 Bradycardia
Supraventricular tachycardia
Imaging
Radiography
Microcardia
 0  Pulmonary edema—noncardiogenic
Anaphylaxis201
Management
 Depends upon the clinical features upon presentation
 Prevention and anticipation (know the drug, the risk, and the patient risk)
●
 Pretreat with antihistamine
●
 Pretreat with corticosteroids
●
 Observe for up to 1 hour posttreatment
       
Further Reading
Mink SN, et al. 1998. Effect of bolus epinephrine on systemic hemodynamics in canine anaphylac
tic shock. Cardiovasc Res 40:546-556.
Murrant T, Bihari D. 2000. Anaphylaxis and anaphylactoid reactions. Int J Clin Pract 54:322-328
Ogilvie GK, et al. 1994. Prevalence of anaphylaxis associated with the intramuscular administration
of L-asparaginase to 81 dogs with cancer: 1989-1991. J Am Anim Hosp 4:362-365.
Eschalier A, et al. 1988. Study of histamine release induced by acute administration of antitumor
agents in dogs. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 21:246-250.
Phillips BS, et al. 1998. Acute reaction in dogs treated with doxorubicin: Increased frequency with
the use of a generic formulation. J Vet Intern Med 12:171-172.
Extravasation Injury
Lee Garrod
Extravasation is the accidental delivery of any substance outside of the blood vessel into
the surrounding subcutaneous or dermal tissue. The agent can escape directly from the
vein or the catheter. When the substance is irritant or vesicant, extra vasation injury results.
 The resulting extravasation injury may range from local pain, discomfort, and mild ery-
thema to local tissue damage or moist dermatitis to extensive necrosis.
Several chemotherapy drugs may be classified as vesicants. Commonly used chemo-
therapy agents that are vesicants include the vinca alkaloids (vincristine, vinblastine, etc.)
and the anthracyclines and related drugs (doxorubicin, actinomycin D, etc.). Vincristine
and doxorubicin are the most commonly used chemotherapy agents associated with
extravasation in veterinary practice.
Vesicants cause an injection site reaction often referred to as a chemical cellulitis that
initially looks like an irritation but may worsen to irreversible tissue damage leading to
severe necrosis. This can start with redness and blistering, but in several days severe skin
 sxa  s  n 1 o  si p ia q o 
an irritant; or 7 to 10 days following extravasation of a vesicant such as doxorubicin, and
the full extent of injury may not be seen for several weeks. The extent of tissue damage
ultimately depends on the concentration, volume, and vesicant nature of the extravasated
agent (potency as a reactive chemical that combines with cellular components resulting in
cellular changes immediately after exposure).
Cancer patients are inherently at high risk of extravasation because these patients often
require multiple venipunctures over time and have thin and fragile veins. In addition, the
number of optimal intravenous sites may be reduced due to previous chemotherapy.
ness of the specific chemotherapy agents that can be harmful to tissues as well as awareness
of risk factors associated with extravasation is key to prevention (see also Chapter 8).
Close monitoring of the injection site throughout chemotherapy administration will facil-
itate immediate recognition of extravasation so that the injection or infusion can be
stopped immediately to prevent any further tissue damage.
202
Extravasation Injury203
Diagnosis
Only a well-placed clean-stick intravenous catheter should be used to administer chemo-
therapy. Do not use IV catheters placed previously for another reason. Administration
using a butterfly-winged infusion needle may increase the risk of extra vasation. The patient
must remain calm and steady throughout the administration of the drug. Extravasation
should be suspected if the patient reacts in any way to the drug infusion, the site swells
or becomes red, leakage is visualized at the site, resistance occurs when attempting to
administer the infusion, or a flash of blood is not obtained on aspiration (however, the
presence of blood does not rule out extravasation). If there is any suspicion of extravasa-
tion, the treatment must be discontinued immediately. As much of the extravasated sub-
stance as possible should be withdrawn through the catheter before removing the catheter.
Treatment
Tissue injury can be extensive if the extravasation goes undetected and untreated. For
milder vesicants where the damaged tissue is irritated and necrotic, when the dead tissue
sloughs off, it may reveal an ulcer that will eventually heal over about a 6-week period
(see Figures 21.1 and 21.2). Doxorubicin is one of the most caustic chemotherapy drugs,
and it may continue to destroy tissue relentlessly, despite immediate intervention. The
tissue necrosis may spread deeper and expose muscle, tendons, and bone (see Figures 21.3
to 21.7). Even the smallest amount of doxorubicin or actinomycin D can create severe,
Figure 21.1. Vincristine extravasation can lead to
pain and swelling if unrecognized at the time of extrav-
asation, or if untreated (as in this dog). Appropriate
Figure 21.2. Vincristine extravasation in this dog was
therapy includes warm compresses, fluid flooding, and
unrecognized, but presumably very small, and the
hyaluronidase if possible. The patient should be pre-
majority of damage has come from the patient licking
vented from further injuring the tissue during healing.
 and chewing until small ulcers are created.
204Oncologic Emergencies
Figure 21.3.  Doxorubicin extravasation in this cat
occurred during a dilute infusion of the drug and
was not recognized until the area was flooded. It
was treated rapidly with ice compresses, but the
slough, while not severe, is extensive and painful.
Figure 21.4. Doxorubicin extravasation in this cat
was less than 0.1 ml of drug, undiluted, and was
treated according to recommendations. Despite
this treatment, tissue necrosis, swelling, and pain
were severe 3 weeks after the incident (see also
Figure 21.5). A treatment that could have been
considered was surgical excision of the doxorubi-
cin bleb at the time of extravasation.
Figure 21.5. Closer image of the extravasation
injury in Figure 21.4.
irreversible tissue damage. Therefore, extravasation of a drug is treated as a medical emer-
 gency and immediate action must be taken.
The rapid treatment of patients with extravasation injury is imperative to improving
   nm n e ss    
(doxorubicin) compresses as often and for as long as the patient will tolerate for at least
Extravasation Injury 205
Figure 21.6. The same cat as in Figure 21.4, but 6 weeks
later, when healing is underway.
Figure 21.7. The healed site of a doxorubicin
extravasation showing scarring, contracture, and
hyperpigmentation and hypopigmentation. It is no
 longer painful.
24 hours. In addition, early administration of dexrazoxane for doxorubicin extravasation
and hyaluronidase for vincristine extra vasation are beneficial. Local application of dimeth-
ylsulfoxide (DMSO) is controversial. Despite best efforts, tissue damage may still occur,
underscoring the need for prevention.
 If tissue damage is extensive, debridement surgery, skin grafting, or even amputation
 may eventually be required to stop the destruction and resultant pain.
Summary: Extravasation
Causes
Vesicant
Doxorubicin
Vincristine
Vinblastine
Actinomycin D
 NOTE: Many other chemotherapy agents may less commonly cause irritation and
be vesicants, so care should be taken with all chemotherapy IV infusions.
ClinicalFeatures
 Client complaint posttreatment
Agitation
 Licking at injection site
206
Oncologic Emergencies
Painful to touch
Limping
 Redness in area of injection
+
Swelling in area or limb of injection
 Clinical findings during treatment if suspect extravasation
 Patient agitated/painful
Pruritus
Erythema around injection site
Swelling
 Resistance to infusion of drug
Reduced flow rate
Alarm on infusion pump set off 
Inadequate flashback of blood
 Clinical findings after treatment 
Moist dermatitis
Skin necrosis
Management
Prevention
 Blood sampling is done from jugular vein to preserve peripheral veins for
injections
 Do not use existing (previously placed for another reason) catheters for chemo-
 therapy administration
Be aware which drugs are extravasation risks, but the best practice is to treat all
chemotherapy drugs as risks
 Proper patient restraint
Sedation if restraint is difficult
Intra venous catheter rather than butterfly
●
Smallest gauge catheter
"Clean-stick" one-time catheter placement
 Large volume (10ml) saline flush before and after drug administration
Constant observation throughout infusion to completion
 Continuous aspiration of blood throughout administration
If extravasation occurs
 Discontinue drug administration immediately
Notify doctor on duty IMMEDIATELY
Leave catheter in place
Aspirate as much of the drug as possible through the catheter, AND THEN remove
catheter
 Remove 5 ml blood from cat and 10 ml from dog
Doxorubicin
Ice limb as much as the patient will tolerate for up to 48 to 72 hours
 Dexrazoxane (Zinecard) IV at 10x the mg dose of doxorubicin within 3 hours
or 400 to 600 mg/m² IV over 15 minutes; repeat at 24 and 48 hours after
extravasation
0
 Possibly topical dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) every 8 hours for weeks while
assess skin slough
Extravasation Injury207
Vinca alkaloids
Infltrate with 3 to 5 ml 0.9% NaCl
 Intralesional hyaluronidase total volume equal to extravasated volume of drug
in 5 to 6 sites around the edges of lesion with needle changed in between and
into patent catheter
O
Warm compress for 15 minutes every 6 hours for 24 hours
Delayed perivascular damage or slough
 Daily wound treatment
●
Antibiotics
 Pain medication
 Surgical
 Debridement of tissues
 Skin grafting
Possible amputation
Further Reading
Bertelli G, et al. 199s. Topical dimethylsulfoxide for the prevention of soft tissue injury after
Kisseberth WC, MacEwen EG. 2001. Complications of cancer and its treatment. Adverse effects.
In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, eds, Small Animal Clinical Oncology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB.
Saunders, 198-218.
Langer SW, et al. 2000. Treatment of anthracycline extravasation with dexrazoxane. Clin Cancer
Res 6:3680-3686.
Ogilvie GK, Moore AS. 199s. Extravasation of chemotherapy agents. In: Ogilvie GK, Moore AS,
eds, Managing the Veterinary Cancer Patient. Trenton, Veterinary learning systems, 186-189.
Spugnini EP. 2002. Use of hyaluronidase for the treatment of extravasation of chemotherapeutic
agents in six dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:1437-1440.
Urological Emergencies
Lee Garrod
Acute Renal Failure
Acute renal failure is a medical emergency because it may cause sudden, life-threatening
biochemical disturbances. Acute uremia can be classified as one of three categories: pre-
renal (impaired perfusion of the kidneys), renal (renal tissue damage), and postrenal
(obstructive). Renal failure in a cancer patient in particular may be multifactorial. Not
surprisingly, prerenal failure is common in this older population. Renal causes related to
neoplasia include cancer involving the kidneys or occasionally nephrotoxicity of chemo-
therapy drugs. Postrenal causes in cancer patients are most commonly neoplasia involving
tissue at any level of the urogenital system (obstructive uropathy).
Cancer of the kidney is more common as a cause of acute renal failure in cats than in
dogs. When it is present it may be either primary cancer or metastatic cancer originating
from another primary tumor. Lymphoma is the most common renal tumor in cats, whereas
adenocarcinoma is the most common primary renal tumor in dogs. In cats and dogs with
leukemia, the kidneys can be infiltrated with neoplastic cells, which can severely compro-
mise renal function.
Hypercalcemia is a common paraneoplastic syndrome, potentially resulting in calcium
nephropathy and renal failure when the calcium X phosphorus product exceeds 70. The
hypercalcemia decreases renal blood flow by vasoconstriction. The patient demonstrates
polyuria and polydypsia in the early stages of hypercalcemia. Once the calcium x phos-
phorus product exceeds 70, tissue mineralization ensues, through the binding of calcium
and phosphorus, and renal failure can occur.
Patients with neutropenia and sepsis can develop urogenital infection. Infection involv-
ing the kidneys, pyelonephritis, results in acute renal failure.
Nephrotoxicity has been associated with some chemotherapy agents in small animals:
streptozotocin and cisplatin in dogs (cisplatin is not used in cats due to fatal pulmonary
toxicity) and doxorubicin in cats. Cisplatin and streptozotocin are administered using
208
Urological Emergencies 209
standard, aggressive, saline diuresis protocols, and this dramatically reduces the incidence
of nephrotoxicity. Nonsteroidal antinflammatory medications should be discontinued in 
patients with existing renal insufficiency.
Diagnosis
When a patient is presented in renal failure, additional tests may be necessary to exclude
other diseases. More than one category of renal failure may be present in an individual
 patient. Even though cancer or chemotherapy may be in the patient's history, a thorough
investigation to rule out the possibility of toxin exposure (ethylene glycol, antifreeze),
recent surgery or anesthesia, exposure to nephrotoxic drugs (nonsteroidal antiinflamma-
tory drugs, aminoglycoside antibiotics), or recent illness should be undertaken. Whether
acute uremia progresses to acute renal failure depends upon the underlying cause and the
early detection and management.
Treatment
 Treatment of acute renal failure starts with careful rehydration and diuresis, monitoring
urine output and for evidence of overhydration. Secondary vomiting, electrolyte, acid-base,
and biochemical abnormalities should be corrected and controlled as needed. The under
lying cause should be corrected whenever possible
Summary: Acute Renal Failure
Causes
Prerenal
1
 Hypovolemia
Dehydration
Vomiting
O
Diarrhea
Hemorrhage
O
Diuretics
 Hypotension
 Septic shock
 Decreased renal perfusion
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatories (NSAIDS
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
Renal
1
Neoplasia
 Primary renal neoplasia
O
Metastatic renal neoplasia
 Paraneoplastic hypercalcemia
210 Oncologic Emergencies
 Nephrotoxic chemotherapy
Cisplatin (used in dogs only)
Methotrexate (high dose or with NSAIDs)
 Streptozotocin
Doxorubicin (cats)
1
Glomerulonephritis
Infection
O
Pyelonephritis
 Renal tubular or tubulointerstitial damage
 Drugs other than chemotherapy agents
■
Aminoglycosides
NSAIDs
■
 Radiological contrast agents
O
Ischemia
Thrombosis (DIC)
 Profound hypertension
■
O
 Tumor lysis syndrome
 Postrenal
Obstructive
O
Tumor {transitional cell carcinoma)
O
Calculi
■
Urethral
■
Ureteral
Neurologic bladder
ClinicalFeatures
 Client complaint
●
Disorientation
Incoordination
Lethargy
Weakness
Depression
 Decreased urine production
Straining to urinate
Hematuria
Anorexia
Polyuria
Polydypsia
Vomiting
 Increased respiratory rate
Seizures
 Clinical findings
Dehydration
Fever
Tachycardia
Bradycardia (if hyperkalemia)
Urological Emergencies 211
Tachypnea
Hypertension
Hypotension
 Peripheral edema
 Pulmonary edema
Diagnostic Findings
Laboratory
Complete blood count
Anemia
Leukocytosis
O
Leukopenia
Thrombocytopenia
 Biochemical profle
1
O
Uremia
Elevated creatinine
O
Hyperphosphatemia
Hypercalcemia
Electrolytes
Hyperkalemia
 Blood gas analysis
 Metabolic acidosis
Urinalysis
O
Isosthenuria
O
Hematuria
O
 Hemoglobinuria or myoglobinuria
Pyuria
Proteinuria
Crystalluria
Renal casts
Urine culture and sensitivity
1
Urine protein:creatinine ratio
 Elevated in glomerular disease
Coagulation profile
 Kidney biopsy or fine-needle aspirate
Ethylene glycol test
ECG
Hyperkalemia
 Bradycardia
 Loss of P wave
O
Tall peaked T waves
Wide QRS complexes
Imaging
Abdominal radiography
 Intravenous pyelogram
Abdominal ultrasound
212 Oncologic Emergencies
Thoracic radiography
 Fluid overload/pulmonary edema
Management
 Intravenous crystalloid (0.9% NaCl) fluid
1
Correct dehydration over 6 to 8 hours
O
Watch closely for volume overload
 0Monitor urine output
Diuresis after rehydration
 Can be mild to moderate (2 to 3 × maintenance 66ml/kg/day) depending on
individual patient
 Monitor urine output
Indwelling urinary catheter
0 2 to 5 ml/kg/hr urine output
Measure ins and outs
 Once a patient is hydrated, ins should match outs
 Monitor patient for signs of overhydration/volume overload
Central venous pressure
专
Heart rate
Respiratory rate and lung sounds
Weigh patient every 6 hours
 Control vomiting to reduce ongoing losses
Antiemetics
Treat gastric hyperacidity with H2-receptor antagonist
NOTE: Reduce the dose of all drugs that are renally eliminated in patients with
reduced renal clearance.
Correct electrolyte abnormalities
Treatment for hyperkalemia (see Table 19.1)
Insulin with 50% dextrose
 Sodium bicarbonate
 Calcium gluconate 10% if ECG changes
Correct acid-base abnormalities
 Treatment for hypercalcemia (see Table 19.1)
 Treatment for hyperphosphatemia
 Drugs to encourage urine production if oliguric or anuric
Mannitol 0.5 to 1.0gm/kg slow IV
Furosemide 2 to 4mg/kg IV every 1 to 3 hours
Dopamine 2 to 3 μg/kg/min CRI
OCan be used with furosemide
Peritoneal dialysis
 Treatment of neoplasia if underlying cause 
 Management to prevent chemotherapy associated renal damage
OSaline diuresis
s  according to  established  protocols 
for cisplatin and
streptozotocin
.
 Pretreatment with furosemide (only if well hydrated)
Doxorubicin in cats is a cumulative nephrotoxicity; monitor creatinine
closely
Urological Emergencies213
Further Reading
2:41-46.
Meyer DJ. 1977. Temporary remission of hypoglycemia in a dog with insulinoma after treatment
with streptozotocin. Am J Vet Res 38:1201-1204.
O'Keefe DA, et al. 1993. Systemic toxicity associated with doxorubicin administration in cats. J Vet
Intern Med 7:309-317.
Hematuria
Hematuria is the presence of blood in the urine. Hematuria can be microscopic (detected
 only on urinalysis) or macroscopic (direct visualization). Seeing blood in the urine of a pet
can be alarming to many owners and they perceive it as a true emergency. The hematuria
patient in the emergency setting typically presents with the direct visualization of blood
in the urine by the owner. There are many potential causes for hematuria, including bac-
terial infection, bladder wall trauma, urinary crystals or stones, neoplasia of the urogeni-
tal system, and coagulopathy.
 Often, but not always, the presence of hematuria is associated with straining to urinate
patient, these symptoms certainly could suggest a bacterial cystitis, especially if the patient
is immunosuppressed, but it can also be related to recent chemotherapy or other drugs,
or even a clotting disorder Therefore, a complete history alone will often lead to the
potential underlying cause. In patients without a prior related history, causes such as cystic
calculi, bacterial cystitis, bladder polyps, or urogenital neoplasia, and coagulopathy are
all considered.
Figure 22.1. A dog that is straining to urinate should be investigated with urinalysis, and urine culture and
sensitivity, as well as abdominal ultrasonography and possibly cytology or histopathology of any lesions.
214Oncologic Emergencies
Urogenital cancers in dogs most commonly involve the bladder. Transitional cell carci-
noma (TCC) is the most common bladder tumor in dogs but is less common in cats.
 Bleeding due to the presence of a bladder tumor is rarely a life-threatening emergency,
because overall blood loss is minimal and the problem is not usually acute in onset.
However, some of these patients may have tumor-related obstruction and therefore may
 have associated renal or electrolyte imbalances that could be life-threatening. Regardless,
when presenting as an emergency, diagnostics must be done to evaluate all potential causes.
Hemorrhagic cystitis is a rare complication of certain chemotherapy agents. Cyclophos-
phamide and ifosfamide can cause sterile hemorrhagic cystitis in the dog. This is due to a
direct chemical irritation caused by metabolites to the urothelial (mucosal) lining resulting
in inflammation, ulceration, and hemorrhage. The risk of sterile hemorrhagic cystitis is
dramatically decreased by the concurrent administration of furosemide during the admin-
istration, by diluting irritant metabolites in urine, and by encouraging frequent voiding.
In addition, the sulfa drug mesna reduces the risk and severity of sterile hemorrhagic
cystitis by binding the irritating metabolites in urine. Dogs receiving cyclophosphamide
should have plenty of access to fresh water and opportunity to urinate.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of hematuria itself is self-evident. Diagnosis of the underlying cause of
hematuria involves urinalysis, urine culture and sensitivity, imaging of the urinary tract,
and possibly cytology or histopathology of any lesions. For dogs with a history of cyclo-
phosphamide or ifosfamide administration, urine culture should still be submitted because
secondary infections can complicate sterile hemorrhagic cystitis.
Treatment
Specific treatment is not usually necessary, and treatment depends on the underlying cause.
Rarely, if blood loss is severe, transfusion may be needed.
Summary: Hematuria
Causes
 Urogenital neoplasia
 Malignant
Transitional cell carcinoma (97%)
0Other neoplasia
Benign
0
 Fibroma
oLeiomyoma
 Calculi
●
Renal
Ureteral
Urological Emergencies 215
 Bladder
 Urethral
Chemotherapy agents (sterile hemorrhagic cystitis)
Cyclophosphamide
Ifosfamide
Glomerulonephritis
 Pyelonephritis
Bacterial cystitis
+
Coagulopathy
+
Trauma
ClinicalFeatures
Client complaint
Stranguria
Hematuria
Pollakiuria
Vomiting
Anorexia
 Clinical findings
Hematuria
 Bladder mass may be palpable (rare) or thick bladder
 Urethral mass or thickening may be palpable on rectal
Diagnostic Findings
Laboratory
Urinalysis
口
Red blood cells
White blood cells
O
Absence of bacteria
Proteinuria
 Atypical epithelial cells
Urine culture and sensitivity
 Renal values
Coagulation screen
Cytology (fine-needle aspirate of a mass) (Caution: transitional call carcinoma has
been reported to seed along needle tracts)
Imaging
Abdominal radiography
Abdominal ultrasound
 Double contrast cystography
Thoracic radiographs
Lung metastases rare with transitional cell carcinoma
Management
 Antibiotics
Surgery
+
216Oncologic Emergencies
Treatment for neoplasia
Piroxicam
Chemotherapy
 Sterile hemorrhagic cystitis
●Prevention
●
 Pain medication
 Discontinue chemotherapy drug and change to a different drug
●
 Antibiotics for secondary bladder infection due to bladder wall irritation
 01  y '0 0n 70 qxo n osds
 If severe, intravesicular DMSO
Further Reading
Burnie AG, Weaver AD. 1983. Urinary bladder neoplasia in the dog: A review of seventy cases.
J Small Anim Pract 24:129-134.
Charney SC, et al. 2003. Risk factors for sterile hemorrhagic cystitis in dogs with lymphoma receiv-
ing cyclophosphamide with or without concurrent administration of furosemide: 216 cases (1990-
1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:1388-1393
Kisseberth WC, MacEwan EG. 2002. Complications of cancer and its treatment. In: Withrow SJ,
MacEwen EG, eds, Small Anim Clin Oncol. St. Louis, Elsevier Health Sciences, 198-219.
Phillips Bs. 1999. Bladder tumors in dogs and cats. Comp for Cont Ed Pract Vet 21:540-547.
Bone Emergencies
Lee Garrod
Pathologic Fracture
A pathologic fracture is a fracture that occurs through weakened, structurally altered bone.
Most pathologic fractures occur in bones affected by cancer. Bones can be affected by
either primary or secondary malignancies (metastases). At least 80% of pathologic
fractures are due to osteosarcoma.
A pathologic fracture can also occur as a result of other diseases affecting the bone, such
as osteomyelitis, bone cyst, or nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism (osteomalacia).
Diagnosis
 History of sudden onset of non-weight-bearing lameness in a large-breed dog should raise
suspicion of pathologic fracture, especially if the dog is known to have a bone tumor. Plain
radiographs confirm the presence of a pathologic fracture.
Treatment
ment, including amputation where appropriate.
Summary: Pathologic Fracture
Causes
 Primary neoplasia (osteosarcoma)
 Metastatic neoplasia
217
218 Oncologic Emergencies
Osteomyelitis {infection)
Bone cyst
 Osteomalacia (nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism)
Clinical Features
 Client complaint
●Lameness
●Pain
 Clinical findings
Palpably swollen limb
●Palpable fracture
Diagnostic Findings
 Imaging
Radiography
 Limb radiograph
 0 Chest radiograph to rule out metastasis
Management
 Pain management
Amputation
 Chemotherapy appropriate for the neoplastic process
?
Treatment of infectious process if the cause
Further Reading
Boulay JP, et al. 1997. Pathologic fracture of long bones in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
23:207-213.
Schneider PR, Stowater JL. 1979. Pathologic fractures associated with skeletal metastasis of osteo-
sarcoma in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 175:61-64.
Hypertrophic Osteopathy
Hypertrophic osteopathy (HO) is a painful debilitating bone disease secondary to disease
elsewhere, usually in the thorax. Hypertrophic osteopathy is the most common paraneo-
plastic disorder associated with primary lung tumors in the dog and cat. Affected animals
develop new bone formation on the outside of the diaphyses (shaft) of long bones of the
limbs, without destruction of cortical bone.
Hypertrophic osteopathy is usually caused by intrathoracic tumors (primary lung tumors
or metastatic; Figures 23.1 and 23.2) or infections (heartworm, Spirocerca, mycobacte-
rium, bacteria, including pulmonary abscess), less commonly by intra-abdominal masses
or bladder TCC (Figure 23.3). Affected animals develop bilateral, symmetrical soft tissue
Bone Emergencies  219
Figure 23.1. Hypertrophic osteopathy in a dog
with pulmonary metastatic disease. Note the irreg-
ular periosteal bone production that affects the
radius and ulna, as well as the humerus and meta-
carpal bones. This condition is often very painful
and should prompt thoracic radiographs as a first
sep to determine a cause.
Figure 23.2. Pulmonary metastatic disease in the
same dog seen in Figure 23.1. Since surgical resec-
tion of the multiple masses is impractical, pharma-
 cological palliation of pain would be preferred.
swelling of the lower legs with periosteal new bone formation. These bony changes do not
Diagnosis
History of gradual onset of lameness in a dog known to have an intrathoracic tumor sug-
 gests HO. Plain radiographs confirm the presence of characteristic periosteal proliferation.
If HO is identified before the underlying cause is known, three-view thoracic radiographs
are indicated; if this is not productive, abdominal ultrasonography should be done.
Treatment
Treatment is directed toward pain management and correcting the underlying cause.
a ro d j o i s  r d an p po s
followed by slow resolution of radiographic changes.
220
Oncologic Emergencies
Figure 23.3. Rarely. nonpulmonary tumors may
be associated with HO; the most commonly
reported is urinary bladder transitional cell carci-
nomas (TCC). In this dog, the bladder TCC is also
mineralized, and HO is evident on the pelvis and
 pelvic limbs. (Courtesy of Dr. Nicole Northrup)
Summary: Hypertrophic Osteopathy
Causes
 Metastatic pulmonary neoplasia
 Primary pulmonary neoplasia
 Pulmonary abscess
 Bronchopneumonia
Bacterial endocarditis
Mycobacterium (tuberculosis)
Heartworm
Spirocercosis
 Urinary bladder TCC
Clinical Features
 Client complaint
 Asymptomatic
Stiffness or lameness
Warm, firm swelling of a limb
Coughing
Difficulty breathing
Exercise intolerance
Bone Emergencies 221
Clinical findings
 Palpably swollen limbs, warm to the touch
 Pain on palpation of the limbs
●
 Abnormal lung sounds
Diagnostic Findings
Imaging
Radiography
 Bilaterally symmetric and generalized periosteal proliferation of long bones
 Soft tissue swelling with little to no bony abnormality (initial stages)
0
Pulmonary mass or masses
Management
 Removal of underlying primary lesion
 Pain medication
 Chemotherapy appropriate for the neoplastic process
+
Treatment of infectious process if the cause
Further Reading
Becker TJ, et al. 1999. Regression of hypertrophic osteopathy in a cat after surgical excision of an
adrenocortical carcinoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:499-505.
Brodey R. 1971. Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in the dog: A clinicopathologic study of 60 cases.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 159:1242.
Carrol KB, Doyle L. 1974. A common factor in hypertrophic osteopathy. Thorax 29:262-269.
Gerbode F, et al. 1966. Experimental hypertrophic osteopathy. Surgery 60:103-112.
Van der Merwe LL, et al. 2008. Spirocerca lupi infection in the dog: A review. Vet J 176:294-309.
Pericardial Effusion and
CardiacTamponade
Lee Garrod
The pericardium is the fibrous membrane that surrounds the heart. Pericardial effusion
refers to the presence of fluid in the pericardial space. As the fluid accumulates, it generates
 pressure on the outside of the heart muscle, and the heart's ability to fill becomes impaired,
 d           i
 including idiopathic (young dogs), neoplasia, infectious, and rarely traumatic. In cats with
congestive heart failure, it is not uncommon to occasionally find a small amount of peri-
cardial effusion, and this is the most common cause of pericardial effusion in this species.
The amount in cats is rarely enough to result in clinical symptoms caused by restricted
filling
The most common cause of pericardial effusion in dogs is hemorrhage from a tumor on
the right side of the heart, typically the right auricular appendage or right atrium. Of these,
hemangiosarcoma is by far the most common neoplasm; and aortic body tumors (chemo-
dectomas) are the second most common neoplasm. Mesothelioma of the pericardial lining
 ( s n     o  n s
Cardiac tamponade occurs when there is excess pericardial effusion, which causes sig-
nificant compression of the heart itself. The effusion in the majority of cases is blood, but
occasionally it can be serosanguinous or purulent. The presence of the fluid in the sac
interferes with the filling of the heart, particularly on the right side, and the ventricles
collapse. This in turn leads to a decreased stroke volume as well as right-sided congestion
(hepatic venous congestion, ascites, pleural effusion). The hemodynamic consequences of
the fluid in the pericardial space depend not only on the volume of fluid in the sac but
how quickly it has accumulated. If the accumulation has been slow, the pericardium is
able to slowly stretch to accommodate the fluid, and a greater volume can be tolerated.
A stretched pericardial sac can easily accommodate even 1 liter of fluid.
222
Pericardial Effusion and Cardiac Tamponade
223
24.1
24.2
Figure 24.1 and Figure 24.2. Lateral and dorsoventral view of a dog with pericardial effusion. Note the globoid
appearance of the heart. Ultrasonography will allow more definitive diagnosis and is the next diagnostic step to
consider.
Figure 24.3. Ultrasonography demonstrates the
pericardial fluid, and can guide collection of a
sample for analysis, or therapeutic drainage of the
pericardial sac.
Diagnosis
Pericardial effusion may be suspected based on the history and physical findings. Thoracic
radiographs demonstrate cardiomegaly (Figures 24.1 and 24.2), and ultrasonography
definitively demonstrates fluid in the pericardium (Figure 24.3).
Treatment
Once the cardiac output becomes severely reduced, the dog ultimately will collapse.
Without emergency treatment, the condition is often fatal. Immediate drainage of the
224Oncologic Emergencies
 pericardial sac is the only treatment to relieve the symptoms associated with cardiac tam-
 ponade in an emergency situation. Once the fluid is removed and the heart can fll, restor-
ing adequate cardiac output, other treatment options can be investigated.
Summary: Pericardial Effusion
Causes
Malignancy
Hemangiosarcoma
Heart base (chemodectoma, ectopic endocrine, hemangiosarcoma)
Other sarcoma (rhabdomyosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, lymphoma)
Pericardial (mesothelioma)
Metastatic (hemangiosarcoma, lymphoma)
Idiopathic
Traumatic
Infection
X
 Bacterial
Fungal
Viral
FIP cats
 Congestive heart failure with cardiomyopathy
?
Cats only
Clinical Features
 Client complaint
Asymptomatic
Polydypsia
 Inappetence to anorexia
Difficulty breathing
Cough
 Exercise intolerance
专
Weakness
Collapse
 Clinical findings
Muffled heart sounds
Pale mucous membranes
Tachypnea to dyspnea
Distended jugular veins
Hypotension
Tachycardia
 Pulsus paradoxus (weak pulse during inspiration with a stronger pulse during
expiration)
Hepatomegaly
 Signs of right heart failure (ascites, pleural effusion)
Collapse
Pericardial Effusion and Cardiac Tamponade
225
Diagnostic Findings
Laboratory
No abnormalities
Anemia
Elevated white blood cell count
Uremia
Elevated ALT
 Lymphoma
ECG
 Diminished QRS voltage
Sinus tachycardia
 Electrical alternans
Ventricular ectopy
Imaging
Radiography
Cardiomegaly
 Enlarged caudal vena cava
O
Pleural effusion
O
Cardiac mass
Ascites (decreased abdominal detail)
 Echocardiography (image mode preferred)
O
Pericardial fluid (small or large volume)
O
Cardiac mass
O
Heart base mass
O
Cardiac tamponade
Pleural effusion
Management
 Depends upon the clinical features upon presentation
Sedation and pericardiocentesis when:
●
Cardiac tamponade
 Respiratory distress
Pleural effusion
Significant abdominal effusion
Weakness or collapse
 Diagnostic sample required for analysis
Thoracentesis if symptomatic for pleural effusion (rare)
Supportive treatment with IV fluids to help the heart fll (judicious if left-sided failure
has also developed)
Diuretic low dose if excessive ascites or pleural effusion
ECG monitoring
Surgery
 Cardiac tumor/auricular appendage resection
Pericardial window
Subtotal pericardectomy
 Percutaneous balloon pericardiotomy
226Oncologic Emergencies
Further Reading
Guglielmini C, et al. 2007. Metastatic pericardial tumors in a dog with equivocal pericardial cyto-
logical findings. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 43:284-287.
Hall DJ, et al. 2007. Pericardial effusion in cats: a retrospective study of clinical findings and out-
comes in 146 cats. J Vet Intern Med 21:1002-1007.
Ogilvie GK, Moore AS. 1995. Managing the Veterinary Cancer Patient, 1st ed. Trenton, Veterinary
Learning Systems Co., Inc, 441-444.
Ware WA, Hopper DL. 1999. Cardiac tumors in dogs: 1982-1995. J Vet Intern Med 13:95-103.
Section
Common Cancers in
Veterinary Patients
Lymphoma in Dog:
Overview
 Lymphoma, or lymphosarcoma, is a cancer seen in many species of animals and in humans.
 Lymphoma is the malignant proliferation of lymphocytes, which are a major component
of the immune system. Most often, a pet's caregiver will notice enlarged lymph nodes.
Less commonly the dog may have a reduced appetite and less energy. Diagnosis is normally
based on a lymph node biopsy, thoracic and abdominal radiographs, and standard blood
tests and urinalysis, but may also include more complicated procedures such as bone
marrow evaluation.
Lymphoma is caused by a variety of factors, potentially involving genetic components,
exposure to carcinogens, and other unknown factors. Although the lymph nodes are often
the most obvious to a caregiver, other organs of the body, including liver, spleen, and
bone marrow, may become affected, and the function of normal cells may be compromised.
 For example, liver damage may occur because of the expanding tumor cell population in
the liver causing elevations in serum ALT and ALP, and in severe cases, patients may have
liver dysfunction. Normally the bone marrow produces the majority of the blood cells
Tumor cells in the bone marrow can cause fewer neutrophils or platelets to be available.
The pet is then susceptible to infection and bleeding (petechiation or ecchymoses).
Anemia is commonly low-grade and due to "chronic disease" rather than bone marrow
infiltration.
 The affected pet may develop paraneoplastic syndromes or tumor-associated conditions.
For example, there may be abnormal proteins (hyperglobulinemia) or hypercalcemia due
to secondary effects of the lymphoma. These syndromes themselves can cause acute, life-
threatening problems; and careful monitoring is important.
 For lymphoma in dogs, remission times and life span, or prognosis, is highly variable
and depends on a number of factors:
229
230 Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
1.
 Immunophenotype: whether the lymphocyte cell type is T- or B-cell. Dogs with B-cell
type do better than those with T-cell type. This must be tested on biopsy by immu-
nohistochemistry.
2.
 Substage: whether the pet is feeling ill. Loss of appetite is probably the most important
symptom in this regard (Figures 25.1 and 25.2). Dogs in substage a (no symptoms)
 do better than dogs in substage b (feeling unwell or having high blood calcium).
3.
 The stage of the disease, which reflects the number and location of major populations
 of tumor cells in the body. Stage 3 means all lymph nodes affected. Stage 5 is the
highest. Dogs with stage 1 and 2 do better than dogs with higher stages (Figures 25.3
and 25.4).
4.
 Histologic grading: the specific appearance of tumor cells and their pattern of infltra-
tion in various tissues (what the pathologists reports from a biopsy specimen).
Dogs in Substage a live Longer
than Dogs in Substage b
1.0
Substage a
0.9
Substage b
0.8
0.3
Figure 25.1. Kaplan-Meier survival curve showing
0.2
dogs in substage a (physically well) live longer than
0.1 
dogs in substage b (clinical signs of illness). Keller
et al., / Vet Internaf Med 7:289-295, 1993, with
0255075100125150175200225250
permission (from Managing the Canine Cancer
Patient, Veterinary Learning Systems 2006, with
Survival time (weeks)
permission).
Anorexia Predicts Shorter
 Remission Duration
1.0
Normal appetite
Anorectic
0.6
I
0.4
0.2
Figure 25.2. Kaplan-Meier survival curve showing
that dogs eating normally live longer than dogs that
are anorectic. Moore et al.,/ Vet internaf Med
2040
6
80100120140
160
15:348-354, 2001, with permission (from Manag-
ing the Canine Cancer Patient, Veterinary Learning
Overall protocol remission (weeks)
Systems 2006, with permission).
Lymphoma in Dogs 231
Clinical stages of canine lymphoma
Clinical Stage*
Criteria
Stage 1
Involvement limited to single node or lymphoid tissue in single organ (excluding the
bone marrow)
Stage 2
Regional involvement of many lymph nodes, with or without involvement of the
tonsils
Stage 3
Generalized lymph node involvement
Stage 4
Involvement of liver and/or spleen, with or without generalized lymph node
involvement
Stage 5
Involvementof blood,bone marrow,and/or other organs
*Stages are further classified to clinical substage a (no clinical signs) or b(with clinical signs). For example,
Stage Illa describes a dog with generalized lymphadenopathy and no clinical signs.
25.3
Figure 25.3 and Figure 25.4. A tabular (25.3)
and a visual schematic (25.4) (from Managing the
Canine Cancer Patient,Veterinary Learning Systems
2006, with permission) describing the stages of
25.4
lymphoma in dogs.
The presence of paraneoplastic syndromes (see above).
6.
The treatment chosen and the care given by the owner and veterinary cancer care
team.
7.
The individual pet's response to therapy.
Diagnosis and Staging
Lymphoma is suspected based on physical examination (Figures 25.5 and 25.6) and is best
confirmed on histopathology; cytology is usually suggestive but not definitively diagnostic.
232
Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
Figure 25.5. A 6-year-old female Dalmatian with massive
peripheral lymphadenopathy, but no clinical illness and no
other sites of lymphoma on staging. The lymphoma is
therefore classified as stage 3a. Immunophenotyping will
help define the best recommendation for treatment.
Figure 25.6. The same patient as in Figure 25.5;
note the hindlimb edema caused by the massive
Iymph node enlargement.
Figure 25.7. A lateral thoracic radiograph shows
an anterior mediastinal lymphoma. These are often
seen as part of T-cell lymphoma in dogs and com-
monly associated with hypercalcemia. (Courtesy of
Kenneth M. Rassnick)
Immunophenotyping should be requested on a biopsy (the tests to ask for are B-cell
(CD-79} and T-cell (CD-3} stains.
 ( a sen oi hn ps aq os  m so
adenopathy, pleural effusion or pulmonary infltration all affect quality of life and clinical
management). Abdominal radiographs or ultrasonography can be used to evaluate the
Lymphoma in Dogs 233
liver and spleen in dogs where the abdomen is difficult to palpate. CBC, serum chemistry
profle, and urinalysis should be performed, and bone marrow aspiration cytology should
be considered for dogs that have cytopenias on their CBC (other than anemia of chronic
disease).
In general, dogs with a lower stage of lymphoma, dogs that are not sick (substage a)
and dogs that have a B-lymphocyte derived tumor have a better chance of remission with
treatment.
Treatment
Untreated dogs usually live 2 months or less. The treatment of lymphoma has evolved to
parallel the treatment of the disease in humans, with certain differences. The goal of che-
motherapy is to achieve a complete clinical remission (CR), which means to make the pet
feel as normal as possible with no outward evidence of cancer. The enlarged lymph nodes
  issu  po  a r res ss p ais u a
most dogs with lymphoma live 9 months to 1 year or more. Therefore, a reasonable goal
is a 1-year survival. Occasionally a dog will live much longer, up to 2.5 years or more,
and about 15% of dogs with lymphoma are permanently cured by combination chemo-
therapy.
 Treatment usually involves the use of multiple anticancer chemotherapy drugs, some
used simultaneously and others in sequence. They are used in a set format, or protocol.
Various such protocols exist, using slightly different drug sequences and dosages. In
 general, similar remission time and life span are achieved with all protocols that use the
same drugs, so that one is not necessarily "better" than another. However, it is important
to use different drugs in combination, since this has been shown to dramatically increase
remission time. The most effective, and commonly used, drugs are vincristine, cyclophos-
phamide, prednisone, L-asparaginase, and doxorubicin.
There are several specific phases of chemotherapy in the treatment of lymphoma. Treat-
ment always begins with the induction phase, and the other phases are used in particular
situations. During induction, aggressive chemotherapy is initiated in order to kill as many
tumor cells as rapidly as possible without causing severe side effects. The goal of the
induction phase is to induce a complete remission. This is most likely to occur with an
induction phase involving the five drugs listed above. A complete blood count (with par-
ticular attention to the absolute neutrophil count) is measured weekly during this phase
to make sure there are enough cells to fight off infections as well as platelets for clotting.
The consolidation phase is used in some protocols to bring induction to a close. Toward
the end of induction, the number of tumor cells is hopefully very low. Consolidation is
designed to theoretically eliminate the remaining lymphoma cells. This is often not entirely
possible; there are nearly always a few left even after this aggressive step is taken because
of the lower dosages used in veterinary chemotherapy than those used when treating
human patients.
The maintenance phase of chemotherapy usually follows consolidation. The goal is to
keep the pet in complete remission while decreasing the potential risk of side effects from
continuous use of potent, high-dose anticancer drugs. This should decrease the amount of
drugs required to keep the pet in remission by reducing the frequency of administration.
 It is important for caregivers to observe their pet closely for any adverse signs that could
234Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
signal relapse. These signs are usually similar to the original signs the dog had before
    s  si   q  
protocols are attempting to reduce the maintenance phase of treatment in order to improve
the pet's quality of life and the amount of chemotherapy it will receive. Intermittent use
-ao aoueuauu, enuuos susn se poo se aq on sieadde suean uoonpu, jo
motherapy for some pets and their caregivers.
Rescue is a term used for aggressive therapy needed when the lymphoma no longer
responds to the routine chemotherapy protocol. Over time, the tumor cells may become
resistant to the drugs being used and again multiply to a critical number, causing signs
such as reenlargement of lymph nodes, lethargy, etc. At this point, new drugs or higher
dosages are needed to reinduce a remission. Many times this is successful and the pet may
again do well for some time. However, with each successive relapse it becomes more dif-
ficult to reinduce remission until finally the disease become resistant to treatment. Drugs
used in this setting include lomustine, mechlorethamine (mustargen) and procarbazine.
These drugs are alkylating agents and usually have no cross-resistance with drugs used in
first-line therapy for lymphoma in dogs.
Nursing Highlights
 One of the very important roles for veterinary technicians/nurses in this disease is empha-
sizing to owners that delaying starting treatment until their pet “needs it" is not a good
strategy. In various studies dogs with lymphoma that are unwell (substage b) at the start
of therapy have median remission times approximately half of those reported for "well"
dogs (substage a). More specific symptoms may predict outcomes even more accurately.
 In one study, of dogs eating normally before diagnosis, 90% achieved complete remission;
of dogs with inappetence, only 60% achieved complete remission. Even when a patient's
history indicates it has been well, it is important to start therapy before such symptoms
arise. It is important to stress to owners that delaying starting treatment until their pet is
are sick will make it more difficult to treat successfully. Supportive care can improve both
the remission rate and survival time for unwell dogs.
Technicians/nurses are often asked by owners for guidance in deciding about the ben-
efits or otherwise of chemotherapy. It is important to recognize that although they are
dealing with a rarely curable disease, their pet can be treated in such a way that a high
quality of life is achieved. In this respect, it is similar to treating heart or kidney disease,
which can also be fatal eventually but which can be managed for some time with a good
quality of life.
Many pet owners wonder whether they should feed their pet anything special during
treatment for lymphoma. There is some evidence that higher protein and fat and lower
carbohydrate content is beneficial to dogs with lymphoma. A commercially available
canned food for dogs that follows these principles and is supplemented with additional
nutrients that may benefit dogs with lymphoma is Hill's Prescription diet n/d, but home-
made diets such as that in Figure 12.3, may also provide a similar benefit. Again, quality
of life is the most important criterion for pets undergoing treatment for cancer, and it is
important that the diet chosen is one that the patient enjoys.
Lymphoma in Dogs235
Case Example
Hannah, an 8-year-old, spayed female, 26.8kg German shepherd was noted by her owner
to have “masses under her neck" and examination by her veterinarian confirmed markedly
enlarged peripheral lymph nodes (submandibular, prescapular, inguinal, and popliteal)
with no associated clinical signs of illness. This presentation is classical for lymphoma,
and biopsy of a lymph node was appropriately performed. The diagnosis was high-grade
diffuse lymphoblastic lymphoma. Immunophenotype was B-cell. CBC and chemistry panel
were normal. Thoracic radiographs showed only mild pulmonary consolidation (felt to be
age rather than disease-related). Based on these results, she was considered to be in at least
clinical stage 3, substage a.
Further Staging
Baseline lymph node measurements should be recorded to evaluate response to
treatment.
 In addition to the already performed CBC and chemistry panel, urinalysis (with culture,
 if indicated) is recommended to detect any subclinical UTI, common in dogs with
lymphoma.
 Careful abdominal palpation, and radiography or ultrasonography if the liver and spleen
cannot be clearly palpated as normal, is indicated. Hepatic or splenic involvement elevates
the stage to 4.
A careful physical examination of her cardiovascular system should be done, and if there
is any question of abnormality, baseline cardiac ultrasonography is indicated. If ultraso-
nography shows any evidence at all of ventricular dilation or reduced shortening fraction,
doxorubicin is contraindicated.
Case Resolution
Hannah was a very typical lymphoma patient and she was felt to be likely to have a very
good response to chemotherapy. Further staging revealed no abnormalities and chemo-
therapy was started with a five-drug protocol using the drugs listed above. She achieved
was noted at a regular examination 9 months later, and repeated treatment caused a second
remission. At her second relapse 5 months later, rescue therapy using lomustine, actino-
mycin-D, and procarbazine was prescribed because the other drugs she had been receiving
total survival time was 2 months longer than that, and her owner was very pleased with
the additional 2 years of good quality of life.
Lymphoma in Cats
Overview
Lymphoma, or lymphosarcoma, is a cancer seen in many species of animals and in humans.
 Lymphoma is the malignant proliferation of lymphocytes, which are a major component
of the immune system. Cats with lymphoma are usually unwell, with extranodal (other
than lymph node) sites more commonly affected than lymph nodes. The most commonly
involved system is the gastrointestinal tract (Figure 26.1). Often cats are presented for
reduced appetite and less energy and diagnosis is made during investigation. Diagnosis is
normally based on a biopsy, thoracic radiographs (Figure 26.2) and abdominal ultraso-
nography (often used to direct the biopsy), and standard blood tests and urinalysis, but
may also include more complicated procedures such as CT scan or cytology of other sites
(Figure 26.3).
Lymphoma in cats is caused by a variety of factors. The best studied is feline leukemia
virus (FeLV); more recently FeLV has been found to be an uncommon cause of lymphoma,
 probably due to testing and isolation of infected cats leading to a decreased prevalence.
In the 2000s other causes predominate, including genetic components (Oriental breeds are
at higher risk), exposure to carcinogens (cats exposed to second-hand smoke are 3 to 4
times more likely to develop lymphoma), and other unknown factors. Because multiple
organs may become affected, including kidney, gastrointestinal tract, and central nervous
system, as well as the liver and bone marrow, the function of normal cells may be com-
promised. For example, renal damage may occur because of the expanding tumor cell
 population in the kidney causing elevations in serum creatinine and urea, and in severe
cases, patients may have renal failure. Normally the bone marrow produces the majority
of the blood cells. Tumor cells in the bone marrow can cause fewer neutrophils or plate-
lets to be available. The pet is then susceptible to infection and bleeding (petechiation or
ecchymoses). Anemia is commonly low-grade and due to "chronic disease" rather than
bone marrow infiltration.
236
Lymphoma in Cats 237
Figure 26.1. A 13-year-old spayed female DLH with a
history of anorexia and vomiting. Physical examination
 showed cachexia, and abdominal palpation was suggestive
of an intra-abdominal mass. Exploratory laparotomy con-
firmed the presence of this intestinal mass, and histopathol-
ogy showed it to be lymphoma. (Courtesy of John Berg)
Fgure 26.2. A 10-year-old neutered male
Burmese with a history of weight loss and dyspnea.
Thoracic radiographs showed a large cranial medi-
astinal mass. (Courtesy of Susan M. Cotter)
Figure 26.3. Cytology of the cranial mediastinal
mass seen in the patient in Figure 26.2; the pres-
ence of a highly variable population of large
lymphoblasts is strongly suggestive of lymphoma.
(Courtesy of Susan M. Cotter)
For lymphoma in cats, remission times and life span, or prognosis, is highly variable
and depends on a number of factors:
 1. The stage of the disease, which reflects the number and location of major populations
of tumor cells in the body. Stage 5 is the highest. Cats with stage 1 lymphoma do
better than cats with higher stages.
2.
 Substage: whether the pet is feeling ill. Loss of appetite is probably the most important
symptom in this regard since cats can lose a large percentage of their body weight in
 a very short time. Cats in substage a (no symptoms) do better than cats in substage
b (feeling unwell). Unfortunately, most cats are substage b when diagnosed.
3.
- o uaned a ue shan r jo aade oads a ipt ooois
tration in various tissues (what the pathologist reports from a biopsy specimen).
238Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
Low-grade lymphoma is better, and often requires less aggressive therapy to gain a
similar remission.
4.
 The pet's response to therapy.
5. The treatment chosen and the care given by the owner and veterinary cancer care team.
Treatment
Treatment usually involves the use of multiple anticancer chemotherapy drugs in a set
format, or protocol. It is important to use different drugs in combination, since this has
been shown to dramatically increase remission time. The most effective, and commonly
used, drugs are vincristine, cyclophosphamide, prednisone, procarbazine, and doxorubicin.
L-asparaginase is much less effective in cats than in dogs.
 In general, cats with a lower stage of lymphoma and cats that are not sick have a better
chance of remission with treatment. Untreated cats usually live 2 months or less. With
therapy, approximately 50% of cats with lymphoma achieve a remission (lower than for
dogs), and live 1 year or more (the same as dogs). Therefore, a reasonable goal is a 1-year
survival. Occasionally a cat will live much longer up to 2.5 years or more, and about
 20% of cats with lymphoma are permanently cured by combination chemotherapy.
More commonly in cats than in dogs, a truly localized (stage 1) lymphoma may be
found. Often this involves the nasal cavity, but it can involve other sites. For these patients,
localized therapy (surgery or radiation therapy) may provide a valuable adjunct to che-
motherapy; or even be used alone (as long as there is not evidence of systemic lymphoma
 on staging). The prognosis for stage 1 lymphomas is favorable.
Nursing Highlights
Supportive care is often important for cats with lymphoma involving the gastrointestinal
tract. Any progression of GI signs means that the patient will need nutritional support.
Some of the chemotherapeutics have the potential to make these symptoms worse. Cats
may lose a large percentage of their body weight in even as short a period as a week, and
continued loss of weight after staring therapy should be considered unacceptable. Anti-
emetics (metoclopramide) and appetite stimulants (such as megestrol acetate or cyprohep-
tadine orally) may be appropriate in addition to good general nursing care in order to
improve nutritional status if chemotherapy is used. Placement of an esophagostomy, gas-
 trostomy, or pharyngeal feeding tube is essential in cats with marked GI signs. In addition
to assisting in feeding, this tube will also enhance the caregiver's ability to administer oral
medication. The use of prophylactic antibiotics should be considered, particularly when
administering a myelosuppressive drug for the first time.
Many pet owners wonder whether they should feed their pet anything special during
treatment for lymphoma. There is some evidence that higher protein and fat and lower
carbohydrate content is beneficial to dogs with lymphoma, but similar studies have not
been performed in cats. Cats have special nutritional requirements, and Hill's Prescription
diet n/d is not a suitable diet for cats. Since quality of life is the most important criterion
for pets undergoing treatment for cancer, it is important that the diet chosen is one that
the patient enjoys.
Lymphoma in Cats239
Case Example
Blue, an 11-year-old castrated male, 5 kg DSH had a history of sneezing beginning approx-
imately 3 months before presentation and gingivitis for which he received dental care with
extractions. Following that intervention he had become inappetent and required support-
ive care. He was serologically negative for FeLV and FIV. His CBC was unremarkable,
and the only abnormality on the serum biochemistry panel was an elevated globulin level.
Nasal radiographs demonstrated a soft tissue mass in the left nasal sinus. Nasopharyngos-
copy demonstrated a smooth fleshy mass that was biopsied for histopathology and yielded
a diagnosis of high-grade lymphoma (frequent mitoses and extensive regions of coagulative
necrosis).
 Blue was thought to have a stage 1 (localized) lymphoma. Further testing was performed
to confirm this because cats that have multiorgan involvement found on further testing
have a worse prognosis and require more aggressive treatment. The best treatment is
usually combination chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Chemotherapy alone is not as
effective as radiation for the treatment of local disease (radiation killing is not limited
by systemic toxicity), but radiation alone should be used only if exbaustive staging has
failed to demonstrate any other site of lymphoma (hence the somewhat aggressive staging
recommendations).
Further Staging
The abdomen and thorax should be evaluated by abdominal ultrasonography and thoracic
radiographs, respectively (with aspiration cytology or biopsy of any lesions seen).
 For completeness, if radiation therapy alone is being considered, bone marrow cytology
should be evaluated for lymphoma.
Urinalysis should be evaluated for subclinical infection, but also for concentrating
ability, which may determine the safety of doxorubicin chemotherapy. Of particular
concern would be if his specific gravity is <1.030. Serum T4 should be evaluated because
hyperthyroidism may mask renal insufficiency.
Immunophenotype may have prognostic value for cats with lymphoma, so stains for
B- (CD-79a) and T-cell (CD-3) markers on the biopsy should be considered.
 If radiation therapy is being considered, a CT scan is needed to delineate the treatment
field. This will also allow examination of the cribriform plate, an important prognostic
factor in a recent study.
Case Resofution
Blue's staging showed that he had normal renal function, and there was no evidence of
lymphoma on further staging. Radiotherapy was not an option for this owner, and Blue
experienced a strong (80%) partial response to chemotherapy, but symptoms returned in
the third week of therapy. Nasal bacterial culture was positive, and the signs again sub-
sided with appropriate antibiotic therapy. Chemotherapy was continued and 6 months
after treatment began, a repeated CT scan showed no evidence of lymphoma. All treatment
was ceased and 2 years later he was still free of signs of disease
Mast Cell Tumor in Dogs
Overview
Mast cells are normally found throughout the body and are considered part of the allergy
system because they contain histamine and other substances that cause swelling and
itchiness when released from the cell. Mast cell tumors (MCT) are one of the most common
skin tumors in dogs and range from essentially benign to highly malignant. The most reli-
able predictor of how an individual mast cell tumor will behave is the grade of the tumor,
which is determined by biopsy:
1. Grade 1 MCT are benign, usually quite small, and localized to the superficial skin
layers. They are usually cured by wide surgical removal that includes a "cuff" of
normal tissue both around and below the tumor.
2.
Grade 2 MCT are locally invasive (meaning they invade adjacent normal tissue), but
they do not typically spread to other places in the body, particularly if they are treated
 appropriately early in the course of the tumor. In this respect they are "between"
grade 1 and grade 3 tumors.
3.
Grade 3 MCT are often very large, often (but not always) associated with swelling
and pain and may spread rapidly to other sites in the body. These tumors are difficult
to control (Figure 27.1).
A recent study also found that the mitotic index (number of mitoses counted per 10
high-power microscope fields [HPF]] predicted survival for dogs that had grade 2 or 3
MCT. Dogs with MCT with a mitotic index of <5 had long survival times of more than
5 years, compared to 2-4 months if the mitotic index was >5.
240
Mast Cell Tumor in Dogs 241
1.00
0.75
Well-diff
0.50
Intermediately-differentiated
0.25
0.00
600
100012001400
Survival (days)
Figure 27.1.Kaplan-Meier survival curve showing the
lian jsew ym saop ioy leniains uo apene jownt jo pae
tumors. Murphy et al., Vet Rec 158:287-291, 2006, with
permission.
Figure 27.2. A 9-year-old spayed female Weima-
raner with an ulcerated mass on the caudal aspect
of the left stifle; histopathology yielded a diagnosis
of mast cell tumor. (Courtesy of A. G. Evans)
Figure 27.3. Another mass on the same patient as
in Figure 27.1; histopathology also yielded a diag-
nosis of mast cell tumor. The presence of multiple
tumors does not in itself confer a worse prognosis,
and each tumor should be treated individually.
(Courtesy of A. G. Evans)
Diagnosis and Staging
 The diagnosis of MCT may be suspected by physical examination, but any cutaneous
lesion could be an MCT, and diagnosis cannot be predicted by external appearance
(Figures 27.2-27.4). Diagnosis of MCT can often be made by FNA cytology; however,
 histopathology is necessary for the critically important information of tumor grade.
Staging for dogs with MCT is performed to check for MCT spread to the most com-
monly affected sites: lymph nodes (the most common site), bone marrow, or abdominal
 organs such as spleen and liver. Radiographs, abdominal ultrasonography, and bone
marrow aspirate may need to be performed in addition to CBC, serum biochemistry
profle, and urinalysis. Buffy coat smears are no longer considered helpful in staging dogs
with MCT.
Even after successful treatment of an MCT, about 10% of dogs will develop another
skin MCT, months to years later. Most oncologists believe this is unrelated to the original
242Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
Figure 27.4. A 6-year-old castrated male golden
retriever with multiple small cutaneous lesions;
histopathology yielded a diagnosis of mast cell
tumor. External appearance does not predict a
diagnosis.
tumor, and can often be treated successfully. Early detection will help in the successful
treatment of second tumors, so the patient should be carefully evaluated at each examina-
tion and by their owner.
Treatment
Grade 1 MCT is usually cured by surgery.
Treatment of grade 2 MCT with low mitotic index is primarily aimed at controlling the
tumor where it occurs because metastasis is uncommon. There are generally two means of
achieving this control. The first is surgery to remove the MCT and a wide and deep (usually
2cm) margin of normal surrounding tissue, which can be difficult depending on where the
tumor is on the body. Particularly on the extremities (leg, face, etc.) it may not be possible
to completely remove all the tumor cells, and the MCT will regrow. The second option is
radiation therapy. Radiation therapy is administered to the tumor and a similar 2 cm cuff
of normal tissue, but normal tissue is better able to repair the damage caused by radiation
therapy than is the tumor. Side effects of radiation therapy include a skin burn that devel-
 ops midway through treatment and lasts 1-2 weeks before healing. During this time, the
pet should be treated with oral antiinflammatory and analgesic medications and topical
burn creams to minimize discomfort. There is also the potential, though very unlikely, for
 permanent damage to underlying tissues depending on the location of the tumor. With
radiation therapy, there is a 95 % chance of controlling the tumor for 1 year and an 80-95 %
chance of controlling the tumor long-term (cure); this is very similar to surgery.
If the MCT is grade 3 or grade 2 with a high mitotic index, chemotherapy should be
considered.
Nursing Highlights
Dogs with larger, bulky MCT disease, with recurrence of cutaneous disease, or with sys-
temic spread of MCT, should receive Hz antagonists, because rapid degranulation of
d n          i do
 gastrointestinal ulceration associated with elevated levels of histamine and to treat ulcers
already present. Hz antagonists such as ranitidine or famotidine reduce gastric acid pro-
duction by competitive inhibition of the action of histamine on Hz receptors of the gastric
Mast Cell Tumor in Dogs243
parietal cells. Omeprazole, which inhibits gastric acid production by the gastric parietal
cells through proton pump inhibition, may also be used. Dogs with evidence of gastroin-
testinal ulceration and bleeding may benefit from sucralfate therapy. Sucralfate reacts with
stomach acid to form a highly condensed, viscous, adherent, pastelike substance that binds
to the surface of both gastric and duodenal ulcers. The barrier formed protects the ulcer
from potential ulcerogenic properties of pepsin, acid, and bile, allowing the ulcer to heal.
H, antagonists (e.g., diphenhydramine) should be considered for use along with an Hz
antagonist before and after surgical removal of canine MCTs to help prevent the negative
effects of local histamine release on fibroplasia and wound healing.
Case Example
Emma, a 7-year-old, spayed female, 30kg bull terrier had a grade 2 MCT excised with
complete histologic margins from the proximal cranial portion of the left hindleg. Prior
to surgery, a CBC and serum chemistry profle showed no significant abnormalities that
would interfere with further treatment. The regional popliteal inguinal and sublumbar
index of the excised MCT was reported as 10 per 10 HPF, which was suggestive of aggres-
sive biologic behavior.
Further Staging
Utrasonography is recommended to evaluate the sublumbar (iliac) lymph nodes.
The abdomen should be carefully palpated, and if there is difficulty palpating the organs
clearly or if there is any suspicion of hepato- or splenomegaly, these organs should be
evaluated further by ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration cytology.
Thoracic radiographs are usually considered part of routine staging of pets with cancer.
Pulmonary involvement with MCT is uncommon, so these may be “low yield" in staging
this disease; but other abnormalities such as sternal lymphadenopathy, or other intercur-
rent disease, could be identified.
Approximately 5% of dogs have mast cell infiltration of the bone marrow. Because of
the high-grade histology, and if aggressive chemotherapy is being considered, this would
be a worthwhile test, because it may change the perception of tumor burden before che-
motherapy but would not change the treatment used.
Case Resolution
Further staging showed Emma had metastasis to the sublumbar lymph nodes, and since
surgery had resulted in complete margins, radiation therapy was not felt to offer any
advantage for local tumor control. It was felt that the treatment most likely to result in
long tumor control would be adjuvant chemotherapy, and a protocol including CCNU,
vinblastine, and prednisone was prescribed. Complete response was seen in the lymph
nodes, but Emma developed persistent liver enzyme elevation after her second dose of
CCNU, and this drug was discontinued because it is a potential hepatotoxin. However,
vinblastine and prednisone were continued. She was still free of evidence of cancer 8
months later.
Soft Tissue Sarcomas in
Dogs and Cats
Overview
Soft tissue sarcomas (STS) are a group of tumors that arise from connective tissues such
as fibrous tissue and muscle. Some of the specific tumors in this category are fibrosarcomas,
 neurofbrosarcomas (nerve sheath tumors), malignant fbrous histiocytomas, myxosarco-
mas, and hemangiopericytomas. Soft tissue sarcomas are locally invasive (meaning they
readily invade into and through adjacent normal tissue), but they are slow to metastasize
(Figures 28.1-28.4).
Soft tissue sarcomas that occur in cats under the skin of the neck, between the shoulder
blades, the flank, and in the back leg muscles are often termed injection site sarcomas, or
vaccine-associated sarcomas, due to their anatomic location at common sites for subcuta-
neous injection, particularly rabies and feline leukemia vaccines. The risk for a cat seems
to be an individual one, rather than a high risk for all cats, but increases with more injec-
tions at the same site on the body.
Staging
Metastasis at the time of diagnosis is uncommon; however, thoracic radiographs should
be obtained as the most common site of systemic metastasis. Regional lymph nodes also
should be palpated, with biopsy or aspiration cytology performed if enlarged. A CBC,
serum chemistry profle and urinalysis are recommended, particularly if multiple anesthe-
sias (such as for radiotherapy) or chemotherapy are anticipated.
The most reliable predictor of how an individual soft tissue sarcoma will behave is the
grade of the tumor, which is determined by histopathologic examination of a biopsy. Dogs
with grade 1 and 2 tumors have a high likelihood of recurrence after conservative surgery,
244
Soft Tissue Sarcomas in Dogs and Cats
245
Figure 28.1. Soft tissue sarcomas can become
ulcerated as they enlarge. This tumor is obviously
painful and requires palliation. In this dog pallia-
tion would be best accomplished by amputation;
however, palliative radiation could be considered
as an alternative.
28.2
Figure 28.2 and Figure 28.3. Whensoft tissue
sarcomas occur on the limbs, excision with com-
plete margins is often impossible and other modal-
ities are needed for tumor control. (Courtesy of
Gordon H. Theilen)
28.3
but approximately 90% are tumor free 12 months after aggressive surgery. Most impor-
tantly, dogs with grade 1 and 2 tumors show very low metastatic rates (less than 15%).
In addition, dogs with low mitotic index have an average survival time of 4 years. Although
the overall risk of spread from a soft tissue sarcoma is low, more than 40% of dogs with
grade 3 tumors show evidence of metastasis. In one study, dogs with grade 3 soft tissue
sarcomas also had an average survival after surgery of only 8 months (Figure 28.5).
246
Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
Figure 28.4. When soft tissue sarcomas occur on
the body, complete excision is sometimes feasible,
but when the tumor is very large surgery may not
be anatomically possible. (Courtesy of John Berg)
Lower Mitotic Index Increases Survival
ing
0.8-
0.6
0.4-
0.2
1
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
Figure 28.5. Kaplan-Meier survival curve showing
Survival time (days)
the effect of tumor grade on survival for dogs with
soft tissue sarcomas. The effect of grade is similar
for cats with this cancer type. Kuntz et al., fAvMA
<10 mitotic figures/10 hpf
10-19 mitotic ligures/10 hpf
211:1147-1151, 1997, with permission (from
>19 mitotic ligures/10 hpf
Managing the Canine Cancer Patient, Veterinary
Learning Systems 2006, with permission).
Treatment
Because they usually remain localized, treatment of grade 1 and 2 STS is primarily aimed
at controlling the tumor where it occurs. Because soft tissue sarcomas are very invasive
and extend tentaclelike projections into adjacent normal tissue, it is very difficult to com-
pletely remove these tumors with surgery alone. To attempt a complete excision, it is
necessary to remove the tumor and a wide (usually 3 cm) margin of normal surrounding
tissue, which can be difficult depending on where the tumor is on the body. The exception
to this would be if the sarcoma occurs on an extremity such as a limb, where amputation
can be performed. Regardless, the best chance of achieving a surgical cure for soft tissue
sarcoma is with an aggressive approach at the first surgery, and repeated attempts at exci-
sion are rarely successful.
A combination of both surgery and high doses of radiation therapy provides the best
chance of controlling otherwise inoperable tumors.
Soft Tissue Sarcomas in Dogs and Cats247
Chemotherapy given after surgery has the greatest chance of slowing down or prevent-
ing metastases, and is recommended for dogs with grade 3 sarcomas. It is important to
remember that even for dogs with grade 3 tumors, 60% of patients do not develop metas-
tasis, so treatment of the primary tumor is still a priority.
Nursing Highlights
 Postoperative pain relief is the most important aspect of treatment for dogs with soft tissue
sarcoma. For wide surgical resections, when there is tension on the wound edges, firm,
comfortable bandages will assist in healing, protect the surgery site from licking and
chewing, and enable better pain relief.
Case Example
Buddy, an 11-year-old, castrated male, 45 kg German shepherd, had a soft tissue mass
noticed on the dorsal surface of the left carpus 12 months previously, and it was debulked
at that time; a regrowth was again debulked 8 months later, and at the most recent pre-
sentation, it was a 6 x 5 x 3 cm mass that was not ulcerated and did not radiographically
involve the underlying bone. Histopathology of an incisional biopsy yielded a diagnosis
of a soft tissue sarcoma. The cells were moderately pleomorphic and the mitotic index was
given as <10 per 10 hpf; patchy necrosis was reported so this was a grade 2 STs. Thoracic
radiographs showed no evidence of metastasis. The regional lymph nodes were not pal-
pable due to obesity. A preanesthetic screen showed azotemia, which may have been
prerenal, but urine specific gravity, while not isosthenuric, was not adequately concen-
trated (1.025) if he was dehydrated. Buddy was not reported to have any other clinical
symptoms related to the tumor or other problems.
FurtherStaging
The external regional lymph nodes (prescapular and axillary) should be identified by
ultrasonography and biopsy or aspiration cytology performed if enlarged.
A CBC, and repeat chemistry panel and urinalysis (with culture, to rule out pyelone-
phritis) are recommended due to the azotemia, particularly if multiple anesthesias (such
as for radiotherapy) or chemotherapy is anticipated.
Case Resofution
Repeated blood work showed resolution of the azotemia, and amputation was recom-
mended as the most likely treatment to result in a cure. Buddy's owners declined amputa-
tion; and debulking surgery and radiotherapy was performed (54 Gray total dose in daily
3 Gy fractions, 5 days a week). He developed postradiation moist desquamation that was
managed with topical cleaning and NSAIDs until it healed 2 weeks after radiation. Two
years after radiotherapy he was alive and well, with no evidence of tumor recurrence.
Splenic Hemangiosarcoma
in Dogs
Overview
Hemangiosarcoma is the most common malignant tumor of the spleen in dogs. The tumor
 in the spleen (Figure 29.1) causes dogs to feel ill, and it is very dangerous because it can
rupture and cause sudden and severe internal bleeding. Hemangiosarcoma also has a very
high propensity to metastasize, particularly to the liver. The surgical removal of the spleen
alleviates the primary symptoms and the immediate risk of sudden internal bleeding;
however, almost all dogs with splenic hemangiosarcoma will eventually develop metastasis.
Staging
The expected survival time for dogs with hemangiosarcoma after surgery depends on the
ability of additional treatment, usually chemotherapy, to delay the development of metas-
tasis. This is largely related to the clinical stage of the tumor in the spleen. Stage 1 tumors
are confined to the spleen with no evidence of metastasis, whereas dogs with stage 2 disease
have a ruptured spleen, with or without regional lymph node involvement. Stage 3 tumors
are large, invasive tumors with distant metastases. Staging therefore should include abdom-
inal ultrasonography (Figure 29.2) (often supplemented by the surgery report) and thoracic
radiographs; a CBC, serum chemistry profle, and urinalysis will help ensure that the dog
is otherwise healthy. Up to 25% of dogs with splenic hemangiosarcoma may also have a
right atrial hemangiosarcoma; ideally, therefore, it is important to examine the right atrial
appendage by ultrasonography for presence of a mass prior to making firm recommenda-
tions for adjunctive therapy.
There may also be some predictive value to the histologic grade of the tumor, a score
assigned by the pathologist based on the tumor's histologic appearance.
248
Splenic Hemangiosarcoma in Dogs
249
Figure 29.1. Hemangiosarcoma often presents
papuasip e yim 'liamun Sujaaj s! ieyi sop e y
abdomen. Here, radiographs disclose a large cra-
nioventral abdominal mass. The location is sugges.
tive of a splenic mass. Histopathology is necessary
to make a diagnosis of hemangiosarcoma, however.
(Courtesy of John Berg)
Figure 29.2. Abdominal ultrasonography of the
same dog in Figure 29.1 shows a large, cavitated
splenic mass. (Courtesy of John Berg)
Figure 29.3. At exploratory laparotomy of the
same dog in Figures 29.1 and 29.2, the large
splenic mass is found to be intact. It is important
to examine the rest of the abdomen. (Courtesy of
John Bergy
Treatment
Splenectomy (Figure 29.3) is the definitive treatment for this disease. Improvement in
symptoms is usually rapid and quality of life is improved. In addition, the short-term risk
of internal bleeding is reduced. However, when metastasis is present, additional treatment
is needed to attempt to extend survival time. With surgery alone, dogs with stage 1 tumors 
have an average survival of 12 months, compared to 3 to 5 months for dogs with stage 2
hemangiosarcoma and 2 months for dogs with stage 3 tumors.
250Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
The good effect of chemotherapy on some other cancers in dogs raised hopes that drug
therapy may also improve survival for dogs with hemangiosarcoma. However the response
has been less successful with this disease. For dogs with stage 1 or 2 disease, chemotherapy
does appear to approximately double survival times over surgery alone. For dogs with
stage 3 tumors, the benefit of chemotherapy is less clear.
 In one study of dogs with metastasis treated with surgery and chemotherapy together,
dogs in which all the visible cancer both in the spleen and elsewhere could be removed,
survived an average of 6 months; dogs whose cancer could not be completely removed
lived an average of 2 months. The chemotherapy medication most likely to provide a
response in hemangiosarcoma is doxorubicin, and other medications may also have a role
to play in the treatment of this difficult disease.
 In addition to chemotherapy, there is also some possibility that antiangiogenic treat-
ments—treatment targeted at tumor blood vessels—may slow the growth of hemangiosar-
coma metastases. However, this is experimental and chemotherapy is more likely to be
effective. Many veterinary oncologists suggest an antiangiogenic approach in combination
with chemotherapy.
Nursing Highlights
Most dogs do very well postoperatively and with the exception of pain control, do not
require supportive care—at least initially. In later stages of disease, they may require anal-
 gesics, antinflammatories, appetite stimulants, and corticosteroids. Blood transfusions
(packed red cells or whole blood) could be used judiciously as needed if bleeding occurs
from abdominal metastases. With chemotherapy, supportive care could include antibiotics
and appetite stimulants when needed. Prophylactic trimethoprim-sulpha for 14 days each
time doxorubicin is given reduces the risk of side effects from that drug.
Case Example
Conner, a 7-year-old, castrated male, 35 kg golden retriever had a history of hemoabdo-
men. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a 5 cm splenic mass but no other visible lesions
in other abdominal organs. A hemangiosarcoma of the spleen was diagnosed after sple-
nectomy, and based on the pathology report it was a grade 3 tumor. At surgery there was
no gross evidence of mesenteric seeding, and liver and regional lymph nodes did not have
visible metastases so he was in clinical stage 2 (because it was ruptured). Thoracic radio-
graphs were reported to show no detectable metastases or abnormal heart base. Post-
operatively his PCV rose to over 40%. A preoperative serum chemistry profle and
urinalysis were normal
FurtherStaging
If further treatment is anticipated, a pretreatment (postoperative) abdominal ultrasono-
gram will provide a baseline for future assessments of efficacy. Examine also the right
atrial appendage by ultrasonography.
Splenic Hemangiosarcoma in Dogs
251
A careful physical examination of his cardiovascular system should be done, and base-
line cardiac ultrasonography can be evaluated when the atrium is examined. If ultraso-
nography shows any evidence at all of ventricular dilation or reduced shortening fraction,
doxorubicin is contraindicated.
Case Resofution
The best chance to improve Conner's survival time was felt to be adjunctive chemotherapy.
Cardiac ultrasonography showed no evidence of a heart base mass, but Conner's cardiac
function (specifically his fractional shortening) was abnormal and low. For this reason,
doxorubicin was not considered to be a good choice for therapy (due to concerns about
exacerbating his cardiac muscle damage), and mitoxantrone was substituted in a combina-
tion chemotherapy protocol. Conner completed his chemotherapy, and at a recheck ultra-
sonogram, his abdomen showed no evidence of metastasis. Unfortunately, about 4 months
after completing chemotherapy (8 months from splenectomy) he again collapsed and mul-
tiple bleeding hepatic metastases were identified on ultrasonography. His owner elected
no further chemotherapy, but he responded to blood transfusion and antinflammatories
and regained approximately 80% of his strength and exercise abilities. A further 2 weeks
later he again collapsed and his owner elected euthanasia.
Osteosarcoma in Dog
Overview
Osteosarcoma, a malignant tumor arising in bone, is one of the most common cancers of
dogs. The tumor affects primarily large breeds of dogs, often at relatively young ages. The
cause is unknown. Although osteosarcoma is a serious disease, with treatment, the vast
majority of dogs can be significantly helped.
 Osteosarcoma behaves in a fairly predictable fashion. The tumor in the leg is very
painful, because small fractures and bleeding cause pressure on the sensitive nerve endings
in the surface of the affected bone (Figure 30.1). Occasionally, the leg may fracture (see
Chapter 23) completely, which necessitates immediate treatment. Osteosarcoma almost
always metastasizes to the lungs prior to diagnosis, although at the time of diagnosis, the
lung tumors are usually microscopic and cannot be seen on thoracic radiographs. In treat-
'shunl aut pue bal aul yoq ui rouni au iean isnu am 'asasp aui bu!
Staging
In addition to radiographs of the affected leg (Figure 30.2), thoracic radiographs, regional
lymph node evaluation, and CBC, serum biochemistry profle and urinalysis are recom-
mended prior to surgery.
 Dogs that have pulmonary metastases that are radiographically detectable at the time
of presentation have a poor prognosis.
 Dogs with preamputation elevations (as measured on a serum chemistry profle) of serum
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) tend to have more aggressive osteosarcomas. Although serum
ALP does not absolutely determine the chance of long-term survival, it has a great impact
on reducing the chances of response to chemotherapy (Figure 30.3).
252
Osteosarcoma in Dogs 253
Figure 30.1. A sectioned specimen of an osteo-
sarcoma shows cortical disruption, periosteal new
bone production, and a mild pathologic fracture in
the proximal humerus.
Figure 30.2. A radiograph of an osteosarcoma of
the distal radius showing marked lysis of the bone
surrounded by periosteal new bone production.
Note that the lesion does not cross the joint space
(all changes restricted to the radius), which is a
srong indicator of cancer in this location.
 Another very important prognostic factor identified for dogs with appendicular osteo-
sarcoma is the histologic grade. Dogs are more likely to have grade 3 tumors, however
those with low-grade tumors have a better prognosis even with less aggressive treatment.
In addition, mitotic index is a predictor of survival with increasing numbers of mitoses
correlating with a poor prognosis.
Finally, dogs that have evidence of metastasis to the regional lymph node have a shorter
median survival (2 months) than if no metastasis are found (10.5 months), mirroring the
poor prognosis if thoracic metastases are visible at diagnosis.
Treatment
 tation is performed primarily to alleviate the pain produced by the tumor, and also to prevent
the leg being broken (Figure 30.4). Amputation is discussed in more detail in Chapter 6.
Life expectancy following surgery alone is limited, because the lung metastases continue
to grow. On the average, dogs live 5 months after surgery, and approximately 10% of
dogs live over 1 year. Nevertheless, we still recommend amputation as the best method of
relieving pain and maximizing quality of life during the survival time. Pain relief allows
considerable improvement in the patient's quality of life. A second, but less effective, option
for dogs that cannot be treated by amputation is radiotherapy for pain relief. This proce-
254Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Survivalfromsurgeryindays
Figure 30.3. A Kaplan-Meier survival curve showing the
effect of high serum ALP level (red line) and normal serum
ALP (green line) prior to amputation and chemotherapy on
survival of dogs with osteosarcoma. Dogs with a normal
serum ALP lived longer on average. Moore et al., / Vet
Figure 30.4. A painful swollen distal leg in a
Internaf Med 21:783-790, 2007, with permission.
boxer with osteosarcoma of the distal radius.
dure allows approximately 80% of dogs to feel less pain, but does not prevent growth of
the metastases or the possibility of the bone being broken.
Because amputation does not prevent growth of the metastases, the most important
advance in treatment of osteosarcoma has been the finding that chemotherapy following
surgery can slow the growth of the metastases, dramatically improve life expectancy, and in
some cases result in a cure. Past experience has shown that three chemotherapeutic medica-
tions—cisplatin, carboplatin, and doxorubicin—are effective in treating dogs with osteosar-
coma. Overall (not accounting for elevations in ALP), approximately 45 % of dogs live over
1 year when either of these drugs is given alone, and many dogs live much longer. The final
choice of drug is often influenced by factors other than the tumor; for example, a Doberman
would not be a good candidate for doxorubicin due to higher risk of cardiotoxicity in that
breed. Many oncologists recommend, for dogs that are otherwise healthy, a chemotherapy
protocol that combines doxorubicin and carboplatin. For dogs completing this protocol
without developing metastases, the overall chances of living 2 years beyond amputation are
about 25%, and approximately 20% of dogs live 3 years or their normal lifespan.
Nursing Highlights
 Pain relief (see also Chapter 11) is the most important aspect of treatment for dogs with
osteosarcoma, either while they are waiting for surgery, or if their owner refuses amputa-
tion. Bone pain is notoriously refractory to medical management, but with multimodality
pain relief, comfort levels can be improved. In addition, changes to their environment
(ramps, etc.) will assist the patient's comfort level (see also Chapter 11).
Osteosarcoma in Dogs 255
In brief, nonsteroidal antinflammatories (NSAIDs) can be helpful, but they usually do
not control the pain themselves. Options include piroxicam, carprofen, or metacam, but
these cannot be combined with each other. Corticosteroids are not usually particularly
helpful, but they can be tried; however, they must not be combined with NSAIDs.
 Tramadol can be combined with NSAIDs and opioids to reduce the effective dosage of all
drugs. Narcotics can also be combined with NSAIDs. When instituting a new narcotic
therapy, the nurse might encounter a possibility of patient sedation; this usually will pass
in the first few days of treatment.
We find codeine particularly helpful for "breakthrough" pain at nighttime and fentanyl
patches may give more consistent pain relief, but care should be exercised in houses where
other pets or children could ingest a patch lost from the patient. If a fentanyl patch is
used, it can take 24 hours for blood levels to rise so dogs can be given a "loading dose"
of injectable fentanyl IV.
Aminobisphosphonates inhibit osteoclast activity and so can reduce osteolysis and the
resultant pain and fracture risk. The response is slow, though, and it can take up to 2
weeks for pain relief to become apparent. Care should be taken with orally administered
bisphosphonates because esophageal irritation can occur particularly in patients that lie
down after taking the drug. See Chapter 11 for details as to how to avoid this risk.
Case Example
Rani, a 5-year-old spayed female, 32kg, Borzoi had a non-weight-bearing left hindlimb
lameness; radiographs showed a lytic and productive lesion of the proximal tibia. The
popliteal lymph node was not enlarged. Thoracic radiographs showed no evidence of
pulmonary metastases. CBC and serum chemistry profile were normal, including the serum
ALP level, which is an important positive prognostic factor. Amputation biopsy confrmed
the lesion to be a high-grade osteosarcoma (high mitotic index [54 per 10hpf], necrosis,
and pleomorphism)
Case Resofution
Amputation was performed and Rani recovered well. Chemotherapy was recommended,
but there was concern that her risk of cardiac toxicity was moderate if doxorubicin was
given, due to a possible breed (Borzoi) predisposition to cardiomyopathy. In one study of
over 300 dogs with osteosarcoma treated with doxorubicin, one of the 3 Borzois entered
developed clinical cardiomyopathy. This rate was higher than for dogs of most other
breeds, but obviously it was a small number of dogs. The availability of alternative che-
motherapy drugs with similar efficacy (carboplatin and cisplatin) suggests that doxorubi-
cin was not the first choice for adjunctive treatment of osteosarcoma in Rani. She therefore
received a protocol of carboplatin alone. She was still free of detectable metastases 2 years
later, although she required nonsteroidal antinflammatories due to worsening joint dis-
comfort in her other legs.
Oral Melanoma in Dogs
Overview
Tumors of the oral cavity are fairly common in older dogs. Unfortunately, they are usually
malignant, with both local infltration and metastasis presenting significant problems.
Symptoms usually relate to the primary tumor impinging on the dog's ability to eat com-
fortably. Oral melanomas are friable and invasive within the soft tissues of the mouth,
often causing bleeding (Figures 31.1 and 31.2). Without any treatment, survival time is
usually only a few months because of the progression of these symptoms.
Metastasis of tumors is probably an early event; however, metastases are often not
detected until some time after the primary melanoma is resected. The growth rate of
metastases may vary, but once lymph node metastasis is found, the chances for long sur-
vival reduce (average survival less than 6 months) and chemotherapy becomes important
in treatment strategies. If metastasis to the lungs is seen, unless there is a good response
to treatment, survival time is usually less than 4 months.
Studies in dogs without obvious metastases have found that the size of the tumor may
predict survival after treatment, with significantly longer survival for dogs with small
(<2cm diameter) tumors (average = 17 months) than for dogs with larger tumors
(average = 5.4 months) (Figure 31.3). Studies have also indicated that dogs with tumors
in the front of the lower jaw, the back cheek, or the lip seem to have longer remissions
and survival after surgery. Another study found longer survival times for dogs with tumors
that had low numbers of mitotic fgures on biopsy. A combination of all of these factors
is probably the most powerful predictor of survival.
Staging
 Prior to starting treatment, thoracic radiographs should be examined for metastases to the
lungs and to make sure the lungs and heart appear healthy otherwise. Lymph nodes should
256
Figure 31.2. Although melanoma usually has the charac-
teristic heavily pigmented appearance, it is not always
pigmented and must still be considered as a diagnostic
differential for nonpigmented tumors.
Figure 31.1. Melanoma is the most common
tumor in the mouth of dogs. Even though it is a
highly metastatic tumor, the quality of life impact
 of the primary tumor in the mouth is the most life-
threatening aspect of the disease for most dogs.
Dogs with Smaller Oral Tumors of
Any Type Live Longer
100
T1
T2
T3
80-
60
40
20
12
24
36
48
60
Time (months)
Figure 31.3. Kaplan-Meier survival curve showing the effect of tumor size, for any type of oral tumor, on survival
after treatment with surgery and radiation therapy. Theon et al., /AVMA 210:778-784, 1997, with permission
257
258Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
be examined by palpation, cytology, and possibly biopsy for presence of metastases.
Finally, routine blood work should be done to ensure that the dog is otherwise healthy
before proceeding with chemotherapy.
Treatment
Surgery is the primary treatment for this disease, but surgical cure is difficult, because of
both the anatomy of the area and the infltrative nature of the tumors. Surgery may also
help to improve the success of other treatment types, such as radiation and chemotherapy.
Radiotherapy has been reported for this disease, and when available may allow long-
term control of the cancer even when surgery is not an option, or as an adjunct to surgery
and chemotherapy. Radiotherapy may also be palliative for dogs with oral melanoma in
later stages of cancer growth.
When metastasis occurs, chemotherapy is the only treatment that has the potential to
extend survival for this disease; the best chemotherapy medications known for this tumor
are carboplatin and other platinum drugs.
Radiotherapy and chemotherapy combined have given the best survival rates for dogs
where surgery is not complete. In one study of dogs treated with this combination, only
15% had local recurrence, usually within the frst 5 months, and about half the dogs
developed metastatic disease within an average time of 10 months. Average survival time
for all treated dogs was 1 year. Without surgery or radiation therapy, about 30% of dogs
will respond to chemotherapy for a period of around 6 months. Even with this treatment,
cure is often not possible, but survival time can often be increased.
Nursing Highlights
Following extensive oral surgery (mandibulectomy or maxillectomy), some problems with
eating would be anticipated, and in one study difficulty in eating was noted for 44% of
the dogs (most commonly after maxillectomy; 64%). On the other hand, pain was felt to
be less after surgery for most animals (see also in Chapter 6). Postoperative analgesia is
important, and dogs may need to be coaxed or even taught to eat. During this time the
nurse can help owners identify foods that are easy to prehend and swallow, and may even
be able to demonstrate hand-assisted feeding techniques. Antibiotics are important regard-
less of whether treatment is performed, because secondary infections are common.
Metronidazole is very effective in reducing the severe halitosis that may interfere with the
bond between owners and their pets.
Most dogs do not require feeding tube support unless surgery is extensive or radiation
side effects are severe.
Case Example
Bindi, an 8-year-old, spayed female, 10.2kg, Maltese-cross had a 1 cm melanoma of the
 oral lip/skin margin in a rostral location that was excised for biopsy. The original biopsy
Oral Melanoma in Dogs259
showed narrow, but complete, margins. Further, more aggressive, surgery was performed,
and margins were assessed as adequate on repeated histopathology. Histopathology on
the original tumor described a mitotic rate of more than 1 per high power field (>10 per
10 hpf). Lymph nodes were normal in size, and thoracic radiographs showed no evidence
of metastases. CBC, serum chemistry profle, and urinalysis showed no evidence of meta-
bolic disease.
 sod  ssod  a d ae r o   e p  
 q i  s   t  n     
Case Resofution
The best primary treatment for Bindi was considered to be an aggressive surgery, which
had already been done. Since Bindi was otherwise well, and her mitotic rate was border-
line high, adjunctive carboplatin chemotherapy was also recommended; chemotherapy is
always more likely to be successful when there is minimal residual disease. On the other
hand, her prognosis was considered to be good even with local treatment alone. If a patient
 like Bindi survives a long time after chemotherapy, you can never be sure she wasn't going
to anyway! In this situation the dilemma is best posed as follows: If the question is, "Can
we get by without chemotherapy?" then the answer is yes, Bindi may be okay without it
although there is a risk. Whereas if the client's approach is, “I want to do the best thing
to ensure that Bindi's chances of remaining disease-free are maximized" then the answer
is, chemotherapy will improve her chances.
Bindi did not receive chemotherapy, and 16 months aer surgery, lymph node metasta-
sis was detected and pulmonary metastases were confrmed. Her owners declined further
definitive therapy and opted for palliation.
Oral Squamous Cell
Carcinoma in Cats
Overview
The most common mouth cancer in cats is squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). They arise
from the mucosal lining of the mouth, commonly under the tongue (Figure 32.1) or around
the teeth (Figure 32.2), and are friable and invasive, often causing bleeding and pain.
Unfortunately they are malignant, with infltration into surrounding structures in the
mouth presenting the most significant problem. Symptoms usually relate to the primary
tumor impinging on the cat's ability to eat comfortably. They can invade into underlying
bone, but rarely spread to distant sites in the body. About 20% will spread to the lymph
nodes nearby; these are usually larger tumors located toward the back of the mouth.
Because these tumors are often advanced, survival time is usually only a few weeks without
any treatment because of the progression of these symptoms.
Oral SCC is associated with tobacco use in human patients, and a weak association
with exposure to environmental tobacco smoke has also been made in cats. In addition,
cats that wear a flea collar have 5 times the risk of oral SCC as cats that do not, and cats
with high canned food intake had a 3 times the risk of developing oral SCC. It is possible
that poor oral hygiene plays a role in pathogenesis as it does in humans.
Staging
Particularly because these cats are often older and medically unstable, some testing is
needed to determine the extent of the cancer and to evaluate them for other diseases that
could impact prognosis or response to therapy. This generally involves CBC and serum
chemistry profle, serum T4, urinalysis, radiographs, and careful evaluation of the lymph
 nodes. The finding of metastasis to either the lymph nodes or lungs denotes a poor
260
Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Cats
261
Figure 32.2. Another common location for oral
squamous cell carcinoma in cats is around the teeth.
This is a notoriously difficult tumor to control with
treatment.
Figure 32.1. Squamous cell carcinoma is the most
common tumor in the mouth of older cats. A classic
location is under the tongue. Although the tumor has
a very low metastatic rate, the quality of life impact of
the primary tumor in the mouth is huge and these cats
unfortunately have short survival time.
prognosis. For very large or erosive cancers a CT scan or MRI may help determine the
depth of the cancer.
Treatment
Surgery is the primary treatment for this disease in dogs and people, but in cats it
rarely improves symptoms or survival times unless the tumor is very small (Figures 32.3
and 32.4). Average survival times for cats treated by surgery alone are less than
2 months.
Radiotherapy has been reported for this disease, and may be palliative for pain, but
again it rarely causes significant improvement in survival times. Average survival times for
cats treated by radiotherapy alone are 3 to 4 months.
Chemotherapy for this disease is rarely warranted, because the risk of metastasis is
low, but it is the only treatment that has the potential to extend survival when metastases
are seen. The best chemotherapy medications known for this tumor are doxorubicin
and carboplatin. One problem with these drugs is that safe administration requires
good kidney function, and often the older cats affected with SCC have underlying kidney
disease.
 The NSAID piroxicam may provide some symptomatic relief, but it rarely causes tumor
shrinkage. One study showed longer survival times when this medication was used, but
still average survival was less than 4 months.
262
Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
32.3
Figure 32.3 and Figure 32.4. Although the prog-
nosis for most cats with oral squamous cell carci-
noma is poor, when the tumor is diagnosed early.
aggressive local treatment may occasionally be
 successful. This cat recovered well from an aggres-
sive bilateral mandibulectomy and had a good
quality of life, with dramatically extended survival
time (more than 1 year, which is when the photo-
32.4
graphs were taken).
Nursing Highlights
Supportive care is possibly the most important aspect of treatment in this often older,
 delicate group of patients. We have seen significant improvement in overall wellbeing and
quality of life in cats treated with only a feeding tube for nutritional support, in conjunc-
tion with pain relief. In addition, management of any other problems such as renal or 
heart disease is important in this older group of patients.
Oral Squamous Ceffl Carcinoma in Cats
263
Case Example
 Billie, a 14-year-old, FS DSH, 5 kg was noticed by her owner to be drooling and favoring
softer foods; on examination a large erosive tumor was found associated with her left
mandible from the symphysis to the first premolar. Biopsy showed this to be an oral SCC
with a high mitotic rate. Routine blood work was reported to be normal, but a urinalysis
was not evaluated. Surgical resection was attempted, but it was incomplete. The man-
dibular node on that side was enlarged and was biopsied at surgery, showing evidence of
metastasis to the node.
Case Resolution
After surgery Billie was eating well and polydypsic. Chemotherapy was planned to start
2 weeks after surgery, but during this period, her appetite reduced and she began to lose
weight. Reevaluation of her blood work showed her to be azotemic, and her urine specific
gravity was isosthenuric. Chemotherapy was delayed while supportive care was instituted
for her renal failure, but her condition deteriorated and she was euthanatized. This case
serves to emphasize the importance of complete evaluation of older patients with cancer;
particularly if aggressive treatment strategies are being considered.
Mammary Carcinoma in Dogs
Overview
 Mammary (breast) tumors account for almost half of all cancers seen in female dogs. Intact
females have a sevenfold increased risk of developing mammary cancer compared to
neutered females, and studies clearly indicate the preventive role of spaying prior to the
 second heat.
Staging
Although most (75%) mammary tumors are either benign, or if malignant, have not
metastasized, approximately 25 % have metastasized by the lymphatics or the bloodstream
at the time of diagnosis. The two most common sites of metastasis are the lymph nodes
(' at) suni aun pue (i'e aii) (sapou yi peuoa ro a oi isaso
Therefore, evaluation of a pet with mammary cancer will include thoracic radiographs,
full blood work and urinalysis, and careful evaluation of regional lymph nodes by palpa-
tion, and (if enlarged or firm) biopsy.
Prognostic Factors
Tumor size is one of the most important prognostic factors for a dog with a mammary
mass. Dogs with mammary tumors less than 3 cm in diameter have a much higher likeli-
hood of being cured by treatment than dogs with larger tumors (Figures 33.3 and 33.4).
Metastasis to regional lymph nodes has been associated with an increased risk for tumor
recurrence and for decreased overall survival after surgery.
264
Ax
T.I
T2
A1
Figure 33.1. A schematic showing the lymphatic
draining of the canine mammary glands. Note that
there is some cross-drainage, so it is important to
carefully palpate all the mammary glands and 
A2
Iymph nodes in dogs with a mammary gland tumor.
T = thoracic
A = abdominal
I = inguinal 
Ax = axillary lymph node
 Ing = inguinal lymph node
Figure 33.2. The lungs are one of the most
common locations for mammary gland tumor
metastasis. When taking thoracic radiographs to
screen for pulmonary metastases, it is important to 
take both lateral views as well as a dorsoventral or
ventrodorsal view, because some lesions are visible
 on one lateral but not the other.
Dogs with Smaller Tumors
Have a Longer Survival Time
n=175
100
80
60
Survival
40-
Figure 33.3.Kaplan-Meier survival curve showing
T1 (n=119}
the effect of tumor size of survival after surgery for
T2 (n=33]
20-
T3 (n=18]
dogs with mammary cancer. Those with smaller
T4 (n=5)
tumors live longer on average. Yamagami et al., /
Vet Med Sci 58:1079-1083, 1996, with permission
(from Managing the Canine Cancer Patient, Veteri-
12
24
nary Learning Systems 2006, with permission).
Survival fime (mo)
265
266
Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
Figure 33.4. Tumor diameter is one of the most
important  prognostic  factors for  dogs  with
mammary gland tumors. This dog with a large
tumor will unfortunately have a poor prognosis; if
the tumor had been addressed earlier, it could have
been quite treatable, underscoring the need to
remind dog owners to be vigilant in screening
intact female dogs for mammary masses and have
them treated when small
Figure 33.5. Inflammatory mammary carcinoma
is an extremely painful invasive form of mammary
carcinoma. These dogs have a poor prognosis and
require a great deal of supportive care.
Rapid and invasive growth, often seen as fixation of the tumor to the overlying skin,
correlates with a worse prognosis. Dogs with tumors that ulcerate overlying skin have a
worse prognosis than dogs with tumors without ulceration.
Diet and body weight were important in one study for dogs with malignant mammary
   e s   sd a   aa   
and protein, the average survival time after surgery for dogs fed a low fat diet (<39%)
with protein greater than 27%, 23-27%, and less than 23% was 3 years, 1.2 years, and
6 months, respectively. Dogs that have a mammary carcinoma may beneft from a low fat,
high protein diet after surgery.
Older dogs have a worse prognosis in some studies but it is unclear whether this is due
In one study dogs that were intact at the time of surgery for a mammary carcinoma
survived a shorter time compared to dogs ovariectomised within the 2 years before surgery.
Dogs with a biopsy showing tumor cells invading blood or lymphatic vessels have a
shorter average survival.
 In general, the more the tumor cells resemble normal breast cells (well differentiated),
 the better the prognosis. After surgery, the chance of a poorly differentiated tumor recur-
ring is 90%; for moderately differentiated tumors, 68%; and for well-differentiated
tumors, 24%.
 Dogs with mammary sarcomas or inflammatory carcinomas (Figure 33.5) have a very
poor prognosis compared to those with noninflammatory carcinomas or mixed malignant
mammary tumors.
Mammary Carcinoma in Dogs267
Complete removal of the tumor as assessed by histopathology has been shown to
increase the length of survival.
Treatment
The surgery plan needs to be extensive enough to remove all cancer tissue. This may mean
that a second surgery may need to be performed when the borders around a mammary
cancer are narrow. Radiation therapy, as used in human breast cancer patients, may also
decrease the risk of recurrence where complete surgery is not possible. For dogs with
mammary tumors that have one or more poor prognostic factors listed above, systemic
chemotherapy is the most likely to improve their chances of remission and survival.
Nursing Highlights
Since size of the tumor is important in prognosis after treatment, all adult female dogs,
particularly those that are intact, or those that have already had a tumor removed, should
have their mammary glands palpated thoroughly at regular intervals in order to detect
tumors at the earliest time possible. Caregivers should be instructed in a proper technique
forexamination.
 To reduce the risk of mammary carcinoma, clients should be counseled to ovariectomize
their dogs before the first estrus, and to ensure that weight control is practiced in at least
the first year of life. Because one study showed dogs with a higher intake of red meat in
their diet were also at higher risk for developing mammary cancer, it may be better to feed
a commercial food that ensures that calories are primarily from other sources.
Nutritional support, and possibly diet modifications as suggested above under prognos-
tic factors, could be important for dogs with mammary carcinomas. Pain relief after
surgery, particularly if the surgery is extensive, is mandatory. Inflammatory carcinomas
have a major impact on quality of life, and supportive care is extremely important in this
group of dogs, using antiinflammatories, analgesics, and antibiotics.
Case Example
Reba, a 10-year-old, female, 21kg, Airedale terrier had a 1 cm axillary mass that grew to
approximately 3 cm in diameter over 6 months. First excision resulted in histologically
incomplete margins. After scar revision (second) surgery, the mass was completely excised,
but metastasis was present in the axillary lymph node. She had not been spayed. Thoracic
radiographs revealed no evidence of metastases. Preanesthetic serum chemistry profle
showed no abnormalities. Reba also had dilated cardiomyopathy (marginally low frac-
tional shortening) and was receiving treatment for that condition.
268Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
FurtherStaging
A CBC and urinalysis (with culture, if indicated) are recommended before starting
chemotherapy.
It is useful to repeat 3-view thoracic radiographs periodically (every 3 months in the
absence of clinical problems) to monitor for the development of pulmonary metastases.
(s yo t aeis ui aq oi panaiso sm eqa 'sisisi apou ydi ae go as
mammary carcinoma. Based on the literature, dogs in stage 4 have a median survival time
with surgery alone of 3 months and 13% were alive 1 year after surgery, so chemotherapy
was recommended.
Case Resofution
Due to her cardiac condition, doxorubicin was contraindicated. Therefore the recom-
mended course of treatment for Reba was chemotherapy consisting of mitoxantrone in
combination with carboplatin and piroxicam. The chances for a cure were considered to
be low, but the expected median survival was 9-12 months. Reba completed her protocol
with no toxicity except for neutropenia after the first mitoxantrone that necessitated a
dose reduction of 25% for all subsequent treatments of that drug. Fourteen months after
surgery she was still clear of metastases at examination and thoracic radiographs. Her
cardiac function had deteriorated, and she was referred to a cardiologist for further
evaluation.
Mammary
 Carcinoma in Cats
Overview
Tumors of the mammary glands in cats are most often carcinomas; benign tumors and
other types of malignant tumors are rare. Mammary carcinomas are seen in older cats,
especially if intact. Tri-colored and Siamese cats are at increased risk for developing
 mammary cancer. DSH and younger cats tend to do better with this disease.
Mammary carcinomas in cats may remain undetected until they become quite large or
ulcerative (Figure 34.1). Thus, unfortunately, mammary carcinoma is often advanced by
the time a veterinarian is consulted. Multiple gland involvement may be seen, and in some
cats the entire mammary chain is affected. Cats with tumors smaller than 3cm diameter
have both longer remissions after surgery and longer survival times.
Staging
Feline mammary carcinoma is an invasive and often rapidly spreading tumor. It can metas-
tasize to both the lungs and the lymph nodes. Some testing is needed to determine the
extent of the cancer. This involves blood work, urinalysis, radiographs, and careful evalu-
ation of the lymph nodes. The finding of metastasis to either the lymph nodes or lungs
denotes a poor prognosis after surgery. Staging takes into account the tumor size and
presence of any metastases and is useful in predicting the likely prognosis of an individual
cat with this disease. Cats with small tumors and no metastases have an average survival
time of nearly 30 months after surgical removal. Likewise, a histologic grading scheme
(assigned by the pathologist based on the microscopic appearance of the tumor) also has
 predictive value. Cats with inflammatory mammary carcinomas have a worse prognosis
and also require extra supportive care including analgesia because their tumors are typi-
cally very painful (Figure 34.2).
269
270Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
Figure 34.1. This large ulcerated mammary tumor on a cat should be removed with the widest possible margins
In addition, draining lymph nodes should be biopsied at the time of surgery. (Courtesy of Dr. Gregory Ogilvie)
Figure 34.2. This cat with multiple ulcerated inflammatory mammary carcinomas in the inguinal region requires
extra supportive care, especially analgesia.
Treatment
Feline mammary carcinomas need to be treated aggressively (Figure 34.3). Surgery alone
is unlikely to provide a cure unless the tumor is very small and localized; however, even
 in cats with larger tumors, it does play a role in reducing local recurrence and improving
survival time.
 Due to the high metastatic potential of mammary carcinoma, chemotherapy appears to
 on i  s  o on  n    
However, few studies have reported the use of chemotherapy. At the present time, doxo-
rubicin and possibly carboplatin appear to be the adjuvant chemotherapy drugs of choice.
 Radiation therapy has been used in some cats for the treatment of mammary carcinoma
and may be effective in helping to prevent local recurrence after surgery. It may also be
Mammary Carcinoma in Cats 271
Figure 34.3. Cats presented with a mammary tumor should always undergo full physical examination, and all
other mammary glands as well as all lymph nodes should be palpated. Mammary tumors may be multiple, and
when this occurs the best surgical approach is often a full-chain mastectomy. Cats that have undergone full-chain
(aio Aolaio la jo Asanon) eisalleue Aeiadsa anen aoddns ainbai Asopase
Figure 34.4. This cat has experienced multiple local tumor recurrence along the suture line. She is being pre-
pared for palliative radiation therapy to attempt to reduce the tumor size and make her more comfortable.
used in some cases to try to reduce inoperable tumors so that they can be removed. Finally,
radiation may be used toward to the end of a cat's life to reduce the discomfort associated
with mammary carcinoma (termed palliative radiation) (Figure 34.4).
Nursing Highlights
Analgesia is used during and after surgical removal of any mammary tumor, particularly
when a full-chain mastectomy is performed (see Figure 34.3). Antiemetics and antinausea
medication can be helpful at reducing the adverse effects of chemotherapy, and supple-
mental feeding methods and appetite stimulants may be considered for some patients to
facilitate healing and prevent weight loss during therapy. In addition, treatment of any
other problems such as renal or heart disease is important.
272Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
CaseExample
Darcie, a 9-year-old, spayed female, 4.9kg DSH had a history of multiple small mammary
tumors (largest 10 mm on pathology) found by her owner in the caudal mammary glands
Preoperative CBC, urinalysis, and chemistry profle were normal. Thoracic radiographs
excision. Histopathology of the masses confirmed one adenocarcinoma that was mildly
infiltrative into surrounding tissues, with a “moderate” mitotic rate, and it is characterized
as low grade. Other tumors were benign adenomas or noninvasive adenocarcinomas.
Lymphatic vessel invasion was noted in the tumor, although the regional lymph nodes were
not enlarged.
CaseResolution
Due to the presence of lymphatic invasion, the risk of metastasis was considered to be
very high for Darcie. For that reason, the recommended course of treatment was a che-
motherapeutic course consisting of doxorubicin in combination with carboplatin. Darcie's
owners refused chemotherapy. Although not needed at that time, the owners were coun-
mammary tumor development. This was also refused, so her owners were counseled in
mammary gland palpation and to be vigilant in detecting new mammary masses and having
them removed while small. Twelve months later she again had mammary nodules detected
and they were removed after repeating the staging and finding no evidence of metastasis.
She continued to feel well, but she had an enlarged axillary lymph node noted 2 months
after the second surgery; this was found to contain metastasis of the mammary carcinoma,
and her owners chose palliative care only.
Transitional Cell Carcinoma
in Dogs
Overview
 Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) is the most common cancer of the bladder in dogs.
Tumors most commonly originate in the trigone (Figures 35.1 and 35.2), but they can also
occur or extend through the urethra (Figure 35.3). The symptoms are similar to those of
a bladder infection, such as needing to urinate frequently but only voiding a small volume,
 and discomfort or pain when urinating. Infection often accompanies TCC, so urine cul-
tures must be done, and antibiotic therapy may be needed.
TCC in dogs has a rate of metastasis of >70% at diagnosis. The most common metastatic
sites are the iliac and other abdominal lymph nodes, liver, and lung (Figure 35.4). However,
the life-limiting aspect of TCC is usually the impact on the pet's quality of life of the
symptoms caused by the primary tumor in the bladder. Dogs that receive no treatment
usually live no longer than 2 months or so, because of these symptoms and the eventual
blockage of urinary outflow, meaning that they become unable to pass urine. Therefore,
even when metastasis is present it is important to focus on control of the tumor in the
bladder.
Staging
Dogs with TCC may need several staging tests done before treatment. Ultrasonography of
the abdomen is done to measure the size of the tumor and look for metastases within the
abdomen. Radiographs of the chest should be examined for metastases to the lungs and
to make sure the lungs and heart appear healthy otherwise. Urine culture should be done
to check for infection and may need to be repeated later during treatment if symptoms
suddenly worsen. Finally, routine blood work should be done to ensure that the dog is 
otherwise healthy before proceeding with chemotherapy.
273
Figure 35.1. Contrast cystography is a fairly reliable diagnostic method for identifying a space-occupying mass
in the bladder. A mass located in the trigone should raise a strong suspicion of transitional cell carcinoma.
(Courtesy of Dr. Dominique G. Penninck)
Figure 35.2. Ultrasonography can also be used to identify bladder masses, and it is more effective for visual-
izing other parts of the urinary tract and screening the rest of the abdomen for metastases. (Courtesy of Dr.
Dominique G.Penninck)
Figure 35.3. Urethral tumors can extend to become externally visible, as for this tumor extending into the vagina.
274
Transitional Cell Carcinomain Dogs
275
Figure 35.4.This dog has very enlarged inguinal
lymph nodes and hindlimb edema because of
metastasis from a urethral TCC.
Dogs That Have Clinical Improvement
After Treatment Live Longer
 Clinical improvement
No clinical improvement
0.8
Figure 35.5. Kaplan-Meier survival curve showing
0.4
that dogs that have any clinical improvement after
P= .0097
treatment with chemotherapy have prolonged sur-
0.2
vival. Henry et al., Clin Cancer Res 9:906-911,
2003, with permission (from Managing the Canine
Cancer Patient, Veterinary Learning Systems 2006,
200
400
600
800
Survival time (days)
with permission)
Treatment
When surgery is possible, it helps to prolong survival for dogs with TCC when followed
by chemotherapy. When bulky tumor is present, the effectiveness of chemotherapy is
limited. Most TCC occur in the bladder trigone (where the ureters enter the bladder), so
they are not resectable.
Whether surgery is possible or not, chemotherapy has been shown to alle viate symptoms
and prolong survival for many dogs with TCC. Piroxicam has the best single agent efficacy,
with a reduction in tumor size of >50% in about 30% of dogs. The most common side
effect of piroxicam is gastrointestinal upset, and the medication misoprostol can be given
with it to reduce the likelihood of this problem. Piroxicam alone is the least expensive
treatment option. The most effective chemotherapy regimen that has been reported is a
combination of two medications, mitoxantrone and piroxicam. This regimen resulted in
 an overall 35 % response rate in the measured size of the tumors in 48 dogs. Most impor-
tantly, symptomatic improvement occurred in 75% of the dogs (Figure 35.5). The average
survival time in this study was 10 months, compared with 6 months with piroxicam alone.
Diarrhea and kidney problems were the most common treatment complications.
276Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
Radiotherapy has been reported for this disease, but it has a high rate of serious side
effects in this location (usually fibrosis), so it is not a good first-line treatment choice for
dogs with bladder tumors, although it may be palliative in later stages.
Nursing Highlights
Most dogs tolerate piroxicam well when dosed accurately and given with food. Misopro-
stol (at a dose of 2 to 5μg/kg PO tid) can be used concurrently if there is vomiting or
other GI signs. Piroxicam can be renal-toxic in some patients, so careful monitoring is
TCC are often complicated by secondary urinary tract infections. For most patients
antibiotics (based on culture results) are recommended to reduce the risk of pyelonephri-
tis, particularly during the initial stages of chemotherapy.
Case Example
Simba, a 7-year-old, castrated male, Scottish terrier, was presented with marked hematu-
ria. Urinalysis confirmed marked hematuria, proteinuria, and pyuria. Serum biochemistry
profle showed only mildly increased ALP. CBC showed anemia and a mild neutrophilia.
Abdominal ultrasonography showed the entire bladder wall to be grossly thickened and
irregular, and the sublumbar nodes were also enlarged. Thoracic radiographs were normal.
Exploratory laparotomy disclosed the thickened bladder and a 5cm x 3 cm sublumbar
lymph node; no other abnormalities were noted. Biopsy of the bladder was taken and
histopathology showed a poorly differentiated TCC. He was then prescribed antinflam-
matories and antibiotics.
Further Staging
Urine culture should be submitted to check for secondary infection that may be exacerbat-
ing his clinical signs.
The current ultrasonogram will serve as a baseline to determine whether there is response
 or progression as treatments progress. Ultrasonography should be repeated before the 3rd
and 5th treatments to assess whether the treatment is helping.
Case Resolution
Urine culture was obtained and Simba was treated with appropriate antibiotics for his
secondary bladder infection. Concurrent with antibiotics, chemotherapy was started with
mitoxantrone and piroxicam. Repeat ultrasonography before the third treatment found
there was an approximately 75% reduction in tumor measurements, and he fnished his
protocol. The response was maintained at another ultrasonogram 6 months later, and he
continued to be in good health
Pulmonary Carcinoma in Dog
Overview
Lung tumors are uncommon in dogs. They are seen mostly in older dogs, and the major-
ity of dogs are more than 20kg in body weight. Signs of the tumor include cough and
 problems breathing, lethargy and weight loss—although many dogs are asymptomatic.
 Studies suggest that carcinogens in the environment may be a cause of lung tumors in
dogs. There is higher risk for this cancer in dogs living in urban environments and a strong
association between passive smoking and lung tumors in dogs. Short-nosed breeds that
are exposed to second-hand smoke have an increased risk of developing primary lung
tumors compared to long-nosed dogs, presumably because of the increased filtration capac-
ity of long-nosed dogs.
Staging
 Most lung tumors are malignant, and they have often metastasized at the time they are
diagnosed. The two most common sites of metastasis are other places in the lungs and the
lymph nodes closest to the tumor (usually the hilar lymph nodes). Therefore, evaluation 
of an affected patient will include thoracic radiographs (Figure 36.1), complete blood
count (CBC), biochemical profle, urinalysis, and an evaluation of regional lymph nodes
by radiographs, ultrasonography, or computed tomography (CT).
 The histologic type of tumor does not influence survival time, but the more the tumor
cells resemble normal lung cells, the better the prognosis. The histologic grade is assessed
by the pathologist. Dogs with grade 1 tumors have an average survival time of 2 years;
dogs with grade 2 had an average survival of 8 months, and dogs with grade 3 tumors
had an average survival of 5 days.
277
278Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
Figure 36.1. The initial diagnostic method for most primary lung tumors in dogs is thoracic radiography. This
shunl ayl u! ssew Aielos paguoswunoum-llam e smous jownt sunl Aieud e ym sop e jo ydeisoipen yioenou!
Absence of Metastasis Improves
Survival of Dogs with Lung Tumors
1.0-
NG [metcstcsis not cdetected;
 N1 [metcastasis detectedl
op
0.6
6
0.2
400
800
1,200
Disease-free interval (days)
Figure 36.2. Kaplan-Meier survival curve showing the effect of metastasis on dogs with lung cancer. Those with
evidence of spread to the lymph nodes have a much worse survival on average. McNiel et al., JAvMA 211:1422-
1427, 1997, with permission (from Managing the Canine Cancer Patient. Veterinary Learning Systems 2006, with
permission).
Factors influencing outcome (prognostic factors) for dogs with lung tumors include the
following:
1.
 Dogs with tumors that have spread to lymph nodes or other sites in the lungs gener-
 ally have a shorter survival expectation than dogs with no evidence of spread (approx-
imately 12 months versus 1-2 months). The type of tumor does not influence survival
times or the disease-free interval (Figure 36.2).
2.
 Dogs with lung tumors that are causing clinical signs at the time the tumor is detected,
have a worse prognosis than if there are no clinical signs (8 months versus 18 months),
even if the cancer has not yet spread.
3.
 Complete removal of the tumor is associated with longer survival times if the cancer
is completely removed; the average survival time is 1 year, compared to 1-2 months
if the excision is not complete.
Pulmonary Carcinoma in Dogs 279
Figure 36.3. Surgery is the primary treatment for most dogs with lung tumors. This is a carcinoma in the right
caudal lung lobe of a dog at surgery. (Courtesy of Dr. John Berg)
Figure 36.4. Automatic stapling device allows quick removal of lung lobes containing tumors. The procedure
can also be done manually, but this increases surgery time. The regional lymph nodes should also be examined
and biopsied during surgery, if possible. (Courtesy of Dr. John Berg)
Treatment
As mentioned above, complete removal of the tumor as assessed by the pathologist has
been shown to increase the length of survival. Therefore the surgery needs to be extensive
enough to remove all cancer tissue (Figures 36.3 and 36.4). This may mean that one or
more lung lobes will be removed. Radiation therapy is not really helpful in dogs with lung
cancer due to risk of side effects to the normal lung tissue.
 For dogs with lung tumors that have one or more poor prognostic factors listed above,
systemic chemotherapy is the most likely to improve their chances of remission and
survival.
280Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
Nursing Highlights
Analgesia and soft comfortable bedding is mandatory postoperatively and should be con-
tinued at home once the patient is discharged.
Appetite stimulants, nutritional support, and antiemetic therapy may also be necessary,
 particularly after chemotherapy administration.
Case Example
Jack, a 12-year-old, castrated male, 10kg, fox terrier, was presented with a 1-month
history of dyspnea and severe weight loss. Unilateral, left, pleural effusion was diagnosed
on thoracic radiographs. Abdominal ultrasonography was essentially normal. Thoracic
ultrasonography disclosed a left cranial lung lobe mass but no lymphadenopathy. The left
cranial lung lobe was removed, allowing for complete excision of the mass. The hilar
lymph nodes were not biopsied at surgery.
Further Staging
A CBC, baseline chemistry panel, and urinalysis (with culture, if indicated) are always
recommended for baseline staging of a pet with cancer, particularly if chemotherapy is
 anticipated.
It is useful to repeat 3-view thoracic radiographs as a baseline and then periodically
(every 2-3 months in the absence of clinical problems) to monitor for the development of
pulmonary metastases.
Case Resolution
Aggressive surgery is the basis of treatment for solitary pulmonary carcinoma and had
been appropriately performed. Jack's dyspnea meant that he had clinical signs of the tumor,
and despite his lymph nodes being normal at the time of surgery the pathologist described
the overall mitotic rate as moderate, and Jack had a grade 2 carcinoma. These factors
meant that the chances of a cure for Jack with surgery alone were low and chemotherapy
was considered to be the modality most likely to extend his survival.
Blood work and urinalysis was normal, and vinorelbine chemotherapy was commenced
3 weeks after thoracotomy. Jack tolerated this very well and completed his prescribed
course 4 months later. At a routine recheck 6 months from surgery he was still free of
recurrence.
Chronic Lymphoid Leukemia
in Dogs
Overview
 Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the abnormal proliferation of mature lymphocytes,
which are a component of the immune system. The major diagnostic differential is acute
lymphoid leukemia (ALL), where the abnormal cells are lymphoblasts. Most dogs with
CLL are at least 10 years old. Most often, a pet's caregiver will notice mildly enlarged
lymph nodes and the dog may have a reduced appetite and less energy. Diagnosis is based
on a blood count, bone marrow evaluation, thoracic and abdominal radiographs, and
other standard blood tests and urinalysis.
CLL cells live longer than normal lymphocytes. Healthy lymphocytes help fight infec-
tion. CLL cells do not. Over time, CLL cells physically crowd healthy blood cells in the
blood, lymph nodes, and marrow. As the number of CLL cells grows, some dogs may
have enlarged lymph nodes or an enlarged spleen, or both. This is caused by CLL cells
piling up in the lymph nodes and spleen. Normally, the bone marrow produces the major-
ity of the blood cells. CLL patients may start to feel less energy when they have fewer
can also cause the marrow to produce fewer normal cells, which aid in blood clotting and
infection fighting to be available. The pet is then susceptible to bleeding and infection.
Staging
Many otherwise healthy CLL patients are diagnosed when a routine blood test shows a
higher than normal number of lymphocytes (Figure 37.1), or when an enlarged lymph
node or an enlarged spleen is found during a physical exam. If there are no signs of illness,
these patients are considered low risk. Further staging tests are still warranted, and thoracic
   a   dr m  pe  s
281
282Common Cancers in Veterinary Patients
Figure 37.1. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia typically presents with an increased number of circulating Iympho-
cytes that appear well differentiated or mature; however, the counts can be very high. (Courtesy of Dr. Susan M
Cotter)
count as part of lymphoma. Bone marrow aspiration cytology will help predict secondary
problems due to low normal cell numbers. As always, a serum chemistry profle and uri-
nalysis will that ensure the dog is otherwise healthy and that it does not have an underly-
ing infection.
Treatment
A dog with low-risk CLL will need repeat visits to the veterinarian who will check for any
 health changes and monitor the lymphocyte count. It is hard to tell ahead of time when
 ha 'im pe m, s o sooo a  aau m id e
waiting is hard for many caregivers to get used to. However, for low-risk CLL patients it
is best not to start treatment as long as the patient feels well. The results of examinations
and laboratory tests over time will help the veterinarian provide advice about when to
start treatment.
The presence of a high lymphocyte count, anemia, thrombocytopenia, or clinical signs
in a patient means that we would recommend chemotherapy. Chlorambucil and pred-
nisolone are the most active agents in dogs, resulting in a median survival of 12 months
(range 1 month-3 years). Some dogs will take up to 3 months to achieve a remission, and
this is common, although symptomatic improvement usually occurs quickly.
Nursing Highlights
There is no cure for CLL. The following are treatment goals:
Slow the accumulation of CLL cells
2.
Keep patients feeling well enough to carry on their day-to-day activities.
3.1
 Protect patients from infection.
Chronic Lymphoid Leukemia in Dogs
283
Dogs with thrombocytopenia are at risk of bleeding, and exercise should be restricted
until counts are over 30,000/μl. Platelet numbers should rise with immunosuppressive
prednisolone, and as the CLL responds. Even if not neutropenic, most dogs with CLL will
CLL and the immunosuppressive therapy needed to treat the CLL. Secondary infection is
a common cause of morbidity and mortality in these dogs. Broad-spectrum antibiotics
such as enrofloxacin should be used.
Case Example
Baxter, an 8-year-old, castrated male, 28 kg, golden retriever was presented for wellness
screening and no history of illness. A CBC showed 12,000 atypical lymphocytes, and serum
globulin was normal. Repeated CBCs on four occasions over the next 5 months showed
a lymphocyte count between 7,000 and 14,000 but with no other cell lines affected. The
chemistry profile showed no evidence of organ damage. A bone marrow aspirate at that
time showed a mild lymphocytosis but was otherwise normal. A trial course of doxycycline
did not alter the CBC fndings. Flow cytometry showed a homogeneous population of
CD-8 T-lymphocytes, which was interpreted as lymphoid leukemia and was presumed to
be CLL because the lymphocytes were consistently reported as mature. The pathologist
did not mention any immature cells (with nucleoli), which would be of concern as the
 primary differential diagnosis would be acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), a much more
aggressive disease with a markedly worse prognosis. Baxter remained in otherwise good
health.
CaseResolution
 In his situation (because his lymphocyte count was relatively stable), monthly CBCs were
recommended. Over the next 5 months the lymphocyte count rose (20,000+ after 4 months
and 30,000+ after 5 months); the rest of the hemogram remained normal, although the
hematocrit decreased within the normal range. Although unlikely that Baxter's prognosis
would have changed a lot since moving from 20,000 to 30,000 lymphocytes, it was felt
that it was time to start treating him because the counts were increasing more rapidly and
his hematocrit was lower. Therefore, chemotherapy with prednisone and chlorambucil was
commenced. Baxter's lymphocyte count returned to normal over an 8-week period after
sion, with a normal blood count.
Section
8
Appendices
Appendix
BSA Conversion Charts
Appendix 1a.Body surface area (meter squared [m²l) conversion chart for DOGS
1. Make sure you have the dog's weight in kilograms.
2. Look up weight in kilograms on weight to body surface area (BSA) chart below.
3.
Determine the dose of drug by multiplying the dosage (e.g., 30mg/m?) by the patient's BSA (m').
Check that this is not a dosage in mg/kg!
4. Before preparing the chemotherapy, check the concentration (mg/ml or mg/capsule).
5.  Before administering the drug, double-check the dose and results of a CBC.
Body Weight in kg
Body Surface Area in m?
Body Weight in kg
Body Surface Area in m?
0.16
8.5
0.42
0.21
6
0.44
4
0.25
9.5
0.45
5
0.30
10
0.47
5.5
0.31
11
0.50
6
62'0
12
0.53
6.5
0.35
13
0.56
7
0.37
14
0.59
7.5
0.39
15
0.61
8
0.40
16
0.64
287
288 BSA Conversion Charts
Appendix 1a.Continued
Body Weight in kg
Body Surface Area in m?
Body Weight in kg
Body Surface Area in m?
17
0.67
66
1.16
18
0.69
40
1.18
19
0.72
41
1.20
20
0.74
42
1.22
21
0.77
43
1.24
22
0.79
44
1.26
23
0.82
45
1.28
24
0.84
46
1.30
25
0.86
47
1.32
26
0.89
48
1.33
27
0.91
49
1.35
28
0.93
50
1.37
29
0.95
51
1.39
0.98
52
1.41
31
1.00
53
1.43
32
1.02
54
1.44
1.04
55
1.46
34
1.06
56
1.48
35
1.08
57
1.50
36
1.10
58
1.51
37
1.12
59
1.53
86
1.14
60
1.55
Appendix 1b. Body surface area (meter squared [m²l) conversion chart for CATS
1.
Make sure you have the cat's weight in kilograms.
2. Look up weight in kilograms on weight to body surface area (BSA) chart below.
Determine the dose of drug by multiplying the dosage (e.g., 25 mg/m') by the patient's BSA (m').
Check that this is not a dosage in mg/kg!
4. Before preparing the chemotherapy, check the concentration (mg/ml or mg/capsule).
5.
 Before administering the drug, double-check the dose and results of a CBC.
BSA Conversion Charts1
289
Appendix1b.
Continued
 Body Weight in kg
Body Surface Area in m?
 Body Weight in kg
Body Surface Area in m?
0.5
0.063
5.5
0.312
1.0
0.100
6.0
0.330
1.5
0.131
6.5
0.348
2.0
0.159
7.0
0.366
2.5
0.184
7.5
0.383
3.0
0.208
8.0
0.400
3.5
0.231
8.5
0.417
4.0
0.252
9.0
0.433
4.5
0.273
9.5
0.449
5.0
0.292
10
0.464
Appendix
Analgesics
Appendix 2. Commonly used analgesics in dogs and cats
Analgesic
Dog Dose Route and
Cat Dose Route and
Interval 
Interval
NSAIDs
Carprofen 
4.4mg/kg PO sid OR
 Postoperative:
 2.2 mg/kg PO bid 
 1-4 mg/kg SC 
OR 4.4 mg/kg SC
Deracoxib
Postoperative:
3-4 mg/kg PO
p/x p!s
Chronic:
1-2 mg/kg PO
Ketoprofen 
 2 mg/kg IV, SC, IM or 
Postoperative:
 PO initially once;
 2 mg/kg SC
 then 1 mg/kg
Meloxicam
0.2 mg/kg PO, SC or
Postoperative:
IV; then 0.1 mg/kg
 0. 1-0.2 mg/kg PO
sid
or SC then 0.05 mg/
kg sid x 4 d 
Chronic:
0.1 mg/kg PO or
SC; then 0.05 mg/
kg sid x 4 d; then
reduce to lowest
effective dose
Piroxicam
 0.3 mg/kg PO every
 0.3 mg/kg PO every
24h
24-48h
290
Anaigesics 291
Appendix 2. Continued
Analgesic
Dog Dose Route and
Cat Dose Route and
Interval
Interval 
Tramadol
Up to 2-4 mg/kg PO
1 -2 mg/kg IV 
every 6h
Opioids
Buprenorphine
0.005-0.02 mg/kg IM.
Oral mucosal, IV or 
IV or SC every
IM: 0.01-0.02mg/
6-12 h
kg every 8-12 h 
 Butorphanol 
0.2-0.4 mg/kg SC, IM
Perioperative: 
or IV; OR up to
0.1-0.4 mg/kg; not
0.4 mg/kg up to
best choice
every 8h
Codeine
Up to 1-2 mg/kg PO
0.5-2 mg/kg PO
every 6h
titrated to effect
every 6-12h
Fentanyl
 3-5 μg/hr/kg patch 
25μg/h patch
placed every 3 d
<5 kg half patch:
>5 kg full patch;
 placed every 3 d 
Morphine
0.5-2 mg/kg IM or SC
 Methadone: 0.1 mg/
every 3-4h
kg IV: 0.3 mg/kg SC
every 4 h
Appendix
3
Antiemetics, Gastroprotectants,
and Appetite Stimulants
Antiemetic
Dog Dose Route and Interval
Cat Dose Route and Interval
 Butorphanol 
0.4 mg/kg IV 20 min prior to 
 chemotherapy infusion 
 OR 0.4mg/kg PO every &h
 Dolasetron (Anzemet)
0.3-1.0mg/kg IV, slowly. For
 0.3-0.6 mg/kg IV, slowly
prophylaxis: 20min prior to and 4 h
after chemotherapy infusion 
OR 0.3-1.0mg/kg PO every 24 h
Maropitant (Cerenia)
1 mg/kg IV, SC or PO every 24h 
1 mg/kg IV, SC or PO every 24 h
Metoclopramide
0.2-0.4mg/kg every 6h PO, SC
0.2-0.4 mg/kg every 6h PO, SC
o IM
or IM
 OR 1-2 mg/kg/d as a continuous IV
 OR 1-2 mg/kg/d as a
infusion
 continuous IV infusion 
Ondansetron (Zofran)
0.1-1.0mg/kg IV, slowly. For
0. 1-0.2 mg/kg IV, slowly.
prophylaxis: 20min prior to and 4 h 
 20min prior to and 4 h after
after chemotherapy infusion 
 chemotherapy infusion
OR 0.1-1.0mg/kg PO every 12 h
OR 0.2-0.3 mg/kg PO every
12h (1 mg total dose)
292
Antiemetics, Gastroprotectants, and Appetite Stimulants 
293
Appendix 3. Continued
Gastroprotectant
Dog Dose Route and Interval
Cat Dose Route and Interval
Famotidine
0.5mg/kg PO, SC, IM, IV every
0.5 mg/kg PO, SC, IM, IV every
12-24h
12-24 hrs (care with IV use)
Omeprazole
0.5-1 mg/kg PO every 24h
0.5-1 mg/kg PO every 24hrs
Ranitidine
0.5-2 mg/kg PO, IV or IM every
2.5 mg/kg IV every 12h
8-12h
OR
3.5 mg/kg PO every 12 h
Sucralfate
For large dogs: 1 gram PO every 8hrs;
0.25 gram PO every 8-12 h
Aana Od wen8 s'0 sop jallews joj
8h
Appetite Stimulant
Dog Dose Route and Interval
Cat Dose Route and Interval
Cyproheptadine (Periactin)
0.3-2 mg/kg PO every 12 h
0.35-1 mg/kg PO every 12-24 h
Diazepam
0.05-0.4 mg/kg IV once; then
1 mg PO once daily
Megestrol acetate
0.5-1.0mg/kg PO sid × 3-5 d; then
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO sid x 3-5 d;
every 2-3 d
then every 2-3d
Mirtazapine
0.5-1 mg/kg PO every 24h
0.5mg/kg PO every 48h
Appendix
4
Antibiotics
Appendix 4.  Commonly used antibiotics in dogs and cats
 Antibiotic
 Dog Dose Route and Interval
Cat Dose Route and Interval
Orally Administered
Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid
12.5 to 13.75 mg/kg PO every 12 h
62.5mg/cat (total dose) PO
every 12h
Cephalexin
30-50mg/kg PO every 12 h
30-50mg/kg PO every 12 h
Enrofloxacin
 5-20 mg/kg PO every 24 h 
5 mg/kg PO every 24 h
Metronidazole
10-20mg/kg PO every 8-12h
 25mg/kg PO every 12h for &d
Orbifloxacin
2.5 mg/kg-7.5 mg/kg PO every 24 h
2.5 mg/kg-7.5 mg/kg PO every
24h
Trimethoprim-sulphadiazine
 30mg/kg PO every 12h
30mg/kg PO every 12h (can
cause nausea)
Parenterally Administered
Cefoxitin 
 30mg/kg SC every 8hrs OR 30mg/kg
30mg/kg IM or IV every
IV every 4-6hrs
4-6hrs
Enrofloxacin
 5-20mg/kg IV every 24h
2.5-5mg/kg IM every 24h
Gentamicin
6 mg/kg IV every 24h (do not use if
6 mg/kg IV every 24h (do not
use if dehydrated}
Imipenem with cilastatin 
 2-7.5mg/kg IV or IM every 8h for
2-7.5mg/kg IV or IM every &h
sodium
3-5d
for 3-5d
Metronidazole
15mg/kg IV every 12 h
15mg/kg IV every 12 h
Ticarcillin-clavulanic acid
40-50mg/kg IV every 6-8 h
40-50mg/kg IV every 6-8h
294
Antibiotics295
For oral prophylaxis of patients on myelosuppressive chemotherapy, we prefer trime-
thoprim-sulphadiazine or enrofloxacin (orbifloxacin in cats may cause less nausea).
For neutropenic septic pets while waiting for culture and sensitivity results: broad-
spectrum combination therapy, such as combinations of gentamicin plus cefoxitin OR
ticarcillin OR imipenem with cilastatin sodium can be used.
Appendix
5
Glossary of Cancer Terms
A
Acute: Symptoms occurring recently or in a short period of time
Adenocarcinoma: A malignant cancer arising from glandular tissue
Adenoma: A benign glandular tumor
Alopecia: Hair loss, often just whiskers in cats, most common in dog breeds that have true
hair rather than fur (e.g., poodles, terriers, etc.)
Anorexia: Complete loss of appetite, not eating
 Antiemetic: A drug that prevents or controls nausea and vomiting
B
Benign tumor: A cancer that does not spread from one part of the body to another and
does not invade surrounding tissues
Biopsy: Surgical removal of a piece of tissue for examination under a microscope
Bone marrow: The organ found inside the bones, which generates blood cells
 Bone marrow aspiration: Inserting a needle into a bone to sample the marrow for cytology
Bone marrow suppression: (see myelosuppression)
C
Cancer: Usually refers to a malignant neoplasm or tumor
Carcinoma: Cancer that starts in the skin or the organs (e.g., renal carcinoma)
Chemotherapy: The treatment of cancer with medications
As se yns Adeiaqn ro o dn-moog e s :(ae ro) a
Combination: more than one chemotherapy agent given together at the same time or
during a structured protocol
Neoadjuvant: prior to other therapy in an effort to reduce the size or spread of a cancer
Chronic: Symptoms occurring over a long period time
CT/CAT (computed tomography) scan: Use of computers and x-rays to create detailed
images of various parts of the body
296
Clossary of Cancer Terms297
Cure: Total eradication of all cancer cells
Cystitis: Inflammation of the urinary bladder
D
Drug resistance: Method by which cancer cells develop the ability to avoid being killed by
cancer chemotherapy
Dysplasia/dysplastic: Abnormal cell growth that is precancerous
E
Effusion: Collection of fluid in a body cavity, usually between two adjoining tissues; for
example, the collection of fluid between two layers of the pleura is pleural effusion
Excision: Surgical removal of a tumor or growth
Extravasation: Inadvertent leakage of injectable medication into tissue surrounding
damage
F
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV): Viral disease of cats transmitted primarily by bites
between cats, which can suppress the immune system
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV): Viral disease of cats that can lead to the development of
lymphoma
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA): Inserting a needle into a lesion or tissue to collect a sample
for cytologic examination
G
Grade: A numerical score from histologic examination that indicates how aggressive or
malignant the tumor appears (high-grade is usually worse)
H
Hematocrit (HCT): The percentage of red blood cells in the blood; a low hematocrit
indicates anemia (similar to PCV)
Hematuria: Blood in the urine
Hyperviscosity: Sludging of blood caused by too much protein; often associated with
multiple myeloma, a plasma cell cancer
Immunosuppression: Weakening of the immune system, thereby decreasing the body's
ability to fight infections and disease
Infection: Bacterial, viral, or fungal invasion of a body part, causing damage
 Inflammation: Swelling, redness, warmth, and pain due to damage to tissues by cancer or
treatment (not the same as infection)
 Infusion: Delivery of fluids or medications into the bloodstream over a specified time
Injection: Introduction of medication into the body with a syringe and needle
Intracavitary: into a body cavity e.g., abdomen or thorax
Intramuscular: into a muscle
Intravenous: into a vein
Subcutaneous: under the skin
298Glossary of Cancer Terms
L
Lesion: An abnormal area, such as a lump or sore, caused by injury or disease, including
cancer
Leukopenia: A low number of white blood cells
Lumpectomy: Removal of a mass without a large amount of surrounding normal
tissue
Lymph node: Localized tissue that is part of the immune defense system; lymph nodes act
as the body's first line of defense against infections and cancer
Lymphatic system: A network that includes lymph nodes and lymph vessels
Lymphoblast: an immature lymphocyte, often seen in lymphoma
Lymphocytes: A specific type of white blood cell; two principal types of lymphocytes (T
and B) act in the immune system
Lymphocytosis: A high number of normal lymphocytes in the blood
M
Malignant tumor: A tumor composed of cancer cells that can spread to other parts of the
body (metastasize) or invade surrounding tissues
Mastectomy: Surgical removal of the mammary gland (breast)
Simple mastectomy: Removal of the entire breast
Radical mastectomy: Removal of the entire breast along with underlying muscle and
lymph nodes
Mean: The average number
Median: The middle number, often used to describe the time point at which half the
patients are alive or in remission
Metastasis: A distant site of cancer
Monoclonal gammopathy: A single blood protein (globulin) produced by cancerous bone
marrow cells (as in multiple myeloma)
  o    e  (   r
provide high detail images of organs and cancer in the body
Mucosa: The lining of the inner surface of the mouth, genitalia, and intestinal tract (also
called mucous membranes)
Myelodysplasia: Disordered cell growth in the bone marrow that is preneoplastic
Myelosuppression: A decrease in the production or number of blood cells, often caused
by either cancer or chemotherapy; severe myelosuppression may lead to infection due
to low neutrophil numbers or bruising and bleeding due to low platelet numbers, very
rarely anemia due to low red blood cell numbers
N
Neoplasm / neoplasia: A new growth of tissue or cells; often used instead of the word
tumor or cancer
Neutropenia: A decreased number of neutrophils
Neutrophil: White blood cell that is important for fighting infections (also called granu-
locyte or segmented neutrophil); the absolute neutrophil count (not the percentage)
should be assessed prior to administering myelosuppressive chemotherapy
0
Oncologist: A veterinarian or doctor who specializes in oncology
Oncology: The study and treatment of cancer
Clossary of Cancer Terms299
P
Palliative treatment: Treatment aimed at relieving pain or other symptoms of disease but
not intended to cure the disease
Pancytopenia: Low numbers of all blood cells (red cells, white cells, and platelets)
Knsn spim Apoq pue sanssh po uonuxa au Aq asasp po Apnss au soo
under a microscope; a specialist in pathology is a pathologist
Petechiae: Small blood spots in the mucosa or skin, often a sign of a low platelet count
Placebo: An inactive “"treatment" or its effect (used in studies)
Polyp: A growth of tissue protruding into a body cavity that may be benign or
malignant
Preneoplastic: Disordered growth that will become cancerous in time
Primary tumor: The original site of cancer
Prognosis: The likely outcome of a disease or the life expectancy for an individual
patient
Proteinuria: A high amount of protein in the urine, possibly due to kidney damage
Protocol: Cancer treatment plan, which may involve radiation, chemotherapy, surgery,
immunotherapy, and supportive care
R
 Radiation oncologist: A veterinarian or doctor who specializes in the use of radiation
therapy
Radiation therapist: A nurse or technician who treats patients with radiation therapy
Radiation therapy (or Radiotherapy): Treatment that damages or kills cancer cells with
radiation
Radiograph: A diagnostic image, often called an x-ray
Recurrence: Reappearance of cancer after a period of remission
Regression: Reduction in size or number of cancer(s)
Relapse: Reappearance of cancer after a period of remission
Remission: Complete or partial disappearance of the signs and symptoms of cancer
 Complete: All detectable evidence of cancer disappears
Partial: Reduction in detectable cancer by more than 50%
Stable disease: Reduction of growth in cancer that is less than 50% or increase of less
than 25% (may just be due to measurement errors or changes in inflammation)
S
Sarcoma: Malignant tumor of supporting tissue, such as bone, muscle, or cartilage
Sepsis: Overwhelming systemic infection, potentially fatal, may occur when a chemo-
therapy patient is severely neutropenic
oq sd e u r jo sxa po  :i
Systemic disease: A disease that affects the whole body instead of a specific organ
T
Tumor: An abnormal overgrowth of cells; tumors can be either benign or malignant, often
used instead of the word cancer
U
Ultrasonogram: The use of high-frequency sound waves for the purpose of imaging and
examining internal body structures (also ultrasonograpby, ultrasound, or sonogram)
300Glossary of Cancer Terms
V
Venipuncture: Placing a needle or catheter into the vein to obtain blood samples or admin-
ister intra venous medication or fluids
Vesicant: An intravenous medication that, if leaked into tissues, could cause pain, swelling,
and/or tissue damage
W
White blood cell count (WBC, WBCC): Number of white blood cells in a blood sample;
not to be confused with neutrophil count; WBCC is not sufficient to assess effects of
chemotherapy, and the absolute neutrophil count should be assessed
Appendix
Chemotherapy Drug
 Information:
Quick Reference
Actinomycin-D
Available:
0.5 mg/ml vials
Route:
Give intravenously with over-the-needle catheter. Reconstitute vial with
1.1 ml sterile water or 0.9% NaCl (without preservative, which may
cause a precipitate). Discard unused solution. Administer into the injec-
tion port of a running saline infusion over 5-10 minutes.
Vesicant when given perivascularly.
Dosage:
According to protocol, at intervals of every 1-3 weeks.
Storage:
Room temperature.
Monitor:
Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,0o0/ul.
BCNU
Available:
100mg vial with 3ml sterile alcohol diluent. Add 27ml of sterile water
 for injection to diluted drug to yield a solution containing 3.3 mg BCNU
per ml.
Route:
Give intravenously with over-the-needle catheter. BCNU should be
infused over 20-30 minutes.
Dosage:
Every 3-4 weeks according to protocol.
Storage:
Refrigerate.
 Monitor:
Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,0o0/μl.
Bleomycin
Available:
10 ml vial (1 mg = 1 USP unit = 1,000IU)
Route:
Subcutaneously or intralesionally
Dosage:
Every week or according to protocol
Storage:
Refrigerate.
Monitor:
 Leucopenia and thrombocytopenia are very rare.
301
302
Chemotherapy Quick Reference
Carboplatin
Available:
450 mg in 45 ml, or 150 mg in 15 ml
Route:
10 mg/ml diluted to a total dose volume of 25 ml (cats) or 50 ml (dogs)
with 5% dextrose and give slow IV push over 15-20 minutes
OR
Su e jo au a u iod uou a ou ioalu mos un
infusion of 5% dextrose over 15-20 minutes
Dosage:
 According to protocol, usually every 3 (dogs) to 4 (cats) weeks
Storage:
Refrigerate.
Monitor:
 Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,000/pμl.
CCNU (Lomustine)
Available:
10mg, 40 mg, 100 mg capsules, or as capsules reformulated to 2.5 mg
 or specific dosage for cats and small dogs
Route:
Orally
Dosage:
 According to protocol, usually every 4 weeks (dogs) to 6 weeks (cats)
Storage:
Room temperature.
Monitor:
Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,000/ul. Monitor
ALT level; do not administer if elevated.
Chlorambucil
Available:
2 mg tablets, or reformulated from a compounding pharmacy for cats
 and small dogs
Route:
Orally
Dosage:
According to specific protocol
Storage:
Refrigerate.
Monitor:
Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,0o0/μl.
Cisplatin
Available:
50 mg vials, reconstituted to 1 mg/ml
Route:
 IV with catheter, or intracavitary given according to protocol
Dosage:
DO NOT USE IN CATS.
Dogs: every 3-4 weeks, but dose varies with weight and according to
specific protocol. Precede with dolasetron (Anzemet) or maropitant
(Cerenia).
Administration:
Cisplatin must be preceded and followed by an established diuresis
protocol. Needles or intravenous sets containing aluminum parts that
may come in contact with solution should not be used for preparation
or administration. Aluminum reacts with cisplatin, causing precipitate
formation and loss of potency.
Storage:
Refrigerate.
Monitor:
 Renal function (serum creatinine and urine specific gravity) before each
 treatment. Do not administer if renal insufficiency.
Cyclophosphamide
Available:
25 mg (U.S. only) or 50mg tablets or 100 mg (U.S. only) and 500 mg
vials. Reconstitute vials with 0.9% NaCl to concentration of
20 mg/ml.
Chemotherapy Quick Reference303
Route:
s s (s -        
(2-4 mg/kg once) is given IV after a saline flush between the drugs or
PO at the same time.
Dosage:
See specific protocol; dose varies with route and interval and species.
Storage:
 Store unreconstituted drug at room temperature. Reconstituted drug is 
stable for 6 days when refrigerated.
Tablets should never be split due to inconsistent distribution of
active drug throughout the tablet and due to risk of exposure to
handler.
Monitor:
 Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,0o0/μl.
Dacarbazine (DTIC)
Available:
Reconstitute 100mg vial with 9.9ml of sterile water. Reconstitute
200mg vial with 19.7 ml of sterile water.
Route:
Give intravenously with over-the-needle catheter. Dilute with 0.9%
NaCl to a 1 :1 ratio; given as a slow intravenous push.
OR
intravenously as an infusion over 4-5 hours. Dilute into 250-1000 ml
of 0.9% NaCl.
Dosage:
According to protocol after pretreatment (20 minutes before starting
infusion) with dolasetron (Anzemet) or maropitant (Cerenia)
Storage:
Refrigerate.
Monitor:
Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,0o0/ul.
Doxorubicin
Available:
10 mg, 20 mg, 50mg vials at concentration of 2mg/ml
Route:
Give intravenously with over-the-needle catheter. Administer into the
  s oot ro u   e jo od 
about 1ml per minute).
Rapid infusion may be associated with histamine release and anaphy-
lactoid reaction (restless, urticaria, vomiting, even collapse); slow infu-
sion avoids this.
to form.
Vesicant when given perivascularly.
Dosage:
 Dosage usually every 3 weeks according to protocol
Storage:
 Refrigerate and protect from light.
Monitor:
Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,0o0/μl.
Gemcitabine
Available:
200 mg, 1 g vials for reconstitution with 0.9% NaCl to 40 mg/ml
Route:
IV with over-the-needle catheter
Give as an intravenous infusion over minutes to hours.
Dosage:
According to protocol. Unlike many other drugs longer infusion times
equate to increasing dosage levels. It is uncertain if the dose-time rela-
tionship is linear but most oncologists assume that it is
Storage:
 Store unopened vials at room temperature. Once reconstituted, refriger-
ate and use within 24 hours.
Monitor:
Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,0o0/μl
304Chemotherapy Quick Reference
Ifosfamide
Available:
1 g and 3g vials (mesna is included in the package). Reconstitute with
0.9% NaCl to 50 mg/ml
Route:
IV as continuous infusion diluted in 0.9% NaCl and given over 30
minutes. Must be preceded and followed by 0.9% NaCl fluid diuresis.
Additionall, to help prevent hemorrhagic cystitis, mesna should be
administered in three doses, each equal to 20% of the ifosfamide dose.
Mesna is given as an IV bolus at the start of pretreatment diuresis and
2 and 5 hours after ifosfamide infusion.
Dosage:
According to protocol, but minimum dose interval is every 2-3 weeks.
Storage:
 Store at room temperature. Reconstituted solution is stable for 6 weeks
re frigerated.
Monitor:
a aaq ( sds a pe a as) g 
treatment. Do not administer if renal insufficiency. Do not administer if
neutrophil count is less than 3,000/μl.
L-asparaginase
Available:
10,000 IU vials for reconstitution. Reconstitute with 2 ml 0.9% NaCl
slowly (will form bubbles if mixed too fast) to final concentration of
5,000 units/ml.
Route:
Subcutaneously or intramuscularly (Can cause an anapbylactic reaction
if given intravenousty; rarely by otber routes.)
Dosage:
According to protocol, but minimum dose interval is weekly
Storage:
Refrigerate. Use within 8 hours of reconstitution and discard unused
solution. Do not use unless clear. Some sources suggest that refrigerated
solution may be stable for 7-10 days.
Monitor:
L-asparaginase alone is not bone marrow suppressive, but it can be very
myelosuppressive when given at same time as vincristine.
Melphalan
Available:
2 mg tablets, or reformulated from a compounding pharmacy for cats
and small dogs. Do not split pills due to risk of exposure to handler.
Route:
Orally
Dosage:
According to protocol
Storage:
Refrigerate.
Monitor:
 Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,0o0/μl.
Mitoxantrone
Available:
10mg, 20mg, 25 mg vials at concentration of 2 mg/ml
Route:
Give intravenously with over-the-needle catheter. Administer into the
injection port of a running saline infusion over 5-10 minutes.
Use normal saline for flushing—no beparin—may form a precipitate.
Dosage:
According to protocol, but usually every 2-3 weeks
Storage:
Refrigerate.
Monitor:
Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,0o0/ul.
Procarbazine
Available:
50 mg capsules or reformulated from a compounding pharmacy for cats
and small dogs
Chemotherapy Quick Reference 305
Route:
Orally
Doseage:
 In combination with other drugs, usually daily for 14 days
Storage:
Room temperature.
Monitor:
Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,0o0/μl.
Vinblastine
Available:
10 mg vials at concentration of 1 mg/ml
Route:
IV with catheter as a bolus injection
Vesicant when given perivascularly
Dosage:
According to protocol, but usually every 1-2 weeks
Storage:
Refrigerate. Reconstituted solution is stable for 30 days refrigerated and
if protected from light.
Monitor:
Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,0o0/μl.
Vincristine
Available:
1 mg, 2 mg, 5 mg vials at concentration of 1 mg/ml
Route:
 IV with catheter as a bolus injection
Vesicant when given perivascularly
Dosage:
According to protocol, but usually every 1-2 weeks
Storage:
Refrigerate. Reconstituted solution is stable for 30 days refrigerated and
if protected from light.
Monitor:
 Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,000/μl. Vincristine
alone is not very myelosuppressive, but it can be very myelosuppressive
when given at same time as L-asparaginase.
Vinorelbine
Available:
10 mg, 50mg vials at concentration of 10 mg/ml Dose should be further
diluted in 0.9% NaCl to 5 ml total volume.
Route:
 IV with catheter as a slow bolus injection over 5 minutes
Vesicant when given perivascularly
Dosage:
According to protocol, but usually every 1-2 weeks
Storage:
Refrigerate. Reconstituted solution is stable for 30 days refrigerated and
if protected from light.
Monitor:
Do not administer if neutrophil count is less than 3,0o0/μl.
A
American College of Veterinary Radiology (ACVR), 8
AAHA (American Animal Hospital Association), 100
American College of Veterinary Surgery (ACVS), 8
Absorption, of chemotherapeutics, 69
American Physical Therapy Association, 108
Acitretin (Neotigason or Soriatane), 8S
American Veterinary Medical Association, 108
Actinomycin D
Aminobisphosphonates, 104, 255
drug information, 301
Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, 294t
extravasation injury from,202, 203,205
Amputation,S1-S2,S3f,S4f
Active listening, 143-144
for bone pain management, 102, 103f
Acupuncture, 91, 91f, 107
for osteosarcoma,254
Acute renal failure, 208-212
for soft tissue sarcoma (STS), 246
causes, 208, 209-210
Analgesia
clinical features, 210-211
administration by veterinary nurses, 98
diagnosis, 209, 211-212
adverse effects, monitoring and treating, 98
reatment/management, 209,212
doses of commonly used analgesics, 290t-291t
ACVECC (American College of Veterinary Emergency
Anaphylaxis, 195-201
and Critical Care), 8
causes, 76, 195-196, 197
ACVIM (American College of Veterinary Internal
clinical features, 196f, 197, 200
Medicine),7, 8
diagnosis, 196, 197f, 200
ACVR (American College of Veterinary Radiclogy), 8
treatment/management, 196-197, 198t-199t, 201
ACVS (American College of Veterinary Surgery), 8
Anemia,28-29
ACVSc (Australian College of Veterinary Scientists), 7
causes, 161, 162-163
Adaptive therapy, 106-107
clinical features, 162-163
Airedale terrier, doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in, 7St
diagnosis, 162, 163-164
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), evaluation in staging of
myelosuppressive chemotherapy and, 72, 124
cancer, 29-30
nonregenerative,161
Albumin, evaluation in staging of cancer, 31
regenerative,161
Alendronate, 104-105
treatment/management, 162, 162f, 164
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP), evaluation in staging of
Antiangiogenesis, 86-87, 250
cancer, 30,252,2$3f
Antibiotics
Allergic reactions, 76, 19s-201
dose route and interval, 294t
Alpha2-agonists, 106
for febrile neutropenia,171-174
Alternative therapy. See Complementary and alternative
prophylactic therapy, 12s, 250
medical (CAM) therapies
for secondary infection in chronic lymphoid leukemia,
Aluminum hydroxide, for hyperphosphatemia, 193t
283
American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA), 100
for sepsis, 127
American College of Veterinary Emergency and Critical
Antiemetics, 116, 292t
Care (ACVECC), 8
Antihistamine, for anaphylaxis,197,198t
American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Antioxidants, dietary, 92
(ACVIM), 7, 8
Aortic body tumor, pericardial effusion in, 222
306
Index307
Apoptosis, 190
Buprenorphine, 106, 291t
Appetite stimulants, 117, 293t
Burneut, 152
Aquatic therapy, 110
Butorphancl, 106, 116, 291t, 292t
Arginine supplementation, 115
Assisted feeding, 117, 118f
C
Australian College of Veterinary Scientists (ACVSc), 7
Cachexia, 113-115,114f
Avastin, 87
Calcitonin, for osteoclast inhibition, 179, 192t
Calcium
B
evaluation in staging of cancer, 30-31
Balance boards, 110
hypercalcemia, 175-180, 192t, 208
BCNU, 301
hypocalcemia, 193t
Bernese mountain dog, malignant histiocytosis in, 10
serum calcium levels, 176-177
Bevacizumab, 87
Calcium gluconate
Bile acids, evaluation in staging of cancer, 39
for hyperkalemia, 191, 193t, 212
Bilirubin, evaluation in staging of cancer, 30
for hypocalcemia, 193t
Biochemistry panel, use in staging of cancer, 29-31
Calcium nephropathy, 177, 208
alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 29-30
Calipers, 27, 28f
albumin, 31
CAM. See Complementary and alternative medical
alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 30
(CAM) therapies
bilirubin, 30
Cancer cachexia, 113-115, 114f
calcium, 30-31
Cancer, defined, S
creatinine,30
Cancer diagnosis, impact of, 135
globulin,31
Carboplatin
glucose,31
“delayed” neutrophil nadir with, 12S
urea, 30
drug information, 302
Biological response modifers (BRMs), 8S-88
for mammary carcinoma in cats, 270
antiangiogenesis, 86-87
for oral squamous cell carcinoma, 261
differentiating agents, 85-86
for osteosarcoma, 70-71, 254
functions of,8S
thrombocytopenia from, 124
imiquimod cream (Aldara), 87
urinary excretion of, 84
immunotherapy, 87-88
Carcinoma, S. See aiso Mammary carcinoma; Pulmonary
piroxicam,86
 carcinoma; Squamous cell carcinoma; Transitional
tyrosine-kinase inhibitors, 88
cell carcinoma
Biopsy. See also Histopathology
Cardiac dysfunction, staging of cancer and, 26-27
needle core {Tru-cut), 20, 20f, 21f
Cardiac tamponade, 222-225
safety of, 20
Cardiotoxicity, of chemotherapeutics, 73, 7St
sample fxation,20,22
Carprofen, 103, 25s, 290t
surgical, 20, 4849
Castration (orchidectomy), effect on cancer risk, 10
Bisphosphonate therapy, 106, 179, 25$
Cataracts, after radiation therapy, 63
Bladder cancer. See Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC)
Cats
Blankets, 107
body surface area (BSA) conversion chart, 288t-289t
Bleomycin, 301
cancers in
Blood culture, 171-172
ymphoma,236-239
Body condition, assessment of, 115
mammary carcinoma,269-272
Body surface area (BSA)
oral squamous cell carcinoma, 260-263
chemotherapy dose calculation, 68
soft tissue sarcoma, 244-247
conversion chart for cats, 288t-289t
sagesop anup
conversion chart for dogs,287t-288t
analgesics, 290t-291t
Bond, human-animal, 135-136, 136f
antibiotics,294t
Bone emergencies, 217-221
antiemetics,292t
hypertrophic osteopathy, 218-221
appetite stimulants, 293t
pathological fracture,217-218
gastroprotectants, 293t
Bone marrow
Causes of cancer in pets
myelosuppression from chemotherapeutics, 72-73
environmental carcinogens, 10-12
radiation therapy, nursing care after, 6S-66
genetics,10
Bone pain, 102, 254-255
gonadectomy, 10
Bone sarcoma. See Osteosarcoma
nutrition,9-10
Bone scintigraphy, 38
Cavaletti rails, 109-110
Boundaries, maintaining professional, 151
CBC. See Complete blcod count (CBC)
Boxer
CCNU, 302
doxorubicin cardiotoxicity, 75t
CCRP (Certifed Canine Rehabilitation Practitioner)
osteosarcoma, 103f, 254f
Cefoxitin, 294t
Brachytherapy, $9, S9f
Cephalexin, 294t
Brain surgery, SS, S6f
Cesium, radioactive, S8
Breed predilections.See specifc breeds
Chemical cellulitis, 202.See also Extravasation injury
BRMs. See Biclogical response modifers (BRMs)
Chemicals, as environmental carcinogens, 11
BSA. See Body surface area (BSA)
Chemodectoma, pericardial effusion in, 222
308
Index
Chemotherapy, 67-84. See also specifc drugs
for osteosarcoma, 70, 254
adjuvant, 71
urinary excretion of, 84
clinical examples, 70-71
C-kit proto-oncogene, 88
 decision tree for intravenous administration, 80f
Cliches, avoiding, 144
dose calculation, 68
Clinical remission,233
dose intensity, 68
CLL (chronic lymphoid leukemia), 281-283
drug handling, safe, 8083, 81f82f
Coagulopathy, 157. See also Disseminated intravascular
drugs, quick reference to, 301-305
coagulation (DIC)
excreta from patients,handling,83-84
Cobalt, radioactive, S8
health and beauty care during, 72
Cocker spaniel, doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in, 7St
how it works, 67
Codeine, 63, 104, 25S, 291t
intravenous bolus injections, 83
Cold therapy, 111
intravenous infusions, 83
Colitis, hemorrhagic after doxorubicin administration,
neoadjuvant, 71
73
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, 69-71
Colon, nursing care after radiation therapy, 65
absorption, 69
Comfort, 151
distribution, 69
Communication with owners, 6-7, 142-146
excretion,70-71
communication network, 145
metabolism, 71
cn complementary and alternative medical (CAM)
Iha5eal system, 79, 79f, 82-83
therapies, 92-93
phases of, 233-234
conflict, dealing with, 14S-146
consolidation, 233
importance of good, 143
induction,233
improving communications, 143
maintenance, 233-234
obstacles to communication, 145
rescue therapy, 234, 235
useful skills, 143-145, 144t
for specifc cancers
active listening,143-144
chronic lymphoid leukemia (CLL), 282, 283
asking open questions, 144
hemangiosarcoma, 250
avoiding cliches, 144
lymphoma in cats, 238, 239
empathy,143,144t
lymphoma in dogs, 233-234, 23S
Compassion, 138
mammary carcinoma in cats,270
Compassion fatigue, 152
mammary carcinoma in dogs, 267, 268
Complaints about colleagues, 151
mast cell tumor, 242
Complementary and alternative medical (CAM)
melanoma, 258,259
therapies, 90-93, 107
oral squamous cell carcinoma, 261
Complete blood count (CBC)
osteosarcoma, 254
changes associated with cancer treatment, 123-12$
pulmonary carcinoma, 279
evaluation at time of chemotherapy treatment, 72-73,
soft tissue sarcoma (STS), 247
74f, 77
transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), 275
evaluation in staging of cancer, 27-29
staging of cancer, infuence on, 26
platelet assessment, 166
strategies
Complete response, defined, 46t
chemotherapy drug resistance, 69
Computed tomography (CT)
combination chemotherapy, 69
hypoglycemia, 183
tumor size and, 68
staging of cancer, 3436, 3Sf38f
timing of, 71
Confdentiality, 151
tips, 77-80, 78f80f
Conflict
toxicity
in cancer-care team, 148-149
cardiotoxicity, 73, 75t
in nurse-owner relaticnship, 14s-146
gastrointestinal toxicity,73
between cwners, 150
Conjunctivitis, after radiation therapy, 63
immune-mediated toxicity, 7S-76
Consolidation phase, of chemotherapy, 233
myelosuppression, 72-73
Corticosteroids
tissue differences, 67
in multimodal pain management, 104
urologic toxicity, 7S
for osteosarcoma pain, 255
Children
Cost of treatment, 149
euthanasia decision/process, involvement in, 130
Counseling, 141, 153
grief and loss, 141
Creatinine clearance, evaluation in staging of cancer,
Chiorambucil, for chronic lymphcid leukemia, 282, 283
38-39
Chronic lymphoid leukemia (CLL), 281-283
Creatinine, evaluation in staging of cancer, 30
case example,283
CT. See Computed tomography (CT)
nursing highlights,282-283
Cyclooxygenase, 106
overview of, 281
Cyclophosphamide
staging,281-282,282f
drug information,302-303
treatment,282
hemorrhagic cystitis, 75, 214
Cisplatin
for lymphoma in cats, 238
drug information, 302
for lymphoma in dogs,233
nephrotoxicity, 75,208-209
Cyproheptadine, for appetite stimulation, 117, 293t
Index:
309
Cystitis, 31, 7S,214
Dogs
Cytology
body surface area (BSA) conversion chart, 287t-288t
advantages of, compared to histopathology, 16t
cancers in
fne-needle aspiration (FNA), 17, 18f
lymphoma, 229-235
jmpression smears (“touch-prints"), 17, 19, 19f
mammary carcinoma,264-272
lymphoma in cats, 236, 237f
mast cell tumor, 240-243
objectives of, 17
oral melanoma, 2S6-259
staining process, 19
osteosarcoma, 252-255
Cytopathology, 15. See also Cytology
pulmonary carcinoma,277-280
Cytoreduction, 49
soft tissue sarcoma, 244-247
splenic hemangiosarcoma, 248-251
D
transitional cell carcinoma, 273-276
Dacarbazine, 303
sagesop 8n.p
Dalmatian, doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in, 7St
analgesics, 290t-291t
Dancing, 110
antibiotics, 294t
D-dimer assay, 158
antiemetics, 292t
Death of pet
appetite stimulants, 293t
euthanasia, 129-132
gastroprotectants,293t
grief and loss
Dolasetron, 116, 292t
children, 141
Dopamine
counseling, 141
for acute renal failure, 212
elderly owners, 141-142
for anaphylaxis,199t
how nurses can help, 138-140
for calciuresis, 179
memorials, 142
Doxorubicin
owner reactions to, 137-138
drug information, 303
societal attitudes toward, 140
excretion of,84
pet remains, dealing with, 130
for hemangiosarcoma, 2s0, 251
Debulking, 49, S1f
for lymphoma in cats, 238
 Delta receptors, 105
for lymphoma in dogs, 233
Deracoxib, 290t
for mammary carcinoma in cats, 270
Dermatitis, following radiaticn therapy, 61f
for oral squamous cell carcinoma, 261
Desquamation, moist, 62, 62f
for osteosarcoma, 254, 255
Dexamethasone
toxicity
for anaphylaxis, 197, 198t
anaphylaxis, 19s-196
for hypercalcemia, 192t
cardiotoxicity, 73, 7St
 Dexrazoxane, for doxorubicin extravasation injury, 205,
extravasation injury, 202-206, 204f, 20sf
206
hemorrhagic colitis,73
Dextrose
hypersensitivity reactions, 75
for hyperkalemia, 191, 193t
inappetence,121
for hypoglycemia, 182, 192t
nausea and inappetence, 121
Diagnosis of cancer, 15-24
nephrotoxicity,7S,208
defnition of pathology terms, 16t 
Daxycycline, 87
impact on owners, 13S
Drug resistance, chemotherapy, 69
gverview, 15
DTIC, 303
tumor cytology, 17-19, 18f-19f
tumor histopathology, 19-24, 20f-21f, 23f-24f
E
Diarrhea, 121
EACA (epsilon aminocaproic acid), 168
Diazepam, for appetite stimulation, 117, 293t
Ears, nursing care after radiation therapy, 63
Diazoxide, for hypoglycemia, 182, 184, 192t
ECG
DIC. See Disseminated intrayascular coagulation (DIC)
acute renal failure, 211
Differentiating agents, 8$-86
anaphylaxis,200
Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), for doxorubicin
febrile neutropenia,173
extravasation injury, 206
hypercalcemia, 179
Diphenhydramine
hyperkalemia, 211
for anaphylaxis,197
hypokalemia,186-187
for mast cell tumor, 243
hypomagnesemia, 189
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
pericardial effusion, 225
157-161
tumor lysis syndrome (TLS), 191
causes, 159
Echocardiography
clinical features, 159
febrile neutropenia, 173
diagnosis, 157-158,159-160
pericardial effusion, 22S
treatment/management,158,160
staging of cancer and,26
Distribution, of chemotherapeutics, 69
ECVIM (European College of Veterinary Internal
DNA vaccination, 88
Medicine), 7
Doberman pinscher, doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in, 73,
Edema, facial, 195, 196f
7St
Elderly pet owners, pet loss and, 141-142
Documentation, 151
Electrical stimulation, 111
310Index
Electron beam teletherapy, S8, 59f
Febrile neutropenia, 170-174
Emergencies
causes,172
anaphylaxis, 19s-201
clinical features, 172-173
bone, 217-221
diagnosis, 171-172, 173
extravasation injury, 202-207
treatment/management, 172, 173-174
febrile neutropenia, 170-174
Feeding
hematologic, 157-169
assisted, 117, 118f
metabolic, 17s-194
parenteral, 119-120
pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade, 222-226
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV), 236
urological, 208-216
Fentanyl transdermal patch, 104, 106, 255, 291t
Emotional experience, of nurses, 148-153
Fever
cancer-care team, 148-149
defined, 170
counseling, 153
ethical dilemmas, 148-152
Fibrosarcoma, 244. See also Soft tissue sarcoma (STS)
self-care, 152
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA)
stress, 152-153
description of process, 17, 18f
Empathy, 143, 144t
lymph node evaluation, 32
End-of-life patient care, 132
Fish-cil supplements, 115
Endotoxemia, 170
Fixation, of biopsy samples, 20, 22
English Cocker spaniel, doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in,
Flat-coated retriever, malignant histiocytosis in, 10
75t
Flea-control products, as cancer risk factor, 11-12, 260
Enrofloxacin, 126,283, 294t
Formalin,20, 22
Environmental carcinogens, 10-12
Fracture, pathological
Environmental tobacco smoke (ETS）,10-12,11f
causes, 217-218
Epidemiclogy, and cancer, 9
clinical features, 218
Epinephrine, for anaphylaxis, 197, 198t, 199t
diagnosis, 217, 218
Epsilon aminccaproic acid (EACA), 168
treatment/management, 217,218
Erythrocytes
Furosemide
anemia, 72, 161-164
for acute renal failure, 212
life span, 161
for calciuresis, 179, 192t
Erythrocytosis, 29
Erythropoietin, 161
G
Esophagostomy tubes, 119
Gastrointestinal support
Essiac,92
medications, 115-117
Ethical issues, 149-152
antiemetics, 116, 292t
Etidronate, for osteoclast inhibition, 179, 192t
appetite stimulants, 117,293t
Etoposide toxicity
gastroprctectants, 116-117, 293t
anaphylaxis,196,197f
side effects of chemotherapy, 121
hypersensitivity reactions,7576
strategies in critically ill cancer patients, 120-121
European College of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Gastrointestinal toxicity, of chemotherapeutics, 73, 121
(ECVIM), 7
Gastroprotectants, 116-117, 293t
Euthanasia, 129-132
Gastrostomy tube, 6S, 119
children, invelvement of, 130
Gemcitabine, 303
contact with cwner after, 132
Gentamicin,294t
discussion with owners, 129-130
German shepherd dog
emotion aspects of, 130
cutaneous fbrosarcoma, 10
ethical considerations, 150
cystadenocarcinoma, 10
location for, 129
Globulin, evaluation in staging of cancer, 31
pet restraint, 129
Glossary, 296-300
procedure, 130-131
Gloves, latex, 80, 81f
surviving pets, involvement of, 130
Glucagon, for hypoglycemia, 192t
Excisional surgery
Glucocorticoids
radical, S1-Ss
for anaphylaxis, 197,198t
wide, S0-S1
for hypercalcemia,179,192t
Excreta, handling from chemotherapy patients, 83-84
forhypoglycemia,182,184,19
Excretion, of chemotherapeutics, 70-71
osteoclast inhibition, 179
Expanding tissues, 67
Glucose
External beam radiation therapy. See Teletherapy
evaluation in staging of cancer, 31
Extravasation injury, 202-207
hypoglycemia, 180-184, 192t
causes, 202,20s
Glutamine supplementation,11S
clinical features, 202, 20S-206
Gonadectomy, effect on cancer risk, 10
diagnosis, 203
Grading of tumors
treatment/management, 203-205, 203f-20Sf, 206-207
by histopathology, 22-23
Eyes, nursing care after radiation therapy, 63, 6Sf
lymphoma in cats, 237-238
mast cell tumors,240,241f
F
soft tissue sarcoma (STS), 244-245
Famotidine, 117, 243, 293t
Granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), 127-
FDP assay, 158
128,172
Index 311
Great Dane, doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in, 7St
Human-animal bond, 135-136, 136f
Grief and loss
Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (HHM), 175
children,141
Hyaluronidase, for vincristine extravasation injury, 203f,
counseling, 141
20S, 207
elderly owners, 141-142
Hypercalcemia, 175-180
how nurses can help, 138-140
causes, 17s-176, 177
memorials, 142
clinical features, 178, 208
owner reactions to, 137-138
defned,17S
professional boundaries, maintaining, 151
diagnosis, 176, 178-179
societal attitudes toward, 140
treatment/management, 176-177, 179-180, 192t
stages, 137
Hyperkalemia, 190-191, 193t, 211
Hyperparathyrcidism, 176
H
Hyperphosphatemia, 193t
H, blocker
Hypersensitivity reactions, to chemotherapeutics, 75-76
for anaphylaxis, 199t
Hypertrophic csteopathy (HO), 218-221
as gastroprotectant, 117
causes,218,220
for mast celltumors,242-243
clinical features, 218-219, 220-221
Hair and coat changes from chemotherapeutics, 76,
diagnosis, 219,221
76f-77f
treatment/management, 219,221
Handling of chemotherapy drugs, 80-83, 81f-82f
Hypocalcemia, 193t
Heat therapy, 111
Hypoglycemia, 180-184
Hemangiopericytoma, 244. See also Soft tissue sarcoma
causes,180-181,182
(STS)
clinical features, 183
Hemangiosarcoma
diagnosis,181,183
case example, 250-251
treatment/management, 181-182, 184, 192t
metastatic,32f
Hypokalemia, 184-187
nursing highlights, 250
causes,18S,186
overview of,248
clinical features, 185, 186
pericardial effusion in, 222
diagnosis, 185, 186187
splenic, 248-2S1
treatment/management, 185, 187, 193t
staging,248,249f,2S0-251
Hypomagnesemia, 187-189
thrombocytopenia in, 165
clinical features,188-189
treatment, 249-250,249f
diagnosis, 187-188, 189
Hematologic emergencies, 1S7-169
treatment/management, 188,189
anemia,161-164
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
157-161
Idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura (ITP), 16S
thrombccytopenia, 164-169
Ifosfamide
Hematologic support, 123-128
drug information, 304
Hematoma, spread of cancer cells and, 48
toxicity
Hematopoietic tumors, defned, S
anaphylaxis,196
Hematuria, 213-216
hemorrhagic cystitis, 214
causes, 213-215
Imaging
clinical features, 213, 215
acute renal failure, 211-212
diagnosis, 213f, 214, 215
anaphylaxis,200
treatment/management, 214,215-216
anemia, 164
Hemoglobin, 161
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), 160
 Hemogram, evaluation at time of chemotherapy
febrile neutropenia, 173
treatment, 72-73, 74f
hemangiosarcoma, 248, 249f, 250-251
Heparin, 158, 165
hematuria, 215
Hepatic dysfunction,chemotherapy and, 26
hypercalcemia, 179
Herbal medicines, 90-92
hypertrophic csteopathy (HO), 219f, 220f, 221
HHM (humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy), 175
hypoglycemia, 183
Histamine, release in anaphylaxis, 195-196
lymphoma in dogs, 232-233,232f
Histiocytic sarcoma
mammary carcinoma in dogs, 26Sf, 268
immunotherapy for, 87
osteosarcoma, 253f
radiographic evaluation, 33f
pathologic fracture, 218
Histiccytosis,immunotherapy for,87
pericardial effusion,223,223f22
Histopathology
for staging of cancer, 32-38
advantages of, compared to cytology, 16t
bone scintigraphy, 38
description, 19-22
computed tomography (CT), 34-36, 3Sf-38f
grading and staging of tumors, 22-23
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),3S-36
margins, evaluation of tumor, 23, 23f, 24f
radiography,32,32f,33f,34
questions answered by, 22
ultrasonography,34, 34f
special stains, 24
thrombocytopenia,168
HO. See Hypertrophic osteopathy
transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), 273, 274f, 276
Homeopathy, 92
tumor lysis syndrome (TLS), 191
Hospice care, 132
Imatinib,88
312Index
Imipenem,294t
drug information, 304
Imiquimod cream (Aldara), 87
for lymphoma in dogs, 233
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT), 16S
Leash walking, 109
Immune-mediated toxicity, of chemotherapeutics, 75-76
Leukemia
Immunohistochemistry, 24
acute renal failure in, 208
Immunotherapy, 87-88
chronic lymphoid leukemia (CLL), 281-283
Impression smears ("touch-prints"), 17, 19, 19f
complete blood count and staging of, 29
Ineline/decline exercise, 109
defined, S
Induction phase, of chemotherapy, 233
tumor lysis syndrome (TLS), 190, 191
Infection
Lidocaine, for post-radiation pain relief, 65
 in febrile neutropenia, 170-172
Limb amputation, S1-S2, S3f, S4f
thrombocytopenia from, 165, 167
Limb function, assessment of, 108-109
urinary tract, 31, 273, 276
Linear accelerator, 59
Injection site sarcoma, 244
Lincleic acid, 8s-86
Insecticides, as cancer risk factor, 11-12
Listening, active, 143-144
Instrument packs, changing,SS
Lomustine
Insulin, for hyperkalemia, 191, 193t, 212
drug information, 302
Insulinoma,180-181
thrombocytopenia from, 124
International Veterinary Academy of Pain Management
Lung cancer. See Pulmonary carcinoma
(TVAPM), 100, 101
Lymph node
Internists,8
evaluation in staging of cancer, 32
Intracapsular surgery,49, 1f
measurements, 27,28f,28t
Iodide, radioactive, S9-60
Lymphocytes, in chronic lymphoid leukemia, 281-282,
Irish wolfhound, doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in, 7St
282f
Iscador, 92
Lymphoma
Isoproterencl, for anaphylaxis, 199t
acute renal failure in, 208
Isotretincin (Accutane), 8S
in cats, 236-239
ITP (idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura), 165
case example, 239
grading,237-238
nursing highlights,238-239
Jejunostomy tubes, 119
overview of, 236-238,237f
Joints, assessment of, 108-109
prognosis,237-238
staging,237,239
K
treatment,238
Kaolin,121
combination therapy, 69
Kaplan-Meier survival curve
defined, S
description of, 47, 47f
in dogs, 229-235
lymphoma in dogs,230f
case example,23S
mammary carcinoma in dogs,26Sf
diagnosis, 229-233, 232f
mast cell tumors, 240
immunophenotype,230,232
melanoma, 257f
nursing highlights, 234
osteosarcoma, 253f
overview of,229
pulmonary carcinoma,278f
prognosis,229-231,230f
soft tissue sarcoma (STS), 246f
staging, 231f, 233, 235
transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), 27Sf
treatment,233-234
Kappa receptors, 10S
 gastrointestinal supportive care, 120-121
Karc syrup,forhypoglycemia,192t
risk factors, 11
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, after radiation therapy, 63
thrombocytopenia in, 165
Ketoprofen, 290t
tmor lysis syndrome (TLS), 190, 191
Lymphosarcoma. See Lymphoma
Laboratory fndings
M
acute renal failure, 211
Magnesium
anaphylaxis, 200
hypomagnesemia,187-189,193t
anemia, 163-164
serum levels, normal, 187
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), 159-160
Magnesium chloride,188,189,193t
febrile neutropenia, 173
Magnesium sulfate, 188, 189, 193t
hematuria,215
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), use in staging of
hypercalcemia, 178
cancer, 35-36
hypoglycemia,183
Maintenance phase, of chemotherapy, 233
hypokalemia, 186
Malignant fbrous histiccytoma, 244. See also Soft tissue
hypomagnesemia,189
sarcoma (STS)
pericardial effusion, 22S
Mammary carcinoma
thrombocytopenia, 168
jn cats, 269-272
tumor lysis symdrome (TLS), 191
appearance,270f
L-asparaginase
case example,272
anaphylaxis with,76,19S
metastasis, 269, 270, 272
Index313
nursing highlights, 271
evaluation in staging of cancer
overview of, 269
lymph node evaluation, 32
staging,269
horacic CT scan, 3S
treatment,270-271,271f
horacic radiography, 32, 32f, 33f
in dogs, 264-268
Methadone, 106
case example, 267-268
Methylprednisclone, for anaphylaxis, 197, 198t
metastasis,264,26Sf
Metoclopramide, 116, 121, 292t
nursing highlights, 267
Metronidazole, 258, 294t
overview of, 264
Metronomic therapy, 87
prognostic factors,264,266-267,266f
Mirtazapine, for appetite stimulation, 117, 293t
staging,264,26Sf, 266-267,266f,268
Misoprostol, 27s-276
treatment, 267
 Mithramycin, for osteoclast inhibition, 180
Mandibulectomy, S2-S4, S4f
Mitotic index
Mannitol, for acute renal failure, 212
defned, 22
Marginal surgery, S0, 51f
mast cell tumors, 240
Margins
osteosarcoma,253
evaluation of tumor, 23, 23f, 24f
soft tissue sarcoma (STS), 245, 246f
scar revision surgery, S0
Mitoxantrone, 275, 304
of wide (excisional) surgery, 49f, 50-51
Modulation, pain, 101
Maropitant, 116, 292t
Morphine, 106, 291t
Masitinib, 88
Mu receptor, 10s, 106
Mast cell tumor (MCT)
Mucositis,radiaticn-induced oral, 6S
case example,243
Multilobar osteosarcoma (MLO), CT reconstruction of,
diagnosis, 241-242, 241f-242f
37f38f
grade,240,241f
Multimodal support nursing paradigm, 97-99
mitotic index and predicted survival, 240
Multiple drug resistance, 39,69
nursing highlights, 242-243
Muscle, assessment in rehabilitation, 109
overview of,240
Mutation, resistance to chemotherapy and, 68
staging, 241-242, 241f, 243
Myeloma, thrombocytopenia in, 16$
treatment, 88,242
Myelophthisis, 29
Maxillectomy, S2-54
Myelosuppression
MDR-1 gene (multiple drug resistance) test, 39
anemia with, 124, 161
Mean survival time, 47
chemotherapeutic agents, relative effects of, 124t
Median survival time, 47
description, 72-73, 123
Medical history, cbtaining from owner, 6
neutropenia with, 72-73, 124-128, 170-172
Megavoltage teletherapy, S8
thrombecytopenia with, 73, 124, 16S
Megestrcl acetate, for appetite stimulation, 117, 293t
Myxosarcoma, 244. See aiso Soft tissue sarcoma
Melanoma
(STS)
appearance of, 256, 257f
case example, 259
N
DNA vaccination, 88
Nadir, of peripheral cell counts, 72, 124-125
metastasis, 256, 258
Narcotics. See Opicids
nursing highlights,2S8
Nasal carcinoma, CT scan evaluation of, 36f-37f
oral in dogs, 256-259
Nasoesophageal tubes, 119
overview of,256
Naturaopathy, 91
staging,256,257f, 258
Nausea, preventing,116,121
treatment,258
Necrosis, with extravasaticn injury, 202-203, 204f
Meloxicam, 103, 290t
Needle core (Tru-cut) biopsy, 20, 20f, 21f
Melphalan, 304
Nephrotoxicity
Memorials, 142
calcium nephropathy, 177, 208
Meningicma, SS, S6f
cisplatin,7S,208-109
Mesna, 7S
doxorubicin,7s,208
Mesothelioma, 11, 222
streptozotocin,208-209
Metabolic alkalosis, from hypokalemia, 185
Neupogen, 172
Metabolic emergencies, 17s-194
Neurofbrosarcoma, 244. See also Soft tissue sarcoma
hypercalcemia, 175-180, 192t
(STS)
hyperkalemia,193t
Neutering,effect on cancer risk, 10
hyperphosphatemia,193t
Neutropenia
hypocalcemia,193t
febrile, 170-174
hypoglycemia,180-184,192t
managing neutropenic patients, 126-127
hypokalemia,184-187,193t
marked (grade 3), 126
hypomagnesemia,187-189,193t
mild (grade 1), 126
tumor lysis syndrome (TLS), 190-191
moderate (grade 2), 126
Metabolism, of chemotherapeutics, 71
severe (grade 4),126-127
Metacam,2'sS
sepsis with,123128,170,172,174
Metastasis. See also specifc tumor types
treatment with G-CSF (granulocyte colony stimulating
biopsy, lack of link to, 20
factor), 127-128,172
314Index
Neutrophils
improving communications, 143
absolute count, 72, 124
obstacles to communication,145
assessment by blood smear, 171, 171f
useful skills, 143-145, 144t
evaluation at time of chemotherapy treatment, 72-73,
complaints by, 151
74f, 77
conflict between, 150
febrile neutropenia, 170-174
disagreement with decisions of, 150
postchemotherapynadirof72,77,170
euthanasia process and, 129-132
Newfoundland, doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in, 75t
grief and loss
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
children, 141
doses of commonly used, 290t-291t
counseling, 141
mode of action, 10s-106
elderly owners, 141-142
in multimodal pain management, 103-104
how nurses can help, 138-140
for osteosarcoma pain, 255
memorials, 142
use in cats, 106
reactions to, 137-138
Nosectomy, S4-SS, SSf
societal attitudes, 140
Nutrition, as cancer risk factor, 9-10
human-animal bond,
,135-136, 136f
Nutritional supplements, 90-92
supporting,13S-146
Nutritional support
Oxygen, nasal administration of, 162f
assisted feeding, 117,118f
body condition, assessment of, 115
P
cancer cachexia,113-115,114f
Packed cell volume (PCV), 161
dietary guidelines, 115
Paclitaxel
feeding tubes, 117-119
toxicity
gastrointestinal side effects of chemotherapy, 121
anaphylaxis,196,196f
gastrointestinal supportive medications, 11s-117
hair loss, 76f
antiemetics, 116
hypersensitivity reactions, 7S-76
appetite stimulants, 117
yew tree as source of, 91
gastroprotectants,116-117
Pain
Ogilvie's Homemade Cancer Food (recipe), 116f
assessing in animals, 97, 101-102, 102t
parenteral feeding, 119-120
attitudes toward, in veterinary nursing, 99-100, 100t
strategiesfor criticallyillcancer atient,120121
defned, 100, 101
management/relief
0
AAHA mandatory standards, 100
Obesity, 114, 114f
with acupuncture, 91, 91f, 107
Octreotide, for hypoglycemia, 184, 192t
after radiation therapy, 63, 65
Omega-3 fatty acid supplementation, 115
with alpha2-agonists, 106
Omeprazole, 117, 243, 293t
with bisphosphonates, 106
Ondansetron, 116, 292t
in cats, 106
Open questions, asking, 144
complementary and alternative treatments, 107
S01 'sadk xondaas proido
diffculties in, 107
Opioids
 at home adaptive therapy, 106-107
deseription of, 104, 10S
multimodal, 102-10s,103t
doses of commonly used, 291t
nonpharmacologic therapy, 98, 103t, 106-107
for osteosarcoma pain, 2ss
with NSAIDs (nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs),
table of commonly used, 10St
105-106
use in cats, 106
with opicids, 10S, 10St, 106
Oral cavity
in osteosarcoma,2s4-2sS
melanoma, 256-259
pharmacologic analgesic therapy, 103t, 10s-106,
 radiation therapy, nursing care after, 65
10St
squamous cell carcinoma, 260-263
roles of veterinary nurses in, 97-98, 98f, 99f
Orbifloxacin, 294t
modulation, 101
Orthovoltage teletherapy, S8
pathologic, 101
Osteosarcoma
perception,101
case example,2sS
physiologic, 101
chemotherapy, 70-71
physiology of,100-101
gonadectomy effect on risk, 10
scales, 101-102, 102t
nursing highlights, 25S
transduction, 101
overview of,2S2
transmission, 101
pain management, 103-104, 103f
Palliation
staging,252-253,253f
as goal of treatment, 45
treatment,254
 palliative radiotherapy, 60, 62
Owners
Pamidronate
barriers to accepting or accessing treatment, 150
 in multimodal pain management, 104
cancer diagnosis, impact of, 135
for osteoclast inhibition, 179, 192t
communicating with, 6-7,142-146
Pancytopenia, 29, 161
communication network, 145
Paraneoplastic syndrome
conflict, dealing with, 14s-146
hypercalcemia, 175
Index 315
hypertrophic csteopathy, 218
Prednisolone
with lymphoma in dogs, 229
for anaphylaxis,197,198t
Parathyroid adenoma, 176
for chronic lymphoid leukemia (CLL), 282, 283
Parathyroid hormone, 17s-176
for hypercalcemia, 192t
Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTH-rP), 175
for hypoglycemia, 182, 184, 192t
Parenteral feeding, 119-120
for lymphoma in cats,238
Partial parenteral nutrition (PPN), 120
for lymphoma in dogs, 233
Partial response, defned,46t
Privacy, respect for, 139, 151
Pathclogical fracture, 217-218
Procarbazine
Pathology
drug information, 304-30S
cytology, 17-19, 18f-19f
for lymphoma in cats, 238
defnition of terms,16t
Professional boundaries, maintaining, 151
histopathology, 19-24, 20f-21f, 23f-24f
Prognosis
PCV (packed cell volume), 161
communicating with owners, 6
PDT (photodynamic therapy), 88
defnition of terms, 46t
Pectin, 121
factors influencing, 6
Pericardial effusion, 222-226
Kaplan-Meier survival curve, 47, 47f
cardiac tamponade, 222, 224
Progressive disease, defined, 46t
causes, 222, 224
Prostaglandins, inhibition by nonsteroidal
clinical features, 224
antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),10S-106
diagnosis,223,223f,225
Pseudocapsule, S0
treatment/management, 223-224, 22S
PTH-rl (parathyrcid hormone-related protein),
Iharynx, nursing care after radiation therapy, 6S
17S
IhaSea1 system, 79, 79f, 82-83
Pulmonary carcinoma, 277-280
IMhosphorus
case example, 280
hyperphosphatemia, 193t
nursing highlights,280
tumor lysis syndrome (TLS), 190
overview of,277
Ihotodynamic therapy (PDT), 88
risk factors for, 277
Photoirradiation, 88
staging,277-278,278f,280
Photosensitizer, 88
treatment, 279,279f
Physical examination, in staging of cancer, 27, 28f, 28t
Physical rehabilitation (physical therapy), 108-111
Q
active physical therapy, 109-110
Quality of life, treatment goals and, 45-46
aquatic therapy, 110
balance boards, 110
R
cavaletti, 109-110
Radiation cncology, 8
dancing, 110
Radiation therapy, S7-66
incline/decline exercise, 109
dose fractions, 61
leash walking, 109
effects of radiation
physioballs and physiorolls, 110
acute,60-61,61f
benefts,108
late, 61-62, 62f
defned, 108
radiosensitive and radioresistant tissues, 60
goals,108
goals of treatment, 60
jimb function, assessment of, 108-109
nursing care, 60-66
 passive physical therapy, 111
bone marrow, 65-66
cold therapy, 111
colon and rectum, 65
electrical stimulation (ES), 111
ears, 63
heat therapy, 111
eyes, 63, 6Sf
therapeutic ultrasound, 111
oral cavity and pharynx, 6$
Physioballs and physiorolls, 110
skin, 62-63, 62f-64f
Pigmentation, change with radiation therapy, 62f, 63,
pain relief from, 104
63f
for specifc cancers
Piroxicam, 86, 87, 103-104, 255, 261, 275-276, 290t
ymphoma in cats, 238, 239
Platelets
mammary carcinoma in cats, 270-271
 evaluation at time of myelosuppressive chemotherapy
mammary carcinoma in dogs, 267
treatment, 73
mast cell tumor, 242
life span in circulation, 164
melanoma,258
postchemotherapy nadir of, 72
oral squamous cell carcinoma, 261
thrombecytopenia, 29, 73, 164-169
osteosarcoma, 254
Pollakiuria, 213
pulmonary carcinoma, 279
Polycythemia vera, 29
soft tissue sarcoma (STS), 246
Potassium
transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), 276
hyperkalemia, 190-191, 193t
types, S7-60
hypokalemia, 184-187,193t
brachytherapy, S9,S9f
Potassium chloride, 185, 187, 193t
systemic therapy, S9-60
PPN (partial parenteral nutrition), 120
teletherapy, S8, S9f
Prayer, 90
Radical excisional surgery, S1-SS
316 Index
Radiography
bilirubin, 30
acute renal failure, 211-212
calcium, 30-31
anaphylaxis,200
creatinine,30
anemia,164
globulin, 31
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), 160
glucose, 31
febrile neutropenia, 173
urea, 30
hemangiosarcoma, 249f
Shock
hematuria, 215
anaphylactic,195
hypercalcemia, 179
septic,127,170
hypertrophic osteopathy (HO), 219f, 220f, 221
Siamese cat, genetic risk of cancers in, 10
hypoglycemia, 183
Sigma receptors, 105
lymphoma in cats, 236,237f
Skin
lymphoma in dogs, 232-233,232f
hair and coat changes from chemotherapeutics, 76,
mammary carcinoma in dogs, 26Sf, 268
76f-77f
osteosarcoma, 253f
radiation therapy, nursing care after, 62-63, 62f-64f
pathologic fracture, 218
Sodium bicarbonate, for hyperkalemia, 191, 193t, 212
pericardial effusion, 223, 223f, 22S
Sodium chloride
soft tissue sarcoma (STS), 244
for hypercalcemia, 179, 192t
staging of cancer, 32,32f, 33f, 34
infltration for vincristine extravasation injury, 207
tansitional cell carcinoma (TCC), 273, 274f
Soft tissue sarcoma (STS)
Radioresistant tissues, 60
appearance, 245f, 246f
Radiosensitive tissues, 60
case example, 247
Ranitidine,117,243,293t
grading,244-24S
Rectum, nursing care after radiation therapy, 6$
injection site sarcoma (vaccine-associated sarcoma),
Rehabilitation. See Physical rehabilitation (physical
244
therapy)
nursing highlights,247
Remission, 233
overview of, 244
Renal dysfunction
staging, 244-245, 246f, 247
acute renal failure, 208-212
treatment, 246-247
chemotherapy and, 26, 71, 208-209
Solid tumors, defned, S
Renewing tissues, 67
Spaying (ovariohysterectomy), effect on cancer risk, 10,
Rescue therapy, 234, 23S
264,267
Restraint
Specialists, 7-8. See also specifc specialties
during chemotherapy, 78, 78f, 79
Spiritual healing, 90
during euthanasia, 129
Spleen, hemangiosarcoma of, 248-251
pain management for cancer patients, 98, 98f, 99f
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
Retinoids, 8S
nosectomy surgery for, S4-SS,SSf
Risk factors. See Causes of cancer in pets
oral,260-263
Rottweiler, bone sarcoma in, 10
appearance of, 260, 261f
case example,263
S
nursing highlights, 262
Saffower cil, 85-86
overview of,260
Saliva, artifcial, 65
staging, 260-261
Samarium, 60, 104
treatment, 261,262f
Sarcoma. See also Hemangiosarcoma; Osteosarcoma;
risk factors, 10, 11
 Soft tissue sarcoma (STS)
Stable disease, defned,46t
defined, S
Staging of cancer, 25-40
electron beam teletherapy for, S8, S9f
assessments used in process, 2740
histiocytic, 33f, 87
bile acids, 39
radiographic evaluation of, 35f
complete blood count (CBC), 27-29
Scar revision surgery, S0
creatinine clearance, 38-39
SCC. See Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
imaging,32-38
Schistocytes, 158f, 161
bone scintigraphy, 38
Scintigraphy, 38
computed tomography (CT), 34-36, 3Sf-38f
Scottish terrier, transitional cell carcinoma in, 10, 11
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 3S-36
Self-care technicians, 152
radiography, 32, 32f, 33f, 34
Sepsis
ultrasonography,34,34
catheter-induced,127
lymph node evaluation, 32
in disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), 160
MDR-1 gene (multiple drug resistance) test, 39
in neutropenia, 123-128, 170, 172, 174
physical examination, 27, 28f, 28t
Septic shock, 127, 170
serum biochemistry panel,29-31
Seroma, spread of cancer cells and, 48
alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 29-30
asues jo durteis ur asn 'iaued Answaysorg wnias
albumin, 31
2931
alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 30
alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 29-30
bilirubin, 30
albumin, 31
calcium, 30-31
alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 30
creatinine, 30
Index317
globulin, 31
osteosarcoma, 254
glucose,31
pulmonary carcinoma, 279, 279f
urea, 30
soft tissue sarcoma (STS), 246
urine evaluation, 31
transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), 275
veterinary bladder tumor antigen (V-BTA) test, 40
Surgical biopsy, 20
cancer type
Surgical ncology, deseription,78
chronic lymphoid leukemia (CLL), 281-282, 282f
Survival curve, Kaplan-Meier, 47, 47f
hemangiosarcoma, 248, 249f, 250-251
Syringes, Luer Lock, 80
ymphoma in cats, 237, 239
ymphoma in dogs, 231f, 233, 23S
T
mammary carcinoma in cats, 269
Tamoxifen,87
mammary carcinoma in dogs, 264, 26Sf, 266-267,
TCC. See Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC)
266f,268
Tea solutions, for oral lavage, 65
mast cell tumor (MCT), 241242, 241f, 243
Team, cancer-care
melanoma, 256,257f, 258
confict within,149
oral squamous cell carcinoma, 260-261
role of nurse in, 148-149
osteosarcoma,252-253,253f
Technetium scintigraphy, 38
pulmonary carcinoma,277-278,278f,280
Teletherapy
soft tissue sarcoma (STS), 244-245, 246f, 247
electron beam, 58, 59f
transitional cell carcinoma, 273, 27Sf, 276
megavoltage,S8
health of patient and, 26-27
orthovoltage, S8
histopathology, role of, 22-23
Terbutaline, for anaphylaxis, 199t
reevaluation (restaging), 27
Test results, communicating with owners, 6
TNM system, 2S-26
Thalidomide, 87
 Staining, of cytology preparations, 19
Therapeutic ultrasound, 111
Static tissues, 67
Thrombocytopenia, 164-169
Stranguria, 213,213f
 assessment before myelosuppressive therapy, 73
Streptozotocin,nephrotoxicity of, 208-209
causes, 29,124,165, 166-167
Stress, 152-153
in chronic lymphoid leukemia (CLL), 282
Strentium, radioactive, S9, S9f
clinical features, 73, 167-168
STS. See Soft tissue sarcoma (STS)
defined, 16S
Sucralfate, 117, 243, 293t
diagnosis, 166,168
Sulfonamides, as trigger for immune-mediated platelet
treatment/management, 166, 168
destruction, 165
Thrombopoietin, 165
Support for nurses and technicians
Thrombosis, 157. See also Disseminated intravasculan
counseling, 153
coagulation (DIC)
self-care, 1§2
Thyroid tumor
stress, 1$2-153
nutritional risk factors, 10
Support for owners and caregivers, 135-146
radioactive iodide treatment, S9-60
Supportive care of patients
Ticarcillin-clavulanic acid, 294t
end-of-life, 129-132
Tissue factor, 157
gastrointestinal and nutritional, 113-121
TLS. See Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS)
hematologic,123-128
TNM system, of cancer staging, 25
multimodal support nursing paradigm, 9799
Tobacco smoke, environmental (ETS), 10-12, 11f
pain management, 99-107
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN), 119-120
physical rehabilitation, 108-111
"Touch-prints,” 17, 19, 19f
Surgery, 48-56
Toxicity and chemotherapy
curative intent, S0-SS
cardiotoxicity,73,75t
radical excisional surgery, S1-SS
gastrointestinal toxicity,73
amputation,S1-S2,S3f,S4f
brain surgery, SS, S6f
immune-mediated toxicity, 75-76
maxillectomy and mandibulectomy, S2-54, S4f
myelosuppression, 72-73
nosectomy, S4-SS, SSf
tissue differences, 67
wide (excisional surgery), S0-S1
urelogic toxicity, 75
instrument packs, changing, SS
TPN (total parenteral nutrition), 119-120
for invasive tumor, 49f
Traditional Chinese medicine, 90 
noncurative intent, 48-S0
Tramadol, 63, 104, 106, 255, 291t
biopsy, 48-49
Transduction, pain, 101
intracapsular surgery, 49, S1f
Transfusion, 162, 250
marginal surgery, S0, S1f
Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC)
for specifc cancers
case example, 276
hemangiosarcoma, 248,249,249f
hematuria,214
mammary carcinoma in cats, 270
metastasis, 273, 275f
mammary carcinoma in dogs, 267
nursing highlights,276
mast cell tumor, 242
overview of, 273
melanoma, 2s8,259
risk factors, 10
oral squamous cell carcinoma, 261, 262f
seeding during surgery, SS
318Index
staging, 273,27Sf, 276
Urinary tract infection, 31, 273, 276
treatment, 27s-276
Urine evaluation, for staging of cancer, 31
ultrasonographic evaluation, 34f
Urologic toxicity
veterinary bladder tumor antigen (V-BTA) test, 40
calcium nephropathy, 177, 208
Transmissible venereal tumor, 68
of chemotherapeutics, 75
Transmission, pain, 101
 Urological emergencies, 208-216
Treatment.See also specifc cancers; specifcmodalities
acute renal failure, 208-212
biclogical response modifcation (BRM), 8S-88
hematuria,213-216
chemotherapy, 67-84
Urethelial toxicity, 75
complementary and alternative medical (CAM)
therapies, 90-93
V
goals, 4s-46
Vaccination
photodynamic therapy (PDT), 88
delaying for chemotherapy,72
radiation therapy, $7-66
DNA, 88
response, evaluating, 46-47, 46t, 47f
Vaccine-associated sarcoma, 244
surgery, 48-S6
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), antibody to,
Tribrissen, 121
87
Trimethoprim-sulpha, 121, 126, 250, 294t
Vertical laminar flow hood, 80, 81f
Tripelennamine, for anaphylaxis, 198t
Vesicants, 202
Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS), 190-191
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesic Support Group,
causes, 191
100
clinical features, 191
Veterinary bladder tumor antigen (V-BTA) test, 40
diagnosis, 190, 191
Vicarious trauma, 153
treatment/management,190,191
Vinblastine, 305
Tyrosine-kinase inhibitors, 88
Vincristine
drug information, 30S
U
for lymphoma in cats, 238
Ulceration, gastric, 117, 243
for lymphoma in dogs,233
Ultrasonography
periwinkle plant as source of, 91
acute renal failure, 211
toxicity
anemia,164
extravasation injury, 202-20S, 203f, 207
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), 160
gastrointestinal,121
febrile neutropenia, 173
for transmissible venereal tumor, 68
hemangiosarcoma,248,249f, 250-251
Vinorelbine, 30S
hematuria,21S
Viral infection, thrombccytopenia from, 165, 167
hypercalcemia, 179
Vomiting, antiemetics for, 116
hypoglycemia,183
lymphoma in cats, 236,239
M
lymphoma in dogs, 232-233
Waste disposal, chemotherapy and, 82, 82f, 83-84
pericardial effusion,223,223f
Weight, conversion to body surface area (BSA), 287t-
staging of cancer, 34, 34f
289t
therapeutic,111
World Health Organization (WHO), 2S
thrombocytopenia, 168
transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), 273, 274f, 276
X
Urea, evaluation in staging of cancer, 30
Xerostomia,6S