BACKGROUND
LESIONSIN
LABORATORY
ANIMALS
A ColorAtlas
Elizabeth F.McInnes
ForewordbyPeterMann
SAUNDERS
小尾巴宠物健康中心http：//ttahc.taobao.com
Background Lesions in Laboratory Animals
AColorAtlas
Background Lesions in
Laboratory Animals
A Color Atlas
Elizabeth F McInneS BVSc, PHD, FRCPATH, MRCVS, FIAP
Department of Pathology, Huntingdon Life Sciences, Cambs,
United Kingdom
Foreword by
Peter Mann DVM, DACVP
Manager, EPL NorthWest, Seattle, WA, USA
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
Edinburgh  London  New York  Oxford  Philadelphia  St Louis  Sydney   Toronto  2012
SAUNDERS
LLSLVIER
@ 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
First published 2012
Reprinted 2012
 No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic
Or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further
the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website:
www.elsevier.com/permissions.
 This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
ISBN 978 0 7020 3519 7
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress 
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this feld are constantly changing. As new research and experience
 broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment 
may become necessary
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and
or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for
whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identifed, readers are advised to check the most
current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (i) by the manufacturer of each product to
be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of
administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own
experience and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best
 treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume
any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability,
negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas
contained in the material herein.
your source for books,
ELSEVIER
journals and multimedia
 in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Working together to grow
The
 publishers
libraries in developing countries
96n 01 s Aolod
paper manufactured
www.clsevier.com | www.bookaid.otg I www.sabte.otg
from sustalne ble forest5
ELSEVIER
BOOK AID
Sabre Foundation
Printed in China
FOREWORD
The volure you hold in your hands reveals the frst secret we
artifacts, i.e. pseudo-changes that may mimic background changes
but which must be separated out so that they are not reported as
animmals without lesions; the normal wear and tear of life causes a
treatment-related findings. Finally, Dr Creasy has admirably described
number of histologic changes in many organs. That Dr McInnes and
the normal changes in both the male and female reproductive tracts
her colleagues—Drs Chamanza, Taylor and Bradley, and Professor
sn aes on s aia sn du pnus yum ra e u
Scudarmore—are all experienced pathologists is obvious from their
 arising from treatment from background changes in these very complex
selection and description of these changes; it is clear that each of these
systerms.
authors has struggled with these, often perplexing, changes at some
The second great secret we learn as toxicologic pathologists is
point in their career. Each lesion has been carefully cataloged, described
that treatment-related changes can be exacerbations of normal back-
-oel jo saioads iofeur au jo yoea iog satu soios ym panensl pue
jo ias anenape ue pue yooq su jo pie au yam saueuo punoe
ratory animal commonly used in toxicology studies, there is a complete,
well organized description ofthe background changes expected for each
 equipped to wend their way through mountains of slides, confident that
of the major organ systems. In addition, there is an invaluable and
they are truly describing only those changes which are the result of
exhaustive list of references for each species; this should prove very
treatment.
useful when documenting these changes in pathology narratives or
when presenting material to regulatory agencies. In addition to the
Peter Mann
 chapters on individual species, there is an additional chapter covering
2011
PREFACE
Evaluating the pathology of tissues involves not only the recognition of
of lesions; for instance, a pathologist may use the term ^cardiomyopa-
lesions caused directly by treatment or disease but also the identifica-
thy' to refer to myocardial necrosis, myocardial fbrosis and myocardial
tion of background lesions. An experienced pathologist should be fami-
inflammatory cell infltration. Grouping findings together in this way
liar with the spontaneous, incidental background lesions present in a
may lead to masking of a treatment-related finding, particularly in long-
particular organ or tissue (Shackleford et al 2002). Toxicologic patholo-
term studies. In general, experienced pathologists tend to record fewer
gists need to be able to recognize background lesions in animals of
background fndings compared to their inexperienced counterparts.
different ages so that these changes are not incorrectly attributed to
Although standardized terminology is encouraged, there is an infinite
the test article. Toxicologists and regulators are understandably keen to 
variety of findings and very often several terms exist for the same lesion.
ensure that background findings are not incorrectly attributed to test
The use of different diagnostic terms to describe the same lesion makes
article effects. This book is for veterinary and toxicologic pathologists,
accurate retrieval of historical control data challenging. In this atlas,
at all stages of their training or career, who want to know more about
every effort has been made to give the lesion its correct name, but
background lesions in laboratory animals.
synonyms for the same lesion have also been included
 Background lesions are described as an array of individual variations
 This atlas describes background lesions and illustrates most of them
with an accepted reference range (Shackelford et al 2002); they are
with a color image. There are chapters on each of the major species of
generally congenital or hereditary fndings, i.e.normal fndings that are
laboratory animal commonly used in toxicology studies, with a com-
unique to the histology of an animal species. Occasionally, background
plete, well-organized description of the background changes expected
lesions include the effects of trauma. Background lesions also include
for each of the major organ systems. There is also a chapter on back-
normal aging changes as well as some degenerative conditions. In
ground lesions in the reproductive system of all laboratory animals;
rodents, background lesions include normal findings such as hematopoi-
the reproductive system is discussed separately from the other organ
esis in the spleen, incomplete growth-plate resorption inthe long bones,
 systems because of the considerable number of background lesions in
continuous eruption of incisor teeth, high celllarity of bone marrow
the reproductive tissues encountered due to normal physiology, housing
a a u ueau pu Aeauiy Aad aiaday pu
conditions and the impact of age (i.e. before or after the onset of
Traumaticbackground lesions include fractures and gavage injuriesite
puberty). Evaluation of the reproductive system in non-human pri-
wounds and foot lesions. Background findings, which also include condi-
mates can be difficult owing to the small sample sizes and the timing
tions such as thymic involution, ovarian and uterine atrophy, may be
around puberty which can result in a large number of background
related to normal physiological or hormonal status and often include
 minor developmental anomalies such as cysts or ectopic tissue. Degen-
chapter contains detailed descriptions of the hormonal changes recorded
erative background lesions resulting from the aging process include
 in female non-human primates, dogs and rodents. Finally, there is also
chronic nephropathy, amyloidosis, atrial thrombosis, cardiomyopathy,
a chapter on artifacts caused during the death process (agonal] and
 polyarteritis, hepatic foci of alteration, and urologic syndrome.
during the processing of tissues. The book is fully referenced.
aq Aeu suoisal pumouayoeq jo auer [euou au uoy Aeme yip y
The authors trust that you will fnd the book both useful and
associated with factors such as changes in supplier and/or geographic
interesting.
source, genetics, age at sexual maturity [dogs and monkeys), diet,
environment, the experience and training of the pathologist, subjective
References
previous studies using animals from the same source or a different
Drevon-Gaillot, E., Perron-Lepage, M.F., Clément, C., et al., 2006. Review of
source. Genetic and geographic influence on background findings can
background fndings in cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis] from
occur in cynomolgus monkeys (Drevon-Gaillot et al 2006, Stevison &
three different geographical origins. Exp. Toxicol. Pathol. 58, 77-88.
Kohn 2008), and disease susceptibility, disease serology status and
Menninger, K., Wieczorek, G., Riesen, S., et al, 2002. The origin of
stress response can also affect the incidence of certain background
cynomolgus monkey affects the outcome of kidney allografts under neoral
lesions (Menninger et al 2002, Drevon-Gaillot et al 2006). This atlas
immunosuppression. Transplant Proc. 34, 2887-2888.
Shackelford,C.,Long,G,Wolf J.,t al,.Qulitativeandquantitativ
various lesions to facilitate recognition of background lesions despite
analysis of non-neoplastic lesions in toxicology studies. Toxicol. Pathol. 30,
93-96.
diagnostic drift.
Some pathologists will use thresholds to flter out background
Stevison, L.S., Kohn, M.H., 2008. Determining genetic background in captive
stocks of cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicuiaris]. J. Med. Primatol. 37,
changes—which may lead to under-diagnosis of a particular lesion.
311-317.
Pathologists may also choose to use broad terms to include a number
Vii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the following people for the generous
Blanco, Stuart Naylor (Charles River), Heinrich Ernst (Fraunhofer
gift of photographs: Carlos Lopez, Antonio de Molina, Nigel Young.
Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine) and Gloria del
David Bell (HLS), David J. Lewis, J. Bowles (GSK), Matt Jacobsen,
Fiero (Cerberus). Where possible, the individual photographs have
Jayne Harris (Astrazeneca), Alys Bradley, Ronnie Chamanza, Ana
been acknowledged; however, in some cases this was not possible
Dedication
For Peter, Edward and Simon (EM).
CONTRIBUTORS
Alys Bradlley
Cheryl Scudamore
BSc, BVSc, MAnimSc, DipRCPath, FRIPH, MRCVS, FRCPath
BVSc, Dip Mgnt, PhD, MRCVS, FRCPath
Director of Pathology, Preclinical Services,
Professor of Toxicological Pathology, Royal Veterinary
Charles River Laboratory, Tranent, Edinburgh, UK
College, Hatfield, UK
Ronnle Chamanza
an Taylor
BVSc, MSc, MRCVS, FRCPath
BSc, DIBT, CBiol, MSB
Principal Pathologist, Preclinical Services,
 Principal Pathologist, Department of Pathology
Charles River Laboratory, Tranent, Edinburgh, UK
Huntingdon Life Sciences, Suffolk, UK
 Dlanne Creasy
PhD, DipRCPath (Tox), FRCPath
Senior Scientific Advisor, Huntingdon Life Sciences,
New Jersey, USA
CHAPTER
Ronnie Chamanza
Non-human primates: cynomolgus (Macaca fascicularis) and rhesus (Macaca mulatta)
macaques and the common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus)
fndings are the most common fndings and prolif-
Introduction
erative lesions are rare, while inflammatory lesions
Non-human primates are extensively used as a
are largely limited to mononuclear cell infltra-
non-rodent species of choice in preclinical toxicity
tions in several tissues.
testing, primarily because of their phylogenetic
and physiological proximity to humans. The most
Cardiovascular system
commonly used species is the cynomolgus monkey
- ro q   u o
Spontaneous findings of the heart are among the
macaque (Macaca fascicularis), rhesus macaque
most commonly encountered fndings in non-
(Macaca mulatta} and the common marmoset
human primates used as controls in preclinical
(Callithrix jacchus). Cynomolgus and rhesus
safety studies. Of these, the most frequently
macaques are Old World monkeys (from Africa
recorded incidental findings are idiopathic myo-
and Asia) of the subfamily cercopithicine and
cardial inflammatory cell infltrations and focal
genus Macaca, while marmosets are New Word
myocarditis. Although various diagnostic terms
monkeys (from Central and South America) of
have been used to describe these two seemingly
HGURE 1.2 Focal myocarditis in a female cynomolgus
the genus Callithridae.
 Cynomolgus monkeys
separate inflammatory findings of the myocardium
monkey. x200.
have gradually replaced rhesus monkeys as the
(Drevon-Gaillot et al 2006, Keenan & Vidal 2006,
most commonly used laboratory non-human
Lowenstine 2003, Qureshi 1979, Scott 1999,
primate mainly because of costs and availability.
 Shimoi et al 1998), it is generally accepted that
for these lesions and to grade them according
 Marmosets are preferred because of their small
they represent a single pathological entity that
tot
the presence or absence of degenerative
size which is ideal for testing products in limited
differs only in the degree of severity (Chamanza
or inflammatory changes in the adjacent myocar-
amounts. They are also easier to handle and less
et al 2006). The pathology continuum starts
dial tissues when evaluating non-human primate
expensive to house. All three species can now be
with minimal to mild, focal, lymphoplasmacytic
hearts in routine toxicity studies (Chamanza et al
obtained from accredited suppliers as young
inflammatory cell infltration of the myocardium,
2006).
animals (one to five years old), purpose-bred for
with little or no evidence of cardiac myocyte
 Myocardial degeneration with karyomegaly is
laboratory use and free of specific disease agents.
necrosis or degeneration (Fig. 1.1], and progresses 
 an idiopathic focal myofibre degeneration or car-
Young macaques may be easily housed in captivity
to focal myocarditis characterized by some evi-
diomyopathy (Vidal et al 2010, Zabka et al 2009)
once obtained from suppliers without major
dence of cardiac myocyte necrosis and associated
that has been described in cynomolgus macaques
disease outbreaks, but the captive management of
edema or fibrin deposition (Fig. 1.2). Both condi-
from various sources and origins. Even though it
marmosets remains a huge challenge and can be
tions occur more commonly in the subendocardial
has occurred at a low frequency, high incidences
associated with problems related to stress and the
or subepicardial areas of the heart and may occur
have been recorded in the few studies in which it
strict dietary requirements of marmosets.
simultaneously in the same heart. No clinical signs
has occurred (Chamanza et al 2010). The finding
In spite of the immense value of non-human
 Or grossly visible lesions are known to be associated
is characterized by minimal to moderate focal
primates in predicting human responses, there
with these findings, and no etiological agent has
myocardial degeneration associated with mild to
are important ethical and scientific considerations
been isolated or demonstrated (Chamanza et al
moderate karyomegaly, cardiac myofbre hyper-
regulating their use. Current regulations dictate
2006). The most likely cause is therefore consid-
trophy and vacuolation, with minimal inflamma-
that non-human primates should only be used
ered to be stress and the release of catecholarmines
tion or fibrosis (Fig. l.3). In early lesions, only
associated with capture or captivity; hence, higher
lipid-depleted vacuolation of cardiac myofbres
It has to be scientifically demonstrated that no
incidences of the fndings have been reported in
and karyomegaly with increased nuclear basophilia,
other non-rodent species commonly used in safety
wild-caught animals (Qureshi 1979) compared
 are present, while more advanced lesions may be
testing is appropriate for the purpose of the study.
with laboratory non-human primates. A proposal
associated with inflammation, hemorrhage, miner-
However, with the advent of biotechnology-
has been put forward to apply umbrella terms
alization and extensive fbrosis. The most com-
derived products or biologics, such as humanized
such as ^focal idiopathic myocardial inflammation'
monly affected areas of the heart are, indecreasing
monoclonal antibodies, which due to their high
order, the subepicardial areas of the apex, the
 species specificity require testing in a pharmaco-
interventricular septum Gjust below the atrio-
logically relevant animal species, the demand for
ventricular valves), and the tip of the papillary
utilizing species that closely match human phar-
muscle and subendocardial areas of both ventri-
macodynamic responses has increased. This has
cles (Chamanza et al 2010).
also increased the need to understand the back-
ground pathology of non-human primates, includ-
ing the range of incidental pathology findings that
might be confused with treatment effects.
This chapter describes and presents photo-
 graphic images of common incidental findings that
might be encountered in young cynomolgus and
rhesus macaques and marmosets used in toxicity
testing as control animals. The spectrum of fnd-
ings are reflective of the young age of the animals,
the strict barrier-conditions they are kept under,
and for marmosets, the problems associated with
diet and nutrition of captive-reared New World
 FIGURE 1.1 Inflammatory cell infiltation of the myocar-
monkeys. In general congenital and degenerative
dium of the cynomolgus heart. x200.
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Keratinized or non-keratinized squamous cysts
(Fig. l.7), squamous plaques with no central
lumen, and thyroid follicle-like epithelial cysts
flled with an eosinophilic fluid have been reported
at very low incidences in the three species. Squa-
mous keratinized cysts are lined with a complete
or incomplete thin layer of fattened epithelium
flled with concentric layers of keratin (Fig. 1.8)
and may be associated with a foreign-body inflam-
matory reaction where the epithelial wall has been
broken, or appears incomplete, and the keratin is
in direct contact with adjacent tissues (Chamanza
et al 2006). Squamous non-keratinized cysts are
composed of a thicker layer of stratifed squamous
epithelium around a central lumen filled with a
HGURE 1.3 Myocardial degeneration and karyomegaly in
 FIGURE 1.5 Myocardial degeneration and hemorrhage in
few inflarmmatory cells, armorphous cellular debris
 a male cynomolgus monkey. x200.
 a female cynomolgus monkey. x100.
or eosinophilic colloid-like material. The base of
the epithelial wall of the non-keratinized squa-
 Rarely eosinophilic intranuclear inclusion bodies,
jo lakel e Aq papunoms Aensn si is snou
fbrous connective tissue of varying thickness.
believed to be caused by invagination of the
cytoplasm into the enlarged nuclei, and intracyto-
plasmic eosinophilic or hyaline granules (usually
located at the poles of the nucleus) within the
hypertrophic cardiac myofibres, may be observed
(Fig. 1.4). Intranuclear (pseudojinclusion bodies
in hypertrophic cardiac myofbres resulting from
intranuclear invagination of cytoplasmic organelles,
including mitochondria, have been reported in man
(Engedal et al 1977), while hyaline, ceroid and
lipofuscin cytoplasmic granules located atthe poles
of cardiac myofibre nuclei have been reported in 
cynomolgus monkeys (Jasty et al 1984).
 FIGURE 1.6a Fibrosis in the subendocardial myocardium
of a marmoset. x50.
HGURE 1.7 Squamous cell lining of cyst in the heart of
a monkey. x100.
HGURE 1.4 Eosinophilic intranuclear nclusions and
cytoplasmic granules in the myocardium. x400.
FIGURE 1.6b Fibrosis of the heart of a marmoset.
Masson's trichrome stain. x100.
Arute hemorrhagic necrosis (Fig. l.5) and/or
fbrosis (Fig. 1.6a & b) of the papillary muscle or
The possible role of catecholamines in this
subendocardial areas, resembling ischemic lesions
idiopathic
 myocardial degeneration has been
such as those associated with beta-agonist and
suggested. Findings similar to those described
above, such as cardiac myofibre hypertrophy,
other cardio-active drugs (Greaves 2000), have
HGURE 1.8 Epithelial squamous cyst in the heart of a
 also been observed in occasional animals, including
karyomegaly and vacuolation, have been observed
cynomolgus monkey. x100.
marmosets (Fig. 1.6a & b).
in a rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta) with an
active angiomatous phaeochromocytoma (Vogel &
 Squamous plaques, which are incomplete cysts
Fritz 2003) and in animals directly injected with
with no central lumen, may be found lying adja-
catecholamines (Khullar et al 1989).
ae Aau asee m u 'sis snbs on iun
Ectopic cysts or glandular structures lined by
thought to represent tangential sections of walls
various types of epithelium, from squamous to
 of adjacent squamous cysts. However, some epi-
cuboidal, or columnar, have been described in
 cardial or endocardial squamous plaques, unasso-
various species, including man (De Lacroix &
ciated with complete squarmous cysts, have also
Hubner 1974, Thomas & van Wesep 1990], cattle
been observed. Keratinized or non-keratinized
(Bundza & Dukes 1978) and mice (Elwell &
squamous cysts and squamous plaques are usually
Mahler 1999j. In non-human primates,
three
located in the subepicardial or subendocardial
 main types of ectopic cyst have been described in
regions between the apex and the base of the
the cynomolgus and rhesus macaques and marmo-
heart, and are therefore easily identified as yellow-
sets (Chamanza et al 2006, Drevon-Gaillot et al
white nodules on the heart surface or interven-
2006, Kaspareit et al 2003).
tricular septum at necropsy.
Non-human primates
Ectopic thyroid tissue or thyroid follicle-like
structures have been observed mainly in the sub-
epicardial areas at the base of the heart, including
atrial appendages and walls of the great vessels,
and are not readily identifed at necropsy. Squa-
mous cysts and squamous plaques may be of
foregut origin while ectopic thyroid tissue could
be of thyroglossal duct origin (Elwell & Mahler
1999, Kaspareit et al 2003).
Various types of vascular lesions have been
reported to occur spontaneously, albeit at very low
frequencies in laboratory non-human primates
(Chamanza et al 2006, 2010). With the exception
of continuous intravenous infusion studies,
in
which local injection sites and systemic vascular
FIGURE 1.11b Mucinous degeneration of the atrium.
FIGURE 1.10 Intimal thickening and atherosclerosis in a 
lesions are common background findings associ-
blood vessel. x200.
x100.
ated with the test item administration procedure
(Lilbert & Burnett 2003), inflammatory lesions of
Another closely-related, degenerative lesion of
blood vessels are uncommon in laboratory non-
Hemolymphoreticular system
arteries seen in young macaques is the accumula-
human primates.
tion of mucopolysaccharides, or mucifcation, in 
Extramedullary hematopoiesis (EMH) occurs fre-
 Two isolated cases of polyarteritis nodosa, a sys-
the subendothelial areas of the aorta and the
quently in the adrenal gland (Fig. 1.53), liver,
temic necrotizing vasculitis of small to middle-
heart. Mucin accumulation in the tunica intima
kidney and other tissues in marmosets. The sever-
sized arteries, have been described in cynomolgus
and, to a lesser extent, tunica media, of the aorta,
ity and incidence of this finding is usually associ-
macaques (Albassam et al 1993, Porter et al
with proliferation of intimal cells and splitting of
ated with the frequency of blood sampling, with
2003). The most frequently encountered inflam-
elastic fbres of the tunica media (Fig. 1.lla), has
marmosets being very sensitive to frequent bleeds
matory vascular lesions are minimal to moderate,
been observed at low frequency in cynomolgus
(Tucker 1984). This spontaneous finding should
localized vasculitis or perivasculitis characterized
macaques used in toxicity studies (Chamanza et al
be differentiated from inflammation, inflammatory-
by a lymphoplasmacytic infltration of the vascular
2010). Mucin or mucopolysaccharide accumula-
 cell infltrates or treatment-related EMH. Sponta-
wall without extensive necrosis of the tunica
tion in the tunica intima of the aorta and sub-
neous EMH in macaques is extremely rare, but
media or substantial fbrin deposition. The most
endocardial tissues of the heart chambers and
has sporadically been observed in lymph nodes of
commonly affected organs include the large intes-
valves (Fig. l.llb) has also been described in
healthy control cynomolgus macaques (Chamanza
tinal wall, lungs, meninges (brain and spinal cord),
humans and other non-human primates (Lindsay
et al 2010).
heart (Fig. 1.9), urinary bladder and sciatic nerve.
& Chaikoff 1966, Scott 1999). The mucopolysac-
Multinucleate lymphocytic syncytia, resem-
charide content of the walls (particularly the
bling the Warthin-Finkeldey bodies associated
intima) of arteries of non-human primates is
with measles (Fig. 1.12), have been observed with
generally more abundant than it is in humans
some frequency in the bronchial-associated lym-
(Scott i999). This aortic degenerative change in
phoid tissue (BALT) of the larynx and the gut-
macaques results in a massive accumulation of
associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) of the large
mucopolysaccharides in the subintimal areas,
intestines in normal healthy cynomolgus macaques
causing localized swelling or expansion of the
(Chamanza et al 20l0). It is not known whether
intima with disruption of the elastic fbres of the
these represent subclinical measles infection, but
intima media (Fig. 1.1la).
no necrosis of lymphocytes is observed within the
ymphoid nodules, nor are viral inclusions present 
within the cells. Natural measles infections which
may originate from animal handlers, are known to
occur in both marmosets and macaques (Scott
1999).
HGURE 1.9 Perivasculitis in the heart. x200.
Naturally occurring, degenerative lesions of
arteries, such as atherosclerosis, do not occur
commonly in non-human primates, but intimal
thickening and the formation of arteriosclerotic
lesions (fibrous plaques) in the coronary artery
and aorta, sometimes leading to occlusion, are
encountered infrequently (Chamanza et al 2010,
Scott 1999j. The intima is infltrated by smooth
muscle cells, mucopolysaccharides and fbrous
tissue with little or no foam cells or extracellular
lipids seen in diet-induced, atherosclerotic plaques
(Fig. 1.10). Intimal proliferation or fbrocellular
 FIGURE 1.11a Intimal degeneration and mucopolysac-
intimal thickening may also be encountered in the
charide acumulation of the aorta in a cynomolgus
FIGURE 1.12 Warthin-Finkeldey bodies in the gastroin-
lung of normal control cynomolgus macaques fol-
monkey. x200.
testinal lymphoid tissue (GALT) of a non-human primate.
lowing organization of small pulmonary emboli
x100.
derived from infusion sites.
The presence of prominent lymphoid follicles
within the bone marrow is a common background
fnding in macaques (Fig. l.13). This lesion,
together with lymphoid follicular hyperplasia and
prominent germinal centres in other sites, such as
the spleen (Fig. 1.14), lymph nodes and salivary
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATOR
ANMALS
glands, have been associated with subclinical
lesions commonly encountered in the lungs of
 findings observed in saline-injected control animals
type D retroviral infection (Guzman et al 1999,
macaques include focal pleuritis and pleural or
on continuous intravenous infusion studies.
Lowenstine 1993). However, most non-human
subpleural fbrosis, with or without lung adhesions
primates used in preclinical studies are routinely
to adjacent lobes or to the parietal pleura. These
screened for, and are known to be free from,
simian retroviruses (type D). Thus hyperplastic
lung adhesions or pale white foci of the pleura.
lymphoid follicles in the spleen and other tissues
are considered to indicate heightened non-specific
immunosurveillance in animals which have been
reared in a relatively disease-free environment and
are known to be free from major pathogens. Peri-
odontal disease, glossitis and tonsillitis are other
common minor inflammatory lesions known to be
associated with lymphoid follicular hyperplasia
 and mononuclear cell infltrations in other organs.
AGURE 1.17 Thrombi and intimal proliferation in a blood
vessel of the lung in a cynomolgus monkey. x200.
Yellowish brown to dark brown pigment in
FIGURE 1.15 Interstitial pneumonia in a subpleural loca-
tion in a cynomolgus monkey. x200.
alveolar macrophages is often found distributed
perivascularly or peribronchiolarly within the
lungs of macaques (Fig. 1.l8). Although iron-
Other inflammatory lesions of the lung include
positive pigment associated with the lung mite
focal, foreign-body_granulomas with minimal to
mild interstitial inflammation. The lesions occur
Pneumonyssus simincola is occasionally encoun-
tered, especially in wild-caught macaques, the
as a result of inhalation of plant, food or other
small particles (Fig. 1.16) and should be distin-
majority of the brown pigment present in the
lungs of purpose-bred macaques is usually not
guished from hair emboli, which usually occur as
FIGURE 1.13 Germinal centres within the bone marrow
associated with any parasite sections or pulmonary
a result of the inadvertent injection of hair or skin
in a cynomolgus monkey. x100.
 parenchymal pathological changes, and is there-
fragments during intravenous injection of test sub-
stances. Hair emboli or fragments of skin lodged
fore believed to be anthracosis. Anthracosis,
iS
in macaque lungs may appear as focal, foreign-
caused by the inhalation of atmospheric carbon
particles by
 laboratory non-human primates
body granulomas in the lung or within arterial
thrombi with a perivascular reaction (Kast 1994).
housed near or within urban areas. Similar pigment
can be encountered within macrophages in the
bronchial or mediastinal nodes and should be dif-
ferentiated from tattoo pigment.
AGURE 1.14 Prominent lymph follicle with hyalinization
in the lymph node in a cynomolgus monkey. x100.
The accumulation of brightly eosinophilic
amorphous material (hyalinization} in the centre
FIGURE 1.16 Foreign body pneumonia in the lung in a
of lymphoid follicles in non-human primate
cynomolgus monkey. x200.
spleens is a common observation of no known
clinical significance. The eosinophilic substance is
Pulmonary
disease
inlaboratory
HGURE 1.18 Brown pigment in the lungs in a cynomol-
vascular
thought to be proteinaceous in content and com-
primates is rare, but arteritis/periarteritis, throm-
 gus monkey. x200.
posed of antigen-antibody complexes. Russell
boembolism, perivascular edema and arterioscle-
bodies can occasionally be observed in the vicinity
rosis may be encountered in control animals. Focal
Vascular or parenchymal mineralization in the
of hyalinized germinal centres, giving more cred-
thickening of the intima, due to cellular prolifera-
lungs (Fig. 1.19) of marmosets occurs commonly
ibility to the theory of immunoglobin composition
tion in earlier lesions and later replacement by
 in control animals. This occurs as part of meta-
of the amorphous material.
fibrosis (with or without smooth muscle hyperpla-
static mineralization in this species and may
sia) of the media can be encountered. Intimal
involve other major organs such as the kidneys,
Respiratory system
lesions can lead to complete occlusion of the
the heart (mostly the atria), the aorta and adrenal
artery concerned (Fig. 1.17), but changes in adja-
glands. Excessive calcium absorption as a result of
Pneumonia in laboratory macaques is not common,
cent tissues are usually absent. However, occlusive
hypervitarminosis D, or high calcium levels in the
but focal interstitial inflammation or fbrosis of
intimal proliferation and thrombosis associated
diet, are believed to be the main causes of meta-
minimal to slight grades of severity, does occur
with continuous intravenous infusion with saline
static calcifcation in marmosets (Kaspareit 2006,
with some frequency. The lesions occur in subp-
 may be associated with bronchopneumonia, which
Scott 1999). The kidneys and the urinary tract
leural areas or at the tips of lung lobes. There may
is usually confined to the distal parts of lung lobes,
are the most commonly affected areas. Minerali-
be proliferation of bronchiolo-alveolar epithelium,
due to the dual blood supply of the lungs. Diffuse
 zation of other organs, such as the lungs, can also
fibrosis and accumulation of alveolar macrophages
interstitial inflammation, periarteritis and peri-
be observed in marmosets with severe renal
in alveolar spaces (Fig. 1.15). Other associated
vascular edema are some of the more common
disease and nephrocalcinosis (Fig. 1.20) which can
Non-human primates
complicate the etiological diagnosis. Metastatic
calcification in macaques is very rare, and almost
 all forms of mineral deposition seen spontaneously
are dystrophic in nature.
FIGURE 1.21 Mycotic oesophagitis in a marmoset. x200.
The normal histology of the stomach of the
HGURE 1.22 Chronic gastritis in the pylorus in a
cynomolgus macaque is of particular importance
cynomolgus monkey. x100.
because some pathological changes affecting the
HGURE 1.19 Mineralization of the lung of a marmoset.
mucosa are associated with an increase or decrease
x200.
in some cell populations that make up the gastric
mucosa. The stomach of the cynomolgus macaque
can be divided into four anatomical regions: the
cardia, fundus, body and antrum. It is the histo-
logical appearance of the fundic region of the
stomach in the non-human primate that differs
slightly from that of humans and dogs. Unlike
humans, dogs and pigs, the fundic region and the
body of the stomach of macaques are histologi-
cally different, with the fundic mucosa having few
or no parietal cells and the transition between the
two zones being marked by the abrupt appearance
of parietal cells (Vidal et al 2008). The histologi-
cal appearance of the antral mucosa does not
HGURE 1.23 Gastric erosion in the fundus of the stomach
differ greatly from that of humans and dogs and
 in a cynomolgus monkey. x100.
has numerous, deep gastric pits, no parietal cells
HGURE 1.20 Mineralization of the kidney of a marmoset.
and a few chief cells. Lymphoid follicles, or foci
Helicobacter pylori and Helicobacter heilmannii-
x200.
of lymphoplasmacytic cells, can be observed
like organisms (also known as Gastrospirillum
throughout the gastric mucosa in normal stomach
hominus) are the most commonly identifed path-
sections, but these can be increased in gastritis.
ogens in the stomach of non-human primates used
Gastrointestinal system
Gastritis, especially chronic gastritis of the
in toxicity studies and are believed to be associ-
antral region, is very common in laboratory non-
ated with subclinical gastritis (Dubois et al 1994,
Superficial inflammation, erosion or ulceration of
human primates and may affect the majority of
Reindel et al 1999j. Helicobacter pylori is a small
the tongue and esophageal mucosa (Fig. l.21),
animals in a toxicity study (McKeag & Mclnnes
(2-4 μm long) bacterium, shaped like a comma, a
associated with Candida albicans infection, is
. Chronic gastritis is characterized by
loose spiral or a seagull's wing, that occurs largely
2012).
occasionally encountered in stressed and deb-
in the gastric antral mucosa. Lesions associated
minimal to marked infltration of the mucosa and
ilitated marmosets (Chalmers et al 1983) or
with H. pylori include a diffuse, mononuclear cell
submucosa with lymphocytes and plasma cells,
macaques on long-term antibiotic treatment. The
infltration of the mucosal lamina propria with
an increase in lymphoid follicles and
 mucosal
lesion is characterized grossly by the presence of
mucosal thickening,
intestinalization of the antral mucosa typifed by
lamina propria expansion
pale white pseudomembranes on the oral or
atrophy of gastric glands with an accompanying
with separation of glands, epithelial hyperplasia,
esophageal mucous membranes, with superficial
increase in the lamina propria area (Fig. 1.22).
prominent lymphoid follicles or mucosal erosion.
ulceration beneath the pseudomembrane. Upon 
While chronic gastritis is observed mainly in the
The lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates can be made
histopathological examination, erosion and ulcera-
antral mucosa, acute or chronic-active gastritis
up of a large percentage of plasma cells with
tion that rarely extend below the basement mem-
associated with hermorrhage, erosions or glandular
Russell bodies but occasionally, and in the more
brane are observed in association with minimal,
micro-abscesses is more common in the fundic/
severe lesions, neutrophilic infltrates in the glan-
mixed inflammatory cell infltrates and fungi in
body of the stomach (Fig. 1.23).
dular lumen (glandular micro-abscesses) may be
the superficial epithelium. The organisms consist
observed.
of septate pseudohyphae and budding blastospores
Helicobacter
heilmannii-like
organisms
and are easier to visualize with PAS or Grocott
(HHLOs) are larger than H. pylori (approximately
Gomori's methenamine silver stains.
7-10 μm) and have a tightly wound spiral shape
with approximately 4 to 12 coils. They typically
colonize the fundic/body mucosa and can
be
observed within parietal cells. Although HHLOs
are more prevalent than H. pylori in the stomach
of both cynomolgus and rhesus monkeys, evidence
shows that HHLOs are relatively non-pathogenic,
although subtle damage to infected parietal cells
has been reported (Dubois et al 1991).
Gastric infarction is an uncommon, but clini-
cally important, fnding in young adult cynomol-
gus macaques. It may be the cause of death or
 poor health in study anirmals or may be observed
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
as an incidental finding in clinically normal animals.
non-human primates used in toxicity studies.
The cause of gastric infarction is not always appar-
Outbreaks of Campylobacter or Shigella enteritis
ent but in most cases a severe systemic insult that
occur occasionally even in the most well main-
predisposes to disseminated intravascular coagula-
tained modern facilities. Campylobacter displays
tion, such as trauma, hernia, intussusception or
a histological picture of villus atrophy and crypt
some other natural disease, is usually present
micro-abscesses in the colon, while acute shigel-
(Chamanza et al 2010, Fikes et al 1996). The
losis manifests as ulceration, erosion, crypt micro-
lesion is characterized by extensive necrosis,
abscesses and exudation of neutrophils leading
hemorrhage and edema of the muscularis and
to accumulation of fbrinopurulent or fbrinon-
submucosa of the fundic or pyloric region of
ecrotic exudate within the lumen or areas overly.
the stomach (Fig. 1.24) associated with micro-
ing the damaged enteric mucosa (Fig. l.26).
thrombi, particularly in the venous system.
Hemorrhage is usually present at the periphery of
the lesion while the lamina propria is filled with a
predominantly neutrophilic celular infltrate with
variable numbers of mononuclear cells.
HGURE 1.27 Balantidium cofi associated with colonic
 mucosal glandular herniation. x100.
Idiopathic chronic colitis, with or without
chronic intermittent diarrhea, occurs commonly
in young adult macaques used in toxicity studies
(Adler et al 1993). Distension of the cecum and
colon with fluid, or thickening of the mucosa, may
be the sole necropsy fnding, but occasionally
reddening of the colonic mucosa or the iliocecal
junction or multifocal ulceration or erosions are
observed in colitis. The most consistent histologi-
cal picture is that of a diffuse, lymphoplasmacytic
HGURE 1.24 Extensive necrosis in the submucosa, due
cellular infltration of the lamina propria and sub-
to microthrombi, in the stomach in a cynomolgus monkey.
mucosa, crypt atrophy, and micro-abscesses (Fig.
x100.
1.28), mucosal epithelial hyperplasia and glandu-
FIGURE 1.26 Colitis associated with Shigelfa sp. in the
 lar micro-herniation into GALT. Other findings
 The presence of pigment-laden macrophages
large intestine in a cynomolgus monkey. x100.
within the lamina propria of the small intestinal
include goblet cell depletion, karyomegaly
of
villi tips is a very common finding in laboratory
hyperplastic mucosal cells, micro-ulcers and
Shigellosis should be differentiated from infec-
 macaques. The fnding has been reported at high
erosions caused by the rupture of crypt micro-
tions by Salmonella, Campylobacter and Yersinia
abscesses, and a few scattered macrophages.
incidences by several authors (Drevon-Gaillot
et al 2006, Lowenstine 2003, Scott 1999), and
species. Disease caused by Campylobacter is less
Associated lesions in other organs such as hyper-
debilitating, while infections with Salmonella and
various theories have been suggested regarding the
 plasia of the lymphocytes in the mesenteric lymph
nature of the pigment. The yellowish to light
Yersinia enterocolitica, unlike shigellosis, usually
nodes, thymic atrophy chronic inflammation in
become septicemic (Bennett et al 1998). Animals
brown, granular pigment is usually associated with
the stomach, liver and gall bladder may also be
with shigelsis die from dehydration if left
apoptotic bodies within the lamina propria
present (Bennett et al 1998).
without any associated damage to the enterocytes.
untreated. Spirochetosis is often present in the
crypts of the large intestine of non-human pri-
The ileum is the most affected small intestinal
mates. Organisms can be found from the cecum
segment (Fig. 1.25). Iron (Scott 1999), bile
pigment, ceroid-lipofuscin and necrotic cellular
to the rectum, and species include Brachyspira.
The protozoan Balantiditum coli may also
debris (Drevon-Gaillot et al 2006, Ito et al 1992)
be
present with this lesion. A high incidence of spi-
have been suggested to be part of the constituents
of this pigment. The significance of this fnding
rochetes in the large intestine of immunocompro-
has not been determined and it may represent
mised monkeys has been reported (Losco et al
attempts by lamina propria phagocytes to engulf
2002).
foreign material.
 Micro-herniation of colonic mucosal glands
through the muscularis mucosae occurs com-
monly in the non-human primate colon. The her-
niated mucosal glands are observed lying deep
within submucosal lymphoid patches of the gut-
associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) of the colon.
Herniation is thought to result from a defect in
the overlying muscularis mucosa, causing the
HGURE 1.28 Chronic colitis in a cynomolgus monkey.
glands to protrude through the gap into the under-
x100.
lying GALT in the submucosa. An increase in the
intraluminal pressure, as part of normal peristalsis,
A similarly common and less well-understood
is thought to contribute to the herniation (Scott
 chronic colitis also occurs in captive-bred marmo-
1999). Micro-herniations play an important role
 sets (David et al 2009). The condition is associ-
in the extension of pathogens through the wall of
 ated with diarrhea and weight loss and may form
the colon, so protozoal species such as Balantid-
part of wasting marmoset syndrome (WMS).
im (Fig. 1.27), and bacteria, can pass the mucosal
Gross and histopathology presentations are essen-
AGURE 1.25 Pigmented macrophages in the lamina
barrier and gain access to the deeper layers (Scott
tially similar to those of chronic colitis of macaques,
 propria of the small intestine in a cynomolgus monkey.
1982, 1999). Parasites and fecal matter trapped
with crypt micro-abscesses, herniation of glands,
x200.
within these herniations or diverticula can incite
micro ulcerations, atrophy and loss of crypts as
a chronic inflammatory reaction with foreign-body
well as lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory cell infl-
Minimal
tomild
intestinal
inflammation
giant cells.
tration into the lamina propria as the most common
associated with episodes of diarrhea is not an
microscopic fndings (Fig. 1.29). Neutrophil accu-
uncommon background fnding in purpose-bred,
mulations within herniated crypts in the GALT are
Non-human primates
more pronounced in marmosets (Fig. 1.30). No
that may include multinucleate giant cells encir-
etiological agent has been identified, and the cause
cled by fibrosis. The nodules are found mainly in
remains unknown, although diet and nutrition are
the large intestine (Fig. 1.3l), but may also be
thought to play a major role in this and in other
found in other ectopic sites such as the stomach
marmoset pathological syndromes.
wall, the peritoneum, kidney, liver and the sub-
cutis (Fig. 1.32}
HGURE 1.33 Dilated Brunner's glands in the duodenum
of a marmoset. x100.
 An accessory spleen is described as a congenital
duplication of splenic tissue in an ectopic location.
Accessory spleens can be located in various sites
AGURE 1.29 Chronic colitis in the large intestine of a
within the abdominal cavity, but the tail of the
marmoset. x200.
FIGURE 1.31 Parasitic granuloma caused by Oesophagos-
pancreas, or the adipose tissue surrounding this
 tomum sp. in the large intestine in a cynomolgus monkey.
area, is one of the most common locations for
x50.
accessory spleen in many animal species. This
occurs during organogenesis, because the spleen
originates from the mesenchymal primordium
adjacent to that of the pancreas in the embryonic
dorsal mesogastrium (Arey 1954). Interestingly, it
has been demonstrated that, in man, the incidence 
of accessory spleen is increased in certain hema-
tological conditions (Olsen & Beaudoin 1969).
 In non-human primates, accessory spleen within
the pancreas has been reported in a capuchin
monkey (Lau 1973) and in laboratory non-human
primates used in toxicity studies (Charmanza et al
2010). The fnding also occurs commonly in other
animal species such as rabbits (Fox et al 1976,
 HGURE 1.30 Colitis with glandular herniation in the colon
Weisbroth et al 1976), chickens (Glick & Sato
of a marmoset. x100.
1964), mice (Gad et al 2007) and Chinese ham-
FIGURE 1.32 Parasitic granuloma caused by Oesophagos-
sters (Yoon et al 2000)], and is almost always
There is a large difference between the natural
tomum sp. in the subcutis in a cynomolgus monkey.
found within the tail of the pancreas. The true
diet of free-living marmosets, which is mainly
x200.
incidence of accessory spleen within the pancreas
composed of insects, fruit and sap, to that offered
in laboratory non-human primates may therefore
to animals in captivity (commercial diet supple-
Brunner's glands are compound tubular mucous
be influenced by the sampling and trimming pro-
mented by fruits), and this difference has been
 glands located in the submucosa of the proximal
cedures employed by the laboratory (whether the
postulated as the main contributing factor to the
duodenum and are concentrated in the region
tail of the pancreas is consistently sampled),
development of enteritis in this species (Kaspareit 
between the pylorus and the sphincter of Oddi.
because this fnding is not easily recognized at
et al 2006, Layne & Power 2003). Marmosets, like
They are anatomically, but not functionally, a con-
necropsy (Chamanza et al 2010).
most callithrids, also have a very high requirement
tinuation of the pyloric glands, the main function
Histologically,
 an intra-pancreatic accessory
for protein, which is nearly twice that of rhesus
of which is to produce an alkaline secretion (bicar-
spleen is usually well-demarcated from pancreatic
macaques (Bennett et al 1998), and a higher
bonate) that neutralizes acid from the stomach.
tissue and may be encapsulated by a thin layer of
requirement than macaques for vitamin E, which
 Some chemical compounds are known to produce
collagenous connective tissue and smooth muscle
 makesthem prone to hypoproteinaemia, hypoalbu-
changes such as vacuolation, dilatation or cystic
fbres with or without evidence of trabeculae
minaemia, Heinz body anemia and, ultimately, to
changes of Brunner's glands in other species
and reticular fbre support. The parenchyma is
stress. This, in turn, makes marmosets even more
(Betton 1998) and in non-human primates, and
composed of mature splenic tissue with recogniz-
selective in their eating habits, leading to patho-
this lesion should be differentiated frorm sponta-
able red and white pulp areas resembling those of
logical manifestations of wasting marmoset syn-
neous Brunner's gland dilatation, hyperplasia or
the spleen (Fig. 1.34). The reticular network is
drome, such as colitis and glomerulonephritis.
cystic Brunner's glands (Fig. 1.33). Cystic Brun-
usually poorly developed, and trabeculae may be
Parasitic granuloma(ta), with sections of nema-
-ie ul saupuy uouuon rauier e are spuea s,rau
scarce or absent, but the presence of lymphoid
tode parasites, are observed more commonly along
mosets (Kaspareit et al 2006). The dilatation or
nodules or recognizable periarteriolar lymphoid
the gastrointestinal tract than elsewhere in the
hyperplasia may result in slight distortion of the
sheaths, deposits of hemosiderin and hematopoi-
body in macaques used in toxicity studies.
overlying villi or the intestinal crypts into which
etic tissue, including megakaryocytes, is helpful in
Oesophagostomum species are by far the most
the secretion exits. This is a fnding of unknown
the diagnosis.
commonly encountered nematode parasite in
pathological significance.
laboratory-reared, non-human primates. Oesopha-
gostomum infections are usually asymptomatic
even though diarrhea and anemia may develop in
heavy infestations. Adult worms live freely in the
large intestine and do not cause lesions, but larvae
can cause characteristic submucosal or tunica
muscularis nodules consisting of a central abscess
with necrosis and mixed inflammatory infltrates
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY
ANMALS
Hepatic lipid vacuolation or diffuse lipidosis
of minimal to severe grades (Fig. 1.37) is often
observed in marmosets, but is seen very rarely in
young laboratory macaques, which usually present
with milder forms of the condition. Severe lipid
vacuolation in marmosets should be distinguished
from marked glycogen accumulation, which is a
common finding in this species, and the two find-
ings may be encountered in the same organ (Fig.
1.37). Grossly, the liver is usually pale yellow
with rounded edges or the liver may be enlarged.
The causes of lipid vacuolation in marmosets are
varied but may include anemia, hypoproteinemia,
hypoalbuminemia, renal disease, intestinal inflam-
HGURE 1.34 Accessory spleen within the pancreas in a
mation or colitis and starvation (Chalmers et al
 cynomolgus monkey. x100.
1983, Lowenstine 2003, Tucker 1984), most of
which are pathological conditions associated with
HGURE 1.38 Tension lipidosis or lipid vacuolation in the
Liver and biliary system
wasting marmoset syndrome. Lipid vacuolation
liver in a cynomolgus monkey. x50. Note the ligament 
can also occur in overweight macaques of a mean
attachments.
Focal, random necrosis of the liver is a common,
age of mine years as part of the fatal fatty liver
spontaneous finding in marmosets (Chalmers
syndrome, also known as the fatal fasting syn-
Hepatic pigment is generally not a common,
1983, Tucker 1984), but it occurs very rarely in
drome (Bennett 1998, Lowenstine 2003), but is
spontaneous finding in macaques, but it occurs
macaques. Small to large patches of coagulative
rarely observed in animals on a study, because
with variable frequency in marmosets, depending
-u luuu e pue aoau yim sisoiau
study animals tend to be much younger.
om the diet and other pathological factors (Miller
 matory response are more often observed in the
et al 1997). Hepatic hemosiderosis, the deposi-
tion of the iron-containing pigment hemosiderin
underlying pathological entities such as lipid vacu-
in Kupffer cells, is the most common pigment
olation and severe glycogen accumulation (Fig.
observed in the marmoset liver (Fig. 1.39) and is
1.35). Most of these necrotic areas are not associ-
thought to be associated with several factors such
ated with any etiological agents, but organisms
as excessive amounts of iron in the diet, endog-
known to cause focal necrosis in laboratory pri-
enous elevations of glucocorticoids due to stress,
mates include Listeria, Yersinia species (causal
as well as the presence of chronic inflammatory
agent of pseudotuberculosis) (McClure et al
processes. In the case of chronic inflammatory
1978) and the causal agent of Tyzzer's disease
diseases, such as those associated with WMS,
(Tucker 1984). Marmoset livers with focal, non-
hemosiderosis is thought to occur as a result of
zonal necrosis may also have several foci of micro-
the sequestration of iron and poor iron transfer
granulomata which may be confused with foci of
from siderophages to erythrocytes in the anemia
extramedullary hematopoiesis (Fig. 1.36).
of chronic disease (Lowenstine 2003).
FIGURE 1.37 Lipid vacuolation, glycogen and extramed-
ullary hemopoiesis in the liver of a marmoset. x100.
Tension lipidosis is a form of focal, lipid vacuola-
tion that occurs in subscapsular hepatocytes lying
adjacent to the insertion areas of ligament attach-
ments (Fig. 1.38). It is a commonly observed
lesion present at necropsy, and a common histo-
logical fnding of the liver in non-human primates
and other laboratory animmal species. The lesion is
 seen at necropsy as a discrete, pale yellow area
near the hilus or other areas of the liver margin.
The focal accumulation of fat in the cytoplasm of
subcapsular hepatocytes lying adjacent to liga-
HGURE 1.35 Necrosis and glycogen accumulation in the 
0 anp aq o unou si suid uorasu yua
HGURE 1.39 Hemosiderosis in the liver of a marmoset.
liver of a marmoset. x100.
hypoxia. It is proposed that the contraction of
x200.
these ligarments exerts tension on the liver capsule,
leading to the impediment of the blood supply to
One very common feature of the marmoset
the adjacent hepatocytes, resulting in hypoxia and 
liver which sets it apart from that of macaques is
lipid vacuolation. Besides lipid accumulation, cap-
the high amount of glycogen which accumulates
sular or subcapsular fibrosis may also be observed.
in hepatocytes (Chalmers et al 1983, Foster 2005,
The lesion is of no known functional significance
Kaspareit et al 2006, Tucker 1984). Glycogen
but it has to be differentiated from treatment-
 accurmulation in marmosets is known to be diet-
related lipid vacuolation.
and age-dependent (Foster 2005), but it can also
vary considerably between studies and among
animals in a study. It is seen histologically as
diffuse or pan-lobular vacuolation that lends a lacy
appearance or rarefaction to the hepatocyte cyto-
plasm (Figs 1.35 & 1.37).
 Focal or localized subcapsular fbrosis, inflam-
mation, necrosis or hemorrhage associated with
HGURE 1.36 Necrosis and fibrosis in the liver of a
minimal to slight bile-duct proliferation in the
marmoset. x100.
adjacent periportal area, can occur commonly in a
Non-human primates
group of young adult cynomolgus macaques or
891
marmosets without any associated clinical or
clinico-pathological abnormalities  (Chamanza
et al 2010). The lesion is characterized by the
minimal to moderate deposition of reticular and
collagen fibres in periportal areas adjacent to the
capsule, or just beneath the capsule, and affects
two to more than five hepatic lobules. Since gross
findings associated with these subcaspular findings
are commonly observed on the parietal surface of
the liver, which lies against the diaphragm and
costal wall, they are considered to be associated
with mechanical handling of animals during treat-
ment (Shimoi et al 1998).
Focal mononuclear inflammatory cell infltra
HGURE 1.43 Interstitial lymphoplasmacytic infiltration of
tion in the liver is among the most common find-
the cortex of a kidney in a cynomolgus monkey. x100.
ings observed in laboratory non-humman primates
FIGURE 1.41 Liver with ectopic adrenal gland in a
(Chamanza et al 2010, Drevon-Gaillot et al 2006,
cynomolgus monkey. x100.
Tubular or cuboidal metaplasia of the parietal
Foster et al 2005). The infltrates are often located
layer of the Bowman's capsule of the renal glomer-
periportally, where they are usually not associated
uli occurs as an incidental fnding of no known
with injury to surrounding tissues. Inflammatory
pathological significance in both male and female
cell infltrates located within the liver parenchyma
cynomolgus monkeys (Kaspareit et al 2004).
may or may not be associated with single-cell
Cuboidal metaplasia occurs in other species where
necrosis (Fig. 1.40). Lesions with associated hepa-
it has a different significance.
tocyte damage often contain other inflammatory
In cynomolgus macaques, where it has been
cells such as neutrophils and macrophages. Spon-
observed, cuboidal metaplasia is characterized by
taneous inflammatory cell foci in the liver, of
replacement of the normal flattened epithelial
minimal or moderate grades, should be differenti-
lining of the parietal layer of the Bowman's
ated from treatment-related findings caused by
capsule by a cuboidal epithelium that structurally
pro-inflammatory test compounds. Chronic peri-
resembles the epithelium of the proximal convo-
Au eisdady inp-aq io uoeuuui [erod
luted tubules (Fig. 1.44). The degree of metapla-
be associated with intestinal tract inflammation
sia varies from affecting only a part of the parietal
(Chalmers et al 1983).
lyer to affecting the full circumference, and the
FIGURE 1.42a Ectopic adrenal tissue in the kidney in a
number of glomeruli affected per kidney also
cynomolgus monkey. x100.
varies. Usually a few glormeruli are affected per
kidney, and in some affected glomeruli the cuboi-
dal parietal layer epithelium is continuous with
the epithelium of the proximal tubules. No sex
difference has been observed with this phenom-
enon in cynomolgus macaques (Kaspareit et al
AGURE 1.40 Inflammatory cell infiltrate and focal necro-
 sis in the liver in a cynomolgus monkey. x200.
FIGURE 1.42b Ectopic adrenal tissue in the epididymis in
Ectopic adrenal gland attached to the liver, and
a cynomolgus monkey. x100.
lying within the liver capsule (Fig. 1.41), has been
observed sporadically in macaques (Chamanza
 n s soo ua a oro
Urinary
 system
adreno-hepatic fusion/adhesion, which involves
ectopic hepatic tissue lying within or attached to
Interstitial nephritis, characterized by minimal to
HGURE 1.44 Cuboidal metaplasia of the Bowman's cap-
slight accumulation of lymphoplasmacytic cells in 
the right adrenal gland. Ectopic adrenal tissue
 Sular epithelium of a kidney in a cynomolgus monkey.
the interstitium of mainly the outer cortex of the
within the liver consists of one or more of the
x200.
three cortical zones lying just below the liver
ings in macaques (Chamanza at al 20l0, Drevon-
capsule with a fusion of the adrenal and hepatic
Various forms of spontaneous glomeruloneph-
Gaillot et al 2006). Interstitial nephritis is also
capsule and co-mingling of hepatic and adrenal
listed as the most frequently observed lesion in a
ropathy have been described in non-human pri-
tissue without intervening fbrous tissue. Ectopic
mates. Lesions range from mesangioproliferative
survey of lesions seen in non-human primates in
adrenal cortical tissue is also observed within the
glomerulonephritis, which is more commonly
zoos (Hubbard et al 1987). Findings range from
kidney (Fig. 1.42a) and epididymis (Fig. 1.42b) in
 seen in marmosets, to those resembling membran-
minimal, focal, lymphoplasmacytic infltration,
non-human primates.
oproliferative glomerulonephritis and sclerotic
without associated damage of renal tubular epithe-
lesions similar to collagenofbrotic glomeruloneph-
lium, to moderate lesions composed of large areas
ropathy (CFGN), occasionally seen in cynomolgus
of inflammatory-cell infltration, renal tubular
macaques (Adachi 2005, Chamanza 2010). Most
necrosis and minimal peritubular fbrosis (Fig.
1.43).
spontaneous
glomerular lesions in laboratory
macaques are focal lesions that involve part of
(segmental) or the whole (global) glomerulus and
10
 BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
do not occur as part of a systemic disease state.
interstitium as well as tubular damage with accu-
 and urinary bladder is observed as a background
Idiopathic glomerulosclerosis, characterized by
mulation of tubular hyaline casts.
change in the cynomolgus monkey (Fig. 1.48b).
segmental or global deposition of a pale Congo-
red-negative, but PAS-positive eosinophilic sub-
stance within an expanded mesangium, is the most
common form observed in macaques (Chamanza
 et al 2010). There is minimal to marked enlarge-
ment of the glomeruli and a decrease in the
number of nuclei in the mesangium, with or
without narrowing of the capillary lumina (Fig.
1.45). Minimal thickening of the Bowman's
capsule and periglormerular and peritubular fbrosis
may be present. Other glomeruli within the same
kidney may also show mesangial proliferation with
glomerular enlargement but less collagen deposi-
tion and periglomerular fbrosis. The findings
differ from the CFGN which has been reported in
cynomolgus macaques (Adachi 2005) in that there
FIGURE 1.46 Diffuse glomerulonephritis in the kidney of
is focal random involvement of glomeruli with
a marm0set. x200.
HGURE 1.48a Eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions in the
little or no tubular and interstitial involvement,
urothelium in a cynomolgus monkey. x400.
unlike CFGN, which has a diffuse distribution of
 Subcapsular ectopic adrenal tissue is sometimes
glomerular lesions, no mesangial proliferation and
 observed in both rhesus and cynomolgus macaque
is associated with clinical disease. The cause of
kidneys. Microscopically, the lesions appear as
most glomerular lesions in untreated, laboratory
poor to well-circumscribed but non-encapsulated
non-human primates is unknown, but some disease
nodules composed of cells resembling the three
states such as diabetes, malaria, dehydration asso-
zones of the adrenal cortex in varying proportions
ciated with colitis (and diarrhea) and infection
and arranged in any order (Fig. 1.42a). Medullary
with the simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) are
cells are usually absent and, in some cases, a zone
known to result in glomerular lesions.
of the adrenal cortex, usually zona glomerulosa or
reticularis, may also be absent. Ectopic adrenal
tissue lying below the kidney capsule has been
described in man, mice and macaques (Chamanza
et al 2010, Prentice & Jorgeson 1979). This is
 considered to be an incidental finding of no known
clinical signifcance, but should be differentiated
from proliferative lesions of the renal tubular epi-
 HGURE 1.48b Vacuolation of the tansitional epithelium
thelium. Ectopic adrenal cortical tissue can also be
or urothelium of the urinary bladder of the cynomolgus
found outside the kidney capsule within the peri-
renal fat (Kaspareit 2009).
monkey. x200.
Multinucleate cells of the renal tubular epithe-
 Mineralization of embryonic, non-patent, vas-
lium of the collecting ducts are a frequent occur-
 cular rermnants, thought to be remnants of umbili-
rence in the renal papilla of macaques (Fig. 1.47).
cal arteries, in the adventitia of the bladder is a
They are considered an incidental fnding of no
common fnding in both non-human primates and
known etiology and of little or no pathological
dogs used in preclinical studies (Fig. 1.49). The
HGURE 1.45 Segmental glomerulosclerosis of the kidney
significance (Lowenstine 2003].
non-patent, vascular structures are commonly
of a cynomolgus monkey. x200.
present with or without mineralization in associa-
tion with fbrosis, hemosiderosis and thrombosis.
Marmosets, which suffer more cases of natu-
Mineralization of the functional blood vessels may
rally occurring glomerulonephropathy than do
 also be observed.
macaques, have more diffuse and severe lesions
which have clinical implications and which may be
an important cause of death. The most common
form of glomerulonephropathy in marmosets is
diffuse, rmesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis
which occurs as part of the wasting marmoset
syndrome and has been demonstrated to be linked
to deposition of immune complexes directed
against parasitic, bacterial (dental disease) and
dietary antigens (Lowenstine, 2003). This form
of immune-mediated glomerulonephropathy is
thought to be either IgM- or IgA-mediated or both
FIGURE 1.47 Multinucleate cells in the kidney tubules of
(Borda et al 2004, Brack et al 1999) in marmosets
a cynomolgus macaque. x200.
and other New World, non-human primates. Food
allergy, colitis and production of IgA-gliadin anti-
Urinary bladder
bodies are thought to be linked to glomerulone-
 HGURE 1.49 Mineralization of embryonic remnants in
phropathy in WMS (Brack et al 1999). Diffuse
Intracytoplasmic, eosinophilic, (pseudo)inclusion
the urinary bladder in a cynomolgus monkey. x200.
mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis in mar-
bodies are often present in the transitional epithe-
mosets (Fig. 1.46) is characterized by enlargement
lium of the renal pelvis and the urinary bladder
Endocrine system
of glomerular corpuscles due to proliferation of
of macaques (Fig. 1.4&a). These are known to
the mesangium (cellular and matrix proliferation),
consist of cytokeratin [tonoflaments) and are of
Non-human primates have a fetal adrenal cortex
slight thickening of the Bowman's capsule accom-
no pathological significance (Lowenstine 2003).
during fetal life which is gradually replaced post-
panied by inflammation and fbrosis of the
Vacuolation of the urothelium of the renal pelvis
natally by an adult cortex with three zones.
Non-human primates
Involution of the fetal cortex is accompanied by
two tissue types without any intervening fbrous
(Kaspareit 2009). A common finding in the
hemorrhage and necrosis which is thought to be
tissue between them in cases of AHF (Fig. 1.51).
adrenals of non-human primates is vacuolation of
partly responsible for the mineralized foci often
Reticulin stains can be employed to demonstrate
cortical cells, which can be either focal, and
seen at the corticomedullary junction (Kast et al
the merging of the reticular network of the liver
restricted to one cortical zone, or diffuse, and
1994, Majeed & Gopinath 1980). Calcified foci
trabeculae with that of adrenal medullary cell
associated with cortical hypertrophy. Moderate
 or concentrically arranged concretions of calcifed
nests
 grades of vacuolation can be seen in marmosets,
material, are often found at the junction of the
and the vacuoles stain positive for lipid (Kaspareit
medulla and cortex or occasionally within the zona
2009). Extramedullary hemopoiesis is commonly
reticularis. They vary in size frorm small foci of less
observed within the adrenal gland of marmosets 
than 0.1 mm in diameter to larger foci occupying
(Fig. 1.53) (Okazaki et al 1996).
a third or more of the medulla. A thin layer of
fbrous connective tissue is usually present around
the edges of the foci (Fig. 1.50). The lesions are
thought to develop
 from either stress-related,
focal degeneration and necrosis of medullary cells
followed by a dystrophic mineralization or from
apoptosis of fetal adrenal tissue located in the
corticomedullary region. Residual cells or nuclei
can be seen in the centre of mineralization in early
lesions, supporting the dystrophic calcifcation
theory. Rhesus macaques are
efar more greatly
affected than cynomolgus monkeys but no sex
HGURE 1.51 Adreno-hepatic fusion in the liver in a
 difference has been reported.
cynomolgus monkey. x100.
Histological evidence of ectopic liver tissue
completely surrounded by adrenal tissues or
HGURE 1.53 Extramedullary hemopoiesis in the adrenal
embedded between cortical and medullary tissue
gland of a marmoset. x100.
has also been observed (Chamanza et al 2010).
The
 clinical signifcance of these conditions
 C-cell hyperplasia is a very common fnding in
has been described in man (Woo et al 2007) in
the thyroid glands of marmosets (Kaspareit et al
which an adrenal cortical adenoma developed
2006, Tucker 1984). It may occur as one or more
in AHF tissue and mimicked malignant hepatic
nodules of concentrated C-cell areas in the middle
tumor at computerized tomographic scanning and
of the organ (Fig. 1.54) or an increased number
angiography-assisted computerized tomographic
of C-cells may be found diffusely distributed
scanning.
throughout the organ, causing follicles to appear
 In marmosets, it is common to observe ectopic
 smaller and fewer in number and giving the organ
liver tissue consisting of a cluster of bile ducts,
a more solid appearance. The significance of this
with or without islands of hepatocytes, in extra-
finding is not fuilly known because no C-cell ade-
HGURE 1.50 Mineralization of the adrenal cortex of a
hepatic areas such as at the hilus of the liver (Fig.
nomas have been reported in marmosets to date
rhesus macaque. x100.
1.52) and in connection with ligaments derived
and the condition does not appear to be sex-
from embryonic remnants such as the round
 dependent as in the rat (Kaspareit et al 2006).
Adreno-hepatic fusion (AHF) and adreno-
ligament.
hepatic adhesions (AHA] on the right side of the
abdominal cavity have been observed with some
frequency in young adult cynomolgus macaques
(Chamanza et al 2010, Mousa & van Esch 2004).
 Adreno-hepatic fusion is defined as the union of
liver tissue with that of the right adrenal gland
with close intermingling of their respective paren-
chymal cells without an intervening connective
tissue capsule between them (Honma 1991). This
is in contrast to adreno-hepatic adhesions in which
a capsule between the two parenchymal tissue
types exists and there is no close intermingling of
the two different types of tissues. Both condi-
tions, which are considered to be congenital in
nature, in non-human primates (Chamanza et al
HGURE 1.54 C-cell hyperplasia in the thyroid of a mar-
2010, Mousa & van Esch 2004), can be detected
FIGURE 1.52 Ectopic liver and bile duct structures in a
moset. x100.
at necropsy. Due to the difficulties involved in
marmoset. x100.
sampling and separating the attached adrenal
Ectopic thymus tissue in the thyroid gland or
 gland from the larger liver lobe, histological inci-
Minimal to slight grades of age-related lipofus-
the parathyroid gland is a very common finding of
dences of these conditions are most likely under-
cin pigment accumulation in the adrenal gland
 no known pathological or clinical significance in
estimated, and cases of pieces of adrenal tissues
cortex is infrequently detected in young adult
left attached to the right liver lobe are known to
cynomolgus macaques used in toxicity studies
(Chamanza et al 2010, Tucker 1984). In man, due
occur. Since the affected adrenal gland remains in
(Kaspareit 2009). The initial stages of the lesion,
to the link between myasthenia gravis and the
its expected anatomical position, and does not lie
seen in the three- to four-year old animals used in
thymus, ectopic thymic tissue has a greater clini-
within the liver capsule, these conditions are con-
preclinical studies, is characterized by yellow to
cal significance. Ectopic thymic tissue is usually
sidered to be different from cases of ectopic
light-brown, granular pigment in the zona reticu-
located at the periphery of the thyroid or parathy-
 adrenal gland in the liver (see Fig. 1.41).
laris and fascicularis, and these regions turn dark
roid gland (Fig. 1.55) as a single, small nodule that
 Histologically, typical liver parenchymal cells
brown as the animals get older. The pigment has
may contain both the medulla (with epithelial
are observed lying adjacent to cortical or medul-
to be differentiated from hemosiderin which may
components) and the cortex, or may just be made
lary adrenal cells with close intermingling of the
be present in macrophages in the same region
up of the cortical tissue. Embryologically, the
12
 BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
thymus, parathyroid and thyroid gland have a
thigh, tongue and esophageal muscles (Fig. 1.57),
(Fig. 1.59). The lesions are a result of direct action
 common pharyngeal pouch origin, hence the high
and extrermely rarely within the heart.
.They
of parathyroid hormone (PTH) on bone, and
prevalence of ectopic thymus in the parathyroid
consist of cross sections of tissue cysts containing
excess PTH production associated with this syn-
and thyroid or vice versa.
crescent-shaped protozoal zoites that are not asso-
drome may also contribute to soft-tissue minerali-
ciated with an inflammatory infltrate.
zation seen in marmosets. Oversupply of vitamin
D is also known to lead to soft-tissue minerali-
zation and nephrocalcinosis (National Research
Council 2003).
HGURE 1.55 Ectopic thymus in the parathyroid gland of
FIGURE 1.57 Sarcocystis cysts present in the skeletal
a marmoset. ×100.
muscle of the tongue of a cynomolgus monkey. x100.
Eosinophilic intranuclear inclusions are visible
Skeletal abnormalities occur not uncommonly
in the pars adenohypophysis of the pituitary.
HGURE 1.59 Fibrous 0steodystrophy in a marmoset.
These inclusions are thought to be cytoplasmic
in young macaques and marmosets on studies;
x50.
they include bone fractures, developmental carti-
invaginations similar to those observed in the
lage and bone abnormalities, hyperostosis and
mouse hepatocytes. This lesion is reported to
Spontaneous growth-plate fractures or micro-
occur in approximately 50% of all cynomolgus
periosteal reaction, growth-plate fractures associ-
fractures in animals with physeal retention or
ated with metaphyseal dysplasia (Chamanza et al
monkeys and should be distinguished from viral
metaphyseal dysplasia have been observed in a
 2010) in cynomolgus macaques, and spontaneous
inclusions by using a phloxine tartrazine special
number of young cynomolgus macaques and the
osteomyelitis (Fig. 1.58) and nutritional osteodys-
stain.
causes remain unclear (Chamanza et al 2010).
trophy of young marmosets (Chalmers et al
They are characterized by foci of persistent hyper-
1983). Fibrous osteodystrophy (FOD) of marmo-
Muscles, bones and joints
trophic chondrocytes lying above a fracture line,
sets has generally been attributed to the inability
an accumulation of primary bone spongiosa and a
of vitamin Dz to promote the intestinal absorption 
Aggregates of large, foamy macrophages with pale
large number of osteoclasts (Fig. l.60). Distin-
of calcium in New World monkeys, which can be
basophilic staining cytoplasm (Fig. 1.56), repre-
 guishing these lesions from rickets can prove to be
ameliorated by substituting vitamin Dz with
Jo sas] euouea une ro uoneusea Buuas 
 a major diagnostic challenge.
vitamin Ds or exposure to sunlight or artificial
Aensn are '(suoeuinea renosnuenu snoiaaid
light of appropriate wavelength (National Research
observed within the thigh muscle that is routinely
Council 2003). Rickets and osteomalacia [in older
collected for histology in toxicity studies. They are
animals) are syndromes associated with feeding
an incidental fnding of no clinical or pathological
diets containing only vitamin Dz with insuffcient
significance
exposure to ultraviolet light. However, FOD,
osteomalacia and rickets in marmosets have
almost disappeared in modern facilities because
vitamin D is now used to substitute vitamin D2
in commercial diets.
HGURE 1.60 Growth plate dysplasia with facture in a
cynomolgus monkey. x25.
Brain and nervous system
 AGURE 1.56 Vaccine granuloma in the skeletal muscle
Mineralized bodies or vascular mineralization
in a cynomolgus monkey. x100.
occur commonly as a spontaneous fnding in the
brain of apparently normal non-human primates
Cysts of Sarcocystis parasites are occasionally
(Wadsworth et al 1995, Yanai et al 1994). This
observed in skeletal muscle, heart or srmooth
FIGURE 1.58 Osteomyelitis in the tibia of a marmoset.
fnding has been reported in most non-human
muscle of both wild-caught and captive-bred
x100.
primate species used in toxicity studies and does
rhesus macaques. While they occur commonly in
not appear to be age-related. The mineralized
wild-caught anirmals, they are relatively uncom-
FOD, which is a common cause of fractures in
bodies are commonly found in association with
mon in laboratory-raised macaques. They are
marmosets, is characterized by thin bone cortices
small blood vessels in the globus pallidus, putamen
generally regarded as incidental and of no patho-
and trabeculae surrounded by fbrous stroma.
or, occasionally, the caudate nucleus, and are
logical significance, even though some reports of
Thinning of bone is brought about by marked
therefore usually observed on coronary sections of
generalized and fulminating disease associated
resorption of spongy and cortical bone. Numerous
the brain that pass through the optic chiasma and
 e  a sa i 
osteoclasts are therefore observed within How-
mammillary bodies (Wadsworth et al 1995). They
rhesus macaques (Gozalo et al 2007, Lane et al
ship's lacunae and there is an invasion of Haver-
appear as irregular and often elongated structures
1998). Cysts are commonly found within the
sian spaces and the marrow canal by fibrous tissue
composed of smaller globoid bodies formed
Non-human primates
3
by concentric lamellar parts that stain strongly
be associated with this lesion. Perivascular cuffs
basophilic or a deep purple colour with hematoxy-
 are characterized by the accumulation of a uniform
lin and eosin (Fig. 1.61). The margins of some of
layer of lymphocytes in the Virchow-Robin space
the larger mineralized structures often show eosi-
around small blood vessels (Fig. l.63b), and are
nophilic staining, while smaller eosinophilic struc-
usually multifocal in distribution. Besides blood
tures may be observed in association with small
vessels in the brain parenchyma, choroidal, menin-
arteries. The nature and the exact origin of these
 geal and spinal-cord blood vessels are also affected
structures is not known; they are considered to be
to a similar or greater extent. Vater Pacini corpus-
associated with iron metabolism by perivascular
cles are large mechanoreceptors that sense pres-
and perineuronal oligodendrocytes because they
sure and stretch and are observed occasionally
are found in regions of high iron metabolism and
within the skin or the pancreas. The structure has
stain positive with Perl's stain (Wadsworth et al
a unique ^onion-skin' appearance (Fig. 1.63c).
1995)
HGURE 1.64a Lymphocytic infiltration into the choroid of
the eye in a cynomolgus monkey. x200.
HGURE 1.63a Glial scar in the brain in a cynomolgus
HGURE 1.61 Brain mineralization in a cynomolgus 
monkey. x200.
monkey. x400.
Various types of pigmentation are observed in
the brain of the macaque. While age-related and
HGURE 1.64b Optic nerve neuritis in a cynomolgus
non age-related, ceroid-lipofuscin pigments are
monkey. x100.
occasionally encountered, perivascular melanin
8：
pigmentation is the most commonly encountered
form of pigmentation in the brain of cynomolgus
4
References
macaques used on toxicity studies (Chamanza
et al 2010). The finding can be observed as black
Adachi, K., Mori, T, Ito, T, et al, 2005.
discoloration at post mortem, and is observed as
 Collagenofbrotic glomerulonephropathy in
a cynomolgus macaque (Macaca fascicuiaris].
Fontana-Masson-positive, perivascular pigment
Vet. Pathol. 42, 669-674.
 on histopathological examination (Fig. 1.62).
Adler, R.R., Moore, PF., Schmucker, D.L., et al., 1993.
Chronic colitis, juvenile macaca mulatta. In: Jones,
FIGURE 1.63b Gliosis and perivascular cuffing in the
TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Monographs on
brain in a cynomolgus monkey. x100.
the pathology of laboratory animals, nonhuman
primates, vol. 2. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 20-32.
Albassam, M.A., Lillie, L.E., Smith, G.S., 1993.
Asymptomatic polyarteritis in a cynomolgus monkey.
Lab. Anim. Sc. 43, 628-629.
Arey, L.B., 1954. Developmental anatomy; a textbook
and laboratory manual of embryology, seventh ed.
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 342-374.
Bennett, B.T, Abee, C.R., Henrickson, R., 1998.
 Nonhuman primates in biomedical research.
Diseases. American College of Laboratory Animal
Medicine Series. Academic Press, San Diego.
Betton, G.R., 1998. The digestive system l: the
gastrointestinal tract and exocrine pancreas. In:
HGURE 1.62 Perivascular melanin in the brain in a
Turton, J., Hooson, J. (Eds.], Target organ pathology.
cynomolgus monkey. Fontana-Masson stain. x100.
Taylor & Francis, London, p. 51.
Borda, J.T, Pauley, D.R., Mackey, J.J., et al., 2004.
Minimal focal gliosis and glial scarring are
Immunoglobulin-A nephropathy with crescentic
unusual, but not uncommon findings in cynomol-
FIGURE 1.63c Vater Pacinian corpuscle in the mammary
glomerulonephritis in a pigtailed macaque (Macaca
 gus monkey brains (Chamanza et al 2010). These
gland of a cynomolgus monkey. x100.
nemestrina]. Vet. Pathol. 4], 44-49.
lesions are often associated with perivascular
Brack, M., Schroeder, C., Fooke, M., et al., 1999.
cuffs, neuronal necrosis and neuronophagia (Fig.
A cluster of uniform small lymphocytes are
IgM/lgA nephropathy in callirichids: antigen
studies. Nephron. 82, 221-231.
1.63a) and macrophage accumulation with lipo-
occasionally seen within the choroid or ciliary
fuscin pigment. The lesions can be observed in any
body of the eyes of cynomolgus macaques (Sinha
 Bundza, A., Dukes, TW., 1978. Some heterotropic
 part of the brain, are usually minimal in severity,
et al 2006). The lesion is of no consequence and
tissue remnants in domestic animals. Can. Vet. J.
19, 322324.
and are often not associated with any clinical or
is not associated with an inflammatory reaction
Chalmers, D.T., Murgatroyd, L.B., Wardsworth, PF.,
necropsy abnormalities. No etiological agent has
(Fig. 1.64a). Optic neuritis is also observed in the 
1983. A survey of the pathology of marmosets
been identified. Perivascular cuffng occurs
far
optic nerves of cynomolgus monkeys with no
(Callithix jacchus] derived from a marmoset
more commonly than gliosis and may or may not
other evidence of disease (Fig. 1.64b).
breeding unit. Lab. Anim. 17, 270-279.
14
 BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Chamanza, R., Parry, N.M., Rogerson, P, et al., 2006.
Ito, T, Chatani, F., Sasaki, S., et al., 1992.
laboratory animals, vol. 1. Springer-Verlag, New York,
Spontaneous lesions of the cardiovascular system in
Spontaneous lesions in cynomolgus monkeys
pp. 1-56.
purpose-bred laboratory nonhuman primates.
used in toxicity studies. Jikken Dobutsu. 4],
McKeag, S., Mcinnes, E.F., 2012. The incidence of
Toxicol. Pathol. 34, 357-363.
455-469.
lymphoplasmacytic gastritis in the fundus and
Chamanza, R., Marxfeld, H., Blanco, A., et al., 2010.
Jasty, V., Jamison, J.R., Hartnagel, R.E., 1984. Three.
antrum of cynomolgus monkey (Macaca fascicularis)
 Incidences and range of spontaneous lesions in
types of cytoplasmic granulesin cardiac muscle cells
 stomachs. Journal of Toxicologic Pathology (ln
control cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicuiaris]
of cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicuiaris]. Vet.
press).
used in toxicity studies. Toxicol. Pathol. 38,
Pathol. 21, 505-508.
Miller, G.F, Barnard, D.E., Woodward, R.A., et al.,
642-657.
Kaspareit, J., 2009. Adrenal gland background
1997. Hepatic hemosiderosis in common marmosets,
David, J.M., Dick, E.J. Jr, Hubbard, G.B., 2009.
pathology of primates in toxicological studies.
Callithrix jacchus: effect of diet on incidence and
Spontaneous pathology of the common marmoset
In: Harvey, PW., Everett, D.J., Springall, C.J.
severity. Lab. Anim. Sci. 47, 138-142.
(Callithrix jacchus] and tamarins (Saguinus
Mousa, S., van Esch, E., 2004. Two cases of
cedipus,Saguinus mystax].J.Med.Primatol. 38(5],
Series, vol. 26. Informa Healthcare, New York,
adreno-hepatic fusion in cynomolgus monkeys
347-359.
pp. 139-160.
(Macaca fascicularis]. Toxicol. Pathol. 32,
De Lacroix, WF., Hubner, G., 1974. Ciliated epithelial
Kaspareit, J., Friderichs-Gromoll, S., Buse, E., et al.,
511-513.
inclusion cyst of the heart. Beitr. Pathol. 151,
2003. Spontaneous squamous cysts and squamous
National Research Council, 2003. Nutritional
103-110.
epithelial plaques in the heart of cynomolgus
requirements of nonhuman primates, second ed.
Drevon-Gaillot, E., Perron-Lapage, M., Clement, C.,
monkeys (Macaca fascicularis]. Exp. Toxicol. Pathol.
National Academies Press, Washington DC,
et al., 2006. A review of background findings in
54, 301-303.
pp. 116-121.
cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis] from
Kaspareit, J., Friderichs-Gromoll, S., Buse, E., et al.,
Okazaki, Y, Kurata, Y, Makinodan, F., et al., 1996.
three different geographical origins.Exp.Toxicol.
 2004. Spontaneous tubular (cuboidal] metaplasia of
 Spontaneous lesions detected in the common
Pathol. 58, 77-88.
the parietal layer of Bowman's capsule in
cotton-eared marmosets (Callithrix jacchus). J.Vet.
Dubois, A., Tarnawski, A., Newell, D.G., et al., 1991.
cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis]. J. Exp.
Med. Sci. 58 (3), 181-190.
Gastric injury and invasion of parietal cells by spiral
Anim. Sci. 43, 13-17.
Olsen, WR., Beaudoin, D.E., 1969. Increased
bacteria in rhesus monkeys.Are gastritis and
Kaspareit, J., Friderichs-Gromoll, S., Buse, E., et al.,
2006. Background pathology of the common
incidence of accessory spleens in hematological
hyperchlorhydria infectious diseases?
disease. Arch. Surg. 198, 762-763.
Gastroenterology 100, 884-891.
marmoset (Callithrix jacchus] in toxicological
studies. J. Exp. Anim. Sci. 57, 405-410.
Porter, B.F., Frost, P, Hubbard, G.B., 2003.
Dubois, A., Fiala, N., Heman-Ackah, L.M., et al.,
Kast, A., 1994. Pulmonary hair ermbolism in monkeys.
Polyarteritis nodosa in a cynomolgus macaque
1994. Natural gastric infection with Helicobacter
(Macaca fascicularis]. Vet. Pathol. 40, 570-573.
pylori in monkeys: a model for spiral bacteria
Exp. Toxicol. Pathol. 46, 183-188.
infection in humans. Gastroenterology 106,
Prentice, D.E., Jorgensen, W., 1979. Ectopic adrenal
Kast, A., Peil, H., Weisse, I., 1994. Calcifed foci at the
1405-1417.
tissue in the kidney of rhesus monkeys (Macaca
 junction between adrenal cortex and medulla of
mulatta]. Lab. Anim. 13, 221-223.
Elwell, M.R., Mahler, J.F., 1999. Heart, blood vessels
rhesus monkeys. Lab. Anim. 28, 80-89.
and lymphatic vessels. In: Maronpot, R.R., Boorman,
Qureshi, S.R., 1979. Chronic interstitial myocarditis in
Keenan, C.M., Vidal, J.D., 2006. Standard
G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.], Pathology of the mouse.
primates. Vet. Pathol. 16, 486-487.
morphologic evaluation of the heart in the
Cache River Press, Vienna, pp. 361-380.
laboratory dog and monkey Toxicol. Pathol. 34,
Reindel, J.F, Fitzgerald, A.L., Breider, M.A., et al.,
Engedal, H., Jensen, H., Saetersdal, TS., 1977.
67-76.
1999. An epizootic of lymphoplasmacytic gastritis
Ultrastructure of abnormal membrane inclusions in
attributed to Helicobater pylori infection in
Khullar, M., Datta, B.N., Wahi, PL., et al, 1989.
nuclei of human myocardial cells. Br. Heart J. 39,
cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicuiaris]. Vet.
Catecholamine-induced experimental
145-151.
Pathol. 36, 1-13.
cardiomyopathy; a histopathological, histochemical
Fikes, J.D., O'Sullivan, M.O., Bain, M.T, et al., 1996.
and ultrastructural study. Indian Heart J. 4],
Scott, G.B.D., 1982. Mucosal microhernias in the
Gastric infarction in cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca
307313.
nonhuman primate colon: their role in the
fascicularis]. Vet. Pathol. 33, 171-175.
pathogenesis of colonic disease. J. Vet. Path. (supp.]
Lane, J.H., Mansheld, K.G., Jackson, L.R., et al., 1998.
7, 130-140.
Foster, J.R., 2005. Spontaneous and drug-induced
Acute fulminant sarcocystosis in a captive-born
 hepatic pathology of the laboratory beagle dog, the
Rhesus macaque. Vet. Pathol. 35, 499-505.
Scott, G.B.D., 1999. Comparative primate pathology.
cynomolgus macaque and marmoset. Toxicol. Pathol.
Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Lau, D.T.L., 1973. Ectopic splenic nodules in the
33, 63-74.
pancreas of a capuchin monkey (Cebus aibifrons].
Shimoi, A., Kakinuma, C., Kukayama, C., et al., 1998.
Fox, R.R., Weisbroth, S.S., Crary, D.D., et al., 1976.
J. Med. Primatol. 2, 67-70.
Comparison of spontaneous minor lesions in
Accessory spleens in domestic rabbits I. Frequency
wild-caught and laboratory-bred monkeys. J. Toxicol.
Layne, D.G., Power, R.A., 2003. Husbandry, handling
description and genetic factors. Teratology 13,
Pathol. 11, 85-94.
 and nutrition for marmosets. Comp. Med. 53,
243-252.
Sinha, D.P, Cartwright, M.E., Johnson, R.C., 2006.
351-359.
Gad, S.C., Frith, C., Goodman, D.G., et al., 2007.
 Incidental mononuclear cell infltrate in the uvea
Lilbert, J., Burnett, R., 2003. Main vascular changes
The mouse. In: Gad, S.C. (Ed.], Animal models in
of cynomolgus monkeys. Toxicol. Pathol. 34,
toxicology, second ed. Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton,
 seen in the saline controls of continuous infusions
148-151.
studies in the cynomolgus monkey over an &-year
pp. 94.
period.Toxicol. Pathol. 31, 273-280.
Thomas, R., van Wesep, R., 1990. Intracardiac
Glick, B., Sato, K., 1964. Accessory spleens in the
 epithelial cyst in association with an atrioventricular
Lindsay, S., Chaikoff, I.L, 1966. Naturally occurring
chicken. Poultry Sci. 43, 1610-1612.
canal defect. Am. J. Cardiovasc. Pathol. 3,
arteriosclerosis in nonhuman primates. J. Atherosc.
Gozalo, A.S., Montali, R.J., St Claire, M., et al., 2007.
325-328.
Res. 6, 36-61
Chronic polymyositis associated with disseminated
Tucker, M.J., 1984. A survey of the pathology of
Losco, PE., Kaminska-McNamara, G.Z., Johnson, J.,
marmosets (Calithrix jacchus] under experiment.
sarcocystosis in a captive-born rhesus macaque. Vet.
et al., 2002. Common incidental histopathological
Pathol. 44, 695-699.
Lab. Anim. 18, 351-358.
fndings in cynomolgus monkeys. Poster presentation
Greaves, P, 2000. Patterns of cardiovascular pathology
to Society for Toxicological Pathology.
Vidal, J.D., Mirabile, R.C, Thomas, H.C., 2008.
induced by diverse cardiovascular drugs. Toxicol.
Evaluation of the cynomolgusmonkey stomach:
Lowenstine, LJ., 1993. Type D retrovirus infection,
Lett. 112, 547552.
recommendations for standard sampling procedures
macaques. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D
in nonclinical safety studies. Toxicol. Pathol. 36,
Guzman, R.E., Kerlin, R.L., Zimmerman, TE., 1999.
(Eds.], ILSI Monographs on the pathology of
250-255.
Histologic lesions in cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca
laboratory animals, nonhuman primates, vol. 1.
Vidal, J.D., Drobatz, L.S., Holliday, D.F., et al., 2010.
fascicularis) naturally infected with simian retrovirus
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 20-32.
type D: comparison of seropositive, virus-positive,
Spontaneous fndings in the heart of Mauritian-origin
Lowenstine, LJ., 2003. A primer of primate
and uninfected animals. Toxicol. Pathol. 27,
macaques [Macaca fascicularis]. Toxicol. Pathol.
 pathology: lesions and nonlesions. Toxicol. Pathol.
672-677.
238, 297-302.
31, 91-102.
Honma, K., 1991. Adreno-hepatic fusion: an autopsy
Vogel, P, Fritz, D., 2003. Cardiomyopathy associated
Majeed, S.K., Gopinath, C., 1980. Calcification in the
study. Zentralbl. Pathol. 137, 117-122.
with angiomatous pheochromocytoma in a rhesus
adrenals and ovaries of monkeys. Lab. Anim. 4,
Hubbard, G.B., Schmidt, R.E., Fletcher, K.C., 1987.
macaque (Macaca mulatta]. Vet. Pathol. 40,
363-365.
468-473.
Systematic survey of lesions from animals in a
McClure, H.M., Chapman, W.L., Hooper, B.E., et al.,
Wadsworth, PF., Jones, H.B., Cavanagh, J.B., 1995.
zoological collection. J. Zoo Anim. Med. 18,
1978. The digestive system. In: Benirschke, K.,
14-46.
The topography, structure and incidence of
Garner, F.M., Jones, TC. (Eds.)], Pathology of
 mineralized bodies in the basal ganglia of the brain
Non-human primates
15
of cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicuiaris]. Lab.
Woo, H.S., Lee, K.H., Park, S.Y., et al., 2007. Adrenal
Yoon, YS., Shin, J.W., Park, C.B., et al., 2000.
Anim. 29, 276-281.
cortical adenoma in adrenohepatic fusion tissue: a
Morphological structure of accessory spleen in
Weisbroth, S.H., Fox, R.R., Scher, S., et al., 1976.
mimic of malignant hepatic tumor at CT. Am. J.
Chinese hamsters. J. Vet. Sci. 1, 73-75.
Accessory spleens in domestic rabbits (Oryctolagus
Roentgenol. 188, 246-248.
Zabka, TS., Irwin, M., Albassam, M.A., 2009.
sunicuius]. il. Increased frequency in hematological
Yanai, T, Masegi, T., Ueda, K., et al., 1994. Vascular
 Spontaneous cardiomyopathy in cynomolgus
m uonpus peuaadxa pue saseasi
mineralisation in the monkey brain. Vet. Pathol. 34,
monkeys (Macaca fascicularis]. Toxicol. Pathol. 37,
phenylhydrazine. Teratology 13, 253-262.
546-552.
814-818.
CHAPTER 2
Elizabeth F Mclnnes
Wistar and Sprague-Dawley rats
Introduction
the cartilaginous foci may mineralize (MacKenzie
& Alison 1990j. Adipose tissue infltration in the
Almost alllaboratory and domestic petrats belong
heart is characterized by the presence of sub-
to a single species, the Norway rat (Rattus mor-
epicardial adipose cells and is often observed in
vegicus). The rat is the most commonly used
older, obese animals (Ruben 2000). Lipofuscinosis
rodent species for toxicology studies. A number
results in golden brown pigment granules at the
of rat species are used in research, contract
 poles of the nuclei of myocytes (Ruben 2000).
research organizations and in the pharmaceutical
industry including the Wistar, Sprague Dawley
and Fischer 344 rat. Different strains of rat differ
in their sensitivity to various compounds and in
their incidence of spontaneous tumors. Differ-
ences in age and sex of rats should also be taken
into consideration when designing toxicological
and experimental studies (Johnson & Gad 2007).
Background lesions in rats are made up of degen-
FIGURE 2.1 Cardiomyopathy in left ventricle. x100.
erative, inflammatory proliferative and congenital
changes. Although aging rats produce many inter-
esting lesions, there are also a number of lesions
that occur spontaneously in young animals.
 The pathology of the aged rat becomes impor-
tant in the latter stages of carcinogenicity studies
(Chandra & Frith 1992). The nonneoplastic
lesions and proliferations noted in aging rats are
2
HGURE 2.4 Carilage at base of aorta in a rat. x100.
problematic as they can be confused with preneo-
plastic and neoplastic disease (Johnson & Gad
Endocardial myxomatous change occurs in
2007). This chapter will give an overview of back-
older rats and is recognized by focal or diffuse
ground lesions encountered in both young and
thickening in the subendocardium due to the pres-
older Wistar and Sprague-Dawley rats.
ence of myxomatous tissue (Ruben 2000). Hyper-
trophy and hyperplasia of the endocardium may
Cardiovascular system
be seen in conjunction with the myxomatous val-
vular changes. In addition, the lesion is character-
Cardiomyopathy (Fig. 2.1) in aging rats (spontane
FIGURE 2.2 Myocardial ymphoid cells. x10.
ized by focal areas of hemorrhage, hemosiderin
ous cardiomyopathy) is a common lesion of older
pigmentation, hyalinization, thrombi formation,
 Mesenchymal proliferation in the subendocar-
rats. It is found most frequently in the subintimal
inflammatory and mast cells and polypoid projec-
myocardium of the left ventricular wall and is
dium (Fig. 2.3) is also known as endocardial
tions (Ruben, 2000). Heart valve cysts may occa-
 hyperplasia, endocardial disease, endomyocardial
more common in male rats (MacKenzie & Alison
sionally be observed in the heart valves of rats
disease or subendocardial fbrosis. Although endo-
1990). The etiology of the disease is unknown,
(Fig. 2.5).
cardial schwannomas can be found in the same
but severity and age of onset are influenced by
diet, environment and stress (MacKenzie & Alison
location, it is not known whether the mesenchy-
1990). The lesion is characterized initially by
mal proliferation in subendocardium always
progresses to neoplasia (Johnson & Gad 2007).
necrotic, eosinophilic cardiomyocytes surrounded
The cells are distinct from the bordering myocar-
by fbroblasts and inflarmmatory cells (Fig. 2.2),
predomminantly lymphocytes. Later, fibrosis is
dial cells, but may extend into muscle bundles.
uasad aa si pe sien uie u and
in the left ventricle, intraventricular septum and
papillary muscle. Cartilagenous and osseous meta-
plasia of the chorda tendinae may occur at the end
stage of the disease (Ruben 2000). Atrial (left)
and ventricular thrombosis are occasionally associ-
ated with cardiormyopathy in aging rats.
HGURE 2.5 Heart valve cyst in the rat. x100.
Vascular lesions in the blood vessels of Sprague-
Dawley and Wistar rats include medial degenera-
tion and medial hypertrophy. Medial degeneration
FIGURE 2.3 Endocardial mesenchymal proliferation in
is common in the coronary arteries of rats and
the rat heart. x100.
the affected vessels display enlarged, irregularly
arranged and sparse nuclei present in a PAS-
Cartilaginous foci at the base of the aorta are
positive matrix (Ruben 2000). Medial hyper-
common in both young and old Sprague-Dawley
trophy of the blood vessels is rare and tends to
rats (Fig. 2.4) (Johnson & Gad 2007). In older rats
occur in pulmonary arteries. This lesion consists
18
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
of thickening of the tunica media due to hyper-
mesenteric, mediastinal and paralumbar lymph
trophy of the smooth muscle cells (Ruben 2000)
nodes are often affected (Frith et al 2000b). Vas-
(Fig. 2.6).
cular ectasia (also known as angiectasia, vascular
sinus dilatation, peliosis, telangiectasis) is the dila-
tation of vascular channels within the medullary
sinuses (Frith et al 2000b). Thrombosis is occa-
sionally observed in the blood vessels in the lymph
node (Frith et al 2000b).
FIGURE 2.7b Age-related vascular medial cartilage and
mineralization in the tongue of a rat. x100.
Arterial thrombosis (not caused by arteritis)
HGURE 2.6 Medial hypertrophy in heart artery. x100.
occurs occasionally in the lung, kidney, liver and
adrenal (Ruben 2000). These thrombi may be
Arteritis (polyarteritis, periarteritis, panarteritis
emboli originating from atrial thromboses in older
nodosa) (Fig.2.29) is found occasionally
in
rats. Atherosclerosis is a rare background lesion
Wistar rats, but is more common in Fischer rats
consisting of focal areas of foam cells within the
(MacKenzie & Alison 1990). The occurrence of
tunica intima or tunica media (Ruben 2000).
HGURE 2.9 Rat lymph node with sinus dilatation. x200.
the lesion is higher in males and increases with
Intimal and/or medial sclerosis with mineraliza-
 age. Pancreatic, mesenteric and spermatic arteries
tion of the elastic fbres occurs in the aorta (Ruben 
Lymph node atrophy (also known as senescent
are more commonly affected. The lesion consists 
2000j. Vascular mineralization in arteries and
of fibrinoid degeneration of the media with
atrophy) is a common lesion of aging rats. The
veins in various organs such as the lung, is occa-
 inflammatory cell infltration progressing to fbro-
atrophy is generally characterized by a reduction
sionally observed as a background lesion in rats.
in germinal centres and follicles and depletion of
sis, vascular dilatation, occlusion and aneurysm
ymphocytes in the paracortex may also be seen
(Mackenzie & Alison 1990). The pathogenesis is
Hemolymphoreticular system
(Stefanski et al 1990). Senescent atrophy is often
unknown but may be related to immune complex
nearly ubiquitous in carcinogenicity studies. Mod-
disease. The vaso vasorum of the mesenteric arter-
Pigmented macrophages in the sinuses (Fig. 2.8)
erate amounts of intracellular pigment (generally
ies of the rat can occasionally be confused with a
(particularly the medullary or subscapular sinuses)
lipofuscin} are often noted in the medullary area.
treatment-related finding (Fig. 2.7a). Age-related
of the lymph nodes are observed commonly in
 Mast cells in lymph nodes (Fig. 2.10], particu-
vascular medial cartilage and mineralization may
rats. Generally this pigment is ceroid or lipofuscin
larly the mandibular lymph node, are observed
be encountered in the blood vessels of aging rats
material (Stefanski et al 1990). Special stains
frequently in the lymph nodes of both young and
(Fig. 2.7b)
[such as Schmorl's for lipofuscin} should be used
old rats. Plasmacytosis of mandibular lymph node
to distinguish ceroid pigment from iron (Perl's-
(Fig. 2.1l) is found predominantly in the medul-
R
 positive) or melanin (Masson Fontana-positive).
ary cords (Stefanski et al 1990). Plasmacytosis of
ymph nodes may be so severe as to be noted at
necropsy as enlargement. The etiology and signif-
cance of the lesion are unknown, but the lesion is
particularly common in mandibular lymph nodes,
particularly in conjunction with oral cavity lesions.
Plasmacytosis may be prominent in animals with
T cell atrophy (Frith et al 2000b). In addition,
accumulations of Russell bodies may also be
observed in a lymph node with plasmacytosis (Fig.
2.12)
HGURE 2.7a Vaso vasorum in adventitia of a mesenteric
artery blood vessel in the rat. x100.
FIGURE 2.8 Macrophages with brown pigment in the
mesenteric lymph node. x100.
Cystic degeneration (Fig. 2.9) of various differ-
ent lymph nodes (also known as sinus dilatation,
lymphangiectasia, cystic ectasia, lymphatic sinus
ectasia, lymphangiectasis, lymphatic cysts)
is
dual zer u uoisal punouayoeq e se paiasqo
nodes. Generally the subcapsular and medullary
sinuses are dilated. The sinuses are dilated with
lymph and occasional lymphocytes or macro-
HGURE 2.10 Mast cells in the sinuses of a mandibular
 phages and erythrocytes or proteinaceous fluid
ymph node. x200.
can be observed within the lumen (Stefanski et al
1990j. Cystic dilatation of the lymph nodes may
be so prominent that it is noted at necropsy. The
Wistar and Sprague-Dawley rats
19
HGURE 2.11 Plasmacytosis in the mandibular ymph
FIGURE 2.14 Capsular cyst in rat spleen. x100.
HGURE 2.16 Perl's-positive hemosiderin pigment pre-
node.x200.
sent in the red pulp of a rat spleen. x200.
Sinus erythrocytosis is characterized by the
 presence of erythrocytes within the lymph node
sinuses (Stefanski et al 1990). This lesion is
common and generally occurs due to the presence
of hemorrhage in the organs draining into the
lymph nodes. Erythrophagocytosis by macro-
phages may also be visible within the sinuses con-
taining red blood cells.
Increased extramedullary hematopoiesis is a
common lesion in the rat spleen (Fig. 2.15). The
rat spleen normally has a minimal level of extra-
medullary hematopoiesis; however, it is very dif-
ficult to distinguish between normal and excessive
levels of extramedullary hematopoiesis. Conges-
tion is a common background lesion of the spleen
and may be linked to the method of euthanasia
HGURE 2.12 Russell bodies in a ymph node. x200.
used to kill the animals (Frith et al 2000b).
HGURE 2.17 Tatto pigment in a rat popliteal lymph node.
X200.
Mineralization of Peyer's patches or other
lymph nodes is occasionally observed in the ileum
Accessory spleen is an uncommon background
and is likely to be secondary to tissue damage
fnding in the rat abdomen. Generally it presents
rsde 5 (1z ) (z  ia 1)
with nodules of splenic tissue present within the
cysts may occur on the surface of the rat spleen
mesenteric adipose tissue. The cause is either con-
(Fig. 2.14). The cysts are lined by endothelial cells
genital or traumatic injury (Stefanski et al 1990).
and contain a pink, proteinaceous fluid (Stefanski
Mineralization may occasionally be seen in the
et al 1990).
walls of the blood vessels of the spleen as well as
in the capsule of aging rats (Frith et al 2000b).
Parenchymal fbrosis of the red pulp of the spleen
can occasionally be observed in aging rats.
 Ectopic thymus is a common fnding adjacent
to the thyroid. Ectopic thymus is often associated
with the thyroid glands due to the fact that par-
athyroid glands arise from the same pharyngeal
FIGURE 2.15 Minimal extramedullary hemopoiesis in a
pouches as the thymus (Stefanski et al i990).
rat spleen. x200.
Thymic cysts (Fig. 2.18) or epithelial remnants
are observed as a background change in the rat
Increased hemosiderin (Fig. 2.16) is observed
thymus. These may be made up of epithelial
as a background lesion in rats. The rat spleen,
tubules or nests in the medullary region of the
particularly in female animals, normmally
has
thymus in older rats. Occasionally these remnants
minimal to slight amounts of hemosiderin. In
can give rise to turmors. Some of the cysts are
common with extramedullary hematopoiesis, it 
remnants of the thymopharyngeal duct, others are
is often diffcult to distinguish between normal
dilatations of thymic tubular structures (Stefanski
HGURE 2.13 Mineralization of Peyer's patches in the
and excessive amounts of hemosiderin. Lipofuscin
 et al 1990). Thymic cysts are often lined by squa-
small intestine of the rat. x200.
 pigment may also be present in the red pulp of
 mous cells or ciliated epithelium.
older rats (Frith et al 2000b). In addition, tattoo
[ad a on pap s ua 
lymph nodes may occasionally be observed in rat
lymph nodes (Fig. 2.17).
20
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Thymic cortical apoptosis is a common back-
Foci of mineralized concretions or corpora amy-
ground fnding (Fig. 2.21). This should be distin-
lacea (Fig. 2.23) are observed commonly in nasal
guished from severe apoptosis where the cortex
epithelia lining the nasal turbinates (Monticello
 contains numerous apoptotic bodies. Severe apop-
et al 1990). Osteopetrosis of the nasal turbinates
tosis is often observed when animals are placed
may present as a spontaneous lesion (Renne et al
under severe stress or treated with immunosup-
2003). Globule leukocytes are present in the res-
pressive drugs (Stefanski et al 1990).
piratory epithelium of the larynx and trachea in
rats (Renne et al 2003, 2009). Mineralized hair,
food particles or debris are often present in the
ventral pouch of the rat larynx, particularly in
older rats and squamous metaplasia may
be
recorded in the respiratory epithelium overlaying
the ventral gland as a spontaneous lesion in male
Wistar rats on inhalation studies (Renne et al
2003). Fischer 344 rats, especially the female sex,
HGURE 2.18 Thymic cysts lined by squamous epithe-
exposed to chronic daily irritation by gavage, are
lium. x200.
predisposed to high mortality rates on chronic
studies due to the high incidence of cartilage
Ectopic parathyroid tissue can occasionally be
degeneration, which presumably leads to a dys-
encountered adjacent to the thymus (Frith et al
function of the larynx (Germann et al 1998).
2000b). Multifocal hemorrhage (and occasionally
eosinophilic crystals) is very commmon in the thymus
of rats, particularly as an agonal lesion due to
carbon dioxide euthanasia (Frith et al 2000b) (Fig.
 FIGURE 2.21 Minimal apoptosis of the rat thymic cortex.
2.19). Thymic atrophy (Fig. 2.20) (also known as
x100.
involution) is a common background finding in
aged rats. Although the thymus continues to
 Bone marrow atrophy is observed in aging rats
increase in size initially, it begins to regress and at
and the lesion is characterized by a decrease in
the end of a carcinogenicity study of two years
hemopoietic cells, an increase in adipocytes and
duration the thymus will be severely depleted
an increase reticular stroma (Frith et al 2000b).
(Stefanski et al 1990). As the atrophy progresses,
Hemosiderin pigment is occasionally observed in
the epithelial components of the thymus become
the bone marrow and may be associated with pre-
 more prorminent and often form tubular structures
vious hemorrhage (Frith et al 2000b).
(Stefanski et al 1990).
Germinal centres and lymphoid follicles can
occasionally be present in the bone marrow of
normal rats (Frith et al 2000b)
Respiratory system
HGURE 2.23 Mineralization (corpora amylacea) of the
dfactory epithelium of the rat nasal turbinate. x200.
Eosinophilic inclusions (also known as globules
and droplets) are observed commonly in aging
rats in the nasal epithelium (Renne et al 2003).
A common background lesion in the rat lung is
The inclusions occur in the olfactory, respiratory
 mineralization of pulmonary arteries (Fig. 2.24).
epithelium and mucous glands. The inclusions are
 The lesion consists of focal or multifocal minerali-
thought to be proteinaceous and the lesion may
zation situated beneath the intima or within the
also be induced by irritant compounds (Renne
 muscular walls of the arteries. The lesion is not
et al 2003) (Fig. 2.22). Eosinophilic inclusions
associated with metastatic calcification.
may occur in association with the loss of sensory
cells (Renne et al 2009). These inclusions are
negative for periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), Alcian
HGURE 2.19 Thymus hemorrhage and eosinophlilic
Blue, Von Kossa, mucicarmine, phosphotungstic
crystals. x200.
acid hematoxylin (PTAH), Masson's trichrome,
Congo Red, and toluidine blue stains (Monticello
et al 1990). Ultrastructurally, the inclusions
appear to be amorphorous, flocculent material in
membrane-bound vacuoles (Renne et al 2009)
HGURE 2.24 Mural mineralization of an artery in the rat
lung. x100.
HGURE 2.20 Thymic atrophy or involution in the rat 
 FIGURE 2.22 Eosinophilic inclusions in the dfactory epi-
 Small areas of alveolar hemorrhage (Fig. 2.25)
thymus. x100.
thelium of the rat nasal turbinate. x200.
are often present in the rat lung and represent an
agonal event, particularly in rats killed with carbon
dioxide or those that die spontaneously (Renne
Wistar and Sprague-Dawley rats
21
et al 2003). Occasionally, small foci of neuroen-
docrine cells in the lung (Fig. 2.26) may be visible
in aging rats. Pulmonary neuroendocrine cells are
found as clusters called neuroepithelial bodies or
as single cells scattered in the respiratory epithe-
lium (Haworth et al 2007). Pulmonary neuroen-
docrine cells are defined as foci of neuroendocrine
cells with greater than 40 nuclei (Haworth et al
2007). The cause of the hyperplasia is not known 
 and the lesion is not thought to progress to neo-
plasia (Haworth et al 2007). Morphologically the
lesion resembles chemoreceptors such as carotid
bodies (Haworth et al 2007)
FIGURE 2.27 Alveolar histiocyte or macrophage aggre-
HGURE 2.30 Pleural lung tag on surface of rat lung.
 gates in the rat lung. x100.
x100.
HGURE 2.25 Alveolar hemorrhage with erythrophagocy-
tosis in the rat lung. x200.
FIGURE 2.28 Cholesterol defts in the rat lung. x400
HGURE 2.31 Mineralization of tracheal cartilage in the
rat. x100.
HGURE 2.26 Proliferation of neuroendocrine cells in
bronchiole of rat lung. x100.
Multifocal aggregates of alveolar macrophages
 FIGURE 2.29 Brown pigmented alveolar macrophages in
(Fig. 2.27) (also known as alveolar histiocytosis)
the rat lung. x200.
HGURE 2.32 Eosinophilic inclusion wthin a Clara cell in
within alveoli and terminal airways are observed
 a bronchiole of rat lung. x100.
in both young and old rats. The alveolar macro-
Occasionally pleural tags (Fig. 2.30) are
phages often contain abundant, foamy cytoplasm
observed in rat lungs. These consist of pleural
(Boorman & Eustis 1990) and the lesion may be
extensions which often contain mononuclear cells
visible at necropsy as white areas on the lung
such as lymphocytes. Mineralization of tracheal
surface (Johnson & Gad 2007). The aggregates are
cartlage (Fig. 2.3l) is a common aging change
often subpleural or located in the more peripheral
 in rats and is observed in most two-year-old rats
regions of the lung (Boorman & Eustis i990).
om carcinogenicity studies. Large eosinophilic
Cholesterol clefts (Fig. 2.28), inflammatory cells
 cytoplasmic inclusions are occasionally seen in
and alveolar epithelial hyperplasia are often noted
untreated rat (Kambara et al 2009) Clara cells
in conjunction with the macrophage aggregates.
(Fig. 2.32) and are generally found in the bronchi-
The aggregates may represent resolved inflamma-
 olar epithelium. The presence of this deeply eosi-
 tory foci and may represent a focal defcit in the
nophilic solitary cell in the lung is often confusing.
pulmonary clearance mechanisms. Some macro-
Perivascular eosinophilic infltration (Fig. 2.33) is 
    n sn
 observed commonly in the lungs of young and old
hemosiderin (Renne et al 2003) or lipofuscin (Fig.
 rats. The etiology of this finding is unknown.
2.29) or carbon from the atmosphere.
AGURE 2.33 Eosinophilic perivascular infiltration in the
rat lung. x100.
22
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Hair shaft emboli or skin fragment emboli are
 Dilatation of submucosal glands of the larynx or
seen in the lungs of animals on intravenous injec-
trachea may also occur as a background lesion in
tion studies. These foreign bodies generally induce
rats (Renne et al 2009) (Fig. 2.36b). Foci of
a granulomatous reaction consisting of multinucle-
 osseous metaplasia are commonly observed in the
ated giant cells and other inflammatory cells
lungs of both young and old rats (Renne et al
(Renne et al 2003) (Fig. 2.34). Eosinophilic crys-
2009) (Fig. 2.37). In addition, ossification of the
tals are occasionally observed free within the
cartilage in the larynx is also occasionally noted in
alveoli (Renne et al 2003) of rat lungs. The crys-
aging rats (Fig. 2.38). Furthermore, mineralization
tals may be associated with areas of alveolar herm-
of mucus is rarely noted within bronchioles of the 
orrhage (Fig. 2.35) or dilated submucosal glands
lungs and within the lumena of the nasal tur-
in the larynx. Hyperinflation (Renne et al 2003)
binates (Figs 2.39, 2.40). Foci of minimal, gener-
Or pulmonary acinar ectasia consists of areas of
ally mononuclear cell inflammation may be noted
alveolar dilatation and may be observed in the
below the pleura in the rat lung (Fig. 2.41).
subpleural region in aged rats (Renne et al 2003]
(Fig. 2.36a). Isolated cystic spaces in lung paren-
chyma are rarely seen in rats and are of uncertain
HGURE 2.39 Mineralization of mucus within a bronchiole
origin. These cysts are lined only by fbrous tissue,
in the rat lung. x100.
with no evidence of inflammation (Renne et al
2009j. Apparent dilatation of alveoli can also
occur due to excessive instillation of fxative into
the lung at necropsy (Renne et al 2003)
FIGURE 2.36b Dilated submucosalglands andeosi-
naphilic crystals in the larynx of the rat. x200.
HGURE 2.40 Mineralization of mucus within the lumen
of the nasal turbinates of the rat. x100.
HGURE 2.34 A hair embolus within an artery in the rat 
lung, surrounded by inflammatory cells. x100.
FIGURE 2.37 0sseus metaplasia in the rat lung. x400.
HGURE 2.41 Minimal, mutifocal, subpleural inflamma-
tion in the rat lung. x100.
AGURE 2.35 Eosinophilic crystals in the rat lung. x200.
Researchers have noticed inflammatory lesions
in the lungs of rats used in research in recent
years. The lesions consist of perivascular lym-
phocytes, inflammatory cells and alveolar macro-
phages in the lung alveoli and the presence of
epithelial hyperplasia. These lesions may mask or
confuse research fndings, particularly in inhala-
tion studies. Initially a virus was suggested as the
cause (rat respiratory virus) (Albers et al 2009),
FIGURE 2.38 Ossification of laryngeal cartilage in the rat.
but recently researchers have demonstrated a cor-
relation between the presence of inflammatory
x100.
lung lesions and Pneumocystis carinii DNA
detected by PCR (Livingston et al 2011).
HGURE 2.36a Pulmonary acinar ectasia in the rat lung.
x200.
Wistar and Sprague-Dawley rats
molar. Ultrastructurally, Fordyce's granules consist
Gastrointestinal system
primarily of typical lipid-filled sebaceous cells. In
Dental dysplasia (Fig. 2.42) is a congenital lesion
addition to the incisor and molar area, the buccal
generally involving the incisor teeth and it may be
mucosa as well as the hard palate and tongue
related to malocclusion or food impaction (Fig.
should also be considered as possible sites of
2.43) (Monticello et al 1990). Dental dysplasia is
occurrence of Fordyce's granules in rats.
the abnormal development of odontogenic tissues
Squamous cysts (Fig. 2.44), often containing
(Bertram et al 1996). Dental dysplasia is often
keratin, are common in the stomach, particularly
observed in conjunction with inflammation and
in the region of the limiting ridge and antral
trauma. The lesion consists of a large mass of
mucosa. In addition, squamous cysts may also be
dentine-like material with fragments of tooth and
encountered in the gingiva or associated with the
bone (Bertram et al 1996). Cleft palate is a con-
teeth in the oral cavity (Bertram et al 1996) as
genital lesion encountered in the midline of the
well as in the esophagus (Bertram et al 1996).
hard palate of rats (Renne et al 2009). A pulp
Glandular cysts (Fig. 2.45) lined by cuboidal
stone is a focal area of dentine in the pulp cavity
Or columnar epithelium may be observed in the
which is often mineralized. Pulp stones often form
glandular stomach (Bertram et al 1996). Meg-
HGURE 2.46 Cystic dilatation of gastric glands in the rat
around cellular debris (Bertram et al 1996).
aesophagus is a congenital condition observed in
 glandular stomach. x200.
young rats (Bertrarm et al 1996).
HGURE 2.47 Focal ulceration of the non-glandular
stomach in the rat. x100.
FIGURE 2.42 Dental dysplasia visible in the rat oral
cavity. x100.
FIGURE 2.44 Squamous cyst filled with keratin near lim-
iting ridge in the rat stomach. x20.
There is often a minimal eosinophilic infltra-
tion in the submucosa of the stomach (Fig. 2.48).
The cause of this finding is unknown. Ectopic
hepatocytes and pancreatic exocrine cells may be
encountered in the lamina propria of the stomach
(Bertram et al 1996). Mesenteric adipose tissue
necrosis (Fig. 2.49) is a common lesion in aging
rats and consists of nodular masses of necrotic
mesenteric adipose tissue generally surrounded by
inflammatory cells, particularly in the intersti-
tium. The lesion is often noted at necropsy in the
peritoneal adipose tissue or adjacent to the testes.
The cause of the lesion is thought to be a foreign-
body response against released lipid (Brown &
Hardisty 1990j which results from torsion or
ischemic pressure (Brown & Hardisty 1990). The
ischemic adipose tissue may later undergo miner-
FIGURE 2.43 Food accummulation around the molar in
the rat oral cavity. x400.
AGURE 2.45 Cyst lined by ciliated epithelium in the non-
alization (Fig. 2.50).
glandular stomach of the rat. x200.
Sebaceous gland ectopia in the oral cavity is
observed at the base of the rmolar teeth (male rats)
Iatrogenic gavage injury is not a background
and between the upper incisors (Bertram et al
change as such, but is commonly encountered in
1996). This finding, referred to as Fordyce's
rats. Gavage injuries include esophagitis, pleuritis,
 granules, which displays morphologically normal
 periesophageal abscessation and fibrosis Bertram
sebaceous glands, is described in several species
et al 1996j. Cystic dilatation of gastric glands
including humans
and
rats.
Histologically,
(Fig. 2.46) is a common finding in the rat stomach.
Fordyce's granules are identical to their cutaneous
The lesion is not accompanied by inflammation
counterpart but are not associated with hair
or any other deleterious lesions. Gastric erosion
follicles.
and ulceration of the glandular or non-glandular
 In rats, there are, at present, only four reports
stomach (Fig. 2.47) is commonly observed in aged
of intraoral ‘ectopic’ sebaceous glands in the lit-
rats. It is more common in gavage studies, pre-
erature (Bernick & Bavetta 1962, Frandsen 1962,
sumably due to trauma during dosing. The edges
Rulli & Martinelli 197l, Yoshitomi et al 1990). In 
 of the ulcers in the non-glandular stomach often
Holtzman and Long-Evans rats, as well as in
display epithelial hyperplasia. It is always impor-
 HGURE 2.48 Submucosal eosinophilis present in the
Wistar rats, Fordyce's granules are found in the
 tant to distinguish ulceration from autolysis of the
submucosa of the rat glandular stomach. x200.
molar gingiva. The most common site in the rat
superficial mucosa.
molar gingiva is probably adjacent to the frst
24
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
HGURE 2.49 Mesenteric adipose tissue necrosis in the 
FIGURE 2.52a Serous focus within mucous salivary
HGURE 2.53 Plasmacytic infiltrates into the salivary
rat. x100.
gland in the rat. x200.
 gland of the rat. x200.
10
HGURE 2.50 Strangulated or ischemic adipose tissue
 displays mineralization. x100.
FIGURE 2.52b Basophilic hypertrophic focus in the rat
 HGURE 2.54 Ectopic small intestinal tissue present in
Lobular atrophy of various salivary glands (Fig.
salivary gland. x400.
the rat stomach. x200.
2.51) with fbroplasia, inflammatory cells and
occasional adipocytes in the surrounding intersti-
Oncocytic cells (also known as eosinophilic
tium and tinctorial alteration are cormmon back-
cells, oxyphil cells) contain large amounts of gran-
 ground changes. Ectopic foci of parotid acini can
ular eosinophilic cytoplasm due to mitochondrial
occur in the sublingual gland (Bertram et al 1996)
accumulation. These cells occur in the epithelium
(Fig. 2.52a). In addition, areas of hypertrophied
of the intercalated ducts and in the secretory
basophilic cells may be encountered in the parotid
ducts of older rats (Neuenschwander & Elwell
salivary gland of the rat (Fig. 2.52b).
1990). Foci of mineralization are occasionally
observed in the duct lurmena and within the acini
of the rat salivary gland (Bertrarm et al 1996).
Adipose tissue infltration or lipomatosis is char-
acterized by the presence of adipocytes between
normal acini (Bertram et al 1996) or within areas
of atrophy and inflammation (Neuenschwander &
Elwell 1990).
Plasmacytic infltration into the parotid salivary
gland is common (Fig. 2.53). Foci of ectopic small
AGURE 2.55 Diverticulum of the duodenum in the rat.
and large intestine (Fig. 2.54), as well as focal epi-
x40.
dermal cysts may be observed in the glandular area
of the rat stomach. In addition, diverticula may be
 Focal areas of moderate to severe hermorrhage,
encountered in the smallintestine (Fig. 2.55).
fbrosis, myodegeneration and inflammatory cell
infltration are noted routinely in the skeletal
muscle of tongues from rats where lingual blood
collection has been performed (Fig. 2.56). Ectopic
HGURE 2.51 Acinar atrophy of the salivary gland with
hepatocyte islands may be noted in the pancreas,
concommitant inflammation. x200.
particularly situated around the islets. These foci
consist of normal hepatocytes with Kupffer cells
as well as bile ducts (Detilleux et al 1995). Pan-
Creatic hepatocytes should not be confused with
the large eosinophilic acinar cells which are some-
times encountered around the islets (Detilleux
et al 1995).
Wistar and Sprague-Dawley rats
25
AGURE 2.56 Focal myopathy, fibrosis and inflammatory-
FIGURE 2.58 Vacuolation of the acinar cells in the exo-
HGURE 2.60b Ectopic pancreas present in the submu-
 cell infiltration is noted in the tongue when lingual blood 
crine pancreas. x200.
cosa and tunica muscularis of the small intestine of a rat.
collection is performed. x200.
x100.
Pancreatic acinar hyperplasia (Fig. 2.59) is a
Arinar atrophy of the pancreas (Fig. 2.57) is
focal or multifocal lesion that is observed as an
Foci of perivascular or periductular lymphocytes
observed in young and old rats. The lesion consists
occasional background fnding in rats. The area
and plasma cells may be observed as a normal
of atrophy of the acinar elements with persistence
consists primarily of tinctorial alteration. In addi-
background fnding in the pancreas of young and
of the duct, a mild inflammatory response and
tion, foci of cellular alteration (basophilic cyto-
older rats (Detilleux et al 1995). Acinar and duct
fbrosis. The islets are not affected (Kendrey &
plasmic change, basophilic foci, focal dysplasia)
snoaueuods are uoneuoy isks pue uonenei
Roe 1969j. The cause of this lesion is not known
are a common finding in the pancreas of rats. The
lesions encountered in the rat pancreas, often in
(Detilleux et al 1995). Hemosiderin pigment
lesion is characterized by small, non-compressive
association with pancreatic acinar atrophy and
deposition and mineralization can also be features
foci of acinar cells with moderate to severely
inflammation (Detilleux et al 1995). The dilated
in these areas, particularly in older rats (Detilleux
basophilic cytoplasm and decreased zymogen
acini and ducts are lined by flattened cuboidal
et al 1995).
granules (Fig. 2.60a) (Detilleux et al 1995).
epithelium and many contain necrotic debris
Ectopic rests of acinar pancreatic tissue may be
(Kendrey & Roe 1969).
encountered in the duodenum, jejunum, stomach,
 Pancreatic adipocyte infltration (fatty infltra-
liver, spleen or mesentery (Detilleux et al 1995)
tion, lipormatosis) may be observed in the older rat
(Fig. 2.60b).
pancreas (Detilleux et al 1995). This lesion is
associated with obesity, atrophy and inflamma-
tion. Lymphoid hyperplasia of the gut-associated
ymphoid tissue (GALT) (Fig. 2.61) in the rat
arge intestine is a common background fnding in
young and older rats.
HGURE 2.57 Acinar atrophy of the exocrine pancreas
with associated inflammation. x200.
Pancreatic vacuoles (Fig. 2.58) are noted in the
pancreas of young and old rats. This finding con-
FIGURE 2.59 Basophilic tinctorial change and hyperpla-
sists of clear vacuoles in acinar cells and is a
sia in the exocrine pancreas. x200.
common incidental fnding of no toxicological sig-
nificance (Detilleux et al 1995). The lesion may
be an early manifestation of autolysis. Occasional
HGURE 2.61 Lymphoid hyperplasia of the rat gut-
apoptotic pancreatic acinar cel may be noted in
associated ymphoid tissue in the large intestine. x40.
the rat pancreas and this change is not considered
to be significant (Detilleux et al 1995)
Liver and biliary system
Tension lipidosis in the median cleft area of liver
(Fig. 2.62) is often recognized at necropsy as a
circumscribed, pale yellow area. It usually occurs
at the periphery of the lobe near the attachments
to the adjacent lobes or tissues. The lesion is char-
acterized by the presence of focal, minimal to
sight, generalized hepatocyte vacuolation. This
lesion is thought to be caused by local hypoxia,
FIGURE 2.60a Focus of zymogen degranulation in the rat
i.e. either the adhesions or attachments between
pancreas. x100.
the liver lobes causing constriction and thereby
causing interference with the local perfusion and
consequent lipidosis or vacuolation of the underly-
ing hepatocytes (Stalker & Hayes 2007).
26
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
with eosinophilic material, although occasionally
the vacuoles are clear. The hypothesis is that the
vacuoles contain blood plasma. This change is asso-
ciated with an increase in liver weight (Detilleux
et al 1995). Intranuclear inclusions resulting from
the invagination of cytoplasm into the nucleus are
occasionally observed in rat hepatocytes and are
similar to those seen in the mouse liver. Ectopic
hepatocytes are rarely encountered in the submu-
cosa of the stomach and gallbladder (Fig. 2.68).
Islands of pancreatic tissue localized within the
hepatic parenchyma are a rare spontaneous finding
in rats (Thoolen et al 2010). In addition, intravas-
cular hepatocytes which protrude into hepatic
veins or occur within the contour of the vessel are
HGURE 2.62 Tension lipidosis in the median cleft area
FIGURE 2.64 Periportal lipid vacuolation in the rat liver.
reported (Thoolen et al 2010).
of the rat liver. x400.
x100.
Bile duct hyperplasia of the liver (Fig. 2.63) is
observed in Sprague-Dawley rats and is a comrmon
aging lesion. The lesion is made up of hyperplasia
of the bile ducts accompanied by a minimal
inflarmmatory-cell infltrate as well as fbrosis in
the portal area. Occasionally the bile duct epithe-
lium may be atrophic or degenerate (Eustis et al
1990). The lesion does not appear to progress to
neoplasia (Eustis et al 1990).
HGURE 2.67 Eosinophic, ntracytoplasmic inclusions in 
FIGURE 2.65 Hepatic angiectasis with dilatation of the 
the rat liver. x200.
sinusoids in the rat liver. x200.
Cystic degeneration of the liver (spongiosis
hepatis) is a multilocular, cystic lesion wherein the
cyst-like structures contain an eosinophilic mate-
rial (Fig. 2.66). The cyst-like structures are not
lined with endothelial cells (in contrast to hepatic
angiectasis). This background lesion is observed at
a low incidence in aging rats (Eustis et al 1990).
HGURE 2.63 Bile ductule hyperplasia in the liver of the
Areas of cystic degeneration may be found inde-
rat. x200.
pendently or within areas of altered hepatocyte
foci
Periportal lipid vacuolation in liver (Fig. 2.64)
is a spontaneous change seen in older rats. particu-
larly Sprague-Dawley rats. Pathologists need to be
careful to distinguish this from a treatment-
HGURE 2.68 Hepatocytes in the submucosa of the non-
related change. Hepatic angiectasis (telangiecta-
 glandular rat stomach. x200.
sia, peliosis hepatis) (Fig. 2.65) is a common lesion
in the rat liver characterized by focal or multifocal
Hemopoiesis in the liver is normal in the fetal
areas of sinusoidal dilatation. The sinusoids in
rat liver, but occurs only under pathological con-
these areas are filled with erythrocytes and are
ditions in the adult rat (Detilleux et al 1995).
lined by a single layer of endothelial cells. Occa-
Hematopoiesis of the erythroid and myeloid pre-
sional, subcapsular areas of sinusoidal dilatation
cursors is generally always accompanied by similar
result in depression of the liver surface. The lesion
is occasionally noted as a dark red area at necropsy.
lesions in the spleen and other sites (Fig. 2.69).
The lesion is more common in male rats (Eustis
Parenchymal and portallymphoid or inflammatory
et al 1990).
cell aggregates in the liver are observed commonly
in the majority ofrat livers. The cause of this lesion
FIGURE 2.66 Cystic degeneration of the rat liver. x100.
is likely to be due to bacterial showering from the
intestine. The lesion may be acute, subacute or
Intracytoplasmic, eosinophilic, inclusion bodies
granulomatous. Individual cell necrosis of occa-
(Fig. 2.67) may develop spontaneously in rat hepa-
sional hepatocytes, accompanied by inflammatory-
tocytes (Detilleux et al 1995). Hepatocyte vacu-
cell infltration, is often observed in rat livers
olation is a common background change in rats
(Detilleux et al 1995) and focal areas of necrosis,
which are not exsanguinated at necropsy and
Ui sassanoid aanajui ol paielal aq ot ruenou
where there is a delay between death and removal
the gastrointestinal tract, are also common in rat
of the liver. Histologically, the affected hepato-
livers (Detilleux et al 1995) (Fig. 2.70). Cholan-
cytes contain a single cytoplasmic vacuole filled
giofbrosis (Fig. 2.71) is a variant of bile-duct
Wistar and Sprague-Dawley rats
hyperplasia in which the bile duct epithelium
assumes the characteristics of intestinal epithe-
lium and produces large cystic areas flled with
mucus (Gopinath 1987). This is a controversial
lesion in the rat liver and is generally induced by
xenobiotics (Thoolen et al 2010). Biliary cysts are
single or multilocular cysts lined by flattened
cuboidal epithelium and are common in older rats
(Detilleux et al 1995) (Fig. 2.72).
HGURE 2.74 Multinucleate hepatocytes in the rat liver.
FIGURE 2.72 Focal bliary cyst in the rat liver. x100.
x200.
Hepatodiaphragmatic nodules (Fig. 2.73) caus-
ing nodular protrusions on the anterior surface of
the liver are associated with small diaphragmatic
hernia. These are common in rats of all ages,
including fetuses (Detilleux et al 1995) and the
hepatocyte tissue is normal both macroscopically
and microscopically, in the areas that have pro-
truded through the hernia. These nodules can be
 HGURE 2.69 Minimal foci of hemopoiesis in the rat liver.
confused with hepatic adenomas.
x100.
HGURE 2.75 Rat liver lobe torsion with coagulative
necrosis. x100.
The spontaneous accumulation of lipofuscin
pigment (Fig. 2.76) is noted in the hepatocytes
of older rats
(Detilleux et al 1995), and bile
pigments may be present in the bile ducts of
aged rats (Detilleux et al 1995). In addition, por-
phyrin is a dense, dark brown pigment which may
rarely be noted within bile ductules and bile canal-
FIGURE 2.73 Herniated liver lobe with fibrosis and
iculi (Thoolen et al 2010). Prominent ploidy is 
HGURE 2.70 Hepatocyte necrosis and fibrosis in the rat 
inflammation in the pedicle. x100.
occasionally observed in the rat liver (Fig. 2.77).
liver.x200.
Foci of cellular alteration are common in rat
Mitotic figures and multinucleated hepatocytes
studies greater than twelve months (Thoolen et al
are observed as a background fnding in small
 2010). Hypertrophy and hyperplasia of Kupffer
numbers of rat livers. Multinucleate hepatocytes
 cells is a rare spontaneous finding in the rat liver
(Fig. 2.74) occur spontaneously in older rats
 and is characterized by the proliferation of the
(Burek 1978). If these lesions are noted in
spindled cells lining the sinusoids (Thoolen et al
increased numbers, then the phenomenon may be 
2010).
related to treatment. Apoptosis of hepatocytes is
 observed at very low levels in rat livers (Detilleux
et al 1995). Torsion of the liver (Fig. 2.75) lobes
is observed occasionally as a background, sponta-
neous lesion. Although torsion may occur in any
lobe, the papillary process of the caudate lobe is
generally the most commonly affected. The lesion
is characterized by focal areas of coagulative
necrosis with a variable inflammatory cell infl-
trate. Later, the lesion may progress to fbrosis as
HGURE 2.71 Cholangiofibrosis in the rat liver. x100.
well as areas of nodular regeneration. Mineraliza-
tion is rarely observed in the liver of rats, but
dystrophic mineralization may be noted in con-
junction with hepatic necrosis (Thoolen et al
2010).
HGURE 2.76 Hepatocyte lipofuscin pigment present in 
rat liver. x400.
28
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
hydronephrosis or pelvic dilatation is seen com-
commonly in aging rats is likely to be lipofuscin
monly in rat kidneys. It is often unilateral and the
(Schmorl's-positive) (Fig. 2.82). Cystic tubules
right kidney is more commonly affected than the
can manifest in different forms and are generally
left (Hard et al 1999) (Fig. 2.80).
found in the cortex. They can be single or multiple
and are generally lined with a single layer of flat-
tened epithelium (Hard et al 1999). Cysts may
be empty or may contain proteinaceous material
(Fig. 2.83)
HGURE 2.77 Prominent ploidy in the rat liver. x400.
Urinary system
Chronic progressive nephropathy is a common
FIGURE 2.80 Hydronephrosis or pelvic dilatation in the
spontaneous disease of aging rats including Fischer
rat kidney. x100.
344 rats (Dixon et al 1995). Chronic progressive
nephropathy is more common in male rats and
The single layer of the parietal epithelium lining
is directly influenced by a high protein diet.
the Bowman's capsule can transform from normal
HGURE 2.82 Lipofuscin pigment in the cortical tubular
The lesion is characterized by basophilic cortical
squamous epithelium to cuboidal cells similar to
epithelium in the rat kidney. x400.
tubules, hyaline casts, glomerulosclerosis 
and
those of the cortical tubules (Hard et al 1999).
 atrophy, interstitial inflammatory cell infltration
This change is observed in older male rats and is
and interstitial fbrosis 
(Montgomery & Seely
referred to as Bowman's capsule metaplasia. In
1990) (Figs 2.78, 2.79).
rats, Bowman's capsule metaplasia is associated
with age (Haley & Bulger 1983), hypertension and
unilateral nephrectomy (Andrews 1981).
Osseous metaplasia, unrelated to renal miner-
alization, is occasionally seen in the interstitium of
the renal cortex (Hard et al 1999). Hyaline drop-
lets (Fig. 2.&1) are eosinophilic, intracytoplasmic
inclusions that generally occur in the cortical
tubules. They are thought to represent liposomes
containing protein (Hard et al 1999). Hyaline
droplets occur normally in the mature, male rat
where they represent reabsoprtion of alphazu-
globulin. Hyaline droplet nephropathy (i.e. accu-
mulation of large numbers of hyaline droplets) can
HGURE 2.83 Polycystic rat kidney with multiple cysts in
be induced by the presence of histiocytic sarcoma
the cortex. x100.
as well as xenobiotics. Mallory Heidenhain stain
is used to visualize hyaline droplets (Hard et al
HGURE 2.78 Chronic progressive nephropathy with
Mineralization (Fig. 2.84) is a spontaneous
1999).
dilated tubules, hyaline casts, basophilic tubules and 
background fnding present in young and old rats
interstitial mononuclear cell in the rat kidney. x200.
an ul mooo Aeu uoisal auL (6661 [e ia preH)
cortex, corticomedullary junction, medulla and
 papilla. Female rats tend to be more affected than
male rats and the lesion is thought to be influ-
enced by diet (Hard et al 1999). Renal calculi
-a (6661 [e 1a p1eH) sie iapio u mno Ae
alization of the basement membrane of the
 glomerulus may occur during chronic progressive
nephropathy in the rat (Fig. 2.85). Basophilic cor-
tical tubules may be a spontaneous background
fnding, although an increase in basophilic tubules
is likely to be related to regeneration after an
insult to the cortical tubules.
FIGURE 2.81 Hyaline droplets in the rat kidney associ-
ated with histiocytic sarcoma. x400.
HGURE 2.79 Glomerulosclerosis and hyaline casts in
chronic progressive nephrotophay in the rat kidney. x200.
 Pigmentation characterized by the intracyto-
plasmic presence of yellow to brown granular
Occasionally a focal area of adrenal cortical
material is observed in proximal convoluted
cells may be observed outside or immediately
tubules (Hard et al 1999). Although the pigment
below the kidney capsule (Hard et al 1999). This
may be iron (Perl's-positive) or bile (Fouchet's-
is referred to as an adrenal rest. Congenital
positive), the brown pigmentation observed
Wistar and Sprague-Dawley rats
29
 AGURE 2.84 Corticomedullary mineralization in the rat 
FIGURE 2.86 Colloidal plug in the urinary bladder of the 
 HGURE 2.89 Lipomatous transformation of the rat renal
kidney. x200.
rat. x200.
cortex. x200.
HGURE 2.85 Mineralization of the basement membranes 
 HGURE 2.90 Renal tubular hypertrophy in the rat kidney
of the glomeruli and tubules in the rat kidney due to 
FIGURE 2.87 Hyperplasia of the rat transitional epithe-
cortex. x400.
 chronic progressive nephropathy. x400.
lium in the rat kidney pelvis. x200.
Artificial separation between the urothelium
and submucosa in the urinary bladder occurs after
inflation with formalin. The fixative may be inad-
vertently injected into the wall of the bladder
during inflation at necropsy (Hard et al 1999).
This lesion may be mistaken for submucosal
edema (Hard et al 1999). In addition, vacuolation 
of the transitional epithelium of the urinary
bladder is a background change usually attributed
to autolysis (Hard et al 1999). Calculi may occur
 spontaneously in the rat urinary bladder (Hard
et al 1999).
 Proteinaceous or colloidal plugs in the bladder
or urethra are observed commonly in male rats
(Fig. 2.86). They are made up of deeply eosi-
HGURE 2.91 Hyperplasia of rat pelvic urothelium with
nophilic material, occasionally containing sperma-
FIGURE 2.88 Lymphocytic infitration into urinary bladder 
vascular ectasia. x200.
tozoa or cellular debris. This lesion is thought to
in the rat. x200.
be caused by ejaculation during euthanasia and is
considered to be an insignifcant background
Lipomatous transformation of the rat renal
lesion (Hard et al 1999). Perfusion of the rat
cortex is observed in older rats and may be a
kidney with glutaraldehyde can produce vacuola-
precursor to lipoma and liposarcoma (Fig. 2.89).
tion of the proximal tubular cells which may not
Occasional enlarged, hypertrophic renal tubules
be distinguished from genuine pathological vacu-
are observed within the rat renal cortex (Fig.
olation (Hard et al 1999). Hyperplasia of the tran-
2.90). Hyperplasia of the rat transitional epithe-
sitional epithelium of the rat urinary bladder and
lium lining the kidney pelvis, often accompanied
renal pelvis is observed commonly (Fig. 2.87).
by vascular ectasia, is observed in the older rat
 Lymphocyte infltration into the submucosa of
kidney (Fig. 2.91). Mineralization of the transi-
the rat urinary bladder is noted in older rats
tional epithelium of the rat kidney pelvis may also
(Fig. 2.88).
be observed in older rats (Fig. 2.92). A unique
form of autolysis is occasionally observed in the
kidney of the Wistar rat and may cause confusion
in carcinogenicity studies if it is mistaken for a
treatment-related finding (Fig. 2.93).
HGURE 2.92 Mineralization of the transitional epithelium 
of the pelvis of the rat kidney. x200.
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
single type of cell may occur in the rat pituitary
(Fig. 2.97). The focus is slightly delineated from
the normal cell population with little or no evi-
dence of compression. The vascular channels
within the region are normal in comparison to the
pattern seen in adenomas, in which they are often
ectatic (Fig. 2.98). Portions of the margins of the
focus may blend with the surrounding paren-
 chyma. The uniform population of cells forming
these foci vary little in size and character from
normal but tend to be pale pink in colour (Fig.
2.99). Individual eosinophilic or basophilic cells
that appear normal may be present in scattered
regions of the focus (Frith et al 2000a).
HGURE 2.93 Autolysis artifact observed in Han Wistar rat
HGURE 2.99 Pituitary gland adenohypophysis prolifera-
kidney. x100.
tion with clear cells. x400.
Endocrine glands
Cortical vacuolation (Fig. 2.100) of the adrenal
is very common and may be focal or multifocal
Pituitary cysts (Fig. 2.94) are very common and
(Frith et al 2000a). The cells of the zona fascicu-
are occasionally lined by cuboidal, ciliated epithe-
lris have clear cytoplasmic vacuoles. Cystic
lium. Pituitary cysts containing eosinophilic mate-
degeneration (Fig. 2.10l) of the zona fascicularis
rial are likely to represent cystic remnants of
is also commonly encountered in aging, female
Rathke's pouch. Here, the pars intermedia and the
rats (Frith et al 2000a). The lesion consists of
pars nervosa of the pituitary may contain focal,
arge, clear or blood-filled spaces. Often the sur-
unremarkable, glandular structures which do not
rounding cortical cells display vacuolation or the
display neoplastic transformation (Fig. 2.95). The
cystic lesion may be part of a hyperplastic (Fig.
epithelium lining the glandular structures as well
2.102) or neoplastic area. The lesion is most
as the cyst is largely cuboidal and the cyst lining 
common in female rats and may be noted as a red
FIGURE 2.96 Angiectasis in the rat pituitary. x40.
is ciliated (Frith et al 2000a).
mass at necropsy. Foci of cortical hyperplasia,
often vacuolated, may be observed in the rat
adrenal (Fig. 2.106) (Frith et al 2000a).
HGURE 2.94 Pituitary cyst in the pars ntermedia in the
FIGURE 2.97 Focal hyperplasia of the pars distalis of the
rat. x200.
rat pituitary. x100.
HGURE 2.100 Cortical vacuolation in the rat adrenal
 gland. x200.
FIGURE 2.95 Rathke's pouch remnants in the rat pitui-
 FIGURE 2.98 Hyperplasia of pars distalis in rat pituitary
tary gland. ×100.
with an unremarkable vascular pattern. x200.
HGURE 2.101 Cortical cystic degeneration in the rat 
Hemangiectasis, i.e. the dilatation of blood-
adrenal gland. x200.
flled spaces in the adenohypophysis (Fig. 2.96) of
the pituitary, is common in older rats (Frith et al
 2000a). One or more focal proliferations of a
Wistar and Sprague-Dawley rats
LE
HGURE 2.102 Corical hyperplasia and vacuolation in the 
FIGURE 2.104 Extramedullary hemopoiesis in the adrenal
FIGURE 2.107 Cortical ossification in the rat adrenal
rat adrenal gland. x400.
cortex of the rat. x200.
gland. x200.
Angiectasis (hemangiectasis, capillary dilata-
tion, peliosis) (Fig. 2.103) is also very common in
the adrenal zona fascicularis as well as occasionally
in the medulla. The lesion consists of dilatation of
the vascular spaces lined by endothelium and may
 also be linked to the areas of cystic degeneration
and cortical vacuolation. In addition, foci of corti-
 cal hyperplasia (foci of cellular alteration} may
also be present within these degenerative lesions.
 The cells are variably sized and may be vacuolated.
Single or multiple well-demarcated lesions are
most commonly found in the zona fasciculata and
zona reticularis. The foci maintain architectural
relationships and produce minor or no compres-
sion of the adjacent parenchyma. The cells within
the foci may resemble those of surrounding
FIGURE 2.105 Extracapsular cortical tissue in the rat
HGURE 2.108 Ceroid or lipofuscin pigment present in the
cortex, be tinctorially distinct and smaller in size,
adrenal gland. x100.
cortex of the rat adrenal gland. x200.
or display vacuolated cytoplasm. Highly vacu-
olated cells may be more numerous in the inner
Aggregates of medullary cells with minimal
region of the foci of hyperplasia. Mitotic activity
altered cellular arrangement and cytological fea-
juasaid iou si eide ieman pe mol Aeoid s
(Frith et al 2000a).
tures may also be encountered in the rat adrenal
gland (Fig. 2.109). The affected cells may be
slightly enlarged, with a round, vesicular nucleus,
or smaller than normal cells with a hyperchro-
matic nucleus. The cytoplasm may show increased
basophilia (Frith et al 2000a). Occasionally foci of
hypertrophy may be noted in the zona glomeru-
losa of the rat adrenal gland (Fig. 2.110).
FIGURE 2.106 Cortical hyperplasia in the rat adrenal
gland. x200.
 Adrenal mineralization may occur in the adrenal
cortex following inflammation or hemorrhage
HGURE 2.103 Angiectasis in the rat adrenal cortex.
(Frith et al 2000a). In addition, adrenal ossifica-
x200.
tion is occasionally observed in the cortex of older
rats (Fig. 2.107). Lipofuscin pigmentation (Fig.
Foci of extramedullary hemopoiesis are occa-
2.108) or ceroid pigmentation is characterized by
sionally observed in the rat adrenal (Fig. 2.104),
the presence of yellow brown pigment in the zona
but these are generally linked to animals respond-
reticularis and this background change is observed
ing to a regenerative anaemia. In these cases,
in older rats (Frith et al 2000a).
 HGURE 2.109 Medullary hyperplasia of the rat adrenal
extramedullary hemopoiesis is likely to be encoun-
gland. x200.
tered at multiple sites such as the liver and the
spleen. Ectopic adrenal tissue (Fig. 2.105) is a
common finding in the rat adrenal. The tissue is
generally present immediately outside the adrenal
capsule. Foci of cortical tissue may occasionally be
found in the medull, and medullary tissue may
extend into the cortex.
32
 BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Hemangiectasis, i.e. blood-flled spaces, may
occur in the islets of aging rats (Frith et al 2000a).
Pancreatic hepatocytes are occasionally observed
in the periphery around an islet in the pancreas
and are thought to derive from pancreatic acinar
cells (Frith et al 2000a). Peri-insular halos (juxta-
insular cells) consist of large, acinar cells adjacent
to the islets with enlarged nuclei and granular,
hypereosinophilic cytoplasm due to an increase in
zymogen granules (Kramer & Tan 1968). The
cause is thought to be due to the greater concen-
trations of insulin in the cells immediately adja-
cent to the islets (Krarmer & Tan 1968) (Fig.
 2.115). Variation in the size of islets is commonly
encountered, but it is not as extreme as it is in
HGURE 2.110 Focal hypertrophy of zona glomerulosa of
FIGURE 2.112 Intracytoplasmic colloid in the rat thyroid.
mice (Fig. 2.116a)
the rat adrenal gland. x200.
x200.
 A common background lesion in the rat thyroid
is the presence of cysts. These are generally lined
by squamous epithelium and flled with keratin
.2
and cellular debris. Follicular cysts and dilated
follicles, flled with colloid, may also be observed.
Ultimobranchial cysts are the remnants of embry-
 onic ultimobranchial bodies that originate from
the third pharyngeal pouch (Frith et al 2000a).
These cysts are lined by flattened squamous epi-
thelium and often contain keratin (Frith et al
2000aj. Persistent thyroglossal ducts originate
from a ventral-down growth of endoderm and are
lined with cuboidal or ciliated columnar epithe-
lium (Frith et al 2000a).
HGURE 2.115 Increased zymogen granules around the
Basophilic concretions in the colloid are also
FIGURE 2.113 Follicular epithelial hypertrophy in the 
islets in rat pancreas. x100.
 appears to represent mineralization and occurs in
juvenile rat thyroid. x200.
aging rats. C-cell hyperplasia (Fig. 2.1ll) is occa-
sionally observed in the rat thyroid, but is not as
Thickened trabeculae, made up of fbrous con-
common as the C-cell hyperplasia noted in the
nective tissue, are observed commonly in the par-
dog thyroid. Areas of ectopic thymus are common
athyroid of aging rats. Cysts may also be present
 adjacent to the thyroid in the rat (Johnson & Gad
in the parathyroid. The cysts are thought to derive
2007).
from the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches
(Frith et al 2000a). Multinucleate giant cells are
occasionally observed at the periphery of the par-
athyroid. The significance of these cells is not
known (Frith et al 2000a). Intracytoplasmic inclu-
sions are rarely observed in the parathyroid of the
rat, but are though to be a background change.
Focal areas of hypertrophy may be observed in the
rat parathyroid gland (Fig. 2.114)
HGURE 2.116a Islet cell hyperplasia in the rat pancreas.
x200.
Skin and appendages
Staphylococcal infections causing ulcerative tarsal
HGURE 2.111 Focal C-cell hyperplasia in thyroid of the
dermatitis (also known as tarsal granulomas) are
rat. x200.
common in male rats; however, it is likely that
initial trauma caused by wire cages, persistent irri-
 Brown pigment may be observed within the
tation and fghting are important contributing
follicular epithelial cells in aging rats (Frith et al
factors. The presence of the lesion on the under-
2000a). In addition, foci of lymphocytes and
side of the tarsus suggests that wire cages may
plasma cells may be observed in the interstitium
cause the initial trauma. The disease is common in
of the thyroid of older rats (Frith et al 2000a).
heavy, aged, male rats and may be related to an
Intracytoplasmic colloid (Fig. 2.1ll2) is occasion-
FIGURE 2.114 Focal hypertrophy in the rat parathyroid
underlying osteoarthritis (Percy & Barthold 2007)
ally observed in the rat thyroid. This lesion may be
gland. x400.
(Fig. 2.ll6b). Epidermal, keratin or follicular
related to intracytoplasmic microfollicular vacu-
cysts, especially on the tail, are common in the rat
 oles described by Neve & Rondeaux (1991). Juve-
Aging Wistar rats develop fbrosis inflammation
skin. The lesion consists of a cyst flled with keratin
nile thyroid follicular epithelium may appear
and lined by squamous epithelium (Fig. 2.117).
 and pigmentation of the islets of Langerhans in the
hypertrophied, but this is a normal change inyoung
pancreas. This may produce a lobular appearance
rats (Rao-Rupanagudi et al 1992) (Fig. 2.113).
in the islets of older rats (Frith et al 2000a}.
Wistar and Sprague-Dawley rats
33
Spontaneous age-related atrophy of bone is
reported in rats (Leininger & Riley 1990). Bone
cysts (Fig. 2.ll9) are rare in rats (Long et al
1996).
Chondromucinous degeneration(
[Fig.
2.120) is observed frequently in the sternum and
growth plate and articular cartilage of long bones
(Leininger & Riley 1990). The lesion increases as
the rat becomes older. The etiology of the condi-
tion is not known and the lesion does not appear
to progress.
AGURE 2.116b Tarsal ulceration and dermatitis in the
rat skin. x200.
HGURE 2.121 Joint mouse in the knee joint of the rat.
x200.
FIGURE 2.119 Subarticular bone cyst in the rat femur.
x200.
HGURE 2.117 Epidermal or follicular cyst flled with
keratin in the rat skin. x40.
HGURE 2.122 Keratin cyst with associated inflammation
within the skeletal muscle of the rat. x200.
Muscle, bones and joints
Brain and nervous system
Atrophy of skeletal muscles occurs spontaneously
Axonal degeneration is commonly observed in the
in aging rats (Fig. 2.118) (Greaves et al 1996) and
cervical, thoracic and lumbar spinal cords of older
the fbres assurme a compressed angular profle
rats (McMartin et al 1997). Sciatic nerve demy-
[Greaves et al 1996], particularly in the hind
elination is common in aging rats. Myelopathy in
limbs. In addition, the atrophic muscle fbres are
the thoracic and lumbar spinal cord, characterized
accompanied by variation in muscle fbre size,
FIGURE 2.120 Chondromucinous degeneration of the 
by distended axon sheaths and myelinophages,
fbrous tissue and the inclusion of lipofuscin and
bone in the rat sternum. x100.
may be linked to the demyelination in the sciatic
lipid droplets within the fibres (Greaves et al
nerve (Fig. 2.123). Lipofuscin pigmentation of
1996). Spontaneous synovitis may be detected in
Degenerative joint disease is observed in the
 neurones is common in the aging rat brain (Knox
the stifle joints of control Wistar rats in four-week
fermur-tibial joint (knee) of aging rats. The lesion
et al 1980). Lipofuscin can be identifed with the
and two-year toxicity studies (Sasaki et al 1998).
is characterized by irregularity and thickening of
use of Schmorl's or carbol fuchsin stains. Loss of
The severity is not increased with aging. The
the articular cartilage and the formation of
 ventral horn motor cell has been reported in aging
pathogenesis is thought to be joint instability
chondrocyte clusters (Long et al 1996). Later,
rats (McMartin et al 1997).
which induces mechanical damage of the syn-
cartilage necrosis, cyst formation, synovial hyper-
ovium (Sasaki et al 1998).
plasia and thickening of the joint capsule are
observed (Long et al 1996). Joint mice may occa-
sionally be observed within the affected joint (Fig.
8-
2.121). Osteochondrosis occurs spontaneously in
Sprague-Dawley rats. Occasional keratin or epi-
derrmal cysts may be encountered in the skeletal
muscle of the rat (Fig. 2.122).
HGURE 2.123 Sciatic nerve demyelination in the rat.
x200.
HGURE 2.118 Atrophy of myofibres in rat skeletal
muscle. x400.
34
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Epidermoid cysts (Fig. 2.124) originate from
staining of the myelin (McMartin et al 1997). Cer-
embryological remnants of ectoderm and are
ebellar hypoplasia is a congenital lesion which is
made up of keratin-filled cysts lined by squamous
rarely observed in the rat brain (Fig. 2.126). Lym-
epithelium (McMartin et al 1997). Epidermoid
phocyte aggregates may be noted in the pineal
cysts are found occasionally on the surface of the
gland of young rats. The nucleus circularis is a focus
spinal cord or the brain. Brain mineralization (Fig.
of neurones in the neonatal rat brain which may be
2.125) is occasionally encountered in the brains of
confused with a treatment-related finding (Fig.
older animals, especially in the thalamus (Burek
2.127). The nucleus circularis, in the anterior
1978). Spontaneous globoid mineralization has
hypothalamus, is a group of magnocellular ele-
been noted in the cerebellum of rats (Yanai et al,
 ments arranged in a ring around a capillary bed. The
1993]. Age-related mineralization is generally
entire nucleus is surrounded or encapsulated by
not observed in conjunction with glial reactions
myelinated fbers (Hatton 1976). The neonatal rat 
(McMartin et al 1997).
brain also contains focal areas of neuroblasts, which
may be confused with gliosis (Fig. 2.128). In addi-
tion, the neonatal rat brain may also display foci of
 HGURE 2.129 Extramedullary hemopoiesis in the choroid
extramedullary hemopoiesis in the choroid plexus
plexus of the neonatal rat. x200.
(Fig. 2.129), which is a normal feature at day 12.
Furthermore, the neonatal brain also displays the
presence of cysts (Fig. 2.130) and large, bizarre
mitotic fgures (Fig. 2.131). Ectopic granule cells
are also visible in the neonatal ratbrain (Fig. 2.132).
HGURE 2.124 Epidermal or keratin cyst in the spinal
cord of the rat. x200.
HGURE 2.130 Cyst present in neonatal rat brain. x100.
FIGURE 2.126 Cerebellar hypoplasia in the rat cerebel-
lum. x100.
HGURE 2.125 Brain mineralization in areas of malacia in
the rat brain. x200.
HGURE 2.131 Bizarre mitotic figures present in the neo-
Gliosis is a response to nervous system injury,
but may be observed as a background lesion in rats
natal rat brain at day 12. x100.
(McMartin et al 1997). The term refers to the
increase in the number of astrocytes and/or
microglia and their processes (McMartin et al
FIGURE 2.127 Nucleus circularis in the cerebrum of a
1997). Hemorrhage into the Virchow-Robin
neonatal rat. x200.
 space around a blood vessel may be observed in
the rat. Artifactual hemorrhage into the brain,
spinal cord and cerebral spinal spaces is common
when the nervous system is not handled carefully
(McMartin et al 1997]. Hydrocephalus, i.e. the
expansion of the ventricles with cerebrospinal
fluid, may be encountered in younger animals as
an incidental finding or it may occur due to sec-
ondary pressure (e.g. tumors).
Vacuolation is occasionally observed in the large
HGURE 2.132 Ectopic granule cells in the neonatal rat
neurones of aged rats as a background change
brain. x100.
(McMartin et al 1997). Artifactual vacuolation in
the brain is common and should be distinguished
from vacuolation associated with pathology. The
100μm
lesion may occur unilaterally or bilaterally. Gener-
ally, vacuolation associated with genuine pathology
FIGURE 2.128 Foci of neuroblasts in the neonatal rat
is accompanied by inflammatory cells and reduced
brain. x100.
Wistar and Sprague-Dawley rats
35
Eye and ear
Porphorin accumulations in the Harderian gland
are considered to be a normal background in
nearly every rat. Inflarmmation of the Harderian 
gland is common, and squamous hyperplasia is
also observed occasionally within the rat Harde-
rian gland (Fig. 2.133). Cellular pleomorphism is 
a normal background change in the lacrimal gland.
In addition, one can often see areas of Harderiani-
zation in the lacrimal gland (Fig. 2.134) and this
is an example of sexual dimorphism of the
extraorbital lacrimal gland in the rat (Ferrara et al
2004). Acinar atrophy and inflammation may be
noted in the lacrimal gland (Fig. 2.135). Acinar
FIGURE 2.136 Acinar hypertrophy in the lacrimal gland 
FIGURE 2.138 Optic nerve atrophy and fibre degenera-
hypertrophy may also be present in the lacrimal
in the rat. x200.
tion in the rat. x100.
gland (Fig. 2.136).
In the rat eye, retinal rosettes are often noted
as a background change (Fig. 2.137). Optic nerve
atrophy and degeneration with areas of vacuola-
tion is observed as an aging change in the rat
(Fig. 2.138). Corneal opacity is a distinct entity in
aging rats and occurs predominantly in male rats
(Taradach & Greaves 1984). Increased fbrosis of
the ciliary body and iris is reported in aging rats
(Taradach & Greaves 1984). Synechia between
the iris and cornea, and iris and lens may be a
congenital or inflammatory lesion in young rats
and coloboma is a congenital condition occasion-
ally reported in rats (Taradach & Greaves 1984).
Lenticular degeneration (Fig. 2.139) and cataracts
are cormmon in older rats, as is retinal atrophy
(Fig. 2.140) which may be a background lesion
HGURE 2.139 Lenticular degeneration of the lens of the
HGURE 2.133 Squamous hyperplasia of the Harderian
or treatment-related or caused by excessive light
rat eye. x200.
gland in the rat. x400.
and other causes. Interestingly, autolysis may also
cause a lesion in the lens of the rat which appears
to be similar to lenticular degeneration (Fig.
2.141).
 HGURE 2.134 Harderianization of the lacrimal gland of
HGURE 2.140 Rat eye retinal atrophy loss of outer
nuclear layer. x200.
the rat. x200.
FIGURE 2.137 Retinal rosettes in the eye of the rat.
x100.
Lens
Cornea
Lens capsule
AGURE 2.135 Acinar atrophy and inflammation in lac-
HGURE 2.141 Lenticular autolysis which is similar to
rimal gland of the rat. x200.
enticular degeneration in the rat eye. x100.
36
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Auricular chondritis (Fig. 2.142) is a lesion
Frandsen, A.M., 1962. Sebaceous glands in the gingiva
MacKenzie, W.F., Alison, R.H., 1990. Heart. In:
noted in the ears of older rats which consists of
of the rat. Oral Biol. 7, 247-248.
Boorman, G.A., Eustis, S.L., Elwell, M.R., et al.
cartilage degeneration, fbrosis and inflammatory
Frith, C.H., Bott, S., Jokinen, M.P, et al., 2000a.
(Eds.], Pathology of the Fischer rat. Academic Press,
Non-proliferative lesions of the endocrine system in
San Diego, pp. 461-471.
cell infiltration.
rats. In: E-l guides for toxicologic pathology. STP/
McMartin, D.N., O'Donoghue, J.L., Morissey, R.,
ARP/AFIP, Washington DC.
1997.Non-proliferative lesions of the nervous
Frith, C.H., Ward, J.M., Chandra, M., et al., 2000b.
 system in rats. In: NS-1 guides for toxicologc
 Non-proliferative lesions of the hematopoietic
pathology. STP/ARP/AFIP, Washington DC.
system in rats. In: HL-1 guides for toxicologic
Montgomery, C.A. & Seely, J.C., 1990. Kidney. In:
pathology. STP/ARP/AFIP, Washington DC.
Boorman, G.A., Eustis, S.L., Elwell, M.R., et al.
Germann, PG., Ockert, D., Heinrichs, M., 1998.
(Eds.], Pathology of the Fischer rat. Academic Press,
San Diego, pp. 127-152.
Pathology of the oropharyngeal cavity in six strains
of rats: predisposition of Fischer 344 rats for
Monticello, TM., Morgan, K.T, Uriah, I., 1990. Non
inflammatory and degenerative changes. Toxicol.
neoplastic lesions nasal lesions in rats and mice.
Pathol. 26, 283-289.
Environ. Health Perspect 85, 249-274.
Gopinath, C., Prentice, D.E., Lewis, D.G., 1987. The
Neuenschwander, S.B., Elwell, M.R., 1990. Salivary
liver. In: Gresham, G.A. (Ed.), Atlas of
glands. In: Boorman, G.A., Eustis, S.L., Elwell,
experimental toxicological pathology, vol. 13. MTP
M.R., et al. (Eds.], Pathology of the Fischer rat.
Press, Lancaster, pp. 43-60.
Academic Press, San Diego, pp. 31-41.
Greaves, P, Seely, J.C., 1996. Non-proliferative lesions
Neve, P, Rondeaux, P, 199l. Age-related accumulation
 of soft tissues and skeletal muscle in rats. In: MST-]
 of lysosomes and other cytological features in active
HGURE 2.142 Auricular chondritis in the rat ear with
guides for toxicologic pathology. STP/ARP/AFIP,
thyroid follicles of the CBA mouse. Cell Tissue Res.
cartilage degeneration and mineralization. x100.
Washington DC
65, 275-285
Haley, D.P, Bulger, R.E., 1983. The aging male rat:
Percy, D.H., Barthold, S.W, 2007. Pathology of
structure and function of the kidney. Am. J. Anat.
laboratory rodents and rabbits, third ed. lowa State
References
67, 1-13.
University Press, IA, p. 133.
Hard, G.C., Alden, C.L., Bruner, R.H., 1999.
Rao-Rupanagudi, S., Heywood, R., Gopinath, C., 1992.
Albers, TM, Sion, M.A., Clifford, C.B., 2009.
 Non-proliferative lesions of the kidney and lower
Age-related changes in thyroid structure and
Histopathology of naturally transmitted "rat
urinary tract in rats. In: URG-] guides for
function in Sprague-Dawley rats. Vet. Pathol. 29,
respiratory virus": progression of lesions and proposed
toxicologic pathology. STP/ARP/AFIP, Washington
278287.
diagnostic criteria. Vet. Pathol. 46, 992-999.
DC.
Renne, R.A., Dungworth, D.L., Keenan, C.M., 2003.
Andrews, PM., 1981. The presence of proximal tubule
Hatton, G.1., 1976. Nucleus circularis: is it an
 Non-proliferative lesions of the respiratory tract in
like cell in the kidney parietal epithelium in response
osmoreceptor in the brain? Brain research bulletin 1,
rats. In R-1 guides for toxicologic pathology. STP/
to unilateral nephrectomy. Anat. Rec. 200, 6]-65.
123131.
ARP/AFIP, Washington, DC.
Bernick, S., Bavetta, L.A., 1962. The development of
Haworth, R., Woodfne, J., McCawley, S., et al., 2007.
Renne, R., Brix, A., Harkema, J., et al., 2009.
gingival sebaceous-like glands and cysts in rats of the
 Pulmonary neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia:
 Proliferative and non proliferative lesions of the rat
Holtzman strain. Oral Surg. Oral Med. Oral Pathol.
identifcation, diagnostic criteria and incidence in
 and mouse respiratory tract. Toxicol. Pathol. 37,
15, 351-354.
untreated ageing rats of different strains. Toxicol.
5S-73S.
Bertram, TA., Markovits, J.E., Juliana, M.M., 1996.
Pathol. 35, 735-740.
Ruben, Z., Arceo, R.J., Bishop, S.P, et al., 2000.
Non-proliferative lesions of the alimentary canal in
Johnson, M.D., Gad, S.C., 2007. The rat. In: Gad S.C.
Non-proliferative lesions of the heart and
rats. In: Gl-1 guides for toxicologic pathology. STP/
[Ed.], Animal models in toxicology, second ed.
vasculature in rats. In: CV-] guides for toxicologic
ARP/AFIP, Washington DC.
 pathology. STP/ARP/AFIP, Washington DC.
Boorman, G.A., Eustis, S.L., 1990. Lung. In: Boorman,
Kambara, T, McKevitt, TP, Francis, I., et al., 2009.
Rulli, M.A., Martinelli, C., 197l. Free sebaceous glands
G.A., Eustis, S.L., Elwell, M.R., et al. (Eds.],
Eosinophilic inclusions in rat Clara cells and the
in the gingival of some rats. Archs Oral Biol. 16,
Pathology of the Fischer rat. Academic Press, San
effect of an inhaled corticosteroid.Toxicol.Pathol.
831832.
Diego, pp. 339-367.
37, 315-323.
Sasaki, S., Nagai, H., Mori, I., et al., 1998.
Brown, H.R., Hardisty, J.F., 1990. Oral cavity,
Kendrey, G., Roe, F.J., 1969. Melanotic lesions of the
Spontaneous synovitis in Wistar rats. Toxicol. Pathol.
esophagus,and stomach.In:Boorman, G.A.,Eustis,
 eye in August hooded rats induced by urethan or
26, 687-690.
S.L., Elwell, M.R., et al. (Eds.], Pathology of the
N-hydroxyurethan given during the neonatal period:
Stalker, M.J., Hayes, M.A., 2007. Liver and biliary
Fischer rat. Academic Press, San Diego, pp. 9-29.
a histopathological study. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 43,
system,In:MaxieMG (Ed.),Jubb,Kennedy &
Burek, J.D., 1978. Pathology of aging rats. CRC Press,
749-762.
Palmer's pathology of domestic animals, vol. 2. ffth
West Palm Beach, FL
Knox, C.A., Yates, R.D., Chen, I., et al., 1980. Effects
ed. Saunders, Edinburgh, p. 312.
Chandra, M., Frith, C.F, 1992. Spontaneous 
of aging on the structural and permeability
Stefanski, S.A., Elwell, M.R., Stromberg, PC., 1990.
neoplasms in aged control Fischer 344 rats. Cancer
characteristics of cerebrovasculature in normotensive
Spleen, lymph nodes and thymus. In: Boorman,
Lett. 62, 49-56.
and hypertensive strains of rats. Acta. Neuropathol.
G.A., Eustis, S.L., Elwell, M.R., et al. (Eds.],
Detilleux, PG., Gruebbel, M.M., Botts, S., et al.,
51, 1-13.
Pathology of the Fischer rat.AcademicPress,San
1995. Non-proliferative changes of the liver,
Kramer, M.F., Tan, H.T, 1968. The peri-insular acini of
Diego, pp. 369-393.
exocrine pancreas and salivary glands of the rat. In:
the pancreas of the rat. Z. Zelforsch Mikrosk Anat.
Baradach, C., Greaves, P, 1984. Spontaneous eye
Gl-2 guides for toxicologic pathology. STP/ARP/
86, 163-170.
lesions in laboratory animals:incidence in relation to
 AFIP, Washington DC.
Leininger, J.R., Riley, M.G., 1990. Bones, joints and
age. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 12, 121-147.
Dixon, D., Heider, K., Elwell, M.R., 1995. Incidence
synovia. In: Boorman, G.A., Eustis, S.L., Elwell,
Thoolen, B., Maronpot, R.R., Harada, T, et al., 2010.
of nonneoplastic lesions in historical control male
M.R., et al. (Eds.], Pathology of the Fischer rat.
Proliferative and nonproliferative lesions of the rat
and female Fischer-344 rats from 90-day toxicity
Academic Press, San Diego, pp. 209-225.
and mouse hepatobiliary system. Toxicol. Pathol. 38,
studies. Toxicol. Pathol. 23, 338-348.
Livingston, R.S., Besch-Williford, C.L., Myles, M.H.,
5S-81S.
Eustis, S.L., Boorman, G.A., Harada, T, et al., 1990.
et al, 20ll. Pneumocystis carinii infection causes
Yanai, T, Masegi, T, Ueda, K., et al., 1993.
Liver. In: Boorman, G.A., Eustis, S.L., Elwell, M.R.,
lung lesions historically attributed to rat respiratory
Spontaneous globoid mineralization in the
et al. (Eds.], Pathology of the Fischer rat. Academic
virus. Comparative Medicine 6l, 45-52.
cerebellum of rats. J. Comp. Pathol. 109,
Press, San Diego, pp. 71-92.
Long, PH., Leinninger, J.R., Ernst, H., 1996.
447-451.
Ferrara, D., Monteforte, R., Baccari, G.C., et al., 2004.
 Non-proliferative lesions of bone, cartilage, tooth
Yoshitomi, K., Brown, H.R., Eustis, S., 1990. Fordyce's
 Androgen and estrogen receptors expression in the
and synovium of rats. In: MST-2 guides for
granules of the incisor and molar gingiva in F344
rat exorbital lacrimal gland in relation to
toxicologic pathology. STP/ARP/AFIP,
rats. Vet. Pathol. 27, 432-438.
"harderianization". J. Exp. Zool. 301A, 297-306.
Washington DC.
CHAPTER 3
Cheryl Scudamore
Beagle dog
Introduction
The majority of dogs used in toxicity studies are
young beagles (generally less than one year old at
the start of study), and therefore a limited range
of background finding is recognized compared to
the ageing population of dogs generally seen in
veterinary pathology diagnostic facilities. The most
common observations are minimal inflammatory-
cell foci, usually predominantly mononuclear cells,
of unknown etiology. Inflammatory-cell foci are
seen in many organs but are particularly common
in theliver (Foster 2005), lung, salivary glands and
tongue. Other common findings include granular
brown pigmentin the spleen (usually hemosiderin)
and liver (usually lipofuscin} and agonal congestion
HGURE 3.3 Focal mineralization of media of aorta. x100.
FIGURE 3.1 Haematocyst at the base of heart valve,
of the vasculature, particularly in the gastro-
characterized by blood-filled channels Surrounded by
intestinal tract (Haggerty et al 2007). Other back-
 Intimal thickening as the result of musculoelas-
connective tissue. x400. Image courtesy of A de Molina,
 ground and incidental fndings are seen with
tic proliferation of intramural vessels in the myo-
HLS.
varying incidence depending on the strain, supplier
cardium (Grant Maxie & Robinson 2007) and
and test facility, and are illustrated below.
pulmonary vessels (Fig. 3.4) can be found in nor-
motensive laboratory dogs. The change needs to
Cardiovascular system
be distinguished from oblique planes of section
through blood vessel walls, particularly where
Young dogs of all breeds - including beagles
there is the possibility that there are drug-induced
may show spontaneous lesions including focal
changes in vascular tone or blood pressure. There
telangiectasia (hematocysts) of the heart valve
is little literature on the spontaneous incidence of
(Fig. 3.1) and endocardiosis (Takeda et al 1991).
these changes (Detweiler et al 1961).
Hematocysts are seen macroscopically as dark red
or black cysts on valve cusps. The incidence of
endocardiosis increases with age, with a frequency
of 1l-25% reported in lifetime studies of beagles
(Van Fleet 2001). Arteritis is seen sporadically,
reportedly in 5-10% of young beagles (Grant
Maxie & Robinson 2007], and occurs more com-
monly in males, affecting either single or multiple
vessels, most commonly in the epididymides,
thymus, and the coronary arteries of the heart
(Fig. 3.2) (Son 2004). In the majority of cases in
FIGURE 3.2 Arteritis and periarteritis of extramural coro-
young dogs the lesions are idiopathic (Hartman
nary artery. x200. Image courtesy of E Mclnnes.
1987] and occur in the absence of any clinical
signs, but they can also occur as part of the beagle
Mineralization of the root of the aorta (Glaister
pain  syndrome'.
 Distinguishing spontaneous
1986, Kelly et al 1982) (Fig. 3.3) and other vessels
lesions from those induced by drugs can be diff-
is occasionally seen in young dogs, although the
cult, and pathologists may need to use a weight-
incidence increases with age (Schwarz et al 2002).
of-evidence approach based on the incidence,
HGURE 3.4 Focal villous intimal proliferation in an intra-
 In beagles, this lesion can occur in animals with
mural myocardial artery. Proliferation may be concentric
distribution of lesions, morphological appearance,
normal serum calcium and phosphorus levels, in
the absence of any other pathology, and may only
or focal forming arterial 'cushions'. x100.
and associated pathology (Clemo et al 2003) to
reach a diagnosis.
be visible microscopically.
Villous mesothelial proliferations are occasion-
ally seen attached to the epicardium and pleura
(Mesfin 1990) (Fig. 3.5), possibly resulting from
local friction or other stimulation. These pro-
jections consist of an extracellular matrix core
surrounding capillaries covered by a cuboidal mes-
othelial lining.
38
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Respiratory system
Normal histological variations occur throughout
the respiratory tract and include foci of squamous
epithelium (Fig. 3.10) in the trachea. Pulmonary
mineralization can occur in two forms: either asso-
ciated with the alveolar interstitium, when it
tends to be diffuse or multifocal, or as focal osteo-
phyte formation (Fig. 3.1l1). Diffuse pulmonary
mineralization is reported in dogs with uraemia
and Cushing's syndrome[
(Berry et al 2005)
but can also be an idiopathic finding, and subepi-
thelial mineralization of peribronchiolar smooth
muscle (Fig. 3.12) can be seen as a spontaneous
fnding in control beagles (D J Lewis, personal
 HGURE 3.5 villous mesothelial projections from epicar-
FIGURE 3.7 Prominent Hassall's corpuscles composed of
communication).
dium of atrium characterized by a connective tissue core 
concentric whorls of keratin are a normal feature of
covered by mesothelium. Atrial wall also shows extensive 
canine thymus. ×100.
adipocyte infiltration. x100.
Hemolymphoreticular system
Few lesions are recorded in the lymphoid tissues
of young beagles. Thymic cysts or epithelial rem-
nants from the branchial pouches (Fig. 3.6) are
commonly seen in the medulla (Newman 1971),
as in other species, and may increase in promi-
nence with involution. Prominent Hassall's cor-
puscles may also be seen in the thymic medulla
[Snyder et al 1993] and are composed of concen-
tric layers of keratin (Fig. 3.7). In the spleen of
 HGURE 3.10 Squamous epithelium is a normal feature 
young dogs haemosiderotic foci or plaques may
 of the epithelial lining of the dorsal trachea where the 
not be obvious macroscopically, but may be seen
 cartilage is discontinuous. x100.
microscopically, usually associated with connec-
FIGURE 3.8 Hemosiderotic plaque in the spleen. Mineral
tive tissue trabeculae or in connective tissue
 and brown pigment deposits on connective tissue trabec-
around the hilar vessels (Fig. 3.8). In older animals 
ulae. x100.
these are recognized macroscopically as yellow or
grey encrustations or nodules along the capsular
Accessory spleens may be present in the
borders, sometimes referred to as Gandy-Gamna
omentum or attached to the surface of the spleen.
bodies.
They appear as brown nodules, usually less than
2mm in diameter (Kelly et al 1982, Patnaik
1985), and they have their own independent
blood supply. Hyalinized material may occasion-
ally be seen in the follicles of lymph nodes and
spleen (Fig. 3.9). In some cases this may
be
amyloid deposition but may alternatively
be
accumulations of immunoglobulin.
HGURE 3.11 Focal osseous metaplasia or osteophyte
formation in lung parenchyma. Image courtesy of DJ
Lewis.x200.
HGURE 3.6 Prominent branchial cyst in involuting
thymus. x100.
FIGURE 3.9 Hyaline deposits in the germinal centre of a
lymphoid follicle. x100.
HGURE 3.12 Mineralization of peribronchiolar Smooth
muscle. Image courtesy of DJ Lewis. x200.
Beagle dog
39
Fibrosing alveolitis, also known as segmental
fbrosis, may be seen macroscopically as pale,
white, focal thickenings of the pleural surface,
often at the edges of the lung lobes. Microscopi-
cally (Figs 3.13, 3.14) these lesions are wedge-
shaped areas of alveolar fbrosis extending into
the lung parenchyma from the pleura, with associ-
ated epithelial hyperplasia and occasional small
numbers of chronic inflammatory cells (Glaister
1986, Hahn & Dagle 2001). These lesions are well
recognized in beagle tissues but do not seem to be
reported in the veterinary literature. There is
some confusion about the cause of these lesions.
HGURE 3.17 Dilated subpleural ymphatics. x100.
Almost invariably no etiological agent is seen in
 the sections, although they may represent damage
caused by previously migrating parasites such as
FIGURE 3.14 Fibrosing alveolitis at higher magnification
Filaroides and Toxocara species. Filaroides hirthi
characterized by fibrosis of the alveolar septae with a
Gastrointestinal system
lung infestations have been reported in beagle
hyperplastic epithelial lining with or without an associated
Subepithelial inflammatory deposits are common
with demonstrable parasites (Bahnemann & Bauer
inflammatory reaction. x100.
in the dog tongue, and occasional granulomas and
1994, Hottendorf & Hirth 1974), but the current
incidence is unknown in laboratory colonies. In
focal ulcers may be associated with particles of
foreign material, for example sawdust bedding
active Filaroides infections macroscopic tan, grey
(Fig. 3.18). These infltrates need to be distin-
or green nodules may be seen on the pleural
guished from the cellular arteriovenous anastomo-
surface associated microscopically with granulo-
ses (Fig. 3.19) which lie below the epithelium
(Pritchard & Daniel 1953). Adipocyte infltration
tions of nematodes (Fig. 3.15). These granulomas
of the salivary glands may be seen incidentally
should be distinguished from those which occur
without clinical correlation or inflammation (Fig.
secondarily to the inhalation of foreign material or
3.20), although it is reported to cause palpable
due to emboli of keratin from intravenous injec-
glandular enlargement in older animals (Bindseil
tion sites (Fig. 3.16) (Hottendorf & Hirth 1974).
& Madsen 1997, Brown et al 1997).
Dilated pleural lymphatics are occasionally seen
and may be artefactual, related to changes in pul-
monary pressure due to clamping or infusion with
fixative (Fig. 3.17) (Colby et al 2007).
FIGURE 3.15 Cross sections of Filaroides larvae with
associated eosinophilic and granulomatous reaction.
Image courtesy of A Bradley. x200.
HGURE 3.18 Subepithelial inflammation of tongue.
x100.
HGURE 3.13 Fibrosing alveolitis is often seen as a pale
depression in the pleural surface which corresponds with
a wedge-shaped lesion extending from the pleural
surface, often towards a pulmonary vessel. x200.
FIGURE 3.16 Focal granuloma in the lung. Granuloma-
tous reaction surrounds refractile foreign material, pos-
sibly sawdust bedding. x200.
HGURE 3.19 Subepithelial arteriovenous anastamosis of
the tongue. x100.
40
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATOR
ANIMALS
AGURE 3.20 Adipocytes separating glandular acini in the
FIGURE 3.22 Spiral organisms in crypt of gastric gland.
HGURE 3.24 Brick inclusion in a hepatocyte nucleus.
salivary gland. x200.
x200.
x200.
Mineralization of the gastric mucosa (Fig. 3.21)
 Occasional developmental anomalies may also
is observed with varying incidence (5-10%) in
occur in the gastrointestinal tract; for example
beagles with no underlying pathological lesions
Meckel's diverticulum, a remnant of the vitelline
(Glaister 1986, Majeed 1985). In some dogs occa-
duct, may be seen attached to the distal small
sional small microscopic foci of mineralization
intestine or separated from the intestine associ-
may be observed, but in other animals the depos-
ated with the serosa or mesentery (Brown et al
 its may be considerably more extensive leading to
2007). Gastric heteropia may be seen within
a gritty feel when the mucosa is handled. It was
diverticular or as isolated foci within the ileal
 previously suggested (Majeed 1985) that this may
mucosa. These foci of histologically normal gastric
relate to dietary immbalances of calcium and phos-
 mucosa may be surrounded by mucous-cell hyper-
 phorus, but mineralization is now found in dogs 
plasia considered to be an adaptive response to
with normal serum calcium or phosphate levels
local acid secretion (Fig. 3.23) (Iwata et al 1990,
fed on balanced modern diets, and so the underly-
Rest 1987).
ing cause remains unknown.
HGURE 3.25 Brick inclusion in nucleus of renal tubular
epithelial cell. x200.
Lipid vacuolation of the gall bladder epithelium
(Boyd 1923) (Fig. 3.26) is a common incidental
finding, although it can also be increased following
treatment with a variety of compounds. Cystic
mucoid hyperplasia of the gall bladder is reported
to increase with age and to be related to progesta-
gen treatment,
,but it can also been seen in
untreated
1youngbeagles
[Kelly
y et al 1982,
Murakoshil et al 2000) (Fig. 3.27).
HGURE 3.23 Gastric heteropia in the ntestine with adja-
HGURE 3.21 Focal mineralization in gastric mucosa.
cent mucus cell hyperplasia. x100.
Note absence of inflammatory response. Image courtesy
of C Lopez. x100.
Liver and biliary system
A number of spiral-shaped bacteria (gastros-
pirilla) have been identified in the gastric mucosa
Compared to other organs in the beagle, the liver
of dogs; they include Helicobacter felis, H. biz-
has the highest incidence of microscopic patho-
zozeroni, H cynogastricus and Candidatus Heli-
logical lesions (Foster 2005). In common with
cobacter heilmannii (Haesebrouck et al 2009).
other species, the majority of these lesions are
Spiral organisms may be found in up to 86% of
minimal, focal, inflammatory lesions which may
involve the parenchyma, perivascular or periportal
clinically normal dogs and are frequently seen in
the surface mucus, in the lumina of gastric glands
compartments. Acidophilic or hyaline rectangular
(Fig. 3.22) and in parietal cells (Recordati et al
intranuclear periodic acid-Schiff(PAS)-positive
2009) of beagles with no associated pathology
(Prachasilpchai et al 2007). However spiral organ-
hepatocytes (Fig. 3.24) (Harlemann et al 1987,
isms, in particular H. felis (Lee et al 1992), may
Maita et al 1977) and renal tubular epithelium
HGURE 3.26 Apical  vacuolation of  gall bladder
also be associated with a lymphocytic mucosal
(Fig. 3.25) (Stalker & Hayes 2007). They may be
epithelium. x100.
infltrate and/or organized lymphoid follicles
large enough to displace the nucleus but are
which may be seen as macroscopic pale white
believed to be of no significance, although their
nodules.
composition and pathogenesis are unknown.
Beagle dog
41
In the urinary bladder, cystitis (Fig. 3.33) with
or without pyelitis (Hottendorf & Hirth 1974) can
be seen incidentally or following catheterization
(Thomas 1979). Other incidental lesions in the
wall of the urinary bladder include lymphoid fol-
licles in the submucosa (Fig. 3.34) and, the throm-
bosed or mineralized remnants of the umbilical
arteries in the muscular wall of the urinary bladder
(Fig. 3.35) (Grant Maxie & Newman 2007b).
HGURE 3.27 Mucoid hyperplasia of the gall bladder
FIGURE 3.29 Focal tubular basophilia with minimal
epithelium. x100.
inflammation of beagle kidney. x100.
Urinary system
Papillary mineralization in the kidney (Fig. 3.28)
is commonly observed in the absence of imbal-
ances in calcium and phosphorus. Individual
basophilic tubules (focal nephropathy) (Fig. 3.29)
(Morishima et al 1990) and focal interstitial fbro-
HGURE 3.33 Cystitis. Thickening of the transitional epi-
sis and inflammation are seen at a low incidence
 thelium with inflammatory cells within the epithelium and 
and severity in young beagles with increasing
in the submucosa. x100.
numbers of cysts and glomerulosclerosis observed
with increasing age (Pomeroy & Roberston 2004).
Cortical tubular vacuolation may be visible as a
background finding in beagles and is seen more
commonly in females (Morishima et al 1990]
(Fig. 3.30); it is thought to be largely due to the
AGURE 3.30 Vacuolation of cortical tubular epithelium in
accumulation of lipid. Lipid may also accumulate
the inner cortex of the kidney. x100.
in fine vacuoles in the mesangial cells of the
glomeruli giving rise to “foam cells' (Fig. 3.31)
(Grant Maxie & Newman 2007a). Small, densely
cellular glomeuli and tubules may be seen, par-
ticularly close to the capsular surface of the
kidney, and are thought to represent underdevel-
 oped fetal or juvenile remnants in the subcapsular
nephrogenic zone (Fig. 3.32) (Eisenbrandt &
Phemister 1978).
HGURE 3.34 Lymphoid follicles in urinary bladder wall
x100.
 FIGURE 3.31 Lipid accumulation in mesangial cels of the 
glomerulus. x200.
AGURE 3.28 Mineralization of renal papilla of beagle
kidney. x100.
HGURE 3.35 Thrombosed urachal artery in muscular
wall of the urinary bladder. x100.
Endocrine glands
Ectopic thyroid tissue and cysts are the most
common incidental findings in the endocrine
HGURE 3.32 Juvenile glomerulus centre with normal
system (Glaister 1986), usually originating from
glomerulus to eft. x100.
remnants of embryonic ducts. Cysts originating
42
 BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
from the craniopharyngeal duct are frequently
found in the pituitary between the pars distalis
and pars nervosa, and they can be quite extensive
(Fig. 3.36). The cysts are lined by a cuboidal to
columnar epithelium which may be ciliated.
Similar cysts arise in the parathyroid (Fig. 3.37)
and thyroid. In the thyroid, cysts originate from
the ultimobranchial duct and are lined by a kerati-
nized squamous epithelium (Capen 2007a)
FIGURE 3.38a Extensive C-cell infiltrates in thyroid gland 
HGURE 3.40 Vacuolation of the zona reticularis of the
with occasional trapped follicles. x100.
adrenal gland. x200.
Focal areas of pancreatic atrophy are occasion-
ally seen in beagles. In these irregular foci acinar
cells may be small or completely replaced by
fbrous tissue and inflammatory cells (Fig. 3.41).
These lesions are thought to be secondary to local
inflammation or obstruction of the duct system
(Charles 2007).
HGURE 3.36 Multiple cysts originating between pars
distalis and pars nervosa. x100.
HGURE 3.38b Lymphocytic thyroiditis in the dog thyroid.
x100.
The presence of focal adrenal cortical vacuola-
tion is highly variable between animals, but tends 
to be more extensive and ocur at a greater fre-
quency in female beagles (Morishima at el 1990).
Vacuolation may be seen in all layers of the cortex
HGURE 3.41 Pancreatic atrophy. Loss of acinar cells
(Figs 3.39, 3.40).
 and replacement by fibrous tissue and inflammatory cell
infiltrate. x200.
HGURE 3.37 Parathyroid-associated cyst. x100.
Nesidioblastosis is an uncommon finding which
consists of a mixture of Islet cell (predorninantly
beta cells) and ductular proliferation (Son et al
Focal to extensive infltration of the thyroid by
2010). In beagles this finding has been reported
nests of C cells, which represent ultimobranchial
 in the absence of any biochemical or pathological
remnants, is a normal fnding in dogs and is some-
abnormalities, although in other breeds it has been 
times called C-cell complex. The term C-cell
associated with islet-cell neoplasia and diabetes
hyperplasia should only be used when there is a
mellitus (Katsuta et al 1992) (Fig. 3.42).
clear increase in numbers compared to those in
age-matched control animals. The cells are pale-
staining and polygonal with haematoxylin and
eosin (H&E) staining and they express thyroglob-
ulin, calcitonin, calcitonin gene-related peptide
and somatostatin (Fig. 3.38a) (Capen 2007b).
FIGURE 3.39 Vacuolation of the zona glomerulosa of the
Lymphocytic thyroiditis is present in a small per-
centage of beagle dogs used in toxicological studies
adrenal. ×200.
(Fig. 3.38b) and may be a heritable condition
(Benjamin et al 1996) possibly associated with the
subsequent development of thyroid neoplasia.
HGURE 3.42 Nesidioblastosis of the pancreas. x400.
Beagle dog
43
Skin and appendages
particularly prominent in the myocardium where
they may extend through half the thickness of the
Few incidental skin lesions are reported in beagles,
ventricular wall (Fig. 3.5) (Pick & Eubank 1965)
with folliculitis being the most common. There is
Amylase-resistant, periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-
often no apparent etiological agent, but occasion-
positive inclusions may be present in the skeletal
ally Demodex mites may be present (Fig. 3.43)
muscle of beagle dogs. Affected myofibers con-
consistent with the self-limiting localized presen-
tained amorphous material that stains lightly
tation of demodicosis in young dogs. Macroscopi-
basophilic with hematoxylin and eosin and is
cally there may be no obvious lesions or there may
strongly PAS-positive with amylase resistance.
be a local area of scaling and alopecia.
Transmission electron micrographic examination
of the inclusions reveals granular, non-mermbrane-
bound, electron-dense material, consistent with
polysaccharide (Wancket et al 2011).
HGURE 3.46 Focal mineralization of spinal cord menin-
ges. x200.
No
HGURE 3.43 Folliculitis associated with demodex mite
infestation. x200.
Ear margin dermatosis is seen in laboratory
FIGURE 3.45 Chondromucinous degeneration of the
beagle dogs (and other hound breeds) as scaling
sternum. x200.
and alopecia of the ear margins. Microscopically
it is characterized by a localized marked orthok-
eratotic, epidermal and follicular hyperkeratosis 
Brain and nervous system
HGURE 3.47 Perivascular cuffing in the central nervous
(Fig. 3.44) which may be complicated by second-
system (CNS). Unilateral, focal blood vessels surrounded
ary bacterial infection (Ginn et al 2007). It is
Incidental findings in the central nervous system
by cuff of mononuclear cells. Image courtesy of J Bowles.
considered to be an idiopathic primary sebor-
are rare in beagles. Although uncommon in young
x100.
rhoeic condition.
animals, the most commonly observed lesions are
collagenous thickening of the meninges, osifying
 Renaut bodies (Elcock et al 2001) may be seen
pachymeningitis (Grant Maxie & Youssef 2007)
in sciatic nerve sections in the endoneurium or
and mineralization of spinal nerves (Fig. 3.46).
perineurium and consist of well demarcated,
These lesions probably allrepresent early onset of
sparsely cellular structures with a flamentous col-
degenerative changes. Perivascular cuffing of
lagen matrix; they are not associated with evi-
vessels (Fig. 3.47) characterized by minimal accu-
 dence of axonal degeneration or inflammation and
mulations of predominantly lymphocytic cells can
are considered incidental findings (Fig. 3.48). The
be seen at a low incidence in normal beagle dogs.
cell rest of Hortega is visible in the canine cere-
The lesions affect only a few vessels, are not bilat-
brum and may be confused with an area of gliosis
eral or symmetrical, and have no associated clini-
cal signs (Ueda et al 2004). The origins and
(Fig. 3.49).
significance of these lesions are unknown, and
although they have been suggested to be post-
vaccinal or post-viral, there is no clear evidence
to support this. Focal accumulations of inflamma-
tory cells may be seen in the choroid plexus; these
HGURE 3.44 Epidermal and follicular hyperkeratosis
may occur in the absence of any other brain
with minimal dermal inflammatory infiltrate. Ear margin 
pathology and appear to be of no significance.
dermatitis. x200.
may also occasionally be seen, often without ass-
ciated clinical signs in control dogs. The underly-
Muscles, bones and joints
ing cause of this lesion is not known, but may be
Focal chondromucinous degeneration may occa-
infectious (Ueda et al 2004).
sionally be seen in the growth plates of young
beagles, particularly in the sternum. This change
includes focal degradation of the matrix with loss
of affinity for toluidine blue stain and degenera-
FIGURE 3.48 Renaut body in sciatic nerve. x100.
tion of chondrocytes, eventually leading to an
amorphous area of chondromalacia (Fig. 3.45)
(Yamasaki 1994). The cause of this lesion is
unknown, and it does not appear to result in any
abnormality in the mature skeleton. Adipocytes
may be seen infltrating normal skeletal muscle
(Van Fleet & Valentine 2007) and may be
44
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Eisenbrandt, D.L., Phemister, R.D., 1978. Postnatal
Morishima, H., Nonoyama, T., Sasaki, S., Miyajima,
development of the canine kidney. Am. J. Anat.
H., 1990. Spontaneous lesions in beagle dogs used in
154, 179-193.
toxicity studies. Jikken Dobutsu 39, 239-248.
Elcock, L.E., Stuart, B.P, Hoss, H.E., et al., 2001.
Murakoshil, M., Ikeda, R., Tagawa, M., Iwasaka, T.,
Renaut bodies in the sciatic nerve of beagle dogs.
Nakayama, T, 2000. Histopathological study of
Exp. Toxicol. Pathol. 53, 19-24.
female Beagle dogs for four year treatment with
Foster, J.R., 2005. Spontaneous and drug-induced
subcutaneous implantation of chlomdinone acetate
hepatic pathology of the laboratory Beagle dog, the
(CMA). Tokai J. Exp. Clin. Med. 25, 87-91.
Cynomolgus macaque and the marmoset. Toxicol.
Newman, A.J., 1971. Cysts of branchial arch origin in
Pathol. 33, 63-74.
the thymus of the Beagle. J. Small Anim. Pract. 12,
Ginn, PE., Mansell EKL, Rakich, PM., 2007. Skin
681-685.
and appendages. In: Grant Maxie, M. (Ed.], Jubb,
Patnaik, A., 1985. Splenosis in a dog. J. Small Anim.
Kennedy and Palmer's pathology of domestic
Pract. 26, 23-31.
animals, vol. l, fth ed. Saunders, Philadelphia,
Pick, J.R., Eubank, J.R., 1965. A clinicopathologic
p.598.
 study of heterogenous and homogeneous dog
Glaister, J., 1986. Laboratory animal pathology. In:
populations in North Carolina. Lab.Anim. Care 15,
HGURE 3.49 Cell rest of Hortega in canine cerebellum.
Principles of toxicological pathology. Taylor &
11-17.
x200.
Francis, London, pp. 146-152.
Pomeroy, M.J., Robertson, J.L., 2004. The relationship
Grant Maxie, M., Newman, S.J., 2007a. Urinary
of age, sex, and glomerular location to the
system. In: Grant Maxie, M. (Ed.], Jubb, Kennedy
development of spontaneous lesions in the canine
Acknowledgments
and Palmer's pathology of domestic animals, vol. 2,
kidney: analysis of a life-span study. Toxicol. Pathol.
ffth ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 465-466.
32, 237-242.
The author is grateful for the help of J Bowles,
Grant Maxie, M., Newman, S.J., 2007b. Urinary
Prachasilpchai, W., Nuanualsuwan, S., Chatsuwan, T.,
GSK for preparation of many of the images not
system. In: Grant Maxie, M. (Ed.], Jubb, Kennedy
et al., 2007. Diagnosis of Helicobacter spp. infection
otherwise acknowledged.
and Palmer's pathology of domestic animals, vol. 2,
in canine stomach. J. Vet. Sci. 8, 139-145.
fth ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 505.
Pritchard, M.M., Daniel, PM., 1953. Arterio-venous
References
Grant Maxie, M., Robinson, W.F., 2007. Cardiovascular
 anastomoses in the tongue of the dog. J. Anat. 87,
system. In: Grant Maxie, M. (Ed.], Jubb, Kennedy
66-74.
andPalmer's pathology of domestic animals, vol.2,
Bahnemann, R., Bauer, C., 1994. Lungworm infection
Recordati, C., Gualdi, V, Craven, M., et al., 2009.
fth ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 71.
in a beagle colony: Filaroides hirthi, a common but
Spatial distribution of Helicobacter spp. in the
not well-known companion. Exp. Toxicol. Pathol. 46,
Grant Maxie, M., Youssef, S., 2007. Nervous system.
gastrointestinal tract of dogs.Helicobacter 3,
55-62.
In: Grant Maxie, M. (Ed.], Jubb, Kennedy and
180-191.
Palmer's pathology of domestic animals, vol. 1, ffth
Benjamin, S.A., Stephens, L.C., Hamilton, B.F., et al.,
Rest, J.R., 1987. Gastrointestinal anomalies in the
ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 345.
1996. Associations between lymphocytic thyroiditis,
dog - two cases reports. Vet. Rec. 121, 426-427.
hypothyroidism and thyroid neoplasia in Beagles.
Haesebrouck, F, Pasmans, F., Flahou, B., et al., 2009.
Schwarz, T, Sullivan, M., Stork, C.K., et al., 2002.
Gastric helicobacters in domestic animals and
Vet. Pathol. 33, 486-494.
Aortic and cardiac mineralization in the dog. Vet.
nonhuman primates and their signifcance for human
Berry, C.R., Ackerman, N., Monce, K., 2005.
Radiol. Ultrasound 43, 419-427.
health. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 22, 202-223.
Pulmonary mineralization in 4 dogs with Cushings
Snyder, PW., Kazacos, E.A., Felsberg, PJ., 1993.
syndrome. Vet. Radiol. Ultrasound 35, 10-16.
Haggerty, G.C., Peckham, J.C., Thomassen, R.W., Gad,
Histologic characterisation of the thymus in canine
S.C., 2007. The dog. In: Gad, S.C. (Ed.], Animal
Bindseil, E., Madsen, J.S., 1997. Lipomatosis causing
X-linked severe combined immunodefciency. Clin.
models in toxicology, second ed. Taylor & Francis,
tumour-like swelling of a mandibular salivary gland
Immunol. Immunopathol. 67, 55-67.
Boca Raton, pp.588-645.
in a dog. Vet. Rec. 140, 583-584.
Son, W-C., 2004. Idiopathic canine polyarteritis in 
Hahn, F.F., Dagle, G.E., 200l. Non-neoplastic
Boyd, W., 1923. Studies in gall bladder pathology.
 control beagle dogs from toxicity studies. J. Vet. Sci.
pulmonary lesions.In:Mohr,U., Carlton,WW
Br. J. Surg. 10, 337-356.
5, 147-150.
Dungworth, D.L., et al. (Eds.], Pathobiology of
Brown, PJ., Lucke, V.M., Sozmen, M., Whitbread, TJ.,
the aging dog, vol. 1, ISU Press/ILSI, Ames, IA,
Son, W.C., Faki, K., Mowat, V., Gopinath, C., 2010.
Wyatt, J.M., 1997. Lipomatous infltration of the
pp. 60-61.
Spontaneously occurring extra-islet endocrine cell
canine salivary gland. J. Small Anim. Pract. 38,
proliferation in the pancreas of young Beagle dogs.
Harlemann, J.H., Suter, J., Fischer, M., 1987.
234-236.
Toxicol. Lett. 193, 179-182.
Intracytoplasmic eosinophilicinclusion bodies the in
Brown, C.C., Baker, D.C., Barker, I.K., 2007.
the liver of beagle dogs. Lab. Animal Sci. 37, 229.
 Stalker, M.J., Hayes, M.A., 2007. Liver and biliary
Alimentary system. In: Grant Maxie, M. (Ed.],
Hartman, L.A., 1987. Idiopathic extramural coronary
system. In: Grant Maxie, M. (Ed.], Jubb, Kennedy
Jubb, Kennedy and Palmer's pathology of domestic
and Palmer's pathology of domestic animals, vol. 2,
arteritis in beagle and mongrel dogs. Vet. Pathol. 24,
animals, vol. 2, ffth ed. Saunders, Philadelphia,
ffth ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 307.
537-544.
p.85.
Hottendorf, G.H., Hirth, R.S., 1974. Lesions of
Takeda, T, Makita, T, Nakamura, N., Kimizuka, G.
Capen, C.C., 2007a. Endocrine glands. In: Grant
1991. Morphologic aspects and morphogenesis of
spontaneous subclinical disease in Beagle dogs. Vet.
blood cysts on canine cardiac valves.Vet.Pathol. 28,
Maxie, M. (Ed.], Jubb, Kennedy and Palmer's
Pathol. 1l, 240-258.
pathology of domestic animals, vol. 2, ffth ed.
16-21.
Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 360.
Iwata, H., Arai, C., Koike, Y, et al., 1990. Heretotopic
Thomas, J.E., 1979. Urinary tract infection induced by
gastric mucosa of the small intestine inlaboratory
Capen, C.C., 2007b. Endocrine glands. In: Grant
intermittent urethral catheterisation in dogs. JAVMA
beagle dogs. Toxicol. Pathol. 18, 373-379.
Maxie, M. (Ed.], Jubb, Kennedy and Palmer's
174, 705-707.
pathology of domestic animals, vol. 2, fth ed.
Katsuta, O., Tsuchitani, M., Narama, I., 1992.
Ueda, A., Ueda, M., Nakazawa, M., et al., 2004.
Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 357.
Abnormal proliferation of pancreatic endocrine cells
 Nonsuppurative meningoencepahlitis in a Beagle
Charles, J.A., 2007. Pancreas. In: Grant Maxie, M.
in beagle dogs. J. Toxicol. Pathol. 5, 67-76.
dog. Tox. Pathol. 1, 51-53.
(Ed.], Jubb, Kennedy and Palmer's pathology of
Kelly, D.F., Lucke, V.M., Gaskell, C.J., 1982.
Van Fleet, J.F., 2001. Age related non-neoplastic lesions
domestic animals, vol. 2, ffth ed. Saunders,
Incidental necropsy fndings. Notes on pathology for
of the heart. In Mohr, U., Carlton, W.W., Dungworth,
26-96 dd eyae
 small animal clinicians. John Wright, Bristol, ch 6,
Clemo, F.A., Evering, W.E., Snyder, PW., Albassam,
pp. 77-96.
 2, ISU Press/ILSI, Ames, IA, pp. 102-104.
M.A., 2003. Differentiating spontaneous from
Lee, A., Krakowa, S., Fox, J.G., et al., 1992. The role
Van Fleet, J.F, Valentine, B.A., 2007. Muscle and
drug-induced vascular injury in the dog. Toxicol.
of Helicobacter felis in chronic canine gastritis. Vet.
tendon. In: Grant Maxie, M. (Ed.], Jubb, Kennedy
Pathol. 31 (suppl):25-31.
Pathol. 29, 487-494.
and Palmer's pathology of domestic animals, vol. 1,
Colby, TV, Leslie, K.O, Yousem, S.A., 2007, Lungs.
Maita, K., Masuda, H., Suzuki, Y, 1977. Spontaneous
ffth ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 202.
In: Sternberg, S.S. (Ed.], Histology for pathologists,
lesions detected in the Beagles used in toxicity
Wancket, L.M., Quist, E.M., Le Net, J.L., Guzman,
third ed. Lippincott, Williams &Wilkins,
studies. Jikken Dobutsu 26, 16]-167.
R.E., Muravnick, K.B., 201l. Spontaneous complex
Philadelphia, p. 489.
Majeed, S.K., 1985. Mineralisation in kidney and
polysaccharide inclusions in the skeletal muscle of
Detweiler, D.K., Patterson, D.F., Hubben, K., Botts,
stomach of Beagle dogs. Vet. Quarterly 2, 162-164.
purpose-bred beagle dogs. Toxicol. Pathol. 39,
R.P, 1961. The prevalence of spontaneously
Mesfn, G.M., 1990. Spontaneous epicardial fbrous
410-413.
occurring cardiovascular disease in dogs. Am. J.
fronds on the atria of Beagle dogs. Vet. Pathol. 27,
Yamasaki, K., 1994. Lesions of sternal and growth plate
Public Health Nations Health 51, 228-241.
458-461.
cartilage in Beagles. Lab. Anim. Sci. 44, 389-392.
lan Taylor
Mouse
the BALB/c and B6C3Fl mouse (Frith et al 1985,
spontaneous pathology occur, these will bereferred
Introduction
Frith & Ward 1988), the CD-1 mouse (Faccini
to and reference will be made to the sources of
 The mouse is one of the most widely used experi-
et al 1990), and those strains of mouse used in the
information available in the scientifc literature.
mental models in pre-clinical toxicity and carcino-
generation of genetically engineered mice (Haines
genicity testing, and biomedical research in
et al 2001, Mahler et al 1996, Percy & Barthold
Cardiovascular system
general, and as such there are numerous sources
 2007, Ward et al 2000). Descriptions of spontane-
of information on the biology physiology and
ous, murine, non-neoplastic pathology are also
The embryology, anatomy, histology and physiol-
spontaneous pathology of the many stocks and
included in other publications reviewing the spon-
ogy of the heart and blood vessels are reviewedby
strains of mouse used in biomedical research.
taneous and induced lesions in different organ
Elwell & Mahler (1999) and Michael et al (2004)
There are a limited number of mouse stocks and
systems in rodents in pre-clinical toxicity and car-
and an extensive review of myocardial diseases of
strains routinely used in pre-clinical toxicity
cinogenicity studies (Gad 2007, Jones et al 1983,
animals has been presented by Van Vleet & Ferrans 
testing, however. This is, in part, because of the
Jones et al 1985a,b, Jones et al 1986, 1988, 1991,
(1986).
regulatory requirement for the background biology
Maronpot et al 1999, Mohr 2001).
 Congenital lesions in the heart are rare (Hagi-
and pathology of these models to be well under-
 The National Toxicology Program (NTP) rou-
wara et al 1996). Cardiomyopathy is a diagnostic
stood, and for there to be suffcient background
tinely uses the B6C3Fl mouse, an Fi hybrid of
term used to describe a spectrum of spontaneous,
data available for all the different parameters
two inbred strains, the C57BL/6 and C3H strains 
age-related,
 degenerative changes,
，including
measured during toxicity and carcinogenicity
(Rao & Boorman 1999), in their toxicity and car-
degeneration, necrosis and increased interstitial
studies.
cinogenicity studies. The outbred CD-1 mouse is
fbrous tissue. The inflammatory component of
 It is important for toxicological pathologists
also routinely used throughout the world in pre-
these changes varies (Berdanier 2004, Elwell &
clinical testing of pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals
Mahler 1999, Frith et al 2007). The reported inci-
working with mice to be aware of the background
 changes commonly seen in laboratory mice, and
and industrial chemicals (Gad 2007).
dence of this finding is considered to vary partly
the stock and strain differences that occur in their
 The NTP publishes on their websites the obser-
because of variation in reporting levels and termi-
background pathology. A knowledge of the spon-
vations recorded in the numerous toxicity and
 nology between pathologists (Elwell & Mahler
taneous findings which occur in young mice, and
carcinogenicity studies performed by them every
ae Aea ue e inso us ssu asau (6661
those changes associated with aging, is essential
year, and maintain a historical control database of
and are occasionally responsible for the early
if a proper interpretation of possible treatment-
neoplastic fndings classifed by species, strain,
death of mice on long-term studies (Son 2003a)
related changes in toxicity and carcinogenicity
route of administration, vehicle and diet (http://
(Fig. 4.1].
studies is to be made.
ntp.niehs.nih.gov/).
 The current chapter aims to present those non-
The NTP also summarize the information
neoplastic findings which occur spontaneously in
they have gathered to date on their evaluation
young and old mice, and which the toxicological
of transgenic models for use in carcinogenicity
pathologist will encounter during evaluation of
testing. The historical control tumor rates for
routine toxicity studies using the mouse. The
 these models are also provided on their web pages.
pathologist should be aware that long-term admin-
 Animal suppliers also routinely maintain histori-
istration of test materials may be associated with
cal control pathology data, and this information
an exacerbation of age-related non-neoplastic
can usually be retrieved from their web sites
pathology which might otherwise be considered
(Charles River: http://www.criver.com/; Harlan:
to be background changes. Careful comparison of
http://www.harlan.com// although this may be
 treated animals with contemporaneous controls,
limited to neoplastic fndings for some strains of
and interpretation based on evaluation of all
anirmals.
the results in the study [including survival and
 There is a need to maintain an up-to-date source
Auap adod o panba are '(suam poq
jo saquu uiau aaa au uo uuui ja
the significance of changes seen in pre-clinical
inbred and genetically modifed strains of mice
studies.
used in biomedical research and those differences 
FIGURE 4.1 Heart: cardiomyopathy. Two-year-old, CD-1,
 male mouse. Degenerate cardiomyocytes are replaced by 
anatomy and histology of all the different organ
[Anagnostopoulos et al 2001, Bolon 2007, Brayton 
fibrous tissue. x100.
systems discussed is beyond the scope of the
et al 2001, Linder 2003, 2006, Linder & Davisson
current chapter, and the reader is referred to rel-
2004, Yoshiki & Moriwaki 2006). The Jackson
 Atrial thrombosis is described as an uncommon
 evant texts for each of the different organs dis-
 Laboratory maintains the Mouse Genome Infor-
 lesion by some authors (Frith & Ward 1988, Frith
cussed. A general review of the anatomy and
matics web site, a database designed to act as an
et al 2007), but as common by others (Berdanier
biology of the laboratory mouse and the use of
international resource for the laboratory mouse,
2004, Faccini et al 1990). This probably reflects
mice in biomedical research has been presented in
integrating genetic, genomic and biological data
the strain and stock differences in the occurrence
various publications (Cook 1965, Green 1966,
(http://www.informatics.jax.org/}. This site offers
of this lesion. It does occur as a spontaneous
Hedrich & Bullock 2004, Hurmmel et al 1966,
resources and links to multiple databases, many of
lesion, however, in CD-1 mice, more commonly
Komarek 2004, Krinke 2004, Percy & Barthold
which provide valuable information for the toxi-
in the left atrium than in the right (Carlton &
2007, Staats 1966).
cological pathologist involved in the evaluation of
Engelhardt 1991, Elwell & Mahler 1999, Frith &
Many sources of information on the spontane-
preclinical studies in the mouse. Other internet
Ward 1988, Frith et al 2007, Hagiwara et al 1996,
 ous, non-neoplastic pathology of laboratory mice
sources of information on genetically engineered
Meier & Hoag 1966, Percy & Barthold 2007,
 are available. The aging patterns of mice and strain
rodents have been reviewed by Bolon (2006} and
Van Vleet & Ferrans 1986). The distended atrium
variations in background pathology have
：been
Linder & Davisson (2004).
contains an organizing, mural thrombus which
reported (Brayton 2007, Cotchin & Roe 1967,
The data presented in this chapter are based
may contain areas of cartilaginous metaplasia.
Hedrich & Bullock 2004, Mohr et al 1996a, b,
in the main on findings observed in the outbred
 The character and features of the thrombus are
Russell 1966, Russell & Meier 1966). The pathol.
Swiss mouse, obtained from Charles River, United
dependent on the age of the thrombus. There are
 ogy of aging mice based on the studies performed
Kingdom  (Crl:CD1(ICR)
[outbred]].
Where
strain and sex differences in the occurrence of
at different laboratories has been presented for
specific strain differences in the occurrence of
atrial thrombi. Diet and parity also influence the
46
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY
ANIMALS
occurrence. Atrial thrombosis was identifed as
Perivascular lymphoid infltrates frequently
one of the major causes of death or morbidity in
occur in older mice in salivary glands, kidneys and
a review of 1l long-term studies in CD-l mice
other organs (Percy & Barthold 2007). Inflamma-
(Maita et al 1988) (Fig. 4.2)
tory changes in the vasculature can occur as iso-
lated lesions, affecting the vessels of a single
Organ, or can affect several systemic arteries. The
occurrence and severity of this change varies with
age, strain and sex, but the etiology is generally
considered to be unknown (Elwell & Mahler
1999, Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith
et al 2007, Percy & Barthold 2007). There are
reports of correlations between elevated blood
pressure in mice and an increased incidence
of polyarteritis (Mullink & Haneveld 1979).
Histologically,
y, the affected arteries typically
show hyaline degeneration of the walls of the
vessel with associated inflammatory cell infltra-
tion affecting the intima, media and adventitia.
Aneurismal dilatation and hemorrhage can be seen
in more severe cases (Fig. 4.4).
HGURE 4.2 Atrial thrombus, 18-month-old, male, CD-1
mouse. The majority of the lumen of the left atrium is
flled with an organizing thrombus. An area of carilagi-
nous metaplasia is apparent at the periphery of the throm-
bus and the atrial wall has a prominent inflammatory cell
HGURE 4.5 Inflammatory changes involving the root
infiltrate. x20.
of the aorta (aortitis) in an 18-month-old, male, CD-1
mouse. x40.
 Dystrophic mineralization (dystrophic calcifica-
tion} is a strain-specific finding and occurs at a
high incidence and at an early age in susceptible
strains. There are sex differences in the occur-
pue Aed pue 'suies um buuy sin jo aua
diet also influence its occurrence (Berdanier 2004,
Eaton et al 1978, Elwell & Mahler 1999, Frith &
Ward 1988, Frith et al 2007, Hagiwara et al 1996,
Maeda et al 1986, Meier & Hoag 1966, Percy &
Barthold 2007, Russell 1966, Van Vleet & Ferrans 
FIGURE 4.4 Arteritis/periarteritis of a renal artery in an
1986, 1991a, Yamate et al 1987). The distribution
18-month-old, CD-1, male mouse. The affected artery
of the mineralization is also strain specifc and
shows degeneration of the wall of the vessel with inflam-
can be epicardial, myocardial or both. Myocardial
matory cellinfiltration affecting the adventitia and media.
mineralization is an uncommon finding in CD-1
x100.
mice (Faccini et al 1990), but is common in
BALB/c mice (Fig. 4.3).
Inflammatory changes involving the root of the
aorta (aortitis) have been described in BALB/c
 HGURE 4.6 Focal angiectasis in the liver of an 18-month-
mice (Ramot et al 2009). These authors consid-
old, male, CD-1 mouse, showing prominent dilatation of
ered that these changes have been under-reported
 the vascular channels. x100.
because of variation in sampling of this area of the
heart in routine toxicity studies (Fig. 4.5). Sys-
Hemolymphoreticular system
temic polyarteritis has been reported as one of the
major causes of death or morbidity in a review of
The embryology, anatomy, histology and physiol-
11 long-term studies in CD-l mice (Maita et al
ogy of the different elements of the hematopoi-
1988). Angiectasis, the focal dilatation of vascular
etic system have been reviewed by a number of
channels, can occur in any organ, but usually
authors (Cesta 2006a, b, Pearse 2006a, Travlos
affects the liver, spleen and lymph nodes of mice.
2006a, van Rees et al 1996, Ward et al 1999,
The existing vascular spaces are dilated and prom-
Willard-Mack 2006). In addition, a recent mono-
inent, and lining endothelial cells are normal in
 graph published by the Society of Toxicologic
appearance, number and size. The etiology of this
 Pathology presented a number of papers covering
change is unknown (Elwell & Mahler 1999, Faccini
the normal structure, function, pathology and
HGURE 4.3 Dystrophic mineralization of the epicardium
et al 1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al 2007,
enhanced histopathology of the hematopoietic
of a 10-week-old, male, BALB/c mouse. x100.
Plendi et al 1996) (Fig. 4.6).
tissues (Maronpot 2006).
 The organs of the hematopoietic system repre-
 In old mice, cartilage cells can sometimes be
sent a complex and dynamic system, where
observed in the fibrous tissue at the base of the
changes can occur in a single component of the
heart valves (Hummel et al 1966). Endocardial
system or be manifested by changes in all of the
myxomatous change has been described as an age-
different organs. There is also a large variation in
related lesion involving the generation of excess
the normal appearance of the different tissues,
myxomatous matrix within valvular interstitial
dependent on the age and sex of the animals
cells. This change is not associated with increased
examined, as well as differences in the individual
morbidity or mortality. The low level of reporting
animal's background of antigenic stimulation
of this lesion is considered to be related to incon-
(Frith et al 1985, Wijnands et al 1996).
sistency of sampling in routine toxicity studies
(Donnelly 2008, Elangbam et al 2002).
Mouse
47
A limited number of lymph nodes are routinely
examined in pre-clinical toxicity and carcino-
genicity studies, with additional nodes usually
being presented for examination because of abnor-
malities reported at necropsy. Accurate identifica-
tion and naming of all the lymph nodes of the
mouse is important to ensure that comparisons
between studies relating to particular anatormical
sites can be correctly made. An investigation into
the normal distribution of lymph nodes in the
mouse, with suggested standardized nomencla-
ture, has been published by Van den Broeck et al
(2006).
Sinus ectasia Qlymphangiectasia, lymphatic
cysts, sinus dilatation] is typically associated with
lymphoid atrophy and can involve the medullary
FIGURE 4.8 Sinus erythrocytosis of the mesenteric ymph
HGURE 4.9 Plasmacytosis. The sinusoids of the
and subcapsular sinuses. It is found commonly
nodes of an 18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. The sinu-
mesenteric lymph node of an 18-month-old, male, CD-1
in the mesenteric lymph nodes of aging mice.
soids are packed with erythrocytes and macrophages
mouse are packed with plasma cells. x200.
Dilated sinuses are lined by endothelium and can
containing pigment, probably hemosiderin, are also 
contain pale eosinophilic/amphophilic material.
present. x400.
Atrophy or lipomatosis occurs in older mice.
Ectasia is probably related to obstruction of effer-
Adipocytes can often be seen in the hilus region
ent lymph vessels (Elmore 2006, Wijnands et al
Sinus histiocytosis is characterized by accumu-
 or medulla of the lymph nodes of old mice (Ward
1996) (Fig. 4.7).
lation of histiocytes in the subcapsular and medul-
et al 1999, Wijnands et al 1996) (Fig. 4.10). The
lary sinuses. The histiocytes have a characteristic
spleen is the principal site for extramedullary
eosinophilic cytoplasm and may contain pigment
hemopoiesis, but this change can sometimes be
or other phagocytosed material (Faccini
et al
 present in the lymph nodes of mice, in response
1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al 1985, 2001,
to a physiological need such as hemorrhage or
2007). Pigment accumulation in sinusoidal mac-
svere inflammation (Elmore 2006, Faccini et al
rophages is a common occurrence in aging mice.
1990, Frith et al 2001).
The pigments are most often hemosiderin or lipo-
fuscin. Hemosiderin is an iron-containing, golden-
brown, granular pigment, and is usually associated
with sinus erythrocytosis. Lipofuscin is a golden-
brown pigment derived from the breakdown
of lipids from cell membranes and organelles
(Berdanier 2004, Elmore 2006, Wijnands et al
1996) (Fig. 4.8).
Lymphocyte hyperplasia may be evident to a
 HGURE 4.7 Sinus ctasia of the mesenteric lymph node
 certain degree in various lymph nodes, and can be
dependent on the location of the lymph node and
of a two-year-old, male, CD-1 mouse. A large dilated 
health status of the animal. These changes increase
 sinus containing eosinophilic material. x20.
in incidence with age and occur more often in
females than in males (Elrmore 2006, Frith & Ward
Angiectasis is most often seen in the mesenteric 
1988, Frith et al 2001, Ward et al 1999, Wijnands 
lymph nodes. The significance of this change is
et al 1996). Hyperplasia can involve different
unknown (Elmore 2006, Frith et al 1985, Ward
types of cell, most commonly plasma cells, but
HGURE 4.10 Lipomatosis. Adipocytes present in the
et al 1999). Sinus erythrocytosis can result from
can include an increase in the number of mast
medulla of the mesenteric lymph node of an 18-month-
a lymph node draining an area of hermorrhage, but
cells.
dld, male, CD-1 mouse. x20.
this lesion can also be artifactual and related to
Plasma cell hyperplasia(
 handling procedures at necropsy. Depending on
(plasmacytosis)  is a
common finding in rodents, particularly in the
Hyperplasia of dendritic reticular cells (inter-
the duration of the initiating lesion, sinus erythro-
submandibular lymph nodes, and is usually in
digitating cells) is occasionally seen in young and
cytosis may be accompanied by hemosiderin-
response to antigenic stimulation (Elmore 2006,
old mice. These are seen in response to viral infec-
laden macrophages, erythrophagocytosis
and
Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al
tions and other processes (Frith et al 1985, Tew
inflammatory cells (Elmore 2006, Frith et al
1985, 2001, 2007, Hummel et al 1966, Ward
et al 1982); they can occur in a single lymph node
1985, Wijnands et al 1996) (Fig. 4.8).
-se (6'+ 31) (9661 [ 1a spueu14 '6661 [9 1a
or affect multiple sites, and can occur as focal
tocytosis is an increase in the number of mast cells
lesions in the paracortex. More extensive lesions
within the sinuses of the lymph nodes. Normal
involve the entire lymph node (Fig. 4.11).
background levels of mast cells in the lymph nodes
may vary by strain (Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al
1985, 2001, 2007).
48
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
accumulate in the spleens of older mice. It is more
Embryonic thymic remnants can give rise to
common in females than in males. In pigmented
ectopic thymic tissues in the thyroids or parathy-
mouse strains, pigmentation of the spleen can
 roids, and occasionally ectopic parathyroid tissue
occur as a result of accumulation of melanin
is seen in the thymus (Faccini et al 1990, Frith &
(Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al
Ward 1988, Frith et al 1985, 2007, Pearse 2006a,
1985, 2007, Hardy 1967, Percy & Barthold 2007,
Percy & Barthold 2007, Ward et al 1999). Lym-
Suttie 2006, van der Heijden et al 1995, Ward
phoid hyperplasia of the thymus occurs in mice
et al 1999, Wijnands et al 1996).
over six months of age, is more common in
Hyperplasia of the splenic white pulp can
females, and may be seen in association with
increase in incidence with age. The lymphoid
thymic involution (Faccini et al 1990, Frith et al
component of the spleen can increase in number
1985, 2001, Pearse 2006b, Ward et al 1999) (Fig.
and size, and enlarged follicles often coalesce
4.14). Lymphofollicular structures with germinal
(Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al
centres can be seen at the corticomedullary junc-
1985, 2001, 2007, Ward et al 1999, Wijnands
tion in aged mice, in association with atrophic
et al 1996).
cortical
1 changes and hyperplastic medullary
HGURE 4.11 Hyperplasia of dendritic reticular cells of
 Lymphoid hyperplasia of the Peyer's patches,
changes (Berdanier 2004, Dumont & Robert
the cervical lymph nodes of an 18-month-old, female,
or other sites of mucosa associated lymphoid
1980, Pearse 2006b) (Fig. 4.15).
CD-1 mouse. Cells resembling histiocytes with eosi-
tissue (MALT) in the srmall and large intestine,
nophilic cytoplasm and elongated nuclei are present in
may occur following antigenic stimulation (Faccini
large numbers throughout the lymph node. x40.
et al 1990, Maekawa et al 1996b, Shackelford &
Elwell 1999). The term is usually reserved for a
prominent increase in lymphoid tissue in an area
Accessory splenic tissue can be found occasion-
where MALT is not normally conspicuous (Shack-
ally, either in the pancreas or abdominal adipose
elford & Elwell 1999)
tissue (Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al 1985, 2007,
 The thymus is larger in young animals compared
Krinke 2004, Hummel et al 1966, Ward et al
to older ones, and reaches maximum size around
1999). Extramedullary hemopoiesis (EMH) is a
the time of sexual maturity. The thymus is usually
normal fnding in the red pulp of the spleen in
larger in females than in males. The normal, age-
mice, and is usually more prevalent in young
associated decrease in the cellularity of the thymus
animals and females (Cesta 2006a, Faccini et al
is termed involution, whereas reductions in cel-
1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al 1985,
lularity associated with stress or toxicity are
2001, 2007, Hardy 1967, Krinke 2004, Percy &
usually termed atrophy (Hardy 1967, Humel
Barthold 2007, Suttie 2006, van Rees et al 1996,
et al 1966, Pearse 2006b, Wijnands et al 1966).
Ward et al 1999, Wijnands et al 1996). Extramed-
Involution is characterized by a reduction in size
ullary hemopoiesis can consist of erythroid pre-
 FIGURE 4.14 Lymphoid hyperplasia of the thymus in an
of the thymus, a loss of cortical lymnphocytes, and
cursors, myeloid precursors, megakaryocytes or all 
18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. x40.
a loss of corticomedullary demarcation (Pearse
three. The predominant feature of EMH depends
 2006b), but the thymus does not completely invo-
on the initiating stimulus (the erythroid compo-
lute (Faccini et al i990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith
nent predominates in response to hemorrhage, the
et al 1985, 2007, Hardy 1967, Percy & Barthold
 myeloid component predominates in response to
2007, Ward et al 1999).
inlammatory conditions) (Suttie 2006). Increased
Hassall's corpuscles are very small or absent in
EMH can often be seen in response to skin ulcera-
the mouse thymus (Pearse 2006a, Percy & Bar-
tion, abscesses, or the presence of large tumors
(Fig. 4.12)
thold 2007, van Rees et al 1996, Ward et al 1999).
Thymic cysts develop from embryonic remnants
arising from the thymopharyngeal duct, or dilata-
tion of thymic tubular structures, and they
increase in number with age (Faccini et al 1990,
Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al 1985, 2007, Pearse
2006a, b, Ward et al 1999, Wijnands et al 1966).
The cysts are lined by ciliated columnar epithe-
lium and usually contain amorphous, eosinophilic
material (Fig. 4.13).
FIGURE 4.15 Lymphofollicular structure with germinal
centre at the corticomedullary junction in the thymus of
a 20-week-old, female, CD-1 mouse. x200.
Histopathological evaluation of the bone
marrow in pre-clinical toxicity studies is per-
formed on the marrow presented in conjunction
with the hematoxylin and eosin (H&E}-stained
 HGURE 4.12 Extramedullary hemopoiesis in the red pulp
sections of femur and sternum. A fbro-osseous
of the spleen of a 20-week-old, female, CD-1 mouse.
lesion involves the partial replacement of bone
x200.
marrow with an eosinophilic matrix, and is dis-
cussed in the section relating to bones and joints.
Atrophy can affect the red pulp or the white
Normal bone marrow is composed of hemat-
anu iaplo ul Aisnoaueuods imoso Aeu pue dind
opoietic elements including granulocytic, erythro-
(Faccini et al 1990, Suttie 2006, Ward et al
cytic, megakaryocytic elements and stem cells.
1999). Pigment accumulation is a common back-
Each of these may undergo hyperplasia inresponse
ground lesion in the murine spleen. The pigment,
FIGURE 4.13 Cyst in the thymus of an 18-month-old,
to a physiological need. The most common form
which is usually hemosiderin, is contained in mac-
male, CD-1 mouse. The cyst contains amorphous eosi-
of hyperplasia in murine bone marrow is an
rophages in the red pulp, but can also be present
nophilic material. x100.
increase in the granulocytic elements in response
in the white pulp, and can be observed to
to inflammatory lesions elsewhere in the animal
Mouse
49
(Faccini et al 1990, Frith et al 1985, 2001) (Fig.
occur in many strains of mice, and increase in
seen in the lumen of the ventral pouch, associated
4.16)
severity with age.
with an inflammatory reaction and hyperplasia of
the laryngeal epithelium. These changes are not
imited to studies utilizing the inhalation route of
exposure, but can be seen in all types of study
(Fig. 4.19). One lesion described as the only
common change associated with aging in the
larynx of B6C3Fl mice in NTP lifetime studies,
is the dilatation of laryngeal glands with the
accumulation of eosinophilic crystalline material
(Leininger et al 1996).
HGURE 4.16 Increased granulopoiesis in the bone
FIGURE 4.17 Intracytoplasmic hyaline inclusions in the 
marrow of the sternum of an 18-week-old, male, CD-1
olfactory epithelium of the nasal turbinates of a 20-week-
mouse. x400.
old, male, CD-1 mouse. Cytoplasm of the epithelium is 
packed with brightly eosinophilic material. x200.
Atrophy of the bone marrow is rare in mice,
but may occur occasionally, and is characterized
Another common change in the nasal turbinates
by a decrease in number of all elements of the
of mice, which increases in severity with age, is
marrow, and increased adipose tissue replacement
the accumulation of hyaline material in the nasal
(Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al
1985).
ventral septum (Leininger et al 1996, Monticello
et al 1990, Percy & Barthold). This material has
HGURE 4.19 Foreign-body reaction in the ventral pouch
Of the larynx of a two-year-old, male, CD-1 mouse. A
been identified as amyloid (Herbert & Leininger
Respiratory system
1999, Percy & Barthold 2007), but the lack of
 prominent inflammatory reaction to the foreign material
is seen in the lumen of the laryngeal pouch and in the
Various reviews of the embryology, anatomy,
positive staining with Congo Red and positive
 se as o sisas ua i u
 laryngeal epithelium and submucosa. Hyperplasia of the
structure and physiology of the lungs and the
laryngeal epithelium is also evident. x100.
the material is not amyloid, but a combination of
upper respiratory tract are available (Braun et al
 collagen and an armorphous material produced by
2004, Dixon et al 1999, Harkema et al 2006,
nasal gland epithelial cells (Brayton 2007, Doi
Spontaneous, age-related changes in the trachea
Herbert & Leininger 1999, Kuhn 1985, Pack et al
et al 2007, 2009, 2010) (Fig. 4.18). Doi et al
are uncommon, but changes can occur from inha-
198l, Pinkerton et al 1996, Renne et al 1992,
[2010) have reported sex differences in the occur-
lation of irritant materials (Herbert & Leininger
Reznik 1990)
rence of eosinophilic substance in the nasal tur-
1999). Intracytoplasmic hyaline inclusions can be
 The variations in the structure and distribution
binates of B6C3Fl mice, with males showing a
seen in the epithelium of the trachea, bronchi and
 of different epithelia within the upper respiratory
 greater degree of deposition than females. Inflam-
bronchioles, with a similar appearance to those
tract require consistent sectioning of the nasal
matory changes in the turbinates occasionally
seen in other regions of the respiratory tract
turbinates and larynx. This is important to ensure
 occur in association with foreign bodies, infection
(Dungworth et al 200l, Ward et al 200l, Yang &
consistency in evaluation of the different struc-
or injury (Herbert & Leininger 1999) and may
Carmpbell 1964). The incidence and severity of
tures, which can have different susceptibilities to
be
 associated with dysplastic dental
changes
this change increases with age. Eosinophilic crys-
pathological changes, particularly as a result of
encroaching
g into the nasal passages (Leininger
tals can also be associated with this lesion, and
inhalation exposure to test materials (Herbert &
et al 1996).
can accumulate in the lumen of tracheal glands
Leininger 1999, Kittel et al 2004, Renne et al
(Fig. 4.20).
1992, Ruehl-Fehlert et al 2003). In order to aid
in the identification of the different epithelia
within the nasal turbinates, diagrams of coronal
and sagittal sections of the nasal passages of the
rat and mouse have been produced (Mery et al
1994).
One of the most commonly encountered
 changes in the nasal turbinates of the mouse is the
presence of intracytoplasmic, hyaline inclusions
(eosinophilic globules, eosinophilic secretory
inclusions, hyaline droplet accumulation) (Ber-
danier 2004, Braun et al 2004, Dungworth et al
2001, Herbert & Leininger 1999, Leininger et al
1996, Monticello et al 1990, Percy & Barthold
2007, Renne et al 2009, Ward et al 2001). These
inclusions can occur at multiple sites within the
FIGURE 4.18 Hyaline material in the nasal septum of a
turbinates and can affect all types of epithelium
two-year-old, male, CD-1 mouse. x100.
 HGURE 4.20 Trachea: dilated tracheal glands containing
The brightly eosinophilic material is observed
 eosinophilic amorphous material and eosinophilic crys-
within the cytoplasm of the mucosal epithelial
Spontaneous, age-related changes in the larynx
tals. x200.
cells and of submucosal glands and ducts and
probably
represents
proteinaceous  secretory
are uncommon, but changes can occur commonly
material accumulating in the cells (Fig. 4.17).
from inhalation of irritant materials (Herbert &
 Pulmonary hair emboli are occasionally seen in
Eosinophilic crystals can also occur both within
Leininger 1999)
the lungs of mice following intravenous injection
the epithelium and extracellularly. These changes
 Foreign-body reactions are occasionally observed
into the caudal veins. Hair fragments in the cir-
 in the laryngeal ventral pouch. Foreign material is 
culation are trapped in the lung vasculature,
50
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATOR
phagocytosed, and can be seen surrounded by
C57BL/6 and 129Sv strains (Guo et al 2000,
foreign-body giant cells (Ernst et al 1996, Faccini
Hoenerhoff et al 2006, Ward et al 2001).
et al 1990, Innes et al 1958, Kast 1985),
 Focal accumulations of macrophages (alveolar
Osseous metaplasia is occasionally observed in
histiocytosis) are a common incidental fnding in
the lungs of mice, although at a lower incidence
the lungs (Braun et al 2004, Dixon et al 1999,
than seen in rats. These small foci are usually
Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al
 cormposed of osteoid or bone and may show early
2007, Renne et al 2009), and can be seen com-
mineralization or calcification. There is usually no
monly in subpleural areas of aging mice lungs.
reaction in the surrounding parenchyma (Braun
 Focal hyperplasia of the alveolar epithelium is
et al 2004, Dixon et al 1999, Ernst et al 1996,
occasionally seen in older mice, particularly those
Faccini et al 1990) (Fig. 4.21)
with a high background incidence of bronchioloal-
veolar tumors, and the incidence increases with
age [Braun et al 2004, Dixon et al 1999, Dung-
worth et al 2001, Faccini et al 1990, Frith et al
2007). Accumulations of alveolar macrophages
HGURE 4.23 Lungs with striated (cardiac) muscle in wall
may be associated with the hyperplastic cells. The
of pulmonary vein of a two-year-old, female, CD-1 mouse.
 affected alveoli are lined by uniform, hypertrophic
x400.
epithelium. Cytoplasmic basophilia and enlarged
nuclei are apparent. The cells form a single layer
Eosinophilic crystal accumulation in alveolar
that is contiguous throughout the area of hyper-
spaces with associated inflammatory-cell infltra-
plasia and the margins of the lesion are indistinct
tion is seen occasionally in routine toxicity studies
(Renne et al 2009) (Fig. 4.25).
(Dixon et al 1999, Ernst et al 1996, Frith et al
2007), and accumulations of eosinophilic material
within alveolar macrophages is associated com-
monly with bronchioloalveolar tumors in carcino-
genicity studies (Dungworth et al 200l, Frith &
HGURE 4.21 Lungs: alveolar osseous metaplasia. Small
Ward 1988, Green 1942). The eosinophilic mate-
focus of mineralized bone in the lungs of a two-year-old,
rial has been considered to originate from break-
male, CD-1 mouse. x200.
down products of granulocytes or hemoglobin
(Dixon et al 1999, Ernst et al 1996, Marshall et al
Arterial plaque is a lung-specific change occa-
1988, Murray & Luz 1990) (Fig. 4.24)
sionally seen in the lungs of mice. Developing
from the tunica media of medium to large pulmo-
nary arteries, there is a focal protrusion into the
lumen of the vessel. The lesion does not occlude
the lumen and is covered by endothelial cells.
There is no associated inflarmmatory reaction, and
in older lesions mineralization develops within the
HGURE 4.25 Focal alveolar epithelial hyperplasia in the
plaque (Ernst et al 1996, Rehm et al 1985b) (Fig.
lungs of a two-year-old, male, CD-1 mouse. x200.
4.22). The walls of the major pulmonary veins of
the lungs in mice contain cardiac muscle (Best &
Heath 196l, Dixon et al 1999, Krinke 2004,
Gastrointestinal system
Percy & Barthold 2007) (Fig. 4.23).
Reviews of the embryology, anatomy, histology
and physiology of the oral cavity, gastrointestinal
tract,
teeth and salivary glands are available
(Berdanier 2004, Botts et al 1999, Leininger et al
1999, Long & Leininger 1999a, Shackelford &
FIGURE 4.24 Accumulations of alveolar macrophages
Elwell 1999, Tucker 2007).
containing eosinophilic material in the lungs of a two-
With the exception of abnormalities of the
year-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Such acumulations are
teeth, there are usually very few spontaneous
often associated with bronchioloalveolar tumors. x200.
lesions of the oral cavity of the mouse (Leininger
et al 1999). Periodontal disease associated with
Eosinophilic crystalline pneumonia is an idio-
the impaction of hair, food or nesting material in
pathic disease affecting certain strains and stocks
the gum adjacent to molars and incisors, occurs
of mice; it is characterized by accumulations of
occasionally, resulting in inflammatory infltration
fne needle-like eosinophilic crystals in macro-
of the periodontal tissues (Fig. 4.26).
phages and multinucleate giant cells within alveo-
lar and bronchiolar spaces. These are accompanied
by mixed inflammatory cell infltrates. The disease
HGURE 4.22 Lungs: arterial plaque. Focal protrusion into 
can range from a mild, subclinical condition to a
the lumen of a pulmonary vessel with an endothelial
severe and fulminating change resulting in respira-
 covering in a 20-week-old, female, CD-1 mouse. x400.
tory distress and death (Braun et al 2004, Hoen-
erhoff et al 2006, Ward et al 2001j.The crystalline
material has been identified as being composed
 primarily of Yml protein, a chitinase-like protein
associated with neutrophil granule products and
secreted by activated macrophages (Braun et al
2004, Guo et al 2000, Hoenerhoff et al 2006,
Renne et al 2009). This disease occurs with a high
incidence in certain strains of mice, such as the
Mouse
51
1988, Hummelet al 1996, Krinke 2004, Maekawa
et al 1996a, Ogawa 2003, Percy & Barthold 2007,
Seely 1996b, Tucker 2007). This appears to be
under the control of testosterone, as the differ-
ence in morphology is not apparent in young
males, and castration of male mice results in a
reduced development of granular convoluted
ducts (Smith & Frommer 1975).
HGURE 4.26 Oral cavity. Periodontal gingivitis involving
FIGURE 4.28 Focal atrophy of the submandibular gland
impacted plant material in gum adjacent to tooth of a
of a 20-week-old, male, CD-1 mouse. x100.
two-year-old, male, CD-1 mouse. x40.
Basophilic hypertrophic foci are seen occasion-
 The impacted areas can develop into ulceration,
ally in the parotid salivary glands (Berdanier 2004,
abscessation and the formation of periodontal
Botts et al 1999, Chiu & Chen 1986, Frith et al
cysts, with disruption of the normal growth of
2007, Krinke 2004, Seely 1996b). These can
the associated dental tissue and bone (Long &
 aa si  u o s 
Leininger 1999a, Losco 1995, Percy & Barthold
sharply demarcated foci of enlarged cells with
FIGURE 4.27a Sexual dimorphism of the submandibular
2007, Sakura 1997). Periodontal abscesses can
 increased basophilia. There appears to be no asso-
salivary glands. The granular convoluted ducts of the
 ciated capsule formation, compression of adjacent
develop involving the adjacent tissues of the head
and may infltrate the nasal turbinates (Leininger
male are larger and contain more prominent eosinophilic 
tissue or inflammatory involvement. The etiology
granules. 18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. x200.
of this change is unclear (Fig. 4.29).
et al 1996, Percy & Barthold 2007).
The incisors of rodents grow continuously
throughout their life, and therefore damage to the
teeth can predispose the teeth to abnormal devel-
 opment and malformations, either as a result of
damage by repeated clipping of teeth, traumatic
damage, or as a result of inflammation (Long &
Leininger 1999a, Losco 1995, Sakura 1997). This
can result in dental dysplasia with disruption
of the normal growth patterns of odontoblasts
and ameloblasts, and the abnormal deposition
of mineralized dental material (Berdanier 2004,
Leininger et al 1996, Long & Leininger 1999a,
Losco 1995, Maekawa et al 1996a, Sakura 1997,
Weber 2007).
Teeth are not routinely presented for his-
topathological examination in preclinical studies,
HGURE 4.27b Eighteen-month-old,female, CD-1 mouse
FIGURE 4.29 Basophilic hypertrophic focus in the parotid
and are most commonly examined in association
with less prominent eosinophilic granules. x200.
salivary gland of a two-year-old, female, CD-1 mouse. A
with sections of the nasal turbinates. As a result,
the reported incidence of more subtle changes in
sharply demarcated focus of enlarged cells with increased 
the teeth of mice may be artifcially lower than
Lymphocytic infltration of the salivary glands
basophilia. x200.
would occur if sections of teeth were routinely
is a common finding, and increases in incidence
with age (Berdanier 2004, Botts et al 1999,
 Spontaneous lesions of the tongue are relatively
examined. Long & Herbert (2002) presented
information on the occurrence of calcified bodies
Faccini et al 1990, Maekawa et al 1996a, Seely
rare in mice.
Certain strains of inbred mice
(denticles) within the dental pulp, which they
1996bj. Atrophy occurs occasionally in the sub-
develop spontaneous calcification of the muscle
mandibular and parotid salivary glands; however,
considered could affect the normal growth pattern
layers of the tongue at a very young age (Irmaoka
it is uncommon in the sublingual glands (Botts
et al 1986, Maekawa et al 1996a, Yamate et al
of the teeth and lead to malformations and maloc-
et al 1999, Frith et al 2007, Frith & Ward 1988,
1987], but this is not apparent in CD-l mice.
clusion of mouse incisors.
Seely 1996b). Atrophy usually affects a single
 Three paired salivary glands, the submandibular
Hemorrhage and degeneration of the muscle can
lobule with reduction in size of acini and a reduc-
[submaxillary), parotid and sublingual glands, are
be seen occasionally, resulting from blood sam-
closely associated and located in the subcutaneous
tion in the diameter and eosinophilic granule
 pling via the sublingual vein.
content of the granular convoluted ducts.
An
 Few spontaneous lesions occur in the esopha-
tissue of the ventral neck. Salivary glands are also
apparent increase in the number of ductular ele-
gus. Gavage accidents may occur rarely, resulting
located at the base of the tongue and may be
ments may be as a result of the reduced size of
in rupture of the esophagus, with a consequent
presented in longitudinal sections of the tongue
the acinar component and an apparent crowding
associated inflammatory reaction of the muscula-
(Ruehl-Fehlert et al 2003).
of the remaining ductular elements (Fig. 4.28).
ris and serosa (Frith & Ward 1988, Leininger et al
 There is a striking sexual dimorphism in the
1999) if the animal survives. Hyperkeratosis has
structure of the submandibular salivary glands
which becomes apparent once males reach sexual
been described as the most common lesion in the
maturity (Fig. 4.27a & b). The gland of the male
esophagus of aging B6C3Fl mice (Leininger et al
1999, Maekawa et al 1996a), but occurs rarely
is larger, and the granular convoluted ducts are
in CD-1 mice. Mega-esophagus is occasionally
larger and contain much more prominent eosi-
noted in older mice.
nophilic granules (Berdanier 2004, Botts et al
1999, Brayton 2007, Faccini et al 1990, Frith et al
 Minor inflarmmatory lesions of the forestomach
2007, Frith & Townsend 1985, Frith & Ward
are occasionally seen, often associated with focal
erosions or ulcerations, and squamous hyperplasia
52
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATOR
ANIMALS
and hyperkeratosis (Betton et al 200l, Faccini
et al 1990, Frith et al 2007, Leininger et al 1999,
Maekawa et al 1996a) (Fig. 4.30).
FIGURE 4.31 Low power view of stomach of an
18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse showing marked ade-
nomatous hyperplasia of the glandular stomach. There is
 a severe thickening of the mucosa, with disruption of the
 normal glandular architecture and ymphocytic infiltration 
of the submucosa. x10.
 HGURE 4.34 Ectopic pancreatic tssue in the submucosa
HGURE 4.30 Focal erosion of the forestomach of a
of the duodenum adjacent to the entrance of the pancre-
 20-week-old, male, CD-1 mouse. A minimal inflammatory
atic duct. 18-month-old, female, CD-1 mouse. x100.
cell infiltrate is associated with the lesion. x100.
Hyperplastic lesions of the forestomach are
usually focal innature, but diffuse hyperplasiaand
hyperkeratosis is associated with reduced food
intake in mice (Faccini et al 1990, Leininger et al
1999). The pathologist must be careful to distin-
guish hyperplasia from the thickening seen at the
limiting ridge at the junction of the non-glandular
and glandular stomach.
 Developmental anomalies are rare, but ectopic
tissues have been reported in the stomach, such
 as hepatocytes in the submucosa/lamina propria
D
near the limiting ridge, and ectopic pancreatic
HGURE 4.32 Higher-power view of Fig. 4.31 showing
tissue in the submucosa (Leininger et al 1990,
cystic dilatation of the mucosal glands and extension of
FIGURE 4.35 Epidermal nclusion cyst on the serosal
1999, Maekawa et al 1996aj. Inflammatory lesions
the disorganized mucosa through the muscularis. x40.
surface of the colon of an 18-month-old, male, CD-1
occur less frequently in the glandular stomach.
mouse. The cyst is lined by keratinized squamous epithe-
Adenomatous hyperplasia of the glandular
lium and the lumen is filed with keratin. x100.
stomach occurs commonly in aging CD-l mice,
with a higher incidence in females compared to
Diverticuli occur occasionally in the small and
 males. This change has been variously described
large intestine (Frith et al 2007). These should be
examined carefully to ensure that they are not a
as gastric hyperplasia, glandular hyperplasia,
result of artifactual folding of the section. The
hypertrophic gastritis, proliferative gastritis, dys-
plasia of gastric epithelium and fundic mucosal
non-proliferative nature of the overlying mucosa
hyperplasia (Betton et al 200l, Faccini et al 1990,
should allow the differentiation between diver-
Frith & Ward 1988, Greaves & Boiziau, 1984,
ticuli and adenocarcinoma (Fig. 4.36).
Leininger et al 1999, Maekawa et al 1996a, Rehm
et al 1987). The incidence and severity of this
change is strain- and age-dependent, and is
reported to occur more frequently in densely
housed mice than in singly housed mice (Greaves
& Boiziau, 1984). There is no clinical manifesta-
tion of this change, and it is not associated with
HGURE 4.33 High-power view of the disorganized
parasitic infection, although an association with
 gastric mucosa, with hypertrophic cells containing eosi-
hormonal disturbances and kidney disease has
nophilic, intracytoplasmic inclusions. x400.
been suggested (Rehm et al 1987).
The early features of adenomatous hyperplasia
Congenital lesions in the intestine of the mouse
of the glandular stomach are focal hyperplasia of
 are relatively rare, although ectopic pancreatic
the gastric mucosa with increased epithelial
tissue can occasionally be seen in the submucosa
basophilia, elongation of the crypts and occasional
of the duodenum (Shackelford & Elwell 1999)
cystic glands. As the lesion progresses the mucosa
(Fig. 4.34). Epidermal inclusion cysts occur occa-
becomes increasingly thicker with a diffuse epi-
sionally in the large intestine (Frith et al 2007).
thelial hyperplasia, disorganization of the normal
These cysts occur in the muscularis of the colon
glandular structure, prominent branching of elon-
and rectum, are lined by squamous epithelium,
 gated crypts and cyst formation, and an accompa-
and contain desquamated keratin (Fig. 4.35)
nying inflammatory infltration in the associated
AGURE 4.36 Diverticulum of the colon of an 18-month-
submucosa. In severe cases there is extension of
old, male, CD-1 mouse. Extension of the mucosa through
disorganized mucosa through the muscularis to
to the muscularis. x40.
the serosa. This is not, however, considered to be
a sign of malignancy. Within the cystic glands,
The Paneth cells of the small intestine of the
hypertrophic cells containing eosinophilic inclu-
mouse contain prominent zymogen granules
sions can be seen (Figs 4.31-4.33). The cause of
(Krinke 2004, Percy & Barthold 2007, Shackelford
the eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusions in the
& Elwell 1999) (Fig. 4.37). Spontaneous degen-
gastric mucosa is unknown.
erative and inflarmmatory lesions are relatively
Mouse
53
uncommon in the mouse intestine, and occur
more frequently in the stomach than in the intes-
tine (Frith et al 2007, Maekawa et al, 1996b,
Shackelford & Elwell 1999).
FIGURE 4.39 Higher power view of Fig. 4.38 showing
hyperplastic epithelium with erosion of surface and
inflammatory cell infiltration. x40.
HGURE 4.41 Adult pinworms (Syphacia obvelata) in the
lumen of the colon of an 18-month-old, male, CD-1
mouse. x20.
 Intussusception is occasionally seen in the large
and small intestine, and rectal prolapse can occa-
Focal adipose tissue necrosis in the mesentery
 sionally occur. These changes are often associated
is a relatively common finding in mice and rats.
with intestinal neoplasms, parasites or other con-
AGURE 4.37 Prominent zymogen granules in the Paneth 
ditions associated with irritation of the intestine
These lesions are grossly visible as yellow nodules.
cells of the ileum of a 20-week-old, male, CD-1 mouse.
 Histologically, areas of adipose tissue necrosis are
(Betton et al 2001, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al
x400.
2007, Mahesh Kumar et al 2004, Rowlatt et al
circumscribed by a granulomatous inflammatory
reaction, with fbrous tissue and areas of hemor-
1969, Shackelford & Elwell, 1999). These condi-
Spontaneous hyperplastic lesions are also rare
 tions can lead to intestinal obstruction, inflamma-
rhage, acute inflammatory infltration and pigment
in the small and large intestine, but avillous hyper-
deposition. In chronic lesions, areas of mineraliza-
tion,
necrosis
and death.
Rectal
prolapse
is
plasia of the duodenum is seen in CD-l mice
 tion may be present. The etiology of these lesions
characterized by eversion of the mucosal surface
(Faccini et al 1990). This change is characterized
may be related to focal ischemia (Maekawa et al
of the rectum through the anus (Fig. 4.40).
by thickening of the duodenal mucosa without
1996b, Shackelford & Elwell 1999).
formation of villi, which occur at the first part of
the duodenum adjacent to the pyloric sphincter
Liver and biliary system
(Betton et al 200l, Faccini et al 1990, Rowlatt
The embryology, anatomy, histology and physiol-
et al 1969). These changes are sometimes referred
to as epithelial plaques. Hyperplasia usually
ogy of the liver and gall bladder are reviewed by
involves all cells of the epithelium, including the
Harada et al (1999) and Thoolen et al (2010),
underlying Brunner's glands. In more severe cases,
and the functional aspects of liver structure are
dilated mucosal glands can extend towards the
reviewed by Malarkey et al (2005).
submucosa and be interspersed between dilated
Congenital lesions in the liver of mice are rela-
 Brunner's glands. The overlying epithelium lacks
tively unusual.H
Hepatodiaphragmatic nodules,
villous projections and can often show erosions or
formed as a result of protrusion of the median
ulcerations with an associated inflammatory infl-
liver lobe through the diaphragm, occur at a much
tration. Submucosal inflammation and edema are
lower incidence than in rats. Ectopic tissues in the
 also present (Figs 4.38, 4.39). These changes are
liver are also rare, but ectopic renal tissue can
considered to be reactive in nature because of the
occasionally be seen in the mouse liver (Harada
inflammatory involvement and the hyperplasia of
et al 1999) (Fig. 4.42).
HGURE 4.40 Prolapsed rectum of an 18-month-old,
more than one type of cell (Betton et al 2001,
female, CD-1 mouse. x10.
Rowlatt et al 1969).
Pinworms are occasionally seen in the lumen of
the colon (Fig. 4.41). Cross sections of the worms,
usually Syphacia obvelata or Aspiculara tetraptera,
are seen in the lumen. Inflammatory reaction in
the adjacent epithelium is not normally associated
with the presence of the parasites (Faccini et al
1990, Frith et al 2007). Syphacia obvelata infec-
tion is not associated with goblet cell hyperplasia
in the colon of mice (Marillier et al 2008).
HGURE 4.42 Ectopic renal tissue in the liver of an
18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. x20.
HGURE 4.38 Avilus hyperplasia of the duodenum of an
18-month-old, female, CD-1 mouse. The section of duo-
Extramedullary hemopoiesis (EMH) is a normal
denum adjacent to the pyloric sohincter (to the right in
feature of the fetal mouse liver, but this function
the image) shows thickening, without formation of villi. A
is lost as the bone marrow takes over this function
submucosal inflammatory cell infiltrate is evident x20.
in the adult mouse. Extramedullary hemopoiesis
can occur in the adult mouse liver as a response
to functional needs, however, for example in
response to anemia, infectious disease or neoplasia
(Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward 1979, 1988,
54
 BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Frith et al 2007, Harada et al 1996, 1999, Jones
Intranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclusions
1967, Thoolen et al 20l0). The nature of the cel-
are frequently observed in the aging mouse liver.
lular components of EHM can vary depending on 
Intranuclear, eosinophilic inclusions occur com-
the nature of the initiating factors, but foci may
monly in the aging mouse liver (Fig. 4.45). Eosi-
be found in sinusoids, around central veins or in
nophilic, homogeneous material forms distinct
periportal areas (Fig. 4.43).
spherical inclusions in the nucleus, and these are
considered to be invaginations of cytoplasmic
material (Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al 2007,
Harada et al 1999, Jones 1967, Thoolen et al
2010, Toth & Sugar 1985).
 FIGURE 4.47 Intracytoplasmic accumulation of erythro-
cytes in the liver of an 18-month-old, female, CD-1
mouse. Multiple erythrocytes are evident in the cytoplasm
of enlarged hepatocytes. x400.
A variety of degenerative lesions are seen in the
liver of aging mice. Hepatocellular vacuolation is a
 HGURE 4.43 Smallfocus of extramedullary hemopoiesis
common incidental finding in the liver of aging
adjacent to a central vein in the liver of a one-year-old,
mice, and can occur as a focal, zonal or diffuse
male, CD-1 mouse. x400.
change. Vacuolation is more commonly visualized
Some of the more striking features of the aging
in males. The vacuoles are the result of lipid
FIGURE 4.45 Intranuclear, eosinophilic inclusions in the
accumulation in the cytoplasm of the hepatocyte,
mouse liver are the presence of cytomegaly, karyo-
hepatocytes of an 18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Dis-
 and appear as clear, distinct, round vacuoles in
megaly, intranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclu-
tinct spherical nclusions of eosinophilic material are 
the cytoplasm on H&E-stained sections of liver
sions (Berdanier 2004, Faccini et al 1990, Frith &
evident in the nuclei of affected hepatocytes. x400.
(Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al,
Ward 1979, 1988, Frith et al 2007, Harada et al
2007, Harada et al 1996, 1999, Percy & Barthold
1996, 1999, Jones 1967, Percy & Barthold 2007,
Eosinophilic inclusions are seen occasionally in
 2007, Thoolen et al 2010, Tucker & Baker 1967).
Thoolen et al 2010, Toth & Sugar 1985, Tucker
the cytoplasm of hepatocytes, the significance of
Macrovesicular vacuolation is characterized by the
& Baker 1967, van Zweiten & Hollander 1985)
which is unclear, but they probably represent a
 presence of a single large vacuole in the cytoplasm,
 These changes increase in incidence and severity
disturbance of protein production by the rough
with displacement of the nucleus. Microvesicular
with age, and commonly occur within the normal
endoplasmic reticulum (Frith & Ward 1988, Jones
vacuolation is characterized by the accumulation
aging liver. Some of these changes are also evident
1967, Toth & Sugar 1985). They are observed
of numerous small, round vacuoles in the cyto-
in neoplastic hepatocytes.
frequently in benign hepatocellular tumors, but
plasm, with no displacement of the nucleus. The
 The relative number of binucleate and multinu-
they may also occur in normal liver cells (Fig.
 cleate hepatocytes in the liver increases with age,
lipid in the vacuoles is lost during routine process-
4.46).
ing of formalin-fxed tissues,butO RedO staining
either as a result of the failure of dividing cells to
of frozen sections can confrm the presence of
separate during mitosis, or by the fusion of cells
(Wilson & Leduc 1948). The presence of very
ipid (Figs 4.48, 4.49).
-oda parea u ianu reaeday rie
cytes also increases with age, and represents
increased chromosome numbers, as a result of
failure of division of nuclei during mitosis. Poly-
®
ploid nuclei may contain two, four or eight times
the normal amount of nuclear DNA (Harada et al
1999, Jones 1967) (Fig. 4.44).
 FIGURE 4.46 Intracytoplasmic, eosinophilic nclusions in
the hepatocytes of an 18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse.
x400.
HGURE 4.48 Lipid vacuolation of the liver of an
18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Microvesicular vacu-
Intracytoplasmic accumulation of erythrocytes
dation, characterized by the presence of numerous,
is also occasionally observed as a spontaneous
small, round vacuoles in the cytoplasm. x200.
change in the aging mouse liver (Harada et al
1999, Thoolen et al 2010, Tucker & Baker 1967).
The cytoplasm of the enlarged hepatocyte is seen
to contain intact erythrocytes. This is usually a
HGURE 4.44 Karyomegaly and multinucleate hepato-
focal change and is considered to represent eryth-
cytes in the liver of aten-month-old, féemale, CD-1 mouse.
Variation in the size ofthe hepatocellular nuclei is evident,
rophagocytosis by the hepatocyte (Fig. 4.47).
 and one hepatocyte has multiple nuclei. x400.
Mouse
55
Focal angiectasis (peliosis hepatis, telangiecta-
sis] occurs occasionally in the liver of aging mice
(Bannasch et al 1985, Faccini et al 1990, Frith &
Ward 1979, Frith et al 2007, Harada et al 1996,
1999, Thoolen et al 2010). Features of this lesion
are widely dilated sinusoidal spaces containing red
blood cells and lined by normal endothelial cells.
The lesion is focal and is distinguished from sinu-
soidal dilatation by the presence of the lining
endothelium, and frorm hemangioma by the mor-
phology of the lining endothelium (Bannasch et al
1985, Harada et al 1996) (Fig. 4.6).
 Foci of cellular alteration occur at a much lower
incidence in mice compared to rats, but they share
similar morphological characteristics, and
are
AGURE 4.49 Lipid vacuolation of the liver of an
FIGURE 4.51 Widespread coagulative necrosis of the
described in the same terms, based on the size of
18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Hepatocytes with
liver of a one-year-old, female, CD-1 mouse. The necrosis 
the hepatocytes as well as the tinctorial and tex-
macrovesicular  and  microvesicular  vacuolation  are
is showing a clear zonal pattern of distribution. x100.
tural qualities of the cytoplasm. As with foci of
evident in this image. The large vacuoles present in the
alteration in the rat, affected hepatocytes merge
 cytoplasm of occasional hepatocytes displace the nuclei.
Pigment accumulation in Kupffer cells and
with the adjacent hepatocytes without compres-
 Pigment accumulation is also evident in the majority of
hepatocytes may be encountered occasionally in
sion. The different types of foci of alteration
hepatocytes, characterized by the presence of fine,
 the aging mouse liver. Endogenous pigments such
described in mice include basophilic, eosinophilic,
golden-brown, granular material within the cytoplasm.
as hemosiderin, lipofuscin (ceroid} and bile can
vacuolated, clear cell, amphophilic and mixed
x200.
accumulate as yellow-brown deposits within the
(Deschl et al 200l, Faccini et al 1990, Frith &
cytoplasm of hepatocytes and phagocytic cells
Ward 1979, 1988, Frith et al 2007, Harada et al
 Focal necrosis is a common fnding in the liver
(Berdanier 2004, Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward 
1996, 1999, Thoolen et al 2010).
of aging mice and can also occur sporadically in
1988, Frith et al 2007, Harada et al 1996, 1999,
 Occasional lesions are seen in the intrahepatic
young mice, often with no clear causative agent.
Thoolen et al 2010) (Fig. 4.49). Hemosiderin
biliary system. Inflammatory infltration in the
Hepatocyte necrosis can occur in a variety of pat-
appears as a golden-brown pigment and can be
periportal area is relatively common, and often
terns ranging from individual hepatocytes to
identifed by special stains such as Perls' stain.
accompanies biliary proliferation or fibrosis of the
extensive areas of necrosis, sometimes involving
Lipofuscin is slightly darker brown than hemosi-
 portal area (Deschl et al 2001, Faccini et al 1990,
whole liver lobes. The typical morphological fea-
derin and can be identified using the Schmorl's
Frith & Ward 1988, Harada et al 1999).
tures consist of coagulative necrosis (Faccini et al
stain.
Simple or multilocular biliary cysts are occa-
1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al2007, Harada
 Inflammatory lesions are commonly seen in the
 sionally seen in the aging mouse liver Harada et al
et al 1996, 1999, Jones 1967, Percy & Barthold
liver of mice of all ages, and low background levels 
1999) (Fig. 4.53).
. These cysts are lined by a
2007, Thoolen et al 2010, Tucker & Baker 1967]
of lymphocytic infltration in the periportal
simple cuboidal or flattened epithelium, with no
(Figs 4.50, 4.51]
regions, or within the sinusoids, are not unusual
evidence of proliferation.
(Faccini et al 1990, Harada et al 1999, Thoolen
et al 20l0). Small focal granuloma [microgranu-
loma) consisting of collections of macrophages
and lymphocytes are common findings in aging
mice, and appear as individual lesions, or as mul-
tiple scattered foci. (Fig. 4.52) This lesion may be
associated with hepatocyte necrosis, because the
inflammatory areas often contain hepatocellular
debris, or surround single necrotic hepatocytes
(Frith et al 2007, Harada et al 1999). The inflam-
matory areas tend to occur more commonly in
females (Harada et al 1996). Showering of bacte-
ria from the intestine through the bloodstream
has been considered a possible cause (Frith et al
2007).
AGURE 4.53 Multilocular biliary cyst in the liver of an
18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. The cyst is lined by a
FIGURE 4.50 Focal necrosis of the liver of an 18-month-
simple cuboidal and flattened epithelium. x40.
old, female, CD-1 mouse. The area of necrosis is charac-
terized by increased eosinophilia, loss of normal cellular
 Hypertrophic and hyperplastic changes of the
structure and infitration by inflammatory cells. x100.
intrahepatic bile ducts, associated with accumula-
tion of intracellular eosinophilic material and the
presence of eosinophilic crystals in the lumen are
occasionally seen. (Fig. 4.54) These changes are
variously described as glandular metaplasia (Lewis
1984) or adenomatoid lesion (Harada et al 1999),
and are similar to changes seen in the gall bladder
(Seely 1996a).
HGURE 4.52 Microgranuloma in the liver of a 20-week-
old, male, CD-1 mouse. A focal accumulation of macro-
phages and lymphocytes. x200.
56
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATOR
hyperplasia may also occur occasionally (Deschl
et al 2001, Harada et al 1996, Lewis 1984) (Fig.
4.56).
HGURE 4.54 Hypertrophic and hyperplastic changes 0f
HGURE 4.57 Acinar atrophy of the pancreas of an
the ntrahepatic bile duct of an 18-month-old, CD-1
18-month-old, male, CD-i mouse. The acini show a
mouse. Vacuolation and accumulation of intracellular
reduction in size and number and in this example is
eosinophilic material in the biliary epithelium is present 
accompanied by an inflammatory cellinfiltrate. ×100.
and eosinophilic crystals are apparent in the lumen of the 
FIGURE 4.56 Focal epithelial hyperplasia of the gall
 duct. A prominent inflammatory cell infiltrate is associ-
bladder of a two-year-old, female, CD-1 mouse. The epi-
ated with this change. x200.
thelium is hypertrophic and thrown into folds. x200.
 One of the most common changes described in
Pancreas
the mouse gall bladder is the presence of eosi-
nophilic material within the cytoplasm of the epi-
The embryology, anatomy, histology and physiol-
thelial cells (Fig. 4.55). These changes are often
ogy of the exocrine pancreas are reviewed by
associated with the presence of eosinophilic crys-
Eustis & Boorman [1985) and Boorman & Sills
tals in the epithelium and the lumen of the gall
(1999), and the developmental biology of the exo-
bladder (Berdanier 2004, Deschl et al 200l, Frith
crine and endocrine pancreas are reviewed by
& Ward 1988, Frith et al 2007, Harada et al 1996,
Slack (1995). An illustrated review of early pan-
Lewis 1984, Percy & Barthold 2007, Seely 1996a,
creas development in the mouse, using 3D imaging
Thoolen et al 2010, Yang & Campbell 
1964).
techniques, has been presented by Jorgensen
These changes are referred to as epithelial hyali-
(2007).
nosis, eosinophilic cytoplasmic change, glandular
 Ectopic pancreatic tissue is occasionally seen in
metaplasia or adenomatoid change (Lewis 1984,
HGURE 4.58 Severe atrophy of the pancreas of an
the gastro-intestinal tract or abdominal cavity
Percy & Barthold 2007, Seely 1996a, Thoolen
18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Extensive adipose
(Boorman & Sills 1999, Faccini et al 1990). These
 tissue replacement of the acini is evident with normal
et al 2010, Ward et al 2001). The etiology of the
foci are composed of normal exocrine pancreatic
 islets embedded in the adipose tissue stroma. x40.
crystalline material is obscure, but is considered
tissue (Fig. 4.34).
to be similar in etiology to that described in the
Atrophic changes are ammong the most com-
lungs, and to be the product of the epithelium.
Arteritis is occasionally seen in pancreatic
 monly occurring degenerative changes in the aging
The crystalline material reacts to various staining
mouse pancreas (Berdanier 2004, Boorman & Sills
vessels, despite an absence of this change in other
tissues (Faccini et al 1990). The changes observed
techniques in a similar way as the eosinophilic
1999, Enomoto et al 1996, Faccini et al 1990,
material within the epithelium (Yang & Carmpbell
Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al 2007). Atrophy can
are typical of those seen in blood vessels through-
1964). The hyaline material in the epithelium
out the body, with fbrinoid necrosis of vessel
be focal, lobular or diffuse. There is a reduction
has been reported to be immunoreactive to
walls and a florid inflarmmatory reaction (Fig.
in the size and number of acini, occasionally
Yml/Ym2 (Thoolen et al 2010).
4.59).
accompanied by an inflammatory infltrate (Fig.
4.57). In early exocrine atrophy, the reduction in
the cytoplasmic content of the acini, and the more
basophilic appearance, can give the impression of
ductular hyperplasia. As atrophy becomes more
extensive, the acini are replaced with adipose
tissue, and in extensive atrophy, normal islets are
left embedded in an adipose tissue stroma (Fig.
4.58). The etiology of exocrine atrophy is unclear.
Focal, basophilic, tinctorial, cellular change is
occasionally seen in the pancreas (Boorman & Sills
1999, Enomoto et al 1996, Frith et al 2007).
These distinct foci are occasionally seen in long-
term studies.
HGURE 4.55 Eosinophilic inclusions in the epithelium of
the gall bladder of a two-year-old, male, CD-1 mouse.
Eosinophilic crystals associated with this change are seen
HGURE 4.59 Arteritis of a pancreatic vessel of an
in the epithelium and the lumen of the gallbladder. x200.
18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Inflammatory cell
infiltration of the adventitia and media is apparent, with
Other changes recorded in the gall bladder,
medial hyaline degeneration and intimal proliferation.
including inflammatory infltration in the sub-
x40.
mucosa, which may be associated with mucosal
erosion or the presence ofgall stones, are extremely
rare in the mouse (Faccini et al 1990, Harada et al
1999, Seely 1996a, Thoolen et al 2010). Epithelial
Mouse
57
Urinary system
strains of mice (Dunn 1967a, Frith & Ward 1988,
Frith et al 2007, Goto et al 1984, 1985, Hsu
The embryology, anatomy, histology and physiol.
1986, Percy & Barthold 2007, Seely 1999, Taylor
ogy of the kidney are reviewed by Liebelt (1986)
& Fraser 1973, Wright & Lacy 1988). Hydroneph-
and Seely (1999} and of the lower urinary tract
rosis may also occur secondarily to urinary tract
by Gaillard (1999). The normal development,
obstruction or inflammatory changes (Ninomiya
growth and aging ofthe urinary bladder isreviewed
et al 1999, Seely 1999) and is characterized by
by Kurata & Shibata [1996].
dilatation of the renal pelvis with associated papil-
There is a sexual dimorphism in the structure
lary flattening and in severe cases, compression of
of the mouse kidney. Male kidneys are generally
the renal cortex. This change can occur unilater-
larger and heavier than fermale kidneys, the renal
ally or bilaterally.
cortices are larger, the cells of the proximal
Cysts originating in the cortex, medulla or
tubular epithelium are larger, and there is a greater
papilla are occasionaly observed as an isolated
percentage of Bowman's capsules with a cuboidal
fnding, and are often associated with interstitial
parietal layer. In fermale mice, the parietal layer is 
inflammatory changes (Faccini et al 1990) (Fig.
4.61).
AGURE 4.62b Pigment accumulation in the cortical
more commonly composed of flattened squamous
tubules in the kidney of a two-year-old, male, CD-1
epithelium (Brayton 2007, Dunn 1967a, Faccini
et al 1990, Frith & Ward i988, Frith et al 2007,
mouse. Schmorl's positive staining indicating the pres-
Hummel et al 1966, Krinke 2004, Liebelt 1986,
ence of ipofuscin. x200.
Percy & Barthold 2007, Yabuki et al 1999). These
differences can be strain-specific and are consid-
 Renal mineralization (calcification) occurs occa-
ered to be under the influence of sex hormones.
sionally in the cortical, medullary or papillary
The occurrence of cuboidal epithelium is influ-
regions, either as an incidental finding on its own,
or in association with other inflammatory of
enced by gonadectomy, and as mice mature, the
number of glomeruli with cuboidal epithelium
degenerative changes (Frith et al 2007, Morrisey
increases (Yabuki et al 1999, 2003). In mice older
1986, Seely 1999j. There are strain differences
than two years the incidence decreases [Okada
in the occurrence of mineralization and it is
et al 2005) (Fig. 4.60a & b).
more cormmonly seen in males than females. The
lesion ocurs as basophilic, granular deposits on
H&E stained sections, and can be present within
FIGURE 4.61 Cortical cyst in the kidney of a two-year-
the epithelium, tubular lumina or the interstitial
old, male, CD-1 mouse. The cyst is lined by a flattened
spaces.
 epithelium, contains pale proteinaceous material and is
 Perivascular accumulations of lymphocytes or
associated with inflammatory cellinfiltration. x20.
plasma cells are common in the kidneys of older
mice and deposits of lymphoid cells below the
 Pigment deposition is occasionally encountered
epithelium of the renal pelvis are not unusual
in the tubular epithelium. This pigment usually
(Dunn 1967a, Faccini et al 1990). These aggrega-
represents accumulation of hemosiderin, originat-
tions are not usually associated with damage to
ing from the breakdown of hemoglobin, or lipo-
the surrounding parenchyma (Fig. 4.63).
fuscin, a pigment derived from the breakdown of
cellular components (Brown 1986). Lipofuscin is
often referred to as the ‘wear and tear pigment'
and accumulates in a number of tissues with
increasing age. Application of appropriate histo-
HGURE 4.60a Sexual dimorphism in the structure of the
chemical techniques (Perls for hemosiderin,
 Bowman's capsule of the mouse kidney. 18-month-old,
Schmorl's for lipofuscin} will allow differentiation
male, CD-1 mouse exhibiting a cuboidal parietal epithe-
of these pigments (Fig. 4.62a & b).
lium. x400.
HGURE 4.63 Perivascular accumulation of ymphocytes
in the kidney 0f a 20-week-old, female, CD-1 mouse.
X100.
More extensive interstitial inflamrmatory lesions
are commonly associated with obstructive uropa-
thy, and may represent an ascending pyelonephri-
tis. Interstitial inflammatory changes can also be
AGURE 4.62a Pigment accumulation in the cortical
associated with glomerular, tubular and interstitial
FIGURE 4.60b Sexual dimorphism in the structure of the
tubules in the kidney of a two-year-old, male, CD-1
changes. It may be difficult to ascertain whether
Bowman's capsule of the mouse kidney. The parietal
mouse. H&E stain. x200.
the inflammation is a consequence of the tubular
layer of this 18-month-old, female, mouse is composed
damage or not (Montgomery 1986b). Inflamma-
of a flattened squamous epithelium. x400.
tory infltration may affect all areas of the kidney,
the nature of the inflammatory infltration reflect-
Congenital lesions are relatively rare in mice,
ing the acute or chronic nature of the lesion
although spontaneous hydronephrosis and poly-
(Faccini et al 1990, Montgomery 1986c). Ascend-
cystic kidneys are common findings in certain
ing pyelonephritis is usually associated with
58
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATOR
inflarmmatory and proliferative changes in the
bladder of the mouse (Frith & Ward 1988, Frith
lower urinary tract (Seely 1999). Necrosis of the
et al 2007, Gaillard 1999, Krinke 2004). Their
 papilla is often associated with this change, and
incidence and severity increases with age (Fig.
cortical scarring can result following progression
4.65). Urothelial hyperplasia is an uncommon
to chronic inflammation and fbrosis, or as a
spontaneous change, but it can be associated
consequence of infarction (Frith et al 2007,
with calculi or inflammatory infltration resulting
Montgomery 1986a, b & c).
from obstructive uropathy or ascending infections
Renal degenerative diseases occur at a relatively
(Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al
low incidence in CD-l mice. The spectrum of
2007, Gaillard 1999) (Fig. 4.66). Calculi are
changes observed have similarities to those seen
unusual spontaneous lesions in the bladder of the
in chronic progressive nephropathy (CPN) with
mouse (Frith et al 2007, Gaillard 1999).
features as described in aging rats (Frith & Ward
1988, Frith et al 2007, Montgomery 1986b, Percy
  1 61  2 1 8
1967, Wolf & Hard 1996], although these changes
tend to occur with a lower incidence and severity
FIGURE 4.64a Glomerulosclerosis ofthe kidney of a ten-
than in rats. The reported incidence of these
month-old, female, CD-1 mouse. Marked accumulation of
changes in individual studies can be variable,
eosinophilic material within the glomeruli is associated
depending on the experience of the study patholo-
tubular
with
degenerative
changes, interstitial
gist and their tendency to group individual find-
inflammatory-cell infiltration and the presence of pigment.
ings together as syndromes. The threshold applied
The material within the glomeruli stains positively with 
by the pathologist for recording CPN can depend
PAS, but negatively with Congo Red. x200.
on the background levels of the individual compo-
nents of this change (tubular basophilia, tubular
Although these changes occur at a low inci
casts, thickening of basement membrane etc.) and
dence, kidney disease is considered to be one of
the main non-neoplastic findings associated with
reduction of this common, age-related pathologi-
the early death of mice in long-term studies (Ettlin 
 cal lesion.
et al 1994, Maita et al 1988, Son 2003a, b). Spon-
FIGURE 4.65 Submucosal ymphoid infiltrate in the
Glomerulonephritis (glomerulopathy, glomeru-
taneous hyperplastic lesions in the kidney are rare,
bladder of a 20-week-old, male, CD-1 mouse. x200.
losclerosis, 
hyaline
glomerulopathy,
hyaline
but they can be seen in association with inflam-
glomerulonephropathy, hyalinization of glormeruli,
matory changes in the urinary tract (Hard et al
membrano-proliferative glomerulonephritis) is a
2001).
Occasionally, intranuclear, eosinophilic
specific degenerative change, associated with the
inclusion bodies are observed in the renal cortical
glomeruli, which occurs at a relatively low inci-
epithelium of severe combined immunodeficiency
dence in aging mice. The incidence and severity
(SCID) mice (Baze et al. 2006). The tubular
of the changes seen are strain-, sex- and age-
epithelial cells demonstrates large, karyomegalic
dependent, occurring more commonly in females
nuclei which contain intranuclear inclusions and
than in males. (Dunn 1967a, Eaton et al 1980,
 marginated chromatin. These cells are randomly
Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith
present in the cortex and medulla but may be
et al 2007, Hoedemaeker et al 1986, Percy &
more prominent near the corticomedullary junc-
Barthold 2007, Russell & Meier 1966, Sass 1986,
tion (Baze et al. 2006) (Fig. 4.64b).
Seely 1999, Tucker & Baker 1967, Maita et al
1988, Wojcinski et al 1991, Wolf & Hard 1996).
This change is characterized in the initial stages
by mild endothelial and mesangial proliferation
and the deposition of an amorphous, eosinophilic
HGURE 4.66 Urothelial hyperplasia associated with sub-
material in the glomeruli. This material has the
mucosal ymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration in the
appearance of amyloid on H&E sections, but
urinary bladder of a 10-week-old, female, CD-1 mouse.
is positive with the periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)
x100.
stain, and stains negatively with Congo Red. This
material is initially deposited in the mesangium
Refluxed seminal colloid plugs in the bladder
and basement membrane and progresses to affect
and urethral plugs (copulatory plugs) occur occa-
the whole glomerular structure. As the disease
sionally in mice and are considered to be an agonal
 progresses it can be accompanied by tubular and
change (Bendele & Carlton 1986, Gaillard 1999,
interstitial changes, with tubular basophilia and
Percy & Barthold 2007). Colloid plugs have,
50μm
however, been considered to affect urine flow in
dilatation, cast formation and interstitial inflam-
matory infltration. The glomeruli become scle-
HGURE 4.64b Large, karyomegalic, renal, cortical,
sexually mature males (Taylor 1985) and have
rotic and dilatation of Bowman's capsule can
 tubular, epithelial nuclei with intranuclear nclusions and
been implicated in the pathogenesis of obstructive
occur. The etiology of this change is complex,
marginated chromatin of severe combined immunodefi-
uropathy (Bendele & Carlton 1986, Gaillard
but an immune-mediated mechanism has been
ciency (SCID) mouse. x400.
1999, Maita et al 1988, Ninomiya et al 1999,
suggested (Hoedemaeker et al 1986, Wojcinski
Tucker & Baker 1967). The plug is composed of
et al 1991) (Fig. 4.64a).
The ureter is a simple tubular organ lined by
eosinophilic proteinaceous material within which
transitional epithelium (Frith et al 1986, Gaillard
spermatozoa can be seen (Fig. 4.67)
1999). There are very few lesions which occur
spontaneously in the ureter of the mouse.
Hydroureter may be associated with congenital
hydronephrosis (Seely 1999). Transitional cell
hyperplasia and inflarmmatory cell infltration may
be observed in association with similar lesions in
the kidneys or bladder.
 Lymphoid follicles in the lamina propria are
a common background change in the urinary
Mouse
59
HGURE 4.68a Multiple developmental cysts in the pars
distalis of an 18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. x40.
 HGURE 4.67 Refluxed seminal colloid plug in the urinary
HGURE 4.69a X zone of the adrenal of an eight-week-
 bladder of a 20-week-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Amorphous
old, female, CD-1 mouse. A distinctive layer of smaller,
eosinophilic material in the lumen of the bladder. x40.
basophilic cells between the zona fasciculata and the
medulla is apparent. x40.
Obstructive uropathy (urologic syndrome) is
considered an important factor in the early deaths
of male mice on long-term studies (Bendele &
Carlton 1986, Maita et al 1988, Son 2003a,b).
This change is associated with gang housing of
male mice in long-term studies and is related to
fghting and genital wounds (Faccini et al 1990,
Gaillard 1999, Seely 1999, Tucker & Baker 1967),
although this change is also seen in singly housed
mice (Bendele & Carlton 1986). The incidence of
this change is also reported to vary with the source
HGURE 4.68b High-power view of one of the cysts in Fig.
of animals in long-term studies (Engelhardt 1996).
4.68a showing ciliated lining epithelium and amorphous
Features of this change include the marked dis-
eosinophilic material in the lumen. x400.
tension of the urinary bladder, often with colloid
plugs in the neck of the bladder blocking the flow
Focal hyperplasia may be present occasionally,
of urine (Gaillard 1999). Inflammatory, degenera-
particularly in the pars distalis, but at a much
tive and proliferative changes of the urinary tract
lower incidence than is reported in the rat. The
are associated with obstructive uropathy as is
lesion is focal, but the periphery of the lesion is
hydronephrosis of the kidneys.
poorly demarcated (Berdanier 2004, Capen et al
HGURE 4.69b Pronounced vacuolation of the X zone of
2001, Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith
a 20-week-old, female, CD-1 mouse. x40.
Endocrine glands
et al 2007, Mahler & Elwell 1999).
The embryology, anatomy, histology and physi-
Accessory cortical tissue is frequently seen in
The embryology, anatomy, histology and physiol-
 ology of the adrenal glands have been reviewed by
close association with the adrenal capsule and
ogy of the pituitary have been reviewed by Capen
several authors (Dunn 1970, Frith 1983a, Nyska
occurs more commonly in females than males. It 
[1983a} and Mahler & Elwell (1999). The pitui-
& Maronpot 1999, Rosol et al 200l, Sass 1983a,
is composed of normal cortical tissue, in which the
tary gland of the female mouse is reported to be
Tischler & Sheldon 1996, Waring 1935, Yarrington
zona glomerulosa and fasciculata can often be dis-
consistently heavier than that of the male (Chai
1996).
tinguished. Medullary tissue is not associated nor-
& Dickie 1966, Hummel et al 1966).
 Sexual dimorphism occurs in the structure of
mally with accessory adrenal tissue and the
Cysts are noted commonly in the pars distalis
the mouse adrenal gland. The adrenal glands of
accessory cortical tissue can undergo the same
or at the cleft dividing the pars distalis and pars
 male mice contain less adipocytes, are smaller
aging changes as the main body of the adrenal
intermedia. They occur frequently as an incidental
than female glands, and there are sex differences
(Dunn 1970, Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward
finding and develop from remnants of the crani-
in the appearance and regression of the transient
1988, Frith et al 2007, Krinke 2004, Nyska &
opharyngeal pouch or Rathke's cleft, and are
 X zone. There is no discernible zona reticularis in
Maronpot 1999, Percy & Barthold 2007, Sass
usually lined by ciliated epithelium and contain
the mouse adrenal, but in young mice there is an
1983b, Waring & Scott 1937) (Fig. 4.70).
eosinophilic material (Capen 1983a, Carlton &
X zone. The X zone is composed of small cells
Gries 1983, Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward
with distinctly basophilic cytoplasm which devel-
1988, Frith et al 2007, Hummel et al 1966,
ops postnatally in the inner cortex of mouse
Mahler & Elwell 1999, Morton & Tekeli 1997,
adrenals, being fully formed at weaning. After
Percy & Barthold 2007, Russfield 1967) (Fig.
weaning it degenerates rapidly in males and disap-
4.68a & b).
pears by puberty. In pregnant females, the X zone
undergoes vacuolar degeneration during the frst
pregnancy. In virgin females, the X zone persists
much longer and increases in size. The X zone
undergoes slow regression and degeneration
during which it develops prominent vacuolation in
fermales. There are strain differences in the rate of
degeneration of the X zone (Brayton 2007, Chai
& Dickie 1966, Dunn 1970, Faccini et al 1990,
Frith 1983a, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al 2007,
Jones 1950, Krinke 2004, Nyska & Maronpot
1999, Percy & Barthold 2007, Rosol et al 2001,
Sass 1983a, Tanaka & Matsuzawa 1995, Waring
1935) (Fig. 4.69a & b).
60
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATOI
FIGURE 4.70 Accessory cortical tissue of the adrenal of
FIGURE 4.71b Periodic acid-Schiff staining of the 
HGURE 4.72b Subcapsular cell hyperplasia of the
a 20-week-old, female, CD-1 mouse. The accessory
adrenal in Fig. 4.71a showing the material in the cells to
adrenal of an 18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Large,
tissue is clearly demarcated from the adrenal gland and
be PAS-positive. x200.
round cells with abundant vacuolated cytoplasm (type B)
is exhibiting vacuolation of the X zone. No medullary
predominate in this lesion. x200.
tissue is apparent in the accessory tissue. x100.
Subcapsular cell hyperplasia (spindle cell hyper-
plasia) is a common, age-related fnding in the
There are strain differences in the occurrence
Lipogenic pigmentation (brown degeneration,
cortex of mice of a number of stocks and strains,
and severity of subcapsular cell hyperplasia, and
ceroid pigment, lipofuscin} is an age-related
including the CD-l mouse. It occurs rarely in
also an association with the infltration of mast
change which occurs spontaneously in several
mice below three months of age. The number of
cells. Some authors suggest that mast cells play a
stocks and strains of mice, including the CD-1
subcapsular cells increases with age, and occurs at
 role in the development of subcapsular cell hyper-
mouse, and takes the form of pigment deposition
a greater incidence and severity in females. The
plasia (Kim et al 1997a, b, 2000). Sex hormones
in adrenal cortical cells and macrophages at the
proliferation of subcapsular cells may be focal or
play a role in the development of this change, as
corticomedullary junction. This change is much
suiod aaiel anedar Aenaa ueo pue asnj
gonadectomy of males leads to an increased inci-
more common in females than in males. The cyto-
 of the cortex and may ultimately develop into
dence of subcapsular cell hyperplasia (Bernichtein
plasm of the affected cells becomes distended,
subcapsular cell tumors. Two types of subcapsular
et al 2009). Focal hypertrophy/hyperplasia of the
brown and foamy and the cells resemble macro-
 cells may be identifed. Oval to fusiform cells with
cells of the zona fasciculata is seen occasionally.
phages. The pigment in the cells is PAS-positive
scant basophilic cytoplasm (type A cells),
and
The affected cells are enlarged with eosinophilic
(Chai & Dickie 1966, Dunn 1970, Faccini et al
large, round cells with abundant eosinophilic or
cytoplasm (Capen et al 200l, Faccini et al 1990,
1990, Frith 1983c, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al
vacuolated cytoplasm (type B cells). Type A cells
Frith et al 2007, Nyska & Maronpot 1999) (Fig.
2007, Hummel et al 1966, Jones 1950, Nyska &
predominate in the earlier lesions, but as the
4.73).
Maronpot 1999, Rosol et al 200l, Yarrington
lesions grow larger more type B cells are involved.
The function of the spindle cels is unknown,
is linked to sex hormones (Bernichtein et al 2009)
but they appear to represent a morphological
(Fig. 4.7la & b).
variant of epithelial cells in the subcapsular region
(Berdanier 2004, Brayton 2007, Capen et al
2001, Chai & Dickie 1966, Dunn 1970, Faccini
et al 1990, Frith et al 2007, Goodman 1983,
Hummel et al 1966, Kim et al 1997a, 2000,
Krinke 2004, Nyska & Maronpot 1999, Percy &
Barthold 2007, Rosol et al 2001, Yarrington 1996)
(Fig. 4.72a & b).
FIGURE 4.73 Focal corical hypertrophy of the adrenal of
a two-year-old, male, CD-1 mouse. A discrete focus of
enlarged cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm is contained
within the zona fasciculata. x100.
AGURE 4.71a Lipogenic pigmentation in the adrenal of
an 18-month-old, female, CD-1 mouse. Distended cells
Proliferative lesions of the adrenal medulla
 containing brown, foamy cytoplasm accumulate in the
occur at a much lower incidence than is seen in
corticomedullary region. H&E x200.
rats, but give rise to a continuous spectrum of
lesions from hyperplasia to malignant phaeochro-
mocytoma. Hyperplasia of medullary cells can
 occur as focal or diffuse lesions. Focal hyperplasia
HGURE 4.72a Early subcapsular cell hyperplasia of the
can be recognized by an increased basophilia of
adrenal of a 20-week-old, female, CD-1 mouse. The
the cytoplasm and an increased size of the affected
basophilic, fusiform (type A) cells extend from the sub-
cells. Diffuse changes involve an increase in the
capsular region towards the medulla. x200.
number and volume of all the medullary cells.
(Capen et al 200l, Faccini et al 1990, Frith
1983b, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al 2007,
Nyska & Maronpot 1999, Tischler & Sheldon
1996).
 The embryology, anatomy, histology and physi-
ology of the thyroid and parathyroid glands have
Mouse
61
been reviewed by several authors (Capen 1983b,
Cystic dilatation of follicles can occasionally be
Frith & Ward 1988, Hardisty & Boorman 1999,
Capen et al 1996, Hardisty & Boorman 1999,
seen, with individual follicles becoming enlarged
Capen et al 2001).
Pour et al 1983a, Thomas & Williams 1996).
and distended with colloid (Frith et al 2007) (Fig.
 The embryology, anatomy, histology and physi-
 Ectopic thyroid tissue can occasionally be found
4.76). Crystals are occasionally visualized in the
ology of the exocrine and endocrine pancreas are
in the adipose tissue at the base of the heart (Frith
lumen of thyroid follicles, which have been identi-
reviewed by Boorman & Sills [1999), and the
1983d, Frith & Ward 1988], and ectopic parathy-
fed as calcium oxalate in humans (Frith & Ward
developmental biology of the exocrine and endo-
roid tissue can occasionally be found in the septa
1988) (Fig. 4.77a & b). Unlike rats, C-cells are
crine pancreas are reviewed by Slack [1995). An
or surface connective tissue of the thymus (Capen
not prominent in mice, and hyperplasia does not
 illustrated review of early pancreas development
et al 1996, Frith & Fetters 1983, Frith & Ward
occur as a common aging change (DeLellis et al
in the mouse using 3D imaging techniques has
1988). Embryonic thymic remnants can give rise
1996, Hardisty & Boorman 1999).
been presented by Jorgensen (2007].
to ectopic thymic tissues in the thyroids or par-
 The most common spontaneous, non-neoplastic
athyroids (Capen et al 1996, Faccini et al 1990,
change noted in the pancreatic islets of the mouse
Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al 1985, 2007, Krinke
is islet-cell hyperplasia. There are sex and strain
2004, Hardisty & Boorman 1999, Pearse 2006a,
differences in the occurrence of this change, but
Percy & Barthold 2007, Pour et al 1983b, Ward
it is seen as an age-related change in many differ-
et al 1999). This is a common fnding in CD-1
ent strains and affects males more than females.
mice of all ages (Fig. 4.74).
The change can involve single or multiple islets,
and the islets are usually rounded, but coalescence
with adjacent islets can result in an irregular
outline. Affected islets are much larger than
normal because of an increased number of cells,
but the cells are morphologically similar to normal
islets. It is not unusual to see a central cystic cavity
in affected islets (Berdanier 2004, Boorman &
Sills 1999, Capen et al 200l, Faccini et al 1990,
Frith & Sheldon 1983, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith
FIGURE 4.76 Cystic dilatation of the follicles of a two-
et al 2007, Leiter & Herberg 1996, Percy &
year-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Individual follicles are 
Barthold 2007) (Fig. 4.78a & b).
distended with colloid. x100.
HGURE 4.74 Ectopic thymic tissue associated with the
parathyroid gland ofa20-week-old, female, CD-1 mouse.
x100.
 The most common, age-related, non-neoplastic
fnding in the thyroid ofthe mouse is cystic dilata-
tion of ultimobranchial bodies (Frith & Ward
1988, Frith et al 2007). In some strains of mouse
this can occur in 90% of animals (Rehm et al
1985a). Cysts occur occasionally in or around the
thyroid and parathyroid. They can be lined by
 ciliated, cuboidal epithelium, or squamous epithe-
HGURE 4.78a Islet cell hyperplasia ofthe pancreas of an
lial cells, and are considered remnants of the
FIGURE 4.77a Crystals in the lumen of a thyroid follicle 
18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Multiple, enlarged,
craniopharyngeal duct or ultimobranchial duct
of an 18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. x400.
 coalescing islets, morphologically similar to normal islets.
respectively (Capen 1983b, Capen et al 1996,
x40.
 Faccini et al i990, Frith & Ward 1988, Hardisty
& Boorman 1999, Percy & Barthold 2007, Pour
et al 1983b) (Fig. 4.75).
AGURE 4.77b Polaried image of the follicle in Fg.
4.77a, showing the birefringence of the crystals. x400.
HGURE 4.78b A hyperplastic islet with a central cystic
cavity. x100.
FIGURE 4.75 Ultimobranchial cyst of the parathyroid of a
eight-week-old, male, CD-1 mouse. The cyst contains
Hyperplastic changes in the thyroid and par-
athyroid of mice are uncommon (Hardisty &
Skin and appendages
eosinophilic flocculent material and is lined by a simple
 squamous and ciliated cuboidal epithelium. x100.
Boorman 1999). Hyperplasia of the parathyroid
can occur secondarily to chronic renal disease, but
Various reviews of the embryology, anatomy, his-
this occurs in mice much less frequently than it is
tology and physiology of the skin, sebaceous
observed in rats (Capen 1983b, Capen et al 1996,
glands and the mammary gland are available
62
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY
ANMALS
(Peckham & Heider 1999, Seely & Boorman
1999, Sundberg 2004, Sundberg et al 1996,
Thody & Shuster 1989).
The thickness of the skin of the mouse varies
with the area of the body, and also with the stage
of the hair growth cycle (Peckham & Heider 1999,
Sundberg 2004). In the mouse, following the
emergence of the frst coat, hair growth occurs in
cycles, with waves of hair growth and fllicular
activity occurring in a distinctive pattern along the
body of the animal (Hummel et al 1966, Stenn &
Paus 2001, Sundberg 2004, Sundberg et al 1996).
There are several reviews of hair structure and
 growth patterns which allow the pathologist to
easily identify and classify the different stages of
FIGURE 4.79 Focal epidermal ulceration of a 20-week-
the hair growth cycle (Hardy 1952, Muiller-Rover
old, male, CD-1 mouse. Epidermal hyperplasia, hyperk-
HGURE 4.81 Subcutaneous abscess of the submandibu-
et al 2001, Paus et al 1999, Stenn & Paus 2001).
eratosis and parakeratosis of the adjacent skin, and a
 lar region in a 15-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Multiple
 Loss of hair associated with excessive grooming
prominent inflammatory cell infiltration of the ulcerated 
abscesses displaying Splendore-Hoeppli material are 
activity can be seen occasionally. There are sex and
area are visible. x100.
evident. x20.
strain differences in the occurrence of this phe-
nomenon which is often associated with multiple
 Epidermal inclusion cysts occur occasionally in
Congenital lesions are not commonly encoun-
housed animals (Faccini et al 1990, Militzer &
mice, although not as commonly as in rats (Faccini 
tered in the mammary tissue of mice, and the
Wecker 1986). Whisker trimming and barbering
et al 1990, Peckham & Heider 1999). These cysts
most common age-related lesions in mouse
can also occur as a manifestation of social domi-
are lined by squamous epithelium, with desqua-
mammmary tissues are mammary tumors (Rehm &
nance in some strains of mice (Strozik & Festing
mated keratin in the lumen. (Fig. 4.80) They are
 Leibelt 1996, Seely & Boorman 1999). Other than
1981).
considered to be the result of damage to the
 neoplasms, duct ectasia and hyperplasia of the
Spontaneous degenerative changes are uncom-
pilosebaceous unit. Branchial cysts in the superf-
mammary tissue are frequently observed in aging
mon in the skin of mice, and the most common
cial tissues of the ventral neck have also been
mice (Bruner et al 200l, Faccini et al 1990)
changes observed are related to injuries associated
described as an incidental finding in some strains
although they occur at a lower frequency than in
with fighting in group-housed, male mice (Faccini
of mice. These are lined by cuboidal to columnar,
aged rats. Marmrmary hyperplasia rmay be focal or
et al 1990, Frith et al 2007, Peckham & Heider
non-ciliated epithelium, and are considered to
diffuse, and may be lobular or acinar. The change
1999, Tucker & Baker 1967]. Similar lesions have
develop from embryonic rests (France et al 2000).
is characterized by an increased number of normal
also been related to stress, with different strains
looking alveoli and ducts with little or no pleomor-
of mice showing different sensitivities (Koopman
phism, compression or encapsulation (Fig. 4.82).
et al 1984).
 The level of fghting injuries in some mice can
be severe enough to lead to increased mortality in
groups of gang-housed, male mice (Son 2003a, b,
Tucker & Baker 1967). There have been several
studies into the appropriate levels of group
housing and environmental enrichment necessary
to reduce stress and fighting among groups of male
mice, and strain differences in the levels of aggres-
sion shown by male mice have been demonstrated
(Kaliste et al 2006, Van Loo et al 2003, 2004).
Lesions associated with fighting generally ocur in
a typical pattern, involving the head, ears, extrem-
ities and perigenital regions (Peckham & Heider
HGURE 4.80 Epidermal inclusion cyst of the skin of the
1999, Son 2003a,b, Tucker & Baker 1967).
tail in a 20-week-old, female, CD-1 mouse. The cyst is 
The pattern of changes seen histologically
lined by a thin, squamous epithelium, and the lumen is 
FIGURE 4.82 Focal hyperplasia of the mammary glands
refects the severity and duration of the damage
filled with desquamated keratin. x100.
of an 18-month-old, female, CD-1 mouse. x100.
to the skin and include epidermal erosions or
ulcerations associated with inflammatory cell infl-
Occasional mice in long-term studies develop
The Zymbal's gland is a modifed sebaceous
tration and squamous hyperplasia of adjacent skin
swelling in the submandibular region of such a size
gland associated with the auditory meatus. This
(Bruner et al 2001, Frith et al 2007) (Fig. 4.79).
that it leads to the early sacrifice of the animal. On
gland is rarely examined during routine gross
Inflammatory changes in the skin may also be
histopathological examination these swellings are
observations and is not commonly presented for
 secondary to the presence of mites or immune
identifed as subcutaneous abscesses (Clarke et al 
(Andrews
histopathological examination. These glands are
complex-mediated 
vasculitis
et al
1978, Son 2003a, b). These can be the result of
best examined in transverse sections of the head
1994, Frith & Ward 1988). Similar degenerative
opportunistic infection of incisions on the skin, or
through the level of the external ears (Ruehl-
and inflammatory changes in the ears have been
through the oral mucosa by Staphylococcus aureus.
Fehlert et al 2003, Seely & Boorman 1999).
associated with excessive grooming or the pres-
The lesions typically contain multiple abscesses
Degenerative lesions, other than ductal dilatation
ence of metal ear tags (Bell et al 1970, Kitagaki &
Hirota 2007).
demonstrating Splendore-Hoeppli material, with 
and cyst formation, are uncommon (Seely &
the formation of eosinophilic material surrounding
Boorman 1999).
the microorganisms in the abscesses (Fig. 4.81).
Muscles, bones and joints
A general discussion on the embryology, anatomy,
histology and physiology of the bones and joints
can be found in Long & Leininger [1999b).
 The femur,including the joint and the sternum,
are the two most commonly sampled sites in
Mouse
63
routine toxicity testing. The section of long bone
ossification of the joint capsule in more severe
is routinely sectioned longitudinally to include the
cases (Fig. 4.84).
femur, knee joint and tibia. This section will allow
evaluation of the bone, bone marrow, growth
plates and articular surfaces. The sternum is rou-
tinely sectioned longitudinally, allowing examina-
tion of two or three sternebrae and the associated
bone marrow (Morawietz et al 2004).
 One of the more common degenerative changes
of the cartilage is chondromucinous degeneration
of the cartilage of the sternum (Fig. 4.83). This
has been described as a common finding in certain
strains of rat (Long et al 1996), but occurs at a
relatively high incidence in older mice (Long &
Leininger 1999b). This change is characterized by
increased eosinophilia, loss of chondrocytes and,
HGURE 4.85 Hyperostosis of the epiphyseal region of
ultimately, necrosis of the cartilage and the forma-
bone from a two-year-old, female, CD-1 mouse. x40.
tion of cystic cavities within the sternebral joints.
This change increases in incidence and severity
FIGURE 4.84 Femur, knee joint and tbia. Degenerative 
 Synovial hyperplasia of the joints also occurs
with age and occurs commonly in both sexes.
joint disease in a two-year-old, female, CD-1 mouse.
sporadically, usually accompanying inflammatory
Disruption of the normal joint structure, involving cartilage
gr degenerative joint changes (Long & Leininger
hyperplasia, remodelling of the articular surfaces, forma-
1999b) (Fig. 4.86a).
tion of bony bridges between the bones of the joint, and 
formation of cyst-like structures at the surface of the
joints. A fibro-osseous lesion can also be seen in the
marrow space of the tibia, characterized by replacement
of the marrow space with eosinophilic material and
spindle-shaped cells. x20.
Fibro-osseous lesion (myelofbrosis, osteofbro-
sis, osteosclerosis) occurs as a spontaneous and
induced change in the marrow cavity of sternebrae
and long bones (Albassam & Courtney 1996,
Berdanier 2004, Faccini 1990, Frith & Ward 1988,
Frith et al 2007, Percy & Barthold 2007, Travlos
2006b). There are strain and sex differences in the
occurrence of fbro-osseous lesion, with females
showing a higher incidence and severity (Albassam
et al 199l, Long & Leininger 1999b, Ritting-
 HGURE 4.86a Synovial hyperplasia of the knee joint of a
hausen et al 1997, Wancketet al 2008) suggesting
two-year-old, female, CD-1 mouse. Proliferation of the 
that sex hormones play a role in the etiology.
 synovium associated with inflammatory cell infiltration in 
In certain strains this lesion is accompanied
 the joint and periosteum. x100.
by reproductive tract lesions, including ovarian
atrophy and uterine cervical dysplasia (Wancket
Areview of the embryology, anatomy, histology
HGURE 4.83 Chondromucinous degeneration of the
et al 2008). This change is characterized by the
 and physiology of skeletal muscle can be found in
replacement of the marrow by an eosinophilic
Leininger (1999).
sternum of a 20-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Loss of
normal chondrocytes in sternebral joint with central area 
matrix, including fbroblast-like cells and osteo-
Spontaneous changes in the skeletal muscle of
clasts (Frith & Ward 1988, Long & Leininger
 mice are rare. There are certain inbred strains of
of necrosis. x100.
1999b) (Fig. 4.84).
mice which show spontaneous degenerative
This lesion should be distinguished from fbrous
 changes or calcifcation at an early age (Leininger
Degenerative joint disease, also described as
osteodystrophy, a metabolic bone disease associ-
1999, Sokoloff 1967), but these are not routinely
osteoarthropathy, osteoarthritis, and osteoarthro-
ated with disturbances of calcium homeostasis.
used in toxicity testing. Congenital lesions of the
sis, is a non-inflammatory progressive, degenera-
 Fibrous osteodystrophy involves extensive remod-
 muscle in CD-l mice are rare, although in chronic
tive disorder affecting the joints which shows an
elling of bones resulting from excessive secretion
 studies, small foci of inflammation, degeneration,
increase in incidence and severity with age (Faccini
of parathyroid hormone. Commonly seen in end-
necrosis and regeneration may occasionally occur
et al 1990, Long & Leininger 1999b, Russell &
stage renal disease, this lesion is usually accompa-
 spontaneously (Novilla & Smith 1996) and dys-
Meier 1966, Sokoloff 1967, Wancket et al 2008,
nied by hypertrophy of the parathyroids and
trophic or metastatic mineralization may occa-
Yamamoto & Iwase 1998, Yamamoto et al 1999).
metastatic mineralization in the soft tissues and
 sionally be seen (Leininger 1999).
There are strain differences in the occurrence of
vasculature throughout the body. This change is
Inflammatory processes in the skin or other
this disorder and also sex differences, with males
more commonly seen in rats than mice (Long et al 
tissues may sometimes involve the adjacent
being more susceptible than females (Long &
1996, Long & Leininger 1999b, Travlos 2006b).
muscle (Faccini et al 1990), and degenerative and
Leininger 1999b, Sokoloff 1967, Walton 1978,
Hypertrophy of the bone (hyperostosis) is occa-
inlammatory changes are a common response to
Wancket et al 2008, Yamamoto & Iwase 1998,
sionally seen in bones and joints of mice, charac-
the injection of saline or vehicle in studies involv-
Yarmamoto et al 1999). The knee joint is most
terized by increased bone mass affecting the
ing intramuscular administration of test materials
commonly affected, indicating that mechanical
periosteum, endosteum or trabecular bone (Long
(Leininger 1999, Thuilliez et al 2009). Atrophic
trauma may be a factor in the etiology (Russell &
& Leininger 1999b) (Fig. 4.85).
changes may also occur secondary to denervation
Meier 1966], although an age-related loss of joint
as a result of traumatic damage to the associated
innervation is also considered to play a role in the
nerve fbers (Leininger 1999, Van Vleet & Ferrans
development of this disorder (Salo et al 2002).
1991b). The muscle spindle is a normal structure
Features of this lesion include destruction of the
articular cartilage with cartilage regeneration and
in skeletal muscle, responsible for proprioception
(Fig. 4.86b).
hyperplasia, formation of subchondral cysts and
64
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATOR
ANMALS
brain and the spinal cord, usually occurring at the
represented an extension of an extracranial growth
midline in the brain and peripherally located
through the cranial sutures of the skull into the
beneath the pia of the spinal cord. They usually
brain of affected mice and did not represent a
consist of cystic structures lined by stratified squa-
disturbance in the embryological development of
mous epithelium and containing desquamated
the brain.
keratin (Fig. 4.87). Occasional cysts in the brain
are lined by cuboidal, ciliated epithelium and
contain flocculent material, similar to develop-
mental cysts seen in the pituitary (Fig. 4.88).
Developmental cysts are considered to be ermbry-
ological remnants, are often seen in young mice,
may increase in size with age, and are not usually
 associated with clinical signs.
AGURE 4.86b The nuclear bag fiber of the mouse
muscle spindle. x200.
Brain and nervous system
A review of the embryology, anatomy, histology
AGURE 4.89 Lipomatous hamartoma of the brain of an
and physiology of the central and peripheral
18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. A well demarcated
nervous system can be found in Radovsky &
cluster of mature adipose cells is present in the midline 
Mahler (1999).
 of the brain, occupying the third ventricle, and distorting
 Due to the small size of the mouse brain, and
the normal architecture of the hippocampus. x40.
the relatively few sections examined in routine
toxicity studies, standardization of the trimming
Cerebral mineralization consists of small depos-
and sectioning of the brain is important to ensure
FIGURE 4.87 Epidermoid cyst in the cervical spinal cord 
its of basophilic concretions, often with concen-
that homologous sections are examined for all
of an 18-week-old, male, CD-1 mouse. The cyst is lined 
tric laminations, occurring in the thalamic region
animals in a particular study. The mouse brain is
-bsap suenuon pue wnauida snowenbs paens e Aa
 of the brain in aging mice and is usually associated
also very susceptible to handling artifacts and
uamated keratin. x200.
with blood vessels (Fig. 4.90). The mineralized
should be processed with care (Morawietz et al
 ae an p a sno ia
 2004, Radovsky & Mahler 1999). The brain is a
in CD-1 and B6C3Fl mice. Their incidence can
highly complex structure and a relatively small
be dependent on the level of brain sectioned
 proportion of the tissue is examined in the three
(Faccini et al 1990, Elwell & Mahler 1999, Frith
or four coronal sections prepared for routine his-
& Ward 1988, Frith et al 2007, Percy & Barthold
topathological examination in pre-clinical studies.
2007, Radovsky & Mahler 1999).
If the reader is required to investigate potential
changes in particular structures within the central
 nervous system, the use of a brain atlas is recom-
mended to identify the position and extent of the
different regions of the mouse brain. Such maps
are now available on-line and give the pathologist
the opportunity to compare the histological sec-
tions for individual animals with high-resolution
images of step-serial sections through the mouse
brain.
One such source of information is the High
FIGURE 4.88 Developmental cyst in the brain of an
Resolution Mouse Brain Atlas (Sidman et al,
18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. A mulilocular cyst
available electronically
at
http://www.hms.
lined by a squamous epithelium, occasionally cuboidal
harvard.edu/research/brain/index.html)
which
and ciliated. The cyst contains faintly basophilic, floccu-
provides step-serial, coronal sections stained alter-
lent material, and is bcated in the hypothalamus, adja-
natively with myelin and Nissl substance stains,
cent to the third ventricle. x100.
 and labelled with all the major grey and white
HGURE 4.90 Cerebral mineralization of the brain of an
matter structures.
Lipomatous hamartoma is the accumulation of
18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. The foci of basophilic,
 An alternative source of immages is provided by
 normal adipocytes, predominantly located in the
rounded, irregular bodies are associated with blood
BrainMaps.org at: (http://brainmaps.org/index.
midline or ventricles of the brain (Fig. 4.89).
vessels in the thalamus. x200.
php?p=speciesdata&species=mus-musculus),
a
Lipomatous hamartoma have been reported as
site which presents images of the brains of various
lipomas, but are considered to result from faulty
Degenerative changes are occasionally seen in
species, including the mouse. Histochemical and
development of the meninges or choroid plexus.
the spinal cord and peripheral nerves of aging
immunohistochemically-stained coronal, sagittal
They do not grow rapidly or progress to malignant
mice, and are characterized by the swelling of
and horizontal sections of the mouse brain are
tumors, and are not usually associated with
axons and vacuolation of the associated myelin
 available.
clinical signs (Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al
 sheaths with cellular debris and the presence of
 Developmental cysts are relatively common
2007, Krinke et al 2000, 200la, Morgan &
macrophages (Fig. 4.91). These changes may be
congenital lesions, variously identified as epider-
Sheldon 1988, Percy & Barthold 2007). Adkison 
observed in the sciatic nerves and all levels of the
moid cysts, epithelial cysts, squamous epithelial
& Sundberg [1991] reported lipomatous hamarto-
spinal cord, but generally occur at a much lower
cysts or epithelial inclusion cysts (Faccini et al
 mas in the brain of inbred strains of mice associ-
incidence than is seen in aging rats (Berdanier
1990, Frith et al 2007, Frith & Ward i988, Garner
ated with the growth of normal adipose tissue
 2004, Engelhardt 1996, Faccini et al 1990, Krinke
et al 1967, Krinke et al 2000, Kulwich 1994,
in the subcutis above the dorsal midline of the
1996).
Percy & Barthold 2007, Radovsky & Mahler 1999,
cranium. These lesions were distinct from the
Satoh & Furuhama 200lj. These occur in the
lipomatous hamartomas reported here in that they
Mouse
65
keratinization, usually resulting from traumatic
damage to the cornea (Frame & Slone 1996,
Geiss & Yoshitomi 1999, Percy & Barthold 2007)
(Fig. 4.93). Spontaneous corneal degeneration and
dystrophic mineralization without an associated
inflammatory response, can occur in some stocks
and strains of mice, including the CD-l strain
(Faccini et al 1990, Frame & Slone 1996, Percy &
Barthold 2007, Yamate et al 1987), with females
being more susceptible than males (Fig. 4.94).
AGURE 4.91 Focal degeneration in the thoracic spinal
AGURE 4.95 Mineralization of the iris of an 18-month-
cord of an 18-week-old, female, CD-1 mouse. Focal area
old, female, CD-1 mouse. A focus of basophilic material
of degenerate fibers with vacuolation and accumulation
is visible within the iris. These depositions can be rounded
of macrophages. x200.
or irregular in shape and usually elicit no inflammatory
response. x200.
Eye and Ear
Histologically, all degenerative changes in the
lens, capsule, lens epithelium or fbers which
A review of the embryology, anatomy, histology
result in reduced permeability of the lens to light
and physiology of the eye and associated glands
are termed cataracts (Frith et al 2007, Geiss &
can be found in Geiss & Yoshitomi (1999) and
Yoshitomi 1999j. Early lesions consisting of foci
Botts et al (1999). Payne (1994) presents an
of swollen or degenerate lens fibers are relatively
extensive review of the structure and function of
common in mice (Faccini et al 1990, Saunders
the Harderian gland.
1967). Multiple, globoid, circumscribed bodies,
 The causes of retinal atrophy retinal degenera-
FIGURE 4.93 Corneal degeneration of the eye of an
and the development of vacuoles within the lens,
tion, retinal dystrophy) are diverse. A genetic pre-
18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Acute inflammatory
are seen in the later stages of the disease [Frith
disposition to retinal degeneration is prevalent in
infiltration of the cornea (keratitis) is apparent, with asso-
& Ward 1988, Saunders 1967). Fibrosis and
several strains of mice and results in the degenera-
ciated epithelial hyperplasia and keratinization of the 
mineralization are features oflate-stage, lenticular
tion and loss of the outer nuclear layers of the
 Surface epithelium. Anterior synechia (attachment of iris 
 degeneration (Saunders 1967). There are strain
retina within the frst month of life (Frarme &
to Descemet's membrane) is also evident. x40.
differences in the occurrence and severity of these
Slone 1996, Frith et al 2007, Fuller & Wimer
changes (Berdanier 2004, Frame & Slone 1996,
1966, Percy & Barthold 2007, Saunders 1967,
Geiss & Yoshitomi 1999). Cataracts may occur
Serflippi et al 2004, Stirling et al 1983). In those
    r 
aap o ussd a e nm a
degenerative changes are relatively common,
eration in the frst weeks of life, the incidence of
severe changes are an unusual occurrence in mice
retinal atrophy varies with stock, strain, age and
(Fig. 4.96).
housing conditions. Light-induced retinal atrophy
is more prevalent in albino than in pigmented
mice (Faccini et al 1990, Frame & Slone 1996,
Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al 2007, Geiss &
Yoshitomi 1999, Serflippi et al 2004). Atrophy
may be unilateral or bilateral, and may be partial.
It is characterized by loss of the rods and the outer
plexiform and nuclear layers (Fig. 4.92).
FIGURE 4.94 Corneal mineralization in an 18-month-old,
male, CD-1 mouse. Basophilic accumulations are appar-
ent at the junction of the corneal epithelium and the
stroma. x100.
Mineralization of the iris occurs at a low inci-
dence in CD-1 mice (Faccini et al 1990). The
etiology of this change is unknown, but it occurs
HGURE 4.96 Lenticular degeneration in a two-year-old,
occasionally as a unilateral or bilateral change in
 male, CD-1 mouse. Swollen and degenerate lens fibers
older CD-i mice, usually with no apparent inflam-
and globoid bodies are apparent and a large vacuole is
matory reaction (Fig. 4.95).
 present within the lens. x200.
There is sexual dimorphism in the function of
the Harderian gland of mice, with females pro-
ducing more porphyrin than males (Krinke 2004,
HGURE 4.92 Retinal atrophy in the eye of an 18-week-
Krinke et al 1996, Payne 1994). The number of
old, male, CD-1 mouse showing loss of the outer nuclear
 spontaneous changes found in the Harderian gland
layer of the retina. x200.
are limited, and the most common finding is the
presence of lymphoid aggregates within the gland
Degenerative changes in the cornea (corneal
 of aging mice. Duct ectasia and focal hyperplasia
degeneration) can include mineralization, inflam-
 may occasionally be seen and the incidence of
mation, ulceration, epithelial hyperplasia and
atrophy also increases with age (Botts et al 1999,
66
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATOR
ANMALS
Faccini et al 1990, Frith & Ward 1988, Frith et al
appearance in H&E stained sections. Amyloid
2007, Krinke et al 1996, 2001b).
stains positively with Congo Red and under polar-
Focal or widespread necrosis of the Harderian
zed light exhibits an apple-green birefringence
gland may also be observed occasionally as a result
(HogenEsch et al 1996, Jakob 197l, Percy &
of damage to the gland during retro-orbital blood
Barthold 2007, Sass 1983c).
sampling procedures. There is usually no risk of
Primary amyloidosis is considered to be geneti-
mistaking these findings as being related to the
cally determined, and the term secondary amy-
administration of a test material given the unilat-
loidosis is used for amyloid associated with chronic
eral occurrence and association with the blood
inflammation (Dunn 1967b). Amyloidosis is also
sampling procedure (Fig. 4.97).
associated with skin lesions related to fghting
in male mice (Brayton 2007, Frith et al 2007,
HogenEsch et al 1996, Page & Glenner 1972,
Tucker & Baker 1967).
 The kidney is a predilection site for the deposi-
tion of amyloid, where it accumulates in the
FIGURE 4.99 Mesenchymal proliferation of the lacrimal
glomeruli (Chandra & Frith 1994, Dunn 1967b).
gland of an 18-month-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Prolifera-
Amyloid deposits in the kidney are associated
tion of spindle-shaped cells within the gland, associated 
with degenerative kidney disease and papillary
with atrophic acini and inflammatory-cell infitration.
necrosis in susceptible strains of mice (Cornelius
x100.
1970, Dunn 1967b, Russell & Meier 1966), and
renal amyloidosis is often considered the main
factor contributing to the death of susceptible
Systemic disease
strains of mice (Chai 1978, Frith et al 2007)
 In systemic amyloidosis, amyloid deposition can
HGURE 4.97 Focal necrosis of the Harderian gland of a
There are frequent references to amyloidosis as a
occur in various organs, and the pattern varies
20-week-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Loss of the normal epi-
significant disease of the CD-l mouse in the sci-
with the strain, but particular sites of deposition
thelial structure of the acini with associated inflammatory-
entifc literature relating to mouse pathology
include the gastrointestinal tract, with marked
cell infiltration. x40.
(Brayton 2007, Elmore 2006, Engelhardt 1996,
deposition in the lamina propria of the small intes-
Frith & Chandra 1991, Frith et al 2007, Glaister
tine, the adrenal cortex, salivary glands, the alveo-
Foci of lymphocytic infltration are the most
1986, Gruys et al 1996, Maita et al 1988, Percy
lar septa of the lungs, the spleen (where it can 
commonly observed finding in the lacrimal glands
& Barthold 2007, Suttie 2006, Thoolen
et al
involve the entire red pulp in extreme cases),
of mice (Botts et al 1999, Krinke et al i996).
2010). Our current experience with CD-l mice
lymph nodes, and the liver (periportal deposits)
As mice age, the incidence of ectopic Harderian 
from Charles River UK, however, is that armyloid
(Dunn 1967b, Elmore 2006, Jakob 1971, Percy &
gland within the lacrimal gland (Harderianization)
occurs at a very low incidence in control animals
Barthold 2007, Sass 1983c, Suttie 2006) (Figs
increases, although this change is more common
in long-term studies, and usually manifests only as
4.100, 4.101a & b).
in females (Frith & Ward 1988, Krinke et al 1996)
an incidental finding in a single tissue in an occa-
(Fig. 4.98). Atrophy of the gland also occurs with
sional animal. The occurrence of systemic amy-
an increased incidence in older mice (Botts et al
loidosis as a significant fnding, and a cause of
1999). An unusual, apparently proliferative, lesion
death in control animals from long-term studies,
of the mouse lacrimal gland occurs occasionally in
has reduced to zero in the last 20 years in the
older CD-l mice. Foci of degenerate acinar cells,
author's experience. This experience is reflected
with replacement by spindle-shaped cells (often
in some reports in the literature. Signifcant dif-
resembling cholesterol clefts), and areas of calci-
ferences in the incidence of amyloidosis in Charles 
fication, occur at a low incidence in male mice
River CD-1 mice from three different sources in
over l year old. This fnding is usually termed
 the USA have been reported (Engelhardt 1996,
mesenchymal proliferation and the incidence
Engelhardt et al 1993j. In males, the incidence of
varies from 0 to 8% in control animals (Fig. 4.99).
amyloidosis ranged from 2% to 45%, and in
The etiology of this change is unclear, although a
females from 0.7% to 30.7%. A similar report on
hormonal influence may be involved given that it
the causes of death in long-term studies using
 does not appear to occur in females.
CD-1 mice from Charles River Japan reported an
abrupt decrease in the incidence of systermic amy-
loidosis in Charles River CD-l mice born after
HGURE 4.100 Amyloid accumulation in the lamina
1980 (Maita et al 1988). The factors contributing
propria of the jejunum of a two-year-old, male, CD-1
to death in control CD-1 mice from 20 long-term
mouse. ×100.
studies performed between 1990 and 2002 were
reviewed (Son 2003a, b). All of the animals in
these studies were supplied by Charles River UK,
and systemic amyloidosis did not feature as a
factor contributing to death in any of the decedent
animals in these studies.
Notwithstanding these changes in the occur-
rence of this fnding in CD-l mice, amyloidosis is
still reported as a significant finding in a number
of strains and stocks of mice (Brayton 2007, Percy
& Barthold 2007, Frith et al 2007), and the toxi-
cological pathologist should be aware of the fea-
HGURE 4.98 Harderianization of the lacrimal gland of
tures of this important systemic disease.
a two-year-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Harderian acini are
The structure,
distribution, incidence
and
 present within an area of atrophic, lacrimal acini. An
pathogenesis of senile amyloidosis is reviewed by
island of normal acrimal acini is present at the bottom
HogenEsch et al (1996). The disease is character-
right of the image and a focus of ymphocytic cellinfitra-
ized by the extracellular deposition of fbrillar
tion is present at the top right. x100.
protein, which has a characteristic eosinophilic
Mouse
67
Bendele, A.M., Carlton, W.W., 1986. Urologic
Capen, C.C., Karbe, E., Deschl, U., et al, 2001.
syndrome,mouse.In:Jones,TC.,Mohr,U.,Hunt,
Endocrine system.In:Mohr,U.(Ed.],International
o sydeo iiss enspa
classifcation of rodent tumors, themouse.Springer
pathology of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, pp. 269-322.
Berlin, pp. 369-375.
Carlton, W.W., Engelhardt, J.A., 1991. Atrial
Berdanier, C.D., 2004. Gastrointestinal system and
thrombosis, rat, mouse, and hamster. In: Jones, TC.,
metabolism. In: Hedrich, H.J., Bullock, G. (Eds.],
Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Cardiovascular and 
The handbook of experimental animals: the
musculoskeletal systemILSImonograph on
laboratory mouse. Elsevier, San Diego, pp. 245-259.
pathology of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag.
Bernichtein, S., Peltoketo, H., Huhtaniemi, I., 2009.
Berlin, pp. 37-41.
 Adrenal hyperplasia and tumors in mice in
Carlton, WW., Gries, C.L., 1983 Cysts, pituitary rat,
connection with aberrant pituitary-gonadal function.
mouse, and hamster. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U.,
Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 300, 164-168.
Hunt,R.Eds.]，ncrineystemnograp
Best, PV., Heath, D., 1961. Interpretation of the
on pathology of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag.
appearances of the small pulmonary blood vessels in
Berlin, pp. 161-163.
animals. Circ. Res. 9, 288-294.
Cesta, M.F., 2006a. Normal structure, function, and
AGURE 4.101a Perivascular accumulation of amyloid in 
Betton, G.R., Whiteley, L.O., Anver, M.R., et al.
histology of the spleen. Toxicol. Pathol. 34,
2001. Gastrointestial tract. In: Mohr, U. (Ed.],
455-465.
the liver of a two-year-old, male, CD-1 mouse. Congo Red 
International classifcation of rodent tumors,the
Cesta, M.F., 2006b. Normal structure, function, and
staining. x200.
mouse. Springer, Berlin, pp. 23-58.
histology of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue.
Bolon, B., 006.Internet resoures forphenotyping
Toxicol. Pathol. 34, 599-608.
engineered rodents. ILAR. J. 47, 163-171.
Chai, C.K., 1978. Spontaneous amyloidosis in LLC
Bolon, B., 2007. Genetically engineered animals. In:
mice. Am. J. Pathol. 90, 381-398.
Kubinyi, H. (Ed.], Comprehensive medicinal
Chai, C.K., Dickie, M.M., 1966. Endocrine variations.
chemistry,second ed.Drug discovery technologies,
In: Green, E.L. (Ed.], Biology of the laboratory
vol. 3. Elsevier, Oxford, pp. 15]-170.
mouse. McGraw-Hill, New York, ch 20,
Boorman, G.A., Sills, R.C., 1999. Exocrine and
pp. 387-403.
endocrine pancreas. In: Maronpot, R.R., Boorman,
Chandra, M., Frith, C.H., 1994. Spontaneous renal
G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.], Pathology of the mouse,
lesions in CD-1 and B6C3Fl mice. Exp. Toxicol.
reference and atlas. Cache River Press, Vienna, ch 8,
Pathol. 46, 189-198.
pp. 185-205.
Charles River website: http://www.criver.com/, 08 July
Botts, S., Jokinen, M.M., Gaillard, E.T, et al, 1999.
2011.
Salivary, harderian and lacrimal glands. In:
Chiu, T, Chen, H.C., 1986. Spontaneous basophilic
Maronpot, R.R., Boorman, G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.],
Pathology of themouse,reference and atlas.Cache
hypertrophic foci of the parotid glands in rats and
mice. Vet. Pathol. 23, 606-609.
River Press, Vienna, ch 5, pp. 49-79.
Clarke, M.C., Taylor, R.J., Hall, G.A., et al., 1978. The
 BrainMaps.org - digital atlases of mouse brain available
FIGURE 4.101b Image from Fig. 4.101a under polarized 
occurrence inmice of facial andmandibular
at: http://brainmaps.org/index.php?p=speciesdata&
abscesses associated withStaprylococcus aureus.
light showing apple green birefringence of the amyloid.
 species=mus-musculus, 08 July 2011.
Lab. Anim. 12, 121-123.
x200.
Braun, A., Ernst, H., Hoymann, H.G., et al., 2004.
Cook, M.J., 1965. The anatomy of the laboratory
Respiratory tract. In: Hedrich, H.J., Bullock, G.
(Eds.), The handbook of experimental animals:
mouse. Academic Press, London, available
References
electronically at http://www.informatics.jax.org/
the laboratory mouse. Elsevier, San Diego,
cookbook/.
pp. 225-243.
Adkison, D.L., Sundberg, J.P, 1991. 'Lipomatous'
Cornelius, E.A., 1970. Amyloidosis and renal papillary
Brayton, C., 2007. Spontaneous diseases in commonly
hamartomas and choristomas in inbred laboratory
used inbred mouse strains. In: Fox, J.G., Barthold,
necrosis in male hybrid mice. Am. J. Pathol. 59,
mice. Vet. Pathol. 28, 305-312.
317-326.
S.W., Davisson, M.T, et al (Eds.], The mouse in
Albassam, M.A., Wojcinski, Z.W, Barsoum, N.J., et al.,
biomedical research, second ed, vol. 3. Academic
Cotchin, E., Roe, F.J.C. (Eds.], 1967. Pathology of
 199]. Spontaneous fbro-osseous proliferative lesions
Press, Burlington, ch 25, pp. 623-717.
laboratory rats and mice. Blackwell, Oxford.
in the sternums and femurs of B6C3Fl mice. Vet.
Brayton, C., Justice, M., Montgomery, C.A., 2001.
DeLellis, R.A., Sheldon, WG., Bucci, TJ., 1996.
Pathol. 28, 381-388.
Evaluating mutant mice: anatomic pathology. Vet.
Changes in thyroid c cells. In: Mohr, U.,
Albassam, M.A., Courtney, C.L., 1996. Nonneoplastic
Pathol. 38, 1-19.
Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton, W.W,
Sundberg, J.P, Ward, JM. (Eds.], Pathobiology of
and neoplastic lesions of the bone. In: Mohr,
, U.,
Brown, R., 1986. Pigment deposition, kidney, mouse.
Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton, WW.,
the aging mouse, vol. l. ILSI Press, Washington,
In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.],
pp. 103-107.
Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of
Urinary system, ILSI monographs on pathology of
the aging mouse, vol. 2. ILSI Press, Washington,
laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp.
Deschl, U., Cattley, R.C., Harada, T, et al., 2001.
pp. 425-437.
244245.
Liver, gall bladder, and exocrine pancreas. In: Mohr,
Andrews, A.G., Dysko, R.C., Spilman, S.C., et al.,
U., (Ed.], International classifcation of rodent
Bruner, R., Kuttler, K., Bader, R., et al., 2001.
tumors, the mouse. Springer, Berlin, pp. 59-86.
 1994. Immune complex vasculitis with secondary
Integumentary system. In: Mohr, U. (Ed.],
ulcerative dermatitis in aged C57BL/6NNia mice.
International classification of rodent tumors,
Dixon, D., Herbert, R.A., Sills, R.C., et al., 1999.
Vet. Pathol. 31, 293-300.
the mouse. Springer,Berlin, pp.1-22.
Lungs, pleura, and mediastinum. In: Maronpot, R.R.,
Boorman, G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.], Pathology of the
Anagnostopoulos, A.V., Mobraaten, LE., Sharp, J.J.,
Capen, C.C., 1983a. Functional and pathologic
mouse,reference and atlas.Cache River Pres,
et al., 2001. Transgenic and knockout databases:
interrelationships of the pituitary gland and the
behavioral profles of mouse mutants. Physiol. Behav.
Vienna, ch 12, pp. 293-332.
hypothalamus. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D.
73, 675-689.
(Eds.], Endocrine system, monographs on pathology
Doi, T, Kotani, Y, Kokoshima, H., et al., 2007.
of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Eosinophilic substance is 'not amyloid’ in the mouse
Bannasch, P, Wayss, K., Zerban, H., 1985. Peliosis
hepatisrodents.In:ones,TC.,Mohr,U.,Hunt,
pp. 101-120.
nasal septum. Vet. Pathol. 44, 796-802.
R.D. (Eds.], Digestive system, ILSI monographs on
Capen, C.C., 1983b. Structural and biochemical
Doi, T, Kotani, Y, Kokoshima, H., et al., 2009.
pathology of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag,
aspects of parathyroid gland function in animals. In:
 Deposition process of eosinophilic substance in
Berlin, pp. 110-115.
Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Endocrine
mouse nasal septum. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 71, 931-935.
Baze, W.B., Steinbach, TJ., Fleetwood, M.L.,
system,monographs on pathology of laboratory
Doi, T, Kokoshima, H., Kanno, T, et al., 2010. New
Blanchard, TW., Barnhart, K.F., McArthur, M.J.,
animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 217-247.
 fndings concerning eosinophilic substance deposition
2006.Karyomegaly and intranuclear inclusions in
Capen, C.C., Grone, A., Bucci, TJ., et al, 1996.
in mouse nasal septum: sex difference and no
the renal tubules of sentinel ICR mice (Mus
Changes in structure and function of the parathyroid
increase in seniles. Toxicol. Pathol. 38, 631-636.
muscuus]. Comp. Med. 56, 435438.
gland. In: Mohr, U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C.,
Donnelly, K.B., 2008. Cardiac valvular pathology:
Bell, J.F, Moore, G.J., Clifford, C.M., et al., 1970.
Carlton, W.W., Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M. (Eds.],
 comparative pathology and animal models of
Dry gangrene of the ear in white mice. Lab. Anim.
Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. 1. ILSI Press,
acquired cardiac valvular diseases. Toxicol. Pathol.
4, 245254.
Washington, p. 109-123.
36, 204217.
68
 BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Dumont, F., Robert, F., 1980. Age- and sex-dependent
France, M.P, Sundberg, J.P, Martinic, G., 2000.
Geiss, V., Yoshitomi, K., 1999. The eyes. In: Maronpot,
thymic abnormalities in NZB X SJL Fl hybrid mice.
Branchial cysts in laboratory mice. J. Comp. Pathol.
R.R, Borman, G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.], Pathology
Clin. Exp. Immunol. 41, 63-72.
123, 55-58.
of the mouse, reference and atlas. Cache River
Dungworth, D.L., Rittinghausen, S., Schwartz, L..
Frith, C.H., 1983a. Histology, adrenal gland, mouse.
Press, Vienna, ch 18, pp. 47]-489.
et al., 2001. Respiratory system and mesothelium.
In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.J,
Glaister, JR., 1986. The ageing mouse. In: Principles
In: Mohr, U. (Ed.], International classifcation
Endocrine system, monographs on pathology of
 of toxicological pathology. Taylor & Francis, London,
of rodent tumors, the mouse. Springer, Berlin,
laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 8-12.
pp. 182-203.
pp. 87-137.
Frith, C.H., 1983b. Pheochromocytoma, adrenal
Goodman, D.G., 1983. Subcapsular-cell hyperplasia,
Dunn, TB., 1967a. Renal disease of the mouse. In:
medulla, mouse. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt,
adrenal, mouse. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt,
Cotchin, E., Roe, F.J.C. (Eds.], Pathology of
R.D. (Eds.], Endocrine system, monographs on
R.D. (Eds.], Endocrine system, monographs on
laboratory rats and mice. Blackwell, Oxford, ch 6,
pathology of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag,
pathology of laboratory animals.Springer-Velag
pp. 149-179.
Berlin, pp. 27-30.
Berlin, pp. 66-68.
Dunn, TB., 1967b. Amyloidosis in mice. In: Cotchin,
Frith, C.H., 1983c. Lipogenic pigmentation, adrenal
Goto, N., Nakajima, Y, Onodera, T, et al, 1984.
E., Roe, FJ.C. (Eds.], Pathology of laboratory rats
cortex, mouse. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt,
 Inheritance of hydronephrosis in the inbred mouse
and mice. Blackwell, Oxford, ch 7, pp. 181-212.
R.D. (Eds.], Endocrine system, monographs on
strain DDD. Lab. Anim. 18, 22-25.
Dunn, TB., 1970. Normal and pathologic anatomy of
pathology of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag,
Goto, N., Nakajima, Y, Imamura, K., et al., 1985.
the adrenal gland of the mouse, including neoplasms.
Berlin, pp. 60-64.
 Influence of testosterone on hydronephrosis in the
Natl. Cancer. Inst. 44, 1323-1389.
Frith, C.H., 1983d. Ectopic thyroid, mouse. In: Jones,
inbred mouse strain DDD. Lab. Anim. 19, 85-88.
Eaton, G.J., Custer, R.P, Johnson, FE.N., et al., 1978.
TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Endocrine
Greaves, P, Boiziau, J.L., 1984. Altered patterns of
Dystrophic cardiac calcinosis in mice: genetic,
system,monographson pathology of laboratory
animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 17]-172.
mucin secretion in gastric hyperplasia in mice. Vet.
hormonal, and dietary influences. Am. J. Pathol. 90,
Pathol. 21, 224-228.
173-186.
Frith, C.H., Chandra, M., 1991. Incidence,
Green, E.L. (Ed.], 1966. Biology of the laboratory
Eaton, G.J., Johnson, F.N., Custer, R.P, et al., 1980.
distribution, and morphology of amyloidosis in
Charles Rivers CD-l mice. Toxicol. Pathol. 19,
mouse. MeGraw-Hill, New York.
 The Icr:Ha(ICR] mouse: a current account of
123127.
Green, E.U., 1942. On the occurrence of crystalline
breeding, mutations, diseases and mortality. Lab.
 material in the lungs of normal and cancerous Swiss
Anim. 14, 17-24.
Frith, C.H., Fetters, J., 1983. Ectopic parathyroid,
mice. Cancer Res. 2, 210-217.
Elangbam, C.S., Colman, K.A., Lightfoot, R.M., et al.,
mouse. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D.
(Eds.], Endocrine system, monographs on pathology
Gruys, E., Tooten, PC., Kuijpers, M.H., 1996. Lung,
2002. Endocardial myxomatous change in Harlan
of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp.
ileum and heart are predilection sites for AApoAll
Sprague-Dawley rats [Hsd:S-D] and CD-] mice: its
263-264.
amyloid deposition in CD-] Swiss mice used for
microscopic resemblance to drug-induced
toxicity studies.Pulmonary amyloid indicates
valvulopathy in humans. Toxicol. Pathol. 30,
Frith, C.H., Sheldon, W.D., 1983. Hyperplasia,
483-491.
AApoAll. Lab. Anim. 30, 28-34.
 adenoma and carcinoma of pancreatic islets, mouse.
In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.],
Guo, L., Johnson, R.S., Schuh, J.C., 2000. Biochemical
Elmore, S.A., 2006. Histopathology of the lymph
Endocrineytemgrphnalogf
 characterization of endogenously formed eosinophilic
nodes. Toxicol. Pathol. 34, 425-454.
laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp.
crystals in the lungs of mice. J. Biol. Chem. 275
Elwell, M.R., Mahler, J.F., 1999. Heart, blood and
297-303.
(17], 8032-8037.
ymphatic vessels.In:Maronpot,R.R., Boorman
Frith, C.H., Townsend, J.W., 1985. Histology and
Hagiwara, A., Tamano, S., Hirose, M., 1996. Changes
G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.], Pathology of the mouse,
in the heart. In:Mohr, U.,Dungworth, D.L, Capen,
reference and atlas. Cache River Press, Vienna,
ultratructure, salivary glands, mouse. In: Jones, T.C.
Mohr U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Digestive system. ILSI
C.C., Carlton, W.W., Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M.
ch 14, pp. 361-380.
monographs on pathology of laboratory animals.
(Eds.], Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. 1. ILSI
Engelhardt, J.A., 1996. Variability in the occurrence of
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 177-184.
Press, Washington, pp. 361-371.
spontaneous lesions in Crl:CD-1(r](ICR] mice
Frith, C.H., Ward, J.M., 1979. A morphologic
Haines, D.C., Chattopadhyay, S., Ward, J.M., 2001.
related to source.In: Mohr, U.,Dungworth,D.L,
classification of proliferative and neoplastic hepatic
 Pathology of aging B6;129 mice. Toxicol. Pathol. 29,
Capen, C.C., Carlton, W.W., Sundberg, J.P, Ward,
lesions in mice. J. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 3,
653-661.
J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of the aging mouse. 1,
329-351.
Harada, T, Maronpot, R.R., Enomoto, A., et al, 1996.
Frith, C.H., Ward, J.M., 1988. Color atlas of neoplastic
Changes in the liver and gallbladder. In: Mohr, U.,
Engelhardt, J.A., Gries, C.L., Long, G.G., 1993.
and non-neoplastic lesions in aging mice. Elsevier,
Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton, W.W.,
Incidence of spontaneous neoplastic and
Amsterdam.
Sundberg J.P, Ward, JM. (Eds.], Pathobiology of
nonneoplastic lesions in Charles River CD-1 mice
Frith, C.H., Pattengale, PK., Ward, J.M., 1985.A color
the aging mouse, vol. 2. ILSI Press, Washington,
varies with breeding origin. Toxicol. Pathol. 21,
atlas of hematopoietic pathology of mice. Toxicology
pp. 207-241.
538-541.
Enomoto, M., Hirouchi, Y, Tsutumi, M., 1996.
Pathology Associates, Little Rock.
Harada, T, Enomoto, A., Boorman, G.A., et al., 1999.
Liver and gallbladder. In: Maronpot, RR., Boorman,
Pancreas. In: Mohr, U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen,
Frith, C.H., Townsend, J.W., Ayres, PH., 1986.
G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.], Pathology of the mouse,
C.C., Carlton, W.W., Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M.
Histology, ultrastructure, urinary tract, mouse. In:
reference and atlas. Cache River Press, Vienna, ch 7,
(Eds.], Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. 2. ILSI
Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Urinary
Press, Washington, pp. 251-260.
system.ILSImonographs on pathology of laboratory
pp. 119-183.
Ernst, H., Dungworth, D.L., Kamino, K., et al., 1996.
animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 281-284.
Hard, G.C., Durchfeld-Meyer, B., Short, B., et al.,
2001. Urinary system. In: Mohr, U. (Ed.),
Nonneoplastic lesions in the lungs. In: Mohr, U.,
Frith, C.H., Ward, J.M., Harleman, J.H., et al., 2001.
International classifcation of rodent tumors, the
Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton, W.W.,
Hematopoietic system. In: Mohr, U. (Ed.],
Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of
mouse. Springer, Berlin, pp. 139-162.
International classifcation of rodent tumors,the
the aging mouse, vol. 1. ILSI Press, Washington,
mouse. Springer, Berlin, pp. 417-451.
Hardisty, J.F., Boorman, G.A., 1999. The thyroid and
pp. 281-300.
parathyroid glands. In: Maronpot, R.R., Boorman,
Frith, C.H., Goodman, D.G., Boysen, B.G., 2007. The
G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.], Pathology of the mouse,
Ettlin, R.A., Stirnimann, P, Prentice, D.E., 1994.
mouse, pathology. In: Gad, S.C. (Ed.], Animal
reference andatlas.Cache RiverPress,Vienna,ch
Causes of death in rodent toxicity and
models in toxicology, second ed. Taylor & Francis,
21, pp. 537-554.
carcinogenicity studies. Toxicol. Pathol. 22,
Boca Raton, pp. 72-122.
165-178.
Hardy, M.H., 1952. The histochemistry of hair follicles
Fuller, J.L., Wimer, R.E., 1966. Neural, sensory, and
Eustis, S.L., Boorman, G.A., 1985. Embryology,
in the mouse. Am. J. Anat. 90, 285-337.
motor functions. In: Green, E.L. (Ed.], Biology of
histology, and ultrastructure of the exocrine
the laboratory mouse. McGraw-Hill, New York, ch
Hardy, J., 1967. Haematology of rats and mice. In:
pancreas. In: Jones, T.C., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D.
32, p. 609-628.
Cotchin, E., Roe, F.J.C. (Eds.], Pathology of
(Eds.], Digestive system. ILSI monographs on
Gaillard, E.T, 1999. Ureter, urinary bladder, and
laboratory rats and mice. Blackwell, Oxford, ch 16,
pathology of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag.
pp. 501-536.
urethra. In: Maronpot, R.R., Boorman, G.A., Gaul,
Berlin, pp. 209-218.
B.W. (Eds.], Pathology of the mouse, reference and
Harkema, J.R., Carey, S.A., Wagner, J.G., 2006. The
Faccini, J.M., Abbott, D.P, Paulus, G.J.J. (Eds.], 1990.
atlas. Cache River Press, Vienna, ch 10, pp. 235-258.
 nose revisited: a brief review of the comparative
Mouse histopathology. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Gad, S.C. (Ed.], 2007. Animal models in toxicology,
structure, function, and toxicologic pathology of the
second ed. Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, pp.72122.
nasal epithelium. Toxicol. Pathol. 34, 252-269.
Frame, S.R., Slone, TW., 1996. Nonneoplastic and
neoplastic changes in the eye. In: Mohr, U.,
Harlan Laboratories web site: http://www.harlan.com/,
Garner, FM., Innes, J.R.M., Nelson, D.H., 1967.
Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton, W.W.,
08 July 201l.
Murine neuropathology. In: Cotchin, E, Roe, F.J.C.
Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of
(Eds.], Pathology of laboratory rats and mice.
Hedrich, H.J., Bullock, G. (Eds.], 2004. The handbook
the aging mouse, vol. 2. ILSI Press, Washington,
Blackwell, Oxford, ch 1l, pp. 295-348.
 of experimental animals: the laboratory mouse.
pp. 97-103.
Elsevier, San Diego.
Mouse
69
Herbert, R.A., Leininger, J.R., 1999. Nose, larynx, and
Kim, J.S., Kubota, H., Doi, K., et al., 1997a
Mohr, U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton,
trachea. In: Maronpot, R.R., Boorman, G.A., Gaul,
Correlation of mast cells with spindle cell
W.W, Sundberg, J.P., Ward, J.M. (Eds.],
B.W. (Eds.], Pathology ofthe mouse, reference and
hyperplasia in the adrenal cortex of IQI/Jic mice.
Pathobiology of the Aging Mouse, vol. 1. ILSI Press,
atlas. Cache River Press, Vienna, ch 1l, pp. 259-292.
Exp. Anim. 46, 103-109.
Washington, pp. 247-260.
Hoedemaeker, PJ., Fleuren, G.J., Weening, J.J., 1986.
Kim, J.S., Kubota, H., Kiuchi, Y., et al., 1997b.
Leininger, J.R., Jokinen, M.P., Dangler, C.A., et al.,
Immune mechanisms in injury to glomeruli and
Subcapsularcellhyperplasia andmast cellinfltration
1999. Oral cavity, esophagus and stomach. In:
tubulo-interstitial tissue. In: Jones, T.C., Mohr, U.,
in the adrenal cortex of mice: comparative study in
Maronpot, R.R., Boorman, G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.),
Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Urinary system, ILSI
7 inbred strains. Exp. Anim. 46, 303-306.
Pathology of the mouse, reference and atlas. Cache
monographs on pathology of laboratory animals.
Kim, J.S., Kubota, H., Nam, S.Y, et al., 2000.
River Press, Vienna, ch 4, pp. 29-48.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 153-174.
Expression of cytokines and proteases in mast cells
Leiter, E.H., Herberg, L., 1996. Aging, pancreatic
Hoenerhoff, M.J., Starost, M.F., Ward, J.M., 2006.
in the lesion of subcapsular cell hyperplasia in mouse
islets, and glucose homeostasis in inbred mice. In:
Eosinophilic crystalline pneumonia as a major cause
adrenal glands. Toxicol. Pathol. 28, 297-303.
Mohr, U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton,
of death in 129S4/SvJae mice. Vet. Pathol. 43,
Kitagaki, M., Hirota, M., 2007. Auricular chondritis
W.W,Sundberg,J.P,Ward, JM. (eds),Pathobiology
682-688.
caused by metal ear tagging in C57BL/6 mice. Vet.
of the aging mouse, vol. 1. ILSI Press, Washington,
HogenEsch, H., Gruys, E., Higuchi, K., 1996. Senile
Pathol. 44, 458-466.
pp. 153-170.
aylidosis.In:Moh,U,ungworth,D.L,Capen,
Kittel, B., Ruehl-Fehlert, C., Morawietz, G., et al.,
Lewis, D.J., 1984. Spontaneous lesions of the mouse
C.C., Carlton, W.W., Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M.
 2004. Revised guides for organ sampling and
biliary tract. J. Comp. Pathol. 94, 263-271.
(Eds.], Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. 1. ILSI
trimming in rats and mice-Part 2. A joint publication
Liebelt, A.G., 1986. Unique features of anatomy,
Press, Washington, pp. 237-244.
of the RITA and NACAD groups. Exp. Toxicol.
histology, and ultrastructure, kidney, mouse. In:
Hsu, H.H., 1986. Hereditary hydronephrosis, mouse.
Pathol. 55, 413-431.
Jones. TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Urinary
In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.],
Komarek, V., 2004. Gross anatomy. In: Hedrich, H.J.,
system. ILSI monographs on pathology of laboratory
Urinary system, ILSI monographs on pathology
Bullock, G. (Eds.], The handbook of experimental
animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 24-44.
of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
animals: the laboratory mouse. Elsevier, San Diego,
Linder, C.C., 2003. Mouse nomenclature and
pp. 273-275.
pp. 117-132.
maintenance of genetically engineered mice. Comp.
Hummel, K.P, Richardson, F.L., Fekete, E., 1966.
Koopman, J.P, Van der Logt, JT., Mullink, J.W., et al.
Med. 53, 119-125.
Anatomy. In: Green, E.L. (Ed.], Biology of the
1984. Tail lesions in C3H/He mice. Lab. Anim. 18,
Linder, C.C., 2006. Genetic variables that influence
laboratory mouse. McGraw-Hill, New York, ch 13,
106-109.
 phenotype. ILAR. J. 47, 132-140.
pp. 247307.
Krinke, G.J., 1996. Nonneoplastic and neoplastic
Linder, C.C., Davisson, M.T., 2004. Strains, stocks,
Imaoka, K., Honjo, K., Doi, K., et al., 1986.
changes in the peripheral nervous system. In: Mohr,
and mutant mice. In: Hedrich, H.J., Bullock, G.
Development of spontaneous tongue calcifcation
U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton, W.W,
(Eds.], The handbook of experimental animals: the
and polypoid lesions in DBA/2NCrj mice. Lab.
Sundberg, J.P., Ward, J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of
laboratory mouse. Elsevier, San Diego, pp. 25-46.
Anim. 20, 1-4.
the aging mouse, vol. 2. ILSI Press, Washington,
Long, PH., Herbert, R.A., 2002. Epithelial-induced
Innes, J.R.M., Donati, E.J.,Yevich, PP, 1958.
"56-28 dd
intrapulpal denticles in B6C3F1 mice. Toxicol.
Pulmonary lesions in mice due to fragments of hair,
Krinke, G.J., 2004. Normative histology of organs. In:
Pathol. 30, 744-748.
epidermis and extraneous matter accidentally
injected in toxicity experiments. Am.J. Pathol. 34,
Hedrich, H.J., Bullock, G. (Eds.)], The handbook of
Long, PH., Leininger, J.R., 1999a. The teeth. In:
experimental animals: the laboratory mouse.
161-167.
Elsevier, San Diego, pp. 133-166.
Maronpot, R.R., Boorman, G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.],
Pathology of the mouse, reference and atlas. Cache
Jakob, W., 197]. Spontaneous amyloidosis of
Krinke, G.J., Schaetti, PR., Krinke, A.-L., 1996.
mammals. Vet. Pathol. 8, 292-306.
Nonneoplastic and neoplastic changes in the
Long, PH., Leininger, J.R., 1999b. Bones, joints, and
Jones, I.C., 1950. The effect of hypophysectomy on
harderian and lacrimal glands. In: Mohr, U..
synovia. In: Maronpot, R.R., Boorman, G.A., Gaul,
the adrenal cortex of the immature mouse. Am. J.
Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton, W.W,
B.W. (Eds.], Pathology of the mouse, reference and
Anat. 86, 371-403.
Sundberg, J.P., Ward, J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of
atlas. Cache River Press, Vienna, ch 25, pp. 645-678.
Jones, TC., 1967. Pathology of the liver of rats and
the aging mouse, vol. 2. ILSI Press, Washington,
pp. 139-152.
Long, PH., Leininger, J.R., Ernst, H., 1996.
mice. In: Cotchin, E., Roe, FJ.C. (Eds.), Pathology
Krinke, G.J.,Kaufmann, W., Mahrous, A.T., et al.,
Proliferative lesions of bone, cartilage, tooth and
of laboratory rats and Mice. Blackwell, Oxford, ch
synovium in rats, MST-2. In: Guides for toxicologic
1, pp. 1-23.
 2000. Morphologic characterization of spontaneous
 pathology. STP/ARP/AFIP, Washington.
Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], 1983.
nervous system tumors in mice and rats. Toxicol.
Losco, PE., 1995. Dental dysplasia in rats and mice.
Endocrine system,monographsonpathology of
Pathol. 28, 178-192.
Toxicol. Pathol. 23, 677-688.
laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Krinke, G., Fix, A., Kaufmann, W., et al., 200la.
Maeda, N., Doi, K., Mitsuoka, T, 1986. Development
Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], 1985a.
Central nervous system. In: Mohr, U. (Ed.],
International classifcation of rodent tumors, the
 of heart and aortic lesions in DBA/2NCrj mice. Lab.
Respiratory system. ILSI monographs on pathology
mouse. Springer, Berlin, pp. 323-345.
Anim. 20, 5-8.
of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Krinke, G., Fix, A., Jacobs, M., et al., 200lb. Eye and
Maekawa, A., Enomoto, M., Hirouchi, Y, et al., 1996a.
Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], 1985b.
Changes in the upper digestive tract and stomach.
Digestive system. ILSl monographs on pathology of
classification of rodent tumors, the mouse. Springer,
In: Mohr, U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C.,
laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Berlin, pp. 347-359.
Carlton, W.W., Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M. (Eds.],
Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], 1986.
Pathobiology of theagingmouse,vol.2.ISIPress,
Urinary system. ILSI monographs on pathology of
Kuhn, Ill, C., 1985. Structure and function of the
Washington, pp. 267-286.
laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
lung. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.)
Maekawa, A., Enomoto, M., Iwata, H., 1996b.
Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], 1988.
of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Changes in the intestine and peritoneum. In: Mohr,
Nervous system. ILSI monographs on pathology of
pp. 89-98.
U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton, W.W,
laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of
Kulwich, B.A., 1994. Epidermoid cysts in the central
Jones, TC., Mohr U., Hunt R.D. (Eds.], 1991
the aging mouse, vol. 2. ILSI Press, Washington,
nervous system of rats and mice: an incidental
Cardiovascular and musculoskeletal system. ILSI
pp.287-294.
monographs on pathology of laboratory animals.
finding in toxicity/oncogenicity studies. Vet Pathol
31, 475-478.
Mahesh Kumar, M.J., Nagarajan, P, Venkatesan, R.,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
et al, 2004. Case report and short communication:
Kurata, Y., Shibata, M.-A., 1996. Aging changes in the
Jorgensen, M.C., Ahnfelt-Ronne, J., Hald, J., et al.,
Rectal prolapse associated with an unusual
2007.An illustrated review of early pancreas
urinary bladder.In:Mohr, U.,Dungworth,D.L,
Capen,C.C,Carltn,W.W,Suberg,J.P,Ward,
combination of pinworms and citrobacter species
development in the mouse. Endocr. Rev. 28,
infection in FVB mice colony. Scand. J. Lab. Anim.
J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. l.
685-705.
ILSI Press, Washington, pp. 345-357.
Sci. 31, 221-223.
Kaliste, E.K., Mering, S.M., Huuskonen, H.K., 2006.
Leininger, J.R., 1999. Skeletal muscle. In: Maronpot,
Mahler, J.F., Elwell, M.R., 1999. The pituitary gland.
 Environmental modifcation and agonistic behavior in
In: Maronpot, R.R., Boorman G.A., Gaul, B.W.,
R.R., Boorman, G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.], Pathology
NIH/S male mice: nesting material enhances fighting
(Eds.], Pathology of the mouse, reference and atlas.
of the mouse, reference and atlas. Cache River
but shelters prevent it. Comp. Med. 56, 202-208.
Cache River Press, Vienna, ch 19, pp. 491-507.
Press, Vienna, ch 24, pp. 637-643.
Kast, A., 1985. Pulmonary hair embolism rat. In:
Mahler, J.F., Stokes, W., Mann, PC., et al., 1996.
Leininger, J.R., MeDonald, M.M., Abbott, D.P, 1990.
Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.],
Spontaneous lesions in aging FVB/N mice.Toxicol.
 Hepatocytes in the mouse stomach. Toxicol. Pathol.
Respiratory system. ILSI monographs on pathology
Pathol. 24, 710-716.
18, 678686.
of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Maita, K., Hirano, M., Harada, T, et al., 1988.
pp. 186-194.
Leininger, J.R., Herbert, R.A., Morgan, K.T, 1996.
 Mortality, major cause of moribundity, and
 Aging changes in the upper respiratory tract. In:
70
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY
ANIMALS
spontaneous tumors in CD-] mice. Toxicol. Pathol.
Mouse Genome Informatics website: http://
TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Endocrine
16, 340-349.
wwwinformatics.jax.org/, 08 July 2011.
system, monographs on pathology of laboratory
Malarkey, D.E., Johnson, K., Ryan, L., et al., 2005.
Muiller-Rover, S., Handjiski, B., van der Veen, C.,
animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 288-294.
 New insights into functional aspects of liver
et al., 2001. A comprehensive guide for the accurate
Radovsky, A., Mahler, J.F, 1999. The nervous system.
morphology. Toxicol. Pathol. 33, 27-34.
classifcation of murine hair follicles in distinct hair
In: Maronpot, R.R., Boorman, G.A., Gaul, B.W.
Marilier, R.G., Michels, C., Smith, E.M., et al., 2008.
cycle stages. J. Invest. Dermatol. 117, 3-15.
(Eds.],Pathologyof themouse,reference and atlas.
Cache RiverPress,Vienna, ch17,pp.445470.
IL-4/IL-13 independent goblet cell hyperplasia in
Mullink, J.W, Haneveld, G.T, 1979. Polyarteritis in
experimental helminth infections. BMC. Immunol.
mice due to spontaneous hypertension. J. Comp.
Ramot, Y, Manno, R.A., Okazaki, Y, et al., 2009.
9, 11 (http://www.biomedcentral.
Pathol. 89, 99-106.
 Spontaneous aortitis in the Balb/c mouse. Toxicol.
com/1471-2172/9/11].
Murray, A.B., Luz, A., 1990. Acidophilic macrophage
Pathol. 37, 667-671.
Maronpot, R.R., 2006. A monograph on
 pneumonia in laboratory mice. Vet. Pathol. 27,
Rao, G.N., Boorman, G.A., 1999. History of the
histomorphologic evaluation of lymphoid organs.
274281.
B6C3F1mouse.In:Maronpot,RR.,Boorman,GA
Toxicol. Pathol. 34, 407-408.
National Toxicology Program, Histrocial Controls
Gaul, B.W. (Eds.], Pathology of the mouse,
Maronpot, R.R., Boorman, G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.],
Database: http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/, 08 July 201l.
reference and atlas. Cache River Press, Vienna, ch 1,
1999. Pathology of the mouse, reference and atlas.
Ninomiya, H., Inomata, T, Ogihara, K., 1999.
pp. 1-6.
Cache River Press, Vienna.
Obstructive uropathy and hydronephrosis in male
Rehm, S., Liebelt, A.G., 1996. Nonneoplastic and
Marshall, G.E., Shortland, J.R., Hudson, G., 1988.
KK-Ay mice: a report of cases. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 61,
neoplastic lesions of the mammary gland. In: Mohr,
Crystalloid material in cells of the murine
53-57.
U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton, W.W.,
mononuclear phagocyte system. J. Anat. 157,
Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of
Novilla, M.N., Smith, C.K., 1996. Changes in skeletal
217-228.
the aging mouse, vol. 2. ILSI Press, Washington,
muscle. In: Mohr, U.,Dungworth, D.L., Capen,
pp. 381-398.
Meier, H., Hoag, W.G., 1966. Blood coagulation. In:
C.C., Carlton, WW., Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M.
Green, E.L. (Ed.], Biology of the laboratory mouse.
(Eds.], Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. 2. ILSI
Rehm, S., Nitsche, B., Deerberg, F., 1985a. Non-
McGraw-Hill, New York, ch 18, pp. 373-376.
Press, Washington, pp. 401-413.
neoplastic lesions of female virgin Han:NMRI mice,
Mery, S., Gross, E.A., Joyner, D.R., et al., 1994. Nasal
Nyska, A, Maronpot, R.R., 1999.The adrenal gland.
incidence and influence of food restriction
throughout life span. I: Thyroid. Lab. Anim. 19,
diagrams: a tool for recording the distribution of
In: Maronpot, R.R., Boorman, G.A., Gaul, B.W,
(Eds.], Pathology of the mouse, reference and atlas.
214223.
nasal lesions in rats and mice. Toxicol. Pathol. 22,
353-372.
Rehm, S., Wcislo, A., Deerberg, F., 1985b. Non-
Michael, L.H., Taffet, G.E., Frangogiannis, N.G., et al.,
neoplastic lesions of female virgin Han:NMRI mice,
Ogawa, Y, 2003. Immunocytochemistry of
incidence and influence of food restriction
 2004. The cardiovascular system. In: Hedrich, H.J .,
myoepithelial cells in the salivary glands. Prog.
throughout life span. Il: Respiratory tract. Lab.
Bullock, G. (Eds.], The handbook of experimental
Histochem. Cytochem. 38, 343-426.
Anim. 19, 224-235.
animals: the laboratory mouse. Elsevier, San Diego,
Okada, A., Yabuki, A., Matsumoto, M., et al., 2005.
pp 207-224.
Rehm, S., Sommer, R., Deerberg, F, 1987.
Development of gender differences in DBA/2Cr
Militzer, K., Wecker, E., 1986. Behaviour-associated
mouse kidney morphology during maturation. J. Vet.
Han:NMRI mice, and influence of food restriction 
alopecia areata in mice. Lab. Anim. 20, 9-13.
Med. Sci. 67, 877-882.
throughout life. Vet. Pathol. 24, 216-225.
Mohr, U. (Ed.], 2001. International classifcation of
Pack, R.J., Al-Ugaily, L.H., Morris, G., 1981. The cells
Renne, R.A., Gideon, K.M., Miller, R.A., et al., 1992.
rodent tumors, the mouse. Springer, Berlin.
of the tracheobronchial epithelium of the mouse: a
Histologic methods and interspecies variations in the
Mohr, U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., et al (Eds.),
quantitative light and electron microscope study. J.
laryngeal histology of F344/N rats and B6C3F1
1996aPathobiology of theagingmouse,vol.IS
Anat. 132, 7184.
mice. Toxicol. Pathol. 20, 44-51.
Press, Washington.
Page, D.L., Glenner, G.G., 1972. Social interaction
Renne, R., Brix, A., Harkema, J., et al., 2009.
Mohr, U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., et al (Eds.],
and wounding in the genesis of 'spontaneous' murine
Proliferative and nonproliferative lesions of the rat
1996b. Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. 2. ILSi
amyloidosis. Am. J. Pathol. 67, 555-567.
and mouse respiratory tract. Toxicol. Pathol. 37,
Press, Washington.
Paus, R., Muller-Rover, S., Van Der Veen, C., et al.,
5S-73S.
Montgomery, Jr., C.A., 1986a. Infarction, kidney, rat,
 1999. A comprehensive guide for the recognition
Reznik, G.K., 1990. Comparative anatomy, physiology,
mouse. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D.
and classifcation of distinct stages of hair follicle
and function of the upper respiratory tract. Environ.
(Eds.], Urinary system. ILSI monographs on
morphogenesis. J. Invest. Dermatol. 113, 523-532.
Health. Perspect. 85, 171-176.
pathology of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag.
Payne, A.P, 1994. The harderian gland: a tercentennial
Rittinghausen, S., Kohler, M., Kamino, K., et al, 1997.
Berlin, pp 179-184.
review. J. Anat. 185, 1-49.
 Spontaneous myelofbrosis in castrated and
Montgomery, Jr., C.A., 1986b. Interstitial nephritis,
Pearse, G., 2006a. Normal structure, function and
 ovariectomized NMRl mice. Exp. Toxicol. Pathol.
mouse. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D.
histology of the thymus. Toxicol. Pathol. 34,
49, 351-353.
(Eds.],Urinary system.ILSI monographs on
504-514.
Rosol, TJ., Yarrington, J.T, Latendresse, J., et al.,
pathology of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag.
Pearse, G., 2006b. Histopathology of the thymus.
 2001. Adrenal gland: structure, function, and
Berlin, pp. 210-215.
Toxicol. Pathol. 34, 515-547.
mechanisms of toxicity. Toxicol. Pathol. 29, 4]-48.
Montgomery, Jr., C.A., 1986c. Suppurative nephritis,
Peckham, J.C., Heider, K., 1999. Skin and subcutis. In:
Rowlatt, C., Franks, L.M., Sheriff, M.U., et al., 1969.
pyelonephritis, mouse. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U.,
Maronpot, R.R., Boorman, G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.],
Naturally ocurring tumors and otherlesions of the
Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Urinary system. ILSI
Pathology of the mouse, reference and atlas. Cache
digestive tract in untreated CS7BL mice. J. Natl.
monographs on pathology of laboratory animals.
River Press, Vienna, ch 22, pp. 555-612.
Cancer. Inst. 43, 1353-1364.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 215-219.
Percy, D.H., Barthold, S.W., 2007. Pathology of
Ruehl-Fehlert, C., Kittel, B., Morawietz, G., et al.,
Monticello, TM., Morgan, K.T., Uraih, L., 1990.
laboratory rodents and rabbits, third ed. Blackwell 
 2003. Revised guides for organ sampling and
 Nonneoplastic nasal lesions in rats and mice.
Publishing, Ames, ch l, pp. 3-124.
trimming in rats and mice-part l. Exp. Toxicol.
Environ. Health. Perspect. 85, 249-274.
Pinkerton, K.E., Cowin, L.L., Witschi, H., 1996.
Pathol. 55, 91-106.
Morawietz, G., Ruehl-Fehlert, C., Kittel, B., et al.,
Development, growth, and aging of the lungs. In:
Russell, E.S., 1966. Lifespan and aging patterns. In:
 2004. Revised guides for organ sampling and
Mohr, U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton,
Green, E.L. (Ed.], Biology of the laboratory mouse.
trimming in rats and mice.Part 3. A joint publication
of the RITA and NACAD groups.Exp.Toxicol.
W.W., Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M. (Eds.],
McGraw-Hill, New York, ch 26, pp. 51l-519.
Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. 1. ILSI Press,
Pathol. 55, 433-449.
Russell, E.S., Meier, H., 1966. Constitutional diseases.
Washington, pp. 261-272.
In: Green, E.L. (Ed.], Biology of the laboratory
Morgan, K.T, Sheldon, W.G., 1988. Lipoma, brain,
Plendi, J., Kolle, S., Sinowatz, F., et al., 1996.
mouse. McGraw-Hill, New York, ch 29, pp.
mouse. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D.
Nonneoplastic lesions of blood vessels. In: Mohr, U.,
(Eds.)], Nervous system. ILSI monographs on
571-587.
Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton, W.W,
pathology of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag.
Russfeld, A.B., 1967. Pathology of the endocrine
Sundberg, J.P., Ward, J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of
Berlin, pp 130-134.
glands, ovary and testis of rats and mice. In:
the aging mouse, vol. 1. ILSI Press, Washington,
Cotchin, E., Roe, F.J.C. (Eds.], Pathology of
Morrisey, R., 1986. Renal calcifcations, mouse.
pp. 385-391.
laboratory rats and mice. Blackwell, Oxford, ch 14,
In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.],
Pour, PM., Qureshi, S.R., Salmasi, S., 1983a. Anatomy,
pp. 391-467.
Urinary system. ILSI monographs on pathology
histology, ultrastructure, parathyroid, mouse. In:
Sakura, Y., 1997. Periodontal inflammatory and cystlike
of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Endocrine
pp. 361-364.
lesions in BDF1 and B6C3Fl mice. Vet. Pathol. 34,
system, monographs on pathology of laboratory
460-463.
Morton, D., Tekeli, S., 1997. Have you seen this?"
animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 252-257.
Salo, PT, Seeratten, R.A., Erwin, WM., et al., 2002.
Pituitary cysts in a mouse. Toxicol. Pathol. 25, 333.
Pour, PM., Wilson, J.T, Qureshi, S.R., et al., 1983b.
 Evidence for a neuropathic contribution to the
Cysts, parathyroid, hamster, rat, mouse. In: Jones,
Mouse
71
development of spontaneous knee osteoarthrosis in a
Stenn, K.S., Paus, R., 200l. Controls of hair follice
mice is caused by accumulation of melanin. Lab.
mouse model. Acta. Orthop. Scand. 73, 77-84.
cycling. Physiol. Rev. 8], 449-494.
Anim. 29, 459-463.
Sass, B., 1983a. Embryology, adrenal gland, mouse. In:
Stirling, P, Tullo, A.B., Blyth, W.A., et al., 1983.
Van Loo, P.L., Van Zutphen, L.F., Baumans, V.,
Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.), Endocrine
 Retinal degeneration in NIH (inbred] mice. Exp.
2003. Male management: Coping with aggression
system, monographs on pathology of laboratory
Eye. Res. 36, 761-763.
problems in male laboratory mice. Lab. Anim. 37,
animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 3-7.
Strozik, E., Festing, M.F, 1981. Whisker trimming in
300-313.
Sass, B., 1983b. Accessory adrenocortical tissue,
mice. Lab. Anim. 15, 309-312.
Van Loo, PL., Van der Meer, E., Kruitwagen, C.L.,
mouse. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D.
Sundberg, J.P, 2004. Skin and adnexa of the laboratory
et al., 2004. Long-term effects of husbandry
dsess
mouse. In: Hedrich, H.J., Bullock, G. (eds.], The
procedures on stress-related parameters inmale
of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
handbook of experimental animals: the laboratory
mice of two strains. Lab. Anim. 38, 169-177.
pp. 12-15.
mouse. Elsevier, San Diego, pp. 195-206.
van Rees, E.P, Sminia, T, Dukstra, C.D., 1996.
Sass, B., 1983c. Amyloidosis, adrenal, mouse. In:
Sundberg, J.P, Hogan, M.E., King, Jr., L.E., 1996.
Structure and development of the lymphoid organs.
Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Endocrine
 Normal biology and aging changes of skin and hair.
In: Mohr, U., Dungworth, D.L, Capen, C.C.
system, monographs on pathology of laboratory
In: Mohr, U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C..
Carlton, W.W., Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M. (Eds.],
animals. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 57-59.
Carlton, W.W., Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M. (Eds.],
Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. 1. ILSI Press,
Sass, B., 1986. Glomerulonephritis, mouse. In: Jones,
Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. 2. ILSI Press,
Washington, pp. 173-187.
TC.,Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Urinary system.
Washington, p. 303-323.
Van Vleet, J.F, Ferrans, V.J., 1986. Myocardial diseases
ILSI monographs on pathology of laboratory animals.
Suttie, A.W., 2006. Histopathology of the spleen.
 of animals. Am. J. Pathol. 124, 98-178.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 192-210.
Toxicol. Pathol. 34, 466-503.
Van Vleet, J.F., Ferrans, V.J., 1991a. Inherited
Satoh, H., Furuhama, K., 200l. 'Have you seen this?
Tanaka, S., Matsuzawa, A., 1995. Comparison of
dystrophic cardiac calcinosis, mouse. In: Jones, TC.,
An epidermoid cyst with rosette-like structures of
 adrenocortical zonation in C57BL/6J and DDD
Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Cardiovascular and
the cerebrum in a male BALB/c Mouse. Toxicol.
mice.Exp.Anim. 44, 285-291.
musculoskeletal system. ILSI monographs on
Pathol. 29, 498-500.
pathology of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag,
Taylor, D.M., Fraser, H., 1973. Hydronephrosis in
Saunders, L.Z., 1967. Ophthalmic pathology in rats
Berlin, pp. 9-1 4.
inbred strains of mice with particular reference to
and mice. In: Cotchin, E., Roe, F.J.C. (Eds.],
the BRVR strain. Lab. Anim. 7, 229-236.
Van Vleet, J.F, Ferrans, V.J., 199lb. Pathologic
Pathology of laboratory rats and mice. Blackwell,
reactions of skeletal muscle to injury. In: Jones, TC.,
Oxford, ch 12, pp. 349-371.
Taylor, D.M., 1985. Urethral plugs and urine retention 
Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Cardiovascular and
in male mice. Lab. Anim. 19, 189-191.
Seely, J.C., 1996a. Gallbladder. In: Mohr, U.,
musculoskeletal system. ILSI monographs on
Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton, W.W,
Tew, J.G., Thorbecke, G.J., Steinman, R.M., 1982.
pathology of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag,
Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of
Dendritic cells in the immune response:
Berlin, pp. 109-126.
the aging mouse, vol. 2. ILSI Press, Washington,
Characterisitics and recommended nomenclature
van Zweiten, M.J., Hollander, C.F., 1985. Polyploidy,
pp. 243-249.
[A report from the Reticuloendothelial Society
Commitee onNomenclature).J.Reticuloendothel
liver, rat. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, R.D.
Seely, J.C., 1996b. Salivary glands. In: Mohr, U..
(Eds.)], Digestive system. ILSI monographs on
Soc. 31, 371-380.
Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton, W.W,
pathology of laboratory animals. Springer-Verlag,
Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of
Thody, A.J., Shuster, S., 1989. Control and function of
Berlin, pp. 83-86.
the aging mouse, vol. 2. ILSI Press, Washington,
 sebaceous glands. Physiol. Rev. 69, 383-416.
Walton, M., 1978. A spontaneous ankle deformity
pp. 261-265.
Thomas, G.A., WilliamsWilliams, E.D., 1996. Changes
in an inbred strain of mouse. J. Pathol. 124,
Seely, J.C., 1999. Kidney. In: Maronpot, R.R.,
in the structure and function of the thyroid
189-194.
Boorman, G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.j, Pathology of the
follicular cell. In: Mohr, U., Dungworth, D.L.,
Capen, C.C,Carltn,WW, Sunder,J.P,Wd,
Wancket, L.M., Devor-Henneman, D., Ward, J.M.,
mouse, reference and atlas. Cache River Press,
 2008. Fibro-osseous (FOL] and degenerative joint
Vienna, ch 9, pp. 207-234.
J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. 1.
lesions in female outbred NIH black Swiss mice.
ILSI Press, Washington,pp. 87101.
Seely, J.C., Boorman, G.A., 1999. Mammary gland and
Toxicol. Pathol. 36, 362-365.
specialized sebaceous glands (zymbal, preputial,
Thoolen, B., Maronpot, R.R., Harada, T, et al., 2010.
Ward, J.M., Mann, PC., Morishima, H., et al, 1999.
clitoral, anal. In: Maronpot, R.R., Boorman, G.A.,
Proliferative and nonproliferative lesions of the rat
andmouse hepatobiliary system.Toxicol.Pathol.38,
Thymus, spleen, and lymph nodes. In: Maronpot,
Gaul, B.W. (Eds.]), Pathology of the mouse,
R.R.,Boorman,GA.,Gaul,B.W. (Eds),Pathology
reference and atlas. Cache River Press, Vienna,
5S-81S.
of the mouse, reference and atlas. Cache River
ch 23, pp. 613-635.
Thuilliez, C., Dorso, L., Howroyd, P, et al., 2009.
Press, Vienna, ch 13, pp. 333-360.
Serflippi, L.M., Pallman, D.R., Gruebbel, M.M., et al.,
Histopathological lesions following intramuscular
Ward, J.M., Anver, M.R., Mahler, J.F., et al., 2000.
 2004. Assessment of retinal degeneration in outbred
administration of saline in laboratory rodents and
 Pathology of mice commonly used in genetic
albino mice. Comp. Med. 54, 69-76.
rabbits. Exp. Toxicol. Pathol. 6l, 13-21.
engineering (C57BL/6, 129, B6,129, and FVB/N].
Shackelford, C.C., Elwell, M.R., 1999. Small and large
Tischler, A.S., Sheldon, W., 1996. Adrenal medulla. In:
In: Ward, JM., Mahler, J.F., Maronpot, R.R., et al.
intestine, and mesentery. In: Maronpot, R.R.,
Mohr, U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., Carlton,
(Eds.], Pathology of genetically engineered mice.
W.W., Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M. (Eds.],
lowa State Universty Press, Ames, ch 13, pp.
Boorman, G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.], Pathology of the
mouse, reference and atlas. Cache River Press,
Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. 1. ILSI Press,
161-179.
Vienna, ch 6, pp. 8]-118.
Washington, pp. 135-151.
Ward, J.M., Yoon, M., Anver, M.R., et al., 200l.
Sidman, R.L., et al., High-resolution mouse brain atlas,
Toth, K., Sugar, J., 1985. Intranuclear and
Hyalinosis and Yml/Ym2 gene expression in the
available electronically at:http://www.hms.harvard.
intracytoplasmic inclusions in normal and neoplastic
stomach and respiratory tract of 129S4/SvJae and
eduw/research/brain/index.html, 08 July 2011.
hepatocytes, mouse. In: Jones, T.C., Mohr,
, U.,
wild-type and CYP1A2-null B6, 129 mice. Am. J.
Hunt, R.D. (Eds.], Digestive system, ILSI
Pathol. 158, 323-332.
 Slack, J.M., 1995. Developmental biology of the
monographs on pathology of laboratory animals.
pancreas. Development. 121, 1569-1580.
Waring, H., 1935. Memoirs: The development of the
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 92-100.
Smith, R.J., Frommer, J., 1975. Quantitative
adrenal gland of the mouse. Q. J. Microscop. Sci.
Travlos, G.S., 2006a. Normal structure, function, and
78, 329-366.
morphology and carbohydrate histochemistry of the
histology of the bone marrow. Toxicol. Pathol. 34,
mouse submandibular gland following prepubertal
Waring, H., Scott, E., 1937. Some abnormalities of the
548-565.
castration. Am. J. Anat. 144, 137-147.
adrenal gland of the mouse with a discussion on
Travlos, G.S., 2006b. Histopathology of bone marrow.
cortical homology. J. Anat. 7l, 299-314.
Sokoloff, L., 1967. Articular and musculoskeletal
Toxicol. Pathol. 34, 566-598.
lesions of rats and mice. In: Cotchin, E., Roe, F.J.C.
Weber, K., 2007. Induced and spontaneous lesions in
Tucker, A.S., 2007. Salivary _gland development. Semin.
(Eds.], Pathology of laboratory rats and mice.
teeth of laboratory animals. J. Toxicol. Pathol. 20,
Blackwll,Oxford, ch 13, pp. 373-390.
Cell. Dev. Biol. 18, 237-244.
203213.
Son, W.C., 2003a. Factors contributory to early death
Tucker, M.J., Baker, S.B.D.e.C., 1967. Diseases if
Wijnands, M.V.W., Kuper, C.F., Schuurman, H.-J.,
of young CD-] mice in carcinogenicity studies.
specifc pathogen-free mice. In: Cotchin, E., Roe,
et al., 1996. Nonneoplastic lesions of the
Toxicol. Lett. 145, 88-98.
F.J.C. (Eds.], Pathology of laboratory rats and mice.
hematopoietic system. In: Mohr, U., Dungworth,
Blackwell Oxford, ch 24, pp. 787824.
D.L, Capen, C.C., Carlton, W.W, Sundberg, J.P.
Son, W.C., 2003b. Analysis of fghting-associated
Van den Broeck, W., Derore, A., Simoens, P, 2006.
Ward, J.M. (Eds.], Pathobiology of the aging mouse,
wounds causing death of young male CD-] mice in.
Anatomy and nomenclature of murine lymph nodes:
vol. 1. ILSI Press, Washington, pp. 205-217.
carcinogenicity studies. Scand. J. Lab. Anim. Sci. 30,
Willard-Mack, C.L, 2006. Normal structure, function,
101-111.
in BALB/cAnNCrl mice. J. Immunol. Methods. 312,
 and histology of lymph nodes. Toxicol. Pathol. 34,
Staats, J., 1966. The laboratory mouse. In: Green, E.L.
12-19.
409-424.
(Ed.], Biology of the laboratory mouse. McGraw-
Hill, New York, pp. 1-9.
van der Heijden, A., van Dijk, J.E., Lemmens, A.G.,
Wilson, J.W., Leduc, E.H., 1948. The occurrence and
 et al., 1995. Spleen pigmentation in young C57BL
 formation of binucleate and multinucleate cells and
72
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
polyploid nuclei in the mouse liver. Am. J. Anat. 82,
differences in the mouse nephron. J. Vet. Med. Sci.
Yamate, J., Tajima, M., Maruyama, Y, et al., 1987.
353-391.
61, 891-896.
Observations on soft tissue calcifcation in
Wojcinski, Z.W., Albassam, M.A., Smith, G.S., 1991.
Yabuki, A., Matsumoto, M., Nishinakagawa, H., et al.,
DBA/2NCrj mice in comparison with CRJ:CD-1
Hyaline glomerulopathy in B6C3Fl mice. Toxicol.
2003. Age-related morphological changes in kidneys
mice. Lab. Anim. 21, 289-298.
Pathol. 19, 224-229.
of SPF C57BL/6Cr mice maintained under
Yang, YH., Campbell, J.S., 1964. Crystalline
Wolf, D.C., Hard, G.C., 1996. Pathology of the
controlled conditions. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 65,
excrements in bronchitis and cholecystitis of mice.
kidneys. In: Mohr, U., Dungworth, D.L., Capen,
845-851.
Am. J. Pathol. 45, 337-345.
C.C., Carlton, W.W., Sundberg, J.P, Ward, J.M.
Yamamoto, H., Iwase, N., 1998. Spontaneous
Yarrington, J.T, 1996. Adrenal cortex. In: Mohr, U.,
(Eds.], Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. 1. ILSI
osteoarthritic lesions in a new mutant strain of the
Dungworth, D.L., Capen, C.C., et al. (Eds.],
Press, Washington, pp. 331-344.
mouse. Exp. Anim. 47, 131-135.
Pathobiology of the aging mouse, vol. 1. ILSI Press,
Wright, J.R., Lacy, PE., 1988. Spontaneous
Yamamoto, H., Iwase, N., Kohno, M., 1999.
Washington, pp. 125-133.
hydronephrosis in C57BL/KsJ mice. J. Comp.
Histopathological characterization of spontaneously
Yoshiki, A., Moriwaki, K., 2006. Mouse phenome
Pathol. 99, 449-454.
developing osteoarthropathy in the BCBC/Y mouse
research: implications of genetic background. ILAR.
Yabuki, A., Suzuki, S., Matsumoto, M., et al., 1999.
established newly from B6C3Fl mice. Exp. Toxicol.
J. 47, 94-102.
 Morphometrical analysis of sex and strain
Pathol. 51, 15-20.
CHAPTER 5
 Elizabeth F Mclnnes
Hamsters and guinea pigs
HAMSTERS
an increase in hemosiderin-laden, alveolar macro-
phages within the alveoli of the lung (Fig. 5.4).
Neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia occurs in small
Introduction
foci in the bronchioles and within the trachea
The total numbers of Syrian hamsters (Mesocrice-
(Fig. 5.5). The presence of spontaneous C-cell
or neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia or benign or
tus auratus] used in biomedical research is much
less than the numbers of rats and mice used,
malignant tumors of these cells in the larynx
however, the Syrian hamster is an important
(Pour et al 1985) or the trachea (Ernst et al 1995)
may be unique to hamsters. The frequency varies
research subject. Hamsters are used in specialized
considerably between colonies of hamsters (Mohr
research situations where the use of their cheek
et al 1996). Pour and co-workers [1985] reported
pouch for tumor induction and transplantation has
an incidence of 9% in the larynx of Syrian ham-
contributed significantly to carcinogenesis research
(Strandberg, i987). Hamsters are also used in
sters. Ernst and co-workers have confirmed the
contract research laboratories and pharmaceutical
neuroendocrine origin of these cells and stated
companies for occasional studies. Information
that they occur in the larynx and upper trachea.
about the incidence of spontaneously occurring
FIGURE 5.1 Left atrial thrombosis and dilatation of left
The proliferation of neuroendocrine cells in the
lesions is essential if the Syrian hamster is to be
larynx and upper trachea is frst observed at 15
ventricle in hamster. x40.
used in acute and chronic toxicity studies (Pour
months of age in Syrian hamsters and it is dif-
ficult to differentiate between hyperplasia, benign
et al 1976a). The interpretation of tumor inci-
dences in hamster carcinogenicity studies depends
and malignant tumors involving these cells (Mohr
et al 1996). The cytoplasm of the neuroendocrine
on a good knowledge of the background neoplastic
cells tends to be clear with large, central nuclei
and non-neoplastic lesions of the species involved
(Pour et al 1976a).
(Mohr et al 1996). Mitotic figures are rare (Mohr
et al 1996). Ernst and coworkers 1995 demon-
Hamsters are occasionally chosen as the candi-
date species for carcinogenicity studies in preclini-
strated that the neuroendocrine cells in these
cal studies. Reasons include the fact that hamsters
laryngeal and tracheal locations are positive for
are less sensitive in developing olfactory mucosa
calcitonin, calcitonin gene related peptide, neu-
ron-specific enolase (NSE), and serotonin using
B aey shansue Pue [i961 [ ia yio] Aiixo
low incidence of spontaneous neoplastic lesions
immunohistochemistry. Benign tumors of neu-
(Kamino et al 200la).
roendocrine cells do not display invasion while
malignant tumors of these cells demonstrate sub-
mucosal and lumenal invasion and metastasis to
Cardiovascular system
the lung (Ernst et al 1995). The term C-cell
Atrial thrombosis, secondary to heart failure, is
FIGURE 5.2 Aortic valve thrombosis of hamster heart.
hyperplasia rather than neuroendocrine cell
x100.
hyperplasia is now favored since the origin of
seen commonly in older hamsters (Gad 2007a).
This lesion generally occurs in the left atrium and
these cells is thought to be the C-cells from the
auricle and may cause dilatation of the left ventri-
thyroid. In addition, alveolar histiocytosis may be
cle (Fig. 5.l). Female hamsters are more com-
Hemolymphoreticular system
observed in the lungs of older hamsters (Percy &
Barthold 2007).
monly affected than male hamsters and the
In common with other laboratory animals, ham-
syndrome may be associated with amyloidosis
sters display atrophy and involution of the thymus
(Percy & Barthold 2007). Atrial thrombosis may
as they reach adulthood (Fig. 5.3).
be associated with myocardial degeneration and
fbrosis as wellas medial degeneration and calcif-
cation of the coronary arteries (Percy & Barthold
2007). In addition, vegetative endocarditis or
aortic valve thrombosis has also been observed in
older hamsters (Fig. 5.2). Vascular calcinosis has
been noted in the aorta and coronary and renal
arteries; however, this lesion is thought to be
related to diet (Pour et al 1976d). Fibrinoid
 degeneration of arterioles may also be observed in
aging hamsters (Percy & Barthold 2007).
HGURE 5.4 Severe alveolar histiocytosis and congestion
due to chronic passive congestion due to atrial thrombo-
FIGURE 5.3 Severe atrophy of the thymus in a hamster.
sis. x200.
x100.
Respiratory system
The severe cardiac insufficiency caused by atrial
thromboses or aortic valve thromboses causes
chronic pulmonary congestion and this results in
74
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Liver and biliary system
In the liver, intranuclear inclusions are a non-
specifc background lesion and the cause is not
known; however, the inclusions are thought to
be formed by invagination of nuclear mem-
brane with incorporation of some cell cytoplasm.
The inclusions are weakly eosinophilic with
H&E, PAS-negative, 5-& micrometers in diame-
ter, homogeneous or granular in appearance and
usually eccentrically located within the nucleus.
The nuclei containing the inclusions are frequently
HGURE 5.5 Neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia in the 
enlarged and have an irregular wrinkled profle
hamster trachea. x100. Turusov, V.S., Mohr, U. (eds),
(Fig. 5.11)
FIGURE 5.7 Mineralization in the tongue of a hamster.
1996. Pathology of Tumors in Laboratory Animals, Vol. Il,
x100.
Tumors of the Hamster, 2nd edition. ARC Scientific Pub-
lications No. 126, 189-222, IARC (nternational Agency
for Research on Cancer), Oxford University Press.
Gastrointestinal system
The Syrian hamster has a long duodenum, long
jejunum, short ileum, large cecum and long colon.
The hamster cecum is divided into apical and basal
portions separated by a semi-lunar valve and a
 series of four valves in the ileocaecocolic area. The
hamster is a pregastric fermenter. The hamster
stomach has a distinct constriction between the
FIGURE 5.11 Intranuclear inclusions in hepatocytes in
forestomach and glandular stomach and there is
the hamster liver. x400.
almost no lesser curvature, resulting in two blind-
ending sacs.
HGURE 5.8 Mineralization in gastric mucosa of hamster
Intracytoplasmic, non-glycogenic vacuolation is
Cyst formation and mineralization in the hard
stomach. x200.
present in the liver under normal circumstances,
palate of a hamster is occasionally observed (Fig.
but is more numerous if there is hepatic damage.
5.6). Mineralization in the tongue of a hamster
The vacuolation is eosinophilic with H&E stain,
is also noted (Fig. 5.7). Mineralization of the
strongly PAS-positive before and after diastase
gastric mucosa is observed commonly in hamsters
digestion, thus indicating its non-glycogenic char-
(Fig. 5.8). Ulcers and erosions are observed com-
acter, and it stains intensely with Sudan Black,
monly in the hamster forestomach as well as in
suggesting the presence of bound lipids. The vacu-
the glandular region (Pour et al 1976a & b) (Fig.
olation is also acid-fast with Ziehl-Neelsen stain
 5.9). Herniation of gastric glands into the tunica
and is usually 2-30 μm in diameter.
muscularis occurs in the hamster stomach (Fig.
 Liver cysts are common in the hamster and are
5.10). Turmors of granular cells and areas of pro-
thought to derive from bile ducts (Gad 2007a)
liferation composed of granular cells in the intes-
(Fig. 5.12). Polycystic liver disease may occur in
tinal walls of white harmsters have been described
hamsters and is characterized by multiple hepatic
 by Pour and co-workers [1973). This fnding may
cysts observed in older animals (Percy & Barthold
be observed in the serosa of the small and large
2007). Cysts are most common in the liver and
intestine.
 epididymis as well as in the seminal vesicles and
pancreas (Percy & Barthold 2007).
HGURE 5.9 Focal erosion in hamster stomach.x100.
AGURE 5.6 Cyst formation and mineralization in the hard
palate of a hamster. x100.
HGURE 5.12 Multiple biliary cysts in hamster liver. x100.
AGURE 5.10 Herniation of gastric glands into tunica
muscularis in hamster stomach. x100.
Papillary proliferation of pancreatic common
duct epithelium with goblet cell metaplasia is an
age-related change in the hamster.
Hamsters and guinea pigs
75
Atrophy of the adjacent hepatocytes, hemosi-
derin deposition, bile duct hyperplasia and peri-
portallymphocytes may be observed in conjunction
with the liver cysts (Percy & Barthold 2007).
Clear-cell foci are a normal background change in
the hamster liver (Karmino et al 200ib) (Fig.
5.13). In common with rats and mice, bile-duct
hyperplasia is observed in the hamster liver (Fig.
5.14) (Percy & Barthold 2001, 2007). Bile-duct
proliferation forms part of the hepatic cirrhosis
complex in hamsters, which includes periportal
fbrosis, bile duct proliferation, nodular hepato-
cellular proliferation, degeneration, necrosis and
a mixed inflammatory-cell infltrate (Percy &
HGURE 5.17 Hyaline casts and tubular dilatation in the
Barthold 2007).
 hamster kidney forming part of the glomerulonephropathy
cmplex. x200.
FIGURE 5.15 Severe diffuse amyloidosis of the hamster
liver. x40.
Arteriolar nephrosclerosis, with subsequent
glomerulosclerosis and interstitial nephritis, is a
disease which is seen commonly in hamsters (Gad 
2007a). In addition, papillary mineralization is
also a common background change in the hamster
kidney (Gad 2007a).
Endocrine glands
Cortical cysts and cortical hyperplasia of the
adrenal are common background lesions in the
hamster adrenal (Pour et al 1976c). In addition,
the male hamster adrenal is very large due to the
HGURE 5.13 Clear-cell focus in a hamster liver. x100.
presence of a large adrenal cortex (Fig. 5.18).
FIGURE 5.16 Hamster gall bladder cholelithiasis and
submucosal lymphocyte aggregates. x100.
Urinary system
Amyloidosis is a disease that occurs in the kidneys
of aging hamsters. Although it is a disease and not
a spontaneous background change, it is mentioned
HGURE 5.18 Large adrenal cortex in male hamster.
HGURE 5.14 Bile duct hyperplasia and dilatation in the
hamster liver. x100.
here due to the high incidence of this phenome-
x200.
non, which can be as high as 88% (Gad 2007a).
Chronic glomerulonephropathy is also observed
Amyloidosis occurs frequently in hamsters, par-
 In the hamster pancreas, islet-cell hyperplasia,
in aging hamsters (Fig. 5.17). The disease is char-
ticularly in older animals and in female animals.
similar to that seen in mice, is observed (Pour et al
acterized by glomerulosclerosis, interstitial inflarm-
Testosterone adrministration will inhibit the occur-
mation and fbrosis, hyaline casts, dilatation and
1976c) (Fig. 5.19). Ductal mucus epithelial meta-
rence of amyloidosis in female hamsters (Percy &
plasia may be observed in the pancreas of a
atrophy of tubules and amyloid deposition in the
Barthold 2007). The liver, kidneys, adrenals and
 glomeruli. This degenerative renal disease causes
hamster (Fig. 5.20).
gonads are the most commonly affected organs.
significant mortality in older hamsters (Percy &
In the liver, amyloid deposition is observed around
Barthold 2007). The disease occurs more com-
the portal areas, within blood vessel walls and
monly in female animals and the cause is not
within the sinusoids (Fig. 5.15). Amyloidosis is
known, although high protein diets are thought to
an important cause of renal failure in hamsters
 play a role (Percy & Barthold 2007).
(Percy & Barthold 2007). Gall bladder cholelithi-
 asis and submucosal lymphocyte aggregates are
 occasionally observed in the hamster gali bladder
(Fig. 5.16).
HGURE 5.19 Minimal islet cell hyperplasia in a hamster
pancreas. x100.
76
BACKGROUND L
BORATOF
Reproductive system
Trophoblastic giant cells are derived from the fetal
placenta, specifically from the trophoblast, i.e. the
epithelial cell layer covering the blastocyst. The
blastocyst erodes the uterine mucosa to establish
the hemochorial placenta seen in hamsters, guinea
pigs, other rodents, and primates. The placenta in
the hamster is of the labyrinthine hemotrichorial
type (Percy & Barthold 2007).
Trophoblastic giant cells are in direct contact
with the maternal bloodstream. These cells
exhibit migratory activity and are frequently
found inside mesometrial uterine arteries and
HGURE 5.20 Ductal mucus epithelial metaplasia in the 
 ovarian arteries. Trophoblast giant cells apparently
pancreas of a hamster. x200.
only migrate toward arterial blood and can be seen
HGURE 5.24 Granular cell accumulation (hyperplasia) in
at three weeks postpartum. A decidual reaction
 the uterus of a hamster. x100.
Hyperplasia of the parathyroid is observed
may be noted in the uterus of hamster (Fig. 5.22).
occasionally in Syrian hamsters (Pour et al 1976c).
Sparse copora lutea are noted in the hamster ovary
(Fig. 5.23).
Skin and appendages
Cheek pouches in the hamster are well developed
and are highly distensible evaginations of lateral
buccal walls. Cheek pouches are used to store
and transport food and can be easily evaginated
under anaesthesia to use as a common site for
experimental tumor implantation and vascular
physiology studies. The hamster cheek pouch is
an immunologically privileged site.
Hamsters have small pigmented spots and the
costovertebral spot or flank organ (Ghadially and
Ghadially 1996j. The small pigmented spot is a
term used to describe pigmented spots in the
HGURE 5.25 Granular cell hyperplasia on the serosal
hamster skin which are made up of melanocytes
 surface of the large intestine. x100.
and melanophages and which are surrounded by
AGURE 5.22 Decidual reaction in uterus of hamster.
pilosebaceous units. The costovertebral spot or
x100.
flank organ is a paired, black organ on the flank of
the hamster comprising large sebaceous glands
discharging into large hair folicles. Large numbers
of melanocytes are visible around the neck of
these hair follicles. Hip or flank glands in hamsters
secrete during sexual arousal in both sexes and are
used for olfactory marking of territory (Fig. 5.21).
Ulceration may occur over the site of the male
flank gland.
HGURE 5.26 Granular cell hyperplasia adjacent to
hamster kidney. x200.
FIGURE 5.23 Sparse copora lutea in hamster ovary.
x100.
In male hamsters, tubular atrophy of the testis
is often noted as a background lesion (Kamino
Granular cell foci are visible in the female
et al 2001b) (Fig. 5.27) as well as epithelial hyper-
hamster uterus (Kamino et al 2001b) (Fig. 5.24).
plasia of the hamster epididymis (Fig. 5.28). Pre-
In addition, granular cell hyperplasia has been
pucial abscesses are common in the hamster (Fig.
observed on the serosal surface of the large intes-
5.29). Epithelial atrophy and mineralization of a
tine (Fig. 5.25) and adjacent to the hamster
hamster prostate
e are also observed in male ham-
kidney (Fig. 5.26). Cysts in the ovary are common 
sters (Fig. 5.30).
HGURE 5.21 Male flank organ of the hamster with focal
in female hamsters (Pour et al 1976c).
ulceration. x100.
Hamsters can develop a bedding-associated der-
matitis (Percy & Barthold 2007). The lesion is
 characterized by a granulomatous inflammatory
response in the dermis and subcutis of the digits.
A subcutaneous abscess in the skin of a Syrian
hamster has been reported (Kondo et al 2008).
Hamsters and guinea pigs
77
HGURE 5.27 Atrophic seminiferous tubules in the
hamster testis. ×100.
FIGURE 5.31 Dysplasia of the hamster sternum. x100.
FIGURE 5.34 Mineralization in the brain of a hamster.
x100.
HGURE 5.28 Epithelial hyperplasia of the hamster epidi-
dymis. x100.
HGURE 5.32 Cartilage degeneration in the sternum of a
hamster. x200.
HGURE 5.35 Chronic suppurative inflammation in the ear
of the hamster. x40.
Eye and ear
Multifocal retinal dysplasia manifesting as rosette-
like structures making up of the photoreceptor
layer, the outer-membrane layer and the outer
sr a u saas pu ae ra ra
eye (Gad 2007a). Degeneration of lens fbres, i.e.
cataract, may be observed in the eye of the
hamster (Fig. 5.33).
2
FIGURE 5.29 Prepuce abscess in a hamster. x100.
AGURE 5.36 Middle ear fibrosis in the ear of the hamster.
x40.
GUINEA PIGS
ntroduction
The Hartley guinea pig strain is most commonly
used in research environments (Percy & Barthold
HGURE 5.33 Degeneration of lens fibres in the eye of a
2007). Heterophils are the equivalent of the
hamster. x200.
neutrophil in guinea pigs. Guinea pigs (Cavia por-
cellus) originate in South America and are used in
research studies on immunology, audiology and
 In common with other laboratory animals,
HGURE 5.30 Epithelial atrophy and mineralization of a
 infectious diseases (Gad et al 2007b). Guinea pigs
mineralization in the brain of a hamster is encoun-
hamster prostate. x100.
are not used in great numbers as they are expen-
tered (Fig. 5.34). In addition, age-related vacuo-
sive and do not have readily accessible peripheral
lation of the brain is also reported (Gerhauser
Muscle, bones and joints
et al 2012). Chronic suppurative inflammation in
veins for collection of blood. (Gad et al 2007b).
Cartilage dysplasia (Fig. 5.31) or chondromu-
the ear of the hamster (Fig. 5.35) is occasionally
cinous degeneration (Fig. 5.32) is often observed
observed and may lead to middle ear fibrosis of
in the sternum of the hamster (Kamino et al
the middle ear (Fig. 5.36).
2001b).
78
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Cardiovascular system
pneumonitis (Percy & Barthold 2007). The lesion
displacement of the nucleus (Percy & Barthold
is characterized by granulomas made up of gener-
2007). Kurloff cells are thought to be lymphoid
Rhabdomyomatosis (nodular glycogen infltration)
ally plant fbres, surrounded by an inflammatory
cells, possibly large granular lymphocytes, and the
is an incidental fnding in guinea pigs of various
cell infltrate made up predominantly of neu-
intracytoplasmic material is PAS positive. Kurloff
ages (Hueper 1941, Rooney 196l, Tkahashi et al
trophils, lymphocytes and foreign-body
giant
cells may also play a role in tumor rejection (Percy
1985, Vink 1969). The condition is thought to be
cells.
 Pseudogland  formation associated
with
& Barthold 2007)
a congenital disease caused by a disorder of glyco-
diffuse or nodular basal cell hyperplasia of the
Multiple cystic
areas may be noted in the
gen metabolism (Percy & Barthold 2007). The
olfactory epithelium of nasal tract of young
ovaries of female guinea pigs, particularly guinea
lesion is present in the heart muscle, usually in the
hamster has been reported.
pigs older than one year. (Percy & Barthold 2007).
left ventricle, but also in the atria, interventricular
The cysts are lined with cuboidal to columnar
septum and papillary muscle. If the lesion islarge,
Gastrointestinal system
 epithelium and the cysts may cause atrophy of the
it is generally visible at necropsy as pink to yellow
surrounding ovarian tissue (Percy & Barthold
foci (Fig. 5.37) or streaks (Percy & Barthold
Intestinal hemosiderin deposition in the lamina
 2007). Large ovarian cysts are thought to derive
2007); however, the lesion may be too small to be
propria of the large intestine is common in guinea
from the rete ovarii 
(Percy & Barthold 2007).
visible macroscopically.
pigs (Percy & Barthold 2007). The hemosiderin is
Cystic  endometrial
hyperplasia, mucometra,
contained within macrophages within the lamina
endometritis and endometrial polyps are lesions
propria. Adipocyte infltration into the pancreas
 noted in conjunction with ovarian cysts (Percy &
is observed in the older guinea pigs (Percy &
Barthold 2007).
Barthold 2007). The areas of adipose tissue may
become quite large and adipocytes may also be
Muscles, bones and joints
noted within the islets of Langerhans (Percy &
Barthold 2007).
Myocardial and skeletal muscle degeneration
occurs in guinea-pig muscle. The lesions may also
Liver and biliary system
demonstrate mineralization (Percy & Barthold
 2007). The muscles of the hind limbs are particu-
Focal areas of hepatic necrosis with a minimal
larly prone to this syndrome, although the affected
inflammatory response are observed in guinea pig
animal may not demonstrate clinical signs. A
livers (Percy & Barthold 2007). In common with
other laboratory animals, guinea pigs also display
accompanies the degenerative lesions in both
HGURE 5.37 Rhabdomyomatosis in the heart of a guinea
chronic, idiopathic cholangiohepatitis (Percy &
 skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle.
pig.
Barthold 2007). The lesion is characterized by
 Metastatic mineralization occurs in guinea pigs
the presence of hepatocyte degeneration,
bile-
 and results in mineral deposition in the soft tissues
Upon histopathological examination, the lesion
duct hyperplasia and portal fibrosis (Percy &
around the elbows and ribs (Percy & Barthold
is visible as a network of vacuolated myofbres
Barthold 2007). The cause of the lesion is not
2007]. Mineralization of other tissues such as
-soa ‘ieueie on eqy Alauy jo pasoduon
known. Occasionally, focal tears of the liver
lung, trachea, heart, aorta, liver, kidney, stomach,
nophilic cytoplasm. The vacuoles contain large
capsule with hemorrhage into the peritoneum
uterus and eye are also observed. The syndrome
quantities of glycogen which will be washed out
are observed at necropsy in guinea pigs (Percy &
is thought to be caused by dietary mineral imbal-
during routine fixation and processing (Percy &
Barthold 2007). The cause of this lesion is thought
ances (Percy & Barthold 2007).
Barthold 2007). The glycogen may be demon-
to be trauma.
strated in alcohol-fixed specimens stained with
Brain and nervous system
PAS (Percy & Barthold 2007).
Urinary system
 There may be displacement and flattening of
Otitis media may occur in guinea pis. The disease
myocyte nuclei in some of the affected fbres
Segmental nephrosclerosis is an aging change
is caused by various bacteria [such as Streptococcus
(Percy & Barthold 2007). Myofbres with centrally-
observed in guinea pigs older than one year (Percy
pneumoniae，Streptococcus zooepidemicus,Borde-
located nuclei and radiating fbrillar processes are
& Barthold 2007). The cause of the renal lesions
tella and Pseudomonas sp.) (Percy & Barthold
z Piog  Ara) a rais, Pale
is not known, however a high protein diet has
 2007), and may cause otosclerosis of the tympanic
Poorly differentiated cardiac myofbres may be
been noted to exacerbate the renal lesions (Percy
bullae. Bacterial conjunctivitis is also common in
present with identifable cross-striations.
The
& Barthold 2007). Segmental nephrosclerosis is
guinea pigs and may be caused by coliforms, Strep-
lesion does not appear to compromise cardiac
characterized by the presence of pitted, granular,
tococcus zooepidemicus,
Staphylococcus aureus
function and is considered to be an incidental
pale
white kidneys at necropsy,
and
the
and Pasteurella multocida (Percy & Barthold
finding.
histopathological lesion consists of interstitial
2007).
fbrosis, tubular dilatation, hyaline casts, inter-
Hemolymphoreticular system
stitial lymphocyte infltrates, glormerular fbrosis
References
and medial hypertrophy of arterioles (Percy &
Degenerate lymphocytes are observed in associa-
Barthold 2007). Osseous metaplasia has been
Ernst, H., Heinrichs, M., Bargsten, G., et al., 1995.
tion with Hassall's corpuscles (Percy & Barthold
 observed in the kidney of the guinea pig.
Neuroendocrine hyperplasias and tumours of the
2007] in the guinea pig thymus. Thymic cysts in
larynx and trachea in the Syrian hamster. In: Jones,
TC., Mohr, U., Hunt, RD, (Eds.), Respiratory
guinea pigs are common (Percy & Barthold 2007).
Reproductive system
system, second ed. Monographs on Pathology
of Laboratory Animals. Springer-Verlag,Berlin,
Respiratory system
Kurloff cells are unique mononuclear cells found
pp. 107-116.
in certain sites in guinea pigs (Percy & Barthold
Gad, S.C., Hess, F.G., Gad, S.C., 2007a. The
Moderate to marked pulmonary arterial hyperpla-
2007), particularly adult, female guinea pigs.
Hamster. In: Gad, S.C., (Ed.], Animal models in 
sia is observed in the guinea pig lung (Percy &
Kurloff cells are encountered routinely in the
toxicology, second ed. Taylor &Francis, Boca Raton,
Barthold 2007). Perivascular lymphoid aggregates
spleen, bone marrow and thymus. The cells
pp. 277-312.
su pue auni aid eaun au u nuasaid uano aie
increase and decrease in number based on the
Gad, S.C., Peckham, J.C., Gad, S.C., 2007b. The
lesion may be visible as white, subpleural foci at
estrus cycle of the guinea pig. Increased numbers
Guinea pig. In: Gad, S.C., (Ed.], Animal models in
necropsy (Percy & Barthold 2007). These lesions
 of these cells are noted during pregnancy (Percy
toxicology, second ed. Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton,
may be caused by antigenic stimuli, but no viral
& Barthold 2007j and large numbers of them
pp.333-400.
cause has been isolated (Percy & Barthold 2007).
are present in the placenta where they are
Gerhauser, I., Wohlsein, P, Ernst, H., Germann, PG.,
thought to play a role in preventing maternal
Baumgartner, W., 2012. Vacuolation and mineralisa-
In common with other laboratory animals, osseous
tion as dominant age-related fndings in hamster
metaplasia is occasionally noted in the guinea
rejection of the fetus (Percy & Barthold 2007).
brains. Exp. Toxicol. Pathol. (In press).
pig lung. Guinea pigs are prone to foreign-body
The cells demonstrate granular cytoplasm with
Hamsters and guinea pigs
79
Ghadially, FN., Ghadially, R., 1996. Tumours of the
Percy, D.H., Barthold, S.W, 2007. Pathology
Pour, P, Mohr, U., Altoff, J., et al., 1976d.
skin.In:Turusov,VS.,Mohr,U,(Eds.),Pathology
 of laboratory rodents and rabbits. third ed
 Spontaneous tumors and common diseases in two
of tumours in laboratory animals. Vol 3. Tumours of
Blackwell Publishing, Ames, ch 1, pp. 168-196
colonies of Syrian hamsters. IV. Vascular and
the hamster. IARC Scientifc Publications no 126,
and 209-247.
lymphatic systems and lesions of other sites. J. Natl.
Lyon IARC, pp. l-44.
Pour, PM., 1985. Clear cell carcinoma in the larynx of
Cancer Inst. 56 (5], 963-974.
Hueper, W.C., 194l. Rhabdomyomatosis of the
the Syrian Hamster. In: Jones, TC., Mohr, U.,
Rooney, J.R., 1961. Rhabdomyomatosis inthe heart of
heart in a guinea pig. Am. J. Pathol. 17,
Hunt, R.D., (Eds.], Respiratory system (monographs
the guinea pig. Cornell Vet. 51, 388-394.
121-124.
on pathology of laboratory animals]. Springer-Verlag,
Sandberg, J.D., 1987. Neoplastic diseases. In: Hoosier,
Kamino, K., Tillman, T., Mohr, U., 200la. Spectrum
Berlin, pp. 75-77.
G.L., McPherson, C.W., (Eds.], Laboratory Hamsters.
and age-related incidence of spontaneous tumours
Pour, P, Althoff, J., Cardesa, A., 1973. Granular cells
Academic Press Inc, London, pp. 157-167.
in a colony of Han: AURA hamsters. Exp. Toxic.
in tumours and in non-tumourous tissues. Arch.
Tkahashi, M., Iwata, S., Matsuzawa, H., Fujiwara, H.,
Pathol. 52, 539-544.
Pathol. 95, 135-138.
1985. Pathological fndings of cardiac
Kamino, K., Tillmann, T, Boschmann, E., Mohr, U.,
Pour, P, Kmoch, N., Greiser, E., et al., 1976a.
rhabdomyomatosis in the guinea pig. Jikken
 2001 b. Age-related incidence of spontaneous
 Spontaneous tumors and common diseases in two
Dobutsu. 34 (4], 417-424.
non-neoplastic lesions in a colony of Han:
colonies of Syrian hamsters. I. Incidence and sites.
Toth, B., Tomatis, L., Shubik, P, 1961. Multipotential
AURA hamsters. Exp. Toxicol. Pathol. 53,
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 56, 931-935.
carcinogenesis with urethan in the Syrian golden
157-164.
Pour, P, Mohr, U., Cardesa, A., et al., 1976b.
hamster. Cancer Res. 21, 1537-154].
Kondo, H., Onuma, M., Shibuya, H., et al., 2008.
 Spontaneous tumors and common diseases in two
colonies of Syrian hamsters.ll.Respiratory tract
Turusov, VS., Mohr, U., (Eds.], 1996. Pathology of
Spontaneous tumors in domestic hamsters. Vet.
Pathol. 45, 674-680.
Tumours in Laboratory Animals, Vol. Ill, Tumours of
and digestive system. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 56,
the Hamster, second edition. IARC Scientifc
Mohr, U., Emura, M., Dungworth, D.L., Ernst, H.,
937-948.
Publications No. 126, IARC (International Agency
1996. Tumours of the lower respiratory tract. In:
Pour, P, Mohr, U., Althoff, J., et al., 1976c.
for Research on Cancer], Oxford University Press,
Turusov, VS., Mohr, U., (Eds.], Pathology of
 Spontaneous tumors and common diseases in two
pp.189-222.
tumours in laboratory animals. Vol 3. Tumours of
colonies of Syrian hamsters. Ill. Urogenital system
Vink, H.H., 1969. Rhabdomyomatosis (nodular
the hamster. IARC Scientifc Publications no 126,
and endocrine glands. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 56,
glycogenic infiltration] of the heart in guinea-pigs.
Lyon IARC, pp. 189-222.
949-961.
J. Pathol. 97 (2], 331-334.
CHAPTER 6
 Elizabeth F Mclnnes 
Minipigs
Introduction
cells are sometimes encountered within the
minipig aorta. Occasionally focal arteritis may be
Minipigs are now used in greater numbers in con-
observed in the minipig kidney.
tract research organizations as well as in the phar-
advantages over dogs due to their greater toler-
 ance of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
antihypertensive agents and sympathicomimetic
drugs (Dincer 2007). In addition, minipigs are
advantageous models for human drugs since their
digestion is similar to that of humans, and their
smaller size makes them more manageable labora-
tory animals. The minipig offers many advantages
as a model in dermal toxicity because of the simi-
larity between porcine and human skin (Mortensen
et al 1998, Lavker et al 1991), including similari-
HGURE 6.3 Lymphoid infiltrate into the cerebrum. x200.
ties in skin thickness, permeability pigmentation,
 allergic reaction and reaction to burning.
In addition, the gastrointestinal system, diges-
tion and metabolism, as well as the renal and
HGURE 6.1 Arteritis and periarteritis of artery in the
coronary groove. x100.
immune systems of minipigs are similar to those
in man. There are also similarities to hurmans in
reproductive tract histology, physiology, and
in cervical and vaginal secretions and vaginal
Hemolymphoreticular system
pH (minipigs are used for intravaginal studies)
The most common histopathological background
(Jorgensen et al 1998). Finally, cardiovascular
lesion noted in minipigs is the focal accumulation
physiology and anatomy, ventricular performance,
of mononuclear inflammatory cells in various
organs. These cells are predominantly
are similar to those in humans.
lym-
phocytes, macrophages and plasma cells (Madsen
Most contract research organizations or phar-
 maceutical companies use the Gottingen minipig
et al 1998), and are generally noted in perivascu-
lar and interstitial locations (Madsen et al 1998).
which displays a number of important background
The foci may be observed in the adrenal glands
lesions. Minipigs are derived from the Eurasian
HGURE 6.4 Renal cortical interstitial lymphoid infiltrate.
(Fig. 6.2), cerebrum (Fig. 6.3), epididymis,
wild boar (Sus scrofa). In total, some 40 strains
x200.
exist, and the Sinclair, Yucatan and Gottingen
oesophagus, kidneys (Fig. 6.4), liver, lung, man-
dibular salivary gland, meninges, parotid gland,
strains are the most common. Maturity occurs at
rectum, stomach,
testes, tongue and vagina
Ellipsoids are pale, eosinophilic structures
four to six months of age. The estrous cycle is
(Madsen et al 1998].
arranged concentrically around capillaries or small
 -xoudde s! uoeisan pue sAep oz Aaieuixodde
arterioles in the spleen. The ellipsoids display vari-
mately 1l4 days.
able prominence; they consist of phagocytic cells
 Advantages to the use of minipigs include their
and reticular fibres and have been referred to in
ready availability and their small size compared
the
 literature as Schweigger-Seidel sheaths
with conventional pigs. Extensive data on anatomy,
(Charles 1996) (Fig. 6.5).
reproductive physiology, clinical parameters and
histopathology are available for the Gottingen
minipig. Minipigs are also easier to house, handle,
dose and sample than non-human primates and
there are no zoonoses (in contrast to non-human
primates). There are fewer ethical or conservation
concerns, sexually mature animals are readily
available and global transportation of minipigs is
easier.
Disadvantages include the fact that the minipig
is larger than the Beagle dog or non-hurman
primate, a greater quantity of test material is
FIGURE 6.2 Lymphoid infiltrate into the adrenal cortex.
required and minipigs are extremely vocal!
x200.
Cardiovascular system
Arteritis and periarteritis are commonly observed
FIGURE 6.5 SchweiggelSiedel sheaths in the minipig
in a variety of organs, including the epididymides,
spleen.x100.
heart, intestine, kidey, lung slen stmach ad
urinary bladder (Fig. 6.1). In the heart, smallfoci
of lymphocytes and occasional areas of myofibre
necrosis are observed. Mononuclear inflarmmatory
82
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
 In common with other pig breeds, minipigs
Gastrointestinal system
display a reversed cortex and medulla in the
lymph nodes, i.e. the medulla is present on the
Interstitial and periductular lymphocytes and
outside of the node and the cortex with germinal
foci of mineralization are commonly seen in the
centres is visible in the middle of the node. In the
salivary glands of minipigs (Fig. 6.1l), and perig-
mesenteric lymph node the presence of a perime-
landular edema adjacent to the mandibular sali-
senteric plexus may sometimes be confusing to
vary glands is common. In addition, foci of
pathologists (Fig. 6.6). The vascular supply to the
squamous epithelial metaplasia may be noted in
lymph nodes differs from that of other marmmals.
the
cuboidal epithelium of the salivary-gland
Major nodal arteries subdivide into branches
ducts (Fig. 6.12). In the tongue, focal chondro-
which envelop the node as a capsular network
cytes are occasionally observed, unassociated with
from which further branches penetrate the paren-
inflammation (Fig. 6.13). The origin of the carti-
chyma (Charles 1996).
lage cells is thought to be ectopic. Erosive and
ulcerative changes and inflammatory cell infltra-
tion are occasionally evident in the glandular and
FIGURE 6.8 Eosinophils in the subcapsular sinus. x100.
non-glandular stomach (Dincer 2007) (Fig. 6.14).
Respiratory system
may be observed in the minipig lung (Fig. 6.9).
Most lesions are focal and mild, and interstitial or
perivascular inflammatory cell infltrates are often
seen, usually involving lymphocytes and macro-
phages. In addition, mineralized material within
the alveoli (Dincer 2007) (Fig. 6.10) as well as
focal areas of interstitial or purulent bronchopneu-
monia are commonly seen (Dincer 2007). The
HGURE 6.6 Perimesenteric plexus adjacent to the
 pulmonary mineralization is often associated with
mesenteric lymph node in the minipig. x100.
 macrophages. The pneumonic lesions may be due
to mycoplasma or other bacterial infections
 Iron deposits are often visible within macro-
(Dincer 2007). Foreign-body granulomata, often 
HGURE 6.11 Focal area of mineralization in the salivary
phages in the sinuses of local lymph nodes
surrounding hair or food particles, are also com-
 gland of the minipig. x200.
(Madsen et al 1998). The widespread iron depos-
monly observed in the minipig lung (Dincer
its visible in the minipig are thought to be due to
 2007]. Occasionally pleural thickening or pleuritis
the intramuscular injections of iron administered
is observed (Dincer 2007).
to neonatal piglets to prevent anemia (Svendsen
et al 1998). In addition, iron deposits may also be
encountered in the kidney, liver and mandibular
lymph node.
 Small lymph node abscesses are common in the
 mandibular node (Dincer 2007) (Fig. 6.7) and are
thought to be secondary to local irritation or
inflammation. Sinus histiocytosis is also com-
monly observed in the minipig lymph node. An
increase in granulocytic cells such as eosinophils
can soretimes be observed in the sinuses of the
mesenteric lymph nodes (Dincer 2007) (Fig. 6.8).
 HGURE 6.12 Squamous metaplasia of duct epithelium in 
sublingual salivary gland. x10.
HGURE 6.9 Alveolar macrophage aggregates in the
minipig lung. x200.
HGURE 6.7 Mandibular lymph node abscess with central
mineralization in the minipig. x100.
HGURE 6.13 Foci of cartilage present in minipig tongue.
AGURE 6.10 Foci of mineralization in the lung of a
x10.
minipig. x100.
Minipigs
83
Liver and biliary system
(Svendsen et al 1998). The lesions are generally
small and focal, and the basophilic tubules are
Chronic necrotic cholecystitis is occasionally
often related to areas of tubular degeneration and
observed in the minipig gall bladder (Svendsen
regeneration. Foci of mineralization, particularly
1998) (Fig. 6.16). This lesion is generally observed
in the papilla, as well as cortical cysts and occa-
at necropsy where the necrotic gall bladder
sionally hyaline casts are also observed in the
appears thickened. Histopathologically the lesion
minipig kidney (Dincer 2007) (Fig. 6.19).
is characterized by necrosis of the mucosa with
large numbers of inflammatory cells extending
into the submucosa and smooth muscle layers
(Dincer 2007). Cholecystitis is not associated
with clinical signs or changes in clinical pathology
parameters. Hypoplasia or aplasia of the gall
bladder are also observed as background findings.
HGURE 6.14 Focal, minimal gastric erosion in minipig
stomach. x100.
Minimal to moderate hemorrhage and inflam-
mation of the lamina propria and submucosa of
the small and large intestine is observed in mini-
pigs. Moderate nurmbers of eosinophils may be
noted in the lamina propria of the small intestine
(Fig. 6.15a). Occasional erosive changes are also
HGURE 6.18 Basophilic tubules and interstitial lym-
visible in the intestinal mucosa. Hyperkeratosis is
phocytes in the minipig kidney. x100.
occasionally noted in the stomach due to the
feeding of finely ground rations and pelleted food
(Madsen et al 1998). Herniated large intestinal
glands are often noted within the underlying sub-
mucosal lymphoid tissue in the large intestine of
the minipig (Fig. 6.15b)
AGURE 6.16 Necrotic cholecystitis in the minipig gall
bladder.x200.
The minipig liver can often display small multi-
focal areas of inflarmmatory cells, and occasional
foci of single-cell necrosis or necrosis can be seen
throughout the liver (Dincer 2007) (Fig. 6.17). In
 addition, fbrous tissue is noted in the interlobular
and subcapsular areas (Dincer 2007). Clear-cell
foci can occasionally be observed in the minipig
liver, and the clear hepatocyte cytoplasm is
thought to be
due to glycogen accumulation
 FIGURE 6.19 Mineralization in papilla of minipig kidney.
(Dincer 2007). Iron deposits are often visible
x200.
within Kupffer cells in the liver.
Multifocal inflammmatory-cell infltration is occa-
 sionally observed in the urinary bladder mucosa
FIGURE 6.15a Moderate numbers of eosinophils in the
and submucosa of minipigs (Dincer 2007). Inflam-
lamina propria of the jejunum of a minipig. x200.
mation, made up predominantly of eosinophilic
granulocytes, is occasionally observed in the
treter of the minipig. Thromboses or areas of
mineralization may be noted in the umbilical
blood vessels within the serosa of the urinary
bladder (Fig. 6.20).
FIGURE 6.17 Focal hepatocyte necrosis in the minipig
liver. x200.
Urinary system
FIGURE 6.15b Herniated colonic glands in submucosal
lymphoid tissue. x100.
The minipig has a multipapillate kidney similar
in structure to the human kidney, including the
presence of true calices. Multifocal interstitial
lymphoid infltrates and fbrosis, as well as multi-
focal cortical basophilic tubules, are observed
HGURE 6.20 Thrombosed umbilical bood vessel in
serosa of the urinary bladder of minipig. ×100.
commonly in the minipig kidney (Fig. 6.18)
84
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
Endocrine glands
Accessory adrenal cortical tissue is sometimes
observed.1
 Ultimobranchial cysts lined by squa-
mous epithelium and filled with keratin may be
observed in minipigs in the thyroid. The pituitary
 gland may sometimes display cysts lined by cili-
ated epithelium as well as mineralization of single
cells (Dincer 2007).
The parathyroid glands in the minipig are dif-
ficult to locate and are generally found within the
thymus. The thyroids are on the ventral surface
of the trachea at the thoracic inlet and are also
diffcult to locate. The thyroids are often damaged
by venipuncture procedures (Fig. 6.21), and this
can affect thyroid hormone levels. The parathy-
FIGURE 6.23 Severe focal epidermal ulceration and
HGURE 6.25 Serous atrophy of adipose tssue in the
 dermal inflammatory-cellinfiltration in the minipig skin.
roids are not attached to the thyroids in the
minipig bone marrow. x200.
minipig, but are located close to the carotid artery
x100.
bifurcation, within the thymus (Fig. 6.22), adipose
Brain and nervous system
or connective tissue. The thymus is located in the
neck and cranial thorax, lying adjacent to the
Reproductive system
Mineralization is often observed in the meninges
trachea. Occasionally, parathyroid glands display
of the minipig brain (Fig. 6.26), and occasional
cysts (Dincer 2007)
In the testes, uni- or bilateral seminiferous tubular
areas of perivascular lymphocyte infltration are
hypoplasia or atrophy is commonly observed and
noted in the brain. In addition, meningeal
is characterized by the presence of vacuolation in
inflammatory cell infltrates are sometimes seen.
Sertoli cells and multinucleate cells (Dincer
 2007). In the epididymis reduced numbers of
spermatids can be observed, generally related to
tubular atrophy in the testes. Interstitial lymphoid
infltration is commonly observed in the prostate
of the minipig (Dincer 2007).
Muscles, bones and joints
Multifocal areas of necrosis and inflammatory cell
infltration are noted in the skeletal muscle of
minipigs. This can be confused with treatment-
related effects. The lesion is observed in skeletal
muscle at many sites, and there is generally
AGURE 6.21 Peritracheal hemorrhage and inflammation 
minimal evidence of myofibre regeneration (Fig.
due to venipuncture procedures in the minipig. x100.
6.24).
AGURE 6.26 Focal mineralization of the meninges of the
minipig brain. x200.
Eye and ear
Focal retinal dysplasia, lymphocytic keratitis, and
superficial keratitis have been observed occasion-
ally in the eyes of minipigs (Madsen et al 1998).
Periocular hyperkeratosis can be observed in
minipigs, and yeasts (Candida spp.) are occasion-
ally found within the debris. In addition, cupping
of the optic disk is often noted as a background
finding in the minipig eye (Fig. 6.27)
AGURE 6.22 The minipig parathyroid within the thymus.
FIGURE 6.24 Myodegeneration and inflammation of the 
x20.
skeletal muscle of the minipig. x200.
Skin and appendages
Serous atrophy of the adipose tissue within
bone marrow is observed in the minipig (Svendsen
The skin of the minipig demonstrates multifocal
et al 1998). The lesion occurs in the epiphysis and
areas of dermal inflarmmatory cells and acanthosis
metaphysis and may be related to nutritional
of the epidermis (Dincer 2007). Focal areas of
imbalances (Bollen & Skydsgaard 2006) (Fig.
epidermal ulceration are also cormmon (Fig. 6.23).
6.25). It occurs in both sexes at any age, possibly
more frequently in male animals, and it occurs
under normal physiological conditions. The lesion
is of no pathological significance and may be con-
sidered as a normal variation in the bone marrow
HGURE 6.27 Cupping of the optic disk in the minipig eye.
cell population.
x40.
Minipigs
85
References
Jorgensen, K.D., Ellegaard, L, Klastrup, S., et al.,
microbiologically defned Gottingen minipigs. Scand.
1998. Haematological and clinical chemical values in
J. Lab. Anim. Sci. 25, 159-166.
Bollen, P, Skydsgaard, M., 2006. Restricted feeding
pregnant and juvenile Gottingen minipigs. Scand. J.
Mortensen, J.T., Brinck, P, Lichtenberg, J., 1998.
Lab. Anim. Sci. 25, 181-190.
may induce serous fat atrophy in male Gottingen
The minipig in dermal toxicology. A literature
minipigs. Exp. Toxicol. Pathol. 57, 347-349.
Lavker, R.M., Dong, G., Zheng, PS., et al., 1991.
review. Scand. J. Lab. Anim. Sei. 3S (Suppl. 1],
Charles, J.A., 1996. Lymph nodes and thymus. In:
Hairless micropig skin.A novel model for studies
77-83.
Sims, L.D., Glastonbury, J.R.W. (Eds.], Pathology of
of cutaneous biology Am. J. Pathol. 138,
Svendsen, O., Skydsgaard, M., Aarup, V, et al., 1998.
the pig. Industry House, Australia, pp. 185-210.
687-697.
Spontaneously occurring microscopic lesions in
Dincer, Z., 2007. The minipig. In: Gad, S.C. (Ed.],
Madsen, L.W., Jensen, A.L., Larsen, S., 1998.
selected organs of the Gottingen minipig. Scand. J.
Animal models in toxicology. CRC Press, Boca
Spontaneous lesions in clinically healthy.
Lab. Anim. Sci. 25 (Suppl. 1], 231-234.
Raton, pp. 739-759.
CHAPTER
Alys E Bradley
New Zealand White rabbit
Introduction
or detomidine in Dutch Belted rabbits (Percy &
findings recorded regularly at a low incidence in
Barthold 2007).
the hematopoietic tissues of rabbits include:
Rabbits are classified in the order Lagormorpha.
ectopic parathyroid in the thymus, increased
They differ from rodents in that they possess an
extramedullary hematopoiesis in the spleen,
additional pair of incisor teeth directly behind the
accessory spleen (Weisbroth et al 1976), eryth-
large incisors of the upper jaw. There are over 100
rophagocytosis, sinusoidal dilation, and pigmented
different breeds of rabbit that are descendants of
macrophages in the lymph nodes. In addition,
the European wild rabbit, Oryctolagus cuniculus.
lymphocyte infltrations may be noted in the liver,
New Zealand White rabbits are used extensively
heart and lungs.
in toxicological studies; however, the design of the
majority of study protocols are such that full his-
topathology of all organ systems seldom occurs.
The animals in toxicology studies are euthanized
at the end of the study period whilst still relatively
young and so pre-neoplastic and neoplastic dis-
eases are rarely seen. The range and extent of
neoplastic and hyperplastic lesions that occur in
older rabbits have been well described in the
FIGURE 7.1 Rabbit heart with adipose tissue infiltration
standard veterinary medicine and pathology texts
in the right ventricle (base). x100.
on laboratory animals (Hrapkiewicz et al 1998,
Saunders & Rees-Davies 2005, Percy & Barthold
2007). This chapter will focus on lesions encoun-
tered as spontaneous background findings in young
rabbits which are between six and 24 months old.
Tissue reactions are generally
conserved
between species, and very few spontaneous back-
HGURE 7.3 Macrophage aggregates, often containing
ground conditions occur in the rabbit that are
debris, present in the rabbit GALT (gut associated lym-
species-specifc. The majority of toxicological
phoid tissue). x100.
studies for which rabbits are used are immunologi
cal, teratological (reproductive toxicity), dermal,
ocular, implant and vaccine safety assessments.
Respiratory system
The latter often involve histopathological sam-
pling of eyes and injection sites only. The rabbit
The mucosa lining the ventral surface of the nose
eye is particularly sensitive to the deposition of
contains some hair follicles, and so the presence
immune complexes.
of these should not be misdiagnosed as hamar-
FIGURE 7.2 Medial mineralization of the aorta of the
toma. The submucosa of the nasal cavity contains
rabbit. ×100.
Cardiovascular system
individual or small aggregates of lymphocytes, but
no lymphoid follicles are present. There are no
The heart is relatively small compared with other
The Watanabe rabbit is used extensively as an
respiratory bronchioles in rabbits. Alveolar macro-
species of similar size. The chambers of the right
animal model of natural endogenous atherosclero-
phage accumulations are often seen in the lungs.
side of the rabbit heart are thin and the right
sis (Garibaldi & Pecquet 1988). Atherosclerosis
The alveolar macrophage aggregates have no par-
ventricle often contains clotted blood with no evi-
may also be observed in the aorta of New Zealand
-rauad aq uee pue uaid uonqasi ienn
dence of contraction (Percy & Barthold 2007).
White rabbits (Salamon et al 2007).
a ie io 'emad an yauaq isnl paed A
The rabbit right atrioventricular valve is bicuspid
bronchoalveolar junction. The macrophages are
rather than tricuspid.
Hemolymphoreticular system
hypertrophic with pale pink cytoplasm, but
Occasionally evidence of the closure of the
usually there is no associated inflammatory cell
ductus arteriosus may be seen as foci of mineraliza-
In the rabbit polychromasia of the erythrocytes
response. Other findings recorded regularly in the
rabbit lung include: perivascular mononuclear or
 tion in the media of major vessels of young rabbits
is a normal fnding. Heterophils are the counter-
jo aueid au uo bupuadap sapns Aooixo u
part of the neutrophil and have distinct acido-
eosinophilic inflammatory cell infltrations, ectopic
section. Mononuclear inflammatory-cell infltrates 
philic granules. Hyposegmented neutrophils may
bone and bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue
are recorded infrequently in the myocardium
be observed in a rabbit blood smear. This is known 
(BALT) hyperplasia in older rabbits. Submucosal
(Lehr 1965). The foci are usually at the base of
as the Pelger-Huet syndrome, and this anomaly is 
mononuclear inflammatory cell infltrations are
the interventricular septum. These are inert cel-
inherited as a partial dominant trait in rabbits
 seen occasionally in the trachea and larynx. Bar-
lular infltrates with no accompanying myocardial
[Salamon et al 2007). Basophils in the rabbit may
 biturate euthanasia can result in petechiae on the
necrosis or fbrosis associated with the lesion.
be relatively numerous and occasionally represent 
surface of the lung which disappear during
Other findings recorded regularly at a low inci-
up to 30% of circulating leukocytes (Percy &
 processing (Salamon et al 2007). In addition, the
dence in the rabbit heart include mineralization of
Barthold 2007).
process of euthanasia may cause alveolar edema
the left atrial appendage, pericardial lipomatosis
Large eosinophilic histiocytes are commonly
 and congestion in the rabbit lung (Fig. 7.4). Occa-
(Fig. 7.l) and pericardial fbrosis. Calcification
 seen within the thymus, lymph nodes and follicles
 sional thrombi with arteritis and periarteritis may
of the aorta and large veins (Fig. 7.2) (arterioscle-
of the
 epithelium-associated lymphoid tissue
be noted in the rabbit lung (Fig. 7.5).
rosis) may be seen at necropsy in older animals
(e.g. bronchiolar and gut-associated lymphoid
[e.g. ex-breeding colonies). Foci of myofibre
tissue) (Fig. 7.3). These histiocytes may have
degeneration and fbrosis with a mononuclear-cell
particulate debris in the cytoplasmic vacuoles.
infltrate in the heart may be associated with
In the thymus they are usually situated in the
administration of ketamine/xylazine combinations
medullary area of the peripheral lobules. Other
88
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATOR
ANIMALS
the ileocecal junction adjacent to the sacculus
Other findings regularly recorded at low inci-
rotundus, the cecum has a large mass of lymphoid
dences in the gastrointestinal tract of the rabbit
tissue called the cecal tonsil. This may be referred
include dilated glands in the fundus of the
to as the ileocecal tonsil, or onpulla ilei in older
stomach, mineralized foci in the fundus of the
anatomy texts. The walls of this area are thick-
stomach, and micro-abscesses in the lamina
ened by aggregations of organized lymphoid tissue
propria of the cecum.
and macrophages and this area should not to be
Rabbits may occasionally be affected by enteric
mistaken for lymphoid hyperplasia or increased
infectious diseases; however, breakdowns in test
celularity. The grossly thickened walls of the sac-
facility closed systems are rare and usually result
culus rotundus, caecal tonsil and vermiform
in parasitic disease only. Other than coccidiosis,
appendix are due to aggregates oflymphoid tissue
which may cause clinical disease that could
in the lamina propria and submucosa. At the junc-
 comprormise a toxicology study, parasitic lesions
tion between the transverse and descending colon
are generally only incidental interesting back-
is the fusus coli, which is unique to rabbits and is
ground findings. Adult nematodes of Passaiurus
HGURE 7.4 Agonal alveolar edema present in rabbit
made up of ganglion cells which regulate the flow
onbiguus (pinworm) (Fig. 7.6), may occasionally
lung. ×100.
of ingesta into the descending colon (Salarmon
be observed in the cecum and colon. Larval forms
et al 2007, Cruise and Brewer, 1994). The rectum
 may be seen in the mucosa of the small intestine
often contains 
submucosal lymphocytes rather
or cecum. Evidence of parasitic transit through
than areas of gut-associated lymphoid tissue
the intestine may manifest as mineralized parasitic
(GALT). Marked plasma-cell infltrations into the
granulomata. Cysticercus larvae of the tapeworm
intestinal tract have been described (Salamon et al
Taenia pisiformis are occasionally seen hanging
2007). In the small intestine, mucosal erosions,
from the mesentery or embedded in the
liver
dilatation of lacteals and blunting of overlying
parenchyma (Soulsby 1986), though this would
villi occur in conjunction with a severe plasma-
be a rare finding in purpose-bred laboratory
cell infltration into the lamina propria (Percy &
rabbits.
Barthold 2007).
 Peyer's patches are normally very large in the
rabbit and should not be misdiagnosed as lym-
phoid hyperplasia. Lymphoid tissues are large and
prominent in the small and large intestines of the
rabbit. The gut associated lymphoid tissue (GALT)
HGURE 7.5 Rabbit lung with pulmonary thrombus, arteri-
of the rabbit represents more than 50% of the
tis and periarteritis. x100.
total mass of lymphoid tissue in the body and
accounts for the relatively small spleen size in the
rabbit.
Gastrointestinal system
 Rabbits are peculiar among laboratory species in
that their main reaction to external stressors of
Malocclusion of the teeth is reasonably common
any type is an episode of diarrhea. This can some-
in rabbits due to congenital mandibular prognathia
times occur days after a stressful event. Any
or secondary to inadequate wear. Ulcerations of
 change in gut microflora, pH or rmotility will lead
50 mm
the tongue may be caused by lower molar maloc-
to diarrhea. Rabbits react negatively to changes of
HGURE 7.6 Passaiurus ambigus ova in faecal flotation
clusion. Upper molar malocclusion causes buccal
environment (moving to a research facility, new
taken from a rabbit. x400.
ulcerations of the cheek. Malocclusion of teeth is
technicians, visitors to the animal rooms) and any
controlled in contract research organizations or
such event may trigger an episode of diarrhea
pharmaceutical industries by the clipping of over-
Liver and biliary system
two to three days later. This is a behavioural trait 
of rabbits and has to be taken into account when
 Rabbit livers are often pale yellw at necropsy due
lae on the dorsal surface of the tongue are
assessing clinical signs. Rabbits are hindgut fer-
to the amount of stored glycogen in hepatocytes.
occasionally mistaken for papillomatous growths.
menters adapted to digest a low-quality, high-fbre
This cytoplasmic vacuolation (Fig. 7.7), associated
Vomiting is not possible in the rabbit, and food
diet. Stress events slow peristalsis and impede
with glycogen accumulation, varies etween sexes
and cecal pellets are always present in the stomach.
caecotrophy or coprophagia. In addition, caecal
 and also varies diurnally. Vacuolation is also influ-
Hairballs or trichobezoars in the stomach or
pH becomes more alkaline due to the slowed
passage of food material, and Escherichia coli can
enced by standard diets and fasting before eutha-
pylorus are encountered commonly, but are gener-
nasia (Percy & Barthold 2007). Generally rabbits
ally incidental findings at necropsy (Haugh 1987).
then dominate the caecal environment.
not starved before euthanasia show high levels of
The hairballs are masses of hair and ingesta that
 Mucoid enteropathy (epizootic rabbit entero-
glycogen accumulation. Therefore animals eutha-
result from excessive self-grooming and boredom
pathy) is a disease of unknown etiology that
u uaokla anou aaeu lm uuou ay u pazu
(Percy & Barthold 2007). Predisposing factors to
occurs in young rabbits. It is a common cause of
hairball formation may include low-fibre diets,
death in commercial and laboratory rabbit colo-
their livers than those euthanized in the after-
nies, but is rare in pet hutch and housed rabbits.
noon. Pathologists should be aware of this diurnal
experimental manipulation and stress. Heter-
 change and interpret any changes in glycogen
ophils and lymphocytes are common in the sub-
Affected animals may recover if switched to a
high-fbre, low-energy diet. Upon histopathola-
vacuolation with the knowledge of whether the
mucosal area of the stomach. In contrast to other
laboratory animals, Brunner's glands are present
 animal was starved prior to euthanasia, for how
gical exarmination, there is rmarked goblet-cell
long, and at what time of day the necropsy
throughout the length of the rabbit duodenum
hypertrophy and hyperplasia, mainly affecting the
(Percy & Barthold 2007).
occurred (Wells et al 1988; Weisbroth et al 1990).
small intestine and colon, with only occasional
 Rabbits are hindgut fermenters with a large and
Vcuolation of hepatocytes is more common in
cecal changes. Srmall intestinal sections may show
complex digestive system. They practise cecotro-
female rabbits. Other fndings regularly recorded
atrophy and fusion of villi. There may be minimal
at a low incidence in the liver include extramedul-
phy, which is the ingestion of mucus-coated night
lymphocytic/plasmacytic inflammatory cell infl-
 lary hematopoiesis, periportal hepatocyte vacuola-
faeces. Cecotrophy is controlled by the adrenal
trates in some animals, but in general an inflam-
tion, multifocal hepatic mineralization and tension
glands and may be altered during periods of stress.
matory reaction is not usually associated with this
The large intestines consist of a spiral cecum, a
condition. The proposed bacterial proliferation
lipidosis.
sacculated colon and the rectum. The sacculus
(E. coli and/or Clostridium spiroforme} is not
rotundus is a round, thick-walled enlargement at
always evident on tissue sections.
the ileocecal junction (Percy & Barthold 2007}. At
New Zealand White rabbit
89
infection is of great concern due to the diffculty
Urinary system
in eradication. The extent of the lesions and clini-
cal signs associated with the disease may invali-
The background data in the literature on non-
date a toxicity study. Developmental stages are
infectious, spontaneous kidney lesions in labora-
usually seen in biliary epithelium, proximal to the
tory rabbits are limited. Vacuolation of the
cell nucleus, five to six days after infection, but
proximal convoluted tubule epithelium is aregular
may be seen after three days in heavy infections
fnding in young, non-pregnant does. These vacu-
(Fig. 7.10). Oocysts are shed around day 23 and
 oles stain positively with Oil red O stain for
patency lasts until day 37 post infection (Soulsby
neutral lipids.
1986). Mineralized foci in the biliary epithelium
Calcium absorption and metabolism in the
may be the only sign of previous infection in a
rabbit is poorly understood. Rabbits normally have
clinically normal rabbit. In some cases oocysts
a higher blood calcium range than other laboratory
may be present in calcifed nodules, and have been
animal species and are predisposed to cystic, ure-
misdiagnosed/misreported as the eggs of
and
thral, ureteral and renal calculi. Rabbits excrete
infection with the nematode Capillaria hepatica.
excess calcium though the urine as calcium car-
HGURE 7.7 Vacuolation of hepatocytes in the rabbit liver.
Histologically, the liver shows well circumscribed
bonate. Mineralized foci are commonly seen in the
x100.
focal granulomatous lesions surrounding the bile
collecting ducts and medulla of rabbit kidneys.
ducts, with schizonts and zygotes of E. stiedae in
The mineralized foci correlate with the normal
The most frequently recorded background
the lumen.
alkaline, cloudy to pigmented urine of rabbits
lesions in the livers of rabbits consist of lym-
caused by the presence of albumin, fine calcium
phocytic cell infltration into the periportal area
of the liver. Lymphocytic infltration increases
carbonate and ammonium magnesium phosphate
crystals. Rabbit urine varies in colour from creamy
with age and is more common in female rabbits.
yellow to dark red depending on the presence
Torsion of the caudate lobe occasionally occurs
of porphyrin pigments derived from the diet
and may result in fatal hepatic rupture (Salarmon
(Percy & Barthold 2007), urobilin or xenobiotics
et al 2007, Weisbroth 1975). Duplication of the
(e.g. antibiotics). Care must be taken to differen-
gall bladder (Fig. 7.8) and cholecystitis (Fig. 7.9)
have been reported in rabbits (Gupta i975).
tiate normal rabbit urine from red urine caused by
 Serosal hemorrhages have been reported
hematuria. Mineralized foci in the tubules or
at
interstitial areas of the cortex are present in large
necropsy in rabbit gall bladder (Salarmon et al
2007).
numbers of rabbits (Fig. 7.12). The lesions are
distributed evenly between males and females,
and have been previously reported in the litera-
ture with similar incidences (Ritskes-Hoitinga
et al 2004). Focal mineralization is also occasion-
FIGURE 7.10 Coccidiosis in the gallbladder of the rabbit
ally recorded in the urothelium of the urinary
liver. x100.
bladder.
Pancreas
The most common finding in the exocrine pan-
creas is the presence of an accessory spleen (Fig.
7.11) (Weisbroth et al 1976). These nodules are
usually fairly large and may be described as raised,
dark foci or masses at necropsy. The architecture
of the splenic tissue resembles that of normal
spleen with clearly discernible follicles. Acinar cell
HGURE 7.8 Duplication of rabbit gall bladder. x100.
degranulation is also occasionally recorded in
control rabbits. This lesion is usually associated
with fasting, and is generally associated with
animals euthanized mid afternoon and correlates
with decreased glycogen accumulation in the liver.
Individual acinar necrosis may also be reported in
rabbits subjected to prior fasting (Salarmon et al
AGURE 7.12 Mineralization in the interstitium of the
rabbit kidney. x100.
2007). Smal lymphocytic infltrations into the
pancreas are common.
Aging glomerular changes are observed at about
ome year of age in the rabbit kidney (Salarmon
et al 2007). These changes consist of mesangial
proliferation with a multifocal distribution. Scars
on the surface of the kidneys are commonly seen
at the necropsy of clinically normal, apparently
healthy rabbits. These are the most common find-
ings in rabbit organs at slaughterhouses.
The
AGURE 7.9 Necrotic cholecystitis in the rabbit gall
lesions are seen in animals from colonies free from
bladder. x100.
Encephalitozoon cuniculi and are the result of a
spontaneous nephropathy syndrome. There are no
Hepatic coccidiosis is a disease of young rabbits
clinical signs accompanying these lesions and no
caused by Eimeria stiedae and is a common cause
evidence of progression or greater severity of the
of condemnation of rabbit livers in slaughter-
ju st uoisa a saps ua au uo suu
houses. Recently coccidiosis has increased in com-
thought to be progressive, unlike the nephropathy
mercial rabbit establishrments and caused a paucity
FIGURE 7.11 Pancreas with accessory spleen in the
of rats. The histological findings are generally
in the availability of rabbits for research. This
rabbit. ×50.
recorded separately as basophilic tubules (Fig.
90
 BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
7.13), dilated or cystic tubules, pigmented tubules 
adrenal cortex have been reported during spring
and interstitial inflammatory cell infltration.
(Greene 1965).
Spontaneous fndings of mineralization, tubular
Lymphocytic infltration is commonly recorded
basophilia and dilatation have been reported pre-
in the thyroid gland of the rabbit. There is usually
viously in young laboratory rabbits under one year
no active inflammatory component to the lesion
of age (Burek et al 1988, Hinton 1981), but the
and it has not been reported to be associated with
incidence of this lesion seems to be increasing in
immune-mediated changes or the presence of
the New Zealand White rabbit population. The
autoantibodies. In some animals lymphoid folli-
abundance of spontaneous renal findings may
cles form in the thyroid and it is considered that
mask nephrotoxic effects. Nephrotoxins
can
these lymphocytic infltrates reflect the high inci-
induce or exacerbate chronic progressive neph-
dence of extra lymphoid tissue in the rabbit com-
ropathy in the rat after single or acute exposure
 pared with other species. Other findings regularly
(Khan & Alden 2002). Although the pathogenesis
recorded at low incidences in the rabbit endocrine
of the lesion in rabbits is unclear and does not
system include ectopic thymus, dilated or cystic
appear to be progressive, this masking effect may
follicles and ultimobranchial cysts in the thyroid
HGURE 7.15 Focal squamous metaplasia with hyper-
occur and so renal evaluation should be approached
and focal mineralization in the adenohypophysis
keratosis in the rabbit prostate. x100.
with care. It is always good practice to record
 of the pituitary. The rabbit pituitary often displays
and grade each finding separately. Any increased
 endothelium-lined spaces at the junction between
The rabbit uterus has two horns and two sepa-
incidences will be apparent once the study is
the pars distalis and intermedia.
rate cervices, and the placentation is hemochorial.
complete and findings can be merged in incidence
Does are induced ovulators. Although tumors of
tables as 'nephropathy' if appropriate.
Skin and appendages
the uterus are common in older animals (i.e. adeno-
carcinomas, deciduomas), fndings in the female
Lesions caused by fghting are common, particu-
reproductive tract of young animals on routine
larly in aggressive males. Hair chewing and bar-
toxicology studies are uncommon. The most fre-
bering are occasionally observed among young
quent findings recorded at low incidences include
group-housed rabbits. The lesion is characterized
follicular cysts, hemorrhagic follicles and mineral-
by alopecia without dermatitis on the face and
ized atretic follicles in the ovary and mesonephric
back. Boredom and low-roughage diets are consid-
duct cysts in the oviduct. Pigmented macrophages,
ered to be predisposing factors (Percy & Barthold
endometrial edema, dilated endometrial glands
2007). Ulcerative dermatitis or pododermatitis is
and endometrial cysts in the uterus and subepi-
observed in older, heavier rabbits kept in wire
thelial cysts and distended veins on the surface of
cages (Percy & Barthold 2007).
the vagina are also recorded. Endometrial venous
Moist dermatitis occurs due to the contact
aneurysms are considered to be congenital defects
wetting of the fur. Multifocal aggregates of lym-
characterized by multiple, blood-filled endome-
phocytes can be observed surrounding hair folli-
trial varices that are composed of dilated, thin-
cles or in the deep dermis. The cause is unknown.
walled veins that rupture and bleed periodically in
Exfoliative dermatitis and sebaceous adenitis have
the uterine lumen (Bray et al 1992).
HGURE 7.13 Focal area of basophilic tubules in cortical
been reported in older rabbits (Salamon et al
Abundant interstitial tissue in the female rabbit
 interstitium of rabbit. x100.
2007).
ovary is referred to as the ovarian interstitial gland
(Mori & Matsumoto 1973) (Fig. 7.16).
Other findings recorded regularly at low inci-
Reproductive system
dences in the rabbit kidney include focal fbrosis,
 Cortical cyst and acute pyelitis in the kidney. Sub-
The male rabbit has patent inguinal canals which
mucosal lymphoid hyperplasia (Fig. 7.14) and
connect to the abdominal cavity and which often
papillary hyperplasia of the urothelium in the
accumulate white to brown secretions produced
bladder are background changes associated with
by scent glands in the inguinal canal wall (Salamon
the high crystalline content of normal rabbit urine.
et al 2007). Tubular atrophy is an infrequent
fnding in the male rabbit testis. This may be
unilateral or bilateral, but is generally localized,
affecting only a few tubules. Periarteritis
and
perivascular lymphoid infltration are common
lesions observed in the rabbit testis. There is an
accompanying oligospermia and sloughing of sem-
iniferous epithelium in the epididymes. Clinically
silent, focal, acute inflammation is occasionally
recorded in the bulbourethral gland and prostate
of the rabbit. Spontaneous, focal, keratinized
HGURE 7.16 The nterstitial gland in the rabbit ovary.
[t' s) aensid au jo eisdeau snouens
x10.
and seminal vesicle epithelium is an infrequent
lesion peculiar to the rabbit. It is important to
Mammary gland
recognize this as a spontaneous lesion when evalu-
ating test articles with androgenic or oestrogenic
Mammary gland dysplasia and cystic mammary
glands are associated with pituitary adenomas and
HGURE 7.14 Submucosal lymphoid hyperplasia noted in
and co-workers [1985).
uterine adenocarcinorma in older rabbits. Cystic
the rabbit urinary bladder. x100.
mammary gland hyperplasia is associated with a
condition called cystic mastitis. This lesion occurs
in one or more glands of non-breeding does over the
Endocrine system
age of three years and appears tobe a preneoplastic
condition. The hyperplastic teats may contain a
The rabbit adrenal often contains vacuolated
brown, serosanguinous fluid and masses or fluid-
cortical areas and extracapsular cortical tissue is
fled cysts may be palpable in the mammary tissues
also a feature. Hyperplastic areas in the rabbit
(Richardson 2000).
New Zealand White rabbit
91
Muscle, bones and joints
Prolapse of the deep gland of the third eyelid
Janssens, G., Simoens, P, Muylle, S., et al., 1999.
has been recently reported and appears histolo-
Bilateral prolapse of the deep gland of the third
gicaly as a mass composed of bilobed glands
eyelid in a rabbit: diagnosis and treatment. Lab.
The preferred location for intramuscular injec-
Anim. Sci. 49, 105-109.
tions in the rabbit is the dorsal lumbar muscle
arranged into an alveolar-like pattern without
inflammation. The cause is proposed to be abnor-
Khan, K.N.M., Alden, C.L., 2002. Kidney. In:
 group. Alum granulomas, indicative of previous
mal laxity of the supporting connective tissue
Hashek-Hock, WM, Rousseaux, C.G. (Eds.],
vaccination, or minimal focal myofibre degenera-
Handbook of toxicologic pathology, vol. 2, second
tion may be seen at this site. The skeleton of the
(Janssens et al 1999).
ed. Academic Press San Diego, pp. 255-336.
rabbit comprises only six to eight percentage of
Lehr, D., 1965. Lesions of the cardiovascular system.
total body weight (Percy & Barthold 2007). The
Metabolic diseases
In: Ribelin, W.E., McCoy, J.R., (Eds.], The pathology
bones of rabbits are fragile and fractures occur
6ds se oe 
readily, especially with improper handling. Verte-
Pregnancy toxaemia occurs in obese rabbits (Percy
Mori, H., Matsumoto, K., 1973. Development of the
bral fracture is caused by improper handling
& Barthold 2007]. At necropsy, obesity is evident,
secondary interstitial gland in the rabbit ovary.
leading to sudden, unsupported movement of the
and the liver and kidneys are pale yellow due to
J. Anat. 116, 417-430.
forelirmbs which causes fracture or vertebral luxa-
mobilized fat stores. Pregnant does may have
Percy, D.H., Barthold, S.W, 2007. Pathology of
uterine hemorrhages and dead fetuses in the
laboratory rodents and rabbits, third ed. Blackwell,
tion. Most fractures occur in the lumbosacral
uterine horns.
Ames, IA, USA.
'sishlered pue aneuep pion leuids asneo pue uoibal
Richardson, VC.G., 2000. Rabbits: health, husbandry
Vertebral spondylosis is common in rabbits
 and diseases. Blackwell Science, Malden MA.
(Richardson 2000).
References
Ritskes-Hoitinga, M., Skott, O., Uhrenholt, TR., 2004.
Bray, M.V., Weir, E.C., Brownstein, D.G., et al., 1992.
 Nephrocalcinosis in rabbits - a case study. Scand. J.
Brain and nervous system
Endometrial venous aneurysms in three New
Lab. Anim. Sci. 31, 143-148.
Zealand white rabbits. Lab. Anim. Sci. 42,
Salamon, C.M., Mackenzie, K.M., Peckham, J.C.,
Occasionally ventricular dilation of the rabbit cer-
360-362.
et al., 2007. The rabbit. In: Gad, S.C., (Ed.],
ebrum is recorded at necropsy. There is no under-
Burek, J.D., Duprat, P, Owen, R., et al., 1988.
Animal Models in Toxicology, second ed. Taylor &
lying pathology in the brain tissue and the lesion
Francis,Boca Raton,pp.421492.
Spontaneous renal disease in laboratory animals. Int.
is presumed to be congenital and related to the
Rev. Exp. Pathol. 30, 231-319.
Saunders, R.A., Rees-Davies, R., 2005. Notes on rabbit
dommed shape of the brachycephalic rabbit skull.
Burrows, A.M., Smith, TD., Atkinson, C.S., et al.
internal medicine. Blackwell, Ames, IA, USA.
Focal meningeal aggregates of lymphocytes and
1995. Development of ocular hypertension in
Soulsby, E.J.L, 1986. Helminths, arthropods and
minimal cortical focal gliosis, are often observed
congenitally buphthalmic rabbits. Lab. Anim. Sci.
 protozoa of domesticated animals, seventh ed.
in the right brain and spinal cord of unhealthy
45, 443-444.
Bailliere Tindall, England.
rabbits. Similar aggregates have also been observed
Cruise, LJ., Brewer, N.R., 1994. Anatomy. In:
Weisbroth, S.H., 1975. Torsion of the caudate lobe of
in the optic nerve (Salamon et al 2007).
Manning, PJ., Ringler, D.H., Newcomer, C.E.,
the liver in the domestic rabbit (Oryctolagus]. Vet.
(Eds.], The biology of the laboratory rabbit, second
Pathol. 12, 13-15.
ed. Academic Press, pp. 47-61.
Weisbroth, S.H., Fox, R.R., Scher, S., et al., 1976.
Eye and ear
Garibaldi, B.A., Pecquet Goad, M.E., 1988. Lipid
Accessory spleens in domestic rabbits (Oryctolagus
keratopathy in the Watanabe rabbit. Vet. Path. 25,
sunicuus]. Il Increased frequency in hematological
Inherited buphthalmia or congenital glaucoma
173-174.
occurs in New Zealand White rabbits as an auto-
Greene, H.S.N., 1965. Lesions of the spontaneous
phenylhydrazine. Teratology 13, 253-262.
somal recessive trait. One or both eyes may be
diseases of the rabbit. In: Ribelin, W.E., McCoy, J.R.
Weisbroth, S.H., Mauer, J.K., Bennett, F.B., et al.,
affected (Burrows et al 1995). The globe is
(Eds.] Pathology of laboratory animals. Springheld,
1990. Hepatocellular vacuolization in rabbits: Effects
 enlarged due to increased intraocular pressure as
IL, pp. 330-350.
of feed restriction, orchidectomy and ovariectomy.
a result of the absence or underdevelopment of
Gupta, B.N., 1975. Duplication of the gall bladder in a
Toxicol. Pathol. 18, 56-60.
the aqueous humour
outflow channels
with
rabbit. Lab. Anim. Sci. 25, 646.
Wells, M.Y, Weisbrode, S.H., Maurer, J.K., et al.,
incomplete lavage of the iridocorneal angles
Haugh, PG., 1987. Hairballs in rabbits: alternative
 1988. Variable hepatocellular vacuolization
(Burrows et al 1995). This manifests in clinically
treatment. Can. Vet. J. 28, 280.
associated with glycogen in rabbits. Toxicol. Pathol.
normal rabbits as foci of inflammatory cells in the
16, 360-365.
Hinton, M., 1981. Kidney disease in the rabbit: a
cornea of the eye. Occasionally these lesions may
histological survey Lab. Anim. 15, 263-265.
Zwicker, G.M., Killinger, J.M., McConnell, R.F., 1985.
progress to conjunctivitis and panophthalmitis,
Spontaneous vesicular and prostatic gland epithelial
Hrapkiewicz, K., Medina, L., Holmes, D.D., 1998.
squamous metaplasia, hyperplasia and keratinised
with involvement of the nictitating membrane and
Clinical medicine of small mammals and primates,
nodule formation in rabbits. Toxicol. Pathol. 13,
eyelids.
second edn. Manson Publishing, London, UK.
222228.
CHAPTER 8
 Elizabeth F Mclnnes 
Artifacts in histopathology
Introduction
cardiac myocytes as well as separation of shrunken
eosinophilic fbres by a pink-staining amorphous
What one may see upon microscopic examination
material. The changes are considered to be arti-
of sections of animal tissues is not always related
factual and a result of barbiturate lysis (Darke
to the normal histology or pathology of the tissue
et al 1996). This change may, however, be con-
in question. Defects or abnormalities in tissue sec-
fused with severe degeneration or necrosis of the
tions may result from the faulty processing of the
cardiac myocytes. The absence of concomitant
tissue specimens. These defects are referred to as
inflammatory cells in the areas of eosinophilia
artifacts. Some artifacts are easily distinguished
militate against this diagnosis (Fig. 8.2). A similar
from normal or pathological tissue components,
lesion may be observed in the liver of monkeys
and some are diffcult to distinguish from such
euthanased with barbiturates. Here, the centri-
entities (McInnes 2005). This chapter will endeav-
lobular hepatocytes demonstrate dilatation of the
our to illustrate some of the many hundreds of
 sinusoids and rarefaction of the hepatocytes (Fig.
artifacts that are most frequently encountered in
8.3). Bone marrow biopsy before death under ter-
the preparation of microscopic tissue sections.
 minal anesthesia can result in bone marrow emboli
Artifacts are defined as being any structure or
lodging in the blood vessels of the lung (Fig. &.4).
HGURE 8.3 Dilatation of centrilobular sinusoids and rar-
feature that has been produced by the processing
efaction of hepatocytes in cynomolgus monkey liver after
 of a tissue or has been introduced artificially. Since
barbiturate injection. x100.
artifacts are generally produced at the different
stages, this chapter will follow the chronological
sequence that is routinely employed in the collec-
tion, fixation and processing of tissue specimens.
Each artifact will be described as well as its cause
or causes and methods for its prevention and/or
correction, if these exist. Artifacts occur at each
of the following stages in the processing of tissue
sections: before death, at postmortem or necropsy,
during the fxation, dehydration, learing, impre-
nation and embedding with paraffn wax and
microtomy of tissues and during the mounting of
tissue sections onto glass slides, during staining
procedures and cover slipping.
FIGURE 8.1 Hemorrhage and gliosis in optic nerve
caused by retro-orbital bleeding in the rat. x100.
Before death/ante mortem
HGURE 8.4 Bone marrow thrombus in dog lung caused
Several artifacts that are encountered in micro-
 by ante mortem bone marrow collction. x100.
scopic tissue sections are not the fault of histology
technicians but have, in fact, been caused by clini-
Postmortem/necropsy
cal procedures performed ante mortem or by ante
mortem environmental factors. Examples include
Numerous artifacts that are observed in micro-
the inclusion of suture material and carbon parti-
scopic tissue sections occur during the necropsy
cles into tissues (Thompson & Luna 1978) as well
procedure. Examples of such artifacts include
as thermal and chermical dehydration. Thermal
talcum powder inclusion, pressure effects, plant
dehydration results from tissues removed by
material, hair contaminants, bone fragment con-
cautery, which causes coagulation of proteins and
tamination and freezing artifacts (Thompson &
chemical dehydration results from the use of
Luna 1978). Talcum powder may become incor-
caustic chemicals to sterilize the surgical instru-
porated into the tissues at necropsy when powder
ments. Carbon particles result from the inhalation
contamination of the carcass occurs with the use
of dust and are ingested by alveolar macrophages
of powdered latex gloves (Thompson & Luna
within the lungs. The condition is called arthraco-
FIGURE 8.2 Barbiturate intracardiac injection causing
1978). Talcum powder is made up of starch and
pue aneud ueumu-uou gop u uouuon si pue sis
hydrous magnesium silicate. The powder appears
human lungs.
eosinophilia of cardiomyocytes. x100.
 as grey crystals in the processed tissues. Hair and
Although the hemorrhage and gliosis present
within the optic nerve, caused by retro-orbital
grass may contaminate tissues at necropsy and
may be observed in cross section in the processed
bleeding, represent a genuine pathological process,
slide (Fig. &.5). In addition, it is important to note
this lesion may still be considered to be an ante
that autolysis (which is an artifact in itself) will
mortem artifact because it occurs regularly and
start to occur within three minutes of death in the
can be confusing to an inexperienced pathologist
small intestine, resulting in the swelling of the
(Fig. &.1). In larger animals, euthanasia is generally
villus tips and epithelial denudation of a few villi
achieved with intravenous barbiturate injection.
(Pearson & Logan 1978)
Occasionally, the inability to find a suitable vein
results in intracardiac barbiturate injection in
order to cause rapid euthanasia. Barbiturate is
highly caustic and when injected into the cardiac
muscle it causes the intense eosinophilia of the
94
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATOR
brain. Such fragments of non-decalcifed bone are
tissue and produce shattering of softer tissue
extremely hard in cormparison with the surround-
(Thompson & Luna 1978). Suture material may
ing soft brain tissue. In addition to nicking the
also become embedded in tissues, and a similar
edge of the microtome knife, the bone fragments
effect is caused when suture material is pushed
are moved by the microtome knife-edge during
ahead of the microtome knife and causes shatter-
cutting and this causes shattering and distortion
ing of the tissue adjacent to the site of localization
of the tissue section (Thompson & Luna 1978).
(Thompson & Luna 1978).
HGURE 8.5 Plant material in brain tissue due to contami-
nation at necropsy. x100.
Tissues may be deliberately or accidentally
frozen after death. Freezing artifacts (Fig. 8.6) are
characterized by vacuolation and cracks caused by
formation of ice crystals intracellularly and extra-
cellularly due to freezing of the cadaver prior to
necropsy examination. The ice crystals melt when
FIGURE 8.7 Perivascular expansion resembling edema
HGURE 8.10 A fragment of hair incorporated into brain
the tissue is placed in fxative and this causes
in lung caused by perfusion of lung tissue with formalin.
tissue. x100.
cell rupture and the formation of spaces within
x100.
the interstitium (Thompson & Luna 1978). Softer
tissues containing greater amounts of fuid are
Fixation
more vulnerable to freezing artifacts than are
Fixation of tissue will always prove to be a com-
harder tissues such as smooth muscle (Thompson
prormise between the need to preserve the cellular
& Luna 1978). Freezing artifacts may also occur
detail of the cells and the technical constraints of
when tissues are frozen after placement into fixa-
tissue processing.
tive, usually when transported in freezing weather
 Many of the artifacts observed in microscopic
with inadequate insulation (Thompson & Luna
tissue sections are the result of incorrect fxation
1978).
procedures. Examples of fixation artifacts include
the use of an incorrect fixative for a particular
tissue specimen and the formation of acid forma-
lin hematin pigment. In addition, autolytic changes
due to specimen adherence to the inner surface
 of the fixative container or the use of inadequate
quantities of fixative may also occur. The practice
FIGURE 8.8 Pinch artifact caused by forceps handling of
of placing tissues in a container and then adding
the fixative often results in the adherence of the
lung tissue at necropsy. x100.
tissue to the sides of the container, with conse-
quent autolysis of the adherent surface of the
tissue. Thick tissue specimens, or insufficient time
spent in fixative, may result in a similar artifact
with a focal area of autolysis visible in the middle
of the tissue, generally pink (Fig. &.1l). Cracking
in the centre of tissues may occur due to inade-
HGURE 8.6 Cracks and open spaces produced in the
s anss a uaum uuy u uxy an
liver due to freezing of the tissue. x100.
processed, the central unfixed tissue is effectively
Perfusion of the lungs with buffered formalin
fxed with ethanol, and shrinks, and thus forms
more cracks than the peripheral formalin-fixed
at necropsy is an accepted technique to improve
the histology of the
tissue during subsequent processing (Fig. &.12).
pulmonary architecture
(Hausmann et al 2004, Braber et al 2010). This
may result in a lesion that resembles perivascular
edema (Fig. &.7). Failure to perfuse lung tissue at
necropsy results in collapse of the interstitial,
alveolar tissue and the lung may appear to dem-
FIGURE 8.9 Bone and skeletal muscle contamination of
onstrate pneumonia. Pressure exerted on tissues
brain tissue during brain removal. x100.
by forceps (Fig. &.8) at necropsy may result in
‘pinch' defects which do not resolve during
Tissue may become contaminated with frag-
processing (Thompson & Luna 1978). Such arti-
ments of the animal's hair (Fig. &.10) at the time
facts cannot be corrected during processing of the
of necropsy and prior to fixation. Such surface
tissue specimen; however, they may be prevented
 contaminants are often not remmoved by washing
by solicitous handling of fresh tissue specimens
the tissue specimens subsequent to fxation and
prior to fixation. Fragments of bone are inserted
prior to further processing, although this is the
 HGURE 8.11 Central areas of pink autolytic tissue in a
commonly deep into the brain tissue (Fig. 8.9),
only method of removal. In some cases, depending
liver specimen due to inadequate penetration of fixative.
due to carelessness on the part of the prosector,
on the orientation of the shaft of the hair, the
during the opening of the cranium to remove the
knife can push the hair or bone further into the
HGURE 8.14 Distortion of testicular tissue after fixation
in formalin. x100.
FIGURE 8.12 Cracking in centre of liver caused by inad-
FIGURE 8.13 Acid hematin, formalin pigment present in 
equate fixation. x100.
a blood vessel in the lung. x100.
Biopsy specimens are often not fixed for a suf-
Contaminants may also be embedded in the
fcient length of time. Fixation requires at least 48
wax block such as bone adjacent to the tissue and
hours and a change of fixative at 24 hours is rec-
may nick the knife during sectioning or cause the
ommended. Formalin penetrates tissues at a rate
 specimen to crumble and fall out of the paraffn
of 16 to 28 mm per 24 hours. If the tissues are
wax block as it is cut (Thompson & Luna 1978).
thicker than 6 mm, then longer fixation is recom-
Fixation in 10% buffered formalin for longer than
mended. The maximum thickness of a specimen
48 hours is not recommended if immunohisto-
should not exceed 6 rmm, and for each volume of
chemistry is to be performed on the tissues;
tissue, 20 volumes of fxative should be used
however, the success of various antibodies depends
(Thompson & Luna 1978). Saprophytic bacteria
largely on the ability of the histologist to retrieve
may occur in areas of autolysis. Slaoui & Fiette
antigen using citrate buffer and microwave tech-
(201l) review the precautions that should be
niques. Conventional fixing of liver in neutral
taken when fixing tissues in 10% neutral buffered
buffered 10% formalin causes the glycogen in
HGURE 8.15 Loss of cellular detail in bone which has
formalin. The saprophytic bacteria are basophilic
hepatocytes to migrate to one side of the cell
 been decalcified in formic acid for 14 days. x100.
 and are not accompanied by inflammatory cells
(Thompson & Luna 1978). Alcoholic formalin
when the tissue is examined under the micro-
fixatives give better and more consistent preserva-
scope. In addition, gas bubbles, due to the pres-
tion of the hepatic glycogen (Thompson & Luna
Processing
ence of clostridial bacteria, may also be observed
rog axy srauaz u paxy sass 6
in autolysed tissues.
greater than eight hours, demonstrate eosinophilia
The ability to cut thin sections from a tissue block
 Black, amorphous crystals may result from
and a loss of basophilia with indistinct nuclei
depends on the consistent hardness of the tissues.
fixing in mercuric chloride-formaldehyde (this
(Thompson & Luna 1978). In addition, crystalliza-
This is achieved by embedding the tissue in a
artifact is not very common today due to the toxic-
tion of erythrocytes may also be encountered with
paraffn wax block in the series of steps that
ity of mercuric chloride and its subsequent disuse).
the use of Zenker's fixative.
involve dehydration, clearing, impregnation and
The mercuric chloride artifact may be removed
Occasionally, tissues are 
：fixed in a fixative
embedding with paraffn wax. Some of the arti-
with iodine and sodium thiosulphate. Contamina-
which is not recommended for that particular
facts that result from the ineffcient processing of
tion of the specimen with rust (formed as a result
type of tissue. This may occur with testes, where
tissues include the presence of crystals of fixative
 of oxidation of the metal cap covering the formalin
fixation in modified Davidson's fixative is recom-
within the tissue due to imperfect removal of
container) is another artifact which may occur
mended over Bouin's fixative (Lanning et al 2002;
 processing fluids and shrinkage of bone marrow
in histopathological tissues (Thompson & Luna
Latendresse et al 2002] or over fixation in forma-
during processing and paraffin infltration. The net
1978)
lin (Fig. 8.14). Modifed Davidson's fixative is
effect of poor fixation and clearing in chloroform
Arid formalin hematin pigment is a dark
recommended over Bouin's fxative because the
Of xylene is excessive shrinkage of the tissue com-
brown, anisotropic, microcrystalline, iron-negative
morphological detail is good and there is minimal
ponents. Very little shrinkage will occur upon
pigment (Fig. 8.13). It is produced by the reaction
shrinkage of central tubules. Over-decalcification
clearing in chloroform and xylene if the tissue
of formic acid from unbuffered formalin with the
may occur if bone tissue is placed in formic acid
has been adequately fixed in formalin previously.
heme of hemoglobin at an acid pH, and it can be
for a long period of time (Fig. 8.15). No nuclear
 Problems with paraffin wax sectioning include wax
removed with a saturated alcoholic picric acid
or chromatin details are observed in the cells
that is too hard, which causes vibration marks and
solution or by fixation in phenol-formalin (Thomp-
because the decalcification in formic acid will
wax that is too soft, which causes compression of
son & Luna 1978j. This pigment results in a brown 
hydrolyse the nucleic acids in the cell. Slow freez-
the tissue and sections of varying thickness.
formalin pigment in, on, or around erythrocytes
ing of tissues (for immunohistochemistry) can
Artifacts occur either during the trimming of
within tissue sections. Consequently the pigment
result in shrinkage of tissue as well as unfrozen
the gross tissue specimen for processing or within
may be encountered in a wide variety of sites
areas, which appear as holes in the sections.
the tissue processor (Figs 8.16, 8.17). During
within tissue specimens because these sites may
macroscopic sectioning of the fixed, gross speci-
contain heme. In tissue sections, a black to brown,
mens prior to processing, care should be taken to
amorphous to microcrystalline pigment is observed
keep the surface of the cutting block free of tissue
particularly over blood vessels and it is often not
debris. If contamination occurs at this stage, the
in the plane of section. In the kidney, formalin
fragments of tissue debris should be in the same
 pigment tends to accumulate in glomeruli.
focal plane as the adjacent tissue. If the artifact is
not in the same focal plane as the surrounding
tissues, then it is logical to assume that the artifact
may have occurred during the flotation of the
tissue section in the water bath during the mount-
ing of the section (Thompson & Luna 1978).
Tissue specimens with detachable components
such as exposed, epithelium-lined surfaces should
96
 BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
be processed in separate biopsy bags and tissue
cassettes to avoid the problem of tissue detach-
ment. Tissue processors are used to carry fxed
tissue specimens automatically through the differ-
ent processing fluids. If an automatic processor is
improperly adjusted, or a power failure occurs,
the basket of cassettes may remain elevated, and
the tissue specimens may become dehydrated by
exposure to air. Inadequately-flled solution con-
tainers will produce a similar artifact which will
result in the tissue gaining a dry homogenous
appearance upon staining.
HGURE 8.20 Empty spaces caused in tissue due to
FIGURE 8.18 Pale areas in the white matter of the spinal
 cramming of tissue into the cassette before processing.
cord due to inadequate dehydration during processing.
x100.
x100.
 If a tissue is inadequately infltrated with paraffin
Cutting
wax during processing it will spread out rapidly
when floated on the water bath. This causes the
The rotary microtome is now the most popular
tissues (particularly the sclera of the eye) to
microtome used in histology today because it is
become pulled apart on the glass microscope slide.
 strong and can cut semi-thin and thin sections for
This is a common artifact in ophthalmic pathology.
light microscopy. Histologists are advised to cut
Inadequate paraffin wax infltration may occur as a
tissues ata steady rate as cutting too fast can cause
result of inadequate fixation, dehydration, clearing
loss of tissue in the block with resultant holes in
or insuffcient time in molten wax. Inadequate
the tissue section. The slow cutting of tissue sec-
HGURE 8.16 Bone marrow tissue incorporated into the
infltration with paraffin wax can also result in
tions results in tissue sections of varying thickness
brain during trimming resulting in an apparent inflamma-
wrinkles that run in all directions of the tissue.
 as the tissue can warm up and expand between
tory focus.x100.
 Utilization of a vacuum oven during paraffn infl-
cutting strokes. Vibration of the tissue specimen
tration, for diffcult tissues such as bone, will help
within a wax block results in an artifactthatresem-
to alleviate this problem (Thompson & Luna 1978).
bles a venetian blind, with compressed zones of
 Shrinkage of bone marrow in bone sections (Fig.
tissue separated by open spaces (chatter) (Fig.
8.19) is also caused by inadequate infltration of
8.21). This effect can also be produced by a loose
paraffn wax and cannot be prevented if paraffin-
 screw on the knife or chuck of the microtome.
embedding techniques are being used. Shrinkage
of bone marrow can be prevented by the use of
the time-consuming, colloidin-embedding tech-
nique. Boonstra and co-workers (1983) have dem-
onstrated that in, morphometric studies, a total
shrinkage of about 15% of the original dimensions
has to be taken into consideration. Examples of
apnu sampanod uppaqua xem uyeied Aane
entrapped air around specimens and multiple
embedding of tissues of varied consistencies. Air
may be trapped around the specimen within the
HGURE 8.17 Pieces of small intestinal tissues appear
paraffn wax block. This allows the tissue to fall
adjacent to the brain due to incorporation during trimming
out or to vibrate during the cutting procedure.
or processing. x100.
Cramming of tissue into a cassette before process-
ing results in empty spaces in the tissue section
Inadequate dehydration occurs during tissue
(Fig. 8.20).
HGURE 8.21 Vibration artifact in ymphoma tissue
processing when the water is removed from the
caused by vibration of the blade when sectioning. x100.
specimen prior to paraffin wax infltration. Water
will remain trapped within the tissue if the tissue
 Knife artifacts include chatter and compression
is inadequately dehydrated. The reasons for poor
caused by a dull blade, nicks in the blade edge
dehydration include failure to cover the processing
which cause splits and nicks in the tissue section
solutions and failure to change the processing
(Fig. 8.22), incorrect clearance angle of the knife
solutions frequently. The alcohols used in pro-
which causes sections to stick to the block and
cessing lose their effectiveness as dehydrating
to roll up and to be of varying thickness. A loose
agents as they become diluted by moisture from
blade in a holder causes chatter marks in the tissue
the atmosphere and tissues. In the stained section,
section and debris on the knife edge causes tissue
inadequately dehydrated tissue will be partially
sections to stick to the block. Incorrect orienta-
unstained (Fig. 8.18). In this situation, the tissue
tion of the tissue in the block causes incomplete
block may be melted down and the tissue may be
sections with missing areas. Hard, calcified mate-
reprocessed in the case of a valuable specimen.
rial in the paraffin wax causes slits and nicks in the
tissue section.
FIGURE 8.19 Shrinkage of bone marrow due to formalin
fixation. x100.
97
components, such as arteries, are pushed ahead as
they are cut and compress the adjacent paren-
chyma. A dull or blunt knife results in numerous
compression artifacts, streaks and cracks, which
are parallel to the blunt edge of the microtome
knife and which can render the tissue inadequate
for microscopic examination. Epithelial cells are
frequently rubbed offrom the technician's fngers
during microtomy or are shed on the knife surface
or unmounted slide as dandruff. These epithelial
cells are then stained and become part of the
microscope slide. The cells are highly eosinophilic
and have large nuclei and resemble skin epidermal
cells. Splitting and disruption of lens fibres in the
eye is a common artifact when sectioning eyes
HGURE 8.22 Scoring of tissue due to nick in the knife's
(Fig. 8.24). The solution is to soften the lens in
HGURE 8.25 The presence of fungi on a kidney tissue
cutting surface. x100.
the wax block with a softening agent.
section due to a contaminated water bath. Note the fact
that no inflammatory cells are present. x100.
The causes of wrinkles in the tissue include a
dull knife or inadequate infltration of the tissue
with embedding medium. In addition, wrinkles
may also be caused by different tissue compo-
nents within the paraffin wax block expanding at
different rates within the hot water bath. Traces
of processing or clearing fluids in the embedded
block of tissue may result in a variety of defects
in tissue sections. These residues are hydrophilic;
however, the tissue section, when placed in the
water bath, is confined by the presence of hydro-
phobic wax. The net result is that the tissue
section becomes wrinkled, and it retains these
wrinkles, even after being flattened in the water
bath or on the microscope slide. These wrinkles 
FIGURE 8.24 Cracks in lens fibre material in the eye
usually extend the length of the section and stain
which occur during sectioning. x100.
more intensely because the stain has access to
HGURE 8.26 Incorporation of liver tissue into lung due to
both tissue surfaces of the wrinkle. This problem
a contaminated water bath. x100.
cannot be corrected, and the discarding of the
Mounting onto glass slides
poorly processed wax blocks is recommended
Staining
(Thompson & Luna 1978). Folds and wrinkles,
Examples of artifacts which occur during mount-
due to thin sections that become folded as
ing of the paraffin wax ribbons of tissue onto the
Unstained tissues are clear and transparent and
they are being cut, often cannot be completely
glass slide, include failure to remove tissue debris
 no cellular detail is visible under the microscope.
smoothed out. In addition, wrinkles may occur if
from the tissue flotation water bath, contamina-
 The commonly-used stain hematoxylin and eosin
the termperature of the water bath is too hot or
tion of the water bath with fungi (Fig. &.25)
(H&E) allows nuclear and cytoplasmic detail to be
too cold: the tissue will not spread out adequately
wrinkling of tissue sections, air bubbles beneath
visualized under the microscope and most tissue
(cold) or will spread out excessively (hot) and will
tissue sections and improper drying of mounted
sections are thus stained with hematoxylin and
produce cracks (Fig. 8.23). Contamination of the
tissue sections. Contaminants such as fungi may
eosin. Residual paraffn wax will occur in a tissue
cutting edge of the microtome knife with pig-
be present in the water bath or may have been on
when the deparaffinization in xylene has not been 
ments or bacteria taken from one block and placed
the glasslide before mounting due to inadequate
complete and the xylene has become saturated.
onto another tissue, may occur if the knife edge
storage of the glass slides. Every effort should be
Alcohol and water droplets may be retained
is not cleaned regularly.
made to eliminate water bath contarminants such
within the tissue section on the slide after rehy-
as bacteria and fungi because they may be con-
dration through graded alcohols to water. These
fused with pathological bacteria or fungi within
bubble artifacts obscure the morphological details
the tissue. In addition to the fungal and bacterial
of the underlying tissue sections.
contaminants, a dirty water bath may also contain
Examples of staining artifacts include faulty
remnants of previous tissues, which may become
clearing techniques resulting in inadequate stain-
incorporated into the present tissue section such
ing and stain deposits. Alum hematoxylin oxidizes
as the liver tissue present within the lung (Fig.
during use and sections stained at the end of the
8.26). As the tissue sections are flattened in the
week may be paler than those stained at the start
water bath, a bubble of air may become trapped
of the week. When a staining dish containing
beneath them. If the bubble is not removed, it
a working solution of hematoxylin is allowed to
breaks and the overlying tissue is shattered
 stand at room temperature for long periods of
(Thompson & Luna 1978). The tissue overlying
 time, a metallic-appearing scum accumulates on
the bubble will stain more intensely because the
the surface of the solution. This scum consists of
stain has access to both surfaces of the tissue at
 cxidized mordant (used to increase the stability
the site of the bubble.
of the stain] and hematein, and this may contami-
HGURE 8.23 Cracks in ymphoma tissue due to exces-
nate tissue sections that are stained in the old dye
sive heat of water bath. x100.
solution. Eosin flakes, seen above the focal plane
of the tissue section, are precipitated dye derived
If the microtome knife is set at too acute an
from an unfltered stock solution. Eosin stain
angle, the knife compresses the tissue specimen
deposit and eggs from an unknown organism in
as it is being cut.
. The compression tends to
the bronchiole of the lung may be seen in Fig.
occur at normal points of weakness. The frm
8.27. The use of either hard or soft water for
98
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATOR
differentiation during the staining process will
putative injury. This includes vascular endothelial
have a marked effect on the appearance of the
swelling, the infltration of neutrophils into areas
stained slides. Occasionally splashes of acid onto
of degeneration and the presence of macrophages
stained tissues [without a cover slip), will result
within myelin digestion chambers (Summers et al
in pale areas scattered throughout the tissue (Fig.
1995)
8.28).
Postmortem myelin vacuolation is a common
artifact observed in the CNS. It generally produces
widespread, uniform, fine, vacuolation ofthe tissue
(Wells & Wells 1989). Prolonged holding of fxed
CNS tissue in 70% alcohol within an enclosed-
system automatic tissue processor (which may
happen over a weekend) may produce vacuolation
of the white matter (Fig. &.32). The effect is con-
sistently reproduced in calf brains but not in pig
brains, suggesting a possible species difference in
FIGURE 8.29 Pollen deposited onto the surface of a
tissue susceptibility (Wells & Wells 1989).
In
tissue section before cover slipping. x100.
addition, the degree of vacuolation depends on
undetermined processor factors additional to pro-
longed immersion in 70% alcohol (Wells & Wells
1989). The artifact resembles forms of intra-
myelinic edema and can be avoided by holding
tissue in primary fixative (Wells & Wells 1989).
HGURE 8.27 Deposition of an eosin flake during staining
and deposition of unidentified eggs and lint in bronchiole 
of lung tissue. x100.
AGURE 8.30 Lint fibre deposited on the surface of the
spleen before cover slipping. x100.
HGURE 8.32 Vacuolation of the white matter of the cer-
ebrum as a result of a suspected extended period in
HGURE 8.28 Pale area within stained tissue caused by
alcohol during processing. x100.
acid splashing of the tissue before cover slipping. x100.
Retraction spaces around capillaries and scat-
Artifacts may also occur during the immunohis-
tered oligodendrocytes are artifacts associated
tochemmistry process these include bubbles drying
with CNS tissue which is not perfusion-fixed and
out of tissue at the edges and blunt-blade artifacts
e p a uaq u a 
caused by a dull knife during the cryostat section-
necropsy (Garman 1990). Cerebellar, cortical,
Purkinje cells (Fig. 8.33) often appear ischemic
ing of frozen tissues.
(i.e. deeply eosinophilic and shrunken); however,
Cover slipping
FIGURE 8.31 A trapped mite deposited on the surface of
in most cases this is an artifact. If the lesion were
adipose tissue before cover slipping. x200.
genuine, the Purkinje cells would be condensed,
Cover slipping of slides with the use of a mount-
elongated and deeply eosinophilic, and the nucleus
ant is recommended to prevent the tissue from
would be pyknotic. Mucocytes (Buscaino bodies)
Artifacts in the central
drying out, to prevent surface damage to the
are a rare artifact in the white matter thatresemble
tissue, to allow long-term storage of tissues and to
pale, blue to grey, amorphous bodies. Mucocytes
nervous system (CNS) and
are PAS-positive and metachromatic and appear
improve the transparency of the tissue. Examples
to arise from the solubilization and subsequent
of cover slipping artifacts include contamination
special senses
of the slides with pollen grains (Fig. 8.29), spores,
precipitation by the fixative of some component
egs, dust, dirt, cotton fbres, contamination of
The central nervous system (CNS) is susceptible
of myelin (Garman 1990, Summmers et al 1995).
to some artifacts that affect all tissues, but it also
Excessive handling of the brain at necropsy pro-
the mounting medium, use of cover slips that are
too small, faulty positioning of the cover slip,
has artifacts that affect only the CNS. Garman
duces artifactual, dark-staining, basophilic neurons
insufficient mountant, which leads to drying back,
(2003) and Fix & Garman (2000) have described
(Fix & Garman 2000, Garman 2006, Summers
entrapment of air during the cover slipping and
different techniques that may be used to produce
et al 1995). These neurons may appear to be
the use of too much mounting medium. Lint fbres
optimal sections of central nervous system tissue.
ischemic, butthey are found in mostareas [whereas
and other debris can be deposited on stained sec-
Artifactual alterations to the grey matter may look
ischemic neurons generally occur at the base of the
tions at the time of cover slipping and the lint of
similar to the effects of trauma and hypoxia and
sulci). Autolysis of the ratlens produces artifactual
linen fibres may be mistaken for a nematode (Fig.
the vacuolar changes seen in myelin may appear
change similar to cataract formation in the eye (Fig.
8.30]. A trapped mite, present on the surface of
similar to myelin edema or Wallerian degenera-
8.34). Many of the above artifacts may be avoided
tion. The most useful action, when examining a
adipose tissue, is illustrated in Fig. 8.31.
by perfusion fixation (Summers et al 1995) fol-
CNS lesion under the microscope, to determine
lowed by a delay of several hours before the brain
whether the change is an artifact or a genuine
is removed from the cranial vault (Garman 2003).
lesion, is to look for evidence of response to
Artifacts in histopathology
66
Acknowledgments
neurotoxicologic evaluation. Neurotoxicology 27 (6],
1126
The fgures and small excerpts of the text from
Hausmann, R., Bock, H., Biermann, T, et al, 2004.
this chapter have been published with kind per-
Influence of lung fxation technique on the state of
mission from Springer Science+Business Media:
Leg. Med. (Tokyo] 6, 61-65.
Comparative
Clinical Pathology, Artefacts
in
histopathology, 13, 2005, 100-108, Elizabeth F
Lanning, L.L., Creasy, D.M., Chapin, R.E., et al., 2002.
McInnes.
 Recommended approaches for the evaluation of
testicular and epididymal toxicity. Toxicol. Pathol.
30, 507-520.
References
Latendresse, J.R., Warbrittion, A.R., Janssen, H., et al.,
2002. Fixation of testes and eyes using a modifed
Braber, S., Verheijden, K.A., Henricks, PA., et al.,
Davidson's fluid: comparison with Bouin's fluid and
 2010. A comparison of fxation methods on lung
 conventional Davidson's fluid. Toxicol. Pathol. 30,
morphology in a murine model of emphysema. Am J
524-533.
Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 299, L843-851.
Mclnnes, E.F., 2005. Artefacts in histopathology.
HGURE 8.33 Eosinophilic Purkinje cells in the cerebel-
Boonstra, H., Oosterhuis, J.W., Oosterhuis, A.M.,
Comp. Clin. Pathol. 13, 100-108.
lum. x100.
et al., 1983. Cervical tissue shrinkage by
Pearson, G.R., Logan, E.F., 1978. The rate of
formaldehyde fxation, paraffn wax embedding.
 development of postmortem artefact in the small
section cutting and mounting. Virchows Arch. A.
intestine of neonatal calves. Br. J. Exp. Pathol. 59,
Pathol. Anat. Histopathol. 402 (2], 195-201.
178-182.
Darke, PG.G., Donagura, J.D., Kelly, D.F., 1996.
Slaoui, M., Fiette, L., 201l. Histopathology
Color atlas of veterinary cardiology. Mosby, St Louis.
procedures: from tissue sampling to histopathological
Fix, A.S., Garman, R.H., 2000. Practical aspects of
evaluation. Methods Mol Bioi 691, 69-82.
neuropathology: a technical guide for working with
Summers, B.A., Cummings, J.F., De Lahunta, A.
the nervous system. Toxicol. Pathol. 28, 122-131.
1995. Veterinary neuropathology. Mosby Year Book,
Garman, R.H., 1990. Artifacts in routinely immersion
pp. 34-35.
fxed nervous tissue. Toxicol. Pathol. 18 (1 pt 2],
Thompson, S.W., Luna L.G., 1978. An atlas of artifacts
149-153.
 encountered in the preparation of microscopic tissue
Garman, R.H., 2003. Evaluation of large-sized brains
sections. Charles Louis Davis DVM Foundation,
for neurotoxic endpoints. Toxicol. Pathol. 31,
Springheld, IL.
32-43.
Wells, G.A., Wells, M., 1989. Neuropil vacuolation in 
Garman, R.H., 2006. The return of the dark neuron.
brain: a reproducible histological processing artefact.
 A histological artifact complicating contemporary
J. Comp. Pathol. 101 (4), 355-362.
HGURE 8.34 Autolysis of the rat lens appears similar to
cataract formation. x200.
CHAPTER
Dianne Creasy
Reproduction of the rat, mouse, dog, non-human primate and minipig
Introduction
detailed characteristics of the different cell types,
another. This gives rise to the concept of stages
the kinetics of the process, and the regulatory
of the spermatogenic cycle, where each stage
The reproductive system has been assigned a sepa-
pathways vary slightly.
can be identified by the precise morphological
rate chapter for a number ofreasons. Most ofthese
The different types of germ cell (spermatogo-
characteristics of the individual germ cells from
reasons relate to the significant rmorphological vari-
nia, spermatocytes and spermatids) are arranged
the four synchronously developing generations.
ability that is seen in the reproductive organs of
in a very regular, layered pattern within the sem-
The detailed description of the cell associations
 all species as a result of normal physiological altera-
iniferous tubules (Figs 9.1, 9.2). They are sup-
is beyond the scope of this chapter but is com-
tions: for example, changes associated with estrus
ported both structurally and metabolically by the
prehensively_ covered in a number of reviews
or menstrual cyclicity in the female reproductive
somatic Sertoli cell, which entirely surrounds each
(Creasy 1997, Creasy & Foster 2002, Russell et al
tissues, changes associated with sexual maturation
germ cell with cytoplasmic processes not readily
i990j. It is important that the toxicological
and reproductive senescence in both sexes, regres-
visible by light microscopy. The true extent of the
pathologist be familiar with the concept of the
sion and recrudescence of reproductive tissues in
 Sertoli cell becomes more apparent when germ
spermatogenic cycle and the different appear-
seasonal breeding animals such as the hamster and
cells are lost from the tubule, leaving only Sertoli
ances of tubules, at least at the beginning, middle
the rhesus monkey. It is essential that the patholo-
cells lining the tubules (Fig. 9.4).
and end of the cycle (Figs 9.1, 9.2) (Foley 2001).
gist is familiar with these normal variations in
morphology so that these findings are not mistaken
Rat and mouse
for pathological changes and so thatthe true range
of 'normal' is appreciated.
Immaturity, peripuberty, maturity
 In addition to physiological endocrine-mediated
changes, the reproductive tissues show a range of
Rats start releasing sperm from the testis at about
-sas ss s  ed i
six to seven weeks of age, but sperm output does
Elongating sperimatid
specific, but more often similar across species. The
spermatle
notreach its full potential until about l0-ll weeks
Pachytene 
 chapter is divided into separate sections on the
of age [for review see Marty et al 2003). The frst
male and femalereproductive background changes,
spermatocyte
cycle of spermatogenesis is relatively ineffcient,
and the most common species (rat, mouse, dog.
with reduced numbers of maturation-phase sper-
non-human primate and minipig) are covered in
matids and numerous degenerating germ cells
Spermatogonium
each section.
(multinucleate and apoptotic cells) in the seminif-
erous tubules. The cauda epididymis is only par-
REPRODUCTION: MALE
 Sertoli cell
tially expanded and contains variable numbers of
sperm as well as cell debris and degenerating
FIGURE 9.1 Rat seminiferous tubule stage V. Tubules in
soughed germ cels from the testes (Fig. 9.3a &
Male reproductive tract
the first half of the cycle (stages -vll) contain four layers 
b). Not all rats will mature at the same rate, and
of germ cells. There are two generations of spermatids
 Recognizing normal
so the appearance can easily be mistaken for tes-
(round and elongating spermatids) and only one genera-
ticular toxicity, especially if the test-article-treated
spermatogenesis in the testis
tion of spermatocytes (pachytene spermatocytes). There
animals are slightly less sexually mature due to
is a basal layer of spermatogonia interspersed by Sertoli
decreased food intake or decreased body weight.
In the male animal, recognizing the different cel-
cell nuclei. x200.
lular associations that make up the spermatogenic
afse-
cycle within seminiferous tubules is essential to
be able to identify when cell populations are
missing or, in the case of spermatid retention,
when they are inappropriately present. An addi-
Pachytene
 Elongating
tional challenge in the male animal is the problem
/spermatocyte
spermatid
of recognizing immaturity and distinguishing it
from degenerative conditions. This is a particular
problem in the dog and non-human primate.
Prepachytene
Spermatogenesis staging is aided by the use
of the correct fixative to preserve the testes
(Latendresse et al 2002, Lanning et al 2002).
 Spermatogenesis is essentially the same in all
mammalian species. It consists of continuous
division and maturation of precursor stem cells
 Sertoli cell
(spermatogonia), which then enter meiosis (sper-
HGURE 9.3a Epididymis from a peripubertal eight-week-
matocytes) where they undergo DNA replication
FIGURE 9.2 Rat seminiferous tubule stage Xll. Tubules in
old rat. The initial segment and caput epididymis are
and reduction division to form the haploid germ
the second half of the cycle (stages K-xiv) also contain
 expanded and flled with sperm. x100.
cells (spermatids). These cells undergo a complex
four layers of germ cells. There is only one generation of
morphogenesis, changing 
g from normal appearing
spermatids (elongating spermatids) but there are two
cells (round spermatids) to thin whip-like cells
generations of spermatocytes (pachytene and prepach-
(elongating spermatids) that possess a head, body
ytene). There is also a layer of spermatogonia inter-
and tail. The mature spermatid is released from
spersed by Sertoli cell nuclei. x200.
the seminiferous epithelium (spermiation} and
transported in seminiferous tubule fluid to the
The germ cells proceed through spermatogen-
collecting reservoir of the rete testis and on into
esis in a highly controlled manner, and in any given
the epididymis via the efferent ducts. The overall
tubule there are always four generations of germ
process is the same between species, but the
cells developing in complete synchrony with one
102
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY
HGURE 9.3b Epididymis from a peripubertal eight-week-
 FIGURE 9.4 0ccasional (1 -5) atrophic tubules, lined only
HGURE 9.6a Diffuse tubular atrophy in the rat. Seminif-
old rat. The ducts of the distal corpus and cauda epidi-
by Sertoli cells, are commonly seen as a background
erous tubules lined only by Sertoli cels with all germ cells
dymis are still contracted and contain few sperm and cell 
finding in rat testes. The finding probably represents a
missing. This can often be seen as a unilateral or bilateral
debris. x40.
loss of germ cells from a short segment of one convoluted 
lesion and may be present in young rats and mice. The
seminiferous tubule. x100.
tubules may have a dilated tubular lumen and be sur-
Puberty occurs earlier in the mouse, with sperm
 rounded by interstitial edema. x100.
being present in the epididymis at approximately
five weeks of age. As with the rat, degenerating
 germ cells and low epididymal sperm numbers
accompanied by cell debris will be present until
spermatogenesis reaches full effciency at around
eight to nine weeks of age.
Congenital or developmental lesions
Absence or incomplete development of the testis
(aplasia or hypoplasia) is occasionally seen but is
relatively uncommon. Hypoplasia is characterized
by a small testis containing reduced numbers of
seminiferous tubules. Cryptorchidism, caused by
delayed descent of the testis into the scrotal sac,
is occasionally seen and results in tubular degen-
AGURE 9.5 Rete testis (rat lined by cuboidal epithelium 
 eration and atrophy. This is often difficult to iden-
with a transitional tubule (tubulus rectus) emptying into
HGURE 9.6b Diffuse tubular atrophy in the rat. The
tify at necropsy because rodents can readily
it. It is common to see tubules lined only by Sertoli cells
tubules may be contracted with luminal closure (b). This
retract the testes into the abdorminal cavity. His-
(*) close to the rete testis. These are normal profiles of
can also be seen as an end-stage, chemically induced
tologically, the cryptorchid testis displays seminif.
the tubuli recti and should not be mistaken for atrophic
lesion (unilateral or bilateral) and so it is important to
erous tubular atrophy and the tubules are lined
tubules. They can often be seen in a subcapsular position
know the historical background incidence of this finding 
 solely by Sertoli cells with few spermatogonia.
somewhat distant from the visible rete because the
in the appropriate strain of mouse or rat. x100.
finger-like projections of the rete testis radiate some dis-
Lesions seen in
tance from the main sac. x100.
Other findings that can occasionally be seen
 young animals: testes
More extensive tubular atrophy, often involving
include tubular dilatation (unilateral or bilateral)
In general, the incidence of background degenera-
(Fig. 9.7) which may be associated with a dilated
complete loss of all germ cells from all tubules in
rete.
Tubular degeneration characterized by
tive findings in rodent testes is low, making them
ome or both testes, can sometimes be seen as a
a very sensitive species for detecting sperma-
varying numbers of degenerating germ cells,
background fnding in young adult rats (Fig. 9.6a).
togenic abnormalities.
including multinucleate giant cells and/or disor-
If the atrophy has been present for more than a
 ganization of germ cell layers, is sometimes seen
few weeks the corresponding epididymis will
Tubular degeneration/atrophy
as a bilateral background finding (Fig. 9.8).
probably be depleted of sperm and/or germ cells.
Occasional tubules (five tubular profles/testis)
This can be a useful indication of whether the
with partial or complete depletion of germ cells is
pue 'reis Apnis ot xod gusixa-ard sem Audone
a common finding in young adult rats (Fig. 9.4).
therefore a background change. Moderate
to
Tubuli recti, which are the transitional tubules
severe tubular atrophy is often accompanied by
that connect the seminiferous tubules with the
rete testis, should not be mistaken for atrophic
edema) (Fig. 9.6b). Care should be taken when
tubules. Tubuli recti are generally seen immedi-
using this diagnosis because fluid accumulation
ately adjacent to the main rete testis lurmen that
can occur as a fxation artifact, particularly in
is situated at the cranial pole of the testis (Fig.
Bouins-fixed testes (Fig. 9.6b).
9.5). The tubuli may also be present in a more
lateral subcapsular position, because fingerlike
extensions of the rete radiate out from the main
sac-like structure.
103
AGURE 9.7 Unilateral or bilateral tubular luminal dilata-
AGURE 9.9 Mice testes occasionally contain abnormal-
 HGURE 9.11 Epithelial cystic vacuolation (rat), some-
tion is occasionally seen in young adult rats. The affected
appearing residual bodies (arrowed) as a background
times referred to as cribriform change or pseudo-gland
testis or testes are enlarged and generally show increased 
lesion. They are larger than normal residual bodies and
 formation, is often seen at the junction between the distal 
weight. The lesion may be associated with a dilated rete
 dften occur in tubular stages not normally associated with
 corpus and cauda epididymis. x100.
and likely reflects fluid build-up due to obstruction of the
residual body formation. They may also be increased as
efferent ducts. The lesion generally progresses rapidly to
 a chemically-induced lesion. x200.
 complete tubular atrophy (as in FGURE 9.6a) due to pres-
Age-related lesions:
sure atrophy, but the tubular lumina often remain dilated.
testes and epididymides
Lesions seen in young
x100.
animals: epididymides
Increased germ cell degeneration or increased
numbers of tubules with germ cell depletion
In the rat and mouse epididymis, sperm is nor-
occur in the testis with increasing age, but gener-
mally present and abundant from the initial
ally spermatogenesis remains relatively effcient
sgment through to the cauda. In the adult rat,
throughout the entire life of the rat and mouse.
there are generally negligible numbers of sloughed
Minimal, diffuse hyperplasia may accompany the
germ cells mixed in with the sperm and so the
decline in spermatogenesis as a secondary hormo-
presence of sloughed cells or debris in the epidi-
nal response.
dymis (particularly in the head) is a very sensitive
The most common age-related testicular fnd-
indicator of testicular injury. Sloughed germ cells
ings include degenerative and inflammatory lesions
are slightly more frequent in the mouse. Sperma-
of the vasculature, including fbrinoid necrosis,
 togenic disturbances in the testes will generally be
hypertrophy and inflammation of the vascular wall
reflected by decreased sperm and cell debris in
 as part of the more generalized condition of pol.
the epididymis.
yarteritis nodosa (Fig. 9.12a). Lymphoid aggre-
 Sperm granulomas are one of the most common
gates within the interstitium of the rat epididymis
Aeu AauL sapuApipidaietBunoa u uaas saauey
are common (Fig. 9.12b). The testis is also a
be unilateral or bilateral and can occur anywhere
common site for deposition of amyloid in systemic
HGURE 9.8 Tubular degeneration (rat) can be seen as an
 in the epididymis, but are more commonly noted
amyloidosis of the aging mouse (Fig. 9.13). Focal
incidental background finding in young rats and mice. It 
in the cauda (Fig. 9.10). Occasional lymphoid
proliferative changes in the Leydig cell population
is generally bilateral, and varying numbers of germ cells 
aggregates in the interstitium of the epididymis are
(hyperplasia and tumors) (Fig. 9.14) are very
may show degeneration. The germ cells may form multi-
a common finding, but are generally few in number.
common in the F344 rat, and are also present at
nucleate or syncytial bodies due to coalescence of germ
a lower incidence in other strains of rats and mice.
cells that are normally joined by cytoplasmic bridges.
Another common proliferative lesion in the mouse
Round spermatids often develop chromatin margination
testis is hyperplasia of the rete epithelium (Fig.
of their nuclei as they degenerate. The degenerate cells
9.15). Lipofuscin pigmentation is associated with
are either sloughed into the lumen or phagocytozed by
aging and is observed in the interstitial macro-
the Sertolicells. As more cells die, the regular layering of
phages and Leydig cells.
the germ cell layers is lost. x200.
Abnormal residual bodies (Fig. 9.9) are most
-r are pue asnn a u uaa u
ized by the presence of abnormally large and
dense residual bodies that are usually located on
the luminal surface of the germinal epithelium in
tubules at various stages of the spermatogenic
cycle. In contrast, normal residual bodies are
an ie juasaid aq Aiuo pinous pue rales qnn
lumminal surface of stage VIl-IX tubules, follow-
 FIGURE 9.10 Epididymal sperm granuloma is a common
ing which they rapidly descend to the basal region 
background finding in young adult rats. The lesion repre-
 of stage X-XI tubules where they are phagocy-
 sents a granulomatous response to sperm (which are
tosed. Abnormal residual bodies are often seen in
antigenically foreign) that have ruptured through the
tubules in other stages of the cycle.
epididymal epithelial lining. Sperm granulomas are more 
common in the cauda than the caput epididymis. x100.
AGURE 9.12a Fibrinoid necrosis of arteriolar walls and
Cribriform change, characterized by intra-
periarteritis in the nterstitial vasculature of the testis of
epithelial microcysts, is a common finding at the
an aging rat. x100.
junction of the corpus/cauda (Fig. 9.11).
04
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN L
AGURE 9.12b Lymphoid aggregates within in the inter-
FIGURE 9.15 Hyperplasia of the rete epithelium in the 
 HGURE 9.17a Purulent inflammation with regenerative
stitium of the rat epididymis are common. x100.
mouse. The normal low cuboidal epithelium has been
epithelialhyperplasiaof the ventral prostate in an aging
replaced by a tall columnar hyperplastic epithelium.
rat with a urogenital infection. x100.
x100.
In the aging rat, the segment of the epididymis
at the junction between the caput and corpus
commonly develops a foamy, basophilic vacuola-
tion within the epithelium (Fig. 9.16). This prob-
ably represents the normal glycoprotein secretory
rat. If the cystic rete testis is filled with sperma-
tozoa, the lesion is referred to as a spermatocoele.
Spermatocoeles are also common at the junction
between the epididymis and vas deferens.
FIGURE 9.13 Amyloid deposition in the nterstitial com-
partment of a mouse testis. The testis is a common site
HGURE 9.17b Epithelial hyperplasia in the acinus of the
for amyloidosis. x100.
rat prostate. ×200.
FIGURE 9.16 Basophilic vacuolation is a common age-
related change in the epididymal epithelium of rats. t only
occurs in one region of the epididymis that is at the junc-
tion of the caput and corpus. x200.
FIGURE 9.14 Focal Leydig cell hyperplasia and Leydig
Age-related lesions: accessory sex
AGURE 9.18 Chronic inflammation of the rat preputial
cell tumors are very common in some strains of rat
gland. x100.
 organs and penis
(F344), but are also seen at a low incidence in other
strains of rats and mice. x100.
Urogenital infections affecting the penis, prepu-
In the accessory sex organs, common age-
tial glands, prostate,
, coagulating glands and
related lesions include distension of the seminal
seminal vesicles are common in aging rodents, par-
vesicles with degradation of the seminal fluid (Fig.
ticularly in mice (Suwa et al 200l). Acute or
9.19) or contraction of the vesicles with atrophy
chronic active inflammation with abscess forma-
 of the epithelium. The prostate also shows pro-
tion (Figs 9.17a, 9.18) may be present throughout
gressive acinar atrophy and mineralized concre-
the genital tract (Fig. 9.17a). Focal epithelial
tions in the acinar lumina (Fig. 9.20). Cystic
hyperplasia is observed in the aging rat prostate 
dilatation of the preputial gland ducts with secre-
(Fig. 9.17b).
tion or cystic atrophy of the acini are common
fndings in both rats and mice (Figs 9.21, 9.22).
Simmilar cystic dilation can also be seen in the
bulbourethral gland (Fig. 9.23).
105
HGURE 9.19 Grossly distended seminal vesicle of a
FIGURE 9.23 Cystic dilatation of the bulbourethral gland 
HGURE 9.24 Totally quiescent testis from a dog,
mouse with degradation of the secretory product. x100.
of a rat, which is expanded with secretion. x200.
five to six months of age. Tubules are lined by Sertoli cells
interspersed with occasional gonocytes. There is no
 lumen within the tubules because fluid is not yet being
Dog
secreted. x100.
are sansan bop aleag ul saueuo poaroeg
common and may obfuscate chemically-induced
toxicity. Spermatogenesis in the dog appears to
be much less effcient than that in the rodent or 
non-human primate and seminiferous tubules fre-
quently show incomplete spermatogenesis (hypo-
spermatogenesis). One of the greatest problems
identifying chemically-induced toxicity is caused
by using dogs that are still sexually immature or
peripubertal at the time of examination. It is
therefore important that the pathologist under-
stands the characteristics of irmmature, peripuber-
HGURE 9.20 Mineralized concretions and progressive
tal and mature reproductive tissues so that the
acinar atrophy of the prostate are common age-related 
degenerative changes that characterize this period
findings in the rat. x100.
of morphological development are not mistaken
for toxicologically-induced disruption of sperma-
togenesis. The normal appearance of sperma-
HGURE 9.25 Testis from a dog, five to six months old,
togenesis in the dog testis and the cell associations
where the Sertoli cells are just beginning to secrete fluid
of the stages of the spermatogenic cycle have
which is forming vacuoles within the Sertolicell lining and
been described in detail by Russell and coworkers
 producing a lumen in the gradually expanding tubules.
(1990].
The gonocytes are proliferating to form spermatogonia,
some of which are apoptotic. x100.
Immaturity, peripuberty, maturity
Dogs mature over a relatively wide age range
(seven to twelve months of age), with most reach-
ing sexual maturity by ten months of age.The age
of sexual maturity is also influenced by the sup-
plier. Dorso and coworkers (2008) reported that
90% of dogs 31-40 weeks of age supplied by
Harlan, France, were sexually mature cormpared
HGURE 9.21 Rat preputial gland with cystic dilatation of
with only 10% of dogs of the same age supplied
the duct with secretion. This often results in gross
by Marshall Farms, USA. Dogs less than ten
enlargement of the gland. x100.
months of age usually show a range of degenera-
tive morphologies reflecting ongoing maturation.
Dogs on the borderline of maturity will have
varying numbers of degenerating, missing and
sloughed germ cells in the testis and the epididy-
mal lumina and some tubules may be vacuolated,
 HGURE 9.26 Testis from a dog, six to seven months old.
contracted or dilated. The appearance of the
 The tubules are progressively expanding due to the fluid 
testes and epididymal contents can be indistin-
secreted by the Sertoli cells and there are numerous
guishable from chemically-induced toxicity, and
evaluating the relationship of such changes to
fluid-filled vacuoles within the Sertoli cellining. Sperma-
togonia and early spermatocytes can be seen in the
treatment is made more difficult by the small
tubules, many of which are undergoing apoptosis. x100.
number of animals in each group. The confusion
can be avoided by ensuring that dogs are at least
ten months and preferably 12 months of age at
the end of the study. The morphological charac-
teristics of the developing dog testis and epidi-
dymis are illustrated in Figs 9.24-9.29 and Figs
 HGURE 9.22 Mouse preputial gland with cystic atrophy
9.30-9.34 respectively.
of the acini. x100.
106
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY
Y ANIMALS
500um
HGURE 9.27 Testis from a dog, six to nine months old.
FIGURE 9.30 Cauda epididymis from a dog, five to six
HGURE 9.33 Cauda epididymis from a dog, 10-12
The tubules are variously populated with germ cells
months of age. The ductal diameter is small due to lack
 months of age. The ductal lumen is fully expanded with
extending up to round spermatids. Spermatogenesis is 
of any fluid secretion by the testis. There are no sloughed 
 sperm and there are only occasional sloughed germ cells.
still patchy in most tubules, and many of the newly devel-
cells or cell debris.
oped germ cells are degenerating or being sloughed into
the lumen. x20.
500um
HGURE 9.34 Caput epididymis from a dog, six to eight
FIGURE 9.31 Cauda epididymis from a dog, six to eight
months of age. The ducts are filled with sloughed, apop-
months of age. The ductal lumen is beginning to expand 
 totic and degenerating germ cels from the developing
HGURE 9.28 Testis from a dog, six to nine months
 and contains a small amount of fluid and sloughed germ
testis but there are no sperm. Sloughed cells are more
of age. Most tubules have layers of germ cells up to
cells from the testis.
obvious in the head than the tail of the epididymis. x200.
pachytene spermatocytes or round spermatids. There are
also occasional elongating spermatids. Degenerating and
Unlike the rodent, the dog goes through a
sloughed germ cells are fewer but still quite frequent.
developmentally quiescent period with respect to
x200.
testicular development. During this period, the
seminiferous tubules are lined by Sertoli cells and
small numbers of gonocytes (pre-spermatogonia)
which do not begin development until around five
months of age (Fig. 9.24). At that time the gono-
cytes begin to proliferate and produce spermato-
gonia which will populate the basal layer of the
seminiferous tubule and initiate the process of
spermatogenesis. At the same time, the Sertoli
cell resumes its maturation and begins to secrete
500um
seminiferous tubule fluid. This often takes the
form of fluid-filled vacuoles within the layer of
Sertoli cells and the gradual formation of a tubular
lumen and expansion of the overall tubular diam-
FIGURE 9.32 Cauda epididymis from a dog, six to eight
eter (Figs 9.25, 9.26). Spermatogonia begin to
 months of age. The luminal diameter is gradually increas-
 m 'sads and pue aea
ing and contains fluid and cells.
turn divide and produce round spermatids. The
HGURE 9.29 Testis from a 12-month-old dog. Alltubules
round spermatids gradually elongate and mature
have complete spermatogenesis and have a full comple-
into the final, whip-like mature spermatids, which
are released into the tubular lumina. From there
ment of elongating spermatids the tails of which fll the
they are transported on into the epididymis. Sper-
lumen. Occasional degenerate cells are still present but 
matogenesis does not develop at the same rate in
they are infrequent. x200.
all tubules, and so different tubules will be rmore
or less advanced than others and because the
Sertoli and germ cells are not yet up to full func-
tional efficiency, there will be considerable degen-
eration and sloughing of germ cells in this first
cycle of spermatogenesis (Fig. 9.27). The gradual
increase in seminiferous tubule fluid production
and the high rate of germ cell attrition is reflected
Reproduction of the rat, mouse
 and
miniblo
107
by the luminal contents of the epididymis (Figs
9.30-34). Small-diameter, empty ducts will grad-
ually expand with fluid and contain degenerate
sloughed germ cells through to puberty
[Fig
9.34), to be replaced by expanded ducts filled
with mature sperm and relatively few degenerate
cells in the fully mature adult (Fig. 9.33).
Identifying the status of sexual maturation in
the dog testis should be done on the basis of the
presence of sperm in the corpus and cauda epidi-
dymis (the caput does not concentrate sperm suf-
fciently to be able to visualize it) and the presence
and number of elongating spermatids in the testis.
The size and secretory activity of the prostate is
not very useful for identifying maturity because
the prostate matures at a different rate.
 FIGURE 9.36 Stage V tubule with hypospermatogenesis
HGURE 9.38 Tubules containing large, 'swollen', densely
(*). The tubule on the leftis at the same stage. Athough
 staining spermatocytes (arrowed). Most testes will have
Lesions seen in young
the elongating spermatid population is normal in the
 a few tubules that contain these cells. They probably
mature animals: testes
hypospermatogenic tubule, it is almost entirely missing 
represent secondary spermatocytes which have failed to
the underlying layers of round spermatids, pachytene
complete their second meiotic division and have become
Changes that can easily be confused with imma-
spermatocytes and spermatogonia that are present in the
arrested in their development while the rest of the cells
turity, but which are background degenerative
normal stage V tubule. x200.
in the tubule continue maturation. x200.
changes of the sexually mature dog, are seen com-
monly in dogs that are more than 10 months
Segmental hypoplasia is typically seen as a
of age. The changes have been described by
discrete group of contracted tubules, often in a
Rehm and coworkers (
[2000) and by Goedken
wedge shape and situated in a subcapsular loca-
and coworkers (2008). The most common fnd-
tion, which are completely devoid of germ cells
ings are tubular hypospermatogenesis and tubular
(Fig. 9.37). These tubules give the appearance of
hypoplasia/atrophy, both of which have an approx-
never having been populated by germ cells, hence
imately 30% incidence in normal dogs. Hyposper-
the term hypoplasia. The lobular distribution sug-
matogenesis is characterized by the absence of
gests that the group of tubular profles belong to
 one or more generations of germ cells from the
a single, coiled, serminiferous tubule.
seminiferous epithelium (Figs 9.35, 9.36). Hypo-
spermatogenesis may be distinguished from
innmaturity by the fact that many of the tubules
will have a layer of mature, elongate spermatids
at the luminal surface, but with the underlying
layer of round spermatids and/or layer of pach-
ytene spermatocytes missing or partially depleted.
HGURE 9.39 A few mulinucleate giant cells, which rep-
This is indicative of transient (cyclical) inhibition
resent degenerating spermatids or spermatocytes, may
of spermatogonial division and is different from
 be found in most mature dog testes. x200.
the pattern of germ cell degeneration and patchy
 germ cel depletion typical of immaturity (com-
Orchitis, characterized by a lymphocytic or
pare with Fig. 9.27). Hypospermatogenesis can
mixed inflammatory cell infltrate in the intersti-
range in severity from minimal (<10% tubules
tium of the testis, may occasionally be seen in
affected) to severe (>75% tubules affected). Most
the dog testes (Fig. 9.40) (Fritz et al 1976). The
inflammation may also extend into the tubular
hypospermatogenesis.
FIGURE 9.37 Tubular hypoplasia typically presents as a
 epithelium, resulting in destruction of the affected
triangular wedge of contracted tubules lined only by
tubules. The lesion is generally accompanied by a
 Sertoli cells. The surrounding tubules show normal sper-
lymphocytic inflammation in the epididymis (Fig.
9.41) and in some cases is genetically associated
matogenesis. The affected tubules have the appearance 
with lymphocytic thyroiditis (Fritz et al 1976).
of never having been populated with germ cells. x100.
The lesion is thought to have an autoimmune
Other common background findings in the
etiology.
adult dog testis include swollen spermatocytes.
These are probably secondary：
 spermatocytes
which have failed to complete their second
meiotic division and remain sequestered in the
germinal epithelium, arrested in meiosis, while
the surrounding cells continue their development
into round spermatids (Fig. 9.38). Occasional
multinucleate germ cells, which represent degen-
erating spermatocytes or spermatids, are also a
HGURE 9.35 Stage VI tubule with hypospermatogenesis
common feature of dog testes (Fig. 9.39). Both
(*). This tubule is in the same stage of spermatogenesis
findings can usually be seen in a few tubules from
as the other two tubules (identifiable by the shape of the
most dog testes.
elongating spermatids). Athough this tubule contains a
normal population of elongating spermatids, it lacks the
underlying layers of pachytene and prepachytene sper-
matocytes that are present in the other two tubules. x200.
108
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LAB
RATOF
epididymis is a normal feature of the aged beagle
dog epididymis (James & Heywood 1979).
Lesions seen in young
mature animals: prostate
The features of the maturing dog prostate and
some of the more common background lesions
have been reviewed by Dorso and coworkers
(2008). The prostatic acini of the dog gradually
expand as secretory activity increases in the epi-
thelium. The prostate of the immature dog is
small, the acini are contracted and lined by a low,
basophilic, cuboidal or squamous epithelium. As
the gland becomes functionally active under the
HGURE 9.40 Lymphocytic orchitis is an uncommon 
FIGURE 9.42 The efferent ducts are embedded in the
regulation of testosterone and dihydrotestoster-
background finding in the dog. The infiltrating ym-
head of the dog epididymis and some are blind-ending.
ome, the epithelium becomes tall and columnar
phocytes and macrophages often penetrate and destroy
This may result in sperm stasis and dilation. x100.
 and flled with intensely eosinophilic secretion. In
seminiferous tubules in the affected areas. x100.
contrast to the rat, in the dog the secretory fluid
Cribriform change, characterized by infolding
 produced by the prostate is stored in the acinar
of the ductal epithelium with the formation of
 epithelium and not in the acinar lumen. Although
 pseudoglandular cysts (Fig. 9.43), is often observed
there is generally good correlation between the
at the corpus/caudal junction. This is similar to
timing of testis and prostate maturity, they are not
the lesion in rodents. Intranuclear eosinophilic
always in synchrony, and one can be mature while
inclusion bodies are a feature of the canine epidi-
the other is immature.
dymis (Fig. 9.44), particularly in the caput,
 The most common background lesions of the
although their significance is unknown.
dog prostate include focal or lobular cystic acini
(Figs 9.45, 9.46). The acini may be lined by low
cuboidal ‘atrophic' appearing epithelium or by
columnar secretory epithelium. Minor inflamma-
tory infltrates are also often noted in the prostate,
ranging frorm focal or periurethral interstitial lym-
phoid infiltrates to subacute or chronic inflamma-
tion affecting the prostatic acini (Fig 9.47). The
inflammatory response is generally accompanied
HGURE 9.41 Lymphocytic epididymitis often accompa-
by atrophy of the affected acinar epithelium.
nies lymphocytic orchitis. x100.
There are age-related variations in the testes and
prostate of beagle dogs (Jarmes & Heywood 1979)
and benign prostate enlargement is a normal
Lesions observed in young
feature of the aged male Beagle.
mature animals: testes
The sperm content of the dog epididymis varies
depending on location. Sperm is generally not seen 
FIGURE 9.43 Cribriform change or 'pseudoglandular"
in the efferent ducts or the head of the epididymis
cysts are frequently present at the junction between the
because it is very dilute. Sperm becomes visible
distal corpus and cauda epididymis of the dog. x100.
in the distal cauda and appears dense throughout
the corpus.
Sperm content within the large-
diameter ducts of the cauda can be variable and
may often be missing due to loss during processing.
The sperm content of the corpus and proximal
cauda should be used to evaluate normal sperm
 content and maturity status.
Sperm stasis, sometimes accompanied by
inflammation, is a common finding in the efferent
ducts situated in the head of the epididymis, and
probably represents impaction of sperm in blind-
HGURE 9.45 Focal, cystic dilation of prostatic acini is a
ending efferent ducts (Fig. 9.42) (Foley et al 1995).
common finding in dogs. x100.
True sperm granulomas, similar to those seen in
rodents, also occur throughout the epididymis.
FIGURE 9.44 Intranuclear eosinophilic inclusions are
commonly seen in the epithelial cells of the caput epidi-
dymis of the dog. Their significance is unknown. x200.
Interstitial lymphocytic infltrates are common
and may also be accompanied by arteritis or
periarteritis either in the interstitium or in the
surrounding adipose tissue of the dog epididymis.
This is a common site for arteritis associated with
the more generalized condition of “beagle pain
syndrome'. Epithelial hyperplasia of the ductus
Reproduction of the rat, mouse, dog, non-human primate and minipig
109
HGURE 9.46 Focal, fluid-filled, cystic acini and an area
FIGURE 9.48 The cynomolgus monkey testis undergoes
HGURE 9.51 Occasionally a focal area of tubules in an
of acinar atrophy in the dog prostate. x100.
a quiescent period until around three and three-and-a-half
 otherwise immature testis will develop complete sperma-
years of age. Prior to this, the seminiferous tubules are
 togenesis ahead of all the other tubules. x100.
 contracted with no tubular lumen and lined by Sertoli cells
and gonocytes. x100.
Seasonal changes
Rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta] are seasonal
breeders and spermatogenesis will undergo cycli-
cal regression and recrudescence depending on the
time of year. The changes occur in response to
decreased levels of testosterone, so the entire
reproductive tract will show varying degrees of
degeneration and atrophy in a cyclical manner.
The appearance of the testes and epididymides
are identical to those of prepubertal and peripu-
bertal cynomolgus monkeys (as seen in Fig. 9.49)
Incidental findings
HGURE 9.47 Area of prostatic acinar atrophy with inter-
stitial chronic inflammatory infiltrate in the dog. x100.
In the sexually mature testis, focal tubular dilation
with thinning of the epithelium, sperm stasis and/
Non-human primate
or decreased numbers of germ cells occurs quite
FIGURE 9.49 Testis from a prepubertal monkey. Sperma-
frequently (Fig. 9.52). Germ cell degeneration
togenesis has only proceeded to the level of pachytene
Cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis) are
and germ cell depletion (tubular degeneration/
spermatocytes and a few round spermatids, many of
 atrophy) are rarely seen as diffuse changes in the
the most common non-human primates used in
which are degenerating and being sloughed into the
preclinical studies. The geographical origin of the
mature non-human primate, but one or several
tubular lumen and will end up in the epididymis. x100.
animal influences the background pathology that
 tubular profles within a lobule (probably repre-
is observed. Many non-human primates are cur-
senting a single tubule) may show degenerative
rently imported from Indo-China and are in most
changes including vacuolation, and partial germ
cases captive-bred. Cynomolgus males become
cell degeneration and depletion (Fig. 9.53).
sexually mature at around four to five years of age,
but it is common for studies to be conducted with
animals that range from totally immature, through
pubertal maturation, to totally mature. This
makes evaluation of any testicular toxicity almost
impossible. It is important for the pathologist to
be aware of the characteristics of the maturing
reproductive system so that degenerative changes
associated with puberty are not confused with
chemically induced degenerative changes.
Characteristics of the prepubertal, peripubertal
and adult cynomolgus testis are illustrated in Figs
9.48-9.50. A detailed description of the normal
HGURE 9.50 Testis from a young adult monkey. The
cynomolgus testis and the cell associations of the
tubules are expanded with a patent tubular lumen and all
spermatogenic cycle have been described by
germ cell types are present, including a small number of
Dreef and coworkers (2007). As with other
mature sperm at the luminal surface. x100.
species, degenerating and sloughed germ cells are
HGURE 9.52 Focal tubular dilation, which is often
present in significant numbers in the testis and in
accompanied by sperm stasis within the dilated lumen (as
the epididymal lumina of pre- and peripubertal
here),is a relatively common finding. It may be associated 
monkeys (Fig. 9.49). Sometimes, a discrete focus
with partial depletion of germ cells as well as thinning of
of tubules may develop complete spermatogenesis
the germinal epithelium. x100.
in an otherwise immature testis (Fig. 9.51). The
irnmature or pubertal testis will also be associated
with absence or low numbers of sperm in the
epididymis. The secretory activity and size of the
seminal vesicles and prostate are also dependent
on the maturational status of the monkey.
110
Minipig
Immaturity, peripuberty and maturity
A characteristic of the mature pig testis is a large
number of interstitial (Leydig) cells. This should
not be mistaken for Leydig cell hyperplasia. The
interstitial cells begin increasing in number around
three to four months of age as the animals reach
puberty, but carry on increasing in number over
the next few months. This may mean that there
is significant variation in Leydig cell numbers in
animals that are three to six months of age.As
with other species, increased numbers of degen-
erating germ cells, reduced numbers of sperm in
AGURE 9.53 Focal tubular degeneration and atrophy is
the epididymis, and incomplete spermatogenesis
HGURE 9.57 Severe tubular hypoplasia or atrophy with
sometimes present as an incidental background lesion.
 may be present in animals that are prepubertal or
contracted tubuleslined only by Sertoli cels. There is also
Tubules may be totally or partially depleted of germ cells,
peripubertal.
moderate Leydig cell hyperplasia. x100.
 with some tubules lined only by Sertoli cells. The change
The normal cell associations of the pig sperma-
is often focal or lobular in distribution. x100.
togenic cycle have been described by Jorgensen
et al (199s). The overall pattern of spermatogen-
Fibrous hypoplasia is a lesion that has become
esis is similar to that in other species.
 more prevalent in recent years and appears to be 
associated with the importation of cynomolgus
Incidental findings in mature animals
monkeys from Indo-China. The change, which is
assumed to be a congenital condition, is character-
Congenital aplasia and cryptorchidism of one or
ized by large tracts of mature collagen connective
both testes have been described in minipigs, with
tissue replacing the normal lobular distribution of
a 1.5% incidence of the latter (Jorgensen et al
seminiferous tubules (Fig. 9.54). Sperm granulo-
1998).
Tubular hypoplasia or tubular atrophy is a rela-
mas are rarely seen in the epididymis of cynomol-
tively common finding in mature pig testes
gus monkeys. The prostate of the cynomolgus
monkey frequently contains mineralized concre-
(Dincer & Svendsen 2006, Jorgensen et al 1998).
The affected tubules are often contracted and the
tions (Fig. 9.55).
interstitial space is generally packed with Leydig
cells, which may be increased in number. The
HGURE 9.58 Reduced or absent sperm may be present
severity of the finding can range from a few to the
 in the epididymides associated with testes that have sig-
majority of tubules affected (Figs 9.56, 9.57).
When the finding is more severe, the epididymis
nificant tubular hypoplasia/atrophy. x100.
shows reduced or absent sperm (Fig. 9.58). In
some cases the hypoplasia and atrophy may be
In the epididymides, aggregates of lymphocytes
associated with cryptorchidism.
may be present in the interstitial tissue. In the
ductal contents, a few sloughed testicular germ
cells may be admixed with the spermatozoa, but
these are generally few in number. Sperm granu-
lomas are only rarely seen in the pig epididymis.
Chronic inflammatory cell infltrate and inter-
stitial mineralized concretions may occasionally
be observed in the prostate (Dincer & Svendsen
2006).
HGURE 9.54 Fibrous hypoplasia of the monkey testis.
This is a relatively common finding in cynomolgus
REPRODUCTION: FEMALE
monkeys originating from Indo-China. It is presumed
to be a congenital condition and is generally present
Female reproductive tract
bilaterally. x20.
The morphological appearance of the female
reproductive tissues is dependent on hormonal
balance. This includes the hormonal interactions
FIGURE 9.56 Minimal tubular hypoplasia or tubular
 of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonad axis as well
atrophy in a mature pig. Note the large number of Leydig
as the balance of hormones secreted by the ovary
cells in the interstitial space, which is a normal feature of
that regulate uterine and vaginal morphology.
the pig testis. x100.
Hormonal balance and therefore morphology
will change in response to cyclicity (estrus or
menstrual), maturational status and reproductive
senescence. It is on the background of this con-
stantly changing profle of morphological charac-
teristics that the toxicological pathologist must
evaluate tissues for evidence of toxicity.
With the exception of rabbits, which
are
induced ovulators, all other species used for toxic-
ity testing undergo an estrus cycle, or in the
HGURE 9.55 Mineralized concretions in the prostate of
case of non-human primates, a menstrual cycle.
a cynomolgus monkey. x100.
Both cycles are driven by a complex interplay of
bidiuju pue aewjd ueuny-uou bop 'asnow tey aut jo uoonpoday
111
hormones which produce cyclical morphological
continues over the subsequent four or five cycles.
changes in the ovary, uterus, cervix, vagina, and in
The continued presence of corpora lutea over
 some species the mammary gland. In the female
several cycles can make detection of failed ovula-
rodent, the ovaries, uterus and vagina all change
tion difficult in shorter-term studies unless the
their morphology in rapid succession during the
detailed morphology of the corpora lutea and fol-
constantly repeating four to five-day estrus cycle.
licles is examined.
In contrast, the Beagle bitch comes into estrus
only once or twice a year and spends most of
the intervening time in the resting, anestrus
phase. In addition to the morphological changes
in the reproductive tract, the appearance of the
marmmary gland shows dramatic cyclical altera-
tions in the dog, whereas there are negligible
changes in the mammary gland of most other
species. The mammary gland of the male rat
differs histologically frorm that of the female rat.
HGURE 9.61 During estrus (rat) the vagina is lined by a
In addition to the physiological changes in
thick keratinized squamous epithelium. The cornified
hormone status due to maturation, cyclicity and
layer is progressively shed as the cycle moves into
senescence, the reproductive tissues show a
metestrus. x100.
variety of background lesions. The follwing
species-specific sections are organized to summa-
rize the main morphological features associated
with these categories of change.
FIGURE 9.59 Ovary of a young adult rat contains primary,
secondary and tertiary follicles as well as corpora lutea
Rat and mouse
from the most recent ovulation and regressing corpora
lutea from previous cycles. x40.
With some exceptions (which are noted in the
text), the response of the female reproductive
The cyclical changes in the vaginal epithelium
tract to hormonal changes and the range of back-
are the easiest and most obvious morphological
ground findings are broadly similar between rat
changes for the pathologist to use when staging
and mouse.
the estrus cycle. However, these must be used in
conjunction with the changing morphology of the
Immaturity and peripuberty
uterus and, to a lesser extent, that of the ovary to
Rats and mice reach puberty and begin cycling at
identify the stage of estrus and to ensure that the
the same time. This occurs at such a young age
various parts of the reproductive tract are in syn-
chrony with one another. The most obvious cycli-
HGURE 9.62 During metestrus (rat), the non-keratinized
(approximately four to five weeks of age) that
cal changes in vaginal morphology are illustrated
squamous epithelium of the vagina becomes progres-
morphological changes associated with immatu-
in Figs 9.60-9.63, but the full spectrum of changes
sively thinner and infiltrated with leucocytes. The epithe-
rity or peripuberty are not seen in general toxicity
and their correlation with uterine and ovarian
lium is thinnest as the cycle enters diestrus. x100.
studies and do not present a problem for inter-
morphology are best illustrated in the excellent
preting test-article-related changes.
reviews by Li & Davis (2007} and Westwood
 Changes associated with estrus
(2008).
cyclicity in young rodents
The average duration of the rodent estrus cycle is
four to five days. The cycle comprises pro-estrus
(12-14 hours), estrus (25-27 hours), metestrus
(six to eight hours) and diestrus (55-57 hours),
based on vaginal smears. There are a number of
comprehensive reviews and illustrations of the
morphological changes in the ovary, uterus and
vagina in the different stages of the estrus cycle
of the rat (Westwood 2008, Yuan & Foley 2002).
A brief summary is provided here.
The short duration of the estrus cycle in the
 HGURE 9.63 Atthe beginning of diestrus (rat),the vagina
rodent means that most stages of follicular and
corpora luteal development and regression are
has a thin squamous epithelium, which is only a few cells
present in the ovary, regardless of the stage of
 thick. As diestrus continues towards pro-estrus the epi-
the cycle (Fig. 9.59). The corpus luteum is the
FIGURE 9.60 Vagina of a rat during proestrus with a
 thelium becomes progressively thicker. x100.
main structure that can be used to recognize
prominent layer of mucified cells above a layer of corni-
cyclical changes. Immediately following ovulation
fication. This will be shed as the cycle moves into estrus.
Cyclical changes in the uterine endometrial epi-
[estrus), the corpus luteum is composed of small
x100.
thelium and stroma are less obvious than those in 
the vagina, but they can sometimes be mistaken
basophilic cells and contains small amounts of
by the inexperienced pathologist as abnormal find-
hemorrhage and may sometimes also contain a
 central cyst. As it matures, the luteal cells enlarge
ings. These include dilation of the uterine lumen
and become flled with lipid vacuoles (containing
in pro-estrus and estrus (Glaister 1986) (Fig.
9.64), prominent apoptosis of the epithelium and
steroid and cholesterol] and are intensely eosi-
nophilic (metestrus). The structure is highly vas-
glands during metestrus (Fig. 9.65), mitotic activ-
ity in the epithelium and glands during diestrus,
cularized in the early stages and then begins to
edema of the stroma during pro-estrus, and
regress as leucocytes, macrophages and fbroblasts
varying degrees of leucocytic infltration of the
infltrate the corpus luteum (diestrus). Regression
endometrium and cervical mucosa throughout the
112
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
cycle (Fig. 9.66). These characteristics should be
occasional cysts (bursal, follicular, luteal or rete
viewed in conjunction with the vaginal and ovarian
ovarij) in the ovary (Figs 9.67, 9.68), and cysts in
morphology to determine normality of the repro-
the cervix and vagina, which may sometimes be
ductive tract.
flled with keratin (Figs 9.69, 9.70a). Dilated
endometrial glands begin to develop in the young
rat as it approaches reproductive senescencej
these are the early stages of cystic endometrial
hyperplasia which is a very common end-stage
lesion in the aged rodent uterus and is described
in more detail below. Foci of prostatic tissue can
be encountered in female rats adjacent to the
urethra and vagina (Fig. 9.70b). Wollfan duct
remnants are made up of small foci of tubular
structures in the cervix of the uterus, generally
below the serosa or in the outer wall.
HGURE 9.70a Epithelium-lined cyst in the vagina of a
mouse. x100.
HGURE 9.64 During late pro-estrus and early estrus (rat),
the uterine lumen becomes dilated with fluid. The horns
are often noted to be grossly dilated at necropsy. x40.
FIGURE 9.67 Follicular cysts in a young adult mouse
ovary. x40.
HGURE 9.70b Prostatic tissue adjacent to the vagina.
x10.
Reproductive senescence
in aging rodents
HGURE 9.65 There is prominent apoptosis of the surface
Reproductive senescence can be a confounding
 epithelium and glandular epithelium during metestrus
factor for interpreting toxicity studies in rodents.
(rat). x200.
Disturbances in hormone balance related to early
senescence are commonly seen in rats and mice
at the end of a 13-week toxicity study. Over 10%
of Sprague-Dawley rats show persistent estrus
by 20-2l weeks of age (Eldridge et al 1999).
The morphological profile of changes is dependent
on the nature of the hormone imbalance and
whether there is unopposed estrogen or unop-
FIGURE 9.68 Rete ovari cyst in a mouse. x100.
posed progesterone at the time of examination.
Increased prolactin  secretion from pituitary
hyperplasia or pituitary tumors can also be a major
determinant.
 In the early stages of reproductive senescence,
the estrus cycle loses its normal four to five-day
cyclicity and becomes longer, generally due to
longer periods spent in estrus (persistent estrus),
which is due to an excess of estrogen compared
HGURE 9.66 Leucocytic infiltration, particularly by e0si-
with progesterone. This is usually accompanied by
nophils, is a common feature of the estrus cycle (rat).
the presence of cystic follicles in the ovary (Fig.
x100.
9.71) due to failed ovulation but an otherwise rela-
tively normal (estrus) morphology of the vagina
Background pathology
and uterus. However, prolonged estrogen stimula-
in young rodents
tion will result in hyperplasia and/or squamous
metaplasia of the uterine epithelium (Fig. 9.72).
Apart from the hormone-mediated
1cyclical
Periods of persistent estrus are generally inter-
changes of the estrus cycle (described above)
FIGURE 9.69 Keratin cyst in the cervix of a rat. Hyper-
spersed with periods of pseudopregnancy, where
and the early changes of reproductive senescence
 plasia of the cervical epithelium and stromal thickening
 progesterone is secreted in excess of estrogen. The
(described below), relatively few background
are also present. x40.
morphological characteristics of this hormonal
changes occur in the reproductive tract of the
profle are persistent corpora lutea (maintained
young female rodent. The most common are
by a concomitant increase in prolactin secretion]
Reproduction of the rat, mouse, dog, non-human primate and minipig 
113
(Fig. 9.73), an atrophic uterus with a folded epi-
thelium (Fig. 9.74), and most strikingly a vagina
atrophic or hyperplastic (Fig. 9.75). Persistent
 anestrus is the end stage of reproductive senes-
cence in rodents and is characterized by an ovary
that is devoid of follicles and corpora lutea. These
 are generally replaced by an excess of interstitial
cells (Figs 9.76a, 9.77), which are formed by
thecal cells from atretic follicles and which secrete
androgens. The remains of the oocytes from the
atretic follicles can also be recognized (Fig. 9.77).
The uterus and vagina show an atrophic morphol-
ogy, similar to that seen in diestrus. These changes
[inactive ovary, uterus and vagina}] are often also
associated with non-specific stress, which results 
FIGURE 9.73 Ovary of a rat in pseudopregnancy.
HGURE 9.76a The end stage of ovarian atrophy in the
in decreased secretion of gonadotropin releasing
Increased numbers of large eosinophilic corpora lutea and
rat is characterized by interstitial gland and follicular
hormone.
absence of tertiary follicles. x40.
cysts. Profiles of tubular structures lined by Sertoli-like 
cells (arrowed) are often present. x100.
HGURE 9.71 Cystic follicles increase and corpora lutea
decrease as reproductive senescence progresses. This
HGURE 9.76b Rat ovotestis with seminiferous tubules
reflects failed ovulation and is generally accompanied by
and ovarian tissue. x10.
features of persistent estrus in the uterus and vagina (rat.
x100.
FIGURE 9.74 Uterus of a rat in pseudopregnancy. The
uterus is atrophic and typically has a lumen lined by
folded endometrium. x40.
HGURE 9.77 Atrophic ovary from an aging mouse. The
tissue contains large amounts of interstitial gland, atretic
HGURE 9.72 Squamous metaplasia of the endometrial
follicles (arrow) and the remains of degenerating oocytes
glands in the uterus is a feature of prolonged estrogen 
(). x100.
stimulation (rat). x100.
FIGURE 9.75 Vagina of a rat in pseudopregnancy. Here
the epithelium is atrophic and mucified, but it can also be 
Background pathology
hypertrophic and mucified. x100.
in aging rodents
Most ofthe background changes seen in the female
reproductive tissues of old mice and rats are a
mixture of degenerative and proliferative lesions
and are the result of chronic hormone imbalance
between estradiol and progestogens. The high
incidence of prolactin-secreting pituitary tumors,
particularly in the Sprague-Dawley rat, has a
major influence on the pathology of the gonadal
tissues and the mammary gland. Although the
overall changes in the various tissues are broadly
114
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
similar between rat and mouse, there are species-
tissue in the ovarian stroma. In the mouse, the
diffcult to distinguish from, diffuse epithelial
and strain-specific differences in the incidence and
ovary is also a common site for polyarteritis
(tubular) hyperplasia, and Sertoli cell tumors,
severity of the changes. This is partly a reflection
nodosa, and many small arterioles may be noted
of the differing species and strain-specifc profles
with fibrinoid necrosis and perivascular inflamma-
of hormonal imbalance. The general changes are
tion. The ovary is also a common site for systemic
occur in the mouse ovary and may be tissue-
illustrated here, but the detailed characteristics of
amyloidosis in the mouse (Fig. 9.79).
specific or part of a multicentric distribution.
the changes can be found in the literature [Alison
They can be diffcult to distinguish from vascular
et al 1990, Davis et al 1999, Leininger et al i990).
ectasia and hematocysts. Tumors of the granulosa,
thecal and luteal cells occur, butare less common.
Ovaries
Germ cell tumors (dysgerminoma, teratoma, cho-
End-stage ‘atrophy' of the ovary generally involves
riocarcinomas and yolk sac tumors) are considered
rare in both rat and mouse.
the presence of numerous cysts and proliferation
of interstitial glands. The ovary may be partially
Uterus and cervix
or entirely replaced by cysts (Figs 9.7l, 9.78)
or by interstitial gland proliferation and fbrous
Ovarian follicular cysts that develop in the aging
stroma (Figs 9.76a, 9.77). The atrophic rodent
ovary commonly secrete an abundance of estro-
ovary is generally smaller in size.
gen, which maintain the animal in persistent
estrus and are also associated with endometrial
epithelial hyperplasia, cystic endometrial glands
and inflammatory lesions in the uterus. Cystic
endometrial hyperplasia is the most common, age-
FIGURE 9.79 Mouse ovary partially replaced by e0si-
related change in the uterus of rats and mice (Fig.
nophilic amyloid. Remaining tissue shows tubulostromal
 9.81). The change is characterized by increased
hyperplasia. x100.
numbers of dilated or cystic endometrial glands,
which often contain proteinaceous fluid and
In addition to the hyperplasia of interstitial cells 
inflammatory cells. The irregular, cystic glands can
in the atrophic ovary, other common hyperplastic
grossly distort the anatomy of the endometrium
lesions in the ovary include epithelial (or tubulos-
and replace much of the endometrial stroma and
tromal] hyperplasia, characterized by cords of
the normal lumen (Fig. 9.81). Hyperplasia of the
epithelial cells forming tubular structures which
endometrial epithelium can be extensive and
appear to originate from the layer of germinal
 polypoid in nature, with vascular ectasia and squa-
epithelium surrounding the ovary (Figs 9.79)
mous metaplasia often present in areas of the
9.80). This change is often diffuse and extensive
endometrium (Figs 9.82, 9.83).
HGURE 9.78 In the aged mouse, the ovary is often
in the mouse. Sertoli cell or Sertoliform hyperpla-
replaced entirely by cysts that are filled with proteina-
sia is also common in some strains of rat and
ceous fluid and erythrocytes. x100.
mouse and takes the form of tubular structures
lined by cells with the characteristics of testicular
Ovarian cysts come in many forms. The most
Sertoli cells (Fig. 9.76a), with large, pale white
common are derived from follicles that fail to
cytoplasm, and large, pale basal nuclei. Less fre-
ovulate. These may be empty, fuid-flled, or
quently, granulosa cell and luteal cell hyperplasia
blood-flled (hematocysts)
(Fig. 9.78). In the
can occur. Ovotestis or hermaphroditism are con-
mouse, hematocysts are often associated with vas-
 genital syndromes characterized by the combina-
cular ectasia, which may be diffcult to distinguish
tion of male and female reproductive organs. The
from hemangioma. Rupture of large hematocysts
ovotestis is made up of seminiferous tubules and
can be a cause of death in aging mice. Other cysts
ovarian tissue (Fig. 9.76b).
include luteal cysts lined by multiple layers of
luteinized cells, bursal cysts, which are commonly
detected at necropsy but which may rupture
during processing, rete cysts arising from the rete
ovarii (Fig. 9.68), paraovarian cysts in the meso-
varium lined by ciliated epithelium and containing
HGURE 9.81 Cystic endometrial hyperplasia in the rat.
smooth muscle in their walls, epidermoid cysts
This is the most common age-related change in the
lined by squamous epithelium and flled with
uterus of rats and mice. x100.
keratin and epithelial inclusion cysts. Epithelial
inclusion cysts are lined by columnar epithelium
which may form papillary projections into the
lumen of the cyst. It has been suggested that in
the mouse many of the cysts, including rete,
paraovarian, and epithelial inclusion cysts, arise
from mesonephric duct remnants (Long 2002).
Brown pigment reflecting hemosiderin and/or
 hematoidin from breakdown of hematocysts, vas-
FIGURE 9.80 Mouse ovary with tubulostromal hyperpla-
cular thrombi and hemorrhage, lipofuschin or
sia. Tubular structures appear to arise as down growths
ceroid pigment from lipid degradation, dystrophic
from the surface germinal epithelium. The change is often
mineralization, fbrosis and chronic inflammatory
diffuse and particularly prominent at the periphery of the 
infltrates are all common sequelae of the degen-
ovary. x100.
erative processes involved in age-related ovarian
atrophy. These lesions are commonly seen, par-
The most common neoplasms of the ovary
ticularly in mouse ovaries. Adipose tissue degen-
include cyst adenoma, which is a neoplastic pro-
eration or adipose tissue metaplasia can often be
gression of the hyperplastic epithelial inclusion
HGURE 9.82 Mouse uterus with extensive cystic
seen in the stromal tissue of atrophic ovaries. It is
cyst, tubulostromal adenomas and adenocarcino-
endometrial hyperplasia forming a polypoid structure that 
characterized by areas of unremarkable adipose
mas, which appear to arise from, and may be
extends into the cervical lumen. x40.
Reproduction of the rat, mouse, dog, non-human primate and minipig
115
Decidual alteration is an unusual lesion that is
leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma, e
shwannoma,
occasionally seen in the aging rat. It generally
hemangioma and hemangiosarcoma. The uterus
appears as a poorly defned nodule within the
and cervix are also commmon sites for granular cell
uterine wall or a polypoid mass projecting into the
tumors, which comprise sheets or nests of large
uterine lumen. The ^mass' is made up of cells with
cells with abundant pale cytoplasm containing
varying morphology, including large epithelioid
fne, PAS-positive granules and small hyperchro-
[histiocytic-like) cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm
matic nuclei (Markovits et al 2000, Veit et al
intermixed with spindle- or fbroblastic-like cells
2008). The possibility that this ^tumor' represents
with wide intercellular spaces and, characteristi-
 a non-neoplastic proliferation of the metrial gland,
cally, small cells with intensely eosinophilic gran-
as seen in decidual alteration, has been suggested
ules, which are also PAS-positive. A lesion with
by Picut et al (2009). Less common tumors
similar cellular characteristics, but forming a more
include squamous cell carcinoma, fbroma and
discrete and organized nodule, may be observed
fibrosarcoma.
more rarely in the young adult rat, where it is
termed a deciduoma. For additional details on this
Vagina
HGURE 9.83 Cystic endometrial hyperplasia in a mouse
lesion see Leininger and coworkers [1990) and
 Squamous cell hyperplasia and inflammation ofthe
 associated with prominent vascular ectasia. x100.
Karbe and coworkers [1998). The characteristics
of the change resemble those of the decidual
vagina may be seen with prolonged periods of per-
Atrophy of the uterus due to age-related,
response of the pregnant, implanted uterus, which
sistent estrus (high estrogen, low progestogen].
Conversely, mucinous atrophy is also commonly
decreased gonadotropin release is also a common
involves development of the metrial gland (Picut
et al 2009) (Fig. 9.84b)
 sen in response to high progestogen:estrogen
change and reveals itself as persistent anestrus.
The uterus is contracted and lined by a low cuboi-
ratio.
 dal epithelium with few endometrial glands and a
 Solitary cysts are common in the vaginal mucosa
(Fig. 9.69). They may occasionally contain keratin.
 collagenous stroma.
 Tumors of the vagina are relatively uncommon.
Vascular lesions, including vascular thrombi,
 hemorrhage, ectasia (of the endometrium or myo-
The most common tumors include granular cell
 metrium), commonly accompany cystic endome-
tumor, schwannoma, and occasionally squamous
trial hyperplasia (Fig. 9.83). Acute or purulent
cell papilloma or carcinoma.
inflarmmation of the uterus (pyometra) may also
Mammary gland
be seen in animals with cystic endometrial hyper-
plasia. High estradiol and progesterone levels con-
In most strains of rats and mice, reproductive
tribute to inflarmmatory lesions and infection in
senescence is accompanied by increased secretion
the reproductive tract.
of prolactin, which is generally the result if hyper-
Squamous epithelial hyperplasia of the cervix
plasia and neoplasia occur in the pituitary gland.
(Fig. 9.69) accompanies prolonged periods of per-
Raised prolactin results in ductal and alveolar
sistent estrus. Stromal hyperplasia or hypertrophy
hyperplasia of the mammary gland and increased
is occasionally noted, particularly in the cervix of
FIGURE 9.84b Deciduoma in the uterus of a female rat.
ecretory product (Fig. 9.86). An increase in
rats at the junction with the vagina. This is the
brown-pigmented cells within the acini is noted in
x200.
region containing the portio vaginalis uteri, which
 older rat mammary tissue. Prolonged stimulation
project down frorm the cervix into the vaginal
 of the mammary gland by prolactin also results in
opening and become hypertrophic in the aging
The most common neoplasm in the rat and
mouse uterus is the endometrial stromal polyp,
a high incidence of mammary gland tumors, the
rat uterus (Leininger et al 1990). Cysts lined by
which is composed of loosely organized stromal
most common being fbroadenoma (Fig. 9.87).
squamous epithelium and sometimes containing
cells interspersed by blood vessels and occasional
 Adenomas and adenocarcinomas of the mammary
keratin may be seen in the cervix (Fig. 9.69).
trapped endometrial glands (Fig. 9.85). The polyp
gland are also common.
 In the mouse and occasionally in the rat, adeno-
 can be edematous, congested, and sometimes
myosis may be seen as a background change in the
infarcted, especially when it extends down into
uterus. This is characterized by the downgrowths
the cervix or vagina. Polyps may be solitary or
of endometrial glands
into the myometrium
multifocal.
(Fig. 9.84a). Sometimes these may extend onto
the serosal surface, so it is important that they
are
not mistaken
for invasive
endometrial
adenocarcinoma.
HGURE 9.86 Alveolar and ductal hyperplasia with
increased secretory product (rat) is generally associated
tary gland hyperplasia or neoplasia. x100.
FIGURE 9.85 Benign stromal polyp in the uterine horn of
 a rat. This is the most common tumor of the reproductive
tract in rats and mice. The polyp is composed of loose 
fibrous tissue with few endometrial glands. x40.
HGURE 9.84a Adenomyosis in the mouse characterized
by down growths of endometrial glands deep into the
Other turmors that are relatively comon in
myometrium. This should not be mistaken for adenocar-
the uterus and cervix of some strains are endome-
cinoma. x100.
trial adenoma and carcinoma, stromal sarcoma,
116
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATOR
Immaturity and peripuberty
In the beagle dog, the first estrus occurs between
10 and 14 months of age, and therefore a high
proportion of dogs that are routinely used in toxic-
ity studies will be immature or peripubertal.
Chandra and Adler (2008) examined a cohort of
young adult dogs more than ll months of age and
recorded the percentage of dogs in the different
stages of the estrus cycle, or that were immature.
They reported five dogs that were imrmature, with
ages in the range 12.5-15.5 months.
The main characteristic of the prepubertal
 ovary is the lack of current or regressing corpora
lutea (Fig. 9.90). This contrasts with the ovary of
HGURE 9.87 Fibroadenoma is the most common neo-
a mature female that has entered anestrus, which
HGURE 9.91 Mammary gland from a prepubertal dog.
plasm of the mammary gland in rats. The ratio of fibrous
always contains remnants of corpora lutea (Fig.
 The absence of glandular development identifies that the 
and glandular components can vary significantly between
9.92). In very young females, the ovary will only
animal has not reached puberty. x40.
tumors and within areas of the same tumor. x100.
contain small primary and primordial follicles. As
the dog approaches puberty, antral follicles will
begin to develop, but all will undergo atresia until
Changes associated with
Clitoral gland
the onset of the first cycle. At that point, a sub-
estrus cyclicity in dogs
Cystic atrophy (Fig. 9.88) or ductal ectasia filled
population of antral follicles will develop into ter-
with secretion (Fig. 9.89) occur in the clitoral
tiary and Graafian follicles and continue through
The detailed morphology of the cycle-dependent
gland of aging rats and mice. These lesions are
changes in the ovary, uterus, vagina and mammary
to ovulation and become luteinized to form
sasseu, [eunbul ssoin se
gland are beyond the scope of this chapter, and
often sarmpled
at
corpora lutea.
the reader is referred to the excellent reviews by
necropsy.
Rehm et al (2007) and Chandra & Adler (2008).
The major changes are briefly summarized and
illustrated in this section.
Following first estrus, subsequent cycles begin
approxirmately every seven to eight months. The
cycle comprises pro-estrus and estrus, each of
which lasts one to two weeks followed by a long
but variable period of diestrus lasting approxi-
mately two to three months, followed by an inac-
tive anestrus phase of variable duration (three to
five months) (Rehm et al 2007). The latter part
of the estrus phase is sometimes termed met-
estrus, but it is very short and generally consid-
ered as part of estrus (Rehm et al 2007). As would
be expected from the durations of these phases,
HGURE 9.90 Ovary from a prepubertal dog. The ovary
the majority of sexually mature dogs will be in
HGURE 9.88 Clitoral glands of a mouse with cystic
 only contains primary and secondary follicles with large
anestrus or diestrus. Chandra & Adler (2008} con-
ectasia of the ducts and atrophy of the acinar glands. x40.
amounts of stroma. There are no remnants of previous
ducted a retrospective analysis of stage of estrus
in dogs, 1l-22.5 months old, used in previous
corpora lutea. Aso note follicles containing multiple
oocytes (arrowed). x100.
toxicity studies and found 54% of dogs in anestrus
and 27% of dogs in diestrus.
The immature uterus is small, with a narrow
 In the case of the dog, the mammary gland as
lumen, a dense basophilic stroma containing few,
well as the ovary, uterus and vagina show marked
cyclical changes depending on the stage of the
contracted and inactive glands lined by a thin epi-
thelial layer. The myometrium is made up of
cycle.
small, basophilic, smooth muscle cells. The vaginal
mucosa is thin and lined with a non-keratinizing.
Anestrus
stratified squamous epithelium.
During anestrus all the tissues are in a resting
 One of the easiest features that can be used to
phase. The ovary is largely populated with small
identify a prepubertal animal is the glandular
primary follicles and a few atretic antral follicles,
development of the mammary gland. This only
and there will be remnants of regressing corpora
occurs once the animal has undergone its frst
lutea with highly vacuolated cells frorm previous
estrus but is maintained throughout the rest of
cycles (Fig. 9.92).
FIGURE 9.89 Rat ditoral gland with cystic ducts dis-
the cycle, including anestrus. Thus the lack of
tended with secretory product. x40.
mammary gland tissue (Fig. 9.9l) and absence
of corpora luteal remnants (Fig. 9.90) indicates
Dog
immaturity. A direct comparison of the morpho-
logical features of the reproductive tissues in an
The morphological appearance of the female dog
immature female and a female in anestrus is pro-
reproductive tract varies significantly with matu-
vided by Chandra & Adler (2008).
rational status and the stage of the estrus cycle.
Relatively few background changes occur in the
age of dogs routinely used in toxicity studies and
reproductive senescence is not an issue in the
young dogs used in routine studies.
Reproduction of the rat, mouse, dog, non-human primate and minipig
117
 The squamous epithelium of the vagina increases
 in thickness, but is not yet keratinized (Fig. 9.98).
HGURE 9.92 Ovary from a dog in anestrus containing
FIGURE 9.95 Mammary gland from a dog in anestrus.
 primary and secondary follicles as well as the vacuolated
 The alveoli are contracted and atrophic in appearance but
and shrunken remnants of a previous corpus luteum.
there is still occasional residual secretion in the ducts.
HGURE 9.98 Pro-estrus vagina with thickened non-
x100.
x100.
keratinized epithelium. x100.
The uterus is small with an atrophic endo-
 Pro-estrus
The mammary gland of a dog in the pro-estrus
metrium containing small endometrial glands
 During pro-estrus, a number of tertiary follicles
of its first cycle will have no glandular develop-
surrounded by a compact ^atrophic' stroma (Fig.
with antral spaces develop (Fig. 9.96). They are
ment, but if the animal has been through at least
9.93] and a basophilic myometrium made up of
lined by multiple layers of basophilic granulosa
 one previous cycle, it will have the same morphol-
small, spindled, smooth muscle cells.
cells without folds.
Bunun snnsue yim paeiosse ie se Aao
atrophic alveoli and ducts containing secretion
(Fig. 9.95). Some alveolar proliferation may be
identified at the end of pro-estrus.
Estrus
The developing follicles in the ovary become large
tertiary follicles lined by a thin layer of granulosa
cells that form projections or folds into the antral
lumen. Following ovulation, the granulosa cells
rapidly luteinize (Fig. 9.99), and although this is
technically metestrus, it lasts a relatively short
time and may be referred to as the ‘metestrus
 phase of estrus' (Rehm et al 2007).
HGURE 9.93 Uterus from a dog in anestrus with low
FIGURE 9.96 Ovary in pro-estrus containing tertiary fol-
cuboidal epithelium, few and small endometrial glands 
licles with large antral space lined by a flattened layer of
 and prominent dense stroma. x100.
granulosa cells. x100.
The uterus becomes slightly edematous and the
 The vaginal epithelium is cuboidal and only one
endometrial surface epithelium proliferates and
or two cell layers thick (Fig. 9.94).
forms crypts into the underlying stroma while the
basal endometrial glands also increase in number
and start to dilate (Fig. 9.97). The myometrial
smooth muscle cells also enlarge and become
more eosinophilic.
HGURE 9.99 Recently ovulated follicle in the 'metestrus'
phase of estrus. The granulosa cells surround a large
central cavity that has just expelled the oocyte. These
cells undergo rapid luteinization. x40.
The uterus in early estrus resembles that in
pro-estrus, but during late estrus the stroma
becomes more collagen-rich and contains an
HGURE 9.94 Vagina from a dog in anestrus with low
increasing number of hypertrophic glands through-
cuboidal epithelium only one or two cells thick. x100.
out the endometrium. The myometrium contin-
ues to expand with hypertrophy of the smooth
The mammary gland is made up of relatively
muscle cells.
few, atrophic-appearing alveoli and ducts, which
FIGURE 9.97 Uterus in pro-estrus showing slight edema
 During estrus the vaginal epithelium reaches its
may contain secretory fluid. This is similar to the
of the endometrial stroma and crypt formation of the
 maximum thickness and develops a cornified layer
 appearance of the gland in pro-estrus (Fig. 9.95).
 Surface endometrial epithelium along with proliferation,
of keratin (Fig. 9.100) which is sloughed towards
dilation and branching of the basal endometrial glands.
the end of estrus. The epithelium is thrown into
x100.
ridges and folds and the underlying connective
118
BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
tissue is increased in thickness with dense collagen
During diestrus the alveoli and ducts of the
fibres.
mammary gland proliferate and gradually become
flled with eosinophilic secretion (Fig. 9.105).
Regressive changes, including apoptosis, macro-
phage infltration and alveolar contraction, occur
in the gland during late diestrus.
FIGURE 9.102 Ovary in diestrus containing large eosi-
HGURE 9.100 Vagina in estrus is lined by a keratinized
nophilic corpora lutea. The luteinized cells are gradually
epithelium which starts to shed its superficial layers into
flling the cavity left following ovulation. x100.
the lumen. x100.
 The uterus demonstrates a striking morphology
The mammary gland shows alveolar and ductal
during diestrus.
 The endometrium and myo-
proliferation with prominent edema surrounding
metrium are at their greatest thickness, but the
HGURE 9.105 Mammary gland in diestrus displaying
the islands of glandular tissue and stromal connec-
endometrium is divided into two different zones,
 marked proliferation of the alveoli which are filed with
tive tissue proliferation (Fig. 9.101). The edema
with the basophilic, basal endometrial glands
secretory fluid. x100.
is accompanied by increased vascularisation, hem-
forming one layer and the surface epitheliurm with
orrhage and inflammatory infltrate.
its crypts lined by a pale-staining, secretory and
vacuolated tall columnar epithelium, forming the
Background changes
other layer (Fig. 9.103).
in the young adult dog
There are relatively few changes in the reproduc-
tive tissues of young female dogs.
 Pseudopregnancy or segmental cystic endo-
metrial hyperplasia (Schulman & Bolton 1997)
(Fig. 9.106) occurs occasionally, and the uterine
changes can be quite dramatic and mistaken for
real pregnancy. The ovary contains prominent and
persistent corpora lutea. The uterine surface
endometrium is replaced by cavernous spaces
lined by hyperplastic, columnar epithelium with
pale pink, secretory cytoplasm, similar to that
seen in the diestrus uterus, and the lower
endometrium 
contains
dilated basal glands.
HGURE 9.101 Estrus mammary gland shows edema
Necrotic tissue derived from the endometrial
around the proliferating alveoli and stromal proliferation.
 surface is generally present in the uterine lumen.
 There may also be hemorrhage and an inflammatory cell
FIGURE 9.103 Uterus in diestrus with two different zones
infltrate. x100.
in the endometrium. The surface epithelium and crypts 
 are lined by pale pink, columnar secretory cells, whereas
the basal glands are more basophilic and coiled. x100.
Diestrus
This is a long stage of the cycle and the morphol-
The vaginal epithelium decreases in thickness
 au s ai o Aea u sa ao
during diestrus and contains mucus-secreting cells
change in the ovary is the formation, maturation
and variable numbers of inflammatory cells (Fig.
and regression of the corpora lutea. At the start
9.104).
of diestrus the luteal cells proliferate around
a fuid and hemorrhagic central cavity. This is
replaced by a homogenous structure made up of
plump eosinophilic cells, and the corpora lutea
take up most of the ovary (Fig. 9.102). As the
corpora lutea regress, the cells become apoptotic
and increasingly vacuolated and begin to shrink.
HGURE 9.106 Uterus from dog with segmental, cystic
endometrial hyperplasia. The Superficial glands are
expanded into cavernous spaces flled with mucinous
secretion and lined by pale pink, secretory cells. The basal
glands form a ttally distinct zone and are also dilated.
 The lumen is filled by necrotic debris from the surface
endometrium. x100.
The canine ovary often contains bi- or multinu-
FIGURE 9.104 The vagina in diestrus becomes reduced
cleate oocytes as a normal feature (Fig. 9.59).
in thickness and infiltrated by eucocytes. x100.
Follicular or luteal cysts are occasionally present
in the ovary.
Reproduction of the rat, mouse, dog, non-human primate and minipig 
119
Non-human primates
Changes associated
with female cyclicity
In non-human primates, puberty occurs at approx-
m ae jo sieaa inoy on e-e-pue-omi Aianei
The non-human primate undergoes a menstrual
leads to significant variation in the pubertal status
cycle that is approximately 30 days in duration,
of monkeys that are norminally the same age. Sea-
but this is often very irregular, particularly in
sonality varies with species; rhesus are highly sea-
the period adjacent to menarche, and intervals
sonal, with sexual activity occurring primarily
of three months between the start of consecutive
between October and March, whereas cynomolo-
cycles are not uncommon. The features of the
gus monkeys show very few seasonal changes at
menstrual cycle and the changing morphology of
different times of the year.
the reproductive tissues have been comprehen-
 -d ue Aaonoudiou Aoosaud ieuu au
sively reviewed by Weinbauer and coworkers
ogy of the female reproductive system of the
(2008) and Van Esch and coworkers (2008). A
 macaque have been comprehensively described in
brief summary is provided here.
a monograph by Buse and co-authors (2008). The
The cycle can be divided into three phases on
following section provides a summary of the major
the basis of the ovarian changes; these are the
HGURE 9.110 Ovary in late luteal phase with a corpus
morphological features associated with matura-
follicular phase, the luteal phase and the men-
luteum undergoing regression. Also note mineralized
tion and cyclicity, as well as some common back-
strual phase. The follicular phase of 12-14 days is
deposits in the cortex; these probably represent mineral-
ground findings.
characterized by growth and maturation of the
ized atretic 0ocytes or primordial follicles. x40.
ovarian follicles (Fig. 9.108) and ovulation, where
Immaturity and puberty
the oocyte is released frorm a single ovulating fol-
The uterus undergoes cyclic morphological
licle. The luteal phase lasts 14-16 days and
changes which coincide with and are regulated by
The reproductive tissues of the immature non-
includes establishment of the corpus luteum (Fig.
the ovarian phases. These are the proliferative
human primate are similar to those of the dog. If
9.109), and then gradual regression of the corpus
(follicular) phase (Figs 9.1ll, 9.112), the secre-
the animal is very young, the ovary is small with
luteum during the subsequent menstrual period
tory (luteal) phase (Figs 9.113, 9.114) and the
 only primordial or primary follcles and stroma. If
(Fig. 9.ll0). Remnants of regressing corpora lutea
menstrual phase (Figs 9.115, 9.116). Van Esch
the non-human primate is approaching puberty,
will remain through multiple, successive cycles.
and coworkers [2008)] also describe a fourth,
follicles may begin to develop antral cavities, but
regenerative phase which follows the menstrual
most will show evidence of atresia. The uterus is
phase and has different characteristics from the
contracted with a basophilic, inactive-appearing
proliferative phase.
endometrium and myometrium. The vagina is also
small in diameter and lined by a thin, cuboidal
epithelium. The immature non-human primate
mammary gland has a rudimentary ductal tree
which begins to develop just prior to the frst
menstrual cycle. There is elongation and branch-
ing of the major ducts accompanied by develop-
ment of terminal end buds surrounded by loose,
myxoid, periglandular stroma (Cline & Wood
2008). There is extensive lobular development in
the peripubertal non-human primate connective
tissue (Fig. 9.107). There is also significant inter-
animal variation in the rate of this growth. It is
important for the pathologist to be aware of this
FIGURE 9.108 Ovary in follicular phase with a number of
when comparing individuals and pathologists
should not mistake normal pubertal glandular
tertiary antral follicles developing. Also present are the 
remnants of a regressing corpus luteum. x100.
development for hyperplasia or neoplasia (Cline
HGURE 9.111 Uterus in proliferative phase. The endome-
& Wood 2008)
tial glands are relatively sparse and have a straight
profile. x100.
FIGURE 9.109 Ovary in the luteal phase with a newly
AGURE 9.107 This is the normal appearance of the 
formed single corpus luteum. x100.
mammary gland from a cycling cynomolgus monkey.
HGURE 9.112 Uterus in proliferative phase showing
There are abundant alveoli with secretion, but there is
mitotic activity (arrowed) in the glandular epithelium and 
significant inter-animal variation in the volume of glandu-
straight profile of the glands. x200.
lar tissue. x100
20
Background changes in
the non-human primate
reproductive tract
Common and uncommon background changes
in the female reproductive tissues of non-human
 oo  amr a a s
Gabrielson (2007] and Cline and coworkers
(2008). The more common changes that are seen
aie saipns Auipixot ul pasn sanbeoeur BunoA u
mentioned and illustrated here. In general, back-
ground pathology is uncommon in the pubertal
and young adult non-human primates used in tox-
icity studies. The main changes that can be recog-
HGURE 9.113 Uterus in secretory phase with densely
FIGURE 9.116 Menstrual uterus with hemorrhage and
nized are the result of minor hormonal disturbances
packed, tortuous-appearing glands. Note prominent spiral
sloughing of surface layers. x100.
that are associated with social or environmental
arteries surrounded by connective tissue (circled). x100.
stress and hormonal imbalances associated with
puberty. These are recognized by inactivity of the
The proliferative phase is characterized by pro-
endometrium and inappropriate shedding of the
gressive increases in mitotic activity of the
surface epithelium (irregular bleeding) due to
endometrial glandular epithelium and stromal
early regression of the corpus luteum.
fbroblasts (Fig. 9.ll2). During this phase, the
Ovarian cysts are quite common and include
endometrial glands are relatively sparse, straight
cysts that arise from structures in the paraovarian
glands, lined by pseudostratified epithelium with
tissue, e.g., embryonic mesonephric remnants,
a narrow lumen. The endometrial blood vessels
dilated rete ovari and cystic follicles or corpora
are not very prominent (Fig. 9.111).
lutea (Fig. 9.117).
Following ovulation, the uterus enters the
secretory phase, which corresponds with the
ovarian luteal phase. Mitotic activity in the
endometrium decreases, and the endometrial
glands are lined by medium to tall columnar epi-
thelium with sub- and supra-nuclear, glycogen-
flled vacuoles (Fig. 9.1l4). The glands are more
prominent than in the proliferative phase and
HGURE 9.114 Endometrial glands from secretory phase
become more tortuous, with a saccular profle and
with saccular profile. The epithelium is tall and secretory
a wider lumen, particularly in the basal zone of
and contains sub- and supra-nuclear, glycogen-filled
the endometrium, as the phase progresses (Fig.
vacuoles.x100.
9.113). During the luteal phase, the endometrium
becomes infltrated by large numbers of lym-
phocytes, many of which contain granules. In
addition, the spiral arteries of the vasculature
become very prominent in the endormetrium, with
areas containing cross sections of spiral arteries
 HGURE 9.117 Follicular cyst compressing surrounding
surrounded by prominent connective tisue (Fig.
 tissue. These are quite common in the cynomolgus ovary.
9.113).
x40.
During the menstrual phase, the spiral arteries
in the upper parts of the endometrium constrict
 Cortical mineral deposits are commonly seen in
and cause ischemia and sloughing of the surface
the young adult non-human primate ovary and
layers. Tissue necrosis, hemorrhage, vascular
 probably represent dystrophic mineralization of
thrombi and leucocytic infltration are the hall-
 atretic follicles (Fig. 9.ll0). Follicles containing
marks of menstruation. During this phase, blood
multiple oocytes are also commonly seen as a back-
and necrotic tissue can be found in the cervix and
ground change, as is hyperplasia of the ovarian
vagina (Figs 9.115, 9.116)
sur face epithelium.
As the menstrual phase comes to an end, the
 Hemorrhage of the uterine surface epithelium
remaining glands in the lower endometrium that
is a characteristic of the menstrual phase of the
HGURE 9.115 Uterus during menstruation with hemor-
have escaped necrosis begin to show proliferative
uterine endometrium, but it often occurs in the
rhage, necrosis and sloughing of the surface endometrium
activity and the epithelium grows out to form a
peripubertal female that is not yet ovulating of
into the lumen. x100.
confluent layer over the denuded stroma. This
cyling in a regular manner and represents irregu-
signals the start of the regenerative phase. During
lar bleeding. Irregular endommetrial hemorrhage
this stage, the underlying stroma of the surface
can be distinguished from true menstruation by
endometrium is composed of small, compact,
the fact that it occurs in an endometrium that is
basophilic cells. The spiral arteries remain promi-
in the proliferative phase, whereas normal men-
nent in the basal region but are not visible in the
struation occurs in an endometrium that is in the
newly forming surface endometrium while the
secretory phase of the cycle. In addition, men-
basal endometrial glands become quiescent in
struation involves full endometrial shedding.
appearance.
whereas irregular endometrial hemorrhage is char-
Although there are minor changes in the prolif-
 acterized by superficial hemorrhage and very little
erative activity of the ductal and alveolar tissue of
endometrial shedding or necrosis. Examination of
the mammary gland during the menstrual cycle,
the ovary should also provide clues on the basis of
the changes are not of suffcient magnitude to be
presence or absence of regressing corpora lutea
readily visible (Cline & Wood 2008).
(present in the menstruating female and absent in
the prepubertal female). Inactive (non-cycling)
Reproduction of the rat, mouse, dog, non-human primate and minipig 
121
uterine morphology can often be seen in non-
Dorso, L., Chanut, F., Howroyd, P, Burnett, R., 2008.
human primates that are postpubertal (i.e. ovaries
Variability in weight and histological appearance of
contain corpora lutea remnants) and is the result
the prostate of beagle dogs used in toxicology
studies. Toxicol. Pathol. 36, 917-925.
of anovulatory cycles. This is often seen in females
that have relatively recently attained puberty or
Dreef, H.C., van Esch, E., De Rijk, E.PC.T., 2007.
may be a refection of non-specific stress, e.g.,
Spermatogenesis in the cynomolgus monkey
[Macaca fascicularis]: a practical guide for routine
social stress or stress associated with test article
morphological staging. Toxicol. Pathol. 35, 395-404.
administration in toxicity studies.
Edridge, J.C., Wetzel, L.T, Tyrey, L., 1999. Estrous
Adenomyosis, characterized by the presence of
cycle patterns of Sprague-Dawley rats during acute
occasional endometrial glands in the myometrium,
and chronic atrazine administration. Reprod. Toxicol.
is a relatively common background finding in the
13, 491-499.
non-human primate uterus.
Foley G.L., 2001. Overview of male reproductive
The myometrial
1 vasculature of non-human
pathology. Toxicol. Pathol. 29(1):49-63.
primates that have previously given birth show
Foley, G.L., Bassily, N., Hess, R.A., 1995. Intratubular
marked expansion of the tunica media by eosi-
spermatic granulomas of the canine efferent
nophilic hyaline material that resembles amyloid.
FIGURE 9.120 Normal cornification of the vaginal epithe-
ductules. Toxicol. Pathol. 23, 731-734.
The affected vessels often have obliteration of the
lium with difuse subepithelial inflammatory cell infitrate.
Fritz, TE., Lombard, S.A., Tyler, S.A., Norris W.P,
1976. Pathology and familial incidence of orchitis
lumina. The change is a consequence of the tro-
x200.
phoblast invasion of the uterus during pregnancy.
and its relation to thyroiditis in a closed beagle
colony. Exp. Mol. Pathol. 24, 142-158.
Nulliparous females do not show these changes.
Squamous metaplasia of the endocervical glands
 This lesion is also noted in rodents which have had
is a common finding in the pre- or peripubertal
Glaister, J.R., 1986. The young rat. In: Principles of
toxicological pathology. Taylor & Francis, London,
 previous litters of pups.
female non-human primates due to the prevailing
pp. 132-145.
Lymphoid aggregates and follicles as well as
hormonal status (oestrogen excess) and should not
Goedken, M.J., Kerlin, R.L., Morton, D., 2008.
varying numbers of infltrating inflammatory cells
be considered to be an abnormal finding.
 Spontaneous and age related testicular fndings in
 are commonly present in the mucosa of the vagina
beagle dogs. Toxicol. Pathol. 36, 465-471.
 and cervix (Figs 9.118-9.120). Mucus-flled cysts
Minipig
James R.W., Heywood R., 1979. Age-related variations
are also commonly seen in the superficial cervical
in the testes and prostate of beagle dogs. Toxicology
mucosa.
The female pig reaches sexual maturity at four
12:273-279.
to five months of age and the estrus cycle is
 Jorgensen, K.D., Kledal, TS.A., Svendsen, O.,
approximately 20 days in duration.
Skakkeboek, N.E., 1998. The Gottingen minipig as
Apart from occasional follicular
cysts in the
a model for studying effects on male fertility. Scand.
ovary and minimal hemorrhage in the uterine
J. Lab. Anim. Sci. 25 (suppl. 1], 16]-169.
myormetrium, no background changes have been
Karbe, E., Hartmann, E., George, C., et al., 1998.
reported in the female reproductive tract of young
 Similarities between the uterine decidual reaction
adult Gottingen pigs (Dincer & Svendsen 2006).
 and the 'mesenchymal lesion' of the urinary bladder
in aging mice. Exp. Toxicol. Pathol. 50, 330-340.
Latendresse J.R., Warbrittion A.R., Jonassen H., et al.,
References
 2002. Fixation of testes and eyes using a modifed
Davidson's fluid: comparison with Bouin's fluid and
Alison, R.H., Morgan, K.T, Montgomery, C.A., 1990.
conventional Davidson's fluid. Toxicol. Pathol. 30:
In: Boorman, G.A., Eustis, S.L., Elwell, M.R.,
524-533.
Montgomery, C.A., MacKenzie, W.F. (Eds.],
Lanning L.L., Creasy D.M., Chapin R.E., et al., 2002.
Pathology of the Fischer rat: reference and atlas.
 Recommended approaches for the evaluation of
Academic Press, San Diego, ch 26, pp. 429-442.
testicular and epididymal toxicity. Toxicol. Pathol.
Buse, E., Cline, J.M., de Rijk, E.PC.T., et al., 2008. A
30:507-520.
monograph on female reproductive pathophysiology
AGURE 9.118 Lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrates of
Leininger, J.R., Jokinen, M.P, 1990. Oviduct, uterus
in macaques.Toxicol. Pathol. 36 (suppl], 5S-172S.
the cervix and focal squamous metaplasia of the normal
and vagina. In: Boorman, G.A., Eustis, S.L., Elwell,
Chandra, S.A., Adler R.R., 2008. Frequency of
M.R., Montgomery, C.A., MacKenzie, W.F. (Eds.],
mucus secreting epithelium (arrow). x100.
different estrous stages in purpose-bred beagles: a
Pathology of the Fischer rat: reference and atlas.
retrospective study.Toxicol.Pathol.36,944949.
Academic Press, San Diego, ch 27, pp. 443-460.
Cline, JM., Wood, C.E., 2008. The mammary gland of
Li, S., Davis, B., 2007. Evaluating rodent vaginal and
macaques. Toxicol. Pathol. 36 (suppl], 130S-141S.
uterine histology in toxicity studies. Birth Defects
Cline, J.M., Wood, C.E., Vidal, J.D., et al., 2008.
Res. B. Dev. Reprod. Toxicol. 80, 246-252.
Selected background fndings and interpretation of
Long, G.G., 2002. Apparent mesonephric duct (rete
common background lesions in the female
anlage] origin for cysts and proliferative epithelial
reproductive system in macaques. Toxicol. Pathol.
lesions in the mouse ovary. Toxicol. Pathol. 30,
36 (suppl], 142S-163S.
592-598.
Cooper, T.K., Gabrielson, K.L., 2007. Spontaneous
Markovits, JE., Sahota PS., 2000. Granular cell lesions
lesions in the reproductive tract and mammary gland
in the distal female reproductive tract of aged
of female non-human primates. Birth Def. Res. (Part 
 Sprague-Dawley rats. Vet. Pathol. 37, 439-448.
BJ 80, 149-170.
Marty, M.S., Chapin, R.E., Parks, L.G., Thorsrud B.A.,
Creasy D.M., 1997. Evaluation of testicular toxicity in
 2003. Development and maturation of the male
safety evaluation studies: the appropriate use of
reproductive system. Birth Defects Res. B. Dev.
spermatogenic staging. Toxicol. Pathol. 25:119-131.
Reprod. Toxicol. 68, 125-136.
Creasy, D.M., Foster PM.D., 2002. Male reproductive
Picut, C.A., Swanson, C.L., Oarker, R.F., Scully, K.L.,
system. In: Haschek, WM.,Rousseaux,C.G.
 Parker G.A., 2009. The metrial gland in the rat and
Wallig, M.A. (Eds.], Handbook of toxicologic
AGURE 9.119 Prominent ymphoid follicles and ymphoid 
its similarities to granular cell tumors. Toxicol.
 infiltrate of the lamina propria of the vagina. x100.
pathology, vol 2. second ed. Academic Press, San
Pathol. 37, 474-480.
Diego, pp. 785-846.
Rehm, S., 2000. Spontaneous testicular lesions in
Davis, B.J., Dixon, D., Herbert R.A., 1999. Ovary,
purpose bred beagle dogs. Toxicol. Pathol. 28,
oviduct,uterus,cervix and vagina.In:Maronpot,
782-787.
R.R., Boorman, G.A., Gaul, B.W. (Eds.], Pathology of
Rehm, S., Stanislaus, D.J., Williams, A.M., 2007.
the mouse. Cache River Press, Vienna, pp. 409-444.
 Estrous cycle-dependent histology and review of sex
Dincer, Z., Svendsen, O., 2006. The minipig: pathology.
 steroid receptor expression in dog reproductive
In: Gad, S. (Ed.], Animal models in toxicology. CRC
tissues and mammary gland and associated hormone
Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. 739-760.
122
 BACKGROUND LESIONS IN LABORATORY ANIMALS
levels. Birth Defects Res. B. Dev. Reprod. Toxicol.
tissue accountability for male accessory sex organs in
Weinbauer, G.F., Niehoff, M., Niehaus, M., et al.,
80, 233245.
Fischer-344 rats. Toxicol. Pathol. 29:467-478.
  jo oa pue Aosy oo
Russell, L.D., Etlin, RA., Sinha Hikim, A.P,
Van Esch, E., Buse, E., Weinbauer, G.F., Cline J.M.,
cycle in macaques. Toxicol. Pathol. 36 (suppl] ,
CleggClegg, E.D., 1990. Histological and
 2008. The macaque endometrium with special
7S-23S.
histopathological evaluation of the testis. Cache
reference to the cynomolgus monkey (Macaca
Westwood, F.R., 2008. The female rat reproductive
River Press, Clearwater, FL.
fascicularis]. Toxicol. Pathol. 36 (suppl], 67S-100S.
Schulman M.L., Bolton L.A., 1997. Uterine horn
Veit, A.C., Painter, JT., Miller, R.A., Hardisty, J.F.,
Toxicol. Pathol. 36, 375-384.
aplasia with complications in two mixed-breed
Dixon D., 2008. Characterisation of granular cell
Yuan Y., Foley G.L., 2002. In: Handbook of Toxicologic
bitches. J. S. Afr. Vet. Assoc. 68:150-153.
tumors in B6C3Fl mice: a histomorphologic,
Pathology,Female reproductive system,eds Haschek
Suwa T, Nyska A., Peckham J.C., et al., 2001. A
immunohistochemical and ultrastructural study. Vet.
WM, Rousseaux CG, Wallig MS. Academic Press,
retrospective analysis of background lesions and
Pathol. 45, 654-662.
London, 2, 2, pp. 847-884.
SUBJECT INDEX
Page numbers followed by "f" indicate fgures.
Alveolar macrophages
Auncular chondnitis, rats, 35, 36f
minipig, 82, 82f
Autolysis artifact
mouse, 50, 50f
fixative, 94, 94f
A
rats, 21, 21f
kidney, rats, 29, 30f
Alveolar osseous metaplasia, mouse, 50, 50f
lens, artifact, 98, 99f
Abscesses
Alveolitis, dogs, 39, 39f
 mandibular lymph node, minipig, 82, 82f
Amyloidosis
prepuce, hamster, 76, 77f
Jamina propria, mouse, 66, 66f
B
Accessory sex organs, rat male reproductive system,
liver, mouse, 66, 67f
104
ovary, rodents, 114, 114f
Background changes, non-human primate female
Accessory spleen see Pancreas
severe diffuse, hamster, 75, 75f
reproductive system, 120-121, 120f
Acid haematin, fixative artifact, 95, 95f
testes, rodents, 103, 104f
Baiantidium colinfection, non-human primates, 6,
Acinar atrophy
Angiectasis
6f
lacrimal gland, rats, 35, 35f
adrenal glands, rats, 31, 31f
 Barbiturate intracardiac injection, cardiomyocyte
pancreas see Pancreas
liver, rats, 26, 26f
artifact, 93, 93f
salivary gland,rats24,24
pituitary gland,rats
Basophilic hypertrophic focus, rat parotid salivary
Acinar hypertrophy, rat lacrimal gland, 35, 3f
Anestrus, dogs, 116-117, 117f
gland,24,24f
Acinar vacuolation, rat pancreas, 25, 25f
Ante mortem artifacts, 93
 Basophilic tinctorial change, rat pancreas, 25,
Adenchypophysis, rat pituitary gland, 30, 30f
Anthracosis, non-human primates, 4
25f
Adenomatoushyperpasiamouse stomach,52,f
Aorta
 Basophilic tubules see Kidney
Adenomyosis, rodents, 1l5, 115f
cartilage, rats, 17, 17f
Basophilic vacuolation, rodent epididymis, 104,
Adipocytes
inflammation, mouse, 46, 46f
104f
dog atnial infltration, 37, 38f
intimal degeneration, cynomolgus macaque, 3,
Beagle dogs, 37-44
dog salivary glands, 39, 40f
3f
brain, 43-44
Adipose tissue
mineralization
cardiovascular system, 37
degeneration, minipig, 84, 84f
dogs,37, 37f
endocnine glands, 41-42
nght ventnicle, rabbit, 87, 87f
rabbit,87,87f
female reproductive system, 116-118
Adrenal gland(s)
Aortic valve thrombosis, hamster, 73, 73f
anestrus, 116-117, 117f
angiectasis, rats,31, 31f
Apoptosis, rat thymus, 20, 20f
diestrus, 118, 118f
ectopic see Ectopic adrenal gland
Arterial mineralization, rats, 20, 20f
immatunity, 116, 116f-117f
 extramedullary hemopoiesis
Arterial plaque, mouse lungs, 50, 50f
estrus, 117-118, 117f-118f
mamoset, 1l, 1lf
Atnial thrombosis
estrus cyclicity, 116-118
rats, 31, 31f
mouse, 45-46, 46f
peripuberty, 116
lipogenic pigmentation, mouse, 60, 60f
rats, 18
pro-estrus, 117, 117f
medullary hyperplasia, rats, 31, 3f
Arteritis
young adults, 118, 118f
subcapsular cellhypeplasia, mouse, 60, 60f
dogs, 37, 37f
gastrointestinal system, 39-40
vacuolation, rabbit, 90
Jung, rabbit, 87, 88f
hepatobiliary system, 40
Xzone, mouse, 59, 59f
minipig, 81, 81f
hemolymphoreticular system, 38
 zona glomerulosa focal hypertrophy, rats, 31,
mouse, 46, 46f
male reproductive system, 105-108, 105f-106f
32f
pancreatic vessel, mouse, 56, 56f
immatunity, 105-107
zona glomerulosa vacuolation, dogs, 42, 42f
Artifacts, 93-99
lesions in young animals, 107-108
zona reticulanis vacuolation, dogs, 42, 42f
ante mortem, 93
matunity, 105-107
Adrenal gland cortex
CNS, 98-99
penipuberty, 105-107
accessory tissue, mouse, 59, 60f
cover slipping, 98, 98f
prostate gland, 108
cystic degeneration, rats, 30, 30f
cutting, 96-97
testes, 107-108
cysts, rats, 30, 30f
environmental factors, 93
musculoskeletal system, 43
ectopic tissue, mouse, 59, 60f
fixation, 94-95
nervous system, 43-44
extracapsular tissue, rats, 31, 31f
mounting, 97
respiratory system, 38-39
focal hypertrophy, mouse, 60, 60f
postmortem/necropsy, 93-94
skin and appendages, 43
hyperplasia
processing, 95-96
urinary system, 41
hamnster, 75, 75f
stains, 97-98, 98f
Bedding-associated dematitis, hamster, 76
rats, 31f
Atherosclerosis, non-human primates,
Benign stromal polyp, rodent uterus, 1l5, 115f
lymphoid infltrate, minipig, 8l, 81f
2, 3f
Bile ducts
 mineralization, non-human primates, 10-1l, 1lf
Atria
ectopic, non-human primates, 1l, 1lf
ossification, rats, 3l, 31f
adipocyte infltration, dogs, 37, 38f
hyperplasia
pigments, rats, 31, 31f
mucinous degeneration, non-human primates, 3,
hamster, 73, 75f
yacuolation, rats, 30, 30f31f
3f
rats, 26, 26f
Adreno-hepatic fusion (AHF), non-human primates,
thrombosis, hamster, 73, 73f
Biiary cysts, hamster,74,74
11, 11f
llous mesothelial projections, dogs, 37, 38f
Bladder, urinary see Urinary bladder
Age-related lesions
Atrophy
Blind-ending efferent ducts, dogs, 108, 108f
rat female reproductive system, 112-114, 114f
acinar see Acinar atrophy
Blood collection trauma, rat tongue, 24, 25f
rat male reproductive system, 103-104
lymph nodes, rats, 18
Bone marrow
Agonal alveolar edema, rabbit, 87, 88f
myofbers, rats, 33, 3
serous atrophy, minipig, 84, 84f
Alveolar hemorrhage, rat erythrophagocytosis,
ovary, rodents, 112-113, 113f
fxative artifact, 96, 96f
20-21, 21f
retina
germinal centres, non-human primates, 3-4,
Alveolar histiocytes, rats, 2l, 21f
mouse, 65, 65f
Alveolar histiocytosis, hamster, 73, 73f
rats, 35, 35f
granulopoiesis, mouse, 48-49, 49f
Alveolar hyperplasia, rodent mammary gland, 115,
seminiferous tubules, hamster, 76, 77f
thrombus, artifact, 93, 93f
115f
thymus see Thymus
Bones see Musculoskeletal system
124
Subject Index
Bowman's capsule
Choroid plexus, rat extramedullary hemopoiesis,
D
 cuboidal metaplasia, non-human primates, 9, 9f
34, 34f
metaplasia, rats, 28
Chronic gastritis, non-human primates, 5, 5f
Decalcifcation, fxative artifact, 95, 95f
sexual dinnorphism, mouse, 57, 57f
Chronic suppurative inflammation, hamster ear, 77,
Decidual reaction, hamster uterus, 76,
Brain
77f
76f
beagle dogs, 43-44
Clara cell, rat eosinophilic inclusion, 2l, 21f
Deciduoma, rodent uterus, 115, 115f
guinea pigs, 78
Clear-cell focus, hammster liver, 73, 75f
Degeneration
lipomatous hamartoma, mouse, 64, 64f
Clitoral glands
cornea, mouse, 65,65f
mineralization
rat female reproductive system, 1l6, 116f
Degenerative joint disease, mouse, 63, 63f
cynomolgus mac:
caque, 12-13, 13f
rodents, 116f
Dehydration artifacts, 96, 96f
hamster, 77, 77f
Coagulative necrosis, mouse liver, S5, S5f
Demodex mite infestation, dogs, 43,43f
minipig, 84, 84f
Coccidiosis, rabbit gall bladder, 89, 89f
Demyelination, rat sciatic nerve, 33, 33f
mouse, 64, 64f
Colitis
Dendritic reticular cells, mouse hyperplasia, 47,
rats, 34, 34f
mamoset, 6-7, 7f
48f
minipigs, 84
non-human primates, 6, 6f
Dental dysplasia, rats, 23, 23f
mouse, 64
Shigella infection, non-human primates, 6, 6f
Dematitis
New Zealand White rabbit, 91
Collagenofbrotic glomerulonephropathy (CFCN),
bedding-associated, hamster, 76
non-human primates, 12-13
9-10
ear margin, dogs, 43, 43f
rats, 33-34
Colloidal plugs, rat urinary bladder, 29, 29f
moist, rabbit,90
Branchial cysts, dog thymus, 38, 38f
Colonic glands
rats, 32f, 33
Bronchioles
diverticulum, mouse, 52
Developmental cysts, mouse pars distalis, 59,
mucus mineralization, rats, 22, 22f
glandular herniation, marmoset, 6, 7f
59f
neuroendocrine cellhyperplasiarats, 20l,
herniationminipig3,8
Diffuse glomerulonephritis, mammoset, 10, 10f
21f
Congenital/developmental lesions, rat male
Dilated submucosal glands, rat larynx, 22, 22f
Brown pigment, non-human primate lungs, 4, 4f 
reproductive system,102
Diestrus, beagle dogs, 1l8, 118f
Brunner's gland, marmoset duodenum, 7, 7f 
Congenital glaucoma, rabbit, 91
Diverticulum
Bulbourethral gland, rodent cystic dilatation, 105f
Cornea
colonic glands, mouse, 52
Buphthalmia, rabbit, 91
degeneration, mouse, 65, 65f
duodenum, rats, 24, 24f
mineralizationmouse,6,f
Ductal hyperplasia, rodent mammary gland, 115,
Cornifciatin,non-human pmateagina121,f
115f
C
Corpora lutea, hamster ovary, 76, 76f
Cortex
pancreas, 75, 76f
Campylobacter infection, non-human primates, 6
adrenal glands see Adrenal gland cortex
Duodenum
Capsular cyst, rat spleen, 19, 19f
kidney see Kidney
Brunner's gland, mamoset, 7, 7f
Caput epididymis, dog intranuclear eosinophilic
Cover slipping, artifacts, 98, 98
diverticulum, rats, 24, 24f
inclusions, 108, 108f
Cracks/fractures
ectopic pancreatic tissue, mouse, 52, 52f
cutting artifact, 97, 97f
hyperplasia, mouse, 53, 53f
artifacts, 93, 93f
fixative artifact, 94, 95f
Dysplasia, hamster sternum, 77, 77f
freezing artifact, 94, 94f
mouse, 45,45f
Cryptorchidism, rodents, 102
rats, 17, 17f
Cuboidal metaplasia, non-human primate Bowman's
E
Cardioyascular system
capsule, 9, 9f
beagle dogs, 37
Cupping, minipig optic disk, 84, 84f
Ear
guinea pigs, 78
Cutting artifact, 96-97, 97f
hamsters, 77
hamsters, 73
Cyclicity-related changes, non-human primate
minipigs, 84
minipigs, 81
female reproductive system, 1l9-120,
New Zealand White rabbit, 91
mouse see Mouse
119f-120f
rats, 35-36
New Zealand White rabbit, 87
Cyst(s)
Ear margin demmatitis, dogs, 43, 43f
 non-human primates, 1-3
biliary, hamster, 74, 74f
Ectopic adrenal gland
rats, 17-18
brain
epididymis, non-human pnimates, 8, 9f
Cartilage
mouse, 64,64f
kidney, non-human primates, 8, 9f
aorta, rats, 17, 17f
rats, 34, 34f
liver, non-human primates, 9, 9f
sternum degeneration, hamster, 77, 77f
branchial, dog thymus, 38, 38f
Ectopic granule cells, ratbrain,34,4f
tongue, minipig, 82, 82f
capsular, rat splen, 19
Ectopic ntestinal tissue,rat stomach,24,24f
trachea mineralization, rats, 21, 21f
follicular, ovary see Ovaries
Ectopic liver, non-human primates, 11, 11f
C-cells
hard palate, hamster, 74, 74f
Ectopic pancreatic tissue
hyperplasia
heart, non-human primates, 2, 2f
duodenum, mouse, 52, 52f
marmoset thyroid gland, 1l, 1lf
heart valve, rats, 17, 17f
small intestine, rats, 25, 25f
rat thyroid, 32, 32f
non-glandular stomach, rats, 23, 23f
Ectopic parathyroid glands, rats, 20
infltratesdog thyroid42,4
parathyroidglanddogs,4142,4
Ectopic renal tissue, mouse liver, S3, 53f
Cell ploidy, rat liver, 27, 28f
pars distalis,dogs41-42,42f
Ectopic sebaceous glands, rats, 23
Cell rest of Hortega, dogs, 43,44f
pars nervosa, dogs, 41-42,42f
Ectopic thymic tissue
Central nervous system (CNS), artifacts, 98-99
pituitary gland, rats,30,30f
parathyroid gland see Parathyroid glands
Cerebellum, rat hypoplasia, 34, 34f
thymus, mouse, 48, 48f
rats, 19
Cerebrum
thyroid, rats, 32
Ectopic tissue, dog thyroid, 41-42
lymphoid infiltrate, minipig, 8l, 81f
vagina, rodents, 112f
Efferent ducts, blind-ending, 108, 108f
nucleus circulanis, rats, 34, 34f
Cystic atrophy, rodent preputial gland, 104, 105f
Endocardium, mesenchymal proliferation, 17,
Cervix
Cystic degeneration, rat liver, 26, 26f
17f
keratin cysts, rodents, 112f
Cystic dilatation
Endocrine system
lymphocytic infiltration, non-human primates,
bulbourethral gland, rodents, 105f
beagle dogs, 41-42
121, 121f
gastric glands, rats, 23, 23f
hamsters, 75-76
rat female reproductive system, 114-115
mucosal glands, mouse, 52, 52f
minipigs, 84
Cholangiofbrosis, rats, 26-27, 27f
preputial gland, rodents, 104, 105f
mouse see Mouse
Cholecystitis
Cystic follicles, rodents, 112-113, 113f
New Zealand White rabbit, 90
minipig, 83, 83f
Cystic hyperplasia
non-human primates, 10-12
necrotic,rabbit, 89, 89f
endometrium, rodents, 114-115,114f-115f
rats, 30-32
Cholelithiasis, hamster, 75, 75f
uterus, rodents, 114, 114f
see also specifc endocrine glands
Cholesterol clefts, rat lung, 21, 21
endometrium, dog, 118
Endometrial glands
Chondromucinous degeneration, sternum see
Cystic replacement, rodent ovary, 114, 114f
 estrus cycle, non-human primate, 120f
Sternum
Cystitis, dogs, 41, 41f
squamous metaplasia, rodents, 112-113, 113f
Subiect Index
125
Endometrium, cystic hyperplasia, 114-115,
Gastrointestinal system
114f-115f
110f
beagle dogs, 39-40
Environmental factors, artifacts, 93
Fibrous osteodystrophy (FOD), mammoset, 12,
guinea pigs, 78
Eosinophilic crystals
12f
hamsters, 74
rat lung, 22, 22f
Fighting, rabbit skin damage, 90
minipigs, 82-83
rat thymus, 20, 20f
Filaroides infection, dogs, 39, 39f
mouse see Mouse
Eosinophilic granulesmouse, l,lf
Fixation artifacts, 94-95
New Zealand White rabbit, 88
Eosinophilic inclusions
Flank glands, ulceration, 76, 76f
 non-human primates, 5-7
Clara cell, rats, 21, 21f
Focal alveolar epithelial hyperplasia, mouse, 50,
rats, 23-25
gall bladder, mouse, 56, 56f
50f
Gemminal centres
intracytoplasmic, liver, 26,26f
Focal angiectasis, mouse liver, 46, 46f
 bone marrow, non-human primates, 3-4, 4f
myocardium, non-human primates, 2, 2f
Focal atrophy, mouse submandibular salivary glands,
lymphofollicular structure, mouse, 48, 48f
nasal turbinate, rats, 20, 20f
 51, 51f
Clandular herniation, mamoset colonic glands, 6, 7f
tracheal glands, mouse, 49-50, 49f
Focal biliary cysts, rats, 26-27, 27f
Claucoma, congenital, 91
urothelium,non-human primates,10,10f
Focal cortical hypertrophy, mouse adrenal glands,
Clial scars, non-human prmate brain, 13, 13f
Eosinophilic perivascular infltration, rat lung, 21,
60, 60f
Gliosis
21f
 Focal cystic dilatation, dog prostate gland, 108,
non-human primates, 13, 13f
Eosinophilic Purkinje cells, artifact, 98, 99f
108f-109f
optic nerve artifacts, 93, 93f
Eosinophils
 Focal degeneration, mouse spinal cord, 64, 65f
rats, 34
 jejunum lammina propria, minipig, 83, 83f
Focal epithelial hyperplasia, mouse gall bladder, 56,
Glomerular lipid accumulation, dog kidney, 4l, 41f
subcapsular sinus, minipig, 82, 82f
56f
Glomerulonephnitis, mouse, 58
Epicardiummousemineralization,464
Focal erosion
Clomerulonephropathy,hamster, 75, 75f
Epidemis
forestomach, mouse, 51-52, 52f
Glomerulosclerosis
cysts, rats, 33, 33f
stomach, hamster, 74, 74f
 cynomolgus macaque, 9-10, 10f
focal ulceration, mouse, 62, 62f
Focal hyperplasia, mouse mammary gland, 62, 62f
mouse, 58,58f
inclusion cyst, mouse, 62, 62f
Focal hypertrophy, rat parathyroid gland, 32, 32f
rats, 28,28f
Epidemoid cyst,mouse spinal cord64,6f
Focal myocarditis, cynomolgus macaque, 1, 1f
Clycogen accumulation, mammoset liver, 8, 8f
Epididymis
Focal necrosis
Granular cell hyperplasia
basophilic vacuolation, rodents, 104, 104f
liver see Livei
kidney, hamster, 76, 76f
 ectopic adrenal gland, non-human primates, 8,
mouse Harderian glands, 66, 66f
large intestine, hamste, 76, 76f
9
Focal squamous metaplasia, rabbit prostate gland,
uterus, hamster, 76, 76f
epithelial cystic vacuolation, rodents, 103f
90, 90f
Granule cells, ectopic, 34, 34f
hyperplasia, hamster, 76, 77f
Focal tubular basophilia, dog kidney, 4l, 41f
Granulomas
lymphoid aggregates,rodents, 103104f
Focal tubular degeneration, non-human primate
lungs, dogs, 39, 39f
pseudoglandular cysts, dogs, 108, 108f
testes, 110f
non-human primates, 7, 7f
rats, 103-104
Focal tubular dilatation, non-human primate testes,
Granulopoiesis, mouse bone marrow, 48-49, 49f
 spem granulomas, rodents, 103, 103f
109f
Growth plate dysplasia, marmoset, 12f, 13
Epiphyses, mouse hyperostosis, 63, 63f
Focal ulceration
Guinea pigs, 77-78
Epithelial atrophy, hamster prostate gland, 76, 77f
epidermis, mouse, 62, 62f
brain, 78
Epithelial cell hyperplasia
non-glandular stomach, rats, 23, 23f
cardiovascular system, 78
gall bladder, dogs, 40, 41f
Focal villous intimal proliferation, dog myocardial
gastrointestinal system, 78
prostate gland, rodents, 104f
artery, 37, 37f
hepatobiliary system, 78
Epithelial ell acuolation, dog gallbladder,4040
Follicle dilatation, mouse thyroid, 6l, 61f
hemolymphoreticular system, 78
Epithelial cysts
Follicular cysts
musculoskeletal system, 78
heart, cynomolgus macaque, 2, 2f
ovary see Ovaries
nervous system, 78
vacuolation, epididymis, rodents, 103f
skin, rats, 33, 33f
reproductive system, 78
Erythrophagocytosis, rat alveolar hemorrhage,
Follicular epithelial hypertrophy, rat thyroid, 32,
respiratory system, 78
20-21, 21f
32f
urinary system, 78
Extracapsular cortical tissue, rat adrenal glands, 31,
Folliculitis, dogs, 43, 43f
Gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT)
31f
Food accumulation, rat molars, 23, 23f
macrophage aggregates, rabbit, 87, 87f
Extramedullary hemopoiesis
Fordyce's granules, rats, 23
non-human primates, 6
adrenal glands
Foreign body, mouse larynx,49,49f
Warthin-Finkeldey bodies, non-human primates,
marmoset, 1l, 11f
Foreign body pneumonia, non-human primate
3, 3f
rats, 31, 31f
4f
choroid plexus, rats, 34, 34f
Forestomach, focal erosion, 5l-52, 52f
liver, mouse, 53-54, 54f
Formalin, perivascular expansion,94,94f
H
spleen
Fungal contamination, 97, 97f
mouse, 48, 48f
Hematocysts, dog heart valve, 37, 37f
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) artifacts, 97
rats, 19, 19f
Eye
G
Hemopoiesis
hamsters, 77
 extramedullary see Extramedullary hemopoiesis
Gall bladder
Jiver see Liver
minipigs, 84
New Zealand White rabbit, 91
coccidiosis, rabbit, 89, 89f
Hemorrhage
rats, 35-36
duplication, rabbit, 89, 89f
optic nerve, artifacts, 93, 93f
eosinophilic inclusions, mouse, 56, 56f
thymus, rats, 20, 20f
epithelial cellhyperplasia dogs, 40,41f
Hemosiderin
F
epithelal alatonog404
liver, mamoset, 8, 8f
focal epithelial hyperplasia, mouse, 56, 56f
spleen, rats, 19, 19f
Fatty vacuolation, mouse liver, 54, 54f
Gastric erosion see Stomach
Hair contamination, 94, 94f
Female reproductive system, 1l0-1ll
Gastric glands
Hair embolus, rats, 22, 22f
beagle dogs see Beagle dogs
cystic dilatation, rats, 23, 23f
Hamsters, 73-79
 non-human primates see Non-human primates
Helicobacter, dogs, 40, 40f
cardiovascular system, 73
rats see Rats
herniation, hamster, 74, 74f
ear, 77
 Fibroadenoma, rodent mammary gland, 116f
Gastric heteropia, dogs, 40, 40f
endocrine glands, 75-76
Fibrosing alveolitis, dogs, 39, 39f
Gastric infarction, non-human primates, 5-6
eye, 77
Fibrosis
Gastric mucosa
gastrointestinal system, 74
herniated liver lobe, rats, 27, 27f
hypertrophy, mouse, 52, 52f
hepatobiliary system, 74-75
liver, mamoset, 8, 8f
mineralization
hemolymphoreticular system, 73
middle ear, hamster,77, 77f
dogs, 40, 40f
musculoskeletal system, 77
myocardium, mamoset, 2, 2f
hamster, 74, 74f
reproductive system, 76
26
Subject Index
Hamsters (continued)
glomerular lipid accumulation, dogs, 41, 41f
respiratory system,73
granular cell hyperplasia, hamster, 76, 76f
skin and appendages, 76
Immatunity
histiocytic sarcoma,rats, 28, 28f
uninary system, 75
dog female reproductive system, 116, 116f-117f
hyaline casts, hamster, 75, 75f
Harderian glands
dog male reproductive system, 105-107
hyaline droplets, rats, 28, 28f
focal necrosis, mouse, 66, 66f
minipig male reproductive system, 110
inflammation, mouse, 57-58
squamous hyperplasia, rats, 35, 35f
non-human primate female reproductive system,
interstitial lymphocytes, minipig, 83, 83f
 Hardenianization, lacrimal gland
119
juvenile glomerulus, dogs, 41, 41f
mouse, 66, 66f
rat female reproductive system, 1ll
lymphocytic infiltration, mouse, 57, 57f
rats, 35, 35f
rat spematogenesis, 101-102
mineralization
Hard palate
Inclusion cyst, mouse epidermis, 62, 6f
dogs, 41, 41f
cyst fomation, hamster, 74, 74f
Inflammation
mamoset, 4-5, 5f
mineralization,hamster,74,74f
aorta, mouse, 46, 46f
minipig, 83, 83f
Hassalls copuscles, dog thymus, 38, 8f
chronic suppurative, hamster ear, 77, 77f
mouse,57
Heart artery, mural hypertrophy, 1718, 18f
kidney, mouse, 57-58
rabbit, 89, 89f
Heart valve
Jacnimal gland, rats, 35, 35f
rats, 28, 29f
cyst, rats, 17, 17f
hematocysts, dogs, 37, 37f
multifocal subpleural, rats, 22, 22f
tubular dilatation, hamster, 75, 75f
Helicobacter infections
muscle
tubular epithelial cells, nuclear bnick inclusions,
gastric glands, dogs,40,40f
minipig, 84, 84f
dogs, 40, 40f
non-human primates, S
rats,33, 33f
tubular hypertrophy, rats, 29, 29f
Hemosiderotic plaque, dog spleen, 38, 38f
myocardium, cynomolgus macaque, 1, 1f 
Kidney cortex
Hepatobiliary system
preputial gland, rodents, 104, 104f
cysts, mouse, 57, 57f
beagle dogs, 40
prostate gland, rodents, 104, 104f
interstitial lymphoplasmacytic infltration,
guinea pigs, 78
Information sources, mouse, 45
non-human primates, 9, 9f
hamsters, 74-75
Inherited buphthalmia, rabbit, 91
Jipomatous transformation, rats, 29, 29f
minipigs, 83
Interstitial glands, rabbit ovary, 90, 90f
lymphoid infltrate, minipig, 8l, 81f
New Zealand White rabbit, 88-89
Interstitial lymphocytes, minipig kidney 8, 83f
pigment accumulation, mouse, 57, 57f
non-human primates, 8-9
Interstitial lymphoplasmacytic infiltration,
  sud usnyod unauida rengn
rats, 25-27
non-human primate kidney cortex, 9, 9f
tubular epithelumvaculatin,dogs41,4
Hepatocytes
Interstitial nephnitis, non-human primates, 9
Kidney pelvis, rat transitional epithelum
 intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusions, mouse,
Interstitial pneumonia, non-human primates, 4, 4f
hyperplasia, 29, 29f
54, 54f
Intestinal tissue, rat stomach, 24, 24f 
 Knee joints, synovial hyperplasia, 63, 63f
intracytoplasmic erythrocytes, mouse, 54, 54f
Intimal degeneration, cynomolgus macaque aorta, 3,
intranuclear eosinophilic inclusions, mouse, 54,
3f
54f
Intracytoplasmic colloid, rat thyroid, 32, 32f
L
 jntranuclear inclusions, hamster, 74, 74f
Intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusions, mouse
lipofuscin pigment, rats, 27, 27f
hepatocytes, 54, 54f
Lacnimal glands
multinucleate
Intracytoplasmic erythrocytes, mouse hepatocytes,
acinar atrophy, rats, 35, 35f
mouse, 54f
54, 54f
acinar hypertrophy, rats, 35, 35f
rats, 27, 27f
Intracytoplasmic hyaline inclusions, mouse olfactory
Hardenianization
necrosis
epithelium,49,49f
mouse, 66, 66f
minipig, 83, 83f
Intrahepatic bile duct, hypertrophy, S5, 56f
rats, 35, 35f
rats, 26-27, 27f
Intranuclear eosinophilic inclusions
inflammation, rats, 35, 35f
 non-glandular stomach, rats, 26, 26f
caput epididymis, dogs, 108,
,108f
 mesenchymal proliferation, mouse, 66, 66f
nuclear bnick inclusions, dogs, 40, 40f
hepatocytesmouse,4,54
Lamina propria
rarefaction, barbiturate injection artifact, 93, 93f
Intranuclear inclusions, hamster hepatocytes, 74,
amyloidosis, mouse, 66, 66f
vacuolation
74f
macrophages, non-human primates, 6, 6f
mouse, 54, 55f
Iris, mineralization, 65, 65f
Large intestine, ganular cellhypeplasia,76,7f
rabbit, 88, 89f
Ischemic adipose tissue, mineralization, 23, 24f
Laryngeal cartilage, ossifcation, 22, 22f
Herniated liver lobe, rat fibrosis, 27, 27f
Islet cell hyperplasia see Pancreas
Larynx
Herniation
dilated submucosal glands, rats, 22, 22f
colonic glands, minipig, 83,83f
foreign body, mouse, 49, 49f
gastnic glands,hamster,74,74
J
Left ventricle, dilatation, 73, 73f
Histiocytic sarcoma, rat kidney, 28, 28f
Lens
Histiocytosis, alveolar, 73, 73f
Jejunum lamina propna, minipig eosinophils, 83,
autolysis
Hyaline casts, hamster kidney, 75, 75f
83f
artifacts, 98, 99f
Hyaline deposits
Joint mice, rats, 33, 33f
rats, 35, 35f
kidney, rats, 28, 28f
 Joints see Musculoskeletal system
degeneration see Lenticular degeneration
lymphoid follicles, ogs38,8f
Juvenile glomerulus, dog kidney, 4l, 41f
Lenticular degeneration
nasal septum,mouse,49,49f
hamster, 77, 77f
Hydronephrosis, rats, 28,28f
mouse, 65, 65f
Hyperostosis, epiphyses, 63, 63f
K
rats, 35, 35f
Hyperplasia
Leydig cell hypeplasia, rodents, 103, 104f
adrenal cortex, hamster, 75, 75f
Karyomegaly
Lipid vacuolation, liver see Liver
bile duet see Bile ducts
cynomolgus macaque, 1, 2f
Lipofuscin pigments
dendritic reticular cells, mouse, 47, 48f
mouse liver, 54, 54f
hepatocytes, rats, 27,27f
ductal mammary gland, rodents, 1i5f
Keratin cysts
kidney cortical tubular epithelium,rats28f
duodenum,mouse,S3,53f
cervix, rodents, 112f
Lpogenic pigmentation, mouse adrenal glands, 60,
lymphoid, rabbit bladder, 90, 90f
muscle, rats, 33, 33f
60f
neuroendocnine cell, hamster, 73, 74f
spinal cord,rats,34,34f
Lipomatosis, mouse, 47, 47f
pelvic urothelium, rats, 29, 29f
Kidney
Lipomatous hamartomas, mouse brain, 64, 64f 
rete epithelium, rodents, 103, 104f
autolysis artefact, rats, 29, 30f
Lipomatous transfommation, rat renal cortex, 29,
Hypertrophy
basophilic tubules
29f
gastnic mucosa, mouse, 52, 52f
minipig,83,83f
Liver
intrahepatic bile duct, mouse, S5, 56f
rabbit, 89-90, 90f
amyloidosis, mouse, 66, 67f
Hypoplasia
corticomedullary mineralization, rats, 28, 29f
angiectasis, rats, 26, 26f
cerebellum, rats, 34, 34
ectopic adrenal gland, non-human primates, 8, 9f
cell ploidy, rats, 27, 28f
testes, rodents, 102
ectopic tissue, mouse liver, 53, 53f
clear-cell focus, hamster, 73, 75f
Hypospermatogenesis, dogs, 107, 107f
focal tubular basophilidogs41,41f
coagulative necrosis, mouse,S5,55f
Subiect Index
127
cystic degeneration, rats, 26, 26f
M
ear, 84
ectopic, non-human primates, ll, 1lf
endocrine system, 84
ectopic adrenal gland, non-human primates, 9, 9f
Macrophages
eye, 84
ectopic renal tissue, mouse, 53, 53f
aggregates,gut-associated lymphoid tissue
gastrointestinal system, 82-83
extramedullary hemopoiesis, mouse,53-54,54f
(GALT), 87, 87f
hepatobiliary system, 83
fatty vacuolation, mouse, 54, 54f
alveolar see Alveolar macrophages
hemolymphoreticular system, 81-82
fbrosis, mamoset, 8, 8f
lamina propria, non-human primates, 6, 6f
male reproductive system, 110
focal angiectasis, mouse, 46, 46f
mesentenic lymph node, rats, 18, 18f 
immatunity, 110
focal necrosis
Male reproductive system, 10l-110
matunity, 110
mouse, 55, 55f
dogs see Beagle dogs
peripuberty,110
non-human primates, 8, 9f
 minipigs see Minipigs
musculoskeletal system, 84
gycogen accumulation, mammoset, 8, 8f
non-human primates see Non-human primates
nervous system, 84
hemopoiesis
rats see Rats
reproductive system, 84
mamoset, 8, 8f
Mammary glands
female reproductive system, 121
rats, 26-27, 27f
aveolar hypeplasi,oents,115,1
respiratory system, 82
hemosidenin, mamoset, 8, 8f
ductal hypeplasiaodents 115,11f
skin and appendages, 84
inflammation, non-human prmates, 8, 9f
fbroadenoma, rodents, 116f
urinary system, 83
intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusions, rats, 26,
focal hyperplasia mouse, 62, 6
Moist dermatitis, rabbit, 90
26f
New Zealand White rabbit, 90
Molars, food accumulation, 23, 23f
karyomegaly, mouse, 54, 54f
estrus cycle, non-human primate, 119f
Mounting, artifacts, 97
lipid vacuolation
rats, 115
Mouse, 45-72
mamoset, 8, 8f
brain, 64
non-human prmates, 8, 8f
13, 13f
cardiovascular system, 45-46
lobe torsion, rats, 27, 27f
Mandibular lymph node
endocrine glands, 59-61
mamoset, 8
abscess, minipig,82,
gastrointestinal system, 50-53
microgranuloma, mouse, S5, SSf
mast cells, rats, 18, 18f
jnfomation sources, 45
necrosis, mammoset, 8f
plasmacytosis, rats, 18, 19f
hemolymphoreticular system, 46-49
periportal fat vacuolation, rats, 26, 26f
Mast cells, rat mandibular lymph node, 18, 18f
musculoskeletal system, 62-63
tension lipidosis
Maturity
nervous systems, 64
 non-human primates, 8, 8f
dog male reproductive system, 105-107
pancreas, 56
rats, 25, 26f
 minipig male reproductive system, 110
reproductive system see Rats
Luminal crystals, mouse thyroid, 6l, 61f
rat spermatogenesis, 101-102
respiratory system, 49-50
Lungs
Medullary hyperplasia, rat adrenal glands, 3l, 31f
stock/strain differences, 45
mineralization
Mercuric chlonide-formaldehyde fxation, artifacts,
 Systemmic disease, 66
mamoset, 4-5, 5f
95
urinary system, 57-59
minipig,82, 82f
Mesenchymal proliferation
Mucinous degeneration, non-human primate atria,
 smooth muscle mineralization, dogs, 38, 38f
endocardium,rats1717
3, 3f
Lymph follicles, non-human primates, 3-4, 4f
lacrimal gland, mouse, 66, 66f
Mucosal glands, cystic dilatation, 52,
Lymph nodes
 Mesenteric adipose tissue necrosis, rats, 23, 24f
52f
atrophy, rats, 18
Mesenteric lymph node
Mucus cell hyperplasia, dogs, 40, 40f
hyalinisation, non-human primates, 3-4, 4f
macrophages, rats, 18, 18f
Multifocal subpleural inflammation, rats, 22,
Russell bodies, rats, 18, 19f
sinus ectasia, mouse, 47, 47f
22f
 sr  s
sinus erythrocytosis, mouse, 47, 47f
Multilocular biliary cyst, mouse, 55, 55f
tattoo pigment, rats, 19, 19f
Metabolic disease, New Zealand White rabbit, 91
Multinucleate cells, cynomolgus macaque kidney,
Lymphocytic epididymitis, dogs, 107, 108f
Metaplasia
10, 10f
Lymphocytic infiltration
Bowman's capsule, rats, 28
Multinucleate giant cells, dog testes, 107,
cervix, non-human primates, 121, 121f
cuboidal, Bowman's capsule, 9, 9f
107f
eye, non-human primates, 13, 13f
osseous see Osseous metaplasia
Multinucleate hepatocytes see Hepatocytes
kidney, mouse, S7, 57f
Microgranulomamouseliver5f
Mural hypertrophy, rat heart artery, 1718,
thyroid gland, rabbit, 90
Middle ear fibrosis, hamster, 77, 77f
18f
uninary bladder, rats, 29, 29f
Mineralization
Muscles
Lymphocytic orchitis, dogs, 107,108f
adrenal cortex, non-human primates, l0-ll,
inflammation, rats, 33, 33f
Lymphocytic thyroiditis, dog thyroid,42,42f
11f
keratin cysts, rats, 33, 33f
Lymphofollicular structure, mouse germinal centres,
aorta
Muscle spindle, nuclear bag fiber, 63, 64f
48,48f
dogs,37, 37f
Musculoskeletal system
Lymphoid aggregates, rodent epididymis, 103,
rabbit, 87, 87f
beagle dogs, 43
104f
artery, rats, 20, 20f
guinea pigs, 78
Lymphoid follicles
brain see Brain
hamsters, 77
bladder, dogs, 41, 41f
bronchiole mucus, rats, 22, 22f
minipigs, 84
hyaline deposits, dogs,3838
cornea, mouse, 65, 65f
mouse, 62-63
vagina, non-human primates, 12l, 121f
epicardium, mouse, 46, 46f
New Zealand White rabbit, 91
Lymphoid hyperplasia
gastric mucosa,hamster,74,7
 non-human primates, 12
bladder, rabbit, 90, 90f
hard palate, hamster, 74, 74f
rats, 33
Peyer's patch, rats, 25, 25f
jns, mouse, 65, 65f
see aiso specifc features
thymus,mouse, 48, 48f
kidney see Kidney
Mycotic oesophagitis, mamoset, 5, Sf
Lymphoid infiltrates
lungs see Lungs
Myocardial artery, focal villous intimal proliferation,
adrenal cortex, minipig, 81, 8lf
nasal turbinate, rats, 20, 20f
37, 37f
cerebrum, minipig, 81, 81f
nasal turbinate mucus, rats, 22, 22f
Myocardial degeneration, cynomolgus macaque, l,
renal cortex, minipig, 8l, 81f
pelvic transitional epithelium, rats, 29, 29f
2F
uninary bladder, mouse, 58, 58f
Peyer's patches, rats, 19, 19f
Myocardial lymphoid cells, rats, 17, 17f
Lymphoma tissue, cutting artifact, 96, 96
prostate gland see Prostate gland
Myocarditis, focal, 1, 1f
Hemolymphoreticular system
salivary gland, minipig, 82, 82f
Myocardium
beagle dogs, 38
spinal cord meninges, dogs, 43, 43f
degeneration, cynomolgus macaque, 2, 2f
guinea pigs, 78
strangulated/ischemic adipose tissue, rats, 23,
 eosinophilic inclusions, non-human primates, 2,
hamsters, 73
24f
2f
minipigs 81-82
anguoi s anguo,
fibrosis, marmoset, 2, 2f
mouse see Mouse
uninary bladder, non-human primates, 10, 10f
inflammatory cells, cynomolgus macaque, 1,
New Zealand White rabbit, 87
Minipigs, 81-85
1f
non-human primates, 3-4
brain, 84
Myodegeneration, minipig, 84, 84f
rats, 18-20
cardiovascular system, 81
Myofbers, atrophy, 33, 33f
28
Subject Index
N
focal hypertrophy, rats, 32, 32f
minipig, 84, 84f
Nasal septum, hyaline matenial, 49, 49f
ultimobranchial cyst, mouse, 6l, 61f
Nasal turbinates
7, 7F
 Parotid salivary gland, basophilic hypertrophic
eosinophilic inclusions, rats, 20, 20f
Estrus, dog female reproductive system, ll7-l18,
focus, 24, 24f
mineralization, rats, 20, 20f
117f-118f
Pars distalis
mucus mineralization, rats, 22, 22f
Estrus cycle
cysts, dogs, 41-42, 42f
Necrosis
dog female reproductive system, 1l6-118
developmental cysts,mouse,59,59f
focal, liver, 8, 9f
mammary gland,nonhuman pimate,119
focal hyperplasia, pituitary gland, 30, 30f
hepatocytes
ovary, non-human primate, 119f
Pars nervosa, cysts, 41-42, 42f
minipig, 83, 83f
rats11121
Passalurus ambiguus ova, rabbit, 88, 88f
rats, 26-27, 27f
uterus, non-human primate, 119f-120f
Pelger-Huet syndrome, rabbit, 87
liver, mamoset, 8, 8f
vagina, rats, 111f
Pelvic transitional epithelium, mineralization, 29,
submucosal, stomach, 5-6, 6f
 Olfactory epithelium, intracytoplasmic hyaline
29f
Necrotic cholecystitis, rabbit, 89, 89f
inclusions, 49, 49f
Pelvic urothelium, hyperplasia, 29, 29f
Neonates, rat brain, 34, 34f
Optic disk, cupping, 84, 84f
Penile lesions, rats, 104
Nephropathy, rats, 28, 28f
Optic nerve
Periartenitis
Nervous system
atrophy, rats, 35, 35f
dogs, 37, 37f
 s 8
gliosis, artifacts, 93, 93f
minipig, 81, 81f
guinea pigs, 78
hemorrhage, artifacts, 93, 9
mouse, 46, 46f
minipigs, 84
neuritis, cynomolgus macaque, 13, 13f
 Perimesentenic plexus, minipig, 82, 82f
mouse, 64
Osseous metaplasia
Periodontal gingivitis, mouse, S0, 5lf
 New Zealand White rabbit, 91
lung parenchyma
Periportal fat vacuolation, rat liver, 26, 26f
 non-human primates, 12-13
dogs,38,38f
Peripuberty
rats, 33-34
rats, 22,22f
dog female reproductive system, 116
Nesidioblastosis, dog pancreas, 42, 42f
rats, 28
dog male reproductive system, 105-107
Neuroblasts, rats, 34, 34f
Ossification
minipig male reproductive system, 110
Neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia
adrenal cortex, rats, 31,31f
rat female reproductive system, 1ll
bronchiole, rats, 20-21, 21f
 rat spematogenesis, 10l-102
hamster, 73,74f
Perivascular cuffing
 New Zealand White rabbit, 87-91
Osteophytes, dog lung parenchyma, 38 38f
brain, non-human primates, 13, 13f
brain, 91
Ovaries
CNS, dogs, 43, 43f
cardiovascular system, 87
amyloid replacement, rodents, 1l4, 114f
Perivascular melanin, non-human primate brain, 13,
ear, 91
atrophy, rodents, 112-113, 113f
13f
endocrine system, 90
corpora lutea, hamster, 76, 76f
 Perivasculitis, non-human primates, 3, 3f
eye, 91
cystic replacement, rodents, 114, 114f
Peyer's patches
gastrointestinal system, 88
follicular cysts
lymphoid hyperplasia, rats, 25,25f
hepatobiliary system, 88-89
non-human primates, 12l, 12lf
mineralization, rats, 19, 19f
hemolymphoreticular system, 87
rodents, 112f
Pigments
mammary glands, 90
interstitial gland, rabbit, 90, 90f
adrenal cortex, rats, 3l, 31f
metabolic disease, 91
estrus cycle, non-human prmate, 119f
renal cortical tubules, mouse, 57, 57f
 musculoskeletal system, 91
pseudopregnancy, rodents, 112-113, 113f
Pinch artifact, 94, 94f
nervous system, 91
rats, 114
Pituitary gland
pancreas, 89
tubulostromal hyperplasia, rodents, 114,
adenohypophysis, rats, 30, 30f
reproductive system, 90
1 14f
angiectasis, rats, 30, 30f
respiratory system, 87
Ovotestis, rodents, 112-113, 113f
cyst, rats, 30, 30f
skin and appendages, 90
pars distalis focal hyperplasia, rats, 30, 30f
uninary system, 89-90
Rathke's pouch remnant, ats, 30, 30f
Non-glandular stomach
P
Plant matenal contamination, 93, 94f
focal ulceration, 23, 23f
Plasmacytic infltrates, at salivary gland, 24, 24f
hepatocytes, 26, 26f
Pancreas
Plasmacytosis
Non-glandular stommach, rats, cyst, 23, 23f
accessory spleen
mandibular lymph node, rats, 18, 19f
Non-human primates, 1-15
non-human primates, 7, 8f
mouse, 47, 47f
brain, 12-13
rabbit, 89, 89f
Pleural lung tag, rats, 21,21f
cardiovascular system, 1-3
acinar atrophy
Pneumoconiosis, non-human primates, 4
ectopic liver, 11, 11f
mouse, 56, 56f
Polyarteritis, rabbit lung, 87, 88f
endocrine system, 10-12
rats, 25, 25f
Polycystic kidney, rats, 28, 28f
female reproductive system, 119-121
acinar vacuolation, rats, 25, 25f
Postmortem/necropsy, artifacts, 93-94
background changes120121,120f
atrophy, dogs,42,42f
Pregnancy toxemia, rabbit, 91
cyclicity-related changes, 119-120,119f-120f
basophilic tinctonal change, rats, 25, 25f
Prepuce abscess, hamster, 76, 77f
immatunity, 119
ductal mucus epithelial hyperplasia, hamster, 75,
Preputial gland
puberty, 119
76f
cystic atrophy, rodents, 104, 105f
gastrointestinal system, 5-7
ectopic see Ectopic pancreatic tissue
cystic distension, rodents, 104, 105f
hepatobiliary system, 8-9
islet cell hyperplasia
inflammation, rodents, 104, 104f
hemolymphoreticular system, 3-4
hamster, 75, 75f
Processing artifacts, 95-96
male reproductive system, 109-110, 109f
mouse, 6l, 61f
Pro-estrus, dog female reproductive system, 117,
incidental fndings, 109-110, 109f-110f
rats, 32, 32f
117f
seasonal changes, 109, 109f
mouse, 56
Prolapse, mouse rectum, S3, 53f
musculoskeletal system, 12
nesidioblastosis, dogs, 42, 42f
Prostate gland
nervous system, 12-13
New Zealand White rabbit, 89
801 sop
respiratory system, 4-5
zymogen degranulation focus, rats, 25, 25f
 epithelial atrophy/mineralization, hamster, 76,
uninary bladder, 10
zymogen granules, rats, 32, 32f
77f
uninary system, 9-10
Pancreatic vessel, arteritis, 56, 56f
epithelial hyperplasia, rodents, 104f
Basophilic hypertrophic focus, mouse salivary
Paneth cells, zymogen granules, 52-53, 53f
focal cystic dilatation, dogs,108,108f-109f
glands,S1, 51f
Parathyroid glands
focal squamous metaplasia, rabbit, 90, 90f
Nuclear bag fiber, muscle spindle, 63, 64f
cysts, dogs, 41-42, 42f
inflammation, rodents, 104, 104f
Nuclear bnick inclusions
ectopic, rats, 20
mineralization
hepatocytes dogs,40,40f
ectopic thymic tissue
hamster, 76, 77f
renal tubular epithelial cells, dogs, 40, 40f
mamoset, 11-12, 12f
non-human primates, 1l0f
Nucleus circularis, rat cerebrum, 34, 34f
mouse, 60-61, 61f
rodents, 104, 105f
Subject Index
129
 Pseudoglandular cysts, dog epididymis, 108, 108f
Rete epithelium, hyperplasia, rodents, 103, 104f
chondrommucinous degeneration
Pseudopregnancy
Rete ovary cyst, rodents, 112f
dogs, 43, 43f
dogs, 118, 118f
Retina
mouse, 63, 63f
ovary, rodents, 112-113, 113f
atrophy
rats, 33, 33f
uterus, rodents, 112-113, 113f
mouse, 65,65f
dysplasia, hamster, 77, 77f
yagina, rodents, 112-113, 113f
rats, 35, 35f
Stock/strain differences, mouse, 45
 Puberty, non-human primate female reproductive
rosettes, rats, 35, 35f
Stomach
system, 119
Rhabdomyomatosis, guinea pig, 78, 78f
adenomatous hyperplasia, mouse, 52, 52f
Pulmonary acinar ectasia, rats, 22, 22
Right ventnicle, adipose tissue infltration, 87, 87f
focal erosion, hamster, 74, 74f
Pulmonary thrombi, non-human primates, 4, 4f
Russell bodies, rat lymph node, 18, 19f
gastnic erosion
Purkinje cells, eosinophilic, 98, 99f
minipig, 82, 83f
non-human primates, 5, 5f
s
squamous cyst, rats, 23, 23f
R
submucosal eosinophils, rats, 23, 23f
Salivary glands
submucosal necrosis, non-human primates, 5-6,
Rathke's pouch remnant, rat pituitary gland, 30,
acinar atrophy, rats, 24, 24f
6f
30f
adipocytes, dogs, 39, 40f
Strangulated adipose tissue, mineralization, 23,
Rats, 17-36
ineralization,minipi,
basophilic hypertrophic focus, mouse, 5l, 51f
24f
brain, 33-34
Striated (cardiac) muscle, mouse lungs, 50, 50f
cardiovascular system, 17-18
plasmacytic infltrates, rats, 24, 24f
Subarticular bone cyst, rats, 33, 33f
ear, 35-36
serous focus, rats, 24, 24f
Subcapsular cell hyperplasia, mouse adrenal glands,
endocnine glands, 30-32
squamous metaplasia, minipig, 82, 82f
60, 60f
eye, 35-36
see aiso specific salivary glands
Subcapsular sinus, eosinophils, 82, 82f
female reproductive system, 1ll-116
Salmonella infection, non-human primates, 6
J9 '79 'ssnou sasqe snoauensgns
aging animals, 112-114, 114f
Sarcocystis cysts, non-human primates, 12, 12f
 Subepithelial arteriovenous anastomosis, dog
cervix, 114-115
Schweiggel-Seidel sheathsminipig sleen,1
tongue, 39, 39f
ditoral gland, 116, 116f
Sciatic nerve
Subepithelial inflammation, dog tongue, 39, 39f
immatunity, 111
demyelination, rats, 33, 33f
Submandibular salivary glands
mammary gland, 115
Renault bodies, dogs, 43, 43f
focal atrophy mouse,51,f
estrus cyclieity, 111-112, 11lf-112f
Seasonal changes, non-human primate male
sexual dimorphism, mouse, 51, 51f
ovanies, 114
reproductive system, 109, 109f
Submucosal eosinophils, rat stomach, 23, 23f
peripuberty, 111
Sebaceous glands
Submucosal necrosis, non-human primates stomach,
uterus, 114-115
ectopic, rats, 23
5-6, 6f
vagina, 115
Seminal vesicle, distension, 104, 105f
Subpleural lymphatics, dogs, 39, 39f
young animals, 112, 112f
Serous focus, rat salivary gland, 24, 24f
Jg u auy asnou esediady 
gastrointestinal system, 23-25
Sperm granulomas, rodent epididymis, 103, 103f
Syphacia obvelata infection, mouse, S3, S3f
hepatobiliary system,2527
Severe diffuse amyloidosis, hamster, 75, 75f
Systemic disease, mouse, 66
hemolymphoreticular system, 18-20
 Sexual dimorphism
male reproductive system, 101-104
Bowman's capsule, mouse, 57, 57f
accessory sex organs104
submandibular salivary glands, mouse, Sl, 51f
age-related lesions, 103-104
Shigella infection, colitis, 6, 6f
congenital/developmental lesions, 102
Sinus dilatation, rat lymph nodes, 18, 18f
Talcum powder, artifact, 93
epididymides, 103-104
Sinus ectasia, mouse mesentenic lymph node, 47,
Tattoo pigment, rat lymph node, 19, 19f
penile lesions, 104
47f
Tension lipidosis, liver see Liver
residual bodies, 103f
Testes
tubular degeneration/atrophy, 102-103,
node, 47, 47f
amyloid deposition, rodents, 103, 104f
102f-103f
Skin
atrophic seminiferous tubules, hamster, 76, 77f
 musculoskeletal system, 33
beagle dogs, 43
dogs,107-108
nervous system, 33-34
hamsters, 76
epididymis hypeplasia, hamster,76,77f
respiratory system, 20-22
minipigs, 84
fibrous hypoplasia,non-human primates, 110f
skin and appendages 33
New Zealand White rabbit, 90
focal tubular degeneration, non-human primates,
spermatogenesis, 10i-104, 101f-102f
rats, 33
110f
inmmatunity, 10l-102
Smal intestine, ectopic pancreas, 25, 25f
focal tubular dilatation, non-human primates,
matunity, 101-102
Spermatogenesis, 10i, 101f-102f
109f
peripuberty, 101-102
rats see Rats
hypoplasia, rodents, 102
uninary system, 28-29
Spinal cord
multinucleate giant cells, dogs, 107, 107f
Rectum,prolapse,,
epidemmoid cyst, mouse, 64, 64f
tissue distortion, fxative artifact, 95, 95f
Refluxed seminal colloid plug, mouse urinary
focal degeneration, mouse, 64, 65f
tubular hypoplasia
bladder,58, 59f
keratin cysts, rats, 34, 34f
dogs, 107, 107f
 Renal cortex see Kidney cortex
meninges mineralization, dogs, 43, 43f
minipig, 110f
Renault bodies, dog sciatic nerve, 43,43f
Spleen
Thrombosis
 Reproductive system
accessory see Pancreas
aortic yalve, hamster, 73, 73f
 female see Female reproductive system
capsular cyst, rats, 19, 19f
atnial, hamster, 73, 73f
guinea pigs, 78
extramedullary hemopoiesis see Extramedullary
umbilical blood vessel, minipig, 83, 83f
hamsters, 76
hemopoiesis
Thrombus
male see Male reproductive system
hemosidenin, rats, 19, 19f
bone marrow, artifact, 93, 93f
minipigs, 84
hemosiderotic plaque, dogs, 38, 38f
lung, rabbit, 87, 88f
New Zealand White rabbit, 90
Schweiggel-Seidel sheaths, minipig, 8l, 8lf
Thymus
 Residual bodies, rat male reproductive system,
Squamous cyst, rat stomach, 23, 23f
apoptosis, rats, 20, 20f
103f
 Squamous epithelium
atrophy
Respiratory system
thymus, rats, 19, 20f
hamster, 73, 73f
beagle dogs, 38-39
trachea, dogs, 38, 38f
rats, 20, 20f
guinea pigs, 78
Squamous hyperplasia, rat Harderian glands, 35,
branchial cysts, dogs, 38, 38f
hamsters, 73
35f
cyst, mouse, 48, 48f
minipigs, 82
Squamous metaplasia
ectopic, parathyroid gland see Parathyroid glands
mouse see Mouse
endometrial glands, rodents, 112-113, 113f
eosinophilic crystals, rats, 20, 20f
New Zealand White rabbit, 87
salivary gland, minipig, 82, 82f
hemorrhage, rats, 20, 20f
non-human primates, 4-5
Stains, artifacts, 97-98, 98f
Hassall's corpuscles, dogs, 38, 38f
rats, 20-22
Sternum
lymphoid hyperplasia, mouse, 48, 48f
seeaiso specific components
cartilage degeneration, hamster, 77, 77f
squamous epithelium, rats, 19, 20f
130
Subject Index
Thyroid gland
Umbilical blood vessel, thrombosis, 83, 83f
Vagina
C-cell hyperplasia
Urachal artery thrombosis, dog bladder, 4l, 41f
 cornifciation, non-human primates, 12l,
mamoset, 1l, 11f
Urinary bladder
121f
rats, 32, 32f
collidal plug, rats, 29, 29f
cysts, rodents, 112f
C-cell infiltrates, dogs, 42, 42f
lymphocytic infltration, rats, 29, 29f
lymphoid follicles, non-human primates, 12l,
cysts, rats, 32
lymphoid infltrates, mouse, 58, 58f
121f
ectopic tissue, dogs, 41-42
non-human primates, 10
estrus cyclicity, rats, 111f
follile dilatation,mouse,61f
refluxed seminal colloid plugmouse,5859f
pseudopregnancy,rodents,112113,113f
fllicular epithelial hypertrophy, rats, 32, 32f
urothelial hyperplasia, mouse, 58, 58f
rats, 115
intracytoplasmic colloid, rats, 32, 32f
Urinary system
Vaso vasorum, rats, 18, 18f
luminal crystals, mouse, 6l, 61f
beagie dogs, 41
Vater Pacinian corpuscle, cynomolgus macaque
lymphocytic infltration, rabbit, 90
guinea pigs, 78
mammary gland, 13, 13f
lymphocytic thyroiditis, dogs, 42,42f
hamsters, 75
Venipuncture damage, minipig thyroid, 84, 84f
venipuncture damage, minipig, 84, 84f
minipigs, 83
Ventricle, adipose tissue infiltration, 87, 87f
Tissue contamination,94-97,94f,96f-97f
mouse see Mouse
Ventricular dilatation, rabbit brain, 91
Tissue distortion artifact, testicles, 95, 95f
New Zealand White rabbit, 89-90
Villous mesothelial projections, dog atria, 37,
Tongue
non-human primates, 9-10
38f
blood collection trauma, rats, 24, 25f
rats, 28-29 
cartilage, minipig, 82, 82f
see aiso Kidney; Urinary bladder
mineralization
Urothelial hyperplasia, mouse urnary bladder, 58,
W
hamster, 74, 74f
58f
rats, 18, 18f
Urothelium
Warthin-Finkeldey bodies, non-human primate
 subepithelial arteniovenous anastomosis, dogs, 39,
eosinophilic inclusions, non-human primates, 10,
gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), 3,
39f
10f
3f
subepithelial inflammation, dogs, 39, 39f
vacuolation, non-human primates, 10, 10f
Wasting marmoset syndrome (WMS), 6-7
Uterus
cartilage mineralization, rats, 2l, 21f
benign stromal polyp, rodents, 115, 115f
 sopuda snoens
X
cystic hyperplasia, rodents, 114, 114f
Tracheal glands, eosinophilic matenials, 49-50,
decidual reaction, hamster, 76, 76f
X zone, mouse adrenal glands, 59, 59f
49f
deciduoma, rodents, 1l5, 115f
Transitional epithelium hyperplasia, rat kidney
granular cell hyperplasia, hamster, 76, 76f
pelvis, 29, 29f
est rus cycle, non-human primate,
Y
Tubular degeneration/atrophy, rat male reproductive
119f-120f
system, 102-103, 102f-103f
pseudopregnancy, rodents, 112-113, 113f
Yersinia infection, non-human primates, 6
Tubular dilatation, hamster kidney, 75, 75f
rats, 114-115
Tubular hypoplasia see Testes
Tubulostromal hyperplasia, rodent ovary, 114,
z
114f
V
Zona glomerulosa
Vaccine granuloma, non-human primate muscle, 12,
focal hypertrophy, 31, 32f
U
12f
vacuolation, 42, 42f
Vacuolation
Zona reticulanis vacuolation, dog adrenal glands, 42,
Uceration
adrenal cortex, rats, 30, 30f-31f
42f
flank glands, hamster, 76, 76f
adrenal glands, rabbit, 90
 Zymogen degranulation focus, rat pancreas, 25,
rats, 32f 33
fixation artifact, 98, 98f
25f
skin, minipig, 84, 84f
hepatocytes see Hepatocytes
 Zymogen granules
Utimobranchial cyst, mouse parathyroid gland, 6l,
processing artifacts, 96, 96f
pancreas, rats, 32, 32f
61f
urothelium, non-human primates, 10, 10f
Paneth cells, mouse, 52-53, 53f