Copyursa i
FLSEVIER
AHSOW
SmallAnimal
Spinal Disorders
DiagnosisandSurgery
2nd edition
NicholasJ HSharpandSimon JWheeler
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Dedication
Professor lan R. Griffiths, Glasgow University Medical School
and
For their inspiration, encouragement and guidance
For Elsevier:
Commissioning Editor: Joyce Rodenhuis
Senior Development Editor: Zoe A Youd
Project Manager: Ailsa Laing
Designer: Andrew Chapman
ELSEVIER
MSBY
@ 2005, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
Copyright 19g4 Times Mirror International Publishers Limited 
Copyright 2000 Harcourt Publishers Limited
 2004 Elsevier Limited. Allrights reservedl.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either
the prior permission of the publishers or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United
t li uouo 'pot uno weuuai oe Kouay buisua huhudo aun Aa panssi wonou
        n a  sn
Philadelphia, USA: phone: (+1) 215 238 7869, fax: (+ 1) 215 238 2239, e-mail healthpermissions
@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier Science homepage
(http://www.elsevier.com), by selecting 'Customer Support' and then 'Obtaining Permissions'
First edlition 1994
Second edlition 2005 
ISBN 0723432090
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
 A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress 
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience
broaden our knowledge, changes in practice, treatment and drug therapy may become necessary
or appropriate. Readers are acvised to check the most current information provided (i on procedures 
featured or (i) by the manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended 
dlose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the
responsibility of the practitioner, relying on their own experience and knowledge of the patient, to
make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, and to
take all appropriate safety precautions. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the publisher nor the
aeuep looue Aunui Aue loj Agell Aue saunsse shoie
The Publisher
your source for books,
LLSEVILR
journals and multimedia
in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Printed in China
Preface
The second edition of Small Animal Spinal Disorders
 generally divided into intraoperative, early postopera-
now expands considerably on the foundations of neu-
tive and late postoperative. These are listed in tabular
roanatomy, clinical neurology and basic neurosurgery 
forrmat and are also discussed and illustrated where
provided in the first edition. The primary aim of the 
possible in the main text. Furthermore, prognostic
second edition remains to assist students, general prac-
information continues to be derived mainly from the
titioners and specialists in the diagnosis and under-
literature rather than from anecdote, at least where
standing of the latest neurosurgical procedures used
information is available. Physiotherapy now receives
to manage dogs and cats with spinal disease. The book
four pages of special emphasis in the postoperative care
      
chapter. An additional change is the separation of the
for 2005. Most of the pre-1994 literature has been
procedures section from the main chapter, so that pho-
reviewed again so that we do not forget lessons learned 
tographs of surgical techniques no longer interrupt the
previously and also so that this knowledge can be 
text. Finally, at the end of most chapters, key issues for
placed in proper context with more recent informa-
future investigation have been identified, to highlight
tion. Many exciting contributions have been made in 
areas where we need to focus our creative energy and
the last 10 years, but not surprisingly veterinary neuro-
future research efforts.
surgery still tends to suffer from limited case numbers,
Additional information relating to this text and to
oisn e u ss u sd dn-me 
 neurosurgery in general has been made available on the
training period in duration. Extensive reference has
 Internet at www.vetneurosurgery.com. This includes
 therefore been made to the human neurosurgical liter-
 direct links that provide abstract information to many
ature, both in an attempt to gain a different perspective
of the citations used in the second edition, along with
and to stimulate a continued reassessment of our cur-
further information on CT and MRI anatomy. It also
rent state of knowledge. Despite obvious differences
provides many links to other websites that contain
and limitations, the greater maturity and collective
information aimed at owners, referring veterinarians
 knowledge of the human specialty provides important
and specialists.
There will come a time when veterinary neuro-
 In addition to being completely rewritten, the sec-
surgery becomes a specialty recognized in its own right,
ond edition now contains 50% more figures. A much
just as it is in human healthcare. Until that time it will
 greater emphasis has now been placed on the advanced
 fall upon individuals, mainly from the European and
imaging techniques of CT and MRI; the chapters on 
 North American specialties of neurology and surgery,
functional anatomy and diagnostic aids in particular
to advance our knowledge one step at a time. This book
reflect these changes. Advanced imaging is also used
aims to bring all of the various quite disparate sources
liberally in the other chapters to illustrate surgical
of information together, in order to provide a compre-
anatomy, pathology and complications.
hensive summary of the current state of knowledge of
Another new innovation emphasizes the problem of
veterinary neurosurgery.
postoperative complications. A specific focus is the
wide variety of complications that can occur during
Nick Sharp
the management of spinal disorders. Complications are
Vancouver and Hertfordshire 2005
Simon Wheeler
List of Abbreviations
ACE
angiotensin-converting enzyme
IV
intravenous
b.i.d.
bis in die (twice daily)
LMN
lower motor neuron
CDV
canine distemper virus
MPSS
methylprednisolone sodium succinate
CK
creatine kinase
MR
magnetic resonance
CMC
cerebello medullary cistern
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
CNS
 central nervous system
NSAID
 non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
COX
cyclooxygenase
OCD
 osteochondritis dissecans
CSM
 cervical spondylomyelopathy
PCV
packed cell volume
CSF
cerebrospinal fluid
PgE
 prostaglandin E
CT
computed tomography
PO
per os
DISH
 disseminated idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
PTE
 pulrmonary thromboembolism
DVT
 deep vein thrombosis
RBC
red blood cells
ECG
electrocardiogram
SQ
subcutaneous
EMG
electromyography
STIR
short tau inversion recovery
FCE
fibrocartilaginous embolism
TMJ
temporomandibular joint
FeLV
 feline leukemia virus
TSH
thyroid-stimulating hormone
FIP
feline infectious peritonitis
UMN
upper motor neuron
FIV
feline immunodeficiency virus
UTI
urinary tract infection
GI
gastrointestinal
VW
von Willebrand
GME
 granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
WBC
white blood cell
IM
intramuscular
Functional anatomy
Chapter 
NERVOUS TISSUE
Nervous tissue
Spinal cord  
Spinal cord
1
 Relationship of spinal cord segments to
The spinal cord lies within the vertebral canal, fitting
vertebrae   2
snugly within the thoracolumbar spine, but with more
Cauda equina 
3
space in the cervical spine. The residual space is filled
Meninges  3
with epidural fat. The spinal cord extends from the
Cerebrospinal fluid  4  
caudal limit of the brainstem at the foramen magnum
 Spinal cord white matter tracts   5
to the caudal lumbar vertebrae, terminating in the sixth 
 Spinal cord nerve fibers and the effect of
lumbar vertebra (L6) in most dogs, and in L7 in cats,
compression   6
with some variations.
The spinal cord is divided into segments:
Skeleton  6
· Cervical Cl-C8.
Vertebrae   6 
● Thoracic Tl-T13.
Articulations  9
● Lumbar Ll-L7.
· Sacral Sl-S3.
Blood supply
14
· Caudal (variable number).
Vertebral column    14
The spinal cord is wider at the cervical and lumbar intu-
mescences (segments C6-T2 and L4-S3 respectively),
References  17
from which the lower motor neurons (LMN) to the
 thoracic and pelvic limbs arise. These segments contain
 Further reading   17
the cell bodies for the LMNs, also known as ventral horn
cells, thus the spinal cord is thicker in these areas.
Knowledge of functional anatomy is important both
 The spinal cord is composed of central gray matter
for understanding the neurological examination and for
and peripheral white matter (l.l). A dorsal sulcus and
performing spinal surgery. This chapter concentrates
ventral fissure, lined by pia mater, divide the spinal
on clinically relevant points of anatomy and physiology,
cord into two halves. Dorsal and ventral nerve roots
 including surgical landmarks. Radiographs, CT scans and
exit the spinal cord at each segment and join to form
 MRIs have been used for illustration, and the reader is also
the segmental spinal nerves. There are eight cervical
directed to the normal radiographic anatomy illustrated in
 segments, but seven cervical vertebrae. The Cl spinal
Chapter 4. For more detail see 'References', page 17.
nerves leave through the lateral foramina in Cl vertebra.
1.1 Spinal cord in transverse section. The
 gray matter forms an H shape, with two
 clorsal horns (a) and two ventral horns (b).
The white matter tracts are dlivided into
dorsal funiculi, between the dorsal roots (c);:
lateral funiculi, between dorsal and ventral 
roots (d); and ventral funiculi, between the
ventral roots (e)
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
1.2 Position of the spinal cord segments
in the cervical and cranial thoracic
vertebrae. The cervical intumescence
(C6-T2) lies within vertebrae C4-T2.
Thus, lesions as far cranial as C4/C5
vertebrae may cause LMN signs in the
thoracic limbs.
A
B
1.3 Normal cervical MRl. A: Sagittal, T2-weighted MRl of the cervical spine in a 7-year-old Doberman. It had undergone a ventral
slot at C6/7 2 years ago and is now clinically normal. The other discs show the expected high signal intensity of the nucleus
within the spinal cord, which is surroundled by a hyperintense rim of cerebrospinal fluid (arrow). The black crescent on one side
The rest of the cervical spinal nerves exit the vertebral
canal cranial to the vertebrae of the same annotation,
except C8 nerves, which exit between C7 and Tl ver-
tebrae. The thoracic and lumbar spinal nerves exit
 behind the same-named vertebrae.
The nerve roots are partly ensheathed by meninges,
which are continuous with the epineurium.
Relationship of spinal cord segments
to vertebrae
Some spinal cord segments lie in the vertebra of the
same annotation, but others do not (l.2, 1.5). Neuro-
logical lesion localization refers to spinal cord segments.
It is therefore important to understand the relationship
between vertebrae and spinal cord segments. Although
regional nerves of the brachial and lumbosacral plexuses
are relatively constant in their distribution they can
vary considerably in their origins. The plexuses arise
from C6 to Tl and from L5 to S3 spinal cord segment
in the majority of animals (l.4, 1.8A). However, the
b
brachial plexus arises from C5 to Tl in about 20% of
dogs and from C6 to T2 in another 20% (Evans, 1993).
Similarly the lumbosacral plexus arises from L3 to S1
(o uena (a) un (e) oeoui ael snxad eog t1
in 20% and from L6 to S3 in 20% (Fletcher, 1970)
radlial (d); axillary (e); and musculocutaneous nerves (f). The
 This can have some impact on the neurological local-
subscapular and suprascapular nerves arise just cranial to
the musculocutaneous nerve.
ization within these regions.
 Functional anatomy 
T13
1.5 Position of spinal cord segments within the lumbar vertebrae. Segments L1 and L2 lie in their respective vertebrae. The lumbar
intumescence lies within vertebrae L3-L5; lesions as far cranial as L3/4 intervertebral disc may cause LMN signs in the pelvic limbs.
The sacral segments S1-S3 are within L5 vertebra in most dogs (the '5' in L5 resembles the 'S' for sacral). The spinal cord ends in 
B
1.6 Normal thoracolumbar MRl. A: Sagittal, T2-weighted MRl of the thoracolumbar spine of a normal 6-year-old Golden retriever
jo si so ping ieuidsogaao jo jael uu aun suaui jeubis aeauaui smous aouanbas asind siui ui snsodind snaonn
intermediate signal intensity (arrow); epidural fat is high signal intensity (arrowhead). Note the nutrient vessels arising from the aorta
(arrowheads) (Parker, 1973). B: Transverse, T1-weighted MRl of the thoracic spine at the level of T13. The spinal cord is surrounded
by high signal epidural fat (arrow); CSF is of low signal intensity and does not show clearly. Note the aorta (arrowheadl) (1.23)
(d). Spinal nerve (e). L6 vertebra (f). L7 vertebra (g). Sacrum (h).
Cauda equina
Meninges
The nerves of the cauda equina have a typical peripheral
1 The meninges (l.l0) surround the central nervous
nerve structure and are partly ensheathed by the system (CNS). The arachnoid mater and pia mater
spinal cord, and there is also a large epidural space in the  pia mater and the arachnoid mater is a space, the
region of the cauda equina (l.8B, 1.9). Thus they are  subarachnoid space, which is filled with cerebrospinal
usually more resistant to injury than spinal cord tissue,  f
fluid (CSF). The subarachnoid space is traversed by
but if severe damage occurs, recovery is unlikely (13.22).t
the arachnoid trabeculae, which suspend the spinal
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
1.8 A: Lumbosacral plexus: femoral (a);:
cbturator (b); sciatic (c); and pudendal 
nerves (d). B: Dorsal, T1-weighted 
MRl of a normal 6-year-old German 
short-haired pointer to show the nerve
roots of the caucda equina surrounded
 by high signal epidural fat (same dog 
a6 1.9).
B
1.9 Normal lumbosacral MRl. A: Sagittal,
T2-weighted MRl of the lumbosacral
spine in extension (same dog as 1.8)
There is loss of signal of the L7/S1
nucleus pulposus (arrowhead) but there is 
no dorsal displacement of the disc
 B: Transverse, T1-weighted MRI through 
the L7/S1 disc space and foramen of the
same dog; the nerve roots (arrowheads)
are surrounced by high-signal epidural fat.
See als0 1.19B
B
1.11  Section of spinal cord to show the subdural space (between
dura and arachncid mater, 1.10) flled with Indian ink. White 
 denticulate ligaments (arrows) anchor the pia and spinal cordl to 
 the dura; they also restrict ventral extension of the ink within the
subdural space (from Penderis et al., 1999).
1.10 There are three layers of meninges. The most superficial
sacrocaudal vertebrae. The meningeal sac is outlined by
is the dura mater, which is composed of dense connective
 myelography or MRI. The caudal limit to its extension
tissue (blue). The thin arachnoid mater (red) is inside the dura
au mooj sauequau oml asaul 'llon luaoeoe sall pue ateu
varies between animals; it can terminate anywhere
larger contours of the spinal cord. The pia mater (green) is a
between L7 and the caudal vertebrae, but usually ends
dlelicate layer that lies dlirectly on the surface of the spinal cord.
in the sacrum (see Chapter 10).
cord within the CSF. The denticulate ligaments also
traverse the subarachnoid space to anchor the spinal cord
 Cerebrospinal fluid
(1.ll). The meninges caudal to the conus medullaris
q a 'q  u p sh p rs
form the filum terminale, which extends into the the choroid plexuses, with contributions from the
 Functional anatomy
1.12 The reflex arc of the LMN is influenced
Sensory to brain
by the UMN systems.
Upper motor neuron
Spinal ganglion
Sensory
fiber
Lowermotorneuror
D
leptomeninges (pia-arachnoid mater) and the ependy-
   s   
 mal lining.
propriospinal and spinoreticular tracts. These tracts lie
 Cerebrospinal fluid flows mainly in a caudal direction.
close to the junction of gray and white matter and there-
Most leaves the fourth ventricle of the brain through the
fore a lesion has to be extensive in order to damage
lateral apertures into the subarachnoid space, with some
all deep pain fibers at a given level. Pain fibers cross
entering the central canal of the spinal cord. It is absorbed
 and re-cross the midline in a multisynaptic arrangement
through the arachnoid villi in cerebral venous sinuses as
throughout the spinal cord, providing a diffuse bilateral
well as by venules in the subarachnoid space, lymphatics 
 pattern of ascending pain fibers from each limb.
around the spinal nerves, and the ependymal lining.
 Information on the degree of urinary bladder filling
The CSF is normally a clear, colorless fluid with a
is transmitted to the brain in the spinothalamic tract.
very low protein and cellular content. It suspends and
protects the brain and spinal cord against shock, allows
DESCEND/NG MOTOR TRACTS
some variation in the volume of the CNS without alter-
Two systems are responsible for the transmission of
ing pressure, and has some nutritional and metabolic
 pue (NNn] uonau iopou iaddn auuosuny sonou
functions.
LMN systems (1.12, 1.13).
The caudal direction of flow of CSF has some clinical
The LMN is the effector neuron of the reflex arc. The
relevance (14.3A). Cerebrospinal fluid collected caudal
cell bodies are the ventral horn cells, which lie in the
  ad  Ai a ose s us e m
ventral gray matter of the spinal cord. The axons leave
information (see Chapter 4).
the spinal cord in the ventral roots and pass through the
brachial and lumbosacral plexuses to form the peripheral
Spinal cord white matter tracts
nerve trunks of the limbs. The sensory arm of the reflex
ASCENDING SENSORY TRACTS
arc is the sensory neuron. It arises in the periphery and
Sensory information is gathered from the peripheral
enters the spinal cord via the dorsal root. It projects to
nervous system via sensory axons. The cell bodies of
the LMN (via an interneuron in some reflex pathways)
these axons lie in the spinal ganglia (dorsal root gan-
and a branch also ascends in the spinal cord.
glia). Central projections of these axons ascend in the
Function of flexor muscles is facilitated by the corti-
spinal cord to the brain (1.12).
cospinal and rubrospinal tracts. The fibers of the corti-
 Proprioception is transmitted in the tracts of the
cospinal tract arise in the cerebral cortex, and most
 dorsal and lateral funiculi. Axons project to either the
decussate at the spinomedullary junction and descend
somesthetic cerebral cortex or to the cerebellum.
in the lateral corticospinal tracts of the lateral funiculi.
Temperature and superficial pain sensation are trans-
Fibers that do not decussate descend in the ventral
mitted by the myelinated fibers of several tracts,
corticospinal tracts, which lie in the ventral funiculi
including the lateral spinothalamic in the lateral funicu-
The rubrospinal fibers originate in the red nucleus of
lus. Severe pain sensation (deep pain or nociception) is 
 the brainstem, cross the midline and descend in the
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
1.13 The UMN system is the sum effect of the
varicus individual clescendling pathways. The
UMIN system in general moderates LMIN activity.
 initiates voluntary movement and maintains
normal muscle tone.
UMN
LMN
LMN
rubrospinal tract ofthe lateral funiculus. The vestibulo-
bear weight, loss of voluntary movement and, finally,
spinal tracts and reticulospinal tracts also influenceloss of deep pain sensation.
motor function. The function of extensor muscles is
The position of the spinal cord tracts also contributes
facilitated by these tracts, which lie in the ventral funi-
 to the progression of signs. The ascending proprioceptive
culi. The vestibulospinal fibers arise in the ipsilateral  tracts lie superficially in the spinal cord and, therefore,
vestibular nuclei. They facilitate extensors and inhibit
 are most susceptible to compression. In contrast, the
flexors on the ipsilateral side, and have the opposite
spinothalamic tracts and ascending propriospinal path-
effect on the muscles of the contralateral limbs.
ways, which carry pain perception, are more deeply pos-
Voluntary bladder emptying is mediated through
 itioned, and the fibers cross the spinal cord at various
fibers in the tectospinal and reticulospinal tracts of the
 levels. Thus a lesion must involve most of the diameter
ventral funiculi.
of the spinal cord for the patient to lose deep pain sensa-
tion (6.2) (Olby et al., 2003). This point and the fact
ASCEND/NGMOTORTRACT
that pain fibers are the most resistant to pressure explain
 In dogs, an ascending motor tract originates in the bor-
why loss of deep pain sensation is such a severe clinical
der cells of the dorsolateral gray matter of the Ll-L7
 sign (see Assessing the severity of the lesion', page 31).
spinal cord segments. Their axons pass cranially in the
 Animals with lesions severe enough to damage transmis-
fasciculus proprius of the lateral funiculus to inhibit 
 sion of deep pain along the cervical spinal cord either do
the extensor muscles of the thoracic limbs. Interference
 not survive their injury or are at high risk of death from
with this pathway, as seen in some peracute, severe
hypoventilation because of loss of respiratory muscle
thoracic spinal cord lesions, is manifest as the Schiff-
function (see Chapter 2).
 Sherrington sign (2.17).
Spinal cord nerve fibers and the
SKELETON
effect of compression
The vertebral column is composed of a series of verte-
 The white matter tracts of the spinal cord are composed
 brae, most of which are joined by the intervertebral
of nerve fibers of different sizes, most of which have a
       
myelin sheath. The largest fibers are myelinated, which
processes.
 are the most rapidly conducting; they transrmit proprio-
ception. Motor fibers are intermediate-sized myelinated
Vertebrae
fibers. Pain perception is transmitted by the smallest
The numbers of different types of vertebrae are as
myelinated fibers and by non-myelinated fibers.
follows: cervical 7; thoracic 13; lumbar 7; sacral 3; and
 Larger diameter fibers are more susceptible to injury
caudal 20 (approximately). Variations are possible,
than fibers of lesser diameter; small fibers are the most 
 particularly in the transition zones between thoracic
resistant. The progression of clinical signs seen with
 to lumbar, and lumbar to sacral vertebrae. The most
Aq Aarel pauerdxa si aneurp pros reuds suiseaiou
 common variations are in the number of ribs (8.19,
this feature. Mild lesions cause loss of proprioception.
 8.2l), and abnormal articulations with the ilium (see
 Functional anatomy
1.14 The atlas C1 (a) articulates with the skull (b)
va the atlanto-occipital joints. C1 has prominent 
transverse processes (c), which can be palpated
esn aui uo ssaooid snouids ou s aaui lisea
arch (d). There are lateral vertebral foramina in 
the vertebral arch (e), through which pass the C1
spinal nerves. The axis or C2 has a large spinous
process (f), which extends cranially over the atlas
and is connected to it by the dorsal atlantoaxial
ligament (g). The atlas and axis are connected by
multiple ligaments (1.35) and by synovial joints 
between the articular processes (h), which lie
ventral to the vertebral canal.
1.15 CT scans of a normal dog through
A: the mid-bocy of the atlas C1: note
 the transverse foramina and the dens on
the floor of the vertebral canal (9.1), and 
B: the cranial portion of the axis C2.
B
surgical landmarks (8.l9-8.2l). The total number of  lateral to the vertebral canal and of the lamina dorsally
thoracic and lumbar vertebrae is generally 20.
The vertebral arch also has cortical and cancellous bone,
The vertebrae have various common features, but 2
 although the cancellous bone may be thin in small dogs
there are differences between the groups. Each vertebra
 and cats. Most vertebrae have transverse processes pro-
has a vertebral body, which lies ventral to the spinal cord,
jecting laterally from the vertebral body, a spinous process
and is joined to its neighbors by intervertebral discs.
projecting dorsally from the lamina, and cranial and cau-
In immature animals, the vertebral bodies have cranial
dal articular processes on the vertebral arch. Mammillary
and caudal growth plates, which close by about 1l months 
processes of the thoracic vertebrae are short, knob-like
of age in dogs (Hare, 1961). The center of the vertebral
 dorsal projections from the transverse processes. On lum-
body is composed of cancellous bone, which is red and
bar vertebrae they are dorsal projections of the cranial
relatively soft. The margins of the vertebral body are
 articular processes (Evans, 1993). Other bony processes 
made of hard, dense, white cortical bone, which also
vary with the group of vertebrae. Between each pair of
forms the vertebral end plates adjacent to the interverte-
vertebrae there is an intervertebral foramen, through
bral discs. The types of bone provide an important guide
which pass the spinal nerves and blood vessels.
to the depth of penetration in surgical procedures (8.32,
8.33, 10.30).
CERVICAL VERTEBRAE
Each vertebra has a vertebral arch, which forms the
There are seven cervical vertebrae. The first two are dis-
dorsal and lateral parts of the vertebral canal enclosing
tinct: the atlas (C1) and axis (C2) (1.14, 1.15). The ver-
the spinal cord. The arch is made up of the pedicles
tebral body of Cl is very small, the bulk of the vertebra
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
being composed of lateral masses. Caudally on the body
y C6 are particularly large and project ventrally; they are
of Cl, there are two articular processes, which articulate
 important surgical landmarks. The C5/6 intervertebral
with C2. There is no intervertebral disc between Cl and disc lies between the cranial edges of these transverse
C2. A prominent ventral tubercle lies on the caudoven- processes [4.6). A vascular channel runs through the
tral aspect of Cl, just cranial to the intervertebral space,  center of these vertebrae and can give rise to hemor-
which can be a useful landmark at surgery. There are rhage and other complications (l.18, 1.19).
transverse foramina in the transverse processes, through
which pass the vertebral arteries (1.36). The dens pro-
jects cranially from the vertebral body of C2 into the
eTHORACICANDLUMBARVERTEBRAE
atlas, lying on the floor of the vertebral canal (9.l). The The 13 thoracic vertebrae articulate with the ribs
dens originates embryologically as part of Cl. It has a  (l.20-l.22A). The spinous processes of the cranial tho-
growth plate at its attachment to the body of C2, which  racic vertebrae (to Tl0) slant caudally; those of the last
can separate after trauma. The atlas has three ossifica-
two thoracic vertebrae slant cranially. The site of this
tion centers at birth; the axis has four at birth and
 change in direction (which may vary) is termed the anti-
another two or three that develop after birth (Hare,
 clinal vertebra (1.20B). The articular processes from T1
1961; Cook and Oliver, 1981).
to Tl0 sit at the base of the spinous process. They are
The other cervical vertebrae each have a similar mor-
 in the same oblique horizontal plane as in the cervical
phology (1.16, 1.17). The large transverse processes of
vertebrae, with the caudal process of the cranial-most
1.16 Cervical vertebrae. The spinous processes are small (a)
and the transverse processes (b) project laterally (with the
1.18 Photograph of the floor of the vertebral canal of C4, C5
exception of C6, where they are dlirected ventrally (4.6, 7.37B)
and C6 with the lamina and pedlicles removed. Note the large
There are transverse foramina (c), through which pass the
vascular foramen in the center of each vertebra (arrows). This
vertebral arteries (1.17, 1.36), except in C7. The articular
can result in significant hemorrhage when driling into bone
processes (d) lie in an oblique dorsal plane.
and can impact screw placement (11.16)
?
1.17 CT scans through the mid-bodie
 Functional anatomy 
6
1.19 Nutrient foramen (arrows) in the center of
lumbar vertebrae. A: Transverse CT scan of 
L4 vertebra. B: Transverse, T1-weighted MRI of
L7 vertebra after fat suppression (same dog as
1.8). Bleeding from this structure is a common 
cause of severe hemorrhage when drilling into
a vertebra; it can be stopped by direct pressure
or with bone wax (1.6A, 1.18, 1.38, 8.2B)
B
vertebra overlying the cranial process of thie caudal-
most vertebra (l.20A). In the caudal thoracic vertebra,
 the articular processes adopt a more vertical orienta-
tion, as between the lumbar vertebrae (13.55). The
change in orientation occurs near the anticlinal vertebra.
The location of the vertebral canal relative to exter-
nal vertebra landmarks at the thoracolumbar junction is
variable, due largely to the orientation of the ribs (1.21,
1.22). It appears fairly constant within each breed of
dog and also in the cat.
The aorta and vena cava are in close proximity to
many of the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. Damage
could be caused to these vascular structures when drill-
ing or placing implants into vertebral bodies (Garcia
et al., 1994). The relationship of the aorta to Tl3 ver-
tebra is shown in 1.6B and 1.23A; to Ll in 1.23B and
A
4.44B; and to L2 in 4.43.
There are seven lumbar vertebrae (l.24-1.28A). The
b
Ll transverse processes are usually small, an important
a
feature in identifying the thoracolumbar junction at
surgery (8.19, 8.20). They are also difficult to palpate
as they are obscured by the last rib. More caudally, the
transverse processes are narrower and longer.
The three sacral vertebrae are fused into one body,
which articulates with the pelvis via the sacroiliac joint
C
(1.28B). There is a marked notch in the cranial lamina of
the sacrum, such that the lamina is not complete over
B
the cauda equina at the lumbosacral junction (10.48).
There are two pairs of dorsal and ventral sacral foram-
1.20 A: Thoracic vertebrae. The vertebral bodies are small with
large spinous processes (a). The articular processes vary with the
ina, through which pass spinal nerves and blood vessels.
The sacrum articulates caudally with the first caudal
short and have a fovea (c) that articulates with a rib. Caudal to the
vertebra (1.26).
midl-thoracic area, caudally projecting accessory processes are
present on the pedicle (13.55A). B: Radliograph of the anticlinal
Articulations
region. Spinous processes of cranial thoracic vertebrae (a); caudlal
SYNOVIAL ARTICULATIONS
thoracic and lumbar vertebrae (b); and T11 , the anticlinal vertebra
(c). This can be a useful surgical landmark, but the position must 
The articular processes of the vertebral bodies have dor-
be ascertained in each animal from the radliographs.
sal articulations (except for Cl/2 where the articulations
10
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders 
T11
T12
T12
113
113
B
B: T12, T13, L1 and L2 vertebrae in a Springer spaniel after myelography. There is accumulation of contrast within the center of the 
spinal cord at T12, as well as leakage through a presumed dural tear (arrow) after trauma (13.10). The rib articulates progressively
higher up the pedicle from T11 vertebra to T13.
1.22 CT scans through the
midl-bodies of A: T12 in a cat; and 
B: L2 in a cat. T12 vertebra of a
cat is shown in 1.23A. Compare
these images with the dogs shown
in 1.21.
H
1.23 The proximity of the aorta 
(arrowheads) is shown relative to
A: T12-T13 intervertebral space in
a cat (shown on a CT scan); and 
B: L1 vertebra in a dog (shown on a 
T1-weighted MRl). The vena cava is also
evident (arrow). The cava lies to the right 
and somewhat ventral to the aorta.
B
 Functional anatomy
11
1.26 Lumbosacral vertebrae. L7 dliffers from the other lumbar
vertebrae in that the spinous process is shorter (a). The
intervertebral foramen (b) lies cranial to the lumbosacral disc
(1.27). The sacrum comprises the three fused sacral vertebrae (c),
the spinous processes of which are fused and form a continuous 
1.24 Lumbar vertebrae. The vertebral bodies are long (particularly 
ridge of bone (d). The lateral wing of the sacrum (e) ariculates 
in cats). The spinous processes are short and blunt and slant 
 laterally with the wing of the ilium.
the caucal process of the cranial-most vertebra lies medial to the
cranial process of the caucal-most vertebra. There are accessory
processes on the pedlicles (13.55c), which project caudally (d).
Sacrum
L7
1.27 Sagittal MRl of a dog to show that the intervertebral
foramen of L7 (arrows) extends much more cranially than it does
in other vertebrae (L6/7 and L7/S1 disc spaces shown by
arrowheads). This foramen is thought to act as a stress riser for
L7 fractures (1.26, 13.14, 13.21).
are ventral, and between the fused sacral vertebrae).
These joints have a capsule, articular cartilage and syn-
 ovial fluid.
/NTERVERTEBRALDISCS
The vertebral bodies are joined by intervertebral discs
(1.3A, 1.6A, 1.9A, 1.29), with the exception of C1/2
along with the fused sacral vertebrae.
The intervertebral discs provide flexibility to the
vertebral column, and act as shock absorbers for the
spine. The capacity to absorb shock is diminished by
 age and degenerative changes. Intervertebral discs have
'uisnp Aq ssasoe uea shuanu aiddns pootq aood e
1.25 CT scans through the mid-bodies of A: L6; and B: L7
vertebrae. Note that the transverse process is located a little more
The anulus fibrosus is supplied with pain fibers, mainly
dorsally on L7 relative to the vertebral canal than on L6 (13.56B).
in the outer laminae (Forsythe and Ghoshal, 1984).
12
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Degeneration of the intervertebral discs occurs with
age and may precede disc herniation (Hansen, 1952). In
humans there is a general loss of water content {Jenkins
et al., 1985; Hickey et al., 1986) and of proteoglycans
with age (Taylor et al., 2000). Similar changes have
also been reported in dogs [Gysling, 1985; Cole et al.,
1986; Bray and Burbidge, 1998). The two main types of
disc degeneration in dogs are chondroid and fibroid
metamorphosis:
· Chondroid metamorphosis occurs in
chondrodystrophoid breeds during the first 2 years
of life. As the disc degenerates, it dehydrates and at
Aq paprau si snsodind snaonu a au aues a
hyaline cartilage. These two processes interfere
with the shock absorbing capacity of the disc by
reducing the hydrostatic properties of the nucleus
 pulposus, and by weakening the fibers of the anulus
fibrosus. In most Dachshunds, by 2 years of age the 
majority of discs have undergone chondroid
 metamorphosis, and many nuclei have also
mineralized, changing from the former jelly-like
consistency into a dry, gritty substance. Normal
B
wear and tear often causes severe weakening of the
 intervertebral discs, especially at the thoracolumbar
1.28 The L7 nerve root runs in a lateral recess in the floor of
junction. This explains why the peak incidence of
the vertebral canal of L7 before emerging from the intervertebral
disc disease is between 3 and 6 years of age for
foramen. A: The lateral recesses can be seen clearly (arrows) in
most of the chondrodystrophoid breeds of dog.
this CT scan taken through the L7 vertebra. B: CT scan taken
Herniation of this type of disc is often termed
through the sacrum and sacroiliac joints.
Hansen type I or a disc extrusion (1.30, 1.33).
· Fibroid metamorphosis occurs in non-
chondrodystrophoid breeds after middle age. The
mucleus pulposus dehydrates but is invaded by
fibrocartilage rather than hyaline cartilage. This
process has a much later onset than in chondroid
metamorphosis, and the discs are usually quite
normal while the dog is young and active. The
mucleus pulposus does not undergo mineralization
 as frequently as in discs that undergo chondroid
 metaplasia. Clinical problems occur primarily in
 older dogs and this type of hermiation is often
termed Hansen type II disease (1.3l). Hansen 
type I lesions may or may not be responsible for
clinical signs (see below).
1.29 The divisions of the intervertebral dlisc are the cuter anulus
fibrosus (a) and the inner nucleus pulposus (b). The anulus
DEFINITION OF DISC LESIONS
fibrosus is made up of concentric fibrous laminae. The laminae
may not form complete rings, but they are interconnected with 
Although the Hansen classification system is useful
the adjacent laminae, thus forming a strong complete structure.
as a general guide, there is considerable overlap between 
 The anulus fibrosus is thicker ventrally and laterally than it is
type I and type II disc lesions. Each type of lesion can
dorsally and the nucleus pulposus is therefore eccentrically
also occur in both chondrodystrophoid and non-
positioned (1.9A). The anulus fibrosus is attached firmly to the
chondrodystrophoid breeds (Cudia and Duval, 1997).
vertebral end plates by deeply penetrating (Sharpey's) fibers.
The nucleus pulposus is a gelatinous structure in young dogs.
Furthermore, there is a spectrum of chondrodystro-
but its characteristics change with age (see below).
phoid breeds ranging from extreme like the Shih Tzu,
 Functional anatomy
13
et al., 1995). The classification scheme used most
commonly for CT and MRI employs the terms normal,
bulge, protrusion, or extrusion. Extrusion is a fairly
distinct category used to describe disc material that has 
clearly escaped the normal boundaries of the disc,
 often to cause injury to neural structures.
Disc extrusions are rare in asymptomatic humans,
occurring in only 2 of 98 people in one study (Brant-
Zawadzki et al., 1995). However the terms normal,
bulge or protrusion include discs with identical degrees
of disruption and associated symptoms in humans.
Furthermore, there is only moderate interobserver
agreement when applying these three terms to MRIs of
disc lesions {Brant-Zawadzki et al., 1995; Milette et al.,
1999). A purely morphological description of the dis-
1.30 Hansen type I disc extrusion is most common in
placement of disc material is therefore preferred to use
chondrocystrophoid breeds. Following chondrcid metamorphosis,
of the terms normal, bulge and protrusion. An example
 the nucleus pulposus extrudes into the vertebral canal
through the damaged anulus fibrosus. The nucleus may take a
would be 'dorsolateral displacement of the L7/Sl disc
tortuous route through the anular fibers or may explode through
to the right causing impingement on the L7 nerve root'?
a large defect (1.33).
(Gorman and Hodak, 1997; Milette et al., 1999). Some
intervertebral discs may have an internal derangement
without obvious change in the contour of the disc.
These changes can nevertheless be an important cause
Aq pasouep aq Auo ues pue suemu u suis ieou jo
using either MRI or discography (Milette et al., 1999)
[see Chapter 4).
LIGAMENTS
The nuchal ligament extends from the dorsal arch of the
axis to the spinous processes of the cranial thoracic ver-
tebrae (11.47, 1l.48). This ligament lies deep in the
 dorsal cervical musculature. It is a large structure but
e snoudsadns aui oddns yau pue peau su
(1.32) continues along the tips of the spinal processes.
1.31 Hansen type Il disc herniation. This occurs mainly
The lumbodorsal fascia blends with this structure in the
following fibroid metamorphosis, in the non-chondrodystrophoid
thoracolumbar region. The interspinous ligament (1.32)
breeds. The anulus fibrosus is damaged and there is
displacement of the intervertebral disc into the vertebral canal.
is a fascial sheet that is found between the spinous
processes and is continuous with the lumbodorsal fascia
classical like the Beagle, to less obvious like the Basset
in the lumbosacral region. The ligaments inside and out-
hound. An additional confounding factor is the high
side the vertebral canal have a significant role in spinal
incidence of small- and medium-sized disc lesions in
stability and mobility (l.32-1.35). The ligamentum
clinically normal animals. There is also a lack of a stan-
flavum (10.27) is found in the roof of the vertebral canal
dardized nomenclature with which to describe disc
and in the space between adjacent vertebral laminae.
abnormalities and this is a serious hindrance to proper
It is continuous with the joint capsules of the articular
communication and particularly to the accurate use of
processes, and may be significantly thickened in some
MRI (see Chapters 4 and 10) (Brant-Zawadzki et al.,
disease conditions, particularly lumbosacral disease
1995; Milette et al., 1999). The term herniation is
 and cervical spondylomyelopathy (CSM). The fibers of
poorly defined and is therefore misused frequently. It
the dorsal longitudinal ligament (1.33, 1.34) merge
e uouap uan rauan e se paaiasai isaq Aqeqoid si
with those of the anulus fibrosus of the intervertebral
non-specific type of disc abnormality and should not be 
disc; both carry pain fibers (Forsythe and Ghoshal,
used to indicate clinical significance {Brant-Zawadzki
1984). The presence of the intercapital ligament (1.34)
14
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
1.32 The cut-away portion reveals the weak ventral longitudinal
ligament (a) running along the ventral surface of the vertebral
bodies and the much more substantial dorsal longitudinal 
ligament (b) on the floor of the vertebral canal (1.33, 1.34). Also
juawebil snouidsjaju! (o) juawebil snoujdsedns aul ae umous
(d); intertransverse ligaments (e); and joint capsule covering the
articular processes (f).
1.34 The cdorsal longitudinal ligament (a) lies on the floor of the
vertebral canal. The ligament is compact and narrow over the
vertebral bodlies (b). It dliverges and is thus thinner over the
intervertebral disc (c). Between the heads of the ribs (except T1,
 T12 and T13) there is a reinforcing intercapital ligament (d),
 which lies undler the dorsal longitudinal ligament.
1.33 Dorsal view of the floor of the vertebral canal with the
spinal cord removed to show a type I disc extrusion. The 
calcified nuclear material lies at the level of the intervertebral
foramen, to one side of the dorsal longitudinal ligament. Note 
how this ligament fans out over, and then merges with, the 
dorsal surface of the anulus fibrosus.
contributes to the low incidence of intervertebral disc
extrusions in the thoracic spine between T2 and Tl1
(Wilkens et al., 1996).
BLOOD SUPPLY
Vertebral column
The arterial supply to the vertebral column is segmen-
tal, with a spinal branch entering the vertebral canal via
the intervertebral foramen, closely associated with the
1.35 The most significant ligament between C1 and C2 is
spinal nerve. The origin of the branches varies between
 the transverse ligament of the atlas (a), which runs between the
the regions of the spine (l.36-l.39) (Forsythe and
sides of the atlas and over the dens, holding it dlown on to the
Ghoshal, 1984).
floor of the atlas. Less significant are the apical ligament of
Venous drainage is via the internal vertebral venous
the dens (b) (dens to foramen magnum) and the alar ligaments
(c) (dens to occipital bones). The dorsal atlantoaxial ligament
plexus, which comprises two valveless veins on the floor
uns between the dorsal arch of C1 and the spinous process of
of the vertebral canal (often termed the venous
C2 (1.14). There are two ventral synovial articulations between
sinuses). The veins converge at mid-vertebral body (and
C1 and C2
 Functional anatomy 
15
1.36 Blood supply to the cervical spine. The arterial supply to the cervical vertebrae is from the paired vertebral arteries (a), which
transverse processes of the vertebrae (except C7). At each segment, there are dorsal (c) and ventral (d) muscular branches.
A significant vessel runs near the caudal edge of the articular processes (e). A spinal branch (f) enters the vertebral canal at each 
intervertebral foramen; these supply the spinal cord. The vertebral artery branches at the atlas. The dorsal branch (g) runs over the
vertebral foramen of C1 (i). The ventral branch runs under the transverse process and also anastomoses with a branch of the
cccipital artery (ij). The internal vertebral venous plexus (venous sinus) (k) lies on the floor of the vertebral canal. The veins converge
at micdvertebral bocy (and sometimes join) (), and then diverge again over the intervertebral dlisc (m). In the atlas and axis, the veins
of the internal vertebral venous plexus are much more laterally positioned. Thus, in attermpting to collect CSF from the
cerebellomedullary cistern, the veins may be perforated if the needlle strays from the midline.
1.37The thoracic spine is supplied by
spinal branches (a) from the intercostal
arteries (b), which enter the vertebral
 canal via the intervertebral forarmina.
The internal vertebral venous plexus 
crains into the major veins of the dlorsal
thorax (c), mainly the azygous vein.
16
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
1.38 The lumbar spine is supplied by spinal
branches (a) of the lumbar arteries (b), which
arise from the aorta (c). Each lumbar artery
also gives rise to a nutrient vessel that enters
the vertebral bocy (Evans, 1993). A dorsal
 branch runs caudally behind the articular
processes in the musculature (d). The lumbar
internal vertebral venous plexus drains into
major veins of the abdomen (e), mainly the
  n an pu ua sne
1.39 The blood supply to the spinal cord arises from the spinal arteries (a), which enter the vertebral canal through the intervertebral
foramina. These branch into dorsal (b) and ventral (c) radicular arteries. These arteries supply an anastomotic network on the surface 
of the spinal cord, deep to the dura mater. There are paired dorsolateral spinal arteries (d), which run on the clorsal spinal cord.
These vessels may be tortuous and not recognizable as a distinct entity. There is a ventral spinal artery (e), which runs in the ventral
fissure. There are muliple anastomotic arteries connecting the main vessels. The segmental arteries are inconsistently present, such
supplied by various arteries that penetrate the surface. The vertical arteries (f) arise from the ventral spinal artery and pass dorsally
arteries on the cord surface, and enter the spinal cord substance. They supply the white matter and the peripheral gray matter.
The areas of spinal cord supplied by each branch have been described (de Lahunta and Alexander, 1976). The venous drainage of 
 the cord is also in a radial pattern, to a network of surface veins (h). These drain into the internal vertebral venous plexus on the flocr
of the vertebral canal (i). These are large, valve-free vessels that have occasional anastomoses in the midline. The plexus drains at
 sai  i s  an  si e  a a  a n  i 
crainage through the vertebral bodlies (1.19).
 Functional anatomy 
17
sometimes join) and diverge over the intervertebral disc
Hare, W.C.D. [196l) Radiographic anatomy of the cervical region of
(7.43). They are thin walled and easily damaged. The
the canine vertebral column. Part I: Fully developed vertebrae II:
Developing vertebrae. Joural of the American Veterinary Medical
venous plexus drains at the intervertebral foramina via
Association 139, 209-220.
the intervertebral veins into the vertebral veins. The
Hickey, D.S., Aspden, R.M., Hukins, D.W, Jenkins, J.P, Isherwood, I.
intervertebral veins may be single at each foramen, or
[1986) Analysis of magnetic resonance images from normal and degen-
erate lumbar intervertebral discs. Spine 11, 702-708.
may be paired, in which case they surround the spinal
Jenkins, J.P, Hickey, D.S., Zhu, X.P, Machin, M., Isherwood, I. [1985]
nerve. The intervertebral veins are fragile and can bleed
MR imaging of the intervertebral disc: a quantitative study. British
profusely if damaged.
Jourmal of Radiology 58, 705-709.
Milette, PC., Fontaine, S., Lepanto, L., Cardinal, E., Breton, G. [1999)
Differentiating lumbar disc protrusions, disc bulges, and discs with nor-
mal contour but abnormal signal intensity. Magnetic resonance imaging
REFERENCES
with discographic correlations. Spine 24, 44-53.
Olby, N.J., Harris, T, Mumana, K.R., Skeen, TM., Sharp, N.J.H. [2003)
Brant-Zawardzki, M.N., Jensen, M.C., Obuchowski, N., Ross, J.S., Modic,
Long-term fumctional outcome of dogs with severe injuries ofthe thoraco
M.T [1995) Interobserver and intraobserver variability in interpretation
humbar spinal cord: 87 cases [1996-2001). Jourmal of the American
of lumbar disc abnormalities. A comparison of two nomenclatures. Spine
Wterinary Medical Association 222,762-769.
20, 1257-1263; discussion 1264.
Parker, A.J. [1973) Distribution of spinal branches of the thoracolumbar
Bray, J.P, Burbidge, H.M. [1998) The canine intervertebral disk. Part Two
segmental arteries in dogs. American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 34,
degenerative changes—non-chondrodystrophoid versus chondrodys-
1351-1353.
trophoid disks.Journalof the AmericanAmimal Hospital Association34,
Penderis, J., Sullivan, M., Schwarz, T, Griffiths, I.R. [1999) Subdural
135-144.
injection of contrast medium as a complication of myelography. Jourmal
Cole, T.C., Ghosh, P, Taylor, TK.F. [1986) Variations of the proteoglycans
of Small Amimal Practice 40, 173-176.
of the canine intervertebral disc with ageing. Biochimica et Biophysica
Taylor, T.K., Melrose, J., Burkhardt, D., Ghosh, P, Claes, L.E., Kettler, A.,
Acta 880, 209-219.
Wilke, H.J. (2000) Spinal biomechanics and aging are major determin-
Cook, J.R., Oliver, J.E.[1981] Atlantoaxial luxation in the dog. Compendium
ants of the proteoglycan metabolism of intervertebral disc cells. Spite
onCotirmuing Education for the PracticingVeterinaria 3,242-250.
25, 3014-3020.
Cudia, S.P, Duval, J.M. [1997) Thoracolumbar intervertebral disk disease 
Wilkens, B.E., Selcer, R., Adams, WH., Thomas, WB. [1996) T9-TI0
in large, nonchondrodystrophic dogs: a retrospective study. Jourmal of the
intervertebral disc hemiation in three dogs. Veterinary and Comparative
American Amimal Hospital Association 33, 456-460.
Orthopaedics and Traumatology 9, 177-178.
de Lahunta, A., Alexander, J.W. [1976) Ischemic myelopathy secondary
to presumed fibrocartilaginous embolism in nine dogs. Jourmal of the
Americal Amimal Hospital Association 12, 37-48.
Evans, H.E. [1993) Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edn. Philadelphia:
FURTHER READING
WB Saunders.
Boyd, J.S., Patterson, C. [1991] A Colour Atlas of CHinical Anatomy of the
 Fletcher, T.F. [1970) Lumbosacral plexus and pelvic limb myotomes of the
Dog and Cat. London: Wolfe Publishing.
dog. American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 31, 3S-41.
Caulkins, S.E., Purinton, PT, Oliver, J.E. [1989] Arterial supply to the
Forsythe, W.B., Ghoshal, N.G. [1984) Innervation of the canine thoraco-
spinal cord of dogs and cats.Americat fourmalofVeterinary Research 50,
lumbar vertebral column. The Anatomical Record 208, 57-63.
425-430.
Garcia, J.N.P, Milthorpe, B.K., Russel, D., Johnson, K.A. [1994)
de Lahunta, A. [1983) Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Climical Neurology.
Biomechanical study of canine spinal fracture fixation using pins or bone
Philadelphia: WB Saumders.
screws with polymethylmethacrylate.Veterinary Surgery 23,322-329.
Jenkins, T.W. [1978) Functiomal Mammalian Neuraamatomy. Philadelphia:
Gorman, WF, Hodak, J.A. [1997) Hermiated intervertebral disc without 
Lea & Febiger.
pain.Jourmal of the Oklahoma State Medical Association 90,185-190.
King. A.S. [1987] Physiological and Climical Anatomy of the Domestic
Gysling, C. [1985) Ageing processof intevertebral disks in the German
Mammals, Vol. I, Central meruous system. Oxford: Oxford University
Shepherd dog [Abstract of Dissertation, Zurich Univ.]. Schweizer Archit
Press.
fur Tierheilkeurnde 127, 53-54.
Worthman, R.P. [1956) The longitudinal vertebral venous sinuses of the
Hansen, H.J. [1952) A pathologic-anatomical study on disc degeneration
dog. Americant Jourmal of Veterinary Research 17, 341-363.
in dogs. Acta Orthopaedica Scandinatia Suppl. 1l, I-117.
Patient examination
Chapter
2
 age should be considered, but again this information
Approach to the patient
19
 must be used with care.
History 19
HISTORY
Physical examination 19
Taking a history and performing a full clinical examina-
tion are prerequisites to the neurological examination.
Neurological examination  20
The history often leads to a provisional diagnosis. Of
Stage 1: Patient in upright position   20 
particular note is evidence of trauma; whether the con-
 Stage 2: Patient in lateral recumbency  25
dlition is progressive, static, or episodic; previous episodes
of disease; signs of pain; vaccination status; travel history;
Localization of lesions  28
and urinary function. In particular, does the animal let
Assessment of the brachial and lumbosacral
the owner know that it needs to urinate, can it void a
plexus 30
stream of urine or does it just dribble urine without
being aware of it? Owners sometimes say that their dog
 Assessing the severity of the lesion 31
is incontinent because every time they pick it up it uri-
 Determining the etiology  32
nates, when in fact this just occurs because of pressure
being placed on its abdomen.
References 32
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Further reading  33
A general physical examination must be made in all
patients. If there has been trauma or if anesthesia is con-
templated, involverment of other body systerms must be
The clinical syndromes seen in animals with spinal dis
determined (Neer, 1992) (2.1). Also, some patients in
ease are recognized generally from either the history or
which spinal disease is suspected have disorders of other
the physical findings. Spinal disease should also be con-
sidered in animals with non-specific pain, exercise intoler-
ance or lameness not caused by orthopedic disease
(McDonnell et al., 200l). This chapter discusses the
'padsns s assp ds  u d e o e
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT
The aims of patient examination are as follows:
●Determine whether the problem is spinal in origin.
· Locate the site of the disorder.
● Assess the severity of the neurological deficit.
· Identify the disease process.
· Determine the most appropriate form of treatment.
·Predict the prognosis.
Knowledge of the breed incidence of spinal diseases
2.1 Damage to thoracic or abdominal viscera is common
is useful in the initial assessment, but it is a mistake to use
after trauma. Here bile duct rupture has given rise to extensive 
such information as the only basis for diagnosis. Similarly,
 peritoneal contamination (see page 282).
20
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
systems. It is not at all unusual for orthopedic disorders to
It is useful to have a form on which to write the find-
mimic spinal conditions; examples are given in Table 2.1.
ings of the neurological examination (2.2). This insures
Careful clinical examination should identify such
that no aspect of the examination is missed, provides a
 problems, and particular note should be made of joint
permanent record, prevents errors and permits more
pain or enlargement, as these signs are present in many
 accurate comparisons of any serial examinations. A video
 dogs misdiagnosed as having neurological disorders.
can also be made of the patient for this purpose.
The presence of any spinal pain or deforrmity should
 also be noted. The quality of the femoral pulse must
Stage 1: Patient in upright position
be determined, particularly in acutely paralysed cats
ASSESS ATTITUDE, POSTURE AND GA/T
although thromboembolism also occurs in dogs (Boswood
Watch the patient as it relaxes in the examination room.
et al., 2000) (see Chapter 14).
It is straightforward to perform a screening neuro-
Let it move to the best of its ability, unless it has an
logical examination as part of a general physical exami-
acute spinal injury, when movement should be restricted.
nation (Table 2.2). If abnormalities are detected, carry
Note the degree of motor function, the gait (particularly
 noting any asymmetry) and the general demeanor. In
out a more complete neurological examination.
cats, this part of the examination is particularly import-
ant as later parts may be difficult to perform. It is use-
ful to listen to dogs as they walk on a hard surface; if
NEUROLOGICAL EXAMINATION
proprioceptive deficits are present, the examiner may
The neurological examination is carried out with the aims
hear the claws scuff.
 of determining the precise location of the spinal lesion
 and its severity. The neurological examination described
DETERMINE THELOCOMOTOR STATUS
here is performed readily with the animal upright in the
The animal is encouraged to move, except where an
first instance, and later placed in lateral recumbency.
acute spinal injury has occurred or if there is severe
 Table 2.1 Disorders that can mimic spinal disease
Systemic
Uni- or Bilateral 
Generalized orthopedic
Neuromuscular
disorders
 orthopedic disorders
disorders
disorders
 Endocarditis 
Csteochondritis dissecans
Hypertrophic osteocystrophy
Generalied myopathies 
 Cardiac insufficiency
Cranial cruciate ligament injury
Polyarthritis 
Ischemic neuromyopathy
Hypertension
Tibial crest avulsion
 Panosteitis
Neuropathies
Upper airway dlisease
Fractures
Radiculopathies 
 Hyperkalemia
 Coxofemoral ostecarthritis 
Junctionopathies
 Hypokalemia 
 Patellar luxation
Hypocalcemia
 Septic arthritis 
Hypoglycemia
Biceps tendonitis
 Hyperthyroidism 
Infraspinatus contracture
Addison's disease
Gracilis contracture 
 Phecchromocytoma
 Achilles tendon rupture 
 Psoas muscle injury
 Table 2.2 Screening neurclogical examination
Postural
Cranial
 Spinal
 Spinal
Bladder
Observation
reactions
nerves
reflexes
hyperesthesia
function 
Mental status
 Paw position
Menace
 Patellar 
 Cervical
 Historical 
 Posture
Hopping 
 Pupillary light reflex
Wwithdrawal
 Thoracolumbar 
Leakage?
Gait
Oculovestibular
 Perineal
Lumbosacral
Voiding?
response
Cutaneous trunci
 Jaw tone; temporal
reflexes 
muscle mass
 Facial sensation
Palpebral reflex
 Patient examination
21
HISTORY
 SPINAL REFLEXES
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
(aNEN)
OBSERVATION
(Spinal cord segments)
LEFT
Triceps
RIGHT
Mental status (e.g alert, depressed, stupor, coma)
(Radial)
Posture (e.g. normal, paraparesis, hemipar
esis,head tilt, tremor
（C-T）
Biceps
Gait (e.g. ataxia, cicling)
MLSC
ulocutar
.ICe-Ce!.
Withdra
POSTURAL REACTIONS
(Multiple)
[Cs:T2).
LEFT
RIGHT
Hopping
(Femoral)
Fent
Gastrocnemius
(L4-L6)
(Tibial, sciatic)
Withdrawal (pevic limb)
(
Frent.
Tactile placing
Front
Visual placing
Rear
.Front.
..Rear..
URINARY FUNCTION
Hemistanding.
Hemiwalking
Voluntary urination?
Wheebarrowing
Bladder diste ntion?
Extensor postural thrust
CRANIAL NERVES 
Test
SPINAL HYPERAESTHESIA
(lnnervation)
LEFT
RIG HT
PANNICULUS REFLEX
(1II& VII)
Level of cut -off (dermatome)
vsion
.!!
L37
RIGHT
SML.
Pupil size
_SML.
DEEP PAIN PERCEPTION
Stimylate lefteye
Thoracic limb.
Stimulate right eye
Felvic imb
"Strabismus
(.1V.&VI)
Tail 
Spontaneous nyst
! IYVI&VW
LESION LOCALIZATION
Positional my
( VVI&V
Oculovestibular response
BRAIN
Side
(1 IVVI&V)
Fore brain.
Facial sensation
(V)
Brainstem.
Vestibular - peripheral
Temporal muscle mass
Vestibular - central
"Mltifca!
Corneal reflex
IW YI& Y!!.
SPINAL CORD
C1-Cs
Palpe bral reflex
-.V.&.Y!..
Tg-L3
L4-S3
xaai ef, Jo bumoliemg
(1X&X)
MULTIFOCAL CNS
Tonuve
PERIPHERAL NERVE
Local
EYES
Horner's Syndrome
(Sympathetic)
NEUROMUSCULAR
MUSCULAR
MUSCLE PALPATION
NORMAL
Tone
Atrophy
KEY: ABSENT D; REDUCED +1; NORMAL +2; INCREASED +3; CLONUS +4
2.2 Form for neurological examination. The DAMNIT scheme can be listed on the reverse side with room to add differential
dliagnoses and the diagnostic plan(s).
22
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
body-weight is supported fully and then each paw is turned 
over indlivicdually to bring the dlorsal surface into contact with the
ground. Normal animals return the paw to an upright position
almost immediately; those with neurological dlisease cranial to
the limb may leave the paw flexedl. If proprioception is normal,
spinal cord dlisease is unlikely to be present.
B
 2.3 A: Hopping in the thoracic limb. The patient's body is 
supported with only one limb bearing weight on the ground,
and then it is moved laterally. The animal will not be able to hop
normally if it has a proprioceptive deficit or impaired motor
function. In a large dog this can be done by just lifting one
thoracic limb and then moving the dog sideways. B: Hopping 
in the pelvic limb. Large dogs can be hopped as dlescribed for
the thoracic limb.
pain. Patients that appear paraplegic at rest may show
some voluntary movement if supported by a sling
(15.9A) or if held by the base of their tails. Unilateral
weaknesses and sensory deficits may be revealed by
 25 Boxer dog with proprioceptive loss in the left pelvic limb.
hopping (2.3), hemistanding and hemiwalking tests. As
Severe deficits such as this are evident even if the animal's
hopping also requires good motor function and intact
weight is not supported properly.
proprioception, it is included in the section on proprio-
ceptive testing below.
Assess muscle strength, if the patient is able to stand,
 Tactile placing can be tested as in 2.l0 but with
by pressing down on the shoulders and hips. Following  the animal's eyes covered or, in small patients, with
these tests, the locomotor status can then be classified, the animal's body curved around the examiner's
for example paraparetic, hemiparetic and tetraparetic.
abdomen so that its head is pointing away from the
table. The thoracic and pelvic limbs on the side nearest
ASSESS PROPRIOCEPTION
to the table are then touched gently against the table
This is evaluated in the standing animal by the paw
 edge. The animal should immediately lift up the
position test and the reflex step (2.4, 2.6). Animals foot; the contralateral limbs are then repositioned so
with deficits of proprioception that can still walk often that they are adjacent to the table and the process is
wear the dorsum of their digit(s) or claw(s).
repeated.
Patient examination
23
2.6 A, B: Proprioception can also be 
tested by the 'reflex step', where a piece
of paper is placed under the foot and 
pulled laterally. The animal should return 
the foot briskly to a normal position; an 
 abnormal response is to let the foot slide 
away from the bocy. This test probably
assesses proprioception more in the 
 proximal part of the limb than the test 
shown in 2.4.
2.7 Wheelbarrowing test. The pelvic limbs are lifted off the
ground as shown and the animal made to walk forward.
This test can reveal thoracic limb paresis and exacerbates
asymmetrical lesions. Elevating the head on this test will
sometimes unmask hypermetria.
 2.9 Extensor postural thrust. The patient is held up, as shown,
and lowered to the surface. The normal animal wil push away
with the pelvic limbs and step backwards. This test is useful in
revealing pelvic limb deficits.
2.8 Wheelbarrow testing in large dogs is particularly useful to
identify subtle weakness in the thoracic limbs that might indicate 
a cervical lesion in a dlog that at frst sight appears to be only
weak in its rear limbs.
PALPATE THEABDOMEN
Determine the degree of bladder filling, and the ease
with which urine is expressed by palpating the
2.10 Pacing test. Here visual placing is being evaluated as the
abdomen. Urinary incontinence is often a feature of
animal can see the table edge. Visual placing evaluates vision
spinal disorders, and some assessment of urinary func-
 and motor function. Tactile placing evaluates sensation,
tion should have been gained from the history.
 proprioception and motor function.
24
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
intact on the contralateral side. Thoracolumbar lesions
important to determine if it is LMN or UMN in nature
may interfere with the afferent part of the cutaneous
(Table 15.6):
trunci reflex, which will be intact only in dermatomes
· The LMN bladder is typically large, flaccid, and
supplied by segments cranial to a spinal cord lesion and
easily expressed. This is usually associated with
will be absent in the segments caudal to it. Lesions cau-
lesions of the sacral spinal cord segments or nerve
dal to Ll spinal cord segment usually have a normal
roots. Some animals, particularly cats with
Cutaneous trunci response as the Ll dermatome extends
sacrocaudal injuries, can nevertheless be difficult to
to the level of the tuber coxae (2.12).
express due to high sphincter tone, probably from
unopposed sympathetic tone via the uninjured
PALPATE THE SPINE
hypogastric nerve (see page 351).
 Determine the presence of spinal hyperesthesia by
· The UMN bladder is characteristically tense
palpating the vertebral column and evaluating the
and dlifficult to express unless grossly distended,
patient's response {2.13, 2.14). This is an important
because urethral sphincter tone is often increased.
step in the examination. The degree of pressure to be
This is seen with lesions cranial to the sacral
segments, usually those affecting the T3-L3
spinal cord region [see 'Disorders of micturition',
page 351).
The importance of determining the type of inconti-
nence is two-fold. Appropriate drug therapy can be deter-
mined from this information (see 'Pharmacological
manipulation of micturition', page 351). Also, the prog-
nosis for recovery of urinary function is often worse for
LMN incontinence compared to most UMN lesions.
THE CUTANEOUS TRUNCI REFLEXES
This is tested by pinching the skin along the dorsal sur-
face of the trunk with fine forceps and observing the
twitch of the cutaneous trunci muscle on both the ipsi-
lateral and, to a lesser extent, the contralateral side
212 The cutaneous trunci reflex. Stimmulation of the skin of
(2.11, 2.12). There is crossing of the pathway within
the back activates the reflex, the efferent arm of which is the
the spinal cord, leading to a bilateral response after uni-
lateral thoracic nerve arising from segments C8 and T1
lateral stimulation. In thoracic limb paresis, the cuta-
and leaving the caudal part of the brachial plexus (a). The
cermatomes are positioned some dlistance caudal to their
neous trunci reflex will also be absent on the affected
respective vertebrae as illustrated here.
side if the lesion involves the C8 and Tl spinal cord
segments, roots or nerves (1.4 and page 30), but will be
213 Examining the neck for evidence of pain. Palpating the
 2.11 The cutaneous trunci reflex is activated by pinching the
neck muscles and moving the neck is usually adequate to reveal
skin over the lumbar spine with forceps or by a gentle needle
pain, as evidenced by an increase in tension (guardling) and by
prick, which leads to a twitch of the cutaneous trunci muscle.
muscle fasciculations
Patient examination
25
applied when determining the presence of pain varies 
CRANIALNERVEEXAMINATION
between patients. In a dog with neck pain caused by a
 Even though abnormal cranial nerve findings may not be
cervical disc extrusion, it is often adequate to palpate
 expected in spinal disorders, some animals with multi-
the cervical muscles gently. It is not usually necessary
to put the head in extreme positions to reach this con-
signs of spinal dysfunction (14.15). It is therefore impor-
clusion. Some animals do not show pain but guard
tant to assess the entire nervous system (de Lahunta,
against neck movement with an increase in resistance
2001; Braund and Sharp, 2003). In addition, particular
compared to normal. In some more stoic dogs, greater
note should be made of the presence of any component
force may be required either by downward pressure on
of Horner's syndrome (ptosis, miosis, enophthalmos and
the spinous processes or along the transverse processes.
third eyelid protrusion), which occurs with interference
The transverse processes of C6 [4.6) can also 
be
to the sympathetic supply to the eye. Note that some
ro ssasse o saop iso u Aisnoauenuad parendu 
animals will only show miosis without the other compo-
low cervical pain.
nents. The resultant anisocoria is missed easily unless
Spinal pain can arise as a result of discogenic pain
tested specifically (2.15). The pupils should be assessed
(Morgan et al., 1993); dorsal longitudinal ligament
carefully for anisocoria by looking through an ophthalmo-
damage; nerve root irritation; stretching or inflammation
scope held about 60 cm from the animal's face. This will
of the meninges; and bone pain. In humans, back pain
produce a tapetal reflection that allows easy comparison
can also arise from the sacroiliac and facet joints; these
of pupil sizes even in a well-lit room; it is particularly
are likely to be potential causes of pain in animals as
important in animals with a dark iris. Isolated miosis may
well but would be much harder to confirm than in
be a feature of spinal disease if the cervical or cranial tho-
humans (Pang et al., 1998) (see Chapter 14).
racic spinal cord segments, or the nerve roots of the
 In some animals with spinal disease, pain is the only
brachial plexus, are involved. An ophthalmoscopic exam-
clinical abnormality, neurological function being normal.
ination should also be carried out to look for fundic
lesions indicative of inflammatory CNS disease.
Stage 2: Patient in lateral recumbency
The patient is then placed in lateral recumbency and
each limb evaluated, with the aim of placing it into one
of the following categories:
· Normal.
· LMN-type abnormality.
· UMN-type abnormality.
An understanding of functional anatomy is required
to appreciate the difference between these types of
deficit (1.12, 1.13).
 The effect of lesions on the LMN and UMN systems
2.14 Palpating the thoracolumbar spine for pain. For
can be considered in terms of motor function, muscle
atrophy, muscle tone and local reflexes. The clinical
2.15 A: Ilsolated miosis due to loss of
sympathetic outflow affter brachial plexus
injury. B: latrogenic Horner's syndrome
in a cat that has just had inflammatory
 polyps removed from the micddle ear.
The ptosis and prolapsed third eyelid are
visible although the pupil is somewhat
obscured. Tumors of the brachial plexus 
may cemonstrate several components of
Horner's syndrome but often only show 
 miosis in the early stages.
B
26
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
 Table 2.3 Differentiation of LMN vs UMN abnormalities
Lower motor neuron (LMN)
Upper motor neuron (UMN)
Motor function
Paresis or paralysis
Paresis or paralysis
Reflexes
Absent or reduced
Normal or increased 
 Muscle tone
Reduced
Normal or increased 
 Muscle atrophy
Severe, early—neurogenic
Late, mild—disuse
217 Paraplegic dog with stiff, hyperextended thoracic limbs
and digits; sometimes the neck is also extended—the
Schiff-Sherrington sign. Thoracic spinal cord lesions may
interfere with inhibitory neurons that have their cell bodies (the
border cells) in the L1-L7 spinal cord segments (Braund and
2.16 Neurogenic atrophy. It is useful to evaluate muscles
Sharp, 2003). Axons from these cells pass cranially to inhibit
that have a dlefinitive bony border, for example the spinatus
neurons supplying the thoracic limb extensor muscles.
muscles as shown, the cranial tibial muscle and the muscles
over the pelvis.
MUSCLEMASS
 Muscle atrophy is assessed by observing and palpating
signs that allow differentiation between UMN and
major muscle groups (2.16).
LMN abnormalities are summarized in Table 2.3.
LMN deficits are characterized by paresis or par-
MUSCLE TONE
alysis; severe (neurogenic) muscle atrophy (2.16);
Test muscle tone by gently flexing and extending
reduced tone in the affected muscles; and depressed or
the joints. Normally there is some resistance to such
absent reflexes. UMN deficits show paresis or paraly-
manipulation. An incorrect impression of increased
sis; mild (disuse) muscle atrophy; normal or increased 
 tone may be gained in excitable or fractious animals,
muscle tone; and normal or hyperactive reflexes. There
or if the animal has a painful orthopedic condition.
is some variation in mild cases, but from the neurologi-
Increased tone in the thoracic limbs is seen in the
cal examination, it should be possible to categorize each
Schiff-Sherrington sign (2.17). This sign (see Ascending
10 ‘Aeuouqe adA-NNn, ‘ieou, Suaq se qu
 motor tract', page 6) does not necessarily denote a
'LMN-type abnormality'.
hopeless prognosis (13.7).
MOTOR FUNCTION
REFLEX TESTING
This has been evaluated previously. With the animal in 
There are a number of local reflexes available for exami-
lateral recumbency, the examination proceeds as follows.
 nation, but it is usual to concentrate on the patellar,
Patient examination
27
2.20 In the pelvic limb critical assessment should be madle of 
hock flexion to assess for evicdence of LMN weakness (2.27). It
may also be necessary to stimulate the withdrawal reflex with
forceps placed over the nail bed or dligit in crder to evoke a
behaviural response for deep pain evaluation (2.21).
 2.18 The flexor or withdrawal reflex is stimulated by pinching
 the toe, which results in flexion of the limb. It is important to
ae suio qul aui lie jeu jeao s l lun sninus aui ym isisiad
as clonus, where the limb vibrates briefly after the first
 fexing. Loss of elbow flexion is often the most sensitive
initial kick. It must be remembered, however, that
indlicator of a weak thoracic limb withdrawal reflex. While the
many animals with UMN lesions have a normal patellar
fexor reflex is being evoked, the contralateral limb should also
reflex. A different type of exaggerated patellar reflex
be cbserved for reflex extension—the crossed extensor reflex.
 can be seen in animals with LMN lesions involving the
sciatic nerve or its origins. The hamstring muscle group
innervated by the sciatic nerve normally counteracts or
damps the reflex kick of the patellar reflex. Interference
with sciatic nerve function can reduce this damping
effect and lead to an increased reflex, so that the lower
limb will oscillate after an initial brisk kick. This is
termed 'pseudohyperreflexia’ or an oscillating patellar
reflex. In tense patients, the patellar reflex may not
respond at all in the upper limb whereas it does in the
lower limb; it is then important to test the reflexes
with the dog on its opposite side. In most animals the
reflex can also be elicited in the standing position if the
limb is relaxed.
2.19 The patellar reflex is evoked by tapping the straight
DEEPPAIN SENSATION ORNOCICEPTION
patellar ligament. It can be dlone on either the upper or the lower
imb, in contrast to the withdrawal reflex that is unreliable in the 
On testing the withdrawal reflex, note the patient's
lower limb.
behaviural response to the stimulus (2.2l). Formerly
called deep pain sensation, this is more correctly
flexor (withdrawal) and perineal reflexes (2.18-2.20).
referred to as nociception although the terms are used
The perineal reflex can be elicited by squeezing the base
interchangeably in this text (de Lahunta, 200l). A turn
of penis or the perineal region. Anal tone can be assessed
of the head or vocalization should be seen in response to
by a rectal examination or using a thermometer.
the pinch, indicating that the painful stimulus has been
 Other reflexes such as the triceps, biceps, and gas-  t
transmitted up the spinal cord to the brain. If there is no
trocnemius may also be tested. However, they are s
such response then the stimulus must be increased, usu-
found inconsistently in normal animals and their main  2
 ally by using larger instruments such as needle holders,
significance is in finding hyperactive responses in UMN  pliers, or even with an electrical stimulator (13.36B)
disorders. Increased patellar reflexes are often seen in across the digit or nail bed. Confirmation of a loss of
UMN lesions cranial to the L4-L6 spinal cord segments.
 deep pain is often provided by the animal showing a line
When this occurs there are sustained contractions known  of analgesia over its flank. The animal responds to
28
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
SITE OF INJURY
THORACIC LIMB
PELVIC LIMB
DEFICIT
DEFICIT
 C1-C5
UMN
UMN
 the limb must not be mistaken for a behaviural response.
 Similarly, some animals willreact to the change in bocy position 
 C6-T2
LMN
UMN
induced by the withdrawal reflex. Ideally, the withdrawal reflex 
o padde anssaid jauung uau pue 'isy paeui aa pinous
T3-L3
NORMAL
evaluate nociception (6.2, 13.36B).
UMN
L4-S3
pinching skin of dermatomes arising cranial to a lesion
NORMAL
LMN
but shows no response in those arising caudally.
Animals with cervical injuries very rarely lose deep
pain. This is because animals that suffer spinal cord
 2.22 Lesions in specific regions will produce dlifferent
injuries severe enough to interfere with nociception
 combinations of neurological signs. Lesions in the cervical spinal
usually are left with no motor function, which results in
cord (a) produce UMIN signs in all four limbs. Lesions in the
 rapid asphyxiation. This emphasizes the importance of
segments of the cervical intumescence (b) produce LMN deficits
in the thoracic limbs and UMN signs in the pelvic limbs. Lesions
aan aas e u uad  sssse
in the thoracolumbar cord (c) produce UMN signs in the pelvic
or tetraplegic animal (6.1, 7.1l). One example where
limbs only, with normal thoracic limbs (the Schiff-Sherington
there may be a unilateral decrease in deep pain after
sign may be present in peracute lesions). Lesions in the lumbar
cervical injury is following catastrophic failure of a disc
intumescence (d) produce LMN signs in the pelvic limbs, tail
after trauma. Here the nucleus pulposus explodes dorso-
and perineum; the thoracic limbs are normal.
laterally to cause devastating, asymmetrical neurologi-
cal deficits (Griffiths, 1970).
innervation to the thoracic and pelvic limbs respec-
Absence of deep pain sensation therefore indicates
tively. Area B also conveys UMNs to the pelvic limbs.
severe spinal cord damage (see Assessing the severity
It can be seen in l.l2 that part of the LMN lies
of the lesion', page 31; 'Spinal cord nerve fibers and the
within the spinal cord; lesions in areas B and D of the
effect of compression', page 6; Mechanisms of recov-
 spinal cord will therefore produce LMN signs in the
ery after spinal cord injury', page 87).
limbs. Variations are possible, for example in some ani-
mals with myelopathy affecting the caudal cervical
segments, the thoracic limbs often show a mixture
LOCALIZATION OF LESIONS
paseansun mous Aeu AauL 'suis NNT pue NNn Jo
On the basis of the neurological examination, it is usu-
 thoracic limb muscle tone, which is an UMN effect on
ally possible to identify the location of the spinal cord
 the elbow and carpal extensor muscles (Seim and
lesion (2.22). Functionally, the spinal cord may be
Withrow, 1982). In addition, there is often an associ-
divided into four regions:
ated LMN weakness of the elbow flexors resulting in a
· A: C1-C5.
weak withdrawal reflex. Dogs with severe C6-T2 signs
●B: C6-T2 (cervical intumescence).
also have a short-strided, choppy or 'disconnected’
·C:T3-L3.
thoracic limb gait and a long-strided, ataxic pelvic limb
D: L4-S3 (lumbar intumescence).
gait (see Chapter ll). In contrast, dogs with Cl-C5
Areas A and C, the cervical and thoracolumbar spinal
signs often show a long-strided or 'floating' thoracic
cord, convey primarily the UMNs. Areas B and D, the
limb gait together with a long-strided, ataxic pelvic limb
cervicothoracic and lumbosacral spinal cord, provide gait (Baum et al., 1992).
 Patient examination
29
When considering the neurological localization,
· Rarely an animal will have no cranial nerve deficits
remember that the spinal cord segments are not all
and will appear to localize to the Cl-C5 spinal
contained in the vertebra of the same number, espe-
cord segments when it actually has a lesion in its
cially in the cervical and lumbar region (l.2, 1.5).
brainstem (2.23).
Examples of potential pitfalls in neurological examina-
●Animals with cerebellar disease as well as those with
tion include:
spinal cord lesions affecting the spinocerebellar
· LMN deficits in all limbs generally indicate diffuse
tracts often show hypermetric and dysmetric limb
 peripheral nerve or neuromuscular disease.
 movements. Animals with primary cerebellar disease
Occasionally, deficits may only be present in either
[see 'Neuroaxonal dystrophy', page 320), can usually
the thoracic limbs or the pelvic limbs early in the
be distinguished as they have additional signs such as
course of generalized LMN diseases.
head tremors, dysmetric movements or menace
· If there are any cranial nerve deficits, or signs
deficits (Holliday, 1980).
such as a change in mentation or behavior, then
· Animals with cervical lesions can sometimes show
it is very unlikely that the animal only has a spinal
vestibular signs. Local nerve blocks or neurectomy
cord lesion.
of the first cervical dorsal nerve roots produces
vestibular signs in monkeys and in horses (Biemond
and De Jong, 1969; Mayhew, 1999).
‘Central cord syndrome' can cause unusual signs.
With this condition a high-cervical lesion causes
tetraparesis with much more severe deficits in the
thoracic limbs than in the pelvic limbs; spinal
reflexes are preserved in all four limbs.
· An LMN lesion may obscure a concomitant UMN
lesion (2.24).
● Animals with some spinal cord lesions, such as
arachnoid cysts or intramedullary tumors, may
show urinary or fecal incontinence while still able
to walk (12.4).
· Apparent paraparesis due to a mild cervical lesion
(see Chapters 7 and 11).
· A lesion in the sacral spinal cord segments can
2.23 Eight-year-old Goldlen retriever with acute onset of left
 mimic nerve root compression at the lumbosacral
hemiparesis and inabity to stand. Neurological cleficits localized
junction (2.25).
to C1-C5 spinal cord segments. No lesions were detected in
·Animals with a choppy thoracic limb gait and
the cervical spine; CT scan revealed a mass in the left medulla.
In retrospect, the only clue to a brainstem lesion was a subtle
paraparesis may have a lesion between Tl-T6
cecrease in mental status.
(3.36A).
A
B
2.24 Aged Dalmatian with mild, progressive paraparesis, dilated anus and urinary incontinence. Neurological deficits localized to
the L7-S2 spinal cord segments. A CT scan of the lumbosacral space was unremarkable (10.2B, 10.10A). A: Myelography 
mid-C7 on the right; and a number of small flling defects over the lumbar cord (not shown). The mass at C2 was a nerve sheath
tumor with subarachnoid metastasis (4.27, 4.28)
30
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
B
2.25 Seven-year-old Shih Tzu that presented initially with loss of tail tone and then mild paraparesis, anal arreflexia and incontinence
medium. A: sagittal and B: transverse images show that the dog has an enhancing mass (arrows), most likely a nerve sheath tumor,
 involving the right L5 nerve root and invading the sacral spinal cord segments. The lumbosacral disc space appears normal.
2.26 A: Dog with a brachial plexus
avulsion injury affecting the caudal portion
of its left brachial plexus. It is unable to fix
the carpal or elbow joint but can stillflex 
its elbow joint due to preserved cranial
plexal function. It has also begun to
mutilate its foot. B: This cdog sustained an
 injury to both the cranial and cauclal
portions of its right brachial plexus. It is
unable to flex the elbow or to bear weight
on the limb (note dropped elbow and 
collapsed carpal joints) and is at high risk 
of abrading its foot.
B
Assessment of the brachial and
the plexus (C5, C6 and C7). Deficits of the cranial
lumbosacral plexus
plexus cause loss of elbow flexion and may result in
Lesions affecting these areas may be missed if specific
 subluxation of the shoulder joint. The radial, median
testing is not performed. Animals must be assessed for 
 and ulnar nerves derive mainly from more caudal por-
brachial plexus lesions after trauma (l3.l) or when
 tions of the plexus (C7, C8, Tl and T2). Deficits of
they have a chronic, progressive thoracic limb lameness
 the caudal plexus cause an inability to fix the elbow or
(12.2). This is done by testing for anisocoria (2.l5);
 carpus and therefore the animal cannot bear weight on
unilateral loss of the cutaneous trunci reflex {2.ll,
 the limb. In addition they often have ipsilateral (full or
2.12); reduced thoracic limb flexor response (2.18,
 partial) Horner's syndrome and cutaneous trunci reflex
2.26); and reduced nociception (2.21).
deficit (l.4, 2.15). Elbow flexion is preserved when
Animals with lesions of the brachial plexus may
 the cranial plexus is intact (2.26).
have deficits referable to the cranial brachial plexus,
 Animals must be assessed for lumbosacral plexus
the caudal brachial plexus, or both (l.4, 2.26). The  lesions after trauma by testing for sciatic, pudendal or
suprascapular, subscapular, musculocutaneous and axil- pelvic nerve deficits. One of the most specific tests for
lary nerves derive mainly from the cranial portions of a sciatic nerve deficit is to assess hock flexion (2.27).
Patient examination
31
Rights were not granted te include this figure in clectronic media.
Please refer lo the printed publicaticn.
2.28 Sensory ceficits secondary to a brachial plexus lesion
may give rise occasionally to trophic ulceration as shown here
the foot and also from abnormal forces placed on the foot due 
to cligital paralysis (Hunt and Chapman, 1991).
2.27 When assessing the withdrawal reflex in the pelvic limb, all
· Superficial peroneal—dorsal aspect of the 3rd
three joints should be assessed. An animal can flex both its hip
digit, proximal end.
and stifle joints by using the femoral and sciatic nerves whereas
1
 Deep peroneal—skin between the Znd and 3rd
it can only flex its hock joint by using the peroneal dlivision of the
digits, dorsal aspect.
sciatic nerve. Weak or absent hock flexion can be appreciated
best by pulling the hock joint gently into extension and then 
 Tibial nerve—skin at the proximal border of the
applying a stimulus to the dligits.
tarsal pad.
 Sensory loss follwing brachial or lumbosacral plexus
injury occasionally gives rise to trophic ulceration (2.28).
Loss of proprioception is a more sensitive indicator
although this does not differentiate an UMN lesion
ASSESSING THE SEVERITY OF
 from a LMN lesion.
ThE LESION
Sensory loss in small animals usually reflects spinal
cord or nerve root lesions. Occasionally, it reflects
Assessing the severity of a lesion plays a major part in
peripheral nerve injury and specific test sites for the var-
the diagnostic procedure. In certain patients, it has as
 ious cutaneous sensory nerves have been defined (Bailey
ood e jn onona au se sisouoid uo suaq yn
and Kitchell, 1987). For the thoracic limb the main sites
prognosis is suggested from the neurological examina-
are:
tion further investigations may be deemed unnecessary.
● Musculocutaneous nerve—just distal to the medial
 In general, patients with spinal diseases that show
epicondyle of the humerus.
D unau e ay sisouid asim e aaeu Ssyap NT
● Radial nerve—dorsal aspect of the third or fourth
function than those showing UMN deficits. One excep-
digit.
tion to this is for dogs with thoracolumbar disc disease
● Ulnar nerve—just distal to the olecranon on the
(Dhupa et al., 1999) (see Chapter 8).
caudolateral aspect of the antebrachium and on the
 In UMN injuries, rate of onset, duration, and degree
lateral surface of the fifth digit.
of spinal cord damage all affect the clinical signs. Rapid
For the pelvic limb the main sites are:
progression of acute signs tends to reflect acute decom-
● Saphenous (femoral) nerve—4 cm distal to the
pensation, which if treated early has a favorable out-
 medial condyle of the tibia.
 come unless the damage is irreversible. Slow progression
32
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
 generally reflects a chronic process that is gradually
 thoracolumbar disc extrusion or a spinal tumor. Clearly,
outstripping secondary compensation mechanisms
 the prognosis for such disorders could differ markedly.
(Gilson, 2003). For thoracic and lumbar lesions, the
 Spinal shock is a phenomenon that affects primarily
degree of dysfunction can be classified as grades 1-5
 humans and higher primates. It is where an UMN lesion 
(Scott, 1997; Scott and McKee, 1999):
is associated with a temporary loss of spinal reflexes
1. Pain only.
below the lesion; in humans this can last for a week or
2. Paraparesis—walking.
Sh pue suaisuen st il sieo pue shop ui sinooo il J 'aro
3. Paraparesis—not walking.
only seen within the first few hours after injury. It could
4. Paraplegia.
confound neurological localization and therefore in ani-
 5. Paraplegia with loss of deep pain sensation.
 The animal usually progresses through these stages as 
 ination should be performed a few hours later (Walmsley
it deteriorates unless the disease is peracute in onset,
 and Tracey, 1983; Gopal and Jeffery, 2001).
 such as trauma or a vascular lesion. The scheme applies
Cervical spinal cord lesions display a similar progres-
to both UMN and LMN lesions. Control of micturition
 sion of signs to that described above but urinary incon-
is often lost between grade 4 and grade 5 but full
 tinence or loss of nociception is very rare. Severe
control of continence may be incomplete as early as
cervical spinal cord lesions may result in respiratory
grade 2. Recovery of spinal cord function usually pro-
failure caused by interference with respiratory control,
gresses steadily in the reverse order, unless the animal
 although this is uncommon (6.1, 7.11).
develops either a reflex bladder or spinal walking (6.2,
13.30, 13.34). Recovery after spinal injury is usually
defined as recovery of continence and of the ability to
DETERMINING THE ETIOLOGY
walk unaided.
Once the lesion has been located, a list of differential
The severity of the neurological deficits depends on
 diagnoses can be made. Many components go into this
two anatomical features: the position of the tracts in the
 assessment, including breed and age of the patient, his-
spinal cord that carry the respective function and the
 tory, presenting signs, progression, and physical and
diameter of the fibers transmitting that function (see
neurological findings. It is important not to depend
'Spinal cord nerve fibers and the effect of compression',
entirely on one feature to make a firm diagnosis. It is
 page 6). The prognosis worsens with increasing neuro-
reasonable to start from the assumption that the most
logical deficit, as in general this reflects greater spinal
common disease is the cause, but this should ideally
 cord damage. The presence of a crossed extensor reflex
 either be confirmed or attempts made to exclude less
(seen in UMN lesions) and the Schiff-Sherrington sign
likely conditions, particularly if the patient is not pro-
indicate severe lesions, but are not in themselves
 gressing as expected. Differential diagnosis is discussed
 prognostic indicators. Schiff-Sherrington syndrome in
 in Chapter 3.
particular is often thought to indicate a poor prognosis
spinal cord injury. However, some animals with Schiff-
REFERENCES
Sherrington syndrome make a good recovery (13.7) and
Bailey, C.S., Kitchell, R.L.(1987) Cutaneous sensory testing in the dog
so prognosis should be inferred from the presence or
Jourmal of Veterinary intermal Medicine 1, I28-135.
 absence of nociception. The prognosis for patients with-
Baum, F., Trotter, E.J., de Lahunta, A.D. [1992) Cervical fibrotic stenosis
out deep pain sensation (grade 5) is guarded for most
in a young Rottweiler. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association 201, 1222-1224.
disorders, especially if it has been absent for longer than
 Biemond, A., De Jong, J.M. [1969) On cervical nystagmus and related dis-
48h (see also page 132). Unfortunately, although it is 
orders. Brait 92, 437-458.
uaaq seu euue [enpiaipu ue Suof mou snoqo Aensn
Boswood, A., Lamb, C.R., White, R.N. [2000) Aortic and iliac thrombosis
in six dogs. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 41, 109-114
paraplegic it is seldom clear exactly when that animal lost
Braund, K.G., Sharp, N.J.H. [(2003) Neurological examination and local-
deep pain. Loss of deep pain sensation after disc disease
ization. In: D. Slatter [ed.], Textbook of SmallAmimal Surgery, 3rd edn,
is associated with a 50-60% chance of recovery follwing
1092-l107. Philardelphia: Elsevier Science.
 Lahumta, A. [200l) Neurological exarmination. In: K.G. Braund [ed.),
surgery (see Chapter 8, page 138 and Table 8.la). Animals
Clitical Neurology inSmall Amimal-Localization,Diagosis and Treatment
that have absent deep pain sensation after trauma carry a
Ithaca: IntemationalVetermary Information Service.http://wwwivis.org/
 much worse prognosis whatever the duration of the clin-
special_books/Braumd/deLahumta/chapter_frm.asp?LA= |
Dhupa, S., Glickman, N.W, Waters, D.J, Dhupa, S. [1999) Functional
ical signs (Olby et al., 2003) (see Chapter 13, page 302).
outcome in dogs after surgical treatment of caudal lumbar intervertebral
 In other grades of dysfunction, the prognosis is also
disk hemiation.Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital Association 35,
somewhat dependent on the etiology. For example, a
I-2
Gilson, S.D. [2003) Neuro-oncologic surgery In: D. Slatter [ed.), Textbook of
Dachshund with grade 3 signs could possibly have a
Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd edn, 1277-1286. Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
Patient examination
33
Gopal, M.S., Jeffery, N.D. [2001) Magnetic resonance imaging in the diag-
Scott, H.W. [1997) Hemilaminectomy for the treatment ofthoracolumbar
nosis and treatment of a canine spinal cord injury. Jourmal of Small
disc disease in the dog: a follow-up study of 40 cases. Joural of Small
Animal Practice 42, 29-31.
Artimal Practice 38, 488-494.
Griffths, I. [1970) A syndrome produced by dorso-lateral 'explosions' of
Scott, H.W., McKee, W.M. [1999) Laminectomy for 34 dogs with thora-
the cervical intervertebral discs. Veterinary Record 87, 737-741.
columbar intervertebral disc disease and loss of deep pain perception.
Holliday, TA. [1980) Clnical signs of acute and chronic experimental lesions
Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 40, 417-422.
of the cerebellum.Veterinary Science Commurtications 3,2S9-278.
Seim, H.B., Withrow, S.J. [1982) Pathophysiology and diagnosis of caudal
Hunt, G.B., Chapman, B.L. [1991) 'Trophic' ulceration oftwo digital pads.
Cervical spondylo-myelopathy with emphasis on the Doberman Pinscher.
AustralianVeterinary Practitioner 21,196,205.
Jourmal of theAmericant AnimalHospitalAssociation 18,241-251.
Mayhew, I.G. [1999) The healthy spinal cord. American Association of
Walmsley, B., Tracey, D.J. [1983) The effect of transection and cold block
Equine Practitioners 45,S6-66.
of the spinal cord on synaptic transmission between Ia afferents and
MeDonnell, J.J., Platt, S.R., Clayton, L.A. [2001) Neurologic conditions
motoneurones. Neuroscience 9, 445-451.
causing lameness in companion animals. Vterinary Clinics of North
America,SmallAimal Practice31,17-38.
Morgan, PW, Parent, J., Holmberg, D.L. [1993) Cervical pain secondary
to intervertebral disc disease in dogs; radiographic findings and surgical
FURTHER READING
implications. Progress int Veterinary Neurology 4, 76-80.
de Lahunta, A. [200l) Neurological examination. In: K.G. Braund [ed.)],
Neer, TM. [1992) A review of disorders of the gallbladder and extra-
CHinical Neurology in Small Animals—Localization,Diagnosis and
hepatic biliary tract in the dog and cat.Jourmal of Veterinary lntermal
Treatment. Ithaca: Intemational Veterinary Information Service
Medicine 6, 186-192.
Olby, N.J., Harris, T, Munana, K.R., Skeen, TM., Sharp, N.J.H. [2003)
deLahunta/chapter_frm.asp?LA= I
Long-term functional outcome of dogs with severe spinal cord injuries.
Journal of Neurotrauma [in press).
Pang, W.W., Mok, M.S., Lin, M.L., Chang, D.P, Hwang, M.H. [1998)
Application of spinal pain mapping in the diagnosis of low back pain—
analysis of I04 cases. Acta Anaesthesiology Singapore 36, 71-74.
Diagnosis and differential
Chapter
3
diagnosis
· The neurologicallocalization will also exclude some
Differential diagnosis  35
 conditions (see Chapter 2).
A: C1-C5
35
B: C6-T2
35
 The breed of the patient may also indicate that certain
C: T3-L3
36
diseases are more likely to be present, but this should
D: L4-S3
37
not be the only information on which the diagnosis is
based. An additional way to narrow the list is by a process
Further reading 39
of elimination. For the dog in 3.l, the signalment and
history were not suggestive of degenerative, anomalous
or metabolic conditions; there was no pain to suggest
On the basis of the neurological examination the lesion is
trauma; and the pattern of progression made vascular
localized to one of the following four areas of the spinal
disease unlikely. The two most probable differential
cord (2.22):
diagnoses were therefore either neoplasia or infectious
·A:C1-C5.
and inflammatory disease.
·B:C6-T2.
·C: T3-L3.
· D:L4-S3.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
These areas relate to spinal cord segments. Refer to 1.2
A: C1-C5
and 1.5 to identify the location of these areas within the
 In adult dogs, intervertebral disc disease (Table 3.2) is
vertebral column.
the most common condition affecting this region. In
 A differential diagnosis list is then drawn up, which
dogs less than 2 years of age the differential diagnoses are
embraces all the disease conditions that could be present.
different. Here, atlantoaxial subluxation, inflammatory
It is usual to create this list using the DAMNIT format
CNS disease, discospondylitis and trauma are the most
(Table 3.1), the elements of which can also be expressed
likely causes. Spinal tumors can occur in dogs of any
using the acronym VITAMIN D. Conditions that occur
 age. The most common tumors in the cervical spine are
frequently in each of the four spinal cord regions are
meningiomas and nerve sheath tumors; both are more
listed in Tables 3.2-3.5. When the animal has no neuro-
 common in older dogs.
logical deficits, consider the conditions listed in Table 2.1
Some dogs with cervical spondylomyelopathy (CSM)
(disorders mimicking spinal disease) and Table 3.6 (dif-
have neurological signs with a Cl-C5 pattern of dys-
fuse or non-localizable pain). Other differential diagnoses
function (see page 28), although the lesion is often
are listed in Box 7.2 (neck pain), Box 8.l (thoraco-
more caudal in the cervical spine. Acute, non-painful,
lumbar disc disease), Box 9.1 (atlantoaxial disease), Table
10.2 (lumbosacral disease), Table ll.l (cervical spondylo-
myelopathy due to fibrocartilaginous embolism (FCE).
myelopathy), and Box 13.1 (trauma). Non-spinal causes
Signs are often asymmetrical and severe.
 of neurological disease and differentials for exercise intol-
 In cats, clinical disc disease is rare in the neck.
erance are included in Table 3.6.
The likely diagnoses are trauma, neoplasia (usually
 The list of differential diagnoses for any given patient
lymphoma) and inflammatory diseases, particularly
can be shortened considerably if some basic information
feline infectious peritonitis (FIP). Atlantoaxial sub-
is taken into account, such as the following:
 luxation is rare in cats.
·The age of the patient.
· Whether the condition is acute or chronic,
B: C6-T2
progressive or static.
 Similar considerations apply here to those causing Cl-C5
● Presence or absence of spinal pain.
signs, although atlantoaxial subluxation does not occur.
36
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Table 3.1 Differential diagnoses for spinal disease using the DAMNIT scheme*
Category
Diseases (common conditions in bold)
 Degenerative
 Degenerative myelopathy
Cervical spondylomyelopathy
Synovial cysts
Disc disease
Leukodystrophies 
 Lysosomal storage disease
Lumbosacral disease
Cervical fibrotic stenosis
Facet joint pain
 Sacroiliac joint pain
Anomalous 
Syringo(hydro)myelia
Vertebral malformations
 Pilonidal (dermoid) sinus 
Cartilaginous exostoses 
 Spinal arachnoid cyst 
 Meningo(rmyelo)celes 
Epidermoid cyst
Spina dysraphism 
 Atlantoaxial subluxation 
Heredlitary myelopathy 
 Spina bifida
 Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
Tethered cord syndrome 
Schmorl's node
 Sacral osteochondritis dlissecans 
 Atlantooccipital dysplasia
 Metabolic
 See Table 3.6, Exercise intolerance 
Lysosomal storage disease
 Neoplastic
 Primary or secondary tumor
Epidural lipomatosis 
 Nutritional
 Hypervitaminosis A
 Thiamine deficiency
Idiopathic
 Tumoral calcinosis
 Disseminated idliopathic skeletal hyperostosis
latrogenic injury
 Peridural scar 
 Diagnostic, radliation or surgical injury
 Inflammatory and 
Discospondylitis
Meningo(encephalo)myelitis
Infectious
 Spinal epidural empyema 
 Cauda equina neuritis 
 Gelfoam reaction
 Foreign body migration
Traumatic
 Sacrocaudal injury
 Dural tear 
 Brachial plexus avulsion myelopathy
 Traumatic disc injury
 Gunshot injury 
 Fracture/luxation
Toxic
 See Table 3.6, Exercise intolerance 
Vascular
Fibrocartilaginous embolism
Traumatic feline ischemic myelopathy
 Spinal cord hematoma
Neurogenic claudication 
Vascular malformation 
 Ascending myelomalacia
 Fat graft necrosis 
 Spinal cord hemorrhage
Ischemic neuromyopathy
* Common condlitions are in bold.
Intervertebral disc disease is less frequent in the caudal
C: T3-L3
cervical spine, but does occur, occasionally even at C7/T1.
This region of the spine accounts for most cases of spinal
Cervical spondylomyelopathy is most prevalent in
disease. Disc hermiation is the most likely diagnosis in
the caudal cervical spine of Dobermans and Great Danes.
dogs older than l year. In younger dogs, inflammatory
Ischemic myelopathy also occurs with some frequency
CNS disease, discospondylitis and trauma are com-
in this region (see Table 3.3).
mon. In cats, disc disease is uncommon but does occur,
Diagnosis and differential diagnosis 
37
Table 3.2 Ciseases causing signs that localize to C1-C5
Table 3.4 Diseases causing signs that localize to T3-L3
(see also Table 3.1)
(see also Table 3.1)
Acute
Chronic
 Acute
Chronic
 Painful
 Atlantoaxial 
 Atlantoaxial 
 Painful
Disc disease
Disc disease
 subluxation 
 subluxation 
Neoplasia
Synovial cysts
CSM
 Atlantooccipital
Discosponcylitis 
 Tumoral calcinosis 
Disc disease
 dysplasia
Meningomyelitis
Neoplasia
CSM
Fracture/luxation 
Discospondylitis
 Cervical fibrotic stenosis
Ascending
Meningomyelitis 
 Synovial cysts
 mmyelomalacia 
Fracture/luxation 
 Syringohydlrormyelia
Spinal cord 
Hypervitaminosis A
 Non-painful 
Traumatic feline 
Degenerative
hematoma
ischemic
 rmyelopathy
 mmyelopathy 
 Spinal arachnoid cyst
Non-painful
FCE
 Spinal arachnoid cyst 
FCE
Neoplasia
Tumoral calcinosis 
 Neoplasia 
 CSM, cervical sponcylomyelopathy.
Table 3.5 Diseases causing signs that localize to L4-S3
(see also Table 3.1)
 Acute
 Chronic
Table 3.3 Diseases causing signs that localize to C6-T2
(see also Table 3.1)
 Painful
Neoplasia
Lumbosacral
Discospondylitis 
disease
Acute
Chronic
Meningomyelitis 
Tethered cord
Fracture/luxation 
 syndrome
 Painful
CSM
CSM
Disc disease
Sacral OCD
Disc disease
Synovial cysts
 Ascending
Neoplasia 
 myelomalacia 
Discospondylitis
 Psoas muscle injury 
 Meningomyelitis
 Fracture/luxation
injuied-uon
 Cauda equina
Degenerative
 Spinal cord hematoma
 neuritis 
rmyelopathy
Ischemic
Spina bifida
 Non-painful
 Brachial plexus 
Spinal arachnoid
 neuromyopathy
Sacrocaudal
 avulsion 
cyst
FCE
 cysgenesis
FCE
 Dermoid sinus 
 Dermoid sinus 
Neoplasia 
Neoplasia
 CSM, cervical sponcylomyelopathy.
 OCD, osteochondritis dissecans.
particularly in aged animals. Trauma, neoplasia and
may be present. Lumbosacral disease is common in 
inflammatory diseases are the most likely causes of
large breeds of dog, but is less common in smaller dogs
feline thoracolumbar spinal disease.
and is rare in cats. In sacrocaudal injuries, signs refer-
In large-breed, older dogs with chronic signs, the pri-
 able to the bladder, perineum, and even paraparesis 
mary differential diagnosis is degenerative myelopathy.
 may be seen.
Chronic disc herniation (Hansen type II), synovial
 Degenerative myelopathy may appear to localize to
Cyst(s), neoplasia and mild L4-S3 lesions must be eli-
this region if the patellar reflexes are absent. This is
minated before this diagnosis is reached (Table 3.4).
due to nerve root involvement; the lesion is still largely
T3-L3 in nature. Ischemic myelopathy is also seen here.
 In young animals, congenital defects ofthe vertebrae or
D: L4-S3
 Subacute or chronic presentations with signs localizing
bifida may be present, but this disease is uncommon.
to this region are usually referable to the lumbosacral
Taking the signalment and neurological localization into
junction (Table 10.2). Neoplasia or discospondylitis
account can therefore reduce the differential diagnosis
38
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
3.1 Eight-year-old Akita that presented with progressive tail
 3.2 German shepherd dog with severe lumbosacral pain.
paralysis, loss of anal reflex, incontinence and pelvic limb
Rectal examination revealed an asymmetrical prostate gland
weakness over 3 weeks. The myelogram indicates a discrete
 fixed to the pelvis. Ultrasound revealed an enlarged prostate
filling cefect within the dural sac over L6 vertebra. Final
(arrowheads) with mineralization (arrow) and small cystic cavities
dliagnosis was an intradural fibrosarcoma.
lumbosacral disease (10.4) and cermatofibrosis with renal
cystadenocarcinoma (4.35). Nevertheless, it tested positive for
Ehrlichia canis and returmed to work as a search and rescue
list. It may be reasonable, in some circumstances, to
 clog after treatment with doxycycline.
proceed with treatment without further investigations,
for example in a middle-aged Dachshund with mild
T3-L3 signs and where conservative treatment is
definitive diagnostic tests instituted (see Chapter 4).
 planned. However, if the patient does not progress as 
 Occasionally, an animal may present with more than
expected, or if there is any doubt about the diagnosis,
one disease that could explain its clinical signs (3.2).
the provisional diagnosis should be reassessed and more
Neurological localization should define the relevant
Table 3.6 Differential diagnoses for diffuse pain, non-spinal neurclogical disease and exercise intolerance 
 Diffuse pain
 Non-spinal neurological disease
Exercise intolerance
Polyarthritis
 Myositis or myopathy
 Myasthenia gravis
 Polymyositis 
 Peripheral neuropathies 
 Mild cervical myelopathy
 Pancreatitis 
 Radiculopathies 
Addison's disease
 Renal or ureteral calculi 
 Myasthenia gravis
Hypoglycemia
Gallstones 
Tick paralysis
Polymyositis
 Gastrointestinal parasites 
 Subacute crganophosphate toxicity
Toxic rmyopathy
Kidney worm
Hypokalemic polymyopathy
 Csteoporotic vertebral fracture 
 Botulism 
Hyperthyroidism
 Mid-thoracic vertebral lesion 
Localized tetanus
 Congenital myopathy 
 Cther abdominal pain
 Brain tumor
Tick paralysis
 Meningoencephalitis 
 Intermittent claudication 
 Coonhound paralysis 
 Thalarmic pain syndrome
Ischemic neuromyopathy
 Lumbosacral pain 
 Prostatic disease
 Psoas muscle hemorrhage
ldiopathic polyradiculoneuritis 
Urethral tumor
 Protozoal myositis and
 polyradiculoneuritis 
 Subacute organophosphate 
toxicity
 Botulism
 Peripheral neuropathy
Ischemic neuromyopathy
Intermittent claudication
Cardiac disease
Upper airway disease
Diagnosis and differential diagnosis 
39
lesion but occasionally each disease may localize to the 
 simply assuming that the most common disease process
same region. This shows that the clinician must strive
 is the one responsible for the clinical signs.
Teuanod yoea ano anu ot An pue puu uado ue daay o
diagnosis in step-wise fashion. Response to treatment is
one useful means of doing this, in which case the sim-
FURTHER READING
 plest therapy should be tried first. The case discussed
Braumd, K.G.(2003)CHinical Neurology in SmallAnimals: Localization,
in 3.2 illustrates the importance of considering a full
Diagrtosis and Treatmet. http://www.ivis.org/special_books/Braund/
range of differential diagnoses for each case and not
toc.asp
Diagnostic aids
Chapter 
 Routine laboratory analysis  41
Biopsy   61
Hematology  41
Biochemistry   41
Key issues for future investigation   62
Urinalysis   42
Serology
42
References 62
Microbiology
42
Other   42
Procedures  64
Collection of CSF
64
Cerebrospinal fluid  42
Myelography   70
Indications and contraindications for CSF
collection 
43
The exact selection of diagnostic tests to be employed
Collection of CSF
43 (64)
 Sample handling and laboratory analysis  43 
varies with the circumstances. In the following chap-
Normal CSF findings   45
ters, recommendations as to the tests most likely to pro-
 Abnormal CSF findings  45 
vide a diagnosis in a particular disease are given. Clearly,
Normal findings in the face of disease  45
 individual preference, experience and the availability
of equipment will influence these decisions.
Radiography
45
Survey radiographs  45
ROUTINE LAbORATORY ANALYSIS
 Radiographic positioning and normal spinal 
A complete blood count, chemistry profile and urinaly-
radiographs  46
 sis should be checked in all patients undergoing non-
emergency procedures. They rarely provide definitive
Special radiographic procedures 
48
 diagnostic information in neurological diseases, but can
Myelography  48 (70)
be important for detecting concurrent disorders (Braund
Epidurography 50
 and Sharp, 2003) (Table 3.6). In emergency situations,
Discography   50
analysis may be restricted to packed cell volume, total
Principles of spinal radiology  
protein, serum glucose and urea concentrations.
50
 Myelographic interpretation   50 
Hematology
Complications of myelography 51
In the majority of animals with spinal disease, the
hemogram is umremarkable, although a stress leuko-
Other imaging techniques
54
gram (lymphopenia, eosinopenia and leukocytosis) is a
Utrasonography   54
 common finding.
Computed tomography
55
 Patients with inflammatory diseases of the spinal
Magnetic resonance imaging  57
cord and meninges usually have normal hemograms.
Scintigraphy   59
 Dogs with discospondylitis or rickettsial disease and
cats with feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) may have
Clinical electrophysiology
60
Electromyography   60
Spinal cord evoked response   60 
Biochemistry
 F waves and cord dorsum potentials  61
Metabolic diseases may cause generalized weakness,
which could be mistaken for spinal disease. Examples
42
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
 include Addison's disease, Cushing's disease, hypothy-
titers are usually necessary for Rickettsia sp. and
roidism, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, hyponatremia
Toxoplasma gondii.
and hypokalemic polymyopathy.
Canine distemper virus (CDV) and FIP both cause
Raised serum creatine kinase concentrations are usul-
 neurological lesions, which may present with spinal
ally indicative of muscle injury. This increases the index
 involvement. The presence of serum IgG is not confir-
of suspicion for protozoal disease, especially when multi-
matory of central nervous system (CNS) involvement by
these viruses unless it can be shown to be due to intra-
coexist [4.46). Note that serum creatine kinase con-
thecal production rather than caused by leakage from
centrations may be raised in patients that suffer trauma
serum. Ante-mortem confirmation of these diseases
or are recumbent for lengthy periods.
is challenging.
 Abnormal biochemical findings may be seen in certain
Non-spinal causes of weakness may be detected by
spinal diseases. Hypocalcemia is seen in some patients
serum tests such as cholinesterase concentrations in
with generalized bone disorders, for example in second-
ary hyperparathyroidism. Hypercalcemia is seen in some
antibody titers in animals with myasthenia gravis
patients with lymphoma or myeloma; this is a paraneo-
(Table 3.6).
plastic effect. Hypergammaglobulinemia may be seen
Microbiology
in myeloma and in chronic, infectious diseases such as
FIP; serum electrophoresis is useful to differentiate
Urine culture is indicated in patients with cystitis related
the two.
to neurological disease. Sensitivity testing should also be
performed to determine the most appropriate antibiotic
Urinalysis
with which to treat infections. However, bladder infec-
 Urinalysis may provide specific diagnostic information
 tions usually only resolve when urinary function returns
regarding renal and hepatic function or urinary tract
to normal.
infection.
 In patients with discospondylitis, urine and blood
If bladder function is in doubt in patients with spinal
culture may be attempted to isolate the causative
disease, urinalysis should be performed on a sample
 organism along with direct aspiration from the affected
collected by cystocentesis when the patient is first
disc space[s).
evaluated. Ultrasound may aid collection of urine if the
 If wound infections occur following surgery, culture
bladder is not palpable. Subsequent urinalysis should
 from the depths of the wound should be performed
be performed periodically until normal urinary func-
after aseptic preparation of the skin surface (see
tion returns (see Chapter 15).
Wound infection', page 357).
Urinary tract infection {UTI) associated with urine
retention is present frequently in animals with spinal
Other
 disease. Urinalysis reveals high white blood cell counts 
 Endocrine testing, analysis of Von Willebrand (VW) fac-
and elevated total protein, and bacteria may be present
tor, and bleeding times may all be deemed necessary
in the sediment. If so, urine culture should be performed
during preoperative evaluation (see Chapters 6 and 11).
and antibiotic sensitivity determined. Fungal hyphae
 Coagulation profles and testing for warfarin are indi-
may be detected in dogs with systemic aspergillosis,
cated in animals with coagulopathies. Blood gas analy-
especially if the urine has been at room temperature
sis should be performed in tetraplegic animals where
for more than 12h.
hypoventilation is suspected (7.11).
For routine urinalysis, aseptic catheterization or
cystocentesis is suitable. For culture, cystocentesis is
preferred.
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID
Bence-Jones proteinuria may be a feature 
 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis is an important tool
myeloma.
in the investigation of neurological patients, but there
are many limitations to CSF analysis. Abnormal CSF is
Serology
strongly indicative of neurological disease, but it is a
Serology is useful in many diseases, and should be con-
 relatively non-specific finding.
sidered in any spinal patient where the origin of the dis-
Cerebrospinal fluid should be collected routinely
order is obscure. Specific examples include Neospora
 from either the cerebello-medullary cistern (CMC—
Caninum, Cryptococcus neoformans, Coccidioides immitis,
'cisterna magna') or the lumbar region. It is important
Bartonella sp., Ehrlichia sp., and also Brucella canis in  to do this prior to performing myelography as injection
dogs with discospondylitis. Acute and convalescent  of contrast medium induces a sterile meningitis that
Diagnostic aids
43
will confound subsequent interpretation of CSF analysis
for l week or more (Widmer et al., 1992). When radi
be performed.
ography and myelography are normal, and in patients
● Patients that could have atlantoaxial subluxation
with multifocal signs, CSF should always be analysed.
should not have CSF collected from the CMC
Even when the diagnosis is obvious, the information
 because of the danger associated with patient
gained may be very useful on a retrospective basis. An
positioning.
example would be a dog with a thoracolumbar disc
If raised intracranial pressure or brain herniation
extrusion that has a very high protein level in CSF and
could be present then the risk of collection is
 that subsequently develops myelomalacia after surgery.
increased significantly. This may be so in any
Collection of CSF is a very low-risk procedure when
patient with a severe intracranial lesion, but
 performed with care and when taking appropriate pre-
particularly following head trauma, with space-
cautions. It is nevertheless an invasive test and informed
 Occupying lesions, or with severe inflammatory
consent should always be obtained. Owners should also
disease. Signs indicative of raised intracranial
be appraised of any specific risk factors before the pro-
pressure include depression, stupor or coma;
cedure (see below). Collection of CSF should always
hypoventilation; bradycardia; dilated pupils or
be performed with the patient intubated and under
anisocoria; and cranial nerve deficits such as
 general anesthesia. Ideally, corticosteroids should not be
decreased or absent physiologic nystagmus and
given prior to CSF collection as they may alter results
poor or absent pupillary light reflexes. Collection
and render interpretation inaccurate.
of CSF from either of the spinal sites in the face of
increased intracranial pressure increases the
likelihood of brain herniation.
Indications and contraindications
for CsF collection
INDICATIONS
Collection of CsF
· Suspected intracranial disease (see 'Contra-
See 'Procedures', page 64.
indications', below).
· Suspected multifocal disease.
· Spinal disease where survey radiographs are
 Sample handling and laboratory
normal.
analysis
· Suspected polyneuropathy.
Analysis of CSF should include gross examination, total
· Ideally in every patient unless contraindicated.
and differential white blood cell (WBC) count and total
protein (4.1). A sedimentation technique [4.2) should
CONTRAINDICATIONS
be used unless the sample can be sent to a specialized
· Where general anesthesia is contraindicated.
laboratory that will perform cytocentrifugation (Cellio,
A
B
4.1 A: Left to right—normal CSF; xanthochromia (which is caused by hemoglobin breakdown products and indicates previcous
intrathecal hemorrhage); and hemorrhage at collection. B: Degenerate neutrophils containing bacteria from the CSF of a dog with
severe, difuse pain and fever secondary to myelography performed 24 h earlier using iohexol from a contaminated, multi-use bottle.
 A filter should be used with multi-use containers.
44
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
B
4.2 Hans Wolfgang Kolmel Sedimentation Chamber (Free
University of Berlin, with permission). A: Glass microscope
slide is placed on the apparatus, B: filterpaper is placed on the
glass slide, and C: the chamber is fitted. CSF is placed in the
chamber and the flter paper absorbs fluid, while cells remain
on the slidle. The slide is then stained for cytology and
dlifferential count.
+
2001). White cell analysis should be performed ideally
 automatic means. Undiluted CSF is used, unless cell
on fresh CSF within 30min of collection as the cells
s  counts are particularly high in which case the CSF will
deteriorate rapidly (Bienzle et al., 2000). If this is not appear turbid.
possible, the specimen should be split in two aliquots
 Normal CSF is free of red blood cells. Normal white
ssa Aeiaua are anq Xioeoqel Aq Aiea sunos an eio aqna via Teus e onu and si one auo uau pue
drop of serum or an equal volume of 4% formalin solu-
 than 5 cells per μl (<5 × 106 per liter). An increase in
tion added in order to preserve the cells (Evans, 1989;
WBCs is termed pleocytosis (4.1B).
Bienzle et al., 2000). Other analyses performed on
CSF include immunology and electrophoresis.
CELL COUNTS AND BLOOD
CONTAMINATION
GROSS EXAMINATION
Mild blood contarmination has little effect on WBC
Normal CSF is clear and colorless. Color change and counts in CSF. There are formulae for correcting CSF
turbidity may be noted in some diseases but these do cell counts that take the peripheral blood WBC count
not occur umless the abnormalities in cell count or pro- into consideration (Rosmeissl et al., 2002). However,
tein are marked. The most frequent color changes are
contaminating red blood cells (RBCs) do not greatly alter
due to hemorrhage or xanthochromia (4.lA).
WBC counts, especially those already markedly elevated
(Wilson and Stevens, 1977). It is probably adequate to
CELL COUNTS
remember that WBCs and RBCs are in a ratio of approx-
These are performed using a hemocytometer; the imately l:500 in blood, and to take this into account
cell numbers are too low to be counted accurately by when viewing cell counts in blood-contaminated CSF
Diagnostic aids
45
DIFFERENTIAL WHITE CELL COUNTS
Table 4.1 Normal values for commonly evaluated CSF
AND CYTOLOGY
parameters
This is an important part of the examination of CSF,
even in the face of a normal total WBC count. The
Color 
Cear, colorless
 Speciic gravity
1.004-1.006
WBCs must be concentrated by centrifugation or sedi-
White cell count
<5/ul
mentation [4.2), mounted on a slide and stained (Cellio,
 Differential white cells
Lymphocytes and monocytes
200l). Most WBCs in normal CSF are mononuclear-
lymphocytes, monocytes and occasional neutrophils or
Total protein
 Cerebello-medullary cistern
10-30 mg/dl (0. 1-0.3 g/l)
macrophages (Duque et al., 2002).
Lumbar
10-45 mg/dl (0. 1-0.45 g/)
The differential WBC count is most useful in distin-
guishing acute and chronic inflammation, for example
between non-infectious suppurative meningoencephal-
itis and granulomatous meningoencephalitis (Thomson
Mononuclear pleocytosis is generally indicative of
et al., 1989, 1990; Chrisman, 1992). Occasionally, high
chronic inflammation, for example canine distemper or
white cell counts will be seen in disc disease as well
granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis.
(Thomson et al., 1989).
 Neutrophilic pleocytosis is seen mostly with infectious
or non-infectious meningoencephalomyelitis ('aseptic
PROTEINCONTENT
meningitis') but may also be seen with meningiomas and
Protein content of CSF is estimated by a number of
vascular disease.
 Mixed pleocytosis is non-specific, but can be seen in
methiods; use of a professional laboratory is best. Normal
CSF collected frorm the CMC has a protein concentra-
some tumors, particularly meningiomas.
tion of less than 30mg/dl; it may be up to 45 mg/dl at
Identification of neoplastic cells in CSF is unusual. It
 the lumbar site. Total protein may be increased in many
is most likely in lymphoma and choroid plexus tumors
diseases but is non-specific. Electrophoresis provides
(see Chapter 12).
Increased protein in the absence of pleocytosis
information regarding the composition of the CSF
('albuminocytological dissociation') is indicative of non-
protein.
inflammatory disorders such as neoplasia or vascular
disease.
MICROBIOLOGY
Bacteria may be seen in CSF occasionally (4.lB).
Examination for the presence of bacteria may be per
 These may be pathogenic, but if present in the absence
formed by microscopy of stained samples (4.1B) and by
of a neutrophilic pleocytosis, they are usually the
culture. If CSF culture is attempted, enhancement
result of reagent contamination. Intracellular bacteria
using blood culture bottles is recommended. Bacterial
should always be viewed as being significant (Munana,
diseases of the CNS are uncommon in dogs and cats and
1996).
even when present, culture of CSF tends to be unre-
warding {Remedios et al., 1996; Lavely et al., 2002;
Radaelli and Platt, 2002) (see below). Care should be
 Normal findings in the face of
exercised in interpreting positive results in the absence
disease
of pleocytosis, as bacteria may be contaminants
Many animals with CNS disease, including spinal dis-
eases, have normal CSF (Thomson et al., 1989, 1990;
Chrisman, 1992; Cellio, 2001). This is particularly so if
Normal CSF findings
the CSF sample is collected cranial to the lesion; that
Normal CSF findings are given in Table 4.1.
is, from the CMC in thoracolumbar and lumbosacral
lesions. Thus, finding normal CSF does not rule out the
possibility of a lesion being present.
Abnormal CSF findings
Abnormal CSF is indicative of CNS (or nerve root)
disease (Murray and Cuddon, 2002).
RADIOGRAPHY
High numbers of RBCs in the CSF
are generally
 Survey radiographs
 indicative of contamination at collection. Hemorrhage
Radiography is a valuable diagnostic aid for spinal
 in the CNS may be inferred from the presence of xan-
patients. Good quality survey radiographs will provide
thochromia (4.1A) or erythrophagocytosis (macrophages
the diagnosis in some cases. To obtain diagnostic
containing RBCs).
radiographs of the spine, general anesthesia is usually
46
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
4.3 Radiographic positioning aids.
A: Radiolucent foam wedges covered in
pastic, 'floppy' sandbags and ties.
B: Foam wedges, ties, 'floppy' sandbag
 along with 2.5 cm tape and a trough (see
examples of use in 4.4-4.14).
A
B
4.5 Lateral cervical spine. A foam wedge is placed under the
4.4 Lateral cervical spine. The patient is in lateral recumbency
middle part of the neck to avoid sagging, which could result in
with the head extended and the thoracic limbs pulled caudally.
 distortion of the intervertebral spaces.
A wedge is placed under the sternum to prevent rotation
(visible in 4.10). It is usually best to take two views, one centered
 at C2 and one at C6.
necessary to position the patient correctly and to mini-
mize radiation exposure of personnel. In many animals
with spinal disease, the radiological features are subtle
so that accurate positioning is essential. An exception is
in acute spinal injuries, where general anesthesia or
manipulations could exacerbate the neural damage.
 The area of interest must be centered properly and the
beam collimated closely. Survey radiographs of large
areas of the spine are rarely useful. Stress radiography
may be helpful but is not without risk (Farrow, 1982)
b
(9.5, 10.12, 11.10, 13.17).
 4.6 Lateral cervical radiograph of a normal dog. Note that the
Radiographic positioning and
normal spinal radiographs
spaces near the micddle of the flm are clear and the end plates
Various positioning aids facilitate spinal radiography
are parallel to the beam. The transverse processes of C6 are 
large and project ventrally (b), (7.37B). See 4.16 for cranial
[4.3). Techniques for radiographing the spine are given
cervical radiograph. See also 11.13B.
 in the following section.
CERVICAL SPINE (4.4-4.9)
ATLANTOAXIAL JOINT (4.8,4.9)
-uan pou are uids fenaian au jo smaa Aaans passas
Projections are as for the cervical spine with the beam
erally of value except when done with care to assess the
centered appropriately. For the lateral projection, a mild
atlantoaxial joint (9.3).
degree of flexion may be employed to demonstrate
Diagnostic aids
47
a
4.9 Lateral atlantoaxial radliograph of a normal dog. Note the 
normal relationship between the dlorsal arch of C1 and the
spinous process of C2. (a) WWing of atlas. Rotating the head
slightly makes the dlens more visible.
4.7 Ventrodorsal cervical spine. The patient is placed in
The bearm is centered on the area of interest. It is useful to
remove the endotracheal tube for this view, particularly in 
myelography.
4.10 Lateral thoracolumbar spine. The patient is in lateral
recumbency with the limbs positioned as shown. Foam wedges
  squll aui uaamiag pue (moe) wnuas aui aoun paoed ae
 prevent rotation and under the lumbar vertebrae to avoid
sagging. The beam is centered on the area of interest and
 collimated closely over the spine to reduce soft tissue scatter
4.8 Ventrodorsal atlantoaxial radiograph of a normal dog.
 and improve radliographic quality.
 Note the dlens (arrow) and the atlantoaxial articulations 
(arrowheads).
patient with the area of interest near the edge of the
subluxation, but this must not be excessive (9.3, 9.5).
film. Accurate interpretation is often impossible (see
The use of the open-mouth view to radiograph the dens
Chapter 9).
is not recommended, as flexing the neck can be dan-
 gerous. The ventrodorsal projection is adequate and the
cervical extension also alleviates cord compression. The
THORACOLUMBAR SPINE (4.10-4.13)
spinal deviation present in many patients with atlanto-
A common error is to center the beam in the mid-
axial subluxation can make positioning difficult.
lumbar region when evaluating the spine for disc dis-
A common error is to try to evaluate the atlantoaxial é
 ease; most herniations occur in the Tll-Ll region, and
joint in poorly positioned films taken of a conscious t
 the beam should be centered accordingly.
48
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
4.11 Ventrodorsal thoracolumbar spine. The patient is in cdorsal
recumbency with the limbs extended. It is important that the bocy
is upright and the beam collimated.
4.14 Lateral lumbosacral spine. Positioning is crucial here as
rotation may induce artefacts. The patient is positioned as for
 the thoracolumbar spine, taking particular care to keep both
 pelvic limbs parallel to the table top.
a
b
 4.12 Lateral thoracolumbar spinal radiograph of a normal dog.
The dlog is well positioned, with the ribs (a) and transverse
 processes (b) superimposed. The vertebral end plates in the
middle of the image are parallel to the beam, whereas those
near the right edge are not.
4.15 Lateral lumbosacral radiograph of a normal dog. In a
well-positioned radliograph, the wings of the ilium will be 
directly superimposed.
LUMBOSACRAL SPINE (4.14-4.15)
SPECIAL RADIOGRAPHIC
PROCEDURES
Myelography
 In myelography the spinal cord is outlined by positive
 contrast medium injected into the subarachnoid space.
 The indications for myelography are:
●Where the neurological examination indicates a spinal
lesion, but none is visible on survey radiographs.
 To determine the significance of multiple lesions
 identified on survey radiographs.
● To determine the presence of spinal cord 
 compression and especially to evaluate dynamic
lesions (10.7, 11.4-11.6).
4.13 Ventrodorsal thoracolumbar spinal radliograph of a
surgery as well as the type of procedure to be
normal clog.
performed.
Diagnostic aids
49
This procedure is contraindicated if general anesthesia
or spinal puncture is unsafe (see 'Cerebrospinal fluid',
 page 42), or where inflammatory disease of the CNS is
 present. The presence of mild CSF pleocytosis is not
in itself a contraindication, as it is present in many
 compressive spinal diseases, including disc herniation
(Thomson et al., 1989, 1990).
The choice of contrast medium is important, as many
are extremely irritating to neural tissue. Hyperosmolar
or hypertonic solutions must be avoided. A non-ionic,
water-soluble contrast medium must be used—-Iohexol
(Omnipaque, Nycomed) is the contrast medium of
4.16 Normal lateral myelogram of the cranial cervical region.
choice (Wheeler and Davies, 1985; Allen and Wood,
Note that the contrast columns are wide in C1 and C2. The
1988). Concentrations in the range of 180-350mg
ventral column thins and is elevated over the C2/3 intervertebral
iodine/ml are used—most often 240 or 300 mg iodine/
ml. The contrast medium should be warmed to body
temperature before injection (Lamb, 1994).
 Performance of a myelogram does not preclude the
need to take high-quality survey radiographs. The prac-
tice of using the survey films only to establish radio-
graphic exposure factors is deplored, as significant
 information that would be visible on good survey films
may be masked by the myelogram. The region of interest
is dictated by the neurological examination, remember-
ing that occasionally a lower motor neuron (LMN)
lesion can mask an upper motor neuron (UMN) lesion
(2.24).
Myelography is carried out with the patient under
general anesthesia. Injection of contrast medium is
 4.17 Normal lateral myelogram of the caudal cervical region.
either at the CMC or in the lumbar subarachnoid
space. The techniques for spinal puncture are des-
cribed above in CSF collection. Contrast is injected
following collection of the CSF sample [4.64, 4.66).
CERVICAL MYELOGRAPHY (4.16,4.17)
Technique is described under 'Procedures', page 70.
LUMBAR MYELOGRAPHY (4.18-4.20)
Technique is described under 'Procedures', page 71.
4.18 Normal lumbar lateral myelogram. Note the streaked
appearance of the contrast medlium where it outlines the nerves
Lumbar myelography is required in many circumstan-
of the caudla equina.
ces, the most commmon being an acute disc extrusion.
Here, injection of contrast medium requires relatively
high pressures to delineate the lesion, as the spinal cord
is often swollen or under pressure. Some radiologists
prefer lumbar myelography for all patients.
Epidural leakage is often a problem in lumbar
myelography, which makes interpretation of the study
very difficult (4.67). Slow injection of the contrast
medium may reduce the chance of epidural leakage.
Another common complication is poor filling of the
subarachnoid space, especially in animals with spinal
4.19 Lateral lumbosacral myelogram from a normal dlog. Note
cord swelling (8.1).
that the contrast column passes well into the sacrum.
50
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Normal
H
H
Extradural
Intradural-
extramedullary
4.20 ventrcdorsal lumbosacral myelogram of a normal dog
The separate contrast columns can be seen in L5 (arrows).
Superimposition of the spinous processes and the presence of
colonic contents can make interpretation dlifficult.
Intramedullary
Epidurography
4.21 Spinal lesions are classified according to their location
relative to the spinal cord and the dura mater. Examples of
 In epidurography, contrast medium is introduced into
potential causes are given in Table 4.2.
the epidural space. For some radiologists this was the
 preferred method for evaluating the lumbosacral region
(Barthez et al., 1994; Ramirez and Thrall, 1998) (10.8B).
 the spinous processes dorsally. For ventrodorsal radio-
 CT or MRI are superior in most cases.
 graphs, start on the left side and work cranial to caudal.
This technique should be employed even if there is an
Discography
obvious lesion, to avoid overlooking other important
In discography, contrast medium is injected into the
nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral disc (Sisson et al.,
features or additional lesions.
1992; Barthez et al., 1994). Normally, only a very small
General radiological principles dictate that images
 are evaluated for the following features: position, size,
amount can be introduced (0.l-0.2ml in the lum-
mmber, contour, architecture and opacity.
bosacral disc). If there is damage to the anulus fibrosus,
 Many of these alterations are seen in spinal disease
more contrast can be injected and the leakage will be evi-
 dent on subsequent radiographs (10.8A). The technique
 and most are shown in this book.
may be particularly useful if combined with CT
(Ohnmeiss et al., 1997; Milette et al., 1999).
Myelographic interpretation
From the myelogram, it is usually possible to gain an
impression of the location of the lesion relative to the
PRINCIPLES OF SPINAL
spinal cord (4.24-4.31, 14.4). Note that lesions in all
RADIOLOGY
locations may give the appearance of an expanded or
It is important to take a systematic approach to evalu-
swollen cord in an image taken face on' to the lesion.
ating spinal radiographs. The clinician has the advantage
 For this reason, it is essential that perpendicular
of having similar adjacent structures with which to com-
 projections (lateral and ventrodorsal) are made [4.30,
pare the suspected lesion. Accuracy of interpretation is
4.31, 7.2).
limited by the radiographs, and it is well worth paying
 Interpretation is relatively straightforward if there
attention to obtaining good images as discussed above.
 are changes in the skeleton at the site of the myelo-
Also, knowledge of the normal radiographic anatomy is 
 graphic abnorrmality, for example in disc hermiation or
required, as discussed in this chapter and in Chapter l.
vertebral neoplasia (4.47). Generally, it is possible to
One system used to evaluate lateral radiographs is
 make some estimate of the location of the lesion as
to assess each structure in turn from cranial to caudal:
 shown in 4.2l. Causes of these compression patterns
start ventrally with the hypaxial muscles and end with are given in Table 4.2. Extradural lesions are shown in
Diagnostic aids
51
 Table 4.2 Common causes of myelographic abnormalities
 Intradural-
Extradural
extramedullary
Intramedullary
Degenerative
Disc herniation
一
Synovial cyst 
Congenital
Atlantoaxial subluxation 
Arachnoid cyst 
 Syringohydromyelia
Neoplasia
 Prirmary or metastatic
Meningioma 
 Glioma 
vertebral or sof tissue
Nerve sheath tumor
 Ependymoma
Nephroblastoma
Metastatic
Inflammatory
Discospondylitis
Myelitis 
Epidural abscess
Disc
 Spinal cord hemorrhage 
Bone fragments
vascular
Hematoma
Ischemic myelopathy (acute stage)
Hematoma
4.23 Extradural lesion. Myelogram of a Doberman with Wobbler
 syndrome' and a large, extradural lesion due to what appears to
be a simple disc extrusion at C6/7. The ventral contrast column is 
split (arrow andl arrowhead) over the C6 vertebra (4.24, 4.25)
exception is dogs with generalized malacia of the spinal
cord (13.10, 14.18). CT reconstruction can further
4.22 Extradural lesion. Diagram of the myelographic pattern
of an extradural lesion.
 MRI is superior for most parenchymal lesions.
4.22-4.25, 7.2, 8.1; intradural-extramedullary lesions
are shown in 4.26-4.28; and intramedullary lesions are
COMPLICATIONS OF
shown in 4.29-4.31.
A CT scan often enhances the utility of the
MYELOGRAPHY
myelogram markedly and also aids surgical planning
The most common complications after cervical injection
(4.25, 11.5).
are either that the contrast has entered the subdural
space (1.1l); that the needle has been displaced from
EXTRADURALLESIONS
the vertebral canal; that excessive contrast has entered
INTRADURAL-EXTRAMEDULLARYLESIONS
the cranial vault [4.65); or either that the contrast has
INTRAMEDULLARYLESIONS
not reached the lesion or that it has flowed past the
Spinal cord swelling may be evident although mye-
lesion (Lamb, 1994; Penderis et al., 1999)(4.32). The
lography rarely delineates parenchymal lesions. One
 most common problem after lumbar myelography is
52
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
4.24 Extradural lesion causing column splitting. Diagram of
column splitting, which generally indicates an asymmetrical 
 4.26 Intradural-extramecullary lesion. Diagram of the typical
extradural lesion (4.25, 4.33).
'golf-tee' pattern (arrows).
4.27 Intradural-extramedullary lesion. Ventrodlorsal myelogram
at L1 of a 10-year-old mixed-breed dog with recurrence of
paraparesis after removal of a nerve sheath tumor at L3/4.
(4.28). Necropsy revealed an anaplastic sarcoma of meningeal 
crigin. An MRI from this dog is shown in 4.44B.
B
4.25 Same dog as in 4.23. A: Column splitting was due to a
probable left-sided synovial cyst (its location shifted slightly into 
C7 with the dog on its back for the CT). A ventral slot was done
at C6/7 but little dlisc material was removed and the dog was
 much worse the next day. B: A postoperative CT myelogram
showed more marked compression, due in part to collapse of 
the interspace. Compression in this dog was probably
4.28 Intradural-extramecullary lesions. Ventrodlorsal
exacerbated by the synovial cyst (11.8). In retrospect this dog
myelogram of this dog is shown in 4.27. An MRl of this area is 
should have undergone a distraction-stabiliation procedure.
shown in 4.44B.
Diagnostic aids
53
4.31 Intramedullary lesion. Lateral myelogram of the dog shown
li se ma su u aa sn eau au 't um
as in the ventrodorsal view.
4.29 Intramedullary lesion. Diagram showing spinal cord
swelling.
4.32 Poor contrast filling is common over the caudal cervical
spine. The cranial cervical and thoracic spines can be elevated
in order to cause the heavier contrast agent to pool in the 
caudal cervical area (from McKee et al., 2000).
than the subarachnoid space. This is not uncommon-
one study found a higher incidence with injections at
the CMC (13%) than after lumbar injection [2.6%)
Subdural contrast is usually restricted to the dorsal
flow caused by the denticulate ligaments (Lamb, 1994,
1997; Scrivani et al., 1997; Penderis et al., 1999;
Scrivani, 2000) (1.11).
Contrast in the subarachnoid space may need to be
pooled by manipulating the animal's position (4.32).
 Positioning the animal in sternal recumbency with its
head elevated slightly can cause contrast to collect in
4.30 Intramedullary lesion. Ventrodlorsal myelogram at L1/2
the caudal cervical area for a dorsoventral view; analo-
of a 7-year-old Doberman with progressive paraparesis of
 2 weeks' duration. The myelographic columns diverge in this 
gous pooling techniques can be applied to the lumbar
 spine. One final potential problerm is that the lesion
was a highly-invasive neurofibrosarcoma with extensive spinal
may only be visible when the animal is lying on one side
eson auo punoe sseu leus Aa e Auo ing uoiseaui pio
but not when it is on the other side [4.33].
nerve rootlet.
Neurological deterioration can occur in some animals
poor myelographic quality (8.lA); this can be due to
after myelography (Allen and Wood, 1988). Large-
several reasons. Epidural leakage may obscure the sub-
 breed dogs with significant cervical cord lesions; dogs
arachnoid contrast medium (4.67). Fortunately, epidural
with chronic spinal cord compression, meningitis or
-qns au ueu apiden arou paqiosqe Aensn s iseuo
extradural tumors; and t
those  with  degenerative
arachnoid contrast medium and so resolution may
myelopathy sem to be affected most often. Fortunately,
improve after 10-20 min. Another potential problem is 
 this deterioration is usually transient, most patients
inadvertent injection into the subdural space rather
returning to their pre-myelogram status within a few
54
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
4.33 Some lesions may be missed if
cnly one lateral view is taken. A: There is
a generalized loss of contrast over the
L1/2 space in this radiograph taken with
the dog in right lateral recumbency.
B: Same dog in lef lateral recumbency.
There is marked splitting of the ventral
contrast column due to an asymmetric
lesion. This indicates that the lesion lies
on the left side of the vertebral canal
(Matteucci et al., 1999).
A
B
Manipulations involved in obtaining flexion, exten-
sion or traction radiographs during myelography can lead
to neurological deterioration and it is wise not to
maintain these positions for excessive periods of time,
particularly when extending the cervical spine (11.9,
11.10).
Seizures occur infrequently on recovery from anesthe-
sia following myelography (Wheeler and Davies, 1985;
 se i g s     
to influence the frequency of seizures; dogs with CSM
 may be prone to this complication (Lewis and Hosgood,
4.34 Injection of contrast into the spinal cord parenchyma. This
1992). Seizures are best managed by intravenous
can cause severe neurological deficits and focal malacia, which 
is related to the volume injected. If injection is performed without 
diazepam or barbiturates and so it is prudent to leave an
fluoroscopic guidance, a test injection should be used (Parker
 intravenous catheter in place in any patient recovering
et al., 1975; Servo and Laasonen, 1985; Kirberger and Wrigley
after a myelogram to facilitate medication.
1993).
days. Clearly, if the spinal puncture or injection tech-
OTHER IMAGING TECHNIQUES
nique itself is at fault, significant neurological damage
Ultrasonography
may result (4.34). Injection of contrast into the central
This technique has two broad indications. The first and
canal can occur in cisternal myelography; the effect on
 most important is to evaluate the heart and abdomen.
 the patient varies but is generally serious. Cardiovascular
The abdomen should be examined in animals that
effects are usually seen and neurological deterioration is 
 might have concurrent lesions caused by trauma or by
likely. Central canal injection in the lumbar spine can
 neoplastic, inflammatory or endocrine disease (4.35).
cause temporary deterioration of deficits and the sever-
Echocardiography is indicated in dogs with cardiac dis-
ity is related to the volume injected. The likelihood of
 ease secondary to degenerative, neoplastic, inflamma-
this complication increases with injections at sites cranial
1  tory or traumatic disease.
- s s (61 KM  aq) 9/T 
The second indication is to visualize the nervous
larly true in small dogs where the spinal cord terminates 
-d ru  a a q n s s
more caudally than in large dogs (Morgan et al., 1987).
 tals such as a fontanelle or the atlantoaxial (4.36) and
Injection of contrast medium can be made between T13
 lumbosacral spaces. It can also be done through thin
and L2 vertebrae but the incidence of epidural leakage
 areas of the skull in toy breed dogs with hydrocephalus
[4.67), and of central canal injection is then higher com-
(a condition that may coexist with syringohydromyelia).
pared to more caudal injections (McCartney, 1997).
In addition, the examination can be performed at
Nevertheless, provided that a test injection is employed,
surgery through a laminectomy defect or ventral slot.
this technique can be useful when injection is not suc-
The main value of intraoperative ultrasonography
cessful at more caudal sites. It is also useful in dogs with 
is that the surgeon may be able to visualize a tumor
lesions that localize to the L4-S3 spinal cord segments as 
 or disc material that is obscured by the spinal cord. It
there is then much less risk of injecting into the lesion
can therefore serve as a real-time aid to localizing and
itself; use of this site is much less desirable in dogs when
defining the extent of a lesion. This could make the
the lesion is located in the thoracolumbar region.
difference between a complete or incomplete tumor
Diagnostic aids
55
4.35 German shepherd dog that presented with mild
neurological deficits and lumbosacral pain. The dog had small
4.36 Ultrasonography can be used to examine the spinal cord
dermal nodules all over its skin suggestive of dermatofibrosis,
an inherited condlition that is associated with renal cyst-
dorsal and ventral dura mater is visible (arrows); the two lines 
acdlenocarcinoma (Moe and Lium, 1997). Ultrascund revealed
ventrally probably represent the dura and pia mater. The 
multiple masses within each kidney (arrow). This dlog also had
hyperechoic area centrally represents the central canal; CSF in
 several other disorders (3.2, 10.4); it dlied 6 months later
the subarachnoid space is anechoic (Finn Bodner et al., 1995).
4.37 A: Dog in dorsal recumbency
intubated and connected to a ventilator
prior to undergoing a CT scan; this
minimizes movement artefacts caused
by breathing (for both CT and MRI).
Breathing artefact is less of a problem 
for lesions in the cranial cervical or
lumbosacral regions. B: Normal L1/2 
intervertebral space of a dog to show
epidural fat within each foramen
(arrowheads). See also 1.23A. This
A
pattern is lost after disc extrusion (4.40A).
resection or prevent the surgeon leaving behind sig-  dose for conventional myelography. If the CT study
nificant amounts of disc material (Nakayama, l993; is performed directly after a conventional myelogram,
Finn Bodner et al., 1995; Hudson et al., 1995; Ham the natural dilution and absorption of the contrast
et al., 1995) (7.8, 8.6). Sonography has also proven medium is sometimes adequate to reduce the contrast
useful in determining the extent of arachnoid cysts (
concentration in some animals or the patient can be posi-
(Galloway et al., 1999). In addition, it can show t
tioned to allow contrast to flow away from the lesion
irregular new bone on vertebrae affected by tumors or
 (taking care that it does not run into the head). Animals
discospondylitis.
(t) Auqunsan iesop u pauosod aensn a
Animals in ventral recumbency tend to lean to one side
Computed tomography
or the other, especially those with a narrow chest but
Computed tomography (CT) of the vertebral column
some fractures may be more stable in this position
is very useful in certain circumstances, particularly
[4.38). In general CT images should be made at right
in patients with mineralized disc extrusions, vertebral
angles to the vertebral canal and not angled as shown
tumors or cervical  spondylomyelopathy.  Contrast
in 4.39.
enhancement by myelography (7.3A), rather than
 For non-mineralized disc extrusions, either CT myel-
intravenous contrast administration as performed in
 ography or intravenous contrast-enhanced CT may be
 intracranial imaging, outlines the subarachnoid space if 
required to see the lesion (Sharp et al., 1995) (1l.52).
needed. A much lower dose of contrast medium is
Use of contrast medium is usually unnecessary for
required for CT myelography than for conventional
chondrodystrophoid breeds of dog (8.2A, 8.3) and will
myelograms. If only a CT study is planned, the dose of  also tend to obscure some of the more subtle features
contrast medium is reduced to about one quarter of the  of disc disease. The study is therefore non-invasive and
56
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
4.38 Positioning for a CT scan
clemands the same precautions as
for radliography; unstable lesions and
cynamic studies warrant particular 
care. A: This dog had an L2 fracture
(arrowhead), which was dlisplaced
markedly by putting the dog into
dorsal recumbency (scout CT image).
B: It was repositioned in ventral
recumbency to reduce the 
dlisplacement (arrowhead) and made a
good recovery after surgery (13.48).
B
4.39 A: Cranial and caudal extent of
extruded dlisc material shown on a
scout image. This also identifies the
exact disc or vertebra(e) involved, which
is particularly useful in surgical planning.
B: Transverse CT scan through the
C2/3 disc to show the mineralized
extrusion (arrow).
B
4.40 A: CT scan through the T12/13
intervertebral disc space from the same
dog as shown in 4.37B. There is loss of 
the normal epicural fat pattern at the 
level of the right forarmen (arrow). Disc
extrusion was confirmed at surgery.
B: Hemorrhage in the epidural or
subdural space (arrow) following a dlisc
extrusion in the thoracolumbar area.
Often the rim of hyperattenuation is less 
dlistinct than this (Olby et al., 2000).
Contrast has not been administered.
A
B
also very fast (5-l0min depending on the scanner).
 Interpreting CT scans in dogs with thoracolumbar
Although CT scans are usually more expensive than  disc disease has been reviewed (Olby et al., 2000).
myelograms, the reduced anesthesia time means that  Normal CT images are shown in Chapter l (l.17, l.21.
the final cost is often similar. The region from caudal T9
91.22, 1.23A, 1.25, 1.28). Images should be viewed
vertebra to cranial L4 vertebra is scanned for dogs with
initially using soft-tissue parameters (4.40) and then
lesions that localize to the T3-L3 spinal cord segments.
[euou auL (I'T] suanaureed auoq busn Auanbasqns
The region from caudal L3 vertebra to mid-sacrum is
 spinal cord has intermediate attenuation on transverse
scanned for dogs with lesions that localize to the L4-S3
 images, equivalent to that of soft tissue such as adja-
spinal cord segments. Three-millimetre slices are usu-
 cent kidney. Spinal cord causes more attenuation than
ally adequate although additional l mm slices can be
epidural fat, which is usually most evident at the level
made through the region of interest (Olby et al., 2000).
 of the disc space, especially adjacent to the interver-
CT is more useful than myelography for surgical plan-
tebral foramen (l.23A, 4.37B). Displacement of
 ning and can also be used to depict the cranial and cau-
 epidural fat at this level (4.40A), or an increase in
dal extent of disc material clearly (Olby et al., 1999)
 the attenuation characteristics of the epidural fat, is
[4.39). Survey radiographs are recommended in addi-
 a useful indicator of a disc extrusion. Another very
tion to the CT scan in order to allow the surgeon to iden-
 common feature is the presence of a focal, heterogenous,
tify any anatomical anomalies (8.19-8.21).
hyperattenuating mass of mineralized disc material in an
Diagnostic aids
57
A
B
C
4.41 The A: lateral and B: ventrcdlorsal myelogram in this dog revealed slight expansion of the spinal cord over the cranial C5/6
disc space. The myelogram was followed by a CT scan, which was inconclusive (not shown). C: 3D reconstruction of the CT
myelogram identified an expansile lesion within the spinal cordl. The dog was euthanized; necropsy was not performed. Had MRI
 been available it would have been a more efficient way to demonstrate this lesion.
epidural location (8.3). A less common presentation  lesions (Cirillo et al., 1988; Kent et al., 1992; Klein
occurs when disc material and blood are spread more et al., 1999). MRI is more accurate for showing the
diffusely along and around the spinal cord. In such cases 6
extent of medullary bone involvement in osteosarcoma
the epidural mass is relatively small in individual trans-
(O'Flanagan et al., 1991); is superior to myelography
verse images and is only slightly more attenuating than  2
 and CT myelography in cervical myelopathy (Masaryk
the spinal cord. It does, however, still cause more attenu-
et al., 1986); is at least as accurate as CT myelography for
ation than epidural fat, which is either displaced or 
 identifying disc disease and for differentiating scar tissue
infiltrated with blood and nuclear material (Olby et al.,
from recurrent disc (Modic et al., 1984; Sotiropoulos
2000). In some animals a rim of increased attenuation is
et al., 1989; Yousem et al., 1992); and is superior to CT
visible around the spinal cord, which almost certainly
at identifying epidural abscess (Angtuaco et al., 1987).
represents epidural or subdural hemorrhage {Penderis 
CT myelography is superior to MRI in detecting multi-
et al., 1999; Olby et al., 2000; Tidwell et al., 2002)
 ple myeloma (Mahnken et al., 2002); and in delineating
(4.40B). The exact appearance of hemorrhage may
meningeal carcinomatosis (Krol et al., 1988) CT myel-
depend on how recent it is and if the hemoglobin has (
ography is equivalent to MRI for diagnosis of nerve root
degraded (Tidwell et al., 1994). Adjacent chronic disc  avulsion in brachial plexus injury (Doi et al., 2002), and
lesions, which are frequent and often incidental findings  is a very accurate means of identifying cervical disc her-
in dogs with acute extrusions, are recognized by their  niations (Houser et al., 1995). CT usually gives superior
extreme hyperattenuation, which may approach that of  s
spatial resolution to MRI, which can be important in
cortical bone. The degree of attenuation can be quanti-
identifying spondylosis and the lateral extent of disc
fied by measuring the Hounsfield units (CT numbers)
extrusion (Karnaze et al., 1988; Jones et al., 2000a).
within a defined region of interest.
For dogs with suspected cervical disc extrusions, the
scan extends from the mid-atlas (useful to help rule
Magnetic resonance imaging
out atlantoaxial instability by demonstrating a normal
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has an impor-
dens) to cranial Tl vertebra. Attenuation characteris-
tics of cervical disc extrusions in chondrodystrophoid
bosacral disease and parenchymal spinal cord lesions 
breeds are similar to those seen in the thoracolumbar 
[deHaan, 1993; Kippenes et al., 1999). Normal anat-
area [4.39B, 7.4A) except that extruded disc material(
 omy and basic changes in canine disc disease have been
rarely extends over more than one vertebra and diffuse,  reviewed (Sether et al., 1990a,b; Kippenes et al., 1999)
subdural hemorrhage is unusual. Reconstruction tech-
(see pages 1l-l3). Imaging of spinal lesions is covered
niques can be used to enhance further the diagnostic
below and in the relevant chapters (7.3B, 8.2B, 9.7,
value of CT in disc disease (7.4, 7.5l) as well as for
10.12, 12.3, 12.6B, 12.41A, 13.7, 14.3A, 14.15, 14.17,
other conditions (4.41).
14.19). The region of interest to be covered by the scan
 Comparisons between CT and MRI in humans show
is dictated by the neurological localization, bearing in
that each has its own strengths and weaknesses (see also
 mind that occasionally a LMN lesion can obscure an
Chapter 10, pages 186-187). CT is superior for identifying
 UMN lesion (2.24). The animal is usually positioned in
[cervical) fractures whereas MRI is better for soft tissue
dorsal recumbency to minimize movement artefact
58
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
4.42 A: T2-weighted, sagittal MRl showing
spinal cord edema (arrow) caused by an
acute disc herniation at C5/6 in a dog with
Wobbler syndrome'. There is also a large.
more chronic lesion at C6/7. Both disc
 spaces have reduced central signal intensity
in this T2-weighted immage. B: T1-weighted,
transverse image at C5/6 to show the spinal
cord (arrowhead) being compressed by a
dorsally cisplaced, non-mineralized cisc
(arrow). Compare to 4.44A, 7.3B and 
11.52. Some scanners indicate the level of
 the transverse image on each image (inset).
4.43 A: Transverse, T1-weighted MRl of
the L2/3 cdisc in an 11-year-old paraparetic
Labrador (same dog as in 8.2B). The
spinal cord is deformed by a large.
somewhat right-sicled, low signal mass.
B: Corresponding image after gadoteridol 
(Prohance, Bracco Diagnostics,
Mississauga, Ontario) acministration.
There is a rirm of enhancement to the mass
(arrow) (Vroomen et al., 1998; Saifuddlin
et al., 1999). Mini-hemilaminectomy with 
corpectomy was used to remove the 
chronic dlisc material.
B
from breathing [4.37A) and sagittal scans using Tl and
d with the changes seen in the lumbosacral region
T2 weighting are used to identify the lesion. T2-
[Adams et al., 1995) (see Chapter 10). In acute thora-
weighted images highlight water and are especially use-
 columbar disc extrusions thiere is often an associated
ful for this as many lesions have an associated spinal cord
 hemorrhage at the site of extrusion secondary to tear-
edema that highlights the lesion clearly (4.42A, 13.7,
 ing of the internal venous plexus (Sether et al., 1990a;
14.15, 14.19). Transverse images are then made through
 Olby et al., 2000). Mineralized disc material may show
the region of interest [4.42B, 4.43, 4.44A). Intravenous
 as a signal void {i.e. hypointense) and the extradural
contrast (gadolidium [Gd-DPTA, Magnavist, Berlex lab-
 spinal cord compression is usually caused by a combin-
oratories, Liberty Corner, NJ] or gadoteridol [Prohance,
 ation of disc material and hematoma. The hematoma is
Bracco Diagnostics, Mississauga, Ontario] both used at
 initially signal hypointense on Tl- and T2-weighted
0.1-0.2 mmol/kg) is administered if needed, followed
 images but between 2 and 7 days after onset the signal
by anothier series of sagittal and transverse Tl scans
[4.43B, 4.44B). Additional pulse sequences may also be
converted to methemoglobin (Tidwell et al., 2002).
added as required (Kippenes et al., 1999) (9.7B).
There is often only minimal contrast enhancement of
The MRI features of cervical disc lesions in dogs
 disc material or hematoma but this can identify which
are similar to those described in humans. Loss of sig-
lesion is more recent (Sether et al., 1990a; Tidwell and
nal intensity of the nucleus pulposus on T2-weighted
Jones, 1999) (4.43, 8.2B). The terminology used to
images is a common finding but is also non-specific. A
 describe disc lesions is discussed on page 12:
more reliable feature is displacement of epidural fat by
● Herniation is a general term denoting a non-
extruded disc material as shown in both sagittal and
 specific type of disc abnormality and should not be
transverse plane images. Extruded disc material has low
used to indicate clinical significance.
signal intensity and it may alter the shape of the spinal
· Extrusion describes disc material that has clearly
cord in a transverse plane (Levitski et al., 1999b;
escaped the normal boundaries of the disc and is
Yamada et al., 200l). These features are also consistent
usually significant clinically.
Diagnostic aids
59
4.44 A: Transverse image of the
dog shown in 7.3B. There is a large,
hypointense extrusion of mineralized disc
material (arrow) causing marked 
unilateral compression of the spinal cord
(arrowhead). The inset shows the level
of this image (C4-5). B: T,-weighted 
MRl of the dog shown in 4.27 and 4.28
after contrast. The enhancing mass 
(arrowhead) is causing marked
compression of the spinal cord. It is not
clear from the MRl if the tumor is extra-
or intra-medullary (Kippenes et al.. 
B
1999).
· The terms bulge' and 'protrusion' are also non-
on T2-weighted images is highly predictive of anular
specific and a morphological description of the
tears extending into or beyond the outer anulus and a
 disc displacement is preferred.
majority of these are responsible for symptoms. A
Criteria for differentiating clinically insignificant
localized area of hypersignal on T2-weighted images is
lesions frorm incidental, age-related changes (7.15A)
also a reliable marker of symptomatic, outer anular dis-
are discussed below and in Chapter 10.
ruption. However, a disc can also have normal MRI
It must be remembered that some disc herniations are
characteristics and yet still be symptomatic (Milette
incidental, age-related findings [4.42A) that are not 
et al., 1999). Changes in disc signal intensity on T2-
responsible for the clinical signs (Jensen et al., 1994;
pue shop ioy inyasn aq on aaoud Aeu sabeun panubiam
Milette et al., 1999; Jones and Inzana, 2000b) (see
cats when a lesion does not involve clear extrusion of
Chapters 1, 10, page 188 and 1l, page 213). MRI of peo-
disc material, but this remains to be proven.
ple without back pain has shown that 50% have one disc
MRI features of spinal cord tumors [4.44B, 12.6B,
herniation and 25% have two (Jensen et al., 1994).
12.4lA) have been reviewed (Kippenes et al., 1999)
Interpretation must therefore be made using clinical
Localization of the mass is initially made using sagittal T2-
signs, electromyographic (EMG) changes in local mus-
weighted images. Identification of tuumor extent and its
cles, and imaging characteristics (Ramirez and Thrall,
 relationship to surrounding tissues is best done with Tl-
1998). Indicators of clinical relevance in dogs include
weighted images after contrast administration. Extradural
changes in posture or evidence of pain such as sponta-
 tumors can usually be identified accurately although their
neous vocalization or discomfort on palpation of local
signal(
chiaracteristics  and
enhancement  patterns
paralumbar muscles (Chrisman, 1975; Nardin et al.,
are not consistent. Contrast enhancement of vertebral
1999). Overall, MRI shows excellent anatomical detail
tumors may be of less value than for tumors in other loca-
with reasonably high sensitivity but only low specificity,
tions. Assessment of bone infiltration is facilitated by use
resulting in a high rate of false positives. In contrast to
of additional pulse sequences such as fat suppression or
MRI, electromyography has high specificity and is there-
 T2-weighted gradient echo, which delineate tumor by its 
fore useful to confirm which lesions are physiologically
hyperintense signal characteristics. Determining the
significant, thereby avoiding unnecessary interventions
intradural-extramedullary compartment is not always
(Nardin et al., 1999; Robinson, 1999). Imaging features
straightforward and it is not uncommon for this classifi-
of disc lesions that suggest physiological relevance include
edema in bone marrow adjacent to the disc (Sether et al.,
show marked contrast enhancement (4.44B). CSF imag-
1990a; Morrison et al., 2000); edema within the spinal
 ing studies (MR myelography) may improve anatomic
cord over the affected disc space [4.42, 13.7); contrast
classification (Kippenes et al., 1999).
enhiancement, which shows a high correlation with rup-
Other indications for MRI include degenerative
ture of the anulus {Vroomen et al., 1998; Saifuddin
{Levitski et al., 1999a,b; Lipsitz et al., 200l; Webb
et al, 1999) (4.43); and changes within the disc itself
et al., 2001), anomalous (14.3A), inflammatory (Kraft
(Jenkins et al., 1985; Milette et al., 1999) (8.2B).
et al., 1998) (14.15), traumatic (13.7), and vascular
MRI signal characteristics within the disc itself are
(14.17, 14.19) lesions (Gopal and Jeffery, 2001).
useful in characterizing internal derangement, which
in humans with low back pain can indicate that the
Scintigraphy
lesion is symptomatic even in the absence of a change
 Bone scintigraphy evaluates certain functional aspects of
in disc contour. Decreased central disc signal intensity
bone, particularly related to blood supply and metabolic
60
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
4.45 Nuclear bone scan from a 10-
year-old German shepherd dog with
paraparesis and back pain of 1 week
duration. A: An csteoproductive lesion is
visible at T5 (arrow); note also the soft
tissue mass ventral to the affected
vertebral body. B: Increased uptake of
technetium is evident on the bone scan.
Final dliagnosis was osteosarcoma.
B
4.46 Spontaneous electrical activity
recorded from the gastrocnemius
muscle of a 7-month-old Sharpei with
protozoal polyracliculoneuritis and
myositis. The dlog was paraplegic with
LMIN deficits. A: The two main types
of spontaneous activity are visible:
1. Fibrllation potential. 2. Positive
sharp wave. The dog tested positive for
Neospora caninum; creatine kinase (CK)
was elevated. B: Muscle biopsy
B
idlentified numerous protozoal organisms.
A
 activity. Certain types of lesions will produce a hot has high specificity and as such is a very useful comple-
spot' on a bone scan [4.45); this may be evident before  ment to MRI. In particular, the combination of these
radiographic changes are visible. Particular uses of bone two tests is one way to overcome the high rate of false-
scintigraphy include discospondylitis, vertebral tumors,
6, positive diagnosis that can occur using MRI alone (Nardin
and small pathological fractures secondary to osteoporo-
 et al., 1999; Robinson, 1999). The second category of
sis {Lamb et al., 1990; Stefanacci and Wheeler, 1991;
 LMN disease is when the animal is suffering from a
Cook et al., 2002).
generalized peripheral neuropathy, or possibly a myopa-
thy, in which case spontaneous activity will be wide-
spread throughout the body and will not be restricted
 to any particular muscle group.
CLINICAL ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY
If an UMN lesion is present, electromyography of
Electromyography
 the paraspinal muscles can sometimes be useful to help
 Electromyography (EMG) is the method by which the
 localize the lesion. Although UMN deficits are evident
electrical activity of muscle is studied and analyzed.
 mainly through their effects on white matter tracts,
This technique can assist the neurosurgeon by helping
 they will also impair neurons in the local gray matter
to localize some of the more subtle lesions as being
 at the same level. Damage to these neurons often
either UMN or LMN in nature. If LMN deficits are
 present they will generally be associated with spontan-
spinal muscles adjacent to the injured spinal cord seg-
eous electrical activity in those muscles supplied by the
ment. This activity seems to occur as a result of both
injured spinal cord segment or nerve root [4.46). It is
degenerative and irritative effects, so the latter may be
important to remember that this spontaneous activity
evident on an acute basis (Chrisman, 1975).
takes between 4 and 7 days to appear, which is the time
taken for the axons to degenerate from the site of injury
to the neuromuscular junctions (Cuddon et al., 2003).
Spinal cord evoked response
Two broad categories of LMN lesions can be seen.
 In this technique, a recording electrode is placed on the
 The first relates to lesions that are restricted to either the
 dorsal lamina of a cervical, thoracic, or lumbar vertebra
brachial or lumbosacral regions, such as brachial plexus
s in order to detect an electrical response in the spinal
avulsion injury or damage to the cauda equina. In this
s  cord. The impulse in the spinal cord is created by sti-
case, the spontaneous activity will be restricted to a mulating a peripheral sensory nerve distal to the lesion.
discrete muscle group(s). Use of EMG in radiculopathy
1 The impulse or evoked response needs to undergo signal
Diagnostic aids
61
averaging to remove background information, much like
a brainstem auditory evoked response. The spinal cord
evoked response has the potential to give prognostic
information about the functional state of the spinal cord
after trauma. The technique is performed routinely in
humans undergoing surgery for scoliosis and can reduce
the incidence of postoperative paraparesis and para-
plegia by more than 60% (Dawson et al., 1991).
Various parameters can be recorded from the evoked
waveforms traveling in the spinal cord, but no single
one has proved to be predictive of the eventual outcome
in dogs with acute spinal cord injuries. Mathematical
manipulations of the data may provide useful information
but it can be difficult to identify and interpret the wave-
forms accurately in dogs with severe spinal cord injuries,
as the waveforms are often small and dispersed
(Sylvestre et al., 1993). It would be a tremendous advan-
tage to have a more objective criterion than nociception
to predict the eventual outcome in an animal with severe
spinal cord injury. The main challenges are the need for
one person to be dedicated solely to the monitoring tech-
nique, the variation in size of canine and feline patients,
and the fact that pre-existing neurological deficits make it
hard to get useful potentials (Cuddon et al., 2003).
Further study is required before the spinal cord evoked
4.47 A: Radliograph of the lumbar spine of a 4-year-old Goldlen
retriever with a 2-week history of lumbar pain and asymmetrical
response can make a significant contribution to the man-
paraparesis. Loss of bone within the L4 vertebral bocy is seen.
agement of clinical cases (Holliday, 1992; Poncelet et al.,
B: Myelogram of the same dlog showing ventral extradural
1993; Cuddon et al., 2003).
compression. A spinal radliographic survey, bone scan and
thoracic radiographs revealed no other lesions.
F waves and cord dorsum potentials
F waves are probably of more value than peripheral
motor nerve conduction studies for most spinal dis-
eases. They represent delayed action potentials that
arrive a few milliseconds after the compound muscle
action potential. F waves are initiated by antidromic
conduction of a stimulus along a motor axon that eli-
cits an action potential from the ventral horn cell in the
spinal cord. This secondary action potential is then con-
ducted orthodromically down the motor axon in the
ventral nerve root and peripheral nerve to produce a
second  muscle-evoked  action 
potential, which is
known as an F wave. These waveforms therefore pro-
vide a specific way to assess nerve roots; the longer
path taken by the F wave also means that any abnor-
4.48 Fine needle aspiration was performed undler fluoroscopy.
malities tend to be magnified compared to standard
The material collected was dliagnostic of myeloma. The dog
nerve conduction studies. They are particularly useful
was treated by radliation and chemotherapy (4.49).
in assessing nerve root disease in cauda equina syndrome
(Cuddon et al., 2003) (see Chapter 10).
 Cord dorsum potentials are a spinal-cord evoked
BIOPSY (4.47-4.49)
response that arise from purely sensory input of
Rumors are the most likely reason for biopsy and
peripheral nerves. They are useful both for evaluating
are discussed in Chapter 12. Most biopsies of spinal
radiculopathies and also for myelopathies that involve 
tissue will be performed following surgical exposure of
the intumescences (Cuddon et al., 2003).
the lesion.
62
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
4.49 Same clog as shown in
4.47-4.48, above. A: Sixty five
months after therapy it was 
euthanized due to a pathologic
fracture of C7 caused by recurrence
 of myeloma. B: The original lesion
at L4 (arrowhead) had not changed
although neoplastic plasma cells
were still present at this location as
well as in the spleen and kidney 
(Rusbridge et al., 1999).
A
B
 Surgical exposure can sometimes be avoided by fine
Cirillo, S., Simonetti, L, La Tessa, G., Elefante, R., Smaltino, F. [1988]
needle aspiration of tissue from within the vertebral
[MR vs CT: which is the diagnostic advantage in neuroradiology].
Radiologia Medica {Torino) 76, 390-398.
canal or vertebral body, preferably under fluoroscopic
Cook, G.J., Hannaford, E., See, M., Clarke, S.E., Fogelman, I. [2002) The
(4.48) or CT (12.4) guidance (Irving and McMillan,
value of bone scintigraphy in the evaluation of osteoporotic patients with
1990). A core of vertebral bone can also be taken using
back pain.Scandinatian Joural of Rheumatology 31,245-248.
Cuddon, PA., Muray, M., Kraus, K. [2003) Electrodiagnosis. In: D. Slatter
a Jamshidi needle (5.35).
[ed.)], Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd edn, ll08-ll17.
Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
Dawson, E.G., Sherman, J.E., Kanim, L.E., Nuwer, M.R. [1991) Spinal
cord monitoring. Results of the Scoliosis Research Society and the
Key issues for future investigation
European Spinal Deformity Society survey. Spine 16, S361-364.
De Haan, J.J., Shelton, S.B., Ackerman, N. [1993) Magnetic resonance
 Can MRl signal characteristics and contrast enhancement 
imaging in the diagnosis of degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in four
be used to differentiate disc lesions that are significant 
dogs.Veterinary Surgery 22,1-4.
 clinically from those that are not significant?
Doi, K., Otsuka, K., Okamoto, Y., Fuji, H., Hattori,Y., Baliarsing, A.S.
[2002) Cervical nerve root avulsion in brachial plexus injuries: magnetic
resonance imaging classification and comparison with myelography and
computerized tomography myelography. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 96,
277-284.
Duque, C., Parent, J., Bienzle, D. (2002) The immumophenotype of blood
REFERENCES
and cerebrospinal fluid mononuclear cell in dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary
Intermal Medicine 16, 714-719.
Adams, W.H., Daniel, G.B., Pardo, A.D., Selcer, R.R. [199S) Magnetic res-
 Evans, R.E. [1989] Haematology, biochemistry, cerebrospinal fluid analysis
onance imaging of the caudal lumbar and lumbosacral spine in 13 dogs
and other clinicopathological investigations. In: S.J. Wheeler [ed.)],
[1990-1993). Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 36, 3-13.
Marual of Small Animal Neurology, 49-62. Cheltenham: BSAVA
Allen, G.S., Wood, A.K.W. [1988) Iohexol myelography in the dog.
Publications.
Veterinary Radiology29,78-82.
Farrow, C.S. [1982) Stress radliography: applications in small animal prac-
Angtuaco, E.J., McConnell, J.R., Chadduck, W.M., Flanigan, S. [1987) MR
tice. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 181,
imaging of spinal epirdural sepsis. American Jourmal of Roentgetology
777-784.
149, 1249-1253.
Finn Bodner, S.T, Hudson, J.A., Coates, J.R., Sorjonen, D.C., Simpson,
Barthez, PY., Morgan, J.P, Lipsitz, D. [1994) Discography
and
S.T, Cox, N.R., Wright, J.C., Garrett, PD., Steiss, J.E., Vaughn, D.M.,
epidurography for evaluation of the lurmbosacral junction in dogs with
Miller, S.C., Brown, S.A. [1995) Ultrasonographic anatomy of the
cauda equina syndrome. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 35,
normal canine spinal cord and correlation with histopathology after
152-157.
induced spinal cord trauma. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 36,
Bienzle, D., MeDonnell, JJ., Stanton, J.B. [2000) Analysis of cerebrospinal
39-48.
fluid from dogs and cats after 24 and 48 hours of storage. Jourmal of the
Galloway, A.M., Curtis, N.C., Sommerlad, S.F, Watt, PR. [1999)
American Veterinary Medical Association 216, 1761-1764.
Correlative imaging findings in seven dogs and one cat with spinal arach-
Braund, K.G., Sharp, N.J.H. [2003) Neurological examination and local-
noid cysts.Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 40,445-452.
ization. In: D. Slatter [ed.), Textbook of Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd edn,
Gopal, M.S., Jeffery, N.D. [(2001) Magnetic resonance imaging in the diag-
1092-l107. Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
nosis and treatment of a canine spinal cord injury Jourmal of Small
Cellio, B.C. [200l) Collecting, processing, and preparing cerebrospinal
Amimal Practice 42, 29-31.
fluid in dogs and cats. Compendium on Continuing Education for the
Ham, L.M.v., Bree, H.J.v, Tshamala, M., Thoonen, H. [1995) Use of com-
Practicing Veterinarian23,786-794.
 puted tomography and computed tomographic myelography for assess-
Chrisman, C.L. [1975) Electromyography in the localization of spinal cord
ment of spinal tumoral calcinosis in a dog. Vterinary Radiology and
and nerve root neoplasia in dogs and cats. Jourmal of the American
Ultrasound 36, I15-118.
Veterinary Medical Association 166, 1074-1079.
Holliday, TA. (1992) Electrodiagnostic examination. Somatosensory
Chrisman, C.L. [1992) Cerebrospinal fluid analysis. Wterinary CHirtics of
evoked potentials and electromyography. Veterinary Clirics of North
North America, Small Amimal Practice 22, 781-810.
America, Small Animal Practice 22, 833-857.
Diagnostic aids
63
Houser, O.W, Onofrio, B.M., Miller, G.M., Folger, WN., Smith, PL.
spine in multiple myeloma: comparison with MR imaging and rad-
[1995) Cervical disk prolapse. Mayo Clinic Proceedings 70, 939-945.
iography.American Jourmal of Roentgemology 178, 1429-1436.
Hudson, J.A., Finn Bodner, S.T, Coates, J.R., Sorjonen, D.C., Simpson, S.T.,
Masaryk, TJ., Modic, M.T, Geisinger, M.A., Standefer, J., Hardy, R.W,
Wright, J.C., Steiss, J.E., Cox, N.R., Vaughn, D.M., Miller, S.C.,
Boumphrey, F., Duchesneau, PM. [1986] Cervical myelopathy: a com-
Brown, S.A., Garrett, PD. [1995) Color doppler imaging and doppler
parison of magnetic resonance and myelography. Jourmal of Computer
spectral analysis in the spinal cord of normal dogs. Veterinary Radiology
Assisted Tomography 10, 184-194.
and Ultrasound 36, 542-547.
Matteucci, M.L., Ramirez, O., III, Thrall, D.E. [1999) Radiographic diag-
Irving, G., McMillan, M.C. [1990) Fluoroscopically guided percutaneous
nosis: effect of right vs. left lateral recumbency on myelographic appear-
fine-needle aspiration biopsy of thoracolumbar spinal lesions in cats.
ance of a lateralized extradural mass. Veterinary Radiology and
Progress in Veterinary Neurology 1, 473-475.
Utrasound 40, 351-352.
Jenkins, J.P, Hickey, D.S., Zhu, X.P, Machin, M., Isherwood, 1. [1985)
McCartney, W.T. [(1997]) Lumbar myelography in 79 dogs, using different 
MR imaging of the intervertebral disc: a quantitative study. British
puncture sites. Veterinary Record 141, 417-419.
Jourmal of Radiology 58, 705-709.
McKee, W., Penderis, J., Dennis, R. [2000) Radiclogy comer: obstruction
Jensen, M., Brant, Z.M., Obuchowski, N., Modic, M., Malkasian, D., Ross, J.
 of contrast medium flow during cervical myelography. Veterinary
[1994) Magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbar spine in people with-
Radiology and Ultrasound 41, 342-343.
out back pain. New England fourmal of Medicine 331, 69-73.
Milette, PC., Fontaine, S., Lepanto, L., Cardinal, E., Breton, G. [1999)
Jones, J.C., Banfield, C.M., Ward, D.L. (Z00Oa) Association between postop-
 Differentiating lumbar disc protrusions, disc bulges, and discs with nor-
erative outcome and results of magnetic resonance imaging and computed
mal contour but abnormal signal intensity Magnetic resonance imaging
tomography in working dogs with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis.
with discographic correlations. Spine 24, 44-53.
Journal of the Americar Veterinary Medical Association 216, 1769-1774.
Modic, M.T, Pavlicek, W., Weinstein, M.A., Boumphrey, F., Ngo, F,
Jones, J.C., Inzana, K.D. [2000b) Subclinical CT abnormalities in the
Hardly, R., Duchesneau, PM. [1984) Magnetic resonance imaging of inter-
lumbosacral spine of older large-breed dogs. Veterinary Radiology and
vertebral disk disease. Clinical and pulse sequence considerations.
Ultrasound 41, 19-26.
Radiology 152, 103-111.
Kamaze, M.G., Gado, M.H., Sartor, K.J., Hodges, FJ., 3rd [1988)
Moe, L., Lium, B. [1997] Hereditary multifocal renal cystadenocarcinomas
Comparison of MR and CT myelography in imaging the cervical and
and nodular dermatofibrosis in Sl German shepherd dogs. Journal of
thoracic spine. Americat fourmal of Roetgertology 150, 397-403.
Small Amimal Practice 38, 498-505.
Kent, D.L., Haynor, D.R., Larson, E.B., Deyo, R.A. [1992) Diagnosis of lum-
Morgan, J.P, Atilola, M., Bailey, C.S. [1987) Vertebral canal and spinal
bar spinal stenosis in adults: a metaanaly sis ofthe accuracy of CT, MR, and
cord mensuration: a comparative study of its effect on lumbosacral
myelography. Americar fourmal of Roentgetology 158, I135-1144.
myelography in the Dachshund and German Shepherd dog. Jourmal of
Kippenes, H., Gavin, PR., Bagley, R.S., Silver, G.M., Tucker, R.L.,
the American Veterinary Medical Association 191, 951-957.
Sande, R.D. [1999) Magnetic resonance imaging features of tumors of
Morrison, J.L., Kaplan, PA., Dussault, R.G., Anderson, M.W. [2000)
the spine and spinal cord in dogs. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasourd
Pedicle marrow signal intensity changes in the lumbar spine: a manifest-
40, 627-633.
ation of facet degenerative joint disease. Skeletal Radiology 29, 703-707.
Kirberger, R.M., Wrigley, R.H. [1993) Myelography in the dog: review of
Munana, K.R. [1996) Encephalitis and meningitis. Veterinary Clitics of
patients with contrast medium inthe central canal. Veterinary Radiology
North America, Small Amimal Practice 26,857-874.
and Ultrasound 34, 253-258.
Murray, M., Cuddon, PA. [2002) Cerebrospinal fluid analysis in acute
Klein, G.R., Vaccaro, A.R., Albert, TJ., Schweitzer, M., Deely, D., Karasick,
Canine polyradiculoneuritis: albumin quotient and immunoglobulin
D., Cotler, J.M. [1999) Efficacy of magnetic resonance imaging in the
imdex determination using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Jourmal of
evaluation of posterior cervical spine fractures. Spine 24,771-774.
eterinary Intermal Medicine 16,370.
Kraft, S.L., Mussman, J.M., Smith, T., Biller, D.S., Hoskinson, J.J. [1998)
 Nakayama, M. [1993) Intraoperative spinal ultrasonography in dogs: normal
Magnetic resonance imaging of presumptive lumbosacral discospondy-
findings and case-history reports. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound
litis in a dog. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 39, 9-13.
34, 264-268.
Krol, G., Sze, G., Malkin, M., Walker, R. [1988) MR of cranial and spinal 
Nardin, R.A., Patel, M.R., Gudas, TF, Rutkove, S.B., Raynor, E.M. [1999]
meningeal carcinomatosis: comparison with CT and myelography.
 Electromyography and magnetic resonance imaging in the evaluation of
Americarn fourmal of Roentgenology 151, 583-588.
radiculopathy. Muscle Nerve 22, ISI-155.
Lamb, C., Berg, J., Bengtson, A. [1990) Preoperative measurement of
O'Flanagan, S.J., Stack, J.P, McGee, HM., Dervan, P, Hurson, B. [1991]
canine primary bone tumors, using radiography and bone scintigraphy.
Imaging of intramedullary tumor spread in osteosarcoma. A comparison
fourmnal of the American Veterinary Medical Association196,1474-1478
oftechnigues. The Jourmal of Bone and Joint Surgery—British tolume 73,
Lamb, C.R. [1994) Common difficulties with myelographic diagnosis of
998-1001.
acute intervertebral disc prolapse in the dog.Joural of Small Animal
Ohnmeiss, D.D., Vanharanta, H., Ekholm, J. [1997) Degree of disc dis-
Practice 35, 549-558.
ruption and lower extremity pain. Spine 22, 1600-1605.
Lamb, C.R. [1997) Subdural collection of contrast medium during
Olby, N.J, Munana, K.R., Sharp, N.J.H., Flegel, T, Van Camp, S.,
cervical myelography Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 38, 479-481.
Berry, C.R., Thrall,D.G. [1999) A comparison of computed tomography
Lavely, J, Vemau, K.M., LeCouteur, R.A. [2002) Spinal epidural empyema
and myelography in the diagnosis of acute intervertebral disc disease in
in seven dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary Intermal Medicine 16, 369.
dogs.Jourmal of Veterinary Intermal Medicine 13, 239.
Levitski, R., Chauvet, A., Lipsitz, D. [1999a) Cervical myelopathy asso-
Olby, N.J., Mumana, K.R., Sharp, N.J.H., Thrall, D.E. [2000) The computed
ciated with extradural synovial cysts in 4 dogs.Journal of Veterinary
tomographic appearance of acute thoracolumbar intervertebral disc hemi-
Intermal Medicine 13, 181-186.
ations in dogs. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 41, 396-402.
Levitski, R.E., Lipsitz, D., Chauvet, A.E. [1999b) Magnetic resonance
Parker, A.J., Cusick, PK., Stowater, J.L., Park, R.D. [1975) Effects of
imaging of the cervical spine in27dogs.Veterinary Radiolog and
intramedullary injection of methiodal and lidocaine on spinal cords
Ultrasound 40, 332-341.
of dogs. American fourmal of Veterinary Research 36, 1529-1532.
Lewis, D.D., Hosgood, G. [1992] Complications associated with the use
Penderis, J., Sullvan, M., Schwarz, T, Griffiths, I.R. [1999) Subdural
of iohexol for myelography of the cervical vertebral column in dogs:
injection of contrast medium as a complication of myelography. Jourmal
66 cases [1988-1990). Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
ofSmall Amimal Practice 40,173-176.
Association 200, 1381-1384.
Poncelet, L., Michaux, C., Balligand, M. [1993) Somatosensory potentials
Lipsitz, D., Levitski, R.E., Chauvet, A.E., Berry, W.L. [2001) Magnetic
in dogs with naturally acquired thoracolumbar spinal cord disease.
resonance imaging features of cervical stenotic myelopathy in 2l dogs.
American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 54, 1935-1941.
Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 42,20-27.
Radaelli, S.T, Platt, S.R. (2002) Bacterial meningoencephalomyelitis
Mahnken, A.H., Wildberger, J.E., Gehbauer, G., Schmitz-Rode, T,
in dogs: a retrospective study of 23 cases [1990-1999). Jourmal of
Blaum, M., Fabry, U., Gunther, R.W. [2002) Multidetector CT of the
eterinary Intermal Medicine 16, I59-163.
64
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Ramirez, O., IIl, Thrall, D.E.[1998) A review of imaging techniques for
Sylvestre, A.M., Cockshutt, J.R., Parent, J.M., Brooke, J.D., Holmberg, D.L,
canine cauda equina syndrome. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 39,
Partlow, G.D. [1993) Magnetic motor evoked potentials for assessing
283-296.
spinal cord integrity in dogs with intervertebral disc diseases. Vterinary
Remedios, A.M., Wagner, R., Caulkett, N.A., Duke, T. [1996)
Surgery 22, 5-10.
Epidural absces and discospondylitis in a dog after administration of a
Thomson, C.E., Kormegay, J.N., Stevens, J.B. [1989) Canine intervertebral
humbosacral epidural analgesic. Camadian Veterinary Jourmal 37, 106-107.
disc disease: changes in the cerebrospinal fluid. Jourmal of Small Amimal
Robinson, L.R. [1999) Electromyography, magnetic resonance imaging, and
Practice 30, 685-688.
radiculopathy: it'stime to focus on specificity Muscle Nerve 22, 149-150.
Thomson, C.E., Komegay, J.N., Stevens, J.B. [1990] Analysis of cere-
Rossmeiss, J.H., Troy, G.C., Inzana, K.D., Jortner, B., Boon, G.D. [2002)
 brospinal fluid from the cerebellomedullary and lumbar cistems of dogs
 Effects of blood contamination on canine cerebrospinal fluid white blood
with focal neurologic disease: 145 cases [1985-1987]. Jourmal of the
cell counts and total protein concentrations. Jourmal of Veterinary
American Veterinary Medical Association 196, 1841-1844.
Intermal Medicine 16, 370.
Tidwell, A.S., Jones, J.C. [1999) Advanced imaging concepts: a pictorial
Rusbridge, C., Wheeler, S.J., Lamb, C.R., Page, R.L., Carmichael, S.,
glossary of CT and MRI technology. CHirical Techriques in Small Amimal
 Brearley, M.J., Bjomson, A.P [1999) Vertebral plasma cell tumors in 8
Practice 14, 65-111.
dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary Intermal Medicine 13, 126-133.
Tidwell, A.S., Mahony, O.M., Moore, R.P, Fitzmaurice, S.N. [1994)
Saifuddn, A., Mitchell, R., Taylor, B.A. [1999) Extradural inflammation
Computed tomography of an acute hemorrhagic cerebral infarct in a
associated with anmular tears: demonstration with gadolinium-enhanced
dog. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 35, 290-296.
lumbar spine MRI. Europeant Spine Jourtal 8, 34-39.
Tidwell, A.S., Specht, A., Blaeser, L., Kent, M. (2002) Magnetic resonance
Scrivani, PV. [2000) Myelographic artifacts. Veterinary Clinics of North
imaging features of extradural hematomas associated with intervertebral
America, Small Amimal Practice 30, 303-314, vi.
disc hemiation in a dog. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 43,
Scrivani, PV, Barthez, PY, Leveille, R., Schrader, S.C., Reed, S.M. [1997])
319-324.
Subdural injection of contrast medium during cervical myelography.
Vroomen, PC., Van Hapert, S.J., Van Acker, R.E., Beuls, E.A., Kessels, A.G.,
Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 38, 267-271.
Wilmink, J.T. [1998) The clinical significance of gadolinium enhance-
Servo, A., Laasonen, E.M. [198S) Accidental introduction of contrast
ment of lumbar disc hermiations and nerve roots on preoperative MRI.
medium into the cervical spinal cord. A case report. Neuroradiology 27,
Neuroradiology 40, 800-806.
'78-08
Webb, A.A., Phar, J.W., Lew, L.J., Tryon, K.A. [2001) MR imaging find-
Sether, L.A., Nguyen, C., Yu, S.N., Haughton, VM., Ho, K.C., Biller, D.S.,
ings i a dog with lumbar ganglion cysts. Veterinary Radiology and
Strandt, JA., Eurell, J.C. [1990a) Canine intervertebral disks: correl-
Utrasound 42, 9-13.
ation of anatomy and MR imaging. Radiology 175, 207-21l.
Wheeler, S.J., Davies, J.V. [1985) Iohexol myelography in the dog and cat:
Sether, L.A., Yu, S., Haughton, VM., Fischer, M.E. [1990b) Intervertebral
a series of one hundred cases, and a comparison with metrizamide and
disk: normal age-related changes in MR signal intensity. Radiology 177,
iopamidol. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 26, 247-256.
385-388.
Widmer, W.R., DeNicola, D.B., Blevms, W.E., Cook, J.R., Jr, Cantwell, H.D.
Sharp, N.J.H., Cofone, M., Robertson, I.D., DeCarlo, A., Smith, G.K.,
Teclaw, R.F. [1992) Cerebrospinal fluid changes after iopamidol and
Thrall, D.E. [1995) Computed tomography in the evaluation of caudal
metrizamide myelography in clinically normal dogs. American Jourmal of
cervical spondylomyelopathy of the Doberman Pinscher. Veterinary
Veterinary Research 53, 396-401.
Radiology and Ultrasound 36, 100-108.
Wilson, J.W., Stevens, J.B. [1977] Effects of blood contamination on cere-
Sisson, A.F, LeCouteur, R.A., Ingram, J.T, Park, R.D., Child, G. [1992)
brospinal fluid analysis. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
Diagnosis of cauda equina abnormalities by using electromyography,
Association 171, 256-258.
discography, and epidurography in dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary lntermal
Yamada, K, Nakagawa, M., Kato, T, Shigeno, S., Hirose, T, Miyahara, K,
Medicine 6, 253-263.
Sato, M. [2001) Application of short-time magnetic resonance examin-
Sotiropoulos, S., Chafetz, N.I., Lang, P, Winkler, M., Morris, J.M, Weinstein,
ation for intervertebral disc diseases in dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary
PR., Genant, H.K. [1989) Differentiation between postoperative scar and
Medical Science 63, S1-54
recurrent disk hemiation: prospective comparison of MR, CT, and contrast-
Yousem, D.M., Atlas, S.W., Hackney, D.B. [1992) Cervical spine disk
enhanced CT. American Jourmal of Neuroradiology 10, 639-643.
hermiation: comparison of CT and 3DFT gradient echo MR scans.
Stefanacci, J.D., Wheeler, S.J. [i991) Skeletal scintigraphy in canine
Jourmal of Computer Assisted Tomography 16,345-351.
discospondylitis. American College of Veterinary Radiology 66.
PROCEDURES
Collection of CSF
General anesthesia is required for CSF collection in dogs and cats; the depth must be suitable so that the
available. The collection site must be clipped and prepared aseptically. Sterile surgical gloves should be worn. An
cistern (CMC).
Which collection site to use warrants some consideration? The two sites available are the CMC and the lumbar
region. Collection from the CMC is easier and is less likely to produce a sample contaminated with blood.
However, as CSF flows in a cranial to caudal direction, abnormal CSF is more likely to be present caudal to a
blood contamination occurs more often.
If raised intracranial pressure is present, lumbar collection is somewhat safer. This is not because brain
lumbar collection. If CSF collection is necessary when intracranial pressure could be elevated (see page 43), then
Diagnostic aids
65
30-35 mmHg. Mannitol, lasix and dexamethasone should also be on hand for emergency use (see below).
COLLECTION FROM THE CEREBELLOMEDULLARY CISTERN (4.50-4.58)
Because the neck is flexed severely (4.51), a kink-proof endotracheal tube should be used. Alternatively, the cuff
is deflated to allow space around the tube for ventilation should the tube obstruct.
An imaginary line is drawn between the wings of the atlas (4.52, 4.53). The ideal site is in the midline of the
up the skin and first penetrate the skin with the needle pointing away from the spinal cord.
       
1. Remove the stilette once the tip of the needle enters muscle and then advance the needle until CSF
appears in the hub of the needle.
 2.  Advance the needle with the stilette stillin place in small increments, removing the stilette between each
needle if the tip has been blunted on bone.
Method (1) is simpler for most clinicians and is less hazardous.
If CSF does not flow or is blood tinged, a number of possible complications could have arisen:
redirected caudally by withdrawing it to a subcutaneous position and moving the hub rostrally.
+ If CSF flows, but is tinged with a trickle of bright red blood in the base of the hub, a dural vessel has been
penetrated. This may clear after a few seconds, and then the CSF may be collected. Rotating the needle helps
to clear this type of hemorrhage. The initial blood contamination can be evacuated from the hub of the needle
using a separate, small needle and syringe although it is often better to just remove the needle and start again.
 Dark venous blood flows from the needle. This indicates that a venous structure has been penetrated,
with a fresh needle.
+ No CSF flows, even though all the features of a successful tap appear to be present and the needle
plugged with tissue or blood clot. If CSF still does not flow, this may be because either the needle is far
has been penetrated. The latter is a significant risk if the needle is advanced with the stilette in place.
The needle should be removed, the patient placed in a normal position and the respiratory pattern
observed. If respiration is normal after several minutes, the procedure may be repeated or a lumbar
cannot be collected from the CMC.
 The patient moves suddenly; this is usually because the spinal cord has been damaged. The needle must
be removed and the patient ventilated. This is a potentially serious situation leading to marked neurological
(30 mg/kg IM) in an attempt to limit the spinal cord damage.
+ The CSF flows forcefully from the needle. It is not always clear why this happens, but it clearly indicates
high CSF pressure at the CMC. Some dogs do not suffer any apparent deleterious effects from this, but
others do deteriorate. The needle should be removed and the precautions mentioned above taken. It may
66
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
also be useful to hyperventilate the patient as discussed below if increased intracranial pressure is
suspected as the cause.
indicates that brain hermiation has occurred; the needle must be removed and the animal ventilated to
maintain end-tidal pCO2 at 30-35 mmHg. Mannitol (1.0 g/kg) and furosemide should be administered
capnometer and emergency drugs should therefore always be available and ready for immediate use for
 any patient considered to be at increased risk of herniating.
4.50 Spinal needles have a stilette and a shallow
bevel. A notch in the hub indicates the side of
the bevel, which in myelography should be
pointing in the direction in which contrast is
4.50
intended to flow.
4.51  Patient positioned in right lateral recumbency for
collection of CSF by a right-handed operator.
The head is held by an assistant in 90° flexion
with the nose parallel to the tabletop. The neck
is positioned close to the edge of the table. A
foam wedge may be used to support the nose.
4.51
4.52 Diagram to show the site of CMC puncture.
Landmarks are the lateral margin of the wings
of the atlas (a), the occipital protuberance
(b), and the midline (c). The location of the
cisterna magna is outlined by contrast in 4.65.
4.52
4.53 Landmarks for CMC puncture. These are the
lateral margin of the wings of the atlas (a), the
occipital protuberance (b), and the midline.
4.53
Diagnostic aids
67
4.54 Needle insertion. The operator is wearing sterile
gloves, and the site has been prepared
aseptically The left hand is identifying the 
landmarks. The thumb and upper fingers are
palpating the wings of the atlas. The middle
finger is on the midline, just behind the intended
site. The 4th or 5th fingers of the right hand
should always be rested on the animal's head in
case the table or dog move inadvertently.
4.54
4.55 The needle is in place with the stilette removed; a
drop of CSF is seen. Spinal needles become
plugged only rarely. If plugging is suspected, the
stilette should be inserted then removed.
4.55
4.56 Fluid is collected into a sterile vial.
4.56
4.57 Fluid can also be collected into a sterile syringe,
which is not used to aspirate CSF but just to
catch drops as they fall.
4.57
68
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
4.58 Diagram to show position of needle. The landmarks are as in
4.52 (a) and (b). Technigue for injection of contrast at the end of
CSF collection is shown in 4.64.
4.58
COLLECTION FROM THE LUMBAR SPINE (4.59-4.63)
Collection of CSF from the lumbar site is more likely to fail than from the CMC. Contamination is also more
pasn aa ueo 2/a teo at u! :t) shop ui 9/t o 9/t7 wo Aiensn s! yooalo anba
If CSF does not flow or is blood tinged, a number of possible complications may have arisen:
 The needle strikes bone. The space available for penetration of the vertebral canal is relatively small,
mineralized and have the feel of bone. Repeated attempts may be required to position the needle and, in 
some patients, the technique may fail. Flexing the spine by drawing the pelvic limbs forward may open up
the interarcuate spaces.
The considerations for hemorrhage are similar to those mentioned above. If the needle appears to be
Aais umepui no Amois paeioi aa ueo aipeau aun leadde iou saop iso laA pue Aoauoo pauosod
Provided that intracranial pressure is normal, one or both jugular veins may be occluded to cause CSF to
 of CSF with a syringe is possible, but blood contamination is more likely.
4.59 Lumbar puncture between L5 and L6. The tip of
the L6 spinous process is palpated. The needle
is inserted alongside the caudal edge of the L6
spinous process and directed cranially and
ventrally through the ligamentum flavum into the
vertebral canal (4.67).
4.59
Diagnostic aids
69
4.60 Here the needle is in position alongside 
the spinous process of L6; the patient is
in lateral recumbency. The technique can 
also be done with the animal in ventral
recumbency, useful when contrast is to 
be used for myelography.
4.60
4.61 The needle is advanced cranioventrally such
that the point reaches the midline at the
vertebral lamina. It may be necessary to ‘step’
the needle off the lamina into the ligamentum 
flavum. This ligament can be tough and require
considerable force to penetrate it. The stilette is
removed intermittently to check progress. There
is often a 'twitch' of the tail and pelvic limbs as
the needle touches or penetrates the neural
tissues. CSF may flow on penetrating the
4.61
subarachnoid space but more slowly than at
the CMC.
4.62 Needle n situ. Another method of lumbar
puncture is to find the cranial edge of the
spinous process and insert the needle vertically
into the ligamentum flavum.
4.62
4.63 Collection of CSF using a syringe.
4.63
70
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Myelography
 As a guide, a dose of iohexol contrast medium from 0.25 to 0.5 ml/kg body weight is used, although this can vary
with the site of the injection and the expected location of the lesion. Better contrast may be obtained when using
a concentration of 300 mg iodine/ml compared to 240 mg iodine/ml.
CERVICAL MYELOGRAPHY (4.64, 4.65)
If possible the table is tilted by 5-10° at injection. The bevel of the needle (jindicated by a notch on the hub)
should be directed caudally. Injection should be performed preferably by connecting the syringe to the spinal
needle using a flexible tube, which is pre-filled with contrast before injection. Contrast should ideally be filtered if
se pley aa pinous aipaau aul pue Loloalui buunp juawaaow aipaau pioAe oi dey Leo aqnl oislaixa Le jo asn
described in 4.64.
After injection the needle is removed and the patient's head is elevated. The legs and maxilla are tied to the
table edge using rope ties. Initially, the patient is tilted at 30° with the head up and an immediate radiograph is
lesion is delineated, ventrodorsal and oblique views should be taken.
If a tilting table is not available, the patient must be held up by the thoracic limbs, with the head above the body.
This can be dificult in large dogs and use of a tilting table is recommended.
should not be considered diagnostic until further time has elapsed and the table tilted to a steeper angle.
4.64 Position of patient and needle. In this patient, an extension tube
medium for myelography. The position of the right hand as
shown is dangerous and NoT recommended. It is much safer
yig pue yit aui buisai Aa loisod ui aiaau aui uieuie ol
finger of the right hand on the dog's head as shown for CSF
collection (4.54).
4.64
Diagnostic aids
71
4.65 Close-up of a myelogram with the neck flexed to
show the atlanto-occipital space and the
cerebellomedullary cistern distended with
contrast (arrow). The cranial border of the atlas is
shown (arrowhead). The cerebellar folia are
outlined by contrast (+); cranial flow of contrast
should be avoided by pointing the bevel caudally
while injecting and then elevating the head
promptly.
4.65
LUMBAR MYELOGRAPHY (4.66-4.68)
:smolloy se aa pinous sudeboen of lapo aul buiuosodan jo lunowe aul aziwuiw pue buibewi ahiadxa ol
ventrodorsal survey radiographs; lateral survey radiographs, then injection of contrast with lateral images;
ldeally, injection should be made at the L5/L6 space as the incidence of complications increases with
injections at sites cranial to this (Kirberger and Wrigley, 1993). Injections at L6/L7 are prone to epidural injection,
although this tends to be true more in large dogs and L6/L7 can be more reliable than L5/L6 in small dogs (4.68).
Epidural leakage may also be more likely when the pelvic limbs are flexed. The bevel of the needle (indicated by
a notch on the hub) should be directed cranially. Injection may be performed directly by applying a syringe to the
spinal needle, or via a flexible tube, which is pre-filled with contrast before injection. A test injection of 0.2-0.4 ml
of contrast should always be made to insure that it is not being delivered into the spinal cord parenchyma (4.34).
Provided that this is not the case, a lateral radiograph is then taken once most of the contrast dose has been
injected but with the needle stillin place. If the spinal cord is swollen then radiographs should ideally be taken as
aul ayel oi injasn si l saseo yons ul aoeds piouuoeeans aul auno isag ol lapio ui paioelui buieg s! lseuoo
contrast to be made. If the needle has been inserted with the pelvic limbs flexed, they should be maintained in
this position as the animal is repositioned. Once the spinal needle has been removed, ventrodorsal and oblique
subarachnoid space and so serial images should be taken in the hope that resolution improves; if it does not then
the study will need to be repeated.
4.66 Contrast injection using an extension tube.
Injection should be slow to avoid epidural
leakage. The apparatus may need to be held in
place to prevent the extension tube and needle
from disconnecting.
4.66
72
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
4.67 Radiograph to show position of needle for
lumbar puncture. A myelogram has been
performed; contrast can be seen in the
subarachnoid space. Note that there is epidural
contrast (arrow) in the cranial lumbar vertebral
canal. This is a common complication in lumbar
myelograms and when present makes
4.67
interpretation much harder.
4.68 T2-weighited MRl of the lumbar region of a large-
breed dog to show the high-signal epidural
(arrowheads) and subarachnoid spaces (arrow).
 Note that the epidural space is usually much
wider relative to the subarachnoid space at L6/7
than at L5/6. The L4/5, L5/6 and L6/7 discs
show normal signal intensities but there is loss of
signal of the L7/S1 disc along with extension of
the disc dorsally compressing the nerve roots of
the cauda equina.
4.68
SPECIALMYELOGRAPHICCONSIDERATIONS
The simple technique of taking a radiograph with the animal lying on the contralateral side should also be
considered (4.33). Oblique projections may also be very useful in myelography; they are of most value from the
ventrodorsal position, although interpreting these projections can sometimes be challenging. A follow-up CT
scan is preferred after myelography when available, when clarification is required.
Cervical spine  In cervical spondylomyelopathy special positions during myelography may be useful:
 The extension view, where the neck is extended dorsally, can reveal other lesions that may become significant
in the future; that is, the 'domino' effect (11.23). This view is not without hazard and must be done with care
(11.9,11.10)
+Flexed and extended views may reveal lesions that cause minor trauma as the animal moves its neck
around (11.6).
Lumbosacral spine  In general a cervical injection is preferred to a lumbar injection to evaluate this region,
even though this necessitates that contrast be made to flow caudally by using gravity. The reason is because
after lumbar puncture there is a risk of either injecting into the lesion (2.25) or of epidural leakage (4.67). An alter-
native is to use an L1/2 injection site (McCartney,1997). Flexion and extension myelography may reveal lum-
technique. Dynamic views may also be used during CT (1o.11) and MRl (1o.12) although the patient will then
need to be repositioned and a second scan conducted.
Instrumentation
Chapter
5
Draping
78
References
79
pue susu riads auos sanbau Arains reus
many of the items are illustrated in this chapter (5.1-
5.35). However, the starting point is a well-equipped
general surgical pack, as would be used for most soft
5.1 Operating loupes. Some form of magnification is almost
essential for neurosurgery.
 5.3 Headlight— good lighting is also essential for neurosurgery
 and this is facilitated by a fiberoptic light source (Goring et al.
1991), ideally one that attaches to the surgeon's head and can
be flipped up or down as needed.
5.2 An operating microscope is extremely useful when
5.4 Anatomical specimens such as this canine spine are
dissecting close to the spinal cord.
invaluable for reference and for surgical planning.
74
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
5.5 Sew in, waterproof drape. See also 12.32.
 5.8 Blunt self-retaining retractors are invaluable in the ventral
approach to the cervical spine. Either Gosset (llustrated) or
pedliatric Balfour (9.18).
5.6 Gelpi self-retaining retractors. These are particularly
useful in all dorsal and dorsolateral approaches to the spine
5.9 Hand-held retractors. The small Hohmann retractor (above)
(10.26, 13.60).
is useful in ventral repair of atlantoaxial subluxation. The Senn
(below) or Langenbeck retractor is useful in dlorsal, dorsolateral
and lateral approaches to the spine (8.15-8.18).
5.7 Multi-toothed self-retaining retractors. llustrated here are
5.10 A laminectomy spreader is very useful to reduce some
 Weitlander and Adson-Baby (top) retractors. West retractors are 
fractures and to dlistract over-ridden vertebrae (Boudrieau,
 similar (9.20). These facilitate ventral cervical approaches.
1997) (13.64).
Instrumentation
75
5.14 #7 scalpel handle with #11 blade. This is particularly
useful for cisc fenestration and ligament removal (7.34, 7.45).
 5.11 Eectrosurgical instruments. The monopolar system is
used for coagulation and for incising tissues (8.14). Monopolar
cautery should not be used in close proximity to the spine, as
the current travels through the patient, and this can lead to
spinal cord damage. Close to the spinal cord, bipolar or 
microbipolar cautery (5.12) must be used for coagulation
(8.24).
 5.15 Instruments for fenestration and dlisc removal from the
vertebral canal. From top: Rosen mobilizer, Shea curette and
House curette (5.16). The latter is also very useful for removal
of bone during the final stages of laminectomy (8.37) and
ventral spinal decompression (7.51).
5.12 Microbipolar cautery should be used when working
close to neural tissues.
B
5.13 Periosteal elevator and freer, for removal of muscle from
the vertebrae (7.38) and for vertebral distraction (11.33).
5.16 Close up of House curette.
76
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
5.17 Nerve hook (below) for retraction of spinal nerves. Dental
tartar scrapers (blunt and pointed) for fenestration and removal
of dlisc material from the vertebral canal (5.18).
udu
 5.20 Small instruments for use with higher-powered
magnification.
 5.21 These delicate rongeurs are used for fine bone removal.
Larger, double action rongeurs are available for heavier bone
B
removal (10.28)
5.18 Cose up of dental instruments (8.35, 8.36, 8.39 and 8.41).
5.19 25 gauge hypodermic needles. These can be held at the 
hub by needle holders. They can be used for cutting or the tip
may be twisted off using needle holders and then bent to size 
as a blunt retractor or scraper. Blunt instruments made in this 
 5.22 Mini chuck for insertion of small pins, such as those used
way are particularly useful when working cown a ventral slot, 
for atlantoaxial subluxation (Chapter 9) and to stabilize articular 
especially in small dogs (11.55B).
 facets after spinal trauma (13.48A).
Instrumentation
77
5.26 Adson suction tip and bulb syringe for bur irrigation
(8.29, 8.30, 8.39-8.41).
neurosurgical procedures. llustrated here is the Hall
Surgairtome 2 with long bur guard, and round and oval burs 
(8.30, 11.53)
W810
ETHICON*
BONEWAX
二三
STERILE
PL0508 / 5001R
2.5 grams
*
PULL
ETHICON.Lm.
OUT
5.27 Bone wax is used for hemostasis; it is used to plug small
 5.24 Angled bur guard is useful for the cement plug technique
vessels in bone by pressing over the bleeding site (8.31, 13.58).
used in Wobbler surgery (11.38).
5.28 Cellulose surgical spears (Ultracell sponges, Ultracell
 medical Technologies Inc., North Stonington, CT) are a very
pepueis asl leuajeu paus pou saop peui abuods jo adkl injasn 
 5.25 An electrical drillis an alternative to the pneumatic drill.
 sponges. They are recommendled to absorb fluid in contact with 
The Dremel model is an example; it is considerably less
the spinal cord.
 expensive than the pneumatic system and does have
 acceptable performance. Sterilization is a problem; ethylene
cxide systems can be used but their availability is restricted.
Methods of wrapping the instrument in sterile drapes are
available, but are less satisfactory, and we do not recommend 
 them in view of the requirement for asepsis in spinal surgery.
Disadvantages of an electric dlril are that it is slower; more
pressure may be needed, which can cause bone necrosis
and possibly inadlvertent injury to the spinal cord; and the
burs may clog more rapidly (Shires et al., 1986; Bitetto and
Kapatkin, 1989)
tissue and orthopedic procedures (Cockshutt, 2003).
With experience,surgeons find which instruments they
prefer for spinal surgery, but there is no doubt that cer-
5.29 Surgicel. If this product is used, it must always be
removed from the laminectomy site cnce hemostasis is
 tain instruments make the tasks easier and, thus, more
efficient.
78
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
CAT.NO.1102-16
Zummer
bone
cement
Gelfoam
(Methy Methacrylate;
sponge
Poly[Methyl Methacrylate])
12-7mm
DOUGH-TYPE
RADIOPAQUE
mableLiqidtoreincooldarkplace
Useatroom temperature
ueens
Eachkit contalns
B925%WW
1ee Lelnaserle)
Upiokn
athyl-D-toluidin
QUANTITY-1
SMALLKIT
 5.30 Gelfoam (Pharmacia, Kalamazoo, Ml) absorbable gelatin 
STERILEUNLESS
sponge is an alternative product for hemostasis that can be left 
in place.
zmmer
Howmedica
Surgical Simplex P
RADIOPAQUE BONE CEMENI
ccpuyne and BarumSufalaUSP)
5.31 Hemoclips (Piling Weck Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC)
are often the only way to control hemorrhage from larger-
l  i    i  
2405
31050
B
5.33 Methylmethacrylate bone cement is used in several of the
 procedures dlescribed in this book. It is worth emphasizing the 
requirement for sterlity when using these products (13.60).
Basic surgical techniques for neurosurgery share
most of the principles of soft tissue and orthopedic
surgery (Cockshutt, 2003; Shmon, 2003).
5.32 Positive profile pins (see Chapter 9 and also 13.48B);
small diameter pins are best inserted using a mini chuck (5.22).
These pins also have a roughened end opposite the threaded
DRAPING
end so that they do not need to be notched like smooth pins.
 Small dliameter negative profile pins can also be used as even
The patient should be completely covered by sterile,
they have 4-6 times the pullout strength of equivalent dliameter
waterproof surgical drapes. Their additional expense
smooth pins (Degernes et al., 1998; Sandman et al., 2001).
 must be weighed against the morbidity and the cost of
Instrumentation
79
placed on top of the waterproof drapes prevent tissues
self-retaining retractors maintain exposure of the surgi-
cal field [10.26, 12.36) and are less likely than standard
sponges to be left in the wound inadvertently. Tissues
should be irrigated regularly with sterile saline to pre-
vent desiccation and to reduce airborne contamination.
After completion of surgery, the site must be inspected
to insure that nothing has been left in the wound.
 Retractors are invaluable for providing adequate
exposure to perform the procedure. This can be sup-
 plemented by use of fine stay sutures, particularly
5.34 Bone graft is used in several situations to promote vertebral
those applied to the dura (see 14.5-14.8).
fusion.Illstrated is a curette and bowl for graft collection (11.24).
REFERENCES
Bitetto, WV, Kapatkin, A.S. [1989) Intraoperative problems associated
with intervertebral disc disease. Problems in Veterinary Medicine 1,
Boudrieau, R.J. [1997) Distraction-stabilization using the Scoville-
Haverfield self-retaining laminectomy retractors for repair of Znd cervi-
cal vertebral fractures in 3 dogs.
.VeterinaryandComparative
Orthopaedics and Traumatology 10,71
Cockshutt, J. [2003) Principles of surgical asepsis. In: D. Slatter [ed.),
Textbook of Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd edn, I49-I54. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders.
Degermes, L.A., Roe, S.C., Abrams, C.F., Jr [1998) Holding power of dif-
aug lon uae u spoyam uoniasu ud pue suisap ud puaia
Veterinary Surgery 27, 301-306.
Goring, R.L., Beale, B.S., Faulkner, R.F [199l) The inverted cone decom-
pression technique: a surgical treatment for cevical vertebral instability
'Wobbler syndrome’ in Doberman Pinschers. Part I. Journal of the
American Atimal Hospital Association 27, 403-409.
5.35 A Jamshidi needle is invaluable for taking a core biopsy
Sandman, K.M., Smith, C.W, Harari, J., Manfra Maretta, S., Pijanowski,
of a vertebral mass.
pue sam auyos jo aouisisan anond go uosuedmo (iooe] 'r5
Imex miniature interface fixation pins in polyurethane foam. Veterinary
and Comparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology 15, 18-22.
Shires, PK., Roberts, E.D., Hulse, D.A., Zeman, D.H., Kearmey, M.T.
a surgical wound infection caused by organisms pene-
[1986) Hemilaminectomy using an autoclavable electrical drill com-
trating a porous drape.
pared to a pneumatic drill. Jourmal of the American Animal Hospital
Association 22, 25-29.
wound further; ideally these should also be waterproof
Shmon, C. (2003) Assessment and preparation of the surgical patient and
operating team.In:D.Slatter [ed.),Textbook ofSmall Animal Surgery,
3rd edn, 162-178. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Preoperative assessment
Chapter 
Clinical assessment 81
 Box 6.1 Conditions that may complicate the
Concurrent disease  81
management of a neurological patient
Hemostasis  82
■ Skin or periodontal disease
Hypoventilation   82
■ Cushing's disease
■ Orthopedic disease
Pharmacological considerations  83
Antibiotics   83
■ Hypothyrcidism
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories   83 
 Cardiac disease
Corticosteroids   83
■ Diabetes mellitus
 Preoperative analgesia   84
 Hepatic disease
Adverse drug reactions and interactions  85
■ Disorders of hemostasis
■ Rena disease
Anesthetic considerations 85
■ Urinary tract infection
Premedication   85 
■Neoplasia
lnduction   85
 Undetected prirmary
Maintenance  85
 Metastatic disease
Recovery   85
■ Prostatic disease
Complications 
86
■ Pyometra
Surgical considerations   86
Laminectomy healing   86
Durotomy   87
(Box 6.l). This is particularly true for older patients,
Myelotomy  87
following trauma (Box 13.2) and dogs with cervical
 Mechanisms of recovery after spinal cord injury  87
spondylomyelopathy (see Chapter 1l, page 213).
Client communication   88
Concurrent disease
The physical examination must be thorough. Skin dis
Key issues for future investigation  88
pyoderma, clipper rash, or povidone-iodine reactions
References  88
may predispose to wound infection. Fleas should be
eliminated to prevent them from entering the surgical
 field. Osteoarthritic joints may cause major interference
Accurate preoperative assessment of the neurosurgical
with rehabilitation from neurological deficits, especially
patient is extremely important, particularly in view of the
for large or obese dogs.
time, expense and complexity of the procedures per-
 Laboratory evaluation should include a hematological
formed. Anticipation of the most likely complications
and biochemical profile, along with a urinalysis (see
 may lessen their impact or even allow them to be avoided
Chapter 4). In cats, the feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
altogether.
and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) status should
be determined. When positive, the likelihood of lymph-
CLINICAL ASSESSMENT
oma as a cause for neurological deficits increases
It is easy to overlook concurrent clinical or subclinical
markedly. If there is suspicion of cardiac dysfunction in
disorders that may have an important bearing on the case
large- or giant-breed dogs, suitable investigations should
82
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
be performed, such as an electrocardiograrm (ECG) and
echocardiogram (Calvert and Wall, 200l). Chest radio-
survive long enough to benefit from definitive treatment
 graphs are essential in these patients:
(Boudrieau, 1997). Any severely tetraparetic animal can
·
 For older animals (>7 years of age).
also develop this complication in the postoperative
●When neoplasia is a differential diagnosis.
period and the owner must be appraised of this risk prior
·For any recumbent, tetraparetic patient.
to surgery (6.1, 7.11).
 Following trauma.
Hypoventilation after spinal cord injury can occur
Similarly, an ultrasound or CT scan of the abdomen
 due to three main mechanisms:
is useful to identify intercurrent disease in the first two
● Hemorrhage or edema affecting the respiratory
categories, above. Endocrine disorders may predispose a
centers in the medulla and Cl spinal cord, which
patient to complications, for example, urinary tract infec-
lead to decreased respiratory drive.
 tions (UTI) and delayed wound healing in Cushing's dis-● Cervical myelopathy severe enough to interrupt
ease and diabetes mellitus or pathological fractures in
 conduction along all motor fibers in the spinal cord,
Cushing's disease (Gehlbach et al., 2000; Hosgood, 2003).
which causes near-paralysis of the respiratory
Neuropathies or myopathies associated with hypo-
muscles (see pages 28, 216).
thyroidism may complicate the patient's neurological● Diaphragmatic paralysis due to a lesion of the
status. The assessment and, if possible, stabilization of
 phrenic LMNs (C5 spinal cord segment or nerve
endocrine disorders is always recommended prior to any
roots); this is the least important mechanism unless
neurosurgical procedure.
 combined with an injury to the white matter at that
level (Smith and Walter, 1985; Blass et al., 1988;
Hemostasis
Beal et al., 2001).
Hemostasis is divided into primary and secondary events
The end result of these injuries is either that there is
decreased respiratory drive or there is insufficient com-
(Kerwin and Maudlin, 2003). Primary hemostasis
munication between the respiratory center and the res-
depends on platelet aggregation and adhesion, and usu-
ally causes most concern to the neurosurgeon. It may be
piratory muscles (Beal et al., 200l). Apnea can also
 disturbed in the following conditions:
occur following the injection of subarachnoid contrast
· von Willebrand disease (see Chapter ll, page 217).
at the cerebello-medullary cistern (CMC) (Widmer
et al., 1992a), or after manipulation during imaging (Seim
 Severe thrombocytopenia
and Prata, 1982) (11.10).
(platelet count < 20 000/μl).
Azotemia (serum creatinine > 5.6 mg/dl).
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)-
 induced platelet dysfunction, including aspirin at
all therapeutic doses and especially above 25 mg/kg.
·Anticoagulant intoxication.
Disorders of primary hemostasis should be identified
by a platelet count and bleeding time evaluation (ll.1l).
 Perturbed hemostasis can cause decreased visualization
an (z'sn) susmq aaeadonsod Kams sump
formation and other more serious complications (15.40).
The dog shown in 6.l, represented 4 months after sur-
gery with a packed cell volume (PCV) of 12% from a
 bleeding gastric ulcer but survived after a transfusion.
 The owner had treated the dog with aspirin at 40 mg/kg
for 2 weeks.
 6.1 Myelogram from a 6-month-old Great Dane with sudlden
onset tetraplegia and dyspnea. It had neck pain with deficits
Hypoventilation
localized to the C1-C5 spinal cord. Blood gas analysis showed
This is a serious potential complication that can occur in
a paCO2 of 45 mmHg (N35-45). Ventral slot at C3/4 retrieved
any animal with a serious cervical spinal cord injury.
 a large amount of nucleus pulposus from the vertebral canal.
Patients that are severely tetraparetic on initial presenta-
On extubation the dog did not breathe spontaneously; its
tion should be evaluated for hypoventilation using blood
paCO2 was 91 mmHg. It was ventilated overnight but attempts
to wean it from the ventilator were unsuccessful until 4 days
gas analysis or a capnometer. Tetraplegic animals are
later. It was able to walk 2 weeks after surgery and made a
at even higher risk. Occasionally an animal may need
good recovery (see Hemostasis).
Preoperative assessment
83
PHARMACOLOGICAL
(Reed, 2002), or given together with corticosteroids, as
CONSIDERATIONS
potentially severe gastrointestinal erosions or ulcerations
Antibiotics
are likely.
Most neurosurgical procedures can be classified as clean
Corticosteroids
and uncontaminated. However, prophylactic antibiotics
Corticosteroids are used widely in all types of spinal cord
are indicated if sterility is broken or if one or more of
the factors in Box 6.2 apply.
conditions, mainly because they are so effective at
reducing the associated inflammation and at relieving
In such cases, perioperative cefazolin (20 mg/kg IV) is
pain. However, there is a widespread misunderstanding
recommended for its good tissue penetration and broad
that these beneficial effects also apply to the neural
spectrum of activity against staphylococci and other
injury itself. While corticosteroids may reduce inflam-
Gram-positive organisms (Dunning, 2003). A short, deci-
mation associated with, for example, extruded disc
sive window for prophylactic antibiotic use extends from
material, they can also prejudice the survival of any
the start of surgery to a maximum of 3 h afterwards. It is 
injured neurons by interfering with their glucose metab-
at this time that bacterial contamination of tissue can be
olism (Sapolsky, 1994; Smith-Swintosky et al., 1996).
- ou si aiu d e Aq passanns
This may be of little consequence with less severe spinal
tage to using IV antibiotics before the start of surgery, or
cord lesions but it could be critical in severe injuries. In
for continuing them beyond its completion, except in
such cases the animal might feel better but may have a
concomitant diseases such as pyoderma or UTI (Rosin,
 decreased chance for neurological recovery. In addition,
1988). A penicillin-derivative or a cephalosporin is usu-
there is almost certainly no neuroprotective benefit
ally a suitable initial choice for retention cystitis. Final
provided by any corticosteroid with the exception of
antibiotic selection for UTI should be based on urine
methylprednisolone sodium sucinate (MPSS) (Heary
culture and sensitivity whenever possible, especially
et al., 1997; Olby, 1999; Hurlbert, 2000; Bracken and
 when the animal has been hospitalized and a nosocormial
Holford, 2002). Corticosteroids can also precipitate gas-
 infection is much more likely (Dumning, 2003).
trointestinal bleeding in as many as 15% of neurosurgical
patients, with mortality rates of up to 2%. Dexametha-
Box 6.2 Some factors that can predispose to
 sone is most likely to cause problems and has no role in
wound infection
the management of spinal trauma (Moore and Withrow,
1982). Standard gastrointestinal protectant agents may
 Dermatitis
not be effective in preventing corticosteroid-induced
■ Periodontal disease
side-effects (Hanson et al., 1997). Duodenal or colonic
■ Urinary tract infection 
perforation are the most serious potential complications
■ Cbesity
(Toombs et al., 1986; Hinton et al., 2002). Routine glu-
■ Shock or sepsis
cocorticoid therapy in spinal patients is strongly discour-
■ Use of a surgical implant 
aged unless these drugs are used for short periods at
■ Cushings disease
anti-inflammatory doses in animals with mild neuro-
■ Corticosteroid or non-stercidal anti-inflammatory drug 
logical deficits (LeCouteur and Sturgess, 2003).
(NSAID) use
■ Diabetes mellitus
■ Surgical time over 90 min
METHYLPREDNISOLONE SODIUM
 Excessive use of electrocautery
SUCCINATE (MPSS)
MPSS has received wide interest in human, and, to a
lesser extent, veterinary medicine in the past 10 years
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories
because of proposed benefits in spinal cord injury. After
These drugs are valuable analgesics although they are
acute injury, the blood supply to the spinal cord is pro-
often less effective than corticosteroids as specific
 gressively reduced. When the injured tissue is reperfused,
anti-inflarmmatory agents for neurological disease. They
massive amounts of highly reactive chemicals called free
can have a number of important adverse effects. Such
radicals are liberated. These free radicals are especially
effects are most marked in drugs that inhibit mainly
 damaging to the plasma membrane of cells via a process
ZXOO on pasoddo se (1-XO) I-assuaxoooo
called lipid peroxidation. Free radical-induced lipid per-
(Kay-Mugford et al., 2000) (see Chapter 15, page 341).
 oxidation is now recognized as a key pathophysiological
NSAIDs must not be used at more than the recom-
 mechanisrm for irreversible tissue loss following spinal
mended dose, used in combination with other NSAIDs 
 cord trauma and ischemia (Brown and Hall, 1992).
84
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
 The neuroprotective effect of MPSS is exerted by its
 Sturgess, 2003). The benefits reported originally were
actions as a free-radical scavenger. These benefits are not 
au Jo buueaau e pou pue uoouny Apoq iaddn on fjue 
due to its glucocorticoid activity and only occur in doses
 ability to walk (Bracken et al., 1990, 1992, 1997). These
far exceeding those that saturate all glucocorticoid
 relatively small changes are crucial in people but are of
receptors. The optimal neuroprotective dose of MPSS
S much less significance in animals. They may also repre-
has been determined to be 30mg/kg, whereas doses of
60 mg/kg were detrimental and doses of 15 mg/kg had
white matter survival is much more important in
no effect. Benefit has only been observed in humans
 animals {Jeffery and Blakemore, 1999a). Furthermore,
 the statistical basis of the original huuman clinical trials has
8h of injury (Bracken et al., 1990, 1992).
now been questioned (Hurlbert, 2000). Although high-
 In animals, the suggested dosage regime is an initial
 dose MPSS therapy may be an advance in the manage-
IV bolus of 30mg/kg MPSS, followed by 15 mg/kg IV
 ment of acute spinal cord injury, it is not a panacea.
2 and 6h later, then 2.5 mg/kg IV per hour for a further
 Administration after the 8-h therapeutic window wors-
24h (Brown and Hall, 1992). The bolus doses should
 ens the outcome in humans while the length of this win-
be given slowly to avoid vomiting and hypotension. The
 dow in dogs and cats has not been determined (Bracken,
 [ue es un pasn Aiapim nou si asop Ah snonuuo
2000a,b, 2001; Hurlbert, 2000). The deleterious effect
patients; humans are given an initial bolus of 30 mg/kg,
 of delayed administration of MPSS is probably due to
followed by an infusion of 5.4mg/kg/h for 24h
 interference with neuronal glucose metabolism (Sapolsky,
(Bracken et al., 1990).
1994; Smith-Swintosky et al., 1996; LeCouteur and
 A similar regime might also provide some benefit when
 Sturgess, 2003). Therapy with MPSS must therefore be
given prior to spinal cord decompression for lesions that
 looked upon at best as a way to complement, but not
have been present for longer than 8h. However, this
replace, current veterinary neurosurgical techniques
hypothesis has not yet been tested and might even have
(LeCouteur and Sturgess, 2003).
an adverse effect (Olby, 1999; Bracken, 2000a,b, 2001).
Vitamin E also has protective effects on the spinal cord
Preoperative analgesia
when given at 1000-2000IU per animal per day for
Fentanyl patches provide a useful way to deliver pre-
 5 days and is an alternative prior to elective surgery
 operative analgesia and they can also be combined with
(Fehlings et al., 1989; Olby, 1999).
 one of the analgesics discussed under postoperative care
No serious side-effects were reported in one study
(see Chapter 15), however the rate of absorption of fen-
-onn um saop gg u Adeiau Ssd asop yau suisn
tanyl can vary considerably in an individual animal over
lumbar disc disease (Siemering and Vroman, 1992). In
time and can also vary at different times in the same animal
another study, 35 of 108 dogs developed complications
(Kyles et al., 1996; Egger et al., 1998). The dose range is
 a  q    s s
2-5 μg/kg/h. Increasing the patch size did not increase
serious and they usually resolved without therapy
 the plasma fentanyl concentration in one study but did
(Culbert et al., 1998). However, endoscopy revealed
 in a second (Egger et al., 1998; Welch et al., 2002a). The
severe, subclinical gastric hemorrhage in 90% of dogs
after MPSS treatment (Rohrer et al., 1999a,b); and 90%
 to that provided by intramuscular oxymorphone and is
 of dogs treated with MPSS prior to spinal surgery get
to butorphanol (Kyles et al., 1998; Robinson et al., 1999;
severe enough to warrant intervention (Hanson et al.,
Franks et al., 2000). The onset of action is faster in cats
1997; Rohrer et al., 1999a). Caution is advisable if con-
(2-6h) than in dogs (24-36h) (Scherk Nixon, 1996;
sidering MPSS therapy after treatment with other types
 Robinson et al., 1999). The patch should therefore be
of corticosteroid or with NSAIDs. Gastrointestinal barrier
 placed 24h prior to surgery in dogs and supplemental
disruption and bloody diarrhea can lead to bacteremia,
 analgesia is often required during this period (Egger
which is undesirable in a surgical patient (Epstein et al.,
 et al., 1998). Concentrations fall rapidly after patch
1992). Complications of MPSS reported in humans
 removal and are often below therapeutic concentrations
include pneumonia, sepsis, immunosuppression and pan-
within lh (Egger et al., 1998).
creatitis {Levy et al., 1996; Bracken et al., 1997; Gerndt
 Respiratory depression can be a serious side-effect in
et al., 1997; Matsumoto et al., 2001).
humans but was not seen in dogs at high doses
 A number of studies have now raised serious questions
(5 μg/kg/h) following thoracotomy (Welch et al., 2002a).
about the value of MPSS in humans (George et al.,
 Caution should be used in dogs that are hypoventilating
1995; Gerhart et al., 1995; Levy et al., 1996; Heary et al.,
cue to head or spinal cord injury (see Chapter 15).
1997; Nesathurai, 1998; Hurlbert, 2000; LeCouteur and
 Other potential side-effects in dogs include bradycardia,
Preoperative assessment
85
dysphoria and vomiting; acepromazine and glycopyrro-
until 2h prior to anesthesia for this reason (Crenshaw
late may alleviate these effects. Skin reactions may also
and Winslow, 2002)
 occur (15.1). The patch must not be placed on a heating
pad as this will increase the rate of absorption from the
Premedication
patch (Egger et al., 1998). Fentanyl is a useful way to
Premedication should have a calming effect and relieve
provide non-invasive, inexpensive, long-lasting analgesia
pain. Hypotension and loss of protective muscle tone
that is tolerated well (Scherk Nixon, 1996; Kyles, 1998).
should be avoided in an animal with severe neurological
However, careful monitoring is needed to insure ade-
deficits or an unstable vertebral column. Glycopyrrolate
quate analgesia and minimize adverse effects (Scherk
is the preferred anticholinergic as it is less likely to
Nixon, 1996; Kyles, 1998) (see also 'Postoperative anal-
induce tachycardia; atropine may still be required to treat
gesia', page 339).
severe bradyarrhythmias (Stauffer et al., 1988).
Adverse drug reactions and
Induction
interactions
A laryngoscope should be used for intubation with as lit.
Adverse effects of drugs are reported only rarely in ani-
tle movement of the spine as possible, especially in dogs
mals but are likely to become a more serious problem,
with unstable lesions or lesions in the cervical area. An
especially with the increasing awareness of such events
armoured endotracheal tube is recommended if cere-
in humans (Stillman, 1989; Weinblatt, 1989). One
brospinal fluid (CSF) is to be taken from the cerebello-
potential adverse effect is a drug interaction, for exam-
 ple renal failure as has been reported in people using
medullary cistern (CMC), if stress radiographs are to be
taken, or if a ventral approach to the neck is to be used.
NSAIDs and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors together (Seelig et al., 1990). Cyclosporin can
Maintenance
with either ketoconazole or with ivermectin (Myre et al.,
Isofluorane is the usual inhalation agent of choice,
1991; Roulet et al., 2003). A second type of adverse
because it is both less depressant to the cardiovascular
Sap renpraiu ue o uoeau pannadaun ue si aaa
system and less arrhythmogenic than halothane. Meth-
for example enrofloxacin as a (dose-related) cause of
oxyfluorane provides good muscle relaxation and better
blindness in cats or metronidazole as a cause of central
postoperative analgesia than isofluorane, but is contra-
vestibular disease (Dow et al., 1989; Gelatt et al., 2001).
indicated in animals receiving opioids or NSAIDs, or in
Hepatotoxicosis, keratoconjunctivitis
and
aplastic
those with renal disease. Sevofluorane is a good inhala-
anemia have been reported in dogs given trimethoprim-
tional agent in dogs and may be superior to isofluorane
sulfonamide combinations (Diehl and Roberts, 1991;
(Branson et al., 200l). Autoregulation in the brain is
Rowland et al., 1992; Fox et al., 1993). Anaphylactic-
preserved better with sevofluorane than with isofluorane
(Summors et al., 1999; Endoh et al., 2001); both agents
type reactions can occur in dogs given cefalosporins
during surgery; to avoid this complication occurring
maintain good spinal cord blood flow (Hoffman et al.,
intraoperatively it is preferable to give the first dose
199l; Crawford et al., 1992).
along with the premedication
where possible
Maintenance of anesthesia should be at a depth suffi-
[Anderson and Adkinson, 1987; Grouhi et al., 1999).
cient to prevent movement of the patient, which could
Adverse drug events have been reviewed extensively in
be dangerous during surgery. Mechanical ventilation is
humans and in animals (Boothe, 1990; Scott and Miller,
recommended in large or debilitated animals, those that
1998, 1999; Ament et al., 2000; Maddison et al., 2000;
are positioned in dorsal recumbency and those with
 Papadogiannakis, 2000).
neurological deficits cranial to the thoracolumbar junc-
tion. Barotrauma must be avoided, especially in small
anirmals (Manning and Brunson, 1994; Parent et al.,
ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
1996). Nitrous oxide is not recommended as it may
Many neurosurgical patients will be dehydrated at pres-
result in a rapid onset of hypoxia if the patient hypoven-
entation, usually when pain or weakness reduce fluid
tilates during CSF collection or if it will be disconnected
intake. They must be rehydrated adequately prior to
Audeiaope sunp Arddns see a uoy Aenodua
anesthetic induction, because of the detrimental effect
of hypotension on spinal cord perfusion (Tator and
Recovery
Fehlings, 1991; Nuwer, 1999). Another way to reduce
The recovery from anesthesia should be smooth, and
dehydration is to increase preoperative fluid intake; fast-
 both. If the anirmal has undergone myelography, its head
86
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
must be kept elevated during the entire recovery period.
(Rosenbluth and Meirowsky, 1953; Seim and Prata, 1982;
Seizures should be treated promptly with diazepam
Clark, 1986). Surgery in the cranial and mid-thoracic
[0.4 mg/kg IV), repeated as necessary. The use of iohexol
spine can also impair autonomic control of cardiovascular
for myelography means that the risk of seizures is low,
function and so the patient must again be monitored
although Doberman pinschers and other large-breed dogs
closely.
with cervical spondylomyelopathy may be at increased
risk and warrant careful monitoring (Lewis and Hosgood)
1992). It is prudent to leave an IV catheter in place until
SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
the patient is fully recovered.
Laminectomy healing
A laminectomy heals as the hematoma forms a fibrous
Complications
callus, which then undergoes metaplasia to cartilage and
Anesthesia must optimize both cardiovascular and
bone (Trotter et al., 1988). Adhesions can involve the
respiratory function in order to minimize ischemia of the
dura and nerve root(s) if no attempt is made to protect
spinal cord. Spinal cord blood flow is autoregulated in a
them after laminectomy (Cook et al., 1994). Adhesions
manner analogous to cerebral blood flow, volatile anes-
around local nerve roots can cause considerable post-
thetic agents may depress this autoregulation and trauma
 sn q aqond 's u  aao
to the spinal cord can abolish it altogether (Tator, 1991;
tethering effect (Songer et al., 1990; Geisler, 1999).
Nuwer, 1999; Olby and Jeffery, 2003). Any cardiac
This has not been identified specifically in animals
arrhythmia or systemic hypotension will compound this by
- p  q  a a 
reducing spinal cord blood flow further and so should be
 dence of probable peridural fibrosis on CT scan have
avoided if at all possible.
been reported (Olby et al., 2000). The preferred way to
Iohexol is a safe agent for myelography (Wheeler and
 assess epidural scarring is by using MRI (Ross et al.,
Davies, 1985), although the incidence of seizures can be
1999). The more scar tissue that is evident on MRI, the
around 7% in large-breed dogs with "Wobbler syndome'
 more pain is reported in humans after lumbar discectomy
(Lewis and Hosgood, 1992; Widmer et al., 1992b).
(Ross et al., 1996; Maroon et al., 1999). It is advisable to
Seizures can cause the animal to extend its neck, which
keep the exposed dura mater separate from the damaged
might have an adverse effect on a dynarmic cervical lesion
epaxial muscles during healing in order to minimize the
(1l.10). It is recommended that the patient be at an ade-
development of adhesions, which can even cause subse-
quate depth of anesthesia before the injection is made,
quent spinal cord compression (Trotter et al., 1988; Cook
that the contrast be used at body temperature, and that
et al., 1994).
it is injected at a steady rate (Lamb, 1994). In one study,
 Several implants have been used to minimize adhe-
six out of 66 dogs developed bradycardia during iohexol
sions but none is ideal (Cook et al., 1994). One study
injection and one died; two also developed bradycardia
 using Gelfoam (Pharmacia, Kalamazoo, MI) showed no
during recovery (Lewis and Hosgood, 1992). The ECG
 reduction of peridural scarring in dogs; two more studies
must be monitored closely during the study and any prob-
showed that scarring was actually increased (Gill et al.,
lems treated promptly. Hypothermia is another potential
1979; Songer et al., 1990; Robertson et al., 1993) and a
problem, particularly in small animals or if the anesthetic
fourth study showed reduction in scar using Gelfoam
 period is prolonged.
(LaRocca and Macnab, 1974).
 Surgical techniques can also affect the patient during
 Better overall results seem to be obtained in dogs using
anesthesia. Cervical spinal surgery is associated with a
autogenous fat (Gill et al., 1979; Cook et al., 1994).
much higher risk of arrhythmias and ventricular prema-
Histopathological evaluation of free fat grafts after
ture contractions than thoracolumbar surgery (Stauffer
laminectomy for disc disease in 2l dogs showed that
et al., 1988). This may result from manipulation of either
 50-90% of the graft was made up of fat with no scar. In
the spinal cord itself, or of nerves in the ventral neck. Both
 a further eight dogs, myelography was used to verify the
 positioning the spine in extension and manipulation of the 
lack of scar formation in the subarachnoid space over
vagosympathetic trumk should be minimized. A para-
 the surgical site. Overall follow-up times ranged from
 median approach to the neck provides better protection for
1 month to 5 years (Biggart, 1988). CT scans can also
vital structures and may therefore reduce the incidence of
be used to verify the presence and viability of fat graft at
 intraoperative arrhythmmias (11.25-11.27). Magnification
a previous laminectomy site (Biggart, 1988; Olby
is recommended when performing surgery on the cervical
 et al., 2000). However, two other studies found either
spinal cord in order to reduce unnecessary manipulation
 no benefit from free fat grafts (Songer et al., 1995), or
[see Chapters 7 and 11). Severe cervical myelopathies can
 that grafts do not prevent dural adhesions (Trevor et al.,
result in sympathetic blockade (1l.10), which can be fatal
1991). Free fat grafts must revascularize and so should be
Preoperative assessment
87
no more than 3-5 mm thick in order to minimize the risk
 residual neurological sequelae (Teague and Brasmer,
of aseptic necrosis (8.8, 8.54, 12.10). An initial inflam-
1978). It has also been used with good results to aid
matory phase resolves as fibrosis increases over 8-16
removal of a spinal cord hematoma and a tumor
weeks. By this time the graft has contracted to roughly
(Martin et al., 1986; Jeffery and Phillips, 1995). No
half its original size (Trevor et al., 199l; Cook et al.,
1994). One study has shown that pedicle grafts in dogs
trauma and the technique is difficult to perform in cats
have no advantage over free fat grafts; a second study
without causing additional injury (Hoerlein et al., 1985).
showed pedicle grafts to be superior (Gill et al., 1979;
Trevor et al., 199l). This discrepancy could simply
Mechanisms of recovery after
reflect the small number of dogs in the studies. A com-
mercially available alternative is ADCON-L (Gliatech
spinal cord injury
Inc., Cleveland, OH), a novel, porcine-derived, polyglycan
Recovery occurs mainly by the re-establishment of a
normal spinal cord microenvironment and forming new
implant that blocks in-growth of fibroblasts. It was shown
to be effective in dogs (Einhaus et al., 1997; BenDebba
et al., 1999; Geisler, 1999); it can even be used to deliver
{Jeffery and Blakemore, 1999b). Nociception is nor-
mally regained first then motor function and continence
morphine locally to the surgical site (Mastronardi et al.,
2002). There is still some controversy about its value and
followed by proprioception (see Chapter 2). Interestingly,
price may be an issue for veterinary use (Richter et al.,
some animals that fail to regain deep pain and continence
2001). A resorbable, polymer barrier film (Hydrosorb 
still recover the ability to walk (13.30, 13.34). Although
TS, Macropore Biosurgery Inc., San Diego, CA) has
often termed spinal reflex walking, this type of recovery
ose seM pue sheu u T-NOOTV o4 ioadns aq ot uaaond
probably requires some input from higher centers
moderately effective in dogs compared to controls
mediated through a few intact axons surviving across
the lesion. Survival of small groups of axons can occur
(Welch et al., 2002b).
because many severe spinal cord injuries are centered on
the gray matter and there is relative sparing of peripheral
Durotomy
white matter (Griffiths, 1978; Olby et al., 2003) (6.2).
Durotomy, or incision of the dura mater, results in mild,
Evidence of higher input in dogs that walk without
temporary deficits in normal dogs (Parker and Smith,
recovering deep pain is inferred from the fact that many
1972). As the dural incision heals, the edges rejoin but
regain a voluntary tail wag (Olby et al., 2003). However,
they often adhere to the spinal cord as well (Trevor et al.,
these dogs nearly always remain incontinent and the
1991). Durotomy is necessary to evaluate intradural
recovery of walking ability takes at least 4 months and
and intramedullary lesions (Jeffery and Phillips, 1995)
usually much longer (Olby et al., 2003).
(12.40). It is sometimes performed at laminectomy in
an attempt to decompress the spinal cord further (8.49,
8.50). Although this may improve decompression, the
relative risks and benefits are unclear (Perkins and Deane,
1988). In experimental situations, durotomy may have
value when performed immediately after trauma, but
was found to have no benefit 2h after the injury (Parker
and Smith, 1974, 1975). However, studies of intra-
cranial pressure show that craniotomy and durotomy
lower pressure by 15 and 65%, respectively (Bagley
et al., 1996). This suggests that durotomy might also pro-
duce a significant decompressive benefit for spinal cord.
Durotomy is not recommended in order to provide prog-
nostic information after spinal cord injury and euthanasia
should not be based solely on the gross appearance of the
spinal cord (Salisbury and Cook, 1988) (8.50).
6.2 Thoracic spinal cord from a dog that dlid not regain deep
Myelotomy
 pain sensation after a spinal fracture 6 weeks previously. There
Myelotomy involves incising the spinal cord on the dorsal
 is a large area of central necrosis with small groups of surviving
axons in the periphery (arrows). These axons may medliate late
midline to the level of the central canal. It has been per
ued daap uan aau peui shop ui uouny loou jo aoa
forrmed in normal dogs at the T3-L3 region with minimal
sensation and that remain incontinent (Olby et al., 2002)
88
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
CLIENT COMMUNICATION
Anderson, J.A., Adkimson, N.F, Jr [1987) Allergic reactions to drugs and
biologic agents. Jourmal of the American Medical Association 258,
The client should always be offered the ‘textbook'
2891-2899.
approach for managing a patient in terms of the diagnostic
Bagley, R.S., Haington, M.L, Pluhar, G.E., Keegan, R.D., Greene, S.A.,
Moore, M.P, Gavin, PR. [1996) Effect of craniectomy/durotomy alone
evaluation and treatment. This should be offered regard-
and in combination with hyperventilation, diuretics, and corticosteroids
less of the clinician's perception of whether the client will
on intracranial pressure in clinically normal dogs. American Jourmal of
pursue treatment, and even when it involves referral.
Veterinary Research 57, 1I16-119.
Beal, M.W., Paglia, D.T, Griffin, G.M., Hughes, D., King, L.G. [2001)
In this manner, the client is made aware that the very best
Ventilatory failure, ventilator management, and outcome in dogs with
is available for their animal, and any compromises arrived
cervical spinal disorders: 14 cases [1991-1999).Jourmal of the American
a  a  s aa  e
Veterinary Medical Association 218, 1598-1602.
Whenever possible, the clinical problems and the diag-
 BenDebba, M., Augustus van Alphen, H., Long, D.M. [1999) Association
between peridural scar and activity-related pain after lumbar discec-
nostic and therapeutic options should be explained to the
tomy. Neurological Research 21 Suppl I, S37-42.
client in non-scientific terms. Anatomical specimens, web-
Biggart, J.F, II [1988) Prevention of laminectomy membrane by free fat
 sites, drawings and the animal's own laboratory data and
grafts after laminectomy in dogs with disk hemiations. Vterinary
Surgery 17, 28-29.
images should be used to illustrate the situation. On the
Blass, C.E., Waldron, D.R., Van Ee, R.T. [1988) Cervical stabilization in
other hand, care must be taken not to overload the client
three dogs using Steinmann pins and methylmethacrylate. Jourmal of the
American Amimal Hospital Association 24, 61-68.
with excessive information, and they should be given time
Boothe, D.M. [1990) Drug therapy in cats: mechanisms and avoidance
and the opportunity to think privately about their deci-
of adverse drug reactions. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
sion. It is also important that the client be given as accurate
Association 196, 1297-1305.
 Boudrieau, R.J. (1997) Distraction-stabilization using the Scoville-
 a prognosis as possible, both for the degree of recovery and
Haverfield self-retaiming laminectomy retractors for repair of Znd cervical
the time required. Giving the client prior knowledge of
vertebral fractures in3 dogs. eterinary and Comparative Orthopaedics
the probable prognosis and of the most likely complica-
and Traumatology 10, 71.
 Bracken, M.B. [2000a) Methylprednisolone and spinal cord injury. Jourtal
tions is invaluable should the patient suffer either a pro-
of Neurosurgery 93 Suppl I, 175-179.
 tracted recovery or setbacks in its postoperative course.
Bracken, M.B. (200ob) The use of methylprednisolone. Jourial of
The client should never be pressured into consenting
Neurosurgery 93 Suppl 2, 340-341.
to a course with which they are not comfortable, even if
 Bracken, M.B. [2001) High dose methylprednisolone must be given for 24
or 48 hours after acute spinal cord injury. British Medical Jourmal 322,
the clinician feels that it is in the animal's best interests.
862-863.
 If complications do arise the client may then hold the
Bracken, M.B., Holford, TR. (2002) Neurological and functional status
I year after acute spinal cord injury: estimates of functional recovery in
clinician responsible, not only for the decision but also
National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study II from results modeled in
for the complications.
National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study Il. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 96,
 Finally, the client should be given, and asked to sign, a
259-266.
Bracken, M.B., Shepard, M.J., Collns, W.F., Holford, TR., Young, W., Baskin,
consent form and a written estimate of the likely cost
D.S., Eisenberg, H.M., Flamm, E., Leo-Summers, L., Maroon, J., et al.
for the entire procedure. It is vital that the client be
(1990) A randomized, controlled trial of methylprechisolone or naloxone
 made aware that there is some risk even in a routine gen-
in the treatment of acute spinal-cord mjury. Results ofthe Second National
Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study New England Jourmal of Medicine 322,
eral anesthetic and scan. This estimate should include a
1405-1411.
 price range to take into account any foreseeable varia-
Bracken, M.B., Shepard, M.J, Collns, WF., Jr, Holford, TR., Baskm, D.S..
tions in the postoperative course. Should the bill begin to
Eisenberg, H.M., Flamm, E., Leo-Summers, L., Maroon, J.C., Marshall,
approach the upper end of the estimate, or if unforeseen
L.F., et al. [1992) Methylprednisolone or naloxone treatment after acute
spinal cord imnjury: I-year follw-up data. Results of the Second National
complications develop, the client must be notified
Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 76, 23-31.
immediately (Thacher, 1989).
Bracken, M.B, Shepard, M.J, Holford, TR., Leo-Summers, L., Aldrich, E.F,
Fazd, M., Fehlings, M., Herr, D.L., Hitchon, PW, Marshall, L.F.,etal. [1997)
Arministration of methylprednisolone for 24 or 48 hours or tirilazad mesy-
Key issues for future investigation
late for 48 hours in the treatment of acute spinal cord injury Results of the
Third National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Randomized Controlled Trial.
1. Does MPSS provide significant neuroprotection in dogs
National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study.Journal of theAmerican Medical
after spinal cord trauma?
Associatiom 277, 1597-1604.
Branson, K.R, Quandt, J.E., Martinez, E.A., Carroll, G.L., Trim, C.M.,
 2. Does MPSS provide benefit when given prophyactically
Dodam, J.R., Hartsfield, S.M., Matthews, N.S., Mackenthun, A., Beleau,
M.H. [200l) A multisite case report on the clinical use of sevoflurane
 prior to surgery?
in dogs. Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital Association 37,
420-432.
3. what are the relative merits of MPSS and Vitamin E?
Brown, S.A., Hall, E.D. [1992) Role of oxygen-derived free radlicals in the
pathogenesis of shock and trauma, with focus on central nervous systerm
injuries. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 200,
1849-1859.
REFERENCES
Calvert, C.A., Wall, M. [200l) Results of ambulatory electrocardiography
in overtly healthy Doberman Pinschers with equivocal echocardiog-
Ament, PW., Bertolino, J.G., Liszewski, J.L. [2000) Clinically significant
raphic evidence of dilated cardiomyopathy. Jourmal of the Americat
drug interactions. American Family Physician 61, 1745-1754
Veterinary Medical Association 219, 782-784.
 Preoperative assessment
89
Clark, D.M. [1986] An analysis of intraoperative and early postoperative
Gill, G., Sakovich, L., Thompson, E. [1979) Pedicle fat grafts for the pre-
mortality associated with cervical spinal decompressive surgery in the
vention of scar formation after laminectomy. An experimental study in
dog. Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital Association 22, 739-744.
dogs. Spine 4, 176-186.
Cook, S., Prewett, A., Dalton, J., Whitecloud, TR. [1994) Reduction in
Griffiths, I.R. [1978) Spinal cord injuries: a pathological study of naturally
perineural scar formation after laminectomy with Polyactive membrane
occurring lesions in the dog and cat. Jourmal of Comparative Pathology
sheets. Spine 19, 1815-1825.
S1-0 *88
Crawford, M.W, Lerman, J., Pilato, M., Orrego, H., Saldivia, V,
Grouhi, M., Hummel, D., Roifman, C.M. [1999) Anaphylactic reaction to
Carmichael, F.J. [1992) Haemodymamic and organ blood flow responses
oral cefaclor in a child. Pediatrics 103, e50.
to sevoflurane during spontaneous ventilation in the rat: a dose-response
Hanson, S.M., Bostwick, D.R., Twedt, D.C., Smith, M.O. [1997) Clinical
study.Canadian fournal of Anaesthesia 39,270-276.
Evaluation of cimetidine, sucralfate, and misoprostol for prevention of
Crenshaw, J.T, Winslow, E.H. [2002) Original Research: Preoperative
gastrointestinal tract bleeding in dogs umdergoing spinal surgery.
Fasting: Old Habits Die Hard: Research and published guidelines no
American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 58, 1320-1323.
longer support the routine use of 'NPO after midnight, but the practice
Heary, R.F, Vaccaro, A.R., Mesa, J.J, Northrup, B.E., Albert, TJ.,
persists. American fourmal of Nursing 102, 36-44.
Balderston, R.A., Cotler, J.M. [1997) Steroids and gunshot wounds to
Culbert, L.A., Marino, D.J., Baule, R.M., Van-Knox, I.-W. [1998) Compli-
the spine. Neurosurgery 41, 576-583.
catins associated with high-dose prednisolone sodium succinate therapy
Hinton, L.E., McLoughlin, M.A., Johnson, S.E., Weisbrode, S.E. [2002)
in dogs withneurologicalinjury.Jourmalof theAmericanAnimal Haspital
Spontaneous gastroduodenal perforation in I6 dogs and seven cats
Association 34, 129-134.
(1982-1999). Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital Association 38,
Diehl, K.J., Roberts, S.M. [1991) Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs associ-
176-187.
ated with sulfonarmide therapy: 16 cases [1980-1990). Progress it
Hoerlein, B.F., Redding, R.W., Hoff, E.J., McGuire, J.A. [198S) Evaluation
Veterinary and Comparative Ophthalmology 1,276-282.
of naloxone, crocetin, thyrotropin releasing hormone, methylpred-
Dow, S.W., LeCouteur, R.A., Poss, M.L., Beadlleston, D. [1989) Central
nisolone, partial myelotomy, and hemilaminectomy in the treatment of
nervous system toxicosis associated with metronidazole treatment of
acute spinal cord trauma. Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital
dogs: Five cases [1984-1987]. Jourmal of the American Veterinary
Association 21, 67-77.
Medical Association 195, 365-368.
Hoffman, W.E., Edelman, G., Kochs, E., Wemer, C., Segil, L., Albrecht,
Dumming, D. (2003) Surgical wound infection and the use of antimicro-
RF. [i99l) Cerebral autoregulation in awake versus isoflurane-
bials.In:D.Slatter[ed.),Textbook ofSmallAmimal Surgery,3rd edn,
mesthetized rats. Aresthesia and Amalgesia 73, 753-757.
113-12l. Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
Hosgood, G. [2003) Wound repair and specific tissue response to injury.
Egger, C.M., Duke, T, Archer, J., Cribb, PH. [1998) Comparison of
In: D. Slatter [ed.], Textbook of Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd edn, 66-86.
plasma fentanyl concentrations by using three transdermal fentanyl
Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
patch sizes in dogs. Veterirnary Surgery 27, I59-166.
Hurlbert, R.J. (2000) Methylprednisolone for acute spinal cord injury: an
Einhaus, S.L., Robertson, J.T., Dohan, F.C., Jr, Wujek, J.R., Ahmad, S.
1(ddns]nnNnraeepuesaddde
[1997) Reduction of peridural fibrosis after lumbar laminotomy and dis-
Jeffery, N.D., Blakemore, WF. [1999a) Spinal cord injury in small animals
cectomy in dogs by a resorbable gel [ADCON-L). Spine 22, 1440-1446;
2. Current and future options for therapy. Veterinary Record 145,
discussion 1446-1447.
183-190.
Endoh, H., Honda, T, Ohashi, S., Hida, S. [2001) [Cerebral autoregula-
 Jeffery, N.D., Blakemore, WF. [1999b) Spinal cord injury in small animals.
tion during sevoflurane or isoflurane anesthesia: evaluation with tran-
I. Mechanisms of spontaneous recovery. Veterinary Record 144,
sient hyperemic response]. Masui 50, 1316-1321.
407-413.
Epstein, M.D., Banducci, D.R., Manders, E.K. [1992) The role of the
Jeffery, N.D., Phillips, S.M. [1995) Surgical treatment of intramedullary
gastrointestinal tract in the development of bum sepsis. Plastic
spinal cord neoplasia in two dogs. Jourmal of Small Animal Practice
Reconstructive Surgery 90, 524-531.
36, 553-557.
Fehlings, M.G., Tator, C.H., Linden, R.D. [1989) The effect of nimodipine
Kay-Mugford, P, Benn, S.J., LaMarre, J., Conlon, P [2000) In vitro effects
and dextran on axonal function and blood flow following experimental
of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on cyclooxygenase activity in
spinal cord injury. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 71, 403-416.
dogs.American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 61, 802-810.
Fox, L.E., Ford, S., Alleman, A.R., Homer, B.L., Harvey, J.W. [1993)
Kerwin, S.C., Maudlin, G.E. [2003) Hemostas, surgical bleeding, and
Aplastic anemia associated with prolonged high-dose trimethoprim-
transfusion.In:D.Slatter[ed.),TextbookofSmallAnimal Surgery,3rd
sulfadliazine administration in two dogs. Veterinary Climical Pathology
edn, 44-65. Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
22, 89-92.
Kyles, A.E. [1998) Transdermal fentanyl. Compendium om Continuing
Franks, J.N., Boothe, H.W, Taylor, L, Geller, S., Carroll, G.L., Cracas, V,
Education for thePracticing Veterinarian 20,721-722,724-726.
Boothe, D.M. [2000) Evaluation of transdermal fentanyl patches for
Kyles, A.E., Hardie, E.M., Hansen, B.D., Papich, M.G. [1998) Comparison of
analgesia in cats undergoing onychectomy. Jourial of the Americar
transdermal fentanyl and intramuscular oxymorphone on post-operative
Veterinary Medical Association 217,10131019.
behaviour after ovariohysterectomy m dogs. Research in Veterinary Scienice
Gehlbach, S.H., Bigelow, C., Heimisdottir, M., May, S., Walker, M.,
65, 245-251.
 Kirkwood, J.R. [2000) Recognition of vertebral fracture in a clinical set-
Kyles, A.E., Papich, M., Hardie, E.M. [1996) Dispsition of transdermally
ting.Osteoporosis Internatiomnal 1l, 577-582.
adlministered fentanyl in dogs.American Jourmal of Veterinary Research
Geisler, F.H. [1999) Prevention of peridural fibrosis: current methodolo-
57, 715-719.
gies. Neurological Research 21 Suppl I, S9-22.
Lamb, C.R. [1994] Common diffculties with myelographic diagnosis of
Gelatt, K.N., van der Woerdt, A., Ketring, K.L., Andrew, S.E.,
acute intervertebral disc prolapse in the dog. Jourmal of Small Animal
Brooks, D.E., Biros, D.J., Denis, H.M., Cutler, TJ. (2001) Enrofloxacin-
Practice 35, 549-558.
associated retinal degeneration in cats. Veterinary Ophthalmology
LaRocca, H., Macnab, I. [1974) The laminectomy membrane. Studies in
4, 99-106.
its evolution, characteristics, effects and prophylaxis in dogs. The Jourial
George, E.R., Scholten, D.J., Buechler, C.M., Jordan-Tibbs, J., Mattice, C.
f Bone and Joint Surgery—British tolume 56B, S4S-SS0.
Albrecht, R.M. [1995] Failure of methylprednisolone to improve the
LeCouteur, R.A., Sturgess, B. [2003) Spinal fractures and luxations. In:
outcome of spinal cord injuries. American Surgeon 61, 659-663.
D. Slatter [ed.)], Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd edn, I244-1260.
Gerhart, K.A., Johnson, R.L., Menconi, J., Hoffman, R.E., Lammertse, D.P
Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
(1995) Utilization andeffectivenessof methylprehisolone m a population-
Levy, M.L., Gans, W., Wijesinghe, H.S., SooHoo, WE., Adkins, R.H.,
based sample of spimnal cord injured persons. Paraplegia 33, 316-321.
Stilleman, C.B. [1996) Use of methylprednisolone as an adjunct in the
Gerndt, S.J., Rodiguez, J.L., Pawlik, J.W, Taheri, PA., Wahl, WL.,
management of patients with penetrating spinal cord injury: outcome
Micheals, A.J., Papadopoulos, S.M. [1997) Consequences of high-dose
amalysis. Neurosurgery 39, 1141-1148; discussion I148-1149.
steroid therapy for acute spinal cord injury. Jourmal of Trauma 42,
Lewis, D.D., Hosgood, G. [1992) Complications associated with the
279-284.
use of iohexol for myelography of the cervical vertebral column in
90
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
dogs: 66 cases [1988-1990].Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
Robinson, TM., Kruse Elliott, K.T, Markel, M.D., Pluhar, G.E., Massa, K.,
Associationt 200, 1381-1384.
Bjorling, D.E. [1999) A comparison of transdermal fentanyl versus
Maddison, J., Ettinger, S.J., Feldman, E.C. [2000) Adverse drug reactions.
epidural morphine for analgesia in dogs undergoing major orthopedic
In: S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman [eds), Textbook of Veterinary Intermal
surgery.JournaloftheAmericanAmimalHospitalAssociationt
Medicine: Diseases of the Dog and Cat, Vols I and 2, Sth edn, 320-325.
35, 95-100.
 Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Rohrer, C.R., Hill, R.C., Fischer, A., Fox, L.E., Schaer, M., Ginn, PE.,
Manning, M.M., Brunson, D.B. [1994) Barotrauma in a cat. Jourmal of the
Casanova, J.M., Burrows, C.F. [1999a) Gastric hemorrhage in dogs given
AmericarVeterinaryMedicalAssociation205,62-64
high doses of methylprednisolone sodium succinate. American Jourtal of
Maroon, J.C., Abla, A., Bost, J. [1999) Association between peridural scar
Veterinary Research 60, 977-981.
md persistent low back pain after lumbar discectomy. Neurological
Rohrer, C.R., Hill, R.C., Fischer, A., Fox, L.E., Schaer, M., Ginn, PE.,
Research 21 Suppl I, S43-46.
Preast, VA., Burrows, C.F. [1999b) Efficacy of misoprostol in preven-
Martin, R.A., Shell, L., Dodds, WJ. [1986) Focal intramedullary spinal
tion of gastric hemorrhage in dogs treated with high doses of methyl.
cord hematoma in a dog. Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital
prednisolone sodium succinate. American fourmal of Veterinary Research
Association 22, 545-550.
60, 982-985.
Mastronardi, L., Pappagallo, M., Puzzilli, F, Tatta, C. [2002) Efficacy of
Rosenbluth, PR., Meirowsky, A.M. [1953) Sympathetic blockade, an acute
the morphine-Adcon-L compound in the management of postoperative
cervical cord syndrome. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 10, I07-112.
 Rosin, E. [1988) The timing of antibiotic administration for antimicrobial
sion 524-525.
prophylaxis in surgery.Veterinary Surgery 17,181.
Matsumoto, T., Tamaki, T, Kawakami, M., Yoshida, M., Ando, M., Yamada, H.
Ross, J., Obuchowski, N., Modic, M. [1999) MR evaluation of epidural
[2001) Early complications of high-dose methylprednisolone sodium
fibrosis: proposed gradmg system with intra- and inter-observer variabil-
succinate treatment in the follow-up of acute cervical spinal cord injury.
ity. Neurological Research 21 Suppl I, S23-26.
Spinte 26, 426-430.
Ross, J.S., Robertson, J.T., Frederickson, R.C., Petrie, J.L., Obuchowski, N.,
Moore, R.W., Withrow, S.J. [1982) Gastrointestinal hemorrhage and pan-
Modic, M.T, deTribolet, N. [1996) Association between peridural scar
creatitis associated with intervertebral disk disease in the dog. Jourmal of
and recurrent radicular pain after lumbar discectomy: magnetic reso-
theAmerican Veterinary Medical Association 180,1443-1447.
nance evaluation. ADCON-L European Study Group. Neurosurgery 38,
Myre, S.A., Schoeder, TJ., Grund, VR., Wandstrat, TL., Nicely, PG.,
855-86l; discussion 861-863.
Pesce, A.J., First, M.R. [199l) Critical ketoconazole dosage range for
Roulet, A., Puel, O., Gesta, S., Lepage, J.F,Drag, M., Soll,M.,Almerie, M,
ciclosporin clearance inhibition in the dog. Pharmacology 43, 233-241.
-isuasaadky saop ao u adkouas zuaoyap-la (eooz] 1 *neaud
Nesathurai, S. [1998) Steroids and spinal cord injury: revisiting the
tive to the P-glycoprotein substrate ivermectin. European Jourmal of
 NASCIS 2 and NASCIS 3 trials. Jourmal of Trauma 45, I088-1093.
Pharmacology 460, 85-91.
Nuwer, M.R. [1999) Spinal cord monitoring. Muscle and Nerve 22,
Rowland, PH., Center, S.A., Dougherty, S.A. [I992] Presumptive
1620-1630.
trimethoprim-sulfadliazine-related hepatotoxicosis in a dog. Jourmal of
Olby, N. [1999] Current concepts in the management of acute spinal cord
the AmericanVeterinary Medical Association 200, 348-350.
injury.Jourmal of Veterinary intermal Medicine 13, 399-407.
Salisbury, S.K., Cook, J.R., Jr [1988) Recovery of neurological function
Olby, N.J., Jeffery, N.D. [2003) Pathogenesis of diseases of the central
following focal myelomalacia in a cat. Jourmal of the American Amimal
nervous system. In: D. Slatter [ed.), Textbook of Small Animal Surgery,
Hospital Association 24, 227-230.
3rd edn, I1321147. Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
Sapolsky, R.M. [1994) Glucocorticoids, stress and exacerbation of excito-
Olby, N.J., Munana, K.R., Sharp, N.J.H., Thrall, D.E. [2000) The computed
toxic neuron death. Seminars in Neuroscience 6, 323-331.
tomographic appearance of acute thoracolumbar intervertebral disc hemi-
Scherk Nixon, M. [1996) A study of the use of a transdermal fentanyl
ations in dogs. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 41, 396-402.
patchin cats.Jourtal of the American Amimal HospritalAssociation32,
Olby, N.J., Hais, T., Mumana, K.R., Skeen, TM., Sharp, N.J.H. (2003)
19-24.
Long-terrm functional outcome of dogs with severe injuries of the
Scott, D.W, Miller, WH., Jr [1998) Idiosyncratic cutaneous adverse
thoracolumbar spinal cord. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
drug reactions in the cat: literature review and report of I4 cases
Associatton 222, 762-769.
[1990-1996). Feline Practice 26, 10-15.
Papadogianmakis, E.1. [2000) Cutaneous adverse drug reactions in the dog
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H., Jr [1999) Idiosyncratic cutaneous adverse
and cat.European fourmal ofCompamion Animal Practice 10,71-77.
drug reactions in the dog: literature review and report of I0l cases
Parent, C., King, L.G., Van Winkle, T.J., Walker, L.M. [1996) Respiratory
{1990-1996]. Catine Practice 24, 16-22.
function and treatment in dogs with acute respiratory distress syndrome:
Seelig, C.B., Maloley, PA., Campbell, J.R. [1990) Nephrotoxicity associ-
19 cases [198S-1993). Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
ated with concomitant ACE inhibitor and NSAID therapy. Southerr1
Associattiort 208, 1428-1433.
Medical Jourmal 83, I144-l148.
Parker, A.J., Smith, C.W. [1972) Functional recovery following incision of
 Seim, H.B., Prata, R.G. [1982) Ventral decompression for the treatment
spinal meninges in dogs. Research in Veterinary Science 13, 418-421.
of cervical disk disease in the dog: a review of S4 cases. Jourmal of the
Parker, A.J., Smith, C.W. [1974) Functional recovery from spinal cord
American Amimal Hospital Association 18, 233-240.
trauma follwing incision of spinal meninges in dogs. Research it
Siemering, G.B., Vroman, M.L. [1992) High dose methylprednisolone
Veterinary Science 16, 276-279.
sodium succinate: an adjumct to surgery for canine intervertebral disc
Parker, A.J., Smith, C.W. [1975) Functional recovery from spinal cord
hermiation.Veterinary Surgery 21,406.
Smith, G.K., Walter, M.C. [1985) Fractures and luxations of the spine.
Veterinary Science 18, I10-I12.
In: C.D. Newton and D. Numamaker [eds), Textbook of Small Amimal
Perkins, PG., Deane, R.H. [1988) Long-term follow-up of six patients
Orthopedics, 307-322. Philadelphia: JB Lipincott.
with acute spinal injury following dural decompression. lnjury 19,
Smith-Swintosky, VL., Pettigrew, L.C., Sapolsky, R.M., Phares, C.,
10-6
Craddock, S.D., Brooke, S.M., Mattson, M.P [1996) Metapyrone, an
Reed, S. [2002) Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-induced duodenal
mhibitor of glucocorticoid productin, reduces brain injury induced by
ulceration and perforation in a mature rottweiler. Canadian Veterinary
focal and global ischermia and seizures. Jourmal of Cerebral Blood Flow
Joural 43, 971-972.
and Metabolism 16, 585-598.
Richter, H.P, Kast, E., Tomczak, R., Besenfelder, W, Gaus, W. [2001)
Songer, M., Ghosh, L., Spencer, D. [1990) Effects of sodium hyaluronate
Results of applying ADCON-L gel after lumbar discectomy: the German
on peridural fibrosis after lumbar laminotomy and discectomy. Spine
ADCON-L study. Jourtal of Neurosurgery 95, 179-189.
15, 550554.
Robertson, J., Meric, A., Dohan, F.J., Schweitzer, J., Wujek, J., Ahmad, S.
Songer, MN., Raushning, W, Carson, E.W, Pandit, SM. [1995) Analysis
[1993) The reduction of postlaminectomy peridural fibrosis in rabbits
of peridural scar formation and its prevention after lumbar laminotomy
by a carbohydrate polymer. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 79, 89-95.
and discectomy in dogs. Spine 20, 571-580; discussion 579-580.
 Preoperative assessment 
91
Stauffer, J.L., Gleed, R.D., Short, C.E., Erb, H.N., Schukken, Y.H. [1988]
Trotter, E.J, Crissman, J., Robson, D., Babish, J. [1988) Influence of
Cardiac dysrhythmias during anesthesia for cervical decompression in
nonbiologic implants on laminectomy membrane formation in dogs.
the dog. American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 49, 1143-1146.
American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 49, 634-643.
Stillman, M.T. [1989) Interaction and selection of therapeutic agents in
Weinblatt, M.E. [1989) Drug interactions with non steroidal anti-mflammatory
the elderly: NSAIDs and the ageing kidney. Scandinatian Jourmal of
drugs [NSAIDs). Scandinatrian Jourmal of Rheumatology Suppiemert
Rheumatology Supplemernt 82, 33-38.
83, 7-10.
Summors, A.C., Gupta, A.K., Matta, B.F. [1999) Dynamic cerebral
Welch, J.A., Wohl, J.S., Wright, J.C. [(200Za) Evaluation of postoperative
autoregulation during sevoflurane anesthesia: a comparison with isoflu-
respiratory function by serial blood gas analysis in dogs treated with
rane. Anesthesia and Analgesia 88, 341-345.
transdermal fentanyl.Jourmalof Veterinary Emergencyand Critical Care
Tator, C.H. [1991) Review of experimental spinal cord injury with emphasis
Medicine 12, 81-87.
on the local and systermic circulatory effects. Neurochirurgie 37, 291-302.
Welch, W.C., Comwall, G.B., Toth, J.M., Tumer, A.S., Thomas, K.A.,
Tator, C.H., Fehlings, M.G. [1991) Review of the secondary injury theory
Gerszten, PC., Nemoto, E.M. [2002b) Use of polylactide resorbable
of acute spinal cord trauma with emphasis on vascular mechanisms.
film as an adhesion barrier. Orthopedics 25 [10 Suppl)], S1121-l130.
Journal of Neurosurgery 75, 15-26.
Wheeer, S.J., Davies, J.V. [1985) Iohexol myelography in the dog and cat:
Teague, H.D., Brasmer, TH. [1978) Midine myelotomy of the clinically
a series of one hundred cases, and a comparison with metrizamide and
normal canine spinal cord. American Jourmal of Veterinary Research
iopamidol. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 26, 247-256.
39, 1584-1590.
Widmer, WR., DeNicola, D.B., Blevins, WE., Cook, J.R., Jr, Cantwell,
Thacher, C. [1989) Problems with owner communications. Problems it
H.D., Teclaw, R.F. [1992a) Cerebrospinal fluid changes after iopamidol 
Veterinary Medicine 1, 478-490.
and metrizamide myelography in clinically normal dogs. American
Toombs, J.P, Collins, L.G., Graves, G.M., Crowe, D.T, Caywood, D.D.
Jourmal of Veterinary Research 53, 396-401.
[1986) Colonic perforation in corticosteroid-treated dogs.Jourmal of the
Widmer, WR., Blevins, WE., Jakovljevic, S., Teclaw, R.F, Han, C.M.,
American Veterinary Medical Association 188, 145-150.
Hurd, C.D. [1992b) Iohexol and iopamidol myelography in the dog:
Trevor, PB., Martin, R.A., Saunders, G.K, Trotter, E.J. [1991) Healing
a clinical trial comparing adverse effects and myelographic quality.
 characteristics of free and pedicle fat grafts after dorsallaminectomy and
Veterinary Radiology andUltrasound 33,327-333.
durotomy in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 20, 282-290.
Cervical disc disease
Chapter
et al., 1992). Dachshunds, Beagles, Poodles, Spaniels,
Clinical signs  93
Shih Tzus, Pekingese and Chibuahuas are affected
most often. Large-breed dogs also suffer from cervical
Diagnosis
¥94
disc disease, usually as part of the syndrome of cervical
 Survey radiography
94
spondylomyelopathy (see Chapter 1l1). Most small dogs
CSF analysis 
94
suffer signs after 2 years of age, with a mean onset at
Myelography 95
6 years (Goggin et al., 1970; Gage, 1975).
CT and MRl  95
Treatment options  96
 Non-surgical treatment  S
CLINICAL SIGNS
96
Surgical treatment  96
The predominant clinical sign is severe neck pain (7.1
Fenestration  96
and Box 7.l), which may be acute or chronic (Fry
Ventral decompression   96
et al., 1991; Smith et al., 1997). In making a diagnosis,
 Ventral decompression and fixation  
97
it is usually adequate to palpate the spine and muscles
Dorsal decompression 98 
of the neck rather than flex and extend the neck to
confirm pain (2.13). This is one of the few conditions
Complications  98
that cause dogs to scream spontaneously. Often the
Intraoperative    98
pain is unremitting and not responsive to medication
Early postoperative  
99
although dogs with more marked neurological deficits
often show less pain. Affected dogs may be reluctant to
Postoperative care
102
eat unless the food is raised off the floor.
Nerve 'root signature' (pain on traction of the limb)
Prognosis  102
is another frequent finding (Seim and Prata, 1982;
 Fry et al., 1991; Morgan et al., 1993). It may present as
Cervical disc disease in cats 
103
Key issues for future investigation  103
References
104
Procedures
106
Approach to the ventral neck 106
Fenestration   109
Ventral decompression   111
Ventral decompression with
distraction-stabilization 
117
Dorsal hemilaminectomy   1 19
Dorsal laminectomy   120
Cervical disc disease is a frequent disorder of dogs.
7.1 Dachshund with neck pain caused by a cervical disc
Small dogs are affected commonly, particularly those
extrusion. Note low head position and thoracic limb held up due
to root signature. The hunched posture can be mistaken for 
with chondrodystrophoid characteristics although the
thoracolumbar pain; history and physical examination
condition can occur in any breed (Gage, 1975; Dallman
dlifferentiates the two.
94
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
 an apparent orthopedic lameness but nerve root pain 
hemiparesis, tetraparesis or even tetraplegia with
can usually be elicited by neck palpation or limb trac-
hypoventilation (6.1, 7.1l). Neurological deficits are
tion. This sign usually indicates that more caudal discs
more common with lesions at C4/5 to C6/7 inclusive,
are affected but can also be seen with C2/3 discs
 while neck pain without deficits is more common with
(Morgan et al., 1993). Neurological deficits may be
lesions at C2/3 and C3/4 {Lemarie et al., 2000). This
restricted to one thoracic limb or the dog may show
 may reflect the greater degree of space in the cranial
vertebral canal compared to more caudally.
Most dogs have Hansen type I extrusions. Hansen
Box 7.1 Clinical signs of cervical disc disease
type II herniations do occur, generally in larger breed
■ Neck pain
dogs (7.56). The C2/3 disc is involved most frequently,
■ Spontaneous screaming
with the incidence decreasing caudally (Seim and Prata,
■ Low head carriage
1982; Fry et al., 1991). Lesions at C6/7 are the least
common, with the exception of large-breed dogs as part
■ Thoracic limb lameness or paresis 
 of cervical spondylormyelopathy and also in Pekingese
■ Thoracic limb 'nerve root signature'
(Fry et al., 1991). The C7/Tl disc herniates occasionally
■Hemiparesis
      s  )
■ Tetraparesis
occasions and should be considered under differential
diagnosis (Coates and Dewey, 1998) (Box 7.2)
 Box 7.2 Differential diagnoses for neck pain
DIAGNOSIS
■ Schmorl's node
Survey radiography
■ Facet joint pain 
 Diagnosis is based on the clinical signs described above.
■ Synovial cyst 
Survey radiographic features of chronic disc disease are
■ Bicipital bursitis 
common incidental findings in older dogs. Narrowing
Temporomandlibular joint (TMJ) lesion or oropharyngeal pain 
of the intervertebral space or dorsal displacement of
 Otitis media
 mineralized disc material is suggestive of disc extrusion
■ Cervical spondylomyelopathy
[myasn aq Aeu1 Audeiaossi (z'2) (2661 *7u 1a ue1oN)
 Atlantoaxial subluxation 
for non-mineralized, lateral extrusions (Felts and Prata,
■ Syringohydromyelia
1983; Wrigley and Reuter, 1984). Myelography or
■ Osteoporotic pathological fracture 
advanced imaging is necessary for definitive diagnosis
■ Soft tissue tumor in the neck cr bone tumor
(Somerville et al., 2001).
■ Intracranial lesion
■ Mid-thoracic lesion, e.g. T5/6 discospondylitis 
CSF analysis
■ Thoracic lesion, e.g. pleuritic pain
Analysis of CSF is useful to eliminate inflammatory
■Meningomyelitis
CNS disease. Results of CSF analysis may be abnormal
■ Polyarthritis
 in disc disease, but elevations of protein and cells are
■ Polymyositis
usually mild (Thomson et al., 1989). Conditions other
■ Spinal cord hematoma or hemorhage
than disc disease are more common in dogs less than
2 years old or in aged animals (Box 7.2).
7.2 A: Lateral myelogram from a
10-year-old Shih Tzu that presented with
neck pain and no neurological deficits.
There is a narrow intervertebral space
at C5/6 with extruded, mineralized disc
material and splitting of the ventral
contrast column at this level (4.23-4.25).
B: Dorsoventral myelogram. Further
 images from the same dog are shown
in 7.3, 7.9 and 7.37.
P
B
Cervical disc disease
95
Myelography
CT and MRI
Myelography or advanced imaging is necessary
to
Depending on the scanner, CT is usually much faster
confirm the diagnosis and because multiple discs are
to perform than myelography and is also more accurate
sometimes involved. In some lateral or intraforaminal
for surgical planning (Olby et al., 1999). When available,
extrusions the myelogram is normal but oblique views
CT is the imaging modality of choice for chondro-
may reveal the offending disc (Felts and Prata, 1983).
dystrophoid dogs with suspected cervical disc disease
Oblique views are also useful in determining the side
(4.39B, 7.4, 7.5). The cross-sectional image helps the
on which an asymmetrical extrusion lies, although CT
 surgeon to plan the ventral slot and is also useful to
or MRI are better.
identify lateralized or foraminal lesions (Hara et al., 1994;
7.3 A: CT scan through C5/6 made
after myelography (same dog as shown 
 in 7.2). The connection between the disc
extrusion and the rest of the nucleus
pulposus is seen clearly. B: T2-weighted,
sagittal MRI to show a dlisc extrusion at
C4/5 (transverse image, 4.44A). The C3/4
and C5/6 dliscs are of relatively normal
signa intensity but C2/3 and especially
C4/5 and C6/7 discs are degenerate with
low signal intensity (Sether et al., 1990;
Levitski et al., 1999).
B
7.4 A: Transverse CT and B: 3D
reconstruction of CT scan from a 
 5-year-old Lhasa Apso that had neck
 pain and was unable to walk. The scan
revealed a large mineralized extrusion at
the C4/5 disc space. The postoperative
scan is shown in 7.5.
B
7.5 A: Transverse and B: 3D
reconstruction of the post-surgical CT
scan from the same dog as shown 
in 7.4. A ventral slot was performed,
which permitted the surgeon to remove 
the majority of the extruced material.
Note the small amount of residual
 material present to one sicde of the slot 
(arrowhead and arrow). The wicth of this
slot is 39% of the vertebral bocy width.
B
96
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
7.6 Dog with severe neck pain and root
signature but no neurological deficits.
A: Transverse CT scan and B: 3D
reconstruction reveals dlisc material
within the intervertebral foramen at 
C5/6 (arrowheads). The dlisc material
was removed using a blunt probe after
a standard ventral approach with
elevation of the longus colli muscles 
from the ventral and lateral aspects of
 the anulus fibrosus. Fenestration was
also performed. The dog was pain free 
within 2 days.
A
B
Bagley et al., 1996) (7.6). The scanner can also be used to
 Surgical treatment
show the exact location and extent of disc material on a
a Indications for surgical treatment include:
scout image [4.39A). A heterogenous, hyperattenuating,
● Failure of non-surgical treatment.
extradural mass with loss of epidural fat is a characteristic
●Unremitting pain.
feature of a mineralized disc extrusion (Olby et al., 2000).
● Severe or progressive neurological deficits.
If CT is not dliagnostic it can be followed by a myelogram
Ventral decompression is the preferred procedure. It
or a CT myelogram (Hara et al., 1994). For more infor-
 may need to be combined with stabilization for caudal
mation on performing and interpreting CT images in disc
 disc extrusions. Dorsal or dorsolateral decompression
disease, see Chapter 4, page 55-57. MRI may be better
 may be required in extrusions that cannot be reached
than CT, particularly when the disc material is not miner-
via ventral slot or if there is doubt about the diagnosis.
alized, but scan times are usually longer and the cost is
higher (Levitski et al., 1999) (4.42, 4.44A, 7.3B)
Fenestration (7.30-7.36)
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Although the value and desirability of fenestration has
Treatment may be non-surgical or surgical.
been questioned (Fingeroth, 1989), it should prevent
further extrusion of disc material into the vertebral canal
Non-surgical treatment
and so reduce the recurrence rate (Russell and Griffiths,
 This entails cage rest and use of anti-inflammatory medi-
1968). It also appears effective for dogs with discogenic
cations. It can be tried in any patient unless marked
pain (Morgan et al., 1993 (Algorithm 7.1)). It is usual to
fenestrate the discs from C2/3 to C5/6 inclusive; C6/7
neurological deficits are present. Either non-steroidal
is fenestrated if there is evidence of disease. Advantages
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), low-dose pred-
nisolone, or narcotics may be used, sometimes com-
and disadvantages of fenestration compared to ventral
 slot decompression are shown in Table 7.l. Fenestration
bined with diazepam or methocarbamol (Tables 15.1,
15.2). Acupuncture may also be of benefit (Janssens,
is only recommended as a primary procedure for dogs
1985). The catastrophic worsening of neurological sta-
with discogenic pain and as a prophylactic procedure in
tus that can occur with medical treatment of thoraco-
combination with ventral decompression. In small breed
 dogs that develop signs suggestive of Wobbler syn-
lumbar discs is rare with cervical disc disease. However,
the neck pain in cervical disc disease seems to be less
drome', fenestration is probably contraindicated as it
responsive to non-surgical treatment than does the pain
 may exacerbate bulging of the dorsal anulus (7.15A).
from thoracolumbar disc disease. Progression of signs or
lack of response in 1-2 weeks indicates treatment fail-
ure. A dog that is responding well to non-surgical treat-
Ventral decompression (7.37-7.52)
 i r  e     
General indications for decompression include:
after clinical signs have resolved. Recurrence of clinical
· Presence of neurological deficits.
signs after non-surgical treatment has been reported
● Spinal cord compression on neuroimaging.
in over 30% of patients (Russell and Griffiths, 1968;
· Failure of fenestration.
 Janssens, 1985). The role of chemonucleolysis is unclear
 Removal of disc material by ventral slot decompres-
and cervical discs must first be exposed surgically if this
 sion provides the most rapid resolution of clinical signs
procedure is planned (Atilola et al., 1993).
and it is therefore the treatment of choice. Accurate
Cervical disc disease
97
Neuroimaging
No spinal cord
Traction
compression 
responsive
Traction
(small dogs*)
ron-responsive
Reassess
diagnosis
Single
Multiple
lésions
lésions
Fenestrate
Cranial discs
Caudal discs
for
C2/3 to C3/4
C4/5 to C6/7
discogenic
Dorsal
pain
laminectomy
C7/T1or very
lateral extrusion
ventral
ventral slot and
 Distraction
1015
stabilize if width 
(7.55)
%05 01 a50p
Dorsolateral
hemilaminectomy
laminectomy
or dorsal
*less than 10 kg body weight
 Algorithm 7.1 Surgical decision-making in cervical disc disease.
 Postoperative fusion occurs in a proportion of dogs 
Table 7.1 Comparison of ventral fenestration and slot
following ventral decompression but how well may
Fenestration  Slot 
depend on the width of the slot (ll.l2); narrow slots
are less likely to fuse than wide slots {Gilpin, 1976;
Technically
Easy
Difficult 
Seim and Prata, 1982). If osseous fusion does occur
across the slot it can then predispose even small breed
 Accurate identification 
Not required
 Required
dogs to domino lesions, although probably to a lesser
of disc involved
degree than it does in large-breed dogs [Prata and Stoll,
 Special equipment
No
Yes
1973; Bagley et al., 1993) (7.14)
required
 Potential for iatrogenic
Unlikely 
 Possible 
Ventral decompression and
 damage
fixation (7.53-7.55)
Postoperative instability or subluxation are important
 Removal of disc material  No
Yes
potential complications that can be prevented by
from vertebral canal
fixation of the interspace at the time of ventral decom-
 Resolution of neck pain
 Slow in 
 Usually within 
pression {Fitch et al., 2000; Lemarie et al., 2000).
 many dogs 
 a few days 
Fixation is not usually necessary for cranial disc lesions
(C2/3 and C3/4) but should be considered for caudal
lesions (C4/5-C6/7) when the slot width is nearing
50% of the vertebral body width (Lemarie et al., 2000)
identification of the disc involved is an obvious prerequi-
(7.10, 7.l6). Fixation is probably not necessary for
site. The width of the slot should be about one third the
caudal lesions if the slot dimensions are less than 50%
width of the vertebral body and certainly no more than
of the vertebral body width. When subluxation does
50% (7.10, 7.l6). These parameters are especially
occurf
following ventral decompression the rescue
important for the C4/5 to C6/7 discs inclusive (Fitch
technique of choice is distraction-stabilization. Several
et al., 2000; Lemarie et al., 2000). The inverted cone
methods can be used for fixation after ventral slot
technique can be used to improve access while minimiz-
[see also pages 118, 220). Cement plugs are very diffi-
ing any potential instability (Goring et al., 1991) (7.50).
cult to use in small dogs (7.13, 7.54). Bone autografts
98
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
from the ilium are effective but necessitate two surgi-
 Occur if the intervertebral space is explored recklessly.
cal approaches (Prata and Stoll, 1973). A more recent 
Other technical errors can occur during fenestration,
study preferred a bone allograft block placed in the
ventral decompression (7.7, 7.8), or implant placement
interspace without use of additional implants (Lemarie
(Box 7.3).
et al., 2000). Autografts give better radiographic fusion
 Hemorrhage can be problematical at various stages.
than allografts but other factors such as graft site
 Dorsal laminectomy can damage vessels in the epidural
morbidity also affect final outcome in humans (Floyd
 space, especially at the level of a foramen {Hurov,
and Ohnmeiss, 2000). Whatever method is used, bony
1979) (7.59, 11.51, 11.52). During a ventral approach
fusion should be encouraged so that long-term fixation
the longus colli muscles tend to bleed when removed
does not depend solely on the implant(s). The progno-
sis is good for dogs that subluxate after a ventral
slot provided that the site can be stabilized {Lemarie
et al., 2000).
In general, adherence to the recommendation to
limit the width of the slot to near 33% is preferable to
 managing potential or subsequent complications.
Dorsal decompression (7.56-7.59)
C4
Dorsal laminectomy is much easier technically in small
dogs than large dogs and short-term morbidity is less of
a problem (Gill et al., 1996; De Risio et al., 2002).
5
Dorsal laminectomy has been proposed as an alterna-
tive to ventral decompression for small dogs but ventral
slot has the advantage of permitting removal of disc
material (Gill et al., 1996; Fitch et al., 2000). Dorsal
7.7 This dog presented with neck pain and no neurological
laminectomy is therefore best reserved for lesions at
C4/5 space. A ventral slot was performed with fenestration
C7/Tl, where there is doubt regarding the diagnosis, or
between C2/3 and C6/7 inclusive. There was considerable
for dogs with multiple lesions (7.15, 7.59).
hemorrhage from the vertebral venous plexus and no disc
Hemilaminectomy can be performed in the cervical
material was retrieved from the vertebral canal. It was assumed
region using a lateral approach but a dorsolateral
that the response would be at least equivalent to a fenestration;
re-examination was scheduled in 2 weeks.
approach is easier (Lipsitz and Bailey, 1995) (7.56-7.58,
12.15-12.29). Hemilaminectomy is indicated where
disc material is situated too laterally to access via ventral
slot, for some lesions at C7/Tl (7.56), or if there
is doubt about the diagnosis (Seim and Prata, 1982).
Intraforaminal extrusions approached in this way or
laterally (Lipsity & Bailey, 1995) may occasionally be
accessible without entering the vertebral canal (Prata
and Stoll, 1973; Felts and Prata, 1983) (7.6).
COMPLICATIONS
Intraoperative
The ventral surgical approach itself has few complica-
7.8 wo weeks after surgery the dog was tetraparetic and
tions unless the surgeon does not identify the midline
unable to stand. The ventral slot had been performed at the
correctly and damages the vertebral artery. It is also pos-
correct interspace; the cranial margin is just visible in the
sible to damage vital structures such as the recurrent
laryngeal nerve (7.25, 7.54); the esophagus can be per-
spinal cord compression is now worse than before. The slot
forated if mistaken for the longus colli muscle and
was re-explored; it was noted to have been dlirected to one
sidle. The slot was redirected to the midline and a large
pleura or other vital structures may be damaged at the
level of the thoracic inlet (Funkquist and Svalastoga,
amount of dlisc material was removed; hemorrhage was
xiem ol alqe sem pue Aaooan poon e apeu bop aul jeuuu
1979). Spinal cord damage during fenestration can
2weekslater.
Cervical disc disease
66
from their insertion on the ventral process. Muscle
Early postoperative
dissection should be restricted to the midline to avoid
These relate mainly to continued pain; neurological
bleeding from the vertebral artery or its branches. The
deterioration (7.8); or respiratory complications (Box
vertebral arteries may also be damaged during removal
7.4). After fenestration neck pain can persist in a sig-
of lateral or foraminal disc material from either a ven-
 nificant number of dogs and may take 1-2 months to
tral or a lateral approach (Felts and Prata, 1983) (7.6).
resolve completely (Denny, 1978) (see ‘Prognosis',
-uon aq uo sup sunp auoq a oy supaa
page 102). Neurological deterioration after fenestra-
trolled with bone wax. The vertebral venous plexus
tion can also occur, probably when incorrect fenestra-
(7.43, 7.44, 1l.29B) is damaged easily and hemor-
tion technique leads to disc material being forced into
rhage can be so severe that it is impossible to continue
the vertebral canal (Tomlinson, 1985).
to explore the vertebral canal (7.7); it may occasionally
After ventral slot decompression neck pain should
even be fatal (Clark, 1986). Severe hemorrhage may
improve within a few days. Moderate or severe pain
occur in as many as one quarter of dogs undergoing
J %sg ot dn u Aiams iae saep  pahiodau uaaq se
ventral slot, even without pre-existing coagulopathy
dogs although this could have been due to excessive
(Smith et al., 1997). Concurrent use of aspirin or the
slot width in some of these dogs (Fitch et al., 2000).
presence of any coagulopathy increases the risk (15.2).
 Persistence of severe pain beyond 72h, or progressive
Steps recommended in case of severe venous plexus
neurological deficits, warrant repeat imaging (Seim and
hemorrhage are outlined in Table 7.2. Venous plexus
hemorrhage can lead on rare occasions to complications
 Box 7.4 Early postoperative complications
in the early postoperative period. Two dogs that had
venous plexus hemorrhage during ventral decompres-
 Residual or increased compression at the site (7.8)
sion developed acute, progressive tetraparesis within
■ Residual material within a foramen
12h. Both had large blood clots compressing the spinal
 Subluxation or instability at the surgical site (7.10, 7.16, 7.52)
cord but recovered well after evacuation combined
■ Extradural hematoma 
with hemostasis using thrombin (Seim and Prata,
 Implant complications (7.13, 7.54)
1982) (Table 7.2).
■ New extrusion at another site 
■ Hyperflexion injury
Dyspnea (7.12)
Box 7.3 Intraoperative complications
■ Infection or sepsis 
■ latrogenic injury
■ Vascular decompensation of spinal cord
■ Cardliopulmonary arrest 
 Hypoventilation (6.1, 7.11)
■ Implant complications 
 Edema (7.12)
Hemorrhage (7.7)
■ Seroma or hematoma of wound 
■ Disc extrusion due to fenestration
■ Hormer's syndrome
■ ventral slot too wide (7.16)
 Megaesophagus
■ Surgery performed at the wrong site
 Laryngeal paralysis 
■ Redistribution of disc material
 Aspiration
 Inacequate decompression (7.8)
■ Pneumonia
 Table 7.2 Hemorrhage from vertebral venous plexus 
Preoperative
Intraoperative
Postoperative
Evaluate for coagulopathy
Place finger over the slot if severe
Check for neurclogical deterioration
Cross-match for high-risk patients
Relieve retraction pressure on jugular veins
Plug slot with macerated muscle tissue 
Pack slot with Gelfoam 
Occlude plexus with direct pressure (11.29B)
Avoid long-term continuous suction of hemorrhage
Increase fluid rate, consider plasma or blood product
100
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
R
R
7.10 Ventrodorsal radiograph of a dog where subluxation had
cccurred following a very wide ventral slot (59%). The dog had
severe neck pain for a week after surgery which prompted
attempted but the dog died (7.16, 7.52).
7.9 Resicual dlisc material does not always cause persistent
et al., 1999; Wolf and Roe, personal communication),
pain. A: Preoperative 3D reconstruction of the CT myelogram
Subluxation leads to severe pain or marked deteriora-
  j s a e i aa   
on the left sidle of the floor of the vertebral canal. B: 3D
tion in neurological status due to nerve root, meningeal
or spinal cord compression (7.10, 7.16, 7.52). Signs
slot has been performed but removal of disc material was
 associated with this usually occur within a week of sur-
suboptimal. Despite this, the dog was almost pain free the day
 gery but can be delayed for up to 3 months (Lemarie
after surgery and was normal within a few days. The slot width
et al., 2000). If subluxation does occur, the lesion should
in this dog is approximately 38%.
be managed by distraction-stabilization, as for a trau-
matic fracture or subluxation. It is likely that instability
Prata, 1982; Smith et al., 1997). This may mean that
 is under-recognized as a cause of continued pain after
some dogs are imaged unnecessarily (7.9) but will also  surgery (Macy et al., 1999; Fitch et al., 2000, Lemarie
identify quickly any dogs that need further surgery.
et al.,2000).
Potential causes of severe postoperative pain are 
 Infection at the surgical site may cause either inci-
shown in Box 7.4. One common cause is when some of  sional drainage or systemic signs (Chambers et al., 1982;
the disc material has simply been moved to a new loca-
Fry et al., 199l; Lipsitz and Bailey, 1995). It can occur
tion during attempts at retrieval, which sets up a new
 following dorsal or ventral decompression, especially
area of irritation. A poorly executed slot is actually no
if the dog becormes bacteremic for any reason (see page
better than a fenestration and can be worse (Chambers
 84). Discospondylitis (14.1l) or even epidural abscessa-
et al., 1986) (4.25, 7.8, 11.21).
tion (14.14) may also develop.
Vertebral instability is another important cause of
 Respiratory arrest during or after surgery has been
persistent pain after surgery and can occur if the slot  reported in several studies (Clark, 1986; Waters, 1989;
is made too wide (Seim and Prata, 1982). Range of  Smith et al., 1997; Beal et al., 200l). This can be due to
motion increases in cadaver spines by 30-40% after either cardiopulmonary or neurological abnormalities
fenestration and by 66% after a ventral slot, even if  (see Chapter 6, page 82). Some dogs develop more
the slot is only one third of the vertebral width (Macy severe neurological deficits following surgery so that
Cervical disc disease
101
7.11 Some dogs only need to be ventilated for a day or two
weaned off mechanical support (Beal et al., 2001) (6.1).
B
7.13 Nine-year-old pug with chronic tetraparesis localizing to
C6-T2 spinal cord. A: There is severe spinal cord compression
at C5/6 and C6/7, which was redluced partially by traction.
Cement plugs were placed at C5/6 and C6/7 using anchor
holes in the end plates and the dog was put in a splint
(Dixon et al., 1996) (11.39). B: It developed severe neck pain
 5 days later; neurological status was unchanged. A myelogram
showed the lesion at C6/7 had improved but C5/6 was worse.
7.12 This dog shows profound swelling 2 days after a ventral
into the canal during plug placement, or the distraction had
slot; the base of the tongue was also affected. It caused this
failedl. There was no evidence of cement in the canal. The dog
auos ui eaudshp lo ejbeudsAo asneo ueo inq sualgoud ou bop
was euthanized; no necropsy was performed.
j0 Algissod au1 (9g aed aas) (66h */e e wean) pateu
infection should be investigated.
complications include trauma during recovery (ll.22);
megaesophagus (
(15.40)  and Horner's syndrome
they are unable to breathe spontaneously. In these ani-
(Boydell, 1995); seizures after myelography; urinary
mals the only option is to put them on a mechanical
tract infection; diarrhea and sepsis (Fry et al., 1991).
ventilator. Ventilation should be considered once the
Any dog that has undergone ventral decompres-
 paCO2 exceeds 50 mmHg and the dog should either be 
 sion in the past, or that has congenitally fused vertebrae,
ventilated or euthanized on humane grounds if the
could go on to develop a domino lesion. The incidence
paCO2 is greater than 70 mmHg (7.11).
 Swelling or edema in the ventral neck can also cause
occur (Prata and Stll, 1973; Bagley et al., 1996) (7.14).
problems after surgery (Fry et al., l99l; Smith et al.,
 The overall risks of serious complications or mor-
1997) (7.12). Care with hemostasis and wound closure
tality with cervical surgery are higher than in thoraco-
helps to avoid this. Seroma is a particular risk after dor-
sal decompression (15.34).
that are unable to walk prior to surgery, especially those
Technical problems may occur when trying to place
with pre-existing disease. Nine of 37 such dogs [25%)
implants in small dogs (7.13, 7.54). Other potential
in one study died or were euthanized. Causes of death
102
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
7.14 A: Eight-year-oldl Silky terrier
(5 kg) with a dlisc extrusion at C5/6.
A ventral slot was performed and
the dog macde a gocd recovery.
B: Eighteen months later the dog 
showed recurrence of neck pain, root
signature, mild tetraparesis and ataxia.
A repeat myelogram revealed no
residual compression at C5/6 but
extrusion of clisc material at C4/5 and
C6/7. Note the fusion at C5/6 (7.53,
7.54)
A
B
included cardiac arrest, pulmonary thromboembolism  and strict attention to bedding and cleanliness is
and respiratory dysfunction (Waters, 1989). Recumbent 
trequired (see Chapter 15).
dogs are also at high risk of developing pneumonia, as
are those that develop laryngeal paralysis (Prata and
Stoll, 1973; Lemarie et al., 2000) (see Chapter 15).
PROGNOSIS
Three of 52 dogs in another study died after ventral
 Resolution of clinical signs may be slow after fenestra-
decompression for cervical disc herniation: one from
 tion. Of 12 dogs with neck pain, six recovered rapidly
uncontrollable venous plexus hemorrhage and two
 but five continued to have intermittent pain for 1-4
from acute bradycardia and hypotension (Clark, 1986).
weeks. Of a further 16 dogs with thoracic limb paresis,
Two of these dogs presented with only neck pain.
12 (75%) recovered in an average of 3-8 weeks. Of
 Dysrhythmias are common during cervical disc surgery.
nine with severe deficits (tetraparesis or tetraplegia),
They were reported in 15 of 48 dogs (31%), two of
five (56%) recovered in 1-6 weeks (Denny, 1978).
which died, emphasizing the importance of good anes-
 Fenestration has been compared to ventral slot decom-
thetic monitoring (Stauffer et al., 1988). Hypotension
pression in lll dogs that were able to walk prior to
is also common during ventral decompression and may
influence outcome (Griffiths, 1973; Cybulski, 1988;
 other than simple incisional swelling, were more com-
Smith et al., 1997) (see page 86).
 mon after ventral decompression (30% vs 12%), resulting
 In summary, a high index of suspicion for complica-
 in longer hospital stays (7.12). However, neurological
 tions must be maintained if the surgery does not go as
 recovery was slower following fenestration. Fenestrated
planned, if the response to surgery is poor and certainly
 dogs were three times more likely to have static signs
if the animal's neurological status worsens after surgery
 at discharge and twice as likely to be unchanged at their
(7.7). In such cases, repeat imaging is strongly recom-
last hospital visit (Fry et al., 1991). Ventral slot decom-
mended (7.7-7.9).
 pression gives much better results overall (Table 7.3).
This is probably because even dogs with no neuro-
logical deficits usually have substantial amounts of
POSTOPERATIVE CARE (see Chapter 15)
disc material in the vertebral canal.
Most patients should be much less painful within a day
The prognosis for dogs with pain or moderate
or two of ventral slot surgery. Two weeks of restricted
 neurological deficits is usually good after a ventral slot
exercise should be enforced, even if improvement has 
 (Table 7.3). The prognosis for dogs that cannot walk is
been marked. Leash exercise for urination and defeca-
 more guarded. Complete recoveries are reported in
tion is allowed, but a harness should be used rather
 55-60% of such dogs, a further 15-20% recover with
than a collar. If discomfort persists, anti-inflammatory
 residual deficits and 20-25% die or are euthanized.
drugs may be needed (Table 15.2) along with
 Dogs that do not walk within 2 weeks are likely to
 diazepam, methocarbamol, ultrasound (15.13B), laser 
continue to have residual deficits (Waters, 1989; Smith
(15.14A), or acupuncture. Severe pain beyond 48h et al., 1997). Others have reported better recovery
warrants repeat imaging (see 'Complications', page 99).  rates for severely affected dogs (Seim and Prata, 1982).
 Dogs with preoperative neurological deficits benefit
 The outcome after ventral slot decompression in
from physiotherapy once the pain has subsided. Large- small-breed dogs appears to be better for dogs with
breed dogs are prone to problems related to recumbency,
/, cranial cervical lesions (C2/3 or C3/4) than for those
Cervical disc disease
103
 Table 7.3 Results of ventral slot decompression for cervical disc
Neurological
No. of
 No. recovered*
No. recovered*
No. recovered*
No. recovered*
 status
sbop
by 2 days (%)
by 7 days (%)
by 28 days (%)
by 365 days (%)
No recovery
Pain +/- RS1
33
16 (48)
24 (73)
30 (91)
33 (100)
 Can walk1
14
6 (43)
10 (71)
12 (86)
14 (100) 
 Can not walk1.2
18
5 (28)
10 (56)
14 (78)
15 (83)
3 (17)
1Seim and Prata (1982); 2vaters [1989).
*Recoovered defined as no neck pein; ability to walk for dogs unable to walk before surgery.
RS, Root signature.
with caudal cervical lesions (C4/5-C6/7 inclusive)
(Fitch et al., 2000; Lemarie et al., 2000) (7.10, 7.16).
(Waters, 1989; Fitch et al., 2000). Long-term resolu
Subluxation does appear to be a significant risk when a
tion of signs after ventral slot decompression was seen
wide slot is performed for caudal lesions. It is not clear
in 31 of 47 dogs with craniallesions [66%) compared to
if this is also true for small dogs when the slot width
only 10 of 48 with caudal lesions (21%). The poor
is kept to about one third of vertebral body width
outcome for dogs with caudal lesions undergoing a
(Lemarie et al., 2000). If ventral slot decompression is
ventral slot contrasts with the long-term resolution
to be performed in dogs with caudal lesions, the slot
seen in 12 of 15 dogs (80%) that were also stabilized
 proportions should be close to 33% or an inverted cone
and distracted intraoperatively at the ventral slot site
should be considered (Goring et al., 1991). If the width
(Fitch et al., 2000).
of a caudal slot is nearing 50% then the site should also
 One of the main reasons for failure to improve, or for
be stabilized (Lemarie et al., 2000).
recurrence of signs after ventral slot decompression, is
lems have only been reported in dogs with caudal
CERVICAL DISC DISEASE IN CATS
lesions (Seim and Prata, 1982; Wheeler and Sharp,
 a s  o o s  o
1994; Smith et al., 1997; Fitch et al., 2000; Lemarie
the cervical region, but clinical signs related to these
et al., 2000). One factor that increases the risk consid-
lesions are rare (Heavner, 197l; Littlewood et al., 1984;
erably is the width of the slot. In dogs that suffer sub-
Kathmann et al., 2000; Knipe et al., 200l; Munana et al.,
luxation the slot is usually too wide; reported as
2001). The principles of diagnosis and treatment are
39-80% of the vertebral width and a median of 50%
discussed above.
Key issues for future investigation
1. How to manage dogs with multiple extrusions of mineralized disc material (7.15A)? Options include dorsa laminectomy (Gil
et al., 19g6), or several ventral slot(s) with bone graft distraction. For the latter procedure it would help to be able to decide
which lesion(s) is most significant (4.43).
 2. How to deal with multiple, cynamic lesions in small dogs (7.15B)? Options include dorsal laminectomy, fusion using cement 
plugs (but see 7.13), or possibly several ventral slots, each with bone graft or cement wedges (page 118).
3. Wwhat is the maximum recommended width for a slot and what are the risks of instability (7.16)?
ym jojs aul uaum Aessaoau Auo slul s! lo suosal jepneo ylm shop u uoexnl juaaid ol uoiexy aunou loj paau e aaui s 't
is >50% (Lemarie et al., 2000)?
104
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
4
B
7.15 A: Multiple herniations in a Pomeranian with neck pain, mild tetraparesis and a dlisconnected gait (see page 28). Extradural
 ompression is evident from C2/3 to C7/T1 inclusive; several lesions were of mineralized material. Fenestration of these dlisc spaces 
led to recurrence of signs within a year. B: Miniature pinscher with neck pain and thoracic limb root signature. Traction-responsive,
ventral extradural compression is present from C2/3 to C6/7 inclusive.
B
 7.16 A: Ventrodorsal survey radiograph from a 6-year-old Yorkshire terrier that suffered a vertebral subluxation at the site of a
previous ventral slot at C4/5 (arrow). The width of the slot is 55% (same dog as in 7.52). B: Seven-year-old Dachshund with 
neck pain and root signature that was unable to walk after ventral slot at C3/4; slot width is 66%. An external splint was applied;
the dog could walk within 2 weeks.
 5. Are cranial lesions more resistant to subluxation (Lemarie et al., 2000) (7.16B)?
6. Vwhat is the best way to fuse interspaces in small-breed dogs? Options include metal and bone cement (page 118) or bone
allografts combined with ventral slot (Fitch et al., 2ooo). Non-biclogical materials that permit bone in-growth may become
available in the future (Cook et al., 1994; Emery et al., 1996).
REFERENCES
Chambers, J.N., Oliver, J.E., Jr, Komegay, J.N., Malnati, G.A. [1982)
Ventral decompression for caudal cervical disk hermiation in large- and
Atilola, M.A.O., Cockshutt, J.R., McLaughln, R., Cochrane, S.M.,
giant-breed dogs.Journal oftheAmericanVeterinary MedicalAssociation
Pennock, PW. [1993) Collagenase chemonucleolysis—a long term radlio-
180, 410-414.
graphic study in normal dogs. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 34,
Chambers, J.N., Oliver, J.E., Jr, Bjorling, D.E. [1986) Update on ventral
321-324.
decompression for caudal cervical disk hemiation in Doberman Pinschers.
Bagley, R.S., Forrest, L.J., Cauzinille, L, Hopkins, A.L., Komegay, J.N.
Jourmal of theAmericanAnimal Hospital Association 22,775-778.
[1993) Cervical vertebral fusion and concurrent intervertebral disc extru-
Clark, D.M. [1986] An analysis of intraoperative and early postoperative
sion in four dogs. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 34, 336-339.
mortality associated with cervical spinal decompressive surgery in the
Bagley, R.S., Tucker, R., Harrington, M.L. [1996) Lateral and foraminal
dog. Jormal of the American Amimal Hospital Associatiorn 22, 739-744.
Coates, J.R., Dewey, C.W. [1998) Cervical spinal hyperesthesia as a clini-
Practicing Veterinarian 18,795-804.
cal sign of intracranial disease. Compendium on Comtinuing Education for
Beal, M.W., Paglia, D.T., Griffin, G.M., Hughes, D., King, L.G. (2001)
thePracticing Veterinarian 20,1025-1037.
Ventilatory failure, ventilator management, and outcome in dogs with
Cook, S.D., Dalton, J.E., Tan, E.H., Tejeiro, W.V, Young, M.J.,
cervical spinal disorders: 14 cases [1991-1999). Jourmal of the American
Whitecloud, TS. 3rd [1994] ln vivo evaluation of anterior cervical
Veterinary Medical Association 218, I598-1602.
fusions with hydroxylapatite graft material. Spine 19, 1856-1866.
Boydell, P [199S) Hormer's syndr ome following cervical spinal surgery in
Cybulski, G., D'Angelo, C.M. [1988) Neurological deterioration after
the dog. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 36, S10-S12.
laminectomy for spondylotic cervical myeloradliculopathy: the putative
Cervical disc disease
105
role of spinal cord ischaemia. Jourmal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and
Kathmann, I., Cizinauskas, S., Rytz, U., Lang, J., Jaggy, A. [2000) Case
Psychiatry 51, 717-718.
report spontaneous lumbar intervertebral disc protrusion in cats: litera-
Dallman, M.J., Palettas, P, Bojrab, M.J. [1992) Characteristics of dogs
ture review and case presentations. Journal of Feline Medicine and
admitted for treatment of cervical intervertebral disk disease: I05 cases
Surgery 2, 207-212.
[1972-1982]. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Associatiot
Knipe, M.F, Vemau, K.M., Hormof, WJ., LeCouteur, R.A. [2001)
200, 2009-2011.
Intervertebral disc extrusion in six cats.Journal of Feline Medicine and
De Risio, L, Munana, K.R., Murray, M., Olby, NJ., Sharp, N.J.H.
Surgery 3, 161-168.
Cuddon, P (2002)
Dorsallaminectomy
for caudal
cervical
Lemarie, R.J., Kerwin, S.C., Partington, B.P, Hosgood, G. [2000) Vertebral
spondylomyelopathy: postoperative recovery and long-term follow-up in
subluxation following ventral cervical decompression in the dog. Jourmal of
20 dogs. Veterinary Surgery 31, 418-427.
He American Amimal Hospital Assaciatiort 36, 348-358.
Denny, H.R. [1978) The surgical treatment of cevical disc protrusions in
Levitski, R.E., Lipsitz, D., Chauvet, A.E.[(1999) Magnetic resonance imag-
the dog: a review of 40 cases. Jourmal of Small Aimal Practice 19,
ing ofthe cervical spine in 27 dogs. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound
251-257.
1-20
Dixon, B.C., Tomlinson, J.L., Kraus, K.H. [1996) Modified distraction-
Lipsitz, D., Bailey, C.S. [1995) Chnical use of the lateral cervical approach
stabilization technique using an interbody polymethyl methacrylate
for cervical spinal cord and nerve root disease: eight cases. Progress in
plug in dogs with caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy. Jourmal of the
Wterinary Neurology 6, 60-65.
AmericanVeterinary MedicalAssociation 208,61-68.
Littlewood, J.D., Herrtage, M.E., Palmer, A.C. [1984) Intervertebral disc
Emery, S.E., Fuller, D.A., Stevenson, S. [1996] Ceramic anterior spinal
protrusion in a cat.Jourmal ofSmall AmimalPractice 25,119-127.
fusion. Biologic and biomechanical comparison in a canine model Spine
Macy, N.B., Les, C.M., Stover, S.M., Kass, PH. [1999) Effect of disk
21, 2713-2719.
fenestration on sagittal kinematics of the canine CS-C6 intervertebral
Felts, J.F., Prata, R.G. [1983) Cervical disk disease in the dog: intrafora-
space. Veterinary Surgery 28, 171-179.
inal and lateral extrusions. Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital
Morgan, PW., Parent, J., Holmberg, D.L. [1993) Cervical pain secondary
Association 19, 755-760.
to intervertebral disc disease in dogs; radiographic findings and surgical
Fingeroth, J.M. [1989) Fenestration. Pros and cons. Problems in Veterinary
implications. Progress in Veterinary Neurology 4, 76-80.
Medicine 1, 445-466.
Munana, K.R., Oby, N.J., Sharp, N.J.H., Skeen, TM. [2001) Intervertebral
Fitch, R.B., Kerwin, S.C., Hosgood, G. [2000) Caudal cervical interverte-
disk disease in I cats. Jourmal of the American Aimal HospritalAssociatiort
bral disk disease in the small dog: role of distraction and stabilization in
37, 384-389.
ventral slot decompression. Jourmal of the American Arimal Hospital
Olby, N.J., Munana, K.R., Sharp, N.J.H., Flegel, T, Van Camp, S., Berry.
Associatiornt 36, 68-74.
C.R., Thrall, D.G. [1999) A comparison of computed tomography and
Floyd, T, Ohnmeiss, D. [2000) A meta-analysis of autograft versus allo-
myelography in the diagnosis of acute intervertebral disc disease in dogs.
graft in anterior cervical fusion. European Spine Jourmial 9, 398-403.
Jourmal ofVeterinary Intermal Medicine 13, 239.
Fry, TR., Johnson, A.L., Hungerford, L., Toombs, J. [1991) Surgical
Olby, N.J, Mumana, K.R., Sharp, NJ.H, Thrall, D.E. (2000) The
treatment of cervical disc hemiations in armbulatory dogs. Ventral
 computed tomographic appearance of acute thoracolumbar intervertebral
decompression vs. fenestration, Ill cases [1980-1988). Progress i
disc hemiations in dogs. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 41,
Veterinary Neurology 2, 165-173.
396-402.
Funkquist, B., Svalastoga, E. [1979] A simplified surgical approach to the last
 Prata, R.G., Stoll, S.G. [1973) Ventral decompression and fusion for the
two cervical discs of the dog. Jourmal of Small Atimal Practice 20, S93601.
treatment of cervical disc disease in the dog. Jourmal of the American
Gage, E.D. [1975) Incidence of clinical disc disease in the dog. Jourmal of
Amimal Hosprital Association 9, 462-472.
the American Amimal Hospital Association 1l, 167-174.
Russell, S.W, Griffths, R.C. [1968) Recurrence of cervical disc syndrome
Gll,PJ, Lippincoct, C.L,Anderson, S.M. (1996) Dorsal laminecty
in surgically and conservatively treated dogs. Jourial of the Americant
in the treatment of cervical intervertebral disk disease in small dogs: a
Veterinary Medical Associatiorn 153, 1412-1416.
retrospective study of 30 cases. Jourmal of the Americar Amimal
Seim, H.B., Prata, R.G. [1982) Ventral decompression for the treatment
Hospital Association 32, 77-80.
of cervical disk disease in the dog: a review of S4 cases. Jourmal of the
Gilpin, G.N. [1976) Evaluation of three techniques of ventral decompres-
American Animal Hospital Association 18, 233-240.
sion of the cervical spinal cord in the dog. Jourmal of the American
Sether, L.A., Yu, S., Haughton, VM., Fischer, M.E. [1990) Intervertebral
Veterinary Medical Associatior 168, 325-328.
disk: normal age-related changes in MR signalintensity Radiology 177,
Goggin,J.E., Li, A., Franti, C.E. [1970) Canine intervertebral disk disease:
Characterization by age, breed, sex and anatomic site of involvment.
Smith, B.A., Hosgood, G., Kerwin, S.C. [1997) Ventral slot decompres
American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 31, 1687.
sion for cervical intervertebral disc disease in Il2 dogs. Australiat
Goring, R.L., Beale, B.S., Faulkner, R.F. [1991) The inverted cone decom-
Veterinary Practitioner 27, 58-64.
pression technique: a surgical treatment for cervical vertebral instability
Somerville, M.E., Anderson, S.M., Gill, PJ. [200l) Accuracy of localiza
'Wobbler syndrome' in Doberman Pinschers. Part I. Jourial of the
American Amimal Hospital Association 27, 403-409.
radiography in dogs. Joural of the American Amimal Hospital
Griffiths, I.R. [1973) Spinal cord blood flow in dogs: the effect of blood
Associatiot 37, 563-572.
pressure.Jourmalof Neurology,Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 36,914.
Stauffer, J.L., Gleed, R.D., Short, C.E., Erb, H.N., Schukken, Y.H. [1988)
Hara, Y., Tagawa, M., Ejima, H., Orima, H., Fujita, M. [1994) Usefulness
 Cardiac dysrhythmias during anesthesia for cervical decompression in
of computed tomography after myelography for surgery on dogs with
the dog.American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 49, 1143-i146.
cervical intervertebral disc protrusion.Journal ofVeterinary Medical
Thomson, C.E., Komegay, J.N., Stevens, J.B. [1989) Canine intervertebral
Sciemce 56, 791-794.
disc disease: changes in the cerebrospinal fluid Jourmal of Small Amimal
Heavner, J.E. [197l] Intervertebral disc syndrome in the cat.Jourmal of the
Practice 30, 685-688.
American Veterinary Medical Association 159, 425-427.
Tomlinson, J. [198S) Tetraparesis following cervical disk fenestration in
Hurov, L. [1979) Dorsal decompressive cervical laminectomy in the dog:
two dogs.Joural of the American Veterinary Medical Association 187,
surgicalconsiderations and clinical cases.Journalof theAmericanAnimal
76-77.
Hospital Association 15, 301-309.
Waters, D.J. [1989) Nonambulatory tetraparesis secondary to cervical disk
 Janssens, L.A.A. [1985) The treatment of canine cervical disc disease by
disease in the dog.Jourial of the American Amimal Hospital Associatiot
acupuncture: a review of 32 cases. Jourial of Small Arimal Practice 26,
25, 647-653.
203212.
Wheeler, S.J., Sharp, N.J.H. [1994] Small Amimal Spinal Disorders:
 Jerram, R.M., Hart, R.C., Schulz, K.S. [1997) Postoperative management
Diagosis and Surgery, Ist edn. St Louis: Mosby, page 82.
of the canine spinal surgery patient—part I. Compendium on Continuing
Wrigley, R.H., Reuter, R.E. [1984) Canine cervical discography. Veterinary
Education for the Practicing Veterinarian 19, 147-161.
Radiology 25, 274-279.
106
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
PROCEDURES
Approach to the ventral neck (7.17-7.29)
 pasn sl adel pue 'uooap jepneo e ui palind ae sawll ooeou au :beapues e lano papuaxa si auids jeoao au
immobilize the head and thorax (7.17). It is important to have the dog straight to insure that the neck is aligned correctly.
Note that extension of the caudal portion of the neck as shown here will tend to close the dorsal intervertebral space of 
C5/6 and C6/7 spaces. Ventral slot decompression at these sites is easier to perform if the neck is put in a more neutral
Deep anatomy includes the carotid sheaths, recurrent laryngeal nerves and esophagus (7.25-7.27). Careful dissection
effective. Further dissection of the deep fascia reveals the longus colli muscles, which lie ventral to the cervical vertebrae
Blunt-jawed self-retaining retractors (5.8) are used initially to maintain exposure (7.29). The retractors must not interfere
Moist towels or sponges are used to protect the tissues. The longus coli muscles join in the midline and insert on the ventral
process of the vertebra, thus overlying the intervertebral dliscs (7.29). Accurate identification of the intervertebral discs at this
stage is crucial. The ventral process of C5 vertebral body lies in the midline between the cranial borders of the large C6 trans-
verse processes (4.6, 7.37B): the C5/6 intervertebral disc lies immediately behind this ventral process. The ventral process
of C1 is particularly prominent and sharp (7.19): this also can or may be palpated. There is no intervertebral disc at C1/2.
7.17
7.17 Positioning of dog for ventral approach to the
neck. Excessive extension will close the dorsal
disc space; mild traction may be preferable
(11.24A)
7.18 Landmarks are (a) larynx; (b) wing of atlas; and
(c) manubrium of sternum. Incision site is depicted
on the midline.
7.19 Landmarks can be palpated; in this illustration
the surgeon is palpating the wings of the atlas
(left hand) and the prominent transverse
process of C6 (4.6, 7.37B).
7.19
Cervical disc disease
107
7.20 Superficial anatomy— see
also 7.21. The skin and
Superficial fascia have 
been divided to reveal the
sternocephalicus muscles
(a), and stermohyoid
muscles (b). The cervical
vertebrae C1 through C7
 are seen in the
background.
7.20
7.21 The skin and superficial fascia have been
divided. This reveals the sternocephalicus
muscles (a), and the stermohyoid muscles (b).
The sternocephalicus muscles should be divided
to the manubrium, particularly if access to the 
caudal cervical vertebrae is required.
7.21
7.22 The sternohyoid muscles are divided in the
midline. If the median raphe is not apparent, apply
finger pressure to the muscles over the trachea
and the raphe will become visible.
7.22
7.23 Making a small incision in the fascia and then
sihaaid Ainsn Aiunia eose an buoassi
bleeding. The caudal thyroid vein lies in the 
connective tissue with small branches on each
side. This vein should be preserved if possible;
the branches may be cauterized. The trachea is
immediately under the fascia.
7.23
108
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
7.24 Once the sternohyoid muscles have been
divided the trachea is visible. Here the separation
is made with fingers.
7.24
7.25 Close up view of the trachea (a); recurrent
laryngeal nerve (b); and carotid sheath (c). The
approach is between the recurrent laryngeal
nerve (which remains associated with the
trachea) and the carotid sheath at the level
indicated by the arrow. At this stage the
esophagus must be identified or the surgeon
could damage it inadvertently (7.26).
7.25
7.26 There are several layers of loose fascia that must
be penetrated before reaching the longus colli
Yuid sll Aa payuap! s! snbeudosa aul 'saosnu
color compared to the darker red of the longus
colli muscles; differentiation is aided by having an
esophageal stethoscope in place (see 7.27 for
labels). The recurrent laryngeal nerve has been
separated from the trachea. This is for illustration
only and is not done normally.
7.26
7.27 Note the recurrent laryngeal nerve (a),
and the carotid sheath containing the
carotid artery along with the more
prominent, white vagosympathetic
trunk (b). The trachea and esophagus
have been retracted away from the
surgeon; they should be kept together
on the same side of the incision.
7.27
Cervical disc disease
109
7.28 Retraction of the vital structures exposes the
longus colli muscles. The transverse processes of
C6 are large and are directed ventrally; they are
palpated readily as shown here (4.6, 7.37B)
7.28
7.29 Deep anatomy. Note the pattern of
longus colli muscle bellies running
cranially. Once landmarks have been
identified and any fenestrations
completed, pressure on the jugular
veins should be relieved by
substituting smaller Gelpi retractors
over the space of interest if a ventral
slot is to be performed.
7.29
Fenestration (7.30-7.36)
During fenestration it is important not to confuse the ventral process of C2-C5 vertebrae with the transverse processes
processes in the midline, transverse processes laterally on each side) should be identified before proceeding.
7.30 To gain access to the disc, the longus colli
muscles are divided in the midline, immediately
caudal to the ventral process. They may be cut
or division may be achieved with a pair of small,
curved hemostats.
7.30
110
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
7.31 Method of fenestration. The anulus fibrosus is cut
in the form of a window to allow access to the
nucleus pulposus (7.34).
7.31
7.32
7.32 The nuclear material is removed (7.35). It is
important not to push the instrument deeply
through the dorsal anulus fiorosus into the
vertebral canal. Radiographs provide some guide
to the depth of the intervertebral space as long as
magnification is taken into account. The window in
the anulus must be larger than the instrument to
avoid creating a piston effect, which could force
disc material dorsally into the vertebral canal.
7.33 If greater exposure of the disc is required, the
muscle separation is maintained by self-retaining
retractors. The longus colli tendons may also be
cut. The ventral surface of the vertebra (a), and
the ventral anulus fibrosus (b), can be seen. The
vertebra cranial to the disc.
7.33
7.34 Fenestration is done by cutting a hole in the
anulus fibrosus; this should be made as large as
possible to allow complete evacuation of the
nucleus pulposus. A fresh #11 scalpel blade is
used to make the opening, either by making four
cuts in a rectangular pattern in the anulus
fibrosus, or by using a sawing motion in an oval
pattern until the piece of anulus is free. The
surgeon's finger is on the ventral process in this
.34
picture.
Cervical disc disease 
111
7.35 Disc fenestrated. Nucleus pulposus is oozing
from the intervertebral space. The removed piece
of anulus fibrosus lies cranial to the disc space
(arrow). A small curette or blunt instrument is
used to remove the nucleus pulposus by entering
the space, dragging towards the surgeon and
then lifting the material out. This maneuver
7.35
should be repeated until there is a reasonable
certainty that all the nuclear material has been removed. Care must be taken to avoid penetrating the
vertebral canal dorsally (7.32).
7.36
7.36 Sagittal diagram shows that fenestration onily
allows access to disc material in the
intervertebral space. Disc material lying in the
vertebral canal cannot be removed by
fenestration.
Ventral decompression (7.37-7.52)
Sometimes the dorsal longitudinal ligament remains after removal of the anulus fibrosus. The ventral surface (the side
nearest the surgeon) of the ligament is slightly roughened and has longitudinal fibers; the dorsal surface is smooth and
shiny. The identity of any tissue exposed in the vertebral canal must be established before further manipulations or inci-
If hemorrhage from the venous plexus does occur, it may be possible to control it with Gelfoam, direct pressure
(11.29), or a small piece of muscle (Table 7.2). Pressure on the jugular veins should be relieved. wwork should then con-
tinue at the other end of the slot. Suction may be maintained while disc material is being removed, but careful note must
be taken of the amount of blood aspirated. If hemorrhage is severe, the slot is packed and time allowed for it to stop
before re-exploration.
112
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
7.37 A: View of cervical vertebrae showing ventral slot
decompression. The procedure allows access to the
vertebral canal through the vertebral body. Correct
identification of the intended space is crucial (see
Approach', page 106). Where concomitant fenestration 
is to be performed this should be done first in order to
verify landmarks. B: 3D reconstruction of a ventral slot 
(same dog as shown in 7.9) to illustrate the appearance
from a ventral aspect at C5/6. The overall width of this 
sot is 38%. Note the prominent wings of C6
(arrowheads).
.37
A
8
7.38 The site for the ventral slot is prepared by
removing the musculature from the vertebrae on
both sides of the midline. The longus colli
Hemostasis at this stage is important, as 
excessive bleeding will obscure the site of the
sot. Muscle separation is maintained with self-
retaining retractors and tissues are protected
with moist sponges.
Cervical disc disease
113
7.39
7.39 Sagittal section shows that the slot should be
started more in the vertebra cranial to the disc
than the one caudal, because of the angulation
of the disc space relative to the vertebral canal.
This will also allow room for screws or pins to
be placed should the slot collapse or subluxate
(7.10, 7.16, 7.52, 11.21).
7.40
7.40 The slot is commenced in the position described
in 7.39. Initially drilling is only into the cranial
     l 
to reveal purple cancellous bone; the
intervertebral disc is caudal to this. The aim is to
create a slot approximately one third of the width
of the vertebra and one third of its length, with
the disc space at its center once the vertebral
canal is reached (7.39, 7.41). This size of slot
should not result in instability and if kept on midline should avoid the internal vertebral venous plexus
(7.8, 7.43, 7.44).
7.41
7.41 Partially completed slot. Somewhat more
advanced than in the previous illustration.
Hemorrhage from the bone is controlled with
bone wax. It is important to keep the bur
irrigated and the site free of debris. It is useful to
stop drilling periodically to clean the site and to 
assess progress.
7.42 The floor of the slot is shown. It is important to
judge the depth of the slot accurately. Cortical
bone is white and hard (a), in contrast to the dark
h
cancellous bone (b). The cancellous bone is
removed over the whole slot area, using a small
bur. The remaining cortical bone is then thinned
to allow easy removal; it is best to thin the whole
area before entering the vertebral canal (8.36,
10.34). The dorsal anulus fibrosus is visible (c).
7.42
The shape of the opening into the vertebral canal
must take into account the location of the venous
plexus (7.43, 7.44).
114
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
7.43 Latex-infused preparation to demonstrate the
location of vertebral venous plexus on the floor of 
the vertebral canal. The dorsal lamina has been
removed for this view from above the spine. The
discs are represented in orange. Note how the
venous plexus converges in the mid-portion of
the vertebra and diverges over the disc
(1.36, 7.44).
7.43
7.44 This series of CT scans was made after intravenous contrast to
highlight the vertebral venous plexus (arrows). A: Middle of C6
vertebra. B: At the C6/7 disc space. C: Middle of C7. Note how
aoiaauoo ing aoeds osip aui o laal aui e aoiaaip sessaA al
again over the vertebral bodies.
7.44
B
Cervical disc disease 
115
7.45 The dorsal anulus fibrosus is incised on each
side of the slot using a fresh #11 blade. One
incision can be seen uppermost in the picture 
(arrow). The near-side incision is being made.
The incision is then extended to where the
cortical bone has been removed.
7.46 The anulus fibrosus is lifted with a suitable
instrument (in this case, a pointed tartar scraper)
and dissected free. Removal can be facilitated by
preserving a small knub of anulus to grasp with 
fne rongeurs (11.29A)
7.46
7.47 The dorsal anulus has been removed, allowing a
view into the vertebral canal. Here the glossy
dura mater is visible. When extruded disc
material is present, it is wise to remove it from
the midline first to avoid damaging the venous
plexus early in the procedure.
7.47
7.48 The slot is almost complete. The floor of the slot is
excised with fine rongeurs or a small curette after 
bone has been removed and ligamentous tissue
cut with a scalpel. Great patience is required 
when removing herniated disc material;
magnification and additional lighting are preferred
(5.1-5.3). Once all material has been removed,
 the spinal cord willie adjacent to the edges of the 
slot as shown. If the disc is asymmetrically
7.48
positioned, it is possible to shape the base of the
slot to allow more exposure on one side although
this may increase the risk of bleeding (7.50B).
116
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
7.49 Removal of mineralized disc material is generally
straightforward although patience is required. As
in the thoracolumbar region, additional disc
material usually remains in the vertebral canal
unless the dura returns to lie level with the bone.
7.49
7.50
7.50 In small dogs or dogs
withverylarge
extrusions the inverted
cone technique can
improve access to the
vertebral canal A: This
5-year-old Dachshund 
had severe neck pain
A
B
'o e uoisnuxa ahny e sous l aajeadoaid au jo uonusuooan ae aul sisaede nat piw pue
viewed looking caudally. B: 3D reconstruction made from the immediate postoperative CT scan looking
ain oi lapo ui auon pataui e se (peaumoue) apis auo ol pepuaixa ua seu nos aul lo oi Aielueo
removed. The width is approximately 33%.
7.51
7.51 Access to disc material in the vertebral canal via
a ventral slot. A: Sagittal diagram. Note the
starting position of the slot relative to the disc.
B: Inverted preoperative (left) and postoperative
(right) 3D reconstruction of the dog shown in 
7.50. The extrusion at C2/3 is indicated in the
left-hand panel (). The margins of the slot are
outlined in the right-hand panel by arrowheads.
Cervical disc disease 
117
7.52 A: Postoperative radiograph of a
dog that had a subluxation after
ventral slot at C4/5. The width of
the slot was 55% of the vertebral
C6
body (7.16). B: Stabilization was
performed using pins and cement.
 The dog suffered respiratory arrest
7.52
and did not recover from surgery.
B
Ventral decompression with distraction-stabilization (7.53-7.55)
(see also Chapter 11)
Preferred methods of distraction-stabilization use a corticocancellous autograft, allograft (Veterinary Transplant Services,
Seattle, WA), or metal and bone cement (Fitch et al., 2000);: cement plugs are difficult to use in small dogs (7.13, 7.54)
Initial distraction can be accomplished as shown in 11.31-11.34, by K-wires (page 235), or by a rope around the dog's
the slot to maintain distraction (Fitch et al., 20oo). Metal and cement implants may also be used (7.55)
7.53 A: This 8-kg Silky terrier
had undergone a ventral
slot at C5/6 and then
suffered domino lesions at
C4/5 and C6/7 some18
months later (same dog as
7.14). B: Both lesions were
traction-responsive.
7.53
B
7.54 A: Cement plugs at C4/5 and
C6/7 using anchor holes in the
end plates (11.38) with
cancellous grafting from C4 to 
C7 (Dixon et al., 1996). An
T1
external splint was not used. B:
Six-week follow-up shows end-
7.54
 plate fracture at C4/5 and
ventral displacement of the
A
B
'siseed leabuel oluabone! padonap pey ing Ajeouo lam buiop sem bop aul (er'2) // je jueldu!
118
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
7.55
7.55 Miniature pinscher with severe neck pain and left thoracic limb root
signature. A: Preoperative myelogram shows collapse and
mineralized material at C6/7. B: CT myelogram shows mineralized
extrusion or osteophytes within the left foramen also (arrowhead)
using 2.7-mm screws and bone cement following traction on the
maxilla as the cement hardened (compare disc space to A). The
caudal screw is positioned poorly but the dog has shown no
clinical signs for 6 years.
A
L
B
Distraction can be maintained with a small amount of bone cement wedged into a partial ventral slot. The edges of
Jo apim e anosai oi pasn ag osle ueo pouiau sul suauao aul jo abeddls suaaaid oi insuapun ae jois au
subluxated ventral slot, as the main goal here is to prevent excessive collapse or subluxation as seen in 7.10
Gelfoam (Pharmacia, Kalamazoo, Ml) should be used to insulate the spinal cord (page 235 and 239). The cement
wedge should be kept to the ventral half of the interspace.
Cervical disc disease
119
Dorsal hemilaminectomy (7.56-7.58) (see also page 266)
7.56
L
7.56 A: Transverse and B: 3D
reconstruction of a CT
scan from a 12-year-old
Labrador retriever with
paraparesis, worse on the
right side. Neurological
examination revealed a
disconnected thoracic
limb gait (see page 28)
and guarding of the neck.
These findings suggested
A
B
a caudal cervical lesion; a C7/T1 ventral, extradural compression was confirmed by myelography. CT
 scan revealed the mass to be mainly right-sided. Differential diagnoses were a disc, nerve root tumor or
meningioma.
7.57
7.57 A: Preoperative
myelogram and B: 3D
reconstruction of the 
postoperative CT
scan to show the
hemilaminectomy
(arrowheads) used to
access the mass. The gap
between C6 and C7
(arrow) is an artefact of
reconstruction. Head is to
 the right in these images.
凸
B
7.58
7.58 Postoperative A:
Transverse and B: 3D
reconstruction of a CT
scan from the same dog as
shown in 7.56-7.57. The
mass was confirmed to be
a large, fibrous disc 
herniation; about 75% of it 
was removed using a
A
B
combination of scalpel and 
rongeurs. A pocket of gas is visible at the surgical site in A. The extent of the hemilaminectomy is shown
clearly in B. The dog made a rapid recovery.
120
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Dorsal laminectomy (7.59)
The surgical approach is described in Chapter 11 (11.44-11.55). Large veins may be encountered in the dorsal epidural
space, especially close to the intervertebral foramen (Hurov, 1979) (11.51, 11.52).
R
7.59
pain shows left-sided, extradural compression over C7 vertebra.
B: CT myelogram shows mineralized material to the left of the dural
tube over mid-C7 vertebral body. C: Intraoperative photograph shows
mineralized disc material to one side of the dural tube (arrowheads).
 The dura was retracted using stay sutures to improve access.
Fenestration was performed using a ventral approach after the
laminectomy. The dog's neurological status was improved the next day
and it was almost normal 1 month later.
L
B
Thoracolumbar disc disease
Chapter 
8
frequently, usually after middle age. However, disc disease
Clinical signs  121
should not be overlooked in large dogs as they can have
acute, Hansen Type I extrusions as well as Type II lesions
Diagnosis
122
(see pages 12 and 56-58). L1/2 is affected most often in
Radiography   122
large dogs (Cudia and Duval, 1997)
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis 
122
Myelography  122
CT and MR imaging
123
CLINICAL SIGNS
Treatment 
123
 Back pain and neurological deficits in the pelvic limbs
Non-surgical   123
are features of thoracolumbar disc disease; urinary
Decompression (hemilaminectomy,
dysfunction may occur with more severe lesions (see
mini-hemilaminectomy or pediculectomy)
126
 page 31). The back pain is usually less dramatic than
Fenestration without decompression 
127
that associated with cervical disc disease. The dog may
show kyphosis and a reluctance to run or jump; dis-
Complications  127
an iaao uedid q paa aq ensn ue 
Intraoperative complications 
127
thoracolumbar region. Pain without neurological deficits
Early postoperative complications
127
can be misinterpreted as being cervical, orthopedic or
Late postoperative complications
130
abdorminal in origin (Table 2.1, Table 3.6, Box 7.2).
The pain in thoracolumbar disc disease arises because
Postoperative care 132
of combinations of anulus fibrosus and dorsal longitudi-
nal ligament damage with associated meningeal and
Prognosis
132
nerve root irritation. Neurological deficits range from
mild ataxia and paraparesis to paraplegia, which may be
Thoracolumbar disc disease in cats
133
accompanied by depressed or absent nociception cau-
dal to the lesion (Olby et al., 200l) (see Assessing the
Key issues for future investigation   133
severity of the lesion', page 31).
Neurological deficits usually become more severe
References  134
with increasing spinal cord compression (see 'Spinal cord 
nerve fibers and the effect of compression', page 6).
Procedures 1
136
In addition to the mass effect of the disc material, the
Dorsolateral hemilaminectomy 
136
rate at which spinal cord compression occurs is also very
Pediculectomy and mini-hemilaminectomy 
151
Lateral fenestration   154 
important. In extreme cases there may be a combination
of mass effect and impact injury to the spinal cord,
resulting from explosive disc rupture. In the majority of
dogs the deficits are upper motor neuron (UMN) in
Thoracolumbar disc disease is a common disorder in
nature and there may be an associated cutaneous trunci
dogs that affects mainly chondrodystrophoid breeds.
reflex cut-off (see page 24). Approximately 10-15% of
 Peak incidence in these breeds is between 3 and 6 years 
dogs show lower motor neuron (LMN) deficits because
of age. Over 50% of lesions occur at the T12/13 and
of lesions between L3/4 and L6/7 discs inclusive {see
T13/Ll discs and more than 85% occur between
1.5). The most common LMN sign is loss of the patellar
Tll/12 and L2/3 inclusive; disc extrusion occurs occa-
 reflex indicating L5 (range L4 to L6) spinal cord segment
sionally as far cranial as T9/l0 (Wilkens et al., 1996).
involvement, usually due to L3/4 disc herniation.
Non-chondrodystrophoid  breeds  are   affected  less 
 Differential diagnoses are listed in Box 8.1.
122
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Box 8.1  Differential diagnoses for thoracolumbar
disc disease and for back pain
■ Lumbar synovial cyst 
■ Lumbar facet joint pain 
■ Congenital, e.g. arachncid cyst
■ Osteoporotic pathological fracture
 Neoplasia
■ Tumoral calcinosis
■Discospondylitis 
■ Inflammatory CNS disease
A
■ Epidural abscess
■ Polyarthritis 
■ Polymyositis
 Trauma
■ Dural tear
■ Ischemic myelopathy
■ Ischemic neuromyopathy
■ Psoas muscle injury
 Abdominal and pelvic pain due to:
■ Pancreatitis
■ Renal pain
■ Ureteral calculi
■ Gallstones
■ Gastrointestinal parasites
■Kidney worm
■ Prostatic disease
B
 Urethral tumor
8.1  A: Lateral myelogram from a clog with a disc extrusion at
T12/13. There is poor fling of the subarachnoid space over T12
vertebral bocy because of a ventral, extradural mass. Filling can 
often be improved by injecting contrast as the radliograph is
being taken. B: The ventrodorsal view of the same dog reveals
DIAGNOSIS
poor contrast flling of the subarachnoid space over T12 and
Radiography
T13 vertebral bodies. The mass is mainly leff-sided over the
Survey radiographs may indicate if disc disease is pres-
T12/13 space (arrow) (from Olby et al., 2000).
ent but are only 60-70% accurate in identifying the
exact location (Kirberger et al., 1992; Olby et al.,
do show mild abnormalities (Thomson et al., 1989).
1994). Survey radiographs must not be used as the sole
Routine collection and analysis from the CMC insures
means of confirming the diagnosis if decompressive
that the clinician is able to detect meningitis. Analysis
surgery is planned. The main roles of radiography areto
of CSF may show that imaging is unnecessary or that
help rule out differential diagnoses (Box 8.1) and to
myelography is contraindicated and it also provides a
confirm anatomical landmarks (8.19-8.21),
sample for further diagnostic testing should the myelo-
 gram prove to be non-diagnostic.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis
Ideally, CSF should be collected routinely from the
Myelography
cerebello-medullary cistern (CMC) unless fluid can be
Either myelography or advanced imaging should be
 obtained from the lumbar region prior to contrast injec-
 performed for definitive diagnosis. A lumbar injection
tion. CSF taken after myelography is almost impossible
 is preferred for myelography because there is often
to interpret as most contrast agents induce a short-term,
 considerable spinal cord swelling, which tends to cause
sterile meningitis (Widmer et al., 1992) (see page 43).
cervical myelograms to stop cranial to the lesion (see
Analysis of CSF can assist in refining the differential Chapter 4, page 7l). Lateral and ventrodorsal images
diagnosis (Box 8.l) although some dogs with disc disease should be taken (8.1A, B). If it is not clear on which
Thoracolumbar disc disease
123
8.2 A: CT scan from the dog shown
in 8.1. This image, performed prior to
myelography, shows a centrally located,
mineralized mass occupying much of 
the vertebral canal (arrows) (from Olby
et al., 2000). B: Sagittal T2-weighted
MRI through the lumbar region of an
1 1-year-old paraparetic Labrador with
dlisc herniations at T12/13-L3/4; L2/3
and L3/4 have decreased signal intensity
(see 4.43). Note the nutrient arteries
entering L4 (arrow) (Parker, 1973).
4
B
8.3 A: Transverse CT image and B: 3D
reconstruction from dlifferent dogs, each
cemonstrating disc material occupying 
both sides of the vertebral canal
(arrows). These images show why it can
sometimes be hard to judge on which
sicde to perform surgery (Schulz et al..
1998; Grevel and Schwartau, 1997).
A
B
side the disc material is located, oblique views or a CT
 some disc herniations that are only incidental findings
 myelogram should be used.
and that are not responsible for causing clinical signs
(Milette et al., 1999; Olby et al., 2000) (see Chapter 4).
CT and MR imaging
CT is more accurate and usually much faster than myel-
 ography, especially in chondrodystrophoid breeds (Olby 
TREATMENT
et al., 1999). CT is non-invasive as mineralized disc
Many dogs will recover from moderate neurological
material shows clearly without the need for contrast, even
 deficits following either non-surgical or surgical treat-
when it is not visible on survey radiographs. It is usually
ment. Certain generalizations can be made regarding
much easier to decide what side(s) the disc material is
the advantages of each type of therapy. An algorithm
on from a CT than from a myelogram (see Chapter 4,
page 55; 8.2A, 8.3). A heterogenous, hyperattenuating,
for surgical decision-making is shown in Algorithn 8.1.
Patients with marked deficits (see Assessing the
extradural mass with loss of epidural fat are characteris-
Ug um uaas (ie ahed ' Ainlu pios leuds jo Aaass
tic features of mineralized disc extrusions (Olby et al.
of spinal cord injury may benefit from concomitant
2000) (4.37B, 4.40A, 8.3A). Contrast medium may be
 methylprednisolone sodium succinate (MPSS) therapy
necessary if the extruded material is not mineralized
[4.40A, ll.52). CT has become increasingly popular
[see page 83].
with neurologists for diagnosing disc disease in chon-
drodystrophoid breeds and is the modality of choice for
Non-surgical
many. It does not show the extent of spinal cord swelling 
 Strict cage rest is the overriding principle here although
as well as myelography but, conversely, swelling does not 
judicious use of analgesics or anti-inflammatory drugs
degrade the CT image. If a CT is not diagnostic it can
always be followed by a myelogram. Scanners can also
when feasible in order to encourage the animal to rest.
be used to show the exact location and extent of disc
The animal rmust rest quietly in a confined space (trav-
material on a scout image (4.39, 4.44A).
eling cage size) for at least 4 weeks, during which time
 MRI also provides transverse imaging and is superior to
it should only be removed to urinate and defecate.
CT when the disc material is not mineralized (4.42, 4.43,
 A satisfactory response should be followed by a further
8.2B). The increased sensitivity of CT and MRI reveal
2 weeks' rest and a gradual increase in activity between
124
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
 Neurological examination 
Grades 1 or 2
Grades 3 or 4
Grade 5 or 
rapid  
 progression 
First episode
 Persistent or
recurrent
Neuroimaging
 Elective
 Rest and monitor
 neuroimaging
URGENT
ELECTIVE
 Fenestration alone 
 Decompression 
Large dog
 Small dog 
Acute
Chronic
Acute
 Pediculectomy
 Pediculectomy
Decompress in
mini-hemilaminectomy, or
 mini-hemilaminectomy, or 
 the least 
hemilaminectomy and stabilize
hemilaminectomy and stabilize
invasive way
 DO NOT FENESTRATE
 DO NOT FENESTRATE
FENESTRATE
AFFECTED DISC
 AFFECTED DISC?
Algorithm 8.1 Surgical decision-making in thoracolumbar disc disease.
Table 8.1 Results of treatment for thoracolumbar disc disease (See also Table 8.1a)
Treatment as % success (no. of dogs)
 Neurological grade
Conservative4
 Decompression1256,78
 Fenestration?
1—no deficits 
100 (8/8)
97 (29/30)
92 (1/12)
 2—paresis - walking
84 (32/38)
95 (36/38)
93 (40/43)
3paresis - not walking 
84 (32/38)
93 (43/46)
85 (22/26)
4—paraplegia
81 (13/16)
96 (37/39)
88 (1/8)
 5-no deep pain
7 (1/14)
64 (86/135)*
33 (2/6)
1Anderson et a/., 1991; 2Black, 1988; 3 Butewoth and Denny, 1991; 4 Daves and Sharp, 1983; $0by et al, 2003;
Scott and McKee, 1999; 7Sukhiani et al., 1996; 8 Yovich et al., 1994.
*See Table 8.1a.
Thoracolumbar disc disease
125
the 6th and 8th weeks. This is the minimum time needed
but non-surgical treatment is ineffective for dogs with
for an avascular structure like the anulus fibrosus to
grade 5 lesions (Davies and Sharp, 1983).
repair. Activities like jumping should be avoided for
Although a useful initial option for some dogs with
46 months.
grade l or 2 lesions, non-surgical therapy is rarely the
Animals thiat will not rest or are confined inadequately
treatment of choice for dogs with grade 3 lesions or
may fail to respond or get worse. The patient must be
worse, especially if there are no financial constraints. The
evaluated regularly for any deterioration, which indicates
major long-term problem is that over one third of dogs
treatment failure, as does a lack of improvement within
will suffer recurrence (Table 8.2). Another disadvantage
2 weeks.
is that the dog can deteriorate during treatment, possibly
Advantages of non-surgical treatment are minimal
as far as grade 5, often due to poor owner compliance.
expense and equipment-needs. Treatment can be con-
In addition, there is a natural tendency to minimize the
tinued at home, ideally after an initial few days of direct
diagnostic evaluations for a dog to be treated by cage
observation. Overall recovery rates are good for dogs
rest and consequently other causes for the neurological
with grade 1 to 3 deficits (Table 8.1). About 50% of
deficits can be overlooked. Physical therapy must also
paraplegic animals that are also incontinent will recover,
be delayed until the latter part of the treatment period
and recovery of the neurological deficits may be slow
or incomplete. Dogs that suffer recurrences after non-
Table 8.1a Results of hemilaminectomy for dogs with no
surgical treatment may also have more severe deficits
ceep pain (grade 5)—percentage (nos)
compared to dogs suffering recurrences after surgical
therapy (Davies and Sharp, 1983; Dhupa et al., 1999a).
Deep pain checked in all dogs at
57 (38/67)2.3
Ashort course of corticosteroids without cage rest does
follow-up*
not constitute effective non-surgical treatment.A high
71 (48/68)1.4.5
proportion of dogs referred for emergen
Deep pain not checked in all
decompres-
dogs at follow-up
sion have been treated in the preceding days or weeks
using corticosteroids without cage confinement (8.4).
Total grade 5 dogs recovering
64 (86/135)1.2.3.4.5
 Hurmans experience a euphoric effect when on steroids 
and a similar phenomenon may also make dogs more
1Anderson et al., 1991; 20lby et al., 2003; 38cot, 1997; 4Soott and
active (Swinburn et al., 1988; Assimes and Lessard,
MoKee, 1999; 5Yovich et al., 1994.
1999). Unrestrained activity renders the dog susceptible
*An additional 8/67 cogs [12%) regained voluntary motor function
without regaining deep pain (Olby et al, 2003).
to further herniation of disc material and severe neuro-
logical deficits.
 Table 8.2 Recovery times and recurrence rates after treatment for thoracolumbar disc disease
Mean recovery time in weeks
 Neurological grade
Conservative4
 Decompression7 8,9,10
Fenestration?
1—no deficits
8
<2
3
 2—paresis - walking
6
<2
 3—paresis - not walking
6
<2 (25. 6-73)
6-8
4—paraplegia
9-12
1-4 
6-8
 5-no deep pain
N/A
5-10 (59, 77, 36)
10
Recurrence of signs (%) (see 'Prognosis')
344. 406
193.10, 166, 138, 67, 41*
04. 22, 156
1Brisson et al, 2002; 2Butterworth and Denny 1991; 3Cudlea and Duval, 1997; 4 Davies and Sharp, 1983; $ Devis and Brown, 2001; Levine and
Caywood, 1984; 7 0lby et al., 2003; 8 Scott, 1997; 9Scott and McKee, 1999; 10 Yovich et al., 1994.
N/A, not available.
126
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
than after either non-surgical treatment or fenestration
(Table 8.2) and there is less likelihood of residual neuro-
logical deficits (see Prognosis', page 132). Cortico-
steroids provide no overall benefit when used with
 decompressive surgery, except possibly MPsS for dogs
that present within the first 8h of injury (Olby, 1999)
[see page 83). Disadvantages of decompression relate
 mainly to the need for advanced imaging and for special
equipment and expertise (8.1l-8.62). Specific recom-
mendations for decompression include:
 Progressive, persistent, or recurrent clinical signs.
● Evidence of severe spinal cord compression.
● Grade 5 lesions—these should be decompressed 
as soon as possible (see page 132).
8.4 Paraparetic Dachshund given large dloses of corticosteroidls
Concomitant fenestration should be performed at
without confinement. The dog had dliarrhea, its packed cel
the time of the decompression (8.53). Probable excep-
volume (PCV) was 21% and its serum albumin 2.4 g/dll
(normal > 3.0). PCV was 15% the next day and the albumin
tions include chronic disc herniations or extrusions in
1.7 g/dl, presumably secondary to corticosteroid-induced
large-breed dogs because of the destabilizing effect
(Shires et al., 1991) (8.5l, 8.52). As many discs as pos-
The dog required 7 days intensive care prior to laminectomy at
T11/12. One year previously it had been decompressed at
sible should be fenestrated in chondrodystrophoid
T13/L1 and fenestrated from T12/13 to L3/4 inclusive.
breeds, especially the discs between Tll/12 and L2/3
inclusive. Decompression without fenestration can
result in recurrence rates as high as 32% {Levine and
Decompression (hemilaminectomy.
Caywood, 1984; McKee, 1992). Up to 10% of dogs
mini-hemilaminectomy or pediculectomy)
where adjacent discs were not fenestrated routinely at
Although decompression is the treatment of choice for
the time of decompression subsequently require another
dlisc disease it does require good-quality imaging. Imaging
decompression due to a second herniation (Smith et al.
usually identifies the affected interspace but determin-
1997; Dhupa et al., 1999a). The re-operation rate falls
ing which side to decompress can be more problematic.
to 4% when prophylactic fenestration of adjacent discs
Myelography is more reliable than neurological signs,
is performed (Brisson et al., 2002).
but CT or MR imaging are superior (Smith et al., 1997;
● Dorsal laminectomy is not recommended as it has
Schulz et al., 1998; Olby et al., 1999). This is because
 no advantages over hemilaminectomy and causes
spinal cord swelling can confound myelographic inter-
 considerably more biomechanical instability (Smith
 pretation regarding the side of the lesion and because
and Walter, 1988). It may also increase intradiscal
the disc material may actually be on both sides [Schulz
pressure, which could affect recurrence rates
et al., 1998) (8.3). Good surgical technique is needed
adversely {Lin et al., 1978; Shires et al., 1991).
to retrieve as much disc material as possible once the
● Hemilaminectomy gives better access to extruded
spinal cord has been exposed. Any material on the con-
disc material than dorsal laminectomy and also
tralateral side must be removed by probing over or under
makes fenestration easier (McKee, 1992; Muir et al.,
the spinal cord; alternatively bilateral decompression
 1995). Compared to standard hemilaminectomy,
may be needed (8.3). Bilateral hemilaminectomy does
 pediculectomy and mini-hemilaminectomy have
not appear to prejudice the outcome in small dogs
the advantage of preserving the articular processes
despite causing an increase in range of motion or even
(8.57), which is likely to retain stability especially
overt instability (Anderson et al., 199l; Shires et al.,
when the disc is also fenestrated (Shires et al.,
1991; Grevel and Schwartau, 1997; Corse et al., 2002;
1991; Hill et al., 2000; Viguier et al., 2002). The
Viguier et al., 2002). Instability will be worsened by
 decreased bone removal should also reduce surgery
concomitant fenestration (Shires et al., 199l). Preser-
time and overall morbidity (Jeffery, 1988; Lubbe 
vation of facet joints is therefore recommended on at
et al., 1994; McCartney, 1997).
least one side (Yovich et al., 1994).
● Mini-hemilaminectomy removes less bone than a
 Decompression is the treatment of choice for dogs with
standard hemilaminectomy but only gives good
spinal cord compression causing persistent or recurrent
access to the ventral portion of the vertebral canal
grade l signs and for most dogs with neurological
(8.57-8.59). The greater tendency for hemorrhage
deficits. The rate of recovery is faster after decompression
when working around the foramen can also
Thoracolumbar disc disease
127
exacerbate the decreased exposure with
cannot be regarded as the treatrment of choice for dogs
mini-hemilaminectomy.
with marked spinal cord compression. Other potential
·  Pediculectomy also preserves the facet joint and
problems are that improper technique can occasionally
 ps e  a sss sonn
force more disc material into the vertebral canal (8.77)
(8.60-8.61). In contrast to a mini-hemilaminectomy,
and fenestration of chronic discs or in large dogs may
pediculectomy avoids the region of the foramen and
decrease stability (Shires et al., 1991) (8.52)
its vessels. However, it also gives restricted access,
especially as most disc material tends to be
COMPLICATIONS
concentrated over the foramen (8.6lB). To improve
access, one or two pediculectomies can be merged
Complications common to both surgical and non-surgical
with a mini-hemilaminectomy (Biggart, 1988; Lubbe
management include gastrointestinal (GI) ulceration,
et al., 1994; McCartney, 1997) (8.62). This com-
iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism, pancreatitis, pulmon-
bination can then readily be expanded to a standard
ary thromboembolism (PTE), deep vein thrombosis
hemilaminectomy if additional exposure is necessary.
(DVT), decubitus, urine scald, urine retention and
urinary tract infection (UTI) (see Chapters 6 and 15).
Fenestration without decompression
Intraoperative complications
Some surgeons believe that fenestration alone has no
These are listed in Box 8.2. The main problems are
merit as the sole surgical procedure. Decompression is
the preferred treatment for extradural compression
finding the correct disc space and removing all of the
caused by disc disease because even dogs that present
disc material. The problems are discussed below.
with back pain alone usually have significant spinal cord
compression (Sukhiani et al., 1996). There are, however,
Box 8.2 Intraoperative complications
a few situations in which to consider fenestration alone:
·● Presumed discogenic pain.
■ Improper identification of the surgical site (8.6, 8.21)
●Recurrent back pain with minimal spinal cord
 Inability to find disc material (8.6, 8.46, 8.61)
compression.
 Inadequate removal of disc material (8.42, 8.61B)
· Recurrent, mild ataxia and paresis associated with
 Diffuse disc material (8.5, 8.55)
multiple small herniations.
 Adhesion of disc material to the dura (8.51)
When fenestration is not combined with decompres-
 Excessive hemorrhage (8.43)
sion it is done most easily in small dogs using a lateral
■ Hemilaminectomy done on wrong side (8.6, 8.46, 8.61B)
approach. Although relatively straightforward in princi-
 Severe spinal cord swelling (8.49, 8.50, 8.55)
ple, fenestration requires a thorough understanding of
anatomy and, like decompression, should be under-
taken only after careful preparation and practice on
Early postoperative complications
cadavers. It is usual to fenestrate the discs from Tl l/12
 Several factors can account for neurological deteriora-
to L3/4 via the lateral approach (8.63-8.78). The more
(e'g xog) pouad aaeiadonsod Aua aun ui uo
caudal lumbar discs should be fenestrated in dogs with
LMN deficits, taking particular care not to damage the
large ventral branches of the spinal nerves at this level.
Box 8.3 Early postoperative complications
The main advantage of fenestrating the majority
Myelomalacia (8.5)
of high-risk discs is that it reduces recurrence rates
 Self-mutilation
(Table 8.2). There is also no need for special instru-
 Inadequate decompression (8.6)
mentation. In comparison to non-surgical therapy, fen-
■ Scoliosis
estration has the added advantage that physiotherapy
■ Second disc extrusion (8.7)
can be instituted immediately.
 The main disadvantages of fenestration are that
■ Body wall flaccidlity
 Fat graft (or Gelfoam) reaction (8.8)
recovery rates and times are prolonged for dogs with
grade 3 and 4 deficits compared to decompression
■ Pneumothorax
(Butterworth and Denny, 199l; Davies and Brown,
■ Instability
2001) (Tables 8.l, 8.2). Results are much worse than
 Femoral nerve paralysis
decompression for dogs with grade 5 deficits (Table 8.1).
■ Wound infection
Residual neurological deficits are also more common
 Cutaneous fistula
than after decompression. Therefore fenestration alone
128
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
●Progressive myelormalacia (8.5) affects about 10% of
myelomalacia the disc material spreads extensively
dogs that present without nociception (Scott and
along the epidural space, often encircling the dura
McKee, 1999; Olby et al., 2003). Most affected dogs
mater but causing no direct spinal cord compression.
 develop paralysis over less than 12h; occasionally
 It is likely that release of catecholamines and other
 dogs present with grade 4 deficits but then go on to
substances causes severe, progressive vasospasm
develop myelomalacia (Griffiths, 1972). The
(Griffiths, 1972). As soon as clinical signs of this
condition usually develops within 5 days of initial
condition are recognized, euthanasia should be
paralysis, with a range of l-10 days; signs may
 performed on humane grounds as patients usually
therefore only become evident in the postoperative
 progress from hypoventilation to asphyxiation.
period. The condition then progresses over 3-7 days
Occasionally the condition stops progressing before it
(Funkquist, 1962; Olby et al., 2003). Warning signs
kills the dog. Differential diagnoses for progressive
include depression, anorexia, vomiting, hypotension,
myelomalacia include any coagulopathy that could
toxemia, profound hyperesthesia, a cutaneous
cause intradural hemorrhage.
trunci cut-off that moves cranially, progression from
 If little or no disc material is retrieved and the
UMN to LMN deficits and tetraparesis with
animal shows no improvement, then repeat imaging
abdominal breathing. Myelography reveals diffuse
should be considered promptly. It is possible that
contrast medium infiltration into the cord
the wrong site was decormpressed (8.6); more disc
parenchyma (Lu et al., 2002) (14.18). CSF usually
material was hidden on the opposite side of the
 shows very high protein levels even when taken from
spinal cord (Schulz et al., 1998) (8.6); disc material
the CMC. Widespread malacia with epidural and
was missed at surgery (Dhupa et al., 1999a) (8.40,
subarachnoid hemorrhages develop, although these
 8.61B); or that the dog is developing progressive
are not always eviclent at the time of surgery
myelomalacia (8.5, 8.55)
(8.5, 8.50). In most dogs with progressive
 Occasionally a dog willherniate a second disc in
the early postoperative period. This can occur as a
 complication of improper fenestration (8.7) or
from manipulation and loss of muscle tone under
anesthesia.
● Aseptic necrosis of an excessively thick fat graft
can cause deterioration within a few days of
surgery (8.8). Adverse reactions have also been
reported after Gelfoarm (Pharmacia, Kalamazoo,
MI) (Muir et al., 1995; Songer et al., 1990).
●Some dogs will deteriorate after surgery yet none of 
 the above factors are present. Iatrogenic damage to
the spinal cord is rare but can occur either during
8.5 Dorsal laminectomy performed in a dog with clinical
myelography (4.34) or at surgery. Postoperative
deterioration seems to be a particular problem in
hemorrhagic spinal cord (arrow). It is very important to
distinguish this situation from the more common one of focal
dogs with chronic compression (8.51, 8.52). This
malacia shown in 8.50 (see 'Prognosis', page 132).
apparent decormpensation may be related to poor
8.6 This dog ceteriorated affer hemil-
Left
Left
arminectomy the previous clay. Myelography
had icdentified an L2/3 dlisc; the surgeon 
believed that clecompression was from L2
to L4 on the right but no disc material was
cetected. 3D reconstruction of a CT scan
made 24 h after hemilaminectomy revealed
cecompression was actually from L1 to L3.
A: Coronal reconstruction shows material
situated over L2/3 (arrow) at the caudal end
of the cecompression (arrowheacs). The
line shows the level of the transverse image
in B. B: Transverse view looking forwardl to
show the residual compression. A left-sicded
B
mini-hemilaminectomy was performed over
L2/3; the dlog made an excellent recovery.
Thoracolumbar disc disease
129
8.7 Series of four CT scans from a dog
Right
Right
with acute paraparesis. Images in A and
C were madle at presentation; A shows a
dlisc extrusion at T12/13. Images in B
and D were made when the dog lost 
deep pain 36 h after surgery at T12/13;
 D shows a second disc extrusion at 
T11/12. A: Right-sided, extradural clisc 
 material (arrows) at T12/13. Material
was retrieved by right-sided 
hemilaminectomy; fenestration was from
 T12/13 to L3/4 inclusive. Deep pain was 
 present 12h after surgery but was
absent after 36h. B: T12/13 at 36h after
surgery showing the hemilaminectomy
 clefect with no residual cdisc material at 
this site (the increased opacity was a
hematoma).C: T11/12 shown prior to 
A
B
 surgery, made at the same time as the 
image in A. D: T11/12 shown 36h after
Right
Right
surgery, at the same time as the image 
 in B. Mineralized clisc material is now
visible at T11/12 (arrows); this was not
present prior to surgery. A second
hemilaminectomy revealed new material
from a herniation of the T11/12 disc (not 
fenestrated previcusly).
C
A
B
extracural compression over the hemilaminectomy defect. A: Marked ventral ceviation of the clorsal contrast column (arrowheads).
B: Thinning of right contrast column between arrowheads. The fat graft was swollen and edematous (12.10). It was replaced by
Gelfoam (Pharmacia, Kalamazoo, Ml) and the dlog madle a good recovery.
130
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Table 8.3 Outcome for dogs according to size following decompression for thoracolumbar disc disease
Neurological
As % success (total
As % success (total
grade
number]-ALL dogs*
number)-LARGE dogs
 2—paresis, walking 
95 (38) 2.5.7
92 (13) 3
3, 4—not walking, paraplegia
94 (85) 2.5.7
90 (31) 3
 5-no deep pain
64 (135) 1.4.5.6.7
25 (4) 3
1Anderson et al., 1991; 2Back, 1988; 3Cudia and Duval, 1997; 40lby et al., 2003; 5Soott, 1997; 6 Soot and McKee,
1999; 7 yovich et al., 1994.
*Mostly small-breed cdogs.
 perfusion in injured spinal cord segments, a
joints are a logical development for dogs and are in
reperfusion injury, or because dogs with chronic
keeping with the trend towards microdiscectomy in
compression may have only just enough surviving
humans (Hermantin et al., 1999) (8.6, 8.56-8.62).
axons to walk and so cannot afford to lose any more
●Fenestration can decrease stability, which may be
(see page 293, 132) (Blight and Decrescito, 1986;
 of clinical relevance in large-breed dogs or at sites
Cybulski and D'Angelo, 1988; Basso et al., 1996;
of chronic compression (Shires et al., 199l). It
 Jeffery and Blakemore, 1999; Olby et al., 2003).
could also cause collapse of an interspace thereby
 Another potential cause for either early
 increasing compression (McKee, 2000).
deterioration or long-term morbidity is low-grade
· Other potential problems during the early
instability after facet joint removal. Facet removal
 postoperative period include postoperative pain;
has minimal effects on lateral bending but significant
wound discharge (14 of 264 dogs or 5%) (Hosgood,
effects during rotation, especially when it is
1992); UTI (9 of 36 dogs or 26% recovering after
combined with fenestration (Shires et al., 1991;
decompression for grade 5 deficits) (Olby et al.,
Schulz et al., 1996; Viguier et al., 2002). Unilateral
 2003); or self-mutilation of the feet or penis (Olby
facetectomy has no effect on strength in studies of
et al., 2003) (see page 359). Scoliosis or flaccidity
flexion and extension but does cause a significant
shop Jo %OI o4 dn ul pa41odau s Tem Apoq au Jo
undergoing fenestration (Bartels et al., 1983; Black,
adverse effects on a spinal cord that is already
1988) (8.9). Pneumothorax [6 of 127 dogs or 5%)
severely injured (Smith and Walter, 1988). The
Aeu (%e 1o sop /zl Jo t) sisaed aiau reiouay pue 
 biomechanical studies performed to date may not
also occur (Bartels et al., 1983; Sukhiani et al., 1996).
address all types of forces acting on the spine and
These problems are usually transient (8.9), but
have only been done in normal cadavers (Smith
scoliosis can be permanent (Yovich et al., 1994].
and Walter, 1988); the effects of severe disc
degeneration on stability are unknown. In addition,
Late postoperative complications
animals with more severe injuries can probably
The main problems in the late postoperative period are
generate only minimal protection from their
listed in Box 8.4.
paraspinal muscles. These various factors may be
even more important in large-breed dogs, and may
 Restrictive, peridural fibrosis or laminectomy scar is
help to explain their apparent lower recovery rates,
recognized only rarely in dogs (Applewhite et al.,
more frequent residual deficits and longer recovery
Sop e ut Aa aso si aI (g 1andeu aas)6661
times following grade 5 lesions compared to smaller
that has had a previous, wide, dorsal laminectomy;
dogs (Cudia and Duval, 1997; Olby et al., 2003)
if hemilaminectomy was combined with
(Tables 8.2, 8.3). Facet preservation or concomitant
 excessive rermoval of bone dorsally; following
vertebral stabilization are recommended in active,
hermilaminectomy over several interspaces (8.56); or
large-breed dogs (McKee, 2000) (see 'Prognosis',
if there has been a chronic reaction to the material
 page 132). In humans, the more extensive the
placed at the surgery site (Muir et al., 1995).
removal of bone the greater the subsequent
 Infection of an intervertebral space may occur,
morbidity (Eule et al., 1999; Papagelopoulos et al.,
which can be iatrogenic (Funkquist, 1978) (see
1997); therefore surgeries that preserve the facet
'Discospondylitis', page 326, 13.34, 14.14).
Thoracolumbar disc disease
131
Duval, 1997) (see 'Prognosis', page 132). One factor
that may contribute to the residual neurological
 deficits in some dogs is inadequate spinal cord
 decormpression. Postoperative vertebral canal stenosis
can cause development of syringohydromyelia in
humans and may be an overlooked cause of
residual neurological deficits in animals (Perrouin-
Verbe et al., 1998; Fischbein et al., 1999; Bains
et al., 2001).
● Fecal incontinence has been reported in 5 to 39% of
dogs recovering from surgery (Anderson et al., 1991;
Cudia and Duval, 1997; Dhupa et al., 1999a; Olby
et al., 2003). This problem is usually only an
intermittent one. Of 36 dogs with no deep pain that
pe ee) tl Kams iae uodaiou paaaoa
fecal incontinence but the owners only perceived
this to be a problem in three (8%) (Olby et al.,
most of the dogs that suffered from postoperative
 8.9 Mild kyphosis and bocy wall flaccidity (arrowheads) in a
fecal incontinence (31%) (Olby et al., 2003).
Cocker spaniel the day after a right-sided hemilaminectomy
● Recurrent UTI occurs in some dogs recovering from
 and fenestration for intervertebral dlisc dlisease. Signs resolved
gradually over a few days and were assumed to have been due
grade 5 deficits (Olby et al., 2003). This may be due
(saau euids o (sio aau d nui xdnau o
to an underlying problem, such as pyelonephritis or
cystic calculi. However, a more important cause of
recurrent UTI is when a dog recovers the ability to
wallk without recovering continence or nociception
Box 8.4 Late postoperative complications
(also termed spinal reflex walking, see Chapter 6,
■ Peridural fibrosis 
page 87). This problem is almost certainly under-
 Residual neurological deficits
■ Infection
■ Fecal incontinence
already returned and so most dogs are not checked
■ Disc extrusion at a new site
for deep pain once they begin to walk (Wheeler and
Sharp, 1994; Oliver et al., 1997). However, 8 of 19
■ Recurrent UTI
dogs [42%) that never regained deep pain sensation
after surgery still recovered the ability to walk. These
● There may be recurrence of signs, which usually
dogs took between 4 and 18 months (mean 9
occurs between l month and 2 years after surgery
d daap pe au aa pue em o (s
due to late disc herniation at a new space (Dhupa
sensation on re-examination and all suffered from
et al., 1999a) (8.4). Although still controversial, it
incontinence and recurrent UTI. Interestingly,
appears that fenestration reduces the recurrence
despite these problems the owner of each dog was
rate and that the more discs fenestrated, the greater
happy with the outcome. If all dogs that regained
this reduction (Funkquist, 1978; Fingeroth, 1989;
motor function in this study are considered to have
Yovich et al., 1994; Olby et al., 2003 (Table 8.2).
had a successful outcome, then 44 of the 64 dogs
Twelve of 265 dogs suffered recurrences [4%) in
(69%) presenting with grade 5 lesions recovered 
 one study; in 10 out of 12 of these dogs [83%)
overall (Olby et al., 2003). The small population of
recurrence was at an interspace that had not been
dogs that walk without regaining deep pain could
fenestrated at the original surgery (Brisson et al.,
explain the apparent discrepancy in outcome
2002).
between studies that checked all dogs specifically
● Residual neurological deficits, usually mild
for recovery of nociception at long-term follow-up
paraparesis or pelvic limb ataxia, affect about
and studies that used telephone follow-up for
20-25% of dogs presenting with severe deficits
some dogs (Table 8.la). Dogs with recurrent UTI
(McCartney, 1997; Scott, 1997). This rate appears
should therefore be assessed critically for deep
to be higher (39%) for large-breed dogs (Cudia and
pain sensation.
132
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
POSTOPERATIVE CARE (see Chapter 15)
with rapidly progressive signs [Anderson et al., 1991;
Scott and McKee, 1999; Olby et al., 2003). However,
Extended cage rest is not usually necessary although it
may be recommended for large-breed dogs, after bilat-
logic would still dictate that early decompression be a
eral  hemilaminectomy  or  after  decompression  of
high priority when a dog presents with severe deficits.
chronic disc lesions. Postoperative physical therapy
Prognosis has been inferred from the presence of
together with restricted exercise on a leash are indi-
spinal cord liquifaction following a durotomy. However,
cated (see Chapter 15). Corticosteroids are not recom-
euthanasia based on a malacic, toothpaste-like spinal cord
mended other than possibly low-dose prednisone for
 at durotomy almost certainly results in the death of some
dogs that would otherwise have recovered (Olby et al.,
analgesia. By far the most important aspect of postoper-
2003) (8.50). In a study where durotomy was routine
ative care is to insure that the bladder is emptied regu-
 and dogs with malacic cords were euthanized, only 20 of
larly of all urine. Urinary retention is the most common
46 dogs [43%) with grade 5 lesions recovered. If the
postoperative problem in dogs paralyzed due to thora-
16 dogs that were euthanized at surgery are excluded,
columbar disc disease. Such dogs must have regular uri-
the recovery rate for the other 30 dogs becomes 66%
nalysis and may require pharmacological intervention
(see 'Control of urinary function', page 350; Table 15.7).
(Duval et al., 1996). This is more in line with the overall
recovery rate for dogs with grade 5 lesions shown in
Table 8.1. As few as 5-10% of axons surviving within a
PROGNOSIS
lesion appear to allow functional recovery and these
pue z 'I apera uim sop ir suaanxa si sisouaoad au
would be impossible to identify at durotomy (Blight
3 deficits, especially following decompression. Dogs
 and Decrescito, 1986; Basso et al., 1996; Jeffery and
with grade 3 and 4 deficits have a better outcome after
 Blakemore, 1999; Olby et al., 2003). Therefore the sig-
surgery and the response is better after decompression
 mificance of focal malacia, as well as the difference
 than after fenestration alone. Decompression is clearly
 between it and the syndrome of progressive myelomala-
the treatment of choice for dogs with grade 5 lesions,
 cia, should not be determined at surgery. Dogs or cats with
with between 60 and 70% making a functional recovery
extensive malacia should only be euthanized based on
in most studies (Tables 8.1, 8.la). When deep pain was
 either a lack of recovery within 4 weeks or if they develop
assessed using bone clamps or pliers the rate was 62%
 clinical signs of progressive myelomalacia (Salisbury and
(23/37) (Scott and McKee, 1999). Specific evaluation Cook, 1988; Muir et al., 1995; Olby et al., 2003).
of all dogs for recovery of deep pain, rather than the
Recurrence rates of clinical signs once a dog has recov-
ability to walk, also brings the recovery rate close to
 ered from surgery ranged frorm 6-9% (Table 8.2).
60% (Olby et al., 2003) (Table 8.la). Most dogs that
 Confirmed recurrences at a new disc space (8.4, 8.7)
make a functional recovery have regained deep pain
 Occur in 5-8% of dogs but these are probably underesti-
within 2 weeks. However, 19% (8/42) recovered deep
 mates of the overall figure (Muir et al., 1995; Smith et al.,
pain in the 3rd or 4th weeks and so a final assessment
1997; Dhupa et al., 1999a). When a recurrence does
should not be made prior to l month post-surgery
 occur it is often at a site that has not been fenestrated
(Scott and McKee, 1999; Olby et al., 2003). Recovery
(Levine and Caywood, 1984; Muir et al., 1995; Smith
et αl., 1997) (8.4, 8.7). Fenestration is a low-risk proce-
(Olby et al., 2003).
dure that, when combined with decompression, appears
 Studies show conflicting results for both the prognostic
 to lower the recurrence rate. However, this assertion
value of the speed of onset of clinical signs and of spinal
 remains to be proven by randomized, prospective studies;
cord swelling at myelography (Duval et al., 1996; Scott
 the role of fenestration in chronic disc disease also needs
and McKee, 1999; Olby et al., 2003). The prognosis
 to be defined {Levine and Caywood, 1984; McKee,
for dogs with LMN signs was no worse than those with
1992; Lubbe et al., 1994; Yovich et al., 1994; Brisson
UMN signs (Dhupa et al., 1999b; Olby et al., 2003).
et al., 2002; Olby et al., 2003) (8.51, 8.52). Fortunately,
Furthermore, prognosis did not correlate with the dura-
 if dogs do require a second decompression for recurrent
tion of signs prior to surgery. Good results were still
extrusion the prognosis appears to be no worse than after
obtained if surgery was performed within 48 h, or even
the first surgery (Dhupa et al., 1999a).
more than 72h after onset of signs {Anderson et al.
Although the recovery rate for large-breed dogs is
1991; Scott and McKee, 1999; Olby et al., 2003), which
 reported as 91%, this only applies to dogs that present
is in contrast to the recommendations in many standard
with good deep pain (grades 2-4) (Cudia and Duval,
textbooks. Taken together,these data suggest that a delay
1997). Results for dogs with grade 5 lesions seem to be
in decompression of a few hours seems to make little dif-
 much worse. Only 1 of 4 large dogs (25%) with grade 5
ference to outcome, with the possible exception of dogs
 signs recovered compared to 86 of 135 small dogs (64%,
Thoracolumbar disc disease 
133
8.10 Lateral myelogram of a cat with a
disc extrusion causing extradural
compression at T13/L1. The CT image
taken at this interspace following
myelography shows a mineralized,
left-sicded extradural mass (arrows).
A
B
Table 8.3). Recovery times after grade 5 lesions also
complication rate (see page 83). They relieve pain
appear to be prolonged for large-breed dogs, with a mean
 and inflammation but do not lessen spinal cord
of 36 weeks compared to 5-7 weeks for small breeds
injury. Recovery from spinal cord injury takes time;
(Cudia and Duval, 1997; Scott and McKee, 1999; O1by
this should be combined with decompression
et al., 2003) (Table 8.2). Furthermore, of the 41 large-
where indicated.
breed dogs that recovered following decompression,
16 (39%) had residual neurological deficits compared
THORACOLUMBAR DISC
to 20-25% of small-breed dogs (Cudia and Duval, 1997;
DISEASE IN CATS
McCartney, 1997; Scott, 1997) (Table 8.2). In addition,
8 of the 4l large dogs (l9%) that recovered then
Neurological deficits caused by disc disease in cats are
suffered a recurrence of signs, of which 5 becarme par-
more common than was thought previously. Affected
alyzed (Cudia and Duval, 1997). This recurrence rate is
cats tend to be older but often have acute, type I
higher than the rates from most other studies (Table 8.2).
extrusions (8.l0). Cats with neurological deficits
If this trend towards disappointing results is borne out
may not show back pain. Lesions are visible on CT
in subsequent studies of large-breed dogs then results
scan although subarachnoid contrast may be helpful.
might be improved through facet joint preservation
Differential diagnoses to be considered include trauma,
using pediculectomy or mini-hemilaminectomy, pro-
neoplasia (lymphoma), inflammatory CNS disease
vided that all disc material can be removed. An alterna-
(feline infectious peritonitis—FIP) and ischemic neu-
tive is for some form of stabilization to be applied
 romyopathy (see Chapter 14). A diagnosis of feline disc
following a standard hemilaminectomy. In addition, fen-
 disease should only be made after thorough patient eval-
estration should probably not be performed at the
uation and neuroimaging (Knipe et al., 200l; Munana 
affected site as it can compromise stability (Shires et al.,
et al., 200l). The response to surgery appears to be
1991; McKee, 2000).
equivalent to that reported in dogs.
 The most important points relating to prognosis are
that:
· The clinician is able to assess the neurological
 Key issues for future investigation
status of the dog accurately.
1. ls there any clinical acvantage for either small- or 
●Any dog presenting with, or subsequently developing,
2aaoey neinoe aui busaid ui shop paag-abiel
a grade 5 neurological status should undergo
decompression as soon after presentation as possible.
2. Does durotomy provide any additional decompression for
● If deep pain does not return within 4 weeks the
 spinal cord swelling?
 prognosis for full recovery is poor (Olby et al., 2003).
● MPSS produces only minor improvements in
3. Does the long-term prognosis depend on the extent of
 human spinal cord injury and is unlikely to cause
 bone removal after extensive hemilaminectomy?
significant improvements in outcome for dogs or
 4. How effectively do we remove 100% of extruded dlisc
cats (Hurlbert, 2000) (see page 83). It may help
 material and does this affect outcome?
some animals with grade 5 lesions but it must be
combined with surgery.
 5. Should a chronic disc be fenestrated; how do we define
· Other corticosteroids are contraindicated as they
chronic disc'?
 may worsen neurological outcome and increase the
134
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
REFERENCES
intervertebral disc disease and loss of deep pain perception. Vterinary
Surgery 25, 6-12.
Anderson, S.M., Lippincott, C.L., Gill, PJ. [1991) Hemilaminectomy in
Eule, J., Breeze, R., Kindt, G.[1999) Bilateral partial laminectomy: a
dogs without deep pain perception. A retrospective study of 32 cases.
treatment for lumbar spinal stenosis and midine disc hemiation.
Califortia Veterinarian45,24-28.
Surgical Neurology 52, 329-337; discussion 337-338.
Applewhite, A.A., Wilkens, B.E., McDonald, D.E., Radasch, R.M,
Fingeroth, J.M. [1989) Fenestration. Pros and cons. Problems in Veterinary
 Barstad, R.D. [1999) Potential central nervous system complications of
Medicine 1, 445-466.
von Willebrand’s disease. Jourmal of the American Arimal Hospital
Fischbein, N.J., Dillon, WP, Cobbs, C., Weinstein, PR. [1999) The 'presy-
Associatiort 35, 423-429.
rinx’ state: a reversible myelopathic condition that may precede
Assimes, TL., Lessard, M.L. [1999] The use of perioperative cortico-
syringomyelia. American Jourmal of Neuroradiology 20, 7-20.
steroids in craniomaxillofacial surgery Flastic Reconstructive Surgery
Fumkquist, B. [1962) Thoraco-lumbar disk protrusion with severe cord
103, 313-321; quiz 322.
compression in the dog. I: Clinical and pathoanatomical observations
Bagley, R.S., Harrington, M.L., Pluhar, G.E., Keegan, R.D., Greene, S.A.,
with special reference to the role of development of the symptoms of
Moore, M.P, Gavin, PR. [1996) Effect of craniectomy/durotomy alone
motor loss. Acta Veterinaria Scandinatia 3, 256-274.
and in combination with hyperventilation, diuretics, and corticosteroids
Fumkquist, B. [1978) Investigations of the therapeutic and prophylactic
o   u  u ad  
 effects of disc evacuation in cases of thoraco-lumbar hermiated discs in
Veterinary Research 57, I16-119.
dogs. Acta Veterimaria Scandinatica 19, 441-457.
Bains, R.S., Althausen, PL., Gitlin, G.N., Gupta, M.C., Benson, D.R.
Grevel, V, Schwartau, K. [1997) Hemilaminectomy in thoracolumbar disc
[2001) The role of acute decompression and restoration of spinal alignment
disease in the dog. Part 2: Intraoperative findings and surgical results.
in the prevention of post-traumatic syringomyelia: case report and
Kleintierpraxis 42, 173-196.
review of recent literature. Spine 26, E399-402.
Griffiths, I.R. [1972) The extensive myelopathy of intervertebral disc pro-
Bartels, K.E., Creed, J.E., Yturraspe, D.J. [1983) Complications associated
trusions in dogs ['the ascending syndrome'). Jourmal of Small Animal
with the dorsolateral muscle-separating approach forthoracolumbar disk
Practice 13, 425-438.
fenestration in the dog.Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
Henry, A., Tmkel, R., Arbit, E., Ku, A., Lachmann, E. [1997) Tethered
Association 183, 1081-1083.
thoracic cord resulting from spinal cord hemiation. The Archives of
Basso, D.M., Beattie, M.S., Bresmahan, J.C. [1996) Graded histological and
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation78, 530-533.
locomotor outcomes after spinal cord contusion using the NYU weight-
Hermantin, F, Peters, T, Quartararo, L., Kambin, P [1999) A prospective,
drop device versus transection. Experimemtal Neurology 139, 244-256.
randomized study comparing the results of open discectomy with those
Biggart, J.F., IIl [1988) Prevention of laminectomy membrane by free fat
of video-assisted arthroscopic microdiscectomy. The Jourmal of Bone and
grafts afterlaminectomy in dogs with disk hemiations. Veterinary Surgery
Joint Surgery—American volume 81, 958-965.
17, 28-29.
Hill, TP, Lubbe, A.M., Guthrie, A.J. [2000) Lumbar spine stability fol-
Bitetto, WV., Thacher, C. [1987) A modified lateral decompressive tech-
lowing hemilainectomy, peiulectmy,adfeestration.trinary
nique for treatment of canine intervertebral disk disease. Jourmal of the
and Comparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology 13, 165-171.
Amercan Amimal Hospital Assaciation 23, 409-413.
Holmberg, D.L., Palmer, N.C., Vanpelt, D., Willan, A.R. [1990) A com-
Black, A.P [1988) Lateral spinal decompression in the dog; a review of
parison of manual and power-assisted thoracolumbar disc fenestration in
39 cases. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 29, S81-588.
dogs. Veterinary Surgery 19, 323-327.
Blight, A.R., Decrescito, V [1986] Morphometric analysis of experimental
Hosgood, G. [i992) Woumd complications following thoracolumbar
spinal cord injury in the cat: the relation of injury intensity to survival of
laminectomy in the dog: a retrospective study of 264 procedures.
myelinated axons. Neuroscience 19, 321-341.
Journal of the American Animal Hosprital Association 28,47-52.
Braund, K.G., Taylor, TK.F., Ghosh, P, Sherwood, A.A. [1976) Lateral spinal
Hurlbert, R.J. [2000) Methylprednisolone for acute spinal cord injury: an
decompression in the dog. Jourmal of Small Amtimal Practice 17, S83-592.
inappropriate standard of care Jourmal of Neurosurgery 93 [I Suppl], I-7.
Brisson, B.A., Moffat, S.L., Parent, J.M. [2002) Canine intervertebral disc
Jeffery, N.D. [1988) Treatment of acute and chronic thoracolumbar disc
disease; retrospective evaluation of 265 cases: 1995-1999. Veterinary
disease by 'mini hemilaminectomy'. Jourmal of Small Animal Practice
Surgery 31, 500.
29, 611-616.
Butterworth, S.J., Denny, H.R. [1991) Follow-up study of I00 cases with
 Jeffery, N.D., Blakemore, WF. [1999) Spinal cord mnjury in smallanimals 2.
thoracolumbar disc protrusions treated by lateral fenestration. Jourtal of
Current and future options for therapy. Veterinary Record 145, 183-190.
Small Artimal Practice 32, 443-447.
Kirberger, R.M., Roos, C.J., Lubbe, A.M. [1992) The radiological diagnosis
Corse, M.R., Renberg, WC., Fris, E.A. (2002) Biomechanical effects of
of thoracolumbar disc disease in the Dachshund. Veterinary Radiology
multiple hemilaminectomy in the canine lumbar spine. Veterinary Sugery
and Ultrasound 33, 255-261.
31, 500.
Knipe, M.F, Vemau, K.M., Hormof, WJ., LeCouteur, R.A. [2001)
Cudia, S.P, Duval, J.M. [1997) Thoracolumbar intervertebral disk disease
Intervertebral disc extrusion in six cats. Jourmal of Feline Medicine and
in large, nonchondrodystrophic dogs: a retrospective study. Jourmalof the
AmericanAmimal HospitalAssociatiot33,456-460.
Surgery 3, 161-168.
Levine, S.H., Caywood, D.D. [1984) Recurrence of neurological deficits in
Cybulski, G.R., D'Angelo, C.M. [(1988) Neurological deterioration after
dogs treated for thoracolumbar disk disease. Jourmal of the American
laminectomy for spondylotic cervical myeloradiculopathy: the putative
Animal Hospital Association 20, 889-894.
role of spinal cord ischemia. Jourmal of Neurology 51, 717-718.
Lin, H.S., Liu, Y.K., Adams, K.H. [1978) Mechanical response of the lum-
Davies, J.V, Sharp, N.J.H. [1983) A comparison of conservative treatment
bar intervertebral joint umder physiological [complex) loadling. The
and fenestration forthoracolumbarintervertebral disc disease in the dog.
Jourmal of Bone and Joint Surgery—American volume 60, 41-55.
Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 24, 721-729.
Lu, D., Lamb, C.R., Targett, M.P [2002) Results of myelography im seven dogs 
Davis, G.J., Brown, D.C. [2001) Prognostic indicators for time to ambula-
with myelomalacia. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasoumd 43, 326-330.
tion in non-ambulatory dogs with acute thoracolumbar disk extrusions:
Lubbe, A.M., Kirberger, R.M., Verstraete, F.J.M. [1994) Pediculectomy
I15 cases. Veterinary Surgery 30, 491.
for thoracolumbar spinal decompression in the Dachshund. Jourmal of
Dhupa, S., Glickman, N., Waters, D.J., Sarit, D. [1999a) Reoperative neu-
the American Amimal Hospital Association 30, 233-238.
rosurgery in dogs with thoracolumbar disc disease. Veterinary Surgery
Maroon, J.C., Abla, A., Bost, J. [1999) Association between peridural scar
28, 421-428.
and persistent low back pain after lumbar discectomy. Neurological
Dhupa, S., Glickman, N.W, Waters, D.J., Dhupa, S. [1999b) Functional
Research 21, Suppl I, S43-46.
outcome in dogs after surgical treatment of caudal lumbar intervertebral
McCartney, W. [1997) Partial pediculectomy for the treatment of thora-
disk hemiation.Jourmal of the American Animal Hosprital Association 35,
columbar disc disease. Veterinary and Comparative Orthopaedics and
323-331.
Traumatology 10, 117-121.
Duval, J., Dewey, C., Roberts, R., Aron, D. [1996] Spinal cord swelling as
 McKee, M. [2000) Intervertebral disc disease in the dog: 2. Management
a myelographic indicator of prognosis: a retrospective study in dogs with
options. It Practice 22, 458-471.
Thoracolumbar disc disease
135
McKee, W.M. [1992) A comparison of hemilaminectomy [with concomi-
Schulz, K.S., Waldron, D.R., Grant, J.W, Shell, L., Smith, G., Shires, PK.
tant disc fenestration] and dorsal laminectomy for the treatrment of
[1996) Biomechanics of the thoracolumbar vertebral column of dogs
during lateral bending. American Joural of Veterinary Research 57,
Milette, PC., Fontaine, S., Lepanto, L., Cardinal, E., Breton, G. [1999]
1228-1232.
Differentiating lumbar disc protrusions, disc bulges, and discs with nor-
Schulz, K.S., Walker, M., Moon, M., Waldron, D., Slater, M., MeDonald, D.E.
mal contour but abnormal signal intensity. Magnetic resonance imaging
[1998) Correlation of clinical, radiographic, and surgical localization of
with discographic correlations. Spinte 24, 44-53.
intervertebral disc extrusion in small-breed dogs: a prospective study of
Moissonnier, P, Carozzo, C., Meheust, P. [2002) Lateral corpectomy
S0 cases. Veterinary Surgery 27, I05-111.
as a treatment of chronic disc hemiation in I5 dogs. Veterinary Surgery
Scott, H.W. [1997) Hemilaminectomy for the treatment ofthoracolumbar
31, 296.
disc disease in the dog: a follow-up study of 40 cases. Jourmal of Small
Muir, P, Jobmson, K.A., Manley, PA., Dueland, R.T. [1995) Comparison of
Amimal Practice 38, 488-494.
hemilaminectomy and dorsal laminectomy for thoracolurmbar intervertebral
Scott, H.W., McKee, W.M. [1999) Laminectomy for 34 dogs with thora-
disc extrusion in Dachshunds. Jourtal of Small Arimal Practice 36,
colurmbar intervertebral disc disease and loss of deep pain perception.
360-367.
Jourmal ofSmallAmimalPractice 40,417-422.
Munana, K.R., OIby, N.J., Sharp, N.J., Skeen, TM. [2001) Intervertebral
Shires, PK., Waldron, D.R., Hedlund, C.S., Blass, C.E., Massoudi, L.
disk disease in I cats. Jourmal of the American Animal Hospital
(1991) A biomechanical study of rotational instability in unaltered and
Associationt 37, 384-389.
surgically altered canine thoracolumbar vertebral motion units. Progress
Olby, N. [1999) Current concepts in the management of acute spinal cord
Veterinary Neurology2,6-14.
injury. Jourmal of Veterinary Intermal Medicine 13, 399-407.
Smith, G.K., Walter, M.C. [1988) Spinal decompressive procedures and
Olby, N.J., Dyce, J., Houlton, J.E.F. [1994) Correlation of plain radiographic
 dorsal compartment injuries: comparative biomechanical study in canine
and lumbar myelographic findings with surgical findings in
cadavers. American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 49, 266-273.
thoracolumbar lisc disease. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 35, 345-350.
Smith, J.D, Newell, S.M., Budsberg, S.C., Bennett, R.A. [1997]
Oby, N.J., Mumana, KR., Sharp, N.J.H, Flegel, T, Van Camp,
*S
Incidence of contralateral versus ipsilateral neurological signs associated
Berry, C.R., Thrall, D.G. [1999) A comparison of computed tomography
with lateralised Hansen type I disc extrusion. Jourmal of Small Animal
and myelography in the diagnosis of acute intervertebral disc disease in
Practice 38, 495-497.
dogs.JourmalofVeterinary Interal Medicine13,239
Songer, M., Ghosh, L., Spencer, D. [1990) Effects of sodium hyaluronate
Olby, N.J., Mumana, K.R., Sharp, N.J.H., Thrall, D.E. [2000) The computed
 on peridural fibrosis after lumbar laminotomy and discectomy. Spine 15,
tomographic appearance of acute thoracolumbar intervertebral disc hemi-
550-554.
ations in dogs. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 41, 396-402.
Sukhiani, H.R., Parent, J.M., Atilola, M.A.O., Holmberg, D.L. [1996)
Olby, N.J., de Risio, L., Munana, K.R., Wosar, M.A., Skeen, TM.,
Intervertebral disk disease in dogs with signs of back pain alone: 25 cases
Sharp, N.J.H., Keene, B.W. [2001) Development of a functional scoring
(1986-1993). Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
system in dogs with acute spinal cord injuries. American Jourmal of
209, 1275-1279.
Veterinary Research 62, 1624-1628.
Swinbum, C.R., Wakefield, J.M., Newman, S.P, Jones, PW. [1988]
Olby, N.J., Harris, T., Munana, K.R., Skeen, TM., Sharp, N.J.H. [2003)
 Evidence of prednisolone induced mood change ['steroid euphoria’) in
 Long-terrm functional outcome of dogs with severe spinal cord injuries.
patients with chronic obstructive airways disease. British Jourmal of
Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 222, 762-769.
Clinical Pharmacology 26, 709-713.
Oliver, J.E., Lorenz, M.D., Kormegay, J.N. [1997] Handbook of Veterinary
Thomson, C.E., Kormegay, J.N., Stevens, J.B. [1989) Canine intervertebral
Neurology, 3rd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
disc disease: changes in the cerebrospinal fluid. Jourial of Small Amimal
Osterholm, J. [1974) The pathophysiological response to spinal cord injury.
Practice 30, 685-688.
The current status of related research. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 40, S-33.
Trevor, PB., Martin, R.A., Saunders, G.K., Trotter, E.J. [1991) Healing
Papagelopoulos, P, Peterson, H., Ebersold, M., Emmanuel, P, Choudhury, S.,
characteristics of free and pedicle fat grafts after dorsallaminectomy and
Quast, L. [1997) Spinal column deformity and instability after lumbar
durotomy in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 20, 282-290.
or thoracolumbar laminectomy for intraspinal turmors in children and
Viguier, E., Petit-Etienne, G., Magnier, J., Diop, A., Lavaste, F. [2002)
young adults. Spinte 22, 442-451.
Mobility of TI3-Ll after spinal cord decompression procedures in dogs
Parker, A.J. [1973) Distribution of spinal branches of the thoracolurmbar
[an t vitro study). eterinary Surgery 31, 297.
segmental arteries in dogs. American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 34,
Wheeler, S.J., Sharp, N.J.H. [1994] Small Amimal Spinal Disorders:
1351-1353
Diagnosis and Surgery, Ist edn. St Louis: Mosby.
Perrouin-Verbe, B., Lenne-Aurier, K., Robert, R., Auffray-Calvier, E., Richard,
Widmer, W.R., DeNicola, D.B., Blevins, WE., Cook, J.R., Jr, Cantwell, H.D.,
I, Mauduyt de la Greve, I., Mathe, JF. [i998) Post-traumatic
Teclaw, R.F. [1992) Cerebrospinal fluid changes after iopamidol and
sringomyelia andpost-traumatic spinal canal stenosis: adirect relationship:
metrizamide myelography in clinically normal dogs. American Jourmal of
review of 75 patients with a spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord 36, 137-143.
Wterinary Research 53, 396-401.
Ross, J.S., Robertson, J.T, Frederickson, R.C., Petrie, J.L., Obuchowski, N.
Wilkens, B.E., Selcer, R., Adams, W.H., Thomas, W.B. [1996) T9-T10
Modic, M.T, deTribolet, N. [1996) Association between peridural
intervertebral disc hemiation in three dogs. Veterinary and Comparative
scar and recurrent radicular pain after lumbar discectomy: magnetic res-
Orthopaedics andTraumatology9,177-178.
onance evaluation. ADCON-L European Study Group. Neurosurgery
Yovich, J.C., Read, R., Eger, C. [1994) Modified lateral spinal decompres-
38, 855-861; discussion 861-863.
sion in 6l dogs with thoracolumbar disc protrusion.Jourmal of Small
Salisbury, S.K., Cook, J.R., Jr [1988) Recovery of neurological function
ArtimalPractice 35, 3S1-356.
following focal myelomalacia in a cat. Jourmal of the American Animal
Hospital Association 24, 227-230.
136
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
PROCEDURES
Dorsolateral hemilaminectomy (8.11-8.56)
8.11 Completed hemilaminectomy with extruded disc
material in situ.
Ideal prerequisites to perform this procedure are:
Identification of the affected interspace(s).
Knowledge of how disc material is distributed three-
dimensionally across the vertebral canal at the
affected interspace(s).
Adequate exposure of the interspace(s) to be
8.11
decompressed.
 Removal of a minimum of bone in order to access disc material and decompress the spinal cord. In
retrospect, the surgeon could have removed this disc material by mini-hemilaminectomy.
Removal of extruded disc material without traumatizing the spinal cord.
8.12 Incision site for caudal
thoracic and cranial lumbar 
intervertebral spaces. The 
incision can be modified
according to the exact
site of compression.
Mini-hemilaminectomy is
made easier if the dog is 
rotated somewhat more 
to one side than for a
standard hemilaminectomy.
8.12
8.13
 Skin and superficial tissues are incised 1 cm
from midline so that the incision does not rest
over the spinous processes on closure.
Subcutaneous fat is reflected for 1 cm on either
side of midline to facilitate closure. This reveals
the lumbodorsal fascia, which is incised on the
near side of each spinous process over five
vertebrae. A periosteal elevator is then used to
lever muscle away from the near side of each
spinous process. Muscular insertions on the
cranial and caudal ends of each process are
8.13
cut. One process is exposed already (arrow).
Thoracolumbar disc disease
137
8.14 Here a second spinous process has been
exposed (arrow). Electrocautery to cut muscular
insertions on the spinous processes reduces
minor hemorrhage during these superficial stages
of vertebral exposure.
8.14
8.15 A Langenbeck or Senn retractor (5.9) is placed
adjacent to the spinous process and pulled
laterally, and slightly cranially, to facilitate
exposure of the dorsal surface of the articular
facet joint.
8.15
8.16 Continued retraction has exposed the articular
 processes (arrow) with muscles still attached.
While maintaining traction, the muscular
attachments onto the articular facets are cut
ayw) alnsdeo luio! a4l 0l alglssod se asop se
arrows). Bipolar electrocautery is helpful to retard
hemorrhage.
8.16
8.17 The muscular attachments have been severed,
and the isolated articular facets are visible clearly
two facet joints on each side of the site to be
decompressed. Gelpi retractors are placed to
facilitate exposure.
8.17
138
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
8.18 Landmarks must now be
evaluated carefully to 
insure that the final
dissection is done at
the corect location.
Landmarks include the
spinous process of the
anticlinal vertebra (1.20B);:
the difference between the
transverse process of the
first lumbar vertebra 
and the head of the last
8.18
rib (8.19, 8.20); and the
relationship of the spinous process of the sixth lumbar vertebra to the wings of the ilium (4.15).
8.19 3D reconstruction of a CT scan to show that the
caudally directed, proximal portion of the 
thirteenth rib is distinct from the short, somewhat
cranially directed, first lumbar transverse
process. It is crucial that landmarks are
identified accurately prior to further dissection 
(8.6). Vertebral anomalies 0ccur in 10-15% 
of Dachshunds (Jeffery, 1988; Kirberger et at.,
1992) (8.21).
8.19
longer (arrow) than the short transverse process
of the first lumbar vertebra. The tip of the
 transverse process can also be palpated with
an elevator, in distinction to the ribs. The angle
of the last rib and the size of the first transverse
The transverse process is also deeper than the
rib. This dog has a neurovascular bundle running
8.20
over the rib.
Thoracolumbar disc disease
139
8.21 This CT reconstruction is from a dog with an
anomalous rib; the surgeon was misled into
performing the hemilaminectomy at the wrong
interspace. On finding no disc material, the
surgeon rechecked the scout image of the
CT scan and noticed that there was a vestigial
thirteenth rib. This had been misidentified as the 
first lumbar transverse process.
8.21
8.22 Once landmarks are ascertained, a Gelpi
retractor is placed dorsal to the articular facet
on either side of the interspace(s) to be
decompressed. Retractors are positioned between
an interspinous space and the epaxial muscles; a
moistened laparotomy sponge is placed over the
muscle for protection prior to distraction.
8.22
8.23 If the anatomy around the chosen intervertebral
space is not clear, a periosteal elevator and dry
Jo sbet Aeme Lealo ol pasn ag Leo abuods azneb
muscle. This should not be done excessively as
a large area of periosteal irritation could increase 
postoperative pain. Here the sponge has clarified
an accessory process.
8.23
140
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
8.24 There is a long, tendinous attachment of the
longissimus muscle (arrowhead) to the accessory
 process (arrow) of the vertebra just in front of each
disc. There is frequently a small artery located
 dorsal to this process that requires bipolar cautery.
(*) Articular process.
8.24
8.25 Cutting the longissimus tendon (arrowhead)
dose to its insertion on the accessory process
(asterisk) by cutting away from the underlying
spinal artery and nerve. The tendon is exposed
by putting pressure on it with an elevator (arrow).
Tendons are cut over one to three
interspace(s).
8.25
 8.26 The tendinous attachment to the accessory
process has now been cut and the main
branches of the spinal artery, vein and nerve
appear as a common neurovascular bundle
(arrow). (*) Articular process. Saline-soaked
laparotomy sponges are repositioned in such
a way as not to interfere with drilling.
8.26
8.27 Diagram to show the
relationship of the
 accessory process to the
intervertebral foramen,
through which the 
 neurovascular bundle
passes.
8.27
Thoracolumbar disc disease
141
8.28 Rongeurs are used to remove the articular
processes at the site of entry into the vertebral
canal. Rongeurs can be used to perform the
entire hemilaminectomy if desired; adjacent
spinous processes are grasped with bone
clamps, which are then used to lever the two
vertebrae apart. The rongeurs can then be
introduced carefully into the intervertebral
foramen to start bone removal.
8.28
8.29 Relationship of the suction tip (arrow) in the
'gutter' formed between the vertebral body and
the epaxial muscle mass, the tip of the irrigator
 Over the hemilaminectomy site, and the drill itself.
Note how the surgeon is holding the drill,.
steadying the bur guard with the other hand to
resist excessive downward force. One hand
should also rest gently on the dog, taking care 
not to compromise ventilation. The articular
facets have been removed.
8.29
8.30 Bone debris can be irrigated away while drilling
by using a jet of water as shown (arrow).
Altermatively, a slow drip of saline can be used
to cool the bur with periodic flushing of debris.
Here the surgeon has repositioned a finger
lower down the bur guard to improve fine motor
control.
8.30
8.31 Bleeding from cancellous bone is controlled
using bone wax. Note that cancellous bone
is visible over both pedicles but not centrally
over the inner articular facet joint (arrowheads).
The surgeon will not encounter any cancellous
bone at the level of the joint prior to entering the
vertebral canal.
8.31
142
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
8.32 Bone has been removed more extensively,
revealing the gray/pink cancellous bone (arrows)
of the caudal vertebral body. Drilling is advanced
further over the cranial vertebral body, where
cancellous bone has been removed to reveal the
inner cortical bone plate (asterisk). Note the seam
of cortical bone at the facet joint (arrowheads).
8.32
8.33 The inner cortical bone plate of each vertebral
body has been exposed in this dog (arrows).
The next stage is to drill to eggshell thickness
over the entire hemilaminectomy defect.
yi ww L Aaewixodde suawano auy saye uoabins aul auoa jo aed buiulewan al di asoo lp aui buipio
excursion, until the bur is felt to bite and cut away fragments of bone. The softness of the inner plate should be
lauui aul un panuuoo si bullp jo poyia siul 'to lamod aul yl ing aaoud e se ang aul buisn lauo paisal
again note that there is a seam of cortical bone at the level of the articular facet joint that unites the outer and
inner plates with no intervening cancellous bone.
8.34 In this diagram, the surgeon has started drilling for a
mini-hemilaminectomy. The aim should be to perform the least
invasive surgery possible for the distribution of disc material (see
page 126). When feasible, start with a pediculectomy or
mini-hemilaminectomy and either combine the two or extend 
 subsequently to a standard hemilarminectomy if necessary
(8.57, 8.62).
8.34
Thoracolumbar disc disease
143
8.35 Once through the inner cortical plate, the surgeon may want to
palpate the floor of the canal with instruments to clarify exactly how
the defect needs to be enlarged.
8.35
8.36 Here the thinned, inner cortical plate has been
broken. All bone should be removed from
within the defect before starting to remove disc
material. It is easier to drill all remaining bone
away when disc material still covers the spinal
cord rather than once the cord has moved back
to the edges of the defect.
8.36
8.37 Extruded disc is often
mixed with old
hemorrhage; it is still
covered here by
endosteum (arrows).
 The surgeon is using a 
House curette (5.16) to
8.37
clear bone from around 
the entire circumference 
B
of the bone window. All force applied to this instrument is directed away from the spinal cord.
144
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
8.38 A: After all bone has been
removed, a thin
endosteum (arrow) often
remains over the extruded
disc material and dura
(8.37). B: The endosteum
8.38
must be broken down
A
B
before disc material can be
accessed. Dura (arrow) is usually much whiter than endosteum. Endosteum is thinner than dura and
tears easily. 8.44 shows the same dog after decompression.
8.39 Instruments are then used
to tease the extruded disc
material (arrows) away
from the dura mater. The
tough, medial portion of 
joint capsule (arrowhead)
8.39
may tear or, in bigger dogs,
it may need to be cut.
A
8.40 A space is visible (vertical line) between dura and
bone when significant disc material remains.
The gray mass under the spinal cord is disc
material (arrowhead); it is separating the dura
from the floor of the vertebral canal. 8.62A is
from the same dog and shows how the dura
returns to the floor of the canal once all disc
8.40
 material has been evacuated.
Thoracolumbar disc disease 
145
 8.41 Gentle exploration beneath the spinal cord with a
blunt probe shown in three successive images. This
 permits ventrally located material to be retrieved even
from the opposite side of the vertebral canal, as 
shown. The suction tip should not touch the dura; a
soft, red rubber catheter tip should be attached to the
metal tip when in close proximity to spinal cord.
8.41
H
8.42 CT reconstruction of a hemilaminectomy defect to show
the idealized motion for retrieving material from
underneath the spinal cord. A long, circular scooping
motion retrieves material better than more linear
movements that often just serve to push material farther
away. The venous plexus ('venous sinus') may be
lacerated accidentally at this stage.
8.42
146
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
the junction of the spinal vein and the venous
plexus, using a small piece of muscle tissue 
(arrow) cut from the adjacent epaxial
musculature. The muscle is macerated then
pressed firmly over the vein; it should be removed
once decompression is finished. Altermatives
include Gelfoam (Pharmacia, Kalamazoo, Ml),
direct pressure on either side of the tear, or a
8.43
small Hemoclip (Pilling Weck Inc., Research 
Triangle Park, NC) for a tear in a spinal vein.
8.44 When all disc material has been removed the
dura returms to lie adjacent to the floor and
pedicle of the vertebral canal; the spinal cord
may remain indented as here (same dog as in
8.38). Other clues to the adequacy of
decompression are reappearance of epidural fat
at each end of the bony defect along with
pulsation of the dura (caused by CSF pulsing in
synchrony with venous flow).
8.44
When no disc material can be found, it may be that:
The surgeon has approached at the wrong site (8.6)
The surgeon has approached on the wrong side.
 The dog could have progressive myelomalacia.
+ The original diagnosis could be wrong.
If landmarks confirm that the site is correct (8.20),the defect must be extended in whichever direction the spinal
of all visible disc material then it is possible that more material exists on the far side of the spinal cord (8.3, 8.6). The
defect may then have to be extended either to one side (8.45), dorsally (8.46) or bilaterally (Schulz et af., 1998)
8.45 To extend the hemilaminectomy, the surgeon
should start drilling a short distance away from
the existing opening. The two should then be 
merged to form one larger opening by breaking
than trying to drill outwards from the edge of the
original hemilaminectomy defect as the drill bit
tends to slip off the edge and could injure the
spinal cord.
8.45
Thoracolumbar disc disease
147
8.46 Drilling can continue dorsally if disc material lies
Excessive bone removal could cause delayed 
injury from restrictive fibrosis; to avoid this
the cancellous and inner cortical bone can
sometimes be removed while sparing the outer
plate. If the disc material is still not visible, it is 
safer to start a mini-hemilaminectomy on the
contralateral side.
8.46
8.47 A: This hemilaminectomy has been extended
(arrow). Bleeding from the spinal artery may
require bipolar cautery. The venous plexus is just
visible on the floor of the vertebral canal
(arrowhead); it is damaged easily, especially
where the spinal vein joins the plexus (8.43).
 B: Lateral corpectomy (arrowheads) of one or
two vertebral bodies improves ventral access
8.47
further, especially to chronic disc hermiations 
(Moissonnier et al., 2002). Drilling should
proceed under the cortical bone plate that forms
the floor of the canal before collapsing the
cortical plate ventrally along with the disc.
The area of the corpectomy is occupied by air;
a large air pocket also lies adjacent to the fat 
 graft placed over the mini-hemilaminectomy site.
B
8.48
8.48 Access to the vertebral canal
varies with the location.
Hemilaminectomy at A:
lumbar vertebrae (L2) often
 gives better access than at
B: thoracic vertebrae (T10/11)
due mainly to the rib heads.
A
B
148
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
8.49 A durotomy has been performed using a
25-gauge hypodermic needle to reveal the spinal 
cord, small pial blood vessels and dorsal nerve
rootlets (arrow). A guarded scalpel or fine
scissors may also be used to incise the dura.
Collapse of the subarachnoid space has caused
the dura mater to become translucent (8.5,
8.50). The venous plexus is visible clearly on the
floor of the vertebral canal (arrowhead),
8.49
Although durotomy may provide additional spinal cord decompression, the relative risks and benefits are not
clear (see page 87):
 Local necrosis of gray matter over one or two spinal cord segments is common after severe injury and it is 
not unusual for this material to ooze out after durotomy (8.50).
This does not necessarily indicate a poor prognosis, such as with complete spinal cord transection, or that
there is progressive myelomalacia (Salisbury and Cook, 1988).
It is only necessary for 5-10% of the white matter to survive in order for an animal to recover; this would
be very hard to quantify after durotomy (Blight and Decrescito, 1986; Bass0 et af., 1996; Jeffery and
 Durotomy should therefore not be used to infer prognosis (Muir et af., 1995); its use purely as an additional
decompressive procedure may warrant further study (Anderson et al., 1991; Bagley et af., 1996).
 Routine use of durotomy is not yet recommended in dogs with grade 5 deficits, particularly as more than
half of these dogs recover without one (Muir et al., 1995) (see Prognosis', page 132).
There is a small risk of spinal cord herniation through the durotomy defect, which can cause severe
distortion and compression (Osterholm, 1974; Henry et af., 1997).
8.50 Minihemilaminectomy and durotomy
(arrowheads) performed in a 25 kg dog
presenting with no deep pain sensation. There
is extensive bruising with focal malacia (white
arrow) of the spinal cord. This dog regained
nociception three days after surgery and made
a good recovery within six weeks of surgery.
The facet joint is shown by an asterisk.
8.50
8.51 Nerve roots can cause significant tethering of spinal
(arrow) except at the lumbosacral plexus. Great care
must be taken when removing a chronic disc like this
(see 'Early postoperative complications', page 127). If
a plane of dissection can be developed between dura
and adhesions, the extrusion can then be cut away by
scalpel. Corpectomy facilitates this (8.47B). Otherwise
the spinal cord is just decompressed as shown with-
out prolonged attempts at removal.
8.51
Thoracolumbar disc disease
149
Rhizotomy improved the degree of decompression although it is not known if cutting the associated segmental
8.52 Diagram to show the relationship of
the spinal nerve, the completed
hemilaminectomy defect and the
intervertebral disc space. These
relationships should be understood
clearly prior to fenestration (8.53).
The surgeon must also take care
not to injure the exposed spinal
cord inadvertently.
8.52
8.53 Fenestration is usually performed after
hemilaminectomy. If the surgeon is not familiar
with fenestration, then it is best to fenestrate the
hemilaminectomy site first as shown here (arrow),
in order to understand the relative positions of the
disc and spinal cord. In practice the spinal nerve is
used to make a deep cut into the anulus (8.70,
8.78). It is not clear if a chronic disc should be 
fenestrated (page 126).
8.53
8.54 Prior to closure, the hemilaminectomy site is
covered by a 3-5 mm thick layer of subcutaneous
fat demonstrated here lying over a cloth drape.
The graft shrinks to 50% of its original size
and so should be considerably larger than the
laminectomy defect (Trevor et af., 1991). It is
held in place by the epaxial musculature
after retractors are removed; alternatively
saline-soaked Gelfoam (Pharmacia, Kalamazoo,
Mll) can be used. The fat graft must not be too
thick (8.8, 12.10).
8.54
150
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
8.55 3D CT reconstruction showing the postoperative
appearance of a standard hemilaminectomy. This
image, along with several other reconstructions 
(8.48, 8.56, 8.60-8.62), shows p0stoperative
   s  e sls
performed in a dog that lost deep pain 2 days
after a hemilaminectomy at L1/2; no residual disc
material was identified and the dog had
8.55
+ The extrusion cannot be found (8.61).
 Disc material is spread over a wide area.
 The spinal cord is very swollen.
Extensive hemilaminectomy does not appear to affect recovery rates but movement at the surgical site is
increased (Corse et ar., 2002); this may cause delayed morbidity in some dogs (Anderson et al., 1991; Grevel and
Schwartau, 1997; Applewhite et ar., 1999; Scott and McKee, 1999).
8.56
after hemilaminectomy from T13 to L3. No cause
was identified; the pain may have been related to
laminectomy scar (Applewhite et af., 1999). There
is a direct correlation in humans between
persistent low back pain and extensive peridural
scarring (Ross et al., 1996; Maroon et al., 1999).
Where possible, less extensive decompression
should be considered (8.57-8.62).
Thoracolumbar disc disease
151
Pediculectomy and mini-hemilaminectomy (8.57-8.62)
    h)    )   
approach only works wellfor lean, small dogs. With a standard dorsolateral approach the dog should be rotated
facet joint (Bitetto and Thacher, 1987).
8.57 Difference between A: hemilaminectomy,
B: mini-hemilaminectomy, and C: pediculectomy.
Hemilaminectomy sacrifices a facet joint; the other procedures
do not. Mini-hemilaminectomy enlarges the region around the
foramen. Pediculectomy spares the foramen but removes bone
between adjacent facet joints. As access is restricted with
mini-hemilaminectomy (8.59B) and pediculectomy (8.61), it is
often better to combine them (8.62).
8.57
B
+
152
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
 8.58 Transverse section through the lumbar region
to show the lateral approach for
mini-hemilaminectommy or pediculectomy.
The transverse processes are palpated and
then the epaxial muscles are elevated dorsally
to reveal the lateral aspect of the vertebrae
(Braund et al., 1976) (8.59, &.63-8.65). A curette
is shown retrieving extruded nucleus pulposus
following a mini-hemilaminectomy.
8.58
8.59 A: Army-Navy retractors elevate the
epaxial muscles and expose the
vertebrae laterally (articular processes 
are obscured by the muscle and
retractors). B: Mini-hemilaminectomy
provides good access to the
mid-ventral vertebral canal. The floor
of the vertebral canal is obscured here
by a large, chronic disc (arrow)
extruding dorsolaterally.
8.59
B
Thoracolumbar disc disease
153
8.60 Pediculectomy via a standard dorsolateral approach
(8.11-8.27). A: Intraoperative photograph, and 
B: 3D reconstruction of a postoperative CT scan from the 
same dog. Pediculectomy gives good access over the 
mid-vertebral body and preserves the articular processes.
Access to the intervertebral space is poor compared to
mini- and standard hemilaminectomy (8.61B).
8.60
8.61 A: When imaging is inconclusive, multiple pediculectomies
(arrows) can be used to search for disc, hemorrhagic fat, or
spinal cord swelling; the defect can be enlarged once the
correct location is found. Although not ideal, this is often 
quicker than extensive laminectomy (8.56).
B: A disadvantage of pediculectomy is that material can be
missed easily. Mid-sagittal 3D reconstruction through the
8.61
missed after pediculectomy (same dog as 1.21A, 8.60).
B
154
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
8.62 A mini-hemilaminectomy has been combined with two
pediculectomies to give much better access than either
procedure alone (Biggart, 1988; Lubbe et al., 1994;
McCartney, 1997). A: Intraoperative photograph, and B: a
3D reconstruction of a postoperative CT scan from the same
8.62
dog as shown in 8.40. The dorsolateral approach used here
makes it easier to extend the bony defect and is therefore
preferred over the lateral approach shown in 8.58 and 8.59.
B
Lateral fenestration (8.63-8.78)
The depth of the epaxial muscle makes the approach progressively more challenging in dogs greater than 10 kg
bodyweight.
8.63 Positioning and skin incision
for lateral fenestration.
Thoracic limbs are tied
forwards with the pelvic limbs
extended backwards. A thin 
sandbag is placed under the 
dog at the level of the
thoracolumbar junction to
open up the disc spaces of
interest; this may be moved
8.63
as required to approach the
lumbar discs. The skin incision is made at the level of the lumbar transverse processes and extends from
approximately T8 to L5.
8.64 The thick, shiny, lumbodorsal fascia lies under
the subcutaneous fat and fascia. The
subcutaneous fat is reflected for 1 cm on either
side of the proposed incision. The lumbodorsal
fascia is then incised as shown. Reflection of fat
creates additional dead space but a wide
later.
8.64
Thoracolumbar disc disease
155
8.65 The deep layer of fat, which can be substantial
even in lean dogs, has been incised to reveal the
iliocostalis lumborum and the thirteenth rib
(arrow). The longissimus dorsi muscle is covered
by a fascial sheath, which is just visible under the
layer of fat (arrowhead). Exposure dorsally is
more than is usually needed but has been made
to show the longissimus muscle.
8.65
8.66 Diagram to show the deep
anatomy and muscle
separation through the
iliocostalis lumborum muscle,
in this case over the L1/2
intervertebral space. The
longissimus muscle is in the 
dorsocaudal part of the
surgical field (arrow). The 
iliocostalis muscle fibers are
seen running obliquely
8.66
(arrowhead) to insert on the ribs.
8.67 Close up to show separation of the iliocostalis
lumborum muscle over the T13/L1 disc by
opening a pair of Metzenbaum scissors in the
same direction as the muscle fibers. The
thirteenth rib (with periosteum reflected for clarity)
is shown clearly in the lower left-hand side of the
picture.
8.67
8.68 Retraction of the iliocostalis muscle. This reveals
the body (+) and transverse process (arrowhead)
of the L1 vertebra along with the T13/L1 disc
(arrow). Note the fibers of the anulus fibrosus 
(over which lies a fine layer of connective tissue).
This is best removed by using a periosteal
elevator covered with a surgical swab (8.23),
pushing the tissue in a craniodorsal direction.
8.68
156
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
8.69 Close up diagram of the site
approached in 8.68. Muscle
separation has revealed the
lateral aspect of the anulus
fibrosus, which lies just cranial 
to the transverse process of 
the lumbar vertebra. Note the
small vein that lies over the 
craniodorsal anulus; this is 
retracted as described in
8.68. The incision in the 
anulus is shown by the 
dotted line. Note also the
accessory process, which
marks the dorsal margin of the 
 intervertebral foramen (arrow).
The exact dorsal limit for the
fenestration varies slightly
depending on the disc space
and also from dog to dog. A
skeleton is a useful reference
(5.4). A blunt periosteal probe 
can be used to palpate the
curving lateral surface of each
disc before fenestrating it. A
 fresh approach is made for
each disc space.
8.69
8.70 Incising the disc with a #11 scalpel
blade reveals the window of anulus and
the jelly-like nucleus pulposus (arrow);
angle same as in 8.68.
8.70
Thoracolumbar disc disease
157
To fenestrate a disc:
The window is made by four separate stab incisions, which are joined at the corners.
A sawing motion is used to cut instead of direct pressure.
 The hole in the anulus must be made larger than any instrument used for removal of nucleus pulposus.
1
space and could cause a clinical problem later.
 Power fenestration with a small drill bit may allow more complete evacuation (Holmberg et al., 199o). Care
must be taken to prevent the drill bit from slipping toward the foramen.
8.71 The approach to thoracic discs is different.
They may be approached by separating the
iliocostalis lumborum muscle as for lumbar discs.
Alternatively, the muscle can be cut close to its
insertions on the 12th and 13th ribs.
8.71
8.72 Retraction of the iliocostalis lumborum muscle
dorsally reveals the levator costarum muscle
(arrow). This will be separated from the rib and
retracted in a cranial direction.
8.72
8.73 The periosteum of the rib has been incised at the
caudal border of the levator costarum muscle
and elevated using a thin periosteal elevator.
Periosteum is elevated adjacent to the neck of
the rib, a small retractor is being used to retract
the levator costarum muscle cranially. The plane
of dissection is medial and dorsal to the pleural
reflection. Dissection of the deep fascia that
attaches to the cranial margin of the rib (arrow) is
8.73
the rib.
158
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
8.74 Diagram to show the
features described in 
8.73. The levator
 costarum muscle is being 
elevated from the rib with
a periosteal elevator. A
hand-held retractor is 
positioned to keep the 
iliocostalis muscles
retracted dorsally. Gelpi
retractors can be used 
here but they must not
tear the pleura. A change
in respiratory character or 
volume indicates possible
pneumothorax.
8.74
8.75 Diagram to show the
lateral aspect of the disc 
exposed, with the levator
costarum muscle
retracted cranioventrally,
and the epaxial muscles
retracted dorsally. The 
site of the fenestration is 
shown.
8.75
Thoracolumbar disc disease
159
8.76 Blunt dissection has been completed and the
disc is now visible clearly (+). Handheld retractors
are being used to elevate the epaxial muscle
away from the last two ribs.
8.76
8.77 A #11 scalpel blade cutting deeply into the
anulus. The fenestration is then completed as
described in 8.70. The surgeon should insure 
that the window in the anulus is slightly larger
than the instrument to be used for curettage or
material might be forced inadvertently into the 
vertebral canal.
8.77
8.78 Diagram of a transverse section through the
lumbar region of a dog to show the lateral
approach for fenestration. This approach allows
access to the lateral anulus fibrosus and to disc
material in the intervertebral space. However,
there is no access to disc material in the
vertebral canal unless a pediculectomy or
mini-hemilaminectomy is also performed 
(8.57-8.62).
8.78
Atlantoaxial subluxation
Chapter 
particularly Yorkshire terriers, Chibuahuas and Miniature
Clinical signs   161
poodles {Denny et al., 1988; Thomas et al., 199l;
McCarthy et al., 1995; Beaver et al., 2000). Rare cases
Diagnosis
163
occur in cats and in large-breed dogs (9.4). Atlantoaxial
Examination 
163
subluxation can cause clinical signs in breeds such as the
Differential diagnosis 
163
Rottweiler (Rochat and Shores, 1999; Wheeler, 1992),
Radiography
163
Doberman {Huibregtse et al., 1992; LeCouteur and
Child, 1995), Basset hound (Hurov, 1979), Standard
Treatment
164
poodle [Knipe et al., 2002), Weimaraner, and German
 Non-surgical treatment 
164
shepherd dog (Read et al., 1987).
Surgery   165
A number of pathological processes can lead to
Complications
167
atlantoaxial subluxation:
Non-surgical treatment 
167
● Absence of the dens (9.2B).
Ventral fusion  
167
·Fracture or separation of the dens (9.2C).
Dorsal fixation   168
● Failure of the ligaments due to either malformation
or rupture (9.2D).
Postoperative care
169
Most dogs with congenital lesions have either
absence or hypoplasia of the dens [46%; 9.4), 30%
Prognosis
169
have a malformed dens (9.1B), and 24% have a normal
dens (Beaver et al., 2000). In dogs with a normal or
Atlantoaxial subluxation in cats
169
malformed dens, abnormalities of the transverse
ligament of the atlas can lead to subluxation (Watson
Key issues for future investigation   170
et al., 1989). This is serious as the dens tends to pro-
e 'o]  s    
References 
170
9.19B).Occipito-atlantoaxial malformation can also
Procedures
171
occur (Read et al., 1987).
Ventral transarticular fixation 
Most patients have an underlying congenital abnor-
mality but trauma can cause failure of normal elements
Multiple ventral implants and bone cement 
177
Dorsal wire fixation   178
in this region (9.2C) (see Chapter 13). Minor trauma
Dorsal cross-pin fixation   180
may also precipitate a crisis in a dog that has a congeni-
tal abnormality but has shown no clinical signs previ-
ously (Thomas et al., 1991; Beaver et al., 2000).
The atlantoaxial joint allows rotation of the head; Cl
 pivots around the dens of C2 but the joint permits little
flexion. There is no intervertebral disc between Cl and
CLINICAL SIGNS
C2 (4.8, 4.9) and the relationship between these verte
Neck pain is seen in most dogs following traumatic
(e'I 'ti') st Aq Aae p s a
lesions and in 30-60% of dogs with congenital lesions
Clinical signs in congenital atlantoaxial subluxation
(Thomas et al., 199l; Beaver et al., 2000). Neurological
are usually seen in immature patients although signs can
signs reflect cervical spinal cord compression. In mild
develop at any age (Thomas et al., 199l; McCarthy
cases only proprioceptive deficits are seen. Tetraparesis
et al., 1995; Beaver et al., 2000) (9.1, 9.32). The disorder
indicates more significant spinal cord compression.
is encountered most often in small breeds of dog,
 Asymmetry of signs, or preferential involvement of
162
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
either thoracic or pelvic limbs, may occur. Tetraplegia :
 also been reported and should be evaluated carefully.
is rarely encountered but if present the dog must be
checked for respiratory failure (Beaver et al., 2000) (see  atlantoaxial subluxation and could cause the animal to
 Chapter 2). Signs referable to brain involvement have show forebrain signs (Chambers et al., 1977; Denny
A
B
9.1 3D reconstruction of CT scans; the dens is indicated by arrows. A: A normal toy-breed clog. B: A dog with atlantoaxial subluxation
 and a malformed cens, which occupies much of the vertebral canal. The spinous process of C2 is also angled away from the arch of
radiographs for dog B in 9.32.
B
C
D
9.2 A: Diagram to show the normal relationship between C1 and C2 (1.14, 1.35, 9.19). B: Congenital absence or hypoplasia of
the dens is the most common abnormality. C: There is an ossification center between the dens and the body of C2, which
Atlantoaxial subluxation
163
et al., 1988). Hydrocephalus may also be accompanied
subluxation is suspected, as this may worsen the situation
by syringohydromyelia (9.12). Another potential expla-
considerably.
nation for signs of forebrain disease in dogs with
atlantoaxial subluxation is hepatic encephalopathy, which
Differential diagnosis
is over-represented in toy-breed dogs and coexisted in
The differential diagnosis for a small-breed dog with
two of six dogs undergoing surgery for atlantoaxial sub-
cranial cervical signs is given in Box 9.l. Inflammatory
luxation (Schulz et al., 1997). Forebrain signs of disori-
CNS disease is the most likely consideration in immature
entation and behavior change, along with vestibular
deficits, have also been associated with basilar artery
dogs. Cervical disc disease is more likely in older dogs but
is rare in dogs less than 2 years of age. Discospondylitis or
compression caused by the dens. The clinical signs
fractures could be present at any age. Atlantoaxial sub-
resolved completely after surgery (Jaggy et al., 1991).
Torticollis has been described with atlantoaxial lesions
(9l aed aas) Aarei spes ui pauaunosua sl uoexnt
 and could be due to syringohydromyelia or a vestibular
sign secondary to a high cervical lesion (Johnson and Hulse,
Radiography
1989; Gibson et al., 1995; Mayhew, 1999) (see page 29).
SURVEY RADIOGRAPHY
Survey radiographs provide the diagnosis in most cases
(9.3). General anesthesia is usually required, although
DIAGNOSIS
 great care must be taken when intubating the patient. If
non-surgical management is to be used following trauma
Examination
then it may be worth trying to obtain diagnostic images
Atlantoaxial subluxation should be considered in any
without anesthesia (see page 283). However, accurate
young, small-breed dog with the clinical signs described.
positioning is essential to evaluate the cranial cervical
Neurological examination indicates a lesion between
region and this may be impossible in the conscious patient,
Cl and C5 and palpation of the neck often localizes
the origin of the pain to the Cl-C2 region. It is unwise
to flex the neck forcibly in a patient where atlantoaxial
It is a common error to diagnose congenital atlantoaxial
subluxation on radiographs of conscious dogs where the
positioning is inadequate and the region of interest is
far from the center of the film. Fluoroscopic observation
Box 9.1 Primary differential diagnoses for
while flexing the neck gently in a conscious animal can
atlantoaxial subluxation (see also Box 7.2)
provide rapid and accurate diagnosis by revealing the
dynamic nature of the lesion while allowing the animal to
■ Cervical disc extrusion (older than 1 year)
maintain some protective muscle tone.
■Syringohydromyelia
 The lateral projection is the most useful. Mild flexion
 Neoplasia
of the cranial cervical region may be required to demon-
■ Inflammatory CNS disease
strate misalignment but this must not be excessive. A
■ Intracranial disease 
ventrodorsal view will highlight the dens; it is safe to
■ Discospondylitis
position the dog in dorsal recumbency with the neck
 Polyarthritis
extended for the ventrodorsal projection, which is
■ Polymyositis
preferable to the open-mouth view. Oblique radiographs
■ Trauma
can also provide an excellent image of the dens (9.3B,
9.4B) (Cook and Oliver, 1981).
9.3 Survey radiographs from a
1-year-old Toy poodlle showing
a marked increase in the gap
between the dorsal arch of C1 and
 the spinous process of C2 when 
the neck is flexed (B). Postoperative 
radiographs are shown in 9.8.
B
164
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
A
B
 9.4 Eight year-old Bull mastiff with acute pelvic limb ataxia. Survey radliographs revealed severe hypoplasia of the clens; a lumbar
myelogram revealed no other abnormality. A: Flexedl view andl B: extenced view of C1 and C2. Note the narrowing of the dlorsal
a good recovery and had no neurological ceficits 4 months later. Subclinical atlantoaxial malformation has been reported in humans 
(McKeever, 1968).
9.5 Myelogram in a 4-year-old Toy
poodle cemonstrates that there may
be little spinal cord compression if 
the dens is absent or hypoplastic.
Postoperative radiographs of this dog
are shown in 9.29.
B
9.6 A: CT scan through the atlas of a
normal toy-breed dog. The dens is of 
normal size and occupies the floor of the
vertebral canal. B: Dog with a malformed
cens. The same dogs are also shown
in 9.1 and 9.19.
A
B
MYELOGRAPHY
imaging, which assists surgical planning (Johnson and
 Myelography should not be necessary for diagnosis and Hulse, 1989) (9.33). It will also reveal abnormal dens
 any post-myelographic seizures could be disastrous. conformation, which is seen in over 70% of dogs (Denny
Cerebello-medullary cistern puncture either for myel- et al., 1988; Beaver et al., 2000) (9.6). An MRI (9.7)
 Ography or CSF sampling should not be performed in  might prove to be prognostic if there is extensive spinal
dogs that could have atlantoaxial subluxation (9.5);
 cord malacia and it will also reveal syringohydromyelia
lumbar puncture is preferable.
(Sanders et al., 2000) (9.12)
CT AND MR!
Although much simpler techniques are available to
 TREATMENT
assess atlantoaxial stability, advanced imaging can add  Non-surgical treatment
 e s  s  s     
Hulse, 1989) (9.6, 9.12). CT provides excellent bone a neck brace (13.18) and use of analgesics (Tables 15.1,
Atlantoaxial subluxation
165
A
B
9.7 Sagittal MRls of a dog with atlantoaxial subluxation. A: T2-weighted and B: short tau inversion recovery (STIR) images.
Note the high signal intensity (edema) and severe spinal cord compression at C1-C2 (arrowheads).
Algorithm 9.1 Surgical decision-making
 Survey radiographs
in atlantoaxial subluxation.
 Normal or
Malformed dens
hypoplastic dens
CT scan
 Fusion with multiple 
Consider odontoidectomy
implants and cement 
 Failure 
 Success
 Dorsal cross 
 External
 pinning 
Replace implant
 splint 
15.2). This approach can produce surprisingly good
is large enough, at least until the long-term outcome of
results. Six toy-breed dogs were managed non-surgically,
non-surgical management is known. Non-surgical treat-
four of which had been unable to walk. After 14 weeks
ment does give excellent long-term outcomes for ani-
all six dogs could walk without neurological deficits
mals that fracture a normal atlantoaxial articulation;
(Hawthorne et al., 1998). Four out of another six dogs
(a aed aas) Aas rn rads ao a s
also did well with non-surgical management (Lorinson
et al., 1998). Despite these excellent results after non-
Surgery
surgical management, the concern is that any improve-
Surgical treatment is indicated in most patients with
 ment might be lost after brace removal and return to
congenital lesions. Even dogs with profound neurological
normal activity (9.32). Nevertheless, it can provide a
deficits are likely to benefit from stabilization (Thomas
very useful alternative for very young dogs, for dogs that
et al., 1991; Beaver et al., 2000). The two main options
cannot walk, or for other high-risk patients. Surgical
are either ventral fusion or dorsal stabilization. Ventral
fusion is the treatment of choice. An algorithm for surgi-
lesions once the neurological deficits improve or the dog
cal decision-making is shown in Algorithm 9.1.
166
Small Animal Spinal Disorders 
9.8 Reduction after transarticular screw
H
fixation is good. Note the hypoplastic
dens. Same dog as in 9.3. Angles are
mediolateral: left 41° and right 38°;
ventrodorsal 33* (9.25).
A
B
Table 9.1  Results of ventral fixation for atlantoaxial subluxation 
 Transarticular fixation
Multiple implant fixation
Total
Total
(1)
(2)
(6)
transarticular  (5)
(4)
(3)
 multiple
 Success rate after
31/40 (78)
9/10 (90)
8/18 (44)
48/68 (71)
5/6 (83)
5/6 (83)
12/13 (92)
22/25 (88)
1st surgery (%)
 Median follow-up
7
12 (mean)  N/A 
21
N/A
36
months
 Residual ataxia (%)
6/31 (19)
NA
N/A
6/31 (19)
0/5
N/A
4/13 (31)
4/18 (22)
 Residual neck pain (%)
3/31 (10)
NA
N/A
3/31 (10)
0/5
N/A
0/13
0/18
 Second surgery (%)
4/35 (11)
0/9
3/18 (17)
7/62 (11)
0/5
1/5* (20)
0/13
1/23 (4)
Mortality (%)
5/40 (13)
1/10 (10)
7/18 (39)
13/68 (19)
1/6 (17)
0/6
1/13 (8)
2/25 (8)
(1) Beaver et al, 2000; (2) Denny et al, 1988; (3) Knipe et al, 2002; (4) Sanders et al., 2000; (5) Schulz et al., 1997; (6) Thomas et al., 1991.
* Two of these recovered.
Aabins puooes obuapun Alenoe jou pip nq paunoal subis 
N/A, not available.
VENTRALFUSION
implants is therefore the technique of choice for ventral
 Fusion of the atlantoaxial joints can be performed using 
fixation. Following ventral fixation, odontoidectomy
 n o (   
 may rarely be indicated via a ventral slot in Cl (9.6,
implants and bone cement (9.32-9.34). Good results
9.27, 9.32).
 can be obtained using transarticular fixation; threaded
pins or screws give superior results to smooth pins.
DORSAL STABILIZATION
However, there is little margin for error with only
Dorsal wiring has a high failure rate (Table 9.2), such
two implants and overall failure rates approach 30%
that many animals need repeat surgery (9.1l). Reinforce-
with transarticular fixation (Table 9.l). Furthermore,
[  iq as aq   aq i 
radiographic evidence suggests that fusion is often
 necrosis could weaken the bone further (Renegar and
delayed or incomplete (Thomson and Read, 1996;
Stoll, 1979; Cook and Oliver, 1981; Martinez et al.,
Beaver et al., 2000). Multiple implant techniques
1997). It does provide an option should ventral fusion
should reduce the failure rate; they add little technical
fail (Beaver et al., 2000), but a second attempt at fusion
difficulty and almost certainly provide more 
rigid
using multiple implants or by dorsal cross-pinning are
fixation (Schulz et al., 1997; Sanders et al., 2000;
 more logical approaches (Thomas et al., 199l; Jeffery,
Knipe et al., 2002) (9.32-9.34). Use of multiple
1996; Schulz et al., 1997; Sanders et al., 2000).
Atlantoaxial subluxation
167
Table 9.2 Results of dorsal suture fixation for atlantoaxial subluxation 
Dorsal wire or suture fixation
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Total dorsal
 Success rate after 1st surgery (%)
9/12 (75)
6/6 (100)
7/13 (54)
2/7 (29)
24/38 (63)
 Median follow-up months 
23
9
NA
N/A
Residual ataxia (%)
4/9 (44)
5/6 (83)
N/A
N/A
9/15 (60)
 Residual neck pain (%)
1/9 (11)
0/6
NA
N/A
1/15 (6)
 Second surgery (%)
2/11 (18) 
2/6 (33)
N/A
3/7 (43)*
7/24 (29)
Mortality (%)
1/12 (8)
0/6
5/13 (38)
0/7
6/38 (16)
1661 "/8 18 s8wo41 (0) 18861 "8 1a Auu80 (e) :2161 *18 18 s18q4eu0 (2) 50002 "/8 18 18689 (1
*One dog recovered.
COMPLICATIONS
 Table 9.3 Complications of non-surgical and surgical
The most common non-surgical and surgical complica-
treatment
tions are listed in Table 9.3.
 Non-surgical
Surgical
Non-surgical treatment
complications
complications
The splinted animal must initially be assessed daily for
Dyspnea
Cardiac arrest 
problems (Table 9.3), including the tendency for mois-
 Aspiration 
Respiratory arrest 
ture to seep into the splint around the mouth. Dyspnea
 Abrasions
 Pulmonary edema
can occur if the splint is too restrictive in the pharyngeal
Decubitus
Implant failure (9.11, 9.31)
Otitis externa
 Soft tissue injury
or thoracic regions but it must also be tight enough to stay
Dermatitis 
Tracheal collapse
in place (Schulz et al., 1997). Aspiration is a particular
Recurrence
problerm if the neck is extended excessively as it is almost
impossible for the dog to swallow in this position.
Nasogastric or gastrostomy feeding may reduce the risk
causes of implant failure are K-wire migration or loss of
of aspiration and also helps to keep the splint clean
reduction; these tend to occur in the first 3 weeks
(Shelton et al., 1991).
{Johnson and Hulse, 1989; Thomas et al., 1991; Schulz
et al., 1997; Beaver et al., 2000). Implant failure in some
Ventral fusion
dogs may not cause clinical signs if preceded by sufficient
 The ventral approach to the neck is straightforward but
fusion (Wheeler, 1992). Threaded pins are preferred
care must be taken to avoid damage to vital structures,
over Kirschner wires as they are much less likely to
particularly the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the vascu-
lar supply to the thyroid gland. Particular care must be
Hulse, 1989; Sandman et al., 200l). In one dog a K wire
taken to prevent excessive traction or compresion on
migrated into the oral cavity although it caused no clini-
the trachea and esophagus (Thomas et al., 1991).
cal signs other than a cough (Schulz et al., 1997) (9.9).
 The main complications are death, or implant failure
The disadvantage of using only two implants in
that necessitates a second surgery (Table 9.3). The
transarticular fashion is the relatively high failure rate
primary causes of death are cardiac or respiratory arrest
(Table 9.l). Failure rates should be lower when screws
and pulmonary edema (Thomas et al.,
,1991; Schulz
or threaded pins are used instead of K wires but failure
et al., 1997; Beaver et al., 2000). One potential cause of
can still occur even when implant position is excellent
pulmonary edema is barotrauma; care must
t be taken
(9.10). In ventral fusion the implants are on the com-
when ventilating toy-breed dogs (see page 85).
pression side of the vertebral column and so are subject
Implant failure is more likely after ventral transarticu-
to greater stresses than implants on the dorsal (tension)
lar fixation than after use of multiple implants. The main
side (Jeffery, 1996; Rochat and Shores, 1999). Even
168
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
A
B
9.9 A: Postoperative racliographs from a 1-year-old Toy poodle show K-wires with bone cement over the exposed ends. Angles are
sem bop aun le ui syaam zl lo pauneuneu sem julds aul 'sxaam g Ag paliel pey suid yiog ing padde sm juids jeuaxa uy
9.10 A: Transarticular fixation using lag
L
D
screws and cancellous bone graft
postoperative alignment is excellent.
Angles are mediolateral: left 22° and right
45°. B: The dog was also placed in a
splint but despite this one screw was
loose at the 6-week recheck and there
was no bridging callus. After a further
6 weeks in the splint good fusion was
evicdent and the dlog macle an excellent
recovery.
B
when failure does not occur, fusion is often delayed  Sanders et al., 2000); tracheal collapse (Thomas et al.,
(Sorjonen and Shires, 198l; Thomson and Read, 1996;  1991); tracheal necrosis (Thomas et al., 1991); pneu-
Beaver et al., 2000). Nine of 12 immature dogs showed  monia (Rochat and Shores, 1999; Beaver et al., 2000);
 no bony fusion 6 weeks after transarticular fixation  dyspnea and sudden death (Denny et al., 1988; Thomas
despite use of a bone graft. Nevertheless, the fixations et al., 199l). Tracheostomy may be necessary to relieve
were stable in 10 of the 12 dogs, usually due to fibro- iatrogenic laryngeal paresis or paralysis (Sanders et al.,
cartilaginous tissue (Sorjonen and Shires, 1981].
 2000). Respiratory dysfunction can also result from
If implant failure does occur, either a splint can be used :
 spinal cord injury impairing respiratory drive or motor
or a second surgery may be performed. Good results can
function (Thomas et al., 199l; Schulz et al., 1997)
often be obtained using non-surgical management when
 (7.1l). Non-respiratory complications include torticollis
the falure is only partial (9.9, 9.10). A second surgery is  (Beaver et al., 200); delayed fracture of Cl (Johnson 
recommended for complete failure of fixation (Thomas  and Hulse, 1989; Beaver et al., 2000); Horner's syn-
et al., 1991; Beaver et al., 2000). After failure of either drome [Jaggy et al., 1991); and esophageal stricture
a dorsal or ventral surgery, rescue is probably best secondary to gastric reflux [Schulz et al., 1997).
attempted using either multiple implants and bone
cement or dorsal cross-pinning (Thomas et al., 199l;
Dorsal fixation
 Jeffery, 1996; Schulz et al., 1997; Sanders et al., 2000;  The main complications are death or failure of fixation.
(9.32-9.34; 9.43). Mini plates are another alternative  Death is due to cardiac or respiratory arrest, which
but there is little margin for error when placing the
 may occur during placement or tightening of the wires
screws in C2 (Stead et al., 1993).
(Denny et al., 1988). The wire suture can also break or
Other postoperative complications include gagging
'cheese-wire' though C2 spinous process (Beaver et al.,
or coughing; laryngeal paralysis (Beaver et al., 2000; 2000; Thomas et al., 1991)(9.11). Almost 30% of dogs
Atlantoaxial subluxation
169
10 months, if the dog can still walk, and if the reduction
after surgery is good (Beaver et al., 2000). Despite the
guarded prognosis for dogs with severe neurological
deficits, 9 of 13 dogs (69%) that were unable to walk
before surgery had a good outcome (Thomas et al.,
1991; Knipe et al., 2002). Neck pain persists in about
10% of dogs and residual ataxia in about 20% after
transarticular pin fixation (Beaver et al., 2000). The
rate of residual ataxia is two to three times as high after
dorsal wire fixation, presumably as the fibrosis at the
surgical site provides less stability than osseous or
fibrocartilaginous fusion ventrally (Beaver et al., 2000)
(Tables 9.1, 9.2).
 Overall failure rates are as follows:
· After dorsal wire fixation techniques the failure
rate is 37%; the mortality rate is 16% and 29%
 suture was used instead of wire in this immature dog to avoid
of dogs need a second surgery (Table 9.2).
'cheese wiring' through the spinous process of C2 but it broke
 A literature summary reported a similar failure
rate in 20/52 dogs (38%) (McCarthy et al., 1995).
crilled in C2 spinous process is visible (arrowheads). The first 
Outcome after dorsal wiring is no different to that
suture was replaced with 0.6-cm Dacron tape; it broke at the
after ventral transarticular fixation using smooth
cranial edge of C1 after a further 7 days. Number 2 Mersiline
was used for the third surgery but almost tore through the
pins (McCarthy et al., 1995; Beaver et al., 2000).
spinous process of C2. The spinous process was then reinforced
·After transarticular fixation the overall failure rate
'saam t lot lulids e ui pad bop aui pue jauao auog yim
is 29%; the mortality rate is 19% and 11% of dogs
which caused severe otitis externa. The dog was walking
need a second surgery. However, when results for
normally 4 months later.
lag screw transarticular fixation are considered
specifically the results are much better than for
require a second surgery after standard dorsal fixa-
smooth pins (Denny et al., 1988; McCarthy et al.,
tion (Table 9.2). Other failures reported after dorsal
1995). Threaded pins should also give much better
wiring include wire suture breakage and fracture of the
results than smooth pins due to their higher pullout
spinous process of C2 (Chambers et al., 1977; Thomas
strengths (Sandman et al., 2001).
et al., 1991; Beaver et al., 2000).
· After multiple ventral implants and bone cement
the failure rate is 12%; the mortality rate is 8% and
POSTOPERATIVE CARE (see Chapter 15)
4% of dogs need a second surgery (Table 9.1).
Pain is common postoperatively and adequate analgesia
Reported outcomes are therefore best for techniques
that employ multiple ventral implants and bone
should be provided, avoiding respiratory depressant
drugs in tetraplegic or severely tetraparetic animals
cement. Dogs requiring a second surgery have no worse
(Tables 15.1, 15.2). Strict rest is enforced for 6-12
outcomes than dogs that undergo only one (Beaver
et al., 2000).
weeks following surgery. Osseous fusion, or at least
stability of implants for a minimum of 6 weeks, is
the goal. External support is useful after surgery,
ATLANTOAXIAL SUBLUXATION
especially with transarticular or dorsal wire fixation.
IN CATS
The splint should be removed periodically for a thor-
Clinical signs of congenital luxation are similar to those
ough inspection.
seen in dogs. All three cats described had good out-
comes after transarticular pin fixation {Jaggy et al.,
PROGNOSIS
199l; Shelton et al., 199l; Thomson and Read, 1996).
The prognosis for dogs with congenital lesions is good
 Differential diagnoses for cats include disc disease (see
if the animal survives the perioperative period (Beaver
 Chapter 8), mucopolysaccharidosis, hypervitaminosis
et al., 2000). The best predictor of a successful out- A (see Chapter 14), lymphoma or other spinal cord
 iandeu aas) e '( ind aas) s Jo sie z o sd si suis go aasuo a uam s an
age (Beaver et al., 2000). The final outcome also tends 
 meningoencephalitis, discospondylitis and possibly
  ssa  rsa  a   ia a 
fibrocartilaginous embolism (FCE) (see Chapter 14).
170
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Jaggy, A., Hutto, VL., Roberts, R.E., Oliver, J.E. (1991) Occipitoatlanto-
 Key issues for future investigation
axial malformation with atlantoaxial subhuxation in a cat. Jourmal of Small
Amtimmal Practice 32, 366-372.
1. What is the long-term cutcome after non-surgical
 Jeffery, N.D. [1996) Dorsal cross pimnning of the atlantoaxial joint: new
management for atlantoaxial subluxation?
surgical technique for atlantoaxial subluxation.Jourmal of Small Animal
Practice 37, 26-29
 2. ls a splint necessary to provide addlitional stability after
Johnson, S.G., Hulse, D.A. [1989) Odontoid dysplasia with atlantoaxial
instability in a dog.Jourmal of the American Animal Hospital Associatiot
surgery?
25, 400-408.
Knipe, M.F, Sturges, B.K., Vermau, K.M., Berry, WL., Dickinson, PJ.,
3. Is there any advantage to performing routine 
Anor, S., LeCouteur, R.A. [2002) Atlantoaxial instability in 17 dogs.
cdontoidectomy for a malformed dens?
Jourmal of Veterinary intermal Medicine 16,368.
LeCouteur, RA., Child, G. [i99s] Diseases of the spinal cord. In:
S.J. Ettinger [ed.], Textbook of Veterinary Intermal Medicine, 629-695.
4. What is the prevalence and significance of 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
syringohydromyelia in atlantoaxial subluxation (
Lorinson, D., Bright, R.M., Thomas, W.B., Selcer, R.R., Wilkens, B.A. [1998]
Atlantoaxial subluxation in dogs: the results of conservative and surgical
therapy. Camine Practice 23, I6-18.
Martinez, S.A., Amoczky, S.P, Flo, G.L., Brinker, W.O. [1997) Dissipation
of heat during polymerization of acrylics used for extemal skeletal fixa-
tor comnecting bars. Veterinary Surgery 26, 290-294.
Mayhew, I.G. [1999) The healthy spinal cord. American Association of
Equine Practitiomers; S6-66.
McCarthy, R.J., Lewis, D.D., Hosgood, G. [1995) Atlantoaxial subluxation in
dogs.Compentdiumont ContituingEducation for thePracticing Veterinariat
17,215-226.
McKeever, F.M. [1968) Atlantoaxial instability. Surgical Climics of North
America 48, 1375-1390.
Read, R., Brett, S., Cahill, J. [1987) Surgical treatment of occipito-
atlantoaxial malformation in the dog. Australian Veterinary Practitioner
17, 184189.
Renegar, WR., Stoll, S.G. [(1979) The use of methylmethacrylate bone
 Cement in the repair of atlantoaxial subluxation stabilization failures.
Case report and discussion. Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital
Association 15, 313-318.
 9.12 Syringohydromyelia has been reported as an incidental
Rochat, M.C., Shores, A. [1999) Fixation of an atlantoaxial subluxation by
use of cannulated screws. Veterinary and ComparativeOrthopaedics and
 finding on MRl of cogs with atlantoaxial subluxation (Sanders 
Traumatology 12,43-46.
et ar., 2000). It could explain residual signs (9.32) or failure to
Sanders, S.G., Bagley, R.S., Silver, G.M. [2000) Complications associated
 improve after stabilization. This dog shows high signal within 
with ventral screws, pins and polymethylmethacrylate for the treatment
the spinal cord over the first and second cervical vertebrae 
ofatlantoaxial instability in 8dogs.Jourmal ofVeterinaryInternal
(arrow). There is also severe compression due to instability at
Medicine 14, 339
 the atlantoaxial joint (arrowhead).
Sandman, K.M., Smith, C.W., Harari, J., Manfra Maretta, S., Pijanowski, G.J.
[(2001) Comparison of pull-out resistance of Kirschner wires and Imex
miniature interface fixation pins in polyurethane foam. Veterinary and
Comparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology 15, 18-22.
Scbulz, K.S., Waldron, D.R., Fahie, M. (1997) Application of ventral pins
REFERENCES
and polymethylmethacrylate for the management of atlantoaxial insta-
Beaver, D.P, Ellison, G.W, Lewis, D.D., Goring, R.L., Kubilis, PS.,
bility: results in nine dogs. Veterinary Surgery 26, 317-325.
Barchard, C. [2000) Risk factors affecting the outcome of surgery for
Shelton, S.B., Bellah, J., Chrisman, C., MeMullen, D. [1991) Hypoplasia
atlantoaxial subluxation in dogs: 46 cases [1978-1998). Jourmal of the
of the odontoid process and secondary atlantoaxial luxation in a Siamese
American Veterinary Medical Association 216, 1104-1109.
cat. Progress in Veterinary Neurology 2, 209-211.
Chambers, J.N., Betts, C.W, Oliver, J.E. [1977) The use of nonmetallic
Sorjonen, D.C, Shires, PK. [1981] Atlantoaxial instability a ventral surgical
suture material for stabilization of atlantoaxial subluxation.Jourial of the
technique for decompression, fixation, and fusion. Veterinary Surgery
American Amimal Hospital Association 13, 602-604.
10, 22-29.
Cook, J.R., Oliver, J.E. [198I] Atlantoaxial hixation in the dog. Compendium
Stead, A.C., Anderson, A.A., Coughlan, A. [1993) Bone plating to stabilise
OmContinuingEducationforthePracticingVeterinarian3,242-2S0.
atlantoaxial subluxation in four dogs. Jourmal of Small Animal Practice
Denny, H.R., Gibbs, C., Waterman, A. [1988] Atlantoaxial subluxation in
34, 462-465.
the dog: a review of thirty cases and an evaluation of treatment by lag
Swaim, S.F, Greene, C.E. [1975) Odontoidectomy in a dog. Jourmal of the
screw fixation. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 26, 37-47.
American Amimal Hospital Association 1l1, 663-667.
Gibson, K.L, Ihle, S.L., Hogan, PM. [199S) Severe spinal cord compression
Thomas, WB., Sorjonen, D.C., Simpson, S.T. [1991) Surgical manage-
caused by a dorsally angulated dens. Progress in Veterinary Neurology 6,
ment of atlantoaxial subluxation in 23 dogs. Veterinary Surgery 20,
5557.
409-412.
Hawthome, J.C., Comell, K.K., Blevins, W.E., Waters, D.J. [1998) Non-
Thomson, M.J., Read, R.A. [1996) Surgical stabilisation of the atlantoaxial
surgical treatment of atlantoaxial instability: A retrospective study.
jointinacat.VeterinaryandComparativeOrhopaedics andTraumatology
Veterinary Surgery 27, 526.
'66-96′6
Huibregtse, B.A., Smith, C.W, Fagin, B.D. [1992) Atlantoaxial luxation in
Watson, A.G., de Lahunta, A. [1989) Atlantoaxial subluxation and absence
a Doberman Pinscher. Camine Practice 17, 7-10.
of transverse ligament of the atlas in a dog. Jourial of the Americart
Hurov, L. [1979) Congenital atlantoaxial malformation and acute subluxa-
Veterinary Medical Association 195, 235-237.
tion in a mature Basset Houndsurgical treatment by wire stabilization.
Wheeler, S.J. [1992] Atlantoaxial subluxation with absence of the dens
Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital Association 15, 177-180
in a Rottweiler. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 33, 90-93.
Atlantoaxial subluxation
171
PROCEDURES
The patient is placed with the neck in extension; this helps to reduce the subluxation. Although positioning the
neck like this helps, reduction of C1 and C2 is usually incomplete. The mid-body of C2 must be grasped with 
necessary to complete reduction. Occasionally malformation or secondary changes make complete reduction
median approach as the carotid artery and its thyroid branch are reflected along with the trachea and larynx. The
dog's head is to the left in all illustrations.
Ventral transarticular fixation (9.13-9.31)
9.13 Positioning for surgery. The area is prepared and
draped, including the proximal humerus to allow
bone graft collection (11.24).
9.13
9.14 Site of incision. Note that the incision extends
cranial to the larynx. At the cranial edge of the
skin incision is the hyoid venous arch, which
should be divided.
9.14
9.15 Incision through the superficial fascia reveals
the sternohyoid muscles (7.21, 7.22). The larynx
(a) is at the cranial end of the incision, and the
trachea is visible (b).
9.15
172
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
9.16 The sternothyroid muscle inserts on the thyroid
cartilage. The muscle is sectioned along the
dotted line. The vascular bundle shown in 9.18
can be seen under the muscle insertion.
9.16
9.17 The sternothyroid muscle is mobilized and
divided close to the larynx. Leave an adequate
portion near the thyroid cartilage for repair. The
thyroid gland is visible (*).
9.17
9.18 A vascular bundle supplies the thyroid gland;
only one artery supplies each gland and so it
must be preserved. Adequate padding with
moist towels or sponges must be provided for
the trachea, esophagus and thyroid gland.
Insufficient protection has been provided here to
the trachea, which could lead to necrosis
(Thomas et al., 1991).
9.18
9.19
9.19 These sagittal 3D
reconstructions of CT
scans show how
subluxation can make
the initial approach 
challenging. A: Normal 
dog to show congruity of
the ventral surfaces of C1
A
B
and C2. B: In most dogs with atlantoaxial subluxation, the dens, atlantoaxial joints and the cranial portion
of C2 are obscured under the body of C1. Reduction is in the direction of the arrow. Images from the
same dogs are shown in 9.1 and 9.6.
Atlantoaxial subluxation
173
 9.20 Deep fascia dissected with C1 and C2 reduced
to show the tendons of the longus colli muscles
inserting on the ventral process of C1 (arrow).
9.20
9.21 Diagram of deep anatommy as shown in 9.20.
Note the relationship of the soft tissues to the
underlying skeletal structures.
9.21
9.22 The tendons of the longus colli muscles are
elevated from the ventral process of C1. The
muscles are elevated caudolaterally from the
body of C2 (exposed here). Dissection of the
fascia reveals the joint capsule of the C1/C2
joints. Here the capsule has been incised and 
removed partially on the dog's right side (arrow).
9.22
9.23 The joint spaces can be seen clearly. The
articular cartilage is removed with a curette, #11 
blade or a small bur. If a bur is used, care must 
be taken not to weaken the cortical bone on
either side of the joint.
9.23
174
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
9.24
9.24 The joint space can be opened using a dental
tartar scraper or small Hohmann retractor. This is 
a useful maneuver in order to support C2 while 
drilling. Here the cranial articular cartilage has
been removed revealing the subchondral
bone (arrow).
9.25 Position of screws. ldeally, the screws are angled
away from the midline at approximately 30°,
towards the medial angle of the alar notch, and
downward (i.e. dorsally) at approximately 20? from
the horizontal, which in practice means using as 
fat a trajectory as possible (Sorjonen and Shires,
1981).
9.25
9.26 Placement of screws. In most miniature dogs,
1.5-mm cortical bone screws are used.
A 1.1-mm hole is drilled in C2 and across the
articulation. The body of C2 has a tendency to
move down, away from the surgeon; use of the
stabilization technique shown in 9.19 and 9.24
can help to prevent this. Once the hole has been
drilled in one side of C2, a tartar scraper may be
inserted in the hole to stabilize the vertebra while
the other hole in C2 is drilled.
9.26
Atlantoaxial subluxation
175
1. Drill both 1.1-mm holes in C2.
3.  Drill 1.5-mm glide hole on the same side in C2.
4. Measure depth of the hole through C2 into C1.
5.Tap this hole with 1.5-mm tap.
6. Place screw through C2 into C1. Do not tighten fully
7. Repeat steps 2 to 6 on the other side.
Performing the operations in the order shown above avoids the problem of drilling holes and not being able to
yonuo pleu-pueu lleus e ylm Alieap! lo bulas lamod mol e buisn palasui aa pinous pue alou loid e ainban ls
(5.22). Pins must also be encased completely within bone cement (Johnson and Hulse, 1989). Cannulated
screws provide another alternative as they permit repositioning of the guide wires if necessary before placing
The average mediolateral pin angle in dogs undergoing a successful stabilization was between 22? and 27°,
with a theoretical ideal of 29? and a practical range of 10° and 45°. If implants are directed too laterally across the
(Rochat and Shores, 1999). The average ventrodorsal angle in the same dogs was between 28.5° and 34.5° with
a theoretical ideal of 22° and a practical range of 15° and 45° (9.8, 9.29, 9.31). The theoretical ideal ventrodorsal
as far caudally as possible in C2 may facilitate this (Sorjonen and Shires, 1981; Jaggy et al., 1991). Malformation
of C1 or C2 can make assessment of the correct angles very dificult (Thomas et af., 1991). Use of a goniometer
during surgery may help improve accuracy (Thomson and Read, 1996). Vertebral positioning must also be per-
fectly symmetrical.
Odontoidectomy is usually described prior to reduction but may be easier and safer once the joint is reduced
and stabilized (Johnson and Hulse, 1989; Jaggy et al., 1991; Gibson et af., 1995) (9.27). Access to the dens is
and Greene, 1975; Johnson and Hulse, 1989; Jaggy et af., 1991; Gibson et af., 1995) but is not necessary in
most dogs (Schulz et a., 1997).
9.27 Here one screw is in position, and the other is
being inserted prior to final tightening.
9.27
176
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
9.28 Cancellous bone is harvested from the proximal
humerus and placed in and around the joint
space before tightening the screws (11.24).
The longus colli is then apposed with absorbable
sutures and the sternothyroid muscle is repaired.
9.28
9.29 A: The ventrodorsal screw
angle is nearly perfect (25°).
B: The mediolateral angles
are a little high but still
acceptable (left 43° and
right 40%). This dog, also
shown in 9.5, was normal at
9.29
 3-month follow-up.
9.30 If the ventrodorsal angle is
suboptimal then failure
occurs due to insufficient
bone purchase (Rochat
and Shores, 1999). Despite
implant failure, this 1-year-
old Toy poodle was
9.30
managed in a splint and was 
A
B
normal 3 years later.
9.31 The screw on the left is not angled adequately away from the midline
and was probably not crossing the joint. It snapped soon after
sem bop aul subis jo aouaunoau lelled e pey bop aul pue Aabins
managed by addition of an external support and made a good
recovery. Angles are mediolateral: left 14° and right 41°.
9.31
Atlantoaxial subluxation
177
Multiple ventral implants and bone cement (9.32-9.34)
Screws can be directed laterally into the thick bone just rostral to each caudal articular surface of C1 (1.15,
9.33A) and also into the bone caudal to the cranial articular surface of C2 (1.15B). The screw heads are then
united with bone cement (9.32). Variations on this technique include placement of two implants in C1, two in C2,
and two more in C3 (Sanders et af., 2000); and the pattern shown in 9.34 that incorporates transarticular
implants (Schulz et af., 1997). Implants of the largest possible size should be chosen and they should penetrate
yonuo-uu e buisn puey Aa ui ind aa Aieap! pinous pue suid yioous ol loadns ae suid papeaiul 'luawao
(5.22). Whatever pattern of multiple implant is used, the length of implant and the volume of cement must be
considered in relation to the amount of room existing at this location (9.34). Care must be taken to protect soft
tissues from the heat of polymerization and to avoid rough edges that might abrade tissues.
9.32 This Miniature poodle was
tetraparetic at 6 weeks of age
but improved dramatically in a
splint. The dog presented
with neck pain, tetraparesis
and fecal incontinence at 3.5
years. Fixation was with
9.32
multiple implants and bone
cement. A and B: Despite
A
B
excellent reduction dorsally
there is a marked step on the floor of the vertebral canal; the malformed dens probably prevented complete
reduction. Odontoidectomy may have helped but the risk of iatrogenic spinal cord trauma was considered too
9.33 CT scans to show A: site of
implant placement in the
thick bone just rostral to the
caudal articular surfaces of
C1 (arrows) and B: the
method for cross-pinning 
into the caudal vertebral
body of C2 (arrows).
Implants should penetrate
9.33
two cortices for maximum
A
8
holding power (Sandman et al.,
 2001). W/hen available, intraoperative radiography is recommended to confirm implant placement (Rochat 
and Shores, 1999). See also 1.14, 1.15.
178
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
9.34 Postoperative A: lateral and B:
ventrodorsal radiographs to show
fixation in a 1-year-old Yorkshire 
terrier using six Kirschner wires,
cancellous bone graft and bone
cement. Two wires were placed into
each of the pedicles of C1 (9.33A).
Two wires were placed across the
 atlantoaxial joints as described in 
9.34
9.24-9.27. Two wires were placed into A
B
the caudal body of C2 at approximately
30° to the transverse plane (9.33B); ideally they should not cross C2/3 disc space (from Schulz et af., 1997).
Dorsal wire fixation (9.35-9.42)
9.35 Incision site relative to
 the skeleton. The finger
is on the occipital
protuberance; the
incision is made just off
the midline. Note that 
the neck must be flexed,
which is not ideal
(page 171).
9.35
9.36 Exposure of the spinous process of C2.
Manipulation and movement of the vertebrae
must be kept to a minimum; it is therefore
preferable to use sharp dissection.
9.36
Atlantoaxial subluxation
179
 9.37 Diagram to show the relationship
between skeletal, vascular and 
nervous structures. (a) Dorsal
notch of the foramen magnum; 
(b) dorsal arch of C1; (c) spinous
process of C2; (d) C2 nerve roots
and vessels. Note also the
vertebral artery and its branches
(1.36).
9.37
9.38 Two holes are drilled in the spinous process of C2.
9.38
9.39 The dorsal atlantoaxial ligament between C1
arch and C2 spinous process is disrupted in
atlantoaxial subluxation. The periosteum and soft
tissues are removed to allow access to the
vertebral canal between C1 and C2. A double
loop of wire is passed under the arch of C1 in a
cranial direction. Pressure on the spinal cord
must be avoided. The internal periosteum of the 
vertebral canal may be continuous with the dura
9.39
mater at this stage, and gentle dissection is 
required to allow passage of the wire.
9.40 The loop of wire is retrieved from the atlanto-
occipital space. This space may need to be
enlarged in order to grasp the wire. This is best
achieved by removing bone from the occiput,
for the fixation.
9.40
180
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
9.41 Arrangement of wires after tightening and
cutting the ends. If the spinous process is too
small to drill holes into, the suture can be
passed under the C2 spinous process
(Chambers et al., 1977).
9.41
9.42 Postoperative radiograph showing reduction of
the subluxation. Note that the wire under the
lamina of C1 is causing some spinal cord
compression.
9.42
Dorsal cross-pin fixation (9.43)
This should be stronger than dorsal wiring: it does not carry the risk of spinal cord trauma and provides a useful
rescue technique for any fixation failure. A disadvantage is that it still relies on the spinous process of C2. Care
must be taken during exposure of the wings of the atlas to avoid the C1 nerve root and also the vertebral artery as
it exits the transverse foramen (1.36). With the vertebrae reduced, a K-wire is driven in a ventrolateral direction
LO jo buim aul jo jeu lepneo aul alelauad pue abebua ol 2o jo ssaooid snouids aul jo apis yoea ssoioe
 Predrilling a small initial hole and then using a bone gouge is necessary to stop the pin from slipping caudally off 
the sloped surface of the wing. Each K-wire is then removed and replaced by a positive profile pin. The pin usually
has to curve slightly between C1 and C2 in order to make good bone contact; the curve is best induced using the
papioae ag pinous loeluoo loauip ing suid auljo sloadse pasodxa aul oi palidde Laul s! lhawao auog aonob auog
between the cement and the spinous process of C2 in order to reduce the risk of thermal necrosis weakening
the bone of toy-breed dogs. Bone graft is also applied between the arch of C1 and the spinous process of C2 to
promote a fibro-osseous union (Jeffery, 1996).
9.43 A,B: Dorsal cross-pin fixation.
9.43
A
B
Lumbosacral disease
Chapter 
10
Clinical signs  183
Diagnosis
183
Examination 
183
Differential diagnosis 
184
Electrophysiology
184
Radiography
185
Treatment
188
Non-surgical treatment  188
Surgical treatment
188
Surgery  189
 Dorsal laminectomy 
189
Foraminal decompression or facetectomy 
190
Dorsal fusion-fixation   190 
Complications
191
10.1 Dog in a typical posture of low back pain. It also had
Intraoperative
191
 lameness in one pelvic limb and marked pain on palpation over
 Early postoperative 
791
the lumbosacral junction.
Late postoperative 
Postoperative care
192
cauda equina. The spinal cord ends within L6 vertebra
in most dogs or in L7 in cats and some small dogs
 Prognosis
192
(Fletcher and Kitchell, 1966) (1.5, 1.8B, 1.9). The L7
nerve roots run in unique troughs called the lateral
Key issues for future investigation  193
recesses within L7 vertebra (1.28B).
 Motion in the normal lumbar spine is greatest at the
References
lumbosacraljoint (Burger and Lang, 1993). In some dogs,
193
 abnormal motion probably leads to degenerative changes
 Procedures
such as spondylosis deformans, osteophyte prolifera-
195
 Dorsal laminectomy
tion and soft tissue overgrowth of the joint capsules.
195
 Foraminal decompression and facetectomy 
These degenerative changes appear to reduce the over-
202
 all range of motion and clinical problems may arise due
Dorsal fixation-fusion   204
to subsequent compression of neural structures in the
vertebral canal and intervertebral foramina (Mattoon
and Koblik, 1993; Schmid and Lang, 1993). This
sequence of events resembles those thought to occur in
The clinical signs seen with lumbosacral lesions differ
hip dysplasia (Chambers et al., 1988).
from those seen at other locations of the spine (10.1),
A number of abnormalities may combine to cause
mainly because of the unique anatomical structure of the
compression of the cauda equina or L7 nerve roots
region. The vertebral canal in this region contains only
(10.2-10.4). These include:
182
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
A
B
10.2 A: Sagittal section to show the normal relationship between L7 and the sacrum. B: 3D reconstruction from a dog with a
normal lumbosacral spine (same dog as in 2.24). The dog was free of signs for lumbosacral dlisease and a transverse CT study
through this region was normal (10.10A).
10.3 A: Hansen type Il disc
herniation compressing the cauda
equina (10.10B). B: 3D
reconstruction of a CT scan from a
7-year-old Mastiff with chronic, lower
back pain, reduced hock flexion and 
low tail carriage. A large, dlisc
herniation was excised via dorsal
laminectomy. The cdog then ceveloped
urinary retention due to increased 
sphincter tone; this resolved after
2 weeks of catheterization (O'Brien,
1988; Coates, 1999).
A
B
10.4 A: Ventral subluxation of the sacrum relative to L7. This may occur in normal dogs, although a step of more than 4 mm
suggests an abnormal lumbosacral junction (WVright, 1980; Denny et al., 1982; Schmid and Lang. 1993). B: Six-year-old working 
German shepherd dog presenting with mild paraparesis, weak hock flexion and lumbosacral pain. The dog was seropositive for
Ehrlichia canis and returned to work after antibiotics; the subluxation did not seem to cause any clinical signs (3.2, 4.35).
Lumbosacral disease
183
·Stenosis (multilevel) of the vertebral canal (Meij,
 Table 10.1 Clinical signs of lumbosacral disease
1993; Jones et al., 1995a,b, 1996b).
· Hansen type II disc herniation at the L7/S1
Mild
Severe
intervertebral space (Jones et al., 1996b).
Low back pain - palpation,
Mild pelvic limb paresis
·Subluxation, osteophytosis or thickening of the
 tail elevation, per rectum
 Pelvic limb muscle atrophy
articular processes {Jones et al., 1994).
Difficulty sitting 
Tal paresis
· Epidural fibrosis (Oliver et al., 1978; Sisson et al.,
 Dificulty jumping
Fecal incontinence
 Difficulty climbing 
1992; Jones et al., 1996b, 1999)
Anal hyporeflexia
 Pelvic limb lameness,
 Urinary incontinence 
● Soft tissue proliferation, usually of the joint capsule
 worsening with exercise
Self-mutilation
 or ligamentous structures (Jones et al., 1999).
Hyperesthesia, pruritus 
●Vascular compromise of the spinal nerves (Tarvin and
Prata, 1980; Jones et al., 1996a, 1999; Porter, 1996).
· Osteochondrosis of the sacrum {Lang et al., 1992;
Hanna, 2001).
 Incontinence results from pelvic and pudendal nerve
● Instability and misalignment between L7 and Sl
dysfunction. Urinary incontinence is usually LMN in
(Schmid and Lang, 1993)
nature with dribbling of urine and a bladder that is
The exact role of lumbosacral instability is unclear
easily expressed by manual pressure (l0.3) (see 'Control
and it is difficult to quantify regardless of the imaging
of urinary function', page 350). Rarely, urinary dysfunc-
technique (Schmid and Lang, 1993; Fox et al., 1996).
tion may be the only clinical sign (Tarvin and Prata,
This can pose a problem for surgical decision-making
1980). Fecal incontinence seems to be related mainly
(Algorithm 10.1).
to poor anal tone, which may be present even when the
Larger-breed dogs, particularly German shepherd
anal reflex is intact
dogs, are affected most frequently although signs are
Dogs with chronic degenerative lumbosacral lesions
also reported in small dogs (Tarvin and Prata, 1980;
 may present with non-specific clinical signs, but low back
Lang et al., 1992; Jones et al., 1995b). Young, working
pain is quite different from that seen in thoracolumbar
Ad are aau pn uaaq aa e s
lesions. Diagnosis of lumbosacral disease depends on
 prone to this disorder (Wheeler, 1992; Danielsson and
recognizing the historical features and clinical signs and
Sjostrom, 1999; Jones et al., 2000). The condition is
on a careful physical examination, which should pin-
rare in cats (Hurov, 1985; Stoll, 1996). Although
point the source of pain.
 degenerative and congenital conditions are the focus of
this chapter, other disorders can affect the lumbosacral
spine. Tumors (see Chapter 12) and fractures (see
DIAGNOSIS
Chapter 13) should be considered in the differential
diagnosis. Discospondylitis also occurs at the lumbo-
Examination
sacral junction (l4.12); its management is discussed in
Clinical signs may be vague in some dogs, which makes
Chapter 14 (page 327). Articular (synovial) cysts have
accurate diagnosis difficult. A thorough physical,
also been described as a cause of lumbosacral pain in a
orthopedic and neurological examination is essential
German shepherd dog (Webb et al., 2001).
along with a rectal examination. In view of the diffi-
culty in interpreting some of the ancillary diagnostic
tests the clinical signs may provide the main basis for
CLINICAL SIGNS
reaching a diagnosis (Table 10.1).
Lumbosacral lesions can cause pelvic limb gait abnormal-
The anal reflex, sphincter tone and tail tone should
ities, lameness, or lower motor neuron (LMN) neurolog-
be evaluated. Reduced or absent hock flexion during
ical deficits. Pain is common but additional signs vary
the withdrawal reflex (2.27) is a sensitive indicator of
depending on the nature and severity of the neurological
motor dysfunction in the sciatic nerve (but mild lesions
impairment (McKee, 1993) (Table 10.1). There may be
will only cause loss of proprioception). The patellar
 reflex may also appear exaggerated if sciatic nerve
 deficits; or paraparesis, tail paralysis and incontinence
function is depressed. This phenomenon of 'pseudo-
(Oliver et al., 1978; de Risio et al., 2001). Limb signs
hyperreflexia' must be differentiated from the increased
include lameness or sciatic deficits affecting the caudal
reflex that occurs with upper motor neuron {UMN)
thigh muscles and those distal to the stifle (Tarvin and
deficits seen with lesions cranial to the L4 segment.
Prata, 1980; Meij et al., 1993). Lameness in performance
Pseudohyperreflexia results from decreased tone in the
animals is often exacerbated by work (Jones et al., 2000).
muscles innervated by the sciatic nerve, which normally
1.84
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
counteract the extension of the stifle induced by the
 imaging should extend as far forward as the L4/5 disc
patellar reflex (see page 27).
space to include the sacral spinal cord.
Hyperesthesia is a frequent finding and the hind-
quarters should be palpated carefully to locate the focus
Electrophysiology
 of pain. Manipulation of the limbs and spine may pro-
voke a pain response, but it may be difficult to distin-
Clinical electrophysiological studies are useful to confirm
guish pain associated with spinal disease from that
LMN disease and nerve root dysfunction (Sisson et al.,
 caused by orthopedic problems. Direct pressure over the
1992; Meij, 1993; de Risio et al., 200l; Cuddon, 2002;
Cuddon et al., 2003) (see page 60). Electromyography
lumbosacral joint, either with the examiner's knee
between the dog's rear limbs to support its pelvis and lift
 of the limbs, tail and perineum may reveal spontaneous
its feet off the ground slightly or with the dog lying on its 
activity, which is consistent with LMN involvement.
- anna o dau Ae '(un iad l ai
 However, a normal electromyogram does not eliminate
 bosacral pain from orthopedic disease. Pain may also be
the possibility of lumbosacral disease (de Risio et al.,
elicited by elevation of or traction on the tail and when
 q s q  r  
the number of false-positive diagnoses associated with
limbs from one side to the other (Sjostrum, 2003). A
MRI evidence of nerve root disorders (Nardin et al.,
final test is to have the dog stand up on its rear legs, with
1999) (see page 60). Nerve conduction studies and F-
its front feet resting on a chair and its spine extended,
wave latencies may also be useful (Cuddon, 2002;
Cuddon et al., 2003) (see page 61). Abnormal findings
 and then apply pressure over the lumbosacral space.
 confirm LMN disease but do not specify the etiology.
If lameness or weakness worsen with exercise and
resolve to some degree with rest then they may be due
to neurogenic claudication, a condition well recognized
in humans. This is due to failure of arterial vasodilation in
 Table 10.2 Differential diagnosis of lumbosacral disease
affected nerve roots during exercise. As well as lame-
ness, paresthesia and sphincter disturbance may also
 Severe neurological
occur (Markwalder, 1993; Porter, 1996). Neurogenic
 Mild clinical signs
deficits
claudication has also been recognized in dogs, one of
 Neurological disorders
which had concomitant stranguria (Tarvin and Prata,
 Degenerative myelopathy
 Degenerative myelopathy
1980).
Synovial cyst
Ischemic myelopathy
Schmorl's node
 Ischemic neuromyopathy
Differential diagnosis
 Discogenic pain
Neoplasia
Differentials vary depending on whether the dog has
Facet joint pain 
 Discospondylitis or epidural
Sacroiliac joint pain 
806c866
 non-specific signs or obvious neurological deficits (Table
Congenital anomaly— spina
 Polyradiculoneuritis 
3.5 and 10.2). Dogs with the orthopedic diseases listed
 bifida, dermoid sinus 
Myelitis 
in Table 10.2 have a normal neurological examination.
Tethering of the terminal
 Trauma
Dogs with pain and no neurological deficits could have
 spinal cord
synovial cysts (Webb et al., 2001); tethering ofthe dural
 Peripheral neuropathy
 Neoplasia— spinal cord or
sac (Huttmann et al., 200l; Shamir et al., 2001); inflam-
 nerve root 
mation of disc, meninges or nerve root; or possibly either
 Discospondylitis
facet or sacroiliac joint pain (Pang et al., 1998) (see
 Occult dliscospondylitis 
Chapter 14). Dogs with degenerative myelopathy are
Meningomyelitis 
 Polyradiculoneuritis 
pain free and the withdrawal reflex is normal, but the
patellar reflex may be depressed because of dorsal nerve
Orthopedic disorders
- aq r    nd s  
 Coxofemoral arthritis
sible to differentiate degenerative lumbosacral disease,
Cruciate rupture
discospondylitis and neoplasia on physical examination.
 Gracilis contracture
 In some dogs, disorders such as degenerative myelopathy
 Psoas muscle injury 
(10.53) or a thoracolumbar disc(s) may coexist with
 Pelvic limb lameness, other
lumbosacral disease and this can confound the neurolog-
Other 
ical localization (2.24). The deficits of lumbosacral dis-
 Prostatic dlisease
ease are referable to the L4-S3 nerve roots and so may
 Urethral neoplasia
be difficult to differentiate from L4-S3 lesions that
 Anal sac adenocarcinoma
 are situated within the dural sac (2.25). In such dogs,
Lumbosacral disease
185
Radiography
normal survey radiographs (Ness, 1994). Identification
of sacral osteochondrosis or transitional vertebrae
SURVEY RADIOGRAPHY
It is advisable that the patient be anesthetized or
increases substantially the likelihood that the dog's signs
are due to cauda equina compression {Lang et al., 1992;
joint. Rotation of the spine and pelvis must be avoided 
Morgan et al., 1993; Morgan, 1999) (10.6).
Neurological localization of a patient may indicate a
(4.14, 4.15). The value of flexed and extended posi-
tional survey radiographs appears limited (Mattoon and 
lesion of L4-S3 spinal cord or nerve roots. It may be pos-
Koblik, 1993; Schmid and Lang, 1993). The main role
sible to define the location more accurately, for example
by the anal reflex. Consideration of the diagnostic imag-
of survey radiographs is to rule out neoplasia (12.1lA),
trauma (13.2l) and discospondylitis (14.12).
ing in many of these patients frequently focuses on the
Many clinically normal dogs have radiographic abnor
lumbosacral joint alone. This policy runs the risk of miss-
ing lesions elsewhere in the vertebral column that are
malities of the lumbosacral junction (l0.5). Conversely,
occasional dogs with lumbosacral disease will have
involving the L4-S3 cord segments (2.25) or ascribing
significance to incidental lesions (10.4).
MYELOGRAPHY
Myelography (or MRI) is particularly useful in dogs that
might have a spinal cord lesion (2.25). The subarachnoid
space extends beyond the lumbosacral junction in about
80% of dogs (Lang, 1988; Ness, 1994; de Risio et al.,
2001). Myelography can therefore be useful to assess
the low lumbar region as well as the rest of the spinal
cord (Rarmirez and Thrall, 1998; Sjostrum, 2003).
Cervical injection is preferred, as it avoids the potential
for epidural contrast leakage in the area of interest.
Filling of the dural sac is improved by flexing the spine
(Lang, 1988). Lesions may cause dorsal elevation or
attenuation of the column; flexion-extension studies
may also be useful (10.7), but false-positive results occur
10.5 Lumbosacral spondylosis deformans and narrowing of the
(Lang, 1988; Watt, 1991; Danielsson and Sjostrom,
intervertebral space. This type of change is seen frequently in
older, large-breed dogs but in itself is not dliagnostic of disease
1999). Furthermore, a normal study does not preclude
(Morgan et al., 1989; Ramirez and Thrall, 1998)
cauda equina involvement (Ramirez and Thrall, 1998).
R
B
C
10.6 A, B: Five-year-old German shepherd dog with lumbosacral pain. Sacral OCD is present; the fragment moves with flexion and
extension (Lang et al., 1992). Subluxation of the articular facets (arrowhead) with foraminal narrowing is also evicent (10.11, 10.46).
C: Four-year-old dlog with transitional vertebra and left nerve root signature. 3D reconstruction of the CT scan shows foraminal
narrowing on the left due to a large articular facet (1o.9). There is only one transverse process (arrow); the other is fused to the ilium.
186
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
DISCOGRAPHYAND EPIDUROGRAPHY
Sjostrom, 1999) (10.8). Discography is abnormal if
 These two methods can be very useful, especially when
more than 0.3 ml of contrast medium can be injected
used in combination (Selcer et al., 1988; Barthez et al.,
(Barthez et al., 1994). When both are to be done the
1994; Ramirez and Thrall, 1998; Danielsson and
discogram should precede the epidurogram. Positional
views may be employed with epidurography (Selcer
et al., 1988; Ramirez and Thral, 1998). If both myelog-
raphy and epidurography are planned, the myelogram
should be performed first, as the presence of epidural
contrast complicates myelographic interpretation. The
utility of discography may be enhanced if it is followed
 by CT and discography in humans may be more sensi-
 tive in detecting anular tears than MRI (Ohnmeiss
et al., 1997; Milette et al., 1999).
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
CT is particularly useful as it shows clearly the vertebral
canal (10.10), lateral recesses (1.28), intervertebral
foramina (1.26, 1.27) and articular processes (10.9) in
cross-sectional images (Jones et al., 1995a, 1996b).
Reformatting can be used to create dorsal and sagittal
images (l0.ll) and facet joint subluxation may be vis-
(Jones et al., 1994; Meij et al., 1996) (10.6, 10.48). CT
can also be used for dynamic studies (l0.1l) and is help-
ful when performed after surgery (Meij et al., 1996;
 Jones et al., 2000) (10.54). The primary abnormalities
B
visible on CT are a replacement of epidural fat with soft
10.7 Seven-year-old German shepherd dog with mild paraparesis
tissue density (l0.10), which often represents epidural
and lumbosacral pain. There is a change in the degree of
fibrosis, and multilevel compression (Jones et al., 1996b)
compression at the lumbosacral space between flexion and
(10.17). Use of intravenous contrast may improve surgi-
extension. A: Good filling of the dural sac when the spine is
cal decision-making by identifying compressed tissues,
flexed; mild dlisc herniation is present at L6/7. B: There is dorsal
which tend to enhance (Jones et al., 1999) (10.40).
displacement of the dural sac in extension and marked
Some CT findings, such as loss of epidural fat, may not
attenuation of contrast filing from L6/7 caudally. Fixation fusion 
sem uoexy ing yen auog e pue smans omi buisn auop sem
be of clinical significance in older animals {Jones and
suboptimal (10.16).
Inzana, 2000). In contrast to MRI, CT offers lower cost
A
epidurogram, which also outlines the bulging disc. Attenuation of more than 50% of the canal is considered abnormal (Ramirez
and Thrall, 1998).
Lumbosacral disease
187
and thinner slice thickness along with better discrimina-
component to the compression (10.12). One potential
tion of bone spurs, articular process disease, soft tissue 
disadvantage of MRI is over-diagnosis. Even expert,
calcification, and soft tissue gas opacities (Jones et al.,
human neuroradiologists tend to over-interpret the sig-
2000). Scans should include at least the L6 vertebral
nificance of lesions seen on MRI (Deyo, 1994; Jensen 
body and, ideally, additional images should also be made 
through the L4/5 and L5/6 disc spaces (10.17).
MRI
This provides better soft tissue resolution than CT as
well as an ability to acquire images in multiple planes
without image degradation; earlier detection of disc
 degeneration (1.9, 4.68) and evaluation of the entire
lumbar spine in a single sagittal examination (Ramirez
and Thrall, 1998; Jones et al., 2000) (1.9, 2.25, 10.12).
 Slice thickness is often greater than for CT, however,
which increases volume averaging artefacts (Jones et al.,
2000). Transverse images provide the best visualization
of disc or foraminal anatomy (Adams et al., 1995) (l.9).
They also reveal lesions in a foramen that cannot be
detected by myelography or epidurography (Chambers 
et al., 1997). Sagittal views made with the spine in
flexion and then extension help to identify a dynamic
B
10.10 A: Transverse CT scan at the level of the L7/S1 disc in a
dog with a normal lumbosacral spine. The nerve roots and 
dural sac are surrounded by epidural fat. Same dog as in 10.2.
B: In this dog (also shown in 10.3) there is almost complete loss
of epidural fat and a general increase in soft tissue opacity.
B
10.11 Sagittal reformatted CT scan made with the dog in an
B
A: extended position and B: flexed position. There is stenosis of
the vertebral canal and foramina with a bulging L7/S1 disc. An 
  a     
 OCD lesion is visible on the sacrum and the degree of compression
CT scan, and B: 3D reconstruction. Same dog as in 10.6C
increases with extension. Same dog as in 10.6 A, B and 10.46.
188
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
et al., 1994). Therefore, the clinician should not rely
clinical signs and this must be considered prior to insti-
exclusively on imaging to confirm the diagnosis (Brant-
tuting treatment (Deyo, 1994; Jensen et al., 1994; Jones
Zawadzki et al., 1995; Gorman and Hodak, 1997;
and Inzana, 2000). A herniated disc is detected in a high
Milette et al., 1999). Part of the problem is a confusion
 proportion of people who have never had spinal pain and
 in terminology. Classification of lesions into a disc bulge,
 so imaging alone, both in dogs and in humans, should not
protrusion or extrusion is not very helpful in humans
 serve as confirmation of a clinical diagnosis (Gorman and
(Milette et al., 1999) (see pages 13 and 58). In particular,
Hodak, 1997). Electrophysiological testing provides an
bulges or protrusions are common incidental findings in 
 additional means of independent confirmation of lesions
people without back pain (Deyo, 1994; Jensen et al.,
(Nardin et al., 1999).
 1994). Criteria in humans for disruption of disc anatomy
include a loss of disc height; decrease in central disc sig-
nal on T2-weighting; or localized, peripheral hyperinten-
TREATMENT
sity on T2-weighting. Most outer anulus disruptions in
Non-surgical treatment
humans are symptomatic (Milette et al., 1999).
Most dogs are treated initially with rest and anti-
The choice of diagnostic tests is largely dependent
 inflammatory medication (Table 15.2). This may be suc-
on availability and clinician preference. Physical and  cessful if pain is the main clinical sign; 3-4 months of
neurological examination, survey radiography, CSF sam- exercise restriction produced improvement in 8/l16 dogs
pling at both the cerebello-medullary cistern (CMC) (50%) (Ness, 1994). Such a course is seldom effective in
and lumbar sites, and clinical electrophysiology are  working dogs and signs often recur when normal activi-
recommended. Imaging by CT or MR is done when ties are resumed (Danielsson and Sjostrom, 1999;
available as they provide cross-sectional images (Ramirez  Janssens et al., 2000; Sjostrum, 2003).
and Thrall, 1998; de Risio et al., 2001). CT and MRI can
also be used to compare the degree of compression with
 Surgical treatment
the spine in flexed and extended positions (Bagley, Surgical treatment is indicated when non-surgical treat-
2003) (10.6A,B, 10.11, 10.12, 10.46). Either myelog-  ment has failed; in working dogs; and in those with pain
raphy or MRI should be performed if the dog has signs of  or neurological deficits (Sjostrum, 2003). Further indica-
spinal cord disease (2.25). MRI is the best, single imag-
 tions for surgery include CT or MR findings of increased
 ing modality overall for humans (Kent et al., 1992). The
 soft tissue suggestive of epidural fibrosis, especially if it
position of the dog in the scanner can be very important;
enhances with contrast. The choice of surgical procedure
a neutral or flexed position reduces compression com-
 is then between dorsal laminectomy, distraction and
pared to an extended position (Adams et al., 1995; Jones
fusion, or a combination ofthe two. Definitive criteria for
et al., 2000). If CT or MRI is not available, myelography
is performed followed by discography and epidurogra- effective for dogs with chronic incontinence [de Risio
Some lesions detected by CT or MRI do not cause neurological deficits or severe pain (Slocum and Devine,
B
10.12 T2-weighted MRls of a 7-year-old Labrador with lumbosacral pain. A: Image made with the spine in flexion. There is loss of
was confirmed at surgery.
Lumbosacral disease
189
1998). These presentations warrant combined dorsal
excised once the cauda equina is retracted laterally when
laminectomy and fixation-fusion. Additional indications
there is marked bulging of the disc (10.3, 10.39). Routine
for distraction and fusion include a marked change in the
fenestration may also be warranted (Danielsson and
degree of compression between flexion and extension or
Sjostrom, 1999). Any redundant joint capsule should also
a telescoping of the facets, which suggest instability
be resected. Laminectomy often provides rapid relief of
(10.6A,B, 10.46-10.48). An algorithm for surgical
pain with improvement of mild gait abnormalities and
decision-making is shown in Algorithn 10.1.
 minor neurological deficits (Danielsson and Sjostrom,
1999; Risio et al., 200l). It does not address instability if
this is a contributing factor. Decompression by laminec-
SURGERY
tomy can be combined with fixation and fusion (Slocum
Dorsal laminectomy (10.18-10.39)
and Devine, 1998; Bagley, 2003) (10.46-10.54). As dogs
Decompression of the cauda equina and spinal nerves can
with  incontinence  of  more than 6  weeks  duration
be achieved by dorsal laminectomy (10.13), which can
respond poorly to laminectomy alone they should also
be combined with foraminal decompression or even face-
undergo fixation and fusion (de Risio et al., 2001).
tectomy (10.40-10.45). The anulus fibrosus should be
 Results of dorsal laminectomy are shown in Table 10.3.
Algorithm 10.1 Surgical decision-making 
 Pain, mild
Neurological
 Incontinence
Severe
in lumbosacral disease.
 deficits or
 radiculopathy
severe pain
 without 
incontinence
Severe
instability
 on imaging 
Dorsal
laminectomy
+/- foraminal
 Dorsal
Dorsal laminectomy
decompression
laminectomy, +/-
 foraminal
 foraminal 
decompression
decompression
 or facetectomy
Fixation-
AND fixation-
 +/- fusion
 fusion
uoisny
B
(10.53). An asterisk indicates the L7/S1 disc space. A: Mid-sagittal 3D reconstruction after CT scan. B: Dorsal view of the 3D
reconstruction shown in A. Same dog as shown in 10.6A,B, 10.11 and 10.46.
06 1
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Epidural fibrosis is a common finding; this is
Chapter 1l). A rationale can therefore be made for
 probably a response to chronic compression (10.17B).
lumbosacral distraction and stabilization (Oliver et al.,
Magnification is recommended if attempts are made to
1978). The principle is the same, namely to open the
 break down adhesions around nerve roots (Oliver et al.,
vertebral canal and intervertebral foramen, relieve
1978; Fingeroth et al., 1989; Sisson et al., 1992;
pressure on neural tissues, and prevent abnormal motion.
Markwalder, 1993; Jones et al., 1996b, 1999).
 Distraction of the dorsal aspect of L7 and Sl is achieved
using screws placed through the articular processes of
L7/Sl and into the body of the sacrum (10.14). Fusion is
Foraminal decompression or
promoted by removing the articular cartilage from the
facetectomy (10.40-10.45)
facet joints and by a cancellous bone graft (10.52). This
can be combined with dorsal laminectomy, especially
An increase in soft tissue within the foramen, loss of
epidural fat or facet osteophytosis are indicators of prob-
for dogs with marked neurological deficits, severe pain,
able radiculopathy {Adams et al., 1995; Jones et al.,
1996b). Contrast enhancement after CT or MRI further
increases preoperative suspicion of foraminal disease
(Jones et al, 1999, 2000) (10.40). Together with radic-
ular pain and delayed late waves (see Chapter 4), these
features are indicators for some form of foraminal
decompression (Oliver et al., 1978; Chambers et al.,
1988). The laminectomy can be simply undercut or
widened over the foramen and any osteophytes can also
be removed by undercutting (10.41-10.43). However,
the foramen can be difficult to examine fully until the
facet is removed (Watt, 199l). The risks and benefits of
facetectomy are unclear as is the need for subsequent
stabilization (Slocum and Devine, 1998) (10.45).
Lumbosacral stiffness is decreased markedly after bilat-
eral facetectomy (Smith and Bebchuk, 2002)
10.14 Middle-aged German shepherd dog that presented with
mild pelvic limb weakness, lumbosacral pain, anal hyporeflexia 
and dribbling urine. CT scan revealed marked telescoping of the
Dorsal fusion-fixation (10.46-10.54)
sacrum relative to L7. Screw fixation was performed using
4.0 mm cancellous screws. The screws had loosened slightly at
 There are a number of similarities between lumbosacral
 6-week follow-up but the dog had an excellent outcome with
disease and caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy (see
 resolution of all signs for 3 years.
Oliver et al..
Chambers et al..
Danielsson and
Risio et al.
1978
1988
Sjostrom, 1999
2001
Dogs (n)
10
26
131
69
Good outcome* n (%)
9 (90)
19 (73)
122 (93)
54 (78)
Mean follow-up months (range)
13 (1-48)
21 (2-55)
26 +/-17 (5-73)
38 +/-22 (6-96)
 Median follow-up months
6
18
N/A
36
Incontinence resolved 
3/4
1/8
N/A
5/11
*Substantial improvement and resolution of any incontinence.
N/A, not available.
Lumbosacral disease
191
or a large disc herniation (Slocum and Devine, 1998; 
distal cortex in order to avoid damage to the lumbosacral
Bagley, 2003).
trunk of the sciatic nerve (1.8, 10.15).
COMPLICATIONS
Early postoperative
These have been reviewed extensively after lumbar
Seroma formation is particularly likely in the lum-
disc surgery in humans but have not been reviewed for 
bosacral region if there is any dead space (Oliver et al.,
dogs (Stolke et al., 1989; Fritsch et al., 1996; Gibson
1978; Slocum and Devine, 1986; Chambers et al.,
et al., 2002). Intraoperative, early postoperative and
1988; Watt, 1991; Ness, 1994). Infection can occur,
late complications are listed in Table 10.4.
especially as some dogs have established urinary tract
infection (UT1) (Oliver et al., 1978). Occasionally, a dog
may be unable to void after surgery because of increased
Intraoperative
sympathetic tone (10.3), analogous to that seen after
The surgeon must be vigilant while using a scalpel in the
sacrocaudal injury (see page 351).
vertebral canal to fenestrate the L7/Sl disc, and also
-eJ nuedu ssns su Aains ae sssiad ud j
while using a bur to undercut a facet, to avoid inadvertent
damage to the cauda equina. In some cases an AO drill
ure, residual compression or possibly instability (10.53).
guard can be used to protect neural tissues from the bur.
The base of the L7 articular process must not be thinned
Late postoperative
excessively (10.4l, 10.42), especially when foraminal
Implant loosening or failure is always a risk after instru-
 decompression is performed. In addition, over-tightening
mented fusion (Fox et al., 1996; Gibson et al., 2002).
IS//T au ssoue mais e Suerd uum paproe aq isn
facet or the facet could fracture. When placing screws,
It is usually due to poor implant selection or subopti-
mal technique (10.16). Sometimes implant failure does
the drill bit, tap and screw must not extend beyond the
not cause clinical problems, especially if physiological
fusion progresses fast enough (Slocum and Devine,
1986; Bagley, 2003) (10.14, 10.53).
Table 10.4 Intraoperative, early postoperative and late
 Postoperative imaging for recurrent lumbosacral pain
 postoperative complications 
may reveal residual disc material or fibrous scar, espe-
Early
Late
cially when intravenous contrast is used (Jones et al.,
Intraoperative
postoperative
postoperative
1999, 2000). Postoperative scarring has been reported
Implant failure 
in several studies (Adams et al., 1995; Danielsson and
 latrogenic nerve
Implant failure
root injury 
Instability (10.16)
Recurrence of 
Sjostrom, 1999; Risio et al., 200l). Herniation of the
 Fracture of L7
 Dorsal seroma 
signs (10.53)
dural sac through the laminectomy defect has also been
articular facet
Infection 
 Dural herniation 
reported; this may be secondary to tearing of the dura
 Poor implant 
Increased sphincter 
 Scar formation 
(Lang, 1988; Markwalder, 1993; Fox et al., 1996). Patient
position (10.16)
tone
Infection (10.45)
 Spinal nerve injury
age and operative time are predictors of complications
Inadequate
in humans undergoing lumbar disc surgery (Stolke
decompression
et al., 1989). Additional reasons for failure to improve
 include surgery done at the wrong site, insufficient
10.15 Nine-year-old Pug that under-
went dorsal laminectomy and fixation 
fusion using 2.7 mm screws and a
bone graft. These screws are actually
still contained within bone because of 
the contour of the ventral sacrum 
(1.28B, 10.46, 10.50, 10.54). However
Iif they were any longer there would be
risk of damaging the proximal sciatic
nerve, which lies in very close proximity
to the ventral surface of the sacroiliac
joint. Same dog as in 10.47
B
192
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
10.16 A: Eight week follow-up radlio-
graph reveals implant failure due to poor
technique. The screws were put in at too
steep an angle in the sagittal plane.
Immediate postoperative radliographs
and fluoroscopy showed the screws to
be in bone and not the disc space; the
dog was confined in the hope that fusion
would occur before implant failure. One
screw has now backed out (10.14,
10.15, 10.53). B: 3D reconstruction
shows the screws also do not dliverge
suifficiently from each other in a trans-
verse plane (10.50).
A
decompression or removal of disc material, a second disc  
 of an osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) lesion does not
lesion, extravertebral compression or nerve root trauma
 appear to affect prognosis after surgery (Hanna, 200l).
(Fritsch et al., 1996; Janssens et al., 2000).
The prognosis for working dogs is similar with 67 of 88
 Facet fracture can cause persistent signs after dorsal
[76%) returning to normal duties after dorsal decompres-
laminectomy. It can occur after excessive thinning of
sion (Danielsson and Sjostrom, 1999; Jones et al., 2000).
the base of the L7 facet at laminectomy or from over-
Some of these working dogs had also undergone forami-
tightening of a screw [Adams et al., 1995). Repeat
 nal decompression or facetectomy (Jones et al., 2000).
imaging is recommended when postoperative problems
 The presence of fecal incontinence, and both the pres-
pdau uaaq aau sauon poo Aaa se doaa
 ence and the duration of urinary incontinence prior to
after a second surgery (Danielsson and Sjostrom, 1999;
Jones et al., 2000; Risio et al., 2001).
bosacral disease. Incontinence for longer than 6 weeks
carries a guarded prognosis {Risio et al., 200l). Success
POSTOPERATIVE CARE (see Chapter 15)
rates after surgery are known to decline over time in
Strict rest is enforced for 3 months following surgery,
humans and this also seems to be true in dogs (Fox et al.,
followed by a gradual return to fitness over a further 2
1996; Javid and Hadar, 1998; Janssens et al., 2000).
 Few specific results are available for either foraminal
 months. Dogs that are allowed to move freely too soon
 decompression or facetectomy. Foraminal decompression
after surgery are at risk of making a poor recovery
 in 12 dogs did not improve outcome compared to 15 dogs
(de Risio et al., 200l). For working and athletic dogs,
 in which laminectomy alone was performed (de Risio
an additional month of gradual transition to full work is
 et al., 2001). Facetectomy gave good long-term results in
recommended (Sjostrum, 2003). After fixation-fusion
15/15 dogs but many were of small breeds (Tarvin and
the dog is confined for at least 6-8 weeks or until there
 Prata, 1980). Nine of 1l larger-breed dogs improved
is radiographic evidence of fusion. Physical therapy, leash
after facet removal but were often left with residual signs
walking and swimming are used with a gradual return to
(Denny et al., 1982; Watt, 1991; Ness, 1994).
normal activity over a further 2-3 months (Bagley, 2003).
 Repeat surgery is indicated for dogs with a poor initial
Long-term   non-steroidal 
 anti-inflammatory
drugs
outcome or that suffer a recurrence of signs following
(NSAIDs) have been suggested to reduce postoperative
dorsal laminectomy. Good results were reported for
scarring and improve outcome but this is unsubstanti-
four of six dogs undergoing a second surgery; with scar
ated (Janssens et al., 2000).
tissue being the most common finding on re-operation
(Danielsson and Sjostrom, 1999; de Risio et al., 2001).
PROGNOSIS
There are only two limited studies with long-term fol-
 low-up after fixation-fusion. All eight dogs in one study
 Similarly, lameness and mild neurological deficits usually 
 and five of five in another had good outcomes (Slocum
improve rapidly. More severe deficits probably carry a  and Devine, 1986; Meheust, 2000). Although one study
less favorable prognosis (Denny et al., 1982; Chambers
 in humans reported better results after fusion than after
et al., 1988; Chambers, 1989). Few studies document
 decompression alone, a large meta-analysis of all avail-
long-term follow-up after lumbosacral surgery. Studies
 able data in people found that fusion did not improve
with mean follow-up periods beyond 1 year show overall outcome and was associated with a higher complication
success rates from 73 to 93% (Table 10.3). The presence  rate (Fox et al., 1996; Gibson et al., 2002).
Lumbosacral disease
193
Key issues for future investigation
1. What is the significance of instability and how should it be assessed (Fox et al., 1996; Gibson et al., 2002) (10.53)?
2. Wwhat is the role of facetectomy and should it be followed by stabilization (10.45)?
 3. ls routine dorsal anulectomy of benefit or does it increase collapse of the lumbosacral space (Danielsson and Sjostrom,
1999; Janssens et al., 2000; de Risio et al., 2001)?
2(oo0z '/e ne ja6ny) (ezg abed) uoisny aouod aoeds osin aul pe buye6 saog t
4(966l 'aod z6el 'uosken) uojssaiduoo jasalnu jo aouanbasuoo e 1l s pue uowuoo os sisoigy jenpida sl Aun 9
aul jol 2/gl jao papuaixa ag uojssaiduooan pinous 's pui yhm hean ag uoeool auo ueui aow je suoisa pinous moh 'g
dog in 10.17A?
7. What are the long-term outcomes after fixation-fusion?
8. When is fusion indicated and when is decompression indlicated?
10.17 A: This dog has a lesion at
L7/S1 and another at L6/7. B: This
dog has an isolated L7/S1 lesion.
Several studies have emphasized the
role of multilevel compression (μJayson,
1992; Markwalder, 1993; Jones et al.
1996b; Porter 1996).
B
Chambers, J.N., Selcer, B.A., Sullivan, S.A., Coates, J.R. [1997) Diagnosis
REFERENCES
of lateralized lumbosacral disk hemiation with magnetic resonance
Adams, W.H., Daniel, G.B., Pardo, A.D., Selcer, R.R. [1995) Magnetic res-
imaging.JouraloftheAmericanAnimalHospitalAssociation33,296-299.
onance imaging of the caudal lumbar and lumbosacral spine in 13 dogs
Coates, J.R. [1999) Urethral dyssynergia in lumbosacral syndrome.
[1990-1993). Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 36, 3-13.
American College of Veterinary Intermal Medicine 1999; 299-301.
Auger, J., Dupuis, J., Quesnel, A., Beauregard, G. [2000) Surgical treat-
Cuddon, PA. [2002) Electrophysiology in neuromuscular disease.
ment of lumbosacral instability caused by discospondylitis in four dogs.
Veterinary Climics ofNorth America,Small Amimal Practice32,31-62.
Veterinary Surgery 29, 70-80.
Cuddon, PA., Murray, M., Kraus, K. [2003) Electrodiagnosis. In: D. Slatter
Bagley, R.S. (2003) Surgical stabilization of the lumbosacral joint. In:
[ed.) Textbook of Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd edn, Il08-ll17.
D. Slatter [ed.], Textbookof Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd edn, I238-1243.
 Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
Danielsson, F., Sjostrom, L. [1999) Surgical treatment of degenerative
Barthez, PY, Morgan, J.P, Lipsitz, D. [1994) Discography and epidurogra-
humbosacral stenosis in dogs. Veteritary Surgery 28, 91-98.
 phy for evaluation of the lumbosacral junction in dogs with cauda equina
Denny, H.R., Gibbs, C., Holt, PE. [1982] The diagnosis and treatment of
syndrome.Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 35,152-157.
cauda equina lesions in the dog. Jourmal of Small Arimal Practice 23,
Brant-Zawadzki, M.N., Jensen, M.C., Obuchowski, N., Ross, J.S., Modic,
425-443.
M.T. (1995) Interobserver and intraobserver variability in interpretation
de Risio, L., Sharp, NJ.H., Olby, N.J., Munana, K.R., Thomas, W.B. (2001)
of lurmbar disc abnormalities. A comparison of two nomenclatures.Spine
Predictors of outcome after dorsal decompressivelaminectomy for degen-
20, 1257-1263; discussion 1264.
Erative lurmbosacral stenosis in dogs: 69 cases [1987-1997]. Jourmal of the
 Burger, R., Lang, J. [1993) Kinematic study of the lumbar and lumbosacral
American Veterinary Medical Association 219, 624-628.
spine in the German Shepherd Dog. Part 2. Results of experiments.
Deyo, R. [1994) Magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbar spine. Terrific
Schweizer Architv fur Tierheilkunde 135, 35-43.
test or tar baby? New England Journal of Medicine 331, 11S-116.
Chambers, J.N. [1989) Lumbosacral stenosis. Confusion, surgery, progno-
Ebraheim, N.A., Haman, S.P, Xu, R., Stanescu, S., Yeasting, R.A. [2000)
sis.Veterinary Medicine Report 1, 228-229.
 The lumbosacral nerves in relation to dorsal Sl screw placement and
Chambers, J.N., Barbera, A., Selcer, B.A. [1988) Results of treatment of
their locations on plain radiographs. Orthopedics 23, 245-247.
degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs by exploration and excision.
Fingeroth, J.M., Johnson, G.C., Burt, J.K., Fenner, WR., Cain, L.S. [1989]
Veterinary Comparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology 3, 130-133.
 Neuroradiographic diagnosis and surgical repair oftethered cord syndrome
194
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
in an English Bulldog with spina bifida and myeloschisis. Jourmal of the
Kent, D.L., Haynor, D.R., Larson, E.B., Deyo, R.A. [1992) Diagnosis of lum-
American Veterinary Medical Association 194, 1300-1302.
bar spinal stenosis in adults: a metaanalysis ofthe accuracy of CT, MR, and
Fetcher, TF, Kitchell, R.L. [1966) Anatomical studies on the spinal cord seg-
myelography Americat fourmal of Roertgertology 158, 1135-1144.
ments ofthe dog. Americart Jourmal of Veterinary Research 27, 1759-1767.
Lang, J. [1988) Flexion-extension myelography of the cauda equina.
Fox, M., Onofrio, B., Hanssen, A. [1996) Clinical outcomes and radiological
Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 33, 69-76.
instability following decompressive humbar laminectomy for degenerative
Lang, J., Hani, H., Schawalder, P [1992] A sacral lesion resembling osteo-
spinal stenosis: a comparison of patients undergoing concomitant arthro-
chondrosis in the German Shepherd Dog. Veterinary Radiology and
desis versus decompression alone. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 85, 793-802.
Utrasoumd 33, 69-76.
Fritsch, E.W, Heisel, J., Rupp, S. [1996) The failed back surgery syn-
 Mark walder, TM. [1993) Surgical management of neurogenic claudication
drome: reasons, intraoperative findings, and long-term results: a report
-Apuods apeauaaap o anp sisouas peuds equn yam suaped ool u
of 182 operative treatments. Spine 21, 626-633.
lolisthesis. Acta Neurochirurgica {Weit] 120, 136-142.
Gibson, J.N.A., Waddell, G., Grant, I.C. [2002) Surgery for degenerative 
Mattoon, J.S., Koblik, PD. [1993) Quantitative survey radiographic evalua-
lumbar spondylosis [Cochrane Review). Issue I ed: The Cochrane
tion ofthe lumbosacral spine of normal dogs and dogs with degenerative
Library. http:/www.update-software.com/cochrane/
lumbosacral stenosis. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasourd 34, 194-206.
Gorman, WF, Hodak, JA. [1997) Hermiated intervertebral disc without 
McKee, WM. [1993) Differential diagnosis of cauda equina syndrome.
pain. Jourmal of the Oklahoma State Medical Association 90, 185-190.
In Practice 15, 243-244.
Hanna, F.Y. (200l) Lumbosacral osteochondrosis: radiological features and
McKee, WM., Mitten, R.W, Labuc, R.H. [1990) Surgical treatment of
surgical management in 34 dogs. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 42,
lumbosacral discospondylitis by a distraction-fusion technique. Journal
272278.
of Small Amimal Practice 31, I5-20.
Hurov, L. (1985) Laminectomy for treatment of cauda equina syndrome in a
Meheust, P [2000) A new surgical technique for lumbosacral stabilization:
cat. Jourmal of the Americar Veterinary Medical Associatiom 186, S04-S05.
arthrodesis using the pedicle screw fixation. A clinical study of S cases.
Huttmann, S., Krauss, J., Collmann, H., Sorensen, N., Roosen, K. [2001)
Pratique Medicale andChirurgicaledelAmimal deCompagrie35,201207.
Surgical management of tethered spinal cord in adults: report of 54
Meheust, P, Mallet, C., Marouze, C. [2000) A new surgical technique for
cases. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 95 [2 Suppl), 173-178.
lumbosacral stabilization: arthrodesis using the pedicle screw fixation.
Janssens, L.A.A., Moens, Y., Coppens, P, Peremans, K., Vinck, H. [2000]
Anatomical aspects.Pratique Medicale and Chirurgicale de I'Animal de
Lumbosacral degenerative stenosis in the dog: the results of dorsal
Compagmie 35, 193-199.
decompression with dorsal anulectomy and muclectomy. Veterinary and
Meij, B.P (1993) Pelvic limb lameness associated with nerve root com-
Comparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology 13, 97-103.
pression: diagnosis, neurosurgery and follw-up in two dogs. Vterinary
Javid, M., Hadar, E. [1998) Long-term follow-up review of patients who
Surgery 22, 249.
umderwent laminectomy for lumbar stenosis: a prospective study.
Meij, B.P, Voorhout, G., Welvekamp, W.T.C. [1996) Epidural lipomatosis
Jourmal of Neurosurgery 89, 1-7.
m a six-year-old dachshund. Veterinary Record 138, 492-495.
Jayson, M.1. [1992) The role of vascular damage and fibrosis in the patho-
Milette, PC., Fontaine, S., Lepanto, L., Cardinal, E., Breton, G. [1999)
genesis of nerve root damage. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related
 Differentiating lumbar disc protrusions, disc bulges, and discs with nor-
Research 279, 40-48.
mal contour but abnormal signal intensity. Magnetic resonance imaging
Jensen, M., Brant,-Z.M., Obuchowski, N., Modic, M., Malkasian, D., Ross,
with discographic correlations. Spine 24, 44-53.
 J. [1994] Magnetic resomance imaging of the lurmbar spine in people with-
Morgan, J.R [1999) Transitional lumbosacral vertebral anomaly in the dog:
out back pain. New England Jourmal of Medicine 331, 69-73.
a radiographic study. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 40, 167-172.
 Jones, J.C., Inzana, K.D. [2000) Subclinical CT abnormalities in the lum-
Morgan, J.P, Hansson, K, Miyabayashi, T. [1989) Spondylosis deformans
bosacral spine of older large-breed dogs. Veterinary Radiology and
in the female Beagle dog: a radiographic study. Joural of Small Animal
Ultrasound 41, 19-26.
Practice 30, 457-460.
Jones, J.C., Wilson, M.E., Bartels, J.E. [1994] A review of high resolution
Morgan, J.P, Bahr, A., Franti, C.E., Bailey, C.S. (1993) Lumbosacral tran-
computed tomography and a proposed technique for regional examina-
sitional vertebrae as a predisposing cause of cauda equina syndrome in
tion of the canine lumbosacral spine. Veterinary Radiology and
German Shepherd Dogs; 16l cases [1987-1990). Jourmal of the
Ultrasoumd 35, 339-346.
American Veterinary Medical Association 202,1877-1882.
Jones, J.C., Cartee, R.E., Bartels, J.E. [1995a) Computed tomographic
Nardin, R.A., Patel, M.R., Gudas, TF., Rutkove, S.B., Raynor, E.M. [1999]
anatomy of the canine lumbosacral spine. Veterinary Radiology and
 Electromyography and magnetic resonance imaging in the evaluation of
Ultrasound 36, 91-99.
radiculopathy. Muscle ard Nerve 22, ISI-ISS
Jones, J.C., Wright, J.C., Bartels, J.E. [199Sb] Computed tomographic
Ness, M.G. [1994) Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in the dog: a review
morphometry of the lumbosacral spine of dogs. Americart Jourial of
of 30 cases.Jourmal of Small ArimaI Practice 35, 18S190.
Veterinary Research 56, I125-l132.
O' Brien, D. [1988] Neurogenic disorders of micturition. Veterinary
Jones, J.C., Hudson, J.A., Sorjonen, D.C., Hoffman, C.E., Braund, K.G.,
CHinics of North America, Small Amimal Practice 18, 529-544.
Wright, J.C., Garrett, PD., Bartels, J.E. [1996a) Effects of experimental
Obnmeiss, D.D., Vanharanta, H., Ekholm, J. [1997) Degree of disc dis-
nerve root compression on arterial blood flow velocity in the seventh lum-
ruption and lower extremity pain. Spine 22, 1600-1605.
laddoq aapeadoeu susn quawaanseau :aop ay jo uoyauea peuds eg
Oliver, J.E., Jr., Selcer, R.R., Simpson, S. [1978) Cauda equina com-
ultrasonography Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 37, 133-140.
pression from lumbosacral malarticulation and malformation in the
Jones, J.C, Sorjonen, D.C., Simpson, S.T, Coates, JR., Lenz, S.D.,
dog. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 173,
Hathcock, J.T, Agee, M.W., Bartels, J.E. [1996b) Comparison between
207-214.
computetoographic ansurgical fdings innine large-breeddogs with
Palmer, R.H., Charmbers, J.N. [1991) Canine lumbosacral diseases. Part II.
lumbosacral stenosis.VeterinaryRadiologyandUltrasound37,247-256.
Definitive diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis. Compendium on
Jones, J.C., Shires, PK., Inzana, K.D., Sponenberg, D.P, Massicotte, C.,
ContiningEducationforthePracticingVeterinarian13,213-222.
Renberg, W., Giroux, A.[1999) Evaluation of canine lumbosacral steno-
Pang, W.W, Mok, M.S., Lin, M.L., Chang, D.P, Hwang, M.H. [1998)
sis using intravenous contrast-enhanced computedtomography Veterinary
uped yoeq mol yo sisouap ayi u sudden ued peuds jo uoeyady
Radiology and Ultrasound 40, I08-114.
analysis of I04 cases. Acta Anaesthesiological Sinica 36, 71-74.
Jones, J.C., Banfield, C.M., Ward, D.L. [2000) Association between post-
 Porter, R.W. [1996) Spinal stenosis and neurogenic claudication. Spine 21,
operative outcome and results of magnetic resonance imaging and computed
2046-2052.
tomography in working dogs with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis.
Ramirez, O., III, Thrall, D.E. [1998) A review of imaging techniques for
Jourmal ofthe American Veterinary Medical Association 216, 1769-1774.
canine cauda equina syndrome. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 39,
Jones, J.C., Shires, PK., Inzana, K.D., Mosby, A.D., Sponenberg, D.P,
283-296.
Lanz, O.1. [2002) Use of computed tomographic densitometry to quantify
Schmid, V., Lang, J. [1993) Measurements on the lumbosacral junction in
contrast enhancerment of compressive soft tissues in the canine lumbosacral
 normal dogs and those with cauda equina compression. Joural of Small
vertebral canal. American fourmal of Veterinary Research 63, 733-737.
Animal Practice 34, 437-442.
Lumbosacral disease
195
Selcer, B.A., Chambers, J.N., Schwensen, K. [1988) Epidurography as a diag-
Smith, M.E.H., Bebchuk, T. [2002) An in vitro biomechanical study of the
nostic aid in canine lumbosacral compressive disease: 47 cases [1981-1986).
effects of surgical modification upon the canine lurmbosacral spine.
VeterinaryComparativeOrthopaedics adTramatology 2,97-103
Veterinary Surgery 31, S05.
Shamir, M., Rochkind, S., Johnston, D. [200l) Surgical treatment of teth-
Stolke, D., Sollmann, WP, Seifert, V. [1989) Intra- and postoperative
ered spinal cord syndrome in a dog with myelomeningocele. Veterinary
complications in lurmbar disc surgery. Spine 14, 56-59.
Record 148, 755-756.
Stoll, S.G. [1996) Altemative method of traction stabilization of L7-SI.
Sisson, A.F, LeCouteur, R.A., Ingram, J.T, Park, R.D., Child, G. [1992)
 San Francisco: American College of Veterinary Surgeons Symposium,
Diagnosis of cauda equina abnormalities by using electromyography,
116-117.
discography, and epidurography in dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary Intertal
Tarvin, G., Prata, R.G. [1980) Lumbosacral stenosis in dogs. Jourmal of the
Medicine 6, 253-263.
American Veterinary Medical Association 177, I54-159.
Sjostrum, L. [2003) Decompression of lumbosacral disease. In: D. Slatter 
Watt, PR. [1991) Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in I8 dogs. Jourmtal of
[ed.], Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd edn, I227-1237.
Small Amimal Practice 32, 125S-134.
 Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
Webb, A.A., Phar, J.W, Lew, L.J., Tryon, K.A. [2001) MR imaging find-
Slocum, B., Devine, T. [1986) L7-SI fixation-fusion for treatment of
ings in a dog with lumbar ganglion cysts. Veterinary Radiology and
cauda eguina compressionin the dog.Jourmalof the American Veterinary
Ultrasound 42, 9-13.
MedicalAssociation 188, 31-35.
Wheeler, S.J. [1992) Lumbosacral disease. Veterinary CHitics of North
Slocum, B., Devine, T. [1998) L7-SI fixatiom-fusion technique for cauda
America, Small Amimal Practice 22, 937-950.
equina syndrome. In: M.J. Bojrab [ed.), Current Techniques in Small
Wright, J.A. [1980] Spondylosis deformans of the lumbosacral joint in
Animal Surgery, Sth edn. 86l-864. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
dogs. Journal of Small Aimal Practice 21, 45-55.
PrOCEDURES
Dorsal laminectomy (10.18-10.39)
disc is causing significant compression (Danielsson and Sjostrom, 1999; Janssens et al., 2000; de Risio et al.,
 2001). A cancellous bone graft can be placed into the disc space following curettage and this may enhance 
fusion (Auger et al., 2000) (10.52, 14.12).
10.18 Positioning of dog for
lumbosacral surgery.
Note that the pelvic limbs
are drawn forward. The
interarcuate space and
dorsal anulus are
widened by either sup-
porting the pelvis over a
sandbag or by pulling the 
10.18
hocks further forward
with the hips flexed (Oliver et al., 1978; Watt, 1991; Slocum and Devine, 1998; Bagley, 2003; Sjostrum,
2003). The dog's head is to the left in all illustrations.
10.19 The important landmarks are being palpated.
The surgeon's right hand is on the cranial dor-
sal iliac spine. The left index finger is on the
spinous process of L6. The spinous process of
L7 is shorter and often cannot be palpated
(10.2B, 10.24, 10.26).
10.19
196
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders 
10.20 Here the upper instrument is over the lumbo-
sacral space, and the lower instrument on the
wing of the left ilium.
10.20
10.21  The skin incision is made just lateral to 
the midline. It extends from the spinous
 process of L5 to the caudal end of the
fused spinous processes of the sacrum.
Here the skin and superficial fascia (a)
have been incised revealing the deep
lumbodorsal fascia (b). The fascia,
which may be quite thick, is undermined
10.21
sightly to facilitate closure (8.13) prior
to incision.
10.22 The lumbodorsal fascia is incised around
 and between the spinous processes
(a). This reveals the epaxial musculature.
Here the fascia has been incised and
retracted on the lower side of the
illustration but is still intact on the upper
 side (b). The lumbodorsal fascia merges 
with the interspinous ligament that lies
 between the spinous processes.
10.22
(c) Transverse process L6. (d) Transverse
 process L7. (e) Wing of ilium.
10.23 Here the fascia has been retracted on
both sides, revealing the epaxial muscles.
The spinous processes are seen in the
midline (a). The interspinous fascia
between the spinous processes is thick.
10.23
Lumbosacral disease
197
10.24 The muscles are elevated from the spin-
ous processes and retracted. The L6
(a), L7 (b), and sacral (c) spinous
processes are visible. Note that the spin-
ous process of L6 is taller than L7.
10.24
10.25 A periosteal elevator is used to remove the
muscles from the spinous processes on
both sides of the vertebral column. It is 
useful to insert self-retaining retractors to 
maintain the exposure (see 10.24 for key).
10.25
10.26 The muscles have been retracted further.
In the illustration, L6 (a), L7 (b) and the
sacrum (c) have been exposed.
10.26
10.27 Closer view of 10.26. The curette is on the
ligamentum flavum. (a) L7 vertebrae.
(b) Sacrum. In some dogs with
lumbosacral disease the sacrum
telescopes cranioventrally and the dorsal
lamina of the sacrum lies adjacent to, or
even under, the lamina of L7 (10.46).
There is then no interarcuate space.
10.27
198
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
10.28 The spinous processes of L7 (shown here)
and S1 are removed with rongeurs or
bone cutters.
10.28
10.29 The laminectomy is made with a power
bur. In this illustration the laminectomy
has been commenced in L7; note the
dark red cancellous bone (a). At least half
of L7 is removed and most of the sacrum
(Danielsson and Sjostrom, 1999). The
remnant of sacral spinous process is 
visible (b). The laminectomy should be 
10.29
restricted to the lamina at this stage,
preserving the articular processes.
10.30 The laminectomy has been continued into
both L7 and the sacrum down to the
inner cortical bone. The margin between
dark cancellous bone and white cortical
bone is seen clearly (arrows).
10.30
Lumbosacral disease
199
10.31 The ligamentum flavum is removed by
sharp dissection. Great care must be
taken not to penetrate too deeply, risking
damage to the cauda equina
(Markwalder, 1993; Fox et al., 1996), as
there is no bony protection overlying the
neural structures at this level. In dogs with 
marked compression and dorsal elevation 
of the cauda equina it is safer to enter
10.31
the vertebral canal over mid-L7 or
mid-sacrum and then peel away the
ligamentum flavum from either side.
10.32 Removal of the ligamentum flavum
epneo aul pue (e) tel lenpida aul sasodxa
equina (b). Epidural fat should be removed
only when necessary.
10.32
10.33
10.33 The final shelf of bone is thinned with
the bur.
200
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
10.34 It is best to bur the bone to eggshell thickness
to allow easy removal. The tip of the probe is 
visible through the thinned bone (arrow).
10.34
10.35 The inner shelf of bone is removed carefully with
rongeurs. The width of this laminectomy is
greater than is ideal if screw fixation were to be
 performed subsequently (compare to 10.41,
10.51 and 10.52)
10.39
10.36 The laminectomy is completed with rongeurs or
a curette. The cauda equina is then inspected.
The S1 nerve roots (a) are usually seen adjacent
to the dural tube of the cauda equina (b). The 
L7 nerve root lies further laterally, in the lateral 
recess and under the articular process (1.27,
1.28). A herniated disc may either be visible 
directly (10.44), or palpable by running a probe
along the floor of the vertebral canal (which is
fat in normal dogs) (10.38A).
10.36
10.37 Laminectomy has been completed. Part of L7
nerve root (a) is seen in the lateral recess,
before exiting the intervertebral foramen. (b) S1
nerve root. (c) S2 nerve root. (d) Remainder of
 cauda equina.
10.37
Lumbosacral disease
201
10.38 Ten-year-old Rottweiler that had been dribbling
urine for 2 months and had lumbosacral pain,
pelvic limb ataxia, and marked reduction of
right-sided hock flexion with a lick granuloma over
the right tarsus. A CT myelogram revealed that 
the terminal dural sac was displaced to the left by
a large soft tissue mass. A: The mass was
palpable just in front of the lumbosacral joint.
B: Retraction of the right S1 nerve root revealed a
10.38
huge disc extrusion (*). C: Continued retraction 
reveals the extent of the mass compressing the
right L7 nerve root. D: After fenestration with a
scalpel the mass was removed using rongeurs to
leave a large crater (arrowhead), which was then
covered with a thin fat graft. The clinical signs
resolved slowly after surgery. Two years later the
dog was pain free, continent and its hock lesion 
had healed.
202
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
10.39 Here the cauda equina is being retracted medially
to allow a bulging disc to be fenestrated on one
side (arrowheads). Half of the anulus fibrosus is 
incised carefully with a #11 blade and removed
with fine rongeurs. The outermost incision is just 
medial to the venous plexus (Danielsson and
 Sjostrom, 1999). The cauda equina is then
retracted to the other side and the second half of
the disc is fenestrated. The nucleus pulposus is 
then removed with a curette.
10.39
Foraminal decompression and facetectomy (10.40-10.45)
Enhancement of soft tissues within a foramen after intravenous contrast is an indication for foraminal decom-
smaos (hal 'auiaa pue wnoois) gea auog pue smaos buisn uoiezllgeis Aa pamolot aa ueo Auoialaoes
and bone cement (10.45), or screws with connecting bars (Meheust, 2000; Meheust et al., 2000).
 Wound closure is routine. A free fat graft, pedicle fat graft or Gelfoam may be placed over the lamminectomy site.
Closure must avoid leaving any dead space.
10.40 A: Pre-contrast, and
B: post-contrast
transverse CT images 
obtained at the level of
the L7/S1 intervertebral
 foramina in a dog with
degenerative
10.40
lumbosacral stenosis.
A
B
 Contrast enhancing 
tissue flls the left foramen. A small area of enhancement can also be seen on the right side of the
ventral canal (Jones et af., 1999).
10.41 Reconstruction following a dorsal laminectomy.
If imaging indicates nerve root compression, the
laminectomy can be widened still further, initially
only to the medial limit of the facet joint
capsule (Danielson and Sjostrom, 1999). The
10.41
intervertebral foramen can be explored with a
 probe; the normal L7 nerve root should move 
a few millimetres without undue tension.
Lumbosacral disease
203
10.42 If a foraminotomy is to be performed, the
laminectomy is extended laterally on that side
dorsal to the foramen. The relationship between
the lumbosacral disc and the foramen is shown
in 1.26 and 1.27; the foramen is cranial to the
disc (10.44). The articular processes should be
preserved and care taken not to weaken the
base of the L7 facet when decompressing the
foramen. Extending the laminectomy all the way
into the foramen will isolate L7 articular process.
10.42
10.43 Undercutting of a foramen to remove osteophytes
is illustrated on this transverse CT image. The level
of the laminectomy is shown by white arrowheads.
Additional undercutting of the L7 or S1 facet can
be performed with a curette or bur, as shown by
the area outlined with black arrowheads (Palmer
and Chambers, 1991). Great care is taken to
protect the nerve roots while drilling. The facet
should not be weakened excessively, particularly if
screw fixation is also to be performed.
10.43
decompression does not expose enough of the
L7 nerve root. Here the dural tube is displaced
medially and S1 spinal nerve laterally by an
extruded L7/S1 disc (arrow). The articular
process of L7 has been removed to expose
cartilage of the sacral facet (asterisk). The dorsal
root ganglion of L7 nerve root can be seen
10.44
within the foramen (arrowhead) although it is
covered partly by remnants of joint capsule.
More bone may need to be removed cranially to decompress the nerve root within the lateral recess as
the foramen is located some distance cranial to the disc space (1.27).
204
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
10.45 This dog had shown
intermittent lameness for
 one year with no
 neurological deficits.
A: After facetectomy,
screws were placed into the
L7 pedicle; this is easier
if a dorsal laminectomy 
10.45
is done first so that both
lateral and medial walls of 
A
the pedicle can be palpated.
B: The cement bridge is visible clearly between L7 and S1; a single screw has also been placed across
the other L7/S1 facet joint (10.50-10.53). Six weeks after surgery it was much improved; at 11 months
it developed a draining tract from the wound but was otherwise normal
Dorsal fixation-fusion (10.46-10.54)
Indications for fixation-fusion include telescoping of the sacrum under L7 and marked instability (10.46). Facet sublux-
(10.49, 13.64). Initial reduction can also be obtained using bone holding forceps or towel clamps (10.47).
10.46 This dog initially underwent dorsal laminectomy
for lumbosacral pain (10.6A,B, 10.13)
Preoperative 3D reconstruction of CT scans
performed with the dog in A: flexion, and B:
extension revealed marked compression of the
cauda equina (10.6A,B, 10.11). The L7 articular
facets and ventral osteophytes on L7 are seen
in a constant position but the sacral lamina has
telescoped under the roof of L7 (arrowhead).
10.46
The disc is also bulging upwards and there is
severe foraminal narrowing (10.6). Postoperative
images are shown in 10.53.
B
Lumbosacral disease
205
10.47 A: Collapse of the dorsal lumbosacral articulation
with telescoping of the sacrum under the L7
lamina. B: The telescoping is reduced and the
distance between the towel clamps is increased
markedly as the L/S articulation is distracted.
 Same dog as in 10.15.
10.47
206
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
10.48 The degree of
telescoping of the 
sacrum relative to L7
increases from A to D
as shown in these 3D
reconstructions from 
four different dogs (dog
A is normal). The black
10.48
line is drawn at the 
cranial edge of each
sacral lamina. The 
 space between the
lamina of L7 and S1
decreases and the
facet overlap increases.
The best guide to the 
degree of subluxation is
provided by opening
the joint capsule
(10.49).
B
D
Lumbosacral disease
207
10.49 A: Subluxation of facet joints is evident by the
amount of articular cartilage exposed on the
sacral facet (arrow). B: Reduction with
a laminectomy spreader anchored at the
laminectomy edges has brought the L7 facet
back to cover the cartilage of the sacral facet
(arrow). The cartilage on both sides of this joint
is removed with a small curette prior to screw
fixation. Bone debris or graft is then packed into
10.49
and around the joint (Bagley, 2003).
凸
B
10.50 Transverse CT image of the LS articulation
from a dog after screw fixation to show the
approximate angles for screw insertion (13.57).
The ideal screw angle is between 30 and 45?
from the sagittal plane (Bagley, 2003).
Compare these angles to the suboptimal
angles shown in 10.16. ldeally, screws should
not compromise the sacroiliac joint or cause 
injury to the lumbosacral trunk of the sciatic
nerve (Ebraheim et al., 2000).
10.50
10.51 Screw entry points are shown (*) in a 3D CT
reconstruction from a dog that had undergone
previous dorsal laminectomy (10.13). The entry
point should be equal in distance from each
side and from the tip of the facet. The tip of the
L7 spinous process can also be used as a
10.51
guide to the angle of insertion (McKee et a.,
1990). Adequate reduction of the facets is assessed by observing joint congruity (10.49).
208
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
10.52 Screw placement. A: One screw is in position; the
pilot hole is being drilled for the second. A dorsal
laminectomy has already been performed. Ideally
the facet nearest the surgeon (L7) is over-drilled. If 
the facet is too narrow, this step can be skipped
rather than risk facet fracture. B: The hole is then
countersunk. Wwashers can also be used (1o.14,
10.15). C: The hole is measured so that the screw
will only just exit the sacrum (10.15); the hole is
10.52
Si ssaooud snouids /l aul jo dll aul 'paddel la
shown (arrowhead). D: Cancellous bone from the 
wing of the ilium is packed over the screw; the L7
spinous process can also be used as a source of
laminectomy would be covered first with a fat graft 
but it has been left exposed here for orientation.
Lumbosacral disease 
209
10.53 This dog had a poor
response to dorsal
lamminectomy done 1 year
previously (same dog as in
10.6A, B, 10.11, 10.13,
10.46). It had episodes of 
severe pain; fluoroscopy
suggested marked lum-
10.53
bosacral instability. A: After
A
fusion the dog was free of
pain for 4 months but then
that the site had fused and was immobile despite lysis around one screw (arrow) and bending of the
other (arrowhead).
10.543D reconstruction of a CT
Scanmade after fusionusing
bone screws and graft 
(same dog as 10.53). Areas
of new bone production are
shown (white arrows). The
black arrowhead indicates
the position of the sacral
spinous process; above it is
the bent spinous process of
L7 (white arrowhead).
10.54
Cervical spondylomyelopathy
Chapter
● Ligamentous hypertrophy.
Clinical signs  212
· Joint capsule proliferation or cyst formation.
Diagnosis
212
· Osteophyte production.
Radiography   213
·Disc herniation.
Vertebral malformation and canal stenosis may be pres-
 Presurgical evaluation  
216
ent at birth in the Doberman, suggesting either a con-
Hypothyroidism   217
 genital or inherited disorder (Burbidge, 200l; Drost
 Bleeding disorders  217
et al., 2002) (11.1).
An early onset of clinical signs is most common in
Treatment  217
giant-breed dogs. Most other breeds show clinical signs
Non-surgical treatment  218
from micddle age onwards. These usually develop due to
Surgical treatment  218
Complications  24
Intraoperative complications  224
Rights were not granted to inclucle this figure in electronic media
Please reter to the printed publication.
 Early postoperative complications 
226
Late postoperative complications   228
Postoperative care  228
Prognosis
229
Key issues for future investigation   229
References 229
Procedures
232
Ventral decompression   233
Vertebral distraction  235
Cement plug  237
Metal implant and bone cement method  239 
 Dorsal decompression   241
Laminoplasty   245
Cervical spondylomyelopathy (CSM or 'Wobbler’ syn
drome) is predominantly a syndrome of large- and
11.1 CT images of C6 and C7 vertebrae from neonatal puppies
giant-breed dogs, particularly Doberman pinschers and
A: Doberman B: other large breed. There are significant
Great Danes. The cause of this disorder is multifac-
diferences in vertebral dimensions between the two breed
 groups: the cranial vertebral canal is relatively narrow in the
torial. Important contributing factors are:
Doberman group and they have vertebral body asymmetry.
·Vertebral canal malformation, stenosis, or both.
Changes were most marked for C7 but were also present at
●Vertebral instability.
both C5 and C6 (Burbidge, 2001).
212
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
acquired soft tissue or osseous lesions, which are proba-
mild ataxia to marked paresis and dysmetria. Cervical
 bly a consequence oflow-grade instability. Compression
hyperesthesia, guarding of the neck, pain on manipula-
is seen mainly at C5/6 and C6/7 in the Doberman but
tion of the prominent transverse process of C6 (4.6), or
lesions in other breeds often affect more cranial disc
 a low carriage of the head may also be seen (ll.2).
spaces.
Lameness and shoulder muscle atrophy in one or both
Both C5/6 and C6/7 sites are at high risk of causing
thoracic limbs, or pain when traction is applied to the
 limb (root signature), suggest nerve root compression
sent with both C5/6 and C6/7 lesions at the time of
[see Chapter 7, page 93). Neurological deficits localize
initial diagnosis. In addition, if either one of these
 to either the Cl-C5 region or to the cranial portion of
intervertebral spaces fuses then the other one seems
C6-T2. Dogs with C1-C5 signs often show a 'floating"
even more likely to cause compression (Bruecker et al.,
 thoracic limb gait in addition to tetraparesis and dysme-
1989a). Any surgical procedure should therefore
tria (Baum et al., 1992). Dogs with C6-T2 signs have
address all high-risk spaces in an individual animal
 more of a short-stepping thoracic limb gait. This causes
(Dixon et al., 1996; Hilibrand et al., 1999).
the thoracic and pelvic limbs to be advanced at different 
 rates and produces a characteristic 'disconnected' gait.
CLINICAL SIGNS
The short thoracic limb steps may be due to either
 increased thoracic limb muscle tone, which is an upper
The most common presentation is a gait disturbance,
 motor neuron (UMN) effect on the elbow and carpal
which is most severe in the pelvic limbs and ranges from
extensor muscles, lower motor neuron (LMN) weak-
ness, or both (Seim and Withrow, 1982). There is often
an associated LMN weakness of the elbow flexors result-
ing in a weak withdrawal reflex. Pelvic limb muscle tone
and reflexes are normal or exaggerated. Tetraplegia is
umcommon but when present (l5.7) the dog must be
assessed for hypoventilation (6.1, 7.1l, 1l.10).
DIAGNOSIS
Although the gait abnormalities are often suggestive of
CSM, careful evaluation of the history and thorough
physical and neurological examinations are important
to help rule out the differential diagnoses listed
11.2 Doberman with CSM. Note the broad-based pelvic limb
in Table 1l.1 (see also Box 7.2 and Chapter 14).
stance and lowered head position.
The clinician should also consider the possibility of a
 Table 11.1 Differential diagnoses for cervical sponcylomyelopathy (CSM)
 Degenerative
Anomalous/developmental
Neoplastic
Inflammatory/infectious
Ischemic
disorders
disorders
disorders
disorders
disorders
 Degenerative
Congenital vertebral 
Meningioma,
Discospondylitis 
 Fbrocartilaginous 
myelopathy
 malformations
Nerve sheath
Epidural abscess
embolic
Leukodystrophies
 Atlantoaxial subluxation
tumor
Meningomyelitis 
myelopathy (FCE)
 Synovial cyst(s)
Multiple cartilaginous exostoses 
 Other tumors
 Spinal cord
 Orthopedic
Tumoral calcinosis (calcinosis 
 hematoma
disease
circumscripta)
Ischemic
 Disc extrusion
 Meningocele/
neuromyopathy
 Cervical 
 meningomyelocele
fbrotic stenosis
Spinal dysraphism
Hydromyelia, syringomyelia,
 or both
 Pilonidal sinus (dermcid sinus)
Epidermoid cyst
Spinal arachnoid cyst
Consider also thoraoolumbar lesion; brainstem lesion.
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
213
 thoracolumbar lesion in a dog with signs restricted to the
flexion or extension. Lesions that did not improve were
pelvic limbs (2.8, 4.30, 4.31). Brainstem lesions can also
termed static and thiose that did improve were termed
mimic cervical spinal cord lesions on rare occasions
dynamic (Seim and Withrow, 1982). Dynamic lesions
(2.23). A further diagnostic challenge is the potential for 
can be subdivided further; first by whether or not they
over-diagnosis using an MRI without any reference to
respond to traction (traction-responsive or traction
the clinical signs. In humans a disc herniation and even 
   m    
spinal cord compression appear in many asymptomatic
change during flexion and extension (positional). This
people older than 30 years (Teresi et al., 1987; Hayashi 
subdivision of lesion types helps the surgeon to decide
et al., 1988; Gorman and Hodak, 1997). By the age of
 on the best procedure to perform. Although there may
60 years, some 12% of asymptomatic individuals show
be some overlap, lesions fall primarily into one of three
compression of the spinal cord on MRI (Gorman and
basic types (11.4-11.6).
Hodak, 1997). Incidental, mild disc lesions also occur in
the cervical region of large-breed dogs.
Traction-responsive lesions  Compressive lesions
Prior to anesthesia, several potential complicating
that improve with traction are termed traction-
conditions should be ruled out:
responsive (McKee and Sharp, 2003) (11.4). Traction
· Chronic active hepatitis of Doberman pinschers
A psne ussa prs rs siseaap Aensn
 is usually evident on serum biochemistry.
anulus fibrosus or ligamentous tissue and therefore
· Cardiomyopathy is seen in many large- and
increases dural tube diameter (Rusbridge et al., 1998).
 giant-breed dogs, and is often fatal within 6 months
Such traction-responsive lesions would be expected to
 of diagnosis, particularly in male dogs. Even a
benefit from a distraction-stabilization surgery. Such
subtle arrhythmia should not be discounted (Calvert
lesions have also been called ‘dynamic' (Seim and
et al., 1996). An electrocardiogram (ECG) and
Withrow, 1982; Wheeler and Sharp, 1994).
echocardiogram should be performed, realizing that
this still cannot rule out occult cardiomyopathy.
Traction non-responsive lesions Some com-
A 24-h ECG may also be of value as a screening
pressive lesions do not improve with traction (ll.5).
Such lesions are usually caused by new bone formation
test (Calvert and Wall, 2001).
●Hypothyroidism.
●Bleeding disorders (page 217).
to respond either to a ventral slot or dorsal decompres-
sion. Such lesions have also been called 'static' (Seim
are less common than traction-responsive lesions (Seim
Radiography
and Withrow, 1982).
SURVEYRADIOGRAPHY
Differentiation between lesions that do or do not
Survey radiographs are useful to rule out potential
respond to traction can be subjective at times, but this
differential diagnoses but are not definitive for CSM.
is still the most logical means of deciding on the best
 a ra  s ia r aa
formation do raise the index of suspicion for CSM,
especially in giant-breed dogs (1l.3).
MYELOGRAPHY
This is the standard means of confirming a diagnosis
of CSM and has the advantage that the lesion can
be observed readily in different positions of the spine.
Contrast should be first concentrated at the lesion by
positioning the site of interest at the low point of the
spine for several minutes (McKee et al., 2000) (4.32).
Lateral, ventrodorsal (for cranial cervical vertebrae),
 dorsoventral (for caudal cervical vertebrae), flexion
and traction views should then be taken (Rendano and
Smith, 1981; Lamb, 1995).
-d aa a se ade iane a ut 
11.3 Survey radliographs must be taken under general
anesthesia to be of dliagnostic quality. This 6-year-old 
tions of adjacent vertebrae are changed. Formerly,
tetraparetic Great Dane has multiple sites of periarticular new
lesions were categorized based on whether or not com-
a 2/g pue g/ 1e Aeoadsa 'slo laoe aui punoe auog
pression changed in the 'stressed' positions of traction,
CT scan of this dog is shown in 11.7.
214
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
11.4 Traction-responsive type of
cynamic lesion. A: Ventral spinal cord
compression at C6/7 due to redundant
anulus fibrosus in a middle-aged 
Doberman. B: Same dog but with
traction applied to the vertebral
column. There is marked relief of spinal
cord compression and widening of the
cural tube dlorsally.
A
A
B
C
compression at C6/7 due to disc herniation. B: Same dog but with traction applied to the vertebral column. C: CT myelogram of the
same dog to show extruded, mineralized disc material at C6/7 (arrow).
type of surgical procedure (Rusbridge et al., 1998).  and preferably only under fluoroscopy (ll.9, 1l.10).
Some lesions will also have a positional component  If this is not available, the dog should be positioned in
and then a judgement must be made about which is  mild (not extreme) extension for as short a time as pos-
most significant.
sible. If the dog is not being ventilated, its ability to
breathe spontaneously must be checked carefully as
Positional lesions Some dogs have minimal spinal
cord compression in a neutral neck position and there- Withrow, 1982). Use of the extension view should be
fore show little change with traction. Nevertheless  restricted to dogs with suspected positional lesions or
they may show significant compression in different  possibly to identify subclinical lesions. Advanced imag-
neck positions (ll.6). In such dogs the degree of com-
- ing technicques are preferable to diagnose subclinical
pression changes specifically as the neck is moved
1 lesions when conventional myelography does not pro-
between flexed, neutral and gently extended positions 
vide sufficient information {4.42, 1l.7-1l.10),
(see below) (Dueland et al., 1973; McKee and Sharp,
2003). These types of dynamic lesion are best termed
CT-MYELOGRAPHY
'positional’ as they are worsened by positions that Ideally all conventional myelograms for CSM should be
reflect normal neck motion. In dogs with positional  followed by a CT scan (Sharp et al., 1992). The CT pro-
lesions the spinal cord is probably suffering repeated,  vides excellent bone imaging (ll.7) and when used with
minor trauma during everyday life. Such dogs may  contrast it also gives a good transverse image of the spinal
therefore benefit from a stabilization procedure to pre-
cord (11.8, 11.10). This information can improve surgi-
vent this repeated, low-grade injury.
cal planning and may provide prognostic information by
 Positional studies are not without risk. The extension
 detecting spinal cord atrophy (Charmbers and Betts,
view can cause severe exacerbation of spinal cord com- 1977; Sharp et al., 1995). Sagittal or three-dimensional
pression and should be undertaken with extreme care 
e  reconstructions may also prove useful (ll.8B). Finally,
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
215
11.6 Dynamic, positional lesions in a
 9-month-old Doberman. A: Neutral
view showing minimal spinal cord 
Rights were not granted to includle this figure in electronic media.
compression. B: There is no change in
 Please refer to the printed publicaticn.
 appearance with traction. C: In flexion
 the craniodorsal aspects of both C4
and C5 vertebral bodies cause mild
 attenuation of the ventral subarachnoid
space. D: There is moderate
 attenuation of the dorsal subarachnoid 
 space over C3/4 and C4/5
 intervertebral spaces in extension
(arrows) (Dueland et al., 1973).
11.7 CT scan at C5/6 from the dog
shown in 11.3. The conventional
 Rights were not grantec to include this figure in electronic media.
 myelogram was of poor quality.
Please refer to the printed publicaticn.
 A: Transverse CT image after
myelography reveals dramatic
overgrowth of the right articular facet 
joint (arrowhead). B: 3D reconstruction 
demonstrates the overgrown right facets
and also shows marked impingement of 
both right and left facet joints into the
 vertebral canal (arrows) (Massicotte
et al., 1999)
11.8 A: Transverse CT image at C5/6
in a 2-year-old Mastifreveals marked,
asymmetrical, extradural compression 
caused by a soft tissue mass adjacent to
the left articular facet joint (same dlog as
in 11.56, 11.57). B: 3D reconstruction
suggests that this is cystic in nature 
(arrow). This was suspected to be a
synovial cyst (Levitski et al., 1999;
Dickinson et al., 2001; Lipsitz et al..
2001). See page 320.
B
216
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
11.9 Myelogram of a 5-year-old 
Rottweiler with tetraparesis. The dog 
had deteriorated after a ventral slot at
C6/7 1 week previously. A: The lateral
view shows no compression. B: The
ventrodorsal view shows moderate
extradural compression at C6/7 on
the right sicde. The radiopaque object
over the spinal cord is a pet
idlentification chip. CT was performed 
with the dog first in a neutral and then 
an extended position (11.10)
B
11.10 A: Same dog as in 11.9.
CT image with the neck in a neutral
position showing moderate attenuation
of the subarachnoid space over C6/7.
The central defect in the vertebral 
bocy of C6 is cue to the ventral slot.
B: CT image from the same dog with
the neck in an extended position.
Spinal cord compression is much
worse; this positional effect also led to
an unanticipated complication (see
below).
B
 postoperative imaging can be used to gauge the effec-
disadvantages are the lack of general availability and,
tiveness of a surgical procedure [4.25, 7.5, 7.8, 7.9,
depending on the machine, the time required to com-
11.10, 11.12, 11.56, 11.57).
plete a study. Dynamic studies are possible but do require
CT can also be used to study positional lesions.
that the patient be repositioned and then re-imaged
 However, keeping the neck in an extended position for
(10.12, 1l.l0). However, dynamic studies are less
the duration of the scan can cause severe injury (ll.10).
 important if the cement plug distraction-stabilization
The dog shown in 1l.9 and 11.10 suffered seizures
 technique is to be used because this surgery can be
during recovery, which were very difficult to control.
used for nearly all types of lesion (Algorithms ll.lA,B).
He was put on a ventilator but became profoundly
y It is then only important for MRI to differentiate a disc
hypotensive and died 12h after the study. The cause
 extrusion from other lesion types (4.42, 4.43).
of death was not determined but was probably com-
 A temporary worsening of neurological deficits may
plicated  by sympathetic blockade  secondary  to
0occur after imaging dogs with CSM, especially after
(Rosenbluth and Meirowsky, 1953; Seim and Withrow,  be undertaken 48h before elective surgery in order to
1982; Clark, 1986). It is likely that maintaining the
 allow the patient to recover. This period also gives
neck in an extended position for the time that it took 
 ample opportunity to decide on treatment options, to
to complete the second CT scan caused severe spinal  discuss these with the owner and to perform a thor-
 ough presurgical evaluation.
seizures.
MRIMAGING
PRESURGICAL EVALUATION
This is the technique of choice for imaging humans 
 During the recovery period following imaging, medical
with degenerative diseases of the cervical spine. It is  problems that may complicate the situation should be
lution to CT-myelography (Lipsitz et al., 200l). The  common in Doberman pinschers with CSM than in
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
217
other breeds (Lewis and Hosgood, 1992). This high-
lights the need for constant monitoring during recovery,
with diazepam on hand to control any seizures as they
could also exacerbate the spinal cord injury (Lipsitz
et al., 2001) (11.10),
Care should be taken to maintain adequate systemic
 blood pressure and spinal cord perfusion throughout the
procedure (see page 86). Dogs with chronic spinal cord
lesions are particularly susceptible to postoperative
deterioration, especially following dorsal laminectomy
or ventral slot {Kohno et al., 1997; Rusbridge et al.,
1998; de Risio et al., 2002). Preoperative methylpredni-
solone sodium succinate (MPSS) may be useful but the
11.11 llustration of a buccal mucosal bleeding time being
risks and benefits of this strategy remain umproven
performed in a dog. The gauze strip has been used to keep the
(Olby, 1999; Pietila et al., 2000). Preoperative vitamin E
lip turned over and cause slight venous engorgement. A two-
may be a useful alternative for elective surgeries (see
bladle, spring-loaded cevice (Simplate Il, Organon Teknika,
page 85).
General Diagnostics, Cambridge, UK) has been used to make
two 6-mm long by 1-mm deep incisions in the upper lip
mucosa. Any obvious blood vessels should be avoidled.
Hypothyroidism
Doberman pinschers and Great Danes are predisposed 
2.62 min, with a range of 1.7-4.2 min (Jergens et al.,
over-diagnosed. Lethargy, muscle weakness and periph-
 1987). The cuticle bleeding time is harder to standard-
eral neuropathy may occur, all of which are undesirable  ize than the buccal mucosa bleeding time, but should
 in a surgical candidate. The best diagnostic test is  identify severe bleeding disorders. A cut is made using
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) stimulation but 
a guillotine nail clipper at the apex of the cuticle. In
this is not widely available. In its absence a high endo-
normal dogs, bleeding stops within 8min, but occa-
genous TSH level with a low total T4 is highly suggestive s
 sional normal animals will bleed for up to 12 min (Giles
of hypothyroidism if the history and clinical signs are  et al., 1982; Stokol and Parry, 1998).
compatible. Glucocorticoids, phenobarbitone and some
 Dobermans with prolonged bleeding times, or those
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may 
with known VW disease, can be given desmopressin
interfere with thyroid function testing (Gieger et al.,
(DDAVP?—Rhone-Poulenc  Rorer) (1.0 μg/kg SQ)
-dns aaiasa Aqeqoud pinous saop piouuodkh (ooo
immediately prior to surgery (Callan and Giger, 2002;
plementation for at least 48h prior to surgery although
Kraus et al., 1989). Cryoprecipitate is the optimal
hypothyroidism does not induce VW disease as was
therapy, although fresh or frozen plasma (l0ml/kg of
once thought, nor does it cause defects in primary
plasma, taken 30-60min after the donor has been
hemostasis (Panciera and Johnson, 1996).
given desmopressin) may also be useful (Kraus et al.,
1989; Ching et al., 1994; Stokol and Parry, 1998). As a
Bleeding disorders
precaution, dogs at known risk can be cross-matched if
It has been estimated that 16% of Doberman pinschers 
they are to undergo ventral decompression. There does
 in the USA have a bleeding tendency related to VW
not appear to be any benefit in giving thyroid hormone
disease (Dodds, 1989). Bleeding from the internal ver-
supplementation to euthyroid dogs with prolonged
tebral venous plexus is a potential problem during ven-
bleeding times as this does not increase plasma VW fac-
tral decompression and can be almost impossible to 
tor antigen (Panciera and Johnson, 1994).
arrest unless the dog has normal hemostatic abilities.
After a ventral approach to the neck, the inability to
TREATMENT
close dead space under the strap muscles can lead to
hematoma formation several days after surgery
The decision on the best way to treat each patient is
(15.40). The easiest way to test an animal's VW sta-b
based on the presenting history, neurological status,
tus is to perform a standardized bleeding time test 
 results of imaging, and on the owner's expectations and
(11.ll). A stopwatch is started just as the incisions 
their ability to undertake any necessary aftercare. Most
are made. Blood is blotted at 5-s intervals using filter
dogs that show neurological deficits are surgical candi-
paper, taking care not to touch the incision itself. The 
dates, but consideration will also be given here to non-
 mean buccal mucosal bleeding time for normal dogs is
surgical treatment.
218
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Table 11.2 Reported results for surgical treatment of cervical spondylomyelopathy (CSM)
 Metal and 
 Cement
Ventral slot
Total
cement 
plug
Dorsal laminectomy
Total
Dogs (n)
182
273
147
59
411
225
188
146
214
53
Successes
14
18
13
45
37
18
14 
11
20
45
(as %)
(78)
(67)
(91)
(76)
(90)
(82)
(78)
(79)
(93)
(85)
Follow-up (months)
10-60
6-48
6-40
3-50
3-60
1.5-53
N/A
7-108
(Mean)
(29)
N/A
N/A
(20)
(21)
(17)
N/A
(38)
No. of repeat episodes
4/14 
N/A
5/13
9/27
8/37
2/18
0/14
N/A
4/21
4/35
(% se)
(28)
N/A
(88)
(33)
(22)
(11)
(0)
N/A
(61)
(11)
Months to repeat episode
12-60
N/A
16-33
5-42
8-33
NA
N/A
4-48
(Mean)
(32)
N/A
(23)
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
(23)
1Bruecker et al., 1989a; 2Bruecker et al, 1989b; 3Chambers et al, 1986; 4de Risio et al., 2002; Dixon et al., 1996; Lipsitz et al., 2001; 
7 Rusbricdge et al., 1998; 8Trotter et al., 1976.
N/A, not available.
Non-surgical treatment
The most logical way to obtain the best overall results is
 Non-surgical treatment is warranted in two situations.
to consider three basic types of surgery and to perform
 The first situation is when a normal dog develops neuro-
these for certain, relatively well-defined indications. The
logical deficits following minor trauma; these may resolve
 three types of surgery are:
 completely within a few weeks unless severe injury is sus-
Ventral decompression.
tained. The second is when a dog develops CSM before it
Vertebral distraction-stabilization.
is skeletally mature and so may benefit from correction of
 Dorsal decompression.
 mutritional imbalances together with severe caloric reduc-
The basic indications for each procedure are summa-
tion. This is analogous to the strategy used for manage-
rized in Table ll.3. The main factor governing the
ment of young horses with "Wobbler’ syndrome but it is 
choice of surgical procedure is the appearance of the
unproven in dogs (Donawick et al., 1993). For most other
spinal cord on imaging, particularly the traction and
dogs, however, surgery is the treatment of choice as the
 flexion views after myelography. Some lesions show a
majority probably show progressive deterioration without
 combination of different types of compression and then
treatment (Jeffery and McKee, 2001).
a judgement must be made as to which is the major
 For most dogs with CSM the surgery is elective. A
component (see 'Myelography’ and 'MRI', pages 213
 2-4 week trial period of severe exercise reduction and
 and 216). Algorithms 11.1A and B are algorithms for
use of a chest harness is often justified (l5.ll); if this
surgical decision-making based on whether the dog has
fails it often emphasizes the need for surgery to the
single or multiple lesions. In general:
owner. Anti-inflammatory doses of prednisolone may
?
 Dogs with single, ventral lesions that do
also be used, but for short periods only and preferably
not respond to traction should undergo a
 on an alternate day basis (VanGundy, 1988). One addi-
ventral slot.
tional role for corticosteroids is to use the resultant
 Single and multiple lesions that respond well to
response, or lack of response, as a crude indicator of
traction should undergo cement plug distraction-
the reversibility of any neurological deficit prior to per-
stabilization. A ventral slot can be as good for single
forming surgery.
lesions if performed well.
 Single and multiple lesions that are positional
should undergo cement plug distraction-
Surgical treatment
stabilization. Some surgeons may prefer dorsal
A large number of different surgical techniques have
 decompression, particularly for dorsal positional
been proposed for CSM, with many of the authors
lesions or synovial cysts (page 320) (Jeffery, 1995;
claiming between 70 and 90% success rates (Table 11.2).
Dickinson et al., 200l; de Risio et al., 2002).
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
219
Table 11.3 General indications for surgical procedures in cervical spondylomyelopathy (CSM)
Procedure
Indication(s) (see also Algorithms 11.1A,B)
Lesion(s) addressed
Ventral decompression
ventral slot
Single, ventral, traction non-responsive (static) lesion*
Disc extrusion
Can be used for anulus 
Ventral slot with metal and
To prevent (or to treat) disc space collapse affer
 Disc extrusion and anulus 
bone cement 
ventral slot decompression*
 Distraction-stabilization 
 Cement plug 
Single lesions of all types except ventral, traction
non-responsive lesion*
 Multiple lesions of all types
 Osseous or soft tissue compression
 Metal and bone cement 
 Single traction-responsive (cynamic) lesion*
Anulus fibrosus
 Rescue after failed ventral slot decompression
Ligamentum flavum 
 Synthes locking plate
 Single lesions—as for cement plug 
Rescue after failed ventral slot decompression 
 Multiple lesions-needs further evaluation
 Dorsal decompression
 Dorsal laminectomy
Single or multiple, dorsal, traction non-responsive
(static) lesion(s)
Single or multilpe, dorsal positional lesion(s)
 Osseous vertebral canal stenosis, articular
facet osteophytosis, synovial cyst(s)
Laminoplasty
 Single traction non-responsive (static) lesion
(needs further evaluation)
 Single dorsal, positional lesion 
*n addition to the operated site, any additional subcinical esion, in particular at C5/6 and C6/7 interspaces, should be addressed routinely in an
attem pt to reduoe the incidence of comino lesions (see 11.30 and page 221).
11.12 A: Preoperative CT myelogram at
 C5/6 in a tetraparetic Doberman. There
 is a soft tissue mass on the right, ventral
to the spinal cord. Radliopaque material 
within the right foramen represents 
mineralized disc or new bone. A ventral
slot retrieved nucleus pulposus and 
 anulus fibrosus; the slot was filled with fat 
and then cancellous bone. B: Eight
weeks later the spinal cord and ventral
subarachnoid space have expanded.
New bone occupies the ventral portion of
the slot. Contrast material within the
spinal cord may represent a syrinx (Faiss 
et al., 1990), (from Sharp et al., 1995).
● In all dogs that show compression at only one
osteophytosis, misshapen vertebrae, and intraoperative
interspace, consideration should also be given to
hemorrhage (Table 7.2). Short-term deterioration is
a strategy that will prevent compression from
common even in dogs that have good long-term results
developing at adjacent high-risk spaces in the
(Rusbridge et al., 1998). This technique is best reserved
future (see page 221).
for the relief of single-level spinal cord compression
caused by midline, dorsal extrusion of disc material. In
such lesions, a ventral slot should permit retrieval of a
VENTRAL DECOMPRESS/ON (11.28-11.30)
large amount of nucleus pulposus or torn anulus fibro-
(see Chapter 7, page 96)
sus from the vertebral canal (1l.5, 1l.12).
Ventral decompressive surgery can be very challenging
 Retrieval of extruded nucleus pulposus is not posible
in CSM because of various combinations of ventral
in some dogs because the compressive lesion consists
220
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
instead solely of anulus fibrosus. In this situation it is
 the cement also tends to collapse into the cancellous
essential that a large portion of this anulus be excised so
 bone with subsequent loss of distraction (Dixon et al.,
that on completion, the dura is visible clearly across the
 1996). A block of corticocancellous autograft (see page
q snaus (i ad) aam us eus ( d aeur su (ezi st' ns a jo m aa
to be very difficult, as the fibers of the anulus tend to  allograft (Veterinary Transplant Services, Seattle, WA),
fragment before they can be removed and are often  or a rope (ll.3l), can be used to distract a ventral slot 
attached to the internal venous plexus. Removal is facili-
 temporarily prior to fixation (page 117).
tated by leaving a plug of anulus to serve as a handle
 The major long-term disadvantage in using a ventral
during removal (1l.29A) and by using the inverted cone
slot for CSM is that about 30% of dogs undergoing sin-
technique (Goring et al., 1991) (7.50).
gle level decompression suffer a second episode of neu-
If the surgeon is in doubt about the adequacy of
rological signs within 2-3 years (Bruecker et al., 1989b;
decompression after a ventral slot then it should be
Rusbridge et al., 1998) (Table 1l.2). In most cases this
converted to a distraction-stabilization technique. This
 is presumed to be due to recurrence at the original site
is recommended in order to prevent intervertebral col-
 or a domino lesion at an adjacent space. There are
lapse with its attendant risk of anular buckling and  probably several reasons for this:
increased spinal cord compression (Chambers et al.,
● Even disc spaces that appear normal often show
1986) (4.25, 1l.2l). The worsening noted after sur-
subclinical or histological abnormalities in dogs
gery even in dogs that do well long term may suggest
with CSM, especially the high incidence spaces
that some degree of collapse is common after ventral
C5/6 and C6/7 (1.3) (Seim and Withrow, 1982;
slot (Rusbridge et al., 1998). It is likely that the signs
Rusbridge et al., 1998).
then improve as the site stabilizes subsequently due to
Such intervertebral discs may not respond to
the development of a fibrous or osseous union (Sharp
fusion of an adjacent interspace in the same way
et al., 1995). Postoperative imaging can be used to
that a disc would in a normal dog (Cole et al.,
 assess the decompressive effect of a ventral slot and is
1987; Bruecker et al., 1989a; VanGundy, 1989;
certainly indicated if the neurological deficits are
Hilibrand et al., 1999). Signal changes on
markedly worse after surgery (ll.10, 1l.21). If a
MRI in adjacent discs have been detected
 distraction-stabilization procedure is needed following
in huumans within 12 months of fusion {Iseda
a ventral slot, then the metal and bone cement technique
et al., 2001).
(11.13A, 1l.40-11.43) or a Synthes locking plate
● Fusion does occur at many disc spaces after a
(11.13B,C) are recommended (Wilson et al., 1994).
 single site ventral slot (1l.12). This occurs mainly
A full cement plug should not be used to distract the
after wide slots but the mobility at the slotted
site after a ventral slot as there is a high risk of cement
space probably changes even for more narrow
entering the vertebral canal through the defect created
slots (Gilpin, 1976; Chambers et al., 1982;
in the dorsal anulus. A further potential problem is that
VanGundy, 1989).
B
C
longer recommended (Wilson et al., 1994) (see 'Vertebral distraction', page 235). B, C: Seven-month postoperative radiographs
of a Doberman treated using Syncage-C intervertebral implant and Cervical Spine Locking Plate (AO) at C6/7. Cutcome at 1 year
was excellent (Matis, 2001)
Cervical spondylomyelopathy
221
 Taken together, this would suggest that high incidence
locking plate (1l.13B), and metal implant and bone
disc spaces adjacent to the ventral slot site should
cement techniques. The latter technique is limited
 apio u ainpanoid ooelaudoid jo aos aos oiapun
to single space distraction. The locking plate may be
to reduce the incidence of domino lesions (see also
suitable for multiple lesions although this needs to be
Vertebral decompression', page 234).
an aq  sed a ssp  a pa
 The choices of prophylactic procedure for high inci-
for nearly all types of lesion. An advantage of all dis-
dence disc spaces adjacent to a ventral slot are:
traction techniques is that they often provide rapid
1.1
 Place a cancellous bone graft at the adjacent
relief of cervical hyperesthesia related to nerve root
space[s), combined with forage of ventral
decompression. Unlike the ventral slot, these distrac-
cortical bone (1l.30), in order to promote
tion techniques do not involve entry into the vertebral
fusion (Dixon et al., 1996). The aim is to
canal but this advantage is partly offset by the risk of
 improve stability and so reduce the likelihood
implant failure or other implant-associated complica-
a un uoisa op e hunpod aeds s jo
tions. Future fixation devices will almost certainly be
future.
made of absorbable materials (Vaccaro et al., 2002).
 2. Place a cement plug at the adjacent space[s).
However, this approach may increase collapse
Metal  implant and bone cement method
of the slotted space. Even if this collapse does not
(1l.40-1l.43)  Metal implant and bone cement dis-
compress the spinal cord it may cause foraminal
traction is a well-tested technique with good long-term
narrowing and radiculopathy.
follow up results (Table ll.2). It is also the standard
3. Do nothing at the adjacent space(s) but then
rescue technique for a failed ventral slot. The metal
the risk of domino lesions will remain high
implants can either be Steinmann pins (ll.43B),
(7.14, 11.18, 11.23A).
threaded pins (McKee and Sharp, 2003), or bone screws
Grafting and forage are recommended as they carry the
(11.13A, 11.19, 11.40-11.43). Attempts to bridge more
lowest risk of the three options, although at present
than one interspace usually result in implant failure
there are no data to support their efficacy (1l.30).
(Elison et al., 1988; VanGundy, 1988) (11.17B). If two
The threat of a domino lesion is also present after a
spaces must be bridged with cement, implants should
single site ventral slot combined with metal and bone
be placed in all three vertebrae and the cement re-
cement fixation. The same three prophylactic options
inforced with a thick Steinmann pin (13.25). The main
also apply for this situation, but inducing osseous
 disadvantage of single-level metal and bone cement is
fusion at the adjacent space will be more difficult due 
the high rate of domino lesions. Subclinical lesions at
to the mass of cement ventral to the slot [see 'Metal
adjacent interspaces should therefore be addressed for
and bone cement', page 239; 11.18, 11.43).
the reasons described under ventral decompression. This
Fenestration is not a suitable treatment for any dog
 is diffcult because of the mass of cement (ll.19), but
with CSM (Lincoln and Pettit, 1985; Jeffery and McKee,
may be best-accomplished using forage (ll.30), a
200l). It hastens intervertebral collapse and anular buck-
cement plug, or possibly a locking plate (ll.13B)
ling, which cause spinal cord compression. Likewise, fen-
estration of discs to position a distraction instrument
Cement plug (11.35-1l.39) Cement plugs can be
is not recommended (Wlson et al., 1994) (ll.13A).
Others suggest that concomitant forage and grafting may
cation is for traction-responsive lesions (page 2l3). These
be sufficient to stabilize an interspace that has been fen-
 implants retain the advantages of the earlier metal washer
estrated for distraction purposes (M. McKee, personal
technique but have overcome many of the disadvantages
communication).
[Wheeler and Sharp, 1994; Dixon et al., 1996; Rusbridge
et al., 1998; McKee et al., 1999). Catastrophic collapse
VERTEBRALDISTRACTION-STABILIZATION
 from end-plate fracture is unusual with the cement plug
(11.31-11.43)
(11.20A), presumably as forces are distributed more
The primary indications for distraction and stabiliza-
evenly over the end plates than thiey were using washiers
tion are the presence of a traction-responsive lesion and
(McKee et al., 1999). The main advantage of cement
to relieve nerve root compression. Lesions may be
plugs is that they can be applied easily to more than one
either single or multiple and cause either dorsal or ven-
intervertebral space. The surgeon can therefore be more
tral spinal cord compression (Algorithms ll.lA,B).
aggressive in dealing with a dog that has more than one
ouuop e asneo on uo on pmnon uum jo auo Aue ‘uoisa 
past using a number of different techniques, but the
problem in the future if not treated (Dixon et al., 1996;
ones now recommended are the cement plug, Synthes
Rusbridge et al., 1998)
222
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Cement plugs should be placed routinely at the high-
degenerated  segments  causing  radiculopathy
or
est risk disc spaces (usually C5/6 and C6/7), and
 myelopathy should be included in an anterior cervical
ideally to any other space that shows subclinical
 arthrodesis (Hilibrand et al., 1999). This is also consis-
lesions. An altermate approach is to implant cement plugs 
 tent with reports suggesting that normal canine discs
at sites of spinal cord compression and fuse other sites
 can adjust to the fusion of adjacent segments, whereas
that are considered to be at risk by forage and grafting
abnormal discs can not (Cole et al., 1987; Bruecker et al.,
(11.30). Obviously not every cervical intervertebral
1989a).
space can be fused and the maximum is probably three
 Cement plugs are also indicated for dogs with posi-
interspaces (Bolesta et al., 2000). It may also be diffi-  tional lesion(s) (page 214, Algorithms 1l.lA,B). The
cult to decide exactly which sites to fuse in any given aim of stabilization in these dogs is to reduce or abolish
dog. For the Great Dane and other giant breeds, C4/5 
 movement at the affected interspace. Stabilization may
pue g/so ym Suore paanoaui aq Aeu t/eO uaa 1o
 even benefit dorsally located soft tissue or osseous
C6/7 (Olsson et al., 1982; Lewis, 1989; Lipsitz et al.,
lesions by limiting movement locally. Fusion has been
2001). For the Doberman usually only C6/7 and C5/6
 shown to cause the regression of ligamentum flavum
discs are at high risk although in some dogs C4/5
 lesions in dogs and of bony articular lesions in horses
should probably also be addressed (11.14).
(Grant et al., 1985; Seim, 1986; McKee et al., 1990).
The aim of fusing multiple spaces routinely is to
Therefore cement plugs should be considered for dogs
reduce the incidence of domino lesions {Dixon et al.,
S      
1996; Jeffery and McKee, 2001) (Table 11.2). Support 
 such as those caused by osseous compression of the
for this more aggressive approach also comes from dorsal vertebral canal (ll.15). The advantage of using
work in humans with cervical spondylosis. In humans,
cement plugs over dorsal laminectomy in these situa-
the risk of new disease at an adjacent level was found to
 tions is that distraction-stabilization should avoid the
be significantly lower following a multilevel arthrodesis short-term morbidity associated with laminectomy and
than it was following a single-level arthrodesis. willalso allw the surgeon to address adjacent, subclin-
Therefore, it has been proposed in humans that all  icallesions (de Risio et al., 2002).
11.14 A: Cement plugs have been
inserted in this Doberman at the C4/5.
C5/6 and C6/7 intervertebral spaces.
The degree of cement filing is good for
C4/5 and C5/6 but suboptimal for C6/7
The dog wore an external splint for 8
weeks (11.39). B: Two-month follow-up
radiograph reveals good osseous fusion
at all three spaces. The presenting 
complaint of neck pain and exercise
ntolerance had resolved.
B
11.15 Young Great Dane with severe,
0sseous stenosis from C3/4 to C6/7.
 A: Preoperative CT myelogram from site
of maximum compression at C5/6.
Cement plugs were applied at C4/5 and
C5/6; C6/7 was only foraged and
grafted. A restraint cevice was applied
(13.18B). B: Two-year follow-up, again
from site of maximum compression at
C5/6 (arrow = cement plug); there is
bony remodeling and less spinal cord
compression (arrowheads). C6/7 had not
fused; compression here was worse, as
was the dog s neurological status.
B
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
223
The main disadvantage of the cement-plug technique
Long-term results of dorsal larminectomy appear to be
is that it is unclear if an external splint must be used in
very good (Lipsitz et al., 200l; de Risio et al., 2002).
the postoperative period. Splints are not tolerated by all
s       s
dogs, they may require frequent modification
or
short-term morbidity with deterioration in neurological
replacement and can cause pressure sores {VanGundy,
status, which can cause considerable nursing problems
1988) (1l.39). An alternative is to use a Halti (13.18B) or
in giant-breed dogs (Trotter et al., 1976; VanGundy,
fixation screw or pin to prevent the cement from falling
1988; de Risio et al., 2002). An extensive soft-tissue
out (McKee and Sharp, 2003), (11.16, 11.36-11.38),
approach is also needed and ventraly located disc
or to use a locking plate instead (1l.13B).
 material cannot be removed (VanGundy, 1988). Although
dorsal laminectomy should not cause domino lesions,
Locking plate  Preliminary results with this tech-
recurrence of clinical signs occurs in about 10% of dogs
nique are encouraging (1l.13B,C). A swivel ring in the
and is reported to be due to restrictive fibrosis (Trotter
plate hole means that screws may be inserted at any
et al., 1976; de Risio et al., 2002) (Table 11.2). Because
angle within a range of ±20° and the screws lock in the
of the disadvantages of laminectomy, and because
plate via a unique locking mechanism. The Syncage is
 cement plugs also allow the surgeon to address multiple
designed to maintain distraction; it lies in the interver-
lesions, including subclinical ones, the cement-plug
tebral space and is packed with cancellous bone. These
technique is preferred for most types of lesion
implants are extremely strong and can even bridge more
(Algorithms 1l.lA,B). Dorsal laminectomy has given
than one interspace (McLaughlin et al., 1997; Matis,
 good results for dogs with synovial cysts, with four of
200l). Failure rates are lower in humans than for
six dogs being followed for more than l year (Dickinson
implants that lack the screw-locking feature (Lowery
et al., 200l). It is not clear if these results will be main-
and McDonough, 1998). However, their utility for mul-
osul shop jo saas iaiel e u uan suot pau
tiple lesions in dogs is not yet clear.
et al., 200l; Lipsitz et al., 2001).
When it is desirable to provide additional stability
DORSALDECOMPRESSION
following dorsal decompression, fusion can be encour-
Dorsal  laminectomy  (11.44-11.57)
This tech
aged by screwing and then bone grafting the facet joints
nique is an alternative for dogs with single dorsal lesions
(11.56, 1l.57). Potential risks include fracture of a
that do not respond to traction as well as those with
facet and trauma to nerves at the level of the foramen.
multiple dorsal lesions (Dickinson et al., 200l; Lipsitz
Stability of this fixation technique was reported to be
et al, 2001) (11.8, 11.56, 11.57). This technique also
 provides an option for dogs with ventral lesions at multi-
2 weeks after surgery (Swaim, 1975). Long-term
ple intervertebral spaces (Lyman, 1991) (7.15).
results of this approach have not been reported.
Algorithm 11.1A  Surgical decision-making in dogs with
 Traction non-responsive
 Positional 
 Traction responsive
a single lesion.
Ventral
Dorsal
ventral
Ventral
Dorsal
lesion 
lesion 
lesion 
lesion 
lesion 
Cement plug(s)*,
 Cement 
 Cement 
locking plate,
d0,(s)6nid
Jo,(s)6n|d
Ventral slot*
laminoplasty or
locking 
locking 
dorsal
plate
plate
laminectomy
Cement plug(s)*
 or locking plate
*Consider a strategy to address all high-risk disc spaces
224
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Algorithm 11.1B Surgical decision-making
 Traction non-responsive
 Positional 
Traction responsive
in dlogs with multiple lesions.
Ventral
 Dorsal
Ventral
Dorsal 
lesions
lesions
lesions
lesions
Ventral
 Dorsal
lesions 
lesions
Ventral
slot*
Cement
Cement
plugs
 plugs
Cement plugs
 or dorsal laminectomy
Laminoplasty (ll.58)  This technique has been
Table 11.4 Main sources of complications
reported just once and was then only used as a single-
level procedure. A 5-year-old Great Dane with marked
Early
Late
ataxia and tetraparesis improved markedly 2 weeks
Intraoperative
postoperative
postoperative
 after surgery. It was normal neurologically 6 months
latrogenic injury 
Implant failure 
 Adjacent segment
later but then died of a gastric torsion (McKee, 1988).
Technical errors
 Postoperative
disease
s m s u im pa si so
 morbidity 
 Recurrence of signs 
vertebral canal stenosis for both single- and multi-level
Infection 
compression (Kohno et al., 1997; Shaffrey et al.,
 Adjacent segment 
1999). Its main advantage over laminectomy is that it
disease
 provides protection to the spinal cord from the recur-
rent compression that can arise from re-growth of a
fibrous or osseous lamina. This is often termed restrictive
 soft tissues during a ventral approach to the neck can
fibrosis (Trotter et al., 1976; de Risio et al., 2002).
 damage important nerves in the cervical region. This
Laminoplasty may also induce less change in adjacent
can induce intraoperative arrhythmias or postopera-
discs compared to fusion {Iseda et al., 200l) and war-
tive laryngeal paralysis (ll.20B), Horner's syndrome
rants further evaluation.
(Boydell, 1995), or megaesophagus (15.40). Bleeding
from the venous plexus can be a major problem during
ventral decompression and may require a blood trans-
fusion. Excessive retraction or improper patient
COMPLICATIONS
positioning can exacerbate the bleeding by compressing
 Some risks are either inherent to surgery on the cervical
the jugular veins (ll.24). Hemorrhage can usually be
spine or to a particular breed and as such should be
arrested by relieving pressure on the jugular veins in
explained clearly to the owner. Many of the respiratory
combination with use of a piece of muscle to promote
and cardiovascular problems discussed in Chapter 7 also
 coagulation (Table 7.2; 8.43). Direct pressure can also
occur in CSM (Boxes 7.3, 7.4; Table 11.4). These prob-
be used (1l.29B). Hematoma formation is most likely
lems emphasize further the need for a thorough pre-
 to occur in the Doberman and can cause delayed dam-
surgical evaluation (Calvert et al., 1996). Complications
 age to the vagus nerve or its branches (15.40) or even
can be divided into three main categories (Table ll.4).
spinal cord compression (Seim and Prata, 1982) (see
page 100).
Technical errors during surgery are the other main
Intraoperative complications
source of complications in CSM. Examples include
These are mainly due to either iatrogenic injury or
 improper selection of the implant (McKee et al., 1990)
technical errors (Table ll.5). Overzealous retraction of
(11.16) and poor implant positioning (11.17A, 11.37).
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
225
Table 11.5 Specific complications
Intraoperative
Early postoperative
Late postoperative
latrogenic neural injury (11.20B)
 Implant failure (11.19, 11.20A)
Adjacent segment disease (11.23A)
Wrong surgical site
[Morbidity after ventral slot (11.21)
 Restrictive fibrosis
Hemorrhage 
 Morbidity after dorsal laminectomy
Recurrence of signs (11.8, 11.23B)
 Poor implant selection (11.16)
 End-plate failure (11.20A)
Ciscospondylitis (14.11)
 Poor implant position 
 Self-induced trauma (11.22)
 Delayed compression from implant 
(11.17A, 11.37)
 Ventral or epidural hematoma
 Pneumomediastinum 
(15.40)
 Prolonged extension (11.18)
Dorsal seroma
Vertebral fracture
Ischemic injury
 Adjacent segment disease
Discospondylitis
Epidural abscess (14.14)
Recumbency complications 
C
11.16 A, B: A single midline screw has been used to keep each cement plug in place (11.35-11.38). Unfortunately each screw
passed through a vascular foramen (1.18) to enter the vertebral canal and cause dramatic compression of the spinal cord, especially
cver C5. C: The screws were removed and replaced by shorter ones. The dog walked without assistance the next day and had an
B
C
11.17 A, B: These screws are allinserted too caudally in their respective vertebral bodies. Two have penetrated an end plate and 
all four have the potential to damage the nerve roots or spinal nerves (Swaim, 1975). C: An excess of bone cement can compress
reinforcement are needed (page 221) (13.25).
226
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
The surgeon may also cause iatrogenic spinal cord
Early postoperative complications
damage (Read et al., 1983; Lipsitzet al., 2001), vertebral
 The main complications at this stage are postopera-
fracture (McKee et al., 1989), induce pneumomedi-
-tive deterioration and implant failure (Table ll.5).
astinum (Marchevsky and Richardson, 1999), perform 
 Refractory neck pain or a marked deterioration in neu-
 surgery at the wrong site, or simply fail to understand 1
 rological status are indications for repeat imaging and
certain limitations of the technique itself (1l.17C).
. possibly for a second surgery (Rusbridge et al., 1998;
 Prolonged or excessive extension of the neck during McKee et al., 1999).
surgery is undesirable as it causes spinal cord corm-
Implant failure can occur such as loss of distraction
pression (1l.10). In addition, it could lead to fusing  after a variety of techniques (Bruecker et al., 1989a;
the vertebrae in extension if the position is not  Wilson et al., 1994; Marchevsky and Richardson, 1999;
corrected prior to cement hardening (Bruecker et al., McKee et al., 1999; (ll.19-11.20A). Implant failure may
1989b) (11.18).
also be subclinical at times (1l.19B, 11.20B, 11.37B).
11.18 A: There is a lesion at C5/6 and a
probable subclinical lesion at C4/5. B: The
C5/6 lesion was distracted manually and
stabilized using screws and bone cement.
Only minimal dlistraction is visible on the 
postoperative myelogram; the caudal spine 
was also fixed inacdvertently in extension.
The dog dlid well after surgery and had no
ceficits or neck pain 7 months later.
The thread for the cranial screw in C6
vertebra was stripped and it was replaced
with a 6.5-mm screw. This dog is at a
particularly high risk for a dlomino lesion at 
C4/5 or C6/7.
11.19 A: Distraction at C6/7
intervertebral space using two small 2.7-
mm dlistraction screws (11.40). Each of
the four 4.5-mm screws only penetrates
cne cortex (11.43). B: Loss of distraction
at 7 months; one of the distraction
screws has broken. In addition the 4.5-
mm screws have changed orientation 
 probably due to bone remodeling.
The cement has not failed and the dog
was doing well clinically although it had
an episode of neck pain 10 months
post-surgery.
4
A
B
11.20 A: Loss of distraction after a cement plug was used at C5/6 (11.38B). The dog showed sudden deterioration 4 weeks after
surgery. A small fracture is visible at the ventral portion of the plug (arrow) and there is failure of the cranial end plate of C6 (arrowhead)
with recurrent spinal cord compression. B: This cog dlid well until it fell clown the stairs 6 weeks after dlistraction at C6/7. Failure of a
screw in C7 dlid not cause clinical signs (McKee et al., 19g0). The dog had also shown a change in bark since surgery.
Cervical spondylomyelopathy
227
End-plate failure can occur after the cement-plug
(Queen et al., 1998; Rusbridge et al., 1998; Macy et al.,
technique (ll.20A); potential factors include exces-
1999). Range of motion increases in cadaver spines by
sive motion, thermal necrosis and possibly weakening
30-40% after fenestration and by 66% after a ventral
from too large an anchor hole (Boker et al., 1989;
slot, even if the slot is only one third of the vertebral
Martinez et al., 1997; Williams et al., 1997).
width (Macy et al., 1999; Wolf and Roe, personal com-
Inadequate removal of disc material during a ventral
munication). Ventral slots with dimensions of greater
slot decompression can increase spinal cord compres-
 than 50% of the vertebral width produce instability in
sion as the intervertebral space collapses (Chambers S
 small dogs and are likely to do the same in larger dogs
et al., 1986; Ellison et al., 1988) (1l.21). This compli-
with CSM (Seim and Withrow, 1983; Fitch et al.,
cation was seen in up to 20% of dogs that failed to
2000; Lemarie et al., 2000). Dorsal laminectomy in the
respond after ventral slot (Chambers et al., 1986).
lumbar region is known to reduce stability significantly
Even if it does not compress the spinal cord, collapse
(see Chapter 8) but data are not available for the neck.
can compress the nerve roots in the intervertebral
Postoperative deterioration could also be due to an
foramen, thereby increasing cervical hyperesthesia.
ischemic or reperfusion injury of the spinal cord
Collapse at an interspace can also be exacerbated by
(Cybulski and D'Angelo, 1988). Vascular injuries can
the presence of an unsuspected synovial cyst [4.25).
occur either during surgery or in the immediate post-
a e aq  a e o s  ag
 operative period (see pages 86 and 130).
ration in neurological status after either dorsal laminec-
 Early development of a second lesion at a new disc
tomy or ventral slot (Rusbridge et al., 1998; de Risio space has been described at 2, 4 and 12 weeks after
et al., 2002). This deterioration increases a dog's  s
 surgery (Chambers et al., 1982; Wilson et al., 1994;
susceptibility to self-induced trauma, particularly as 
 Rusbridge et al., 1998). One of these lesions developed
it recovers from anesthesia or tries to stand up
 at a space that had been fenestrated in order to place
(Bruecker et al., 1989b) (1l.22).
a Gelpi for distraction and in another the disc was
Even without injury, there may be deterioration sec-
affected subclinically at the time of the first surgery
ondary to decreased stability at the operated site[s)
{Wilson et al., 1994; Rusbridge et al., 1998],
11.21 A: The preoperative myelogram
reveals ventral, extradural compression at
C6/7 that dlid not improve with traction.
B: The dog was worse the day after
ventral slot at C6/7; the margins of which
are visible clearly in C7 (arrowheadl) and 
to a lesser extent in C6. Compression 
was now more severe than before
surgery, probably because of inadlequate
removal of dlisc material and intervertebral
collapse (Chambers et al., 1986).
A
11.22 A: This dog made a good
recovery after ventral slot at C5/6 but
became severely tetraparetic 36 h later.
A smallfracture is visible at the ventral
aspect of C5 (arrow), presumably due
to hyperflexion injury (Bruecker et al..
1989b; McKee et al., 1989).
B: Distraction-stabilization were
performed using screws and bone 
cement. The dog made a slow
recovery and was able to walk
4 months after surgery (15.11).
A
B
228
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Discospondylitis can also occur on either an early
Recurrence of paraparesis or tetraparesis occurs in up
or delayed basis after surgery (Chambers et al., 1982).
to one third of dogs after either ventral decompression
It can sometimes be associated with an epidural
or metal implant and bone cement fixation (Table 1l.2).
abscess (14.14).
Recurrence can be caused by compression at the original
site or by a domino lesion at an adjacent site (Jeffery and
McKee, 200l). It usually occurs between 6 months
Late postoperative complications
and 4 years after the original surgery, with a mean of
The most important of these is recurrence of clinical
around 2 years (Seim, 1986; Bruecker et al., 1989a,b;
signs (Table 11.5; 11.8, 11.23B). Domino lesions or
Rusbridge et al., 1998; McKee et al., 1999). Recurrence
adjacent segment disease (ll.23A) are a particular
seems to be less of a problem for the cement-plug tech-
problem and result at least in part from abnormal
 nique, which is probably because all high-risk interspaces
stresses imposed on one intervertebral space by fixa-
 can be stabilized at the same time {Dixon et al., 1996;
tion of an interspace adjacent to it (Fox et al., 1996;
；Hilibrand et al., 1999).
Hilibrand et al., 1999). These stresses can exacerbate
 Recurrence after dorsal decompression is often due
any pre-existing subclinical instability and so producet
 to constrictive fibrosis at the surgical site, also termed
either disc extrusion or hypertrophy of anular or liga-
the laminectomy membrane' (LaRocca and Macnab,
mentous structures [Bruecker et al., 1989a).
1974) (page 86). When the roof of the vertebral canal
is removed at laminectomy, the spinal cord is often dis-
placed upwards when ventral extradural compression is
present (Lyman, 1991). However, the scar that forms
as the laminectomy heals often does so in the position
of the original lamina, which can then cause a recur-
rence of compression {Trotter et al., 1975, 1976;
Lyman, 199l; de Risio et al., 2002). A second surgery
may be successful when signs recur following a dorsal
laminectomy (de Risio et al., 2002) (11.23B). Overall
and ventral decompressive techniques {Jeffery and
McKee, 2001).
 Spinal cord compression can also be caused by a rela-
 tive change in the position of an implant secondary to
bony remodeling and collapse of a distracted interspace
(McKee et al., 1990). In addition, late-onset dis-
cospondylitis has been recorded 6 and 26 months after
a surgery and it can also occur as a complication of
an unrelated surgical procedure (Ellison et al., 1988;
Dixon et αl., 1996) (14.11)
Postoperative care
 Activity must be restricted severely in the immediate
 postoperative period. Ataxic dogs should be confined
to a small kennel for l-2 weeks to prevent them from
stumbling and hyperflexing their neck (ll.22).
B
a minimum precaution, neck collar restraint and vigor-
11.23 A: This dog undlerwent a ventral slot clecompression at
Ous exercise should be avoided for 4 months. The first
C6/7 1 year previously. It had recurrent tetraparesis due to a new
6-8 weeks after surgery are the most crucial until sig-
lesion at C5/6. This is the dlomino effect. B: CT myelogram
nificant osseous or fibrous healing has occurred.
madle at C5/6 in a Great Dane that uncerwent a corsal
laminectomy 1 year previcusly. The dlog improved but then
may be tolerated poorly (11.39, 13.18).
 Dogs that remain recumbent after surgery require a
reforrmed the lamina of the vertebral canal resulting in severe spinal
cord compression with atrophy (A and B from Sharp et al., 1992).
high level of nursing care (see Chapter 15). Pneumonia
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
229
is a particular risk for these dogs (Seim, 1986; Bruecker
 on whether dogs that are unable to walk before surgery
et al., 1989b). Recumbent dogs are also prone to muscle
have a poor prognosis; the opposite may even be true
atrophy, decubitus, gastric volvulus (Trotter et al., 1976;
(Seim, 1986; Ellison et al., 1988; Bruecker et al.,
Mason, 1979; Seim, 1986; McKee, 1988) seroma for-
1989a; Dixon et al., 1996; Jeffery and McKee, 2001;
mation at the surgical site (15.34), urinary tract infection
de Risio et al., 2002). Clearly there is a need to reduce
(UT1) (Rusbridge et al., 1998), and urine scald (15.35)
the overall mortality rate for dogs with this condition
{VanGundy, 1989). Some of these factors can be com-
and in particular to reduce the high risk of recurrent
plicated further by hypothyroidism (VanGundy, 1989;
spinal cord compression.
de Risio et al., 2002). Additional postoperative problems
in CSM include hematoma formation due to VW disease
Key issues for future investigation
(Rusbridge et al., 1998) (15.40), diarrhea and gastroin-
testinal hemorrhage, especially after excessive corticos-
1. Does grafting an interspace that is judged to have
 subclinical disease increase its stability and thereby result
teroid use (VanGundy, 1988), pancreatitis (Read et al.,
 in a decreased incidence of domino lesions (11.30B)?
1983; VanGundy, 1988); excoriation of digits (Trotter
et al., 1976) (15.7, 15.10), discospondylitis or epidural
 2. Does forage of the ventral cortex of adjacent vertebrae 
abscess (Chambers et al., 1982; Dixonet al., 1996) (14.11,
enhance the cegree of fusion at a site grafed with 
14.14), sepsis (Black, 1986) (14.14), and multiple
cancellous bone (11.30A)?
abscessation (Seim, 1986).
 3. Does the routine fusion of C5/6 and C6/7 interspaces
 cecrease the incidence of domino lesions or wil this 
PrOGNOSIS
approach just serve to transfer the problem along to C4/5
 or C7/T1? If this approach works, how does the surgeon
The seriousness of this condition is best illustrated by
cecidle how many spaces to fuse (Bolesta et al., 2000)
the fact that a quarter of dogs with CSM in one series
(11.14)?
were euthanized within 6 weeks of surgery as a result
of neurological problems [Seim, 1986). Overall long-
4. ls there any cbjective means to decide whether an
term mortality rates for CSM vary frorm 19 to 43%
 interspace is at risk of a domino lesion (Mitchell et al..
 2001)? Will MRI be able to identify such an interspace 
(Seim et al., 1986; Dixon et al., 1996; Rusbridge et al.,
 and does this technigue have any advantage over use of
1998; McKee et al., 1999; de Risio et al., 2002). Dogs
 an extension view under myelography?
with more than one lesion generally have a worse prog-
nosis than dogs with single lesions, and dogs with
 5. f the aim is to induce fusion between adjacent vertebrae.
chronic tetraparesis have a guarded prognosis [Seim,
 at what stage should this be considered successful
1986). Most severely tetraparetic dogs that are going to
(Fox et al., 1996; Gibson et al., 2002)? Does the
recover will do so within 6 weeks. In some dogs surgery
 presence of a radiolucent line in the bridging spondyle
 mean that there is insufficient stability?
will only halt the progression of disease (VanGundy,
1988). This is presumably because there is often signifi-
cant loss of neural tissue at the site of the lesion {Read
et al., 1983; Sharp et al., 1995). It is therefore likely
REFERENCES
that the outcome will be better if surgery is done earlier
Anderson, G.1. [1988) Polymethylmethacrylate: a review of the implica-
 in the disease process (Chambers et al., 1986; VanGundy,
tions and complications of its use in orthopaedic surgery. Veterinary and
ComparativeOrthopaedics and Traumatology 2,74-79.
1988; McKee et al., 1990).
Bagley, R.S., Silver, G.M., Connors, R.L., Harrington, M.L., Cambridge,
The general estimate provided by Seim is still useful
AJ., Moore, M.P [2000) Exogenous spinal trauma: surgical therapy and
to predict the likely outcome after surgery for
aftercare.Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing
eterinrian 22, 218-230.
CSM. For dogs with single lesions, about 80% of those
Baum, F., de Lahunta, A., Trotter, E.J. [1992) Cervical fibrotic stenosis in a
that are walking prior to surgery willhave a favorable
youngRottweiler.ourmtaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation
outcome [Seim, 1986). Success rates quoted in the
201, 1222-1224.
literature vary from 70 to 90% but these figures do
Black, A.P. [1986) Results of arthrodesis as a treatment for caudal cervical
not include dogs that undergo euthanasia later for
16, 147-148.
reasons related to CSM, usually due to recurrence of
Boker, D., Schultheiss, R., Probst, E. [1989) Radiologic long-term results
signs (Chambers et al., 1986; de Risio et al., 2002)
after cervical vertebral interbody fusion with polymethyl methacrylat
(PMMA). Neurosurgical Review 12, 217-221.
(Table 1l1.2). Any apparent differences in success rates
Bolesta, M.J., Rechtine, G.R., Znd, Chrin, A.M. (2000) Three- and four-
between the various techniques are not statistically sig-
level anterior cervical discectomy and fusion with plate fixation:
a prospective study. Spine 25, 2040-2044; dliscussion 2045-2046.
nificant (Jeffery and McKee, 200l). There are conflict-
Boydell, P [1995) Homer's syndrome following cervical spinal surgery in
 ing results from the limited studies conducted to date
the dog.Journal of SmallAmimal Practice 36, S10-512.
230
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders 
Bruecker, K.A., Seim, H.B., Blass, C.E. [1989a) Caudal cervical spondylo-
Dueland, R., Fumeaux, R.W., Kaye, M.M. [1973) Spinal fusion and dorsal
myelopathy: decompression by linear traction and stabilization with
laminectomy for midcervical spondylolishthesis in a dog. Jourmal of the
Steinmann pins and polymethyl methacrylate. Jourial of the Americart
AmericanVeterinary Medical Association 162,366-369
Animal Hospital Association 25, 677-683.
Ellison, G.W, Seim, H.B, Clemmons, R.M. [1988) Distracted cervical
Bruecker, K.A., Seim, H.B., Withrow, S.J. [1989b) Clinical evaluation of
spinal fusion for management of caudal cevical spondylomyelopathy in
three surgical methods for treatment of caural cervical spondylo-
large-breed dogs. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
myelopathy of dogs. Veterinary Surgery 18, 197-203.
193, 447-453.
Burbidge, H.M. [200l) Caudal Cervical Vertebral Malformation in
Faiss, J.H., Schroth, G., Grodd, W., Koenig, E., Will, B., Thron, A. [1990]
the Dobermann Pinscher, I2l-135. PhD thesis. Massey University,
Central spinal cord lesions in stenosis ofthe cervical canal. Neuroradiology
New Zealand.
32, 117-123.
Callan, M.B., Giger, U. [2002) Effect of desmopressin acetate administra-
Fitch, R.B., Kerwin, S.C., Hosgood, G. [2000) Caudal cervical interverte-
tion on primary hemostasis in Doberman Pinschers with type-l von
bral disk disease in the small dog: role of distraction and stabilization in
Willebrand disease as assessed by a point-of-care instrument. American
ventral slot decompression. Jourmnal of the America Arimal Hospital
Jourmal of Veterinary Research 63, 1700-1706.
Associatior 36, 68-74.
Calvert, C.A., Wall, M. [2001) Results of ambulatory electrocardiography
Fox, M., Onofrio, B., Hanssen, A. [1996) Clinical outcomes and radio-
im overtly healthy Doberman Pinschers with equivocal echocardio-
logical instability following decompressive lumbar laminectomy for
graphic evidence of dilated cardiomyopathy. Jourmal of the Americat
degenerative spinal stenosis: a comparison of patients undergoing con-
Veterinary MedicalAssociation 219,782-784
comitant arthrodesis versus decompression alone.Journalof Neurosurgery
Calvert, C.A., Jacobs, G.J., Pickus, C.W. [1996) Unfavorable influence of
85, 793-802.
amesthesia and surgery on Doberman Pinschers with occult cardiomy-
Garcia, J.N.P, Milthorpe, B.K., Russell, D., Johnson, K.A. [1994)
opathy. Jourmal of the American Animal Hospital Association 32,S7-62.
 Biomechanical study of canine spinal fracture fixation using pins or bone
Cechner, PE. [1980) Ventral cervical disc fenestration in the dog: a modi-
screws with polymethylmethacrylate. Veterinary Surgery 23, 322-329.
Hed technigue.Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association
Gibson, J.N.A., Waddell, G., Grant, I.C. [2002) Surgery for degenerative
16, 647-650.
lumbar spondylosis [Cochrane Review). Issue I ed: The Cochrane
Chambers, J.N., Betts, C.W. [1977) Caudal cervical spondylopathy in the
Library. http://www.update-soft ware.com/cochrane/
dog:a review of 20 clinical cases and the literature.Jourmal of the
Gieger, TL., Hosgood, G., Taboada, J., Wolfsheimer, K.J., Mueller, PB.
American Amimal Hospital Association 13, 571-576.
lae saop u Aane auizua seday wnas pue uonoung piourg (ooz)
Chambers, J.N., Olver, J.E., Jr, Komegay, J.N., Malnati, G.A. [1982)
phenobarbital ardministration. Jourmal of Veterinary lntermal Medicine
Ventral decompression for caudal cervical disk hermiation in large- and
14, 277-281.
giant-breed dogs. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
Giles, A.R., Tinlin, S., Greenwood, R. [1982) A canine model of hemo-
180, 410-414.
philic [factor VIIl:C deficiency) bleeding. Blood 60, 727-730.
Chambers, J.N., Oliver, J.E., Jr, Bjorling, D.E. [1986) Update on ventral
Gilpin, G.N. [1976) Evaluation of three techniques of ventral decompres-
 decompression for caudal cervical disk hermiation in Doberm an Pinschers.
sion of the cervical spinal cord in the dog. Jourmal of the American
Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital Association 22, 775-778.
Veterinary Medical Association 168, 325-328.
Ching, Y., Meyers, K.M., Brassard, J.A., Wardrop, K.J. [1994) Effect of
Goring, R.L., Beale, B.S., Faulkner, R.F. [199l) The inverted cone decom-
cryoprecipitate and plasma on von Willebrand factor multimeters and
pression technique: a surgical treatment for cervical vertebral instability
bleeding time in Doberman Pinchers with type-I von Willebrand's dis-
'Wobbler syndrome’ in Doberman Pinschers. Part I. Jourmal of the
ease. American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 55, I02-110.
American Amimal Hospital Association 27, 403-409.
Clark, D.M. [1986) An analysis of intraoperative and early post-
Gorman, WF, Hodak, J.A. [1997] Hemiated intervertebral disc without 
operative mortality associated with cervical spinal decompressive sur-
pain.Journal of the Oklahoma StateMedical Association90,185-190.
gery in the dog.Jourmalof the American Amimal Hospital Association 22,
Grant, B., Hoskinson, J.J., Barbee, D.D., Gavin, PR., Sande, R.D.,
739-744.
Bayly, WM. [1985) Ventral stabilization for decompression of caudal
Cole, T., Ghosh, P, Hannan, N., Taylor, T, Bellenger, C. [1987) The
cervical spinal cord compression in the horse. Proceedings of 3Ist Arrual
response ofthe canine intervertebral disc to immobilization produced by.
Convention of the American Association ofEguine Practitioners 1985;
spinal arthrodesis is dependent on constitutional factors. Jourmal of
75-103.
Orthopedic Research 5, 337-347.
Halligan, M., Hubschmann, O. [1993) Short-term and long-term failures
Cybulski, G.R., D'Angelo, C.M. [1988) Neurological deterioration after
of anterior polymethylmethacrylate construct with esophageal perfor-
laminectomy for spondylotic cervical myeloradiculopathy: the putative
ation. Spine 18, 759-761.
role of spinal cord ischaemia. Jounal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and
Hayashi, H., Okada, K, Hashimoto, J., Tada, K., Ueno, R. [1988) Cervical
Psychiatry 51, 717-718.
spondylotic myelopathy in the aged patient. A radiographic evaluation of
De Risio, L., Mumana, K, Murray, M., Olby, N., Sharp, N.J., Cuddon, P.
the aging changes in the cervical spine and etiologic factors of myelo-
[2002) Dorsal laminectomy for caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy:
pathy. Spine 13, 618-625.
Cszudn-m upuaaasd
Hilibrand, A., Carlson, G., Palumbo, M., Jones, P, Bohlman, H. [1999)
Surgery 31, 418-427.
Radiculopathy and myelopathy at segments adjacent to the site of a pre-
Dickinson, PJ., Sturges, B.K., Berry, WL., Vermau, K.M., Koblik, PD.,
vious anterior cervical arthrodesis. The Jourmal of Bone and Joint
 LeCouteur, R.A. [200l) Extradural spinal synovial cysts in nine dogs.
Surgery—American volume 81, 519-528.
Jourmal ofSmall ArimalPractice 42,S02-S09
Iseda, T, Goya, T, Nakano, S., Kodama, T, Moriyama, T, Wakisaka, S.
Dixon, B.C., Tomlinson, J.L., Kraus, K.H. [1996] Modified distraction-
Zl uo sosip suaoeipe aya jo saisuanul peusis u sasueyo juas (iooz)
stabilization technique using an interbody polymethyl methacrylate plug
weighted sagittal images after surgical treatment of cervical spondylosis:
in dogs with caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy.Jouralof theAmerican
anterior interbody fusion versus expansive laminoplasty. Acta
Veterinary Medical Association 208, 61-68.
Neurochirurgica {Wein) 143, 707-710.
Dodds, WJ. [1989) Acquired von Willibrand's disease in dogs. American 
Jeffery, N.D. [199S) The 'wobbler' syndrome. In: N.D. Jeffery [ed.),
Animal Hospital Associatiorn I989; 614-619.
Handbook of Small Animal Spinal Surgery, I69-I86. London: WB
Donawick, WJ., Mayhew, I.G., Galligan, D.T, Green, S.L., Stanley, E.K.,
Saunders.
Osbome, J. [1993) Results of a low-protein, low-energy diet and con-
 Jeffery, N.D., McKee, WM. [2001) Surgery for disc-associated wobbler
finement on young horses with wobbles. Proceedings of the Thirty Ninth
syndrome in the dog—an examination of the controversy. Jourmal of
Annual ConventionoftheAmericanAssociationofEguinePractitioners,
Small Artimal Practice 42, 574-581.
Texas, USA, December 5-8, 1993, 125-127.
Jergens, A.E., Turrentine, M.A., Kraus, K.H., Johnson, G.S. [1987] Buccal
Drost, W.T, Lehenbauer, T.W., Reeves, J. (2002) Mensuration of cervical
mucosa bleeding times of healthy dogs and of dogs in various pathologic
vertebral ratios in Doberman pinschers and Great Danes. Veterinary
states, including thrombocytopenia, uremia, and von Willebrand's dis-
Radiology and Ultrasound 43, 124-131.
ease.Americant fourmal ofVeterinary Research 48,1337-1342.
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
231
Kohno, K., Kumon, Y, Oka, Y, Matsui, S., Ohue, S., Sakaki, S. [1997)
McLaughlin, M.R., Purighalla, V, Pizzi, F.J. [1997) Cost advantages oftwo-
Evaluation of prognostic factors following expansive larminoplasty for
level anterior cervical fusion with rigid intemal fixation for radiculopathy
cervical spinal stenotic myelopathy.Surgical Neurology 48, 237-245.
and degenerative disease. Surgical Neurology 48, 560-565.
Krag, M.H. [l99l) Biomechanics of thoracolumbar spinal fixation. A
Mitchell, R.A.S., Immes, J.F, McNally, D. [(2001) Pressure profilometry of
review. Spine 16 [3 Suppl], S84-99.
the lumbosacral disk in dogs. American Jourmal of Veterinary Research
Kraus, K.H., Turrentine, M.A., Jergens, A.E., Johnson, G.S. [1989) Effect 
62, 1734-1739.
of desmopressin acetate on bleeding times and plasma von Willebrand
Olby, N. [1999) Current concepts in the management of acute spinal cord
factor in Doberman Pinscher dogs with von Willebrand's disease.
mjury. Jourmal of Veterinary Intermal Medicine 13, 399-407.
Veterinary Surgery 18,103-109.
Olsson, S.E., Stavenbom, M., Hoppe, F. [1982) Dynamic compression of
Lamb, C.R. (1995) The dorsoventral cervical myelogram. Veterinary
the cervical spinal cord. A myelographic and pathologic investigation in
Radiology and Ultrasound 36, 201-202.
Great Dane dogs.Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica 23,6S-78.
LaRocca, H., Macnab, I. [1974) The laminectomy membrane. Studies in
Panciera, D.L., Johnson, G.S. [1994) Plasma von Willebrand factor antigen
its evolution, characteristics, effects and prophylaxis in dogs. The fournal
concentration in dogs with hypothyroidism. Jourmal of the Americar
of Bome and Joint Surgery—British volume 56B, 545-SS0.
Vterinary Medical Association 205, I550-1553.
Lemarie, R.J., Kerwin, S.C., Partington, B.P, Hosgood, G. [2000)
Panciera, D.L., Johnson, G.S. [1996) Plasma von Willbrand factor antigen
Vertebral subluxation following ventral cervical decormpression in the
concentration and buccal mucosal bleeding time in dogs with experimen-
dog. Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital Association 36, 348-358.
tal hypothyroidism. Jourmal of Veterinary Intermal Medicine 10, 60-64.
Levitski, R., Chauvet, A., Lipsitz, D. [1999) Cervical myelopathy associ-
Pietila, T.A., Stendel, R., Schilling, A., Krzmaric, I., Brock, M. [2000)
ated with extradural synovial cysts in 4 dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary
Surgical treatment of spinal hemangioblastomas. Acta Neurochirurgica
Intermal Medicine 13, 181-186.
{Wein) 142, 879-886.
Lewis, D.D., Hosgood, G. [1992) Complications associated with the use 
Queen, J.P, Coughlan, A.R., May, C., Bennett, D., Penderis, J. [1998]
of iohexol for myelography of the cervical vertebral colutmn in dogs: 66
Management of disc-associated wobbler syndrome with a partial slot
cases [1988-1990]. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Asso-
fenestration and position screw technique. Jourmal of Small Animal
ciation 200, 1381-1384.
Practice 39, 131-136.
Lewis, D.G. [1989] Cervical spondylomyelopathy ('wobbler' syndrome]
Read, R.A., Robins, G.M., Carlisle, C.H. [1983) Caudal cervical spondylo-
in the dog: a study based on 224 cases. Jourmal of Small Animal Practice
myelopathy [wobbler syndrome) in the dog: a review of thirty cases.
30, 657-665.
Jourmal of Small Arimal Practice 24, 605-621.
Lincoln, J.D., Pettit, G.D. [198S] Evaluation of fenestration for treatment
Rendano, VT, Jr, Smith, L.L. [198l) Cervical vertebral malformation-
of degenerative disc disease in the caudal cervical region of large dogs.
malarticulation [wobbler syndrome]—the value of the ventrodorsal view
Veterinary Surgery 14, 240-246.
in defining lateral spinal cord compression in the dog. Jourmal of the
Lipsitz, D., Levitski, R.E., Chauvet, A.E., Berry, W.L. [2001) Magnetic res-
American Amimal Hospital Association 17, 627-634.
i u a s   s  a
Roosen, K., Grote, W, Liesegang, J., Linke, V. [1978) Epidural tempera-
Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 42, 20-27.
ture changes during anterior cervical interbody fusion with polymethyl-
Lowery, G.L., MeDonough, R.F. [1998) The significance of hardware fail-
methacrylate. Aduanices in Neurosurgery 5, 373-375.
ure in anterior cervical plate fixation. Patients with 2- to 7-year follow-
Rosenbluth, PR., Meirowsky, A.M. [1953) Syumpathetic blockade, an acute
up. Spine 23, 181-186; discussion 186-187.
cervical cord syndrome. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 10, I07-112.
Lyman, R. [1991) Wobbler syndrome. Continuous dorsal laminectomy is 
Rusbridge, C., Wheeler, S.J., Toington, A.M.,Pead, M.J., Carmichael, S.
the procerdure of choice. Progress in Veterinary Neurology 2, 143-146.
[1998) Comparison of two surgical techniques for the management of
Macy, N.B., Les, C.M., Stover, S.M., Kass, PH. [1999) Effect of disk fen-
cervical spondylomyelopathy in Dobermanns. Journal of Small Animal
estration on sagittal kinematics of the canine CS-C6 intervertebral
Practice 39, 425-431.
space. Veterinary Surgery 28, 171-179.
Seim, H.B. [1986) Caudocervical spondylomyelopathy. I4th Anmual
Marchevsky, A.M., Richardson, J.L. [1999) Disc extrusion in a Rottweiler 
Veterinary SurgicalForum 1986;72-78.
dog with caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy after failure of inter-
Seim, H.B., Prata, R.G. [1982) Ventral decompression for the treatment
vertebral distraction/stabilisation. Australian Veterinary Jourmal 77,
of cervical disk disease in the dog: a review of 54 cases. Jourmal of the
295-297.
American Amimal Hospital Association 18, 233-240.
Martinez, S.A., Amoczky, S.P, Flo, G.L., Brinker, W.O. [1997) Dissipation
Seim, H.B., Withrow, S.J. [1982) Pathophysiology and diagnosis of caudal
of heat during polymerization of acrylics used for extemal skeletal fix-
 cervical spondylo-myelopathy with emphasis on the Doberman Pinscher.
ator connecting bars.Veterinary Surgery 26,290-294.
Jourmal of the American Animal Hospital Association 18, 241-251.
Mason, TA. [1979) Cervical vertebral instability [wobbler syndrome) in
Seim, H.B., Withrow, S.J. [1983) Ventral decompression forthe treatment
the dog. Veterinary Record 104, 142-145.
of hermiated cervical intervertebral disk in the dog. In: M.J. Bojrab [ed.],
Massicotte, C., Jones, J., Newman, S., Moon, M. [1999) Wobbler syndrome
Current Techriques in Small Animal Surgery,Znd edn,S44-S48.
due to cervical stenosis in a Great Dane puppy. Canine Practice 24, I8-21.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Matis, U. (2001) AO spinal implants for canine wobbler syndrome.
Shaffrey, C., Wiggins, G., Piccirilli, C., Young, J., Lovell, L. [1999)
McKee, M., Sharp, N. (2003) Cervical spondylopathy. In: D. Slatter [ed.)],
Modified open-door laminoplasty for treatment of neurological deficits
Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd edn, I180-I192. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
im youmger patients with congenital spinal stenosis: analysis of clinical
McKee, W, Penderis, J., Dennis, R. [2000) Radiology comer: obstruction
and radiographic data. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 90 [4 Suppl], 170-177.
of contrast medium flow during cervical myelography. Veterinary
Sharp, N.J.H., Wheeler, S.J., Cofome, M. [1992) Radiological evaluation of
Radiology and Ultrasound 4l, 342-343.
'wobbler’ syndrome—caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy. Jourmal of
McKee, WM. [1988) Dorsal laminar elevation as a treatment for cervical
Small Amimal Practice 33, 491-499.
vertebral canal stenosis in the dog.JournalofSmall Animal Practice 29,
Sharp, N.J.H., Cofone, M., Robertson, I.D., DeCarlo, A., Smith, G.K.,
95-103.
Thrall, D.E. [199S) Computed tomography in the evaluation of caudal
McKee, WM., Lavelle, R.B., Mason, TA. [1989) Vertebral stabilisation for
cervical spondylomyelopathy of the Doberman Pinscher. Veterinary
cervical spondylopathy using a screw and washer technique. Jourmal of
Radiology and Ultrasound 36, I00-108.
Small Arimal Practice 30,337342.
Stokol, T., Parry, B.W. [1998) Efficacy of fresh-frozen plasma and cryopre-
McKee, WM., Lavelle, R.B., Richardson, J.L., Mason, TA.[I990)
cipitate in dogs with von Willebrand's disease or hemophilia A. Journal
Vertebral distraction-fusion for cervical spondylopathy using a screw
Veterinary Intermal Medicine 12, 84-92.
and double washer technigue.Journal of Small Animal Practice 31,
Swaim, S.F. [1975) Evaluation of four techniques of cevical spinal fixation
21-26.
imdogs.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 166,
McKee, W.M., Butterworth, S.J., Scott, H.W. [1999) Management of
1080-1086.
cervical spondylopathy-associated intervertebral disc protrusions using
Teresi, L.M., Lufkin, R.B., Reicher, M.A., Moffit, B.J., Vinuela, FV,
metal washers in 78 dogs. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 40, 465-472.
Wilson, G.M., Bentson, J.R., Hanafee, WN. [1987) Asymptomatic
232
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
degenerative disk disease and spondylosis of the cervical spine: MR
Wheeler, S.J., Sharp, N.J.H. [1994) Caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy.
imaging. Radiology 164, 83-88.
In: S.J. Wheeler and N.J.H. Sharp [eds), Small Animal Spinal
Trotter, E.J., Brasmer, T.H., de Lahunta, A. [1975) Modified deep dorsal
Disorders—Diagnosis and Surgery, I3S-IS5. London: Mosby-Wolfe.
laminectomy in the dog. Cormell Veterinariant 65, 402-427.
Willams, N., Tomlinson, J.L., Hahn, A.W, Constantinescu, G.M., Wagner-
Trotter, E.J., de Lahunta, A., Geary, J.C., Brasmer, TH. [1976) Caudal cer-
Mann, C. [1997) Heat conduction of fixator pins with polymethyl-
vical vertebral malformation-malarticulation in Great Danes and
methacrylate extermal fixation. Vterinary and Comparative Orthopaedics
Doberman Pinschers. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
and Traumatology 10, 153-159.
Association 168, 917-930.
Wilson, E.R., Aron, D.N., Roberts, R.E. [1994) Observation of a secondary
Vaccaro, A.R., Venger, B.H., Kelleher, PM., Singh, K, Carino, J.A.,
compressive lesion after treatment of caudal cervical spondylomye-
Albert, T, Hilibrand, A. [2002) Use of a bioabsorbable anterior cervical
lopathy in a dog.Jourmal of the AmericanVeterinary MedicalAssociationt
plate in the treatment of cervical degenerative and traumatic disk dis-
205, 1297-1299.
ruption. Orthopedics 25 (10 Suppl), sl191-1199; discussion sl199.
Zindrick, M.R., Wiltse, L.L., Widell, E.H., Thomas, J.C., Holland, WR.
VanGundy, T. [I989) Canine wobbler syndrome. Part II. Treatment.
Field, B.T, Spencer, C.W. [1986] A biomechanical study of intrapedun-
Compendium omnContinuingEducatin for thePracticingVeterinarian 11,
cular screw fixation in the lumbosacral spine. Clirical Orthopaedics and
269-284.
Related Research 203, 99-112.
VanGundy, TE. [1988) Disc-associated wobbler syndrome in the
Dobertman Pinscher. Veterinary Climics of North America, Small Amimal
Practice 18, 667-696.
PROCEDURES
Paramedian approach to the ventral neck
pue aoeds osip aul jo ped jesiop aul asoo ol spual ll se buiuolisod buunp paploae aa pinous uoisuaixa aassaox3
maxilla. The mild traction also tends to open the disc space, keep the anulus under tension and reduce spinal cord
compression (Goring et af., 1991) (11.24). Exposure to the caudal vertebrae may also be improved using the lateral
muscle separating approach and the strap muscles then serve to protect the trachea, recurrent laryngeal nerve,
(ohl 'lauyoa) saouods dwep ylm sanssll pasodxa e poaioid ol pue laui ooeoul aul leau uooassip buuno
11.24
11.24 A: Patient positioning for a ventral
decompression or distraction-stabilization
using traction. The sandbag shown under the
dog's head can be removed to produce mild
cervical extension if needed. B: Harvesting of
cancellous bone from a proximal humerus
(inset). Both shoulders should be included in
the operative field. Bone graft can be used to
promote fusion following a ventral slot,
distraction-stabilization or after vertebral forage
at an adjacent site (11.30).
A
B
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
233
11.25 Initially the standard, midline, ventral approach
to the neck is followed as described in
Chapter 7 (7.17-7.21). Once the strap muscles
have been exposed the surgeon can use a more
lateral approach. The right stermothyroideus
muscle is first separated from the right
stermocephalicus muscle (Cechner, 1980).
11.25
B  i  si     '
structures ventral to the longus colli muscles
away from the surgeon except for the right
sternocephalicus, which is pulled towards the
surgeon (Cechner, 1980).
11.26
11.27 The dissection is continued through the loose
cervical fascia until the longus colli muscles are
exposed. Balfour self-retaining retractors are
used to keep structures away from the midline
while the dissection is continued to expose the
vertebrae of interest. The esophagus is visible
 at the caudal end of the dissection (arrow).
11.27
Ventral decompression
 The ventral slot techinique can be challenging in CSM because of ventral osteophytosis, malformed vertebral
    n o      a   
Aa buuoisod ueied yl aen lenoed uyei Aa paaoidwi ag leo ssaooe ina inon Allloadsa ag Aew lo
use of traction (11.24) and possibly by using a paramedian approach (11.25-11.27). Decompression should be
outcome will be more like a fenestration (Chambers et af., 1986; Ellison et af., 1988). However, a slot that
approaches 50% of the vertebral body carries a high risk of subluxation (Fitch et af., 2000; Lemarie et af., 2000).
In general the slot should be about one third of the vertebral width unless it is shaped like an inverted cone
(Goring et al., 1991; Lemarie et al., 2000) (7.50).
234
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Osseous fusion is common following a ventral slot (Swaim, 1975; Gilpin, 1976; Sharp et al., 1995) (11.12). This
(Fox et af., 1996; Hilibrand et af., 1999). Normal disc spaces can tolerate this stress but subclinically affected spaces
 therefore needed to prevent domino lesions after single site ventral slot surgery. One technique that might accom-
plish this is to try to promote fusion at subclinically affected spaces by forage and grafting (11.30).
11.28 3D reconstruction of a CT scan made the day
after a ventral slot was performed at C5/6
intervertebral space (same dog as in 4.25).
 Suction and excellent lighting, such as a 
fiberoptic source (5.3), are essential; access 
may be improved by modifying the slot into an
inverted cone (7.50) (Goring et al., 1991).
11.28
11.29 A: Removal of anulus can be especially
difficult in CsM. It can be aided by preserving
a small knub of anulus during drilling (arrow).
This can then be grasped like a handle to
facilitate its removal after a window has been
cut into the vertebral canal (Jeffery, 1995)
(7.45-7.49). B: Hemorrhage from the
11.29
vertebral venous plexus can be hard to
A
control (7.44; Table 7.2); 0cclusion of the
vertebral venous plexus is by pressure or a
small piece of muscle tissue (8.43). The most
ikely puncture sites for the venous plexus are
at each corner. The width of the slot in this
 illustration is much greater than generally 
recommended unless some type of
stabilization is to be applied afterwards
(11.41-11.43).
B
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
235
11.30 A: After a ventral slot at C6/7
(not shown) cortical bone was
removed over the ventral
aspect of C5 and C6 vertebrae
(arrowheads) without damaging
the C5/6 disc (arrow).
Cancellous bone was then
11.30
applied over both disc spaces
A
B
(Dixon et al., 1996; Hilibrand
et ar., 1999). B: A ventral slot at C6/7 with forage of the ventral cortical bone on either side of C5/6 (different
dog to A, see 11.5). Both sites show good ventral bridging with new bone at 6 weeks; this progressed to
complete fusion by 4 months. The dog's neurological deficits had resolved completely by 6 months.
Vertebral distraction (11.31-11.34)
The temporary distraction device can be custom-made as shown in 11.33A but a Freer or Synthes periosteal ele-
tractor is then repositioned to curette the other side. It is especially important to remove as much material as
'eoeeud) weoeg buisn juawao buonpoiui ol youd enp aul loaiod ol alaissod s! ll 'uol si sninue aul l leueo
Kalamazoo, Ml) as this has good thermo-insulating properties (Roosen et al., 1978; Boker et al., 1989).
but ideally not by placing a retractor in the adjacent disc spaces (Bruecker et af., 1989a; Dixon et af., 1996; Wilson
et ar., 1994) (11.13A). Distraction can also be accomplished by an assistant pulling on a rope around the dog's
upper canine teeth (7.55) but is unreliable and often produces inadequate distraction (11.18). Finally, small K-wires
Ventral
11.31 A: Sagittal section through the cervical spine
to show compression ventrally from anulus (a)
:a (a) wnaell wniuaweal woy Aisop pue
 Distraction relieves compression caused by
redundant tissues. Gelpi retractors maintain
distraction; one tip is against the caudal end
plate of the cranial vertebra and the other in a
small hole drilled in the body of the caudal
11.31
Dorsal
vertebra (11.34). A rope pulling on the dog's
maxilla (11.24A), and tied to a hook on the
A
surgical table, with or without the Gelpi
distraction shown here, are the most reliable
Ventral
techniques to permit cement hardening.
Dorsa
B
236
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
11.32
11.32 A: Distraction has been started by making a wide
fenestration at the C6/7 disc. The window in the
ventral anulus fibrosus (a) and the nucleus pulposus
(b) are visible. B: The C6/7 disc is curetted
thoroughly following fenestration. This is easier with
the space distracted as shown in 11.33B.
8
11.33 A: A distraction device is introduced into the
intervertebral space to aid curettage. B: The device
is then turned through 90° to distract the two
vertebrae and widen the intervertebral space.
When all nucleus and end-plate cartilage have
been removed (Dixon et af., 1996), a rope or Gelpi
retractor is used to maintain distraction as shown in 
11.31B and 11.34.
11.33
B
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
237
11.34 A: A channel is drilled with a fine bur just under
the cortical bone on the ventral surface of the
vertebra. This hole starts about two thirds the
distance along the vertebra caudal to the disc
space to be distracted. One end of the Gelpi is
hooked into this hole; the other is set against
the caudal end plate of the vertebra in front of
the disc space to be distracted (11.31B). The
space is distracted as shown in 11.33B and the
Gelpi is locked. B: The Gelpi retractor is locked.
11.34
The initial distraction device is now removed
and the space checked again to insure that no
凸
nuclear material remains. The space is now
ready to be filled with cement. Care must be
taken not to dislodge the Gelpi once it is in
place; sudden collapse of the distracted space
could injure the spinal cord (Dixon et af., 1996).
B
Cement plug (11.35-11.39)
11.35 Cement is mixed until the powder is dissolved
and then it is transferred quickly to a 60-ml
catheter-tipped syringe. Attached to the end of
the syringe is an 8 French red rubber tube with 
the end cut short so that its tip just fits into the
disc space. Cement is injected into the space
taking care to fill the dorsal portion first without 
trapping air under the cement. The Gelpi is then 
11.35
left in place for 10-12 min.
aq lsnu dll siui :dil dlay aui to apis laule uo juaweo aui ssaidwoo ot pesn s juewnuisu! leus e jo aipuey aul
kept clear of cement to facilitate its removal after cement hardens.
Ideally the two or three high-risk spaces are distracted using this procedure as shown in 11.16 and 11.37.
Aternatively, any subclinically affected spaces can be foraged and then grafted as shown in 11.30.
aa Leo maos ww-g't albuis e Laul 6nid juawao aul yououe oi aeld pua aul oiu pallp uaeg seu aloy ou H
af., 2000). The second (jinner) cortex should prevent the screw from entering the vertebral canal (see 11.16 for
should be less likely to collapse as they are not weakened (11.20A, 11.38) and there is also no need for the dog
end plates (Anderson, 1988; Boker et al., 1989), and to pressure-induced resorption. This technique has worked
238
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
well in the small number of dogs studied provided that the screw is positioned so the head sits over the cement
plug (11.36, 11.37). A similar approach uses threaded pins to anchor the plug instead (McKee and Sharp, 2003).
awao ys asaul lll oi pue aieid pua yoea ui saloy llp oi si bnjd juawao e buuoyoue loy poyiaw leuibuo au1
into the cranial end plate.
 It is not clear if an external splint provides additional benefit following the standard cement-plug technique.
 Although dogs that were not splinted had outcomes as good as those that were, most surgeons who use this
technique recommend use of a splint (Dixon et al., 1996). The dog should be assessed closely for the appear-
ance of rub sores, discomfort, odor or any type of malaise that might signify infection under the splint. If there is
any doubt it should be replaced. A Halti and chest harness are an easier way to restrict movement (13.18B)
11.36 A: Cement has hardened
(arrow). A screw, then
cancellous bone is
applied over the distracted
space. B: Good new bone
production is evident at
C6/7 5 weeks after surgery
with nearly complete
11.36
bridging callus. Note the
A
radiolucent area ventral to
the cement (arrow), which also occurs with the standard technique (Dixon et af., 1996). The implant
survived this male St Bermard jumping a fence to reach a bitch in heat and falling on the far side 2 weeks
after surgery. The dog was normal at 4 months.
11.37 A: These screw heads do
not cover the cement plug 
adequately (11.16, 11.36).
 B: Follow-up radiograph
12 weeks after surgery
reveals that the plugs have
fallen out (Marchevsky and
11.37
Richardson, 1999). Despite
A
B
this the dog did well clinically
and its neurological deficits had resolved by 4 months.
11.38 A: Distraction can be
accomplished using a Gelpi
retractor positioned within 
each vertebral body as
shown here (Dixon et a.,
1996). B: Excellent filling of
the C5/6 disc space;
cement can be seen clearly
11.38
where it has entered the
caudal anchor hole
A
B
(arrow). Despite this the
 plug failed due to end-plate collapse 4 weeks after surgery (11.20A) and the dog was euthanized.
 It had not worn an external splint although this is not a prerequisite for a successful outcome (Dixon 
et al., 1996).
Cervical spondylomyelopathy
239
11.39 A splint can be made in one piece from
fiberglass; it is easiest to apply under general
anesthesia but can also usually be done under
heavy sedation. Whatever material is used has
to be well padded and the entire splint should
be replaced every 2 weeks, or sooner should 
problems arise. A Halti headcollar tied to a
chest harniess is a simple and effective way to
limit neck movement (13.18B).
11.39
Metal implant and bone cement method (11.40-11.43)
Initial vertebral distraction for the metal and bone cement technique cannot be performed using the method
in 11.33B or 11.40. Then a bone allograft (Veterinary Transplant Services, Seattle, WA) or an autograft from either
the wing of C6, the sternum or the ilium can be wedged into the slot to maintain distraction prior to cement appli
cation (Fitch et al., 2ooo). Use of such a graft has the additional advantage that it will promote an osseous union.
Aternatively, distraction can be maintained by a rope around the maxillary teeth (11.24) that is then tied to the
surgical table.
11.40 A: Another distraction
option is to use two,
2.7-mm distraction screws.
 With the space distracted
(11.33) these are directed
from the ventral vertebral
body to cross the disc
space and rest against the
end plate of the caudal
vertebra (Queen et ar.,
1998). B: The distraction is
11.40
asymmetrical as one of the 
A
B
distraction screws was
aimed too laterally; this is exacerbated by the curved shape of the end plate (11.19).
The anchoring pins or screws should enter the bone close to the midline (11.41) and are then driven towards
the contralateral articular facets, away from the vertebral canal. Two implants are placed in the vertebrae on each
side of the affected space. The vertebrae are then distracted and this position is maintained by molding bone
cement carefully around each one of the screws.
 Even when a ventral slot is not needed to produce decompression, a shallow slot is useful in order to pack with
insulate the graft as the cement hardens (Roosen et af., 1978; Boker et af., 1989). If pins or screws are to be com-
1975; Zindrick et af., 1986) (11.40, 11.43). If only one cortex is penetrated then the implant will be strengthened
considerably by use of three screws in each vertebra (Garcia et al., 1994).
2408
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
11.41 A: Placement of pins or
screws in cervical vertebra
for dlistraction-stabilization
(13.56A). B: The diverging
path of the screw in each
vertebra is shown clearly in
this dorsoventral radiograph.
 This dog had also 
undergone a ventral slot 
decompression; the cranial
 portion of the slot is visible
11.41
(arrowhead).
A
B
11.42 Sagittal section shows how the ventral slot should
be started almost entirely in the vertebra cranial to
the disc. Owing to the angle of the end plates, and
the position of the slot, there is often less room for
screws in the cranial vertebra than in the caudal 
vertebra (11.17-11.19, 11.22, 11.40-11.43).
11.42.
11.43 A: Postoperative radiograph of screws and bone
cement in position after a ventral slot.
A hole was only drilled and tapped for the first
(ventral) cortex. Screw position is good but still
there was only room for one 4.5-mm and one
3.5-mm screw in C6 due to the angle used and
the proximity of the cranial edge of the slot
(arrow). B: Pins can also be used as the metal
implant. Positive profile pins are preferred to the 
smooth pins shown here. Fully threaded screws
are also preferred to the partially threaded ones
11.43
shown in 11.22B as the thread junction can act 
A
as a stress riser.
B
Cervical spondylomyelopathy
241
Dorsal decompression (11.44-11.55)
Dorsal decompression may be limited to two vertebrae or it can extend over multiple vertebrae (Lyman, 1991). It
[epa aul Aensn s! leaowan auoa jo lll aul os pue s ya shop ui siuio! laoel al aaasad ol alaesipe si
aspect of the facet joint(s) (Trotter et al., 1976; VanGundy, 1988). After the initial approach (11.44-11.47), the nuchal
ligament is divided in the midline (11.48). The approach can be alongside the ligament rather than dividing it and it can
even be sectioned if additional exposure is required. It can be repaired later but this is not necessary.
There is a layer of thick fascia and ligamentum flavum between adjacent vertebrae. It can be removed using sharp
Screws are preferred over wire for providing additional stability after dorsal laminectomy (Swaim, 1975; Trotter
et af., 1976) (11.56, 11.57). Cartilage is debrided from the joint surfaces and bone debris, or ideally cancellous
bone graft, is packed around the joints. The main risks with the screw fixation technique are facet fracture or nerve
root damage. The latter could have severe consequences if major nerves to the brachial plexus are injured.
11.44 The dog is positioned with its
limbs pulled cranially and its
caudal neck supported by a
sandbag. The site of incision
when approaching the caudal
cervical vertebrae is from
C3 to T2.
11.44
11.45 Skin and superficial fascia incised and retracted
to reveal the aponeurosis of the rhomboideus
 and trapezius muscles.
11.45
11.46 Diagram to show the position of
muscles relative to underlying
skeletal structures. The muscles
are divided in the midline. Bleeding
 from the large neurovascular
bundles that penetrate the fascia
must be controlled to prevent
postoperative hematoma (15.34).
The nuchal ligament can be
 palpated at this stage.
11.46
242
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
11.47 The fascia overlying the nuchal ligament is
divided and cleared. The ligament is freed back
to the prominent spinous process of T1. Here 
the nuchal ligament has been mobilized,
revealing the paired spinalis muscles (arrows)
11.47
11.48 A: The nuchal ligament
attaches to the spinous
process of T1 and then
continues caudally with
the interspinous
ligament. The spinous 
process of C7 can 
usually be palpated at 
this stage. The relative 
size of C7 and T1
should be ascertained
11.48
 from lateral radiographs
as they may vary between
animals. B: Nuchal ligament being divided.
11.49 Closer view showing spinalis muscles attached 
to spinous process of C7 (arrow).
11.49
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
243
11.50 The muscles are elevated from the spinous
process (a) and lamina of the vertebra.
The spinous process is then removed with
bone cutters.
11.50
11.51 The spinal cord is now visible (a). Large veins may
be present in the epidural space (11.52). Bleeding 
may respond to bipolar cautery but a Hemoclip
(Pilling Weck Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC) or
fine suture is needed if a vein is torn.
11.51
11.52 CT scans of a tetraplegic
Doberman after IV contrast.
A: Image at the unaffected
C6/7 disc space shows how
the vertebral venous plexus
communicates with 
intervertebral veins at the
level of the disc space
(arrows). These veins may
11.52
extend into the dorsal epidural
A
B
space; the exact patterm is 
variable. B: Image through C5/6 disc space to show the spinal cord compressed by a lateralized,
non-mineralized disc extrusion (arrowhead) that was confirmed at surgery (from Sharp et af., 1995).
11.53 The laminectomy is performed with a bur. Close
 attention is paid to the layers of bone as they are
rem0ved (8.32, 10.29, 10.30).
11.53
244
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
11.54 A: Spinal cord exposed (see also 7.59). The
laminectomy can be continued laterally to 
remove proliferated articular processes and
synovial tissue (11.57). B: The laminectomy can
be continued to one side to expose the nerve
root more fully. However, this almost certainly
decreases stability.
11.54
B
11.55 A: Myelogram of a 6-year-old Rottweiler with marked
tetraparesis of 12 months' duration. There is a
dilation of the ventral and, to an even greater extent,
dorsal subarachnoid space. B: Intraoperative
photograph after dorsal laminectomy to show the
exposed spinal cord and dilation of the subarachnoid
is in progress (14.5-14.8).
11.55
A
B
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
245
11.56 Tw0-year-old mastiff with
at C2/3 (11.57A) that had a
dorsal laminectomy and
4.5-mm lag screws inserted
across the facet joints. The 
dog recovered well but
11.56
developed mild left-sided
A
hemiparesis 3 months later.
This follow-up myelogram shows good decompresson at C2/3
surgery; the dog improved and was doing well 3 years later.
B
11.57 3D reconstructions of the
(A) preoperative, and (B)
3-month postoperative CT
myelograms at C2/3; same
dog as shown in 11.8 and
11.56. Undercutting was
used to remove compressive
periarticular bone on the
medial aspects of the facet
11.57
joints; this has widened the
vertebral canal significantly
A
B
(10.43) (Trotter et al., 1976).
Laminoplasty
Laminoplasty can be performed using a variety of techniques (McKee, 1988; Kohno et al., 1997; Shaffrey et al.,
1999). In the method illustrated in 11.58, a fine-tipped bur is used to make a cut three quarters of the way along
the midline of the C6 dorsal lamina. Great care is needed to avoid the spinal cord, especially cranially. The cut is
with each pedicle. The laminar flap is elevated sufficiently to make a small bur hole in its medial edge for 0
polypropylene suture. The inner cortical bone is weakened further by drilling until each flap can be elevated
cellous bone graft is packed around the joints and a fat graft then placed over the spinal cord (McKee, 1988).
246 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
11.58 Laminoplasty of the cervical vertebrae as
performed in a 5-year-old Great Dane with
e  ( 9) 9 e sis
types of laminoplasty are used in humans
(Shaffery et al., 1999) (from McKee, 1988)
11.58
Neoplasia
Chapter
12
Clinical signs  247
References 263
Tumor biology  248
Procedures
266
Extradural tumors   248
Hemilaminectomy  
266
Intradural/extramedullary
249
Dorsal lamminectomy  270 
Intramedullary   250
Vertebrectomy
273
Nerve sheath tumor resection   275
Diagnosis  250
Radiography   250
Ultrasound   250
Eectrophysiology   250
Although tumors are uncommon causes of spinal dis-
Myelography  251
ease, they are significant once the more common prob-
Computed tomography   251
lems such as disc disease (in dogs) and trauuma are
Magnetic resonance imaging  251
eliminated. Older animals are usually affected, although
Biopsy   251
certain tumor types do occur in young individuals.
Staging 252
CLINICAL SIGNS
Treatment 254
Animals with vertebral column tumors present with
Medical treatment  2
254
 Radiation treatment  254
a fairly typical pattern of initial non-specific discomfort,
followed by development of progressive neurological
Surgical treatment 
255
 deficits and more definitive evidence of spinal pain.
 Severe pain and significant neurological dysfunction
Complications 
258
develop eventually if the condition is allowed to progress.
Marked weight loss or localized muscle atrophy is often
Postoperative care
259
 e  d s   ao ss
decline follwing initial mild or even imperceptible signs.
Prognosis  259
This can occur with vertebral body tumors where
Extradural tumors   260
pathological fracture develops (12.12), or in soft tissue
Intradural/extramedullary tumors  260
tumors where the animal tolerates a slowly progressing
Intramedullary tumors  261
degree of spinal cord compression until it decompen-
sates suddenly. Vascular interference by the tumor may
 Feline spinal tumors  261
also be responsible for acute deterioration.
Diagnosis
262
Most tumors of the spinal cord cause little or no
Treatment 263
discomfort. Although incontinence usually develops
Prognosis  263
only after an animal has lost all motor function {see
Chapter 2), some animals with intramedullary tumors
Key issues for future investigation   263
develop urinary or fecal incontinence while they are
 still able to walk. This can occur even for lesions affecting
248
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
T3-L3 segments (Prata, 1977; Jeffery and Phillips,
TUMOr bIOLOGY
1995) (12.4).
There are a large number of tumor types that affect
Tumors involving the brachial or lurmbosacral plexus
the spine. Many tumors are only reported in small
may present initially as a slowly progressive unilateral
mumbers and these have been reviewed elsewhere
lameness (McDonnell et al., 2001). This can present a
 (LeCouteur and Child, 1995; LeCouteur, 2001; Oakley
diagnostic challenge and may lead to extended efforts
 and Paterson, 2003). Common tumor types are listed
to find a non-neurological abnormality; even including
in Table 12.1.
surgery for a suspected orthopedic lesion (McCarthy
Aoodons A paiss aq  son ieus
et al., 1993). Rectal examination may identify a mass
(Table 12.1) or according to their anatomic location in
within the pelvic canal (such as an enlarged lumbosacral
the spine (4.21):
trunk, the intrapelvic portion of the sciatic nerve, 1.8A)
Extradural.
(Niles et al., 200l). Animals with brachial plexus
·
 Intradural/extramedullary.
tumors may have an axillary mass or show pain on
 Intramedullary.
palpation of the area (Carmichael and Griffiths, 1981;
Extradural tumors are the most prevalent type in
Brehm et al., 1995). The miosis of partial Horner's
dogs, accounting for approximately half of all cases.
syndrome (Bradley et al., 1982) (2.15A), unilateral
Intradural/extramedullary tumors make up another
loss of the cutaneous trunci reflex with a consensual
third and intramedullary tumors the remainder
response (Carmichael and Griffiths, 1981) (2.1l, 2.12),
(LeCouteur, 200l). Tumors of bone and nerve roots are
 or diaphragmatic hemiparalysis (13.12) may be other
Aapeig] eiseidoau snxald enuoeiq on sanio zuiodun
 comrmon in cats (Oakley and Patterson, 2003). The
et al., 1982; Wheeler et al., 1986; Bailey, 1990). Signs
biology and expected behavior of a tumor must be
tend to be insidious in onset, with spinal cord dysfunc-
understood if it is to be diagnosed, staged, and treated
tion occurring only if the vertebral canal is invaded.
properly.
 Even then half of all dogs with nerve sheath tumors
and abnormal myelograms show no neurological
deficits in the pelvic limbs (Bradley et al., 1982).
Extradural tumors
The lower motor neuron {LMN) deficits make elec-
As the name implies these tumors lie outside the dura
tromyography a useful test, first for confirming that the
animal has neurological disease and then in identifying
cal deterioration and include vertebral body tumors
which nerve roots are involved (see 'Electromyography',
 amd those that ocupy the epidural space. Most verte-
page 250).
bral body tumors are osteosarcomas; fibrosarcomas are
Involvement of other body systems with diffuse neo-
the next most common type (Dernell et al., 2000).
plasia or metastasis may cause clinical signs unrelated
Chondrosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma and myeloma
to the nervous system. This is most frequent in animals
are less frequent (Dernell et al., 2000; LeCouteur,
with lymphoma. Paraneoplastic effects may also be
2001; Withrow and MacEwan, 2001). Meningiomas
seen, particularly lymphoma-related hypercalcemia.
and nerve sheath tumors can be extradural in location
 Table 12.1 Classification of major spinal tumor types according to location within the spine 
Extradural
Intradural/extramedullary
Intramedullary
Primary
 Meningioma
Ependymoma
Csteosarcoma
 Nerve sheath tumours
Glioma 
Fibrosarcoma 
(schwannoma, neurofibroma,
Lymphoma
 Chondrosarcoma
neurofibrosarcoma, lymphoma)
Hemangiosarcoma 
Lymphoma
 Nephroblastoma 
Reticulosis (focal
Hemangiosarcoma 
Sarcoma
 granulomatous 
Lymphoma
 meningoencephalomyelitis (GME))
Metastatic
Carcinoma 
Metastatic
Metastatic
 Sarcoma
 Melanoma 
Lymphoma 
Myeloma
Neoplasia
249
but are discussed under intradural tumors. Extra
Meningiomas usually cause pain or chronic discom-
dural tumors may also be metastatic in origin (osteo-
fort with slowly progressive neurological deficits. Some
sarcomas or carcinomas). Discovery of an extradural
tumor indicates the possibility of a primary mass else-
ography due to associated edema, even though they are
where, particularly the mammary or thyroid glands,
located outside the spinal cord (Fingeroth et al., 1987).
kidney or urinary bladder.
They tend to be discrete, firm to rubbery extra-
Osteosarcoma and fibrosarcoma of the spine show
medullary masses. Meningiomas usually compress rather
similar biological behavior. The usual cause of treat-
 than infitrate spinal cord but some show invasion along
ment failure is local recurrence (Dernell et al., 2000).
the perivascular space (Summers et al., 1994). Four of
Spinal osteosarcomas are moderately aggressive with a
13 spinal cord meningiomas in one report were invasive
metastatic rate reported as 17% (Heyman et al., 1992).
(Fingeroth et al., 1987). Distant metastasis has been
A new grading system has been developed for osteosar-
reported for intracranial but not for spinal meningioma.
coma; most tumors are high grade (Kirpensteijn et al.,
Meningiomas show a remarkable histopathological diver-
2002). Grading for fibrosarcoma is less clear cut
sity, probably because the meninges arise from both
(Ciekot et al., 1994; Hung et al., 2000).
neural crest and mesodermal cells. They originate from
Vertebral plasma cell tumors may exist as a soli-
 arachnoid granulations and cap cells, and often have recep
tary plasmacytoma or as multiple myeloma. Solitary
tors for progesterone (Summers et al., 1994; Theon
plasmacytoma is not associated with paraneoplastic
et al., 2000). Histopathological grading is not standard-
syndromes and usually does not cause monoclonal gam-
ized although characteristics of benign versus malignant
mopathy. It has a better prognosis than multiple 
 meningiomas have been reviewed (Ribas et al., 1991;
myeloma but in humans about 50% go on to develop 
Summers et al., 1994; Theon et al., 2000).
disseminated disease (Rusbridge et al., 1999) (12.12).
Nerve sheath tumors usually cause a chronic, progres-
This may be because a third of huumans thought to have
 sive lameness. The two most common sites of origin are
solitary disease actually have occult multiple myeloma
from the plexus or from a nerve root within the
on MRI (Moulopoulos et al., 1993). Multiple myeloma
vertebral canal (Brehm et al., 1995). Brachial plexus
does cause monoclonal gammopathy and additional
tumors are fusiform thickenings of one or more nerve
clinical signs can occur from hyperviscosity or paraneo-
trunks, which sometimes coalesce into a common mass.
plastic syndromes (Rusbridge et al., 1999).
Spinal cord compression is usually a late event for
Lymphoma has the propensity to involve the dura
brachial plexus tumors but is often a presenting sign for
mater and the spinal cord substance itself but is included
tumors that arise from within a nerve root (Brehm
here as the usual site is extradural (Britt et al., 1984).
et al., 1995). Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor is
Canine lymphoma is usually a manifestation of multi-
the term preferred to malignant schwannoma or neuro-
centric disease. Lymphoma can affect nerve roots. Spinal
fibrosarcoma as it is usually not possible to discriminate
cord compression is often extradural and the mass can
the cell of origin. These tumors are usually malignant
sometimes be mistaken for epidural fat (Summers et al.,
both cytologically and biologically (Surmmers et al.,
1994). Some dogs show meningeal infiltration and most
1994). Nerve sheath tumors often invade extensively
have neoplastic lymphocytes in the CSF (Rosin, 1982;
along the nerve (Oliver et al., 1965; Bradley et al., 1982;
Britt et al., 1984; Couto et al., 1984). Grading tech-
McCarthy et al., 1993; Brehm et al., 1995; Jones et al.,
niques for multicentric lymphoma can predict outcome
1995). Invasion into the spinal cord can occur but local
and these may be applicable to spinal lymphoma [Kiupel 
or distant metastasis is unusual (Brehm et al., 1995;
et al., 1999; Dobson et al., 2001). Malignant histiocyto-
Sharp, 1988; Summers et al., 1994). They also metasta-
sis and mastocytosis also affect the spinal cord occasion-
size occasionally along the subarachnoid space (2.24,
ally (Moore and Rosin, 1986; Tyrrell and Davis, 200l;
4.27, 4.28, 4.44B). Histopathologically, nerve sheath 
Uchida et al., 200l; Moore et al., 2002). Feline lym-
tumors are often anaplastic with abundant mitosis and
phoma is discussed on page 261l.
necrosis. Specific grading systems are not yet standard-
ized (Summers et al., 1994; Kuntz et al., 1997).
Intradural/extramedullary
Nephroblastoma  is another type of intradural/
These tumors lie within the dura mater but outside
extramedullary tumor that occurs between Tl0 and L2
the spinal cord parenchyma. The most common tumors 
 vertebrae in young dogs (Pearson et al., 1997; Summers
in this category are meningiomas and nerve sheath
et al., 1988; Terrell et al., 2000) (12.40). It was
tumors (neurofibroma, neurofibrosarcoma, schwan-
referred to formerly as neuroepithelioma but this
noma, lymphoma). Both types can also be in an extra-
tumor is really an extrarenal nephroblastoma equiva-
durallocation.
lent to Wilms' tumor in humans (Pearson et al., 1997)
250
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Spinal cord compression is often severe but the massF
Radiography
tends to be well-circumscribed and the prognosis has 
 Spinal tumors are usually relatively easy to diagnose
been very good after surgical excision in some dogs 
 using standard methods. Following a physical and neuro-
(Ferretti et al., 1993; Siegel et al., 1996). Metastasis is
 logical examination, routine blood work and urinalysis
rare but some of these tumors are invasive locally
 are performed. Radiography is often the technique with
(Baumgartner et al., 1988; Terrell et al., 2000).
the highest diagnostic yield. Survey radiographs of the
spine may not be diagnostic of soft tissue tumors, part
Intramedullary
of the value of negative findings lies in the elimination
Intramedullary tumors occur within the spinal cord
 of obvious, destructive lesions and of differential diag-
substance and are the least common type. They typi-
 noses such as discospondylitis {l4.ll). The axial and
 appendicular skeleton should be surveyed in suspected
Tumors are either gliomas (l2.4) or, very occasion-
 plasma cell tumors in order to stage the tumor as soli-
ally, metastatic tumors (Waters and Hayden, 1990;
tary or disseminated (Rusbridge et al., 1999). Bony
LeCouteur, 2001). Staging relies mainly on neuroimaging
 changes will be seen mainly in vertebral tumors (l2.1)
and MRI gives the best definition for intramedullary 
 but other turmors, such as meningiormas and nerve sheath
lesions. However, MRI may not always differentiate
 tumors can cause mineralization or bone remodeling.
intramedullary tumors from those in the intradural/
 Spinal tumors do not metastasize frequently to the tho-
extramedullary compartment. This is due partly to  rax but chest radiographs (three projections-both right 
the limitations of slice thickness and partly because and left laterals with ventrodorsal or dorsoventral
some tumors are only classified accurately using histo-views) should always be taken. Chest radiography is fol-
pathology (Kippenes et al., 1999). A rare, non-neoplastic lowed by abdominal ultrasound; in some animals the
differential diagnosis for an intramedullary space-
 spinal tumor itself may be a metastatic lesion (Bentley
occupying lesion is epidermoid cyst (Tomlinson et al.,
et al., 1990; Jeffery, 1991).
1988).
Ultrasound
 A general examination of the abdomen is indicated to
DIAGNOSIS
idlentify other sites of neoplastic involverment and evaluate
anq pmnouns iensn st ron e jo sisou
 intercurrent disease (Platt et al., 1998). Ultrasonography
degenerative conditions like disc disease (see Chapters
can also be very useful to identify some nerve sheath
 7 and 8) and degenerative myelopathy, congenital
tumors (Platt et al., 1999; Niles et al., 200l) and
anomaly with late onset such as an arachnoid cyst, infec-
may even be superior to MRI (Donner et al., 1994;
tious inflammatory disease including discospondylitis and
Simonovsky, 1997; Platt et al., 1999).
focal granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis (GME),
 aedonu oaus se ns saseasp iensea no
Electrophysiology
both dogs and cats, warrant consideration (see Chapter
 Evidence of denervation on electromyography (EMG)
14). Bone tumors may cross a disc space but this is rare;
 is highly suggestive of nerve sheath tumor in a dog
this helps to differentiate them from discospondylitis
with suspicious clinical signs [Wheeler et al., 1986;
(Moore et al., 2000).
Steinberg, 1988; Brehm et al., 1995). Nerve conduction
12.1 A: Four-year-old German shepherd
dog presenting with back pain and
paraparesis. Survey radliographs show a
cestructive process affecting the T3
spinous process (arrows). Myelography
revealed extradural compression of the
spinal cord at this site (12.6A). B: Ten-
year-old paraparetic Cocker spaniel with
an osteoproductive process within
and ventral to the T5 vertebral body
(arrow-heads) (12.6B).
A
B
Neoplasia
251
studies, late wave assessment and cord dorsum poten-
Thickening can also be due to edema and not to neo-
tials may also provide supportive evidence (Cuddon
plastic invasion (Simpson et al., 1999). MRI is probably
et al., 2003).
better than CT myelography at differentiating tumor
from edema (Simpson et al., 1999).
Myelography
This provides useful information about the location of
Magnetic resonance imaging
the tumor and its position within the vertebral canal
This is now considered the gold standard imaging
relative to the dura mater and spinal cord (4.27-4.31).
modality for human oncosurgery (Gilson, 2003) (see
It is important to take two views (lateral and ventro-
page 57). It is superior to CT for imaging metastases
dorsal) for correct localization (4.30, 4.31). Although 
 and occult myeloma within medullary bone (O'Flanagan
it will remain an important imaging modality, myel-
et al., 1991; Rusbridge et al., 1999; Moore et al., 2000).
ography is invasive and image quality can vary due to
Sagittal images with T2-weighting provide excellent
technical problems such as contrast leakage or poor
filling of the subarachnoid space (see Chapter 4).
Nerve sheath tumors are an exception as they do not
False-negative results can also occur, especially with
always show abnormalities on T2-weighting although
nerve sheath tumors (Carmichael and Griffiths, 198l;
they usually enhance well with contrast (Kippenes et al.,
Bradley et al., 1982; McCarthy et al., 1993) and myel-
1999) (2.25, 12.3). As nerve sheath tumors are often
ography may miss as many as 42% of intramedullary
located away from the midline within the axilla the
tumors (4.41) (Grem et al., 1985; Waters and Hayden,
study must be centerd to include soft tissues on the
[aa u IN no LO Aq Sun asiaasu (061
affected side (Kippenes et al., 1999; Levitski et al.,
allows earlier detection and better surgical planning
1999; Platt et al., 1999). For most tumor types, T1-
than myelography (Waters and Hayden, 1990; Brehm
weighted images post-contrast are preferred for defin-
et al., 1995).
ing tumor volume and the relationship between the
tumor and surrounding tissues. Assessment of bone
Computed tomography
marrow infiltration requires additional pulse sequences
such as fat suppression. The main limitation of MRI is
Computed tomography excels in imaging tumors that
that some lower field-strength magnets are unable to
destroy cortical bone (Dernell et al., 2000; Moore et al.,
2000) (12.6A, 12.7). Administration of intravenous
image thin enough tissue slices to permit fine anatomic
resolution (Kippenes et al., 1999).
contrast may improve detection further, especially for
some nerve sheath tumors (McCarthy et al., 1993;
Niles et al., 200l). Beam-hardening artefact from the
Biopsy
humerus can interfere with resolution of brachial plexus 
 This may be done as a needle aspirate or as an incisional
lesions (Platt et al., 1999). False-positive results can
 or excisional procedure. The choice is important and
occur in some animals that show thickening of nerve
biopsy tracts must be within the final field of surgical or
roots on CT myelography suggestive of tumor (l2.2). radiation treatment. Percutaneous fine needle aspiration
L
L
B
12.2 CT myelogram from a dog with chronic lameness, LMN deficits, Horner's syndrome, and a painful mass in the right axilla.
Myelography was unremarkable. A: A CT scan showed subtle, right-sided, extradural compression at the cranial edge of T1
252
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
A
B
12.3 MRl of a clog with a 5-month history of unilateral pelvic limb lameness. It was unable to extend its stifle due to severe atrophy
and paralysis of the quadriceps muscle, the patellar reflex was absent but the withdrawal reflex was intact. A: Post-contrast,
suppression reveals a high signal mass at the same location as shown in A (arrowhead). Diagnosis was a nerve sheath tumor.
A
B
C
contrast from T10 to T13. A: CT-guicded needle biopsy (arrowhead) at T11/12 was non-cliagnostic. B: Hemilarminectomy revealed
dliscolored spinal cordl andl a needle aspirate was dlone over T11. C: Cytological dliagnosis was epencymoma or oligodendroglioma.
Euthanasia was performed and histopathological dliagnosis was poorly differentiated glioma (Fernancez et al., 19g7). In humans the
histological gracle of epencymoma does not necessarily correlate with prognosis (Mork and Loken, 1977; Ritter et al., 1998).
of the spinal cord was shown to produce no neurologicalof choice except for lymphoma or plasma cell tumors.
deficits when conducted at Ll/2 or L2/3 in seven  Needle biopsy is preferable when lymphoma or plasma
normal dogs [Schulz et al., 1994). It has also been cell tumor is suspected (Rusbridge et al., 1999; Gilson,
used safely in five cats: one with an intramedullary
2003).
lesion at L2/3 and four with epidural lesions (Irving
and McMillan, 1990). Overall, percutaneous needle
-nose (aaiseaui Aeuuu pue pideu s suenq u Asdonq
STAGING
racy rates range frorm 80 to 95% with image-guidance
 General staging includes neurolocalization, screening for
(Ayala and Zornosa, 1983; Schiff et al., 1997; Ashizawa
 any concurrent or paraneoplastic disorders, radiographic
et al., 1999; Gilson, 2003)(12.4).
survey of the entire vertebral colurmn, abdominal ultra-
Incisional biopsy provides a higher diagnostic yield
 sound, and screening for pulmonary metastases using
than percutaneous techniques and larger tissue samples 
 thoracic radiographs or spiral CT. Aspiration of lymph
incisional biopsy necessitates two-stage procedures unless  and MacEwan, 200l). Screening for bone metastases in
combined with frozen sections and it can also disseminate humans is done best with a bone scan as this is more
tumor cells if done poorly (Gilson and Stone, l990). accurate than survey radiography although false-positive
Excisional biopsy is better for spinal cord tumors as results have been reported in dogs (Bentley et al., 1990;
most are wellocalized and excision is also the treatment  Berg and Lamb, 1990; Rusbridge et al., 1999; Dernel
Neoplasia 
253
12.5 Diagram of an anatomic
classification system for the extent of
tumor involvement within and adjacent
to a vertebral booy (modlified from Gilson,
 2003). See below for an explanation of 
A
B
A
B
arrowheads); it has also extended dorsally around the rib () into zone ll and into the vertebral canal (white arrows). The spinal cord 
et al., 2000) (see page 59). Bone scan may also fail to
Anatomical classification of the extent of vertebral
identify plasma cell tumors (Rusbridge et al., 1999).
tumors is used to determine surgical approach and
 A CSF sample should be collected as neoplastic cells will
resection technique and may also assist in determining
be identified occasionally. Neoplastic cells were found in
the subsequent fixation to be employed. Classification
CSF from 10 of 12 dogs with lymphoma, which is more
 is based on the region of spine involved and on the por
often than for feline lymphoma [one third of cats, see
tion(s) of vertebral body affected. A guide for anatomic
'Feline spinal turmors', page 262) (Rosin, 1982; Couto
classification of vertebral body involvement is shown in
et al., 1984). Local and regional turmor imaging is done by 
12.5 (Gilson, 2003).
myelography, CT or MRI. CT is very useful for looking
 For most tumors of zone I and for smaller tumors of
at cortical bone but MRI is now the gold standard modal-
zone II, complete en bloc removal is recommended via
ity for both neural and vertebral tumors (Gilson, 2003)
a dorsal or dorsolateral approach (Klopp and Quinn,
(12.3, 12.6B).
2001; Gilson, 2003) (12.6A)
254
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
12.7 A: Survey radiograph of the lumbar
spine in a 9-year-old Rottweiler with
umbar pain and severe paraparesis.
There is loss of bony detailin the
vertebral arch (arrow). B: CT scan shows
destruction of the pedicle and part of the
vertebral body (zones Il and IV). The
extent of bony involvement is clearer on 
this than on either the survey radiograph
or the myelogram (not shown). An 
intraoperative view is shown in 12.9
(see page 256); the necropsy
A
B
appearance in 12.8.
consideration of results in humans, there is a great deal
of room for improvement in our management of animals
with spinal tumors. It is probable that improvements will 
be incremental based on gradual advances in diagnostic 
and surgical techniques combined with earlier diagnosis 
and better adjuvant therapies (Gilson, 2003].
Medical treatment
Medical treatment of spinal tumors is unlikely to pro-
vide curative therapy in most patients. The exception
is for animals with multiple myeloma where good
responses are obtained with chemotherapy alone or in
combination with radiotherapy; melphalan and pred-
nisone are the standard chemotherapeutic agents
(Rusbridge et al., 1999). In lymphoma, chemothera-
peutic regimens are employed ideally without surgical
intervention. Agents such as cytosine arabinoside may
be adlded due to the difficulty of getting drugs across
the blood brain barrier {Couto et al., 1984; Withrow
12.8 Section through the lumbar vertebra at necropsy
 performed 4 weeks after imaging and laminectomy revealed
and McEwan, 200l). Lomustine is of value for CNS
the extent of the tumor re-growth, particularly involving the
tumors {Jeffery and Brearley, 1993; Moore et αal., 1999;
vertebral bocy and the lamina (zones Il,Ill and IV). The CT image 
 Fan and Kitchel, 2000) and oral hydroxyurea may
in 12.7 is very similar to this picture.
prove useful for meningioma (Mason et al., 2002).
Doxorubicin or cisplatin {in either systemic or slow-
Resections in zone II at certain sites may be chal-1
 release formulations) have been used to treat various
lenging because of the vertebral artery, ribs or wings of
capsular resection, vertebrectomy or both (Chauvet
edema, although when used alone they only relieve
et al., 1999; Dernell et al., 2000) (12.6-12.8). Tumors
clinical signs for relatively short periods.
in zone III must be assessed critically for adherence to
cervical soft tissues or to the thoracoabdominal great
Radiation treatment
vessels or organs (12.4l) (Gilson, 2003).
Ideally, radiation treatment is used as an adjunct to sur-
 gery, unless the tumor is small, well localized and par-
ticularly sensitive to radiation (e.g. lymphoma or plasma
TREATMENT
cell tumor) in which case radiation may be used as the
 Treatment is not possible in every animal with a spinal
 only therapy (LeCouteur, 200l; Rusbridge et al., 1999;
tumor, but an aggressive approach will prove rewarding Withrow and MacEwan, 200l). An important consider-
 in some patients. With the exception of myeloma, verte-:
 ation is that previous surgery decreases the radiation
bral body tumors are difficult to treat, but the fun- tolerance of brain (and probably spinal cord) by causing
damental techniques are well established. Based on injury to local blood vessels. If surgery reduces tumor
Neoplasia
255
burden to microscopic levels, then this is not crucial. If
the exact location of the mass. Only 4% of patients
incomplete resection leaves a larger tumor burden, this
with anterior (i.e. ventral) tumors worsened after an
factor may prevent the aggressive, postoperative radia-
 anterior approach whereas 26% worsened after poster-
tion therapy necessary to control macroscopic disease
ior (i.e. dorsal) laminectomy. Similarly, over 30% of
(Smith and LaRue, 2000). Radiation can also cause
patients with posterior tumors could still walk after
injury to the spinal cord (Tiller-Borcich et al., 1987;
a posterior approach compared to less than 16% of
Powers et al., 1992; Rusbridge et al., 1999):
·Early delayed effects occur from 2 weeks to
(Gilson, 2003).
3 months after therapy. They are probably due to
transient demyelination; signs are often temporary
Vertebral tumors Dogs may show good initial
and may respond to systemic corticosteroids.
improvement after debulking surgery (Moore et al.,
● Late effects occur 6 months or more after
2000), but then often worsen markedly (Bentley et al.,
radiotherapy and are caused by vascular endothelial
1990; Heyman et al., 1992; Chauvet et al., 1999)
 and glial cellinjury. Signs are usually progressive;
(12.9). Of 20 dogs undergoing debulking surgery, seven
this is the main factor limiting radiation dose.
were unchanged (35%), eight were better [40%), and
More accurate radiation planning allows higher treat-
five (25%) worse after surgery. Improvement is usually
ment doses to be delivered to the tumor while sparing
temporary unless combined with effective adjunctive
normal tissues (Smith and LaRue, 2000). Several
therapy (Dernell et al., 2000).
tumors affecting the spinal cord appear to respond to
 Stabilization is required after most partial and all com-
radiation (Siegel et al., 1996; Oakley and Patterson,
plete vertebral body resections (Chauvet et al., 1999;
2003) (Tables 12.4-12.6). These include meningioma,
Dernell et al., 2000; Gilson, 2003); temporary stabiliza-
ependymoma, nephroblastoma and some but not all
a aa u  rn rd paan s u
nerve sheath tumors (12.49, 12.50).
(Chauvet et al., 1999; Gilson, 2003) (12.41). Principles
of spinal stabilization after tumor resection are similar to
those used for spinal trauma (Sundaresan et al., 1990)
Surgical treatment
[see Chapter 13). The most versatile technique is metal
Owing to the inherent anatomical limitations of dealing
implants and bone cement. An external fixator has some
with the CNS, aggressive surgical margins are rarely pos-
advantages but is better suited to techniques that do not
sible for vertebral or spinal cord tumors. Nevertheless,
Use a cement spacer (Walker et al., 2002). Some studies
removal of vertebral tumors using wide margins for
report a high incidence of cement failure in humans over
most of a mass, with a more limited margin for the por-
time (McAfee et al., 1986; Sundaresan et al., 1990;
tion nearest the spinal cord, may not affect adversely
u ases au aq on seadde pou saop sul '(eooz uos
the success of local tumor control (Gilson, 2003).
 animals following spinal trauma, probably because of the
Effective biological barriers to neoplastic tissue should be  relative difference in life span, although this issue has
used to advantage; these include 'collagen rich/vascular
not been studied in spinal neoplasia (see Chapters 11
poor' structures such as intervertebral disc, cortical bone,
and 13). Whether or not postoperative radiation will
dorsal longitudinal ligament, dura mater, interspinous
affect implants is also unclear (D.E. Thrall, personal
and intertransverse ligaments, and fascial sheaths of
communication). Titanium implants may be affected
paraspinal muscles (1.29, 1.32-1.35, 8.65). General
less than other metals and have the advantage that they
principles of surgical oncology must be adhered to in 
 also permit postoperative MRI.
order to insure a successful outcome (Gilson, 2003).
 Following vertebrectomy the surgeon has three main
-eq aqeauadu q paoanod aq asn sanss eun
options:
riers and copious lavage with suction used to clear the
1. Replace excised bone using grafts such as freeze-
surgery field of tumor cells. Contaminated instruments
 dried femoral allograft (Veterinary Transplant
should be discarded after tumor excision and new mate-
Services, Seattle, WA) packed with autogenous,
rials and instruments are used for closure. The most
 corticocancellous bone from a vertebral spinous
proximal portion of the specimen is identified and the
process. The graft replaces the vertebral body and
tumor margins are assessed histologically (Gilson,
 is anchored by plates (12.42) or with metal
2003). The goal of surgery is to achieve complete resec-
implants and bone cement. Autologous bone can
tion or, at minimum, reduce tumor burden to residual
also be harvested from ilium, rib, fibula, ulna or
microscopic disease (Algorithm 12.1).
possibly a coccygeal vertebra (Yeh and Hou,
The best results are obtained in humans when the
1994). Additional pieces of cortical graft or an
surgical approach and type of resection is targeted to
adjacent rib are split longitudinally to make
256
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Algorithm 12.1 Surgical decision-making in
 Neurological
localization 
spinal tumours.
 Survey radiographs of
Vertebral
spine and thorax, plus 
Spinal cord
tumour
 abdominal ultrasound
tumour
 Neuroimaging - CT or 
MAI or (rmyelography)
Laminectomy
Lymphoma, rmyeloma,
Anatomical
 nerve sheath tumor, 
Resection under
classification
see text
magnification
Surgical
approach
and margins
Zone I, Zone Il(small)
Zone Ill
Zone IV or
crossing
 Zones Il or Ill
Dorsal or dorsolateral
ventral or
 Combined approach 
approach - en bloc 
lateral approach -
vertebrectomy
resection
 intracapsular
or vertebrectomy
B
12.9 Intraoperative photographs from the dlog in 12.7 and 12.8. A: Exposure of the vertebral column revealed a mass of abnormal
tissue on one vertebra (arrow). B: Hemilarminectomy was performed; much of the vertebral arch was absent. Debulking of the soft 
tissues revealed a large defect in the vertebral bocy (a). The spinal cord (b), spinal nerve (c) and spinal ganglion (d) are seen. The
dog recovered well and was able to walk within 2 days. Histopathological diagnosis was anaplastic carcinoma. Attempts to find the 
primary tumor failed, and the dog was paraparetic again within 4 weeks, when it was euthanized (12.8).
 protective strut grafts placed dorsal to the spinal
 2. Fashion a spacer from bone cement to replace
cord (Chauvet et al., 1999; Gilson, 2003) (12.42).
 the vertebral body. This is anchored using metal
For further information see bone grafts (see
implants and additional bone cement. The
page 292).
advantage of the spacer is that it provides
Neoplasia
257
immediate stability and, because there is no graft
necessitates that the limb be amputated as the result-
to revascularize, this technique is not affected by
ant deficit to the radial, median and ulnar nerves will
adjunctive therapies such as radiation (Brasmer and
be too disabling. Good preoperative imaging is espe-
Lumb, 1972; Sundaresan et al., 1985; Matsui
cially helpful in surgical planning, such as in determin-
et al., 1994; Gilson, 2003). Ideally, some stabilization
ing the exact nerve roots involved and where to
must also be provided to dorsal spinal elements
perform the laminectomy (Sakai et al., 1996; Platt
This could be fashioned from cement although
et al., 1999).
thermal injury to the spinal cord must be avoided,
such as by using Gelfoam (Roosen et al., 1978;
Spinal  cord  tumors 
 For spinal cord tumors,
Boker et al., 1989). An alternative is to add
resection at the pseudocapsule between the mass and
modified segmental fixation (12.41).
normal neural tissue can be curative for many tumor
3. Simply close the gap and fuse the adjacent 
vertebrae to leave a shortened vertebral column. In
for tumors of the spinal cord than for vertebral tumors.
one study the L2 vertebra was removed from eight
Extensive dorsal laminectomy warrants some form of
normal dogs; five of these were clinically normal
stabilization, especially after pedicle or articular process
11 months later (Yturraspe and Lumb, 1973). The
removal (Siegel et al., 1996) (12.39). Ideally, surgery for
advantage is that there is no spacer to loosen or
spinal cord tumors should combine good preoperative
revascularize and there is good protection dorsally
imaging, preferably using MRI, intraoperative imaging
for the spinal cord. Some histological changes were
with ultrasound and magnification, together with 'no-
reported at the surgical site in normal dogs and it is
touch' techniques employing lasers and ultrasonic aspira-
not known how well a compromised spinal cord
tion (Gilson, 2003). As a minimum, good preoperative
would accept this technique (Yturraspe et al.,
 imaging with intraoperative magnification is preferred
a Jo yoeodde asaq au Aqeqoid s su (s6
for intradural/extramedullary tumors (Ferretti et al.,
 three although the ribs may complicate its use in
1993). Magnification is essential for resection of
thoracic areas.
intramedullary tumors in order to differentiate tumor,
pseudocapsule and normal tissue; to minimize spinal
Nerve sheath tumors Nerve sheath tumors pre-
cord manipulation; and to allow recognition and ligation
sent a difficult surgical challenge but are also potentially
 of blood vessels that supply the tumor and not the nor-
Curable if three criteria can be satisfied:
mal spinal cord (Jeffery and Phillips, 1995; Gilson,
1. Several centimeters of normal nerve can be excised
2003). Mass removal may lead to reperfusion injury of
with complete histological margins proximal and
the spinal cord, and spinal cord manipulation can also
distal to each branch of the mass. Simple visual
cause damage. Use of preoperative vitamin E or periop-
inspection of margins usually underestimates
erative methylprednisolone sodium succinate (MPSS)
the extent of invasion markedly (Bradley et al.,
may
be
beneficial  (
(Pietila et al., 2000)
[see
1982).
page 83).
 2. There is no invasion into the sympathetic nerves
As microscopic tumor burden often remains after
and ganglia or the spinal cord (Bradley et al.,
resection of many tumors, adjunct therapy using
1982; Bradney and Forsyth, 1986) (12.49,
chemotherapy or radiation should be considered for
12.50).
follow-up treatment (Jeffery, 1991; Siegel et al., 1996).
3. There is no local (McCarthy et al., 1993), or
One possible exception is a well-circumscribed nerve
distant metastasis {Oliver et al., 1965; Bradley
sheath tumor resected with wide margins of normal
et al., 1982; Brehm et al., 1995). These tumors can
nerve on either side or in dogs with more extensive
sometimes invade through the epineurium and
 nerve sheath tumors that undergo forequarter amputa-
tion and for which histological margins show no evi-
even into adjacent bone (Jones et al., 1995).
It is usually necessary to amputate the forequarter or
dence of residual tumor (12.50).
hemipelvis in order to satisfy these criteria {Bailey,
1990; Targett et al., 1993; Simpson et al., 1999) (Table
TUMOR DISSECTION
12.6). This is also necessary due to the diffuse nature
Gentle tisue handling is vital for turmors in or near the
 of the tumor within nerves, the high recurrence rate,
spinal cord. Manipulation must be kept to a minimum to
and the critical nature of much of the plexus for ade-
avoid iatrogenic damage; it is preferable to avoid touching
quate limb function. For the thoracic limb, neoplastic
the spinal cord at all. If manipulation is necessary then
infiltration of C8 and Tl spinal nerves, of more than
dural sutures are used (Yturraspe and Lumb, 1973)
one spinal nerve or a major portion of the plexus,
(12.40). The spinal nerve and vessels can be sacrificed in
258
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
order to improve access if a tumor is difficult to remove
Table 12.2 Main sources of complications
(8.5l), but this should be avoided if possible in the
brachial and lumbosacral plexuses unless the limb can be
Early
Late
sacrificed (Fingeroth et al., 1987). The tumor site is
Intraoperative
postoperative
postoperative
isolated with cottonoid pledgets (5.28) to both prevent
Technical problems 
Infection
Infection 
dissemination of tumor cells and retard migration of
Technical errors
Lack of stability
Implant failure 
hemorrhage into the subarachnoid space. The goal of
 Non-neurological 
surgery is to remove the tuumor without causing damage
problems
to the spinal cord rather than to preserve a beautiful
specimen (Fingeroth et al., 1987). If the tumor involves
dura mater, sharp dissection is used to decrease spinal
 Table 12.3 Complications 
cord manipulation. Large dural defects seem to be of no
consequence in animals and can be left open (14.8)
Early
Late
(Fingeroth et al., 1987; Ferretti et al., 1993). Soft tumors
Intraoperative
postoperative
postoperative
can be removed by gentle suction but it is important to
latrogenic spinal 
Instability 
Implant failure
retain a piece of the mass for histopathology. For tumors
 cord injury 
Pathological
Tumor recurrence
that involve nerve it is crucial to mark the proximal
Difficulty locating 
 fracture (12.12,
(12.11, 12.50)
margins of the mass accurately (12.50) (Targett et al.,
tumor
12.12)
 Peridural scar
Invasive tumor
Implant failure
1993; Niles et al., 2001).
 Poor access to
Wound infection
-ounp ea pauoeoudde saq aue sioum Aenpaurenu
tumor
Sepsis
tomy, piaotomy and dorsal myelotomy using magnifica-
 Incomplete
Fat graf necrosis
tion. An ultrasonic aspirator, microsurgical bipolar
resection
(12.10)
 cautery and a laser are particularly helpful at this stage
 Diagnostic error
 but good results may be obtained using bipolar cautery,
loupes and copious irrigation with suction to preserve
visibility {Jeffery and Phillips, 1995). Tumor removal is
achieve complete resection without amputating the
 a a e   ss   
limb (Fingeroth et al., 1987).
mal tissue and the mass, or the mass is debulked with
Technical errors during surgery may result in instability
the aim that the pseudocapsule then fall in on itself and
 in the early postoperative period (Table 12.3). Dorsal
a plane can then be developed between normal tissue
laminectomy, especially if combined with removal of
and mass (Jeffery and Phillips, 1995; Gilson, 2003).
the articular processes, causes a significant reduction
Although considered highly desirable in people, intraop-
01 dn sueunq ul pue (9g7 aaed aas) Arqens feuids u
erative monitoring of spinal cord evoked potentials
20% of patients experience neurological deterioration
requires dedicated personnel and expertise that are
(Findlay, 1984, 1987; Gilson, 2003). Preoperative ver-
rarely available for animals (Cuddon et al., 2003).
tebral body collapse in humans also has a negative
effect on outcome after laminectomy (Findlay, 1987;
Santen et al., 199l; Chauvet et al., 1999) (12.11).
Laminotomy has been used in children instead of
COMPLICATIONS
laminectomy to avoid late deformity due to instability
The main sources of complications are listed in Table
and may be warranted in certain situations for animals
12.2. Intraoperative complications include iatrogenic
(Fingeroth and Smeak, 1989; Cristante and Herrmann,
spinal cord injury, which can occur from manipulation,
1994; Gilson, 2003).
instability or vascular compromise (Brasmer and Lumb,
Implant failure may occur due to inadequate fixation
1972; Fingeroth et al., 1987) (Table 12.3). The sur-
(Brasmer and Lumb, 1972; Yturraspe and Lumb, 1973;
geon may also be unable to find the tumor, especially if
Onimus et al., 1996; Miller et al., 2000). Failure of
it is intramedullary. Intraoperative ultrasound is partic-
bone cement tends to occur in humans over time
ularly useful in this situation (Nakayama, 1993). The
 although this is less likely in animals, probably due in
tumor may be invasive and therefore difficult to resect,
 part to differences in life span (McAfee et al., 1986;
or access to the tumor can be difficult if it extends ven-
Jonsson et al., 1994; Yerby et al., 1998; Lu et al., 2001;
tral to the spinal cord. Access may be improved by
 Jang et al., 2002) (see page 291). However, the incidence
performing a partial corpectomy of the 
vertebral
 of metal implant and bone cement failure could prove
body (Moissonnier et al., 2002b) (8.47B). If nerve roots
 to be higher following tumor irradiation than it is in
are involved at an intumescence it may be impossible to
 spinal trauma (D.E. Thrall, personal communication).
Neoplasia
259
12.10 Aseptic necrosis of fat graft after dorsal laminectomy.
 The dog's neurological status deteriorated several days
Aaoan poo e aeu bop aun pue pau sem yeni aul
(8.8)
12.12 This dog had been dliagnosed 5 years previously with a
solitary plasma cell tumor in L4 when it was treated with 
melphalan, prednisone and irracliation (4.47-4.49); back pain
recurred after 63 months. A lytic lesion on the spinous process
of T7 was removed but the sample was non-diagnostic. Two
months later the dog had sudden onset of tetraparesis due to a
pathological fracture of C7. Plasma cells were found at necropsy
in C7, T10, L4 and the spleen and kidney (Rusbridge et al., 1999).
a 10% rate of histopathological misdiagnosis has been
A
reported and the rate may be up to 15% in humans
(Levy et al., 1997a).
Some problems only become apparent later in the
postoperative period (Table 12.3). The most important
problem is tumor recurrence. This can also cause insta-
bility but unless vertebral column failure is cata-
strophic (12.1l, 12.12), it may respond to repeat
surgery or adjunctive therapy (Bell et al., 1992;
Schueler et al., 1993).
12.11 A: Lateral radiograph of the lumbar spine of a
POSTOPERATIVE CARe
paraparetic 3-year-old mixedl-breed dog with a dlestructive
Routine nursing considerations  are discussed 
lesion in the L5 vertebral body (arrow). It underwent a dorsal 
in
laminectomy and biopsy. B: The dog became paraplegic with 
Chapter 15. Any postoperative deterioration in neuro-
reduced deep pain sensation 2 days later. There is marked
logical status will necessitate a high standard of nursing
collapse of the L5 vertebral bocy compared to the preoperative 
care (Chauvet et al., 1999). If radiation treatment is
radiographs. Histological diagnosis was fibrosarcoma (12.42)
planned, it is usual to delay this for l0 days or until the
(from Chauvet et al., 1999).
wound has healed (Siegel et al., 1996).
Fat grafts used to cover dorsal laminectomies must be 
PROGNOSIS
thin enough to revascularize (8.8, 12.12; see also 
 In some circumstances where a tumor is not amenable
'Laminectomy healing', page 86).
to treatment because of its location or because a patho-
 Further potential complications include sepsis, which
logical fracture has occurred, euthanasia is indicated
is a particular risk for debilitated animals with cancer
Alternatively, palliative radiation therapy may be con
(Chauvet et al., 1999), and diagnostic errors. For example, s
sidered along with analgesia as discussed in Chapter 15.
260
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
 Table 12.4 Outcome of dogs with extradural tumors
Myxoma/
Myxosarcoma3
Plasma cell
type
( = 3)
Osteosarcomaa
Osteosarcoma2
Fibrosarcoma2
Fibrosarcoma'
tumors4
 Adjuvant 
None
None
Variable 
Variable 
Vaccine
Chemotherapy ±
 treatment 
radiation 
 Survival
11+; 19; 35
<1;10
4.4
3.7
24+
17, 26, 65*
(s4ow)
Final
N/A
N/A
Variable
Variable
N/A
Recurrence
outcome
IChauvet et al, 1999; 2Dernell et al., 2000; 3Levy et al. 1997a; d Rusbridge et al., 1999.
*One dog euthanized at 4 months due to radliation myelopathy.
N/A, not available.
Treatment may only lead to short-term remission in
?
 Surgery without curative intent for soft tissue
some patients, but the quality of life during that period
 sarcomas may produce useful remission if
can be acceptable if pain is controlled adequately.
combined with other treatment modalities
Remission may be achieved for CNS lymphoma in
(Dernell et al., 2000). However, the prognosis is
some dogs. Survival times, however, range from days to
poor if the animal has marked neurological deficits
a few months (Couto et al., 1984; Turner et al., 1992).
(Dernell et al., 2000; Gilson, 2003) (12.7-12.9),
Results may be improved by use of radiation therapy
and is also influenced negatively by pathological
(LeCouteur, 2001).
fracture (Findlay, 1987; Chauvet et al., 1999)
(12.11).
Extradural tumors
Extradural tumors, with the exception of plasma cell
 Intradural/extramedullary tumors
tumors and lymphomas, carry a guarded prognosis
 Intradural/extramedullary tumors have a variable prog-
(Dernell et al., 2000; Gilson, 2003) (Table 12.4).
nosis depending largely on tumor type:
 Preoperative neurological status is one important
· Meningiomas treated by surgical excision alone in
determinant of final outcome in both humans and
nine dogs gave good long-term outcomes in six
dogs (Dernell et al., 2000; Gilson, 2003). In
(Fingeroth et al., 1987). Survival is probably
humans, between 60 and 95% of patients who could
improved further by use of adjunctive therapies
walk well before surgery still did so after surgery but
(Bell et al., 1992; Siegel et al., 1996). Even
only 35-65% of paretic patients and less than 25%
 incomplete resection of meningioma can give a
of paraplegic patients walked again (Gilson, 2003).
· Another factor is anatomic location; four dogs with
three such dogs had 8-, 15- and 25-month survival
tumors in the dorsal spinal compartment were alive
times (Siegel et al., 1996) (12.28). A mean survival
from 7 to 30 months after excisional surgery; a
shop o iauoue i patrodau sem suuour s'el jo
fifth died from complications after 2 months
with meningioma (Moissonnier et al., 2002a).
(Klopp and Quinn, 2001).
 Survival data for dogs with meningioma are shown
 Local disease control is also an important prognostic
in Table 12.5.
factor for overall survival (Kuntz et al., 1997;
 Nerve sheath tumors on the other hand have
Dernell et al., 2000). Dogs with soft tissue
 given very disappointing results overall. This is
sarcomas that are resected with incomplete margins
particularly true for dogs with tumors that arise
 are 10 times more likely to have local recurrence
within the vertebral canal and for those undergoing
than dogs with complete margins (Kuntz et al.,
incomplete resections (Bradley et al., 1982; Brehm
1997). One dog with a fibrosarcoma treated by
et al., 1995; Jones et al., 1995; Kuntz et al., 1997;
vertebrectomy survived for over 2 years (Chauvet
McCarthy et al., 1993; Schueler et al., 1993;
et al., 1999) (12.42). Another dog that
Targett et al., 1993). Only 6 of 51 dogs [12%)
tail amputation for a caudal osteosarco
where margins were not assessed remained disease
2.5 years (Heyman et al., 1992)
free after 1l year (Brehm et al., 1995). Ideally all
Neoplasia 
261
Table 12.5 Cutcome of dogs with intradural/extramedullary lesions (excluding nerve sheath tumors (12.6))
Hemangio-4
 Nephro-
 Nephro-
Nephro-
Mening-
 Mening-
Mening-
Mening-
Mening-
type
 sarcoma
blastomas
blastoma2
 blastoma8
ioma
ioma?
ioma'
iomaa
ioma6
No. of dogs
1
6
2
9
10
Adjuvant
Doxo-
 Radiation 
None
 Radiation 
 Radiation 
N/A
 Radiation 
None
None
 treatment 
rubicin 
 Survival
11
6+
36+
6.5
8-25
46 & 47
19
5 live
Mean =
(s4ou)
 median =
19.5
13.5
1 alive at 
36 months
Final
Metastasis
N/A
N/A
 Recurrence 
6ee
N/A
 Recurrence
885
N/A
outcome
citation 
 citation
Bellet af, 1992: 2Ferretiet af, 1993; 3Fngeroth et al. 1987: 4Jeffery, 1991: $Jeffery and Phillips, 1995: 6Moissonier et al,2002a; 7 Levy et al, 1997a;
ssiegel et al, 1996.
NA, not available.
 Table 12.6 Cutcome for nerve sheath tumors follwing complete excision
Targett et al.,
Bailey, 1990
 Platt et al.,
Niles et al.,
Siegel et al.,
Unpublished
1993
1999
2001
1996
(NCSU)
Number of dogs 
2
1
1
Survival (months)
9*.18*
42*
16*
25*
24*, 36*, 8**
 Adjuvant 
None 
None 
 None 
None 
 Radiation
None 
*Without recurrence.
paeneaa uaag pou peu subiew leobolosly sdaioau ou 'aouaunoal algegald 
NCSU, North Carolina State University.
involved branches are resected along with a
Intramedullary tumors
 generous margin of normal nerve and histological
 Intramedullary tumor resection has only been reported
 margins are evaluated. For tumors involving the
in three dogs. Two had ependymomas and both under-
plexus this nearly always necessitates concomitant
went surgery and radiation therapy (Jeffery and
amputation (Targett et al., 1993; Simpson et al.,
Phillips, 1995; Siegel et al., 1996). One dog made a full
1999) (12.49, 12.50). Usually nerve sheath tumors
recovery and survived for 70 months (Siegel et al.,
are contained within the nerve by an effective
1996). The second had a poorly differentiated tumor;
tissue barrier of epineurium. Therefore
it could walk well 3 months after surgery but was euth-
 all neoplastic tissue can often be excised with
anized because it remained incontinent {Jeffery and 
complete margins, in which case these tumors
Phillips, 1995) (see also 12.4). A third dog had a para-
should be curable (Targett et al., 1993; Ganju et al.,
 ganglioma that was removed and the dog was still alive
 2001). Results for dogs where apparent complete
10 months later (Poncelet et al., 1994).
excision was performed are shown in Table 12.6.
 Nerve sheath tumors show an unreliable
FELINE SPINAL TUMORS
 response to radiation (Siegel et al., 1996)
(12.49, 12.50). Malignant nerve sheath tumors
Spinal tumors account for over half of all cases of feline
 in humans also have poor outcomes and the best
spinal disease not associated with trauma (Wheeler,
survival times follow amputation (Ganju et al.,
1989). Several types of spinal tumors have been
2001).
reported, with lymphoma being the most common.
262
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Neurological signs are seen in 5-12% of cats with sys-
 include: meningioma (most common), osteosarcomas,
temic lymphoma [Spodnick et al., 1992; Lane et al.,
 chondrosarcoma, myeloma, lipoma, glioma and nerve
1994). Most lymphomas are solitary and extradural but
sheath tumor (Mills et al., 1982; Shell et al., 1987;
in some cats the tumor may extend over multiple
Wheeler, 1989; Levy et al., 1997b).
vertebrae or there may be distant meningeal infiltration
(12.13). Nerve root infiltration is also reported
Diagnosis
(Spodnick et al., 1992; Lane et al., 1994). About two
Some extradural tumors may affect the vertebral
thirds of cats with lymphoma are feline leukemia virus
 bodies, causing bony changes on survey radiographs,
(FeLV) positive (35/54) and have involvement of other
 but this is not typical. Myelography or transverse imag-
"p  ynupods) Aaup a u Aso '(os/e) sueio
ing is required to confirm the diagnosis in most cats
1992; Lane et al., 1994; Noonan et al., 1997).
[Asperio et al., 1999). Compression is usually extradural
A less common cause of spinal lymphoma is feline
 in lymphoma (12.13, 12.14) although occasionally other
immunodeficiency virus (FIV). In contrast to FeLV-
 patterns are seen, particularly if nerve roots are affected.
associated lymphoma, which is a disease of T cells,
Other findings that may indicate possible neoplasia
most FIV-associated lymphomas are B cell in ori-
include soft tissue opacities in the cranial thorax with
gin (Callanan, 1996) (12.14). Other tumor types
mediastinal lymphosarcoma, organomegaly or pulmon-
ary metastases.
Other diagnostic tests are indicated to confirm the
 presence of a tumor and to define its nature. The bone
marrow is involved in approximately 75% of cats
(14/l9) with extradural lymphoma and bone marrow
aspiration is indicated for cytological analysis (Spodnick
et al., 1992; Noonan et al., 1997). CSF contains malig-
nant lymphocytes in only 1l of 3l of cats with CNS
lymphoma (Spodnick et al., 1992; Lane et αl., 1994;
12.13 Myelography showing extradural spinal cord 
compression due to FeLV-associated lymphosarcoma in a
Noonan et al., 1997). In some instances, fine-needle
1-year-old cat that presented with a sudden onset of lower
aspiration (page 252) or biopsy at exploratory surgery
may be the only means of making a definitive diagnosis
B
12.14 Myelogram from a cat with acute ataxia, paraparesis, generalized lymphacenopathy and herpes keratitis; it was FeLV negative
but FlV positive. Neurological deficits localized to T3-L3 spinal cordl; the thoracic limbs were normal. Neoplastic lymphocytes were
dletected in the CSF; flow cytology idlentified these as B-cells. A: Myelogram reveals extradural compression at T1-2, which was
unexpected given the normal thoracic limbs. B: CT myelography confirms the mass as extradural (arrow). Response to chemotherapy
cat was euthanized 18 months after presentation
Neoplasia 
263
(Irving and McMillan, 1990; Spodnick et al., 1992). In
One cat with meningioma survived almost 4 years;
an FeLV-positive cat with spinal disease related to an
 median survival for four other cats was 6 months (Levy
extradural soft tissue mass demonstrated by neuro-
et al., 1997b). One cat with myeloma survived 3 months
imaging, it may be reasonable to make a diagnosis of 
on prednisone therapy (Mills et al., 1982). Complete
 lymphoma and to treat accordingly
excision of a nerve sheath tumor resulted in a 6-year
survival in one cat. Vertebral osteosarcoma may be less
aggressive in cats than in dogs and a survival time of 4.5
Treatment
  a r a   sia s
Chemotherapy often leads to a rapid improvement in
excision. Non-lymphoid tumors in cats may therefore
 a  s sse   
have a better prognosis than vertebral canal lymphoma
Chemotherapeutic protocols are described elsewhere
(Levy et al., 1997b).
(Withrow and MacEwan, 200l). Clearly, surgical treat-
 ment alone in lymphoma has only a limited role because
of the multifocal nature of the disease (Spodnick et al.,
REFERENCES
1992). Radiotherapy may be of benefit in lymphoma,
Ashizawa, R., Ohtsuka, K., Kamimura, M., Ebara, S., Takaoka, K. [1999)
but should probably be combined with chemotherapy
Percutaneous transpedicular biopsy of thoracic and lurmbar vertebrae—
for the same reason {Lane et al., 1994). If lymphoma is
method and diagnostic validity. Surgical Neurology 52, 545-5S51.
Asperio, R.M., Marzola, P, Zibellimi, E., Villa, W., Sbarbati, A., Osculati, F,
Addis, F. [1999) Use of magnetic resonance imaging for diagnosis of a
tumor type and can be combined with surgical excision
spinal tumor in a cat. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 40, 267-270.
of the mass (Levy et al., 1997b).
Ayala, A.G., Zornosa, J. [1983) Primary bone tumors: percutaneous needle
biopsy. Radiologic-pathologic study of 222 biopsies. Radiology 149,
675-679.
Prognosis
Bailey, C.S. [1990] Long-term survival after surgical excision of a schwan-
 Although initial improvement may be seen after therapy
noma ofthe sixth cervical spinal nerve in a dog. Journal of the Americat
n s ssd   on
Wterinary Medical Assaciation 196,754-756.
Baumgartner, W, De Vargas Peixoto, PF. [1988) Spinal nephroblastoma
because of the propensity for multifocal involvement,
[neuroepithelioma] in the dog. Kleintierpraxis 33,75-76, 78.
 local recurrence or the development of systemic FeLV-
Bell, F.W., Feeney, D.A., Caywood, D.D., Hultgren, B.D. [1992] Extemal
beam radiation therapy for recurrent intraspinal meningioma in a dog.
related disease. Three of six cats treated with chemother-
Jourmial of the Americarn Animal Hosprital Association 28, 318-322.
apy went into complete remission but this usually lasted
Bentley, J.F, Simpson, S.T, Hathcock, J.T, Brawner, W.R., Powers, R.D.
less than 6 months (mean 3.5 months). Remission for
(1990) Metastatic thyroid solid-follicular carcinoma in the cervical por-
more than l year was seen in only 2 of 14 cats, one of
tion of the spine of a dog. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
Associationt 197, 1498-1500.
which underwent surgery and chemotherapy (Spodnick
Berg, J., Lamb, C. [1990) Bone scintigraphy in the initial evaluation of dogs
et al., 1992; Lane et al., 1994). Cats usually succumb to
with primary bone tumors.Jourmal ofthe American Veterinary Medical
Association 196, 917-920.
systemic effects of the disease (Spodnick et al., 1992;
Boker, D., Schultheiss, R., Probst, E. [1989) Radiologic long-tertm results
Lane et al., 1994).
after cervical vertebral interbody fusion with polymethyl methacrylat
(PMMA). Neurosurgical Retview 12, 217-221.
Bradley, R.L., Withrow, S.J., Snyder, S.P [1982] Nerve sheath tumors in the
dog.Jourmal ofthe AmericanAnimal HospitalAssociation 18,915-921.
 Key issues for future investigation
Bradney, I.W, Forsyth, WM. [1986] A Schwannoma causing cervical spinal
Cord compression in a dog.Australian Veterinary Joural 63,374-375.
1. How are the sympathetic nerves that arise from the
Brasmer, T.H., Lumb, W.V. [1972) Lumbar vertebral prosthesis in the dog.
 brachial plexus best assessed for neoplastic involvement
Americarn fourmal of Veterinary Research 33, 493-S00.
and what is the best way to dissect them cut?
Brehm, D.M., Vite, C.H., Steinberg, H.S., Haviland, J., Van Winkle, T.
[1995) A retrospective evaluation of Sl cases of peripheral nerve sheath
 2. Should dogs with nerve sheath tumors that are resected
tumors in the dog.Joural of the American Amimal Hospital Association
 with complete histological margins undergo postoperative 
31, 349-359.
Britt, J.O., Jr, Simpson, J.G., Howard, E.B. [1984) Malignant lymphoma of
radiation therapy?
the meninges in two dogs. Jourmal of Comparatite Pathology 94, 45-53.
Callanan, J.J., Jones, B.A., Irvine, J., Willett, B.J., MeCandlish, I.A.,
 3. Is a bone allograf preferable to a cement spacer following
Jarrett, O. [1996] Histologic classification and immunophenotype of
vertebrectomy?
lymphosarcomasin cats with naturally and experimentally acquired feline
immumodeficiency virus infections. Veterinary Pathology 33, 264-272.
Carmichael, S., Griffiths, I.R. [198l) Tumours involving the brachial
4. Will radliation therapy acdversely affect metal implant and
plexus in seven dogs. Veterinary Record 108, 435-437.
bone cement stabilization after vertebrectomy?
Chauvet, A., Hogge, G., Sandin, J., Lipsitz, D. [1999) Vertebrectomy,
bone allgraft fusion,andantitumor vaccinationforthetreatment ofver
 5. ls sponcylectomy without vertebral replacement 
tebral fibrosarcoma in a dog. Veterinary Surgery 28, 480-488.
Ciekot, PA., Powers, B.E., Withrow, S.J., Straw, R.C., Ogilvie, G.K., LaRue,
S.M. [1994) Histologically low-grade, yet biologically high-grade, fibrosar-
with an allograft or cement spacer?
comas ofthe mandible and maxilla in dogs: 25 cases [1982-1991). Jourmal
ofthe American Veterinary Medical Association 204, 610-615.
264
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Couto, C.G., Cullen, J., Pedroia, V, Turrel, J.M. [1984] Central nervous
Jonsson, B.,Jonsson, H., Jr., Karlstrom, G., Sjostrom, L. [1994) Surgery of
system lymphosarcoma in the dog. Jourmal of the Americar Veterinary
cervical spine metastases: a retrospective study. European Spine Jourtal
Medical Association 184, 809-813.
3, 76-83.
Cristante, L., Herrmann, H.D. [1994) Surgical management of
Kppenes, H., Gavin, PR., Bagley, R.S., Silver, G.M., Tucker, R.L., Sande,
intramedullary spinal cord tumors: functional outcome and sources of
R.D. [1999) Magnetic resonance imaging features of tumors of the spine
morbidity. Neurosurgery 35, 69-74; discussion 74-76.
and spinalcorindogs.VeterinaryRadiologyandUtrasoutd40,627-633.
Cuddon, PA., Murray, M., Kraus, K. [2003) Electrodiagnosis In: D. Slatter
Kirpenstein, J., Kik, M., Rutteman, G.R., Teske, E. [2002) Prognostic sig-
[ed.], Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd edn, I108-ll17.
nificance of a new histologic grading system for canine osteosarcoma.
Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
Veterinary Pathology 39,240-246.
Dermell, W, Van, VB., Straw, R., LaRue, S., Powers, B., Withrow, S. [2000)
Kiupel, M., Teske, E., Bostock, D. [1999) Prognostic factors for treated
Outcome following treatment of vertebral tumors in 20 dogs [1986-1995].
canine malignant lymphoma. Veterinary Pathology 36,292-300.
Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital Associatiomt 36, 245-251.
Klopp, L.S., Quinn, M.K. [200l) En-Bloc excision and comparative
Dobson, J.M., Blackwood, L.B., Mclnmes, E.F., Bostock, D.E., Nicholls, P,
surgical staging of dorsal compartment vertebral tutmors. Eterinary
Hoather, TM., Tom, B.D.M. [(2001) Prognostic variables in canine mul-
Surgery 30, 497.
ticentric lymphosarcoma. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 42, 377-384.
Knecht, C.D., Greene, J.A. [1977) Surgical approach to the brachial plexus
Donner, TR., Voorhies, R.M., Kline, D.G. [1994) Neural sheath tumors of
in small animals. Jourmal of the American Animal Hospital Associatiot
major nerves. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 81, 362-373.
13, 592-594.
Fan, TM., Kitchell, B.E. [2000) Lomustine. Compendium om Comtinuing
Kuntz, C.A., Dernell, WS., Powers, B.E., Devitt, C., Straw, R.C.,
Education forthe Practicing Veterinarian 22,934-936.
Withrow, S.J. [1997] Prognostic factors for surgical treatment of soft-
Femandez, FR., Grindem, C.B., Brown, TT, Jr, Sharp, N.J.H., Saulnier, M.
tissue sarcomas in dogs: 75 cases [1986-1996]. Jourmial of the American
 [1997) Cytologic and histologic features of a poorly differentiated glioma
Veterinary Medical Association 21l1, I147-1151.
in a dog. Veterinary Clintical Pathology 26, 182-186.
Lane, S.F., Komegay, J.N., Dumcan, J.R., Oliver, J.E. [1994) Feline spinal
Ferretti, A., Scanziani, E., Colombo, S. [1993) Surgical treatment of a
lymphosarcoma: A retrospective evaluation of 23 cats. Jourial of Veteri
spinal cordtumor resembling nephroblastoma in a young dog. Progress it
nary Intermal Medicine 8, 99-104.
Veterinary Neurology 4, 84-87.
LeCouteur, R.A. [200l) Tumors of the nervous system. In: S.J. Withrow
Findlay, G.F. [1984) Adverse effects of the managerment of malignant
and E.G. MacEwan [eds) Small Amimal Climical Orcology, 3rd edn,
spinal cord compression. Jourmal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and
 S14-S31. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Psychiatry 47,761-768.
LeCouteur, R.A., Child, G. [1995) Diseases of the spinal cord. In:
Findlay, G.F. [1987) The role of vertebral body collapse in the manage-
S.J. Ettinger [ed.) Textbook of Veterinary Interal Medicine, 629-695.
ment of malignant spinal cord compression. Jourmal of Neurology,
Philadelphia: WB Saumders.
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 50, IS1-154.
Levitski, R., Lipsitz, D., Chauvet, A. [1999) Magnetic resonance imaging of the
Fingeroth, J.M., Smeak, D.D. [1989] Laminotomy of the axis for surgical
Cervical spmein27dogs.VeterinaryRadiologyandUtrasound40,332-341.
access to the cervical spinal cord. Veterinary Surgery 18, 123-129.
Levy, M.S., Kapatkin, A.S., Patnaik, A.K., Mauldin, G.N., Mauldin, G.E.
Fingeroth, J.M., Prata, R.G., Patnaik, A.K. [1987) Spinal meningiomas in
[1997a) Spinal tumors in 37 dogs: clinical outcome and long-term sur-
dogs: 13 cases [1972-1987].Jourmalof the American Veterinary Medical
vival [1987-1994).Jourmal ofthe American Amtimal Hospital Associatiot
Association 191, 720-726.
Ganju, A., Roosen, N., Kline, D.G., Tiel, R.L. (2001) Outcomes in a con-
Levy, M.S., Mauldin, G., Kapatkin, A.S., Patnaik, A.K. [1997b) Non-
secutive series of Ill surgically treated plexal tumors: a review of the
lymphoid vertebral canal tumors in cats: Il cases [1987-1995). Jourmal
experience at the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center.
ofthe American Veterinary Medical Association 210,663-664.
Journal of Neurosurgery 95, SI-60.
Lipsitz, D., Bailey, C.S. [1995) Clinical use of the lateral cervical approach
Gilson, S.D. [2003) Neuro-oncologic surgery In: D. Slatter [ed.)], Textbook of
for cervical spinal cord and nerve root disease: eight cases. Progress i
Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd edn, I277-1286. Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
Veterinary Neurology 6, 60-65.
Gilson, S.D., Stone, E.A. [1990] Surgicall induced tumour seeding in
Lu, W.W, Cheung, K.M., Li, Y.W., Luk, K.D., Holmes, A.D., Zhu, Q.A.,
eight dogs and two cats. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
Leong, J.C. [200l) Bioactive bone cement as a principal fixture for
Associaton 196, 1811-1815.
spinal burst fracture: an in vitro biomechanical and morphologic study.
Grem, J.L., Burgess, J., Trump, D.L. [198S) Clinical features and natural
Spinte 26, 2684-2690; discussion 2690-2691.
history of intramedullary spinal cord metastasis. Cancer 56, 2305-2314.
Mason, W.P, Gentili, F, Macdonald, D.R., Hariharan, S., Cruz, C.R.,
Heyman, S.J., Diefenderfer, D.L., Goldsschmidt, M.H., Newton, C.D.
 Abrey, L.E. [2002) Stabilization of disease progression by hydroxyurea in
[1992) Canine axial skeletal osteosarcoma: a retrospective study of I16
patients with recurrent or unresectable meningioma. Jourmal of
cases [1986 to 1989). Veteritary Surgery 21, 304-310.
Neurosurgery 97, 341-346.
Hill, TP, Lubbe, A.M., Guthrie, A.J. [2000) Lumbar spine stability fol-
Matsui, H., Tatezaki, S., Tsuji, H. [1994) Ceramic vertebral body replace-
lowing hemilaminectomy, pediculectomy, and fenestration. Veterinary
ment for metastatic spine tumors. Jourmal of Spinal Disorders 7, 248254.
and Comparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology 13, 165-171.
McAfee, PC., Bohlman, H.H., Ducker, T., Eismont, F.J. [1986) Failure of
Hung, L.C., Pong, VF., Cheng, C.R., Wong, FI., Chu, R.M. [2000) An
stabilization of the spine with methylmethacrylate. A retrospective
improved system for quantifying AgNOR and PCNA in canine tumors.
analysis of twenty-four cases. The Jourmal of Bone and Joint Surgery
Anticaricer Research 20, 3273-3280
Americar volume 68, I145-1157.
Irving, G., McMillan, M.C. [1990) Fluoroscopically guided percutaneous
McCarthy, R.J., Feeney, D.A., Lipowitz, A.J. [1993) Preoperative diagnosis
 fine-needle aspiration biopsy of thoracolumbar spinal lesions in cats.
of tumors of the brachial plexus by use of computed tomography in
Progress inVeterinary Neurology 1,473-475.
three dogs.Jourmal of the AmericanVeterinary Medical Association 202,
Jang, J.S., Lee, S.H., Rhee, C.H. [2002) Polymethylmethacrylate-
291-294.
augmented screw fixation for stabilization in metastatic spinal tumors.
McDonnell, J.J., Platt, S.R., Clayton, L.A. [2001) Neurologic conditions
Technical note. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 96, 131-134.
causing lameness in companion animals. Veterinary Clirics of North
Jeffery, N., Brearley, M.J. [1993) Brain tumours in the dog: treatment of
America, Small Amimal Practice 31, 17-38.
I0 cases and review of recent literature. Jourial of Small Amimal
Miller, D.J., Lang, FF, Walsh, G.L., Abi-Said, D., Wildrick, D.M,
Practice 34, 367-372.
Gokaslan, Z.L. [2000) Coaxial double-lumen methylmethacrylate
 Jeffery, N.D. [199l) Treatment of epidural haemangiosarcoma in a dog.
reconstruction in the anterior cervical and upper thoracic spine after
Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 32, 359-362.
tumor resection. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 92 [2 Suppl), 181-190.
Jeffery, N.D, Phillips, S.M. [1995) Surgicaltreatment of intramedullary spinal
Mills, J.N., Eger, C.E., Robimson, WF., Penhale, WJ., McKenna, R.P.
Cord neoplasia in two dogs. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 36, SS3-S57.
[1982) A case of multiple myeloma in a cat. Jourmal of the Americat
Jones, B.R., Alley, M.R., Johnstone, A.C., Jones, J.M., Cahill, J.I.,
Antimal Hospital Association 18, 79-82.
McPherson, C. [1995) Nerve sheath tumours in the dog and cat. New
Moissonier, P, Crigel, M.-H., Timmerman, P [200Za) Spinal tumors in
Zealand Veterinary Jourmal 43, 190-196.
dogs: Retrospective study of 18 cases. Veterinary Surgery 31, 301.
Neoplasia
265
Moissommier, P, Carozzo, C., Meheust, P [2002b) Lateral corpectomy as a
Roosen, K., Grote, W., Liesegang, J., Linke, V. [1978) Epidural tempera-
treatment of chronic disc hemiation in I5 dogs. Veterinary Surgery 31, 296.
ture changes during anterior cervical interbody fusion with polymethyl-
Moore, A.S., London, C.A., Wood, C.A., Williams, L.E., Cotter, S.M.,
methacrylate. Aduanices it Neurosurgery 5, 373-375.
DA, L.H., Frimberger, A.E. [1999) Lomustine [CCNU) for the treatment
Rosin, A. [1982) Neurologic disease associated with lymphosarcoma in ten
of resistant lymphoma in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Intermal Medicine
dogs. Jourmal ofthe American Veterinary Medical Association 181, S0-S3.
13, 395-398.
Rusbridge, C., Wheeler, S.J., Lamb, C.R., Page, R.L., Carmichael, S.,
Moore, G., Mathey, W., Eggers, J., Estep, J. [2000) Osteosarcoma in adjacent
Brearley, M.J., Bjomson, A.P. [1999) Vertebral plasma celltumors in 8
lumbarvertebrae inadog.Jourmal of theAmerican VeterinaryMedical
dogs.Jourmal of Veterinary interal Medicine13, 126-133.
Association 217, 1038-1040.
Sakai, F, Sone, S., Kiyono, K., Maruyama, Y, Oguchi, K, Imai, N., Li, F,
Moore, L.E., Garrett, L.D., Debey, B., Biller, D.S. [2002) Spinal mast cell
Matsubara, M., Ueda, H., Haniuda, M., Kubo, K, Honda, T, Ishi, K.
tumorina dog.lourtal of theAmericanAnimalHospitalAssociatiot38,
[1996) Magnetic resonance imaging of neurogenic turmors of the thoracic
67-70.
mlet: determination ofthe parent nerve.Journalof Thoracic Imaging 1l,
Moore, PF, Rosin, A. [1986) Malignant histiocytosis of Bermese mountain
272-278.
dogs. Veterinary Pathology 23, 1-10.
Santen, D.R., Payne, J.T, Pace, L.W, Kroll, R.A., Johnson, G.C. [1991)
Mork, S.J., Loken, A.C. [1977) Ependymoma: a follow-up study of 101
Thoracolumbar vertebral osteochondroma in a young dog. Jourmal of the
cases. Cancer 40, 907-915.
American Veterinary Medical Association 199, 1054-1056.
Moulopoulos, L.A., Dimopoulos, M.A., Weber, D., Fuller, L., Libshitz, H.I.,
Schiff, D., O'Neill, B.P, Suman, VJ. [1997) Spinal epidural metastasis as
Alexanian, R. [1993) Magnetic resonance imaging in the staging of soli-
the initial manifestation of malignancy: clinical features and diagnostic
tary plasmacytoma of bone. Jourmal of Clirical Oncology 1l, 13ll-1315.
approach. Neurology 49, 452-456.
eou:sop uydesounuds aadu (6ei]  eeeye
Schueler, R.O., Roush, J.K., Oyster, R.A. [1993) Spinal ganglioneuroma in a
findings and case-history reports. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound
dog.Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 203, S39-541.
34, 264-268.
Schulz, K.S., Chickering, W.R., Shell,L, Doherty, M.A., Mon, N., Shires, P
Niles, J.D., Dyce, J., Mattoon, J.S. [2001) Computed tomography for the
[1994) Fluoroscopic-guided and direct spinal cord aspiration in the normal
diagnosis of a lumbosacral nerve sheath tumour and management by
dog. Progress it Veterinary Neurology 5, 46-48.
hemipelvectomy. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 42, 248-252.
Sharp, NJ.H. [1988) Craniolateralapproach tothe camine brachiallexus.
Noonan, M., Kline, K., Meleo, K. [1997] Lymphoma ofthe central nervous 
Vterinary Surgery 17, 18-20.
system: a retrospective study of I8 cats. Compendium ont Continuing
Shell, L., Dallman, M.J., Sponenberg, P. [1987] Chondrosarcoma in a cat
Education for thePracticing Veterinarian 19,497-502.
presenting with forelimb monoparalysis. Compendium omt Continuing
Oakley, R.E., Patterson, J.S. [2003) Tumors of the central and peripheral
Education for the Practicing Veterinarian 9, 391-397.
nervous system In: D.Slatter[ed)Textbook ofSmalAmimal Surery,
Shires, PK., Waldron, D.R., Hedlund, C.S., Blass, C.E., Massoudi, L.
3rd edn, 2405-2424. Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
(1991) A biomechanical study of rotatiomal instability in unaltered and
O'Flanagan, S.J., Stack, J.P, McGee, H.M., Dervan, P, Hurson, B. [1991]
surgically altered canine thoracolumbar vertebral motion units. Progress
Imaging of intramedullary tumour spread in osteosarcoma. A compari-
f Veterinary Neurology 2, 6-14.
son oftechniques.The Jourmalof Bone andJoint Surgery—British volume
Siegel, S., Komegay, JN., Thrall, D.E. [1996) Postoperative iradiation of spinal
73, 998-1001.
Cord tumors in 9 dogs. Veterinary Radliology and Ultrasound 37, 150-153.
Oliver, J.E., Eubank, N.H., Geary, J.C. [196S) Neurofibrosarcoma in a dog.
aao us aauad6 yu
Jourmnal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 146, 96S-970.
nosed by sonography: report of three cases and discussion. Europeat
Onimus, M., Papin, P, Gangloff, S. [1996) Results of surgical treatment
Jourmal of Radiology 25, 47-S1.
of spinal thoracic and lumbar metastases. European Spine Jourmal
Simpson, D.J., Beck, J.A., Allan, G.S., Culvenor, J.A. [1999) Diagnosis
5, 407-411.
and excision of a brachial plexus nerve sheath tumour in a dog.
 Parker, A.J. [1973) Distribution of spinal branches of the thoracolumbar
ArstralianVeterinary Jourmal 77, 222-223.
segmental arteries in dogs.American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 34,
Smith, G.K., Walter, M.C. [1988) Spinal decompressive procedures and
1351-1353.
dorsal compartment injuries: comparative biomechanical study in canine
Pearson, G.R., Gregory, S.P, Charles, A.K. [1997] Immunohistochemical
cadavers.American fourmzal ofVeterinary Research 49,266-273.
demonstration of Wilms tumour gene product WTI in a canine 'neu-
Smith, M.O., LaRue, S.M. [2000) Lesssons leamed from I0 years of irra-
roepithelioma' providling evidence forits classfication as an extrarenal
diating brain tumors. American College of Veterinary Intermal Medicine
nephroblastoma. Jourmal of Comparative Pathology 116, 32l-327.
Anmual Conference, Seattle, WA, 2000; 305-307.
Pietila, TA., Stendel, R., Schilling, A., Krznaric, I., Brock, M. [2000)
Spodnick, G.J., Berg, J., Moore, FM., Cotter, S.M. [1992) Spinal lymphoma
Surgical treatment of spinal hemangioblastomas. Acta Neurochirurgica
m cats: 21 cases [1976-1989]. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
{Wein) 142, 879-886.
Associatiort 200, 373-376.
Platt, S.R., Sheppard, B.J., Graham, J, Uhl, E.W, Meeks, J., Clemmons, R.M.
Steinberg, H.S. [1988) Brachial plexus mnjuries and dysfunctions. Veterinary
[1998) Pheochromocytoma in the vertebral canal oftwo dogs. Jourtal of
CHintics of North America, Small Amimal Practice 18, S65-S80.
the American Amimal Hospital Association 34, 365-371.
Summers, BA., de Lahunta, A., McEntee, M., Kuhajda, F.P [1988) A novel
Platt, S.R., Graham, J., Chrisman, C.L., Collins, K, Sundeep, C.,
intradural extramedullary spinal cord tumor in young dogs. Acta
Siminger, J., Newell, S.M., Chandra, S. [1999) Magnetic resonance
Neuropathologica 75, 402-410.
imaging and ultrasonography in the diagnosis of a malignant peripheral
Summers, B.A., Cummings, J.F., de Lahunta, A. [1994) Veterinary
nerve sheath tumor in a dog. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound
Neuropathology. St Louis: Mosby.
40, 367-371.
Sundaresan, N., Galicich, J.H., Lane, J.M., Bains, M.S., McCormack, P
Poncelet, L., Snaps, F., Jacobovitz, D., Pippendop, B., Balligand, M. [1994)
(1985) Treatment of neoplastic epidural cord compression by vertebral
Successful removal of an intramedullary spinal paraganglioma from a
body resection and stabilization. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 63, 676-684.
dog.Jourmal oftheAmericanAmimal HospitalAssociation30,213-216.
Sundaresan, N., Schmidek, H.H., Schillr, A.L. [1990) Tumors of the spine:
Powers, B.E., Beck, E.R., Gillette, E.L., Gould, D.H., LeCouter, RA. [1992)
Diagnosis and Clinical Management. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Pathology of radiation injury to the canine spinal cord. lntermational
Targett, M.P, Dyce, J., Houlton, J.E.F. [1993) Tumours involving the nerve 
Jourtal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics 23,S39-549.
sheaths of the forelimb in dogs. Jourmal of Small Animal Practice 34,
Prata, R.G. [1977) Diagnosis of spinal cord tumors in the dog. Veterinary
221-225.
Clinics of North America, Small Amimal Practice 7, 165-185.
Terrell, S.P, Platt, S.R., Chrisman, C.L., Homer, B.L., de Lahunta, A.,
Ribas, J.L., Carpenter, J.L., Mena, H., Schulman, F.Y, Lee, K. [1991]
Summers, B.A. (2000) Possible intraspinal metastasis of a canine spinal
Central nervous system meningioma in the dog: a review of S0 cases.
cord nephroblastoma. Veterinary Pathology 37, 94-97.
Journal of Neuropathology andExperimental Neurology 50,373.
Theon, A.P, LeCouteur, R.A., Carr, E.A., Griffey, S.M. [2000) Influence
Ritter, A.M., Hess, K.R., McLendon, R.E., Langford, L.A. [I998)
of tumor cell proliferation and sex-hormone receptors on effectivenessof
Ependymomas: MIB-l proliferation index and survival. Jourmal of
radiation therapy for dogs with incompletely resected menin-giomas.
Neurooricology 40, 51-57.
Jourmnal of theAmericar Veterinary MedicalAssociation 216, 701-707.
266
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders 
Tiller-Borcich, J.K., Fike, J.R., Phillips, TL., Davis, R.L. [1987) Pathology
Waters, D., Hayden, D. [1990) Intramedullary spinal cord metastasis in
of delayed radiation brain damage: an experimental canine model.
the dog. Jourmal of Veterinary intermal Medicine 4, 207-215.
Radiation Research 110, 161-172.
Wheeler, S.J. [1989) Spinal tumors in cats. Veterinary Ammual 29, 270-277.
Tomlinson, J., Higgins, R.J., LeCouteur, R.A., Knapp, D. [1988)
Wheeler, S.J., Clayton-Jones, D.G., Wright, J.A. [(i986) The diagnosis of
Intraspinal epidermoid cyst in a dog. Jourmal of the American Veterinary
brachial plexus disorders in dogs: a review of twenty-two cases. Jourmal
Medical Association 193, 1435-1436.
of Small Arimal Practice 27, 147-157.
Turmer, J.L, Luttgen, PJ., VanGundy, T.E., Roenigk,WJ., Hightower, D.,
Withrow, S.J., MacEwan, E.G. [200l) Small Animal Clinical Omcology,
 Frelier, PF. [1992) Multicentric osseous lymphoma with spinal
 3rd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saumders.
extradural involvement in a dog. Jourmal of the American Veterinary
Yeh, L.S., Hou, S.M. [1994) Repair of a mandibular defect with a free vas
Medical Associatior 200, 196-198.
cularized coccygeal vertebra transfer in a dog. Veterinary Surgery 23,
Tyrrell, D., Davis, R.M. (200 I) Progressive neurological signs associaterd wit h
281-285.
systemic mastocytosisin a dog.Australiat Veterinary Jourmal79,106-108.
Yerby, S.A., Toh, E., MeLain, R.F. [1998) Revision of failed pedicle screws
Uchida, K., Morozumi, M., Yamaguchi, R., Tateyama, S. [200l) Diffuse 
using hydroxyapatite cement. A biomechanical analysis. Spine 23,
leptomeningeal malignant histiocytosis in the brain and spinal cord of a
1657-1661.
Tibetan Terrier. Veterinary Pathology 38, 219-222.
Yturraspe, D., Lumb, W, Young, S., Gorman, H. [1975) Neurological and
Viguier, E., Petit-Etienne, G., Magnier, J., Diop, A., Lavaste, F. [2002)
 pathological effects of second lumbar spondylectomy and spinal column
Mobility of TI3-LI after spinal cord decompression procedures in dogs
shortening in the dog. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 42, 47-58.
[an tin titro study]. Veterinary Surgery 31, 297.
Yturraspe, D.J., Lumb, WV. [1973) Second lumbar spondylectomy and
Walker, TM., Pierce, WA., Welch, R.D. (2002) Extemmal fixation of the
shortening of the spinal column of the dog. American Jourmal of
lumbar spine in a canine model. Veterinary Surgery 31, I8l-188.
Veterinary Research 34, S21-525.
PROCEDURES
Hemilaminectomy (12.15-12.29)
Cervical hemilaminectomy is described below. The ventral slot approach is rarely useful for spinal tumor exploration as
12.15
12.15 Patient positioning for
 cervical hemilaminectomy
via a dorsolateral approach.
12.16 To approach the mid-
cervical vertebrae, the
incision can extend from the
 occipital protuberance to
the spinous process of T2.
The skin incision is to one
side of the midline, which
reduces any tendency for
wound breakdown by
avoiding tension over the 
12.16
spinous processes. Good
wound healing is important
in case postoperative radiation therapy is planned. Good hemostasis is also vital; any seroma or
hematoma formation should be attended to carefully (see 15.34).
Neoplasia 
267
12.17 The skin and superficial fascia are incised to
reveal the superficial muscles. Note the dorsal
midline and diverging laterally. Each is usually
combined with an artery and vein, which must
be ligated or cauterized as necessary. Further
details of anatomy are covered in Chapters 7, 9
and 11.
12.17
12.18 The incision is continued in the midline through
the muscular aponeurosis. The nuchal ligament
is exposed. This may be retracted away from
 the surgeon, transected or divided in the 
midline.
12.18
12.19 The nuchal ligament has been divided in the
midline as have the spinalis muscles. This
reveals the muscular attachments to the spinous
 process of the cervical vertebra (arrow).
12.19
12.20 The spinalis muscles have
been elevated from the
spinous processes (a) and
vertebral laminae (b) on the 
side of the spine to be
approached.
12.20
268
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
12.21 The paraspinal muscles are elevated first from
the articular process (a) and then from further
ventrally. Branches of the vertebral artery
emerge here and must be ligated if
encountered. Bleeding from spinal veins is best
occluded with a Hemoclip (Pilling Weck Inc.,
Research Triangle Park, NC) (5.31, 11.51). The
spinous process (b) and lamina (c) are seen
here. (1.16).
12.21
12.22 The articular process is removed with
rongeurs. The laminectomy is commenced
with a bur. Here the cartilage of the articular
surfaces can be seen (arrow).
12.22
12.23 Site of hemilaminectomy.
Here the bone has been
removed in the cranial-
most vertebra. The site of
bone removal is shown in 
the caudal-most vertebra.
12.23
Neoplasia 
269
12.24 Bone is removed until the vertebral canal is
entered. Here the inner cortical bone is visible, and
ligamentum flavum is exposed in the craniodorsal 
cornmer (arrow). The bone will be burred to eggshell
canal is entered (8.34-8.36, 10.34). The inner
 portion of the joint capsule is visible in the center of 
the defect (a).
12.24
12.25 The laminectomy is continued to reveal the spinal
cord, nerve root (a) and spinal ganglion (b). Large
branches of the vertebral artery and vein are
closed using a Hemoclip (Pilling Weck Inc.,
Research Triangle Park, NC) (5.31). Hemorrhage 
may also occur from the vertebral plexus. This is 
best controlled with Gelfoam (Pharmacia,
Kalamazoo, Ml), direct pressure, or, as in this case,
12.25
a piece of macerated muscle (c).
12.26 The laminectomy is continued
into the intervertebral foramen
to reveal the nerve root and
spinal ganglion. The
laminectomy may be extended
as appropriate for removal of
neoplasms (7.56-7.59, 11.54).
12.26
12.27 Myelogram of a dog that
 presented with a 3-month
history of neck pain and 
right-sided weakness.
An extradural mass is 
compressing the spinal
cord at the level of C1
(arrowheads).
12.27
A
B
270
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
12.28 CT scan without
subarachnoid contrast,
samme dog as in 12.27.
A: Mineralized mass to one
side of the vertebral canal
prior to surgery (arrowhead).
B: After surgery the mass is 
still visible along with the 
12.28
laminectomy defect in C1.
A
B
Complete resection was not
possible as the mass had a consistency similar to bone. Histological diagnosis was meningioma; tissue
consisted of cartilage, mature bone with bone marrow and a few scattered fusiform cells.
12.29 3D reconstruction of the dorsolateral
hemilaminectomy (arrows) performed over the
right side of C1 and the cranial aspect of C2.
The residual mass of the meningioma is evident
within the vertebral canal (arrowhead).
12.29
Dorsal laminectomy (12.30-12.40)
Cervical dorsal laminectomy is described in 11.44-11.55. Thoracolumbar dorsal laminectomy is described below.
some (12.29, 12.40). Good access is often essential for complete tumor resection and to permit the extensive removal
of surrounding dura necessary with meningioma. Access to ventrally located masses may be somewhat restricted and
use of dural stay sutures (12.40, 14.5-14.8) or rhizotomy (8.51) may be necessary (Fingeroth et al., 1987). Partial
corpectomy of the vertebral body adjacent to the mass (with occlusion of the vertebral venous plexus using bone wax)
may improve access further (8.47B) (Moissonnier et ar., 2002b). Dorsal laminectomy with removal of an articular
12.30
12.30 Positioning of dog for
thoracolumbar dorsal
laminectomy.
Neoplasia
271
12.31 The skin incision is made
1 cm to one side of the
midline. The precise site of
the incision is governed by
the location of the lesion.
12.31
12.32 The skin is incised just off the midline, at least
two vertebrae on each side of the vertebra to
be approached. The superficial fascia is
mobilized and retracted to reveal the 
lumbodorsal fascia. Here the fascia has been
incised bilaterally to reveal the spinous
processes.
12.32
12.33 Exposure of the vertebral bodies is done
bilaterally using the methods described under
thoracolumbar hemilaminectomy (8.12-8.27).
The multifidus muscles have been elevated from
the spinous processes (a) and the vertebral
arch. This reveals the articular processes (b),
and the longissimus tendon attaching to the
accessory process (c). The muscle retraction is
maintained with Gelpi retractors. The dissection
is completed on one side before starting the
12.33
 other side. The spinous processes are then
removed with rongeurs or bone cutters.
12.34 The spinous processes have been removed.
The articular processes are still present (a)
and the ligamentum flavum is visible between
the vertebrae (b).
12.34
272
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
12.35 The laminectomy is commenced in the midline
with a bur, preserving the articular processes at
this stage. Here the cortical bone has been
removed over two vertebrae, revealing dark
cancellous bone. See Chapter 8 for details on
technique for using the bur (8.34).
12.35
12.36 The cancellous bone has been removed with the
bur to reveal the white, inner cortical bone.
This is then thinned to eggshel thickness over
the entire defect (8.33-8.36).
12.36
12.37 The final layer of bone is removed to reveal the
spinal cord (arrow). This is achieved with fine
rongeurs and a curette. This degree of exposure
may be adequate for some circumstances.
12.37
12.38 The approach can be modified depending on
requirements. Wide exposure of the tumor and
spinal cord is desirable. If the spinal cord is
swollen, care should be taken to remove
enough bone to prevent injury by impingement
of the bone edges (Fingeroth et af., 1987). Here
the pedicle is removed between the articular
processes to expose the lateral aspect of the
spinal cord (arrow). The articular processes are 
preserved if at all possible.
12.38
Neoplasia 
273
12.39 Here the left articular processes have been
removed as have the pedicles of two vertebrae.
This gives good access to the nerve root (a).
Note the vertebral plexus lying on the floor of
the vertebral canal (arrows); this should be
avoided. Constrictive fibrosis is a potential risk
with this degree of bone removal. Subsequent
stabilization is advisable (Hill et al, 2000; Viguier
et af., 2002; Gilson, 2003).
12.40 Nephroblastoma in a young dog with acute
paraparesis. A: The dura has been opened and
the edges retracted using silk stay sutures. The
spinal cord, covered by nerve rootlets, has
herniated through the durotomy. It is important
to make a long enough laminectomy and
durotomy to prevent distortion of spinal cord 
under pressure. B: Gentle dissection has teased
out a large mass (arrows). One rootlet was
enveloped by the mass but there was no
attachment to the spinal cord. The dog
underwent radiation therapy. It improved
 substantially but was then lost to follow-up.
Trauma
Chapter
13
Initial assessment
281
 Box 13.1 Differential diagnosis of spinal trauma
Other injuries  281
■ Congenital atlantoaxial instability
Cardiothoracic   282
 Degenerative disc disease
Urinary tract  282
■ Cervical spondylomyelopathy
Other  2
282
■ Pathological fracture, neoplasia 
Neurological examination  282
■ Dural tear
 lschemic neuromyopathy (cats and dogs, see Chapter 14)
Radiography  283
■ Traumatic feline ischemic myelopathy (see Chapter 14)
Survey radiography  283
■ Spinal cord hemorrhage
Additional imaging  
283
■ Fibrocartilaginous embolus
■ Psoas muscle injury
Pathophysiology  286
■ Bilateral pelvic/long bone fracture or cruciate rupture
Spinal fracture biomechanics 
286
Biomechanics of fixation devices   289
Trauma can damage the vertebra(e), disc(s), meninges,
Treatment 293
spinal cord, or any combination of these. Diagnosis is by
 Choice of therapy 
293
history and physical findings in most dogs, but may be
Anatomical location of the injury  
295
less obvious in cats (Box 13.1).
After initial assessment of a spinal trauma patient,
Postoperative care   297
consider methylprednisolone sodium succinate (MPSS)
if within 8h of the injury (see page 83). General prin-
Complications 
297
ciples of treatment can be summarized as follows:
Intraoperative complications  297
● Establish a prognosis and stabilize other injuries.
Early postoperative complications 
299
· Provide analgesia and consider whether or not to
Late postoperative complications 2
299
use MPSS (see page 83).
· Reduce vertebral misalignment to relieve spinal
Feline spinal injuries  301
cord compression.
●Provide stability by cage confinement, an external
Prognosis 301
splint, or an internal or external fixator.
· Decompression by laminectomy is not usually
Key issues for future investigation 
302
 necessary when vertebral alignment is good. It is
 recommended for marked extradural compression
References
303
from hematoma, disc material or bone fragments.
Procedures
305
Non-surgical
305
INITIAL ASSESSMENT
Metal and bone cement 
309
Modified segmental fixation   315 
Other injuries
External fixation  316
The first priority is to treat shock and other life-
threatening disorders (13.1). A thorough and meticulous
282
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
reduce spinal cord perfusion (page 86), complicate
anesthesia and may also be fatal (Murtaugh and Ross,
1988; Snyder et al., 200l). Dyspnea is also common
 after trauma and some animals may require ventilation
(Campbell and King, 2000; Beal et al., 2001).
Urinary tract
 Bladder rupture usually causes discomfort on abdominal
palpation, vomiting, depression and hematuria within
24-48h. Damage to the more proximal urinary tract
may take longer to manifest itself (Weisse et al.,2002).
Pubic or perineal swelling indicates potential urethral
trauma.
13.1  This dog sustained spinal trauma 2 h previously. It has been
strapped to a rigid board for evaluation and transport. The head
Other
can also be taped dlown for cervical injuries. Early immobilization
 Bile duct rupture, although rare, can result in patient
is very important as up to 50% of animals continue to dleteriorate
deterioration up to 15 days after injury (Neer, 1992)
after injury particularly when referral is delayed (McKee, 1990;
(2.1). As some injuries are not apparent immediately,
Aggressive intravenous fluid therapy is in progress.
the owner should be forewarned of the potential need
for further diagnostic evaluation and treatrment (Lanz
et al., 2000).
Box 13.2 Other injuries associated with spinal
 After initial assessment [including nociceptive evalu
trauma
ation—see below) the patient is given analgesics.
 Narcotic agonists are preferred unless there is concomi-
■ Shock
tant hypoventilation; they should also be used with care
■ Pulmonary or pleural lesions 
after head injury (Table 15.1). Analgesia must be com-
■ Diaphragmatic hernia
bined with some form of stabilization, so that the ani-
■ Traumatic cardliomyopathy
mal does not injure itself further. If presented within
■ Damaged urinary tract 
8h of injury high-dose MPSS should be considered
■ Ruptured bile duct 
although the available evidence for its use is not com-
■ Injury to other abdominal organs 
pelling (Hurlbert, 2000) (see page 83). Sedatives should 
■ Long bone or pelvic fractures
aaa Ae Aaun asnenaq araunn pasn aq rou
■ Multiple spinal injuries
 protective muscle tone; adverse effects on the cardio-
■ Brachial or lumbosacral plexus injury
vascular system may also exacerbate shock and com-
■ Soft tissue injuries
 promise spinal cord blood flow [see page 86).
■ Head injuries
NEUROLOGICAL EXAMINATION
The neurological examination is essential to localize the
physical examination is essential at this stage as many
deficit, to identify multiple lesions, and to determine the
animals have non-neural injuries, which could be over-
looked (Box 13.2). In one study, 20% of dogs with
prognosis. The single, most important prognostic factor
following spinal trauma is the presence or absence of
injuries to lumbar vertebrae had concomitant pelvic
nociception or deep pain sensation (2.2l, 13.36B). If
fractures; 33% had cardiopulmonary lesions (Turner
1987). Brachial plexus injury must also be ruled out
nociception is absent caudal to a traumatic lesion the
prognosis for return of neurological function is poor
(page 30, 2.15, 2.26, 13.1).
(page 302) (Olby et al., 2003). Analgesics should be
given only after this parameter has been assessed as they
Cardiothoracic
could alter the findings. Animals with cervical injuries
Post-traumatic cardiac arrhythmias are common and
 very rarely lose nociception (see page 28) but if severely
are easily overlooked as they can be delayed in onset by
 tetraparetic they must be assessed for hypoventilation
up to 24 h. Continuous electrocardiogram (ECG) moni-
(Griffiths, 1970; Boudrieau, 1997) (6.1). The Schiff-
toring is recommended for 24 h or until any arrhythmia
a  Sherrington response has no prognostic value (see pages
resolves. Arrhythmias can decrease cardiac output, 26, 32, 13.7) although severe vertebral displacement
Trauma
283
does (Bagley, 2000; Papadopoulos et al., 2002) (13.4).
The animal must always be assessed for injury to the
head and brachial plexus (Griffiths et al., 1974; AANS,
2000; Platt et al., 2001) (see pages 29, 30). Screening for
ssasse Aq ap si Ainu usae snxd l
pupil diameter, cutaneous trunci reflex, thoracic limb
withdrawal and sensation to the digits (Griffiths et al.,
1974; Faissler et al., 2002) (2.20, 2.26).
RADIOGRAPHY
Survey radiography
Once the patient has been stabilized and a neuroanatomi-
cal diagnosis has been reached, survey radiographs are
13.2 Diagram to illustrate assessment of the articular facets
taken. The clinician must remember that radiographs
with the animal in lateral recumbency and with the X-ray beam
angled. The facet joint closest to the flm is highlighted with the
are no substitute for the neurological examination; it is
beam angled as in a; the cther by the beam angle b.
not possible to estimate the neurological status from
the radiographs alone unless there is 100% vertebral dis-
placement (McKee, 1990; Bagley, 2000) (13.6, 13.35).
Lateral views are taken first. Oblique views to assess the
articular facets may be taken with the animal in lateral
recumbency and the beam angled (13.2, 13.3),
although CT is more accurate (13.12, 13.16).
Ventrodorsal radiographs are best taken using a hori-
zontal beam. Failing that, extreme care must be taken
when positioning the animal for ventrodorsal or
dorsoventral radiographs [4.38). Temporary stability
Anesthesia or heavy sedation is undesirable prior to this
as it will reduce the stabilizing effect of paravertebral
muscle spasm (Blass et al., 1988)
Multiple fractures are not common except when
13.3 This oblique radliograph reveals a fracture of the articular
adjacent vertebrae are involved or with injuries caudal
facets (13.12).
to the lumbosacral junction (Feeney and Oliver, 1980;
Turner, 1987; McKee, 1990; Selcer et al., 1991;
These techniques require general anesthesia. Great
Hawthorne et al., 1999). The neurological localization
 care must be taken when intubating animals with cervical
and assessment for focal hyperesthesia should help to
fractures and when positioning any animal with a fracture
rule out multiple injuries. As lower motor neuron (LMN)
that might be unstable (4.38). Myelography and MRI
lesions can mask upper motor neuron (UMN) deficits,
 often add significant time to the overall procedure. MRI
the T3-L3 region should be surveyed when L4-S3
and CT have the advantage of being non-invasive. Of the
deficits are present, likewise the Cl-5 region with
two, CT is faster but MRI provides better images of
C6-T2 deficits (see page 29).
extradural and intradural injuries (Fehlings et al., 1999)
(13.7). Additional imaging is not generally indicated in 
Additional imaging
an animal with good deep pain sensation that is to be
Specific indications for spinal cord imaging by myelog-
 managed non-surgically.
raphy, CT or MRI include:
· Identification of additional lesions, such as when
MYELOGRAPHY
survey radiographs do not correlate with the
Advantages of myelography are that:
 neurological localization.
The entire spine can be evaluated easily.
· Identification of lesions that require removal such
· It may rule out differential diagnoses (Box 13.1).
as extradural bone fragments, blood clots or disc
● Dural tears (Hay and Muir, 2000) (13.10)
material.
and spinal cord transection (13.4) can be
284
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
identified. The spinal cord may be transected
the added manipulation and anesthetic time. In more
even if radiographs show little evidence of
severely affected animals the benefits of invasive imaging
subluxation as there could have been a transient
may outweigh the risks. However, care must be taken
yet complete luxation at the time of the original
 not to manipulate the spine excessively during injection
trauma (13.4).
of contrast. One important goal of managing animals 
Routine myelography is not recommended for surgi-
 with spinal trauma is to prevent deterioration, which is
cal candidates that have only mild or moderate neuro-
why non-invasive imaging by CT or MRI is preferred
logical deficits. These animals should make a very good
(Bagley, 2000)
recovery provided that they do not deteriorate prior to
definitive stabilization. The benefit of identifying a sig-
COMPUTEDTOMOGRAPHY
nificant extradural lesion in such animals is outweighed
 Computed tomography should detect bone fragments
by the risk of neurological deterioration secondary to within the vertebral canal (13.5, 13.12, 13.16). It is
better than survey radiography at detecting articular
facet fractures and it also allows fracture stability to be
assessed using a three-compartment or column model
(Denis, 1984; Shires et al., 1991). In addition, images
can be used to make 2D and 3D reconstructions of the
lesion (13.5, 13.6).
After localizing the lesion, scans should be made
through the region of interest [see page 55). A CT can
aid the choice of entry points and trajectories if an
implant is to be placed in the vertebral bodies (13.49-
13.57). The scan should identify bone fragments, min-
eralized disc and acute hemorrhage (Tidwell et al., 1994;
13.4 Myelographic appearance of a dog that has suffered an
Lanz et al., 2000). Use of Hounsfield units (i.e. CT num-
anatomical spinal cord transection following vertebral luxation.
u (saadoid unane anss go anseau e si
Note that there is now only minimal vertebral dlisplacement.
also distinguish spinal cord edema, which is potentially
A
B
C
13.5 A CT scan was used in this dog to look for bone fragments in the vertebral canal. A: Survey radliograph. Note the instability 
evident between this and image B. B: Sagittal view of 3D reconstruction. A smallfragment is visible on the floor of the canal but it is
not causing compression (arrowhead). C: Transverse view of 3D reconstruction. Fracture of the transverse process is visible. The
postoperative radliograph for this dog is shown in 13.24. A myelogram was not performed.
Trauma
285
reversible, from intramedullary hemorrhage, which car-
 Buusnus Aq uonuu osouaod apaond Ae
ries a poor prognosis (Ramon et al., 1997). CT may 6
edema from hematoma. Hematoma often carries a
 miss traumatic disc herniations although these are usu-
 poor prognosis whereas edema has the potential to be
ally impact injuries with little residual mass effect. A
 reversible (Ramon et al., 1997; Gopal and Jeffery, 2001)
disadvantage of CT is that it may underestimate signifi-
 (13.7). The following are prognostic indicators in humans
cantly the extent of spinal cord compression and so(
(Ramon et al., 1997; Selden et al., 1999):
should ideally be combined with an MRI (Tator et al., ● Presence and extent of any intra-axial hematoma.
1999). Both CT and MRI still carry the risk of fracture
· The extent of spinal cord edema.
displacement during positioning. Animals with failure  · The extent of spinal cord compression by
of the disc or end plate [13.5) may be prone to hyper-
extra-axial hematoma.
 Spinal cord swelling does not interfere with MRI as
for MRI, below) splint could be used to reduce the risk. it can for myelography (Gopal and Jeffery, 200l) (see
pages 57, 123, 8.1). The main problems with MRI are
MR IMAGING
-n as pue sau uess ianaa sos pue Aiqeiae
A mid-sagittal, T2-weighted MRI allows a large area of
ness may also be factors. The ideal way to image human
the spinal cord to be surveyed for injury and can alsos
spinal cord injury is using both MRI and a CT scan
provide a quantitative assessment of compression. MR
(Fehlings et al., 1999; Tator et al., 1999).
13.6 A: Survey radliograph of a 5-year-old
Labrador that was hit by a car to show
100% dlisplacement of L2 vertebra relative
to L3 in the vertical plane. B: 3D
reconstruction of a CT scan in the same
dog, which ilustrates 100% dlisplacement
in the lateral plane as well. The dog was
euthanized as there was no hope of a
functional recovery.
E
13.7 This dog was paraplegic and incontinent with Schiff-Sherrington syndrome and UMIN cdeficits 2 days after vehicular trauma.
high signal within the spinal cord adjacent to these discs consistent with ecema. B: 3-mm, axial, T2-weighted image at L1-L2,
si euoieuau e ag oi luonoui seu enn-exa 'jeubis mol y passaiduo lou ng yal aui oi paoeidsn s poo peuids bon auess
286
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Dorsal
Huge forces are necessary to disrupt the vertebral col-
 umn and so the spinal cord often sustains a much more
severe injury than it does after a simple disc extrusion
(Tator et al., 1999). Although secondary injury mechan-
isms are the same, the prognosis is much worse after
trauma than it is after a disc extrusion for animals that
have severe injuries (see page 302). In some animals the
bony elements are spared but catastrophic failure of
the disc can still cause serious spinal cord injury (trau-
o snsodind snaonu Auieau fisnoaaad e busnen snnu
rupture explosively into the vertebral canal. This type
of extrusion does not produce the usual mass effect
associated with the mineralized material of degenerative
disc disease. In the cervical region the explosion of
Ventral
 a Aq Aeaneosip pannap st snsodd snan
sal longitudinal ligament and can cause devastating,
13.8 Diagram to illustrate the dorsal and ventral compartments
asymmetrical neurological deficits. Hemiplegia results
of the vertebral column, as referred to in 13.9-13.16. The major
together with loss of sympathetic function and poor
crawback of this method of classification is that the majority of
nociception on the affected side (Griffiths, 1970).
injuries damage both dlorsal and ventral compartments (Smith
 Catastrophic disc failure in the thoracolumbar region
and Walter, 1985).
 can also cause severe spinal cord injury and the sudden
change in subdural pressure may tear the dura mater
judged using lateral and oblique radiographs of the spine
(1.2l, 13.10). Severe spinal cord injuries with dural
tears can even occur after vigorous running or strug-
(13.2, 13.3) or preferably by CT or MRI (13.12, 13.16).
 The vertebral body is assessed readily by survey radio-
gling without any vertebral injury (Hay and Muir,
2000; Yarrow and Jeffery, 2000).
graphs (13.14). The disc must also be assessed as it is the
single most important stabilizing factor against rotation
and lateral bending (Shires et al., 199l; Schulz et al.,
Spinal fracture biomechanics
1996). The main advantage of this scheme is that it gives
Forces that act on the vertebral colurmn include bending
 some indication of stability and can serve as a guide to
[dorsoventral and lateral), rotation, shear, and axial
the fixation procedure best suited to each injury (see
loading. These can interact to cause a variety of injuries,
'Biomechanics of fixation devices, page 289). The main
but regardless of the exact mechanism one of the
categories of injury are listed in Table 13.1:
most important clinical questions is 'How stable is the
fracture/luxation site?' Estimates of stability can be
made from knowledge of the elements in the spine that
Table 13.1 Main categories of injury
are compromised. The simplest method is to classify
injuries into three types based on the anatomical com-
Failed component(s)
Intact component(s)
partment that has been compromised. Injuries may
 I Intervertebral disc
 Vertebral buttress and articular
damage the dorsal compartment, the ventral compart-
facets
 ment or both (Smith and Walter, 1985) (13.8). Another
II  Articular facet
 Vertebral buttress and
method to assess stability is to divide the spine into three
 intervertebral disc 
compartments; however, the exact elements of each
Ill  Vertebral buttress
Articular facets and 
 intervertebral disc
compartment vary depending on whether or not the soft
IV Articular facets and 
Vertebral buttress 
tissues are included (Denis, 1984; Shires et al., 1991).
 intervertebral disc
A modification of these various schemes assesses the
IV Vertebral buttress and 
Articular facets
ability of the vertebral column to resist forces applied to
intervertebral disc
it (13.9-13.16). This scheme assesses specifically the
IV vertebral buttress and 
Intervertebral disc
articular facets
integrity of the vertebral body, which acts as a buttress
IV vertebral buttress,
None
to resist bending and axial loading, and of the articular
articular facets and
facets, which resist all forces (Smith and Walter, 1985;
intervertebral disc
 Patterson and Smith, 1992). Articular facet integrity is
Trauma
287
·I: The disc has failed; the buttress and articular
extension (Smith and Walter, 1988; Shires et al.,
1991; Schulz et al., 1996) (13.6, 13.10). It is
facets are intact. This injury is surprisingly
unstable due to the importance of the disc for 
 sometimes combined with minor fracture(s)
stability against rotation, lateral bending and
 of the vertebral body, but in such cases the
spine can usually still resist axial compression
and some degree of dorsoventral bending
(13.5, 13.17, 13.24). An external splint can
provide adequate stability for many fractures in
this category (Patterson and Smith, 1992).
Metal and bone cement or an external fixator
 provide the best means of stabilization (Walker
et al., 2002).
●II: A facet has failed; the buttress and disc are
intact. Articular facet fractures that preserve the
ventral buttress are relatively stable provided that
the disc is intact (Shires et al., 199l; Schulz et al.,
1996) (13.12). Facet joints are important for
rotational stability; the metal and bone cement
technique best resists this force (Shires et al.,
1991). Failure of one facet alone causes minimal
instability although cicatrix formation has been
recorded as a late complication of articular facet
13.9 I: Vertebral buttress and articular facets are intact but the
fracture (Waters et al., 1994).
anulus has failed (arrow) (13.10)
●II: The buttress has failed; the facets and disc are
intact. Fractures of the ventral buttress are often
unstable and are particularly susceptible to bending
and collapse in axial compression (Walter et al.,
1986) (13.14, 13.32A). Both external and internal
fixators can give excellent results for this type of
injury (Walter et al., 1986; Bagley, 2000; Walker
et al., 2002; LeCouteur and Sturgess, 2003)
(13.21, 13.26, 13.65). An external splint is not
ideal for this type of injury.
B
13.10 This dog presented with paraplegia and a lack of deep
pain sensation in one limb. A: Myelography revealed extensive
spinal cord malacia with leakage of contrast over T12 (Lu et al.
2002) (13.52A, 14.18). There is an isolated ventral compartment
injury; the ventral buttress is intact but the clisc has failed. B: 3D
reconstruction of a CT scan from the same dog. There is
leakage of contrast (arrowhead) secondary to a presumed dural
13.11 Il: The vertebral buttress and disc are intact; an articular
tear (1.21, 13.52). See 13.20 and 13.30 for follow-up
facet is fractured (13.12).
288
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders 
13.12 Il: This cat was tetraparetic and
paralyzed on its left thoracic and pelvic
L
limbs along with the ipsilateral dliaphragm 
after being bitten in the neck by a dog.
 A: A triangular bone fragment is
overlaying the vertebral canal at C5/6
(arrow). B: Transverse CT image at C5/6
shows an impacted left articular process.
This fracture was considered stable.
The facet was removed; no fixation was
appliedl. The cat recovered wellbut
had severe, residual LMIN deficits in 
its left thoracic limb.
A
B
·IV: Tivo or more components fail. An injury is
usually very umstable when two components fail
(13.15, 13.19, 13.32). Failure of two components
is often associated with failure of the third (l3.16).
 Any fixation technique must now withstand almost
 all the forces acting on the vertebral column. For
most dogs the choice is between metal implants
and bone cement or an external fixator. An
external splint does not resist axial compression
and is not ideal when there is major failure of the
buttress (Patterson and Smith, 1992). Cage rest is
also suboptimal for this injury.
The scheme in 13.9-l3.l6 can only serve as a
guide to stability . An additional way to assess vertebral
stability is by the use of stress radiography. In its
simplest form, this is done by just comparing vertebral
positions in subsequent radiographs (13.17). The risks 
of more deliberate attempts to move the fracture
are obvious and this is best done with caution under
13.13 Ill: The vertebral buttress is fractured; the articular facets
fluoroscopy.
and disc are intact (13.14).
Regardless of the method used, our understanding
of fracture stability remains incomplete (Walter et al.,
1986; Schulz et al., 1996). Shear force and axial
A
B
C
13.14 This dog jumped out of a truck at 20 mph. It could walk and was continent but had cdecreased anal tone. There is a fracture
of the L7 buttress; the facets are intact. A: Survey radiograph. B: Mid-sagittal 3D reconstruction of the same dog. C: Dorsal view of
the 3D reconstruction. The facets are intact but overridden (10.48). Postoperative radiographs are shown in 13.21.
Trauma
289
recumbency or as it moves with its pelvic limbs
dragging to one side. Axial loading occurs from para-
vertebral muscle spasm. Only the effects of isolated
dorsoventral, lateral bending and rotational forces
have been studied experimentally and these studies
may not reflect the clinical situation accurately. It is
very hard to predict stability for most injuries except
for rare isolated facet lesions. Furthermore, good out
[ans-uou suisn sauauos paueqo aq Ae sau
management or with less rigid internal fixation tech-
niques even in unstable fractures (Selcer et al., 1991)
(13.63).
 Despite these shortcomings, the least stable frac-
tures must be where there has been catastrophic failure
of two or three components (Schulzet al., 1996; Shires
et al., 1991) (13.16, 13.32). Although in vitro results
for metal and bone cement implants have been con-
13.15 Iv: Vertebral buttress and articular facet fracture; the dlisc
flicting, it is the internal fixation technique with the
may also fail.
best overall success in clinical use (Garcia et al., 1994;
Sharp et al., 1998; Bagley, 2000; Walker et al., 2002;
LeCouteur and Sturgess, 2003). An external fixator
loading have not been tested; most models have not (
 can also be very strong and a splint can be successful in
looked at the effect of vertebral body failure; the(
certain situations (Patterson and Smith, 1992; Walker
definition of instability has been questioned (Fox et al.,et al., 2002).
1996); and the strength that a fixator requires to
counter each force is not known (Waldron et al., 1991;
Schulz et al., 1996). Most internal fixation methods
Biomechanics of fixation devices
tested to date are far from ideal (Walter et al., 1986).
NON-SURGICALMANAGEMENT
The relative contribution of the four main forces
Animals with injuries in the cervical or lumbosacral
acting on the vertebral column is also unknown, and
regions often respond well to non-surgical management
almost certainly varies between patients. For example,
(Smith and Walter, 1985; Hawthorne et al., 1999).
dorsoventral bending occurs when a paraplegic animal
Analgesia is not usually required beyond 96 h. Intractable
is lifted or as it attempts to raise its hindquarters.
pain or neurological deterioration warrants a reassess-
Rotation may occur as an animal rises from lateral
ment of therapy.
13.16 Images of a 1.6 kg dog with articular facet fractures; the vertebral buttress has also failed through the dlisc. The dog had
cecreased anal tone but could walk and was continent despite the marked displacement. A: Survey radiograph. B: Mid-sagittal
3D reconstruction of a CT scan through the fracture site. C: Transverse CT scan to show articular facet fractures. Spinal stapling
was successful although not at allideal for this fracture (13.63)
290
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
A
B
13.17 A, B: Severe instability of a spinal fracture as clemonstrated by a change in position between two radliographs (McKee, 1990).
Although there is only a smallfracture, loss of the disc removes 30-40% of the spine's overall stability (Shires et al., 1991).
cations related to implants and the spinal cord is not  times work with severe compromise of the ventral but-
subject to myelography, anesthetic hypotension or tress although it is not the ideal technique for such
manipulation. Hospitalization times may be less than  injuries (Patterson and Smith, 1992).
for internal fixation (Selcer et al., 1991).
Advantages  The advantages are similar to conserva-
Disadvantages  Significant  instability  cannot be
 tive management but this technique provides much
addressed, reduction is difficult, some animals suffer
 greater stability (13.46). It can be used as the sole means
prolonged discomfort, and the neurological deficits
s of fixation or as a supplement to internal fixation. It is
 i   s   
 most aplicable to mid-thoracic or lumbar fractures but
The main problem with medical management of tho-
 can also be used for cervical or lumbosacral injuries.
racic or lumbar fractures is the longer recovery period
compared to surgery and the much longer time
 Disadvantages The disadvantages are: the nursing
required to reach optimal neurological status (Selcer
 care needed; variable individual tolerance for splints;
et al., 1991). Cage rest alone is only recommended for
 the possibility of neurological deterioration (13.24);
the most stable fractures in the thoracolumbar region
 and the development of complications such as urine
 scald or decubitus (13.36A, 13.47). When employed as
when two or three components have failed (l3.16,
 an adjunct to internal fixation it is difficult to observe
13.32). Non-operative management in humans is not
 the surgical wound unless the splint is attached by
and a degree of immobilization that is not possible in
 Good candidates for external fixation include those
most animals (Fehlings and Tator, 1999; Tator et al.,
 with normal nociception, an intact ventral buttress
1999). An external splint is the nearest equivalent in
(13.9, 13.1l), and no pelvic, thoracic or major soft tis-
animals and this may also help to reduce some dis-
sue injuries (Patterson and Smith, 1992).
placed fractures (Patterson and Smith, 1992)
Marginal candidates are those with a compromised
ventral buttress (13.13, 13.15) and those with pelvic,
EXTERNAL SPLINT (13.37-13.47)
thoracic or soft tissue injuries (Patterson and Smith,
An external splint has been shown to prevent dorsoven-
1992).
tral angulation of thoracolumbar spines subjected to
large bending forces. The forces used were in excess of
EXTERNAL FIXATOR (13.64-13.66)
those causing failure of five internal fixation techniques External constructs have been compared to both intact
 in a spinal fracture model and were in the range of  spines and to Steinmann pin and bone cement implants.
those experienced by a large paralyzed dog undergoing Type II external constructs and internal fixation using
routine nursing care. External splinting works best with eight Steinmann pins with bone cement were stronger
Trauma
291
Advantages The advantages are that it is economi-
four pins with cement. All implants te
cal, most clinics have the necessary orthopedic implants
         
and it can work well when the vertebral buttress is
stronger in flexion; the type II external construct using a
intact.
parabolic arch was the strongest single device. Although
Disadvantages
there was no overall difference between the arch con-
 The disadvantages are that it immo-
bilizes a long segment of the vertebral column with the
the arch was the strongest in flexion. Flexion is consid-
weak link being the orthopedic wire, not the Steinmann
ered the main mode of failure for most implants (Lanz
pin. In addition, the wire can cause fracture of the artic-
et al., 2000; Walker et al., 2002).
ular facets. It is not recommended for stabilizing a com-
promised vertebral buttress (13.13, 13.15).
Advantages  The advantages are that these fixators
can be made to be very strong (Walker et al., 2002); they
METALANDBONECEMENT
work wellif the ventral buttress is compromised (13.65);
This technique was originally described using Steinmann
dissection can be minimized and pins can even be placed
 pins placed in the vertebral bodies (Rouse and Miller,
fluoroscopically (Wheeler et al., 2002); and the implant 
1975; Blass and Seim, 1984). Threaded metal implants
can be removed easily after healing (Ulman and 
and bone cement are preferred for most types of spinal
Boudrieau, 1993; Lanz et al., 2000) (13.65). It can also
fracture/luxation and have been used in animals of all
be a very useful rescue technique if other methods fail
sizes with very good results, including those with sig-
(13.65).
nificant compromise of the ventral buttress (13.32). A
study using negative threaded, 4-mm Steinmann pins
Disadvantages   Disadvantages include the poten-
showed that four-pin and eight-pin patterns were at
tial to introduce infection and place excessive tension
least as stiff as intact spines. Eight-pin constructs were
on the skin or fascia (Shores et al., 1989; Lanz et al.,
significantly stronger than four-pin constructs (Walker
2000); the pin tracts need regular cleaning; additional
et al., 2002). The optimum configuration of pins or
postoperative management can be labor intensive
 screws has yet to be determined by biomechanical testing
(Lanz et al., 2000); limited pin lengths for large dogs
and a variety of configurations work well in a clinical
using some systems (14.13); and the risk of traumatic
setting (13.25, 13.31, 13.48). Failures in clinical cases are
removal (13.65). Removal of the device prior to opti-
unusual despite mixed results in biomechanical testing
mal fracture healing could result in catastrophic failure.
(Garcia et al., 1994; Sharp et al., 1998; Bagley et al.,
2000; Magnier and Lavaste, 2002; Walker et al., 2002;
LeCouteur and Sturgess 2003). Implant failure occurred
INTERNALFIXATION
in only one of 19 dogs in one series (Sharp et al., 1998)
The procedures described are usually performed via a
[cement fracture shown in 13.28A).
standard dorsal approach to the thoracolumbar spine
(12.30-12.33). The dorsal spinal plate, vertebral body
Advantages The advantages are the immobilization
plate, transilial pin techniques (Lewis et al., 1989), and
of only a short segment of the vertebral column and its
spinal stapling are no longer recommended. Bilateral
utility in thoracic and caudal lumbar areas because the
plating has similar biomechanical properties to pins and
ribs and spinal nerves can be avoided easily. The implants
bone cement but is harder to perform over the thoracic
provide excellent strength and stability against rotation,
and caudal lumbar regions (Viguier et al., 2002). AO
flexion and extension (Waldron et al., 199l; Walker et al.,
locking plates may be useful in some situations
2002).
(11.l3B); these can now be made from bioabsorbable
materials that avoid stress protection by transferring
Disadvantages
The disadvantages include the low
load gradually to the spine (Yerby et al., 1998; Vaccaro
and Madigan, 2002; Vaccaro et al., 2002) (13.33).
ing (Walter et al., 1986; Walker et al., 2002); migration
of smooth pins (13.29), difficulty in closing soft tissues
over cement if placed in a doughnut pattern, difficulty of
MODIFIED SEGMENTAL FIXATION (13.61-13.63)
removal; potential for implant failure (13.27, 13.28) or
Although the original spinal stapling technique is inad-
stress protection (l3.33), and the risk of infection
equate and no longer recommended for all but the 
(10.45, 13.28, 13.34).
smallest dogs, it is improved by incorporation of the
 Failure of Steinmann pins and bone cement occurs
articular facets into the fixation and by use of several
 mainly because of pin pullout from the bone (Walter
pins in parallel (McAnulty et al., 1986)
et al., 1986; Waldron et al., 1991). The cement bar must
292
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
be thick enough (13.59) and the implants must be strong
· The implant diameter should be as large as possible.
enough for each patient (Willer et al., 1991) (13.27).
4.5-mm cortical screws should be used for dogs
Although one study showed poor results with screw and
weighing over 30kg (Beaver et al., 1996) (13.27).
cement implants, it compared 3.2-mm Steinmann pins
to 3.5-mm screws but these screws have only a 2.4-mm
core diameter (Garcia et al., 1994). The strength of a
BONE GRAFTS
metal implant is proportional to its radius to the power
 These have a wide range of potential uses, which include
of four, so small increases in diameter dramatically
 to enhance the healing of fractures and luxations. Grafts
increase implant strength (Beaver et al., 1996). When
 are either cortical or cancellous in origin; they can be
pins of the same diameter are used to produce external
 derived from the host (autograft) or from a donor (allo-
fixation and internal fixation of the lumbar spine in a
 snouasoy (eooz zau pue s) (e.na
canine model the techniques have similar mechanical
 lous graft is the most effective material to improve bone
properties (Walker et al., 2002). The actual strength
 healing. It does not provide useful mechanical strength
M inq umou nou si ree uai Aue u panban
 but up to l0% of transplanted cells survive to produce
obviously depend on the fracture, and the weight and
 bone (osteogenesis). It also induces adjacent cells to
temperament of the animal. In general, the largest pos- make new bone (osteoinduction) and it forms a
sible implant should be used. Use of threaded in place
weak scaffold for bone ingrowth (osteoconduction).
of smooth implants should increase the strength of the
Harvesting autogenous cancellous bone requires a sep-
fixator because:
arate surgical approach; the proximal humerus is the
· Threaded implants have greater resistance to
most accessible site during ventral surgical approaches
pullout than equivalent-sized smooth pins.
(11.24) and the iliac crest during dorsal approaches.
 Threaded implants are less likely to migrate than
· Cortical autografts can be harvested from the
smooth pins.
ilium, rib, fibula or ulna.
● Threaded implants do not need to be notched to
· Caudal vertebra can be used as a free vascularized
 provide anchorage for the cement.
graft (Yeh and Hou, 1994).
Additional advantages of screws over threaded pins
● Corticocancellus autograft can be obtained from
are that:
the ilium, sternum, wing of C6 vertebra, or from
● Screws do not require cutting, which could cause
adjacent spinous processes (Chauvet et al., 1999).
rocking and loosening of a pin.
● Cancellous allgraft (Veterinary Transplant Services,
 Screws are interchangeable, so the optimum
Seattle, WA) can be used like fresh cancellous graft;
implant length can be selected.
it can also be combined with a small amount of
● Screw heads provide additional purchase for the
autogenous graft. Cancellous allografts contain no
cement.
live cells; they are not osteogenic but are both
In summary:
osteoconductive and osteoinductive. Small blocks of
● Positive profile threaded pins or screws should be
allograft can also be used to temporarily distract a
used instead of Steinmann pins.
ventral slot during fixation.
The implant patterm shown in 13.54A (see also
· Cortical allografts (Veterinary Transplant Services,
13.20, 13.25, 13.65) is preferred over the
Seattle, WA) are used to provide some mechanical
pattern shown in 13.49A. This is because three
 support and a strong scaffold for new host bone
implants per fragment are 66% stronger than two
 ingrowth. They may be packed with cancellous
per fragment (Garcia et al., 1994). Implants can be
bone to enhance healing further.
 placed in two vertebrae on each side of the lesion
· Demineralized bone matrix can also be used to
if necessary (Bagley, 2000; Bagley et al., 2000),
enhance bone healing. It is available as a powder
but this immobilizes four or five vertebrae
(Veterinary Transplant Services, Seattle, WA) made
compared to just the two or three shown in
from cortical bone after acid-extraction of the
13.20 and 13.48.
mineral to expose osteoinductive proteins. These
●The implant should penetrate two cortices for
 proteins then cause adjacent mesenchymal cells to
greater holding power (Zindrick et al., 1986). The
differentiate into osteogenic cells.
risk of damage to the aorta or vena cava is low but
 Potential indications for bone grafts in neurosurgery
this must still be borne in mind when drilling and
are to improve healing potential such as in a diabetic or
when tapping the thread (see page 9, 1.23). The risks
 geriatric animal; for arthrodesis (9.28, 10.52D, 11.30A),
are lowered by using a relatively flat trajectory
to replace bone loss such as after vertebrectomy
(13.52, 13.54B)
(12.42) and to manage infection (13.28, 14.12).
Trauma
293
TrEATMENT
· Reassess deep pain after 24h of circulatory support
Choice of therapy
combined with an external splint.
Non-surgical management is indicated for most cervical
clear evidence of spinal cord transection, which
injuries and for some lumbosacral injuries [see Anatomi-
carries a hopeless prognosis for recovery (13.4).
cal location of the injury', page 295). Surgical manage-
Severe compression or parenchymal hemorrhage on
ment is best for most thoracic and lumbar injuries.
MRI are also likely to be poor prognostic signs in
 Severe shock and hypotension can exacerbate the neu-
rological deficit and so it may be worth reassessing a
animals much as they are in humans (Ramon
et al., 1997; Fehlings et al., 1999).
patient that shows a lack of deep pain sensation after a
·Perform a durotomy as this might identify that the
24-h period of circulatory support. Definitive treat-
spinal cord is not in continuity (13.4). However,
ment in such animals should only be undertaken once
the owner has been made fully aware of the prognosis
a severely compromised spinal cord that nevertheless
remains physically intact may be even less likely to
and the likely time course for recovery [see 'Prognosis',
survive when subjected to additional manipulation.
page 301).
If there is any tissue in continuity, the animal
PATIENTSWITHNODEEP
should be given the benefit of the doubt. Only
PAIN SENSATION
 about 5% of axons need to survive across the injury
The clinician has several options for animals with no deep
site in order for a dog or cat to regain the ability
 pain due to thoracic or lumbar injuries (Algorithm 13.1):
to walk (Blight and Decrescito, 1986; Basso et al.,
● Perform euthanasia because of the poor prognosis
1996; Jeffery and Blakemore, 1999; Olby et al.,
(Olby et al., 2003).
 2003). The presence of severe, localized malacia is
 Algorithm 13.1 Surgical decision-making
Presentati on
Euthanasia
when deep pain is absent.
Reassess after 24 hours
 support with a splint
(+/-MPSS)
 Deep pain
No deep
Examine for
 present
pain
 spinal cord 
transection by
durotomy
 See Algorithm 13.2
Euthanasia
Imaging
Cord intact
Cord
 transected
Cord
 No compression
 transected 
Severe
 compression 
Euthanasia
Euthanasia
Stabilize
Decompress
 External 
 Internal 
fixation
fixation
294
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
to be expected after any serious injury and on its
UMous s uoeoudde pansasans y 'siseq ienpiaiu ue uo
own does not warrant euthanasia (Salisbury and
in Algorithnl3.2. If the animal satisfies criteria for a
Cook, 1988) (8.50 and see page 132).
aq ues Adeau iesiauns-uou uaun (oz aaed aas) aus
 If imaging or direct inspection rules out spinal cord
 considered. With surgery, the risks of implant failure
transection, the surgeon can:
or infection, overall hospitalization time and cost are
 Stabilize the spine using internal or external fixation
factors to be considered. Surgical patients may stay in
 and hope that the dog recovers or can live in a cart.
hospital longer than medically treated patients and can
 Apply an external splint and reassess over 7 days.
 therefore incur more than twice the expense. Final neu-
 If deep pain sensation has not returned by then,
rological status may not differ between animals treated
and certainly if it does not return within l month,
medically and those treated by surgery (Selcer et al.,
then it probably never will. The only hope is that
1991). However, in general: 
 the animal will have a delayed recovery of motor
 Surgery is the preferred treatment for thoracic or
function but without recovery of continence
 lumbar injuries due to the low overall risk of
or deep pain (Olby et al., 2003) (see pages 87,
 complications and the difficulties in instituting
131,302)
non-surgical therapy in many animals. Reduction
od un s u adase si re n
of misalignment, additional decompression if
vided that the owner is aware the chances for a full
necessary and rigid fixation are the goals of surgery.
 recovery are probably less than 5%.
 For most animals a simple re-alignment provides
sufficient decompression (Bagley, 2000; Bagley
PATIENTSWITHINTACTDEEP
 et al., 2000). Immediate decompression has the
PA/N SENSATION
 most relevance in patients with severe deficits
 The decision between surgical and non-surgical man-
(Tator et al., 1999; Fehlings et al., 2001;
 agement for thoracic or lumbar injuries should be made
Papadopoulos et al., 2002).
Algorithm 13.2 Surgical decision-making
Consider
when deep pain is present.
anatomical
Non-surgical
Advanced
 External 
fixation
imaging
(Splint)
Compression
No
Improves
Deteriorates
compression
Decompress by
realignment
Continue
Surgical
Bone, disc
hematoma
Decompress by
(mini} hemi-
laminectomy
 Fixation 
 Internal fixation 
External fixator 
Trauma
295
· Adding a laminectomy will increase surgical
· Hemilaminectomy should be used rather than dorsal
time and decrease stability further. It is only
laminectomy (Smith and Walter, 1988). Where
indicated when there is a large extradural mass
possible, less invasive surgeries that preserve the
of bone fragment, disc or blood clot (Lanz
facet are preferred over standard hemilaminectomy
et al., 2000).
because facet removal is very destabilizing,
 particularly when the disc is also damaged (Shires
et al., 1991; Schulz et al., 1996) (see page 126).
● The vertebral column must always be stabilized
after dorsal laminectomy.
·A final factor that may modify the decision regarding
surgery is the anatomical location of the injury.
Anatomical location of the injury
CERVICALSPINE
This region has the largest ratio of vertebral canal to
spinal cord diameter. Cage rest, with external support
in unstable or displaced fractures (13.18), is the treat-
ment of choice for most cervical fractures unless the
animal is deteriorating neurologically (Hawthorne et al.,
1999). Mortality rates may be as high as 35-40%
with surgery (Stone et al., 1979; Hawthorne et al.,
1999). Severe intraoperative hemorrhage can also
Occur with C2 fractures and reduction can be challeng-
ing (Boudrieau, 1997; Schulz et al., 1997) (13.64).
auo anq suds e Adde o uoeoot asaisea aun nou si su
can be made from various materials (l3.18).
Surgery may reduce recovery times but is best
reserved for animals that:
· Are tetraplegic or have poor ventilatory function.
 Show neurological deterioration despite adequate
 confinement or external fixation.
· Remain very painful beyond an initial 48-72h.
B
The most useful surgical technique for cervical injuries
13.18 A: Dog with a fracture/uxation of C2 treated with an
is ventral placerment of pins or screws and bone cement
external splint. The splint should ideally extend from near the
(Rouse, 1979; Schulz et al., 1997) (11.22, 13.19 and
lateral canthus of the eyes to the mid-thoracic region. B: An
see page 22l). The main disadvantage ofthis technique
alternative means of stabiizing the upper cervical area using
is that it may fail if used to span more than one inter-
a chest harness and Halti collar; the Halti with harness can also
be used in cervical spondlylomyelopathy (CSM).
vertebral space, which can be a problem if a vertebral
13.19 This dog was unable to walk after
running into a tree. The C5 fracture was
stabilized with bone screws and cement
(11.22, 13.56A); the dog could walk well
within 2 weeks. Note that the screws in
C7 are placed too far caudally.
B
296
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
13.20 Dog shown in 13.10 after
stabilization with six 3.5-mm screws
and bone cement. This dog suffered
an unusual complication (shown in
13.30)
B
13.21 Postoperative radiographs from
the dog shown in 13.14. A: L7 fracture
stabilized with screws and bone cement.
B: Two cancellous screws have been
inserted into the wing of each ilium.
Better purchase would have been
cbtained by angling these screws
vertically as shown in 13.65 and 14.12.
The dog was clinically normal 6 weeks
after surgery.
B
three implants should be on either side of the fracture  deficits (l3.16, 13.26). Fractures in this region can heal
and Steinmann pins used to reinforce the cement  satisfactorily without surgical intervention (Smith and
(13.25). If dorsal stability is required, such as after facet
t Walter, 1985; Patterson and Smith, 1992). Candidates
luxation, screws may be placed across the articular
 for internal fixation include animals with persistent pain,
facets (Swaim, 1975; Basinger et al., 1986).
marked deficits or deteriorating neurological status.
Screws or threaded pins and bone cement are the pre-
ferred technique, with implants in the wing of the ilium
THORACICANDLUMBARSPINE
These are the most common regions of the vertebral
if necessary (13.2l, 13.26).
An external fixator also works well in this area (13.65,
column to be injured in animals, and are also at most
 13.66, 14.13). A splint or modified segmental fixation
risk for devastating neurological consequences because
can be effective but ideally the ventral buttress should
of the relatively small diameter of the vertebral canal
then be intact (McAnulty et al., 1986; Patterson and
compared to other areas. Metal implants and bone
Smith, 1992) (13.63).
cement (13.20) or an external fixator (13.65) are pre-
ferred unless the dog is a good candidate for an exter-
SACRAL, SACROCAUDAL AND
nal splint (Patterson and Smith, 1992) (see page 305).
TAILINJURIES
Fractures of thie sacrum have a high incidence of
L6AND L7VERTEBRAEAND
neurological deficits if they traverse the vertebral canal
LUMBOSACRALJUNCTION
or involve the sacral foramina {Kuntz et al., 1995;
 The vertebral canal is relatively spacious in the caudal
 Anderson and Coughlan, 1997; Kuntz and Bonagura,
lumbar area because the spinal cord ends around the 2000) (13.22). Surgery may improve outcome although
6th lumbar vertebra, and only nerve roots occupy  the risk of iatrogenic injury is high (Kuntz et al., 1995).
the caudal part of the vertebral canal (l.5, l.9 and  Therefore surgery should be restricted to animals
see page l). For these reasons, injuries causing severe with severe or progressive deficits. Realignment of the
Trauma
297
A
B
13.22 A: Cat with a sacrocaudal injury and transverse sacral fracture (arrow). Six weeks post trauma the cat still had a paralysed
tail, no anal reflex and was incontinent. Dorsal laminectomy revealed fibrosis; neurolysis produced no improvement and the cat was
euthanized at 18 weeks. Histopathology revealed lesions in the S2, S1 and L7 nerve roots caused by traction injury to the cauda 
equina (Smeak and Olmstead, 1985; Kuntz and Bonagura, 20o0). B: Necropsy specimen from a dog with a transverse sacral
fracture that has severed all nerve roots at this level (arrowheads).
L7-Sl articular facets facilitates reduction of a sacral
 Table 13.2 Intraoperative complications
fracture (Pare et al., 200l). Sacrocaudal injuries occur
most commonly in cats (Feeney and Oliver, 1980).
Early
Late
The role of tethering in this type of injury is unclear 
Intraoperative
postoperative
postoperative
(Taylor, 1981; Smeak and Olmstead, 1985; LeCouteur
 Poor reduction 
 Complications 
 Implant failure 
and Sturgess, 2003). Cats that do not recover contin-
(13.24-13.26)
of trauma 
Infection (13.34)
 Poor implant
Implant failure
 Callus 
(Smeak and Olmstead, 1985). Fractures of the caudal
selection (13.27)
(13.28, 13.29)
encroachment
 Poor implant 
Wound infection
Syringomyelia
vertebra are usually treated non-surgically or by tail
placement
(13.28)
Arachnoid cyst
amputation.
(13.23)
Gastrointestinal
(13.32)
 Inadequate
ulceration
 Late deformity
cement
 Urinary tract
POSTOPERATIVE CARE (see also
 Adjacent segment 
(13.27, 13.28A)
infection 
disease (13.28)
Chapter 15)
 Pneumothorax
Decubitus 
The surgical wound must be examined at least daily for
 Fat embolism 
Urine scald
Cardiac
 Pneumonia
any sign of infection. A urinary tract infection (UTI)
arrythmias
Vascular
should be anticipated in any animal whose deficits are
 complications
severe enough that it cannot walk. Urine obtained by
Sepsis
cystocentesis should be analysed every 2 days or if the
urine appears cloudy; culture should be done if there is
any sign of infection. Bacteremia from the urinary and
 gastrointestinal tracts or from skin lesions increases the
Intraoperative complications
risk of infection at the surgical site (see page 355). Any
These fall into two main groups: cardiopulmonary com-
sudden increase in pain (13.27) or deterioration in neu-
plications and technical errors (Table 13.2). Cardiovas-
rological status (13.30) suggests infection or implant
cular complications are most likely in animals with
failure and requires repeat radiographs. A deterioration
cervical and thoracic injuries (Hawthorne et al., 1999)
in patient status can also occur from non-neurological
[see page 86). Pneumothorax is common and may be
complications of the original trauma (Box 13.2)
iatrogenic (Swaim, 197l; Blass and Seim, 1984; Selcer
 et al., 1991). Fat embolism may occur during fracture
repair (Schwarz et al., 2001). Technical errors in fixation
COMPLICATIONS
inclucle improper placement of implants (Blass and Seim,
These are discussed for three major time points-
1984) (13.19, 13.23), poor postoperative alignment
intraoperative, early and late postoperative (Table 13.2).
(13.24-13.26) that can even lead to a delayed onset
298
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
A
13.23 One Steinmann pin has been inserted too far and could 
(see 1.23 for relationship of vertebrae to the aorta and vena
cava). This dog was normal at 5-year follow-up.
B
13.25 A: Mild cleformity in extension, and B: significant lateral
misalignment. Use of K wires through the articular facets helps
to prevent this (Berry et al., 199g). The cement bars have been 
A
reinforced with Steinmann pins (13.59). Six 4.5-mm screws
have been used in this 30-kg dog. Despite the poor alignment
 the dog recovered from paraparesis to walking within 48 h and
was normal at 6 weeks. See also 13.51.
B
13.24 This dog was progressively paraparetic 7 days after a low-
impact injury. An external splint was applied but the neurological 
status cleteriorated. A: Preoperative radliograph shows an injury at
L4/5 (same dog as 13.5). B: Although facet joint alignment was
good, the surgeon exerted excessive ventral pressure causing a
misalignment in extension (Matthieson, 1983). Use of a towel or 
sandbag under the abdomen helps to prevent this as does gentle
13.26 This 11 kg dlog was paraparetic with no anal tone 24h
and Seim, 1984; Lewis et al., 1989; Berry et al., 1999). Fortunately
affter trauma. Reduction using a laminectomy spreader, curved 
 the clog recovered quickly and was normal within 2 months.
hemostat or Senn retractor could have overcome the
misalignment shown here (Harrington and Bagley, 1998) (13.64).
 syringomyelia in humans (Perrouin-Verbe et al., 1998;
Correct alignment is not quite so crucial in the caudal lumbar or
Fischbein et al., 1999; Bains et al., 2001), poor choice
cervical regions because there is more space at these sites.
 Nerve roots of the cauda equina also tolerate deformity better
of implant (13.27), and too little cement or an uneven
 than does spinal cord. The dog was normal within & weeks
cement bar (13.27, 13.28A).
and remained so 2 years later
Trauma
299
13.27 Implant failure 4 days after
surgery; the cement dlid not cover the
cranial screws acequately (13.57). The
 3.5-mm screws were also not strong
1996). They were chosen in order to fit
down the pedicle into the base of the 
articular facet of L7. This is a useful way
to adld an acditional implant but should
not be used as the sole fixation because
the pedlicle limits the implant dliameter.
The rescue procedure is shown in
13.64-13.66.
B
B
13.28 Implant failure 5 days affter surgery. A: The cement has broken; either the bar was not thick enough (13.59) or a bubble
(13.33), fold or thin area was present at this site (McAfee et al., 1986) (13.27). Wound culture yielded Streptococcus fecalis.
B: Wound dlischarge resolved 2 weeks after the implant was replaced with screws and cement plus modified segmental fixation
resolved again. The dog did well for 3 more years but then developed a marked kyphotic deformity.
Late postoperative complications
Early postoperative complications
The most likely problems at this stage again relate to
A high index of suspicion must be maintained during this
either the implant or to delayed infection (Table 13.2).
period for complications relating to other organ systems 
Of 19 dogs managed by metal and bone cement, five had
such as leakage from the urinary tract or bile duct
 infections (13.34). All were treated successfully although
(Matthieson, 1983). Some complications, especially vas-
one suffered a late recrudescence (13.28). Three of the
cular disorders like pulmonary thromboembolism and
five did not undergo implant removal (Sharp et al., 1998).
deep vein thrombosis, will benefit from early mobiliza-
Infection can also be a problem underneath external
tion and physical therapy (Selcer et al., 1991). If the ani-
splints and may even be fatal if detected too late (McAfee
 mal becomes very painful or deteriorates neurologically
et al., 1986) (13.36A). Callus has been reported to
then implant failure or infection must be considered
encroach into the vertebral canal but this is a very unusual
(13.28-13.30; see also Table 13.2). External fixation
 problem (Carberry et al., 1989). Internal fixators do not
(13.64-13.66) is an excellent rescue technique in such
 generally require removal; late removal could lead to
situations. It would have been a much better rescue 
kyphotic deformity or even pathological fracture (13.28,
technique for the dog shown in 13.28B; bone grafting
13.33). Other potential problems inclucle adjacent seg-
may also help to improve healing at infected sites (Auger
 ment disease (13.31), late-onset syringomyelia (Perrouin-
et al., 2000).
Verbe et al., 1998), or arachnoid cyst formation (13.32).
300
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
13.29 This dog died 1 week after surgery of unknown causes.
The pin was loose in the abdomen but did not appear to be the 
cause of death. Implant migration is most likely with smcoth pins 
13.31 Three-year follow-up of the dog shown in 13.32.
(Blass and Seim, 1984; Blass et al., 1988; Wong and Emms,
Although domino lesions have not been reported after fracture
1992). Every effort should be madle to incorporate allimplants into 
repair there is evidence that addlitional strain is imposed on
 the cement, including any K wires (compare 13.48 and 13.63)
segments adjacent to the fixation (arrows) (Fox et al., 1996;
Wheeler et al., 2002). This could help to explain the failure 
shown in 13.30 (Goffin et al., 1995).
B
13.30 This dog lost deep pain sensation 8 days after surgery at
T12/13 (13.20). This unusual failure may be a type of adjacent 
segment dlisease (MacMillan and Stauiffer, 19g1; Fox et al.,
1996; Lanz et al., 2000; Wheeler et al., 2002) (11.23, 13.31).
B
A: Radiography revealed luxation at the adjacent T13/L1
interspace. The implant was intact. B: Marked rotational
13.32 A: Preoperative myelogram of the dog shown in 13.31
deformity was also present. The preoperative myelogram and
and 13.33. The T12 vertebral buttress has failed and the facet
CT scan were re-examined but no injury was found at T13/L1.
 joints have luxated. Despite the severity of the injury the dog
3D CT scan reconstructions were also examined to view the 
 made an excellent recovery and did very well for 3 years when
articular facets but no abnormality was cetected (13.10B). The
it ceveloped progressive paraparesis. B: A myelogram then
dlog recovered motor function at 3 months; it could walk by
6 months but did not recover continence or deep pain
 pages 321, 323). The dog remained stable for a further 21
(Olby et al., 2003) (see pages 32, 131, 302).
months without intervention (Skeen et al., 2003).
Trauma
301
13.35 Example of the dlevastating type of spinal injury
commonly encountered in cats (13.6, 13.12).
13.33 A CT scan through the arachnoid cyst shown in 13.32
confirmed a focal dilation of the subarachnoid space (arrowhead).
FELINE SPINAL INJURIES
Note also the large bubble in the cement (arrow). This can
weaken the implant and could predispose it to failure (McAfee
Although non-surgical therapy is useful it usually is
limited to cage confinement as cats tolerate splints poorly
is also significant loss of cortical bone in the vertebral bocy when
(Carberry et al., 1989). In theory, any internal fixation
compared to the ribs. This could be due to stress protection,
technique can be applied to cats although feline spinal
Vaccaro and Madigan, 2002) (13.28).
injuries are often severe (13.35).
PROGNOSIS
This varies somewhat with the location of injury. Progno-
Fights were not granted to includ thisfigurein elctronic mdia
Pleasa rafer to the printed publication
sis is very good after cervical injury if the animal does not
die acutely from respiratory arrest (see pages 28, 82). In
the largest series to date, 32 of 39 dogs [82%) with neck
injuries made a functional recovery; results were much
better after non-surgical treatment because the mortality
rate was only one third of that in the surgically treated
dogs. Twenty-five of 28 dogs recovered after non-surgical
management compared with seven of ll after surgery
- [eims-uou aage poo aam sas (%tg sa %68)
agement even for dogs that were unable to walk. Delay in
instituting definitive treatment was a predictor of poor
outcome (Hawthorne et al., 1999). Immediate decom-
mals with tetraplegia or hypoventilation secondary to
cervical injury (Papadopoulos et al., 2002).
The prognosis following thoracic and lumbar injury is
similar to that for disc disease provided that the animal
has good deep pain at presentation. However, studies
with good follow-up are limited. Surgical management
'(%88) 17 ul shnsan poos aaee sieue qns t7 Jo
although l0 had residual deficits and one was eutha-
nized due to implant migration after 22 months (Blass
13.34 Infection is a potential problem when using bone
and Seim, 1984; McKee, 1990). In another study, 19
cement. A: Reduction of the luxation was poor. B: The dlog
d dap a  asad () sp 7 J
ceveloped pain after 6 weeks due to dliscospondlylitis at T13/L1.
made good recoveries [Sharp et al., 1998). Non-surgical
The entire implant was removed and the pain resolved after
management in a further 25 animals, comprising either
2 months of antibiotics (Blass and Seim, 1984; Wong and Emms,
1992) (13.28). At 2-year follow-up the dog was walking but had
cage confinement or splinting, gave good results in 24
no deep pain sensation (Olby et al., 2003).
(96%). Three had residual deficits (Carberry et al.,
302
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
1989; McKee, 1990). Non-surgical management using
Although MPSS may have some benefit in severe
a splint in l6 dogs gave good results in all animals
 injuries, its contribution is likely to be marginal (see
although six had residual deficits. Six dogs also devel-
 page 83). Adequate reduction and fixation by internal
oped serious complications and three deteriorated but
 or external means is far more important.
these problems were temporary and resolved in all 
 The prognosis after sacral fracture is good with 26 of
cases (Patterson and Smith, 1992).
32 dogs (81%) recovering (Kuntz et al., 1995). Cats
Animals presenting with thoracic or lumbar injuries
and no deep pain rarely recover after trauma. Of nine
nence if they retain good anal tone and perineal sensa-
such dogs, none regained deep pain over follow-up
 tion on initial examination. Cats that do not become
periods of 6 weeks to 2 years (Olby et al., 2003). Two
 continent within I month generally fail to regain urinary
did recover motor function without recovering deep
function {Moise and Flanders, 1983; Smeak and
pain (13.30, 13.34). This unusual phenomenon, which
Olmstead, 1985). Animals that remain incontinent
can also occur after thoracolumbar disc disease (see
[audad e q paneiau si Arqeunsaid 'iel 'ze saed
(see 15.32).
rim of surviving axons at the edge of an extensive cen-
The prognosis following brachial plexus injury is
tral lesion (Griffiths, 1978; Olby et al., 2003) (6.2).
 guarded to poor. The best prognostic indicator is the
Recovery of motor function without deep pain usually
presence or absence of deep pain sensation in the distal
takes 3-4 months; it rarely produces a normal gait and
limb. Five of seven dogs with normal sensation made
animals are usually incontinent with recurrent urinary
complete recoveries whereas only six of 2l with
tract infections. Based on extrapolation of data from
 reduced sensation recovered or remained in stable con-
disc disease, a fullrecovery is unlikely umless deep pain
 dition. Abnormal motor nerve conduction is also asso-
returns within 4 weeks of injury (Olby et al., 2003).
 ciated with a negative outcome (Faissler et al., 2002).
Key issues for future investigation
1. What is the best way to manage cranial thoracic lesions (13.36A)?
2. ls there any advantage to using more severe stimuli to assess deep pain (13.36B)?
2ah l "jie b uouet) abeuouay pioo jeuids buoaap Aq sueuny ui ag ke ll se sjeuue ui osouaoid ag oi aoid lan l 'e 
Fehlings et al., 1999; Selden et al., 1999)?
4. What can electrophysiology contribute to determining prognosis?
B
13.36 A: This dog showed progressive paraparesis after trauma. It had subluxation at T2/3, which was managed with an
external splint. This is a dlifficult area to stabilize so the sides of the splint were extended down each flank to just above the elbow
sem pue buulids jaye shep g tea jou pinom bop aul 'l buowan inoulm juds aui yeauag yoauo oi alqissodu! l apeu siui ing 
found in extremis on day 6. A huge, phlegmon-like, subcutaneous abscess was present associated with a small decubital lesion.
Bone cement and threaded implants would have been preferable in this dog. B: The prognosis for dogs with traumatic injuries
seue aeuaan oi age ag oi inydiay ag pinom ll (cooz ie be Aalo) jood Aa s uoeluasaid uo uoidaoloou noum pue
without deep pain that are capable of functional recovery from those with irreversible injuries. Here an electrical stimulator from
pliers or a cattle prod (see page 132).
Trauma
303
REFERENCES
Craven, TG., Carson, W.L., Asher, M.A., Robinson, R.G. [1994) The
AANS [2000] Guideline to Improve the Outcome of Brain Trauma Patierts:
effects of implant stiffness on the bypassed bone mineral density and
Management andPrognosisofSevereTraumatic Braininjury,Zndedn.
facet fusion stiffness of the canine spine. Spine 19, 1664-1673.
Brain Trautma Foundation: American Association of Neurological Surgeons.
Denis, F. [1984] Spinal instability as defimed by the three-column spine
http://www.braintrautma.org/ndex.nsf/Pages/Guidelines-main.
concept in acute spinal trauma. Clirical Orthopaedics and Related
Anderson, A., Coughlan, A.R. [1997) Sacral fractures in dogs and cats: a
Research 189, 65-76.
classification scheme and review of Sl cases. Jourmal of Small Animal
Egger, E.L., Histand, M.B., Blass, C.E., Powers, B.E.[1986) Effect of fixatin
Practice 38, 404-409.
pin insertion on the bone-pin interface. Veterinary Surgery 15,246-252.
Anderson, G.1. [1988) Polymethylmethacrylate: a review of the implica-
Ethell, M.T., Benmett, R.A., Brown, M.P, Merritt, K., Davidson, J.S., Tran, T.
tions and complications of its use in orthopaedic surgery. Veterinary and
[2000) in vitro elution of gentamicin, amikacin, and ceftiofur from poly-
Comparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology2,74-79.
methylmethacrylate and hydroxyapatite cement.Veterinary Surgery 29,
Auger, J., Dupuis, J., Quesnel, A., Beauregard, G. [2000) Surgical treat-
375-382.
ment of lumbosacral instability caused by discospondylitis in four dogs.
Faissler, D., Cizinauskas, S., Jaggy, A. [2002) Prognostic factors for fumc-
Veterinary Surgery 29,70-80.
tional recovery in dogs with suspected brachial plexus avulsion. Jourtal
Bagley, R.S. (2000) Spinal fracture or luxation. In: W.B. Thomas [ed.),
Veterinary Internal Medicine 16,370.
Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Amimal Practice,I33-154.
Feeney, D.A., Oliver, J.E. [1980) Blunt spinal trauma in the dog and cat:
 Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
neurologic, radiologic, and therapeutic correlations. Jourmal of the
Bagley, R.S., Silver, G.M., Connors, R.L, Harington, M.L., Cambridge, A.J.,
American Amimal Hospital Association 16, 664-668.
Moore, M.P [2000) Exogenous spinal trauma: surgical therapy and after-
Fehlings, M., Tator, C. [1999) An evidence-based review of decompressive
Care.CompendiumonContimuingEducationforthePracticingVeterinariat
surgery in acute spinal cord injury: rationale, indications, andtiming based
22, 218230.
cn experimental and clinical studies.Journal of Neurosurgery 91, I-1l1.
Bains, R.S., Althausen, PL., Gitlin, G.N., Gupta, M.C., Benson, D.R.
Fehlings, M.G., Rao, S.C., Tator, C.H. et al. [1999) The optimal radiologic
[2001) The role of acute decompression and restoration of spinal align-
method for assessing spinal canal compromise and cord compression in
ment in the prevention of post-traumatic syringomyelia: case report and
 patients with cervical spinal cord injury. Part I: Results of a multicenter
review of recent literature. Spine 26, E399-402.
study Spie 24, 605-613.
Basinger, R.R., Bjorling, D.E., Chambers, J.N. [1986) Cervical spinal luxa-
Fehlings, M.G., Sekhon, L.H., Tator, C. [200l) The role and timing of
tion in two dogs with entrapment ofthe cranial articular process of C6 over
decompression in acute spinal cord injury: what do we know? What
the caudal articular process of Cs. Jourmal of the Americar Veterinary
should we do? Spine 26, S101-110.
Medical Association 188, 865-867.
Fischbein, N.J., Dillon, WP, Cobbs, C.,Weinstein, PR. [1999) The presy-
Basso, D.M., Beattie, M.S., Bresnahan, J.C. [1996) Graded histological
rinx' state: a reversible myelopathic condition that may precede
and locomotor outcomes after spinal cord contusion using the NYU
syringomyelia. American Jourmal of Neuroradiology 20, 7-20.
weight-drop device versus transection. Experimental Neurology 139,
Fox, M., Onofrio, B., Hanssen, A. [1996) Clinical outcomes and radiological
244-256.
instability following decompressve lumbar laminectomy for degenerative
Beal, M.W., Paglia, D.T, Griffin, G.M., Hughes, D., King, L.G. [2001)
spinal stenosis: a comparison of patients umdergoing concomitant arthro-
Ventilatory failure, ventilator management, and outcome in dogs with
desis versus decompression alone. fourmal of Neurosurgery 85, 793-802.
cervical spinal disorders: 14 cases [1991-1999) Jourmal of the America
Garcia, J.N.P, Milthorpe, B.K., Russell, D., Johnson, K.A. [1994)
Veterinary Medical Association 218, I598-1602.
 Biomechanical study of canine spinal fracture fixation using pins or bone
Beaver, D.P, MacPherson, G.C., Muir, P, Johnson, K.A. [1996) Methyl-
screws with polymethylmethacrylate.Veterinary Surgery 23,322-329.
methacrylate and bone screw repair of seventh lumbar vertebral
Goffin, J., van Loon, J., Van Calenbergh, F., Plets, C. [1995) Long-term
fracture-luxations in dogs. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 37,
results after anterior cervical fusion and osteosynthetic stabilization for
'98-18
fractures and/or dislocations of the cervical spine. Jourmal of Spinal
Berry, W.L., LeCouteur, R.A., Vemau, K.M., Sturges, B.K. [1999]
Disorders 8, S00-508; discussion 499.
Trans-articular process pinning for the initial stabilization of vertebral
Gopal, M.S., Jeffery, N.D. [2001) Magnetic resonance imaging in the diag-
fracture/luxations in I8 dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary lntermal Medicine
nosis and treatment of a canine spinal cord injury. Jourmal of Small
13, 240.
Amimal Practice 42, 29-31.
Blass, C.E., Seim, H.B. [1984) Spinal fixation in dogs using Steinmann pins
Griffiths, I. [1970) A syndrome produced by dorso-lateral 'explosions' of
and methylmethacrylate. Veterinary Surgery 13, 203-210.
the cervical intervertebral discs. Veterinary Record 87, 737-741.
Blass, C.E., Waldron, D.R., Van Ee, R.T. [1988) Cervical stabilization in
Griffiths, I.R. [1978) Spinal cord injuries: a pathological study of naturally
three dogs using Steinmarm pins and methylmethacrylate. Jourmal of the
occurring lesions in the dog and cat. Jourmal of Comparative Pathology
American Amimal Hospital Association 24, 61-68.
88, 303-315.
Blight, A.R., Decrescito, V. [1986] Morphometric analysis of experimental 
Griffiths, I.R., Duncan, I.D., Lawson, D.D. [1974] Avulsion of the brachial
spinal cord injury in the cat: the relation of injury intensity to survival of
plexus. 2. Clinical aspects.Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 15, 177-183.
myelinated axons. Neuroscietce 19, 321-341.
Harrington, M.L., Bagley, R.S. [1998) Realignment of a seventh lumbar
Boker, D., Schultheiss, R., Probst, E. [1989) Radliologic long-term results
vertebral fracture/luxation using a Senn retractor in two puppies.
after cervical vertebral interbody fusion with polymethyl methacrylate
Joural of theAmericanAmimal Hospital Association34,377-380
[PMMA). Neurosurgical Retview 12, 217-221.
Hawthome, J.C., Blevins, W.E., Wallace, L.J., Glickman, N., Waters, D.J.
 Boudrieau, R.J. [1997) Distraction-stabilization using the Scoville-Haverfield
[1999) Cervical vertebral fractures in S6 dogs: a retrospective study.
self-retaining laminectomy retractors for repair of Znd cervical vertebral
Jourtal of theAmerican Antimal Hosprital Association 35, 135-146.
fractures in 3 dogs. Veterinary and Comparative Orthopaedics and
Hay, C.W, Muir, P. [2000) Tearing of the dura mater in three dogs.
Traumatology 10, 71.
Veterinary Record 146,279-282
Campbell, V.L., King, L.G. [2000) Pulmonary function, ventilator manage-
Hurlbert, R.J. (2000) Methylprednisolone for acute spinal cord injury: an
ment, and outcome of dogs with thoracic trauma and pulmonary contu-
imappropriate standard of care. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 93, 1-7.
sions: 10 cases [1994-1998). Jourmal of the American Veterinary
Jeffery, N.D., Blakemore, WF. [1999) Spinal cord injury in small animals 2.
Medical Association 217, 1505-1509.
Current and future options for therapy. Wterinary Record 145, 183-190.
Carberry, C.A., Flanders, J.A., Dietze, A.E., Gilmore, D.R., Trotter, E.J.
Kriaras, I., Michalopoulos, A., Turina, M., Geroulanos, S. (2000) Evolution
[1989) Nonsurgical management of thoracic and lumbar spinal fractures
of antimicrobial prophylaxis in cardiovascular surgery. European Jourhal
and fracture luxations in the dog and cat: a review of 17 cases. Jourzal of
Cardiothoraic Surgery 18,440-446.
the American Amimal Hospital Association 25, 43-54.
Kuntz, C.A., Bonagura, J.D. [2000) Sacral fractures and sacrococcygeal
Chauvet, A., Hogge, G., Sandin, J., Lipsitz, D. [1999) Vertebrectomy,
injuries in dogs and cats. In: R.W. Kirk and J.D. Bonagura [erds), Kirk's
bone allograft fusion, and antitumor vaccination for the treatment of ver-
Current Veterinary Therapy Xili: Small Amimal Practice, I023-1026.
tebral fibrosarcoma in a dog. Veterinary Surgery 28, 480-488.
Philadelphia: WB Saumders.
304
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Kuntz, C.A., Waldron, D., Martin, R.A., Shires, PK., Moon, M., Shell, L.
Ramon, S., Dominguez, R., Ramirez, L., Paraira, M., Olona, M., Castello, T,
[1995) Sacral fractures in dogs: a review of 32 cases. Jourmal of the
Garcia Femandez, L. (1997) Clinical and magnetic resonance imaging
American Amimal Hospital Association 31, 142-150.
correlation in acute spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord 35, 664-673.
Lanz, O.1., Jones, J.C., Bergman, R. [2000) Use of an extemal fixator to
Roosen, K., Grote, W, Liesegang, J., Linke, V. [1978) Epidural tempera-
correct spinal fracture/luxation and instability in three dogs. Veterinary
ture changes during anterior cervical interbody fusion with polymethyl-
Neurology and Neurosurgery,htp://www.neurouet.org/LanzSpinalFixator!
methacry late. Aduances in Neurosurgery 5, 373-375.
LANZ1final.htm#spinal%20instability,%20traumatic.
Rouse, G.P. [1979) Cervical spinal stabilization with methylmethacrylate.
LeCouteur, R.A., Sturgess, B. [2003) Spinal fractures and luxations. In:
Veterinary Surgery 8, 1.
D.Slatter [ed.)], Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd edn, I244-1260.
Rouse, G.P, Miller, J.1. [1975) The use of methylmethacrylate for spinal
 Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
stabilization. Jourmal of the American Arimal Hospital Association 1l,
Lewis, D.D., Stampley, A., Bellah, J.R., Donner, G.S., Ellison, G.W.
418-425.
[1989) Repair of sixth lumbar vertebral fracture-luxations, using transil
Salisbury, S.K., Cook, J.R., Jr [1988) Recovery of neurological function fol-
ial pins and plastic spinous-process plates in six dogs. Jourmal of the
lowing focal myelomalacia in a cat. Jourmal of the American Animal
American Veterinary Medical Association 194, S38-542.
Hospital Association 24,227-230.
Lu, D., Lamb, C.R., Targett, M.P [2002) Results of myelography in seven dogs
Sandman, K.M., Smith, C.W., Harari, J., Manfra Maretta, S., Pijanowski, G.J.
with myelomalacia. Veterinary Radiology amd Ultrasourtd 43, 326-330.
[2001) Comparison of pull-out resistance of Kirschner wires and Imex
MacMillan, M., Stauffer, E.S. [199l) Traumatic instability in the previ-
miniature interface fixation pins in polyurethane foam. Veterinary and
usly fused cervical spine. Jourmal of Spinal Disorders 4, 449-454.
Comparative Orthopaedics andTraumatology15,18-22.
Magnier, J., Lavaste, F. [2002) In vitro biomechanical evaluation of unsta-
Schulz, K.S., Waldron, D.R., Grant, J.W, Shell, L., Smith, G., Shires, PK.
8 1    u sa us 1 a
[1996) Biomechanics of the thoracolumbar vertebral column of dogs
Marcellin Lttle, DJ., Papich, M.G., Richardson, D.C., DeYoumg, D.J. [1996) 
during lateral bending. American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 57,
Pharmacokinetic model for cefazolin dlistribution during total hip arthro-
12281232.
plasty in dogs.American fourmal of Veterinary Research 57,720-723
Schulz, K.S., Waldron, D.R., Fahie, M. [1997) Application of ventral pins
Matthieson, D.T. [1983) Thoracolumbar spinal fractures/luxations: surgical
and polymethylmethacrylate for the management of atlantoaxial insta-
management.Compendium on Comntinuing Education for thePracticing
Veterinarian 5, 867-878.
Schwarz, T, Crawford, PE., Owen, M.R., Stork, C.K., Thompson, H.
McAfee, PC., Bohlman, H.H., Ducker, T., Eismont, FJ. [1986) Failure of
[2001) Fatal pulmonary fat embolism during humeral fracture repair in
stabilization of the spine with methylmethacrylate. A retrospective
a cat. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 42, 195-198.
analysis of twenty-four cases. The Jourmal of Bone and Joint Surgery
Selcer, R.R., Bubb, WJ., Walker, TL. [1991) Management of vertebral col-
Americant tolume 68, I145-I157.
umn fractures in dogs and cats: 21l cases [1977-1985). Jourmal of the
McAnulty, J.F, Lenehan, TM., Maletz, L.M. [1986] Modified segmental
American Veterinary Medical Association 198, 1965-1968.
 spinal instrumentation in repair of spinal fractures and luxations in dogs.
Selden, N.R., Quint, D.J., Patel, N., d'Arcy, H.S., Papadopoulos, S.M.
Veterinary Surgery 15,143-149
paon jeuds pepuan jo sujgewi aoueuosan onaua Aouaiamg (6661]
McKee, WM. [1990) Spinal trauma in dogs and cats: a review of Sl cases.
injuries: clinical correlation and prognosis. Neurosurgery 44, 785-792;
Veterinary Record 126, 285-289.
discussion 792-793.
Millis, D.L., Martinez, S.A. [2003) Bone grafts. In: D. Slatter [ed.)],
Sharp, N.J.H., Gilson, S.D., Komegay, J.N., Wheeler, S.J., Hopkins, A.L-,
Textbook of Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd edn, I87S-1890. Philadelphia:
Lane, S.D. [1998) Long terrm follow-up of spinal fracture fixation using
Elsevier Science.
screws or pins and bone cement in 30 dogs. Veterinary Orthopedic
Moise, N.S., Flanders, JA. [1983) Micturation disorders im cats with
Society 1998; Snowmass, CO.
sacrocaudal vertebral lesions. In: R.W. Kirk [ed.), Current Veterinary
Shires, PK., Waldron, D.R., Hedlumd, C.S., Blass, C.E., Massoudi, L.
Therapy V111, 772-776. Philadelphia: WB Saumders.
{199l) A biomechanical study of rotational instability in unaltered and
Murtaugh, R.J. and Ross, J.N. [1988) Cardiac arrhythmias: pathogenesis
surgically altered canine thoracolumbar vertebral motion units. Progress
and treatment in the trauma patient. Compendium on Comntinuing
it Veterinary Neurology 2,6-14.
Education for the Practicing Veterinarian 10, 332-339.
Shores, A., Nichols, G., Rochat, M., Fox, S.M., Burt, G.J., Fox, WR.
Neer, TM. [1992] Areview of disorders of the gallbladder and extrahepatic
[1989) Combined Kirschner-Ehmer device and dorsal spinal plate fixa-
biliary tract in the dog and cat. Jourmal of Veterinary Internal Medicine
tion technique for caudal lumbar vertebral fractures in dogs. Jourtal of
6, 186-192.
the Americar Veterinary Medical Association 195,335-339.
Novell, A. [1999] Antimicrobial prophylaxis in surgery: the role of phar-
Skeen, TM., OIby, N.J., Munana, K.M., Sharp, N.J.H. [2003) Spinal
macokinetics. Jourmal of Chemotherapy 1l, S65-572.
arachnoid cysts in 17 dogs. Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital
Olby, N.J., Harris, T, Munana, K.R., Skeen, TM., Sharp, N.J.H. [2003)
Associationt 39, 271-282.
Long-tertm functional outcome of dogs with severe injuries of the thora-
Smeak, D.D., Olmstead, M.L. [1985) Fracture/luxations of the sacro-
columbar spinal cord; 87 cases. Jourmal of the Americar Veterinary
Coccygeal area in the cat. A retrospetive study of Sl cases. Veterinary
Medical Associationt 222, 762-769.
Surgery 14, 319-324.
Papadopoulos, S.M., Selden, N.R., Quint, DJ., Patel, N., Gillespie, B.,
Smith, G.K., Walter, M.C. [198S) Fractures and luxations of the spine.
Grube, S. [2002) Immediate spinal cord decompression for cervical spinal
In: C.D. Newton and D. Numamaker [eds), Textbook of Small Amimal
cord injury: feasibility and outcome. Jourzal of Trauma 52, 323-332.
Orthopedics, 307-322. Philadelphia: JB Lipincott.
Pare, B, Gendreau, C.L., Robbins, MA. [200l) Open reduction of sacral
Smith, G.K., Walter, M.C. [1988) Spinal decompressive procedures and
 fractures using transarticular implants at the articular facets of L7-Sl: 8
 dorsal compartment injuries: comparative biomechanical study in canine
Consecutive canine patients [1995-1999). Veterinary Surgery 30,476-481.
cadavers.American Jourmal ofVeterinary Research 49,266-273
Patterson, R.H., Smith, G.K. [1992) Backsplinting for treatrment of thor-
Snyder, PS., Cooke, K.L., Murphy, S.T, Shaw, N.G., Lewis, D.D., Lanz, O.1.
acic and lumbar fracture/luxation in the dog: principles of application
   sh  s  (io
and case series. Veterinary and Comparative Orthopaedics and
related trauma.Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital Association 37,
Traumatology 5, 179-187.
55-62.
Perrouin-Verbe, B., Lenne-Aurier, K., Robert, R., Auffray-Calvier, E.,
Stone, E.A., Betts, C.W., Chambers, J.N. [1979) Cervical fractures in the
Richard, I., Mauduyt de la Greve, I., Mathe, J.F. [1998) Post-traumatic
dog: a literature and case review. Jourmal of the American Arimal
syringomyelia and post-traumatic spinal canal stenosis: a direct relation-
Hospital Association 14, 463-471.
ship: review of 75 patients with a spinal cord injury. Spimal Cord 36,
Swaim, S.F. [197l) Vertebral body plating for spinal immobilization.
137-143.
Jourmal ofthe American Veterinary Medical Association 158, 1683-1695.
Platt, S.R., Radaell, S.T, MeDonnell, J.J. [2001) The prognostic value of
Swaim, S.F. [1975) Evaluation of four techniques of cervical spinal fixation
the modified Glasgow Coma Scale in head trauma in dogs. Jourmal of
in dogs. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 166,
Veterinary Intermal Medicine 15, S81-584.
'9801-0801
Trauma
305
Tator, C.H., Fehlings, M.G., Thorpe, K., Taylor, W. [1999) Current use and
Waters, D.J., Wallace, L.J., Roy, R.G. [1994) Myelopathy in a dog second-
timing of spinal surgery for managerment of acute spinal cord injury in
ary to scar tissue [cicatrix) formation: a complication of vertebral articu-
North America: results of a retrospective multicenter study. Jourmal of
Iar facet fracture. Progress it Veterinary Netrology 5, I05-108.
Neurosurgery 91 [I Suppl), 12-18.
Weisman, D.L., Olmstead, M.L., Kowalski, J.J. [2000) In titro evaluation
Taylor, R.A. [198l) Treatment of fractures of the sacrum and sacro-
of antibiotic elution from polymethylmethacrylate [PMMA) and
coccygeal region. Veterinary Surgery 10, I19-124.
mechanical assessment of antibiotic-PMMA composites. Veterinary
Tidwell, A.S., Mahony, O.M., Moore, R.P, Fitzmaurice, S.N. [1994)
Surgery 29, 245-251.
Computed tomography of an acute hemorrhagic cerebral infarct in a
Weisse, C., Aronson, L.R., Drobatz, K. [2002) Traumatic rupture of the
dog. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound35,290-296.
ureter: I0 cases.Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital Associationt
Rurmer, W.D. [1987] Fractures and fracture-luxations ofthe lumbar spine:
38, 188192.
retrospective study in the dog Jourmal of the American Animal Hospital
Wheeler, J.L., Cross, A.R., Rapoff, A.J. [2002) A comparison of the accu-
Association 23, 459-464.
racy and safety of vertebral body pin placement using a fluoroscopically
Ullman, S.L., Boudrieau, R.J. [1993) Intemal skeletal fixation using a
ua pns oa 4 ue yoeodde leiaans uado ue snsia papg
 Kirschner apparatus for stabilization of fracture/luxations of the lumbo-
Surgery 31, 468-474.
sacral joint in six dogs. A modification of the transilial pin technique.
Willer, R.L., Egger, E.L., Histand, M.B. [1991) Comparison of stainless
Veterinary Surgery 22, I1-17.
steel versus acrylic for the conmecting bar of extermal skeletal fixators.
Vaccaro, A.R., Mardigan, L. [2002) Spinal applications of bioabsorbable
Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital Association 27, 541-548.
implants. Orthopedics 25 [10 Supp), sll15-1120.
Wong, W.T, Emms, S.G. [1992) Use of pins and methylmethacrylate in
Vaccaro, A.R., Venger, B.H., Kelleher, PM., Singh, K., Carrino, JA.
stabilisation of spinal fractures and luxations. Jourmal of Small Amimal
Albert, T., Hilibrand, A. [2002) Use of a bioabsorbable anterior cervical
Practice 33, 415-422.
plate in the treatment of cervical degenerative and traumatic disk dis-
Yarrow, T.G., Jeffery, N.D. [2000) Dura mater laceration associated with
ruption. Orthopedics 25 [10 Suppl], sl191-1199,; discussion sl199.
acute paraplegia in three dogs. Veterinary Record 146, 138-139.
Viguier, E., Petit-Etienne, G., Magnier, J., Lavaste, F. [2002) ln titro bio-
Yeh, L.S., Hou, S.M. [1994) Repair of a mandibular defect with a free vas-
mechanical evaluation of unstable TI3-Ll stabilization procedures in
cularized coccygeal vertebra transfer in a dog. Veterinary Surgery 23,
dogs. Veterinary Surgery 31, 288.
281-285.
Waldron, D.R., Shires, PK., McCain, W., Hedlund, C., Blass, C.E. [1991)
Yerby, S.A., Toh, E., McLain, R.F [1998) Revision of failed pedicle screws
The rotational stabilizing effect of spinal fixation techniques in an unsta-
using hydroxyapatite cement. A biomechanical analysis. Spine 23,
ble vertebral model. Progress in Veterinary Neurology 2, I05-I10.
1657-1661.
Walker, TM., Pierce, W.A., Welch, R.D. [2002) External fixation of the
Zindrick, M.R., Wiltse, L.L., Widell, E.H., Thomas, J.C., Holland, W.R.,
lumbar spine in a canine model. Veterinary Surgery 31, I8l-188.
Field, B.T., Spencer, C.W. [1986] A biomechanical study of intrapedum-
Walter, M.C., Smith, G.K., Newton, C.D. [1986] Canine lumbar spinal
cular screw fixation in the lurmbosacral spine. Clirtical Orthopaedics and
internal fixation techniques. A comparative biomechanical study.
Related Research 203, 99-112.
Veterinary Surgery 15, 191-198.
PROCEDURES
Non-surgical (13.37-13.47)
 Cage confinement can give excellent results and is the only non-surgical option for most cats (Carberry et al., 1989;
Selcer et af., 1991). A splint is preferred for dogs if certain criteria are satisfied including intact deep pain sensation,
a0 ellixe pue uioib aul jo uiys aul yl buoe alaissod se iuids al lapun eae aul jo Lonw se peyl leuassa s!1
examined daily. Urine soiled straps must be replaced. Areas at risk from urine scalding or fecal soiling benefit from
application of Desitin ointment (Pfizer Inc., New York). If there is any doubt, the straps or splint must be loosened 
Useful indicators of potential problems are the animal's mental attitude, its appetite, and the presence of pain
or fever (13.36A). Most animals are surprisingly comfortable in a splint unless problems such as decubital ulcers
develop. The splint should be maintained for a minimum of 4 weeks (3 weeks for immature animals), and is
preferably then followed by a further 2-4 weeks of strict cage confinement.
306
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
13.37 Diagram to ilustrate the construction of an
extermal splint that is to be applied to a dog with
a spinal injury. The splint is made from sheet
aluminum, 0.54 mm in thickness, double or
triple layered if necessary for added rigidity. In
animals less than 10 kg, materials such as
Orthoplast (Johnson and Johnson, New
Brunswick, NJ) may be substituted. To make
the splint, measure and cut the splint to the
dimensions A-B, 2A-C and 2B-D (Patterson 
13.37
and Smith, 1992).
13.38 The splint extends from between the
scapulae to the tail base, measured directly
along the spine. Most animals have marked
kyphosis following spinal injury, which must be 
considered during measurement.
13.38
13.39 The material is bent along its longitudinal axis
to form a ridge; the splint is flattened slightly
over the pelvic area. At the sides, the splint
should extend laterally to the mid-scapula and 
the hip joint (13.46). The splint should be well
padded with cotton, especially at the edges,
and covered with Elastoplast (Johnson and 
Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ).
13.39
13.40 Some animals tolerate application of the splint 
while fully conscious, but most require
sedation and a few need general anesthesia 
(Patterson and Smith, 1992). With the animal
on its side, the splint is slid under the dog with
the ridge aligned along the animal's dorsal
midline.
13.40
Trauma
307
13.41 The animal and splint are then rotated
simultaneously until the animal is lying on its back in 
the splint (Patterson and Smith, 1992). The dog
usually relaxes and the fracture may reduce to
heavily with cotton wool prior to attaching the splint
using Elastoplast (Johnson and Johnson, New 
13.41
 Brunswick, NJ). This has the advantage of being 
light, porous and adhesive. Velcro straps are much 
easier to re-adjust but more likely to cause abrasions. Velcro is preferred when the splint needs to be
removed frequently.
13.42 To secure the dog to the splint, the caudal half
of the animal is first extended over the end of
a table.
13.43 Elastoplast (Johnson and Johnson, New
 Brunswick, NJ) is applied in a cruciate pattern 
over the pelvis, avoiding the anus and vulva. In
male animals it is important that any strap
crossing the base of the penis is not too tight,
or pressure necrosis of the urethra is possible
(Patterson and Smith, 1992).
13.43
13.44 In male dogs, a cod-piece roughly the shape
of a half flowerpot can be made from
aluminum, Orthoplast (Johnson and Johnson,
New Brunswick, NJ) or an empty saline bag to
protect the base of the penis and to try to
funnel urine away from the abdomen and
inguinal straps (Bagley et al., 2000).
13.44
308
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
13.45 h the pectoral region, the straps are applied as a figure of eight,
extending in front of the shoulder and under the neck like a
harmess. The straps around the chest must be snug but must
not impede ventilation. Radiographs can be taken through the
splint to check fracture alignment.
13.45
13.46 The main advantages of an extermal splint are
that it is inexpensive and strong (Patterson and 
Smith, 1992). It also facilitates lifting the
animal, turning it from side to side, moving it to
clean the kennel, or taking it out to void.
Handles made from aluminum rods can also
be incorporated into the splint or may be
taped on afterwards (Bagley, 2000).
13.46
pressure sore formation along the edges and 
undermeath the splint (13.36A). In addition, the
straps can cause skin excoriation in the axilla
or inguinal region. They may also hinder
manual expression of the bladder, and
 prevention of urine scald can be challenging.
13.47
Trauma3
608
Metal and bone cement (13.48-13.60)
This is the internal fixation technique of choice. Threaded pins or screws should be used (Sandman et af., 2001); the
The cement bar must also be strong enough (Rouse and Miller, 1975; Wwiller et af., 1991) (13.59). Variables in using
implants include:
*The pattern in which implants are placed (13.49, 13.54).
+The angle or trajectory at which they penetrate the vertebrae (13.52).
·Their entry points (13.55).
Intravenous antibiotic effective against staphylococci (such as a cephalosporin) is given and repeated every
1-2h during surgery (Marcellin Little et al., 1996; Novelli, 1999; Kriaras et al., 2000).
 Fracture reduction can be very difficult in some injuries without some type of mechanical assistance (Boudrieau,
1997; Schulz et af., 1997; Bagley et af., 2000) (13.64). A laminectomy spreader, Senn retractor, or a curved
'wias pue ssela) lel aul uo ind aa ueo yoioel lenueu io sanioey /l jo uoonpan iol pasn aa ueo jeisowa
1984; Beaver et al., 1996; Harrington and Bagley, 1998; Bagley et af., 2000). Cervical injuries can be reduced
and Seim, 1984; Blass et af., 1988) (11.38). A Scoville-Haverfield or similar retractor can also be placed in adjacent
disc spaces or between a disc space and the base of the skull for C2 fractures (Boudrieau, 1997).
Initial stabilization is provided by bone-holding forceps (13.48, 13.60) while K-wires are placed across the artic-
ular facets to provide additional stability and maintain alignment (Blass and Seim, 1984; Beaver et af., 1996; Berry
aly lsal e aye oi pasn ag ose leo ll 'la llp aul lol aseloind jo tuiod e ayeu ol Aielui pasn si ais y lleus y
Aisea Leo alou isat lis sill lood s! Aenb auog jl 'lueldwi ahl jo yied yasouo aul laao Aenb auog aienjea ol
aonpai oi bulas lamod mol e buisn paoeid aa pinous suld 'aloy lolid euy aul bupipnlaid inoulm paloaipai ag
aouy e laul aloy lolid aul woy sasue abeoway ysia Hl 'peno lup e ylm bulp buunp paioaoid aa pinois
or bone wax should be placed over the hole, which should be tapped and screwed as soon as possible (1.19).
A flatter implant trajectory increases implant holding strength due to the greater bone contact (Garcia et af.,
tioned well away from the spinal cord. Landmarks for lumbar vertebrae are the ventral portion of the base of the
accessory process and the junction of the transverse process with the vertebral body (Rouse and Miller, 1975; Blass
be between these landmarks and are discussed in 13.55. A skeleton should always be available for reference.
The implant entry point should be no higher than the base of the accessory process. If a flat trajectory is to be used
then the entry point should ideally be no higher than the floor of the vertebral canal otherwise the vertebral canal may
be entered inadvertently (Wwalker et af., 2002). There is some variation based on the exact vertebra (1.21-1.23, 1.25,
more precise centrally. A CT scan is invaluable for planning the entry point as well as the trajectory.
The bone cement is applied in a cylindrical pattern on each side of the spine. Wound closure is then much eas-
jer than when cement is applied in a doughnut pattern. Implants must be encased fully by the cement (13.57).
The wound is irrigated with saline to dissipate heat generated by the curing of the cement. The spinal cord and
     aa  n  o  s
Ml) has good insulating properties and should be used to protect exposed spinal cord (Roosen et af., 1978;
that this is encased fully by the cement (Bagley et af., 2000) (13.25, 13.28, 13.48). Antibiotic should not be added
to the methylmethacrylate unless done in a very carefully controlled fashion as it tends to reduce strength (Ethell
et af., 2000; Weisman et af., 20oo). It is preferable to give a second dose of intravenous antibiotic just prior to
bone cement application.
310
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
13.48 A: Counter pressure is
applied by bone clamps on
the spinous processes 
during the initial approach,
K-wire fixation of facets
(shown here) and while the
cement hardens (Blass and 
Seim, 1984) (13.24). Note
13.48
the torn supraspinous
A
B
ligament (arrow). B: All K-wires
must be incorporated fully into the cement to prevent migration (13.63). If this is not possible then
small screws should be used. In this Pomeranian, three screws and three positive profile pins were
used for fixation; several hairline fractures dictated the implant pattern. The dog (4.38) was almost normal
6 months later.
13.49 Diagramms to
illustrate one
possible implant 
pattern. The
 preferred pattern is 
to drive implants
13.49
 perpendicular to
P
the vertebral body
(13.54A), which allows placement of three implants in each vertebra
instead of the two shown here (Garcia et al., 1994). A: Dorsoventral
view. B: Transverse view.
B
13.50 Steinmann pins must be cut and notched and
the ends then bent to provide purchase for
the bone cement. Positive profile pins are
preferred due to the tendency for smooth pins
to migrate (Wong and Emms, 1992) (13.29).
They also have a roughened surface for better
cement attachment and do not need to be
notched (5.32).
13.50
Trauma 
311
13.51 A: Lateral, and B: ventrodorsal radiograph
of pins and bone cement fixation. This dog
developed a late postoperative infection 
(13.34). Alignment is suboptimal. In theory this
dog is at risk for late onset syringomyelia 
(Perrouin-Verbe, et al., 1998).
13.51
A
B
13.52 Range of angles that
can be used for
vertebral implants 
(same dog as in 
13.10). A 30° angle
 from horizontal has
been recommended
as standard (Walker
13.52
et al., 2002;
Wheeler et al., 2002).
A
A: Transverse CT scan
angles have to be more vertical in thoracic vertebrae because of the ribs. Landmarks for thoracic vertebrae
are the ventral portion of the base of the accessory process and the tubercle of the rib. B: Transverse CT
scan of L2 vertebra to show the range of possible implant trajectories (1.21-1.23).
312
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
13.53 A: This 3D reconstruction
is from the dog shown in
13.31-13.33. The screws
are visible in blue and were
 placed using the more 
vertical angle shown in
13.49B than the flat angle
shown in 13.54B. B:
 Corresponding ventrodorsal 
13.53
radiograph to show screw
A
position.
13.54
13.54 Diagrams to show the preferred implant
pattern. A: Dorsoventral view. The advantage of
this pattern is that it makes it easier to place three 
implants in each vertebral body (Garcia et a.,
1994). B: Transverse view to show a flat trajectory
for screws. Implants can also be put in using the
more vertical angle shown in 13.49 and 13.53 but
a flatter trajectory provides slightly more bone
 purchase as well as more room for cement (13.52).
B
Trauma 
313
13.55 llustration of potential
entry points in the 
vertebral bodies. A, B:
T12 vertebra. C, D: L2
vertebra. Implants should
enter bone between the
two lines; the higher the
entry point, the more
vertical the trajectory and 
vice versa. If further
 clarification of anatomy is 
13.55
needed, the floor of the 
vertebral canal can be
A
B
palpated with care at the
intervertebral foramen
using a fine, curved
dental instrument.
D
13.56 The entry points and
implant trajectory will
vary with the anatomical
location of the fixation.
A: Entry points and 
potential implant 
trajectories are shown on
a CT scan of C6 vertebra
(11.41-11.43). The disc
spaces and intervertebral
foramina should be
13.56
avoided (Rouse, 1979;
B
Wong and Emms, 1992).
 B: Entry points and potential implant trajectories are shown on a CT scan of L6 vertebra. The range of
possible angles is less here than can be used at L2 and is even less for L7 vertebra (1.25). Variations 
314
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders 
13.57 Fractures or luxations involving
L7 vertebra may
warrant different implant
patterns. Radiographs of this
13.57
dog are shown in 13.27 and
13.65. A: Implants can be
A
B
placed in L7 down the pedicle
and into the base of an articular facet as shown here. Note that there is insufficient cement around the
screws; the technique should also not have been used with a compromised ventral buttress. B: Screw
placement in the sacrum (two most lateral screws on each side) is also discussed on page 204.
Implants can also be placed into the wings of the ilium, but should be placed vertically (13.65) rather
than horizontally (13.21, 14.12) for better bone purchase.
13.58 Bone cement is best applied when it no longer
sticks to the surgeon's gloves. It can be used
when more liquid, but then bone wax wrappers
should be used as a mold. Wrappers are first
coated with bone wax to retard cement
adhesion and they must be removed before it
hardens.
13.58
13.59 Vertebral bodies A: before, and B: after
bone cement application (13.33, 13.53,
13.57, 13.60). The cement bar must be of
sufficient thickness; as a rough guide the 
bar should be between 1.25 and 2.5 cm in
diameter depending on the weight of the
animal. This usually requires 40 g of cement
for large dogs and 20 g for smaller animals 
13.59
(Rouse and Miller, 1975; Willer et af., 1991).
A
ldeally vacuum mixing should be used to 
 prevent bubble formation and to lessen 
exposure of personnel (Anderson, 1988)
(13.33). Steinmann pins of various sizes
can be incorporated into the cement to
reinforce it (13.25). This is useful for large
dogs or at sites subject to excessive
forces (11.17C).
Trauma
315
13.60 Intraoperative view A: after implant placement,
and B: after bone cement application. Bone
wax has been used to fll the screw heads to
facilitate implant removal if necessary. Kirschner
wires should ideally be placed through the
articular facets once the fracture has been
apposed to maintain alignment (13.28, 13.48).
Bone holding forceps maintain reduction as
cement hardens (13.24, 13.25, 13.48).
13.60
B
Modified segmental fixation (13.61-13.63)
The original spinal stapling technique should only be used for cats or for dogs weighing less than 7 kg (Matthieson,
(13.28B). Both technigues should ideally be used only when the ventral buttress is intact.
13.61  Diagram to show application of modified
 segmental fixation. The orthopedic wire 
penetrates the base of the articular facet and is
twisted around the Steinmann pins. Wires can
also be placed through the base of each spinous
process.
13.61
316
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
13.62 Close-up of an articular facet joint to show the
position of the wire in modified segmental 
fixation. Additional pins are used depending on
the estimated stability of the fracture and on the
weight of the dog (McAnulty et a., 1986).
13.62
13.63 Spinal stapling as shown in this 1.6 kg dog
(13.16) and modified segmental fixation provide
useful alternatives for fixation in the lumbosacral 
region (McAnulty et a., 1986). A: The bone
 fragment visible at L6/7 could not be reached
after a dorsal laminectomy. B: The dog was
normal and there was good fracture healing
6 weeks later although one K-wire had
migrated. The dog was normal 6 months after
13.63
surgery.
A
B
External fixation (13.64-13.66)
 Although dependent on the exact design of the fixator and on the type of implants used, this can be an extremely
reliable method for use in even very large dogs (walker et af., 2002) (13.65, 14.13). It is als0 a useful rescue pr0-
give more consistent insertion angles and better bone purchase; a closed technique makes fracture stabilization
during implant insertion of paramount importance (wheeler et ar., 2002).
Trauma
317
13.64 Reduction of an overridden L7 fracture
 using a laminectomy spreader (same dog 
as in 13.27) (Bagley et af., 2000). The
positions of the laminectomy spreader jaws
are marked by white arrowheads.
= articular facet of L7. A: Before
reduction. A short dorsal laminectomy has
been made in the center of the caudal
lamina of L7; the laminectomy spreader has 
been anchored cranially at this point and
caudally under the roof of S1. B: Fracture 
reduced. Torn articular facet joint capsule is 
now visible (black arrow).
13.64
318
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
13.65 After failure of the implant
shown in 13.27, an
external apparatus was
applied as shown. A:
Lateral view. B:
 Dorsoventral view.
Implants in each ilial wing
13.65
are angled from dorsal to
ventral to obtain better
A
B
purchase into sot bone. Skin and lumbodorsal fascia must be pulled towards the midline prior to pin
penetration or there will be excessive tension at wound closure (Shores et af., 1989; Lanz et af., 2000).
13.66External fixator (SK External Fixation System,
Imex Veterinary Inc., Longview, Tx) in place
(14.13). Postoperative management can be 
labor intensive. There is also a risk of
traumatic removal; this dog panicked and 
removed the entire device as it tried to enter its
kennel during a thunderstorm 5 weeks after
fixation. Incredibly, the dog's neurological
status, which was almost normal, did not
deteriorate (Lanz et al., 2000; Walker et a.,
2002).
13.66
Miscellaneous conditions
Chapter 
14
Degenerative  319
Psoas muscle injury   331
radiculomyelopathy, CDRM)  319
Vascular
　332
Synovial cyst  320
Fibrocartilaginous embolism (ischemic
Facet joint pain  320
myelopathy) 332
Sacroiiac joint pain   320
 Ascending myelomalacia  32
Leukodystrophies  320
 Ischemic neuromyopathy (aortic embolism, iliac 
Arachnoid cyst  321
thrombosis)  332
Spondylosis deformans   321
 Spinal cord hemorrhage, hematoma  3
333
 Intermittent claudication
334
Anomalous 321
Congenital vertebral anomalies 
321
Key issues for future investigation  334
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis  322
Spina bifida   322
References
334
Tethered spinal cord   322
Spinal dysraphism   322
Further reading  337
 Syringomyelia and hydromyelia.
322
Cartilaginous exostoses  323
This chapter covers various other important conditions of
Dermoid sinus  323
the spine that are likely to be encountered but are not
Epidermoid cyst  323
covered specifically elsewhere in this book. Surgical treat-
Arachnoid cyst  323
ment is not indicated in many of these conditions, thus
they must be diagnosed correctly to avoid unnecessary
Metabolic
326
operations (Braund and Sharp, 2003). Key references
Lysosomal storage diseases  326
are given, but the list is not intended to be encyclopedic.
Osteoporosis  326
See Dewey et al. (2003), Braund (Further reading) and
LeCouteur et al. (2000), which are comprehensive and
Nutritional
326
have excellent bibliographies. The diseases are listed
Hypervitaminosis A
326
according to the DAMNIT scheme (Table 3.1).
ldiopathic
326
Tumoral calcinosis 
326
DEGENERATIVE
 Disseminated idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
 Degenerative myelopathy (chronic
(DISH)  326
degenerative radiculomyelopathy, CDRM)
This is a degenerative condition of the spinal cord of older
Infectious/inflammatory
326
Aened pue spaa aret u uaas Aso si i isao
Discospondylitis  326
German shepherd dogs. A similar disorder has been
Epidural empyema  328
described in a cat (Mesfin et al., 1980). There are prob-
Inflammatory CNS diseases 
329
ably several different types of canine degenerative
Epidural steatitis  331
myelopathy that are grouped together and cannot be dif-
ferentiated at present. Phenotypes in the various breeds
Trauma  331
of dog may vary somewhat from that of the classic condi-
tion found in the German shepherd dog (Matthews et al.,
320
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
1985; Salinas and Martinez, 1993). Onset of signs in
animals (Cook et al., 2002). Diagnosis is not simple
German shepherd dogs is from 5 years of age. Progressive
 and depends largely on nerve blocks  in humans
pelvic limb ataxia, loss of proprioception, and paraparesis
s (Manchikanti, 1999). Signal intensity changes in lumbar
occur. The neurological examination usually indicates a
e si re o so e aq    sad
T3-L3 lesion, but some dogs lose their patellar reflex
cable to animals (Morrison et al., 2000).
because of dorsal nerve root involvement. Urinary and
fecal function is normal. Spinal pain is not seen. Signs in
Sacroiliac joint pain
affected dogs progress over several months, and eventul-
 d yq m Jn asin u  si S
ally the thoracic limbs will be involved (Averill, 1973;
hmans that can mimic disc pain and that might have a
Griffiths and Duncan, 1975).
counterpart in animals (Pang et al., 1998; Swezey, 1998;
The diagnosis is confirmed by the absence of struc-
Hodge and Bessette, 1999). CT evidence of osteoarthri-
 tural spinal cord disease on myelography or MRI. Even if
 tis in the joint is suggestive but MRI will probably prove
other lesions are found, for example a disc extrusion, the
 to be more useful as an indicator of physiological signifi-
 possibility of degenerative myelopathy also being pres-
cance (Morrison et al., 2000).
ent should be considered (10.53). Analysis of lumbar
CSF often reveals a moderate elevation in protein. The
Leukodystrophies
n  ou  a  o s a
Degenerative changes are found at necropsy throughout
Several breed-specific disorders are described in Afghan
the spinal cord and in nerve roots, mainly affecting the
hounds, Dalmatians, Miniature poodles and Dutch
 thoracolumbar region. There is a loss of both myelin and
 kooiker dogs. The most common examples are seen in
axons, with cellular infiltration in the most severely
Rottweilers.
affected regions {Johnston et al., 2000).
ROTTWEILERLEUKOENCEPHALOMALACIA
Synovial cyst
Leukoencephalomalacia is a degenerative CNS disease,
These cysts arise from the synovial joints between the
reported in Rottweilers in the USA, the Netherlands and
articular facets. Often the affected joint(s) also show(s)
Australia. There is malacia throughout the spinal cord,
degenerative changes on survey radiographs. The cysts
 particularly in the cervical region, due to demyelination
tend to occur mainly in the cervical area of giant-breed
 and cavitation. The etiology is unclear.
dogs but can be found in the thoracolumbar area
Affected dogs show clinical signs from l to 4 years of
   o    "  
-ond 'aad pue eixne qu lad si anau 'se 
German shepherd dog presenting with lumbosacral pain 
 gressing through paraparesis to tetraparesis over a period
(Webb et al., 200l). Synovial cysts in humans are thought 
tof months. Proprioceptive deficits are marked. Limb
to be an under-diagnosed problem in the elderly and this 
 reflexes are intact or hyperactive.
problem will probably be recognized more frequently in
 Differentiation from neuroaxonal dystrophy and other
dogs with the increased use of cross-sectional imaging and
 CNS conditions is important. All routine diagnostic tests
especially MRI (Charest and Kenny, 2000). CT myelogra-
are normal in leukoencephalomalacia. The major differ-
phy and MRI reveal discrete, round, cystic structures
 ential features are the presence of proprioceptive deficits
(Levitski et al., 1999a,b; Lipsitz et al., 200l) (11.8).
Imaging by myelography usually shows dorsolateral com-
 movements together with decreased menace responses in
pression of the spinal cord due to soft tissue rather than
 neuroaxonal dystrophy (see below).
bone. Cysts in the caudal neck may be located more
There is no treatment and the prognosis is poor;
laterally or even ventrolaterally within the vertebral canal
 most dogs with leukoencephalomalacia are euthanized
[4.25, 1l.8). Dorsal laminectomy and removal of the cyst
within 1 year of presentation (Chrisman, 1992).
Prognosis has been good over a mean follow-up of 17
ROTTWEILERNEUROAXONALDYSTROPHY
months although it is not known how young dogs do over
 Neuroaxonal dystrophy is a degenerative CNS disease
a longer period of time (Dickinson et al., 200l). In
  e s i sir  a 
  os a  s s s
Occasionally in cats. Axonal dystrophy with spheroids is
joint degenerative disease and so there may be overlap
seen in parts of the CNS, including the dorsal horn gray
with facet joint pain (see below) (Howington et al., 1999).
matter of the spinal cord, and in the gracile, cuneate and
dorsal spinocerebellar tract nuclei. Cerebellar atrophy
Facet joint pain
 may also be seen. The etiology is unknown and there
Facet joint pain is a common cause of both neck and low
 may be overlap in some dogs between this condition and
back pain in humans and is a potential source of pain in  leukoencephalomalacia.
Miscellaneous conditions 
321
Affected dogs show clinical signs from puppyhood,
Spondylosis deformans
but these may not be noticed until the dog is adult.
 Spondylosis deformans is a comrmon radiographic finding
There is pelvic limb ataxia and hypermetria of the thor-
 in older dogs, but it is rarely associated with clinical signs
acic limbs. Proprioception is normal. Limb reflexes are
(Morgan et al., 1989). Generally the osteophytes develop
intact or even hyperactive. Head incoordination, tremor,
ventrally and laterally on the vertebral body, and they
positional nystagmus, and loss of menace response [due 
 may grow to the point that they bridge the intervertebral
to cerebellar involverment) develop later, often after sev-
space {Larsen and Selby, 1981) (14.1). Osteophytes
eral years. Weakness is not seen.
around the articular facet joints may be of more signifi-
Differentiation from other CNS conditions is import-
cance (see 'Facet joint pain', above). The thoracolumbar
ant (see above). Routine diagnostic tests are normal
junction and lumbosacral joint are particularly affected.
There is no treatment and the long-term prognosis is
Where these changes are seen at the lumbosacral joint
poor, although affected dogs may survive as active pets 
 they may be related to clinical signs of lumbosacral dis-
for several years (Chrisman, 1992).
ease. However, this diagnosis should not be reached on
the basis of survey radiographs alone, as such changes
Arachnoid cyst
are seen in many normal dogs (see page 188). It is
 In an arachnoid cyst there is a focal accumulation of
important to differentiate spondylosis deformans from
CSF in the subarachnoid space, which compresses the
the changes seen in discospondylitis (14.1l-14.13)
spinal cord (Dyce et al., 1991; Skeen et al., 2003). These
can be acquired secondary to some type of injury (13.32)
although they are usually congenital lesions (see below).
ANOMALOUS
Congenital vertebral anomalies
Vertebral malformations are common findings in dogs
and are also seen occasionally in cats. Some do cause
compressive myelopathy or are associated with anom-
alies of the spinal cord (Bailey, 1975; Bailey and Morgan,
1992). Many cases of atlantoaxial subluxation also have
an underlying congenital vertebral malformation (see
Chapter 9). Anomalies such as hemivertebrae, butterfly
vertebrae and block vertebrae are relatively common
14.1 Spondylosis deformans was an incidental finding in this
but they rarely cause clinical signs. Hemivertebrae are
 7-year-old Boxer dog.
seen usually in the small, brachycephalic breeds. They
14.2 Dog with severe ataxia and paraparesis due to a hemivertebra at T7. Threaced pins and bone cement were used to stabilize
the site prior to performing a dorsal laminectomy. Neurological function was unchanged postoperatively and the dog was walking 
well within a few days.
322
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
are wedge-shaped deformities that may cause spinal
 Tethered spinal cord
deviation in the lateral or dorsoventral plane depending
 This condition is usually associated either with spina
on the orientation of the wedge (l4.2). When the devi-
- bifida and meningo(myelo)cele or with an intradural
 ation is marked they tend to cause a chronic, progressive
lpoma (Fingeroth et al., 1989; Plummer et al., 1993;
myelopathy. Skeletal abnormality may be apparent on
Huttmann et al., 200l; Shamir et al., 200l). It can also
physical examination but the exact site should be con-
 be caused by previous surgery that leaves a residual
firmed by neuroimaging (Dewey et al., 2003). Animals
 defect in the dura mater with subsequent spinal cord
that have severe spinal cord compression may show a
herniation (Henry et al., 1997).
marked deterioration of neurological deficits after inva-
sive tests such as myelography, so MRI is preferred.
Spinal dysraphism
Deterioration is also common when animals with these
 Malformations of the spinal cord have been described in
lesions are subject to decompressive laminectomy (page
several breeds of dogs, particularly Weimaraners (Broek
126). Stabilization of the vertebral column should be the
et al., 1991). Various lesions of the central canal, gray
 primary aim of surgery and decompression should not be
  s   s   
performed without concomitant fixation (Aikawa, 200l).
described and a syringohydromyelia may also be present.
Nevertheless, the prognosis is guarded in dogs with .
 A bunny-hopping pelvic limb gait, abnormalities of the
severe neurological deficits. Vertebral anomalies would
 hair coat, a depression of the sternum, and head tilt may
be an ideal condition in which to use electrophysiological
 be seen. Neurological deficits localize to the T3-L3 spinal
monitoring during spinal cord surgery (see Chapter 4,
 cord and signs are often evident in affected puppies. The
page 60).
signs are usually non-progressive. Abnormalities may be
detected using MRI (Dewey et al., 2003).
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
Cats and dogs with congenital tail defects often have ver-
Syringomyelia and hydromyelia
tebral abnormalities of the sacrum and caudal vertebrae.
 Syringomyelia and hydromyelia are fluid-flld cavitations
Manx cats, Pugs and Bulldogs are affected most often
 of the spinal cord and central canal respectively.
and the condition is inherited in the Manx. The vertebral
 Syringomyelia can be a congenital or an acquired (1l.12)
abnormalities may t
themselves cause neurological
 spinal cord lesion (Cauzinille and Kornegay, 1992;
deficits that affect the pelvic limbs, lower urinary tract
Perrouin-Verbe et al., 1998), whereas hydromyelia is
 and anus or there may be malformations of the spinal
 more often associated with congenital malformations.
cord such as spina bifida. Diagnosis is suspected from the
 Hydromyelia can also be a complication of myelography
clinical signs. Radiography will demonstrate vertebral
(Kirberger and Wrigley, 1993), and has been described in 
 abnormalities and myelography or MRI may reveal spinal 
 a cat secondary to feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
cord malformations. Treatment is not possible and the
(Tamke et al., 1988). Clinical differentiation is often
prognosis is poor.
impossible and these two conditions may occur together.
In humans these conditions probably result from over-
Spina bifida
crowding within the caudal fossa of the skull, such as
This is a developmental defect resulting from failure of
 Occurs in Chiari type-l malformations. The overcrowding
the embryonic vertebral arch to fuse normally. There
is thought to obstruct CSF flow and lead to the syringo-
may be protrusion of the meninges or spinal cord into
hydromyelia (Nishikawa et al., 1997). Early surgical inter-
a meningocele, a myelocele or a meningomyelocele; this
 vention to decompress the caudal fossa and restore the
is termed spina bifida aperta. Alternatively, there may
 fow of CSF in susceptible individuals might prevent the
be no protrusion of nervous tissue, which is termed
development of syringomyelia (Fischbein et al., 1999).
spina bifida occulta (Wilson et al., 1979; Wilson, 1982).
The onset of clinical signs is usually in adult dogs.
There is a high incidence of these conditions in English
Diagnosis is aided considerably by MRI (Kirberger et al.,
bulldogs and Manx cats.
1997; Levitski et al., 1999b; Taga et al., 2000). Associated
Spina bifida usually involves the caudal lumbar spine.
changes such as spinal hyperesthesia, torticollis or scolio-
Clinical signs indicative of L4-S3 spinal cord dysfunction
sis are common (Child et al., 1986; Bagley et al., 1997;
occur. Radiography may reveal defects in the dorsal
Dewey et al., 2003). Syringohydromyelia has been
vertebral arch, such as paired spinous processes, and
 reported in Cavalier King Charles spaniels, which usually
myelography or MRI may demonstrate a meningocele.
 present with a characteristic scratching at the shoulder
 Treatment is not possible but untethering may help (see 
 region (14.3A). Other signs include apparent neck, tho-
below). When there is an opening in the skin, closure
  q    a o q 
should be considered to prevent meningomyelitis.
neuron (LMN) deficits. In these dogs the disorder is
Miscellaneous conditions 
323
ribs and limb bones. It is caused by abnormal differenti-
ation of cartilage cells in bones that develop by endo-
chondral osification, leading to the production of large
masses composed of a thin cortex lined by cartilage and
with a core of cancellous bone. The etiology is unclear
(Gambardella et al., 1975; Meomartino et al., 1997).
The masses continue to grow until skeletal maturity is
reached and may also continue thereafter in some dogs.
Diagnosis is by radiography (14.3B). Surgical decom-
pression of compressive lesions may be necessary but the
prognosis is guarded in dogs and is considered to be poor
in cats. Neoplastic transformation can result in clinical
signs in adult animals and this may actually be more
common than was thought previously (Jacobson and
Kirberger, 1996; Dewey et al., 2003).
A
Dermoid sinus
In dermoid sinus (pilonidal sinus) the skin over the dor-
sal midline is inverted and, in some dogs, the invagin-
ation communicates with the dura mater. Rhodesian
ridgebacks and Shih tzus have a high incidence
(Tshamala and Moens, 2000). Infection from the cyst
may extend to the spinal cord, causing meningitis and
myelitis with associated clinical signs.
 Diagnosis is based on physical examination and clini
cal signs. If a cyst is suspected to be in communication
B
with the vertebral canal, myelography or MRI is
14.3 A: Syringohydromyelia (arrow), mild hydrocephalus and
preferable to fistulography. Infected lesions are treated
caudal occipital malformation in a Cavalier King Charles
by antibiotics and surgical excision; it may be necessary
spaniel with persistent scratching at the shouldler. B: Multiple
to perform a laminectomy to retrieve all the tissue.
cartilaginous exostoses affecting the last rib and L4 vertebra.
Careless exploration of this type of lesion, without a
full appreciation of its extent, can lead to the develop-
thought to develop secondary to compression at the
ment of marked neurological deficits.
level of the foramen magnum (Rusbridge et al., 2000).
 Anti-inflammatory medications may improve the clinical
Epidermoid cyst
signs temporarily but early surgical intervention is
This is a rare cystic lesion that arises from entrapment of
recommended in humans with Chiari type-l malforma-
epithelial cells within the neural tube. This lesion can be
tions (Rusbridge, 1997; Fischbein et al., 1999). There is
congenital or it can be acquired secondary to mechanical
a trend away from shunting of the syrinx in humans
implantation of epithelial cells, such as by puncture of
towards decompressing the caudal fossa by an occipital
the spinal cord by a needle (Tomlinson et al., 1988).
craniectomy (Sgouros and Williams, 1995; Nishikawa 
Myelography or MRI will show an intramedulary
et al., 1997; Sakamoto et al., 1999). This approach 1
lesion, which is likely to be mistaken for a spinal cord
has also been used with success in a small number of t
tumor such as nephroblastoma of young dogs (see
dogs with syringomyelia (W.B. Thomas, personal com-
page 249).
munication). When syringomyelia develops following
trauma, a decompressive laminectomy with subarach-
Arachnoid cyst
noid space reconstruction is recommended (Sgouros and 
a e aa aou o a se sis an nu ae a
Williams, 1996).
lining (Dyce et al., 199l). Rather there is a focal accu-
mulation of CSF, probably due to adhesions within the
Cartilaginous exostoses
subarachnoid space (Dyce et al., 199l; Moissonier et al.,
Cartilaginous exospores (osteochondromatosis) may
2002) (14.6). The natural pulsation of CSF is sufficient
cause spinal cord compression at any site of the vertebral
to produce a bulbous or tear-drop enlargement of the
column of dogs and cats. Lesions may also occur on the subarachnoid space and this can then cause marked spinal
324
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
cord compression (Dewey and Coates, 2003) (14.4).  et al., 2002; Skeen et al., 2003) (13.32). Diagnosis is by
(tt) (6e1 u na Aemoe)  o Audeaola  -uos s Auedme Ae eaous ao usdeas
tion (Dyce et al., 1991; Galloway et al., 1999). The con-
 Sonography is helpful during surgery to provide intra-
dition occurs at two main locations: the cervical area or operative orientation (Gallway et al., 1999). Surgical
the thoracolumbar junction. It should be suspected in decompression may be effective. A dorsal laminectomy is
a young dog with progressive signs of myelopathy, but usually needed in order to gain adequate exposure of the
which is pain free. Rottweilers may be over-represented  cyst (1l.55, 14.5). Seven of 1l dogs improved in one
(Moissonier et al., 2002; Rylander et al., 2002; Skeen  series after fenestration and resection of the cyst. How
et al., 2003). The condition is also described in cats  ever, three dogs with cervical lesions required postopera
(Shamir et al., 1997). Arachnoid cysts can also be tive ventilatory assistance, two because of hematoma
acquired secondary to trauma or disc lesions (Rylander  formation (Rylander et al., 2002). Successful long-term
A
B
space at C2/3. This communicates with the rest of the subarachnoid space as contrast flowed caudally within a few minutes
(14.8B). B: Dorsoventral view confirms the dliscrete border of this lesion. Surgical appearance of the lesion is shown in 14.8A.
A
B
aa su (moe) lm iso aul a (moe) poo uids aui buissaduo pue eu ls s! lim aun is aul lao pauado uaag se
Miscellaneous conditions 
325
outcomes were obtained in 8 out of another 13 dogs that
were followed for more than l year. There were no sig-
nificant predictors of a good outcome although there was
a trend towards a good outcome in dogs of less than
3 years of age, those that had a duration of signs of less
thian 4 monthis, and whien marsupialization was used as
the surgical technique (Skeen et al., 2003).
 Marsupialization is one potential technique for treat-
ing arachnoid cysts (McKee and Renwick, 1994).
Durotomy is performed and the dural edges are sutured
to periarticular soft tissues using magnification and non-
absorbable suture material (4/0 to 8/0 depending on the
breed). A wide laminectomy gives excellent access but
runs the risk of putting undue tension on the dura, espe-
cially at the cranial and caudal ends of the durotomy. If
14.6 Three-year-old Toy poodlle with a cervical arachnoid cyst.
The dura has been cpened to reveal an extensive network of 
this happens a release incision should be made (14.7A).
 fine adhesions (arrow) in the subarachnoid space. The dura
Another technique used to treat arachnoid cysts is to
make a wide fenestration in the dura. Here the dura is
head) with two, modified 25-gauge needles (5.19). This dog's
excised over the cyst (14.8) and ideally visible subarach-
It then developed urinary incontinence and its gait 
noid adhesions (14.6) are also removed using meticulous
ceteriorated 26 months postoperatively (Skeen et al., 2003).
hemostasis (Frykman, 1999; Rylander et al., 2002). A rare
B
14.7 A: Marsupialization at T1 2/13 in a 9-year-old westie with progressive paraparesis and fecal incontinence for 2 months.
A release incision may be needed if marsupialization puts tension on the dura (arrow). The dog was doing well 22 months after
surgery (Skeen et al., 2o03). B: The laminectomy in this dog is not as wicde but still gave enough access to suture the dura accurately.
B
surgery (Skeen et al., 2003). B: Radliograph taken 10 min after the images shown in 14.4. Contrast has flowed from the previous
point of obstruction (arrow) into the remainder of the subarachnoidl space. CSF flow dlynamics have been studied in one dog
with an arachnoid cyst and showed normal communication with the subarachnoid space (Moissonier et al., 2002)
326
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
potential complication of not closing a dural incision is
that the spinal cord could herniate through the defect;
this has only been reported in humans (Osterholm,
1974; Henry et al., 1997; Watters et al., 1998)
METAbOLIC
Lysosomal storage diseases
Lysosomal storage diseases occur where there is a defect
of metabolism caused by dysfunction in a specific
 in dogs and cats and frequently cause neurological signs,
-sd ae p a u a  uss An ae m
14.9 Hypervitaminosis A in a cat showing massive vertebral
sive. Most cause signs of intracranial disease but cats
exostoses.
with mucopolysaccharidosis type VI can present with
paraparesis. Neurological deficits are caused by verte-
parts of the spine and the limbs may also be involved
bral exostoses that can resemble cartilaginous exostosis
(Goldman, 1992). Clinical signs related to nerve root and
and hypervitaminosis A {Haskins et al., 1980, 1983).
spinal cord compression are seen. Neck pain and rigidity,
Mucopolysaccharidosis type IHIA in dogs can present as
 ataxia, paresis of the thoracic limbs, and lameness may
an adult onset pelvic limb ataxia or hypermetric gait
(Fischer et al., 1998; Jolly et al., 2000). Cytoplasmic
 on liver, and is confirmed by radiography (14.9).
inclusions may be detected in hepatocytes but defini-
Treatment is difficult. Stopping vitamin A intake can
tive diagnosis requires specialized techniques. There is
 arrest the development of further exostoses, and anti-
 no treatment and the prognosis is poor.
inflammatory drugs may relieve clinical signs.
Osteoporosis
IDIOPATHIC
Jo anupiu a suu u uaqoid uouon e si s
Tumoral calcinosis
which increases with age as well as in women after meno-
Also known as calcinosis circumscripta, this condition
pause or ovariectomy (Riggs, 2002). Other risk factors
has been described as a cause of compressive spinal cord
include chronic renal disease, type I diabetes, cortico-
dysfunction in young dogs. The most common site is
steroid use and Cushing's disease (Khanine et al., 2000;
between Cl and C2 but it has also been reported in the
Vestergaard et al., 2002). Vertebral fractures are a com-
thoracolumbar region (McEwan et al., 1992; de Risio
mon sequel to osteoporosis in humans {Khanine et al.
and Olby, 2000). Diagnosis is by radiography, a mineral-
2000); diagnosis is made by radiography, scintigraphy,
ized mass is visible at the site of cord compression
CT or MRI (Cook et al., 2002; Tan et al., 2002). Even
(14.l0). The cause is not known. Surgical decompres-
though vertebral fracture due to osteoporosis is a comm-
sion may be successful.
 s      
diagnosed (Gehlbach et al., 2000). Osteoporosis has been
Disseminated idiopathic skeletal
produced experimentally in canine lumbar vertebrae as a
hyperostosis (DISH)
result of ovariectomy or steroid administration (Norrdin
This is thought to be an exaggerated proliferation of bone
et al., 1990; Yamaura et al., 1993); it has also been recog-
-as a result of minor stresses, which results in extensive
nized as a clinical problem in dogs with Cushing's disease
ossification throughout the body. A characteristic feature
as well as in routine post-mortem studies (Pellegrini et al.,
 in the spine is a “flowing pattern’ of ventrolateral new
1979; Huntley et al., 1982; Schleithoff, 1984). Vertebral
 bone formation that extends over at least four adjacent
fracture secondary to osteoporosis is therefore likely to be 
 vertebrae. Clinical signs usually just reflect the mechani
an under-recognized cause of spinal pain in dogs, espe-
cal limitations to movement (Morgan and Stavenborn,
cially in older, neutered animals with Cushing's disease.
199l; Dewey et al., 2003).
NUTRITIONAL
INFECTIOUS/INFLAMMATORY
Hypervitaminosis A
Discospondylitis
Cats fed a diet with excessive vitamin A may suffer from
 Discospondylitis is an inflammatory condition centered
a skeletal condlition characterized by severe exostosis of  on the intervertebral disc and involving the vertebral end
the vertebrae, particularly in the cervical spine. Other plates and adjacent bone of the vertebral body. Large
Miscellaneous conditions 
327
breeds of dogs are affected most often. The condition is 
first identified. Systemic illness is common, typically
rare in cats (Malik et al., 1990; Watson and Roberts,
with pyrexia, lethargy, inappetence, and dysuria related
1993). The disease is usually caused by Staphylococcus
to cystitis
intermedius but other organisms including Streptococcus
Diagnosis is by radiography (14.11, 14.12). Generally
sp., Escherichia coli and Brucella canis are also found.
the radiographic changes are seen clearly, but occasion-
Fungal infections are uncommon but should be consid-2
 ally the radiographs will be normal even though infection
ered particularly in German shepherd dogs; hyphae may
is present (occult discospondylitis). When the radio-
be detected in urine sediment (Butterworth et al., 1995;
graphs are inconclusive, a bone scan may reveal the
Watt et al., 1995; Greene, 1998).
lesion (Stefanacci and Wheeler, 1991) (see page 59).
    s   n 
 Blood or urine cultures are positive in about two thirds
hematogenous spread from other foci in the body, of 
of patients (Kornegay, 1986). Brucella canis titers should 
which the bladder is most common. Occasional cases 
 be analyzed in endemic areas.
associated with foreign body migration are seen, usually
Treatment of bacterial discospondylitis is initially
grass seeds (awns). Iatrogenic cases following surgery
by use of antibiotics. In view of the predominance of
are also recognized, especially when an implant has been
S. intermedius, clindamycin, cepazolin or cloxacillin are
used (13.34, 14.11, 14.14).
the best initial choices. Ampicillin and amoxycillin are
The first clinical sign is usually pain, with concurrent
not useful because the organism is often resistant to these
or later development of neurological deficits. Certain
drugs through the mechanism of β-lactamase production.
sites are predisposed: lumbosacral, caudal cervical, thora-
Further treatment is governed by clinical progression
columbar and mid-thoracic vertebrae. Multiple discs
and results of bacteriological testing. Treatment must be
may be involved, either adjacent or distant to the disc
 continued for at least 6 weeks, even when the response
is good. Most dogs respond well to antibiotics alone
(Gilmore, 1987), or combined with surgical curettage
(Kornegay and Barber, 1980). It is not known how many
dogs suffer a recurrence of signs.
Treatment for B. canis is with minocycline (25 mg/kg
PO q24h for 2 weeks) and streptomycin (5 mg/kg IM or
SQ q12h for 1 week) or gentamycin (2 mg/kg IM or SQ
q12 h for l week) (Greene, 1998). There is potential for
zoonotic spread, and recurrence is common. It may be
wise to castrate male dogs with B. canis infection as the
testes can act as a reservoir of infection (Kerwin et al.,
1992).
 Surgical curettage of solitary, readily accessible
lesions often leads to rapid resolution of signs
(Kornegay and Barber, 1980). It also provides material
14.10 Tumoral calcinosis in a young Labrador retriever with
for culture and promotes blood supply to the affected
progressive paraparesis. The myelogram reveals a large,
mineralized epidural mass located dorsally between C1 and C2.
disc. Surgical intervention should always be considered
Following surgical removal of the mass the dog returned to
in patients with an unsatisfactory response to anti-
normal within a few weeks (Lewis and Kelly, 1990)
biotics. The main risk is that surgery could destabilize the
14.11 Ten-year-old Doberman with 
 S. intemmedius discosponcylitis at C6/7.
It had undergone total hip replacement
9 months previously which became
infected and was removed after 4 
months. A: Destructive lesion at C6/7.
There is sclerosis and destruction of C6
and C7 end plates (arrowheac). B: CT
scan through caudal C6 confirms bony
cestruction within the vertebral body
(arrowhead)
4
B
328
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
14.12 Rottweiler with uncontrollable
pain due to discosponcylitis at L7/S1
that did not respond to 1 week of 
antibiotics and opicid analgesics. An
external fixator was applied and the
dlog was pain-free the next cday. It 
was normal 3 months later although
L7/S1 had not fusedl; no bone graft 
had been used at surgery.
B
A
B
14.13 A: The dog shown in 14.12 at 6-week follow-up. B: Dorsal view of the external fixator (SK External Fixation System, Imex
the clamps.
affected intervertebral space further; loss of stability
laminectomy without stabilization is not recommended
bony destruction. Subluxation or collapse of the inter-
In addition to instability and collapse of thie disc
vertebral space then results together with severe pain  space, another serious complication of discospondylitis
and neurological deficits. When collapse occurs in the is the development of epidural abscessation (see below)
lumbosacral area the animal often develops intractable  (Lobetti, 1994; Remedios et al., 1996).
pain (14.12). Fixation of the spine is then best pro-
 Fungal discospondylitis is a systemic infection that
vided by an external device that can be removed once  occurs in German shepherd dogs and occasionally in
the infection has resolved and the site has stabilized other breeds of dog;this disorder is not restricted to tropi-
[Auger et al., 2000; Walker et al., 2002). In the lum- cal or semi-tropical regions as was initially thought. It is
bosacral area threaded pins or screws may be driven caused usually by one of several Aspergillus species and
through the articular facets into the sacrum (McKee
Aq pauieaqo aq uao ueo sisouei 'sisououd sood e su
 et al., 1990). Pins or bone cement have also been used  identifying fungal hyphae in urine sediment. Itraconazole
successfully in the face of infection (Lavely et al., may control the disease but the long-term prognosis is
2002). An autogenous bone graft placed into the
poor (Butterworth et al., 1995; Watt et al., 1995).
affected interspace probably enhances complete fusion
[(Auger et al., 2000) although this does not seem to be
 Epidural empyema
crucial for a successful outcome (McKee et al., 1990)  This is an emergency situation that requires rapid diag-
(14.13). Decompression of discospondylitis lesions by  nosis and treatment (14.14). Clinical signs include fever,
Miscellaneous conditions 
329
A
B
14.14 A: Doberman that undlerwent a ventral slot and dlistraction stabilization using screws and bone cement for a cynamic lesion
at C5/6. The dog did wellfor 4 days but then became febrile and suffered progressive neurological deterioration. B: A repeat
myelogram 2 weeks after surgery revealed small erosions of the C6/7 end plates and a diffuse epidural mass extending from the
midl-bodly of C5 vertebra to midl-C7 (arrowheads). The dog died; epidural abscess was found at necropsy.
lethargy, pain and neurological deficits along with even thousands per microliter), mainly comprising neu-
peripheral neutrophilia and a neutrophilic CSF pleocy-
 trophils along with an increase in protein concentration.
tosis. Less than half of dogs described have had con-
 Infectious agents are not seen in the CSF and culture is
comitant discospondylitis. Myelography can provide an
 negative; an immune-mediated mechanism is suspected.
The CSF may be relatively normal between bouts of the
humans if MRI is available because the latter permits
disease.
earlier identification of lesions [Angtuaco et al., 1987;
Treatment with long-term corticosteroids is recom-
Reihsaus et al., 2000). Lumbar puncture is also no longer 
 mended (prednisolone 2-4 mg/kg/day initially, reducing
recommended in humans as it carries the risk of intro-
to anti-inflammatory doses) until the clinical signs and
ducing infection into the subarachnoid space. Surgical
CSF pleocytosis resolve. The prognosis is fair, although
decompression and drainage together with antibiotics
some dogs experience relapses. Older dogs with high
are the treatment of choice in humans. The biggest prob-
lem is one of early diagnosis before massive neurological
ticosteroid therapy and have a less favorable prognosis
damage has occurred (Reihsaus et al., 2000). Results in
(Tipold and Jaggy, 1994; Cizinauskas et al., 2000).
dogs have been mixed. One study reported a good out-
corme in five of seven dogs whereas others report a poor
CANINEDISTEMPERVIRUSINFECTION
outcome even after aggressive therapy (Dewey et al.,
Canine distemper virus (CDV) infection is the most
1998; Lavely et al., 2002).
common infectious cause of neurological disease in dogs.
Demyelination and inflammation occur in various sites
Inflammatory CNs diseases
throughout the CNS. The virulence of the virus strain
STEROID-RESPONSIVEMENINGITIS-
and the immunocompetence of the dog are important
ARTERITIS
factors in determining the severity of disease. Other
 Several aseptic meningitis syndromes have been described
CNS infections may be seen in association with the
in dogs. Meningitis and polyarteritis has been described in 
 immunosuppression related to CDV. Systemic signs of
a colony of young research Beagles; Bernese mountain
disease may occur, although this is not a consistent fea-
dogs also suffer from a similar syndrome (Meric, 1988).
ture (Tipold et al., 1992; Thomas et al., 1993). The neu-
These disorders are similar to necrotizing vasculitis of the
 rological signs may be multifocal although in one third of
meningeal arteries (Meric et al., 1986).
cases they suggest a focal lesion. Signs may be acute in
 The clinical signs are typical of meningitis, with depres-
onset. CSF analysis usually reveals mild to moderate,
sion, cervical pain and stiff gait; pyrexia is also seen in this
lymphocytic pleocytosis (see page 45). Diagnostic meth-
condition. The disease may be acute or it can have a(
 ods include testing for local production of antibody in
relapsing pattern. Analysis of CSF reveals marked pleocy-
the CSF; fluorescent antibody testing of conjunctival
tosis (with CSF white blood cell counts in the hundreds or  cells, CSF leukocytes, or skin biopsy; or for viral RNA by
330
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
polymerase chain reaction (Tipold et al., 1992; Thomas
which can lead to the formation of large granulomas
et al., 1993; Haines et al., 1999; Sharp et al., 2000).
(Cordy, 1979).
Confirmation of a diagnosis of CDV infection is difficult
 Clinical signs are typical of meningoencephalomyelitis;
ante mortem. Skin biopsy is easy and may be the most
onset is usually between 3 and 7 years of age. Spinal cord
accurate method (Haines et al., 1999).
syndromes may be seen alone or as part of a multifocal
Treatment is restricted to managing the clinical signs
 presentation. The signs of spinal disease may be restricted
and providing supportive care. Prognosis is guarded.
to spinal hyperesthesia or may include neurological
deficits. The course is usually chronic, but some cases
FELINEINFECTIOUSPERITONITISVIRUS
show a rapid decline.
INFECTION (FIP)
Analysis of CSF reveals moderate, mainly mono-
Neurological signs, including spinal cord syndromes, may
findings are non-specific. Imaging in dogs with spinal
be seen in cats with FIP virus infection. Multisystemic
signs, particularly ocular involvement, are seen in most
cord involvement may reveal an intramedullary lesion
(14.15). Treatment with immunosuppressive doses of
affected cats. Neurological signs are most often associ-
ated with the dry form of the disease. CSF is usually
corticosteroids may lead to improvement (prednisolone
1-2 mg/kg/day) (Munana and Luttgen, 1998). The long
abnormal with increased protein and a mixed, predomi-
nantly neutrophilic pleocytosis (Foley et al., 1998) (see
term prognosis used to be poor, although excellent long-
page 45). There is no definitive treatment and the prog-
term results have now been obtained after treatment
nosis is poor (Kline et al., 1994).
with cytosine arabinose (Cuddon et al., 2002).
GRANULOMATOUS
OTHERINFECTIOUSAGENTS
MENINGOENCEPHALOMYELITIS (GME)
 This is an inflammatory disease of unknown etiology, any
dogs and cats; infections are usually associated with brain
part of the CNS may be involved and the lesions can
involvement and therefore present with multifocal neu-
either be focal or diffuse in nature. The retina and optic
rological signs. Many organisms have been implicated,
including bacteria, rickettsial, fungal and helminth
nerves may also be affected. Perivascular accumulations
organisms; the distribution of some of these is regional
of mononuclear cells are present throughout the CNS,
(Munana, 1996; Stiles, 2000; Gasser et al., 2001). Some
 of the organisms that may affect the spinal cord in dogs
 and cats are listed in Table 14.1.
The signs are typical of inflammatory CNS disease as
described above. Some infections show mainly signs of
intracranial disease, typically rickettsial infections when
seizures, dullness, depression, and vestibular signs occur.
 Pelvic limb hyperextension is often seen in young dogs
with toxoplasmosis or neosporosis (Nesbit et al., 1981).
Systemic signs of infection may be apparent, for exam-
ple gastrointestinal disturbance or respiratory signs,
which may indicate the portal of entry into the CNS.
Patients may be pyrexic, but this is variable
Confirmation of the diagnosis is usually by CSF
14.15 T2-weighted MRl of a 9-year-cld Boxer dlog with an
analysis. Pleocytosis is variable, but very high cell counts
 extensive high signal area (arrow) in the cervical spinal cord.
(in the thousands per microliter) may be seen, mostly
Histopathological diagnosis was GME.
 Table 14.1 Known organisms associated with spinal cord disease
Viruses
Bacteria
Rickettsia
Fungi
Protozoa
Helminth
 Canine distemper
 Staphylococcus sp.
Rickettsia sp.
Cryptococcus neofommans
Toxoplasma gondli
Baylisascaris sp.
Feline infectious
Brucella canis
Ehrichia sp.
Coccidioides imitis
Neospora caninum
 peritonitis 
Bartonella sp.
 Blastomycoides demmatidis
Rabies
Histoplasma capsulatum
Miscellaneous conditions 
331
 composed of neutrophils; eosinophils may also be present.
consequence of trauma and it is imperative that they be
Organisms may be seen in the CSF. Culture may be
recognized on admission of the patient (2.15, 2.26,
attempted but is often unrewarding. Serological test-
2.28, 13.1, 14.16B).
ing may be useful in some infections, for example in
 Re-implantation of avulsed ventral nerve rootlets into
neosporosis, rickettsial disease or cryptococcosis.
the cervical spinal cord has recently been proposed as a
Those rare patients where bacterial infections are iden-
new treatment for avulsion injuries in dogs and cats
tified should be treated with antibiotics. The bacterial
{Moissonnier et al., 1996, 200l). Although an effective
sensitivity and CNS penetration of the drug must be con-
treatment is needed desperately, surgical repair is
sidered in choosing an antibiotic (Greene, 1998). Fungal1
unlikely to be useful for most animals with plexal
infections are difficult to treat, but amphotericin B, itra-
injuries due to the difficulty in producing an early
conazole and fluconazole may be effective. Rickettsial
 return of function to the distal limb and the likelihood
 of residual sensory deficits (Rodkey and Sharp, 2003).
cycline or chloramphenicol. Protozoal infections may be
 Trauma can occasionally produce neurological deficits
treated with clindamycin, azithromycin or trimethoprim-
by affecting the blood supply to the spinal cord, periph-
sulfonamide combined with pyrimethamine (Bosch-
eral nerves or muscles. Acute pelvic limb paralysis is
Driessen et al., 2002).
described in cats after severe abdominal trauma. It is
The use of corticosteroids in meningomyelitis is con-
thought to be a vasospasm or thrombosis of radicular
troversial. They are contraindicated in fungal infection,
blood vessels (Summers et al., 1994). Paralysis of a
but may have a role in acute bacterial infections of the
thoracic limb has been described after injury to the sub-
CNS (Vandecasteele et al., 200l; Gijwani et al., 2002).
clavian artery in a dog (MacCoy and Trotter, 1977).
The potential consequences of corticosteroid use must
 Gunshot injuries may involve the vertebral column or
be considered before their administration. Their use at
spinal cord and are usually devastating (Fullington and
the same time as antibiotics can also make it difficult to
Otto, 1997).
 determine which is responsible for an improvement in
the animal's condition.
Psoas muscle injury
This unusual condition can cause acute onset of pelvic
Epidural steatitis
limb lameness with severe pain on extension of the hip
This is a common complication to epidural empyema but
and palpation of the psoas muscles along with reluc-
could also occur secondary to infection with Brucella,
tance to stand (Krawiecki and Puignero, 1995; Breur
Bartonella or Mycobacterium sp. (Postacchini and
and Blevins, 1996). If inflammation and hemorrhage is
Montanaro, 1980; Nas et al., 200l). Epidural fibrosis and
severe there may also be unilateral femoral nerve
fat necrosis are also seen secondary to vascular com-
deficits (N. Olby, personal communication). The clin-
promise in lumbosacral disease (see page 190).
ical signs are caused by an injury or a hematoma within
the psoas muscle; femoral neuropathy is due to com-
pression within the muscle compartment (Robinson
TRAUMA
'IN xo punosenn Aq apeu si sisousei '(iooz "j 1a
The most common disorders are discussed on pages
Most dogs improve with rest but a tenomyectomy may
30 and 283. Brachial plexus injuries are a common
be necessary to resolve the pain.
14.16 A: Post-mortem appearance of a
brachial plexus avulsion. Note the absent
nerve roots and rootlets on the side with 
subdural hemorrhage. B: This dog was
paraplegic due to an L1 vertebral fracture;
its brachial plexus avulsion was almost
overlooked before repairing the vertebral
fracture.
B
332
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
VASCULAR
Confirmation of the diagnosis is by elimination of
Fibrinocartilaginous embolism
other causes. Myelography or MRI should be performed
to rule out compressive spinal cord lesions (l4.17).
(ischemic myelopathy)
Generally, the myelogram is normal, but in some cases of
Fibrocartilaginous embolism {FCE) is a syndrome of
FCE, it will show an intramedullary pattern of spinal
acute, severe neurological dysfunction of dogs. It is an
important differential diagnosis in cases of disc disease,
cord swelling. MRI reveals spinal cord ederma and
trauma, and other acute spinal conditions (Cauzinille
swelling in the acute stage. Changes in CSF are often
and Kornegay, 1996). The emboli are composed of fibro-
non-specific although xanthochromia is very suggestive
cartilage, identical to the material within the nucleus
of FCE (4.1).
pulposus. In pathological studies of FCE, emboli are
Treatment is by supportive care of the patient. Use
found in the vasculature of the spinal cord substance or
of methylprednisolone sodium succinate (MPSS), as in
spinal trauma, may be useful in the first few hours fol-
nerve roots. The exact mechanism by which they gain
lowing onset [see page 83). Other corticosteroids are
access to these areas is not clear.
Adult dogs of large and giant breeds are affected most
not indicated.
 The prognosis is variable and dependent largely on the
often along with Miniature schnauzers, but this condi-
tion can affect any dog. FCE can occur in dogs as early
size of the area that undergoes necrosis. Discrete upper
as 8 weeks of age, although it is seen most often in
motor neuron (UMN) lesions often improve, but loss of
adults between 3 and 7 years (Cauzinille and Kornegay,
 nociception or extensive LMN deficits carry a poor prog-
 nosis (Cauzinille and Kornegay, 1996). Dogs that recover
1996; Junker et al., 2000; Hawthorne et al., 2001). The
may be left with residual neurological deficits unless the
condition appears to be very rare in cats (Scott and
O'Leary, 1996; Abramson et al., 2002)
lesion is small (Hawthorne et al., 200l).
 Peracute, severe neurological presentations occur,
often following vigorous exercise or mild trauma.
Ascending myelomalacia
Owners may note a progression of the signs over a
 period of several hours, often from an initial lameness to
diffuse spread of extruded disc material; it is illus-
eventual paralysis. However, progression beyond the
trated in 8.5 and 14.18 and discussed on page 128.
first 24h is very umusual and this helps to differentiate
Extensive malacia may also be evident following
the condition from other myelopathies. Spinal hyper-
trauma (13.10).
esthesia is not usually present on clinical examination,
but sometimes severe discomfort is apparent during
the development of the condition and this can persist
Ischemic neuromyopathy (aortic
for several hours after onset (Cauzinille and Kormegay,
embolism, iliac thrombosis)
1996). Any part of the spinal cord may be affected, and
Ischemic neuromyopathy is a common cause of acute
 often the signs are markedly asymmetrical.
 paraplegia in cats. Involvement of either one pelvic limb,
A
B
weighted MRls show high signal within the spinal cord (arrows) that extends A from the level of C2 to C7 vertebral bodies and that
B cccupies much of the cross-sectional area of the spinal cord. Histological dliagnosis was FCE.
Miscellaneous conditions 
333
or of one thoracic limb, has been reported in 13 and 14%
The prognosis for long-term survival is guarded. Rectal
of cats, respectively (Smith et al., 2003). Hypothermia,
temperature of 99°F (37.22°C) or higher was the best
      sis pe 
predictor of survival to discharge; 76% of 39 cats with a
affected cats and renal or gastrointestinal dysfunction
temperature of 99°F (37.22°C) or more survived to be
may also be apparent. Affected limbs are usually
discharged (Smith et al., 2003). Median long-term sur-
arreflexic, hypothermic and hypalgesic; femoral pulses 
vival of 44 cats was 1l 7 days. Recurrence occurred in 11
are often absent and the gastrocnemius muscles
cats (25%). Cats with congestive heart failure at presen-
swollen and painful in pelvic limb involvement. The nail
tation had significantly shorter survival times than cats
beds are characteristically cyanotic and the toes do not
without heart failure [77 days vs 223 days). Low-dose
bleed after needle prick. Diagnosis is based on the 
aspirin therapy is recommended as an inexpensive, safe
clinical signs (Griffiths and Duncan, 1979; Laste and
treatment that is at least as effective as high-dose aspirin
or warfarin (Smith et al., 2003).
the thromboermbolic episode, but the presence of a
This condition also occurs in dogs although it is less
thrombus does not entirely explain the clinical signs.
common than in cats. The presenting signs are also dis-
There also appears to be a failure of collateral circulation
tinct from those in cats; the onset tends to be gradual
caused by release of vasoactive substances from the area
ss u aq o adde nou op sop iso pue
of the thrombus.
Hyperadrenocorticism, neoplasia and cardiac disease
are predisposing factors (van Winkle et al., 1993).
The prognosis depends on the underlying cause;
the prognosis for dogs surviving the acute episode is
favorable (Boswood et al., 2000)
Spinal cord hemorrhage, hematoma
Hemorrhage and hematoma formation may occur within
the spinal cord, in the subarachnoid space or in the
epidural space. Epidural hemorrhage is a common com-
plication of acute thoracolumbar disc extrusion (Olby et
al., 2000). Hemorrhage can also cause marked deteriora-
tion after ventral slot surgery for cervical disc extrusion
(Seim and Prata, 1982). Bleeding can occur with various
coagulopathies such as hemophilia, rickettsial disease,
trauma, anticoagulant toxicosis, or as a complication to
any severe bleeding disorder (Stokol et al., 1994). If spinal
14.18 Typical myelographic appearance of a dog with
myelomalacia secondary to intervertebral dlisc extrusion
hemorrhage is suspected in the absence of trauma, tests
There is infltration of contrast material into the parenchyma
for clotting function should be performed. Analysis of CSF
of the spinal cord (arrow) (Lu et al., 2002).
may reveal xanthochromia (4.l) or erythrophagocytosis.
A
B
C
14.19 T2-weighted MRl of a 9-month-old dog with neck pain and tetraplegia for one day caused by a hematoma (arrowheads)
Platelet numbers, coagulation profile and a buccal mucosal bleeding time were normal. The dog failed to improve and was
euthanized after 3 weeks; necropsy showed that the hematoma was subarachnoid; no cause was identified. A: Sagittal image.
The dlotted line shows the level of the transverse image. B: Transverse image. For MRl of blood, see page 58. C: Necropsy
334
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
If fresh blood is seen in a CSF sample, it is most likely to
Bailey, C.S. [1975) An embryological approach to the clinical significance
be caused by puncture of a dural vessel rather than
of congenital vertebral and spinal cord abnormalities. Jourmal of the
American Amimal Hospital Association 1l, 426-434.
reflecting an underlying blood disease.
Bailey, C.S., Morgan, J.P [1992) Congenital spinal malformations. Veterinary
 Intramedullary hematoma formation is an unusual
Clintics of North America, Small Amimal Practice 22, 985-1015.
Bosch-Driessen, L.H., Verbraak, F.D., Suttorp-Schulten, M.S., van
cause of tetraparesis in young, large-breed dogs (Martin
Ruyven, R.L, Klok, A.M., Hoyng, C.B., Rothova, A. [2002) A prospective,
et al., 1986) (14.19). The cause is not known; there may
randomized trial of pyrimethamine and azithromycin vs pyrimethamine
or may not be an associated coagulopathy. Neck pain is a
and sulfadiazine for the treatment of ocular toxoplasmosis. Americat
variable finding. Surgical decompression is indicated
Jourmal of Ophthalmology 134, 34-40.
Boswood, A., Lamb, C.R., White, R.N. [2000) Aortic and iliac thrombosis 
in compressive lesions not associated with clotting
im six dogs. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 41, I09-114.
disorders. Any underlying coagulopathy must also be
Braund, K.G., Sharp, N.J.H. [2003) Neurological examination and local-
addressed.
ization. In: D. Slatter [ed.) Textbook of Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd edn,
1092-ll107. Elsevier Science, Philadelphia.
Breur, G.J., Blevins, W.E. [1996) Traumatic injury of the iliopsoas muscle
Intermittent claudication
in 25 dogs. Veterinary Surgery 25, 262.
im shop pue suenu uoq ul pazusooau si su
Broek, A.H.M.v.d., Else, R.W., Abercromby, R., France, M. [1991) Spinal
dysraphism in the Weimaraner. Jourmal of Small Artimal Practice 32,
lesions in the lumbar and lumbosacral regions (Tarvin
258-260.
and Prata, 1980; Markwalder, 1993; Porter, 1996). It is
Butterworth, S.J., Barr, F.J., Pearson, G.R., Day, M.J. [1995) Multiple dis-
characterized by circulatory impairment of neural
cospondylitis associated with Aspergilus species infection in a dog.
Veterinary Record 136,38-41.
structures that occurs secondary to exercise. Inter-
Cauzinille, L., Komegay, J.N. [1992) Acquired syringomyelia in a dog.
 mittent claudication has also been recognized in humans
Jourtal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 201, 1225-1228.
 with cervical or thoracic spinal cord compression where
Cauzinille, L., Komegay, N. [1996) Fibrocartilaginous embolism of the
spinal cord in dogs: review of 36 histologically confirmed cases and retro-
it can complicate cervical spondylotic myelopathy
spective study of 26 suspeted cases. Jourmal of Veterinary Intermal
[Kikuchi et al., 1996).
Medicine 10, 241-245.
Charest, D.R., Kenny, B.G. [2000) Radicular pain caused by synovial cyst: an
umderdiagnosed entity in the elderly? Jourmal of Neurosurgery 92
(I Suppl), S7-60.
Key issues for future investigation
Child, G., Higgins, R.J., Cuddon, PA. [1986] Acquired scoliosis associated
with hydromyelia and syringomyelia in two dogs. Jourmal of the
1. ls decompression indicated for severe vertebral 
American Veterinary Medical Association 189, 909-912.
deformities and if so, should it be performed at the same
Chrisman, C.L. [1992] Neurological diseases of Rottweilers: neuroaxonal
time as stabilization or at a second surgery?
dystrophy and leukoencephalomalacia. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice
33, 500-504
2. what is the long-term recurrence rate following medical
Cizinauskas, S., Jaggy, A., Tipold, A. [2000) Long-term treatment of dogs
 treatment for discosponcylitis? Is this influenced by the
with steroid-responsive meningitis-arteritis: clinical, laboratory and thera-
peutic results.Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 41, 295-301.
 duration of antibiotic therapy?
Cook, G.J., Hannaford, E., See, M., Clarke, S.E., Fegelman, I. [2002) The
value of bone scintigraphy in the evaluation of osteoporotic patients with
3. ls MPSS of any value in FCE?
back pain.Scandinavian fourtal of Rheumatology 31, 245-248.
Cordy, D.R. [1979) Canine granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis.
Veterinary Pathology 16, 325-333.
4. Is any treatment regime useful in degenerative myelopathy?
Cuddon, PA., Coates, J.R., Murray, M. (2002) New Treatments for
Granulomatous Meningoencephalomyelitis. Proceedings of the ACVIM
Veterinary Forum 2002; 319-321. American College of Veterinary Intemal
Medicine, Dallas, TX.
de Risio, L., Olby, N.J. (2000) Tumoral calcinosis of the thoracic spine:
Veterinary
Neurology
Neurosurgery.
REFERENCES
http://www.neurovet.org/
 DeRisioandOlby I/Tumoralcalcinosis.htm 
Abramson, C.J., Platt, S.R., Stedman, N.L. [2002) Tetraparesis in a cat
Dewey, C.W., Hoffman, A., Coates, J.R. [2003) Miscellaneous spinal con-
with fibrocartilaginous emboli. Jourmal of the American Arimal Hospital
ditins. In: D. Slatter [ed.) Textbook of Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd edn,
Associatior 38, 153-156.
1148-l162. Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
Aikawa, T. [200l) Surgical management of vertebral deformity in four
Dewey, C.W, Kortz, G.D., Bailey, C.S. [1998) Spinal epidural empyema
dogs.Journal of the American Amimal Hospital Association {Japan} 16,
in two dogs.Jourmal of the American Animal HospitalAssociation 34,
39-44.
Angtuaco, E.J,McConell, J.R., Chadduck, WM., Flanigan, S. [1987) MR
Dickinson, PJ., Sturges, B.K., Berry, WL., Vemau, K.M., Koblik, PD.,
imaging of spinal epidural sepsis. Americart Jourmial of Roenitgertology
LeCouteur, R.A. [200l) Extradural spinal synovial cysts in nine dogs.
149, 1249-1253.
Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 42, 502-S09.
Auger, J., Dupuis, J., Quesnel, A., Beauregard, G. [2000) Surgical treat-
Dyce, J., Herrtage, M.E., Houlton, J.E.F, Palmer, A.C. [1991) Canine
'saop anoy u spuodsoosip Aq pasnes Aaqeisul euoesoqunl jo zuau
spinal'arachnoid cysts.Journal of SmallAmimal Practice32,433-437.
Veterinary Surgery 29, 70-80.
Fingeroth, J.M., Johnson, G.C., Burt, J.K., Fenner, WR., Cain, L.S. [1989)
Averill, D.R., Jr [1973) Degenerative myelopathy in the aging German
 Neuroradiographic diagnosis and surgical repair of tethered cord syn-
Shepherd dog: clinical and pathologic findings. Jourmal of the American
puanor sisyosa pue epq euids ym sopng ysug ue ui amop
Veterinary Medical Association 162, I045-1051.
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 194, 1300-1302.
Bagley, R.S., Silver, G.M., Seguin, B., Lincoln, J.D., Britt, L.G. [1997)
Fischbem, N.J., Dillon, WP, Cobbs, C., Weinstein, PR. [1999) The 'pre-
Scoliosis and associated cystic spinal cord lesion in a dog. Jourmal of the
syrinx' state: a reversible myelopathic condition that may precede
American Veterinary Medical Assaciation 21l, 573-575.
syringomyelia. Americat Jourmal of Neuroradiology 20, 7-20.
Miscellaneous conditions
335
Fischer, A., Carmichael, K.P, Mumell, J.F., Jhabvala, P, Thompson, J.N.,
Johnston, PE.J., Barrie, J.A., MeCulloch, M.C., Anderson, TJ., Griffiths, I.R.
Matalon, R., Jezyk, PF, Wang, P, Giger, U. [1998] Sulfamidase defi-
[2000) Central nervous system pathology in 25 dogs with chronic degen-
ciency in a family of Dachshunds: a canine model of mucopolysacchari-
erative radliculomyelopathy. Veterinary Record 146, 629-633.
dosis IIA [Sanfilippo A). Pediatric Research 44, 74-82.
Jolly, R.D., Allan, F.J., Collett, M.G., Rozaklis, T, Muller, VJ., Hopwood, J.J.
Foley, J.E., Lapointe, J.M., Koblik, P, Poland, A., Pedersen, N.C. [1998)
[2000) Mucopolysaccharidosis IlIA [Sanfilipo syndrome] in a
Diagnostic features of clinical neurologic feline infectious peritonitis.
New Zealand Huntaway dog with ataxia. New Zealand Veterinary
Jourmal ofVeterinary Intermal Medicine 12, 415-423.
Jourmal 48, 144-148.
Frykman, O.F. [1999) Spinal arachnoid cyst in four dogs: diagnosis, surgi-
Junker, K., van den Ingh, T, Bossard, M.M., van Nes, J.J. [2000)
cal treatment and follow-up results.Jourmal of SmallAmimal Practice 40,
yi aaan u [e] poo pus ay go msoqa snoe
544-549.
Wolfhounds. Veterinary Quarterly 22, I54-156.
Fullington, R.J., Otto, C.M. [1997) Characteristics and management of
Kerwin, S.C., Lewis, D.D., Hribemik, TN., Partington, B., Hosgood, G.,
gunshot wounds in dogs and cats: 84 cases [1986-1995]. Jourmual of the
 Eilts, B.E. [1992) Diskospondylitis associated with Brucella canis infec-
American Veterinary Medical Association 210, 658-662.
tion in dogs: 14 cases [1980-i991]Jourmal of the American Veterinary
Galloway, A.M., Curtis, N.C., Sommerlad, S.F, Watt, PR. [1999)
Medieal Association 201, 1253-1257.
Correlative imaging findings in seven dogs and one cat with spinal arach-
Khanine, V, Foumier, J.J., Requeda, E., Luton, J.P, Simon, F, Crouzet, J.
noid cysts. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 40, 445-452.
[2000) Osteoporotic fractures at presentation of Cushing's disease: two
Gambardella, PC., Osbome, C.A., Stevens, J.B. [197S) Multiple cartilagi-
case reports and a literature review. Joint Bone Spine 67, 341-345.
nous exostoses in the dog. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
Kikuchi, S., Watanabe, E, Hasue, M. [1996) Spinal intermittent claudication
Association 166,761-768.
due to cervical and thoracic degenerative spine disease. Spine 21, 313-318.
Gasser, A.M., Birkenheuer, A.J., Breitschwerdt, E.B. [2001) Canine rocky
Kirberger, R.M.M., Wrigley, R.H. [1993) Myelography in the dog.
mountain spotted fever: a retrospective study of 30 cases. Jourmal of the
Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 34,253-258.
Americarn Amimal Hospital Associatior 37, 4148.
Kirberger, R.M., Jacobson, L.S., Davies, J.V., Engela, J. [1997] Hydromyelia
Gehlbach, S.H., Bigelow, C., Heimisdottir, M., May, S., Walker, M.,
in the dog.Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 38,30-38.
Kirkwood, J.R. [2000) Recognition of vertebral fracture in a clinical set-
Kline, K.L., Joseph, R.J., Averil, D.R. [1994) Feline infectious peritonitis
ting.Osteoporosis International 11, S77-582.
with neurologic involvement: clinical and pathological findings in 24
Gijwani, D., Kumhar, M.R., Singh, VB., Chadda, VS., Soni, PK., Nayak, K.C.
cats. Jourmal of the American Animal Hospital Association 30, Ill-l18.
Gupta, B.K. [2002) Dexamethasone therapy for bacterial meningitis in
Kormegay, J.N. [1986) Discospondylitis. In: R.W. Kirk [ed.), Current
adults: a double blind placebo control study. Neurology India 50, 63-67.
Wterinary Therapy, 810-814. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Gilmore, D.R. [1987] Lumbosacral diskospondylitis in 21 dogs. Jourmal of
Komegay, J.N., Barber, D.L. [1980) Diskospondylitis in dogs. Joural of the
the American Animal Hosprital Association 23,S7-61.
AmericanVeterinary MedicalAssociation 177,337-341.
Goldman, A.L. [1992) Hypervitaminosis A in a cat. Jourmal of the
Krawiecki, J.M., Puignero, V. [199S] Avulsion of the tubercle of the psoas
American Veterinary Medical Association 200, 1970-1972.
minor muscle in a dog. Point Veterinaire 26, I167-l169.
Greene, C.E. [1998] lnfectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, Znd edn.
Larsen, J.S., Selby, L.A. [1981] Spondylosis deformans in large dogs—
 Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
relative risk by breed, age and sex. Jourmal of the American Animal
Griffths, I.R, Duncan, I.D. [197S) Chronic degenerative radiculo-
Hosprital Associationt 17, 623-625.
myelopathy in the dog. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 16, 46l-471.
Laste, N.J., Harpster, N.K. [199S] A retrospective study of I00 cases of
Griffiths, I.R., Duncan, I.D. [1979) Ischaemic neuromyopathy in cats.
feline distal aortic thromboembolism: 1977-1993. Jourmal of the
Veterinary Record 104, S18-522.
American Amimal Hosprital Association 31, 492-500.
Haines, D.M, Martin, K.M, Chelack, B.J., Sargent, R.A., Outerbridge, C.A.,
Lavely, J., Vemau, KM., LeCouteur, RA. [2002) Spinal epidural empyema
Clark, E.G. [1999) Immunohistochemical detection of canine distemper
im seven dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary Intermal Medicine 16, 369.
virus in haired skin, nasal mucosa, and footpad epithelium: a method for
LeCouteur, R.A., Grandy, J.L., Ettmger, S.J., Feldman, E.C. [ed.) [2000)
antemortem diagnosis of infection.Jourmal of Veterinary Diagmostic
Diseases of the spinal cord. Textbook of Veterinary Intermal Medicine:
Investigation 11, 396-399.
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, Vols I and 2. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Haskins, M.E., Aguinre, G.D, Jezyk, PF, Patterson, D.F. [1980) The
Levitski, R.E., Chauvet, A.E., Lipsitz, D. [1999a) Cervical myelopathy
pathology of the feline model of mucopolysaccharidosis Vl. Americat 
associated with extradural synovial cysts in 4 dogs.Jourmal of Veterinary
Jourtal of Pathology 101, 657-674.
ntermal Medicine 13, 181-186
Haskins, M.E., Bingel, S.A., Northington, J.W, Newton, C.D., Sande, R.D.
Levitski, R.E., Lipsitz, D., Chauvet, A.E. [1999b) Magnetic resonance
 Jezyk, PF., Patterson, D.F. [1983) Spinal cord compression and hindlimb
imaging of the cervical spine in 27 dogs. Veterinary Radiology and
paresis in cats with mucopolysaccharidosis Vl. Jourmal of the Americant
Ultrasound 40, 332-341.
Veterinary Medical Association 182, 983-985.
Lewis, D.G., Kell, D.F. [1990) Calcinosis circumscripta in dogs as a cause
Hawthome, J.C., Wallace, L.J., Fenner, WR., Waters, D.J. (2001)
of spinal ataxiafournal of Small Amimal Practice 31, 35-37.
Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy in miniature schnauzers. Jourtal
Lipsitz, D., Levitski, R.E., Chauvet, A.E., Berry, W.L. [2001) Magnetic res-
of the American Amimal Hospital Association 37, 374-383.
Onance imaging features of cervical stenotic myelopathy in 2l dogs.
Henry, A., Tunkel, R., Arbit, E., Ku, A., Lachmann, E. [1997) Tethered
Veterinary RadiologyandUItrasound 42,2027.
thoracic cord resulting from spinal cord hemiation. Archives of Physical
Lobetti, R.G. [1994) Subarachnoid abscess as a complication of dis-
Medicine and Rehabilitationt 78, S30-583.
cospondylitis in a dog. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 35, 480-483.
Hodge, J.C., Bessette, B. [1999) The incidence of sacroiliac joint disease in
Lu, D., Lamb, C.R., Targett, M.P [2002) Results of myelography in seven dogs
patients with low-back pain. Canadian Association of Radiologists
with myelomalacia. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 43, 326-330.
omal50, 321323.
MacCoy, D.M., Trotter, E.J. [1977) Brachial paralysis subsequent to trau-
Howington, J.U., Connolly, E.S., Voorhies, R.M. [1999) Intraspinal syn-
matic partial occlusion of the right subclavian artery. Jourmal of the
ovial cysts: IO-year experience at the Ochsner Clinic. Jourral of
Americal Amimal Hospital Association 13, 625-630.
Neurosurgery 91 [2 Suppl), 193-199.
Malik, R., Latter, M., Love, D.N. [1990) Bacterial discospondylitis in a cat.
Huntley, K., Frazer, J., Gibbs, C., Gaskell, C.J. [1982) The radiological
Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 31, 404-406.
features of canine Cushing's syndrome: a review of forty-eight cases.
Manchikanti, L. [1999) Facet joint pain and the role of neural blockade in
fourmal of Small Amimal Practice 23, 369-380.
its management. Currerit Retiew of Pait 3, 348-358.
Huttmann, S., Krauss, J., Collmann, H., Sorensen, N., Roosen, K. [2001)
Mark walder, TM. [1993) Surgical management of neurogenic claudication
Surgical management of tethered spinal cord in adults: report of 54
-Apuods anpeuauasap o anp sisouais peuds equn ylm suaed 0o1 u
cases. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 95 [2 Suppl], 173-178.
lolisthesis. Acta Neurochirurgica {Wein] 120, 136-142.
 Jacobson, L.S., Kirberger, R.M. [1996] Canine multiple cartilaginous exos-
Martin, R.A., Shell, L., Dodds, WJ. (1986) Focal intramedullary spinal cord
toses: unusual manifestations and a review of the literature. Jourmal of
hematoma in a dog. Jourmal of the American Artimal Hospital Associatiot
the American Amimal Hospital Association 32, 45-51.
22, 545-550.
336
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Matthews, N.S., de Labunta, A. [198S) Degenerative myelopathy in an
Perroum-Verbe, B., Lenne-Aurier, K., Robert, R., Auffray-Calvier, E.,
arlult Miniature Poodle. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
Richard, I., Mauduyt de la Greve, I., Mathe, J.F. [1998) Post-traumatic
Association 186, 1213-1215.
syringomyelia and post-traumatic spinal canal stenosis: a direct relation-
McEwan, J.D., Thomson, C., Sullivan, M., Callanan, S., Park, M. [1992)
ship: review of 75 patients with a spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord 36,
Thoracic spinal calcinosis circumscripta causing cord compression in two
137-143.
German Shepherd dog littermates. Veterinary Record 130, 575-578.
Plummer, S.B., Bunch, S.E., Khoo, L.H., Spaulding, K.A., Komegay, J.N.
McKee, W.M., Renwick, PW. [1994) Marsupialisation of an arachnoid cyst
[1993) Tethered spinal cord and an intradural lipoma associated with a
in a dog. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 35, I08-Il1.
meningocele in a Manx-type cat. Journal of the American Veterinary
McKee, WM., Mitten, R.W., Labuc, R.H. [1990) Surgical treatment of
Medical Association 203, Iis9-1161.
lumbosacral discospondylitis by a distraction-fusion technique. Jourmal
 Porter, R.W [1996) Spinal stenosis and neurogenic claudication. Spine 21,
of Small Animal Practice 31, 15-20.
2046-2052.
Meomartino, L., Fatone, G., De Vico, G. [1997] Osteochondromatosis
Postacchini, F, Montanaro, A. [1980] Tuberculous epidural granuloma
[multiple cartilaginous exostoses) in a dog: report of a clinical case.
simulating a hemiated lumbar disk: a report of a case. Clinical
Veterinaria Cremona 1l,95-99.
Orthopaedics and Related Research 148, 182-185.
Meric, S.M. [1988] Canine meningitis. Jourmal of Veterinary lntermal
Reihsaus, E., Waldbaur, H., Seeling, W. [2000) Spinal epidural abscess:
Medicine 2, 26-35
a meta-analysis of 915 patients. Neurosurgical Retview 23, 175-204;
Meric, S.M., Child, G., Higgins, R.J. [(1986) Necrotizing vasculitis of the
discussion 205.
spinal pachyleptomeningeal arteries in three Bermese Mountain dog litter-
Remedios, A.M., Wagner, R., Caulkett, N.A., Duke, T. [1996) Epidural
mates. Jourmal ofthe American Animal Hospital Association 22, 459-465.
abscess and discospondylitis in a dog after administration of a lum-
Mesfin, G.M., Kusewitt, D., Parker, A. [1980) Degenerative myelopathy in
bosacral epidural analgesic. Canadian Veterinary Jourmal 37, I06-107.
a cat.Jourmal of theAmericanVeterinary Medical Association 176,62-64.
Riggs, B.L. [2002) Endocrine causes of age-related bone loss and osteoporosis.
Moissomier, P, Duchossoy, Y, Lavieille, S., Reviron, T, Ye, J.H., Horvat, J.C.
Notartis Fourtdatiort Sympositm Series 242, 247259; discussion 260264.
[1996) Reimplantation of ventral rootlets into the cervical spinal cord
Robinson, D.E., Ball, K.E., Webb, PJ. (200l) Iliopsoas hematoma with
after their avulsion in the dog: a new surgical treatment of brachial plexus
femoral neuropathy presenting a diagnostic dilemma after spinal decom-
injuries? Veterinary Surgery 25 (3), 263.
pression. Spine 26, E135-138.
Moissonnier, P, Duchossoy, Y, Lavieille, S., Horvat, J.C. [2001) Evaluation
Rodkey, W.G., Sharp, N.J.H. [2003) Surgery of the peripheral nervous sys-
of ventral root reimplantation as a treatment of experimental avulsion of
tem. In: D. Slatter [ed.)], Textbook of Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd edn,
the cranial brachial plexus in the dog. Revue de Medecine Veterinaire
1218-1227. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
152, 587-596.
Rusbridge, C. [1997) Persistent scratching in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels.
Moissonier, P, Carozzo, C., Gnirs, K., Ruel, Y, Blot, S., Begon, D., Rault, D.,
Veterinary Record 141, 179.
Delise, F., Boulouha, L., Colle, M.-A. [2002) What is the exact nature of
Rusbridge, C., MacSweeny, J.E., Davies, J.V., Chandller, K, Fitzmaurice, S.N.,
'spinal subarachnoid cysts? Imaging and surgical investigation in I3 dogs.
Demmis, R., Cappello, R., Wheeler, S.J. [2000) Syringohydromyelia in
Veterinary Surgery 31, 301-302.
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. Jourmal of the Americar Artimal Hospital
Morgan, J.P, Stavenbom, M. [199l) Disseminated idiopathic skeletal
Associatiornt 36, 34-41.
hyperostosis [DISH) in a dog. Veterinary Radiology 32, 65-70.
Rylander, H., Lipsitz, D., Berry, W.L., Sturges, B.K., Vemau, K.M.
Morgan, J.P, Hansson, K., Miyabayashi, T. [1989) Spondylosis deformans
Dickinson, PJ., Anor, S.A., Higgins, R.J., LeCouteur, R.A. [2002)
in the female Beagle dog: a radliographic study. Jourmal of Small Amimal
o panr sa tl u ss puoe eus jo seue aas
Practice 30, 457-460.
Veterinary Intermal Medicine 16, 690-696.
Morrison, J.L., Kaplan, PA., Dussault, R.G., Anderson, M.W. [2000) Pedicle
Sakamoto, H., Nishikawa, M., Hakuba, A., Yasui, T, Kitano, S., Nakanishi, N.,
marrow signal intensity changes in the lumbar spine: a manifestation of
Inoue, Y [1999) Expansive suboccipital cranioplasty for the treatrment
facet degenerative joint disease. Skeletal Radiology 29, 703-707.
of syringomyelia associated with Chiari malformation. Acta Neurochirurgica
Munana, K.R. [1996] Encephalitis and meningitis. Veterinary Clinics of
(Wein) 141, 949-960; dliscussion 960-961.
North America Small Amimal Practice 26, 857-874.
Salinas, E.M., Martinez, N.L. [1993) Description of a case compatible with
Munana, K.R., Luttgen, PJ. [1998) Prognostic factors for dogs with granu-
degenerative myelopathy in an English Mastiff dog. Veterinaria Mexico
lomatous meningoencephalomyelitis: 42 cases [1982-1996]. Jourmal of
24, 159-162.
the American Veterinary Medical Association 212, 1902-1906.
Schleithoff, N.S. [1984) Frequency of occurrence of skeletal lesions among
Nas, K., Gur,A,Kemalogu, MS., Geyik, M.E, Cevik, R.,Buke, Y,Ceviz, A,
adult dogs Berlin: Fachbereich Veterinartmedizin der Freien Universitat
Sarac, A.J., Aksu, Y. [200l) Managerment of spinal brucellosis and out-
Berlin.
come of rehabilitation. Spinal Cord 39, 223-227.
Scott, H.W., O'Leary, M.T. [1996) Fibro-cartilaginous embolism in a cat.
Nesbit, J.W., Lourens, D.C., Williams, M.C. [1981) Spastic paresis in two
Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 37, 228-231.
littermate pups caused by Toxoplasma gondi. Jourmal of the South
Seim, H.B., Prata, R.G. [1982) Ventral decompression for the treatment
African Veterinary Association 52, 243-246.
of cervical disk disease in the dog: a review of S4 cases. Jourmal of the
Nishikawa, M., Sakamoto, H., Hakuba, A., Nakanishi, N., Inoue, Y. [1997)
American Amimal Hospital Association 18, 233-240.
 Pathogenesis of Chiari malformation: a morphometric study of the pos-
Sgouros, S., Willams, B. [I995) A critical appraisal of drainage in
terior cranial fossa. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 86, 40-47.
syringomyelia. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 82, I-10.
Norrdin, R.W., Histand, M.B., Sheahan, H.J., Capenter, TR. [1990) Effects
Sgouros, S., Williams, B. [1996) Management and outcome of posttrau-
of corticosteroids on mechanical strength of intervertebral joints and ver-
matic syringomyelia. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 85, 197-205.
tebrae in dogs. Clirical Orthopaedics and Related Research 259,268-276.
 Shamir, M., Rochkind, S., Johnston, D. [200l) Surgical treatment of teth-
Olby, N.J., Mumana, K.R., Sharp, N.J.H., Thrall, D.E. [2000) The com-
ered spinal cord syndrome in a dog with myelomeningocele. Vterinary
puted tomographic appearance of acute thoracolumbar intervertebral
Record 148, 755-756.
disc hemiations in dogs. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 41,
Shamir, M.H., Shahar, R., Aizenberg, I. [1997) Subarachnoid cyst in a cat.
396-402.
Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital Associatiorn 33, I23-125.
Osterholm, J. [1974) The pathophysiological response to spinal cord injury.
Sharp, N.J.H., Vitek, S., Steingold, S., Olby, NJ., Munana, K. [2000)
The current status of related research. Jourmal of Neurosurgery 40, S-33.
A rapid, antemortem diagnostic test for canine distemper virus. Jourmal
Pang, W.W., Mok, M.S., Lin, M.L., Chang, D.P, Hwang, M.H. [1998)
ofVeterinary Intermal Medicine 14, 341.
Application of spinal pain mapping in the diagnosis of low back pain—
Skeen, TM., OIby, N.J., Munana, K.M., Sharp, N.J.H. [(2003) Spinal arach-
analysis of I04 cases. Acta Anaesthesiologica Simica 36, 71-74.
noid cysts in 17 dogs. Jourmal of the American Animal Hospital
Pellegrini, N., Braca, G., Pozzo, F, Pambianco, L., Poli, A. [1979] Diabetic
Assoctiatiort 39, 271-282.
osteopathy in the dog. Post-mortem findings and pathogenesis. Artriali
Smith, S.A., Tobias, A.H., Jacob, K.A., Fine, D.M., Grumbles, PL. [2003)
della Facolta di Medicina Veterinaria di Pisa 31,271-280.
Arterial thromboembolism in cats: acute crisis in 127 cases [1992-2001)
Miscellaneous conditions 
337
and long-term management with low-dose aspirin in 24 cases.Jourmal of
Tment of bacterial meningitis in adults: do we have to change our strate-
Veterinary Intermal Medicine 17,73-83.
gjes in an era of increasing antibiotic resistance? Acta Clirica Belgica
Stefanacci, J.D., Wheeler, S.J. [1991) Skeletal scintigraphy in canine dis-
56, 225-233.
Cospondylitis. American College of Veterinary Radiology, 66.
van Winkle, TJ., Liu, S.M., Hackner, S.G. [1993) Clinical and pathological
Stiles, J. [2000) Canine rickettsial infections. Veterinary Clinics of North
features of aortic thromboembolism in 36 dogs. Journal of Veterinary
America, Small Amimal Practice 30, I135-l149.
Emergency and Critical Care 3, 13-21.
Stokol, T, Pary, B.W, Mansell, PD., Richardson, J.L. (1994)
Vestergaard, P, Lindholm, J., Jorgensen, J.O., Hagen, C., Hoeck, H.C.,
 Hematorrhachis associated with hemophilia A in three German Shepherd
Laurberg, P, Rejnmark, L., Brixen, K, Kristensen, L.O., Feldt-
dogs.Jourmal ofthe AmericanAmimal HospitalAssociation30,239-243.
Rasmussen, U., Mosekilde, L. [2002) Increased risk of osteoporotic
Summers, B.A., Cummings, J.F, de Lahunta, A. [1994) Veterinary
fractures in patients with Cushing's syndrome. European Journal of
Neuropathology. St Louis: Mosby.
Endocrinology 146, 51-56.
Swezey, R.L.[i998) The sacroiliac joint. Nothing is sacred. Physical
Walker, TM., Pierce, WA., Welch, R.D. (2002) External fixation of the
Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinics of North America 9, S1S-S19.
lumbar spine in a canine model. Veterinary Surgery 31, 18l-188.
Taga, A., Taura, Y, Nakaichi, M., Wada, N., Hasegawa, T. [2000) Magnetic
Watson, E., Roberts, R.E. [1993) Discospondylitis in a cat. Veterinary
resonance imagingof syringomyeliain five dogs.fourtalofSmallAnimal
Radiology and Ultrasound 34,397-398.
Practice 41, 362-365.
Watt, PR., Robins, G.M., Galloway, A.M., O'Boyle, D.A. [1995)
Tamke, PG., Peterson, M.G., Dietze, A.E., de Lahunta, A. [1988) Acquired
 Disseminated opportunistic fungal disease in dogs: 10 cases [1982-1990].
 hy drocephalus and hydromelia in a cat with feline infectious peritonitis:
Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 207, 67-70.
a case report and brief review. Canadian Veterinary Jourmal 29,
Watters, M.R., Stears, J.C., Osbom, A.G., Tumer, G.E., Burton, B.S.,
997-1000.
Lillehei, K., Yuh, W.T. (1998) Transdural spinal cord hermiation: imaging
Tan, D.Y, Tsou, I.Y., Chee, TS. (2002) Differentiation of malignant
amd clinical spectra. American Jourmal of Neuroradiology 19, 1337-1344.
vertebral collapse from osteoporotic and other benign causes using
Webb, A.A., Pharr, J.W, Lew, L.J., Tryon, K.A. [2001) MR imaging find-
magnetic resonance imaging. Armals of the Academy of Medicine
ings in a dog with lumbar ganglion cysts. Veterinary Radiology and
Singapore 31, 8-14.
Ultrasound 42, 9-13.
Tarvin, G., Prata, R.G. [1980) Lumbosacral stenosis in dogs. Jourmal of the
Wilson, J.W. [1982) Spina bifida in the dog and cat. Comperndium of
American Veterinary Medical Association I77, I54-159.
Comtirming Educationfor thePracticingVeterinaria 4,626-632,636-637.
Thomas, W.B., Sorjonen, D.C., Steiss, J.E. [1993) A retrospective evalu-
Wilson, J.W., Kurtz, H.J., Leipold, H.W., Lees, G.E. [1979) Spina bifida in
ation of 38 cases of canine distemper encephalomyelitis. Jourmal of the
the dog. Veterinary Pathology 16, 165-179.
American Amimal Hospital Association 29, 129-133.
Yamaura, M., Nakamura, T, Nagai, Y, Yoshihara, A., Suzuki, K. [1993)
Tipold, A., Jaggy, A. [1994) Steroid responsive meningitis-artertis in
Reduced mechanical competence of bone by ovariectomy and its preser-
dogs: long-term study of 32 cases. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice
35, 311-316.
Calcified Tissue Itermiational 52, 49-56.
Tipold, A., Vandevelde, M., Jaggy, A. [1992] Neurological manifestations
of canine distemper virus infection. Jourmal of Small Animal Practice 33,
466-470.
FURTHER READING
Tomlinson, J., Higgins, R.J., LeCouteur, R.A., Knapp, D. [1988] Intraspinal
epidermoid cyst in a dog. Joural of the American Veterinary Medical
Braund, K.G. [2003) Clinical Neurology in Small Amimals: Localization,
Association 193, 1435-1436.
Diagnosis and Treatment. http://www.ivis.org/special_books/Braund/
Tshamala, M., Moens, Y. [2000) True dermoid cyst in a Rhodesian ridge-
toc.asp
back.Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 41, 352-353.
Vandecasteele, S.J., Knockaert, D., Verhaegen, J., Van Eldere, J.,
 Peetermans, W.E. [200l) The antibiotic and anti-inflammatory treat-
Postoperative care
Chapter
15
Analgesia 339
 Box 15.1 Important clinical signs to recognize in
Opioid analgesics  340
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
■ Post-myelographic seizures
analgesia  341
■ Inappetance
Analgesia in cats   343
Other agents  343
■ Depression
■ Persistent fever
Nursing care
343
■ Wound discharge
Moving patients  343
■ Diarrhea or vomiting 
Myelography   343
■ Abdominal pain
Treatment plans 343
■ Melena or 'coffee ground' vomit 
Cleanliness  343
■ Change in abity to void, or in the ease of manual
Urinalysis  344
expression
Recumbency  344
■ Blood or floccular material in urine
Hydration and nutrition   344
■ Odiferous urine 
■ Urine scald
Fooring for recumbent patients
345
■ Decubital ulcers 
■ Increase in spinal pain
Physiotherapy  346
■ Deterioration in neurological status
Control of urinary function   350
 Anatomy and physiology  350
conditions such as pneumonia or pancreatitis. If com-
Disorders of micturition   351
plications are viewed as something to be expected the
 Pharmacological manipulation of micturition 
351
surgeon is more likely to have the patient monitored
Assisted emptying of the bladder  352
appropriately (Box 15.1).
Care of neurosurgical patients can be labor intensive
Postoperative complications
355
(Table 15.4). It is important that hospital nursing staff
Urinary tract infections   355
have a high standard of training and are properly
Gastrointestinal disturbances 
355
informed about what parameters to monitor, how often
Pancreatitis  357
to monitor them, and what the most likely complica-
Wound complications 
357
tions are going to be in each individual patient. Clear
Urine scald   357
written instructions should also be given to the client at
Decubital ulcers  358
the time of discharge.
Miscellaneous  359
References 360
ANALGESIA
Neurosurgical procedures often cause a great deal of
pain for huuman patients. It is likely that in the past vet-
The surgeon should accept that some form of postop-
erinarians have tended to overlook the degree of pain
erative complication will develop in many neurosurgi-
suffered by our patients [Hansen and Hardie, 1993;
cal patients. This may range from a simple urinary tract
Dohoo and Dohoo, 1996; Lascelles et al., 1999). Doubt
infection {UTI) to less common but life-threatening
as to whether an animal really is in pain often caused a
340
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
clinician to withhold analgesics, yet the same clinician
The pure opioid agonists are the most potent anal-
would administer antibiotics without documented evi-
 gesics but they also have more potential side-effects.
dence of infection (Crane, 1987). When in doubt, a
They should be given on a fixed schedule every 2-4h;
dose of opioid should be tested for effect.
the interval can be decreased if greater analgesia is
 needled. The response varies markedly between patients.
Opioid analgesics
Therefore small, intravenous doses should be given
Opioids are the most effective analgesic for severe pain.
every 5 min (for dogs and cats 0.l mg/kg morphine;
The approximate duration of action of these drugs,
0.05 mg/kg oxymorphone; 0.05 mg/kg hydromorphone)
togethier with thieir advantages and disadvantages, are
umtil a satisfactory level of analgesia is achieved (stop
 outlined in Table 15.1. Preoperative or intraoperative
 administration if mydriasis occurs in cats). The total dose
 opioid administration is recommended to reduce the
 required for that patient is then repeated on the fixed
requirement for postoperative analgesia. Fentanyl patches
schedule thereafter. A continuous intravenous infusion
are a convenient way to provide long-lasting analgesia
 can also be used by delivering the curmulative dose for
(15.l). As these patches have a delayed onset of action
each time interval as a constant rate infusion over
[see Chapter 6, page 84), they should be applied the
that same period, but the animal must be re-evaluated
night before elective surgeries and are supplemented
frequently in case adjustments are needed to the
 with additional intravenous opioid agonists as needed.
rate. Common side-effects include ileus and nausea.
Table 15.1 Narcotic analgesic agents1
Drug*
Dose
Interval 
Advantages
Disadvantages
Morphine (pure agonist) 
Dog: 0.2-1.0mg/kg IM, SQ
4h 
 Inexpensive, sedative
Respiratory depression
Dog: 1-5.0 mg/kg PO
4-6h 
Bradycardia**
Cat: 0.1-0.4 mg/kg IM, SQ
4h
Caution IV**
Emesis
 Oxymorphone (pure
Dog: 0.05-0.2 mg/kg
2-4h
 Less vomiting than
 As for morphine 
agonist)
M, IM, SQ
with morphine
 Expense, availability
Cat: 0.02-0.1 mg/kg 
M, IM, SQ
 Hydromorphone 
Dog: 0.02-0.4 mg/kg 
2-4h
Similar to oxymorphone
 As for morphine
(pure agonist)
M, IM, SQ
Expense
Cat: 0.02-0.2 mg/kg
M, IM, SQ
 Butorphanol
 Dog: 0.2-1.0mg/kg 
1-2h 
 Reduced respiratory or 
Less potent analgesic in
(agonist/antagonist)
M IM, SQ
cardiovascular effects
severe pain, sedation
Cat: 0. 1-0.6 mg/kg IV, IM, SQ;
2-6h 
lasts longer than
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO
6-8h 
analgesia
 Buprenorphine
Dog: 0.005-0.02 mg/kg 
6-12h
 Reduced respiratory
If respiratory depression
(partial agonist)
Iv, IM, SQ
cr cardliovascular 
does occur it can be
Cat: 0.005-0.01 mg/kg IV, IM, SQ
effects
 dlifficult to reverse
 Fentany transdermal
Dog: <10kg: 25 μg
Lasts up to 
Convenient, well 
Delay in onset 12-24h 
 patch (pure agonist)
10-29 kg: 50 μg
 3 days; longer tolerated, apply before 
dogs, 6-12h cats.
>30kg: 75-150 μg
in cats 
surgery (see page 84)
Ineffective in some 
Cat: 25 μug patch 
 animals 
Codeine 60 mg with
Dog: Dose at 10 mg/kg of
8h
Inexpensive 
 Sedation, Gl side-
 300 mg acetaminophen 
 the acetaminophen PO 
Useful crally 
effects. Not for cats
1 B. Hansen, personal communication.
* Consult appropriate source for contraindications and acverse reactions and to verify cdoses. Many opioids are controlled substances.
reiusauelanun o swaoadu l walgad e Auo s sup reeeg aoaaa al panbal ag Ae auidane yo uesuue jueuouo  
Gl, gastrointestinal.
 Postoperative care
341
Histamine release occurs in dogs after IV administration
 increases in dogs to a mean of 13 h with the addition of
of morphine; this can cause problems for animals under 
epidural medetomidine at 5μg/kg {Branson et al.,
 general anesthesia or those with hypovolemia but not
 1993). Buprenorphine and morphine are equally effec-
usually for hemodynamically stable, conscious dogs.
The dose-dependent respiratory depression of opioid
 phine is 0.1 mg/kg and for buprenorphine is 4 μg/kg,
agonists means that they must be used with care in
diluted in warm saline to a volume of l ml per 5 kg and
animals that have decreased ventilatory function, such
injected into the lumbosacral epidural space (Smith et
as those with cranial cervical spinal cord lesions. Opioid
@l., 200l). Urinary retention can occur after epidural or
agonists can increase intracranial pressure and should be
systemic opioid (Herperger, 1998). Epidural abscessation
used with care after severe head trauma unless paCO2
has been reported as a rare complication of epidural anal-
 can be monitored and preferably intracranial and mean
gesia (Remedios et al., 1996). In general, transdermal
arterial blood pressure as well (Marik et al., 1999; de
fentanyl lasts much longer than epidural morphine and is
Nadal et al., 2000; Lam and Warner, 200l). Judicious use
easier to use (Robinson et al., 1999).
aaass ss um siee u pasn si sae asaun j
head injuries provided that their neurological status can 
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
be monitored closely and ideally that the effect on
drug (NSAID) analgesia
paCOz can also be assessed. Animals thiat become
The NSAIDs are indicated either as a supplement to
hypercapnic will need to be ventilated in order to
 opioid analgesia or when opioids are unsuitable (Table
restore paCO2 to between 25 and 30 mmHg.
15.2). Carprofen is particularly useful as it can also be
Epidural morphine is a useful technique for some neu-
 given intravenously; it is most effective when given pre-
rosurgical patients such as those with severe nerve root or
 operatively (Lascelles et al., 1998). All NSAIDs provide
cancer pain. Respiratory depression has not been a prob-
analgesia by blocking the cyclooxygenase enzymes that
lem in normal dogs. It does not have central opioid 
produce prostaglandins. Cyclooxygenase (COX) activity
effects and is not associated with sensory, sympathetic
is either primarily constitutive (the COX-1 enzyme con-
or motor blockade, so the patient can still walk and anal-
gesia can be effective as far cranial as the thoracic limbs.
metabolic functions in many tissues) or primarily
Epidural morphine is equivalent both to intravenous mor-
inducible (the COX-2 enzyme is induced by inflamma-
phine and to local bupivacaine nerve block for controlling
tion to produce prostaglandins locally). Prostaglandins are
 pain after lateral thoracotomy (Pascoe and Dyson, 1993;
integral to the inflammatory process and they enhance
Popilskis et al., 1993). The onset of action is from 20 to
nociception both peripherally and centrally. Some
60min and mean duration of analgesia is 6h; this
prostaglandins, particularly prostaglandin E (PgE) are
intestine.
 Newer NSAIDs have now been developed that only
inhibit COX-1 weakly. Carprofen, ketoprofen, etodolac
and meloxicam are COX-1 sparing; carprofen and keto-
Rights were not granted to include this tigure in elctronic media
profen being somewhat less so than meloxicam (Kay-
Please refer to the printed publication.
Mugford et al., 2000; Brideau et al., 200l). The analgesic
effects of these newer NSAIDs are good and they are
roughly equivalent to each other. Carprofen provides
pue shop ui auad pioido au on eisarieue roadns
cats (Lascelles et al., 1994; Balmer et al., 1998); higher
 doses of most NSAIDs provide analgesia comparable to
low doses of opioids in most studies.
The COX-l sparing NSAIDs in general cause less
gastrointestinal ulceration than more potent COX-1
inhibitors. The gastrointestinal side-effects of etodoloc
and carprofen are significantly less than aspirin (Reimer
et al., 1999). Carprofen is known to preserve protective
levels of PgE in the gut and no significant gastrointesti-
nal problems were observed in more than 200 dogs with
15.1 Skin reaction to a fentanyl patch. The patch has been
removed as dermatitis can increase the rate of absorption.
degenerative joint disease (Holtsinger et al., 1992).
Fever can have the same effect (Bagley et al., 2000).
   s    
342
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Table 15.2 Non-stercidal anti-inflammatory drug analgesia1
Drug*
Dose-dog
Dose-cat
Comment**
Aspirin 
10-25 mg/kg PO q12 h
10 mg/kg P0 q36-48h 
 Coagulopathy
Ketoprofen
1 mg/kg PO, IV IM, SQ q24 h 
1 mg/kg PO, IV, IM, SQ q24 h
for 5 days
for 5 days
 Meloxicam 
Acute pain:
Acute pain:
0.2 mg/kg PO, IV, SC once, then 
0.2 mg/kg PO, IV, SC once,
0. 1 mg/kg q24 h
 then 0.1 mg/kg P0 q24 h for
3-4 days
Long-term therapy:
 Long-term therapy: up to
 0.1 mg/kg q24 h 
0.1 mg per cat q48-72h
 Etodolac
10-15 mg/kg P0 q24h
NA
Lower dose for long-term use
 Meclofenamic acid 
1.1 mg/kg PO q24 h
N/A
Lower dose for long-term use
 Deracoxib
 3-4 mg/kg q24 h
N/A
 Carprofen 
2mg/kg PO, IV q12h
 2-4 mg/kg q5 days PO, IV, SC
 Rare, severe hepatic effects.
Do not repeat within 5 days 
or use long-term for cats 
1 B. Hansen, personal communication.
* Consult appropriate soure for fullist of contraindications and acverse reactions and to verify doses.
* All NSAIDs have the potential to cause Gl side-effects.
N/A, not available.
ulceration despite its greater selectivity for COX-2.
Acute renal failure has been reported in humans taking
COX-1 sparing drugs (Goldstein et al., 200l; Ahmad
et al., 2002). Owing to the tendency for neurosurgical
patients to develop gastrointestinal disturbances,
NSAIDs should not be used for more than a few days
and this probably applies to COX-l sparing drugs as
well (Ahmad et al., 2002). A specific contraindication
to NSAID use is when the animal has recently had
corticosteroids, including methylprednisolone sodium
succinate (MPSS), because of the high risk of gastroin-
testinal bleeding and even perforation (Toormbs et al.,
1986; Strombeck and Guilford, 1990; Hinton et al.,
2002). Care in the use of NSAIDs is also needed in any
animal with renal or hepatic dysfunction; especially dur-
ing periods of hemodynamic instability. Furthermore,
COX-l inhibition by some of these drugs, such as
 15.2 Postoperative appearance of a dog given 12 mg/kg of
aspirin and ketoprofen, prevents thromboxane A2 syn-
aspirin 24h before ventral slot. Severe bruising was probably
thesis and causes decreased platelet aggregation with
due to poor platelet aggregation. Aspirin blocks COx-1
significantly increased bleeding times (Grisneaux et al.,
irreversibly, thereby inactivating platelets. New platelets 
must then be generated and so the effect on coagulation 
1999; Mathews et al., 200l; Kerwin and Maudlin,
can last 7 days or more. Aspirin should not be used 
2003) (l5.2). A synthetic form of prostaglandin E
preoperatively.
 Postoperative care
343
(misoprostol) can be used prophylactically to counter
Myelography
gastrointestinal side-effects of NSAIDs (Walt, 1992;
It is important that the animal's head is kept elevated
Murtaugh et al., 1993). Misoprostol is also protective to
at all times following the injection of contrast into the
the kidney and could be used for this purpose should
 subarachnoid space, both during the myelogram and
NSAIDs be deemed necessary (Paller and Manivel,
during recovery from anesthesia. This simple precau-
1992; Shield, 1992; Davies et al., 2001).
tion is easily overlooked as a means of preventing post-
myelographic seizures.
Analgesia in cats
Treatment plans
Selected opioids can be used in cats (Table l5.l).
The best way to nurse a neurological patient, especially
Meloxicam and carprofen are also tolerated well by cats
using oral (both drugs) and IV (carprofen) routes (Parton
one with multiple problems, is to make a plan for each
et al., 2000; Slingsby et al., 2000; Lascelles et al., 2001)
day as illustrated in Tables 15.3 and 15.4. In this man-
(Table 15.2). Acetaminophen should not be used in cats.
ner, voiding requirements, physiotherapy needs, med-
ications, laboratory work and routine tasks are planned
out and not forgotten. A specific plan for physiother-
Other agents
apy is also useful (Table 15.5).
These include:
● Gabapentin is an anticonvulsant that has also
Cleanliness
 been used to alleviate trigeminal pain in humans.
 It can be an effective analgesic for animals with
to manage if their entire hindquarters are shaved.
pain caused by neoplasia or inflammation of a
Soiled areas should be bathed as necessary; bathing of
 nerve root. The dose range starts at 5 mg/kg q8h
the perineal area may be needed several times a day in
 and extends in dogs up to 50 mg/kg q8h given to
some animals. It is often suggested that patients with
effect; potential side-effects include sedation and
surgical wounds should not be bathed until a minimum
ataxia.
Suq Apnas auo u 'aaamo Aiahuns iage shep S Jo
· Medetomidine can provide useful supplemental
analgesic at low doses (1-3 μg/kg/h). The drug's
cardiovascular effects are much shorter in duration
Table 15.3 Nursing plan for a neurological patient*
when used at such low doses but are quite
Task
0800
1200
1600
2000(etc)
dramatic with an IV bolus. The dose should
 therefore be given over 10min to avoid
TPR
(x)
hypotension; it can also be delivered by syringe
Express bladder
(x)
()
()
()
 pump or in IV fluids.
● The skeletal muscle relaxants methocarbamol
Feed 1/4 can
(xX)
()
(55-132 mg/kg PO in divided doses) or diazepam
(Table 15.7) are useful to relieve muscle spasm
 after spinal surgery.
Check drinking water
(X)
()
()
()
· Acupuncture may also be a helpful adjunctive
 Phenoxybenzamine 
(x)
()
means of providing analgesia {Haskins, 1987;
5mg PO
Still, 1989; Janssens, 1992).
● Physiotherapy such as heat, ultrasound (l5.13B)
Diazepam 2.5 mg PO(X)
()
()
and laser (15.14A) can provide additional pain
 relief. Pain relief after laser therapy is probably
Trirmethoprim-sulfa
(x)
()
mediated mainly through serotonin release
120 mg PO
(Walker, 1983; Clokie et al., 1991].
Urinalysis 
()
NUrSING Care
*Taken from the hospital record of a 4-year-old male Dachshund that
had uncergone a hemilaminectomy for thoracolumbar disc extrusion
Moving patients
4 days previously The cog was paraplegkc and incontinent, with 
 Proper support must be provided for the spine when
educed deep pain sensation. An E. coll, sensitive to trimethoprim/
moving an animal with a spinal lesion, especially an
sulfa, had been cultured from his urine on admission.
TPR, temperature, pulse and respiratory rate; (X, task completed; 
anesthetized patient. Use of a board or stretcher is
( ), task stil to be completed.
indicated (13.1).
344
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
and swimming did not influence the incidence of wound
ventilation. The chest should be auscultated twice
infection, even when performed in the first 3 days after
daily to facilitate early detection of problems. Patients
surgery (Hosgood, 1992).
should be fed while supported in a sternal position to
reduce the risk of aspiration (Nicoll and Remedios,
Urinalysis
1995). They should be kept on a water bed if possible
If urinary incontinence is present, a urinalysis should be
 to minimize the development of decubitus.
done every 2-3 days, regardless of whether the patient
is on antibiotics. Most animals with neurological deficits
Hydration and nutrition
that are severe enough to interfere with motor function
 Tetraparetic animals dehydrate easily and should be
will also have inefficient bladder emptying that predis-
offered water from a sternal position every 4 h and most
poses them to retention cystitis.
 also require intravenous fluids. Total protein, hemato-
crit, urine specific gravity and serum electrolyte con-
Recumbency
centrations should be monitored daily in these patients.
 Recumbent, tetraparetic animals need to be turned every
 Nutritional support for the neurosurgical patient
 2 h because sustained hypostatic congestion predisposes
should also be evaluated carefully. Stress, particularly
the patient to pneumonia; alternating between lateral 
 from trauma or surgery, results in an increased metabolic
and stermal recumbency will also help to improve
rate and so enhanced nutritional intake is important
 Table 15.4 Nursing plan for a neurological patient*
Task
we g we + wez  1ubjupiw zl wd o  ud 8  ud g wd + wd z  uoou zl  we ol  we8
TPR b.i.d.
(x)
()
 Express bladder 
(xX)
()
()
()
q 6h; take cutside 
Nil per os 
except water
Offer water q4 h
(x)
()
()
()
()
()
and place sternal
 Sucralfate 500 mg 
(X)
()
 per os q12 h
375 mg Amoxycillin-
(xX)
()
 clavulanic acid q12 h
Rebandage feet
(x)
Turn q4 h 
(X)
()
()
()
()
()
 Coupage and turn q4 h
()
()
()
()
()
()
 Chest radiograph
()
 Place in sling for 1/2h 
(X)
()
()
peu peun Aunedoawoouods leonao ym (2'sh us umous se bon awes) uewagoa ale pio-lear-g e jo pooal leidsoy au wa uael 
uncergone a ventral cecompression 1 week previously The cog was recumbent, tetraperetic, and although continent, he neeced manual
expression of his bladder to initiate voiding. Food was being withheld as he had suffered severe bloody diarrhea the previous day, for which he was
being treated with sucralfate. The ckog also tended to chew his feet if they were left unbandaged. The chest radliograph was scheduled because
the dog appeared cepressed and auscultation of the lungs suggested early pneumonia. Coupage and turning the animal effectively every hour is
preferable for pneumonia; propping the animal into stemal recumbency is also helpful. The nursing care for this patient is particulary complex, and
TPR b.i.d., temperature, pulse and respiration rate, twioe a day; (X), task completed; I ), task stll to be completed.
Postoperative care
345
 to minimize immunosuppression and the tendency to
deplete body protein. The patient should be given
 palatable, high-quality meals several times daily to cope
with their increased requirement; ideally, their exact
caloric requirements should be calculated. Conversely,
an inactive, overweight, paraplegic dog with no serious
complications may need a reduction in its nutritional
intake (Strombeck and Guilford, 1990).
FlOorING FOr recuMbenNT
PATIENTS (15.3-15.7)
Different flooring materials and their indications are illus-
trated below. In general, a raised grate is best for most
15.5 A waterproof foam mattress; in general the foam should
small paraparetic or paraplegic patients. The advantage
be as thick as possible. Non-retentive bedding is recommended
of a grate is the reduced tendency for an animal to lie in
as urine tends to pool in the depression made by the patient.
Foam does distribute body weight more evenly but cdecubitus
its own urine and feces, particularly if non-retentive
 will still develop without adldlitional precautions.
bedding is provided. A grate does not provide padding
15.3 Paraplegic dog on a raised grate. This flooring allows urine
15.6 An inflatable airbed also provides good protection against
and other fluids to pass through it keeping the dog cleaner and 
decubitus. A useful, cheap and dlisposable alternative is to use 
drier. It is suitable for most small patients and for larger patients
plastic bubble packing material; the largest-sized bubbles seem
 with minimal neurclogical ceficits.
to work best.
15.4 Non-retentive bedding. Artificial fleece (Unreal Lamb Skin,
15.7 A waterbed is the ideal surface for a large recumbent 
Apha Protech, North Salt Lake, UT) is an excellent material to 
 patient. Problems include cost and the risk of cooling the animal
use with a raised grate as it stays dry yet allows liquids to pass
unless the water is heated. Punctures can be a problem just as
through (Swaim et al., 1996). It may make some patients
they can for airbeds. The patient also tends to roll off the edge 
uncomfortably hot (Nicoll and Remedios, 1995).
unless the bed is surrounded by a barrier. See Table 15.4.
346
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
 and is not suitable for large, severely tetraparetic patients 
circulating water blanket is the only safe way to warm
or those with established decubitus. In such cases, a vari-
a neurological patient (15.8). Electric heating blankets
ety of padded flooring materials can be employed; each
can be unreliable and dangerous (Swaim et al., 1989).
has its own advantages and disadvantages.
Direct heat must not be applied to patients with a fen-
Nursing staff must be aware that patients with dis-
tanyl patch (page 85).
turbed pain perception are at extreme risk for the devel-
opment of thermal burns. A thermostatically controlled
PHYSIOTHERAPY
However good the flooring material, the aim is to mini-
mize the recumbency period, because this is when
the animal is most susceptible to complications. This
period can be shortened by physiotherapy and early
mobilization. Towel walking of paraplegic dogs or
supporting a tetraparetic patient in a sling are often
possible within 24-48h of surgery (15.9, 15.10).
15.8 Neurological patients are susceptible to cooling excessively
as they may have dlifficulty avoiding draughts or generating their 
aui buuem Ag Aajes paddns ag Auo ueo jean jeay umo
surroundling air (15.20), or via a thermostaticaly controlled water
blanket.
A
B
15.9 A: Walking a paraplegic dog by supporting its
B
hindquarters with a towel placed under the abdomen just in 
front of the pelvic limbs. The tail can also be used to provide
 to rehabilitate tetraparetic dogs. A: A canvas sling and metal
support provided that it is held at the base to avoid injury.
frame; this sling tends to rub more than the one shown in B.
B: A Walkabout sling (Walkabout Harnesses, Santa Cruz, CA)
B: This sling is made from Neoprene (Dupont-Dow, Wilmington,
 can also be useful for early mobiliation.
DE); it is shown in 15.16 supporting a dog in a whirlpool bath.
Postoperative care
347
Tetraparetic animals with good motor function can be
walked with assistance using a tracking harness
diately after recovery from surgery. Massage of the
(15.1l). Assistants must take care not to injure them-
limbs for l5min once or twice a day is usually well
selves when lifting heavy patients (15.12).
tolerated especially for recumbent animals. Massage
Standard physiotherapy techniques are often effec-
should be performed in a distal to proximal direction
tive when modified for animals (Taylor, 
1992;
in order to promote venous return (Berry and Reyers,
Bockstahler et al., 2002) (15.13-15.15). Massage and
1990). Hot packing is useful to reduce swelling, pain
and muscle spasm (7.l2). Hot packs should be insu-
lated from the animal's skin; treatments should last
10-20 min repeated every 8-12h (Jerram et al., 1997)
Ultrasound is another way of applying warmth to
deeper tissues and is useful to prevent and treat muscle
spasm (Taylor, 1992) (15.13B). Ultrasound is converted
to heat, mainly at the bone-tissue interface; it causes
little temperature rise in superficial tissue. Intensities
from 0.5 to 4 W/s are used; pain indicates excessive heat
generation. Creative thinking can adapt other human
techniques to veterinary patients (Taylor, 1992) (15.14,
15.15). Neuromuscular stimulator packs (Respond Dual
Channel Neuromuscular Stimulator, Medtronic) can
build specific muscle groups and can be useful (Taylor,
15.11 A tracking harness gives effective support to a tetraparetic
1992), for example after brachial plexus injury has
dog with good motor function. This is the same dog illustrated in
15.38 and 15.39, 4 months after surgery for cervical sponcylo-
myelopathy (11.22). The dlecubital ulcer visible in 15.38 has
nursing care, it is recommended to develop a specific
contracted but is still open and eventually required surgical closure.
 plan for each animal (Table 15.5). An external splint (see
15.12 A: A mechanical hoist is
invaluable for lifing large, recumbent 
dogs in a sling. The hoist is raised
and lowered using a simple lever
mechanism (arrowhead). B: This 
dlog has been suspended from the
same hoist but this time using two 
Walkabout slings (Wvalkabout
Harnesses, Santa Cruz, CA).
B
15.13 A: Passive range of motion; this
is done for 5-10 times in two or three 
sessions a day (Jerram et al., 1997).
B: Ultrasound should not be used over
nerves or directly over a laminectomy
dlefect as it generates heat (Taylor, 1992)
Here the energy is being directed away
from the bony defect.
B
348
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders 
15.14 A: Low power, cold laser is used
immediately after surgery to stimulate
healing by evoking an intracellular,
photochemical response;it also causes
release of serotonin to provide pain relief.
 B: A treadmill is invaluable for tetraparetic 
dogs; it can be combined with a sling 
as here.
B
15.15 Balance training stimulates
recovery of proprioceptive
responses. A: Tetraparetic dog on
a ball. B: Same dog on a balance 
board.
B
 Table 15.5 Physical therapy plan for a neurological patient?
8am 10 am 1
12 noon
2pm 4pm 6pm
1 8 pm   10 pm   12 midnight
 Range of motion 
X
X
X
 Proprioceptive sensory stimulation 
X
X
X
X
X
Massage (effleurage)
X
X
X
X
X
 Helium-neon laser; scan surgical site
X
 Standing balance in sling 
X
(15.10, 15.12). 10 min increasing 
to 30 min
auapun eu jeun Auedolauouods jeoao ym (ot'sh ui umous bon au o lelwis) bop plo-ea-ll ue jo poal leidsoy aun waly uael
 a ventral cdecompression 1 week previously. Active postoperative physical therapy begins postoperatve Day 1. Active mobiization and sensory
 stimulation continues every 4 h until the dog is discharged.
X, task completed.
13.46) can be applied as a temporary precaution to
 In addition to the physical well-being of the patient,
make physiotherapy safer for an animal with an unstable
the mental attitude of the animal often has a significant
thoracolumbar lesion. Swimming in a whirlpool bath or
effect on outcome, particularly when recovery is delayed
a bathtub is invaluable (15.16-15.19) but the animal
(15.39). For dogs facing protracted recovery periods the
must be dried thoroughly afterwards (15.20).
temporary and intermittent use of a paraplegic cart can
Postoperative care
349
15.17 A small dog can be suspended by hand in a shallow
bath. Water levels can be varied to providle support along with
some degree of weight bearing. At the end of the session, the 
15.16 The sling shown in 15.10B has been used to support
 patient must be dried with towels and a warm air drier to
this dog inside a whirlpool bath. while in the pool, the patient's
prevent hypothermia (15.20)
 limbs are flexed and it is encouraged to swim. Chlorhexidine
 has been added to the water which should be at 38-40%℃.
The tank is either filtered or it must be crained dlaily.
15.18 Life jackets are necessary
 when an animal is in a deep pool as 
 it can still get into difficulty, especially 
 once tiredl. A: The jacket has a
 handle on top and must fit properly
so that the dog cannot slip out of it 
(K-9 Float coat, Ruffwear, Bend,
OR). B: Hydrotherapy should begin
slowly, an attendlant must always be
 present and the animal must wear a
life jacket (Taylor, 1992; Jerram et al.
1997).
B
15.19 Here the patient is being made to swim against a jet of
15.20 A warm air blower is invaluable as neurological patients 
water; it can also be made to swim around the tank to retrieve a
 are inefficient at drying themselves. The drier must not be too
 ball Animals with cervical lesions may be reluctant to maintain 
hot, as the patient may be unable to move away or may not 
 their head in this somewhat extended position.
350
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
play a role in rehabilitation. In general, the risk of the dog
 Insure that the bladder is emptied at least three
 coming to rely on the cart is usually outweighed by the
times daily.
stimulus of enhanced mobility although they should
 Monitor the urine regularly using a dipstick at home.
probably not be used for the first month in order to
 The dog must be of a suitable temperament.
encourage the animal to walk. In special circumstances,
Provided that these criteria are satisfied, many dogs
some dogs will do well in a cart long-term (15.2l). The
can have an excellent quality of life and may live for
 permanent use of carts is suitable for selected patients
years in this way.
in which there is no hope for return of neurological
function. In such cases the owner must:
CONTROL OF URINARY FUNCTION
 Be informed of the final prognosis.
 Be able to cope with the physical demands of
 The clinician is usually aware of the animal's preoperative
getting the dog into and out of the cart.
urinary status, but the status can change several times in
 the days after surgery. For example, an incontinent dog
Be able to be with the dog while it is in the cart.
 Be able to manage the incontinence and tendency
that could be expressed easily before surgery might
for urine scald along with repeated infections.
become impossible to express a few days after surgery.
Several days of intermittent catheterization might then
be necessary before manual expression again becomes
possible using drugs to modify sphincter tone (page 24).
 Anatomy and physiology
Parasympathetic fibers run in the pelvic nerves, which
originate from Sl to S3 spinal cord segments and cause 
the detrusor muscle of the bladder wall to contract
(15.22). The detrusor muscle normally contracts in a
co-ordinated fashion to empty the bladder. Each indi-
vidual smooth muscle cell in the bladder wall is joined
to its neighbors by so-called 'tight junctions'. These
junctions have low electrical resistance so that the wave
of mermbrane depolarization spreads rapidly from cell to
cell over the whole detrusor muscle. Over-distension of
the bladder can disrupt the ‘tight junctions' so prevent-
 ing the normal co-ordinated contraction of the detrusor
15.21 A cart (K-9 Cart Company, Oak Harbor, WA; Dewey's
a   a  s s 
Wheelchairs for Dogs, Prineville, OR) designed for use in
paraplegic dogs. These are madle in a variety of sizes to
bladder volumes low at all times and paying strict atten-
suit different bodly weights.
tion to assisted ermptying of the bladder (see below).
15.22 The physiclogical control of
Cortical
micturition is complex and involves the
neurons
integration of spinal cord reflexes with
the modulating effect of higher centres.
Any lesion in the spinal cord is likely to 
alter either the reflexes, their higher
UMN-sphincter
control, or both. This can then change
S
Sensory-
the bladder's ability to store urine
sphincter
efficiently and to empty itself completely.
-Motor-
Motor-
 sphincter
detrusor,
Sensory-
detrusor
Sympathetic
 Postoperative care
351
Sympathetic fibers run in the hypogastric nerves,
out when the bladder fills to the point where intravesicu-
which originate from Ll to L4 or L5 spinal cord seg-
lar pressure exceeds sphincter pressure causing urinary
ments, and cause the urethral smooth muscle to contract.
retention and overflow. After approximately 1 month, a
 Somatic nerve fibers run in the pudendal nerves, which 
reflexive emptying of the bladder develops.
originate from Sl to S3 spinal cord segments and cause
 In LMN lesions, the sphincter tone is decreased and
the urethral striated muscles to contract. Both the
so urine will tend to leak continuously (Table 15.6).
smooth and the skeletal muscle tone of the urethra con-
Occasionally some animals, such as cats with sacrocaudal
tribute to maintaining a functional urethral sphincter
injuries, have an LMN bladder that is difficult to express
mechanism. (These will be referred to collectively as the
because of increased sympathetic tone (O'Brien, 1988).
urethral sphincter mechanism unless stated otherwise.)
Pharmacological manipulation
Disorders of micturition
of micturition
Micturition disorders are divisible broadly into either
The most common problem is excessive urethral sphinc-
upper motor neuron (UMN) deficits affecting the spinal
ter tone in UMN bladder dysfunction. The patient's vol-
cord proximal to the sacral segments, or lower motor
untary efforts to void, or attempts at manual expression
neuron (LMN) deficits affecting the sacral spinal cord
of the bladder, may be unable to overcome this excessive
or nerve roots. In mild or moderate UMN spinal cord
urethral tone. The result is an increase in the residual
lesions (grade 2 or 3), increased urethral tone may pre-
volume of urine in the bladder. As it is not usually pos-
 vent the patient from emptying the bladder fully. Initially,
sible to distinguish smooth from striated muscle effects
in severe UMN lesions (some grade 4 and all grade 5), the 
in any individual patient,the simplest approach is to block
detrusor muscle is paralysed and urine is retained. It leaks
the activity of both sphincters (15.23, Table 15.7). Dogs
 Table 15.6 Differences in urinary function associated with UMN or LMN lesions
UMN (cranial to
UMN (cranial to
LMN lesions
sacral segments)
sacral segments)
(sacral segments)
paraplegic-acute
paraplegic—chronic
 Detrusor function
 Striated muscle sphincter tone
+αr++
+α++
 Smooth muscle sphincter tone
+αr++
+++
+ Normal; + + ncreased; - cecreased.
 LMN, lower motor neuron; UMN, upper motor neuron.
15.23 Innervation of the bladldler and urethra.
Detrusor muscle
 Urethral sphincter
(smooth and striated muscle)
Somatic sympathetic α
Contracts and closes 
Parasympathetic—contracts
LSympathetic β—relaxes 
352
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
with UMN lesions that have minimal motor function
Assisted emptying of the bladder
are therefore usually started on diazepam, along with
 The three crucial roles of assisted voiding are to:
● Prevent leakage and urine scald by keeping
approach is preferable to waiting for an UTI to develop;
 intravesicular pressure and volurme low.
the drugs can easily be discontinued once the animal is
 Empty all urine from the bladder periodically to
 able to void unaided. Drugs acting on the urinary tract
reduce the risk of retention cystitis.
are shown in Table 15.7:
Prevent overstretching of 'tight junctions' by
● Diazepam is used to reduce the striated muscle
avoiding bladder distension.
tone. It is not recommended in cats; dantrolene
can be used as an alternative.
does not empty its bladder completely. No antibiotic,
 Phenoxybenzamine is used to reduce the smooth
regardless of its potency or spectrum, can prevent this.
muscle tone (sympathetic antagonist). There
Use of ‘antibiotic cover’ in these circumstances only
is usually a delay of 2-3 days before
succeeds in selecting the most resistant organism
phenoxybenzamine takes effect. The drug
(Lees, 1986). Incontinent animals with either UMN or
is potentially carcinogenic and may be
 LMN bladder lesions require assisted emptying at least
 discontinued
three times daily, with pharmacological assistance rec-
 Prazosin is now the preferred alpha antagonist. It
 ommended for UMN lesions. Some clinicians prefer
 is inexpensive but can cause marked hypotension
indwelling catheters to avoid urine leakage and the
and so animals should first be tried on half the
patient stress that manual expression can cause.
calculated dose and ideally blood pressures are
Repeated cystocentesis is not recommended as a means
measured for the first few days of treatment (Lane
of keeping the bladder empty. Bethanechol and pos-
and Thomas, 2000). An alternative is terazosin,
sibly cisapride (Lane and Thomas, 2000), may improve
 e sp u es pasn aq oe se 
voiding in animals with LMN lesions but are not rec-
(R. Schueler, personal communication).
 ommended in UMN lesions.
Table 15.7 Drugs acting on the lower urinary tract1
Use
Drug*
Species
Dose
Notes and side-effects
 Alpha antagonist
 Phenoxybenzamine 
Dog
0.25-0.5 mg/kg P0 q12 h
Hypotension
Cat
Per cat-1.25-7.5 mg P0 q12-24 h
 Start at lowest dose
Carcinogen?
Availability?
 Alpha antagonist
 Prazosin 
Dog 
1 mg /15 kg P0 q12-24 h
Hypotension 
Cat
Per cat-0.25-0.5 mg PO q12-24 h
Start at lowest dose
Care in CRF
Seizures
 Alpha antagonist
Terazosin 
Dog 
 Per dog- 1-2 mg up to 11 kg.
Hypotension 
2-5 mg up to 50 kg: P0 q12h
 Start at lowest dose
Cat
Per cat-0.5-1 mg P0 q12h
 Priapism, rare, needs 
immediate treatment 
 Skeletal muscle
 Diazepam
Dog
Per dog-2-10mg P0 q8 h
Give 10-20 min before
relaxant
Cat 
Not recommended 
expression
 Skeletal muscle
 Dantrclene
Dog
1-5 mg/kg PO q8-12h
Alternative to diazepam 
relaxant 
Cat
0.5-2.0 mg/kg PO q8 h 
 Potential for hepatic toxicity
 Urinary antiseptic 
 Methenamine
Dog
10-20 mg/kg PO q8-12h 
Urine pH must be below 6.5
 mandelate 
Cat 
Same or 250 mg P0 q8-12h
 Liver function must be normal
'Lane and Thomas, 2000.
*Consult appropriate source for fulist of contraindications and acverse reactions.
CRF, chronic renal failure.
 Postoperative care
353
MANUAL EXPRESS/ON (15.24, 15.25)
or tense abdomens, those with external splints, or before
Probably the best method to try initially for assisted
increased urethral tone has been modified by drugs.
voiding is simple manual expression of the bladder.
Some animals become very difficult to express due to
 Drugs that decrease sphincter tone usually make expres-
the development of UTI, presumably because it often
sion easier. It can sometimes be difficult to estimate the i
 induces urethral spasm. Animals managed with manual
completeness of bladder emptying without subsequent 
 expression are prone to urine leakage and need fre-
catheterization or ultrasound scanning. Occasional use
quent bathing of their hindquarters to prevent urine
of one of these objective methods for determining
scald and decubitus (15.35).
bladder volume is useful, but with experience the effec-
tiveness of manual expression can usually be assessed
INTERMITTENTASEPTIC
quite well by palpation. The advantage of manual expres-
CATHETERIZATION (15.26-15.28)
sion is that, in contrast to catheterization, it avoids the 
This may prove necessary in some difficult or fractious
introduction of bacteria into the normally sterile blad-
 patients, or in dogs whose sphincter tone has not been
der. Even if only performed twice daily, with the third
modified successfully. Strict attention must be paid to
emptying done by catheter, this approach is preferable 
 aseptic technique. Even with these precautions, bacteria
to catheterization each time. The disadvantages of
 may still be introduced into the bladder because the
manual expression are that it can be difficult to perform
effectively in some animals, especially those with large
15.26 Aseptic technique is crucial when catheterizing the bladder.
The tip of the penis or the vulva is irrigated with sterile saline and 
15.24 Manual expression of the bladder relies on gentle,
then dllute iodophor or chlorhexidline solution. In females a sterile
continuous, caucal abdominal pressure to overcome urethral
bujuado eujaun aul ajeool ol pasn sl jabuy paojb e lo wnjnoads
resistance.
15.27 A sterile, soft rubber urinary catheter with sterile
15.25 Excessive force should not be used to overcome high
lubricating jelly is advanced using a 'no touch' technique,
sphincter resistance; this might damage the bladldler wall. It is
The catheter is protected inside its wrapping to prevent
to fatigue.
 contamination prior to insertion.
354
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
15.30 A commercially available urine collection container is
15.28 Once the catheter is in the bladder, a sterile syringe is
preferred for the closed technique. This apparatus prevents 
used to aspirate urine. If large volumes are anticipated, then a
ag oi auun molle oi lnjasn s! yooodois lo dei rem-aaui aluas
reflux of urine into the bladder and has a much lower likelihood
of introducing bacteria into the urinary tract than IV drip tubing
emptied from the syringe without repeated disconnection and
and an empty fluid bag.
potential contamination.
41212
15.29 A Foley catheter can be sutured to the vulva and the
15.31 Drip tubing connects this catheter to an empty IV fluid
bulb inflated as shown. The catheter can then be connected
bag. The bag should always be kept lower than the animal; if
to a closed collection system (15.30, 15.31).
the animal is moved the tubing should be clamped to prevent
reverse flow. These bags are difficult to empty aseptically; laying
the bag on the floor increases the likelihood of contamination.
distal urethra has a normal flora that includes Staphylo
The preferred collection apparatus is shown in 15.30.
coccus intermedius and Escherichia coli in particular
(Stone and Barsanti, 1992). Nosocomial organisms
 to measure urine output in patients with reduced renal
may also be introduced by poor technique. Urinary
finction. Closed collection has the advantage of per-
catheters are the second most common source of noso-
mitting diuresis while keeping the bladder empty.
comial bloodstream infection in people (Maki and
 Diuresis is useful if the patient has a severe infection as
Tambyah, 200l); the risk of infection also increases
it helps to flush debris and bacteria from the bladder.
with the number of catheterizations {Lees, 1986;
This technique is also useful for the short-term manage-
Lulich and Osborne, 1995). Irrigation of the prepuce
ment of incontinent animals as it keeps the animal clean
or vestibule with 0.02% chlorhexidine prior to each
and dry, which reduces both the development of urine
catheterization may help to reduce the infection rate
scald and the chances for direct contamination of a
(see 'Closed collection system', below).
surgical wound. Closed collection should ideally be
replaced by another means of assisted voiding within
CLOSED COLLECTION SYSTEM (15.29-15.31)
 3 days. If a catheter is to be used for longer, it must be
This system is useful in incontinent patients with severe  replaced every 3 days and use of urinary antiseptics
UTI, in males that are hard to express manually, and  should be considered. The risk of infection can be kept
 Postoperative care
355
consequence of UTI is transient bacteremia, which
may lead to wound infection or sepsis (Barsanti and
Finco, 1984). Repeated UTI is common; it may be the
presenting problem for animals that fail to recover
nociception after a severe injury even though they
recovered good motor function (Olby et al., 2003).
The potential for increased residual urine and an
associated UTI should be recognized in all patients
with a lesion severe enough to disturb motor function.
 In such animals a urinalysis should be performed every
2-3 days on urine collected by cystocentesis. Evidence
of inflarmmation on urinalysis, such as the presence of
 inflammatory cells or bacteria, warrants:
· Urine culture.
· Re-assessment of the method for assisted voiding.
15.32 Tube cystostomy is best performed using a Bard Urological
· Specific antibiotic therapy.
Catheter (C.R. Bard, Inc., Covington, GA) with a mushroom tip.
In an animal with marked neurological deficits and a
severe, established UTI, a 12-24h period of diuresis
low for the first 4 days if good catheter management is
combined with continuous evacuation of the bladder
practiced (Smarick et al., 2002); but increases signifi-
into a closed drainage system is recommended. Before
cantly thereafter. The vestibule or prepuce should be
urine culture results are available, the initial antibiotics
irrigated every 8h with sterile saline and then a very
 of choice are trimethoprim-sulfa, amoxycillin-clavulanic
dilute solution of chlorhexidine (0.02%) (Smarick et al.,
acid or a cephalosporin. Treatment is maintained for 14
 2002). Nosocomial bacteriuria or candiduria develops
days and repeat culture is performed once the animal
 in up to 25% of humans requiring a urinary catheter for 
has been off antibiotics for 7 days. Multidrug-resistant
7 days or more (Maki and Tambyah, 2001); correspond-
 organisms may be treatable with subcutaneous amikacin
ing rates for animals can be as high as 50% after 4 days
or imipenem (Barker et al., 2002). Candida sp. are an
(Barsanti et al., 1985).
important cause of UTI in humans and may account for
infections in animals where bacterial culture is negative,
TUBECYSTOSTOMY
especially those on long-term antibiotic therapy (Maki
In certain circumstances a prepubic tube cystostomy
and Tambyah, 2001).
provides an alternative to repeated catheterization
 Methenamine mandelate (Table 15.7) is a urinary anti-
(15.32). An interlocking box suture pattern is recomm-
septic agent that is useful in chronic UTI or in patients
mended to anchor the tube (Daye et al., 1999). Tubes
undergoing intermittent catheterization (Kevorkian et al.,
are left in place for a minimum of 7 days; animals are
1984; Krebs et al., 1984). The drug is hydrolyzed in the
able to void normally after tube removal once the initi-
bladder to ammonia and formaldehyde at a pH <6,
ating problem has resolved (Williams and White, 1991).
which usually requires the mandelic acid supplemen-
Tube cystostomy can also be used occasionally as a long-
tation (Pearman et al., 1978). It should only be used in
term option for animals that are permanently inconti-
 animals with normal liver function.
nent and difficult to express (Smith et al., 1994).
Gastrointestinal disturbances
Up to 15% of dogs with disc disease will develop gas-
POSTOPErATIVE COMPLICATIONS
trointestinal problems and the mortality rate has been
The most important potential complications are UTI,
reported to be as high as 2%. The major risk factor in one
gastrointestinal disturbances, pancreatitis, surgical
study was use of dexamethasone; dose and duration of
wound complications, urine scald and decubital ulcers.
therapy were not important (Moore and Withrow, 1982).
Vomiting can have a variety of causes inclucing cortico-
Urinary tract infections
steroids, antibiotics, NSAIDs or pancreatitis. If vomiting
Stagnant urine remaining in the bladder after voiding will
occurs, food, water and non-critical medications should
predispose the patient to UTI. Animals with Cushing's
be withheld for 24h and intravenous fluids given to
disease or diabetes mellitus are also predisposed to UTI 
 replace losses. A high index of suspicion should be main-
and animals given corticosteroids may be at increased
risk of pyelonephritis (Barsanti et al., 1992). An important
t monia (especially in recumbent animals). Drugs used to
356
Small Animal Spinal Disorders
 treat gastrointestinal disturbances are listed in Table 15.8.
 intake and non-essential drugs are stopped and symp-
 Persistent vomiting warrants anti-emetic therapy and sug-
tomatic therapy is started. Misoprostol is indicated for
 gests an underlying cause such as pancreatitis.
NSAID-induced GI ulceration. It would also seem to be
Diarrhea will tend to increase the risk of UTI or
the logical therapy for corticosteroid-induced bleeding.
wound infection and every attempt should be made to
However, it does not reduce the incidence of GI hem-
prevent it, or at least to shorten its severity and duration.
orrhage caused by corticosteroids; omeprazole, cimeti-
Food should be withheld for 12-24h and then a high
dine and sucralfate are also ineffective {Hanson et al.,
fiber diet offered. If this fails, opioids are the preferred
1997; Neiger et al., 2000). The lack of a suitable phar-
anti-diarrheal drugs (Strombeck and Guilford, 1990).
 macological agent emphasizes the importance of preven-
 Bleeding into the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract, presenting
tion, supportive care and dietary management. Barium
as 'coffee ground’ vomit or melena, should be treated
sulfate may work to stop GI bleeding or diarrhea when
aggressively (8.4). This problerm has a high potential mor-
 all else fails.
tality rate; compromise of the GI barrier can also lead to
Colonic and gastroduodenal perforation carry the
bacteremia and sepsis (Epstein et al., 1992). All oral
highest mortality rate of all GI complications. Furthermore,
 Table 15.8 Drugs acting on the gastrointestinal system1
Use
Drug**
Species
Dose
Notes and side-effects
 Antiemetic
Metoclopramide
 Dog and cat 
0.2-0.5 mg/kg SQ q8 h
Not if Gl bleeding, seizures
 Antiemetic 
Chlorpromazine
 Dog and cat 
 0.5 mg/kg IM q8 h
Hypotension, seizures 
 Ulceration 
 Ranitidine
Dog
2 mg/kg PO, IV, q8-12h 
More effective than cimetidine 
Cat
 2.5 mg/kg PO, V, q12 h 
Ulceration 
 Famotidine
Dog 
0.5-1.0mg/kg PO,
Cnce daily dosing 
SQ, IV q24h
180
0.5 mg/kg PO, SQ q24h 
IV in cats not recommended
Ulceration 
 Sucralfate
 Dog and cat 
0.25-1.0g per
 Can bind other drugs
animal-PO q8h
Ulceration 
 Omeprazole 
 Dog and cat 
0.5-0.7 mg/kg
PQ q24h 
NSAID-induced ulceration   Misoprostol 
Dog
1-5 μg/kg PO q8 h
Diarrhea, abortion 
Cat 
Unknown
Diarrhea
Loperamide
 Dog and cat 
0.08 mg/kg PO q8 h
 Narcotic overdose 
 Diarrhea
Bismuth salicylate 
Dog
0.25 ml/kg PO q6 h
 For enterotoxic diarrhea, not
with NSAIDs or corticosteroids
Cat 
 Not recommended 
 Diarrhea and ulceration 
Barium sulfate
 Dog and cat 
0.5 ml/kg q 24 h,
Constipation 
max. 3 doses
 Aspiration
Constipation
 Bisacocyl
 Dog and cat 
 5-10mg P0 q24h
Laxative
per animal
Constipation
 Psyllium 
Dog and cat
 2-10g PQ in food q12-14h
Laxative and stool softener
1Strombeck and Guilfomd, 1990; Hart et al., 1997; Plumb, 1999.
*Consult appropriate souroe for fullist of contraindications and ackerse reactions.
 Gl, gastrointestinal. NSAID, non-steroidal anti-intlammatory drug.
Postoperative care
357
affected dogs often show none of the classic signs of an
complication was swelling of the wound (7.l2), which
acute abdomen making early detection very difficult.
affected 7.5% of the dogs. Wound discharge occurred
Major risk factors are multiple doses of corticosteroids,
-odoid zeum pauuanap zou sem l anq %s iauoue u
particularly dexamethasone, or combination of cortico-
tion of these was infected (Hosgood, 1992).
steroids with NSAIDs; enemas may also play a role in
 Many factors play a role in wound infection (Hosgood,
colonic perforation (Toombs et al., 1986; Hinton et al.,
 2003) (see Box 6.2). Spinal surgery is classified as a clean
2002; Reed, 2002).
surgical procedure; the infection rate for clean proce-
Control of defecation rarely causes a problem, as
dures is reported as 2.5% (Vasseur et al., 1988). How-
reflexive emptying will occur periodically even in 
ever, a number of factors predispose spinal surgeries to
animals with functional transection of the spinal cord.
a higher infection rate compared to other clean proce-
However, constipation can become a problem. Good
dures, including frequent preoperative use of cortico-
hydration status must be maintained but enemas should
steroids or NSAIDs, obesity, GI ulceration and UTI
be used with caution due to the potential risk of colonic 
(Epstein et al., 1992; Hosgood, 1992) (8.4, 15.2).
perforation associated with this procedure (Toombs
 Routine use of intraoperative antibiotic is therefore rec-
et al., 1986). High fiber diets and stool softeners such as
ommended, especially when surgery lasts longer than
psyllium derivatives are safer alternatives (Hart et al.,
90 min (Vasseur et al., 1988; Novelli, 1999). Postoper-
1997). One potential late complication in dogs that fail
 ative antibiotic is only recommended when intra- or post-
to recover after intervertebral disc disease is fecal
 operative infection is documented (Kriaras et al., 2000).
 incontinence; this applies to dogs with UMN as well as
 A sterile adhesive dressing is useful to protect the
LMN injuries (Olby et al., 2003).
wound from gross contamination (15.33). This should be
kept in place for several days, but the wound must also
Pancreatitis
be checked daily for seroma formation, swelling, red-
Acute pancreatitis has a high mortality rate. It should
 ness or discharge Large seromas should be drained and
be considered along with GI perforation in any neuro-
the wound repaired again to close dead space (15.34).
logical patient that develops a sudden onset of vomiting,
 If infection is documented, a culture should be taken
collapse and pyrexia during its postoperative course.
from the depths of the wound after aseptic preparation
Some dogs show a more insidious onset of signs. High(
 of the skin. Antibiotic therapy should be instituted, ini-
doses of corticosteroids do seem to predispose dogs to
tially directed at staphylococcal involvement (cefazolin
pancreatitis, particularly those with neurological dis-
5-15 mg/kg IV, IM q8h, or cefadroxil 20mg/kg PO
ease (Strombeck and Guilford, 1990; Williams, 1995).
ql2h). Severe wound infections should be subject to
Diagnosis can be difficult; serum amylase and lipase
 surgical debridement and irrigation.
are not specific but may help if markedly elevated and
abdorminal ultrasound can also be very useful (Hess et al.,
Urine scald
1998). Treatment entails withholding all oral intake for
 Urine scald is an important cause of dermatitis and also
5 days until the clinical signs are in remission. Intravenous 
predisposes to decubital ulcer formation. Any dog that
fluid therapy must keep up with fluid losses, which can
soils itself with urine or feces must have the affected
be dramatic, and urine output should also be moni-
tored. Metabolic acidosis and electrolyte derangements
are common and warrant regular blood gas and elec-
trolyte measurements. An anti-emetic such as chlor-
 promazine should be used at the lowest posible dose to
control vomiting. Metaclopramide is not recommended.
Procaine penicillin and an aminoglycoside are the anti-
biotics of choice (Strombeck and Guilford, 1990). The
 prognosis is guarded.
Wound complications
Wound complications have been recorded in as many
as 14% of dogs undergoing spinal surgery (36/264).
Surgical time over 90min and use of multifilament,
absorbable suture material increase the complication
15.33 A sterile, self-adhesive dressing. Use of a bandage does
rate; monofilament, absorbable material is therefore
not reduce the incicdence of wound complications; it is not known
recommended for wound closure. The most common
if it lowers the actual wound infection rate (Hosgood, 2003)
358
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
15.34 A: Seroma after cervical dorsal
laminectomy. This area and the lumbo-
sacral region are at high risk of seroma or
hematoma formation and so closure of 
cead space must be perfect. B: Closed
suction apparatus craining a seroma.
The protective bandage has been
removed for illustration.
B
15.35 Early urine scald around the vulva in a dog incontinent 
due to an L6 fracture managed using an external splint. Regular
replacement of the straps and washing and crying the skin is 
indicated. Desitin (Pfizer Inc., New York) is helpful although
ingestion of large amounts can cause zinc toxicity.
area bathed and dried. Emollient cream and a water
repellent ointment such as Desitin (Pfizer Inc., New York)
15.36 The area over the ischiatic tuberosity in the early stages of
are particularly useful (15.35). Animals that are unable
dlecubitus formation, to show edema and the onset of hair loss. At
to move can be placed on human infant absorbent diapers,
which collect urine and prevent it from soaking the skin;
a wet area on the hair coat cue to the exucation of serum.
-no aun Aunh o Aiessnau ji pauiam aq ue asa
put. An indwelling catheter may be needed to prevent
leakage until the urine scald resolves.
skin overlying the shoulder, elbow, rib cage, pelvis, hip,
 and lateral stifle are the areas most at risk. The hair over
Decubital ulcers
high-risk areas must be parted and inspected regularly
Decubital ulcers result mainly from unrelieved com-
to look for moisture and hyperemia (Swaim et al.,
pression of tissue between a hard surface and a bony
1996). The early appearance of decubitus is develop-
prominence (15.36-15.39). Even small paraplegic ani-
 ment of erythema, edema and tenderness, followed by
mals can develop decubital ulcers (15.37).
serum exudation and alopecia. Skin and subcutaneous
The skin should be kept clean and dry at all times and
1  tissue loss then develops rapidly. Decubital ulcers may
in recumbent animals the bony prominences should be  give rise to episodes of bacteremia, with the potential
examined at least daily for the onset of decubitus. The risk of infecting the surgical wound or implant.
Postoperative care
359
An appropriate flooring material (15.3-15.7) is essen-
tial to prevent, or at least retard, the onset of decubitus.
Resolution of established decubitus is obviously difficult
until the inciting cause is eliminated. Relief of pressure
is an important principle of treatment, which has been
reviewed in detail (Swaim et al., 1996). Neurological
patients are at particular risk due to the high potential
for urine and fecal soiling, which must be minimized
by regular bathing and drying (15.17, 15.20). Prompt
removal of devitalized tissue and regular irrigation with
an antiseptic solution (such as 0.4% chlorhexidine or
 Domeboro solution (Domeboro Astringent Solution,
Bayer, Morristown, NJ)) are recommended. Surgical
15.37 Some paraplegic dogs, like this Miniature schnauzer, sit
debriderment and primary closure, possibly using skin
compulsively with their pelvic limbs extendled rigidly. This posture
flaps or grafts, may be required to resolve an indolent
puts constant pressure on the ischiatic tuberosity leading to
 ulcer, even after neurological function returns (Swaim
cecubitus. Foam rubber pads or aluminum splints can be 
et al., 1996) (15.11).
fashioned to prevent continued contact (Coates et al., 1995;
Swaim et al., 1996).
Miscellaneous
A number of other problems can arise during the post-
operative period. These include:
· Self-mutilation can occur in some animals with
paresthesia or absent deep pain (2.26, 15.7).
● Some male dogs with severe UMN lesions develop
permanent erections; this can also lead to self-
mutilation or the exposed penis may simply get
traumatized (Olby et al., 2003). Gabapentin
 Aioseds ea on pasn uaaq se (ete aed)
humans with chronic spinal cord injuries (Gruenthal
et al., 1997); it may help to reduce the muscle
 spasm contributing to erection in dogs. Elizabethan
collars or other restraint devices may also be helpful.
15.38 An acvanced dlecubital ulcer over the greater trochanter
· In humans, prolonged recumbency combined with
 inactivity increases significantly the risk of deep vein
thrombosis and pulmonary thromboembolism. These
are almost certainly under-recognized as causes of
patients (Feldman, 1986). Treatment is difficult so
every effort should be dlirected toward avoiding
 circulatory stasis by providing adequate
physiotherapy and intake of fluids (LaRue and 
Murtaugh, 1990). Aspirin may be protective.
· Some problems are more likely to develop after
surgery for specific disorders. Myelomalacia
develops in some dogs with thoracolumbar disc
pue eounaud isioum euds ym shop u ino
15.39 The same dog illustrated in 15.11 and 15.38 is shown
gastric dilation or torsion are more likely in
ying on inflatable rings, one placed under the shoulder and one
recumbent, tetraparetic dogs after cervical surgery.
g oui au e uosl oi si aanie uy 'dy aui jaoun
Some complications can be prevented by a
similar doughnut shape (Nicoll and Remedios, 1995). These
thorough presurgical evaluation (15.40).
devices are difficult to keep in place for long; they were used to
allow this clog to be moved from his waterbed into an area with
Finally, an animal's mental status should not be over-
lots of activity.
looked in the recovery process. Affection from nursing
360
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Branson, K.R., Ko, J.C.H., Tranquilli, WJ., Benson, J., Thurmon, J.C.
[1993) Duration of analgesia induced by epidurally ardministered mor-
phine and medetomidine in dogs.Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology
and Therapeutics 16, 369-372.
Brideau, C., van Staden, C., Chan, C.C. [200l) In vitro effects of
cyclooxygenase inhibitors in whole blood of horses, dogs, and cats.
American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 62, 1755-1760.
Clokie, C., Bentley, K.C., Head, TW. [199l) The effects of the helium-neon 
laser on postsurgical discomfort: a pilot study. Jourmcal of the Canadian
Dertal Associatiort 57, 584-586.
Coates, J.R., Sorjonen, D.C., Simpson, S.T, Cox, N.R., Wight, J.C.,
Hudson, J.A., Finn Bodner, S.T., Brown, S.A. [199S) Clinicopathologic
effects of a 2l-aminosteroid compound [U74389G] and high-dose
methylprednisolone on spinal cord function after simulated spinal cord
trauma.Veterinary Surgery 24,128-139.
Crane, S.W. [1987) Perioperative analgesia: a surgeon's perspective. Jourmal
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 191, 1254-1257.
Davies, N.M., Longstreth, J., Jamali, F [2001) Misoprostol therapeutics
revisited. Pharmacotherapy 21, 60-73.
Daye, R.M., Huber, M.L, Henderson, R.A. [1999) Interlocking box
15.40 Cervical swelling illustrated by barium esophagram.
jejunostomy: a new technique for enteral feeding. Jourmal of the
 This was a hematoma that arose 10 days after surgery in a
American Amimal Hospital Association 35, 129-134.
de Nadal, M., Munar, F, Poca, M.A., Sahuquillo, J., Gamacho, A.,
 Rossello, J. [2000) Cerebral hemodynamic effects of morphine and fen-
with intermandibular edema, Horner's syndrome, laryngeal
tanyl in patients with severe head injury: absence of correlation to cere-
 paralysis, megaesophagus and aspiration pneumonia.
bral autoregulation. Anesthesiology 92, I1-19
Dohoo, S.E., Dohoo, I.R. [1996) Postoperative use of analgesics in dogs and
Cats by Canadian veterinarians. Camadia Veterinary Jourmal 37,546-SS1.
staff, multiple physiotherapy sessions throughout the
Epstein, M.D., Banducci, D.R., Manders, E.K. [1992) The role of the
 day, putting the animal in a location where it can see a
gastrointestinal tract in the development of bum sepsis. Flastic
lot of activity, regular trips outside and frequent con-
Recornstructive Surgery 90, S24-531.
Feldman, B.F [1986] Thrombosis-diagnosis and treatment. In: R.W. Kirk
tact with owners extending to overnight stays at home
[ed.], Curremt Veterinary Therapy IX,SOS-S09. Philadelphia: WB Saumders.
where feasible, can mean the difference between suc-
Goldstein, J.L., Correa, P, Zhao, W.W, Burr, A.M., Hubbard, R.C.,
cess and failure in some animals (l5.39).
Verburg, K.M., Geis, G.S. [2001) Reduced incidence of gastroduodenal
ulcers with celecoxib, a novel cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, compared to
naproxen in patients with arthritis. American fournal of Gastroenterology
96, 1019-1027.
REFERENCES
Grisneaux, E., Pibarot, P, Dupuis, J., Blais, D. [1999) Comparison of keto-
profen and carprofen administered prior to orthopedic surgery for con-
Ahmad, S.R., Kortepeter, C., Brinker, A., Chen, M., Beitz, J. [2002) Renal
trol of postoperative pain in dogs.Jourmal of the AmericaVeterinary
failure associated with the use of celecoxib and rofecoxib. Drug Safety:
Medical Association 215, I10s-1110.
an Intermational Jourmal ofMedical Toxicology andDrugExperience 25,
Gruenthal, M., Mueller, M., Olson, W.L., Priebe, M.M., Sherwood, A.M.,
537-544.
Olson, W.H. [1997) Gabapentin for the treatment of spasticity in
Bagley, R.S., Silver, G.M., Connors, R.L., Harrington, M.L., Cambridge,
patients with spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord 35, 686-689.
A.J., Moore, M.P [2000) Exogenous spinal trauma: surgical therapy and
Hansen, B.D., Hardie, E.M. [1993) Prescription and use of analgesics in
aftercare.Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing
dogs and cats in a veterinary teaching hospital: 258 cases [1983-1989]-
Veterinarian 22, 218-230.
Jourmal ofthe American Veterinary Medical Association 202, 148S-1494.
Balmer, TV, Irvine, D., Jones, R.S., Roberts, M.J., Slingsby, L., Taylor,
Hanson, S.M., Bostwick, D.R., Twedt, D.C., Smith, M.O. [1997) Chnical
PM., Waterman, A.E., Waters, C. [1998) Comparison of carprofen and
evaluation of cimetidine, sucralfate, and misoprostol for prevention of
pethidine as postoperative analgesics in the cat. Jourmal of Small Animal
gastrointestinal tract bleeding in dogs undergoing spinal surgery. Americar
Practice 39, 158-164.
Jourtal of Veterinary Research 58, 1320-1323.
Barker, C.W, Stevenson, M.A., Zhang, W., Sanchez, S., Boudinot, F.D.,
Hart, R.C., Jerram, R.M., Schulz, K.S. [1997) Postoperative management
Budsberg, S.C. (2002) Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
ofthe canine spinal surgery patient—Part I. Compendium on Contimuing
imipenem in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 31, 475-476.
Education for the Practicing Veterinarian 19,I133-1142.
Barsanti, JA., Finco, D.R. [1984) Bacteremia of urinary tract origin
Haskins, S. [1987) Use of analgesics postoperatively and in a small animal
[urosepsis]. In: R.W. Kirk [ed.], Curret Veterinary Therapy, IIS0-I153.
intensive care setting. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Philadelphia: WB Saumders.
Association 191, 1266-1268.
Barsanti, J.A., Blue, J., Edmunds, J. [198S) Urinary tract infection due to
Herperger, L.J. [1998) Postoperative urinary retention in a dog following
mdwelling bladder catheters in dogs and cats. Journal of the American
morphine with bupivacaine epidural analgesia. Canadian Veterinary
Veterinary Medical Association 187, 384-388.
oxmal39, 650652
Barsanti, J.A., Shotts, E.B., Crowell, WA., Finco, D.R., Brown, J. [1992)
Hess, R.S., Saunders, H.M., van Winkle, TJ., Shofer, FS., Washabau, R.J.
Effect of therapy on susceptibility to urinary tract infection in male
[1998) Clinical, clinicopathologic, radiographic, and ultrasonographic
cats with indwelling urethral catheters. Jourmal of Veterinary Intermal
abnormalities in dogs with fatal acute pancreatitis: 70 cases
Medicine 6, 64-70.
[1986-1995). Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
Berry, W.L., Reyers, L. [1990) Nursing care of the small animal neurological
213, 665-670.
patient.Jourmal ofthe SouthAfricaVeterinary Association 61,188-193.
Hinton, L.E., McLoughlin, M.A., Johnson, S.E., Weisbrode, S.E. [2002)
Bockstahler, B., Lorinson, D., Grossliner, K., Lendl, S. [2002) Effects of a
 Spontaneous gastroduodenal perforation in l6 dogs and seven cats
rehabilitation program for dogs undergoing decompressive spinal cord
[1982-1999). Jourmal of the American Animal Hosprital Association 38,
surgery. Veterinary Surgery 31,293.
176-187.
 Postoperative care
361
Holtsinger, R.H., Parker, R.B., Beale, B.S., Friedman, R.L. [1992) The
Murtaugh, R.J., Matz, M.E., Labato, M.A., Boudrieau, R.J. [1993) Use of
therapeutic efficacy of carprofen [Rimadyl-VTM) in 209 clinical cases of
synthetic prostaglandin El [misoprostol) for prevention of aspirin-
canine degenerative joint disease. Veterinary Comparative Orthopaedics
imduced gastroduodenal ulceration in arthritic dogs. Jourmal of the
and Traumatology 5,140-144.
American Veterinary Medical Association 202,251-256.
Hosgood, G. [1992) Wound complications following thoracolumbar
Neiger, R., Gaschen, F., Jaggy, A. [2000) Gastric mucosal lesions in dogs with
laminectomy in the dog: a retrospective study of 264 procedures.
acute intervertebral disc disease: characterization and effects of omepra-
Jourmal of the American Amimal Hosprital Association 28, 47-52.
zole or misoprostol. Jourmal of Veterinary Intermal Medicine 14, 33-36.
Hosgood, G. [2003) Woumd repair and specific tissue response to injury
Nicoll, S.A., Remedios, A.M. [i995) Recumbency in small animals: patho-
In: D. Slatter [ed.], Textbook of Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd edn, 66-86.
physiology and management. Compendium on Continuing Education for
Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
the Practicing Veterinarian 17, 1367-1374.
 Janssens, L.A.A. [1992) Acupuncture for the treatment of thoracolumbar
Novell, A. [1999) Antimicrobial prophylaxis in surgery: the role of phar-
and cervical disc disease in the dog. Problems in Veterinary Medicine 4,
macokinetics.Jourtal of Chemotherapy 1l, 56S-572.
107-116.
O'Brien, D. (1988) Neurogenic disorders of micturition. Veterinary
 Jerram, R.M., Hart, R.C., Schulz, K.S. [1997) Postoperative management
CHintics of North America, Small Amimal Practice 18, S29-544.
ofthe canine spinal surgery patient—part I. Compendium on Continuing
Olby, N.J., Harris, T, Munana, K.R., Skeen, TM., Sharp, N.J.H. [2003]
Education for the Practicing Veterinarian 19, 147-161
Long-term fumctional outcome of dogs with severe injuries of the thoraco-
Kay-Mugford, P, Benn, S.J., LaMarre, J., Comlon, P [2000) In titro effects 
humbar spinal cord. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on cyclooxygenase activity in
Association 222, 762-769.
dogs. American Jourmal of Veterinary Research 61, 802-810.
Paller, M.S., Manivel, J.C. [1992) Prostaglandins protect kidneys against
Kerwin, S.C., Maudlin, G.E. [2003) Hemostasis, surgical bleeding, and
ischemic and toxic injury by a cellular effect. Kidney Intermational 42,
transfusion. In: D. Slatter [ed.], Textbook of Small Amimal Surgery, 3rd
13451354.
edn, 44-65. Philadelphia: Elsevier Science.
Parton, K., Balmer, TV, Boyle, J., Whittem, T, Machon, R. [2000) The
Kevorkian, C.G., Merritt, J.L., Ilstrup, D.M. [1984] Methenarmine man-
pharmacokinetics and effects of intravenously administered carprofen
delate with acidification: an effective urinary antiseptic in patients with
and salicylate on gastrointestinal mucosa and selected biochemical meas-
neurogenic bladder. Mayo CHimic Proceedings 59, S23-529.
urements in healthy cats. Jourmal of Veterinary Pharmacology and
Krebs, M., Halvorsen, R.B., Fishman, I.J., Santos-Mendoza, N. [1984)
Therapeutics 23, 73-79.
Prevention of urinary tract infection during intermittent catheterization.
Pascoe, PJ., Dyson, D.H.[1993) Analgesia after lateral thoracotomy in
Jourmal of Urology 131, 82-85.
dogs: epidural morphine vs.intercostal bupivacaine. Vterinary Surgery
Kriaras, I, Michalopoulos, A., Turina, M., Geroulanos, S. (2000) Evolution
22, 141-147.
of antimicrobial prophylaxis in cardiovascular surgery. European Journal
Pearman, J.W, Peterson, G.J., Nash, J.B. [1978) The antimicrobial activity
ofCardiothoracic Surgery 18,440-446.
of urine of paraplegic patients receiving methenarmine mandelate.
Lam, A.M., Wamer, D.S. [2001) Opiates, intracranial pressure, and auto-
Investigative Urology 16, 91-98.
regulation. Anesthesiology 94, 177-178.
Plumb, D.C. [1999] Veterinary Drug Handbook, 3rd edn. Ames, Iowa:
Lane, I.F, Thomas, WB. (2000) Diagnosis and management of urinary
Iowa State Press.
retention.Veterinary Clinics of North America,Small Amimal Practice
Popilskis, S., Kohn, D.F., Laurent, L., Danilo, P [1993) Efficacy of epidural
30, 25-57.
morphine versus intravenous morphine for post-thoracotomy pain in
LaRue, M.J., Murtaugh, R.J. [1990) Pulmonary thromboembolism in dogs:
dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary Araesthesia 20, 21-25.
47 cases [1986-1987]. Jourmal of the American Veterinary Medical
 Reed, S. [2002) Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-induced duodenal
Associaton 197, 1368-1372.
ulceration and perforation in a mature rottweiler. Canadian Veterinary
Lascelles, B.D.X., Butterworth, S.J., Waterman, A.E. [1994) Postoperative
Jourtal 43, 971-972.
analgesic and sedative effects of carprofen and pethidine in dogs.
Reimer, M.E., Johnston, S.A., Leib, M.S., Duncan, R.B., Jr, Reimer, D.C.,
Veterinary Record 134, 187-191.
Marini, M., Gimbert, K. [1999) The gastroduodenal effects of buffered
Lascells, B.D.X., Cripps, PJ., Jones, A., Waterman Pearson, A.E. [1998]
aspirin, carprofen, and etodolac in healthy dogs. Jourmal of Veterinary
 Effcacy and kinetics of carprofen, administered preoperatively or post-
Intermal Medicine 13, 472-477.
operatively, for the prevention of pain in dogs undergoing ovariohys-
Remedios, A.M., Wagner, R., Caulkett, N.A., Duke, T. [1996) Epidural
terectomy. Wterinary Surgery 27, 568-582.
abscess and discospondylitis in a dog after administration of a lumbo-
Lascelles, B.D.X., Capner, C.A., Waterman-Pearson, A.E. [1999) Current
sacral epidural analgesic. Canadian Veterinary Jourmal 37, 106-107
British veterinary attitudes to perioperative analgesia for cats and small
Robinson, TM., Kruse Elliott, K.T., Markel, M.D., Pluhar, G.E., Massa, K.,
mammals. Veterinary Record 145, 601-604.
Bjorling, D.E. [1999) A comparison of transdermal fentanyl versus
Lascelles, B.D.X., Henderson, A.J., Hackett, I.J. [2001) Evaluation of the 
epidural morphine for analgesia in dogs undergoing major orthopedic sur-
clinical efficacy of meloxicam in cats with painful locomotor disorders.
gery.Jourmal ofthe American AnimalHospitalAssciation35,95-100.
Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 42, 587-593.
Shield, M.J. (1992) Misoprostol: new frontiers; benefits beyond the gas-
Lees, G.E. [1986) Risks of urinary catheterisation. In: R.W. Kirk [ed.),
trointestinal tract.Scandinavian JourmalofRheumatology Supplement
Curret Veterinary Therapy, I127-l129. Philadelphia: WB Saumders.
92, 31-52.
Lulich, J.P, Osbome, C.A. [1995) Bacterial infections of the urinary tract.
Slingsby, L.S., Waterman Pearson, A.E. [2000) Postoperative analgesia
In: S.J. Ettinger and E.C. Feldman [eds)], Textbook of Veterinary lntermal
im the cat after ovariohysterectomy by use of carprofen, ketoprofen,
Medicine: Diseases of the Dog and Cat, Vols I and 2, 4th edn,
meloxicam or tolfenamic acid. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 41,
1775-1788. Philadelphia: WB Saumders.
447-450.
Maki, D.G., Tambyah, PA. [200l) Engineering out the risk for infection
Smarick, S., Aldrich, J., Foley, J., Kass, P, Ling, G., Fudge, M., Haskins, S.
with urinary catheters. Emerging Infectious Diseases 7, 342-347.
[2002) Catheter-associated urinary tract infections in a small animal
Marik, P, Chen, K, Varon, J., Fromm, R., Jr, Stembach, G.L. [1999]
intensive care unit. Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 12, 195.
Management of increased intracranial pressure: a review for clinicians.
Smith, J.D., Stone, E.A., Gilson, S.D. [1994) Permanent cystostomy
The Jourmal of Emergency Medicine 17, 7ll-719.
catheter as a pallative treatment for urine outflow obstruction from
Mathews, K.A., Pettifer, G., Foster, R., McDonell, W. [2001) Safety and
presumed transitional cell carcinoma. American College of Veterinary
efficacy of preoperative administration of meloxicam, compared with
Surgeoms Armual Comfererice I994; 426.
that of ketoprofen and butorphanol in dogs undergoing abdorminal sur-
Smith, L.J., Yu, K.A.J. [200l) A comparison of epidural buprenorphine
gery.AmericanJourmal of Veterinary Research 62,882-888.
with epidural morphine for postoperative analgesia following stifle sur-
Moore, R.W., Withrow, S.J. [1982) Gastrointestinal hemorrhage and pan-
gery in dogs. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 28, 87-96.
anrpaguasagaaugmpaese
Still,J. 1989) Analgesic effects of acupumcture in thoracolumbar disc dis-
the American Veterinary Medical Association 180, 1443-1447.
ease in dogs. Jourmal of Small Amimal Practice 30, 298-301.
362
 Small Animal Spinal Disorders
Stone, E.A., Barsanti, J.A. [1992] Urologic Surgery of the Dog and Cat.
Vasseur, PB., Levy, J., Dowd, E., Eliot, J. [1988) Surgical wound infection
Malvem, PA: Lea & Febiger.
rates in dogs and cats. Data from a teaching hospital. Veterinary Surgery
Strombeck, D.R., Guilford, W.G. [1990) Small Amimal Gastroenterology,
17, 60-64.
Znd edn. Davis, CA: Stonegate Publishing Company.
Walker, J. [1983) Relief from chronic pain by low power laser irradliation.
Swaim, S.F, Lee, A.H, Hughes, K.S. [1989) Heating pads and thermal
Neuroscierice Letters 43, 339-344.
bums in small animals. Jourmal of the American Amimal Hospital
Walt, R.P [1992) Misoprostol for the treatment of peptic ulcer and anti-
Association 25, 156-162.
inflammatory-drug-induced gastroduodenal ulceration. New England
Swaim, S.F, Hanson, R.R., Jr, Coates, J.R. [1996) Pressure wounds in
Jourmal of Medicine 327, 1575-1580.
animals.Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing
Williams, D.A. [1995) Exocrine pancreatic disease. In: S.J. Ettinger and
Veterinarian 18, 203-218.
E.C. Feldman [eds), Textbook of Veterinary Interal Medicine: Diseases
Taylor, R.A. [1992) Postsurgical physical therapy: the missing link.
of the Dog and Cat, Vols I and 2, 4th edn, 1372-1392. Philadelphia:
Compendiumon ContinuingEducation for the Practicing Veterinariat
WB Saunders.
14, 1583-1593.
Williams, J.M., White, R.A.S. [199l) Tube cystostomy in the dog and cat.
Toombs, J.P, Collins, L.G., Graves, G.M., Crowe, D.T., Cay wood, D.D.
Jourmal of Small Atimal Practice 32, S98-602.
[1986) Colonic perforation in corticosteroid-treated dogs. Joural of the
American Veterinary Medical Assaciation 188, 145-150.
Index
Note: Numbers in bold refer to illustrations or tables
A
Anaphylaxis 85
bulging 110, 124-125, 219
Anatomical location of the injury
CSM 219, 234, 236
Abdominal palpation 23-24
295-297
fenestration 154, 202
Abrasions 167
Abscess formation 51, 184, 122, 212,
Anatomical specimens 73, 74
mini-hemilaminectomy 159
Anatomy
pediculectomy 159
225, 229
blood supply 14-17
Accessory process 14l, 156
removal 234
nervous tissue 1-6
spinal fracture 288-289
ACE inhibitors 85
skeleton 6-14
thoracolumbar disc disease
Acetaminophen 343
urinary system 350-351
124-125
Achilles tendon rupture 20
Anesthesia
Aorta 10
Arupuncture 96, 343
complications 86
Aortic embolism 332-333
ADCON-L87
CSF collection 64
Apnea 82
Addison's disease 20, 38
induction 85
Arachnoid cyst 321, 323-326
Adjacent segment disease 225
maintenance 85
diagnosis 29, 36, 122
Adverse drug reactions
premedication 85
localization of signs 37
analgesics 84-85, 340-342
recovery 85-86
marsupialization 244
anesthetics 85
side-effects 85
myelographic abnormalities 51
anti-coagulants 82, 99, 333, 342
Angiotensin converting enzyme
 postoperative complications 297,
anti-convulsants 343
(ACE} inhibitors 85
300, 301
anti-emetics 356
Angled bur guard 77
spinal 212
anti-infectives 85
Anomalous spinal disease 36
subarachnoid 324
anti-inflammatories 83, 84, 85,
Antibiotics see also specific drugs
Arrhythmia, heart 297
341-342
drug side-effects 85, 355
Arteritis 329
cardiovascular system agents 85,
prophylactic 83, 309, 327, 331,
Articular facet fracture 287-289
352
355,357
Articulations, synovial 9-11
gastrointestinal system agents 356
wound infection 357
Ascending motor tracts 6
sedatives 282
Anticlinal vertebra 9
Ascending myelomalacia 36, 37, 332
Albuminocytological dissociation 45
Anti-coagulant drugs 82, 99, 333,
Ascending sensory tracts 5
Allograft 117, 220, 221, 274, 292
342
Aseptic catheterization (intermittent)
see also Fat graft
Anti-convulsants 343
353-354
Alpha-antagonists 352
Anti-emetics 356, 357
Aseptic necrosis 259
Amikacin 355
Anti-infective agents 85
Aspergillus infection 42, 328
Aminoglycoside 357
Anti-inflammatory drugs see aiso
Aspiration 167
Amoxycillin 327, 344, 355
Corticosteroids; Non-steroidal
Aspirin
Amphotericin B 331
anti-inflammmatory drugs
analgesia 342
Ampicillin 327
cervical disc disease 96
bleeding disorders 99, 342
Amputation, tail 297
CSM 218
ischemic neuromyopathy 333
 Analgesia
hypervitaminosis A 326
platelet dysfunction 82, 342
opiates 84-85, 340-341, 343, 356
lumbosacral disease 188
Assessment, clinical &1-82
palliative 254
palliative 254
brachial plexus 30-31
postoperative care 131, 339-343
side-effects 83, 85, 341-342
cranial nerves 20, 21, 25
preoperative assessment 84-85
thoracolummbar disc disease 123
DAMNIT formula 21, 35, 36
thoracolumbar disc disease 123,
ventral slot surgery 102
differential diagnosis 20
131
Antiseptic, urinary 352
etiology 20-28
Anal reflexes 183
Anulus fibrosus
eyes 21
Anal sac adenocarcinoma 184
approach to ventral neck 115
functional 20-22, 25-29, 184
364 Index
Assessment, clinical (contd.)
Beagle
Blood contamination 44
grading 124, 125
chondrodystrophy 13
Blood gas analysis 42
history taking 19
meningitis 329
Blood supply 14-17
lesion localization 21, 38-39
 Bedding (postoperative} 346
see aiso Vascular system
lesions 28-32
Bence-Jones proteinuria 42
Body position
lumbosacral plexus 30-31
 Bermese mountain dog [meningitis)  329
CSF collection 66
neurological 20-28
Bethanechol 352
head position 29, 94
observation 20, 21
Bile duct rupture 19, 282
irmaging 46, 47,54,55,56
palpation 21, 22-25, 26
 Biomechanics of spinal fixation
patient examination 20-25, 25-28
physical 19-20
286-290
paw position 20, 22
Ataxia 167,169
 Biopsies
perception of 5, 6, 22, 23,348
Atlantoaxial joint 46-47
core 79
position for radiography 46
Atlantoaxial subluxation (fracture)
needle 61-62, 275
postoperative 225, 228-229, 343,
161-180
tumors 61-62, 251-252, 275, 276
344,345-346
bone cement 177-178
Bisacodyl 356
Body weight (cement bar thickness)
cats 169-170
Bismuth salicylate 356
314
clinical signs 37,161-163
Bladder
Bone diseases
 complications of treatment
assisted emptying 131, 343, 344,
CSM 211, 212
166-167
352, 353
DISH 326
cross-pins 180
dysfunction 351-352
lumbosacral 183, 184
CSF collection 43
innervation 351
mimicking spinal disease 20
decision-making algorithm 165
leakage 20
neurological patient 81
diagnosis 36, 37, 94, 163-164, 212
neurological screening 20
osteoarthritis 20
dorsal stabilization 166-167
nupture 282
osteochondritis dissecans 20, 36,
fixation 166-180, 171-176
Blastomycoides dermatidis 330
37,183
multiple ventral implants
Bleeding disorders see aiso Von
osteochondritis 20, 36, 37, 183
177-178
Willebrand disease
osteoporosis 38, 122, 326
 myelographic abnormalities 51
aspirin-induced 99
scintigraphy 59-60
non-surgical treatment 164-165,
bleeding time test 217
tumors 94, 248, 249, 260
167
blood clots 99
Bone physiology
postoperative care 169
cervical disc surgery 99
composition 7
prognosis 169
cervical myelopathy 82
demineralized matrix 292
ventral fusion 166-168
CSF analysis 65
production 209
wire fixation 178-180
CSM 217, 224, 225, 229, 234
Bone surgery
Atlantooccipital dysplasia 37
epidural 57
allograft 117, 220, 221, 274, 292
Atlantooccipital space 71
gastrointestinal 83, 84, 229, 342,
atlantoaxial subluxation 168,
Atlas (C1) 7, 14, 106, 161
356
177-178
Atropine 85
Hemoclips 78
autograft 117
Axis (C2) 7, 14, 174
hypoventilation 82
bleeding from cancellous bone 142
Azithromycin 331
laminectomy 98, 138, 146
bone vessel plug 77
Azotemia 82
neurovascular bundles 241
bone wax 77, 142, 313, 314
Azygous vein 15, 16
preoperative assessment 213, 217
cement 238, 314
prevention 138
CSM 223, 232, 235, 238-240,
respiratory 82
245
B
spinal cord 51, 94, 281, 333
decompression 117, 203, 243
Bacterial infections see also specific
subdural 57
external fixation 290-292
 organisms
surgical complications 98, 128,
facetectomy 203
CSF analysis 45
224,225,229
fragments 51
 postoperative complications 355
 thyroid hormone supplementation
fusion 234
spinal cord disease 330
217
hemilaminectomy 1, 143, 268,
Balance training 348
venous plexus 99, 146, 234
269
Barium sulfate 356
Von Willebrand factor 42, 82, 217,
infection risk 301
Bartonella 42, 330, 331
229, 360
instrumentation 77, 79
Basset hound (atlantoaxial
Blood cell counts
laminectomy 195,198, 200,208,
subluxation} 161
CSF 44,45
272
Bathing (postoperative) 343, 349
routine laboratory analysis 41
lumbosacral disease 19l, 198,
Baylisascaris 330
white blood cells 42, 329
200
Index  365
Bone surgery (contd.)
tachycardia 85
vertebral distraction-stabilization
metal and cement fixation 313, 314
vascular diseases 20, 36, 329,
221-223
methylmethacrylate 78
332-333
Central cord syndrome 29
rongeurs 76
Carprofen 341, 343
Cerebellar disease 29
trauma 291-292
Cartilaginous exostoses 36, 323
Cerebellomedullary cistern (CMC)
tumors 255-256
Cart (paraplegic} 350
CSF collection 64, 65-68, 85
vertebrectormy 274
Catheters 353-354
injection of contrast medium 53, 71
Botulism 38
Cats
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
Boxer dog
analgesic drugs 340, 343
cell counts 44, 45
proprioception disorder 22
anti-inflammatory drugs 342
cervical disc disease 94, 99
spondylosis deformans 320
atlantoaxial subluxation 169-170
collection 43, 64-69, 85
Brachial plexus
cervical disc disease 35, 103
examination 44,45
anatomy 2
feline immunodeficiency virus
functional anatomy 45
assessment 30-31
81, 262
meningitis 329
avulsion 30, 37 331
feline infectious peritonitis 35,
neutrophils 43
miosis 25
330
sedimentation chambers 44
myelopathy 36
feline leukemia virus 81, 262, 263
thoracolumbar disc disease 122
nerve sheath tummor resection 275,
gastrointestinal tract 356
ventral recumbancy 69
276
Horner's syndrome 25
xanthochromia 45
spinal trauma 2
282,283, 302
hypervitaminosis A 326
Cervical disc disease 93-120 see also
Brain herniation 65, 66
ischemic myelopathy 37, 38
Cervical spondylormyelopathy
Brainstem lesions 29, 212
ischemic neuromyopathy 281,
cats 103-104
Brain tumor 38
332-333
diagnosis 35-37, 94-96
Brucella canis 42,327,330,331
lymphoma 263
clinical signs 37, 93-94
Buccal mucosal bleeding time 217
Manx 322
decision-making algorithm 97
Bulldog 322
pharmacology 340, 342, 343, 352,
palpation 24
Bupivacaine 341
356
dorsal decompression 98
Buprenorphine 340, 341
sacrocaudal dysgenesis 322
laryngeal nerve paralysis 99
Bursitis 94
spinal trauma 36, 37, 169, 287,
non-surgical treatment 96
Butorphanol 340
297, 301-302, 305
pain 37, 94
Buttress, vertebral 287-289
thoracolumbar disc disease 10,
postoperative care 102
127, 128, 129, 133
prognosis 102-103
tumors 261-263
surgical treatrment
C
urinary tract 302, 352
approach to ventral neck
Cage rest 125, 126, 131, 228, 288, 305
Cauda equina
106-109
Calcinosis circumscripta 212
compression 181-182
complications 98-102
Calcinosis [tumoral) 37, 122,326
disc fenestration 202
distraction-stabilization 117-118
Calcium metabolism 42, 212, 326
functional anatomy 3
dorsal decompression 98
Calculi 38, 122
lumbosacral laminectomy 199,
dorsal laminectomy 120
Callus encroachment 297,299
200
fenestration 96, 109-110
Candida 355
nerve roots 3
hemilaminectomy 119, 266-270
Canine distemper virus (CDV) 42,
neuritis 36, 37,184
indications 96
329-330
Caudal vertebra
locking plate 220
Carcinoma 248
lumbosacral disease 183
 paramedian approach to ventral
Cardiovascular disorders
sacrocaudal dysgenesis 322
neck 232-233
arrhythmia 282, 297
tail injuries 296-297
postoperative care 102
bradycardia 86
Cauterization 75, 83, 275
ventral decompression 96-98,
cardiac arrest 167
Cavalier King Charles spaniel
111-118
cardiomyopathy 213
[syringomyelia) 322-323
Cervical fibrotic stenosis 212
cardiopulmonary arrest 99
Cefadroxil 357
Cervical spine
differential diagnosis 38
Cefalosporin 83, 85, 355
blood supply 15
disorders mimicking spinal disease
Cefazolin 83, 327, 357
diagnosis 35-37
20
Cellulose surgical spears 77
anatomical location of injury
endocarditis 20
Cement plugs
295-297
hypertension 20
CSM 218, 219, 220-223, 226,
myelography 38, 70, 72
insufficiency 20
237-239
radiography 46, 49
neurological patient 81
ventral decompression 117
ligaments 14
366 Index
Cervical spine [contd.)
Cisapride 352
Constipation 356
spinal cord segments 3
Cisplatin 254
Contrast meda
stenosis, fibrotic 36, 37
Claudication,
absorbtion 53
Cervical spondylomyelopathy (CSM]
intermittent 38, 334
discography 50
 211-246 see also Wobbler
neurogenic 36
epidural leakage 71
apss
Clavulanic acid 344, 355
epidurography 50
cement plug 218, 237-239
Cleanliness, postoperative 343-344
hand position 70
CSM 218
Client communication 88
iohexol 43, 49, 86
diagnosis 35, 36,94, 71-72,
Client consent form 88
myelography 49, 72
212-216, 281
Clindamycin 327, 331
poor filling 53
decision-making algorithms
Closed collection system 354-355
spinal cord parenchyma 54
223-224
Cloxacillin 327
sterile meningitis 42-43
neurological examination 20
Coccidioides imitis 330
Coonhound paralysis 38
hypothyroidism 217
Cocker spaniel
Cord dorsum potentials 61
non-surgical treatment 218
kyphosis 131
Corpectomy 58, 149, 147
surgical treatment 218-224
thoracic tumor 250
Corticosteroids see also Anti-
complications 224-228
Codeine 340
inflammatory drugs
dorsal decompression 223,
Cod-piece 307
canine distemper virus infection
241-245
Collar (head) 237, 239, 295
330
dorsal laminectomy 218
Column splitting 52
CSM 218
indications 219
Computerized tomography (CT)
drug side-effects 355, 356, 357
laminoplasty 223-224,245-246
imaging 55-57 see also Magnetic
fungal infections 331
 metal and cement fixation 218,
resonance imaging
GME 330
239-240
atlantoaxial subluxation 164
meningitis 329
 paramedian approach to ventral
body position 55, 56
meningomyelitis 331
neck 232-233
cervical disc disease 95-96
MPSS 83-84, 133, 217, 257, 282,
postoperative care 228-229
comparison to MRI 57
293, 332, 342
presurgical evaluation 216-217
CSM 214-216
osteoporosis 326
prognosis 229
disc extrusion 56, 57, 94
preoperative assessment 83-84
ventral decompression 218,
dorsal recumbency 55
thoracolumbar disc disease 125,
219-221, 233-235
neoplasia 251
126, 131, 133
vertebral distraction 221-223,
preoperative assessment 82
wound infection 83,357
235-237
spinal cord expansion 57
Costs of surgery 88
Cervical tumors 35, 37
thoracolumbar disc disease 56, 123
++e anedno
Cervical vertebrae 7-8
tauma 284-285
Coxofemoral arthritis 184
C1/C2 7, 14, 106, 161,174
Confinement (cage)
125, 126,131
Cranial nerves 20, 21, 25
C1/C5 15, 28-29, 36, 37-38, 212
228, 288, 305
Creatine kinase (CK) 42
C1/C8 1
Congenital diseases
Creatinine 82
C5/C7 8
arachnoid cyst 122,
Crossed extensor reflex 32
C5/C6 212
atlantoaxial instability 281
Cross-pin fixation see also Pin
C6/C7 52, 211
myopathy 38
fixation; Screw fixation
C6/T2 15,28, 28,36, 212
vertebral anomalies 37, 212,
atlantoaxial subluxation 180
Chemical shift artifact 2
321-322
dorsal 180
Chemotherapeutic agents 254,
Consent form 88
spinal trauma 282
262-263
Conservative treatment
Cruciate ligament rupture 20, 184
Chest harness 237, 239
anti-inflammatory drugs 96
 Cryoprecipitate, bleeding disorders
Chihuahua (atlantoaxial fracture) 161
atlantoaxial subluxation 164-165,
217
Chloramphenicol 331
166-167
Cryptococcus neoformans 42, 330
Chlorhexidine 355
cervical disc disease 96
Curettage 236
Chlorpromazine 356, 357
complications 166-167
Curettes 75, 79
Chondrodystrophoid breeds 2-13, 93
CSM 218
bone graft collection 79
Chondroid metamorphosis 12
decompression 124, 125
House 75, 144
Chondrosarcoma 248
fenestration 124, 125
Shea 75
Chronic degenerative
immobilization 282
Cushing's disease
radiculomyelopathy (CDRM) 319
lummbosacral disease 188, 192
osteoporosis 326
Cicatrix formation 287
recovery times 124, 125
preoperative assessment 82
Cimetidine 356
rest 123, 124, 125, 192, 282
wound infection risk 83
Index  367
Cushing's syndrome 81
Degenerative disc disease 36, 183,
microbiology 42, 45
Cutaneous trunci reflex 20,24, 26-27
184, 281, 320
serology 42
Cuticle bleeding time 217
 Degenerative leukoencephalomalacia
trinalysis 42
Cyclosporin 85
320
Diaphragm
Cystocentesis, postoperative 297
Degenerative myelopathy 36, 37,
herniation 282
Cysts
209, 212, 319, 319-320
paralysis 82
arachnoid 29, 37, 51, 122, 212,
Degenerative neuroaxonal dystrophy
Diarrhea 339, 356
297,300, 301, 321, 323-326
320-321
Diazepam
cystocentesis 297
Dehydration (fluid intake) 85, 343,
analgesia 85, 96, 102, 343
dermoid sinus 184, 212, 323
344-345,355
lower urinary tract effects 352
epidermoid 36,212, 323
Demineralized bone matrix 292
micturition disorders 352
kidney 55
Dens
post-myelographic seizure
marsupialization 244
hypoplasia 164
prevention 216
subarachnoid 324
ligaments 14
Disc anatomy 12-13
synovial 36, 37, 52, 94, 122, 183,
malformation 164
Disc degeneration 12, 36, 183, 184,
215, 245, 320
normal CT 7
281, 320
tube cystostomy 355
Dental instrumments 76
Disc extrusion (bulge) see aiso
Cytosine arabinoside 254
Depression [post-surgical] 339
Intervertebral discs; specific
Dermatitis 83, 167
spinal regions
Dermatofibrosis 38
age related 59
D
Dermoid sinus 36, 37, 184, 212, 323
atlantoaxial 163
Dachshund
 Descending motor tracts 5-6
cervical 93, 94, 99
cervical disc extrusion 93
Desitin 358
definition 13
chondroid metamorphosis 12
Desmopressin (DDAVP) 217
diagnosis 56, 57, 94, 212
hemilaminectomy 344
Detrusor function 351
dorsolateral hemilaminectomy
L4/S3 lesions 38
Dexamethasone 65, 83
144-145
thoracolumbar disc disease
Diabetes mellitus 81, 83
Hansen type 13
teatment 126
Diagnosis, differential
intervertebral forarmen 96
thoracolumbar mid-bodies 10
cervical spine 35-39
protrusion 59
ventral slot decompression 116
CSM 281
surgical complications 127, 129,
Dalmatian (L2/L7 defects) 28-29
lumbar spine 15, 37
131
DAMNIT scheme 21, 35, 36
lumbosacral spine 35-39, 184, 184
surgical indications 219
Dantrolene 352
myelopathy 184
thoracolumbar 122, 127, 129, 131,
 Decision-making algorithms
neurological examination 20
136
atlantoaxial subluxation 165
spinal trauma 184
Disc herniation see aiso Intervertebral
cervical disc disease 97
synovial cyst 36, 94
discs
 cervical spondylomyelopathy 223
thoracolumbar spine 35-39, 122
CSM 211, 219
lumbosacral disease 189
Diagnostic techniques 41-72
dorsal hemilaminectomy 119
neoplasia 256
diagnostic imaging
Hansen type 12, 37
thoracolumbar disc disease 124
CT scan 55-57
lumbosacral 186, 200
trauma 293,294
MRI 57-59
myelographic abnormalities 51
 Decompression [dorsal) for CSM
myelography 51-54, 70-72
surgical indications 219
218, 219
radiography 45-50
terminology 58
see aiso Ventral decompression
radiology 50-51
thoracic 123
Decubital ulcers 339, 347, 358-359
scintigraphy 59-60
thoracolumbar 36
Decubitus 127, 167, 297
ultrasonography 54-55
taumatic 285
Deep pain sensation see aiso
electrophysiology
Disc mineralization 59
 Nociception; Pain
 cord dorsum potentials 61
Discogenic pain 184
after durotomy 293
electromyography 60-61
Discography 50
after hemilarminectomy 150
F waves 61
Discospondylitis 326-328
lack of 293
 spinal cord evoked response
atlantoaxial subluxation 163
malacia 293-294
60-61
CSM 212, 225, 228
neurological examination 21
laboratory analysis
differential diagnosis 36, 122
spinal fracture 87
biochemistry 41-42
fungal infection 328
thoracolumbar disc disease 125
biopsy 61-62
localization of signs 37
trauma 293-295, 301-302
CSF analysis 42-45, 64-69
lumbosacral disease 183, 184
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) 127, 359
hematology 41
 myelographic abnormalities 51
368 Index
Disc trauma 36, 51
butorphanol 340
F waves 61
Disseminated idiopathic skeletal
codeine 340
gastrocnemius muscle 60
hyperostosis (DISH) 36, 326
dantrolene 352
neoplasia 250-251
Distraction-stabilization 117-118,
fentanyl 8485, 341
spinal cord evoked response
235-237
glycopyrrolate 85
60-61
Doberman 
halothane 85
Electrosurgery
bleeding disorders 217
iohexol 86
cautery 83
chronic active hepatitis 213
ivermectin 85
instruments 75
CSM 36, 211-212, 214-215,
ketoconazole 85
Embolism
219-220, 222, 243
ketoprofen 342
aortic 332-333
epidural mass 329
loperamide 356
fat 297
hypothyroidism 217
metronidazole 85
fibrocartilaginous 35, 37, 212, 281,
intramedullary lesion 53
misoprostol 356
332
MRI of cervical spine 2
morphine 340, 341
Empyema, epidural 36, 328-329
seizures during myelography 86
MPSS 84
Endocarditis 20
Staphylococcus intermedius 327
nitrous oxide 85
Endotracheal tube 85
ventral decompression 344
non-steroidal 83, 85, 341-342
End-plate failure 225, 227, 238
von Willebrand disease 359-360
opiates 84-85, 340, 341
Enrofloxacin 85
 Dogs (general} see also specific breeds
cxymorphone 340
Ependymoma 51, 248, 252
anticonvulsants 343
phenoxybenzamine 352
Epidermoid cyst 36, 212, 323 36
anti-inflammatory dose 342
prazosin 352
Epidural abscess 51, 122, 212, 225
carts 350
sedatives 282
Epidural empyema 328-329
 gastrointestinal tract pharmacology
steroids 83, 85,326, 357
Epidural fibrosis 183
356
sucralfate 356
Epidural hemorrhage 57
narcotic analgesic dose 340
terazosin 352
Epiduralleakage 49, 53, 71
physical therapy 348
trimethoprim-sulfonamide 85
Epidural lipomatosis 36
postoperative nursing plan 343,
Dura
Epidural steatitis 330-331
344
 dorsolateral hemilaminectomy
Epidurography 50
urinary tract pharmacology 352
incision 148
Epineurium 276
water therapy 349
herniation 191
Erections 359
Domino lesions
lesions 51
Erythrophagocytosis 45
after fracture repair 300
stay suture 279
Escherichia coli 327
after ventral slot surgery 117, 220,
tears 36, 122, 281
Esophagus disease 98, 99
221, 228
Durotomy
Etodolac 341
cement plug 221-222
dorsolateral hemilarminectomy 148
Euthanasia 229, 293
Wobbler syndrome 101
patients with no deep pain
Euthyroidism 217
Dorsal funiculi 1
sensation 293
Evoked response, spinal cord 60-61
Dorsal longitudinal ligament 14
preoperative assessment 87
Exercise intolerance 36-37, 222
Doxorubicin 254
thoracolumbar disc disease 132,
Exostoses, cartilaginous 36, 323
Doxycycline 331
149
Extensor postural thrust 23
Draping 74, 78-79
Dysgenesis, sacrocaudal 322
External fixation 237, 316-318,
Dressings 344, 357
Dyspnea 82, 99, 167
328
Drug interactions 85, 342
Dysplasia
External splints 239, 290, 305, 306
Drug side-effects
antlantooccipital 36, 37
Extradural tumors 248-250,
ACE inhibitors 85
myelodysplasia 36, 212, 322
259-263
alpha-blockers 352
Dysraphism (spinal) 36, 212, 322
Eye function 21
anesthetics 85
anti-coagulants 82, 99, 333, 342
E
F
anti-convulsants 343
anti-emetics 356
Edema 99
Facetectomy 192, 202
anti-infective agents 85
Ehrlichia 38, 42, 330
Facet joints
anti-inflammatory agents 83, 85,
Electric drill 77
fracture 191, 207
341-342
Electrocardiogram (ECG) 213, 282
pain 36, 122, 184, 320
barium sulfate 356
 Electrocautery 83
removal 130
Baytril 85
Electromyography (EMG) 60-61
Facial sensation 20
bisacodyl 356
Electrophysiology
Famotidine 356
buprenorphine 340
cord dorsum potentials 61
Fat embolism 297
Index
369
Fat graft
external 290-291
German shepherd
autogenous fat 86-87
internal 291
chronic degenerative
dorsolateral hemilaminectomy 149
multiple implant 166
radiculomyelopathy 319-320
fenestration of disc extrusion 201
Fixation-stabilization
fungal discospondylitis 328
foraminal decompression and
atlantoaxial subluxation 166-167
lumbosacral disease 38, 185, 186,
facetectomy 202
caudal disc extrusion 96
190
free fat 86-87
cervical disc disease 117-118
nuclear bone scan 60
laminectomy 208
Flexor (withdrawal) reflex 27
sacral subluxation 182
minimization of scarring 86-87
Floating limb gait 28, 212
thoracic tumor 250
necrosis 38
Flooring [cage] 345-346, 359
German short-haired pointer 4
postoperative complications 127,
Fluconazole 331
Giant breed dogs (CSM) 21l, 222,
128, 129
Fluid intake 85, 343,344-345, 355
223
thoracolumbar disc disease 127,
Focal granulomatous
see aiso Large breed dogs; specific
128, 129
meningoencephalomyelitis
breeds
Fecal incontinence 13l, 183
(GME} 248
Glioma
Feline diseases see also Cats
Food intake 343, 344, 356
myelographic abnormalities 51
thoracolumbar disc disease 127,
Forage (CSM surgery) 221, 232,
poorly differentiated 252
128, 129
235
tumor classification 248
FeLV-associated lymphoma 262
 Foramen magnum 179
Glucocorticoids 217
feline immunodeficiency virus
Foraminal decompression 192, 202
Glucose metabolism 20, 38
(FIV) 81, 262
Foreign body migration 36
Glycopyrolate 85
feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
Free radicals 84
GME (focal granulomatous
35,330
Fungal infection 42, 328, 330
meningoencephalomyelitis) 248
feline leukemia virus (FeLV) 81,
Fusion-fixation
Golden retriever
263
atlantoaxial subluxation 166,
bulbous dilation of dorsal arachnoid
Femoral nerves 127
167-168
space 324
 Fenestration and disc removal
lumbosacral disease 189, 192
left hemiparesis 29
bulging disc 202
new bone production 209
myelomalacia 61
cervical disc disease 96, 109-111
sacral subluxation 204
 thoracolumbar spinal cord segments
 comparison to ventral slot 97
F waves 61
3
CSM 221, 227
vertebral bone loss 61
fenestration 127, 154-159
Golf-tee pattern 52
G
hemilaminectomy 149, 159
Gracilis contracture 20, 184
instrumentation 75
Gabapentin 343
Grafts
laminectomy 201
Gadoteridol 58
bone 117, 220, 221, 274, 292
pediculectomy 159
Gagging 20
fat 38, 86-87, 127, 128, 129, 149,
postoperative complications 130,
Gait abnormalities
201, 202, 208,
221, 227
disconnected 212
Granulomatous
thoracolumbar disc disease 124,
"floating' limb 28, 212
meningoencephalomyelitis
127, 130, 154-159
neurological examination 20
(GME) 330
Fentanyl 84, 340, 341
Gallstones 38, 122
Great Dane
Fever 339
Gastrocnemius muscle 60
CSM 36, 211, 213, 222-224, 228,
 Fibrocartilaginous embolism (FCE)
Gastrointestinal tract disturbances
246
35, 36, 37, 212, 281, 331-332
bleeding 83, 84, 342, 356
dyspnea after imaging 82
 Fibroid metamorphosis 12
diarrhea 339, 356
hypothyroidism 217
Fibrosarcoma 38, 248, 249, 260
drug-induced 83, 84, 341, 342,
 postoperative complications 228
 Fibrosis
356
Gunshot injury 36, 331
cervical 36, 37, 212
melena 339, 356
epidural 183, 190
parasites 38, 122
H
peridural 131
perforation 83
restrictive 225, 273
pharmacology 356
Halothane 85
Fine needle aspiration 61
postoperative 339, 355-357
Halti head collar 237, 239, 295
FIP (feline infectious peritonitis) 35,
ulceration 127, 297, 341, 356
Hansen-type disc herniation 12, 13,
330
vomiting 339, 356
182, 183
Fistula, cutaneous 127
Gelatin sponge 78
Harnesses 218,237, 239, 347
Fixation devices
Gelfoam 36, 78, 86, 99, 269
Headlight 73, 74
biomechanics 289-290
Gentamicin 327
Head movements 29, 94
370  Index
Heart disease
Hepatic disease 8l,
CSM 220, 224, 225, 226, 238,
arrest 167
hepatitis (chronic) 213
239-240
cardiomyopathy 213
hepatotoxicosis 85
failure 167,191, 192,224, 225,
cardiopulmonary arrest 99
Histopiasma capsulatum 330
226, 258-259, 299, 318
differential diagnosis 20, 38
History taking 15, 19
intervertebral 220
neurological patient 81
Hock flexion 27, 30, 182
lumbar spinal injury 296
rhythm disorders 85, 86, 282, 297
Hopping 20, 22
lumbosacral disease 19l, 192
Heat therapy 347
Horner's syndrome
metal and cerment fixation
Helminths 330
cats 25
239-240, 296
Hemangiosarcoma 248, 261
cervical disc surgery 99
migration 300
Hematoma
cervical tumor 251
multiple ventral irmplants 
cervical disc surgery 99
CSM 224
177-178
CSM 212, 225, 229
Horses (Wobbler syndrome) 218
screw fixation 192
extradural 99
Hounsfield units (CT numbers)
surgical complications 19l, 224,
 postoperative complications 99,
283
225, 226
225, 229
Hydration 85, 343, 344-345, 355
thoracic spinal injury 296
prognosis 284
Hydrocephalus 162-163
threaded 292
spinal cord 36, 37 212, 333
Hydromorphone 340
titanium 255
spinal trauma 284
Hydromyelia 212,322-323
wound infection risk 83
Hemilaminectomy see aiso Mini-
Hydrosorb TS 87
Infections see also Wounds and
hemilaminectomy
Hydroxyurea 254
wound infections; specific
cervical disc disease 98, 119,
Hyoid venous arch 171
organisms
266-270
Hypercalcemia 42
antibiotic prophylaxis 83
dorsolateral 136-150
Hyperesthesia 20, 21, 183, 184
discospondylitis 36, 326-328
marsupialization 326
see also Nociception; Pain
epidural empyema 328-329
neoplasia 266-270
Hyperflexion injury 99,227
infectious agents 330-331
nerve sheath tumor 275-279
Hypergammaglobulinemia 42
inflammatory disorders 35,
spinal trauma 294
Hyperkalemia 20, 38
330-331
thoracolumbar disc disease 125,
Hyperreflexia [pseudo) 183
surgical 83, 99, 131, 191, 357
126, 151-154
Hypertension 20
Inflammatory disorders 35, 36
Hemiparesis 94
Hyperthyroidism 20, 38
atlantoaxial subluxation 36, 163
Hemivertebra 320-321
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy 20
canine distemper virus infection
Hemoclips 78
Hypervitaminosis 36, 37, 326
329-330
Hemocytometer 44
Hypocalcemia 42
cauda equina neuritis 36
Hemogram 41
Hypodermic needles 76
central nervous system 122,
Hemorrhage see aiso Bleeding
Hypoglycemia 20, 38
329-331
disorders
Hypokalemia 20
discospondylitis 36, 326-328
aspirin-induced 99
Hypothyroidism 81, 82, 213, 217
epidural empyema 36, 328-329
cervical 82, 99
Hypoventilation 82,99
epidural steatitis 330-331
CSF analysis 65
FIP 330
CSM 224, 225,229, 234
foreign body migration 36
 diaphragm paralysis 82
1
Gelfoam reaction 36
epidural 57
Iatrogenic injury
GME 330
gastrointestinal 229
cervical disc surgery 99
meningo[encephalo]myelitis 36
Hemoclips 78
CSM 224, 225, 226
steroid-responsive
hypoventilation 82
intraoperative complications 224
meningitis-arteritis 329
prevention 138
lumbosacral disease 191
Infraspinatus contracture 20
psoas muscle 38, 281
neural 225, 226
Instrumentation, surgical 73-79
respiratory 82
surgical complications 99, 191,
 Intercapital ligament 13
spinal cord 51, 94, 281, 333
225,226
Intercostal artery 15, 278
subdural 57
Idiopathic disorders 38, 326
Intermittent aseptic catheterization
surgical 98, 128, 138, 146, 224,
Iiac thrombosis 38, 332-333
353-354
225, 229
Imipenem 355
Intermittent claudication 38, 334
thoracolumbar 128
 Immobilization 282
 Internal fixation devices 291
venous plexus 99, 146, 234
Implants see also Locking plates;
see also Metal and cement
Hemostasis 8l, 82
 Metal and cement fixation 
fixation
Hemostat 77
atlantoaxial subluxation 177-178
Interspinous ligaments 14
Index  371
Intertransverse ligaments 14
K-wires 117, 167-168, 235
Lhasa Apso 94
Intervertebral discs see also Disc
Kyphosis 131, 306
Ligamentous hypertrophy 211
herniation 
Ligaments
anatomy 12
cruciate 20
disc removal 75
L
dorsal longitudinal 14
functional anatomy 1l-13
Labrador
functional anatomy 13-14
fusion 220, 221
disc herniation 123
ligamentum flavum 197, 199
 Intervertebral foramen 3, 11, 96
displacement of L2, 284
nuchal 242
Intracranial disease 163
dorsal hemilaminectomy 119
ventral longitudinal 14
lesions 94
lumbosacral disease 188
vertebral 13-14
raised pressure 64
spinal cord hematoma 36, 333
Limb disorders
Intradural-extramedullary lesions
spinal cord mass 58
functional assessment 25-26
29,51, 52, 53, 248
subarachnoid cyst 324
gait, attitude and posture 212
Intradural-extramedullary tumors
tumoral calcinosis 327
lameness 183, 184, 204
248-252, 259-263
Lameness (pelvic limmb) 183, 184,
neurological exarmination 28
 Intraoperative complications
204
Lipomatosis, epidural 36
cervical disc disease 98-99
Laminectomy
Liver disease 81
CSM surgery 224-226
cervical disc disease 98, 120
Locking plates 219, 220, 220, 221,
thoracolumbar disc disease 127
CSM 218, 219, 227, 243-244
223
trauma surgery 297, 297-299
dorsal 98, 120, 126, 189-190,
Locomotor status 20, 20, 22
tumor surgery 258
195-202, 218, 223, 272
Lomustine 254
Intubation 85
healing 86-87
Longissimus tendon 271
Intumescence 2, 3, 258
lumbosacral 188, 189-190, 192
Longus colli muscles 109, 112, 173
Iohexol 43,49, 86
neoplasia 270-273
Loperamide 356
Ischemic injury 225
postoperative complications 209
Lower motor neurons (LMN)
Ischemic myelopathy 35, 36, 51,
spinal trauma 294
bladder function 24, 351
122, 184, 281
technique
diagnostic pitfalls 29
 Ischemic neuromyopathy 20, 38,
compared to pediculectomy 153
differentiation of abnormalities 26
122, 212, 281, 332-333
dorsal 126, 189-190, 218, 219,
EMG 60
 Ischemic neuropathy 281,
227
lesion severity 31-32
332-333
House curette 75
limb function 25-26
Ischemic spinal cord 86
spreader 74
motor system function 26
Isoflurane 85
thoracolumbar 126, 270-273
muscle atrophy 26
Itraconazole 331
Laminectomy membrane 228
reflexes 5, 26
Ivermectin 85
Laminoplasty 219, 223-224,
thoracolumbar disc disease 121
245-246
Lumbar arteries 16
Large breed dogs see aiso specific
Lumbar cord segments 3
J
breeds
Lumbar disc disease see aiso
Jamshidi needle 79
cardiomyopathy 213
 Lumbosacral disease
Jaw tone 20
CSM 211
 anatomical location of the injury
Joint capsule proliferation 211
lumbosacral disease 183, 184
296
Joint pain 36, 122, 184, 320
spondylosis deformans 185
CSF collection 68-69
Jugular vein 69, 278
thoracolumbar disease 132-133
differential diagnosis 15, 35, 37
Junctionopathy 20
Laryngeal nerve 98, 99, 108
lumbar puncture 68, 69, 72
Laryngoscope 85
myelography 71
Larynx 171
radiography 47-48, 49-50
K
Laser therapy 348
Lummbar nerve roots 3
Ketoconazole 85
Lasix 65
Lumbar nutrient foramen 9
Ketoprofen 341, 342
Laxatives 356
Lumbodorsal fascia 154
Kidney disease
Lesions (examination)
Lummbosacral anatomy 1l, 182
calculi 38
classification 50
Lumbosacral disease 18l-209
cysts 55
decision-making algorithm 223,
see also Lumbar disc disease
nephroblastoma 249-250
224
diagnosis
 neurological patient 81
localization 21, 28-31
clinical signs 183
pain 122
severity 31-32
CT 186-188
worms 38, 122
Leukodystrophy 36, 320, 320-321
decision-making algorithm 189
Kirschner wires 178
Leukoencephalomalacia 320
differential 36, 184
372 Index
Lumbosacral disease (contd.)
Massage [effleurage] 348
Methylprednisolone sodium succinate
discography 186
Mastiff
(MPSS)
electrophysiology 184
CSM 215, 245
see aiso Corticosteroids
epidurography 186
dens hypoplasia 164
drug dose 84
examination 183-184
Hansen-type disc herniation 182
drug interactions 342
hyperesthesia 184
Medetomidine 343
drug side-effects 84
localization of signs 37
Medullary lesions 51
neuroprotective effect 83
L4/S3 lesions 37
Melena [coffee ground) vomit 339,
spinal trauma 282, 293
myelography 185
356
treatment
survey radiography 185
Melanoma
248
CSM 217
non-surgical treatment 188
Meloxicam 341-342, 343
decision-making 293
surgical treatment
 Menace deficits 20, 29
fibrocartilaginous embolism
complications 191-192, 192
 Meninges 3-4
332
dorsal fusion-fixation 190-191,
Meningioma see aiso Neoplasia;
outcome 133
204-209
Tumors
preoperative 83-84, 217, 257
dorsal laminectomy 189-190,
CSM 212
spinal cord tumors 257
195-202
diagnosis
spinal trauma 282
facetectomy 190, 202-204
differential diagnosis 35
thoracolumbar disc disease
foraminal decompression 190,
localization of signs 37
133
202-204
 myelographic abnormalities 51
Metronidazole 85
prognosis 192
intradural 249
Micturition see aiso Urinary system;
Lumbosacral junction 296
prognosis 260
Urine
Lumbosacral myelography 48-49, 72
surgical dissection 273
neurological damage 24
Lumbosacral plexus 4, 30, 148
treatment outcome 261
physiological control 350
Lumbosacral reflexes 183
tumor classification 248
postoperative care 351
Lumbosacral vascular system 183
Meningitis-arteritis 329
Miniature dogs see aiso Small breed
 Lurmbosacral vertebrae
Meningitis (FIP) 330
dogs
anatomy 8-9, 10,11
Meningocele 212
Chihuahua 161
L1/L7, 1
Meningoencephalitis 38
pinscher 118
L2, 284
 Meningomyelitis
poodle 177, 325
L3, 36-37
CSM 212
schnauzer 332, 359
L4/S3, 28, 37-38
differential diagnosis 36
toy breeds 165
L6/L7, 296
localization of signs 37
Mini-chuck 76
L7, 12, 296
lumbosacral disease
184
 Mini-hemilaminectomy
Lymphoma see also Neoplasia;Tumors
neck pain 94
combined with pediculectomy
extradural 249
Meningomyelocele 36, 212
154
FeLV-associated 81, 263
Mental status
dorsolateral 143
spinal 262
depression 339
lateral approach 151
tumor classification 248
neurological screening 20
thoracolumbar disc disease
Lysosomal storage disease 36, 326
postoperative care 359-360
126-127, 136, 151-154
Metabolic disease 36
Minocycline 327
Metaclopramide 356, 357
Miosis 25
M
 Metal and cement fixation, see also
Misoprostol 343, 356
 Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging
 Implants
Mobilizers, surgical 75
atlantoaxial subluxation 164
CSM 218, 219,221, 228
Morphine 340, 341
cervical disc disease 95-96
239-240
Motor system 5-6
comparison to CT 57
failure 258-259
 Motor neurons (LMN and UMN) 5,
CSM 216
implant pattern 310, 312
20,24-26, 29, 31-32, 60, 121,
diagnostic imaging 57-59
implants 239-240, 296
351
thoracolumbar disc disease 123
postoperative complications 228
Movement disorders 183 see aiso
tauma 285-286
trauma 309-316
Walking ability
Malacia, focal 148, 286, 293-294
ventral decompression 117
 Moving of patients, postoperatively
Mannitol 65
Methenamine mandelate 352
343
Manx cat
Methocarbamol 96, 102, 343
 Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI 326
sacrocaudal dysgenesis 322
Methoxyfluorane 85
Mucosal bleeding time (buccal) 217
spina bifida 322
 Methylmethacrylate bone cement 78
Multiple cartilaginous exostoses
Marsupialization 244, 325
see aiso Bone cement
(osteochondromatosis) 212
Index  373
Multiple ventral implants 169, 177
Myelomalacia
surgical treatment 255-259,
Muscle 146
malacia 148
266-279
Muscle activity see also
postoperative 127, 359
umor biology 248-250
Electromyography
secondary to disc extrusion 333
Neospora caninum 42, 330
EMG 60-61
thoracolumbar disc disease 127, 128
Nephroblastoma 51, 248, 249-250,
gastrocnemius muscle 60
Myelopathy
261, 273
wrinary sphincter 351
brachial plexus 36
Nerve block 341
Muscle atrophy 26, 183
cervical 38, 82, 212
Nerve compression 6, 29
Muscle masses 20, 26
degenerative 37, 184, 209
Nerve hook 76
Muscle miosis 25
differential diagnosis 184, 212
Nerve roots 3, 12, 21, 131
Muscle palpation 21, 24
fibrocartilaginous embolic 212
nerve root compression 29
Muscle relaxants 352
hemorrhage 82
nerve root signature 93, 94, 103,
Muscles and muscle groups
hypoventilation 82
212, 279
epaxial 147, 152,159, 196, 197
hereditary 36
nerve root tumors 251, 275,
iliocostalis 155, 156, 157, 158
ischemic 35, 37, 51, 184
279
intercostal 278
lumbosacral disease 184
Nerve sheath tumor
levator costarum 157, 158
 myelographic abnormalities 51
clinical signs 248
longissimus 141, 155
Myelotomy 87
diagnostic imaging 252
longus colli 109, 112, 173, 233
Myesthenia gravis 38
differential diagnosis 35, 212
multifidus 271
Myopathy 20,38
 myelographic abnormalities 51
omotransversarius 276
Myositis 20, 38
prognosis 260-261
pectoral 276
Myxoma 260
resection 275-279
psoas 37, 38, 331
surgery 257
rhomboideus 241
umor biology 248
N
scalenus 277,278
Nerves
spinalis 242, 243, 267
Narcotic agents 85, 96, 340
cranial 20, 21, 25, 277, 278
sternocephalicus 107, 233
Necrosis
femoral 127
sternohyoid 107,171
aseptic 259
laryngeal 98, 99, 108
sternothyroid 172
fat graft 36
musculocutaneous 31
strap 233
Needle biopsy 275
pelvic 30
trapezius 241
Neoplasia 247-279 see aiso specific
pudendal 30
Musculocutaneous nerve 31
tumor types
radial 31, 275
Mycobacterium 331
diagnosis
saphenous 31
Myelitis 184
biopsy 251-252, 262
sciatic 30
 Myelodysplasia (spinal dysraphism]
classification 248
superficial peroneal 31
36
clinical signs 247-248
thoracic 277,278
Myelography
differential 35, 163, 281
tibial 31
abnormalities
electrophysiology 250-251
ulnar 31
common causes 51
imaging 250-251
Nervous tissue, functional anatomy
CSM 213-216
localization of signs 37
1-6
interpretation 50-51
staging 252-254
Neuritis
neoplasia 251
extradural 248-249, 259
cauda equina 36, 37, 184
nerve sheath tumor 51
extramedullary 249-250, 259-261
polyradiculoneuritis 38
neurodegeneration 53-54
fibrosarcoma 38
Neurogenic muscle disease 24, 26
spinal cord expansion 57
intradural 38, 249-250, 259-261
Neurological disease
trauma 283-284
intramedullary 250, 261
CSM 212
complications 51-54, 217
lumbosacral 184
ischemic 38, 332-333
contrast media 49, 70, 86
nerve root tumors 251, 275, 279
localization of signs 37
indications 48-49
nerve sheath tumor 257, 275-279
lumbosacral disease 184
postoperative care 343
neurological patients 81
neuroaxonal dystrophy 320-321
spinal region
prognosis 259-26l, 263
neurogenic atrophy 26
cervical 49, 70-72, 95, 164
spinal 248, 261-263
neuromyopathy 37,38,184,
lumbar 49-50, 71
spinal cord 59, 257-258
212
lumbosacral 72
treatment
neuropathy 38, 184, 332-333
normal lateral 49
decision-making algorithm 256
patient management 81
thoracolumbar 122-123
non-surgical treatment 254255,
peripheral 38, 184
Myeloma 42, 61, 248
262-263
trauma 282-283
374 Index
Neurological examination see aiso
Non-surgical treatment
Osteoporotic pathological fracture
Reflexes
anti-inflammatory drugs 96
122
brachial plexus 30-31
atlantoaxial subluxation 164-165,
Osteosarcoma 248, 249, 260
cranial nerves 20, 21, 25
166-167
Otitis externa 167
DAMNIT formula 21, 35, 36
cervical disc disease 96
Otitis media 94
differential diagnosis 20
complications 166-167
Oxymorphone 340
eyes 21
CSM 218
functional assessment
decompression 124, 125
P
attitude, posture and gait 20, 22,
fenestration 124, 125
29
immobilization 282
Packed cell volume (PCV) 82
hyperesthesia 20, 21, 184
lumbosacral disease 188, 192
Pain see aiso Deep pain sensation;
limbs 28,29
recovery times 124, 125
 Nociception
motor function 20, 22, 26
rest 125, 126, 131, 192, 228, 282,
abdominal 38, 122
pain 21, 25, 27-28
288, 305
discogenic 184
proprioception 22
thoracolumbar disc disease 123,
facet joint 36, 122, 184
urinary function 20, 21
124, 125
lumbosacral 18l, 184
grading 124,125
tauma 282,289-290, 305-309
neck 94
lesion localization 21, 38-39
Nuchal ligament 241, 242
oropharyngeal 94
lumbosacral plexus 30-31
Nucleus pulposus 13, 11l, 152, 156
with paraplegia 32
observation 20, 21
Nursing care, postoperative 343-345
pleuritic 94
 palpation
see aiso Postoperative complications
postoperative
abdomen 22-24
Nutrient foramen 9
after hemilectomy 149
muscle 21,26
Nutrition see also Food intake
after spinal trauma 301-302
pain assessment 24
hypervitaminosis A 36, 37, 326
after ventral slot surgery 103
spine 24-25
postoperative nursing care
sacroiliac joint 184
Neuromuscular disorders 20
344-345
thoracolumbar disc disease 122,
Neuromyopathy (ischemic) 20
vitamin disorders 36, 37, 217, 326
125
Neuropathy 38, 184, 332-333
Pain syndrome (thalamic) 38
Neurovascular bundle 139, 141
Palliative therapy 254
Neutrophils 43, 45
0
Palpation (spine) 24-25
Nitrous oxide 85
Obesity 83
Palpebral reflex 20
Nociception [pain perception} see aiso
Occipital artery 15
Pancreatitis 38, 122, 357
Pain
Occipital protuberance 178
Panniculus reflex 21
decision-making algorithms 293,
 Oculovestibular response 20
Panosteitis 20
294
Odontoidectomy 171, 177
Paraparesis 29, 32
deep pain sensation 20, 21,
Oligodendroglioma 252
Paraplegia 26, 32, 130
87, 125, 127, 293-295,
Omeprazole 356, 356
Paralysis
301-302
Operating loupes 73, 74
Coonhound 38
localization 37, 38
Operating microscope 73, 74
progressive myelomalacia 127
neurological examination 27-28
Operation duration 83
tick 38
pathophysiology 286
Opioid analgesics 340-341, 343, 356
Patellar luxation 20
prognosis 32, 301-302
side-effects 84-85, 340, 341
Patellar reflex 20, 26-27
recurrent 150
Organophosphate toxicity 38, 42
Pathophysiology, trauma 290-292
trauma 87,293-295
Oropharyngeal pain 94
Patient examination
withdrawal reflex 28
Orthopedic disease
etiology 20-28
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
CSM 211, 212
history taking 19
drugs (NSAIDs) see also Anti-
DISH 326
lesions 28-32
inflammatory drugs
fracture 122
neurological 20-28
cervical disc disease 96
lumbosacral 183, 184
physical 19-20
effect on thyroid function tests
neurological patients 81
Paw position 20
217
mimicking spinal disease 20
Pedicle grafts 87
pharmacology 341
tumors 248, 249, 260
Pediculectomy 127, 151-154
postoperative care 192, 341-343
Osteoarthritis 20
Pelvic nerve 30
preoperative assessment 82, 83
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD]
Penicillin derivatives 83
side-effects 83, 85, 341-342, 355,
20, 36, 37, 183
Penile erection 359
356
Osteophytes 211
Penrose drains 276
wound infection 357
Osteoporosis 38, 326
Perineal reflex 20
Index  375
Periodontal disease 83
flooring and bedding 345-346
surgical considerations 86-87
Periosteal elevator 75, 136, 197,235
hydration and nutrition 344-345
Pressure sores 308
Peritonitis 330
moving patients 343
Procaine penicillin 357
Peroneal nerve 31
myelography 343
 Proprioception (perception of
Pharynx pain 94
neoplasia 259
position)
Pheochromocytoma 20
neurosurgery 339
anatomical considerations 5
Phenobarbitone 217
physical therapy 346-350
effects of compression 6
Phenoxybenzamine 343, 352
recumbency 344
neurological examination 22
Physical examination 19-20
slings and harnesses 346, 347, 349
 postoperative sensory stimulation
see aiso Neurological exarmination
trauma 297
348
Physical therapy 131, 343, 346-350
treatment plans 343, 344
reflex step 23
Pilonidal sinus [dermoid sinus) 36,
urinary function 344, 350-352,
Prostate disease 38, 81, 122, 184
37, 184, 212, 323
353-355
Protein analysis 42, 45
Pin fixation 78 see also Cross-pin
Postoperative complications 224
Protozoal infections 38, 330
fixation; Screw fixation
see also Intraoperative
Pruritus 183
angles for fixation 311, 312
complications; Preoperative
 Pseudohyperreflexia 27, 183
entry points and trajectory 312
complications
Psoas muscle 37, 38, 122, 184, 281,
external fixation 292
cervical disc surgery 99-102
331
failure rates 169
CSM 225,226-228
Psyllium 356
insertion 76
decubital ulcers 358-359
Ptosis 25
metal and cement fixation 309
deep pain sensation (loss of) 150
 Pudendal nerve 30
stapling technique 315-316
deformity 258
Pug
Steinmann pins 22l, 290-292,
fenestration 130
lumbosacral disease 191
296, 298, 310, 314, 315
gastrointestinal 127,297, 355-357
sacrocaudal dysgenesis 322
vertebral distraction-stabilization
implant failure 258-259
tetraparesis 101
221
infections 83, 258, 259, 354-355,
Pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE)
Pinscher, miniature 118
357
359
Placing test 23
myelomalacia 359
Pupillary light reflex 20
Plasmma cell tumor 
259, 260
osseous fusion 97
Pyoderma 81
Platelets 82, 342
penile erection 258, 359
Pyometra 81
Peocytosis 44, 45, 49, 329, 330
respiratory 168
Pyrimethamine 331
Pleuritic pain 94
self-mutilation 359
Pneumatic system 77
seroma formation 358
R
 Pneumomediastinum
225
spinal cord tethering 149
Pneumonia 99, 297
thoracolurbar disc disease
Rabies 330
Pneumothorax 127, 130, 158, 297
127-132
Radial nerve 31, 275
Polyarthritis 20, 38, 94, 122
 thromboembolism 359
Radiation injury 36
Polymyositis 38, 94, 122, 163
trauma 299, 299-301
Radiation therapy 254-255
Polyradiculoneuritis 38, 184
tumor recurrence 259
Radicular arteries 16
Poodle
urine scald 357-358
Radiculopathy 20, 38
atlantoaxial subluxation 16l, 163,
Posture, attitude and gait 20, 20, 23,
Radiography
168
181
 imaging techniques
 dens hypoplasia 164
Prazosin 352
discography 50
Position (perception of)
Prednisolone 96, 218,329, 330
epidurography 50
anatomy 5
Prednisone 254
interpretation 50-51
nerve compression 6
 Preoperative assessment
myelography 48-50, 51-54
neurological examination 22
analgesia 84-85
normal spinal 46
 postoperative sensory stimulation
anesthesia 85-86
positioning 46,47
348
client communication 87
principles 50-51
reflex step 23
clinical assessment 81-83
survey radiography 45-46, 283
Positive profile pins 78
durotomy 87
x-rays 82, 99
Postoperative care 339-360
imaging 82
lesions
analgesia 339-343
laminectomy healing 86-87
atlantoaxial joint 46-47
atlantoaxial subluxation 169
myelotomy 87
cervical 46, 49, 94
cervical disc disease 102
pharmacological considerations
extradural 51
cleanliness 343-344
83-85
intradural 51
CSM 228-229
recovery after spinal cord injury 87
intramedullary 51
376 Index
Radiography (contd.)
thoracolumbar disc disease 123,
Sarcoma 248, 261
lesions (contd.)
124, 125
Scalenus muscle 277, 278
lumbar 49-50
Restrictive fibrosis 225, 273
Scalpel 75
neoplasia 250
Reticulosis (focal granulomatous
Scar formation 86-87, 191, 192
thoracolumbar 122
 meningoencephalomyelitis) 248
Schiff-Sherrington sign 26, 32
trauma 283
Retractors
Schiff-Sherrington syndrome 32,
postoperative care 344
Adson-Baby 74
284
Ranitidine 356
Army Navy 152, 233
Schmorl's node 36, 94, 184
 Recovery times, thoracolumbar
blunt 74
Schnauzer (miniature)
surgery 125
Gelpi 74, 108, 138, 235, 236,237,
decubital ulcers 359
Recumbency
238
fibrocartilaginous embolism 332
CSF collection 59
Gosset 74
Sciatic nerve 31
imaging 47, 55
Langenbeck 138
Scintigraphy 59-60
postoperative 225, 228-229, 344
multi-toothed 74
Scoliosis 61, 127
Red blood cell counts 44, 45
pediatric Balfour 74
Screaming (in dogs) 94
Reflexes 26-27
self-retaining 74, 197
Screw fixation see also
anal 183, 185
Senn 138
 Fusion-fixation; Pin fixation
crossed extensor 32
Weitlander 74
atlantoaxial subluxation 166, 169,
cutaneous trunci 20, 24, 24,26-27
 Retriever
174-176
hock flexion 27,30, 182
bulbous dilation of dorsal arachnoid
CSM 220, 223, 225, 226,
LMN 5, 26
space 324
237-240
palpebral 20
left hemiparesis 29
failure rates 169
panniculus 21
myelomalacia 61
lumbar spine 274, 296
patellar 20, 26-27
thoracolumbar spinal cord
lumbosacral spine 190, 191, 192,
perineal20
segments 3
296
postural 20
vertebral bone loss 61
pelvic limb lameness 204
pseudohyperreflexia 27, 183
Rhizotomy 148
 postoperative complications 208,
pupillary 20
Rhodesian ridgeback 222
225,226
reflex step 23
Rib (thirteenth) 140, 155
techniques
 Schiff-Sherrington sign 32
Rickettsia 42, 330
cement plug 237, 238
spinal 20, 21, 87
Rongeurs 76
laminectomy 191, 192, 208
UMN 6, 26
Root signature 93, 94, 103,212, 279
locking plates 223
withdrawal 20, 27, 28, 31
Rottweiler
 metal and cement fixation
Renal disease
atlantoaxial subluxation 161
239-240
calculi 38
CSM surgery 244
placement 207,208
cysts 55
discospondylitis 328
threaded screws 240, 292, 309
nephroblastoma 249-250
laminectomy 201,244
ventral slot 220
neurological patients 81
leukodystrophy 320-321
vertebrectomy 274
pain 122
leukoencephalomalacia 320
trauma 296
worms 38,122
lumbar turmor 254
Sedatives 282
Respiratory disorders
neuroaxonal dystrophy 320-321
Sedimentation chambers 44
 dyspnea after imaging 82
spinal compression 216
Seizures
fentanyl-induced 84
after myelography 53-54, 86, 339
hypoventilation 82
after neurosurgery 339
S
pneumomediastinum 225
prazosin 352
pneumonia 99,297
Sacral vertebrae
Self-mutilation 127, 183, 359
pneumothorax 127, 130, 158,
S1/S3, 1
Sensory function see aiso Neurological
297
S3,37,37-38
examination; Nociception;
postoperative 168
Sacrocaudal spine
Proprioception
pulmonary edema 167
dysgenesis 36, 37, 322
ascending sensory tracts 5
respiratory arrest 167
localization of signs 37
facial sensation 20
upper airway disease 20, 38
tail injury 296-297
Sepsis (postoperative) 99, 229, 259,
Rest see aiso Non-surgical treatment
 Sacroiliac joint pain, cervical 36, 184
297
cage confinement 125, 126, 131,
320
Septic arthritis 20
228, 288, 305
see also Lumbosacral disease
Septic shock 83
lumbosacral surgery 192
Sacrum 3
Seroma formation 99, 191, 229, 358
spinal trauma 282, 288
Saphenous nerve 31
Sevofluorane 85
Index  377
Sharpei 60
Spondylomyelopathy (cervical) 20,
Syringohydromyelia 163
Shih Tzu
35, 36,94, 71, 211-246, 281
Syringomyelia 36, 37, 51, 94, 163,
chondrodystrophy 12
see aiso Wobbler syndrome
212, 297, 311, 322
t6 uoisnxa 5s
Spondylosis deformans 185, 320, 321
L4/S3 neurological defects 30
Sponges 77, 78, 79, 141
Stabilization
T
neck pain 94
Shock
atlantoaxial subluxation 166-167
Tail defects
septic 83
caudal disc extrusion 96
lumbosacral disease 183
spinal 32,282
cervical disc disease 117-118
sacrocaudal dysgenesis 322
Silky terrier [disc extrusion] 102
Staphylococcus 327,330
Tail injuries 296-297
Sinus (pilonidal] 36, 37, 184, 212, 323
Stapling (spinal) 316
Tartar scrapers 76
Skeletal hyperostosis 36, 326
St Bernard 238
Technical errors 258
Skeleton 6-14
Steatitis (epidural) 330-331
Temperature, pulse, respiratory rate
Slings and harnesses 346, 347, 349
Steinmann pins 221, 290-292, 296,
(TPR) 343, 344
Small breed dogs see also Miniature
298, 310, 314, 315
Temporal muscle mass 20
 dogs; Toy breed dogs
Stenosis
 Temporomandibular joint lesion 94
atlantoaxial subluxation 161
cervical fibrotic 36, 37, 212
Tendonitis 20
thoracolumbar disc disease 151
vertebral canal 183
Tendons 20, 271
Soft tissue tumors 94
Sternocephalicus muscles 107
Terazosin 352
Spears 77
Sternohyoid muscles 107
Tetanus 38
Specific gravity (CSF) 45
Sternothyroid muscles 172, 172
Tethered spinal cord 36, 37, 149,
Sphincter tone 191
Steroid-responsive meningitis-arteritis
184, 322
Spina bifida 36, 37, 184, 322
329
Tetracyline antibiotics 331
Spinal arteries 16
Steroids 83, 326, 329, 357
Thalamic pain syndrome 38
Spinal cord
see also Corticosteroids; Non-
Thiamine deficiency 36
anatomy 1, 1-6, 24
steroidal anti-inflammatory
Thoracic spine
blood supply 16
san.p
anatomy 8-9
evoked responses 60-61
Stilette 65
aorta 10
nerve fibers 6
Stranguria 184
blood supply 15
segments 1-3
Streptococcus 327
localization of injury 296
ultrasound examination 55
Streptomycin 327
mid-bodies 10
white matter tracts 5-6
Subdural hemorrhage 57
radiography 47-48
Spinal cord disease
Subdural space 4
spinal cord segments 3
compression 227, 228
Sucralfate 344, 356
Thoracolumbar disc disease
expansion 57
Suction tip and bulb syringe
diagnosis
hematoma 36, 37, 94, 212,
Supraspinous ligaments 14
clinical signs 121-122
333-334
Surgical instrurments 73-79
CSF analysis 122
hemorrhage 36, 51, 94, 281,
Surgicel 77
decision-making algorithm 124
333-334
Surgifoam 77
differential 122
herniation 147, 273
Survey radiography 163-164, 213,
imaging techniques 56, 122-123
infection 330
283
kyphosis 131
injury 87
Suturing 276
non-surgical treatment 123-126
ischemia 86
Swallowing 20
prognosis 132-133
lquification 132
Swimming therapy 348-349
surgery
malacia 287
Synovial articulations 9-11
complications 127, 129,
swelling 127
Synovial cyst 320
130-132
tethering 36, 37, 149, 184, 322
cervical 215
disc extrusion 127, 129, 131
umors 59, 257-258
column splitting 52
decompression 124, 126-127,
Spinal dysraphism (myelodysplasia)
CSM 212, 219, 245
130
36, 212, 322
differential diagnosis 36, 94, 122
fenestration 127, 154-159
Spinal ganglion 3
localization of signs 37
hemilaminectomy 126,
Spinalis muscle 267
lumbosacral 183
126-127, 136-150,151-154
Spinal nerves 3, 183, 191, 277,
Synthes locking plate 219, 220, 221
kyphosis 131
278
Syringes
larminectomy 126, 270-273
Spinal palpation 24-25
collection of CSF 67
pediculectomy 126, 127,
Splints, external 239, 290, 305, 306
hypodermic needles 76
151-154
Spondylitis 326-328
suction tip and bulb syringe 77
recovery times 124-125
378 Index
Thoracolumbar vertebrae
spinal region
Urinary system see aiso Badder
T1/T13, 1
cervical 295-297
antiseptic 352
T2, 36
lumbar 296
function 21, 22, 23-24, 351-352
T3/L3, 15, 28, 36,37
lumbosacral 184
incontinence 24, 183, 302
Thrombin 99
sacral 36, 296-297
infection 42, 81,82, 83, 131, 297,
Thrombocytopenia 82
thoracic 282, 296
355
Thromboembolism 359
treatment
micturition disorders 351
Thrombosis (iliac) 332-333
bone grafts 292
neurological damage 24
Thyroid gland 20, 172, 217
choice 293-295
pharmacology 352
Thyroid hormone supplementation
complications 297-301
physiological control 350
217
fixation 2890-291, 316-318
postoperative care 351
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
metal and bone cement
Urine
217
291-292, 309-316
urine retention 182
 Tibial crest avulsion 20
 modified segmental 291
urinalysis 42, 339, 343, 344
Tibial nerve 31
non-surgical treatment 289-290,
urine scald 127, 297, 339,
Tick paralysis 38
305-309
357-358
Toxicity
postoperative care 297
voiding change 339
organophosphate 38, 42
wrinary tract 282
toxic disease 36
 Traumatic feline ischemic myelopathy
V
toxic myopathy 38
36,37, 281
zinc 358
Trimethoprim-sulfonamide 85, 331,
Vascular disease 20, 36, 329,
Toxoplasma gondi (toxoplasmosis)
343, 355
332-334;
42, 330
Tube cystostomy 355
see also Cardiovascular disorders
Toy breed dogs 165, 325
Tumoral calcinosis (calcinosis
Vascular system see also Blood supply
see aiso Miniature dogs
circumscripta} 36, 37, 122, 212,
arteries
TPR (temperature, pulse, respiratory
326
aorta 10, 332-333
rate} 343,344
Tumors 252-254 see also Neoplasia;
intercostal 15, 278
Trachea 108, 171
specific types of tumor
occipital 15
Traction [response to) 213, 214,
biopsy 61-62
omocervical 276
223, 224
classification 248, 253
superficial cervical 278
 Transverse foramen
7.8
seeding 276
blood supply
Transverse ligament of the atlas
spinal 59, 257-258, 261-263
spinal regions
14
cervical spine 15
Trauma 281-318 see also
lumbar spine 16
U
Atlantoaxial subluxation
lumbosacral spine 183
bile duct rupture 19
Ulcer formation
spinal cord 16
biomechanics 286-289
decubital 339, 358-359
thoracic spine 15
diagnosis
gastrointestinal 127,297,341,
vertebral column 14-17
 anatomical location of the injury
356
veins
295-297
Ulnar nerve 31
azygous 15
decision-making algorithm 293,
Ultrasonography 5455, 250
jugular 278
294
Ultrasound therapy 347
venous drainage 17
differential 36, 184
Upper airway disease 20, 38
vena cava 10
imaging techniques 283,
Upper motor neurons (UMN); see 
venous plexus 114, 145-146,
283-286
also Lower motor neurons
148
initial assessment 28l-282
bladder function 20, 24, 351
Ventilation (mechanical) 101
neurological signs 28, 282-283,
crossed extensor reflex 32
Ventral decompression (slot)
293-295
EMG 60
cervical disc disease 99, 103
fracture 21, 36, 87, 286-289
motor evaluation 25-26
comparison to fenestration 97
gunshot injury 36, 331
reflexes 6, 26
complications 98, 99, 227, 228
neurology
severity 31-32
CSM 218, 218, 219-221, 227,
deep pain sensation 293-295
thoracolumbar disc disease 121
228
examination 21
Ureter calculi 38, 122
laryngeal nerve 108
pathophysiology 289-292
Urethra
lumbosacral disease 192
psoas muscle 331
innervation 351
postoperative care 100, 101,
prognosis 30l-302
neoplasia 184
102
recovery 87
tumor 38
recovery 103
Index  379
Ventral fissure 16
Vomiting 339, 355-356
White matter tracts 5-6
Vertebrae (general)
Von Willebrand (VW) factor/disease
Wire fixation
anticlinal 9
cervical hematoma 360
atlantoaxial subluxation 167, 169,
blood supply 14-17
CSM surgery 229
178-180
column splitting 52
diagnosis 217
dorsal 178-180
congenital anomalies 32l-322
hypothyroidism 217
failure rates 169
functional anatomy 1-15
 preoperative assessment 82
K-wires 117, 167-168, 235
intervertebral discs 1l-12
routine laboratory analysis 42
Withdrawal reflex 20, 28, 31
ligarments 13-14
Wobbler syndrome see also Cervical
 spinal cord segments 2-3
spondylomyelopathy
W
synovial articulations 9-11
domino lesions 101
Vertebral buttress
3 287-289
Walking ability
drug-induced seizures 86
Vertebral canal 7, 8
CSM surgery 229
horses 218
cauda equina compression 181
lumbar vertebrectomy 274
MRI 58
CSM 211, 219
neurological examination 32
surgery 77, 218
differential diagnosis 36
pain 32
Working dogs (lumbosacral disease)
tumors 253
paraparesis 32
183, 188
type I disc extrusion 14
paraplegia 32
Wounds and wound infections
Vertebral column 14-17
spinalreflex 87
discharge 339
Vertebral distraction/stabilization
supported 346
dressings 344, 357
218, 219, 221-223
thoracolumbar disc surgery 124,
obesity 83
see also Fixation-stabilization;
130
postoperative 99, 127, 128,297,
 Internal fixation devices; Metal
ventral slot surgery 102, 103
339,357
and cement fixation
Warfarin 333
predisposing factors 83, 357
Vertebral forarmen  141
Washing (postoperative)  343
prevention 357
Vertebral fracture 225, 331
Water bath therapy 348-349
routine laboratory analysis 42
Vertebral instability 211
Water intake 85, 343, 344-345,
septic shock 83
Vertebral plexus 15, 269, 273
355
Vertebral tumors 253, 255-257
Waterproof drapes 74
Wedges [foam] 46
X
Vertebrectomy 255, 273-274
Vestibular disease 85
Weimaraner
Xanthochromia 45
Viral infections 330
atlantoaxial subluxation 161
Visual function
spinal dysraphism 322
Westie [marsupialization} 325
Y
blindness 85
 neurological examination 20, 21
Wheelbarrowing test 23
Yorkshire terrier 43
placing test 23
White blood cells (WBC)
ptosis 25
CSF analysis 44, 45
Z
Vitamin A 36, 37, 326
meningitis 329
Vitamin E 217, 257
urinalysis 42
Zinc toxicity 358