Self-Assessment
ColorReview
LEARN·REVISE·REINFORCE
Small Animal
Ophthalmology
DonASamuelson
DennisEBrooks
Clinicalcases
Problembased
Fullyillustrated
MANSON
PUBLISHING
Self-Assessment Color Review
Small Animal
Ophthalmology
Don A Samuelson
MS, PhD
Professor of Histology and Ophthalmology
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA
Dennis E Brooks
DVM, PhD, Diplomate ACVO
 Professor of Ophthalmology
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA
MANSON PUBLISHING/THE VETERINARY PRESS
Dedication
We dedicate this work to our loved ones, who supported us during the process of its
development. We especially dedicate it to our mothers, Laura Katrina Samuelson and
Acknowledgements
The creation of this book is a testament, in part, to the successful ophthalmology
program that was developed by Kirk N Gelatt well over 30 years ago at the University
of Florida. We, both, have been very fortunate to have been mentored by Kirk and to
have worked by his side along with many faculty, residents, and graduate students, who
Special thanks are extended to Pat Lewis, who prepared much of the histology used in
the book, and to Ashley Beattie and Suzanna Lewis for their reviewing and editing of
this text.
Copyright O 2011 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN: 978-1-84076-145-0
All rights reserved. No part of this publication rmay be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
systerm or transmitted in any forrm or by any means without the written perrmission of the
copyright holder or in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright Act 1956 (as
amended), or under the terms of any licence permitting limited copying issued by the
Copyright Licensing Agency, 33-34 Alfred Place, London WC1E 7DP, UK.
criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available frorm the British Library.
For full details of all Manson Publishing Ltd titles please write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringharm Road, London NW11 7DL, UK.
Tel: +44(0)20 8905 5150
Fax: +44(0)20 8201 9233
Email: manson@mansonpublishing.com
Website: www.rmansonpublishing.com
Commissioning editor: Jill Northcott
Project manager: Paul Bennett
Copy editor: Peter Beynon
Design and layout: Cathy Martin
Color reproduction: Tenon & Polert Colour Scanning Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed by: Butler Tanner & Dennis, Frome, England
Preface
We have tried to create a book that provides a general review of small animal
ophthalmology in a case-based manner. To that end we have illustrated several
examples for each of the more frequent ophthalmic conditions of dogs and cats that
are commonly presented to general veterinary practitioners. The differential diagnoses,
examination techniques, and therapies for these ocular conditions are discussed within
specific cases as well as separately. While ophthalmic problems relate to dogs and cats
in similar and sometimes identical ways, there are a number of instances where this
does not occur. For that reason, we have distinguished the canine cases from the feline
ones in our listing of the *Classification of cases'. For more in-depth information on
differential diagnoses, examination techniques, and therapies offered in our work we
encourage the reader to refer to the latest edition of Kirk Gelatt's Veterinary
Ophthalmology (see Suggested Further Reading List).
Don A Samuelson
 Dennis E Brooks
Contributors
Kathleen P Barrie DVM, Diplomate ACVO
Gil Ben-Shlomo DVM, Ph D
Sarah E Blackwood DVM
Dennis E Brooks DVM, PhD, Diplomate ACVO
Catherine M Nunnery DVM,Diplomate ACVO
Caryn E Plummer DVM, Diplomate ACVO
Don A Samuelson MS, PhD
Avery A Woodworth DVM
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA
Abbreviations
CT
computed tomography
DNA
 deoxyribonucleic acid
EDTA
ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid
MRI
 magnetic resonance imaging
NSAIDnonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
PCR
polymer chain reaction
RNA
 ribonucleic acid
3
Suggested further rea
Gelatt KN (2007) (ed) Veterinary
Miller PE (Consulting Editor), Tilley
Ophthalmology,4th edn. Blackwell
LP (Co-Editor), Smith FWK (Co-
Publishing, Ames.
Editor) (2005) The S-Minute
Maggs DJ, Miller PE, Ofri R (2008}
Veterinary Consult Canine and
(eds) Slatter's Fundamentals of
FelineSpecialtyHandbook:
Veterinary Ophthalmology, 4th
Ophthalmology. Wiley-Blackwell,
edn. Saunders Elsevier, St Louis.
Hoboken.
Martin CL (2005) Ophthalmic Disease
Stades FC, Wyman M, Boeve MH et
in Veterinary Medicine, revised and
al.(2007) Ophthalmology for the
updated edn 2010. Manson,
Veterinary Practitioner, 2nd revised
London.
and expanded edn. Schlitersche,
Hanover.
lassification of cases
Ciliary body 20,40,47,48,83,102,
191, 195,202, 205, 214, 216, 242,
123,135, 180, 214
245, 246, 247
Conjunctivae 1, 2, 3, 25, 29, 41, 45, 51,
Lens 28, 31,70,71, 110, 111, 131A,
61,68, 80,92,94,101,107,108,112,
131B, 132, 137, 142, 143, 145, 148,
114,121,181,187, 204, 227,223,
170, 174, 175,197, 239, 240, 241, 242
234, 235
Miscellaneous 17,44, 52,119,138,139,
Cormea 2, 8, 10, 12,16, 18, 23, 24, 29,
144, 146,154,156,178, 204, 224,
33, 39, 41, 45, 48, 50, 55, 56, 63, 64,
230, 244, 249, 250
65,72,80,81,86,87,89,90,91,93,
Nictitating membrane 1, 68, 82, 84, 92,
94,95,96,97,98,99,100,103,109,
139,211,223,235,236
111,112, 114, 133, 142, 168, 171,
Periorbital/periocular 11, 15, 53, 66, 67,
176,188,196,199,210,212,213,238
119, 120, 123, 125, 126, 127, 128,
Diagnostic tests 1, 26, 30, 42, 94, 103,
129,130,186,200,201,218,220,
104, 105, 106, 113, 120, 127, 128,
221,222,226,228
151,158,168,206,229,237
Pupil 9, 37,40, 47, 84, 132, 140, 147, 182
Eyelids 6,14, 18,25,32,38,46, 57, 58,
Retina/fundus 9,19, 20, 22, 27, 34, 35,
59,60,68,69,100,115,116,117,
36,43,49,54,62,66,67,74,75,76,
118,121,139,167, 172, 190,207,
77,78,79,85, 121,122,123,126,149,
212,217,218,220, 231, 232, 243
150,151,152,153,154,156,157,158,
Globe 5,10,48,68, 88, 110, 111, 124,
159,160, 161,162,163,164, 166,177,
125,126, 169, 184, 185, 194, 201,
179,183, 189,192, 193, 198,202, 203,
209, 215,225,248
208, 209, 219, 250, 251
Iris 7, 10, 13, 16,37,40, 47,55,56, 72,
Sclera 4, 81, 83, 179
73,102, 123,132, 133, 134, 135, 136,
Surgical techmiques 70, 98, 165, 186, 243
138,140,141,144, 169, 173, 182,
Vitre0us 21,71,84,155,164
4
I, 2:Questions
1 A nine-year-old domestic shorthaired cat was brought to the clinic for a
complaint of the cat's left nictitating membrane. The third eyelid conjunctiva of
this cat exhibited protrusion, chemosis, and hyperemia (1). Rose bengal stain has
been applied to the eye.
i. What does rose bengal stain evaluate?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses for the conjunctivitis in this cat?
 2 This 12-week-old Boston Terrier was presented for a puppy wellness exam-
a rog Addnd aun anboe oi aqe am Aaun iel padxa sraumo aui 'uo
because she had “funny eyes' (2). They wanted to know what was wrong with the
puppy's eyes.
i. What do you tell the owners?
ii. Does this condition affect vision?
ii. What can be done to resolve the condition in this puppy?
I,2:Answers
1 i. Tear film stability. The inner mucin layer of the tear film normally blocks
staining of the surface epithelial cells and stroma. If the mucin layer is absent, rose
bengal staining occurs. While it stains living cells, dead and degenerating cells, and
mucus, this stain may have a dose-dependent ability to react with normal corneal
and conjunctival epithelial cells. Rose bengal (dichloro-tetra-iodo-fluorescein) is
available in solution form or impregnated paper strip. A lower concentration
(0.5%) is often used, as higher concentrations (1.0% and greater) can be irritating.
i. Herpesvirus, Chlamydopbila, Mycoplasma, and bacterial infection. Con-
major cause of respiratory disease with conjunctivitis in cats. Cats with chronic
conjunctivitis may also be feline immunodeficiency virus positive. Often, more than
one cat in a multi-cat household will be affected. Chemical and mechanical irritants
may also cause conjunctivitis. Foreign bodies are frequently incriminated. Plant,
upholstery, and carpet irritants may cause chemosis and conjunctivitis in cats.
Household cleaners and soaps have been suspected as causes of conjunctivitis in
cats. Lack of tear production is also a cause of conjunctivitis in cats. Other less
common causes include hypersensitivity to topical ophthalmic preparations,
parasites, and mycotic infections.
2 i. This puppy has congenital strabismus. Strabismus refers to a deviation in
alignment of one globe in relation to the other globe. It may be constant or
intermittent. The two eyes may be crossed (esotropia), out-turned (exotropia} as in
this puppy, deviated up vertically (hyperopia), or deviated down vertically
(hypotropia).
ii. Binocular vision is an acquired reflex that normally develops early in life. The
development of binocular vision requires both eyes to have visual capability and to
be properly aligned. Similar retinal images must project onto corresponding retinal
areas of both eyes during the period of binocular vision development. Puppies with
congenital or early-onset strabismus do not receive the essential visual retinal
stimulation for development of binocular vision and thus lack true stereopsis. The
two eyes fail to focus on the same image point, and the brain ignores the input from
the deviated eye, resulting in a form of vision loss termed amblyopia.
ii. Surgical correction of the strabismus by rectus muscle transposition can be
performed. Muscles can be weakened by moving the muscle insertion posteriorly or
strengthened by shortening the muscle or advancing the insertion site anteriorly;
alternatively, muscle insertions can be transposed to different locations in order to
alter the functional pull of the muscles. Nothing but observation was done in this
puppy and the strabismus self-corrected.
6
3, 4:Questions
3a
3b
3 A seven-year-old female Husky is
3c
presented with a two-day history of
blindness. Over the past month her iris
color had changed from blue to brown
(due to uveitis) (3a). She also has nasal
 depigmentation (3b) and retinal scarring
(3c).
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What breeds of dog are predisposed
to this condition?
iii. What are the treatment options?
4The owner of a seven-year-old
Norwegian Forest cat had recently
noticed a change in the color of her cat's
right eye (4). The irides of both eyes had
been normally a light blue in this nearly
albinotic individual. The iris of the right
eye, however, had changed during the
past week to a greenish-orange. The
distinctly pigmented margin around the
pupil had faded considerably. What are
the two main differential diagnoses of
iris color change?
/
3,4:Answers
PE
3 i. Uveodermatologic syndrome (UDS). This syndrome in the dog is similar to
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome in humans. This immune-mediated
disease against melanin is characterized by severe, bilateral panuveitis and
hypotony, with secondary cataracts, glaucoma, retinal detachments, and blindness.
Iris and retinal depigmentation, and poliosis/vitiligo of the face and muzzle are often
noticed. Diagnosis is made from clinical lesions and breed of dog. A skin biopsy can
help to confirm the condition.
ii. Originally described in the Akita, UDS has also been diagnosed in the Australian
Shepherd Dog, Beagle, Brazilian Fila, Chow Chow, Dachshund, Golden Retriever,
Irish Setter Old English Sheepdog, Saint Bernard, Samoyed, Shetland Sheepdog,
and Siberian Husky.
ii. The initial therapy for this condition is immunosuppressive doses of oral
prednisone plus azathioprine or cyclophosphamide. After five weeks tapering, oral
prednisone can begin. Most dogs require a low dose of both azathioprine and
prednisone to control the disease. Topical anti-inflammatories and atropine are
used to treat the uveitis (see case 12). The eye is carefully monitored for develop-
ment of secondary glaucoma. In this case the nose repigmented and the uveitis
quieted following therapy (3d).
4 Anterior uveitis and intraocular neoplasia. Eyes with anterior uveitis may also
exhibit ocular hypotony, aqueous flare, miosis, chemosis, hypopyon, keratic
precipitates, and/or synechiae formation. A complete physical and ocular exam-
ination is important in order to provide diagnostic clues to the etiology of the
inflammation. Intraocular melanomas and lymphoma are common in the cat and
may also cause iris color change.
8
5,6:Questions
5 A nine-year-old spayed female dog
5a
was presented with this unilateral eye
problem (5a).
i. Describe the clinical signs.
ii. What is your diagnosis?
ili. What are the possible causes?
6 This nine-year-old Labrador Retriever
6a
was presented because of difficulty
eating and an enlarged left eye (6a).
There was epiphora and redness asso-
ciated with the eye, and a corneal ulcer
was present. The right eye appeared
normal. A depigmented mass was
present behind the last molar tooth of
the exophthalmic side (6b}.
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. You discover that there is also a mass
in the caudal aspect of the hard palate.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
li. How would you treat this condition?
iv. What is the likely prognosis?
6b
1
5,6:Answers
5b
5 i. There is moderate conjunctival hyperemia with corneal vascularization at the
whole corneal circumference (360°). Diffuse, severe corneal edema is noticed, but
a dark mass can still be observed obliterating the anterior chamber. The Schirmer
tear test is normal, there is no dazzle reflex or consensual light reflex, and the cornea
is fluorescein negative.
ii. These clinical signs are consistent with glaucoma, which was confirmed by
tonometry (intraocular pressure of 35 mmHg). Ocular ultrasonography revealed a
mass in the anterior chamber attached to the iris. This mass was suspected to be a
Lveal melanoma, as this is the most common primary intraocular neoplasm in dogs.
The eye was enucleated and histopathology confirmed the diagnosis (5b).
ii. Uveal melanomas in dogs are usually unilateral, rarely metastatic, destructive to
the eye, and most often arise from the anterior uvea. Glaucoma may develop secon-
dary to tumor-induced uveitis and neoplastic obliteration of the iridocorneal angle.
6 i. Orbital abscess, myosarcoma of the extraocular muscles, and orbital neoplasia
(see cases 9, 146, 223).
i. In this instance, an orbital tumor that has invaded the oral cavity. Ultrasound and
CT/MRI are indicated. A biopsy revealed a fibrosarcoma.
ii. The orbit was exenterated in order to try to save the dog's life.
iv. Poor, as orbital tumors are generally malignant.
10
7,8:Questions
Ta
7b
7 This adult male Norwegian Forest cat was brought to the clinic because he had
been squinting in both eyes (7a, b).
i. Describe the clinical examination findings represented here.
ii. List other clinical findings that may also be present in a cat with bilateral uveitis.
ii. What are some of the more frequent causes of anterior uveitis in the cat?
8a
8b
8 A 12-year-old mixed breed dog is
presented with a three-week history of
blepharospasm, epiphora, and a red eye
with a partially opaque cornea (Sa, b).
i. Describe the lesion. What is your most
likely diagnosis?
ii. What breeds of dogs are prone to this
condition?
ili. What is the pathology of this
condition?
iv. What are the treatment options?
11
7,8:Answers
7 i. Hyphema is noted in the right eye. There is a focal area of fibrin mixed with
red blood cells at the seven to eight o'clock position of the pupil margin in the left
eye. The pupils are of similar size in both eyes. This cat has bilateral uveitis.
11.
Blepharospasm, conjunctival hyperemia, aqueous flare, hypopyon, keratic
precipitates, iridal hyperemia, miosis, iris color change, decreased intraocular
pressure, and decreased vision. Synechiae, cataract, lens subluxation or luxation,
chorioretinitis, and secondary glaucoma may also be noted in uveitic eyes.
ii. Some of the more frequent causes of uveitis in the cat are lymphocytic-
plasmacytic uveitis, feline infectious peritonitis virus, feline immunonodeficiency
virus, herpesvirus, feline leukemia-associated lymphosarcoma, trauma, and lens-
induced uveitis.
8 i. There is moderate conjunctival hyperemia, mild diffuse corneal edema, corneal
vascularization into the central cornea (8a), and a superficial ulcer with a loose lip
of epithelium at the dorsal ulcer margin (Sb). The loose epithelial lip in a chronic
superficial ulcer suggests this is a Boxer or indolent ulcer.
ii. Boxer, Corgi, Pekingese, and Lhasa Apso, but refractory ulcers have been
documented in more than 24 breeds.
ili. Indolent corneal ulcers have been shown to have fewer hemidesmosomes and
other abnormalities in the corneal epithelial basement membrane, such that the
epithelium adheres to the stroma poorly. There are focal areas of epithelial
separation with splitting of the basement membrane, and edema with accumulation
of a basement membrane-like material.
iv. (1) The first step is debridement, with topical anesthetic and dry cotton-tipped
applicators, of unattached and loosely attached epithelium. (2) Superficial grid
keratotomy (GK) or multiple punctate keratotomies (MPK) also speed healing. A
20 gauge needle is used to make cross hatches ('tic tac toe') through the ulcer bed,
with the scratches approximately 1-2 mm apart into adjacent normal epithelium
and stroma (GK), or used to make multiple superficial punctures into the anterior
stroma (MPK) and adjacent 1-2 mm of epithelium. (3) Chemical removal of the
epithelium can also be accomplished with diluted topical povidone-iodine or
phenol. (4) Refractory ulcers are treated medically following debridement and
possible keratotomy with topical broad-spectrum antibiotic solutions, a topical
cycloplegic (1% atropine) as needed, a topical hyperosmotic agent (2-5% NaCl
solution) to decrease edema, and topical serum to reduce tear film protease activity.
A bandage soft contact lens can also help corneal epithelial attachment.
12
9, I0:Questions
9a
9b
 9 A two-year-old male Whippet is presented with exophthalmos, nictitans protru-
sion, and a muropurulent ocular discharge of his left eye (9a, b).
i. There is pain on palpation of the globe and severe blepharoconjunctivitis. What
is the next step in the examination?
ii. What other diagnostic tests are indicated?
ili. What is the diagnosis, and how would you treat this condition?
10
10 A diagnostic test is being performed in this adult cat (10).
i. What diagnostic test is being performed?
ii. Explain how the test is performed, and why it is used.
13
9,I0:Answers
9 i. An oral examination under general
gc
anesthesia. A soft swelling is noted
behind the last molar on the affected
side (9c).
ii. Culture of the fluid from the swelling
and specimens obtained for cytology.
Exploration of the area is recommended
after retrobulbar ultrasound or ad-
vanced imaging (CT, MRI). Ultrasound
is often helpful in the diagnosis of an
abscess or tumor. Advanced imaging
would be helpful in determining if there is bony damage from an orbital tumor or
if a foreign body is present. Ultrasound revealed a hypoechoic, 2 cm encapsulated
structure in the retrobulbar space. Cytology revealed many neutrophils and
bacteria.
ii. A retrobulbar abscess. Treatment is by drainage. The oral mucosa behind the last
upper molar is incised and a closed hemostat slowly advanced through the
pterygoid muscle. A sharp instrument should never be advanced blindly into this
area of blood vessels and nerves. Damage to the maxillary artery, optic nerve, and
ciliary nerves has been reported. A biopsy of the affected tissue is recommended.
Irrigation of the retrobulbar area may cause increased exophthalmos and spread of
 the infectious organism. Systemic broad-spectrum antibiotics are indicated pending
results of culture. Advanced exophthalmos may necessitate a temporary tarsorr-
haphy until the swelling reduces.
10 i. The phenol red thread (PRT) test.
-Hd e pan pouaud qm paneuandun si pearui suof uu s e 'isai rean Ld au ui !!
sensitive indicator, and used to measure tear production. A 3 mm indentation at the
end of the thread is inserted into the inferior conjunctival sac for 15 seconds. The
alkaline tears turn the pale yellow thread red. The mean PRT absorbance value in
cats (23.0 mm/15 seconds) is approximately two-thirds the mean PRT absorbance
value in dogs (34.2 ± 4.4 mm/15 seconds). Anesthesia is not necessary for the PRT
tear test because the subject has little or no sensation from the thread. It is theorized
that the minimal sensation and short test time give a more accurate indicator of the
volume of residual tears in the inferior conjunctival sac of the eyes than the Schirmer
tear test.
14
11, 12:Questions
Ila
Llb
11A three-year-old German Shepherd
Ilc
Dog was presented with bilateral con-
junctivitis of the third eyelid (11a, b).
The corneas appeared to be uninvolved
and the dog had no previous history of
ocular diseases. A cytologic sample from
the conjunctiva is shown (11c).
i. Describe the clinical and cytologic
findings.
ii. What is the diagnosis?
ili. How is this best treated?
12 A cat is presented with aqueous
12
flare, which is demonstrated by slit lamp
examination (12).
i. What is aqueous flare?
ii. How is it treated?
15
11, I2:Answers
11 i. Hyperemia and thickening of the third eyelid conjunctiva. No corneal disease
is present. Cytology shows plasma cells, conjunctival epithelial cells, and a few
neutrophils.
ii. Plasmoma of the third eyelid, a plasma cell infiltration of the third eyelid
conjunctiva that is often associated with pannus in German Shepherd Dogs
Plasmoma also has a bilateral potential in the Belgian Shepherd Dog, Borzoi,
ii Plasmoma is a chronic, progressive, conjunctival disorder that can be controlled
in many cases by medical and/or surgical therapy, but at the present time it cannot
be cured. Long-term therapy will be necessary, at a level depending on the severity
of disease in the patient and the geographic location. With the exception of
geographic areas of high altitude, useful vision can usually be preserved with
medical therapy. Choice of drug and frequency of therapy depends on severity of
lesion. Dexamethasone (0.1%) or prednisolone (1%) 1-6 times daily (to effect) is
usually the first choice. As lesions regress, therapy should be reduced.
Subconjunctival steroids can be given in severe cases when lesions do not respond
to topical steroid or owner compliance is a problem. Cyclosporin A may also be
useful in refractory cases or as maintenance therapy.
12 i. Aqueous flare occurs as protein-rich aqueous humor and cellular components
accumulate within the anterior chamber after the blood-aqueous barrier has been
disrupted. The interendothelial cell junctions of iris capillaries become weakened.
Flare approximates the visual experience of water droplets detected by automobile
headlights in fog. It is best noted in a dark room using a slit lamp biomicroscope
or the small aperture of the direct ophthalmoscope in a dark room.
i. Aqueous flare is pathognomonic for anterior uveitis. Topical anti-inflammatory
therapy should be started immediately after diagnosis. Topical steroids are the
treatment of choice when there is no corneal ulcer. Prednisolone acetate (1%) and
dexamethasone (0.1%) (Neopolydex 0.1%) are effective topical steroid treatments
for anterior uveitis. Flurbiprofen and diclofenac are topical NSAIDs that can reduce
flare. Systemic NSAIDs such as carprofen have been shown to decrease flare in
canine uveitis. Topical parasympatholytics agents such as atropine can also decrease
flare by stabilizing the blood-aqueous barrier.
16
13-15:Questions
13  A young white-haired cat presents
13a
with long conjunctival hairs (13a).
i. Describe the clinical abnormality
noted.
ii. What is the origin of this lesion?
ili. What is the treatment of choice for
this particular condition?
iv. Histopathologically, what is present
in this lesion?
14 You are presented with a four-year-
oldWeimaraner dog exhibiting the
condition shown (14). After you mani-
pulate the mass, you determine that it is
mostly associated with the nictitating
 membrane. You collect a dark, pigmen-
ted, thick liquid by fine-needle aspiration.
i. What is your principal diagnosis?
ii. Based on what you know about this
mass, what do you tell the owner about
the disease and the prognosis?
ii. What treatment will you recom-
mend?
15 A six-month-old Dachshund was
5
presented with a complaint of recurrent
'eye problems’ that have occurred for
the last four months (15). What is your
diagnosis, and what is the patho-
physiology of this problem?
17
13-15:Answers
13 i. There are long hairs in association
13b
with the conjunctiva that extend or lay
over the corneal surface and are
beginning to cause corneal irritation.
This is a conjunctival dermoid.
ii. A conjunctival dermoid is a benign
congenital mass of ectoderm, neural
crest, and mesoderm. There is abnormal
invagination of the ectodermal tissue,
which has resulted in a locus of dif-
ferentiated dermal tissue within the
conjunctiva of this cat. Dermoids may also contain cartilage and bone.
ili. Surgical removal. Hf removed completely, the dermoid should not return.
iv. A hair follicle is found in the dermoid (13b, histologic appearance of a compound
ectopic hair associated with a dermoid).
14 i. Melanoma of the nictitans.
i. Neoplasia of the third eyelid, while uncommon, is usually malignant. Recurrence
after resection of malignant melanomas of the third eyelid is common. Metastasis is
also common. Weimaraners may have a breed predilection for these types of tumors.
ii. The best therapy for minimizing recurrence will be resection of the mass and
third eyelid and cryotherapy of the surgical site. Radiographs should be taken of the
thorax to evaluate the chance of metastasis.
15 This dog is suffering from distichiasis. Distichiasis refers to single or multiple
hairs arising from the meibomian duct openings at the lid margin. The meibomian
glands are modified hair follicles that normally lack development of hair shafts,
q n  or nss  prn  sdo sis p
affected and the condition is usually bilateral. Distichiasis occurs frequently in
mixed breed and pure breed dogs such as the American and English Cocker Spaniel,
Welsh Springer Spaniel, Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, Flat-coated Retriever, Boxer.
English Bulldog, Havanese, Shetland Sheepdog, Shih Tzu, Pekingese, Tibetan Terrier
and Spaniel, Dachshund, Poodle, and Jack Russell Terrier. In dogs affected with
soft distichia, directed away from the cornea, the condition appears to have limited
clinical significance. Stiff hairs that rub the cornea can irritate and cause
lacrimation, blepharospasm, entropion, epiphora, and corneal ulcers. Distichiasis
may be difficult to detect without magnifying glasses and strong, focal illumination.
18
16, 17:Questions
16 What is the treatment of choice for the dog in 15, and what are the risks of this
treatment?
17a
17b
17 You are examining the normal fundus of two presenting cats.
i. List the anatomic structures shown in these direct ophthalmoscopic images of the
normal feline fundus (17a, b).
ii. What is the term for the vascular pattern of cats?
ii. Why is the tapetal reflection of 17a green with the nontapetum pigmented, and
 in 17b the tapetal reflection is light yellow with a red coloration to the nontapetal
region?
19
16, I7:Answers
16 For permanent treatment of disti-
16
chiasis the hair follicle is destroyed,
removed, or redirected with surgery. The
surgical methods vary from electro-
epilation, electrocautery, high-frequency
radiohyperthermia, cryotherapy, laser
ablation, partial resection of the distal
tarsal plate, transpalpebral conjunctival
dissection, and Hotz-Celsus lid margin
repositioning; however, all have some
limitations. All these methods require
general anesthesia and adequate mag-
nification (5-10x) to detect the orifice of the hair and the follicle. Cryosurgery is the
most popular technique (16). It is performed through the conjunctival surface
directly over the follicle (3-4 mm behind the free margin of the lid). The lid margin
is stabilized and everted with an eyelid clamp. A double freeze-thaw cycle using
nitrous oxide specific probes destroys the follicles but spares the adjacent eyelid
tissue. A -25?C 60-second freeze is followed by a brief thawing period and then a
second freeze for 30 seconds. The immediate postoperative effect is considerable
swelling of the cryosurgery site. Preoperative systemic NSAIDs and/or postoperative
topical
I treatment with coricosteroid-antibiotic eye ointment are helpful.
takes up to six months to complete.
17 i. Tapetum, nontapetal retina, retinal vasculature, optic nerve head, and
choroidal vessels. The dark ring around the optic disk is pigment in the retinal
pigment epithelium and/or sclera.
ii. Holangiotic. There are three major pairs of cilioretinal arterioles and larger
venules that emerge near the periphery of the optic nerve head. The retinal vessels
do not anastamose on the disk surface in cats.
common tapetal color in cats. The nontapetum is usually heavily pigmented. The
lighter tapetum with a red nontapetum is most likely due to a very lightly pigmented
cat with a light hair coat and blue irides. The redness in the nontapetum is due to
the visualization of the choroidal vessels in the absence of melanocytes.
20
18, 19:Questions
18a
18b
18 A four-year-old tan-colored domestic shorthaired cat presents with bilaterally
afflicted corneas and conjunctivae (18a).
i. Describe the corneal lesions in this cat.
ii. What treatment would have been utilized to achieve the clinical result seen in
18b?
19
19 A six-year-old Golden Retriever is presented with dark, circular masses within
the anterior chamber that the owner says have only appeared recently (19). The
masses have distinct margins, appear to be free-floating, and can be trans-
illuminated with a slit-lamp biomicroscope. There is no epiphora or evidence of
ocular pain.
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What additional diagnostic tests could be performed to confirm your diagnosis?
ii. What is the pathophysiology of the abnormality?
iv. What treatment will you recommend?
v. If left untreated, what concerns would you have?
21
18,19:Answers
18 i. There is white cellular infiltrate and deep vascularization, probably the result
of a viral (most likely herpesviris) infection and a secondary bacterial infection.
Herpes ulcers can be linear or *dendritic', or be large geographic ulcers as in this cat.
ii. Topical antiviral preparations and broad-spectrum antibiotics. The efficacy of
involvement) remains undetermined. It can be used in severe cases, but is usually
unnecessary since the condition is often self-limiting. Initial treatment includes
topical 1% trifluridine or 0.1% idoxyuridine ophthalmic solution applied 3-9 times
daily. The more frequent administration usually has more rapid results; however,
cats can become stressed when treated this often. Vidarabine is effective topically,
but can be difficult to acquire. Cidofovir (0.5%) is effective topically in cats when
given BID. Systemic and/or topical alpha-2-interferon (300 U/cat PO SID; 1 drop
in affected eye TID or QID) may be beneficial in cats that are refractory to other
therapies. Oral famciclovir (62.5 mg/cat SID or BID for 3 weeks) is effective at
replication in latently infected cats and should be considered as a long-term therapy
for cats susceptible to recurrent bouts of herpetic keratitis. If corneal ulcerations are
Stress reduction is important
19 i. Uveal cysts (a similar example with less pigmented cysts that have yet to break
away from their origin is seen in case 79).
i. The best diagnostic tool for differentiating a uveal cyst from a uveal tumor or
neoplasia is transillumination with a slit-lamp biomicroscope. Ultrasound of the
mass can also aid the diagnosis.
ii. Cysts can be acquired post trauma and/or inflammation, or they may be
congenital. Congenital cysts often go unnoticed until at least a few years of age,
when they become more visible. Cysts are benign and can be free-floating in the
anterior chamber (see cases 27 and 79). They can also be attached in the anterior
Or posterior chambers or be dislodged into the vitreous.
iv. Many cysts do not require any treatment. However when multiple, free-floating
cysts are present, they may be aspirated with a small gauge needle on a tuberculin
syringe via the limbus, or deflated with a diode laser.
v. Untreated cysts have the potential to interfere with vision and/or decrease or close
the iridocorneal angle, leading to secondary glaucoma. Uveal cysts in Golden
Retrievers can be associated with uveitis
22
20, 21:Questions
20 A seven-year-old female domestic
20
shorthaired cat is seen for her annual
wellness examination, and ophthalmo-
scopic examination has revealed the
findings shown (20).
i. Describe the clinical findings shown in
this image.
ii. Between which portions of the retina
is this fluid located?
ili. What changes in vision might be
noted by the owner with the retinal
edema noted in this cat?
iv. What may be the ultrasonographic
findings in this case?
21a
21b
21  A young female Wirehaired Terrier was presented with an injured cornea of
her left eye (21a). There was considerable pain and blepharospasm associated with
this wound. The cornea had become edematous and somewhat opaque. When a
fluorescein stain was applied topically to the cornea much of the region around the
wound absorbed the stain (21b).
i. What is the most likely diagnosis and pathogenesis for the injured cornea in this
animal?
ii. What treatments could be utilized to resolve the problem?
ii. The first image (21a) was taken after 24 hours of medical therapy. What has
occurred?
23
20, 2I:Answers
20 i. There is a tan to gray, circular to ovoid lesion with distinct borders.This is a
focal area of retinal detachment in the tapetum due to retinal edema and/or cellular
infiltrate.
ii. The fluid and/or cells are located between the retinal pigmented epithelium and
the neurosensory retina (the photoreceptor layer).
ii. The owner most likely did not notice any changes in the cat's vision. If the retina
was completely detached, the owner may have noticed partial or fully dilated pupils.
iv. Subretinal fluid may be noted in a focal area of the eye.
21 i. A melting corneal ulcer. A corneal ulcer is a lesion in which epithelium and a
variable amount of stroma have been lost. Corneal dissolution and liquefaction
under the influence of proteases is called keratomalacia and often referred to as a
'melting cornea'. Ulcers in which proteases are active have a grayish-gelatinous,
liquefied appearance around the ulcer margin, which must be distinguished from
normal corneal edema. In this case the damage to the epithelium had been
considerable and its role as an effective barrier against invading bacteria and other
organisms had been lost. With infection, proteases and collagenases are released,
mainly by neutrophils, to digest or melt the corneal collagen.
i. (1) Broad-spectrum antibiotics are usually administered based on culture and
sensitivity tests. Gentamicin, tobramycin, and/or cefazolin are recommended for
initial antimicrobial therapy. (2) Autologous serum, 0.05% EDTA, and/or
acetylcysteine (5%) are used topically for their collagenase and protease inhibiting
properties (every 1-2 hours for the first few days, and then reduced to 3 or 4 times
daily for the next 7-10 days). (3) Topical atropine therapy (1% TID) is instituted
to relieve ciliary spasm and pain due to secondary anterior uveitis, and to decrease
the formation of synechiae from the miotic pupil. (4) Provide corneal support of
deep corneal ulcers or descemetoceles with a 360 degree, hood, island, pedicle, or
bridge conjunctival flap. Amniotic membrane grafts are very good for melting
ulcers. Temporary tarsorrhaphies and third eyelid flaps can be used, but are not as
beneficial as conjunctival or amniotic membrane flaps.
ii. The cornea has ruptured, with the iris covered in red fibrin protruding. Surgical
correction is necessary to save the eye.
24
22, 23:Questions
22
22 This one-year-old cat was presented with blindness. History revealed that it was
fed a noncommercial 'vegetarian' diet.
i. Describe the ophthalmoscopic findings (22).
i. What is the etiology and pathophysiology of this problem?
lli. How can it be treated?
23a
23b
23 This young white domestic shorthaired cat is an emergency case, having been
hit by a car (23a, b).
i. What is the most likely cause of the lesion in this cat?
o sqo pasoidod a ien sie un uoisa ron sisoond an si ie '!
necessarily this cat)?
ii. What simple diagnostic test can be performed in a cat with a proptosed globe
to evaluate the prognosis for vision?
iv. What is the recommended treatment for this cat?
25
22,23:Answers
22 i. There is generalized retinal degeneration, with attenuation and loss of retinal
vessels and tapetal hyperreflectivity adjacent to the optic disk at the nine o'clock
position. The optic disk is very dark. The retinal degeneration was bilateral.
i. This is a nutritional retinopathy, most likely due to a dietary deficiency in taurine.
Taurine is a sulfur-containing amino acid essential to cats. Taurine has been
speculated to function as a neurotransmitter and to have a protective influence on
cell membranes. Ophthalmoscopic signs of taurine retinopathy become apparent
between three and seven months of age, with complete retinal degeneration
becoming apparent by nine months. The histopathologic appearance is one of
progressive photoreceptor degeneration that is first noted in the cones and later in
the rod outer segments. There are five stages of taurine retinopathy: stage 1,
granularity of area centralis; stage 2, elliptical, hyperreflective lesion temporal to the
optic disk; stage 3, second hyperreflective lesion nasal to optic papilla; stage 4, the
two lesions coalesce; stage 5, generalized retinal degeneration with attenuation and
loss of retinal vessels. Blindness occurs during stage 5. The present case is stage 5.
For an example of an earlier stage see case 209.
ili. Nutritional or taurine retinopathy is best prevented with proper diets. A dietary
taurine level of 500-750 ppm has been suggested as being necessary to prevent
retinal disease. The retinal effects of early taurine deficiency are only partially
reversible when adequate diet is given, and irreversible in later stages. Because
taurine deficiency has been linked to feline cardiomyopathy, cardiac function should
be evaluated in all cats affected with these ophthalmoscopic abnormalities.
23 i.Trauma.
i. Poor. The optic nerve in cats is very short and tolerates little stretching, especially
during traumatic globe proptosis, which usually results in loss of vision. The
nonproptosed normal globe must also be examined for blindness due to possible
tension on the optic chiasm caused by stretching of the optic nerve from the moving
injured globe.
ii. Direct and consensual pupillary light reflexes (PLRs) can be performed to
evaluate the prognosis for vision. A positive PLR is a good finding.
iv. Enucleation would be the only surgical option for this cat, as the globe has
collapsed and the optic nerve appears avulsed. Replacement of the globe along with
medical therapy is another option if there is the possibility for return of
vision. Medical therapy would consist of oral antibiotics, anti-inflammatories and
analgesics, and topical antibiotics.
26
24, 25:Questions
24a
 24 A five-year-old German Shepherd Dog was presented with a two-day history of
blepharospasm, epiphora, and a brown spot on the eye (24a). The owner had just
got back from camping with the dog.
i.What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What is the recommended therapy?
25
25 A nine-year-old cat is presented because of a “change in color' of the eye (25).
The owner explains that she has been managing her cat for glaucoma for the last
eight months.
i. What has occurred in this cat?
ii. How does this occur?
ili. What is the treatment for this condition?
27
24,25:Answers
24b
24 i. This is a corneal foreign body. The fluorescein stain
can be negative if cornea has healed over the foreign body.
i. Therapy depends on how deep the foreign body has
penetrated into the cornea. To determine the depth a slit
lamp examination is recommended. A foreign body that is
deep (24b) will be in the posterior part of the slit. Corneal
foreign bodies are removed in order to limit pain, reduce
the potential for infection, and prevent vascularization
and scar formation. Small, superficial foreign bodies are
removed with topical anesthesia and saline irrigation,
cotton tip debridement, ophthalmic forceps, or a needle-
shaped instrument.
.Deep foreign bodies should be
removed under general anesthesia, and may require
corneal suturing and placement of a conjunctival flap.
After removal of the foreign body, a broad-spectrum
topical antibiotic and atropine are administered to limit
infection and control pain due to secondary uveitis
25 i. This cat has an anteriorly luxated cataractous lens.
Anterior lens luxation causes an obvious loss in anterior chamber depth.
ii. Luxation of the lens in cats is most common as a sequela to chronic uveitis (see
case 32) or glaucoma. The opposite scenario of glaucoma being caused by lens
luxation is not as common in cats as in dogs due to the larger anterior chamber
depth of cats. The anterior luxation causes the lens and corneal endothelium to be
in contact, resulting in corneal endothelial damage, elevated intraocular pressure
due to the lens blocking aqueous humor movement at the pupil, and often persistent
uveitis. Primary lens luxation can also occur as a result of weakness in the zonular
fibers.
ii. If the cause of the luxation is primary, intracapsular lens extraction is much
more successful than if the luxation is secondary to uveitis. In diseased eyes with
surgery is still recommended if retinal function is normal. Careful attention should
be given to the treatment if uveitis or glaucoma is associated with the luxation.
28
26. 27:Questions
26a
26b
 26 An adult female Collie is presented with a severe mucopurulent nasal discharge
(26a). Dacryocystorhinography was performed on the patient (26b).
i. What are the clinical signs associated with dacryocystitis?
ii. What is the purpose of dacryocystorhinography?
ii. Describe how the procedure of dacryocystorhinogram is performed.
iv. How should this dog be treated?
27a
27b
27 The owner notices a brown spherical structure at the pupil margins in a three-
year-old neutered domestic shorthaired cat (27a, b).
What is the diagnosis?
ii. How might this condition be treated?
29
26,27:Answers
26 i. Clinical signs include ocular discharge,
26c
either epiphora or mucopurulent discharge,
swelling in the medial periorbital area, bleph-
arospasm, and conjunctivitis.
ii. To identify obstruction of the nasolacrimal
duct from inflammation, infection, masses,
rupture or incomplete development, deviation
of the lacrimal drainage system, dilation of the
lacrimal sac, and orbital and nasal osteolysis
The photo of dacryocystorhinography (26b)
shows dilation of the lacrimal sac and duct in
association with dacryocystitis, and duct
obstruction and rupture.
ii. Dacryocystorhinography is performed under
general anesthesia. Sterile saline is used to flush
the nasolacrimal duct. About 0.5-1 ml of
radiopaque ionic or nonionic iodinated contrast
material is injected into the nasolacrimal puncta
through cannulation of the duct. Once the contrast is instilled, radiographs or
fluoroscopy are performed to visualize the nasolacrimal duct drainage system.
iv. The nasolacrimal duct should be cannulated with silastic tubing to allow the
infection to drain and cause recannulization of the duct (26c).
27 i. A uveal cyst. Compare this case with case 53. In this case the uveal cyst is very
dense and a slit lamp is needed to transilluminate it. Uveal cysts may arise from the
posterior pigment epithelium of the iris or from the inner ciliary body epithelium;
by their spherical shape and translucency when illuminated with intense, focal light
sources, and are frequently positioned at the pupillary margins. If the uveal cyst is
very dense and pigmented, high frequency ultrasound can help with the diagnosis.
i. An argon laser can be used to rupture, coagulate, and deflate the cyst.
30
28, 29:Questions
28a
') umos si nz s po-ia-n e jo ai sosdo u 8
i. What is the pathology?
ii. What are the etiology and treatment?
29
 29 A five-year-old domestic shorthaired cat presents with an abnormal pupil shape
(29).
i. Describe the clinical findings in this cat's right eye.
ii. Describe the neural innervations to the iris.
ii. How is it possible for this cat to have a pupil that is D-shaped?
iv. Why cannot a pupil of this shape be found in the dog?
31
28,29:Answers
28  i. This is a giant rhegmatogenous
28b
retinal detachment. A rhegmatogenous
detachment is one that is associated with
a tear or hole in the layers of the sensory
or neural retina. The retinal defect
allows vitreous and fluid to dissect the
neuroretina from the retinal pigmented
epithelium, thus exacerbating the size
and significance of the lesion.
i. Rhegmatogenous retinal detachments
from retinal tears can be congenital
(28b, 1 = optic nerve; 2 = retina), be associated with Collie eye anomaly, result post-
cataract surgery, occur with retinal dysplasia, and result from glaucoma. Retinal
tears may be focal or giant retinal detachments that involve the entire retina. Giant
used to try and stop the retinal detachment progress.
 29 i. There are prominent iris vessels associated with the lateral and medial iris. The
pupil resembles the letter D'.
ii. Parasympathetic nerves innervate the iris sphincter muscle and sympathetic
nerves innervate the iris dilator muscle. The long ciliary nerves are branches of the
nasociliary nerve that branch off the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve.
They provide both sympathetic efferent and somatosensory afferent nerve fibers to
the iris. These sympathetic fibers innervate the iris dilator muscle. Parasympathetic
fibers in the oculomotor nerve synapse at the ciliary ganglion and then become the
short ciliary nerves that innervate the iridal sphincter muscle.
ii. The cat has two short ciliary nerves from the ciliary ganglion. The malar short
ciliary nerve is lateral and the nasal short ciliary nerve is medial. They each innervate
their respective half of the iris sphincter muscle. Lesions to the medial aspect or nasal
short ciliary nerve result in iris sphincter hemiplegia or a D-shaped pupil, as noted
in this cat's right eye. A lesion to the lateral aspect or malar short ciliary nerve results
in a reversed-D-shaped pupil in the right eye. Lesions in the left eye are reversed.
iv. The neural anatomy of the short ciliary nerves differs between the cat and the
i an o tr sdsrd a m pioss tis e o a u o
sphincter muscle results in dilation of the pupil equally in both the medial and
lateral aspects.
32
30-32:Questions
30
0A 14-day-old Golden Retriever
30
puppy has just opened his eyes (30).
i. At what age do the eyelids normally
 open in puppies and kittens?
iiWhat are the risks of premature
opening of the eyelids?
31  A three-year-old domestic long-
3
haired cat was presented with a two-day
history of blepharospasm, epiphora, and
conjunctivitis. A rose bengal stain was
applied to the right eye and resulted in
an uptake in a linear, branching pattern
in the dorsal cornea (31).
i. What is the most likely cause of such
a staining pattern?
ii. What is the importance of using rose
bengal stain?
ii. What is the etiology of this disease?
iv. What are the treatment options?
32An adult female Siamese cat was
32
being treated for anterior uveitis. When
she was brought back for a re-exam-
ination, the
present condition was
noticed (32).
i. What is the diagnosis of this condition
in this cat?
i. What are possible etiologies for this
condition?
ii. What are the possible treatments for
this condition?
33
30-32:Answers
30 i. The canine and feline palpebral fissure is normally sealed during the second
and third trimesters of fetal development, respectively, and opens at 10-14 days
postpartum.
i. The postpartum ankyloblepharon period is needed due to the relative immaturity
of the ocular and adnexal tissue at birth. A natural or iatrogenic early opening of
the palpebral fissure will usually lead to exposure keratoconjunctivitis and moderate
to severe corneal ulceration. Corneal rupture is a possible complication. In cases of
premature opening of the palpebral fissure, frequent administration of artificial tear
ointment is necessary to protect the ocular surface. Temporary tarsorrhaphy for
10-14 days should be considered, especially if the palpebral fissure opens
peripartum.
31 i. The large rose bengal uptake over the dorsal bulbar conjunctiva is due to the
touch application of the rose bengal strip. The linear dendritic staining pattern of
the cornea represents a herpes ulcer in this cat.
ii. Rose bengal dye evaluates the stability of the mucin layer of the tear film. If the
magenta.
ii. A dendritic ulcer is pathognomonic for herpes keratitis in a cat. Feline herpes-
virus-1 is a widespread disease with an estimated 50-97% of cats being
seropositive. The dendritic lesions indicate viral movement along the superficial
corneal nerves from the trigeminal ganglion.
iv. Therapy consists of topical antiviral preparations and broad-spectrum antibiotics
to control secondary bacterial infections (for further details see cases 11 and 130).
32 i. Anterior lens luxation, as determined by the visible aphakic crescent laterally.
ii. Luxation can be associated with trauma, chronic uveitis, and glaucoma. The
zonules are weakened by inflammation or mechanical stretching to such an extent
that they break and allow the lens to shift from its normal position.
ii. Surgical treatment for lens luxation is intracapsular lens extraction before
permanent ocular changes occur. Anteriorly luxated lenses can lead to corneal
endothelial damage, glaucoma, and retinal detachment if not surgically removed.
Posteriorly luxated lenses can be associated with ocular discomfort and retinal
detachment.
34
33. 34:Questions
33
33 This retinal image (33) was taken from a male Miniature Schnauzer.
i. What condition is depicted in the retinal vessels?
ii. List some common systemic diseases that may cause this manifestation.
ili. Is the syndrome usually unilateral or bilateral?
iv. What diagnostic tests should be run if the condition is suspected?
v. What is the treatment for this eye condition?
34
 34 An eight-year-old cattle dog presents with a four-week history of a blue cornea
(34).
i. Describe the ocular abnormalities.
ii. What is the cause of the Haab's striae in the central cornea?
ili. What are the treatment options for this globe condition?
35
33,34:Answers
33 i. Lipemia retinalis from hyperlipidemia, as seen by the pale pink retinal
vasculature. Excessive plasma chylomicrons are present. This condition is more
easily identified when the retinal vessels over the nontapetal retina are visualized.
ii. Lipemia retinalis and hyperlipidemia can be a primary condition in the Miniature
Schnauzer. Pancreatitis, high-fat diets, postprandial, glomerulonephropathy,
hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, and renal or hepatic
disease are causes of secondary hyperlipidemia.
iii. This syndrome is systemic and therefore bilateral.
iv. General blood work and fasting triglycerides and cholesterol levels are evaluated.
 Urinalysis, a thyroid panel, and testing for Cushing's disease should also be run if
indicated.
v. Lipemia retinalis is not associated with ocular pathology. The primary disease is
treated as indicated by the results of diagnostic testing. Low-fat diets should be
implemented.
34 i. There is episcleral injection, mild diffuse corneal edema, Haab's striae (linear
streaks of edema), dorsal lens subluxation, and the pupil is dilated.
ii. A rupture in Descemet's membrane. Uncontrolled intraocular pressure (IOP)
elevation will stretch the globe and cornea to cause breaks in Descemet's membrane.
Aqueous enters the area, causing regions of linear edema along the break.
ii. The clinical signs indicate that the eye is glaucomatous. Treatment options are
medical and surgical (see case 81). Multiple drug therapy decreases IOP by reducing
production of aqueous humor and diminishing the resistance to aqueous humor
outflow. Topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (e.g. dorzolamide, brinzolamide)
timolol, betaxolol) reduce aqueous humor production. Topical prostaglandins (e.g-
latanaprost, travaprost) increase aqueous humor outflow through the uveoscleral
pathway. Topical parasympathomimetic drugs (e.g. pilocarpine, demecarium
bromide) act primarily to cause ciliary muscle contraction, increasing the outflow
of aqueous humor.(
Oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (acetazolamide,
10-25 mg/kg PO BID; dichlorphenamide, 5-10 mg/kg PO BID; methazolamide,
5 mg/kg PO BID) reduce ciliary body production of aqueous humor.
Hyperosmotics (mannitol, 1-2 g/kg IV QID; glycerol, 1-2 mg/kg PO QID) lower
IOP rapidly by osmotically reducing the volume of the vitreous and are only
effective for a few hours.
36
35,36:Questions
35a
35b
35  A seven-year-old neutered domestic
shorthaired cat was presented for oph-
thalmic examination (35a, b).
i. What is the tan structure seen at the
three o'clock position of the cornea?
ii. How would you treat it?
36
36 A 12-year-old Siamese cat is presented with a painful, slightly enlarged cloudy
eye (36). There is ventral corneal edema, aqueous flare, and the iris is mottled in
appearance. The intraocular pressure (IOP) is 45 mmHg.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What is the etiology of this condition?
ii. What therapy is recommended, and what is the prognosis for vision?
37
35,36:Answers
35c
35 i. The iris, which was prolapsed due to full-thickness perforation of the cornea.
This condition can develop from the progression of deep corneal ulcers or from
trauma.
ii. Corneal perforations can be treated successfully with conjunctival flaps and
grafts. This photo (35c), which was taken of the eye one month later, shows how
well the perforation has healed.
36 i. Uveitis-induced secondary glaucoma.
i. The anterior uveitis has caused iris swelling and blockage of the iridocorneal
angle with scar tissue and inflammatory debris. The onset of clinical signs of uveitis-
induced glaucoma in cats is often insidious, as cats are less likely to demonstrate the
acute intense corneal edema and episcleral congestion exhibited in dogs. All ocular
tissues are eventually affected by the elevated IOP.
ii. Multiple drug therapy to decrease IOP by reducing production of aqueous
humor and diminishing the resistance to aqueous humor outflow. A topical beta
blocker (timolol maleate, 0.5% BID) and a topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
(1% brinzolamide or 2% dorzolamide, TID), plus topical and systemic steroids t0
reduce the signs of uveitis, can be beneficial in cats with glaucoma. Frequent IOP
monitoring is essential. Surgery should be considered when the IOP cannot be
controlled medically. Anteriorly luxated lenses should be removed in functioning
eyes to relieve pupillary block and prevent corneal damage due to the lens touching
the corneal endothelium. A diode laser can be used to cause ciliary body necrosis
(cyclophotocoagulation) to lower IOP. Gonioimplants can shunt aqueous humor
around the blocked drainage angle to lower IOP. Enucleation is indicated when
vision is lost in uncontrolled glaucoma. The prognosis for vision is not good in this
eye as controlling the uveitis may be difficult.
38
37,38:Questions
37a
37 A one-year-old Great Dane is presented with ocular discharge, chemosis, and
'cherry eye', with folding of the nictitating membrane (37a).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. Discuss the pathophysiology involved in this condition.
li. Describe two surgical corrections for this condition.
38
38 One method of measuring intraocular pressure (IOP) is the use of Schiotz
tonometry (38).
i. What is a Schiotz tonometer?
i. How is the device used, and what are the normal IOP readings using the Schiotz?
39
37,38:Answers
37 i. Everted cartilage of the nictitating
37b
membrane and idiopathic prolapse of the
gland of the nictitating membrane (*cherry
eye').
ii. The pathophysiology of “cherry eye' is not
fully known. It is thought to result from
weak connective tissue attachments between
the periorbital tissues and the ventral portion
of the membrane. Once the gland has
become exposed, it enlarges due to chronic
exposure. Everted nictitans cartilage occurs
due to folding of the anterior edge of the nictitating membrane, with subsequent
exposure of the posterior portion. This condition is caused by faster growth of the
posterior portion of the nictitans cartilage compared with the anterior component.
ili. Excision of the folded section of the cartilage is recommended for correction of
everted nictitans cartilage. Two options have been described for surgical repair of
a prolapsed gland: simple excision of the gland or replacement of the gland into its
normal position (37b). The pocket technique for replacement requires the creation
of a subconjunctival pocket of the nictitans conjunctiva, leaving a small opening at
either end of the pocket to prevent cyst formation. The prolapsed gland is buried
in the pocket. In the anchoring technique, a suture is placed through the periosteal
tissue of the orbital rim in order to pull the gland back into its natural position
behind the orbital rim.
38 i. It is an indentation tonometer. The routine use of Schiotz tonometry is more
accurate than digital tonometry, is relatively inexpensive, and is a valuable
diagnostic aid. The tonometer consists of a corneal footplate, plunger, holding
bracket, recording scale, and 5.5, 7.5, 10.0, and 15.0 g weights. The low friction
plunger within the corneal footplate indents the cornea proportionally to the IOP.
The accuracy of Schiotz tonometry depends on the clinician and the patient. The
Schiotz tonometer should not be used on corneas with deep ulcers.
ii. Measurement of IOP with the Schiotz tonometer in small animals is relatively
easy. Topical anesthetic is applied to both eyes. The animal is placed in a sitting
position or in lateral or dorsal recumbency. The eyelids are held open and the
animal's head elevated dorsally. The tonometer is held vertically and placed on the
center of the cornea just long enough for the measure to be read off the scale. The
conversion table provided with the instrument is used to determine IOP.
Using a 5.5 g weight, the IOP is normal in a dog if the Schiotz scale reads
between 3 and 7, and in the cat if the scale reads between 2 and 6. Readings <2-3
40
39,40:Questions
39a
39b
39 A 14-week-old female Weimaraner puppy was presented with a unilateral lesion
associated with her left eye (39a).
i. Describe the corneal lesions in 39b.
ii. This dog suffered from neonatal ophthalmia. What are the causes and treatment
for this condition?
40
40 A three-year-old female Doberman Pinscher was presented with a corneal
problem of her left eye (40).
i. Describe the clinical abnormalities observed.
ii. What systemic abnormalities can be associated with this keratopathy?
ii. What is the theory behind how the substance is deposited in the cornea?
iv. If systemic abnormalities are associated with this corneal condition, are there
treatments that can be used to remove these deposits in the cornea?
41
39,40:Answers
39 i. The cornea is heavily vascularized 360° around the limbus, with severe,
diffuse, corneal edema and fibrosis. Corneal fluorescein staining is negative in this
case, indicating that a corneal ulcer is not present.
ii. Neonatal ophthalmia is an infection of the conjunctiva and/or cornea that results
from premature breakdown of the palpebral fissure. This infection is usually
associated with staphylococcal keratoconjunctivitis in dogs; in cats it may be caused
by feline herpesvirus. Infectious organisms enter the conjunctival sac presumably via
a small patent opening at the medial canthus. The first indications of neonatal
ophthalmia may be a slight purulent discharge at the medial canthus and/or bulging
of the eyelids due to accumulation of inflammatory debris between the lids.
Symblepharon (adhesions of the conjunctiva to the cornea) may develop in some
eyes with neonatal ophthalmia. Corneal perforation and iris prolapse are
occasionally seen. The first step in treatment is careful opening of the palpebral
fissure by manual traction, beginning at the medial canthus, and drainage of any
purulent material touching the cornea. Warm compresses may help in separation of
the eyelids. The conjunctival sac and cornea should be lavaged with warm saline or
1:50 povidone-iodine aqueous solution and the discharge removed. The eyes should
be treated with topical, broad-spectrum antibiotics QID until the condition resolves.
40 i. The condition seen is corneal lipidosis (lipid keratopathy). There is a vertical
ovoid, white to blue opacity associated with the lateral peripheral cornea. Usually
there is also a clearer peripheral perilimbal zone with this condition. Corneal
lipidosis is usually found with no corneal vascularization, but vascularization can
occur in chronic cases.
i. Hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, pancreatitis, hyperlipoproteinemia, and
biochemical changes can be evaluated by blood tests.
ii. The theory is that the perilimbal blood vessels deposit the lipid into the cornea,
 or that there is in-situ lipid deposition.
iv. Dietary change to a low-fat diet may stop the deposition of further lipid or
decrease the amount of deposits within the cornea. If, through serum biochemistry
analysis, a disease process such as hypothyroidism or diabetes mellitus is diagnosed,
treating the disease may stop the progression of lipid deposition or minimize the
number of opacities within the cornea. Keratectomy to remove the lipid deposits is
possible, but unless the source of the deposition is identified deposition will
continue.
42
41, 42:Questions
41  A four-week-old kitten has this bilateral thread-looking lesion in its eye (41).
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. Why are these structures tan to white in color?
42
42 A five-year-old Pug was presented with bilaterally dry eyes. The anterior
epithelium of the corneas and bulbar conjunctivae had become notably thickened.
While neither eye had any obvious ulceration, blinking resulted in considerable
pain. Initially, the eyes were red and inflamed, with some mucopurulent discharge.
Cultures yielded litle useful information. The dog was thought to have been
exposed to some irritant or even possibly have bacterial conjunctivitis. Eventually,
the condition illustrated (42) arose.
i. What are the most common etiologies of keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) in dogs
and cats?
i. Describe the diagnostic procedures useful in animals with KCS.
ili. What is the most effective treatment for KCS?
43
41,42:Answers
41 i. Persistent pupillary membranes (PPMs). In the fetus the pupil is closed with
a thin pupillary membrane (tunica vasculosa lentis) that regresses prior to birth.
Sometimes, regression is not complete at birth and web-like strands are still present
until 4-5 weeks of age. PPMs are rare in cats and may present in normal eyes or eyes
with multiple ocular anomalies. They vary in size and shape from one individual to
another (see case 248)
i. PPMs are generally brown or the color of the iris. They are a remnant of the
tunica vasculosa lentis, a vascular structure of the fetal lens. The PPMs in this kitten
are still patent and are tan to white because of increased levels of serum lipids.
42 i. Iatrogenic loss of lacrimal tissues due to surgical removal of the nictitans gland
in cherry eye procedures; congenital and/or breed-related hypoplasia or aplasia of the
tear-forming glands; eyelid and tarsal gland agenesis in cats. A reduction in tears
can also occur from chronic, diffuse conjunctival infiltration and destruction of
openings of the tarsal (meibomian) glands by closing and plugging the ducts,
resulting in KCs. The use of topical atropine, several sulfonamides, and topical anes-
thetics can result in KCS. Atropine can temporarily reduce lacrimal gland secretion,
so where topical atropine is used with ulcerated corneas, it is imperative to document
and monitor tear production. Systematically administered sulfonamides (e.g.
phenazopyridine, sulfadiazine, sulfasalazine) have a toxic and often permanent effect
on the secretory cells of the lacrimal gland. A loss of lacrimal gland neural inner-
vation due to traumatic, infectious, iatrogenic, neoplastic, and other conditions will
result in lacrimal gland inactivity. Most KCS in dogs appears to be a result of an
immune-mediated attack on the lacrimal gland (see case 199). Radiation therapy
can also destroy lacrimal gland tissue and cause KCS in dogs.
ii. The Schirmer tear test (STT), which can be performed either with or without the
use of a topical anesthetic; fluoroscein staining of affected eye(s) to detect corneal
ulcers; use of rose bengal stain to evaluate tear film stability and adherence.
production, although it may take several weeks of therapy to reach maximum STT
levels.
44
43, 44:Questions
43b
43a
43 An adult cat is presented one month post enucleation of the right eye (43a). An
orbital exenteration surgery was necessary to resolve the condition (43b).
i. Describe and define the tissue seen underneath the skin laceration.
ii. Describe two enucleation methods and how to prevent the above complication.
 This eight-year-old male mixed
44
breed dog has a corneal burn injury that
has led to a corneal degeneration (44).
i. What is corneal degeneration?
ii. What is the hallmark clinical sign of
corneal degeneration?
ii. Describe the appearance of calcium
in the cornea.
iv. Describe the appearance of lipid in
the cornea.
v. Why are lipid and calcium deposited
within the cornea?
45
43, 44:Answers
43 i. There is a pink, glistening tissue underneath the skin laceration. This appears
to be conjunctiva of the nictitating membrane. The conjunctiva, lacrimal gland,
and nictitating membrane should have been removed as part of the original
enucleation surgery.
ii. The most commonly used enucleation technique is the subconjunctival approach.
Beginning in the dorsal quadrant, the bulbar conjunctiva is incised approximately
5 mm posterior to the limbus. The conjunctiva and Tenon's capsule are bluntly
dissected from the globe and the extraocular muscles are identified and transected
close to their scleral insertion. Medial rotation of the globe will expose the optic
nerve, which is clamped with curved hemostats and then transected behind the
globe. Two to three millimeters of eyelid margins are then removed and the
subcutaneous tissue closed with absorbable sutures. The eyelids are closed with
simple interrupted sutures using 4-0 nonabsorbable monofilament suture material.
A second technique is the transpalpebral enucleation approach in which the eyelids
are sutured together in a continuous suture pattern. Two elliptical incisions,
approximately 2-3 mm behind the lid margins, are joined near the medial and
lateral canthus. Deep dissection will identify the bulbar conjunctiva. Forward
traction of the eyelids will help with dissection of the conjunctiva until the sclera is
encountered at the limbus. Further posterior dissection and removal of the globe is
the same as that for the subconjunctival approach. Care should be taken not to
stretch the optic nerve during enucleations.
44 i. Corneal degenerations can consist of lipid, cholesterol, or calcium, and are
associated with collagen breakdown, corneal vascularization, and corneal
pigmentation. The burn that had occurred in this dog has resulted in degenerative
changes to the cornea.
ii. Vascularization of the cornea.
ii. Calcium appears as punctate, irregular, white, superficial or deep, shiny
opacities.
iv. Lipid appears as off-white colored crystalline opacities. They can be superficial
or deep in the cornea.
v. Necrotic cells release crystalline and noncrystalline lipids. Fibroblasts and
keratinocytes may form lipid after inflammation or injury. Vascularization may
allow for hematogenous lipid deposition. Calcium is deposited commonly in
inflamed corneas because the corneal calcium levels are close to saturation and
small changes in pH or temperature easily result in calcium precipitation.
46
45, 46:Questions
45
5A 15-year-old domestic short-
45a
haired cat was presented with bilateral
 acute blindness. Funduscopic examin-
ation of the right eye revealed the
condition shown (45a).
i. Describe the lesion.
ii. What is the most likely cause of this
lesion, and what would be the treat-
ment?
ii. What is the prognosis for return of
vision?
46
46  A three-year-old Border Collie is presented with active chorioretinitis and
blindness (46). Ivermectin had been administered one day prior.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
i. What is the pathogenesis of this condition?
ii. What breeds are predisposed to this condition?
iv. What is the treatment and prognosis?
47
45, 46:Answers
45 i. There is a large bullous retinal
45b
detachment ventral to the optic nerve
head (ONH) and a focal area of retinal
edema dorsal (left) of the ONH.
Compare this case with case 159.
i. High blood pressure. The systolic
blood pressure in this cat was 230
mmHg. The treatment of choice was a
calcium channel blocker (amlodipine,
0.625-1.25 mg per cat PO SID) to
lower the blood pressure.
ii. The prognosis is dependent on the
length of time since the retina detached
and the ability to control the blood pressure (45b, vision has returned in ten days
as the retina has reattached following blood pressure reduction). There is some
evidence that the feline retina begins to degenerate within the first week of
detachment. Retinal hemorrhages and edema can resolve with appropriate therapy.
46 i. Ivermectin-induced chorioretinitis or toxic chorioretinopathy. There are
multifocal, light gray, round to linear areas in the nontapetal fundus (46).
i. Ivermectin is an antiparasitic drug that activates ligand-gated chloride channels
in invertebrates, paralyzing the parasite. Therapeutic levels of ivermectin do not
normally reach toxic levels in the CNS of mammals due to P-glycoprotein on the
vascular endothelial cells of the blood-brain barrier. The P-glycoprotein prevents a
variety of molecules from entering the CNS. The P-glycoprotein is coded for by the
multiple drug resistance gene (MDR-1). Animals with this mutant gene cannot
prevent ivermectin from crossing the blood-brain barrier.
ii. Breeds found to carry the mutant MDR-1 allele include the Australian Shepherd
Dog, Miniature Australian Shepherd Dog, Collie, English Shepherd, Long-haired
Whippet, Old English Sheepdog, Shetland Sheepdog, and the Silken Windhound.
iv. The therapy is supportive care. Animals typically make a full recovery with
return of vision in 2-10 days, but can take many weeks. Residual pigment
disruption may be visible in the nontapetal region after recovery. Severely affected
dogs may die from respiratory/cardiovascular compromise.
48
47, 48:Questions
47 A 10-year-old spayed female cat is
47a
seen with a two-month history of a pink
mass growing in the medial canthus and
lower eyelid (47a).
i. What are the differentials for this
mass?
ii. What are the treatment options?
48a
48b
48c
48 What is the etiology of the ocular
condition found in these three images
(48a-c)?
49
47,48:Answers
47i. Differentials include squamous cell
47b
carcinoma (SCC), basal cell carcinoma, mast
cell
tumor
fibrosarcoma,
 papilloma,
adenoma, adenocarcinoma, fibroma, neuro-
fibroma,
neurofibrosarcoma,
melanoma,
hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma, and myxo-
sarcoma. The most likely possibility for a lid
tumor in a white cat or a cat with non-
pigmented eyelid margins is SCC, although in
this instance it turned out to be myxo-
sarcoma. Eyelid tumors in cats are less
common, but generally more malignant, than
those in dogs.
i. The treatment options for eyelid tumors are
surgical. Since the potential for malignancy is high, careful examination of the
whole animal is indicated, and cytology of local lymph nodes is recommended.
Surgical removal with wide-based excision and adjunctive therapy is the treatment
of choice. The goal of surgery is to restore eyelid margins and prevent trichiaisis
with secondary keratitis. Adjunctive therapies include cryotherapy, beta-irradiation,
laser ablation, and hyperthermia. Blepharoplasty may be required when tumors are
extensive. A rotational graft was used in this cat (47b). The upper lip of the mouth
was rotated to create a lower eyelid with a mucous membrane margin.
48 Each of these images has an optic disk coloboma. Colobomas of the optic nerve
head in Collies with Collie eye anomaly are caused by faulty closure or fusion (or
both) of the embryonic ventral (i.e. fetal) fissure of the optic stalk and cup;
peripapillary colobomas originate from orbital cysts. Optic disk colobomas in
Collies may be small and hard to differentiate from a deep, physiologic cup (48c),
or they may be very large in diameter (48a). They may be “typical at the six o'clock
position or ‘atypical at the nasal or temporal disk margin. (48b). Colobomas are
also found in Australian Shepherd Dogs, Shelties, Basenjis, American and English
Cocker Spaniels, Norfolk Terriers, Huskies, Tibetan Spaniels, Irish Setters,
Labrador and Golden Retrievers, Whippets, Samoyeds, Malamutes, Beagles,
Bernese Mountain Dogs, Flat-Coated Retrievers, and German Shepherd Dogs.
50
49, 50:Questions
49
The cornea of a two-year-old
49a
German Shepherd Dog (GSD) is shown
(49a). The lesion started from the lateral
aspect of the cornea and progressed to
cover the whole cornea.
i. Describe the lesions.
ii. What is your diagnosis, and what is
the etiology of this keratopathy?
ii. What is the treatment?
50a
50b
50
0An eight-year-old Dachshund is
50c
presented with a pigmented mass in the
sclera near the limbus (50a). Some
corneal invasion is occurring. The con-
junctiva is movable over the scleral por-
tion of the lesion.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii.
What is present one-day post-
operatively (50b)?
ii. What do the histologic results display
(50c)?
51
49,50:Answers
49 i. There are multiple raised, red
49b
masses and vascularization covering the
whole cornea.
i. Chronic superficial keratitis (CSK)
(pannus). CSK is a progressive, bilateral,
inflammatory, and potentially blinding
disease of the canine cornea. Clinically,
pannus is manifested initially at the
temporal or inferior temporal limbus.
Vascularization and pigmentation pro-
gress centrally (as seen in 49a) without
therapy until the entire cornea becomes vascularized, pigmented, and scarred. GSDs
and Greyhounds are most commonly affected with CSK, but it can occur in any
breed. Both the incidence and severity of pannus increase at higher altitudes (>1500
meters). In GSDs affected at a fairly young age (1-5 years), the condition is usually
rapidly progressive and severe. In those GSDs first affected later in life (4-6 years),
however, the lesions appear be less severe and progressive. Greyhounds tend to be
affected at less than 2-3 years, and exhibit milder lesions. The cause of CSK in the
dog may be an immune-mediated disease against viral or corneal antigens. CSK must
be distinguished from pigmentary keratitis due to other causes (e.g. KCS).
ii. Pannus can usually be controlled, but it cannot be cured. Initial therapy consists
of topical corticosteroids (0.1% dexamethasone or 1.0% prednisolone 3-4 times
daily for 3-4 weeks), followed by a reduced medical maintenance schedule (49b).
Topical cyclosporin A (0.2-1.0%) can also be an effective treatment.
50 i. A melanoma, which can arise from melanocytes in the limbus or can present
from intraocular melanomas invading through the sclera.
ii. A blood clot from hyphema. The limbal melanoma was surgically excised and
resolved and the surgical site is quiet.
ii. Pigmented cells are found invading the cornea (to the left) at the level of the
midstroma. The majority of the tumor is in the sclera (on the right).
52
51, 52:Questions
51
 51 This adult six-year-old cat was presented with an incipient cataract (51).
i. What are the possible etiologies for this cataract?
i. What are the changes associated with an incipient cataract?
ili. What clinical signs may be associated with cataracts?
iv. What are the treatment options for this cat?
52
52 An adult domestic shorthaired cat is presented with bilateral, severe swelling of
the conjunctiva (52). The right eye is more severely affected than the left, but they
are equally painful. Ophthalmic examination reveals no corneal abnormalities. The
owner claims that the cat has had redness to its eyes in the past, but never swelling
of this magnitude.
i. What are the common causes of feline conjunctivitis?
ii. How will you determine the cause of this cat's conjunctivitis?
ili. How will you treat this cat?
53
51,52:Answers
51 i. Cataracts in the cat are usually secondary to trauma, anterior uveitis,
glaucoma, metabolic diseases, or lens luxation. Traumatic cataracts are usually
focal and slowly progressive. Diabetic metabolic cataracts in cats are less frequent
than in diabetic dogs. Other metabolic cataracts in cats can be associated with
hypocalcemia from hypoparathyroidism. Cataracts associated with lens luxations
are noted as diffuse subcapsular cortical opacities. Uveitis-induced cataracts are
also common in cats.
i. An incipient cataract is an early cataractous change and is usually associated
with the cortical, subcortical, and Y suture lines (see case 224).
ili. Sudden cataract formation is associated with blindness. Cataracts from anterior
uveitis may be associated with clinical signs such as aqueous flare, anterior
synechiae, rubeosis irides, and iris bombe (see case 215).
maturation, it can be removed surgically.
52 i. Conjunctivitis can be frequently caused by feline herpesvirus-1. The virus
affects epithelial cells of the respiratory tract, conjunctiva, and cornea. The disease
initially affects the youngest of populations, causing sneezing, coughing, and nasal
discharge along with fever and generalized malaise. Once infected, the virus can
become latent and recur in times of stress. Herpesvirus conjunctivitis can be severe
and result in conjunctival ulcerations. Chlamydopbila felis is an intracellular
bacterium that is also a common cause of conjunctivitis in cats. Acute infection
leads to conjunctivitis, with 
1  possible nasal discharge and sneezing. The
conjunctivitis is initially unilateral, but often progresses to bilateral. Calicivirus is
an RNA virus that is common in kittens. The virus is specific to the respiratory
 tract, but can cause conjunctivitis. In most cats the virus is self-limiting.
ii. Cytology and response to therapy.
ii. Herpesviral infections are best treated with antiviral drugs and lysine supple-
mentation. Lysine acts as a competitive inhibitor to arginine, which is an essential
amino acid for the herpesvirus. Once infection is apparent, recurrences are likely.
Recurrences can include conjunctivitis or the cat may present with characteristic
corneal plaques. Chlamydial and mycoplasmal infections are treated with topical
 d o o      p r
herpesvirus. Calicivirus is fortunately self-limiting because no specific antiviral
treatment yet exists for this RNA virus.
54
53, 54:Questions
53a
 53  A two-year-old neutered Siamese cat was presented for annual examination.
Multiple spherical structures were observed at the pupil margins and tapetal
reflection could be observed through the tiny spherical structures (53a).
i. What is the diagnosis and significance of these dark structures?
ii. Does this require treatment?
54
54 A 10-year-old Toy Poodle is presented with progressive blindness. A mydriatic
has been applied (54).
i. Describe the lesion.
ii. What is the diagnosis?
iii. What is the treatment?
iv. What is the prognosis for return of vision?
55
53,54:Answers
53 i. The spherical structures are uveal
53b
cysts. They may arise from the posterior
pigment epithelium of the iris or from
the inner ciliary body epithelium, and
can be congenital or acquired (53b,
histologic view x100). They are rem-
nants of the embryonic optic vesicle and
contain a viscous fluid. Uveal cysts are
identified by their spherical shape and
translucency when illuminated with an
intense, focal light source, and are fre-
quently positioned at the pupillary margins. These cysts may be thick walled and
therefore may not readily transilluminate. Tumors are solid, while cysts are hollow.
Iridal cysts may be confused with early melanomas.
ii. Treatment is not usually necessary, but if the cyst is big enough to impair vision,
obstruct aqueous flow, or mechanically damage the corneal endothelium, treatment
may be indicated. The least invasive method of treatment is the use of a diode laser
to achieve rupture and coagulation of the cyst.
 54 i. There is a white to blue lens with a separation of the lens fibers and formation
of a cleft along the anterior Y' suture. There is no tapetal reflection showing.
ii. A mature cataract. The lens fibers are swollen as shown by the Y suture cleft.
Compare this cataract with that in case 224, which also involved the suture lines.
 In that instance the cataract was early in development or incipient.
ii. This cataract is blinding. Most of the lens fibers have become swollen and have
begun to break apart in a manner seen in 1oob. The treatment to restore vision is
phacoemulsification cataract surgery. There is no medical therapy to restore vision
lost from cataracts.
iv. Prognosis for return to vision is good with surgery. Prior to surgery, ocular
ultrasound and electroretinography are strongly recommended. Ocular ultrasound
is used to look for retinal detachments, posterior capsular anomalies (rupture,
vascular remnants), and intraocular neoplasia. A fundic examination cannot,
however, be performed on a dog with mature cataracts, so electroretinography is
used to test retinal function.
56
55, 56:Questions
55a
55b
55 An 11-year-old male domestic shorthaired calico cat was presented with a large
mass associated with his lower right eyelid (55a). The owner had noticed a raised
ulcerative region along the lower eyelid several months previously. As the cat was
an outdoor cat, the owner thought the mass was a slow-healing wound that was
continually being irritated by the animal.
i. What are the differential diagnoses for the lid lesion in this cat?
ii. What therapy was performed (55b)?
56b
56a
as si p dn yoao a e rg ti a s (s) and raa upio g 9s
to have a blue tapetal fundus (56b).
i. Is this puppy's fundic examination, as depicted in 56b, normal or abnormal?
i. This puppy is probably less than what age?
ii. At about what age does the adult tapetal color and structure become fully
manifested?
57
55,56:Answers
55c
55 i. Diagnosis of eyelid tumors is based on histologic examination. Squamous cell
  on   '  o  o no n   
associated with prolonged exposure to actinic radiation and is most prevalent in
older white cats. SCC appears clinically as an ulcerative lesion. Basal cell carcinoma
can also affect eyelids in the cat. As with SCC, there is a tendency for basal cell
carcinoma to become ulcerated. They are usually benign. Mast cell tumors are also
found in the eyelids of cats. They can be raised, focal, and are often nonulcerated.
Fibrosarcoma of the feline eyelid can be solitary or multicentric, nodular, and often
ulcerated. Eyelid fibrosarcomas in younger cats can be caused by feline sarcoma
virus (FesV). The prognosis for life of cats with FeSV-induced tumors is poor, as
these cats are feline leukemia virus positive.
i. A rotating skin flap involving the lip margin was used to remove the SCC in this
cat. The result is shown (55c).
56 i. Normal. At around 7-8 weeks of age the blue tapetum is granular in
appearance. The optic nerve and retinal vessels all appear normal. The darker spot
in the central area of the disc is known as the physiologic cup, and is also normal.
ii. Probably <10 weeks of age.
ii. By about 3-4 months of age.
58
57, 58:Questions
57a
57b
57 Proptosis of the right eye occurred in this kitten due to a dog bite injury (57a).
Direct and indirect pupillary light reflexes (PLRs) in this eye are absent.
i. What is the prognosis for vision of the proptosed globe in this cat, and why?
ii. What other clinical signs are associated with a proptosed globe?
ili. What possible long-term sequelae might result from a proptosed globe?
iv. Describe the surgical procedure carried out to replace the globe (57b)
58 A swollen optic nerve is found in a
58
blind dog (58). This adult Border Collie
 presented for blindness of both eyes and
was diagnosed with optic neuritis
secondary to granulomatous meningo-
encephalitis (GME).
i. What is the presumptive etiology for
GME?
ii. What ocular clinical signs are asso-
ciated with this disease?
iii.What would evaluation of a cere-
brospinal fluid (CSF) tap of a dog with
GME reveal?
iv. What are the three described classical
forms of GME?
v. What diagnostic procedures are best suited for diagnosing GME?
vi. What is the treatment of choice for GME?
vi. What is the prognosis for vision, as wellas the prognosis for survival, in a dog
with GME?
59
57,58:Answers
57 i. Poor, as indicated by the failed PLRs in the globe.
ii. Severe head trauma, fractures of the skull and orbit, corneal perforation/ulcer-
ation, and hyphema.
ii. Blindness, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, exposure keratitis, lagophthalmos,
exotropia, decreased corneal sensitivity, strabismus, glaucoma, and phthisis bulbi.
iv. The cat is placed under general anesthesia and an artificial tear lubricant used
to lubricate the globe. Horizontal mattress sutures are placed through the eyelid
margins, and the upper and lower lids are pulled rostrally, dorsally, and ventrally
to get them in front of the globe (57b). A temporary tarsorrhaphy is then placed
using 4-0 monofilament nonabsorbable suture material and horizontal mattress
sutures and stents. The medial canthal area should be exempted from being
incorporated into the tarsorrhaphy so that the owner can administer medications.
The temporary tarsorrhaphy should be left in place for at least one week.
58 i. It is an idiopathic (possible immune-mediated), nonsuppurative inflammatory
disease. GME may be an unusual form of lymphoma.
i. Ocular signs include acute blindness, peripapillary edema, optic neuritis, dilated
pupils, retinal detachment, petechial hemorrhages, uveitis, and secondary glaucoma
(see case 206).
ii. CSF fluid may be normal if there is no disruption of the blood-brain barrier, but
the classic presentation is a mononuclear pleocytosis with elevated protein.
iv. The focal form that mimics a space-occupying mass, which is associated with a
slower onset and progression; the multifocal form, which progresses more rapidly
 than the focal form and has an acute onset and multifocal neurological involvement;
and the ocular form, which has marked nonsuppurative inflammatory infiltrates
and granuloma formations within the optic nerve and retina.
v. Procedures include a CSF tap with cytology and culture, and CT or MRI. CT
scan findings of a patient with GME include contrast-enhanced lesions, hydro
cephalus, edema of the optic nerve, asymmetry of the lateral ventricles, and
deviation of the falx cerebri.
vi. An immunosuppressive dose of corticosteroids, which is tapered over many
months. In some cases chemotherapeutic agents are used in conjunction with
corticosteroids.
vii. There is a very poor prognosis for vision, as well as for long-term survival.
60
59, 60:Questions
59
59 This fundus photograph (59) is from an adult Australian Shepherd Dog that was
diagnosed with progressive retinal atrophy (PRA).
i. What are the clinical manifestations of PRA?
ii. What is the clinical history that accompanies a dog with PRA?
ii. What other structures in the eye, other than the retina, are affected by PRA?
iv. What is the inheritance of PRA?
v. What diagnostic test can be performed to help with confirmation of PRA?
60a
60b
60 This young cat is presented with squinting in both eyes (60a, b).
i. What are the domestic breeds in which this lid condition has been reported?
ii. Is this condition usually unilateral or bilateral?
ili. What are the clinical signs associated with a cat with that has this lid problem?
(Use 60b as a guide.)
iv. This lid condition can be associated with what other developmental anomalies?
v. What is the classic surgical technique used to correct this problem?
vi. What are some common complications that can occur and need to be corrected
with surgical repair of this condition?
61
59,60:Answers
59 i. They include sluggish pupillary light reflexes, retinal atrophy, tapetal
hyperreflectivity, and attenuation of retinal blood vessels. Optic nerve head atrophy
advanced stage of the disease. PRA is a bilateral disease.
i. The owners have noted changes in their dog's night vision (nyctalopia) that has
become progressively worse with time. Eventually, they also notice a loss of day
vision. These changes may occur over several months to years until the dog is blind.
ili. The vitreous degenerates and liquefies in some dogs with PRA. Cataracts are also
a common occurrence with PRA due to anterior migration of retinal toxins from
the degenerating retina to the posterior lens.
iv. The inheritance varies from autosomal recessive to dominant, and is breed
dependent. Genetic testing is available for many dog breeds.
v. Electroretinography can be performed to evaluate retinal function. Early changes
show decreases in the b-wave amplitude, while the implicit times are normal. The
rods are affected first in PRA, and then the cones.
60 i. This cat has eyelid agenesis, which has been reported in domestic shorthaired
cats, Persians, and Burmese.
ii. Usually bilateral.
ii. The area of agenesis (or coloboma) is an area of abnormal eyelid margin
development usually noted in the lateral portion of the upper lid, as in 60b. The
patient can develop exposure keratitis, corneal ulceration from exposure, trichiasis,
a vascular response secondary to exposure or ulceration, dry eye, and secondary
infections.
iv. Colobomas of the choroid and optic nerve. Persistent pupillary membranes and
retinal dysplasia may also be present.
v. The Roberts and Bistner procedure is the classic surgical technique where a flap
of skin, the orbicularis oculi muscle, and the tarsus are rotated from the inferior
eyelid to the superior eyelid to replace the defect. A modification of this technique
by Dziezyc and Millichamp was created where a nictitating membrane pedicle is
also rotated to the defect to provide conjunctiva to the inner portion of the newly
created lid margin.
vi. Upper eyelid hairs may touch the cornea with the rotating flap.
62
61,62:Questions
6la
61  The fundus view of the left eye of a young Collie that has Collie eye anomaly
(CEA) is shown (61a). What is CEA?
62b
62a
62 A three-year-old female Dachshund presents with a 12-hour history of blue,
painful eyes and poor vision. On examination there is moderate to severe corneal
edema and anisocoria (62a, b).
i. What are the differentials for acute corneal edema?
ii. What additional diagnostics may be helpful?
ili. What are the treatment options?
63
61,62:Answers
61CEA is inherited as a simple auto-
61b
somal recessive condition and its
expression varies between dogs. The
condition is bilateral, although there
may be an asymmetry to the lesions
present. The disease is generally non-
progressive,  although
eyeswith
colobomas can infrequently progress to
retinal detachment.  Reports indicate
approximately
85%
of
Collies
(Rough/Smooth) are clinically affected,
but this number is declining. Approximately 5-10% of Shetland Sheepdogs have
CEA.
Ophthalmic examination can reveal microphthalmia, focal choroidal hypoplasia
located slightly superior and temporal to the optic disk (61a), optic disk coloboma,
scleral ectasia, and retinal detachment. The retina has detached from the choroid
in this young dog (61b, 1 = retina; 2 = choroid). The choroidal hypoplasia looks like
a 'pale’ area of varying size dorsal and lateral to the optic disk. It is an area of
retinal pigmented epithelium and choroidal hypopigmentation, tapetal hypoplasia,
and choroidal dysplasia. Choroidal hypoplasia is found in all eyes with CEA. The
retina is atrophic over the area of hypoplasia. Colobomas are severe pits or holes
involving the layers of the retina, choroid, sclera, and optic nerve. They may be
seen in 30% of dogs with CEA. Large colobomas of the optic disk are associated
with visual deficits and may progress to retinal detachment. Retinal detachments are
present in 5-10% of the cases. Retinal or vitreous hemorrhage is noticed in 3-4%
of CEAeyes.
62 i. Differentials include corneal ulcers, glaucoma, anterior uveitis, and anterior
lens luxation (see cases 34 and 116).
ii. Moderate to severe corneal edema makes examination of the inside of the eye
difficult. A slit beam was essential in finding the edge of the anteriorly luxated lenses
in this dog. Ocular ultrasound can help in determining lens location.
ili. Treatment options for anterior lens luxation are both medical and surgical. An
intracapsular lens extraction is generally the recommended surgery to remove the
lens if corneal edema is present.
64
63, 64:Questions
63b
63a
63 A three-year-old male domestic shorthaired black cat was presented with widely
dilated pupils (63a). The owner felt that he seemed to have lost his vision. She had
noticed these changes in the past day and wondered whether it had any relationship
to his recent treatment for urinary tract obstruction. He did not respond to a
examination revealed tapetal hyperreflectivity and considerable attenuation of the
retinal blood vessels (63b). Scattered rust-colored spots were also apparent within
the tapetal fundus. What are the differential diagnoses for the retinal degeneration
in this cat?
64 This dog was referred to a veterinary
64
ophthalmologist after three weeks of
medical therapy for a superficial ulcer
with no progress in healing (64). On
presentation, an axial superficial ulcer
(about 30% of corneal surface in size)
was observed.
i. Describe the pathophysiology
of
spontaneous chronic corneal epithelial
defects (SCCEDs) (also known
as
indolent ulcers or “Boxer ulcers').
ii. How would you diagnose a SCCED?
65
63,64:Answers
63 Inherited, idiopathic, toxic, or associated with taurine deficiency. A rod-cone
dysplasia and a rod-cone degeneration have been described in the Abyssinian breed,
with the former occurring as early as one month after birth, and the latter beginning
at 1.5-2.0 years of age and taking another 2-4 years to progress to complete
blindness. Taurine is an essential dietary requirement in cats, as they are unable to
synthesize taurine from its precursor cysteine. Taurine is a cell membrane stabilizer
and neurotransmitter and is highly concentrated within the photoreceptors. Taurine
depletion thus leads to retinal degeneration.
This cat had been treated for urinary obstruction with enrofloxacin, which has
recently been associated with a rare adverse ophthalmic toxicity causing an acute,
irreversible retinal degeneration in cats. The reported incidence of this adverse
reaction is 1 in 122,414 treated cats (i.e. 0.0008 %). Adherence to the manufacturer's
current recommendation for enrofloxacin dosage in cats of 2.5 mg/kg BID orally is
advisable, but may still be too high for some aged cats. There is a remote possibility
that vision can return if enrofloxacin is stopped as soon as mydriasis and blindness
are observed. Marbofloxacin has been shown not to be as toxic and is safer to use
in cats.
64 i. SCCEDs are chronic superficial epithelial ulcers that fail to resolve through
normal wound healing processes. They have been documented in almost every canine
breed. It is likely that the initiating event in dogs is minor superficial trauma.
Histology shows the epithelium to be poorly attached to the underlying corneal
stroma and there is evidence of dysmaturation or loss of the normal epithelial
architecture. A variable amount of stromal fibroplasia, vascularization, and leukocytic
infiltrate occurs. There is either no epithelial basement membrane or only small
discontinuous segments of basement membrane on the surface of the exposed stroma
A hyalinized acellular zone composed of collagen fibrils admixed with an ill-defied
amorphous or fine fibrillar material and fibrin is present on the SCCED surface.
ii. A SCCED should be considered in any middle-aged and older dog with a
superficial nonhealing ulcer. Underlying causes for a nonhealing ulcer include lid
abnormalities such as lid tumors, ectopic cilia, entropion and lagophthalmia,
foreign bodies, infection, tear film abnormalities, exposure from poor lid
conformation, paralysis of lids, neurotrophic keratitis, exophthalmia
10r
buphthalmia, or corneal edema leading to bullous keratopathy. If no underlying
causes of nonhealing are found in a superficial ulcer with loose or redundant
epithelial edges, such that fluorescein stain pools underneath a seemingly intact
epithelium, then a diagnosis of SCCED can be made.
66
65-67:Questions
65 How would you treat the dog in 64?
66b
66a
66 This male Border Collie is brought to the clinic with a fixed and dilated pupil
in both eyes (66a). The fundic image of the right eye is shown (66b).
i. What is the diagnosis and pathogenesis?
ii. What would the clinical findings be on retinal examination?
ii. What specific breeds may be at risk for the condition that is present in this
animal?
67 This is a fundus photograph (67) of
67
a three-year-old domestic shorthaired
cat that presented with chorioretinitis.
i. Are these lesions active or inactive?
ii. What are the etiologies for chorio-
retinitis in the cat?
67
65-67:Answers
65 Débridement of loose epithelium
65a
with a dry, sterile cotton-tipped swab
after application of topical anesthesia
can be repeated at 2l-day intervals.
Punctate (65a) or grid keratotomy (65b)
using a 20G needle to aid adhesion can
be performed after epithelial debride-
ment. Superficial keratectomy is more
invasive and requires general anesthesia
and may cause more scarring, but is
65b
successful in a majority of the cases.
Application of a soft contact lens after
any of these procedures will reduce
frictional irritation from the eyelids,
improve comfort, and help with healing.
Topical
corticosteroids
should
be
avoided, as they can decrease the rate of
corneal wound healing and decrease
host defense mechanisms.
Medical
 therapy includes topical broad-spectrum
antibiotics, serum, and hypertonics such
as 5% NaCl.
66 i. Optic nerve aplasia. This condition is caused by the complete absence of
retinal ganglion cells and the ganglion axons that would normally form the optic
nerve.
i. Retinal examination would reveal an absence of the optic nerve as well as retinal
vessels. Anatomically, the optic nerve is entirely absent. Only a small cluster of
supportive tissue might be observed when examining this region histologically.
ili. Irish Wolfhound and Beagle.
67 i. The lesions look inactive based on the sharp and distinct borders of the
lesions. There is atrophy of the tapetal neural retina in this cat, which is noted by
hyperreflectivity. The retinal pigmented epithelium was affected by the disease such
that the center of the lesion is pigmented. Active chorioretinal lesions have indistinct
borders due to retinal edema (see case 186).
i. Blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, cryptococcosis, feline infectious peritonitis, and
mycobacteriosis are associated with granulomatous chorioretinitis in cats.
68
68, 69:Questions
68a
68b
68 This dog has had surgery for glaucoma.
i. What is the name and function of the device seen in the anterior chamber of this
dog's eye (68a) and illustrated in 68b?
ii. What is the indication for this type of surgical procedure?
ili. What is the lowest intraocular pressure that this device is designed to permit?
iv. What is a common complication after placement of gonioimplants in dogs?
69a
69b
69 A dog presents with keratoconjunctivitis siccca and reduced corneal sensation
(69a). The same eye is shown as it appeared two months later (69b).
i. Describe the clinical findings based on the original presentation (69a).
ii. What is the sensory innervation of the cornea?
ii. What problems arise when there is dysfunction of the corneal sensory nerves?
iv. What examination techniques can be used to evaluate corneal sensitivity?
v. What can cause damage to the sensory innervation of the cornea?
vi. What are some general treatment options that should be implemented in a dog
with this condition?
69
68, 69:Answers
68 i. An Ahmed valve, which is designed to bypass the blocked iridocorneal angle
and shunt aqueous humor into the subconjunctival space. The cornea is wrinkled
due to low intraocular pressure (IOP) (68a).
i. This type of valve is surgically implanted in eyes with glaucoma that have an
IOP that is not responsive to medical therapy.
ii. Unidirectional valved systems are designed to permit passage of aqueous humor
at approximately 10-12 mmHg.
iv. The tubing can become blocked with fibrin and therefore unable to shunt
aqueous humor out of the anterior chamber.
69 i. There is a pink to red area of granulation tissue associated with the axial
cornea. Vascularization is present over 360 degrees. The cornea is edematous
peripheral to the central lesion. The peripheral cornea is clear enough to see the iris
and pupil.
i. The long ciliary nerves, which are derived from the ophthalmic division of the
trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V).
ii. A decreased blink response and an increased evaporation of the precorneal tear
film. Corneal healing is also slowed.
iv. The frequency of the blink reflex should be assessed, as a reduction in blinking
may indicate reduced corneal sensitivity. Corneal sensitivity can be evaluated by
touching the cornea with a small piece of cotton. If the sensitivity is normal, the
patient will blink and retract the globe, causing protrusion of the third eyelid. A
Cochet-Bonnet esthesiometer can also be used to assess corneal sensitivity. An
adjustable nylon filament is used to stimulate the cornea. When a blink reflex is
only elicited with a short filament, corneal sensation is reduced. When a long
filament elicits a blink reflex, corneal sensation is normal.
v. Trauma to the head. This condition is also commonly present in brachycephalic
dogs and diabetic animals.
vi. Artificial tears and serum are used to protect the insensitive cornea. A third
eyelid flap or temporary tarsorrhaphy may also provide some protection of the
cornea when decreased corneal sensitivity is present.
70
70, 71:Questions
70b
70a
 70 A 15-year-old cat presents with a two-week history of exophthalmos and
nictitans protrusion (70a) as well as the funduscopic changes shown (70b).
i. What are the differentials for feline exophthalmos?
ii. Describe the fundic lesions.
ili. What is the prognosis for feline orbital tumors?
71
71 This adult Poodle was presented because of a decrease in vision at night, but it
still had some vision during the day.
i. What clinical signs are noted in 71?
ii. What is the most likely inherited disease that is being depicted in this Poodle?
ii. What are the clinical complaints from an owner with a dog that suffers from this
disease?
iv. What diagnostic test should be performed to confirm the diagnosis?
71
70,71:Answers
70c
POL
 70 i. Differentials include orbital abscess, orbital cellulitis, orbital emphysema,
orbital tumor, extraorbital tumor (sinus or nasal), and trauma.
ii. There are two focal areas of retinal detachment in the tapetum ventral to the
optic nerve head. Retinal detachment may occur in this cat due to the mechanical
pressure from an orbital mass, the mass irritating the globe, or vascular compromise
to the globe.
ii. Poor. Approximately 90% of orbital tumors are malignant. A complete work-
up for metastasis is recommended prior to surgery. Radiography (70c, d) reveals
significant amounts of bony erosion in the orbital region of this cat with orbital
osteosarcoma.
71 i. There is retinal vessel attenuation and a focal area of hyperreflectivity noted
dorsal, temporal, and nasal to the optic nerve. The optic nerve appears slightly
small and dark
i. Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA).
ii. Decreased vision at night or in dim light (nyctalopia) in both eyes is noted in
dogs with PRA. The pupillary light reflex is sluggish and there is a larger resting
pupil than normal. Dogs with PRA may develop secondary cataracts in the
advanced stages of this disease.
iv. Electroretinography can be performed to evaluate for PRA, as well as genetic
blood testing to identify affected dogs (see case 59).
72
72, 73:Questions
72 A five-year-old domestic shorthaired
72a
cat was presented for ocular exam-
ination after a fight with another cat
(72a).
i. Describe the findings and differential
diagnosis.
ii. How would you treat this condition?
73a
73b
73
From time to time, young pets
73c
brought to the clinic can have significant
differences with regard to the size of
their right and left eye. The difference in
the size of an animal's eyes is usually the
result of one being abnormally larger
than the other. There also may be times
when(
one
orboth
1 eyescan
be
observably smaller than normal. Three
examples (two puppies and one kitten)
are shown (73a-c) where one eye is
substantially larger than the other. What condition is present in these animals?
73
72,73:Answers
72 i. There is a corneal lesion with
72b
severe local corneal edema. There is
hyphema in the anterior chamber and
the iris
sandthe
pupil
cannot
be
identified. Hyphema can be caused by
trauma, retinal detachment, neoplasia,
uveitis (due to systemic diseases or other
reasons),
coagulopathies,
vasculitis
(immune-mediated
or secondary to
rickettsial diseases), systemic hyper-
tension, or parasite migration, and can
be secondary
tocongenital
ocular
defects (such as in Collie eye anomaly).
ii. Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be given both systemically and topically.
Uveitis should be treated aggressively with systemic and topical anti-inflammatory
drugs. Atropine should be given topically to prevent synechiae and discomfort.
Tissue plasminogen activator may
be1
necessary to digest fibrin in the anterior
chamber. Corneal lacerations with leakage of aqueous humor require corneal
suturing and the possible placement of a conjunctival graft to seal the corneal fistula
and promote healing. Damage to the lens may lead to lens-induced uveitis and
cataract formation. In this case the hyphema cleared almost completely 13 days
after initiation of medical therapy, and the iris and pupil could be clearly seen (72b).
A small blood clot and fibrin with adjacent focal cataractous changes are present
on the dorsal aspect of the anterior lens capsule, Cataracts may form in some eyes
following lens capsule rupture and require surgical removal by an ophthalmologist.
73 Buphthalmos, which is generally found with advanced chronic glaucoma. In
kittens and puppies, congenital glaucoma is usually secondary to malformation of
the iridocorneal angle and/or dysgenesis of the structures of the anterior segment.
The eyes of young animals tend to enlarge more rapidly and more severely when
glaucoma is present. There is no treatment other than enucleation if the lids cannot
protect the cornea.
74
74, 75:Questions
74
74 The application of fluorescein dye (74) may be performed during an ophthalmic
examination (e.g. cases 21, 153, 156) to determine the integrity of the corneal
epithelium.
i. Which layer(s) of the cornea does fluorescein stain?
ii. What other ophthalmic uses are there for fluorescein dye?
75
75 The owner of this male cat (75) says she does not know what is wrong, but
when her cat came home after being away for a couple of days, his eyes were all red
and swollen. She thinks he might have been in a fight.
i. What do you tell the owner is wrong with her cat?
i. What causes this condition in cats?
ii. What do you recommend as treatment?
75
74,75:Answers
74 i. The cornea has four layers: the epithelium, stroma, Descemet's membrane, and
the endothelium. The corneal epithelium is hydrophobic/lipophilic and prevents
any appreciable penetration of fluorescein. The water-soluble fluorescein dye will
stain the corneal stroma, but will not stain a healthy intact epithelium or Descemet's
membrane. In the presence of a corneal epithelial defect or ulcer, the dye rapidly
diffuses into the corneal stroma.
i. The passage of fluorescein from the eye to the external nares evaluates the
patency of the nasolacrimal system (Jones I test). A strip of fluorescein is moistened
with a few drops of sterile eyewash and touched to the upper bulbar conjunctiva.
The dye usually appears at the external nares within five minutes in dogs and cats.
 Fluorescein may exit more readily into the nasopharynx in cats and brachycephalic
dogs. The animal's tongue and saliva should also be examined in these cases.
 Fluorescein can also be used to look for corneal fistulas, leaking sutures, and leaking
descemetoceles with the Seidel's test. Fluorescein is applied to the cornea and
examined for a change in color associated with aqueous humor dilution of the
fluorescein. The tear film breakup time can also be evaluated with fluorescein stain.
blinking, and the cornea observed for the appearance of dark areas in the
fluorescein stain. It should take >15-20 seconds for these dark areas to appear if
the tear film integrity is stable, and be very quick if there is a tear film problem.
75 i. This cat has bilateral eversion or prolapse of the gland of the nictitans, a
condition commonly referred to as ‘cherry eye'.
ii. This condition in cats occurs especially in the Burmese breed. The eversion of the
nictitans and prolapse of the gland is caused by folding of the narrow stem of
cartilage near the gland. The cause of the cartilage folding is unknown. It has been
suggested that there is deterioration of the attachments between the cartilage and
the deep orbital fascia. This condition is not only unsightly to the owner, but can
be uncomfortable and possibly cause corneal ulceration in the patient.
ii. Eversions of the nictitans gland can be treated by surgical removal or amputation
of the hypertrophied gland; however, this is generally no longer recommended due
to the risk of decreased tear production and keratoconjunctivitis sicca post gland
amputation surgery. Several techniques for surgical replacement of the everted
nictitans gland have been described.
76
76, 77:Questions
76
76 A cat is presented with sneezing, difficulty breathing, disorientation, and
staggering. Fundic examination reveals chorioretinitis with multiple, slightly raised,
gray-yellow exudative lesions (76).
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. Describe the disease and the ocular manifestations.
ii. What is your treatment recommendation?
77a
77b
77
A young adult Labrador Retriever is presented with moderate to severe,
 generalized blepharitis (77a, b). The owner explains that the dog can often be found
rubbing his eyes on the carpets. Occasionally, he has moderate epiphora. He is
otherwise healthy and on no medications at this time.
i. Explain the possible causes of blepharitis.
i. How might you determine the cause in this case?
ili. How would you treat this condition for each cause?
77
76,77:Answers
76 i. The most likely diagnosis based on the fundic examination is granulomatous
chorioretinitis caused by the fungus Cryptococcus neoformans (see 186b).
ii. The fungus is likely contracted by inhalation of infective spores, which can
deposit in the upper or lower respiratory tract. Once established in the airways, the
infection can spread hematogenously or by tissue invasion. Infections with C.
neoformans may result from immunosuppression in cats with feline immuno-
deficiency virus and feline leukemia virus infection, in dogs with ehrlichiosis, and
from chronic glucocorticoid therapy. Eye infections can arise hematogenously or via
dilated, unresponsive pupils and blindness to chorioretinitis, anterior uveitis, and
retinaldamage
ii. While the prognosis for survival with the ocular form of cryptococcosis is fair
to good using triazole antifungal drugs, the prognosis for return of vision is guarded
to poor due to retinal damage.
77 i. Bacterial, fungal, and parasitic infections, or immune mediated. Bacterial
blepharitis is most commonly caused by Staphylococcus or Streptococcus spp.
Mycotic blepharitis results from concurrent skin infection with Trichopbyton or
Demodex canis or Sarcoptes scabiei. Immune-mediated blepharitis can be seen with
pemphigus, uveodermatologic syndrome, and other immune-mediated diseases.
i. A careful skin scraping of the eyelid, with direct cytology (for Demodex or
Sarcoptes identification) and culture on Sabouraud-dextrose agar (for Trichopbyton
and Microsporum). In the presence of lid abscesses and exudates, swabs should be
submitted for cytology, culture, and sensitivity.
ili. Bacterial blepharitis is treated with systemic and topical ophthalmic antibiotics
consistent with the sensitivity results received. Mycotic blepharitis is treated with
thorough cleansing of the area with povidone-iodine scrub in addition to a topical
   n ( ) s  n 
stubborn, chronic mycotic blepharitis infections. Demodectic blepharitis is typically
self-limited in young dogs, but healing can be aided by treatment with amitraz dips
or systemic ivermectin or milbemycin. Sarcoptic blepharitis is best treated with
multiple lime sulfur dips and/or amitraz. Ivermectin and selemectin (two doses at
30-day intervals) are also effective. Immune-mediated blepharitis is treated with
such as cyclophosphamide, have also been used in chronic cases.
78
78-80:Questions
78 A Maine Coon kitten is examined at
81
the clinic (78).
i. Describe the clinical signs illustrated.
ii. What congenital disease does this
Maine Coon kitten have?
ii. Why did this congenital disease
develop?
79
A two-year-old male Golden
79
Retriever presents for yearly vaccina-
tion. On ophthalmic examination there
is a round, brown cystic structure
(arrow) free floating in the anterior
chamber (79).
i. What is the diagnosis, and where do
these structures arise?
ii. What is its significance?
80  Ophthalmic  examinations 
often
80
include the technique being used here
(80).
i. What diagnostic technique is being
demonstrated in this image?
i. What are the limitations of this
technique?
79
78-80:Answers
78 i. There is buphthalmia, corneal edema, and keratitis.
ii. Bilateral primary glaucoma.
ii. This bilateral congenital disease developed because of a developmental
abnormality of the aqueous humor outflow pathways alone or as part of anterior
segment dysgenesis.
79 i. A uveal cyst, which is often seen in the Golden Retriever (compare with case
19), Labrador Retriever and Boston Terrier. Uveal cysts arise from either posterior
pigmented epithelium of the iris or from the inner ciliary body epithelium (see case
53).
ii. Uveal cysts are round and usually considered benign. The potential complications
to benign cysts are glaucoma (obstruction of outflow) and cyst rupture (pigment
then attaching to the corneal endothelium or anterior lens capsule). Careful
examination for signs of uveitis in Golden Retrievers with uveal cysts is indicated,
since both may occur at the same time in this breed. Note that in this case the cyst
is less pigmented than in case 19. This is most likely the result of it having arisen
from the nonpigmented epithelial layer of the ciliary process.
80 i. Direct ophthalmoscopy. A condensing lens is not positioned between the
the patient's eye. The fundus image is highly magnified, real, and upright. The direct
ophthalmoscope head offers a range of lenses to enable focusing at various depths
within the eye. These lenses are calibrated in diopters and are color coded. The
diopter setting is usually started at 0 and adjusted to between +3 (green) and -3
 po s  un s ro aissod s ses  rd  (r)
ophthalmoscopic lenses are usually needed to focus on the patient's retina and optic
nerve. There are also controls for spot size and brightness. There may be a red-free
filter, and a cobalt blue filter is used to look for corneal ulcers. The “red-free' (do
 not callit 'green') filter is useful for enhancing the appearance of blood vessels and
hemorrhages by making blood show up black.
i. Penetration of cloudy or partially crystallized media is limited by the relatively
low intensity of the instrument's bulb. Because of the extreme magnification, there
is a small field of view and examination of the peripheral fundus becomes difficult.
Stereopsis is absent and depth of focus is limited. The small working distance
frightened animals.
80
81,82:Questions
81a
81b
81A nine-year-old Siamese cat is
8lc
presented for blindness (81a-c).
i. Describe the lesions.
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. Which breeds of cat are predisposed
to this condition?
iv. What are the treatment options for
these conditions?
82
2ArelativelyyoungDoberman
82
Pinscher is presented with these fine
opacities in the vitreous humor (82).
What is the differential diagnosis for
these vitreal opacities?
81
81,82:Answers
81 i. There is bilateral mydriasis, with
P18
green tapetal and red choroidal reflec-
tions (see 81a). When looking at the
eyes at an angle, there is a red fundic
reflection in the ventral pupil bilaterally
(see 81b, c). In 81c a lens subluxation is
revealed by the presence of a bright red
fundic reflection (central), an aphakic
crescent, and taut ciliary body processes
(right).
ii. The most likely diagnosis for a
Siamese cat that presents blind with
dilated pupils is primary glaucoma.
Systemic hypertension and retinal disease should also be considered.
ii. Siamese, European Shorthair, Burmese, and Persian breeds.
 (   s    g so s  
surgical. Surgical therapies for glaucoma include gonioshunts, ciliary body ablation
(81d, lens rupture following accidental intralenticular injection of gentamicin
instead of the vitreous during a ciliary body ablation procedure), cryotherapy, or
diode laser), enucleation, and evisceration with prosthetic implant. The treatment
options for lens subluxations are medical therapy for uveitis and intraocular
pressure increases, and monitoring for complete luxation.
82 Vireous opacities may be caused by inflammatory vitritis, hemorrhage, asteroid
hyalosis, and synchysis scintillans. Retinal detachment, luxated lens, foreign bodies,
neoplasms, and parasites (Dirofilaria) may also cause vitreal opacities. This case
represents a vitreal degeneration termed asteroid hyalosis. Asteroid hyalosis is
relatively common in dogs and is often called *floaters'. Complexes of calcium-lipid
crystals attached to the framework of the vitreous oscillate slightly when the
eye/head moves. Synchysis scintillans is rare in dogs and is associated with retinal
degeneration. The cholesterol crystals in the liquefied vitreous of synchysis
scintillans display ‘snow flake’ movement when the globe moves. There is no
therapy for asteroid hyalosis or synchysis scintillans.
82
83, 84:Questions
83a
83 A one-year-old Singapura cat is presented with bilateral epiphora of four weeks'
duration (83a). The lid margins are normal and there is no conjunctivitis.
i. What diagnostic test should be performed?
ii. If the test is negative, what is the next step?
li. After these tests, what is the most likely diagnosis?
iv. What are the treatment options?
84
84 A long-haired Dachshund is presented with epiphora and possible vision loss.
The owner explains that she has just had the living room remodeled and noticed the
dog bumping into the new furniture. Complete ophthalmic examination reveals
corneal cloudiness, mild to moderate corneal pigmentation, normal tear production,
and corneal neovascularization (84). The cornea is fluorescein negative.
i. What is the diagnosis and etiology?
ii. What are your differential diagnoses?
ii. Describe the pathophysiology of the condition.
iv. How will you treat the eye?
83
83,84:Answers
83i.A Jones test is used to determine
83b
patency of the nasolacrimal system. This
cat had a negative Jones test.
11.
 The next step is to cannulate the
upper and lower puncta and flush the
ducts. There were no duct openings in
this cat. There were also no nasal duct
openings in either nostril. A dacryo-
cystorhinogram cannot therefore be
performed because contrast cannot be
injected into the nasolacrimal system.
ii. As there are no openings on the nasal or conjunctival ends of the nasolacrimal
system, the most likely diagnosis is nasolacrimal agenesis. Cats that are
brachycephalic are most commonly diagnosed with this problem.
iv. The treatment of choice is a conjunctivalrhinostomy (83b) or a conjunc-
tivaloralostomy. A lower puncta is created when an osteotomy is performed into the
nasal passage or oral cavity, respectively. The new drainage system is cannulated
with silicone tubing and left in place for 4-6 weeks.
84 i. Immune-mediated punctate keratitis, a breed-related corneal disease.
i. Differentials include pigmentary keratitis, pannus, keratoconjunctivitis sicca,
glaucoma, and retinal degeneration.
ii. Immune-mediated punctate keratitis is most common in long-haired
Dachshunds, but may occur in any breed of dog. This chronic disease can lead to
cloudiness of the entire cornea, pigmentation, and some degree of vision loss.
Excessive exposure to ultraviolet radiation may aggravate this condition.
iv. The eye is fluorescein negative and is therefore not ulcerated. However, if
ulceration was present, antibiotics would be necessary. In this case, treatment
consists of topical cyclosporin A and corticosteroids for extended periods. Therapy
may be a lifelong.
84
85, 86:Questions
85b
85a
 85  A 14-month-old cat presents with the curvilinear tracts seen in these fundic
photographs (85a, b).
i. What diagnostic technique has been used to highlight the curvilinear tracts in the
retina seen in 85b?
ii. What is the cause of these curvilinear tracts?
ii. Where do these parasites migrate?
iv. What are the most common clinical signs reported by owners of cats with this
disease?
86
A six-month-old Shar Pei is
86
presented with epiphora, blepharo-
spasm, and chemosis. Initial examin-
ation reveals entropion of the upper and
lower eyelids
andaprotruding
descemetocele (86).
i. What steps will you take to examine
this puppy and determine the diagnosis?
ii.
What are the etiology and patho-
physiology of the condition?
ii. Describe the treatment you will
recommend.
iv.
What
follow-up
care
will
be
necessary?
85
85, 86:Answers
85 i. Fluorescein angiography. Defects
85c
in the retinal pigment epithelium from
the larval migration allow visualization
of the fluorescein dye in the choroid.
ii. Ophthalmomyiasis (see case 95).
ii. In and around the sensory retina
(85c, collage of fundus photographs
showing the migratory marks going
around the optic nerve).
iv. Usually there are no specific clinical
signs and cats are asymptomatic. There
have been cases where ophthalmomyiasis has caused anterior uveitis in cats.
86 i. Careful examination of the margins of the eyelids is necessary to look for
distichia or ectopic cilia. Fluorescein stain uptake is critical to evaluate corneal
ulcers. The stain will not bind to healthy epithelium or to Descemet's membrane.
A cobalt blue filtered light enhances the fluorescence and can be helpful in defining
the nature of the stain uptake. In this dog, the center of the ulcer did not take up
stain, indicating the presence of a descemetocele (see cases 142 and 232). A culture
swab of the ulcer would be warranted to define the most effective antibiotic for
this animal.
i. In breeds with excessive skin folding (e.g. Shar Pei, Bulldog, Chow Chow),
moderate to severe entropion with trichiasis often occurs (see case 157). Irritation
by the redundant skin and trichiasis cause blepharospasm and corneal ulceration.
Long-term irritation causes scarring and pigmentation of the cornea.
ii. The descemetocele should be treated with a conjunctival graft. The eyelid
changes require blepharoplastic procedures. Conjunctival  grafts  provide
physical'structural support, deliver plasma to the injured area, add fibroblasts to the
ulcer site, and direct a vascular supply to the corneal lesion.
iv. Conjunctival flaps require trimming approximately 6-8 weeks post surgery to
anesthesia, and tenotomy scissors.
86
87,88:Questions
87a
87b
 87 These two images (87a, b) are from an eight-month-old Australian Shepherd
Dog. Note what is demonstrated in the retina in 87b.
i. Based on these images, what is the diagnosis, and how does it form
embryologically?
ii. What is the name of the syndrome associated with these lesions in the Australian
Shepherd Dog?
ii. Describe the histologic appearance of these lesions.
iv. What is the inheritance of microphthalmia with this condition in Australian
Shepherd Dogs?
88
88 This dog has a dilated pupil, which allows the fundus to be seen by direct
ophthalmoscopy (88). What is discovered in the direct ophthalmoscopic image?
87
87.88:Answers
87c
87d
87 i. White equatorial colobomas. Embryologically, colobomas form due to a
primary defect in the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE). This results in focal
hypoplasia of the choroid and sclera. This 3-D reconstruction of a young Australian
Shepherd Dog eye (87c) shows the absence of some of its RPE (fuchsia color), which
led to a subsequent coloboma. The lens is blue, and the outer and inner retinae are
green and yellow, respectively. As the loss of choroidal elements mimics the absence
of the RPE, the sclera will seal this defect to form a coloboma, but in a less than
perfect way (87d).
i. Merle ocular dysgenesis (MOD), which is accompanied by multiple ocular
disorders including micropthalmia, microcornea, heterochromia irides, dyscoria,
corectopia, hypoplastic irides, cataracts, retinal detachment, and the colobomas.
ii. They show decreased to absent choroidal vasculature in the location, and a thin
and irregular sclera.
iv. MOD in this breed is inherited as an autosomal recessive with incomplete
  s  s s  o   
color.
88 The retina and optic nerve head (ONH) changes are a result of glaucoma. The
ONH is demyelinated, dark, and atrophic. A small region of tapetal hyper-
reflectivity is present adjacent to the right side of the optic disk. The optic nerve disc
has moved posteriorly in response to elevated intraocular pressure to block the
circulation from a short posterior ciliary artery to the retina. As a single short
posterior ciliary artery provides blood to specific wedge-shaped regions of retina,
the ischemia from such a reduction in the retinal circulation results in retinal edema
and an associated wedge-shaped hyporeflective tapetal pattern, as is seen from 9 t0
1 o'clock.
88
89-91:Questions
68
89 A two-year-old neutered male domestic shorthaired cat is presented with an
abnormal eyelid margin (89). This cat has been treated on-and-off over the past
three months for a lid abscess.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What are the differentials for the eyelid abscess?
ili. What are the treatment options?
06
91
90 A young adult dog (mixed breed) is
 91 This image (91) shows an examina-
presented with this condition (90).
tion procedure referred to as retro-
i. What is the diagnosis?
pulsing the globes.
ii. What can be done therapeutically?
1. Describe the process of globe retro-
pulsion.
ii.What circumstances might arise that
would not allow for retropulsion?
89
89-91:Answers
89 i. Cicatricial ectropion. The chronic eyelid abscess or pyogranuloma has
resolved with a scar (cicatrix). The contraction of the scar has caused the ectropion.
ii. Differentials include neoplasia, meibomian gland adenitis, chalazia (chronic lipid
granuloma of meibomian glands), eyelid cysts, eosinophilic keratitis plaques, and
eyelid pyogranulomas.
ii. Treatment of the eyelid abscess or pyogranuloma starts with confirmation of
the diagnosis. Diagnosis is based on cytologic examination (polymorphonuclear
neutrophils, lymphocytes, plasma cells with evidence of chronic inflammation) or
excisional biopsy. Treatment is systemic and intralesional injections of antibiotics
followed by warm compresses. In this case, after the eyelid pyogranuloma had
resolved, a cicatricial ectropion occurred. The treatment of choice for cicatricial
ectropion is a simple V to Y blepharoplasty. The procedure requires dissection of
the scar tissue, mobilization of the adjacent skin, and suturing of the V into a Y, thus
pushing the skin toward the eye.
90 i. This is an iris prolapse with the protruding iris covered in a layer of beige
colored fibrin. There may be persistent aqueous humor leakage, which causes a low
intraocular presure, shallow anterior chamber, and persistent uveitis, or the corneal
perforation may be sealed with iris and fibrin.
i. If there is a dazzle reflex or a consensual pupillary light reflex to the other eye
to indicate a functional retina in this eye, the protruding iris can be amputated and
the corneal lesion covered by a corneal transplant or a conjunctival graft. An ocular
ulrasound can be beneficial for evaluating retinal function in these cases, but must
be carefully performed due to the keratopathy. Infection and uveitis are then treated
topically.
91 i. Globe retropulsion is a test used to evaluate orbital volume changes and
orbital pain. Gentle digital pressure is applied to the globe with the eyelids closed.
The globes should be easily moved posteriorly by this pressure in most dogs, and
no signs of pain or discomfort should be observed.
ii. A space-occupying lesion behind the globe, such as an abscess, cellulitis, tumor,
or cysts, would prevent the globe from being retropulsed (see cases 9, 98, and 166).
Retropulsion of the orbit of small breed dogs and most cats will yield little posterior
globe movement, as the orbit is small.
90
92, 93:Questions
92a
92
2A 16-year-old cat presents with a two-month history of progressive
exophthalmos and a recent history of hemorrhagic nasal discharge (92a).
i. What part of the physical examination is critical in this cat?
ii. What is the treatment of choice?
93a
93b
93 You are presented with a two-year-old Bloodhound who exhibits coughing,
shallow breathing, generalized malaise, and uveitis (93a). Aspiration of the vitreous
reveals the cytology shown (93b).
i. What organism is depicted in 93b?
ii. Describe the pathophysiology of this disease.
ili. What is the treatment?
91
92, 93:Answers
92b
92c
92 i. An oral examination, which revealed a swelling behind the last molar (92b).
Pain on opening the mouth suggests an orbital inflammatory disease. No pain on
opening the mouth indicates the possibility of a noninflammatory neoplastic
disease. Examination of the oral cavity near the last molar for abnormal swellings,
discharge, and dental disease can help with diagnosis. If there is swelling,
exploration is indicated after diagnostic imaging. Orbital abscesses can be drained
from the area posterior to the last molar (see cases 9, 146, and 166). Culture,
cytology, biopsy, and molar extraction may all be indicated.
ii. This was a case of orbital invasion of a sinus lymphoma. The globe was
enucleated in an to attempt to save the cat's life (92c). Radiation/chemotherapy can
be instigated for the sinus tumor.
93 i. Blastomyces dermatitidis, a dimorphic fungus that causes canine blasto-
mycosis.
ii. B. dermatitidis is not transmitted between animals, but rather is acquired by
inhalation of the spores. Dissemination of the fungus through the blood and lymph
results in a generalized, multisystemic, pyogranulomatous disease. Approximately
30-40% of dogs who acquire the disease will also develop ocular signs. The most
common manifestations are pyogranulomatous inflammation of the anterior and
posterior segment, with secondary glaucoma and retinal detachment. However,
clinically, uveitis is most commonly diagnosed.
ili. The currently recommended treatment is systemic iraconazole for up to three
uveitis until infection has been resolved. Secondary glaucoma can develop.
92
94, 95:Questions
94a
94b
     (r   e  e
was presented in the clinic with a copious mucoid to mucopurulent discharge
covering the corneas of both eyes (94a, b). In addition, the dog was exhibiting
blepharospasm and conjunctivitis. The corneas appeared dull, with some
neovascularization and pigmentation. The Schirmer tear test reading was 4 mm
wetting/minute in each eye. The owners had been frequently complaining to their
veterinarian of *chronic eye infection'. While topical medication had provided
improvement in the past, the problem was never resolved.
i. What is the most likely cause for this dog's eye condition?
ii. What can be done to resolve this condition medically?
ili. What can be done to resolve this condition surgically?
95 A seven-year-old domestic short-
95
haired cat is presented with decreased
vision. On ophthalmoscopic examin-
ation there are linear tracks across the
retina (95).
i. What are the differentials for this
condition?
ii. What is the most common etiology of
this condition?
ili. What are the treatment options?
93
94,95:Answers
94 i. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS). West Highland White Terriers are at risk of
KCS and thus this dog's KCS is probably breed related.
i. Up to four months of medical treatment should always be attempted, as the
lacrimal gland can take that long to repair itself once medical therapy is initiated.
The goals of KCS therapy are to remove pain and maintain vision. First, replace
tears with artificial tear replacers. Serum can also be used as tear replacement
therapy. Second, stimulate the production of tears with topical 0.2% cyclosporin A
(CSA) BID. CSA is known to inhibit T lymphocyte-induced apoptosis of lacrimal
gland acinar cells and to reduce adenitis. It interferes with prolactin, has anti-
inflammatory activity, and greatly reduces pigmentary/inflarmmatory keratitis.
Topical 0.03% tacrolimus and 1% pimecrolimus (both BID) have similar
immunomodulating effects to CSA and may also be used. Oral 2% pilocarpine (1
drop/10 kg BID) also can be effective in neurogenic cases of KCS. Third, corneal
infection and keratitis should be reduced with topical broad-spectrum antibiotic
ii. A conjunctival flap should be constructed in order to provide corrective tissue
and blood vessels to any deep corneal ulcers. In patients who do not respond to
medical therapy and/or patients whose owners cannot manage medical therapy.
transposition of the parotid duct could be performed. Note that saliva is not a
perfect tear substitute, but is adequate in most cases.
95 i. The presence of arcuate or linear depigmented areas in the feline fundus may
be due to traumatic, degenerative, or inflammatory disease of the retinal pigment
epithelium. Curvilinear tracts in the ocular fundus of cats have been associated with
the presence of parasitic insect larval stages and are termed ophthalmomyiasis
interna posterior. Clinical findings are usually incidental. Curvilinear tracks are
present in the tapetal as well as the nontapetal fundus.
ii. Ophthalmomyiasis is rare in cats. Cuterebra larvae are the most often reported
cause of feline ophthalmomyiasis. The parasite migrates in and around the sensory
retina. Most affected cats are asymptomatic, but some can have signs of anterior
Lveitis.
ii. The treatment of choice for inflamed eyes is systemic corticosteroids. Topical
anti-inflammatories should be given to patients with anterior uveitis. Rarely, the
larva can be seen in the anterior chamber or vitreous, and surgical exraction may
be recommended.
94
96, 97:Questions
96b
96a
ll pakoues pio-reak-nog e uorg uaxei ae (q 'e96) seui snpung asau 96
presented with blindness, mild iris color change, and depigmentation of the nasal
planum.
i. What is the cause of the blindness?
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis considering the breed and clinical signs?
iii. What is the treatment?
97
 97 A seven-year-old mixed breed dog was presented with a deep melting stromal
corneal ulcer (97). The medical term for *melting' is keratomalacia. What is the
mechanism for the 'melting' process, and how is it manifest clinically?
95
96, 97:Answers
96c
96 i. Bullous retinal detachment (191a)
i. The retinal detachment, iris color
change from uveitis, nose depigmenta-
tion, and breed suggest uveodermato-
logic syndrome (UVD), also known as
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome.
The most recent hypothesis regarding
the etiology of canine UVD syndrome is
that it results from an immune-mediated
destruction of melanocytes of the eye
and skin. The iris and retinal pigmented
epithelium can also develop progressive
depigmentation (96c). Dermal and hair depigmentation (vitiligo and poliosis,
respectively) develop. The lesions are usually restricted to the face, involving the
eyelids, nasal planum, and lips, but the scrotum and footpads are other areas of
possible dermal involvement (see case 3).
lii. Initial therapy involves immunosuppressive doses of oral prednisone ±
azathioprine or cyclophosphamide. Azathioprine has a lag period of 3-5 weeks
before it becomes effective, therefore tapering of corticosteroids should not be
attempted before this period. Maintenance therapy may require one or both drugs
at a markedly reduced dose. Topical corticosteroids may be used for anterior
and therapy should be considered to be lifelong. Relapses are frequent if therapy is
stopped or tapered.
97
 Keratomalacia, or ‘melting', is corneal stromal collagen dissolution and
liquefaction under the influence of elevated levels of tissue, microbial, and tear film
proteases. The keratomalacia gives a grayish-gelatinous liquefied appearance to the
ulcer and the ulcer margin. Melting stroma in the early stages may be difficult to
distinguish from corneal edema. This catastrophic corneal degenerative condition
may deteriorate rapidly and lead to corneal perforation and iris prolapse in as few
as 12-48 hours. Proteolytic enzymes (proteases) perform important physiologic
functions in the normally slow turnover and remodeling of the corneal stroma.
Natural protease inhibitors are also present in the precorneal tear film and in the
cornea. These normally prevent excessive degradation of normal healthy tissue.
Melting corneal disorders occur when there is an imbalance between proteases and
protease inhibitors in favor
r of the proteases, t
therefore causing pathologic
degradation of stromal collagen and proteoglycans in the cornea.
96
98, 99:Questions
98a
 98 A nine-year-old female Labrador Retriever is presented with a two-week history
of progressive enlargement of her left eye (98a).
i. Is the dog buphthalmic or exophthalmic? What diagnostic tests will be helpful?
ii. What are the major differentials?
li. What diagnostic test should be performed?
iv. What are the options for therapy?
B66
966
99 A six-year-old cat is presented with rapid onset of the bulging, cloudy corneal
disease seen in 99a, b. No known trauma is reported, but the cat does go outdoors
during the day. There is no fluorescein dye retention.
i. What are your differential diagnoses?
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What is the pathophysiology of the disease?
iv. What treatment is recommended?
97
98, 99:Answers
98 i. A high intraocular pressure (IOP)
98b
indicates
glaucoma
and
possible
buphthalmos. On retropulsion of both eyes,
a buphthalmic eye will retropulse well and
an exophthalmic eye will retropulse with
difficulty (see cases 9, 101, and 166). Pain
 on opening the mouth indicates extraocular
inflammation (see case 146). Measuring the
horizontal corneal diameters can also aid
differentiation of the enlarged globe of
buphthalmos compared with the normal
globe in exophthalmos. This dog has normal
IOPs, poor retropulsion, and no pain on
opening the mouth, indicating that the
patient is exophthalmic, with a possible orbital mass as the cause.
i. Orbital abscess, orbital cellulitis, orbital emphysema, orbital hematoma, orbital
pseudotumor, orbital tumor, extraorbital tumor (sinus or nasal), and trauma.
ii. Diagnostic imaging. Ocular ultrasound is a reliable way of examining the orbit.
Advanced imaging (CT, MRI) is best for determining the extent of tissue invasion
and is helpful for surgical plans (98b, CT of the dog reveals an optic nerve
meningioma).
 orbitotomy to keep a visual eye. Most patients require an extenteration for orbital
tumors.
99 i. Differentials include descemetocele, corneal foreign body, iris prolapse,
corneal epithelial inclusion cyst, acute bullous keratopathy, and corneal endothelial
dystrophy.
siop a ') os sradde 1n i pe ssd si  ie sr  '
is acute bullous keratopathy.
ii. Acute onset of corneal edema due to a possible stromal defect leads to formation
of small vesicles in the corneal epithelium that coalesce into larger bullae, which
may rupture, causing loss of epithelium and corneal ulceration. The condition
resembles a melting ulcer, but has an acute onset.
iv. Treatment requires support be provided to the cornea by a nictitans flap and/or
possibly a tarsorrhaphy to reduce the chance of bullae rupturing. Topical anti-
biotics, 1% atropine, 5% topical hypertonic NaCl ointment or solution, and
antiprotease treatment with autologous serum are recommended. A conjunctival
flap is also indicated for many cases of bullous keratopathy.
98
100, I0l:Questions
100a
100 A five-year-old female Siberian Husky with diabetes mellitus was presented for
her annual examination. A general physical examination was performed. Ophthal-
mology examination with pharmacologic mydriasis revealed the finding shown
(100a)
i. Describe the lenticular changes in this dog.
ii. What is the mechanism by which diabetes mellitus induces these lens changes?
ii. What stage of lens disease is present?
10la
101b
101 A six-year-old male Pug with a
two-day history of a red swollen eye
(101a, b) is examined.
i. Describe the lesion.
ii. What are the diagnosis and etiology?
ili. What is the treatment?
iv. What is the prognosis for vision?
99
100,I0l:Answers
100i.Early cataractous changes are
100b
observed in the form of equatorial
cortical vacuoles. Note the red fundic
reflection in this dog due to the lack of
the tapetum (which is consistent with its
blue iris and light coat color).
i. Glucose is the main lens energy
source. Lens hexokinase normally con-
verts glucose to glucose-6-phosphate, but
is overwhelmed by the excess levels of
glucose in the diabetic lens. Aldose
reductase normally only metabolizes 5% of the lens glucose, but metabolizes up to
33% of the excess glucose to sorbitol in the diabetic lens. Sorbitol dehydrogenase
(SD) normally breaks down sorbitol to fructose, but SD is overwhelmed in diabetics
and sorbitol thus accumulates in the lens. The sorbitol osmotically draws water into
the lens, causing lens fiber swelling and rupture. These early cataractous changes
appear as vacuoles in the equatorial lens cortex in dogs and may be seen in the
posterior cortex of diabetic cats. Diabetic cataracts rapidly progress to maturity in
dogs (100b).
i. The cataracts in this dog are incipient. Incipient cataract refers to early clinically
apparent cataractous changes involving less than 15% of the lens volume.
101 i. The right eye is swollen and rostrally displaced in the orbit. There is dark
red scleral hemorrhage, lateral strabismus, and some corneal pigmentation.
ii. Proptosis, a forward displacement of the eye from the orbit seen commonly with
retrobulbar hemorrhage and edema following trauma. Often, there is sufficient
trauma to cause stretching and/or tearing of extraocular muscles. Proptosis occurs
fairly commonly in dogs (especially brachycephalics).
ii. The eye should be kept moist pre-surgically. This is something the owner can do
on the way to the emergency clinic. A temporary tarsorrhaphy is performed under
general anesthesia and the sutures are kept in place for 1-3 weeks. Medical
treatment with systemic antibiotics and topical antibiotic ointment and atropine is
indicated. Systemic anti-inflammatory drugs may be used to help decrease severe
swelling of the periocular tissue.
iv. Proptosed eyes should be evaluated for hyphema, pupillary light reflexes, and
extraocular muscle damage. All proptosed eyes should be fluorescein stained to
evaluate for corneal ulceration. If there are favorable prognostic indicators (absence
of hyphema, short duration of proptosis, the muscles intact, the pupil miotic) the
eye should be replaced. However, many proptosed eyes do not regain vision.
100
102, 103:Questions
102a
102b
102 A five-year-old Persian cat was presented for an anterior ocular problerm
(102a).
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. What is the etiology?
ili. What treatment has been carried out in this cat (102b)?
103 A five-year-old dog is presented
103
for a routine wellness examination.
The owner notes that something
strange has occurred in the dog's blue
eye (103). She is unsure if any trauma
could have occurred, but suggests it
is unlikely. You draw blood for a
complete blood count (CBC) and
serum chemistry analysis.
i. What do you expect to find on the
CBC based on the ocular changes
seen?
ii. Explain the pathophysiology of this iris condition.
ii. How would you treat this dog, and what is the prognosis?
101
102,103:Answers
102 i. Corneal sequestrum, an area of
102c
corneal
stromal
necrosis. Corneal
sequestra are usually unilateraland
appear as a brown or black, oval to
round
plaque (
of
the central
or
paracentral cornea.
ii. Unknown. However it is likely due to
chronic corneal irritation or previous
trauma. Connections between corneal
sequestrum and
1  feline herpesvirus,
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, nonhealing
superficial ulcer, and entropion have
been noted. Grid keratectomy of super-
ficial ulcers should not be performed in
cats, as it may lead to corneal sequestra. Cats receiving topical or subconjunctival
corticosteroids are more likely to develop corneal sequestra, possibly through
activation of feline herpesvirus-1.
ili. Superficial keratectomy with corneoscleral transposition. Healthy cornea,
limbus, and conjunctiva have been transposed to cover the keratectomy site. Six
weeks postoperatively there is good corneal healing, with no recurrence of the
sequestrum (102c). The transposition site is healed, but the limbal area remains
opaque.
103 i. A thrombocytopenia. Causes of thrombocytopenia in dogs include infectious
disease (ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever), neoplasia, and, most
commonly, immune-mediated conditions.
i. Thrombocytopenia in dogs results in a decreased ability to maintain blood
homeostasis, therefore hemorrhaging throughout the body and eye is likely. Ocular
changes associated with thrombocytopenia include hyphema, petechiation of the iris
and sclera, and retinal hemorrhaging. Retinal hemorrhage can result in a disruption
in the retinal layers, leading to retinal detachment and blindness.
ili. Treatment depends on the diagnosis. In the case of the more common immune-
mediated thrombocytopenia, corticosteroid therapy is effective in controlling the
disease. Tetracycline administration for up to one month will combat tick-borne
illness-induced thrombocytopenia. Resolution of the thrombocytopenia will reduce
any hemorrhaging
in
the6
eye.
Hyphema is treated
1 with standard uveitic
corticosteroid therapy, as in this case. Blindness may still result ifretinal detachment
has occurred. The prognosis is good if the symptoms can be controlled and if the
disease is treated in a timely manner.
102
104, 105:Questions
104a
104b
104 A four-year-old cat is presented
104c
with eyelid and conjunctival granulomas
(104a, b). On fundic examination there
is retinitis and a retinal detachment
(104c).
i. What are the major differentials?
ii. What diagnostic test may be helpful
in this case?
ii. What are the endemic areas for this
disease?
iv. What are the treatment options?
105 A one and a half-year-old Labrador
105
Retriever is presented with chronic
tearing and redness of the eyes. On
physical examination the right eyelid is
pulled ventrally to demonstrate the
conjunctiva of the third eyelid. You
observe that a small amount of dirt has
collected in the lower eyelid and appears
to be trapped there (105).
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. What do you tell the owner?
ili. How could you resolve this problem?
103
104, 105:Answers
104d
104 i. Systemic mycoses, which include cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, blasto-
mycosis, and coccidioidomycosis (see cases 76 and 186).
ii. Diagnosis is based on clinical and ocular signs, radiographs, stained smears from
tissue samples, ocular paracentesis, peripheral lymph node aspirates, culture, and
serology. Positive serology is supportive of the diagnosis, but cats with disseminated
this cat (104d)
ii. Histoplasma is widespread in both North and South America, and is becoming
diagnosed more frequently in Europe and Turkey. Common sites for disseminated
disease are lung, bone, skin, and visceral organs. Ocular lesions include granulo-
matous chorioretinitis, anterior uveitis, retinal detachment, and optic neuritis.
iv. Cats with histoplasmosis have been successfully treated with itraconazole. An
internal medicine text should be consulted for current treatment options.
105 i. Persistent conjunctivitis due to medial canthal pocket syndrome.
ii. Medial canthal pocket syndrome is found in large breed dogs such as Rottweilers
and Labrador Retrievers. Due to the large orbit in some breeds, a “pocket forms at
the nasal canthus and collects debris. This debris elicits a focal conjunctivitis of the
third eyelid, with the rest of the conjunctiva normal.
ili. Treatment is palliative, as this condition is due to an anatomic problem. Topical
 steroids and antibiotics can reduce inflammation if severe.
104
106, 107:Questions
6A five-year-old male domestic
106a
106
shorthaired cat is presented with a one-
week history of third eyelid protrusion
(106a).
i. Describe the lesion.
ii. What is the diagnosis, and what is the
pathophysiology of this condition?
ii. What are the most common causes
of this condition?
iv. What test can be performed to help
locate the lesion in this cat?
107a
107b
107 A dog is presented with a painful
107c
eye. A deep ulcer is present, with slight
limbal vascularization and corneal
edema (107a). A conjunctival pedicle
flap was surgically placed. The eye is
shown four days postoperatively (107b).
i. Why was a pedicle flap used rather
than a third eyelid flap?
ii. What medications
areindicated
topically at this point?
ii. This is the eye 40 days post-
operatively (107c). What therapy is
recommended at this point?
105
106,I07:Answers
106 i. There is nictitans protrusion,
106b
miosis, and ptosis of the right eye.
i. Horner's syndrome. Loss of adrenergic
innervation to Millers muscle of the
upper eyelid results in narrowing of the
palpebral fissure and ptosis. Lack of
sympathetic tone and enophthalmos
results in protrusion of the nictitans.
Reduction of normal sympathetic tone to
the iris dilator muscle results in miosis in
the affected eye. Adrenergic neurons of
three thoracic segments of the spinal cord. A lesion in this part of the pathway
produces a first-order Horner's syndrome. Adrenergic neurons then exit the thoracic
spinal cord and move in the cranial chest to join the thoracic sympathetic trunk and
synapse in the cranial cervical ganglion. A lesion to this neuron will produce a
second-order Horner's syndrome. The last neuron in the sympathetic pathway exits
the cranial cervical ganglion to innervate the iris dilator muscle. A lesion to this
neuron will produce a third-order Horner's syndrome.
ili. Idiopathic, anterior mediastinal neoplasia, otitis media, cervical trauma.
iv. Topical epinephrine 0.001% or phenylephrine 10% should be applied and the
time to pupil dilation recorded. If the lesion is postganglionic, the pupil dilates
rather quickly (within ~20 minutes), and slower (within ~30-40 minutes) if
preganglionic. In this cat the condition resolved 30 minutes after instillation of
topical epinephrine (106b). This patient most likely has a preganglionic lesion
involving the ear, brachial plexus, or anterior chest.
107 i. A pedicle flap provides physical support to the weakened cornea, a
controlled blood supply to the lesion, direct plasma perfusion of antiproteases to the
lesion, and fibroblasts to scar the corneal lesion. A third eyelid flap only provides
physical support.
i. Topical antibiotics, atropine, and antiproteases to reduce infection, dilate the
pupil, and reduce tear film proteases, respectively.
ii. The flap can be transected to leave a small corneal scar.
106
108, I09: Questions
108 Bilateral retinal lesions are found
108a
 in this English Springer Spaniel (108a).
i. Describe the lesions seen.
i. In what breeds does this retinal
 problem most commonly occur?
ili. What are some causes of this type of
retinal disease?
iv. What is the most likely cause of the
specific retinal disease in this English
Springer Spaniel?
109a
109b
109 An eight-year-old female Rottweiler is brought to the clinic with acute
exophthalmos of its right eye (109a, b).
i. What are the clinical signs illustrated?
i. During the examination, the eye cannot be retropulsed. What are the possible
differentials for exophthalmos in this dog?
ili. During the examination the veterinarian attempted to open the mouth of this
dog. The dog yelped in pain and twisted his neck and head to move away. What
differential moves to the top of the list when pain on opening the mouth is
observed?
iv. What is the treatment for this condition?
107
108,I09:Answers
108 i. There are several medium to
108b
large, dark pigmented, irregularly ovoid
to circular focal lesions in the tapetum
superior to the optic nerve head (ONH)
around the dorsal retinal vessels. Areas
of hyperreflectivity circumferential to
these lesions indicate thinning of the
retina at this location. This observation
is seen histologically (108b). Dark
triangular areas of scleral pigment are
noted in several locations of the peripheral ONH. The nontapetal region is not
visible in this photograph. The diagnosis is geographic retinal dysplasia.
i. Labrador Retrievers and English Springer Spaniels.
ii. Possible causes include heredity, idiopathic, viral infections, vitamin A deficiency,
trauma in utero, or toxins.
iv. A dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance.
109 i. There is blepharospasm of the right eye, a miotic pupil, protrusion of the
third eyelid, and hyperemia of the conjunctiva of the third eyelid.
i. Prior to the information included about the inability to retropulse the right eye,
Horner's syndrome could have been on the list of differentials as Horner's syndrome
also has ptosis, miosis, enophthalmos, and protrusion of the third eyelid (see case
139). The differentials for exophthalmos with conjunctival hyperemia and the
inability to retropulse a globe would include orbital cellulitis, retrobulbar abscess
(secondary to a tooth root abscess, or foreign material behind the eye), and orbital
neoplasia (see case 98).
ili. Retrobulbar abscess or orbital cellulitis.
iv. The abscess is drained by making an incision posterior to the last upper molar
on the side of the face with the affected eye (see cases 9, 146, and 166). It is
important to be wary of the close proximity to the maxillary artery, optic nerve, and
ciliary nerves when entering the retrobulbar space with surgical instruments. The
drainage from the abscess should be submitted for aerobic and anaerobic culture.
The patient should be placed on oral antibiotics and anti-inflammatories, as well as
exposure of the cornea, a temporary tarsorrhaphy may be indicated.
108
1l0, Ill:Questions
110 This 18-week-old Persian kitten
110
was presented with a complaint of
blindness, having quiet, blind eyes.
i. Describe the funduscopic findings
(110).
i. What is your diagnosis, and what is
the etiology?
Illa
111  A litter of very young (two-week-
llc
old) Shar Pei puppies was brought into
the clinic with excess forehead skin and
severe entropion preventing them from
effectively opening their palpebral
fissures (111a). Blepharospasm spasti-
city of the eyelids occurred bilaterally.
Close inspection of the corneas reveals
some irritation to their anterior surfaces.
i. What are the etiologies of canine
entropion?
ii. What temporary corrective measures
have been used in this Shar Pei (111b, c)?
109
Ilo,Ill:Answers
110 i. There is tapetal hyperreflectivity, retinal vessels attenuation, and optic nerve
atrophy. Both eyes were similar.
ii. Retinal degeneration, which in cats can be genetic (often termed progressive
retinal atrophy [PRA]), secondary to inflammatory retinal or choroidal diseases,
drug induced (e.g. enrofloxacin), secondary to taurine deficiency, or associated with
previous retinal detachment. In the Persian cat, an autosomal recessive, progressive
retinal degeneration has been identified. The earliest clinical sign is a reduced
pupillary light reflex noted at 2-3 weeks of age. By 16 weeks, retinal degeneration
is complete. The Siamese breed is also at risk, but all cat breeds can be potentially
affected. Abyssinian cats can develop a form of PRA called rod-cone dysplasia, with
kittens being affected as early as four weeks of age. A rod-cone degeneration can
also form in the Abyssinian as a second form of progressive retinal degeneration.
This does not begin until 1.5-2 years of age and progresses to complete
degeneration in 2-4 years. The ophthalmoscopic findings can be confirmed on
electroretinography. Unfortunately, treatment is not available for this condition and
these diseases.
111 i. Entropion may result from a difference in tension between the orbicularis
oculi muscle and the malaris muscle (lower lid entropion), and is influenced by
multiple conditions such as the length of the lid fissure, conformation of the skull,
the orbital anatomy, gender and the extensivenes of folds of the facial skin around
the eye. Entropion in the dog occurs either as a developmental anatomic problem
or secondarily as an acquired condition due to other ongoing lid, orbital,
conjunctival, corneal, intraocular, or systemic disease processes. Many breeds have
a predisposition to entropion. The condition is particularly common in the Shar
Pei, where it can be severe, affecting pups as early as 14 days of age, as in this case.
In large breeds (e.g. Bull Mastiff, Doberman Pinscher, Great Dane, Rottweiler) the
large orbit size and/or macropalpebral fissure can also contribute to inadequate lid
support resulting in entropion,
ii. Tacking of the affected eyelids with mattress sutures. Staples could have been
used. Before surgery can be performed the degree of lid spasticity exacerbating the
awake dog, There are various surgical treatments for the permanent correction of
entropion in dogs older than six months of age and in adult dogs. The most
common treatment involves the Hotz-Celsus surgical technique.
110
112, 113: Questions
112a
112 A 13-year-old cat is seen with a three-week history of a swollen red eye (112a).
i. Describe the lesion.
ii. What are the differentials?
ii. What test should be performed?
iv. What are the treatment options?
113
10
113 The Schirmer tear test (STT) is a tool for assessing ophthalmic-associated
tissues (113).
i. What does the STT assess?
ii. How long should the test be performed?
i. What are the normal STT values?
111
112, 113:Answers
112
2i. There is severe periocular
112b
swelling and exophthalmos. The pupil is
dilated and there is hyperemic conjunc-
tivitis with chemosis.
ii. Differentials include orbital abscess,
orbital cellulitis, orbital emphysema,
orbital pseudotumor, orbital tumor,
extraorbital tumor (sinus or nasal), and
trauma.
ii. Diagnostic imaging and an oral
examination (see cases 92, 220, and 254)
should be performed in all cases of
progressive exophthalmos. Skull radiographs and orbital ultrasound may be helpful
in the diagnosis of orbital abscess, orbital cellulitis, orbital trauma (foreign body),
and orbital emphysema. In patients with orbital tumors, advanced imaging is helpful
for surgical planning. CT was used to delineate the borders of this tumor (112b).
iv. Surgery may only be a palliative therapy because 90% of feline orbital neoplasms
are malignant. The therapy of choice for most orbital tumors is enucleation or
exenteration
113 i. The aqueous layer of the precorneal tear film is evaluated quantitatively by
the STT. The diagnosis of “dry eye' (keratoconjunctivitis [KCS]) may be missed if
 the STT is not routinely used. Topical anesthesia and other eye drops are avoided
before the test. The round end of the test paper is bent while still in the envelope
and positioned without contamination in the lacrimal lake at the junction of the
lateral and middle third of the lower eyelid. The animal usually closes its eyelids
during the test.
ii. The STT strip should be left in position for one minute. It is not a linear test, so
if you obtain a value of 7 mm/30 seconds, this does not mean it will be
14 mm/minute. The first 30 seconds of the STT are faster then the last 30 seconds.
ii. Dog, 21.9 ± 4.0 mm wetting/minute; cat, 20.2 ± 4.5 mm wetting/minute. Dogs
with slightly lower than normal STT values are suspicious for dry eye if the STT
value is combined with clinical signs (dry corneal surface, corneal visualization,
corneal pigmentation, conjunctival hyperemia, 1
 mucoid ocular discharge,
blepharospasm). STT values <5 mm/minute are diagnostic for dry eye (KCS) in
dogs. STT values in a normal cat can be 5 mm/minute with no clinical signs, but a
low STT value with concurrent clinical signs is diagnostic for feline KCS.
112
114, 115:Questions
114a
114 An adult cat was presented with a cataract (114a) of a different type to the one
seen in case 51.
i. What are the dark, finger-like projections noted from about eight to 12 o'clock?
ii. What type of cataract is depicted in 114a?
ii. What secondary clinical signs might be noted on examination of a cat with this
type of cataract?
115
115 This ophthalmoscopic examination (115) was performed in a dog four weeks
Audone (Hno) peaq aarau odo panoui siupuy 'aqo aui jo sisodord ssod
with blood vessels attenuation and retinal nerve fiber layer hemorrhages. The
intraocular pressure was normal.
i. What is the pathophysiology of these findings?
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
113
114, 115:Answers
114i.Pigmented ciliary body pro-
4
cesses. The lens zonules arise from these
ciliary processes and attach at the lens
equator to suspend the lens in position.
ii.A resorbing hypermature cataract.
Hypermature cataracts are associated
with a reduction in lens volume, a
wrinkled lens capsule (114b, histological
image from a plastic section of
a
resorbing cataract), an increased ability
to visualize the tapetal reflection due to a reduction in lens opacification, and an
increase in the depth of the anterior chamber. The reduction in lens volume during
the resorption of a hypermature cataract causes the lens capsule to contract and
pull on the lens zonules, and thus stretch the ciliary processes. This is the reason
why the ciliary processes are so visible in this eye. Anterior uveitis can also be noted
with rapidly forming and hypermature cataracts.
ili. Clinical signs associated with anterior uveitis (e.g. flare, synechiae, rubeosis
iridis) may be noted when evaluating a cat with a resorbing hypermature
 s n s n n  s n   s
inflammatory uveitic reaction, as these proteins are not recognized as self by the
eye's immune system.
115 i. All portions of the optic nerve (i.e. intraocular intraorbital, intracanalicular
intracranial) are susceptible to traumatic injury from head trauma. Force applied to
the anterior orbit can be transmitted to the optic foramen, with subsequent traction,
contusion, and shearing forces applied to the optic nerve and small nutrient vessels.
Rapid deceleration of the anterior portion of the optic nerve relative to the fixed
  sird   i  o n  jo  
ONH avulsion, globe rupture, optic nerve laceration and atrophy, and vascular
compromise to the ONH. Hemorrhage after trauma may disrupt the optic nerve
parenchyma or accumulate within the nerve sheaths. Hemorrhage into the optic
nerve or interference with its blood supply as the result of trauma can also result
in optic nerve vascular compromise as a consequence of short posterior ciliary
artery vessel thrombosis and subsequent ischemia. Intracanalicular optic nerve
trauma can result from direct damage by penetrating foreign bodies, compression,
and orbital bone fractures, or it can result from a blow to the frontal region.
i. Traumatic optic nerve atrophy. A number of treatment options have been
advocated, including systemic hyperosmotic agents and systemic corticosteroids.
Visual reconvery is not possible in dogs with optic atrophy.
114
116, 117:Questions
5A nine-year-old female spayed
116a
116
Boston Terrier is presented with a
progressive six-week history of blue eyes
(116a). The intraocular pressure
is
15 mmHg in both eyes.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. Which breeds are most likely to have
this disease?
ii. What is the pathology of this
condition?
iv. What are the treatment options?
l17b
117 A six-year-old Greyhound dog is
presented with this corneal ulcer (117a).
Therapy consisted of topical antifungals,
antibiotics, atropine, and serum.
i. Describe the lesion. Cytology revealed
hyphae.
ii. What is the status of healing after
four weeks of therapy (117b)?
ili. What is the status of the eye six
weeks after therapy was initiated
(117c)?
115
116,I17:Answers
116 i. Corneal edema, which in this case has
116b
been caused by endothelial dystrophy. The
lack of corneal vascularization and conjunc-
tival hyperemia, and the normal IOPs, rule
out uveitis, glaucoma, anterior lens luxation
(see case 34), and corneal ulceration. A slit
lamp examination (116b) would show the
cornea to be 3-5 times thicker than a normal
cornea (see case 24 for comparison).
ii. Boston Terrier, Chihuahua, and Dachs-
hund.
ii. Endothelial dystrophy is a progressive,
bilateral degeneration of corneal endothelial
cells that results in an edematous, avascular
cornea. The dystrophic endothelium has a
decreased number of cells and
lexhibits
116c
fibrous metaplasia. As the cell layer thins, the
fluid pumps of the endothelium cannot keep
up with the demand and aqueous humor
leaks into the stroma to result in edema.
iv. Topical 5% sodium chloride can pull fluid
osmotically out of the cornea and reduce
edema in the early stages of disease. When
medical therapy fails, a thermokeratoplasty
(see case 242), a Gundersen conjunctival
flap, or a full-thickness corneal transplant is
recommended. A penetrating keratoplasty
with fresh, healthy canine cornea gives the best long-term results (116c).
117 i. A white cellular infiltrate with a brown ring is present. The infiltrate is large
and involves the superficial and deep cornea. There is little to no corneal
vascularization, as is typical for fungal ulcers. The pupil is dilated from a mydriatic.
ii. The corneal fungal plaque is smaller and being invaded by blood vessels. The
cornea is healing and remodeling behind the blood vessels. This is a good response.
ii. The ulcer has healed, leaving a smallscar. The pupil remains dilated temporally.
No therapy is necessary at this time.
116
118, 1 19: Questions
18a
118b
118 A four-year-old male domestic shorthaired cat is presented with an eight-week
history of iris color change in his right eye (118a, b).
i. What are the differentials for iris color change?
ii. What is the treatment of choice?
119
9A six-year-old Irish Setter was
119a
presented with the neurophthalmic signs
seen in 119a including ptosis of the
lateral two-thirds or so of the right
upper eyelid,
mydriasis,  decreased
corneal
sensation,
 reduced
globe
motility, and slight strabismus (119b).
i. What is the most likely cause of this
dog's neurophthalmic condition?
ii. What diagnostics can be performed to
help determine the location of the
lesion?
119b
117
118,119:Answers
118 i. Uveitis, neoplasia, melanosis.
118c
ii.There is notreatment for iris
 melanosis. Monitoring pigment changes
and intraocular pressures every six
months is recommended. Glaucoma can
occur if the iridocorneal angle is
obstructed by pigment. Gonioscopy is
used to determine if the pigment has
migrated into the angle. Ocular ultra-
sound may be helpful to determine if the
pigment involves more than just the
anterior face of the iris.
The treatment for diffuse iris melanoma is enucleation. The time to enucleate an
eye will vary according to the progression of diffuse iridal melanoma, and will differ
within the aqueous outflow pathway greatly increases the likelihood of glaucoma
and of metastasis to the liver and the lung. A micrograph taken from a cat with
iridal melanoma that had progressed to the base of the iris (1) is shown (118c).
Although the tumor cells had not entered the iridocorneal angle (2) or the sclera (3),
the situation certainly was precarious in that case.
ai " N) ai 1o an "in N) u roo a so  '! 6
abducens nerve (CN VI), and the mandibular and ophthalmic branches of the
trigeminal nerve (CN V) all course together through the cavernous sinus and enter
the orbit through the orbital fissure. Clinical signs noted with cavernous sinus
syndrome are associated with dysfunction to these nerves and are collectively
termed ophthalmoplegia. Inability to rotate the globe medially, dorsally, or
ventrally, ptosis, lateral strabismus, decreased corneal sensitivity, possible decreased
or absent corneal blink reflex, and the inability to retract the eye are noted in
external ophthalmoplegia. Lesions to the oculomotor nerve fibers in the cavernous
sinus that cause a dilated pupil that is unable to constrict by either the direct or
indirect pupillary light reflexes are found with internal ophthalmoplegia. The
consensual response from the affected eye to the unaffected is, however, present as
the optic nerve is not affected in cavernous sinus syndrome.
ii. CT and MRI can aid the diagnosis and localization of this neurophthalmic
problem. Trauma and tumors are causes of cavernous sinus syndrome in dogs and
cats.
118
120, I2l:Questions
120
120 An adult black DSH cat presents with different appearing irides (120).
i. How does the right eye differ from the left?
ii. What is the most likely cause of this change in this cat?
ii. What are the possible etiologies for this condition?
iv. Is there a treatment? Will the changes in the right eye resolve with treatment?
121
121 Methods to examine the eyes of small animals involve the use of an ophthal-
moscope and, in the instance seen here (121), a hand lens in conjunction with a
head-set (i.e. indirect ophthalmoscopy).
i. What are the advantages of performing indirect ophthalmoscopy along with direct
ophthalmoscopy?
i. How does one perform indirect ophthalmoscopy effectively?
119
120,I21:Answers
120 i. The right eye exhibits iris color change. Small, dark foci are present in the
iris of the right eye compared with the left.
7). Clinical signs with feline uveitis include decreased vision, blepharospasm,
corneal edema, aqueous flare, fibrin-filled anterior chamber, hypopyon, anterior
vitreal infiltrate, miosis, and iridal hyperemia.
ii. Causes of uveitis in cats include feline immunodeficiency virus, feline infectious
peritonitis, feline leukemia virus, fungal infection, toxoplasmosis, and bartonellosis
(cases 4, 177, and 189). Trauma, neoplasia, cataracts, and lens luxation are also
causes of uveitis in cats (cases 25, 148, and 178).
iv. Therapy for feline uveitis involves suppressing the inflammation with
corticosteroid therapy and dilating the pupil with mydriatics. Changes to the iris
color from uveitis are unlikely to resolve.
121 i. The advantages of binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy are penetration of
cloudy media, large field of view, examination of the peripheral fundus, ease of
compensation of refractive errors and eye movements, stereopsis, greater distance
between examiner and patient, 2-3 simultaneous observers, and the ability to
examine more intractable patients with less hazard to the examiner.
：The
disadvantages include less magnification for studying particular areas and the need
for drug-induced mydriasis.
between the light source and the eye. Incident light is condensed to illuminate the
fundus. The reflected light then is condensed by the same lens to form a virtual,
inverted, and reversed image between the lens and the light source. Indirect
ophthalmoscope is adjusted so that the light is slightly off center of the examiner's
visual field (to reduce glare). The patient's muzzle is held gently and the lens is
i si au nn p rdn a e  a  n i pod
usually held close to the cornea initially to permit observation of the ocular fundus
and then moved away from the eye until the image is maximum size. When the
hand lens is interposed between the light source and the eye, the fundus is visualized.
Image magnification (2x to 4x) is dependent on the diopter power of the hand lens.
Occasionally, a hindering light reflection may occur and can be remedied by slightly
tilting the hand lens.
120
122, 123:Questions
122
A four-month-old mixed breed
122
puppy is presented with a brown spot
on the right eye (122).
i. Describe the lesion.
ii. How does this occur?
ili. What are the treatment options?
iv. In what breeds might this condition
be inherited?
123 Glaucoma insidiously causes dam-
123a
age to the retina and the optic disk and
can result in partial to complete blindness 
without therapeutic intervention.
i. What can be seen in the fundus image
(123a) and
1thescanning
electron
micrograph (SEM) of a trypsin-digested
optic disk (123b) in this dog?
ii.What is the pathologic process
present in the glaucomatous optic disk,
and what is its significance to saving
sight?
123b
121
122,I23:Answers
122 i. There is a circular, brown, pigmented, raised, corneal lesion associated with
the lateral limbus that has white hairs. This is an example of a corneal dermoid.
i. A dermoid forms by abnormal invagination of ectodermal tissue during gestation
and results in well-differentiated normal tissue in an abnormal location.
Histologically, corneal dermoids contain many types of tissue, including glands and
cartilage.
ii. Surgery is often required to remove the dermoid; a superficial keratectomy is the
best option. The cornea is thin under a dermoid and an operating microscope is
recommended for surgical removal.
iv. This congenital condition may be familial or breed-related in Dachshunds,
Dalmatians, Doberman Pinschers, German Shepherd Dogs, and St. Bernards, as
well as in the Burmese cat.
123 i. Posterior displacement of the optic nerve and scleral lamina cribrosa or optic
sog jo no st (Hno) peay aaau sndo punon au 'eonelg wo auddno, ys
at the plane of the retinal vessels and focused deeper in the vessels of the center of
the optic disk. This is due to posterior movement of the disc in response to elevated
intraocular pressure (IOP). All neural tissue is absent in the SEM. The scleral lamina
cribrosa has moved posteriorly due to elevated IOP to form the ^optic nerve cup*
noted with the ophthalmoscope in advanced canine glaucoma. The SEM demon-
strates compression of laminar pores and illustrates the difficulty optic axons would
have passing through those pores in glaucoma.
i. The sclera is a strong and elastic fibrous tissue, but with abrupt and prolonged
elevation of IOP it develops functional and anatomic alterations to its collagen and
axons and ocular blood vessels penetrate is termed the scleral lamina cribrosa. This
is distorted and compressed posteriorly by increases in IOP, thus affecting
axoplasmic flow within the axons and reducing the blood supply to the ONH. The
cupping of the ONH associated with glaucoma results from optic nerve axonal
death as well as from compression, stretching, and rearrangement of connective
tissue of the lamina cribrosa in response to this altered IOP. As damage to the ONH
and optic nerve axons progresses, the clinical signs of mydriasis and visual
impairment occur.
122
124-126:Questions
124 This four-month-old Shih Tzu was
124
born with the problem shown (124).
i. What ophthalmic condition does this
young dog have?
ii. What are the consequences of the
disease?
125 This is a funduscopic picture of a
125
kitten with the condition known as
lipemia retinalis (125). What is lipemia
retinalis, and what is its significance?
126 A five-year-old German Shepherd
126
Dog was treated with trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole for urinary tract
infection. Two weeks after initiation of
therapy the dog was presented for an
eye problem (126).
i.
 Describe the clinical findings and
determine the diagnosis.
ii. What are the possible causes for this
dog's eye condition?
ii. What is the therapy?
123
124-126:Answers
124 i. Euryblepharon or macropalpebral fissure. This is a symmetrical enlargement
and widening of the palpebral fissure encountered primarily in brachycephalic dogs
with shallow orbits and some large breed dogs. The globe is nearly proptosed in its
natural condition to expose a lot of sclera and conjunctiva.
i. In this dog the condition also resulted in varying degrees of eyelid, blinking, and
tear dysfunction. Chronic inflammation of the conjunctiva and corneal irritation
can occur. Ophthalmic ointments can protect the cornea in mild cases. Surgical
correction with lateral canthoplasty is recommended if corneal disease becomes a
problem in dogs with euryblepharon.
125 The term lipemia retinalis describes the ophthalmoscopic visibility of lipids,
lipoproteins, or both, in retinal blood vessels. It occurs infrequently in the cat and
does not by itself cause retinal pathology. Diseases characterized by defective lipid
synthesis or degradation, such as diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and familial
126 i. There is an axial, deep corneal ulcer with diffuse corneal edema and
vascularization of the cornea from the dorsal and nasal limbus. The clear,
transparent center of the ulcer suggests that this is descemetocele, a type of deep
r           
leaving a corneal lesion lined only by Descemet's membrane and corneal
endothelium. When fluorescein stain was applied to the cornea, dye uptake was
aui ui nou ing raoin aui po Arudiad aul ie pasodxa eons jeauon aul ie paio
central area, confirming the diagnosis of descemetocele.
i. Descemetoceles and full-thickness corneal perforation may develop from
progression of deep corneal ulcers caused by infection, keratoconjunctivitis sicca
(KCS), chemical burns, and trauma. The sulfa component of the systemic antibiotic
in this case was toxic to the lacrimal gland and resulted in very low tear production
and KCS, which caused the ulcer. Excessive tear film proteases then caused loss of
stroma and baring of Descemet's membrane.
ili. Most descemetoceles can be treated successfully using conjunctival grafts or
corneal transplantation. Medical therapy should be aggresive and include
antiprotease drugs (e.g. serum, EDTA, and N-acetylcysteine), broad-spectrum
antibacterial drugs (determined by culture and sensitivity results) topically and
systemically, mydriatics (e.g. atropine), and systemically administered NSAIDs.
124
127, 128: Questions
127 There are instances when clinical
127
signs in an animal indicate an abnormal
intraocular pressure (IOP) in one or
both eyes. IOP can be assessed by
applanation tonometry (127).
i. What are the normal IOP measure-
ments?
ii. What does a low IOP indicate?
ili. What do you do if the tonometer is
not working?
128a
128b
128 Iris color change has taken place in
128c
the right eye of this adult cat (128a, b).
A large pigmented mass was present and
a uveal tumor was diagnosed. The eye
was enucleated because of the large size
and location of the tumor in the
peripheral iris. The enucleated globe was
dissected to reveal the extent of tumor
invasion (128c).
i. Describe the clinical signs observed in
128a and b.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis in
this adult cat?
ii. Where would the tumor cells that
may indicate if metastasis of this tumor could be present be located histo-
pathologically within the eye?
iv. What secondary disease may occur with this type of tumor in its advanced stage?
v. If metastasis occurs, what are two likely locations to which this tumor might
spread?
vi. When should the globe be enucleated if this type of tumor is suspected?
125
127, I28:Answers
127 i. Tonometry is an indirect measurement or estimation of IOP. Applanation
tonometry measures the force required to flatten a constant area of the cornea. The
most popular applanation tonometers, such as the TonoPen, are very accurate and
easy to use, and have made it much easier to diagnose animal glaucomas. The
normal IOPs are: dogs, 16.8 ± 4.0 mmHg; cats, 20.2 ± 5.5 mmHg
ii. Low IOP, typically <10 mmHg, should raise suspicions of anterior uveitis.
Comparison of IOPs in both eyes may be helpful in determining if uveitis is present.
Clinical signs of uveitis must also be present to make this diagnosis.
ii. If the TonoPen is not working, first change the TonoPen tip cover and re-
calibrate. When the TonoPen reads “GOOD' you have calibrated the instrument. If
the TonoPen reads BAD', you have to try again. If TonoPen readings are greater
than the 5% error level, then you must try again. Be sure to gently tap the central
cornea to get the most accurate readings.
128 i. The iris of the right eye has a color change when compared with the left
eye. On closer examination there is a raised, dark tan, thickened, irregularly
marginated mass, which is larger laterally than medially. The mass appears to
involve the drainage angle. The pupil is dilated and deformed from the nine to 12
o'clock position.
ii. Uveal melanoma.
ii. Tumor cells exfoliate and circulate in the anterior chamber. They then move to
ai n  p q n  am s mo o ai
filtration meshwork and scleral venous plexus. These cells then have access to the
circulation, where they can metastasize.
iv. Secondary glaucoma can occur if the tumor has infiltrated and obstructed a large
amount of the drainage angle (see case 118).
v. Liver and lungs.
vi. Experienced ophthalmologists struggle with this answer as most of these eyes are
visual. Enucleation should be recommended if there is aggressive infiltration of the
iris, posterior epithelium, or the ciliary body, or if any of the pigmented mass is
noted within the iridocorneal angle. The presence of secondary glaucoma is also an
indication to enucleate.
126
129, 130: Questions
129
129 This four-month-old Dobermann puppy was presented with microphakia and
opacities at the posterior lens capsule (129). There was no history of any eye
problem or systemic illness. The pupil was dilated pharmacologically.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. What is the etiology of this problem?
130
130 A three-month-old cat was presented with bilateral severe blepharospasm,
epiphora, mucopurulent discharge, conjunctivitis with chemosis, and symblepharon
(130).
i. What is the differential diagnosis?
ii. What diagnostic technigues can be used?
iii. What is the recommended treatment?
127
129,I30:Answers
129 i. Persistent hyperplasic primary vitreous (PHPV).
ii. The adult lens is avascular, but embryologically the lens has a blood supply
known as the tunica vasculosa lentis. The hyaloid artery comprises the primary
vitreous and feeds the tunica vasculosa lentis on the posterior part of the lens. In this
dog there is apparent proliferation and persistence of the primary vitreous/hyaloid
artery/tunica vasculosa lentis tissue known as PHPV instead of the usual atrophy.
PHPV is present in young puppies, but may not be noticed until later in life.
Clinically, PHPV appears as a white or fibrovascular plaque in the posterior pupil
near the posterior lens capsule and anterior vitreous. Vessel ingrowth and frank
hemorrhage into the vitreous and lens cortex, calcium deposits, posterior lenticonus,
microphakia, lens coloboma, intralental pigmentation, progressive cataracts, and
elongated ciliary processes may also be present. Dobermanns and Staffordshire Bull
Terriers are predisposed to PHPV.
130 i. Herpesvirus (commonly), calicivirus (rarely), Chlamydophila, and, less
frequently, Mycoplasma are causes of infectious conjunctivitis in cats. Kittens and
 s       r s s
 frequently manifested in association with severe upper respiratory tract infections,
conjunctivitis may also occur alone.
ii. Virus isolation, indirect fluorescent antibody staining of conjunctival samples,
 and the demonstration of viral DNA with PCR. The herpesvirus PCR technique is
the most sensitive test, although normal, nonsymptomatic cats can give positive
results.
i Initial treatment for viral keratitis includes 1% trifluridine or 0.1% idoxyuridine
ophthalmic solutions applied to the affected eye(s) 3-9 times a day. Vidarabine is
effective topically, but is sometime difficult to acquire. Cidofovir (0.5%) is effective
U/cat PO SID; 1 drop in affected eye TID or QID) may be beneficial in cats that are
refractory to other therapies. Oral famciclovir (62.5 mg/cat SID or BID) for three
weeks is effective at reducing herpesvirus clinical signs. Lysine (250-500 mg PO
BID) can reduce viral replication in latently infected cats. If corneal ulcerations are
present, concurrent treatment with a broad-spectrum topical antibiotic is advised.
Antiviral therapy should be continued for 1-2 weeks after resolution of clinical
signs. Topical steroids should be used cautiously if at all, as they can increase virus
shedding and promote outbreaks of clinical signs in the chronically dormant feline
herpes cases.
128
131, 132:Questions
13la
131 A three-year-male domestic shorthaired cat was presented with bilateral
entropion (131a).
i. What are the causes and clinical signs of entropion in a cat?
ii. What are the treatment options?
ii. Describe the modified Hotz-Celsus procedure.
132
132 This puppy has a small area of choroidal hypoplasia (132).
i. What is *go normal in relation to Collie eye anomaly (CEA)?
ii. What problems for breeders are associated with the diagnosis of CEA?
129
131, 132:Answers
131 i. Entropion is an inward rolling of
131b
the eyelid margin such that eyelid hairs
rub on the cornea. Clinical signs include
epiphora, blepharospasm, conjunctivitis,
and keratitis. Entropion is uncommon in
cats, except for the Persian cat. Feline
entropion
1maybe anatomicfrom
microphthalmos, spastic from ocular
pain, and cicatricial from scarring.
i. Medical treatment involves using
ocular lubricant ointments to protect the
cornea from the eyelid hairs. Surgical treatment can be temporary or permanent.
Temporary procedures involve using nonabsorbable sutures to evert or 'tack' eyelids
 in immature animals. When planning and performing permanent entropion surgery,
the amount of correction must be estimated prior to general anesthesia. Surgical
treatment of entropion should always undercorrect slightly, as postoperative
scarring adds to the extent of the correction.
ili. It is a relatively simple procedure that can be adapted to most types of feline
entropion (131b). The initial incision is made parallel to and 2-3 mm from the
eyelid margin to a depth that includes the orbicularis oculi muscle. The length of
 the incision is determined by the amount of eyelid margin involved. The ends of the
first incision are joined by a ventral elliptical incision, the width previously
determined by evaluating the degree of eversion. Closure is with simple interrupted
sutures using 4-0 to 6-0 nonabsorbable suture.
132 i. Some Collie dogs have only minor, geographically focal areas of choroidal
hypoplasia. These pale areas of choroidal hypoplasia may become masked with
pigment as the dog's retina matures. Therefore, by 12 months of age, although
genotypically affected, these eyes with focal choroidal hypoplasia may appear
clinically normal and are termed “go-normals'; however, these dogs are still
 genotypically affected and are carriers for CEA.
ii. Diagnosis of CEA can be made at 4-8 weeks of age. Severely affected puppies can
often be identified at this time. Due to the high prevalence in the Collie population,
eradication of CEA is very difficult. Breeding minimally affected dogs does not
necessarily avoid producing puppies that are severely affected, but it is a practice
used by Collie breeders to reduce the prevalence of CEA.
130
133-135:Questions
133 A seven-year-old cat is presented
133
with this abnormality (133). The owner
informs you that the cat has been on
some medication for this eye for 10
months.
i. What do you suspect is wrong with
this eye?
ii. What are the etiology and patho-
physiology of the condition?
ii. What is a possible complication to
the lesions present here?
134 This photograph (134) represents
134
a direct ophthalmoscopic view of the
fundus of an 11-year-old dog.
i. Describe the clinical signs seen.
ii.
What are some possible etiologic
diagnoses that may be associated with
this condition?
ii. What portion of the retina is affected
in this dog?
iv. What diagnostic tests should be
performed initially on a patient that
presents for this condition?
135
5The right eye of this cat (135)
became suddenly painful. She was
squinting and actively pawing at the eye.
A foreign body (resting on the holder's
finger) was found behind the nictitans in 
the ventral fornix. What types of ocular
damage could be caused by such a
wooden foreign body?
131
133-135:Answers
133 i. Posterior synechiae and cataracts have developed secondary to anterior
uveitis.
ii. Miosis from the uveitis has increased the normal contact between the lens and
iris. Fibrin has caused adhesions between the lens and iris. Iris pigment has migrated
on the surface of the lens capsule. The oxidative insult generated by the uveitis has
disturbed the lens physiology and resulted in cataract formation.
ili. Posterior synechiae can block aqueous humor movement through the pupil, thus
causing glaucoma. The iris bulges anteriorly, which causes scarring and collapse of
the iridocorneal angle and a resultant increase in intraocular pressure.
134 i. There are peripheral bullous retinal detachments associated with the ventral
fundus. The retinal vessels can be followed onto the anteriorly displaced pillow.
like bullous detachments. The borders of the detachment appear distinct.
ii. Possible etiologic diagnoses are infectious (such as tick-borne, bacterial, and
mycotic diseases), congenital (such as retinal dysplasia, see case 28), metabolic (such
as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, see case 161), neoplastic (such as lymphoma),
immune-mediated (such as uveodermatologic syndrome, see cases 3 and 96), and
toxinrelated.
ili. The nine layers of the neurosensory retina are separated from the retinal
pigmented epithelium by fluid.
iv. It is important to obtain a complete history, including recent travel, vaccinations,
and all medications administered orally. Complete blood count, general chemistry,
tick titers, fungal titers, blood pressure, and urinalysis should also be performed.
These tests may lead to the necessity of chest and abdominal radiographs as well
as an abdominal ultrasound. The retinal detachment in this dog was caused by
elevated systemic blood pressure from kidney disease.
135 Superficial corneal ulcers, deep corneal ulcers, and corneal perforation with iris
prolapse could occur from an ocular foreign body. The most important factor to
evaluate is the integrity of the cornea. Is there an ulcer or has the cornea ruptured?
Fluorescein staining and careful evaluation of the anterior chamber depth and pupil
size will aid evaluation of the cornea. Infection is also a worry.
132
136, 137:Questions
136a
136 A 10-year-old spayed female Beagle is presented for bilateral corneal lesions
(136a). The eyes are not painful and the corneas do not retain fluorescein dye.
i. Describe the clinical lesions.
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What are the three morphologic types of this condition that have been described
in the literature?
iv. Histologically, what is the make up of these opacities?
137a
137b
137  A three-and-a-half-year-old mixed breed dog was presented with a melting
ulcer and significant corneal stroma loss (137a). The ulcer was treated surgically
(137b, three months postoperatively) and medically.
i. What is the pathophysiology of a melting ulcer?
i. What is the treatment for a melting ulcer, and what is the benefit of a conjunctival
or amnion graft?
133
136,I37:Answers
136 i. A ring-shaped corneal opacity is
136b
noted in the paraxial cornea and a
second opacity in the center. The smooth
flash artifact indicates that these
opacities are within the cornea and not
the corneal epithelium.
ii. Oval lipid corneal dystrophy in the
Beagle dog.
ii. The lesions are located in the
subepithelial stroma (compare with case
40). The nebular form of lipid corneal
dystrophy is homogeneous with a ground-glass appearance. The racetrack form is
 aa ai qon panoi q t in ase sn i s se  po  e
 stroma and is of a more dense opacity than the nebular form. The white arc type is
also dense and associated with white plaques of spiculated material.
iv. Cholesterol, neutral fats, and phospholipids are found histologically by frozen
sections in lipid corneal dystrophy. Examination by transmission electron
       e e e ( o
deposits (arrows) are randomly placed within the corneal lamellae (1).
137 i. During normal corneal healing, proteases and collagenases are produced
that aid in the removal of devitalized cells and debris. Corneal epithelial cells,
fibroblasts, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and microbes produce these enzymes.
In some corneal ulcers, overproduction of these enzymes or their reduced inhibition
contributes to progressive keratomalacia and rapid 'melting' of the corneal stroma.
i. Successful management of melting ulcers lies in controlling infection with
antibiotics and reducing the impact of enzymatic degradation on the cornea with
the help of antiproteases such as serum, EDTA, or N-acetylcysteine. The anti-
protease medications (alone or in combination) should be given every 1-2 hours in
severe cases. The surgical treatment of choice for fast melting ulcers, however, is a
 conjunctival flap or amniotic membrane transplant graft. Conjunctival flaps provide
a plasma lavage of blood-associated immune components, systemic antibiotics, and
natural anticollagenases (e.g. alpha-2-macroglobulin) to the ulcer, provide corneal
support to the weakened cornea, provide fibrovascular tissue to fill the corneal
defects, and bring a blood supply to the lesion. Amniotic membrane grafts provide
massive amounts of antiproteases and physically support the weakened cornea.
134
138-140:Questions
138a
138b
138 This six-week-old Himalayan kitten was rescued and then presented for a right
eye problem (138a, b).
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What is the material covering the cornea in the first image?
ii. What is the recommended therapy?
139 This four-month-old Irish Setter
61
puppy is presented with a congenital
abnormality (139).
i. What is this abnormality?
ii. What is the treatment?
140A10-year-oldfemaleGerman
140a
Shepherd Dog presents for annual
vaccinations. On ocular examination
the nucleus of the lens has increased
opacification  and
there are large
multiple punctate opacities in both eyes
(140a).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What is the pathophysiology of this
condition?
ili. What is the treatment?
135
138-I40:Answers
138 i. The kitten has a large iris prolapse and a corneal abscess.
ioog ui ep ia raao oi p as iei iea oi raea os sm ty a '
ili. The globe was gently enucleated and the kitten recovered nicely.
139 i. An eyelid dermoid. Dermoids of the lids are ectopic islands of skin in or at
the margin of the eyelid. They are frequently associated with some dysplastic
deformities of the adjacent conjunctiva. They are usually found on the lower lid
near the lateral canthus. Genetic predisposition exists in the German Shepherd Dog,
 Dalmatian, and St. Bernard. Blinking is abnormal and hairs generally grow towards
the cornea, causing chronic irritation and resulting in edema, vascularization, and
pigmentation.
i. Treatment consists of removal of the abnormal parts of the eyelid and
conjunctiva, and especially the malpositioned hair follicles in the involved area.
 Blepharoplasties are necessary when lid margin involvement is extensive.
140 i. Nuclear sclerosis and a nuclear cataract.
i. Fully developed normal lens fibers consist of long, rod-shaped cells with distinct
"ball and socket′ intercellular attachments that allow the lens fibers to change shape
during accommodation. In cataracts, these lens cells swell (140b, scanning electron
micrograph of a swollen lens fiber) as cell membrane integrity is reduced. As a
result, the structural uniformity of the fibers where the swelling occurs is lost, and
the ability of light to transmit through this region is impeded. It often begins with
small opacities that eventually coalesce, block light, and affect vision. Nuclear
sclerosis is an age-related opacification of the lens associated with nuclear
dehydration and altered lens proteins. It is not a true cataract.
ii. Lens removal is warranted if vision loss is
severe, but was not performed in this dog as she
140b
had functional vision.
136
141, 142: Questions
14la
          r s
140, an 11-year-old female Labrador Retriever is examined for blue eyes.
Retroillumination through a dilated pupil shows a central dense nucleus with a
surrounding clear halo (141a).
i. What is the diagnosis?
i. What is the pathophysiology of this condition?
ili. What is the treatment?
142a
142b
142 In this patient an acute corneal ulcer has formed (142a) due to a sudden onset
of keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) caused by administration of a systemic
antibiotic. Note how fluorescein does not stain the center of the ulcer (142b).
i. Describe the clinical signs in the two photographs?
i. What is the diagnosis of this corneal problem?
ii. What is the proposed mechanism of KCS caused by sulfa antibiotics?
iv. What are the immediate concerns associated with the corneal problem?
v. What diagnostic test should always be performed on this corneal problem prior
to surgical repair?
vi. How should this case be managed surgically?
137
141,I42:Answers
141 i. Nuclear sclerosis.
41F
i. The pathophysiology is a dense nucleus, which
is not a true pathologic process. As the lens ages, it
compresses the lens fibers (141b, scanning electron
micrograph of older lens fibers that have become
more accordion in shape, but concomitantly have
lost their flexibility) in the nucleus to make room
for new lens fibers. The nucleus becomes relatively
 dehydrated and compacted such that it is no longer
perfectly transparent. The lens fiber arrangement is
still relatively normal. The older the animal, the
more dense the nucleus.
ii. There is no treatment. As long as the center of
the lens is transparent the animal should be
visual, though the ability to fine tune vision via
lenticular accommodation becomes increasingly
diminished with age until it is entirely lost. This effect is believed to have minimal
influence on the visual behavior of small domestic animals.
142 i. There is protrusion of a moderately hyperemic and chemotic nictitating
membrane, moderate diffuse corneal edema, and a deep black depression or
descemetocele of the axial cornea. The depression edges are fluorescein positive
and the depression center is fluorescein negative.
i. A descemetocele, which results from exposure of Descemet's membrane.
Descemet's membrane does not stain with fluorescein (see case 194) and it is only
about 3-12 μm thick in dogs. Corneal ulcers that are deep enough to become
descemetoceles can be due to infection, excessive tear film protease activity, or
traumatic injury. In this case the deep corneal ulcer has been caused by KCS
secondary to the use of oral sulfonamide antibiotics.
ii. A toxic effect of the drug on the lacrimal glands. In some cases, lacrimation
returns to normal after cessation of administration of the antibiotic if the antibiotic
was only used for a short term. Long-term use may lead to a permanent dry eye
condition.
iv. Due to the thin nature of a descemetocele, rupture of the globe is imminent.
v. Bacterial and fungal culture should be performed on all descemetoceles prior to
surgical repair.
vi. Conjunctival flaps or amnion grafts should be considered. A conjunctival flap
can provide structural support as well as a direct blood supply to the affected area.
If available, corneal grafting or a corneoscleral transposition are also acceptable
surgical options.
138
143, 144:Questions
143  This dog was presented with a
143a
melting corneal ulcer and corneal
cellular infiltrate (143a). The ulcer was
swabbed for culture. Culture of the
cornea
revealed
infection
with
Pseudomonas spp.
i. What is the pathophysiology of the
melting ulcer in this dog?
i. What is the benefit of a pedicle
conjunctival flap?
144a
144b
144c
144d
144 An Australian Shepherd Dog puppy
is presented with these multiple con-
 genital ocular defects (144a-d). Microphthalmos is present in both eyes. The pupils
are dyscoric. Fundus examination reveals an equatorial coloboma with a retinal tear.
i. What is a coloboma, and how does it form embryologically?
ii. What is the syndrome called that is associated with equatorial colobomas in the
Australian Shepherd Dog?
ii. Describe the histologic appearance of the equatorial coloboma in Australian
Shepherd Dogs.
139
143, 144:Answers
143 i. Opportunistic infections by bacteria are
143b
common in corneal ulcers. Many cases of melting
ulcers in dogs and cats involve Pseudomonas spp.
Such ulcers are often rapidly progressing melting
ulcers that require prompt surgical therapy.
Culture and sensitivity of the ulcer should be
performed prior to surgery, and the initial
antimicrobial therapy adjusted based on the
results. For more details about the patho-
physiology and treatment of melting ulcers, see
case 137.
ii. The use of pedicle conjunctival flaps (143b, c)
143c
covering only a small area of the normal cornea
allows the clinician to visualize much of the
cornea and anterior chamber which in turn allows
continuous examination of these structures 
111
order to monitor ulcer progression and possible
anterior uveitis. Having only a small portion of
the cornea covered may also allow the animal to
continue to be visual. Hood conjunctival flaps or
nictitans flaps will cause blindness in the eye for the length of the therapy. Three to
eight weeks after placement of the grafts, the blood supply should be interrupted by
cutting the base of the graft at the limbus. This can usually be performed using
topical anesthesia and Stevens tenotomy scissors. Eliminating the blood supply will
allow the conjunctival graft to recede and lessen the resulting corneal scar.
144 i. A coloboma is a tissue defect (144c, funduscopic view of a coloboma).
Embryologically, colobomas in Australian Shepherd Dogs form due to a primary
defect and reduced formation of the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE), which in
turn results in focal hypoplasia of the choroid and sclera (see case 87).
i. Merle ocular dysgenesis, a syndrome accompanied by microphthalmia,
microcornea, heterochromia irides, dyscoria, corectopia, iris hypoplasia, cataracts,
retinal detachment, and scleral colobomas.
ii. The coloboma, when examined histopathologically, shows decreased to absent
choroidal vasculature in the location concomitant with an absent RPE, and a thin
and irregular sclera that seals off the defect. The retina cannot attach to an RPE-
less area and has the potential of becoming dysplastic. In 144d (light microscopic
view) the retina is seen to come together where the choroidal fissure failed to close
properly and the RPE had ceased to form.
140
145, 146:Questions
145
A nine-month-old Shih Tzu is
145a
presented with a two-week history of
blepharospasm, epiphora,
corneal
edema,and cornealvascularization.
Fluorescein has been applied topically
(145a).
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. What is a likely cause for this
condition in a young brachycephalic
dog?
ii. What are the treatment options?
146a
146b
146 A seven-year-old female hound was presented at the clinic with an inflamed
left orbit (146a). The owner noted that the dog had lost her appetite over the past
couple of days and that a discharged substance was draining down the left side of
her face. The dog was quite sensitive to slight pressure applied around the left orbit
as well as when looking into her mouth. There was no doubt that she was in
considerable pain. The discharge was mostly mucopurulent in content. There was
swelling of the oral mucosa, primarily behind the last ipsilateral molar (146b).
i. What is the most likely diagnosis? Do you expect the eye to be involved directly?
ii. What is the recommended therapy?
141
145,I46:Answers
145b
145 i. There is a superficial corneal ulcer with fluorescein staining under the visible
edge of the ulcer. This is an indolent ulcer. The stain has diffused under the loose
edge of the ulcer, creating a larger area of fluorescein uptake than the exposed
stroma.
ii. Indolent corneal ulcers in brachycephalic dogs can be primary or secondary to
eyelash or eyelid abnormalities, corneal edema, infection, or tear film abnormalities.
Ectopic cilia grow down from the meibomian gland and exit through the palpebral
conjunctiva, as in this case (145b). This nearly always occurs near the center of the
upper lid. The hairs can often be very small and require magnification to be
       an   s e o
visualize. Animals with ectopic cilia often have severe ocular pain and chronic
corneal ulcers. Diagnosis is made with the eyelid everted to look for a papilla of
tissue containing the hair(s)
ili. Conjunctival resection is the preferred treatment.
146 i. This dog most likely has an orbital or retrobulbar abscess or cellulitis. The
eye is expected to be uninvolved in most of these cases.
i. In this instance the eye appeared normal and the intraocular pressure was normal.
Administration of systemic antibiotics is strongly indicated. There is rarely a discrete
abscess to drain, but careful surgical drainage of an orbital abscess or pocket of
cellulitis is very important in cases that recur following administration of
antibiotics.
142
147, 148: Questions
147a
147b
147 You are presented with an older white-haired domestic shorthaired cat with
an ulcerated lesion on the right dorsolateral eyelid (147a). There is no history of
trauma and the owner indicates that the cat lives indoors.
i. Based on the presentation, what is the likely diagnosis?
ii. Discuss the etiology and pathophysiology of this lesion.
iii. What surgery is being performed in 147b.
148
148 A 10-year-old domestic shorthaired cat presents for what the owner describes
as "the sudden development of a cataract' (148).
i. Discuss the formation of a cataract in the cat.
ii. Would you recommend surgery to remove the cataract?
143
147, 148:Answers
147c
147 i. A squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
ii. SCCs are the most common tumors of the eyelids in cats. Their prevalence
increases with age and they are most common in white cats. These tumors are
usually associated with the eyelid margin, are ulcerated or crusted, and are slightly
raised. Although metastasis is only likely if the disease is allowed to progress, the
tumor can be locally very aggressive.
ii. While cryotherapy and teletherapy/radiation therapy are often effective against
SCCs, the most effective treatment is surgical removal. An H-flap technique (H-type
blepharoplasty) was used to excise the tumor in this cat. An H-flap is effective for
 the excision of full-thickness eyelid neoplasms. This is a sliding skin graft that uses
a graft of skin distal to the neoplasm. Initially, two incisions are made to either side
of the tumor. Then two equal-sized triangles are cut at the extent of the linear
incisions. The tumor is removed, followed by careful dissection of the graft and
suturing of the graft over the defect left by the tumor. This is a relatively simple
procedure that is effective and leaves very little lid scarring (147c, two months
postoperatively the incisions have healed).
 a n se si  o se no ar sii p p  't t
dogs. The majority of cataracts in the cat are secondary to trauma, uveitis, diabetes,
lens luxation, or glaucoma. This is a Morgagnian-type cataract. The more opaque
and heavy lens nucleus has settled out ventrally because of gravity when the cataract
in the outer cortex resorbs and liquefies. Uveitis is often associated with
Morgagnian cataracts, which are considered a variant of the hypermature cataract.
The lens capsule is wrinkled in these cataracts due to cortex resorption.
i. Phacoemulsification is performed in cats and is reported to have a greater success
rate than in dogs. The uvea of cats is less reactive to the trauma of surgery and
postoperative inflammation more readily controlled, resulting in a high success rate.
144
149-151:Questions
149a
149b
149 This middle-aged Labrador Retriever has developed a soft swelling below the
left eye (149a, b).
i. What are the differentials for such a lesion?
ii. What diagnostic tests and therapy are indicated?
150 A three-year-old Siamese cat was
150
presented with a brown colored mass
visible in the right eye (150).
i. Describe the lesion.
ii. What are the two major differentials?
ii. What is the pathophysiology of this
condition?
iv. What are the treatment options?
151A six-year-old Pekingese was
151
presented one week ago for proptosis
(151). The proptosis was repaired, but
the owner is worried because the dog
‘doesn't move his eye correctly any-
more'.
i. What has occurred in this case?
ii. What caused this condition for this
particular dog?
li. Can this condition be treated?
145
149-151:Answers
149 i. Zygomatic salivary gland adenitis, sialocele, or neoplasia; zygomatic bone
neoplasia; dental problems.
i. Fine-needle aspirate and/or biopsy, oral and orbital examination, and imaging
with CT/MRI and plain films could aid the diagnosis. The fine-needle aspirate
indicated a zygomatic salivary gland adenitis that responded to systemic antibiotics.
150 i. There is a brown oval-shaped mass in the lateral pupil margin. The mass
appears to be behind the iris and is comparable to that seen in case 27.
ii. Uveal melanoma and an iridal cyst. The easiest way to differentiate between these
two is to transilluminate the mass (see cases 27 and 53). An iridal cyst will allow
light from the tapetal reflection to show back through the mass (see the dorsal part
of the mass in i5o). Melanomas will not transilluminate because they are solid
tissue. Ocular ultrasound can be performed to help diagnose masses that are
difficult to transilluminate.
ii. The pathophysiology of iridal cysts is localized dilation of the margin of the
optic vesicle after it forms the optic cup. Cysts can be single or multiple and can be
free floating or attached to the posterior iris or the pupillary margin.
iv. Iridal cysts are not treated unless the mass is impairing vision. Cysts that are
impairing vision, obstructing aqueous flow, or causing mechanical damage to the
corneal endothelium can be treated with laser deflation.
151 i. This dog has strabismus secondary to the globe proptosis. Strabismus is a
common complication of traumatic globe proptosis.
ii. Extraocular muscles are commonly torn or avulsed secondary to globe proptosis
The most susceptible muscles are the medial and ventral rectus muscles and the
ventral oblique muscle. When only one muscle has been torn, the strabismus may
be a temporary complication. If three or more extraocular muscles are torn, the
prognosis is less favorable. In this particular dog the ventral rectus and ventral
oblique were likely ruptured, resulting in a dorsolateral strabismus.
ii. If necessary, the positioning of the extraocular muscles can be repaired. However,
if only a partial tear has occurred, the deviations can spontaneously decrease within
a few months. Any exposed bulbar conjunctiva will become pigmented and
diminish the awkward appearance in time.
146
152, 153:Questions
152a
152b
152 This cat returned home with what the owner describes as an enlarged, white-
blue eye (152a,b). The cat is painful, exhibits epiphora and blepharospasm, and is
vocalizing. The cornea is fluorescein negative. There are no right direct or left
consensual pupillary light reflexes.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What is the pathophysiology of this disease?
ii. What other diagnostic tests might aid the diagnosis?
iv. How would you treat this cat?
153
153 A three-year-old mixed breed dog was presented with an axial iris prolapse.
The coloring seen (153) is the result of topically administered fluorescein.
i. Describe the ocular findings.
ii. What is the treatment for this problem?
147
152,153:Answers
152 i. Endophthalmitis, most likely caused by a
152c
foreign body or penetrating wound to the eye.
i. Endophthalmitis occurs following penetration
of the eye by a foreign body or claw that can
impregnate the vitreous, anterior chamber, and
cornea with bacteria. It can also occur from
endogenous systemic infections. Bacterial infec-
tion leads to inflammation, neutrophil migration,
and purulent exudate formation. Corneal edema
results from severe uveitis. The intraocular
pressure was elevated due to angle obstruction
with inflammatory debris.
ili. This eye is enlarged (buphthalmic), has severe
corneal edema, and contains a large amount of
purulent material in the anterior chamber. Ultrasound would be an excellent
additional diagnostic tool to assess the intraocular environment and ocular
structure. Endophthalmitis will result in the presence of hyperechoic debris in the
    i  '   
pressure.
iv. The most humane course of treatment in this case is enucleation. The pus-filled
globe following enucleation in this cat is shown (152c).
153 i. There is moderate, diffuse corneal edema with an axial superficial ulcer (with
fluorescein uptake). At the center of the superficial ulcer is a corneal perforation
with iris prolapse covered in reddish fibrin.
i. Full-thickness corneal perforations can develop from the progression of deep
corneal ulcers or from trauma. The iris moves anteriorly to plug the hole in the
cornea. Because of the risk for infection and intraocular inflammatory damage with
perforations, surgical repair of the lesions should be recommended. Before surgery,
the potential for vision of the affected eye should be assessed. Evaluation of the
consensual pupillary light and dazzle reflexes may provide some information
regarding the integrity of the retina and posterior segment. Corneal perforations
should be considered at risk of infection, and preoperative bacterial culture and
sensitivity tests performed before surgery to help direct medical therapy. Corneal
n s p e s ni aq  sd
transplants, and corneal transplants. F
 Bioengineered
d porcine small intestinal
submucosa and extracellular matrix derived from porcine urinary bladder have
been used for the replacement of missing cornea.
148
154-156:Questions
154 This one-year-old mixed breed dog
154
was presented with blepharospasm of
both eyes (154).
i. What are the possible reasons for
blepharospasm?
ii. How should you determine the cause?
155 You are presented with a cat who is
155
exhibiting generalized depression, fever,
 inappetence, and weight loss. On exam-
ination you also note corneal abnor-
keratitic precipitates (KPs) and hyphema
(155).
i. What disease is this cat suffering
from?
ii.
Describe the
disease and
the
pathophysiology of the ocular changes.
li. What is the prognosis for this cat?
156 A dog has a melting ulcer. When
156
fluorescein dye is placed on the cornea
and not flushed off, a progressive
change in fluorescein color is noted to
occur (156). What is the problem here?
149
154-156:Answers
eyelids. It is caused by conjunctival, corneal, and/or intraocular pain, or by
stimulation of the palpebral nerve. Painful ocular conditions can be caused by
corneal ulcers, glaucoma, uveitis, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, foreign bodies, and by
distichia, trichiasis, and ectopic cilia. Ocular pain may cause the globe to be
retracted into the orbit and result in secondary third eyelid elevation.
i. Thorough eye examination, including biomicroscopy, tonometry, and a Schirmer
tear test (STT), should reveal the source of pain leading to the blepharospasm. In
this case the intraocular pressure was within normal limits and no foreign body or
lid hair disorders were found. STT was 5 mm/60 seconds and biomicroscopy
revealed superficial keratitis and conjunctivitis. Blepharospasm, accompanied by
enophthalmos in this case, resulted from the pain and discomfort caused by
deficiency of the precorneal tear film.
155 i. Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP).
ii. FIP is a coronavirus that can present in two different forms, effusive and non-
effusive (see cases 177 and 229). Vasculitis causes the clinical signs of effusive FIP.
The granulatomous nature of the disease leads to the deposition of 'mutton-fat'
KPs on the cornea, as seen in 155. Pyogranulomatous chorioretinitis and
perivascular cuffing can also result.
ili. Currently, there is no treatment for this disease. A definitive diagnosis is made
at necropsy. Palliative care with corticosteroid therapy and symptomatic treatment
is the only treatment option.
156 This is a positive Seidel's test and it indicates a hole in the cornea, with leakage
of aqueous humor through the hole. The orange fluorescein dye color is altered to
become green or clear when aqueous humor leaks through the corneal hole and
following suture placement in a cornea.
150
157, 158:Questions
157a
157b
157 A two-year-old intact male Shar Pei was presented with severe entropion of
both eyes (157a, b). Describe the surgical technique used to correct both the
entropion and the trichiasis in one procedure.
158a
158b
158 A one-year-old mixed breed rescue dog is presented for ocular examination.
A small lesion is detected near the center of the cornea (158a, b).
i. Describe the lesion.
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
iii. What is the most common etiology?
iv. What are the potential long-term complications?
151
157, 158:Answers
157c
57d
157 The Stades procedure combines correction of upper eyelid trichiasis and
entropion (157c, d). A section of upper eyelid skin is excised extending vertically
0.5-1.0 mm from the upper lid margin to 15-25 mm above the palpebral fissure,
and horizontally 2-4 mm medial from the nasal canthus to 5-10 mm external to
the lateral canthus. The upper eyelid wound is partially closed by apposition of the
upper eyelid skin to the subcutaneous eyelid layer 5-6 mm from the eyelid margin
with 4-0 to 5-0 simple interrupted sutures or a combination of simple interrupted
and continuous nonabsorbable suture. The exposed area immediately above the
upper eyelid margin heals by secondary intention and the resultant fibrosis everrs
the upper eyelid margin. This area may become pigmented. The animal stillretains
its facial folds of skin and its overall appearance is not markedly altered in the
Stades procedure.
158 i. There is a small oval-shaped opacity in the cornea. In the center of the
opacity there is a brown pigmented area. The pupil is dyscoric (abnormal shape)
and the iris on the left is pulled up toward the cornea.
ii. A healed corneal perforation, small iris prolapse, and an anterior synechia.
oq r e o ad no dis i e s s ' '
iv. The perforated cornea can heal with an anterior synechia if the perforation is
very small, as in this dog. Complications can include intraocular infection and
associated lens trauma. The inciting injury can damage the cornea and lens capsule
such that it may cause uveitis and cataract formation (see cases 35 and 153).
152
159, 160: Questions
159
159 A 13-year-old Tonkinese cat presents with acute bilateral blindness.
i. Describe the lesion seen in 159.
ii. What is the diagnosis?
ili. What are the differentials for this condition?
iv. What test should be performed?
v. What is the pathophysiology of this condition?
160
o    n     -  
discoloration below each eye (160).
i. Describe the clinical findings.
i. Explain the pathophysiology of this condition and possible treatment.
153
159, 160:Answers
159 i. There is a membrane of tissue with vessels just posterior to the lens.
ii. Bullous retinal detachment.
iii. The main differential for a bullous retinal detachment in a 13-year-old cat is
systemic hypertension, until proven otherwise.
evaluated. Cats with hypertensive retinopathy often have systolic blood pressures
160-200 mmHg or greater.
v. The eye is the target organ for hypertensive damage. The small diameter vessels
in the eye vasoconstrict when there is prolonged systemic hypertension. The
vasoconstriction is normally autoregulated, but this autoregulation breaks down
under conditions of high blood pressure, resulting in compromised vascular
integrity. Leakage of plasma and red blood cells occurs when the endothelial cells
and vascular smooth muscle become damaged. This leakage leads to retinal edema
 n   ou n     
 the result of this effusion from the diseased choroidal vasculature.
160 i. Bilateral epiphora with nasal tear staining.
i. Many brachycephalic and toy breed dogs have epiphora and tear staining related
multiple anomalies of the medial canthal region and inferior puncta. The inferior
puncta and canaliculi are commonly displaced inward and ventrally by a subtle,
nasoventral entropion, which rolls the medial eyelid margin into the cornea,
partially obstructs the puncta, and narrows and compresses the canalicular lumen.
In addition, tight medial canthal ligaments displace the medial canthus ventrally
and, in combination with medial canthal trichiasis and eyelid trichiasis, exacerbate
tear spillage in these dogs. The brown color results from bacterial action on the
tear film proteins.
The treatment of choice for this condition is observation and daily cleaning with
dermatologic ointments and hydrogen peroxide, or a bilateral medial canthoplasty
antibiotics can reduce the tear staining in severe cases.
154
161, 162:Questions
16la
161b
161 A six-year-old spayed German Shepherd Dog was presented for ophthalmic
examination with a complaint of blindness. Fundic pictures were taken before
treatment (161a) and 30 days post treatment (161b).
i. What is the diagnosis, and give an explanation of the cause of the pathology
shown in 161a?
ii. What is the etiology of the problem in this dog?
ii. How would you treat the dog?
162
162 A cat was presented with a large growth over 75% of the iris that was
obliterating the anterior chamber (162). The owner reported that the growth had
been present for several months, but had recently significantly increased in size.
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. What are the treatment options?
ii. What is the prognosis for this cat?
155
161,162:Answers
161 i. Exudative, bullous retinal detachment. Retinal detachment is actually the
separation of the retina between the photoreceptor layers and the pigment
epithelium. The intimate contact between the rods and cones and pigment epithelial
cells is disrupted, leading to retinal hypoxia. The normal pumping mechanism to
remove subretinal waste products and fluid no longer functions, such that fluid
n an usnd pu aiq s og on ads jens ai un sn
anteriorly. Fluid and cell deposition in the subretinal space can occur from
chorioretinitis or vascular hypertension. Large volumes of subretinal fluid can cause
the retina to balloon anteriorly, even extending to the posterior surface of the lens
in extreme cases. When there is anterior displacement of the detached retina it can
often be readily viewed directly through the pupil with a focal light source.
ii. Exudative retinal detachment, for which an etiology is not established despite
laboratory work-up, has been recognized for many years in large breed dogs and
termed steroid-responsive retinal detachment. Affected dogs typically present with
a history of an acute-onset loss of vision. The detachments are bilateral and
nonrhegmatogenous (no holes in the retina). German Shepherd Dogs and Labrador
crosses are commonly affected
ili. Even extensive detachments may be reattached, with return of vision provided
treatment is commenced early (161b). When a steroid-responsive exudative
detachment is suspected, systemic steroids should be started as soon as possible
after ruling out potential infectious and systemic causes. Failure to reattach leads
to retinal degeneration and loss of visual capacity in the affected area.
162 i. Differentials include lymphoma, melanoma, and adenoma. Melanomas are
the most common primary intraocular tumor in the cat and, as in the dog, they can
be amelanotic in nature.
i. Uveal melanomas in cats can be either relatively benign if nodular, or malignant
if they are diffuse in nature. Treatment is by enucleation.
ili. The prognosis for life is generally good. Melanomas are generally not as highly
aggressive as other ocular tumors. Nevertheless, metastasis can occur and
enucleation is recommended (see case 118).
156
163, 164: Questions
163a
163b
163 A seven-year-old Miniature Poodle is presented with depression and sudden
loss of vision. The owner complains that the dog has been bumping into walls in
the last couple of days. These images are obtained from direct ophthalmoscopy
(163a, b).
i. Describe what you see in these fundic images.
ii. What are the possible causes of the vision loss in this dog?
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
iv. What is the pathophysiology of this disease?
164 A six-month-old kitten is presented
164
with an acute, gray, soft spot in the
cornea (164).
i. What are the differentials for this
condition?
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What diagnostic tests should be
performed?
iv. What is the etiology of this condition?
v. What are the treatment options?
157
163,I64:Answers
163 i. Attenuation of the retinal vasculature and the presence of 'ghost vessels',
which have developed in response to retinal atrophy. The optic disk is visible in
163b and appears normal in color and shape. The periphery of the nontapetum has
    i     
i. The retinal disease could be the result of drug toxicity, vitamin E deficiency, or
progressive retinal atrophy (PRA). Optic neuritis and sudden acquired retinal
degeneration could also be causes of this appearance.
ii. Considering the signalment in this case, PRA or more specifically, progressive
rod-cone degeneration (Prcd) is the most likely diagnosis.
iv. Prcd is an autosomal recessive trait common to many breeds of dog, including
the Miniature and Toy Poodle, Cocker Spaniel, Labrador Retriever, Portuguese
Water Dog, and Australian Cattle Dog. The prevalence in Poodles is particularly
high. The disease manifests as early as three years of age and usually begins with
the development of night blindness. Pathology actually begins to develop in puppies
e   sq 5      t   
retinal quadrants and progresses to the superior and temporal quadrants later in the
disease. The rod physiology is affected before the cones develop pathology, but both
photoreceptors are eventually damaged.
164 i. Differentials include bullous keratopathy, descemetocele, corneal foreign
body, iris prolapse, melting corneal ulcer, epithelial inclusion cyst, and corneal
endothelial dystrophy.
i. Bullous keratopathy. This acute condition often presents bilaterally in cats and
may lead to corneal perforation (for a different example see case 99).
ii. A Seidel's test should be performed to help determine if there is aqueous humor
leaking through a corneal perforation. Corneal cytology and culture should be
obtained.
iv. There are several theories for feline bullous keratopathy. Endothelial dystrophy,
as in the Manx cat, excessive stromal protease activity, and uveitis disrupting
corneal endothelial function can result in bulla formation. The condition is often
linked to previous use of topical steroids.
v. Aggressive medical therapy and surgery. Medical therapy for this condition
includes topical anti-collagenases (EDTA, serum, N-acetylcysteine), broad-spectrum
antibiotics, mydriatics, and hypertonic saline (5% NaCl). Surgical options, if the eye
is not ruptured, include a nictitans flap and/or a tarsorrhaphy.
158
165-167:Questions
165 A 14-year-old mixed breed dog is
165a
presented with unilateral lower eyelid
(left) swelling and mild mucoid dis-
charge (165a).
i. The basic ophthalmic examination
was normal. What other test can be
performed to determine if there is a
bulbar mass?
ii. What is the next step?
ii. What is the treatment?
166 This cat (166) has a dilated pupil
166
and a negative dazzle reflex. What is
present in this eye?
167 A six-week-old kitten is presented
167
with symblepharon (167).
i. What is the leading cause of symble-
pharon in cats?
ii. What are the treatment options?
159
165-167:Answers
165 i. Retropulsion of the globe. The lids
165b
are gently closed manually over the globes
and both eyes are simultaneously pushed
 gently back into the orbits. The affected eye
will not retropulse are well as the normal
eye if there is an orbital mass. Pain may be
elicited in some cases. The retropulsion was
normal and without pain in this dog.
ii. An oral examination. In older dogs, a
thorough dental examination of the upper
molars on the affected side is indicated. A
tooth root abscess (165b) was found to be
responsible for causing the swelling in this
dog and in case 146.
ii. Extraction of the affected tooth to treat the tooth abscess and digital radiography
post extraction to evaluate residual root apices. The tooth sockets should be gently
curetted to open any abscess pockets. Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be started
pending culture results. The lower lid swelling and ocular discharge should
completely resolve in 7-10 days.
166 The normally sharp and distinct outline of the optic disk of this cat is fuzzy
and out of focus. The diagnosis is optic neuritis. Optic neuritis is rare in cats and
is associated with feline infectious peritonitis, toxoplasmosis, and cryptococcosis.
167 i. Herpesvirus conjunctivitis. In some cats, conjunctivitis can become severe,
with the result that ulcerations of the conjunctival epithelium occur. Ulcerated areas
in the conjunctiva can form adhesions to one another and to ulcerated corneal
lesions. These adhered areas can become permanent (symblepharon) if not broken
down quickly. Symblepharon can involve the entire corneal ocular surface.
i. A conjunctival transposition of resecting, moving the symblepharon adhesion
Covering the remaining corneal ulcer with amnion can also prevent recurrence.
     o      
during healing.
160
168-170:Questions
168a
169
169 The owner of this 13-year-old male
 Basset Hound was concerned with what
she saw and brought her dog with the
presenting ophthalmic problem (169).
168 A flesh-colored mass was present
1. Describe the clinical findings.
in the vitreous andretina of this
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
domestic shorthaired adult cat (168a).
iii. What is the treatment?
What is the differential diagnosis for this
condition?
170a
170b
170 A four-year-old domestic shorthaired cat is presented with swelling and redness
of the eyes. The owner says the cat has been slightly uncomfortable for two weeks,
but it seems to be getting worse. She explains that the cat lives in the barn with the
horses and cows and is usually quite independent, but lately has been staying
around the barn more. The ophthalmic examination reveals small white motile
strands within the conjunctiva and on the cornea (170a, b).
i. What are these small, white strands?
ii. Describe how this infection occurs.
ili. What is the treatment?
161
168-170:Answers
168b
168 This is a cat with a ciliary body tumor that is causing retinal degeneration and
retinal detachment. Uveal neoplasia in the cat is most commonly due to lympho.
sarcoma, plasma cell myeloma, carcinoma, or adenocarcinoma. The tumor in this
cat was determined to be an adenoma (168b, light microscopy of uveal adenoma),
which occupied space normally occupied by the vitreous.
169 i. A dorsally-located (between nine and two o'clock) fleshy corneal mass,
bordered by corneal edema and vascularization, occupies about 25% of the cornea.
ii. Include squamous cell carcinoma, lymphosarcoma, hemangioma, hemangio-
sarcoma, and adenocarcinoma. In young dogs, viral papillomas should also
considered. Diagnosis is determined by biopsy. In this case the diagnosis was
hemangiosarcoma of the cornea, which is uncommon in the dog, but is fairly
destructive when it arises. Hemangiosarcomas are commonly accompanied by
extensive corneal vascularization and perilesional edema.
ili. Therapy includes corneoscleral graft or enucleation.
170 i. The nematode Thelazia californiensis. This worm can be found within the
conjunctival sac under the third eyelid and in the lacrimal duct.
flies. The larvae develop in the fly for about 30 days and are then redeposited on
the eye of a host when the fly feeds near the eye. The larvae grow into adults, which
are approximately 10-14 mm long. The adults feed off the secretions of the eye.
Damage to the conjunctiva results from the lateral serration of the cuticle of the
larvae.
ii. Treatment consists of physical removal of the parasites. Topical parasiticides
could be useful in selected cases.
162
171, 172: Questions
17la
171b
17lc
171A ten-year-old intact German
Shepherd Dog survived canine dis-
temper virus (CDV) infection. He now
suffers  from demodicosis associated
with chronic infection with CDV as well
as the ocular complications shown
(171a-c). What are the possible ocular
complications of CDV infection?
172 Transcleral cyclophotocoagulation
172
in a dog is shown (172).
i. What is this technique utilized for?
ii. What is the mode of action of this
therapy?
163
171, 172:Answers
171 Bilateral mucoid conjunctivitis is an
171d
 early sign of CDV infection that appears
within the first week of exposure to the
virus. With time the discharge becomes
mucopurulent
and
the
cytologic
response changes from mononuclear to
polymorphonuclear. Cytoplasmic inclu-
sion bodies are uncommon, but can be
present in conjunctival epithelial cells
early in the infection (171d, distemper
inclusion
(1}
from
conjunctival
cytology). CDV causes adenitis of the
lacrimal glands and the glands of the third eyelid, and may result in a transient or
permanent keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Acute solitary or multifocal chorioretinitis
occurs frequently in dogs with CDV infection. The appearance of retinal lesions
{171c, ‘medallion' lesion} is similar to that of retinitis from other causes, with areas
of retinal atrophy manifested by tapetal hyperreflectivity and pigmentation. The
effect on vision is variable depending on the distribution and number of retinal
lesions. Optic neuritis is associated with CDV. Central blindness may develop as a
consequence of chronic
distemper-induced encephalitis, which results  in
demyelination and astrocytosis of the optic radiations.
172 i. The treatment of glaucoma.
ii. Transcleral cyclophotocoagulation decreases the formation rate of aqueous
humor by destroying part of the ciliary body. Laser energy directed through the
overlying sclera results in high heat and coagulation of the epithelium of the
pigmented ciliary body processes. In the dog the probe must be positioned
approximately 5 mm posterior to the limbus in order to reach the ciliary body
processes. With globe enlargement, the ciliary processes of the pars plicata may
shift an additional 0.5-1.0 mm posteriorly. Moderate laser energy levels can be
used to lower intraocular pressure in visual eyes, but excessive application of laser
energy can result in irreversible destruction of the ciliary body, permanent ocular
hypotony, and phthisis bulbi. In nonpigmented eyes (e.g. as in the Siberian Husky),
laser cyclophotocoagulation is less successful.
164
173, 174: Questions
173a
173 A 13-year-old male domestic shorthaired cat with a two-month history of iris
color change and a two-week history of ocular pain is examined (173a).
i. Describe the lesion.
ii. What are the differentials?
iii. What is the treatment?
174a
174b
174 A seven-and-a-half-year-old neutered Belgian Shepherd Dog was presented
with an axial ulcer and corneal edema. The ulcer was treated with no effect with
triple antibiotic eye ointment three times a day. After 14 days of therapy the dog was
referred to a veterinary ophthalmologist. The eye examination revealed extensive
corneal changes.
i. Describe the clinical findings shown (174a, b).
ii. What are the possible causes for this?
165
173,174:Answers
173 i. There is moderate bulbar con-
173b
junctival
hyperemia,
，asuperficial
fluorescein-positive corneal ulcer, and a
miotic pupil. The iris is tan, with yellow
pupillary margins and a thickened and
vascular stroma.
i. The main differentials are anterior
uveitis and uveal neoplasia. This is a cat
with an invasive iris lymphosarcoma.
Ocular ultrasound and aqueous centesis
and
cytology
can
aid
diagnosis.
Lymphosarcoma is the most common
metastatic intraocular tumor in the cat.
ii. The level of pain and clinical
appearance of iris tissue invasion led to
enucleation of this globe. Histopathology confirmed iris lymphoma (173b, gross
appearance of the iridal tumor). Systemic chemotherapy is recommended. Topical
corticosteroids may reduce the size of the intraocular mass in the short term.
174 i. The cornea shows extensive vascularization with diffuse corneal edema
(174a). A deep groove can be seen axially as well as a focal, round area of cellular
infiltrate in the cornea. The conjunctiva is hyperemic with engorged blood vessels
(174b). The clinical signs are consistent with chronic corneal ulcers.
ii. A foreign body was found embedded in the palpebral conjunctiva under the
superior lid. Examination for foreign bodies under the lids and third eyelid should
be performed in eyes with nonhealing ulcers. Other causes for chronic ulceration are
distichia, ectopic cilia, trichiasis, entropion, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, and eyelid
masses. Treatment varies according to the primary cause. In addition to elimination
of the primary cause, treatment should include broad-spectrum topical antibiotics
(determined by culture and sensitivity), as well as antiproteases (e.g. serum, EDTA,
or N-acetylcysteine) and atropine. Systemic broad-spectrum antibiotics as well as
anti-inflammatory drugs should be considered according to the severity of clinical
signs.
166
175, 176: Questions
175a
175b
175 This three-year-old male Labrador Retriever is presented with dysphagia and
'strange-looking’ eyes (175a, b). The owner reports that the dog is drooling
excessively and having difficulty keeping food in his mouth. Examination reveals
exophthalmos, a normal globe, and a reluctance to open the mouth.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. What is the pathophysiology of the disease?
iii. Why is the dog exophthalmic?
iv. What is the treatment for this condition?
176
176 A three-year-old Cocker Spaniel was presented with a corneoscleral lesion at
the nine o'clock position of the right eye (176).
i. Describe the lesion.
ii. What is your diagnosis, and is there a breed disposition?
ii. What are the pathogenesis and treatment for this disease?
167
175, 176:Answers
175 i. Immune-mediated myositis of the masticatory muscles is the most likely
diagnosis. Ultrasound and MRI were important in making this diagnosis
i. Immune-mediated myositis can have a general effect on skeletal muscle or be
limited to the masticatory muscles. The muscles of mastication have a specific
Jo ad a e m paiosse si ien sia  ad n jo uio soqa
myosin. In this disease, the immune system attacks the myosin of the masticatory
muscles
ili. Exophthalmos results from swelling of the inflamed muscles. As this disease
progresses, the masticatory muscles atrophy and concomitantly fibrose, leading to
an inability to open the mouth.
iv. As with most immune-mediated conditions, an immunosuppressive dose regimen
of corticosteroids is the most effective treatment. With immune-mediated myositis
it is imperative that treatment is initiated as soon as possible, as any muscle fibrosis
that has already occurred is irreversible.
176 i. There is an elevated, pink, fleshy mass arising at the limbus and infiltrating
the adjacent corneal stroma, with moderate corneal edema around the mass.
ii. Nodular granulomatous episcleritis (NGE). Nodular fasciitis, fibrous
histiocytoma, proliferative keratoconjunctivitis, limbal granuloma, pseudotumor,
and Collie granulomas are other terms for this disorder. Ocular findings in NGE
include multiple, elevated, fleshy masses or a single mass arising at the limbus and
infiltrating the adjacent corneal stroma. Nictitating membrane involvement is
common, and there is a breed predisposition in the Collie, Cocker Spaniel, and
Shetland Sheepdog. The lesions tend to be bilateral in the Collie and may tend to
recur following therapy. In order to obtain a diagnosis, fine-needle aspiration or
biopsy should be performed.
ili. The predominant histologic cell types in NGE are histiocytes, lymphocytes, and
plasma cells. Production of lymphokines by the T lymphocytes and the resulting
chemotaxis of histiocytes is a proposed pathogenesis of NGE. Generally, NGE tends
to be benign clinically, with good response to oral azathioprine treatment in
conjunction with topical administration of corticosteroids. Cyclosporin A can be
used topically in conjunction with steroids initially, and then used alone to help
prevent recurrence once the mass has resolved.
168
177-179:Questions
177A two-year-old spayed cat was
177
diagnosed
with
feline
infectious
peritonitis.
i. Describe the ocular findings (177).
ii. What is the pathophysiology of this
process?
178 An adult cat presents with bilateral
178
cataracts, with the left eye, shown here
(178), being less advanced than the
right.
i. Describe/name the cataract shown.
ii. What is a common cause of this type
of cataract?
179 This photograph (179) depicts a
179
small optic nerve head (ONH) from a
young adult dog that has otherwise
normal appearing eyes.
i. What is the diagnosis, and what does
the pupil and pupillary light reflex
(PLR) look like clinically in this patient?
ii. What is the vision of the eye of this
:8op
ii. What breeds are predisposed to this
condition?
169
177-179:Answers
177 i. There are large, thick keratic precipitates (KPs), along with pigment and
blood, adhered to the corneal endothelium at the ventral and medial cornea at the
five to nine o'clock position. Fibrin is adherent to the anterior lens capsule and
appears dark due to the retroillumination.
i. KPs are accumulations of inflammatory cells, fibrin, and iris pigment. They are
released due to blood-ocular barrier breakdown from vasculitis and/or vascular
injury and deposited on the corneal endothelium. Convection currents in the
      s  o so
granulomatous conditions (e.g. feline infectious peritonitis), KPs tend to form as
large, waxy-yellow deposits, often called 'mutton-fat' deposits. These deposits are
made of plasma cells and macrophages typical of granulomatous inflammation.
KPs may partially resolve or be associated with permanent corneal opacification.
178 i. Linear, equatorial cataract. The nucleus is transparent.
i. The equator is where new lens fibers are produced throughout life. The
appearance of cataracts in this position suggests a recent change to the metabolism
of the cat. The cat should be evaluated for diabetes and other metabolic diseases.
179 i. The optic disk is small and gray in color. There are no myelinated axons or
nerve fibers noted on the disk. The retinal vasculature is normal, but looks large
next to the small ONH. The diagnosis is micropapilla or optic nerve hypoplasia.
These two terms are conditions that represent ranges of the same condition of
reduced numbers of retinal ganglion cells. Micropapilla means the optic disk is
smaller in size than average, but there is no effect on vision or the PLR. Optic nerve
hypoplasia means there are significantly reduced numbers of retinal ganglion cell
 a n r  ar y o p a do an nn s s
size. Eyes with optic nerve hypoplasia, as in this dog, would have a slightly dilated
pupil and a slow PLR.
i. The lack of retinal ganglion cells and their associated optic nerve axons would
affect vision in this dog to some extent, but the dog may still have functional vision.
li. Rough Collies, Beagles, Miniature Schnauzers, St. Bernards, Dachshunds,
Shetland Sheepdogs, Irish Setters, German Shepherd Dogs, Cocker Spaniels,
Standard Poodles, Miniature Poodles, Toy Poodles, Tibetan Spaniels, Soft-Coated
Wheaten Terriers, Labrador Retrievers, Kerry Blue Terriers, Old English Sheepdogs,
Afghan Hounds, Borzois, Golden Retrievers, Pharaoh Hounds, English Springer
Spaniels, Keeshonds, Italian Greyhounds, Greyhounds, and Shih Tzus.
170
180, 18l:Questions
180 A spontaneous chronic corneal
180a
epithelial defect (SCCED) (Boxer ulcer)
is shown (180a).
i.Describe the
pattern of corneal
neovascularization.
ii. Explain the pathogenesis of neo-
vascularization.
18la
181b
181
A two-year-old spayed female
181c
Doberman Pinscher is presented with
severe conjunctivitis and a copious
mucopurulent discharge (181a, b). The
referring veterinarian believed that the
globes were destroyed, but referred the
dog for evaluation before enucleation.
The same dog is shown after three
months of medical therapy (181c).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What is the pathogenesis of this condition?
ii. What is the treatment?
171
180,I81:Answers
180 i. Superficial corneal blood vessels
180h
are growing from the limbus and
forming large areas of pink granulation
tissue at the center of the cornea.
ii. Superficial  vessels 
6occuratthe
anterior third of the stroma and appear
"tree-like’ or arborescent. They usually
begin at the limbus as a single trunk
vessel and branch extensively within the
cornea. Very superficial vessels may be
seen crossing the limbus because they
are continuous with the conjunctival circulation. Deep intrastromal vessels are
corneal stromal or intraocular disease, whereas superficial vessels are induced by
surface (usually corneal epithelial) disease (180b, scanning electron micrograph of
a superficial corneal ulcer involving primarily the anterior epithelium: 1, anterior
epithelium; 2, corneal stroma). The image on the right shows the depth of the failed
interaction/connection between the epithelium and the stroma. (See cases 8 and 64
for details of treatment of SCCED.}
181 i. Ligneous conjunctivitis.
ii. This is an idiopathic, breed-related, exuberant conjunctivitis of Doberman
Pinscher dogs. The clinical presentation is dramatic, with proliferative conjunctivitis
and ocular discharge. The palpebral conjunctiva and nictitating membranes are
thickened and hyperemic with proliferative, opaque membranes. Affected dogs
often display signs of concurrent systemic illness. Histopathologically, the affected
conjunctiva has a thick, amorphous, eosinophilic, hyaline-like material in the
conjunctival substantia propria, with a moderate mononuclear infiltrate. The
surface of the conjunctiva is often encased in purulent debris and fibrin. The
pathogenesis is unknown, but is speculated to be immune mediated. Congenital
  nd aq  pn o sa n ro ose o ip o
underlying cause of the ligneous conjunctivitis.
ili. Topical and subconjunctival administrations of fresh frozen plasma (FFP),
topical administration of cyclosporin A, and oral administration of azathioprine
have been used in some dogs. Excision of the membranes followed by intensive
treatment with topical applications of heparin, tissue plasminogen activator,
corticosteroid, and FFP, and intravenous administration of FFP prevented
membrane regrowth in one case. Treatment was dramatically effective in this dog.
172
182, 183:Questions
182a
182b
182 A dog has bilateral corneal disease (182a). The corneas are fluorescein
negative.
i. What ophthalmic test is being performed in 182b?
ii. What disease process is present?
ili. What treatment options are available to improve the corneal disease in this dog?
183a
183b
183 This seven-year-old white domestic shorthaired cat has been plagued with
intermittent eye pain for several years (183a, b). There is no dazzle reflex or
consensual pupillary light reflex to the other eye.
i. What is the most reasonable scenario for the lesions found in this eye?
ii. Is there any reasonable therapy for this eye?
173
182,I83:Answers
182 i. Schirmer tear test (STT). A 5 by 35 mm strip is bent at the rounded tip and
placed in the conjunctival fornix of the mid to lateral lower eyelid in contact with
the cornea. Tears are allowed to migrate down the strip for 60 seconds. The strip
is then removed and measured. Normal tear production is considered to be 15-
25 mm wetting/min. Two types of STT can be considered. The STT I is performed
without any topical anesthestic and measures reflex and basal tearing levels. The
STT II is performed with topical anesthetic and measures only basal tear levels.
ii. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS, or dry eye'). There is yellow mucoid discharge
on the cornea and eyelids. Pigment deposition on the corneal surface is present to
such a significant degree that the anterior ocular structures (iris and pupil) cannot
be visualized.
ili. Medical treatment modalities include topical immunomodulating medications
(e.g.cyclosporin A [0.2% ointment or 1% and 2% solutions] and tacrolimus
[0.03% ointment or solution], topical antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory
medications, and artificial tear replacement (see case 197). In eyes with KCS and no
Corticosteroids must be used with caution in eyes with KCS, as the corneal surface,
being unhealthy from low tear levels, is more susceptible to corneal ulceration.
There is a surgical option of parotid duct transposition available for KCS. For
further examples of KCS see cases 42, 69, 94, 126, and 199.
183 i. This cat has chronic uveitis. A posterior synechia is present, with neo-
vascularization of the lens from the iris. Uveal pigment has migrated onto the
anterior lens capsule. The lens, which is mostly white, is now fully cataractous and
most likely a result of the chronic uveitis. Dilatation of the pupil was not drug
induced, but may have been caused initially by a retinal detachment. The posterior
synechia has resulted in permanent mydriasis.
i. Topical corticosteroids could help with eye pain. Enucleation is indicated if the
pain is severe and cannot be controlled medically.
174
184, 185:Questions
184a
184 This (184a) is a direct ophthalmoscopic picture of a one-year-old Cocker
Spaniel.
i.Describe the ophthalmoscopic findings.
ii. What is your diagnosis, and what is the etiology of this problem?
ii. What is the treatment?
185a
185b
185 Two young Burmese cats were presented, each with a growth along the lateral
canthus of the left eye. The growth in one cat was small and devoid of hair (185a).
In the second cat the growth consisted of misaligned dark hairs attached to the
bulbar conjunctiva near a defect in the lid margin (185b).
i. What are the masses associated with the conjunctivae and lids of these cats?
ii. What treatment(s) could be utilized to resolve the problem?
175
184,I85:Answers
184b
184
184 i. There are multiple, linear, retinal gray opacities in the tapetal region of the
fundus.
ii. Retinal dysplasia, which is generally nonprogressive and does not usually
interfere with vision. Retinal dysplasia has been defined as an anomalous
differentiation of the retina. It is characterized histologically by folding of the
sensory retina and formation of rosettes composed of retinal cells around a central
lumen. As the sensory retina forms folds or raised areas, the outer segments of the
photoreceptors elongate before pulling away from the underlying retinal pigmented
epithelium (RPE) altogether, as seen in this scanning electron micrograph (184b),
Concomitantly, the RPE forms extended microvilli and eventually disappears
altogether (184c, asterisk indicates an area where the RPE has become totally
disconnected from the sensory retina and the hexagonal shape of the cells is now
visible). Spontaneous retinal dysplasia occurs in several breeds, and hereditary
factors have been shown or suspected to be the cause in many. Multifocal retinal
dysplasia has been reported in some breeds.
ii. There is no treatment. Dogs with retinal dysplasia should not be bred.
185 i. Congenital defects of the lateral canthus occur in Burmese cats and are
associated with corneal and conjunctival dermoids. Nasal dermoids have also been
observed in Burmese cats with eyelid dermoids.
ii. The lateral canthal defect is readily corrected surgically by excision and
reconstruction of the lateral canthus. Conjunctival dermoids, as with most
conjunctival neoplasms, are for the most part readily dissected away from the globe,
being generally noninvasive.
176
186-188: Questions
186 This 12-year-old neutered domestic
186a
shorthaired cat was presented with
blindness. Small hyperreflective lesions
were seen ventrally (186a).
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. What are the possible etiologies for
this problem?
187 This is an eye (187) of an older
187
male dog that had cataract surgery one
year previously. What is seen in this eye?
188
A specific technique is being
188
performed on the upper eyelid region of
this young Beagle in order to assess an
ocular condition (188).
i. What technique is this?
ii. What feature is being assessed?
iii. How and why is this technique
performed?
177
186-188:Answers
186 i. This is an active chorioretinitis.
186b
Chorioretinitis refers to inflammatory
conditions that arise in the choroid and
extend into the retina. The fuzzy outline
to the lesions indicates retinal edema
and activity (compare with case 67).
ii. Viral chorioretinitis in the cat has
been associated with feline infectious
peritonitis
virus,
feline
immuno-
deficiency virus, and feline leukemia
        s
plasmosis, blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, and candidiasis. The protozoal agent
Toxoplasma gondii is a documented cause of chorioretinitis in cats. Feline
chorioretinitis and retinal detachment have been associated with tuberculous
Mycobacterium bovis, as well as the nontuberculous agent Mycobacterium simiae.
Parasitic infections such as dipteran larvae may cause chorioretinitis as the parasite
migrates within or under the retina. In this case, Cryptococcus was identified as
the cause of the chorioretinitis (186b, transmission electron micrograph of
C. neoformans in the feline choroid). C. neoformans is the most commonly reported
feline mycotic infection (see case 76).
187 An intraocular lens (IOL) has been placed in the lens capsular bag. The IOL
is slightly out of position. Posterior capsular opacification surrounds the IOL. This
opacification results from lens epithelial cellfibroplasia and is a common long-term
complication of cataract surgery in dogs. This eye is still visual.
188 i. Digital tonometry.
ii. This form of tonometry is used to qualitatively assess the intraocular pressure
(IOP) of the eye. Normal IOP in most animals is between 15 and 25 mmHg
ili. To perform this diagnostic technique, the examiner stabilizes the globe with the
fingers of one hand, while using the fingers of the other hand to apply gentle
downward pressure along the lid margin. The accuracy of this procedure is
dependent on the experience of the examiner; however, it is never as accurate as the
quantitative objective measurement obtained from applanation tonometers (see
cases 38 and 127).
178
189-191:Questions
189
189 A nine-year-old male domestic shorthaired cat is presented with a two-week
history of iris color change. On ophthalmic examination there is moderate aqueous
flare, mild blepharospasm, and a miotic pupil (189).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What are the differentials for this condition?
ili. What diagnostic tests should be considered?
iv. What is another typical clinical sign of this disease?
v. What are the treatment options?
061
191
191 The eye of an 11-year-old mixed
breed dog is shown (191).
190 The optic nerve head (ONH) of a
1.
Describe the ophthalmic findings
one-year old dog is shown (190).
shown.
i. What defines the shape of the ONH?
ii. What are your clinical findings?
ii. Is the ONH in this dog normal or
abnormal?
179
189-191:Answers
189 i. Anterior uveitis.
ii. Differentials include feline leukemia virus (FeLV), feline immunodeficiency virus
(FIV), feline infectious peritonitis, toxoplasmosis, bartonellosis, cryptococcosis,
histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, blastomycosis, iris neoplasia, lens-induced
uveitis, parasite migration, and idiopathic uveitis.
ili. Tests for FeLV and FIV should be submitted. This cat is positive for FIV.
iv. Cats with FIV-induced uveitis often have a pars planitis, which results in cellular
infiltrates in the anterior vitreous and associated snowbanking or adhesion of these
cells to the posterior lens capsule.
v. Supportive care for the FIV and treatment of the uveitis (see case 12).
190 i. The prelaminar optic nerve is known as the optic disk, ONH, or optic
papilla. Optic disk shape varies according to breed, the degree of axonal
myelination, and the number of retinal ganglion cells. The canine optic disk has
large prominent vessels that anastamose on the surface of the disk. There is often
variation in disc diameter and shape of the canine ONH due to myelininated optic
nerve axons anterior to the scleral lamina cribrosa. These cover the surface of the
optic disk and continue into the retinal nerve fiber layer beyond the edge of the
scleral canal such that the shape of the dog optic disk may be circular, triangular,
or irregular. The canine ONH is white to pink in color, with a dark central spot
called the physiological pit, a remnant of the hyaloid artery. In general, larger optic
disks contain more nerve fibers than smaller disks.
ii. Normal.
191 i. There is pupil margin scalloping, nuclear lens opacity, and multiple, mobile
vitreal opacities.
ii. Mild iris atrophy, nuclear sclerosis, and asteroid hyalosis, which are age-related
ocular changes. Asteroid hyalosis is a form of vitreal degeneration and consists of
conglomerates of calcium and lipids. Such opacities may move following
movements of the globe. Vitreal degeneration may be age related, secondary to
inflammation, or primary. Primary vitreous degeneration is also breed related and
found in the Brussels Griffon, Chihuahua, Chinese Crested, Havanese, Italian
Greyhound, Lowchen, Papillon, Shih Tzu, and Whippet.
180
192, 193: Questions
192a
192 A three-month-old intact female American Cocker Spaniel was presented with
significant unilateral epiphora. Flushing the superior punctum in the affected eye
resulted in the formation of a bleb of tissue at the ventral punctum (192a).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. How can the diagnosis be confirmed?
ii. How is this condition treated?
193
193 A four-week-old Border Collie puppy was presented for a general physical
examination. The ophthalmic examination revealed the finding shown (193).
i. Describe this finding.
ii. What are the differential diagnoses, and how would you differentiate between
them?
181
192, 193:Answers
192 i. Punctal atresia, which may affect
192b
 the superior, inferior, or both puncta. It
can be either unilateral or bilateral and
is commonly seen in American Cocker
Spaniels, Bedlington Terriers, Golden
Retrievers, Miniature and Toy Poodles,
and Samoyeds.
i. Dorsal punctal atresia is asympto-
matic and  is diagnosed incidentally
during routine biomicroscopic exam-
ination. Ventral punctal atresia is
associated with epiphora in puppies, and
confirmed by nasolacrimal flushing. The
conjunctiva over the canaliculus will
bulge during flushing.
ii. Ventral punctal atresia is treated by surgical excision of the ballooning
conjunctiva (192b). The affected eye is then treated with topical antibiotic and
corticosteroid solutions QID until re-examination in approximately seven days. If
required
193 i. There are multiple, linear, retinal whitish opacities. The tapetum is blue due
to the immaturity of this structure.
ii. This finding may be consistent with retinal dysplasia (see case 184) or with retinal
folds. The high frequency of retinal folds among the eyes of puppies in some breeds,
particularly the Collie and Shetland Sheepdog, has sometimes been interpreted as
being a very mild form of retinal dysplasia. The folds are believed to result from the
disparity of growth between the retinal layers and sclera, and they often resolve
with growth and maturation of the eye. In contrast, retinal dysplasia represents
abnormal differentiation of the retina and, therefore, would be expected to be
permanent. Thus, a follow-up of these funduscopic alterations could indicate
whether the lesions should be designated as retinal folds or retinal dysplasia.
182
194- 196:Questions
194A four-year-old male castrated cat
194
is presented with a five-day history of
blepharospasm, epiphora, and a red eye.
i. Describe the lesion shown (194).
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ili. What are the treatment options?
195 This dog (195) received the same
195
surgical treatment as the dog in case
218. The image was taken one-year post
operation.
i. What is happening in this instance?
ii. Why does this occur?
196 i. Describe the clinical signs shown
196
in this dog (196).
ii. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What ocular changes can result from
this condition if it becomes chronic?
iv. In this case it is already known that
the cause for the eyelid condition was
secondary to systemic adriamycin
administration. In cases where the cause
is unknown, how should this condition
be worked up?
183
194-196:Answers
194 i. There is a moderate conjunctival hyperemia and a large-diameter, deep defect
in the cornea. Some corneal vascularization is present and the pupil is dilated.
i. A descemetocele. This is the deepest type of corneal ulceration, with corneal
epithelium and stroma missing and exposure of Descemet's membrane (see case
232). The membrane may bulge through the defect. To confirm the diagnosis of a
true descemetocele, fluorescein stain should be applied, with gentle flushing after
staining. The ulcer bed will stain positive at the ulcer edges, but not in the area
where Descemet's membrane is exposed.
ii. Due to the risk of rupture, a descemetocele should be surgically repaired as soon
as possible with a conjunctival flap, amnion graft, or corneal transplant. Direct
suture closure of 1 mm diameter lesions can be attempted, but direct suturing is
not recommended for large descemetoceles. Insertion of a donor corneal button or
biosynthetic material into the defect will add strength to the cornea, and use of a
conjunctival flap will both support the surgical area and aid vascularization.
195 i. A white intraocular prosthesis has eroded through the cornea and is now
exposed.
ii. A corneal ulcer from infection or keratoconjunctivitis sicca could result in this
problem. This breakdown occurred most likely due to mechanical irritation of the
implant against the corneal endothelium and/or intraocular infection or
218.)
196 i. Periocular crusts, hyperermia, and alopecia are present. The alopecia is noted
 in both eyelids and the crusting is mostly associated with the medial portion of the
upper lids.
ii. Blepharitis.
ili. Corneal and conjunctival irritation associated with blepharitis may develop into
entropion and/or ectropion. Scarring and infection of the eyelids may also develop
due to self-trauma.
iv. Many cases of canine blepharitis, regardless of the cause, are infected. The
infection may mask the initial cause of the blepharitis. Skin scrapings and skin
biopsies with culture are important in the initial work-up for blepharitis. Systemic
medications are critical to resolving eyelid inflammation. Further examples of
blepharitis and their underlying causes can be seen in cases 77 and 210.
184
197, 198: Questions
197 A four-year-old cat is presented
197a
with a two-week history of a red squinty
eye with a mucoid discharge (197a). The
Schirmer tear test reading is 3 mm
wetting/minute and there is a large
 superficial ulcer. One week later the cat
is more uncomfortable and the cornea is
melting (197b).
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What are differentials for your
diagnosis in a cat?
ii. What are the treatment options?
iv. What are the advantages of a con-
junctival graft compared with a nictitans
197b
flap?
福
198 A two-year-old Portuguese Water
198
 Dog presents with optic neuropathy in
both eyes (198).
i. Describe the findings shown in 198.
ii. What are causes of optic neuropathy?
li. With what clinical signs might this
dog present?
185
197, 198:Answers
197c
197d
197 i. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, with a secondary superficial ulcer.
ii. Differentials include blepharoconjunctivitis with lacrimal ductule obstruction
and feline herpesvirus infection with chemosis of the lacrimal gland.
ii. Treatment options are aggressive medical therapy (see case 164) and surgery.
The surgical treatment of choice is a conjunctival graft (197c). The graft should be
trimmed four weeks postoperatively to decrease scarring and increase the visual
field (197d). Other options are amniotic membrane transplants and, in some cases,
a nictitans flap.
iv. Conjunctival flaps provide structural support to the corneal lesion (more than a
nictitans flap), provide blood vessels for stromal healing, provide a source of
fibroblasts and connective tissue, and provide plasma from leaking vessels that may
inhibit collagenase activity.
198 i. The optic disk is prominent, irregular in outline, and appears to be swollen
due to obstructed axoplasmic flow. The blood vessels on the surface of the optic
nerve head appear to be raised at the disk periphery. The retinal vessels are also
tortuous. There are red focal perivascular areas of retinal hemorrhage.
i. Optic neuropathies may be inflammatory or noninflammatory. Inflammatory
optic neuropathies are termed optic neuritis and inflammation of the optic disk
termed papillitis. Infection, reticulosis, and inflammatory orbital disease can cause
optic neuritis. Swelling of the optic disk or papilledema can occur from elevated
cerebrospinal fluid pressure. Glaucoma and optic nerve tumors cause optic disk
swelling from obstructed axoplasmic flow. This dog's optic disks appear to
represent a congenital problem. Function was normal.
ii. Fixed, dilated pupils and blindness. This dog's vision, pupillary light reflexes, and
pupil size were, however, normal.
186
199, 200: Questions
199a
199 A two-year-old Weimaraner dog is presented with a one-week history of
moderate conjunctivitis and mucoid ocular discharge (199a). The Schirmer tear test
value is O for both eyes.
i. What are the differentials for absolute keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)?
ii. On further examination, the dog's nose and gums are very dry. What is the most
likely diagnosis?
ili. What are the treatment options?
200
 200 An eight-year-old Springer Spaniel is presented with a lens problem in the right
eye (200).
i. Describe the clinical findings shown.
i. What is the area with the yellow tapetal reflection in the upper portion of the
photograph called?
lii. What anatomic structures that usually hold the lens in its normal position are
compromised in this dog?
iv. What secondary complications may arise from lens luxation?
v. What is the surgical treatment for lens luxation?
187
199,200:Answers
199 i. Differentials for KCS in a young
199b
 adult dog include neurologic KCS, drug-
induced   
KCS,
and
autoimmune-
mediated KCS.
i. Sjogren's syndrome, which is an auto-
immune disease that attacks moisture-
producing glands such as the tear and
salivary glands. Sjogren's syndrome
occurs in a small percentage of canine
KCS patients. The clinical signs for this
disease are KCS and a dry mouth due to
lack of tears and saliva.
ili. Treatment options for absolute KCS (no tears at all) are limited to medical
therapy. A parotid duct transposition will not be effective because of the lack of
saliva in Sjogren's syndrome (199b). Medical therapy with topical immuno-
suppressive agents, such as cyclosporin A, tacrolimus, and/or pimecrolimus, is
recommended, but may not be effective. Frequent application of topical ocular
lubricant is helpful in preventing corneal ulceration and improving patient comfort.
200 i. There is moderate conjunctival hyperemia. The pupil is dilated and has
irregular margins. Posterior synechiae are noted at seven and 10 o'clock. The lens
is cataractous and posteriorly luxated, but is being held in position by the synechiae.
The tapetal reflection can be seen dorsal to the lens.
ii. The aphakic crescent.
ii. The lenticular zonules must break to allow for the lens to become luxated.
Reasons for zonular breakdown are discussed in case 236.
iv. Secondary complications include inflammation, glaucoma, retinal detachment,
and corneal endothelial damage.
v. Intracapsular lens extraction can be performed to remove the luxated lens. A 180
degree incision is made near the limbus from nine to three o'clock. The cornea is
retracted, and the lens is extracted using a cryoprobe while detaching the vitreous
closed.
188
201, 202: Questions
201 a
201 The fundus of a male Flat-Coated Retriever is shown (201a).
i. Is this fundus normal or abnormal?
ii. What is the name and origin of the dark spot in the center of the optic nerve
head (ONH)?
ii. Which components of the ONH should be evaluated during eye examinations?
iv. What are the light tan, fuzzy appearing peripapillary areas?
202
 202 This seven-year-old mixed breed dog was presented for recheck five days after
 the beginning of medical therapy for canine ehrlichiosis.
i. What are the multiple, whitish, spherical opacities seen at the corneal endothelium
(202)?
ii. With what other eye disease is the condition always associated?
189
201, 202:Answers
201b
201 i. A normal fundus.
i. A physiologic pit (see case 250). The physiologic pit is a remnant of the hyaloid
artery (201b, scanning electron micrograph of a normal canine optic disk or nerve
head with a remnant of the hyaloid artery [1]].
ili. The retinal vessels that anastamose on the optic disk surface, the neuroretinal
rim (peripheral edge of the disk), and the optic cup (central disk area).
a un 1a ssaxa st HNo ai aoqe isa ae Azz n n a a
retinal nerve fiber layer. This is a normal variation in some dog breeds.
202 i. Pigmented and nonpigmented keratic precipitates (KPs). A large area of iris
depigmentation is also present.
ii. KPs are accumulations of inflammatory cells, fibrin, and pigment from the iris
that are deposited on the corneal endothelium. It is important to note KPs because
their presence is always indicative of uveitis. Topical anti-inflammatory therapy
should be instituted immediately after the diagnosis of anterior uveitis is made.
Failure to initiate therapy early in the disease process in cases of uveitis may result
in many adverse sequelae, including synechiae formation, cataract, secondary
glaucoma, endophthalmitis, and phthisis bulbi.
190
203-205:Questions
203a
204
204A six-month-old Golden Retriever
is presented with swelling of the upper
eyelid. When the conjunctiva is everted
it appears to have small pustules' along
203 This adult dog shown (203a) was
the exposed, inflamed area (204). The
presented with extensive lid laceration.
puppy is blepharospastic and exhibits
What is the recommended therapy?
moderate tearing.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. Explain the disease and the con-
sequences of the disease.
ili. How will you treat this condition?
205a
205b
205 An object is seen in the vitreous in these fundus photographs of an eight-week-
old Himalayan kitten (205a).
i. What is the linear structure (arrow in 205a and enlarged in 205b) floating in the
vitreous?
ii. What is the most likely disease?
191
203-205:Answers
203Eyelid lacerations are frequent in
203b
young small dogs and require surgical
repair (203b). Both the wound in the lid
and the conjunctival sac must be very
thoroughly
irrigated.
Mechanical
wound debridement should be kept to a
minimum. Sutures at the eyelid margin
should have their knots external to the
free rim of the lid margin in order to
avoid contact with the cornea. This can
be accomplished with a figure-of-eight
or cruciate suture. Two layers of sutures
may be used in sterile wounds. The
deeper palpebral conjunctiva and tarsus
can be closed by simple continuous 6-0
to 8-0 absorbable suture. Knots should not penetrate the conjunctiva surface and
rub against the cornea. The skin, together with the orbicularis oculi muscle, is closed
using simple interrupted nonabsorbable, 5-0 to 6-0 monofilament sutures.
Absorbable material is used to close skin incisions in aggressive patients.
204 i. An inflamed meibomian or tarsal gland (also called meibomianitis).
ii. The meibomian glands produce the lipid part of the tear film. Meibomianitis is
often secondary to bacterial infection and results in enlarged, painful, exudative
meibomian glands. Meibomian gland adenitis can result in alterations of the lipid
layer of the precorneal tear film and corneal ulceration. If meibomianitis becomes
chronic, it can result in fibrosis and thickening of the eyelids and loss of the lipid
secretion of the tear film.
ili. To provide the most accurate reatment, culture and sensitivity of the meibomian
gland exudates is recommended. A topical and systemic broad-spectrum antibiotic
and, often, a topical corticosteroid will be most effective in treating this condition.
205 i. A parasite.
i. The most likely parasite is a fly larva. This condition is termed ophthalmomyiasis
and is generally an incidental finding. Retinal edema and linear retinal hemorrhages
may also be an indication of recent larval migration.
192
206, 207:Questions
206a
206b
206 This dog has an optic neuropathy
termed optic neuritis, which is caused by
granulomatous
meningoencephalitis
(206a).
i. When a dog arrives at your hospital
with blindness and fixed dilated pupils,
206c
what are the general disease processes
that should be on the list of differentials?
ii. What diagnostic tests are performed
to help identify the cause of the clinical
signs associated with this patient?
li. Describe what is seen in 206b.
iv. Define optic neuritis.
v. What are possible causes for optic
neuritis in the dog?
vi. What is fluorescein angiography used
to visualize?
vi. What abnormalities are being
depicted in this fluorescein angiography
image (206c)?
207
A five-year-old
1Boxerwas
207
presented with a six-month history of a
red mass at the dorsal lateral limbus
(207).
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What are the treatment options?
193
206,207:Answers
206 i. Optic nerve disease, retinal disease, visual cortex involvement, and
glaucoma.
i. Slit lamp biomicroscopy, indirect and direct ophthalmoscopy, and possibly
electroretinography.
ii. The border of the optic nerve head (ONH) is less distinct and fuzzy due to edema
or obstructed axoplasmic flow from nine to three o'clock. There is a focal area of
hemorrhage at the one o'clock position on the ONH. The physiologic cup is
indistinct and difficult to identify due to optic disk swelling.
iv. Optic neuropathies may be inflammatory or noninflammatory. Optic neuritis is
inflammation of the optic nerve. A meningioma would cause a noninflammatory
optic neuropathy.
v. Distemper, cryptococcosis, blastomycosis, ehrlichiosis, histoplasmosis,
toxoplasmosis, head trauma, and orbital cellulitis are possible causes of optic
neuritis in the dog. Neoplasia of the orbit or optic nerve, and optic nerve trauma
from globe proptosis, toxins, vitamin A deficiency, and idiopathic optic nerve
disease may have clinical signs resembling optic neuritis, but are noninflammatory
in nature.
vi. The retinal and choroidal vasculature in order to evaluate the permeability of the
vessels and to identify any pigment abnormalities.
vii. Swelling of the ONH. The optic disk hemorrhage that is noted in 206b is
obstructing the fluorescence.
207 i. Hemangioma or hemangiosarcoma (see case 169). Hemangiomas and
hemangiosarcomas are uncommon, but when they occur it is often at the lateral
bulbar conjunctiva or the leading edge of the third eyelid. These tumors willinvade
the cornea and grow slowly in most cases, but some can be quite aggressive.
i. The therapy of choice is a keratectomy and cryotherapy, laser ablation, or
radiation. Depending on how large and deep the corneal defect is after keratectomy,
       s  p 
required if the mass is large or has invaded the orbit. There have been no reports
in dogs of metastasis of hemangioma or hemangiosarcoma from the eye to other
organs.
194
208, 209: Questions
208a
 208 A young adult Siamese cat is presented with a filament-like object protruding
from his eye (208a). What is the therapy for corneal foreign bodies as seen in this
individual?
209
209 A middle-aged domestic shorthaired cat presents with this retinal lesion (209).
i. What caused the lesion in this cat?
ii. What stage of the condition is present?
ii. What are the etiology and pathophysiology?
iv. What is the therapy for this condition?
195
208,209:Answers
208b
s 5   s  ga  e so  g 
as using topical anesthetic and carefully flipping a superficial foreign body off the
i on ro  d an p soq  'qms    
penetrate the anterior chamber will require general anesthesia and microsurgical
techniques for surgical removal. Antimicrobials are recommended postoperatively.
209 i. This retinal lesion is typical of taurine deficiency retinopathy.
ii. The clinical presentation of taurine deficiency retinopathy in this case is relatively
early, consisting of a horizontal band of hyperreflectivity dorsal to the optic nerve
head.
ii. See case 22. Taurine is an essential amino acid for cats. The cones are initially
affected in the entire retina, but early cone death is most easily detected in the area
centralis, as noted in this photo, due to the high concentration of cone photo-
receptor cells in this region.
iv. Taurine supplementation in the diet. The effects are only partially reversible and
depend on the length of time the taurine deficiency has been present. Complete
retinal degeneration is apparent after nine months if taurine is not supplemented.
196
210, 21l: Questions
210a
210b
210 This adult male Labrador Retriever is presented with crusting and redness
around the eyes (210a, b). The owner reports that this has recently worsened and
 that the dog has begun to traumatize himself by scratching and rubbing at the eyes.
 A moderate amount of purulent exudate is also present. Fluorescein staining is
negative.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. What are the etiology and pathophysiology of this disease?
i. What treatment do you recommend?
211
211  A three-year-old mixed breed dog presents with a two-day history of a red
painful eye (211).
i. Describe the lesions.
ii. What is the etiology?
ili. What is the treatment?
197
210, 21I:Answers
210 i. Severe, bilateral blepharitis. Blepharitis is inflammation of the eyelids and is
 sd     o    
is indicated by severe blepharospasm (squinting) and excessive tearing. The
condition is uncomfortable and the animal may subject himself to self-trauma.
ii. It is often difficult to determine the cause of blepharitis. Blepharitis can result
from infectious causes (i.e. bacterial, mycotic, or parasitic) or it can be immune-
mediated (for an in-depth review of causes and treatments see case 77). Due to the
     o      ss
condition is with a combination of tests. Skin scrapings and culture and biopsy of
lid pyodermas are indicated.
ii. This was a bacterial blepharitis and it was treated with systermic antibiotics for
two months.
211 i. There is moderate bulbar conjunctivitis and moderate corneal edema.
Corneal vessels are present 360 degrees around the limbus. Multiple white
curvilinear structures are present in the anterior chamber The iris is swollen and the
pupil dyscoric. When bright light is shone into the eye, these curvilinear structures
exhibit motility.
ii. This patient has anterior uveitis due to heartworms. Dirofilaria immitis is the
most commonly reported intraocular nematode among dogs in North America.
Ocular involvement is postulated to be a result of aberrant migration of the fourth-
stage larvae from the subconjunctival space. The parasites induce mild to severe
anterior uveitis. In a retrospective study, German Shepherd Dogs were over-
represented, with 33 % of the study group affected.
ii. Surgical removal of the D. immitis worm through a limbal incision is generally
successful. Preoperative treatment with a topical cholinesterase inhibitor may help
to decrease parasite movement. After surgery, treatment for anterior uveitis is
recommended (see case 12)
198
212, 213: Questions
212a
212b
212 A three-year-old domestic shorthaired cat is presented with moderate blepharo-
spasm and bilateral pink spots on both eyes of four weeks' duration (212a, b).
i. What is the most likely diagnosis for this case?
ii. What are two other differentials for this case?
ili. How is this disease diagnosed?
iv. What is the treatment for this condition?
213  This Rottweiler dog is presented
213
with a large mass under the jaw (213).
The owner is concerned about both the
mass and the droopy looking right
eyelid. Aspiration of the mass reveals a
stringy, blood-tinged fluid with little to
no cell population.
i. What are your differential diagnoses
for this mass?
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What is the pathophysiology of the
mass and the ectropion?
iv. How would you surgically correct the
condition?
199
212, 213:Answers
2120
          
examination usually reveals a localized-to-diffuse, white-to-pink granular appearing
corneal plaque. Feline herpesvirus-1 has a strong link to EK, with 76% of cats with
EK being feline herpesvirus-1 positive in one study.
i. Differentials for a pink granular mass on the cornea in a cat are neoplasia
(squamous cell carcinoma} and granulation tissue. It would be very rare to have
either of these two differentials present bilaterally.
ii. Diagnosis of EK is based on cytology of corneal scrapings or histopathologic
examination of corneal biopsies. Cytologic examination usually demonstrates the
presence of eosinophils (212c), mast cells, lymphocytes, or plasmacytes.
iv. The treatment of choice when the corneal epithelium is intact is topical
corticosteroids. Topical cyclosporin A can be useful in some refractory cases.
213 i. Differentials include sialocele and neoplasia (lymphoma, lipoma, salivary
tumor).
ii. Based on analysis of the fine-needle aspirate, this dog has a large sialocele that
is causing slight ectropion,
ili. The exact cause of sialoceles is unknown; however, trauma and foreign body
penetration have been suggested. When the salivary gland is damaged, saliva leaks
out into the surrounding tissue. Extravasated saliva then pools most commonly in
 the cranial cervical and intermandibular regions.
iv. Surgical drainage of the swelling and surgical removal of the sialocele are the
treatments of choice. Following shrinkage of the sialocele, correction of the
ectropion may be required, but was not necessary in this dog.
200
214-216:Questions
214 An 11-year-old intact male mixed
214a
breed dog was presented with a tan, flat,
round mass on the lateral aspect of the
upper eye lid (214a).
i. What is the likely origin of this mass,
and what is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. How can this mass be treated?
215 This domestic shorthaired cat was
215
presented with the condition called iris
bombe. Fibrin is present in the pupil and
the anterior chamber is collapsed (215).
i. What is the mechanism for the forma-
tion of iris bombe?
ii. How is iris bombe treated?
216A10-year-oldmale Golden
216
Retriever is presented with bilateral
painful red eyes. On ophthalmic exam-
ination there is mild
1  conjunctival
hyperemia, mild aqueous flare, and
three to four blood-filled uveal cysts
(216).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What is its significance?
201
214-216:Answers
214 i. The mass is arising from the eyelid
214b
meibomian glands, so it is most likely an adenoma
or adenocarcinoma. These tumors may be pink or
have varying degrees of pigmentation, and are
often lobulated. Some meibomian gland adenomas
(214b) or adenocarcinomas may ulcerate and
hemorrhage. They can cause blepharospasm,
epiphora, conjunctival hyperemia, and corneal
vascularization and pigmentation. Other tumors of
the canine eyelids are melanomas, fibromas and
fibrosarcomas, mastocytoma or mast cell sarcoma,
lipomas, and papillomas.
ii. Therapies for canine lid tumors include surgical
excision, cryosurgery, or a combination of both.
Recurrence rates after surgery and cryosurgery are low. Masses that involve the
medial canthus and/or lacrimal puncta can be excised, but they are associated with
damage to the nasolacrimal drainage system.
215 i. Chronic uveitis can lead to iris bombé. Miosis of the pupil is noted in
response to prostaglandins and other inflammatory mediators that act directly on
the iris sphincter muscle. Miosis causes increased iris lens contact to increase. Fibrin
and inflammatory proteins released into the uveitic aqueous humor can cause rapid
adherence or synechiation of the iris to the anterior lens capsule. If the synechiae
occur for 360 degrees around the pupil, aqueous humor continues to be produced,
which increases the pressure in the posterior chamber and pushes the iris anteriorly
to narrow the anterior chamber. Glaucoma is a result of iris bombe.
i. Medically. The uveitis is suppressed with topical corticosteroids and attempts to
dilate the pupil are made with topical atropine and phenylephrine. Tissue
plasminogen activator is used in acute cases in an attempt to breakdown the fibrin
causing the synechiae. The prognosis is poor for vision if iris bombe remains.
216 i. Pigmentary uveitis. Clinical signs of this condition are radially oriented
pigment on the anterior lens capsule, multifocal pigmented iris areas with or
without uveal cysts, blood-filled uveal cysts, spiderweb-like fibrinous debris in the
anterior chamber, and posterior synechiae.
i. Pigmentary uveitis is a progressive blinding disease in the Golden Retriever.
Medical therapy for uveitis should be started immediately and will be long term
 o  q  i   a    
blindness.
202
217, 218: Questions
217a
217b
 217 A young Weimaraner presents with a soft swelling of the left medial canthus
(217a, b)
i. Describe the clinical signs seen in this dog.
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ili. What clinical sign will be noted in all patients with this condition?
iv. What is the treatment for this type of condition?
218a
218b
 218 An eight-year-old male mixed breed dog was diagnosed with bilateral primary
glaucoma that left the dog permanently blind. The chosen therapy was an
intraocular prosthetic placement. The two images shown were taken one year
postoperatively (218a,b).
i. Why do you suspect intraocular prostheses were chosen as therapy in this dog?
i. Do the eyes look as expected one-year postoperatively?
203
217,218:Answers
217c
217d
217 i. Bilateral blepharospasm and epiphora are noted. There is a swelling medial
and ventral to the medial canthus of the left eye (217b). It is possible that a similar
lesion (although smaller) may exist in the same location in the right eye.
i. A canaliculops, a congenital cyst of canalicular origin. The lacrimal drainage
system of the dog consists of a lacrimal punctum in the upper and lower lids. These
o s e g o  n p n i e n i 
lacrimal duct that drains into the nose.
ii. Epiphora is noted secondary to compression of the canaliculi by the
canaliculops.
iv. The cystic fluid can be removed using a syringe and needle (217c). This may
improve the clinical signs temporarily, and the fluid can be used for diagnostic
purposes. Surgical removal of the cyst (217d) can restore canalicular patency and
therefore improve the patient's epiphora.
218 i. Long-term intraocular pressure (IOP) elevation leads to retinal damage and
blindness. When blindness occurs, enucleation or intraocular prosthetics would be
recommended. Some owners prefer the cosmetic appearance of prostheses, although
the dogs surely do not care! The dogs are no longer painful and do not require
 Prosthetic placement should not be done if the dog has keratoconjunctivitis sicca or
corneal degeneration, or if the glaucoma was caused by intraocular infection or
neoplasia.
i. Following placement of an intraocular prosthesis, the globe will shrink around
 the implant and the cornea will vascularize and become gray. The dark color is the
result of the globe color combined with the black color of the prosthesis.
204
219, 220: Questions
219
219  A three-year-old domestic shorthaired cat is examined and found to have
blepharospasm, epiphora, and moderate conjunctivitis (219). The cat has just
moved to a new house.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What is the cause of the brown tear staining?
ili. Why are the eyes different colors?
220
This 12-year-old dog was
220a
presented with mild, painless exo-
phthalmos of the left eye.
1
Describe the findings
ofthe
ophthalmoscopic examination (220a)
and ultrasonogram (220b).
ii. What is your differential diagnosis
and treatment?
220b
205
219,220:Answers
219 i. Herpes conjunctivitis (see case 31). Feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) becomes
latent in the trigeminal ganglia and will recrudesce when the cat is stressed. Severe
ocular surface inflammation from FHV-1 infection in kittens may cause acquired
punctal stenosis or occlusion. Symblepharon (abnormal adhesion of the bulbar and
confirm occlusion, careful examination of the punctal opening under magnification
can be performed.
ii. The brown tear staining is caused by a lactoferrin-like pigment in the tears. Tear
staining is often seen in white-coated animals, but it does occur in dark-coated
animals as well. Bacterial action on the tear proteins can exacerbate the amount of
staining.
ili. This cat has iridal heterochromia, or two different iris colors. This can be a
normal finding, as in this cat, or be secondary to anterior uveitis or iris melanomas.
220 i. The ophthalmoscopic examination shows deformation and indentation of
the ventral edge of the optic nerve head; the ultrasonogram indicates a space-
occupying structure in the orbit.
ii. Orbital tumors and abscesses should be considered in the diagnosis. Tumors
represent the most common group of orbital diseases. The most frequent orbital
neoplasms are fibroma, meningioma, osteosarcoma, and lymphosarcoma. Orbital
tumors are mostly primary and malignant. As expected, all kinds of tumors occur.
Orbital tumors cause slowly progressive unilateral exophthalmos, with variable
displacement of the globe, while orbital abscesses are generally acute in onset and
very painful. In contrast to orbital inflammatory diseases, orbital neoplasms are
not initially painful. Ultrasonography and, preferably, CT or MRI can demonstrate
the extent of orbital neoplasia and careful fine-needle aspiration can be used to
make a definitive diagnosis. Surgical removal of the neoplasm is performed in
localized masses, ideally with preservation of the globe and vision. If preservation
of the globe is not possible, exenteration of the globe or radical orbitectomy must
be considered. Surgical management of orbital neoplasia can be combined with
radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or both. In most cases the prognosis is guarded
 at best. Fine-needle aspiration revealed orbital lymphosarcoma in this dog.
206
221,222:Questions
22la
221b
221 You are presented with a 10-year-
old mixed Terrier that is exhibiting
221c
redness and alopecia associated with a
lateral canthal mass of the left eye
(221a). Surgical removal of the mass
(221b, c) and
biopsy reveal
a
chondroma.
i.
What would have been your dif-
ferential diagnoses for a lateral canthal
mass?
ii. What are the etiology and patho-
physiology of chondromas?
lii. Discuss the surgical procedure for
removal of this mass.
222 This fundus photograph (222) was
222
taken from a 15-year-old domestic
shorthaired cat.
i. Describe the clinical findings.
What ocular abnormalities
are
associated with systemic hypertension in
the cat?
ii. The
e blood vessel located at 12
o'clock has successive
dilatations,
referred to as *boxcars'. What is the
pathophysiology of the clinical sign of
"box carring'?
207
221,222:Answers
221  i. Chondroma, sebaceous adenoma/adenocarcinoma, squamous cell
carcinoma, melanoma, or other neoplasms.
ii. Chondromas are tumors associated with cartilaginous tissues.
ii. Surgical excision followed by reconstructive blepharoplasty will be required to
remove the mass and achieve acceptable cosmesis. The skin around the mass must
be dissected away and removed. A lateral canthoplasty and dissection around and
under the mass to determine the extent of its attachment are required for complete
removal. Reconstructive blepharoplasty can be performed on the lateral canthus
following mass removal using the Z-plasty procedure (as described in various
textbooks).
222 i. There is a segmental constriction and dilatation of blood in the vessels. This
is termed “box carring'
i. Retinal hemorrhage, *box carring', retinal detachments, retinoschisis, retinal
edema, retinal degeneration, hyphema, and glaucoma.
ii. Hypertension can lead to sustained vasoconstriction of the retinal arterioles,
which can result in ischemic damage and degeneration of the retina. Red blood cells
and plasma leak from vessels into the retinal tissue when endothelial cells and
vascular smooth muscle become compromised and this causes very high increases
 in the tissue pressure. This is visualized as retinal hemorrhage, retinal edema, and
retinoschisis. 'Box carring? is caused by the retinal tissue pressure being higher than
 the intravascular pressure such that the vessels collapse in certain segments. The
intravascular pressure then builds up and forces blood forward until it reaches a
this process differs from that seen in case 244, which also involved ocular
hypertension in the cat.
208
223, 224: Questions
223a
223b
223
3Exophthalmos associated with
223c
orbital neoplasia was present in this
English Springer Spaniel (223a). An
abscess was drained behind the last
molar tooth (223b). A drain was placed
[o aid removal of the exudate (223c).
i. What clinical signs are associated with
orbital neoplasia?
ii. What other orbital neoplasms have
been identified in domestic species?
ii. Approximately what percentage of
canine orbital tumors are malignant?
iv. What is the recommended surgical approach to removal of an orbital neoplasm?
v. What follow-up therapy may be recommended after surgical removal of the
tumor is performed?
224 A two-year-old female Golden
224
Retriever presents for her annual
vaccinations. On ophthalmic examina-
tion a cataract is discovered (224).
i. Describe the cataract.
ii. Is this cataract going to progress to
blindness?
ii. Should the client breed this dog?
iv. What is the treatment recom-
mendation?
209
223,224:Answers
223 i. Unilateral exophthalmos(which
223d
is usually painless), reduced motility of
the globe, deviated globe, protrusion of
the third eyelid, exposure keratitis
secondary to exophthalmos, periocular
swelling, dilated pupil, nasal discharge,
and blindness. This dog had an orbital
squamous cell carcinoma that was
necrotic and thus had some degree of
pain.
1i.
Meningioma,
lymphosarcoma,
adenocarcinoma, fibrosarcoma, glioma, myxoma, multilobular osteosarcoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma (see case 98).
ii. About 80-90%.
iv. An exploratory orbitotomy by zygomatic arch resection. Resection of the tumor
can be attempted, but orbital exenteration may be necessary.
v. Radiation therapy (223d), chemotherapy, or immunotherapy. In this case, iridium
implants controlled the condition for over a year.
224 i. This is a posterior triangular suture line cataract. The cataract is in the
posterior part of the lens because the posterior Y suture is an upside down Y. This
is the typical location (posterior subcapsular cataract) for a breed-related cataract
in Golden Retrievers and Labrador Retrievers.
ii. In rare cases the cataract will slowly progress to maturiry and cause blindness.
There is a second breed-related cataract in the Golden Retriever that is a progressive
corticalcataract.
iii. There is most likely an autosomal-recessive mode of inheritance in both the
Golden and Labrador Retriever. It has been suggested that the triangular cataracts
are heterozygotes and the more progressive cataracts are homozygotes. In order to
reduce the spread of inherited cataracts in this breed, it is recommended that the dog
is not bred
iv. Fortunately, this breed-related cataract rarely progresses, but it should be
monitored yearly. There is no preventive medical or surgical treatment for cataract
formation.
210
225, 226: Questions
225a
225b
 225 These two images (225a,b) are taken from two dogs, each with a ciliary body
mass.
i. Describe the clinical appearance of these two dogs.
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What other lesions are likely to be on the differential list when clinically
evaluating masses in this location?
iv. What type of stains used on this tumor tissue are retained?
226a
226b
226 Severe conjunctivitis is present in this two-year-old dog (226a, b).
i. Describe the clinical signs noted in these photographs.
ii. What is the association between this orbital disease and conjunctivitis in dogs?
ili. What other clinical signs may also be noted with this orbital condition?
211
225,226:Answers
225
225 i. In both photographs there is a pink fleshy mass located posterior to the
pupillary margin through a dilated pupil.
i. Ciliary body adenomas, which are the most common tumors of the ciliary body
and iris, and comprise the second most common intraocular tumor of the dog. The
epithelial tumors become distinctly gland-like in their appearance (225c).
ii. Melanomas have a similar clinical presentation and location. Uveal cysts should
also be considered
iv. Vimentin, S100, neuron-specific enolase, and Alcian blue will all stain positive
226 i. There is epiphora of the ventral eyelid. A mild light yellow mucoid discharge
is noted at the medial canthus. Severe hyperemia of the conjunctival surface of the
 third eyelid is visible. The conjunctiva appears necrotic in some areas and there is
protrusion of the left third eyelid. The dog has been diagnosed with sinus
osteomyelitis
ii. Orbital cellulitis and conjunctivitis can be seen with sinus disease. The
conjunctiva is commonly the first ocular tissue to show irritation, swelling, or
displacement in orbital and sinus disease.
ii. Fistulous tracts, blepharedema, and exophthalmos
212
227-229:Questions
227 This eight-month-old Dachshund
227
was presented with chorioretinitis
caused by a Coccidioides sp. infection
(227).
i. What is the organism that causes
coccidioidomycosis in dogs?
i. How is this disease spread?
ii. In what regions is coccidioido-
mycosis more common?
iv. What are the ocular manifestations
of coccidioidomycosis?
v. How can the diagnosis of cocci-
dioidomycosis be made?
vi. What systemic treatments can be
used for coccidioidomycosis?
228
229
228
8A six-year-old spayed female
 229 A young domestic shorthaired cat
Boston Terrier was presented with a
has feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) and
traumatic foreign body (tag hook with
presents with this iris disease (229).
collar attached) in the upper eyelid
i. What form of FIP is more often
(228).
associated with ocular lesions?
i. What should be done before removing
ii. What is the most common ocular
the foreign body?
manifestation of FIP, and what clinical
ii. What are the treatment options?
sign is being depicted in the cat in 229?
ii. What is the postoperative care?
ili. What causes FIP, and what are other
ocular manifestations of this disease?
213
227-229:Answers
227 i. Coccidioides immitis is a spherical dimorphic saprophytic fungus that lives
in soil.
ii. The organism is spread through inhalation of the fungal spores.
ii. This disease is endemic in low altitude areas of the southwestern United States.
It is also seen in Mexico and Central and South America.
iv. Granulomatous uveitis and iritis are associated with the anterior segment, and
chorioretinitis and retinal detachment are associated with the posterior segment.
v. Vitreocentesis and anterior chamber centesis could yield fungal elements. PCR has
due to the short-term duration of the DNA within the serum of the dog. Latex
agglutination, agar gel immunodiffusion, and ELISA have been used for
identification, as well as complement fixation titer and measuring IgG antibodies.
vi. Ketoconazole, itraconazole, or fluconazole. Treatment is of long duration.
228 i. An ophthalmic examination should be performed. The cornea and anterior
chamber should be carefully examined. Corneal laceration and perforation are
potential complications to lid trauma. The anterior chamber should be examined
for hyphema, lens material, and pupil size.
i. Eyelids are highly vascular and have a great capacity to heal and resist infection.
The treatment of choice is removal of the tag hook and primary closure of the
wound. Alternatively, the hook can be cut and removed under sedation, and the
wound allowed to heal by second intention.
ii. Postoperative care includes topical and/or systemic antibiotics, systemic anti-
inflammatories (e.g. carprofen), and an Elizabethan collar. Ice packs immediately
postoperatively and warm compresses 2-4 days postoperatively can reduce lid
swelling.
229 i. The noneffusive or dry form of FIP.
ii. Granulomatous anterior uveitis with large mutton-fat keratic precipitates and
fibrin in the anterior chamber is commonly found in the eyes of cats with FIP.
Rubeosis iridis {iris neovascularization} is seen in this cat.
ili. FIP is a coronavirus. Chorioretinitis is also found in cats with with FIP. A
pyogranulomatous exudate may be located perivascularly in retinal vessels. There
may also be retinal detachments, optic neuritis, and retinal hemorrhages.
214
230, 231:Questions
230a
230b
230 An adult mixed breed dog was
230c
presented with wounds consistent with
those inflicted from a shotgun blast.
Corneal perforation from a steel pellet
is seen (230a). Radiography (230b, c) is
performed.
i. Discuss the radiographic findings.
ii. What other imaging technques might
be useful?
231 A nine-year-old dog presents with a
23
one-week history of painful red eyes
(231). The dog has bilateral severe
anterior uveitis and a swollen iris. On
physical examination there is lymph-
adenopathy.
performed?
ii. What is the diagnosis?
iii. What are the treatment options?
iv. What is the prognosis?
215
230, 23I:Answers
230d
230e
230 i. The key to this case is to determine if any pellets have entered the eye.
Metallic objects can be seen in several places in the radiographs, but the plain films
do not determine if the pellets are intraocular or not.
i. Ultrasound (the ultrasonogram [230d] shows a reverberation artifact as the pellet
blocks the soundwaves from the ultrasound probe) and CT (the ‘starburst sign'
[230e] localizes the pellet to inside the globe). An MRI should not be used for the
localization of metallic foreign bodies, as the magnet could indiscriminately pull
the pellet out of the globe, resulting in further trauma.
231 i. Fine-needle aspiration of the lymph nodes should be performed.
i. Cytology of the lymph node revealed lymphosarcoma (see case 173).
Lymphosarcoma is the second most common intraocular neoplasia in dogs. Ocular
disease can be the presenting complaint and is often bilateral. A large prospective
study revealed that 37% of lymphosarcoma patients present with some ocular
lesions.
ili. Medical therapy for anterior uveitis should be started immediately (see case 12).
Enucleation of the globe does not improve survival time, but may improve quality
of life due to elimination of the ocular pain caused by uveitis and secondary
glaucoma. For treatment options for lymphosarcoma, current internal medicine
textbooks should be consulted.
iv. Poor. Most animals with ocular lymphoma lesions are in the advanced stages of
lymphoma and may also have leukemia. The survival times for dogs with ocular
lymphoma are short.
216
232,233:Questions
232a
232b
232 A four-year-old Coonhound is presented with a small descemetocele and
corneal ulcer in the axial cornea.
i. What surgical method has been used to treat the descemetocele (232a, b)?
ii. What are the cons and pros for this procedure compared with the alternative
ones?
233a
233b
233 A 12-year-old domestic shorthaired cat is presented with a two-week history
of red squint eyes (233a, b).
i.Describe the lesions.
ii. What are the differentials for the conjunctival lesions?
ili. What are the differentials for the corneal lesion in the right eye?
217
232, 233:Answers
232C
232 i. A conjunctival free island graft.
ii. A conjunctival free island graft is a modified conjunctival graft as it has no blood
supply. These grafts are essentially a transplant of conjunctival tissue to the cornea
for deep corneal ulcers or corneal perforations. The success of this surgical
procedure may depend on the vascularity of the lesion, therefore lesions without
corneal vascularization may heal better with a typical conjunctival pedicle graft.
a watertight, 360° closure can be made; there is no tension to cause premature
retraction of the graft: and the graft does not require trimming after surgery as do
(232c).
233 i. There is bilateral severe conjunctival hyperemia and chemosis. The
 n di  e  r si   a  si s
observed. The right cornea has no tapetal reflection; there is a tan to pink gelatinous
raised oval-shaped central lesion and corneal vascularization with edema.
ii. The differentials include viral (feline herpesvirus-1) and bacterial (e.g.
Chlamydophila, Myoplasma) infection, meibomian gland adenitis, keratocon-
junctivitis sicca, eosinophilic keratoconjunctivitis, conjunctival trauma or foreign
body, and neoplasia. This was a case of conjunctival lymphosarcoma.
li. The differentials include descemetocele, corneal foreign body, iris prolapse,
melting corneal ulcer, epithelial inclusion cyst, corneal endothelial dystrophy, and
sloughing corneal sequestrum. This was a case of iris prolapse.
218
234-236:Questions
234
235
234 A retinal hemorrhage is observed
235 A six-year-old male Doberman
(234) during funduscopic examination
Pincher is presented with a four-week
of a middle-aged male mixed breed dog.
history of vitiligo (depigmentation of the
i. Where is this retinal hemorrhage,
skin) around his eyes (235).
called “keel boat', located in relation to
i. What are the differentials for depig-
the retina?
mented skin around the eye?
ii. What type of disease processes may
ii. There is no generalized vitiligo, but
have “keel boat’ hemorrhages as 
no detectable uveitis. What is the most
clinical sign on ophthalmoscopic exam-
likely diagnosis?
ination?
ili. What is the pathogenesis of the skin
ii. Describe the other types of retinal
lesions?
hemorrhage that can be visualized on
ophthalmoscopic examination, and the
location that corresponds to the shape.
236 A six-year-old mixed breed dog
236
presents with a two-day history of a
painful eye. On ophthalmic examination
a crescent-shaped structure is seen
behind the pupil (236).
i. Describe the lesion.
ii. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What is the pathophysiology of this
condition?
iv. What are the treatment options?
219
234-236:Answers
234 i. The hemorrhage is preretinal and is located in the vitreous in front of the
retina. The superficial retinal vessels can leak and cause separation of the vitreous
from the retina and, in association with gravity, the shape of the hemorrhage is that
of a “keel boat', as its rounded end points toward the six o'clock position.
ii. This type of hemorrhage may be associated with infectious chorioretinitis from
ii. Subretinal hemorrhages, which are located between the retina and the choroid,
appear as large areas of indistinct bordered, diffuse, dull-red areas of hemorrhage.
Superficial retinal hemorrhages, located within the nerve fiber layer, are visualized
as linear brush or flame shapes. Hemorrhages located in the deep retina are usually
visualized as small, discrete, round hemorrhages.
235 i. Differentials include zinc deficiency, lupus erythematosus, and uveodermato-
logic syndrome.
ii. The immune-mediated disease lupus erythematosus. Discoid lupus erythematosus
is limited to the skin, and systemic lupus erythematosus is a multiorgan disease.
Both forms frequently have a facial dermatosis with eyelid involvement.
ii. The pathogenesis of the skin lesions involves an autoimmune response where
antinuclear antibodies bind to the keratinocytes. The antibodies then cause
cytotoxic injury and cytokine release, resulting in attraction of lymphocytes and
epithelial damage. A current internal medicine text will help with the details of
diagnosis and treatment.
236 i. The cornea is clear and there is an aphakic crescent to the right as the lens
 is luxated to the left. A clear view of the optic nerve, tapetum, and nontapetalregion
can be seen to the right in the aphakic crescent
ii. Lens luxation.
ii. The pathophysiology of lens luxation is unknown. An inherited defect in the
suspensory apparatus or ciliary zonules of the lens is the cause of primary lens
luxations in terrier breeds and Shar Peis. Inflammatory cells may attack the zonular
fibers in dogs with a lens luxation and anterior uveitis. Buphthalmia as a result of
glaucoma will also cause lenses to either subluxate or fully luxate into the anterior
chamber or vitreous.
iv. Treatment options are both medical and surgical (see case 62).
220
237, 238: Questions
237b
237a
237 This mixed breed dog is presented for recent development of a mass external
to the globe (237a, b). The owner said it occurred suddenly and she was afraid it
might be cancer. Careful manipulation of the mass reveals a soft, pigmented, *oily'
mass loosely attached to the globe.
i. What are your differential diagnoses?
i. Describe how you might quickly determine the etiology of the mass?
ili. What is the treatment for this condition?
iv. What is the prognosis?
 238 A seven-year-old mixed breed dog
238
is presented with bilateral moderate
blepharitis and loss of periocular hair of
[wo weeks duration (238).
i. What diagnostic test should
Hbe
performed?
i. What are the differentials for canine
blepharitis?
alopecia, weight gain without an
increase in appetite, and dry skin. What other tests should be submitted?
221
237,238:Answers
237 i. Possible differentials include cherry eye (prolapse of the nictitating gland),
third eyelid neoplasia (lymphoma, lipoma, sarcoma, melanoma), and orbital fat
prolapse.
i. A fine-needle aspirate of this mass found a large number of adipocytes, so a
diagnosis of orbital fat prolapse was made.
ii. Orbital fat prolapse occurs due to breakdown of the orbital septum. It is treated
surgically by removal of the prolapsing fatty tissue followed by suturing of the
conjunctiva to the episcleral tissue.
iv.Recurrences can occur.
238 i. All dogs with blepharitis should have a Schirmer tear test (STT) performed
(see case 113). This dog has a STT value of 5 mm wetting/minute, indicating
significant keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS). Dogs with blepharitis should also have
skin cytology and/or histology performed.
i. Differentials for bilateral blepharitis are bacterial (staphylococci and strepto-
cocci), mycotic (Microsporum and Trichopbyton), parasitic (Demodex and scabies),
leishmanial, hormonal, and immune-mediated conditions.
ili. There is a clinical association between hypothyroidism and KCS. An estimated
20% of dogs with hypothyroidism have KCS. The blepharitis seen in this patient is
in a pattern often associated with hypothyroidism, as well as the truncal alopecia,
weight gain, and dry skin. A thyroid panel looking at T3, T4, thyroid-stimulating
hormone, and free T4 would aid the diagnosis. A current internal medicine text
will help with the details of diagnosis and treatment.
222
239, 240: Questions
239a
239b
239 A five-month-old Siamese cat is presented for vaccinations.
i. Describe the lesions (239a, b). (The pupil is pharmacologically dilated.)
ii. What is the diagnosis?
ili. Does this animal possibly have a breed predisposition to this condition?
iv. What are the treatment options?
240a
240b
240 An adult male Mastiff was presented with severe bilateral eyelid disease and
blepharospasm (240a, b).
i. Describe the clinical abnormalities noted in these photographs.
i. What degree of entropion is present? Mild, moderate, or severe?
ii. What are some factors that may contribute to the presence and severity of the
eyelid problems in this dog?
iv. What simple test that can be done to help determine if the eyelid problem present
is primary (congenital or developmental) or secondary (acquired due to severe
pain)?
v. What is the treatment for this condition?
223
239,240:Answers
239 i. The lens is small and the ciliary processes are stretched and elongated. There
is a focal cataract laterally.
ii. Bilateral microphakia. The lens is smaller in volume than normal, with the result
that the ciliary processes can be visualized.
ii. Siamese cats are predisposed to this congenital lens condition, but it has also
been reported in domestic shorthaired cats.
iv. There is no treatment for microphakia. Patients should be monitored for lens
subluxation and luxation, as well as glaucoma. (See cases 34 and 81 for
presentation and treatment of lens luxations and glaucoma.)
240 i. There is bilateral lichenification, depigmentation, and hyperkeratosis of the
upper and lower eyelids. Entropion is present as no normal eyelid margin can be
visualized in either eye. In both eyes only a small opening allows for visualization
of the globe. In 240b a small section of visible conjunctiva is hyperemic.
ii. This Mastiff has severe entropion defined by a rolling inward of the eyelid margin
of about 180 degrees. Mild entropion is a rolling inward of about 45 degrees, while
moderate is about a 90 degrees rolling inward of the lid margin.
ili. Entropion can be influenced by bone structure of the orbit, skull conformation,
orbital fissure length, stage of growth, excessive facial skin and folding, and gender.
iv. Topical anesthetic can be applied to the corneal surface to help differentiate
between primary or anatomic entropion and secondary or spastic entropion.
Careful observation is necessary after the application of the topical anesthetic.
v. Surgical repair. In this dog, multiple blepharoplastic techniques or a combination
of several techniques may be necessary to correct the defects.
224
241, 242: Questions
241
241 A five-year-old female mixed breed dog has acute glaucoma in her right eye.
This image is of the right fundus (241).
i. Describe the clinical findings shown in 241.
ii. What are some possible differential diagnoses that one could make from this
image?
ii. In glaucomatous dogs, what are the optic disk changes noted with regard to
retinal ganglion cell death and axon loss?
iv. What ophthalmoscopic findings can be found when using the red-free filter on
the direct ophthalmoscope in a dog with glaucomatous retinal and optic nerve
damage?
242a
242b
242 A seven-year-old female Boston Terrier is presented with a six-month history
of increased blueness of both eyes, intraocular pressure of 18 mmHg in both eyes,
and superficial nonhealing ulcers in both eyes (242a).
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. What procedure has been performed in 242b?
225
241,242:Answers
241 i. Swelling of the entire optic disk is present. There are indistinct borders of
the optic disk, especially from nine to three o'clock. The vessels associated with the
peripheral optic disk are elevated anteriorly from retinal edema. The retina is
edematous from 10 to two o'clock, as well as a focal area more peripheral to the
disk at the nine o'clock position.
ii. Glaucoma and optic neuritis.
ii. The optic nerve head cup size increases in diameter and the neuroretinal rim
area decreases (see case 123). Papilledema and hemorrhage of the disk may also be
noted.
iv. Dark wedge defects in the retinal sheen of the attenuated nerve fiber layer are
found with the red-free filter.
s    s   s   
(bilateral, slowly progressive, increased corneal edema, normal IOP, and superficial
nonhealing ulcers) indicate endothelial dystrophy.
ii. Patients with persistent bullae formation and nonhealing corneal ulcers may
   i       
permeability of the epithelium and contraction of the superficial stromal collagen
fibers to allow movement of water out of the cornea in order to reduce corneal
edema. Thermokeratoplasty is performed under heavy sedation or general
anesthesia. Multifocal points of low-voltage thermal cautery are applied over the
exposed stroma. The resulting corneal ulcers heal quickly.
226
243, 244: Questions
243
243 A nine-year-old Yorkshire Terrier was presented with an iris abnormality
(243), mainly at the 12 and six o'clock positions.
i. What is the name of the condition seen in this Yorkshire Terrier?
ii. What is its etiology, and does it require treatment?
244b
244a
244 A 16-year-old domestic shorthaired cat was presented with acute vision
loss. When questioned, the owner revealed that the cat seemed also to be polyuric
and polydipsic.
i. What is the major differential for the lesions depicted in these fundus photographs
(244a, b, right and left eyes, respectively)?
i. What diagnostic tests should be performed, and what therapy can be utilized in
this cat?
227
243,244:Answers
243 i. Senile iris atrophy (SIA).
ii. SIA is a common finding in older dogs. It is a spontaneous progressive thinning
of the stroma or pupillary margin of the iris. Though it may occur in any breed, the
Toy and Miniature Poodle, Miniature Schnauzer, and Chihuahua appear to have a
higher incidence of this condition. The pupillary margin often develops a scalloped,
 moth-eaten appearance. Atrophy of the pupillary muscles results in dyscoria and
may lead to reduced or absent pupillary light reflexes. Therefore, when efferent
pupillary abnormalities are present, the clinician must consider iris atrophy as a
possible cause. SIA may also initially manifest as a subtle fading of the natural iris
color and increased pigmentation present in focal areas due to exposure of the
pigmented posterior iris epithelium. As degeneration progresses, additional thinning
may result in holes in the pigmented iris epithelial layers. With transillumination,
affected areas appear as translucent patches or openings within the iris (as seen in
243), and are most striking when light is reflected from the tapetal fundus through
the areas of affected iris. These full-thickness defects should not be mistaken for
congenital iris colobomas. Vision is unaffected by iris atrophy; however severe cases
may manifest photophobia. There is no treatment for iris atrophy, although goggles
 and tinted contact lens have been utilized in severely photophobic dogs.
244 i. Vitreal hemorrhages and focal areas of retinal detachment are present in
both eyes. The top differential is systemic hypertension. The history of
polyuria/polydipsia suggests the vascular hypertension is probably secondary to
renal disease. This is a common cause of acute blindness in geriatric cats (see case
159). Ocular examination may reveal retinal detachment, sub- and intraretinal
hemorrhage, tortuous vessels, hyphema, vitreal hemorrhage, and glaucoma.
i. A blood pressure reading, as well as general blood work and a urinalysis to
evaluate renal function. The most common therapy to reduce the blood pressure
and allow the retina to reattach is oral amlodipine (0.625 mg/cat/day).
228
245.246:Questions
245
245 The left eye of a one-year-old German Shepherd Dog is shown (245).
i. What is the abnormality shown in this photo?
ii. What is the etiology?
ii. What is the treatment?
246
 246 A dog presents with sudden blindness. Is this a normal or abnormal dog fundus
image (246)?
229
245,246:Answers
245 i. There is an inversion of the shaft and the medial and lateral tips of the
nictitating membrane (NM) cartilage.
ii. Eversion of the shaft of the NM cartilage is a commonly occurring anomaly in
very large breed dogs. It may be hereditary in German Shorthaired Pointers. It is
compared with that of the anterior portion. The everted cartilage appears as an
anterior folding of the leading edge of the NM, with exposure of the posterior
aspect. The result is chronic conjunctivitis and ocular discharge.
ii. The most popular surgical correction is excision of the folded portion of the
NM cartilage. A less common anomaly of the NM cartilage (as in this case) is
inversion of the medial and lateral tips of the NM cartilage. Irritation from this
cartilage can result in keratitis and corneal ulceration. The bent tips can also be
surgically excised if involved.
246 The fundus appears normal in both eyes this case, but the dog is blind. The
diagnosis was sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD) based on electro-
retinography (ERG) and clinical examination. SARD is a syndrome of diseases with
sudden loss of vision. The differential diagnosis for sudden blindness would also
include optic neuritis, cortical blindness, and retinal detachment, but there is no
evidence of these conditions in this image. There are no ophthalmoscopic signs
initially in SARD cases, but signs of retinal degeneration can occur weeks to months
later. ERG is not detectable from the onset due to explosive photoreceptor
destruction. SARD is found commonly in middle-aged, slightly obese female dogs
Dachshunds are breeds commonly affected. The etiology is unknown, but a toxic
degeneration or metabolic disorder related to hormonal imbalances of melanocyte
stimulating hormone or adrenocorticotropic hormone, and metabolic disturbances
of the retinal pigment epithelium have been proposed. Some SARD cases may be
immune mediated. Intravitreal glutamate levels are high in some cases. There is no
reliable or proven therapy at present, but research continues for the etiology and
treatment of SARD.
230
247-249:Questions
247a
247b
247 This adult female Pekinese (247a, b) had been diagnosed with blastomycosis
and was being treated for fungal-induced anterior uveitis.
i. Describe the clinical presentation shown.
ii. What disease process causes this type of presentation?
iii. What are the treatment options for this dog?
248
249
248 A 12-week-old kitten presents with
a large gray spot in the center of the
cornea (248).
249 This is a CT image of a cat (249).
i. Describe the lesion.
i. What are the advantages of CT
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis, and
scanning in veterinary ophthalmology?
what is the etiology?
ii. What ocular lesion is present?
iii. What are the treatment options?
231
247-249:Answers
s    1       
buphthalmia, and a swollen iris (247a).
ii. Secondary glaucoma is the most likely cause for the prominent buphthalmos.
Angle obstruction from the uveitis resulted in chronic elevation in intraocular
pressure (IOP). The IOP increase caused globe enlargement.
ii. The globe is severely buphthalmic and blind and it is impossible for the dog to
blink completely in order to cover the cornea (247b). The globe was enucleated.
248 i. There are multiple strands of iris colored tissue extending from the iris to the
cornea. The cornea has a large gray area where the strands adhere to the corneal
endothelium. There is no indication of active inflammation
ii. Persistent pupillary membranes (PPMs). In the fetus, the pupil is closed with a
thin pupillary membrane that regresses prior to birth. Sometimes, regression is not
complete at birth and small strands are still present until 4-5 weeks of age (see case
41). In this case the PPM is large and easily seen. PPMs are always attached to the
iris collarette at one end, with the other end either floating in the anterior chamber,
attached to the lens (anterior capsular cataract), attached to the iris collarette at
other end, or, as in this case, adhered to the corneal endothelium, resulting in a
large opacity or leukoma.
ili. The majority of PPMs require no therapy.
249 i. CT has dramatically improved the diagnosis and management of ocular and
orbital disease in animals. The scanning x-ray tube of the CT machine emits a thin
collimated beam of x-rays. These are attenuated as they pass through tissues and then
collected by an array of special detectors. The detectors convert x-ray photons into
images of thin slices of tissue (1-3 mm). The anatomy of the orbit is an ideal subject
for CT. The relatively dense nerves, globe, and extraocular muscles are surrounded
by lucent orbital fat and encased in dense bone and this provides a tissue of high
contrast for CT. CT is used in the analysis of orbital trauma, optic neuritis, orbital
infection and cellulitis, and orbital neoplasia. It can also demonstrate changes within
the globe such as lens luxation, globe perforation, and intravireal hemorrhage.
Congenital optic disk colobomas can be identified, and multiple intraocular and
orbital foreign bodies >0.5 mm in size can be accurately localized with CT. However
 the availability of CT scanners for routine diagnostic testing is still somewhat limited
and costly, and the procedure requires general anesthesia in animals.
i. A posteriorly luxated lens is found in the eye on the right side of the image.
232
250,251:Questions
250a
250b
250 Two normal dog fundus images are shown (250a, b).
i. List the anatomic structures shown in these direct ophthalmoscopic images of a
normal canine fundus.
ii. What is the name of the dark spot in the center of the optic nerve head (ONH)?
ili. What is the predominant cell type within the ONH?
251a
25 1b
251 Enophthalmos is present following head trauma in this male adult Doberman
Pinscher (251a). When the dog lowers his head the conjunctiva balloons rapidly
forward (251b).
i. What is this condition, and what clinical signs are found with it?
ii. What may be the causes of this type of condition?
ii. What diagnostic tests may be performed to help confirm the condition?
iv. What is the treatment for this condition?
233
250, 251:Answers
250c
250 i. Tapetum, nontapetum, retinal vessels, and the ONH. The tapetum is
granular with tapetal islets in 250a.
ii. The physiologic pit, which is a remnant of the hyaloid artery. It is best seen in
histologic specimens (250c, plastic section).
ii. The glial cell (the astrocyte), which provides physical support, absorbs excess
extracellular potassium released by depolarizing axons, and stores glycogen.
251 i. An orbital varix, or abnormal anastomosis of orbital arteries and veins. This
dog presents with an intermittent positional exophthalmos to enophthalmos that is
not painful.
soaaire te Aq pai aq to i ro peo aq tn toon s '
anastomosis from a traumatic event, as in this dog.
ii. Diagnostic imaging such as MRI contrast studies and Doppler ultrasound can be
useful.
iv. The treatment for this condition is either observation or surgical ligation of the
abnormal vessels.
234
252-254:Questions
252 The removal of cataracts is the most common intraocular surgical procedure
performed in veterinary medicine. What type of cataract removal surgery is
recommended for the dog and cat?
253 The third eyelid of this kitten is
253
attached to the dorsal conjunctiva and
is not freely mobile (253). What are two
possible causes for this condition?
254a
254b
254c
254 This dog has a hard lump on its
skull near the orbits that has slowly
'sak omi snoiaard aul raao paieadde
The mass is causing exophthalmos
(254a).
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How do you interpret the radio-
graphic findings (254b, c)?
235
252-254:Answers
252
252 Phacoemulsification cataract surgery (as shown in 252) is the most useful
technique for the dog and cat. This extracapsular procedure through a 3.2 mm
corneal incision utilizes a piezoelectric handpiece with an ultrasonic titanium needle
in a silicone sleeve to fragment and emulsify the lens nucleus and cortex following
removal of the anterior capsule. The emulsified lens is then aspirated from the eye
while intraocular pressure is maintained by infusion of lactated Ringer's solution or
balanced salt solution. An intraocular lens implant can be inserted following
cataract removal. The success rate approaches 90% for patients with healthy
corneas and retinas and the absence of preoperative uveitis.
253 Abnormal adherence of conjunctiva to conjunctiva is termed symblepharon.
Symblepharon is commonly associated with feline herpesvirus infections (see case
167). Symblepharon can also be due to a congenital malformation of the third
eyelid, which is likely the cause in this kitten.
254 i. Neoplasia, most likely osteosarcoma, of the skull and orbit.
i. The radiographs indicate extensive bone lysis. Multilobular osteochondro-
sarcoma and osteosarcoma are other bony tumors reported in the skull of dogs;
osteosarcomas of the skull are found in cats. Despite the aggressive bone lysis
detected radiographically, this dog's lesion grew slowly and seemed to have limited
metastatic potential over the next four years. CT and MRI can aid the diagnosis and
management of skull masses.
236
Note: References are to case
blepharoplasty
chemosis 233
numbers
H-type 147
s ze ana kuauo,
Vto Y 89
Chlamydophita felis 52
abscess, orbital/retrobulbar
Z-plasty 221
chondroma, lateral canthus
9,109, 146
blepharospasm 154
221
Ahmed valve 68
blindness
chorioretinitis 67, 76, 186
alopecia 196
cataracts 54
causes 67, 186
alpha-2-interferon 18, 130
chorioretinitis 186
coccidioidomycosis 227
 amniotic membrane graft
glaucoma 81
crytpococcosis 76, 186
137
granulomatous
fungal 186
anisocoria 62
meningoencephalitis 58
viral 186
anterior uveitis
nutritional retinopathy 22
chorioretinopathy, toxic
aqueous flare 12
optic neuritis 206
46
cat 4, 7, 120
progressive rod-cone
choroidal hypoplasia 62,
cataracts 51, 133
degeneration 163
132
chronic 32
retinal detachment 161
cicatrix 89
feline immunodeficiency
steroid-responsive retinal
cidofovir 18, 130
virus-induced 189
detachment 161
ciliary body
heartworms 211
uveodermatologic
ablation 81
inis color change 4, 120
syndrome 3
adenoma 225
keratic precipitates 202
blink reflex, assessment 69
tumor 168
lens luxation 32
blood pressure, elevation
ciliary body processes,
lymphosarcoma 231
45, 159, 244
pigmented114
posterior synechiae 133
"blue’ eyes 62, 116
ciliary nerves
secondary glaucoma 36,
box carring' 222
long 69
133,247
Boxer (indolent) ulcer 8, 64,
short 29
antibiotics,
65, 145, 180
coccidioidomycosis 227
ophthalmotoxicity 63,
bullous keratopathy 99, 164
Cochet-Bonnet
126
buphthalmos 73, 247
esthesiometer 69
antiproteases 137
Collie eye anomaly 48, 61,
antiviral medications 18, 52,
calcium, corneal deposits 44
132
130
calicivirus 52
diagnosis 132
aphakic crescent 32, 200,
canaliculops 217
go-normals’132
236
canine distemper virus
coloboma
aqueous flare 12
infection 171
eyelid 60
aqueous humor, leakage
carbonic anhydrase
optic disk 48, 61
156
inhibitors 34, 36
retina 87, 144
argon laser 27
cataracts
 computed tomography
asteroid hyalosis 82, 191
breed-related 224
scanning 249
atropine 21,42,72
cat 51, 148
conjunctiva
azathioprine 3, 176, 181
diabetes 100
dermoid 13
equatorial178
hyperemia 109,233
basal cell carcinoma 55
hypermature resorbing
lymphosarcoma 233
beta-blockers, topical 34, 36
114
conjunctival flap 137, 142,
binocular vision 2
incipient 51, 100
197
Blastomyces dermatitidis 93
mature 54
hood 143
blastomycosis 93, 247
Morgagnian-type 148
pedicle 107,143
blepharitis 77, 196, 210
nuclear 140
conjunctival graft 86, 232
bilateral 210,238
surgery 54,187,252
conjunctivalrhinostomy 83
causes 77,210
cavernous sinus syndrome
conjunctivitis
sequelae 196
119
causes 1
237
conjunctivitis (continued)
‘cushingoid’ features 246
enucleation
herpesvirus 18, 31, 52,
Cuter
ghralal
9.5
endophthalmitis 152
130,167,219
following trauma 23
ligneous 181
172
technique 43
nictitans 1, 11
cyclosporin A 94, 176, 181,
uveal tumor128
persistent in medial
199
eosinophilic keratitis 212
canthal pocket 105
cysts
 epiphora
sinus osteomyelitis 226
iris 150
bilateral 160
contact lens, soft 65
veal 19,27, 53,79
in puppies 192
cornea
unilateral 192,194,217
abscess 138
dacryocystitis 26
euryblepharon 124
bulla 99, 164
dacryocystorhinography 26,
exophthalmos
degeneration 44
83
cat 70
dermoid 122
dazzle reflex 166
masticatory muscle
fluorescein staining 74
Demodex canis 77
myositis 175
foreign body 24, 135,
dental disease 9, 165
positional exophthalmos
208,230
dermoids 185
to enophthalmos 251
hemangiosarcoma 169
conjunctival 13, 185
progressive 112
keratic precipitates 155,
corneal 122
retrobulbar abscess 9, 109
177,229
eyelid 139
skull/orbital tumor 254
lacerations 72
descemetocele 86, 142, 194
extraocular muscles, tearing
lipidosis (lipid
causes 126
151
keratopathy) 40
clinical findings 126
eyelids
neovascularization in
diagnosis 194
abscess 89
spontaneous chronic
treatment 86,
,126,142,
agenesis 60
corneal epithelial defect
194,232
dermoid 139
180
Descemet's membrane
foreign body 228
perforation 21, 35, 90
exposure 126,142
lacerations 203
healed 158
rupture 34
temporary tarsorrhaphy
surgical treatment 153,
dexamethasone 11
57, 101
232
diabetes mellitus 100, 178
tumors 47, 55, 147, 214
sensory innervation 69
diet 22,40
sequestrum 102
Dirofilaria immitis 211
famciclovir 18
corneal edema 34,72
distichiasis 15,16
feline herpesvirus-1 212,
acute 62
dry eye 42, 113
219
diffuse 142
feline immunodeficiency
endophthalmitis 152
ectopic cilia 145
virus 189
endothelial dystrophy
ectropion, cicatricial 89
feline infectious peritonitis
116, 242
electroretinography 54, 59,
155,177,229
corneal ulcer
71
feline sarcoma virus 55
Boxerfindolent 8, 64, 65,
endophthalmitis 152
fibrin, anterior chamber 229
145, 180
endothelial dystrophy 116,
fibrosarcoma, orbit 6
fungal 117
242
“floaters’82
melting 21, 97, 137, 143,
emophthalmos 154,251
fluorescein angiography 85,
156
entropion 86, 111, 157,240
206
nonhealing 242
in cats 131
fuorescein staining 74, 86,
surgical management 143
differentiation of
194
corneoscleral transposition
primary/secondary 240
fly larvae, intraocular 205
102
in dog 111
foreign body
corticosteroids 3, 11, 49,
medical treatment 131
causing endophthalmitis
182
severe 240
152
cranial nerves 119
surgical treatment 131,
comea 24,135,208
cryosurgery 16
157
eyelid228
Cryptococcus neoformans
temporary management
intraocular 230
76, 186
111
see aiso trauma
238
fresh frozen plasma 181
hyphema 7,50,72,103
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
fundus
hypothyroidism 238
42,69,94,113,182,238
curvilinear tracks 95
autoimmune 199
nommal 17, 201,250
idoxyuridine 130
diagnosis 113
funduscopy, see
immune-mediated disease
and hypothyroidism 238
ophthalmoscopy
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
medical treatment 94, 182
fungal disease 117, 186
199
surgical treatment 197
masticatory muscle
keratomalacia (melting
glaucoma
myositis 175
ulcer) 21,97, 137, 143,
congenital 73, 78
punctate keratatis 84
156
long-term consequences
uveodermatologic
management 137
218
syndrome 3,96,134
keratopathy
medical treatment 34,36
immunosuppressive therapy
bullous 99, 164
optic nerve head changes
3, 96, 199
lipid (comeal lipidosis) 40
88, 241
topical 182
keratoplasty, penetrating
optic disk changes 88,
insect larvae 85,95,205
116
123, 241
intraocular lens 187
keratotomy
primary 81
intraocular pressure
grid 8
secondary to uveitis 5,36,
decreasing 34, 36
multiple punctate 8
247
long-term consequences
surgical treatment 36, 68,
of raised 218
lacrimal duct
81, 172
measurement 38, 127,188
canaliculops 217
glial cells 250
normal values 38, 127,
see also nasolacrimal
globe proptosis 23, 57, 101,
188
system
115, 151
raised 123,218
lateral canthus
evaluation 101
intraocular prosthesis 195,
chondroma 221
extraocular muscle injury
218
congenital defects 185
151
iris
lens, intracapsular
long-term sequelae 57
color changes 3, 4, 5,
extraction 25,200
replacement 57
118,120,128,189
lens luxation
globe retropulsion 91, 98,
cyst 150
anterior 25,32,62
165
depigmentation 202
pathophysiology 236
gonioimplants 36
heterochromia 219
posterior 200,249
granuloma,
innervation 29
lipemia retinalis 33, 125
 eyelid/conjunctiva 104
melanoma 118
lipid corneal dystrophy 136
granulomatous
prolapse 35,90,138,
lupus erythematosus 235
meningoencephalitis
153,233
lymphoma, sinus 92
58
senile atrophy 243
lymphosarcoma 220, 231,
grid keratotomy 8
iris bombe 2i5
233
ivermectin 46, 77
lysine, supplementation 18,
H-flap technique 147
52,130
Haab's striae 34
jaw mass 213
heartworms 211
Jones test 74,83
 masticatory muscle myositis
hemangioma 207
175
hemangiosarcoma 169,207
keratectomy, superficial 65,
 medial canthal pocket
herpes conjunctivitis 18, 31,
122
syndrome 103
52,130,167,219
keratic precipitates 177,
 meibomian glands
herpes keratitis 31, 130
202,229
adenoma/adenocarcinoma
histoplasmosis 104
keratitis
214
Horner's syndrome 106
chronic superficial
hairs (distichiasis) 15
hyaloid artery 129, 201
(pannus)49
inflammation 204
remnant 201
eosinophilic 212
melanoma
hyperlipidemia 33
herpes 31, 130
iris 118
hypertension 45,159,222,
immune-mediated
nictitans 14
244
punctate 84
sclera 50
239
melanoma (continued)
nonsteroidal anti-
palpebral fissure(continued)
uvea 5,128,150,162
inflammatory drugs 12
symmetrical enlargement
meningioma, optic nerve
nuclear sclerosis 140, 141
124
98
nyctalopia 71
pannus 49
merle ocular dysgenesis 87.
papillitis 198
144
ophthalmomyiasis 85, 95,
parasites
microphakia,bilateral239
205
insect larvae 85, 95, 205
ophthalmoplegia 119
heartworm 211
mouth opening, painful 98
ophthalmoscope
Thelazia californiensis
multiple drug resistance
lenses 80
170
(MDR-1) gene 46
red-free filter 80
parasympathomimetic drugs
multiple punctate
ophthalmoscopy
34
keratotomies 8
binocular indirect 121
persistent hyperplastic
‘mutton fat' keratic
direct 80, 184, 250
primary vitreous 129
precipitates 155,177,229
glaucoma 88,123,241
persistent pupillary
Mycobacterium bovis186
lipemia retinalis 33
membranes 248
Mycobacterium simiae 186
normal fundus 17
phacoemulsification 148,
mydriasis 183
 retinal hemorrhages 234
252
myositis, masticatory
rhegmatogenous retinal
phenol red thread test 10
muscles 175
detachment 28
photophobia 243
optic nerve
pigmentary uveitis 216
nasolacrimal system
aplasia 66
pilocarpine 94
agenesis 83
meningioma 98
pimecrolimus 94
assessing patency 74, 83
traumatic atrophy 115
plasmoma 11
obstruction 26, 217
optic nerve head (optic disk)
posterior synechiae 133,
neonatal ophthalmia 39
cell types 250
183
neoplasia
changes in glaucoma 88,
prednisolone 11
ciliary body 225
123, 241
prednisone 3
cornea 169
coloboma 48, 61
progressive retinal atrophy
eyelid 47, 55, 147, 214
evaluation 201
59, 71,110
hemangioma/hemangio-
hypoplasia 179
diagnosis 59
sarcoma169,207
physiologic pit 201, 250
rod-cone dysplasia 110
iris melanoma 118
scanning electron
progressive rod-cone
lymphosarcoma 231
micrograph 123
degeneration 163
nictitans 14
shape 190
proptosis, see globe
orbit 6, 70, 98, 112, 220,
optic neuritis 166,198
proptosis
223
optic neuropathies 198,
prostaglandins, topical 34
sclera 49
206
prosthesis, intraocular 195,
skull 254
causes 198,206
218
uvea 4,5,128,150,162,
diagnostic tests 206
proteolytic enzymes 97
168
orbit
Pseudomonas spp. 143
neurophthalmic problems
abscess 146
ptosis 119
119
inflammatory disease 92
punctal atresia 192
nictitating membrane
tumors 6,70,112,220,
pupil, D-shaped in cat 29
cartilage inversion 245
223
pupillary light reflex, slow
 gland prolapse (cherry
orbital fat prolapse 237
179
eye) 37,75
orbital vessels, abnormal
pupillary membranes,
conjunctivitis 1, 11
anastomosis 251
persistent 41
melanoma 14
csteomyelitis, sinus 226
plasmoma 11
csteosarcoma, skull/orbit
radiation therapy 223
protrusion 106
254
 retinal degeneration
nictitans flap 143
causes 63
night vision 71
P-glycoprotein 46
sudden acquired 246
nodular granulomatous
palpebral fissure
retinal detachment
episcleritis 176
opening in puppy 30
bullous 45, 96, 134, 159
240
retinal detachment
spontaneous chronic corneal
tooth root abscess 165
(continued)
epithelial defects
toxicities
hypertension 45,159,244
(continued)
antibiotics 63, 126
orbital tumor 70
corneal revascularization
ivermectin 46
pathophysiology 161
180
Toxoplasma gondii 186
retinal edema 20
treatment 65
trauma
rhegmatogenous 28
squamous cell carcinoma
exophthalmos to
steroid-responsive 161
eyelid 47, 55, 147
enophthalmos 251
retinal dysplasia 184, 193
orbit 223
eyelid lacerations 203
geographic 108
Stades procedure 157
globe proptosis 23, 57,
retinal folds 193
strabismus
101,115, 151
retinal hemorrhages, types
congenital 2
hyphema 72
234
correction 2
shotgun blast 230
retinal pigmented
globe proptosis 151
see aiso foreign body
epithelium 87, 144, 184
sudden acquired retinal
trichiasis 86, 157
retinal vessels
degeneration 246
Trichophyton spp. 77
“box carring' 222
symblepharon 39,167,219,
tuberculous chorioretinitis
lipid/lipoproteins 125
253
186
retinopathy
synchysis scintillans 82
tunica vasculosa lentis 129
hypertensive 45, 159,
synechiae 215
222, 244
posterior 133,183
ultrasound, ocular 54
nutritional 22,209
uveal cysts 19, 27, 53, 79
Roberts and Bistner
tacrolimus 94
complications 79
procedure 60
tapetal reflection
treatment 27
rod-cone dysplasia 110
absence 233
uveal melanoma 5, 128,
rose bengal stain 1, 31
aphakic crescent 32, 200,
150, 162
236
uveitis
Sarcoptes scabiei 77
color 17, 56
cat 4,7,120
scanning electron
tarsorrhaphy, temporary 57,
chronic 32, 183, 215
microscopy 123
101
iris color change 4, 120
Schiotz tonometry 38
taurine
pigmentary 216
Schirmer tear test 42, 113,
biological role 63
secondary glaucoma 36,
154, 182
deficiency 22, 63, 209
247
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
tear drainage, reduced 160
 see also anterior uveitis
238
tear film stability, evaluation
uveodermatologic (Vogt-
nomal values 113
1, 31
Koyanagi-Harada-like)
technique 113
tear production
syndrome 3, 96, 134
types 182
measurement 10
sclera 123
reduced 42, 113
vidarabine 18, 130
melanoma 50
tear replacement, artificial
vitiligo, periocular 235
scleral lamina cribrosa
69, 94
vitreal hemorrhages 244
123
tear staining 219
vitreous degeneration 191
Seidel's test 74, 156, 164
tear test, see Schirmer tear
vitreous humor, opacities 82
selemectin 77
test
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like
senile iris atrophy 243
Thelazia californiensis 170
(uveodermatologic)
shotgun blast 230
thermokeratoplasty 242
syndrome 3,96, 134
sialocele 213
third eyelid, see nictitans
sinus osteomyelitis 226
thrombocytopenia 103
Sjogren's syndrome 199
thyroid function testing 238
slit-lamp examination 12,
tissue plasminogen activator
19, 24, 116
72
spontaneous chronic corneal
tonometry 5,127
epithelial defects
digital 188
(Boxer/indolent ulcer) 8,
Schiotz 38
64, 180
TonoPen 127